[^Pemell, Robert: De morbis puerorum^] 
 
[}De Morbis Puerorum, 
OR, A 
TREATISE 
OF 
The Diseases of Children; 
WITH 
Their Causes, Signs, Prognosticks, and 
Cures, for the benefit of such as do not 
understand the Latine Tongue, and very useful 
for all such as are House-keepers, 
and have Children. 
 
With the Contents of the several Chapters, as also an 
Alphabetical Table of all the Diseases mentioned herein. 
 
By ROBERT PEMELL Practitioner in Physick, 
at Cranebrooke in Kent. May the 29. 1653. 
 
LONDON, 
Printed by J. Legatt, for Philemon Stephens, at the guilded Lion 
in Pauls Church-yard. 1653.}] 
 
[^Omitted a letter from the author to the reader and a table of contents.^] 
[^Extract 1, pp. 1-30^] 
 
[^p.1^] 
[}Of the diseases of the Children.}] 
 
[}CHAP. 1. 
of Ulcers and sores in Childrens heads.}] 
 
CHildren are many times troubled with running 
sores and ulcers in their head, both 
when they suck, and when they be weaned. 
 
[}The cause.}] 
 
The cause hereof are excrementitious 
humors thin and sharp, or they proceed 
from a mixt humour, partly thin and 
sharp, and partly thick and melancholy and altogether salt and 
nitrous; from whence there ulcers and sores look sometimes white, 
sometimes red, sometimes yellow, and sometimes black, alwayes 
salt and fretting whereby they cause itching, and from thence 
they are forced often to scratch. Now these humours are gathered 
together, or produced partly in the womb from the impurity 
of the mothers blood, whereby the infant is nourished; partly 
from the vitiousnesse of corruption of the milk, whereby the infants 
are nourished either from the mother or nurse. 
 
[}The signs are Manifest.}] 
 
These sores and ulcers if they be but gentle and easie are judged 
[^p.2^] 
to be very healthful for children, because nature expelleth ill and 
noxious humours from the inward parts to the outward, and if 
they dry up, many times children fall into fears and other diseases: 
Hippocrates [/1./] saith, that if ulcers or sores arise in the heads of children, 
or in their ears, or face, or in any other part of their body, 
they are freed from the falling sicknesse. These ulcers are many 
times cured without means, as strength and age increaseth. If they 
continue long and run much, it is to be feared least these exulcerations 
pierce to the skul and brain. If these ulcers continue long and 
grow crusty and black, they are hard to cure. 
 
[}The cure.}] 
 
Concerning the Cure care must be taken that such things as are 
cooling and binding be not used. Let the Nurse use a good Dyet, 
and abstain from all sharp and salt meats, and such as breed vitious 
or bad juyces; as Onions, Garlick, Leeks, Peese, Beans, Raddish, 
salt Beef, Porke, &c: If the Nurse have need of purging, give her 
a purge, of the Electuary called Confectio Hamech, or Diacatholicon; 
and let her use Burrage, Buglosse, Fumitory, Sorrel, 
Succo y, &c. Or sirup of any of these. The child if of any bignesse 
may take the sirupe likewise, or half an ounce of Manna, or 
more according to its age. 
 
[}A Bath.}] 
 
First, let the childs head be bathed with a decoction of Mallows, 
and Barly, or with a decoction of Dock roots, mallows, Celendine 
the greater, Wormwood, Fenegreek, Cicers, Lupines, 
Beans, &c. If there be need of greater cleansing, you may boyl 
the foregoing herbs in wine; or make a Lotion with decoction of 
Marshmallow roots, made with Urine of the infant alone, or mixt 
wih Barly water. Then anoint the head with oyl of Roses and 
oyl of bitter Almonds mixed with a little litharge of gold or 
silver in fine powder; or take of the joyce of Beets and Celendine 
the greater of each one ounce, Hogsgrease two ounces; boyl them 
together a while, then being almost cold put in of Brimstone in 
powder a drachme, make an ointment, with which anoint the parts 
affected morning and evening. Or wash the head with Sope-suds 
made strong. If these ulcers eat to the skul, then use hony of Roses 
mixed with a little spirit of Wine, and afterwards the powder 
Birthwort and natural Balsam. 
 
[^p.3^] 
[}CHAP. 2. 
Of Lice breeding in Children.}] 
 
IF persons of years do live nastily and not change often, they 
soon become lousey. But tis very familiar for Children to breed 
Lice. 
 
[}The cause.}] 
 
They arise from a hot and moist matter which putrifieth in the 
skin, or pores of the body. Sometimes they are bred by eating 
of Figs, in grown persons because they ingender bad juyce. 
 
[}The signs.}] 
 
The signs are apparent, for the lice are bred both nhead and 
body. 
 
[}The Prognosticks.}] 
 
This disease is a foul and filthy disease, and very troublesome, 
because it causeth a constant scratching, but especially if they breed 
in the whole body as many times it happneth. Lice are wont to 
leave those that are ready to die, and to creep away in heaps, which 
surely cometh to passe because that hot moist nourishment (which 
bred them) is wanting, and noysome vapours arise from the party 
ready to die. If lice be onely in the head, in many it preserves 
their health, because they consume much excrementitious humors. 
Lice are engendred in the beginning of the Leprosie, and in the second 
and third kinds of hecktick Feavers. If they breed much and 
that all over the body, they are not onely very irksome, but sometimes 
bring death. 
 
[}The cure.}] 
 
First, for the prevention of lice, and to hinder the breeding of 
them, it will be very necessary to keep the child often changed, and 
to comb often the head, and to avoid all meats of ill juyce. If the 
child be of any bignesse the body may be purged in this manner. 
 
Take of Sene and Polipodium of each two drachmes, Fumitory 
one drachme and a half. Cream of Tartar a drach. Licorice and 
Anniseed, of each a drachme; bruise the Polipodium and Licorice, 
then infuse or steep them all in half a pint of water on hot embers, 
[^p.4^] 
and afterwards gently boyl them; strain it, and to the clear add 
of sirup of Roses one ounce: let the child take every morning two 
or three spoonfuls fasting, and fast one hour after it, then to take 
some warm posset-drink or broth. Make a bath as followeth. 
 
[}A Bath.}] 
 
Take of Elecampane root bruised two ounces, white Briony 
root bruised half an ounce, Beets, Mercury, Sopewort, Centory 
the lesser, of each a haldfull, Lupines bruised one ounce, Nitre half 
an ounce; boyl these in water and make a bath for the head, with 
which let the head be bathed morning and evening warm. After 
bathing anoint the head once or twice a day (if a strong child 
twice, if a weak child but once,) with this oyntment following. 
 
[}An oyntment.}] 
 
Take of Stavesacre one ounce, Wormwood, Rue, of each half an 
ounce, Brimstone, and Nitre, of each two drachmes, make all into 
powder, and with two or three ounces of oyl of Bayes, and one 
ounce of oyl of Wormwood make an oyntment. 
 
Or take of Brimstone in powder half an ounce, of Stavesacre in 
powder one ounce, oyl of Wormwood two ounces and a half, vinegar 
one ounce; make all into an oyntment, and use it as before 
is shewed. 
 
Or take seawater, or else Brine and strong lee of Ashes, of each 
a quart, Wormwood a good handful or two; boyl it a while 
therein, and afterwards wash the body or head therewith. Many 
use stronger oyntments made with Arsenick, or Quicksilver, and 
white Hellebor, but for young children it is not safe to use them. 
 
This powder following is very good and safe. 
 
[}A powder good and safe for Lice in the head.}] 
 
Take of Coculus Indy a quarter of an ounce, white Pepper a 
drachme; beat them into a grosse powder, and strew it into the 
heads of children, for it will soon destroy the lice. Or you may 
dip a comb in strong Mercury water, or water made with Arsenick, 
and so comb the childs head therewith. 
 
[^p.5^] 
[}CHAP. 3. 
Of the Scab and Itch.}] 
 
THe Scab and Itch is an infection of the skin, sometimes 
with crusts or scabs, sometimes dry, sometimes onely in the 
head, and sometimes in the whole body, and doth much provoke 
to scratching. 
 
[}The cause.}] 
 
These come from the sharpnesse of the milk, or from some salt 
humour abounding in the body, and sometimes they bring this infection 
into the world with them. 
 
[}The signes.}] 
 
The signs are manifest. 
 
[}Prognoscticks.}] 
 
If the Scab or Itch be small and do not hinder sleep, it is the 
easier cured, but if it do much molest and disquiet the childe in the 
night, it is the more difficult to cure. If they be of long continuance 
and have got a habit in the body, they are not easily cured. 
 
[}The cure.}] 
 
For the cure of the Itch and Scab, many use to give common 
Treacle, which I do not approve of, but rather advise to use flower 
of Brimstone morning and evening in milk or Posset drink. Also 
sirup of Fumitory is good to give often half a spoonful thereof to 
children of growth. 
 
If the head be scabby, it is usual to anoint with burnt butter, but 
this many times strikes into the body and makes the child sick. You 
may anoint with this oyntment following. 
 
[}An Oyntment.}] 
 
Take oyl of Roses four ounces, quick Brimstone in powder one 
ounce, juice of Lemmons two ounces, Rosin three ounces, make 
all into an oyntment, and anoint the head, face, or body with it; but 
observe this, that you do not anoint all over where the itch or 
scab is, but anoint first at one place, and when that is killed, then 
use it to another place, and so the rest one after another. You may 
also anoint with the white Camphire oyntment, or with Tarr and 
[^p.6^] 
Hogs grease boyled together; or you may use a decoction of Tobacco 
stalks boyled in water and vinegar. 
 
If the Itch or Scab be hot and burning, then use this oyntment 
following. 
 
Take white lead and Lytharge of gold in fine powder, of each 
five drachmes, lee made of the ashes of a vine three drachmes, oyl 
of Roses an ounce, wax as much; melt the wax and oyl first, then 
put in the rest keeping it stirring, and last of all add two yolks 
of eggs, or rather the whites, make an oyntment, and use 
it. 
 
See more in my book called Help for the Poor, in Itch and Scab, 
pag. 21, 22. Cap. 23. 
 
[}CHAP. 4. 
Of the Falling sicknesse and convulsion.}] 
 
THhese are diseases very incident to children newly born; 
and because they are so neer of affinity I shall joyn them together. 
 
[}The cause.}] 
 
The falling sicknesse cometh sometimes by consent of the inferior, 
or lower parts especially of the stomach and bowels, when milk is 
corrupted in the stomach, or hath an ill quality, which doth often 
happen when the nurse is of an ill complexion, or from the nurses 
ill dyet, and to frequent drinking of wine, and so ill vapors arise 
from the stomach too the brain, and affect the membranes thereof, 
or worms, the Small Pox and Measels, or Fevers may cause these 
fits, or primarily it may come from the brain being ill affected 
Sometimes it may be Hereditary and come from the Parents;. 
Also vehement pains of the teeth (whereby the brain is drawn into 
consent) may cause convulsions in children. Moreover sudden 
fears or beating the child may occasion these fits. Some will have 
flegme to be the cause of the Falling sicknesse; but if it were so, 
then why might not old men (whose brains are flegmatick) have 
the Falling sicknesse, and Infants as well as olf men, be taken with 
the Apoplexy, which notwithstanding we see by experience doth 
[^p.7^] 
not happen: Therefore the falling sicknesse doth not proceed from 
flegme, but rather from an occult and sharp quality, which doth 
oppresse the membranes of the brain. For although children do 
abound with flegme, (from whence suffocating rheumes and other 
diseases be bred, yet doth not the Falling sicknesse follow except 
there be some venomous and corrupt vapour joyned therewith. 
 
[}The signs.}] 
 
The signs are manifest. But whether it proceed from vitious 
or corrupt milk, or from worms, the small Pox, or Measels, breeding 
of teeth, or from fears, the signs of those diseases will manifest. 
If fear be the cause, the standers by or tenders can evidence 
the same: Now if none of these be the cause, then it is probable 
it may arise primarily from the brain. 
 
[}The Prognosticks.}] 
 
The Falling sicknesse and convulsion are diseases very horrible 
to behold, and dangerous in all persons and ages, and doth kill many 
children that are taken therewith so soon as they be born. 
 
Where these fits happen to young children, 'tis more dangerous 
then in grown persons, because they can bear and endure the fits 
better. 
 
[}The cure.}] 
 
For the cure of these diseases, somthing must be done in the fit, 
and something when the fit is over. 
 
[}What is to be done in the fit.}] 
 
First, in the fit give three or four drops of spirit of Castor in 
beer or milk, also black Cherry water with little sirup of Pyony, 
or give a small spoonful of this following Julep. 
 
[}A Julep.}] 
 
Take of Piony water, and linden water, of each one ounce, sirupe 
of Piony compound half an ounce, spirit of black Cherries 
two drachmes, magister of Coral a scruple, mix them together, 
and give it as before is shewed. Put to the nostrils Rue bruised, 
or oyl of Amber, or Balsam of Amber. Apply to the Region 
of the heart, and to the Temples Mithridate, or London Treacle, 
with the juice of Rue and a little wine, or water Epileptick of 
Langius. Let the nape of the neck, and the ridge of the back be 
anoynted with this following. 
 
Take oyl of Castor, or oyl of Euphorbium half an ounce, the 
juice of Rue one ounce; boyl them together to the consumption 
[^p.8^] 
of the juice, and use it. Hang about the neck of the childe a thin 
slice of Piony, or white Briony roots as green as you can. 
 
[}What must be done when the fit is over.}] 
 
Secondly, something must be done out of the fit. If the child 
be five or six years old, you may give it this potion. 
 
[}A purging potion.}] 
 
Take of Agarick trochiscated four scruples, infuse it five or six 
hours in Oxymel of Squils; strain it hard, and add thereto of Castor 
in powder three greins, sirupe of Roses solutive with Agarick 
one ounce, Balm water one ounce, make a potion, and give it in a 
morning fasting. Let the child constantly take of the Julep before 
mentioned, and be kept anointed with the oyl of Castor and 
juice of Rue; also let it wear about it's neck constantly a root of 
male Peony, or white Briony. 
 
In Italy, and other places where this disease is very frequent, so 
soon as children be born, they cauterize or burn them in the neck 
with a hot iron, or else drop a burning wax candle upon the place, 
where they desire to make an Issue, and that to prevent the falling 
sicknesse, for hereby they think the brain is dryed, and by pain 
the humour which doth flow, or may flow, is drawn and derived 
to the hinder part of the head, especially if the Issue be made by 
burning, for thereby whatsoever is gathered together in the brain 
that is offensive is evacuated. Cornelius Celsus was of the same 
minde, Lib. 3. Cap. 28. fol. 40. for he adviseth to have an Issue 
made there in two places, and he saith, it is the last refuge or remedy 
for to cure the Falling sicknesse: But I conceive that it is not 
safe to use such a remedy in young and tender bodies; for if the 
bodies of such young and tender children will not suffer purging 
or bleeding, how shall they endure burning, when as this must 
needs bring continual pain and watchings, whereby the strength 
must also decay. 
 
Again, although an Issue may be profitable where the falling 
sicknesse ariseth primarily and chiefly from the brain, yet when the 
Falling sicknesse ariseth from the lower parts, (which doth often 
happen to children) it doth not profit, when as the matter, or ill 
vapor that cometh from the lower parts cannot be turned from the 
brain. 
 
If the Falling sicknesse arise from worms, then use means against 
worms, as you may see in the Chapter of worms, to which means 
[^p.9^] 
may be added the root of Piony, red Coral, &c. 
 
Let the Mother, or Nurse keep a good dyet, and neither eat not 
drink any thing that may offend the childe, or occasion these 
fits. 
 
See more in my book of the chief diseases of the head, in the 6. 
& 7. Chapters. 
 
[}CHAP. 5. 
Of the pain in the ears, with inflammation, moistures, 
ulcers, and worms thereof.}] 
 
AMong the diseases of children [/2./] Hippocrates in his Aphorismes 
doth nominate the moisture or running of the ears; For when 
the brain of infants is very moist, greater part of that superfluous 
moisture is evacuated, or purged by the ears, yet this doth not often 
happen without inflammation. Therefore when abundance of 
moist humours do flow plentifully to the ears, they cause inflammation, 
also grievous pain is joyned therewith, which in moist bodies 
of children cannot be dispersed or dissolved, but is turned into 
matter, so that blood and matter doth flow out of the ears. 
 
[}The cause.}] 
 
The cause is abundance of moist humours and excrements of 
the brain, which nature cannot expel by the nose and Palat. 
 
[}The signs.}] 
 
The moisture of the ears is easily known by it's running, but 
pain and inflammation thereof is not so easily discerned, because 
infants cannot declare the same; but it may be known by their 
crying out and unquietnesse, especially being touched neer their 
ears, also rednesse and heat is perceived about the ear or ears. 
 
[}The Prognosticks.}] 
 
These diseases are not to be sleighted for such pains (in grown 
persons) have proved dangerous, much more therefore in children 
if it continue long. 
 
Inflammation of the ears is many times dangerous, and brings 
a delirium or dotage and indangers life. 
 
[^p.10^] 
In ulcers of the ears if the matter be white, not too thick nor 
too thin, neither bloody nor much stinking, it is the better. 
 
Inveterate and long continued Ulcers of the ears are dangerous, 
because they soon turn to a Fistula. 
 
[}The cure.}] 
 
For pain of the ears, use oyl of Roses, or oyl of Violets warm, 
or milk warm dropped into the ears, and afterwards stopped with 
wool. or drop therein the juice of Origanum and milk mixed together: 
Or drop in a little Linseed oyl warm, or use a decoction 
of the heads of white Poppy, or the white of an Egg beaten and 
mixed with a little milk: or put a little Saffron into the ears. 
 
Against moistnesse of the ears and ulcers thereof, use hony of 
Roses, and water of hony; dip a clout or tent therein and put it 
warm into the ears; or put in oyl of bitter Almonds warm. 
 
For worms in the ears, use oyl of bitter Almonds and Myrrhe 
in powder, as in two drachmes of oyl put of Myrrhe in powder a 
scruple or thirty grains: or put the juyce of Wormwood warm 
into the ears. 
 
Or take of Aloes, Myrrhe, and the seeds of Coloquintida, of 
each a drachme; boyl them in two ounces of oyl of Roses, strain 
it and drop of the strained liquor into the ears. 
 
[}CHAP. 6. 
Of breeding and coming of teeth.}] 
 
Among all diseases that children are subject to, there is none 
more grievous or troublesome to them then the pain in breeding 
of their teeth. For saith [/3./] Hippocrates, The time of teeth breeding 
coming there hapneth itching of the gums, feares, Convulsions, 
Fluxes of the belly, especially when they bring forth their 
teeth, and most principally to those children which are most fat 
and grosse and have their belly hard and bound. 
 
Sometimes children are born into the world with teeth, as experience 
witnesseth. [/4./] Pliny saith M. Curjus was so born, who 
thereupon was surnamed Dentatus; and Cn. Papyrius Carbo, both 
[^p.11^] 
of them very great men and right honourable Personages. And 
Bald-Rousæns de vitæ hom. primord. cap de dent. In the year 1564. 
Saith he saw a girle born with two teeth in her lower gums called 
cutters. 
 
[}The time of breeding teeth.}] 
 
The time of breeding teeth is about the seventh month, and first 
those teeth are bred that are called Incisorii, cutters or shearers, in 
Greek [^GREEK OMITTED^], because they shew themselves when we laugh: 
then within a little space of time come forth the Canini or Dog-teeth, 
from their length above the rest: They are called Oculares 
or eye teeth, not that they reach to the orbit of the eye; for they 
mount not higher then the Nostrils; but because sprigs of the nerves, 
which move the eyes are carried to them. Last of all are bred 
the Molares or Grinders, because like Millers they grind the meat. 
Of these the hindermost are called Genuini & dentes sapientiæ, the 
teeth of wisdom, because they themselves until men come 
to the years of discretion, to wit, the 28. 30. yea even to old 
age it self. In some they never appear. 
 
And first of all at their comming forth Children have a great itching 
of their gums, afterwards there following a pricking of their 
gums at the roots as it were with needles, from whence followeth 
vehement pain, watchfulnesse, inflammation of the gums, fears, 
fluxes of the belly, and convulsions; And this doth chiefly happen 
when they breed their Dog teeth, or Eye teeth as the vulgar 
call them: from whence we have a Proverb, that Parents cannot 
rejoyce in their children till their eye teeth be come. 
 
Sometimes about the seventh year children sheed their teeth, or 
their teeth fall out, and new come in their roome, but this is without 
any pain, although children cannot speak of their pain in breeding 
their teeth, yet it may be known by these signs. 
 
[}Signs of teeth breeding.}] 
 
First from the time of breeding, viz. about the seventh month. 
Secondly, because they often put their fingers in their mouth, thereby 
to ease the pain. Thirdly, because Nipples of the mother 
or nurse are more wrinkled then before. Fourthly, in those places 
[^p.12^] 
where the teeth are breeding the gums are white and swollen. 
Lastly, divers accidents happen, as pain, watchfulnesse, fluxes of 
the belly, fevers, convulsions: Now these fears which follow upon 
the teeth breeding, the inflammations of the gums, and watchfulnesse, 
they all come from pain, and then humours are stirred up and 
choller abounding which brings fluxes of the belly. 
 
[}The Prognosticks.}] 
 
The breeding of teeth in Children is very grievous and troublesome, 
by reason those diseases and symptomes that accompany the 
same, in so much that many die thereof: when convulsions and 
fevers are joyned therewith. Hip. de dentione fol. 59. 
 
The longer the teeth are comming forth, the greater is the 
danger. Such children as have a loosnesse when they breed teeth, 
are lesse subject to Convulsions then those that are bound. If an 
acute or sharp Fever happen to children breeding their teeth, they 
are seldom taken with the Convulsion; because by the Fever the 
matter that might bring a convulsion is taken away. 
 
Such as are in good health when they breed their teeth, if they 
be very drowsie and sleepy, there is danger least they fall into 
convulsions. 
 
Such as breed teeth in winter are lesse troubled then those in 
sommer: and if they be a little helped they will endure it the easier. 
 
Not all that breed teeth (being taken with convulsions) do die, 
but many escape. 
 
Their teeth come forth hardest, or with most pain, that have a 
little Cough withall; and if they be troubled with pricking and 
shooting of the gums, they become very lean. While children breed 
their Dog teeth, or Eye teeth, they are worst, and more troublesome, 
because they bring more sharp and grievous pain to them. 
 
[}The cure.}] 
 
Let the gums be often rubbed with the finger wet with Hony, or 
with Hony and Butter mixed together, or with the brains of a 
Hare; or the brains of a Hare mixed with Capons grease and 
Hony. If you cannot get a Hares brains, take Conies brains. 
 
[^p.13^] 
Rub the gums often with red Coral. It is good also to wash 
the outside of the cheek with a decoction of Mallows and Camomil 
flowers; or to anoint the same with the juyce of Mallows and 
Butter mixed together. 
 
If there be an inflammation of the gume, and the pain be very 
extream, use oyl of Roses with the juyce of Nightshade. 
 
If these medicines prevail not, as many times come to passe, 
then the best way is to cut the gums; for this is very safe, and were 
it more used, fewer Children would die: for I am confident the 
want hereof doth occasion the death of many a child. 
 
[}Dyet.}] 
 
The Nurse must observe a good Dyet, and be very temperat 
therein, and rather incline to cooling then heating. She may use 
Barly water made with Avens, Lettice and Endive, abstaining from 
all salt and sharp meats, especially about the time of breeding their 
teeth. 
 
[}CHA.P. 7. 
Of the inflammation of the mouth and throat, with 
ulcers and sores thereof.}] 
 
OFtentimes there arise certain ulcers and sores in the mouthes of 
children called Aphthæ, which do not onely possesse the sides 
of the mouth, the tongue and gums, but sometimes the very Almonds 
and Pallat of the mouth. 
 
Among the diseases of children, Hippocrates [/5./] maketh mention 
of the inflammations of the Almonds of the mouth. 
 
[}The cause.}] 
 
They proceed from vitious and corrupt milk, for seeing the inward 
parts of the mouthes in children are soft and tender, and 
have not been used to any meat in the mothers womb, if the milk 
be not very sweet and pleasant, but sharp and corrupt, these ulcers, 
sores, and inflammations are soon bred. The same doth happen 
if the milk be corrupt in the stomach, for from thence arise hot and 
[^p.14^] 
sharp vapours, especially considering the tendernesse of those parts 
about the mouth and throat. 
 
[}The Prognosticks.}] 
 
These inflammations and sores being not of any long continuance, 
(especially in tender and young infants) are easily cured, because 
they arise from a light cause and matter: But such as are of 
long continuance are more hardly cured, and have putrifaction 
joyned therewith. 
 
Those sores and ulcers of the mouth in children that are black 
and with crusts or scales, are worst of all, and many times prove 
mortal. 
 
[}The cure.}] 
 
In the beginning we must use astringent, or binding and repelling, 
or medicines to drive back; afterwards medicines binding but 
withall discussing. 
 
If there be onely heat and inflammation, then we must use cooling 
means and a little binding. If these sores come from the fault 
of the milk, then the Nurse must keep a good Dyet, and avoid all 
hot, sharp and salt meats. 
 
Give the child often sirup of Mulberries with hony of Roses, 
and if need be with Oxymel. If they be red, then use medicines 
moderatly binding, as sirup of dry Roses, sirup of Purslain, sirup of 
Grapes, Sorrel, Citrons, and Mulberries with the powder of Lentils, 
Sumach and red Roses. 
 
If they be yellow use cooling meanes, as sirup of Violets, sirup 
f Purslain, &c. 
 
Or take the juyce of Lettice, Purslain, Nightshade, of each half 
an ounce; mix them together and use it with a feather. 
 
Or take of red Roses and Violets in powder of each a drachme, 
Hony, one ounce and a half, or as much sirup of Mulberries, mix 
them together and use it. 
 
Or take of Plantain water half an ounce, hony of Roses, and 
sirup of Mulberries, of each half an ounce, mix them together, and 
wash the childs mouth often with it. 
 
Or take of French Barly half an ounce, Agrimony, Plaintain, 
red Roses, of each a handful: boyl these in water, strain it, and in 
[^p.15^] 
six ounces thereof mix of sirup of Mulberries half an ounce, hony of 
Roses one ounce, and a half, and if there be need, you may add half 
a drachme of Allom, which will make it more cleansing. 
 
Or take of Rosewater, or Plantain water one ounce, hony of 
Roses, half an ounce, oyl of Vitriol so many drops as may make it 
sharp; mix them together, and wash the mouth therewith. 
 
[}CHAP. 8. 
Of fevers in Children.}] 
 
CHildren are many times taken with burning fevers, as well as 
with Quotidian, Tertian, and quartain Agues. 
 
[}The cause.}] 
 
The cause of fevers in children may arise from corrupt milk, for 
when the milk doth putrifie choller is stirred up, and also the rest 
of the humours are inflamed, from whence cometh fevers. Sometimes 
fevers may proceed from the breeding of teeth, sometimes 
from pains, inflammation and overmuch watching, as Hippocrates 
witnesseth. Hip. Aph. 3. 25. 
 
[}The Signs.}] 
 
The signs of a Fever in children are these; Great heat and drynes, 
rednes of the tongue and throat, want of rest, urine red, sometimes 
thick and sometimes thin, quicknesse of the pulse, much inquietnesse, 
and many times raving and idle talke if they be of any bignes. 
If fevers come from the breeding of teeth, then you have the 
signs in the Chapter of breeding of teeth. 
 
[}The Prognosticks:}] 
 
These fears being but gentle, are not dangerous, for the cause being 
taken away, they soon cease; but if the milk continue long 
corrupt and vitious, then children are much indangered by these 
fevers. If sharp fevers come upon children while they breed their 
teeth, they are seldom taken with convulsions; sometimes fluxes, 
[^p.16^] 
of the belly and great watchings accompany these fevers, whereby 
children are soon suffocated. 
 
[}The cure.}] 
 
If the fever proceed from corrupt milk, then choller doth abound; 
the mother or nurse therefore must use cooling and moistening 
means, as broth or posset-drink made with Lettice, Endive, Sorrel, 
Violet leaves, straberry leaves, &c. 
 
Also Almond milk made with the four cooling seeds, and Barly 
water are very useful. The mother or nurse must abstain from 
Wine, hot water and all hot spices; and may use some purging 
means, as Manna, two ounces thereof may be taken in broth or 
clear posset drink, or three ounces of sirup of Roses solutive, or one 
ounce, or one ounce and a half of Cassia, in the same you may give 
the child often sirup of Violets, sirup of the juyce of Citrons, half 
a spoonful at a time; or Take one ounce of sirup of Violets, and 
add to it as much Endive water, and give the child a spoonful at any 
time. 
 
[}A Julep.}] 
 
Or take of Borrage water four onnces, sirup of Violets, or sirup 
of Citrons one ounce and a half, spirit of Vitriol five or six drops, 
mix them togther, and let the child take often two or three spoonfuls 
at a time. 
 
If the body of the child be bound, you may put up a Violet comfit 
or two, first anointed with a little oyl; or give one ounce of 
sirup of Roses solutive (more or lesse according to the age of the 
child) in posset drink in a morning. Or give half an ounce of 
Manna dissolved in posset drink. Anoint the back and ridge of the 
child with oyl of Violets mixed with a little wax. And anoint the 
stomach with some of this oyntment following. 
 
[}An oyntment.}] 
 
Take oyl of Roses, and Mastick in powde of each half an ounce. 
rtd and white Saunders in powder, red Coral in powder of each x 
scruple, wax two drachmes; make an ointmen, aud use it as before 
mentioned. 
 
[}A Pultis.}] 
 
Or take of red Roses in powder two drachmes, the juyce of 
Plantain, Housleek, and Endive of each half an ounce; with the 
[^p.17^] 
white of an egg and some Barly flower make a pultis, and apply it 
to the stomach. Anoint the temples and wrests with oyl of Roses 
and oyl of Populeon of each a little quantity mixed together. 
 
If the fever proceed from breeding of teeth, use means to help nature 
herein, as in the first Chapter. 
 
[}CHAP. 9. 
Of the small Pox and measels.}] 
 
Of smal Pox and Measels are diseases that most children are 
troubled with first or last. 
 
They are both of one nature and proceed from one cause, saving 
that the measels are ingendred of the inflammation of blood, and 
the small Pox of the inflammation of blood mingled with Choler. 
 
[}What the small Pox are.}] 
 
The small Pox are spots, red pustules appearing in the skin, 
with a continual fever stirred up or excited from the strength of 
the expulsive faculty and ebullition or boyling of the blood. 
 
[}What the Measels are.}] 
 
The Measels are spots or risings upon the outside of the skin, in 
some parts, more or lesse with a Fever, by reason of the strength of 
of the expulsive faculty, and heat or boyling of the blood. 
 
[}The difference between the small Pox and the Measels.}] 
 
At the first appearing they are so like one another, that you can 
hardly discern the difference; the Measels (most times) come 
more suddenly, & the face & the skin of the whole body looks redder, 
and the rednes continues longer without rising, there being joyned 
therewith most commonly a greater itching and pricking. But 
the small Pox come not forth so suddenly, neither is the skin so red, 
nor doth the colour stay so long, and the pimples rise higher, neither 
is the itching and pricking so much, and at length grow white. 
 
[^p.18^] 
[}The cause.}] 
 
There are two chief causes thereof. First, the reliques and impurity 
of the mothers blood, with which the child was nourished 
in the womb, and receiving the same into the pores of the body, 
the which at that time for debility of nature could not be expelled, 
but the child increasing afterward in strength is driven out of the 
veins into the upper skin. 
 
Secondly, it may come by way of contagion, from a peculiar 
malignity of the air when any place is infected, so that one person 
infecteth another. 
 
Now the fuller the body is of this menstrual blood, the deeper 
impression doth the outward air make in it; which is the reason 
that some have them in greater quantity, and are fuller of them 
then others: And so according to the malignity of the humor, it 
is more or lesse dangerous to some then to others. Sometimes the 
ill dyet of the nurse, or feeding upon meats that increase rotten humours, 
may cause this disease. 
 
[}The signs.}] 
 
The signes of them are these. Pain of the head, eyes and throat, 
with a beating of the head and temples, itching of the nose, 
neesing, fear, and starting in sleep, like fits of the convulsion, 
or Falling sicknesse, and sometimes Convulsions with ravings; all 
which happen from hot vapours, and that from the boyling of the 
blood, and so ascend up to the head. Also there is a pain and beating 
of the back, heavinesse of the whole body, a pricking pain in all 
parts, as if stung with nettles, difficulty of breath, a trembling of 
the feet, yawning or gaping, and a stretching of the body, trembling 
of the heart, and sometimes swoning, rednesse of the eyes, great 
drought, hoarsness, and a dry cough. The urine is sometimes red and 
thick, which shewes great heat and boyling of humours, and sometimes 
not much differing from the water of one in health. The nose 
doth many times bleed, and that from the heat of the blood, and 
by it's sharpnesse doth open the orifices, or mouthes of the veins; 
which if it happen to be much in the beginning, then the disease is 
not so violent. Sometimes the eyes water and are moist: And last 
of all the spots appear, and that most times within three or four 
daies. 
 
The small Pox or Measels happen chiefly in the Spring and Autumne, 
especially if the Summer before were wet, and the winde 
[^p.19^] 
in the South; or if the winter foregoing be warm, and the wind 
Southern. 
 
[}The Prognosticks.}] 
 
It is better to have the small Pox or Measels come forth speedily 
then to be long in coming forth; for this sheweth strength of 
nature. 
 
If after they be come forth, the feaver and other symptomes do 
decrease, tis a good sign. 
 
If the spots be white, or red, and full, coming to maturity or 
ripenesse, 'tis good; but if they be blew or black, livid and fall flat, 
whether few or many, 'tis a bad sign. 
 
If fainting of the spirits, or swoonings, fluxes of the belly, 
shortnesse of breath, black urine, or Convulsions happen, 'tis worst 
of all. 
 
If the feaver increase after they be come forth, and they flash 
abroad not ripening speedily, and if hoarsenesse follow, these are 
very bad signs. 
 
[}The cure.}] 
 
The safest way is not to meddle much with children that have 
these diseases, but to let nature alone herein; yet where nature is 
weak it will be very necessary to use means to expel out the disease: 
As Saffron in milk, London Treacle, and Diascordium, if there 
be a loosenesse is very good, given in Carduus or Angelica water. 
Barly water made with Figs, Dates, Licorice and Annis seed is 
very good; or 
 
Take of French Barly a handful, shavings of Ivory and Harts 
horn, of each two drachmes, Licorice bruised one ounce, Citron 
pils dry and cut in thin slices three drachmes; boyl them in a pint 
and a half of Posset drink to a pint, strain it, and let the child drink 
often of it, especially morning and evening. 
Or, 
 
Take three or four Figs cut, Harts horn two drachmes, Marigold-flowers 
a drachme, Carduus half a drachme; Boyl them in 
a pint of Posset-ale, strain it and add thereto of Saffron in powder 
two scruples. Give three or four spoonfuls of it morning and 
evening warm. 
 
[^p.20^] 
[}A Cordial Julep.}] 
 
Take of Carduus, or Angelica water three ounces, syrup of 
Baume one ounce two drachmes, Treacle water a spoonful or two, 
mix them together, and give often of it a spoonful at a time. 
 
If the child be bound, you may put up a violent comfit anointed 
with oyl, or if the Pox be well come forth, and the child be bound, 
you may administer a Clister made with milk and brown Sugar; 
or, take of milk a quarter of a pint, and two ounces of Sugar, mix 
them together, and administer it warm. 
 
After the Pox are come forth, and do begin to dye, you may 
anoint with this following. 
 
[}An Oyntment.}] 
 
Take of chalk in fine powder, and often washed in Plantane 
water two drachmes, of Cream two ounces; mix them well together, 
and anoint the face with a feather. Or, use the oyl of sweet 
Almonds mixed with Parmacitty. 
 
You must not keep the childe too hot nor too cold, for being kept 
too hot it may cause faintings and swoonings, and being kept too 
cold, it may drive them in again, and so check and hinder nature 
from expelling them out to the skin. 
 
See more in my book called Help for the Poor, Pag: 56, 57, 58, 
& 59, 
 
[}CHAP. 10. 
Of watchings out of measure, and want of rest.}] 
 
THe childe while it is in the mothers womb is detained or kept 
in a perpetual sleep, and after it is born, if it be well, it doth 
sleep much at the first, because it hath a very moist brain, and doth 
abound with humidity or moisture. 
 
[}The cause.}] 
 
The cause of watchings, is the corruption of the milk, or too 
much milk, which putrifieth in the stomach, from whence sharp 
vapors arise continually to the brain, and stir up the animal spirits 
not letting them be at quiet. Sometimes breeding of teeth may 
be the cause thereof. 
 
[^p.21^] 
[}The signes.}] 
 
The signs are manifest, for the child cannot sleep, but is constantly 
out of quiet. 
 
[}Prognosticks.}] 
 
This is dangerous in children, not onely because in general sleep 
and watchfulnesse if they exceed measure, are ill; but chiefly because 
this is contrary to the nature of children, which are wont to 
sleep much. 
 
By too much watching humours are stirred up, and become dry, 
from whence Convulsions, fears, Catarrhes or Rheums, and other 
diseases are bred in children. 
 
[}The cure.}] 
 
The means to bring rest are inward or outward. Inward means 
are the following. 
 
[}Inward means.}] 
 
If the child be bound give it syrupe of Roses, or put up a violet 
comfit into the body of it, and give every night the bignesse of a 
Pease of Diascordium, in a little Posset drink, more or lesse, as the 
childe is in bignesse. This you may use four or five nights together 
if need be, but where the body is bound be sparing in the use of it. 
Barly water (made with white Poppy seeds) may be given to the 
child at night, or half a spoonful of syrupe of violets, or syrupe of 
white Poppy heads, half so much, where the childe is subject to 
watchings, else use not the last. 
 
[}Outward means.}] 
 
Outward means, are these following, make a Bath (if it be 
Summer) of the tops of Dill, Cammomil flowers, Mallowes 
Willow leaves, Vine leaves, and the heads of Poppy, white or 
red; and wash the feet therewith. You may anoint the temples 
with oyl of Roses, or oyl of Violets, or water Lillies, or with 
Populeon oyntment; or you may use oyl of Nutmegs (made by 
expression) to the temples warm, or you may make a Pultis of 
white Poppy seed, womans milk; or Rose water, or Nightshade 
water, and the white of an egg with a little Saffron. Anoint 
the nostrils with oyl of Violets mixed with the juice of Nightshade. 
If it proceed from breeding of teeth, then use those means 
set down in the Chapter of breeding teeth. Let the Nurse use a 
good dyet, and means that may cause sleep, as Almond 
[^p.22^] 
milk, made with a decoction of Lettice and white Poppy seeds: 
Or, she may take a spoonful of sirup of white Poppy for three or 
four nights together in Posset drink. 
 
[}CHAP. 11. 
Of Fear, Starting, and terrible dreams.}] 
 
AMong the diseases that are incident to children, Hippocrates 
mentions great fears, and startings which is nothing else but 
troublesome sleep, accompanied with terrible dreams. 
 
[}The cause.}] 
 
The causes hereof are impure and filthy vapors which mingle 
themselves with the animal spirits, and trouble the same, representing 
terrible fancies to the imagination; now these vapors arise 
from the bad concoction of the stomach. Therefore this disease is 
very subject to children, who suck the milk very greedily, or eat 
abundantly, and so receiving more nourishment then the stomach 
can digest, it is corrupt, and so these vapors arise to the brain, and 
trouble the animal spirits. Neither is it absurd to say that these 
vapours do not onely ascend by the [/6./] Oesophagus or gullet, but that 
by the veins they ascend up to the head. Elder children are subject 
to this disease as well as younger. 
 
Galen saith, these fears, are caused when there is a natural imbecibillity 
or weaknesse of the childs stomach, and the meat received is 
corrupted in it, which cause vapours to arise up to the head, and 
bring these startings. Sometimes they come from worms, and when 
they breed their teeth. 
 
[}The signs.}] 
 
The signs are manifest, for they often start in their sleep, screech 
and cry out suddenly, and many times they shake and are all in a 
water, and most times a hot and stinking vapour proceedeth out of 
the childs mouth. 
 
[}The Prognosticks.}] 
 
This disease must not be sleighted, because many times it is the 
forerunner of the Falling sicknesse. 
 
[^p.23^] 
[}The cure.}] 
 
For the cure hereof, means must be used to take away the corrupt 
humours in the stomach. 
 
Let the Nurse keep to a moderate dyet, and use meats that hinder 
corruption, and abstain from all vitious and corrupt food; as 
Pease, Beans, Leeks, Onions, Colewort, &c. that so the milk 
may be good which the childe sucketh. 
 
Let the childe suck but sparingly and moderately least by too 
often sucking the stomach be oppressed; neither let the childe after 
sucking or feeding be laid to sleep, but kept watching a while, that 
so the nourishment may descend to the bottome of the stomach, 
and the concoction be the better. When it is laid to sleep, let it 
not be much rocked, for overmuch shaking of the child hindreth 
digestion, and causeth the childe many times to vomit. 
 
To remove the corrupt food in the stomach, let the childe take 
oyl of sweet Almonds, or sirup of Succory, or Manna, or a little 
hony of Roses solutive; you may give a spoonful or two of either, 
for these will cleanse the corrupt humours and provoke to stool. 
Give the child half a scruple or more of Pyony seeds in a little milk 
morning and evening; or give it a little Magister of Coral. 
 
Or, 
 
Take Magister of Coral a drachme, species Pleres Archonticon a 
scruple, Sugar dissolved in Rosewater one ounce; make rouls or 
cakes, and give of them to the childe, or dissolve them in beer and 
so give them. 
 
Let the stomach be anointed morning and evening with oyl of 
wormwood, Mints, Nardus, Mastick, or oyl of Nutmegs. 
 
Or, 
 
Take oyl of Wormwood and Mastick of each a drachme, Cloves 
in powder ten grains, wax half a drachme, make a Liniment, and 
anoint the stomach therewith. 
 
If starting come of worms, of from a feaver, then use those 
means set down in the several Chapters. Great care must be taken 
against all occasions of fear and frighting be taken away. 
 
[^p.24^] 
[}CHAP. 12. 
Of Rheume, the Cough, and shortnesse of breath.}] 
 
THe Cough, Rheume, and shortnesse of breath doth oftentimes 
much molest and disquiet children. 
 
[}The cause.}] 
 
The cause of rheume in children is from their natural constitution, 
or moist temper of brain, from which many excrements are easily 
heaped together. And this happens from abundance of milk 
oppressing the stomach, from whence many vapours arise up to the 
brain and fill the same. For if the brain be filled with excrementitious 
humours, or molested with the cold air, (which the child was 
not used to in the mothers womb, or with too much heat, or being 
kept too hot (either the head or body.) the matter gathered together 
in the brain doth plentifully fal down to the nostrils, mouth, or 
lungs. Now if these excrementitious humours cannot be purged by 
the nostrils, they slide down into the rough artery & cause a cough. 
If they fall down to the lungs they cause shortnesse of breath. 
 
[}The Signs.}] 
 
Whether the humor be hot or cold is easily known, for if it be 
hot the humour is more thin, and the child doth often sneese, the 
face and cheeks are hot, and the mouth of the child is hot, which 
may be perceived by the nipples of the nurse, as also in sucking. If 
the humour be cold, then the contrary is found. Now whether the 
shortnesse of breath proceed of matter descending from the head, 
or from a phlegmatick blood, ascending from the veins to the 
lungs, may be thus known; if it come from the head there is a 
cough, and rheume doth follow, and sometimes as they breath they 
snort, and make a noise, because the air is stopped coming from 
the lungs. But if it come from a flegmatick humour arising from 
the hypochonders, then there is neither cough nor rheume, and the 
hypochonders are puffed up and swollen. 
 
[}The Prognosticks.}] 
 
Rheumes, and also the cough following, and shortnesse of breath 
[^p.25^] 
in infants and children are not to be neglected, because strong 
Coughing doth not onely cause watchings and vomiting but Ruptures, 
and Rheumes also bring suffocations and death many times. 
These Rheumes and Coughs in children are not so easily cured, because 
those medicines cannot be used which bring expectoration 
or spitting, and to cause the matter to be easily spit out. 
 
[}The cure.}] 
 
Let the nurse keep a temperate dyet, avoiding all sharp and salt 
meats, as also all things that cause vapours to ascend up to the 
brain. 
 
Let the nurse take often of this pectoral decoction. 
 
Take of Figs and Jujubes of each twenty in number, Sebestens 
thirty in number, Raisons of the sun stoned ten drach. Licorice 2. 
drachmes, Maidenhair, Hyssop, and Violets of each an ounce; boyl 
them in three pints of water to the consumption of the third part, 
then being strained give it as before. 
 
If the child be bound you may give it sirup of Roses, Manna or 
Cassia. And give the child oyl of sweet Almonds with white Sugar 
candy, which will not onely loose the belly but ease the Cough. 
If shortnesse of breath proceed from the fulnesse of the stomach and hypochonders, 
then give the child some Hony mixed with a little Fenegreek 
seed and Comin seed in powder. Afterwards give the 
juyce of Fennel in milk, or sirup of Jujubes, or sirup of Maidenhair: 
or make Almond milk with some Pine kernels in Colts foot water, 
or Scabious water, and sweeten it with sugar Candy. 
 
Or, 
 
Take one ounce of sugar Pellets, and being dissolved in two ounces 
of Hyssop water, warm them on the fire, and give a spoonful often 
of it. Or you may give sugar Candy and Hyssop water in the 
same manner. If the child be of any bignes, you may give it often 
pectoral Roules, or Trosses to eat, or sugar Pellets. 
 
Let the breast be anointed morning and evening warm with oyl 
of sweet Almonds mixed with Capons grease or sweet Butter; or 
with the oyntment called Pectorale. 
 
Or, 
 
Take of the oyntment called Resumptivum, oyl of sweet Almonds 
[^p.26^] 
of each one ounce, Capons grease and Goose grease, of each 
two drachmes, mix them together and use it, 
 
To dry up the Rheume lest the childs headclothes be perfumed 
with the powder of red Roses and Frankincense at night. And 
you may bath the childs feet with a decoction made with Rosemary, 
Sage, Marjoram, &c. And afterwards anoint the feet with 
oyl of Bayes, or oyl of Costus warm. 
 
And because the Rheume sometimes falls down by the rough artery, 
so that the nostrils of the child are dry, and much stopped, 
therefore you must anoint the same with fresh Butter, or put up 
some therein, or with oyl of sweet Almonds, or with this following. 
 
Take of the juyce Beets of and Marjoram, of each two drachmes, 
of the juyce of Chickweed half an ounce, oyl of sweet Almonds 
one ounce, mix them together, and anoint the nostrils therewith; 
or put up Basil, Cloves, or Marjoram in powder into the nostrils 
to provoke sneesing, that thereby the matter which flowes down 
by the rough Artery may flow out of the nose. 
 
If the Cough hinder the child from sleeping, give it at night of 
sirup of Jujubes, sirup of Violets, and sirup of white Poppy, of each 
a like quantity mixed together, or give Conserve of red Roses if 
the child be of any bignesse. 
 
[}CHAP. 13. 
Of vomiting and weaknesse of the stomach.}] 
 
MAny times the childs stomach is so weak that it cannot retain 
any sustenance taken. 
 
[}The cause.}] 
 
The cause hereof is either abundance of milk which the child 
greedily sucketh; or the ill quality of the milk, or worms; from 
whence ill humours are stirred up and so cause vomiting. It may 
also proceed from flegme falling down upon the stomach, but this 
is more rare in children and doth not often happen. 
 
[}The signs.}] 
 
If it come from abundance of milk sucked the Nurse may soon 
[^p.27^] 
know it; besides the childe after vomitting is better. 
 
If it proceed from the corruption of the milk, 'tis known by 
the quality thereof, for the milk is yellow, green, or of some 
other bad colour which is vomited up, and hath an ill savour or 
smell; also the milk of the Nurse is not good. 
 
If worms be the cause, then you have the signs in the Chapter 
of worms. [}The Prognosticks.}] 
 
Vomiting in children is most times little dangerous, for it is 
a common saying among women, that those children are most 
lively and vivacious that being young do vomit; and there wants 
not reason to second this opinion; for the child being newly born 
hath some vitious humours in the stomach, which was collected in 
it's mothers womb, and then receiving fresh nourishment from 
the Nurse which it was not accustomed to; moreover the stomach 
being lax or loose, moist and weak, it soon happeneth that the 
milk is corrupted: Therefore if these vitious humours be cast out 
by vomit, it is far better then if they were retained in the 
stomach. 
 
If vomiting proceed from abundance of milk, there is lesse 
danger, and most times after vomiting the childe is better. If 
from the corruption of the milk it is worse, because thereby may 
follow other dangerous symptomes. 
 
If vomiting continue long, it is dangerous, because it may bring 
an Atrophy, or leannesse of the whole body, and so death at 
length. 
 
If that which is vomited be white and flegmatick, 'tis better then 
if it be yellow, green or blackish. 
 
[}The cure.}] 
 
If vomiting proceed from too great plenty of milk sucked, then 
let not the childe suck so often, nor so long. 
 
If it come from corruption of the milk, then the fault of the 
milk must be mended, as is before declared, and that which is corrupt 
must be cleansed by the use of syrupe of Roses solutive, or hony 
of Roses solutive. 
 
Now that the stomach of the childe (which is weak and loose) 
may be strengthened, you may use syrupe of Mints, syrupe of 
Quinces, &c. Or, 
 
[}A powder of lohoch.}] 
 
Take of wood Aloes, red Coral, Mastick, of each half a drach. 
[^p.28^] 
Galangal half a scruple, make them into powder, and give of it 
to the child in milk, as much as will lye upon two pence, or three 
pence at a time; or make a lohoch, or licking medicine thereof 
with syrup of Quinces, and give it often to the childe. Marmalade 
of Quinces also is very good for the child, or a Quince rosted tender 
and given with Sugar and Cloves in powder: Apply outwardly 
to the stomach the plaister of a crust of bread, the Cerot called 
distomachale, or a crust of bread, wet in Muscadel. 
 
Or, 
 
Take oyl of Mastick, oyl of Quinces, oyl of Mints, oyl of 
Wormwood, of each half an ounce, oyl of Nutmegs by expression 
half a drachme, Cloves in powder a scruple, mix them together, 
and anoint the stomach therewith morning and evening warm. 
 
Or, 
 
Take of red Roses half a handful, Mints a drachme, Cyperus 
roots and Myrtle berries, of each two drachmes; Boyl them in 
red wine, and bathe the childes stomach therewith warm. 
 
Or, 
 
Wet a spunge, or wollen cloth therein, and lay it warm to the 
stomach. Or, 
 
Take Mastick, Frankincense, red Roses, of each two drachmes, 
Cloves a scruple; make them into powder, and with the juice of 
Mints, or the distilled water thereof make a Pultis, and lay it to 
the stomach. Or, 
 
Take of oyl of Mastick, or oyl of Wormwood two ounces, wax 
one ounce and a half, Cloves, Mace and Cynamom in powder, of 
each two drachmes; make all into an oyntment, adding thereto a 
little Vinegar: Anoint the stomach with it morning and evening 
warm. You may anoint the stomach morning and evening with 
oyl of Mace made by expression. 
 
If the milk be very hot, then anoint the stomach with oyl of 
Quinces, or oyl of Myrtles, or oyl of Roses. 
 
Or, 
 
Take oyl of Roses, and oyl Myrtles, of each one ounce, Vinegar 
two drachmes, red Coral and the three Saunders in powder, of 
each half an ounce, mix them together, and use it to the stomach. 
Coral doth much prevail herein by an occult, or hidden property, 
and therefore it is hung about the neck of children to stay vomiting. 
 
[^p.29^] 
[}CHAP. 14. 
Of the Consumption, or Leannesse of the Rickets.}] 
 
CHildren do many times wax lean without any manifest cause, 
and although they suck much, or feed well, yet they are not 
therewith nourished. 
 
[}The cause.}] 
 
Now the causes are many; as the corruption of the milk, for 
being either too hot or too cold, it turns into ill humours, and so 
hinders the breeding of good blood; or it may come for want of 
suck, from whence we see many times that when a childe consumes 
and pines away with sucking one Nurse, if it suck an other, 
it soon thrives and growes. 
 
Again, worms may be the cause, both such as are bred in the 
belly, as also in other parts; or it may come by reason of a Feaver, 
or from a flux of the belly. 
 
[}The signs.}] 
 
The signs are manifest. 
 
[}The Prognosticks.}] 
 
If the child consume for want of milk, or a good Nurse, this 
may soon be cured by getting a better Nurse. 
 
If it come from worms in the belly or other parts, it is not easily 
cured. The Consumption in most children is dangerours if it be 
not taken in time, and kills many. 
 
[}The cure.}] 
 
If the fault be in the milk, that must be rectified by good dyet 
of the Nurse, or if that do not help, then the Nurse is to be 
changed. 
 
If worms be the cause, then means must be used to kill worms, 
as you may see in the Chapter of worms. 
 
If leannesse come from a Feaver, or without any manifest cause, 
make this following Bath. 
 
[}A Bath.}] 
 
Take the head and feet of a Wether; boyl them till the bones 
fall asunder; then bath the childe with this liquor twise a day, and 
after bathing anoint with this following oynment. 
 
[^p.30^] 
Take of fresh Butter, oyl of Roses and of Violets, of each one 
ounce, Hogs-grease, or the fat of raw Pork half an ounce, wax a 
quarter of an ounce; make an oyntment, and anoint the body 
with it warm twise a day. 
 
Or, 
 
Anoint the body with oyl of sweet Almonds and fresh butter 
mixed together; or else anoint the body with the oyntment called 
Resumptivum, or Resumptive oyntment. 
 
Or, 
 
If it come from great drynesse of the stomach, bathe the stomach 
with milk warm, and use this following. 
 
Take of fresh Butter, Hens grease, of each half an ounce, 
Saffron in powder five or six grains, oyl of Violets, or Wormwood 
three ounces, mix them together, and anoint the stomach 
morning and evening warm. 
 
If it come from a flux of the belly, then use the means to stay the 
loosenesse as in the Chapter of the flux of the belly. 
 
Concerning the Rickets, there is a learned Treatise set forth 
lately by three or four Doctors, and since translated into English, 
where you have that disease accurately and exactly handled, unto 
which I refer the Reader. 
 
