[^Sharp, Jane: Midwives book^] 
 
[}THE 
MIDWIVES BOOK. 
Or the whole ART of 
MIDWIFRY 
DISCOVERED. 
Directing Childbearing Women 
how to behave themselves 
 
[^Beginning of a flowchart figure.^] 
In their 
	Conception, 
	Breeding, 
	Bearing, 
	and 
	Nursing 
		of CHILDREN. 
[^End of a flowchart figure.^] 
 
In Six Books, Viz. 
 
I. An Anatomical Description of the Parts of Men and 
Women. 
II. What is requisite for Procreation: Signes of a Womans being 
with Child, and whether it be Male or Female, and how the 
Child is formed in the womb. 
III. The causes and hinderance of conception and Barrenness, and 
of the paines and difficulties of Childbearing with their causes, 
signes and cures. 
IV. Rules to know when a woman is near her labour, and when she is 
near conception, and how to order the Child when born. 
V. How to order women in Childbirth, and of several diseases and 
cures for women in that condition. 
VI. Of Diseases incident to women after conception: Rules for the 
choice of a nurse; her office; with proper cures for all diseases Incident 
to young Children. 
 
By Mrs. Jane Sharp Practitioner in the Art of 
MIDWIFRY above thirty years. 
 
London, Printed for Simon Miller, at the Star at the 
West End of St. Pauls, 1671.}] 
 
[^A dedication to Ellenour Talbutt, a preface to midwifes of England and a table of contents omitted.^] 
[^Extract 1, pp. 1-45^] 
 
[^p.1^] 
[}THE 
MID-WIVES BOOK.}] 
 
[}BOOK. I. 
 
The Introduction. 
Of the necessity, and Vsefulness of the 
Art of Midwifry.}] 
 
THe Art of Midwifry is doubtless 
one of the most useful and necessary 
of all Arts, for the being and 
well-being of Mankind, and therefore 
it is extremely requisite that a Midwife, 
be both fearing God, faithful, and exceeding 
well experienced in that profession. 
Her fidelity shall find not only a reward 
here from man, but God hath given a 
special example of it, Exod. 1. in the Midwives 
of Israel, who were so faithful to their 
trust, that the Command of a King could not 
make them depart from it, viz. But the Midwives 
[^p.2^] 
wives feared God, and did not as the King of 
Egypt commanded them, but saved the men children 
alive. Therefore God dealt well with the 
Midwives; and because they feared God, he 
made them Houses. 
 
As for their knowledge it must be twofold, 
Speculative; and Practical, she that 
wants the knowledge of Speculation, is like 
to one that is blind or wants her sight: she 
that wants the Practice, is like one that is 
lame and wants her legs, the lame may see 
but they cannot walk, the blind may walk 
but they cannot see. Such is the condition 
of those Midwives that are not well versed 
in both these. Some perhaps may think, 
that then it is not proper for women to be 
of this profession, because they cannot attain 
so rarely to the knowledge of things as 
men may, who are bred up in Universities, 
Schools of learning, or serve their Apprentiships 
for that end and purpose, where Anatomy 
Lectures being frequently read, the sitution 
of the parts both of men and women, 
and other things of great consequence are 
often made plain to them. But that Objection 
is easily answered, by the former example 
of the Midwives amongst the Israelites, for 
though we women cannot deny, that men 
in some things may come to a greater perfection 
[^p.3^] 
of knowledge than women ordinarily 
can, by reason of the former helps that 
women want; yet the holy Scriptures hath 
recorded Midwives to the perpetual honour 
of the female Sex. There being not so 
much as one word concerning Men-midwives 
mentioned there that we can find, it 
being the natural propriety of women to be 
much seeing into that Art: and though nature 
be not alone sufficient to the perfection 
of it, yet farther knowledge may be gain'd 
by a long and diligent practice, and be 
communicated to others of our own sex. I 
cannot deny the honour due to able Physicians, 
and Chyrurgions, when occasion is: 
Yet we find even that amongst the Indians, 
and all barbarous people, where there is no 
Men of Learning, the women are sufficient 
to perform this duty: and even in our own 
Nation, that we need go no farther, the 
poor Country people where there are none 
but women to assist (unless it be those that 
are exceeding poor and in a starving condition, 
and then they have more need of 
meat than Midwives) the women are as 
fruitful, and as safe and well delivered, if 
not much more fruitful, and better commonly 
in Childbed than the greatest Ladies 
of the Land. It is not hard words that 
[^p.4^] 
perform the work, as if none understood 
the Art that cannot understand Greek. 
Words are but the shell, that we ofttimes 
break our Teeth with them to come at the 
kernel, I mean our brains to know what 
is the meaning of them; but to have the 
same in our mother tongue would save us a 
great deal of needless labour. It is commendable 
for men to imploy their spare time 
in some things of deeper Speculation than 
is required of the female sex; but the Art 
of Midwifry chiefly concern us, which, even 
the best Learned men will grant, yielding 
something of their own to us, when they are 
forced to borrow from us the very name 
they practise by, and to call themselves Men-midwives. 
But to avoid long preambles in a 
matter so clear and evident, I shall proceed 
to set down such rules, and method concerning 
this Art as I think needful, and that as 
plainly and briefly as possibly I can, and with 
as much modesty in words as the matter 
will bear: and because it is commonly 
maintain'd, that the Masculine gender is 
more worthy than the Feminine, though 
perhaps when men have need of us they will 
yield the priority to us; that I may not 
forsake the ordinary method, I shall begin 
with men, and treat last of my own sex, 
[^p.5^] 
so as to be understood by the meanest capacity, 
desiring the Courteous Reader to use 
as much modesty in the perusal of it, as I 
have endeavoured to do in the writing of it, 
considering that such an Art as this cannot be 
set forth, but that young men and maids 
will have much just cause to blush sometimes, 
and be ashamed of their own follies, 
as I wish they may if they shall chance to 
read it, that they may not convert that into 
evil that is really intended for a general 
good. 
 
[}CHAP. I. 
 
A brief description of the Generative 
parts in both sexes; and first of 
the Vessels in Men appropriated to 
procreation.}] 
 
THere are six parts in Men that are fitted 
for generation. 
 
1. The Vessels that prepare the matter to 
make the seed, called the preparing Vessels. 
 
2. There is that part or Vessel which 
works this matter, or transmutes the blood 
into the real desire for seed. 
 
[^p.6^] 
3. The Stones that make the Seed fructifie. 
 
4. There are Vessels that conveigh the Seed 
back again from the Stones when they have 
concocted it. 
 
5. There are the seminal or Seed-Vessels 
that keep or retain the Seed concocted. 
 
6. The Yard, that from these containing 
Vessels, casts the seed prepared into the Matrix. 
 
[}CHAP. II. 
 
Of the Seed-preparing Vessels.}] 
 
I. THe Vessels that prepare the matter to 
make the Seed are four, two Veins and 
two Arteries, which go down from the small 
guts to the Stones; they have their names from 
their office, which is to fit that matter for 
the work, which the Stones turn into Seed 
that is made fruitful by them, though it be a 
kind of Seed or blood changed into a white 
substance before it comes to the Stones. 
 
It will be needful that you should know 
that the fountain of blood is the Liver, and 
not the Heart, as was anciently supposed, 
and the Liver by the Veins disperse the 
[^p.7^] 
blood through the Body. The two Arteries 
that prepare the matter, arise both from the 
great Artery or Trunk that is in the Hearts 
and is the beginning of all the Arteries, for 
the Arteries rise from the Heart, as the Vein, 
do from the Liver; but the two Veins for 
preparation of seed, are one on the right 
the other on the left side; the right Vein 
proceeds from the great hollow Vein of the 
Liver, a little below the beginning of the 
Emulgent Vein; but the left Vein springs 
commonly from the root of the Emulgent 
Vein, yet it hath been seen to have a branch 
that comes to it from the Trunk of the hollow 
Vein. Of these two Veins and Arteries 
there is one Vein, and one Arterie of 
each side; these two Veins in the middle 
part, pass streight through the Loins, and 
they repose upon the Lumbal Muscle, having 
only a thin skin, that comes betwixt 
them, and there they divide and scatter 
themselves into the skinny parts that are 
near adjoining. All these Veins and Arteries 
so descending, are called Seed-preparing 
Vessels, and they are covered with a 
skin that comes from the Peritonæum, the 
Vein lies uppermost, and the Artery under it. 
The lower part of these two Veins goes beyond 
the Midriff to the Stones, and descends 
[^p.8^] 
with a little Nerve, and that Muscle which 
holds up the Stones, through the doubling 
of the Midriff, but they pass not through 
the Peritonæum, and when it comes near the 
Stones an Artery joins with it, and then are 
these Vessels with that skin that comes 
from the Peritonæum twisted together as the 
young twigs of Vines are, and so pass they 
to the end of the Stones. These two Arteries 
have their beginning from the great Artery 
a little below the Emulgent, and so 
they go downwards till they join with the 
two Veins formerly mentioned; the two 
Veins they prepare and carry the natural 
Blood to make Seed of; the two Arteries, 
they carry the vital Spirits or vital 
blood. 
 
[}CHAP. III. 
 
Of the Vessels that make the change of 
red Blood into a white substance like 
Seed.}] 
 
THese Vessels, as you heard before, are also 
four, two Veins and two Arteries, 
that at their first descending keep near one 
to the other, carrying their different blood, 
[^p.9^] 
one from the Liver the other from the Heart, 
as fit matter for the Stones to make Seed of; 
but before they come at the Stones, they twist 
one with the other, sometimes the Veins going 
into the Arteries, and sometimes again the Arteries 
going into the Veins, thus they joyn their 
forces, the better to prepare the matter for the 
use of the Stones, and after that they part again, 
which things are full of delight for a 
Man to behold, that he may the more admire 
the excellency of the works of the great God 
that hath so wonderfully made Man. The 
two Veins and two Arteries, after they have 
joyned with many ingraftings and twistings 
together, appear but two Bodies crumpled like 
the tendrels of a Vine, white and pyramidal, 
and rest one upon the right, the other on the 
left Stone, piercing the very tunicles of the 
Stones with very small veins, and so disperse 
themselves all through the bodies of the 
Stones. The substance of these vessels is betwixt 
that of the stones and that of the Veins 
and Arteries, being neither wholly kernels, 
nor wholly skinny; their office is, by their several 
twistings, to mingle the vital and natural 
blood together which they contain, and 
by vertue they borrow from the Stones, to 
change the colour of red blood into a 
matter that is white, prepared immediately 
[^p.10^] 
for the Stones to make Seed of. 
 
[}CHAP. IV. 
 
Of the Cods, or rather the Stones contained 
therein.}] 
 
THe Cods is as it were a purse for the 
Stones to be kept in with the seminary 
Vessels, and this purse is divided in the middle 
with a thin membrane, which some call the 
seam, and may be seen on the outside of the 
Cods, making a kind of wrinkle that runs all 
along the length of it, and just in the middle: 
This member suffers many kinds of diseases 
and distempers, the property of it is to be dilated 
and extended, by which means there arise 
sundry Ruptures, the Watry Uly, the 
windy, the Humoral, the Fleshy, and the watry 
ruptures, and all this happens by reason of 
too much repletion of the vessels of seed caused 
by much grosse or watry bloud. Within 
this pursy and sobbing and chaking of the 
stones which are two whole kernels like to the 
kernels of womens paps, their figure is Oval, 
and therefore some call them Eggs. 
 
The substance of the Stones hath neither 
[^p.11^] 
blood in it nor feeling; yet they feel exquisitely 
by reason of the pannicles, and each stone hath 
two Muscles sticking to their pannicles, to 
lift them up that they hang not too loose. They 
are temperately hot and moist, but the bloud 
that flowes to them is very hot, by which 
means they draw as a Limbeck the matter of 
seed from the whole Body. Physicians place 
them amongst the Principal parts for the Generation 
and the preservation of mankind. 
They are fastned to all the Principal parts by 
Veins, Arteries, and Pannicles, they are subject 
to mulplicity of diseases and distempers. 
They are wrapt up in three several Coats, the 
outermost is thepurse or Cod common to them 
both, it differs from other skin that covers the 
Body, because other skin is smooth, this is 
wrinkled, that it may observe the motions of 
the stones, to extend or shrink with them, 
then they ascend, or descend: they ascend 
in time of copulation, but in all violent heats, 
or Feavers, or weakness, or in old age, the 
stones hang down, which is alwayes a very 
strong sign of much damage in sickness. 
The second Coat wraps up the stones as the 
first purse doth, but the second wraps them 
nearer, and is not so wide as the first; and 
though the fleshy pannicle from which it 
springs be thinner here than any where else, 
[^p.12^] 
yet it is full of small arteries and veins, that carry 
in vital & natural bloud to keep the stones 
warm, which are of themselves a very coldpart 
The third Coat immediately wraps in the 
Stones, and is white, thick, and strong to preserve 
the soft and loose substance of the Stones. 
Some persons there are, yet not many, and 
those Monsters in nature, that have but one 
stone, and some three stones, but one stone is oftener 
than three; and unlesse it be some great 
failing in Nature, I rather think that the other 
stone lyeth up close within the Body, as sometimes 
both stones do, and do not come down 
into the Cod till such an age, or at certain 
times as is proved by experience, where the 
stones lie within, and come not down; such 
persons are more prone to venery, because 
the stones are kept warmer than when they appear; 
yet the stones are tyed with strings that 
are long and slender, which are Muscles that 
hang by on both sides, to keep the stones from 
being overstretched or oppressing the passage 
of the the seminal Vessels; if any ill chance befall 
the stones then these Muscles are exceeding 
sensible of pain and subject to swell by reason 
of it. The left stone is the biggest, and therefore 
some think more femals are begotten than 
males, and the right is the hotter and breeds 
the stronger Seed, and therefore it is generally 
[^p.13^] 
maintained that Boyes are begotten from the 
right stone, but Girles with the left. Those that 
have hottest stones are most prone to Venery: 
and their stones are longer and harder, and 
they are more hairy about those parts especially. 
The right stone is the hottest in all, because 
it receives more pure and Vital blood 
from the hollow Vein and the great Artery 
than the left doth, which receives onely a watry 
bloud from the Emulgent Vein. But both 
of them have an innate quality to make Seed, 
and without the Stones no procreation can be; 
as we see that such as are gelded lose the faculty 
of Generation, though they want nothing 
else but their stones. The substance of the 
stones is very like to the Seed it self, moist, white 
and clammy. There is yet another Vessel, or 
conduit belonging to the stones, which is called 
the Vessel of ejecting, or casting forth of the 
Seed, it comes from the head of the stones to 
the root of the yard overthwart the stones in 
a small body like a Silk worm, by one end the 
carrying vessel elutes the stones, and carries 
forth the seed, from the other end the casters 
forth of the Seed passeth and descends to the 
bottom of the stones, and bends back again and 
is knit to the preparing Vessels, and returns to 
the head of the stones, and so goes upward till 
it touch the bone of the small guts, keeping 
[^p.14^] 
close to the preparing vessels, till it pierce the production 
of the Hypogastrium or lower belly, 
which is the upper part of the place where the 
hair grows above the Privities; it reacheth 
from the Navil to that hair, and so it runnes 
from thence through the hollowness of the hip 
and sides between the bladder and the straight 
gut, till it come as far as the forestanders, and 
so fixeth it self, where it ends at the root of the 
Yard where it begins; so long as it remains amongst 
the Coats of the stones, it is full of many 
windings forward and backward, but near 
the end it hath many little Bladders like 
Warts. 
 
[}CHAP. V. 
 
Of the carrying Vessels.}] 
 
THe carrying Vessels on both sides, are certain 
small bladders, united between the 
Bladder and the right Gut, the last of them, 
with the seminary Vessels, by a little pipe ends 
in the forestanders: These carry and conveigh 
the seed that is first fully concocted in the 
stones, by the great heat of them by reason of 
the vital blood that is brought to them, to the 
seminary Vessels which are to hold the Seed, 
[^p.15^] 
till there is cause to cast it forth. They are but 
two white nervous sinews, obscure, hollow 
Pipes, they rise from the Stones to the Belly 
not far from the preparing Vessels, from the 
hollow of the belly they return and go to the 
backside of the bladder; betwixt that and the 
right gut, and near the neck of the bladder they 
are joyned to the Vessels for Seed, which are 
like a Honey-comb; these Honey-combs or 
hollow Cells have an oyly matter in them, for 
they attract the fatty substance from the Seed, 
and that they send forth into the urinary 
passage chiefly in the act of carnal copulation, 
lest the thin skin of the Yard, which is very 
quick of feeling should be hurt by the sharpness 
of the Seed. The carrying Vessels fall at last into 
the vessels ordain'd to the Seed till there is 
use for it. The carriers strengthen the vessels 
for the seed, and are storehouses for it, that the 
whole store be not wasted in one act; you shall 
find in some persons enough to serve for severall 
acts of copulation. They are hollow and 
round to contain the more Seed, and they are 
full of membranes that they may be shortned 
or lengthened as the Seed is more or less in 
quantity, and are full of meanders and turnings, 
that the seed pass not away without a 
mans will. 
 
[^p.16^] 
[}CHAP. VI. 
 
The Vessels for seed.}] 
 
THe Vessels for Seed are such as you call 
kernels in your meat, we call them here 
forestanders; they are two little stones seated 
at the root of the Yard, a little above the sphyaster 
of the bladder, they are wrapt up with 
a skin that covers them, they seem to be round, 
but they are flat behind, and before, they are 
loose and spongy as kernels usually are, and 
white and hard, in some persons more or less, 
they having a quick feeling to stir up delight 
in Copulation; they have some small pipes 
which open into the common pipes through 
which the Seed passeth into the Yard: these 
kernels or forestanders being pressed by the 
lower muscles of the Yard, besides the oyly 
fat substance they defend the urinary passage 
by, they also defend the Vessels that carry the 
seed to them, left by much standing and 
stretching of the Yard the carriers of seed 
should be hurt; they have another use also, for 
lying between the bladder and the right gut, 
they serve for cushions for the vessels to rest 
upon, to keep them from violent pressing, and 
this is the cause why those that are costive and 
[^p.17^] 
cannot easily go to stool, when they strain to 
do their business, they press those kernels and 
sometimes void some Seed, and also must needs 
make some water, more or less when they go 
to stool. These kernels compass the vessels 
that carry the seed, and through the midst of 
these passeth the water or Urine pipe, or common 
passage both for seed and Urine, or conduit 
of the Yard. At the mouth of this conduit 
where the carrying vessels meet with it, 
there is a thin skin that keeps the vessels for 
seed that are like a spunge in nature, that they 
shed not forth the seed against mens will. But 
this skin is full of holes, which open by the 
violent heat and motion in Copulation, and so 
the seed finds its way out, for it is a thin spirit, 
and the rather by reason of motion, and passes 
like Quicksilver through a piece of leather; 
there are no more holes to be seen in this 
skin than in a piece of leather, unless it be 
seen in some persons after death, who were 
in their lifetime troubled with a great running 
of the Reins as it is called, but properly an involuntary 
shedding of the Seed, because these 
holes are become so great, that the subtile seed 
cannot be kept back by it; the reins are to 
part the Urine from the blood, and to send 
that to the bladder by the conduits of Urine, 
but not to send forth seed or to provide it, 
[^p.18^] 
that is the work of the stones as I said. Yet 
by communication of parts, if the reins be much 
offended, the seminary parts cannot perform 
their office as they should, but an involuntary 
shedding of Seed will follow, untill such time 
as the reins be strengthened and cured. I shall 
give onely one observation and so conclude 
this Chapter: And that is a warning to all 
that cut for the stone in the bladder, of what 
age soever they be who are cut; oftentimes in 
drawing forth the stone they so rend and tear 
the seed vessels, that such persons are never 
able to beget Children, they may hatch the 
Cuckows Eggs, and keep other mens if they 
please, but they shall never get any themselves; 
these kernels are a hard and spungy substance 
near as great as a Walnut. 
 
[}CHAP. VII. 
Of a mans yard.}] 
 
THe Yard is as it were the Plow wherewith 
the ground is tilled, and made fit for production 
of Fruit: we see that some fruitful persons 
have a Crop by it almost every year, only 
plowing up their own ground, and live 
more plentifully by it than the Countryman 
can with all his toil and cost: & some there are 
that plow up other mens ground, when they 
can find such lascivious women that will pay 
[^p.19^] 
them well for their pains, to their shame be it 
spoken, but commonly they pay dear for it in 
the end, if timely they repent not. The 
Yard is of a ligamental substance, sinewy and 
hollow as a spunge, having some muscles to 
help it in its several postures. The Yard and 
the Tongue have more great Veins and Arteries 
in them than any part of the Body for their 
bigness; by these porosities, by help of Imagination 
the Yard is sometimes raised, and 
swels with a windy spirit only, for there is a 
natural inclination and force by which it is 
raised when men are moved to Copulation, as 
the motion is natural in the Heart and Arteries; 
true it is that in these motion is alwayes 
necessary, but the Yard moves only at some 
times, and riseth sometimes to small purpose. 
It stands in the sharebone in the middle as all 
know, being of a round and long fashion, 
with a hollow passage within it, through 
which passe both the Urine and Seed; the 
top of it is called the Head or Nut of the 
Yard, and there it is compact and hard, & not 
very quick of feeling, lest it should suffer 
pain in Copulation; there is a soft loose skin 
called the foreskin which covers the head of it, 
and will move forward and backward as it is 
moved; this foreskin in the lower part only 
in the middle, is fastned or tyed long ways 
[^p.20^] 
to the greater part of the Head of the Yard 
by a certain skinny part called the string or 
bridle. It is of temperament hot and moist, 
& it is joined to the middle of the share bone, 
and with the Bladder by the Conduit pipe that 
carrieth the Urine, & with the brain by Nerves 
and Muscles that come to the skin of it, to 
the Heart and Liver by Veins and Arteries 
that come from them. The Yard hath three 
holes or Pipes in it, one broad one and that is 
common to the Urine and Seed, and two small 
ones by which the Seed comes into the common 
long Conduit pipe; these two Arteries or 
Vessels enter into this pipe in the place called 
the Perinæum, which in men is the place 
between the root of the Yard and the Arsehole 
or Fundament, but in a woman it is the 
place between that and the cut of the neck of 
the womb; from those holes to the Bladder, 
that passage is called the neck of the Bladder, 
and from thence to the head of the Yard 
is the common pipe or channel of the Yard. 
The Yard hath four Muscles, two towards 
the lower part on both sides, one of them 
near the channel or pipe of the Yard, and 
these are extended in length, and they dilate 
the Yard and raise it up, that the Seed may 
with ease pass through it: two other muscles 
there are that come from the root of it 
[^p.21^] 
near the share bone that comes slanting toward 
the top of the Yard in the upper part of 
it, when these are stretched the Yard riseth, 
and when they slacken then it falls again, and 
if one of these be bent and the other be not, 
the Yard bends to that muscle that is stretched 
or bent. 
 
If the Yard be of a moderate size, not too 
long, nor too short, it is good as the Tongue 
is, but if the Yard be too long, the spirits in 
the seed flee away; if it be too short, it 
cannot carry the Seed home to the place it 
should do. 
 
The Yard also serveth to empty the Bladder 
of the water in it, and that is easily proved 
by a Louse put into the pipe of the Yard, 
which by biting will cause one to make water 
when the Urine is supprest. The foreskin 
was made to defend the Yard that is tender, 
and to cause delight in Copulation; the 
Jews were commanded to cut it off. Many 
diseases are incident to the Yard, but a priapisme 
or standing of the Yard continually 
by reason of a windy matter, is a disease that 
peoperly belongs to this paart, and is very dangerous 
sometimes. 
 
The Yard of a man is not bony, as in Dogs, 
and Wolves, and Foxes; nor gristly, for then 
it could not stand and fall as need is; it is 
[^p.22^] 
make of Skins, Brawns, Tendons, Veins, 
Arteries, Sinews, and great Ligaments; 
yet not so full of Veins but it may be emptyed 
and filled again; nor so full of Arteries as to 
beat alwayes, yet you shall find it beat sometimes; 
it consists not of Nerves for they are 
not hollow enough for the passages, but it is 
compounded of a peculiar substance that is 
not found in any other part of the body; the 
place of it, as I said, begins at the share-bone, 
and it is fast knit to the Yard between the 
Cods and the Fundament, so that there is a 
seam that comes up along the Cods and parts 
them in the midst between the Stones. The 
Yard is not perfectly round, but is somewhat 
broad on the back or upperside, it differs 
a little in some from others; the situation 
of it is so peculiar to Men, that they have 
herein a preeminence above all other creatures. 
Some men, but chiefly fools, have 
Yards so long that they are useless for generation. 
It is generally held, that the length 
or proportion of the Yard depends upon cutting 
the Navel string, if you cut it too short 
and knit it too close in Infants it will be too 
short, because of the string that comes from 
the Navel to the bottom of the bladder, 
which draws up the Bladder and shortnes 
the Yard: and this beside the general opinion, 
[^p.23^] 
stands with so much reason, that all Midwives 
have cause to be careful to cut the Navel 
string long enough, that when they tye 
it, the Yard may have free liberty to move 
and extend it self, alwayes remembring that 
moderation is best, that it be not left too 
long, which may be as bad as too short. 
There are six parts to be observed of which 
the Yard consists: 1. Two sinewy bodies. 
2. A sinewy substance to hold up the two 
side Ligaments and the urinary passage. 3. 
The Urinary passage it self. 4. The Nut of 
the Yard. 5. The four Muscles; and 6. The 
Vessels. 
 
The two sinewy bodies are really two 
though they are joined together, they are 
long and hard, within they are spongy 
and full of black blood, the spongy substance 
within seems to be woven network, and is 
made of numberless Veins and Arteries, 
and the black blood that is contained in 
them is full of spirits. Motion and leisure in 
Copulation heats them, and makes the Yard 
to stand, and so will imagination; the hollow 
weaving of them together was to hold 
the spirits as long as may be that the Yard 
fall not down before it hath performed the 
work of nature. These side ligaments of 
the Yard where they are thick and round, 
[^p.24^] 
spring from the lower part of the sharebone, 
and not the upper part as Galen supposed. 
At the beginning they are parted 
and resemble a pair of Horns or the Letter 
Y, where the common pipe for Urine and 
Seed goes between them. It is thus manifest 
that the greatest part of the Yard is 
made of two sinewy parts, one of them of 
each side, and they both end at the top 
of the head of the Yard, they come from 
two beginnings and lean upon the hip 
under the share-bone, and so run on to the 
Nut of the Yard. Also their substance is 
double, the outside is sinewy, hard and 
thick, the inside black, soft loose, spongy 
and thin, they are joined by a thin and sinewy 
skin, which is strengthened by some 
slanting small Veins placed there like to a 
Weavers Shuttle; they are parted at their 
first rising to make way for the water pipe, 
but they are joined about the middle of the 
share-bone, and there they lose near a third 
part of their sinewy substance. 
 
The use of these two sinewy bodies that 
make the yard, is for the vital spirits to 
run through the thin parts of them and fill 
the Yard with spirits, and they are so thick 
and compact, and strong on the outside, 
that they hinder these spirits from breaking 
[^p.25^] 
suddenly away, for should they flee out, the 
Yard will stand no longer but presently fall 
down. 
 
In the inside of the substance of the Yard 
which is wrapt about by the outward sinewy 
substance there is seen a thin and tender artery 
coming from the root of the Yard, 
and runs quite through the whole loose substance 
of it: Besides these there is a Conduit 
pipe placed at the lower part of the Yard 
that serves both for Seed and Urine to be 
put forth by, as common to them both, 
and it runs through the middle of the foresaid 
two sinewy bodies, and is of the 
same substance with them, and is loose 
and thick, soft and tender, and runs equally 
in all respects from the neck of the 
bladder to the top of the Yard, only it is 
something larger where it begins than where 
it ends at the top of the Nut. This pipe 
at first, as I said, hath three holes where 
it riseth from the neck of the bladder, 
that in the middle is wider than the other 
two pipes or holes are which stand on both 
sides of it, and which are derived from the 
passage that comes from the Seed Vessels, 
and they carry the Seed into this great pipe. 
In this great pipe where it is fastened to 
the Nut of the Yard, and with the two sinewy 
[^p.26^] 
bodies, there is a little hollow place 
wherein when a man is troubled with the 
running of the Reins by reason of the Pox, 
some corrupt seed or sharp matter lyeth, 
which occasions great pains and Ulcers, and 
sometimes the Chirurgeon is forced to cut 
off the top of the Yard; and sometimes 
from these Ulcers there will grow a piece 
of flesh in the Yards passage for Urine, 
which hinders the Urine that it cannot come 
forth till that piece of flesh be taken away 
by conveighing something into that Urinary 
passage that may eat it off. There is one 
thing more worth taking notice of by Chirurgions, 
concerning this pipe or Urinary 
passage, that from the place where it begins 
and goes forward from the neck of the 
bladder to the spermatick Vessels and forestanders, 
that there is a thin and very tender 
skin which is of most acute feeling, and 
to stir up delight in the act of Venery, and 
it will make the Yard stand upon any delightsome 
thoughts or desires. If the Chirurgions 
be not careful when they thrust the 
springs in near that place, they will soon 
break this skin and undoe their Patient. This 
common pipe comes from the neck of the 
bladder, that is, it begins there, but it doth 
not take its being from it; for boyl the bladder 
[^p.27^] 
of any creature, and it will part from it 
whereby it is plain, that it is only join'd to 
it, and so runs on to the Nut of the Yard. 
 
[}CHAP. VIII. 
 
The Nut of the Yard.}] 
 
THe Nut is a piece of soft thin brawny 
flesh, that it may do no hurt to the Womb 
when it enters; it is full of spirits and blood, 
very quick and tender of feeling, yet will endure 
to be touched; the skin of it is very 
pure thin skin; and if it be broken or rub'd 
off, it will soon grow again, but if the body 
of it be hurt in the fleshy part, or once lost, 
it will never grow again; it is a little sharp 
at the end, and made like to a top, that it 
may enter the better; it is fastened as I told 
you, to the foreskin or the lower part with 
a ligament or bridle, which is sometimes so 
streight tied, and is so strong, that it will pull 
the head of the Yard backwards when it 
stands; but it is usually broken, or gives way 
the first time that a man lyeth with a woman, 
for the combate is then doubtless so furious, 
that a man feels no pain of it by reason of the 
[^p.28^] 
abundance of pleasure that takes it off, otherwise 
doubtless the part is so quick of feeling, 
that no man were able to endure it. 
 
[}CHAP. IX. 
 
The Muscles of the Yard.}] 
 
A Muscle is an Instrument for voluntary 
motion, for without that no part were 
in a capacity to move it self. There is a little 
Book lately set forth and is well worth the 
reading, concerning the reason of the motion 
of the Muscles. Of these Muscles the Yard 
hath four, two on each side to give motion 
to it. These Muscles are a fibrous flesh to 
make up their body; they have sinews for 
feeling, veins for nourishment, Arteries for 
vital blood, a skin to cover them, and to 
part one Muscle from another, and all of 
them from the flesh, you may if you please 
easily discern them in a leg of a Rabbit. Of 
each side of the Yard, one of these Muscles 
is shorter and thicker than the others are, 
and they serve to raise the Yard and to make 
it stand, and are therefore called raisers or 
erecters; the other two are longer and smaller, 
and they open the lower part of the 
[^p.29^] 
Urinary pipe both when men make water, 
and when they cast forth the Seed, and 
are therefore called hasteners, because 
they dispatch and hasten the work; one pair 
of these Muscles comes from a part of the 
hip near the beginning of the Yard; besides 
that they raise the Yard to make it stand, 
they also bend the fore part of the Yard to 
be thrust into the womb, so that all things 
are so exactly fitted by nature, that a blind 
man cannot miss it. The two longer Muscles 
come from the sphincter of the Fundament, 
and are of a more fleshy substance; and are 
full as long as the Yard, under which they 
go downward ending at the side of the water 
pipe about the the middle of the Yard; were it 
not for these large Muscles to open the conduit 
pipe, the passage would be stopt by repletion 
of nervy bodies, both when men 
should make water, or cast out the Seed: 
They also hold the Yard firm, that it lean 
not to either side, and serve farther to press 
forth the Seed out of the forestanders, all 
helping to the sudden and forceable casting 
it out in time of Copulation, lest the spirits 
fly away and the Seed prove unfruitful. 
 
There are all manner of Vessels in the Yard, 
as Veins, Nerves, Arteries, yet Columbus tells 
us, that Vesalius a great Anatomist, maintains 
[^p.30^] 
that there is neither Vein, nor Nerve in 
it, which is very false, for there are some 
Veins and Arteries to be seen in the outward 
skin of the Yard, others are within, 
and there the Arteries are far more than the 
Veins, and are dispersed through the whole 
body of the Yard. The right Artery runs 
to the left side of it, and the left to the right 
side, the veins that appear on the outside of 
it, and on the foreskin, come from the 
under belly; and these Veins do swell with 
a frothy blood when the Yard begins to 
stand. 
 
It hath also two sinews, the lesser of the 
two goes upon the skin, the greater upon 
the muscles and body of the Yard. These 
sinews scatter themselves from the marrow 
of that bone which is called the holy bone, 
and they pass quite through the Yard, and 
cause exceeding great delight when the Yard 
stands, and they prick forward in the action 
of Venery. 
 
The Yard is stretched and made to swell 
by reason of fulness of Seed and plenty of 
wind, and therefore all windy meats, as 
Pulse, Beans, and Pease and the like, will 
make the Yard stand, and sometimes they 
cause a priapisme or continual standing of 
the Yard, which will be more troublesome 
[^p.31^] 
than if it should never stand at all. It is 
not to be imagined what pains some have 
undergone, who by indiscreet taking of Cantharides 
have fallen into this grievous 
distemper, wherefore I would wish men to 
take heed lest they pay for it at last, for the 
Proverb is commonly true, sweet meat must 
have sour sawce. Sometimes the bladder is 
full of Urine, and the veins are very hot 
which make the Yard to rise. 
 
The Yard is placed betwixt the thighs, 
that it may stand the stronger to perform its 
work with all the force a man is able, and at 
the lower end of it to add more strength it 
is more fleshy, and that flesh is musculous, and 
besides that it hath two muscles as I said 
on both sides to poise it equally when it stands, 
they are indeed but small muscles yet they are 
exceeding strong. 
 
The skin of the Yard is long and loose 
that it may swell or slack as the Yard doth, 
and the foreskin of that skin sometimes covers 
the head of the Yard, and sometimes 
goes so far back that it will not come forward 
again. This skin in time of the Venerious 
action, keeps the mouth of the 
womb close that no cold air get in, yet some 
think the action might be better performed 
without it; the Jews indeed were commanded 
[^p.32^] 
to be Circumcised, but now Circumcision avails 
not & is forbidden by the Apostle. I hope 
no man will be so void of reason and Religion, 
as to be Circumcised to make trial which 
of these two opinions is the best; but the world 
was never without some mad men, who will 
do any thing to be singular: were the foreskin 
any hindrance to procreation or pleasure, nature 
had never made it, who made all things 
for these very ends and purposes. 
 
The top of the Nut hath a hole for the Urine 
and Seed to come forth by, and nature hath 
made a little round circle at the bottom of the 
Nut, with a fit jetting out from the body of 
the Yard, and when the Yard casts the Seed 
into the Womb, the neck of the womb with 
her own slanting fibres lays hold of it and embraceth 
it, and by this circle the Seed is kept 
in the womb that it cannot fly out again. The 
Nut of the Yard, when it is half covered with 
the foreskin, looks like an Acorn in the Cup, 
and therefore some call it Glans, which in Latin 
signifies an Acorn, in this Acorn or Nut of 
the Yard lyeth all the pleasure of Copulation, 
so that if the Nut were gone, many think 
there could be no more tickling or moving in 
the Seed, but all fruitful Copulation would be 
lost, or at least there would be no pleasure in 
the act of Generation, though the Stones 
[^p.33^] 
might move a desire to it by transmitting of 
the Seed which is made by them. Let men 
be careful then how they enter too far, for it 
will be hard to say which were the greater 
loss, of the Stones or the Nut. 
 
[}CHAP. X. 
 
Of the Generation or Privy parts in 
Women.}] 
 
MAn in the act of procreation is the agent 
and tiller and sower of the Ground, 
Woman is the Patient or Ground to be tilled, 
who brings Seed also as well as the Man to 
sow the ground with. I am now to proceed 
to speak of this ground or Field which is the 
Womans womb, and the parts that serve to 
this work: we women have no more cause 
to be angry, or be ashamed of what Nature 
hath given us than men have, we cannot be 
without ours no more than they can want 
theirs. The things most considerable to be 
spoken to are, 1. The neck of the womb or 
privy entrance. 2. The womb it self. 3. The 
Stones. 4. The Vessels of Seed. At the bottom 
of the womans belly is a little bank called 
a mountain of pleasure near the well-spring, 
[^p.34^] 
and the place where the hair coming forth 
shews Virgins to be ready for procreation, in 
some far younger than others; some are more 
forward at twelve years than some at sixteen 
years of age, as they are hotter and riper 
in constitution. Under this hill is the springhead, 
which is a passage having two lips set 
about with hair as the upper part is: I shall 
give you a brief account of the parts of it, 
both within and without, and of the likeness 
and proportion between the Generative parts 
in both sexes. 
 
[}CHAP. XI. 
 
Of the Womb.}] 
 
THe Matrix or Womb hath two parts, 
the great hollow part within, and the 
neck that leads to it, and it is a member 
made by Nature for propagation of children. 
The substance of the concavity of it 
is sinewy, mingled with flesh, so that it is not 
very quick of feeling, it is covered with a 
sinewy Coat that it may stretch in time of 
Copulation, and may give way when the 
Child is to be born; when it takes in the Seed 
from Man the whole concavity moves towards 
[^p.35^] 
the Center, and embraceth it, and 
toucheth it with both its sides. The substance 
of the neck of it is musculous and 
gristly with some fat, and it hath one wrinkle 
upon another, and these cause pleasure in the 
time of Copulation; this part is very quick 
of feeling. The concavity or hollow of it 
is called the Womb, or house for the infant 
to lie in. Between the neck and the Womb 
there is a skinny fleshy substance within, 
quick of feeling, hollow in the middle, that 
will open and shut, called the Mouth of the 
Womb and it is like the head of a Tench, 
or of a young Kitten; it opens naturally in 
Copulation, in voiding menstrous blood, and 
in child-birth; but at other times, especially 
when a woman is with Child, it shuts so 
close, that the smallest needle cannot get in 
but by force. 
 
The neck is long, round, hollow, at first 
it is no wider than a mans Yard makes it, 
but in maids, much less. About the middle 
of it is a Pannicle called the Virgin Pannicle, 
made like a net with many fine ligaments and 
Veins, but a woman loseth it in the firts act, 
for it is then broken. At then end of the neck 
there are small skins which are called foreskins; 
within the neck, a little toward the 
share bone, there is a short entrance, whose 
[^p.36^] 
orifice is shut with certain fleshy and skinny 
additions, whereby, and by the aforesaid 
foreskin, the air coming between, 
they make a hissing noise when they make 
water. 
 
The figure of the concavity of the Womb 
is four quare, with some roundness, and hollow 
below like a bladder. 
 
There is towards the neck of the Womb on 
both sides a strong ligament near the hanches, 
binding the womb to the back, they are like 
a Snails horns, and therefore are called the 
horns of the womb. 
 
About these horns there is one Stone on 
each side, harder and smaller than Mens stones, 
and not perfectly round, but flat like an Almond; 
Seed is bred in them, not thick and 
hot as in men, but cold Watry seed. 
 
These Stones have not one purse to hold 
them both as Mens stones have, but each of 
them hath a covering of its own that springs 
from the Peritoneum, binding them about, the 
horns and each of them hath a small muscle to 
move them by. 
 
The foresaid Seed-Vessels are plainted in 
these Stones, and are called preparing Vessels, 
descending from the Liver Vein, the great Artery 
and the Emulgent Veins; then there are 
other Vessels called carriers, that continually 
[^p.37^] 
dilate themselves and proceed as far as the 
concavity of the womb, where it is joyned to 
the neck, and they carry the Seed to the hollow 
of the Womb. 
 
The many Orifices of these Vessels are called 
Cups, the menstruous blood runs forth by them, 
and the Infant suck's its nutriment from them 
by the Veins and Arteries of the Navel, that 
are joyned to these Cups. 
 
A Woman hath no forestanders, for a womans 
Vessels are soft, and do not hurt the 
stones as they would do in Men because they 
are so hard. 
 
The whole Matrix considered with the 
stones and Seed Vessels, is like to a mans Yard 
and privities, but Mens parts for Generation 
are compleat and appear outwardly by reason 
of heat, but womens are not so compleat, and 
are made within by reason of their small 
heat. 
 
The Matrix is like the Yard turned inside 
outward, for the neck of the womb is as the 
Yard, and the hollow of it with its receivers, 
and Vessels, and Stones, are like the 
Cods, for the Cods turned in have a hollowness, 
and within the womb lye the Stones and seed 
Vessels, but Mens stones and Vessels are 
larger. 
 
The place of the cut of the Matrix is between 
[^p.38^] 
the Fundament and the share-hone, and 
the place between both Arteries, is called the 
Peritoneum. 
 
The neck from the cut by the belly goeth 
upward as far as the womb, and the place of 
it is between the right Gut and the bladder; 
all these are placed at length in the cavity of 
the belly. 
 
The womb is small in Maids, and less than 
their bladder, neither is the hollow compleat, 
but groweth bigger as the body doth. In 
Maids of ripe years it is not much bigger than 
you can comprehend in your hand; unless 
when they come to be with Child, yet it 
grows by reason fo their courses. The sides 
of it are fleshy, hard and thick, but when a 
Woman is with Child it is stretched out and 
made thin and seems more sinewy, and then 
it riseth toward the navel more or less accordding 
as the Child is in bigness. 
 
It hath but one hollow Cell, yet this at 
the bottom is in some manner divided into 
two, as if there were two wombs fastened to 
one neck. 
 
For the most part Boys are bred in the right 
side of it, and Girles in the left. 
 
It joyns to the Brain by Nerves, to the 
Heart by Arteries, to the Liver and Lightes by 
Veins, to the right Gut by Pannicles, to the 
[^p.39^] 
bladder by the neck of it; which neck is short, 
and comes not forth as Mens do; it is joyned 
to the hanches by the hornes, the concavity 
of it is loose every way, and therefore it will 
fall to the sides, and sometimes it will come 
all forth of the body by the neck of it. Perhaps 
it is no error to say the Wombs are two, 
because there are two cavities like two hollow 
hands touching one the other, both covered 
with one Pannicle, and both end in one channel; 
No Man that sees a womb can well discern 
it unless he be well skiled in the Aspects, 
concerning limbs, and shadows, whereby Physicians 
are much helped in many practices as well 
as other Artificers. 
 
The womb by reason of that which flows to 
it, is hot and moist. It is of great use to cleanse 
the body from superfluous blood, but chiefly 
to preserve the Child. 
 
It is subject to all diseases, and the whole 
womb may be taken forth when it is corrupted, 
as I have seen, and yet the woman may 
live in good health when it is all cut away. In 
the year of our Lord 1520, upon the 5=th.= of 
October, Domianus a Chirurgion, cut out a 
whole womb from one called Gentil, the wife 
of Christopher Briant of Millan, in the presence 
of many Learned Doctors, and other Students: 
and that woman did afterwards follow her ordinary 
[^p.40^] 
business, and as she and her Husband 
confest and reported, she kept company with 
her husband, and cast forth Seed in Copulation, 
and had her monthly courses as she was 
wont to have before. 
 
[}CHAP. XII. 
 
Of the likeness of the Privities of both 
sexes.}] 
 
BUt to handle these things more particularly, 
Galen saith that women have all the 
parts of Generation that Men have, but Mens 
are outwardly, womens inwardly. 
 
The womb is like to a mans Cod, turned 
the inside outward, and thrust inward between 
the bladder and the right Gut, for then 
the stones which were in the Cod, will stick 
on the outsides of it, so that what was a Cod 
before will be a Matrix, so the neck of the 
womb which is the passage for the Yard to enter, 
resembleth a Yard turned inwards, for they 
are both one length, onely they differ like a 
pipe, and the case for it; so then it is plain, that 
when the woman conceives, the same members 
are made in both sexes, but the Child proves to 
[^p.41^] 
be a Boy or a Girle as the Seed is in temper; 
and the parts are either thrust forth by heat, 
or kept in for want of heat; so a woman is 
not so perfect as a Man, because her heat is 
weaker, but the Man can do nothing without 
the woman to beget Children, though some 
idle Coxcombs will needs undertake to shew 
how Children may be had without use of the 
woman. 
 
[}CHAP. XIII. 
 
Of the secrets of the Female sex, and first 
of the privy passage.}] 
 
SEven things are here to be observed: 1. 
The Lips. 2. The Wings. 3. The Clitoris. 
4. The passage for Urine. 5. The four 
fleshy Knobs. 6. The membrane, or sinewy 
skin thay joynes these four fleshy knobs together. 
7. The neck of the womb. 
 
The Lips, or Laps of the Privities are outwardly 
seen, and they are made of the common 
coverings of the body, having some 
spongy fat, both are to keep the inward parts 
from cold, and that nothing get in to offend 
the womb; some call this the womans modesty, 
for they are a double door like Floodgates 
[^p.42^] 
to shut and open: the neck of the womb 
ends in this, and it is as it were a skinny addition, 
for covering of the neck, answering to 
the foreskin of a Mans yard. These Lips which 
make the fissure of the outward orifice, are 
long, soft, of a skinny and fleshy substance; 
in some kind spongy and like kernels, with a 
hard brawny fat under them, and they are 
covered with a thin skin; but in those women 
that are married, they lye lower and smoother 
than in maids; when maids are ripe they are 
full of hair that grows upon them, but they 
are more curled in women than the hair of 
Maids. They that have much hair and very 
young are much given to venery. 
 
The wings appear when the Lips are parted, 
and they are made of soft spongy flesh, 
and the doubling of the skin, placed at the 
sides of the neck, these compass the Clitoris, 
and are like a Cocks Comb. These wings besides 
the great pleasure they give women in 
Copulation, are to defend the Matrix from 
outward violence, and serve to the orifice of 
the neck of the womb as the foreskin doth 
to a mand Yard, for they shut the cleft with 
lips as it were, and preserve the womb from 
cold air and all injuries: and they direct the 
Urine through the large passage, as between 
two walls, receiving it from the bottom of 
[^p.43^] 
the cleft like a Tunnel, and so it runs forth in 
a broad stream and a hissing noise, not so 
much as wetting the wings of the Lap as it 
goes along; and therefore these wings are 
called Nymphs, because they joyn to the passage 
of the Urine, and the neck of the womb, out 
of which as out of Fountains, whereof the 
Nymphs were called Goddesses, water and humours 
do flow, & besides in them is all the joy 
and delight of Venus. Those parts that are seen 
without are the Lips, the slit, and the groin, but 
so soon as the Lips are divided there are three 
slits to be seen, the greatest is the outmost and 
is first seen, and there are two less slits between 
the wings, which serve to close up the 
parts the more firmly. But that which is the 
great and long slit, is made by the Lips, and 
bends backward toward the Fundament from 
the share-bone downward toward the slit of 
of the buttocks, and the more backward it 
goes the deeper and broader it is, and so it 
makes a trench like a Boat, and ends in the 
welt of the orifice of the neck of the womb. 
 
The Clitoris is a sinewy hard body, full of 
spongy and black matter within it, as it is in 
the side ligaments of a mans Yard, and this 
Clitoris will stand and fall as the Yard doth, & 
makes women lustfull and take delight in Copulation, 
and were it not for this they would 
[^p.44^] 
have no desire nor delight, nor would they 
ever conceive. Some think that Hermaphrodites 
are only women that have their Clitoris 
greater, and hanging out more than others 
have, and so shew like a Mans Yard, 
and it is so called, for it is a small exuberation 
in the upper, forward and middle 
part of the share, in the top of the greater 
slit where the wings end. It differs from 
the Yard in length, the common pipe, and 
the want of one pair of the muscles which 
the Yard hath, but is the same in place and 
substance; for it hath two sinewy bodies 
round, without thick and hard, but inwardly 
spongy and full of holes, or pores, that 
when the spirits come into it, it may stretch, 
and when the spirits are dissipated it grows 
loose again; these sinews as in a Mans Yard, 
are full of gross black vital blood, they come 
from both the share-bones and join with the 
bones of the Hip, they part at first, but join 
about the joining of the share-bones, and so 
they make a solid hard body of the Yard; 
and the end is like the Nut, to which is joined 
a small muscle on each side. The head 
of this counterfeit Yard is called Tertigo, 
and the Wings joining cover it with a fine 
skin like the foreskin; it hath a hole, but it 
goes not through, and Vessels run along the 
[^p.45^] 
back of it as upon a Mans Yard; commonly 
it is but a small sprout, lying close hid under 
the Wings, and not easily felt, yet sometimes 
it grows so long that it hangs forth 
at the slit like a Yard, and will swell and 
stand stiff if it be provoked, and some lewd 
women have endeavoured to use it as men 
do theirs. In the Indies, and Egypt they are 
frequent, but I never heard but of one in this 
Country, if there be any they will do what 
they can for shame to keep it close. 
 
