[^Anonymous: Aristoteles master-piece^] 
 
[}ARISTOTELES 
MASTER-PIECE 
Or 
The Secrets of Generation displayed 
in all the parts thereof. 
 
Containing, 
1. The Signs of Barrenness. 2. The way of getting 
a Boy or a Girl. 3. Of the likeness of Children to 
Parents. 4. Of the Infusion of the Soul into the 
Infant. 5. Of Monstrous Births, and the reasons 
thereof. 6. Of the benefit of Marriage to both 
Sexes. 7. The prejudice of unequal Matches. 
8. The discovery of Insufficiency. The cause 
and cure of the Green-sickness. 10. A Discourse 
of Maiden-heads. 11. How a Midwife ought to be 
qualified. 12. Directions and Cautions to Midwives. 
13. Of the Privities. 14. The Fabrick of 
the Womb. 15. The Use and Action of the Genitals. 
16. Signs of Conceptionm and whether of a 
Male or Female. 17. To discover false Conceptions. 
18. Instructions for Women with Child. 
19. For preventing Miscarriage. 20. For Women 
in Child-bed. 21. Of ordering new-born Infants 
and many other very useful Particulars. To which 
is added a word of Advice to both Sexes in the 
Act of Copulation: And the Pictures of several 
Monstrous Births drawn to the Life. 
 
Entered According to Order. 
 
London, Printed for J. How, and are to be sold 
next door to the Anchor Tavern in Sweetings-Rents 
in Cornhil. 1684.}] 
 
[^An introduction omitted.^] 
[^Extract 1, pp. 5-52^] 
 
[^p.5^] 
[}CHAPTER 1. 
Of Marriage, and at what Age Virgins and 
Youths are capable of Generation, and the 
reason that prompts them to desire Copulation; 
with the signs of Barrenness, and 
how long a Man or Woman are capable of 
getting Children.}] 
 
THat Marriage is an Honourable State 
ordained by God in Paradice, and 
since confirmed by our blessed Saviour, 
who wrought his first Miracle at a Wedding, 
I hope none will deny; therefore it 
is convenient that Parents well take care 
of their Daughters Chastity, and when 
they find them inclinable to Marriage, 
not righteously to restrain their Affections, 
for Nature will have its course, but rather 
to provide for them, is possible, such Husbands 
as may be for their advantage, and 
with whom they may live comfortably in 
that blessed State, least being crossed in their 
purposes, and delayed, they part with their 
Honour dishonourable ways. 
 
The propension and inclination of Maids 
to Marriage, is to be discovered by many 
Symptoms; as when Nature fringes the 
[^p.6^] 
obscure parts, and their Terms flow at the 
time appointed, which is usually in the 
Fourteenth or Fifteenth Year of their Age, 
when as the Seed increaseth in some sooner, 
and in others later, according to their Habits 
or Constitutions: And the Blood, 
which is no longer taken to augment their 
Bodies, abounding, incites their Minds and 
Imaginations to Venery. And by the Retention 
of the Seed, many times it falls out 
that they are cruelly afflicted with fainting 
Fits, and strangling of the Mother: for all 
learned Physicians are of Opinion, that 
more harm comes by the Seed corrupting, 
than by their Courses being unseasonably 
obstructed; for the Seed derogates to a venomous 
quality; and from the effects 
thereof arise the Swarth and weasel Colour 
in Maids, when they begin to be in 
Love, and desirous of Copulation; as also 
their short Breathings, Tremblings, and 
Pantings of the Heart. The Expulsive Faculties 
being moved to cast out the superfluous 
Humour. But if they happen to be 
Married to their own Content, these afflictions 
vanish, and their native Beauty returns 
more gay than before: nor is their 
eager gazing, & desiring to associate them-selves 
with Men, a lesser sign that Nature 
prompts them to desire what she ordain'd: 
[^p.7^] 
Their due of which, sometimes being by 
obdurate Parents debarred in a lawful way, 
breaking the bounds of Modesty, rather 
than during such violent Agitations and 
Conflicts within themselves, they satiate 
their desire in unlawful Love. The same 
may in all Particulars be observed in young 
brisk Widows, whom Death, that Enemy 
of sweet Conjugal Love, has separated from 
the Bosom of their Husbands. 
 
At fourteen Years of Age, commonly the 
Terms in Virgins begins to flow, and then 
they are capable of Conceiving, and so continue 
generally till forty four; at what time, 
for the most part, the Eflux being stayed, 
they are no longer capable of Generation, 
unless such as are exceeding healthful, strong 
of body, and have used themselves to Temperance, 
who have appear'd to be delivered 
of Children till fifty five Years; but 
such Prodigies rarely happen, although the 
Termes extend farther in some Women 
than in others; but many times such Eflux 
proceeds not from any natural cause, but 
by reason of some violent straining or 
other violence, and does often endanger 
the life of the Party: And therefore young 
Men that marry Women surmounting the 
Age aforesaid, if they expect Children, 
unless by Miracle, must labour against the 
[^p.8^] 
Wind, though if an old Man, that is not 
worn out by Diseases and Incontinency, 
marry a brisk lively Lass, there is hopes 
even to threescore and ten, and some that 
are extraordinary lusty, till fourscore. 
 
Hipocrates, that Famous and Learned 
Physician, is of Opinion, that a Youth at 
16 years, or between that and 17, having 
much vital strength, may be capable of getting 
Children, and that force and heat of 
Procreating matter continually increases till 
45, 50, & 65. and at the end of the latter begins 
to flagg; the Seed by little and little becoming 
unfruitful, the natural Spirits being 
extinguished, and the humours dried up; 
and in general, most Physicians at this day 
do observe it, but as to particulars, as I 
have before mentioned, it often happeneth 
otherwise; nay, 'tis reported by a credible 
Author, that in the Reign of Erecus, 
King of Sweedland, a Man was married at 
a Hundred years old, to a Bride of Thirty, 
and had many Children by her, but looked 
so fresh, that such as knew him not took 
him not to exceed half that Age. 
 
In Campania, where the Air is temperate, 
serene, and calm, men of 80 years usually 
marry young Virgins, and have Children 
by them, which argues, that Age in 
men hinders not Procreation, unless they 
[^p.9^] 
be exhausted in their Youth, and their 
Members shriveled up. If any ask why 
a Women is sooner barren than a Man? 
I answer, the Cause is, the natural Heat, 
which is more predominant in the latter 
than in the former; for since a Woman is 
more moist than a Man, as her Courses do 
most evidently demonstrate, as also the 
softness of her Body, 'tis also apparent, 
that he doth exceed her in Native heat; 
and as for that heat, it is the chief thing 
that concocts the Humours, and changes 
them into the substance of the Seed, which 
Aliment the Woman wanting, grows fat, 
when a Man, by reason of that heat, melts 
his fat by degrees, and his Humours are 
dissolved, but by the benefit thereof they 
are elaborated into Seed: and this may, 
for the better Confirmation of what I propose 
be added, That the Woman is not so 
strong as a Man, nor so wise and prudent, 
nor hath so much reason, nor is so ingenious 
in contriving her Affairs, whereby the 
Faculties are hindered in their operation. 
And so I conclude my Assertion. 
 
[^p.10^] 
[}CHAP. II. 
General and particular Rules laid down by 
Learned Physitians, how to proceed in getting 
a Male or Female Child; and of the 
Embrio and perfect Birth, and the Season 
fittest for Copulation.}] 
 
WHEN a young likely Couple 
have entred the holy state of 
Wedlock, & are desirous of Mutual 
Enjoyment for Generation sake, which is 
the chief end for which Wedlock was ordain'd, 
and rather covet to be blessed with 
one Sex than another, let them know first 
for certain, that the Success of such things 
depends upon Divine Providence, though 
secondary causes must be actual and instrumental 
therein; and those are especially 
two: First, the Genital Humour which proceeds 
partly from the Brain, and partly 
from the Liver, the Fountain of Blood; 
then the spirit that is conveyed by Arteries 
from the Heart, by force whereof the Yard 
is erected, and made capable to eject the 
Seed; and partly it flows from the whole 
Body without exception. To which may be 
added the appetite and desire to Copulation, 
[^p.11^] 
which fires the Imagination with unusual 
Fancies, or by the sight and feeling 
a brisk charming Beauty, whose wit and 
liveliness may much incite, and more inflame 
the Courage; but if Nature be infeebled, 
then are there fit artificial Remedies 
to restore it; viz. such meats as most conduce 
to the affording such aliment as proves 
to make Seed abound, and restore the decaies 
of Nature, that the Faculties may freely 
opporate: for as Dung and well manuring 
restores Ground that is worn out and 
heartless; even so seasonable and proper 
Diet opporates to the restoring the faint 
heart, weak spirit, coldness and dryness of 
the Genital Parts, and reduceth the weakness 
of the Nerves to their Temperament, 
and removes Impediments, obstructing the 
Procreation of Children. Then since the 
Diet may, and will alter the evil state of 
the Body to a better, it is necessary that 
such as are subject to Barrenness should eat 
such meat only as tend to render them 
fruitful; and among such things as are inducing 
and stirring up thereto, are all meats 
of good juyce, that nourish well, and makes 
the body lively and full of sap: of which 
Faculty are all hot moist meats: for according 
to Gallen, the substance of Seed is 
made of the pure concocted and windy superfluity 
[^p.12^] 
of Blood, from whence we may 
conlude there is in many things a power to 
accumulate or heap up Seed, as also to augment 
it, and other things of force to cause 
Erection and Ejection of Humour, as Hen-Eggs, 
Pheasants, Woodcocks, Gnatsappers, 
Thrushes, Black-birds, young Pidgeons, 
Sparrows, Partridge, Capons, Almones, 
Pine-nuts, Rasons, Currants, all strong 
Wines moderately taken, especially those 
made of the Grapes of Italy; but the Genitals 
are chiefly erected and provoked by Satyrium, 
Eringoes, Cresses, Eressimum. Parsnips, 
Artichokes, Turnips, Rapes, Asparagus, 
Candid Ginger, Gallinga, Acorns bruised 
to powder and drunk in Muscadel, Scallions, 
Sea-shell Fish &c. And these, though 
excellent Restoratives, will not have present 
Operation, but you must use your self 
to them sometime before you handled your 
Arms, or your Wife will grudg the charge; 
for when Husbands will win their Wives 
favour, then they shall account nothing 
too good nor too dear for them: then must 
they be well prepared to enter this Conflict; 
and when they find themselves so to 
be, they must take the opportunity of doing 
their business well, and that is when 
the monthly Terms are over, lest the 
Seed be hindred from coagulating and fermenting, 
[^p.13^] 
and the Womb be rendred unfit 
for Conception. When therefore the Terms 
are finished, and the Womb well cleansed, 
they must proceed decently, and not over 
rashly, tho' courage and activity must not 
be wanting, nor the force of Imagination: 
and having performed what is necessary, 
the Woman must gently repose on her 
right side, with her head lying low, and her 
body sinking down, that by sleeping in that 
Posture the cells on the right side of the Matrix 
may prove the receptacles of the Seed, 
in which are the greatest force of Generative 
heat, which is the chief inducement to 
the procreation of Male Children, and 
rarely misses to answer the expectation of 
such as experience it, especially if they keep 
themselves warm, and without much motion, 
leaning for the most part to the right 
and drinking a little Spirit of Saffron and 
Juyce of Hysop in a Glass of Malligo or 
Aligant when they lie down and rise, for 
the space of a Week. Now the fittest time 
for the Procreation of Male Children, is 
when the Sun is in Leo, and the Moons 
Sign is Virgo, Scorpio, or Sagitarius. 
 
This Order may be observed for a Female 
Child, by lying as aforesaid, on the 
left-side, and strongly fancying a Female 
in the time of Procreation, especially if the 
[^p.14^] 
Woman drink the decoction of Female 
Mercury, four days from the first day of Purgation; 
the Male Mercury (both Herbs so 
called,) having the like Operation in case 
of a Male Child, for the juyce or concoction 
of these Simples are of force, the one to 
purge the right, and the other the left side 
of the Womb, and thereby open the Receptacles, 
making a way for the Semenary 
of Generation: and the best time to copulate 
for this Sex, is, when the Moon is in the 
Wain and the Sign in Libra, or Aquarius; for 
then they will be of a moist gentle affable 
temper, very fair and perfect in all their 
Members. Avicenna, an Author of good repute, 
describes the time of Procreation thus: 
When, saith he, the Terms are spent and 
the Womb is cleansed, which is commonly 
in five days, or seven at most, if a Man lye 
with his Wife from the first day she is purged 
to the fifth, she will conceive a Male, 
but from the fifth to the eigth day a Female, 
and from the eigth to the twelfth a 
Male again; but after that number of days 
peradventure neither distinctly, but both in 
an Hermophrodite. And thus this Opinion of 
his by the Learned is explained; viz. for 
as much as the first day the Womb being 
cleansed, and the sordid humour perfectly 
purged forth, the Matrix has more heat, 
[^p.15^] 
whereby the Seed of either Sex are better 
contracted, and take surer place on the 
right-side of the Womb, by the attracting 
force of the Liver and right Kidney, from 
which also in those days hot Blood is derived 
for the Nutriment of the Child that shall 
be for left part, as being cold, numb'd 
and void of Blood, cannot contribute any 
thing so soon as the Terms are purg'd, but 
Blood is drawn later and more sparingly 
from the Veins on the left side, which are 
called emulgent Veins, that creep about the 
Milt and left Kedney; so that at length, 
after the first day, until the eighth day, some 
Blood comes forth of them, whereby the 
Child is to be nourish'd; so that when these 
parts perform their Office, and the right-side 
ceases by reason of the Situation and 
cold Nutriment, a Female is generated: after 
the eighth day, the parts on the right side 
operate again, & Blood comes from them 
to nourish the Male after these circuit of 
days, because the menstrual Blood flows 
without distinction from all parts, and the 
Matrix is made too moist with cold Humours 
flowing into it; and the Seed adheres 
to neither side, but floats in the middle of the 
Womb, the Seed of either Sex confounded 
or confused, and out of due Place and Order, 
fixed at last in the Cell at the bottom 
[^p.16^] 
of the Womb, generates an Hermophrodite, 
tho' sometimes such unusual and unnatural 
Conceptions are occasioned by the indecency 
of Copulation, when preposterously the 
Woman in the Act lies uppermost, and the 
Man under her, or by the force of strange 
Imaginations: but many are of Opinion 
such Births happen through the powerful 
Influences of Mercury and Venus in conjunction. 
In a word, they that would be commended 
for their Wedlock Actions, and be 
happy in the fruit of their labour, must observe 
to copulate at distance of time, not 
too often, nor yet too seldom, for both these 
hurt Fruitfulness alike; for to eject immoderately 
weakens a Man and wasts his Spirits, 
and too often causes the Seed, by long 
continuance, to be ineffectutl, and not 
manly enough. And thus much for the 
first general and particular; from whence 
I shall proceed to the second; which is, to 
give the Reader to understand how the 
Child is formed in the Womb, and what 
Accidents it is incident to, how nourished, 
and when brought forth. 
 
Certain it is, there are various Opinions 
concerning this matter; therefore I shall, 
for the satisfaction of the curious, lay down 
the Opinions of the learned; as thus, Man 
consists of the Seed of both united in the 
[^p.17^] 
Matrix by Copulation, and for the first seven 
days the Mothers Blood running to it 
it grows in shape like an Egg; but there is 
a forming faculty and virtue in the Seed 
from a divine and heavenly gift, it being 
abundantly indued with Vital and Etherial 
Spirit, which gives shape and form to the 
Child; so that all the parts and bulk of the 
Body, which is made up in the space of 
many months, and is by degrees framed 
and formed into a decent and comely Figure 
of a Man, do consist in that, and are 
adumbrated thereby: on which Holy David 
contamplating, fell into his divine Rapture 
and Admiration expressed in Psal. 138. 
I will praise thee, O Lord, because I am wonderfully 
made: thy Works are wonderful. My 
Soul searcheth and knoweth it right. Well thou 
knowest all my Bones when I was fashioned in 
the secret place, and when I was wonderfully 
formed in my Mothers Womb. Thy Eyes beheld 
me yet unmade, and in thy Book were all my 
Members written, which day by day were fashioned. 
Thy Knowledge is wonderful unto me, 
whereby I was made, I cannot understand it, 
&c. And Physicians that have narrowly 
contemplated Mans Nature, consistute 
four different times wherein this Micro-cosm 
or little World is framed and perfected 
in the Womb. 
 
[^p.18^] 
First, When after Copulation and mutual 
embracing it hath the nature of Seed; 
at which time it is called Conception or 
Geniture, because the Seeds of the Man and 
Woman mixing and fermenting, become 
like Cream and are perfect in the first week 
if no Eflux happen, which sometimes falls 
out through the slipperiness of the Matrix, 
or the head thereof that shuts over like a 
Rose-bud opening on a sudden by reason 
of some cold distemper, or over weariness 
in Travel. 
 
The second time of forming is constituted, 
when Nature and the force of the 
Womb, by the use of her own inbred forces 
and vertue, makes a manifest mutation 
in the Seed, so that all the substance seems 
congealed Flesh and Blood, rather than 
Seed, which happens about the 12 or 14 
day after Copulation; and though this 
Concretion, or fleshy Mass, abound with 
hot fiery blood, yet it remains undistinguishable 
without form of figure, and may be 
called the rough draught, or Embrio, and 
well likened to Seed which is sown in the 
ground, which through kindly heat and 
moisture grows up by degrees into a perfect 
form, either in Plant or Grain; or as 
when a Potter fashions a Vessel out of a 
rude Lump of Clay. 
 
[^p.19^] 
The third time to make up this Fabrick, 
is set when the three principal Parts shew 
themselves evidently and perspicuously, viz. 
The Heart, from whence proceeds the Arteries, 
the Brain, from which the Nerves 
proceed like many small threads running 
through the whole Body, and the Liver, 
from whence the Veins derive their Original. 
These are the Seeds and Fountains of 
Life, that nourish and support each part of 
the Body; in framing which, the Faculty of 
the Womb is busied from the time of Conception 
to the eighteenth day of the first 
Month. 
 
But lastly, which time reacheth to the 28 
or 30 day, the outward Parts are seen exquisitely 
elaborated and distinguished by 
Joynts, and then the Child begins to grow 
and pant; from which Progress of days, by 
reason the Limbs are divided, and the whole 
frame is perfect, it is no longer held an imperfect 
Child or Embrio, that is, a Concretion 
that springs forth, but is held to be a 
perfect and absolute Child. Males for the 
most part are perfect by the 30 day, but 
Females seldom till the 42 or 45 day; and 
the reason why the one is sooner perfected 
than the other, is, that the heat of the 
Womb is greater in producing the Male 
than the Female; for heat extends the humour 
[^p.20^] 
like soft wax, diffusing & delating it, 
and then by its force contracting, framing 
and fashioning it, so heat and vigour of the 
Body, and Alacrity of Nature in the Man 
makes the Male to move in 3 months, but 
the Female rarely under 4, at which time 
also his Hair and Nailes come forth, and 
the Child begins to stir, kick and tumble in 
the Womb, so that the motion is plainly 
perceived, and the Women are troubled 
with nauseating and loathing of their meat, 
and oftentimes covet and greedily long for 
things contrary to Nutriment, as Coals, 
Rubish, Chalk, Lime, Starch, Oat-meal, 
raw Flesh and Fish, or the like, which desire 
proceeds from a former contraction of evil 
humours, occasioning impure Blood in their 
containing Vessel within, and often occasions 
abortion and miscarriage; some Women, 
as it has been noted by divers Authors 
of Credit, have been so extravangant in their 
longings, that they have coveted Hob-Nails, 
Leather, Horse-Flesh, Mans-Flesh, and the 
Flesh of divers ravenous Beasts, for want 
of which they have cast their Birth untimely, 
or the Child has continued dead in the 
Womb, for many days, to the eminent 
hazard of the Womans life: But to proceed 
in this great mystery, I shall unfold 
by what means the Infant is sustained 
[^p.21^] 
in the Womb, and the posture it there remains 
in. 
 
The infant being arrived to some perfection, 
is fastened by a long string to the 
Navel, as the Apple by the stalk is fastened 
to the Tree; by which, through the help 
of the Umbelical Vein, it is nourished by a 
Fountain of pure Blood, not taking it in at 
the mouth, as some ignorant People have 
imagined; that being of no use during the 
aboad in the Womh, neither do any Excrements 
fall from the Vessels of Evacuation; 
but the Umbelical Vein springing from 
the Matrix, enters the Liver in two parts, & 
terminates in Vena Porta, from which the 
most pure Blood from the Seminary Vessels 
are derived to the Matrix. And hence it 
is that the Blood & Spirits, like Auxiliaries, 
are always convey'd downwards, that so 
none of them be wanting, whereof are 
those Channels and Rivers of Veins and 
Arteries that proceed from the Mothers 
Body, are carried to the Womb, and then 
fastned into the Navel, feed the Child by 
insensible ways, and by the faculty of the 
Seed that is fostered by the heat of the 
Womb, and moistned with Blood; being 
perfected at the times specified in all its 
parts equal ballanced, it is in the midst of 
the Womb, as in the Center lying all 
[^p.22^] 
on a heap, and being something long, is turned 
round, so that the Head a little inclines, 
and it lays its Chin on its Breast, his Heels 
and Ancles upon his Buttocks, its Hands on 
its Cheeks, and its Thumbs to its Eyes; but 
its Legs and Thighs are carried upward with 
its Hams bending, so that they touch the 
bottom of its belly: the former & that part 
of the body which is over against us, as the 
Fore-head, Nose, Face, are turned towards 
the Mothers Back, and the Head inclining 
downwards towards the Cocyx or Rump-bone 
that joyns to the Os Sacrum, which 
Bone, together with Os Pubis, in the time 
of the Birth parts, and is loosened; whence 
it is that Male Children commonly come 
with their Faces downwards, or with their 
Heads turned somewhat Oblique, that their 
Faces may be seen; but the Female Children 
with their Faces upward, tho' some-times 
it happens that Births follow not according 
to Natures order, but Children 
comes forth with their feet stradling, their 
Necks bowed, and their Heads lying Oblique 
with their Hands stretch'd out, which greatly 
endangers themselves and the Mother, 
giving the Midwife great trouble to introduce 
them into the World: but when all 
things proceed orderly and naturally, the 
Child, when Natnres set bounds are accomplished, 
[^p.23^] 
is desirous to break its bounds, 
and come forth of the Womb; and by inclining 
himself, he rouls downward; for 
he cannot longer be obscured in those hiding 
places, than he can find Nutriment from 
the Navel, and the heat of the Heart can 
subsist without external respiration; where-fore 
being grown great, he is more and 
more desirous of Nutriment and Light; 
when coveting the Etherial Air, he by strugling 
to obtain it breaks the Membrains & 
Coverings whereby he was restrained and 
fenced against Attrition; and for the most 
part, with bitter Pangs of the Mother, issueth 
forth to view the Day, commonly in the 
ninth Month; for then the Matrix divided, 
and Os Pubis being loosened, the Woman 
strives what she can to cast forth her burthen, 
and the Child doing the like to get 
forth, by the help of its inbred strength, the 
Birth comes to be perfect; but if the Child 
be dead, then more dangerous is the Delivery, 
tho' Nature, as a kind Commiserator, 
often helpeth the Womans weakness 
herein; but the Child that is quick and 
lively labours no less then the Woman. 
 
Now there are Births at 7 or 8 months, 
and some Women go to the 10th month 
but of these, and the Reasons for them, I 
shall speak more largely in another place, 
and at present proceed to unravel other mysteries 
of Nature. 
 
[^p.24^] 
[}CHAP. III. 
The Reason why Children are often like their 
Parents, and what the Mothers Imagination 
contributes thereto: How the Mother contributes 
Seed, and is a Companion in the whole 
Generation; and whence grows the Kind, viz. 
Whether the Man or the Woman is the cause 
of the Male or Female Child, &c.}] 
 
IT is the opinion of learned Physicians, 
grounded upon reason, That if a Woman 
in the Act of Copulation afford 
most Seed, her likeness will have the greater 
impression upon the Child; but if on 
the contrary, then will follow the contrary 
effects; or if a proportionable quantity 
proceed from either, then will the Similitude 
depend upon either. 
 
Lactantius is of opinion, That when a 
Mans seed falls on the left side of the womb 
a Male Child may be gotten: but by reason 
it is the proper place for a Female, there 
will be something in it greatly resembling 
a Woman, viz. It will be fairer, whiter, 
and smoother, not very subject to have 
hair on the Body or Chin, long lank hair 
on the Head, the Voice small and sharp, 
[^p.25^] 
and the Courage feeble; and arguing yet 
further, he says, that a Female may perchance 
be procreated if the Seed fall on the 
right side; but then through extraordinary 
heat, she will be very large boned, full of 
Courage, indued with a big Voice, and 
have her Chin and bosom hairy, not being 
so clear as others of the Sex; subject to 
quarrel with her Husband when married, 
for the superiority, &c. yet in case of the similitude, 
nothing is more powerful than the 
imagination of the Mother; for if she conceive 
in her mind, or do by chance fasten 
her eyes upon any Object, and imprint it in 
her Memory, the Child in its outward parts 
frequently has some representation there-of; 
so whilst a Man and Woman are in the 
Act of Copulation, if the Woman earnestly 
behold his Countenance and fix her mind 
thereon, without all peradventure, the 
Child will resemble the Father; nay so 
powerful is its Operation, that though a 
Woman be in unlawful Copulation, yet if 
fear or any thing else causes her to fix her 
mind upon her Husband, the Child will 
resemble him, tho' he never got it. The 
same effect, according to the opinion of the 
Learned, proceeds from Imagination in 
cause of Warts, Moldspots, Stains, Dashes, 
and the figures of strange things, though 
[^p.26^] 
indeed they sometimes happen thro' frights 
or extravagant longings. Many Women 
there are, that seeing a Hare cross them 
when great with Child, will, through the 
strength of imagination, bring forth a Child 
with a hairy-lip. Some Children again are 
born with flat Noses, wry Mouths, great 
bluber Lips, and ill shaped Bodies, and most 
ascribe the reason to the strange conceit of 
the Mother, who has busied her Eyes and 
Mind upon some ill shaped or distorted 
Creature; therefore it greatly behoves all 
Women with Child to avoid any monstrous 
sight, or at least to have a stedfast 
mind, not easily fixed upon any one thing 
more than another. And this opinion Pliny 
confirms in his 7th Book of natural things, 
and the 12th Chapter. The Famous Sir Thomas 
More likewise confirms it, and discants 
merrily on a Passage of his times, wherein 
a Person having divers Children, would 
own none but one that was like him, when 
in the end it proved, by the asseveration 
of the Mother, that all, except that, were 
of his own begetting; but whilst another 
man was mounted in his Saddle, she fearing 
that he would come and detect her in 
the Act, had her imagination so fix'd on 
him, that as she conceived, the similitude 
could proceed from no other cause, wherefore 
[^p.27^] 
it is apparent that likeness can confirm 
no Child to be a lawful Fathers own: Yet 
in manners, wit, and the propension of the 
mind, daily examples teach us that Children 
which have all force and Spirits from 
the faculty of the Seed, are commonly of 
the same condition with their Progenitors, 
and of the same nature, but there is much 
in this; whether venery be used with great 
or weak desire, for many are less venerous 
and not so hot, and consequently not so desirous 
of Copulation, but rather decline it, 
unless the obstreporusness of their Wives 
cause them to compliance therein, and then 
they proceed faintly and drowsily, whence 
it happens that the Children fall short of 
the Parents nature, wit and manners; and 
hence it is that wise men frequently beget 
stupid sloathful Children of feeble Minds, 
because they are not much given to these 
delights, but as I said on the contrary, when 
the Progenitors are hot in venerious Actions, 
and do liberally and abundantly employ 
themselves therein: it oftentimes happens 
that the Children are of the same desires, 
manners and actions of the mind with 
their Parents. And thus much for the first 
point, now I shall proceed to the second, 
which is to prove, that the Mother's equally 
contributing to the making the Child, &c. 
 
[^p.28^] 
Though it is apparent that the Seed of 
man is the chief efficient and beginning of 
action, motion, and Generation, yet that 
the Woman does afford seed, and effectually 
contributes in that part particular to the procreation 
of the Child, is evinced by strong 
reasons; in the first place, Seminary Vessels 
had been given them in vain, and genital 
Testicles inverted, if the Woman wanted 
Seminal excessence; for being Nature doth 
nothing in vain, therefore it must be granted 
that they were made for the use of seed 
and procreation and fixed in their proper 
places, both the Testacles and Receptacles 
of Seed, whose nature and force is to operate, 
and afford fruitful vertue to the Seed: 
and to prove this, there needs no stronger 
Argument than that, if a Woman do not 
use Copulation to eject her Seed, she oftentimes 
falls into strange Diseases, as appears 
by young Widows and Virgins. A second 
reason may be urged, that although the 
society of a lawful Bed consist not altogether 
in these things, yet it is apparent, that 
the Female Sex is not better won, and appear 
more blith and jocund, than when they 
are often satisfied this way; which is an inducement 
to believe that they have greater 
pleasure, and receive more content than a 
man: for since by Nature much delight 
[^p.29^] 
accompanies the ejection of the Seed, by 
breaking forth of the swelling Spirit, and 
the stiffness of the Nerves, in which case 
the operation of the Womans part is double 
she suffering both ways, even by ejection 
and reception, whereby she is more recreated 
and delighted in the Venereal Act. 
 
Hence it is that the Child more frequently 
resembles the Mother than the Father, 
because the Mother confers the most towards 
its Generation: and further it may 
be instanced from the great love they bear 
them, for besides their contributing Seminal 
matter, they, during the time they are 
in the Womb, feed and nourish the Child 
with the purest Fountain of Blood: which 
Opinion Galen confirms, by allowing the 
Child to participate more of the Mother 
than the Father, and refers the difference 
of the Sex to the influence of menstrual 
Blood; but the reason of the likeness he attributes 
to the force of the Seed; for as 
Plants receive more from fruitful ground 
than from the industry of the Husbandman, 
so the Infant in more abundance receives 
from the Mother than the Father; for first 
the Seed of both is heaped and fostered in 
the Womb, and there grows to perfection, 
being nourished with blood. And hence 
it is that Children for the most part affect 
[^p.30^] 
their Mothers best, for it proceeds from 
the nearness of nature by a natural instinct, 
because the Mothers forces were most imployed 
about 'em? for nine months, and 
sometimes ten, she nourisheth the Child with 
her purest Blood, then her love towards it 
newly born, and the likeliness do clearly 
demonstrate, that the Woman affordeth 
Seed, and that Women do contribute more 
towards making the Child than Men. And 
thus much for the clearing of this point 
also; and now to the third thing proposed, 
viz. Whence grows the kind, and whether 
the Man or the Woman is the cause of the 
Male or Female Infant. 
 
The primal cause, as is justly due in this 
and all other causes, we must ascribe to God 
the Ruler and Disposer of all things; yet 
many things, by his high sufferance, proceed 
in regular order by the Rules of Nature, 
and are carried by their in-bred motion, according 
to their usual and natural Course 
without variation, tho' indeed by favour 
from on high. Sarah conceived Isaac; Hanna, 
Samuel; and Elizabeth, John the Baptist; 
but these were to fulfil the Almighty's 
Decree; nor since those times have the 
Prayers of the righteous been unsuccessful, 
in obtaining Children; but passing over 
such Supernatural and Extraordinary causes 
[^p.31^] 
that have their peculiar effects: I shall proceed 
to speak of things natural and common, 
and how Nature worketh by her inbred 
Forces; for she prepares a Body fit for 
the reception of the Soul (of whose Nature 
I shall hereafter discourse) and gives every 
thing its temper; but since there are two 
Principals out of which the Body of Man 
is made, and which render the Child like 
the Progenitors, and to be of one or the 
other Sex, viz. Seed common to both Sex, 
as I have before demonstrated, and menstrual 
Blood proper to the Woman only. 
The Similitude consists in the force of the 
Male or Female Seed, so that it proves like 
to the one or the other, as more or less plenty 
is afforded by either; but the difference 
of Sex is not referred to the Seed, but to 
the menstrual Blood, which is proper to 
the Woman; for were that force altogether 
retained in the Seed, the Mans Seed being 
of a hotter quality than the Womans, Male 
Children would be superabundant, & none 
of the other Sex (or very rarely) would 
be propagated, whereof the kind of the 
Creature is attributed to the temperament 
of the active qualities, which consist in heat 
and cold, and to the substance or nature of 
the matter under them, that is to the flowing 
of the menstrual Blood: now the Seed 
[^p.32^] 
affords both force to procreate and form 
the Child, and matter for its Generation, 
also in the menstrual Blood there is both 
matter and force; for as the Seed most 
helps the material Principles, so likewise 
the menstrual Blood, the potential Seed, is, 
saith famous Galen, Blood well concocted by 
the Vessels that contain it, so that Blood is 
not only the matter of generating the Child, 
but also Seed, in possibility that menstrual 
Blood has both principles, as matter, and 
faculty of effecting. Many do allow that 
the Seed is the strongest efficient, the matter 
of it being very little in quantity, but the 
potential or efficient faculty of it is very 
feeble: wherefore, if the material part and 
principal of Generation, according to which 
the Sex is made, were only in the menstrual 
Blood, then would the Children be all or 
mostly Females, as if the efficient force was 
in the Seed, they would be all Males: but 
since both have operation in menstrual 
Blood, Matter predominates in quantity, 
and in the Seed force and vertue. Deservedly, 
saith famous Galen, the Child receives 
its Sex rather from the Mother than from 
the Father, although his Seed doth contribute 
something to the material Principles, 
though more weakly. But as for similitude, 
although Imagination be of extraordinary 
[^p.33^] 
force, it is referr'd rather to the Father than 
the Mother, as to the quality of the Seed, 
at or for a short time after Copulation, but 
continues not long so to do, for the Womans 
Seed receiving faculty from the menstrual 
Blood for the space of nine months, 
overpowers the Mans as to that particular, 
because the menstrual Blood flowing into 
the Vessels, rather cherishes and augments 
the one than the other; from which it 
may be more easily conjectured, that the 
Woman not only affords matter to make 
the Child, but force and vertue to perfect 
the Conception, though the Womans Seed 
be fit Nutriment for the Mans, by reason 
of the moisture and thinness of it, being 
more fit to frame and make up Conception 
thereby; for as of soft Wax and moist 
Clay the Workman can frame what he 
intends, so the Mans Seed mixing with the 
Womans, as also with the menstrual Blood, 
helps effectually to make the form and perfect 
part of Man; or to give you a better 
comparison, viz. as the Earth is to Plants, so 
is the Womb for Conception; for as the seed 
of every Plant requires the Earth to nourish 
and increase them, so the Seed of Man requires 
the Womb, which is affected with a 
desire of off-spring, for by its moisture and 
the help of the effluent Blood, it doth grow 
[^p.34^] 
and increase. Hence you may plainly conjecture 
what curious Art Nature useth in 
conceiving and framing a Child, which by 
an innate force grows up by degrees, and 
secretly increasing comes to maturity. 
 
[}CHAP. IV. 
A serious discourse of the Soul of Man: How it 
comes not from the Parents Seed, but is infused 
by God, and can neither dye nor corrupt; 
and what day of Child bearing it is 
infused: of the Immortality thereof, and 
Certainty of the Resurrection.}] 
 
THE Soul of Man is of so divine a nature 
and excellency, that man him-self 
can in no wise comprehend it, it being 
the infused breath of the Almighty immortal 
and incomprehensible, but by him 
that gave it, it being, as it well may be 
termed, a part of himself; for Moses, by 
Holy Inspiration, relating the Original of 
Man, tells us, That God breathed into his Nostrils 
the breath of Life, and he became a living 
Soul. Now as for all other Creatures, at 
his Word they were made, and had life, 
[^p.35^] 
but the Creature that God hath appointed 
to set over his works, was favoured with 
the more immediate hand of the Almighty, 
forming him out of the Dust of the Earth, 
and secondly condescending to Breath into 
his Nostrils the Breath of Life; which implies 
that there was more care, and (if we 
may so term it) labour used about man, than 
about all other Creatures or created things, 
he only partaking and participating with 
the Divine Nature, being made in his likeness, 
bearing the Image of God, that is in 
Innocence and Purity, whilst he stood firm; 
but in his Fall that lively Image was defaced; 
yet such was the infinite Love of God 
towards him, that altho' he Rebelled against 
him, he would not altogether cast him off, 
but found a way to restore him. Nay, 
so much in esteem was he thought, not 
deserving the least favour, that the Son of 
God, the second Person in the glorious Trinity, 
when the fulness of Time was come, 
laying aside his Crown of Stars, left the 
right-hand of Glory, Majesty, & the bright 
effulgence that adorned him, and descending, 
took upon him our nature. O infinite & 
unspeakable love. Nay more, indured shame, 
reproach, scourging, buffeting, spitting on, 
and the death of the Cross, that he might 
bruise the head of the Serpent, and deliver 
[^p.36^] 
beloved man from the Jaws and Brink of 
utter Ruine; and the better to confirm his 
love towards us, is ascended on high, leading 
Captivity captive, where he is so far 
from forgetting us, that he is become our 
Mediator, and makes daily intercession for 
us to the Father, whose offended Justice he 
has satisfied as to the Original Sin: but to 
come nearer to my purpose. 
 
If a man would understand the excellency 
of the Soul, as far as it is capable of comprehending 
it self, let him after serious Recollection 
descend into himself, and search 
diligently his own mind, and there he shall 
find so many admirable Gifts and excellent 
Ornaments, that it must needs strike him 
with Wonder and Amazement, as Reason, 
Understanding, true Choice, ability of 
Wit, Memory, and divers other faculties, 
that absolutely approve the Soul to be more 
admirable, than that any should imagine it 
to be finite or subject to Annihiliation; yet 
by reason of its many Offices and Operations, 
whilst in the Body it is specified under 
sundry denominations. For as St. Augustine 
saith, when it enlivens the Body it is 
called the Soul; when it gives it knowledge, 
the judgement, the mind, when it recalls 
things past, the memory, whilst it discourseth 
& discerneth, reason, whilst it contemplates 
[^p.37^] 
the Spirit, whilst it is in the sensitive 
parts of the Senses: and these are the principal 
Offices, whereby the Soul declares its 
Power, and performs its Actions; for placed 
in the highest part of the Body, and 
nearest Heaven, it diffuseth or disperseth 
effectually its force into every Member, 
not proceeding from the Parents Seed, nor 
mixed with gross Matter, but the infused 
Breath of Almighty immediately proceeding 
from him, never passing from one 
to another, as fond and absurdly the Pithagorians 
have insinuated their Opinions about 
the Transmigration of the Soul; & so 
vain were they, that they did not only imagine 
the Souls of deceased men passed into 
new Born Infants, but into Beasts also; and 
from thence it was they forbid the eating of 
Flesh, and abstained themselves from so doing, 
least, as they fondly fancied, they might, 
as Tertullian Records it, Eat their Grand-Father 
in a Calf: but such frivolous and superstitious 
Notions are to be rejected by 
Christians, and those true ones observed, 
which are both reasonable and agreeable 
to humane Capacities; for Orthodox Divines 
conclude in general, that the Soul is given 
to every Infant by Infusion, when he or she 
is perfected in the Womb, which happens 
about the 45 day after Conception; especiall 
[^p.38^] 
for Males that in likelihood will be born 
at the end of nine Months, but that Females 
(who are of a weaker Constitution, and 
not so soon formed and perfected through 
the defect of heat) have not their Souls till 
the fiftieth day. 
 
And although this day in all cases cannot 
be perfectly set down, yet Hypocrates has undertaken 
to give his absolute opinion, when 
the Child has its perfect form, when it begins 
to move, and when born if in due season; 
for in his Book of the Nature of Infants 
he affirmeth, That if it be a Male, and he be 
perfect on the thirtieth day, move at the 
sixtieth, he will come forth at the seventh 
Month: but if he be perfectly formed on 
the 35 day, he will move on the 70th, and 
be born in the 8th Month: again, if he be 
perfectly formed on the 45th day, he will 
move on the 90th day, and be born in the 
ninth Month. Now from these passings of 
days & months, it plainly appears, that the 
day of Forming being doubled, makes up 
the day of moving; and that day 3 times 
reckoned, makes up the day of Birth. 
 
As for example, where 35 perfect the 
Form, If you double it, it makes 70; the 
day of motion and three times 70 amounts 
to 206 days or 7 months, allowing 30 days 
one month, and so you must consider the 
[^p.39^] 
rest: But as for Female, it is longer perfecting 
in the Womb, and the Mother ever 
goes longer with a Boy than a Girl, so that 
there is difference in the Accompt; for a 
Female formed in 30 days, moves not till 
the 70 day, and is Born in the 7 Month; 
when she is formed in the 40 day, she moves 
on the 80 day, and is born in the 8 month: 
but if she be perfectly formed on the 55 
day, she moves on the 90, and is born in 
the 9 month; but she that is formed on 
the 50 day, moves on the 100 day, then will 
she be born in the 10 month. And thus 
have I more largely demonstrated it to the 
Reader, that he may know the reasonable 
Soul is not in the Parents Seed, but is infused 
by God when the Child hath its perfect 
Form, and is exactly distinguished in 
its Lineaments; for the Soul is not present 
in the first month the Child begins to be 
Formed, but the faculty of the Matrix, and 
force of the Seed, perform the work by degrees, 
distinguishing the parts, and rendering 
the form perfect. 
 
Now as the life of every other Creature, 
as it is testified in the 17 Chapter of Leviticus, 
is in the Blood, so the life of Man consisteth 
in the Soul; the which, although Subject 
to passion, by reason of the gross composture 
of the Body, in which it has a temporary 
[^p.40^] 
confinement, yet it is immortal and 
cannot in it self corrupt or suffer charge, it 
being a spark of the Divine Mind, and a 
blast of Almighty Breath, that distinguishes 
Man from other Creatures, and renders 
him Immortal: and that every man has a 
peculiar Soul, it plainly appears by the vast 
difference between the Wit, Judgment, Opinion, 
Manners, Affections, &c. in Men. And 
this David observes, when he says, God hath 
in particular fashioned the Hearts and Minds 
of all Men, and has given to every one its own 
Being, and a Soul of its own Nature. Hence 
Solomon rejoyced, that God had given him 
a happy Soul, and a Body agreeable and 
suitable to it. 
 
It has caused many Disputes amongst the 
Learned, especially Philosophers, in what 
part of the Body the Soul chuseth to reside: 
and some have given their opinion, that its 
resident is in the middle of the Heart, and 
from thence communicates it self to every 
part; which Solomon, in the Fouth of his Proverbs, 
seems to assert, when he says, Keep 
thy Heart with all thy diligenee, because Life 
proceedeth therefrom: but many curious Physicians 
searching the Works of Nature in 
Man's Anatomy, &c. do give it as their 
Opinion, that its chief Seat is in the Brain, 
from whence proceed the Senses, Faculties, 
[^p.41^] 
and Actions, diffusing the operations of 
the Soul through all parts of the Body, 
whereby it is enlivened with heat and 
force; but it doth communicate particular 
force to the Heart by Arteries, Carotides, or 
sleepy Arteries that part upon the Throat; 
the which if they happen to be broke, or 
cut, cause Barrenness, and if stopped they 
become Apoplectick; for there must necessarily 
be some ways through which the 
Spirits animal and vital may have intercourse, 
and convey native heat from the 
Soul. For although the Soul is said to reside 
in one place, it operates in every part, 
exercising every Member which are the 
Souls Instruments, by which she manifesteth 
her power: but if it so happen that any 
of the Organical parts are out of Tune, 
the Work is confused, as it may appear in 
the case of Idiots, Madmen, &c. Though in 
some of them, the Soul by forcibly working 
recovers her supernatural vigor, & they become 
right after a long dispondency of mind 
and in some it is lost in this life. For as fire 
under ashes, nor the Sun obscured from our 
sight by thick Clouds, afford not their full 
lustre, so the soul overwhelmed in moist 
or faulty matter, is darkned, and Reason 
thereby overclouded; and although reason 
shines less in Children than in those that 
[^p.42^] 
are arrived to maturity; yet no man must 
imagine that the Soul is an Infant, and 
grows up with the Child, for then would 
it again decay; but it suits it self to the 
weakness of Nature, and the imbecility of 
Body wherein it is placed, that it may the 
better operate. And as the Body is more 
and more capable of receiving its influence, 
so it shews it self in its proper lustre, having 
its force and endowments at the time it enters 
the formed Child in the Womb, for 
the Substance of it can receive nothing less: 
And thus much to prove that the Soul 
comes not from the Parents Seed, but is 
infused by God: and the next thing now 
to be handled is its Immortality; and 
thereby I shall demonstrate the certainty of 
the Resurrection. 
 
That the Soul of Man is a divine Ray 
infused by God, I have already made apparent, 
and now come to shew you that 
whatever immediately proceeds from him 
must participate of his Nature, and from 
thence consequently be as Immortal as it's 
Original; for although all other Creatures 
are indued with life and motion, yet want 
they a reasonable Soul: and from thence 
'tis concluded, their life is in their Blood, 
and that being corruptible, they perish, and 
after their expiring are no more. But Man 
[^p.43^] 
being endued with a reasonable Soul, and 
stamped with the Divine Image, is of a different 
nature; and though his Body be corruptible, 
yet his Soul cannot perish, but 
must, when it is expunged its earthly Tabernacle, 
return to God that gave it, either 
to receive reward or punishment: now that 
the Body can sin of it self is impossible, because 
wanting the Soul, it cannot act nor 
proceed to any thing either good or evil; 
for could it do so, additional sins might be 
accumulated even in the Grave; but 'tis 
plain, that after Death there is a cessation; 
for as Death leaves us, so Judgment finds 
us. And St. John, in the Fifth Chapter of his 
Gospel, tells us, That the hour shall come, that 
all that are in their Graves shall hear his Voice, 
and they that have done well shall come forth to 
the Resurrection of Life; & they that have done 
evil, to the Resurrection of Condemnation. And 
Holy Job, in the 14 & 19 Chapter, speaking 
to the same purposes, says, For I know that 
my Redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at 
the latter day upon the Earth: And though after 
my Skin Worms destroy my Body, yet in my 
Flesh shall I see God: whom I shall see for my 
self, and mine Eyes shall behold, and not another, 
though my Reins be consumed within me. 
By this 'tis plainly proved, that the Soul 
is made of immortal Essence, incapable 
[^p.44^] 
of death, having a place assigned it after 
its separation from the Body, till the day 
of the general Resurrection, not in the 
Grave, but in a Mansion prepared by the 
Almighty for its Reception; and that 
through the mighty working of him that 
is able to subdue all things to himself, it 
shall again enter the same Body that was 
laid down, tho' the dust thereof be scattered 
to the four Winds of Heaven; nay, such 
force and vigour shall it have, that it shall, 
as it were take up the Body; for Job positively 
says, I shall rise out of the Earth at the 
last day &c. Which being applicable to the 
future Tense, may be meant two ways, I 
shall, or will rise; for plainly foreseeing 
the Resurrection, he claimed it as the promise 
of his Creator. Nay, so far were the 
Heathens, by the light of Nature, from 
doubting the immortality of the Soul, that 
Plato in this Phdro thus reasons; viz. What 
consists not of Elements (saith he) is Immortal 
and can never dye. The Soul is not made of 
Elements, nor of created matter, but came from 
God, and therefore it cannot dye, &c. Then 
may it be without difficulty granted, that 
the Body which has been a long Companion 
of the Souls, will once again enjoy it 
never more to be separated; for the Body 
at the Resurrection shall be incorruptible, 
[^p.45^] 
and so as far from a capacity of perishing 
any more as the Soul; made so by him that 
at first created it. For St. Paul speaking of 
the Resurrection, saith, He shall change our 
vile Bodies, & make them like his glorious body. 
The consideration of which, makes him 
in another place cry out, O the depth of the 
Riches, of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! 
How unsearchable are his Judgments, and his 
ways past finding out. For who hath known the 
mind of the Lord, or who hath been his Councellor? 
For by him, and through him, and to him 
are all things. Nay, the Resurrection of 
mans Body may be proved by the renewing 
of many inconsiderable Creatures, and 
their returning to life after they seem dead; 
nay, some of them thereby also changed; 
as who hath not observed that when a 
Grashopper is grown old, and hath cast his 
skin, a lively new shrill insect will come 
forth of it. From a dying & sluggish Catterpiller 
comes out a lively painted Butterfly. 
From Ants a winged Fly. The Silk-worm 
having spent her Bowels in weaving out 
her Web, after many days seeming dead 
and motionless, becomes a Butterfly, providing 
for increase by laying a number of 
Eggs, and then expires. But above all, the 
Phnix, that the Learned Lactantius writes 
of, may put us in mind, if not confirmed to 
[^p.46^] 
us the Resurrection, for after she has liv'd 
in the Arabian Fields (as some affirm) about 
600 years, and finding her self wasted with 
Age and Infirmity, she gathers the sprigs 
of Cassei, Myrrh, Frankincense and other 
Aromatick combustion, when labouring 
with her Wings, she firing them by the 
heat of the Sun, which in those Countreys 
is excessive, she expires upon the Funeral-Pile, 
when out of her Ashes springs a 
Worm, and from that Worm another 
Phnix, to supply her place; nay further, 
do we not behold Grain thrown into the 
ground, continue there for a season as if lost 
and dead, but when warmth and moisture 
gives it force, it springs up, and bears a 
hundred fold: Yea, Herbs and Plants whilst 
Winter with his Icy Arms grasps the 
Earth, seem dead, retiring as it were into 
the Grave, and wait the Resurrection of the 
Spring. But to conclude as to this point 
the infinite love towards Man, may convince 
him that he was not made to be annihilated, 
since the second person of the Trinity 
condescended to take his nature upon 
him. Even he who is the Wisdom of the 
Father, and of whom the wise Man Testifies 
in the 3 of his Proverbs, viz. I was with 
God in the beginning before any thing was 
made: I was with him from Eternity, when he 
[^p.47^] 
made the Heavens: I was there when he compassed 
in the depth by a Law: I was present 
when he sustained the Heavens above, and the 
Earth beneath: I was with him, ordering all 
things, and was continually delighting before 
him, recreating my self in the Earth, and my 
delight was with the Sons of Men. 
 
[}CHAP. V. 
Of Monsters and monstrous Births, and the 
reason thereof, according to the Opinions of 
sundry learned Men, with serious considerations, 
whether Monsters are endued with 
reasonable Souls.}] 
 
THat many monstrous Births have 
happened contrary to the course of 
Nature, is evident, not only in this 
but in former Ages; wherefore I shall take 
some pains, for the satisfaction of the Reader, 
to inquire into the cause of such pre-posterous 
forms. 
 
Now a monstrous habit or shape of Body 
is contracted divers ways, as from 
Fear, sudden Frights, extraordinary Passion, 
the influence of the Stars, too much 
or too little Seed, the Mothers strange Imaginations 
[^p.48^] 
and divers phantasms which the 
mind conceive deform the Body, and render 
the Children of an improper shape, 
and many times not perfect in either Sex: 
sometimes the whole course of Nature is 
changed, either when the Seeds are vitated, 
or the Instruments of Generation 
unfit, so that the natural Faculties, to propagate 
and form the Child, cannot perform 
their Office exactly: for as the most 
ingenious Artist can bring nothing to perfection 
if his Materials be bad or out of order, 
so Nature wanting the force of her 
Faculties, or not having fit matter, must 
of necessity proceed preposterously in forming 
the Child. As in the Art of melting 
of Mettals it may be observed, if the 
matter be impure and not well cleansed, 
the Vessels or Receiver Oblique, and full of 
windings, not well joynted, the Corners 
set awry, and full of Chinks or Plates; if 
loosed or holds ill together, it is apparent 
men cast ill shaped Figures. So if the 
Womb or the Matter be unfit or ill tempered, 
'tis impossible, without an extraordinary 
over ruling Providence; but above 
all, unseasonable Copulation, or intemperate 
Venery, is the cause of so many monsterous 
shapes. 
 
So the Low-Country Women, especially 
[^p.49^] 
those living near the Sea-side, being restless 
& troubled in Copulation, bring forth 
mishapen Embrio's, or rude and deformed 
Burthens, not only without motion, but 
some that pant and are alive, and these 
most commonly happen in case of Sailors or 
Mariners, who coming home, rashly marry, 
or run upon their Wives without any 
due regard to their menstrual courses, or 
the Wombs cleansing it self to the Season 
of the year, or the Moon or Suns progress 
through the Clestial Signs; nor are the 
Women, without regard to the health or 
shape of their posterity, less desirous to receive 
them after a long separation, which 
is not only exceeding hurtful to them-selves, 
for thence proceed not monsterous 
or untimely Births only, but dangerous Diseases 
often to those who so rashly proceed. 
The first is because the Seed mixing with 
menstrual Blood, contracts an unnatural 
mass of corrupt Matter, which either turns 
to Miscarriage, Abortion, or a Monstrous 
and Deformed Birth, for by that means the 
faculty of the Womb, as I said, looseth its 
force to Generation and success of Breeding 
the Child, or if it try to come to any thing, 
it is at most some monsterous Form, not 
shaped like a Man, unless in some parts, 
which after a long continuance in the 
[^p.50^] 
Womb, will come forth with great pain 
and labour, not unlike to this, there is an 
Eflux that greatly troubles such as by their 
inconsiderate rashness are subject to it. 
 
Our Women, because conception begins 
in the fourth Moon, when the Terms flow 
down by force, & that Planet in conjunction 
call it a Moon Birth, or many kinds. And 
some are of opinion that this Conception 
may be made without the help of a Man, 
by force of Imagination, in those that are 
extreamly Lascivious; for that by often 
seeing and touching their Husbands, at the 
same time strongly fancying themselves in 
the Act, their Seed flows to the Blood, and 
is by the heat of the Womb formed into a 
foul Mass, but arrives at no perfection. 
And to the same purpose it is when Men 
strive against the Stream: entering into 
copulation in the fourth and silent Moon, 
and in the fourth day of its Conjunction; 
for then not observing Natures Rules, he 
either loses his labour, or Generates a 
monsterous Birth, or if it change, which is 
almost next to a miracle to be perfect, it is 
by the Latins called a Birth of the fourth 
Moon, because the product is commonly 
unhappy in all the Series of its Life, having 
had its enterance by Generation, contrary 
to Natures order; which Moses considering, 
[^p.51^] 
or being so commanded by God, 
strictly commanded the Hebrew men not to 
touch a Woman that was unclean of her 
Blood: and these that have been so rashly 
profligate of either Sex, have many times 
by sad experience found their wilful folly 
too late, but especially the Female Sex; 
for by the violent concussion and motion 
used in Copulation and evil mixture, the 
contagion by degrees will seize upon the 
whole habit of the Body, causing the Pox 
and Leprosie: The like Effects it has upon 
Men, if the Woman be infected, especially 
if he deal with Whores at such times, 
who commonly are infected, and may be 
accounted so many walking Contagions, or 
Emissaries of the Prince of Darkness, for the 
destruction of Mankind, and at this day the 
greatest pest and grievance of the Nation. 
 
These things rightly considered, no man 
need wonder at so many mis-shapen Births 
and monsterous People, with scald Heads, 
bowed and distorted Legs, Arms, and 
Backs, wry Necks, crumpled Feet, incident 
to swellings and inherent Diseases, 
especially swellings in the Groin, Buboes, 
and Emerods, as also that their minds are 
dull, stupid, forgetful, foolish, mad, and unreasonable, 
which are indeed the effects of 
unseasonable and unreasonable Venery, 
[^p.52^] 
which every Creature but Man observes 
in the Season Nature has allotted: and 
when their Females have conceived, they 
desire no longer, but rest satisfied. 
 
