
|P_3
[}Lithotomia Douglassiana:
 OR, 
An Account of a New Method
of making the High Operation, 
in order to extract the Stone out of 
the Bladder, &c.}]
[^Decorative frame around the letter "I".^]IN this new Operation, I cut on 
the lower Part of the Belly. In 
the common Operations, viz.
Cutting on the Staffe, and cut-
ting on the Gripe, they cut on 
the Perinæum, i. e. between the Testicles and 
Fundament. 

|P_4
This Section is call'd by Authors, The High 
Operation, or Hypogastrick Section.

I have hitherto only met with three, that 
ever pretended to have made it: The first 
of whom is Peter de Franco of Turriers in 
France, of which he gives the following 
Account in his Treatise of Hernio's, (at the 
End of the 33d Chapter, Page 139) publish'd 
at Lyons in the Year 1561, in these Words: 
"Histoire, 
Je reciteray ce que une fois m'est advenu 
voulant tirer une pierre a un enfant de deux 
ans ou environ: auquel ayant trouué la pierre 
de la Grosseur d'um æuf de poulle, ou peu pres, 
je fey tout ce que je peu pour la mener bas: & 
voyant que je ne pounoye rien avancer par-
tous mes efforts, avec ce, que le patient estoit 
merueillcusement tormenté, & aussi les Parens 
desirans qu'il mourust plustost que de viure en-
tel travail: Joint aussi, que je ne vouloye pas 
quil me fut Reproché de ne l'avoir seu tirer, 
(qui estoit à moy grand folie) je deliberay 
avec l'importunité du pere, Mere, & amis, de 
Copper le dit enfant par dessus l'os Pubis, d'au-
tant que la Pierre ne voulut descendre bas, 
& fut Coppé sur le Penil, un peu a Costè & 
sur la Pierre. Car je leuoys icelle avec mes 
doigts, qui estoyèt au fondment, & d'autre 
Costé en la tenant subiette avec les mains 
d'un Serviteur qui comprimoit le petit ventre 
|P_5
au dessus de la pierre, Dont elle fut tirée hors 
par ce moyen, & puis apres le patient fut 
guary, (non obstant qu'il en fut bien malade) 
& la playe consolidée: Combien que je ne 
conseille a #omine d'ainsi faire. Ains plust-
ost user du moyen par nous ino#nt# du quel 
nous venons de parler. "

This is (in his own Words) all that he 
says about it: Which, for the Benefit of 
those that don't understand French, I shall 
translate into English, thus: 

"He says, he had a Child about two 
Years old, who had a Stone in the Bladder 
as big as a Hen's Egg, brought to him to 
cut: He used all his Dexterity to force the 
Stone down to the Neck of the Bladder, 
but found it impossible to be done: The 
Child was in that Torture and Misery, 
that the Parents wished him rather dead, 
than he should live longer in so doleful a 
Condition. De Franco, on the other Hand, 
thinking it would tend to his Dishonour 
not to take away the Stone, at last re-
solv'd to make Tryal, whether he could 
not bring it to the very Groin, which he 
did, by putting his Fingers into the Fun-
dament, and raising up the Stone, he caus'd 
his Servant, on the other Side opposite to 
him, to press it down to the Place in-
tended for Incision; which he made, took 
out the Stone, and, tho' the Child was 
|P_6
very weak, recover'd him, and heal'd the 
Wound: But he advises others not to fol-
low his Example; and, instead of it, re-
commends the Operation which he calls 
his own Invention, and has describ'd, in 
the foregoing Part of the same Chapter." 

The next to him, that's said to have per-
form'd it, is one Bonnet, of whom Mons. 
Tollet, in the 5th Edition of his Lithotomy,
publish'd at Paris 1708, gives the following 
Account, Page 139. 

"Feu M. Jonnot m'a dit autrefois que 
M. Bonnet Chirurgien, qui prætiquoit il ya 
tres-long-temps la Lithotomie dans l' Hôtel 
Dieu de Paris, l'avoit assuré d'en avoir taillé 
de cette façon. M. Petit, Maitre Chirurgien 
façon de cet Hospital mà dit l'avoir vu pratique 
sur une Petite fille par le même M. Bonnet."

"Mr. Tollet says, that the late Mr. Jonnot
(who was also a famous Lithotomist) told 
him formerly, that Mr. Bonnet, a Surgeon, 
who practis'd Lithotomy a considerable 
Time ago in the Hotel Dieu at Paris, assur'd 
him, (viz. Mr. Jonnot) that he had cut 
after that Manner. Mr. Petit,Master-Sur-
geon of that Hospital, also told our Au-
thor, that he had seen it practised by the 
same Bonnet on a young Girl."

|P_7
Mons. Dionis, in the 2d Edition of his 
Course of Chirurgical Operations, publish'd at 
Paris 1714, Page 139, gives the following 
Account of the same Man, viz.

"On nous assure que Monsieur Bonnet 
a pratiqué sovent cette Operation à l'Hôtel 
Dieu de Paris avec une heureux succés, & 
que même Monsieur Petit luy a vû faire."

"We are assur'd, that Mons. Bonnet,fre-
quently and with good Success, perform'd 
this Operation at the Hotel Dieu in Paris;
and that Mons. Petit has seen him perform 
it." This is all the Account that I have 
met with of this Bonnet.

After him, Dr. Groenevelt was the next 
that perform'd it, of which he gives the fol-
lowing Account in the English Edition of 
his Lithotomy, publish'd at London in 1710. 

"I once had a Patient in Long Lane, Moor-
fields, upon whom I was oblig'd to per-
form this High Operation; and very suc-
cessfully extracted the Stone, by making 
Incision near the Groin, the Patient soon 
recovering; which shews, that Wounds in 
the fibrous Part of the Bladder are not 
always mortal."

Those are the only Three that I have met 
with, that ever pretended to have cut above 
the Os Pubis, i. e. into the Belly. 

|P_8
Franco cut so first, because he had a Pa-
tient that he could not cut his own Way, 
tho', at the same Time, he had the Cha-
racter of one of the best Lithotomists of his 
Age. But tho' he succeeded, yet, it seems, 
he found such Difficulties in it, that he 
would never do't again, and charges us never 
to follow his Example; which one would 
have expected that he should have explain'd 
in his Account of it, the better to deter 
others from the like Practice. 

Bonnet is said to have done it several Times 
with Success; yet he don't recommend it to 
others as a Rule of Practice, nor was ever 
imitated by any of his Contemporaries. 

Groenevelt did it but once, and says, he 
was oblig'd to do it: I suppose, in some such-
like Case as De Franco's; and though he 
also succeeded, yet, instead of recommending 
it, he only draws this Consequence from 
it, viz. That Wounds of the fibrous Part 
of the Bladder are not always mortal. 

Franco cut on the Hair above the Pubis,
a little on one Side; Groenevelt near the 
Groin: But not one of them tells us what 
lustruments they used, or which Way they 
used them; whether they made a cross, ob-
lique, or longitudinal Incision; whether 
they made the Incision at once, or at several 
Times, or what Position they put their Pa-
tient in; all which, and many more Cir-
cumstances, ought to have been exactly de-
scrib'd, before any one could be said to have 
|P_9
follow'd their Method; from whence I 
may very safely infer, that it will be no 
easy matter to tell which Way any of them 
made their Operations, and yet it's commonly 
asserted with the greatest Assurance (not with 
any Design to raise De Franco's Reputation, but 
to lessen mine) that I made this Operation 
after De Franco's Method, though he has told 
but very little of his Story, and I have told 
none of mine. 

Upon the Whole, I must say, that it's a Mi-
racle to me, that after so much Success, either 
they, or those that saw them do it, did not ei-
ther continue the Practice of it, or give us more 
substantial Reasons why they disapprov'd of it; 
so far from that, they have not given us one 
Instance of a Patient's dying after this Section. 

This Operation is also recommended as a 
very probable Way by Roussecus, Dionis, &c. 
yet not one of them was ever so far perswa-
ded of it as to make the Experiment, how-
ever several of them have undertaken (which 
none that ever made the Operation thought 
fit to do) to describe the Method how it may 
be done, i. e. to teach others to perform 
what they can't do themselves; (which, in my 
Opinion is the greatest Absurdity in Nature;) 
but to what Purpose, he that makes the Ex-
periment will see. 

Having thus recited all the Instances that I 
have met with of the Stone in the Bladder, 
being extracted through the Belly, in the 
Words of the Authors, That every one may 
|P_10
be a Judge of the Encouragement I had to 
undertake this Operation from what has been 
done this Way before. 

I shall next give an Account of the Ob-
jections made against the fore-mention'd Gen-
tlemens Operations, by some of the most au-
thentick Authors that have mention'd them. 

First, Some say that the Urine from the 
Bladder, and the Discharge from the Wound, 
will flow into the Cavity of the Abdomen or 
Pelvis, where Corrupting, will occasion several 
grievous and incurable Symptoms, amongst 
whom is Dr. Drelincount, &c. who expresses 
himself thus: 

"Operatio Franconiana ut inventa est sic 
exolevit, quia dum perfunderetur Vesicæ fun-
dum Urina Effluebat in Abdominis Cavum & 
Mortem inducit, i. e."

"The Franconian Section, viz. the high 
Operation, died assoon as it was invented; 
because when the Fund of the Bladder is 
perforated, the Urine flows into the Cavity 
of the Belly and causes Death."

Secondly, Others say that the Wound being 
made in the membranous Part of the Bladder, 
won't heal again, amongst whom is Bar-
bett, &c. who has these Words: 

|P_11
"Periculosa interim & in se molesta Operatio 
est, & quod si Labia Vulneris in Vesia facti 
haud uniantur Musculis Abdominis, exulceratio 
vesicæ sequitur, magis dolorifica minus cura-
bilis ipso Calculo, quæ etiam incommoda effe-
cerunt quod minus Operationibus aliis haberi 
cœperit à practicis veris, i. e."

"It's a dangerous and in it self a trouble-
some Operation; and if the Lips of the 
Wound made in the Bladder don't unite 
to the Muscles of the Abdomen, an Ulcera-
tion of the Bladder will follow, more pain-
ful and less curable than the Stone it self, 
which Inconveniencies have made it less 
esteem'd than the other Operations by true 
Practitioners."

Thirdly, Mons. Thevinin, a very eminent 
Surgeon, in his Book of Chirurgical Obser-
vations, publish'd at Paris in the Year 1669, 
Pag. 68. gives this Account of it, viz.

"L'hault appareil qui a este premierement prati-
qué par de Franco n'est point en usage à present, 
à Cause de l'incision qui'l oblige de faire au 
fonds & corps inferieur de la vessic qui apporte 
de grand accidens, i. e."

"The high Operation, first practisd by de 
Franco, is no more in Use, because the In-
cision being made in the Fund and Body 
of the Bladder causes great Accidents."

|P_12
Fourthly, Others say that the Guts will 
burst out at the Wound, &c.

Thomas Fienus, in the 70th Page of his Book, De præcipuis Artis Chirurgicæ controversis, Edit. 1602. gives his Opinion of this high Operation, in these Words: 

"Præter hactenus usitatam Sectionem exorcus est, Francisus Rousettus, qui in Libro suo de 
Partu Cæsario scribit, videri longe securio-
rem & faciliorem sectionis rationem futuram, 
si Venter aut Abdomen a Latere sub umbilico 
aperiantur, & imposita per foramen manu 
vesicæ corpus vulneretur & inde calculus exi-
matur. Sed illa ratio non valet: vesicæ enim 
vulnus lethale est, & non potest consolidari, & 
quamvis aliquando legatur consolidatum, est 
tamen rara avis, & temerarium nimis foret, 
& quia illam rationem nemo secutus est, 
de ea non agimus, i. e."

"Besides the common Ways of Cutting, 
there's one Fr. Rousettus, who affirms in 
his Book of the Cæsarian Birth, that the 
Operation would be safer and easier, if 
we cut through the Belly (a little below 
the Navel, and on one Side) and into the 
Bladder, and then extracted the Stone 
through the Wound. But that can't be, 
because Wounds of the Bladder are mor-
tal, and cannot be consolidated; altho' 
we have some Histories of their being cur'd, 
|P_13
it's a great Rarity, and therefore it's too 
rash an Undertaking; and because no Body 
practises it, I'll say no more on't."

The Answer to all which (not to descend 
to Particulars) is the happy Success of my 
Operation. 

The next Question that naturally follows, 
is, What could incite or encourage me to 
undertake this high Operation, which those 
that had done it, had such an indifferent Opi-
nion of, which those eminent Authors (just 
quoted, and almost every one else that have 
mention'd it) exclaim'd so warmly against, 
and which, by the common Consent of Man-
kind, was deem'd impracticable? 

To which I answer: That it was, first, 
because I was fully perswaded that the great 
Danger, Tediousness, and frequent bad Con-
sequences of the common Operations, were 
entirely owing to the Structure of the Parts 
concern'd, which the best Operator could 
not avoid, if the Stone was of any consi-
derable Bigness, or of a rugged irregular 
Figure. 

Secondly, Because I was as firmly per-
swaded, that all the Objections made against 
the fore mention'd Gentlemens Operations, 
(so far as they concern mine) were very ill 
grounded; which is prov'd by the Success. 

|P_14
The Two Operations that are only in Use 
now amongst us are, First, That which Sur-
geons call Cutting on the Staffe, i. e. When 
a furrow'd Probe is pass'd into the Bladder, 
upon which they afterwards Cut. 

The other is call'd cutting on the Gripe, 
i. e. When they pass their Fingers into the 
Fundament, and press the Stone outwards, 
and then cut upon it. 

In order to explain what I have just now 
asserted, viz. That the Danger, Tedious-
ness, &c. of the common Operations, are 
entirely owing to the Structure of the Parts 
concern'd. I shall first describe the Parts 
concern'd in each, and then make such Con-
clusions as naturally follow therefrom. 

Cutting on the Staffe is most in Use, and 
therefore I shall begin with it. 

Parts concern'd in Cutting on the Staffe, or 
Great Apparatus. 

Parts Cut: 

They cut first through the Skin, on one 
side of the Rapha of the Perinæum.

2dly, Through the Accelerator Muscle.

3dly, Through the Bulb of the Urethra.

Parts that are dilated. 

The Incision being made, opens a Passage 
into the membranous Part of the Uretha, at 
the upper-end of which is the Sphincter of 
the Bladder, through both which the Instru-
|P_15
ments must pass into the Bladder, and the 
Stone, tho' enlarg'd by the Thickness of the 
Forceps, must pass out. 

They are both apt to be too much dilated 
by a large, and lacerated by a rugged Stone. 

The membranous Urethra, is about Two 
Inches long, more or less, according to the 
Bigness of the Person. 

It's about as big (in a middle-siz'd Man) as 
to admit of a Goose Quill. 

It's much longer, and not so thick and 
strong, as the Urethra in Women, and conse-
quently more liable to be injur'd. 

The Sphincter is a few circular Fibres; 
which keep the Bladder shut, and so prevents 
the involuntary Discharge of the Urine. 

The Genital Parts, which by the Nearness of their 
Situation are liable to be injur'd, next after the 
foremention'd, are: 

First, The Vesiculæ Seminales, i. e. the Re-
servatories of the Seed: They are situate im-
mediately behind the Sphincter, between the 
Bladder and Rectum, i. e. the straight Gut. 

Secondly, Their Ducts; which pass from 
them, and open about the Middle of the 
membranous Part of the Urethra, by Two 
Orifices, which are cover'd by a sort of a 
Caruncle, call'd, Caput Gallinaginis, or Veru-
montanum; which serves instead of Valves, to 
hinder the involuntary emission of the Seed. 

|P_16
Thirdly, The Prostatæ; which are situated a 
Little below the Vesiculæ Seminoles, between 
the membranous Urethra and straight Gut. 

The Structure and Situation of the Parts 
being thus stated, it will not be difficult to 
deduce all die foremention'd Inconveniencies 
from them, viz.

First, The Danger of this Operation (to 
say no more) will appear from a Computati-
on of the Number of those that do and do 
not escape after it; which is (in general) oc-
casion'd by the Length and Streightness of the 
Passage before describ'd, Figure and Bigness 
of the Stones, Force requir'd to extract 
them, &c. Whence the foremention'd Parts, &c.
are lacerated and contused to too great a Degree, 
and thence excessive Pain, Hemorrhagy, Loss 
of Strength, &c. too great to be master'd. 

Secondly, Every one that has made, or seen 
any Number of these Operations perform'd, 
cannot but be sensible of the Tediousness of 
them (and consequently of the Pain the Pa-
tient must needs suffer) which is owing to the 
Length and Streightness of the Passage (which 
cannot be alter'd, as is commonly suppos'd, 
by enlarging the External Orifice,) Num-
ber, and Necessary Largeness of the Instru-
ments used; Number, Bigness, and Figure of 
the Stones, &c.

Thirdly, The bad Consequences that fre-
quently follow this Operation (in those that 
|P_17
escape with Life) are, Incontinency of Urine, 
Impotency, Fistula's, &c. which every one 
must be satisfy'd of, that have seen any 
Number of them: In some of whom you'll 
observe an Incontinency of Urine, in others 
Impotency, in others Fistula's, in others all of 
them; any one of which is very little better 
than the Stone itself. 

[}Cause of the Incontinency of 
Urine. }]
It's caused when the Sphincter of the Blad-
der is over-stretched by the Bigness, or lace-
rated by the Asperitys of the Stone; because 
it can never afterwards do its Office as before; 
And so the Urine flows involuntarily Day 
and Night; which keeps them always wet, 
from whence none of the most agreeable 
Scents arise. 

[}Cause of the Impotency. }]
It's occasion'd by the Laceration of the 
Ducts of the Vesiculæ Seminales, or the Veru-
montanum; and that by the Bigness or Aspe-
ritys of the Stone, as before: So when 
the Wound heals, the Ducts, or Verumonta-
num; are stopp'd by the Callous, so that the 
Seed can no more flow into the Urethra.

|P_18
[}Cause of Fistula's. }]
These Parts are Membranous, Nervous, or 
Spermatick, as Authors call them, and, of 
Course, very unapt to heal when wounded, 
lacerated, or contused; which is also in-
creas'd by the constant Passage of the Urine, 
Gravel, &c. thro' the Wound, and so they 
turn fistulous; and then all or a great Part 
of the Urine, which should pass thro' the 
Yard, passes thro' the Fistula left in the 
Wound; whence People are made nauseous 
to themselves and others. 

The Great Hildanus, pag. 733, expresses the 
Danger of this Operation in these Words: 

"Ingens ac magnus Calculus ut per Collum 
Vesicæ extrabatur, propter ejus angustiam 
longum requirit tempus, interim æger ingen-
tibus affligitur Doloribus, Vesica, ipsiusque 
Fibræ dilacerantur, Sanguis copiosè profluit, 
vires dissolvuntur, maximoque cum Cruciatu 
æger vel in ipsa Operatione aut paulò post 
extinguitur, i. e."

"When a large Stone is extracted through 
the Neck of the Bladder, because of its 
Streightness, it takes up a long Time: In 
the mean Time, the Patient suffers intole-
rable Pain, the Bladder and its Fibres are 
|P_19
tore, there's a great Flux of Blood, Loss 
of Strength, and the Patient, by reason 
of the great Torture, dies, either in or 
soon after the Operation."

The late Mr. Couper, in his Comment upon 
Bidloo, has the following Observations on 
the Accidents which happen from the Stru-
cture of the Parts. 

"This Part of the Urethra, viz. that be-
tween the Prostatæ and the Bulb, is liable 
to be wounded, and sometimes perforated, 
by too hastily introducing the Conductor 
into the Bladder, after an Incision is made 
in the Perinæum in Cutting for the Stone; 
whereby the Operator afterwards thrusts 
his Forceps between the Bladder and Re-
ctum."

"This Inadvertency, I'm persuaded, is 
very often practised by the Pretenders to 
Lithotomy, and frequently proves fatal to 
the Patient: One would think it hardly 
possible, that a Man in his Senses, and 
but tolerably acquainted with Anatomy, 
could commit such Errors; yet, of this I 
have met with more than one Instance, 
when being called to dissect the Deceased, 
in whom such Operators have been so un-
fortunate as to leave the Stone still in the 
Bladder."

|P_20
So much to shew the unavoidable Danger, 
&c. of Cutting on the Staffe.

The other Operation in use is Cutting on 
the Gripe.

Parts cut. 

They cut (farther off of the Rapha of the 
Perinæum than in the foregoing Operation) 
1. Through the Skin: 2. The Fat: 3. Part 
of the Erector Penis: 4. Some confiderable 
Blood-Vessels: 5. A Part of the Levator Ani:
6. Into the Body of the Bladder above the 
Sphincter.

This Operation can't always be practis'd, 
because our Fingers are not long enough to 
bring down and keep the Stone fast against 
the Perinæum in grown People. Though, 
when it can be done, 

The Inconveniencies of it are, 

1. When the Stone is rough, it's trouble-
some, painful, and tedious, to make the In-
cision on it. 
2. The Arteries, which are cut, are often 
very large. 
3. When the Stone is rough, it pricks, and 
contuses the Bladder in several Places, by 
being pressed hard against the Perinæum;
whence several dangerous and deadly Symp-
toms ensue. 
|P_21
4. The Wound in the Bladder being de-
pending, is hinder'd from aglutinating, by 
the Gravel and Urine passing thro' it, &c.
From all which, I think 'tis evident, that 
the rare Success of these Operations, even 
in the best of Hands, (not to mention the 
Havock that is often made by Pretenders) is 
entirely owing to the Structure of the Parts 
concern'd; which is what I undertook to 
prove. 

Advantages of this new Operation. 

Whereas, in the other Operations, the 
Danger, &c. are owing to the Structure of 
the Parts; in my Operation, by reason of 
the Structure of the Parts, they are success-
fully prevented. E. G.

1. There can be no Impotency caused by 
it, because there's none of the Genital Parts 
can be injur'd in doing it. 

2. There can be no Incontinency of Urine 
caus'd by it, because the Sphincter of the 
Bladder cannot be hurt in making it. 

3. There can be no Fistula after it, if pro-
per Care is taken of the Wound. 

4. There can be no such Force requir'd to 
extract the Stone, as will contuse and lace-
rate the Parts, which, in the other Opera-
tions, are the Cause of Symptoms too hard 
to be govern'd) because the Wound may be 
|P_22
made as large as you please, which can't be 
done in them. 

5. There can't be any Flux of Blood, 
because there's no Occasion to cut any of 
the great Vessels, &c. Thus the Defects of 
the others are supply'd by this. 

My Patient was between sixteen and se-
venteen Years of Age, and was cut two 
Days before last Christmas, and in a Month's 
Time the Wound was perfectly cicatriz'd, 
i.e. healed. 

The Operation was over in one Minute, 
and I believe will never be above two. 

He now performs all his natural Faculties 
as well as he had never been troubled with 
the Stone. 

There were two Physicians, two Surgeons, 
and an Apothecary, present at the Opera-
tion: But to save them the Trouble of an-
swering every little Prig's impertinent Que-
stions, I don't think it's proper to mention 
them. 

The Stone was of the Bigness and Figure 
express'd in the Plate following. 

|P_23
[^a bladder stone^]
[}The Natural Figure & Bigness of ye stone }]
Some say that I have robb'd the Dead of 
their Right, and endeavour'd to impose on 
the Living, by putting my own Name to 
another Man's Work, and pretending that 
it's a new Operation, though, at the same 
Time, it was practis'd by its first Inventor, 
De Franco, above 150 Years ago. 

|P_24
De Franco (whose Memory I reverence, 
because he was certainly an excellent Sur-
geon, and one of the best Lithotomists in his 
Time) is so far from valuing himself upon 
the High Operation, which he was once forc'd 
to make, that he owns himself to be very 
much to blame for doing of it; and desires 
no Man afterwards to follow his Example; 
and in the Room of that, in the preceding 
Part of that very same Chapter, recom-
mends another which is made on the Peri-
næum, which he assumes, and, with a great 
deal of Pleasure, calls his own Invention. 

Hildanus is also of the same Opinion, and 
expresses himself thus, Pag. 730. 

"De quarto operandi modo, in Lithotomia 
usitato, qui merito Lithotomia Franconiana 
appellari potest."

And so he goes on to describe and re-
commend that Operation, which De Franco
owns in the 33d Chapter of his Book, to be 
his proper Invention: But it's not the High,
but an Operation in the Perinæum, that's as-
sum'd by the one, and commended by the 
other. 

In Page 732, he has these Words: 

"Franciscus Rousettus Lib. de partuCæsa-
rioconcludere voluit, semper calculum eo in 
|P_25
Loco exsecandum esse, illudque minori cum pe-
riculo fieri posse. Lithotomiam proinde illam
Franconianam vocat, cum tamen D. Franc. 
eam minimè ad Imitationem præscripserit, 
sed expressè in Libro suo, se stolide egisse 
fateatur, adeoque unumquemque, ne ipsum hac 
in parte imitetur, sed precedentem operandi 
modum amplectatur, Hortetur."

"Franciscus Rousettus, in his Book on the 
Cæsarian Birth, asserts, that we ought al-
ways to cut for the Stone through the 
lower Part of the Belly, because it can be 
done with a great deal less Danger; and 
then calls it De Franco's Method, notwith-
standingDe Franco never prescrib'd it as a 
Rule; so far from which, he confesses in 
his own Book, that he acted foolishly in 
doing it; and therefore advises us never 
to imitate him in it, but in the Operation 
just before describ'd."

He concludes his Story thus: 

"Cum dicto igitur D. Franco, fideli atque 
industrio cuivis Chirurgo periculosæ hujus
Lithotomiæ Administrationem iterum atque 
iterum dissuadeo."

"Therefore, with the foremention'd De 
Franco, I again and again dissuade every 
faithful and industrious Surgeon from per-
forming this dangerous Operation."

|P_26
From all which I conclude, that instead of 
being an Honour to De Franco, to have had 
his Name put to it, it would have been a 
real Injury to the Memory of the Dead, to 
have made him the Author of an Operation, 
that he blam'd himself for doing when 
alive. 

Nay, I'm so far from having an Opinion 
of De Franco's Operation, as he has describ'd 
it, that I think it's fully as inconsistent and 
impracticable as Talicotius's Project of re-
storing lost Noses. 

All the Analogy between his and mine, 
is, that they are both made in the Belly. 
But his was made in one Place of the 
Belly, and mine in another: His, with his 
own Instruments, (which he has not men-
tion'd) mine with mine: His were used af-
ter one Manner, mine after another: And 
those, I think, are the most material Diffe-
rences betwixt any two Operations, viz. The 
Variation of the Place upon which the Ope-
ration is made, of the Number, Figure, and 
Size of the Instruments, and of the Method 
of using them. 

The two foremention'd Operations, call'd, 
Cutting on the Staffe, and Cutting on the 
Gripe, are both made on the Perinæum: The 
Design of both is the same, viz. To extract 
|P_27
the Stone out of the Bladder; yet no Man 
ever was so absurd as to call them both the 
same Operations, for the Reasons before-
mention'd. 

The late famous Mr. Rau, Professor of 
Physick and Surgery at Leyden, and the fore-
mention'dDe Franco, and several others, as 
Celsus, Guido, Marianus, &c. had each a par-
ticular Method of Cutting on the Perinæum,
to which every one gave his own Name, 
and why should not I be allow'd the same 
Liberty. 

But supposing that my Operation was, in 
every Tittle, the same as De Franco's; yet, 
if it's found to be a safer and easier Way of 
relieving the Miserable, it's nevertheless 
new; for that Operation was as much dead, 
before mine, and thought as much im-
practicable, (which the general Opinion 
of the Town on this Occasion abundantly 
proves) as it was 150 Years before De Franco
was born. 

I readily grant, that one Operation, tho' 
successfully perform'd, is not enough to sa-
tisfy the Publick that it's the safest Method; 
but it's enough to me, who, before the Ope-
ration, thought myself very sure of Success, 
else I had never attempted it. But now I 
have perform'd it, and seen the whole Pro-
cess of the Cure, I'm in no manner of Pain 
|P_28
about the future Success of if; nay, I dare 
venture to prophecy, that not one in ten will 
die, nor one in fifty want a perfect Cure, that 
do after the common Methods; and there 
fore do (what never any did before) recom-
mend it as the most easy safe, and speedy 
Method of extracting the Stone, (exclusive 
of all others) in Males, and when the Stone 
is large, in Females. 

I have had a great many vile, malicious 
and salfe Reflections cast upon me, on this 
Occasion, by a Set of Scioli, who (because 
they never did anything out of the common 
Road themselves) envy every Man else that 
does. 

The Imputation of Novelty (says the great 
Mr. Lock) is a terrible Charge among those 
who judge of Mens Heads, as they do of 
their Perukes, by the Fashion, and can allow 
none to be right but the receiv'd Doctrines. 
Truth scarce ever carry'd it by Vote any 
where at its first Appearance: New Opi-
nions are always suspected, and usually op-
pos'd, without any other Reason, but be-
cause they are not already common: But 
Truth, like Gold, is not the less so, for be-
ing newly brought out of the Mine. 

Magna est Veritas, & prevalebit.
FINIS. 

|P_
[}INDEX. }]
PLACE where this new Operation is 
made Page 3
An Account of three Surgeons that have 
made the High Operation P.4
The Opinions of some of the most eminent 
Authors about it P. 10
Remarks on the two Operations now in Use, 
viz. Cutting on the Staffe, and Cutting on 
the Gripe; whereby their Inconveniencies 
are explain'd P. 14
The Advantages of the New Way explain'd P. 21
The common Objection, viz. That this is not 
mine but De Franco's Operation, fully 
answer'd, &c. &c. P. 23
[}Advertisement. }]
IN a short Time will be publish'd, Anato-
mia Chirurgo Necessaria: Or, a Description 
of all those Parts of Anatomy, that are abso-
lutely necessary to be well understood by Sur-
geons, with their practical Uses, as mention'd 
in my printed Syllabus.

For the Use of Students of Surgery. 

Qui fructuosa non qui multa soit sapit.
Printed for Tho. Woodward.

|P_
[}BOOKS printed for Tho. Woodward 
near Temple Bar. }]
1. ASyllabus of what is to be perform'd in 
a Course of Anatomy, Chirurgical O-
perations and Bandages. By John Douglas,
Surgeon. 

2. General Observations and Prescriptions 
in the Practice of Physick, on several Persons 
of Quality, &c. by an eminent LondonPhy-
sician, who was Contemporary with Dr. Gif-
ford, Dr. Ridgley, Dr. Meveral, Dr. Andrews,
and Sir Theodore Mayerne, Physicians in Or-
dinary to King James, and King Charles the 
First. Inscrib'd to Sir Samuel Garth, Kt. 

3. A. short and easy Method to understand 
Geography; wherein are describ'd, the Form 
of Government of each Country, its Qua-
lities, the Manners of its Inhabitants, and 
whatsoever is most remarkable in it. To 
which are added, Observations upon those 
Things of Importance that have happen'd 
in each State. With an Abridgement of the 
Sphere, and the Use of Geographical Maps. 
Made English by a Gentleman of Cambridge,
from the French of Mr. A.D. Fer,Geogra-
pher to the French King. 

|P_
4. Mathematical Elements of Physicks 
prov'd by Experiments; being an Intro-
duction to Sir Isaac Newton's Philosophy. 
By Dr. William James Gravesande,Profes-
sor of Mathematicks and Astronomy in the 
University of Leyden, and Fellow of the 
Royal Society of London. Made English and 
illustrated with 33 Copper Plates, revis'd 
and corrected by Dr. John Keil, F.R.S.Pro-
fessor of Astronomy in Oxford.

5. Christiani Hugenii Libellus de Ratiociniis 
in Ludo Aleæ: Or, the Value of all Chances 
in Games of Fortune, Cards, Dice, Wagers, 
Lotteries, &c. Mathematically demonstrated. 
Price 1 s.
