
|P_iii
[}TO 
Mr. William Cheselden, 
Surgeon to St. Thomas's Hospital, 
AND 
Fellow of the Royal Society. }]
SIR, 

[^Decorative frame around the letter "I".^]I Have heard, that 
the Watch-Word 
in the Time of 
War, is frequent-
ly the Name of One of the 
Generals; and that he who 
|P_iv
makes use of it, (upon be-
ing Demanded, Who Goes 
there?) is allow'd, without 
further Questions, to pass on about his Business. 

This engag'd me to ask 
the Liberty of Prefixing 
your Name to this Trifle; 
which however unworthy it 
may be of the Honour, will 
yet derive a double Advan-
tage from it; first to Itself, 
then to it's Author: It will 
Itself, by this Means, pass un-
question'd into the World; 
and it's Author will have an 
Opportunity of paying due 
Acknowledgments, for the 
|P_v
Benefits he has receiv'd from 
your Industry and Ingenu-
ity. The Success which has 
so frequently attended the 
Use of your Needle in this 
Delicate Operation, suffici-
ently shews the Niceness of 
your Hand; and the little 
Damage you have ever done, 
where Unavoidable Acci-
dents have conspir'd to ren-
der the Operation unsucces-
ful, is a great Evidence of 
the Accuracy of your Judg-
ment. 

The Knowledge I have of 
this Branch of my Professi-
on, such as it is, I am wholy 
|P_vi
indebted to You for; and 
the Success I have had on a 
Great Number of Subjects 
within these two Years, will 
I hope prove that I have fol-
low'd no ill Director. 

If I have in any Degree 
made it probable, that the 
Opacity of the Crystalline 
Humor is the True CATA-
RACT, I must here own 
that I had the First Hint of 
it from You: And if I have 
done no Injustice to your 
Opinion by unworthily de-
fending it, I hope shortly to 
see some One of my Bre-
thren, more able than My-
|P_vii
self, take this Method of gi-
ving You publick Thanks 
for the Discovery. 

I am, 
Worthy SIR, 
Your most Obliged 
and most Obedient 
Humble Servant, 
John Taylor. 

|P_ix
[}THE 
PREFACE.}]
[^Decorative frame around the letter "I".^]I Think it Necessary for 
my own Vindication to 
say Something by Way 
of Preface, and I expect 
to be pardon'd for it 
by all Honest Impartial Men; for 
'tis to such only I appeal, having 
already suffer'd as much as I could 
suffer, from Men of a Character quite 
contrary. 

I am sorry I have it to say, That 
the worst Usage I have met with, has 
|P_10
been from the Gentlemen of my own 
Profession; and that this Trifle of 
mine whilst an Embryo, has been suf-
ficiently ridicul'd by them: 'Tis, 
perhaps, still shapeless and unform'd; 
but if there are found in it the Fea-
tures of a Man, 'twill at least demand 
some Regard from all those who 
would deserve the Character of Men. 
I have been driven to such a Dilem-
ma by their Unnatural Treatment, 
that for some Time I have suspen-
ded the Publication, and was once 
resolv'd intirely to suppress it. This 
following has been their Way of Ar-
guing, If 'tis his Own, 'twill not bear 
the Light; if 'twill bear the Light, 
'tis not his Own; either Side of this 
would be equally prejudicial to me: 
But I shall endeavour to prove, that 
if I have not made a very ill Use of 
|P_11
my Time and Advantages, it may 
bear the Light, and yet be my Own. 

When I have done this in the best 
Manner I am capable, I shall desire 
this following Fair Challenge may be 
annex'd to my Account of Myself: 
That if any of my Unkind Brethren
have any Thing to say, which They 
think will prove me too ignorant for 
my Profession, that they may do it 
in the same publick Manner which I 
have made Use of to prove that I 
am not so. 

The Worthy Gentleman to whom 
I have made an Offer of this Trifle 
in the Dedication, will be my Wit-
ness of rhe Truth of the following 
Particulars: That I attended the Pra-
ctice of St. Thomas's Hospital regu-
|P_12
larly and diligently the Time I was 
a PUPIL there, and that it was fur-
nish'd at that Time with a Sett of the 
Best and most Rational Practitioners 
which have been ever known there. 

I think according to the Account 
of the Hospital, that there are very 
seldom less than 4 or 5000 Subjects 
cured of their several Diseases in a 
Year; and I believe it will very rea-
dily be granted by all unprejudic'd 
People, that where Accidents are so 
various and numerous, a young Sur-
geon may improve himself more in 
five or six Months, than he can with 
the best private Master in the King-
dom in as many Years: Here more-
over a Man has the Opportunity of 
learning every Branch of his Profes-
sion; and he who does not endea-
|P_13
vour to practise it afterwards, as it 
comes in his Way, ought (I think) 
to be suspected of great Negligence 
in his Observation, or Want of Abi-
lity to see into the Reason of the Pra-
ctice; either of which will certainly 
make him fearful of undertaking it, 
because the Success will always ap-
pear doubtful to him: But when a 
Man has by diligent Observation on 
the Chirurgical Part, and a compe-
tent Knowledge of the Rational, qua-
lify'd himself to discharge the Duty 
of his Profession with Ability and 
Honesty, I think his endeavouring 
to do so, should not only not ren-
der him obnoxious to the Gentle-
men of his Profession, but even make 
him claim some Share of their Re-
gard, and Protection too from the 
Insults of the rest of the World: 
|P_14
But to come nearer to the Point, and 
the Occasion of this Preface.

When I came to practise in this 
City, full of Expectation of the U-
sage just now mention'd, I soon 
found myself miserably deceiv'd; for 
instead of That, I was immediately 
surrounded with Calumny and Detra
ction: And from what Quarter? 
Why even from those Gentlemen by 
whom I thought to be Protected:
There was immediately a Partyrai-
sed against me, who not contented 
with aspersing my Abilities, fell foul 
upon my Manners; and would fain h
ave insinuated, (if they could have 
got any Man of Sense to have be-
liev'd them) that if a Man wore to-
lerable good Cloaths, and lik'd the 
Company of a Friend, 'twas impos-x
|P_15
vour he could be a good Surgeon: 
These are a Sett of worthy People, 
who are themselves 

— Dully grave, insipidly serene, 
And carry all their Wisdom in their Mien. 
And in short, they like Nobody, but 
such as are like themselves: So that 
an Awkard Saint-like Behaviour, a 
Solemn Gait, an HypocritialEleva-
tion of the Eye, and an Affected 
Religious Grimace, is sufficient with 
them to set a Man at the Head of 
his Profession. If a Man is recom-
mended to any of them, the First 
Question is, Is he One of Us? If 
they are answer'd in the Negative, 
they immediately fly; and tho' they 
know Nothing of the Man, swear 
he has no Faith, no Honour, no Ca-
|P_16
pacity, no Money, nor any Thing 
else which can render a Man quali-
fy'd to be employ'd in any Thing. 

'Tis a great Hardship to fall into 
the Hands of these Gentlemen, and 
yet to be quite void of all those va-
luable Talents which must recom-
mend one to their Favour. For my 
Part, if I am call'd to a Patient, I 
expect my Business is with his Body,
and not with his Soul: I can Set a 
Broken Leg, as well as my Neigh-
bours; but as to Cases of Conscience,
I must leave them to be set right by 
Gentlemen whose Profession qualifies 
and authorizes them to do it. 

But I am afraid, if we come to ex-
amin the Matter a little more close-
ly, we shall find that this is generally 
|P_17
all Stratagem; and that my Worthy
Brethren who make use of it, have 
an odd Way of imposing upon the 
World, and giving of it one Term for 
another: Their pretended Gravity
should be call'd Natural Dulness, for 
'tis so in Fact; and where there is 
Fire, it will shew itself: Their Pre-
tence to Religion, in Opposition to 
Human Reason, is not because they 
have more of the First than their 
Neighbours, but less of the Latter: 
Their Canting Custom of Asking a 
peculiar Blessing on every Thing 
they undertake, is because they know 
their Skill will stand very much in 
Need of it: Their Disaffection to 
Human Learning is, because they 
know Nothing more of it than the 
Name; and so of every Thing else; 
|P_18
In short, I am tir'd of them; but I'll 
beg Leave to say, they are very pret-
ty People to trust Mens Lives and 
Limbs with. 

I have often wonder'd, that when 
the ACT was made for Examining 
all Surgeons (before they were ad-
mitted to practise in and about Lon-
don) at Surgeons-Hall, the same Or-
der did not pass thro' every County, 
that the Country might have had the 
same Advantage of having a Sett of 
Able Men amongst them as the Town 
has: Many and great would have been 
the Benefits of it, to the Profession 
in General, to every Able Professor 
of it in Particular, and to all those 
whose Misfortunes oblige them to 
have Recourse to It or Them for Assi-
|P_19
stance. Every Apprentice would be 
oblig'd to be diligently attentive in 
his Business, in order to qualifie him-
self to pass his Examination; and 
this certainly in Time would be of 
infinite Advantage to the Profession: 
Every Able Professor of it would 
certainly be known, by that very 
Examination, to be so; and by this 
Means would be plac'd in his pro-
per Sphere, and fear no Danger from 
the Canting Blockheads beneath him. 
The Benefit of the Patient, is too ob-
vious to be insisted upon; his Limbs 
very frequently, and often his Life 
too would be preserv'd by it. 

But as a Capacity is not Every Thing 
which is requir'd of a Surgeon, I wish 
there was any Method as certain as 
|P_20
this, to try their Honesty: Some I 
have known who have wanted Both, 
others who have had the First and 
wanted the Latter; but in order to 
make a Good Surgeon, 'tis absolutely 
necessary that a Man should want 
Neither of them. I'll beg the Liberty 
to relate a Story or Two of a Gen-
tleman who has been remarkably 
kind to me, and I am very glad I 
have this Opportunity of returning 
his Civility, and letting the World 
know that he is a Man of Real Me-
rit: This Friend of mine was sent for 
to a Child that had dislocated its 
Knee, he carried with him Plaisters, 
Bandage, &c. in order to reduce it, 
which he endeavour'd to do in the 
best Manner his Capacity would ad-
mit of; after the Business was over, 
|P_21
he encourag'd the Friends by promi-
sing the greatest Success: Next Day 
he call'd to see his little Patient, and 
found the Family much pleas'd at his 
great Skill, declaring that the Child's 
Complaint in that Part was intirely 
remov'd: The Doctor finding in this 
Case that he had not spent his Skill 
in vain, began to exert himself upon 
it, and undertook a Case of much 
more Difficulty, (which prov'd a Dis-
location in Fact) in which he assured 
them of the like Success, and that he 
would cure that as expeditiously as he 
did the other; which, to prove his 
Assertions true, he actually did; by 
which wonderful Cure he has demon-
strated his Genius in a laudableMan-
ner. Another Brother of mine (some 
small Distance from this Place) had 
the Care of a Gentlewoman, whom 
|P_22
he kept in Torment several Years, 
and left her at last as Bad or Worse 
than he found her; she applied her-
self to a Surgeon of my Acquain-
tance, who made a perfect Cure of 
her in Fourteen Days: This Won-
derful Man was ask'd some Time af-
ter, How it came about that a Man 
of his pretended Abilities and long 
Practice, after a Trial of Years, should 
miss of Success in a Case where a 
Young Fellow just beginning to pra-
ctise, succeeded to the Surprize of 
the whole Town in a few Days? 
And whether he did not think it 
ought to diminish his Character, and 
add to the Character of the other? 
He had a Conflict with himself for 
some Time whether he should sa-
crifice his Capacity or Honesty; at 
last it went on the Side of Dear Ca-
|P_23
pacity, and answer'd, She had Mo-
ney! But I shall leave him as I found 
him; and hasten to tell you the Rea-
son of my publishing the following 
Account of a CATARACT. 

I am more sensible than any other 
Man can be, of my own Inability 
to perform accurately what I have 
propos'd in my Title-Page; my De-
sign not being at all to instruct those 
whose regular Education in Physick 
and Mathematicks have qualify'd them 
to understand these Things infinite-
ly better than I can pretend to do: 
And I declare before I enter upon 
the Work, that I have no other View 
in it than to satisfie the World that 
I am no Emprick (as I have been 
vilely and maliciously represented to 
|P_24
pacity, be) in my Profession of COUCH-
ING; but that I know as much of 
the Nature and Structure of the EYE, 
as is requir'd of any one who pre-
tends to the Operation. 

The Reason why this nice and ne-
cessary Operation is so rarely perfor-
med by Gentlemen regularly bred to 
the Profession of Surgery, I take to be 
this; That it having been a long Time 
the distinguishing Excellency of seve-
ral of our famous Mountebanks, the 
regular Surgeons, by undertaking it, 
are under the dreadful Apprehensi-
ons of being rank'd with itinerant 
Operators, commonly known by the 
Name of Quacks: The Fault is abso-
lutely their own; for did they not 
join with these Empiricks (whom up-
|P_25
on every other Account they suffici-
ently despise) to oppress every young 
Fellow who dares attempt a Thing 
which is not the general Profession 
of the whole Fraternity, whatever 
Pains he has taken, or whatever Ad-
vantages he has had to make himself 
Master of the Performance; did they 
not join to do this, I say, how ineffe-
ctual would all the little Malice and 
Calumny of these contemptible Wret-
ches be towards ruining the Reputa-
tion of a regular Surgeon! And how 
easie would it be for us, (for 'tis We 
only who can do it) by making a 
Collection of the injudicious and 
barbarous Practices of those illite-
rate murdering Raseals, so to destroy 
their Reputations, (if 'tis not a Scan-
dal to the Word Reputation to use 
|P_26
it in suck Company) that in a few 
Years we might be able to take this 
and some other Branches of our Pro-
fession Home to ourselves, the Ori-
ginal Proprietors, without any Man-
ner of Danger of the foregoing Im-
putation. 

|P_27
[}AN 
ACCOUNT
OF THE 
Mechanism of the EYE. }]
[^Decorative frame around the letter "A".^]AS I have propos'd to give 
some Account of the Me-
chanism of the EYE, I 
know no properer Way 
of beginning it, than 
by an Anatomical Disse-
ction of the EYE Itself; 
and after I have shewn 
some few general Diseases that the particu-
lar Coats and Humors of the Eye are sub-
ject to, I shall proceed to shew how the 
said Coats and Humors are instrumental to 
|P_28
Vision, and then by what particular Diseases 
the Eye is render'd Totally Opake: And 
there I shall endeavour to ascertain the true 
Place of a Cataract, and the Consequence 
of a judicious or injudicious Removal of It. 

The Globe of the Eye is moved by Six 
Muscles, Four Streight, and Two Oblique, 
viz. Elevator; Depressor, Adductor, Abductor, 
Obliquus Superior, and Inferior: The First 
of these arises out of the Bottom of the Or-
bit, and after it has ascended and grown ten-
dinous, is inserted into the Upper Part of the 
Tunica Sclerotis, near the Cornea. The De-
pressor arises and is inserted directly opposite 
to the Elevator. The Adductor arises from 
the Bottom of the Orbit, and is inserted on 
the Side next the Nose, into the Tunica Scle-
rotis. The Abductor arises and is inserted 
directly opposite to the Adductor. The Su-
perior Oblique Muscle arises between the 
Elevator and Adductor, at the Bottom of the 
Orbit, thence ascending by the Sutura Trans-
versalis becomes a Round Tendon, which 
passes thro' a little Annular Cartilage call'd 
Trochlea, (from its bearing the Form of a 
Pully) at the upper and inner Part of the 
|P_29
Orbit near its Edge, is inserted near the Bot-
tom of the Eye. The Inferior Oblique Mus-
cle arises from the Os Maxillae Superioris,
thence passing over the Depressor, is inserted 
at the Bottom of the Eye near the Abductor.
The Four Streight Muscles are so fix'd to 
the Sclerotis, that they lift up the Eye, de-
press it, bring it towards the Nose or from 
it, hold it fast, turn it round, just as they 
act either separately or conjointly. 

The Superior Oblique Muscle moves the 
Eye round towards the Nose about its Axis,
and pulls it upward and inward, and there-
by directs the Pupil outward and downward; 
and thus the Eye is dispos'd to see Things 
placed near it. The Inferior Oblique Mus-
cle turns the Eye towards the outward Cor-
ner, and also upwards; if these Two act 
together, they fix the Eye fierce and protu-
berant out of the Orbit: Moreover, ano-
ther Use of these Muscles is, to suspend the 
Eye, and render it very fit to perform the 
Motions of the other Four. Between these 
Muscles Fat is interspers'd, which serves to 
lubricate and facilitate their Motion. 

|P_30
Next we come to the Coats and Humors
of the Eye: The first is the Tunica Adnata,
or Conjunctiva; it makes that which is 
call'd the White of the Eye, and is full of 
Blood-Vessels; which are very visible in an 
Ophthalmia: The Symptoms of this Disease 
are Heat, Pain, Pulsation, and an apparent 
Distention of these Blood-Vessels; it may be 
occasion'd externally, by any Thing forc'd 
against or coming into the Eye, irritating 
or compressing the Fibres of this Coat. If 
this Inflammation be only external, the Case 
symptomatical, and the Patient not worne 
out by other Diseases, 'tis easily Curable: 
On the Contrary, if it becomes so great as 
to tumefie the Face, and the Humors very 
pungent and corrosive, we judge it difficult 
to cure. Its Cure depends on Bleeding, le-
nient Purgation, Blistring, Cupping, &c.toge-
ther with the Assistance of a cooling Diet, 
topical Application, and proper Collyria.

The next Coat is the Sclerotis: It expandes 
itself nearly into a Globe, membranous and 
hard almost like Leather, and encompasses 
the whole Eye, growing gradually thinner, 
clearer, and prominent in the Fore-part, 
|P_31
which Part of it is call'd Cornea, from its 
Transparency; they make together one firm 
Coat, for the Use of the other Coats and 
Humors. This Coat is sometimes diseas'd 
by a little White Speck of a Cartilaginous 
Substance, covering Part of, and sometimes 
the whole Pupilla: If this Excrescence is 
only superficial, it may be remov'd by an O-
peration in Surgery call'd Leucotomy; but 
if the Cornea is throly affected, I believe it 
incurable. This Operation is perform'd in 
the following Manner, viz. I place the Pa-
tient in a proper Position, and fixing the Spe-
culum Oculi invented for that Purpose in or-
der to keep the Globe without Motion, pare 
off the Excrescence with a small curv'd Knife, 
leaving as few Inequalities as possible; and 
having prevented an Inflammation by proper 
Repellents, I blow a Powder into the Eye; 
which, assisted by the Motion of the Eye-
lid, smooths off the Inequalities left by the 
Knife. 

Next to this Coat lies the Tunica Choroi-
des: 'Tis a Membrane of little Firmness, be-
ing much thinner than the former; 'tis ting'd 
by a dark Liquor separated from the Blood-
|P_32
Vessels, so that it appears of a rusty dark Co-
lour; this Coat has a Perforation in it, call'd 
Pupilla: The Part of this Coat which makes 
the Circumference of this Hole, and which 
lies upon the Side of the Crystalline Hu-
mor, is call'd Uvea, compos'd of circular and 
streight Fibres; 'tis qualified by this Means 
to contract and dilate, as Light and Objects 
make different Impressions upon it. The 
Outside of this last Membrane is call'd 
Iris, where appear different Colours: On 
the Inside of it from its Circumference arise 
the Processus Ciliares, made of short Fibres 
like Lines drawn from the Circumference to 
the Center. 

The last Coat is the Retina, so call'd from 
its Resemblance to a Net; it covers the 
whole Fund of the Eye, and is nothing more 
than a fine Expansion of the Medullary Fi-
bres of the Optick Nerve, upon which the 
Rays of Light meeting in a Point, convey 
the Images of outward Objects to the Brain. 
The Disease of this Coat is call'd Gutta 
Serena; the Eye seems clear in Appearance, 
and there are no other Signs of Blindness ex-
cept a preternatural Dilatation of the Pu-
|P_33
pilla. I shall have Occasion to speak more 
largely of this Disease by and by. 

Between these Coats are contain'd Three 
Humors, the Aqueous, the Crystalline, and 
the Vitreous: The First is call'd Aqueous
because it resembles Water, being a thin 
transparent Fluid; it serves to extend the 
Cornea into an equal Convexity; besides, it 
serves moreover for the Crystalline Humor 
to move forward or backward in, as Occasion 
requires us to see Objects nearer or farther 
from us. 

Next is the Crystalline: It's compounded 
of numberless spherical Segments, closely u-
nited and transparent; its Shape is a deprest 
Spheriod, it's inclos'd in a fine Membrane 
call'd Aranea, and is much thicker than ei-
ther the Aqueous or Vitreous: Its Diseases 
and Uses I shall speak of in another Place. 

The next is the Vitreous: It's very clear 
and tenacious, it lies behind the Crystalline,
and fills the greatest Part of the Eye; it's 
vascular on every Side, its Foreside concave 
for the Crystalline Humor to lodge in, and 
|P_34
Backside convex; it keeps the Retina and 
Crystalline Humor at a proper Distance: 
This Humor is sometimes so vitiated as to 
hinder or utterly destroy Sight, which Dis-
ease is often mistook for a Gutta Serena.

I shall now proceed to speak of the Parts 
of the Eye, as they are subservient to Vision. 

The Use of the Muscles in general is to 
direct the Globe of the Eye, and fix it in 
such a Position, as that the Rays of Light 
reflected from any Object which we would 
have visible to us, may pass thro' the Pupilla
and paint the Image of it on the Retina.

To form the Image of any Object, 'tis ne-
cessary that the Rays of Light coming from 
it should converge and meet in a Foous:
And we judge of the comparative Magni-
tude of all Bodies, by the Angle which is 
subtended by those Bodies before the Eye. 

To qualifie the Eye to perform this, Na-
ture has given it a spherical Form, and com-
pos'd it of transparent Goats and Humors; 
the latter to transmit the Rays coming from 
|P_35
the luminous Points of Objects, and the for-
mer to refract them in such a Degree as to 
bring them all together in a Point on the 
Retina.

All convex diaphanous Bodies refract the 
Rays of Light by Attraction, and the Ray 
bends towards that Part or the Body where 
there is the greatest Quantity of Matter; 
this in convex Bodies is the Middle. 

Therefore all Rays on whatever Parts 
of such Bodies they fall, are refracted to-
wards a Line drawn thro' the Center of 
those Bodies, and made to converge behind 
them at a Distance proportionable to the 
greater or less Convexity of the Bodies them-
selves: Thus when the Eye is too flat, as 
in old People, (from a Decay of the Humors, 
or a Shrinking of the Coats, or both) the 
converging Rays do not coalesce at the Re-
tina; but would pass on if suffer'd, and not 
come to a Point but at some Distance beyond 
it: By this Means Vision becomes weak 
and indistinct. 

|P_36
On the contrary, those call'd Myopes, or 
Near-sighted People, have their Eyes too 
gibbous, and the Convexity of them is so 
great, that the Rays meet and cross one a-
nother before they arrive at the Retina. The 
former Eyes are help'd by Convex-Glasses, 
which put the Rays into a State of easie Re-
fraction before they fall upon the Eye: The 
latter are help'd by Concave-Glasses, thro' 
which the Rays passing do diverge, and fall 
upon the Eye in such a Manner, as to re-
quire a greater Degree of Refraction than 
they would in their natural Course: In the 
former Case the Eye is not help'd by the 
Object's appearing bigger, but more distinct; 
for very small Objects are render'd distinctly 
visible to such an Eye by the Help of a Con-
vex-Glass, whereas very large ones cannot be 
seen enough to be distinguish'd by the Na-
ked Eye. 

I don't propose to give any new Theory 
of Vision, nor to be able to describe the Man-
ner of it better than 'tis already done by an 
eminent Author; for which Reason I shall 
make use of his own Words, so far as they 
are serviceable to my present Purpose, and 
|P_37
conducive to the main End of this Treatise, 
which is to ascertain the True PLACE of 
a Cataract.

All the Rays which come from one Point 
of an Object, are by the Cornea and Humors 
of the Eye united in a Point of the Retina,
which is in a streight Line, drawn from the 
same Point of the Object, thro' the Center of 
the Eye; and consequently all the Rays, 
which come from all the Points of an Object, 
are united on the Retina, in the same Order 
and Proportion as the Points of the Objects 
are from whence those Rays come. 

Therefore the Interposition which these 
Rays make upon the Retina, must be the 
Image of the Object. 

And thus Vision in general is perform'd: 
But to know what the several Parts of the 
Globe contribute hereunto, it's needful to 
observe that the Cornea is more convex than 
any other Part of it; by which Means all 
the Rays are gather'd to pass thro' the Pu-
pilla, and none of them are lost upon the 
Uvea.

|P_38
The Aqueous Humor being thinnest, and 
most liquid, easily changes its Figure, when 
either the Ligamentum Ciliare contracts, or 
both the Oblique Muscles squeeze the Mid-
dle of the Bulb of the Eye, to render it ob-
long, when Objects are too near us. 

The streight Fibres of the Uvea dilate 
the Pupilla, when there are but few Rays of 
Light; and the circular Fibres contract it, 
when there are too many. 

When the Pupilla is contracted, we see 
most distinctly; when it is dilated, we see 
most clearly. 

The Glassy Humor keeps the Crystalline
at such a Distance from the Retina, as is ne-
cessary for uniting the Rays, which come 
from one Point of the Object, exactly in one 
Point of the Retina. The Impression of the 
Object is made upon the Retina.

The Choroides is tinctur'd black, that the 
Rays of Light which pass thro' the Retina
may not be reflected back again to confuse 
the Image of the Object. 

|P_39
Being distinct, Vision consists in the Union 
of all the Rays which come from one Point 
of an Object exactly in one Point of the Re-
tina; and that the Rays which come from 
Objects at different Distances, are united at 
different Distances, behind the CrystallineHu-
mor; they cannot both be exactly united up-
on the Retina, therefore the Eye cannot 
see equally distinct, at the same Time, Ob-
jects at different Distances. 

The Optick Nerves pierce the Globe of the 
Eye, a little on the Inside of the Optick 
Axes. Their external Coat, which is a 
Production of the Dura Mater, is continu'd 
to the Sclerotis, as their internal from the 
Pia Mater is to the Choroides; and their 
medullary Fibres passing thro' all, are expan-
ded into the Retina, upon which the Images 
of Objects are painted. 

The Center of this Expansion is insensible, 
and all Rays which fall upon it are lost; and 
consequently that Point of the Object from 
which those Rays come, is invisible to the 
Eye: The Reason of which proceeds proba-
bly from the Blood-Vessels, which enter with 
|P_40
the Optick Nerve, and cover this Part of 
the Retina.

But whatsoever its Cause is, there is a ma-
nifest Advantage in the Optick Nerves being 
inserted on the Inside of the Optick Axes:
For if they had pierc'd the Eye in the Axis,
then the middle Point of every Object had 
been invisible; and where all Things con-
duce to make us see best, there we had not 
seen at all. 

We must likewise have lost some Part of 
an Object, if the Optick Nerves had been 
placed on the Outside of the Optick Axes:
Because an Object may be so placed, as that 
all the Rays which come from one Point, 
may fall upon the Outside of both Eyes: 
But it is impossible they should fall upon the 
Inside of both Eyes; and therefore that Point 
which is lost in one Eye, is visible by the 
other. 

This shall serve for the general The-
ory of VISION: I shall now come to 
speak of a few Diseases of the Eye, by 
which Vision is render'd incompleat, or to-x
|P_41
pilla. destroy'd: And first of the CATA-
RACT. 

Before I define a Cataract, 'twill be ne-
cessary to premise a few Things, in Order to 
clear the Way for my Definition: For since 
the Hypothesis I go upon is New, and not 
yet clearly demonstrated, it would be look'd 
upon as a strange Peice of Presumption to 
overlook in the Gross all the different Obje-
ctions which may be made against it, and sa-
tisfie myself with only a few Probabilities 
(collected out of my own little Experience 
and Observation) which may seem to make 
for it. 

Objection I. 'Tis Demonstrated by the 
Mathematicians, that neither Corpuscles in 
the Aqueous or Crystalline Humor can be per-
ceiv'd on the Retina; and 'tis said by Physi-
cians, that a Beginning of a Cataract is a 
Suffusion of the Eye, when little Clouds, 
Motes, and Flies, seem to float about in the 
Air: Now if these Assertions are both true, 
one would be apt to conclude, that neither 
the Aqueous nor Crystalline Humor can be 
the Seat of a Cataract: The first is indis-
|P_42
putable, but the latter is not always True 
in Fact. 

For I have known a good Number of 
Subject with real Confirm'd Cataracts,
who never remember to have been thus af-
fected at the Beginning of them. 

And altho' some at the Beginning of Ca-
taracts are thus affected, 'tis no Proof that 
the Disease may not be in one or the other 
of these Humors: For the same Cause which 
will produce a Cataract, may at the same 
Time the Cataract is forming affect also 
the Fund of the Eye; and by disordering 
the Blood-Vessels, here and there stop the 
Influx of the Animal Spirits into the little 
Filaments of the Optick Nerve which help 
to make the Retina. This will certainly 
produce them Clouds, Motes, &c.

And I have the more Reason to believe 
this, because I have Couch'd several who af-
ter the Cataract has been well supprest, 
have remain'd blind with a Gutta Serena;
which is, I suppose, a total Stoppage of the 
Influx of the Animal Spirits into the nervous 
Filaments afore-mention'd. 

|P_43
Objection II. 'Tis suppos'd, that without 
the Assistance of the Crystalline Humor there 
could be no Vision; that is, except that Hu-
mor lay always ready to receive the Rays 
and refract them after they had pass'd the 
Pupilla, they would still proceed with so 
small a Degree of Refraction that their 
Place of Converging would be beyond the 
Retina; and by Consequence Vision would 
be render'd very indistinct, or perhaps the 
Eye would only perceive a confuss'd Glare 
of Light; if this Humor was taken away, 
and this could be demonstrated, 'twould 
not destroy my Supposition: For I freely 
acknowledge, that after the Removal of a 
Cataract, (or the Crystalline Humor, 
which as I proceed I shall use synonymously) Vi-
sion is never so perfectly perform'd as it was 
before the Eye was diseas'd. 

And if the Subjects I have hitherto per-
form'd the Operation upon were of Consi-
deration enough to have given me Pains 
beyond my Needle, I make no Doubt but I 
could have fix'd them with Glasses which 
would have still assisted their Sight, and 
|P_44
made them some Amends for the Loss of 
the aforesaid Humor. 

Objection III. If Vision can be perform'd 
without this Humor, and the Maxim is true 
Quod Natura Nihil agit frustra, Why was it 
placed in the Eye? 

I answer, 'Tis placed there to enable the 
Eye to see equally well at different Distan-
ces: For since the Rays proceeding from 
the luminous Points of nigh Objects diverge 
more than those from more remote Objects, 
the Power of making them equally converge 
at the Retina is very probably lodg'd in the 
Crystalline Humor; which, according to the 
different Distances of Objects, approaches 
nigher to, or removes farther from the Re-
tina, and perhaps too assumes a different 
Convexity. 

And this I look upon to be unquestiona-
ble: Because I have made it my constant Ob-
servation, That after a successful Depressure 
of a Cataract, the Patient sees best at a 
Distance something greater than the Eye re-
quires when all its Parts are in their natural 
|P_45
Situation; and that if the Object is placed 
considerably further from, or nearer to the 
Eye, Vision is render'd indistinct or confus'd. 

Objection IV. But if the Crystalline Humor 
is depress'd, what becomes of it afterwards? 
And how is the Cavity fill'd up, which the 
said Humor possess'd in its natural Situation? 

Answer. When I pass my Needle into the 
Eye, I press directly forward to the Crystal-
line Humor, and endeavouring to disengage 
it from the Ligamentum Ciliare, I depress it 
to the Bottom of the Vitreous Humor; when 
the Pupilla immediately seems clear to me, 
and such a Torrent of confus'd Light rushes 
into the Eye, as sometimes affrights the Pa-
tient even more than the Puncture of the 
Needle. 

Common Sense tells us, That if a solid 
Body which is immers'd in a Fluid should 
be remov'd from one Part of that Fluid in-
to another, it makes no Alteration in the 
Bulk of the Whole; for whatever Place the 
Solid is remov'd to, it fills up but so much 
Space precisely as it did in the Space which it 
|P_46
was remov'd from. Immediately upon the 
Removal of the Crystalline Humor, the A-
queous turns in and fills up the Cavity. 

N. B. From the different Specifick Gravity 
of the Crystalline Humor, which in all Pro-
bability is different in different Stages of the 
Distemper, we may account for what is call'd 
the Rising again of the Cataract: As to 
what becomes of the Crystalline Humor af-
ter 'tis depress'd, 'tis not unlikely that being 
broke from the Vessels which nourish'd it, it 
shrinks by Degrees, and as it were melts in-
to the Vitreoeus.

Dr. Turner says, A Cataract is a Disease 
of the Eye, in which a Film or Skin grow-
ing before the Pupilla, like a Curtain drawn 
against a Hole letting the Light into a Room, 
hinders the Passage of the same, till it is 
depress'd by the Needle, as in Couching. 

There is no one of my Profession who pays 
a greater Veneration to the Authority of that 
worthy, learned, and ingenious Gentleman, 
than myself; I am beholden to him that I 
have a regular, methodical, and I may ven-
|P_47
ture to say a certain System of Surgery in my 
Head and Hand; but as he himself (who had 
always more Business in other Parts of Surgery 
than a Man of his studious Temper could well 
attend to) very rarely, if ever perform'd the 
Operation, I hope 'twill not be thought Pre-
sumption if when I come to speak of the Ope-
ration itself, I should venture to give some 
Reasons which may seem to thwart his Opi-
nion, and establish my own. 

That there are such Films as the Doctor 
mentions on this Side the Pupilla, and in the 
Aqueous Humor, I can readily grant, having 
met with several of them in the little Course 
of my Practice: These the Practitioners are al-
low'd to call Suffusions, Films, &c. but not 
Cataracts; for I am determin'd to call no 
Disease of the Eye by this latter Name, ex-
cept that particular One which is to be re-
medied by the Use of the Needle: But the 
Case as mention'd by the Doctor can receive 
no Benefit that I know of by the Operation, 
nor did I ever attempt to Couch a Patient 
(tho' I have had several offer'd me) when the 
Circumstances were as before-mention'd: This 
I shall endeavour to demonstrate, in descri-
bing the Operation itself. 

|P_48
The French Authors, with Vaughion at 
the Head of them, imagine a Cataract to be 
a Film separated from the Crystalline Humor, 
and floating in tine Aqueous; that all its Parts 
are existent in its first Conformation, that it is 
a Cystis, and that Cystisses are never form'd 
de novo, but are only Membranes disengag'd 
from the neighbouring Parts, which increa-
sing in Thickness receive Nourishment from 
the Parts to which they adhere. 

I shall beg Leave to examine this Opinion 
a little, and however specious and refin'd it 
may seem, I am afraid we shall find as little 
Reality in it, as there is in the ordinary Pro-
fession of Friendship amongst the Gentlemen 
of their Country. 

First they say, 'tis a Membrane disengag'd 
from the Crystalline, and floating in the Aque-
ous; the first they don't offer to prove, and 
the latter is false in Fact: For if this pre-
tended disengag'd Membrane should float in 
the Aqueous, the Patient would have at least 
a Chance of seeing now and then a little, 
by its being remov'd wholy or in part from 
before the Pupilla; but such a Removal we 
|P_49
find never happens; and that after the For-
mation of the Cataract, the Eye continues 
in a constant equal Blindness, till the Cause 
is remov'd by the Needle: I must beg them 
then to fix their floating Island, before they 
pretend to make a rational Hypothesis of it; 
and if they do, I hope they'll be so kind as 
to let us know to what Membranes they'll 
join it, and in what Manner it receives Nou-
rishment from them, then we'll talk farther 
with them. 

What have led the Frenchmen into the 
Talk of its being a Cystis, and that no Cy-
stisses are form'd de novo, is the late Disco-
veries made by the Improvements of Micro-
scopes. They are wonderfully pleas'd with 
and fond of the Opinion, that every Thing 
which is proceeds originally from an Egg or 
Seed; but however true this may be of per-
fect Beings, I don't expect that the same will 
be asserted of the Fungus's of Trees, and 
other supernatural Excrescences: I can be 
very well content to believe, that Sloughs and 
Mucus may be detach'd from several Mem-
branes in the Body, and may afterwards in-
crease by an Addition of the same Matter, 
|P_50
and yet there may be no Cystis; but I shall 
prove presently, that 'tis impossible a Cata-
ract should be in this Part of the Eye; and 
that will at once put an End to the Contro-
versie. 

What has given me frequent Occsion of 
reflecting lately, has been the odd Manner 
of our Authors of General Theories; they 
undertake to describe and define every parti-
cular Disease, with as much Freedom and 
Positiveness, as if they had been acquainted 
themselves with a good Number of Patient 
labouring under such Disease, and had made 
the Causes, Symptoms, Cure, &c. of it, their 
peculiar Study. 

How just a Proceeding this is, will appear 
by the following Definition of a Cataract
in a late modern Writer of this Sort. 

A Suffusion, says he, is a thick Foulness of 
Excrescence, of the Tunica Cornea, Adnata 
or Aqueous Humor, which when confirm'd 
makes the Cataract.

According to this Account, any thing which 
thickens the Cornea, or makes the Aqueous
|P_51
Humor dark and cloudy, may be term'd a 
Cataract; for he seems to use the Word Ca-
taract not as any particular Disease, but only 
as something which shall darken and obscure 
the Sight, by hindring the Transmission of the 
Rays of Light. Thus the Albugo, Pterygium, 
Hyopyon, or the Viscidity of the Aqueous
Humor, frequently consequent upon an Oph-
thalmia, may be justly deem'd a Cataract.
But how this squares with the real Notion of 
this Disease, and its Cure, I shall leave my 
Readers after a few Pages to determine. 

But passing over all the different Definitions 
and Surmises of others, I shall take the Li-
berty (for Reasons which I shall give after-
wards) to define it in the following Manner. 

A Cataract is a Disease of the Crystalline
Humor, whereby the said Humor is totally 
or at least one Side of it render'd opake: The 
Humor in this diseas'd State reflect all or 
most of the Rays of Light, instead of trans-
mitting them to the Retina; in Consequence 
of which, the Humor appears whitish, bluish, 
yellowish, &c. and the Eye is blind. 

|P_52
[}CAUSES. }]
Any Blow or Shock, which may alter the 
particular Position of the Particles of which 
this Humor is compos'd: for to make a Body 
diaphanous, 'tis not only necessary that it 
should be made of such particular Particles, 
but that those Particles should be combin'd 
and united after a particular Manner. Thus 
Salts, wet Paper, or the Oculus Mundi Stone, 
grow opake by being dried; Horn, by being 
scrap'd; Glass, by being reduc'd to Powder, 
or otherwise flaw'd; Turpentine, by being 
stirr'd about with Water till they mix im-
perfectly. 

The Matter which is separated for the na-
tural Nourishment of this Humor from the 
Blood, may from the too great Viscidity of the 
Blood itself, either be separated in too small a 
Quantity, (the Glands and Strainers of these 
Parts being exceeding fine) and by this Atro-
phy the Humors may grow dry and opake, 
as Paper, Salts, Oculus Mundi Stone, &c.
Or otherwise upon a Fever or Ophthalmia,
the Vessels leading to this Humor may be so 
enlarg'd, as to admit Particles of an improper 
|P_53
Figure or Magnitude: The Heterogeneous 
Particles, (if I may so call them) instead 
of properly nourishing the Humor, may be 
lodg'd irregularly in its Pores, (as Water and 
Turpentine as above) and by destroying that 
Equality which we are told is necessary to 
Transparency, render the Humor opake. 

It may be caus'd by violent Grief, which 
occasions a more than natural Secretion of 
Tears from an adjacent Part; this may from 
a Continuance make so great a Revulsion, 
that the Crystalline Humor may probably 
grow dry, or suffer Diminution, for Want of 
its usual Supplies. I have Reasons to imagine 
this, because in Eyes thus diseas'd I have 
found this Humor much smaller than ordi-
nary. 

It may and often does proceed from an un-
skillful Treating of the Eye in an Ophthal-
mia, whilst there is a more than ordinary Flux 
of Matter upon the Parts which seems to in-
treat a Passage thro' the Coats: Instead of al-
luring it forwards by kind Discutients, I have 
too frequently known it drove back by cold 
Repellents; and by lodging itself in the Coats 
|P_54
and Humors of the Eye, at once deprive it 
of its Use and Beauty. 

Dr. Pitcarn, in speaking of a Cataract,
says, Some ascribe it to the thickning or co-
agulating of the Aqueous Humor, and others 
to that of the Crystalline: But these know No-
thing of the Nature of the Eye; for Corpus-
cles floating in the Aqueous or Crystalline 
Humo, can't be prerceiv'd on the Retina. 

For once I'll run the Risque of having my 
Understanding censur'd, and venture to say. 
That tho' the Corpuscles themselves are not 
seen being within the Eye, yet they can hin-
der the Eye from discerning every distinct 
Part of any Object which is without it: And 
these little Specks of Darkness, amidst a Glare 
of Light, are mistaken by the Patient for Some-
thing positive, when they are only Privations; 
and the Effect would be the same, if there 
were any Stoppages in the small nervous Fi-
laments which compose the Retina.

Thus the Doctor's Philosophy is true, when 
he says they can't be seen, &c. But if he would 
pretend to inferr from thence, that they can 
|P_55
be no Causes why the Eye can't see other 
Things, his Consequence is false; and clearly 
demonstrated to be so, by Mr. Cheselden
at the End of his ANATOMY. 

[}DIAGNOSTICK. }]
'Tis known by a Diminution of Sight in 
the Patient, and by Something which appears 
like a Bluish Cloud behind the Pupilla, tho' 
the Colour of it often varies: I do not yet 
know whether there be any Reason given for 
the Variety of Colours, but I have observ'd 
that the Green and Yellow are generally in 
old Subjects. 

[}PROGNOSTICK. }]
Not so rnuch the Age of the Person is to 
be consider'd, as the Age and Ripeness of the 
Cataract: I have seen both very young and 
very old Subjects couch'd with Success, tho' 
the best Prognostick is certain to be made in 
a middle Age and good Habit. 

If a Surgeon understands the Operation, 
and is at all able to judge when the Cata-
ract is ripe for it, he has a great deal of 
Reason to promise Success. 

|P_56
If an uncommon Inflammation supervenes, 
which he can't foresee, and sometimes 'tis 
impossible for him to prevent, he is not to be 
blam'd if he misses of Success, tho' he 
had seem'd pretty positive in promising it both 
to his Patient and himself. 

[}Regimen before the Operation. }]
In Order to prevent an Ophthalmia, use 
proper Evacuations, as Bleeding, Lenient Pur-
gatives, &c. a few Days before the Opera-
tion. 

[}OPERATION. }]
The most temperate Seasons are the best, 
for which Reason I make Choice of Spring
or Autumn. 'Tis requisite the Day should 
be fine and clear, and the Light well chosen. 
I oblige the Patient to recline his Head back-
wards upon a Pillow, the Pillow is supported 
by the Back of a Chair of a proper Heighth; 
behind the Patient an Assistant is plac'd, to 
keep his Head without Motion; 'twill be 
necessary too for a Person on each Side, to 
secure the Hands of the Patient; for I have 
seen very ill Consequences attend the Neglect 
|P_57
of this: Having thus prepar'd the Patient, I 
place myself on a Stool, rais'd by Pillows ac-
cording to the Heighth of the Subject, till I 
have a full Command of the Patient's EYE; 
then bidding him turn his Eye towards his 
Nose, so that the Tunica Conjunctiva may 
be sufficiently apparent, I plunge my Needle 
directly into the Vitreous Humor, thro' the 
Tunica Conjunctiva, about the Distance of the 
Tenth Part of an Inch from the Cornea; then 
thrusting it boldly to the upper Part of the 
Crystalline, gently turn the flat Part of my 
Needle on the Top of the Cataract; by 
which Means I have a greater Surface upon 
it, and the Cataract consequently less liable 
to slip from under my Needle: I depress it ve-
ry slowly, and place it as I think at the Bot-
tom of the Vitreous Humor; I don't immedi-
ately remove my Needle off it, but continue 
it depress'd for about Half a Minute, for Rea-
sons which I shall give when I come to speak 
of the Causes of a Cataract's rising again: 
After this, I draw my Needle back about the 
Sixth Part of an Inch; and gently raising the 
Point, take it quite out of the EYE. 

|P_58
[}Regimen after the Operation. }]
Immediately after the Operation I apply a 
Repellant Compress, and order the Patient to 
be put to Bed, raising his Head something 
higher than usual; and after suffering of him 
to remain quiet a few Hours, I renew my dres-
sing, and begin to treat him with a cool Re-
gimen, proper Diet, &c. as in a symptoma-
tical Fever: This I do to second the Inten-
tion of the former Regimen; notwithstanding 
which, an Ophthalmia in Spite of all I can 
do will sometimes supervene, and then it 
must be treated as such. 

These Ophthalmia's are sometimes so vio-
lent as to become difficult of Cure, and of-
ten produce all the Effects, and perhaps too 
really bring that Distemper upon the Eye 
call'd Gutta Serena. This last mention'd Di-
sease is seated on the Retina, and may be 
brought on by any Thing which will enlarge 
the Capillary Arteries of that Membrane; 
for they lying contiguous to the Nerves, and 
their Diameters being increas'd, the interme-
diate Nerves are so press'd betwixt them, that 
the Influx of the Animal Spirits is intirely pro-
|P_59
hibited, and all Commumication is cut off be-
twixt them and the Original of the Optick 
Nerves in the Brain, which is the Commune 
Sensorium: Thus tho' the Cataractconti-
nues well depress'd, and the Eye in all Appea-
rance perfectly clear, yet the Patient will re-
main Blind, and 'tis too often beyond the 
Reach of Art to give him any Assistance. 

However, I generally use all the Evacu-
ations proper in a stubborn Ophthalmia, with 
Calomel, Purgatives, &c. and keep the Pa-
tient to an attenuating Diet; obliging him 
to abstain from all viscid Nutriments, and to 
use much Exercise: This Method I have 
known to meet with its desir'd Success. 

There are many other Causes besides this 
Common One, which may render the Ope-
ration unsuccessful; first, the Rising again of 
the Cataract.

The Cataract will sometimes rise again, 
even before the Needle is out of the Eye: 
There are many specious Reasons to be as-
sign'd for it, tho' perhaps none of them true; 
however I shall mention what I have hitherto 
|P_60
imagin'd, not without a Promise to correct 
any Thing I shall here say if I find it con-
tradicted by future Practice. 

The first Reason (which is perhaps more 
obvious to others than myself) is, That the 
Crystalline Humor being diseas'd, is become 
specifically lighter than the Vitreous; and 
that being disengag'd from the Membranes to 
which it in some Measure adhered, and de-
press'd to the Bottom of the Vitreous, upon 
Removal of the Needle it ascends by its 
own specifick Levity, and places itself at or 
near the Place from whence it was remov'd. 

The next is, That consisting of very gluti-
nous Parts, and being join'd perhaps to the 
Uvea, the Needle only removes the main 
Body, which still remains attach'd to the 
Uvea by certain small elastick Filaments; 
which as soon as the Needle is remov'd con-
tract themselves, and again lift up the Cry-
stalline Humor into its natural Position. 

If it remains depress'd for some Days and 
afterwards rises again, but being a second 
or third Time depress'd it continues where 
|P_61
you would place it, it may proceed from an 
increas'd Viscidity in the Humor itself, or 
from a Rarefaction of that Fluid into which 
it's immers'd; both of which will perhaps be 
consequent upon an Inflammation, perhaps 
from an Elasticity in the Cornea, whereby the 
Aqueous Humor may be immediately thrust 
into its Place by Removal of the Crystalline;
which Elasticity and Contraction of the Cor-
nea, may possibly be too great to be overcome 
by the diffrent specifick Gravity of the Cry-
stalline.

But I must confess, if I was to give my 
Opinion of the general Cause of the Rising 
again of the Cataract immediately upon 
its being depress'd, I should imagine it to be 
the lifting up the Point of the Needle before 
I withdraw it very near back again to the 
Place from whence I remov'd the Cataract.
For I imagine that the specifick Gravity of the 
Crystalline Humor, (being very little different 
if at all from that of the Vitreous) would ne-
ver be sufficient to overcome the Resistance 
of the said Vitreous Humor, which is a very 
viscid and tenacious Fluid, unless there was 
a Passage made for it to rise again by that 
|P_62
Motion of the Needle which I have just now ex-
press'd; and therefore hold it necessary that 
after the Cataract is depress'd, the Needle 
ought to be kept some Time upon it, that 
the Fluid above it may have Time perfectly 
to reunite; so as becoming all over equally 
tenacious, it may be impower'd to keep the 
Cataract in the Position we would have it. 

Another Cause of ill Success is, the woun-
ding the Uvea or Iris; the Consequence of 
which will be an irregular Form of the Pu-
pilla, some of which I have seen intirely 
clos'd: However if they are not so, there is al-
ways such a Callosity upon the wounded 
Membrane, as stops up the Pupilla in one 
Part, and leaves such an Opening of it on 
the other, that by stopping up the Rays where 
they should pass, and suffering them to pass 
where they should not, the Eye is render'd 
intirely useless. 

These Parts too, when wounded, some-
times ulcerate; by which Ulceration, the 
whole Coats and Humors of the Eye become 
one common Mass of Pus, and the Eye in-
tirely sinks. 

|P_63
The Reason that a Person is oblig'd to 
wound the Uvea and Iris is, when he would 
endeavour to remove a Film which lies in 
the Aqueous Humor, or on this Side the 
Pupilla. And this, till I know better, I 
shall call an Injudicious Practice.

It often happens that the said Coats are 
wounded thro' the Fault of the Patient, even 
when the Operation is the most judiciously 
performed; for he not havingCourage to keep 
his Eye in the Position he was directed, and 
by endeavouring to fly from the Pain which 
is given by the first Puncture of the Needle, 
which he imagines is only to be done by Mo-
tion, and not being able to move his Eye any 
farther towards the great Canthus, turns it 
back against the Point or Edge of the Needle; 
and by this Means, in Spite of all the Art or 
Address of the Surgeon, will with that Mo-
tion wound the Coats above-mention'd: But 
this last Accident does not happen to a Man 
who knows what he is doing, perhaps above 
Once in Twenty Times. 

Another Reason of ill Success is, the Cata-
ract proving Milky: To be able to deter-
|P_64
mine whether 'tis so or not before I touch it 
with my Needle I have not yet learn'd, and 
should be glad to be inform'd by any Body 
who has. 

Another Cause of ill Success, which is also 
sometimes attributed to the Surgeon, may be 
a strange Fondness of Sight, which engages 
the Patient after having been couch'd Three 
or Four Days to pull off the Dressings in the 
Absence of the Surgeon; by which he expo-
sing the Eye to the Assaults of the open Air, 
brings on that Ophthalmia which we were 
endeavouring to prevent: In this Case he him-
self is blamable, and not the Surgeon, for all 
the ill Consequences that may attend it, one 
of which I have found often to be the intire 
Loss of Sight. 

Another Misfortune, which too frequently 
attends the unhappy Patient, is, when the Ca-
taract is accompanied with a Gutta Serena,
perhaps of as long standing as the Cataract
itself; this we find when upon depressing the 
Cataract, (and there's no Possibility of judg-
ing of it before) and the Pupilla remaining 
clear, the Patient notwithstanding continues 
|P_65
in total Darkness: This Case is indeed de-
plorable. I should be unwilling to think 
that there was any Part of Mankind such 
Strangers to common Sense, as to imagine 
this to be a Fault of the Surgeon; but, I 
myself have more than once been calumnia-
ted on this very Account: I can't help say-
ing, I have been unfairly dealt with by some 
of the Gentlemen of my own Profession, who 
have misrepresented the Cases, and deluded 
the common People, as well as injured me; 
this was the Case of Three Subjects that I 
lately Couch'd in Yarmouth.

N. B. I have met with the same Treat-
ment on Account of a Subject which I Cut 
for the Stone, where I will undertake to de-
monstrate to any Man in England, that it 
was as impossible to meet with Success in 
that Operation as it was circumstanc'd, as it 
is to succeed in the Operation of Couching 
where the Cataract is attended with a Gutta 
Serena; for unless a Man could directly look 
into the Body in the one Case, or down to 
the Bottom of the Eye in the other, he can 
be no more able to make a positive Progno-
stick, than he would be to alter the Circum-
stances. 

|P_66
I shall make here another Observation, 
That where there is a Cataract in one Eye 
and the other Eye sound and good, the Pa-
tient don't ought to be encourag'd to suffer 
the diseas'd Eye to be Couch'd; because the 
Symptoms which may possibly attend it, may 
be the Occasion of the Loss of both. 

I shall take the Liberty of mentioning a 
Case of my own, wherein I have met with 
some of the afore-mention'd Accidents. A-
bout Five Months since, a Patient came to 
me with a Confirm'd Cataract in one Eye, 
and a Suffusion in the other. I found the Ca-
taract good, and (after the common Prepa-
rations) depress'd it with no apparent ill Ac-
cident. The Eye continu'd clear, and the 
Patient saw for some Days: At which Time 
an Inflammation came on, which equally af-
fected both Eyes; and, notwithstanding all 
I could do to abate it, the Coats and Hu-
mors were so thicken'd by it, that the Eye 
which had the Suffusion in it became totally 
blind: And some Time after, that which I 
had couch'd was in like Manner intirely de-
priv'd of Sight; tho' the Cataract remain 
depress'd, and the Pupilla perfectly clear. 

|P_67
Observation. It seems pretty plain, That 
the Suffusion above-mention'd was Nothing 
more than the Beginning of a Cataract,cau-
sed by the Crystalline Humor growing thick 
and muddy: And that this Inflammation, by 
increasing the Viscidity of the Matter separa-
ted for the Nourishment of the said Humor, 
increas'd the Thickness so, as to render the 
Humor intirely opake; or in other Terms, 
ripen'd the Cataract. The Reason why I 
did not venture to Couch it afterwards was, an 
uncommon Dilatation of the Pupilla, which 
had been from the Beginning of the Suffusion: 
The Disease of the other was a direct Gutta 
Serena, caus'd by the Inflammation in the 
Manner before deserib'd. 

The Subject I have been treating of being 
altogether new, I shall beg Leave to add the 
following Queries, to be consider'd by the 
Gentlemen of my Profession, not troubling 
myself whether they make for or against my 
Hypothesis.

Query I. Whether the Reason of the Dila-
ation of the Pupilla in one Eye and not the 
her may not be this: That the Crystalline
|P_68
Humor being render'd somewhat less transpa-
rent than formerly, the Patient finds that the 
Rays of Light do not strike so clearly and for- 
cibly as they us'd to do; or in other Words 
the Eye is darker than in its natural State. 
To amend which, he naturally and one may 
almost say involuntarily dilates the Pupilla
in order to receive more Rays of Light, and 
recompense the Defect of the diseas'd Hu-
mor? 

The same is done whenever we want to see 
Objects in the Dark; but in this case the Cause 
remaining constant, the Dilatation is constant 
too, till the Pupilla by the frequent Use of 
this Motion becomes actually wider than it 
ought naturally to be. In such a Dilatation as 
I here mention, we can't promise any great 
Success from the Use of the Needle: For was 
the Humor itself perfectly clear, such a dila-
tedPupilla would admit such a Glare and 
Flow of Rays to the Retina, as would ren-
der Vision confus'd and indistinct; much less 
can we hope to have a good Eye, when that 
Humor so necessary to Vision is intirely re-
moved. 

|P_69
Query II. Whether the Cataractsome-
times appearing at first in a white Point, and 
afterwards spreading itself like a Line drawn 
from a Center to a Circumference, is not a 
Proof that 'tis a transparent Body already 
form'd, growing thick and cloudy, rather 
than the Beginning of a new Membrane? 

N. B. The Composition of the Crystalline
Humor, in the Anatomy of the Eye. 

Query III. Whether Cataracts very old 
and discolour'd, declining in the same Man-
ner, and becoming angulous and uneven, is 
not a Proof of the same Thing? 

Query IV. Whether it would not be worth 
while to observe after the Couching a young 
Subject, if the same Subject is ever troubled 
with a second Cataract, properly distingui-
shing whether it be the same Cataract risen 
again or not? And this I think is best to be 
done, by observing the Interval of Time which 
passes between his being Couch'd and the Ap-
pearance of this second Cataract.Whe-
ther if this Observation be just, and a second 
Cataract be form'd in the same Eye, and 
|P_70
in the same Subject, this would not destroy 
my Hypothesis?

Query V. Whether our not being able to 
remove a Cataract at its first Appearance, 
is not a Proof that 'tis not the CrystallineHu-
mor? Because for all what we know certain-
ly, the Crystalline Humor is equally remo-
vable at all Times. 

Query VI. Whether or no in that Stage of 
the Disease which we call a MilkyCata-
ract, there may not be such a Solution of 
Continuity of the Parts of the CrystallineHu-
mor, as may suffer the Needle to pass back-
wards and forwards in it, without being able 
to remove it out of its Place? 

Query VII. And whether in a farther Stage 
of this Disease, the Parts may not again close, 
and stick together in such a Manner, as that 
the whole Body of the Humor may be at 
once remov'd, by only pressing upon a parti-
cular Part of it? 

Query VIII. Whether there may not be a 
Gradation of Colouring settled from Sir Isaac 
|P_71
Newton's Theory, beginning at a light Blue 
and ending at a greenish Yellow; whereby 
we might be able to determine the exact Age 
of a Cataract, as soon as we see it? And 
whether such a particular Colour will or will 
not successfully bear the Needle? 

Query IX. Whether 'tis not possible to in-
vent a Speculum Oculi, which may keep the 
Globe of the Eye without Motion, and with-
out giving that Pain to the Patient which too 
frequently contributes to the bringing on of 
an Inflammation? I mention this, because I 
have seen so many Inconveniencies attend the 
Use of the Common Speculum Oculi; that, ra-
ther than use it myself, I have chose to have 
Nothing to assist me, except the Pressure of 
the Thumb and Finger? 

Query X. Whether a Trembling, which I 
have observ'd in the Aqueous Humor some 
Time after Couching, does not proceed from 
a Loss of Part of that Humor in Couching? 
And whether this Trembling is one Reason 
why the Rays of Light pass confus'd into the 
Eye? 

|P_72
Query XI. Whether there is Room for the 
Needle to pass between the CrystallineHu-
mor and the Uvea, without removing the 
former so as to spoil the Eye, or cutting or 
lacerating the latter? 

Query XII. Whether, if this last is practi-
cable, there's not a Possibility of removing a 
Film that may be in the Forepart of the Pu-
pilla, notwithstanding the Needle enters in 
at the Backpart of it? 

Query XIII. Whether there might not be 
a nice Experiment made, by placing an Eye 
like a Lens in the Hole of a dark Chamber? 
I think (if I remember rightly) I have met 
with the following Account in an Author of 
Experimental Philosophy. Stripping the Fund 
of the Eye of its Integuments, he plac'd it 
as above-mention'd; and holding a Peice of 
white Paper within the Room, at a small 
Distance from the Eye, he distinctly percei-
ved the Images of all Objects from without 
painted upon the Paper; as they would have 
been upon the Retina, if the Eye had been 
in its natural Position. 

|P_73
Had a nice Hand been there who would 
have gon on the Outside and with a Needle 
as in Couching depress'd the CrystallineHu-
mor, and if notwithstanding this Depression 
the Person within could still perceive the I-
mages as before, it would be a certain Proof 
that the Eye might see, notwithstanding the 
Loss of the Crystalline Humor. 

The Eye should be taken down, and disse-
cted; and by observing in what Part the Cry-
stalline Humor after its Removal was lodg'd, 
we should receive a great Light into the 
Theory of Couching, and much Satisfaction, 
as to the Truth of this Hypothesis.

I only mention this as it seems to me pos-
sible, without being able to determine whe-
ther 'tis practicable or not. 

[}CONCLUSION. }]
Before I conclude, I thought it my Duty 
to mention, (and in the Words of a Great 
Man) That as a candid and sincere Beha-
viour ought to be preferr'd to all other Con-
siderations, I would not let my Heart re-
|P_74
proach me with a Consciousness of having 
gain'd even the Possibility of a Praise, which 
is not in every Particular my Right: I 
therefore thought proper to acknowledge, 
that I am oblig'd to a very ingenious Gentle-
man (whom I have the Honour to be ac-
quainted with) for Two or Three Hints 
that he has given me in the latter Part of 
this short Dissertation, which otherwise pro-
bably might have been omitted. 

N.B. I believe it will be necessary to ob-
serve to such Persons as are not Judges of the 
Subject I have been treating of, That I have 
therein demonstrated the Reason of my not 
meeting with Success in some Patients that 
I have Couch'd, particularly in Yarmouth.

FINIS. 
