

[^Sample 1: book - ^]

|P_
[^A rectangular decorative figure, six lines in height.^]

[}TREATISE

OF THE

Operations of SURGERY. }]
[^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page.^]
[}CHAP. I. 

Of SUTURES. }]
[^A decorative frame around the letter "W", five lines in height.^]WHEN a Wound is recent, 
and the Parts of it are divid-
ed by a sharp Instrument, 
without any farther Violence, 
and in such a manner that they 
may be made to approach 
each other, by being returned with the Hands 
they will, if held in close Contact for some 
time, re-unite by Inosculation, and cement 
|P_2
like one Branch of a Tree ingrafted on another. 
To maintain them in this situation, several 
sorts of Sutures have been invented, and for-
merly practis'd, but the number of them has of 
late been very much reduced. Those now chief-
ly described, are the Interrupted, the Glover's, 
the quill'd, the twisted, and the dry 
Sutures, but the interrupted and twisted, are almost the 
only useful one's; for the quill'd Suture is never 
preferable to the interrupted; the dry Suture 
is ridiculous in terms, since it is only a piece 
of Plaister apply'd in many different ways to 
re-unite the Lips of a Wound; and the Glover's, 
or uninterrupted Stitch, which is recommended 
in superficial Wounds to prevent the defor-
mity of a Scar, does rather by the frequency 
of the Stitches occasion it, and is therefore to 
be rejected in favour of a Compress and stick
ing Plaister; the only Instance where I would 
recommend it, is in a Wound of the Intestine: 
the manner of making this Suture I shall de-
scribe in the Chapter of the Gastroraphy.

From the Description I have given of the 
state of a Wound proper to be sewed up, it 
may be readily conceived, that Wounds are 
not fit subjects for Suture when there is either 
a Contusion, Laceration, loss of Substance, great 
Inflammation, difficulty of bringing the Lips 
|P_3
into apposition, or some extraneous Body in-
sinuated into them; though sometimes a lace-
rated Wound may be assisted with one or 
two Stitches. It has formerly been forbidden to 
sew up Wounds of the Head; but this Rule is 
very little regarded by the Moderns, though 
the ill effects I have frequently seen from 
Matter pent up under the Scalp, and the great 
convenience there is of using Bandage on the 
Head, have convinc'd me that much less 
harm would be done, if Sutures were us'd in 
this Part with more caution.

If we stitch up a Wound that has none of 
these Obstacles, we always employ the inter-
rupted Suture, passing the Needle two, three, 
or four times, in proportion to the length of 
it, though there can seldom be more than 
three Stitches required.

The method of doing it is this, the Wound 
being emptied of the grumous Blood, and 
your Assistant having brought the Lips of it 
together, that they may lie quite even; you 
carefully carry your Needle from without, in-
wards to the bottom, and so on from within, 
outwards; using the Caution of making the 
Puncture far enough from the edge of the 
Wound, lest the Ligature should tear quite 
through the Skin and Flesh; this distance may 
|P_4
be three or four tenths of an Inch: as many 
more Stitches as you shall make, will be only 
repetitions of the same Process. The Threads 
being all passed, you begin tying them in the 
Middle of the Wound, though if the Lips are 
held carefully together all the while, as they 
should be, it will be of no great consequence 
which is done first. The most useful kind of 
Knot in large Wounds is a single one first, 
over this a little linnen Compress, on which is 
to be made another single Knot, and then a 
Slip-knot, which may be loosened upon any 
Inflammation; but in small Wounds there is 
no danger from the double Knot alone, with-
out any Compress to tie it upon, and this is 
most generally practis'd. If an Inflammation 
should succeed to any degree, loosening the 
Ligature only will not suffice, it must be cut 
through and drawn away, and the Wound be 
treated afterwards without any farther Suture. 
When the Wound is small, the less it is di-
sturbed by dressing, the better, but in large 
ones there will sometimes be a considerable 
Discharge, and if the Threads are not cauti-
ously carried through the bottom of it, Ab-
scesses will frequently ensue from the Matter 
being pent up underneath, and not finding 
issue. If no accident happens you must, after 
|P_5
the Lips are firmly agglutinated, take away 
the Ligatures, and dress the Orifices they 
leave, superficially. 

It msst be remembered that during the Cure, the Suture must be always assisted by the Application of 
Cure, the Suture must be alwyas assisted by the 
application of of Bandage if possible, which is 
frequently of the greatest Importance, and 
that sort of Bandage with two Heads, and a 
slit in the middle, which is by much the best, 
will in most cases be found practicable. 

The twisted Suture being principally em-
ployed in the Hare-lip, I shall reserve its de-
scription for the Chapter on that Head. 

[^A decorative horizontal line, spanning the whole page.^]
[}CHAP. II. 

Of the Suture of Tendonds. }]
WOUNDS of the Tendons are not only 
known to heal again, but even to admit of 
sewing up like those of the fleshy parts, though 
they do not re-unite altogether in so short a 
time. When a Tendon is partly divided, it is 
generally attended with an excessive Pain, In-
flammation, &c. in consequence of the re-
maining Fibres being stretch'd and forced by 
the action of the Muscle, which necessarily 
|P_6
will contract more, when some of its resist-
ance is taken away: To obviate this mischief, 
it has been hitherto an indisputable Maxim in 
Surgery, to cut the Tendon quite through, 
and immediately afterwards perform the Su-
ture; but I do not think this Practice advise-
able; for though the division of the Tendon 
affords present ease, yet the Flexion only of 
the Joint will have the same effect, if it be a 
Wound of a Flexor Tendon: Besides, in or-
der to sew up the extremities of the Tendon 
when divided, we are obliged to put the Limb 
in such a situation, that they may lap one 
over the other, and even to sustain it in that 
posture to the finishing of the Cure: If then 
the posture will lay the Tendon in this posi-
tion, we can likewise keep it so without using 
the Suture, and are more sure of its not slip-
ping away, which sometimes happens from any 
careless motion of the Joint, when the Stitches 
have almost wore through the Lips of the 
Wound; on which account I would by all 
means advise in this case, to forbear the Su-
ture, and only favour the situation of the ex-
tremities of the Tendon. 

If it should be suggested that for want of 
a farther separation, there will not be Inflam-
mation enough to produce an Adhesion of 
|P_7
the several parts of the Wound, which is 
particularly mention'd as the Property of this 
sort of Cicatrix, though it is likewise of all 
others: I say, that the Inflammation will be 
in proportion to the Wound, and a small 
Wound is certainly more likely to recover than 
a large one. If it should be objected that 
keeping the Limb in one posture the whole 
time of the Cure, will bring on a Contraction 
of the Joint, the Objection is as strong against 
the Suture; and now I am upon this Subject, 
I would advise Surgeons to be less apprehen-
sive of Contractions after Inflammations of 
the Tendons, than Practice shews they are: 
For perhaps there is hardly any one Rule has 
done more mischief than that of guarding 
against this Consequence, and I would lay it 
down as a method to be pursued at all 
times, to favour the Joint in these Disor-
ders, and keep it in that posture we find 
most easy for the Patient. The risque of an 
immoveable Contraction in six weeks is very 
little, but the endeavour to avoid it has been 
the loss of many a Limb in half the time. 

But when the Tendon is quite separated, 
and the ends are withdrawn from one another, 
having brought them together with your Fin-
gers, you may sew them with a strait trian-
|P_8
gular pointed Needle, passing it from without 
inwards, and from within outwards, in a 
small Tendon, about three tenths of an Inch 
from their extremities, and in the Tendo Achil-
lis near half an Inch. 

Some Surgeons, for fear the Muscle should 
contract a little, notwithstanding all our care, 
advise not to bring the ends of the Tendon 
into an exact Apposition, but to lay one a lit-
tle over the other, which allowing for the con-
traction that always ensues in some degree, 
the Tendon will become a strait Line, and 
not be shorten'd in its length. As the Wound 
of the Skin will be nearly tranverse I would 
not have it rais'd to expose more of the Ten-
don, but rather sew'd up with it, which will 
conduce to the strength of the Suture. The 
Knot of the Ligature is to be made as in 
other Wounds, and the Dressings the same: 
There is a sort of thin crooked Needle that 
cuts on its concave and convex sides, which 
is very handy in the Suture of large Tendons, 
and to be preferr'd to the strait one. During 
the Cure the Dressings must be superficial, and 
the parts kept steady with Paste-board and 
Bandage: The small Tendons re-unite in three 
weeks, but the Tendo Achillis requires six at 
least. 

|P_9
[^A decorative horizontal line, spanning the whole page.^]
[}CHAP. III. 

Of the GASTRORAPHY. }]
THE Account of this Operation has em-
ploy'd the Ingenuity of many Surgical 
Writers, and occasioned much debate about 
the proper Rules for performing it, and yet 
what makes the greatest part of the descrip-
tion can hardly ever happen in Practice, and 
the rest but very seldom. I have been told 
that Du Verney, who was the most eminent 
Surgeon in the French Army a great many 
years during the Wars, and fashion of Duel-
ling, declar'd he never had once an opportu-
nity of practising the Gastroraphy, as that 
Operation is generally described; for though 
the word in strictness of etymology, signifies 
no more than sewing up any Wound of the 
Belly, yet in common acceptation it implies 
that the Wound of the Belly is complicated 
with another of the Intestine. Now the 
symptoms laid down for distinguishing when 
the Intestine is wounded, do not with any 
certainty determine it to be wounded only in 
one place, which want of information, makes 
|P_10
it absurd to open the Abdomen in order to 
come at it; if so, the Operation of stitching 
the Bowels can only take place, where they 
fall out of the Abdomen, and we can see where 
the Wound is, or how many Wounds there 
are: If it happens that the Intestines fall out 
unwounded, the Business of the Surgeon is to 
return them immediately without waiting for 
spirituous, or emollient Fomentations; and in 
case they puff up so, as to prevent their re-
duction by the same Orifice, you may with a 
Knife or Probe-Scissars dilate it sufficient for 
that purpose, or even prick them to let out 
the wind, laying it down for a Rule in this, 
and all Operations where the Omentumpro-
trudes, to cut off so much as shall be morti-
fied before you replace it. 

Upon the supposition of the Intestine being 
wounded in such a manner as to require the 
Operation, for in small Punctures it is not ne-
cessary; the method of doing it may be this: 
Taking a strait Needle with a small Thread, you lay hold of the Bowel with your left 
hand, and sew up the Wound by the Glover's 
Stitch, that is, by passing the Needle through 
the Lips of the Wound, from within outwards 
all the way, so as to leave a length of Thread 
at both ends, which are to hang out of the 
|P_11
Incision of the Abdomen; then carefully mak-
ing the interrupted Suture of the external 
Wound, you pull the Bowel by the small 
Threads into Contact with the Peritonæ-
um, for the more readily uniting afterwards 
 by Adhesion with it; though I think it 
would be more secure to pass the Threads 
with the strait Needle through the lower 
edges of the Wound of the Abdomen, which 
would more certainly hold the Intestine in 
that situation. In about six days it is said the 
Ligature of the Intestine will be loose enough 
to draw away, which must be done without 
great force; in the interim the Wound is to 
be treated with superficial Dressings, and the 
Patient to be kept very still and low. 

[^A decorative horizontal line, spanning the whole page.^]
[}CHAP. IV. 

Of the BUBONOCELE. }]
WHEN the Intestine or Omentum falls 
out of the Abdomen into any Part, the 
Tumour in general is known by the Name of 
Hernia, which is farther specified either from 
the difference of Situation, or the nature of its 
Contents. When the Intestine or Omentum falls 
|P_12
through the Navel, 'tis call'd a Hernia Umbili-
calis, or Exomphalos; when through the Rings 
of the Abdominal Muscles into the Groin, 
Hernia Inguinalis; or if into the Scrotum, Scro-
talis: Thse two last, though the first only is 
properly so call'd, are known by the Name of 
Bubonocele. when they fall under the Ligamen-
tum Fallopii, through the same Passage that the 
Iliac Vessels creep into the Thigh, 'tis call'd Her-
nia Cruralis. With regard to the Contents cha-
racterising the Swelling, it is thus distinguish-
ed: If the Intestine only is fallen, it becomes 
an Enterocele; if the Omentum (Epiploon) Epi-
plocele; and if both, Entero-Epiplocele. There 
is besides these another kind of Herniamen-
tion'd and describ'd by the Moderns, when the 
Intestine or Omentum is insinuated between the 
Interstices of the Muscles, in different Parts 
of the Belly: This Hernia has derived its 
name from the Place affected, and is call'd the 
Hernia Ventralis. 

All the Kinds of Hernia's of the Intestines 
and Omentum, are owing to a preternatural Di-
latation of the particular Orifices through 
which they pass, and not to a Laceration of 
them, which last Opinion however has pre-
vailed so much, as by way of eminence, to 
give name to the Disorder, which is known 
|P_13
more by that of Rupture, than any of those 
I have mentioned; on which account I shall beg leave to make use of it myself. 

The Rupture of the Groin, or Scrotum, is 
the most common Species of Hernia, and in 
young Children is very frequent, but it rarely 
happens in Infancy that any mischiefs arise 
from it. For the most part, the Intestine re-
turns of it self into the Cavity of the Abdo-
men, whenever the Person lies down, at least 
a small degree of Compression will make it. To 
secure the Intestine when returned into its pro-
per place, there are Steel Trusses now so artfully 
made, that by being accommodated exactly to 
the Part, they perform the Office of a Bolster, 
without galling, or even sitting uneasy on the 
Patient. These Instruments are of so great 
service, that were people who are subject to 
Ruptures always to wear them, I believe very 
few would die of this Distemper, since it of-
ten appears, upon enquiry, when we perform 
the Operation for the Bubonocele, that the ne-
cessity of the Operation is owing to the neglect 
of wearing a Truss. 

In the Application of a Truss to these kinds 
of Swellings, a great deal of judgment is some-
times necessary, and for want of it we daily 
see Trusses put even on Bubo's, indurated 
|P_14
Testicles, Hydrocele's, &c. But for the Her-
nia's I have described, I shall endeavor to lay 
down two or three Rules, in order to guide 
more positively to the Propriety of applying 
or forbearing them. 

If there is a Rupture of the Intestine only, 
it is easily, when return'd into the Abdomen, 
supported by an Instrument; but if of the 
Omentum, notwithstanding it may be return'd, 
yet I have never found the Reduction to be of 
much Relief; for the Omentum will lie uneasy in 
a lump at the bottom of the Belly, and upon 
removal of the Instrument drop down again 
immediately; upon which account, seeing the 
little Danger and Pain there is in this kind of 
Hernia, I never recommend any thing but a 
Bag-Truss, to suspend the Scrotum, and pre-
vent possibly by that means the increase of 
the Tumour. The difference of these Tu-
mours will be distinguished by the Feel; that 
of the Omentum feeling flaccid and rumpled, 
the other more even, flatulent, and springy. 

Sometimes in a Rupture of both the In-
testine and Omentum, the Gut may be reduced, 
but the Omentum will still remain in the Scro-
tum, and when thus circumstanced, most Sur-
geons advise a Bag-Truss only, upon a Suppo-
sition that the Pressure of a Steel one, by stop-
|P_15
ping the Circulation of the Blood in the Ves-
sels of the Omentum, would bring on a Morti-
fication: but I have learnt, from a multitude 
of these Cases, that if the Instrument be nice-
ly fitted to the Part, it will be a Compress 
sufficient to sustain the Bowel, and at the 
same time not hard enough to injure the Omen-
tum; so that, when a great quantity of Inte-
stine falls down, though it is complicated with 
a Descent of the Omentum, the Rupture will 
conveniently and safely admit of this Re-
medy. 

There are some Surgeons who, to prevent 
the trouble of wearing a Truss, when the In-
testine is reduced, destroy the Skin over the 
Rings of the Abdominal Muscles with a 
Caustick of the size of a half Crown-piece, 
and keep their Patients in Bed till the Cure of 
the Wound is finish'd; proposinging by the 
Stricture of the Cicatrix to support it in the 
Abdomen for the future: But by what I have 
seen of this Practice, the event, though often 
successful, is not answerable to the Pain and 
Confinement; for if after this Operation the 
Intestine should again fall down, which some-
times happens, there would be much more 
danger of a Strangulation than before the Scar 
was made. 

|P_16
I have as yet considered the Rupture as 
moveable; but it happens frequently that the 
Intestine, after it has pass'd the Rings of the 
Muscles, becomes inflam'd, which inlarging 
the Tumour, prevents the Return of it into 
the Abdomen, and becoming every moment 
more and more strangled, it soon tends to a 
Mortification, unless we dilate the Passages 
through which it is fallen, with some Instru-
ment, to make room for its return, which Di-
latation is the Operation for the Bubonocele. 

It rarely happens that Patients submit to this 
Incision before the Gut is mortified, and it is 
too late to do service; not but that there are 
Instances of People surviving small Gangrenes, 
and even perfectly recovering afterwards. I 
my self have been an Eye-witness of the Cure 
of two Patients who some time after the Ope-
ration, when the Eschar separated, discharged 
their Fæces through the Wound, and conti-
nued to do so for a few Weeks in small quan-
tities, when at length the Intestine adhered 
fairly to the external Wound, and then was 
easily healed. 

In Mortifications of the Bowels, when fal-
len out of the Abdomen into the Navel, it is 
not very uncommon for the whole gangren'd 
Intestine to separate from the sound one, so 
|P_17
that the Excrement must necessarily ever after 
be discharged at that Orifice: There are like-
wise a few Instances, where the Rupture of the 
Scrotum has mortified and become the Anus, 
the Patient doing well in every other respect. 
These Cases however are only mentioned to fur-
nish Surgeons with the knowledge of the possi-
bility of such Events, and not to mislead them 
so far as to make favourable Inferences with 
regard to Gangrenes of the Bowels, which ge-
nerally are mortal. 

Before the Performance of the Operation 
for the Bubonocele, which is always to be done 
in wxtremity of Danger, the milder Methods 
are to be tried; these are, such as will con-
duce to sooth the Inflammation; for as to the 
other Intent of softening the Excrements, I 
believe it is much to be questioned, whether 
there can be any of that degree of Hardness 
in the Ilium, which is the Bowel diseased, as 
to form the Obstruction; and in fact, those 
Operators who have unluckily wounded the 
Intestine, have proved, by the thin Discharge 
of Fæces which has follow'd upon the Inci-
sion, that the Induration we feel is the Ten-
sion of the Parts, and not the hardened Lumps 
of Excrement. 

|P_18
Perhaps, except the Pleurisy, no Disorder 
is more immediately relieved by plentiful 
Bleeding than this; Clysters repeated one af-
ter another three or four times, if the first or 
second are either retained too long, or imme-
diately return'd, prove very efficacious; these 
are serviceable, not only as they empty the 
great Intestines of their Excrements and Fla-
tulencies, which last are very dangerous, but 
they likewise prove a comfortable Fomenta-
tion, by passing through the Colon all around 
the Abdomen. The Scrotum and Groin must, 
during the stay of the Clyster, be bath'd with 
warm Stoops wrung out of a Fomentation, 
and with these on the Part you must attempt to 
reduce the Rupture: For this purpose let your 
Patient be laid on his Back, so that his But-
tocks may be considerably above his Head; the 
Bowels will then retire towards the Dia-
phragm, and give way to those which are to 
be push'd in. If after endeavouring two or 
three Minutes, you do not find Success, you 
may still repeat the Trial: I have sometimes, 
at the end of a Quarter of an Hour returned 
such as I thought desperate, and which did 
not seem to give way in the least, till the 
moment they went up; however this must be 
practis'd with caution, for too much rough 
handling will be pernicious. 

|P_19
If, notwithstanding these means, the Pa-
tient continues in very great torture, though 
not so bad as to threaten an immediate Mor-
tification, we must apply some sort of Pul-
tice to the Scrotum; that which I use in this 
Case is, equal parts of Oil and Vinegar made 
into a proper consistence with Oatmeal: Af-
ter some few hours the Fomentation is to be 
repeated, and the other Directions put in prac-
tice. 

After all, should the Pain and Tenseness of 
the Part continue, and Hiccoughs and Vomit-
ings of the Excrements succeed, the Operation 
must take place; for if you wait till a languid 
Pulse, cold Sweats, subsiding of the Tumour, 
and Emphysematous Feel come on, it will be 
most likely too late, as they are pretty sure 
symptoms of a Mortification. 

To conceive rightly of the Occurrences in 
this Operation, it must be remembered that in 
every Species of Rupture the Peritonæum falls 
down with whatever makes the Hernia, for 
the contents of the Abdomen being immediate-
ly envelop'd in this Membrane, they cannot 
 push though any Orifice, but they must like-
wise carry a part of it along with them: So that 
 in the Bubonocele, the Situation of tht Tumour 
|P_20
will be in the Cavity of the Scrotum, upon 
the Tunica Vaginalis and Spermatic Cord. 

The best way of laying your Patient will 
be on a Table of about three Foot four Inches 
high, letting his Legs hang down; then pro-
perly securing him, you begin your Incision 
above the Rings of the Muscles, beyond the 
extremity of the Tumour, and bring it down 
about half the length of the Scrotum, through 
the Membrana adiposa, which will require ve-
ry little trouble to separate from the Perito-
næum (call'd the Sac of the Hernia) and con-
sequently will expose the Rupture for the far-
ther Processes of the Operation; but I cannot 
help once more recommending it as a thing of 
great consequence, to begin the external Incision 
high enough above the Rings, since there is no 
danger in that part of the Wound: and for 
want of the room this Incision allows, the 
most expert Operators are sometimes tedious 
in making the Dilatation. If a large Vessel be 
open'd by the Incision, it must be taken up 
before you proceed further. 

When the Peritonæum is laid bare, you 
must cut though it carefully to avoid prick-
ing the Intestines; though, to say the truth, 
there is not quite so much danger of this 
|P_21
Accident as is represented, for generally speak-
ing the quantity of Water separated in the 
Sac of the Peritonæum, raises it from the In-
testine, and prevents any such mischief. This 
discharge of Water which follows upon wound-
ing the Peritonæum, and the Ignorance of the 
Structure of the Tunica Vaginalis, have made 
 it so generally thought that Ruptures were 
received into the Cavity of that Tunick. 

It has lately been consider'd by some as 
an Improvement in the Operation, to forbear 
wounding the Peritonæum, and to return the 
Sac intire into the Abdomen, thinking by this 
means to make a firmer Cicatrix, and more 
surely to prevent a Relapse for the future; 
but besides that this Practice is not found-
ed on Reason in the very particular it is re-
commended for, the seeming necessity there 
is of letting out the Waters that are fre-
quently fœtid, of taking away the mortified 
Part of the Omentum, which we cannot come 
at without the Incision, and lastly to leave 
an Opening for the issue of the Excrements 
out of the Wound, in case an Eschar should 
drop from the Intestine, put out of dis-
pute, in my opinion, the Impropriety of this 
new Method. 

|P_22
ThePeritonæum being cut through, we 
arrive to its Contents, the nature of which 
will determine the next Process; for if they 
be Intestine only, it must directly be reduced, 
but if there be any mortify'd Omentum, it 
must be cut off; in order to which it is ad-
vised to make a Ligature above the Part 
wounded, to prevent an Hæmorrhage, but it 
is quite needless, and in some measure perni-
cious, as it puckers up the Intestine, and dis-
orders its situation, if made close to it: For 
my part I am very jealous that Wounds of the 
Omentum are dangerous, on which account I 
cannot pass over this part of the Operation, 
without cautioning against cutting any of it 
away, unless it is certainly gangrened; and 
when that happens, I think it adviseable to 
cut off only some of the mortify'd Part, and 
leave the rest to separate in the Abdomen, 
which may be done with as much safety, as 
leaving the same quantity below a Ligature. 

When the Omentum is remov'd, we next 
dilate the Wound, to do which with safety, an infinite number of Instruments have been 
invented; but in my opinion, there is none we 
can use in this case with so good m manage-
ment as a Knife; and I have found my Finger 
in the Operation a much better defence against 
|P_23
pricking the Bowels, than a Director which 
I intended to employ: The Knife must be 
a little crooked and blunt at its extremity, 
like the end of a Probe. Some Surgeons per-
haps may not be steady enough to cut dex-
terously with a Knife, and may therefore per-
form the Incision with Probe-Scissars, care-
fully introducing one Blade between the In-
testine and circumference of the Rings, and 
dilating upwards. When the Finger and Knife 
only are employ'd, the manner of doing the 
Operation will be by pressing the Gut down 
with the fore Finger, and carrying the Knife 
between it and the Muscles, so as to dilate 
upwards about an Inch, which will be a 
Wound large enough. 

The Opening being made, the Intestine is 
gradually to be push'd into the Abdomen, and 
the Wound to be stitch'd up; for this purpose 
some advise the quill'd, and others the inter-
rupted Suture, but as there is very little danger 
of the Bowels falling out when a Dressing 
and Bandage are applied, and the Patient all 
the while kept upon his Back, I would by all 
means use but a slight Stitch through the 
Skin only, since the stricture of a Ligature in 
the tendinous Parts cannot but be dange-
rous, and I could wish the Operation was 
|P_24
practis'd without sewing up afterwards at 
all. 

Hitherto, in the description of the Bubo-
nocele I have suppos'd it loose, or separate in 
the Sac and Scrotum, but it happens sometimes 
in an Operation, that we find not only an 
Adhesion of the outside of the Peritonæum to 
the Tunica Vaginalis, and spermatic Vessels, 
but likewise of some part of the Intestines to 
its internal Surface; and in this case there is 
so much confusion that the Operator is often 
obliged to extirpate the Testicle, in order to dissect away and disintangle the Gut, tho' if 
it can be done without Castration it ought: 
I believe however, this Accident happens 
rarely, except in those Ruptures that have 
been a long time in the Scrotum without re-
turning; in which case the difficulty and 
hazard of the Operation are so great, that un-
less urged by the symptoms of an inflamed 
Intestine, I would not have it undertaken. 
I have known two Instances of Persons so 
uneasy under the circumstance of such a load 
in their Scrotum, tho' not otherwise in pain, 
as to desire the Operation, but the Event in 
both proved fatal; which I think should make 
us cautious how we expose a Life for the 
sake of a convenience only, and teach our 
|P_25
Patients to content themselves with a Bag-
Truss, when in this condition. 

The dressing of the Wound first of all 
may be with dry Lint, and afterwards as di-
rected in the Introduction. 

The Operation of the Bubonocele in Wo-
men so exactly resembles that perform'd on 
Men, that it requires no particular description, 
only in them the Rupture is form'd by the ln-
testine or Omentum falling down through the 
Passage of the Ligamentum Rotundum into the 
Groin, or one of the Labia Pudendi; where 
causing the same symptoms as when obstructed 
in the Scrotum, it is to be return'd by the Di-
latation of that Passage. 

[^A decorative horizontal line, spanning the whole page.^]
[}CHAP. V. 

Of the EPIPLOCELE. }]
There have been a few Instances where 
so great a quantity of the Omentum has 
fallen into the Scrotum, that by drawing the 
Stomach and Bowels downwards, it has ex-
cited Vomitings, Inflammation, and the same 
train of Symptoms as happen in a Bubonocele; in 
which case the Operation of opening the Scro-
|P_26
tum is necessary: The Incision must be made 
in the manner of that for the Rupture of 
the Intestine, and the same Rules observed 
with regard to the Omentum, that are laid 
down in the last Chapter. It is necessary also 
the Rings of the Muscles should be dilated, 
or otherwise, though you have taken away 
some of the mortify'd part of the Omentum, the rest that is out of its place, and strangled 
in the Perforation will gangrene also. The 
Wound is to be treated in the same manner 
as that after the Operation of the Bubonocele. 
What I have here described as an Inducement 
to the Operation, should, by the Experience 
I have had, be the only one. There are a 
great many People who are so uneasy with 
Ruptures, though they are not painful, that 
a little encouragement from Surgeons of Cha-
racter will make them submit to any means 
of Cure; but as I have seen two or three Pa-
tients, who were in every respect hale and 
strong, die a very few days after the Opera-
tion, the event, though very surprising, should 
be a Lesson never to recommend this method 
of treating an Epiplocele, unless it is attended 
with Inflammation, &c.

|P_27
[^A decorative horizontal line, spanning the whole page.^]
[}CHAP. VI. 

Of the Hernia Cruralis. }]
THIS Species of Rupture is the same in 
both Sexes, and form'd by the falling of 
the Omentum or Intestine, or both of them, 
into the inside of the Thigh, through the 
Arch made by the Os Pubis, and Ligamen-
tum Fallopii, where the Iliac Vessels and Ten-
dons of the Psoas and Iliacus InternusMus-
cles pass from the Abdomen. It is very ne-
cessary, Surgeons should be aware of this Dis-
order, which creates the same Symptoms as 
other Ruptures, and must first of all be treat-
ed by the same methods: The manner of 
operating in the Reduction is also so nearly 
the same, with the difference only of dilat-
ing the Ligament instead of the Rings of the 
Muscles, that it would be a mere repetition 
of the Operation for the Bubonocele to give any 
description of it. 

|P_28
[^A decorative horizontal line, spanning the whole page.^]
[}CHAP. VII. 

Of the EXOMPHALOS. }]
THIS Rupture is owing to a Protrusion 
of the Intestine, or Omentum, or both of 
them, at the Navel, and rarely happens to be 
the subject of an Operation; for though the 
case is common, yet most of them are gra-
dually form'd from very small beginnings, 
and if they do not return into the Abdomen
upon lying down, in all probability they ad-
here without any great inconvenience to the 
Patient, till some time or other an Inflam-
mation falls upon the Intestines, which soon 
brings on a Mortification, and Death, unless 
by great chance the mortified Part separates 
from the sound one, leaving its Extremity 
to perform the office of an Anus: in this 
Emergency however I think it adviseable to 
attempt the Reduction, if call'd in at the be-
ginning, though the universal Adhesion of 
the Sac and its Contents, are a great obstacle 
to the success: The Instance in which it is 
most likely to answer, is, when the Rupture 
is owing to any Strain, or sudden Jerk, and 
|P_29
is attended with those Disorders that follow 
upon the Strangulation of a Gut. 

In this Case, having tried all other means, 
in vain, the Operation is absolutely necessary, 
which may be thus performed: Make the In-
cision somewhat above the Tumour, on the 
left side of the Navel, through the Membrana 
Adiposa, and then emptying the Sac of its 
Water, or mortified Omentum, dilate the Ring 
with the same crooked Knife, conducted on 
your Finger, as in the Operation for the Bu-
bonocele; after this, return the Intestines and 
Omentum into the Abdomen, and dress the 
Wound without making any Ligature. 


[^A small decorative figure in the middle of the page.^]
|P_30
[^A decorative horizontal line, spanning the whole page.^]
[}CHAP. VIII. 

Of the Hernia Ventralis. }]
This Tumour is seldom larger than a 
Walnut, and is a Disease not so common 
as to have been observed by many, but there 
are Cases enough known to put a Surgeon 
upon enquiry after it, when the Patient is 
suddenly taken with all the Symptoms of a 
Rupture, without any appearance of one in 
the Navel, Scrotum, or Thigh: I have before 
defined this Hernia to be a Strangulation of 
the Gut, between some of the Interstices of 
the Muscles of the Abdomen: The manner of 
dilating it will be as above directed in the 
other Hernia's: After the Operation in this, 
and all Hernia's where the Intestines have 
been reduced, 'twill be convenient to wear a 
Truss, since the Cicatrix is not always firm 
enough in any of them, to prevent a Relapse, 
as I have had several opportunities to inform 
 my self. 

|P_
|P_31
[}>PLATE II. 

The Explanation.}]
A. The round-edged Knife, of a conve-
nient size for almost all Operations where 
a Knife is used; the Make of it will be better 
understood by the Figure than any other De-
scription; only it may be remark'd, that the 
Handle is made of a light Wood, as indeed 
the Handles of all Instruments should be, that 
the Resistance to the Blades may be better felt 
by the Surgeon. 

B. A Pair of Probe-Scissars, which require 
nothing very particular in their Form, but 
that the lower Blade should be made as small 
as possible, so that it is strong and has a good 
Edge, because being chiefly us'd in Fistula's 
in Ano, the Introduction of a thick Blade in-
to the Sinus, which is generally narrow, 
would be very painful to the Patient. 

C. The crooked Knife with the Point 
blunted, us'd in the Operation of the Bubo-
nocele. 
[^Illustrations of the three instruments on the previous page.^]
|P_32
[^A decorative horizontal line, spanning the whole page.^]
[}CHAP. IX. 

Of the HYDROCELE. }]
THE Hydrocele, called also Hernia Aquosa, 
Hydrops Scroti, and Hydrops Testis, is a 
watry Tumour of the Scrotum; which not-
withstanding the multiplicity of distinctions 
used by Writers, is but of two kinds: The 
one, when the Water is contain'd in the Tu-
nica Vaginalis, and the other when in the 
Membrana Cellularis Scroti: This last is al-
most always complicated with an Anasarca, 
which species of Dropsy is an Extravasation of 
Water lodged in the Cells of the Membrana 
Adiposa; and when thus circumstanced will 
not be difficult to be distinguish'd; besides that 
it is sufficiently characteris'd by the shining 
and softness of the Skin, which gives way to 
the least Impression, and remains pitted for 
some time. The Penis is likewise sometimes 
enormously inlarged, by the Insinuation of the 
the Fluids into the Membrana Cellularis, all 
which Symptoms are absolutely wanting in 
the Dropsy of the Tunica Vaginalis. 

|P_33
In the Dropsy of the Membrana Cellularis 
Scroti, the Puncture with the Trocar is recom-
mended by some, and little Orifices made here 
and there with the point of a Lancet by others, 
or a small Skane of Silk pass'd by a Needle 
through the Skin, and out again at the distance 
of two or three Inches, to be kept in the man-
ner of a Seton, till the Waters are quite 
drained: But the two first Methods avail 
very little, as they open but few Cells; 
and the last cannot be so efficacious in 
that respect as Incisions, and will be much 
more apt to become troublesome, and even to 
gangrene. 

Indeed it is not often proper to perform 
any Operation at all upon this Part, since the 
Membrana Cellularis Scroti, being a continua-
tion of the Membrana Adiposa, Scarifications 
made through the Skin in the small of the 
Legs will effectually empty the Scrotum, as I have many Times experienced; and this 
Place ought rather to be pitch'd upon than 
the other, as being more likely to answer 
the purpose by reason of its Dependency: 
However it sometimes happens that the Wa-
ters fall in so great quantities into the Scro-
tum, as by distending it, to occasion great Pain, 
and threaten a Mortification: The Prepuce of 
|P_34
the Penis also becomes very often excessively 
dilated, and so twisted that the Patient can-
not void his Urine. In these two Instances I 
would propose an Incision of three Inches 
long to be made on each side of the Scro-
tum, quite through the Skin into the Cells 
containing the Water, and two or three, of 
Half an Inch long in any part of the Penis, 
with a Lancet or Knife; all which may be 
done with great safety, and sometimes with 
the success of carrying off the Disease of the 
whole Body. This I can positively say, that 
though I have done it upon Persons in a very 
languid Condition, yet, by making the Wound 
with a sharp Instrument, and treating it af-
terwards with Fomentations and soft Diges-
tives, I have never seen any Instance of a 
Gangrene, which is generally so much appre-
hended in this case. 

The Dropsy of the Tunica Vaginalis is 
owing to a preternatural Discharge of that 
Water which is continually separating in a 
small quantity on the internal Surface of the 
Tunick, for the moistening or lubricating the 
Testicle, and which collecting too fast, heaps 
up and forms in time a Swelling of great 
magnitude: This is what I take to be the 
other Species of Hydrocele, and the only one 
|P_35
besides; though from the time of Celsus
down to our own Days, the Writers on this Sub-
ject make two kinds, one on the inside of the 
Tunica Vaginalis, and another between the 
Scrotum and outside of it, and among the 
Causes assigned for this Distemper, the prin-
cipal one is the Derivation of Water from the 
Ascites, which Opinion though universally 
received, is absurd in Anatomy: For besides 
that People afflicted with a Hydrocele are very 
seldom otherwise dropsical, and on the con-
trary, those with an Ascites have no Hydro-
cele; the Tunica Vaginalis is like a Purse to-
tally shut up on the outside of the Abdomen, so that no Water from any Part can insi-
nuate into it; and with respect to the No-
tion of Water falling from the Abdomen into 
the Interstice of the Tunica Vaginalis and Scro-
tum, it is equally impossible; for though in 
the Hernia Intestinalis, the Gut falls into this 
Part, yet in that case the Peritonæum (which 
would hinder the Egress of the Water) falls 
down too, which the Ancients did not know, 
and the Moderns have omitted to reflect on 
in relation to this Subject. 

TheHydrocele of the Tunica Vaginalis
is very easily to be distinguished from the 
Hydrocele of the Membrana Cellularis, by 
|P_36
the preceding description of that Species of 
Dropsy: I shall now explain how it differs 
from the other Tumours of the Scrotum, 
viz. the Bubonocele, Epiplocele, and enlarg'd 
Testicle: In the first place, it is seldom or 
never attended with Pain in the beginning, and 
is very rarely to be imputed to any Acci-
dent, as the Hernia's of the Omentum and In-
testine are: from the time it first makes 
its appearance it hardly is ever known to 
diminish, 
but generally continues to increase, 
though in some much faster than in others; 
in one Person growing to a very painful Di-
stension in a few Months, whilst in another 
it shall not be troublesome in many Years; 
nay, shall cease to swell at a certain Period, 
and ever after continue in that state with-
out any notable disadvantage; though this last 
Case very rarely happens: In proportion as 
it enlarges it becomes more tense, and then 
is said to be transparent, indeed the Trans-
parency is made the chief Criterion of the 
Distemper, it being constantly advis'd to hold 
a Candle on one side of the Scrotum, which 
it is said will shine through to the other, if 
there be Water: but this Experiment does 
not always answer, because sometimes the 
Scrotum is very much thicken'd, and the 
|P_37
Water it self not transparent; so that to 
judge positively if there be a Fluid, we must 
be guided by feeling a Fluctuation; and tho' 
sometimes we do not perhaps evidently per-
ceive it, yet we may be persuaded there is 
a Fluid of some kind, if we are once assur'd 
that the Distension of the Tunica Vaginalis
makes the Tumour, which is to be distin-
guish'd in the following manner. 

If the Intestine, or Omentum, form the 
Swelling, they will be soft and pliable, (un-
less inflamed) uneven in their Surface, particu-
larly the Omentum, and both of them extend 
themselves up from the Scrotum quite into the 
very Abdomen; whereas in the Hydrocele, the 
Tumour is tense and smooth, and ceases before 
or at its arrival to the Rings of the Abdominal 
Muscles; because the upper extremity of the 
Tunica Vaginalis terminates at some distance 
from the Surface of the Belly. 

When the Testicle is increas'd in its Size, 
the Tumour is rounder, and, if not attended 
with an Inlargement of the Spermatic Ves-
sels, the Cord may be easily distinguish'd be-
tween the Swelling and Abdomen; but with-
out this Rule of distinction, either the Pain 
or the very great Hardness, will discover it to 
be a Disease of the Testicle. 

|P_38
As to the Cure of this Distemper by exter-
nal Applications, or internal Means, after hav-
ing tried upon a great variety of Subjects, 
most of the Medicines invented to that end, I 
have found but very little Satisfaction in the 
Event; for if by chance any one has mended 
under a Physical Regimen, it must be con-
fess'd too, that there are some Instances of 
People recovering, who have so absolutely 
neglected themselves as not even to wear a Bag-
Truss; on which account, I should judge it ad-
visable to wait with patience till the Tumour 
becomes troublesome, and then to tap it with 
a Lancet, which is rather less offensive to the 
Tunica Vaginalis than the Trocar. In open-
ing with a Lancet it may possibly happen, the 
Orifice of the Skin shall slip away from that 
of the Tunick, and prevent the Egress of the 
Water; to obviate which Inconvenience you 
may introduce a Probe, and by that means se-
cure the exact Situation of the Wound. It is 
spoken of as an easy thing to hold the Testicle 
with the left Hand, while we make the Punc-
ture with the right, but when the Tunica 
Vaginalis is very tense it cannot well be distin-
guish'd, however I think there is no Danger of 
wounding it, if you open the inferior part of 
the Scrotum, and not with too long a Lancet. 
|P_39
During the Evacuation, the Scrotum must be 
regularly press'd; and after the Operation a 
little piece of dry Lint and sticking Plaister are 
sufficient. 

This Method of Tapping is call'd The Pal-
liative Cure; not but that it does now and then 
prove an absslute one. To prevent the Re-
lapse of this Disease, Surgeons prescribe the 
making a large Wound, either by Incision or 
Caustick, that upon healing it afterwards, the 
Firmness and Contraction of the Cicatrix may 
bind up the relaxed lymphatic Vessels, and 
obstruct the further preternatural Effusion of 
their Contents: But by what I have seen of 
this Practice, it is attended with so much dan-
er, that, notwithstanding its success in the 
end, I believe whoever reads the following 
Cases will be apt to discard the Method, and 
abide rather by the Palliative Cure. 

[}CASE I.}]
A. B. aged 44, a strong Man, never in his 
Life having been subject to any other Infirmi-
ty, put himself under my care for the Relief 
of a Hydrocele on the left side of the Scro-
tum. 

December 3, 1733, I discharged the Water, 
by making an Incision through the Teguments 
|P_40
about four Inches long. Towards Night he 
grew feverish, got no rest; the Scrotum and 
Testicle on that side beginning to inflame, and 
the capillary Arteries (dilating) to bleed freely. 
He was seized too with a violent Pain in his 
Back, which was in a great measure remov'd 
by suspending the Scrotum with a Bag-Truss. 

From the 3d to the 7th, continued in a msst 
dangerous condition, when the Fever tended 
to a Crisis, by the Suppuration of both Wound 
and Testicle. 

From the 7th to the 24th, he daily acquired 
Strength; but the Discharge from the Testicle 
increasing, and the Sinus penetrating now very 
deep towards the Septum Scroti, I opened the 
Body of the Testicle the whole length of the 
Abscess. 

From the 24th, the Discharge lessen'd sur-
prisingly, so that in six days, the Surface of the 
greatest part of the Testicle united with the 
Scrotum, and there remain'd only a superficial 
Wound, which was intirely cicatris'd on Jan. 
10, 1733-4. 

March 31, 1737, he continued in perfect 
Health.

|P_41
[}CASE II.}]
In the Year 1733, I made an Incision thro' 
the Scrotum and Tunica Vaginalis of a Boy a-
bout eight years of age, who narrowly esca-
ped with his Life: but the Symptomatick Fe-
ver terminating at last in an Abscess of the 
Scrotum, it prov'd his Cure, though with some 
trouble, in a few Weeks.

[}CASE III.}]
A. C. aged 37, of a very hale habit of Bo-
dy, had complained of a Tumour on one side 
of the Scrotum, which continuing to enlarge 
for six Years, he apply'd to a Surgeon, who 
laid a small Caustick on the upper part of it, 
and opening the Eschar, empty'd near three 
Pints of Water; but he relapsing soon after 
this, I undertook the absolute Cure. 

December 15, 1736, I laid on the anterior 
and upper part of the Scrotum, a Caustick a-
bout six Inches long, and one broad. 

December 16, by a small Puncture through 
the Eschar, I emptied above a Quart of 
Water. 

From the 17th to the 24th, he continued 
in a great deal of Pain, not only in the Part, 
but in his Back and Loins, and had very little 
|P_42
rest; the Scrotum on that side became exceed-
ingly inflam'd and thicken'd, the symptoma-
tic Fever running very high, without any 
signs of the Digestion of the Wound. 

On the 24th at night he grew a little ea-
sier, and continued so till the 29th, when the 
Slough separated; but the Wound retained 
still a bad Aspect, no Granulations appearing 
on its Surface. 

FromDecemb. 29, to Jan. 5, he remain'd 
in the same state. 

From the 5th to the 13th, the Swel-
ling and Pain rather increas'd, and that night 
he was seized with an Ague Fit, which re-
turn'd every other day twice more. 

From the 17th to the 26th, the Ague be-
ing stopt, he began to alter much for the bet-
ter, a couple of Imposthumations on the Scro-
tum being in this interim opened. 

ByFeb. 2, the Pain was quite gone, the 
Tumour very much sunk, and the Induration 
softened. 

In a very few days after, the Wound cica-
tris'd, and on Feb. 24, I left him in perfect 
Health, and free from any complaint. 

Having in the preceding Cases been threat-
ened with the Death of the Patients, I tried 
the following Experiment, upon the reputa-
|P_43
tion of its having been done with Success by 
others.

[}CASE IV.}]
A.D. aged Forty-two, had for near four 
years been troubled with a Hydrocele on one 
side, for which I had tapp'd him about do-
zen times, taking away near a Pint of clear 
Water each Operation. 

Jan. 3, 1736-7, after having emptied the 
Tunica Vaginalis, I injected an Ounce of Spi-
rit of Wine; in the instant he complained of 
great Pain, which continued to increase, and 
the next day the Teguments were very much 
augmented in their bulk and thickness. 

Jan. 7, the Tension became violently 
painful, and perceiving a Fluctuation, I made 
a Puncture, and he voided about half a Pint 
of Water, very deeply tinged with Blood, but 
without any flavour of the Spirits to be distin-
guish'd by the smell: This gave him some 
ease, but the Inflammation and Thickness con-
tinued a whole month, and then terminated in 
a couple of Abscesses on the forepart of the 
Scrotum, which I open'd the 7th of February
following, and on their Discharge the whole 
Tumour subsided, leaving a firm Cicatrix and 
absolute Cure of that Disorder. 

|P_44
Something similar to the Circumstance of 
A. D's bloody Water is the Case of another 
Person who was under my care: He had at 
considerable intervals of time been often tapp'd, 
discharging that sort of serous Water the Tu-
nica Vaginalis for the most part yields; at last 
it became tinged with Blood, and every time 
grew more bloody than the other: The fourth 
Discharge of this kind was attended with a 
remarkable Hæmorrhage, and terminated in an 
absolute Cure; no signs of a Relapse appear-
ing some Months after, as I had an opportuni-
ty to inform myself. 

To the Cases above recited I could add still 
more that have fallen within my know]edge 
since the time I made these Observations; par-
ticularly two, attended with Inflammation and 
Abscess, from the mere Puncture of the Lan-
cet; both of which terminated in an absolute 
Cure. It may be remark'd however of these 
two, that one was attended with a thickened 
Tunick, and the Water bloody; and in the 
other, the Coat was thickened, and the Epidi-
dymis inlarged and indurated from a former Go-
norrhœa. 

I would not however be understood from 
this Catalogue of Misfortunes, that the Opera-
tion is never performed with Safety; a few 
|P_45
Examples I have known in its favour, but by 
no means enough to balance the bad Effects 
of it. 

'Tis worth observing, that upon examina-
tion of the several Hydrocele's after their Cure, 
it appeared evidently it was wrought by an 
universal Adhesion of the Testicle to the 
Tunica Vaginalis, and again of that Coat to 
the Parts enveloping it; from which Observa-
tion it will not be difficult to conceive how it 
happens, that Discharges of bloody Water work 
a Cure; since Inflammations of Membranes al-
most perpetually produce Adhesions of the 
neighbouring Parts, and these Discharges are 
no other than a mixture of Blood with the 
Water from the ruptur'd Vessels of the infla-
med Tunick. 

It has been suggested that probably the ex-
posing the Tunica Vaginalis to the Air, might 
occasion the abovemention'd Disorders; but be-
sides that the Case of the injected Sp. Vin. the 
Case of the Caustick and the two Punctures, 
are sufficient Answers to that Opinion, the In-
stances I have seen of the whole Scrotumse-
parating in a Gangrene from the Tunica Vagi-
nalis, and leaving it naked a great many days 
without any ill effect, put it out of dispute 
that 'tis the mere Inflammation of the Tunick 
|P_46
produces the Danger. I have castrated two 
Men, whose scirrhous Testicles were accom-
panied with a Hydrocele, but the whole Tuni-
ca Vaginalis being carried off by the Opera-
tion, they both recover'd without any bad 
Symptoms. 

I shall finish this Chapter with a further 
Remark on the supposed variety of Hydroce-
le's. Besides the imaginary one already speci-
fied between the Scrotum and inferior Mem-
branes, there is mention made of a Species of 
Dropsy between the Cremaster Muscle and Tu-
nica Vaginalis, call'd the Encrysted Hydrocele: 
But I judge it more likely to be within-side the 
Coat, which adhering in different Places to the 
Spermatick Cord, may form a Cyst or two be-
tween the Adhesions, of which an instance has 
fallen under my own Examination. Indeed if we 
reflect on the Cause of a Dropsy of this Part, 
we must necessarily confine it to the Inside of 
the Membrane, where only is that order of Ves-
sels which are the Subject of the Disease. The 
Dropsy of the Testis itself is the last suppos'd 
Species, but it's what I have never seen; and 
from the Analogy of the Testis to the Structure 
of other Glands, that are not pretended to 
become Dropsical, I am suspicious there is no 
such Distemper. 

|P_47
[^A decorative horizontal line, spanning the whole page.^]
[}CHAP. X. 

Of CASTRATION. }]
THIS is one of the most melancholy Ope-
rations in the Practice of Surgery, since 
it seldom takes place but in Disorders into 
which the Patient is very apt to relapse, viz.
those of a Schirrhus, or Cancer, for under most 
of the Symptoms described as rendering it ne-
cessary, it is absolutely improper; such as a 
Hydrocele, Abscess of the Testis, an increasing 
Mortification, or what is sometimes understood 
by a Sarcocele; of which last it may not be 
amiss to say a Word. In the utmost latitude 
of the meaning of this Term, 'tis receiv'd as 
a fleshy Swelling of the Testicle itself, call'd 
likewise Hernia Carnosa; or in some Inlarge-
ments, such as in a Clap, more frequently 
Hernia Humoralis; but generally speaking is 
consider'd as a fleshy Excrescence form'd on 
the Body of the Testis, which becoming ex-
ceeding hard and tumefied, for the most part 
is suppos'd to demand Extirpation, either by 
burning away the Induration, or amputating 
the Testicle: But this Maxim too precipitate-
|P_48
ly receiv'd, has, I apprehend, very much mis-
guided the Practitioners of Surgery. 

In order to conceive better of the Distinc-
tion I'm going to make, it must be remem-
bred, that what is call'd the Testicle, is real-
ly compos'd of two different parts; one Glan-
dular, which is the Body of the Testis itself; 
and one Vascular or Membranous, known by 
the name of Epididymis, which is the begin-
ning of the Vas Deferens, or the Collection of 
the excretory Ducts of the Gland. 

Now it sometimes happens that this Part is 
tumefied, independent of the Testicle, and 
feeling like a large adventitious Excrescence, 
answers very well to the Idea most Surgeons 
form of a Sarcocele; but not being aware of 
the different Nature and Texture of the Epi-
didymis, they have frequently confounded its 
Disorders with those of the Testicle itself, and 
equally recommended Extirpation in the Indu-
ration of one or the other. But without ti-
ring the Reader with particular Histories of 
Cases relating to this Subject, I shall only say, 
That from diligent enquiry I have collected, 
that all Indurations of the glandular Part of 
the Testicle not tending to Inflammation and 
Abscess, generally, if not always, lead on to 
Scirrhus and Cancer; whereas those of the 
|P_49
Epididymis seldom or never do. It is true, in 
spite of internal or external Means, these last 
often retain their Hardness, and sometimes 
suppurate, but however without much danger 
in either Case. 

'Twill not be hard to account for this dif-
ference of Consequences from Tumours of 
seemingly one and the same Body, when we 
reflect how much it is the nature of cancerous 
Poisons to fix upon Glands, and how different 
the Epididymis is from a Gland, though so 
nearly in the neighbourhood of one. 

I would not have it supposed from what I 
have said, that the Epididymis never becomes 
Cancerous; I confess it may, so may 
every part of the human Body: But I ad-
vance, that it rarely or never is so, but from 
an Affection of the Glandular Part of the 
Testicle first, which indeed seldom fails to 
taint, and by degrees to confound it in such 
manner as to make one Mass of the two. 

Before we castrate, it is laid down as a 
Rule to inquire whether the Patient has any 
Pain in his Back, and in that Case to reject 
the Operation, upon the reasonable Presump-
tion of the Spermatick Vessels being likewise 
diseased; but we are not to be too hasty in 
this Determination; for the mere weight of 
|P_50
the Tumour stretching the Cord, will some-
times create the Complaint. To learn the 
Cause then of this Pain in the Back, when the 
Spermatick Cord is not thickened, let your Pa-
tient be kept in bed, and suspend his Scrotum
in a Bag-Truss, which will relieve him if dis-
ordered by the weight only; but if the Sper-
matick Cord is thickened or indurated, which 
Disease, when attended with a Dilatation of 
the Vessels of the Scrotum, is described by the 
Latins under the name of Ramex, (though it 
is more now known by the Greek Appellations 
Circocele and Varicocele) the Case is desperate 
and not to be undertaken. 

But supposing no obstacle in the way to 
the Operation, the Method of doing it may 
be this: Lay your Patient on a square Table 
of about three foot four Inches high, letting 
his Legs hang down, which, as well as the 
rest of his Body, must be held firm by the 
Assistants. Then with a Knife begin your 
Wound above the Rings of the Abdominal
Muscles, that you may have room afterwards 
to tie the Vessels, since for want of this Cau-
tion Operators will necessarily be puzzled in 
making the Ligature: then carrying it through 
the Membrana Adiposa, it must be continued 
downward, the length of it to be in propor-
|P_51
tion to the size of the Testicle. If it is very 
small, it may be dissected away without taking 
off any part of the Scrotum; but I am not 
very fond of this Method, because so much 
loose flabby Skin is apt to form Abscesses af-
terwards, and very frequently grow callous. 
If the Testicle, for Instance, weighs twenty 
Ounces; having made one Incision about five 
inches long, a little circularly, begin a second 
in the same Point as the first, bringing it 
with an opposite Sweep to meet the other in 
the inferior Part, in such a manner as to cut 
out the shape of an Oval, whose smal-
lest Diameter shall be two inches: After 
this, dissect the body of the Tumour, with 
the piece of Skin on it from the Scrotum, first 
taking up some of the Blood-Vessels if the 
Hæmorrhage is dangerous. Then pass a 
Ligature round the Cord, pretty near the Ab-
domen, and if you have space between the Li-
gature and Testicle, a second about half an inch 
lower, to make the stoppage of Blood still 
more secure. The Ligatures may be tied with 
what is call'd the Surgeon's Knot, where the 
Thread is pass'd through the Ring twice. This 
done, cut off the Testicle a little underneath 
the second Ligature, and treat your Patient as 
in other fresh Wounds. 

|P_52
I once castrated a Man whose Testicle 
weighed above three Pounds, where some of 
the Vessels were so exceeding varicous and 
dilated as nearly to equal the size of the 
Humeral Artery; however, I took up two 
or three of the most considerable, and 
pursued the Operation, cutting away near 
three fourths of the Skin, by which means I 
avoided a dangerous Effusion, as by dividing 
the Vessels before they were much ramified, 
I had fewer Ligatures to make: The Success 
answer'd the Design, and the Patient surviv'd 
the Operation and healing of the Wound, 
but the cancerous Humour falling on his 
Liver some time after, destroy'd him. In 
large Tumours, such as the last I have men-
tion'd, it is very much to be advis'd to cut 
away great part of the Skin; for besides that 
the Hæmorrhage will be much less in this 
case, and the Operation greatly shorten'd; 
the Skin by the great Distension having been 
render'd very thin, will great part of it, if not 
taken away, sphacelate, and the rest be more 
prone to degenerate into a cancerous Ulcer. 

It may be observ'd, I do not, in order to 
avoid wounding the Spermatick Vessels, re-
commend pinching up the Skin before the 
Incision, and afterwards thrusting the Fingers 
|P_53
between the Membrana Adiposa and the Tes-
ticle, to tear the one from the other; the 
first is not dextrous, and the other is cruel, 
and both of them, in my opinion, are calcu-
lated to prevent what there is little or no 
danger of. 

[^A decorative horizontal line, spanning the whole page.^]
[}CHAP. XI. 

Of the PHYMOSIS.}]
THE Phymosis signifies no more than 
such a straightness of the Prepuce, that 
the Glans cannot be denuded, which if it 
becomes troublesome so as to prevent the 
Egress of the Urine, or conceal under it 
Chancres, or foul Ulcers, quite out of the 
reach of Application, is to be cut open. It 
sometimes happens that Children are born im-
perforate, in which case a small Puncture, 
dress'd afterwards with a Tent, effects a Cure: 
But this Operation is chiefly practis'd in ve-
nereal Cases, in order to expose Chancres 
either on the Glans or withinside the Prepuce 
it self: And here, if the Prepuce is not very 
callous and thick, a mere Incision will an-
swer, which may be made either with the 
|P_54
Scissars, or by slipping a Knife between the 
Skin and Glans to the very extremity, and 
cutting it up: This last Method is more 
easy than that of the Scissars, but it is 
much safer to make the Wound on one 
side the Prepuce than upon the upper part, 
for I have sometimes seen the great Vessels 
on the Dorsum Penis afford a terrible Hæ-
morrhage, which may be avoided by follow-
ing this Rule. 

If the Prepuce be very large and indurated, 
the Opening alone will not suffice, and it is more 
adviseable to take away the Callosity by Cir-
cumcision, which must be performed with a 
Knife; and if the Artery bleeds much, it 
must be taken up with a small Needle and 
Ligature. 

