

[^Sample 1: book - ^]

|P_183[^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}AN 
ACCOUNT 
OF SOME 
EXPERIMENTS 
ON 
STONES 
In the KIDNIES and BLADDER. 
WITH 
An Inquiry into the NATURE of 
Those AnomalousConcretions. }][^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page. ^]
|P_184
|P_185
[}THE 
INTRODUCTION. }]
1. I Am sensible that some may be apt to 
think it savours too much of vanity 
and presumption, for any one, after 
such innumerable fruitless researches of the 
ablest chymists, to attempt to find out a safe 
dissolvent of the stone in the Bladder. The 
great tenderness of those parts on the one 
hand, and the extreme hardness of many of 
the Calculi on the other, do with too much 
probability make the case seem desperate. For 
after applying all imaginable chymical prepa- 
rations, it is found, that neither the alkaline, 
nor acid, the neutral, saline, nor sulphureous, 
menstruums, have any effect on these concre- 
cretions; spirit of nitre, which is too corro- 
sive, being the only thing which has hitherto 
been found effectually to dissolve them. Yet 
in a matter of so great importance to the 
ease and welfare of a considerable part of man- 
kind, we ought not wholly to despair of find- 
ing some proper and safe dissolvent. And we 
are hitherto excited by the greatest and most 
knowing chymists, who do frequently en- 
|P_186
courage us, not to give over this research; 
being sensible there were menstruum power- 
ful enough to dissolve metals and stones, yet 
so mild as not to hurt, or offend the tenderest 
part of the body. 

2. What more particularly induced me to 
make some few attempts in this matter, was, 
that when I was endeavouring some time since 
to analyse the air by many Chymio-statical
experiments, among other trials, I found that 
by distillation, vegetable tartar, viz. that of 
wine, contained above five hundred times 
its bulk of air, which was a great deal more 
than I found, bulk for bulk, in any the fluid 
or solid parts of vegetables. This put me upon 
trying whether it was the same with animal 
tartar, viz. The calculus humanus.. 

3. I was furnished with variety of Calculi
by the favour of Mr. Ranby, Surgeon to his 
Majesty's Houshold, F. R. S. 

|P_187
[}Experiment I. }]
1. A Piece of Calculus that weighed two 
hundred and thirty grains, and was 
something less than 3/4 of a cubic inch in bulk, 
being distilled in a gun-barrel, as described in 
Vegetable Statics, Vol. I. Exper. LXXVII.
p. 189. there arose from it, in distillation, five 
hundred and sixteen cubic inches of elastic 
air, that is, a bulk equal to six hundred and 
forty-five times the bulk of the stone; so that 
above half the stone was raised by the action 
of fire into elastic air. The remaining Calx
weighed forty-nine grains, that is 1/4.69 part of 
the Calculus; which is nearly the same pro- 
portion of Calx, that Dr. Slare found remain- 
ing, after the distillation, and calcining two 
ounces of Calculus, one ounce and three 
drams of which, he says, evaporated in 
the open fire (a material circumstance, 
which the chymists rarely inquire after) 
of which we have no account. Philos. 
Transact. Lowthorp's Abridgment, Vol. III.
p. 179. the greatest part of which was, we 
see by this Experiment, raised into permanent- 
ly elastic air. 

|P_188
2. Hence it was found, that the Calculus
and tartar of wine did yield more air in 
distillation, than any other substances, whether 
animal, vegetable or mineral. And it was re- 
markable, that a greater proportion of this new 
raised air from these two substances, was re- 
sorbed and lost its elasticity, in standing a few 
days, than that of any other parts of animals 
or vegetables, which are strong symptoms that 
the Calculus is a true animal tartar. And as 
there was very considerably less oil, in the 
distillation of Rhenish tartars, than there was 
in the distillation of the seeds and solid parts 
of vegetables; so I found, that this Calculus
contained much less oil, than the blood or 
solid parts of animals. But some stones which 
were taken out of a human gall-bladder 
yielded in distillation more oil, and much 
air. 

3. A small stone of the gall-bladder, which 
was of the size of a pea, was dissolved in a 
Lixivium of Sal Tartar in seven days, which 
Lixivium will also dissolve tartar; yet it will 
not dissolve the Calculus, tho' I boiled a hard 
piece in it for several hours. 

4. A quantity of Calculus equal to one 
half of what was distilled, viz. a hundred 
|P_189
and fifteen grains, did, when a cubic inch of 
sp. of nitre was poured on it, dissolve in 
two or three hours, with a large froth, and 
generated forty-eight cubic inches of air; 
none of which lost its elasticity, in standing 
many days. A like quantity of tartar, hav- 
ing spirit of nitre poured on it, was at the 
same time dissolved; but no elastic air was 
generated, notwithstanding tartar abounds so 
much with air. 

5. Small pieces of tartar and Calculus were 
in twelve or fourteen days dissolved in oil 
of vitriol; the like pieces of tartar and Cal- 
culus were dissolved in a few hours by oil 
of vitriol, into which there was gradually 
poured near an equal quantity of spirit of 
harts-horn made with lime, which mixture 
made a considerable ebullition and heat. 

6. Tho' the remaining Calx of the distil- 
lation of tartar runs per deliquium, and has 
therefore Sal Tartar in it; and tho' the Calx
of distilled Calculus does not run per deli- 
quium, and has consequently no Sal Tartar
in it; yet it cannot thence be inferred, that 
the Calculus is not a tartarine substance; be- 
cause Sal Tartar itself, when mixed with an 
animal Calx, distils all over, so that the Calx
will not afterwards run per deliquium. By 
|P_190
the great similitude there is therefore, in so 
many respects, between these two substances, 
we may well look upon the Calculus as a true 
Animal Tartar, and doubtless gouty con- 
cretions are the same. 

7. Animal Tartar I would call it in contra- 
distinction to Vegetable Tartar; for as ani- 
mal and vegetable substances greatly differ in 
their salts and sulphurs when chymically ana- 
lysed, so do also their respective tartars: but 
then they are found exactly to agree in these 
remarkable properties, viz. that they are 
both formed not barely as a sediment at the 
bottom of their liquors; but being equally 
expanded and separated from all parts of their 
fluids, they adhere uniformly to the sides of 
their containing vessels, in the form of a hard 
crust; those particles which are immediately 
next the sides of the vessel being first attracted, 
and adhering to them. And as it is a known 
and wonderful property of fluids, to diffuse 
what is mixed with them equally in every 
part, so when part of these incrusting particles 
are attracted out of the fluids, the remaining 
particles equally diffusing themselves, a new 
succession of them is thereby brought with- 
in the attraction of the already incrusting 
particles, and so on successively: otherwise 
|P_191
the particles which float in the fluid at some 
distance from the sides of the vessel, could 
not be attracted thither; for this attraction of 
cohesion acts only near. Further, these tar- 
tars are both observed to be deposited in 
greatest plenty, when the sides of the vessels 
have been already incrusted: they agree also 
in this, that the animal and vegetable fluids 
deposit their incrusting matter in greatest plen- 
ty when they are in an attenuated state; and 
the more attenuated they are, the harder 
will their incrustations be. They both agree 
also in this, that they yield in distillation 
more air than any animal or vegetable sub- 
stance. With good reason therefore has the 
Calculus been called a tartar by many. And 
as the Germans call the tartar of wine, wine- 
stone, so the Calculus may be called urine- 
stone; as also the incrustations from mineral 
and other waters may be called water-stones: 
but as they are all formed in the same man- 
ner, and have several of the same properties 
in common, so they may not improperly be 
called the tartars of those several fluids. 

8. From the great quantities of air that 
are found in these tartars, we see that une- 
lastic air particles, which by their strongly at- 
tracting property are so instrumental in form- 
|P_192
ing the nutritive matter of animals and ve- 
getables, is by the same attractive power, apt 
sometimes to form anomalous concretions, as 
the stone, &c. in animals, especially in those 
places where any animal fluids are in stag- 
nant state, as in the urine and gall-bladders. 
They strongly adhere also to the sides of uri- 
nals, &c. The like tartarine concretions are 
also frequently formed in some fruits, parti- 
cularly in pears: but they do then especially 
coalesce in greatest plenty, when the vegeta- 
ble juices are in a stagnant state, as in wine- 
vessels, &c.

9. This great quantity of attracting, une- 
lastic air particles, which we find in the Cal- 
culus, should rather encourage than discou- 
rage us in searching after some proper dissol- 
vent of the stone in the bladder, which in 
the Analysis of it is found to be well stored 
with active principles, such as are the great 
agents in fermentation. For Mr. Boyle found 
therein a good quantity of volatile salt, with 
some oil; and we see by these experiments, 
that there is store of unelastic air-particles in 
it, which are raised in distillation into an ela- 
stic state, at the same time that the volatile 
salt arises in white fumes; an argument that 
|P_193
they are intimately combined with each other 
in the Calculus. 

10. And it was this consideration, which 
put me upon making some attempts, to try 
by variety of fermenting mixtures, whether 
the brisk action of some fermentations might 
not possibly so shake and rouse these air-par- 
ticles, as to make them fly off into an elastic 
state, and thereby dissolve the union of the 
parts of the stone. We find that spirit of 
nitre acts in this manner on the Calculus, 
in the dissolution of it; for we see in Ex- 
periment I. Numb. 4. that a hundred and 
fifteen grains, or about 1/3 of a cubic inch of 
Calculus, when dissolved in spirit of nitre, 
generated forty-eight cubic inches of air, 
with a large froth, a quantity equal to a hun- 
dred and forty-four times the bulk of the 
Calculus. 

11. From the few trials I have hitherto 
made, I have found a fermenting mixture, 
which by its vigorous action, not only throws 
off elastic air from many human Calculi, but 
also very sensibly wastes and dissolves several 
of those which are of a less compact tex- 
ture; especially the gravel-stones, which are 
not generally so hard as stones which have 
had a longer time to harden in the bladder; 
|P_194
yet I have met with some of these gravels so 
hard as not to be dissolved by this mixture. 

12. Tho' I have not herein succeeded so 
far, as to encourage any one to attempt the 
dissolving therewith gravel-stones in the blad- 
der: yet I though it might not be improper 
to give an account of the small progress I 
had made herein; since it might possibly be 
a step towards the happy and important dis- 
covery, by exciting and engaging others in 
the same pursuit; who among the infinite 
variety of menstruums that may be com- 
pounded, may haply hit upon some, which 
may more easily dissolve most gravel-stones 
at least, if not the larger and harder Calculi. 
If we could make no farther advance than 
this, it would be of considerable benefit to 
mankind, by taking away, when it first falls 
into the bladder, the Nucleus, on which 
larger and harder stones are in time formed. 
And this would be effected, if with a few 
injections of a safe and proper menstruum, 
we could only dissolve a small part of a large 
gravel-stone, lately fallen from the kidnies, 
so as to make it fit to pass off thro' the Ure- 
thra; which it would also do with more 
ease to the patient, by having thereby its 
surface and sharper points softened and made 
|P_195
mucilaginous, and less stimulating. This is 
what the fermenting mixture I am going to 
give an account of, will do on some of the 
softer stones, but not without too many re- 
peated injections, to make it practicable with 
safety to the patient. 

13. That I might with the greater accura- 
cy and readiness vary and adjust, as occasion 
required, the several proportions of the fer- 
menting mixtures, I divided the capacity of 
several glass vessels, out of which I poured 
the liquors, into cubic inches, making marks 
with a file on the outside of the glasses, at 
each division. I divided also the capacity of 
a large tube into quarter cubic inches; it was 
half inch diameter, and sealed at one end. I 
made also several divisions on a short tube, 
which was 1/4 inch diameter, the capacity of 
each division containing ten drops of oil of 
sulphur; so that by dipping one end of this 
tube in liquor to any of these marks, and 
then stopping the other end with my finger, 
I could readily take up 10, 20, 30, 40 or 50 
drops, or any intermediate number. 

14. I will now give a short account of 
some of the principal Experiments I made; 
in doing of which I did not confine myself 
to such mild mixtures, as might probably not 
|P_196
be injurious to the bladder; but chose to be- 
gin with the strongest fermenting mixtures, 
in hopes that if I should find any of these 
would dissolve the Calculus, by gradually 
weakening and lowering such mixtures, I 
might possibly bring it to such a degree of 
mildness, as might make it not injurious to 
the bladder, and yet retain in some measure 
its dissolving quality. Or if I should not be 
so happy as to succeed so far, yet I thought 
it most probable, that I might find dissolvents, 
among these stronger mixtures, which might 
at least give some farther insight into the na- 
ture of the Calculus. 

[}Experiment II. }]
1. A Cubic inch of oil of vitriol, and 
double its quantity of water, when 
mixt together, made so hot a ferment, that I 
could hardly bear to hold my hand at the 
bottom of the bolthead; yet it had no effect 
on a piece of the hardest kind of Calculus. 
And it was the same when the heat and fer- 
ment was renewed by throwing in some file- 
ings of iron. 

2. The like proportions of oil vitr. and 
water, with several kinds of powdered vi- 
|P_197
triolic stones or Pyrites, made violent fer- 
ments, but had no effect on this very hard 
Calculus. 

3. It was the same with oil of vitriol, and 
other acid spirits, when poured on several al- 
kaline bodies, such as powdered Belemnites, 
Asteria, coral and oyster-shell, &c.

4. But oil of vitriol mixed with unrecti- 
fied spirit of C. C. tho' it would not dissolve 
the above-mentioned very hard piece of 
Calculus, yet with ten or twelve fresh mix- 
tures, it rotted and dissolved several pretty 
thick Laminæ, or cloves of other Calculi; 
which tho' not of so compact a texture as 
the other, yet were so hard, that I could not 
make any impression on them with my nail: 
but this was too pungent a mixture to give 
any hopes that the bladder can bear any de- 
gree of it. 

5. Spirit of rye-bread being found by chy- 
mists a dissolvent so powerful as to dissolve 
several kinds of stones and hard substances, 
and yet withal so mild, that it may with 
great safety be held in the hollow of the 
hand; I prepared a good quantity of it, both 
unrectified and rectified, and made it one in 
a great variety of briskly fermenting mix- 
tures, in hopes that by thus putting its parts 
|P_198
in a brisk motion, it might have made some 
impression on the Calculus, but it had noe. 

6. I made a preparation of tartar of vitriol, 
by mixing one part of oil of vitriol, with 
twice its quantity of hot water, in which 
were pieces of Calculus and tartar; the Cal- 
culus emitted bubbles, but not the tartar: 
then I poured in gradually Ol. Tart. when 
both Calculus and tartar emitted for some 
minutes a great quantity of bubbles. The 
tartar was almost at once dissolved, and the 
Calculus was very rotten and brittle, but it 
was not of the very hard kind; Sal Tartar, 
which is a fixt alkaly, being less corrosive 
than spirit of harts-horn, which is a volatile 
alkaly. 

[}Experiment III. }]
1. I Made a solution of it in water, in the 
proportion of an ounce of Sal Tartar
to four of water; and made many brisk 
fermentions, with several portions of this 
alkaline mixture, by pouring in of the strongest 
acid spirits, as spirit of nitre, spirit of salt, 
spirit and oil of vitriol, and oil of sulphur. 
I found oil of vitriol and oil of sulphur most 
effectual to my purpose; and of these two, 
|P_199
I chose rather to make use of oil of sulphur 
than oil of vitriol, as being the purer acid 
of the two, and less noxious to animal bo- 
dies than oil of vitriol. 

2. I found, after the mixture of a great 
variety of proportions of these liquors, that 
the following were the properest for my pur- 
pose, viz. one cubic inch of water, one 
third of a cubic inch of solution of Sal Tar- 
tar, and twenty-five, or sometimes thirty 
drops of oil of sulphur; also six cubic inches 
of water, 3/4 cub. of the solution of Sal Tar- 
tar, and fifty drops of oil of sulphur. 

3. These proportions fermented briskly, 
and made air-bubbles arise very fast from the 
Calculi for eight or ten minutes, as would 
also several other proportions, tho' I did not 
find any so effectual as these, which after se- 
veral fresh affusions of them, would dissolve 
some Calculi which were hard to the touch: 
They would also dissolve several gravel stones, 
tho' not all; nor had they any effect on ma- 
ny of the hardest Calculi. 

4. If air do not arise briskly from the Cal- 
culus, upon pouring on any of these mix- 
tures, the rule to adjust the proportions ac- 
curately, is to drop in a few drops of oil of 
sulphur; if this addition make more air arise 
|P_200
from the Calculus, it is a sign some of it 
was wanting; but if more air does not arise, 
then it is a sign that more solution of Sal 
Tartar is wanting. 

5. It fermented best, when half the water 
was poured on the solution of Sal Tartar, 
and the spirit of sulphur was dropped into 
the other half, and then both mixtures pour- 
ed together. Warm water was better than 
cold, tho' it fermented longer cold. 

6. When there was a double quantity of 
oil of sulphur, I have not found it more 
powerful in dissolving; and when the solution 
of Sal Tartar was much stronger, the fer- 
ment was less. 

7. This liquor has no effect on the Cal- 
culus after the ferment is over, as I have 
found by laying several Calculi to soak in it 
for a whole year. So that the effect it has 
on the Calculus while it is fermenting, seems 
not to depend on the fitness of the particles 
of the menstruum to enter the pores of the 
Calculus, but rather on certain harmonic 
proportions between the vibrations of the 
fermented liquor, and the tone or degree of 
tenseness of the parts of the Calculus: Just 
as when two strings are equally tense, the 
striking of one will make the other sound; 
|P_201
or, as I have often observed, the different 
pipes of an organ will make different boards 
vibrate, according to the uniformity there 
is between the tenseness of the fibres of the 
several boards, and the tone of the different 
pipes. 

8. And in like manner we may not un- 
reasonably suppose, that when there is the 
like uniformity between the vibrations of the 
fermenting liquor, and those of the parts of 
the Calculus; that the Itus and Reditus of 
these vibrations increasing in this case each 
other's force, some parts of the Calculus are 
thereby thrown off into elastic air. In con- 
firmation of this conjecture, I have observed 
air to arise briskly from a Calculus with 
twenty or ten drops of oil of sulphur; and 
yet with fifteen drops little or no air arose, 
notwithstanding the proportion of the other 
ingredients of the fermenting mixtures was 
the same in all three cases. 

[}Experiment IV. }]
1. ACalculus which weighed three hun- 
dred and fourteen grains, after forty- 
nine fresh assusions of the above-mentioned 
dissolving menstruum, was wasted a hundred 
|P_202
and thirty-four grains; but the remaining 
Nucleus of this Calculus was so very hard, 
that this liquor had no effect on it. 

2. I dissolved also several other of the sof- 
ter kind of Calculi, and the broken shells or 
cloves of others; but there were many of 
the harder kind, which this liquor had no 
sensible effect upon. 

3. When a large Calculus was sawn asun- 
der, and immersed in the fermenting liquor, 
I observed the air to rise in much greater 
quantity, from the softer inward part of the 
Calculus, than from the hard polished surface. 

4. As for gravel stones, I was obliged to 
several persons, who were so good as to fur- 
nish me with 'em, which I made the follow- 
ing Experiments upon, viz.

5. Some small grains of a redish yellow 
gritty gravel were crumbled into coarse sand 
with seven affusions of one cub. water, 1/3
cub. of solution of Sal Tartar, and twenty- 
five drops of oil of sulphur; the air which 
rose from the gravel, adhering to it in large 
bubbles, made the gravel frequently rise to 
the top of the liquor. 

6. I put into the same menstruum a clove 
or fragment of a scale of a larger Calculus, 
which was voided the day before; it was 
|P_203
1/16th part of an inch thick, and 3 broad, of 
an ash colour, so hard that it was difficult to 
break away its edges with one's nails. After 
thirty-six affusions of this liquor, it was rot- 
ten as dirt, tho' it retained its shape. 

7. Three hard redish gravels, of a third 
person's, which were as big as large shot, 
were after eleven affusions of the same li- 
quor, considerably more brittle, their surface 
rotten and much diminished, and after twen- 
ty-six more affusions they were wasted to the 
size of pins-heads. 

8. I laid two other gravel stones of the 
same person's, but somewhat less than the 
former, to soak in urine for twenty-four 
hours, and then poured on eight affusions of 
the dissolving menstruum: The following 
night they were laid to soak again in urine, 
and the next day I poured on sixteen more 
affusions; after which one was wasted, and 
the other very rotten; so the soaking in 
urine does not hinder dissolution. 

9. I dissolved in the same manner the gra- 
vel of three other persons, which were either 
of an ash colour, or such as seemed to be 
composed of a coarse redish sandy grit. 

10. But the larger gravel of two other per- 
sons, which had probably lain much longer 
|P_204
a hardening in the kidnies or bladder, and 
were covered with a kind of hard polish, had 
very little impression made on them by this 
liquor; yet some grit came off the surface 
of one of these after eleven affusions; and 
after thirty more affusions, each end was soft 
and crumbled. But this liquor made no im- 
pression on the gravel of the other person. 

11. This liquor dissolved a piece of Tar- 
tar in five affusions, but a like piece of Tar- 
tar lay thirty hours in the same liquor, be- 
fore it was dissolved, when there were no re- 
peated affusions. 

12. That all the air-bubbles, which arise 
during the ferment, do not arise from the 
Calculus, is plain, because some arise in that 
part of the glass vessel where there is no Cal- 
culus. These bubbles therefore must arise from 
the fermenting mixture; for Sal Tartar, by 
Experiment LXXIV. Vol. I. p. 184. contains 
a good quantity of air. Yet far the greatest 
quantity of air arises from the Calculus, as 
is evidently to be seen, when two like quanti- 
ties of this liquor are poured at the same time 
into two glass vessels, which have, one of 
them, a Calculus in it, and the other none. 

13. Tho' this menstruum is far from being 
efficacious enough to encourage any one to 
|P_205
make the trial on human bodies, it require- 
ing, as we see, too many repeated injections 
to dissolve some of the softer kinds of Cal- 
culi; yet I thought it not improper to try 
whether the bladder could bear a liquor with 
this degree of acidity in it; it being so mild 
that it may be taken into the mouth with- 
out inconvenience, tho' it sets an austere 
roughness on the teeth. 

[}Experiment V. }]
1. I Injected therefore at three several times 
thro' a tunnel and tube about half a 
pint of this liquor into the bladder of a 
Dog, after which he did not shew any signs 
of uneasiness: But when another time a pint 
and half of near double the strength of the 
former was injected, he seemed uneasy, as if 
troubled with the strangury, but the uneasy 
symptoms went off in half an hour. Some 
days after I killed the Dog, but could not 
perceive, on opening him, that the injected 
liquor had done any harm to his bladder. 

2. These injections are easily made into a 
Dog's bladder, by passing a catheter directly 
into it, thro' an artificial Fistula made in the 
Perinæum, as directed by Mr. John Douglas, 
|P_206
Surgeon, F. R. S. in the Philosoph. Trans. 
Numb. 399.

3. I injected also the same liquor twelve 
several days into the bladder of a Bitch, af- 
ter which she sometimes shewed some un- 
easiness for a little while, and sometimes not. 
She continued very lively and brisk long 
after; but some months after, in the follow- 
ing summer, she was in copulation dog-drawn, 
as it is called, i. e. the vagina was drawn out, 
which caused her death; whence we may con- 
clude, that its fibres were hardened and con- 
tracted by the acid spirit of sulph. and it may 
probably have had the like effect on the fibres 
of the bladder. It is therefore by no means 
adviseable to attempt the use of it in a hu- 
man bladder; neither do I here give an ac- 
count of it with any such view; my design 
herein being only to shew, that this is at least 
some advance towards discovering a safe dis- 
solvent for most gravels, and some of the 
softer kinds of Calculi; but as to the harder 
kinds, on which nothing has hitherto been 
found to have any effect towards a dissolu- 
tion, except Aquafortis, there is little hope 
of ever finding a safe dissolvent for them. 
But as to the softer kinds, there are several 
|P_207
mild acid mixtures, that will dissolve them, 
when laid to soak in them for a few days. 

4. I tried to make this liquor more mild 
by mucilaginous mixtures; such as solution 
of gum Arabic, and decoction of comfrey 
root; but I did not find it signified any thing;
it served only to increase the froth in the ef- 
fervescence, which was also the inconvenience 
of using urine instead of water: For I dis- 
solved several pieces of Calculus, with urine, 
solution of Sal Tartar, and oil of sulph. so 
that a little urine in the bladder would be no 
impediment to the operation of this liquor. 

[}Experiment VI. }]
1. THinking it might possibly be of use 
in Experiments of this kind, to have 
a continual flow of liquor in and out of the 
blander, I directed an ingenious artist to make 
me a double Catheter, the cavity of which 
was divided lengthwise by a thin partition, 
into two separate channels, which ended in 
two divaricating branches. To one of these 
branches was fastened an Ox's ureter, or the 
windpipe of a Goose or Turkey, which, by 
means of a glass tube, either communicates 
with, or has water flowing from a capacious 
|P_208
vessel, placed three feet above the Catheter; 
so the liquor, as it flows from the vessel, 
runs thro' the one half of the Catheter, 
and flows into the bladder, and then returns 
out of the bladder, thro' the other half of 
the Catheter. 

2. Thro' this instrument I caused twenty- 
three cubic inches of the dissolving liquor to 
flow in and out of the above-mentioned Bitch's 
bladder in a continual stream: And after 
that, for four hours and a half, there ran in- 
cessantly in and out, in the same manner, a 
stream of water, of the warmth of urine, in 
quantity about nine hundred cubic inches, 
or three gallons ale measure, and this with- 
out the least harm or inconvenience to the 
Bitch, that I could perceive; sometimes, when 
the bladder was pretty full, the water flowed 
out between the Sphincter and the Catheter, 
and then ceased to flow till it had filled the 
Bladder to the same degree of fulness again. 

3. Dr. Keill, in his Medicina Statica Bri- 
tannica, p. 14. observes, that the quantity of 
urine which he made in twenty-four hours 
day and night, was about thirty-nine ounces, 
of which, he says, twenty-one ounces may 
be allowed for what passed off in twelve hours 
day, which is near at the rate of two ounces 
|P_209
in an hour, in the day-time; which, suppose- 
ing it to be at that rate, then there having 
passed thro' the double Catheter, nine hun- 
dred cubic inches in four hours and a half, 
that is at the rate of two hundred cubic 
inches, or a hundred and thirteen ounces in 
an hour: Then the proportion the urine 
which will flow into the Bladder in that 
time will bear to the water which passed 
thro' the Catheter in the same time, will be 
as one to fifty-six, which proportion may be 
much diminished by increasing the perpen- 
dicular height, and consequently the force 
of the water which flows thro' the Catheter, 
as also by abating on such an occasion the 
quantity of drink that is taken in. This 
small proportion of urine to water may pro- 
bably very little disturb the effect of any li- 
quor that may by this means be made to pass 
the bladder; whether for dissolving of the 
Calculus, if any such liquor should ever be 
discovered, or whether it be for any medi- 
cinal purpose to cure any disorders in the 
Bladder; in which cases this instrument may 
possibly be sometimes of use. 

4. But if, upon trial, it be found, that the 
canals of this double Catheter are too small, 
then it may perhaps be a better way to pass 
|P_210
any liquor into the Bladder, thro' a small 
or middle-sized common Catheter, thro' 
which it would flow more plentifully in, and 
also pass out more freely between the Sphin- 
cter and the Catheter, when the Bladder is 
full to a certain degree, whereby any gross, 
slimy or feculent matter would more easily 
be discharged from the Bladder, than thro' 
the narrower passage of a double Catheter. 

[}Experiment VII. }]
1. I Pounded severally the three following 
hot alkaline Plants, viz. Onions, Scur- 
vy-grass and Horse-radish roots; and put the 
pulp into three pots, in the middle of which 
I put very hard Calculi, which were all taken 
out of the same person. I pressed the mash 
hard down, and set the pots in a hot-bed 
for thirteen days. 

2. The Scurvy-grass and Horse-radish had 
no sensible effect on their Calculi: But the 
surface of that which was put into the Oni- 
ons was so soft, that I could scrape it off with 
my nail; and it was the same when I put a 
like Calculus into onion juice mixed with 
water, which was kept warm in a chimney- 
corner for fifteen days; in which liquor the 
|P_211
redish gritty gravel of two other persons was 
at the same dissolved. 

3. Hence Onion juice seems to have some 
considerable efficacy in dissolving the Calcu- 
lus: And where frequently eaten should, if 
not waste, at least prevent the increase of the 
Calculus. Dr. Lobb found Leeks more ef- 
fectual dissolvents than onions. 

[}Experiment VIII. }]
1. IN the history of the Royal Academy of 
Sciences of Paris, An. 1720. there 
are accounts of several Calculi being dis- 
solved by laying them many days in water, 
sooner or later, according to their different 
degrees of hardness. 

2. I took some of the above-mentioned 
ash-coloured, and round redish gravel stones, 
and put some of them at the same time in- 
to cold and warm water, and found those 
in warm water dissolv'd much sooner than 
the other, they being covered with a white 
Mucus. 

3. I laid several gravel stones in a little 
rill of warm water, for fourteen days, and 
a good part of those nights: They had several 
of them a white Mucus over them; but they 
|P_212
did not dissolve so fast as those in stagnant, 
warm water; the reason of which might be 
that this running water was but half so warm 
as the above-mentioned stagnant water; and 
they were besides some part of each night 
cold, when the water ceased to run. 

4. I poured into a Florence Flask thirty- 
nine cubic inches of water, and one of fresh 
urine, and put therein the gravel of seven 
different persons, and then set the flask in 
hot dung, where it had a heat equal to that 
of blood; but they had very little Mucus on 
them in six days: So that this small propor- 
tion of urine seems to be some hindrance to 
dissolution. 

5. What I had principally in view in make- 
ing these last-mentioned experiments, was to 
see whether we might have any reasonable 
expectation of wasting in some degree, gra- 
vel stones, by a continued series of diuretics; 
but they give us very little encouragement 
to hope for any other success from thence, 
than barely the washing down of the gravel, 
if not grown too large. It seems indeed 
probable, that while diuretics are using, the 
gravel or stone may make a very little, if 
any, progress in increasing in bulk, because 
at that time the urine is more diluted and 
|P_213
less rancid and urinous; and consequently not 
so much charged with tartarine particles: For 
it is observed, that as those of a hot tempera- 
ment, and of the hardiest constitutions, have 
the most rancid urine, so they are generally 
more subject to the stone than others: Not 
only because they are supposed to perspire 
the watry matter more plentifully, but also 
because their urine is more highly alkalized, 
attenuated and digested, and its tartarine parts 
thereby subtilized, and rendered less muci- 
laginous than the urine of those of a less ro- 
bust and more lax constitution of fibres; 
which is probably a principal reason why 
women are much less subject to the gravel or 
stone than men. 

6. As fermentation breaks and dissolves the 
mucilaginous texture of vegetable fluids, so 
is the like texture of animal fluids dissolved 
in proportion to the degree of digestion 
which they undergo. For as all degrees of 
ferment in vegetable fluids have a tendency 
from viscidity to acidity; so all degrees of 
digestion, from its first beginning in the sto- 
mach, thro' its whole course, have a tendency 
to putrefaction: But in a healthy state of an 
animal, this tendency is stopped at a certain 
degree, by the sweet emulsion of fresh nutri- 
|P_214
ment, without a constant supply of which, 
the animal fluids would soon tend to a fatal 
degree of putrefaction, and putrefaction dis- 
solves viscidities. And accordingly it is ob- 
served, that urine deposits its tartar more 
freely to the sides of urinals, when it has 
stood some time to putrefy, and to become 
thereby less viscid and more dilute. Thus 
also Must, or the unfermented juice of grapes, 
yields no tartar; nor do wines deposit their 
tartars to the sides of vessels, while they are 
in a thick, turbid, mucilaginous state; but 
when, by a farther degree of ferment, they 
are so much diluted as to fall fine, then the 
tartarine particles being disintangled, do plen- 
tifully adhere to the sides of vessels, so as 
to form thereby a hard crust. And as the 
tartar of wine is observed to be the harder, 
the finer and more attenuated the wine is, so 
probably the more digested and attenuated 
the urine is, the Calculus will be propor- 
tionably the harder, and frequently to a very 
great degree of hardness, notwithstanding it 
lies constantly in urine; thus the mortar of 
walls which are so situated under ground as 
to be never dry, is often observed to be har- 
der than that which lies dry; and thus the 
bones of animals, and the woody substance 
|P_215
of trees, harden in a continually moist state: 
And, as naturalists have observed, that bones 
of animals are more compact and harder in 
hot than in cold climates; so 'tis probable 
that, cæteris paribus, the Calculus may be 
harder in hot than in cool constitutions; 
agreeably to what Dr. Frederic Hoffman ob- 
served of the stony incrustations in the Caro- 
line bath, which are hardest and reddest, but 
in least quantity at the mouth of the spring 
when the water is hottest; but as the water 
grows cooler at a farther distance from the 
spring-head, there the incrustation is greater 
in quantity, but softer, more friable, and like 
sand. Disquisitio Physico-Medica de Ther- 
mis Carolinis. 

7. Nature seems to have given us a hint, 
that soft mucilaginous things are good to 
prevent the growth of the stone, by the care 
she has taken to line the ureters and bladder 
with the like substance, which is separated 
from its glands; which serves not only to 
prevent the bladder's being injured by the 
acrimony of the urine, but also to hinder the 
adhesion of the tartarine particles of the 
urine, which are then found to adhere to the 
bladder, when this mucilaginous lining is by 
the Calculus rubbed off: And a calculous
|P_216
sand is sometimes found adhering to the 
whole substance of the bladder, which grows 
thereby thick, hard and scirrous. And daily 
experience teaches us, that the tartar of urine 
constantly adheres to urinals and other vessels 
it is contained in; and would doubtless do 
the same to the substance of the bladder, 
were it not defended with a slimy coat. 
And accordingly it is observed by modern 
physicians, that the more mucilaginous the 
urine itself is, the less apt it is to breed the 
stone: No wonder then, that balsamic, lu- 
bricant and mucilaginous liquor, such as 
milk, soft unctuous ale, water-gruel, barley- 
water, and liquors made of or mixed with 
honey, &c. are found to be good preventives 
of the growth of the gravel or stone. 

8. And as toasted bread, roasted, broiled 
and fried meats of all kinds, are observed to 
be apter to breed the stone than boiled, this 
is doubtless owing to the same cause, viz.
that they are less mucilaginous than boiled 
meats; for the surface of these meats being 
imbrowned, that is in some degree burnt, 
the mucilaginous texture of these burnt parts 
is thereby spoiled, and the cohesion of the 
tartarine air-particles (many of which accord- 
ing to the different degrees of burning are 
|P_217
thrown off into an elastic state) is to such a 
degree broken as to leave them more at li- 
berty to form in this their detached unelas- 
tic state tartarine concretions. 

9. Hence we see how greatly the antients 
were mistaken, who generally attributed the 
growth of the Calculus to mucose, pituitous 
matter, which is sometimes in great plenty 
separated from the scrophulous glands of the 
bladder, but is not found to harden into a 
Calculus. 

10. It was the general opinion of the 
learned in Beverovicius's time, (who pub- 
lished what they wrote to him on that sub- 
ject about a hundred years since) that the 
matter of the Calculus was a pituitous viscid 
matter, caused by the ill-disposed kidney, 
and hardened by the heat of the bed. But 
Helmont in his treatise de Lithiasi, justly 
explodes this notion, and denies the Cal- 
culus, which he calls Duelech, to be owing 
to any viscid matter, for the following rea- 
sons, viz.

11. He says the viscid matter, which is 
sometimes found in those who have a stone 
in the bladder, arises from the mucilage 
which the stone rubs off the bladder; for 
when the Calculus is cut out of the bladder, 
|P_218
there is no more viscid matter in the urine: 
That if it arose from this Mucus, the blad- 
der would soon be filled with a Calculus: 
That this Mucus dried, makes only a little 
chalk stone, like that of the Mucus of the 
nose when dried: And that it cannot incrust 
in the bladder to form a Calculus; whence 
he concludes that it does not arise from this 
Mucus, but from a part of the urine which 
adheres to urinals. 

12. Though he filtrated urine through 
linen, yet it still deposited its tartar; whence 
he concludes, that the tartar was not formed 
when the urine was first voided; of if it had 
passed the linen in the form of sand, then 
it would have precipitated, like sand or se- 
diment, to the bottom of the urinal, and 
not have adhered to the sides at equal di- 
stances; because it would have wanted, he 
says, a glue whereby to have adhered to the 
sides. 

13. And since, as he further observes, this 
sand is no-where glutinous, but where it ad- 
heres to the vessel, it is, he says, hence evi- 
dent, that this sand adheres at the instant it 
is formed: And this sand is formed and ad- 
heres to the vessel long after the urine is 
made, when it begins to putrefy, the very 
|P_219
instant before it fixes. To which more and 
more is continually added. And in the same 
manner he concludes the Calculus to grow. 
He observes this tartar to adhere sooner and 
in greater plenty to a vessel already incrusted 
with it, than to a clean vessel, viz. because 
the fixt tartarine particles attract more strong- 
ly than those of the sides of the vessel: An 
uncomfortable observation for those to re- 
flect on, who have a Calculus once begun in 
them. 

14. He found that even distilled urine de- 
posited a tartar; the reason he gives why 
urine long detained in the bladder does not 
deposit its tartar to the sides of the bladder, 
as in a pot, is because in the bladder it is not 
so soon disposed to putrefy, and that tartar 
will not adhere so well to the bladder as to a 
pot. 

15. Helmont finding the ignorance and in- 
cogitancy of others on this subject, says, he 
gave away as many books, as were worth 
two hundred pieces of gold, and wished he 
had burnt them; for books gave him not the 
least light. A mortifying, but strong and live- 
ly instance of the little progress we must ever 
hope to make in our researches into the na- 
ture of things, without first striking out what 
|P_220
light we can, by variety of proper experi- 
ments. 

16. The urine that is made at the greatest 
distance from drinking, is observed to be 
most rancid, as is in the like case the milk 
of women; because it has not only been 
longer a digesting in the blood, but also be- 
cause the more watery part goes off first in 
greatest proportion: And its being more ea- 
sily retained in the bladder, than the higher 
coloured urine, shews that it is less rancid 
and stimulating, than a higher coloured 
urine. 

17. Whence it seems probable, that the 
stone does not increase with an equable pro- 
gression, in those that are subject to it, but 
faster or slower, in proportion to the more 
diuretic and diluted, or more rancid state of 
the urine. Whence we may not unreasona- 
bly conclude, that the stone increases faster 
in the summer, when a greater proportion of 
moisture is perspired off, and the urine ren- 
dered thereby more rancid, than in the win- 
ter, when the perspiration being diminished, 
a greater quantity is discharged by urine. 
Add to this, that heat is observed to contri- 
bute to the induration of many bodies. Are- 
tæus on the contrary imagined the Calculus
|P_221
to be increased most in winter and autumn, 
viz. from a suppressed perspiration. 

18. The Laminæ or cloves which are ob- 
served in many of the Calculi, are a further 
confirmation of this; for when the urine does 
not deposit its tartar plentifully on the Cal- 
culus, then its surface acquires, by rolling 
up and down in the bladder, a kind of hard 
polish; but when the urine returns again to 
its more rancid tartarine state, then the Cal- 
culus is covered with a new coat; the last 
polished surface being the partition between 
the two cloves, at which surface they more 
easily separate than elsewhere. 

19. Mr. Hucks member of parliament, a 
brewer in London, having killed a Horse of 
his, which was twenty-eight years old, and 
had lived for twenty years on nothing but 
grains; there were found in his stomach and 
guts, a great number of stony concretions, 
in quantity sufficient to fill a quart; they 
were most of them of a flat oval form, and 
some of them prismatical. 

20. Mr. Hucks gave me sixty-seven of 
these, which were of different sizes, from 
half an inch to an inch and three quarters 
in length; they were hard and smooth, and 
looked on their surface like brownish flints. 

|P_222
21. In thirty-four of these, which I broke 
asunder in the middle, I found small hard 
Nucleus's, which were the beginnings on 
which these stony concretions were form'd. 
Twenty-three of these Nucleus's were very 
black stony substances, so hard that a file 
would not cut them; their out-sides, tho' 
uneven, were smooth; the insides of them, 
when broke, were rough, and looked like 
rusty iron. 

22. The Nucleus's or Kernels of eight of 
them were bits of hard greysih stones, per- 
haps pieces of the mill-stones which ground 
the malt. 

23. The other three Nucleus's were bits of 
brick or tile. 

24. The substance of the stones which 
were incrusted over these Nucleus's, was very 
hard and brown, somewhat like in colour 
to broken rosin; it was form'd in oval ring- 
lets, like the substance of the knots in deal 
boards. 

25. We have here, in many instances, a 
proof how apt calcarious incrusting particles 
are to adhere to the surfaces of hard bodies, 
which are not covered with a mucilaginous 
substance. 

|P_223
23. And there are many the like instances 
of large stones being thus formed, not only 
in Horses, but also in the bowels of Men, 
who have swallowed plum or cherry-stones, 
&c. And the cleaner such stones are from 
any pulp of the fruit, the more danger there 
is, that such strong concretions may be 
formed on them. 

[}Experiment IX. }]
1. I Put into a Florence Flask full of cold 
water, a small round redish gravel 
stone, about th of an inch diameter, and al- 
so a piece of a very hard Calculus; and hav- 
ing suspended the flask over a fire, when the 
water boiled, air arose in plenty from the 
gravel, whereby it was raised up in the wa- 
ter, and much agitated to and fro; so that it 
looked like the Nucleus of a comet, with 
its long train of air-bubbles arising from it. 

2. When it had boiled for an hour and 
half, on pouring in a little more hot water, 
it ceased to boil for a minute, and during 
that time, no air arose from either of the 
Calculi. 

3. An hour and half after that, I poured 
into the flask some more water, which was 
|P_224
much cooler than what was poured in be- 
fore: As soon as the water boiled, I expected 
air would arise again from the gravel; but 
none rose till it boil'd a considerable time: 
Then I took out the gravel, and found it 
wasted two thirds: But the very hard Calcu- 
lus was not sensibly wasted, notwithstanding 
some air arose from that also in boiling. 

4. I repeated the same Experiment with 
two other large hard gravel stones, and a 
piece of Rhenish Tartar, which was dissolv'd 
in a quarter of an hour; and found that when 
the flask was filled up with very hot water, 
then air arose from the gravel, soon after the 
water began to boil again: But when what 
was wasted by boiling, was filled up with 
cold water, then no air arose from the gra- 
vel till it had boiled a long time. 

5. Hence we see how the alternacies of 
hot and cold, warm and cool, as they fix the 
parts of the gravel, and thereby hinder their 
arising from it in the form of air, so they 
conduce much to the hardening of some bo- 
dies. Thus the parts of animals and vege- 
tables do gradually coalesce, and the Calculus
hardens more and more in the bladder. And 
thus by changes from very hot to sudden 
|P_225
cold, fatal coagulations of the blood are fre- 
quently made. 

6. If there be any thing in the common 
notion, that lying on one's back contributes 
to the increase of gravel in the Kidnies, by 
heating of them, then this Experiment will 
shew one cause which may contribute to it. 
Tho' I suspect, that a principal cause of the 
first beginning of the growth of gravel in 
the kidnies, is owing to the horizontal po- 
sture we are in when we lie in bed: In which 
posture one of the Kidnies being lower than 
the Bladder when we lie on one side, and 
both the Kidnies when we lie on our back; 
the Pelvis or cavity of the Kidnies becomes 
thereby the sink for the tartarine parts of the 
urine to settle in. And the urine being in 
that posture propelled by the Kidnies with a 
force not only equal to the perpendicular 
height of the Bladder above them, but also 
with a force sufficient to dilate the Bladder, 
and circumambient parts of the Abdomen; 
the urine must needs press (especially when 
the Bladder is in a good degree full) with a 
considerable force against the orifices of the 
excretory guts of the Kidnies; whereby the 
progress of the urine being in some degree 
retarded, it has more time to deposit its 
|P_226
Tartar in those small Ducts in the papillæ, 
where it is thought the first minute begin- 
nings of gravel are usually formed; it being 
in dissections found there. 

7. Q. Might not these inconveniencies be, 
in some measure, obviated, by lying as sol- 
diers do in their Barracks, not in a hori- 
zontal, but in a reclined posture, with the head 
and upper parts of the body considerably 
higher than the feet and lower parts? 

8. In this posture the urine flowing more 
easily down the Ureters, would not only more 
readily carry its tartarine recrement along with 
it; but its pressure against the orifices of the 
excretory Ducts being thereby taken off, it 
would more readily and in greater plenty be 
separated from the blood; for which reason 
it seems not improbable, that an erect posture 
of the body may contribute something, among 
other causes, that are with good reason usual- 
ly assigned, for the greater flow of urine in 
the day-time, than in the night. 

9. The care nature has taken to prevent 
the urine's regurgitating from the bladder, by 
means of valves placed at the lower orifices 
of the ureters, where they discharge them- 
selves into the bladder, shews the impor- 
tance of the urine's not pressing on the ori- 
|P_227
fices of the excretory ducts of the Pelvis. 
Ruysch observed the kidnies of a sheep ex- 
tended to the size of a pint, occasioned by 
stoppage of urine in the bladder; and doubt- 
less, lesser degrees of pressure on those 
Ducts, will propottionally incommode their 
secretions. 

10. And for the same reasons, it must 
needs be adviseable, to take care to lie alter- 
nately, sometimes on one side, and some- 
times on the other: For since, while we lie, 
suppose on the left side, the excretory 
Ducts and Sinus's of the kidney will be 
in a low depending posture, for the recre- 
ment of the urine to fix in them; while 
at the same time the excretory Ducts and 
Sinus's of the right kidney will be in such 
a superior posture, as that the separated urine 
freely flows from them, and vice versa when 
the right kidney is lowermost; therefore 
it seems to be of no small importance, to 
change sides alternately, that whatever sedi- 
ment may have been settled in the inferior 
kidney, may, by inverting it, be washed out, 
before it have time to fix into small sand 
and gravel, whence it too easily increases in- 
to a larger size. 

|P_228
11. And for the same reason it seems ad- 
visable, that when we feel the first begin- 
nings of uneasiness in one kidney, we should 
take care to have that be, for the most part, 
the uppermost kidney, to try if haply, by that 
means, the first beginning sand may be wash- 
ed away. 

12. It is to be suspected, that the first be- 
ginnings of Calculus in infants, may be fre- 
quently owing to their lying much upon their 
backs, as well as to their long retaining of 
urine in the bladder while they sleep much. 

13. I am sensible, that these may seem to 
some to be very trifling precautions; yet for 
the above-mentioned reasons I cannot think 
them such; tho' I am far from imagining, that 
they will be an effectual preventive for all; 
yet as they may possibly be beneficial to some, 
it will sure be worth the while to make so 
easy a trial, in a case of so great importance 
to our welfare. 

14. Helmont says, he was once afraid of 
lying on one side constantly, lest the urine 
should not pass freely from the lower kidney 
to the superior bladder, besides what impedi- 
ment it might suffer from the pressure of the 
bowels. But he was eased, he says, of this 
fear, when he found two persons, who lay 
|P_229
constantly, the one on the right, and the 
other on the left side, and yet were neither 
of them troubled with Calculi in those lower 
kidnies, but one of them in the upper. But 
notwithstanding this and some other like in- 
stances that I have known, yet it seems from 
the above-mentioned reasons, most likely 
that the lower kidney should be most liable 
to breed sand and gravel. 

15. Many observing one kidney to be free 
from Calculi, and the other not, concluded 
it was owing to the different soundness of 
the kidnies; some alledging that the excre- 
tory Ducts in the morbid kidney were too 
narrow, others that it was too much relaxed; 
which they are found often to be: Which 
relaxation may probably be owing to stop- 
ping the secretion of urine, and to a long 
series of pain from the Calculus, not that 
the relaxation was the antecedent cause, but 
the effect of the Calculus. 

16. I have known some instances of per- 
sons who, in a fit of the gravel, have thought 
they have been relieved much the sooner, 
by kneeling on the floor, and leaning with 
their elbows in the seat of a chair: Tho 
bowels in this depending posture not pres- 
sing on the ureters, they can dilate the more, 
|P_230
to give a freer passage for any stone that is 
in them to descend. 

[}Experiment X. }]
1. WHEN we consider the great quanti- 
ties of air that are in our food, 
whether animal or vegetable, (without which 
it would be no food) and at the same time 
reflect on the disposition that most of the li- 
quors which we drink have to deposit tar- 
tarine concretions, we cannot wonder to see 
the urine of some persons so much disposed 
to breed the Calculus: Which quality of the 
urine seems to arise in a greater measure from 
our drink, than from our food; our food, 
especially that which is boiled, being more 
mucilaginous than the greatest part of the 
liquors which we drink, and consequently 
less apt to deposit its Tartar: Of which con- 
jecture we have some further confirmation 
from hence, viz. that by comparing the 
several airs generated by distillation, fermen- 
tation, or effervescence, from animal and ve- 
getable substances, with the airs generated from 
their Tartars, which are concretions mostly 
from their fluid parts, we find that the Tar- 
tars yield considerably more air, than the so- 
|P_231
lid substances of animals or vegetables: Which 
shews the aptness of fluid mediums for tar- 
tarine concretions to be formed in. And 
this holds true not only in urine, and fer- 
mented liquors, as wine, &c. but the same 
may be observed in most waters. Thus I 
find upon trial, that the incrustations of pe- 
trifying springs are of a tartarine nature; as 
are also the incrustations, which adhere to 
the bottom and sides of vessels in which wa- 
ter has been frequently boiled. 

2. For three hundred and eighteen grains, 
or about half a cubic inch of petrified in- 
crustations from the Cold Bath in Madingly
wood near Cambridge being distilled in 
the iron retort, fig. 38. p. 266. Vol. I. there 
arose from it three hundred and twenty-six 
cubic inches of air, of which fifty-four cubes 
lost its elasticity in six days. 

3. And from a hundred and six grains of 
the same substance mingled with spirit of 
salt, there arose in fermentation seventy-two 
cubes of air, all which in seven days lost its 
elasticity. 

4. And it was the same with the incrusta- 
tion of a tea-kettle, in which well-water had 
been boiled, which well was dug below a 
stratum of gravel into a blue clay: From 
|P_232
3/4ths of a cubic inch of this incrustation, I 
obtained, by distillation, three hundred and 
twenty-four cubic inches of air, of which 
one hundred and eighty lost their elasticity 
in four days. 

5. And from a like quantity of the much 
harder incrustation of the New River water 
there arose, in distillation, two hundred and 
thirty-four cubes, of which in four days a 
hundred and eight lost their elasticity. 

6. The air arises much slower from these 
substances in distillation, than from the Tar- 
tar of wine, or from the Calculus Humanus; 
for which reason a longer continuance of an 
intense degree of heat is requisite. 

7. From three hundred and twenty-eight 
grains, or about half a cubic inch of the 
powdered incrustation of boiled well-water, 
let fall on two cubes of spirit of salt, there 
arose eighty-one cubic inches of air, all which 
lost its elasticity in seven days. 

8. Three hundred and twenty-eight grains 
of the last-mentioned incrustation, with two 
cubes of oil of sulphur, generated two hun- 
dred and sixteen cubes of air, all which did 
also lose its elasticity in seven days. 

9. The same with the like quantity of oil 
of vitriol generated a hundred and ninety- 
|P_233
eight cubes, of which a hundred and twenty- 
four were resorbed in seven days. 

10. A hundred and forty-six grains of in- 
crustation of a tea-kettle from water that 
came from chalk at Basingstoke in Hamp- 
shire, generated with spirit of salt, a hun- 
dred and twenty-six cubic inches of air, of 
which seventy-two lost their elasticity in such 
plenty from the water, that in the space of 
two years the crust was half an inch thick. 

11. Hence we see, that these incrustations 
are of a tartarine nature: They adhere also 
like Tartar, not only as sediment to the bot- 
tom, but also to the sides of vessels: Whence 
we may not unreasonably conclude, that 
many waters which produce these, have prin- 
ciples in them, which may promote the 
growth of the stone in the Kidnies and Blad- 
der. For which quality some waters are more 
remarkable than others, as those of Paris, 
which so fur up the pipes with these tartarine 
incrustations, that the water cannot pass. And 
it is well known, that the inhabitants of Pa- 
ris are more subject to the stone in the blad- 
der, than those of most other cities. An ar- 
gument that liquors contribute more to the 
breeding of the Calculus than our food. 
|P_234
Of which we have a further proof in the 
instance of small wines, which abound with 
Tartar, and which are too well known to 
subject those who drink them to the stone 
and gout. 

