

[^Sample 1: book - ^]

|P_
[^A horizontal double line spanning the whole page. ^]
[}PHYSIOLOGIA;

OR, A 

COURSE of LECTURES

ON THE 

Visceral Anatomy and Living
Oeconomy of the Human Body, &c.}]
[^A horizontal line spanning the whole page.^]
[}LECTURE I.}]
[}Of the Animal Fibres.}]
§. 1. THE most: simple parts of the 
human body are either fluid 
or solid. The fluid parts be-
ing of divers kinds, we shall 
hereafter consider in their most convenient 
places. But here the solids, which make 
the most simple and true basis of the body, 
come first to be considered before the histo-
ry of the other parts.

|P_2
[}REMARK.}]
A body, philosophically speaking, is any ex-
tended and resisting object of our senses; whose 
parts have more or less an attractive and cohesive 
force one to another. If this cohesion betwixt 
the parts are strong enough to keep them in their 
situations (contrary to the force by which they 
tend to the earth's center) and preserve the na-
tural figure of the body, we call it a solid; but 
if this cohesion be so weak that the gravitation 
of parts brings them to a level, or to a portion 
of the earth's convexity, when left to themselves, 
we call it a fluid; but if the cohesion of parts 
be neither strong enough to retain the figure, 
nor weak enough to let them flow fo a level, we 
call the body soft, in various degrees 'till you 
come to the cohesion of a solid, beyond which 
we count hardness. Hence we see, that, by 
lessening the cohesion and contact of parts, the 
same body may be either solid, soft or fluid; 
as, e. g. Resin or butter with different degrees 
of heat, lessening the attraction of cohesion in 
the constituent particles.

§. 2. The solid parts of animals and ve-
getables have this fabric in common, that 
their elements, or the smallet parts we can 
see by the finest microscope, are either fibres, 
or an unorganized concreet.

[}REMARK.}]
(1.) Elements are the smallest and most sim-
ple particles we can descend to in the composi-
tion of bodies. And these, which we are to 
consider as the keys of nature, are such as we 
are either led to by sense and reason or by rea-
|P_3
son only. These last are, therefore, termed onto-
logical elements or primitive atoms, from their 
first observer Democritus, in contradistinction 
to the four common or physical elements of Ari-
stotle. For though matter be in the mind infi-
nitely divisible, 'tis not actually so in nature, 
but to a certain degree. And from these indi-
visible or atomical particles, differing only in 
bulk and figure, by a various combination, a-
rise those sensible or universally extended homo-
geneous bodies we call physical elements, be-
cause we see nature uses them by mixture, tex-
ture and organization to form all the bodies in 
the universe. Such are the infinite expansion of 
æther; our limited sphere of air; the more 
confined body water; and that still less body 
which we call earth.

(2.) ÆTHER is that comipound, ever highly 
elastic and subtilest of all fluids, which is ex-
tended by reciprocal undulations throughout the 
universe (our vacuum's or exhausted glasses not 
excepted) so as (by moving with a certain cele-
rity in direct lines) to form light; by refleftion 
and refrction, colours; by attraction and col-
lission with the other elements, heat and fire, 
less degrees of which we call cold. 


(3.) Air is that diaphanous and compressible 
fluid which is extended about a degree round 
the terraqueous globe, being with us about 
46,656,000,000 times more dense and sluggish 
than æther, betwixt which and air there is a very 
great affinity or attractive force, as their density; 
i. e. the air contiguous to the æther takes in and 
concentrates the æther proportionally to its 
greater density., by which it is rendered more 
springy and active, with this difference that the 
air, by contact and cohesion in the parts of bo-
|P_4
dies, becomes solid and unelastic (but æther ne-
ver); from whence again, by heat, fire or dis-
solution of parts being seperated, its elasticity 
returns. This element has a near affinity or re-
lation to water, because it eagerly takes up rari-
fied water into itself, as water again drinks up 
a portion of air within its contact; so that air 
and water, actuated by æther, make the levers 
and wedges by which nature performs all her 
changes in bodies either synthetically or analy-
tically. And it serves as the common medium 
of communication betwixt us and all bodies.

(4.) Water is a colourless, insipid, inodo-
rous and uninflammable liquor, strongly related 
or of near affinity both to air and earth, but 
more particularly the last, since it readily ab-
sorbs them, as they absorb it. This owes it 
fluidity to a certain degree of heat, since with 
a heat, two thirds less than that of our blood, 
it congeals; and with about twice the heat of 
our blood it boils, beyond which it can be made 
no hotter.

(5.) Earth, as an element, is a solid, opaque, 
angular, friable, chalky substance of such small 
volatile particles, that it readily diffuses itself 
through air and water, and resides invisibly in 
them; as earth eagerly imbibing both air and 
water, by their means forms the permanent basis 
and growth of all mineral, vegetable and animal 
bodies.—A small particle of æther, air and 
water combined will, from their fluidity, form a 
spherule, consequently insipid and inodorous; 
but coming into strict union, round a more 
dense, angular particle of earth, will be a conoide 
corpuscle, of which the spherule will be the basis, 
and the least point of the earth the apex. Such 
a particle, irritating the smell and taste by its 
|P_5
figure and density, volatile from its minuteness, 
and strongly attracting both air, water, and 
earth, (especially the last) we call an acid, fluid 
salt. And such parts again variously combined 
with light earth and the other elements, will form 
a bituminous, greasy, fulphurous or oily substance, 
combustible or inflammable, as Sir I. Newton 
observes. Thus mineral elements, salts and sul-
phurs taken from the earth, do, by heat and or-
ganisation, become vegetable in plants; those 
of plants are changed into animals, and those 
of animals into one another, without ever carry-
ing the dissolution to the minima naturalia, or 
atoms of Democritus. An acid is thus by the 
reed neutralised into sugar; in the common ra-
dish, pellitory of the wall, &c. 'tis made ni-
trous; in the horse-radish, onion, &c. alcaline; 
and alcalies, (foot, pot-ash, rotten flesh) are a-
gain in the vine and grape changed first into a 
four and then into a saccharine juice, &c. so 
that out of a few simple elements (as in the notes 
of music) by combinations arise all the varieties 
of medicinal and other substances. These com-
bined by mere mixture and contexture, as in mi-
nerals, salts, gums, cartilages, glue, &c. make 
an unorganised concreet; but when the parts 
combined perform any motion in a living body, 
wether plant or animal, we call them a ma-
chine, or if complex an organ; of which fibres 
or flexible elastic threads are the most simple, 
and universally compose the rest. So elastic 
globules, with a watry albumen or gelly, are the 
basis of all the circulating juices, that of the 
nerves not excepted. 

§. 3. A fibre in general may be mathe-
matically considered as resembling a line made 
|P_6
of points, having a moderate breadth; or 
rather geometrically as a slender cylinder. 
And that the more constant or permanent 
parts thereof are earth, is demonstrated from 
a calcination, or a long continued putre-
faction. 

[}REMARK.}]
An animal or human body is not improperly 
said to be made up of clay or slimy earth, since all 
the solids (which are composed of fibres) and 
even the permanent or globular fluids which cir-
culate, are formed of chalky particles like those 
of pipe clay cemented together by glue or gelly; 
as you may see by burning a lump of blood or 
a bone in a clear fire, where after the air, water, 
salt and oil, which compose the glue, are expel-
led and consumed, you have a white, friable, 
chalky earth, coming the nearest to virgin or 
elementary earth of any we know. So likewise 
by disease or putrefaction in a spina ventosa of 
the bones. And we see these stamina or gluey 
particles of earth, which compose all the mi-
nute, solid and fluid machinulæ of the body, are 
prepared from our ingesta passing not only the 
chylificative, sanguineous and serous vessels, but 
also for fome parts through the brain and nerves, 
before they are applied as nutritious matter; 
requiring a healthy strong state both of vessels 
and humours to duly prepare them as to size, 
quantity and quality, as well as to apply them, 
(a defect of which we see in rickets, scorbutic, 
venereal, cases); whence 'tis somewhat strange 
our great Boerhaave should in his 21st prac-
tical aphorism, conceive them as immutable in 
their soft glutinous state within cur bodies, as 
|P_7
in the dry rigid condition of a goldsmith's cup-
ped, after passing the fire. 

§. 4. These earthy particles have their 
connexion and power of cohesion not from 
themselves, or a mere contact, but from the 
intermediate glue placed betwixt them. This 
we know from the experiments mentioned 
above (§. 3.); and from the easy experiment 
by which a burnt hair, whose parts yet hang 
together, recovers a degree of firmness by 
dipping in water or oil. Also the remains of 
ivory or bone shavings, whose gelly has been 
extraded, become friable.

[}REMARK.}]
These experiments sufficiently prove that the 
degree of cohesion in the parts ot a fibre by 
which 'tis said to be strong or weak, lax or rigid, 
depends chiefly on the quantity and tenacity of 
the intermediate connecting glue.

§. 5. That this glue is composed of oil 
combined with water by the vital attrition in 
animals, appears again from the chemical 
analysis of bones and hair; from the jelly of 
bones, ivory, and horns; and from the na-
ture of our aliments themselves. Nor is 
there any kind of glue that could more pow-
erfully join tbs parts of animals together; 
as we experience in fish-glue, and that of 
joiners or cabinet-makers, &c. See §. 15. 
ult. 

|P_8
[}REMARK.}]
Add that this oil is dispofed to unite with the 
water by attrition from a considerable portion of 
an ammoniacal or neutral salt joined with a good 
deal of unelastic air; which salt we obtain in an 
alcaline volatile state by distillation. 

§. 6. Earthy particles then (§. 3.) cohe-
ring longitudinally, and tied together by an 
intervening cohesive glue, (§. 5.) compose 
first one of the least or most simple fibres; 
such as we have a knowledge of rather from 
reason than sense. 

[}REMARK.}]
The finest microscopes have been hitherto in-
sufficient to lead us to a fight of the smallest 
moving and nervous fibrils, and still less can 
we ever expect from them to get any sensible 
idea of the mechanism by which sensation and 
motion are effected. For how motion is modu-
lated to produce animal sense, or how animal 
sense and will can produce motion, we can only 
conjecture, and never certainly know. We pro-
ceed, therefore, to compound visible fibres. 

§. 7. But the least fibres which appear last 
to the sight, if you will take up with their 
first appearance and the established opinion, 
are of two kinds. 

[}R E M A R K.}]
From the figure of these two kinds of fibres, 
as we shall presently see (§. 8, 9.) we may distin-
guish the former by the title of filamentary, and 
the latter of membranous. 

|P_9
§. 8. The first kind of these fibres (§. 7.) 
is lineal, namely, such a form as makes their 
length considerably large in proportion to 
their breadth; and which, by disposing of 
the elementary particles in a right line, must 
of course lay them generally parallel with 
the neighbouring or contiguous fibres. Ex-
amples of such fibres we see in the bones, and 
most easily in those of a fœtus; and likewise 
in the tendons, ligaments and muscles: only 
we must here always remember, that the 
eye never reaches to the smallest fibres, but 
to larger ones made up the smallest, and like 
to them in slenderness, placed together in a 
rectilineal course. That these are not diffe-
rent from the smallest fibres, we are per-
suaded by the most accurate microscopes of 
Muyse and Lewenhoeck; by which, the 
muscular fibres divided even to the last, ap-
pear similar to the larger, till, at length, 
they seem mere lines, like spiders threads. 

§. 9. The second kind of fibres (§. 7.) 
are those which are conjoined with a breadth 
frequently larger than their length, in form-
ing what is commonly called the cellular
tunic or membrane; tho' the name tunic or 
membrane is on many accounts improperly 
given to it. 

[}REMARK.}]
From what has been said, we may admire na-
ture no less for her wife œconomy than simplicity, 
in thus forming all that variety of parts we see in 
an animal from one simple mass of clay or slimy 
|P_10
matter, compounded of earth and glue; from 
whence the body is not only augmented from a 
single point in the ovum to its full growth and 
stature; but, like the timbers of a ship, is also 
every day repaired during life, 'till, at length, 
not two jots of the old or first materials re-
main. This renovation of parts is made flower 
in some constitutions, and in some organs, than 
in others. How quickly the animal humours 
with the hair, nails, &c. are renewed every one 
knows: and we may venture to say, that once 
in three years the change is universal; at the 
end of which time, tho' a man remains the same 
identical person, he is not the same matter.— 
But we proceed from these simple fibres to the 
next least compounded solid which they compose, 
viz. the tela vel substantia cellulosa spongioides, the 
cellular web-like substance. 

§. l0. The said cellular substance is made 
up partly of the forementioned simple fibrills 
(§. 8, 9.) and partly by an infinite number of 
little plates or scales, which, joined in various 
directions intercept fmall cells and web-like 
spaces; and by extending round every, even 
the least moving solid parts of the body, 
conjoins them altogether in such a manner as 
not only sustains, but allows them a free and 
ample motion at the same time. But in dif-
ferent parts of the body we observe a great 
variety of this web-like substance, in respect 
of the proportion betwixt the membraneous 
sides and intercepted cells, as well as the 
breadth and strength of those sides, and the 
nature of their contained liquor, which is 
|P_11
sometimes more watry, and sometimes more 
oily. 

[}REMARK.}]
The extension of this substance, not only with 
the skin round the whole body, but also round 
every viscus or organ, and round every individual 
moving fibre or vessel of them, into the cavities 
of the bones, and even the substance of the brain 
and its medulla, is a modern and wonderful disco-
very of anatomists, by which we have great 
light into many otherwise obscure diseases. This 
substance in its ultimate or finest state being 
composed of simple membranes, when com-
pacted and convoluted, gives birth to the least 
or most simple vessels, which, again reslected 
through plates of the same substance compacted 
together, make compound and vascular mem-
branes, to the consideration of which we next 
proceed. 

§. 11. Out of this net-like cellular sub-
stance compacted by a concretion of the 
membranous plates or partitions, and pressed 
together by the force of the incumbent 
muscles and distending fluids, arise other 
broad and flat plates or skins in various parts 
of the body, which being generally disposed 
in one and the same direction, seem to have 
yet a better right to the title of membrane, 
than the former; and these being convoluted 
into cones and cylinders, pervaded by a flux 
of some juice or liquors brought to them, 
put on the name of vessels, or else being ex-
tended round some space that is in a plane 
|P_12
parallel to itself, we call it a tunic or coat. 
But that tunics or coats are formed out of the 
cellular substance is proved to ocular inspec-
tion, especially in the aorta or dura-mater, 
by maceration; and the coats of the muscles 
are thus evidently of a cellular fabric, while 
they resemble the texture of other mem-
branes; from a degeneration of the pericar-
dium as a true membrane into the cellular 
substance, or membranes of the great blood 
vessels belonging to the heart; from the ori-
gin of the hard and thick membranes which 
are about encysted tumors, and which are 
formed only in the cellular substance; lastly, 
from the easy change of the dartos coat of the 
testicle, and the nervous tunic of the intestines, 
by inflation, into the cellular fabric. 

§. 12. All the vessels with which we 
see tunics commonly painted, are an ad-
dition to the cellular net-work, and in no 
wise constitute the nature of a membrane, 
but are superadded to the membrane itself, 
which is first formed of the cellular net-like 
substance. Betwixt the mashes or spaces of 
the intestinal net-work of vessels, perfectly 
well filled by the Ruyschian art of injection, 
we still see that the white cellular substance 
which remains, greatly exceeds the bulk of 
the vessels, although, by their preternatural 
distention, they take up more room by filling 
more of the space. But for membranes 
compounded of fibres, interwove or decussa-
|P_13
ting each other, I know of none such, un-
less you will take ligamentary or tendinous 
fibres for them, which yet are spread only 
over the face of some true membrane. 

§. 13. This cellular web-like substance in 
the human body is found throughout the 
whole; namely, wherever any vessel or mov-
ing muscular fibre can be traced, and this, 
without the least exception, that I know of, 
in any part whatever. See remark of §. 10. 
and of §. 17. following. 

§. 14. The other elementary substance of 
the human body {§. 2.) viz. concrementum 
glutinosum chondroeides, which cannot be 
truly called either a fibrous or cellular plate, 
is a mere glue evasated and concreted, not 
within the fibres, but in spaces betwixt them. 
In the bones this extravasated substance is 
manifest enough; for you see the fibres very 
distinct in the bones of a fœtus, in the in-
tervals betwixt which you perceive the ves-
sels running; so that every bone in the skull 
on all sides resembles the teeth of a comb. 
But this fabric is so altered in an adult person, 
that a cartilaginous juice being extravasated 
in the spaces betwixt the fibres, we see small 
plates formed of it. 

§. 15. But here the course of nature seems 
to be such, that even the filamentary fibres 
(§. 3.) are all first formed of such a transfu-
sed glue. And that the membranous or scaly 
fibres of the cellular substance (§. 7.) are thus 
formed appears, from those cellular fibres 
|P_14
produced in the thorax from a concreted va-
pour or serum transfused through the surface 
of inflamed lungs, which are thereby con-
joined to the pleura; for these perfeftly re-
semble the true and natural cellular substance. 
The same appears also from a comparison of 
the fœtus with an adult; for the large sub-
cutaneous cellular substance has in a fœtus a 
mere jelly in its stead interposed betwixt the 
skin and muscles, which last we observe very 
firm in a fœtus. This theory is again illu-
strated (1.) synthetically, by the fibrous cake 
one may draw out from blood by stirring it 
round with a probe; and from the mem-
brane, which may be in like manner formed 
thence according to the experiment of Ruysch, 
and Albinus's membrane from mucus; last-
ly, from the formation of a polypus, silk 
and glue. (2.) Analytically, we see, from 
diseases, that the bony fibres are formed first 
of a compacted glue; because the hardest 
bones, by a dissolution of their glue, return 
again into cartilage, flesh, and jelly: such 
experiments we make on the bones of fish 
and other animals with Papin's digestor. 

§. 16. The anthropogenesis, therefore, or 
formation of the human solids, seems begun 
when a gelatinous water, like the white of 
an egg, with a small portion of fine creta-
ceous earth, runs together into a thread, from 
some pressure, the causes of which are not 
our present concern. Such a filament, by 
the mutual attraction of cohesion, intercept-
|P_15
ing spaces betwixt itself and others, helps 
to form a part of the cellular net-like sub-
stance, after having acquired some toughness 
from the neighbouring earthy particles, which 
remain after an expulsion of the redundant 
aqueous glue. And in this net-like substance, 
wherever a greater pressure is imposed on its 
scales or sides, they turn into fibres and mem-
branes or tunics; and in the bones, lastly, 
they concrete with an unorganised glue. 
(§. 14). Hence, in general, all parts of the 
body, from the softest to the hardest, seem 
to differ no otherwise than as the former have 
more of the earthy particles more closely 
compacted together, with less of the aqueous 
glue; while in the softest parts there is less 
earth, and more glue. See the remark of 
§. 3. 


[^An oval shaped decorative figure in the centre of the page.^]
|P_16
[}LECTURE II.}]
[}Of the cellular substance and its fat.}]
§. 17. WE have now seen (§. l0.) that 
the cellular web-like substance 
is made up of fibres and plates, which are 
neither hollow nor vascular, but solid; al-
though they are afterwards painted by an ac-
cesion of vessels. But the principal diffe-
rences of its fabric are the following. In 
some parts of the body it is open and loose, 
being formed of long and distant plates; in 
others, it is thin and compact, being made 
up of short fibres, concreted together. I 
find it thinest and of the shortest fibres, be-
twixt the sclerotica and choroides of the eye; 
and betwixt the arachnoides and pia mater 
of the brain. I also find it very thin, but 
more tender and conspicuous, betwixt every 
two coats of the intestines, stomach, bladder 
and ureters: 'tis also thin and empty under 
the skin of the penis, forehead, and in the 
lungs, in which last we call it vesicles. 'Tis 
composed of yet longer fibres, where it is 
extended over the larger vessels, under the 
name of a capsule or vagina; as through the 
viscera, and particularly the liver and lungs. 
Its principal use is to bind together the con-
tiguous membranes, vessels and fibres in such 
a manner as to allow them a due or limited 
motion. But the cellular substance, so far 
|P_17
as we have hitherto described it, hardly ever 
admits of any fat into the cells; which are 
rather moistened by a watry vapour. that is 
somewhat gelatinous and oily, exhaled out 
of the arteries and received again into the 
veins. The truth of this is easily demon-
strable from injections of oil and water, either 
alone or with fish-glue, made in all parts of 
the body. When this vapour is, by inflam-
mation too glutinous, or, from any cause, 
absent or abolished, the small fibres grow one 
to another, and the contiguous membranes 
or plates are cemented into one, with a loss 
of their motion. 

§. 18. The cellular substance and its plates 
or scales, are still more loose and open where 
it divides the muscles and all their fibres (even 
to the ultimate fibre); and likewise where it 
surrounds and sustains the least vessels with 
their free motion. That within the cavities 
of the bones is also made up of bony plates,
with membranous ones intermixed; and last-
ly, it is the most loose and open of all, round 
the surface of the body on all sides, betwixt 
the muscles and the skin. 

§. 19. Into the empty spaces of this cel-
lular substance, (§. 18.) almost every where, 
in the fœtus is poured at first a jeily, and 
afterwards a fat; which at first is grumous 
or curdy, but afterwards clear and leasy; 
namely, a thick, insipid, inflammable liquor, 
which, in a cold air, congeals, in some de-
gree, into a solid, especially about the kid-
|P_18
neys of herbivorous and horned cattle; but 
is softer and yellower in carnivorous ones; 
and while they are living, it seems a mere 
fluid, or very nearly so. 

§. 20. Through this cellular web-like sub-
stance the small vessels are spread and rami-
fied in all parts of the body, from whose ar-
terial extremities the fat is deposited into the 
cells, and afterwards absorbed by the venal 
orifices. This passage, from the arteries into 
the adipose cells, is so free and short, that 
there must needs be very large mouths by 
which they open, and by which they give 
admittance to injefted mercury, air, water, 
dissolved fish-glue or jelly, and oil not ex-
cepted which is always very sluggish in pas-
sing through the vefssels, even of living ani-
mals. The oily fat, in this substance, is 
seperated and expelled from the artery, not 
by any long ducts, but by transuding on all 
sides through the whole extent of the vessel; 
insomuch that when an artery is filled or in-
jected with water, there is no part of the 
surrounding cellular substance, but what 
swells with the moisture. How quickly it 
is collected from the arteries, appears from the 
speedy renovation of it, by a returning fatness 
after acute diseases. See §. 25. 

§. 21. But this return of the fat absorbed 
by the veins, we are taught from the sudden 
effects which labour or exercise of the 
muscles more especially has in consuming 
the oil of very fat animals; also from the 
|P_19
consumption of our fat in fevers, snd from 
the cure of dropsies, where the water trans-
fused into the cellular substance, is in a man-
ner absorbed and thrown out by the intesti-
nal tube; and lastly, from the transuding of 
water and oil from the venal orifices, when 
injected by the syringe. Whether any of the 
nerves pour out their contents into, or are 
spread upon, the adipose cells, is an impro-
bable question. But 'tis certain they in most 
parts run through this substance, and here-
by divide, in their course, into the minutest 
filaments, so small that you can no longer 
trace them by the knife. But then the fat is 
both insensible and unirritable,

§. 22. With regard to the sponge-like 
communications of this substance, 'tis re-
markable, the intervals or spaces betwixt the 
plates or scales that make up their sides in the 
cellular membrane, are every where open, 
and agree in forming one continuous cavity 
throughout the whole body. This appears 
from the inflation which butchers make by a 
wound of the skin, and which being once 
received into this substance, is easily driven so 
as to raise the skin all over the body; and 
likewise from an emphysema, in which the 
air received by a wound of the skin, being 
retained, causes a swelling throughout the 
whole surface of the body; and finally from 
diseases, in which a watry or ferous humour 
is deposited into all the cells of this net-like 
substance, throughout the body. That none 
|P_20
of the cellular fabric is excepted from this 
communication, appears from wounds or ac-
cidents, wherein even the vitreous body itself 
of the eye has received the status of an em-
physema; and again from disease, in which 
the gelatinous ferum of a dropsy has been 
found transfused even into the cavernous bo-
dies of the penis. 

§. 23. The great importance and ufs of 
this cellular substance, in the animal fabric, 
must be evident to all who consider that from 
this part alone proceeds the due and healthy 
firmness, strength and stability not only of 
all the arteries, nerves and muscular moving 
fibres of the body, but likewise of all the 
fleshy parts and viscera, which are made up 
of the former, folded together within this 
substance: and even the figures, cavities, 
pliability or flexures and motions of the soft 
parts depend entirely on the cellular mem-
brane, in some places of a lax and in others 
of a more close and hard fabric. That out 
of this substance joined with vessels, nerves, 
muscular and tendinous fibres (a great part of 
all which are before formed of this substance 
only) all the viscera, all the muscles and 
glands, with their ligaments and capsules, are 
entirely composed; and that only from the 
different length, tension, quantity or pro-
portion of this the diversity of our glands 
and viscera arises; and lastly, that this alone 
makes up by far the greatest part of the 
whole body, as we are certain, although the 
|P_21
whole be not formed out of cellular fila-
ments of this kind.

§. 24. The uses of the fat are various as 
to facilitate the motions of the muscles in all 
parts, lessen their attrition against each other, 
and prevent a stiffness or rigidity; it fills up 
the intermediate spaces betwixt the muscles 
in such a manner, with the cavities about 
many of the viscera, that it readily yields to 
their motions, and yet supports them when 
at rest; it serves as a stratum or bed to con-
duct and defend the vessels in their course to 
all parts; it gives an uniform extension to the 
skin, and serving as a cushion to ease the 
weight of the body in many parts, at the 
same time it renders the whole of a comely, 
agreeable shape; it probably by returning 
and mixing with many of the humours, a-
bates their acrimony; it has a principal share 
in forming the matter of the bile, and by 
transuding through the cartilaginous incrusta-
tions of the bones, it mixes with the articu-
lar liniment or synovia; also by exhaling in 
a living person from the mesentery, mesoco-
lon, omentum and round the kidneys, it lu-
bricates the surfaces of the viscera with an 
oily emolient vapour, and by interposing be-
twixt their integuments, prevents their grow-
ing one to another. 

§. 25. The fat is deposited into the cells of 
this substance by much sleep, with rest of body 
and mind; whence being collected in too great 
a quantity, it proves injurious by compressing 
|P_22
the veins, and by causing too great a resistance 
to the heart it makes a person short-breathed 
and liable to an apoplexy or a dropsy. The 
same humour is repelled from the cells into the 
veins, and being rapidly moved along the ar-
teries, the excessive motion will not allow it to 
go off laterally by the secerning pores to the 
cells: whether this celerity of the blood be, by 
violent exercise, watchings, cares of the mind, 
a salivation or a fever. Thus it causes an increase 
of acute diseases, tinges the urine of an high 
colour, and forms a great part of its hypo-
stasis or sediment. After a sudden consump-
tion of it, 'tis soon renewed again from good 
juices, or healthy humours: but in a languid 
valetudinary habit, a gelatinous serum, instead 
of fat, is deposited into the cells; and this 
causes the dropsy we call anasarca, affecting 
the whole habit, together with an external 
hydrocele or watry swelling. 

[}REMARK.}]
Hitherto we have surveyed the œconomy of 
nature in her wise formation of the most simple 
solid machinulæ of our body, namely such parts 
as by their form and elasticity are capable of a 
reciprocal action, so as to perpetuate for a num-
ber of years the motion that is once given them. 
These we see she has formed of the most perma-
nent earthy particles incrusted with an oily glue; 
which as they are prepared by a continued unde-
qual attrition of fluids through a numerous se-
ries of vessels, must receive a spherical figure[/1./], 
that will be apt to change by compressure, at 
|P_23
least on their surface, which consists of a soft 
yielding glue. Such particles then having the 
same power of mutual tendency or attraction, 
will each of them apart be spherical; but when 
two or more of them meet in contact, their 
surfaces must yield in proportion to the density 
and vicinity of their central contents, and from 
round, become depressed spheroids or cakes, 
whence both their contacts and cohesion will in-
crease, yet so as to allow a free motion of the 
central parts to slide one by the other so long as 
the quantity and tenacity of the surrounding 
glue answers to the moving distractile force ap-
plied, A number of such parts then united 
longitudinally will form a simple, elastic and 
distractle fibril; or six of them conjoined to-
gether, at equal distances, will form a simple, 
elastic and least globule: and those we see make 
the primary and most simple instruments of mo-
tion in an animal body, to the state or disposi-
tion of which all the other solid or fluid parts 
they compose correspond in the strength and 
action. Here the solids, as the main spring, have 
the predominant ruling force over their elastic 
contained fluids, which, as the regulating or 
weaker spring must answer in their nature and 
motion to the former; whence the diversity of 
native constitutions.—If the central points of 
these earthy stamina, in a fibre or globule, come 
close enough to cause a due cohesion of parts, 
which may sufficiently yield to and return the 
given impulse required, 'tis said to be healthy 
and robust. If their cohesion be too close, and 
connecting glue too tough or dry, they are said 
to be rigid and unactive; but if they recede far-
ther, have a glue too watry, and cohere less 
than suffices to receive and return the due vi-
|P_24
vibrations, they are then said to be weak and 
lax. And these two last are the morbid condi-
tions which call for the care of the physician. 
What has been said of these primary simple ma-
chinulæ is true in a greater degree of the more 
compound membranes, vessels and viscera which 
they compofe; and also of the lymphatic, serous 
and red spherules, with respect to their consti-
tuent parts, and to each other. 

Hence we see, (1) that life is the mere 
motion, and health a certain latitude or degree 
of that motion, betwixt the elastic solids and 
fluids, extended through a series of vascular 
parts gradually more compounded.(2.) That 
an excess or defect in this motion alters the 
texture towards death or disease.(3.) That 
moderate exercise repeated makes the parts 
strong and healthy, by keeping them moveable 
upon each other, by expelling the redundant 
watry parts, and giving the whole glue a due 
firmness and cohesion.(4.) That one of the 
least vessels closed into a fibre must be stronger 
than that vessel was before? from the in-
creased contact and cohesion. (5.} That a cal-
lus is tougher and less distractile than original 
flesh? because it is less vascular and without the 
interposition of cellular substance; whence also 
it will be little or nothing perspirabie.( 6.) That 
the strength, rigidity or laxity of the fluids and 
solids are correspondent one to the other; i. e. 
lax solids will make lax thin fluids, whence a 
weaker reaction of them in the vessels, &c. 
which will pave the way to flow, cold diseases; 
as the contrary will dispose to acute inflammatory 
diseases.(7.) That astiringents are such as ap-
proximate the solid stamina and thicken their 
connecting glue; whence they stop evacuations 
|P_25
by thickening the humours and lessening the 
diameters of the vessels: so that given sparingly 
in laxity of the folids and fluids they corrobo-
rate; but in excess, and in old, laborious rigid 
subjects, with an inflammatory lentor, (or even 
in a cold viscidity, unless joined with stimulants) 
they coagulate the juices and suppress the actions 
of the solids.(8.) That oils relax without 
weakening, because they have a greater tenacity 
than water; which last dissolves the connecting 
glue and weakens the automatic action or elasti-
city of the stamina and fibres thence arising. 
For which reason large and sudden evacuations 
leaving the solids ioose and unactive upon the 
fluids, cause faintings and weakness.(9.) We 
see that where there is a natural laxity of the 
blood and its vessels, as in women and children; 
where they move with a greater impetus than 
suits their cohesion, as in fevers and periodical 
hæmorrhages; or where the connecting glue is 
too much dissolved by a putrid alcaline conta-
gion, as often in eruptive and epidemical fevers, 
there may be an extravasion (according to the 
degree or multitude of those causes) either of 
serous or sanguineous fluids into the cellular sub-
stance of the skin, and other larger internal ca-
vities, without a rupture of vessels, in which man-
ner flow the courses of women. Hence by a 
dissolution of the connecting glue, from a vene-
real or scorbutic acrimony, the bones, vessels 
and the elastic globules break easily; whence 
frequent hæmorrhages with livid cutaneous spots, 
&c. And thus hæmorrhages happen oftenest in 
the nose and lungs, because the arteries have their 
coats there thinner, and in the lungs have little 
resistance or confinement from the empty cells, 
and very thin epithelium or internal cuticle: 
|P_26
whence an infection is sooner sent to the blood 
through these parts, and consumptive ulcera-
tions here oftener take place.(l0.) We see 
that from the birth, the strength and cohesion of 
the solids gradually increase with age, while the 
fluids continue less altered, till at length a senile 
weakness and natural death ensue from the dead 
resistance of the rigid membranes and vessels 
not yielding to the now weaker nervous influx; 
the nervous secretion daily lessening and the cor-
tex indurating as the vessels close by age.
(11.) We see how an injudicious internal use of 
astringents powerfully contracting the larger 
vessels, may rather increase than stop an hæmor-
rhage, and some local fluxes; or by causing too 
great a push upon the smaller vessels in a weakened 
part, may produce one de novo.(12.) We see 
that in the warmer countries and seasons of the 
year, where there is always a greater tenacity of 
the fluids and a weaker spring or action of the 
solids, bleeding is oftener called for to relieve the 
tone of the vessels in full habits; and this espe-
cially in wine countries, as south of France, Spain 
and Italy; for that from its globular matter and 
moderate increase of the circulation breeds blood 
very fast.(13.) We see why in most fevers, 
and in colder countries or seasons, 'tis necessary 
for the patient to have a moderately warm room, 
warm bed, warm drinks, sleep, &c. by which 
the tension of the vessels is relaxed, and tenacity 
of the humours lessened; from both which a 
fever is augmented.(i4.) W"e see how a thick 
moist air in foul weather, seems heavy to us, 
though it be much lighter than a dry serene air? 
because from its less prefTure on the body the 
spring of the solids upon our fluids is weakened.
(15.) Why onions, mustard, pepper and other 
|P_27
alcaline stimulants are used to promote the di-
gestion of putrescent meats, pork, salt-fish, &c.? 
because they are antiseptic and by increasing the 
muscular strength of the stomach make them 
stay there not too long.(16.) Why a dropsical 
patient so easily relapses after freeing him from 
his waters? because being lodged where the 
fibres have the least tone and elasticity, as in the 
lymphatics and cellular substance, where corro-
borants seldom penetrate, 'tis very difficult to re-
store or confirm their first strength.(17.) What 
pains are increased and what lessened by blood-
letting? namely it relieves in full habits with a 
pleuritic or sizy blood, but where rheumatic or 
hysterical pains come from too great a laxity of 
the smaller vessels and a loose watry sluggish blood. 
Gum. Guaic. Cinnab. Cort. Peruv. Rad. Valer. 
Rhei & Camph. are preferable to the lancet, as 
that increases the generating cause.(18.) Why 
inflammatory tumours are painful and resi-
sting, but œdematous ones indolent and pit-
ting? becaue the lymphatics and cellular sub-
stance, the usual seat of the last, have but little 
elasticity and sensibility.§.21. (19.) Why inflam-
mation and pain are always less by bleeding; and 
how it may provoke perspiration, sweat or urine? 
viz. by abating the compressure of the excretory 
ducts, by lessening the force and distention of 
the blood vessels, and by relaxing the blood and 
humours themselves urging upon the distressed 
part.(20.) Why the pulse of a fat person 
compared with that of a lean one is weak and 
languid to the touch? namely because the ictus 
is lost in a soft, unresisting and unelastic substance, 
and receives little or no increase or return from 
the wellcloathed contiguous bone.(21.) That 
sudorisics, diuretics and scarifications are much 
|P_28
preferable to tapping or strong purging in drop-
sies; because by exhausting the parts gradually 
they better contract and recover their lost tone, 
while the better elastic or globular parts of the 
juices are still retained in the habit.(22.) That 
there are no proper or peculiar adipose vessels 
and receptacles, only such as are also common as 
well to the watry and gelatinous as by a greater 
laxity or impulse to the serous and even red 
parts of the blood from whence the fat laterally 
recedes. Lastly, as the cellular fabric fur-
rounds every individual tubulus or nervous fi-
bril, both in the encephalon, in its progress 
thence, and in its ultimate expansion(23); we 
see thence how a weakening of this fabric, by 
excess of dram-drinking, tea-drinking and 
lewdness, has reduced the old athletic British 
constitution of our ancestors to the modern puny 
tenerity of habit, obnoxious daily to a train of 
nervous and other disorders, almost unknown to 
our progenitors. And why these have worse 
effects on the young, witty, studious and seden-
tary; who have a natural tenderness of the cel-
lular fabric and nervous system; to relieve 
which, the cortex was timely and happily dis-
covered.

|P_29
[}LECTURE III.}]
[}Of the arteries and veins. }]
§. 26. THE compound membranes made 
out of the preceding more simple 
parts, we shall hereafter better describe each 
in their respective places. Of these mem-
branes there are several common to the ar-
teries; which are elastic tubes or canals, form-
ing parts of longly extended cones, whose 
diameters decrease as they divide into more 
numerous branches. But where the arteries 
run for some length, without sending of 
branches, as towards their ultimate extremi-
ties, their convergency is not very evident; 
and at length, where they are called capil-
laries, and wherever they give passage to only 
a single red globule, they are either cylindri-
cal or very nearly so, from the imperceptile 
diminution; but their transverse sections are 
every where and without exception circular, 
when the artery is full. The common basis 
of the cone in all arteries is either in one or 
the other ventricle of the heart; and the 
apex of the cone terminates either in the be-
ginning of the veins, or in the beginning of 
the cylindrical or anastomosing part of the 
artery. In some places indeed the arteries 
seem to diverge or dilate; at least they be-
come there of a larger diameter ' after they have 
been filled or distended with wax; which 
|P_30
possibly may arise from some stoppage of the 
wax, by whose impulse that part of the length 
of the artery becomes more distended than 
the rest. Examples of this kind we have in 
the vertebral artery, at the basis of the skull, 
in the splenic artery, in the flexure of the 
carotid artery, according to Mr. Cowper's in-
jections; and lastly, unless all my experi-
ments deceive me, in the spermatic arteries. 

§. 27. There is indeed no external adventi-
tious coat perpetual and proper to all the ar-
teries; but the office of such a coat is sup-
plied to some of them by one single external 
and incumbent integument, which in the 
thorax is the pleura, and in the abdomen the 
peritonæum. In the neck a sort of thicker 
cellular-substance surrounds the arteries; for 
the membrane of the pericardium which on 
all sides closes round the aorta, soon disap-
pears by changing into the cellular substance. 
The dura mater imparts a capsule that sur-
rounds the carotid artery as it passes out thro' 
the hole in the skull for that purpose. But 
the first true external membrane common to 
the arterial tube in all parts of the body, is 
the cellular substance (§. 17.) which in some 
parts, (as in the thorax) we often see reple-
nished with fat. (§. 19.) 

§. 28. This cellular coat is in its external 
surface of a more lax, open texture, painted 
with a great many small arteries and veins; 
and it has nerves running through its sub-
stance, which are none of the smallest. 
|P_31
There is sometimes so much of this cellular 
substance about the artery as might occasion 
one to think it hardly belonged to it as an 
external coat or lamella, but rather as some 
foreign net-work added to this vessel. Thus 
we find it in the arteries of the neck, groins 
and subclavians; in the mesenteric, cœliac 
and hepatic arteries. And these are the va-
ginæ or capsules of the arteries, formerly ob-
served by some eminent anatomists.

§. 29. As this cellular coat advances more 
inward, and nearer to the light and capacity 
of the artery, it becomes more dense or solid, 
and is tied more closely together by small fi-
bres, insomuch that there appears to be no 
tendinous coat of the arteries distinct from 
this last part of the cellular substance; as is 
evident from maceration, whereby the inner 
stratum of this arterious tunic changes into 
a cellular fabric. 

§. 30. Within the former, and nearer the 
light or capacity of the artery, it has a coat 
of mufcular fibres, which are in general im-
perfect circles; that is to say, no fibre any 
where makes a compleat circle round the 
vessel, but a number of segments conjoined 
together, with their extremities turned off 
sideways, seem to form one ring round the 
artery. These fibres, in the larger arterial 
trunks, form many strata or plates one wi-
thin the other, appear of a redish colour and 
are remarkably firm and solid; but in the 
smaller arteries they are by degrees more 
|P_32
difficult to demonstrate. Within this there 
seems to be a sort of continuation from the 
former cellular membrane from betwixt the 
muscular fibres, although it be among them 
invisible, and here very difficult to demon-
strate; into the cells of which a chalky con-
creting matter is poured when an artery 
ossifies. 

§. 31. The innermost coat of the artery is 
thin or cuticular, and finely polished by the 
influent blood; so as to form a single incru-
station that every where lines the flehy fi-
bres, (§. 30.) which being somewhat loose, 
or not very continuous one to the other; this 
innermost lining prevents the blood from insi-
nuating into the spaces betwixt them. 'Tis 
every where smooth and without valves, 
altho' from a sort of mechanical necessity it 
sometimes, at the origination of branches, 
forms a projecling eminence; as we see at 
the branches produced by the arch of the 
aorta. Yet in arteries of the viscera the in-
nermost coat is softer and more lax than 
what we have described; and 'tis there in a 
manner wrinkled and almost friable.

§. 32. The arteries themselves have arte-
ties which are more particularly spread thro' 
their external cellular coat; and springing on 
all sides from the next adjacent small arterial 
trunks, form numerous, branchy net-works, 
which are all of them indeed very minute, 
but plainly appear, even in the fœtus with-
out injection, to be very numerous. We see 
|P_33
also there are nerves which descend for a 
long way together through the surface of 
the artery, and, at last, vanish in the cellu-
lar substance of the vessel; of which we have 
a specimen in the ex and internal carotids, and 
arch of the aorta. And from these, as in 
other muscles, the arteries seem to derive a 
muscular and convulsive force*, very different 
from that of their simple elasticity. Does 
not this force show itself plainly enough in 
fevers, faintings and passions of the mind? 
But the artery, abstracted from its nerves, is 
in a manner insensible and unirritable. 

[}REMARK.}]
* This is a successive contraction of the arterial 
fibres, like those of the intestines, from the larger 
to the less diameter, or the reverse; by the first, 
the blood moves quicker in a certain trunk to the 
veins, as in blushing, anger, &c. by the last, 
it reverts back to the heart in faintings, hysteri-
cal fits, &c. Hence come the pains, improperly 
called flatulent, which are local cramps of the 
artery, beyond which you will scarce feel any 
pulse, but before it a strong one; whence, in 
hysteric, and other nervous cases, you have often 
a pulse in one wrist and little or none in the 
other. When violent in the carotids, it often 
kills by an apoplexy, that is now a-days very 
frequent, and in which bleeding avails little. 
Seizing the heart itself, it often kills suddenly, 
without leaving any apparent cause, upon dis-
section. (V. Willisii Cap. 8. de apoplexiâ obs. 
ult. in Theologo). By this peristaltic motion 
|P_34
of the arteries, the passions quicken, retard or 
suppress the renal, uterine, hepatic, lactiferous, 
falival, and other secretions; being a great key 
to many otherwise unintelligible symptoms, &c. 
See §. 44. and 553. 

§.33. The sections or divisions of arteries 
show themselves with a round, light or hol-
low capacity, because they are elastic; and 
this is the reason why, from small arteries, 
as those of the teeth, hæmorrhages are some-
times fatal. The aorta, indeed, of the tho-
rax and abdomen, the carotids of the neck, 
and some other arteries of the dead body, 
from their lessened extension, appear some-
what flat or depressed; but their round figure 
or circular section is every where restored by 
injection. Their elasticity is also evident in 
that powerful compressure, which a segment 
of a large artery makes upon the finger that 
distends it. In the living body, indeed, this 
force yields to that of the heart, but instantly 
recovers itself, when the heart is relaxed, 
and restores the artery to its former diameter; 
and this makes the pulse, whose full expli-
cation ought to be preceded by an history of 
the heart: at present, it may suffice for us to 
say, that all the arteries have this pulsation, 
although the systole and distole thereof can 
be perceived by the finger, only in the larger 
ones, and not in the smaller ones naturally; 
but by an increased motion of the blood even 
the lesser ones make a violent pulsation, as 
we see in an inflammation. 

|P_35
§. 34. The strength of the arteries is con-
siderable enough, but as the dense, hard net-
work of the outer cellular coat (§. 29.) re-
fuses to yield to a distending force, it breaks 
without much difficulty, almost easier than 
the coats of the veins; and from thence 
aneurisms often arise. But in general, the 
trunks are, in all parts of the body, weaker, 
and the branches stonger in their coats; 
whence the impulse of the blood may exert 
a considerable effect upon the former, but 
least of all on those of the limbs. From 
hence it is, that aneurisms are most frequent-
ly formed near the heart; for in the lower 
extremities, the strength of the arteries, and 
of the veins too, is much increased. 

§. 35. With regard to the course and gene-
neral distribution of the arteries, nature has 
every where disposed of them in places of 
the utmost safety, because wounds cannot 
happen to the smaller of them without dan-
ger, nor to the larger without loss of life. 
The skin is spread with numerous short and 
small arterial trunks, but the larger ones, de-
sended by the skin, creep along betwixt the 
muscles and the bones weil guarded. 

§. 36. In the particular division or rami-
fication of an arterial trunk, each branch 
sends out smaller circles by a numerous sub-
division; the last extremities of which you 
will scarce be able to trace. Here the lights 
or sections of any two branches taken toge-
ther, always exceed the light of the trunk 
|P_36
from whence they come, in nearly a sesqui-
alteral proportion, or as one and a half to 
one, or somewhat less. Also every trunk, 
just above its bifurkation or division, is some-
what broader or more expanded. The an-
gles, at which the branches go out from 
their trunks, are generally acute, either half 
right angles or nearly so; to the forming of 
which angles, as we see in mechanics, there 
is required the longest projection. Instances 
of their going off at right angles, or nearly 
so, we have in the lumbal or intercostal ar-
teries; of their going off in a retrogade or 
reflected course, we have one instance in the 
coronaries of the heart, and another instance 
in the spinal arteries, which are produced by 
the vertebrals. But generally speaking, those, 
which are esteemed retrograde or reflexed, 
were sent off, at their origin, in acute angles; 
such as the ascending artery of the pharynx, 
the descending one of the palate, the umbi-
lical and mammary arteries. Lastly, we 
often observe larger arteries arising under les-
ser angles, and smaller arteries under greater 
angles: but it is rarely, that we observe two 
arteries of a larger diameter run together into 
one trunk of a less; as in the basilaiis, form-
ed out of the vertebral arteries. §. 338. 
[In many parts the arteries have repeated al-
ternate undulations or flexures, as they run 
on in a spiral course, wherein we see their 
diameter often considerabiy enlarge; as in 
the colon, rectum, womb, face, spleen, &c. 
|P_37
This, and the division info branches larger 
than the trunk, greatly abates the velocity of 
the blood; as does the largeness of the angle 
with the trunk, and the number of undu-
lations by which an artery, that lies in a 
small compass, may be easily extended to a 
great length, as in the uterus, &c.] 

§. 37. The arteries are frequently con-
joined one to another by intermediate or ana-
stomosing branches, in such a manner, that 
the twig of some certain artery shall run to 
meet one of the same kind from another 
neighbouring artery, and by joining together 
with that form one trunk. Instances of 
this kind we have many, among the large 
trunks in the intestines; among the middling 
ones, in the kidneys, womb, &c. and a-
mong the smaller, in all parts of the body; 
insomuch that there is no one part of the hu-
man body, wherein the neighbouring ar-
terial trunks, whether of the same, or of 
different denominations, do not form anasto-
moses or joinings one to the other, by in-
termediate, lateral branches. Of uch rings 
diverging laterally from the arteries, and re-
turning again into themselves, we have in-
stances betwixt the iris and choroides of the 
eye. The extremities of the arteries, which 
are either cylindrical or nearly so, send off 
smaller branches, which, for their extent, 
are more numerous, and generally disposed 
like a net, so that each branch, by smaller 
circles, forms anastomoses with those of its 
|P_38
neighbouring branches. And thus we find 
it in all membranes.

§. 38. Lastly, one of the least arteries 
is either changed by a continuation of its 
canal into a vein, in such a manner, that 
the ultimate little artery, which is generally 
reflected, having surpassed the angle of its 
reflection, becomes now a small incipient 
vein; or else, a branch, sent out at right 
angles from the artery, is inserted under 
a like angle into the branch of a small 
vein. Both these kinds of mechanical fa-
bricature of the maller arteries with the 
veins are demonstrated to us by the micro-
scope. And these vascules we see sometimes 
large enough to receive only one, and some-
times several blood-globules at a time. See 
§. 6. In the viscera, we find the small 
arteries disposed not so much in net-works, 
as in a different fabricature, wherein the 
small branches descend very thick or in clu-
sters, parallel to the trunk, so as to resemble 
brush-pencils, a variety of little trees or 
bushes, small serpents, threads, &c. accord-
ing to the variety of the parts, whose com-
position they enter.

§. 39. Other arteries again pass not into 
veins, but into excretory ducts, like unto veins, 
which convey a humour different from that 
of the blood. This continuation of the ar-
teries and ducts is somewhat more difficult 
to discover than the former, (§. 38.) and is 
generally not so easily described or traced by 
|P_39

the injection or liquor that is urged into 
them. 

§. 40. Another termination of the arteries 
is, by branching out into pellucid ones, of 
much less orders, which we sometimes ob-
serve to be not only continuous, but true and 
direct trunks of the sanguineous arteries; as 
in the ophthalmic artery of the eye, if you 
trace its branches into the choroides, then 
into the arterial circle of the uvea, and 
lastly, into the colourless arteries of the iris, 
vitreous body, and crystalline lens: so like-
wise, in the red branches of the same oph-
thalmic artery forming a net-work in the 
conjunctiva tunica, to which is continued 
the pellucid, but arterial net-work of the 
albuginea or sclerotica: the truth of this ap-
pears from inflammations, from the redness 
of parts caused by warm vapours, from 
cupping, from artificial emptying and re-
pletion of the arteries, and lastly, to the 
eye itfelf by the microscope of Lieberkuhn, 
commonly called solar, applied to the mem-
branes of frogs, by which we see the co-
lourless globules pass out of a red artery, and 
go off into pellucid continuous ones. The 
uriniserous ducts or tubes of the kidney are 
thus continuous with the sanguine arteries. 
In this structure of the arterial extremities, 
we see it is no difficult matter to urge any 
red liquor or coloured injection into the 
smaller pellucid vessels. 

|P_40
§. 41. As for the small, lateral, excretory 
ducts, we before mentioned, (§. 39.) which 
seem to go off as branches from the smallest 
red arteries, and again laterally detach other 
trunks; they make a greater resistance, than 
the former, to an injection; whence it be-
comes more difficult to fill their excretory 
vessels. And this seems to be the fabric in 
most of the small glands and viscera, destined 
for secretions where, with some difficulty, 
we can urge a liquor from the arteries into 
their excretory ducts. 

§. 42. Another termination of the arte-
rial extremities, is, into the exhaling vessels; 
and this is a manner of their ending, very 
frequently to be observed in all parts of the 
body. The whole external and internal 
skin, all membranes of the human body, 
which form any close cavity, all the ven-
tricles of the brain, the anterior and poste-
rior chambers of the eyes, all the adipose 
cells and pulmonary vesicles, the whole ca-
vity of the nostrils, phauces, stomach and 
intestinal tube, through which the air has 
a passage, are all of them replenished with 
exhaling arteries of this kind. These breathe 
out a thin, watry vapour or humour, very 
little gelatinous, which being condensed or 
collected together by standing, sometimes 
makes no inconsiderable quantity; and par-
ticularly, by disease or death, they yield a 
watry, but congealable lymph, hardening 
by heat or alcohol. The truth of this is 
|P_41
easily demonstrable, from the watry sweat 
that ensues after injecting the arteries with 
that liquor warm. In some places, indeed, 
they exhale not a thin vapour, but blood it-
self, as we see in the cellular fabric of the 
penis, urethra, clitoris, and nipple of the 
female breast; in all which, the blood itself 
is naturally poured out. Does not every se-
cretion, that is made in true glands or hol-
low cryptæ, bear some analogy to this ex-
haling fabric? 

[}REMARK.}]
Even the whole encephalon and nervous sy-
stem are a kind of cylindric, exhaling vessels, 
whose contents are, in part, elastic globules, 
and move the slowest of any juice; in some 
nerves, by tubular attraction and arterial im-
pulse, only modulated by impulsions of objects 
one way, and (in some) of the mind the other 
way: this juice, moving in the organ imme-
diately by continuity, moves the mind, as the 
mind again thereby moves the organ, not by any 
flux, but. by a transfered motion; as when 
10,000 ivory balls fill a tube, if you put in 
one more it will instantly thrust out another at 
the opposite end. 

§. 43. Whether or no, in all parts of the 
human body, the pellucid vessels, (§. 40.) 
arising from the sanguine ones, and carry-
ing a humour thinner than blood, again send 
out other smaller vessels to be subdivided into 
still lesser orders? We seem, indeed, not to 
want examples of this, in the manner pro-
|P_42
posed to us by the celebrated Boerhaave and 
other professors. That the aqueous humour 
is separated by very fine vessels, generated 
from the colourless arteries of the iris, is, 
indeed, more than probable. That the red 
coloured vessels, in the cortical substance of 
the encephalon, separate a juice, pervading 
the medullary substance, by the intermedia-
tionof other smaller vessels, we are almost 
certain. And the like we are persuaded 
from an erysipelas, or yellow inflammation, 
arising from the yellow or serous globules, 
impacted into smaller vessels.

§. 44. It may be then asked, if there are 
not yellow arterious vessels of a second or-
der, which send off lymphatic ones of a 
third order, from whence, by degrees, still 
lesser kinds of vessels branch out? such a 
fabric does not seem agreeable to the very 
easy transition that is made by the blood, 
mercury or wax into the exhaling and per-
spiratory vessels; into the uriniserous tubuli, 
with the adipose and pulmonary cells; nor 
is it very difficult for the blood to stray into 
the lactiferous, lymphatic and lachrymal
ducts, whither it should seem not able to 
penetrate, if it went through any other in-
termediate vascular system, smaller than the 
blood-globules, which make the same jour-
ney. Nor can this system be allowed by 
the great impediment or retardation that 
must arise to the humours in a third, and 
|P_43
much more in a fourth, and lesser orders of 
vessels. 

[}REMARK.}]
From what has been said, we see the arteries 
act by a double force on their contents; the one, 
a dead automatic elasticity, (32.) the other, a vital 
or muscular constriction from the nerves in their 
fabric. (33.) The first continues to operate in the 
dead animal, the latter only in the living; and 
that variously, as to force and celerity in dif-
ferent organs, or in one and the same organ at 
different times, in proportion as their nervous 
fabric is more or less irritated by distention or 
acrimony internally, or from pain, passions or 
nervous consent externally. This is the force 
that gives a due form and modulation to many 
of the secerned juices, and carries them through 
ducts and vessels, which, after death, are no 
longer pervious; and, although the great share 
which it has in almost all febrile or inflamma-
tory, nervous and painful diseases, seems little 
regarded by our British physicians; yet, some 
of the greatest note, and particularly among the 
Germans, have built their systems almost entire-
ly hereupon: thus, sometimes Hippocrates calls 
it nature, Helmont calls it his archeus, Hoff-
man and Sthail their convulsive spasms; so pro-
lisic of diseases.—These are the forces which 
actuate all medicines so as to produce their va-
rious effects, which are always in proportion to 
the state of these powers and that of the confined 
juices on which they act; and, therefore, never 
exactly the same in two people, or at two different 
times.—These powers, however, in some 
measure, antagonize one the other; for the 
greater the arterial density, the less their ner-
|P_44
vous irritability and the reverse. The former, 
too much increased, paves the way to all acute, 
inflammatory and painful diseases; as the latter 
does to all slow, nervous and hysterical com-
plaints. This last is the door-keeper to the cata-
menia, whose generating or material cause is a 
plethora, but the motive or actual cause a fe-
ver, with a topical or painful irritation of this 
sluice-keeper in the womb, without whose per-
mission, a plethora can never issue there. This 
is the milk-maker in the breasts, to which the 
chyle affords matter to be moulded: milk and 
chyle being very distinct humours, &c. we see 
the nervous system influences this muscular 
power of the arterial; and that again acts upon 
the nervous, both as to the secretions and distri-
butions. All pleasing passions and sensations, as 
well as painful, uneasy ones, variously intend 
or remit the circulation, by acting on this mus-
cular fabric and force of the heart and arteries. 
All medicines in themselves are dead tools, 
which exert effects varying according to the 
strength or disposition of this agent, viz. the 
elastic and muscular force of the artery, in con-
junction with the density or laxity of the 
humours, and more or less sensibility of the 
nerves. A spasm of this muscular force of the 
artery in any emunctory, causes a suppression, 
as in the skin, kidneys, lungs, womb, &c. to be 
relieved by warm bathing, vapours, semicupium, 
opiates, nervous and hysterical medicines, after 
one spare bleeding. Any slow stimulus acting 
on this nervous and muscular force of the arte-
ries, causes a nervous atrophe, whether from pain, 
want of mucus, putrid or scorbutic acrimony, 
&c. In a word, this is a principal key to-
wards understanding the nature and cure of nu-
|P_45
merous symptoms of diseases, and the various 
operations of medicines. See §.552 and 553.

[}Of the veins.}]
§. 45. The veins, in many particulars, 
(§, 36.) resemble the arteries. Their basis 
is in the ventricles of the heart, and their 
apices in the extremity of each branch thro' 
all parts of the body, excepting one instance 
in the liver. And, in a great number of 
parts, they run parallel with the arteries, one 
by the side of the other. But the veins dif-
fer from the arteries in various respects, as 
we shall now see.

§. 46. The membranous fabric of the 
veins is thin, every where smooth, and very 
difficultly separable into distinct coats or 
membranes, in which there are but few 
places, wherein one can demonstrate muscu-
lar fibres. Notwithstanding this thinness of 
their sides, the veins are, in most parts, very 
firm, and do not easily burst with inflated 
air; being, in most instances, stronger than 
the arteries, if experiments do not deceive 
us. But they burst much more easily in 
living, than in dead animals, as appears 
from morbid instances in the arm, face, leg, 
thigh, &c. Nor do they support them-
selves like cylinders after being divided, but 
they collapse together, so as to make their 
light or capacity appear like a slit; except 
they are sustained and hindered from col-
lapsing thus, by some stronger cellular sub-
|P_46
stance placed round them, as we see in the 
liver and womb. [They are like the arte-
ries, but slightly irritable, unless the stimu-
lus be of the chemical or more acrid classes; 
for, in that case, they contract themselves 
with a convulsive force, greater in propor-
tion than that of the arteries themselves.] 
(§. 32.) They have no pulsation, unless 
the venal channel is somewhere obstructed; 
or when, in dying people, the blood is 
thrown back again from the right auricle 
into the descending and ascending cava.

§. 47. The veins are much larger than 
their corresponding arteries, having the square 
of their diameter often double or triple that 
of the latter, and, in some places, almost 
quadruple; as near the emulgents, and in 
the venal trunks. They differ, likewise 
from the arteries in their course or division; 
having more numerous trunks and branches: 
for to one artery in the limbs, we usually 
meet with two veins. The larger veins 
are also branched in a more net-like dis-
position, by forming more frequent anasto-
moses one with another; for not only 
the smaller branches, but even the larger 
trunks of the veins are conjoined one to the 
other within its neighbourhood, upper with 
lower, and right with left, by apparent in-
lets or inosculations. They affect more than 
arteries to run near the surface of the body; 
and through the limbs, neck, head, &c. 
they run a long way covered with little more 
|P_47
than the bare skin; which is a circumstance 
we very rarely observe in arteries: and for the 
same reason, they often go out in their 
course, to a considerable distance from the 
arteries. For, in this case, the veins follow 
the surface of the parts next the skin, with-
out their correponding artery, which, in the 
mean time, descends to a considerable depth, 
attended, in its course, by some smaller ve-
nal branch. In the smaller branches of the 
vessels, where they make net-likedisposi-
tions in the membranes, and compose the 
internal fabric of the viscera, the veins and 
arteries commonly run contiguous one with 
the other; but here the veins have generally 
a less serpentine or inflected course.

§. 48. The veins have their origin, as we 
said before, (§. 37.) from the terminations 
of the arteries. They sometimes arise by a 
continuation from the inserted branches, or 
from a reflexion of recurved trunks, of the 
smallest arteries. Others again are either 
continued from veins less than those which 
carry blood, or else receive additions and 
roots from them; as we see, for instance, 
in the lymphatic veins of the thoracic duct. 
Other veins, of a bibulous kind, arise from 
absorbing ducts or orifices opening through 
out the whole extended surface of the body; 
as in the chambers of the eyes, the cavities of 
the intestines, bladder, womb, breast, peri-
tonæum, pericardium, and ventricles of the 
brain. For from these issue a watry sweat, 
|P_48
by injecting the venal trunks with that kind 
of liquor, which easily resembles an ordi-
nary sweat throughout the whole human 
body: hence, we meet with injections of 
water, fish-glue or oil distilling from the 
vena portarum into the cavity of the inte-
stines; of which experiments, we shall 
speak more largely hereafter in a proper 
place.

§. 49. Not much differing from the for-
mer are those veins which, arising in all 
parts of the cellular membrane, or rather 
sponge-like substance, return thin vapours, 
dropsical waters, and dissolved fat again in-
to the mass of blood; or which take up 
again and return the blood itself from the 
cellular fabric of the penis, clitoris, or nip-
ples of the breasts after the venereal act. 
And that inhaling veins of this kind open 
into all the glands, is highly probable; where, 
by absorbing the thinner humour, they leave 
the remaining mass of a thicker consistence; 
of which we have instances in the bile, 
sperm, mucus, &c.

§. 50. That there are pellucid veins of a 
smaller class, but resembling those which 
convey blood, appears from the same expe-
riments, which demonstrate the pellucid arte-
ries (§. 40.): thus in the iris of the eye, there 
are small veins, and in the adnata tunica of 
that organ, more than a few trunks, which, 
in a healthy person, are naturally pellucid. 
The larger of these veins, which come next 
|P_49
to those that carry blood, are much more 
conspicuous than the arteries of the same 
kind; and are usually called lymphatic vessels; 
of which we shall fpeak more at large, 
when we come to describe the lacteal vessels.

§. 51. Namely, in most parts of the hu-
man body [but in brute animals they are 
more easily and clearly discovered] are found 
transparent veins, often full of a reddish, 
yellowish, and almost pellucid liquor, hard-
ening like the white of an egg with a 
boiling heat or alcohol; which veins being 
formed of very thin coats, [have, like the 
blood-veins, (§. 46.) a proportionable degree 
of irritability, from any chemical or very 
acrid stimulus; whence we infer them to be 
muscular or nervous, notwithstanding they 
are pellucid, like the fibres of fish, frogs, &c.] 
have frequent valves or partitions, which make 
them in those places seem jointed, or knot-
ted like a reed, when they are turgid; these, 
by degrees, meeting together, either all or 
most part of them, empty their contents 
into the thoracic duct. But all the lympha-
tics, in their course, meet together in a pe-
culiar kind of conglobate glands, into which 
they enter, and from the shape of veins be-
coming arterial or like converging cones, 
they divide into small branches, and then 
proceed to meet together again in other little 
trunks. They are found seated on all the 
surfaces of the viscera, in the thorax and 
abdomen; but are more easily and clearly 
|P_50
discovered in brutes: they run thro' the low-
er part of the face, muscles of the tongue, the 
adjacent parts of the neck, and those parts 
of the upper limbs, which are nearest the 
trunk, as far as the bending of the elbow; 
throughout the whole length of the me-
diastinum, before and behind, and wherever 
we find conglobate glandules, either in the 
neck or thorax: the lymphatic veins are also 
spread through the whole lumbal region that 
is contiguous to the aorta, the mesocolon 
and pelvis, vessels and surface of the testicle; 
and in the lower limbs wherever they are 
supplied with conglobate glandules. Whe-
ther they extend further into other parts, 
throughout the whole body, or through the 
brain, eyes, hands, feet, back, fore part of 
the peritonæum, &c. remain, as yet, unde-
termined; at least, there are not examples 
enough in the human body, upon which one 
can depend to evince the truth of their exi-
stence. But they are every where to be 
found upon the surfaces of the viscera, and 
about the larger blood vessels.

§. 52. The valves of these pellucid ves-
sels are composed of two semilunar, or ra-
ther semicircular, projecting membranes, 
which give way to the fluid that goes to-
wards the larger trunks; so that, by apply-
ing themselves close to the sides of the ves-
sel, they leave a free light or capacity thro' 
it. But the same valves, if the contained 
liquor is pressed back towards the smaller 
|P_51
branches of the vessel, being filled out there-
with, swell or expand, so as to shut up the 
light of the canal.

§. 53. But many valves of the same kind 
are also found in. great numbers within the 
larger blood-veins. These, joined with the 
side of the proceeding vein, intercept a space, 
of which the outerside is the vein itself, and 
the inner the valve, which, by its convexity, 
stands out within the bore or light of the 
vein; so that the parabolic space or hollow 
mouth of the valves always look towards the 
heart: they are found in all the subcuta-
neous veins of the limbs, in those of the 
neck, face, tongue, and in the veins of the 
penis: at the origin. of the larger branches 
there are two, three, four, and sometimes 
five of them together, while in their smaller 
branches they are only single. There are 
none of these valves in the deep running 
veins of the viscera; and, therefore, none 
in those of the brain, lungs, heart or liver, 
or through the whole system of the vena 
portarum, nor in the kidneys or womb (ex-
cept one or two valves in the spermatic vein); 
nor, lastly, are there any in those smaller 
blood-veins, which are of a less diameter 
than the twelfth part of an inch. Whether 
there are any such valves in the vena azygos 
is questioned; but I have, not been able to 
find any. [Valves have been sometimes, 
though very rarely, found in the vena azy-
gos: and at the mouths of the hepatic and 
|P_52
renal veins: there I have several times observ-
ed a sort of wrinkles in the place of valves.

§. 54. In the smaller venal branches there 
are a set of long, sharp-pointed or parabo-
lical valves of a more extended figure, as the 
vein is smaller: and these make a greater 
resistance than the larger valves, to hinder 
the blood from returning back upon the 
parts.

§. 55. The common use or office of these 
valves is, to determine the pressure that is 
given from any quarter upon the veins, to-
wards the heart, by allowing no opportunity 
to the venal blood, that has once entered the 
trunk, which they intercept, to flow back 
to the branches. For since the coving spaces 
of the valves open upwards towards the 
heart, the blood enters into, and expands 
them. Thus those parts of the valves, 
which stand out with a free motion within 
the light of the vein, approach each other 
towards the axis, until the opposite sides, by 
meeting together, shut up the tube. This 
we know from inflations, ligatures and in-
jections of the veins; for you never can force 
a liquor easily into the veins, by urging it 
against, or contrary to, their valves. They 
do not, indeed, every where shut up the 
whole cavity of the veins; but where they 
shut not close, they always intercept the 
greatest part of the light.

§. 56. Another office of the valves in the 
veins, seems to be for sustaining the weight 
|P_53
of the blood, that its upper columns may 
not gravitate upon the lower; nor the blood, 
flowing through the trunks, make too great 
a resistance against that which follows it 
through the branches. For if, from the 
slower return of the blood into the veins, its 
weight or pressure shall, in any part, much 
exceed the impulse, that drives it on, so as 
to cause some part of the column to descend 
by its weight; 'tis, in that case, imme-
diately catched and sustained in its relapse 
by the next adjacent valve, which hinders 
it from urging against the next succeeding 
column, and affords time and opportunity 
for some contiguous muscle, by its pressure 
or concussion, to send forward the said co-
lumn. And this is the reason, why valves 
are placed in veins of the limbs and neck; 
in which parts, they are both more nume-
rous and more robust than elsewhere. And 
this is the cause, from whence varices or 
herniæ are formed in the veins, when the 
blood, entering the hollow valves, urges 
their solid convexity downwards, and makes 
the vein dilate in that part. 


[^1. * These are the common physical or natural elements of all ani-
mals and vegetables, easily commutable one into the other.^]