

[^Sample 1: book - ^]

|P_[^A horizontal double-line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}CASES 
and 
REMARKS 
in 
SURGERY. }][^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}A case of a fractured scull in an old 
man. }]
March the 19th, 1749. 

M. H. of T. a robust labouring man, 
aged sixty one, received a blow 
upon his head, with the end of a 
rafter; he instantly fell down deprived of 
sense and motion, and was carried home 
as a dead man, but discovered signs of life 
soon after: a violent Ecchymosis appeared, 
without any breach of the skin; upon 
|P_2
scalping the same day, a very extensive 
fracture was discovered, with a great com- 
minution and depression of the superior 
part of the right parietal bone: as soon as 
the hæmorrhage was restrained, the trepan 
was applied; it appeared necessary to make 
six perforations, in order to remove the 
fragments and depressed pieces of the 
Cranium then in view; after their removal 
we observed a separation of the Dura Mater
from the Cranium much beyond the per- 
forations. 

After the operation the patient was 
dressed as usual in such cases; was let 
blood frequently and kept to a strict regi- 
men, laxatives being occasionally admi- 
nistered. He recovered his senses perfect- 
ly in about ten days; the wound had a 
kind aspect, and the symptomatic fever 
abated, which gave us great hopes of his 
recovery. 

As the digestion advanced we observed 
a farther separation of the Dura Mater
from the Cranium, at the superior and most 
concave part of the parietal bone, which 
continued as far as the inferior and de- 
|P_3
pending point, where there was a lodg- 
ment of matter at every dressing: the dis- 
charge seemed now more than a well-con- 
ditioned wound of that apparent size ought 
to produce, his pulse became quicker, 
with great restlessness, and soon after he 
fell into a Stupor, as at first. 

These threatening symptoms return- 
ing, and growing worse every hour, we 
were reduced to a great difficulty to know 
how to act with the greatest probability of 
relieving our patient, but upon observing 
where most matter proceeded from, at every 
dressing, underneath theCranium, at length 
we resolved to remove another portion of 
the scalp, beginning at the superior part, 
describing the segment of a circle towards 
the Occiput, and so coming round to the 
most inferior part of the first incision. 
This discovered to us at the most depend- 
ing part, a triangular sharp-pointed frag- 
ment of the Cranium, struck into, if not 
quite through the Dura Mater, whence the 
matter had issued at every dressing for three 
or four days. 

|P_4
Under these circumstances we thought 
it most adviseable to remove the whole arch 
of bone, from which the Dura Mater was 
detached, and this being impracticable with 
the head-saw, was effected by seven per- 
forations of the trepan, on the 1st of April. 
After this operation, he grew immediately 
better, and every bad symptom gradually 
vanished. 

In the beginning of July, he was in a 
condition to walk two miles to be dressed, 
but it was more than a year before the 
cicatrice was perfected; and, even to this 
day, vesicles now and then arise, break, 
discharge a little, and then heal with very 
little trouble. 

What substitutes the loss of the Cra- 
nium is not entirely ossified; in a young 
subject probably it would have acquired 
such a degree of hardness as constitutes 
bone. 

In order to guard the brain against ex- 
ternal injuries, he wears a very thin iron 
|P_5
plate; and has followed his ordinary em- 
ployment several years, without any con- 
siderable inconvenience. 

Plate I. exhibits a view of this frac- 
ture. 

|P_6
[}Plate I. }]A. A. A. The extent of the first opera- 
tion done March the 28th. B. B. B. The extent of the second ope- 
ration done April the 1st. C. The point of the triangular 
piece of bone, which was 
struck into the Dura Mater, 
and discovered upon the se- 
cond operation. [^An illustration of ??? on a separate page — missing from the source text. ^]
|P_7
[}An uncommon case of a fracture of 
of the scull. }]
June the 24th, 1749. 

MR. J. E. of T. aged about thirty, 
came to my house when I hap- 
pened to be from home, and asked a gen- 
tleman who lived with me, to dress a small 
wound which he had received in the mid- 
dle of his forehead, without saying how 
it happened; and a plaster was accord- 
ingly applied, without examining the 
wound, it appearing so very slight. 

I was called to him three days after, 
and found him in a Stupor, attended with 
other threatening symptoms. Upon exa- 
mining the wound, which was indeed 
very trifling in its external appearance, my 
probe passed, without any resistance, into 
the brain more than two inches, at the ex- 
tremity of which, I was sensible of some 
solid body, and took it to be a fragment 
of the internal table of the scull, after 
having been informed that the accident hap- 
pened, by the breech-pin of a gun, when 
|P_8
the barrel flew out of the stock upon dis- 
charging it. 

I scalped him, stopped the hæ- 
morrhage with the needle and ligature, and 
trepanned him immediately, making two 
perforations adjoining, not being able to 
extract the fragments of the bone, which 
were drove into the brain, through one: 
the diameter of the fracture of the exter- 
nal table was of no larger extent than the 
tail of the breech-pin; but one of the frag- 
ments of the internal table was almost as 
broad as a shilling. 

TheStupor, &c. went off soon after 
the operation, and he recovered his senses 
perfectly: though some portion of the 
brain was discharged at every dressing, the 
symptoms continued so favorable until the 
eighteenth day, that I began to be flattered 
with hopes of his recovery, but the Stu- 
por, &c. returned, and he died the next 
day. 

I could not obtain leave to open the 
scull after the death of the patient, to exa- 
mine the brain, &c.

|P_9
[}A fracture upon the Os Frontis. }]
August the 3d, 1754. 

THE wife of T. H. of H. aged about 
fifty, received this accident by a stone 
thrown with great force; the wound though 
inconsiderable was immediately stitched, 
and the case in all respects treated contra- 
ry to the rules of surgery. 

I was called to her about a week af- 
ter, and found an erysipelatous tumor had 
seized her head, face and neck, to the 
greatest degree I ever saw; those parts were 
as much swelled as in the most confluent 
kind of small-pox, the fever ran high, she 
was delirious, breathed very short, and in- 
deed I thought could not have lived until the 
next day. I discovered a fracture with my 
probe, which easily passed a good way 
round about upon the scull; I made a lon- 
gitudinal incision, but did not venture to 
move the scalp under these circumstan- 
ces, to inform myself of the nature and 
extent of the fracture. As yet no evacua- 
|P_10
tions had been made. Repeated bleeding, 
lenient purgatives, nitrous medicines, &c.
gave her some relief in a few days, beyond 
expectation; then I removed a sufficient 
portion of the scalp, to bring the fracture 
in view, applied the trepan, and found 
much extravasated blood upon the Dura 
Mater. It was a long time before she ap- 
peared out of danger, and was recovered 
with the utmost difficulty. 

In a single perforation of the scull in trepanning, I 
have often found the plate of lead, described and 
strongly recommended by Belloste in his Hospital-Surgeon, 
of signal service in keeping the Dura Mater sufficiently 
depressed; by which the growth of fungous flesh from 
thence, through the perforation, will be easily prevent- 
ed, and the discharge of any kind of matter facilitated, 
that may happen to be lodged between the scull and that 
membrane: I never saw any inconvenience from the use 
of it, but dreadful consequences may justly be appre- 
hended from cutting off fungus, or destroying it with 
escharotics in these cases. By a piece of card laid over 
the ears of the plate, raised a little above the superficies 
of the scull, the pressure may be regulated to a just de- 
gree with a compress and the common bandage; or 
strips of common plaster applied crucially over the 
wound, which are best without any other bandage far- 
ther than to contain the dressings. 

The first time that I performed this operation, I 
found the same inconvenience, which I suppose put 
Belloste upon inventing this plate, and used it several 
times without knowing it had been used by any surgeon 
before. In this operation I always used that kind of 
trepan called the trephine. 

|P_11
[}A case in which the trepan was ap- 
plied to the occipital bone, with 
success. }]
THE Reverend Mr. Baker of Hedenham, 
a very worthy Divine, in the fifty 
ninth year of his age, of a robust consti- 
tution, by a fall from his horse running 
away with him, July the 11th, 1757, re- 
ceived one large and extensive fissure, in a 
right line downwards, from near the supe- 
rior angle of the occipital bone, and ano- 
ther as small as an hair, diverging at an 
acute angle about an inch from the top of 
the large one, on the left side of it, ex- 
tending almost to the lambdoidal suture. 

He was taken up speechless and sense- 
less; the Stupor went off, in a great mea- 
sure, upon scalping and plentiful bleed- 
ing; a fever soon followed attended with 
delirious symptoms at times, with an ap- 
pearance of the intellectual faculties being 
much impaired though not entirely de- 
stroyed. 

|P_12
Many circumstances concurred to de- 
lay the use of the trepan until the eleventh 
day after the accident, when it being una- 
nimously agreed upon in consultation, by 
Dr. Bennet of Norwich, Messrs. Cooper, 
Manning and Lewis, of Bungay in Suffolk, 
Surgeons, with myself, and consented to 
then, by the persons nearly concerned, a 
single perforation of the bone was made, 
taking in a small part of the capillary fis- 
sure, without any ill accident attending the 
operation: we bore in mind this excellent 
maxim in surgery, Festina lente, and exa- 
mined the Sulcus frequently with a probe 
or quill, to observe when and where the 
saw had cut through, and when the piece 
was moveable, holding by one third or 
fourth of its circumference, we thought it 
most adviseable to break it up with the E- 
levator; the Dura Mater then appeared 
highly inflamed, looking of a dusky red, 
much like a lump of coagulated blood. 
We afterwards, with small gouges, carv- 
ing and engraving tools, enlarged the low- 
er part of the fissure, where we perceived 
an issuing of a fetid gleet like what was 
discharged through the perforation, from 
between the Dura Mater and the Cranium: 
|P_13
apprehending they had a communication, 
we should have looked upon it as justifiable 
practice to have made one or two perfo- 
rations more with the trepan, towards that 
point, and should have proposed it had not 
the symptoms abated. 

He had a variety of symptoms both 
before and after the operation, shewing 
that the nervous system was greatly dis- 
ordered, but we could not precisely deter- 
mine what part of the Encephalon was most 
affected; before the operation he constant- 
ly complained of much pain upon the sides 
and fore part of his head, which was ac- 
companied with a most intense degree of 
heat sensible to our touch; not evident- 
ly relieved by copious bleeding and the 
observance of an exact regimen. About 
six hours after the operation he gave signal 
proofs of the improvement of his reason, 
and the pain and heat of his head soon 
abated; still many threatening symptoms 
continued, and new ones arose, among the 
rest, a Spasmus cynicus on the left side, with 
a remarkable sinking and dulness of the 
right eye at the same time, both which 
proved of short duration. 

|P_14
After lenient purgatives, cooling re- 
medies, soft diet and very plentiful bleed- 
ing, it was thought proper, on account of 
feverish symptoms which encreased perio- 
dically, and a black slough upon the Du- 
ra Mater, to give the Bark, joining Rhubarb
with it to prevent costiveness. 

About a fortnight after the operation, 
we began to conceive some hopes of his 
recovery; now, October the 6th, the wound 
is contracted into the compass of a fonti- 
nel, and kept open at the bottom as such; 
his intellects are perfect, he is able to take 
the air in his chariot, and his health is 
daily improving. 

We wanted circumstantial and well- 
warranted precedents to enforce the ap- 
plication of the trepan, and satisfy all par- 
ties concerned, of the propriety and neces- 
sity of it upon the occipital bone. It is 
to be wished that writers of approved cha- 
racter, who have treated this subject, had 
farther considered a point of so much im- 
portance to surgery; for the Dura Ma- 
ter may be so injured, that though the 
|P_15
Cerebellum has received no immediate hurt, 
yet, without trepanning, the patient must 
inevitably perish: and this appearing to be 
the state of the case before us, had the ha- 
zard of doing it been much greater, we 
should have thought ourselves justified in 
the practice. 

The objections which have been made 
against it are, the great difficulty of per- 
forating the bone on account of its une- 
qual thickness, the danger of wounding 
the Cerebellum, and of opening a Sinus. 
Should the latter happen we have instan- 
ces, where it has not proved mortal; and 
upon a strict examination of the bone, we 
believe, it will appear that few parts of it 
have such an inequality, in the circular 
compass of the saw, as to be more than a 
little thicker on one side than the other; 
from which considerations and the Cere- 
bellum and Sinuses being well defended, by 
so thick a membrane as the Dura Mater, 
we are encouraged to hope that a cautious 
operator may succeed without injuring ei- 
ther; but he should be well acquainted 
with the structure of the bone and the re- 
spective situation of the subjacent parts, 
|P_16
proceeding with the utmost circumspection 
and prudence, where the practice may not 
yet be thought sufficiently authorized. 

Since these sheets were sent to the press, I have received 
an account from Mr. Cooper, that the wound is healed, 
and that Mr. Baker has recovered a good state of health. 

|P_17
[}A Species of tumor called by the 
common people the Mumps. }]
EARLY in the spring, after the hard 
winter in 1739, the feverest in the 
memory of man, this disease appeared, 
which I had never seen before, nor read 
any description of. 

It began with a slight fever, the face 
and throat swelled soon after, looking of 
a little deeper color than a damask-rose, 
but the tumor seldom extended so far as 
the eyes; it was chiefly external, and some 
times in a few days it increased to such a 
prodigious size, as to obliterate the fea- 
tures, and put the patient out of the know- 
ledge of his most intimate acquaintance; 
yet that quick and extraordinary disten- 
tion of the parts was in general attended 
with but little pain. 

The disease was chiefly among chil- 
dren, and young persons of the poorer 
sort. The general antiphlogistic method 
|P_18
succeeded very well; the disease was rarely 
mortal, and seldom terminated in an ab- 
scess, but when that happened it healed 
kindly by the common treatment. 

IN five or six cases, in which I was con- 
cerned, the tumor in the face, &c. subsid- 
ed in three or four days, and was from 
thence immediately translated to the testi- 
cles, but this circumstance required no al- 
teration in the general method of cure. 

In some a thickness and hardness re- 
mained upon the parotid and maxillary 
glands after they were well in all other re- 
spects, which I found readily yielded to 
small doses of Merc. dulc. with gentle purg- 
ing at proper intervals, keeping the af- 
fected parts moderately warm, and the pa- 
tient to a suitable regimen, during the mer- 
curial course. Sometimes I used a mild 
mercurial ointment. 

this disease continued rife all the sum- 
mer season, which was remarkably cold, 
dry and unfruitful, and did not intirely dis- 
appear until autumn, 1741. 

|P_19
The summer after the disappearance of this disease, 
the malignant sore throat, which has been accurately 
described by three very learned physicians, first appeared, 
and continued more than ten years before its total dis- 
appearance, in that part of the kingdom where I then 
dwelt, about ten miles from the city of Norwich; but 
it was not equally violent during the whole of that 
time; it raged and was most mortal in the years 1745 
and 1746. I attended a great many in it, and, from 
what I observed, there appeared to me some analogy 
between this disease and that among the horned cattle, 
which has been upwards of forty years in this island. 
Aretæus, taking notice of such a disease in the throat, 
expresly says, that it was preceded by a plague among 
that species of cattle. 

|P_20
[}A glandular tumor situated under 
the ear upon the articulation of 
the jaws, successfully extirpated. }]
June the 1st. 1755. 

MR. J. B. of O. aged about thirty, 
a gentleman of a lively temper, 
but not of a good constitution, had this 
tumor gradually growing three or four 
years, from a very small beginning to a 
considerable size: its increasing exceed- 
ingly in the last ten or twelve months af- 
fected his mind very much, and made him 
more than ordinarily anxious about the re- 
moval of it. 

We were of opinion in consultation, 
that the operation was practicable. After 
the patient was duly prepared, I performed 
it, with greater ease to him, and less trou- 
ble to myself, than I expected; for, upon 
removing an oval piece of the teguments, 
and laying the glandular substance in view, 
I found it so disengaged from the circum- 
|P_21
jacent parts, that I turned it out with my 
finger, having very little further use for the 
knife. 

The wound discharged during the 
cure a great quantity of saliva, especially 
upon mastication, which was avoided as 
much as possible, by the nature of the food 
he was allowed. 

When the wound was contracted in- 
to a narrow compass, I directed a strong 
elastic steel machine, resembling that which 
is made use of to keep the wig close to the 
ears, with a soft pad to press upon the 
aperture of the salival duct, and rest upon 
the opposite temple; by which, and sel- 
dom dressing, with lint moistened in Alco- 
hol and a common plaster, it was soon per- 
fectly healed. 

The Machine, as described in plate 2. 
fig. 1. was kept in its proper position, with 
a ribband passing behind the head, from 
one branch of it to the other, and another 
ribband affixed to that behind the head, 
in the middle, and to the machine on the 
top of the head. 

|P_22
[}A glandular tumor extirpated, which 
had been gradually growing more 
than twenty years to the circum- 
ference of fourteen inches, ex- 
tending from the root of the ear 
unto the cheek, and far down the 
neck. }]
IN the beginning of June 1757, Mrs. B.
of A. about forty five years of age, 
and healthy in all other respects, first 
asked my advice in this case; afterwards, 
in a consultation of a Physician and four 
Surgeons, besides myself, it was unani- 
mously agreed, from the threatening as- 
pect of the tumor, that there was now 
no time to lose; and that the operation 
was adviseable, without any farther delay, 
though the season was unfavorable on 
account of the excessive heat of the wea- 
ther. 

These Gentlemen were present at the 
operation, July the 11th; the tumor re- 
quired to be dissected off with great cau- 
|P_23
tion to avoid the blood vessels lying be- 
neath it; not one was opened of any dan- 
gerous consequence, nor did the division 
of salival duct prove any obstacle to 
the healing of the wound, by the usual 
treatment. 

We examined the tumor after it was 
extirpated; the glandular substance of it 
was in a scirrhous state, and in the su- 
perior part, immediately under the skin, 
which was of a dusky red color, and rea- 
dy to burst, we found about a quarter of 
a pint of a blackish, oily fluid, where we 
had observed a fluctuation before the ope- 
ration. 

It may not be amiss to observe, that when we may 
reasonably suppose we have effectually stopped the hæ- 
morrhage, by ligatures, or otherwise, after any ope- 
ration, wherein many considerable blood-vessels must 
unavoidably be divided, it will even then be prudent 
to wait a little while (and until the pulse rises, if the 
patient happens to be faint) before we finish the dres- 
sing of the wound, lest any retracted vessel, which may 
have escaped our notice, should bleed soon after: this 
accident has often happened through that inattention, 
when it will occasion the more trouble, besides alarm- 
ing the patient and by-standers to our prejudice. 

|P_24
[}A violent extension and contusion 
upon the muscles of the neck, 
attended with uncommon conse- 
quences. }]
May the 3d, 1755. 

THE daughter of H. L. of S. was 
thrown backwards off an horse, and 
received an extension and contusion upon 
the muscles serving to draw the head back- 
wards. When she was brought to me, 
her chin was fallen upon her breast, and 
from the friction, by an involuntary and 
constant vibrating motion, the skin was 
fretted off both these parts, which, with 
the pain she suffered upon the posterior 
part of her neck, made her life very un- 
comfortable. 

Various applications and bandages 
were tried for two years to no purpose. 
I gave directions for making the machine, 
in plate 2, fig. 2. by the use of which alone 
the relaxed parts recovered their tone, and 
|P_25
she was perfectly cured in six months. By 
the same means, I have since cured a similar 
case of a year's standing. 

A machine of this kind, with a branch to pass up on 
each side of the head, may be useful to keep the head 
and neck in their natural direction, after the operation 
for the wry-neck, and perhaps answer the end better 
than the common bandage used upon that occasion; 
but I cannot recommend it with certainty, having never 
had an opportunity of experiencing it in that case: how 
far it might contribute to the cure of that disorder, or 
give relief without the operation, may be worth consi- 
dering and trying. 

|P_26
[}Plate II. }]a. a. The fixed points to rest upon the top 
of the shoulders. b. The branch to pass up the side of 
the head, and bear gently against 
it to keep it steady. c. The branch to come forwards for the 
chin to rest upon, having a soft 
concave pad annexed to it, move- 
able with a screw to raise the head 
gradually. d. The bow to be placed behind the neck. e. e. The straps of leater to pass from the 
shoulders, and hang unto the pins 
f. f.[^An illustration of ??? on a separate page — missing from the source text. ^]
|P_27
[}A great number of large strumous 
glands situated in the Axilla, and 
 underneath the Pectoral Muscle, 
successfully extirpated; and an 
 Ophthalmy cured. }]
Nov. the 8th, 1750. 

THE Wife of H. L. of T. twenty five 
years of age, first perceived a small, 
indolent, moveable tumor in the right Ax- 
illa, between five and six years ago, which 
grew gradually in two years to the size of 
a turky's egg; another appeared then, im- 
mediately beneath the clavicle, and in six 
months acquired the bigness of a large 
walnut: these tumors increased by little 
and little, and more glands became ob- 
structed and swelled. About five months 
ago inflammations seized both her eyes, 
soon depriving her of the sight of one of 
them, and with the other she was scarce 
able to guide herself. 

|P_28
Her parents were healthy, and before 
the appearance of the tumor in the Axilla
she had a good state of health, but after 
that was grievously afflicted with pain in 
her stomach, and heat in her bowels, ac- 
companied with an obstinate costiveness; 
for which she found but little relief, by a 
great variety of medicines prescribed by a 
very judicious practitioner. 

In this most deplorable condition she 
fell under my care, with the whole Axilla
full of distempered glands, beginning to 
have a cancerous appearance; and a chain 
of them was continued from thence near 
the clavicle quite to the neck, daily in- 
creasing. After deliberately considering 
the case, I thought nothing could be done 
to any purpose, unless the diseased glands 
could be entirely extirpated: we had a con- 
sultation immediately, consisting of a phy- 
sician and four surgeons of eminence, who 
readily concurred in my opinion; but we 
were all of us apprehensive, that if these 
glands were removed, even then, it was 
very doubtful what would be the event of 
the operation; for, if the disease happened 
|P_29
to be stopped here, the same cause still ex- 
isting, probably would produce the same 
effect, and attack some other part inter- 
nal or external, and frustrate our endea- 
vours. 

These indeed were very discouraging 
circumstances, but the patient after hear- 
ing all that passed in our consultation, as 
we thought it right she should in such an 
hazardous case, in order to chuse for her- 
self; said, with great courage and resolu- 
tion, she would submit to the operation, 
desiring to have it done whenever it should 
be thought proper. 

NOVEMBER the 16th, I performed 
the operation in the presence of those gen- 
tlemen, beginning in the Axilla, whence I 
dissected all the glands, opening but one 
blood vessel of any consequence, which I 
easily commanded with the needle and li- 
gature, though it lay deep in the Axilla: 
I filled the wound then with dry lint, and 
got one of my assistants to support a com- 
press upon it with his hand. We now 
found it expedient to refresh our patient 
with a little wine, and allow her a short re- 
|P_30
spite; after which, she readily submitting, 
I made an incision from the superior part 
of the other glands, in a curved line, to 
the angle of the Axilla, where I left off, 
intending to meet it at the same point with 
another, in order to remove an oval piece 
of the teguments along with the affected 
glands; but instead of laying them bare, as 
we expected, only the Pectoral Muscle came 
in view, which circumstance made us he- 
sitate a moment; having, however, pro- 
ceeded thus far, it was unanimously agreed 
to go on: upon this determination, I di- 
vided the muscle in an oblique direction as 
far as was thought necessary, and the glands 
being pretty much disengaged from the 
subjacent parts, were removed without any 
difficulty or effusion of blood worth re- 
garding. Thus ended, very happily, one 
of the most tedious and dangerous opera- 
tions we had any of us ever seen. There 
are but few difficulties that occur in ope- 
rations, but what we may be able to sur- 
mount, if we can preserve a calmness and 
presence of mind. 

The number of glands taken out of 
the Axilla was nineteen of various sizes, 
|P_
some were like large potatoes, others no 
larger than filberts; and eight were situated 
under the Pectoral Muscle, which differed 
also in their size. 

After dressing with dry lint and di- 
gestive in the common manner, I applied 
soft compresses of cloth spread thick with 
Unguent. e Florib. Sambuci, and the roller 
no straiter than just to confine the dressings. 
After every capital operation we should 
give our utmost attention to the applica- 
tion of the compresses and bandage, that 
they may sit, and be left as easy as possi- 
ble upon the tender parts; as long con- 
tinued pain must have destructive conse- 
quences; from which considerations, a 
little warm Ol. Olivar. optim. should now 
and then be poured in, after gently raising 
the compresses and bandage in convenient 
places. 

The symptoms following the operation 
were very favorable, the wound digested 
kindly and was perfectly cicatrized in eight 
weeks. When she was in a condition to 
bear alteratives, I had recourse to them, 
particularly to small doses of Merc. dulc.
|P_32
Within about three months she recovered 
the perfect sight of one eye, and the in- 
flammation did not continue upon the 
other, but the Cornea was too much thick- 
ened to transmit the visual rays. After the 
wound was healed, I made her first a seton 
in her neck, and then super-scapulary fon- 
tinels, which she kept open about two 
years. For a long time after the wound 
was perfectly cicatrized, she drank sea- 
water, and took Æthiop. min. and Antimon. 
crud.

Her happy deliverance from this im- 
pending danger, and the enjoyment of 
good health ever since, have amply reward- 
ed her uncommon fortitude; and me for 
my care of her, she being an object of 
charity, and supported, during the cure, 
by a gentleman whose great delight is in 
doing good. 

|P_33
[}A cancerous breast, of an enormous 
size, extirpated. }]
Sept. the 11th, 1755. 

IN a consultation held on the case of 
Mrs. D. of P. a remarkably corpu- 
ent woman, yet very active and tempe- 
rate, it was unanimously agreed, that she 
had no other chance for relief but by losing 
her breast, which was about a yard in 
circumference, not yet fixed, but threat- 
ening immediate ulceration. 

Under these discouraging circum- 
stances we could not urge the opera- 
tion, but the week following, at her own 
desire, I performed it, Mr. Layman an 
eminent surgeon, and the surgeon whose 
patient she had long been, assisting me: 
the operation did not prove tedious con- 
sidering the magnitude of the breast, nor 
did any thing material occur in it. 

The skin of the whole breast was af- 
fected to such a degree, that we durst not 
|P_34
attempt to preserve so much of it as we 
would willingly have done; and the Mem- 
brana adiposa was near five inches thick 
towards the Axilla. The wound healed 
very kindly, it was perfectly cicatrized in 
a little more than three months, by the 
great care of the surgeon whose patient 
she had been before; she had as good 
health as usual for about a year after. 

We examined the principal distempered 
gland, suspended in a bloody fluid, which 
appeared of a lymphatic nature, by in- 
spissating with a moderate degree of heat; 
the Cyst which contained the fluid, was 
formed of the Capsula of the gland, the 
gland itself remaining in a scirrhous state, 
out of which an excrescence was grown, 
resembling the head of a collyflower, as 
represented in plate 3. 

Upon cutting into the body of the 
gland, which was like the gizzard of a 
turkey, we observed some vessels varicous, 
others ruptured, and many Coagulums of 
blood, such, I suppose, as the Ancients 
called Atra Bilis, and looked upon to be 
the efficient cause of Cancers. 

|P_35
DECEMBER the 28th, 1756, I was 
again desired to meet her surgeon, on ac- 
count of an indolent tumor, extending 
uniformly over the whole Scapula on the 
other side, and measuring three feet and 
eight inches in circumference, without 
the breast or glands in the Axilla being the 
least affected, yet I looked upon it to be 
an appearance of the old leaven, there- 
fore I advised no application, only to have 
it well supported, and that all possible 
care should be taken to prevent its break- 
ing. 

She died April the 2d, 1757. Before 
her death the tumor was much increased; 
she lived but a short time after it broke, 
and that in the utmost misery, without any 
ease but what was procured by opiates: 
the discharge was immensely great, and the 
matter not only excessively offensive in smell, 
but the Effluvia proceeding from it were so 
virulent, as to affect those who constantly 
attended her. One of the persons who 
bore her to the grave told me, that the 
stench made him very sick, and that he 
was immediately seized with a flux, which 
soon relieved him. 

|P_36
The cicatrice where the breast was ex- 
tirpated, continued perfectly smooth and 
well to her death, without the least ap- 
pearance of the disease upon the circum- 
jacent parts. 

Many years ago Mr. Layman and I were present when 
Mr. Amyas, late of Norwich, extirpated a cancerous 
breast, in which we found a considerable quantity of 
gravel, and many small stones, in the center of the 
glands. 

|P_38
[}Plate III. }]
[}The representation of a cancerous gland. }]a. a. a. a. The common teguments. b. b. b. b. The capsula of the gland which 
formed the cyst containing the 
bloody fluid. c. c. c. The colly-flower-like excrescence, 
which sprouted from the body 
of the gland. d.  The Fimbria which laid loose 
upon the gland, but was at- 
tached to the excrescence. e. The incision into the body of the 
gland, which discovered the 
varicous and ruptured vessels, 
and the coagulums of blood. [^An illustration of ??? on a separate page (probably should be in the place of page 37) — missing from the source text. ^]
|P_39
[}A cancerous disease which arose from 
drinking some liquor impregnated 
with the matter that issued from 
an ulcerated cancer. }]
IN the year 1752, I was desired to visit 
a person of great virtue and veracity 
in Norwich, near sixty years of age, who 
had a cancerous tumor upon her breast, 
and the glands in the Axilla much af- 
fected, causing a large œdematous swel- 
ling of the whole arm, quite through to 
the ends of her fingers. 

The account she gave me of her very 
singular case, confirmed by her relations, 
was this: that her parents were healthy, 
and that when she was a child about three 
years old, she went with her mother to vi- 
sit a friend, who had an ulcerated cancer 
upon her breast, which had just been 
dressed, and some of the liquor with which 
it had been washed, standing in a tea-cup 
upon the table, she drank a little of it: an 
eating ulcer seized her tongue and one side 
|P_40
of her mouth about a fortnight after, mak- 
ing dismal ravage of the cheek, as well 
on the outside as the inside: she was put 
under the care of a surgeon of great cha- 
racter in London who found much diffi- 
culty in stopping the progress of the dis- 
ease here. More than twenty years after 
that, the leaven shewed itself upon her 
thigh, where she had received a contusion 
some years before, and an abscess was 
formed near the bone, towards the articu- 
lation of the hip, which was also cured 
with the utmost difficulty, by a very able 
surgeon at Norwich. She had a tolerable 
good state of health after this, for about 
fifteen years, and then discovered a small 
scirrhous knot in her breast, remaining in- 
dolent and moveable, increasing but slow- 
ly, untill the time of the cessation of the 
menstrual discharge; it began then to in- 
crease very considerably, and in a few years 
occupied the whole breast, with all the 
glands in the Axilla at last, but it rernained 
occult to her death; a few months before 
which, her arm became affected as already 
described. 

|P_41
[}An abscess in the Pleura opened and 
cured. }]
MR. R. N. of M. aged about forty 
five, who had by intemperance in- 
jured a good constitution, was seized in 
the beginning of September 1755 with a 
pleurisy, for which he was blooded and 
treated as regularly, as an untractable pa- 
tient would admit of, but all to little pur- 
pose. Respiration became extremely diffi- 
cult, attended with a violent cough and 
continual fever; he grew daily worse in all 
respects, and his life appeared to be in the 
most imminent danger; yet, not being 
apprehensive of the danger he was in, 
when urged by his friends to do what was 
proper, he rejected their persuasions, and 
shewed an invincible obstinacy; but, at 
length, his breathing becoming so difficult 
as to threaten immediate suffocation, I was 
called to him in great haste, October the 
25th. 

Besides these symptoms, I found him 
greatly emaciated. After strict inquiry, 
|P_42
and obtaining all the information I could 
from him, and those who attended him, 
I carefully examined the affected side, when, 
comparing it with the other, it appeared to 
me rather thicker, especially where he 
complained of a fixed pain, which was 
between the fifth and sixth rib, about the 
middle from the Sternum to the Spine, upon 
which part I understood he had formerly 
received a blow, though he had no com- 
plaint in consequence of it, worth taking 
notice of, until he was attacked with this 
disease. 

After having considered all these cir- 
cumstances, I was inclined to think an ab- 
scess was formed in the Pleura, and that 
the matter would make its way into the 
cavity of the Thorax, if it had not alrea- 
dy done so, which determined me to pro- 
pose the operation directed in the Empyema, 
as the only means of relieving him; he 
was very much averse to it, but by rea- 
soning with him, and shewing the impro- 
bability there was of affording him relief 
in any other manner, joined to the earnest 
entreaty of his relations and friends, he 
did at last comply with what I proposed. 

|P_43
Without any farther delay, I then 
performed the operation, directly upon 
the part where he complained of pain, and 
discharged a large quantity of fetid matter. 
The next day, in order to keep the aper- 
ture open, and allow a free Exit to the 
matter in the intervals of dressing, I intro- 
duced a flat hollow tent dipped into Bel- 
loste's compound Samaritan Balsam, and ap- 
plied over it a piece of common plaster, 
with a hole corresponding to the mouth 
of the tent, and soft compresses, a laced 
flannel bandage and scapulary: the tent 
was made of a leaden Canula covered with 
a piece of plaster, with ears of a sufficient 
length and breadth to rest steadily upon 
the rib above and below, and confined to 
the part with snips of plaster: this me- 
thod of dressing I have often found an- 
swers the purpose perfectly well in such 
cases. 

Upon the evacuation of the matter he 
was immediately relieved; the pain and 
cough ceased, he breathed freely in every 
position, in a short time the fever left him, 
ind he recovered a good appetite. 

|P_44
The discharge was very large for about 
ten days, then became moderate; when 
the matter was grown well-conditioned, 
and the quantity of it much lessened, I 
left out the tent, and carefully touched 
the circumference of the wound with the 
Caust. commun. fort. dressing for the future 
superficially. 

In about six weeks the wound was per- 
fectly healed, and he recovered a good state 
of health soon after. Ass's milk, Balsa- 
mics, &c. were prescribed during the cure. 

When we have reason to suspect that an abscess may 
be forming in the Pleura, we cannot be too watchful, 
as it is of the utmost consequence to discover and open 
it before it bursts and discharges the matter into the 
cavity of the Thorax. What Mr. Sharp in his Critical 
Inquiry , and Monsr. Le Dran in his Operations and Ob- 
servations in Surgery, have wrote upon this subject, 
with the different kinds of Empyema and Abscesses in 
the Thorax deserve to be read with the greatest atten- 
tion. Bonetus in his Anatomia practica has also a col- 
lection of cases to the same purpose well worth reading. 

|P_45
[}An incysted tumor situated between 
the muscles of the Abdomen and 
the Peritonæum. }]
MR. C. M. of S. a man of more than 
ordinary vigor, aged about thirty 
five, received some blows upon the Abdo- 
men, in a boxing match, which were not 
attended seemingly with any bad conse- 
quences farther than slight transient pains, 
during the space of four or five years; af- 
ter this period, however, a circumscribed 
tumor appeared three or four inches round 
the navel, accompanied with a constant 
obtuse pain: in this state it remained se- 
veral years, making but a very slow pro- 
gress, and those whose advice he took were 
very dubious of its nature. 

About ten years were elapsed when 
he came to ask my opinion, October the 
12th, 1741. After well considering the 
detail he gave me of his case from the 
beginning, and strictly examining the 
tumor, which was increased in the last six 
|P_46
months to a great size, extending most 
towards the Inguen, I was inclined to think 
it of the incysted and lymphatic kind. His 
health had been greatly impaired; the tu- 
mor was prominent and much inflamed 
at the navel, the matter seemed to have 
made its way through the Cyst, and was just 
ready to break through the skin. 

I attended him as soon as he re- 
turned home, and upon attempting to rise 
from his seat when I entered the room, 
the skin broke and discharged a large quan- 
tity of a brown lymphatic fluid. As the 
matter had made its own way out, he 
would not suffer me to make an opening 
at the bottom, either by incision on caus- 
tic, as I proposed and urged, nor yet to 
remove the thin teguments at the navel by 
knife or scissars, to procure a freer Exit
to the matter; but through much persua- 
sion he did allow me to touch those parts, 
with a piece of Caust. commun. fort. I 
found the aperture plugg'd up the next 
day with a stiff gelatinous substance, which 
I extracted; and, after pushing back the 
Cyst, at least three pints of the same kind 
of fluid issued out: the dressing was after 
|P_47
the usual manner, and when the Eschar. 
fell off, I touched the parts again with the 
Caustic, as much as an ungovernable pa- 
tient would permit, aiming to open, by 
this means, an ample passage for the Cyst. 

Thus I proceeded, and on November
the 3d, when I took off the dressings, I 
found the Cyst, like an inflated intestine, 
strangled in the opening, still too narrow 
to admit of an easy extraction, yet he 
would not give me leave to enlarge it by 
incision, but, with great care and trouble, 
I extracted it whole, which was very pu- 
trid, and had an excessively offensive, ca- 
daverous smell: a few days after I extrac- 
ted another intire Cyst of a smaller size. 

There was now an immoderate dis- 
charge of a fetid matter, highly acrimo- 
nious and excoriating, which turned silver 
in a minute's time like copper; the patient 
had a cough, was hectical, and daily lost 
flesh and strength, yet, as the Cysts were 
come away, he thought he should soon be 
cured, and all the arguments I could use 
were not prevalent enough to convince him 
how much still depended upon making an 
|P_48
opening at the bottom of the Sinus, which 
was very capacious. Under these circum- 
stances I was greatly embarrassed, and 
dreading the worst consequences would at- 
tend the constant absorption of putrid 
matter into the blood, I insisted upon a 
consultation, in hopes that the result of it 
would influence him to submit to what 
appeared to me absolutely necessary to be 
speedily done. 

A very eminent Physician and Sur- 
geon were consulted: after examining the 
part and considering the condition the pa- 
tient was in, they both peremptorily told 
him, he must submit to a depending open- 
ing being made, as I had proposed, if he 
would give himself a chance for his life. 
The thickness of the parts, I believe, was 
about two inches, through which an open- 
ing was agreed upon to be made by a Caus- 
tic: I foresaw the difficulty that would at- 
tend effecting it by the common manner 
of applying the Caustic, therefore after 
moistening the skin with a few drops of 
warm water, I began by rubbing it gent- 
ly with a piece of pipe-form Caust. commun. 
fort. having thus mortified the skin and 
|P_
Membrana adiposa, I divided the Eschar with 
a lancet immediately, laying the muscle in 
view, and thrusting the point of the lan- 
cet a little way into it; I then took a 
pointed piece of the Caustic and by turn- 
ing and pushing it with a moderate force, 
wrought into the bottom of the Sinus as 
the probe directed me, in less than half 
an hour; through this opening I drew a 
seton dipped into Belloste's compound Sama- 
ritan Balsam, and soon gained a free dis- 
charge of the matter at this depending 
part, immediately above the ring of the 
muscles on the right side. 

Within a week or ten days there 
was a visible amendment in his health, 
and the matter grew better conditioned. 
When the Eschar was digested off I dis- 
continued the seton, introduced a leaden 
Canula, through which the matter passed 
uninterrupted, and ordered a flannel body- 
piece should be laced on, with an easy 
compress stitched to it, to rest upon the 
superior part of the Sinus. When the 
matter appeared well conditioned, and in 
a small quantity, I left out the Canula and 
|P_50
dressed superficially, only with dry lint and 
a common plaster. 

By this treatment, with a few medi- 
cines, and drinking ass's milk, he was per- 
fectly cured in about four months. He 
lived many years after, and often told me 
that he enjoyed as good health as in the 
former part of his life, without finding 
any considerable diminution of his strength; 
but died at last in consequence of a mad 
frolick. 

From what I have observed, in a variety of instances, 
I have reason to believe the application of the Caust. 
commun. fort. in this manner, will be found most eli- 
gible, as it acts much quicker, and the Eschar can be 
made of the very dimensions we chuse. 

|P_51
[}A Prolapsus Ani, &c. }]
IN the year I749, I was consulted in 
this case by a gentleman's wife, in 
whom the parts which suspend the Anus
had been so relaxed for a long time, that 
she was not able to walk across the room 
without its prolapsing: I thought of the 
machine represented in pl. 4. which im- 
mediately answered the intention so well, 
as to enable her to follow her family af- 
fairs; it was not long before she could 
walk some miles, and ride on horseback 
with it, without any considerable incon- 
venience. 

She had been grievously afflicted with 
the bleeding piles almost all her life, at 
length, from one of them, which was ve- 
ry large, an hæmorrhage ensued, and 
brought her into imminent danger: upon 
this occasion I was consulted in 1751, and 
was of opinion with her Physician and 
Surgeon, that nothing could be done with 
a prospect of relief, without taking it off; 
|P_52
the operation was forthwith performed, 
which in all probability saved her life, as 
her solids were greatly relaxed, and her 
blood extremely impoverished by the long 
continuance of the bleeding. 

She was in general very costive, and 
whatever medicines were prescribed to re- 
medy that inconvenience soon lost their 
effect: Sea-water was at last tried, which 
agreed with her; it answered the intention 
perfectly well, and does so to this day, in 
the same small quantity as at first. Though 
she has now drank it more than seven 
years. 

As soon as she could bear the ma- 
chine or truss she wore it again, and can- 
not now go without it: she is not the on- 
ly person who has found relief by the same 
means. 

She wears the bow upon the upper 
part of her hips, the flat upright part un- 
der her stays up the spine, and fixes the 
band at the bottom of the Abdomen: in 
this manner she finds that it keeps well 
fixed upon the part, and that upon any 
|P_53
occasion she can easily slip it aside, and ad- 
just it again, now she is well used to the 
management of it. The dimensions of 
it for her, who is of a common size, are 
15 inches long, properly turned, and made 
rounding where it passes between the hips; 
the flat part of it, made a little tapering, 
is about two inches broad at the top; the 
pad is of an oval form, about an inch 
broad, well stuffed and prominent in the 
middle; the bow is 18 inches long and one 
broad, thin and very elastic and so curved 
as to sit easy upon the parts; the band is 
20 inches long; the whole is covered with 
soft oiled leather, and stuffed where neces- 
sary for the patient's ease. 

Additions or alterations in this machine may be made 
occasionally, at the discretion of the Surgeon; per- 
haps another bow to pass over the loins; a suspensory 
from the shoulders; or a strap between the thighs 
coming from the waste-band and hanging unto a hook 
upon the pad, &c. may be found necessary to fix it 
steadily and well in some cases. Great care is required 
in taking the measure, that it may be exactly adapted 
to the parts, and have an easy and regular bearing every 
where: the best way of measuring for this, as well as 
for common trusses, is with a wire, which can be turn- 
ed every way, and will stand to the form of the parts. 

|P_54
[}A singular case of the stone. }]J.H. of P. aged 48, had been subject 
to the stone from his infancy; was 
searched and should have been cut at eight 
years of age: his constitution was natu- 
rally robust, but he had much impaired it 
by drinking, and living a very intempe- 
rate life. 

The operation was performed on June
the 8th 1746, by Mr. Harmer, late of Nor- 
wich, an experienced Lithotomist, after Ma- 
rianus's method. It was found impracti- 
cable to extract the stone through a wound 
of the common size, which he had made, 
or break it by the force of the Forceps, 
therefore, at his desire, I divided the parts 
occasionally as he gently extracted it. 

There was no reason to expect the 
wound would ever be perfectly healed after 
the extraction of a stone of that size, but 
he had no symptoms that threatened his 
life in consequence of the operation: he 
|P_55
lived until April 1751, walking abroad un- 
til within a few days of his death. 

The stone is represented in pl. 5. fig. 1. 
it weighed near fifteen ounces, and, I be- 
lieve, is the largest we have upon record, 
taken from a living subject. It was of a 
hard texture, and had a substance like Spar, 
to a considerable thickness, upon many 
parts of its surface. 

The Gorget, as improved by Mr. Serjeant Hawkins, 
obviates an accident which may happen in the opera- 
tion when performed by the most skilful artist, but the 
cutting edge of it, for a very obvious reason, I think, 
should not extend above one third of its length; and 
it should have a small shoulder that it may enter with 
the greater facility. I have used it three times without 
ahy apparent inconvenience either in the operation or 
after it. 

The first, was in a child of eight years old, who had 
a bad constitution, yet the wound was perfectly healed 
in nineteen days. 

The second, was in one of eleven, who had a soft 
stone of three ounces weight, the external Lamina of 
which cracked in the Forceps, in many places, yet it 
was extracted without any of the pieces separating: 
two days after the operation he was sensible of an oc- 
casion to make urine, which he voided through the 
Penis with a pretty, full and strong stream; very little 
passed through the wound after that time, which was 
speedily healed. 

The third, was in a subject of between eleven and 
twelve years of age, in which it appeared of very sig- 
nal service to many able Surgeons present at the ope- 
|P_56
ration. This patient had symptoms of the stone soon 
after he was born; for many years the stone had con- 
stantly lain at the neck of the bladder, where it had 
caused an uncommon thickness and hardness of the 
parts, as far as we could feel with our fingers intro- 
duced into the Anus, and produced an ulcer, which 
daily discharged much matter through the Penis: the 
Prepuce was so contracted at the end that it would not 
admit the smallest sound; the matter, mixed with the 
urine, was continually stopping between the Glans Pe- 
nis and the Prepuce, which excoriating and ulcerating 
these parts, made circumcision necessary before the ope- 
ration for the stone; besides these unfavourable cir- 
cumstances, he had a Procidentia Ani to a great degree 
always upon going to stool, and often at other times. 
From the condition of the neck of the bladder, and 
the stone being long bedded and firmly fixed there, I 
found great difficulty to introduce the Gorget notwith- 
standing its cutting. The stone broke into many frag- 
ments, being soft like sand and clay mixed together, 
still the operation succeeded happily and the wound was 
perfectly cured, but with great trouble and difficulty. 
In this case Bougies appeared very usesul in keeping the 
natural passage open, by introducing them now and 
then, during the cure. 

|P_57
[}A case in which sixteen stones were 
extracted out of the Urethra and 
Bladder. They are represented in 
Plate 5. Fig. 2. }]
THE person from whom these stones 
were taken was cut at four years of 
age, by Mr. Donne of Dearham, an ex- 
pert Lithotomist, as well as a very able Sur- 
geon; when the wound was almost cica- 
trized, the urine not having pass'd through 
it for near a week, as he was tumbling 
upon the bed, he fell astride upon the 
frame of the bedstead, by which accident 
the wound was broke open, the adjacent 
parts were violently contused, and the 
wound could never be perfectly healed af- 
terwards. 

Ten years after this he was again 
brought under Mr. Donne's care, and, 
upon strict examination, he discovered an 
hard body in the course of the Urethra
from the Scrotum into the Bladder. These 
stones were easily extracted through a 
|P_58
wound of two or three inches long; all 
of them were contiguous, and bedded the 
one into the other; that which appears of 
an irregular oval figure at one end was 
lost in the Scrotum; the two at the other 
end, which were all that were found in 
the Bladder, much resembled the ball and 
socket of a bone, and at first sight seemed 
more of the texture of a bone than a 
stone; all the other were like alabaster in 
color, and of as fine or rather a finer 
polish. Various attempts were made to 
cure the wound but all in vain: the pa- 
tient is now a stout strong man aged 24, 
and does not want health in any other 
respect. 

I had the above narration, as well as 
the opportunity of examining the patient, 
when I was with Mr. Donne in November
1755, on account of his cutting a young 
gentleman for the stone, in whose case and 
in the operation, there was likewise some 
remarkable circumstances. It was ob- 
served that he used frequently to be seized 
with a spasmodic contraction in his blad- 
der, and that his urine always ran from 
him then involuntarily. As soon as the 
|P_59
incision was made into the staff, the spasm 
forced out the urine, before the opera- 
tor could introduce the gorget into the 
bladder, and upon introducing the Forceps
he could not find the stone; after search- 
ing some time he withdrew them, felt 
with his finger and desired me and ano- 
ther Surgeon to do so; we could not feel 
any, but all of us were sensible of an un- 
usual stricture, at the extremity of our 
fingers; after a little farther search in the 
common posture that he was in, we re- 
moved the ligatures, placed him in an up- 
right sitting posture, and pressed strongly 
upon the Abdomen, which relaxed the stric- 
ture and brought the stone instantly down 
to the neck of the bladder; then it was 
easily extracted. 

this patient was much emaciated and 
hectical, yet the symptoms after the opera- 
tion were very favorable, and he soon 
recovered a better state of heath. 

|P_60
[}A case of the stone in a woman, at- 
tended with some uncommon cir- 
cumstances. }]
MRS. T. of A. aged between forty 
and fifty years, after having been 
severely afflicted about ten years, and using 
various medicines to no purpose, had re- 
course to Mrs. Stephens's with no better ef- 
fect, though she gave them a fair trial for 
eleven months. Growing daily worse she 
resolved to submit to the operation, if it 
should be thought adviseable, her consti- 
tution being much impaired, and having 
a constant discharge of purulent matter 
from the bladder. 

AUGUST the 17th, 1740, she asked 
my advice, and after well considering all 
her complaints, I was of opinion it was 
right to extract the stone, though the 
event of the operation could not but be 
looked upon as very precarious; for by 
passing my finger up the Vagina Uteri, I 
could plainly discover it was a large one, 
|P_61
the friction of which had caused an in- 
flammation and ulceration in the bladder. 

After putting her in the posture for 
the operation, I intended to have proceeded 
according to the usual manner, by dilating 
the Urethra, and making an incision as 
should be found necessary to facilitate the 
extraction of the stone, but finding, with 
my finger, that it lay very favorably to 
be cut upon through the Vagina Uteri, 
now considerably dilated, I altered my 
original design, and, with the approba- 
tion of two experienced practitioners, cut 
upon it, and extracted it with very little 
pain to the patient, or trouble to myself, 
 comparison to what a stone of between 
three and four ounces weight must una- 
voidably have occasioned, by performing 
the operation after the common method. 

The symptoms after the operation 
were the most gentle; the ulceration of 
the bladder soon healed, by soft, balsamic 
injections, and she was perfectly cured in 
three weeks, without any defect of the 
retentive faculty remaining. 

|P_62
[}A case of a complete Hernia attend- 
ed with a mortification in an aged 
woman, perfectly cured. }]
THE wife of R. R. of B. aged about 
sixty years, naturally of a good, 
strong constitution, had a descent of the 
intestine, &c.December the 20th, 1752, 
to which she had been subject many years, 
without ever wearing a truss: the usual 
symptoms attending a strangulation of the 
intestine soon followed; an Apothecary was 
immediately sent for, who took her com- 
plaint for the colic and treated it accord- 
ingly three or four days; the symptoms 
growing daily worse, and she often vomit- 
ting excrementitious matter, he then look- 
ed upon it as the iliac passion, and had 
recourse to tobacco clysters, and then to 
Argent. viv. giving her, as he told me, lb. 1 ß. 

On the 29th I was called to her, and 
found the teguments much inflamed and 
vesicated, with livid spots here and there 
interspersed; and the tumor having lost 
|P_63
its renitence, I did not doubt of the in- 
testine, &c. being in a mortified state: 
the Abdomen was greatly inflated, tense and 
painful; she frequently vomited excre- 
ments, could bear nothing in her stomach, 
had the hiccup and a weak, quick and in- 
termitting pulse. 

Under these most miserable circum- 
stances, her relations and friends were 
come to take their last leave of her; in- 
deed I thought death would have put an 
end to her misery in a few hours; all that 
appeared to me rational now to propose 
and attempt for the preservation of her 
life was, to open the part sufficiently, in 
order to remove the strangulation of the 
intestine, and evacuate the Fæces, though 
I must confess I could not expect the 
case would have ended more favorably, 
than by leaving an artificial Anus in the 
Inguen. 

This proposition being approved by 
the patient and all persons concerned, I 
forthwith made an opening of between 
two and three inches long, through which 
there was an immediate discharge of ma- 
|P_64
ny pints of black, fluid, fermenting ex- 
crements, like what those who attended her 
observed she had vomited many days: upon 
this discharge the inflation of the Abdomen
subsided, and she found instant relief. I 
fomented the parts with a common anti- 
septic Fotus, dressed them with a warm di- 
gestive, applying a warm cataplasm to 
them and all the Abdomen. It appeared to 
me adviseable, on account of the fæcal dis- 
charge, that she should be dressed every six 
hours: I directed the application of blad- 
ders of hot water to preserve a due de- 
gree of heat from dressing to dressing. I 
did not forget to advise the discretionary 
use of cordials, laxatives and clysters; and 
that she should, for some time, be nou- 
rished only with liquid diet, taken in small 
quantities and often. 

After having agreed with the Apo- 
thecary upon the method for him to pure 
sue, I left her to his care, urging at the 
same time his assiduous attendance, as the 
event of the most dangerous cases often 
exceeds our expectations, desiring he would 
suffer nature to cast off the mortified 
sloughs, without using any violence to re- 
|P_65
move them. The next day he informed 
me the symptoms were favorable, that 
her diet did not offend her stomach, and 
that she had not vomited since the open- 
ing. 

Two days after, I was desired to visit 
her again; I found her then sitting up in 
her chair, with a quick, strong pulse, and 
great swelling in her face: upon examin- 
ing into the cause of these appearances, I 
discovered they arose from transgressing 
the rules prescribed in regard to diet; for 
notwithstanding the strictest injunctions 
were laid upon her and the nurse in that 
point, yet this day for dinner, she indulged 
her desire and craving appetite, with roast- 
ed chicken and strong beer, eating and 
drinking very plentifully. This transgres- 
sion was very near subverting the fair hopes 
we began to have of her recovery; to pre- 
vent the ill consequences of it as much as 
possible, we had immediate recourse to 
bleeding, repeating it thrice in 24 hours, 
with other measures, to check the rising fe- 
ver and guard against an inflammation 
again seizing the weak and tender intes- 
tines; but it was many days before the 
|P_66
danger was over, which she was evidently 
thrown into by this indiscretion. 

TheFæces began to be evacuated by 
the Anus on the third day after the open- 
ing, and they passed freely both ways until 
the beginning of March; the discharge of 
them gradually lessened at the wound as it 
contracted, which was perfectly healed, 
by the common treatment, soon after that 
time. 

OnFebruary the 4th I first observed 
some of the Argent. viv. in the wound, 
which she had taken on December the 24th, 
and which passed by that as well as by the 
Anus until the wound was perfectly heal- 
ed; for many months afterwards, she 
saw some, now and then, divided into an 
infinite number of globules, which had 
lost their brightness, looking like lead long 
exposed to the air; and she generally was 
sensible of griping pains preceding the stools 
wherein she observed it. 

She enjoys as good health as in the 
former part of her life, and is entirely free 
|P_67
from the inconvenience she had many years 
before laboured under. 

The happy event of this threatening 
case may teach and encourage us, never to 
leave our patients in the utmost apparent 
danger and distress, without endeavouring 
to assist nature by all the prudent and ra- 
tional measures we can think of. 

