
|P_v
[}ADVERTISEMENT. }]
NOtwithstanding much has been 
lately wrote upon this subject, 
yet no one seems to have considered it 
thoroughly. The author therefore begs 
leave to offer the result of his enquiries 
concerning this matter, imagining, if 
he has gone farther than other writers, 
that he is doing some service to the Art 
of Surgery, though this Essay should 
(as it probably will) fall short of per-
fection. 

|P_vii
[}INTRODUCTION. }]
WHOEVER takes a view of 
the late well-intended at-
tempts to recommend a less 
painful method of suppressing the hæ-
morrhage from divided arteries, than 
is generally practised, will find that 
these writers have omitted to ascertain 
by proper experiments the principles 
on which the suppression depends; 
and upon enquiry the different theo-
ries which have been invented by other 
writers will appear to be greatly defi-
cient, and destitute of any fact or ex-
periment sufficient to evince their truth. 

|P_viii
Indeed Mr. Gooch[/1./] has considered 
this affair nearly in its true light; but 
as what he says is only conjectural, it 
seems not to have gained preference 
to the other hypotheses which have 
been advanced; a very ingenious sur-
geon at this time adopting the opinion 
of Pouteau[/2./]. 

In fact, this part of practice has al-
ways been defective, by not learning 
from nature the true intentions to be 
answered. Hence, from not acting 
upon right principles, remedies have 
been applied at random; and nature 
has often effected a cure, in opposi-
tion to the most barbarous and im-
|P_ix
proper applications. The different 
specifics which have been cried up 
and in vogue, and the multiplicity of 
remedies, sufficiently point out the 
uncertainty with which this subject 
has been treated; for had the princi-
ples on which we were to proceed 
been ascertained, the most effectual 
applications would easily have been 
discovered, and the rest discarded as 
useless. And though since the needle 
and ligature were introduced, we have 
been more steady in our practice, yet 
I apprehend we have, even in this 
particular, been not quite free from 
imperfection.—And were we not so 
unsettled, as to be near giving it up 
for remedies recommended with only 
supposed advantages? 

|P_x
The following essay is therefore in-
tended to supply these defects; and I 
hope, by proper experiments, and 
giving a new light to several facts, I 
have both ascertained the principles 
on which a suppression of the flux 
from divided arteries depends, and 
what method most safely and effec-
tually, under different circumstances, 
answers this purpose. 

|P_
[}}]
AN 
ESSAY
ON THE 
Methods of Suppressing 
HÆMORRHAGES
FROM 
Divided Arteries. 


[}CHAP. I.
Of the natural or spontaneous suppression of 
Hæmorrhages from divided arteries. }]
WHEN agaric of the oak was first 
introduced in England, for sup-
pressing the hæmorrhage from 
divided arteries, I made several 
experiments to try in what manner it pro-
duced its effects; and I was soon convinced, 
that it had no other property than that of ad-
|P_2
hering close to the mouth of the vessel: this 
circumstance, together with considering how 
often the smaller arteries close themselves by 
their own natural contraction, and that it was 
common for very considerable arteries to be 
closed in the same manner, when the impulse 
of the blood was abated by the swooning 
of the patient[/3./], led me to imagine that the 
same thing must of course happen in the large 
arteries, provided the passage of the blood 
through them be first intercepted for a time, 
and that the close contraction which was ob-
served in those arteries[/4./] to which the agaric 
had been applied, was intirely owing to the 
course of the blood being impeded by block-
ing up the end of the vessel. 

Every day's experience confirmed me in 
this opinion; for I found that the flux from 
very considerable arteries was easily and ef-
fectually suppressed by only making a per-
pendicular pressure a few minutes upon the 
end of the vessel.—But, in order to be more 
|P_3
certain about this matter, in the latter end of 
the year 1755 I made the following experi-
ment. 

After tying a large horse down, Mr. Peale 
of Maidstone, then with me, took off one of 
his hind legs about the middle of the thigh: 
immediately upon the bone being divided, 
the horse drew the stump towards his body, 
at which time the tourniquet slipt off, and five 
arteries, the least of them about the size of a 
wheat-straw, some near as large as a goose-
quill, and one much larger, poured out with 
great vehemence; but an immediate stop was 
put to the flux by a person pressing with both 
hands upon the wound; and by continuing 
this pressure fifteen minutes, the vessels be-
came so firmly closed as not to discharge the 
least drop of blood. However I passed a 
needle and thread round one of the largest, 
intending to make an experiment with the 
ligature. 

The pulsation at first was very plainly seen 
at their extremities; but after some time it 
became less perceptible, and the wound was 
|P_4
covered with tow, which was kept on with 
very slight bandage. 

The horse was kept alive forty-eight hours 
after the operation; and though he tumbled 
about and struggled much in attempting to 
raise himself up, yet there was not any return 
of the hæmorrhage, nor did there appear the 
least pulsation. 

After he was killed we dissected the thigh, 
and found that the bleeding was not sup-
pressed by congealed blood, but by all the 
vessels being quite close contracted for near an 
inch or more from their extremity. 

After this I made more experiments of the 
same kind upon brutes with the same success, 
and always found, upon dissection, the ends 
of the vessels close contracted for a consi-
derable way: by removing my fingers from 
time to time, while I pressed upon the vessel, 
it was easy to discover this contraction taking 
place by a gradual decrease of the stream of 
blood; but in August 1757 the following case 
gave a further light to this matter. 

|P_5
Jos. Ayre of Caudwell, about twenty years 
of age, in being bled had the misfortune to 
have the humeral artery opened along with 
the basilic vein, and the operator with much 
difficulty suppressed the hæmorrhage by ban-
dage: however a tumor with great pulsation 
soon began to arise in the part wounded, 
which in six or seven weeks increased to the 
size of a pullet's egg. 

The nature of the tumor was at once evi-
dent, and an eschar on the upper part of it 
being upon the point of separation, deter-
mined me to perform the operation for the 
aneurism. 

The impulse of the blood against the liga-
ture at the time of the operation was very 
great; and as part of the artery (whose dia-
meter was considerably enlarged) was exposed, 
its pulsation was remarkably visible: but upon 
removing the dressings the third day after-
wards, the pulsation could neither be seen nor 
felt nearer to the ligature than an inch and 
half; whence I was led to conclude, that the 
artery had collapsed and gradually closed itself 
|P_6
up to the nearest lateral branches, as the re-
sistance towards the ligature abated from the 
blood passing through those vessels.—And it 
appeared to me self-evident that nature always 
took this step to suppress the hæmorrhage 
from divided arteries, when I reflected that 
the same circumstance constantly happens, 
when the umbilical vessels are divided at the 
birth of the foetus. 

However, as I did not look for the lateral 
branches in the experiments mentioned, I cut 
off another horse's tail near his body, and sup-
pressed the hæmorrhage by pressing a few mi-
nutes with my fingers; and by a careful dis-
section the next day after he was killed, I 
found that the conclusion I had drawn was 
(in this subject at least) perfectly right. 

Is it not owing to this cause that an hæ-
morrhage does not follow those mortifications, 
where the greatest part of the limb is de-
stroyed and separates? For if the great vessels 
were closed no farther than where the morti-
fication ends, a flux of blood must of course 
ensue upon the coming away of the dead 
|P_7
parts. Is not this evinced in a case lately pub-
lished by Mr. Antrobus[/5./]? where, though 
the mortification stopped only two inches 
above the ancle, yet it is probable that the 
large arteries closed themselves as far at least 
as where the femoral artery divides below 
the knee; because neither pulsation nor hæ-
morrhage appeared when the leg was taken 
off. 

It will not, I imagine, appear at all sur-
prising, that the closing of the end of the 
vessel an inch only, or perhaps less, should be 
sufficient to resist the force of the circulation, 
when it is considered, that this impulse against 
the end of the artery immediately becomes 
less, and soon intirely ceases, from the blood 
upon meeting with resistance dilating and 
passing through the nearest lateral branches; 
as is fully evident from the gradual decrease, 
and at length the total disappearance, of pul-
sation. 

|P_8
Nor is this contraction of the artery and 
the alteration in the course of the blood long 
in taking place, as appears from the experi-
ments mentioned: and besides these, in many 
instances I have observed, that arteries as large 
as those we commonly meet with in cutting 
for the stone, or in taking off schirrous breasts, 
&c. will for the most part, if they are wholly 
divided, be effectually closed by pressure in 
three or four minutes. And if in taking off 
a leg, we intercept the course of the blood 
longer than is usually done, most of the ar-
teries will often be closed, if the patient is in 
a tolerable good habit, as I have learnt by 
tying the large vessels without loosening the 
tourniquet. 

I took off a woman's leg near the middle 
of her thigh, and tied the large artery with-
out loosening the tourniquet; upon setting it 
at liberty, we observed some blood draining 
down the muscles from one artery only, and 
though it had contracted itself so much as 
scarce to admit the passage of any blood, yet 
by the pulsation it appeared to be a very con-
|P_9
siderable vessel, and on this account the li-
gature was used. 

Several more, which did not bleed, were 
discovered by a strong pulsation at their ex-
tremities; and therefore, instead of immedi-
ately dressing the patient, we waited ten or 
fifteen minutes, and gave her wine to raise 
her spirits, so that we might see whether they 
would bleed or not, and thereby prevent our 
being alarmed with a fresh hæmorrhage after 
she was put to bed: but during this time the 
pulsation gradually disappeared, and the bleed-
ing was effectually stopped. 

Indeed, since I have attended to this cir-
cumstance I have seen it so often happen, that 
I am well convinced in amputations larger 
vessels have been trusted with lint and flour 
than has generally been imagined; and that 
when a fresh hæmorrhage returns some hours 
after an operation, it is not from small arte-
teries being dilated by an increased motion in 
the blood, as has generally been thought, but 
to the principal lateral branches which had 
closed themselves being again forced open. 

|P_10
That the large arteries are also closed in a 
very little time, does not only appear from the 
experiment made upon the horse's leg, but 
likewise in several of those cases where the 
course of the blood was intercepted, either by 
the application of agaric or other fungous sub-
stances, especially a case related by Mr. War-
ner[/6./], where, "in an hour after the opera-
tion, the mouths of the vessels were found 
totally contracted, so as to resist the whole 
force of the circulation;" after which they 
probably, like the umbilical vessels, shrink 
into a perfect cord, and become impervious.— 
And does not nature seem to point out, that 
intercepting the passage of the blood for a 
while, is all that is required from art; as 
some animals by instinct, in separating their 
young from the placenta, lacerate the cord 
with their teeth, whence probably the ragged 
fibres stop up the end of the vessel by col-
lapsing over each other? 

Seeing then that nature suppresses the hæ-
morrhage from divided arteries by the natural 
|P_11
contraction of their circular fibres, when the 
impediment to this contraction is removed, 
by intercepting the impulse of the blood, let 
us fairly enquire what method best answers 
this purpose, beginning with the ligature, on 
account of its having been long in general 
use. 

|P_12
[}CHAP. II.
Of the Ligature.}]
THE success which has hitherto in ge-
neral attended the ligature, is a full 
proof of its efficacy; and it is evident no-
thing can more powerfully intercept the course 
of the blood, provided it can be properly ap-
plied: and though it seems to have been a 
general opinion, that the vessel only unites in 
that part where the stricture is made, and 
preference has on that account been lately 
given to other remedies[/7./]; yet I imagine, 
from what has been said, it will readily be 
conceived that it is also in this case closed by 
its own natural contraction, and which will 
be found true, if the end of the artery can be 
discovered. 

But this is often difficult, it being at first 
commonly covered with the swelled muscles, 
|P_13
and after some time sends out (like all other 
parts) new flesh, and cannot be distinguished: 
therefore as a proof, I shall observe that the 
artery which was tied in the horse's leg, was 
net only closed below, but also at least half 
an inch above the ligature; so that every ad-
vantage possible, in regard to stopping the 
blood, is obtained, provided the end of the 
vessel does not separate and come away with 
the ligature; for though no inconvenience 
will follow, if the stricture is made some dis-
tance from the lateral branches; yet, if it 
happens to be very near, a fresh flux of blood 
must ensue, which is probably one reason 
why there are some few instances to be met 
with of the arteries bleeding again some time 
after they have been tied. 

But, from attending several years to this 
particular, I find that the end of the vessel 
does not so often come away as is imagined, 
and that a separation may be generally avoided, 
as it only happens when the ligature is thin, 
and very little substance is comprised along 
with the vessel in the noose; whereas when 
we take in a proper quantity of the circum-
|P_14
jacent parts to defend it, and the ligature is 
of a proper size, upon digestion coming on it 
becomes loose and slips off, leaving the vessel 
firmly closed and intire. 

However, that we may avoid with as much 
certainty as possible the separation of the end 
of the vessel, I would advise that the ligature 
should be made of long twelve-penny flax, 
without either being the least twisted or waxed 
further than just the end, to make it pass thro' 
the eye of the needle; and if it is rubbed 
over with some soft digestive, it will slip ea-
sily through the flesh. 

This will be found sufficiently strong for 
the purpose for which it is wanted, without 
the least danger of its injuring the vessel; nor 
need the compressure be greater than is just 
necessary to intercept the passage of the blood, 
which will still add to the security in this re-
spect, and at the same time produce other 
advantages, as will be observed in their proper 
place. 

|P_15
And further, if the ligature can be pro-
perly applied, it is equally effectual, whether 
the artery be only in part or intirely divided; 
whether it is at liberty to retract itself, or ad-
heres to an undivided muscle or the bone. 
And if the needle can be passed a proper 
depth into the adjacent parts, no accident 
can remove it, if they are sound, till the state 
of contraction and inflammation is over; 
when, in general, all will have been done 
that is necessary, the pressure of the swelled 
muscles most effectually assisting the closing 
of the vessels. 

Nevertheless, along with these advantages 
it must be confessed, that great pain often ac-
companies the use of the ligature; which, where 
it cannot be avoided, would make us prefer 
any other remedy that is equally safe and un-
attended with this inconvenience. But it very 
fortunately happens, that where the ligature 
is most wanted, it may be applied with very 
little or no pain, if properly managed; for 
the large arteries are commonly surrounded 
with a considerable quantity of cellular mem-
|P_16
brane; and if we only take in with the vessel 
this nearly insensible substance, the patient 
seems undisturbed during the operation[/8./]: 
and upon enquiring of several at the time of 
tying the vessel, whether they felt much pain, 
I have always been answered in the negative; 
and though the nerve which accompanies the 
artery is inclosed in the noose, it makes no 
difference in regard to this circumstance. 

Perhaps it may seem strange to those who 
have not considered this matter, that great 
pain should not arise upon a nerve, which is 
an organ of sensation, being compressed; but 
there are several instances in the practice of 
surgery, besides this, which lead us to ima-
gine that the nerves are incapable of being 
irritated, till they are divested of their cover-
ings, unless you penetrate through their coats 
down to the medullary substance[/9./]conse-
|P_17
quently, when they are also defended by the 
artery, fat, and cellular membrane, they will 
still be less liable to be affected. 

This may be illustrated by reflecting on the 
situation of the nerves in the bones, tendons, 
membranes, and the like; where they seem 
to be rendered insensible and incapable of 
being irritated by the compactness of the 
parts which invest them[/10./], as appears from 
|P_18
the new flesh which follows their being 
wounded, being sensible, and again losing its 
sensibility, as the part acquires its natural tex-
ture. 

With this we may observe that numbness, 
the usual consequence of compressing a nerve, 
cannot here give any uneasiness, because the 
parts to which the nerves were distributed are 
removed. 

However, when the vessels are so situated 
that muscular fibres must of course be in-
closed, the ligature will unavoidably be at-
tended with considerable pain; owing proba-
bly to the nerves being divested of their cover-
ings, and their medullary substance alone ex-
panded over every fibre of a muscle; not, I 
imagine, in the form of papillæ, but in the 
|P_19
same manner, though much thinner, as the 
retina in the bottom of the eye[/11./]. 

But this pain is only momentary, because 
whatever is inclosed becomes nearly insensible 
upon the stricture being made. If the liga-
ture recommended is used, the parts will be 
|P_20
less irritated; and whether the absolute secu-
rity against a future hæmorrhage does not fully 
compensate for the uneasiness the patient feels 
on this account, may be gathered from what 
follows. 

But it is thought, "that the ligature, by 
compressing the adjacent nerve, is some-
times productive of convulsions." Now as 
no facts are brought to support this opinion, 
and as I have never yet seen any accident of 
this kind happen, though I have always, 
without regarding the nerve, freely used the 
needle and ligature; nor, upon strict enquiry, 
found one instance of its happening amongst 
an extensive chirurgical acquaintance, I am 
induced to think with Mr. Sharp[/12./], that the 
doctrine of convulsions being caused by the 
tying of a nerve is merely speculative, and 
seems, though the theory is changed, to have 
taken its rise from the arguments brought 
against Parey, when he first introduced the 
practice of tying the arteries, and since to 
have been copied from one to another by suc-
ceeding writers. 

|P_21
But is it not probable that in this instance, 
as well as many others in surgery, by quite 
altering the meaning of the word nervus we 
have made those symptoms follow the tying 
of a nerve, which should have been consi-
dered only as the consequence of pricking a 
tendon? for long after Parey's time nervus
was used to signify tendon, and by "ner-
vosam aliquam partem, vel nervum[/13./]," &c. 
there is great reason to think Parey's adver-
sary meant a tendon or any tendinous part; 
especially as he supports his opinion by shew-
ing, that for fear of the accidents described, 
Galen durst not stitch transverse wounds till 
he had first discovered the aponeurosis of the 
muscles.

However, we will consider this matter in 
the light it now stands; and for this purpose 
we may observe, that the ligature seems only 
|P_22
capable of irritating and of totally obstructing 
the nerves. 

Now as the nerves upon the muscular fibres 
are very easily irritated, a theory plausible 
enough may be invented to shew, that in cer-
tain habits convulsions will come on upon 
their being tied; but then this would most 
probably happen at the very time they were 
irritated[/14./]: so far from this, no one that I 
know of has even pretended to say, that he 
has seen any patient fall into convulsions at 
the time the stricture was made. It is true 
there are instances where convulsions have 
instantly been brought on by irritation[/15./]; but 
they seem not to have any analogy with the 
case in hand: for the parts were diseased, 
and in all probability had a more acute feel-
ing than ever happens to the nerves in their 
natural state, and consequently different effects 
would arise.—May not the pain in this case, 
as it is smart and of short duration only, 
somewhat in the manner of volatiles applied 
|P_23
to the nose, rather enliven the spirits than 
bring on convulsions? 

On the other hand, if convulsions arose in 
consequence of the nerve being obstructed, 
instead of being a symptom that but very 
rarely happens, they would either in a greater 
or less degree appear almost every time a large 
one was tied; for if these are, as is generally 
believed, distinct cords from their origin, the 
obstruction and its effects would be always 
nearly the same. But so far from this, con-
vulsions of any kind are not more frequent 
where the large nerves are inclosed in the li-
gature, than in slight injuries where it is not 
used. 

Lately Le Dran[/16./] seems to have biassed the 
minds of people[/17./] in favour of this doctrine; 
but unfortunately his practice immediately 
contradicts his theory: for speaking of those 
who, in performing the operation for the 
aneurism, inclose the adjacent flesh within 
|P_24
the ligature, he says[/18./], "though by this me-
thod they tie the nerve together with the 
artery, yet it is very seldom any ill conse-
quences ensue from thence, as the quantity 
of flesh included by the ligature prevents the 
nerve from being much compressed." And 
does not the same reasoning hold good, as is 
already shewn in amputations, where as great 
a quantity of the neighbouring parts is com-
monly inclosed? Besides, when he tells us, 
"that tying the nerve along with the vessel, 
sometimes brings on convulsions some days 
after the ligature is made." He also in-
forms us, "that there will not be any danger 
of this happening, if we apply a button of 
vitriol when the dressings are first re-
moved;" which, he says, "gradually forms 
an eschar that includes the ligature, and 
renders it useless."

Now in a few days the ligature becomes 
loose spontaneously, and is no longer capable 
of doing injury. The parts being now in-
flamed and more sensible, vitriol will act with 
|P_25
great violence upon the nerves; so that if no 
ill effects arose from this complicated treat-
ment, much less could they arise from the li-
gature alone. 

If the convulsions then were not the con-
sequence of the dying state of the patient[/19./], 
is it not probable they were owing to the 
nerves being irritated, either with acrid mat-
ter or some other cause? for it is well known 
after the inflammation comes on the nerves 
become tense, and acquire a more acute feel-
ing, and sometimes, where the fluids are very 
acrid, in few days are rendered so extremely 
sensible, as to bring on convulsions upon the 
slightest touch: and this seems to hold equally 
good in regard to the locked jaw, which within 
these few years has been said, "sometimes 
to come on in consequence of the stricture 
made upon the arteries and their neigh-
bouring parts by ligatures;" for in all the 
cases of this kind which have come to my 
knowledge, it appears not to have happened 
till the injured part has been inflamed and 
painful. In wounds it has often come on, 
|P_26
when there has been the greatest reason to 
believe that the habit was become bad[/20./], and 
the parts extremely sensible from a long con-
tinued flux of acrid matter falling upon them. 
But it seems most frequently to have occurred 
in wounds of the joints and other mem-
branes[/21./], where the nerves 
being put more 
upon the stretch are more liable to produce this 
terrible symptom, which seems only to differ 
from other convulsions in its degree of vio-
lence, and affects those, probably, where the 
whole nervous system is in a most extreme 
degree of irritability, as appears by the large 
and repeated doses of opium necessary to quiet 
the spasms. 

From the whole then of what has been 
said, there is reason to acquit the ligature of 
|P_27
being productive of those convulsions which 
sometimes have happened to attend a wound 
wherein it has been used. 

Another kind of spasms, that are partial 
and attended with pain, are said constantly to 
attend the use of the needle and ligature; and 
it must be confessed, that while the needle is 
piercing a muscle a spasm is often produced: 
but it may with equal truth be observed, that 
it immediately ceases when the parts inclosed 
are numbed with the ligature. And it seems 
more likely that those spasms, which conti-
nue more or less for some time after the ope-
ration, arise from the nerves being irritated 
by the knife, by the air, and by the dress-
ings; for whoever attends to this circum-
stance will find, that the spasms which fol-
low, for instance, an amputation of the leg, 
immediately seize the muscles upon their be-
ing divided before any needle can be used. 
And we know by experience they will con-
tinue some time after the irritating cause is 
removed, in proportion as the nerves were 
more or less affected[/22./]. That a similar effect 
|P_28
will be produced by the other causes assigned, 
there is reason to conclude from observing, 
that even the muscles of animals, immedi-
ately after death, are thrown into spasms by 
being exposed to the cold air; and spasms are 
also often brought on by touching naked 
wounds with dry lint. 

Besides, spasms follow those amputations 
just in the same manner, where the vessels 
are not tied[/23./]; nor can the absence of this 
symptom with justice be ascribed to the omis-
sion of the ligature in amputations of the 
breasts[/24./], because in this case the muscles, 
which are the seat of spasms, are seldom 
touched with the needle; the cellular and 
adipose membrane only being taken in with 
the vessel, and which, from their small de-
gree of sensibility, give but little uneasiness: 
and out of many instances I do not remember 
any patient attended with troublesome spasms 
after this operation, though the needle and 
ligature were always used. 

|P_29
Another objection to the ligature is, "that 
it increases the symptomatic fever, because 
its application gives violent pain:" but 
though it often gives smart pain for an in-
stant, it does not follow that it aggravates the 
symptomatic fever, for the pain is only mo-
mentary, and whatever is included in the li-
gature immediately becomes so insensible, as 
to give no future disturbance. It is true, an 
inflammation will take place above the stric-
ture; but as an inflammation of equal degree 
would probably have occurred, though the 
ligature was not used, very little difference of 
pain can arise from this cause, as is evinced 
by the symptoms following an operation be-
ing much the same, whether we use many 
ligatures or few. 

But the symptomatic fever seems not to 
arise from the pain which accompanies or im-
mediately follows any part of the operation, 
but to the distension which is caused by the 
obstruction and inflammation that comes on 
some time after in consequence of the division 
of the parts; for that pain which arises from 
the nerves being irritated and disordered in 
|P_30
the operation, presently goes off, the irritating 
cause being instantly removed. And does not 
the symptomatic fever gradually come on, a 
few hours after the operation, as the parts 
about the wound begin to swell, and again 
decline as the distension abates, from the 
lymphatic vessels freely transmitting their con-
tents? 

Besides, from the account given us of the 
symptomatic fever following an amputation 
of the leg, where the ligature was omitted, 
we see[/25./] it came on about the usual time, and 
seems to have been nearly the same as when 
it is used. And though the symptomatic fe-
ver has been slight in amputations of the 
breasts[/26./], where the vessels were not tied, 
yet it does not appear to be a proof that it is 
increased by the use of the ligature, because 
in this operation the symptomatic fever is for 
the most part, if not always, slight; for the 
fat in the cellular membrane easily melts 
down, and the reticular or membranous part 
|P_31
sends out new flesh without giving much dis-
turbance, and in this case these, with the 
skin, are the only parts wounded; for even 
when a schirrus adheres, it is separated from 
the pectoral muscle without doing much in-
jury, as this operation, I imagine, is never 
practised when the adhesion is otherwise than 
slight. 

With this we should remember, that the 
symptomatic fever is always slight where the 
solids are relaxed and weak, in consequence 
of the small degree of force with which the 
blood is carried against the obstructed vessels. 
And is it not therefore more likely owing to 
this cause than to the omission of the liga-
ture, that a slight fever only followed in those 
whose legs were amputated by Mr. Warner[/27./], 
as all these patients were much reduced pre-
vious to the operation? And is not, in such 
habits, the symptomatic fever constantly slight, 
though the ligature is used. 

It is also said that abscesses are the conse-
quence of using the ligature, and that it some-
|P_32
times remains fixed to the last, so as to retard 
the healing of the wound; but these incon-
veniencies only happen when the needle is 
passed very deep, and may therefore be avoid-
ed by a contrary practice: nor is passing the 
needle deep at all necessary (if the parts are 
sound) as a small quantity of flesh or cellular 
membrane below the stricture will sufficiently 
prevent the ligature being pushed off by the 
impulse of the blood. However I would cau-
tion against extremes; for with passing the 
needle but a very little way the vessel some-
times may not be tied, and cause unnecessary 
trouble; if we therefore pass the needle only 
a moderate depth, the ligature will always 
come away in due time without inconveni-
ence, or at least it may be taken away long 
before the wound is healed, without any dan-
ger of bringing on a fresh hæmorrhage: for 
as soon as digestion is complete, and the new 
flesh begins to rise, the ligature makes not any 
pressure upon the vessel; and though new 
flesh may have covered the noose, yet if we 
take the advice long since given by Monro[/28./], 
|P_33
it may be removed without any hazard of 
cutting the artery. 

This is the light in which I have been led 
to consider the use and abuse of the needle 
and ligature in tying the blood vessels, and 
shall now proceed to enquire into the method 
of suppressing the hæmorrhage by fungous 
substances; which, like the ligature, will ap-
pear to have their advantage and inconve-
nience. 

|P_34
[}CHAP. III.}]
Of suppressing the hæmorrhage by the applica-
tion of fungous substances, by coagulated 
blood, by astringents, and by perpendicular 
pressure. 

THE late success which has attended the 
application of fungous substances is a 
full proof that an hæmorrhage from large ar-
teries may often be effectually suppressed by 
their use; and it at the same time points out 
the truth of the doctrine advanced, and what 
little assistance in this case is wanting. 

But the manner of applying funguses makes 
a material difference in regard to success; for 
if they are pressed close against the end of the 
vessel, they intercept the passage of the blood; 
and the artery closes itself up in the manner 
described: whereas, when this circumstance is 
not observed, and they are only laid near to 
the orifice, in the manner Cheselden[/29./] used 
|P_35
spunge, they suppress the hæmorrhage by 
choaking up the mouth of the vessel with 
coagulated blood, which hinders its being 
closed; and though it stops the bleeding at 
present, yet it may be the source of a future 
hæmorrhage. 

This is evident from the experiments made 
by La Foss[/30./], where the coagulated blood, 
which filled the end of the artery, was formed 
into a cone with its apex towards the heart; 
consequently, if the plug happens to extend 
to the next collateral branch, a fresh flux of 
blood must ensue upon its coming away; for 
it does not unite with the vessel, as some 
have imagined. 

I know there are instances, where an ori-
fice made in an artery has been stopped with 
a clot of solid blood, which adhering firmly 
to the cicatrix of the integuments, produced 
a considerable callosity, and which seems to 
have given rise to this opinion. But it must 
be observed in these cases, the wound was 
|P_34
|P_35
|P_36
cured without coming to suppuration; whereas 
when the air has free access, we well know a 
putrefaction of the coagulated blood, as well 
as digestion, is always the consequence; and 
I make no doubt but the separation of coa-
gulated blood is one cause why a fresh bleed-
ing has sometimes come on after the inflam-
mation was abated, and matter began to be 
freely discharged. In a very late instance, 
where the bleeding from a divided artery had 
been suppressed by coagulated blood, I saw it 
renewed again next day by taking this blood 
away; the artery bleeding in the same manner 
as when it was first opened; but upon pressing 
it betwixt my fingers it was soon effectually 
closed. Hence we may observe, that the prac-
tice of laying allum, or any thing else, at 
the end of the artery to coagulate the blood, 
is very improper, as every impediment to the 
contraction of the vessel should on the con-
trary be removed. 

This leads me to take notice of Petit's opi-
nion, who imagined that the hæmorrhage 
from divided arteries was always suppressed 
by plugs of blood within the vessel; because 
|P_
|P_37
he found in some of them, after the death of 
the patient, coagulated blood, which extended 
itself upwards a considerable way. 

But notwithstanding this, it is very proba-
ble that the hæmorrhage was stopped by the 
natural contraction of the vessel; for we find 
in the two waggoners mentioned by Mons. 
Fagot[/31./] where, after death, coagulated blood 
was found in the same manner, "their ex-
tremities were contracted and straitened, as 
if they had been tied." And in the many 
experiments I have made on this occasion, I 
never found coagulated blood but once; and 
then the extremity of the artery was close 
contracted[/32./]. 

Pouteau[/33./] opened several arteries, and ne-
ver found any coagulum; nor is there any 
|P_38
coagulum found in the umbilical vessels of 
children after death: from all which may we 
not conclude, that this circumstance is merely 
accidental, and no step taken by nature, who 
is always uniform, if no impediment, is in 
the way? Indeed, I think with some other 
writers,[/34./] that it is of the same kind, and 
produced in the same manner as the fibrous 
blood we often find in the great arteries near 
the heart: that which I saw had exactly the 
same appearance; nor did it seem sufficient 
to have blocked up the vessel. What is al-
ready said about coagulated blood preventing 
the contraction of the vessel, here also takes 
place; and was it extended to the extremity 
of the artery, putrefaction and its consequences 
must of course ensue, from its being in con-
tact with the air. 

It follows then, that whatever fungus is 
used, it should be pressed close to the end of 
the vessel; and that kind which adheres clo-
sest should be chosen. Mr. White says[/35./] that 
spunge is on this account preferable; and if 
|P_39
his directions, in regard to the choice, pre-
paration, and manner of applying it, be ob-
served, I believe he says true; but even this 
sticks the fastest when it is least wanted; for 
though after a while it adheres so firm, that 
it is removed with difficulty, yet, till the parts 
begin to swell and become moist, the adhe-
sion is very slight. 

Bandage therefore must be carefully applied 
to preserve it in its proper situation; and if 
this circumstance had been duly attended to, 
instead of relying upon a specific property in 
agaric, better success would probably have at-
tended it when in vogue; for where agaric 
itself proved ineffectual, tight bandage and 
common dressings suppressed the hæmorrhage. 
And we might produce innumerable instances 
which prove, that whatever is kept firm upon 
the end of the vessel is sufficient for the pur-
pose. —However, if what is said about tying 
the great arteries be true, most surgeons, I 
imagine, will still secure them with the liga-
ture; for no sort of bandage can with safety 
in amputations be so applied, but the fungus 
may sometimes be displaced by spasms, cough-
|P_40
ing, vomiting, or the like: and should an hæ-
morrhage return from these vessels, we know 
death may ensue from the loss of no very large 
quantity of blood. Mr. Sharp's[/36./]pa-
tient, in whom the vessels burst open three 
hours and half after he had applied agaric, 
died in about twenty minutes with the loss of
 less than thirty ounces of blood, including 
what was lost in the operation: nor could as-
sistance be speedy enough to prevent this ca-
tastrophe, though it was upon the spot when 
the hæmorrhage returned; and how much 
more likely is this to be the case in private 
practice, especially in the country, where the 
person obliged to be intrusted with our pa-
tient is often an intire stranger to chirurgical 
operations? 

But suppose our assistant should be so lucky 
as to compress the tourniquet time enough to 
save the patient's life, yet it is probable a 
quantity of blood will often be lost, that may 
be injurious to him; for though the loss of 
some blood from this accident may be ser-
viceable, when the patient is not much re-
|P_41
duced by the disease[/37./]; on the other hand, 
the loss of a few ounces, when he is become 
weak, will be very improper, and very likely 
retard the recovery of his health: and we 
may observe, even in strong habits, that the 
discharge of blood ought not to be commit-
ted to chance, but intirely directed by the 
judgment of the surgeon. And though it 
should happen that very little blood is lost, 
the patient may not only undergo great pain 
from the compressure, till the surgeon can be 
called, perhaps from a considerable distance, 
but the parts may be much injured by the 
fluids being so long in a state of stagnation. 

But this inconvenience will for the most 
part attend the use of this remedy in ampu-
tation of the limbs; for all agree that it is 
necessary to keep the limb compressed a con-
siderable time with the tourniquet, and which 
will also in all probability overbalance the pain 
caused in using the needle and ligature. Nor 
can we help thinking but some mistake hap-
|P_42
pened in describing those cases, where we 
are told, though the tourniquet was kept 
compressed for half an hour, that the pa-
tient was remarkably easy during that time. 
Mr. Sharp's[/38./] patient, when he used agaric, 
complained grievously of pain arising from the 
tourniquet; and my patients tell me, it is 
the worst part of the operation: besides, I 
have observed when a piece of fungus ad-
heres close, it gives very considerable pain in 
being removed; so that upon the whole, this 
method of securing the great vessels is attended 
with more pain and less safety, than the liga-
ture when properly applied. 

This reasoning also holds good in regard 
to the lesser arteries, when they are surrounded 
with the cellular or adipose membrane only; 
though it cannot be extended to the tying 
of those which are situated amongst the muscles, 
because, as is already observed, the ligature is 
here attended with considerable pain; nor is 
the tourniquet in this case wanted; and I 
make no doubt, but these vessels may in ge-
|P_43
neral be trusted with spunge, or any thing 
else that adheres close to their extremities: 
but the spunge should be removed the first or 
second dressing, otherwise the new flesh grow-
ing into its pores will cause an increase of 
pain in the removal. 

On the other hand, if the bleeding should 
happen to return, though on account of the 
size of the vessels it might not be dangerous, 
yet even here more blood might be discharged 
than it would be prudent to lose; a fresh hæ-
morrhage is always alarming to the patient; 
and as momentary pain seems to be the only 
inconvenience, perhaps many surgeons will 
think it best to leave their patients in perfect 
security: and we may just observe, that in 
many operations the ligature must of course 
be used upon all the vessels, as it will be ne-
cessary to stop the bleeding as we go on. 

Nevertheless, when the flesh is become ten-
der, and gives way to the ligature, spunge 
seems to be the best remedy; for though the 
large vessels might be pulled out, and tied in 
|P_44
the manner Dionis[/39./] describes, yet, being un-
defended, the end would commonly separate; 
and unless the ligature was placed near its ex-
tremity, sometimes bring on a fresh hæmor-
rhage in the manner already observed. And 
this was most probably the reason why Parey 
had more certain success, when he took in, 
along with the vessel, some of the adjacent 
parts, than when he inclosed it alone in the 
ligature. 

Where the vessels are so deeply situated as 
not to be come at with the needle, the same 
kind of application must have preference, if 
it can be laid close to the mouth of the ar-
tery; and it succeeds better in this case, as 
the sides of the wound assist in keeping it in 
its proper situation: but before it is applied, 
it seems necessary to examine whether the ar-
tery is wholly divided; for without this cau-
tion we may sometimes be disappointed in 
our expectation, and ascribe insufficiency to 
|P_45
this method, as was done to the agaric[/40./], 
when the want of success was owing to the 
vessel being in part divided, whence it was 
incapable of intercepting the passage of the 
blood. Nor should we forget, that in wounds 
which admit of cure by an immediate union 
of their divided parts, fungous substances are 
unnecessary, as the common method of dress-
ing effectually suppresses the bleeding, though 
it is from considerable arteries. 

However, if the artery is large, and any 
difficulty occurs, if the part will admit of the 
practice of dilating the wound, perhaps it 
may seem more proper by that means to use 
the ligature, especially if it adheres to an un-
divided muscle or the bone, and bandage can-
not be conveniently applied; and where the 
principal trunk of a large artery is wounded 
in a longitudinal direction, Mr. Lambert's[/41./]
method of sewing it up should, I think, be 
tried. 

|P_46
When an hæmorrhage arises from a thin 
state of the blood, and the discharge is from 
the whole surface of the wound, puff ball
seems preferable to spunge, or the like, as the 
blood would probably escape through its pores. 
In this case, with tight bandage it has an-
swered my purpose, till internal medicines 
had their proper effect: and if upon trial it 
should prove successful under the like circum-
stances, will it not be more proper than styp-
tics or astringents, &c. as these harden the fi-
bres, and prevent digestion, from which in-
convenience this remedy is free? Nor do I 
apprehend the bandage will be so unartfully 
applied, as to bring on a flux of blood by 
compressing the veins, as I imagine in general 
this obvious cause of an hæmorrhage is well 
understood, being pointed out by several wri-
ters on surgery, and clearly demonstrated by 
Monro[/42./]. 

Perhaps some will think that styptics and 
astringents will forward the contraction of 
the vessels: but we may learn how little they 
|P_47
are wanted, from the artery in the young fel-
low's arm, which was evidently relaxed and 
weak, closing itself without any assistance; 
and I am persuaded, from some experiments 
I have made, that these applications, instead 
of assisting, would, if they were not hindered 
by mixing with the blood in wounds, rather 
prevent the collapsing of the vessel by hard-
ing its fibres. And however contrary this doc-
trine may be to the generally received opi-
nion, experience is certainly in its favour; 
for though by coagulating the blood, they 
might succeed upon very small arteries, yet, 
being applied to those which were large, they 
were always found insufficient to suppress the 
bleeding, unless tight bandage was at the same 
time used, and to which I think it is clear the 
success was owing: for many of these com-
positions, which were thought to be astrin-
gents, had certainly no other property as blood-
staunchers than that of choaking up the mouths 
of the vessels[/43./]. 

|P_48
It is obvious that the fungus, when used, 
must be kept in its proper situation by ban-
dage differently applied, according to the part 
wounded; and in this matter every surgeon's 
own judgment will best direct him. How-
ever we may just observe, that in amputations 
good slicking plaister, as advised by Mr. 
White[/44./], and keeping the hand pressed harder 
against the part for a few hours, may often 
be suffcient; though the machine recom-
mended by Mr. Gooch[/45./] will, probably, be 
more certain; and when this is not at hand, 
a circular piece of leather may be made to 
answer nearly the same purpose. 

This piece of leather must be large enough 
to cover the end of the stump, and near its 
edge must be cut four slits in opposite direc-
tions, that will admit each a fillet.—Supposing 
a leg taken off below the knee, two fillets be-
ing passed through these slits crossways, and 
under a roller or a piece of cloth that goes 
round the thigh, above the knee, must be 
|P_49
brought back again, and tied upon the end 
of the stump, by which means the dressings 
will be fixed, and any degree of pressure may 
be made: and this bandage, if it is kept from 
slipping down, by being fastened with filleting 
to a roller round the waist, serves equally well 
when we amputate above the knee. Nor do 
I recommend this method without experience; 
for having amputated a leg, where the blood 
was extremely poor, and the flesh very tender, 
the ligatures were forced off the vessels a few 
hours after the operation, by a fit of cough-
ing and vomiting; I immediately applied the 
bandage above-mentioned, with bolsters of 
dry lint, which effectually answered the pur-
pose: for, though the patient vomited and 
coughed several times afterwards, the hæmor-
rhage did not return. 

Indeed bandage seems hitherto to have 
proved less serviceable than it might have 
been, merely from imagining it would be 
useless, unless the sides of the vessels were 
brought together in close contact; whereas, had 
the pressure been made only upon the end of 
the vessel, and just sufficient to resist; the im-
|P_50
pulse of the blood, it might much oftener 
have been used without inconvenience, and 
with better success, as there is reason to think 
from many instances. 

We have only further to add on this head, 
that where the wounded artery cannot be come 
at, pressure is still the only remedy; and 
where things are so circumstanced that we 
are obliged to choak up the mouths of the 
vessels with coagulated blood, it seems neces-
sary, for reasons already given, to make a 
pressure, if it can be done, against the end of 
the artery, that the contraction beyond the 
plug may more certainly take place. 

|P_
|P_51
[}CHAP. IV.
Of suppressing hæmorrhages by cauteries, cau-
stics &c. }]
BESIDES the methods above-mentioned, 
Mr. Warner[/46./] has shewn, that when an 
artery is opened in the roof of the mouth, the 
actual cautery is sometimes necessary to stop 
the bleeding: and many years ago, after ex-
tirpating a tumor from this part, I was obliged, 
for the same reasons, to have recourse to the 
same remedy; but the iron was no hotter than 
just sufficient to form the neighbouring parts 
into an eschar upon the end of the artery; by 
which means the course of the blood was in-
tercepted, and the vessel left at liberty to close 
itself up; whereas when the cautery is very 
hot, it not only burns the end of the artery 
a considerable way, but hardening its fibres 
beyond the eschar, renders it incapable of col-
lapsing; so that it is no wonder an hæmor-
|P_52
rhage should so often ensue upon the sepira-
tion of the dead parts. 

However, the cautery is at all times a cruel 
application, and should be avoided, if possi-
ble: nor do I now call to mind any other 
part where its use can be wanted. But if this 
is cruel, the potential cautery is more so, as 
it spreads itself further into the neighbouring 
parts; and yet it is not very uncommon for 
surgeons in performing operations to apply 
lint soaked in scalding oil of turpentine, where 
the artery, though not very large, cannot be 
readily come at: and this piece of cruelty is 
still aggravated, when we consider that a few 
minutes pressure would, in all probability, 
have alone been suffcient for the purpose. 

Caustics, &c. are, I believe, in general, 
laid aside in supperssing hæmorrhages; and 
therefore we need only observe, that, though 
they do not, by hardening the sides of the 
artery, render it incapable of collapsing above 
the part destroyed, yet, by causing its end to 
##### thei###### is #########rary to right 
##### ##### advise ill, 
|P_53
who give up every advantage gained by the 
ligature, in afterwards applying a piece of 
vitriol. 

But all these errors in the choice of reme-
dies, or their application, have arose from the 
true principles of supperssing hæmorrhages 
not being previously investigated; it will 
therefore give great pleasure to the author of 
this little essay, if it appears that he has set 
in its proper light this important, though 
common operation. 

THE END. 
