

[^Sample 1: book - ^]

|P_
[}A 
TREATISE 
on the 
THEORY and PRACTICE 
of 
SURGERY. }][^A horizontal double-line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}CHAPTER I. }]
[}Of Sutures. }][^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}SECTION I. }]
[}Of Sutures in general. }]
AS sutures of one kind or another are 
found necessary, not only in every 
large wound, but in almost every opera- 
tion of importance, the consideration of 
|P_2
this subject seems first to require our at- 
tention. 

A variety of sutures have been practised 
by surgeons, each of which has from long 
experience been applied to a particular 
purpose, viz. the interrupted suture; the 
quilled suture; the glover's, and the twisted 
suture. Many others are enumerated by 
ancient writers; but the four now men- 
tioned are the only species of sutures at 
present in ordinary use; and even of these, 
some, we think, might with propriety be 
omitted. 

The intention of every suture, is to 
unite parts, which either by accident or 
design have been divided. Another mode 
of effecting this, is through the interven- 
tion of adhesive plasters; and this by sur- 
geons has been termed the false or dry 
suture; in opposition to the others per- 
formed by the needle, which are denomi- 
nated the true or bloody suture.—But as 
the consideration of this subject, viz. the use 
of adhesive plasters in wounds, will be 
more properly introduced in a subsequent 
|P_3
part of this work, we shall not in this 
place enter upon its discuslioni 

[}SECTION II. }]
[}Of the Interrupted Suture. }]
IN deep wounds, when a reunion of the 
divided pasts is intended, this is the su- 
ture to which we generally have recourse; 
but from what will be afterwards more 
fully explained when treating of wounds, 
and from what will presently farther appear, 
it does not seem to be so well adapted to 
this purpose as the twisted suture. When 
it is determined, however, to make trial of 
the interrupted suture, the following is 
the easiest mode of doing it. 

In every Wound where sutures are found 
necessary for the retention of parts, it has 
commonly been considered as good prac- 
tice, to carry the needle and ligature to 
the bottom of the sore, so as to afford as 
little chance as possible of matter collecting 
underneath; and the usual mode of effect- 
ing this, is by introducing the needle from 
|P_4
without inwards, and again from the 
bottom of the wound to the same distance 
on the opposite side. But this suture, it 
may be remarked, is much more neatly, 
and at the same time more easily performed, 
by passing both ends of the thread from 
within outwards; which is readily done 
by using two needles upon each thread, 
instead of one. A needle being put upon 
each end of the fame thread, and each 
needle being inserted at the bottom of the 
sore, and pushed outwardly so as to pass 
out at a proper distance from the edge of 
the wound, the needles are then to be taken 
off, and the threads allowed to remain till 
all the ligatures are passed which the ex- 
tent of sore seems to require. 

The number of ligatures necessary for 
any wound, must in a great measure de- 
pend upon the extent of divided parts. By 
authors in general it has been laid down 
as an established rule, that one suture is 
fully sufficient for every inch of wound. 
It will frequently indeed happen, that this 
number is found sufficient; but in some in- 
|P_5
stances, particularly where muscular parts 
are deeply cut transversely, and where con- 
sequently a great degree of retraction oc- 
curs, a greater number of stitches are ne- 
cessary: Whenever a number of angles, too, 
occur in a wound, more ligatures are re- 
quired than in a straight wound of the 
same extent; for, at every angle, however 
inconsiderable it may be, there ought to be 
a suture. 

In pasting the ligatures, great care is 
necessary to pierce the skin at a sufficient 
distance from the edge of the wound; for, 
if they do not comprehend a thickness of 
parts in some measure proportioned to the 
depth of the wound, and to the extent of 
retraction to be expected, they will very 
readily cut through the parts entirely.— 
By some authors we are directed to pass 
the ligatures, at nearly the same distance 
from the edges of the sore, as the wound is 
of depth. This rule, however, will by no 
means be found to answer in practice. 
Thus, in a very deep wound, for instance 
of three inches or so, no necessity, can oc- 
|P_6
cur for carrying the ligatures three inches 
from, the edges of the sore; and again, in 
very superficial cuts, it sometimes happens 
that the ligature ought to be passed out at 
a greater distance from the edges of the 
wound than the sore is of depth. It ought 
not, in almost any case, to be less than half 
an inch from the edge of the sore; and it 
will seldom happen, even in the largest 
wounds, that an inch is not found to be a 
sufficient distance. 

It will be readily understood, that the 
strength of the ligature and size of needle 
ought always to be proportioned to the 
depth of the sore and retraction of parts. 
The several sizes of needles, as represen- 
ted in Plate I. are of the various di- 
mensions found necessary in practice; 
and the ligatures to be used along with 
them ought to be such as nearly, though 
not entirely, to fill the eyes of the diffe- 
rent needles. In order to make the liga- 
tures pass more easily, to render them 
more durable, and at the same time to 
make them more susceptible of a flattened 
|P_7
form, which does not so readily cut thro' 
the contained parts as a round one, they 
ought all to be well covered with fine bees- 
wax. 

So soon as the threads are all passed, the 
lips of the wound ought to be pressed to- 
gether and supported by an assistant till all 
the ligatures are firmly tied; beginning 
either in the middle of the wound, or at 
one end, as the operator inclines. In ty- 
ing the knots, it is usual to pass the ends 
of the threads twice through the first noose, 
in order to prevent their yielding; and 
when this is done, it is alleged by some 
that there is no necessity for more than 
one knot upon each ligature; but as two 
knots are very easily made, and as every 
chance of their yielding is thereby effec- 
tually prevented, this precaution ought 
never to be omitted. It is a practice with 
some surgeons to insert a piece of lint be- 
tween the first and second knots, or be- 
tween the first knot and the skin below, in 
order to save the parts underneath from the 
pressure of the knots; but as in reality all 
|P_8
such means of protection afford no advan- 
tage of importance, and as they prevent the 
knots from being made with exactness, they 
ought therefore to be laid entirely aside. 

By some writers on this subject, we are 
desired not to bring the knots of ligatures 
immediately upon the edges of the wound, 
but rather to carry them to one side, over 
upon the sound teguments: but whoever 
has tried both methods, will at once be 
sensible, that this is by no means an im- 
provement; for in no other way can both 
sides of the sore be equally supported, but 
by the knots being passed immediately 
above the lips of the divided parts. 

[}Explanation of Plate I. }]
(|. . .. , Fig. i. A form of hook, commonly ter- 
med a tenaculum, for the purpose of pul- 
ling out bleeding vessels to be tied by liga- 
tures. 

Fig. 2. and 3. Two needles of a different 
curve from those in ordinary use. The cur- 
vatures being altogether on their fore-parts, 
and the handles perfectly straight, they are 
thereby more easily managed than the 
others, particularly in deep wounds. Fig. 5. 
and 6. represent two needles of the usual 
form; but neither these nor the other two 
have an edge on their concave parts. They 
are made somewhat round like a lancet, 
both on their convex and concave sides; 
|P_
which adds to their strength, and makes 
them enter with more ease than the others. 
I have long made use of those needles, and 
whoever employs them will find them pre- 
ferable in every respect to the others. 

Fig. 4. and 7. Two straight needles for 
sutures of the intestines and other delicate 
membranous parts. 

All these needles are represented of the 
full size. 

A number of instruments have been 
contrived for holding the needles when 
they are to be employed in deep wounds. 
The Port-aiguille represented in Plate II. 
will answer this purpose as well as any 
other; but instruments of this kind can- 
not be often needed. 
[^^]
[}SECTION III. }]
[}Of the Quilled Suture. }]
AS the quilled suture is still retained by 
some practitioners, it is here thought 
necessary to describe the. mode of perform- 
ing it. 

In deep wounds attended with much re- 
traction, it, is always a necessary precau- 
|P_9
tion, to assist the operation of the liga- 
tures, by means of bandages so applied as 
to afford as much support as possible to the 
divided parts: But, even with every assist- 
ance of this nature, it now and then hap- 
pens, that the divided parts cannot be kept 
together, retraction occurs to a greater or 
lesser degree, and the ligatures of course 
cut asunder the soft parts they were at 
first made to surround. 

With a view to prevent this receding of 
the teguments and other parts, it was long 
ago proposed to add to the interrupted su- 
ture what was supposed would afford an ad- 
ditional support; viz. quills, or pieces of 
plaster rolled up into the form of quills, 
one of which being placed on each fide of 
the wound, the double of the ligature is 
made to include the one, and the knot to 
press directly upon the other, instead of 
being made immediately on the edges of 
the sore as was directed for interrupted 
sutures. 

It is at once evident, however, that the 
ligatures must here make the same degree 
|P_10
of pressure on the parts through which 
they pass, as they do in the interrupted 
suture; and this being the case, it is equal- 
ly obvious, that the interposition of these 
substances cannot be of any use. This 
suture is accordingly now very rarely prac- 
tised, and it is probable that it will be 
soon laid entirely aside. 

[}SECTION IV. }]
[}Of the Glover's Suture. }]
THIS suture is termed the Glover's from 
being the one in common use among 
that set of people. As it is exceedingly 
simple, and very universally known, it does 
not here merit much description: We shall 
therefore just shortly observe, that it con- 
sists in a series of stitches all connected with 
one another, and continued in an oblique 
spiral direction along the course of the di- 
vided parts intended by it to be kept to- 
gether. 

This suture has hitherto been univer- 
sally employed for reuniting such parts of 
|P_11
the intestines as have been divided by 
wounds: but, when treating of accidents 
of this kind, I shall endeavour to show, 
that the same end may be more perfectly 
attained, and probably with less danger, 
by means of the interrupted suture; so 
that as this suture has almost never been 
applied to any other purpose, it will like- 
wise in all probability soon fall into dis- 
use. 

[}SECTION V. }]
[}Of the Twisted Sutura. }]
BY the term twisted suture is meant, that 
species of ligature, by which, parts 
either naturally or artificially separated, 
are united together, by means of strong 
threads properly twisted round pins or 
needles pushed through the edges of the 
divided parts. 

This suture is commonly employed for 
the purpose of uniting the parts in cases of 
hare-lip; and this indeed is almost the only 
use to which it has been hitherto applied: 
|P_12
But we may here remark, that it may with 
great advantage be put in practice in a va- 
riety of other cases, particularly in all arti- 
ficial or accidental divisions either of the 
lips or cheeks; and, in every wound in 
other parts that does not run deep and in 
which sutures are necessary, this suture is 
preferable to the interrupted or any other. 

In very deep wounds, for instance in all 
wounds extending to a greater depth than 
an inch and half, the interrupted suture is 
the only one that is admissible; for, in 
all such deep cuts, the pins necessary in the 
twisted suture cannot with propriety be 
employed, as they cannot be introduced 
to such a depth, and afterwards so twisted 
with ligatures as to reunite the divided 
parts, but with great pain to the patient. 
In such wounds, therefore, we must of ne- 
cessity have recourse to the interrupted su- 
ture: But it may be here remarked, that 
wounds of this depth requiring the aid of 
sutures, are very rarely met with; so that, 
in by much the greatest proportion of 
wounds where sutures are advisable, the 
|P_13
twisted suture will be found practica- 
ble; and whenever it is so, it ought cer- 
tainly to be preferred to every other, as 
being obviously better calculated, even than 
the interrupted suture, for the retention of 
divided parts. The pins made use of for 
twisting the threads upon, ought to be 
made of a flat form, so as not to cut the 
parts through which they pass, so readily 
as the ligatures employed in the interrupted 
suture: And thus one great objection to 
the latter is very effectually obviated; for, 
every practitioner must be sensible of this 
being the most faulty part of the interrup- 
ted suture, that when muscular parts are 
divided, so as to produce much retraction, 
the ligatures employed for retaining them, 
almost constantly cut them thro' before a 
reunion is accomplished; whereas, the flat- 
ness of the pins used in the twisted suture, 
and upon which, it may be remarked, the 
whole pressure produced by the ligatures 
is made to rest, proves in general a very 
effectual preventative against all such oc- 
currences. 

|P_14
The The pins used in this operation, have 
commonly been made of silver; and, in 
order to make them pass with greater ease, 
steel points have been added to them. As 
gold pins, however, are capable of receiv- 
ing a sufficient degree of sharpness, which 
renders the intervention of steel points quite 
unnecessary; and as gold is fully more 
cleanly than silver, from its not acquiring 
so readily that kind of crust which immer- 
sion in fluids is apt to produce upon the 
other, pins of this metal are therefore pre- 
ferable. 

The form and size of pins as repre- 
sented in Plate II. is what from experience 
has been found to be the most useful for 
every ordinary purpose; but, for parti- 
cular uses, the size must no doubt be sub- 
ject to variations. 

The manner of performing this opera- 
tion is as follows. The divided parts in- 
tended to be reunited, must by the hands 
of an assistant be brought nearly into con- 
tact; leaving just as much space between 
the edges of the sore, as to allow the sur- 
|P_15
geon to see that the pins are carried to a 
proper depth. This being done, one of the 
pins must be introduced through both sides 
of the wound, by entering it on one side 
externally, pushing it forwards and in- 
wards to within a little of the bottom of 
the wound, and afterwards carrying it 
outwardly through the opposite side, to the 
same distance from the edge of the sore 
that it was made to enter at on the 
other. 

The distance at which the needle ought 
to enter from the edge of the sore, must be 
determined by the depth of the wound, 
and by the degree of retraction produced 
in the divided parts. In general, however, 
it is a proper regulation in deep wounds, to 
carry the pins nearly to the same distance 
from the side of the sore, as they are made 
to penetrate in depth: And it may be also 
remarked, that, whatever the deepness of 
the wound may be, the pins ought to pass 
within a very little of its bottom; other- 
wife the parts which lie deep will run a 
risk of not being united, a circumstance 
|P_16
which must always give rise to troublesome 
collections of matter. 

In passing the pins through the different 
sides of the wound, if the skin and other 
teguments are not more firm than ordi- 
nary, it may commonly be done by the 
fingers alone, and particularly if the pins 
are made with small heads or knobs for the 
fingers to press upon; but when, from 
firmness of parts and other circumstances, 
much difficulty is expected to the entrance 
of the pins, the instrument termed Porte- 
aiguille very effectually removes this in- 
convenience.—In Plate II. is represented 
the most convenient form of this instru- 
ment that has yet been invented. 

The first pin being passed in this man- 
ner very near to one end of the sore, 
and the parts being still supported by an 
assistant, the surgeon, by means of a firm 
waxed ligature, passed three or four times 
round and across the pin, so as nearly to 
describe the figure of 8, is to draw the parts 
through which it has passed, into immediate 
and close contact: and the thread being 
|P_17
now secured with a loose knot, another pin 
must be introduced in the same manner at 
a proper distance from the former; and 
the thread with which the other was 
fixed, being loosed, and in the same man- 
ner carried round this pin, others must be 
introduced at proper distances along the 
whole course of the wound, and the same 
ligature ought to be of a sufficient length 
for securing the whole. 

The number of pins to be used, must 
be determined entirely by the extent of the 
wound. Whenever this suture, however, is 
practised, whether the wound be large or 
of very small extent, a pin ought to be in- 
troduced very near to each end of it, other- 
wise the extremities of the sore are apt to 
separate so as not to be afterwards easily 
reunited. In large wounds, if the pins 
are introduced at the distance of three 
quarters of an inch from one another, it 
will in general be found sufficient; but, in 
cuts of smaller extent, a greater number of 
pins become necessary in proportion to the 
dimensions of the sores. 

|P_18
Thus, in a wound of an inch and half 
in length, three pins are absolutely requi- 
site; one near to each end, and another in 
the middle of the sore: Whereas, five pins 
will always be found fully sufficient for a 
wound of three inches and a half in extent, 
allowing one to be within a quarter of an 
inch of each extremity of the wound, and 
the others to be placed along the course of 
the sore at the distance of three quarters of 
an inch from one another. 

The pins being all introduced and se- 
cured in the manner directed, nothing re- 
mains to be done, but to apply a piece of 
lint wet with mucilage, all along the course 
of the wound, with a view to exclude as 
effectually as possible every access to the ex- 
ternal air. 

In order to prevent the ends of the pins 
from pressing upon and hurting the skin 
below, it is usual to apply a small bolster 
of finen or charpie under each of them; 
but as this always does mischief, by tend- 
ing to press upon the pins, so as to force 
them to act upon the soft parts thro' which 
|P_19
they have passed, every thing of this kind 
ought to be omitted. When, however, the 
patient happens to complain of being hurt 
by the ends of the pins, this may be easily 
prevented, by introducing between them 
and the skin pieces of thin linen spread with 
any adhesive plaster. 

In order to give every chance of success 
to this operation, it has been commonly 
advised, immediately after the pins are se- 
cured, to apply the uniting bandage over 
the whole, so as to afford as much support 
as possible to the contiguous parts. The 
least reflection, however, renders it evident, 
that every degree of pressure made in this 
manner must do mifqhief; for, the bandage 
being made to rest immediately upon the 
pins, a considerable degree of pain and con- 
sequent inflammation must of course be pro- 
duced by it: And in fact this is so much the 
case, that, in every instance in which I have 
seen this bandage applied, it either did harm, 
by exciting inflammation in consequence 
of too much pressure upon the pins; or, if 
that effect was not produced, no advantage 
|P_20
was received from it, from the bandage 
not being applied with such tightness as 
to afford any support whatever to the parts 
below. 

The next point to be determined, is, the 
time the pins should be allowed to re- 
main. When they remain long, they gene- 
rally do harm, by the unnecessary irritation 
and consequent retraction of parts with 
which they are always attended; and again, 
if they are not continued for a sufficient 
length of time, that degree of adhesion is not 
produced between the divided parts that is 
necessary for their future retention, so that 
the effect of the operation comes to be in 
a great measure, if not entirely, lost. 

In wounds of no great depth, for in- 
stance of three quarters of an inch or so, a 
sufficient degree of adhesion always takes 
place in the space of five days; and six, or 
at most seven days, will generally be found 
sufficient for wounds of the greatest depth. 
But with respect to this circumstance, it 
must always be understood, that the pa- 
tient's state of health must have a consider- 
|P_21
able influence on the time necessary for 
producing adhesion between divided parts. 
In specifying the time necessary for this pur- 
pose, the operation is supposed to have been 
done on a constitution in a state of perfect 
health. When the patient labours under 
scurvy, or any disorder which affects the 
general system, it is impossible to ascertain 
this circumstance with precision: In such 
cases we must be determined by the nature 
and state of the disease present at the time. 

So soon as the pins are withdrawn, the 
uniting bandage may be then applied with 
great advantage in order to serve as a support 
to the parts newly united; but, as flips of 
leather spread with ordinary glue, when ap- 
plied to each side of the cicatrix, may, by 
means of ligatures properly connected with 
them, be made to answer this purpose in a 
more effectual manner, this mode of sup- 
porting the parts ought of course to be 
preferred [/1./]. 

As the twisted suture when properly 
|P_22
performed is a very neat operation, as its 
consequences are in general of importance, 
and as it may with much advantage be made 
to supersede the use of almost every su- 
ture, a few instances only excepted, I there- 
fore thought it proper to consider it with 
more attention than has hitherto been com- 
monly bestowed upon it. 

[}Explanation of Plate II. }][^^]
Fig. 1. A Porte-aiguille mentioned inp. 16. 
A. A. The handles of the instrument. 
B. A groove for receiving the pins used in the twisted suture. 

This instrument is commonly made with 
a slider for fixing the handles after the pins 
|P_24
are inserted into the groove; but as this al- 
ways proves troublesome to the operator, 
and is not in any degree necessary, it is here 
purposely omitted. 

Fig. 2.3. and 4. are different sizes of pins 
used in the twisted suture described p. 13. 

And fig. 5. is a flat needle sometimes 
found useful in stitching blood-vessels that 
lie between contiguous bones. 

All the instruments in this plate are re- 
presented of their full size. 
[^^]
[}CHAP. II. }]
[}Of the LIGATURE of ARTERIES, and other 
means employed by art for putting a stop to 
HÆMORRHAGIES. }]
IN every species of wound, whether ac- 
cidentally produced, or effected by the 
hands of a surgeon, the first circumstance to 
be attended to, is the degree of hæmorrhagy 
that takes place. In all such occurrences, 
|P_25
the blood is discharged, either from one or 
more large arteries; or, is produced by a 
general oozing from the smaller vessels over 
the surface of the sore: To the former of 
these causes we shall first attend, and shall 
afterwards proceed to the consideration of 
the latter. 

A surgeon being called to a person losing 
much blood from the division of any of the 
larger vessels, the first step to be taken, is, by 
means of strong compression, to effect a tem- 
porary stoppage of the discharge, till by the 
application of ligatures a more effectual re- 
medy is obtained. In the head, as well as in 
the trunk of the body, the easiest method of 
applying pressure of this kind, is, by means 
of dossilsof linen or charpie, held firmly up- 
on the mouths of the bleeding vessels, either 
by the hands of an assistant, or by the use of 
a proper bandage: Or, when pressure can be 
effectually applied to the superior part of the 
artery, it answers better; as it not only se- 
cures the vessel equally well, but admits of 
the necessary ligature being applied with 
greater freedom. 

|P_26
When, again, accidents of this nature 
occur in any of the extremities, and where 
pressure can be made with ease on the supe- 
rior parts of arteries, for such cases we are 
in possession of a remedy, which, when skill- 
fully applied, never fails of producing an 
immediate stop to all farther loss of blood. 
What is here meant, is, the Tourniquet. 

Till the invention of this instrument, 
which was not known till last century, Sur- 
gery remained in a deplorable state indeed. 
No operation of importance could be un- 
dertaken on any of the extremities but with 
great hazard to the patient; and the effects 
of large wounds must frequently have pro- 
ved mortal, from the want of this assist- 
ance, which otherwise might not have been 
in any degree hazardous. 

As the invention of the tourniquet is 
claimed by different people, and even by 
different nations, we shall not here pretend 
to say from whence it originally came: 
but whoever had the merit of it, the first instru- 
ment of this kind with which the world 
was made acquainted, was exceedingly 
|P_27
simple; so much-so, indeed, that we now 
reflect with astonishment at the discovery 
having been reserved to such a very late pe- 
riod. A small cushion being placed upon the 
course of the principal artery of a limb, a 
circular rope or bandage was made to pass 
twice round it; and a small timber handle 
being then introduced between one of the 
folds of the bandage, for the purpose of 
twisting it, the cushion by these means was 
pressed with so much force upon the artery, 
as to put an effectual stop to the course of 
the blood through the under part of the 
limb. 

Mr Petit, an eminent surgeon of Paris, was 
the first who proposed a considerable im- 
provement on this instrument, by connec- 
ting the circular bandage with a screw, 
which was so contrived as to produce the 
pressure chiefly on the principal arteries, 
without materially affecting the rest of the 
limb. It had this advantage over the other 
instrument, that the operator himself could 
manage it, without being under the neces- 
sity of employing an assistant; but it was 
|P_28
liable to one great inconvenience from 
the very circumstance which by the inven- 
tor was considered as an improvement. 
This instrument of Mr Petit being made 
to act upon the principal arteries only, 
the smaller vessels communicating with 
these, by not being properly compressed, 
discharge blood freely from the instant they 
are cut; and as this proves a very trouble- 
some circumstance in the course of ope- 
rations, different improvements have of 
late been made upon it. The pattern in 
Plate III. is the result of all of these. 

By means of this instrument in its now 
improved state, the blood in arty limb is 
very easily and effectually commanded; and 
as it grasps the whole member equally, all 
the collateral branches as well as the prin- 
cipal arteries are equally compressed by it. 
It has this material advantage, too, over 
every other instrument of this kind, that, 
when properly applied, a single turn, or 
even half a turn of the screw, is sufficient 
for producing either a flow of blood, or 
|P_29
for putting a total stop to it.—The manner 
of using it is this. 

Let a cushion of three inches in length 
by one inch and half in diameter be pre- 
pared of a linen roller, and be made tole- 
rably firm but yet not so hard as to ren- 
der pressure produced by it very pain- 
ful: This being placed upon the course of 
the principal artery of the limb, is to be 
firmly secured in that situation by one or 
two turns of a circular roller, of the same 
breadth with the cushion itself. 

The instrument A, with the strap con- 
nected with it, being now placed upon the 
limb, with the handle of the screw B on 
the opposite side of the member to the 
cushion upon the artery, the strap C is to be 
carried round the limb directly over the 
cushion, and to be firmly connected on the 
other side to the buckle D. In thus connec- 
ting the strap and buckle together, parti- 
cular attention is necessary in doing it with 
great firmness, so as that the screw may 
afterwards operate with as much advantage 
as possible, in producing a sufficient degree 
|P_30
of pressure. When proper attention is paid 
to this circumstance, a single turn of the 
screw, as we have said, proves sufficient 
for putting an entire stop to the circulation 
of blood in the limb; but when the strap 
has not originally been made very tight, 
several turns of the screw become neces- 
sary; an occurrence which may be always 
very easily prevented, and which, when not 
attended to, frequently proves very em- 
barrassing in the course of an operation. 

Whenever it is determined, therefore, 
that any farther loss of blood from a divi- 
ded artery is to be prevented, pressure on 
the superior part of the vessel ought to be 
immediately had recourse to; by the hands 
of an assistant, or a proper bandage, when 
the cut is on the head or trunk of the 
body; and by means of the tourniquet, 
when any of the extremities are wound- 
ed. 

The patient being in this manner secured 
from immediate danger, the practitioner 
must now proceed to the easiest and most 
effectual mode of preventing a return of 
|P_31
hæmorrhagy on the removal of the tourni- 
quet. 

The ancients, as we have seen, were ig- 
norant of the use and application of the 
tourniquet, and they were equally deficient 
in the employment of means for giving a 
permanent security against the flow of 
blood from divided vessels: It will there- 
fore readily occur to every modern prac- 
titioner, that in this imperfect state of 
Chirurgical knowledge, when any capital 
operations were attempted, they must have 
run a much greater risk of doing mischief, 
than of procuring any advantage to their 
patients. To the smaller vessels they ap- 
plied dossils of linen covered with astringent 
powders; and for the larger arteries, sear- 
ing with hot irons was their only re- 
source. 

Even this last remedy however, although 
it commands a temporary stoppage of the 
blood in every case of hæmorrhage, its 
effects are by no means to be depended on: 
for, in general, the pulsation of the larger 
arteries very soon overcomes all the resist- 
|P_32
ance produced by the application of the 
cautery. 

In ancient times, however, when this 
was the most effectual remedy with which 
the world was acquainted, practitioners 
were under the necessity of having recourse 
to it; and, at that period, it is not surpri- 
sing to find them exercising their genius in 
inventing a variety of styptic applications: 
But since surgery became enriched with 
that material improvement of securing the 
larger arteries by means of ligatures, a 
practice easily effected, and with very little 
pain to the patient, it is surprising to find 
that remedies of this kind are still searched 
after. If the use of ligatures was in itself at- 
tended with much difficulty, if by experi- 
ence it had been found to be productive of 
many bad consequences, or, if it had been 
frequently known to fail in answering as a 
full security against the hæmorrhagies of 
the larger arteries; in any of these events, 
it ought to be the business of practitioners 
to endeavour to procure a more effectual 
remedy. But, as the ligature of arteries is 
|P_33
very simple in its nature; as the pain ari- 
sing from it is trifling; as few instances 
occur of any thing bad being produced by 
it; and especially, as, when properly per- 
formed, it never fails of proving a sure 
preventative against all loss of blood from 
the larger arteries; there can therefore be 
no good reason for anxiously seeking after 
other remedies instead of it. 

Agaric and other fungous substances 
have been much extolled for their styptic 
powers; and chalybeate solutions, as well 
as all the variety of mineral acids, have 
in different forms been held forth to the 
public as effectual remedies of this nature; 
not only as nostrums by those of less liberal 
principles, but, what is more surprising, in 
some instances by practitioners of character. 

With the former class of men this hap- 
pens as a common occurrence in the course 
of their profession, and is therefore to be 
expected; but, a perseverance in quest of 
any new remedy of this kind on the part 
of Surgeons of reputation, who are already 
well acquainted with the effects of liga- 
|P_34
tures in cases of hæmorrhagy, and who 
also know that the practice is seldom at- 
tended with bad consequences, must pro- 
ceed from a degree of nicety and refine- 
ment, which may create much trouble to 
themselves, but which in all probability 
can never be productive of any practical 
advantage. 

We shall therefore venture to lay it down 
as an established maxim in surgery, That in 
every case of hæmorrhagy from any of the 
larger arteries, no styptic application what- 
ever ought to be trusted to, the ligature 
being the only remedy to be depended on. 
We now proceed therefore to the considera- 
tion of the easiest and most effectual mode 
of carrying this application into execution. 

Various methods have been invented for 
securing arteries by means of ligatures. 
The practice now in ordinary use, is, by 
means of a curved needle, to pass a ligature 
of sufficient strength round the mouth of 
the bleeding vessel, including a quarter of 
an inch all round of the surrounding parts [/2./], 
|P_35
and afterwards to form a knot of a proper 
tightness upon the vessel and other parts 
comprehended in the noose. 

One great objection, however, to this 
method, is, that the nerves accompanying 
the blood-vessels, together with a consider- 
able portion of the muscular substance 
through which they pass, must always be 
surrounded with every ligature formed in 
this manner. From this circumstance 
much more pain is produced than is neces- 
sary, by the nerves and other parts be- 
ing at the same time compressed with the 
arteries; and, on some occasions, the same 
cause has evidently given rise to violent 
convulsive affections, not only of the part 
chiefly affected, but of the whole system. 

Spasmodic twitches are frequently found 
to occur after the amputation of limbs, and 
are often the source of much distress. In 
some instances they are no doubt to be 
considered as the effect of other causes; 
but in various cases it has happened, that 
demonstrative proof has been obtained of 
their arising from the ligatures of ar- 
|P_36
teries having been applied in ah improper 
manner. When such convulsive affections 
occur after amputations, and the usual 
means of preventing them being found to 
fail, effectual relief may be frequently ob- 
tained by destroying the ligatures altoge- 
ther, so as to remove the compression upon 
the nerves; care being taken at the same 
time to renew the ligatures upon the arte- 
ries immediately, without comprehending 
any of the contiguous parts. 

Thus, it is not the simple ligature of 
vessels to which any bad symptoms occur- 
ring in such cases are to be attributed; but 
to the operation being done in an im- 
proper manner, by including nerves and 
other parts, instead of tying the arteries by 
themselves. 

Practitioners have commonly been afraid 
of tying up blood-vessels by themselves 
without the intervention of some of the 
surrounding parts, on the supposition of 
the coats of arteries not being of a suffi- 
cient firmness for bearing that degree of 
|P_37
compression necessary for the prevention 
of hæmorrhagy. 

This, however, originates from an idea 
of the coats of arteries not being so strong 
as they really are, and of a great degree of 
force being necessary for compressing the 
sides of arteries into close contact with one 
another. 

But it is now well known, that even 
very small arteries are possessed of much 
firmness; and it is also certain, that even 
in the largest arteries of the arm or thigh, 
a very slight degree of compression is fully 
sufficient, not only for restraining hæmor- 
rhagy, but for securing the ligature on the 
very spot to which it is first applied: And 
in small vessels the force necessary for this 
purpose is trifling indeed; being far less 
than is commonly practised. 

Although the circumstance we are now 
insisting upon may not at first sight seem 
to be of much importance, yet in fact it 
merits very particular attention. Even of 
itself it is a matter of no small conse- 
quence, but it is the more material when 
|P_38
we consider it as'connected in many in- 
stances with circumstances on which the 
life of a patient may in a great measure 
depend; and we know well too, that suc- 
cess in surgical operations depends more 
on a minute attention to every circum- 
stance relating to them, than on particular 
dexterity in any one part of them. 

It has also been objected to this mode of 
securing blood-vessels by themselves, that 
the ligatures, although they should not 
cut the arteries through, yet are more 
apt to slip than when some of the sur- 
rounding parts are comprehended along 
with them; and, in some instances, it is 
said that arteries retract so far, that they 
cannot in any other way be laid hold of, 
than by means of the crooked needle in 
the ordinary method. 

Long and repeated experience, however, 
of a few individuals, of this mode of ta- 
king up arteries by themselves, has put 
the fact beyond a doubt, that it is equal- 
ly secure as any other yet invented [/3./].— 
|P_39
Fatal hæmorrhagies after capital opera- 
tions, either from inattention, or some 
other cause, do now and then indeed hap- 
pen in the hands of the most able practi- 
tioners; but occurrences of this nature 
have as frequently happened when the 
curved needle was employed, as when the 
blood-vessels were secured by themselves 
without any of the contiguous parts being 
included. 

From the result of my own experience, 
indeed, I mould be induced even from 
this consideration, to draw a conclusion 
in favour of the method we have been en- 
deavouring to inculcate. For, in the course 
of practice, both among hospital patients 
and in private, I have known different deaths 
occur from the bleeding of stumps after 
the amputation of members: Whether this 
proceeded from the ligatures having slip- 
ped from some of the arteries; or that 
some of the vessels, from not appearing 
during the operation, had been of course 
passed over without being observed and 
had afterwards burst out, I shall not pre- 
|P_40
tend to determine; but in all of these, the 
crooked needle only had been used during 
the operation; and it has so happened, 
that I never met with a single instance of 
a similar occurrence where the arteries 
were secured by themselves by means of 
the tenaculum, an instrument to be after- 
wards taken notice of. 

In a few instances it may happen, that 
a bleeding vessel, from lying at the bottom 
of a deep wound, cannot be laid hold of 
in any other manner than by the curved 
needle being made to pass round it. Such 
occurrences, however, are exceedingly rare; 
insomuch that I have seldom known an 
instance in which hæmorrhagy could not 
be as effectually restrained by the mode 
now to be pointed out, as by the use of 
the crooked needle. 

In all operations whatever, to save unne- 
cessary pain ought to be a very capital ob- 
ject. In every business of this kind, the 
object in view ought no doubt to be at- 
tained in the most complete manner; but 
that mode by which we perform an ope- 
|P_41
ration equally well with any other, at the 
same time that we save a good deal of pain 
to the patient, is undoubtedly in every in- 
stance to be preferred. Now, with respect 
to the point in question, as we have al- 
ready clearly shown, that arteries may be 
tied with as much safety in every respect, 
by themselves, as when connected with 
any of the neighbouring parts, the diffe- 
rence of pain produced by the two modes 
of operating, ought at once to determine 
in favour of the former. 

When any of the contiguous parts, par- 
ticularly when the nerves which generally 
accompany the blood-vessels, are included 
in the same ligature with an artery, and 
which when the curved needle is em- 
ployed is a circumstance scarcely to be 
avoided, every practitioner knows that 
tying the knot in this manner is fre- 
quently complained of by the patient in 
very severe terms. I have on many occa- 
sions known patients, who have bore the 
amputation of limbs, and of cancerous 
breasts, without shrinking, complain bit- 
|P_42
terly of the severe pain produced by the 
method of securing arteries by means of 
the crooked needle. And on the con- 
trary, the pain attending the method now 
proposed, is so trifling, that, when pro- 
perly done, even the most timid patients 
very seldom complain of it. 

For some time after I first began to 
use the tenaculum, curiosity induced me, 
on different occasions, to put the matter 
under consideration to the test of experi- 
ment: And to render the trial as fair and 
decisive as possible, it was always made 
upon the same subject, under the same ope- 
ration. Different vessels were secured in 
the ordinary manner by the crooked needle; 
whilst others were laid hold of by the tena- 
culum: But so great was the difference in 
point of pain, that the one was uniformly 
allowed to give very little uneasiness; 
whereas it frequently happened, that the 
other was complained of as the most pain- 
ful part of the whole operation. 

Among other advantages which the ty- 
ing of arteries by means of the tenaculum 
|P_43
has over the old mode of operating, there 
is still one we have not yet taken notice of. 
It often happens after amputations, and 
other operations where the larger arteries 
have been tied, that the ligatures do not 
come easily away, from being made to run 
so deep as with the curved needle is com- 
monly necessary. In some instances much 
pain and trouble has occurred from this 
circumstance, the ligature remaining quite 
immoveable for a great many weeks: And 
after all, I have seen it necessary for the sur- 
geon, to put the patient to a great deal of 
pain, by being obliged to cutout the threads 
with a scalpel. But when the tenaculum 
is used, every risk of this kind is effec- 
tually avoided, from the ligatures generally 
falling off of their own accord, in the 
gourse of the third or fourth dressing of 
the sore. 

From what has been said, therefore, we 
shall consider it as a practice that ought to 
be established, that in forming the ligature 
of arteries, the nerves and other contiguous 
parts should be carefully avoided. 

|P_44
For the purpose of effecting this with 
ease and safety, forceps of various kinds 
have been invented; with these, the arte- 
ries of a sore are laid hold of and pulled 
out, so as to admit of the application of 
ligatures. 

For the larger blood-vessels, the forceps 
have been found to answer conveniently 
enough; but, in the smaller arteries, they 
are by no means so fit for the purpose as 
the curved hook commonly termed a te- 
naculum, as represented in Plate I. And as 
a hook of this form answers equally well 
in the larger arteries likewise, the use of 
the forceps may therefore be laid entirely 
aside. The manner of using the tenacu- 
lum is this. 

In order to detect the arteries to be 
tied, the tourniquet with which they are 
secured, must be slackened a little by a 
turn or two of the screw; and the moment 
the largest artery of the sore is discovered, 
the surgeon fixes his eye upon it, and im- 
mediately restrains the blood again by 
means of the tourniquet. An assistant 
|P_45
now forms a noose on the ligature to be 
made use of; and this noose being placed 
immediately over the end of the artery, 
so as to include it with certainty, the 
operator then pushes the sharp point of 
the tenaculum through the sides of the 
vessel, and at the same time pulls so much 
of it out, over the surface of the surround- 
ing parts, as he thinks is sufficient to be 
included in the knot which the assistant is 
now to make. In forming this ligature, 
the surgeon's knot, as it is termed, which 
consists in passing the thread twice thro' 
the first noose, is certainly preferable to 
every other, from its being less liable to 
yield or flip. And as some additional se- 
curity is obtained by forming a second knot 
above the first, this precaution ought never 
to be omitted. It is easily done; and on 
security in this point, the patient's life may 
in a great measure depend. 

The degree of strength of the ligature 
must always be proportioned to the size of 
the vessels; but this is a circumstance to be 
at all times determined by the judgment 
|P_46
of the practitioner, as must also the force 
to be employed in forming the knots. To 
what was already said upon this point I 
shall just add, that a very small force is fully 
sufficient for securing even the largest ar- 
teries 5 and that, after such a force has been 
applied as evidently restrains the farther loss 
of blood, a very trifling additional compres- 
sion is all that is in any degree necessary. 

The principal artery being in this man- 
ner secured, all the vessels of the part 
must one after another be taken up in the 
fame manner, by first loosening the tour- 
niquet in order to discover them, and 
afterwards applying the ligature to each in 
the manner directed. 

It often happens, however, that the loss 
of blood the patient has sustained, a ten- 
dency to deliquium which may take place 
for the time, the fear he labours under, and 
the degree of cold to which the sore is ex- 
posed, have all together such an effect upon 
the smaller arteries, as to prevent them for 
the time from discharging their contents, 
and as arteries left in such a state without 
|P_47
being secured, generally burst out on the 
removal of these causes, a circumstance 
which always occasions much trouble to 
the practitioner, as well as a great deal of 
pain to the patient, every surgeon there- 
fore ought to pay the nicest attention to 
this point. 

The tourniquet should be made perfect- 
ly loose; any coagulated blood on the sur- 
face of the sore, ought to be carefully wash- 
ed off with a spunge and warm water; and 
the patient, if faintish, ought to get a 
glass of wine, or some other cordial; and 
after all, the surgeon ought to examine, 
with the most minute attention, the usual 
course which the vessels of the part are 
known to take. 

This being done, every artery of the part, 
even the smallest that can be distinguished, 
ought to be secured with a ligature: For 
such vessels as appear exceedingly trifling 
while the part is yet exposed to the air, 
after the patient becomes warm in bed, 
when of course the solids become relaxed, 
and the fluids expand, even the smallest 
|P_48
branches of arteries that happen to be 
neglected, will now be capable of produ- 
cing much mischief, by discharging very 
considerable quantities of blood; and, as 
little or no injury can ever occur by the 
proper application of ligatures to all the 
arteries that present themselves, the greatest 
attention ought at all times to be paid to 
this circumstance. 

I have insisted the more on this, from 
having frequently observed much un- 
easiness and distress produced by a want 
of proper attention to this part of an ope- 
ration. 

When the principal arteries of a stump 
have been taken up, and a little blood 
continues to be discharged, but appears to 
come from sundry small vessels only, the 
surgeon, unless he is much accustomed to 
this kind of business, is induced to think, 
that as they are very trifling to appear- 
ance, so he need not be at the trouble of 
tying them, as the necessary compression 
of the bandages proper for the wound will 
in all probability effect a total stoppage of 
|P_49
the hæmorrhagy. In a general oozing of a 
small quantity of blood from the whole 
surface of a sore, and when no particular 
vessel can be distinguished, there is a neces- 
sity for trusting to this remedy; but, when- 
ever an artery can be discovered, of what- 
ever size it may be, it ought unquestionably 
to be secured by a ligature. It very rarely 
happens that any inconvenience occurs 
from ligatures when properly applied; but 
many lives have been lost from a remissness 
in this article. I have known different in- 
stances of this, and the same must have oc- 
curred to others. 

When, from the deepness of a wound, or 
from any other cause, some particular ar- 
tery cannot be properly secured by the 
tenaculum, in this case we are under the 
necessity of employing the crooked needle, 
and the following is the mode of using it. 

The operator ought to be provided with 
needles of various sizes, and of different 
forms. The needles in ordinary use, are 
for many purposes quite too much crooked; 
for, in general, they are mope easily ma- 
|P_50
naged when their curvatures are not so 
considerable. 

The same kinds of needles as are found 
necessary for the interrupted suture, as re- 
presented in Plate I. answer equally well 
for the ligature of arteries. 

The needles in common use are made 
triangular, with three different edges, one 
on each side, and a third on the concave 
part of the needle. There is no real ne- 
cessity, however, for more than two: In- 
deed the needle enters fully more easily 
with two than with three edges; and as the 
third edge on the concave side, renders 
them more liable to injure arteries and 
other parts in the course of their introduc- 
tion, this addition ought therefore to be 
omitted. 

A needle of this shape, armed with a li- 
gature of a size proportioned to itself and 
to the vessel to be taken up, is to be intro- 
duced at the distance of a sixth or eighth 
part of an inch from the artery, and pushed 
to a depth sufficient for retaining it, at the 
same time that it is carried fully one- 
|P_51
half round the blood-vessel. It must now 
be drawn out; and being again pushed 
forward till it has completely encircled 
the mouth of the artery, it is then to be 
pulled out, and a knot to be tied of a suffi- 
cient firmness, as was already directed when 
the tenaculum is used. 

In this manner, either by the use of the 
crooked needle, or of the tenaculum, every 
hæmorrhagy depending upon a division of 
one or more large arteries, may in general 
be very easily restrained; but it frequently 
happens, that considerable quantities of 
blood are discharged, not from any parti- 
cular vessel, but from all the small arteries 
over the surface of the sore. In wounds of 
great extent, particularly after the extir- 
pation of cancerous breasts, and in other 
operations where extensive sores are left, 
this species of hæmorrhagy often proves 
very troublesome by being exceedingly dif- 
ficult to suppress. 

Bleedings of this kind seem evidently to 
proceed from two very different and oppo- 
site causes; a circumstance which, in the 
|P_52
treatment of them, is a matter of much 
importance to attend to. 

First, We now and then find effusions of 
this nature occurring in strong robust people, 
where they evidently proceed, either from 
too great a quantity of blood contained in 
the vessels, or from an over degree of tone 
in the vessels themselves; or, perhaps, from 
a combination of both these causes. But, 
Secondly, Such evacuations undoubtedly 
happen most frequently in constitutions 
quite the reverse of the former, viz. in such 
as are very relaxed and debilitated; either 
from a putrid dissolved state of the blood, 
or from a want of tone in the containing 
vessels, or in some instances from a con- 
currence of both. 

In constitutions perfectly healthy, when 
the fluids are not tainted with any degree 
of putrescency, and the solids are possessed 
of their natural tonic powers, on the oc- 
currence of wounds even of the most ex- 
tensive nature, so soon as the larger arteries 
are secured, all the small vessels that have 
been divided, in consequence of that con- 
|P_53
tractile power with which in a state of 
health they are endowed, and from the sti- 
mulus of the external air to which they are 
now exposed, are diminished not only in 
their diameters, but also in their length; in 
consequence of which, they recede consi- 
derably within the surface of the surround- 
ing parts. 

This cause of itself would probably in 
the greatest number of instances prove suf- 
ficient for restraining all loss of blood 
from the smaller arteries; but, in the sound 
state of constitution of which we have now 
been speaking, another very powerful agent 
is provided by nature for producing the 
fame effect. From the extremities of the 
divided vessels which at first discharged 
red blood only, there now, in their con- 
tracted state, oozes out a more thin, though 
viscid fluid, containing a great proportion 
of the coagulable parts of the blood; and 
this being equally distributed over the sur- 
face of the wound, by its balsamic agglu- 
tinating powers, has undoubtedly a very 
|P_54
considerable influence in restraining all such 
hæmorrhagies. 

In constitutions altogether healthy, where 
neither of the states of disease we have al- 
luded to preponderates over the other, we 
find, that, so soon as the larger arteries of 
wounds are secured, nature, in the manner 
already described, generally puts a stop to 
all farther discharge. So that, whenever the 
contrary happens, by a tedious oozing con- 
tinuing from the surface of the sore, we 
ought then to pay particular attention to 
the habit of body with which it is connec- 
ted. 

When such an occurrence happens in a 
patient, young and vigorous, and where 
the tone of the muscular fibres is evident- 
ly great, the most effectual means of putting 
a stop to the discharge, is to relax the 
vascular system, either by opening a vein 
in some other part, or, what gives still more 
immediate relief, by untying the ligature 
on one of the principal arteries of the part, 
so as to allow it to bleed freely: Those vio- 
lent spasmodic twitchings too, so frequent 
|P_55
after operations on any of the extremities, 
when they do not depend on a nerve being 
included in the ligature with the artery, 
are in this manner more effectually re- 
lieved than by any other means. 

By the same means, the patient, from 
being in a febrile heat and much confused, 
soon becomes very tranquil: The violent 
pulsation of the heart and larger arteries 
abates, and, the blood not being pro- 
pelled with such impetuosity into the 
smaller vessels of the part, they are thereby 
left at more liberty to retract; and as in 
this state they do not pour forth red blood 
so freely, they are the more readily covered 
with that viscid glutinous fluid which we 
have already shown to be one of the most 
important means intended by nature for 
the prevention of such hæmorrhagies. At 
the same time that by the means recom- 
mended we endeavour to allay the com- 
motion produced in the system, the patient 
ought to be kept exceedingly cool; wine 
and other cordials should be rigidly avoid- 
ed; cold water, acidulated either with the 
|P_56
mineral or vegetable acids, ought to be the 
only drink; motion of every kind, par- 
ticularly of the part affected, should be 
guarded against; and the wound being 
gently covered with soft charpie, ought 
to be tied up with a bandage so applied 
as to produce a moderate degree of pres- 
sure on the extremities of the divided 
parts. 

In every extensive wound attended with 
hæmorrhagies of this kind, and particularly 
when violent spasmodic affections of the 
muscles supervene, together with the means 
already recommended, large doses of opi- 
ates are found highly beneficial; for what- 
ever hurtful effects may have been appre- 
hended from opiates in some inflamma- 
tory affections, every practitioner who has 
ventured on a free use of them must ad- 
mit, that in all occurrences of this nature 
their influence far surpasses that of any 
other remedy. 

So soon therefore as a sufficient quantity of 
blood has been discharged, and the wound 
being dressed and the patient laid to rest, 
|P_57
a dose of opium proportioned to the vio- 
lence of the symptoms ought to be imme- 
diately exhibited. It ought to be remark- 
ed however, that, in all such circumstan- 
ces, much larger doses of the remedy 
are necessary, than in ordinary cases re- 
quiring the use of opiates. Small doses, 
instead of answering any good purpose, 
seem frequently rather to aggravate the 
various symptoms; so that, whenever they 
are here had recourse to, they ought always 
to be given in quantities sufficient for the 
intended effect. 

Although hæmmorrhagies of this nature 
do now and then occur in firm vigorous 
constitutions; yet they undoubtedly happen 
much more frequently in relaxed enfeebled 
habits, where the solids have lost part of their 
natural firmness, and the fluids have acqui- 
red some degree of putrescency. As the 
vessels in this situation of matters are sup- 
posed to have been deprived of that degree 
of tone of which we wish them to be posses- 
sed, instead of restraining the patient from 
the use of cordials, as is done usually in 
|P_58
every case of hamorrhagy, a moderate use 
of generous wine ought to be immediately 
prescribed; for nothing, it may be obser- 
ved, tends so much in such circumstances 
to restrain hæmorrhagies, as a well-directed 
use of proper cordials. By tending to in- 
vigorate and brace the solids, they thereby 
enable the arterial system to give a due 
resistance to the contained fluids; and the 
same cause, it may be observed, has a consi- 
derable influence in restoring to the fluids 
that viscidity of texture, of which in all such 
instances we suppose them to be deprived. 

Whenever, therefore, such tedious hæmor- 
rhagies occur in relaxed debilitated habits, 
a free use of Port, Madeira, or any other 
wine whose strength and goodness can be 
depended on, ought to be immediately 
allowed; a nourishing diet also becomes 
proper; the patient ought to be kept cool; 
and the mineral acids, from their known 
utility in every species of hæmorrhagy, 
ought also to, be prescribed. Rest of body 
is here proper too; and opiates, when in- 
dicated, either by pain or spasmodic affec- 
|P_59
tions of the muscles, ought never to be 
omitted. 

Together with these remedies adapted 
to the general system, particular dressings, 
appropriated to the state of the parts to 
which they are to be applied, have been 
found very beneficial. We have already 
remarked, that in firm healthy constitu- 
tions, so soon as the discharge of blood 
which naturally occurs in every large 
wound is over, the parts come soon to be 
covered with a viscid coagulable effusion 
from the mouths of the now retracted ar- 
teries; but in constitutions of an opposite 
nature, where the solids are much relaxed, 
the blood in general is found in such a 
dissolved state as to afford no secretion of 
this nature. 

In order therefore to supply as much as 
possible the deficiency of this natural bal- 
sam, different artificial applications have 
been invented. Dusting the parts with 
starch or wheat flour, has sometimes been 
found of use; and I have known gum 
|P_60
arabic in fine powder to answer when 
these have failed. 

Applications of this kind, indeed, have 
been used with success in all such hæmor- 
rhagies, with whatever habit of body they 
happen to be connected; but they have al- 
ways proved more particularly serviceable 
in relaxed constitutions, attended with a 
dissolved state of the blood and an enfeebled 
muscular system. We may here use with 
freedom too, a remedy which in such cir- 
cumstances generally proves serviceable, 
but which in constitutions of an opposite 
nature ought never to be employed. The 
remedy alluded to is alcohol, or any other 
ardent spirits, impregnated with as great a 
quantity as they can dissolve of myrrh or 
any other of the heating viscid gums. The 
balsamum traumaticum of the shops, a reme- 
dy of this nature, has long been famous for 
its influence in such cases, but that indiscri- 
minate use of this and similar applications 
which has long prevailed with some prac- 
titioners, I am confident has done much 
harm; for, as they are all possessed of very 
|P_61
stimulating powers, they of course tend to 
aggravate every symptom in wounds con- 
nected with a tense state of fibres, when much 
pain, and especially when spasmodic muscu- 
lar affections, prevail. But, in constitutions 
of an opposite nature, where the blood ap- 
pears to be in a dissolved state, and where 
the arterial system seems evidently to re- 
quire a stimulus, remedies of this class come 
to be very useful: Insomuch that, in every 
constitution of this kind where hæmor- 
rhagies prove troublesome, no application 
whatever is found to answer better, than 
charpie immersed in an agglutinating 
spirituous balsam of this nature. 

By a due perseverance in one or other of 
the plans here pointed out, it will seldom 
happen that hæmorrhagies of this nature 
are not at last put a stop to: But when 
the contrary does occur; when, notwith- 
standing the use of the remedies recom- 
mended, a discharge of blood still conti- 
nues; together with the means already ad- 
vised, an equal moderate pressure ought to 
be applied over the whole surface of the 
|P_62
sore, to be continued so long as the necessity 
of the case seems to indicate. 

In finishing the dressings of such wounds, 
after the charpie and compresses have been 
applied, a bandage properly adapted to 
the part ought to conclude the whole, and 
in such a manner as to produce as equal 
a degree of pressure over the surface of the 
sore as possible. But it now and then hap- 
pens, that no bandage whatever can be so 
applied, as to produce the desired effect; 
and in such cases, the hand of an assistant 
is the only resource. In such instances, a 
person's hand being firmly applied over the 
dressings, so as to produce a very equal 
degree of pressure, will commonly succeed 
when no other remedy is found to have 
much influence. 

Having thus endeavoured to point out 
the most effectual means of putting a stop 
to morbid hæmorrhagies, we shall now 
proceed to consider the different modes 
employed by art, for effecting a discharge 
of blood when indicated by the presence of 
some disorder in the constitution. 


[^1. *Figures of parts united in this manner, will be re- 
presented when we come to treat of the Hare-Lip. ^]
[^2. * Sharp's Surgery—On Amputation. ^]
[^3. * See an essay upon this subject, by Mr Aitken, 
an ingenious surgeon of Warrington. ^]