

[^Sample 1: book - ^]

|P_
[}PART II. 
containing 
A DESCRIPTION OF THE SITUATION AND NUMBER OF 
THE ABSORBENT GLANDS, 
and of the 
PARTICULAR DISTRIBUTION OF THE ABSORBING VESSELS 
THEMSELVES, 
IN THE HUMAN BODY. }]
|P_117[^A horizontal double-line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}INTRODUCTION to PART II. }]
THE blood-vessels of the human body have been frequently and 
accurately described by authors. The anatomists who have de- 
scribed parts of the absorbent system are also neither few nor obscure; 
but the subject is really difficult; they have not hit on the proper 
methods of investigation; they had not the advantages of proper sub- 
jects, and proper instruments; they were not sufficiently masters of 
their own time; they did not live to accomplish what they had begun; 
or they laid before the public the produce of a fertile imagination, in the 
place of a true description. 

I have, in another part of this treatise, already mentioned the first 
writers on the absorbents; and the' reader is supposed to be acquainted 
with Asellius, Veflingius, Rudbeck, and Bartholine. Their united la- 
bours amounted to little more than the discovery of the lacteals, some 
lymphatics of the liver and testicle, with the thoracic duct. Nor does 
any body appear, for a long time after, to have added any thing to their 
stock of knowledge. If I afterwards make it appear, that some other 
parts of this system were known, yet, as this knowledge was not ge- 
neral, but confined to private societies or persons, and formed what 
Haller would call crepusculæ lymphaticorum, it will not invalidate 
the general assertion I have now made. Haller knew all these facts I 
allude to; yet he says, "Post ea tempora, diu nihil accessit, & multum 
hæc historia etiam nunc a perfectione abest, neque in omnibus parti- 
bus corporis animalis hæc vasa demonstrata sunt, neque systema ab- 
solutum est, quale ad arterias corporis humani possidemus. Multæ 
enim partes corporis sunt, in quibus vasa lymphatica nemo vidit, aliæ 
ubi & raro quisquam, & cum dubio aliquo. Ad alia enim incisores 
|P_118
se converterunt, eorumque labores rei difficultas vicit. " — We have, 
indeed, been informed, that Nuck had traced the absorbents over the 
whole body; that he had engraved the appearances, and was going to 
publish them, when he was prematurely cut off. "Plura promiserat 
Antonius Nuck, & poterat de ejus viri industria magna incisorum 
expectatio esse. Integrum enim vasorum lymphaticorum systema amal- 
gamate repletum siccaverat, fed pertinacem in eo labore virum, & 
per plura animalia sua vascula persequentem, mors ante diem abstulit. 
Ad ea quæ edidit, utique brutis animalibus usum esse constat, vel cordis 
exemplo. Non ideo tamen vir. cl. aut J. Henrici Schulzii acerbam 
accusationem meritus est, aut Laurentii Heisteri censuram, qui tabulas 
hujus viri pro fictitiis habent. Ipse enim testimonium pro Nuckio 
dixit Hermannus Boerhaave, tabulasque vasorum lymphaticorum vidit, 
quæ argento vivo repleta vir industrius continuata siccaverat. "

I should be exceedingly sorry to detract from the reputation of any 
industrious anatomist; but the appearances he has caused to be engraved 
are not like what I have seen. It is very evident, that he sometimes 
described from the quadruped; it is to me also very evident, that he 
describes from his own imagination. He is right in describing the ab- 
sorbent glands as cellular; but neither his engravings of those glands, 
nor some others that I have seen, very much resembling them, are ac- 
cording to nature. Haller, indeed, says of him, "Pari facilitate vasa 
lymphatica ostendebat ut alii rubra, " and that he injected these in 
vacuo: "Antlia pneumatica ad eum scopum usum fuisse. " — He also 
informs us, that he made use of an amalgam of quicksilver. This does 
not correspond, however, with what he afterwards says: "Nuckium 
adipe aliquo argentum vivum coegisse. " This mixture would not pass 
into the absorbent vessels readily, in the way we now inject: I cannot 
say what might happen, if the vessels were injected in vacuo; but I 
have a great many doubts on this subject. 

Some attempts have since that period been made, and some things have 
been added to the history of the absorbents, by Mekel, Hewson, and 
Haller; but the description is still incomplete, as Haller himself con- 
fesses: "III. Meckelius passim ad eorum historiam aliqua addidit,. tum 
Alexander Monro fil. & potissimum Guil. Hewson, qui multas novas 
ex humano corpore tabulas dedit, etiam in artubus, & in his non sola 
|P_119
cuti vicina vasa, fed etiam profunda, neque prius dicta. Sparsim & 
ego, & in hominum cadaveribus, & in vivis animalibus, vasa lym- 
phatica & vidi, & persecutus sum. Plurima tamen ubique desunt, neque 
in artubus, aut dorso, aut interiori capite ea vascula hactenus satis 
certo visa sunt, neaque constitutæ radices aut extremi termini. "

 The description of the absorbent system I am about to give, is in most 
things the same with that which I gave at lectures twelve or thirteen 
years ago, as I formerly observed, particularly that of the absorbents of 
the liver, and of the lungs, and pancreas, which were not known to 
Dr. Hunter himself; the last, particularly, neither to Haller nor Mr. 
Hewfon. Every year I added such varieties as I had discovered. Most of 
the pupils at Windmill Street took notes; and copies of my description 
are in the hands of a vast number of students. 

I have used, in the First Part of this treatise, the terms lacteals and 
lymphatics, instead of absorbents, in order to avoid all ambiguity con- 
cerning the vessels meant; but, having there disproved absorption by red 
veins, I cannot now be misapprehended, and shall in future employ the 
term absorbents, to signify lacteals and lymphatics; and shall write glands of 
the absorbents instead of lymphatic glands. I must also remark, that neither 
the glands of the absorbents, nor their vessels, are so constant in their situa- 
tion and distribution as the arteries; in which respect they resemble the 
red veins. I have here described them as I found them most frequently. 

Another general observation I wish also to premise is, that, indepen- 
dent of those absorbents which accompany the arteries, and which are 
usually one on each side, there is on the extremities a set of cutaneous 
absorbents, accompanying the larger trunks of the cutaneous veins, as 
the saphena major and minor, in the lower extremity; the basilic and 
cephalic veins, in the upper extremity. There is also on the viscera 
commonly a superficial and a deep-seated set; the first run by themselves, 
on the surfaces of the viscera; the second accompany the principal blood- 
vessels of the viscera, and ramify in the same manner. This distinction 
takes place even amongst the absorbents of the intestines themselves. 

Previous to the description of the vessels, I have thought proper to 
describe the number and situation of the glands of the absorbents, as they 
are more easily discovered. By this means I shall give an outline of the 
|P_120
system, which will facilitate afterwards the description of the vessels 
themselves. 

Many of these glands, from their bulk, may be discovered under 
the integuments, both by the eye and by the touch. When they are 
swelled or indurated, they are still more easily discovered; and in the 
dead body, dissection, with the utmost facility, discovers them in all 
the other parts where they exist. Both in the description of the glands 
and of the vessels, I shall begin at the greatest distance from the termi- 
nations of the system; viz. the angles of the jugular and subclavian 
veins, and follow the course of the absorbed fluids moving in their 
vessels: consequently, I begin with the lower extremity. I have quoted 
Haller very often, not only because I consider him as the best anatomi- 
cal author, on the whole, that we have, but also because I find the 
anatomical knowledge of all his predecessors collected in his writings. 
He does not appear to have done much in this system himself; but he 
knows every thing that has been done by his predecessors and cotem- 
poraries. 

|P_121[^A horizontal double-line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}A 
DESCRIPTION 
of the situation and number of the 
GLANDS of the ABSORBENTS. }][^A long horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
[}THE POPLITEAL GLANDS. }]
I Have not seen any glands in the lower extremity, below the ham. 
Haller makes a similar observation: "Sensim rariores factæ in 
poplite fere desinunt, cum in tibia, fibula, pedeque nullæ mihi un- 
quam occurrerint. " — Mr. Hewson describes and delineates one very 
small gland a little below the middle of the tibia, on the fore part of 
that bone, between it and the external integuments; but I have never 
once met with it; and would therefore consider it as a kind of lusus 
naturæ. Dr. Hunter once found the glands even of the ham wanting. 
This circumstance also I never met with. There are seldom more than 
three; they lie close upon the popliteal artery; and, though small, are 
by no means, as Haller says, "uti ultimæ conglobatarum, ita minimæ. "
There are many on the mesocolon, and in a variety of other places, 
much smaller than they are. They swell from sores on the outside of 
the foot, in the sole of the foot, and from sores of the integuments on 
the calf of the leg. Dr. Hunter mentioned a case of a patient who was 
bit by a mad dog in the calf of the leg: the sore healed at first, but 
some weeks after broke out again. Red lines were perceived running 
upward from the sore, with the saphena minor, which dipt down in the 
ham, and were lost. They were inflamed lymphatics going to those 
glands. 

|P_122
[}THE INGUINAL GLANDS. }]
THE glands of the groin are of an uncertain number, from eight, 
ten, or twelve, to twenty or more. Haller makes them only four. 
"Illas cum plures esse credidissem, accuratius numerans, quatuor in- 
veni; octo faciebat Whartonus. " They are situated, principally, above 
the fascia of the thigh, though several of them lie under it. These last are 
placed on the iliacus internus muscle, between the triceps and sartorius. 
Sometimes several of these glands are collected into one large one, which 
lies on the upper side of the inguinal artery. Those which are nearest 
the symphysis pubis belong to the absorbents of the parts of generation 
in both sexes, and become, in the venereal disease, the seat of buboes. 
In some obstinate venereal ulcerations of these glands, the coats of the 
subjacent inguinal artery have been so eroded, that from straining 
the artery has burst, and the patient instantly expired. A case of 
this kind was related by Dr. Hunter, as having happened in a sol- 
dier of the guards. — Those on the outside of these last-mentioned 
are more apt to inflame and enlarge, from serophulous or other sores 
on the inside or top of the foot, from sores on the inside of the 
knee, or any where in the course of the saphena major. They may 
swell from sores any where on the inside or fore part of the leg 
and thigh. I have known them swell from wounds of the buttocks, 
and even from the inflamed and bleeding piles about the verge of the 
anus. When plasters, producing ulcers in the integuments, have been 
applied to the skin, near the spine of the ilium, I have also repeatedly 
seen these glands swell. They sometimes swell, and even suppurate, 
from sympathy with an inflamed testicle, though there is no connec- 
tion between them by lymphatic vessels. Haller and Nuck make 
these glands extend sometimes to the middle of the sartorius muscle: 
"Aliquousque cum magnis vasorum truncis ad medium fere sartorium 
descendunt, a quo musculo, sartoriarum nomen, Nuckius sumsit, ab 
arteria, vero, crurales dixit. " I have seldom seen any glands between 
the popliteal and inguinal glands, neither with the cutaneous nor deep- 
seated lymphatics. 

|P_123
[}THE EXTERNAL ILIAC GLANDS. }]
THESE also are of an uncertain number, from six to eight or ten, 
or even more, and are situated both above and below the external iliac 
artery and vein: "A magnis vasis, eædem (glandulæ) cum eorum iliacis 
ramis cognomines, ad femora tendunt. " Though the venereal poison 
must pass through these glands, in its way to the blood, I know of no 
instance of their ever forming buboes; and it is very fortunate they do 
not; for if these, like the inguinal glands, suppurated, they could not 
be opened by the lancet, they must be left to themselves — might burst; 
the pus might fall into the cavity of the abdomen; might produce pe- 
ritoneal inflammation, and might probably destroy the patient. It 
is very difficult to assign any reason for this, as cancerous matter 
not only affects the first glands it enters, but all the glands that 
lie between the fore and the thoracic duct. Some have assigned, as a 
reason for the venereal virus not affecting the second glands as 
well as the first, that the poison was diluted by being mixed with the lymph in 
the first gland. This is by no means satisfactory; since, even after it 
has been mixed with the whole mass of blood, it is capable of producing 
ulcers in the throat, blotches on the whole surface of the body, and 
caries in the bones. 

[}THE INTERNAL ILIAC GLANDS. }]
THESE also have been noticed by Haller. — Speaking of the former 
class, or external iliac glands, he says, "Ab eo agmine alter fasciculus 
in pelvim descendit cum vena hypogastrica ramoque ejus obturatorio. "
Their number is also uncertain; generally, however, more numerous 
than the former. They are apt to form large indurated masses, from 
diseases, about the rectum, uterus, or bladder, which in many instances 
have proved fatal. A case of this kind Dr. Hunter attended. A woman 
was in labour, and could not be delivered in the natural way, from a 
tumor on the side of the pelvis preventing the child's head from coming 
|P_124
down. After she was compleatly exhausted, and the pains gone, he was 
obliged to deliver by the crotchet. The child, of course, was lost; the 
mother fell into a fever, and died. Haller, speaking of the same glands, 
says, "Funestis schirris obnoxiæ! "

[}THE SACRAL GLANDS. }]
HALLER blends these with the former class. They are connected 
with them, undoubtedly; but, lying more in the hollow of the sacrum, 
and behind the rectum, I have considered them apart. Some of these 
are a continuation of the glands of the mesocolon, and belong to the 
rectum; others to the vagina, bladder, and glutæi muscles. "In 
pelvi ultimas mesentericarum quæ rectum intestinum posteriores co- 
mitantur, hæ sacræ iterum adtingunt. " These, as well as the former, 
are liable to schirrus; and have sometimes so compressed the rectum, as 
almost entirely to prevent the extrusion of the fæces: the patient has 
been wore out, and destroyed. 

[}THE LUMBAR GLANDS. }]
THE bodies of the lumbar vertebræ, the lower part of the aorta, 
and cava inferior, are covered with a plexus of lymphatic glands, more 
numerous than any of the former classes. Under these the thoracic duct 
takes its origin; so that I am not surprized at Bartholin's considering 
them to be the real receptacle of the chyle in man. Haller says, "Cum 
vena cava, porro, anteriores glandulæ descendunt, per lumborum ver- 
tebras, lumbalium nomine; celebres toties Bartholino laudatæ, quas 
vir cl. ob numerosa immista vasa lymphatica, omnino pro vero in 
homine chyli receptaculo, habuit. " These, in cancers, and scrophulous 
affections of the testicles and ovaria, are frequently enlarged and diseased. 
"Grandes sunt, & frequenter intumescunt. " In the dead body of a man, 
whose left testicle had formerly been extirpated on account of its being 
cancerous, I found the lumbar glands enlarged to the size of a child's head 
at birth, and enclosing the vena cava inferior, and aorta descendens, 
for some way. 

|P_125
[}THE MESENTERIC GLANDS. }]
THEIR number is from between 130 to 140 or 150. — Ruysch 
makes them vastly more numerous than I do; and says, that he has 
counted seventy glands in a portion of the mesentery not broader than 
the palm of his hand. — Haller does not say how many glands there 
are in the mesentery, but uses the term plurima. "In adipe circa 
vasorum intestinalium divisiones, plurimæ glandulæ sedent, ovatæ, 
compressæ, molles, tenera membrana obductæ, conglobati generis, cellu- 
losæ & ipsæ; in mesenterio quidem potissimum, tamen etiam in mesocolo 
transverso, inque aliis mesocolis, etiam pone rectum intestinum. Iis 
glandulis cum thymo commune est, fucco lacteolo in fetu adbundare, 
vasculisque innumerabilibus, deinde ea ætate succulentas esse, & in se- 
nibus demum diminui, & fere evanescere. " This variety depends on this 
circumstance — the intestinal canal is longer in some human bodies than 
in others; so much so, that it is sometimes seven or eight times the length 
of the whole body; at other times not more than three times that length. 
The number of the glands, and the breadth of the mesentery, are almost 
always in proportion to the length of the intestinal tube, and of course to 
the number of the absorbent vessels. As the absorbents are more nu- 
merous upon the jejunum, or superior part of the intestinal tube, their 
glands are not only more numerous, but larger, on that part of the 
mesentery which corresponds to that intestine. Most of them are 
situated on the convex or left side of the superior mesenteric artery. In 
the healthy state of the body, even in the adult, the largest glands on 
the mesentery seldom exceed the size of an almond. It is very seldom 
that they are situate nearer the edge of the intestine than one or two 
inches. They are commonly scattered at a little distance from each 
other. Sometimes they are clustered, or accumulated; and in many 
quadrupeds they are only to be found in this clustered form, at the root 
of the mesentery. Asellius found them so in the dogs; and, from their 
forming a line of some length at that place, as well as from other cir- 
cumstances, supposed them to be the pancreas. Although succeeding 
anatomists discovered his error, they still continued to call this conglo- 
|P_126
meration of the lymphatic glands, in those animals, by the name of the 
Pancreas of Ascllius. 

I have said, that the glands of the absorbents on the lower part of the 
mesentery, and towards the right side, are smaller and less numerous than 
those toward the upper and left side; but the chyle from the lower 
part of the ilium, if it passes at first apparently through fewer and smaller 
glands, passes afterwards through a greater number, and even through 
the large glands at the root of the mesentery; so that what is not 
strictly true respecting the vessel, though asserted by Haller, is certainly 
true respecting the chyle absorbed from the ilium. "Idem vas lacteum, 
quod mihi selegerim, ad quintam usque glandulam, in superficie mesenterii prosecutus sum. "

These glands often become enlarged and indurated; this enlargement 
frequently depends upon a species of dysentery and ulceration of the in- 
testines. The absorbents arising out of the. ulcers carry the inflamma- 
tion to the mesenteric glands, and become the cause of their enlarge- 
ment. The glands of the mesentery also enlarge from scrophula, without 
any inflammation or ulceration of the intestines: and, as children liable 
to this complaint are generally very much emaciated, and soon after die, 
their emaciation and death has been attributed to the obstruction in the 
glands preventing the chyle from entering into the blood; and the 
disease has been called tabes mesenterica, as I have already said. 
Haller says, "Non alibi, in corpore humano frequentior schirro 
locus est & steatomatibus etiam lapideis cducretionibus, ut omnino 
dudum earum tumor & schirrus pro causa peculiaris atrophiæ infan- 
tilis habiti sunt. " After which he exhibits a long list of indurations 
and enlargements of these glands: — "Schirrus enormis librarum decem — 
In atrophia mesenterium totum lapidosum — Glandulæ mesenterii tumi- 
dissimæ, intus tartaro fetæ. " — Diemerbroeck appears to have mistaken the 
scrophulous suppuration of these glands for the stagnation and coagulation 
of the chyle in them: "In atrophia glandulæ mesentericæ tumidæ ca- 
seoso chylo plenæ. " De Haen mentions a case where the mesentery, from 
the diseased glands, weighed thirty pounds: "Tumor mesenterii cum 
hydatidibus, etiam cartilagineis partibus, triginta librarum pondere. "

|P_127
[}The GLANDS of the MESOCOLON. }]
THE glands of the mesocolon are neither so large nor so numerous 
as those of the mesentery. They are among the smallest in the body; and 
their number seldom exceeds twenty or thirty. They are situated nearer 
the edge of the intestine; but are also scattered not only along what is 
called the mesocolon, but on that fixt production of the peritoneum 
which belongs to the caput coli, and also to the sigmoide flexure of 
the colon. They are also found on what Haller calls the mesocolon in- 
ferior, in the hollow of the sacrum, what Dr. Hunter used to call the 
mesorectum. Haller says little or nothing of these glands: "Nume- 
rosissimis illis mesenterii & mesocoli glandulis conjungitur. " The me- 
senteric glands, at the time of the absorption of the chyle, are of a pure 
white colour; but 1 never saw this happen to the glands of the meso- 
colon. Winslow says, that he demonstrated, to the Academy of Sciences, 
chyle in the lacteals of the great intestines. This I formerly observed I 
never saw. The chyle is principally found in the jejunum; and the con- 
tents of the ilium, towards its lower end, approach very much to the nature 
of fæces. In the great intestine I have never found any thing but fæces. 
The circumstance of the glands being more numerous in the mesentery, 
along which almost all the chyle is carried, and being smaller and less nu- 
merous on the mesocolon, through which hardly any passes, looks as if the 
glands were intended to produce some remarkable change on the chyle. 
These glands are not so liable to schirrus as those on the mesentery; but 
are sometimes enlarged, from cancers and lchirri in the great intestines, 
which occur there more frequently than in the small. 

[}The GLANDS of the OMENTUM and STOMACH. }]
IT is seldom that any glands are found on the omentum till you come 
near the great arch of the stomach; they are about three or four in num- 
ber, in the course of the gastrica dextra and smistra; and, though they 
belong to the omentum as much as to the stomach, have been considered 
by some anatomists as belonging to the stomach only, and been termed 
|P_128
glandulæ ventriculi inferiores. There are some small glands also on the edge 
of the little epiploon, where it adheres to the small arch of the stomach; 
these, from their situation, have been termed glandulæ ventriculi su- 
periors. 

[}The GLANDS of the LIVER, PANCREAS, and SPLEEN. }]
THE trunk of the vena portarum, near its entrance into the 
liver, is beset with absorbent glands; these I have seen diseased, and 
distended to an enormous size, and compressing both the ductus 
communis choledochus, and the pancreatic duct, at the place of their 
insertion into the duodenum: and this plexus is connected with another, 
which runs in the course of the splenic artery and vein, and belongs 
to the stomach, pancreas, and spleen. 

[}The THORACIC GLANDS of the ABSORBENTS. }]
FROM the cavity of the abdomen we now go to the cavity of the tho- 
rax. The first glands we meet with in the cavity of the thorax, on the fore 
part of the pericardium, and upper surface of the diaphragm, are three or 
four in number; they are of a moderate size, and belong commonly to the 
absorbents of the liver, sometimes only to the diaphragm. There are 
others between the laminæ of the anterior mediastinum, three, four, or 
five; neither of these have I, on any occasion, seen diseased. On the op- 
posite side of the pericardium, between the lamina of the posterior me- 
diastinum, there are absorbent glands, which lie upon the œsophagus; 
a continuation of which are found, in most subjects, scattered on the 
external surface of that canal, throughout its whole length. 

Along with the internal mammary arteries a number of small glands 
are commonly found, under the cartilages of the true ribs, from six to eight 
or ten. — Sometimes, but rarely, the glands of the absorbents are found 
within the substance of the lungs. They are constantly found, however, 
at the root of the lungs, both before and behind the bifurcation of the 
trachea, in the two bronchia. Haller says, "Quæ cum arteria aspera 
|P_129
descendunt, eæ utrumque pariter cjus ramum comitantur, & pulmonis 
grandia vasa circumstant, & anteriores & posteriores. " These glands belong 
to the absorbents of the lungs, and may be termed the bronchial glands of 
the absorbents; some of them frequently blend with others which lie 
upon the arch of the aorta, not unfrequently between the origins of the 
carotids, which may be termed the cardiac glands. The former glands 
are commonly of a blue, sometimes of a black colour. When they are of 
the latter colour, their internal substance appears as it were broke down 
or dissolved; and when cut into, resemble so many little bags of ink; at 
other times are full of ossifications, which sometimes have ulcerated their 
way into the trachea, and bits of bone have been coughed up, to the asto- 
nishment of the practitioner, as well as of the patient. Bone may be 
coughed up from other causes, however. Dr. Hunter used to relate a 
case, and shew the basis of the cricoid cartilage converted into bone, 
which, dying from some cause in the part itself, exfoliated, and was at 
last coughed up. The patient, for several months, coughed up blood and 
pus, though in small quantities; was supposed to be in a consumption; 
but on the bone's separating, and being coughed up, he recovered. — 
Some glands are also continued from these, on the fore part of the trachea, 
all the way to the upper edge of the sternum. I once knew an instance 
of these glands becoming schirrous, and forming a considerable mass, 
which being prevented by the sternum from pushing forwards, pressed 
backwards upon the trachea, and compressed it in such a manner, that 
its cavity was gradually obliterating. The man was for some time inca- 
pable of the least exertion or motion, without running immediate risk 
of suffocation; and actually died one morning suddenly, as he was putting 
on his cloaths. 

The sides of the vertebræ of the back have a small chain of glands 
continued as it were from the lumbar glands, through their whole 
length. These glands are almost always to be found, and are commonly 
very small; they belong to the absorbents of the intercostal spaces, and 
seem to be so many guards on the thoracic duct, that no absorbent may 
enter it, which has not previously passed through a gland. 

|P_130
[}The GLANDS Of The ABSORBENTS Of The NECK. }]
THE glands of the neck are almost as numerous as those of the mesentery; 
they are situated chiefly on the sides of the neck; some of them lie imme- 
diately under the skin, and accompany the external jugular veins; but by 
far the greater number accompany the internal jugular veins and carotid 
arteries. "Porro hæc glandularum series cum pharynge continuatur & 
ad latus & ad posteriorem ejus faciem, secundum iter jugularis venæ 
& carotidis arteriæ — Verum agmen illud jugulare dextrum cum vena 
cava, utriusque vero lateris cum aspera arteria continuatur. " Haller. 
These glands frequently swell in children, from inflammations of the 
gums and alveolar processes in teething, and recover after the teething 
is over. They frequently swell and enlarge from suppurations and 
ulcerations of the integuments on the top of the head; and they fre- 
quently inflame and enlarge from scrophulous disposition alone. I have 
known them swell to an enormous size; and, though commonly ac- 
companied with little pain, I have known the inflammation changed 
from indolent to active; and the pain and irritation of the parts, together 
with the affection of the mind, have worn out and destroyed the pa- 
tient. Commonly, however, the scrophulous affection of those glands is 
more offensive to the eye of spectators, and troublesome to the patient, than 
dangerous. As they are situated in parts which are not usually covered, 
they are exposed to every body's view, and almost constantly excite the 
idea of scrophula, and of the blood's being tainted with an hereditary 
disease, which may be communicated to the offspring of the person. The 
inflammation of those glands not unfrequently terminates in suppura- 
tion. They burst of themselves, continue discharging for months or 
years, or alternately heal and break out again, till the age of fourteen or 
sixteen; when the increased vigor of the constitution, and the changes 
that take place respecting the organs of generation, put a stop to the 
disease, the patient for the remainder of his life shews no more symptoms 
of scrophula, or at least not till towards the end of life, when the vigor 
of the body declining, permits this disposition again to shew itself. 
|P_131
These glands not only enlarge from particular affections of the teeth and 
jaws, and of the integuments on the outside of the head, but from affec- 
tions of the brain and its coverings; a proof not only of there being ab- 
sorbents in the brain, but of the course which these absorbents take. 
These glands also swell from ulcerations of the integuments in the nape 
of the neck. 

[}The GLANDS of the ABSORBENTS in the AXILLÆ. }]
THESE glands blend in with another plexus, situated under 
the clavicles and in the axillæ; these are not so numerous as 
those of the neck, though in general they are larger. They belong 
to the absorbents of the arms, of the breasts, and of the integuments 
behind the scapulæ; and inflame and enlarge in particular affections 
of those parts. They even receive absorbents from the cavity of the 
chest; and I have known them swell from pleurisy, peripneumony, and 
pulmonary consumption. A nerve from the second dorsal perforates 
the intercostal muscles, and also goes to the axilla, at the same place 
with these absorbents. These glands, particularly, swell in cancerous 
affections of the breasts of women. It is sometimes possible to extirpate 
them with the diseased breasts themselves, but more frequently their 
swelling on these occasions is a mark of the disease being incurable; 
and I have known them form a schirrous mass, and surround the axillary 
artery in such a manner, that it was impossible to extirpate them, with- 
out extirpating that part of the artery too. In most of the cases of 
cancer in the breast, where these glands have been extirpated, the disease 
returns, because it is almost impossible to find out or extirpate all the 
infected glands; or the arm some time after becomes œdematous, because 
the trunks of the absorbents have been cut through, and afterwards in- 
cluded in the cicatrix. 

|P_132
[}GLANDS of the ARM. }]
THESE also are of an uncertain number, from three to six or seven in 
each arm, and placed in no certain order: they occupy the inside of the 
arm, from the axilla to the internal condyle of the humerus, where there 
is almost constantly one gland, in each arm, to be found on the anterior sur- 
face of that condyle. They run principally with the brachial artery. I 
have known the last-mentioned glands die, and slough out in scrophula, 
without any great inconvenience. 

[}GLANDS of the FACE. }]
THERE are some small glands belonging to the absorbents on the 
sides of the face; the uppermost of these are immediately under the zygo- 
matic processes of the temporal bones, others lie on the external surfaces 
of the parotid glands, as well as on the buccinator muscles. There may 
be four, five, or six of each side; sometimes there are none. There are 
also several glands about the angles of the lower jaw, and on its base, 
between these angles and its symphysis. There are constantly two be- 
hind and upon the mammillary processes of the temporal bones, but these 
are rather to be considered as the uppermost of the neck than belonging 
to the head. 

[}Where there are no GLANDS of the ABSORBENTS. }]
HAVING thus pointed out in what parts of the body the absorbent 
glands are chiefly to be found, it will naturally be asked, Are there no 
glands to be met with in the other parts of the body? I do not say that 
they are never found any where else. Anatomists may yet find them in 
parts where I have not seen them. We are every day finding some lusus 
naturæ in the arteries, veins, and nerves; and, as the absorbent system 
allows of a still greater variety, other glands may yet be seen than those 
|P_133
which I have described. But I have seen no glands on the feet, none on 
the legs below the ham, none between the integuments of the thigh 
and the muscles, different from those described. Others have seen those 
that sometimes, as it would appear, accompany the femoral artery in the 
middle of the thigh; I have seen none between the ham and the groin. 
I never saw any either under the integuments of among the muscles of 
the nates. I have met with none, on the posterior part of the trunk of 
the body, different from those I have already described; nor on the ante- 
rior part, except some small ones on the breasts of women, situated be- 
tween the nipple and the axilla. There are none on the hands. I 
never saw any in the fore-arm. There are none on the outside of the 
cranium; none on the inside, either in the coverings or in the substance 
of the brain. The pituitary gland has some resemblance to the glands 
of the absorbents; but when cut into, it evidently consists of two sub- 
stances; in which respect it resembles the renal capsula of quadrupeds: 
one upon the outside, which may be called cortical; and another on the 
inside, which, were we to compare it to the substance of the brain, may 
be called medullary. There is nothing of this appearance in the glands 
of the absorbents of the human body. No absorbent vefiels have been 
yet traced into it; we therefore do not know whether it is or is not a gland belonging to the absorbents. 

|P_134
[}of the 
PARTICULAR DISTRIBUTION 
of the 
ABSORBENT VESSELS themselves, 
in the different parts of the body. }][^A long horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
[}ABSORBENTS of the Lower Extremity. }]
I Have, in a former part of this work, demonstrated that the trunks 
of the absorbents are at least double the number of the larger ar- 
teries. Some have imagined that this superiority in number did not 
extend to the minute branches; but the annexed engraving of the deep- 
seated lacteals will sufficiently demonstrate that this superiority in num- 
ber is kept up there also. I have occasionally seen, immediately under 
the common integuments on the top of the foot, innumerable ramifica- 
tions of the absorbents, and exactly the fame appearance as in the ramification of arteries themselves. Bartholin and Steno appear first to have 
seen something of these vessels in quadrupeds; but Van Horne was the 
first who saw them in the human subject. This I take on the authority 
of Haller: "Ea vero in humano crure ostendit Johannes Van Horne. "
The larger absorbents of the lower extremity are formed into two sets, 
superficial, and deep-seated; the superficial set accompany chiefly the 
cutaneous veins, and the deep-seated accompany the arteries. The cu- 
|P_135
taneous veins of the lower extremity form two principal trunks; one 
of these is named saphena major, and the other saphena minor. The 
greater number of the cutaneous absorbents accompany the saphena 
major; and I have long distinguished them by the name of vasa lymphatica 
venam saphenam majorem comitantia. Some absorbents arise from the sides 
of the toes, in the same manner as the arteries, two and two. But, be- 
sides these, there is a net-work of absorbents compleatly surrounding the 
toes. The two lateral absorbents accompany the deep-seated arteries; 
the net-work upon the outside belong to those which accompany the 
cutaneous veins. They form four great divisions; the first arises from 
between the great toe and the one on its outside, where the saphena 
major commences, and consists of six or seven vessels; they run over the 
top of the foot, with that vein, towards the fore part of the inner ancle; 
from thence they run, in company with the vein, towards the inside of 
the knee, where they are joined by others, presently to be described. 
The second division, which I have seen consisting sometimes of eight 
or ten vessels, arise about the middle of the inner edge of the foot, 
pass behind the inner ancle, and, running over the inside of the calf of 
the leg, join the last-described vessels on the inside of the knee. The third 
division, consisting of five or six vessels, arise near the little toe, run over 
the outer and upper side of the foot, in the direction of the outer ancle; 
when they come near it, they divide into two; one part cross over the 
anterior part of the tibia, and go likewise to the inside of the knee, where 
they join the two former divisions. — It happened once, that when I was 
injecting this plexus with quicksilver, I injected a portion of the skin 
to great minuteness, the mercury having run contrary to the valves, 
into exceeding fine extremities of the absorbents. The part where this 
happened, as well as the vessels from whence it was injected, are seen 
in the largest annexed figure. — From the union of these three divisions, a 
grand plexus is formed, consisting of fourteen, sixteen, or twenty trunks 
of the absorbents, which still continue to accompany the saphena major; 
that is, to run obliquely from the inside of the knee to the middle of 
the groin; there they commonly go into the different inguinal glands 
already described. But, in the most successful injection that I ever 
made of these vessels, they terminated in one gland, as will be seen in 
|P_136
the annexed figure. It frequently happens, that two or three of these 
trunks pass by the glands of the groin, and are not inserted into any gland 
till they have passed under Paupart's ligament. Part of the last division, 
viz. that coming from the little toe, join another which arises from the 
middle of the outer edge of the foot, where the saphena minor commences, 
and accompanying that vein, pass behind the outer ancle; from thence run 
on the outside of the tendo achilles, go afterwards between the bellies of 
the gastroenemeus muscle, and, dipping down between its heads, near the 
place where they are inserted into the condyles of the os femoris, terminate 
in the glands of the ham, already described. These I have long distinguished 
by the name of vasa lymphatica venam saphenam minorem comitantia. These 
are not above one fifth so numerous as the former. The deep-seated ab- 
sorbents arise, as I have said, from the sides of the toes, along with the 
arteries, two on each side, as the deep-seated veins. Part of these accom- 
pany the anterior tibial artery, on the top of the foot; and I have long 
distinguished them by the name of vasa lymphatica arteriam tibialem an- 
ticam comitantia; they accompany it through its whole course, with it, 
perforate the interossial ligament, between the tibia and fibula, and ter- 
minate in the glands of the ham: but the principal part accompany the 
arteries plantaris externa & interna, in the sole of the foot, and afterwards 
the posterior tibial artery through its whole course, and terminate also 
in the glands of the ham; these I have long named vasa lymphatica ar- 
teriam tibialem posticam comitantia. I have once or twice also seen the ab- 
sorbents accompanying, in the fame manner, the peroneil artery. Though 
I have not injected them with quicksilver, I have inflated them with air, 
and have no doubt but that they terminate in the same glands. From the 
glands of the ham, two grand trunks emerge, as vasa efferentia principally 
to the deep-seated absorbents now described, but also to the cutaneous 
absorbents which accompanied the saphena minor; these run one on each 
side of the femoral artery: I have usually called them arteriæ cruralis 
comites. These frequently communicate with one another by cross canals, 
and their branches sometimes form circles which compleatly surround 
the artery. In one case they both terminated in the same gland in which 
the greater number of the cutaneous absorbents had terminated; but 
more frequently they terminate in three or four of the larger glands, 
|P_137
which lie on the upper or under side of the inguinal artery. The glands 
and the vessels together I have usually named lymphaticorum plexus inguina- 
lis. From these glands several trunks emerge. I have occasionally seen 
two; sometimes four; and, the very last time that I injected them, which 
was last summer, there were six: these I have been used to name effe- 
rentia inguinis. The principal trunk lies under the fascia of the thigh, 
immediately in contact with the upper side of the inguinal artery, and 
a little above that passes under Paupart's ligament, where it immediately 
enters into the glands that are upon the sides of the external iliac ar- 
tery; and, being joined with other smaller trunks from the thigh, forms 
a very elegant plexus of vessels and glands, all the way to the lowermost 
vertebra of the loins; which I have usually distinguished by the name 
of lymphaticorum plexus iliacus externus: sometimes the principal trunk, 
without entering any gland, accompanies the iliac artery till it is lost in 
the lumbar glands. I have sometimes found it passing along these, with- 
out entering any of them, and going immediately into the beginning of 
the thoracic duct, where, joined by a similar trunk from the opposite 
side, they might be said, as it were, to form the two crura of the thoracic 
duct. Some of the smaller vasa efferentia of the groin lie above the fascia 
of the thigh, and, before they pass under Paupart's ligament, are obliged 
to perforate the fascia in so many different places. When the absorbents 
of the thigh form one large trunk, lying on the upper side of the ingui- 
nal artery, I have distinguished it by the name of efferens inguinis maxi- 
mum. If the operation for the inguinal aneurism was to be performed 
in such a case, this trunk must be tied up with the artery, the leg must 
become œdematous, and there would be a stagnation of lymph in almost 
all the absorbents of the lower extremity. About two years ago I in- 
jected the trunks accompanying the femoral artery: — a little above the 
middle of the thigh they split into four branches; these subdividing, 
formed about seven or eight; some of these were inserted into glands on 
the inside of the inguinal artery, but the principal vessels went with it 
under Paupart's ligament, into the cavity of the abdomen, and were in- 
serted into the external iliac glands. 

|P_138
[}The ABSORBENTS of the Penis. }]
THESE likewise may be divided into a superficial and deep-seated 
set. The superficial absorbents arise from the prepuce, in three divi- 
sions; one on the right side of the frænum, another on the left, and the 
third directly in the middle, on the superior side. Those from the 
under side make a semicircular turn, from the under to the upper side of 
the penis; whilst that on the superior part of the prepuce runs on the 
middle of the dorsum penis, exactly in the direction of the symphysis 
pubis. At a little distance from the symphysis, the three divisions unite 
into one common trunk, which almost immediately separates again into 
two. One of these trunks goes to the right groin, accompanies those 
veins which go to the inguinal vein, and terminates near it in those 
inguinal glands which are nearest the symphysis pubis. The other trunk 
goes to the left groin, and terminates exactly in the same manner as the 
former. I have usually named these penis lymphatica cutanea. It is from 
this circumstance, that when venereal matter is absorbed from a chancre 
on the prepuce, red lines are sometimes seen running on the body of the 
penis, and terminating in the groin: these are the absorbent vessels in- 
flamed by the irritation of the poison. This inflammation seldom lasts 
above a day or two. At other times they put on the appearance, and 
have the feel of small cords: these also go off in a few days. At other 
times the vessels not only inflame, and form indurations, but also sup- 
purate in different places, and form what has been called buboes of 
the penis. The deep-seated ones accompany the arteries, and pass 
with them on the inside of the tuberosities of the ischia, or under 
the angle of the pubis. If the venereal virus forms a chancre on the 
prepuce, a buboe is frequently the consequence, in one of the glands 
of the groin; but if the chancre is formed on the glans penis, there is 
seldom a buboe in the groin, and yet the constitution is infected as 
certainly as in the former case. The inguinal glands sometimes inflame 
and suppurate merely from sympathy with the urethra, though no vene- 
real matter be passing through them: this we see sometimes in go- 
norrheas cured without mercury; where, notwithstanding, symptoms 
of the lues venerea in the constitution appeared afterwards. The 
|P_139
same thing frequently happens when bougies have been introduced, 
with a view to the cure of a stricture in the urethra. These absorbents 
may be termed lymphatica penis profundiora. 

[}The ABSORBENTS 
OF THE EXTERNAL PARTS OF GENERATION IN WOMEN. }]
THE absorbents from the clitoris, and beginning of the vagina, 
also form two divisions; one of these, as in the male, goes to the in- 
guinal glands of each side; the other runs up with the round liga- 
ments towards the rings of the external oblique muscles of the abdo- 
men, and may either pass into the glands on the inside of Paupart's 
ligament, or, blending with the absorbents of the uterus, most probably 
terminate in the lumbar glands. This arrangement of these vessels will 
explain what we commonly fee taking place, as the consequence of 
chancres in women — If the chancre is near the meatus urinæ, the red 
lines, which mark the inflamed absorbents, are sometimes seen run- 
ning in the course of the round ligament; and suppurations, similar 
to the buboes of the penis in men, also sometimes take place; but if 
the chancre be situated any where near the perineum, the red lines are 
seen running in the direction of the groin, and the buboe has the 
same situation that it usually has in men. 

[}Some other ABSORBENTS, 
TERMINATING IN THE GLANDS OF THE GROIN. }]
I HAVE seen absorbents injected with quicksilver, which arose 
from the buttocks and posterior part of the thigh, and which, passing 
between the integuments and muscles of the outside of the thigh, were 
inserted into those inguinal glands which are nearest the spine of the 
ilium. The following appearances shew, that the absorbents about the 
verge of the anus, as well as the absorbents of the lateral part of the 
abdomen, are inserted in the glands of the groin. Where the piles 
have been very much inflamed or suppurated, I have repeatedly seen 
the inguinal glands swell; and where ulcerations have been produced 
|P_140
in the integuments which cover the posterior edge of the obliquus 
externus, the absorbent glands of the groin have also swelled. 

[}The ABSORBENTS of the Testicle}]
MAY be divided into four classes: those of its coats, those of the body 
of the testicle, those of the rete testis, and those of the epididymis. 
The first I have usually distinguished by the name of lymphatica tunicæ 
vaginalis; the second, by the name of lymphatica testis profundiora; the 
third, lymphatica rete testis; and the fourth, by the name of lympha- 
tica epididymidis. The absorbents of the tunica vaginalis are easily dis- 
covered, lying between the reflection of that coat and the tunica albu- 
ginea. Though they are thus situated, I know that they belong equally 
to the body of the testicle: they are in great numbers, and I have 
sometimes covered the albuginea with absorbents injected with quick- 
silver; perhaps there is not any part of the human body where the ab- 
sorbents are larger or more numerous, in proportion to the part, than 
here. They soon leave the albuginea, and get upon the cord, where 
they are joined by others, to be described presently; but the tunica va- 
ginalis has also other absorbents, upon the anterior and lateral parts, which 
have not the least connection with the body of the testicle, nor with the 
albuginea, and which also soon blend with the former, on the beginning 
of the cord. The absorbents which arise out of the rete testis are ex- 
ceedingly large, and appear to have no connection with its coats. A very 
beautiful preparation of these vessels I made at Windmill Street, at least 
ten years ago: I injected the vas deferens with quicksilver, and 
had in view not only the filling of the epididymis, but the tubuli 
testis themselves. I had forced the mercury along the epididymis, and 
was delighted to see it get into the body of the testicle; the mercury 
continued to descend very quickly through the glass injecting tube, 
but I soon found that it was not running into the tubuli testis, but 
into some vessels which mounted along the cord; these I soon perceived 
were absorbents. The preparation was dried, afterwards put into oil of 
turpentine; the absorbents were then, and are now, distinctly seen rising 
out of the rete testis. I have also injected them from every part of 
the epididymis, from its superior extremity, from the middle, and from 
|P_141
the lower end. The vasculum aberrens Halleri is not an absorbent ves- 
sel, and cannot possibly return the semen to the blood; it is a lusus 
naturæ, and either forms a cul de sac, or, after many convolutions, 
returns back again upon itself, and terminates where it began. It some- 
times mounts four inches upon the cord, and then terminates in a 
cæcum or blind pouch. Sometimes it is not a quarter of an inch in 
length. I have seen it convolute like the epididymis itself; from 
which it could not be distinguished, till by maceration and dissection 
the cellular membrane had been removed. It may be compared with the 
diverticulum ilii, so frequently met with in the human intestines. The 
absorbents having reached the cord, form from six to twelve trunks, 
or more; some of these are sometimes larger than a crow-quill: they do 
not appear to anastomose with one another as they pass along the cord; 
at first they run straight upwards, in the direction of the ring of the 
external oblique muscle; after which they are bent upon themselves, and 
pass a little way in the direction of the spine of the ilium; after which 
they are bent as it were a second time upon themselves, and run over 
the anterior surface of the psoas muscle, and terminate at last in the 
lumbar glands. The reason of their termination, so distant from their 
origin, will easily occur to those who reflect that the original situation 
of the testicle was at this place, and that it was natural for it, like the 
other viscera, to receive its blood-vessels and nerves from the nearest 
trunks, and to return its absorbents to the nearest glands. I have al- 
ready said, that, in schirrus or cancer of the testicle, these glands 
were sometimes infected, and enlarged to an immense size. Nuck 
appears to have been the first who saw the lymphatics of the 
testicle. Haller says, "Olim Cl. Nuckius flatu per venas sperma- 
ticas impulso hæc vasa distenderat, & ad quadraginta vasa lymphatica ex 
albuginea tunica nasci, in quinque ramos confluere, suamque lympham 
in cisternam chyli deponere docuerat: aliud vero vasculum cum ductu 
deferente ad ureteram tendere, pariterque prope renes in cisternam finiri. 
Ligatis vasis spermaticis, Graafius utebatur, & ejus præceptor Sylvius. "
There is a circumstance in this description which renders it suspicious; 
that is, his asserting that they terminated immediately in the receptacle 
of the chyle. In all my injections of those vessels, they have con- 
stantly terminated in the lumbar glands. Dr. Joliffe appears to have 
|P_142
been the first who saw those vessels on the spermatic cord of the living 
human subject, as I have formerly observed. Haller appears also to 
have seen them, but, with his usual candor and modesty, confesses that 
he knew very little either of their origin or termination. "In homine 
aliquoties vidi majuscula, non tamen valde numerosa, in funiculo 
seminali cum venis adscendentia, valvulosa, ut tamen neque originem, 
neque finem satis accurate viderem. "

[}The ABSORBENTS of the Uterus. }]
AS the uterus has two sets of arteries and veins, it has also two sets 
of absorbent vessels: one of these is the largest, and accompanies the 
hypogastric arteries and veins; I have usually named them lymphatica 
hypogastrica. The other is smaller, and accompanies the spermatic ar- 
teries and veins; and which I have usually distinguished by the name of 
ovarii lymphatica spermatica. In the gravid uterus, the trunks of the 
hypogastric absorbents are as large as a goose-quill, and the vessels 
themselves so numerous, that, when they only were injected with quick- 
silver, one would have been almost tempted to suppose that the uterus 
consisted of absorbents only. In the unimpregnated uterus they are 
not so easily detected; but, when that viscus has been injected by the 
arteries and the veins, and has afterwards been macerated in water 
for some days, the air then produced in the cellular membrane, by pu- 
trefaction, gets into the absorbent vessels, and makes them per- 
fectly distinct. The hypogastric plexus pass from above downwards, 
into glands which are situated on the sides of the vagina; which en- 
large, as the vessels themselves do, in the impregnated state, though they 
are almost invisible in the unimpregnated state: from these glands the 
trunks of these vessels pass to other glands, surrounding the internal iliac 
artery and vein, and which have been already described; the glands and 
vessels together I have distinguished by the name of lymphaticorum 
plexus iliacus internus: from these they pass into the lumbar glands, 
and there blending with the trunks from the lower extremities, they pass 
into the thoracic duct. On the internal surface of the gravid uterus, at 
that part where the placenta had formerly adhered, I have seen the quick- 
|P_143
silver, which I had thrown into these vessels from the external surface of 
the uterus, escaping at torn extremities of vessels which had been passing 
into the placenta, even contrary to the valves. 

The absorbents which accompany the spermatic artery and vein are 
neither so large nor so numerous as the former; they belong chiefly to 
the ovarium, fallopian tube, and the round ligament; they anastomose 
with the former in such a manner that they are frequently injected 
from them; this cannot happen in any other way than contrary to the 
valves. They run up on the spermatic cord, without passing through 
any gland, till they come to the fame place where the absorbents of 
the testicle terminate in the male; there they also terminate, in glands 
situated on the sides of the vertebræ of the loins: from these glands 
they pass out, and blending with the lumbar plexus, get into the thoracic 
duct. In quadrupeds the absorbent vessels of the uterus are very easily 
distinguished, and they ramify exactly as the arteries and veins. 

The absorbent vessels of the human uterus were first seen by Mery, 
afterwards by Morgagni and Winslow. Haller says, "Vidit in 
humano utero Johannes Mery, in omnibus ad instrumentum genitale 
pertinentibus partibus; tum I. B. Morgagnus in puerpera, turgida, sub 
membrana externa uteri repentia; & I. B. Winslow. "

He himself appears never to have seen them: "Etsi in homine 
ea vasa nunquam mihi contigit vidisse, vidi tamen in majoribus bestiis 
etiam manifestissima. "

[}The ABSORBENTS of the Bladder. }]
THESE, in both sexes, accompany the principal veins on the 
bladder, and at the bottom, on the right and left side, pass into the 
glands surrounding the internal iliac artery and vein, but previous to 
this they frequently pass into small glands situated on the sides of the 
bladder itself. Zellerus has given a description of those vessels, in a 
treatise, which I have not seen. Haller says "Zellerus vasa lym- 
phatica (vesicæ) injecto vinculo confirmavit; " and, though Haller had 
not seen the absorbents themselves, he had seen the small glands which 
|P_144
I have mentioned, and for that reason has no doubts of Zellerus's de- 
scription. He says, "In vesica quidem non vidi, sunt tamen in cellu- 
losa tela, ei circumposta glandulæ conglobatæ, quæ rei fidem faciunt. "

I have usually distinguished these by the name of vesicæ lymphatica. 

[}The ABSORBENTS of the Rectum. }]
AS the blood-vessels of the rectum are in proportion larger than in 
most parts of the great intestines, so are its absorbents. It is also sur- 
rounded with absorbent glands. Mr. Hewson says, "The lymphatic ves- 
sels arise even from the rectum, as can be seen in quadrupeds that are 
opened immediately after death, or in fish when a coloured injection is 
thrown into their lymphatic system. " He seems to me to have had no 
adequate idea of the absorbent system: I could as easily conceive a part 
to be without arteries and veins as without absorbents. Haller says, 
"Qui negaverunt crassis intestinis lactea data esse, ii non satis ad 
difficultatem negationis universalis adtenderunt. " Mr. Hewson should 
have known, that the absorbents of the rectum were the first discovered 
after those of the liver, by Rudbeck; and, from the authority 
I last mentioned it appears, "Prima etiam lymphatica vasa, quæ 
præter hepar in hbmine visa sunt, ea in recto intestino adparuerunt. "
Auerbach also asserts, that he had seen the absorbents of the rectum 
with his naked eye; "Sibi nudo oculo in elapso intestino visa esse. "
Haller is here obliged to reject the existence of the ampullula; and the 
reason he gives us is, that there are no villi formed on the internal sur- 
face of the rectum. He says, "Cum villi hic nulli sint, necesse 
est, etiam alio modo & absque ampullula, chylum de intestino posse 
sorberi. " The lymphatics of the rectum, having passed the glands that 
lie upon it, terminate at last in the lumbar glands, where, blending 
with the larger trunks of the absorbents, already described, the fluids 
they have absorbed are carried to the thoracic duct. Those I have usually 
called lymphatica hæmorrhoidea interna. 

|P_145
[}The ABSORBENTS of the Hips. }]
THESE I have usually distinguished by the name of lymphatica 
sciatica. Some of these, I have already said, go round by the great tro- 
chanter of the thigh to the glands of the groin; or pass on the inside 
of the thigh, between it and the scrotum, to the same glands: but by 
far the greater number go in at the sciatic notch, with the arteries 
glutea and sciatica, and terminate in the glands surrounding the internal 
iliac artery and vein; and when they have passed through those glands, 
they terminate at last in the lumbar glands, from whence their fluids go 
into the thoracic duct. 

[}The ABSORBENTS of the Kidnies. }]
THE absorbents of the viscera are commonly found in two sets; one 
which runs on the external surface of the viscus, and another deep seated, 
which accompanies the larger blood-vessels. In the sound state of the 
kidney, I have very seldom seen the superficial absorbents; but in cases 
where the kidnies were diseased, and formed into large hydatids, those 
vessels, which, in the sound state of the viscus, from their minuteness 
are with great difficulty seen, having enlarged with the diseased parts, 
become perfectly distinct. They run from the outer edge of the kidney 
towards the inner, where they either blend in with the deeper-seated set, 
or go separately to be inserted into the lumbar glands, already described. 
Nuck's engravings of these vessels appear to me highly suspicious. These 
I have usually distinguished by the name of lymphatica renis exteriora. In a 
diseased kidney, where its substance, in consequence of stones being con- 
tained in the pelvis, had shrunk, and left the principal branches of the veins 
and arteries naked, I injected nine absorbents with quicksilver; which run 
upon the outside of the blood-vessels, and ramified as they did. When 
they came near the trunks of the emulgent artery and vein, they were 
more closely collected into a plexus, and, running nearly parallel to each 
other, terminated at last in the lumbar glands, a little to the outside of the 
|P_146
origin of the emulgent artery. Those I have usually distinguished by the 
name of lymphatica renis profundiora. By making a ligature upon the emul- 
gent vein, and compressing the substance of the kidney, whilst it was in situ, 
I have forced the blood, which had transuded into the cellular substance 
of that viscus, into the mouths of the absorbents, and thence into their 
branches; they have then shewn themselves to have been exceedingly 
numerous, at least equal to the blood-vessels. It is in this state I have 
represented them, in the substance of the kidney, in the large figure an- 
nexed. 

