
|P_
|P_iii
ALTHO' Fractures of the Ster-
num are described by every 
writer on the accidents to which the 
bones are subject, yet they appear to 
have seldom occurred, even to the 
oldest practitioner. All those authors 
whom I have had an opportunity of 
consulting, very fully describe in 
what manner this accident may hap-
pen, and as fully prescribe the rules 
to be observed in the treatment of it. 
They seem, however, to have copied 
from each other, without adducing 
any proofs to corroborate their asser-
tions. Du Verney, in his excellent 
Treatise on the Diseases of the Bones, 
|P_iv
is the only writer (that I have met 
with) who enters fully and circum-
stantially into Fractures of this part, 
he mentions three cases which had 
occurred to him, two of which proved 
instantly fatal; and the third recover-
ed, but the patient remained an in-
valid during the rest of his life. He 
likewise asserts, that all Fractures of 
the Sternum are to be regarded as 
mortal; "tho' there have been pa-
tients whose constitutions have held 
out, and have been cured." I can 
only regret that he gives no informa-
tion where those cases are recorded. 

The singularity of the following 
case, the unexpected favourable ter-
|P_v
mination of it, together with the 
solicitations of my friends, are the 
motives which induce me to have a 
few copies printed for their perusal. 

My particular thanks are due to my 
worthy Friend and Colleague Dr. 
Skeete, and to Mr. Haighton, for 
their kind advice and assistance during 
the progress of the cure. They who 
are acquainted with the professional 
abilities of those Gentlemen, will 
rather approve my silence, than com-
mend me for any further eulogium 
on their merits. 

October, 1787. 

|P_
[}CASE
OF A 
FRACTURED STERNUM. }]
JOHN OATES, aged 38, by trade 
a cabinet-maker, being in company 
with some friends at a Tavern, and drink-
ing freely, a dispute arose, which termi-
nated in blows, and he was unfortunately 
thrown down with such violence on the edge 
of a chair, as to cause a fracture of the 
Sternum, about four inches above the 
ensiform cartilage. 

|P_8
Being carried home, a neighbouring 
Apothecary was sent for, who ordered some 
draughts to be taken, and a volatile liniment 
to embrocate the part. Symptoms, how-
ever, soon became alarming, great pain 
and difficulty in respiration, cough, and 
oppression on the lungs. These complaints 
were suffered to increase, without any means 
being used to alleviate them, for the space 
of one week. He often spoke with cer-
tainty of his breast being broken, and said 
he could "feel the bones jar against each 
other."

Obtaining no relief, and being positively 
told that his complaint was only a bruise, 
he dismissed his Apothecary, and applied 
to the New Finsbury Dispensary, on 
Tuesday, the 23d January, 1787. He 
was immediately visited by Dr. Skeete
|P_9
and myself, with Mr. Haighton, who 
happened to call on me that morning. On 
examination, we perceived that a fracture 
had taken place as described above, but 
how much of the bone was depressed, or 
how deep the depression might be, we could 
not readily ascertain, owing to an inflam-
mation which occupied the inferior and 
middle part of the Sternum, and which 
seemed hastily advancing to suppuration. 
His pulse was hard and full, the cough 
frequent, and attended with such distress 
and anxiety to the patient, that he said he 
should be perfectly well if the cough could 
be stopped; for at that time he could plainly 
feel the broken edges of the bone grate on 
each other, the irritation of which was al-
most insupportable, and prevented his taking 
any rest. 

|P_10
He was immediately blooded to the 
quantity of sixteen ounces, which was much 
inflamed, a laxative mixture ordered to be 
taken occasionally, an emulsion of Sperm. 
Ceti, cum Sal. Nitri, and Tinct. Thebaic. 
every three hours; and every other means 
used to obviate the effects which we imagined 
would be the consequences of such an acci-
dent. On the day following, the pulse 
was rather softer, and the respiration not 
quite so laborious; ten ounces more of 
blood were taken from him, which had the 
same inflammatory appearance; the inflam-
mation on the Sternum was more circum-
scribed, and evidently shewed that some 
pus was already formed. The laxative 
medicine was ordered to be repeated, and 
thirty drops of Tinct. Thebaic to be taken 
at night. 

|P_11
Symptoms continued much the same till 
Saturday, the 27th of January, when Mr. 
Cooper, Surgeon to Guy's Hospital, fa-
voured me with his company, and was of 
opinion that the abscess on the Sternum 
should be immediately opened. About six 
ounces of pus were discharged. On passing 
my finger to the bottom of the wound, I 
expected to have discovered the broken 
portion of bone, but did not, probably 
owing to the parts having become thickened 
in consequence of the preceding inflamma-
tion. The fracture, however, was evident 
to one sense, though not to the other; for 
on the patient desiring us to place our ear 
on the wound, we could hear the edges of 
the bone grate on each other at every in-
spiration. The pulse being still full, it was 
thought necessary to draw six ounces more 
of blood. He had no rest this night, the 
|P_12
cough being incessant. On Sunday, the 
28th, the countenance appeared much de-
jected, the skin hot, but the pulse calm; 
I ordered the opiate to be increased to 
seventy drops of Tinct. Thebaic, and ap-
plied a bandage, or rather a girt, (such as 
I use in fractures of the ribs, and which is 
made to buckle to what degree of tight-
ness may be requisite) in hopes of being 
able to confine the motion of the Sternum, 
and thereby prevent the irritation which the 
fracture produced. I intended to have ap-
plied this bandage when I first visited him, 
but it was thought that if much pressure 
was thrown on the ribs, it might probably 
cause the inferior broken part of the bone 
to protrude through the inflamed integu-
ments, and be productive of much danger; 
the bandage was therefore deferred till the 
abscess was opened, and the bone not being 
|P_13
evident to the touch, we had less to fear 
from the application of a moderate pressure. 

He experienced much relief in conse-
quence of the bandage being applied, the 
cough was greatly abated, the opiate pro-
cured a sound sleep, and the bone was not 
troublesome in inspiration; the pulse was 
perfectly calm, and the wound discharged 
a healthy pus. He was now ordered some 
mutton broth, having hitherto been confined 
to water-gruel. 

From this time to Monday the sixth of 
February, the symptoms indicated much 
danger; he sweated profusely, coughed in-
cessantly, and what he expectorated was 
often tinged with blood. He took liberally 
of a decoction of Bark with Elixir of 
Vitriol, drank warm milk every morning, 
and used such nourishing articles of diet as 
|P_14
were directed by Dr. Skeete. This plan 
seemed to succeed, for from the 6th to 
12th of February, the sweats were much 
diminished, and the cough less frequent; 
but the wound discharged a fœtid ichor in 
great abundance, which proceeded from a 
sinus extending above, and for some space 
round the superior part of the wound. We 
were now of opinion that this ichorous dis-
charge might proceed from the edges of 
the broken bone, if so, it became advise-
able to make a further opening, to endea-
vour to reach the foundation of the mis-
chief, and then pursue such a course as 
might be indicated from examining the 
condition of the parts. 

This, however, was delayed till Saturday, 
the 17th of February, as for some days we 
pleased ourselves with the idea that the 
|P_15
parts would unite independent of our in-
terference, especially as the discharge from 
the wound became thicker; (Dr. Skeete
having added Gum Myrrh to the decoction 
of Bark) but we were unhappily disap-
pointed in our expectations; and as no 
time was to be lost, I informed him of the 
plan which (on consultation) we intended 
to follow, viz. to make an incision down 
to the bone, to examine its condition, and, 
if necessary, to remove whatever part of it 
might, in our opinion, be an obstacle to a 
perfect union. He readily assented to what-
ever might be judged expedient for his 
relief; not on his own account, having 
suffered so much that life was become a 
burden, but for the sake of his wife and 
five infant children, whose subsistence de-
pended solely on his labour. I made an 
incision from about an inch above the edge 
|P_16
of the old wound, and continued it to the 
bottom, the knife grated on the bone, and 
the inferior part became evident to the 
touch, tho' covered externally with a smooth 
granulation. It now appeared that the 
fracture was not immediately on the centre 
of the Sternum, but more inclined to the 
right side of it; that portion to which the 
ribs are united was firmly attached to them, 
and in consequence of the incision, the 
fractured part had separated from its situa-
tion, and exposed the cavity of the mediasti-
num. I passed my finger into the cavity, and 
felt the parts apparently carious on each side. 
We now could only conjecture that a large 
exfoliation would ensue; but, in all proba-
bility, the consequence of this operation 
might prove fatal, either by the pus lodging 
in the cavity of the mediastinum, or by 
causing that irritation often consequent to 
|P_17
the exposure of cavities. Theory certainly 
justified us in these conclusions, but practice 
has happily convinced us that notwith-
standing these discouragements, there was 
still a method left to prevent what we had 
so much reason to fear. The bone, tho' 
broken, was not denuded, both the superior 
and inferior portions were covered with 
granulations; it then became an object to 
endeavour to promote a union of those parts 
by incarnation, similar to what occurs in 
compound fractures, in which light it might 
now certainly be considered. 

I must here observe, that on the day fol-
lowing, I found him much better, he be-
came easier after the operation, coughed 
but little, and slept the greatest part of the 
night without taking the opiate; this was 
the first natural sleep he had enjoyed since 
|P_18
the accident happened, for the opiates only 
served to palliate the cough, without pro-
curing any refreshing sleep, altho' he gene-
rally took one hundred drops of Tinct. 
Thebaic; the expectoration also appeared 
more frothy, and he had no difficulty in 
discharging it from the lungs. This amend-
ment was but temporary, for from the 17th 
to the 24th of February, the opiates were 
again obliged to be given. Our attempts 
to procure a union of the parts proved 
abortive, and the inferior edge of the bone 
protruded through the wound at every in-
spiration, and consequently exposed the 
cavity of the mediastinum. There seemed 
no prospect of any exfoliation, I therefore 
omitted the former bandage, as it appeared 
to have no power to answer the intention we 
had in view, and passed a common roller 
round the inferior part of the Sternum; 
|P_19
the pressure of this brought the lower por-
tion in contact with the upper, and we had 
the pleasure of seeing a union effected in 
a few days. The sweats from this time 
totally ceased, and the cough was not 
troublesome. I removed him to Islington, 
for the benefit of the air, there the cough 
entirely left him, and he slept without taking 
the opiate. 

When he attempted a deep inspiration, 
he felt a small pressure on the fractured 
part, and also on the right side of the 
wound; which side was evidently enlarged, 
and felt as if the cartilages of the ribs had 
received some injury from the fall. He 
complained that the air was too sharp for 
him, and (to use his own expression) "felt 
like vinegar in his nostrils;" indeed this 
was so much the case, that if he stood at the 
|P_20
window when open, or attempted to walk 
out, the air instantly caused him to sneeze 
violently, which gave great pain to the 
fractured part. I was therefore obliged to 
remove him from Islington, where he only 
continued four days; and for two or three 
nights after he returned home, the cough 
again became violent, so that I was under 
the necessity of repeating the opiates. As 
the wound healed, the cough abated, and 
his only complaint was that of great weak-
ness, and a total inability to use his arms 
with any freedom of motion. He could 
stoop to buckle his shoe, could take up any 
weight, but was utterly unable to perform 
any lateral motion.

March. During this month, he was 
perfectly free from complaint; had taken 
Pulv. Cort. Peruv. 3. ter die. The 
|P_21
enlargement related to have been on the 
right side of the wound was much lessened, 
but an abscess formed on that side imme-
diately on the breast, which broke on 
Friday, the 30th of March. It appeared 
quite superficial, and to have had no con-
nection with the original injury. 

April. The wound on the Sternum was 
now healed to about the size of a six-pence, 
and from this a vast discharge was daily 
evacuated; suspecting some sinus, I passed 
the probe, and found one, which extended 
about two inches on the right side between 
the two inferior cartilages, directly above 
that enlargement already mentioned. This 
sinus was laid open, and continued discharg-
ing till the beginning of August, when it 
was proposed to apply a caustic on the 
part; the action of which laid bare the 
|P_22
fractured portions of the bone, the superior 
edge greatly depressed, and the intermediate 
space filled with a kind of membranous 
substance, which had prevented an ossific 
union of the parts. It was now curious to 
observe the process which nature was daily 
executing, in order to fill up the vacuity; 
at every dressing some new excitement 
was perceived; increased vascularity[/1./] in the 
living portions of bone, by which the carious 
|P_23
part became more separated, and granu-
lations arising from the surrounding soft 
parts. On the 10th of October, the exfo-
liation from the inferior part took place, 
the portion of bone was but small, healthy 
granulations being substituted in its place. 

We now assisted him with an elastic truss, 
which proved of so much service as to 
enable him again to follow his business of 
a cabinet-maker. This truss makes an 
equal pressure on each side of the breast, 
and supports the sternum in such a manner, 
that if he takes it off, he says, he feels "as 
if his inside was falling in pieces."With-
out it, he is incapable of performing any 
lateral motion. 

The wound now healed, without any in-
terruption, and was perfectly cicatrized on 
the 23d of October. 

|P_24
The following observations are such as 
will naturally suggest themselves on an at-
tentive consideration of the above facts. 

First, That the case was attended with 
considerable danger, throughout the greater 
part of its progress; but from very different, 
and even opposite circumstances, at different 
periods. In the beginning, the symptoms 
of inflammation in the Thorax seemed to 
be so general and violent, that without the 
free use of the lancet, assisted by dilution 
and the antiphlogistic regimen, it is pro-
bable that a fatal termination would speedily 
have ensued; but the only method by which 
this could be prevented, doubtless assisted 
in inducing that state of debility and hectic 
under which the patient was afterwards in 
danger of sinking, and which required the 
liberal exhibition of Bark, Elixir of Vitriol, 
|P_25
Myrrh, and such nourishing articles of diet 
as were judiciously prescribed by Dr. Skeete. 
The same thing happens in many cases of 
disease which fall under the care of the 
Surgeon; and the present instance is a strong 
illustration of the necessity of a particular 
attention being required to the state of the 
constitution, as well as to the condition of 
the diseased part. 

Secondly, It may appear extraordinary, 
that notwithstanding the frequent exposure 
of the cavity of the Mediastinum, which 
seemed to take place when the broken edges 
of the bone were separated, during the 
alternate motions of inspiration and expi-
ration, that this exposure was not followed 
by any repeated attack of inflammation, or 
by any effusion of pus into the cavities of 
the Thorax, tho' we had more than once 
sufficient reasons to apprehend such effects, 
|P_26
especially when the expectoration assumed 
a purulent and bloody appearance, with 
symptoms of hectic. The event therefore 
seems to prove that such adhesions must 
have taken place between the Lungs and 
Pleura in the neighbourhood of the injured 
part, as compleatly to have prevented any 
such effect. 

Thirdly, After some months, the treatment 
was almost entirely confined to the part; 
the healing of the wound being prevented 
by the state of the bone underneath, as 
has been already mentioned. 

Fourthly, That the loss of substance 
which the Sternum has sustained, is at 
present supplied by granulation only; and 
whether nature will in this case, as in many 
others, restore the part to its original state, 
by a bony deposition, time alone will be 
able to discover. 

|P_27
[}POSTSCRIPT. }]
SINCE the foregoing sheets came from 
the press, I have read an account of a 
Fractured Sternum, in the Edinburgh Medical 
Commentaries, Vol. IV. p. 185, 
by Mr. George Borthwick, Surgeon to the 
14th regiment of Dragoons. In many in-
stances the symptoms agreed with those 
mentioned in my case, particularly the 
grating noise in the time of respiration. 
Mr. Borthwick being immediately called in, 
prevented that train of dangerous symptoms 
which unfortunately befel my patient. The 
account being drawn up with great precision, 
I refer my reader to the book itself for 
further information. 

|P_28
The addition of this Postscript affords 
me an opportunity of saying, that my pa-
tient called on me at the Dispensary, on the 
30th ult. and informed me that he had 
gained so much strength within a few days, 
as to be enabled to perform the most la-
borious part of his work, without the 
assistance of the truss. 

November, 1787. 
