
|P_
[}A
LECTURE 
ON
MUSCULAR MOTION. }]
[/1./]This Lecture was founded by Dr. Croone, who was one of the 
original Fellows of this Society, having been previously a member of 
those private meetings which laid the foundation of this institution. 
He was not only a physician of learning and eminence, but his cha-
racter for taste, as well as for mathematical and natural knowledge, 
was so distinguished, that he was elected Professor of Rhetoric in Gresham College[/2./], and was appointed a member of the first council 
of the Royal Society. What prompted him to perpetuate and keep 
alive an attention to this subject was, no doubt, an opinion of its 
importance and difficulty. There are certain branches of know-
|P_2
ledge which, being considered as belonging to particular professions, 
appear less interesting to men who entertain a taste for general science; 
and this has in some measure been the case with inquiries 
relating to the animal œconomy. But when we consider the rank 
which animated beings hold in the scale of Nature, and that Mus-
cular Motion involves some of the most important circumstances 
relating to them, it cannot be denied that this is a subject highly 
interesting, as a branch of natural knowledge in general, indepen-
dent of its utility as subservient to medicine. For though sensitive 
beings bear no assignable proportion to the great volume of the ma-
terial world, yet as man belongs to this class of existence, and as 
all other existence would seem to be created in vain, unless there 
were beings capable of perception and enjoyment, the investigation 
of animal nature appears to be of the utmost importance, not only 
as the grounds of a useful art, but as an object of philosophical 
curiosity. 

[/3./]Muscular motion is justly deemed an important and a characteristic 
attribute of animated beings, not only as conferring that loco-mo-
tive faculty peculiar to animals, and that power by which they are 
enabled to exercise a command over external objects, but also as it 
constitutes that energy by which the motion of the fluids and all 
the internal functions of the body are carried on. For we are to 
consider as muscles not only those large masses of flesh which com-
pose so great a proportion of the whole bulk of the body, but like-
wise all the minuter organs subservient to circulation, nutrition, 
and secretion; since not only the heart itself, but the whole vascu-
lar system and the intestines, owe their action to certain powers of 
irritability and contractility peculiar to muscular fibres. 

|P_3
In investigating this subject, it seems most natural to begin by 
comparing the muscles, and the motion belonging to them, to other 
modifications of matter and motion that occur in nature. 

[/4./]A muscle, even in so far as its structure is an object of our senses 
in its dead state, has characters which distinguish it from every 
other substance in nature. The most striking of these, is its re-
gular organization of parallel fibres. The fibrous structure is, in-
deed, found in other parts of the body, such as the tendons and 
ligaments, and also in vegetables, some of which are even 
possessed of visible irritability; and a similar conformation is manifest in some 
minerals, such as the asbestos; but there is a certain degree of tena-
city, elasticity, and moisture, which, joined to its fibrous organi-
zation, distinguish it from every other form of matter. With re-
gard to the minute structure of muscles, though some have fancied 
they have seen, by the help of glasses, the ultimate fibres, and 
these consisting either of hollow tubes, or strings of vesicles, or rhom-
boidal articulations, according to the respective theory with which 
the mind of the observer was prepossessed, it appears, from the best 
microscopical observations, that the fibres are divisible beyond what 
the powers of the best assisted sight can trace, and that they are to 
all appearance uniform. 

This regular fibrous structure of muscles, may be compared to 
the crystallisation of salts, and other regular forms which inanimate 
bodies assume, when passing to a solid form from a state of solution 
or fusion. Every species of matter has a mode of aggregation pe-
culiar to itself, when its particles are at liberty to attract each other 
according to that tendency which has been called their polarity.
Those who first conceived this idea, seemed to have proceeded on 
|P_4
the supposition of the ultimate particles of matter being solid bo-
dies, infinitely hard, having their different sides endowed with 
different powers of attraction and repulsion, so as to give various 
configurations to the parts of matter, when concreting into a solid 
form. There is another and later idea[/5./] of polarity, founded on the 
hypothesis of the ultimate particles of matter being combinations 
of attracting and repelling points, which when brought much within 
the natural limits of these powers, produce unequal degrees of at-
traction and repulsion at equal distances from their common centre, 
thereby defining what may be called the shape of the particles, and 
constituting polarity. In whatever manner we conceive this to take 
place, some such circumstance seems universal, and perhaps neces-
sary to all the varieties of solid matter; and there is in some in-
stances a difference in the appearance and other properties of the 
same substance, after passing from a fluid to a solid form, according 
as its particles have been at liberty to follow more or less freely the 
tendency of their polarity in the act of concretion. This may be 
illustrated by the freezing of water, and the crystallisation of salts, 
which are more or less regular or confused, according to the cir-
cumstances in which they have taken place. The same may be 
exemplified in metals and other substances; for it is well known, 
that the properties of iron and glass, in point of cohesion and elasti-
city, are very much affected by the quickness or slowness with 
which they pass from a state of fusion to a state of solidity. It is 
probably in some circumstance of this kind that muscles differ from 
other soft animal matter. We cannot trace by inspection the man-
ner in which the fluid nutritious matter is applied in forming solid 
parts; but as muscles are composed of parts so regularly figured 
|P_5
and endowed with contractility, it seems probable that there is 
some provision made by Nature, whereby the particles follow the 
exact impulse of their polarity, and constitute a more exquisite 
structure than in other parts of the body. 

So far with regard to the character of a Muscle, considered in its 
dead state. 

[/6./]The first circumstance that meets the attention in considering its 
living state, is that contractile power or motion, which is properly 
the subject of this Lecture; and in order to investigate its nature, 
it will be necessary to compare it with that which takes place in 
inanimate bodies, by considering the nature of motion in general. 

[/7./]So far as we know, either from actual observation, or from ana-
logy, there does not exist in nature any such thing as absolute rest:
for when we contemplate the motions of the earth and heavenly 
bodies, the various complications of the planetary revolutions in 
their rotation round their own axes, and in the paths of their orbits, 
in the irregularities arising from the disturbances of their mutual 
gravitation, and from the precession of the equinoxes, not to mention 
the influence of the innumerable siderial systems upon each other
[/8./], 
it may be affirmed, on incontestible principles, that no particle of mat-
ter ever was, or will be, for two instants of time, in the same place, 
and that no particle of it ever has returned, or will return, to any one 
point of absolute space which it has ever formerly occupied. Whe-
ther motion, therefore, can strictly be called an essential property of 
matter or not, it is, certainly, by the actual constitution of nature, 
originally and indefeasibly impressed upon it; and as rest does not 
|P_6
exist in nature, but may be considered, in a vulgar sense, as a fal-
lacy of the senses, and in a philosophical sense, as an abstraction of 
the mind, it follows, that what is called the vis inertiæ of matter, 
is not a resistance to a change from rest to motion, or from motion 
to rest, but a resistance to acceleration or retardation, or to change 
of direction. If it should be alledged, that any given particle or 
portion of matter is carried along by virtue of the motion of the 
planet to which it belongs, it may be answered, that the earth or 
any other planet is nothing more than a congeries of such particles, 
each of which must possess a share of the same energy which ani-
mates the whole mass. 

[/9./]The active nature of matter is farther proved by those attractions 
and repulsions which universally take place among its parts, how-
ever near or remote; and every instance of motion within the cog-
nisance of our senses, in the bodies around us, is referrible, either in 
itself or its cause, to some mode of attraction or repulsion.
[/10./]Me-
chanical impulse being the moil familiar cause of motion in the 
ordinary events of life, is apt to be considered as the most simple 
and original cause of it; but it is obvious, upon reflection, that it 
cannot originate in itself, and that all collisions are produced either 
by the efficiency of living animals, that is, by muscular action, or 
by means of some operation of nature, depending on attraction or 
repulsion. Of the first kind, all the mechanical operations of art 
are examples; and with regard to the others, they may, if care-
fully investigated, be referred in every instance, either immediately 
or remotely, to the above-mentioned inherent energies of matter. 
The natural agitation of air or water, for instance, may produce mo-
tion by impulse, or may bring two solid bodies to impinge upon 
each other; but it is evident that these motions in the atmosphere 
|P_7
or the ocean, could not take place without gravitation, which is 
one of the attractive powers of matter. 

[/11./]Attraction and repulsion may be considered as one principle, in-
asmuch as they are both expressive of that active state originally 
inherent in matter, and because any two particles, having affinity 
with each other, either attract or repel, according to their distance, 
their common temperature, and other circumstances; and it is so 
universal an agent in nature, that some modern philosophers have 
made it absorb, as it were, every other power and property of mat-
ter. The late Father Boscovich[/12./], of Milan, about forty years ago, 
advanced a very bold doctrine to this effect, alledging, with great 
strength of argument, illustrated by geometrical reasoning, that 
there does not exist in nature any such thing as impenetrable ex-
tended particles; and he deduces all the phænomena of the mate-
rial world from one principle, which supposes it constituted of 
points having several spheres of attraction and repulsion, which be-
ing variously arranged and combined, produce the different forms and 
properties of matter, and its several powers, such as chemical at-
traction, cohesion, and gravitation. Whether this hypothesis is 
founded in truth or not, it would appear from the reasonings made 
use of, that all the relative properties of matter may be accounted 
for, though we abstract from every other consideration but attrac-
tion and repulsion. 

[/13./]It is evident, therefore, that whatever may be the cause of mus-
cular motion, it is not referrible to mechanism, which is itself only 
|P_8
a secondary principle. Some theories have had recourse to the con-
veyance of a fluid into the fibres of muscles, by which they were 
swelled, and thereby shortened. One of the most plausible of 
these hypotheses supposes this fluid to be the blood; but this is 
plainly a petitio principii; for, in order to give motion to the blood, 
the very power in question is necessary. Other fluids have been 
supposed to have this effect, but even the existence of these has not 
been proved. I will not detain this learned audience with a recital 
of the numerous theories of this kind that have been invented by 
fanciful and ingenious men, only one of which can be true, and 
the most solid objections could be urged against them all. Other 
arguments, derived from the nature of irritability and sensibility, 
could, if necessary, be brought to prove that Muscular Motion can-
not depend on any mechanical cause: but this part of the subject was 
fully treated of by the ingenious Gentleman who delivered the 
Croonian Lecture last year. 

[/14./]As it has been proved that all matter is in a state of perpetual 
motion, originally impressed upon it by Nature, also that attraction 
and repulsion are essential to it, and the ultimate causes of all new 
motions that can arise in the universe, mechanical action being 
only a secondary cause, it seems most agreeable to the analogy of 
nature, to refer Muscular Motion to an original law of animated 
matter, whereby its particles are endowed with an attractive power 
for which no cause can be assigned, any more than for gravitation, 
cohesion, or chemical affinity. If I understand it right, this was 
the doctrine laid down and illustrated last year by Doctor Fordyce, 
and to which I am endeavouring to contribute some additional proofs 
and illustrations, from a conviction that it is the only rational and 
philosophical light in which this subject has hitherto been viewed. 

|P_9
[/15./]If the shortening of a muscular fibre depends on this increased 
power of attraction between its particles, the effect of it will be to 
add to the power of cohesion in the fibre, and if this shall be found 
in fact to be the case, it will be a farther proof of the doctrine just 
now advanced.[/16./] In order to decide this, I made the following ex-
periment upon the flexor muscle of the thumb of a man, five hours 
after death, while the parts were yet warm and flexible. All the 
parts of the joint having been separated, except the tendon, a weight 
was hung to it, so as to act in the natural direction, and was in-
creased gradually till the muscle broke, which happened when 
twenty-six pounds had been appended. I found that a man of the 
same age, and the same apparent size and Strength, with the sub-
ject of the preceding experiment, could with ease lift thirty-
eight pounds by the voluntary exertion of the same muscle. It is far-
ther in proof of this fact, that in the case of a violent strain from 
muscular contraction in the living body, it is the tendon that gives 
way, whereas we have seen, in the experiment just now related, 
that in the dead body, the muscle is the weaker of the two. It is 
also well known, that in cases of over-exertion, the muscular 
fibres themselves do not give way, though the strongest tendons, 
such as the tendo Achillis, and even bones, such as the knee-pan, 
are broke by their living force[/17./], which, in such instances, must be
many times greater than the strength of the dead fibres. 

|P_10
[/18./]The sensible increase of hardness in a muscle, when in a state of 
contraction, may also be considered as a proof of an increased attrac-
tion of its particles to each other at that time. 

[/19./]In investigating this subject farther, it is of importance to de-
termine, whether or not a muscle, when in a state of contraction, 
undergoes any change of density. A comparison of it in this re-
spect with dead matter, may throw some light on the nature of 
muscular action. 

Every homogeneous body possesses a certain degree of density, 
determined by the distance of its integrant particles. The most 
common means in nature, by which the density of such bodies is 
altered, are heat and cold; the one universally producing expan-
sion, the other condensation. Whether mechanical force has the 
same effects is a point in natural philosophy not so well ascertained; 
for though tension and collision produce in solid elastic bodies a 
change of figure, which they immediately resume when the force 
is withdrawn, it has not been enquired, so far as I know, whether in 
such cases, a change of density takes place while the body is in 
the state of elongation or compression. Two elastic balls, in the act of 
collision, undergo a momentary change of figure, so that there must 
be an approximation of particles in the direction in which they are 
flattened; and in the elongation of an elastic chord by tension, there 
must be an increased distance of the particles in one direction, but 
while these changes take place in one dimension of the respective 
bodies, they may be compensated by contrary changes in the other 
dimensions; so that the several bodies may preserve, upon the 
whole, the same solid contents. In order to ascertain this in the 
|P_11
case of tension, which is the only case bearing analogy to Muscular 
Motion, I made the following experiment:[/20./] I took a piece of the 
elastic gum, or kahoutchouck, three inches square, and about the 
eighth of an inch in thickness; I procured a piece of sheet-tin, 
three inches broad, and six inches long, cut into sharp teeth at each 
end. The gum was first weighed in air, and found to be 380.25 
grains. It was then weighed in water, along with the tin, to 
which it was loosely attached, and the weight of both was then 
758,75 grains. The gum was then stretched upon the tin, by 
means of the teeth at each end, to a surface of about five inches 
square, the tin being bent so as to leave a free space between it and 
the gum, in order that when immersed in the water, no air bub-
bles might be entangled. In this situation, the weight of both in 
water was found to be 746,75 grains. Here was a difference of twelve 
grains, which could be owing only to a diminution of specific gravi-
ty; and in order to be sure that there was no fallacy nor inaccuracy 
in the experiment, the gum was immediately afterwards disengaged 
from one end of the tin, so as to allow it to shrink, and being again 
weighed in this state in the water, it was found to have recovered 
exactly its former weight. This, as well as the subsequent statical 
experiments, was performed by means of the exquisite balance 
lately invented and constructed by Mr. Ramsden, and belonging to 
Sir Joseph Banks, who politely allowed me the use of it. I was 
also assisted by Mr. Gilpin, clerk of this society, who is extremely 
accurate and expert in all operations of this kind. 

[/21./]Now, does the state of relaxation and contraction make in like 
manner a temporary difference in the density of muscles? When the 
circumstance of decurtation only is considered, we should be tempted 
to think that there must be an approximation of the particles of the 
|P_12
fibre; but there is at the same time a lateral swelling of the muscle, 
which may compensate for what is lost in the other dimension. 
This point cannot be decided but by an experimental examination. 
It might be determined whether a muscle occupies most space when 
relaxed or when contracted, by finding its specific gravity in each 
of these states by means of the hydrostatical balance. But this 
would be found extremely difficult; for the state of contraction is 
very transitory, and the motion itself would produce such a distur-
bance, as would render the result unsatisfactory. As there is this 
obstacle to the experiment on a living muscle, it occurred to me 
that it might be performed on the muscles of a fish, which had 
undergone the operation of crimping, as it is called; for, in conse-
quence of dividing the muscles, by cutting them when alive, they 
undergo a contraction, which continues after death[/22./]; and upon 
comparing, by the hydrostatic balance, portions of muscle which 
had been crimpt, with those of the opposite side of the same fish, 
which had on purpose been saved from this operation, it did not 
appear that there was any difference in the specific gravity. Two 
|P_13
trials were made, one with the masseter muscles of a skate, the 
other with the sides of a large trout. 

The following experiment was also made, in order to decide the 
comparative density of a contracted and relaxed muscle. I took a 
glass flask, into which one half of a living eel was introduced. 
The mouth was immediately afterwards fused by a blow-pipe, and 
drawn into a tube like the stem of a thermometer. The flask and 
tube were then filled with water, in order to see whether the mo-
tion of the animal would make the fluid rife or fall. It had neither 
the one effect nor the other, though there were at times strong 
convulsions, and if the muscles had at any one time occupied 
either more space or less than at another, a sensible fluctuation would have 
been produced, especially when the column of fluid was rendered 
very fine, by the introduction of a steel wire to irritate the parts. 
That part of the eel from the anus to the tail was made use of for 
this experiment, as the other division, containing the organs of 
respiration and the air-bladder, might have occasioned a fallacy, 
from the expansion or condensation of an elastic fluid, by acciden-
tal changes of temperature, or compression. This was repeated 
three times, with the same result. In one of the trials, the above-
mentioned portion of two eels was introduced, and though they 
were at times both in convulsions at once, not the least motion of 
the fluid in the tube could be perceived. 

[/23./]I was the more desirous to be accurate in this and the preceding
 experiments, as the result of them was different from my own pre-
possession at the time, and different, I believe, from the opinion of 
most modern physiologists. It may safely be inferred from them, 
that the contraction of a muscle produces no change in its density, 
|P_14
and that animal life differs from inanimate matter in this respect, as 
well as in most of its other properties and laws. One purpose in na-
ture for muscles always preserving the same density may be, that 
as some of them act in confined cavities, inconvenience might arise 
from their occupying more space at one time than another. In 
the extremities of crustaceous animals, for instance, which are filled 
with muscles, a change of density would be apt to burst them. 
This may also be considered as a proof of the fact itself. 

[/24./]Another circumstance in which the contractions of muscles differs 
from simple elasticity is, that the former, however frequent and 
violent, does not produce any heat as collision and tension are 
known to do. This may admit of some cavil with regard to ani-
mals of warm blood; for, one of the theories with regard to ani-
mal heat is, that it arises from the perpetual vibration of muscular 
fibres, particularly those of the vascular system; but this will not 
hold with respect to animals of cold blood, in which the actions of 
life are equally vigorous. 

[/25./]The principal phænomena, therefore, of Muscular Motion, are 
the shortening of the fibres, the lateral swell, the increase of cohe-
sion and hardness, and the unchanged density and temperature. 
It would appear, from the two last circumstances, that the intimate 
motions of the particles in relation to each other, must be different 
from what take place in the several instances of contraction and 
expansion in dead bodies. In the expansion arising from the action 
of heat, and the contraction from cold, the change of density shews 
that in the one case, the ultimate particles must recede from each 
other; and in the other case, that they must approach. The same 
may be said of elasticity. But as there is no alteration of the den-
|P_15
sity of a muscle in passing from relaxation to contraction, this 
change cannot consist in the approximation of the integrant parts 
of the fibres, but must depend on some other circumstance in the 
intimate disposition of the particles. In attempting to conceive in 
what this consists, the following explanation may be offered:—
[/26./] It was formerly mentioned that the regular structure of solid bodies 
depended on the polarity and shape of their integrant parts. Now 
all bodies, except such as are sphærical, must have a long and a 
short axis; and let us imagine the fibres of muscles to be composed 
of sphæroidal particles; we may then conceive relaxation to consist 
in their being disposed with their long axis in the line of the fibres,
and contraction to consist in their short axis being disposed more or 
less in that direction. This will not only account for the de-
curtation, and uniform density, but for the lateral swell, and 
also for the increased hardness and cohesion; for though the 
particles do not approach or recede, as in bodies simply elastic, 
yet their power of attraction will be increased by their cen-
tres being brought nearer, and by being applied[/27./] to each other 
by more oblate surfaces. This hypothesis accords with what 
has been before proved, concerning the unchangeable density; 
for what is lost in one dimension, is gained in another; and the 
cause for there being no increase of temperature, depends proba-
bly on the same circumstance by which the density is preserved 
unaltered. 

|P_16
[/28./]WHAT has been hitherto advanced on this subject, has tended 
only to explain that state of a muscular fibre which renders it sus-
ceptible of contraction, and to ascertain the nature of that change 
which takes place in passing from the state of relaxation to that of 
contraction. It still remains a question by what efficient power 
this contraction is excited. We have, indeed, referred the cause 
to attraction; but of attractions some are perpetual, such as gra-
vitation, which exerts an equal and unremitting nisus upon every 
particle of matter, which is the subject of its action; and there are
others fugitive and occasional, such as electricity and magnetism, 
and we may add muscular contraction. With regard to the first 
kind, as it is always uniform, it seems sufficient to say, that it 
exists as a part of the invariable constitution of nature; but with 
regard to that which is fluctuating, it seems incumbent on those 
who search into the laws of nature, to say by what mode of ef-
ficiency the attraction is performed, so that its action should take 
place at one time, and not at another. In order to answer this 
question, with regard to Muscular Motion, we ought to be able to 
specify by what mode of operation a stimulus excites contraction. 
Those theories which account for the contraction of muscles, by 
the swelling of the fibres, in consequence of a conveyance of mat-
ter, professed to account for the operation of stimuli; but upon the 
principles I have adopted in this Lecture, I am obliged to confess 
my entire ignorance on this subject. Perhaps it is inscrutable. 
Perhaps the state of human knowledge is not ripe for such an 
inquiry; for we are still in the dark with regard to most of those 
properties of matter which bear any analogy to this, and the 
knowledge of which might tend to throw light upon it. We know 
that electric attraction depends on the accumulation of a subtle 
|P_17
fluid, but we are ignorant of the nature of magnetism. With re-
gard to heat, which is universally a cause of repulsion, and the most 
general, powerful, and active, as well as the most useful and fa-
miliar agent in nature, it is hardly decided as yet whether it is a 
matter or a quality; and with regard to light, though it is itself 
the medium by which we become acquainted with the most re-
mote objects, it is so obscure in its own nature, that it is still a 
question whether it consists in the transmission or vibration of a 
subtle fluid. 

As I am unable, therefore, to explain the operation of stimuli, I 
shall content myself with endeavouring to enumerate them. 

[/29./]Every natural cause exciting the contraction of a muscular fibre, 
is called a stimulus. They may be divided into internal and exter-
nal.[/30./] As an example of the former, the circulation of the blood 
may be mentioned; as this is kept up by an exciting influence of 
the blood upon the heart and vessels which contain and impel it. 
The earliest perceivable instance of Muscular motion, is the beating 
of the heart, as it is seen in the first rudiments of the embryo in 
an egg, and called the punctum saliens. There seems to be establish-
ed by nature, a certain habitude of action between the vessels and 
their fluids, whereby the former are duly stimulated to propel the 
latter. This does not depend merely on the acrimony of the 
fluids; for if a fluid even more mild than the blood, such as milk, 
be injected into the circulation, it will produce great disturbance; 
and if the blood, by being deprived of the influence of respirable air, 
becomes destitute of a certain property which it would naturally ac-
quire in the act of respiration, it does not prove a stimulus to the 
heart. 

|P_18
[/31./]The irritability of all die containing parts, is in like manner ac-
commodated to the nature of their respective contents. The in-
testines are so calculated, as to have proper motions excited in them 
by the aliment, and the secretions which are mixed with it; and 
there are bodies which, though perfectly mild, such as alimentary
 substances of difficult digestion, yet excite more violent commo-
tions in the stomach than other substances which are very acri-
monious. The various effects of poisons in different parts of the 
body, may also be mentioned as an illustration of the peculiar sus-
ceptibility of the several organs of the body. The poison of a 
viper, for instance, is perfectly innocent, not only in the recep-
tacles of the animal which produces it, but it may be taken into the 
stomach of any animal without the least bad effect, and only exerts 
its deleterious power when brought in contact with a wounded part. 
Some vegetable poisons, on the contrary, such as that of laurel water[/32./], prove deadly, when taken into the mouth, or applied to 
any part of the alimentary canal, but are innocent when injected 
into the veins. The same principle might be illustrated by the opera-
tion of various medicines, some of which act upon one set of organs, 
and some upon another. But it is meant here more particularly to 
elucidate the natural internal actions of the body; and it may be re-
marked, that the receptacles of the several secreted fluids, such as the 
gall bladder, and bladder of urine, are so adapted to their natural con-
tents, by a due measure of irritability, as to bear their accumulation 
to a certain degree, and then to expel them. We have here also a 
proof that irritability is not in proportion to sensibility; for both 
these receptacles are extremely sensible to pain and irritation, from 
extraneous acrimony, though so moderately sensible to the acrimony 
of their natural contents. This disposition in the several organs to 
|P_19
perform their natural functions, in consequence of the stimulus of 
the respective fluids they contain, has aptly enough been called the 
natural perception of these organs[/33./]. 

It follows from this, that the application of chemical and me-
chanicalstimuli to irritable parts, is not a mode of experiment likely 
to be productive of useful knowledge, since the internal organs are 
calculated to perform their actions in consequence of peculiar and 
specific stimuli, provided by nature;[/34./] and this consideration may serve 
to suggest the most likely means of restoring lost irritability 
and action to the vital functions, when suspended by suffocation, 
strangulation, or submersion. The action of the heart depends on 
the action of the lungs and the inspiration of atmospheric air; and 
I have found, from repeated experiments on animals, that in such 
cases, all other means of restoring circulation and life, are of little 
or no avail, in comparison of inflating the lungs with atmospheric 
air, and by stroking and pressing the ribs, so as to imitate the ac-
tion of respiration. Neither mechanical friction, nor any other 
external stimulus, nor stimulating clysters, seemed to have any 
sensible effect in recalling life. The only other means, besides 
those above mentioned, that seem material in attempting to restore 
suspended animation, is a due attention to the external temperature. 
In the case of drowning in cold water, for instance, it is of the ut-
most consequence to restore the natural warmth, either by the 
cautious use of artificial heat, or the application of living bedies. 
In the case of those who have been suffocated by foul air, it is, on 
the contrary, adviseable to expose them to cool air. 

|P_20
[/35./]From what has been before advanced, concerning that habitude 
or mutual influence of the solids and fluids, it would appear that 
they are specifically appropriated to each other, in order to carry 
on not only the circulation, but the important functions of diges-
tion, absorption, secretion, and excretion; and as the healthy 
condition of an animal consists in the maintenance of that natural 
harmony, so must the state of disease depend on the derangement 
of those delicate impressions and nice sensibilities, or rather irritabi-
lities, in which the functions of the several organs consist; and as the 
affections of the solids and fluids are reciprocal, disease may depend 
either on some deviation of the former, from their healthy and natural 
perceptions, or from some acrimony or vitiation of the latter, or per-
haps more commonly from the concurrence of both, in consequence 
of their mutual influence. When the fluids only are morbidly af-
fected, nature alone is possessed of resources of cure; for if the 
containing solids retain their natural irritability, they will be sti-
mulated to expel what is extraneous or vitiated. A depraved state 
of the solids is therefore likely to prove a more frequent cause of 
morbid derangement; and as they differ from the fluids, by pos-
sessing an inherent activity, it is the object of medicine to incite,
 restrain, or alter their diseased actions, according to the nature of 
the morbid affection. 

It is evident, that this doctrine will admit of a much more 
extensive application in pathology, than there is time here 
to follow out; and I shall confine myself to the illustration 
of it,[/36./] in the case of the absorbent vessels. These evidently 
possess a power of absorbing certain substances, and rejecting 
others. The lacteals, for instance, in a state of health, take up 
|P_21
only the nutritious part of the alimentary mass; for there is in the 
fecal part substances equally soluble as the chyle. The inner sur-
face of the gall bladder is beset with absorbents, which, however, 
do not absorb bile in the ordinary state of health, and only con-
centrate it by taking up the fluid with which it is diluted. But 
when in consequence of the obstruction of the gall ducts, the blad-
der becomes over distended, or when the specific perception of the 
absorbents is depraved by disease, in these cases the bile is absorbed 
and thrown into the circulation. Sometimes, such unusual actions 
of the absorbents are excited as a resource of nature, either to cure 
disease, or to carry on growth; for it has been shewn by Mr. Hunter, 
that not only soft and fluid parts, but bone, can be removed by absorp-
tion. At other times, disease consists in affections of these vessels, 
either by their action being too much retarded, as in the case of 
dropsy, or where the matter of an ulcer, or in the pustules of the 
small pox, is prematurely absorbed, in consequence of the depraved 
action of fever. It is sufficiently demonstrable, that the whole sur-
face of the skin and bronchiæ is beset with inhaling vessels, which 
absorb the fluids dissolved in the atmosphere; and it would be 
contrary to the analogy of the rest of the body, to suppose that 
these are not possessed of some elective power, whereby they prefer 
or reject such fluids as are presented to them, according to their 
several qualities, and that this power should not be various, ac-
cording to the state of health or disease. But, independent of ana-
logy, the variable state of the human body, in respect to its sus-
ceptibility of contagious diseases, seems to be a direct proof of this. 
It is a well-known fact, that a person who has never had the small 
pox, will at one time be closely exposed to their infection, and 
|P_22
yet escape the disease, and at another time will be affected by the 
slightest degree of it. If it should be said, that the poison is in-
haled in the one case as well as the other, but that the internal 
state of the body is in one case disposed to be affected, and in the 
other not, it may be answered, that any method by which it can 
certainly be introduced, as by inoculation, will almost infallibly 
produce this disease in constitutions that have never before under-
gone it.[/37./] And this seems to afford a solution of a much agitated 
question, On what does the superior safety of the inoculated small 
pox depend? For, in a constitution already morbidly disposed, the 
powers of life will be more apt to give way to any disturbance that 
may be excited; and the same derangement of nature, which, in 
this case, makes the inhalant vessels admit the noxious effluvia of 
disease, will render the body less capable of counteracting it when 
admitted. In the case of inoculation, the poison is not taken 
into the circulation by any natural operation of the body; but 
being obtruded by art, there is no particular propensity in the 
constitution to give way to it, unless the time of inoculation should 
accidentally coincide with those moments in which the body is na-
turally susceptible; and as this must sometimes happen, it is ac-
cordingly observed, that one case in a great number of inoculated 
small pox, is equally malignant as any case of the natural sort. 

[/38./]The specific irritability of muscular fibres, in consequence of the 
peculiar action of stimuli, has been called perception, as was men-
tioned before. This term is not to be taken in a sense strictly lite-
ral, but as a metaphor, borrowed from sensation, and applied to 
motion. In like manner as the senses are fitted to convey pecu-
liar ideas, in consequence of their respective organs being adapted 
to their corresponding external impressions, so are the various organs 
|P_23
of motion by nature made susceptible of excitement from peculiar 
impressions, either internal or external. This analogy is the more 
exact, that the nerves seem to be the instruments of both; for 
not only the organs of sensation and voluntary motion, but those 
of involuntary motion, are supplied with nerves, and dependant 
upon them; for if the influence of the nerves leading to the heart 
or intestines is interrupted, by cutting ligature or palsy, the func-
tion of these parts is thereby destroyed. Thus, as there is a pecu-
liar sensibility belonging to the several senses, so is there a peculiar 
irritability belonging to the several organs of motion. The inten-
tion of Nature, therefore, in distributing nerves to every muscular 
organ, was probably in order to constitute those peculiar percep-
tions on which the various vital and natural functions depend. But 
I give this only as a conjecture; and though the nervous influence 
may thus modify irritability, there is reason to think that it does not 
bestow it. 

[/39./]This leads us to consider how far vitality is dependant on the 
nerves. It has been the opinion of some physiologists, who have 
been supposed to entertain very rational ideas of the animal œco-
nomy, that all muscular irritability depended on a sentient prin-
ciple[/40./]; and some have even maintained, that there is an intelli-
gent principle[/41./] residing in animal bodies, in order to guide their 
functions and operations. From the preceding facts and reasoning, 
and from its being well attested that there have been several in-
stances of the production of fœtuses, without the brain[/42./], there seems 
|P_24
no occasion to have recourse to so violent a hypothesis. This, how-
ever, is not the question here intended to be discussed; but it is meant 
to enquire, whether or not there is a foundation in nature for an 
opinion broached by Mr. Hunter, that there is a living principle, 
distinct from the nervous system, and independent of sensation and 
consciousness. The principal fact in support of this opinion, is 
the existence of animals without brain and nerves. That there are 
such, was, I believe, first observed by Haller[/43./], and has been 
confirmed by Mr. Hunter; who maintains farther, that the sto-
mach is a centre, or seat of life, more essential to it than the brain. 
That the stomach should be an organ of so much consequence, 
seems natural enough, from the importance of its function, 
which is that of assimilation; and life can be more imme-
diately and completely extinguished by an injury to it, such 
as a blow, than by the same violence to any other part 
of the body. It is also well known, that the muscular fibres 
of animals, endowed with a nervous system, will retain their 
irritability for some time after their separation from the brain 
and nerves. It is evident, likewise, from the phænomena of ve-
getation, that irritability may exist in nature, without sensation, 
consciousness, or any suspicion of the existence of a nervous system. 
The facts I allude to, are not only the perceptible motions of the 
sensitive plant, but more particularly those motions which must 
necessarily take place in all plants, in carrying on their growth; 
for there is no accounting for the accretion of solid parts, in 
consequence of the conveyance of nutrition by the propulsion 
of the sap, but by admitting some power, acting by laws 
different from those of dead matter. In favour of this opinion, 
it is farther observable, that those animals which are destitute 
|P_25
of brain and nerves, are of the class vermes, the most simple in 
nature, having only one function, to wit, that of assimilation, and 
therefore not requiring that variety of action, and those peculiar 
perceptions which are necessary to more complex animals. Lastly, 
the state of an egg before incubation, and the condition of those 
animals which become torpid from cold, and afterwards revive, af-
ford facts which favour this opinion; as they shew that there is a 
certain principle of self-preservation, independent not only of the 
operation of the nervous system, but even of the circulation; for, 
in this quiescent state, these portions of animal matter are preserved 
for a great length of time from that corruption to which they 
would otherwise be liable, and their fluids are prevented from 
freezing in a degree of cold, which would congeal them, were they 
destitute of every principle of life. 

[/44./]But though simple life may be considered as distinct from the 
nervous system, which is only an accessary appendage to it, yet in 
those animals in which they are conjoined, the purposes of nature 
render them dependant on each other. The functions of the 
brain, for instance, cannot go on without the action of the heart; 
for whenever the circulation of the blood is interrupted, conscious-
ness and sensation are destroyed, as is evident in the case of a swoon, 
and in the effects of strangulation. On the other hand, as has been 
before observed, the action of the heart has a dependance on the 
influence of the nerves, as connected with the brain. There are 
also incontestible proofs of the extreme vessels being affected by the 
influence of the brain; for we know that a thought in the mind 
will produce partial determinations of the circulating fluids, as in 
the case of blushing, and the fullness of the vessels in the organs 
of generation, in consequence of certain passions. It does not, 
|P_26
however, follow, from all this, that irritability depends on the 
nerves; the influence of which may be considered as modifying 
general irritability, in the manner already mentioned; or it may 
be considered rather as a stimulus to the muscular fibres, than as en-
dowing them with irritability, as in the instances last adduced: and 
though the organs essential to life, such as the heart, cannot exert the 
action necessary to life, without the influence of the nerves, yet the
 vessels of the extremities can exert their usual action independent 
of it; for there are cases in which the natural heat and circulation 
continue in the limbs, after a total deprivation both of voluntary 
motion and sensation[/45./]. 

[/46./]It may here be observed, that beside muscular irritability, the 
principal, if not the only, powers of simple life, are the assimilation 
of aliment, and that power in the living body, by which it preserves 
itself from putrefaction; and it is strongly in proof of vitality being 
independent of nervous power, that when the trunk of a nerve is 
cut through, the limb to which it leads, though deprived of all sen-
sation and voluntary motion, not only continues free from sponta-
|P_27
neous putrefaction, but the warmth and circulation continue, even 
though the nerve should not be regenerated[/47./]. The only visible 
change produced in a limb by this operation, is, that after some 
time it begins to waste. 

[/48./]But there are circumstances that would seem to prove, that the 
nervous system is not only a mere appendage to life, but that it 
tends to impede its operation, and shorten its existence. Simple 
life will not only survive sensation, but will survive it longer, if 
the animal is killed, by destroying the nervous system, than if it 
had been destroyed by hæmorrhage, suffocation, or other violence.[/49./] It is a curious and well ascertained fact, that if a fish, immediately 
upon being taken out of the water, is stunned by a violent blow on 
the head, or by having the head crushed, the irritability and sweet-
ness of the muscles will be preserved much longer, than if it had 
been allowed to die with the organs of sense entire. This is so 
well known to fishermen, that they put it in practice, in order to 
make them longer susceptible of the operation called crimping. A 
salmon is one of the fish least tenacious of life, insomuch, that it 
will lose all signs of life in less than half an hour after it is taken 
out of the water, if suffered to die without any farther injury; but if, 
immediately after being caught, it receives a violent blow on the 
head, the muscles will shew visible irritability for more than twelve 
hours afterwards. 

[/50./]There is a circumstance observed with regard to animals of warm 
blood, which seems to depend on the same principle. An excessive 
exertion of voluntary motion, immediately before death, prevents 
the muscles from becoming rigid when cold, and renders them 
|P_28
more prone to putrefaction. Thus, if an ox is killed immediately 
after being overdrove, the carcase will not become stiff when it 
grows cold, nor is it capable of being preserved by means of salt. 

[/51./]In illustration of the same principle, it may be remarked, that 
there is a symptom in certain diseases of the human species, shew-
ing that digestion, which is one of the principal functions of simple 
life, will sometimes go on better, in consequence of lesions of the 
brain; for in those disorders in which the exercise of the senses is 
in a great measure destroyed, or suspended, as in the hydrocepha-
lus and apoplectic palsy, it happens not uncommonly that the ap-
petite and digestion are better than in health. 

[/52./]From these facts we may infer, with Mr. Hunter, that the ex-
ercise of sensation is inimical to life, and that a sort of fatigue is
induced by this, as well as by voluntary motion: so that all that 
intercourse carried on through the nerves, whether towards the 
brain, in the case of sensation, or from the brain, in acts of volition, 
tends to wea rout the animal powers[/53./]. And as intense and long-
continued thought, though not terminating in any outward action,
tends also to produce an inability for farther exertions, it would 
appear that the brain, or sensorium, is more particularly the organ 
which is subject to that species of sufferance called fatigue.[/54./] From 
these facts, we perceive the necessity of sleep, which consists in a 
|P_29
temporary suspension of sensation, volition, and thought, and is a 
resource of nature, whereby the powers of life recover themselves 
after satiety and fatigue, which are provided as guards to warn us 
when nature is in danger of being strained, either by repletion or 
over exertion; and it is evident that such barriers were absolutely 
necessary, in order to set bounds to operations which are only oc-
cationally requisite, and which would otherwise depend on the 
caprices of the will. The exercise of sensation and voluntary mo-
tion, in a moderate degree, is conformable to the intention of na-
ture, and therefore salutary; and it is only when they are excessive, 
that they tend to wear out the powers of life, and more 
especially if these are not duly recruited by sleep.[/55./] Immoderate labour, there-
fore, and watching, also spasms and convulsions of every kind, are 
unfriendly to health and long life: in like manner, sensations, 
when too frequent or intense, especially those which consist in 
the gratification of the senses, tend to wear out the animal 
powers; and hence we perceive why a life of sensuality is 
productive of certain diseases, independent either of the re-
pletion or evacuation which attend them. The gout, but more 
certainly the palsy, seems to proceed merely from the indul-
gence of the senses; for the latter commonly enough occurs in the 
most spare and emaciated constitutions, and in those who have 
been accustomed to exhausting pleasures, as well as those of a full 
habit, who have indulged in the excesses of the table. A turge-
scence of the vessels in the brain will certainly be more apt to pro-
duce that rupture of them in which apoplectic palsy consists, when 
these vessels have been relaxed, as we conceive them to be, by fre-
quent and intense sensations. But in those who are the reverse of 
being plethoric, and who fall victims to this disease, in consequence 
of too tree indulgence in venereal pleasures, in the decline of life, 
|P_30
(as every one who has much observation of the world, or experience 
in physic, knows to be a frequent case) it must arise from a pre-
ternatural weakness in the brain, induced by the mere circumstance 
of sensation. This accounts for what has been reckoned a diffi-
culty in reasoning on the cause of apoplexy and palsy, to wit, that 
the same effect should be produced by those gratifications which 
produce repletion, as by those which produce evacuation. 

[/56./]It follows, from the same principle, that when life is threatened 
by certain diseases, of which the chief symptom is irritation, any 
means by which sensation, whether natural or morbid, and mus-
cular motion, whether voluntary or involuntary, convulsive or 
spasmodic, can be soothed or suspended, will prove salutary, by 
allowing the powers of life to rally, as it were, and recover them-
selves. In this consists the operation of narcotic medicines, such 
as opium, which, in complaints both of a general and local nature, 
proves useful not merely as a palliative, by the removal of tem-
porary pain or spasm, or by procuring sleep, but as a principal 
instrument of recovery, by allowing the powers of life to exert 
their natural action, in consequence of the removal of irritation
[/57./]. 
|P_31
It is but just to own, that this is an idea which was first suggested 
to me by a learned and eminent physician[/58./] of this place, when in 
consultation with him a few years ago. 

[/59./]It would be curious, as well as useful, to distinguish the ope-
ration of medicine, as they affect simple or sensitive life. I at-
tempted a comparison of this kind with opium, which, though it 
chiefly affects sensation, has also a powerful effect on simple life, 
as I found by trying its effects upon leeches, which are a species of 
animals without brain or nerves. In order to discern the power of
this drug, as affecting the different principles of animals possessing 
both sorts of life, I took a solution of it in water, into one portion
of which I put some sound living eels, and into another some eels
also alive, but having their heads bruised, chusing the former, as 
nearly as I could, of the same vigor with the latter, before their 
heads were bruised. It was found, in a number of trials, that the 
sound eels generally died sooner than the others. The opium had 
a double effect on the former, as it acted both upon the senses and 
upon the principle of simple life, and the effect upon the senses 
was more than equivalent to the external injury of the latter, upon 
which the opium acted only upon one principle, the senses being 
locked up by the destruction of their organs. In order to make 
this operation succeed, the solution should be of a certain degree 
of strength, so as to act as a poison. There should be at least half a 
grain of opium to an ounce of water. When the trial was made 
with a solution of half this strength, the sound eels lived much 
longer; for the time was then protracted to that period in which 
|P_32
the wounded eels would have died merely of their injury. It may 
be mentioned, that those which had their heads bruised, and were 
put into a solution of opium, died considerably sooner than those 
which had suffered the same injury, and were put into plain water 
for a standard. 

[/60./]Having considered the various qualities of the fluids exciting the 
corresponding irritability of the respective vessels, as a leading prin-
ciple in carrying on some of the most important functions of the 
body, and serving to account for many of the vital and involuntary 
motions, the only other internal stimuli that remain to be enume-
rated, are those connected with consciousness. The great masses 
of muscle in the trunk and extremities of the body, are the instru-
ments of the mind in acting upon external bodies; and we may, 
therefore, reckon in the list of stimuli, the nervous power by which 
the will and the passions excite external motions. This is a func-
tion sufficiently important for the nerves, without admitting them 
as the principle upon which irritability depends. This question has 
been already discussed; but it may be farther observed, that the ner-
vous power, being a stimulus acting upon an irritable principle in 
the muscular fibres, affords a presumption that they are different from 
each other; for, the matter being considered abstractedly, where any 
effect is the result of the concurrence of two bodies, as, for instance, 
in the combinations of chemistry, these two bodies must be different, 
in order to produce any given effect. It is otherwise, indeed, when 
the effect depends on mere communication, as in the case of mecha-
nical impulse, where the same motion that is lost by one body is 
acquired by another. But it will not be said, that there is any simi-
|P_33
larity between what takes place in a nerve, and what takes place in 
a muscular fibre in the act of voluntary contraction. 

I have already acknowledged my ignorance of the manner in 
which stimuli in general operate, and that this must be admitted as 
an ultimate fact in nature. But the operation of the will through 
the nerves, seems involved in double obscurity; for as it depends
on the nature of thought, it cannot be made a subject; of experi-
mental investigation. For this reason I shall decline the inquiry, 
as not being adapted to the ends of this Society; and it seems 
impossible for human sagacity to penetrate the connection of matter 
with sensation and volition, except by inferences more or less hy-
pothetical. The properties of different bodies, in relation to each 
other, appear to be the only proper subjects of experimental rea-
soning; for, in their relation to the mind, they are only the ef-
fects, perhaps the remote effects, of their intimate nature upon the 
senses; so that we may venture to affirm that human reason can no 
more fathom the connection of thought with the corresponding 
changes in the corporeal organs, than the eye can see itself. 
