
|P_
[}A TREATISE, &c.}]
[}THE DEFINITION OF A CATARACT. }]
An opaque body, placed between the pupil 
and the vitreous humour, intercepting, and 
thereby debilitating or destroying Vision, 
forms the disease termed a Cataract. 

The seat of the Cataract, strictly defined, 
is either in the crystalline humour itself, or 
in its capsule, or in the transparent mu- 
cous fluid which is between the crystalline 
lens and its capsule (humor Morganius).
In opacities of either of these parts, it is 
called the true Cataract; and if all these 
three parts are affected at the same time, it 
is termed the mixed Cataract; but if the 
opacity is on the outside of the capsule, it 
is denominated a false Cataract. To adduce 
an instance of this last, it sometimes oc- 
curs that either pus, or some other viscid 
and cloudy matter, is found in the anterior 
|P_2
chamber, the thinner parts of which have 
been absorbed, whilst the thicker remain; 
or that a mucus of a brown colour, supposed 
to descend from the pigmentum choroideæ, 
is found in the pupil before the capsule, 
which constitutes this description of the 
disease. If after an operation of a Cata- 
ract, the capsule, or the tunica hyaloidea, or 
any mucous matter, should come behind the 
pupil opaque, this is termed a secondary 
Cataract. Each of these species of the Ca- 
taract is subdivided into several others: 
to explain these is not within my present 
intention; my purpose is to confine myself 
to one of the most common species of the 
true Cataract: I mean that disease which 
consists in an opacity of the crystalline lens 
only; and the operation for its cure is by 
no means difficult. 

[}THE DIAGNOSIS OF THE TRUE CATARACT. }]
The indications of this disease may be 
divided into those which are observed 
|P_3
by the Patient, and those which occur to 
the Practitioner on inspection. It is the 
more necessary to attend to these signs, as 
the amaurosis has, in the beginning, symp- 
toms not dissimilar to those of a Cataract, 
though the distinction manifests itself de- 
cisively in the progress of the disease. 

Of the symptoms which occur to the Obser- 
vation of the Patient in the case of a Cataract, 
are to be remarked, first, that the vision is 
gradually debilitated; small and remote ob- 
jects appear, in the first instance, to be 
covered with a mist, or, as it were, enve- 
loped in smoke. In the progress of the 
disorder this appearance increases, until 
by degrees it extends itself to the largest 
and nearest objects. From the first affect- 
tion of the organ, this symptom is constant 
and invariable, though its progress is acce- 
lerated or retarded in different cases. In 
the last stage of its advancement, the patient 
is unable to distinguish any objects, and 
there remains nothing more than a glare of 
light. 

|P_4
Secondly, The patient, in the commence- 
ment and progress of the disease, can see 
better by twilight than by daylight. The 
same occurs if the ingress of light be mo- 
derated by the intervention of the hand, 
or a screen. The reason of this is, that as 
the place is darkened, the pupil is enlarged; 
and the result is the same as if the opaque 
body behind the pupil was in the same 
degree diminished. 

Thirdly, They can see lateral objects 
much better than those which are diame- 
trically opposite them, because the rays of 
light which enter laterally, find the outer 
part of the crystalline lens less obscured 
than its centre. 

Fourthly, some aid is frequently ob- 
tained in the commencement of this dis- 
ease from the use of convex glasses. This 
may appear, until the cause be assigned, 
to contradict some of the preceding re- 
marks: it is, that objects seen through a 
convex glass are represented under a larger 
angle. 

|P_5
Fifthly, The power of distinguishing light 
from darkness most generally remains in 
the last stage of the disease; and looking 
at the sun, or a clear fire, occasions a bright 
glare on the eye of the patient. 

[}OBSERVATION OF THE OPERATOR. }]
The operator must examine the diseased 
eye both by daylight, and in a darkened 
room, by candle-light, and in all directions. 
If only one eye is affected, and the operator 
wishes to observe the motion of the pupil, 
the eye which is not affected must always 
be kept closely covered; as without this 
precaution the operator may often be 
greatly mistaken: for the pupil of the 
sound eye being exposed to the light, com- 
municates its motion to the pupil of the 
other, and they have commonly one motion; 
which the surgeon will find, on close exa- 
mination of the eye affected. 

1. In the middle part of the pupil, he 
will observe an opacity, or a cloud, which 
|P_6
is not natural, it sometimes appearing of a 
white, grey, yellow, green, blue, or black 
colour, but differing from the natural black 
of the pupil: this colour in the beginning 
of the disease is scarcely visible; but as the 
visual faculty diminishes, the colour becomes 
more apparent, and diffuses itself more and 
more over the whole pupil, forming those 
little specks or clouds behind the pupil. It 
continues to extend itself in the progress of 
this disease, and the diminution of the sight 
is always in exact proportion to this ex- 
tension. 

2. If you examine the eye laterally, you 
will observe a black circle around the opa- 
city, which in the beginning is large, but 
in the increase of the disorder it appears 
occasionally larger and smaller, in propor- 
tion to the dilatation or contraction of the 
pupil. 

3. The iris always preserves its natural 
colour, and has at times more and less mo- 
tion. 

|P_7
[}THE OPERATION FOR THE CATARACT. }]
It is very seldom possible to cure the true 
Cataract with medicine only; and those 
few cases where the Cataract has been said 
to be cured without operation, by internal 
and external medicine alone, are not suffi- 
ciently proved: it is matter of great doubt 
whether the practitioner has not, in these 
cases, mistaken an opacity in the transpa- 
rent cornea, or before the pupil, for a true 
Cataract. In the former cases, some relief 
may possibly be given by medicine, inter- 
nally and externally administered; but in a 
true Cataract, where the crystalline lens is 
not only opaque, but its whole organization 
destroyed, it is plain that no effectual relief 
can be obtained but by resorting to an ope- 
ration. 

Of what the medicines consist, which are 
tried in those cases, it is not my purpose to 
state; I confine myself solely to the only 
efficacious remedy, the operation. 

|P_8
The operation is practicable in two diffe- 
rent methods, viz. Depression and Extraction.
In the first mode of practice, the oculist de- 
presses the opaque crystalline lens from its 
natural situation to the bottom of the eye, 
where being no more behind the pupil, it can- 
not intercept or prevent the rays of light 
from passing to the retina: in the second 
mode, the oculist extracts the opaque crys- 
talline lens, by making an incision into the 
transparent cornea, and removing theopaque 
crystalline lens entirely out of the eye. 
The first operation has been long known, 
and is called Depression, or Couching; the 
second operation is more novel, and is called 
Extraction. Both these modes of operating 
have their respective preference; but it is 
generally to be observed, that the cases 
where extraction is preferable, are much 
more frequent than those which are to be 
cured by depression. 

The season of the year for the perform- 
ing this operation is not material; it is only 
necessary that the patient be in a moderate 
|P_9
degree of warmth, and that at all seasons 
can be effected. should any epidemic 
disorder prevail, the time must be consi- 
dered as unsuited to this, as to all other great 
operations. Violent heat in summer is at 
all times fatiguing, and under some cir- 
cumstances dangerous to the patient; and 
should on that account be avoided. 

The operator may with reason hope for 
success, 1. When the patient, independent 
of the Cataract, is in perfect health. 2. 
When the proximate or occasional cause 
no longer exists, I mean that acrimony, ar- 
thritic or venereal, &c. which might have 
produced the opacity. 3. When the pa- 
tient, after the beginning of the Cataract, 
is not affected with frequent head-achs, and 
inflammations of the eyes. 4. When the 
patient can clearly distinguish light from 
darkness. 5. When the pupil moves free 
and lively, and retains its natural round- 
ness. 6. When the eye has a spacious ante- 
rior chamber. 7. When the Cataract is at 
a certain distance behind the pupil; and, 
|P_10
8. When the other parts of the eye are 
perfectly well, and free from blemish. 

But even though there should be a con- 
currence of all these favourable circum- 
stances, yet the operator must be very 
cautious, and indeed can never with pro- 
priety insure the success of the operation; 
for even if attended by the most favourable 
symptoms, it may sometimes fail, and yet 
the operator be blameless. 

[}PREPARATION OF THE PATIENT. }]
A patient intending to submit to the 
operation must be prepared: and here the 
golden medium should be observed, to 
which too many operators neglect to attend. 
Long experience has proved, that excessive 
or tedious preparation is not only useless 
to a person who is to undergo the opera- 
tion for the Cataract, but it is often inju- 
rious. 

The preparation is special, or general, 
special, if a patient afflicted with a Cata- 
|P_11
ract labours at the same time under other 
diseases, which may have an influence on 
the operation. These diseases must be 
first removed, or the operation will be at- 
tended with more hazard. such dangerous 
influence may be caused, for example, from 
sordes biliosæ, plethora, congestion from the 
blood to the head, &c. &c. The general pre- 
paration is that which is recommended to 
every patient afflicted with the Cataract, 
and who is in a good state of health.— 
Every heat of the body, and agitation of 
the mind, is injurious.—All strong food 
and spices, &c. must, for some days pre- 
ceding the operation, be avoided; also every 
thing that causes general heat and obstruc- 
tion should be disused. To clear the primæ 
viæ, he must take, a few days before the 
operation, an opening medicine. One great 
point, as well in this as in other operations, 
is to keep the primæ viæ clear. Plethora 
through bleeding, and cooling attenuating 
remedies; congestions from the blood to the 
head, must be removed by using lukewarm 
|P_12
pediluvia, &c. &c. But this regards the 
special preparation; and every intelligent 
surgeon must, without my advice, under- 
stand how such complaints are to be re- 
moved. 

In general, the preparation must be as 
short and simple as the constitution of the 
patient will permit. The longer the pre- 
paration, and the more formality that is 
used, the longer the patient is kept in fear 
and anxiety: this disturbs the secretions 
and occasions weakness in the nervous sys- 
tem, and sharpness in the juices. The 
principal circumstances to be observed in 
this operation are, that the patient is in good 
spirits, free from vexation and anxiety, and, 
if possible, from any fear of the operation. 
For these reasons, I should therefore never 
defer the time when once fixed, avoid letting 
the patient be acquainted with the hour in- 
tended, and take him by surprise. I have be- 
fore said, that it is impossible to insure suc- 
cess; but the operator should always give 
the greatest hope, and take all possible pre- 
|P_13
caution to divert the thoughts from the ope- 
ration. He should conceal every thing that 
may offend the sound eye of the patient; 
he should avoid a consequential bustle of 
preparation, and be careful not to exhibit 
his instruments, be they ever so magni- 
ficent, as these always produce apprehen- 
sion and terror in the patient: he should 
not, for the purpose of increasing his own 
merit, make the operation appear more dif- 
ficult and hazardous than it really is. This 
practice may suit the Charlatan, but every 
skilful surgeon must be well convinced it 
is equally ridiculous and despicable. 

[}OF THE SURGEON'S PREPARATION. }]
Care and caution are requisite on the 
part of the surgeon in all operations, but 
he should attend more particularly to this; 
for though it does not affect the life, there 
depends on it one of the most valuable 
senses, the sight.

He should, at least, have every thing in 
|P_14
readiness which is necessary for the opera- 
tion some days before; and lest any thing 
should be wanting at the appointed time, 
it will be proper to examine his apparatus 
a few hours preceding the operation. The 
delay occasioned by waiting for any thing 
at that time is aukward, and disagreeable 
both to the surgeon and patient, and may 
perhaps be injurious. 

The main point is, that the surgeon 
should know well how to place himself, that 
nothing may embarrass him, and that he 
may be free from all involuntary motion; 
he should likewise be careful to keep all the 
actions of his patient in his power. 

You cannot sufficiently admonish the 
patient to refrain from every sudden motion 
of the head and eyes; which always im- 
pedes, and frequently defeats the whole of 
the operation: therefore this operation is 
seldom practicable on children with success, 
because this advice is useless. 

Most surgeons, to fix the head of the pa- 
tient, press it against the breast of an 
|P_15
assistant; but it is obvious that the least 
motion, even the assistant drawing breath, 
occasions a corresponding motion of the 
head of the patient. It is impossible that 
a man should be as immoveable as a ma- 
chine; that the operator may have the 
head of the patient fast, and wholly in his 
power, I propose, therefore, a chair, which 
I have for many years found to be useful 
(see Tab. I. Fig. 1.). It is a strong-made 
chair, to which is fastened a back, a, which 
on each side, by means of a screw, b, moves 
backwards and forwards. In the top, d,
which can by c, if necessary, be turned 
back, is a little concave cloth cushion, for 
the greater security of the head, and to 
prevent slipping. As I always perform the 
operation standing, the chair is made con- 
venient for my size; and, to make the pa- 
tient a proper height, I have different pieces 
of wood (Tab. II. Fig. 1. e e) to put under 
the cushion. Each of these pieces of wood 
has two pegs, f f, which fit in the holes of 
the seat. The cushion, (Tab. II. Fig. 2. h), 
|P_16
is made in a wooden frame, to which is fixed 
(Tab. II Fig. 2.) two pieces of iron, i i, which 
go through the holes f f in the chair, and 
fasten at the back, in the hind part of the 
chair, with an iron peg (Tab. I. Fig. 3. g g). 
There is nothing to be observed more than 
two bars (Fig. 3. h h) to support the top; 
i is a stand, to prevent its falling, received 
into the notches k; which enable the opera- 
tor, by their different distances, to incline 
the moveable top as much backwards as he 
thinks suited to the most favourable posi- 
tion of the head, during the operation. 

Let the patient be seated a few days be- 
fore the operation upon this chair, and bring 
the seat to the proper height, that the head 
may exactly rest within the concave cushion, 
that on the day of the operation he may 
not have any secondary things to claim 
his attention. 

In the like manner have ready all the 
instruments and bandages. The bandage 
which I use for this operation is (Tab. II. Fig. 
3.) a double piece of linen, a a, about three 
|P_17
fingers broad, and proportioned in its 
length to the circumference of the head. 
At each end of this bandage are to be 
fixed two strings, b, b, to tie it upon the 
forehead. To this piece are sewed two 
pieces of double, dark coloured silk, or 
linen, c, c, about six fingers square, so that 
the piece which covers the diseased eye 
should be a little under the other piece, 
that no light may possibly reach the eye 
on which the operation has been per- 
formed. These two pieces must not reach 
below the nose. This bandage, two thin 
pledgets, for using after the operation, 
some lint, to cover the sound eye during 
the operation, a thin silk handkerchief to 
tie up the sound eye, and a linen one 
to dry the tears, are all that is necessary 
on this occasion. 

some inconveniences result during this 
operation, from the necessity of keeping 
up the upper eyelid with the finger alone, 
as it easily slips clown, and the tears which 
flow incessantly, make it so slippery that 
|P_18
it is impossible to retain it with the finger, 
without either drying it continually, or 
making a dangerous pressure upon the 
eye. 

Much advantage must arise, therefore, 
from keeping up the eyelid without causing 
any irritation, or pressure on the eye; 
and to obtain this end, I use the Elevator, 
(vide Tab. III. Fig. 1.) which is of silver 
wire, about two lines thick; it has on 
the upper part, by a, a ring, by which 
the assistant keeps it, from b to b it should 
be well nealed, that by this means becom- 
ing softer, it may be more easily adapted 
to the form of the orbit of the upper eyelid, 
and fit well, without pinching. 

The knife, which I use for this opera- 
tion, (Tab. III. Fig. 3) is the same as that 
improved by the celebrated Professor Rich- 
ter, in Gottingen, and which I have found, 
certainly, to be the best for this operation; 
I shall therefore in the description use this 
great oculist's own words. 

"The knife which I use is different 
|P_19
from every other knife intended for the 
same purpose. simple as it may appear, 
there are still a great many things to be 
remarked concerning it. It may, per- 
haps, be supposed, that more depends on 
the hand that guides the knife, than on 
the knife itself; and there is some truth 
in this; but we shall soon be convinced, 
that the ease and nicety with which the 
operation is executed, depends very much 
indeed on the structure and make of the 
knife, and who would not rather use a 
convenient knife than such a one as is ma- 
nagged with difficulty and inconvenience? 
One of the great requisites in this opera- 
tion is, not to allow the aqueous humour 
to flow out until the incision be ended: 
therefore the blade of the knife must be 
constructed in such a manner, that it 
gradually increases in breadth from the 
point to the heel, in order both to en- 
large the wound as it passes along, and 
also to fill up the incision as it is made, 
and thus prevent the discharge of the 
aqueous humour. Both Mr. Beranger's 
|P_20
knife and mine are of this shape, and all 
others not so constructed are worth no- 
thing. The whole depends upon this, 
that the knife with which we are to cut 
the cornea should, at its broadest part, be 
fully as broad as half the diameter of the 
cornea. The cornea is in general about 
six lines in diameter; the knife, there- 
fore, must be three lines in breadth, and 
at least ten lines distant from the point; 
taking it for granted, however, that no 
more than the under half of the cornea 
is intended to be cut through. In using 
a knife, such as I have described, we shall 
find, that as soon as it has traversed the 
anterior chamber, and that that part of 
its blade which is three lines in breadth 
enters the eye, then the inferior portion 
of the cornea will be divided. It is un- 
necessary to draw the instrument back. 
the whole is done with one cut, and the 
aqueous humour does not flow out be- 
fore that is finished. 
[/1./]

|P_21
The blade of my knife is about an inch 
and an half in length. It is convex on 
both sides: whilst the knife traverses the 
anterior chamber of the eye, the con- 
vexity of its side presses the iris back, 
and keeps it from falling under the edge. 
A convex blade also is easier pushed 
through the cornea than a flat one, and 
it does not rub so much on the iris. 

The point of the knife must be sharp 
on both edges, for the least the breadth 
of one line, in order that it may enter 
quickly, and easily. 

Particular care ought to be taken that 
the point of the knife is well conditioned. 
I have seen it happen that the point of 
|P_22
the knife has bent on the cornea. [/2./] If 
such a knife be not very sharp, it does 
not enter, and, upon the surgeon making 
use of more force, it suddenly pierces 
the cornea, and lacerates the iris. The 
great error consists in making the point 
too thin, and too flexible; in a word, too 
much like the point of a lancet. A knife, 
whose point is so constructed, subjects 
the operator almost to a certainty of la- 
cerating the iris. It is true, that with a 
little dexterity, especially if the point be 
|P_23
very sharp, the knife may be made to 
enter the anterior chamber of the eye 
with apparent ease; but as soon as it 
comes in contact with the opposite and 
internal surface of the cornea, owing to 
the density of that membrane, and the 
obliquity of its direction, the thin flexible 
point is reflected posteriorly, and una- 
voidably lacerates the iris before it can 
be pushed through the other side. Par- 
ticular direction ought, therefore, to be 
given to the instrument-maker to have 
the point made pretty strong, and firm, 
although not rigid, nor inelastic. 

The back of the knife must be made 
quite blunt. As we push the knife for- 
ward, its back ought to be turned a little 
toward the iris; this would be impossible 
were it sharp, from the risk we should run 
of wounding that part. It is evident that 
a knife with a sharp back, such as Poyet's,
&c. must cut the cornea both upwards 
and downwards, which is quite con- 
trary to the intention of the surgeon, 
|P_24
who only wishes to cut the inferior half 
of that membrane; for which reason the 
knife ought to cut only downwards. 

The back of the knife must not, there- 
fore, be sharp, nor must it be too thick; 
the thinner the better; for when it is 
thick, it dilates the upper angle of the 
wound too much, and causes a small 
opening at the top, through which the 
aqueous humour may flow out. The back 
of my knife is thin, and therefore has not 
that inconvenience. I must here take no- 
tice, that the person who sharpens the in- 
strument, very often, through inatten- 
tion, sharpens it on the back, especially 
near the point This neglect, if not disco- 
vered, may be attended with bad conse- 
quence. For my part, before I make use 
of a new sharpened knife, I always pass 
the back of it over a fine stone. 

The back of the knife must be perfect- 
ly straight, not bent nor curved. A knife 
perfectly straight on the back, which is 
made to enter the anterior chamber of 
|P_25
the eye, at the external point of the 
transverse diameter of the cornea, will 
easily follow that direction, and come 
out exactly at the opposite point; but 
on the contrary, if a knife be made use 
of with the back curved, or bent, it must 
happen that the point, although entered 
exactly opposite the centre of the cornea, 
will come out much lower at the opposite 
side; and indeed always the lower the 
more bent it is. It is true, this fault may 
be corrected, by elevating the point of 
the knife in the chamber of the aqueous 
humour, as soon as it approaches the in- 
side of the eye, and then pushing it 
through the cornea. But that is a parti- 
cular manoeuvre, that requires much at- 
tention, and renders the operation at 
least more difficult, for, the fewer steps 
there are in any operation, the easier will 
that operation be. 

So far Professor Richter. 

(Tab. III. Fig. 4.) is a straight knife, the 
|P_26
blade about an inch and an half long, and 
two lines in breadth; on the point is a 
little button. 

(Tab. III. Fig. 5.) is the needle for 
opening the capsule. 

(Tab. III. Fig. 6.) is a hook which I use 
for extracting the obscured capsule, &c. 

(Tab. III. Fig. 2.) is the Parma spear, 
corrected by Casaamata, to make an un- 
steady eye firm; this spear is two inches 
in length, with a handle as long again; the 
needle is bent like an s; a half line behind 
the sharp point is a large blunt button, to 
prevent the point going too deep in the 
cornea. 

(Tab. III. Fig. 7) is a little broad hook, 
for keeping down the under eyelid, while 
using the spear (Fig. 2); by a, it is hooked 
in the under eyelid, and by b a little 
weight, or a key is suspended. 

It is a frequent complaint of the sur- 
geons in this operation, that the knife for 
cutting the cornea is never sufficiently 
|P_27
sharp. This complaint is often very just, 
therefore it would be better if the surgeon 
were to endeavour himself to sharpen his 
instruments, than that he should be oblig- 
ed to rely on the word of the instrument- 
maker. sometimes this complaint is un- 
just, as bluntness will often seem to exist, 
but is in reality produced by resistance from 
the hardness and thickness of the cornea; 
and as often from the fearful and unsteady 
hand of the operator. 

All the instruments that are necessary 
for this operation must, as I have before 
said, be ready at least a day before the 
operation; and the chair brought to such 
a height, that the patient's head may rest 
exactly within the concave cushion. The 
elevator, (Tab. III. Fig. 1) properly bent, 
and every thing in due readiness. 

From the room, in which the operation 
is to be performed, all false light must be 
excluded; and, for that purpose, every win- 
dow, except the one which gives the best 
light for the operation, must be effectually 
|P_28
closed. Not only a double, but a too 
strong light is dangerous; therefore, at the 
same time be careful to regulate the un- 
closed window in such a manner, that at 
any moment during the operation you may 
have as much more or less light, as may be 
necessary for your purpose. 

The patient's bed must be adjacent, or, 
if possible, in the same room in which the 
operation is performed; every motion after 
the operation, is not only troublesome, but 
dangerous to the patient. The sleeping 
room must be made dark, and carefully 
preserved from any possible entrance of 
strong light. 

Let the patient be released from all su- 
perfluous cloathing, and let him be in a 
night-gown, or great-coat, that he may 
not be, after the operation, long occupied, 
or in useless motion by undressing. 

If the patient is remarkably timid, it 
may be as well that he should not know 
when you propose to perform the opera- 
tion, for which purpose you may therefore 
|P_29
give him frequent visits at unappointed 
times. If he should absolutely desire to 
be acquainted with the fixed hour for the 
operation, rather tell him a day later, than 
that actually fixed for the purpose, that if 
any unforeseen impediment should make it 
necessary to postpone the operation, the 
surgeon may still keep his word with the 
patient. 

One cannot too scrupulously adhere to a 
promise made to those who count, with 
passionate expectation, each minute, look- 
ing forward to that happy one, when they 
hope to receive their sight. Every disap- 
pointment should likewise be avoided, on 
another account, as it tends to disturb the 
serenity of the patient, and by ruffling his 
spirits, to render him less fit to undergo so 
important an operation. 

The surgeon, to return to necessary mi- 
nutiæ, should take every care to have a 
strong chair for himself, in case he should sit 
during the operation. He should likewise 
choose as clear a day and sky as possible. 
|P_30
The light of the sun is injurious, and a sky 
which is one moment bright, and the next 
clouded, is apt to derange the operator. 

If the patient has not had an evacuation 
on the day of the operation, let him have 
an emollient opening clyster a few hours 
before; and if he should be very fearful of 
the operation, give him, an hour preceding, 
one grain of opium with some wine, which 
will be found of service. 

When every thing is thus prepared, I 
now come to the operation itself. But 
here let me remark, that in my judgment,
it should be performed on one eye only at 
a time, in case the patient should be blind 
of both. The contrary practice can only 
have originated in the precipitance of some 
itinerant oculist, who, not having patience 
to wait for the recovery of the first eye, 
undertake the double operation, for the 
sake of the double fee. He then departs, and 
frequently leaves the patient in a state of 
incurable blindness! To shew the hazard, 
and to demonstrate the inhumanity of this 
|P_31
practice, it is only necessary to observe, 
that the operation for a cataract may be 
performed on one eye, with the best suc- 
cess, yet, through some unexpected cir- 
cumstance, fail with respect to the other. 
The immediate communication between 
the eyes is well understood. The strong 
inflammation of the eye, on which the 
operation has miscarried, affects the other 
in its weakened state, and by this means 
both are frequently lost. A variety of 
such cases have come within my know- 
ledge, in the course of my practice, and all 
arising from that indecent precipitation 
which I have stated. If the patient can 
see, after the operation of one eye, then he 
does not require to undergo a second on 
the other; but on the contrary, if it should 
so happen that the first miscarries, there is 
a remaining hope of success from the se- 
cond. This hope, as I have observed, is 
totally extinguished by a double operation. 

Here a question occurs, which I think 
this the proper place to discuss; namely, 
|P_32
Whether the Assistant should be a sur- 
geon, or a man acquainted with this ope- 
ration, or not? My opinion is, he should 
not. It is supposed that an informed man 
can assist the operator; but he wants no 
other aid, than the simple act of keep- 
ing up the eyelid. The assistant need not, 
therefore, be acquainted with the opera- 
tion; on the contrary, I maintain that an 
assistant, who thinks himself possessed of 
knowledge, is of much more injury than 
use. His curiosity and earnestness to see 
the operation, as he stands behind the 
patient, causes him to bow his head 
over, and to forget to take care of the 
eyelid, or he makes a dangerous pressure 
on the eye. His confidence may even go 
far enough (if he keep up the eyelid with 
the finger) to think that he may aid the 
operator by a push, or a pressure, in the 
operation, which is enough to defeat the 
whole. I have seen many instances of this; 
it is therefore clear, that an assistant hav- 
ing any knowledge of the business, instead 
|P_33
of advantage, occasions inconvenience and 
danger. I therefore should recommend 
for an assistant an intelligent man, who 
is unacquainted with the operation, and 
attentive only to the instructions of the 
operator. 

The assistant should have been pre- 
viously instructed to watch the eyes of the 
surgeon, who must let him know by their 
means to lift the eyelid, or the contrary. 
It is proper to accustom every assistant to 
understand by signs from the operator what 
he has occasion for; as a blind person is 
ever attentive to hear what passes, and the 
calling for instruments, knives, scissors, &c. 
make fearful impressions on the patient. 
The surgeon should rather, during the 
operation, converse with him on indifferent 
subjects, and endeavour to turn his thoughts 
from what is doing. 

|P_34
[}THE OPERATION. }]
First, take from the patient his neck- 
cloth, unbutton his shirt collar, and release 
him from every thing which may hinder 
the free circulation; then seat him in the 
chair, that is already adapted to the height 
required; let him put his hands across 
his back, or secure them in such a manner, 
by a strong inflexible cane placed between 
his arms and back, as to be certain that, 
during the operation, he cannot direct them 
to his eyes, or the instruments of the ope- 
rator. If this situation should incommode 
a lusty person, you must direct the assist- 
ants to give strict attention to his hands. 
The operator must either stand, or sit on a 
strong chair; but in such a position, that 
his mouth may be exactly on a level with 
the eyes of the patient; the feet of the 
latter must be stretched out betwixt those 
of the operator. The surgeon must, in 
this situation, be near to a window, that 
|P_35
he may have a clear light; the patient 
must sit so that the light may fall sideways 
over the nose to the affected eye; for if 
the patient sits opposite the light, the sur- 
geon himself being in the shadow, this in- 
terposition hinders him observing if the 
pupil be clear; on the contrary, if the light 
comes from the side of that eye on which 
the operation is to be performed, the sha- 
dow of the hand, or the knife, is always an 
obstruction. some pretend that the eye 
always turns towards the light; this is not 
quite certain, in the case of a patient af- 
flicted with the Cataract. It is more clear 
that the blade of the knife, or the hand, 
always make a shadow, and that the eye is 
otherwise too much exposed to the light; 
but in this particular, every surgeon may 
do as he thinks best. 

Let the assistant be now placed behind 
the patient's chair; the latter being seated 
as before directed, in such a manner that 
the light falls sideways over the nose upon 
the eye affected; take then some doubled 
|P_36
lint, and put it on the eye which is not 
to be operated, and tie it fast with a 
thin silk handkerchief, which is preferable, 
because it takes but little room; lest the 
sound eye should come into motion, and 
by its communicating with the other, ren- 
der the operation more difficult. It is ne- 
cessary to have some wine ready, to re- 
fresh the patient during the operation, and 
some cold and warm water. The surgeon 
should select all the necessary instruments, 
and place them on a napkin, in a dish, in 
the probable order he may want them, and 
let an assistant hold this near to him, that 
he may readily take those for which he 
has occasion. 

During the time that the cornea is di- 
vided, much light must fall on the eye, for 
through that, the pupil contracts itself, and 
the iris will not so easily press under the 
edge of the knife, and at the same time 
you have less to fear from the sudden pro- 
trusion of the crystalline lens, after the in- 
cision is finished. 

|P_37
With the elevator (Tab. III. Fig. 1.) the 
upper eyelid must be kept up; give this 
into the hand of the assistant, who is be- 
hind the patient's chair, (but never let 
the assistant put it on.) If it is the left 
eye, (which I now propose for the ope- 
ration) the assistant must keep his right 
hand under the chin of the patient, and 
support it in such a manner, that his face 
may be a little turned upwards, and at the 
same time let the head be gently pressed 
against the back of the chair; the assist- 
ant keeps the elevator with the left hand, 
by a, pressing it gently upwards against 
the edge of the orbit. 

Many oculists, during the operation, 
keep the hand (with which they make the 
incision in the cornea) firm on the cheek 
of the patient; some put their elbow on 
their knee, and rest their foot on a stool; 
others lay their elbow on a table, &c. &c. 
to make their hand more firm: but all 
these positions seem to me to be too con- 
fined, and to hinder that freedom of motion 
|P_38
which is necessary to an operator. My 
method is, to press the upper part of the 
arm and elbow of that hand, with which I 
perform the operation, strongly against my 
own breast and ribs, and lean my little 
finger about an inch, from the outside of 
the eye, on the cheek-bone of the patient, 
and, as soon as I see the eye in a good po- 
sition, I at once hold my breath, and re- 
main in that situation while I make the 
incision in the cornea, which assists greatly 
the firmness of the hand. Though this 
may appear trifling, it will be found of 
great utility. 

To command the patient, in harsh words, 
to keep his eye steady, is absurd; it only 
tends to excite apprehension, as the motion 
of the eye is not in his power; any harsh- 
ness can only add to his fear, and thereby 
render the eye more unsteady, therefore, 
leave him to himself, give him a small 
quantity of wine, and you will find that 
the patient will be quiet, and in a few mi- 
nutes the eye quite steady. 

|P_39
The surgeon, in this operation on the 
left eye, must press with the first and 
middle finger of his left hand, the under 
eyelid down, and if the eye is a little un- 
steady, he must make the pressure rather 
stronger with the middle finger, which 
hinders it retreating into the inner corner. 

The knife he must take in his fingers, 
like a pen, and lean the little finger of his 
right hand on the cheek-bone of the pa- 
tient; and he should give great attention 
to the motion, when the eye is directly 
straight forward, but looking a little up, 
and outwards. As soon as the eye is in 
that direction, introduce the knife a little 
over the horizontal diameter, and a half line 
from the albuginea, in the cornea. But do 
not insert the knife in the cornea, if the eye 
be not in the position just now stated. The 
impatience of the surgeon sometimes so far 
misleads him, that although the eye is not 
in the right direction, by introducing his 
knife into it, he hopes to bring it right; 
but, in this case, he is greatly mistaken. It 
|P_40
will be found infinitely better to wait the 
favourable moment. The coolest patience 
is necessary, as well as the strongest pre- 
sence of mind, in an operation on which 
depends the greatest happiness of life— 
the sight. 

The incision in the cornea, must be 
shaped like an half circle, and must begin 
in the outer corner of the eye, a little over 
the horizontal diameter (as I have stated) 
in the transparent cornea, and come out in 
the same direction in the inner corner of 
the eye, that the under half of the cornea 
may be cut; and this incision must be the 
distance of half a line from the albuginea. 

In this part of the operation, much de- 
pends on the incision being sufficiently 
large; and it is always better, that it 
should be a little too large, than too small. 
The only way of making the incision suf- 
ficiently large, is, by keeping the knife, in 
passing through the oblique diameter, as 
near as possible to the outer edge of the cor- 
nea. The farther the entering of the knife 
|P_41
is from the outer edge of the cornea, the 
less will be the incision. The larger the in- 
cision is, the more easily and gently the 
crystalline lens is extracted through the 
pupil. It is not my intention to advise 
the incision to be two-thirds of the circle 
of the cornea; there may be an apprehen- 
sion, in this case, of a sudden protrusion of 
the crystalline lens, and also of the vitre- 
ous humour, and iris. 

Particular care should be taken by the 
operator that he performs this incision well, 
that the aqueous humour does not run out 
before the whole incision be finished. If 
the aqueous humour flows out sooner, the 
anterior chamber collapses while the knife 
is still in it; the iris becomes then close to 
the cornea, and comes before the point, 
and under the edge of the knife. In this 
case, it is impossible to bring the knife 
through the anterior chamber to the inner 
corner of the eye, without hurting or 
wounding the iris; and to continue the 
|P_42
incision in the collapsed cornea with the 
same knife, would make the wound too 
high, and uneven, and by this means the 
whole operation often miscarries. Of this 
I shall speak hereafter. But take all pos- 
sible precautions, to finish the operation 
with proper quickness, by making the 
whole incision with an even movement in 
the cornea at once, before the aqueous hu- 
mour escapes. 

As soon as the eye is in the direction 
that is desired, you must make, with that 
finger with which you keep down the un- 
der eyelid, a soft easy pressure on the eye, 
as I have before said; put in the point of 
the knife a little right angular, (then, if 
you put it a little awry, you will soon 
come betwixt the lamellæ of the cornea) 
and push through the cornea. 

Now the knife is through the cornea, 
in the anterior chamber, change the di- 
rection, so that the point be directed to 
the spot at the inner corner, where it 
|P_43
must come out; keep the knife quite pa- 
rallel with the iris, but with the edge a 
little outward from it, and push it with 
an even movement to the inner corner, 
and finish the incision as I directed be- 
fore. 

If the eye is prominent, the anterior 
chamber large, the patient not very timid, 
the eye quiet, and the operator has firm- 
ness enough in his hand, sufficient pre- 
sence of mind, and be not precipitate, this 
part of the operation may always be per- 
formed with a sufficient share of certainty. 

But, in spite of every previous rule, and 
every possible precaution, it will sometimes 
happen, through unforeseen circumstances, 
or mistake of the operator, that the inci- 
sion is not properly finished; this is occa- 
sioned either by the motion of the eye on the 
internal angle, or the aqueous humour es- 
caping too soon, or the iris falling before the 
point, or under the edge of the knife, &c. 

If the surgeon, as soon as he observes 
that the eye begins to turn to the inner 
|P_44
canthus, cannot prevent it, by a soft pres- 
sure with the finger, on the under and inner 
side, he will do best to press the knife directly 
downwards, and divide through as much 
of the cornea as possible; and if it should 
be only a half of the incision he intended, 
he can afterwards finish it with a pair of 
scissors. (To draw the eye forward in this 
case with the knife that is in it, and to fi- 
nish the incision, requires all the dexterity 
of an experienced and cool hand, and even 
then seldom succeeds.) It is said, only 
through prejudice, that the opening by a 
pair of scissors makes a wound which is 
apt to suppurate, and frequently leaves be- 
hind an opaque cicatrix. Repeated expe- 
rience proves, that an opening in the cor- 
nea with a good sharp pair of scissors, 
will heal as even, and as well, as if 
done with a knife. Those which are used 
for this purpose are different. I make 
use of a pair like those of Daviel, with 
blunted points. The method of using 
these scissors is quite simple. I lay (in an 
|P_45
operation of the left eye) my fore finger 
of my left hand fast on the cheek of the 
patient, to keep down the eyelid. I then 
place my scissors on the back of the finger, 
as a firm point, and make the incision in 
the cornea sufficiently large. 

The cases in which the iris generally 
falls before the point, and under the edge 
of the knife, are when it is inserted too 
near the outer edge of the cornea, (too 
near the albuginea) when the aqueous hu- 
mour flows out too soon, when the assistant 
makes a pressure upon the eye, or through 
any other cause occasions a spasm, from ir- 
ritation on the muscles of the eye, by which 
the iris is pressed forwards. If, with every 
precaution observed, the iris should fall 
before the point of the knife, you must 
try, by a soft pressure and rubbing upon 
the cornea, to make the iris retreat, and 
move the point of the knife a little to the 
cornea, and over the iris. If the iris falls 
forward, and the knife is in the inner can- 
thus, and through the cornea, try likewise 
|P_46
through a soft rubbing upon the cornea, 
and by keeping your knife still, to make 
the iris recede, and to finish the incision. 

If, notwithstanding all these endea- 
vours, the iris will not recede, be not pre- 
cipitate; turn not the edge of the knife 
more towards the cornea, to finish the in- 
cision: it never can in this manner be 
made as it should be, and you endanger 
the patient; for the cicatrix will, after the 
operation, appear too high, and on its size 
and situation depends the sight. The best 
mode, under these circumstances, is to 
withdraw the knife, and to finish the open- 
ing with a pair of scissors, or with a knife 
with a blunted point, as will be mentioned 
in the sequel. 

sometimes before the operation, the eye 
is in such an unquiet and convulsive state, 
that all the repose and intervals that are 
given cannot make it quiet. If the surgeon, 
retaining his presence of mind, has lost all 
hopes of fixing the eye, and is convinced 
that there remains nothing else but to se- 
|P_47
cure it with an instrument; I believe that 
out of all the number of instruments re- 
commended for this purpose, the spear of 
Parma, corrected by Casaamata (Tab. III. 
Fig. 2.) is one of the best. The inconve- 
nience of this instrument is, that it re- 
quires the whole hand of the surgeon, and 
will not admit a finger to be left for keeping 
down the under eyelid; but this fault is to 
be remedied by affixing the little hook 
(Tab. III. Fig. 7.) to the under eyelid 
by a, and by b hang a small key, heavy 
enough to keep it down: by this is spared 
a hand extraordinary; but be sure to avoid, 
as much as possible, all superfluous instru- 
ments. 

In the operation of the left eye, you 
take the spear (Tab. III. Fig. 2.) by a in 
the left hand, put up by b the fore finger, 
and watch when the eye is in the direction 
before mentioned, and push at once the 
point of the spear horizontally about a half 
line over the oblique diameter of the cor- 
nea, and half a line from the albuginea, in 
|P_48
the inner part of the cornea; in this man- 
ner you can, by a soft pressure with the 
spear, keep the eye, without harm, im- 
moveably fixed; when you find that this 
is effected, push the knife, at the same mo- 
ment, into the opposite side, (Tab. IV. 
Fig. 1.) as I before intimated, and com- 
plete the incision. But if you make use of 
the elevator (Tab. III. Fig. 1.) to sustain 
the upper eyelid, then make a soft pressure 
with the finger with which you keep down 
the under eyelid; and take care that the 
point of the knife be well sharpened, and 
choose one which has not too thick a blade. 
You will be very seldom incommoded 
through the strong motion of the eye; and 
it is not often that the use of the spear will 
be necessary. 

The method thus described, of cutting 
the cornea at once, and with one knife, 
can always be used when the eye is quiet; 
but every experienced oculist knows, that 
though before the operation, the patient 
and the eye are quiet, he cannot rely on 
|P_49
the same degree of quiet during the opera- 
tion. 

The slight irritation which arises from 
keeping up the upper eyelid, and the be- 
ginning of the operation in piercing the cor- 
nea, though void of feeling, particularly with 
sensitive and irritable patients, often oc- 
casion a sudden spasm in the muscles of the 
eye, though the cornea be cut at once, and 
in the best manner; yet if the eye be pro- 
minent, with a large moveable pupil, the 
crystalline lens, with or without its capsule, 
may suddenly gush out, and frequently with 
it a part of the vitreous humour. This case 
often happens, and sometimes without de- 
triment to the patient; but there too fre- 
quently arises from this an irregularity, a 
prolapsus, and paralysis of the iris, and con- 
cretion of the pupil (synizesis), by which 
the whole operation is frustrated. 

This is sufficiently proved by a great va- 
riety of cases, where the best skill, of the 
most experienced oculist, was of no avail. 

In such a delicate operation as that 
which has for its object, to restore the sight, 
|P_50
nothing dare ultimately be hazarded. It 
remains, therefore, only to state the safest 
and most efficacious mode of proceeding, in 
case of the accident happening which I have 
just stated. 

I am not, for my own part, of the num- 
ber of oculists who pride themselves on the 
mechanical adroitness of performing this 
operation. The credit of quickness must not 
be attained by the operator at the price of 
the patient's safety. 

some oculists advise in the case of a spasm, 
when the knife is in the eye, or the point 
through the anterior chamber, and such 
convulsion should occur, to keep the knife 
for a moment steady, and to finish the 
incision slowly. I have tried, at diffe- 
rent times, this manner, but always found 
that the crystalline lens sprung forwards 
suddenly, and frustrated every precau- 
tion. 

Experience proves the success of the ope- 
ration to be the better, the more slowly 
the crystalline lens comes forwards, be- 
cause the pupil is the more gradually di- 
|P_51
lated; but on the contrary, the quick 
coming forward of the crystalline lens, 
by its distending too suddenly, tends to 
lacerate, and to destroy the figure of the 
pupil afterwards. In the latter case, the 
pupil loses its motion, and changes its fi- 
gure, and the consequence is a proportional 
diminution of the sight, (vide Tab. IV. 
Fig. 4.). When I observe, therefore, in this 
operation, such an irritation and convulsive 
contraction of the muscles of the eye, which 
chiefly manifests itself from the suddenly 
starting and pressing forward of the eye, 
an immediate blood-shot appearance in the 
vessels the conjunctiva, an advance of the 
crystalline lens and iris towards the cor- 
nea, &c. An experienced hand will aslo, 
in a moment, perceive a stronger and clo- 
ser pressure against the knife, and combin- 
ing all these circumstances, the operator is 
clear of a spasm coming on violently. In 
this case, when I have my knife in the eye, 
I push it into the inner corner through 
the cornea, at least more than a line out- 
ward, (vide Tab. IV. Fig. 2) and draw 
|P_52
it in the same direction backward out 
of the eye, with the certainty of not wound- 
ing the iris. However, being so far ad- 
vanced, it would be easy for me to com- 
plete the incision at once; but by drawing 
back the knife, the aqueous humour flows 
out: the eye, from that circumstance, be- 
comes collapsed, the muscles not moving 
with such strength, it begins to be quieter, 
and comes into that state which is desired. 
The pupil is now more dilated, and the 
crystalline lens more forward, but by a 
gentle rubbing on the closed eye, and 
applying a handkerchief with cold, or a 
little warm water (as the circumstance 
requires), the crystalline lens will soon 
recede, and set the iris free. This mo- 
ment must be waited for with patience. 
When the patient and his eye are at length 
quiet, I order the upper eyelid to be again 
kept up, and take that knife, at the point 
of which is a little round blunted button, 
(vide Tab. III. Fig. 4.); with this knife I 
re-enter the opening (vide Tab. IV. Fig. 3.) 
a, and come out through the anterior cham- 
|P_53
ber by b, in the inner corner, without the 
least injury to the iris, and then can (as 
shews the white points by c) finish the inci- 
sion as large as I desire. 

My reasons for using two knives, when 
I could finish the incision with one, are, 
that in the first place, I wish the eye to 
be perfectly quiet, the spasm mitigated, 
and to prevent the dangerous sudden start- 
ing out of the crystalline lens, &c. &c. 
and secondly, I cannot see of what de- 
detriment this second knife can be, as hav- 
ing at the point a little round button, by 
which it cannot wound or irritate, as it acts 
only on the insensible cornea. I never knew 
any great inflammation follow in conse- 
quence of this treatment. 

Let us now suppose the cornea cut as it 
should be, and large enough for the passage 
of the crystalline lens; be not precipitate 
in drawing out the crystalline lens, but let 
the eye become again quiet. 

The room must, soon after the opening 
of the cornea, be more darkened, to pro- 
mote the dilatation of the pupil, and then 
|P_54
try if the crystalline lens, with its capsule, 
will come out by a soft pressure; (in this in- 
stance, the operator himself must keep the 
upper eyelid up with his finger;) this soft 
pressure is made by the two underlaid fin- 
gers alternately, which occasions the crys- 
talline lens to revolve on its axis, and at 
length come out of the eye. 

But if the operator should perceive that 
the crystalline lens, with its capsule, will 
not come near to the pupil, and that the 
latter is not much enlarged, let him desist 
in a moment from the attempt, and bring 
the eye again into a state of rest; for if he 
should venture to press more strongly, the 
vitreous humour would protrude first, leav- 
ing the Cataract with its capsule behind. 
This is the worst event which can attend 
the operation: it sometimes happens also, 
that by too violent a pressure, the capsule 
is forcibly rent, at the moment the Ca- 
taract comes forward. 

Eminent oculists have observed, and 
my own experience has confirmed it, that 
if the capsule be forcibly rent in the ope- 
|P_55
ration, the greater part of it becomes 
thereby afterward opaque, and there re- 
mains either a weak sight, or very often 
a second blindness (Caracta secundaria). 
But, on the contrary, if the capsule be well 
opened, and cut with a sharp instrument, 
if a strong inflammation should not occur, 
the capsule commonly remains clear and 
transparent. 

But to return to the operation; if the 
eye is again quiet, then let the upper eye- 
lid be kept up by the assistant with the ele- 
vator, and let the operator proceed to open 
the capsule. 

The opening in the capsule must be 
made as large as possible; it sometimes 
happens, that the crystalline lens, while it 
comes through the capsule, leaves behind 
an opaque slime, or a broken piece, which 
must be carefully extracted. This some- 
times is not done without much difficulty; 
but it seldom happens, if the capsule is suffi- 
ciently opened. But if the incision in the cap- 
sule is not large enough, it is in vain to at- 
|P_56
tempt the taking out of the opaque part 
remaining. 

A second reason for largely opening the 
capsule is, that if, for any particular reason, 
the opaque remainder cannot be extracted, 
you have the hope, founded upon repeated 
experience, that the aqueous humour, whilst 
it flows in the capsule, will dissolve the 
opaque body. This will be more certain 
in proportion to the size of the opening. 
some oculists open the cornea and the cap- 
sule at the same time; but in this mode, 
the opening in the latter never can be 
large enough. some open it with the cys- 
totom of Lafaye, &c. &c. but I make use of 
a double-edged needle, (Tab. III. Fig. 5.) 
of a lancet form, in the following manner; 
by the operation of the left eye (make the 
flap d of the chair fall over behind, and let 
the head of the patient lean a little back; if 
the operator has before been seated, he must 
now stand, to have free motion in finishing 
the other part of the operation). With my 
right hand I take the spoon of Daviel, and 
|P_57
with it, keep up the wound in the cornea. I 
take in the left hand this needle, and keep 
the under eyelid down with the little finger 
of the same hand ; I then pass this needle 
through the wound in the cornea into the 
pupil, and open the capsule as much as pos- 
sible, and try to cut it in two half circles, 
that a whole piece may be taken out from 
the centre. To cut a large piece out of the 
capsule, a great degree of dexterity is neces- 
sary to the dilatation of the pupil; namely, to 
press with the underlaid little finger, softly, 
the globe of the eye, whereby the crystalline 
lens, with its capsule, comes nearer to the 
pupil, which dilates; but this, as I have said, 
requires great caution, as the capsule is ea- 
sily torn by this pressure, and by the touch 
of the needle, the Cataract will be found 
suddenly to come out, which must be avoid- 
ed. If the capsule be cut as well as it is 
required, the Cataract now, by the soft 
pressure of the underlaid fingers, turns 
about its axis, and falls out of the wound in 
the cornea. It is to be observed, that the 
|P_58
lower edge of the crystalline lens turns for- 
ward and upward, and comes into the pu- 
pil, before it presses or distends the lower 
part of the iris outward in any considerable 
degree, then presses it so forward and down- 
ward, that it may be out at the wound in 
the cornea, till at last the lower edge, and 
the posterior part of the crystalline lens slips 
down over the lower edge of the pupil, and 
out at the wound of the cornea. If the 
operator takes care after this extraction to 
keep the eye in a horizontal situation, this 
slow dilatation of the pupil is of no detri- 
ment, the pupil will be perfectly round, and 
come into its former place. 

In case the Cataract is wholly come out 
of the eye, more light should be admitted 
into the room, to observe if the pupil be 
quite clear.—The operator must be very 
cautious, and keep his hand over the ope- 
rated eye, and let just as much light fall on 
it as he finds by his examination to be ne- 
cessary. He should observe most accu- 
rately if any part of the Cataract, or of the 
|P_59
humor Morgagnii, or of the capsule, re- 
mains behind opaque; if any should be 
found, he must endeavour to bring the first 
out with the spoon of Daviel, and the lat- 
ter with a pair of small nippers, or the hook 
(Tab. III. Fig. 6.). Those opaque parti- 
cles often remain in the eye undiscovered 
by the strictest examination, and make 
their appearance after the wound in the 
cornea is closed. They are concealed during 
the operation in the upper part of the cap- 
sule, because the pupil is frequently drawn 
down after the operation: it is therefore 
the more necessary to examine the pupil by 
different degrees of light, that if any thing 
opaque remains behind, it may be discover- 
ed. —In this examination the greatest cau- 
tion is requisite, on account of the irri- 
tation occasioned by the entrance of the 
light into the tender eye. If the pupil be 
quite clear and black, and no portion of the 
iris fallen within the wound of the cornea, 
instantly close the eye, and by no means 
try to make any experiment, whether the 
|P_60
patient can or cannot see. He can seldom 
see distinctly, on account of the extracted 
crystalline lens, the flowing out of the 
aqueous humour, which renders the cornea 
wrinkled and flabby. But at all events, it 
is a vain glorious essay, which is dangerous 
for the patient's tender eye, which being 
accustomed to darkness, is irritated by the 
light. This curiosity seldom goes unpu- 
nished. 
