

[^Sample 1: book - ^]

|P_277
[}CHAPTER III. }]
[}THE ADHESIVE INFLAMMATION.}]
[^A horizontal double-line in the middle of the page.^]
I shall begin by treating of the nature and effects of what I have called 
the adhesive inflammation, as well as giving a proper idea of it. I shall 
also open the way to a clear understanding of the many phænomena 
which attend the suppurative inflammation; but as inflammation does not 
produce one effect only, but several, and as most of them take place about 
the same time, it is difficult to determine in the mind, which to describe 
first. 

Inflammation in most cases appears to begin at a point; for at the very 
first commencement, all the local symptoms are within a very small 
compass, and they afterwards spread according to the violence of the 
cause; the disposition in the parts for inflammation, and the nature of the 
surrounding parts themselves, which susceptibility in the surrounding parts 
may be either constitutional or local. 

This is so much the case, that inflammation shall come on at once in 
a fixed point, giving great pain, and which shall be soon followed by 
tumefaction. 

This is also the case with those inflammations which arise from acci-
dent, for all accidents are confined to fixed and determined limits, but the 
inflammation which follows is not; it spreads over a large extent, yet 
the inflammation is always the greater, the nearer it is to the first fixed 
point; and gradually becomes less and less in the surrounding parts, till 
at last it is insensibly lost in them. 

This spreading of the inflammation is owing to continued sympathy, 
the surrounding parts sympathising with the point of irritation; and in 
|P_278
proportion to the health of the surrounding parts and constitution, this 
sympathy is less; for we find in many states of parts, and many consti-
tutions, that there is a disposition to this sympathy, and in such, the in-
flammation spreads in proportion. 

[^A horizontal double-line in the middle of the page.^]
[}I. ACTION OF THE VESSELS IN INFLAMMATION. }]
The act of inflammation would appear to be an increased action of the 
vessels [/1./], but whatever action it is, it takes place, most probably in the 
smaller vessels, for it may be confined almost to a point where nothing 
but the smallest vessels exist. The larger vessels may be considered as 
only the conveyers of the materials, for the smaller to act upon and dispose 
of according to the different intentions; however, inflammation in a part, 
is not only an action of the smaller vessels in the part itself, but in the 
larger vessels leading to it. This is proved by a whitlow taking place on 
the end of a finger; for although the inflammation itself shall be confined 
to the end of a finger, and the inflammatory sensation or throbbing be 
situated in this part, yet we can feel by our hands, when we grasp the 
finger, a strong pulsation in the two arteries leading to the inflamed part, 
while no such pulsation can be felt in the other fingers; and if the in-
flammation is very considerable, the artery, as high as the wrist, will be 
sensibly affected, which proves that the arterial system is at that time 
dilating itself, and allowing a much larger quantity of blood to pass than 
is usual. This is probably by continued sympathy. 

Where the inflammation affects the constitution, the vessels of the 
system rather contract, and keep as it were stationary, which stationary 
contraction is more or less according to the state of the constitution; in 
strong healthy constitutions whose powers are equal to the necessary actions, 
|P_279
or in parts that affect the constitution less, this contraction is less and less 
stationary. 

The very first act of the vessels when the stimulus which excites in-
flammation is applied, is, I believe, exactly similar to a blush. It is, I 
believe, simply an increase or distension beyond their natural size. This 
effect we see takes place upon many occasions, gentle friction on the skin 
produces it; gently stimulating medicines have the same effect, a warm 
glow is the consequence, similar to that of the cheek in a blush; and if 
either of these be increased or continued, real inflammation will be the con-
sequence, as well as excoriation, suppuration, and ulceration. This effect we 
often see, even where considerable mischief has been done; and I believe 
it is what always terminates the boundaries of the true inflammation. A 
musket-ball shall pass a considerable way under the skin, perhaps half 
way round the body, which shall be discovered and traced by a red band 
in the skin, not in the least hard, only a little tender to the touch; and it 
shall subside without extending farther. This appearance I shall term a 
blush; for although this may be reckoned the first act of inflammation, 
yet I would not call it inflammation, having produced a lasting effect; I 
should rather say, that inflammation sets out from this point, and that 
afterwards a new action begins, which is probably first a separation of the 
coagulating lymph, and the throwing it out of the vessels. 

The parts inflamed appear to become more vascular; but how far they 
are really so, I am not certain, for this appearance does (at least in part) 
arise from the dilatation of the vessels, which allows the red part of the 
blood to go into vessels where only serum and coagulating lymph could 
pass when they were in a natural state, and till the newly extravasated 
substances become vascular; the effect is most probably owing wholly to 
the above cause. 

This incipient enlargement of the vessels upon the first excitement of 
inflammation is satisfactorily seen in the following manner. Make an in-
cision through the skin on the inside of the upper part of a dog's thigh, 
three inches long; by pulling the cut edges asunder, and observing the ex-
posed surface, we shall see the blush or ash-coloured cellular membrane 
covering the different parts underneath, with a few arteries passing through 
|P_280
it to the neighbouring parts; but in a little time we shall see these vessels 
increasing in size, and also smaller vessels going off from them that were 
not before observable, as if newly formed or forming; the number and 
size shall increase till the whole surface shall become extremely vascular, 
and at last the red blood shall be thrown out in small dots on the ex-
posed surface, probably, through the cut ends of the arteries that only 
carried the lymph before. This surface will become in time more opaque, 
and less ductile. Parts inflamed, when compared with similar parts not 
inflamed, shew a considerable difference in the size of the vessels, and pro-
bably from this cause bring an increased number to view. I froze the 
ear of a rabbit and thawed it again; this excited a considerable inflam-
mation, and increased heat, and a considerable thickening of the part. This 
rabbit was killed when the ear was in the height of inflammation, and the 
head being injected, the two ears were removed and dried. The uninflamed 
ear dried clear and transparent, the vessels were distinctly seen ramifying 
through the substance; but the inflamed ear dried thicker and more 
opaque, and its arteries were considerably larger. 

In inflammation of the eye, which is commonly of the tunica conjunc-
tiva, the progress of inflammation may, in part, be accurately observed, 
although not so progressively as in a wound. The contrast between the 
red vessel and the white of the eye, under this coat is very conspicuous, 
and although we do not see the vessels enlarging in this coat, yet we see 
the progress they have made, the white appears as if it was becoming 
more vascular, and these vessels larger, till at last the whole tunica con-
junctiva shall appear as one mass of blood, looking more like extravasated 
blood then a congeries of vessels, although I believe it is commonly the 
last. 

From these circumstances it must appear, that a much larger quan-
tity of blood passes through parts when inflamed than when in a natural 
state, which is according to the common rules of the animal œconomy; 
for, whenever a part has more to do than simply to support itself, the 
blood is there collected in larger quantity; this we find to take place uni-
versally in those parts whose powers are called up to action by some 
necessary operation to be performed, whether natural or diseased. 

|P_281
As the vessels become larger, and the part becomes more of the colour 
of the blood, it is to be supposed there is more blood in the part; and as 
the true inflammatory colour is scarlet, or that colour which the blood 
has when in the arteries, one would from hence conclude, either that the 
arteries were principally dilated, or at least, if the veins are equally dis-
ended, that the blood undergoes no change in such inflammation in its 
passage from the arteries into the veins, which I think is most probably 
the case; and this may arise from the quickness of its passage through 
those vessels. 

When inflammation takes place in parts that have a degree of trans-
parency, that transparency is lessened. This is, probably, best seen in 
membranes, such as those membranes which line cavities, or cover bodies 
in those cavities, such as the pia-mater, where, in a natural state, we may 
observe the blood-vessels to be very distinct. But when we see the blood-
vessels fuller than common, yet distinct in such membranes, we are not 
to call that inflammation, although it may be the first step, as we find to 
be the case in the first action of the vessels in consequence of such irri-
tation as will end in inflammation. As it may not, however, be the first 
step, there must be other attending circumstances to determine it to be the 
very first action of the vessels in inflammation, for as that appearance 
may either belong to a briskness in the circulation in the part at the time, 
or the very first step in inflammation, their causes are to be discriminated 
by some other symptom; they are both a kind of blush, or an exertion of 
the action of the vessels; but when it is an effect of an inflammatory cause, 
it is then only that the inflammation has not yet produced any change in 
the natural structure of the parts, but which it will soon do [/2./]. What the 
action is, or in what it differs from the common action of the vessels, is 
not easily ascertained, since we are more able to judge of the effects 
than the immediate cause. However, it is probably an action of the 
|P_282
vessels, which we can better observe than any diseased action in the body, 
for we can observe the state in which the arteries are, with their general 
effects; we feel, also, a different temperature respecting heat, yet the im-
mediate cause may not be ascertainable. 

The vessels, both arteries and veins, in the inflamed part are enlarged, 
and the part becomes visibly more vascular, from which we should sus-
pect, that instead of an increased contraction, there was rather what would 
appear an increased relaxation of their muscular powers, being, as we might 
suppose, left to the elasticity entirely. This would be reducing them to a 
state of paralysis simply; but the power of muscular contraction would 
seem to give way in inflammation, for they certainly dilate more in in-
flammation than the extent of the elastic power would allow; and it must 
also be supposed, that the elastic power of the artery must be dilated 
in the same proportion. The contents of the circulation being 
thrown out upon such occasions, would, from considering it in those 
lights, rather confirm us in that opinion; and when we consider the whole 
of this as a necessary operation of nature, we must suppose it something 
more than simply a common relaxation; we must suppose it an action in 
the parts to produce an increase of size to answer particular purposes; and 
this I should call the action of dilatation, as we see the uterus increase 
in size in the time of uterine-gestation, as well as the os tincæ in the time 
of labour, the consequence of the preceding actions, and necessary for 
the completion of those which are to follow. 

The force of the circulation would seem to have same share in this 
effect, but only as a secondary cause; for I could conceive a part to 
inflame, or be in a state of inflammation, although no blood were to pass. 
As a proof of this, we may observe, that by lessening either the action 
of the heart, or the column of blood, inflammation is lessened; and I may 
also observe, that we have an increased pain in the inflamed part in the 
diastole of the artery, and a part inflamed by being gently pressed is made 
easier. Thus, a person with an inflammation in the fingers will find relief 
by gently pressing it in the other hand. These are strong proofs that it 
is not a contractile action of the vascular coat of the vessel; for in such a 
sensible state of vessels if they contracted by their muscular power, the 
|P_283
pain would be in their systole; for we find in all muscles which are in a 
state of great sensibility, from whatever cause, that they cannot act 
without giving great pain. Thus an inflamed bladder becomes extremely 
painful when expelling its contents, an inflamed intestine in the same 
manner; I should say, therefore, that in inflammations the muscular coats 
of the arteries do not contract. 

Whatever purpose this increase of the size of the vessels may answer, 
we must suppose it allows a greater quantity of blood to pass through the 
inflamed part than in the natural state, which supposition is supported by 
many other observations. 

The part inflamed, I have already observed, becomes to appearance 
more vascular than when in the natural state, and it is probable that it is 
really so, both from new vessels being set up in the inflamed part, as well 
as the new and adventitious uniting substance becoming vascular. Besides, 
the vessels of the parts are enlarged, so that the red blood passes further 
than common, which increases those appearances. But the brain appears 
to be an exception to these general rules; for in all diseases of the brain, 
where the effects were such as are commonly the consequence of inflam-
mation, such as suppuration from accidents, I never could find the above 
appearances; the brain may, perhaps, go directly into suppuration, as 
sometimes the peritoneum does; but its slowness of going into suppuration 
after the accident, would make us supppose, apriori, that there was suf-
ficient time for adhesions to form. 

[^A horizontal double-line in the middle of the page.^]
[}II. OF THE COLOUR, SWELLING, AND PAIN OF INFLAMED PARTS. }]
The colour of an inflamed part is visibly changed from the natural, 
whatever it was, to a red. This red is of various hues, according to the 
nature of the inflammation; if healthy, it is a pale red; if less healthy, 
the colour will be darker, more of a purple, and so on till it shall be a 
blueish purple, which I took notice of in the short sketch of the peculiar 
|P_284
inflammations; but the parts inflamed will in every constitution be more 
of the healthy red when the parts inflamed are near to the source of the 
circulation, than when far from it. This increase of red appears to arise 
from two causes; the first is a dilatation of the vessels, whereby a greater 
quantity of blood is allowed to pass into those vessels which only admitted 
serum or lymph before[/3./]. 

The second is owing probably to new vessels being set up in the ex-
travasated uniting coagulating lymph. 

This colour is gradually lost in the surrounding part if the inflammation 
is of the healthy kind, but in many others it has a determined edge, as in 
the true erysepelatous, and in some specific diseases, as in the small-pox, 
where its quick termination is a sign of health. 

From the account I have given of the immediate effects of inflammation 
of the cellular membrane, in which I include the larger cavities, the 
volume of the part inflamed must be increased. This, when a common 
consequence of inflammation, is not circumscribed, but rather diffused, as 
the inflammation, however, begins in a circumscribed part, which is at 
least the case with that arising from violence; the inflammation I just now 
observed is always the greatest nearest to that point, and is gradually lost 
in the surrounding parts, the swelling of course is the greatest at, or nearest 
to this point, and it is also lost in the surrounding sound parts. This 
takes place, more or less, according to the constitution, or the situation of 
the inflammation; for if the constitution be strong and healthy, the sur-
rounding parts will sympathize less with the point of irritation, so that 
inflammation and its consequences, viz. extravasation will be less diffused. 

There will be less of the serum, and of course a purer coagulating lymph, 
so that the swelled parts will be firmer; but in some specific disease or 
dissimilar part, as a gland, it has a more determined edge, the surrounding 
parts not so readily taking on specific diseased action as in other cases. In 
this both the colour and swelling correspond very much, since they both 
depend on the same principle. 

|P_285
This increase of volume is owing to the extravasation of the coagulating 
lymph, and some serum; in proportion to the inflammation, the degree of 
which depends on the causes abovementioned, this effect is more or less, 
and therefore is greatest at the point of inflammation, becoming less and 
less as it extends into the surrounding parts, till it is insensibly lost in 
them. 

The extravasation of the serum along with the coagulating lymph is, 
probably, not a separation of itself, as in a dropsy, but a part of it being 
separated from the lymph in the coagulation of that fluid, is squeezed into 
the surrounding cellular membrane, where there is but little extravasation, 
and where the cells are not united by it. Thus the circumference of such 
swelling is a little œdamatous; but the whole of the serum, if there be a 
depending part, will move thither, and distend it considerably, as in the 
foot in consequence of an inflammation in the leg. But in most cases 
there is a continued extravasation of serum, long after the extravasation of 
the coagulating lymph is at an end; so that depending parts will continue 
œdematous, while the inflammation is resolving, or while suppuration, or 
even healing is going on. 

The whole swelling looks like a part of the body only a little changed, 
without any appearance of containing extraneous matter; and indeed it is 
simply formed by an extravasation of fluids without their having under-
gone any visible or material change, except coagulation. 

As few uncommon operations can go on in an animal body without 
affecting the sensations, and as the first principle of sensation arises from 
some uncommon action, or alteration being made in the natural position 
or arrangement of the parts, we should naturally suppose that the sensation 
would be in some degree according to those effects, and the sensibility of 
the parts. One can easily form an idea of an alteration in the structure 
of parts giving sensation which may even be carried to pain, but that the 
simple action of parts should produce sensations and even violent pain is 
but little known, or at least has been, I believe, but little attended to; all 
|P_286
these effects, I think, may justly be included under the term spasm[/4./]; at 
least we are led by analogy to suppose that they belong to that class. 

By spasm I should understand a contraction of a muscle, without the 
leading and natural causes. 

Thus the contraction of a muscle of the leg, called the cramp, gives 
considerable pain, often violent, as also the tetanus, and when in a less 
degree, as in the twinkling of the eye-lid, it gives only sensation, whereas 
if the muscles were to act by the will, no sensation would be produced. 

We find that those sensations are more or less acute, according to the 
quickness or slowness of the progress of these causes, from whence we are 
naturally led to assign two causes which must always attend one another; 
for when both do not take place at the same time, the mind then remains 
insensible to the alteration. This is its being produced in a given time, 
for the alteration in the position of the parts may be produced so slowly, 
as not to keep pace with sensation, which is the case with many indolent 
tumors, ascites, etc. on the other hand this alteration in the natural posi-
tion of parts may be so quick as to exceed sensation, and therefore there is 
a certain medium, which produces the greatest pain. 

The actions I have been describing being pretty quick in their effects, 
we cannot fail to see why the pain from the inflammation must be consi-
derable; however the pain is not the same in all the different stages. In the 
adhesive state of the inflammation it is generally but very inconsiderable, 
especially if it is to go no further, and is perhaps more of a heavy than an 
acute pain; when it happens on the skin it often begins with an itching; 
but as the inflammation is passing from the adhesive to the suppurative, 
the parts then undergo a greater change than before, and the pain grows 
more and more acute, till it become very considerable. The nerves also 
acquire at that time a degree of sensibility, which renders them much more 
susceptible of impressionn than when they are in their natural state; thus 
an inflamed part is not only painful in itself, but it communicates im-
|P_287
pressions to the mind independent of pain, which do not arise from a na-
tural sound part. This pain increases every time the arteries are dilated, 
whence it would appear that the arteries do not contract by their muscular 
power, in their systole, for if they did, we might expect a considerable pain 
in that action which would be at the full of the pulse. Whether this 
pain arises from the distention of the artery by the force of the heart, or 
whether it arises from the action of distention from the force of the artery 
itself, is not easily determined. We know that diseased muscles give much 
pain in their contraction, perhaps more than they do when stretched[/5./]. 

That the degree of inflammation which becomes the cause of adhesions 
gives but little pain, is proved from dissections of dead bodies; for we 
seldom or never find a body in dissection which has not adhesions in some 
of the larger cavities; and yet it may reasonably be supposed, that many 
of these persons never had any acute symptoms, or violent pain in those 
parts; indeed, we find many strong adhesions upon the opening of dead 
bodies, in parts which the friends of these persons never heard mentioned, 
during life, as the subject of a single complaint. 

That adhesions can be produced from very slight inflammation, is 
proved in ruptures in consequence of wearing a truss; for we find the 
slight pressure of a truss exciting such action as to thicken parts, by 
which means the two sides of the sack are united, though there be hardly 
any sensation in the part; we also see, in cases where this inflammation 
arises from violence, it gives little or no pain. A man shall be shot 
through the cavity of the abdomen, and if none of the contained parts are 
materially hurt, the adhesive inflammation shall take place in all the in-
ternal parts contiguous to the wound made by the ball, and yet no great 
degree of pain shall be felt. This assertion is still proved by the little pain 
suffered after many bruises, where there is evident inflammation; and in 
simple fractures, the pain from the the inflammation is very trifling, what-
ever it may be from the laceration of the parts. But this will be ac-
|P_288
cording to the degree of inflammation, what stage it is in, and what parts 
are inflamed, as will be fully explained hereafter. 

We find it a common principle in the animal machine, that every part 
increases in some degree according to the action required. Thus we find 
muscles increase in size when much exercised; vessels become larger in 
proportion to the necessity of supply, as for instance, in the gravid uterus; 
the external carotids in the stag, also, when his horns are growing, are 
much larger than at any other time; and I have observed, that in inflam-
mation, the vessels become larger, more blood passes, and there appear to 
be more actions taking place; but the nerves do not seem to undergo any 
change. The nerves of the gravid uterus are the same as when it is in 
the natural state; neither do the branches of the fifth and seventh pair of 
nerves in the stag become larger; and in inflammation of the nerves, their 
blood-vessels are enlarged, and have coagulating lymph thrown into their 
intestines, but the nerve itself is not increased so as to bring the part to 
the state of a natural part, fitted for acute sensation, which shews that the 
motions of the nerves have nothing to do with the œconomy of the part, 
they are only the messengers of intelligence and orders. It appears that 
only the actions of the materia vitæ in the inflamed parts is increased, and 
this increase of action in the inflamed part is continued along the nerve 
which is not inflamed, to the mind, so that the impression on the senso-
rum is, probably, equal to the action of the inflamed materia vitæ. 

The quantity of natural sensibility is, I believe, proportioned to the 
quantity of nerves, under any given circumstance; but I apprehend, the 
diseased sensibility does not take place at all in this proportion, but 
in proportion to the diseased action of the materia vitæ. Thus a tendon 
has very little sensation when injured in a natural state; but let that ten-
don become inflamed, or otherwise diseased, and the sensation shall be 
very acute. 

It may not be improper to observe, that many parts of the body in 
a natural state, give peculiar sensations when impressed; and when those 
parts are injured, they give, likewise, pain peculiar to themselves; it 
is this latter effect, which I am to consider. I may also observe, that the 
|P_289
same mode of impression shall give a peculiar sensation to one part, while 
it shall give pain to another. Thus, what will produce sickness in the 
stomach, will produce pain in the colon. When the sensation of pain is 
in a vital part, it is somewhat different from most of those pains that are 
common. Thus, when the pain arises from an injury done to the head, 
the sensation is a heavy stupifying pain, rendering the person affected 
unfit to pay attention to other sensations, and is often attended with sick-
ness, from the stomach sympathizing with it. 

When the pain is in the heart or lungs, it is more acute, and is very 
much confined to the part diseased. 

When in the stomach and intestines, especially the upper part of them, 
it is a heavy oppressive sickly pain, but more or less, attended with sick-
ness, according to its pressure or proximity to the stomach; for when 
situated in the colon, it is more acute, and less attended with sickness. 

We cannot give a better illustration of this, than by taking notice of 
the effects of a purge. If we take such a purge as will produce both sick-
ness and griping, we can easily trace the progress of the medicine in the 
canal; when in the stomach it makes us sick, but we soon find the sick-
ness becoming more faint, by which we can judge that it has proceeded 
to the duodenum, and then a kind of uneasiness, approaching to pain, suc-
ceeds; when this the case, we may be certain that the medicine is passing 
along the jejunum; it then begins to give a sickish griping pain, which I 
conceive belongs to the ilium; and when in the colon it is a sharp pain, 
soon after which a motion takes place. 

The liver, testicles, and uterus, are subject nearly to the same kind of 
pain as the stomach. 

A tendon, ligament, and bone, give something of the same kind of pain, 
though not so oppressive; namely, a dull and heavy pain, often attended 
with some little sickness, the stomach generally sympathizing in such 
cases. 

But the skin, muscles, and the cellular membrane, in common, give an 
acute pain, which rather rouses than oppresses, if not too great. All of 
this will be further mentioned when we treat of each part. 

|P_290
One cause of this variety of sensations, according as the parts inflamed, 
are vital or not vital, seems to consist in the different systems of materia vitæ 
with which those parts are supplied, having, probably, nerves peculiarly 
constructed for this purpose; for all the parts which are supplied with 
branches from the par vagum and intercostals, affect the patient with low-
ness of spirits from the very first attack of the inflammation: the actions 
of those parts are involuntary, and therefore are more immediately con-
nected with the living principle, and consequently that principle is affected 
whenever any thing affects these nerves. 

The other system of the materia vitæ, when affected by this inflamma-
tion, rather rouses at first the constitution, which shows signs of strength, 
unless the parts have rather weak powers of recovery, such as tendon, 
bone, etc. or are far from the heart, in which cases the signs of weakness, 
sooner or later, appear: hence it would seem that this difference in the con-
stitution, arising from the difference in parts and their situation, arises from 
the constitution having a disease which it cannot so easily manage, as it 
can in those parts which are not vital, and in parts that are near to the 
heart, which circumstances alone become a cause of irritation in the con-
stitution. 

[^A horizontal double-line in the middle of the page.^]
|P_521
[}PART IV. }]
[}CHAPTER I. }]
[}OF GUN-SHOT WOUNDS. }]
[^A long horizontal double-line in the middle of the page.^]
Gun-shot wounds may be said to be an effect of ainodern improve-
ment in offence and defence, unknown in the former mode of war, which 
is still practised where European improvements are not known; and it is 
curious to observe that fire-arms and spirits are the first of our refine-
ments that are adopted in uncivilized countries; and, indeed, for ages they 
have been the only objects that have been at all noticed or sought after 
by rude nations. It was not till the fourteenth century that gunpowder 
was made, or rather compounded; but it was not, till afterwards, applied 
to the purpose of projecting bodies. But even now, the wounds received 
in war are not all gun-shot wounds: some, therefore, are similar in many 
respects to those received in former times. 

The knowledge of the effect of gunpowder, and its application to the 
art of war, or the projection of bodies for the destruction of men, has been 
in some degree accompanied by improvements in the arts and sciences 
in general, and among others, that of surgery, in which art, the heal-
ing of wounds so produced, makes a material part. In France, more 
especially, the study of both were carried to considerable lengths; but 
though the art of destruction has been there improved and illustrated by 
writings, it is rather surprising that the art of healing should not have 
been equally illustrated in the same manner. Little has been written on 
this subject, although, perhaps, when we take every circumftance into 
|P_522
consideration, it requires particular discussionn; and what has been written 
is so superficial, that it deserves but little attention. Practice, not pre-
cept, seemed to be the guide of all who studied in this branch; and, if we 
observe the practice hitherto pursued, we shall find it very confined, being 
hardly reduced to the common rules of surgery, and therefore it was hardly 
necessary for a man to be a surgeon to practice in the army. 

[^A horizontal double-line in the middle of the page.^]
[}I. THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN GUN-SHOT WOUNDS AND COMMON 
WOUNDS. }]
Gun-shot wounds are named, as is evident, from the manner in which 
they are produced. From the frequency of their happening in the time 
of battle to a set of men appropriated for war, both by sea and land : and 
from the appointment of particular surgeons for their cure, they have been 
considered apart from other wounds, and are now become almost a dis-
tinct branch of surgery. 

Gun-shot wounds are made by the projection of hard obtuse bodies, the 
greatest number of which are musket-balls; for cannon-balls, pieces of 
shells and stones from ramparts in sieges, or splinters of wood, etc. when 
on board of a ship in an engagement at sea, can hardly have their effects 
ranked among gun-shot wounds, they will come in more properly with 
wounds in general. As the wounds themselves made by those very dif-
ferent modes will in general differ very considerably; any peculiarity that 
may be necessary in the treatment of gun-shot wounds, from those made 
by cannon-balls, shells, etc. or even common wounds, will generally be-
long to those made by musket-balls. 

The whole of gun-shot wounds will come within the definition of ac
cidents. They are a recent violence committed on the body; but they 
often become the cause of, or degenerate into a thousand complaints, 
which are the objects of surgery or physic, many of which are common to 
accidents in general, and to many other diseases; of this kind are abscesses, 
ulcerating bones, fistulæ; but some are peculiar to gun-shot wounds, as 
|P_523
calculi in the bladder from the ball entering that viscus, consumption 
from wounds in the lungs, which I believe rarely happens; for I cannot 
say I ever faw a case where such an effect took place. But it is the recent 
state in which they are distinguished, and in which they are to be con-
sidered as a distinct object of treatment. 

Wounds of this kind vary from one another, which will happen ac-
cording to circumstances; these variations will be in general according to 
the kind of body projected, the velocity of the body, with the nature and 
peculiarities of the parts injured. The kind of body projected, I have ob-
served, is principally musket-balls, sometimes cannon-balls, sometimes 
pieces of broken shells, and very often on board of ship, splinters of 
wood. Indeed, the effects of cannon- balls on different parts of the ship, 
either the containing parts, as the hull of the ship itself, or the contained, 
are the principal causes of wounds in the sailor; for a cannon-ball must 
go through the timbers of the ship before it can do more execution than 
simply as a ball, (which makes it a spent ball) and which splinters the 
inside of the ship very considerably, and moves other bodies in the ship, 
neither of which it would do if moving with sufficient velocity; musket 
or cannon-balls seldom doing immediate injury to those of that profession. 
The wounds produced by the three last bodies will be more like many 
common and violent accidents, attended with much contusion and lace-
ration of parts. 

Gun-shot wounds, from whatever cause, whether from a musket-ball, 
cannon-ball, or shell, etc. are in general contused wounds, from which 
contusion there is most commonly a part of the solids surrounding the 
wound deadened, as the projecting body forced its way through these solids, 
which is afterwards thrown off in form of a slough, and which prevents 
such wounds from healing by the first intention, or by means of the ad-
hesive inflammation, from which circumstance most of them must be al-
lowed to suppurate. This does not always take place equally in every 
gun-shot wound, nor in every part of the same wound; and the difference 
commonly arises from the variety in the velocity of the body projected; for 
we find in many cases, where the ball has passed with little velocity, 
which is often the case with balls, even at their entrance, but most com-
|P_524
monly at the part last wounded by the ball, that the wounds are often 
healed by the first intention. 

Gun-shot wounds, from the circumstance of commonly having a part 
killed, in general do not inflame so readily as those from other accidents; 
this backwardness to inflame will be in the proportion that the quantity of 
deadened parts bear to the extent of the wound; from which circum-
stance the inflammation is later in coming on, more especially when a 
ball passes through a fleshy part with great velocity; because there will 
be a great deal deadened, in proportion to the size of the wound; there-
fore inflammation in gun-shot wounds is less than in wounds in general, 
where the same quantity of mischief has been done; and this, also, is in 
an inverse proportion to the quantity of the parts deadened, as I have al-
ready explained in my introduction to inflammation, viz. that inflamma-
tion is less, where parts are to slough, than where parts have been destroyed 
by other means. On the other hand, where the ball has fractured some 
bone, which fracture in the bone has done considerable mischief to the 
soft parts, independent of the ball, then there will be nearly as quick in-
flammation as in a compound fracture of the same bone, because the 
deadened part bears no proportion to the laceration or wound in general. 

From this circumstance, of a part being often deadened, a gun-shot 
wound is often not completely understood at first; for it is at first, in 
many cases, impossible to know what parts are killed, whether bone, ten-
don, or soft part, till the deadened part has separated, which often makes 
it a much more complicated wound than at first was known or imagined; 
for it very often happens, that some viscus, or a part of some viscus, or a 
part of a large artery, or even a bone, has been killed by the blow, which 
does not show itself till the slough comes away. If, for instance, it is a 
part of an intestine that has received a contusion, so as to kill it, and which 
is to slough, a new symptom will most probably appear from the sloughs 
being separated, the contents of the intestine will most probably come 
through the wound; and probably the same thing will happen when any 
other containing viscus is in part deadened; but those cases will not be so 
dangerous, as if the same loss had been produced at first, for by this time all 
communication will be cut off between the containing and contained parts; 
|P_525
nor will it be so dangerous as when a considerable blood-vessel is deadened; 
for in this case, when the slough comes off, the blood, getting a free 
passage into the wound, as also out of it, probably death will immedi-
ately follow. If this artery is internal, nothing can be done; if in an ex-
tremity, the vessel may be either taken up, or probably amputation may 
be necessary to save the person's life; therefore an early attention should 
be paid to accidents, where such an event is possible. In case of a bone 
being deadened, an exfoliation takes place. 

Gun-shot wounds are often such as do much mischief to vital parts, the 
effects of which will be according to the nature of the parts wounded, 
and the violence of the wound; and also to parts, the soundness of which 
are essential either to the health of the whole, or to the uses of the parts 
wounded; such as some viscus, whose contents are voided through the 
opening, or joints, the disposition of which is slow to heal, and whose 
uses are impeded when healed. 

Gun-shot wounds often admit of being classed with the small and deep 
seated wounds, which are always of a particular kind respecting the cure. 

The variety of circumstances attending gun-shot wounds is almost end-
less; the following case may be given as an example. 

An officer in the navy was wounded by a pistol-ball, in the right side, 
about the last rib; it entered about five inches from the navel, and ap-
peared on the inside of the skin about two inches from the spinal process, 
having passed, I believe, in among the abdominal muscles. The only re-
remarkable thing that occured was, that the cellular membrane for some 
way about the passage of the ball was œdematous, and when I cut out the 
ball, air came out with it. 

[^A long horizontal double-line in the middle of the page.^]
[}II. OF THE DIFFERENT EFFECTS ARISING FROM THE DIFFERENCE 
IN THE VELOCITY OF THE BALL. }]
Many of the varieties between one gun-shot wound and another, arise 
from the difference in the velocity of the body projected; and they are 
principally the following. 

|P_526
If the velocity of the ball is small, then the mischief is less in all of 
them; there is not so great a chance of their being compounded with frac-
tures of the bones, etc. but if the velocity is sufficient to break the bone 
it hits, the bone will be much more splintered than if the velocity had 
been very considerable; for where the velocity is very great, the ball, as it 
were, takes a piece out; however, all this will also vary according to the 
hardness of the bone. In a hard bone the splinters will be the most fre-
quent. 

When the velocity is small, the direction of the wound produced by 
the ball, will, in common, not be so strait, therefore its direction not so 
readily ascertained, arising from the easy turn of the ball. 

When the velocity is small, the deadened part or slough is always less; 
for with a small velocity, a ball would seem only to divide parts, while 
when the velocity is great, the contrary must happen; from this circum-
stance it is, that the slough is larger at that orifice where the ball enters 
than where it comes out; and if the ball meets with a great deal of resist-
ance in its passage through, there will very probably be no slough at all 
at its exit, which will be therefore only a lacerated wound. 

The greater the velocity of the ball, the cleaner it wounds the parts, 
so much so as almost to be similar to a cut with a sharp instrument; from 
which circumstance it might be imagined, that there should be a smaller 
slough; but I suspect, that a certain velocity given to the best cutting in-
strument, would produce a slough on the cut edges of the divided parts; 
for the divided parts not giving way equally to the velocity of the dividing 
body, must of course be proportionally bruised. 

Gun-shot wounds are attended with less bleeding than most others; 
however, some will be attended with this symptom more than others, 
even in the same part; this arises from the manner in which the wound is 
produced: bleeding arises from a vessel being cut or broken; but the free-
dom of bleeding arises from the manner in which this is done: if the ar-
tery is cut directiy across, and it is done by a ball passing with a consider-
able velocity, it will bleed pretty freely; if bruised, and in some degree 
torn, then it will bleed less. When the velocity of the ball is small, the 
vessel will be principally torn, for they will have time to stretch before 
|P_527
the continuity of their parts gives way; but if it is great, they will bleed 
more freely, because velocity will make up for want of sharpness. 

According to the velocity of the ball so is the direction. When the ve-
locity is great, the direction of the ball will be in general more in a strait 
line than when it is small; for under such circumstances the ball more 
easily overcomes obstructions, and therefore passes on in its first di-
rection. 

Velocity in the ball makes parts less capable of healing, than when it 
moves with a small velocity; therefore gun-shot wounds in pretty thick 
parts are in general later of healing at the orifice where the ball enters, 
than at the orifice where it passes out; because it becomes in some degree 
a spent ball, the part having less slough, being only torn, which will often 
admit of being healed by the first intention. 

In cases where the ball passes through, and in such a direction as to have 
one orifice more depending than the other, I have always found that the 
depending orifice healed soonest, and more certainly so is the ball came 
out that way, and also if the ball had been pretty much spent in its pas-
sage; therefore it will require art to keep the depending orifice open, if 
thought necessary; but this circumstance of its being a spent ball, will not 
always happen, because if the person is near the gun when fired, the velo-
city of the ball will be very little diminished in its progress through the soft 
parts; and therefore it will have nearly the same velocity on both sides. 

This fact of the lower orifice healing soonest, is common to all wounds, 
and I believe is owing to the tumefaction which generally arises from the 
extravasated fluid always descending to the lower part, and being retarded 
at the lower orifice, it is as it were stopped there, and presses the sides 
of the wound together, obliging it to heal, if the parts have not been 
deadened; this is evidently the case after the introduction of the seaton in 
the hydrocele, especially if the two orifices of the seaton are at some 
distance; but in the hydrocele there is a more striking reason for it; for 
in this disease, the extravasated fluids are wholly detained about the lower 
orifice, as there is no depending part for the fluid to descend to. 

|P_528
[}III. OF THE DIFFERENT KINDS OF GUN-SHOT WOUNDS. }]
Gun-shot wounds may be divided into the simple, and the com-
pound. Simple, when the ball passes into, or through the soft parts only: 
the compound will be according to the other parts wounded. 

The first species of compound, are those attended with fractures of the 
bones, or with the wound of some large artery. 

The second species of compound wounds is, where the ball penetrates 
into some of the larger circumscribed cavities. This last, or penetrating 
wound, may be doubly complicated, or may be divided into two. First, 
simply penetrating; and, secondly, where some viscus or contained part, 
as the brain, lungs, heart, abdominal visera, etc. is injured; all which 
cases will be taken notice of in their proper places. 

|P_529
[}CHAPTER II. }]
[}OF THE TREATMENT OF GUN-SHOT WOUNDS. }]
[^A horizontal double-line in the middle of the page.^]
It has been hitherto recommended, and universally practised by almost 
every surgeon, to open immediately upon their being received, or as soon 
as possible, the external orifice of all gun-shot wounds made by musket-
balls; so much has this practice been recommended, that they have made 
no discrimination between one gun-shot wound and another; this would 
appear to have arisen, and to be still continued, from an opinion that 
gun-shot wounds have a something peculiar to them, and of -course are 
different from all other wounds, and that this peculiarity is removed by 
the opening; I own that I do not see any peculiarity. The most pro-
bable way of accounting for the first introduction of this practice, is from 
the wound in general being small, and nearly of a size from one end to 
the other; also the frequency of extraneous bodies being forced into 
these wounds by the ball, or the ball itself remaining there; for the way 
in which these wounds are made, is by the introduction of an extrane-
ous body which is left there, if it has not made its way through, so that 
the immediate cause of the wound makes a lodgment for itself; often car-
rying before it cloathes, and even the parts of the body wounded, such as the 
skin, etc. from hence it would naturally appear at first view, that there was 
an immediate necessity to search after those extraneous bodies, which very 
probably led the surgeon to do it; and in general the impossibility of find-
ing them, and even of extracting them when found, without dilatation, gave 
the first idea of opening the mouths of the wounds; but, from experience, 
they altered this practice in part, and became not so desirous of searching 
after these extraneous bodies; for they found that it was oftener impossibleimpossi
ble to find them than could at first have been imagined, and when found that 
|P_530
it was not possible to extract them, and that afterwards these bodies 
were brought to the skin by the parts themselves, and those that could 
not be brought to the external surface in this way, were such as gave 
little or no trouble afterwards, such as balls; yet they altered this prac-
tice only so far as respected the attempt to extract extraneous bodies, for 
when they found from experience, that it was not necessary nor possible 
to extract these immediately, yet they did not see that it therefore was not 
necessary to take the previous or leading steps towards it. 

The circumstance I have mentioned, of gun-shot wounds being con-
tused, obliges most of them to suppurate, because in such cases there is 
more or less of a slough to be thrown off, especially at the orifice made 
by the entrance of the ball; there is, therefore, a freer passage for the 
matter, or any other extraneous substance, than the same sized wound 
would have, if made by a clean cutting instrument, even if not allowed to 
heal by the first intention. 

From all which, if there is no peculiarity in a gun-shot wound, I 
think this of dilating them as a general practice should be rejected at 
once, even were it only for this reason, that few gun-shot wounds are 
alike, and therefore the same practice cannot apply to all. 

This treatment of gun-shot wounds is diametrically opposite to a prin-
ciple which is generally adopted in other cases, although not understood 
as a general rule, which is, that very few wounds of any kind require sur-
gical treatment at their commencement, excepting with an opposite view 
from the above, viz. to heal them by the first intention. 

It is contrary to all the rules of surgery founded on our knowledge of 
the animal œconomy to enlarge wounds simply as wounds; no wound, 
let it be ever so small, should be made larger, excepting when preparatory 
to something else, which will imply a complicated wound, and which is 
to be treated accordingly; it should not be opened because it is a wound, 
but because there is something necessary to be done, which cannot be ex-
ecuted unless the wound is enlarged. 

This is common surgery, and ought also to be military surgery respect-
ing gun-shot wounds. 

|P_531
As a proof of the inutility of opening gun-shot wounds as a general 
practice, I shall mention the cases of four Frenchmen, and a British sol-
dier, wounded on the day of the landing of our army on the island of Bel-
lisle; and as this neglect rather arose from accident than design, there is no 
merit claimed from the mode of treatment. 

Case I. A. B. was wounded in the thigh by two balls, one went 
quite through, the other lodged somewhere in the thigh, and was not 
found while he was under our care. 
II. B. C. was shot through the chest; he spit blood for some little 
time. 
III. C. D. was shot through the joint of the knee: the ball entered at 
the outer edge of the patella, crossed the joint under that bone, and came 
out through the inner condyle of the os femoris. 
IV. D. E. was shot in the arm: the ball entered at the inside of the in-
sertion of the deltoid muscle, passed towards the head of the os humeris, 
then between the scapula and ribs, and lodged between the basis of the 
scapula and spinal processes, and was afterwards extracted. The man's 
arm was extented horizontally when the ball entered, which accounts for 
this direction. 
These four men had not any thing done to their wounds for four days 
after receiving them, as they had hid themselves in a farm-house all that 
time after we had taken possession of the island; and when they were 
brought to the hospital, their wounds were only dressed superficially, and 
they all got well, 

A grenadier of the 30th regiment was shot through the arm, the ball 
seemed to pass between the biceps muscle and the bone; he was taken 
prisoner by the French. The arm swelled considerably, they fomented 
it freely, and a superficial dressing only was applied. About a fort-
night after the accident he made his escape, and came to our hospital; but 
by that time the swelling had quite subsided, and the wounds healed; 
there only remained a stiffness in the joint of the elbow, which went off 
by moving it. 

|P_532
[}I. OF THE PROPRIETY OF DILATING GUN-SHOT WOUNDS. }]
It would be absurd for any one to suppose that there is never occasion 
to dilate gun-shot wounds at all; but it is certain there are very few in 
which it is necessary. It will be impossible to determine by any general 
description what those are that ought to be opened, and what those are 
that ought not, that must be left in a great measure to the discretion of 
the surgeon, when once he is master of the arguments on both sides. 

Some general rules may be given with regard to the more simple cases; 
but with regard to the more complicated, the particular circumftances of 
each case are the only guide; and they must be treated according to the 
general principles of surgery. 

Let us first give an idea of the wound that would appear to receive no 
benefit from being dilated; and first of the most simple wounds. 

If a ball passes through a fleshy part where it can hurt no bone in its 
way, such as the thick of the thigh, I own, in such a simple wound, I 
see no reason for opening it; because I see no purpose that can be an-
swered by it, except the shortening of the depth of the wound made by 
the ball, which can be productive of no benefit. If the ball does not pass 
through, and is not to be found, opening can be of as little service. 

If the opening in the skin should be objected to, as being too small, 
and thereby forming an obstruction to the exit of the slough, etc. I 
think that in general it is not; for the skin is kept open by its own elas-
ticity, as we see in all wounds; this elasticity, muscles and many other 
parts have not; and in general the opening made by a ball is much 
larger than those made by pointed instruments; for I have already ob-
served, that there is often a piece of the skin carried in before the ball, 
especially if it passed with considerable velocity, besides the circular slough; 
so that there is really in such cases a greater loss of substance; there-
fore, whatever matter or extraneous body there is, when it comes to the 
skin, it will find a free passage out. Nor does the wound in the skin in 
|P_533
general heal sooner than the bottom; and, indeed, in many cases not so 
soon, because the skin is generally the part that has suffered most. 

However, this is not an absolute rule, for the skin sometimes heals first; 
but I have found this to be the case as often where openings had been 
made, as in those where they had not; and this will depend upon cir-
cumstances or peculiarities; such as the bottom being at a considerable 
distance, with extraneous bodies, and having no disposition to heal, tend-
ing to a fistula; and I have observed in those cases, that the wound or 
opening made by the surgeon generally skinned to a small hole before the 
bottom of the wound was closed, which brings it to the state it would 
have been in, if it had not been dilated at all, especially if there are ex-
traneous bodies still remaining; for an extraneous body causes and keeps 
up the secretion of matter, or rather keeps up the disease at the bottom of 
the wound, by which means the healing disposition of its mouth is in 
some degree destroyed. 

Let me state a case of this last description. Suppose a wound made 
with a ball; that wound (from circumftances) is not to heal in six 
months, because the extraneous bodies, etc. cannot be extracted, or work
 out sooner, or some other circumstance prevents the cure in a shorter time; 
open that wound as freely as may be thought necessary, I will engage 
that it will be in a month's time in the same state with a similar wound 
that has not been opened, so that the whole advantage (if there is any) 
must be before it comes to this state; but it is very seldom that any thing 
of consequence can be done in that time, because the extraneous bodies 
do not come out at first so readily as they do at last, for the inflamma-
tion and tumefaction, which extends beyond that very opening, gene-
rally keeps them in; and if the wound is opened on their account at first, 
it ought to be continued to the very last. Upon the same principle, open-
ing on account of extraneous bodies at first cannot be of so much service 
as opening some time after; for the suppuration, with its leading causes, 
viz. inflammation and sloughing, all along the passage of the ball, makes 
the passage itself much more determined and more easily followed; for 
the want of which, few extraneous bodies are ever extracted at the be-
ginning, excepting whit are superficial, small, and loose. 

|P_534
If the extraneous bodies are broken bones, it seldom happens that they 
are entirely detached, and therefore must loosen before they can come 
away; also the bones in many cases are rendered dead, either by the blow 
or by being exposed, which must exfoliate, and this requires some time; 
for in gun-shot wounds, where bones are either bruised or broke, there is 
most commonly an exfoliation, because some part of the bone is deadened, 
similar to the slough in the soft parts. 

A reason given for opening gun-shot wounds is, that it takes off the 
tention arising from the inflammation, and gives the part liberty; this 
would be very good practice if tention or inflammation were not a conse-
sequence of wounds; or it would be very good practice, if they could 
prove that the effects from dilating a part that was already wounded were 
very different, if not quite the reverse of those of the first wound; but as 
this must always be considered as an extention of the first mischief, we 
must suppose it to produce an increase of the effects arising from that 
mischief; therefore this practice is contradiaory to common sense and 
common observation. 

They are principally the compound wounds that require surgical ope-
rations, and certain precautions are necessary with regard to them, which 
I shall here lay down. 

As the dilatation of gun-shot wounds is a violence, it will be necessary 
to consider well what relief can be given to the parts or patient by such an 
operation; and whether without it more mischief would ensue; it should 
also be considered what is the proper time for dilating. 

But it will be almost impossible to state what wound ought, and what 
ought not be opened; this must always be determined by the surgeon, 
after he is acquainted with the true state of the case and the general prin-
ciples; but from what has been already said, we may in some measure 
judge what those wounds are that should be opened, in order to produce 
either immediate relief, or to assist in the cure: we must have some other 
views than those objected to, we must see plainly something to be done 
for the relief of the patient by this opening, which cannot be procured 
without it, and if not procured, that the part cannot heal, or that the 
patient most probably must loose his life. 

|P_535
The practice to be recommended here will be exactly similar to the com-
mon practice of surgery, without paying any attention to the cause as a 
gun-shot wound. 

One of the principal points of practice will be to determine at what pe-
riod of time the dilatation should be made. 

First, if the wound should be a slight one, and should require opening, it 
will be better to do it at the beginning, before inflammation comes on; 
for the inflammation, in consequence of both, will be slight; but in slight 
cases dilatation will never be necessary, except to allow of the extraction of 
some extraneous body that is near. But if the wound is a considerable one, 
and it should appear upon consideration, that you cannot relieve imme-
diately any particular part, or the constitution, then you can gain no-
thing by opening immediately, but will only increase the inflammation, 
and in some cases the inflammation arising from the accident and opening 
together, may be too much for the patient; under this last circumstance, it 
would be more advisable to wait till the first inflammation ceases, by which 
means the patient will stand a much better chance of a cure, if not of his 
life; therefore it is much better to divide the inflammations; however, it 
is possible that the inflammation may arise from some circumstance in the 
wound, which could be removed by opening it; for instance, a bill, or 
broken bone pressing upon some part whose actions are either essential to 
the life of the part or the whole, as some large artery, nerve, or vital part; 
in such the case will determine for itself. 

On the other hand, it may, in many cases be better to remove the whole 
by an operation, when in such parts as will admit of it, which will be 
taken notice of. 

Secondly, if an artery is wounded, where the patient is likely to become 
either too weak, or to loose his life from the loss of blood; then, certainly 
the vessel is to be tied, and most probably this cannot be done without 
previously opening the external parts, and often freely. 

Or thirdly, in a wound of the head, where there is reason to suspect a 
fracture of the scull, it is necessary to open the scalp, as in any other com-
mon injury done to the head where there was reason to suspect a fracture, 
|P_536
and when opened, if a fracture is found, it is to be treated as any other 
fractured scull. 

Fourthly, where there are fractured bones in any part of the body that 
can be immediately extracted with advantage, and which would do much 
mischief if left, this becomes a compound fracture wherever it is, and it 
makes no difference in the treatment, whether the wound in the skin was 
made by a ball, or the bone itself, at least where the compound fracture is 
allowed to suppurate; for there is often a possibility of treating a com-
pound fracture as a simple one, which gun-shot fractures, if I may be 
allowed the expression, seldom will allow of; but where the compound 
fracture must suppurate, there they are very similar. However, there 
have been instances where a fracture of the thigh-bone made by a ball 
has healed in the same way as a compound simple fracture. 

Fifthly, where there is some extraneous body which can with very 
little trouble be extracted, and where the mischief by delay will probably 
be greater than that arising from the dilatation. 

Sixthly, where some internal part is misplaced, which can be replaced 
immediately in its former position, such as in wounds in the belly, where 
some of the viscera are protruded, and it becomes necessary to perform 
the operation of gastroraphia; which is to be done in this case in the 
same manner as if the accident arose from any other cause; but the 
treatment should be different; for gun-shot cases cannot heal by the first 
intention, on account of the slough that is to ensue. 

Or, seventhly, when some vital part is pressed, so that its functions are 
lost or much impaired, such as will often happen from fractures of the 
scull, fractures of the ribs, sternum, etc. in short, when any thing can be 
done to the part after the opening is made for the present relief of the 
patient, or the future good arising from it. If none of these circumstances 
has happened, then I think we should be very quiet. Balls that enter any 
of the larger cavities, such as the abdomen or thorax, need not have their 
wounds dilated, except something else is necessary to be done to the 
contained parts, for it is impossible to follow the ball; therefore they are 
commonly not opened, and yet we find them do very well. 

Balls that enter any part where they cannot be followed, such as into 
|P_537
the bones of the face need not have the wound in the skin in the least 
enlarged, as it can give no assistance to the other part of the wound, which 
is a bony canal. The following cases are strongly in proof of this, being 
respectively instances of both modes of practice. 

[}case first.}]
I was sent for to an officer who was wounded in the cheek by a ball, 
and who had all the symptoms of an injured brain; upon examining the 
parts, I found that the ball had passed directiy backwards through the 
cheek-bone; therefore, from the symptoms and from the direction of the 
wound, I suspected that the ball had gone through the basis of the scull 
into the brain, or at lead had produced a depression of the scull there: I 
enlarged the external wound, and with my fingers could feel the coronoid 
process of the lower jaw; I found that the ball had not entered the scull, 
but had struck againd about the temporal process of the sphenoid bone, 
which it had broke, and afterwards passed down on the inside of the lower 
jaw. With small forceps I extracted all I could of the loose pieces of 
bone; he soon recovered from his stupor, and also from his wound. 
The ball afterwards caused an inflammation at the angle of the lower jaw, 
and was extracted. The good which I proposed by opening and search-
ing for extraneous bodies and loose pieces of bone was the relieving of the 
brain; but as the ball had not entered the scull, and as none of the bones 
had been driven into the brain, it is most probable that I did no good by 
my opening; but that I could not foresee. 

[}case second.}]
An officer received a wound by a ball in the cheek, (which in this case 
was on the opposite side) the wound led backwards, as in the other; by 
putting my finger into the wound I felt the coronoid process of the lower 
jaw, as in the former; but he had no symptoms of an injured brain; I 
therefore advised not to open it, because the reason for opening in the pre-
ceding case did not exist here; my advice was complied with, and the 
wound did well, and rather better than the former, by healing sooner. 
The ball was never found, so far as I know. 

|P_538
The present practice is not to regard the balls themselves, and seldom 
or ever to dilate upon their account, nor even to search much after them 
when the wound is dilated, which shews that opening is not necessary, or 
at least not made upon account of extraneous bodies. 

This practice has arisen from experience; for it was found that balls, 
when obliged to be left, seldom or ever did any harm when at rest, and 
when not in a vital part; for balls have been known to lie in the body for 
years, and and are often never found at all, and yet the person has found no 
inconvenience. 

This knowledge of the want of power in balls to promote inflam-
mation when left in the body, arose from the difficulty of finding them, 
or extracting them when found; and therefore in many cases they were 
obliged to leave them. 

One reason for not readily finding the ball at first is, because the parts 
are only torn and divided, without any loss of substance, (till the slough 
comes off) by which means the parts collapse and fall into their places 
again, which makes it difficult to pass any thing in the direction of the 
ball, or even to know its direction. The different courses they take, by 
being turned aside by some resisting body, add also to the difficulty; as will 
be explained. 

But the course of a ball, if not perpendicular, but passing obliquely and 
not very deep a little way under the skin, probably an inch or more, is 
easy to be traced through its whole course, for the skin over the whole 
passage of the ball generally is marked by a reddish line. I have seen 
this redness, even when the ball has gone pretty deep; it has none of the 
appearances of inflammation, nor of extravasation, for extravasation is of 
a darker colour, and what it is owing to, I have not been able to discoverdis-
cover. I can conceive it to be something similar to a blush; only the 
small vessels allowing the red particles of the blood to flow more easily. 


[^1. 
* It may be here remarked, that the action of vessels is commonly supposed to be con-
traction, either by their elastic or muscular coats; but I have shewn that their elastic power 
also dilated them; and I have reason to believe their muscular power has a similar effect. 
^]
[^2. 
* When this appearance is seen any where after death, it should not be called inflam-
mation, even although we knew it was the first action of inflammation; for as we are then 
only looking out for the causes of death, or the symptoms prior to death, we are only to look 
out for such as can be a cause, and not lay hold of those that cannot possibly be a cause, 
which those first actions cannot be. 
^]
[^3. 
The tunica conjunctiva of the eye when inflammed, is a striking instance of this; but the 
visible progress of inflammation I have already described in the experiment on the dog. 
^]
[^4. 
† How far a nerve from a part, or how far the materia vitæ of a part, can act so as to con-
vey sensation I do not know; but we all know that an involuntary action of a voluntary
muscle, or the spontaneous action of an involuntary muscle will produce it. 
^]
[^5. 
* This is very evident in the bladder of urine when inflamed, for in the contraction of that 
viscus to expel the urine, there is more pain than in the dilatation; indeed, the distention 
is gradual, and when the urine is wholly evacuated, the irritation produced by the contraction 
still continues, which produces a continuance of the straining. 
^]