[^Geminus, Thomas: Compendiosa totius anatomie delineatio^] 
 
[}COMPENDIOSA 
totius Anatomie delineatio, ære 
exarata: per Thomam Geminum. 
LONDINI. 1553.}] 
 
[^Omitted a dedication to Prince Edward VI by Thomas Geminus and to readers and surgeons of England by Nicholas Udall.^] 
[^Extract 1, ff.A1r-A5v^] 
 
[^f.A1r^] 
[}The fyrste parte of thys treatyse of 
Anatomie/ wherein is conteyned a 
ompendious or briefe rehersal of al and singuler the partes 
of Mans body, whiche shall herafter be set furth to the 
eye, in figures most lyuely representyng the same, 
with their proporcions, shape and facions, euen 
all as by the practise cuttynge in Anatomie 
it is founde.}] 
 
[}A diuision of the bodye into foure princypall partes. Chapitu. j.}] 
 
THe bodye of man (in describyng 
wherof we intende by the grace 
of god to trauaile) is deuided in 
to foure pryncipall partes, that 
is to wete, the Head, the Breste, 
the Belye, and the other membres 
called all together in the 
latyn terme, Artus, in englyshe, 
Lymmes, which are the Armes, the Handes, the Legges 
and the Fete. &c. The heade, beyng called of many 
men the vppermoste Uentricle, doeth ende where 
the necke begynneth. And the Heade conteyneth the 
partes belongynge to the Soule. The Brest, whych 
they also cal the mydle Bealy or ventricle, and somtymes 
the vpper bealy (as in the eyght and thirtyeth 
Aphorisme of the seuenth boke) begynneth at the two 
Canyl bones, & reacheth to the Mydriffe. And is enclosed 
on eyther syde with rybbes, and doeth conteyne 
the vitall partes of the bodye. The neythermoste 
bealy, in the whiche the naturall partes are conteyned, 
doeth reache from the midriffe, to the bone aboue 
the priuye membres. The fourth parte of the deuision 
called Artus, is the Legges and the Handes. &c. 
 
[}Of the nethermost bealy. Capi. ij.}] 
 
ANd for so muche as the partes conteyned 
in the neythermoste bealy can 
in no wyse longe contynue or endure 
whan y=e= lyfe is once disseueryd from 
the body, without stynck & noysome 
sauours, wherof often times aryseth 
suche corruption and lothsomnes, so contagious to 
the handlers therof, that none maye approche therunto 
to make demonstracion of any membre or parte 
therof, wythout greate disease, molestacion and peryll: 
Therfore we shall fyrste take in hande therupon 
to worke oure feate, and to treate of the partes conteyned 
in the neythermoste bealye, wherby their nature, 
their differences, their state and vse maye be 
sene and knowen. Fyrste, all the whole region of the 
bealy on the outer syde is called of the Grecians Epigastrion, 
and of the Latynes Abdomen, and of the Arabians 
Mirach, which Arabian name Mirach (fyrste 
for lacke of a more conuenient and peculyer worde) 
and than to flee the tediousnesse of circumloquntion, 
and thyrdely, because it is already a terme familiarly 
knowe~ to al Surgions that are any thyng skilful, 
we shal also occupie in this our Englysh translation, 
or els y~ Greke terme Epigastrion. And thys Mirach (as 
we are taught by Galen in y~ seuen and .xxx. Aphorisme 
of the seconde boke) is deuided into thre partes, 
that is to wete, into Hypochondria or Precordia, whiche is 
the hyghest parte therof, nexte the rybbes of the brest 
or the sharpe gristle: The seconde is the partes about 
the nauell: The thirde is the parte nexte aboue 
the priuye membres, called Imum ventris, as ye would 
saye in englyshe, the botome of the bealy. And thus it 
is apparent that the nauyll is placed in the myddes, 
as it were the roote or Centre, and iuste myddes to al 
the bodye, hauynge the parte aboue hym called, Hypochondria, 
departed into two collaterall partes beynge 
bothe vnder the rybbes, lyenge aboue the lyuer, & the 
Splene or mylt. Lykewise is y~ part beneath y~ nauyl 
deuided into two collaterall partes lyenge on either 
syde to the two haunche bones, and the emptye or 
voyde parte from the neithermoste rybbe of the brest 
to the haunche bone. And therin lieth the hongry gut. 
and it, that is called in Latyn Mesenterium, in Englyshe 
the Mouget or [^ORIG. BLURRED^]_iddyng. And y~ thynne or small entrelles, 
otherwyse called the small guttes, be they whych 
Galen in Greke calleth Kheneonas. And the mydle betwene 
the thynne entrelles and the bone aboue the priuy 
membres, is called in Latyn Sumen and imus venter. 
And the laste parte therof, where it endeth is named 
in Greke Ephibaion, in Latyne Pubes, or Aqualiculus & it is 
the place nexte adioynaunt to the heere of the priuye 
membres. 
 
[}Of the skynne. Capitu. iij.}] 
 
THe skynne, that compasseth and enwrappeth 
al y~ bodye, is called of the 
Grekes Derma, & in Latyn Cutis. And it 
is of diuers nature & propertye, in 
certen places of the body, and varieth 
accordynge to the parte or membre 
of the bodye whereon it lyeth. For the skynne of 
the Palmes of y~ handes, of the Sooles of the fete, of 
the Forehead, and almoste of all the whole face, yea, 
and of some other partes also, can in no wyse be stayne 
by reason of muscles. And tendons graft and rooted 
into it, as Galen wryteth in hys seconde booke 
entiteled de vsu partium, that is to saye, of the vse of the 
partes of the body. And thys skinne it is, that is called 
the true skynne in dede, the vppermoste or vtmoste 
parte whereof, is called in Greke Epidermis, and 
hathe in it of it selfe no sence nor felynge, as witnesseth 
Galen in the thyrde boke and the fourteneth of 
[^f.A1v^] 
hys worcke entytled, howe to cure diseases and syckenesses. 
There is also another skynne lyenge vnder 
thys skynne, and it is called Ym_[^ORIG. BLURRED^] in the Greke 
language, and in the commune Latyne terme 
that the Phisicians and Surgions vse, panniculus 
carnosus, that is to saye, the fleashy pannicle or couerynge, 
vnto whiche and through whyche the vaynes 
that nourishe the skynne, with the fibres or stringes 
of the synowes arysynge from the sinowye partes 
there under lyinge, and geuynge sense or felynge 
to the skynne, doe procede and come: and thereby is 
the skynne as it were tyed and knytte to the partes 
that are vnder it, as Galen teacheth in the begynning 
of hys thyrde boke of admynistrynge Anatomye, and 
in the syxtenth of the vse of partes. 
 
[}Of the fatte whych in Latyn is called Adeps. Capi iiij.}] 
 
THe fatte called of the Grecians Pimelibi 
requireth in no wise any sinowes, 
and it is sprede abrode in partes of 
the bodye, lyke fatte oyle betwyxte 
the thynne skynnye partes, and the 
partes that hathe synowes, to the 
ende that the sayde sinowes beynge of nature drye, 
maye throughe that natyue and natural liquour perpetuallye 
be moystered. And fatte is engendred or 
made of the fatter part of the bloud being streygned 
through smal thyn veynes: And when it is once contoyned 
with the colde and drye partes, it congealeth 
togyther. Wherefore in colde conplexyoned folkes 
it is aboundaunt: And in suche as are hotte of complexion, 
it is verye skante, or none at all. As Galen 
declareth in the .xvi. of the vse of partes, and in the 
ende of hys worcke entytled, de temperamentis, that is to 
saye, of complexions. 
 
[}Of Mirachor epigastrion. Capitu. v.}] 
 
THat same parte also whiche the Grekes 
call Epigastrion, and the Arabians call Mirach, 
and y~ Latynes Abdomen (as is afore 
sayde) is a compounde membre of foure 
thynges, that is to wete, of the skynne without furth, 
of fatnes of the aforesayde fleashy pannicle called of 
the Grecians Hymen, and of musclous substaunce. 
And it is to be vnderstanded, that all the whole substaunce 
conteyned frome peritoneum outwarde, is comprehended 
vnder the name of Mirach, accordynge 
to the mynde of Galen, who commaundeth in all 
woundes of the belly or wombe, to sowe the Siphach 
with Mirach. Whereby it is to be taken as a thynge 
proued, that all without Siphach is Mirach. And in 
thys Mirach are to be noted eyghte muscles, whereof 
there are two commynge downe longwyse frome 
the sharpe gristle or shylde of the stomacke where 
they fyrste begynne, vnto the bones aboue the priuy 
membres, whyche bones are called Ossa pectinis. There 
be also other two muscles called Latitudinales, that is 
to saye, lyinge in bredth commynge from the backe 
vpwarde towarde the bealye or wombe, and than be 
ther foure muscles y~ lye crossewise euen ouerthwart: 
where of two spryngen from the rybbes on the ryght 
[^ORIG. BLURRED^]_yde, and procedynge to the lefte doe parte, and reach 
to the bones of the haunches, and to the sayde bones 
aboue the pryuye membres. The other two sprynge 
from the rybbes on the lefte syde, and so passe ouer 
the bealye or wombe, as dyd the other, to the ryghte 
partes. And here is to be noted, that by the vertue 
and propertye that is in the muscles, whiche as afore 
is sayde come downe longwyse, is made the power 
attractiue. And of the muscles that runne croswyse, 
commeth the power retentiue. And by the muscles 
that lye on breadeth is made the vertue to expel and 
to voyde. And throughe the vertue or power attractiue 
is drawen downe aswel by the entrailes as other 
wyse, all the superfluities of the digestions, as the 
vrine or water, the wynde, and the earthye excrementes. 
And throughe the vertue retentiue, all thynges 
are vpholden, kepte and conteyned, tyll that nature 
hath wroughte and done in them her kynde and office 
of digestion. And by the vertue expulsiue, is put 
furthe and expelled suche thynges as nature commaundeth 
or prouoketh to be done. And Galen affirmeth 
in hys treatise de iuuamentis, that all woundes 
or incisions made in the myddes of the wombe are 
more peryllous then those on the sydes, for because 
the partes on the sydes are more apte to be handled 
and more easye to be taken fourth of the entraylles, 
then the myddle partes be. And it is also taughte vs 
that the woundes percynge the wombe, wyll scacely 
receaue anye newe growynge of fleashe, excepte 
Mirach be sewed to Siphach. 
 
[}Of Siphach whych the Grekes call Peritoneon. Ca. vj.}] 
 
NOwe nexte within thys Abdomen or 
Mirach is conteyned Siphach, whiche 
is a certayne rymme or pa~nicle, 
or couerynge. And it is a membre 
spermatike, that is to saye sedie, and 
euerye parte thereof is of one substaunce, 
nature and effyce. It is also sensible and 
quycke of felynge, it is full of sinowes, and of subtyll 
and fine operacion. And of complexion it is colde and 
drye, hauynge his begynnyng at the inner pannicle 
of the mydriffe, where also spryngeth didimus, as it 
shalbe sayde withinfourth. Siphach was ordayned 
because it shoulde continue and bynde together all 
the bowelles and entrailles and suche lyke partes 
within it: and to defende the muscles, that they compresse 
not the naturall partes and membres vnder 
it. It is also stronge and toughe, to the ende that it 
may not lightlye be broken, whereby the thynges 
therein conteyned shoulde fortune to goe fourth, as 
it happeneth often tymes to theym that are bruste, 
and that haue their bowels hangynge out. 
 
[}Of the partes conteyned within the sayde 
skynne and rymmes. Capitu. vij.}] 
 
NExt vnder the sayde Syphach or Peritoneu~, 
is conteyned Omentum or zirbus, whiche in 
the tables of y~ figures we name y~ Caule. And 
it is a fatte pannicle or couerynge, whiche encloseth 
and enwrappeth the stomacke or ventricle, with y~ entraylles 
also. And it is enbrodred wyth many veynes 
[^f.A2r^] 
and arteries, and greate substaunce of fatnes 
prepared for to moysten and to preserue the partes 
withinforth. Thys Caule is and officiall membre, and 
is compounde of many veynes and arteries, whych 
entre and make a longe lyne of the vtter tunicle or couerynge 
of the stomacke, vnto the whyche tunicle 
hangeth the Caule, couerynge all the guttes or entralles 
downe to the share. And two causes we fynde 
why they were thus ordeyned. One is, that they 
shoulde defende the nutrites from offence withoutforth. 
The other is, that through his owne thyckenes 
he shoulde strengthen and comforte the digestion of 
the sayd nutrites, sith they are much more febler then 
the other membres, for they haue but thinne skinnes. 
&c. And nexte to thys Caule, doe the bowels or guttes 
appeare: of the whiche Galen in hys fourth booke 
de iuuamentis and the seconde chapyter declareth, and 
sayeth: that the guttes in their fyrste creation were 
ordayned to conuey downe the drosse or refuse of 
the meate and dryncke that we receyue, and to clense 
the bodye of their superfluites. And you shall here 
vnderstand that there are syxe porcions of one whole 
gutte (althoughe they haue sondrye names) and that 
in euerye man and beaste, the sayde Gutte taketh his 
begynninge at the neather mouthe of the Mawe or 
Uentricle, and so continueth forth with diuers wyndynges, 
foldynges and tournynges, to the ende of the 
foundement, neuerthelesse he hathe diuerse shapes 
and fourmes, as he hath dyuers operacions in the 
bodye: And therfore hath he dyuers names. And here 
vpon sayeth the Philosopher in the fyrste de historia animalium, 
that the lower wombe of a man is lyke vnto 
the wombe of a swyne. And lyke as the Mawe or 
Uentricle hathe two tunicles or cotes of skynne to 
couer it: euen so haue all the guttes two tunicles, in 
whyche they are enclosed. And the fyrst porcion of the 
gutte is called Duodenum, because he is twelue ynches 
in length, and he couereth the neather parte of the 
stomacke or ventricle, and receyueth all the drosse. 
The seconde porcion of the gutte is called Ioinim, or 
the hungry gutte, because he is euermore emptye, for 
to hym lyeth continuallye the lytle bladder of coler, or 
the cheste or purse of galle, alway beatynge hym, and 
drawynge forth of hym all the drosse; and vtterlye 
clensynge hym frome all kynde of excrementes. The 
thyrde porcion or gutte is called Ileon or the thinne entrayle 
whych is a smal & a longe thya gutte, and conteyneth 
in length fyftene or sixtene cubites. And in 
thys gutte often tymes falleth a passion or disease 
called Iliaca passio. The fourth gutte is called Monoculus 
or the blynde gutte, whiche we call in Englyshe the 
one ended gutte, because it semeth to haue but one 
holle or mouthe: But yet in dede it hathe two, the one 
nere vnto the other, for by the one goeth in all thynges, 
and by the other they goe forth agayne. The 
fyfth is called Colon, and it receyueth all the drosse fro~ 
the other beynge cleane purged or purified from all 
the profitable iuice. And therfore the veynes called 
Mesaraicæ, come not to hym as they doe to the other. 
The syxte and last parte of thys gutte, is called Intestinum 
rectum or Longaon, in Englyshe we call it the straite 
entrayle or y~ arse gutte, & thys endeth at the holle in 
the foundement, & he hath in hys neather ende foure 
muscles, to holde, to open, to shutte, and to put forthe. 
As you shal moore playnelye perceaue here after in 
the figures. And ye shal note that there come to euerye 
tournynge of the guttes certayne sinowes frome 
the sixe coniugacion or payres y~ come from y~ brayne. 
And these sinowes serue bothe for the felynge and 
also for the expellynge or voydynge of the excrementes. 
Mesenterium a notable texture or enweauynge of 
innumerable veynes and arteries, whiche are called 
Mesaraicæ, & of some authours they are named Lactes, or 
the fyrste veynes, frome whome is drawen the nutrimente 
out of the stomacke, and caried to the gates 
of the lyuer. And these veynes doe ramifie and sprede 
abrode in braunches out of the veyne called, Porta epatis. 
And it is couered and defended with pannicles 
and ligamentes beynge common to the entrayles 
with the backe therof also beynge full of gladulous 
fleashe or full of kyrnels. 
 
[}Of the Ventricle or Stomacke. Capi. viij.}] 
 
THe Uentricle called commonlye in 
Englyshe the Stomacke, is a membre 
compounde & spermatyke, synowye, 
quycke and light of felyng. And 
therein is made perfecte the nutrymente 
of the fyrste digestion called 
Chilus. Thys is a membre muche necessarye to al the 
body, for yf it fayle in hys operacio~ or worckyng, the~ 
al y~ me~bres of y~ body do afterward fal to corruptio~. 
And therfore Galen in the fyrste chapter of hys boke 
de iuuamentis and also the Philosopher in the firste de 
historia animalium, declare the Stomacke to be ordeyned 
chiefelye for two principall causes: The one is, 
that it shoulde be to all the membres of the bodye, 
as the earth is to al thynges engendred on the same, 
so that the other membres of all the whole bodye 
shoulde of it require their sustenaunce, and sufficient 
nouryshinge. The other is, that this Uentricle or 
Stomacke shoulde be as a sacke or cheste, or as a 
store house for all the meate belongyng to the bodye, 
yea, and the Cooke also or dresser of the meate to all 
the partes of the body. Thys Stomacke is constituted 
or made of two pannicles, of the whyche the innermore 
is synowye, and the vtter is fleshye. Thys 
inner pannicle hathe longe muscles lyinge on length, 
and stretcheth longe wyse frome the Stomacke or 
Uentricle to the mouthe thereof, and thys mouthe of 
some men is named Mery, and of some other it is 
called the necke of the Mawe. But of the Grekes 
it is called Stomachus, and with thys the Uentricle fetcheth 
or reacheth into hym the meate form the mouth 
as it were with handes. He hathe also certayne muscles 
lyinge ouerthwart or crossewyse, in whiche is a 
propertye or power to holde and to make retention. 
And also the vtter pannicle lyeth in bredth and hath 
power or vertue to expulse and putre out whe~ season 
shal require. It hath also much carnositie or fleasheynesse, 
that there by with heate there withal ioyned, it 
should helpe the vertue digestiue of the Stomacke. 
And the same effecte he worcketh also by other heates 
geuen to hym by hys neyghburs, as thus, for it 
hathe the lyuer on the ryghte syde, chafynge hym 
[^f.A2v^] 
wyth hys wynges or sydes, to encrese naturall heate, 
in hym: and the Splene on hys lyfte syde with hys 
fattenes and veynes sendynge to hym the melancolique 
humour, therewith to styrre and to prouoke his 
apetyte: and aboue hym is the hearte, quickenynge 
hym wyth hys arteries. And the brayne also sendeth 
to hym a braunche of synowes to geue hym felynge. 
And he hathe on the hynder parte descendynge frome 
the partes of the backe certayne ligamentes wherewyth 
he is bou~de or fastened to the spondylles or turnynge 
ioyntes of the same. The shape or fygure of 
the Stomacke is endelonge after the maner of a 
gourde, croukynge vpwarde, and bothe the holes 
or mouthes thereof, are on the vpper parte of the 
bodye of it, to the ende that there by nothyng shoulde 
passe forth vnaduiselye. The quantitie of the Stomacke 
holdeth mooste commonlye two pitchers of 
wyne. And it maye suffre manye passions. The neather 
mouthe of the sayde Uentricle or Stomacke, is 
bothe narower and strayghter then the vppermouth, 
and that for thre causes. The fyrste is, because the 
vpper mouthe receyueth meates greate and boysteous 
in substaunce not fyned nor made small. 
The seconde is, because that by the neather mouthe 
passeth from the Stomake to y~ lyuer, the meate after 
the fyrste digestion, when it is brought to Chylus, as afore 
is sayd. And the thyrde cause is, that the sayd seconde 
or lower mouth shoulde not wythoute wyll, let 
passe the drosse and refuse of the meate into the guttes, 
before it be fully clensed and digested. But when 
you shal take thys Uentricle or Stomacke out of the 
body, the partes adiacent beyng consydred, ye muste 
bynde the necke therof wyth a poynte or strynge, that 
the sauoure therof maye not anoye theym that stande 
by, and loke vpon it. And whan ye haue seperated it 
frome the bowels, washe it dilygentlye, and then may 
you meete or measure it with water, to be assured 
how much in quantitie it wyll holde. And you shal see 
the fourme or shape thereof in the .13 14 15 and 16 fygures 
of the partes of Nutritio~, hereafter folowing. 
 
[}Here foloweth the Lyuer. Capitu. ix.}] 
 
THe Lyuer is a principall membre 
and offyciall, and of hys fyrste creation 
spermatyke, complete in quantitye 
of bloude, and of it selfe insensible. 
Yet neurthelesse, by accedentall 
causes it hathe a felynge in it. And 
in the Lyuer is made the seconde digestion, and he is 
lapped in a synowye pannicle. And that he is a pryncypall 
membre it is recorded in the fourtenth booke 
of the partes of beastes. And lykewyse in the songe 
or verses of Auicen. And also Galen in the thyrde 
Chapter and the fourth booke entytled de iuuamentis. 
And y~ he is offyciall nedeth no profe. He is also spematyke, 
and synowye in substaunce, of the whyche are 
engendred hys veynes. And because the Lyuer was 
but lytle in quantitie, Nature hath added to it curded 
bloude to the accomplyshment & performaunce of a 
suffycient qua~titie. Besyde this he is bewrapt in a synowie 
pa~nicle. And y~ he is curded, is because it shulde 
geue colour to the humiditie or moystie pappe of 
Chilus, whyche commeth to hym frome the Stomacke 
and shoulde tourne it into the colour of bloude. 
And the Lyuer is ordeyned, that in hym shoulde 
be transfourmed or engendred the bloude nutrimentall. 
And the Lyuer is moste conuenientlye placed 
ouer the Stomacke somwaht declynynge vnder the 
rybbes on the ryghte syde. And it is fourmed gybbous 
or bunchynge out on the backesyde, and holowe 
on the insyde, lyke the insyde of the hande. And the 
cause why it is so shapen, is, that it shoulde aplye to 
the Stomacke or Uentricle as the hande doth to an 
apple, thereunto ayde and comforte digestion with 
his heate and worckynge as the fyre doeth vpon the 
potte or cauldron hangynge ouer it. And the Lyuer 
is also bounde with hys pellicles or small skynnes, to 
the mydriffe, and also with stronge ligame~tes. And it 
hathe also a certayne knyttynge or tyinge together 
wyth the Uentricle & the Entrayles, with the Hearte, 
the Raynes, the Testicles or Stones, and diuerse other 
membres. And there are in the Lyuer fyue pellicles 
or skynnes with cleftes like vnto fyue fingers. 
And in Galen in the laste Chapter of his treatyse of 
naturall powers, the Lyuer is called Massa sanguinis vinaria 
conteynynge in it selfe .ii. substaunces, natural, 
and nutrimental. And in the seconde boke de Alimentis 
is declared, that the nutrimentalles sprede abrode 
with the bloude, to nouryshe and to be transfourmed 
into the substaunce of the partes wherunto is apperteyneth, 
the other iuyce as wel naturall, as excrementall, 
is sequestred and separated into places thereunto 
prepared for sondrye considerations, for the 
place of humours is in the Lyuer aswell as of the 
bloude. The yelowe or citryne coloure in the Uessicle 
or Cheste of the Galle, the blacke colour or melancolye 
hathe the Splene, the Flegme, the Pulme and 
the Ioynctures. But the wateryshe and superfluous 
humours are cast downe to the Raynes & the Bladder, 
which also go some time with the bloude, where if 
they be aboundante and rottyng they brede feuers or 
agues, of suche nature, qualitie and name, as is the 
preminaunt humour connexed with theym. And some 
are putte out to the skynne, to be resolued by vapourous 
sweates or exhallations, some tyme by scabbes, 
scurfe, puscles or wheales, apostemes and such lyke. 
And these foure naturall humoures, that is to saye, 
Bloude, Flegme, Colour, and Melancolye are engendred 
and distributed after thys maner. Fyrste, 
you shall vnderstande that frome the spermatycke 
substaunce of the Lyuer withinforth, are engendred 
two great veynes, of whome the fyrste and the greatest 
is called Vena porta, and he commeth from the cauitie 
or holow syde of the Lyuer, from whom spryngen 
al the small veynes called Mesaraice, & these Mesaraice 
be to Vena porta as the brauches of a tree are to 
the bodye or stocke of the same, for some of them be 
conteyned with the bothom of the Uentricle, some 
with Duodenum, some with Ieiunum, some with Ileon, and 
some wyth the one eyed gutte called some tyme the 
sacke. And from all these guttes they brynge the succositie 
or iuice pappe of Chilus whiche descended vnto 
them from the Stomacke, distributynge it in the substau~ce 
or body of y~ Lyuer, & these veynes, called Mesaraice, 
are almost innumerable, because yf any thing 
shoulde scape from the one of them, yet shoulde the other 
catche it, and receaue it. And in these veynes is 
[^f.A3r^] 
begonne the seconde digestion, and ended in the Lyuer, 
lyke as y~ fyrste was in the Stomacke. And thus 
is it manifeste that these veynes Mesaraice serue 
to brynge the iuice or humiditie of the meate and 
dryncke that passed or scaped the Stomacke to the 
Lyuer. And they sprede them selues abrode through 
the substaunce of the Lyuer, and also they al stretche 
towarde the Gybbous part y~ bosseth out to the outwarde 
Conuexited or bolle of the Lyuer. And there 
they mete and goe all into one, and beynge so vnited 
and ioyned together, they make the seconde greate 
veyne, called Vena chilis or Vena concaua, and it is called of 
some men Vena ramosa. And thys veyne wyth hys rootes 
draweth out all the bloude engendred in the Lyuer, 
and wyth hys braunches ramifiynge vpwardes and 
downewardes, he caryeth or conueyeth the same to al 
the other membres of the bodye, therewith to nourish 
and fulfyll theym, and in them is made the thyrde 
digestion. There go also frome the Lyuer other veynes 
and colatures, bearyng the superfluities of third 
digestion to theyr proper places, as it shal hereafter 
be declared. And in administring Anatomie y~ Lyuer 
is taken out next after the Splene. 
 
[}Here foloweth of the Vessicle or Bladder 
of Coler. Capitu. x.}] 
 
NOw to speake of the Galle or y~ Uessycle 
of yelowe color. We haue learned 
that it is an offyciall membre, 
beynge bothe spermatycke and synowye, 
and hathe in it selfe subtyll disposition, 
and it consisteth lyke a 
purse or a panniculer bladder. In the holowe syde of 
the Lyuer, aboute the myddle lob or particion of the 
Lyuer, there ordeyned to receyue the colericke superfluitie 
engendred in the sayde Lyuer, the whyche 
purse or vessycle hathe thre holles or neckes, of the 
whyche by the firste, he draweth to hym from the Liuer 
the colerycke humour, that the bloude be not infected 
or noyed therwyth. And by the seconde holle 
or necke he sendeth coler to the bothom of the Stomacke, 
therein to ferder the same makyng decoction. 
And by the thyrde necke, he sendeth Coler orderlye 
from one gutte to another to clense them of the drosse 
or superfluitie of the meate. And that is the cause 
that colerycke persons be more laxatiue than men of 
other complexions. And thys Uessycle may conteyne 
in quantitye aboute halfe a pynte. 
 
[}Here foloweth of the Splene. Capit. xj.}] 
 
THe Splene otherwise called y~ Milt, 
is a spermaticke me~bre & officiall as 
other membres be. And it is the receptacle 
of the mela~colicke humoure 
or blacke Coler, enge~dred in the Liuer. 
And in Lio~s, Dogges, Wolfes, 
and suche other stronge and hotte beastes it obteyneth 
a blacke or swortyshe colour, but in a Swyne or 
other beastes, whyche are colder and moyster, it is 
more whiter, as Galen teacheth in y~ sixth of administryng 
Anatomie, and in the fourth de metode Medendi, 
Furthermore, hys place is on the lefte syde crossewyse 
embrasynge and halsynge the Stomacke 
whole substaunce is rare & thynne and muche after 
the fashion of a spounge, at the lefte wyse as touching 
hys holonesse, and hys porositie. And two causes I 
fynde wherfore the Splene was ordeyned and there 
placed. The fyrste is, that by the melancolious superfluities, 
whiche he draweth from the Lyuer, he is 
there nouryshed and fedde. The seconde cause is that 
the good nutritiue bloude by suche drawynge of the 
adust and noughtye qualyties frome hym shoulde 
therby be clensed and made pure from his dregges & 
refuse & mela~colyke grosse thickenes, wherby the co~plexion 
myght be hurted & altered, if this me~bre were 
not. Moreouer, the cote wherin y~ Splene is lapped, 
is broughte frome Peritoneum, not as a bande, but 
as a cote, enclosynge in euerye place hys skymy substaunce. 
The Splene also receyueth a small synowe 
frome the syxth knyttyng of the Brayne, lykewise as 
the Reynes, and the Uessicle of Coler. And in takynge 
forth the bowels, ye shall suffre the Lyuer 
and the Splene to remayne in the bodye tyll ye haue 
consydered the procedynge of the vesselles from the~ 
to the other membres. 
 
[}Of the Reynes or Kydneys. Cap. xij.}] 
 
WYthin y=e= regio~ of y~ nutrites vnder y~ 
Matrix behyndforth, be~ ordeyned & 
placed the Reynes to mundifie and 
purge the bloude, from hys waterish 
superfluities. And they haue eche of 
them two passages conueyaunces or 
wayes, by the one is drawen the waternesse or superfluous 
moysture from Vena chilis, and that by two veynes 
whyche are called Emulgentes or mylkynge veynes 
beinge of the length of a mannes fynger, and descendynge 
from the lyuer. And by the other is sende 
the selfe humiditie or moysture to the bladder, and 
they are called Pori vritides or vretici. The substaunce of 
the Kydneys are lacerteous fleashe, hauynge a propertie 
to stretch out in length. And their place is behynde 
on eche syde of the spondils or tournynge ioyntes 
of the loynes, beynge two in numbre. And the 
ryghte Kydneye lyeth somewhat hygher then the 
lefte, and is bounde faste to the backe with ligamentes. 
And the Philosopher sayeth that the Kydneyes 
of a man are muche lyke to the Kydneyes of a 
Cowe, for they are full of harde knottes, hauynge in 
them manye finall cauities or holowe places, as it 
were certayne celles. And therefore, the soores or 
vlcers in theym are verye harde to cure. And they 
are also moore harde in substaunce than anye other 
fleashye membre of the bodye. And that for two causes, 
the one is, that they maye not be peryshed or 
hurte by the sharpenesse of the vrine. The other is, 
that the sayde vrine whiche passeth throughe and 
from theym, maye be altered and clensed or scoured 
throughe theyr soliditie and massiuesse. Also there 
commeth from the Hearte to eche of the Kydneyes, an 
arterye that bryngeth vnto them bloude, heate, spirite 
and lyfe. And in the same maner there commeth 
a veyne from the Lyuer, that bryngeth vnto theym 
nutrimentall or nouryshinge bloude. The greace or 
[^f.A3v^] 
fatnesse of these Kydneyes is lyke to the substaunce 
of the fatte on the other membres therwithin. Thys 
greace is an officiall membre, made of thynne bloude 
congeyled and crudded throughe colde, lyke as they 
are sometyme dissolued throughe immoderate heate. 
And there is the moore or greater quantitie of fatte 
aboute these Kydneyes, partelye to tempre and moderate 
theyr heate, & partely to prohibit and let the vryne, 
left wyth hys sharppe bytynge, it myghte frette 
and make rawe the substaunce of them. And betwene 
the Kydneyes on y~ tournyng ioyntes, crepeth Venachilis, 
or the holowe veyne, beynge there a veyne of great 
substaunce, for he receyueth all the nutrimentall 
bloude frome the Lyuer. And from hym passen forth 
manye small pypes or braunches on euerye syde. 
And at y~ tournyng ioyntes betwixt the shoulders he 
deuideth him selfe whole into .ii. great armes or boughes, 
the one of them going to y~ one arme, & the other 
into the other arme, there deuydynge them selues into 
manye veynes & brau~ches, as it shalbe lyuely expressed 
hereafter in the seconde fygure of veynes, whereunto 
you maye resorte to beholde his vniuersall delineation 
or discription howe it is set forth. 
 
[}Of the lower parte of the bealy or wombe, 
called the Haunches. Capitu. xiij.}] 
 
THys lower parte of the bealye is closed in 
on bothe the sydes, wyth the two Haunche 
bones. And in it are thre thynges princypallye 
to be noted. The fyrste is, of the partes 
conteyned withoutfurth: The seconde is of the 
partes conteyned withinforth. And the thyrde is, of 
the partes procedynge outwarde from within. The 
partes conteyned withoutforth, are parte of Abdomen 
and Peritoneum, otherwyse named Mirach, and Syphach, 
as is afore sayde, with the caule and the bones. 
The partes conteyned withinfurth, are the Uessicle or 
Bladder of vryne, the vessels spermatycke, the Matryx 
in women, Intestinum rectum or the arsegutte, with 
also the synowes, veynes and arteries. The partes 
procedynge outwardes, are Dindimus Peritoneum, the 
Buttockes and the Muscles descendynge to the thighes, 
whyche shall here after be spoken of in order. 
And as for the partes conteyned withoutforth as Abdomen, 
Peritoneum and the Caule, it is sufficientlye spoken 
of before. And therefore, we shall nowe speake 
somwhat of the bones, whyche are also of the partes 
conteyned withoutforth. 
 
[}The discription of certayne bones belongynge 
to thys place. Capitu. xiiij}] 
 
WE shall fyrste speake of the bones of 
the backe called the Spondylles or 
turnynge ioyntes, whiche are in numbre 
thyrtye wherof the fyrste are called 
in Latyne Vertebræ ceruicis, whyche 
are the Spondyls in the necke, the 
seconde are in the backe agaynst y~ brest, and therfore 
they are called Vertebræ thoracis. The .iii. part are co~teined 
in the Loynes, the rest are in the holy bone, and 
after some authours, there are thre of the Spondyls 
in the rumpe bone. But howe manye of these bones 
are conteyned in euerye parte you shall here after 
learne in the declaratio~ of the Caracters and figures 
of the bones. And it is to be noted that euerye one of 
the tournyng ioyntes are holowe in the myddes wher 
throuhe passeth the marey of the backe, called Nucha, 
from the brayne. And some authours saye that 
there is no differe~ce in substau~ce, betwene this marey 
of the backe and the brayne. And thys marey of the 
backe geueth to the synowes bothe the power of mouynge 
and also of felynge. And euerye one of these 
tournynge ioyntes hathe holes on euerye syde thorowe 
y~ whyche procede bothe arteries and veynes 
bryngynge from the Hearte and lyuer both lyfe and 
nouryshynge, lyke as they do to the brayne. And from 
the pannicle of the Marey in the backe, through the 
holes at the sydes of the spondyls spryngen furth the 
synowes that geue and cause mouyng. And ther they 
associate them selues wyth the stronge lygamentes, 
whyche be of them selues withoute sence or felynge, 
and geue to the sayde ligamentes felynge lyke as 
they receyued it of the Marey descendynge in the 
Spondyls. And for thys cause Nucha is iudged to be 
of the substaunce of the brayne, and the pannicles 
therof to be also of lyke substau~ce with y~ pannicles of 
the brayne. Moreouer, eche of these turnynge ioyntes 
or Spondyls are bounde faste one to another: 
so that one of them maye not well be moued without 
the other. And the continuation or lynkynge and 
tyinge of these bones togyther is called of many the 
rydge bone, whyche is the foundation and fourme or 
shape of the bodye. And wyth the laste ioyntes of the 
backe are framed or ioyned the Haunche bones. And 
they are the vpholders, and as it were proppes to 
beare vp all the tournynge ioyntes in the backe. 
And these bones are small towarde the tayle or 
rumpe, and brode towarde the Haunches, and these 
bones make Ossa pectinis, whyche are the bones aboue 
the priuye membres, they are also brode agaynst the 
thinne entrailes. And therfore are they called of some 
men Ossa Ilia. And eche of these bones towarde 
the share hathe a great rounde hole, in which is receyued 
the whyrle bone. And besydes that place also is a 
geat hole or a waye where through proceden from aboue 
diuers muscalous, veynes, and arteryes, whych 
passe throughe that waye to the thighes. And thus is 
it to be noted that of thys bone Ilion or Pecten and of the 
whyrle bone bothe together is made the ioynt of the 
thyghe. 
 
[}Of the partes conteyned wythinforth, 
and fyrste of the Bladder. Cad. xv.}] 
 
THe fyrste thynge that commeth to 
syghte in the neather partes of the 
bealye, is the Bladder or Uessicle of 
bryne, whych is an offyciall membre, 
and compounded of two sinowye pannycles. 
And it is in complexion colde 
and drye, whose necke is fleashye, and hath much to 
witholde and to lette go. And in men it is longer, and 
is conteyned with the yarde, passing through Peritoneum. 
But in women it is shorter, and is conteyned with 
[^f.A4r^] 
in the shape for the necke therof passeth throughe the 
necke of the Matrix within the body, as it appeareth 
in the nynth figure of the Matrix. The Bladder is 
placed betwene the bone of the share and the arsgut, 
called Longa_[^ORIG. BLURRED^]n or the streyght gutte. And in women 
it is betwene the sayde bone of the share and the Matrix, 
beinge in it enplanted two longe veynes commynge 
fro~ the Kydneyes, as it appeareth in y~ second 
figure of womens shape. And the names of theyr 
two veynes, are called of moste wryters Pori vretici or 
els Venæ vretedes, bryngynge wyth them the vryne or 
pisse from the kydneyes into the bladder, which priuely 
and subtylly entreth into the bladder by the thynne 
rymes, chimes, or pores and holes of the pannicles 
there, by a naturall mouyng betwene tunicle and tunicle, 
& thus the vrine fyndeth an issue and so falleth 
priuely into the cauitie or purse of the bladder. And 
the more y~ bladder is fulfylled wyth vryne y~ streyghter 
be the two tunicles pressed together. For the holes 
of the tunicles are not the one euen agaynst the 
other, & therfore, be the bladder neuer so full, yet may 
none rebounde backe agayne. The fourme of y~ bladder 
is round and conteyneth in quantitie almoste the 
measure of a pytcher, howbe it in some men more and 
in some men lesse. There are also founde two other 
veynes called the Vasa seminaria, that is to saye, the 
seede vessels, and they come frome Vneachilis bryngynge 
from thence bloude into the testicles or stones, 
aswell in man as in woman, in whome by ferther degestion 
it is in man made sparme, that is to saye, the 
seede of nature, and they be put to muche outwardes 
because the testicles are withoute. But in women it 
abydeth within because their testicles are placed with 
in, as it apeareth here after. And next to the vessicle is 
sene the Matrix, as it appeareth here after in the 
fygures and tables of womans bodye. 
 
[}Here foloweth of the Matrix. Capit. xvi.}] 
 
THe Matrix or chambre in woman is 
an officiall membre compunde and 
full of synowes and in complexion 
colde and drye, and it is the house or 
receptacle of mans generation being 
ordeyned to receaue, take, conserue 
and nouryshe the sede of man. It is situat betwene 
the Bladder, and the streyght entrailes. The fourme 
or shape therof is as it were a mans yarde turned inwarde. 
It hathe two armes commynge frome the 
sprynge toppe of the testicles, whiche in approchunge 
thyther caste furth sondrye braunches, as ye maye see 
in the seconde and fourth figures of women. It hath 
in it two concauites or holowe celles and nomore, as 
farre as we can fynde by cuttinge, not withstandyng 
the dyuersytye of opinions, of certayne wryters: But 
all other beastes haue as manye celles as they haue 
pappe heades. It hath also a longe necke lyke an vrynal: 
and in the necke it hath two mouthes, that is to 
wete, the one within, and the other wythoute. The innermore 
lyeth iuste and faste to the bealye thereof, or 
at the ioynynge of the necke to the bealye, whiche in 
the time of conceptio~ shutteth close together. But the 
outer remayneth styll open as it dyd before, and thys 
outer mouthe is called Vulua, or the womans shape. 
It is placed betwene the thyghes, and hathe in the 
myddes a lasarteous pannicle, called in the Latyne 
tongue, Tentigo. And in the creation of thys pannicle, 
is founde two vtilities and purposes that it serueth 
for. The firste is, that by it goeth forth the vrine, whiche 
otherwyse myght shede or defile the partes adlacent. 
The seconde is, that whan a woman doeth 
sprede her thighes, it altereth the ayre that entreth 
into the Matrix to moderate and temper the heate 
there, and in lykewyse doth it in cold seasons, helpe to 
kepe forth the colde. Ferdermore, the necke that is betwene 
these two mouthes, hathe in her concauitie manye 
inuolutions and plightes or foldinges, rolled 
and pleited together in maner of roseleaues are before 
they be rype or spredde abrode. And they are after 
conception shutte together in maner of a purse, 
and from thence furth do no moore open tyll the tyme 
of chylde byrth. And aboute the meddle of this necke 
be certayne veynes in maydens, whyche in tyme of 
theyr fyrste lyinge with man are corrupte and by reason 
therof are in mediatelye broken. Ferdermore, in 
the sydes of the outer mouthe of the Matrix within, 
are two tisticles, or stones with two seede vessels also, 
whiche seede vessels in women are more shorter then 
the seede vessels in man, whiche in the arte or worcke 
of generation, shed downe the sparme into the botome 
of the Matrix. There are also diuers veynes commynge 
downe frome the Lyuer to the Matryx, which 
brynge thyther nutriment to nouryshe the cholde 
whyle it remayneth within the mothers wombe. And 
those veynes what tyme the Matrix is voyde, bryngeth 
thyther the superfluous bloude from certayne 
membres of the body wherof are engendred womans 
floures, wherby their bodyes are purged and delyuered 
from greuous diseases. And thys Matrix beynge 
taken furth, we vse to slytte the substaunce therof 
that we may behold y~ wrinckles and inwarde partes 
that maye be viewed therEof. There are also in 
the substaunce of the Matrix dyuerse skynnes or inwrappers, 
as ye shall perceyue in the fyfth, syxth, seuenth 
and eygth fygure of the same, in the booke 
here folowynge. 
 
[}Of Embrio. Capitu. xvij.}] 
 
ANd nowe for asmuche as it hathe 
pleased almyghtye God to geue 
the knowledge of his high misteryes 
and worckes to hys treatures here 
lyuynge in thys worlde: It shall not 
be vnconuentent nor hurteful, but rather 
muche helpynge and beneficiall, to touche some 
what of the secrete operation of Nature, whiche God 
hathe ordeyned for the generation of man, and deliuerynge 
of chyldren in thys world, for the continuaunce 
and propagation of mankynde to hys deuyne pleasure, 
so longe as shall lyke hys deuine maiestye. We 
shall therfore in this present treatyse somwhat touch 
and declare howe man is engendred in the mothers 
wombe, and howe it is there conserued and brought 
to lyfe. For declaration wherof, it is fyrste to be declared 
what Embrio is, so farre forth as it hathe pleased 
God to geue knowledge there of, by naturall reason 
and by Philosophie naturall. Embrio therfore as farre 
[^f.A4v^] 
as we haue learned of noble and excellent Philosophers 
wrytynge on thys matter) is a thynge engendred 
in the mothers wombe, the origynall whereof is 
the seede of man and of woman together, of whyche 
two is made the myghte and power of creatynge the 
infante within the mothers wombe, such is the goodnesse 
of God, who of hys vnsercheable wysdome and 
infinite omnipotencie, hath graunted thys so greate 
a benefite for y~ continual propagation, not onelye of 
man, but also of all beastes and lyuynge thynges to 
be preserued in theyr kindes, wherof we shal by gods 
grace here after speake moore at large. But for this 
present, firts y~ fielde of generatio~ called y~ Matrix, is 
knowen to be placed in woman betwene the Bladder 
and Longaon. In y~ whych place is sowen by the tyllage 
of man, a conuenable matier of kyndelye heate. For 
kyndelye heate or natural heate is the cause efficient 
bothe of doynge and worckynge, and also of spirite 
that geueth vertue and efficacie to the bodye, and gouerneth 
and ruleth the same in due temper. And the 
seede of generation cometh frome the partes of the 
bodyes of man and woman together, as by a naturall 
confent and effectual wyll of all the membres together. 
And thus is the sayd sperme and seede of Nature 
shedde in the place of conceyuynge. Where it is 
through y~ vertue of kynde gathered together in the 
celles of the Matrix, and in the same by the meane of 
the actiue operacion of mans seede, and by the waye 
of suffrynge of the womans seede, they are so together 
mixed, that eche of theym worcketh in other, and eche 
of them suffreth in other. And thus is engendred Embrio. 
And it is ferder to be noted that thys sperme or 
seede of nature that commeth bothe of man and woman, 
is made of the moste best and purest droppes of 
bloude that are in all the bodye. And by the laboure 
and chaffynge of the Testicles or stones, thys bloude 
is turned into another kynde, and is made sperme or 
seede of nature, as afore sayde, which is in man hotte 
of complexion, white of coloure, and thycke of substaunce, 
wherefore it maye not be spred, nor of it selfe 
runne abrode, but it renueth in takynge mixture of 
the womans seede, whyche hathe qualities contrarye 
to the seede of man, for the womans sperme is thynner, 
colder and febler. And (as some authours doe 
wryte) whan thys matter is gathered in the ryghte 
side of the Matrix, then there foloweth the fourmyng 
and creation of the Male kynde, and contrarywyse, 
whan it is gathered together in y~ left side of the Matrix, 
than commeth thereof perfourmed the Female 
kynde, and where the vertue is most, to that the worke 
enclyneth moste. And ferder it is to be noted, that as 
the renet of the cheese hath by it selfe the waye or vertue 
of worckynge hys feate, so hathe the mylke by 
waye of suffrynge. And as the renet and the mylke 
maketh the cheese, so doeth the sperme of man and woman 
make and fourme, by generation the Embrion, 
wherof commeth the chylde. And of the selfe same 
thynge within spryngeth by the vertue of kyndelye 
heate a certayne skynne or caule, whyche it lappeth it 
selfe in, wherewith afterwardes, it is tyed to the mothers 
wombe, & y~ couering cometh forth afterward at 
the byrth of the chylde. And yf it happen that anye of 
the skynne remayne wythin the woman after the 
byrth of the chylde, then is the woman in paryll of her 
lyfe. Furthermore, it is sayde that of thys Embrio is engendred 
the Hearte, the Lyuer, the Brayne, the Synowes, 
the Uaynes, the Arteries, the Cordes, the Ligamentes, 
Skinnes, Grystils and Bones receyuing 
to them by kindelye vertue the menstuall bloude, of 
the whyche also is engendred bothe fleashe and fatnesse. 
And (as y~ auncient wryters do specifie) the fyrst 
thynges that are shapen are the pryncypalles, as 
the Heart, the Lyuer and the Brayne. For of y~ Heart 
spryngeth the arteries, of the Lyuer the veynes, & of 
the Brayne the synowes. And whan these haue taken 
theyr fourme and shape, then Nature maketh and 
shapeth bones and grystels, to kepe, conserue and sustayne 
the same. As the bones of the heade for the 
brayne, the breste bones and the rybbes, for the heart 
and y=e= Liuer. And after these springen al other members 
one after another in suche order as is mooste 
requisyte and expedient for the bodye. 
And the chylde is bredde forthe in foure degrees, 
as thus. The fyrste is when the sperme or sede 
is lyke the substaunce of mylke. The seconde is, 
when it is turned from that kynde to another, whyche 
is lyke a lompe of bloude. And Hipocrates calleth 
this by the name of Feotus. The thyrde degre is 
when y~ principal partes are shapen, as the Hearth, the 
Lyuer and the brayne. The fourth and laste is, when 
all the resydue of the membres be perfectlye shapen. 
For then the Philosophers holde, that it receyueth 
soule, lyfe and breath, for then it begynneth to moue it 
selfe alone, whiche without the thynges afore sayde it 
coulde not doe. Nowe in these foure degrees afore 
sayde, it continueth in the fyrste degrees afore 
sayde, it continueth in the fyrste (as mylke) by the 
space of seuen dayes. In the seconde (as Feotus) nyne 
dayes. In the thyrde (lyke a lompe of fleashe engendrynge 
the pryncypals) by the space of twelue dayes. 
And in the fourth (which is to y~ ful tyme of perfection 
of all the whole membres it remayneth by the space 
of eyghtene dayes, and so by the accompte of diuerse 
Phisicions, there are syxe and fourty dayes, from the 
daye of conception to the daye of full perfection and 
receyuynge the due shape complete and the soule, but 
in that we submytte oure selues to the wysdome and 
prouident ordinaunce of hym that is the maker of all 
thynges, in whome onely is the premyses to ordeyne 
and determyne. And we shall here retourne agayne 
to the reste of the Inwardes conteyned in the haunches 
or neather parte of the bealy. 
 
[}Of the streyghte entrayle otherwyse called 
the arsgutte. Capitu. xviij.}] 
 
THys streyght entrayle called Longaon 
or the Arsgutte, lyeth betwene the 
Matryx and the backe, and it is of 
panniculer substaunce as all the other 
bowels are. And it is in length a 
good spanne, the vpper ende thereof 
stretcheth vp nyghe to the reynes, and hys neathe_[^ORIG. BLURRED^] 
parte is called of some men the towell. And aboute 
hym is founde two muscles, the one of them to open, 
and y~ other to shut. And there are also founde in hym 
fyue veynes or braunches of veynes, called Hemoroides 
whyche haue a colligation or knyttynge together 
[^f.A5r^] 
wyth the bladder, and therefore are they partakers 
together in theyr greuaunces or diseases. And when 
thys Longaon is raysed vp in administring Anatomie, 
them maye you see the veynes, arteries and synowes, 
howe they are braunched, & bowed downe to the neather 
partes. And concernynge ferder knowledge here 
in, you maye repayre to the fygures here after folowynge, 
and chiefelye in the eyghte and twenty fygure 
of the Muscles. 
 
[}Here foloweth of the partes procedynge 
outwarde, and fyrst of the Yarde. Ca. xix.}] 
 
THe Yarde or y~ me~bres generatiue in man are 
now to be spoke~ of, whych dure or co~tinue vnto 
the parte called Peritoneum, whiche place is from 
the coddes vnto the foundemente, wherein is sene a 
seame, & in y=e= fyrst boke of stories y=e= .vii. cap. y=e= Philosopher 
sheweth it to be placed at y=e= ende of y~ share. The 
Yarde is an officiall membre, and the tyller of mans 
generation, compou~de and made of skinne, brawnes, 
tendons, veynes, arteries, synowes and greate lygamentes. 
And it hathe in it two passages, canelles or 
princypal yssues, that it is to wete, one for the sperme 
or seede, and another for the vrine. And the Philosophers 
assigne therunto the quantitie or length of seuen 
or eyghte ynches commonlye, with proportionall 
and measurable bygnes accordynge to the capacitie 
of the Matrix. But the trueth is, that it varieth in 
euerye manne concernynge bothe those demensions. 
And Auicen affirmeth the Yarde to haue 
thre passages, holes or yssues, throughte the one to 
passe insensyble polition, and the wynde that causeth 
the erection of the Yarde, and the other two holes for 
vryne and seede, as is sayde afore. Moreouer the bodye 
of the Yarde hathe a skynne aboute it, where the 
heade or glandyll thereof is clothed with a double 
skynne called Preputium, whiche the Iewes vse to cutte 
of from theyr chyldren by the institution of their law. 
And thys skynne is mouable, for throughe the confrication 
thereof, the spermetyke moyster is the better 
and the sooner gathered together, and the sooner also 
caste forth from the testicles, by the Yarde into the 
Matrix, for by it is had the moore delectacion in doynge 
with the woman. And the formoste parte of the 
heade of the Yarde is made of a subtyll brawny flesh, 
whyche of it be once loste, it is syldome or neuer restored 
agayne, not wythstandyng y~ it maye be well cicatriried 
and skynnyed. Ferdermore, betwene that double 
skynne and the sayde toppe of the Yarde called 
the Glandyl, doeth often aryse a Pustyl, whiche longe 
continued infecteth the whole bodye. 
 
[}Of the purce conteynynge the Testicles 
called commonly the Coddes. Capit. xx.}] 
 
THys membre is also compounde and official, 
and though it be numbred amongest 
the generatiue membres, yet it is a pryncipal 
membre, for withoute it is not geueration, 
the Purse was onlye ordeyned for the custodye 
and comforte of the Testicles, and the other spermatyke 
vessels, and it is also made of two partes, 
that is to wete, of y~ inner & of the vtter, y~ vttermoost 
is compounde and made of skynne and lasaries runnynge 
bothe on length and also croswyse, in lyke 
maner as is y~ Myrach. The inner part therof is of y~ 
substau~ce of Siphach & in it is y~ similitude of .ii. pockettes 
drawen together by the~ selues, nothyng differynge 
from Siphach or Peritoneum, and they be made 
two for thys cause, y~ yf y~ one shoulde he hurt yet the 
other shoulde be preserued. The testicles or stones 
beinge within them conteyned or made or constitute 
of glandulous or kyrnellye fleashe. And ferdermore, 
there comen synowes frome the brayne throughe the 
Dindimus vnto the Testicles, and from the heart, arteries, 
and from the lyuer veynes, bryngynge to them 
bothe felynge, styrrynge, lyfe spirite & nurtimentall 
bloude, beyng the most purest bloude of al the membres 
of the bodye, wherof by decoction and laboure 
of the Testicles is made sperme or seede, whiche beyng 
put forth in dew tyme as is before rehearsed, geueth 
formal essence and power of encreacement to the 
fruite of generation. 
 
[}Of the Graynde or Share. Cap. xxj.}] 
 
HEre is knowen to be the place eniunctorye 
or purgatiue to the Lyuer. And 
what so euer infection be in the Lyuer, 
yf nature be stronge and sufficient, 
it expelleth it to thys place, as we 
ofte~ serie in tyme of y~ plague, & after 
great agues, and other infections taken of vncleane 
women. And the fleash and skyn in thys place is thyn, 
wrynckled or couruye by reason of bowynge the thyghes. 
And the hyppes haue greate brawnye fleashe 
theron, bycause thyther descende muscles, cordes and 
lygamentes, to moue and bynde together the thighes 
with the haunches or the bone called Coxix or Coxendix. 
And as for the constitutions of the buttockes we referre 
to the tables of the Muscles, where the partes 
therof are at large declared. 
 
[}Here foloweth of the seconde or myddle ventricle, 
whyche is the Breste, called in Latyne 
Pectus, & in Greke Thorax. Capit. xxij.}] 
 
THys seconde Uentricle begynneth 
at the former parte of the 
necke called Iugulum, and so conteynynge 
all the whole region 
bothe behynde and before vnto 
Diafragma otherwyse called the 
Myndryffe. And the Breste it 
selfe is called the Cheste of the 
spiritual membres of man. And it is to be noted that 
there be on the vtter parte thereof conteyned foure 
principall partes, as the Skynne, muscleous fleashe, 
the Pappes and the Bones. And the partes within 
are eyghte, that is to wete, the Hearte, the Pulme, 
(whych conteyneth the Lyghtes and Lounges) Pa~nicles, 
Lygamentes, Synowes, Ueyues, Arteries, 
with the mouthe of the Uentricle, whyche is called 
Isophagus, and it is also commonlye named the Stomacke. 
[^f.A5v^] 
Nowe as concernynge the outwarde partes, 
they shall here after be at full sette out in the 
declaration of the same, the Pappes, whyche we 
shall here somwhat touche, eare we goe anye ferder. 
The fleashe of the Pappes differeth frome the other 
fleashe of the body, in that it is whyte, glardelous 
and spongeous, hauynge also in theym bothe Synowes, 
Ueynes and Arteries, with whyche they are tyed 
and knytte vnto the Hearte, the Lyuer, the 
Brayne & y~ Generatiue membres. And there are also in 
the Brest (as y~ auncie~t Authours do make mencion) 
foure score and ren muscles, for some of them be come~ 
to the Necke, some to the Shoulders and the Shoulder 
blade, some to the Myddryffe, to the Rybbes, to 
the Backe, & some to the Breste it selfe. And we finde 
verye certayne commoditye and profyt in the creation 
of the Pappes, euen as well in men as in women, 
for in man they defende and kepe the spirituals from 
hurte, and noyaunce withoutforth. And by theyr 
thyckenesse and complexion they comforte the naturall 
heate, mundifyinge and clensynge. And in women 
there is in them hadde the generation of mylke, 
for in women there commeth from the Matrix into the 
Brestes or Pappes, dyuers and soundrye Ueynes. 
bryngynge in theym menstruall bloude, whyche is 
there throughe the vertue and power digestiue, turned 
into the colour of whytenes, lyke vnto y~ fleash of 
the sayde Pappes, in lyke maner as the Iuice of the 
Meate or Chilis commynge from the Uentrycle to the 
Lyuer, is digested into the colour of the Lyuer. Ferdermore 
the bones of the Breste are sayd to be triple 
or threfolde, and they are innumbre seuen lyinge in 
the Breste before and theyr length is after the breadeth 
of the Breste. And theyr extremyties or 
endes be grystelye, as the Rybbes be. And at the vppermost 
part of Thorax or the Brest is a hole or cauyte, 
wherein are sette the seete of the Furkylbones or Cauell 
bones, whyche are called in Latyne Clauicn_[^ORIG. BLURRED^]læ. And 
as the neather part of the Breste agaynste the mouth 
of the Uentricle hangeth a grystle, whyche we call 
properlye y=e= shape grystle, for it is called of the Doctours 
Ensis formus, that is to saye swearde like. And thys 
grystle was ordeyned for two causes. The one is, that 
it shoulde defende the Uentricle withoutfurth frome 
hurte. The seconde, that in tyme of reprexion or of 
fulnesse is shoulde geue place to the Uentricle 
when nede requireth. The partes of the backe belongynge 
to the Breste conteyne twelue spondyls or 
turnynge loyntes, throughe whome passeth the Marey 
of the backe called Nucha. And from them spryngen 
twelue payre of nerues or synowes, bryngynge 
to the muscles of the Breste aforesayde bothe felyng 
and mouynge. And here is to be noted, that in euerye 
syde are twelue rybbes, whereof seuen are called the 
true rybbes, and fyue are called the false rybbes, because 
they are not of the iuste length of the other seuen 
as it maye be iudged by the eye, and as you maye perceaue 
in the thre fygures of bones. 
 
