[^Vicary, Thomas: Anatomie of mans body^] 
 
[}A profitable Treatise 
of the Anatomie 
of mans body: 
 
Compyled by that excellent 
Chirurgion, M. Thomas 
Vicary Esquire, Seriaunt 
Chirurgion to king Henry the 
eyght, to king Edward the .vj. to 
Queene Mary, and to our most 
gracious Soueraigne Lady 
Queene Elizabeth, and also 
cheefe Chirurgion of S. 
Bartholomewes 
Hospital. 
 
Which work is newly reuyued, 
corrected, and published by the 
Chirurgions of the same 
Hospital now beeing. 
An. 1577. 
 
Imprinted at London, by 
Henry Bamforde}] 
 
[^Omitted a poem, a dedication to the President of Saint Bartholomew's Rouland Haiwarde, Ambrose Nicholas and Alderman Ramsay by surgeons William Clowes, Wil. Beton, Richard Story and Edward Bayly and prefaces by the Surgeons of Saint Bartholomew's and Thomas Vicary.^] 
 
[^Extract 1, f.A1r-G3v^] 
 
[^f.A1r^] 
[}A breefe Treatise of 
the Anatomie of mans body: Compyled 
by me Thomas Vycarie Esquire, 
and Sargeant Chirurgion to king 
Henry the eyght, for the vse and 
commoditie of al vnlearned 
Practicioners in Chirurgerie.}] 
 
IN the name of God, Amen. 
Heere I shal declare 
vnto you shortly and breefly 
the sayinges, and the determinations 
of diuers auncient Authors, in three poyntes, very 
expedient for al men to knowe, that entende 
to vse or exercise the mysterie or 
arte of Chirurgerie. The first is, to 
knowe what thing Chirurgerie is: The 
second is, how that a Chirurgion should 
be chosen: And the thirde is, with what 
properties a Surgion should be indued. 
 
THE fyrst is to know what thing 
Chirurgerie is. Heerein I doo 
note the saying of Lamfranke, 
whereas he sayth, Al thinges that man 
[^f.A1v^] 
would knowe, may be knowen by one of 
these three thinges: That is to say, by 
his name, or by his working, or els by 
his very being and shewing of his owne 
properties. So then it followeth that 
in the same manner we may know what 
Chirurgerie is by three thinges. First by 
his name, as thus, The Interpreters 
write, that Surgerie is deriued oute 
of these wordes, Apo tes chiros, cai tou 
ergou, that is too bee vnderstanded, A 
hand working, and so it may be taken for 
al handy artes. But noble Ipocras 
sayth, that Surgerie is hande working 
in mans body, for the very ende and profite 
of Chirurgerie is hande working. 
Nowe the seconde manner of knowing 
what thing Chirurgerie is, it is the saying 
of Auicen to be knowen by his beeing, 
for it is verely a medecinal science: 
and as Galen sayth, he that wyl knowe 
the certentie of a thing, let him not busy 
him selfe to knowe only the name of that 
thing, but also the working and the effect 
of the same thing. Nowe the thirde 
way to knowe what thing Chirurgerie 
is, It is also to be knowen by his beeing 
[^f.A2r^] 
or declaring of his owne properties, the 
which teacheth vs to worke in mannes 
body with handes: as thus, In cutting 
or opening those partes that be whole, 
and in healing those partes that be broken 
nor cut, and in taking away that that 
is superfluous, as warts, wennes, skurfulas, 
and other lyke. But further to declare 
what Galen sayth Surgery is, 
It is the laste instrument of medecine: 
That is to say, Dyet, Pocion, and Chirurgerie: 
of the whiche three, sayth he, 
Dyet is the noblest, and the most vertuous. 
And thus he sayth, whereas a 
man may be cured with Dyet onely, let 
there be geuen no maner of medicine. 
The seconde instrument is Pocion: for 
and if a man may be cured with Dyet 
and Pocion, let there not be ministred 
any Chirurgerie. The thirde and laste 
Instrument, is Chirurgerie, through 
whose vertue and goodnes is remoued 
and put away many greeuous infirmities 
and diseases, which might not have 
bene remoued, nor yet put away, neither 
with Diet nor with Pocion. And by 
these three meanes it is knowen what 
thing Chirurgerie is. And this suffiseth 
[^f.A2v^] 
for vs for that poynt. Nowe it is knowen 
what thing Chirurgerie is, there 
must also be chosen a man apt and mete 
to minister Surgerie, or to be a Chirurgion. 
And in this poynt al Authors doo 
agree, that a Chirurgion should be chosen 
by his complexion, and that his complexion 
be very temperate, and al his 
members wel proportioned. For Rasis 
sayth, Whose face is not seemely, it is 
vnpossible for him for to haue good manners. 
And Aristotle the great Philosopher 
writeth in his Epistles to the noble 
king Alexander (as in those Epistles 
more playnely doth appeare) howe hee 
should choose al suche persons as should 
serue him, by the forme and shape of the 
face, and al other members of the body. 
And furthermore they say, he that is of 
an euill complexion, there must needes 
folowe like conditions. Wherefore it agreeth 
that a Chirurgion must be both 
of a good and temperate complexion, as 
is afore rehearsed. And principally, that 
he be a good lyuer and a keeper of the 
holy co~maundements of God, of whom 
commeth al cunning and grace, and that 
his body be not quaking, and his hands 
[^f.A3r^] 
stedfast, his fingers long and smal, and 
not trembling: and that his left hand be 
as ready as his right hande, with al his 
lymmes able to fulfil the good workes of 
the soule. Nowe here is a man meete to 
be made a Chirurgion. And thoughe he 
haue al these good qualities before rehersed, 
yet is he no good Chirurgion, but a 
man very fitte and meete therfore. Now 
then to knowe what properties and conditions 
this man must haue before he be 
a perfect Chirurgion. And I doo note 
foure thinges moste specially that euery 
Chirurgion ought for to haue: The first 
that he be learned: the seconde, that he 
be expert: the thirde, that he be ingenious: 
the fourth, that he be wel manered. 
The first (I sayde) he ought to be learned, 
and that he knowe his principles, 
not onely in Chirurgerie, but also in 
Phisicke, that he may the better defende 
his Surgery. Also he ought to be seene 
in natural Philosophie, and in Gra~mer, 
that he speake congruitie in Logike, that 
teacheth him to proue his proportions 
with good reason. In Rethorike, that 
teacheth him to speake seemely and eloquently: 
also in Theorike, that teacheth 
[^f.A3v^] 
him to knowe thinges natural and not 
natural, & thinges agaynst nature. Also 
he must knowe the Anatomie, for al authors 
write against those Surgions that 
worke in mans body not knowing the 
Anatomie, for they be likened to a blind 
man that cutteth in a vine tree, for he taketh 
more or lesse than he ought to doo. 
And here note wel the saying of Galen 
the prince of Philosophers, in his Estoris, 
that it is as possible for a Surgion 
not knowing the Anatomie, to worke in 
mans body without error, as it is for a 
blind man to carue an Image & make it 
perfyt. The .ij. I said, he must be expert: 
for Rasus sayth, he ought to knowe and 
to see other men work, and after to have 
vse and exercise. The thirde, that he be 
ingenious or wittie, for al things belonging 
to Chirurgerie may not be written, 
nor with letters set foorth. The fourth 
I sayde, that he muste be wel manered, 
and that he haue al these good conditions 
here folowing: First, that he be no spousbreaker, 
nor no drunkarde. For the Philosophers 
say, amongst all other thinges 
beware of those persons that followe 
dronkennes, for they be accompted for 
[^f.A4r^] 
no men, bicause they liue a life bestiall: 
wherfore amongst al other sortes of people, 
they ought to be sequestred from the 
ministring of medicine. Likewise a Chirurgion 
must take heede that he deceiue 
no man with his vayne promises, for to 
make of a smal matter a great, because he 
woulde be counted the more famous. 
And amongest other thinges they maye 
neither be flatterers, nor mockers, nor 
priuie backbyters of other men. Likewise 
they muste not be proude, nor presumptuous, 
nor detracters of other me~. 
Likewise they ought not to be too couetous, 
nor no nigarde, & namely amongst 
their freendes, or men of worship, but let 
them be honest, curteous, and free, both 
in worde and deede. Likewise they shal 
geue no counsayle except they be asked, 
and then say their aduise by good deliberation, 
and that they be wel aduised afore 
they speake, chefly in the presence of wise 
men. Likewise they muste be as priuie 
and as secrete as anye Confessour, of 
al thinges that they shal eyther heare or 
see in the house of their Pacient. They 
shal not take into their cure any maner 
of person, except he wyl be obedient vnto 
[^f.A4v^] 
their preceptes, for he can not be called a 
pacient, vnlesse he be a sufferer. Also that 
they doo their diligence aswel to the poore 
as to the riche. They shal neuer discomfort 
their pacient, and shal commaunde 
all that be about him that they doo the 
same, but to his freendes speake truthe 
as the case standeth. They must also be 
bolde in those thinges whereof they be 
certayne, and as dreadfull in al perilles. 
They may not chide with the sicke, but 
be alwayes pleasaunt and mery. They 
must not couet any woman by waye of 
vylanie, & specially in the house of their 
Pacient. They shal not for couetousnes 
of money take in hande those cures that 
be vncurable, nor neuer set any certaine 
day of the sickemans health, for it lyeth 
not in their power: folowing the distinct 
counsayle of Galen, in the amphorisme 
of Ipocras, saying, Oportet seipsum no~ 
solum. By this Galen meaneth, that 
to the cure of euery sore there belongeth 
foure thinges: of which, the first and principal 
belongeth to God, the second to the 
Surgion, the thirde to the Medicine, 
and the fourth to the Pacient. Of the 
whiche foure and if any one doo fayle, the 
[^f.B1r^] 
Pacient can not be healed: then they, to 
whom belongeth but the fourth parte, 
shal not promise the whole, but bee first 
wel aduised. They must also be gracious 
and good to the poore, and of the rich take 
liberally for bothe. And see they neuer 
prayse them selues, for that redoundeth 
more to their shame and discredite, then 
to their fame & worship: For a cunning 
and skilful Chirurgion neede neuer vau~t 
of his dooings, for his works wyll euer 
get credite ynough. Likewise that they 
despise no other Chirurgion without a 
great cause, for it is meete that one Chirurgion 
should loue another, as Christe 
loueth vs al. And in thus dooing they 
shal increase both in vertue & cunning, 
to the honour of God and worldly 
fame. To whome he bring 
vs al. Amen. 
 
[}Heereafter foloweth the 
Anathomie of the simple 
members.}] 
 
AND if it be asked you how many 
simple members there be, it is to 
be answered, eleuen, and two that 
be but superfluities of members: 
[^f.B1v^] 
and these be they, Bones, Cartylages, 
Nerues, Pannykles, Lygaments, Cordes, 
Arteirs, Weines, Fatnes, Fleshe 
and Skinne: and the superfluities be 
the heares & the nayles. I shal beginne 
at the Bone, because it is the fundation, 
and the hardest member of al the body. 
The Bone is a consimile member, simple 
and spermatike, and colde and dry of 
complexion, insencible, and inflexible: 
and hath diuers formes in mans body, 
for the diuersitie of helpings. The cause 
why there be many bones in mans body 
is this: Sometime it is needeful that 
one member or one lymme should moue 
without another. Another cause is, that 
some defende the principal members, as 
dothe the bone of the brest, and of the 
head: and some to be the fundation of diuers 
partes of the body, as the bones of 
the Ridge, and of the legges: and some 
to fulfyll the hollowe places, as in the 
handes and feete. &c. 
 
The Grystle is a member simple and 
spermatike, next in hardnes to the bone, 
and is of complexion colde and drye, and 
insencible. The grystle was ordeyned 
for sixe causes, or profites that I fynd in 
it: The first is, that the continual mouing 
[^f.B2r^] 
of the hard bone might not be done 
in a iuncture, but that the grystle should 
be a meane betweene the Lygament and 
him: The seconde is, that in the time of 
concussion or oppression, the softe members 
or limmes should not be hurt of the 
harde: The thirde is, that the extremitie 
of bones and Ioyntes that be gristly, 
might the easelyer be folded and moued 
together without hurt: The fourth is, 
for that it is necessarie in some meane 
places to put a grystle, as in the throte 
bowel for the sounde: The fyfth is, for 
that it is needeful that some members be 
holden vp with a grystle, as the liddes of 
the eyes: This sixth is, that some limmes 
haue a sustayning and a drawing abrod, 
as in the nose and the eares. &c. 
 
The Lygament is a member consimple, 
simple, and spermatike, next in hardnes 
to the gristle, and of complexion cold 
and dry, and is flexible and insensible, 
and byndeth the bones together. The 
cause why he is flexible and insencible is 
this: If it had bene sensible, he mighte 
not haue suffred the labour and mouing 
of the ioynts: and if it had not ben flexible 
of his bowing, one lymme should not 
haue moued without another. The seconde 
[^f.B2v^] 
profite is, that he be ioyned with 
sinews, for to make Cordes & Brawnes: 
The thirde helpe is, that he be a resting 
place to some sinewes: The fourth profite 
is, that by him the members that be 
within the body be sustayned, as the matrix 
and kidneys, and diuers other. &c. 
 
The Sinew is a consimiler member, 
simple and spermatike, meane betweene 
harde and softe, and in complexion colde 
and drye, and he is both flexible and sensible, 
strong and tough, hauing his beginning 
from the braine, or fro~ Mynuca, 
whiche is the marow of the backe. And 
from the brayne commeth .vij. payre of 
Nerues sensatiues, and from Mynuca 
commeth .xxx. payre of Nerues motius, 
and one that is by him selfe, that springeth 
of the last spondel. Al these senews 
haue both feeling and mouing, in some 
more, and in some lesse. &c. 
 
A Corde or Tendon is a consimple 
or official member, compounde and spermatike, 
synowy, strong, and tough, meanly 
betweene hardenes and softnes, and 
meanely sensible and flexible, and in co~plexion 
colde and dry. And the Corde or 
Tendon is thus made: The synewes 
[^f.B3r^] 
that come from the brayne & from Mynuca, 
and go to moue the members, is 
intermingled with the Lygamentes, and 
when the Synewes and Lygamentes 
are intermingled together, then is made 
a Corde. And three causes I perceyue 
why the Cordes were made: The fyrst 
is, that the Synewe alone is so sensible 
that he may not suffer the great labour 
and trauel of mouing, without the felowship 
and strength of the Lygament 
that is insencible, and that letteth his 
great feeling, and bringeth him to a perfect 
temperaunce, and so the Cordes 
moue the limmes to the wil of the soule. 
And this Corde is associated with a simple 
flesh, and so therof is made a brawne 
or a muskel, on whom he might rest after 
his trauel. And this Brawne is called 
a Muskle. Then when this Corde 
is entred into this brawne, he is departed 
into many smal threeds, the whiche 
be called wylle. And this wyl hath three 
properties: The fyrst is in length, by 
whose vertue that draweth it hath might: 
The soconde in breadth, by whome the 
vertue that casteth out hath might: The 
third in thwartnes, in whom the vertue 
[^f.B3v^] 
that holdeth hath might: and at the ende 
of the Brawne those threedes be gathered 
together to make another muskel. &c. 
 
Nowe I wyl begynne at the Artere. 
This Artere is a member consimyle, 
simple and spermatike, hollowe and 
synowy, hauing his springing from the 
hart, bringing from the harte to euery 
member blood and spirite of lyfe. It is of 
complexion colde and drye. And al these 
Arteres haue two cotes, except one that 
goth to the Lunges, and he hath but one 
cote that spreadeth abrode in the Lungs, 
and bringeth with him to the Lunges 
blood, with the spirite of lyfe to nourishe 
the Lungs withal: and also that Artere 
bringeth with him from the lunges ayre 
to temper the fumous heate that is in 
the harte. And this Artere is he that is 
called Arteria venalis, because he hath 
but one cote as a vayne, and is more obedient 
to the delated abrode through al the 
lunges, because that the blood might the 
sooner sweate through him: wheras al other 
Arters haue two cotes, because one 
cote may not withstande the might and 
power of the spirit of life. Diuers other 
causes there be, which shal be declared in 
[^f.B4r^] 
the Anathomie of the brest. &c. 
 
The Veyne is a symple member, in 
complexion colde and drye, and spermatike, 
like to the Artere, hauing his beginning 
from the Lyuer, and bringing from 
the Lyuer nutritiue blood, to nourishe 
euery member of the body with. And it 
is so to be vnderstanded that there is no 
more difference betweene these two vessels 
of blood, but that the Artere is a vessel 
of blood spiritual or vytal. And the 
Veyne is a vessel of blood nutrimental, 
of the which Veynes there is noted two 
most principal, of the which one is called 
vena porta, the other is called venacelis, 
of whom it is too much to treate of now, 
vntyll we come to the anathomie of the wombe. 
&c. 
 
The flesh is a consimiler member, simple, 
not spermatike, and is ingendred of 
blood congeled by heate, and is in complexion 
hote and moyst. Of the which is 
noted three kindes of fleshes: that is to 
say, one is soft & pure fleshe: the seconde 
is muskulus or hard & brawny flesh: the 
thirde is glandulus, knotty, or kurnelly 
fleshe. Also the commodities of the fleshe 
be indifferent, for some be common to 
[^f.B4v^] 
euery kinde of fleshe, and some be proper 
to one maner of fleshe alone. The 
profytes of the fleshe be many, for some 
defende the bodye from colde as dothe 
clothes: also it defendeth the body from 
harde thinges comming agaynst it: also 
through his moysture he rectifieth the 
body in sommer, in time of great heate. 
Wherefore it is to be considered what 
profitablenes is in euery kinde of fleshe 
by him selfe. And fyrst of simple and pure 
fleshe, whiche fulfylleth the concauities 
of voyde places, and causeth good forme 
and shape: and this fleshe is founde betweene 
the teeth, and on the ende of the 
yarde. The profite of the Brawny fleshe 
or muskulus fleshe, shal be spoken of in 
the Anathomie of the armes. The profites 
of the Glandulus fleshe are these: 
First, that it turneth the blood into a cullour 
like to him selfe, as doth the fleshe 
of a womans paps turne the menstrual 
blood into mylke: secondly, the Glandulus 
fleshe of the Testikles, turneth the 
blood into sparme: thirdly, the Glandulus 
flesh of the cheekes, that ingendreth 
the spittle. &c. 
 
The next is of Fatnes, of the whiche 
[^f.C1r^] 
I finde three kindes: The firste is 
Pinguedo, and it is a consimilar member, 
not spermatike, and it is made of a 
subtyl portion of blood congeled by colde: 
and it is of complexion colde and moyst, 
insencible, and is intermedled amongest 
the partes of the fleshe. The seconde is 
Adeppes, and is of the same kinde as is 
Pinguedo, but it is departed from the 
fleshe besydes the skinne, and it is as an 
oyle heating and moysting the skinne. 
The thirde is Auxingia, and it is of 
kinde as the others be, but he is departed 
from the fleshe withinforth about the 
kidneys, and in the intrayles, and it helpeth 
both the kidneys and the intrayles 
from drying by his vnctiositie. &c. 
 
Then come we to the Skinne. The 
Skinne is a consimile member or officiall, 
partely spermatike, strong and 
tough, flexible and sencible, thinne and 
temperate, Wherof there be two kindes: 
One is the Skinne that couereth the 
outwarde members: and the other the 
inner members, whiche is called a 
Pannicle, the profitablenesse of whome 
was spoken of in the laste Lesson: 
But the Skinne is properlye wouen 
[^f.C1v^] 
of Threedes, Nerues, Veynes, and 
Arteirs. And he is made temperate, because 
he should be a good deemer of heate 
from colde, and of moystnes from drynes, 
that there shoulde nothing noye nor 
hurt the body, but it geueth warning to 
the common wittes thereof. &c. 
 
The Heyres of euery part of mans 
body are but a superfluitie of members, 
made of the grosse fume or smoke passing 
out of the viscoues matter, thickened to 
the forme of heyre. The profitablenesse 
of him is declared in the Anathomie of the 
head. &c. 
 
The Nayles likewise are a superfluitie 
of members, enge~dred of great earthly 
smoke or fume resolued through the 
natural heate of humours, and is softer 
then the Bone, & harder then the Fleshe. 
In complexion they be colde and drye, 
and are alwayes waxing in the extremitie 
of the fyngers and toes. The vtilitie 
of them are, that by them a man shal 
take the better holde: also they helpe to 
clawe the body when it needeth: Lastly, 
they helpe to deuide thinges for lacke 
of other tooles. &c. 
 
[^f.C2r^] 
[}Heereafter foloweth the 
Anathomie of the compound members, 
and first of the head.}] 
 
BEcause the head of man is the habitation 
or dwelling place of the 
reasonable soule of man, therefore 
with the grace of God I shal fyrst speake 
of the Anatomie of the head. Galen saith 
in the seconde Chapter De iuuamentes, 
and Auicen rehearseth the same in hys 
fyrst preposition and third Chapter, prouing 
that the Head of man was made 
neither for Wittes, nor yet for the Braynes, 
but onely for the eyes. For beastes 
that haue no heades, haue the orgayne or 
instrumentes of Wittes in their brests. 
Therefore God and nature haue reared 
vp the head of man onely for the eyes, 
for it is the hyest member of man: and 
as a beholder or watchman standeth in 
a highe Towre to geue warning of the 
enemies, so doth the Eye of man geue 
warning vnto the common Wittes, for 
the defence of all other members of the 
body. Nowe to our purpose. If the question 
be asked, how many things be there 
[^f.C2v^] 
conteyning on the head, and howe many 
thinges conteyned within the head? As 
it is rehearsed by Guydo, there bee but 
fyue conteining, and as many conteined: 
as thus, The Heyre, the Skinne, the 
Flesh, the Pannicles, and the Bone, neither 
rehearsing Veyne nor Artere. The 
which Anathomie can not be truly without 
them both, as thou shalt wel perceiue 
both in this Chapter, but specially in the 
next. And nowe in this lesson I shall 
speake but of Heire, Skinne, Fleshe, 
Veines, Pannicles, and Bones, what 
profite they doo to man, euery of them in 
his kinde. Of the Heire of the head 
(whose creation is knowen in the Anatomie 
of the simple members) I doo note 
foure vtilities why it was ordeyned: the 
fyrst is, that it defendeth the Brayne fro~ 
too muche heate, and too muche colde, 
and many other outwarde noyances: 
The seconde is, it maketh the forme or 
shape of the head to seeme more seemelyer 
or beautyfuller. For if the head 
were not heyred, the face and the heade 
should seeme but one thing, and therefore 
the heyre formeth and shapeth the 
head from the face: The thirde is, that 
[^f.C3r^] 
by the cullour of the heyre is witnessed & 
knowen the complexion of the Brayne: 
The fourth is, that the fumosities of 
the brayne might assend and passe lyghtlyer 
out by them. For if there were a sad 
thing, as the skinne or other, of the same 
nature as the heyre is, the fumosities of 
the brayne might not haue passed throwe 
it so lightly, as it doth by the heyre. 
 
The Skinne of the head is more lazartus, 
thicker, and more porrus, than 
any other Skinne of any other member 
of the body. And two causes I note why, 
One is, that it keepeth or defendeth the 
brayne from too muche heate and colde, 
as doth the heyre: The other, it discusseth 
to the common wittes of al thinges 
that noyeth outwardly, for the heyre is 
insencible: The thirde cause why the 
skinne of the head is more thicker then 
any other skinne of the body, is this, that 
it keepeth the brayne the more warme, 
and is the better fence for the brayne, 
and it bindeth and keepeth the bones of 
the head the faster together. 
 
Next followeth the Fleshe, the which 
is al Musculus or Lazartus fleshe, lying 
vpon pericranium without meane. 
[^f.C3v^] 
and it is made of subtile Wylle, and of 
simple fleshe, Synewes, Veines, & Arteirs. 
And why the fleshe that is al musculus 
or lazartus in euery member of a 
mans body was made, is for three causes: 
the fyrst is, that by his thicknes, he 
shoulde comforte the digestion of other 
members that lye by him: The seconde 
is, that through him euery member is 
made the more formelyer, and taketh the 
better shape: The thirde is, that by his 
meanes euery member of the body draweth 
to him norishing, the which others 
withholde to put foorth from them: 
as it shal be more playnlyer spoken of in 
the Anathomie of the wombe. 
 
Next followeth Pericranium, or the 
couering of the bones of the head. But 
heere it is to be noted of a Veyne and an 
Artere that commeth betweene the flesh 
and this Pericranium, that nourisheth 
the vtter part of the head, and so entreth 
priuily through the commissaries of the 
skul, bearing to the Brayne and to his 
Pannikles nourishing: of whose substaunce 
is made bothe Duramater, and 
also Pericranium, as shall be declared 
in the partes conteyned in the head. Here 
[^f.C4r^] 
it is to be noted of this Pannikle Pericranium, 
that is bindeth or compasseth al 
the bones of the head, vnto whom is adioyned 
the Duramater, and is also a part 
of his substaunce, howbeit they be separated, 
for Duramater is nerer y=e= brayne, 
and is vnder the skull. This Pericranium 
was made principally for two causes: 
one is, that for his strong bynding 
together he should make firme and stable 
the feeble commissaries or seames of the 
bones of the head: The other cause is, 
that it shoulde be a meane betweene the 
harde bone and the softe fleshe. 
 
Nexte is the Bone of the Pot of the 
head keeping in the Braynes, of which 
it were too long to declare their names 
after al Authors, as they number them 
and their names, for some name them 
after the Greeke tongue, and some after 
the Arabian, but in conclusion, al is to 
one purpose. And they be numbred seuen 
bones in the pan or skul of the head: the 
fyrst is called the Coronal bone, in which 
is y=e= Orbyts or holes of the Eyes, and it 
reacheth from the Browes vnto the middest 
of the head, and there it meteth with 
the seconde bone called Occipissial, a 
[^f.C4v^] 
bone of the hinder part of the head called 
the Noddel of the head, which two bones 
Coronal and Occipissiale be deuided by 
the Commissaries in the middes of the 
head. The thirde and fourth bones be 
called Parietales, and they be the bones 
of the sideling parts of the head, and they 
be deuided by the Co~missories both from 
the foresayde Coronal and Occipissial. 
The fyfth and the syxth bones be called 
Petrosa or Mendosa: and these two 
bones lye ouer the bones called Parietales, 
on euery side of the head one, lyke 
skales, in whom be y=e= holes of the eares. 
The seuenth and last of the head is called 
Paxillarie, or Bazillarie, the whiche 
bone is as it were a wedge vnto all the 
other seuen bones of the head, and doth 
fasten them togeather. And thus be all 
numbred: the first is the Coronal bone, 
the seconde is the Occipissial, the thirde 
and the fourth is Parietales, the fyfth 
and the sixth is Petrosa or Mendosa, 
and the seuenth is Paxillari, or Bazillari. 
And this suffiseth for 
the fyue thinges conteyning. 
 
[^f.D1r^] 
[}In this Chapter is declared 
the fiue thinges conteyned 
within the head.}] 
 
NExt vnder the bones of the head 
withinfoorth, the first thing that 
appeareth is Duramater, then 
is Piamater, then the substaunce of the 
Brayne, and then Vermy formes and 
Retemirabile. But first to speake of Duramater, 
whereof, and howe it is sprong 
and made: First it is to be noted of the 
Veine and Arteire that was spoken of in 
the laste Chapter before, howe priuyly 
they entred through the commissoris or 
seames of the head, and there by their vnion 
together, they doo not onely bring 
and geue the spirite of lyfe and nutriment, 
but also doo weaue them selues 
so togeather, that they make this pannicle 
Duramater. It is holden vp by 
certayne threedes of him selfe comming 
through the sayd commissories, running 
into Pericranium or pannicle that couereth 
the bones of the head. And with the 
foresayde Veyne and Arteire, and these 
threedes comming from Duramater, is 
[^f.D1v^] 
wouen and made this Pericranium. 
Also why this panicle Duramater is set 
from the skul, I note two causes: the first 
is, that if the Duramater shoulde haue 
touched the skul, it shoulde lightly haue 
bene hurt with the hardnes of the bone: 
The seconde cause is, that the matter 
that commeth of woundes made in the 
head pearsing the skul, shoulde by it the 
better be defended and kepte from Piamater, 
and hurting of the brayne. And 
next vnto this panicle there is another 
pannicle called Pia mater, or meeke mother, 
because it is so softe and tender vnto 
the brayne. Of whose creation it is to 
be noted as of Duramater, for the original 
of their fyrst creatio~ is of one kind, 
both from the Hart and the Lyuer, and 
is mother of the very substaunce of the 
brayne. Why it is called Piamater, is, 
for because it is so softe and tender ouer 
the brayne, that is nourisheth the brayne 
and feedeth it, as doth a louing mother 
vnto her tender childe or babe, for it is 
not so tough and harde as is Duramater. 
In this panicle Pia mater is much 
to be noted of the great number of Veynes 
and Arteirs that are planted, ramefying 
[^f.D2r^] 
throughout al his substaunce, geuing 
to the brayne both spirite and lyfe. 
And this Pannicle doth circumuolue 
or lappe al the substaunce of the brayne: 
and in some places of the brayne the 
Veynes and the Arteirs goo foorth of 
him, and enter into the diuisions of the 
brayne, and there drinketh of the brayne 
substaunce into them, asking of the hart 
to them the spirite of lyfe or breath, and 
of the Lyuer nutriment. And the aforesayde 
spirite or breath taketh a further 
digestion, and there it is made animal, 
by the elaboration of the spirite vital is turned 
and made animall. Furthermore, 
why there bee moo pannicles ouer the 
brayne then one, is this, If there had 
beene but one pannicle onely, eyther it 
must haue beene harde, or soft, or meane 
betweene both: If it had beene harde, it 
should haue hurt the braine by his hardnes: 
if it had beene soft, it shoulde haue 
beene hurt of the harde bone: and yf it 
had beene but meanely neyther hard not 
soft, it should haue hurt the braine by his 
roughnes, and also haue beene hurte of 
the harde bone. Therefore God and nature 
haue ordeyned two Pannicles, the 
[^f.D2v^] 
one harde, and the other softe, the harder 
to be a meane betweene the softe and the 
bone: and the softer to be a meane betweene 
the harder and the braine it selfe. 
Also these Pannicles be colde and dry of 
complexion, and spermatike. 
 
Next is the Brayne, of which it is marueylous 
to be considered and noted, how 
this Piamater deuideth the substaunce 
of the Brayne, and lappeth it into certen 
selles or diuisions, as thus: The substaunce 
of the braine is diuided into three 
partes, or ventrikles, of which the foremost 
part is the moste: the seconde or 
middlemost is lesse: the third or hindermost 
is the least. And from eche one to 
other be issues or passages that are called 
Meates, through whom passeth the spirit 
of life too and fro. But here ye shal note 
that euery Ventrikle is diuided into two 
partes, and in euery parte God hath ordeyned 
and set singular and seueral vertues, 
as thus: First in the foremost Ventrikle 
God hath founded and set the common 
Wittes, otherwise called the fyue 
Wittes, as Hearing, Seeing, Feeling, 
Smelling, and tasting. And also there is 
in one part of this Ventrikle, the vertue 
[^f.D3r^] 
that is called Fantasie, and he taketh al 
the formes or ordinaunces that be disposed 
of the fiue wittes, after the meaning 
of sensible thinges: In the other parte 
of the same Ventrikle is ordeyned and 
founded the Imaginatiue vertue, the 
whiche receyueth of the common Wittes 
the fourme or shape of sensitiue thinges, 
as they were receyued of the common 
wittes withoutfoorth, representing their 
owne shape and ordinaunces vnto the 
memoratiue vertue. In the middest sel 
or ventrikle there is founded and ordeyned 
the Cogitatiue or estimatiue vertue: 
for he rehearseth, sheweth, declareth, and 
deemeth those things that be offered vnto 
him by the other that were spoken of before. 
In the thirde Ventrikle, and last, 
there is founded and ordeyned the vertue 
Memoratiue: in this place is registred 
and kept those things that are done 
and spoken with the senses, and keepeth 
them in his treasurie vnto the putting 
foorth of the fyue or common wittes, or 
orgaynes, or instrumentes of animal 
workes, out of whose extremities or 
lowar partes springeth Mynuca, or marowe 
of the spondels: of whom it shall 
[^f.D3v^] 
be spoken of in the Anatomie of the 
necke and backe. Furthermore it is to 
be noted, that from the foremost Ventrikle 
of the brayne springeth seuen payre 
of sensatiue or feeling senews, the which 
be produced to the Eyes, the Eares, the 
Nose, the Toung, and to the Stomack, 
and to diuers other partes of the body: 
as it shal be declared in their anatomies. 
Also it is to bee noted, that aboute the 
middest ventrikle is the place of Vermiformis, 
with curnelly fleshe that filleth, 
and Retemirabile, or wonderful caule 
vnder the Pannicles, is sette or bounded 
with Arteirs onely, whiche come 
from the harte, in the whyche the 
vitayle spirite, by his great labour is turned 
and made animal. And ye shal vnderstande 
that these two be the best kept 
partes of al the body, for a man shal rather 
dye, then any of these should suffer 
any manner of greefes from withoutfoorth, 
and therefore God hath set them 
farre from the hart. Heere I note the 
saying of Haly Abbas, of the comming 
of smal Arteirs from the hart, of whom 
(sayth he) is made a marueylous net or 
caule, in the which caule is inclosed the 
[^f.D4r^] 
Brayne, and in that place is layde the 
spirite of feeling, from that place hath 
the spirite of feeling his first creation, 
and from thence passeth to other members. 
&c. Furthermore ye shal vndersta~d 
that the brayne is a member colde and 
moyst of complexion, thinne, and meanely 
viscous, and a principal member, and 
an official member, and spermatike. And 
fyrst why he is a principal member, is, 
because he is the gouernour or the treasurie 
of the fyue wittes: And why he is 
an official member, is, because he hath 
the effect of feeling and stering: And why 
he is colde and moyst, is, that he shoulde 
by his coldnes and moystnes abate and 
temper the exceeding heate and drought 
that commeth from the harte: Also why 
he is moyst, is, that it should be the more 
indifferenter and abler to euery thing 
that shoulde be reserued or gotten into 
him: Also, why it is soft, is, that it should 
geue place and fauour to the vertue of 
stering: And why it is meanely viscous, 
is, that his senewes should be strong and 
meanely toughe, and that they shoulde 
not be letted in their working throughe 
his ouermuche hardnes. Heere Galen 
[^f.D4v^] 
demaundeth a question, which is this, 
Whether that feeling and mouing bee 
brought to Nerues by one or by diuers? 
or whether the aforesayde thing be brought 
substancially or radically. The matter 
(sayth he) is so harde to searche and 
be vnderstoode, that it were much better 
to let it alone and passe ouer it. Aristotle 
intreating of the Brayne, sayth, The 
Brayne is a member co~tinually mouing 
and ruling al other members of the body, 
geuing vnto them both feeling and 
mouing: for if the Brayne be let, al other 
members be let: and if the Brayne be 
wel, then al other members the body be 
the better disposed. Also the brayne hath 
this propertie, that it moueth and followeth 
the mouing of the Moone: for in 
the waxing of the Moone the Brayne 
followeth vpwardes, and in the wane of 
the Moone the brayne discendeth downwardes, 
and vanisheth in substaunce of 
vertue: for then the Brayne shrinketh 
togeather in it selfe, and is not so fully 
obedient to the spirit of feeling. And this 
is proued in menne that be lunatike or 
madde, and also in men that be epulentike, 
or hauing the falling sicknesse, that 
[^f.E1r^] 
be moste greeued in the beginning of the 
newe Moone, and in the latter quarter 
of the Moone. Wherefore (sayth Aristotle) 
when it happeneth that the Brayne 
is eyther too drye or too moyst, then can it 
not worke his kinde: for then is the body 
made colde: then are the spirites of 
lyfe melted and resolued away: and then 
foloweth feebleness of the wittes, and of 
al other members of the body, and at the 
laste death. 
 
[}Heereafter foloweth the 
Anatomie of the Face.}] 
 
THE Front or the Forhead conteyneth 
nothing but the Skinne 
and Musculus fleshe, for the 
panicle vnderneth it is of Pericranium, 
and the bone is of the Coronal bone. 
Howebeit there it is made broade as yf 
ther were a double bone, whiche maketh 
the forme of the Browes. It is called 
the Forhead or Front, from one Eare 
to the other, and from the rootes of the 
Eares of the head before, vnto y=e= browes. 
But the cause why the Browes were set 
[^f.E1v^] 
and reared vp, was, that they shoulde defende 
the Eyes from noyaunce withoutfoorth: 
And they be ordeyned with heare 
to put by the humour or sweat that commeth 
from the head. Also the Browes do 
helpe the Eyeliddes, and do beautifie and 
make fayre the face, for he that hath not 
his Browes heyred, is not seemely. And 
Aristotle sayth, that ouer measurable 
Browes betokeneth an enuious man: 
Also high browes and thicke betokeneth 
hardnes: and browes with little heare 
betokeneth cowardnes: and meanly signifieth 
gentlenes of hart. Incisions about 
these partes ought to be done according 
to the length of the body, for there the 
Muscle goeth from one Eare to the other. 
And there if any incision should be 
made with the length of the Muscle, it 
might happen the Browe to hang ouer 
the Eye without remedie, as it is many 
times seene, the more pitie. The browes 
be called Supercilium in Latin, and vnder 
is the Eye liddes, which is called 
Cilium, and is garnished with heyres. 
Two causes I finde why the eye liddes 
were ordeyned: The fyrst is, that they 
shoulde keepe and defende the Eye from 
[^f.E2r^] 
duste and other outwarde noyances: the 
seconde is, when the eye is weery or heauy, 
then they should be couered and take 
rest vnderneath them. Why the heyres 
were ordeyned in them, is, that by them 
is addressed the formes or similitudes of 
visible thinges vnto the apple of the eye. 
The Eare is a member semely and grystlye, 
able to be folden without, and is 
the orgayne or instrument of hearing: 
It is of complexion colde and drye. But 
why the eare was set vp out of the head, 
is this, that the soundes that be very fugitiue 
should lurke and abyde vnder his 
shadowe, tyl it were taken of the instrumentes 
of hearing: Another cause is, 
that it should keepe the hole that it standeth 
ouer, from thinges falling in that 
might hinder the hearing. The senewes 
that are the Orgayns or Instrumentes 
of hearing, spring each from the Brayne, 
from whence the seuen payre of senewes 
do spring, & when they come to the hole 
of the Eare, there they writhe lyke a 
wyne presse, and at the endes of them 
there be like the head of a worme, or like 
a little teat, in whiche is receyued the 
sounde, and so caried to the common 
[^f.E2v^] 
wittes. The Eyes be nexte of nature 
vnto the Soule: for in the Eye is seene 
and knowen the disturbances & greefes, 
gladnes and ioyes of the Soule, as loue, 
wrath, and other passions. The Eyes be 
the instrumentes of sight. And they bee 
compounde and made of ten things: that 
is to say, of seuen Tunicles or Cotes, 
and of three humours. Of the whiche 
(sayth Galen) the Brayne and the head 
were made for the Eye, that they might 
be in the hyest place, as a beholder in a 
towre, as it was rehearsed in the Anatomie 
of the head. But diuers men holde 
diuers opinions of the Anatomie of the 
Eyes: for some men accompt but three 
tunikles, and some sixe. But in conclusion 
they meane all one thing: For the 
very truth is, that there be counted and 
reckoned seuen Tunikles, that is to say, 
Sclirotica, Secondyna, Retyna, Vnia, 
Cornua, Arania, and Coniunctiua: and 
these three humours, That is to say, 
humor Vitrus, humor Albigynus, and 
humor Crystallinus. It is be knowen 
howe and after what maner they spring. 
You shal vnderstande that there springeth 
of the brayny substaunce of his for 
[^f.E3r^] 
most Ventrikles, two senewes, The one 
from the right side, and the other from 
the left, and they be called the fyrst payre, 
for in the Anatomie they be the first paire 
of senewes that appeare of al seuen. And 
it is shewed by Galen, that these senews 
be hollowe as a reede, for two causes. 
The fyrst is, that the visible spirit might 
passe freely to the Eyes: The second is, 
that the forme of visible thinges mighte 
freely be presented to the common wits. 
Nowe marke the gooing foorth of these 
senewes: When these senewes goo out 
from the substaunce of the Brayne, he 
co~meth through the Piamater, of whose 
substaunce he taketh a Pannicle or a 
Cote: and the cause why he taketh that 
Pannicle, is to keepe him from noying, 
and before they enter into the skul, they 
meete and are vnited into one senewe 
the length of halfe an inche: and then 
they depart agayne into two, and eche 
goeth into one eye, entring through the 
brayne panne, and these senews be called 
Nerui optici. And three causes I finde 
why these Nerues are ioyned in one before 
they passe into the Eye: First, if it 
happen any diseases in one eye, the other 
[^f.E3v^] 
should receyue all the visible spirite that 
before came to bothe: The seconde is, 
that all thinges that we see shoulde not 
seeme two: for if they had not beene ioyned 
together, euery thing shoulde haue 
seemed two, as it doth to a worme, and 
to other beastes: The thirde is, that the 
Senewe might stay and helpe the other. 
But herevpon Lamfranke accordeth 
muche, saying, that these two Senewes 
come together to the Eyes, and take a 
Panikle both of Piamater and of Duramater, 
and when they enter into the 
Orbyt of the Eye, there the extremities 
are spread abroade, the which are made 
of three substances: that is to say, of Duramater, 
of Piamater, and of Nerui 
optici. There be ingendred three Tunikles 
or Cotes, as thus, Of the substa~ce 
that is taken from Duramater is ingendred 
the fyrst cote that is called Secondina: 
and of Nerui optici is ingendred 
the third cote that is called Retina: 
and eche of them is more subtiller then 
other, & goeth about the humours without 
meane. And it is to be vnderstoode, 
that eche of these three Tunicles be diuided, 
and so they make sixe: That is to 
[^f.E4r^] 
say, iij. of the partes of the brayne, and 
three of the parts outwardes, and one of 
Pericranium that couereth the bones of 
the head, whiche is called Coniunctiua. 
And thus you maye perceyue the springing 
of them: as thus, of Duramater 
springeth Sclirotica and Cornua: of 
Piamater springeth Secondina and Vnia: 
and of Nerui optici springeth Coniunctiua. 
Nowe to speake of the humors 
which be three, and their places are the 
middle of the Eyes: Of the whiche the 
fyrst is Humor Vitrus, because he is 
lyke glasse, in colour very cleare, redde, 
liquit, or thinne, and he is in the inward 
side next vnto the brayne: and it is thin, 
because the nutritiue blood of the Crystalline 
might passe, as water through a 
sponge should be clensed and made pure, 
and also that the visible spirite mighte 
the lightlyer passe through him from the 
Brayne. And he goeth about the Crystaline 
humour, vntil he meete with Albuginus 
humour, which is set in the vttermost 
parte of the Eye. And in the myddest 
of these humours Vitrus and Albuginus, 
is set the Crystalline humour, 
in whiche is set principally the syght 
[^f.E4v^] 
of the Eye. And these humours be separated 
and inuolued with the Pannicles aforesayde, 
betweene euery Humour a 
Panicle. And thus is the Eye compound 
and made. But to speake of euery Humour 
and euery Pannicle in his due order 
and course, it would aske a long processe, 
and a long Chapter: and this is sufficient 
for a Chirurgion. Nowe to begin 
at the Nose: You shall vnderstande 
that from the Brayne there commeth .ij. 
Senews to the holes of the brayne pan, 
where beginneth the concauitie of the 
Nose, and these two be not properly senewes, 
but organes or instrumentes of 
smelling, and haue heades lyke teates or 
pappes, in whiche is receyued the vertue 
of smelling, and representing it to the 
common wittes. Ouer these two is set 
Colatorium, that we cal the Nose thrils: 
and it is set betweene the Eyes, vnder 
the vpper part of the Nose. And it is to 
be noted, that this concauitie or ditche 
was made for two causes: The fyrst is, 
that the ayre that bringeth foorth the spirite 
of smelling, might reste in it tyll it 
were taken of the organ or instrument 
of smelling: The seconde cause is, that 
[^f.F1r^] 
the superfluities of the Brayne might be 
hydden vnder it vntill it were clensed: 
And from this co~cauitie there goeth two 
holes down into y=e= mouth, of which there 
is to be noted three profites: The fyrste 
is, that when a mans mouth is close, or 
when he eateth or sleepeth, that then the 
ayre might come through them to the 
Lunges, or els a mans mouth should alwayes 
be open: The seconde cause is, 
that they helpe to the relation of the 
forme of the Nose: for it is sayd, a man 
speaketh in his Nose when any of these 
holes be stopped: The thirde cause is, 
that the concauitie might be clensed by 
them when a man snuffeth the Nose, or 
draweth into his mouth inwardly. The 
Nose is a member consimple or official, 
appearing without the face, somewhat 
plicable, because it shoulde the better be 
clensed. And it is to be perceyued that it 
is compounde and made of skinne and 
Lazartus fleshe, and of two bones standing 
in maner trianglewise, whose extremities 
be ioyned in one part of the Nose 
with the Coronal bone, and the nether 
extremities are ioyned with two grystles, 
and another that diuideth the Nose 
[^f.F1v^] 
thrilles within, and holdeth vp the nose: 
Also there be two concauities or holes, 
that if one were stopped the other should 
serue: Also there is in the Nose two 
Muskles, to helpe the working of hys 
office. And Galen sayth, that the Nose 
shapeth the Face moste, for where the 
Nose lacketh (sayth he) al the rest of the 
face is the more vnseemely. The Nose 
should be of a meane bignes, and not to 
exceede in length or breadth, nor in highnesse. 
For Aristotle sayth, yf the Nose 
thrills be too thinne or to wyde, by great 
drawing in of ayre, it betokeneth great 
straightnes of hart and indignation of 
thought. And therefore it is to be noted, 
that the shape of the members of the body 
betokneth and iudgeth the affections 
and wyll of the Soule of man, as the 
Philosopher sayth. The temples be called 
the members of the head, and they 
haue that name because of continuall 
mouing. And as the science of the Anatomie 
meaneth, the spirite vital is sente 
from the hart to the brayne by Arteirs, 
and by veynes and nutrimental blood, 
where the vessels pulsatiues in the temples 
be lightly hurt. Also the temples 
[^f.F2r^] 
haue dentes or holes inwardely, wherin 
he taketh the humour that co~meth from 
the brayne, and bringeth the eyes asleepe, 
and if the sayde holes or dentes be pressed 
and wroung, then by trapping of the 
humour that continueth, he maketh 
the teares to fal from the Eye. The Cheeks 
are the sideling partes of the face, and 
they conteyne in them Musculus fleshe, 
with Veynes and Arteirs, and aboute 
these partes be many Muscles. Guydo 
maketh mention of .vij. about the chekes 
& ouer lyp. And Haly Abbas sayth, there 
be .xij. Muscles that moue the nether 
Iawe, some of them in opening, and other 
some in closing or shutting, passing 
vnder the bones of y=e= temples, And they 
be called Temporales: And they be right 
noble and sensatiue, of whose hurte is 
muche peril. Also there be other Muskles 
for to grinde and to chewe. And to 
al these Muscles co~meth Nerues from 
the brayne, to geue them feeling and mouing: 
and also there commeth to them 
many Arteirs and Veines, and cheefly 
about the temples, and the angles or corners 
of the Eyes, and the Lippes. And 
as the Philosophers say, the cheefe beautie 
[^f.F2v^] 
in man is in the cheekes, and there 
the complexion of man is most knowen, 
as thus, if they be full, ruddy, and meddled 
with temperate whitenes, and not fat 
in substaunce, but meanely fleshly, it betokeneth 
hotte and moyst of complxion, 
that is, sanguin and temperate in culler. 
And if they be white coloured, without 
medling of rednes, and in substaunce fat 
and soft, quauering, it betokeneth excesse 
and superfluitie of colde and moyst, that 
is flematike: And if they be browne in 
colour, or cytrin, yelowe, redde, and thin, 
and leane in substaunce, betokeneth great 
drying and heate, that is cholerike: And 
if they be as it were blowen in colour, 
and of little fleshe in substaunce, it betokeneth 
excesse and superfluitie of drynes 
and colde, and that is melancolie. And 
as Auicen sayth, the Cheekes doo not only 
shewe the diuersities of complexions, 
but also the affection and wil of the hart: 
for by the affection of the hart, by sodaine 
ioy or dreede, he waxeth eyther pale or 
redde. The bones or bony partes, fyrste 
of the Cheekes, be two: of the Nose outwardely, 
two: of the vpper Mandibile, 
two: within the Nose, three: as thus, 
[^f.F3r^] 
one diuiding the Nosethrilles within, 
and in ech Nosethril one, and they seeme 
to be rowled like a wafer, and haue a 
holownesse in them, by whiche the ayre 
is respyred and drawen to the lunges, 
and the superfluitie of the brayne is purged 
into the mouthwardes, as is before 
rehearsed. But Guydo and Galen say, 
that there be in the face nyne bones, yet 
I can not finde that the nether Mandible 
should be of y=e= number of those nyne, 
for the nether Mandible accompted 
there, proveth them to be ten in number, 
Of which thing I wyl holde no argument, 
but remit it to the sighte of your 
Eyes. The partes of the mouth are 
fyue, that is to say, the Lippes, the teeth, 
the toung, the Uuila, and the Pallet of 
the mouth. And first to speake of the lippes, 
they are members consimile or official, 
full of Musculus fleshe, as is aforesayde, 
and they were ordeyned for two causes, 
one is, that they should be to the 
mouth as a doore to a house, and to keepe 
the mouth close tyl the meate were kindly 
chewed: The other cause is, that they 
should be helpers to the pronouncing of 
the speache. The teeth are members 
[^f.F3v^] 
consimile or official, spermatike, and hardest 
of any other members, and are fastened 
in the cheke bones, and were ordeyned 
for three causes: First that they 
should chewe a mans meate, or it should 
passe downe, that it might be the sooner 
digested: The seconde, that they should 
be a helpe to the speache, for they that 
lacke their Teeth, doo not perfectly pronounce 
their wordes: the thirde is, that 
they should serue to beasts as weapons. 
The number of them is vncertayne, for 
some men haue mo, and some lesse, they 
that haue the whole number haue .xxxij. 
that is to say .xvj. aboue, and as many 
beneath, as thus, two Dvvallies, two 
Quadripulles, two Cannines, eyght Morales, 
and two Cansales. The Toung 
is a carnous member, compounde and 
made of many Nerues, Lygamentes, 
Veines and Arteirs, ordeyned principally 
for three causes: The first is, that 
when a man eateth, the Toung mighte 
helpe to turne the meate tyll it were 
wel chewed: The seconde cause is, that 
by him is receiued the taste of sweete and 
sowre, and presented by him to the common 
wittes: The thirde is, that by him 
[^f.F4r^] 
is pronounced euery speach. The fleshly 
parte of the toung is white, and hath 
in him nine muskles, and about the roote 
of him is Glandulus, in the whiche be 
two welles, and they be euer ful of spittle 
to temper and keepe moyst the toung, 
or els it would waxe dry by reason of his 
labour. &c. The Uuila is a member 
made of a spongeous fleshe, hanging 
downe from the ende of the Pallet ouer 
the goulet of the throte, and is a member 
in complexion colde and dry, and oftentimes 
when there falleth rawnes or 
muche moystnes into it from the head, 
then it hangeth downe in the throte, and 
letteth a man to swallowe, and it is 
broade at the vpper ende, and smal at 
the nether. It was ordeyned for diuers causes: 
One is, that by him is holpen the 
sounde of speache, for where the Uuila 
is lacking, there lacketh the perfect sou~d 
of speache: Another is, that it mighte 
helpe the prolation of vomites: another 
is, that by him is tempered and abated 
the distemperaunce of the ayre that passeth 
to the Lunges: another is, that by 
him is guyded the superfluities of the 
brayne that commeth from the coletures 
[^f.F4v^] 
of the Nose, or els the superfluities 
should fal downe sodenly into the mouth, 
the which were a displeasure. The Pallet 
of the mouth conteyneth nothing els 
but a carnous Pannikle, and the bones 
that be vnderneath it haue two diuisions, 
One along the Pallet from the diuision 
of the Nose, and from the opening 
of the other Mandible vnto the nether 
ende of the Pallet, lacking halfe an inch, 
and there it diuideth ouerthwart, and the 
first diuision is of the Mandible, and the 
seconde is of the bone called Paxillarie 
or Bazillarie, that sustayneth and byndeth 
al other bones of the head together. 
The skinne of the Pallet of the mouth 
is of the inner parte of the stomack and 
of Myre, and of Ysofagus, that is the 
way of the meate into the stomacke. 
The way how to know that such a pannicle 
is of that part of the stomacke, may 
be knowen when that a man is touched 
within the mouth, anone he beginneth 
to tickle in the stomacke, and the neerer 
that he shal touche vnto the throte, the 
more it abhorreth the stomocke, and often 
times it causeth the stomacke to yeld 
from him that is within him, as when a 
[^f.G1r^] 
man doth vomite. Also in the mouth is 
ended the vppermoste extremitie of the 
Wesande, which is called Myre or Isofagus. 
And with hym is conteyned 
Trachia arteria, that is, the way of the 
ayre, whose holes be couered with a lap 
like a tong, and is gristly, that the meate 
and drinke mighte slyde ouer him into 
Isofagus: The whiche grystle, when a 
man speaketh, it is reared vp, and couereth 
the way of the meate: and when a 
man swalloweth the meate, then it couereth 
the way of the ayre, so that when the 
one is couered, the other is discouered. 
For if a man open the waye of the ayre 
when he swalloweth, if there fal a crum 
into it, he shal neuer cease coughing vntil 
it be vp agayne. And this suffiseth for 
the necke. 
 
[}Heereafter foloweth the 
Anatomie of the Necke.}] 
 
THE Necke foloweth next to be 
spoken of. Galen proueth that the 
Necke was made for no other 
cause but for the Lunges, for al thinges 
[^f.G1v^] 
that haue no Lungs haue neither necke 
nor voyce, except fishe. And you shal vnderstande, 
that the necke is all that is 
conteyned betweene the head and the 
shoulders, and betweene the chinne and 
the brest. It is compounde and made of 
foure thinges, that is to say, of Spondillus, 
of Seruicibus, of Gula, & of Gutture, 
the which shal be declared more playnely 
hereafter, and through these, passe the 
waye of the meate and of the ayre, but 
they be not of the substance of the necke. 
The Spondelles of the necke be seuen, 
The fyrst is ioyned vnto the lower parte 
of the head, called Paxillarie or Bazillarie, 
and in the same wise are ioyned euery 
Spondel with other, and the laste of 
the seuen with the fyrst of the Backe or 
Ridge: and the Lygamentes that keepe 
these Spondels together are not so hard 
and tough as those of the backe: for why? 
those of the necke be more feebler and 
subtiller: The cause is this, for it is 
necessary otherwhile that the head moue 
without the necke, and the necke without 
the head, the whiche might not well 
haue beene done if they had beene strong 
and boystrous. Of these aforesayd seuen 
[^f.G2r^] 
Spondels of the necke, there springeth 
seuen payre of Senewes, the whiche be 
diuided into the head and into the Vysage, 
to the shoulders, and to the armes. 
From the hole of the first spondel springeth 
the fyrst payre of senewes, betwene 
the fyrst spondel and the seconde, and so 
foorth of al the rest in like maner as of 
these. Also these senewes receyue subtil 
wylle of the senews of the Brayne, of the 
which wylle, and senewes, and fleshe, 
with a pannikle, make the composition 
of Muskels, Lazartes, and Brawnes, 
the which three thinges be al one, and be 
the instrumentes of voluntarie mouing 
of euery member. The Muskles of the 
neck after Galen are numbred to be .xx. 
mouing the head and the necke. Likewise 
it is to be noted, that there be three 
maner of fleshes in the necke: the first is 
called Pixwex or Seruisis, and it is called of 
Chylder Golde heire, or yellowe heire, 
the whiche are certayne longitudinales 
lying on the sides of the Spondels from 
the head downe to the latter Spondel. 
And they are ordeyned for this cause, 
that when the Senewes be weery of ouer 
muche labour with mouing and trauayle, 
[^f.G2v^] 
that they might rest vpon them as 
vpon a bedde. The second fleshe is musculus, 
from whome springeth the Tendons 
and cordes that moue the head and 
the necke, whiche be numbred twentie, 
as is afore declared: The thirde fleshe 
replenisheth the voyde places. &c. 
The thirde parte of the necke is called 
Gutture, and it is the standing out of the 
Throte boll. The fourth part is called 
Gula, and the hinder parte Ceruix, 
and hath that name of the Philosophers, 
because of the marowe comming to the 
Ridge bones. It is so called, because it 
is as it were a seruaunt to the brayne: 
For the necke receiueth and taketh of the 
brayne influence of vertue of mouing, 
and sendeth it by senewes to other parts 
of the body downwardes, and to al members 
of the body. Heere you shal vnderstand, 
that the way of the meate, & Mire 
or Isofagus, is al one thing, and it is to 
be noted, that it stretcheth fro~ the mouth 
to the stomache, by the hinder part of the 
necke inwardly, fastned to the spondels 
of the necke, vntyl he come to the fyfthe 
spondel, and there he leaueth the spondel 
and stretcheth tyl he come to the formost 
[^f.G3r^] 
part of the brest, & passeth through 
Diafragma tyl it come to the mouth of 
the stomacke, and there he is ended. Furthermore 
it is to be noted, that this Wesande 
is compounde and made of two 
Tunikles or Cotes, that is to say, of the 
inner and of the vtter. The vtter tunikle 
is but simple, for he needeth no retention 
but onely for his owne nourishing: 
but the inner Tunikle is compounde 
and made of Musculus Longitudinal 
Wyl, by which he may drawe the 
meate from the mouth into the stomack, 
as it shal be more playnely declared in 
the Anatomie of the stomacke. Furthermore 
Caua pulmonis via trachia arteria, 
al these be one thing, that is to say, 
the throte boll, and it is set within the 
necke besides y=e= Wesande towardes Gula, 
and is compounde of the grystle knytte 
eache with other. And that pannikle that 
is meane betweene the Wesand and the 
throte bol, is called Isinon. Also ye shal 
vnderstand, that the great Veines which 
ramefie by the sydes of the necke to the 
vpper part of the head, is of some men 
called Gwidege, & of others Vena organices, 
the incision of whom is perillous. 
[^f.G3v^] 
And thus it is to be considered, that the 
Necke of man is compounde and made 
of skinny fleshe, Ligamentes, and bones. 
And this suffiseth for the necke and the 
throte. 
 
