[^Paré, Ambroise: Workes of Ambrose Parey^] 
 
[}THE 
WORKES 
of that famous 
Chirurgion 
Ambrose Parey 
Translated out of 
Latine and compared 
with the French. 
by 
Th: Johnson. 
 
Nefassare vide, neu quæ sunt parta saluti, 
Vertat in exitium, non solers cura medentis. 
 
London 
Printed by Th: Cotes 
and R. Young 
Anno 1634.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 1133-1146^] 
 
[^p.1133^] 
[}THE APOLOGIE 
AND TREATISE, CONTAINING 
THE VOYAGES 
MADE INTO DIVERS PLACES. 
BY 
AMBROSE PARE of Laval in Maine, Counsellor 
and cheefe Chirurgion to the King.}] 
 
[}THE TVVENTININTH BOOKE.}] 
 
TRuely I had not put my hand to the penne, to write on 
[/1./] 
such a thing, were it not that some have impudently injured, 
taxed, and more through particular hatred, disgraced 
 
me, than for zeale or love they beare to the publicke 
good; which was, concerning my manner of tying 
the Veines and Arteries, writing thus as followeth. 
 
Male igitur & nimium arroganter inconsultus & temerarius 
[/2./] 
quidam, vasorum ustionem post emortui membri resectionem 
a veteribus omnibus plurimum commendatam & 
semper probatam damnare ausus est, novum quendam deligandi 
vasa modum, contra veteres omnes medicos sine ratione, experientia & judicio docere 
cupiens, nec animadvertit majora multo pericula ex ipsa vasorum deligatione quam acu 
partem sanam profunde transfigendo administrari vult, imminere quam ex ipsa ustione. 
Nam si acu nervosam aliquam partem, vel nervum ipsum pupugerit, dum ita novo & 
inusitato modo venam absurde conatur constringere, nova inflammatio necessario consequetur, 
a qua Convulsio & a convulsione cita mors. Quorum symptematum metu Galenus non 
ante transversa vulnera suere audebat (quod tamen minus erat periculosum) quam musculorum 
aponeuroses denudasset. Adde quod forcipes quibus post sectionem iterum carnem dilacerat, 
cum retracta versus originem vasa se posse extrahere somniat, non minorem adferant 
dolorem quam ignita ferramenta admota. Quod si quis laniatum expertus incolumis 
evaserit, is Deo optimo maximo cuius Beneficentia crudelitate ista & carnificina liberatus 
est, maximas gratias habere & semper agere debet; which is thus: Ill then, and too arrogantly 
a certaine indiscreet and rash person would blame and condemne the cauterizing 
of vessells after the amputation of a rotten and corrupted member, much 
praised and commended and alwayes approved by the Ancients; desiring to shew and 
teach us without reason, judgement, and experience, a new way to tye the vessells, 
against the opinion of the Ancient Physitions, taking no heede, nor being well advised, 
that there happens farre greater perills, and accidents, through this new way of 
[^p.1134^] 
tying the vessells (which he will have to be made with a needle, piercing deepely the 
sound part) than by the burning and ustion of the sayd vessells; for if the needle shall 
pricke any nervous part, yea the nerve it selfe, when he shall by this new and unaccustomed 
way absurdly constraine the veine by binding it, there must necessarily 
follow a new inflammation; from an inflammation a convulsion, from a convulsion 
death: for feare of which accidents, Galen never durst stitch transversall wounds, 
(which notwithstanding were lesse dangerous) before he had discovered the Aponeuroses 
of the muscles. Moreover the pincers with which after the section, the flesh 
is again dilacerated, while he thinkes to draw the vessells out which are drawne in 
toward their originall, bring no lesse paine than the cautering irons doe. And if any 
one having experimented this new manner of cruelty have escaped danger, he ought 
to render thankes to almighty God forever, through whose goodnesse he hath beene 
freed from such tyrannie, feeling rather his executioner than his methodicall Chirurgion. 
 
O what sweete words are heere for one, who is sayd to be a wise and learned Doctor? 
[/3./] 
he remembers not that his white beard admonisheth him, not to speake any 
thing unworthy of his age, and that he ought to put off and drive out of him all envie 
and rancor conceived against his neighbour. So now I will proove by authority, 
reason and experience, that the sayd Veines and Arteryes ought to be tyed. 
 
[}Authorities.}] 
 
AS for Authorities, I will come to that of that worthy man Hippocrates, who 
[/4./] 
wils and commands the cure of Fistula's in the fundament by ligature, as well to 
consume the callosity, as to avoyd hemorragie. 
 
Galen in his method, speaking of a fluxe of blood made by an outward cause, of 
[/5./] 
whom see heere the words, It is (saith he) most sure to tye the roote of the vessell, 
which I understand to be that which is most neere to the Liver, or the heart. 
 
Avicen commands to tye the veine and the Arterie, after it is discovered, towards 
[/6./] 
his originall. 
 
Guido of Chauliac, speaking of the wounds of the Veines and Arteries, injoyneth the 
Chirurgion to make the ligature in the vessell. 
 
Master Hollier speaking of a fluxe of blood, commands expressely, to tye the 
[/7./] 
vessells. 
 
Calmetheus in the chapter of the wounds in the Veines and Arteries, tells a most 
sure way to stay a fluxe of blood, by ligature of the vessell. 
[/8./] 
 
Celsus from whom the sayd Physition hath snatched the most part of his booke, 
[/9./] 
chargeth expressely, to tye the vessells in a fluxe of blood happening to wounds, as a 
remedy most easie and most sure. 
 
Vesalius in his Chirurgery, willeth that the vessells be tyed in a fluxe of blood. 
[/10./] 
 
Iohn de Vigo treating of a hemorragie in bleeding wounds, commands to tye the 
Veine, and the Artery. 
[/11./] 
 
Tagaultius treating of the meanes to stay a fluxe of blood, commands to pinch the 
Veine or Artery with a Crow or Parrots bill, then to tye it with a very strong 
[/12./] 
thred. 
 
Peter of Argillata of Bullogne, discoursing of a fluxe of blood, and the meanes 
[/13./] 
to stoppe it, giveth a fourth way expressely, which is made by ligature of the vessells. 
 
Iohn Andreas a Cruce, a Venetian, makes mention of a method, to stay a fluxe of 
[/14./] 
blood by the ligature of the vessells. 
 
D'Alechamp commands to tye the Veines, and Arteries. 
 
See then (my little good man) the authorities which command you to tye the vessells. 
As for the reasons, I will debate of them. 
 
The hemorragie (say you) is not so much to be feared in the section of the Call, 
[/15./] 
as in that of the Varices, and the incision of the temporall Arteries, as after the amputation 
of a member. Now you your selfe command, that in cutting the Varices, the 
[/16./] 
fluxe of blood be stopped by the ligature of the vessells. You command the same, 
[^p.1135^] 
speaking of the stitch, with the amputation and section of the Call, changed by the 
outward ayre, see heere your owne words: After that must bee considered concerning 
the Call: for if there be any part corrupted, putrified, withered, or blackish, 
First having tyed, for feare of a fluxe of blood, you doe not bid afterward to have 
it cauterized, but to say the truth, you have your eyes shut, and all your senses dulled, 
when you would speake against so sure a method, and that it is not but through 
anger, and an ill will. For there is nothing which hath more power to drive reason 
from her seate, than choler and anger. Moreover when one comes to cauterize 
the dismembred parts, oftentimes when the escar comes to fall off; there happens 
a new flux of blood: As I have seene divers times, not having yet been inspired 
by God, with so sure a meanes then, when I used the heate of fire. Which if 
you have not found, or understood this method in the bookes of the Ancients, you 
ought not thus to tread it under your feete, and speake unluckely of one who all his 
life hath preferred the profit of the Common-wealth before his owne particular. 
Is it not more than reasonable to bee founded upon the saying of Hippocrates; upon 
whose authority you serve your selfe, which is thus? That what the medicament 
[/17./] 
cureth not, the iron doth, and what the iron doth not amend, the fire exterminateth: 
It is a thing which savours not of a Christian, to fall to burning at the first dash without 
staying for any more gentle remedies. As you your selfe write, speaking of the 
[/18./] 
conditions required in a Chirurgion to cure well; which passage you borrow from 
some other place: for that which may bee done gently without fire, is much more 
[/19./] 
commended than otherwise. Is it not a thing which all schooles hold as a Maxime, 
that we must alwaies begin with most easie remedies, which if they be not sufficient, 
we must then come to extreame, following the doctrine of Hippocrates? Galen commands 
in the place before alledged, to treate or dresse the diseased quickly, safely, 
and with the least of paine that is possible. 
[/20./] 
 
[}Let us come now to Reason.}] 
 
NOw so it is, that one cannot apply hot irons but with extreame and vehement 
paine in a sensible part, void of a Gangreene, which would be cause of a Convulsion, 
Feaver, yea oft times of death. Moreover, it would bee a long while afterwards 
before the poore patients were cured, because that by the action of the fire 
there is made an eschar, which proceeds from the subject flesh, which being fallen, 
[/21./] 
nature must regenerate a new flesh in stead of that which hath beene burned, as 
also the bone remaines discovered and bare; and by this meanes, for the most 
part there remaines an Vlcer incurable. Moreover there is yet another accident. 
It happeneth that oftentimes the crust being fallen off, the flesh not being well renewed, 
the blood issueth out as much as it did before. But when they shall be tyed, 
the ligature falls not off untill first the flesh have very well covered them againe: 
which is prooved by Galen, saying, that escharoticke medicines which cause a crust 
or eschar, whensoever they fall off, leave the part more bare than the naturall habit 
[/22./] 
requires. For the generation of a crust proceeds from the parts subject, and 
which are scituate round about it, being also burned, as I may say: wherefore by 
how much the part is burnt, by so much it looseth the naturall heate. Then tell 
[/23./] 
me when it is necessary to use escharoticke medicines, or cautering irons? Tis when 
the flux of blood is caused by erosion, or some Gangreene or putrifaction. Now is 
it thus? In fresh bleeding wounds there is neither Gangreene nor putrifaction. 
Therefore, the cauteries ought not to be there applyed. And when the Ancients 
commanded to apply hot irons to the mouthes of the vessells, it hath not beene 
onely to stay the flux of blood, but cheefely to correct the malignitie, or gangreenous 
putrifaction which might spoile the neighbouring parts. And it must be here 
noted, that if I had knowne such accidents to happen, which you have declared in 
your booke, in drawing and tying the vessells, I had never beene twice deceived; 
nor would I ever have left by my writings to posteritie, such a way of stopping a 
flux of blood: But I writ it after I had seene it done and did it very often, with happy 
successe. See then what may happen through your inconsiderate counsell, without 
[^p.1136^] 
examining, or standing upon the facility of tying the sayd vessells. For see, heere's 
[/24./] 
your scope and proposition, to tye the vessells after amputation is a new remedy, say 
you; then it must not be used, it is an ill argument for a Doctor. 
 
But as for that (say you) one must use fire after the amputation of members, 
to consume, and drie the putrifaction, which is a common thing in Gangreenes, and 
mortifications, that indeed hath no place here, because the practise is to amputate 
the part above that which is mortified, and corrupted; as Celsus writes and commands, 
[/25./] 
to make the amputation upon the sound part, rather than to leave any whit 
of the corrupted. I would willingly aske you, if when a veine is cut transverse, and 
that it is very much retracted towards the originall, whether you would make no 
conscience to burne till that you had found the orifice of the veine, or artery; and if 
it be not more easie onely with a Crow bill to pinch and draw the vessell, and so tie 
it? In which you may openly shew your ignorance, and that you have your minde 
[/26./] 
seised with much rancor and choler. We daily see the ligature of the vessells practised 
with happy successe after the amputation of a part, which I will now verifie by 
experiences and histories, of those to whom the said ligature hath beene made, and 
persons yet living. 
 
[}Experiences.}] 
 
THe 16. day of Iune 1582. in the presence of Master Iohn Liebaud doctor in the 
[/27./] 
faculty of Physicke at Paris, Claud Viard sworne Chirurgion, Master Mathurin 
Huron, Chirurgion of Monsieur de Souvray, and I, Iohn Charbonell master Barber Chirurgion 
of Paris, well understanding the Theoricke, and Practicke of Chirurgery, did 
with good dexterity amputate the left legge of a woman tormented the space of 
three yeares with extreame paine, by reason of a great Caries which was in the bone 
Astragal, Cyboides, great and little focile, and through all the nervous parts, through 
which she felt extreame and intollerable paines night and day: she is called Mary of 
Hostel, aged 28 yeares, or thereabouts, wife of Peter Herve, Esquire of the Kitchin 
to the Lady Duchesse of Vzez, dwelling in the streete of Verbois on the other side 
Saint Martin in the fields, dwelling at the signe of the Saint Iohns head; where the 
sayd Charbonell cut off the sayd legge, the breadth of foure large fingers below the 
Knee, and after that he had incised the flesh, and sawed the bone, hee griped the 
[/28./] 
Veine with the Crow bill, then the Artery, then tyed them; from whence I protest 
to God (which the company that were there, can witnesse) that in all the operation 
which was sodainely done, there was not spilt one porrenger of blood; and I bid 
the sayd Charbonell to let it bleed more, following the precept of Hippocrates, that 
[/29./] 
it is good in all wounds and also in inveterate ulcers, to let the blood runne; by this 
meanes, the part is lesse subject to inflammation. The sayd Charbonell continued the 
dressing of her, who was cured in two moneths, without any fluxe of blood happening 
unto her, or other ill accident; and she went to see you at your lodging being 
perfectly cured. 
 
Another history of late memory, of a singing man of our Ladyes Church named 
[/30./] 
master Colt, who broke both the bones of his legge which were crusht in divers 
peeces, insomuch that there was no hope of cure: to withstand a gangreene and 
mortification, and by consequence death. Monsieur Helin Doctor, Regent in the faculty 
of Physicke, a man of honour and of good knowledge, Claud Viard, and Simon 
Peter, sworne Chirurgions of Paris, men well exercised in Chirurgery; and Balthazar 
of Lestre, and Leonard de Leschenal, Master Barber Chirurgions, well experimented 
in the operations of Chirurgery, were all of opinion to withstand the accidents 
[/31./] 
aforesayd, to make entire amputation of the whole legge, a little above the 
broken & shivered bones & the torne nerves, veines, arteries; the operation was nimbly 
done, by the sayd Viard, and the blood stancht by the ligature of the vessells in 
the presence of the sayd Helin, and master Tonsard great Vicar of our Ladyes 
Church, and was continually drest by the sayd Leschenal, and I went to see him other 
whiles; he was happily cured without the application of hot irons, and walketh 
lustily on a woodden legge. 
 
[^p.1137^] 
[}Another History.}] 
 
IN the yeare 1583. the 10. day of December, Toussaint Posson borne at Ronieville, at 
this present dwelling at Beauvais neare Dourdan, having his Legge all ulcered, 
and all the bones cariez'd and rotten, prayed me for the honor of God to cut off his 
Legge by reason of the great paine which he could no longer endure. After his body 
was prepared I caused his legge to be cut off, fowre fingers below the rotula of 
the knee, by Daniel Powlet one of my servants, to teach him and to imbolden him 
in such workes; and there he readily tyed the vessells to stay the bleeding, without 
application of hot irons, in the presence of Iames Guillemeau ordinary Chirurgion 
to the King, and Iohn Charbonell master Barber Chirurgion of Paris: and during the 
cure was visited by Master Laffile and Master Courtin Doctors, Regents in the facultie 
of Medicine at Paris. The said operation was made in the house of Iohn Gohell 
Inkeeper, dwelling at the signe of the white horse in the Greve. I will not here forget 
to say, that the Lady Princesse of Montpensier, knowing that he was poore, and in my 
hands, gave him money to pay for his chamber and diet. He was well cured, God 
be praysed, and is returned home to his house with a woodden Leg. 
 
[}Another History.}] 
 
A Gangreene happened to halfe of the Legge to one named Nicholas Mesnager 
[/32./] 
aged threescore and sixteene yeares, dwelling in S. Honores street, at the signe 
of the Basket; which happened to him through an inward cause, so that wee were 
constrained to cut off his Legge to save his life: and it was taken; off by Anthony Renaud, 
master Barber Chirurgion of Paris the 16. day of December 1583. in the presence 
of Master Le Fort, and Master La Noue sworne Chirurgions of Paris; and the 
blood was stanched by the Ligature of the vessells, and hee is at this present cured 
and in health, walking with a woodden Leg. 
 
[}Another History.}] 
 
A Waterman at the Port of Nesle, dwelling neare Monsieur de Mas, Postmaster, 
named Iohn Boussereau, in whose hands a Musket brake asunder, which broke 
the bones of his head, and rent and tore the other parts in such sort that it was needfull 
and necessary to make amputation of the hand two fingers above the wrist: 
which was done by Iames Guillemeau then Chirurgion in ordinary to the king, who 
[/33./] 
dwelt at that time with me. The operation likewise being redily done, and the 
blood stancht by the Ligature of the vessells without burning irons: hee is at this 
present living. 
 
[}Another History.}] 
 
A Merchant Grocer dwelling in S=t=. Denis street at the signe of the great Tournois 
[/34./] 
named the Iudge, who fell upon his head, where was made a wound neare the 
temporall muscle, where he had an artery opened, from whence issued forth blood 
with great impetuosity, in so much that common remedies would not serve the 
turne; I was called thither, where I found Master Rasse, Master Cointeret, Master 
Viard, sworne Chirurgions of Paris, to stay the blood; where presently I tooke a 
needle and thread, and tyed the arterie, and it bled no more after that, and was 
quickly cured. Master Rousselet can witnesse it, not long since Deacon of your Facultie, 
who was in the cure with us. 
 
[}Another History.}] 
 
A Sergeant of the Chastelet dwelling neare S. Andrew des Arts, who had a stroake 
[/35./] 
of a sword upon the throate in the Clarkes medow, which cut asunder the jugular 
[^p.1138^] 
veine externe, as soone as he was hurt he put his handkercher upon the wound, 
and came to looke for mee at my house, and when hee tooke away his handkercher the 
blood leaped out with great impetuosity: I suddainly tyed the veine toward the 
roote; he by this meanes was stanched and cured thankes be to God. And if one 
had followed your manner of stanching blood by cauteries, I leave it to be supposed 
whether he had beene cured; I thinke hee had beene dead in the hands of the operator. 
If I would recite all those whose vessells were tyed to stay the blood which 
have beene cured, I should not have ended this long time; so that me thinkes there 
are Histories enough recited to make you beleeve the blood of veines and arteries 
is surely stanched without applying any actuall cauteries. 
 
[}DV BARTVS. 
 
He that doth strive against experience, 
Daignes not to talke of any learned science.}] 
 
NOw my little Master, seeing that you reproach me, that I have not written all 
the operations of Chirurgery in my workes which the Ancients writ of, I 
[/36./] 
should be very sorry for it: for then indeede might you justly call me Carnifex. I 
have left them because they are too cruell, and am willing to follow the modernes, 
who have moderated such cruelty: which notwithstanding you have followed step 
by step, as appeareth by the operations here written, extracted from your booke, 
which you have drawne here and there from certaine ancient Authors, such as follow: 
and such as you have never practised nor seene. 
 
[}The first operation.}] 
 
TO inveterate fluxions of the eyes, & Migrimes, Paulus Ægineta as also Albucasis 
[/37./] 
command to make Arteriotomie, see here the words of the same Ægineta. You 
marke the Arteries which are behind the eares, then divide them in cutting to the 
very bone, and make a great incision the breadth of two fingers; which is the will also 
[/38./] 
of Aetius that the incision be made transverse, cutting or incising the length of 
two fingers, even till that the Artery be found, as you command to bee done in 
your booke; but I holding the opinion of Galen, who commands to dresse the diseased 
[/39./] 
quickly, safely and with the least paine that is possible, I teach the young 
Chirurgion the meanes to remedy such evills in opening the Arteries behind the 
eares, and those of the Temples, with one only incision, as a letting blood, and not 
to make a great incision and cut out worke for a long time. 
 
 [}The second operation.}] 
 
TO fluxions which are made a long time upon the eyes, Paul Æginete and Albucasis 
command to make incision which they call Periscythismos or Angiologie of the 
Greekes; and see heere the words of Paul, In this operation first the head is shaved, 
[/40./] 
then taking heede of touching the temporall muscles, a transverse incision must bee 
made, beginning at the left Temple and finishing at the right, which you have put 
in your booke word for word, without changing any thing: which sheweth openly 
you are a right wound-maker; as may be seene in the Chapter which you call the 
Crowne cut, which is made halfe round under the Coronall suture from one temple 
to the another even to the bone. Now I doe not teach such a cruell kind of remedy, 
[/41./] 
but instruct the operator by reason, authority and notable proofe of a sure and 
certaine way to remedy such affections without butchering men in this kind. 
 
[}The third.}] 
 
IN the cure of the Empyema, Paul Æginete, Albucasis and Celsus commanded to 
[/42./] 
apply some 13. others 15. Cauteries to give issue to the matter contained in the 
breast, as the said Celsus in the aforesaid place appointeth for Asthmatick people, 
[^p.1139^] 
which is a thing out of all reason (with respect to their honour be it spoken) that 
since the Chirurgions scope is to give issue to the matter therein contained, there 
is no other question than to make apertion, to evacuate the matter in the most inferior 
part. I have shewed the young Chirurgion the meanes to doe it safely, without 
tormenting the patients for nothing. 
 
[}The fourth.}] 
 
IN Paps that are too great, Paul Æginet and Albucasis commands to make a crosse 
[/43./] 
incision, to take out all the fat, and then joyne together the wound by stitch: In 
briefe, it is to flea a man alive, which I have never practised, nor counsell it to bee 
[/44./] 
done by the young Chirurgion. 
 
[}The fifth.}] 
 
ALbucasis and Paul Æginet will cauterize the Liver and the Spleene with hot 
[/45./] 
[/46./] 
irons, which the modernes have never practised; for indeede reason is manifestly 
repugnant thereunto. 
 
[}The Sixth.}] 
[/47./] 
 
IN the Paracentesis which is made in the third kind of Dropsie called Ascites, Celius 
Aurelianus commandeth divers apertions to be made in the belly. Albucasis 
applies nine actuall cauteries, that is to say, foure about the Navell, one upon the 
Stomacke, one upon the Spleene, one upon the Liver, two behind the backe upon 
the spondills, one of them neare the breast, the last neare the Stomacke. Ætius 
is likewise of the same opinion, to open the belly with, divers cauteries. Paul Æginet 
commands to apply five actual cauteries to make the said Paracentesis. But abhorring 
such a kind of burning of which you speake much in your third booke, I shew another 
[/48./] 
kind of practise, the which is done in making a simple incision in the sayd 
belly, as may be seene in my workes, with happy successe. I doe not teach yong men 
in my workes the manner of burning, which the Ancients have called infibulare, that 
is not in practise though Celsus writeth of it. 
 
[}The Seaventh.}] 
 
IN the Sciaticke proceeding from an internall cause, and because the viscous humors 
[/49./] 
displace the bones, Paul commands to burne or cauterize the said joint to 
the bone. Dioscorides commands the same, Which I doe not finde expedient, taking 
indication from the subjacent parts: for there where one would burne, tis in 
the place of the foure twin muscles, under which passeth the great Nerve descending 
from the holy bone; which being burnt, I leave it to your censure what might 
happen, as Galen remarketh speaking of the Vstion which must be made in the shoulder 
called humerus. 
 
[}The Eighth.}] 
 
IN the outward Laxation of the Spondills, Hippocrates commands to bind the man 
[/50./] 
right upon a Ladder, the Armes and Legges tyed and bound: then afterwards having 
raised the Ladder to the top of a tower, or the ridge of an house, with a great 
rope in a pully, then to let the patient fall plumbe down upon the hard pavement; 
which Hippocrates sayes was done in his time. But I doe not shew any such way of 
giving the strapado to men, but I shew the Chirurgion in my workes, the way to 
reduce them surely, and without great paine. Moreover I should be sorry to follow 
the saying of the sayd Hippocrates, in the third booke De morbis, who commands 
in the disease called Volvulus to cause the belly to bee blowne with a paire of Bellowes, 
putting the nosell of them into the intestinum rectum, and then blow there 
[^p.1140^] 
till the belly be much stretcht, afterwards to give an emollient glister, and to stop 
the fundament with a sponge. Such practise as this is not made now a dayes, therefore 
wonder not if I have not spoken of it. And you not being contented to patch 
together the operations of the above said Authors, you have also taken divers in my 
workes, as every man may know: which sheweth manifestly that there is nothing of 
your owne in your Chirurgions Guide. I leave out divers other unprofitable operations 
which you quote in your booke, without knowing what beasts they are, in never 
having seene them practised; but because you have found them written in the 
bookes of the Ancients, you have put them into your booke. 
 
Moreover you say that you will teach me my lesson in the operations of Chirurgery, 
which I thinke you cannot doe: because I have not onely learned them in my 
Study, and by the hearing for many yeares the lessons of Doctors of Physicke: but 
as I have sayd before in my Epistle to the Reader, I was resident the space of three 
yeares in the Hospitall of Paris, where I had the meanes to see and learne divers 
workes of Chirurgery, upon divers diseases, together with the Anatomy, upon a 
great number of dead bodies, as oftentimes I have sufficiently made triall publickly 
in the Physitions schoole at Paris, and my good lucke hath made mee seene much 
more. For being called to the service of the Kings of France (foure of which I 
have served) I have beene in company at Battells, Skirmishes, assaults, and beseiging 
of Citties and Fortresses; as also I have beene shut up in Citties with those that 
have beene beseiged, having charge to dresse those that were hurt. Also I have 
dwelt many yeares in this great and famous Citty of Paris, where, thankes bee to 
God, I have lived in very good reputation amongst all men, and have not beene 
esteemed the least in rancke of men of my profession, seeing there was not any cure, 
were it never so difficult and great, where my hand and my counsell have not beene 
required, as I make it appeare in this my worke. Now dare you (these things being 
understood) say you will teach mee to performe the workes of Chirurgery, since 
you never went further than your study? The operations of the same are foure in 
generall (as we have declared heretofore) where you make but three, that is to say, 
joyne that which is separated, separate that which was conjoyned, and to take away 
that which is superfluous, and the fourth which I make, is as much necessary as industrious 
invention, to adde to Nature that which is wanting, as I have shewed 
heere above. Also it is your will that the Chirurgion make but the three operations 
above sayd without medling to ordaine a simple Cataplasme, saying it is that 
which comes to your part belonging to the Physition: And that the Ancients (in the 
discourse which you have made to the Reader) have divided the practise of Physick 
into three kinds, that is to say, Diet, Medicine, and Chirurgery. But I would willingly 
demand of you, who hath made the partition, and where any thing should be 
done, who are those which are content with their part, without any enterprize 
upon the other? For Hippocrates, Galen, Ætius, Avicen, in briefe, all the Phisitions, 
as well Greekes and Latins as Arabians, have never so treated of the one, that 
they have not treated of the other, for the great affinitie and tye that there is betweene 
them two, and it should bee very difficult to doe otherwise. Now when 
you will vilifie Chirurgery so much, you speake against your selfe; for in your 
Epistle which you have dedicated to Monsieur of Martigues, you say, that Chirurgery 
is the most noble part of Physicke, as well by reason of the originall, antiquity, 
necessity, as certainty in her actions; for shee workes Luce aperta, as learnedly writeth 
Celsus in the beginning of his seaventh booke; therefore it is to be beleeved you 
never went out of your study, but to teach the Theorick (if you have beene able to 
doe it.) 
 
The operations of Chirurgery are learn't by the eye, & by the touch. I will say that 
[/51./] 
you much resemble a yong Lad of Low Britany, of plump buttocks, where was stuffe 
sufficient; who demanded leave of his father to come to Paris, to take France; being arrived 
the Organist of our Ladys Church, met with him at the Pallace gate, who took 
him to blow the Organs, where hee was remaining three yeeres: hee saw hee could 
somewhat speake French, he returnes to his father, and told him that he spake good 
French, and moreover he knew well, to play on the Organs: his father received him 
[^p.1141^] 
very joyfully, for that hee was so wise and learned in so short a time. Hee 
went to the Organist of their great Church, and prayed him to permit his sonne to 
play on the Organs, to the end he might know whether his sonne was become so 
skilfull a master, as he sayd he was; which the Organist agreed to very willingly. 
Being entred to the Organs, he cast himselfe with a full leape to the bellowes, the 
master Organist bid him play, and that he would blow; then this good master answeares, 
Let him play himselfe on the Organs if he would for him, hee could doe 
nothing but play on the bellowes. I thinke also my little master, that you know nothing 
else, but to prattle in a chaire; but I will play upon the keyes, and make the Organs 
sound (that is to say) I will doe the operations of Chirurgery, that which you 
cannot in any wise doe, because you have not gone from your study or the schooles, 
as I have sayd before. But also, as I have sayd already in the Epistle to the Reader, 
that the labourer doth little profit by talking of the seasons, discourse of the manner 
of tilling the earth, to shew what seedes are proper to each soyle; all which is nothing 
if he put not his hand to the Plough, and couple the Oxen together. So likewise 
is it no great matter if you doe not know the Practicke, for a man may execute 
Chirurgery well, although he have no tongue at all. As Cornelius Celsus hath very 
well remarked in his first booke when he saith, Morbos non eloquentia, sed remedijs curari: 
quæ si quis elinguis, usu discretus bene norit, hunc aliquanto majorem medicum futurum, 
quam si sine usu linguam suam excoluerit; that is to say; Diseases are not to bee 
cured by eloquence, but by remedies well and duely applyed, which if any wise and 
discreete man though he have no tongue know well the use thereof, this man in time 
shall become the greater Physition, than if without practise his tongue were dipt 
with oratory; the which you your selfe confesse in your sayd booke by a Tetrasticke 
which is thus: 
 
To talke's not all in Chirurgions Art, 
But working with the hands. 
Aptly to dresse each greeved part, 
And guide, fire, knife, and bands. 
 
Aristotle in the first booke of his Metaphysicks the first chapter saith, Experience 
is almost like unto science, and by the same, Art and science have beene invented. 
And indeed we see these which are experimented, attaine sooner to that which 
they intend, than those which have reason and not experience, because that the sayd 
experience is a knowledge of singular and particular things, and science on the contrary 
is a knowledge of things universall. Now that which is particular is more 
healeable than that which is universall, therefore those which have experience are 
more wise and more esteemed, than those which want it, by reason they know what 
they doe. Moreover I say, that science without experience, bringeth no great assurance. 
 
Alciat, a Doctor of Milan, boasted one day of himselfe, that his glory was greater 
and more famous than that of Counsellors, Presidents, masters of Request: because that 
it was by his science, and his instructions that they became such: but he was answeared 
by a Counsellor, that he was like unto a whetstone, which made the knife sharpe 
and ready to cut, not being able so to doe it selfe, and alledged the verses of Horace 
that: 
 
Fungebatur vice cotis, acutum 
Reddere quæ ferrum valet, exors ipsa secandi. 
 
See you now (my little master) my answers to your calumniations, and pray you, 
if you beare a good minde (to the publicke good) to review and correct your booke, 
as soone as you can, and not to hold young Chirurgion in this errour by the reading 
of the same, where you teach them to use hot irons after the amputation of 
members, to stay a fluxe of blood, seeing there is another meanes, and not so cruell 
and more sure and easie. Moreover if to day after an assault of a Citty, where diverse 
[^p.1142^] [^Original misnumbered as p.1143.^] 
Souldiers have had armes and legges broken, and shot off by Cannon Bullets, 
Cutlas or other instruments of warre; to stay the fluxe of blood, if you should use 
hot irons, it would be needfull to have a forge, and much coales to heate them: and 
also the souldiers would hold you in such horror for this cruelty, that they would 
kill you like a Calfe, even as in times past they did to one of the chiefest Chirurgions 
of Rome, which may be found written before in the third chapter of the Introduction 
of Chirurgery, the 1 booke. Now least the Sectators of your writings 
should fall into such inconveniencie, I pray them to follow the methode aforesayd, 
the which I have shewed to be true and certaine, and approved by authority, reason 
and experience. 
 
[}The Voyage of Thurin, 1536.}] 
 
MOreover, I will heere shew to the readers the places where I have had meanes 
to learne the Art of Chirurgery, for the better instructing of the young Chirurgion: 
and first in the yeere 1536, the great King Francis sent a great Army to 
Thurin, to recover the Cittyes and Castles, which the Marquesse of Guash, Lievtenant 
generall of the Emperor had taken: where the high Constable of France the 
great master, was Lievtenant generall of the Army, and Monsieur de Montian Colonel 
generall of the foote, of which I was then Chirurgion. A great part of the Army 
[/52./] 
arrived in the Country of Suze; we found the enemy which stopt the passage, 
and had made certaine Forts, and trenches, insomuch that to hunt them out and 
make them leave the place, we were forced to fight, where there were divers hurt 
and slaine, as well of the one side as the other: but the enemies were constrayned 
to retire, and to get into the Castle, which was caused partly by one Captaine 
Ratt, who climed with divers of the souldiers of his company upon a little Mountaine; 
there where he shot directly upon the enemies, hee received a shot upon the 
anckle of his right foote, wherewith presently he fell to the ground; and sayd then, 
Now is the Rat taken. I dressed him, and God healed him. We entred the throng 
in the Citty, and passed over the dead bodyes, and some which were not yet dead, 
we heard them cry under our horses feete, which made my heart relent to heare 
them. And truely I repented to have forsaken Paris to see so pitifull a spectacle. Being 
in the Citty, I entred into a stable thinking to lodge my owne, and my mans 
horse, where I found foure dead souldiers, and three which were leaning against 
the wall, their faces wholly disfigured, and neither saw nor heard, nor spoake; and 
their cloathes did yet flame with the gunpowder which had burnt them. Beholding 
[/53./] 
them with pitty, there happened to come an old souldier, who asked me if there 
were any possible meanes to cure them, I told him no: he presently approached to 
them, and gently cut their throates without choler. Seeing this great cruelty, I 
told him he was a wicked man, he answered me that he prayed to God, that whensoever 
he should be in such a case, that he might finde some one that would doe as 
much to him, to the end he might not miserably languish. And to returne to our former 
discourse, the enemie was so~moned to render, which they soon did, & went out, 
their lives onely saved, with a white staffe in their hands; the greatest part whereof 
went and got to the Castle of Villane, where there was about 200. Spaniards; Monsieur 
the Constable would not leave them behind, to the end that the way might 
be made free. This Castle is seated upon a little mountaine, which gave great assurance 
to them within, that one could not plant the Ordinance to beate upon it, and 
were sommoned to render, or that they should be cut in peeces; which they flatly refused, 
making answere that they were as good and faithfull servants to the Emperor, 
as Monsieur the Constable could bee to the King his master. Their answere 
[/54./] 
heard, they made by force of arme, two great Cannons to be mounted in the night 
with cords and ropes, by the Swiffers and Lansquenets; when as the ill lucke 
would have it, the two Cannons being seated, a Gunner by great negligence set on 
fire a great bagge of Gunpowder; wherewith he was burned together with ten or 
twelve souldiers; and moreover the flame of the powder was a cause of discovering 
the Artillery, which made them that all night, they of the Castle did nothing but 
[^p.1143^] 
shoote at that place where they discovered the two peeces of Ordinance, wherewith 
they kild and hurt a great number of our people. 
 
The next day early in the morning a Battery was made, which in a few houres 
made a breach, which being made they demanded to parly with us; but twas too late 
for them; For in the meane time our French foote, seeing them amazed, mounted 
to the breach, and cut them all in peeces, except a faire young lusty mayd if Piedmount, 
[/55./] 
which a great Lord would have kept and preserved for him to keepe him 
company in the night, for feare of the greedy wolfe. The Captaine and Ensigne 
were taken alive, but soone after were hanged upon the gate of the Citty, to the 
end they might give example and feare to the Imperiall souldiers nor to bee so rash 
and foolish, to be willing to hold such places against so great a Army. Now all 
the sayd souldiers of the Castle, seeing our people comming with a most violent fury, 
did all their endeavour to defend themselves, they kild and hurt a great company 
of our souldiers, with Pikes, Muskets, and stones, where the Chirurgions had good 
store to worke cut out. Now at that at that time I was a fresh water Souldier, I had not yet 
seene wouuds made by gun-shot at the first dressing. It is true, I had read in Iohn de 
Vigo, in the first booke of wounds in generall, the eight chapter, that wounds made 
[/56./] 
by weapons of fire did participate of Venenosity, by reason of the pouder, and for 
their cure commands to cauterize them with oyle of Elders scalding hot, in which 
should be mingled a little Treackle; and not to faile, before I would apply of the 
sayd oyle, knowing that such a thing might bring to the Patient great paine, I was 
willing to know first, before I applyed it, how the other Chirurgions did for the 
first dressing, which was to apply the sayd oyle the hottest that was possible into the 
wounds, with tents and setons; insomuch that tooke courage to doe as they did. 
At last I wanted oyle, and was constrained in steed thereof, to apply a digestive of 
yolkes of egges, oyle of Roses, and Turpentine. In the night I could not sleepe in 
quiet, fearing some default in not cauterizing, that I should finde those of whom I had 
not used the burning oyle dead impoysoned; which made me rise very early to visit 
[/57./] 
them, where beyond my expectation I found those to whom I had applyed my 
digestive medicine, to feele little paine, and their wounds without inflammation or 
tumor, having rested reasonable well in the night: the other to whom was used the 
sayd burning oyle, I found them feverish, with great paine and tumour about the 
edges of their wounds. And then I resolved with my selfe never so cruelly, to burne 
poore men wounded with gunshot. Being at Thurin I found a Chirurgion, who had 
the same above all others, for the curing of wounds of Gunshot, into whose favour 
I found meanes to insinuate my selfe, to have the receipt of his balme, as he called it 
wherewith he dressed wounds of that kind, and hee held me off the space of two 
yeeres, before I could possible draw the receipt from him. In the end by gifts and 
presents he gave it me, which was this, to boyle young whelpes new pupped, in 
[/58./] 
oyle of Lillies, prepared earth wormes, with Turpentine of Venice. Then was I 
joyfull and my heart made glad, that I had understood his remedy, which was like 
to that which I had obtained by great chance. See then how I have learned to dresse 
wounds made with gunshot, not by bookes. My Lord Marshall of Montian remained 
Lievtenant generall for the King in Piedmont, having ten or twelve thousand 
men in garrison through the Cittyes and Castles, who often combated with swords 
and other weapons, as also with muskets; and if there were foure hurt, I had alwayes 
three of them, and if there were question of cutting off an arme or a legge, or to 
trepan, or to reduce a fracture or dislocation, I brought it well to passe. The sayd 
Lord Marshall sent me one while this way, another while that way, for to dresse the 
appointed Souldiers which were beaten aswell in other Citties as that of Thurin, 
insomuch that I was alwayes in the Countrey one way or other. Monsieur the Marshall 
sent for a Physition to Milan, who had no lesse reputation in the medicinall 
Art (than the deceased Monsieur le Grand) to take him in hand for an hepaticall flux, 
whereof at last he dyed. This Physitian was a certaine while at Thurin to deale with 
him, and was often called to visite the hurt people, where he alwayes found me, and 
I consulted with him, and some other Chirurgions, and when wee had resolved to 
doe any serious worke of Chirurgery, twas Ambrose Pare that put his hand thereto, 
[^p.1144^] 
where I did it promptly and with dexterity, and with a great assurance, in so much 
that the sayd Physition admired me, to see me so ready in the operation of Chirurgery, 
seeing the small age which I had, One day discoursing with the sayd Lord 
Marshall, he sayd to him, Signor, tu hai un Chirurgico giovane di anni, ma egli e vecchio 
di sapere e di esperientia. Guarda lo bene, perche egli ti fara servicio & honore. That is to 
[/59./] 
say, Thou hast a young Chirurgion of age, but he is old in knowledg and experience, 
preserve him well; for he will doe thee service, and honour. But the old man knew 
not that I had dwelt three yeares in the Hospitall of Paris, there to dresse the diseased. 
In the end Monsieur Marshall dyed with his hepaticall fluxe. Being dead, the 
King sent Monsieur the Marshall of Annebaut to be in his place, who did me this honour 
[/60./] 
to pray me to dwell with him, and that he would use me as well or better, than 
Monsieur the Marshall Mountian; which I would not doe for the greefe I had for 
the losse of my master who loved me intimately, and I him in the like manner; and so 
I came backe to Paris. 
 
[}The Voyage of Marolle and of low Brritany, 1543.}] 
 
I Went to the Camp of Marolle, with the deceased Monsieur de Rohan, where King 
Francis was in person, and I was Chirurgion of the company of the sayd Monsieur 
de Rohan. Now the King was advertized by Monsieur de Estampes, governour of 
Brittany, that the English had hoyste Sayle to land in Low Brittany, and prayed 
him that he would send Monsieur de Rohan, and Monsieur de Laval for succour, because 
they were the Lords of that Countrey, and for their sakes those of that Country 
would beate backe the enemy and keepe them from landing. Having received 
this advertisement, his Majesty dispatched to send the sayd Lords for the releese of 
their Countrey, and to each was given as much power as to the Governour; in so 
much that they were all three the Kings Lievetenants. They tooke willingly this 
charge upon them, and speedily went away in Poste, and lead me with them to Landreneau, 
there where we found every one in armes, the Alarum bells sounding on 
every side, yea five or sixe leagues about the Harbors, that is to say, Brest, Conquet, 
Crozon, Le Fou Doulac, Laudanec, each of them well furnisht with Artillery, as Cannons, 
Demy-cannons, Culverins, Sakers, Serpentines, Falcons, Harque buzes, in breefe 
there was nothing wanting in Artillery, or souldiers aswell Brittanes as French, to 
hinder that the English made no landing, as they had resolved at their parting from 
England. The enemies Army came unto the very mouth of the Cannon, and when 
we perceived them that they would land, they were saluted with Cannon shot, and 
we disovered our men of warre, together with our Artillery: they fled to Sea againe, 
where I was glad to see their vessells hoise saile againe, which was in a great number 
[/61./] 
and in good order, and seemed like a Forest which marched upon the Sea. I saw a 
thing also whereat I marveiled much, which was that the bullets of great peeces 
made great rebounds, and grazed upon the water as upon the ground. Now to make 
the matter short, the English did us no harme, and returned whole and found into 
England, and left us in peace. We stayd in that Countrey in garrison, till we were assured 
that their army was dispersed. In the meane time our horsemen exercised 
their feates of activity, as to run at the ring, fight in duell, and others, so that there was 
still something to imploy me withall. Monsieur de Estampes, to make sport and 
pleasure to the sayd Monsieur de Rohan, and Laval, and other gentlemen, caused diverse 
Countrey wenches, to come to the feasts, to sing songs in the Low Brittan 
tongue, where their harmony was like the croaking of Frogges, while they are in 
love. Moreover made them dance the Brittany Triory, without mooving feete or 
[/62./] 
buttockes, hee made them heare and see much good. Otherwiles they caused 
the Wrastlers of the Cittyes, and Townes, to come where there was a Prize for 
the best, and the sport was seldome ended, but that one or other had a legge or an 
[/63./] 
arme broken, or the shoulder or hippe displaced: there was a little man of Low Britany 
of a square body and well set, who held a long time the credit of the field, and 
by hisskill, and strength, threw five or sixe to the ground; there came to him a 
[^p.1145^] 
great schoolemaster, who was sayd to be one of the best wrastlers of all Brittany: 
he entred into the lifts, having taken off his long jacket, in hose and doublet, and being 
neere the little man, he seemed as if he had beene tyed to his girdle. Notwithstanding 
when each of them tooke hold of the collar, they were a long time without doing 
any thing, and they thought they would remaine equall in force and skill: but 
the little man cast himselfe with an ambling leape under this great Pedant, and tooke 
him on his shoulder, and cast him on his Kidneyes spread abroad like a frogge, and 
then all the company laught at the skill and strength of this little fellow. This great 
Dativo had a great spight, for being cast by so little a man: he rose againe in choler, 
and would have his revenge. They tooke hold againe of each others collar, and 
were againe a good while at their hold without falling to ground: in the end this 
great man let himselfe fall upon the little, and in falling put his elbow upon the 
[/64./] 
pitch of his stomacke, and burst his heart, and kild him starke dead. And knowing 
he had given him his deathes blow, tooke againe his longe cassocke, and went away 
with his tayle betweene his legges ans hid himselfe, seeing that the little man came 
not againe to himselfe, either for Wine, Vinegar or any other thing that was presented 
unto him; I drew neere to him, and felt his pulse which did not beate at all, then 
I sayd he was dead; then the Brittanes who assisted the wrastling sayd aloud in their 
jabbering, that is not in the sport. And some sayd that the sayd Pedagoge was accustomed 
to doe so, and that but a yeere passed he had done the like in a wrastling. 
I would needes open the body to know the cause of this sodaine death, where I 
[/65./] 
found much blood in the Thorax and in the inferiour belly, and I strived to find out 
any apertition in the place, from whence might issue so great a quantity of blood, 
which I could not doe for all the dilligence I could make. Now I beleeve it was per 
Diapedesin or Anastomofin, that is to say by, the apertion of the mouthes of the vessells, 
or by their porosities; the poore little wrastler was buryed - I tooke leave of 
Messieurs de Rohan, de Laval, and Estamps. Monsieur de Rohan, gave mee a present of 
fifty double duckets, and an ambling horse, and Monsieur de Laval another for my 
man, and Monsieur de Estamps, a Diamond of thirty Crownes, and so I returned to 
my house at Paris. 
 
[}The Voyage of Parpignan, 1543.}] 
 
A Little while after Monsieur de Rohan tooke me with him poste, to the campe of 
Parpignan; being there, the enemy made a Sally forth, and came and inclosed 
three peeces of our Artillery, where they were beaten back, to the gates of the Citty: 
which was not done without hurting and killing many, and amongst the rest de Brissac, 
(who was then chiefe master of the Artillery) received a musket shot upon the 
shoulder: returning to his Tent, all the others that were hurt followed him, hoping 
to be drest by the Chirurgions, that ought to dresse them. Being come to his Tent 
and layd on his bed, the bullet was searched for by three or foure the most expert 
Chirurgions of the Army, who could not finde it, but sayd it was entred into his 
body. 
 
In the end hee called for me, to see if I were more skilfull than them, because 
[/66./] 
he had knowne me before in Piedmount: by and by I made him rise from his bed, and 
prayed him to put his body into that posture as it was then when hee received his 
hurt; which he did taking a javelin betweene his hands as he held the Pike in the 
skirmish. I put my hand about the wound, and found the bullet in the flesh, making 
a little tumor under the Omoplate: having found it I shewed them the place where it 
was, and it was taken out by Master Nicholas Lavernaut Chirurgion to Monsieur the 
Dolphin, who was the Kings Lievtenant in that army, yet notwithstanding the honour 
remained to me for finding of it. 
 
I saw one thing of great remark, which is this: that a souldier in my presence gave to 
[/67./] 
one of his fellowes a stroake with an Halbard upon the head, penetrating even 
to the left ventricle of the braine, without falling to the ground. Hee that 
[^p.1146^] 
strooke him said, he had heard that he had cheated at Dice, and that he had drawne 
a great summe of money, and that it was his custome to cheate; I was called to dresse 
him, which I did as it were for the last, knowing well that he would quickly die: 
having drest him he returned all alone to his lodging, which was at least two hundred 
paces distant: I bid one of his companions send for a Priest to dispose of the 
affaires of his soule; he helpt him to one who stayd with him to the last gaspe. The 
next day the patient sent for mee by his shee friend in an boyes apparell to come to 
dresse him, which I would not doe, fearing hee should die under my hands; and to 
put it off, I sayd I must not take off the dressing till the third day, by reason hee 
would die though hee were never touched. The third day hee came staggering, and 
found me in my Tent accompanied with his wench, and prayed mee most affectionately 
to dresse him: And shewed me a purse wherein he had an hundred or sixscore 
peeces of Gold, and that he would content me to my desire; for all that, yet notwithstanding 
I left not off to deferre the taking off his dressing, fearing least hee 
should die at the same instant. Certaine Gentlemen desired me to goe dresse him, 
which I did at their request, but in dressing him he died under my hands in a Convulsion. 
Now this Priest accompanied him untill death, who seazed upon the 
purse for feare least another should take it, saying, hee would say Masses for his 
soule. Moreover hee furnisht himselfe with his cloathes, and with all the rest of 
his things. I have recited his History as a monstrous thing, that the Souldier fell 
not to the ground when he had received this greate stroake, and was in good senses even 
till death. Soone after, the Campe was broken for divers causes; the one because 
we were advertized that foure companies of Spaniards were entred into Parpignam; 
the other, that the Plague begun much in our Campe, and it was told us by the people 
of the countrey that shortly there would bee a great overflowing of the Sea, 
which might drowne us all; and the presage which they had, was a very great 
winde from Sea, which arose in such a manner that there remained not one Tent 
which was not broken and overthrowne, for all the strength and dilligence that 
could be given; and the Kitchins being all uncovered, the winde raised so the dust 
and sand which salted and poudred our meate, in such sort that wee could not 
eate it, so that wee were constrained to boile it in pots and other vessells well covered. 
 
Now that we did not uncampe our selves in so good time, but that there were many 
Carts and Cartes Mules, and Mule drivers drowned in the Sea, with great losse of 
baggage. The Campe broken, I returned to Paris. 
 
[}The voyage to Landresy. 1544.}] 
 
KIng Francis raised a great Army to victuall Landresy: on the other side the Emperour 
had no lesse people, yea much more; that is to say, eighteene thousand 
Germans, tenne thousand Spaniards, sixe thousand Wallons, tenne thousand English, 
and a matter of thirteene or foureteene thousand Horse. I saw the two Armies 
neare one another, within Canon shot, and it was thought they would never part 
without giving battaile. There were some certaine foolish Gentlemen who 
would approach the enemies Campe; certaine shot was made at them, and some dyed 
at the place, others had their Legges or Armes carried away. The King having 
done what hee desired, which was to revictuall Landresy, retired himselfe with his 
Army to Guise, which was the day after All Saints, one thousand five hundred forty 
four, and from thence I returned to Paris. 
 
