[^Read, Alexander: Workes of that famous physitian^] 
 
[}THE 
WORKES 
OF THAT 
FAMOUS PHYSITIAN 
D=r=. Alexander Read, 
Doctor of Physick, and one of the Fellows 
of Physitians-Colledge, London. 
CONTAINING 
I. Chirurgicall Lectures of Tumors and Ulcers. 
II. A Treatise of the first part of Chirurgery, which 
teacheth the re-unition of the parts of the body 
dis-joynted; and the methodicall Doctrine of 
Wounds. 
III. A Treatise of all the Muscles of the Body of man. 
 
Delivered in severall Lectures at Barbar-Chirurgians-Hall, 
upon Tuesdaies appointed for these 
Exercises, and the keeping of their Courts. 
 
Published in his life time in severall TREATISES, 
and now in one Volume, corrected and amended. 
 
The second Edition. 
 
LONDON, 
Printed by E. G. for Richard Thrale, and are to be sold by 
Iohn Clarke at the lower end of Cheapside entring into 
Mercers-chappel. 1650.}] 
 
[^Omitted a dedication to baron of Bradenham Thomas Lord Windsor, an epistle to the reader and tables of contents.^] 
[^Extract 1, pp. 1-24^] 
 
[^p.1^] 
[}A TREATISE 
OF 
TUMORS. 
The first Treatise.}] 
 
[}LECT. 1. 
Of the definition and parts of Chirurgerie.}] 
 
MAny learned discourses have been delivered 
out of this seat, of sundry points of the renowned 
Art of Chirurgery by Master Doctor 
Gwyn of famous memory, who by reason 
of his not vulgar learning, hath left an 
eternall memory in the minds of those who 
knew him inwardly, to himselfe. God having 
called him out of this transitory life, 
and vale of misery, to rest from his labours; it seemed good to 
the Governours of this worshipfull Company to have this exercise 
performed by the most able of the Brethren as it should 
come to every one according to his place and dignity. And undoubtedly 
this office hath been performed by most, laudably, and 
fruitfully to the praise of the Hall, and mutuall communication 
of skill, for the better performing of duties, which so high a 
Calling doth require. And surely if this course had been continued, 
it had mightily encreased in Readers the theoricall, or contemplative 
part, which doth consist in the knowledge of the 
Precepts, had made them able to give greater contentment to 
their Patients by their rationall discourses, and more emboldened 
them in particular operations, having sufficient warrant of 
[^p.2^] 
Art for their practice, and ability to convince Empericks and 
malicious Calumniators. But seeing (as I understand) the highest 
power of this Realm, from whom there is no appeale, hath 
decreed that this exercise shall be performed by a Doctor of Physick, 
and that the worshipfull Company hath for the present 
made choise of me, who profess my self to be a Member of the 
Company; I shall labour by diligence to supply all defects in 
me, which sundry may find in me, if they compare my weakness 
with the ableness of my Predecessor. Howsoever the matter falleth 
out, I will endeavour to deliver what is for the purpose of 
that subject whereof I read, although not all peradventure which 
might be alleadged to the purpose. Nevertheless I mean not to 
be so sparing in my discourses, as that you shall have occasion 
to think that any thing absolutely requisite hath been kept back. 
And if it fall out that at anytime I check or controule those Authors, 
who by some are highly esteemed, I desire that none 
ascribe this to any ambition or vaine glory in me before they 
weigh my reasons in the impartiall balance of judgement. And 
as it is impossible for any man, who curiously and scrupulously 
treadeth in another mans footsteps, to compass a long journey 
in a day: So let none think that ever he shall be famous in his 
Art, if he give himself only to imitation of others. The Ancients 
have left not a little to be found out by the diligence of Posterity. 
Whosoever is industrious and judicious, shall find my 
words to be an Oracle. Many of them have set down sundry 
things not tryed by experience, but imagined by their fancy, 
which the sickle of triall will prune. Nevertheless in reprehension 
I will use them respectively, by reason of reverence, which 
is due to Antiquity. Besides this, nothing can be both invented and 
perfected at once. Now seeing in all the Discourses and Lectures 
which have been delivered out of this place, only particular 
points of the Art have been handled, and none hath taken the 
pains to touch any Præcognita or generall notions, which may 
be in stead of an introduction, to the particulars, seeing no Subject 
hath been delivered, or commended to me, I will briefly 
touch some Introductory points, which will give no small light 
[/1./] 
to the Lectures, which hereafter shall be read. The first shall be 
of the antiquity and dignity of Chirurgery. The second shall be of 
most famous Authors, who have taken the pains to illustrate it, by 
their writings. The third shall be of its place in the course of 
[^p.3^] 
Philosophie. The fourth of the definition of it. The fifth of the 
division or parts of it. Which things when I have set down, I 
shall shut up this Lecture; permitting election to the Governours 
whether they will have me proceed methodically, through the 
whole course of Chirurgery, or scatteredly to handle dispersed 
parts of the same as hitherto hath been done. My opinion is, 
[/2./] 
that it will be both more fruitfull and pleasing to intelligent Hearers 
(if God will grant me life and health) to pass through all 
the points of Chirurgery methodically: For first, the coherence 
of the parts will help the memory: And who shall be assiduous 
hearers shall not by snatches take a hungry morsel, but have a 
full banquet, fully to answer the appetite. When I come to particulars, 
I will not only deliver the principles of Hippocrates, and 
Galen, and their sectators the Arabians. But I will acquaint you 
with the Theorems of the Chymists and compare the opinions of 
both, that it may be known who have been most familiarly nursed 
in the bosome of nature. Of the Chymists Paracelsus is the 
[/3./] 
Generall. He hath sundry Colonels under him, as Petrus Severinus 
the Dane, Quercetan, Petreius, and sundry others, who 
are oftentimes clouds without raine; more fraughted with bountiful 
promises, than reall performances. Now to come to touch 
[/4./] 
the first generall point of Chirurgery, which is the Antiquity 
of it, I dare be bold to affirme, that of all Arts liberal, it was the 
first which was invented after the fall: For as for Agricultura and 
ars pastoralis, husbandry and grazing, they would have been required 
of man, if he had continued in the state of innocency, to 
have furnished unto him nourishment, and other things requisite 
for the enjoying of this life contendedly, untill he should have 
been translated from earth to heaven to enjoy the beatificall vision 
of his Creator. Now it is most probable, I may say demonstrative, 
that what strange event did first minister occasion to invent 
an Art, that that Art was first enquired for & found out; Such 
was the wounding and killing of Abel, by his brother Cain, by 
reason of emulation. This could not but move Adam and Cain 
himself to study how they might not only repel violence, but have 
in readinesse means to cure hurts also, if they should have been 
wounded, and their lives spared. All things which were done before 
the floud are uncertaine and unknown, if you except those 
things which that eminent Prophet Moses, by the inspiration of 
the Holy Ghost, hath recorded. You may read of bragging 
[^p.4^] 
Lamech, Gen. 4, 23. who boasted of murthering. Besides this, the 
wickedness of man encreased, Gen. 6. 5. sufficient to set him on, 
and that there were before the floud Giants and mighty men, 
ver. 4. and so able to performe by violence of villany. Shall any 
man think that men unable to resist, did not think upon remedies 
to cure their hurts, being endued with reason; but as dogs licked 
their own wounds, and provided no means for curing contusions, 
fractures, dislocations, and such accidents as follow after 
[/5./] 
violence offered? As for internal Physick, being so neare to the 
Creation, living long, even to 969 yeares, Gen. 6. 27. as Methuselah 
did, it is like they used none, seeing they had no other 
sickness but that of old age: which falleth out, the natural and 
accidental heat exhausting the radical moysture, and was unavoidable 
after that the sentence of mortality was pronounced against 
Adam and his Posterity, Gen. 3. 10. Thus we see that as the practice 
of Chirurgery was necessary before the floud, so we cannot 
gather by any obscure conjectures, that that part of Physick which 
cureth by exhibiting internall medicaments was in use. Yea, untill 
the time of Hippocrates, Physick it self seemeth to have been 
only a knowledge of simples, fit for curing of internal diseases, 
and outward griefes, found out by experience: and that there 
were but few precepts concerning the Art, shewing either the 
knowledg of particular griefes, or the method of curing of them; 
They, who are accounted the Authors and inventors of Physick, 
[/6./] 
prove this to be true. Amongst the Grecians, Apollo, the son of 
Jupiter and Latona, is accounted the first, which gave his mind 
to the study of Physick and Chirurgery. Of him thus writeth 
Ovid. 1. Metamorph. 
 
Inventum medicina meum est, opifexque per orbem 
Dicor, & herbarum subjecta potentia nobis. 
 
Physick is my invention, and throughout the world 
Helpful I am said to be, & the faculty of herbs is subject to me. 
 
Æsculapius his son followed his father, who added much to that 
which his Father invented; wherefore he was accounted amongst 
the gods. His two sons Podalyrius, and Machaon accompanied 
the Grecians to Troy, unto whom they did good service in curing 
the wounded persons. Chiron Achilles his Master is said by 
Plinie to have had great skil in the knowledge of simples, and 
that he was skilful in dressing of wounds, both his name sheweth, 
(for it is likely he was called Chiron, because he was skilfull 
[^p.5^] 
in the manuall part: [^GREEK OMITTED^] in Greek is a hand) and Achilles his practice 
in curing wounded persons: for he cured Telephus King of 
Nysia, whom he had overcome and hurt, and from him the herb 
Millefole is called Sideritis Achillea. Of this, which hath been 
spoken, we may gather that these eminent and worthy men did 
more practice Chirurgery than Physick. Hippocrates is the first we 
have, who committed to writing Precepts concerning the practice 
of Physick: He did not onely practice Chirurgery himself, but 
wrote sundry Treatises concerning sundry operations of it: as 
of fractures, lib. 1. of joints, lib. 1. of reducing bones by instruments, 
lib. 1. of ulcers, lib. 1. of fistulaes, lib 1. of wounds of the 
head, lib. 1. of drawing out of the womb a dead child, lib. 1. All 
these are in the sixt section of his works. Galen succeeded him 
about six hundred yeares after, a man worthy of eternall memory, 
who did illustrate Hippocrates with his learned commentaries, 
and by adding of those things which were wanting, did 
perfect the Art. In his works are sundry Treatises, concerning 
Chirurgicall subjects. The rest of the Greek writers follow him, 
as Paulus of Ægina, Aetius, Alexander Trallianus, Oribasius, 
Actuarius and the rest. Amongst the Latines Celsius excelleth, 
who hath written accurately of all Chirurgical operations, whom 
all modern writers do exceedingly commend, as Fallopius de 
tumoribus præter naturam, cap. 1. And Fabricius ab aqua pendente 
in sundry places, and the rest. Of some, who went before 
him, thus he writeth: lib. 6. cap. 1. And in Rome sundry reasonable 
good professors (he meaneth of Chirurgery, which he 
calleth vestutissimam most ancient) but chiefly of late Triphon 
the Father, and Euelpistus added somewhat to that discipline. 
Arabians follow; amongst whom Avicen is the chiefest, who lived 
1100 years after Christ: of Chirurgicall matters he discourseth 
in the third book of his Canon, and in the fourth part of 
his Canticles. Rases 2. Continent. Albucasis. Amongst our moderne 
writers these excell, Guido de Cauliaco, whom Tagaultius 
hath exprest in good Latine: Fallopius, with whom none is to be 
compared: Ambrosius Paræus, Iohannes de Vigo, Hieronymus 
Fabricius ab aqua pendente, Gulielmus Fabricius in his Centuries, 
and Master Gale, Master Banister, and Master Clowes, while they 
lived, brethren of this worshipfull company, who by their writings 
have commended themselves to all posteritie. So much I 
thought good to deliver of the antiquity, dignity, and of the 
[^p.6^] 
chief professors of Chirurgery; which ought to stir up your diligence 
in labouring to excell in the particular operations of it, 
and to resolve to contemne the obloquies and calumnies of rude 
and ill bred persons, who shall seem to slight this excellent Art. 
If you inquire for the beginning of it, it is vetustissima most ancient, 
according to Celsus in the place above mentioned: If you 
require certainty; it is grounded upon experience, and offereth 
it self to the eye: If you aske who did of old practice it? you 
shall find that either they were numbred amongst the gods, or 
were renowned persons, called heroes, as Hercules, Chiron, Achilles, 
[/7./] 
or men of eminent learning and worth, as Hippocrates, Galen, 
Avicen, and sundry others. It hath for its subject the body of 
man, and in this point no whit inferiour to Physick it self. And 
whereas many will stick to take a dangerous medicament; 
[/8./] 
yet they will not stick to admit Chirurgicall operations, although 
they be full of perill, as incision for the stone and dropsie, dismembring, 
and such like, as we may see day by day. Now to 
know what part of Philosophie Chirurgery is to be referred, 
[/9./] 
we must consider that there be two parts in Philosophie: whereof 
the one is speculative, whose end is knowledge; The other 
[/10./] 
practick, whose end is practice. Now practice hath two differences, 
Action, and Effection. Action leaveth no worke behind it: 
Effection doth. Of the active part of Philosophie, there be 
three parts; Ethick, which frameth the manners of a private person: 
Oeconomick, which sheweth how a family is to be governed, 
and Policy, which teacheth how a Commonwealth is to be 
ruled: These we will leave, because they belong not to our purpose: 
[/11./] 
as neither those Arts which are meerly factive, commonly 
called mechanical, and so unworthy of a Philosopher. The speculative 
part of philosophy, comprehendeth under it the Metaphysicks, 
natural philosopy, and the Mathematicks: Of the first and last we 
will speak nothing, because they belong nothing to that subject 
which we have in hand. The subject of naturall philosophy is corpus 
naturale, or a natural body: Now of all natural bodies, the 
body of man is the chiefest and most excellent, which moved the 
kingly Prophet to burst out into this resolution: Laudabo te, quia 
mirabiliter formatus sum: I will praise thee: because I am wonderfully 
framed: the admirable composition of the body of man drew 
[/12./] 
from Galen himselfe, not the best master of piety, a hymne to his 
Creator. Now natural philosophy considereth the body of man, 
as it is a species or kind of natural body: but medicine as it is 
[^p.7^] 
curable by art. Of medicine there are two principal parts, 
[^GREEK OMITTED^], and [^GREEK OMITTED^]. The first teacheth the preservation of 
[/13./] 
health by convenient dyet, exercises, and such like: The second 
[/14./] 
teacheth, how health lost may be recovered. There be two 
meanes to repaire health: for this is done either by medicaments, 
or manuall operation. The first is performed by that art, which 
here is called Physick; the second by Chirurgery. So that Chirurgery 
is the second branch of the curative part of medicine, without 
the which neither Country, City, Town, Village, Hamlet, yea, 
no private Family can well continue or subsist. This we must confess, 
if we consider to how many external injuries the body of man 
is subject, as to scaldings, fractures, luxations, wounds, ulcers, ruptures, 
stone, and to what not: So that the use of Chirurgery is 
by reason of absolute necessity more often required than the 
ministration of medicaments. And seeing the operation of a 
Chirurgion is more subject to the eye and other senses, than the exhibition 
of medicaments is, it behoveth every one to be well verst 
in that which he taketh in hand, seeing his practice is more subject 
to censure: There be a number of emperical knaves, filthy bauds, 
and bold queanes, who daily minister medicaments boldly, who 
notwithstanding dare not meddle with any curious operation in 
Chirurgery. Such impure hands dare not touch such a chaste and 
[/15./] 
undefiled Lady. Now it is time to come to the fourth point, 
which I intended in my proposition: which is to shew what Chirurgerie 
is: Now there is a double quid, or what; quid nominis, 
& quid rei: The first sheweth the reason why this terme was 
[/16./] 
found out to expresse this art: The second delivereth the nature 
of the art it self. Chirurgia is a Greek terme composed of 
[^GREEK OMITTED^] which signifieth a hand, and [^GREEK OMITTED^] to work: Because 
it restoreth health to the bodies of men by manual operation. 
Chirurgery then may be thus defined: it is a branch of the curative 
[/17./] 
part of medicine, which teacheth how sundry diseases of the 
body of man are to be cured by manuall operation. It is not a 
Science properly, because it resteth not only in knowledge; but 
an art as Physick it self is; for it leaveth an effect after the operation, 
to wit, health: So that for the genus, it hath the same with 
Physick it self: Both Physick and Chirurgery propose to themselves 
one end: yet the means are divers. Physick restoreth health 
by ministration of medicaments; but Chirurgery by manual 
operation. Seeing then the definition which I have assigned to 
[^p.8^] 
Chirurgery doth consist of genus and differentia, according to 
Schoole termes, it must be an essentiall definition, fully expressing 
the nature of it. The fift point whereof I intended to speak 
[/18./] 
of this Lecture, was of the parts of Chirurgery, which must be 
assigned according to the maine differences of operations. Those 
are foure in number, and consequently so many parts: for either 
by Chirurgery, solution of unity is removed, and union restored, 
or things unnaturally united are separated and disjoined; or 
or things superfluous taken away: or last of all defects supplyed. 
Now solution of unity is either gathered by reason, or deprehended 
by sense. In tumors, although the parts seeme to the eye 
[/19./] 
united; yet reason teacheth us, that there is a divulsion of them: 
The doctrine of tumors therefore ought to be the first particular 
Treatise. Solution of unity apparent to the senses, to wit, sight 
and touch, are either in the soft parts, or in the more solid and 
hard. In the soft or fleshy parts there be two differences of solution 
of unity: vulnus & ulcus, a wound, and an ulcer. In the 
hard parts there are found a fracture, and a luxation; two distinct 
sorts of solution of unity to fill up the forth and fifth places. This 
[/20./] 
part may be called [^GREEK OMITTED^], or pars compositrix, the part joyning 
together. The second part of Chirurgery opposite to the first, 
teacheth to separate parts unnaturally united: where either the 
comely composition of the body of man is defaced or empaired, or 
the actions of the same hindered. Sundry have been brought into 
the world with the anus & vulva quite shut up. The consideration 
of that membrane, which is found in the neck of the matrix of 
some women, is in this place to be noted and considered: Seeing 
there have been, and yet are so many concertations amongst 
both skilful Physitians and Chirurgions. Here also is the cure of 
the wry neck to be set down. In this griefe the head on the one 
side by reason of one or more tendons of the muscles of the neck 
shortened, the head is drawn towards the claves more than on 
the other: whereby it commeth to pass that the face groweth 
awry and distorted: and so the beauty of the countenance is 
much impaired. To this part belongeth the curing of tongue-tyed 
children, in whom sucking and speech are hindered. Not 
only fingers and toes cleave together in the same person: but 
twins also, and double members of one person. The consideration 
of such doth belong to the history of Monsters: not to 
any Art: seeing such things are to be ranged amongst raro contingentia, 
[^p.9^] 
and so belong not to Art which is of things necessary. 
This part may be termed [^GREEK OMITTED^], or separatrix pars, the separating 
[/21./] 
part. Now followeth the third part of Chirurgery, which 
sheweth the meanes to remove from the body things superfluous, 
[/22./] 
which may fitly be called [^GREEK OMITTED^], or ablatrix pars, the nipping 
or removing part. Things superfluous are such, either by event, 
or by their owne nature. Things superfluous by event are 
sundry: And first a dead child in the womb, or staying too long 
to the prejudice of its owne and the mothers life. Here shall 
be set the manner how to bring women to bed (as we terme it) 
artificially and safely. Secondly, a falling of the small guts into 
the cod by enlarging or renting of the production of the Peritonæum, 
which we call a rupture. When I come to this point, I will 
set downe the diversities of ruptures, and the meanes of curing 
of each: which are either incision, or trusse, or application of medicaments, 
sometimes used solitary, sometimes concurring most 
or all together. Thirdly, the amputation of a limme by reason of 
a mortification, or some other accident. Here shall be set downe 
the most accurate method of dismembring. Fourthly, the extirpation 
of any part, as the breast, when a cancerous either tumor 
or ulcer doth possesse it. Here you shall be acquainted with the 
safest way of exstirpating a cancer and a lupus. Fifthly, bloud 
offending either in quantity, or quality, is drawne by phlebotomy, 
leeches, ventoses, of all which I will particularly discourse. Things 
by their owne nature superfluous, are either somewhat familiar to 
nature, or altogether adverse: Of the first sort, are Wens, and 
Strumæ; when I come to them I will set downe the diversities of 
them, and how they also are to be cured. Secondly, the couching 
of a cataract offereth it selfe. Here I meane to set down the variety 
of cataracts, the prognosticks of them, whereby it shall be 
knowne which are curable and which not, and the most exquisite 
manner of couching of such as are curable. Things adverse to nature, 
are stones in sundry parts of the body; but chiefly in the 
bladder. The incision for extracting of it, is called [^GREEK OMITTED^]: 
of it I meane diligently to discourse; because it is a dangerous 
operation, and many times scandalous. Last of all, I come to the 
[/23./] 
fourth and last principall part of Chirurgery, which is the supplying 
of the defects of the body, which may be called [^GREEK OMITTED^] or 
additrix the supplying or adding part. Now things which are added, 
are either of the body it selfe, as restoring of the Nose lost, 
[^p.10^] 
or curing of the haire-lip. Of the first, I will set down the method 
of the Bononian Physitians, and Chirurgeons: Of the second, 
my owne and other famous mens experiments in curing both the 
single and the double haire-lip. The matter of things, which is 
used for repairing of the losses in other parts, as the eye, the eare, 
arme, and legge, is no wayes of the nature of the body. Neverthelesse 
when I am come so farre, I will make an end of the course 
of Chirurgery with touching these so much as shall seeme sufficient, 
to instruct such as have not beene verst in these practises. I 
have run through those five introductory points of Chirurgerie; to 
wit, of the antiquity and dignity of it: of the professors of it, 
of its place amongst the liberall Arts, of the definition and parts 
of the same. As concerning the two last points I have varied 
from all who have written of this subject: Neverthelesse I have 
the light of nature on my side, and the experience of all skilfull 
practitioners. So that it is needlesse to take further paines, either 
to confirme those things which I have alleaged, or to refute that 
which hath beene said by others; Seeing I intend rather to frame 
an able operating Chirurgeon, than to set out a contentious disputing 
theorician: Besides reprehending of others doth not so much 
instruct the hearers in the knowledge of the truth, as sheweth 
that, which is not to be learned, but shunned. Neither is a Chirurgeon 
contented to have performed so many duties to the body of 
man while it is alive, and the instrument of the soule for performing 
actions; but when it is dead, the spirit returning to God, who 
gave it, he ceaseth not to be officious to it, in dissecting of it, for 
the instruction of himselfe and others, and preserving it from putrefaction 
and annoyance, untill time and place fit for burying of 
it be offered: which he compasseth partly, by encearing of it, partly 
by embaulming: of the which two last, I meane also to discourse: 
That the Chirurgeon, which I meanr to frame, may be 
compleat. I have now presented to the view of the eyes of 
your understanding, this Chirurgicall Canaan: Into which I 
meane to bring you, not to use the native inhabitants hardly, as 
Joshua did the Canaanites and their things: but mutually to enjoy 
the use of those good things which you shall finde with them. If 
I proceed orderly, I must enter into the doctrine of Tumors, 
which will be both pleasing and profitable in my first Lecture. It 
is a subject, which is most frequently offered, and from whence 
the meanest of all the brethren, which practiseth, is not exempted. 
[^p.11^] 
Wherefore it behoveth every one to be well grounded in this 
point. Howsoever I shall be willing that the Governours of the 
worshipfull Company set down the matter, whereof I shall 
read. 
 
[^Beginning of a flowchart figure.^] 
The Treatise of Tumors doth deliver things either 
	Generall to all Tumors, 
	and those are in number 
	three. 
		1. The description of a Tumor. 
		2. The causes of a Tumor 
		according to the 
			Dogmatists 
			Chymists. 
		3. The difference of Tumors. 
	Speciall, belonging 
	to every Tumor 
	particularly. 
	How all Tumors are 
	either 
		Simple, and 
		those are 6. 
		which proceed 
		from either 
			Humors, and 
			those are 
			foure. 
				Phlegmone, caused 
				of bloud. 
				Erysipelas, of choler. 
				Oedema, of flegm 
				Schirrus, of Melancholy. 
			Or from 
				Water, an aqueous 
				Tumor. 
				Flatuosity, a flatuous 
				Tumor. 
		Compound. Now the combination of the Tumors 
		proceeding from the mixture of the material 
		causes, causing the simple, I have set down in 
		every particular Tumor. 
[^End of a flowchart figure.^] 
 
[^p.12^] 
[}LECT. II. 
The generall doctrine of Tumors.}] 
 
SEeing according to Aristotle in cap. 1. lib. 1. physic. accroas. in 
every methodicall tractation, that which is most general ought 
first to be set down, then that which is more special; because the 
general points being set down, they exceedingly further the knowledge 
of the particulars; I will begin from those things which are 
common to all speciall Tumors, and those I make in number three. 
First, I will declare what a Tumor is. Secondly, which are causes 
of tumors. Thirdly, which are the maine differences of Tumors. 
 
[/24./] 
Before I come to the essential definition of a Tumor, I will 
set down the denominations of it. A Tumor in Greek is called 
[^GREEK OMITTED^], that is, a prominence or protuberance in the body. And 
from hence the Latine words uncus, a crook or hook, and aduncus, 
bended or crooked, are derived: Because things bended 
cause a sticking out. The Arabians and barbarous Physitians, who 
follow them, call all Tumors unnatural Apostemata, in Latine 
abscessus: this word is derived from the Greek Verb [^GREEK OMITTED^] abscedere: 
Because in Apostemes there is a collection of humors in 
any place, which have left their own proper seat &c. For humors 
which cause Apostemes come from the veines, and so leaving 
their own naturall receptacle, seat themselves in other parts 
of the body, being dependant and weake. And Chirurgeans 
commonly call Tumors wherein there is collection of matter 
Apostemes. Tumor which is a Latine word, and by frequent use 
made familiar in English conferences and discourses, is derived 
from the Latine word Tumeo, to be raised or puffed up: And 
from Tumor commeth Tumulus, a grave: Because it is raised up 
[/25./] 
higher than the ground adjacent to it. Now bunchings or stickings 
out of parts of the body, are threetold: for either they are 
[/26./] 
natural, and then they serve for the comliness of the body, and 
further the actions, as we may see in the Head, Belly, Joints, the 
[/27./] 
Thighs, Calves of the Legs, and Armes: Or they only pass the 
ordinary dimensions of some parts, such are the Dugs full of milk, 
[/28./] 
and the bellies of women which are with child: Or they are altogether 
unnatural, not onely marring the comely composition of 
that part of the body which they possess; but hindering the actions 
[^p.13^] 
also. Such a Tumor, or eminence of the body, is called by Galen 
[^GREEK OMITTED^] id est, tumor præter naturam, a Tumor contrary 
to nature. Having set down the denominations of a Tumor, 
I must come to the definition of it. Seeing so many as have 
written of Tumors have set down one definition or another, if I 
should set down all the severall definitions which are by divers 
Authors set down, and insist in the refutation of such definitions 
as offend against the conditions of a good definition, I should 
rather seem to the judicious, to make an ostentation of reading, 
and wit, then a care of the profiting of the hearers. Of all the definitions, 
two are chiefly to be noted: the one of Fallopius in his 
Treatise of Tumors, cap. 3. The other of Hieron. Fabricius ab 
aqua pendent. in Operibus Chirurgicis, part, 2. lib. 1. de tumoribus 
cap. 1. That of Fallopius is gathered out of Galen. cap. 1. lib. 13. de 
method. medendi: and it is thus. It is a disease, whereby the parts 
lose their naturall bigness, exceeding it. So that extenuation is 
contrary to a Tumor. He will have it to be a disease of the instrumentary 
parts: for quantity is only an instrument, whereby 
the organicall parts performe their actions, more strongly, or 
weakly, as we may see in dwarfs, and tall men. Galen lib. 1. de 
tumoribus præter nat. c. 1. affirmeth, that in Tumors contrary to 
nature, all dimensions, that is, length, height and breadth are 
increased. But the former definition cannot be ascribed to every 
particular Tumor, and so it is not large enough: for in an Erysipelas, 
extreme heat rather offendeth, than the bigness enlarged, 
which very often cannot be deprehended by the senses. The definition 
[/29./] 
set down by Fabricius ab aqua pendente is this: A Tumor 
against nature is a disease for the most part compounded, which 
is to be named of that thing which hindereth the actions. And 
seeing to a Crow her own Birds seem fairest, for if any one set 
under her Hens eggs to be hatched, that they may have Cocks of 
the game, they must watch for the time of disclosing, lest she kill 
them: So he to make his definition plausible to his Readers, will 
have all to mark some remarkable points in his definition. And 
first of all, in that he calleth a Tumor against nature morbus, or a 
disease, he will not have pushes in the face, and such small eminences 
of the skin to be Tumors, because they hinder not the actions: 
He cannot deny that the equality of the skin is altered, and 
besides this, the action of the skin, which is perspiration in that 
place is hindered. Let no man think it harsh, that I ascribe action 
[^p.14^] 
unto the skin, being a simple and similar part of the body: It 
cannot be denied that all similary parts have an use; which use 
sometimes is an action, as this of the skin; to send out by the 
pores of it fuliginous vapors; and superfluous serosity of the bloud 
by insensible perspiration and sweat. And although such small 
eminences commonly are denied to be diseases, because they hinder 
not the actions; yet they be passions, and affections, which 
require the skill of the Physitian and Chirurgian: yea those pushes 
of the face are sometimes more hard to be cured than great 
Tumors, and Artists many times gaine more by those, than these: 
Besides this, by reason of the matrer they are to be referred to 
one or the other of the maine Tumors. Howsoever they are not to 
[/30./] 
be neglected. According to Aristotle 1. Rhetorick c. 5. & Galen ad 
Thrasibulum, there be three gifts of the body, to wit, Health, 
Strength, and Beauty, all which Medicine is to direct: Health is 
preserved by wholesome nourishment, Strength by convenient 
exercises: of the which [^GREEK OMITTED^] intreateth, whereof Hieron. 
Mercurialis hath written a Volume; [^GREEK OMITTED^] hath care of the 
beauty: Now seeing by reason of the face a man is called beautifull 
or ugly, who can deny that they deserve the care of the Physitian, 
and Chirurgian? He addeth that a Tumor is a disease most 
commonly compounded; if he had said ever compounded, he had 
spoken a truth: for in every one of these Tumors there is a Tumor 
conspicuous or latent; or a solution of unity either sensible 
or imaginary. In an Erysipelas it self, wherein there appearth neither 
quantity of part encreased, nor solution of unity procured, 
yet in it there are undoubtedly both: for the first, seeing there is 
so great a heat in the part possessed with with this grief, the Humors 
must be rarified, and the part dilated, which will require a more 
spacious place than it had before, which is an evident argument 
that the quantity is inlarged. As for the second, the parts before 
arctly united must be somewhat separated by stretching: Reason 
must teach us that which cannot be deprehended by the senses. 
The last clause of the definition, That the Tumor is to be named 
from that which hindereth the action; as Erysipelas a disease of 
distemperature, because heat doth most hinder the action of the 
part: this is frivolous, because not heat onely, but the bedewing 
of the skin with choler, by the which it is stretched, hindreth the 
contraction and extention of the skin, and so by a necessary consequence, 
the hindring of the motion of the part organicall, 
[^p.15^] 
wherein it is seated. To conclude, this definition may be applyed 
to other griefes then a Tumor, as to the head-ache, which is a disease 
most commonly compounded of distemperature of the humors, 
and solution of unity, and may have its denomination from 
the diversity of the humor causing it. Wherefore, seeing neither 
the definition of Fallopius out of Galen, nor the definition 
of Fabricius ab aqua pendente, can abide the triall of the Laws of 
a good definition, we must assay to give another, which shall be 
this: A Tumor against nature is most frequently a disease, sometimes 
a light affection, for the most part incident to the organicall 
[/31./] 
parts, increasing their quantity above nature, by reason of 
receiving of superfluous humors sent from other parts. Here I 
wil labour to yield a reason for every point of this definition. 
The genus is a griefe, because it hindereth the actions; sometimes 
it is a passion or light affection, which hindereth not the action 
of the part, as appeareth in small Oedematous Tumors, and schirrhosities: 
and therefore these modifications frequently, and sometimes 
are added. The subject of a Tumor is a part organicall, 
sometimes by its own nature organicall, as a finger or toe, sometimes 
organicall only by office, as when the use of a similary part 
is performed by an action: as it appeareth in the skin, one of the 
uses whereof is to send forth by its pores insensible perspirations, 
fuliginous vapors, superfluous serosity of the bloud by sweat, and 
ichors of humors in the beginning of Tumors, and declination by 
discussive and resolutive medicaments. The forme of a Tumor 
is quantity encreased, whereby it differeth from all other griefes. 
[/32./] 
The cause of encrease of quantity, is receiving of superfluous humors, 
which is done two manner of waies, to wit, affluxion, and 
congestion. Affluxion is, when a humor offending either in quantity 
[/33./] 
or quality suddenly with violence seizeth upon any member, 
either by reason of the weakness of it, the rarity, looseness, dependency, 
heat, or paine, or because the whole body is full, or 
cacochymical, and the parts sending strong. Congestion is, 
[/34./] 
when a humor is collected in any part by little and little, by 
reason of the weaknesse of the concocting and expelling 
faculty of the same: So that a Tumor against nature is a disease 
alwaies compounded, against Fallopius in his Treatise of Tumors, 
c. 3. For there is alwaies a solution of unity, either manifest, or 
latent and occult, and this he granteth; for he saith, & de hac 
conveniemus: we shall agree concerning this. Besides this, the 
[^p.16^] 
quantity is encreased, and that alwaies to reason and imagination, 
although not to the sense, as hath been said of an Erysipelas. 
Moreover, you shall hardly find a Tumor without some distemperature, 
either simple, or compounded. I have insisted somewhat 
too long in clearing the Probleme of the definition of a Tumor 
against nature, because there is great contention concerning 
it amongst Authors, both ancient and moderne. 
 
[/35./] 
Now order of doctrine requireth, that we speak somewhat 
of the causes of Tumors: these are either external, or internal; 
[/36./] 
The causes external are in number eight. 1. The air, if it be contagious, 
it causeth Tumors, as Carbuncles, and Botches in the 
Plague time. 2. The touching of things exceeding temperature 
in the active qualities, as we see in the application of Vesicatories, 
and sitting long upon any cold seat. 3. Too hard binding of the 
part, which causeth sometimes Gangrenes. 4. The application 
of an attracting instrument to the body, as Cupping-glasses, and 
Hornes. 5. Whatsoever may cause solution of unity, as wound, 
fracture, luxation, or contusion. 6. Biting of Beasts, whether 
they be venomous or no. 7. Taking inwardly things offensive to 
nature, whether it be by the excessive quantity, as when by too 
liberall drinking wine an Erysipelas seazeth upon the head, or by 
a maligne quality, as we may see fall out after the taking of Arsenick 
or Mercury sublimate. 8. Immoderate motion, whereby 
immoderate heat is procured, whereby the humors become more 
subtil, and the passages to the weaker part more patent. 
 
Now the part is weak: First, by nature, and that either by 
[/37./] 
reason of its substance, it being spungeous, and loose as Glandules: 
so we see frequently Parotides behind the eares, and Bubones 
in the groines, or by reason of the natural humidity of the 
part; so Tumors more often appear in the flesh than in the spermatick 
parts. A part also naturally is weak by reason of the 
situation; for the dependant parts are more apt to receive influence 
of humors, as the more high are to receive Halitus; so it is 
often seen, that it rising from the stomack, or some inferiour part, 
causeth in some the falling sicknesse. A part, secondly, is weak 
by accident, and that by reason of errours committed in the things 
not naturall, as aire, meat and drink, exercise, and such like 
whereof much is spoken in that part of Physick which is called 
Physiologia. So that to the causing of a Tumor in a part, there be 
[/38./] 
required, the weaknesse of the part which receiveth, patent 
[^p.17^] 
passages, preparation of the Humor, and the strength of the part 
sending. 
 
The internal causes of Tumors are either Humors or Flatuosites: 
The Humors are either natural or unnatural: The natural 
[/39./] 
are either sincere, as choler, flegme and melancholy; or mingled, 
as some of these with blood; for blood is no where sincere, but according 
to the humor mingled with it, which is predominant, it is 
called cholerick, phlegmatick, or melancholy blood. The humor unnatural 
is water, as in the dropsie, for it never can become nourishment. 
Of Tumors which are caused by reason of strange things, 
as wormes, lice, bones, nailes, haire, grisly substances, and such 
like, I will speak when I come to the third part of Chirurgerie, 
called [^GREEK OMITTED^], or Ablatrix, which taketh away superfluities. 
But time admonisheth to come to the setting downe of the principal 
differences of Tumors. In this matter I will leave all needlesse 
and fruitlesse distinctions of Tumors, from time, as that some 
are new, some old, some short, some long enduring: from the 
quantity, as that some are small, some great, some of a mean bignesse: 
from the condition of them, as that some are milde, some 
maligne, some curable, some uncurable, and such like; which either 
do not greatly further the knowledge and curation of Tumors, 
or else are to be set downe to some purpose in the explication 
of every particular Tumor. Only now in my general discourse 
of Tumors, which is to shew light unto that which shall hereafter 
be spoken in the special doctrine of each, I will meddle with the 
differences taken from the material cause of Tumors, from whence 
spring the main principal Species of Tumors, unto which all other 
may be reduced. 
 
All Tumors then are either simple, or compounded. The simple are 
[/40./] 
caused either of Humors or Flatuosity: the humors are either natural, 
or unnatural: the natural Humors are foure, Bloud, Choler, 
Flegme and Melancholy: If blood, which neither in the veines, 
nor without, is found sincere and unmixed (as hath been said) 
cause a Tumor, it is called Phlegmone, or Inflammatio, according to 
Galen. lib. 2. ad Glaucon. cap. 1. Of the divers kinds of it, which have 
their denominations from their places, and of the diversities 
which arise from the complication of it with other Humors, I mean 
to discourse when I come to the particular traction of it: for I 
meane not to confound particulars with generals, because this 
would breed confusion, and so deprive the memory of fruit of 
[^p.18^] 
that which is delivered. Of all other Tumors a Phlegmone deserveth 
the first place, because it is caused of bloud, which is the son 
of nature, first begotten, and the treasure of life. If choler cause 
the Tumor, it is called Erysipelas; these two are hot Tumors. If 
flegme cause a soft and white Tumor like it selfe, it is called Oedema, 
unto which divers pituitous Tumors are reduced, of the 
which I will speak in their proper places. If a Tumor very hard 
be produced of the melancholy juice, and without paine, it is called 
Schirrhus; these two last are cold Tumors. If a Tumor be 
caused of water contained in any part, it is called Tumor aquosus: 
If from flatuosity, Emphysema; these two last Tumors are the 
off-springs of crudity, caused by the weaknesse and defect of the 
naturall heat. And seeing these have the material cause different 
from that of others, I will speak of these in several Lectures, as 
was done in every other particular Tumor. Besides this, they require 
other medicaments then the rest of the main Tumors do, as 
shall be shewed when we come to the curation of them, differing 
them from the rest. I see no reason why they may not be accounted 
several Tumors; one cannot truly say that either Hernia aquosa, 
or flatuous Tumors of the joynts, can be reduced to the aforesaid 
foure principal Tumors, or that they can be cured by the 
same indications of curing, and medicaments which are applyed 
to the other. You see how I have set down six simple Tumors, for 
fewer I cannot, if you consider either the diversity of the materiall 
causes, or the diversity of the topicall applications, or the evidence 
[/41./] 
of doctrine. The combination of these begets the compound 
Tumors; in these compound Tumors, what Humor is predominant, 
that carrieth away the denomination: As for example, if 
blood abound more than choler, the Tumor is called [^GREEK OMITTED^]. 
If choler be predominant, it is called [^GREEK OMITTED^], 
and so in all other combinations of Humors in Tumors, 
which shall be presented to your view. When you have noted 
the Pathognomonical signes of each of the simple principal 
Tumors, it is an easie matter at the first sight to discerne the kinde 
of Tumor, and what compound medicaments are to be applyed 
to it. Hitherto have I declared unto you the opinion of Hippocrates, 
Galen, and of the rest of the Grecians, as also of the Arabians 
concerning the material causes of Tumors. Now to fulfill 
my promise, I will shew you what Paracelsus and his followers 
think of this point: First then they acknowledge but two elements, 
[^p.19^] 
water and earth; for if they should not grant so much, 
they could not be counted in the number of the faithful; for in 
the very first verses of Genesis mention is made of both. Secondly, 
they account the Humors parts of the body, and so the causes of 
no griefs, but erroneously; for if they were parts, they would be 
[/42./] 
endued with life, which they are not. Thirdly, they would have 
some action, whereof they also are deprived: only they have an 
use, which is to nourish the parts. Besides this, they maliciously 
dissemble the doctrine of the rational Physitians and Chirurgeons, 
for they make each Humor, contained in the masse of blood, either 
natural, or against nature: the natural they make, either alimentary, 
which nourisheth the parts, or superfluous, which nature reserveth 
for some other uses: of this abounding, diseases proceeding 
of fulnesse are ingendred, called Plethora: of the Humor against 
nature, causing impurity, Cacochymia is caused; so choler in 
the veines and arteries is natural, and alimentary. In the Cystis 
fellis, and in the Porus biliarius, the superfluous is contained: if it 
leave the appointed receptacles, and passe to the habit of the body, 
it causeth the yellow jaundize; if by adustion, it become Bilis 
[/43./] 
atra, it procureth Cancers and Wolfes; so that they hold not 
the natural, but those that are unnatural to be causes of diseases. 
 
[/44./] 
The Paracelsians appoint three principles of all things, Sal, Sulphur, 
and Mercurie, and not only by resemblance, or allegorically, 
but really: By Sulphur, they understand the fattie substance; 
by Mercurie, the waterish substance: by salt, the earthly substance: 
Distill Cloaves, there come two humidities, the oyle and spirit: 
in the bottome the earthly substance stayeth, which hath two 
parts, Terra repurgata, the crystalline salt, and Terra mortua, the 
black earth. The life of the salt is a strong water, which if it be by 
[/45./] 
distillation drawn, it leaveth but a Terra damnata, only fit for the 
dunghil. This salt preserveth the body from putrefaction; wherefore 
[/46./] 
Christ called his Disciples the salt of the earth, because by the 
preaching of the Gospel, and administration of the healthful Sacraments 
they procured to the unfaithful the life of grace, who before 
were but Terra damnata; & by a wonderful transmutation of 
terrestrial creatures, made them spiritual, representing the Angels, 
[/47./] 
yea God himself, by restoring his image. From defects in these 
three, they will have all diseases to proceed: and concerning Tumors 
against nature, the hot they will have to proceed from Sulphur 
and Mercurie; and the hotter it is, the more Sulphur to concurre. 
[^p.20^] 
The cold Tumors they will have to proceed from Mercury 
and Salt, and according to the loosnesse, or firmnesse of the Tumor, 
the more Salt or Mercury to be required, as in Oedema more 
Mercurie, in Scirrhus more Salt. This is their doctrine concerning 
the material causes of Tumors; in my judgement it is the safest 
course to insist in the foot-steps of the ancient, for their way is 
plaine and easie; no man can deny that there are foure Humors in 
the masse of blood, as may appeare when it is drawne out of the 
veines: Choler swimmeth about the blood, which is known by its 
bright rednesse; Melancholy is in the bottome, which is deprehended 
by its grossenesse and blacknesse; now flegm uniteth these 
two last Humors, and maketh them tough. The Paracelsian doctrine 
is full of difficulties, which he maketh more obscure by coyning 
strange words, as his Reader will perceive; so that his discourses 
are but a kinde of canting Philosophy. Neverthelesse, I 
thought good in plain terms to acquaint you with it, that when 
any Emperick shall make a shew of learning, by using these terms, 
you may finde him out, and esteem of him as he is: that is, like 
that head which the Wolfe afarre off espied, representing the head 
of a living man, but coming neer, and seeing it but curiously carved, 
affirmed it to be Pulchrum caput, sed sine scientia, A comely 
head, but without wit. 
 
[}LECT. III. 
Of the generall Indications of curing Tumors.}] 
 
OF the general points whereof I intended to speak before 
the handling of every particular Tumor, having set down 
the definition, causes, and differences of Tumors, now I 
am called upon to set downe the general indications of curing 
Tumors. 
 
Now an indication is that which sheweth what course is to be 
taken for the recovery of health: The general indications are taken 
[/48./] 
either from the matter, or from the times of every Tumor; In 
the matter; we are to consider the motion of it, and its nature. 
As concerning the motion of the matter; it is either in flowing, or 
it is received already into the part. The causes of fluxion are 
two, Plethora, or fulnesse and Cacochymia, an ill complexion: 
Plethora or fulnesse is twofold, Ad vasa, and Ad vires: Ad vasa 
[^p.21^] 
is when the veins are only full, and the body notwithstanding 
quick and nimble; this is twofold, Pura, when there is a due 
proportion of the Humors of the body; and Impura, when there is 
an excesse of any of the three Humors besides blood, as Choler, 
Flegme, or Melancholy. Ad vires is when there is such a fulnesse, 
as causeth sluggishnesse of the body: this requireth evacuation 
of Phlebotomie, as Cacochymia by purgation. As for Phlebotomie, 
three things are to be observed concerning it. 1. The 
manner: In fulnesse Quoad vasa, at one time so much blood is to 
be drawne as is requisite; but in fulnesse, Quoad vires, because 
strength is somewhat abated, you are to draw blood by repetition, 
and not all at one time. 2. Is the quantity, how much then is 
to be drawne, the weaknesse or strength of the party will informe 
you; for in a weake body you are to draw lesse, in a strong body 
more; strength and weaknesse are to be discerned by the functions: 
the weaknesse of the natural faculty is discerned by crudity 
of Urine, and excrements of the body: the weaknesse of the vital, 
by a weak and small pulse, as also breathing weak and thick; 
the weaknesse of the animal function is found out by defect in 
moving and feeling; by the integrity and perfection of these three 
faculties, the strength of the party is perceived: But we must diligently 
[/49./] 
distinguish between languishing and weaknesse indeed, 
and oppression of the faculties by reason of fulnesse, making them 
dull and slow; for, as in weaknesse, great moderation is to be used 
so in oppression we may more bountifully and boldly suffer 
the veine to run. The third thing to be observed in Phlebotomie, is 
the end of it, wherefore it is instituted; the scopes of blood-letting 
are two; Derivation and Revulsion: Derivation is the drawing 
of the Humor to the part adjacent, or of the same side, by opening 
of that veine, or a branch of it, which is inserted into the 
part affected: as for example, if in diseases of the head or neck, we 
open the Cephalica in the same side: and even in this there is a 
kind of opposition, to wit, high and low; or in Tumors of the 
groyne, we open Vena poplitis: this they do also who open this 
veine in Podagra, if the gout invade the foot. This kinde of interception 
we use, not only because there is a plentiful fluxion 
to the part affected, but because a speedy interception is required, 
lest the natural heat of the part be oppressed, or the 
rupture of a vessel ensue; so in inflammation of the lungs and side, we 
open the liver veine of the same side, and draw blood plentifully. 
[^p.22^] 
Revulsion is a drawing of the Humor to a part opposite: of this 
there be foure differences: 1. From the higher to the lower parts, 
as from the head to the feet. 2. From the right side to the left. 
3. From the fore part to the back, which we shall do if we apply 
Leeches in diseases of the brest or belly. 4. Is when we draw 
from the center unto the circumference, as in applying Ventoses 
with Scarification to the neck in diseases of the braine, as in the 
Apoplexie, and Lethargie. Vesicatories performe the same. 
 
[/50./] 
But one may aske which are to be accounted high, and which 
low. 
 
[/51./] 
I answer, That all those parts which are above the navel, including 
also the liver and stomack, are accounted high: but the parts 
below the liver, are accounted low, as the kidneys, and genitals in 
man and woman. 
 
[/52./] 
This kind of interception we use in two cases: First, if the matter 
flow but slowly, and so a sudden interception is not required. 
Secondly, if we are to open a veine to prevent a disease, as Vena 
cubiti for to free one of a fit of the gout. But this kinde of drawing 
hath no place in contagious Tumors, if they appear either in 
the upper or lower parts; for whether they appear either behind 
the eares, and arme-pits in the upper parts, or in the groynes in 
the lower, revulsion must be by the Vena cava, which is inserted 
into the right ventricle of the heart: now whether any contagious 
vapor or Humor can besent by this passage safely, let every 
judicious person consider. 
 
Now there is a difference between Revulsion, Derivation, and 
Evacuation; for in the former two, motion is required, as you 
have heard, but in vacuation the Humors must be quiet. In the 
translation of Humors flowing from any part, we must mark according 
to Hippocrates, that it be done [^GREEK OMITTED^], Secundum rectitudinem, 
by observation of a straight course; and that is done two 
manner of wayes. 
 
First, by the rectitude of the parts, as the left with the left, and 
right with the right, and the hinder with the fore parts. Secondly, 
by the rectitude of the vessels: as for example, The liver vein of the 
arme hath a kind of straitnesse with the veines ascending to the 
head: so if one bleed immoderately at the right nostril, by applying 
a ventose to the region of the liver, the flux ceaseth: if it flow 
from the left nostril, it must be applyed to the region of the 
spleen. 
 
[^p.23^] 
Having set down how Plethora is to be abated, if it cause fluxion, 
we are to shew how Cacochymia is to be removed, which is 
not so much by reason of the quantity oppressing, as by reason of 
an evill quality offending a part. Now this matter offending in 
quality, it either moveth from place to place, or it resteth where 
it had its first invasion; if it move from place to place, it is the 
safest course to abate the Humors wherein this quality is resident 
by Phlebotomie, lest it seize upon some principal part: if it be 
quiet, resting contented with the first place, then let us use 
purging, expelling the Humor, whether it be choler, flegme, or 
melancholy, with appropriate medicaments, which Physick prescribeth 
in that branch of the curative part of Physick which restoreth 
health by the administration of inward medicaments. Having 
set down the indications which are taken from the motion 
of the Humor, we must come to those which are taken from the 
nature of it. 
 
Now the humor it selfe is either not contagious, or contagious: 
If it be not contagious, the fluxion of it doth proceed from three 
causes: The first is the strength of the part sending the humor, 
which it doth, either because it is burthened with the quantity, or 
pricked on by the quality; we have shewed what is to be done 
in these cases. The second is the thinnesse of the humor. The 
third is the attraction of the affected part. If fluxion be caused 
by reason of the thinnesse of the humor, if we cannot use phlebottomie 
or purging, as in children, decrepid persons, and in 
women with childe in the last moneth: then we must use revulsion, 
and this is done six manner of wayes: 1. By Ventoses without 
scarification, as when we apply a Ventose to the region of the 
liver, when one bleedeth too much at the right nostril. 2. Painful 
constriction, or binding of the parts, as armes and legges: but 
we must first rub hard the parts which are to be bound; and if we 
binde the arme, we must use a Ligature in three parts. First, Neer 
the arme-pit. Secondly, a little above the elbow. Thirdly, about 
the wrist. In the legges we must use a Ligature neer the groyne, a 
little above the knee, and neere the ankle. 3. Painful frications 
when we meane to revel from the center to the circumference. 
4. Bathing of the parts with very hot water: for first by reason 
of the paine it doth revel. Secondly, it doth discusse, because it 
openeth the pores. And in Fevers by bathing the limbs sleepe 
is procured, the vapours ascending to the head. 5. Vesicatories 
[^p.24^] 
which are used in the Appoplexie, Lethargie, and such like. 6. Fontanels, 
and they are in great use to be applyed to divers parts, for 
the preventing and curing sundry griefs. If the fluxion be procured 
by the ion of the part affected, there be two causes of 
the attraction: First, the distemperature of the part. Secondly, 
paine. If distemperature of the part be the cause, it must be removed 
by its contrary: but seeing it is most commonly a hot distemperature, 
things cooling are to be applyed, as by applying 
clothes moistned with oyle of Roses or Violets cold: but when 
the clouts become hot, they are to be removed, and cold to be applyed, 
or cloaths moistned in the juyces of cold herbs. If we apply 
unguents, as infrigidans Galeni, Rosatum Mesuis, de cerussa Rasis, 
Populeon, we must not apply the unguent immediately to the 
skin; but a thin linnen cloth; for it keepeth the unguent from 
drying, and doth not hinder the breathing out of the vapors, which 
the immediate application of the unguent would do, and so by 
stopping of the pores, would increase both the heate and paine. 
 
