[^Ross, Alexander: Arcana microcosmi^] 
 
[}Arcana Microcosmi: 
OR, 
The hid Secrets of MAN's Body discovered; 
In an Anatomical Duel between Aristotle and 
Galen concerning the Parts thereof: 
 
As also, 
By a Discovery of the Strange and marveilous 
Diseases, Symptomes & Accidents 
of MAN's BODY. 
 
WITH 
A Refutation of Doctor Brown's 
VULGAR ERRORS, 
The Lord BACON's 
NATURAL HISTORY, 
 
And Doctor Harvy's Book 
DE GENERATIONE, 
COMENIUS, and Others; 
 
Whereto is annexed a Letter from Doctor Pr. 
to the Author, and his Answer thereto, touching 
Doctor Harvy's Book de Generatione. 
 
BY A. R. 
London, Printed by Tho. Newcomb, and are to bee sold 
by John Clark, entring into Mercers-Chappel, at 
the lower end of Cheapside, 1652.}] 
 
[^A dedication to Edward Watson and a table of contents omitted.^] 
[^Extract 1, pp. 1-23^] 
 
[^p.1^] 
Arcana Microcosmi: 
OR, 
The hid Secrets of MAN's BODY discovered. 
WITH 
A Refutation of Doctor BROVVNS 
VULGAR ERRORS, 
My Lord BACON'S Naturall History; 
AND 
D=r= HARVEY's Book De Generatione.}] 
 
[}CHAP. I. 
1. The Hearts dignity, scituation, priority, necessity, and use. 2. The 
Heart first formed, not all the parts together. 3. The Galenists 
Objections answered. 4. How the heart is perfect before the other 
members, and how nourished. 5. All the temperaments united 
in the Heart. 6. Three ventricles in som Hearts. 7. The Heart 
nervous. 8. No parts more spermatical then others. 9. The Liver, 
not the first that is formed. 10. The Heart the seat of Bloud 
and nourishment. 11. The heat of the Matrix not generative. 
12. The right Ventricle nobler then the left. 13. The vital and 
nutritive facuties are the same. 14. Heat the cause of the Hearts 
motion. 15. The Heart was first formed and informed. 16. There 
is but one principal member in the body, not many.}] 
 
AS in all States and Kingdomes there have 
ever been factions and sidings, so have 
there been still oppositions in the Common-wealth 
of Learning; amongst many 
others, there are two great factions concerning 
the fabrick of Mans Body; namely, 
the Peripateticks and Galenists; so that in 
Rome there was not greater emulation between the Pompeians 
and Cæsarians, then there is between the Philosophers and Physitians 
[^p.2^] 
in the points of Anatomy: I stood as neuter a long time, 
but at last being evinced by the multitude and strength of Aristotelian 
reasons am forced to side with them against the Galenists; 
but so, that I do what I can to reconcile them in some 
things, and to make peace; for, Nulla salus bello. 
 
1. I will therefore briefly set down the reasons that have induced 
me to side with the Aristotelians. And first concerning the 
Heart: I finde that it is the first member that lives and is formed 
in our bodies; and consequently the noblest and chiefest 
of all our members, whatsoever the Galenists say to the contrary. 
For 1. The Heart is placed in the midst of the breast, as the 
Sun in the midst of the world, that it might impart its vital 
heat and motion to all parts: So the seed is in the midst of the 
fruit. 2. Where there is a medium there must needs be extreams; 
but we finde in mans body this medium; to wit, that there 
are some parts which both give and receive life and motion; 
therefore there must be some that receive but give not; and 
consequently some that give but receive not; and this must be 
the heart; or brain, or liver: for to make more originals then 
one, is needless, seeing Nature always tends to, and aims at 
unity. Now that the heart is this principal, appears by these 
reasons. 3. First, that is most likely to be the originall of life, 
sense, and motion in other members, which is most apt and 
capable of these; and so, that had first life and motion, which 
had the greatest inclination and aptitude to receive them; 
but the heart of all other parts is most apt to receive these 
from the formative faculty: Therefore doubtless this faculty in 
the seed, would first produce the heart, as being a matter prepared 
to receive first the impressions of the formative. 4. What 
the heart is in Animals, that the root is in Vegitables; but 
the root is the first thing the plant thrusts out: therefore the 
heart is first formed. 5. The heart dieth last, therefore it lived 
first: for this method Nature observes, that the parts which 
are last made, decay first, as the eies and teeth; and consequently 
that decayeth last, which was framed first. 6. They 
that have been curious by inspection into eggs, to observe Natures 
progress in the generation of the chick, have found a 
red spot the third day, which had a motion like palpitation; 
this could be nothing else but the heart. 7. The other members 
cannot live without the heart, but the heart can live 
without the other members, as I have seen a Monkeys heart 
live a great while after it hath been taken out of the body: 
If then the life of the other members depends from the heart, 
[^p.3^] 
and not the heart from them, the heart must needs be the 
first that liveth. 
 
8. The heart imparts the vitall heat to the other parts, it must 
therefore have existence before the other parts; for operation 
follows the existence. 9. The formative power of the seed 
doth not operate but by the vital heat of the heart; therefore 
this mus be first, before that can operate. 10. The matter 
cannot be disposed, to receive the form of the members, nor 
can the parts be distinguished one from another, without the 
heat and motion of the heart. 11. Nature in her operations 
aims at an end; but where there is an end, there is order; 
and where there is order, there is priority, and something 
that was first. 
 
II. There are some who hold that the heart is not first generated, 
but that all the members are at the same time begot and 
formed together; But this cannot be so; for in the Embryo 
we see that all the parts are not equally articulated and figured, 
but some sooner, some later. 2. We see this in art, 
which imitates Nature; for the artificer carves and figures one 
part before another. 3. We see the teeth are begot long after 
the other parts; for nature produceth the members as there is 
use of them; the infant needs no teeth whilst it feeds on milk, 
4. If all the parts are at the same time framed and articulated, 
then all the body is at the same time perfected; but this is not 
Natures work, which proceeds by degrees to perfection, having 
imperfected beginnings. 
 
III. The Galenists object, that Nature had to no purpose 
made the heart before the rest of the body, seeing there is no 
use of the heart till the body be formed. I answer, there is a 
two-fold use, namely, of Animation, and of preparation; the 
heart could not animate the body before it was, but it could 
prepare the matter by its vital heat and motion to receive the 
impression and influence of the formative power, working by 
the heart on the matter; the heart then is usefull, not only 
to the body after it is generated but also whilst it is in Fieri; 
and in generation, the heart is the foundation of the whole 
corporeal Fabrick; we cannot say the foundation is needless, 
because it is laid before the house is built; for though it doth 
not support the superstructure before it be, yet it is ready and 
fitted to support it, when is shal be: Neither will it follow, 
that because the house before it is built needs no foundation, 
therefore the foundation must not be first laid. There is need 
of priority and order; the building needs it, when it shall 
[^p.4^] 
be, and the builder needs it before it be: though the body 
not yet formed needs not the heart, yet the formative power 
needs it. Secondly, they object that the formative power is 
common to all the parts alike, having no more relation to one 
then to another; and therefore works upon them all alike, 
and produceth them together. I answer, God is the common 
and universal cause of all his creatures; yet he did not create 
them all in one day; the universality of the cause, excludes 
not the order of casuality; nor is the common relation it hath 
to the effects, any reason of producing them all at one time. 
Again, though the formative power hath an equal relation to 
all parts, as they are parts; yet it hath a nearer relation to the 
heart, as being its organ, by which it works on the other parts. 
 
IV. If it be asked whether the heart be perfect or imperfect 
before the other members be articulated. I answer; It is perfect, 
if it be compared with any other member, but imperfect 
if compared with the whole compositum. Again, it is imperfect 
to what it shal be, when it shall be fitted with all necessary 
Organs for animation. 2. If again it be asked, how the heart can 
live without nutriment, seeing the liver by blood seeds it. I 
answer, though the liver be not yet formed, yet the heart is 
nourished by some adjacent matter, as the chick is by the yeolk 
of the egg; and this nourishment sufficeth the heart, till blood, 
a perfect nutriment be prepared. Again, the nutritive faculty 
doth not flow from the liver, as the vitall from he heart, but 
it is inherent and implanted into every part, as well in the 
heart as in the liver; whereas the vitall is implanted only in 
the heart, and from thence flowing into every member. Lastly, 
we may say that the heart needs no food, till there be a dependition, 
or wasting of its substance. 
 
V. The unity of the vegetive soul cannot be preserved in so 
many different temperaments; or the body, (for there are as 
many as there are parts) if it were not for the common temperament 
of the heart, in which all the others are united, 
receiving from thence heat and spirits: It was needfull then 
that the heart should be first formed, as being the common 
originall of all the other parts, all which may be said to have 
but one common temperament, and one soul, because there is 
but one heart. 
 
VI. Though the Galenists affirm that the heart hath but two 
ventricles; yet the Aristotelians in affirming three in bigger 
creatures, seem to speak more reason: For if in bigger animals 
there is greater store of spirits, and a greater elaboration of 
[^p.5^] 
them, then in the lesser, it stands with reason that their hearts 
being bigger, should have also more receptacles for containing 
the vitall blood and spirits, then the lesse. 
 
VII. It stands also with reason, that the substance of the heart 
is nervous, that is might be the more firm and solid. 2. Because 
the heart is the original of motion, which is performed by the 
nerves. 3. Because the substance of the veins and arteries, whereof 
the heart is the originall, is nervous. 
 
VIII. The parts which the Galenists call Spermaticall, are 
not made of the Sperma, or Seed, more then any other parts are, 
but of the dryer and more solid parts of the blood, as the 
Sanguineall are of the thinner parts therof. 2: The males seed 
is onely active, the woman hath no other seed then the menstruous 
blood, which is meerly passive; in both which seeds 
there is a power or potentiality of generation; the active in 
the male, the passive in the female, both which are from the 
heart. In this also I subscribe to Aristotle. 
 
IX. I cannot assent to the Galenists, in affirming the liver 
rather then the heart to be the first that lives in us, and therefore 
the original of other parts, because it is bigger, and nearer 
to the matrix, then the heart; for the Aristotelians say well, 
that the original of things consisteth not in bulk, but in 
vertue; the seeds of trees and plants are least in bulk, and yet 
are the originals of great bodies. 2. The vicinity to the matrix 
is not the cause of priority; for the matrix is the place 
of, but not an agent in generation; the agent is only the formative 
faculty in the seed. 
 
X. Both Aristotelians and Galenists affirm, that the child at 
first lives the life of a plant; but from hence the Aristotelian 
concluds, that the heart is the first members begot in us, because 
it is answerable to the root in plants, which is first generated; 
but the Galenist infers, that the liver must be the first member, 
because the child living the life of a plant, hath no other faculty 
but nutritive, which is the faculty of the plant, the seat 
whereof is in the liver. But here I side with Aristotle, because 
the liver is no more the seat of nutriment then the heart: 
And because the heart is as the root; but it is by the root the 
plant lives and is nourished: And if the liver be the seat of 
nutriment, because of the blood thereof; I should rather say 
the heart is this seat, because we finde blood there out of 
the veins, as in a cistern; but in the liver there is no other 
Blood, then what is in the veins: Neither can the liver be the 
originall of the nurtitive power, because there is the sense of 
[^p.6^] 
indigence or want; for so the stomack should rather be this 
originall, because there is the most exquisit sense of want. 
 
XI. The liver cannot be generated without heat and spirits; 
but the seat of heat and spirits is the heart, therefore this must 
be first. If any will say that the heat of the matrix is sufficient; 
I deny it; for that heat is onely conservative, not generative; 
it hardeneth and consolidateth the outward parts, but doth 
not produce the inward. 
 
XII. Aristotle will have the right ventricle of the Heart 
the nobler; Galen the left; but I subscribe to Aristotle; because 
I finfe that the right Ventricle liveth longer then the left. 
2. That the Pulse in the right side of him that is dying, is more 
valid then in the left side. 3. The right ventricle leans upon 
the lungs as upon a Cushion or supporter, Nature shewing as 
it were, a greater care of this then of the other. 4. The right 
parts are nimbler and stronger then the left, because they are 
hotter. 5. Though the spirits receive their completion in the 
left ventricle, yet they are prepared and fitted in the right; and 
therefore there needs not so great a heat in the left ventricle, 
as the Galenists speak of; for a moderate heat will suffice to 
perfect that which is already begun. 6. The left ventricle is 
but a servant to the right, in finishing that work which was 
begun by the right, and distributing it into the body, being 
finished. 
 
XIII. The Aristotelians make the vital and nutritive faculty 
the same; the Galenists make them distinct; but the Peripateticks 
reason prevails with me, which is this; That where there 
are distinct faculties, there must be distinct operations, because 
the faculty is for the operation; But there are no distinct 
operations of the vital faculty, from that of the nutritive; for 
accretion, diminution, and generation are actions of the 
vital or nutritive: Sense and motion are actions of the animal 
faculties. 2. Life is the presence of the soul in the body; this 
presence consists in action, this action is nutrition; for when this 
action fails, life fails; because the chief and first action of the living 
creature is to preserve it self, which cannot be without 
nutrition; seeing nutrition is not without tact in the sentitive 
creature; but when tact faileth, animality must needs fail. 
 
XIV. The Aristotelians make heat the efficient cause of 
the hearts publick motion: Others will have the soul; Others, 
the vegetive faculty; but Aristotle is in the right; for 
the soul works by its faculties, and these by heat; so that heat 
is the immediate cause of this motion, and the souls instrument; 
[^p.7^] 
yet not such an instrument as worketh nothing but by 
the force of the principal agent; for the heat worketh by its 
own natural force, though it be directed and regulated by the 
soul; the heat then of the heart rarifying the blood into vapors; 
which require more room, dilate the heart; but by expelling 
some of these vapors into the arteries, and receiving 
also some cold air by the lungs, the heart is contracted, this is 
called Systole, the other Diastole: And as heat is the efficient 
cause, so it is also the end of this motion. For therefore doth 
the heat move the heart, that it by this motion might impart 
heat to the body. But I understand not here by heat, a bare 
quality, but that which is called [Calidum innatum] If it be 
objected, that there is in Plants a vegetive faculty and heat, 
but not this pulsifick motion, nor yet in effects. I answer; the 
reason is, because there are not instruments fit for such a motion, 
nor is there any use of it. 2. This motion of the 
heart is local not totally, but partially; for not the whole 
heart, but the parts thereof change their place or seat, and 
so in this regard augmentation and diminution are local motions. 
 
XV. That the heart is not only first formed, but is also first 
informed, and first exerciseth the action of life, is plain by 
this reason drawn from the Peripateticks; the heart was made 
at first an Organical member; but that could not be, if it was 
not first informed by the soul, which is the first act of the organical 
body: and if it was made organicall, it had been made 
to no end, and nature had been idle, to have made an useless 
member, which could no more deserve the name of heart, 
then a blinde eye, the name of eye: But the soul that I speak 
of here, is the vegetive or sensitive resulting out of the matter, 
which is first prepared in the heart for reception of it; and 
not the reasonable soul, which with all its perfections is created 
and infused by God, into the whole body after it is articulated, 
and made capable of such a noble Guest. 
 
XVI. The Aristotelians are more rational in placing but one 
principall member in the body, then they who place either 
three or four: For it is nedless to make so many principals, 
when as one will suffice: Nature aimeth always at unity; for 
all the five senses are united in one common sense; all the 
members in one body; all the different specificall parts of the 
world into one common nature; so all the members into one 
heart, which hath in it the natures of all, or their temperaments; 
Nor could the soul being but one, work upon so many 
[^p.8^] 
different temperaments, if they were not united into one 
temperament: Besides, we should be forced to run in infinitum, 
if we should hold more principles then one; for avoiding of 
which inconvenience, we must stay in one chief principle. 
If it be objected, that the nerves, veins and arteries are of different 
temperaments, therefore must proceed from different 
principles. I Answer, that from one principle in which divers 
temperaments are united, may issue different temperatures. 
2. I denie that the temperature of the veins, nerves 
and arteries are different, otherwise then Secundum magis, & 
minus. 
 
[}CHAP. II. 
Blood begot in the Heart, not in the Liver, why? 2. The Heart is 
the original of the Veins and Nerves, of nutrition, and sense, and 
motion. 3. Why the nerves and veins do not beat, and the cause of 
Hydropsies. 4. All blood is not elaborated in the heart; how it is 
the original of the veins. 5. The arterial blood must waste, or 
else it would infinitely increase. 6. Why the blood thickneth not 
in the heart till death. 7. The heart is the seat of passion. 8. Why 
the heart a fitter seat for the soul then the liver. 9. A double 
unity, to wit, of the matter, and of the form.}] 
 
1. IF blood were begot in the liver, there should be some Cavity 
in it, that the blood there might be concocted, and 
receive its form; for in the stomack, Heart, Gall, bladder, 
&c. there are sensible cavities for generation and reception of 
the Chylus, vital blood, choler, urine, &c. but in the liver 
there is no such receptacle; and to say that the blood is begot 
in the substance of the liver, is to make penetration of bodies: 
Therefore it is more likely, according to Aristotle's Doctrin, 
That blood is begot in the heart. If it be objected, that if 
blood were not begot in the liver, to what end did Nature 
fasten the gall-bagg to the liver, if it were not to purge the 
blood, and receive its excrementitious choler, as the spleen 
doth is melancholy? I answer, The gall and spleen do not 
purge the blood made by the liver, but that matter which was 
to be prepared by the liver, for the heart; the heart then makes 
the blood, which was prepared by the liver, and purged by 
the gall and spleen, that the matter might be the fitter to receive 
the form of blood in the heart, being purged before from 
its gross humors. 
 
II. Because the heart is the original of the nutritive and 
[^p.9^] 
auctive faculties; it must also be the original of the veins, 
through which these faculties are conveyed through the whole 
body. The liver then hath not so much heat as is requisite for 
nutrition, auction, and generation; Therefore the original 
of these must be in the heart, which is the fountain of heat. 
2. And because the heart is the seat of Passions, it must be 
also the original of sense and motion, without which there 
can be no passion; and consequently it must be the first organ 
of the nerves. 3. The heart and veins have the same essential 
form, which is nutritive or vitall; the same essential work and 
end also which is to nourish the body, or to give it life and 
vegeration. The like may be said of the nerves; therefore 
it must follow, that the matter of the heart, veins 
and nerves is the same; and that from the heart they have their 
beginning. 
 
III. The Galenists will not have the heart the originall of 
the nerves and veins, because they do not beat, as the arteries 
do, which they grant proceeded from thence; but rather 
will have the liver to be the original of them, as also of blood, 
because when the liver is corrupted, sanguification fails, and so 
arises Hydropsies. I answer; though the nerves and veins arise 
from the heart, yet they beat not, as the arteries do, because 
the blood in the veins is grosser, less hot, and spirituous then 
that in the arteries; and the nerves beat not, because they 
have not those fumes which by the motion of the arteries must 
be expelled; their heat also is tempered by the frigidity of the 
brain; and if there were any motion in the nerves, it could 
not be so easily discerned, because of the thickness of the 
nerves, and their lying deeper within the body; as for Hydropsies, 
they are caused, not because the liver doth not sanguifie, 
but because it doth not prepare fit matter for the heart 
to sanguifie. And indeed, if the liver did sanguifie, the Hydropick 
would presently die upon the cessation of that action; 
for life cannot subsist without nutrition, nor this without sanguification. 
Therefore doubtless in Hydropsies, the heart being 
sound, converts some part of that inconcocted matter into 
blood, which the corrupted liver could not prepare; and by 
this means the hydropick lives a while. 
 
IV. All the blood in the veins is not elaborated in the heart, 
but only that portion which is by the arteries distributed into 
al parts of the body; and hath a formative power over the veinal 
blood. The heart blood then is not conveyed by the (Vena cava) 
into the body; but by the arteries. 2. When the heart is called 
[^p.10^] 
the original of the veins, we do not mean, the efficient cause, 
for that is the formative power joyned to the heart; but 
the place in which they are formed: And there is no place so 
fit for this generation, both of blood, veins, and other parts, 
as the heart; because it is the fountain of heat, whose action 
is the first, and the most common of all actions in the body; 
for without the action of heat, there can be neither nutrition, 
motion, sensation, nor understanding, as it works by the 
phantasie. 
 
V. If the arterial blood were not the nutriment of the 
body, and so wasted, being converted into the substance of 
the body, what becomes of it all, it must infinitely increase, being 
it is continually generated, and not wasted; neither can the 
veinal blood nourish, but as it is perfected, and receives its 
form, by and from the arterial blood. 
 
VI. That the heart is the proper seat of the blood, appears 
by this, that the blood never thickneth in the heart, as it 
doth in other places, being out of the veins. But whereas the 
blood is found curdled in the heart of dead bodies, and thin 
in the veins of the liver, it is plain that the blood had received 
its full concoction and perfection in the heart, but not in 
the liver, as being not so fibrous, and therefore more thin and 
watrish. 
 
VII. Because the heart is the seat of passions and appetite, 
it follows that it must be also the seat of sensation; for without 
this there can be no appetite in the sensitive creature; and 
if of sensation, then also of nutriment, for the sensitive includes 
the nutritive faculty; and if it be the original of the nutritive, 
it must be also of blood, by which we are nourished, and 
consequently of the veins which conveyeth the blood, chiefly 
of Vena Cava, which ariseth from the superficies of the heart; 
and so fastned to it, as to its principle, that it cannot be parted 
from it. 
 
VIII. Because the heart is an organical body, being distinct 
into divers dissimular parts, it is a fitter place for the soul then 
the liver, which is altogether simular, seeing the soul is the act 
of an organicall body: and therefore the nutritive faculty must 
be rather in the heart then the liver; and though sensation be 
by the simular parts, yet motion requires dissimular and organicall 
parts, because divers bendings and turnings require divers 
organs. 
 
IX. All sensitive creatures have a double unity; to wit, 
of the matter, and of the form: The unity of the matter consists 
[^p.11^] 
in the unity of the parts and temperaments, which is to 
be found in the heart onely; the unity of the form consisteth 
in the sensitive soul, containing in it the vegetive and the particular 
forms of each part. 
 
[}CHAP. III. 
1. Why the heart the original of sensation, and how it feeleth. 2. The 
brains being cold cannot beget sensative spirits: Why the animal spirits 
most active where is most heat. 3. There can be no generation 
of the animal spirits out of the vitall, without the corruption 
of the vitall, which is impossible: The animal spirits are not 
begot of the aire. 4. Neither are they concocted or generated in 
the ventricles of the brain, nor are they wasted. 5. The brain is 
not the originall of sense and motion, although these fail upon the 
hurt of the brain. 6. Why upon the distemper of the heart, there 
is no failing of sense and motion. 7. The nerves are not from the 
brain, though they be like; but indeed they are not like the brain. 
8. Why the nerve of the heart loseth sense and motion beneath the 
knot, not above it. 9. The brain is the coldest of all the parts? 
how void of veins and blood, how hot, and the cause of hairs. 
10. The blood and spirits alter not the brains temper. Why its 
coldness is not felt: the pith in the back bone hot. 11. Why the 
brain and heart at such a distance: by the spirits they work on each 
other. 12. Why both the brain and lungs were made for refrigeration. 
13. The mans brain larger then the womans: why 
man hotter then Lions. 14. The testicles ignobler then the heart 
and brain. 15. The heart, not the testicles, the cause of sensation 
and generation; the testicles not chief because necessary, or because 
they cause an alteration in the body, from whence is the distinction 
of sexes. 16. The seed receiveth its specificall form from the heart. 
17. Why Eunuchs fatter, we aker, and colder.}] 
 
THough the organs offense be in the brain, yet the originall 
of sensation is the heart, because it is the originall of the 
spirits, the chief causes of sensation, and without which the 
organs were no organs: But the frigidity of the brain is not 
the cause of sensation, nor of the sensitive spirits; it only tempers 
the heat of the heart and vital spirits, that they may become 
animal. Neither is softness and hardness any thing to sensation, 
seeing this is no material but a spiritual and perfective 
quality. Now the heart is sensitive, not by the animal spirits 
[^p.12^] 
derived thither from the brain; for these spirits in the heart 
would quickly lose their temper, by reason the heat of the 
heart is a more active quality then the coldness of the brain; 
but it feeleth by its own spirits, whether we call them vital 
or animal, or both. For the spirits being turned from vital 
to animall, receive only an alteration, but not a substantial 
change. For that only is in the aliments, which is 
transubstantiate into our bodies. 
 
II. The brain being cold and moist, useth to convert superfluous 
vapours into those humours which most resembleth 
it self in these qualities, to wit, into watrish Catharrs, and cold 
distillations: therefore it is likely that the brain can transform 
the vital spirits into other more excellent then themselves; especially 
seeing coldness is a quality hurtful to nature, which 
consisteth in heat and moisture, and hath no other use in 
our bodies, but to condensat and to temper the activity of our 
natural heat; therefore we finde the animal spirits most active 
and copious in those creatures that abound most in heat, as 
in Men, Lions, Birds, &c. and in young men more then in old 
men. 
 
III. If there be a substanital mutation of the vital spirits 
into the animal, the generation of the one must be the corruption 
of the other; and so the vital spirits must die, that the 
animal may receive the essential form. But how can the 
animal spirits subsist without the vital? Or how can that be 
called an animal or sensitive creature, whose vital spirits are 
dead, seeing there can be no sense where there is no life, nor 
life where the vital spirits are dead? The animal spirits 
are not generated of the aire, which we draw in by breathing; 
for there can be no generation without mixtion, nor mixtion 
but of divers bodies: Now the aire is but one simple body, 
which cannot make a perfect mixtion without the other elements. 
If it be objected, that the air is impure, and not simple, 
I answer, Though the aire be not pure, yet it is not a 
mixed body Physically and properly, but only by apposition, 
as Wheat and Barley may be said to be mixed when they are 
joyned together, which is no Physical mixtion, wherein the 
elements lose their forms. 
 
IV. The animal spirits cannot be generated in the ventricles 
of the brain, because there the excrementitious flegme is 
concocted: Nor can they be said to receive concoction there, 
seeing what is concocted is thickned, but the animal spirits are 
attenuated: now the cold brain is not fit to attenuate. Again, 
[^p.13^] 
seeing there is continual use of the animal spirits, they must 
be continually generated; but if they be continually generated, 
and never wasted, where will there be room enough 
for them? And that they are not wasted is plain, because 
they are not consumed by nutrition, as not being fit to nourish; 
nor by sensation, seeing this is a spiritual and perfective not a 
material or destructive act. Nor lastly by transpiration; for 
nothing is exhaled but excrements. Lastly, how can the 
brain be without feeling, seeing it is full of sensitive spirits, by 
which all other parts of the body feel? 
 
V. When the brain is hurt and distempered, there followes 
a defect in sensation and motion, which is not a sufficient 
reason to prove that the nerves, sense, and motion have their 
original from the brain; no more then that the brain should 
have its beginning from the stomach, or other nervous parts: 
for we know that the mouth of the stomach being hurt, the 
brain by consent is made ill affected by reason of the sympathy 
and union of the nervous parts: so motion is hindred upon the 
ill affection of the brain, because of the many nerves united 
to the brain and back-bone: the brain then is not the principal 
agent of sense and motion, but instrumental onely, in 
that by its frigidity it tempers the vital spirits, and so makes 
them apter for sense and motion: so upon the defect in the 
pen, followes the faults in writing; and yet not the pen, 
but the pen-man, is the chief agent in writing. 
 
VI. The reason why upon the distemper of the heart, sensation 
and motion do not cease, as they do upon the distemper 
of the brain; because though the heart be distempered, yet 
it maked spirits, which spirits being refrigerate by the brain, 
and conveyed through the nerves, cause sensation and motion, 
which could not be if the brain were hurt, this being the immediate 
agent and instrument, without which the heart doth 
not operate in sensation. 
 
VII. To conclude the nerves to have their originall from 
the brain, because of their similitude, is a weak argument: 
For 1. Many children are not like their parents from whom 
they have their oroginall, but like strangers many times, to 
whom they have no relation. 2. There is no similitude between 
the brain and nerves; for that is soft and moist, 
these hard and dry. 3. Nor is the nerve in its medullary part 
like the brain; for this is cold, the marrow is hot. 4. If 
the nerves are from the brain because their inward parts are soft 
and narrowy, then the bones should be derived also from the 
[^p.14^] 
brain, for they have much more marrow in them. 5. If the 
nerves are from the brain because they have two tunicles, 
as it hath; by the same reason let the Arteries also have their 
beginning from thence; for these also are double tunicled. 
6. All nerves have not this medullary substance within them. 
 
VIII. Though the heart hath but one little nerve, which 
being tied, looseth its sense beneath the knot, but above retains 
it; though this, I say, be so, yet from hence it cannot be 
proved, that the brain is the originall of the nerves, or of 
sensation; but rather the heart; for the upper part of the nerve is 
sensible, because it is joyned with other nerves, whereas the 
lower part is joyned to none. 2. The spirits in the upper part 
are tempered by the frigidity of the brain, whereas the lower 
part hath no refrigeration; and though the faculty or power 
of sense is from the heart, yet the act of sensation is not exercised 
without a temperate heat, or refrigeration. 3. I think 
this is rather a conjecture of the Galenists, then an experiment 
for who did ever fiind this nerve in a living creature. 
 
IX. Aristotles reasons for the coldnesse of the brain, are to 
me not improbable, or easie to be answered: for if the brain 
were hot, we should never sleep, seeing coldness causeth sleep. 
2. There are more moist humors and flegme ingendred in the 
brain, then any where else. 3. There is not blood in the brains, 
as in other parts of the body; for it is the blood that warms 
the body. I say there are not veins incorporating themselves 
into the substance of the brain, and terminating there, as they 
do in the flesh and skin; which is the cause that every part of 
the flesh or skin being pricked, bleeds; so doth not the brain, 
whose substance is white and bloodless; therefore though there 
be veins in the brain, yet they are distinct from the substance 
of the brain, and not ending in them; neither is that heat 
which is in the brain, its own, but adventitious and externall, to 
wit, of the arteries and veins, as also of fumes and vapours: so 
then the brain is the coldest of all the parts of mans body, yea 
colder then the bones, because the bones are dry, the brain 
moist: but cold with moisture is greater effectively then with 
siceity, so the water is colder then the earth. If it be objected 
that the brain is hot, because the head is more hairy then 
any other part of the body, and because the brain stands 
continually in need of ventilation by the nostrils, and transpiration 
by the seams of the skul; I answer, That hairs are ingendred 
by the adventitious heat of the brain, out of the excrementitious 
humours of the head, and fumes which ascend thither; 
[^p.15^] 
and therefore the brain stands in need of ventilation, 
because of the many hot fumes and vapours continually ascending 
thither. 
 
X. The blood and spirits which are in the brain, alter not 
its natural temperament which is cold, especially seeing the 
blood is sent thither for nutrition; but nourishment is to cherish 
the part nourished, being converted into its substance, 
and not to alter its temperament. Now the reason why we 
feel the moisture of the brain, but not its frigidity, is, because 
there is nothing to hinder the ract from discerning its moisture, 
being in a soft substance (for where the substance is hard, there 
the tact is hindred from feeling the moisture) though it be 
moist, as when we touch ice; but the tact is hindred from discerning 
the frigidity of the brain, because of the veins and 
arteries within it, containing warm blood and spirits; yet 
though the brain be cold, the pith in the back-bone which is 
joyned to the brain, is hot, because we finde no flegme about 
it, as about the brain; it is harder then the brain, therefore 
more apt to receive and to retain heat: it is begot of 
blood, which is hot; and it was fit, that this warm pith should 
be joyned to the cold brain, for moderating the brains frigidity. 
 
XI. The brain was made cold to temper and moderate the 
heat of the heart; but not to diminish or destroy it; and for 
the same cause the heart was made hot to temper, but not to 
destroy the brains frigidity: therefore nature hath placed 
them at a proportionable distance: for had they been nearer, 
their actions upon each other had been more violent. 2. Though 
the organs of the sense be in the brain, yet the original of sensation 
is not there, but in the heart: for the brain with its 
organs are helps and instruments, not the efficient causes of 
sensation. 3. The mutuall action of the heart and brain upon 
each other, is not done immediatly, but by the intercourse of 
the spirits. 
 
XII. Though nature doth not make two members specifically 
different in the same body, for the same operation, therefore 
fishes want Lungs, because they have gills for refrigeration; 
yet she hath made both the brain and lungs too in 
our bodies, for the same end and work, namely, to refrigerate 
the heart; and yet in this she is not superfluous, because the 
heart stood in need of a double refrigeration, as being subject 
to a double heat; the one is natural, for tempering of this the 
brain was made, that so the animal spirits might be generated; 
[^p.16^] 
the other is adventitious, caused by hot fumes: for clearing 
of these, and of cooling the heart, the lungs were made, and 
so were the arteries too. As for the two eyes, and two ears 
and other double organs in our bodies, they are not specifically 
different. 
 
XIII. As the male hath a hotter heart then the female, so 
he hath a larger brain for the most part, that there may be the 
more refrigeration. I say for the most part, because the works 
of nature admit divers times exceptions; so Lions, though hotter 
then men, yet have lesser brains then men; but that heat in 
the Lion is more terrestriall,, and therefore needs lesser 
refrigeration then that which is more aerial; yet it may 
be supposed that man abounds more in heat then Lions, because 
he hath a strait body, which is caused by the abundance 
of hot bloud and spirits in mans body more then in other creatures. 
 
XIV. That the testicles are not of such absolute necessity as 
the heart, even in respect of generation, is plain, because many 
creatures, as plats and insects have the faculty and power of 
generation without testicles. 2. The heart and brain in dignity 
far exceed the testicles, because these doe not communicate 
to all parts the power of generation, as the heart and brain 
doe impart life and sense. 3. Creatures that have lost the testicles, 
can live long without them, but no creature can live 
long without the heart and brain. 
 
XV. In sensitive creatures that doth originally communicate 
the generative faculty, which imparts the sensitive, because 
this includes that; but it is the heart not the testicles, which 
imparts sensation, and consequently the heart not the testicles, 
causeth generation. If it be answered that the power of sensation 
is derived from the heart to the testicles, and consequenly 
of generation; then we must know, that this very answer 
confirms the Aristotelian opinion, namely, that the heart 
not the testicles, is the original of the generative. 2. It is a 
weak argument to prove the principality of the testicles from 
their necessity, for every part of the body, though never so 
base, is necessary, and yet there is but one principal member: 
And as weak is it to argue the principality of the testicles from 
the change that is caused in the body upon the loss of them; for 
so there is upon the losse of any other member, and many times 
death it self. 3. The distinction of Sexes proceeds from the 
formative power, but this hath not its original residence in 
the testicles, but in the heart, as being the perfectest member, 
[^p.17^] 
and chief receptacle of heat and bloud, and spirits, by 
which the formative power operates. 
 
XVI. The seed receives its specifical form and essence in 
the heart, not in the testicles, in which it receives indeed concoction, 
that it might be made fitter for generation; but concoction 
causeth only an alteration in the quality, not a mutation 
in the substance. So the fruit receiveth its maturity or 
ripeness immediatly from the bough on which it hangeth; but 
its generative power from the root alone: so that the testicles 
are but the hearts instruments, working by its heat, and concocting 
the seed that it may be the fitter for generation. 
 
XVII. The bodies of Eunuchs are fatter, weaker, and 
colder then of other men, not because the testicles do corroborate 
the body, as the Galenists think, but because the seed wanting 
evacuation, is turned into fat, and many vapours or excrements, 
which with the seed are evacuated in other men, are 
retained in Eunuchs, which oppresse the natural heat, and consequently 
cause debility; and because of this coldnesse, Eunuchs 
are lesse hairy; for hairs are begot of hot fuliginous vapours. 
 
[}Finis Libri Primi.}] 
 
[^p.18^] 
[}BOOK II. 
GALEN in some things maintained; 
in some things rejected, or reconciled 
to ARISTOTLE.}] 
 
[}CAP. I. 
1. Mans Body fitted onely for mans Soul. Tritons are not men. 
2. How Mans body is more excellent then all others. 3. How the 
Soul is most in the Brain and Heart. 4. A twofold heat in us. 
5. What Creatures nourish most. 6. The Womans imagination 
cannot alter the form.}] 
 
I. AS GOD hath bestowed upon Man the most excellent 
Soul of all others; so hath he fitted him 
with a Body answerable to such a Soul, of which no 
other Body is capable; and if it were, yet for want 
of fit Organs; the Soul could not exercise her functions; 
as we see in that Fiction of Apuleius, whose soul being 
in the body of an Asse, could neither speak, nor write, nor doe 
any thing but what was proper to an Asse; yet I have read of 
Tritons, or Fishes having the face, lineaments, and shape of 
mans body; One was seen in the days of Tiberius, another in 
the time of Augustus, a third under Nero: Pliny, Ælian, Theodor 
Gaza, Trapezuntius, Alexander ab Alexandro, Scaliger, and divers 
others affirm the truth of this; yet these Tritons or Nereides, 
cannot be called, nor are they men, though they have the outward 
shape: for it is not the matter, nor outward lineaments, 
but the form that gives essence and denomination. 
 
II. Mans body is of all others the most perfect and excellent; 
though he hath not wings like a bird to fly, nor can see 
so far as an Eagle, nor hear so quickly as a Fox, nor smell so 
well as a Dog, nor taste so well as Poultry, nor hath so quick a 
tact as Oysters aud Spiders; yet his hands, speech, and reason, 
[^p.19^] 
doe countervail all these: for celerity and reception his senses 
yeild to the beasts; for variety aud judgement they must yeild 
to him. 
 
III. Though mans soul in respect of understanding and will, 
be inorganical, and therefore not properly resident in any particular 
member more then in another, yet accidentally, because 
the brain is the seat of the fantasie, from which the intellect receives 
its objects, and the heart the seat of the affections, subservient 
to the will; the brain is the seat of the intellect, the 
heart of the will. 
 
IV. There is in us a twofold heat, the one celestial, the other 
elementary: that preserves us, this destroys us: that concocts 
our food, and turns it into nutriment, this corrupts and putrifies 
it, and turns it into noxious humours and excrements, as 
we see in burning Fevers. It is not then every heat that chylifieth 
or sanguifieth, or assimulateth, but this celestial heat; 
Neither is it the quantity, but the quality thereof, and affinity 
it hath with the things concocted: For there is more heat in a 
Lion, then in a Pigeon, and yet the Pigeon will concoct that 
which the Lion cannot; yet this celestial heat is helped by 
the elementary heat if it be temperate, and by the crafis, temperament, 
or constitution, if it be found. 
 
V. Nothing by way of food can cherish our natural heat, and 
maintain our life, but what had life and heat it self; and the 
more perfect life it had, the better it nourisheth, as having neerer 
affinity with us. Hence animals nourish more then vegitables, 
because the matter of their bodies and spirits, are more 
consonant to ours then of hearbs or fruits, which if they bee 
contrary to us in their nature and qualities, they destroy us, as 
poisonable hearbs do. Purging medicaments are of a middle 
nature, as having some similitude with the humours of our bodies, 
which they attract; as Agary with Flegme, Rubarb with 
Choler, &c. and some dissimilitude with our bodies, upon which 
they work by weakning them, especially if they have any delatory 
quality. 
 
VI. Though the woman in conception, or afterwards, can by 
the strength of imagination impresse some note or mark upon 
the seed or Embryo: yet she cannot alter the sex or form as she 
pleaseth, because this is not the work of imagination, but of a 
diviner power, to wit, of the external formative agent; for 
which cause a man cannot beget any other then a man, for that 
his seed is not capable of any other form, neither doth the formative 
agent work otherwise then as the seed is inclinable to. 
 
[^p.20^] 
[}CAP. II. 
1. The Stomach and Lungs not necessary for life. 2, How the limbs 
are moved: the spirits are bodies more required for motion then 
sensation: the spirits are light: how they are the souls instruments: 
how the Muscles move. 3. Seven properties of the brain. 4. Twelve 
properties of the eye. 5. Its substance warrish. 6. Why but one 
sight. 7. The eye how an agent and patient. 8. Its two lights and 
its colours. Light gives the second act.}] 
 
THough the Stomach and Lights be two noble parts of the 
body for those that are to live long; yet life can consist 
without them or their action: For 1. Some have lived without 
chilification and respiration: the meseraick veins can draw 
some portion of the clysters to the liver for sanguification, by 
which life can be preserved. 2. Divers creatures live all the 
Winter, as Swallows, Cuckows, Dormise, &c. without any 
chilification or action of the stomach. 3. Women that are hysterical, 
can live only by transpiration, without respiration at 
all. 4. The arteries can draw air to the heart, though there 
were no lungs at all, yet not with that conveniency, because 
the lungs temper and qualifie the frigidity of the air before it 
comes to the heart. 5. Fishes breath not at all, nor have they 
any lungs, yet they live. 
 
II. In the motion of our bodies the limbs are moved by the 
muscles, these by the nerves, the nerves by the animal spirits, 
and these by the soul, which produceth neither sense nor motion 
in the body without these spirits: for if the nerve be cut or 
obstructed, or bound, motion ceaseth; which sheweth that the 
soul worketh by these spirits, and that in the nerve there is 
more then a bare faculty of sense and motion required to make 
it move and feel: for in the obstructed nerve there is the faculty 
still, but not the motion, because the spirits are intercepted, 
which have their original from the brain as well as the 
nerves, but their action from the soul. 2. These spirits are bodies, 
as appears by their generation, fatigation & dissipation: for 
when these spirits fail, motion ceaseth, and we grow weary. 3. In 
the nerve though one and the same animal spirit causeth both 
sense and motion; yet a greater vigour is required for motion 
then for sensation, because the perfection of this consists in reception 
only, but of that in action chiefly. Now more force is 
required for action then for passion. 4. In the animal spirits 
there is a light or splendour, because they are a very attenuated 
[^p.21^] 
substance, warmed by a celestial heat: This light is perceived 
in the eye being shut, in the other senses it is not seen, becaue 
their organs are not transparent: Now the spirit of the eye is 
the same with that of the ear, &c. 5. The spirits are not properly 
the instruments of the soul, because the soul is the form 
which worketh immediatly upon its matter; and the spirits 
are parts of this matter, but they are called instruments, becaus 
they convey to the members the faculties of the soul. 6. Though 
the will moves the muscles in men, and the will moves according 
to knowledge and election; yet in infants the muscles are 
moved by a natural instinct, and so they are in beasts who have 
not election and reason. 
 
III. Man hath a larger and more capacious brain then other 
creatures have; because the soul of man being endowed with 
more faculties, required a larger habitation. 2. The brain is 
void of sense and feeling, because it is the Judge of all the senses. 
Thus the eye which seeth all colours, hath no colour it self, 
nor the tongue and palat any taste, which judgeth of all tastes: 
experience sheweth, that the wounded brain being cut or pricked, 
feeleth not. 3. Though the brain seeleth not, yet it hath a 
natural faculty to expel things hurtful; so there are antipathies 
and sympathies in insensitive things. 4. The brain hath no 
animal motion, though it be the original of this motion; yet it 
hath a natural motion of Systole and Diastole for the generation 
of the spirits, and expulsion of noxious things. 5. The brain 
is cold and moist; cold naturally, but hot accidentally, by reason 
of the spirits and arteries in it: cold, otherwise the attenuated 
animal spirits in it would quickly wast and consume with 
heat; and with often study and cogitation, it would soon be 
inflamed, and so into phrenzies wee should bee apt to fall. 
6. Though the brain be cold, and the heart hot, yet the animal 
spirits are more attenuated then the vital, because these are generated 
immediatly of the grosse bloud, whereas the animal 
are begot of the vital spirits, and are refined by the arteries of 
the brain. 7. The brain is moist, 1. That is may the more easily 
receive impressions: 2. That it may the better resist inflamation: 
And 3. That the nerves may by its moisture bee the 
more pliable, which otherwise would be stiffe. 
 
IV. The Eye is the most noble of all the senses: 1. Because 
its action is quickest, apprehending its object in an instant: 
2. Though the object be never so far distant, it is perceived by 
the eye, as the stars are. 3. Because light, which is the object 
of the eye, is of all accidents the most noble. 4. The eye hath 
[^p.22^] 
more objects then any other sense; for besides light and colour 
of all sorts, its particular objects, it hath also number, magnitude, 
state, motion and figure, which are common objects. 
5. None of the senses hath such a curious fabrick: for the eye 
hath six tunicles, three humours, six muscles, two nerves, the optick 
and motory, many veins and arteries. 6. It is the first 
and chief organ of knowledge; for at first men got their knowledge 
by observation and the eye, though now we have it by 
instruction and the ear. 7. The eye hath the highest place of 
all the senses in the body. 8. And it hath the perfectest figure, 
for it is almost round, that it may move the easier and swifter. 
9. It hath a liberty and command of it self which the other senses 
have not; for it can inclose it self within its casements, 
and open them when it pleaseth. 10. It hath a peculiar light 
within it self, besides that light which is in the air, and it hath 
more spirits then any other of the senses, and these spirits are 
more subtle, nimble, and quick then any other animal spirits 
are. 11. Without the eye no living creature could finde out 
its food, in which consisteth the life of the creature. 12. Without 
the eye men could not have naturally attained to the 
knowledge of God, and of Divinity; for by the contemplation 
of the Heavens, and their light and motions, men came to 
have the knowledge of their Maker: For the invisible things 
of him from the creation of the world, are clearly seen, being 
understood by the things that are made, Rom. 1. 20. 
 
V. The eye is of a watrish not of a fiery substance, as may bee 
seen, 1. By the water that flowes from it when it is hurt: 2. By 
the fat which is about it; this would consume if the eye were 
fiery: 3. By the watrish humour which is in the cavities of the 
face in the new formed Embryo: 4. By the reception and conservation 
of the species; for the fire can neither receive nor 
confer any image or species, as the water doth. 
 
VI. Though there be two eyes, there is but one sight, or one 
object seen; 1. Because the optick nerves are united in one 
before they reach to the eyes: 2. Because there is but one fantasie, 
and one common sens which judgeth of the external object. 
 
VII. The eye in respect of its grosse and solid parts, is a patient 
in seeing, by receiving the species or shape, (not the substance) 
into the chrystalline humor; but in respect of the spirits 
in the eye, it is an agent by perception of the species, and 
partly a patient: for there is some impression in the spirits, or 
else by them the species could not be conveyed into the common 
sense and phantasie: The spirits then are agents, not outwardly 
[^p.23^] 
upon the object, but inwardly upon the spirits received 
from the object: and when they are employed about som other 
thing in the phantasie, the eye seeth not its object, though the 
species be impressed in the chrystalline; because there is required 
for sight, not only the impression in the chrystalline, but also 
a perception and apprehension in the spirits; in which action 
properly and formally vision consisteth. And though the spirits 
be no part of the eye as it is a solid substance, yet they are 
part as the eye is the instuments of sight. 
 
VIII. There are in the eye when it seeth, two lights, the 
one from without, whereof there is greatest quantity in the 
white of the eye; the other from within, which is most prevalent 
in the chrystalline, disposing it to receive the species, as 
the outward light disposeth the air. The outward light, if it 
bee not proportionable to the inward, makes this unfit for vision, 
not by extinguishing, or destroying it, for one light cannot 
destroy another; but by too much extending or destroying the 
mean and proportion of the inward light. There is besides 
these two, a third light in the eies of owls, cats, & such creatures 
as live by preying in the dark, which light is not immanent in 
the eye, but transient into the air, that the medium being illuminate, 
the species of the object might be raised. 
 
IX. The eye hath not such colours as are made by the mixture 
of the four elements, or prime qualities, but such only as 
are made by the mixture of the light and the diaphanous or 
perspicuous body. The first sort of colours are in the dark in 
respect of their existence or quality: the second sort hath no 
existence at all in the dark: And though the light give not the 
first act or beeing to colours, yet it giveth the second act in making 
them visible, and actuating them, to work upon the eye, 
by sending their species thither. 
 
