[^Fioravanti, Leonardo: Treatise of chirurgery^] 
 
[}A 
TREATISE 
OF CHIRURGERY: 
PUBLISHED 
Wih many EXCELLENT 
EXPERIMENTS 
AND 
SECRETS; 
 
Found out by the Same Author. 
 
LONDON, 
Printed by G. D. 1652.}] 
 
[^A preface omitted.^] 
[^Extract 1, pp. 6-33^] 
 
[^p.6^] 
[}What Chirurgery is.}] 
 
CHirurgery is both Science and practise, and to say 
the truth, he that will know the composition of 
mans body, must of necessity have some Science, 
and be Anatomist, although the same Science be 
a thing to be learned by practise, for I have seen 
many times, those which were unlearned, to be expert in the 
Anatomy of mans body, and those were Painters and Drawers, 
the which was necessary for them to know to frame 
their figures accordingly: and therefore I take not that for 
Science, but practise: For Science is onely that wherewith the 
causes of every infirmity is found out, and is of small effect 
to our purpose, because Chirurgery helpeth not onely the 
cause, but also the effect after it is known, and therefore I may 
say, that Chirurgery is no other then a pure and meer practise, 
and that it is onely necessary for the Chirurgian to know 
how to stitch a Wound well, to mundifie an Ulcer, and to keep 
it from putrifaction, and keep it from alteration, so that there 
run no evill humours unto the place offended, and to know 
all kind of Unguents that are apt to heal all kind of Wounds 
and Ulcers, which thing must be known by practise, And 
likewise to make all manner of Unguents necessary for Chirurgery, 
and for that cause I conclude most truly, that our 
Chirurgery is onely practise or experience. And that which 
causeth me to beleeve it is, that I have alwayes seen the most 
part of Chirurgians, when they should have any case in Chirurgery, 
they knew not what Unguent would help the sore, 
but many times they prove this, and that, and so continue 
untill they have found one that is convenient for the sore, 
whereunto it is applyed, and therefore this is a certain signe, 
that they kuow not by Science their Medicine to help the 
sore, but with experience they search it. Therefore if it be so, 
[^p.7^] 
it is a sign that I have said the truth, and so conclude, that 
Chirurgery is a practise to help sores on mens bodies, and also 
on beasts, when occasion shall serve. 
 
[}What Wounds are.}] 
 
VVOunds are those which in Latine are called Vulnus, 
and of the vulgar Vulnera, and they are of two kinds, 
that is, simple, and compound. The simple are those that 
are onely in the flesh, the compound are those where are cut 
Sinewes, Veins, Musckles, and Bones, and these are of divers 
and sundry kinds, And the difference that is among them is, 
by the variety of the place where they are wounded, and by 
the difference of the weapon wherewith they were hurt, for 
some goe right, some overthwart, some long, some broad, 
some are thrusts or stocate, that offend divers parts of the 
body. The simple are of small importance, because if yee 
keep them clean and close shut, nature will heal them without 
any kind of Medicine. But those, where Veins are cut, have 
need of some art or practise, with the which they may stop 
the bloud, and in any wise not to suffer the wound to remain 
open, but to sow it up very close, so that the Vein may heal. 
Also those where Sinews are hurt are of great importance, 
and would be healed with great speed, so that the Sinews may 
joyn with more ease. But those where Bones are hurt, are 
of greater importance, for if the Bone be separated from the 
other, of necessity it must be taken forth before the Wound 
be healed. So that by this means every one may know what 
Wounds are, and their kinds. 
 
[}Of Vlcers, and what they are.}] 
 
ULcers are of divers and sundry kinds, and are ingendered 
of many causes, as hereafter I will shew. But first I will 
write of those kind of Ulcers that are caused of Wounds. 
You shall understand, that Wounds, in what part of the body 
soever they be, being imposthumated, or cancrenated, they 
change their names, and are no more called Wounds, although 
[^p.8^] 
the originall was a wound. For when it is cancrenated, 
it is called Ulcera corrosiva, because it goeth eating and 
creepiug on the flesh. But when the wound is importhumated 
and full of matter, it is called, Ulcera putrida, that is putrified, 
and it is because it is filthy and stinketh. But when it 
is neither cancrenated, nor yet aposthumated, but that 
through some evill disposition the wound is closed, and that 
there cometh in it evill qualities without alteration, then it 
is called Ulcera sordida, because therein is evill qualitie, and it 
appeareth but a little, but it is evill to heal. There be other 
sorts of Ulcers also, the which are caused of divers and sundry 
kinds of tumours, and the most evill and mischievous are 
those that are of tumours caused of the Pox, for unto those 
there runneth abundance of evill humours that augment the 
Ulcer, and they be the worst sort, for they cannot be healed by 
themselves, except the body be well purged and evacuated of all 
the humours that are offensive. There is another kind of Ulcer 
the which cometh of an Imposthume, as well hot as cold, and 
those are more gentle and easie to be helpt, if yee know the 
Medicines that are apt to help and dissolve those kind of Ulcers. 
These are the three kind of Ulcers that commonly happen 
unto men and women through divers causes, as it is said before, 
so that these are the principall causes of those malign 
Ulcers. 
 
[}Of Imposthumes, and their kinds.}] 
 
IMposthumes are a certain kinde of Tumour that are called 
after divers manners, because they come in divers places 
of the bodie, as those sorts of Imposthumes that come in the 
Groin, which in Venice are called Pannoche, in Rome, Tencone, in 
Naples, Dragonselly, in Spain, Incordi, and the Ancients called 
them Buboni, and some with other names. There are other 
that come in all parts of the body, and when they come they 
cause great pain, and then they ripen and break of themselves 
for the most part, and these in Naples, are called Autrax, 
and in Rome, Chicholini, in Venice, Vn-nasito, in Lumbardie, 
Vn bungo, and in Spain, Vn nacido mui viliaco. There is 
[^p.9^] 
another kind of Imposthume, that is ingendered of a contusion 
or bruise, and is properly called Apostvmatio pro Amacatura. 
In the Head there grow certain kinds of sores that are 
called Talpæ, or Topinare, the which are of small importance, 
for they may be healed in short time, and these are seen in 
childrens heads, that are often troubled therewith, and 
sometimes in their throats, and for the most part about the 
eares. 
 
[}Of Fistulaes, and their kinds.}] 
 
ALl manner of Sores that doe not siccatrize perfectly, and 
have communication with the inward parts, are called 
Fistulaes, and we term them in Italian Sifio, or Spiraculo, 
as yee may see by experience, and this is perillous, when a Fistula 
closeth, being in the body, and specially those Fistulaes 
that are in the Fundament, for Nature her self doth ingender 
it for ease. But these Fistulaes that come in divers parts of 
the body are troublesome, but not perillous: Also all such 
sores as tarry long before they be incarnated come to Fistulaes, 
and many times it cometh through their being long 
curing, by tenting with their tents, which are the causes 
that Nature maketh a Callow, and leaveth the sore so hollow, 
that it will never be filled with flesh, but so remain 
hollow, as it is seen easily by experience. There be other 
sorts of Fistulaes in form of a sore, and they be those sores 
that most commonly come on the leggs, the which doe purge 
a long time, and are also very hard to heal, because if yee 
heal one of them presently, there will rise another hard by 
it, and that is a kind of Fistula. There is another kind of Fistula 
that is caused of those sores that are upon the bone, the 
which by his continuance doe break and consume the skin and 
the bone, and these many times remain Fistulated, but who so 
taketh away the cause of the sore, nature it self will prevail 
mightily, and will heal it, as may be seen daily by experience, 
in those that be so troubled. The Fistulaes that 
come in the eyes, are called Fistulæ Lachrymosæ, and they have 
[^p.10^] 
some communication with the inward parts, and are evill to be 
healed. Because first the cause must be taken away inwardly, 
and then nature will heal it by it self, as I have seen by experience, 
so that these are the kinds of Fistulaes most known 
unto all men, and the causes of these Fistulaes are two, 
and for my part I am fully perswaded it is so. The First 
is of wounds evill healed, that remain Fistulated. The Second 
cause, I find to be of sores caused of the Pox, and to shew a 
truth, yee shall cure them of the Pox, and their Fistulaes will 
heal of themselves without any other help, as it is daily to 
be seen. There may be many other causes the which as 
yet I know not, but these two are a sufficient reason, and 
to be considered of the Professors of this Art, if they desire 
to come to any excellency; and therefore I will reason no 
more of the matter, because the Science, and my experience 
will reach no further. 
 
[}Of all sorts of Scabs.}] 
 
THere be divers kinds of Scabs, but I will onely treat of 
those in which I have had most experience, and will see 
them forth as plainly as I can, that every one thereby may 
have profit. The first kind of Scab is that which is caused of 
Ripletion of the body, by eating much meat of great nourishment, 
and then not to digest it, so in that cause nature, to 
ease it self, sendeth forth that humiditie, and when it joyneth 
to the skin, it ingrosseth and causeth an Imposthume, and passing 
to the outward parts, it is alreadie corrupted, and so 
causeth the Pustulaes, as by experience may be seen, and this 
kinde is a viscous and fat humour with great humidity. There 
is another kind of Scab that is alwaies dry with rednesse, and 
is small, with great heat and Itching, and the same in my judgement 
is caused by much heat of the Liver, and adustion of 
blood, and may be healed easily. There is another kind of 
great scab that hath a great dry crust on them, and they grow 
big, and the same is of the French Pox being new taken. 
There is another kind like Serpigo, that goeth creeping, and 
[^p.11^] 
hath a dry crust, and hath no matter under it; and the same is 
also of the French Poxe inveterated. There are also divers 
other kinds, the which I will leave at this time, because they are 
of small importance, and may be helped with those Medicines 
which are fit for the kinds aforesaid. 
 
[}Of Formicola, and his Effects.}] 
 
THose kind of Ulcers that are commonly called Mal di 
Formica, are so called, because they are a kind of malign 
Ulcers and corrosive, that goeth creeping upon the flesh, 
and maketh many holes that are lifted up on the sides, and are 
red, and these for the most part are caused of the Pox, as may 
be seen by experience, and these sores are evill to be healed, 
because thereunto runneth abundance of humours, the which 
cannot be resolved but with inward Medicines, that is, with 
exquisite Purgations that purifie the blood, and that cutteth 
away the evill humours that run thereunto, and cause great 
alteration with burning. This kinde of sore cometh many times 
in the head, and when it cometh in that part, it is called 
Tigna, or the white scall, and to shew that this is the truth, 
yee may see that those Medicines which heal Formicola, doth 
also heal the white Scall, for this is a kind of the Pox, as by 
the Effects yee may plainly see; for if any should say the contrary, 
I would answer him again, that this may well be, because 
the same infirmitie may be taken in the mothers womb, 
or as soon as the child is borne, it may take it of the Nurse 
that giveth it suck, if shee be infected with that disease, so 
that I conclude it may be so. But there are a number of that 
kinde of disease, which I let passe, because I have seen no experience 
of them. 
 
[}A Discourse of Wounds, and other kindes of Inward Sores.}] 
 
VVOunds that are within the body, as in the stomack, 
or belly, or Intestinals, in the bladder, reins, or guts; 
The Milt, Liver, Lungs, Heart or other Muskles or Arteries, 
as there be a number, I confesse to know nothing therein, and 
[^p.12^] 
I will shew you the reason: You shall understand, that 
when a wound doth offend the Interior parts, the Physitian or 
Chrurgian, or great Anatomist whatsoever he be, cannot know 
all those parts offended in the body, for after the weapon is 
within the bodie, it may turn, and with the point hurt other 
parts afar off the wound, and offend divers particular parts 
one different from the other, and therefore I beseech you, excellent 
Chirurgians, when such a case cometh, how doe you 
know or discern which parts are hurt? but to say the truth, 
I beleeve in that case they know all alike, but what should I 
say of the cure of such a wound, if the Chirurgian know not 
where it is, nor of what importance, but worketh by imagination, 
and if that Nature doth prevail, and that the wound 
doth heal, it is by the good fortune of the Physitian, so that 
for wounds inwardly I conclude no other at this time, but 
will leave it to those that know more then I, and hereafter I 
will discourse of Ulcers and Imposthumes inwardly, what they 
are, and how to cure them with our order: yee shall understand 
that there are a number of kinds of Ulcers and Imposthumes 
that may ingender inwardly, but it seemeth to me 
so hard to understand, that I can determine nothing that 
were true, and the cause is this, that we have seen an infinite 
of Physitians and Chirurgians that have visited one Imposthumated, 
or Ulcerated, and the Physitian could not know the 
place, and particular of that Imposthume or Ulcer, if that 
the Patient do not tell him and shew him, and cause him to 
feel with his hand, and this is most true, and therefore if one 
cannot resolve him of outward things, that he may see and feel 
with his hand, how can he resolve him when one of those accidents 
is within the bodie, where the Patient knows not himself, 
which is grieved? Truly, I would gladly know what judgement 
they would give of that matter, for because if there be any Imposthume 
or Ulcer in any part of the bodie, the sick shall feel 
great offence and pain, neverthelesse he cannot tell where it is, 
nor what part is hurt, so that I conclude, if that the Patient know 
not, much lesse the Physitian knoweth, and of this I have 
made a large discourse in Caprici medicinale, for as I have 
said before, in this case I know nothing. Neverthelesse, when 
[^p.13^] 
it shall come to his place, I will write a discourse of the order 
to cure the most part of Ulcers, and Imposthumes, but touching 
wounds, I will promise no more then I have said before. 
Also I will write excellent Remedies of great experience, 
with the which all wounds, so they be not mortall, may be helpt 
and healed, and also the reasons convenient in that matter. 
 
[}An order to use in healing all manner of Diseases appertaining 
unto the Chirurgian.}] 
 
VVOunds and all other sorts of sores, are of sundry and 
divers kinds, as is aforesaid, neverthelesse the order 
to helpe them is not much different one from the other, if we 
should say onely the truth without abuse. For yee shall understand, 
that Nature is the master of all things created, and 
the Physitian and Chirurgian are helpers of that Nature, as 
the antient Professors of the Art have affirmed. Then seeing 
this is so, what need we to make such adoe, having Nature that 
worketh so gently, if it be not hindered by the Minister, and 
therefore if we will speak of Wounds, I say, that the Minister 
hath three operations to doe and no more, and the rest leave 
to Nature that worketh gently. The three operations that 
the Master hath to doe are these: To defend the Wound so 
that there runneth no humours to it, and that it putrfie not, 
and to keep it clean, and when the Minister hath done that, 
let Nature work that which she will work well, and if any desire 
to see if it will be so in effect, yee may see by a Dog, for 
if he hath a great wound upon his body, he healeth it without 
any Medicine, onely with diet, and keeping it clean with his 
tongue, and this is most true, that those which doe help 
Wounds by inchantment, doe nothing but keep the Wound 
clean, and cause the Patient to keep a diet, and so nature worketh 
as well on a Man as on a Dog, therefore let none marvell of 
this authority of a Dog, although I approve the like of a 
Christian. But for so much as it would be good to help Nature, 
that it might work with more speedinesse, as Husbandmen 
and Gardners doe, who because they would have Nature 
to work the better, and quicker in their ground, doe cast 
thereon divers sorts of dungs, &c. The which is done onely 
[^p.14^] 
to help Nature to work the quicker, and to conclude, I say, 
that the Chirurgian should doe the same in helping of Wounds. 
But as for Ulcers of divers sorts, it were necessary to find out 
the cause, because they come of divers causes, for when the 
cause is found, it will be more easie to be helped, because Ulcers 
cannot come but by great distemperance of Nature in 
our bodies, as by great heat or cold, or by repletions of the 
body. Therefore in this case it is necessary to purge the body: 
First, to ease Nature which is offended, and to extinguish 
the superfluous heat or cold that is in the bodie: That being 
done, the minister or helper of Nature hath three things to 
doe. The first is to mortifie or kill the sore, the second to 
mundifie, and the third to incarnate, and then Nature will 
cicatrize it, and these three operations are to be used in Ulcers. 
Also Imposthumes are caused of divers accidents, in 
the which it is also necessary to seek out the cause, whereby 
to know what purgations are fit to purge the body of the 
superfluous humours, and then the Minister hath three things 
to doe in that case. First to bring it to maturation quickly, 
then when it is ripe and broke, to mundifie it well, and thirdly 
to incarnate it, and these are the three operations that are to 
be done in an Imposthume to help Nature to work well, and 
so following this order thy work shall prove well, and goe 
the right way, as hereafter I will shew in his place, the operations 
to use in the effect, with the order to help them, and 
also to make thy Unguents, shewing their quality and vertue, 
and will prove by reason those things that are doubtfull, so 
that every one shall be satisfied in that matter. 
 
[}Of Medicines to be used in all kind of Wounds outward, with ease 
and brevity.}] 
 
HAving declared what outward Wounds are, it is also 
necessary to shew the order how to cure them, with as 
much speed and ease as it is possible, and therefore I will begin 
first with simple Wounds that are onely in the flesh, without 
offence of Veins, Sinews, or Bones, although these need 
no help, but onely to joyn the lips close together, and if 
[^p.15^] 
need be, to stitch them close, and then let Nature work, the 
which in short time will heal them, but if thou by Art wilt help 
nature, thou shalt annoint them with oyle of frankincense 
once a day. But Wounds, where Veines are cut, have need of 
present help, and artificiall meanes, and sufficient remedies 
to help it, with as much speed as may be, so that the Veins cut 
may joyn again together, without any great offence of the 
Wound, and that is done in this order. The first thing is to 
joyn the parts close together, and stitch it well, not as the 
common Chirurgians doe, but as they doe use to stitch bags, 
and when it is stitched close, annoint it onely upon the Wound 
with our Magno liquore, and lay thereon a cloth wet in the 
same Oil very warm, then take Hypericon with the seed, Millefolie, 
Viticella, ana. and make thereof a powder, the which thou 
shalt strew upon the Wound being drest, and round about it, 
for this Medicine doth assubtiliate the matter that runneth 
unto the Wound, and taketh it forth with great ease, and 
without pain of the Wound, for this is the most soveraign 
Medicine in that case, that Nature with Art may make, and 
hath been proved a thousand times by experience in divers 
places. But those Wounds where Bones and Sinews are hurt, 
have need of great artifice and cunning, because they be of 
importance; But when the Sinews be onely offended, it were 
necessary to stitch them presently, as I have said of those 
where Veins are cut, but not to dresse it with Magno liquore, 
but instead thereof to take our Oleum Benedictum, and Oil of 
Frankincense, of each alike, for those Oils doe exceedingly 
comfort the Sinews that are cut, and when it happeneth that 
a Sinew hath a puncture, or is cut half way, in that case it were 
necessary to cut it overthwart, because it shall bring no Spasmus 
to the Wound, but if so be then that the Bone be hurt, 
and that there be any part to come forth, it were necessary 
to leave the Wound open untill the Bone cometh forth, and 
then to incarnate it, and this thou shalt doe with our artificiall 
Balm, for the same serveth for Wounds, and lay thereupon 
the Gerot of Gualtifredo di Medi, the which healeth it 
with speed, and so with these orders thou mayest help all the 
aforesaid sorts of Wounds, and the defensive to use in these 
[^p.16^] 
Wounds is this. Rec. Aqua vitæ made of pure wine, and that 
will burne all away, and put therein Hypericon, Millefollie, Viticella, 
Betonica, and then wet a cloath in that infusion and, lay it 
for a defensive round about the Wound, and so thou shalt 
have thine intent to the great satisfaction of the Patient. 
Wounds in the head are helped as those are where the Sinews 
are offended, there are also divers other sorts of Wounds 
which are helped with the Remedies by us formerly mentioned. 
 
[}To help Ulcers of all sorts.}] 
 
SEeing that Ulcers are of divers and sundry kinds, it were 
necessary to know of what kind and qualitie they are, so 
that thou mayest help them in form and order convenient, and 
first I will write of the corrosive Ulceras of a wound cancrenated, 
mal di Formicola, and other sorts of Ulcers that go 
creeping upon the flesh. The cure of these kinds of Ulcers 
is to apply quickly our Caustike to mortifie the evill, the 
which thou shalt doe thus, wet a little bumbaste in our Caustike, 
and therewith wash all the sore, and then leave 
it so open twentie four hours without binding it fast, and 
when twentie four houres are past, wash the sore with 
strong Vinegar and water, of each a like quantitie, with 
charge, that there remain none of the Caustike in the sore, 
then lay thereon butter washed, with a colewort leaf untill the 
asker or dead flesh fall away, then take our Cerot Magistrale, 
with a little Precipitate strewed thereon, and then annoint it 
with Magno liquore, and lay it upon the sore, for this Cerot 
helpeth all manner of corrosive Ulcers without any other 
help, and every Plaister will serve three or four dayes, taking 
them off every twentie four hours, and make them clean, and 
then lay them on again, and as for the filthy Ulcer that I have 
shewed of in his Chapter, ye shall dresse them onely with 
our Unguento magno, the which without any other help will 
heal them quickly: But ye must every four dayes touch them 
with Aqua fortis drawn from Precipitate, the which water 
draweth forth the offensive matter, and leaveth it putrified 
[^p.17^] 
and clean; and in all other sorts of Ulcers, our Balm artificiall, 
our Magno liquore, Oyle of Waxe and Turpentine, the 
Black Cerot of Gualtifredo, di Medi, our Cerot Magistrale, with 
Precipitate, are able to help, be they never so evill. 
 
[}The Order to be used in curing Imposthumes of divers sorts.}] 
 
THere be many sundry kinds of Imposthumes that cometh 
to mans bodie, that are caused of divers and sundry 
accidents, and therefore must be cured by divers orders, and 
with sundry Medicines according to his kind, because some 
Imposthumes are caused of a contusion or bruised flesh, some 
are certain griefs, that Nature would discharge her self of, 
and so sendeth forth that matter, some are caused of cold, 
others of melancholy humours, and others are caused of corruption 
of the Pox, and these are the kindes of Imposthumes 
that commonly come, and hereafter I will shew the 
order to cure them one after another. 
 
And first of those that are caused of a contusion, because 
it is bruised flesh, for every contusion must be putrified 
and brought to matter, therfore make a maturative, and bring 
it to suppuration, and when you know there is matter, presently 
launce them, and dresse them with this Medicine as 
well within as without, the which without any other help 
will heal any great contusion. But you must make the Unguent 
fresh every day, and with new Eggs, yee shall mix the 
yoalk of an Egg with our Magno liquore, and therewith 
dresse them. And as for those Imposthumes that come by indisposition 
of Nature, are certain Sborine, a word so called 
in Italian, by the which Nature would prevail: it were necessary 
to let those have their cures according to Nature, untill 
they break of themselves, and when they are broken, dresse 
them within with this Unguent. +R. Oyle of Roses, +o. vi. Litarge 
of Gold in fine powder, +o. ii. Storax liquida, +o. i. 
Turpentine two ounces, yellow Wax, +o. iii. mix them and 
boyl them one the fire untill it be black, and if it be too hard, 
put thereto more oyle of Roses, and make it in form of an 
Unguent, and therewith dresse those kindes of Imposthumes, 
[^p.18^] 
and lay thereon the Cerot Diapalma, and therewith will be 
wrought miracles. Also for those Imposthumes caused of 
cold, yee shall use hot Medicines and attractives: The Cerot 
of Oxicrocii is excellent in those kind of Imposthumes, our 
Balm artificiall, or the water, and such like things as are temperate 
by Nature. But those Imposthumes that have their 
Originall of the French Pox, are evill and malign, because 
their cause is malign and evill, and therefore their cure is with 
great purging, and to let the Imposthume ripe of himself, and 
when ye launce it, dresse it within with our Unguento magno, 
mixed thus, +R. Unguento magno +o. ii. Magno liquore +o i. 
Precipitate, +o. +s. mix them well together, and therewith 
dresse the Imposthume, the which will heal quickly and well, 
and lay thereon our Cerot Magistrale, with this charge, that 
in all the cures aforesaid yee purge the body well, so that the 
humours run not unto the place offended, and use defensives 
according to the kind of Imposthume, as oyle of Frankincense, 
of Turpentine of Wax, of Honey, Aqua vitæ: all these are 
excellent defensives by themselves, annointing them round 
about the Imposthume. 
 
[}The Order to cure all manner of Fistulaes.}] 
 
Fistulaes, as I have said before, are of divers kinds, and caused 
of divers accidents, and so likewise they have need of divers 
Medicines, and first I will write of those Fistulaes that 
come of Wounds evill healed, and that have made a callow in 
that order that Nature cannot siccatrize, and so remain Fistulated, 
and the cure of these kind of Fistulaes is to put therein 
a Rupture that doth cut and mortifie the callow, and causeth 
it to fall away, and then with incarnating Medicines, incarnate 
them, and siccatize them, and this is the true cure of these 
Fistulaes. But those kind of Fistulaes that nature causeth to 
ease her self of some accident, commonly come in the lower 
parts about the fundament, and they be very perillous, and 
and not to be healed as they before were. But they must be 
with purging the body, stomack, and head, the which is to be 
done thus, First, purge them ten or twelve daies with our Magistral 
[^p.19^] 
Sirrup, then give them our Aromatico, and drink thereon 
a little white Wine, then purge the head with a perfume made 
of Myrrha and Cinaber, after these things be done yee shall 
rectifie the Liver with some decoction fit for that purpose, 
as of Lignum Sanctum, or Sarsa parilla, or such like that work 
effect, for this Medicine doth also help Fistula lachrymosa, 
that commonly come about the eyes or eares. There be other 
Fistulaes in form of a sore, which must be helpt with purging, 
and lay upon the sore our Cerot Magistrale with Precipitate, 
and annoint it with Magno liquore, for with this Cerot onely 
may all Fistulated sores be healed, for it doth mundifie 
and afterwards siccatrize it, there be also divers such like 
matters that are easily cured, if ye apply thereunto those Medicines 
that are appropriate. 
 
[}To help all manner of Scabs.}] 
 
THe kinds of Scabs be many, and caused of divers causes, 
and their cures are also divers wayes. Those that are 
caused of repletion of the body, and of grosse blood, the 
which are caused by eating abundance of such meats as are 
of great nourishment, the which if thou wilt cure them, it 
were necessary to purge them with our Sirrupo Solutivo, ten 
or twelve daies, then give him or her one drachm of our Aromatico 
in the morning fasting, and drinke thereon a cup of 
sweet Wine, then let him sweat three or four times, and after 
annoint him with our Vnguento magno two or three times, and 
it will heal him of those kind of scabs. 
 
Now to cure that kind of scab that is red and small, and 
causeth great itching, you shall make a decoction of Hearbs, 
that cool the liver and purifie the blood, as Borage, Buglosse, 
Endive, Maiden-hair, Liver-wort, Harts-tongue, Agrimony, 
Citrach, Succorie, and such like Hearbs, then purge 
with Aloes, the juyce of Elder roots, Hiera pigra solutiva, and 
such like, as doth cool the Liver and Blood, and then annoint 
them with Vnguento di Lithargirio, and therewith you shall 
help all those kinds of scabs. There be also certain great 
scabs over all the body, the which are very thick, and those 
[^p.20^] 
are a kind of the Pox, the which may be helpt with giving 
them our Pillole contra il mal Francese, the quantity is according 
to the discretion of the Physitian, and these Pills yee 
shall take three times every third day, and then annoint them 
with our Unguento magno, and he shall be helped. There is 
another kind of scab that goeth creeping with a dry crust like 
unto Petigine, and those are the meer Pox inveterated, and 
and the order to cure them is thus, give them our Sirrup against 
the melancholie humour, because it purgeth the blood 
and cooleth the Liver, and dissolveth that viscous humour 
that ingendereth that crust, that being done, give them our 
Aromatico, and annoint them with our Magno liquore, and 
he shall be perfectly helped in short space. There are other 
kind of Scabs that come through great cold, and those are 
healed onely with annointing them with oyle of Frankincense 
three or four times. 
 
[}To help Mal di Formica.}] 
 
THose be certain Ulcers which go creeping in the upper 
part of the flesh, and have many orifices or mouthes, 
and these are caused of the Pox being inveterated, the which 
are cured in that order that the Poxe is, and that is this: First, 
purge the bodie with our Electuario Angelica, the which purgeth 
away grosse and malign humours, and evacuateth the 
stomack of choler and flegm, this being done, cause the 
Patient to sweat, for that will assubtiliate the humours, and 
cause them to come forth, that being done, take our Cerot Magistrale, 
and strew thereon Precipitate, and then annoint it 
with our Magno liquore, and lay it upon the sore, and there 
let it lye twentie four hours before ye change it, then make it 
clean, and lay it on again, for that Plaister may serve four daies, 
making it clean every 24. hours, and when the Plaister will 
draw no more matter, you shall use our Vnguento magno, the 
which will help it in short time. But if it doe happen that 
this Order doe not cure them, then it would be necessary for 
them to be annointed with the Unction for the Pox, and to 
annoint them so long till the mouth be sore, and when that 
[^p.21^] 
sign doth appear, annoint them no more, for he will spit or 
vapour at the mouth for twelve or fifteen dayes, and as soon 
as he vapoureth make a Bath and wash him well, and wash the 
mouth with Wine, and without all doubt it shall help him God 
willing; now hereafter I will write of certain things which are 
used of common Chirurgians, with a brief discourse upon 
them. 
 
[}Of the Tow which is laid upon Wounds by common Chirurgians.}] 
 
THe pleggits of Tow, which are laid upon Wounds when 
they are first stitched is made in this order. +R. The 
white of an Egge, Salt, and Rosewater, and beat them together, 
and when the Wound is stitched then lay it thereon, 
because the bloud should stint, and the Wound remain shut, 
so that it may be helped with more ease. Now touching this, 
I will shew thee a reason why they use it in their first cure, yee 
shall understand, that every like desireth his like to succour 
him, or keep company with him, and therefore the Antients, 
our antient Professors of Art, willed the white of an Egge 
to be occupied in Wounds, because it is a substance of flesh 
like unto the other flesh; and to declare the truth, I will prove 
it by naturall reason, for yee shall understand, that the white 
of the Egge is that part which ingendereth the flesh, the skin, 
and the feathers of the Hen, and the yolk ingendereth onely 
the guts and other intrals of the Animall, then seeing the 
white is that which ingendereth the flesh onely, it is like unto 
flesh, as it is said before; then the Salt is a materiall which 
preserveth all things from putrifaction, as is seen by experience 
daily, and for that consideration it was put in this Composition 
to preserve the flesh, the Rosewater by nature is cold 
and dry, and by his coldnesse defendeth the inflammation, 
and by his drinesse is repercussive, and mittigateth, so that these 
are the reasons why the said Tow is laid upon Wounds, but 
I would to God that such things were used, as by their excellent 
operations would help and heal from the beginning to 
the latter ending. and to leave of such trifling orders. 
 
[^p.22^] 
[}Of the digestive with the which they dresse wounds after the aforesaid 
Tow.}] 
 
AFter that the Tow is taken away from the Wound they 
dresse it with a Composition called digestive, because 
it digesteth the Wound, although this Medicine be somewhat 
scrupulous, and against Science, and the reason is this, yee 
shall understand, that when a man is wounded, the place before 
was sound, and therefore being wounded, our true duty 
is to help the same Wound, and not to digest or rot it, as 
commonly all Chirurgians doe, for by rotting of it in that 
order it is perillous, and more dangerous to be cured, as is 
daily seen by experience, and this no man can deny. But 
now I will follow our Regiment in shewing what this digestive 
is, the which is made thus. 
 
+R The yolk of two Eggs, Turpentine washed +o. i. Oil 
of Roses +o. +s. mix them in an Unguent, and this is the digestive 
wherewith they dresse it untill the sore have made 
matter enough, and then they use to dresse it with Medicines 
much differing from the same; but I marvell much at the 
diversity of this matter, that this digestive being applyed to a 
putrified Ulcer worketh divers effects, for it healeth it divinely: 
and moreover, yee shall understand, that if it be applyed 
unto when they be incarnated, it will sicatrize them marvellously, 
for truly these are things worthy to be known, and he 
that understandeth the reason, I accompt him to be wise, for 
if this digestive be laid on fresh wounds it putrifieth and rotteth 
them, again being laid on a filthy sore it doth mundifie 
and heal, and then if it be applyed on a Wound incarnated, 
it sicatrizeth and healeth it, for this I have done divers and 
sundry times, the which is to be wondred at. 
 
[}Of the mundificative Unguent wherewith they dresse the Wounds 
after they are digested to mundifie them.}] 
 
VVHen Wounds are come to digestion, and that they 
purge, alwayes they change Unguents, and they 
[^p.23^] 
apply Unguents that have vertue to mundifie the Wound and 
make it clean, so that it may the better incarnate, and that 
Unguent is called properly a mundificative, the which is made 
of Barly flower, and Hony, or Hony of Roses, and Oil of Roses, 
and this is the mundificative they use eight or ten dayes 
together, for if the Wound were not well mundified, it would 
never incarnate well, so that this Unguent is most necessary in 
that operation, in respect of the ingredient. 
 
[}Of their incarnative wherewith they dresse the Wound after it is 
mundified.}] 
 
VVHen that the Wound is mundified, so that thereunto 
cometh small quantity of matter, then it is necessary 
to apply Unguents that incarnate, so that they may siccatrize 
with more ease, and this kind of incarnative is in the most use 
among the common Chirurgians, the which is made of Turpentine, 
Wax, and Frankincense, and a little Oil of Roses mixt 
on the fire, and this is their incarnative. 
 
[}A rare secret, the which this Authour did send unto a speciall 
friend of his, being in the warres in Africa, the which helpeth 
all Wounds, either by cut, thrust, galling with Arrows, or harquibush-shot, 
or otherwise.}] 
 
THe first thing that yee shall doe is, to wash the Wound 
very clean with Urine, and then dry it very well, then put 
therein our Quintessence of Wine, and presently joyn the parts 
close together, and stitch or sow them well, but in any wise 
sow nothing but the skin, for otherwise it would cause great 
pain, then put thereon five or six drops of our Balsamo, and 
upon the Wound lay a cloth wet in our Magno liquore, as hot 
as he may suffer it, and this doe the first day, then the next 
day follow this order, first put thereon our Quintessence, and 
a little Balsamo, and then our Magno liquore very hot, and never 
change this Medicine untill it be whole. 
 
[^p.24^] 
[}Of those Unguents that siccatrize Wounds.}] 
 
THe Unguents that siccatrize Wounds after they are incarnated 
be of divers kinds, although they work one 
effect in siccatrizing, or causing a skin. The digestion that is 
written of before, being applyed upon a Wound incarnated, 
doth siccatrize it with speed, the like doth Diachilon, and 
Unguentum de Tutia. The Cerot called Gratia Dei, although 
these be sundry Compositions one differing from another, 
yet in effect they serve all to this siccatrization, as yee may 
see by experience, and this they doe, because they be temperate 
and of good qualities, and so they help nature to work 
more quickly, and they are called helpers of nature. But 
these kind of Unguents that work by themselves, as Unguento 
Apostolorum, the Caustick, Ægypciacum, the Rottery, and 
such like Unguents as work with violence, and suppresse nature, 
and doe that which nature cannot doe by it self without 
help, but all those Unguents that are not violent neither in 
heat or cold, are apt to siccatrize Wounds, and all sores, that 
are mundified and incarnated. 
 
[}A Remedy to help a Wound with great speed, of our invention.}] 
 
VVOunds of divers and sundry sorts are very perillous 
of life, but to help them quickly, because the Patient 
may take no harm, yee shall use this secret, wash the Wound 
with our water of Balm, and cleanse it well, and lay thereon 
clothes wet in Oil of Frankincense made by distillation, 
and therewith thou shalt heal any great Wound in short 
time, as I have proved divers and sundry times, in sundry 
causes. 
 
[}An excellent secret to heal Wounds of Gun-shot, or Arrowes, without 
any danger.}] 
 
IF thou wilt help the aforesaid Wounds, it were necessary 
first to joyn the parts close too, and wash it with our 
[^p.25^] 
Aqua celestis, and lay thereon our Oleum Balsami, and therewith 
thou shalt save the lives of many wounded persons. 
 
[}A Discourse upon old Wounds that are not yet healed, and their 
soveraign Remedy.}] 
 
VVHen that Wounds are evill healed, and that they imposthumate, 
and that the Arme, or Leg, or other parts 
where they were wounded, is indurated and full of pain, thou 
shalt use this secret of our invention, never known before 
of old nor new Writers, for it is of great vertue, and many 
times proved: first yee shall wash the Wound well, and make 
it clean round about, then wash the Wound with our Quintessence, 
and make it to fume, because our Quintessence doth 
open the pores, and assubtiliateth the matter, and causeth 
the humour to come forth, that being done, annoint it all over 
with our Magno liquore, and thus doing, before three dayes 
end he shall feel great ease, and in short time it shall be helped, 
because this Medicine taketh away the hardnesse, and healeth 
the Wound, and comforteth the place offended. 
 
[}To dissolve a Bruise in short time, when it is new done.}] 
 
THese are called Contusions, unto the which nature sendeth 
quickly great quantity of humidity, and in that place it 
causeth Imposthumation: But if our Chirurgians would be 
diligent and quick, all Contusions might be helped with great 
ease in short time, and therefore if thou wilt work miracles in 
the cure, use this our meanes, and it will turn to thy great honour, 
and the remedy is this. 
 
+R. Liquid Vernish three pound, yellow Wax +o. iv. common 
Ashes +o. vi. Aqua vitæ rectified two pound. Put all the 
aforesaid matters in a Retort of glasse, and distill it with a 
gentle fire untill all the substance be come forth, the which 
will be Oil and water, the which yee shall separate, and keep 
them, and when occasion serveth, annoint the Bruise therewith, 
and lay thereon a cloth wet in the same, for this is a miraculous 
Medicine, experimented and proved by reason, for 
[^p.26^] 
an experiment without reason is as a man without clothes, and 
therefore if thou wilt know great and rare secrets never written 
before, looke in my Spechio del scientia universali, and in 
my Thesauro del vita humana, and therein thou shalt find strange 
things proved by reason and experience, the which books 
God willing, I mean to set forth in the English tongue to the 
profit of my Country. 
 
[}To help a Wound quickly that is in perill of any accident.}] 
 
VVOunds in some parts of the body are very dangerous 
of life, and especially where Sinewes be cut or peirced, 
or Veines or Muscles hurt, or Bones broke, and by an infinite 
of other particulars, which being open or evill healed, the Patient 
may be in danger of life, because the winde entereth in, 
and they cause pains and inflammation, and therefore to 
avoid all these aforesaid matters, so that the Wound shall have 
no detriment, use this remedy. First joyn the parts close together, 
and put therein our Qnintessence, and lay thereon a 
cloth wet in our Balm, and bind it fast that the air get not in, 
for it is very hurtfull; yee shall understand, that these are 
two of the excellentest Medicines that may be found, because 
our Quintessence doth assubtiliate the bloud, and taketh it 
forth, and taketh away the pain, and the Balm doth warm and 
comfort the place offended, and will not suffer any matter 
to run thereunto by any meanes, for this is most true, as I 
have proved divers and sundry times, and alwayes have had 
good successe. 
 
[}To stop the flux of bloud in Wounds with great speed.}] 
 
VVHen there is any great flux of blood in Wounds, by 
reason of some vein that is cut, and that the Chirurgians 
would stop it, it were necessary to stitch it well, but 
not as the common Chirurgians doe, with wide stitches, but 
stitch it very close and hard, and put therein our Quintessence, 
and upon the Wound strew the bloud of a man dried in 
powder; and lay upon the bloud a cloth wet in our Balm 
[^p.27^] 
artificiall very warm, and upon that bind the Wound with ligaments 
very streight, and every day twice wash it with our 
Quintessence, and round about annoint it with our Balm, and 
also cast thereon our secret powder for Wounds, and that 
doe morning and evening every day, without opening of the 
Wound, and in that time the Wound will remain well, and the 
veins will be in a manner healed so that they will not bleed, 
giving you charge, that the Wounded man keep no diet, because 
the vertue being weak relaxeth the veins, and that causeth 
the flux of blood. 
 
[}Another Remedy to stay the flux of bloud in a Wound.}] 
 
VVHen there is a great glux of bloud in a Wound, the 
perfectest remedy is to stitch it very close, then take 
mans bloud being dried, and made into powder, and cast it 
upon the Wound, and bind it somewhat streight, and so let it 
remain four and twenty hours, and when yee unbind it, take 
heed that yee remove nothing, and cast on more dried bloud 
upon the Wound, annoint it round about with our Oleum 
Philosophorum de Turpentina & Cera, and bind it up again 
other four and twenty hours, and then bind it gently, and 
annoint the Wound with Oil of Frankincense, and so in 
short time it will be whole, giving thee great charge, that 
yee put in no tent or such like, and then thou shalt see miracles. 
 
[}Of our Cerot Magno, that helpeth against all sorts of Sores and 
Wounds.}] 
 
THis Cerot is of great vertue, and healeth all manner of 
Sores and Wounds, if it be spread on a cloth and laid 
thereon, and the order to make it is thus. 
 
+R. Galbanum +o. i. Ammoniacum +o. ii. Oppepomax +o. ii. Aristolochia 
longa +o. i. new Wax +o. xviii. fine Mirrh, Olibanum, 
Verdigriece, ana. +o. i. Bdellium +o. ii. Gum of the Proin tree 
+o. ii. Lapis hematites +o. ii. Turpentine, Frankincense, of each 
+o. iiii. Oil of Wax +o. iii. Beat all those that are to be beaten, 
[^p.28^] 
and searce them finely, and keep every one by himself, then 
dissolve the Gums in distilled Vinegar, according to Art, and 
then vapour away the Vinegar again, and strain the gums 
through a cloth, then take the Wax with as much sweet oyle 
and melt them on the fire, and when they are melted, put 
thereunto +o. ii. of Litarge of gold finely searced, and stir 
them continually untill it be boyled, the which ye shall know 
by this token. Put a feather therein, and if it be boyled enough, 
it will burn straightwaies, or else let it boil untill it 
burn it, then take it from the fire, and cool it a little, and then 
put in the gums and stir them well together, and set it on the 
fire again, and it will rise with a great noise, and therefore 
let it boyl untill it do fall down again, then take it from the 
fire, and put thereunto all the aforesaid powders, and stir it 
untill it be cold, and therewith thou shalt work marvellous 
cures, if it be made well, according to Art. 
 
[}Of our Magistrall Vnguent that helpeth divers sorts of 
Sores.}] 
 
THis Unguent is appropriate for many kind of sores, because 
it comforteth the sore, and taketh away the pain, 
and draweth the matter from the lower parts or bottom of 
the sore, the which matter is cause of the pain: It keepeth 
also from accidents, giving you charge that it be made artificially, 
for otherwise it will not be of so much vertue, and 
this is the Unguent. 
 
+R. Litarge of Gold, four ounces, Oyle of Roses, two 
pound; boil them in a Copper pan so long, as if yee put a 
feather therein, it will burn it, then it is sod, then put thereto 
of new Wax, +o. vi. Storax liquida, two ounces, common 
Honey, three ounces, then let it boil awhile untill they 
be well incorporated, then take it from the fire, and put 
thereto Olibanum, Myrrha, Mercurie Precipitate, Oyle of 
Wax, Oyle of Turpentine, Oyle of Frankincense, of each 
two ounces, mix them well till they be incorporated, then 
put thereto pure rectified Aqua vitæ, +o. iiii. and mix them well, 
[^p.29^] 
and then it is ended; and this is of my invention, wherewith 
I have done very strange cures. 
 
[}To make Oyle of Frankincense.}] 
 
TAke a Retort of glasse well luted, and fill it half full of 
Frankincense, and for every pound of Frankincense, put 
thereunto +o. iii. of common Ashes finely searced, then distill 
it in sand, and the first that cometh forth will be water, the 
which will be clear, then increase the fire, and there will come 
forth an oyle of the colour of a Rubie, the which keep close 
in a glasse, the first water is of marvellous vertue in divers 
operations, but one miraculous experiment I will not leave 
to write of, because it is a thing very necessary, and it is this. 
For those that have chilblains, or kibes, or chops in the hands 
or feet that cometh through cold, yee shall first perfume the 
parts that are sore over the fume of hot water, so that they 
may sweat, then dry them and wash them, with the aforesaid 
water, and put on a pair of gloves, and in short time they 
shall be whole, it helpeth also the white scall and scabs, and such 
like things. The Oyle serveth in many operations, and specially 
in all cold diseases; if they be inwardly, give thereof every 
morning one scruple to drinke, and if they be outward annoint. 
Also it helpeth all manner of wounds be they never 
so great: If yee annoint them therewith, and keep them 
close from the ayre. 
 
And in any wise use no tenting to keep them open, 
but wet a cloth therein, and lay it thereon, and in short space 
they will be healed, also it dissolveth a bruise in short space 
if yee annoint it often therewith, this oyle serveth also for 
Painters to make Varnish. 
 
[}Of Oyle of Wax, and his Effect.}] 
 
THis Oyle of Wax is marvellous excellent, for so much 
as it serveth for the most part against all diseases; which 
Oyle Raymond Lulli doth approve to be a more heavenly and 
divine Medicine then humane, and is most rare for wounds, but 
[^p.30^] 
it is not good for common Chirurgians, because it helpeth a 
great wound in ten or twelve daies at the most, but as for 
small wounds, it healeth them in three or four daies, annointing 
onely the wound therewith, and lay thereon clothes wet 
in the same. Also this oyle worketh miracles against divers 
diseases inwardly, if yee give thereof one drachm with white 
wine, and as for those whose hair and beard doe fall away, it 
is a rare thing and of great profit, and the order to make it 
is thus. 
 
+R. A retort of glasse well luted, and put therein what quantity 
of Wax you will, so that it be not half full, and for every 
pound of Wax, put thereunto four ounces of the powder of 
Bricks, then set it in a furnace, and give it gentle fire untill 
all the substance be come forth, the which oyle will be congealed 
hard, the which is his perfection, for if you will distill it 
so many times that it congeal no more, it will be too hot 
and sharp, and not to be used within the body in any wise, 
but the first distillation you may use safely inwardly, and make 
Unctions for any kind of disease where need shall require, 
and alwaies it will be good, and doe no hurt in any wise in 
any disease, and therefore this Oyle ought to be had in great 
regard of all men. 
 
[}To help the Tooth-ach, that is caused of rotten teeth, or that 
cometh of a descention of the Head.}] 
 
THe teeth being rotten or corrupted alwayes causeth great 
pain, and many times it cometh of a descention from the 
head and such like humours, as Catarrs, Erisipella, but let it 
come of what cause it will, I will shew a remedie of great importance, 
and it is very short, yee shall take our Aqua reale, 
and hold it in your mouth a good while, and then spit it 
out again, and this yee shall doe for three dayes together 
every day once, then afterward it were necessary to wash 
your mouth in like manner with our Aqua balsami for the 
space of a moneth, and so the tooth-ach shall be taken away 
with ease, for this is our Secret, and may be used in all times 
of the year. 
 
[^p.31^] 
[}Against a stinking Breath.}] 
 
THe Breath may stink through many causes, as by Ulcers in 
the mouth, or by corrupt and rotten teeth, and sometime 
it cometh of the stomack, and that is evill to be helpt, and 
therefore if thou wilt help these, thou must use divers Remedies, 
and first to help those that have their mouthes ulcerated, 
yee shall give them a quantity of our Pillole aquilone, 
and then let them wash their mouthes with our Aqua reale, 
and so the Ulcers shall be helpt, and the mouth shall not 
stinke. But when the stench cometh of rotten teeth, use the 
aforesaid remedie or Medicine that is written for the tooth-ach, 
the which will make the teeth as white as snow, and 
will ake no more, but when the stink cometh from the stomack, 
it were necessary to purge the body with our Sirrup 
Solutivo, six or seven dayes, and then to take our Aromatico, 
that being done, take rectified Aqua vitæ, and the water of 
Honey, and oyle of Turpentine, of each alike, mix them well 
together, and every morning drinke thereof +o. +s. fasting, 
for the space of of a moneth or thereabout. 
 
[}To help all such persons that have a great Cough in the Stomack.}] 
 
THe Cough doth come of divers and sundry causes, but 
let it come of what cause it will, it alwaies offendeth the 
stomack and the head, for alwaies when the stomack is offended, 
of necessitie the head is offended, because it hath communication 
with the Stomack, so that the Stomack is cause of 
the pains in the head, and therefore it is necessary to help the 
stomack first, and that thou shalt doe with our Pillole aquilone, 
the which is written in this Book following, and if so bee 
you cannot take Pills, take our Aromatico, this being done, if 
there be no Fever, give him every morning, +o. i. of our Electuarie 
Magistrale per la tosse, and every night annoint his 
stomack with Magno liquore, and also his head and nosthrils, 
but if it happen that the aforesaid things help it not, then 
[^p.32^] 
take the bloud of the Liver-vein, and purge the body with our 
Sirrup against the melancholie humour, and so by the grace 
of God they shall remain healed. 
 
[}To help those that cannot hold their water.}] 
 
THis proceedeth of two causes principally, the first is, of 
superfluous heat of the body, through the which heat, nature 
doth assubtiliate too much that humid part, and continually 
doth send it down into the Bladder. The second cause 
is, that the pores are too much relaxed or opened, by the 
which operation the Urine doth passe without retention, and 
these are the two causes why the Urine cannot stay, and this 
cometh commonly to young children, because they are very 
hot of complexion, and the order to help them, is this. 
 
Give them our Pillole Aquilone three times, the quantitie 
is from +Q. i. to one and a half; that being done, yee shall 
make them a decoction of Hysope of the mountain, and put 
therein Sugar, and this they shall use ten or twelve daies at the 
least, for this mundifieth the place offended, and disposeth it 
to solution. Then after this is done, yee shall give him for ten 
daies together half a drachm of Mastick, with a little Plantain 
water, for this is hot and restringeth the pores, and ingrosseth 
the Urine, and so the Patient shall remain whole of 
that infirmitie, by the vertue of the aforesaid three Medicines, 
and it is a very easie cure, and soveraign for that purpose. But 
sometime there happeneth a Flux of Urine somewhat like 
this, and it is not of the aforesaid causes, but of causes much 
different from them,, for this is in men and women of age, 
and this I find to be caused of the Pox that causeth the Flux, 
and they void certain threds which some call Gonorea, 
and the remedie thereof is onely with great purging and 
sweating, and then to annoint them five or six nights with our 
Unguento magno, and keep them warm in bed untill ye have ended 
to annoint him, and then go to the stow, and he shall be 
helpt of that infirmitie. 
 
[^p.33^] 
[}To help those that cannot make water.}] 
 
THe Urine is staid through divers and sundry causes, and the 
principall are three, of the which one is the Stone that ingendereth 
in the Bladder, for alwaies it hangeth down in the 
neck of the Bladder, and stoppeth the Meatus, or pores that 
the Urine cannot passe, the which grieveth the Patient marvellously. 
The other is caused of gravell, or grosse and viscous 
humours that cannot passe the pores, and so cause that 
retention of Urine with great pain. The third is caused of an 
obstruction or restriction of the pores or conduits, where the 
Urine doth passe, and so keepeth the Urine within with great 
pain, so that these bee the three chiefest causes of the retention 
of Urine 
 
The cure of the first cause which is the Stone, is to purge 
them well, and then to use our most soveraign Remedie that 
is written in this Book following, the which is of great vertue 
to break the Stone, as I have proved many times, but 
when this Medicine is not able to break it, then it is necessary 
to cut it forth, and this is all concerning the first cause. 
To help the second cause, it were necessary to use Purgations 
that purge the Reins well, and then to give them our 
Aromatico, and then to annoint the Reins six dayes every day 
once with Vnguento magno, and with this Medicine thou shalt 
help him perfectly. 
 
To cure the third cause it were necessary to purge with 
aperative things, and then to annoint his Reins, and under the 
members and belly with our Balm artificiall, and give him to 
drinke the powder of Hoglice, or Centum pedes, that are found 
under stones, and by the grace of God he shall be perfectly 
whole. 
 
