[^Harvey, William: Anatomical exercises^] 
 
[}THE 
ANATOMICAL 
Exercises of 
D=r=. WILLIAM HARVEY 
Professor of Physick, 
AND 
Physician to the Kings Majesty, 
Concerning the motion of the Heart 
and Blood. 
 
WITH 
The Preface of Zachariah Wood 
Physician of Roterdam. 
 
To Which is added 
Dr. James De Back his discourse of the 
Heart, Physician in ordinary to the 
Town of Roterdam. 
 
LONDON, Printed by Francis Leach, 
for Richard Lowndes at the White Lion in St. 
Pauls Churchyard, near West end. 
1653.}] 
 
[^Omitted a preface by Zachariah Wood, an epistle by Harvey, dedications to S. P. D. and King Charles, a table of contents and a proem omitted.^] 
[^Extract 1, pp. 1-43^] 
 
[^p.1^] 
[}ANATOMICAL 
EXERCISES, 
CONCERNING 
The motion of the Heart, 
the Blood, in Living Creatures.}] 
 
[}CHAP. I. 
The Causes which mov'd the Author to 
write.}] 
 
WHen first I applyed my 
mind, to observation, from 
the many dissections of 
Living Creatures as they 
came to hand, that by 
that meanes I might find 
out the use of the motion of the Heart 
and things conducible in Creatures; I 
straightwayes found it a thing hard to be 
attained, and full of difficultie, so with Fracastorius 
I did almost beleeve, that the motion 
of the Heart was known to God alone: 
For neither could I rightly distinguish, 
[^p.2^] 
which way the Diastole and Systole 
came to be, nor when nor where the dilatation 
and constriction had its existence. 
And that by reason of the quicknesse of the 
motion, which in some creatures appeared 
in the twinckling of an eye, like the passing 
of Lightning; so that sometimes the Systole 
[/1./] 
did present it self to me from this place, 
and the Diastole from that place, sometimes 
[/2./] 
just contrary, sometimes the motion was 
various, sometimes confus'd: whence I was 
much troubled in mind, nor did I know 
what to resolve upon my self, or what beleef 
to give to others, nor wonder'd I at 
that which Andreas Laurentius writes, 
That the motion of the heart, was as the 
ebbing and flowing of Euripus to Aristotle. 
At last using daily more search and diligence, 
by often looking into many and severall 
sorts of creatures, I did beleeve I had 
hit the nail on the head, unwinded and 
freed my self from this Labyrinth, and 
thought I had gain'd both the motion and 
use of the heart, together with that of the 
arteries, which I did so much desire: Since 
which time I have not been afraid, both privately 
to my friends, and publickly in my 
Anatomie Lectures to deliver my opinion. 
 
Which, as it commonly falls out, pleased 
some, and displeased others; Some there 
were that did check me, spoke harshly, and 
[^p.3^] 
found fault that I had departed from the 
precepts and belief of all Anatomists; Others 
avouching that it was a thing new, 
worthy of their knowledge, and exceeding 
profitable, requir'd it to be more plainly 
delivered to them. At last, mov'd partly 
by the requests of my friends, that all men 
might be partakers of my endeavours, and 
partly by the malice of some, who being 
displeas'd with what I said, and not understanding 
it aright, endeavoured to traduce 
me publickly, I was forced to recommend 
these things to the Press, that every man 
might of me, and of the thing it self deliver 
his judgement freely. But so much the 
more willing I was to it, because Hieronym. 
ab Aq. P. having learnedly and accurately 
set down in a particular Treatise, almost 
all the parts of living creatures, left the 
heart only untouched. Lastly, if any profit 
or advantage might by my industry in 
this accrew to the republick of Literature, 
it might perchance be granted that I had 
done well, and others might beleeve that 
I had not spent my time altogether to no 
purpose, and as the oldman says in the Comedie, 
 
No man so well e'r laid his count to live, 
But that things, age, and use some new thing give, 
That what you thought you knew, you shall not know, 
And what you once thought best, you shall forgoe. 
 
This may perchance fall out now in the 
[^p.4^] 
motion of the heart, that from hence the 
way being thus pervious, others trusting to 
more pregnant wits, may take occasion to 
doe better, and search further. 
 
[}CHAP. II. 
What manner of motion the Heart has in the 
dissection of living Creatures.}] 
 
FIrst then in the hearts of all creatures, 
being dissected whilst they are yet alive, 
opening the breast, and cutting up the capsule, 
which immediately environeth the 
heart, you may observe that the heart 
moves sometimes, sometimes rests: and 
that there is a time when it moves, and 
when it moves not. 
 
This is more evident in the hearts of colder 
creatures, as the Toads, Serpents, Frogs, 
House-Snails, Shrimps, Crevises, and all 
manner of little Fishes. For it shews it self 
more manifestly in the hearts of hotter bodies, 
as of Doggs, Swine, if you observe attentively 
till the heart begin to dye, and 
move faintly, and life is as it were departing 
from it. Then you may clearly and plainly 
see that the motions of it are more slow, 
and seldome, and the restings of it of a longer 
continuance: and you may observe and 
distinguish more easily, what manner of 
[^p.5^] 
motion it is, and which wayes it is made, 
in the resting of it, as likewise in death, the 
heart is yeelding, flagging weak, and lyes 
as it were drooping. 
 
At the motion, and whilst it is moving, 
three things are chiefly to be observed. 
 
1. That the heart is erected, and that it 
raises it self upwards into a point, insomuch 
that it beats the breast at that time, so as 
the pulsation is felt outwardly. 
 
2. That there is a contraction of it every 
way, especially of the sides of it, so that it 
appears lesser, longer, and contracted. The 
heart of an Eel, taken out, and laid upon a 
trencher, or upon ones hand, doth evidence 
this: It appears likewise in the hearts of 
little Fishes, and of those colder Animals 
whose hearts are sharp at top, and long. 
 
3. That the heart being grasp'd in ones 
hand whilst it is in motion, feels harder. 
This hardnesse arises from tention, like as 
if one take hold of the tendons of ones arm 
by the Elbow, whilst they are moving the 
fingers, shall feel them bent and more resisting. 
 
4. Tis moreover to be observed in Fish, 
and colder Animals which have blood, as 
Serpents, Froggs, at that time when the 
heart moves it becomes whitish, when it 
leaveth motion it appears full of sanguine 
colour. From hence it seemed to me, that 
the motion of the heart was a kind of tention 
[^p.6^] 
in every part of it, according to the 
drawing and constriction of the Fibers every 
way; because it appear'd that in all its motions, 
it was erected, received vigour, grew 
lesser, and harder, and that the motion of 
it was like that of the muscles, where the 
contraction is made according to the drawing 
of the nervous parts, and fibers, for the 
muscles whilst they are in motion, and in 
action, are envigorated, and stretched, of 
soft become hard, they are uplifted, and 
thickned, so likewise the heart. 
 
From which observations with good reason 
we may gather that the heart at that 
time whilst it is in motion, suffers constriction, 
and is thickned in its outside, and 
so streightned in its ventricles, thrusting 
forth the blood contained within it: 
which from the fourth observation is evident 
because that in the tention it becomes 
white, having thrust out the blood contained 
within it, and presently after in it relaxation, 
and rest, a purple and crimson 
colour returns to the heart. But of this 
no man needs to make any further scruple, 
since upon the inflicting of a wound into 
the cavitie of the ventricle, upon every motion, 
and pulsation of the heart, in the very 
tention, you shall see the blood within 
contained to leap out. 
 
So then these things happen at one & the 
same time, the tention of the heart, the erection 
[^p.7^] 
of the point, the beating (which is felt 
outwardly) by reason of its hitting against 
the breast, the incrassation of the sides of 
it, and the forcible protrusion of the blood 
by constriction of the ventricles. 
 
Hence the contrary of the co~monly received 
opinion appears, which is, that the heart 
at that time when it beats against the breast, 
and the pulsation is outwardly felt, it is 
beleev'd that the ventricles of the heart are 
dilated, and replete with blood, though 
you shall understand that it is otherwise, 
and that when the heart is contracted it is 
emptied. For that motion which is commonly 
thought the Diastole of the heart, is 
really the Systole, and so the proper motion 
of the heart is not a Diastole but a Systole, 
for the heart receives no vigour in 
the Diastole, but in the Systole, for then 
it is extended, moveth, and receiveth vigour. 
 
Neither is that to be allowed, though 
it is confirmed by a comparison alleged 
by the Divine Vessalius, of a wreath of Oziers, 
meaning of many twiggs joynd together 
in fashion of a Pyramide: that the 
heart doth only move by the streight fibers, 
and so whilst the top is brought near to the 
bottom, the sides of it are dilated round 
about, and do acquire the form of a little 
gourd, and so take in blood (for according 
to all the drawing of the Fibers which it 
[^p.8^] 
has, the heart is stiffned and gatherd together) 
But that the outside and substance 
of it are rather thickned and dilated, and 
that whilst the Fibers are stretched from 
the top of the corner to the bottom, the 
sides of the heart do not encline to an orbicular 
figure, but rather contrary, as every 
Fiber circular lies plac'd, does in its 
contraction encline to streightness, and as 
all the Fibers of the muscles whilst they are 
contracted and shortned of their length, so 
towards the sides they are extended, and 
are thickned after the same fashion as the 
bodies of the Muscles. 
 
To this add, that not only in the motion 
of the heart, by erection and incrassation 
of the sides of it, it so falls out, that the 
ventricles are streightned, but moreover 
all the sides inwardly are girt together as it 
were with a noose, for expelling the blood 
with greater force, by reason that those Fibers 
or little tendons, amongst which there 
are none but streight ones, (for those in 
the outside are circular) called by Aristotle 
Nerves, are various in the ventricles of 
the hearts of greater creatures, whilst they 
are contracted together with a most admirable 
frame. 
 
Neither is it true which is commonly believ'd, 
that the heart by any motion or distention 
of its own doth draw blood into 
the ventricles, but that whilst it is moved 
[^p.9^] [^Original misnumbered as p.6.^] 
and bended, the blood is thrust forth, 
and when it is relax'd and falls, the blood 
is received in manner as follows. 
 
[}CHAP. III. 
What manner of motion the Arteries have in 
dissection of living creatures.}] 
 
THeir occurs in the motion of the heart 
these things further to be observ'd, 
which have relation to the moving and 
pulsation of the arteries. 
 
1. That whilst there is a tention, contraction 
of the heart, and a percussion of the 
breast, and an apparent Systole, the arteries 
are dilated, do beat, and are in their 
Diastole. In like manner when the right 
ventricle thrusts out the blood contained 
in it, the arterious vein beates and is dilated, 
together with the rest of the arteries of the 
body. 
 
2. When the left ventricle ceaseth to 
move, beat, and to be contracted, the 
beating of the arteries ceases: nay when 
the tention is but faint, the pulsation of the 
arteries is hardly to be perceived, and so 
likewise in the arteriall vein, when the 
right ceases. 
 
3. Likewise cutting or piercing any arterie 
in the very tention of the left ventricle 
[^p.10^] 
the blood is forcibly thrust out of the 
wound, so cutting the arteriall vein at the 
same time, and in the tention and contraction 
of the right ventricle, you shall see 
the blood to burst out forcibly from 
thence. 
 
So likewise in Fishes, cutting the conduit 
pipe, which leads from the heart to the gills, 
at which time you shall see the heart stiff, 
and contracted, from thence you shall 
likewise see the blood forcibly thrust out. 
 
Lastly, as in the cutting of any arterie, 
the blood leaps out sometimes farther, 
sometimes nearer, you shall find the outleaping 
to be just with the Arterial Diastole, 
at which time the heart strikes the brest, 
and at that time then when it appears that 
the heart is in its tention, and contraction it 
is in its Systole, and that the blood is thrust 
out with the same motion. 
 
From hence, this against the Common 
rule appears to be clear, that the Arteriall 
Diastole is at the same time with the Systole 
of the heart, and that the arteries are fill'd 
and distended, by reason of the immission 
and intrusion of blood made by the constriction 
of the ventricles of the heart; as 
likewise that the arteries are stretched, because 
they are fill'd like Baggs or Sachels, 
and are not fill'd because they are blown 
up like Bellows: and for the same cause do 
all the arteries of the body beat, by reason 
[^p.11^] 
of the tention of the left ventricle of the 
heart, as the arteriall vein from the tention 
of the right. 
 
Lastly, That the pulsation of the arteries 
arises from the impulsion of blood 
from the left ventricle; just so, as when one 
blows into a glove, he shall see all the fingers 
swell up together, and assimulate this 
pulsation. As also according to the tention 
of the heart, the pulsations are greater, 
more vehement, more frequent, swifter, 
keeping the number, quantity, and order, 
of the beating of the heart. 
 
Nor is it to be expected, that because of 
the motion of the blood there should be a 
certain distance of time betwixt the constriction 
of the heart, and the dilatation of the 
arteries (especially of those that are furthest 
distant) that they be not at the same instant, 
because that in a bason (as likewise 
in a Drum, and long peeces of Timber) 
the stroke and the motion are alike soon at 
both extremes. since the case here is just 
as in the blowing up of a glove, or a Bladder. 
Hence Arist. 3. Anim. C. 9. de resp. 
Cap. 15. The blood (says he) of all living 
creatures, beats within their veins, (meaning 
the arteries,) and with a continuall 
motion moves every where: so do all the 
veins beat together, and by turns, because 
they have their dependance upon the heart. 
But it does always move, wherefore they 
[^p.12^] 
likewise move, and in order to its motion 
when it doth move. 
 
We must observe with Galen, that the arteries 
were named veins by the antient 
Philosophers. I chanced on a time to see 
and have in hand, an accident which did 
most plainly confirm this to me to be true: 
A certaine person had a great swelling 
which did beat on the right side of his throat 
neer to the descent of the subclavial arterie, 
into the armpits, call'd Aneurisma, begotten 
by the corrosion of the arterie it self, 
which grew bigger and bigger every day, 
being filled with the immission of blood 
from the arterie at every pulsation; which 
was found upon the cutting up of his body 
after he was dead. In this man the pulse 
of his arm upon that side, was very weak, 
by reason that the greater portion and influx 
of blood was turned into the swelling, 
and so diverted. 
 
Wherefore, whether it be by compression, 
stuffing, or interception, that the motion 
of the blood through the arteries be 
hindered, in that case the furthermost arteries 
doe beat lesse, seeing the pulse of the 
arteries is nothing but the impulsion of 
the blood into the arteries. 
 
[^p.13^] 
[}CHAP. IV. 
What manner of motion the Heart, and the 
ears of it, have in living Creatures.}] 
 
BEsides these, there are to be observed 
such things as belong to the ears, which 
Gaspar Bauhinus P. C. Anat. 22. 21. and 
Johan. Riolanus, men very learned, and skilfull 
Anatomists have observed, and advises 
us, that (if in the live dissection of any animals 
you have good regard to the motion 
of the heart, you shall see four motions, distinct 
both in time and in place: which leave of 
such eminent men be it spoken, there are 
four motions distinct in place, but not in 
time; for both the ears move together, 
and both the ventricles move together, so 
that there are four motions distinct in 
place, only at two times, and it is thus, 
 
There are as it were at one time two motions, 
one of the ears, and another of the 
ventricles themselves, for they are not 
just at one instant, but the motion of the 
ears goes before, and the motion of the 
heart follows; and the motion seemes to 
begin at the ears, and to passe forward to 
the ventricles; when all things are already 
in a languishing condition, (the heart 
dying away, as it is both in Fishes, and other 
colder animals which have blood) there 
[^p.14^] 
intercedes some short resting time betwixt 
these two motions, and the heart being as 
it were weakned, seems to answer the 
motion, sometimes swifter, sometimes slower; 
last of all drawing towards death, it 
ceases to answer by its motion, and only 
by nodding its head seems as it were to give 
consent, and moves so insensibly, that it 
seems only to give a signe of motion to the 
ears: So the heart first leaves beating, before 
the ears, so that the ears are said to 
out-live it: the left ventricle leaves beating 
first of all, then its ear, then the right 
ventricle, last of all (which Galen observs) 
all the rest giving off and dying, the right 
ear beats still: so that life seems to remain 
last of all in the right. And whilst by little 
and little the heart is dying, you may 
see after two or three beatings of the ear, 
the heart will, being as it were rowsed, answer, 
and very slowly and hardly endeavor 
and frame a motion. 
 
But this is chiefly to be observed, that 
after the heart has left beating, and the 
ears are beating still, putting your finger 
upon the ventricle of the heart: every pulsation 
is perceived in the ventricles, just 
after the same manner as wee said the 
pulsations of the ventricles were felt in 
the Arteries, a distention being made 
by impulsion of blood: and at this time, 
the ears only beating, if you cut away the 
[^p.15^] 
point of the heart with a pair of Scissors, you 
shall see the blood flow from thence at every 
pulsation of the ear, so that from thence 
it appears which way the blood comes into 
the ventricles, not by attraction or distention 
of the heart, but sent in by the impulsion 
of the ears. 
 
It is to be observed, that all those which 
I call pulsations, both in the ears, and in 
the heart, are contractions, and that the 
ears are evidently first contracted, and afterwards 
the heart it self. For the ears 
whilst they move and beat, become whitish, 
especially when there is little blood 
in them, for they are fill'd as the cellars and 
treasuries of blood, by the compressive 
motion of the veins, and the tending of the 
blood to its proper Centre. Nay further, it 
is most evident, in the ends and extremities 
of them, that the whiteness arises meerly 
from the contraction of them. 
 
In Fishes, and Froggs, and the like, having 
but one ventricle of the heart (for in 
lieu of one ear they have a little bladder 
plac'd at the bottom of their heart full of 
blood) you shall most evidently see the 
bladder first contracted, and the contraction 
of the heart to ensue. 
 
Notwithstanding I thought fit to insert 
those things which were of a contrary 
course, the heart of an Eel, as also of some 
Fishes, and living creatures being tane out 
[^p.16^] 
beats without ears, nay though you cut it 
in pieces, you shall see the pieces when they 
are asunder contract and dilate themselves, 
so that such, after the motion of the ears, 
the heart does leap and beat: But this perchance 
is only proper to such creatures, w=ch.= 
are more tenacious of life, whose radical 
moisture is more glutinous fatter, tougher, 
and not so easie to be dissolv'd. This also 
does appear in the flesh of Eels, which after 
the skinning, exenteration, and cutting in 
pieces, retains motion. 
 
This is certain that upon a time trying 
an experiment upon a dove, after that the 
heart had quite left motion, and that the 
ears had a while given over, I wetted my 
finger with spittle, and being warmed kept 
it a while upon the heart, by this fomentation, 
as if it had received strength and life 
a fresh, the heart, and its ears began to 
move, to contract, and open, and did 
seem as it were recall'd back again from 
death. 
 
But besides all these I have often observ'd 
that after the heart it self, and even its 
right ear, had at the very point of death left 
off beating, there manifestly remain'd in the 
very blood which is in the right ear, an 
obscure motion, and a kind of inundation, 
and beating, that is to say, so long as it seemd 
to be possess'd with any blood or spirit. 
 
A thing of the like nature, in the first 
[^p.17^] 
generation of a living creature most evidently 
appears in a hens egg within seven 
days after her sitting, first of all there is 
in it a drop of blood, which moves, as Aristotle 
likewise observ'd, which receiving 
encrease, and the Chicken being formd in 
part, the ears of the heart are fashioned, 
which beating there is always life; then 
afterwards within a few days the body 
beginning to receive its lineaments, then 
likewise is the body of the heart framed, 
but for some days it appears whitish and 
without blood, nor doth it beat and move 
as the rest of the body; as also I have seen 
in a child after three moneths, the heart to 
be also form'd but whitish, and without 
blood; in the ears of which notwithstanding 
there was great store of blood, and of 
a crimson colour: so likewise in the egg 
when the Chick was new form'd, and encreased, 
the heart began likewse to encrease, 
and to have ventricles in which it began to 
receive blood and pass it through. 
 
So that is a man will more narrowly pry 
into the truth, he will not say, that the heart 
is the first thing that lives, and last that 
dies, but rather the ears (and in Snakes, 
Fishes, and such like creatures, the part 
which is instead thereof) and that it both 
lives before the heart, and dies after it. 
 
Nay its doubtful too, whether or no before 
them also the spirit and blood have an obscure 
[^p.18^] 
beating, which to me it seem'd to 
retain after death, or whether we may say 
that with this beating the life begins, seeing 
the Sperm, and prolifique Spirit, of 
all living creatures, goes from them with 
a kind of leaping, as if it self were a living 
creature, So Nature in death making as it 
were a recapitulation, returns upon her 
self with retrograde motion, from the end 
of her race to the beginning of it, from 
whence she first issues thither she returns, 
seeing the generation of living creatures, 
from not being a living creature, is to be a 
living creature, as from a non entitie to be 
and entitie, so by the same steps, corruption 
passes from an entitie to a non entitie; 
whence it is, that that which in living creatures 
is last made, fails first, and that which 
is first made, fails last. 
 
I have likewise observ'd, that there is 
really a heart in all animals, and not only 
(as Aristotle says) in the greater sort, and 
such as have blood, but likewise in lesser, 
and such as have none, as those that are 
crusted without, or have shels, as house-Snails, 
Crabfish, Crevises, Shrimps, and in 
many others, nay in Wasps, Hornets, and 
in Gnats by an optick glass made for the 
discovery of the least things, in the upper 
end of that place which is called their tail, 
I saw the heart beat, & shewed it to others. 
 
But in those creatures which have no 
[^p.19^] 
blood, the heart beats very slowly & with 
deliberate stroaks, as it does in other creatures 
which are dying, and is contracted leisurely, 
as in Snails is easie to discern, whose 
heart you shall find in the right side at the 
bottom of that Orifice, which it seems to 
open and shut for taking of air, and from 
whence it casts out foam, dissecting it at the 
top near the place which is answerable to 
the liver. 
 
But it is to be observed likewise, that in 
Winter, and colder seasons, some creatures 
which have no blood, such as is the Snail, 
have nothing which beats, but doe rather 
seem to be like plants; as likewise the rest, 
which for that cause are called Plant animals. 
It is likewise to be observed, that 
in all creatures which have hearts, there are 
ears likewise, or some thing answerable to 
them, and wheresoever the heart has two 
ventricles, there are two ears, but not contrarily. 
But if you observe the fashioning of 
a chick in the egg, first of all there is in it as 
I said only a bladder or drop of blood, which 
beats, and encreasing afterwards the heart 
is perfected; so in some creatures (as not 
reaching a further perfection) there is a 
certain little bladder only like a point, red 
or white, as the beginning of life, as in 
Bees, Wasps, Snails, Shrimps, Crevises. 
 
There is found here with us a sort of very 
little Fish, called in English, a Shrimp, 
[^p.20^] 
and in Low Dutch Een Garneel, usually taken 
in the Sea, and in the River of Thames, 
all the bodie of which is transparent: This 
little Fish I have often shewn in water to 
some of my speciall friends, so that we could 
clearly discern the motion of the heart in 
that creature, the outward parts nothing 
at all obstructing our sight, as if it had been 
through a window. In a Hens egg I 
shewed the first beginning of the Chick, 
like a little cloud, by putting an egg off 
which the shell was taken, into water warm 
and clear, in the midst of which cloud there 
was a point of blood which did beat, so little, 
that when it was contracted it disappeared, 
and vanish'd out of our sight, and in 
its dilatation, shew'd it self again, red, and 
small as the point of a needle; insomuch 
as betwixt being seen, & not being seen, as it 
were betwixt being, and not being, it did represent 
a beating, and the beginning of life. 
 
[}CHAP. V. 
The action and office of the motion of the 
Heart.}] 
 
I Confidently beleeve then, that out of 
these and the like observations, it will be 
found that the motion of the heart is after 
this manner. 
 
First of all the ear contracts it self, and 
in that contraction throws the blood with 
which it abounds, as the head spring of the 
[^p.21^] 
veins, and the cellar and cistern of bloud, 
into the ventricle of the heart, which being 
full, straightway the heart raises it self, stretches 
all the nerves, contracts the ventricles, 
and makes a pulsation: by which pulsation 
it continually thrusts that blood, (which by 
the ears is sent in) forth into the arteries, the 
right ventricle into the lungs, through that 
vessel which is called the vena arteriosa, but 
is indeed both in its place and function, and 
every thing else, an arterie; the left ventricle 
into the aorta, and so by the arteries into 
the whole body. 
 
Those two motions, the one of the ears, 
the other of the ventricles, are so done in a 
continued motion, as it were keeping a certain 
harmony, and number, that they are 
both done at the same time, and one onely 
motion appears, especially in hotter creatures, 
whilst they move with sudden motion. 
Nor is this otherwise done, than 
when in Engines, one wheel moving another, 
they seem all to move together; and 
in the lock of a piece, by the drawing of the 
spring, the flint falls, strikes the steel, fires 
the powder, enters the touch-hole, discharges, 
the balls flie out, pierces the mark, and 
all these motions by reason of the swiftnesse 
of them, appear in the twinkling of an eye: 
So likewise in the deglutition, the meat or 
drink is thrown into the jaws, the larinx is 
shut close, by its own muscles, and the Epiglottis, 
[^p.22^] 
the top of the weason, is lifted up, 
and opened by its muscles, just as a sack 
is raised to be filled, and opened that it may 
receive; it thrusts down the meat or drink 
being receiv'd, by the thwarting muscles, 
and with the long muscles sucks it down; yet 
notwithstanding that all these motions are 
made by severall and contradistinct organs, 
whilst they are don in harmony and order, 
seem but to make one motion and action, 
which they call swallowing. 
 
So it comes to passe clearly, in the motion 
and action of the heart, which is a kind 
of swallowing, and transfusion of blood out 
of the veins into the arteries. And if any 
man carefully observing this, shall diligently 
search the motion of the heart in the 
dissection of any living thing he shall see 
not only that which I have said, that the 
heart erects it self and makes one continued 
motion with the ears of it, but likewise a 
certain motion and inclination side-wayes, 
and an obscure leaning that way, in order 
to the draught of the right ventricle, so carrying 
on the work. As we may see when 
a Horse drinks, and swallows the water, at 
every gulp the water is sup'd down into the 
belly, which yeelds a certain noise and 
pulse to him that heeds him, and touches 
him; even so it comes to passe, that whilst 
some portion of the blood is drawn out of 
the veins into the arteries, there is a beating 
[^p.23^] 
which is heard within the breast. 
 
The motion of the heart then is after this 
manner, and the transfusion and propulsion 
by mediation of the arteries is one of 
the actions of the heart, so that the pulsation 
which we feel, is nothing else but only 
the impulsion of the blood by the heart. 
 
But whether or no the heart contribute 
any thing else to the blood, besides the transposition, 
local motion, and distribution of it, 
we must enquire afterwards, and collect out 
of other observations. Let this suffice for 
the present, that it is sufficiently evidenced, 
that in the beating of the heart the blood 
is transfused and drawn out of the veins, into 
the arteries, through the ventricles of the 
heart, & so distributed into the whole body 
 
But this all do in some manner grant 
and gather from the fabrick of the heart, 
and from the figure, place, and use of the 
Portals, yet stumbling as it were in a dark 
place, they seem to be dim-sighted, and 
clamper up divers things, which are contrary 
and inconsistent, and speak many things 
at random (as we shewed before.) One 
thing seemes to me to have been the chief 
cause of doubt and mistake in this businesse, 
which is, the contexture in a man of the 
heart and lungs; For when they did see 
the vena arteriosa, and the arteria venosa, 
comming likewise into the lungs, and there 
to disappear, it could not sink with them 
[^p.24^] 
either how the right ventricle should distribute 
the blood into the body, or how the 
left ventricle should draw it out of the vena 
Cava. This Galens words do testify in 
his book De plac. Hip. & Plat. 6. Where he 
inveighs against Erosistratus, concerning 
the beginning and use of the veins, and the 
concoction of the blood. You will answer 
(sayes he) that it is so ordained, that the 
blood be prepared in the Liver, and so carried 
to the Heart, there to receive its proper 
form and absolute perfection: which truly 
seems not without reason; for no perfect and 
great work is done suddenly, at one attempt, 
and gains all its refining from one instrument. 
Which if it be so, shew us another vessell 
which draws out the blood, being absolutely 
perfected from the heart, and disposes of it 
as the arteries doe of the spirits through the 
whole bodie. 
 
See here an opinion which carries reason 
with it left and rejected by Galen, because 
(besides not perceiving the passage,) he 
could not find a vessel which from the heart 
should distribute the blood into the whole 
body. 
 
But if at that time in the defence of that 
opinion (which is now ours, & in all things 
else agreeable to reason by Galens own 
confession) one should with his finger 
have pointed out the great Arterie dispensing 
the blood from the Heart into the 
[^p.25^] 
whole body, what would that Divine man, 
most ingenious, and most learned, have answered? 
I wonder whether he would have 
said that the arteries distribute Spirits and 
not blood certainly he should not by this? 
sufficiently have confuted a Erosistratus 
who did imagine the Spirits to be contained 
in the arteries only, but should in the 
mean time contradict himself, and basely 
deny that, which in one of his own books 
he stiffly maintains to be true, proves it by 
many and strong arguments, and by experiments 
demonstrats it, that blood is naturally 
contain'd in the arteries, and not Spirits. 
 
But if that Divine man, as he does often 
in the same place, do grant that all the arteries 
of the body do arise from the great arterie, 
and it from the heart, and professing 
likewise that those three pointed doors plac'd 
in the Orifice of the Aorta do hinder the 
return of the blood into the heart, and that 
nature had never ordain'd them for the 
best of our intralls, unless it had been for 
some speciall Office, I say, if the father of 
the Physicians should grant all these things, 
and in the same very words as he does in 
his forementioned book, I do not see how 
he could deny that the great arterie was 
such a vessel as did carry the blood, after 
it had received its absolute perfection, out 
of the heart into the whole body: Or perchance 
[^p.26^] 
he would stil continue to be doubtfull, 
(as all the rest since his time to this very 
day) because not seeing the contexture 
of the heart with the lungs he was ignorant 
of the ways by which the Blood could be 
carryed into the arteries, which doubt 
does not a little perplex the Anatomists 
when always in dissections they find the arteria 
venosa and the left ventricle full of 
thick knottie black blood, so that they are 
forc'd to affirm that the blood swets 
through the encloser of the heart from the 
right ventricle to the left; but this way I 
have sufficiently refuted already, therefore 
there must another way be prepared and 
laid open, which being found, there can, 
I imagine, be no difficulty, which can hinder 
any body from granting and confessing 
those things which I propounded before of 
the pulsation of the heart, and dispensation 
of the blood by the arteries into the whole 
body. 
 
[}CHAP. VI. 
By which ways the blood is carried out of the 
vena cava, into the arteries, or out of the 
right ventricle of the heart into the left.}] 
 
SInce it is probable, that the connexion 
of the heart with the lungs has given 
this occasion of mistake, they are to be 
blamed in this, who whilst they desire to 
give their verdict, to demonstrate, and 
[^p.27^] 
understand all parts of living creatures, 
look but into man only, and into him being 
dead too, and so do no more to the purpose, 
than those, who seeing the manner 
of Government in one Common wealth, 
frame Politicks, or they who knowing the 
nature of one piece of Land, beleeve that 
they understand agriculture, or as if from 
one Particular proposition, they should 
goe about to frame Universal arguments. 
 
Nevertheless were they but as well practis'd 
in the dissection of creatures, as 
they are in the Anatomie of mens carcases, 
this business, which keeps them all in doubt 
and perplexitie, would in my opinion 
seem clear without all difficultie. 
 
First of all in Fishes having but one ventricle 
of the heart (as having no lungs) the 
thing is clear enough. For it is certain, that 
it may be confirmd before our eys, that the 
bladder of blood, which they have at the 
bottom of the heart, answerable to the 
ear of the heart, sends the blood into the 
heart, and that the heart does afterward, 
through a pipe or arterie, or something answering 
to an artery, openly transfuse it, both 
by our own view, and also by cutting the arterie, 
the blood leaping out upon every 
pulsation of the heart. 
 
You may likewise see the same afterward 
easily in all other creatures, in which there 
is but one ventricle only, or something answerable 
[^p.28^] 
to it, as in the Toad, Frogg, Serpents, 
house-Snails, which although they 
are said in some manner to have lungs, because 
they have a voice (of the frame of 
whose lungs I have many observations by 
me, which are not proper for this place) 
yet from our own eye sight it is clear, after 
the same manner in them that the blood 
by the pulsation of the heart is brought out 
of the veins into the arteries, the way of 
it open, patent, manifest, no occasion or 
doubt of difficulty at all. For the case is just 
so with them, as it might be with a man, 
the enclosure of whose heart were pierced 
through, or taken away, and so both the 
ventricles become one, I beleeve no man 
then would doubt which way the blood 
should go out of the veins, into the arteries. 
 
And seeing there are more creatures 
which have no lungs, than there are which 
have, and more which have but one ventricle, 
than there are which have two, we 
may very well aver for the most part, and 
almost in all, that the blood is transfus'd 
out of the veins, into the arteries, through 
the bosom of the heart by an open passage. 
 
But I conceiv'd with my self that it is 
plainly seen too in those Embryons which 
have hearts. 
 
In a birth there are four vessells of 
the heart the vena cava, the vena arteriosa, 
arteria venalis, and the aorta, or arteria 
[^p.29^] 
magna, and are otherwise united then in 
one come to age, which all Anatomists 
know well enough. 
 
The first touch and union of the vena 
cava with the arteria venosa, which comes 
to passe before the vena cava opens it self 
into the right ventricle of the hart, or sends 
out the Coronal vein, a little above its outgoing 
from the liver, displays unto us its 
orifice side-wayes, that is to say, a hole, 
wide and large, of an oval figure, made 
through passagable, from the vena cava 
into that Arterie: Insomuch as through 
that hole the blood may freely and abundantly 
passe out of the vena cava, into the 
arteria venosa, and the left ear of the heart, 
and so to the left ventricle. There is moreover 
against that place which lookes towards 
the arteria venosa a membrane thin 
and hard, like a cover, which afterwards in 
those which grow to riper years, covering 
this hole, and growing together every way, 
does quite stop it, and takes away almost 
all signe of it. This [/3./] membrane, I say, is so 
ordained, that hanging loosely with its own 
weight, it makes way into the lungs, and 
heart, and is turned up giving passage to 
the blood which flows from the vena cava, 
but hinders it from flowing back into the 
cæva again. So that from hence we may imagin 
in an Embryon, that the bloud ought 
continually to passe through this hole into 
[^p.30^] 
the arteria venosa, out of the vena cava, and 
so into the left ear of the heart, and after it 
is enter'd, that it can never return. 
 
The other union is that of the vena arteriosa, 
(which comes to passe after that that 
vein comming out of the right ventricle, is 
divided into two branches) and it is as it 
were a third trunk, or arterial conduit-pipe, 
diverse from the two former, from hence 
crookedly drawn, and perforate into the 
Arteria magna; so that in the dissection of 
Embryons, there appears as it were two aortas, 
or two roots of the great arterie. This 
conduit likewise in those that come to riper 
age is attenuated by little and little, and 
fades away, and at last is quite dryed up, 
& lost, like the Umbilical vein. This arterial 
conduit-pipe hath no membrane to hinder 
the motion of blood backward, or forward, 
for there are in the orifice of that vena 
arteriosa, of which this conduit-pipe as I said 
before is a branch, three [/4./] doors of the fashion 
of a [^Greek letter sigma omitted.^]. which appear outwardly and inwardly, 
and doe easily give passage to the 
blood flowing into the right ventricle by 
this way, but on the contrary hinder any 
thing which may flow from the arterie or 
the lungs into the right ventricle, which 
they shut very close: So that here we have 
reason to think, that in an Embrion when 
the heart contracts it self, the blood must 
alwayes be carryed out of the right ventricle 
[^p.31^] 
into the arteria magna by this way. 
 
In answer to that which is commonly 
spoken, that these two conjunctions, so 
great, so open, so wide, were made for the 
nourishing of the lungs, and that in those 
who arive to riper age, when the lungs by 
reason of their heat and motion require 
more abundant nutriment, they should be 
tane away, and made up, is an invention improbable, 
and inconsistent. And that is 
likewise false which they say of the heart 
of an Embryon, that it is idle and does 
nothing, moves not at all: whence it comes 
to passe, that Nature was forc'd for the norishing 
of the lungs to make those passages; 
when by our own eys it is made plain to us, 
that both in an egg whereon a Hen hath 
sate, and in Embryons newly cut out of 
the womb, the heart doth move as in those 
of riper age; and likewise, that Nature is 
pressed with no such necessity: Of which 
motion not only these my eyes have often 
been Witnesses, but likewise Aristotle him 
self affirms; The pulse (says he) appears at 
the very beginning in the constitution of the 
heart, which is found in the dissection of living 
creatures, and by an egg in the forming of the 
Chick. But we also observe, that those 
passages are open and free, aswell in men, 
as also in other creatures, not only to the 
time of the birth, which the Anatomists 
have observ'd, but likewise many moneths 
[^p.32^] 
after: yea in some for many years, if not all 
their life-time, as in the Goose, and very 
many Birds. Which thing perchance did 
deceive Botallus, so that he affirm'd, That 
he had found a new passage for the blood, 
out of the vena cava into the left ventricle 
of the heart. And I doe confesse, That 
when I my self first found this in a Rat of 
full growth, that I did imagine some such 
thing. From which it is understood, that 
in the unripe births of mankind, and likewise 
in others, in which these unions are 
not taken away, this very thing falls out, 
that the heart by its motion brings forth 
the blood from the vena cava openly, and 
by very patent ways, by the drawing of 
both its ventricles. For the right receiving 
the blood from the ear, thrusts it forth 
through the vena arteriosa, and its branch 
called canalis arteriosus, into the great arterie. 
Likewise, the left at the same time 
by the mediation of the motion of the ear, 
receives that blood, which is brought into 
the left ear through that oval hole from 
the vena cava, and by its tention and constriction 
thrusts it through the root of the 
Aorta into the great arterie likewise. So 
in Embryons whilst the lungs are idle, and 
have no action nor motion (as if there were 
none at all) Nature makes use of both the 
ventricles of the heart, as of one for transmission 
of blood. And so the condition 
[^p.33^] 
of Embryons that have lungs and make no 
use of them, is like to the condition of those 
creatures which have none at all. 
 
Therefore in these likewise the truth appears 
as clearly, that the heart by its pulsation 
brings forth, and transfuses the 
blood out of the vena cava, into the great 
arterie, and by as open ways as if both the 
ventricles (as I said before) were made 
pervious to one another, by taking away 
the partition betwixt them. Therefore seeing 
for the most part these wayes are open 
in all creatures at some times, which do 
serve for transmission of blood through 
the heart, it now remains that we enquire 
either why in some creatures, as in men, and 
those hotter, and of riper age, we do hold 
that not to be performed through the substance 
of the lungs, which nature did before 
in an Embryon through those passages (at 
that time when there was no use of lungs,) 
which she seems to have made of force 
for want of passage through the lungs. 
Or why it is better that Nature (for Nature 
always does that which is best) hath altogether 
shut up those open ways, of which 
she before made use in the Embryon, and in 
the birth, and in all other creatures does 
make use of, nor in the lieu of them hath 
found out any other passage for the blood, 
but hinders it altogether after this manner. 
 
So then the business is arriv'd to this, that 
[^p.34^] 
to those who search for the veins in men 
(by which the blood passes out of the vena 
cava in the left ventricle, and into the 
arteria venosa) it were more worthy 
their pains, and wiselier done, if from the 
dissection of living creatures they would 
search the truth, why in greater, and 
more perfect creatures, and those of riper 
age, nature would rather have the blood 
to be squeezed through the streyner of the 
lungs, than through most patent passages, 
as in other crearures: and then they would 
understand that no other way nor passage 
could be excogitated. 
 
Whether this be, because that greater 
and perfecter creatures are hotter, and 
when they come to be of age, their heat is 
apter to be suffocated and to be inflamed, 
and therefore the blood is streynd and sent 
through the lungs that it may be temperd 
by breathing in the air upon it, and freed 
from over-heating and suffocation, or some 
such other thing. But to determine and 
give a reason of this is nothing else but 
a search for what the lungs were made. 
And thus much concerning them and their 
use, & all manner of cooling, of the necessity 
& use of air, & the like, of several and different 
organs made in animals. For this cause 
although by observation I have found out 
a great many things, yet lest I should seem 
by straying from my purpose, of the motion 
[^p.35^] 
of the heart, to go besides my intention, 
and leave my task to confute the business, 
and decline it; I shall leave these things fitter 
to be set forth in a Treatise by themselves; 
and that I may return to my former 
purpose, I will goe on to prove what remains. 
And first I prove, that in the more 
perfect Animals, and those come to age, as 
in Man, the blood may passe from the right 
ventricle of the heart by the vena arteria, 
into the lungs, and from thence through 
the arteria venosa into the left ear, and from 
thence into the left ventricle of the heart, 
and then that it is so. 
 
[}CHAP. VII. 
That the blood does passe from the right ventricle 
of the heart, through the streyner of 
the lungs, into the arteria venosa, and 
left ventricle of the heart.}] 
 
IT is well enough known that this may be, 
and that there is nothing which can hinder, 
if we consider which way the water 
passing through the substance of the earth, 
doth procreate Rivulets and Fountains; or 
if we do consider how sweat passes through 
the skin, or how urine flowes through the 
streyner of the reins: It is to be taken notice 
of in those that make use of the waters 
of the Spaw, or de la Madonna, as they call 
them in Padua, or other brackish or vitriolated 
[^p.36^] 
waters; or those who in carrowsing 
swill themselves with drink, that in an 
hour or two they pisse all this through 
their bladder. This great quantity ought 
to stay a while in concoction, it ought to 
flow through the liver, (as they confesse 
that the juyce of the nourishment we receive 
doth twice a day) so ought it through 
the veins, through the streyner of the reins, 
and through the ureters into the bladder. 
 
Those therefore which I hear denying, 
that blood, yea the whole masse of blood, 
may passe through the substance of the 
lungs, as well as the nutritive juice through 
the liver, as if it were impossibe, and no 
wayes to be beleeved: It is to be thought 
that those kind of men, I speak with the Poet, 
where they like, they easily grant, where 
they like not, by no means: Here where 
need is, they are afraid, but where no need 
is they are not afraid to aver. The streyner 
of the liver, and of the reins too, is 
much thicker than that of the lungs, because 
they are far thinner woven, and of 
a spongious substance, if they be compared 
to the liver and reins. 
 
In the liver there is no impulsive, no 
strength forcing; in the lungs, the blood is 
thrust against them by the impulsion of the 
right ventricle of the heart, by which impulsio~ 
there must necessarily follow a distensio~, 
of the vessels, and porosities of the lungs. 
[^p.37^] 
Besides, the lungs in respiration rise and fall, 
Galen de usu part. By which motio~ it follows 
of necessity, that the porosities of them and 
their vessels are open'd and shut, as it falls 
out in sponges, & all things of a spongy substance 
when they are constricted and dilated 
again; On the contrary, the liver is at 
rest, nor is it seen at any time to be so constricted 
and dilated. 
 
Last of all, Since through the liver, there is 
none but affirms, that the juice of all things 
we receive may passe into the vena cava, 
both in Men, Oxen, or the greatest creatures, 
and that for this reason, because it 
must passe some way into the veins if there 
be any nutrition, and there is no other way, 
and for that cause they are forced to affirm 
this: Why should they not likewise believe 
this of the passage of the blood through the 
lungs in men come to age, upon the same arguments? 
And with Columbus, a most 
skilful and learned Anatomist, believe and 
assert the same from the structure and 
largenesse of the lungs; because that the 
Arteria venosa, and likewise the ventricle, 
are alwayes full of blood, which must needs 
come hither out of the veins, by no other 
path, but through the lungs; as both he and 
we from our words before, our own eyesight, 
and other Arguments, do believe 
to be clear: 
 
But seeing there are some such persons 
[^p.38^] 
which admit of nothing, unlesse there be an 
authority alleged for it: let them know, 
that the very same truth may be proved 
from Galens own words, that is to say, not 
onely that the blood may be transfused out 
of the vena arteriosa, into the arteria venosa, 
and thence into the left ventricle of the 
heart, and afterwards transmitted into the 
arteries; but also that this is done by a 
continued pulse of the heart, & motio~ of the 
lungs, whilst we breath. There are in the orifice 
of the vena arteriosa 3. shuts, or doors, 
made like a [^Greek letter sigma omitted.^], or half-Moon w=ch= altogether 
hinder the blood sent into the vena arteriosa 
to return to the heart, which all know. 
 
Galen expresses the use and necessity of 
those shuts, in these words, De usu part: 6. 
Cap. 10. In all (sayes he) there is a mutual 
Anastomosis or opening of the veins, together 
with the arteries, in their kissing, and they 
borrow both blood and spirit from one another 
by invisible and very narrow passages. But 
if the very mouth of the Vena Arteriosa had 
alwayes stood open, and Nature had found no 
device to shut it, when it was requisite, and to 
open it again, it could never have come to 
passe that by those invisible and little kisses, 
the Thorax being contracted, the blood could 
be transfused into the arteries. For every 
thing is not from any thing extracted and emitted 
after the same manner; for as that 
which is light is easilier attracted than that 
[^p.39^] 
which is heavy, by dilatation of the instruments, 
and by the constriction is squeezed out 
again; so any thing is easier attracted through 
a broad passage, tha~ through a narrow passage, 
and so sent forth again. But when the Thorax 
is contracted, the Arteriæ Venosæ which 
are in the Lungs, being on every side pulsated, 
and compress'd together strongly, doe 
squeeze out very quickly the spirit that is in 
them, and doe borrow through those fine touches 
a part of the blood, which truly could never 
come to passe, if through that great opening, 
such as is the Vena Arteriosa, the blood 
could return back to the Heart: Now the return 
of it through that great mouth being 
stop'd, some of it through those small orifices 
does drop into the Arteries, it being press'd 
every way And a little after in the following 
Chapter, How much the more 
the Thorax endeavours to squeeze out 
the blood, so much the more those Membranes, 
that is to say those three Sygma-like 
doors, do closlier shut the mouth of it, and suffer 
nothing to return. Which he says likewise 
in the same tenth Chapter a little before. 
Unlesse there were doors there would 
follow a three fold inconvenience, for so the 
blood should make such a long journey but in 
vain, by flowing in the Diastoles of the Lungs, 
and filling all the veins in the~, in the Systoles, 
as it were a neap tide, like Euripus reciprocating 
its motion again and again, hither and 
[^p.40^] 
thither, which would not be convenient for the 
blood: But this may seem no great matter, 
but that in the mean time it should weaken 
the benefit of respiration, this is no more to be 
counted as a small business. And a little after, 
And likewise the third inconvenience 
would follow, no slight one, when in our 
breathing our blood should return backwards, 
unlesse our Maker had ordain'd the naturall 
position of those Membranes. Whence he 
concludes, ch. 2. Indeed the use of all the shuts 
or portals is the same, to hinder the return of 
the matter, & either of the~ have a proper use, 
to draw matter from the heart, that they may 
return no more, and to draw matters into the 
heart, that they may goe no more from thence. 
For Nature would not have the heart to be 
wearied with needless travel, nor send thither 
whence it was better to extract, nor extract 
from thence again whither it was better 
to send. For which cause there being four 
orifices onely, two in either Ventricle, one 
takes in, the other drawes forth. And a little 
after. Furthermore, when one of the vessels 
consisting of but of one Tunicle is implanted 
into the Heart, and the other consisting 
of a double Tunicle is drawn forth from it, 
viz. (The right ventricle Galen means, so 
do I the left ventricle by the same reason) 
It was needfull that there should be as it were 
a cistern to both, to which both of them belonging, 
that the blood might be drawn out by 
[^p.41^] 
one, and sent out by the other. 
 
That argument which Galen brings for 
the passages of the blood through the 
right ventricle out of the vena cava into 
the lungs, we may more rightly use for the 
passages of the blood out of the veins 
through the heart into the arteries changing 
only the terms. 
 
It does theerefore clearly appear from 
the words and places of Galen, a divine man, 
father of Physicians, both that the blood 
doth pass from the vena arteriosa into the 
little branches of the arteria venosa, both 
by reason of the pulse of the heart and also 
because of the motion of the lungs and thorax: 
See the commentarie of the most learned 
Hofmannus upon the sixth Book of Galen 
de usu Part. which book I saw after I 
had written these things. 
 
Furthermore it was necessary that the 
heart should receive the blood continually 
into the ventricles, as in a pond or cistern, 
and send it forth again: and for this reason 
it was necessary that it should be serv'd 
with four locks or doors, whereof two 
should serve for the intromission and two 
for the emission of blood, lest either the 
blood like and Euripus, should inconveniently 
be driven up and down, or goe back 
thither from whence it were fitter to be 
drawn, and flow from that part to which 
it was needfull it should have been sent, and 
[^p.42^] 
so should be wearied with idle travell, and 
the breathing of the lungs be hindred. Lastly 
our assertion appears clearly to be true, 
that the blood does continually & incessantly 
flow through the porosities of the 
lungs, out of the right ventricle into the 
left, out of the vena cava into the arteria 
magna; for seeing the blood is continually 
sent out of the right ve~tricle into the lungs 
through the vena arteriosa, and likewise is 
continually attracted out of the lungs into 
the left, which appears by that which has 
been spoken, and the position of the Portalls, 
it cannot be, but that it must needs 
pass through continually. 
 
And likewise seeing that always, and 
without intermission, the blood enters into 
the right ventricle of the heart, and goes 
out, (which is likewise manifest, of the left 
ventricle, both by reason and sense) it is 
impossible but that the blood should pass 
continually through, out of the vena cava 
into the Aorta. 
 
That therefore which is apparent to be 
done in most, and really in all whilst they 
are growing to age, by dissection through 
most open passages, is here likewise manifest 
to come to pass in those when they are 
ariv'd to full age, by the hidden porosities 
of the lungs, and touches of its vessels, both 
by Galens words, and that which has been 
spoken: From whence it appears, that albeit 
[^p.43^] 
it one ventricle of the heart, that is the left, 
were sufficient for the dispensation of the 
blood through the whole body, and the eduction 
of it out of the vena cava (as it is in 
all creatures which want lungs) Yet Nature 
desiring that the blood should be strained 
through the lungs, was forc'd to add the 
right ventricle, by whose pulse the blood 
should be forcd through the very lungs out 
of the vena cava into the receptacle of the 
left ventricle: and so it is to be said that the 
left ventricle was made for the lungs sake, 
and not for nutrition only; seeing in such 
an abundance of victuall, adding to it the 
help of compulsion, it is no ways to be believ'd 
that the lungs should rather want 
so much aliment and that of blood so much 
more pure and full of spirit, as being immediately 
conveyd from the ventricles of the 
heart, than either the most pure substance of 
the brain, or the most resplendent and divine 
constitution of the eyes, or the flesh 
of the heart it self, which is more fitly nourished 
by the vena coronalis. 
 
