[^Wiseman, Richard: Of wounds^] 
 
[}A 
TREATISE 
OF 
WOUNDS.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 339-354^] 
 
[^p.339^] 
[}OF 
WOUNDS. 
 
The Fifth Book.}] 
 
[}CHAP. I. 
Of WOUNDS in general.}] 
 
A WOUND is a Solution of continuity in any Part of the body suddenly 
[/1./] 
made, by any thing that cuts or tears, with a division of the 
Skin. 
 
This Definition differs much from what is usually delivered by Authors; 
and it is fit it should. For they generally defining a Wound by a Solution in 
parte molli, do thereby exclude a Cut made into a Bone, as that into the Cranium 
by a Pole-Axe, &c. which why it should not be called a Wound I know 
not. I say, it is made by any thing that cuts or tears. Other Authors define 
it to be made by an external Instrument, &c. How then do they call that 
fracturam cum vulnere, a Fracture with a Wound, where the Bone from 
within makes the Wound, and thrusts it self quite through the Flesh? Sennertus 
adds to his Definition, that it be done a re secante & acuta: yet he reckons 
those for Wounds that are made by Bullets, although it be Cannon-shot. 
I do therefore think it fit to make my Definition more comprehensive, and to 
take in whatsoever makes a sudden Solution of a continuity, at least immediately 
and by it self, on what Part soever it lighteth. So a Cut into a Bone is a 
Wound: Tearing the Flesh, Nerve, Sinew, Tendon or Cartilage, by Bullet, 
Stone, Splinter, &c. is a Wound. Only I add this restriction, that the Skin 
must be likewise divided: by which last words I exclude Fractures that come 
not through the Skin, and Contusions if the exteriour Parts be continuous. 
But by the word Skin I understand not only the external Cutis, but also the 
inward Membranes of the Gullet, Ventricle, Guts, Bladder, Urethra, and 
Womb; all which are capable of Wounds from sharp Instruments, either 
swallowed, or thrust into them. 
 
A Wound thus defined admits of many Differences, of which I know none 
[/2./] 
that can be properly called essential. Great or small, deep or shallow, wide 
or narrow, straight or crooked, round or angular, are but accidental Differences. 
Distinctions taken from the Weapons, whether sharp or blunt, Sword, 
[^p.340^] 
Rapier, or Bullet, Cut, Prick, or Tearing, are likewise but accidental. Those 
that look most like essential Differences are they which are taken from the 
Subject in which the Wound (which is it self but an Accident) inhereth, 
viz. from the Flesh, Skin, Brain, Nerve, Tendon, Artery, Vein, Gristle, 
Bone, &c. All which, being the several Subjects of Wounds, may well be 
allowed to specifie them; and so much the rather, because from the nature of 
them we raise our greatest Indications of altering the method of Cure. To 
this Head may likewise be referred the division of them into Simple, or 
Compound. 
 
Wounds are in themselves so visible, that they need no general Marks to 
[/3./] 
be known by. But the peculiar affections of the particular Parts hurt, and 
the methods of discovering what inward Part is wounded, by observation 
made of the Symptoms that happen, are fully handled in those Chapters 
which treat of the Wounds of the several Parts. 
 
[/4./] 
The Prognosticks are there also delivered, that the young Chirurgeon may 
be informed how to make judgement of them, and avoid the ingaging himself 
in promising a Cure of such Wounds as are mortal. The greater Symptoms 
of Gangræna, Paralysis, and Spasmus, I have translated to Gunshot-wounds, 
they being there more frequent and usual. Hæmorrhagiæ are spoken 
of in this present Treatise. 
 
The Wound being a Solution of continuity, doth require to be made one 
[/5./] 
again, Unity being the perfection of whatsoever hath a being. To effect 
this is the work of Nature and Art; both must mutually joyn their helping 
hands: and unless both the vital Faculties and nourishment of the Part do 
assist the Art of the Chirurgeon, it will be lost labour: here must be a joynt 
meeting and agreement of all in one. 
 
In Simple Wounds the Chirurgeon is to afford his assistence five manner 
of ways; the omitting of any one of which will render him negligent or ignorant 
in his Trade. 
 
The first is, in careful and diligent taking away all such extraneous bodies 
as by their interposition may hinder the true Agglutination of the disjoyned 
Parts, whether they be concrete Bloud, Hair, Sand, Dust, pieces of Bones, 
Cartilages, or pieces of Weapons, Rags, &c. 
 
The second is, in bringing the Lips of the Wound even together, which 
were separated. 
 
The third is, in retaining the Lips so brought together, that they may by 
Consolidation be restored to their former figure. 
 
The fourth is, in conserving the Temperament and natural Heat of the 
Part, in order to Unition. 
 
The fifth is, in preventing ill Accidents, and correcting such as have already 
seized on the Part. 
 
Thus much is required if the Wound be only Simple: but if it be a Compound 
[/6./] 
Wound, with loss of Substance, or Contusion, then he hath somewhat 
more to do. As where there is loss of Substance, there he must assist 
Nature with his Sarcoticks, for regaining what is lost: and where there is 
Contusion, there he must endeavour the turning what is contused into Pus 
or Matter, which must be performed before there can possibly be any Reunion. 
 
As long as there is any strange body or different substance to keep off the 
[/7./] 
Unition, you must not hope to make any Cure of a Wound. Therefore 
if any such be to be drawn forth, before you attempt it, consider seriously, 
first, whether it can be done or no; secondly, whether safely. 
 
For, first, sometimes the Weapon sticketh so fast, that by no art it can be 
[^p.341^] 
extracted. Then it is of necessity to be left to Nature, who in this case sometimes 
worketh Miracles. For I have known pieces of Splinters, &c. sometimes 
stick so fast in the inward Parts, or to have been so inclosed, that we 
could by no means get them out: yet at length, upon Apostemation of the 
Part, they have thrust forth. 
 
Secondly, you are to consider whether you may with safety pluck out the 
Weapon or no. Some will live a day with the Weapon in their Body, who 
would expire upon the moment of Extraction. But if your judgement suggest 
to you that the Patient is recoverable, make hast, out with it before the Part 
be inflamed. 
 
If the Weapon have pierced deep, and through great Vessels and Nervous 
[/8./] 
places; or if the Part opposite to it be full of Veins, Arteries and Nerves, 
or have a Bone lying in the way, or over against the Wound; if there be no 
great fear of Laceration, pull it out the same way it went in. For the effecting 
of which, our Masters have left us variety of Instruments, the Figure and 
Use whereof you may see in Scultetus. But if the Point of the Weapon have 
pierced above half way through the Member, and there be no Bones nor notable 
Vessels to hinder you, (here is use of your Anatomy and exact knowledge 
of the Parts,) either thrust the Weapon through, or make way for 
it by Incision on the contrary side: but beware the Weapon be not too big, 
lest you do make two large Wounds for one. 
 
If the Weapon stick in the Bone, move it up and down to loosen its Point, 
[/9./] 
and then pluck it out: but in case it will not move, cut away the Bone before 
you extract it. 
 
If a Weapon be fastened betwixt two Joynts, make an Extension of the 
[/10./] 
Parts both ways, as it is the manner in Fractures and Dislocations, that so the 
Tendons and Ligaments being stretched, the Weapon may with more ease 
come out. But do this with moderation, lest you break some notable Vessels, 
and a Flux of bloud or some ill Accident befall you in your extracting 
it. It will be necessary in this work, that you consider the position the Part 
was in when the Wound was inflicted. Gesner hath a Story, in his Observat. 
de Chirurgiæ dignitate & præstantia, of a Chirurgeon, who when he could 
by no means get forth an Arrow, asked the wounded Patient in what posture 
of his body he received the Wound. Understanding it was done on 
Horseback, he placed him in a riding posture, and immediately drew out 
the Weapon. 
 
The Weapon thus drawn out, cleanse it from Rags or ought else, and permit 
the Wound to bleed, accordingly as you in your judgement shall think fit, 
still having respect to the Constitution and Habit of body, that what is in the 
small Veins cut asunder may flow out, as well to hinder Inflammation, as 
the generation of much Matter. The Bleeding staid, if there be Hair growing 
about the Wound, shave it off: then wipe away the clotted Bloud with 
a Sponge dipt in Red wine, Oxycrate, or Water. But if it stick deep in the 
Wound, be not too busie with your armed Probe, for thereby you may stir 
up a new Bleeding; whereas this concreted Bloud keeps the Wound warm, 
and defends it from the outward Air; and by digestion Nature will thrust 
it forth. 
 
The second Intention is performed by bringing the Lips of the Wound exactly 
[/11./] 
together. 
 
This Intention is delivered in a few words, but they are to be observed as a 
Law; for without that Reduction of the Lips, a slow and deformed Healing 
follows. Nature hath nothing to do here in bringing the Lips together, that 
is the sole work of the Chirurgeon; who must not lay a Pledgit, or croud a 
[^p.342^] 
Dossil of Lint or Tent into a little Wound: no, that is the way to keep the 
Wound open, and make it painful, whereby Defluxions are stirred up, the 
Temperament of the Part weakened, and the Cure prolonged; contrary to 
the intention of all who have writ of Wounds, and to the practice of our 
knowing Chirurgeons here. Yet amongst the Pretenders to that Art we 
often meet with such work. As for instance: 
 
A Young man was wounded near High-gate in the Back, slanting under 
[/12./] 
the right Scapula; he had another Wound also on the Back, and another 
through the upper part of the left Shoulder, with a long Gash over the Forehead, 
and others besides, some whereof were not considerable. The next day 
being carried thither to dress these Wounds, I found them all distended with 
Tents and Dossils of Lint, disposed to inflame and swell, and the Patient exceeding 
full of pain. After I had taken out these extraneous bodies, my endeavour 
was to dress them so, as I might incline their upheaved Lips to return 
to their natural site. To which purpose I fomented them with Milk, 
and applied Pledgits spred with a Digestive ex terebinth. cum vitell. ovi, embrocating 
them with ol. ros. then by empl. e bolo, and Bandage with gentle 
Compression, I drest him up; and afterwards here in Town cured him by 
Sarcoticks and Epuloticks, as in Compound Wounds; a longer work, which 
at first ought to have been done by Agglutination. Parts separated and disjoyned 
are to be brought together gently and equally, that they may touch 
one another, and so be prepared for Unition. 
 
This must be done ( I say) first gently; sensim & sensim, as Fallopius hath 
[/13./] 
it, by little and little; not hastily at one pluck. If the Parts be equally soft, 
bring them equally together: if the one soft, the other hard, and not to be 
moved but with difficulty, bring the soft part to the stubborn. If the Parts 
be grown stiff with cold, as when the party hath been left in the field all 
night, which after a Battel hath often happened, (and particularly to a merry 
fellow, a common Souldier, that used to wear an iron Scull under a Cap, 
and from thence was called by a Nick-name; his Wounds were large, and the 
Lips hardened with the cold, and it was well for him, his Bleeding being 
thereby stayed;) in this case you are to supple them by fomenting them with 
Milk or warm Water, or else embrocate them with Oil, till you perceive 
the Lips made soft enough for your purpose, before you endeavour Reunion. 
 
Secondly, equally, that the Parts cut asunder may answer one another, as 
[/14./] 
well in the top as the bottom, brim to brim, and, if possible, underneath Vessel 
to Vessel; that Nature may be in a capacity of doing its own work, and 
by virtue of its Balsam re-unite, agglutinate, consolidate, and heal the 
Wounds: in all which Intentions she is the Agent, and the Chirurgeon 
only the Assistent. Which Assistence that it may be the more effectually 
given, we must go on to the Third. 
 
The Third Intention is, Deligation, or retaining the Parts so joyned together. 
[/15./] 
 
For the effecting of this, our famous Masters have left us two principal 
means, Fasciæ and Suturæ, Rowling and Stitching: to which some, nay most 
of them, added Fibulas, or Clasps. But I will not put you upon that. If the 
[/16./] 
Wound be small, and in a Fleshy part, & according to the length of the Fibres 
or Member, you may perform the Cure by Bandage; for here Nature will 
truly act her part, by application of bloud and nourishment to both sides indifferently, 
and finish the Coalitus without your farther assistence. And this is 
that which gives such credit to the Sympathetick Powder. In the application 
of this, it becomes every Chirurgeon to be much experienced, in 
[^p.343^] 
respect of the unspeakable commodities which the whole Art receiveth 
thereby. 
 
By Bandage not only are Parts dextrously accomodated for Union; but 
[/17./] 
such also as would unnaturally grow together are kept asunder. In Burnings, 
Scaldings, &c. the Fingers would many times grow together, the Chin 
would grow to the Breast, the Arms to the Sides, were they not this way 
hindred. By them are Fluxes averted, and the delapse of Humours into the 
interiour Parts forbidden; and, being already lodged, they are prest out. By 
these are good Juices advantageously forced into Parts emaciated. As, if the 
right Arm pine away, rowl up the left from the Hand to the Arm-pit, that 
the Bloud being prest out into the Vena cava, or rather hindred to flow in so 
fast by the Artery, may with more eagerness flow into the other side, where 
it was wanting. By these we see great Fluxes of bloud, large Hæmorrhagiæ 
every day stayed. By them are ill-shaped Wounds brought into better figures, 
and made more apt to be cured. By them is the force of your Applications 
helpt and furthered, they keeping them close to their proper places, 
where your care hath bestowed them. By them is the true natural form and 
beauty of the Part commonly preserved. 
 
Three especial sorts of Fasciation or Rowling, pertaining to our present 
[/18./] 
work, have the Worthies of our Profession commended to posterity. The 
first they term Incarnatrix or Agglutinatrix, the Incarnative or Agglutinative: 
the second, Retentrix, or Retentive: the third, Expultrix, or Expulsive. 
 
The Incarnative is that which brings the Lips of the Wound together, and 
[/19./] 
conserveth them in their right figure. It must be more strict than the Retentive, 
and more loose than the Expulsive; and is the most useful in simple, 
fresh, and yet bleeding Wounds. The manner of performing it is 
thus. 
 
Have in readiness a Rowler of such matter, length and breadth as I shall 
anon shew you; rowl it up at both ends firmly to the middle; then lay the 
middle part of the Rowler on that part which is opposite to the Wound, to 
prevent pain and inflammation. You are then, after you have made a turn 
upon the Wound with both ends of the Rowler, to go up with the one, and 
down with the other, and take so many turns about the Part as may be requisite 
for the restraining the Flux of bloud, or, according to the Season of the 
year, to defend it from cold, and yet not keep the Wound too hot, for that 
may weaken the Part. You must also be careful that your Bandage be not 
too hard, so as to intercept the Spirits. Your Rowler running downwards 
will press out the Matter from the affected Part, and by passing upward 
hinder the influx of Humours. 
 
The Fascia Retentrix is used to keep your Dressings on close about the 
[/20./] 
Wound. They for the most part are only of use in Wounds of the Head. 
There must be a moderation in binding with this Bandage. 
 
Fascia Expulsiva is performed by a Rowler of one hand: the special use of 
[/21./] 
it is, to expel Matter out of Fistula's or Sinuous Ulcers; as also to prevent the 
descent of Humours, and to expel such as have already seated themselves upon 
the Part wounded or otherwise. Do it in the manner following. 
 
Begin in the sound part, beneath the seat of the Humours, and rowl upward 
[/22./] 
pretty streight at first, and by degrees; as you come nearer the Mouth 
of the Wound, gentlier and gentlier. If you will press out the Matter contained 
in the Cavity of the Wound, you must rowl loosely there a turn or 
two, then harder, and yet a little streighter, the higher you go, to hinder the 
descent of Humours; but not too hard, for fear of harm. Terminus fit bona laborantis 
[^p.344^] 
tolerantia; Celsus: Let it be made with such moderation, as the 
Patient may well endure it. Hippocrates de Offic. Medic. Vinculorum aliud per 
se (saith he) remedio est, aliud iis quæ remedio sunt subservit: Amongst Ligatures, 
some of themselves are Remedies, others are servants to Remedies. 
And true it is in these: for the Incarnative and Expulsive are in themselves, 
as you may perceive, Remedies; and the Retentive the common servant to 
them all. 
 
To these Fallopius, in Tract. de Vulneribus in genere, adds four more; viz. 
[/23./] 
1. Fasciam disjunctionis, 2. Fasciam directionis, 3. Fasciam facientem Apostema, 
4. Fasciam prohibentem Apostema. 
 
1. Fascia disjunctionis. By this Rowling Parts are kept from joyning together, 
as the Fingers when they are bared of the Cutis. 
 
2. Fascia directionis is that which assisteth in making of a crooked Part 
straight, or bendeth a Part unnaturally straight to his proper figure. 
 
3. Fascia faciens Apostema is that which will cure an Aposteme, by summoning 
the Matter up into one part, which might perhaps dangerously flow 
into others, and those more principal. 
 
4. Fascia prohibens Apostema is that which forbiddeth the collection of 
Matter, and consequently hindereth the generation of an Aposteme. 
 
For the matter of your Rowlers, they must be made of good strong 
[/24./] 
even Cloath, white, clean, and gentle, without Hem, Seam, or Thread 
hanging by. 
 
Let the length be such as the Member affected and the multitude of circumvolutions 
[/25./] 
require; longer in Winter than in Summer. Hyeme (saith 
Celsus) sæpius fascia circumire debet; Æstate, quoties necesse est: Rowl on, on, 
and again, in the Winter; in the Summer no oftner than needs must. His 
ground, I suppose he had from our great Master, Sect. 5. Aphor. 20. Frigidum 
ulceribus mordax, cutem obdurat, dolorem insuppurabilem facit: Cold nippeth 
a Wound, makes the Skin hard, and causeth pain which cannot be digested. 
[/26./] 
For the Breadth of the Rowler, Petr. Pigræus, Lib. de Vulneribus, is 
most punctual. Let them be for the Shoulders, saith he, of six inches broad; 
for the Thighs, of 5 inches; for the Legs, of 4 inches; for the Arms, of 3 inches; 
for the Fingers and Toes, of one inch broad. But this your judgement will 
teach you to alter, according to the conformation, shape and positure of Parts. 
 
Fasten not your Rowler by tying a knot; nor yet sow it upon the Wound, 
or where you cannot easily come at it again; lest you hurt your Patient. 
Quickness and neatness distinguisheth the Workman from the ignorant and 
unskilful. As the Subject is more noble you work on, so strive to perform 
your office more excellently; intending not only your profit, but decency in 
the dispatch; that you may please the Eye, both in the time of, and when 
you have done your work: thus shall you gain credit to your self, and endear 
your Patient to submit the more readily to your Rules, which is not the 
least part of the Cure. 
 
The next thing that offers it self for keeping the Lips of the Wound together 
[/27./] 
are Sutures, and they are of three sorts; first, the Incarnative, secondly, 
the Restringent, and thirdly, the Conserver. 
 
The first is that which is in most use amongst us, and is by making so many 
[/28./] 
Stitches at a distance. 
 
The second is the Glover's Stitch, and much in use among the Spaniards, 
[/29./] 
who stitch almost all Wounds by it. In the Forehead and Face I have seen 
them bring the Wounds very close: the third day they commonly cut the 
Knots off, and draw the Thread out; then with dry Stitches keep them 
so brought together; and in two or three days more they cure them. 
 
[^p.345^] 
The third Stitch is of use in great Wounds, and those of the Oesophagus, 
[/30./] 
&c. to hold them forcibly together. It is performed with Pins or Needles, 
as in Hair-lips. 
 
There are four sorts of Stitches, mentioned by the Ancients, for the Wounds 
of the Belly, whereof I shall take notice only of one, which I have made use 
of my self in the stitching of those Wounds; the manner whereof is thus: 
You are to take up the Peritonæum on one side, and leave it on the other; and 
then take it up on the other side, and leave it on this. It is so made, that the 
Peritonæum, which is a dry body, may be united with the Musculous flesh: 
otherwise only the Fleshy parts would unite, and the Peritonæum lie open, 
upon which a Hernia would certainly succeed, and the Patient be put to the 
trouble of wearing a Truss the rest of his life. The Thread you are to use 
for this purpose ought to be a strong round white Thread proportionable to 
the Needle, and both accordingly as the Wound requireth. You must remember 
to cleanse the Wound of its clotted Bloud, if you can: but however 
go on with your work, that Bloud will find its passage out. 
 
In great Fluxes of bloud the Glover's Stitch is best. Endeavour in your 
Stitching to bring the Artery and Vein to its wounded fellow; so shall you 
the likelier secure your self, and make the work more seemly. 
 
In the Incarnative, you are to consider the Wound. If you find it but 
the length of a finger's breadth or a little more, 'tis not worth the stitching: 
your Medicaments and Bandage will keep the Lips together, and quickly 
heal it. 
 
If the Wound be of two Fingers breadth, make one Stitch in the middle; 
[/31./] 
if three fingers breadth, make two Stitches; if four fingers breadth, three 
Stitches; and so go on, making a Stitch less than the Wound is in number 
of fingers. Sometimes in declining Parts we make our Stitches at a little 
more distance. 
 
The time of taking out the Stitches is, when the Parts are agglutinated; 
[/32./] 
which is sooner or later according to the Habit of body, or Season of the year. 
Commonly in great transverse Wounds eight days are required; in less 
Wounds not so deep, three or four days: in the Face, do it the next dressing, 
lest the Stitches make so many Scars. But in this work you must use your judgement: 
[/33./] 
for sometimes the Wound may seem to be agglutinated, while the Lips 
are held together by Suture, which, after the Stitches are cut out, is not so exactly 
cicatrized, but that you might have done better to have left the Stitches 
[/34./] 
a day longer. But in this case the dry Stitch may help you; and that is another 
way of keeping these Wounds together. They are made with little bits 
of strong linen Cloath, triangular or quadrangular, or of such figure as may 
serve your purpose. These are most proper in the Face, to avoid the other 
way of Stitching: yet they are of use in other Parts, to preserve the Lips 
close. They are commonly spred with a Mixture of sang. dracon. thuris, aloes, 
farin. tritic. gumm. tragacanth. an. part. æqual. cum albumin. ovi. They ought 
to be of such a consistence, that they may adhere firmly to the Skin. They 
must be applied at such distance as they may best perform their work. After 
they are dried on, you must bring the Lips of the Wound close together, and 
retain them so, taking care they be not wet by the Matter. 
 
The Fourth Intention is, the preserving the natural Temperament of the 
[/35./] 
Part, that thereby Agglutination may be obtained. Which Agglutination 
indeed, as I have already hinted, is the work of nature alone, by whose only 
power all Parts wounded, disjoyned and broken, are knit and made one 
again. But in regard there is a certain Medium, which answers in proportion 
to a Glew, required in this work, Nature taketh what is next hand, even 
[^p.346^] 
[/36./] 
the Nourishment of the Part which is hurt, to make it of. Ubi morbus, ibi 
remedium, is here as an Oracle; Where the Disease is, there is the Remedy. 
No sooner is the Wound made, but the Balsam is discovered. Bloud (at 
least the ferous part of it) is the Glew which she useth, both in curing by the 
first and second Intention. The first being performed per Symphysin, i.e. a 
[/37./] 
Re-union of the Parts without any Medium; by which word I here mean 
any Callus or Flesh, or other body interposed; for in another sense the Balsam 
of Nature is the Medium, the instrument of Unity, and knits the Parts 
together: the second per Syssarcosin, i.e. with a Medium, or interposition of 
[/38./] 
some Flesh or Callous substance, that fills up the space between the Lips of 
the Wound. Great care must therefore be taken, that the Bloud offend neither 
in quantity nor quality. Too much bringeth on proud and loose Flesh; 
as too little doth defraud the Part, and affordeth not a competency of Matter 
for the work. If the quality of the Bloud be ill, it cannot produce good 
Flesh: as the Bloud is, such is the Flesh. 
 
[/39./] 
The means whereby this Intention is performed is a Regiment of the Patient: 
and that is either Universal, as to his Diet; or Particular, as to the peculiar 
management of the Part it self. As to the Universal, we are to consider, 
first, whether a full or slender Diet be to be used. This hath been a 
Dispute in former Ages: but I think, no man of common sense but knows, 
that as a full Diet is hurtful for those of a Plethorick Body, in Wounds where 
there is great Inflammation and like Symptoms; so when a Body hath been 
exhausted through loss of bloud or the like, it's reason that a greater liberty 
should be allowed, as to take Broths, Jellies, new-laid Eggs, &c. Withal I 
[/40./] 
conceive there should be Consideration had of the Patient's manner of living. 
Some people have so accustomed themselves to drinking of Strong drinks, 
that without such a proportion they cannot live. I could instance it by many 
Stories, if it were necessary; but I shall give you one for all, and that from 
abroad. 
 
Ed. Br. an old servant to a Person of Honour, was bit by a Monky in the 
[/41./] 
Back of his hand. To prevent Inflammation, I forbad him Wine. The next 
morning he complained he had not slept that night, that he was faint and 
sick, and that his Wound was the least of his ailment. That day he continued 
faint and ill, and the next morning complained again of his want of rest; 
and that afternoon he swouned, and complained he could not live without 
Wine. He had good Broths, Caudles, and such like; and I believe he did drink 
some Wine. (But he was allowed by his Master a Bottle of a Quart every 
morning for his Draught, and was seldom sober.) His Wound was indigested 
and inflamed. I complied with his desire; he drank again as he pleased; 
his Sickness went off, his Wound digested, and he was soon after cured. 
 
This I have seen often in some of the Dunkerkers at Sea, who drank extraordinarily, 
and were full of drink at the time of their Sea-fights. I could scarce 
ever cure any of them without allowing them Wine; and thereby their Spirits 
were kept up, and I had the liberty to bleed them as I thought fit. When 
these kind of people eat as plentifully as they drink, they then upon a sudden 
change of Diet labout under a Crapula, and are subject to Fainting, or have 
Colick, Dysuria, &c. and if the Wound happen in the Abdomen, it gives a 
suspicion (to those that are not well skilled in the Symptoms of Wounds) 
to think that it ariseth from the penetration of the Wound, when there is 
no such thing; and so by the perseverance in those Rules the Patient 
suffers. 
 
It hath been a common Saying, A Hair of the same Dog, and thought that 
Brandy-wine is a common relief to such. What then must become of such a one, 
[^p.347^] 
after a hard drinking for many months together, if he chance in heat of drink 
to be wounded, and from that time his Chirurgeon condemn him to Ptisan 
for a week together, nay two days? will he not faint and languish, and his 
Wounds become indigested and inflamed? You may laugh at my pleading 
for them: but I hope you will consider that I am a Water-drinker the while. 
 
As for other things, such Diet is to be observed as their Strength will permit. 
We do not use to purge with Catharticks in Wounds, lest by stirring 
Matter it flow to the weak Part: but we allow Lenitives, as Cassia, Tamarinds, 
Manna, Senna, Rhubarb, with Sal prunellæ: also Electuaries, as elect. lenitiv. 
diaprun. syr. ros. solut. de cichor. cum rhabarb. also Broths wherein have been boiled 
Lettice, Succory, Endive, Sorrel, Purslane, Borrage, Buglosse, &c. And we let 
them bloud according to the Strength of their Body, & Symptoms indicate. 
 
Another part of the Regiment of wounded persons will consist in giving 
[/42./] 
of Vulnerary drinks: of which we find many mentioned by Authors, and the 
materia medica very large; witnes that great tribe of Vulneraries in Parkinson's 
Herbal. 
 
The most common Simples with us in England are Comfry, Bugle, Ladies-mantle, 
Agrimony, Sanicle, Pauls-betony, Fluellen, Perwinkle, Mugwort, 
Plantane, Horse-tail, Adders-tongue, Avens, Cinquefoil, Wild-tansie, Vervine, 
Ground-ivy, Golden-rod, Herb-trinity, Centory, St. Johns-wort, 
Snake-weed, Knot-grass, Mouse-ear, Yarrow, Scordium, Strawberry-leaves 
and roots, Tormentil, Bistort, Valerian, Red roses, &c. Some of these are made 
choice of to be boiled in Water, or White wine, with an addition of Honey: 
of which sort you have sufficient examples in the Decoctum traumaticum of the 
Pharmacop. Lond. Their principal use is in Wounds of the Thorax and Abdomen: 
yet they are frequently prescribed in all great Wounds. Sometimes also, 
if the Disease run out to a length, we add Guaiacum, Sarsa, and Scorbutical 
Medicines. There are likewise Powders made of Crab's-eyes, Coral, Nutmeg, 
&c. and Electuaries of some of the foresaid Roots and Hearbs beaten up 
with these Powders. 
 
The Particular Regiment is, in preserving the natural Heat and Tone of 
[/43./] 
the Parts, without which we can hope for no Union. For the better understanding 
hereof, I must put you in mind, that there is not any Part of our body 
admits of a Solution of continuity without Pain. Every Scratch in the 
Skin, and little Cut in the Finger, is painful: much more are the deeper 
Wounds in the Flesh. This Pain stirs up a Heat fermenting in the ferous 
part of the Bloud, which readily makes way to the Wound, and, if not timely 
prevented, distendeth and raiseth the Part into a Tumour with Inflammation. 
If this happens in a full Body, or one of an ill Habit, where the 
Bloud is ferous, and more apt to ferment, the mischief is the greater. And 
if the Wound be in a declining Part, as the Legs, the influx of Humours is 
more abundant; and the Member through its weakness not being able to assimilate, 
not yet expel them, is the cause that Crudities do heap upon the 
lower Parts, and make an Oedamatous Tumour. 
 
To make this more plain, I shall give one Instance of the many that happen 
[/44./] 
daily. A young Gentleman about 18 years of age, of a good Habit of 
body, one day sporting in the Country with his Gun and Dogs, was prickt 
with a Thorn on the outside of the Calf of his Leg. He took little notice of 
it till the Evening, and then drest it with a little Balsam. The next Morning it 
was more painful and inflamed, and at length terminated in a Phlegmon. I was 
then sent for, and found the Tumour large and full of Matter, and in the lower 
part about the Foot an œdematous Tumour. I opened the Swelling above, and, 
discharging a quantity of Matter, cured the Patient as is usual in Phlegmons. 
 
[^p.348^] 
If this person had been treated according to the universal Regiment, by 
Bleeding and lenient Purgatives, &c. nay, if only after this particular Regiment, 
in preserving the Temperament of the Part, he had been dressed, as in 
[/45./] 
this case he ought to have been, by Refrigerants and Astringents, to have prevented 
the influx of Humours, and with a Pledgit of basilicon, to cause Maturation 
in the festred Scratch, with convenient Bandage over all; it had 
preserved the Tone of the Part, and cured the Soar without farther trouble. 
 
To proceed rationally by this Intention in Wounds, your first Application 
ought to be of such Medicaments as have an agglutinative faculty, as bolus 
Armen. sang. drac. thus, aloes, gum. elemi, colophon. terebinth. and apply over 
them such as are cooling, and of an astringent quality, to resist the influx of 
Humours, as Cloaths dipt in the Juices of the following Plants, fol. plantag. 
equiseti, millefol. vincæ pervincæ, ulmi, or Red wine, or Oxycrate. To which you 
may add some of these Powders, flor. ros. rub. balaust. nuc. cupress. gallar. far. 
hord. & fabar. & oleum olivar. matur. These simple Medicaments may be proportionably 
mixed according to the Habit of body and condition of the 
Wound. In small and superficial Wounds, Nature of her own accord is 
wont to effect the Cure; she seldom requiring more from us, than that the 
Lips of the Wound be brought close together, and defended from the Fluxion, 
&c. as aforesaid, and with Bandage so retained. A Pledgit of liniment. 
Arcei with empl. diapalmæ frequently serves the turn. But in greater Wounds 
that will not so easily be cured, we stitch the Lips together, and sprinkle them 
with such like Powder: +R bol. armen. thuris, sang. dracon. an. part. æqual. 
and apply a Mixture of some of the same Powder with the White of an egg 
over them, with a Compress prest out of Oxycrate, and a sutable Bandage 
over all. This is generally the way: but lest by the adhesion of this emplastick 
Medicament the Lips of the Wound should be torn or disturbed in 
taking the Dressing off, I chuse rather to apply over the sprinkled Powders 
a Pledgit with some of these following sarcotick Unguents: +R terebinth. 
Venet. +o iij. gum elemi +o ij. sang. dracon. thuris, mastich an. +Q j. Misc. & fiat Unguent. 
S. A. or this; +R terebinth. +o ij. resin. pin. oliban. colophon. an. +o j. +s. mastich. 
+o j. croci +Q j. ceræ +o ij. olei hyperic. q. s. fiat Unguentum. Over which may be applied 
any of these following Emplasters, viz. empl. diapalmæ, diachalcit. de 
lithargyr. de bolo, &c. In all Wounds where I design to cure by Agglutination, 
and would preserve my Stitches, I forbear the use of Fomentations 
and slabby Medicaments: nor will you have occasion for such Applications, 
if you proceed rationally, as hath been above said; for Nature will do her 
part towards the Agglutination of the Wound, if you defend it from the influx 
of Humours. I always accounting these Wounds near cured, when 
the Lips are retained close together, and dressed as abovesaid. 
 
Thus far I have proceeded in the Agglutination of Simple Wounds: I 
[/46./] 
shall now consider of Wounds with loss of Substance made by Bill, Pole-axe, 
Sword, &c. some cutting twice or thrice in one or near one place, whereby 
the Wound is large, transverse, yea and oblique, at the same time, and the Lips 
contracted various ways, & so the Cure is rendred much more difficult. These 
kind of Wounds are not so often seen in times of Peace, but in the Wars 
they are frequent, especially when the Horse-men fall in amongst the Infantry, 
and cruelly hack them; the poor Souldiers the while sheltring their 
Heads with their Arms, sometime with the one, then the other, until they 
be both most cruelly mangled: and yet the Head fareth little the better the 
while for their Defence, many of them not escaping with less than two or 
three Wounds through the Scull to the Membranes, and often into the Brain. 
And if the man fly, and the Enemy pursue, his Hinder parts meet with great 
[^p.349^] 
Wounds, as over the Thighs, Back, Shoulders, and Neck. Mr. Sanderson, 
now one of the Chirurgeons of St. Bartholomew's-Hospital, was once with me 
assisting in the dressing such. At Sterling in Scotland Mr. John Chase, Apothecary 
to his Majesty, helped me in like work. One of the Souldiers had 
such a gash thwart the Nape of his Neck, that it was a wonder to us he lived. 
His Wound was full of Maggots; and so were those of all the rest that were 
inflicted on the Hinder parts, they having been some days undrest. 
 
In order to the Cure of these Wounds, you are in the first place to cleanse 
them, and then to endeavour the bringing of the Lips together by the Incarnative 
Suture, making so many stitches as may retain them together. And 
if you doubt this way not sufficient, you may then, as in a Hair-lip, pass 
Needles or Pins through the Lips of the Wound, with little Plates of Lead 
to secure them from tearing. But if the Wound be so deep as you suspect its 
incarning in the bottom, you must leave a declining Orifice for the discharge 
of Matter. If the Wound hath lain long undressed, or were not stitched at 
the first dressing, and be now so contracted and stubborn that the Lips of it 
will not be brought near one another; you must them foment them warm 
with some lenient Decoction ex. fol. & rad. althææ, malvæ, viol. sem. lini, &c. 
or with new Milk; then joyn them together, as hath been said, and dress 
them as Wounds so stitcht. But if you left a declining Orifice, keep it open by 
a small Tent dipt in some such Medicament as shall be by & by prescribed, and 
after Digestion withdraw the Tent, & heal it as such like Wounds. The greater 
Wounds, which cannot be brought together by Suture, must be digested, and 
so disposed as that new Flesh may be generated to fill up the Cavity: to which 
purpose +R terebinth. +o iij. far. hord. +Q vj. thuris +Q j. Misc. cum vitell. ovi. To this 
after a day or two may be added mel. ros. During which the Humours ought 
to be diverted from the Wound by the universal Regiment set down of 
Bleeding, Purging, &c. and by the external application of Refrigerants with 
good Compress and Bandage, to press the Lips of the Wound together, that 
it may be the sooner cured. After the Wound is digested, you may deterge 
with mundif. Paracelsi, or with this of Quercetan's, which is also a good Sarcotick: 
+R fol. plantag. apii, an. M j. ros. rub. P ij. vini rub. +o viij. coq. ad medietat. 
in colat. dissolve sacchar. rub. +o ij. terebinth. +o j. far. juniper. & orobi, an. +Q vj. aloes, 
myrrhæ, an. +Q j. decoq. rursus, & addendo cæræ q. s. reduc. ad formam Unguent. 
or with this Balsam of the Spanish Priest, commonly called ol. Aparici; +R ol. 
olivar. +o iij. terebinth. Venet. +o vi j. frument. integr. +o j. sem. hyperici +o ij. rad. card. 
benedict. rad. valerian. an. +o j. pul. thuris, vernicis, an. +o ij. The Seeds and Roots 
are to be cut and beaten, and infused two days in White-wine: then the Oil 
and bruised Wheat must be put to it, and so boiled together to the consumption 
of the Wine; then strain the Liquor hard out, and add the terebinth. 
thus, &c. giving it two or three walms more, and reserve it for your use. In 
these larger Wounds, it will be necessary to apply warm Stupes wrung out 
of Red wine wherein have been infused flor. ros. rubr. balaust. nuc. cupress. &c. 
But those Wounds that are full of Maggots or Worms ought to to be washt with 
a Decoction absinth. card. benedict. rad. gentian. myrrh. aloes &c. and deterged 
as abovesaid with Mundificatives: after which you may proceed in the same 
method of Cure as is before mentioned. As to the time of dressing Wounds, 
the second dressing ought not to be till the third day, by which time we suppose 
them somewhat digested: from that time every other day may be sufficient. 
Galen, speaking of the dressing Ulcers, saith, he dressed them but every 
third day, though the Matter flowed very much; and but every fourth day in 
Winter. Indeed the too frequent dressing is hurtful: yet there may be occasion 
of opening them sooner than by him proposed, for the strengthening of 
[^p.350^] 
Bandage, or for the preserving of the Stitches by putting on dry Stitches. 
Also the retention of Matter causeth the Suture to relax, and the Lips of the 
Wound to open again: therefore that ought to be left to the discretion of 
the Chirurgeon. 
 
After the Cavity in the Wound is incarned, you may cicatrize it with unguent. 
desiccat. rubr. aq. calcis, &c. or with the Vitriol or Alume-stone, and dry 
Lint. 
 
[/47./] 
If the Wound be made by a Fall or Blow with great Contusion, you must 
endeavour that the bruised Flesh be digested & turned into Matter; to which 
purpose unguent. basilic. is proper, applied warm upon Lint, or dissolved in 
ol. lumbric. lini, or such like, anointing the Parts about with ol. ros. & myrtill. 
cum album. ovor. with which you may also make up a Restrictive, with an addition 
of bol. Armen. sang. dracon. balaust. flor. ros. rub. and apply it over all. 
But if the Wound were of some days continuance before you were consulted, 
you must then foment it with Discutients, and embrocate the contused Parts 
with ol. cham. sambuc. rutac. &c. and continue the application of Maturatives, 
proceeding as is set down in the Chapter of Ecchymosis. After separation of the 
contused Flesh, the loss of Substance must be restored by Sarcoticks, and the 
Wound cured as abovesaid; remembring that in these Contusions Venæsection 
is most necessary. If the Wound be deep, and the Orifice narrow, yet 
capable of inlarging; it must be laid open proportionably, that the Matter 
may not be retained, and render the Wound more hollow. But if the Sinus 
be of any great length, and so depending that the Matter cannot discharge 
by the Wound; you may then make a Perforation in the lower part for discharge 
of it, by Knife or Caustick, or both, first Caustick, then Knife; or 
by a Seton-needle with a twisted Silk or Thread, as hath been shewed in Sinuous 
Ulcers; and proceed accordingly. 
 
What I have said of Wounds cut and hackt in heat of Fight by a broad 
Sword, happeneth sometimes in fighting or foyning with a Rapier. For if 
the Thrust be redoubled, an Attrition may be made in the lower part of the 
Wound: and if there be such an Attrition there, or if some tendonous body 
be there wounded, it will be too painful to heal by the first Intention; and 
if it run far, and deep amongst the Muscles, it may be a maiming of the person, 
or an indangering of his life, to cut such a Wound open from top to bottom. 
Wherefore you ought to consider well the manner of the Wound; and 
if it penetrate so deep, and be not capable of being laid open by reason of the 
thickness of it, make a search with a Probe to the bottom, and feel how far 
distant it is there from the Skin: and if it do not lie far off, nor under any considerable 
Vessel, the speediest way of curing the Wound will be by pasting in 
a Director, and cutting it open. Which done, keep it open, and permit the 
upper part to agglutinate. But if you think it not fit to open, yet mark 
the place, that in case there be a necessity of doing it afterwards, you may 
make the Apertion more certainly. That done, dress the Wound with a proportionable 
short Tent armed with a Digestive ex terebinth. cum vitell. ovi; 
and embrocate the Parts about with ol. ros. myrtill. & aceto; over which apply 
empl. e bolo, or such like; and afterwards proceed as aforesaid, For your 
farther information and more caution, I shall give you one Instance of the ill 
effects of cutting open such Wounds the whole length. 
 
Some years since a young Gentleman was wounded in a Duel; the Rapier 
[/48./] 
entred into his right Side slanting by his short Ribs under the Muscles, reaching 
within a finger's breadth of the Spine, with a redoubled Thrust. He was 
carried to a French Chirurgeon's house, & dressed by him. The third day after 
I was fetcht, and saw the Wound inflamed and undigested, likewise the Orifice 
[^p.351^] 
over strecht by the extraordinary bulk of the Tent. I advised the dressing 
it with one lesser, and armed with a Digestive, also Embrocations, &c. as abovesaid. 
But it was in vain. This Pretender dressed the Wound with a Tent 
proportionable to the former, anointed with some Unguent wherein was sang. 
dracon. binding a Stupe over it. By this way of dressing the pain and inflammation 
increasing, I was fetcht again two days after, and then made a search; 
and feeling my Probe penetrating obliquely down deep among the Muscles, 
within a finger's breadth of the Spine, (as abovesaid) I concluded it best to 
make an Opening there. Accordingly I used a mild Caustick, then dressed 
up the Wound with a less Tent, spreading it with a Digestive ex terebinth &c. 
embrocating it cum ol. ros. &c. and soon after applied an anodyne Cataplasm, 
and so left the Patient to rest. But in the night, he turning in his bed, the 
Cataplasm slid off, and our Monsieur discovered a discolouring in the Part, 
and supposing it an approach of a Gangrene, I was fetcht out of my bed. 
Upon sight of it, I found it was only stained with the Saffron and Lupins which 
were in the Cataplasm, and applied it again, leaving the Patient better satisfied. 
But the next morning I met another Chirurgeon of the forementioned 
Monsieur's acquaintance. We took off Dressings, and saw the Wound digesting. 
I proposed the dividing the Escar below, to give vent that way to the 
Matter; but they were positive for the cutting open the Wound thwart all the 
Muscles, the length of between 5 or 6 inches. To which purpose Sponges 
were prest out of Melilot Emplaster, and the Wound was fill'd with them. The 
next day this latter Operator laid the Wound open with a pair of Scissors so far 
as his Sponges had dilated it, and dressed it up his way. The morning following 
the Wound appeared dry, and the Parts about inflamed and swelled very 
much, and continued exceeding painful to the third day. Then they, being 
at a loss, were contented to divide the Escar; upon which there discharged a 
quantity of Matter made by Apostemation in that part: yet notwithstanding 
they would not inlarge that Opening, but began where they ended, and cut 
open the Wound to the Aperture made by the Caustick, and dressed it up as 
formerly. Thus they having increased the pain, the Fluxion also increased, and 
a great quantity of Matter discharged from the lower part, also a large Sinus 
discovered it self stretching over the Spine to the other Side. In order to the 
curing of this, they designed Injections; which I endeavoured to disswade 
them from: but they persisting in the use of them, I protested against their 
proceeding, and left them. They laught at me: but about the ninth day after 
the Patient died, and made good my prediction. For, alas! what else 
could be expected from such a Division of parts, and casting in Injections, 
but to render it more sinuous from Side to Side? whereas possibly by Digestion 
and good Compression it might haply have healed. 
 
The Fifth Intention is, in preventing of evil Accidents, and correcting 
[/49./] 
such as are already fallen upon the Part. And these are Hæmorrhagia, Pain, 
Fever, Intemperies, Convulsions, Syncope, Delirium, and Palsie. 
 
We shall begin with Hæmorrhagia, as being incident to all Wounds more or 
[/50./] 
less, and sometimes the cause of all other Accidents; wherefore I have treated 
purposely of the Wounds of Veins and Arteries in a Chapter by it self; so intend 
here only to speak of it as it is made by some Authors the second Intention. 
The way to stop the Bleeding as it is common in all Wounds, is, by 
bringing the Lips of the Wound close together by Suture, and by applying 
such Medicaments to them as have a drying and agglutinative faculty; as 
Galen's Powder of Aloes P j. thuris P ij. and Hares-furre mixt with the White 
of an egg, applied upon a Pledgit, also a Plaister of the same Restrictives, 
with Compress and Bandage. But if the Wound be such that you cannot bring 
[^p.352^] 
the Lips of it together, apply the aforesaid Powder upon Dossils on the 
bleeding Vessels, and your Astringents next, with Compress and Bandage 
over all: then place the Member in such a position as may be for the ease of 
the Patient. 
 
[/51./] 
You ought to be speedy in the mitigating Pain, for that nothing disspiriteth 
your Patient more, nor maketh more disturbance in Wounds, the Humours 
flowing abundantly to the pained Part, whence insueth great Inflammation 
and Tumour. Wherefore you must hasten to succour it by Anodynes; 
amongst which Phlebotomy is proposed by Authors in the first place, for that 
it maketh evacuation and derivation of the ferous Humour which causeth 
the grievance. The external Applications proper to ease Pain are, fol. & rad. 
althææ, malvæ. viol. hyoscyami, thaps. barbat. flor. ros. cham. melilot. sem. lini, fænugræc. 
cydonior. psyllii, papaver. alb. &c. which may serve for Fomentations 
and Cataplasms, being boiled in the Broth of a Sheep's head and feet, or new 
Chapter of a Phlegmon, in Tumours. If after this it tend to Suppuration, 
you may proceed as in a Phlegmon. If it yield to none of these, you may truly 
conjecture some Nerve is offended: then proceed as is said in the Wounds 
of the Nerves. But if pain be caused by Matter that wants a passage out, 
give it onely by Knife or Caustick. 
 
If some hot distemper from Choler offends the Part, which may be perceived 
[/52./] 
by what hath been said of an Erysipelas, then these Unguents, nutritum, 
alb. camph. refrigerans Galeni, populeon, are proper; or this following: +R succi 
plantag. solani, semperviv. an. +o j. bol. Armen. +o +s. lithargyr. loti, aq. plantag. & 
tutiæ præparatæ, an. +o j. ol. ros. omphac. & nymph. an. +o ij. aceti rosacei & ceræ tantillum; 
fiat Unguentum. If the Distemper be œdematous, then Fomentations 
wherein flor. cham. aneth. meliloti, sem. fænug. and such like have been 
boiled, may, with good Bandage, serve your purpose. 
 
Fever accompanies great Wounds; especially where there is Inflammation, 
[/53./] 
it is almost inseparable; therefore you are the less to trouble your self 
thereat. But if it continues after the Pain and Inflammation is removed, and 
hath Delirium or Syncope with it, there is great cause to doubt the welfare 
of your Patient: therefore hasten Revulsion by Venæfection or Vesicatories, 
also use Clysters and lenient Purgatives, to loosen the body; and prescribe 
Juleps, Emulsions, Epithems, which, by refrigerating and contemperating 
the heat, may relieve the Patient. The other Symptoms of Gangrene, 
Convulsions and Palsies, are translated to the Discourse of Gun-shot Wounds. 
 
[^p.353^] 
[}CHAP. II. 
Of Wounds of the Veins and Arteries.}] 
 
The next thing that offers it self to our consideration is, the Wounds of 
particular Parts; and first of the Veins and Arteries, which are subject 
to great effusion of bloud, therefore require your speedy help. You may 
distinguish whether the bloud be from an Artery or a Vein, by the flowing 
of it, and by its colour. 
 
From the Artery the bloud rushes impetuously and per saltum, by reason 
[/54./] 
of the dilatation and constriction of the Heart, and is of a florid colour. The 
Venal bloud flows with a more smooth and even stream; it is of a grosser 
[/55./] 
consistence, and of a darkish colour. 
 
Of these latter Wounds there is no great danger; Galen's Powder with 
[/56./] 
the White of an egg, and the formerly proposed way of dressing, will stay 
their bleeding, and cure the Wound in few days. But those of the Arteries 
are most difficultly stopt, for that the bloud is in a most vigorous and strong 
[/57./] 
motion. 
 
If these Wounds be not with loss of Substance or bruised Lips, you may 
bring the Lips and Mouths of the Arteries both together, and retain them 
[/58./] 
by Suture, passing your Needle with a strong waxed Thread through both of 
them, making the Glovers Stitch, which Guido calls Suppressio. Then apply 
such like Emplastick as this; +R bol. Armen. +o iij. sang. dracon. thuris, aloes, glutin. 
sicc. an. +o j. gypsi, farin. volatilis, an. +Q +s. hypocistid. acatiæ, sumach.an. +o iij. 
Misc. cum album ov. to the consistence of Honey, and apply over it a Compress 
squeezed out of Oxycrate or Red wine; then rowl up the Member with 
[/59./] 
the agglutinative Rowler, beginning on the opposite part, bringing both the 
heads over the Wound: and having taken a turn or two there, rowl upwards 
and downwards, so as to press the bloud upward, and restrain the Influx from 
above. Your Bandage must be so made, that it be to the ease of the Patient: 
the Position ought also to be such as may prevent Pain. He must keep cool 
[/60./] 
and quiet, and observe a slender Diet. His Drink ought also to be cooling 
and astringent; as Fountain-water with sal. prunell. or acetum, or with gads 
of Steel quencht in it, and sweetned with Syrup of Coral, Pomegranates, Limons, 
&c. or this following Draught of Quercetan's, +R croci Martis, essentiæ 
corallor. an +q j. syr. de ros. sicc. & myrtill. an. +o j. aq. papaver. rhæad. +o iv. Misc. so also 
a decoct. hord. cum sem. papav. alb. & hyoscyam. with an addition of Rose-water, 
and Sugar of Roses, to sweeten it; also a grain or two of ladanum in case of 
extremity, if the Patient bears it well. You may also let the Patient bloud, 
[/61./] 
by opening a Vein on the contrary part, if his strength will permit it, taking 
a little at a time only for Revulsion. You may also use Cupping, Friction, 
and Binding the remote Parts, for Derivation. 
 
In Wounds of the Artery, dress not oftener than you needs must; once 
in five or six days may be sufficient, whilst there is danger of Bleeding. But 
if you find the bloud hath made its way through all the Dressings, and the 
Bleeding continues, take them off: and if you discover the Stitches broken, 
[^p.354^] 
and the Lips of the Wound incapable of being stitched again; consider whether 
the bleeding Artery may not be taken up and tied: if it may, do so. The 
way of doing it you may see in the Chapter of Aneurisma, and in one of the 
following Observations. Then proceed in the Cure by Sarcoticks, &c. But 
if the Artery lieth so deep that you cannot possibly come to make Deligation 
on it, proceed by application of Escaroticks to the Vessel, or by an actual 
Cautery. 
 
[/62./] 
If by Escaroticks, then you ought to cleanse the Wound of the clotted 
bloud, and dip your Dossils in some such like Powder; +R thur. pulv. +o ij. 
aloes, glutinis sicc. an. +o j. chalcanth. ust. +o ij. arsenici +Q vj. gypsi +o iij. Apply these 
with Lint on the bleeding Artery, and over it Dossils of Lint dipt in album. 
ovi cum pulv. Galeni, and dress up the Wound as aforesaid. At your next 
dressing, leave the Escarotick sticking on the Artery, and incarn as fast as 
you can. For want of the abovesaid Powders, take Vitriol powdered and tied 
in a fine Rag, and apply it to the Artery with convenient Dressings over 
it, as beforesaid. 
 
But if after these your Endeavours the Artery yet continue to bleed, you 
[/63./] 
must use the actual Cautery; by which the Vessel will shrink up at both ends. 
You may convey the Cautery down to the Artery through a Cannula: and 
that the Cautery may not burn through it, you may cover the outside with a 
Plaister or Rag wet with the White of an egg, &c. That done, dress the 
cauterized part with Dossils dipt in Mucilage of Quince-seeds, or with the 
White of an egg, and embrocate the Parts about cum ol. ros. applying emplastr. 
diachalcit. cum succis plantag. &c. over all. After you have allayed the 
heat of the Part, digest, incarn, and cicatrize the Wound as followeth. 
 
