[^Minderer, Raymund: Medicina militaris^] 
 
[}MEDICINA MILITARIS: 
OR, A 
BOBY 
OF 
MILITARY MEDICINES 
Experimented. 
BY 
Raymundus Minderus, 
Late Chief Physician of the Electoral 
Court of Bavaria, and of the 
Imperial City of Aspurg. 
 
Englished out of High-Dutch 
 
LONDON, 
 
Printed for Charles Shortgrave at the 
Turk's-Head-in St. Paul's Church-Yard. 
1686.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 23-57^] 
 
[^p.23^] 
[}A 
BODY 
OF 
MILITARY MEDICINES 
EXPERIMENTED.}] 
 
[}CHAP. I. 
Concerning the Morals of a Souldier.}] 
 
WHereas the Old Philosophers wished 
to every one MENTEM SANAM 
IN CORPORE SANO, a Sound 
Mind in a Sound Body; considering 
how much it conduceth to the Health of the 
Body to have the Mind free from Vice and 
Vexation: It will behove a Souldier, as much at 
least as any man, to endeavour after that Soundness 
and Integrity of conscience, which may 
inspire him with true Fortitude, undisturbed 
from the troubles and anxieties accompanying 
Impiety and Injustice. To this end, he ought, 
[^p.24^] 
in the first place, be constant in paying his Duties 
to Almighty God, by serving Him in publick 
and private, by imploring the Divine protection 
and blessing in all his Just undertakings, 
and by returning his humble acknowledgments 
for every good success. Next, he ought to 
serve his Prince faithfully to the best of his 
skill and power, to obey his Officers readily, 
and to do to all others, as he would be done 
to, if he were in their condition. 
 
[}CHAP. II. 
What care a Souldier is to take of his Body.}] 
 
THe Mind being thus taken care of, thou 
art to advise with a skilful Physician concerning 
thy Body, whether it be not necessary 
to purge it, the better to secure thy self from 
Agues and Fevers. Then furnish thy self 
with some Mithridate or Treacle, to use 
it against Infection; taking of it in the 
morning fasting, against the ill Air, the 
quantity of a Hasel-Nut. Take also with thee 
a quantity of Zedoary, Angelica, Imperatoria or 
Masterwort, and Carlina; of which thou shalt 
do well, now and then to eat some for the 
preservation of thy strength, and against the corruption 
of the Air. But especially keep thy 
Head and Feet warm, by the neglect of 
which thou maist cast thy self into great danger. 
Take heed of surcharging the stomach, 
which is to prepare and to convey the nourishment 
[^p.25^] 
for the whole body, and restrain as much 
as thou canst thy appetite, there being nothing 
more hurtful to health, than when that is irregular 
and extravagant. 
 
Gird thy self well, that thy body may be 
close, and so be secured from receiving mischief 
in leaping, falling, storming, &c. and 
thy bowels from being put out of their place. 
 
Take also with thee out of the Apothecary's 
shop a powder, called Pulvis solutivus de 
Tribus, which is not dear. Of this, when 
thou needest purging, take the weight of a 
ducat or a little more, according to thy constitution, 
in warm flesh-broath or the like, 
early in the morning fasting; so ordering the 
matter, that that day thou maist keep thy self 
warm in thy quarter. Fast two hours after 
the taking of it, and then eat warm meat. 
The same be done with Pulvis Sena Montagnana, 
and Pulvis solutivus de Tartaro. 
 
If thou be troubled with Corns on thy feet, 
apply to them every day fresh lard, and continue 
this, till by the fatness of the lard they 
grow soft; and then they will fall off from 
the very roots without pain. 
 
To free or secure thy self from Vermin, take 
a good quantity of Wormwood, and the inner 
cuttings of horse-hoofs, cut out by the 
Farriers when they shooe horses; boyl these 
both together in half lye and half water, and 
so put thy shirt into it, and afterwards dry it 
in the Air, without washing it out any other 
way, and not a Lowse will come into it. This 
Experiment is found approved amongst the 
old German Souldiers; and although there 
[^p.26^] 
should be a Lowse in thy shirt, it would not 
stay there. 
 
If thy feet be moist and sweaty, (which 
is very troublesome not only to thy self, but 
to others also,) take the filings of Brass, which 
are sometimes used for dust to dry moist writings 
with, and put some of it into thy socks, 
and walk upon it. Refresh this every other 
or third day, and thou shalt soon be freed of 
that inconvenience: Nor be thou troubled, 
that it makes, as it will do, thy feet look 
greenish; for there is no hurt at all in that, 
since you are not like to put them in your cap. 
 
Take also with thee some Stags or Bucksgrease, 
to make use of in case thou shouldst be 
galled any where in riding, or going on foot. 
Anoint the part therewith at the fire-side, 
and it will soon be healed. 
 
To prevent Rust, draw thy Sword through 
the fat of a Goose or a Capon, or grease thy 
Arms therewith. 
 
Take care to have always about thee a hard 
crust of Rye-bread; for if thou art dry, and 
destitute of water, wine or beer, to quench 
thy thirst, chew some of this dry crust, and 
it will moisten thy mouth, and considerably 
abate thy thirst. The same may be done with 
a Leaden-bullet, rolled to and fro in the 
mouth, Lead being cooling. 
 
It hath been prescribed above, to take with 
thee the Herbs Imperatoria and Carlina. Of 
this be mindful; for if it should happen, that 
thou shouldst be obliged to stand some hours 
in battel or in the field, take a piece of it in 
thy mouth for hunger, thirst, and refreshment, 
[^p.27^] 
and thou shalt find, it will keep thee a good 
while from faintness. But woe to thy fellows, 
if they want it; for they will certainly faint, 
unless thou be so kind as to give them a share 
in thy provision. 
 
In the best Apothecary-shops may be found 
a root, called Costus, somewhat like Cinnamon; 
which hath the same effect. And if 
others should eat Onions, others drink Brandy, 
and I only hold in my mouth of this root the 
bigness of half a Pea; I should keep in breath 
a good while longer than they. But take notice, 
that this, I speak of, is not the common 
Costus, which hitherto hath been sold for the 
true in common shops; but that which comes 
to us from the Indies. 
 
If thou art a Horse-man, take a good quantity 
of Bay-salt, a little Brimstone, Clove, 
and Ginger, and mingle with it some of the 
powder of the two above-said herbs, Imperatoria 
and Carlina, and give it to thy Horse, or 
in case of want of Provender let him have of 
it upon his bit, or give him some upon a slice 
of bread, and it will make him strong and vigorous. 
 
If thou art to ride in a German Saddle, the 
two hind-knobs whereof are wont only to be 
stuffed out with straw or horse-hair; get thee 
made two Tin-flasks with good screws, fitted 
for those places. In one of them carry Brandy, 
in the other Vinegar. The Brandy will serve 
thee in cold nights, and fresh mornings; and 
and 'twill be good also for thy horse, giving 
him a little of it upon bread. The Vinegar 
will be of use to thee for the heat of the day, 
[^p.28^] 
washing thy mouth with it, as also spirting a 
little of it into thy horses mouth. Besides mingling 
it with water, it will afford thee a good 
cooling drink. 
 
If it he very cold, put some of that horse-hair, 
that is wont to be curried out of their 
mains and tails, into thy Boots. I never received 
on such occasions more warmth from 
any thing, especially keeping my self dry. A 
Hares-skin is also good for this purpose, making 
socks of it; but if it grow wet, 'tis 
naught. 
 
Gather of the Wheel-grease that runs out 
at the nave of the Wheels, and would else be 
lost, which hath taken in some of the substance 
of the Iron that is about the Axel-tree, 
witness its blackness: This is a good Ointment 
for Horses. 
 
When thou comest into the field, and art 
to lye abroad, look out for some rising 
ground, that the Rain, which may possibly 
fall, may run away from thee: And avoid as 
much as is possible Vallies, Marishes, Ditches, 
Meadows, and the like low and moist places. 
 
Besides, observe the Air, and put up thy 
Tent towards the East; which quarter though 
it be cool, yet 'tis wholsom. But lest it should 
be too cool, order it so, that thou mayst enjoy 
that wind, which comes from between 
the East and South, as being one of the wholsomest 
of all Airs, and temperate, the South-air 
qualifying the sharpness of the Eastern. 
Beware of the Western wind, especially that 
which blows from between the South and 
West. The Air of Mid-night is wholsome 
[^p.29^] 
enough and dry, but sharp and piercing. Believe 
it, a Souldier is much concern'd in the 
Air; nor hath Hippocrates without cause written 
a whole Book De Aere, Aquis & Locis, 
to teach, how the Air, Water, and Places are 
to be discerned and chosen. 
 
Moreover, look about thee for good clear 
Water, such as grows warm and cool again 
sooner than other waters; and observe this 
mark for my sake. I know water, that will 
not boyl Pease, Vetches, Stock-fish, Flounders, 
&c. In some Springs Iron is turn'd into 
Brass, and great care is to be had in the choice 
of water for drinking. 
 
But if thou canst not have Spring-water, but 
art necessitated to use Pit or Ditch-water; 
have a care not to drink it without straining, 
least thou shouldst swallow Frog or Snake-spawn. 
For I have known and had in my cure 
a Countrey-man, who voided, though not at 
once but at different times, two hundred fifty 
and five Frogs, and of them many in my own 
house, in the presence of divers Ecclesiastical 
and Secular Persons; and some of the biggest 
of them, being dried, are still to be seen in 
the Repositoy of Mantua, as also in that of 
Mr. Philip Hainhofer at Auspurg. And there 
is a Cook in the Hospital of Wessenburg or 
Landsberg, who, (as appeared by the event) 
had drunk the Spawn of Serpents, out of 
which were bred divers Serpents in his Body, 
some of which he voided by vertue of the 
Medicine he took, amongst which there was 
one of the length of a Bavarian Ell. The Man 
hath been since in good health, and continues 
in his service to this day. 
 
[^p.30^] 
Wherefore it will behove you to spread 
your handkerchief over the Ditch-water, and 
so drink through it; or if you take any of it 
up unstrain'd, quench first a red-hot Stone or 
Iron in it, whereby the noxious quality will 
be destroyed. Or, if you lye still, and can get 
any Oyl of Vitriol, let some drops of that fall 
into it, and you need not then fear any corruption 
or poyson in such water. Otherwise, if 
time will permit, let it boil up and cool again, 
and put a crust of bread into it, and you may 
drink of it safely. 
 
Those Waters that run out of stony hills and 
from under rocks, are the best; to which may 
be reckon'd those Springs, that flow from high 
places, and purge themselves in clear sand and 
pebles. 
 
If thou meet with Beer or Wine, take heed 
of excess; and forbear drinking New beer 
that hath not yet done working, or is not some 
days old, because new beer causeth the Strangury. 
And in case this should trouble thee, take 
a handful of Hay-blossoms, boyl them in water, 
and Urine over it, drawing into thy body the 
warm steam thereof, and anointing thy Navel 
several times with warm suet. 
 
If thou art hot, and canst not forbear drinking, 
make water first; then wash thy mouth, 
and cool the arteries on both thy temples, and 
those of both thy wrists, and then drinking will 
hurt thee less. 
 
If you chance to drink whilst you are hot, 
(which is so dangerous a thing, that some have 
dyed within 24 hours after it; others have 
fallen into consumptive Coughs, others been 
[^p.31^] 
troubled with Pains in their sides and with 
Impostumes, &c.) then take of the leaves of 
Bellis or Daisy, which grows in all meadows 
and pasture-grounds, and is green both winter 
and summer, and wash them clean, and 
dress them like a Salad with Oyl, Vinegar and 
a little Salt, and forthwith eat thereof; and 
it helps immediately, as I know by much 
Experience. But this must be used presently, 
the sooner the better. I can say with truth, that 
in all my Practice of Physick for above 20 years 
I have not met with any Experiment of so 
quick an Operation from any herb, as from 
this. But here I must note, that I have always 
used the Red Daisy, and have not tryed the other 
sorts; though I am apt to believe, the others 
may have the like effect. You must not 
eat the Flowers, but only the Leaves. This 
Experiment should be put up on all posts every 
where, for the good of Courriers, Mowers, 
and other labouring Men, that are wont to 
drink plentifully when they are hot, and thereby 
spoil themselves in great numbers. 
 
But to proceed; as thou art to beware 
of excess of drinking at all times, so thou art 
especially to forbear when thou art to stand 
Sentinel, lest thou should fall a sleep; whereby 
thou mayst lose thy life, at least, thy place 
and thy preferment for ever. 
 
Neither be fond of Gaming at dice, tables, 
&c. whence are occasioned quarrels, mistrusts, 
deceit, swearing, and what not? 
 
Avoid also the company of base women, 
lest thou shouldst be constrained to undergo the 
Mercurial Salivation, and with it a very lean 
[^p.32^] 
Diet, of thin broth, water-gruel, barley-broth, 
prunes, roasted apples, and such like, without 
any flesh-meat at all. 
 
[}CHAP. III. 
Concerning the Physicians and Chirurgeons 
in an Army.}] 
 
EVery Army ought to be well provided with 
one or more able Physicians, such as are 
not only expert in the cure of inward Diseases, 
but also understanding in outward Cases, as 
Wounds, Burnings, Luxations. Dislocations, 
Erysipelas's or St. Antony's Fires, &c. 
 
These Physicians ought to be no Youngsters, 
that are lately come from Schools and Univerversities, 
knowing only in Controversies and 
Disputations, but such as are expert in the Cure 
of Diseases, especially such as are most frequent 
in Armies. They are also to be Men of good 
nature, great honesty and condescension, willing 
to take pains with the poor as well as the 
rich. Physicians thus qualified may so gain the 
hearts of the Souldiers, that these will love 
and honour them as if they were their Parents. 
 
Likewise the Chirurgeons ought to be 
learn'd, discreet, and affable, such as have been 
long vers'd, and experienc'd, in all the operations 
of Chirurgery, that can distinguish well of 
Diseases, and with prudence make their judgments 
thereon: They ought also to be diligent, 
and careful of those committed to their charge, 
[^p.33^] 
and very knowing in all manner of outward 
applications, as Unguents, Plaisters, Pulments, 
Lenitives, Stiptiques, Attractives, Digestives, 
Causticks, Escharotiques, as also their Mollifying, 
Dissipating, Repelling, Suppurating and 
Mundifying, &c. Medicines. They ought to 
be skilful in discerning them, and withal in 
knowing well the cases and times where and 
when to use them, They are to be very careful 
in observing the beginning, middle and end 
of Ulcers, Wounds, &c. since it often may be 
impertinent and even hurtful too, to use 
that in the beginning, that may be pertinent 
and beneficial in the midst of the cure, and the 
like. 
 
An able and dextrous Chirurgeon is a great 
Treasure in an Army, and cannot be enongh 
valued, especially if he consult in all dangerous 
cases with an understanding Physitian. 
 
These two, Physitians and Chirurgeons, are 
to be intimate friends together, assisting one 
another without envy and pride, for the better 
relief and the greater safety of their Patients. 
 
'Tis very necessary, both these should go 
abroad and travel before they undertake to 
practise, thereby to acquire experience, and 
to learn also to converse with the more discretion 
and gentleness with all sorts of humors. 
And when they come to practise, the Chirurgeons 
ought to advise with Physitians, who 
are but lame Doctors, if they be not skilled 
in Chirurgery; since this is the third part of 
Physick, from which it can and ought not to 
[^p.34^] 
be separated, being an integral part thereof. 
It is recorded in history, that above 2000 
years since, Podalyrius and Machaon, Sons to 
Esculapius, went both with Agamemnon in the 
Expedition for Troja, and there purchased great 
honour by their practise not so much of Physick 
as Chirurgery. 
 
[}CHAP. IV. 
Of Fevers, Hungarian Distempers, Spotted 
Fevers, and other Pestilential Diseases, 
as also of Hereditary Maladies, 
together with their Remedies.}] 
 
'TIs known seldom to fail, that in an army 
there reigneth some Disease or other, 
according to the nature and constitution of the 
Country, Air, and Diet. The reasons are; 
 
First, that amongst so great a number of 
Men, raised from so many different places, 
there are to be found Men of very different 
tempers and constitutions, sound and unsound; 
and amongst the latter, some that are scabby, 
others scorbutical, others labouring under 
venereal Diseases, many inclined to dangerous 
and infectious Fevers, &c. all which a Physitian 
must have a watchful eye upon, and endeavour 
to prevent their spreading. 
 
Secondly, that Souldiers in an Army want 
conveniences wherewith to take due care 
of their health; but are often constrain'd to 
expose themselves and sleep in the open Air 
[^p.35^] 
on moist ground, the vapours whereof penetrate 
into their bodies; and they are careless 
or want oppertunities of expelling them out 
again by sweat. Whence is caused an inward 
putrefaction in the blood and humours, 
which sometimes proceeds so far, as to assume 
a venemous nature, and to break out into 
spots, tumors, bubo's, carbuncles, &c. 
 
Thirdly, that Souldiers commonly keep an 
irregular diet. Sometimes they have plenty 
and do supperabound; at other times they 
have nothing; and then being very hungry, 
when they come again to a place of plenty, 
they over-feed and surfeit; whence are bred 
crudities in the Stomach, and corruption, 
which causeth malignant Fevers in abundance. 
Besides, they often feed upon Meat that is 
unwholsom, as stinking Venison, rotten 
Cheese musty Bread, &c. which cannot but 
occasion many Diseases. And when they come 
to places, where Fruit abounds, as Apples, 
Pears, Plums, Melons, Cherries, Grapes, &c. 
they over-eat themselves, and thereby cause 
Gripings in the Guts, Diarrhæa's, &c. 
 
Lastly, sometimes the Air is corrupted, especially 
after a great Battel, and slaughter of 
Men that remain unburied; whereby the Air 
being tainted infects the living that take it in. 
Which is often made worse by the exhalations 
of low and moorish ground, and by thick 
Fogs. 
 
These are the general Causes of the common 
Distempers reigning in Armies; against 
which thou art to arm thy self accordingly. 
First then be careful in thy Diet; eat not 
[^p.36^] 
greedily and indiscreetly every thing that 
comes to hand; and though it be good, yet 
eat and drink not too plentifully of it, but restrain 
thy appetite, considering how destructive 
every excess may be to thy health. 
 
If thou canst and hast no aversion from it, 
drink every Morning of thy own Vrine, which 
prevents corruption in the Stomach, opens 
obstructions in the Liver, Spleen, Mesaraic 
Veins; which if not removed, there will 
follow Fevers, the Yellow Jaundice, Swellings, 
and difficulty of breathing. If thou art 
averse from doing so, eat some Bread and 
Butter with Rue on it; or, if it be not hot 
weather, take in the morning the quantity of 
a Hasel-nut of Mithridate or Treacle; or infuse 
in Brandy, or rather in Spirit of Juniper-berries, 
some Zedoary, Angelica, and a little 
Citron-peels, and drink a spoonful of it in the 
Morning. 
 
When the Air is corrupted, and there be 
at hand a Goat, rub thy self at him, and let 
not the strong smell keep thee from it. Also 
put Quicksilver in an empty Hasel-nut, closed 
up with Spanish Wax, and hang it about thy 
neck; or the Zenechton prepared of Arsenic, 
(after the manner by and by to be described) 
sowed up in thin Leather; for if it should 
touch the bare skin, it would cause Blisters 
and do harm. This Zenechton is a Plaister, out 
of which are cut pieces of the bigness of a Dollar, 
which are carried about the Neck, and 
hang down near the Heart; keeping good a 
whole year. And when the infection is past, 
this Zenechton being reduced to Powder, will 
[^p.37^] 
yet serve to kill Rats and Mice with. It is to 
be thus prepar'd, 
 
Take of Yellow and White Arsenic, of 
each an ounce, or 3/4 of an ounce; of gummi 
Tragacanth 1/2 an ounce; put this gummi in Rosewater 
or in common water over night, and it 
will yield a slimy Water. Then beat thy Arsenic 
in a Mortar, and put so much of this 
gummed Water to it, as is necessary to reduce 
it to a Paste having the consistence of Dough; 
work it well and round it, and then cut off 
a slice of the bigness of a Dollar, somewhat 
thicker; let this slice dry in the Air, and sow 
it in a piece of thin Leather (well-dressed 
Dogs-skin is the best for this purpose;) carry 
this about thy Neck so as to let it hang down 
upon, and to touch the place of thy Heart. 
Some mix with it a proportion of the Powder 
of dried Toads, which I have done my self, it 
being esteem'd more powerful. Some carry 
about their Necks dried Spiders; Theophrastus 
commends Celondine, Leaves and Root, carried 
about the Neck. 
 
Remember also to burn frequently Juniper-wood 
before thy Tent; though all ordinary 
fires cleanse the Air: Upon which account 
Hippocrates advised great fires to be made in 
Greece at the time of a great Plague, which was 
thought to have been remov'd by that means. 
Some burn only a few Chips of Juniper-roots, 
or some of the Berries of that shrub, which is 
as effectual. 
 
If these means cannot be had, burn some 
Gunpowder, ordering it like a Train; this 
purifieth the Air likewise. And the volleys 
[^p.38^] 
of shot made mornings and evenings in a Camp, 
conduce very much to the dispelling of Mist, 
and qualifying raw weather. 
 
Frankincense also, Mastick, and such other 
Perfumes as dry and clear the Air, may be very 
usefully burnt; and even a Scholars Perfume 
made of waste Paper is not to be despised. 
 
If thou canst get Rue, smell often to it: And 
remember me for this general hint, to take 
good notice of all Herbs that are green Winter 
and Summer, and which are not eaten by 
Horses or Cattel; for they are endow'd with 
excellent virtues for the good of Man, and 
therefore made to grow at all seasons of the 
year. 
 
When the Air is pestilential, or breeding 
any Epidemical Disease, then wash thy face 
with Vinegar every morning. If thou canst 
get Acetum of Rue, Elder-flowers, Lavender, 
Roses, Marigold-flowers, 'tis the better. Or, 
if you have the conveniency, prepare the following 
Acetum: Take Rue, Elder-flowers, 
Burnet-roots, white Dittany, Carlina, of each 
equal quantity; a few Orange or Citron-peels, 
(of which the latter are the better of the 
two,) and a little Camphire, and some Walnut-kernels 
(the fresher the better,) leaving the 
bitter skins upon them; put all these into 
common Vinegar, and with this infusion moisten 
every morning thy Temples, Mouth and 
Nostrils, and the beating Arteries of both thy 
Wrists; taking down a good spoonful of it, 
and thou hast a good preservative. 
 
If it be cold weather, take Angelica-roots, 
Zedoaria, white Dittany, some dried Citron-peels, 
[^p.39^] 
and a little Camphir, infuse them all in 
Brandy, especially in such as is made out of 
Wormwood or Juniper-berries. Of this Liquor 
drink in the morning a spoonful. But if 
thou be of a hot constitution, then content thy 
self with the former Acetum, in which you may 
mix a little Treacle. 
 
Some advise to take fasting some of the 
Juice of Marigold, freshly express'd out of the 
Flower and Leaves, as a good preservative 
against the Infection. This I have not tried; 
but I have often in such cases used the Acetum 
of Marigold-flowers, especially for a Cordial 
and Sudorifick, and, I think, with very good 
success. 
 
Or make an Electuary of Rue and Juniper-berries, 
of each equal quantity, adding thereto 
a double quantity of Walnuts, with their bitter 
skin on them, some Figs, a little Treacle, 
and a little Saffron; beat them together in a 
Mortar, and pour on them, whilst thou art 
beating, as much Rue-vinegar as will reduce it 
to a thick Puls or Electuary: Of this take the 
bigness of a Hasel-Nut or two, fasting. 
 
Take the Roots of the greater Burrdock, 
and those of Celondine, both well cleared, and 
the Bark of Ash; infuse them twenty four 
hours in half White-wine, and half Rue-vinegar; 
then distil it, and in the distilled water 
mix a little Brimstone-oyl, to render it a little 
sowrish. Of this take two spoonfuls in the 
morning for a preservative. But if any be already 
infected with the Plague, let him take 
of the same six or eight spoonfuls at a time 
and sweat upon it, it being a very sudorifick 
[^p.40^] 
Liquor, which, under the name of Aqua Bardana 
composita, hath been used by me and my 
Collegues in Hospitals and other places with 
very great success. You may mix some Mithridate 
with it, if you please. 
 
Else take Carlina, Imperatoria, Serpentaria, 
Valerian, Saxifrage, Tormentil, Gentian, Angelica 
and Zedoaria, all cut small; infuse them in 
Brandy, and drink of it a spoonful in the 
morning for a preservative; but if thou hast 
the Contagion, take two spoonfuls, to sweat 
upon it, in case the Pestilential Poison be not 
yet broken out, and the Patients Tongue not 
dry; but if it be, content thy self with the 
newly prescribed Acetum, as being more safe, 
and an Inflammation being to be feared from 
the Brandy. 
 
Hold Zedoar, Angelica, Lovage or Imperatoria, 
in thy mouth; but if thou be subject to 
the Head-ach, then cut it first small, and infuse 
it in Vinegar, and let it stand infused for the 
space of 24 hours, then take it out again, dry 
it, and use it as prescribed above. 
 
Amongst the good Preservatives reckon this 
also: Take Garden-rue, beat it into a mortar, 
pour Vinegar on it, and strain all through a 
cloth; mix some Treacle with it, set it by in a 
glass, and take of it in the morning half a spoonful 
or a whole. Put a little Camphir to it, if 
you will have it stronger. 
 
Or put Camphir in Worm-wood-wine, 
and drink a good draught of it every morning. 
 
When I served in times of great mortality, 
I infused in Wine Carduus benedictus, Worm-wood, 
[^p.41^] 
Scordium, Dictamne of Creet, Burnet-roots, 
and Citron-peels, and after I had taken every 
morning a good mess of sourish broth, I drank 
after it a good glass of this infusion. As long 
as the herbs retain a bitterness, fresh wine may 
be infused upon them. 
 
Infuse also white and well cleansed Garlick 
in Acetum made of Rue, and take of it a spoonful 
or two in the morning. 
 
In the Apothecary-shops are Pills, call'd 
Pestilential Pills: Among these cause a little 
Camphir to be mixt, and of it let Pills be 
made; of which take at once three or four 
every week, taking them in a spoonful of 
White-wine, an hour before supper. These 
prevent all inward putrefaction, and keep off 
all infection, nor do they suffer any collection, 
of morbifique matter within thee, though they 
purge not, but only keep the body soluble. They 
are made up of Aloe, Myrrhe and Saffron. Formerly 
I have printed a whole Book of such 
Pills, which I call'd Marocostinas in Latin, 
where I have described their vertues at large. 
 
For the Rich may serve what follows; Take 
Terra Sigillata, Bolus Armenus, Pulvis Alexipharmacus, 
or Bezoardicum Nicolai, or the Cordiales 
Alexandrini Benedicti; item Spocies de Hyacintho, 
Aqua Stapediana, Acetum Theriacale, or 
the Red Hungarian Powder; all these serving 
not only to preserve, but also to recover, by 
Gods blessing. 
 
Provide out of the Apothecaries-shops 
Pastils of the extract of Angelica or Zedoaria; 
take one or two of them in thy mouth every 
morning, and there let them melt down. 
[^p.42^] 
Keep thy body clean every way; be chearful; 
avoid rashness; nor be affraid, considering 
that many have been infected by fear, 
terrour, and melancholy. Chear thy self up 
now and then with a glass of good and sincere 
Wine, but not to excess. Never fasting, nor 
never full. One that is empty will soon be 
caught with this distemper, especially if he 
live amongst infected people. If he do, let 
him drink a good draught of Wormwood-wine, 
Juniper-berry-wine, Rosemary, Sage, 
or Zedoar-wine; which may keep thee from 
many dangers. But remember, not to drink 
more of it than will chear thee up and revive 
thy Spirits. At least, drink a little Wine 
with Camphir and Vinegar, kindling the 
Camphir and letting it burn in the Wine, so as 
to let it sink into it; for if it burn on the top, it 
will there remain swimming: And if the 
Wine be skinned over with it, kindle it again 
till it be quite burnt out. Take of Camphir 
for one draught, the quantity of a pease; but 
if thou be subject to the Head-ach, then Camphir 
will not agree with thee. 
 
In case that any come to be infected, he is 
forthwith to be separated from the sound, and 
to be laid to bed, so as his head and shoulders 
may lye somewhat high; by which means he 
will be less subject to faintness. Then let him 
presently take some Sudorifick Medicine, to 
make him sweat; for if the poyson be not 
speedily driven from the heart, the Patient is 
lost. You are also to take great care, that 
this Distemper prevail not, and to endeavour 
to discover it before the Patient be quite disabled: 
[^p.43^] 
For, as soon as any begins to droop, 
grows melancholy, faint and feeble in his 
limbs, so as that he is hardly able to hold up 
his head, drawing his breath with difficulty, 
letting his head fall to and fro, losing his stomach, 
growing yellowish about his eyes, 
with the apples of his eyes standing out, finding 
head-ach, interrupted heats and colds; as 
soon, I say, as these symptoms appear in times 
of the Plague, Spotted Fevers, Hungarian 
Disease, &c. you may then look to it by 
times; forasmuch as such Patients, that are 
already infected, go often about until the sixth 
or eighth day, as I have known my self, until 
the lurking poyson of the heart has got the 
prevalency; and then the poor Patient is quite 
cast down, and often dyes in very few days, 
and even in a few hours. Wherefore thou art 
not to stay, till the swellings and boils appear 
behind the ears, under the arms, &c. or till 
the Carbuncles, Bubo's, and the like, break 
out; but thou art immediately to make use 
of the best Medicines, thou canst be Master of, 
to drive out the poyson, if thou wilt save thy 
life. I never found any thing, that was considerable, 
done in the Plague, by means of 
Purging and Bleeding; but rather on the 
contrary, all those that had Spots, if they were 
Purged or let Blood, soon after died. However, 
I will prescribe nothing magisterially to 
any man; let every one endeavour to do, 
what he can give a good account of. I have, 
together with my Collegues, treated many 
hundreds in our Hospitals infected with the 
Plague, without ever opening a Vein, and 
[^p.44^] 
yet we have by Gods blessing recovered near 
600 persons, besides those that by the same 
mercy we have cured in their several Houses. 
 
Now to procure sweat in the very beginning, 
take the quantity of two Hasel-nuts of 
Treacle, dissolve it in common Vinegar; but 
if thou canst have a cordial Acetum, made of 
Rosemary, Lavender, Elder-blossoms, Rue, 
Roses, or Elder-berries, use it much rather, and 
give it the Patient to sweat. 
 
Or take the roots of Celondine, boyl them in 
Vinegar, and dissolve some Treacle in it: Or 
take Carduus benedictus, Rue, Petasites or Butterburr, 
a little Angelica, Zedoaria, or Saxifrage-roots, 
boyl them together in half White-wine, and 
half Vinegar, or only Water, dissolve a little 
Treacle or Mithridate in it, and let the Patient 
take it warm, to make him sweat. 
 
Mithridate hath the like virtue with Treacle, 
yet neither of them are safe to take for 
Women with Child, old Persons and young 
Children. 
 
You may also make use to good purpose of 
the Saxon-powder, taking of it the weight 
of a Ducat in Caduus benedictus, Scabius, or Sorrel-water; 
which Powder is thus to be prepared: 
 
Take Valerian half an ounce; Celondine, or 
Nettel-roots, of each one ounce; Polypody, Althæa, 
(or Marchmallow,) wild Angelica, of each 
two ounces, of garden Angelica, four ounces; 
of the rind of Laureola, (or Lowry,) an ounce 
and an half: These roots are to be dug up in 
their best strength, viz. between the middle 
of August and the middle of September, and being 
[^p.45^] 
cleansed, they are to be cut small, and then 
put in a glazed pot, pouring a sharp Vinegar 
upon it, so as to cover it two inches high. Then 
lute on the cover with a lute made of whites 
of Eggs and Flower; let all be boiled upon a 
gentle fire; then pour off the liquor, and dry 
the roots, and reduce them to powder, mixing 
with it some 26 berries of Herbe Paris, (or 
One-Berrie( which look like Pepper-corns, 
very good against poison; and thus the powder 
is made. This herb grows in shadowed and 
moderately moist places; I have found of it 
several times in Koshinger-wood near Ingolstad: 
It hath four leaves on one stalk, and one berry 
on the top. An herb belonging to the family 
of Solanum's or Night shades; whence the leaves 
of it do very much cool Inflammations, especially 
those of the Eyes, when laid upon 
them. 
 
Take notice of Sorrel, bruise some of it and 
pour Vinegar on't, (the Rue acetum is the best,) 
and strain the juice through a cloth; put into it 
a little powder of Angelica, about the weight 
of half a Ducat; or of the root of Dictam, or 
of Butter-burr, or a little Treacle or Mithridate, 
and give it to sweat. 
 
On this occasion of mentioning Dictam, I 
must add, that in our Countrey there grows 
only the white Dictam, which is, among others, 
an excellent Antidote, but you must take of 
it the double quantity and weight to that of 
Creta. You may boil of the root of half an 
ounce in half White-wine and half Vinegar, 
or, instead of the Wine, in Carduus benedictus 
water; and drink of the Decoction warm, and 
[^p.46^] 
put your self to sweat; or take of the powder 
of it a drachm and an half in warm 
broth with a little Vinegar, for the same purpose. 
 
The Dictam of Creta hath hairy leaves and 
purpureous blossoms, and is used in the prepation 
of Treacle. This herb by its odour drives 
away Serpents. The wild Goats being hurt by 
any Arrows eat this herb, and 'tis said, that by 
this means the Arrows fall out of the 
wound. This perhaps hath no other ground 
than that of the Poet Virgil, affirming that 
Venus with this herb healed her Son Æneas 
when wounded in the War. His words are 
Æneid. 12. 
 
Hic Venus indigno nati concussa a dolore; 
Dictamnum genitrix Cretæa carpit ab Ida, 
Puberibus caulem foliis & flore comantem 
Purpureo, non illa feris incognita Captis 
Gramina, cum tergo volucres hæsere sagittæ. 
 
About this time came in the Hungarian Infection, 
which was a Disease that bred such a 
a putrefaction in the bodies of Men, that even 
when they were near death, they fell a vomiting 
but that with such a stench, that no body could 
endure it. Here those Medicines do well, that 
preserve the body from putrefaction; for the 
Plague, Spotted Fevers, and the Hungarian 
Distemper, proceed all from inward corruption. 
And of them, the Plague attacks the Spirits residing 
in the Heart, and so killeth very quickly; 
whereas Spotted Fevers have their seat in 
[^p.47^] 
the Blood, and therefore do last twelve, fourteen, 
and sometimes twenty days before they kill. 
But the Hungarian Disease is seated chiefly in 
the putrified Phlegm of the Head and Brains; 
whence those that labour under it are tormented 
with great and maniacal head-ach. 
 
But though these three Diseases have their 
rise from one and the same cause (Putrefaction,) 
and are to be cured by the same remedies; 
yet is therein required the discretion of a prudent 
Physitian, for the ordering and prescribing 
of Medicines according to circumstances. 
 
Take a drachm of Zedoary, give it pulverised 
to the Patient in Acetum of Rue, or Elder, 
or Marrigold flowers, or even in common 
Vinegar: Let him sweat upon it. 'Tis good 
against all sorts of venom, and causeth a sweet 
breath, as resisting inward corruption. 
 
In the Apothecary Shops you find an Electuary, 
called Diascordium, found by that famous 
Physician Hieronymus Fracastorius. It is like to 
Treacle and Mithridate; only 'tis red from 
some Ingredients giving it that colour. This 
may be used with safety by Women with 
Child, young Children and all sorts of Persons, 
whereas, as was said above, Treacle and Mithridate 
may not. It is made chiefly of Scordium 
or Water-Germander, which hath the smell 
of Leek when bruised. 
 
Galen in his first Book De Antidotis, Chap. 12. 
writeth, that when in a great Battel some 
slain Bodies chanced to fall upon this Herb, 
they rotted not as far as they were touched by 
this Herb. 
 
[^p.48^] 
The said Fracastorius did compound this his 
Diascordium out of this Herb Scordium, Tormentil, 
Serpentaria, Gentian, Bole Armeniac and 
Terra Sigillata, and such like Ingredients. 
 
It is chiefly to be used in the hot Diseases 
of the Head; which I have done many a hundred 
times. Take of it the weight of about 
two ducats in common Vinegar, or in Elder-water, 
or rather in the expressed Juyce of 
fresh Sorrel, and sweat upon it. 'Tis very good 
especially in the Hungarian Sickness and other 
venomous and infectious Diseases. To young 
People you may give a lesser quantity, and 
proportionably you are to lessen the Dose for 
Women with Child or in Child bed, and little 
Children. 
 
Besides take notice of the Powder of Doctor 
Hessius, which hath been used with great benefit, 
and is thus prepared. 
 
Take a drachm of Sugar-candy, a quarter 
of an ounce of pulverised Ginger, and a 
drachm of Camphir; reduce all to a fine Powder; 
give of it to the infected Patient the 
weight of a drachm in Vinegar mingled with 
the Water of Marigold flowers, Scabious or 
Sorrel, and sweat upon it. If you have none 
of these Waters, then look that the Vinegar 
be not too sharp, and to that end dilute it 
with some Wine and Water. Mean time, 
though in this case I highly value Camphir, 
yet in stead of Ginger I would use Zedoary, 
Saxifrage, Carlina or Imperatoria, or the 
true Petasites or Butter-burr. 
 
Again, Brimstone is none of the meanest 
Remedies in these infectious cases; for it preserves 
[^p.49^] 
the Body from Putrefaction. Wherefore 
take of the noble Flowers of Sulphur a quarter 
of an ounce, being sublimed from Colcothar; 
add to it one scruple of Camphir, an 
ounce of the Spirit or Oyl of Cyprian or Venetian 
Turpentine. Put all this into a Glasshead, 
lute it well and put it upon hot Sand 
or Ashes, whereby the Oyl of Turpentine 
will come to open the Brimstone, and produce 
a red colour like a Ruby, or at least as yellow 
as a high-colour'd Hyacinth. Of this give some 
to the Patient three or four times, mingled 
with a little Treacle, or in Sorrel, Cardobenedictus, 
or Scabious-water. This Balsom is 
excellent also in sore Breasts that are growing 
purulent, taken in warm broth, or in a good 
Wound-drink. But this must be in cases of no 
great heat or inflammation, in which it would 
be dangerous. 
 
Amongst all the Remedies, which serve 
against Infectious Diseases, that of Henricus 
Stapedius, to be found in my Book de Pestilentia, 
is an excellent one, and perhaps the best 
for curing as well as preserving; of which half 
a spoonful being taken fasting, is able to keep 
a Man well for twelve hours or more: But 
if any be already infected, he must take of it 
at any time immediately, to the quantity of 
a spoonful and an half, or two spoonfuls, for 
sweating. Which is to be repeated every 
eighteen or twenty four hours, to make the 
Patient sweat, till he recover, or till the 
Pestilential Boyls and Carbuncles break out 
behind the Ears, under the Arms, or elsewhere. 
This Water, though it be somewhat 
[^p.50^] 
dear, yet its vertue countervails its price. The 
older it grows the more vertue it hath. 
 
Many have ascribed great efficacy to the 
Blood of Animals: Thus old Democritus, (witness 
Galen,) prepared an Electuary of such 
Blood, called Diathæmaton. Some esteem much 
the Blood of Storks, because they eat Toads 
and Snakes; others value the Blood of Hens, 
because they eat Spiders and other venomous 
Insects. I should esteem most the Flesh or 
Blood of Badgers; which is to be dried in the 
shade, and that done, you must mix with it 
Saffron, Camphir, and some or other of the 
Anti-pestilential Roots, as of Angelica, Zedoaria, 
or the like, together with a little live Brimstone 
to the quantity of a ducat; which is to 
be taken in Acetum of Rue, or Marigold-flowers, 
or Walnuts, and in case of want of 
these, in common Vinegar: Upon which the 
Patient is to sweat. If thou art a good Husband, 
have ready a good Acetum of Rue, Walnut-kernels 
and Marigold-flowers, taking the 
greater quantity of Rue; and as you use it, fill 
it up again with Acetum of Elder-berries. 
 
The Rich do use for their Physick in the 
time of the Plague, the red Hungarian, as also 
the Imperial red and gray Powder, Bezoar, 
Harts-horn, Antidotum Matthioli, Terra Sigillata, 
Bole Armeniack, Scorzonera and Contrayerva, 
Species de Gemmis, Diamargariton de Hyacintho, 
and other high Medicines, of which I 
have largely discoursed in my above-cited 
Book De Pestilentia. But I, though I have 
used such Remedies among the Rich, yet I 
content my self commonly with the plainer 
[^p.51^] 
and most common Medicines, of which I have 
more knowledge and experience. 
 
The Pickle of Ebulus or Walwort, (alias 
Dane-wort, or Dwarf-elder,) which is of kin 
to Elder; as also the Pickle of Juniper-berries, 
are also of great use in this case. 
 
The Physicians of Ausburg made great use, 
in the year 1572. of the red Imperial Powder; 
the composition of which is in the Augustan 
Dispensatory at large, as also in my Book de 
Peste. 
 
These are the several means to provoke 
sweat, which I esteem to be of great efficacy 
for that purpose upon a sudden. And though 
Souldiers have not the conveniency of a Bed 
for sweating, when they are in a march, and 
often cannot put off their Cloaths for many 
nights together; yet let them use such sudorifick 
means: for, though they cannot sweat 
outright, yet they may fall into a dampish 
moisture, which if it strike not in again, may 
prove as good as a sweat. Yet in this case he 
must turn his Shirt: Quod non facit sudor, 
præstat id tenuis udor. 
 
But here is to be noted, that 'tis not enough, 
once only to give a sudorifick Medicine to an 
infected Body; considering that the venom, 
like a raging Sea, is tossed to and fro every 
way. And though it should seem to thee, as 
if by thy approved Antidote thou hadst overcome 
the Disease, the symptoms of it excepted, 
yet thou art not to trust in this case; for I my 
self have been sometimes deceived, and hard 
put to it to make good what by confidence I 
had omitted. Wherefore you must not trust 
[^p.52^] 
to the once taking a sudorifick Potion or 
Powder, because such malign and lurking 
Diseases, that keep no stitch, do indeed fly the 
first time from thy Medicament, and hide 
themselves under it, but they are wont suddenly 
to re-appear. Wherefore you must repeat 
the Antidotes, that were first administred to 
you, for the time of 16, 18, 20, or 24 hours, 
according to circumstances, and so long and 
often, till you judge your sick Brothers or 
Friends Heart secured from the infectious 
Venom. 
 
When the sweating is over, thou must then 
refresh thy Patient, first by drying him well, 
and next by giving him a little Vinegar to 
taste in a spoon. The Rich may afford some 
slices of Citron, of which Theopompus Chius 
writeth, that the Tyrant Clearchus Heracleota, 
who lived in Pontus, having poisoned many 
People, the vertue of Citron was at length 
found out, of which a slice being eaten proved 
an effectual Antidote against it. The 
same vertue may be found in a slice of a common 
Apple; and the Syrupus de Pomis is one of 
the Cordials of our shops. 
 
But the thirst, that uses to follow upon 
sweating, will not be quenched with so small 
a matter; wherefore take three parts of water, 
one part of Vinegar, and, if the Patient 
be not too hot, one part of Wine, mixing 
some Sugar therewith, and of this let him 
drink a good draught, and it will cool and refresh 
him. 
 
Besides, take some of the guts of Hens, 
and some slices of Radish, sprinkle them with 
[^p.53^] 
Vinegar and Salt, and bind them to the soles 
of his feet; this will draw away the heat. 
But let not the Radish lye too long upon 
them, because it will give a stink that may increase 
the head-ach, wherewith the People 
that have the Plague are commonly troubled 
enough without provoking it. Moreover you 
will do well to tye about his wrists some Rue 
beaten with Vinegar. Anoint his Loyns and 
Back-bone with the Unguent of Roses, or with 
fresh Butter; but if there appear any Spots, 
forbear to anoint him, lest they should be driven 
in. 
 
You will do well to have Epithemata of 
good things about you, as of Rose water and 
Elder-vinegar, to lay over the Heart; with 
which mix some Camphir. But if you find 
any thing of Specks, &c. broke out, you 
must use no wet thing. 
 
Anoint his Heart with Oyl of Scorpions, 
take the Oyl of Sea-blossoms and of those 
Earth-worms that appear after rain, of each 
six ounces, of St Johns-wort Oyl two ounces, 
of fresh Elder-blossoms and Rue, each a handful 
and an half, of the Acetum, of Marigold-flowers 
and Roses, each about three ounces, 
of live Spiders forty five: Boil all these together, 
till the Vinegar be so qualified, that 
when 'tis thrown into the fire, it cause no 
cracking there. Then strain it, and in this 
strained Oyl put a matter of five and twenty 
Spiders more, of the biggest sort, and add to 
it of Camphir dissolved in the Spirit of Roses 
half a drachm; let it stand in Balneo Mariæ or 
upon hot embers for twelve hours, and then 
[^p.54^] 
put to it of Treacle and Mithridate, of each 
half an ounce, and let them work together. 
With this Oyl anoint the eight Pulses, viz. 
both Temples, behind both Ears, both Hands, 
and both Knees, as also the Heart. And this is 
an excellent Succedaneum to Scorpion-oyl, much 
used by the Germans. 
 
Besides, you must refresh and strengthen the 
Patient with convenient Meat and Drink; I 
mean with good Flesh or Barley-broath, with a 
little Vinegar in it to make it savoury to him 
who will have appetite to little else, till he 
have shaken off this venomous Distemper; 
which when he hath done, his stomach will be 
so keen, that you will find work enough to 
keep him from surfeiting. 
 
Be also careful to keep thy Patients Body 
open; if he be obstructed, use a Clister, or take 
Butter or Hogs-grease, mixing a little Salt 
with it, or, if it be to be gotten, a little Mice-trickles, 
and put it into his bowels. Physick 
at the mouth for this purpose is not always 
safe: When the Patient is discharged of the 
venom, a little liquor of stew'd Prunes with 
some Senna-leaves in it will do well for opening 
the body. Some fresh Butter eaten in the 
morning, or melted in warm Broath, and taken 
down, is wont also to keep the body soluble. 
 
The Drink of these Patients may be, Water 
with some Bread soaked in it; or take of such 
Water, wherein Bread hath been soaked, one 
quart, and a little Vinegar, with two or three 
spoonfuls of Kitchin-sugar, mingling it well 
together. If you have no Sugar, use such Water 
[^p.55^] 
with Vinegar alone: This affords good Drink 
in malignant Fevers. Among the Romans it 
was drunk by the Souldiers, under the name of 
Posca. 
 
You may also take a handful of well cleaned 
Plantain-roots, and boil them up in three quarts 
of Water, and then decant the Water, which 
though it be somewhat bitter, yet 'tis very good 
in Fevers, and a good Drink in hot Distempers. 
 
If you have Oyl of Vitriol, let a few drops 
of it fall into clear Water, mingling it well; 
and you will have a factitious Sawer-brun or Atidula. 
But use no Metalline Vessel for this 
purpose. With this kind of Water many People 
have been served in all sorts of Fevers; the 
Oyl of Vitriol, in such Distempers, if rightly 
used, being very beneficial. 
 
But if a Man should have with it any Pulmonick 
Disease, in that case he must forbear acid 
things, and use Liquorice, and content himself 
with Ptisane. Nor is it at all good to use acids 
in Pestilential Pleurisies. 
 
And since on this occasion we mention this 
case, and we having above given warning, not 
easily to blood in Pestilential Diseases; yet 
may Venæ-section be sometimes, upon good 
consideration, used in that Pleurisie, provided 
it be done in the very beginning, and the Patient 
be strong and full of Blood. Yet this is not 
to lessen the blood, but only to give it vent; 
but before bleeding the Patient is to sweat 
by taking some of the above specified Antidotes. 
 
If the Patient have violent Head-ach, lay 
on his head Vine-leaves or fresh Cabbage-leaves; 
[^p.56^] 
and, if you have no Alablaster-salve, 
take two parts of Vinegar, and one part of Oyl 
of Olives (the Sea-blossoms Oyl, and Elder-Vinegar 
were better;) dip long rags of linnen 
therein, and having well squeez'd them again, 
lay them lukewarm over the face and temples. 
Even Vinegar alone is good. Of such Applications 
you may make many of Acetum of Roses, 
Elder-blossoms, and the like, with a little Camphir. 
The expressed Milk of Peaches is also 
very effectual in this case. 
 
If at the going off of this Distemper, a hot 
defluxion should fall into the Eyes, take Camphir 
and infuse it in water, and often moisten 
the Eyes therewith; and if it should be cold 
and windy weather, you will do well to keep 
your self out of the open Air, and not to let 
this water dry up in your Eyes in the cold 
wind. 
 
In case of having lost thy hearing, take of 
thy own Urine, and with it wash thy Ears 
within, but withal dry them very well, because 
that moisture is very noxious to the Ears: 
And it often happens, that after the Hungarian 
Sickness People grow deaf or hard of hearing. 
Others put the water of Carduus-benedictus 
distilled with Wine into the Ears, or the Oyl 
of bitter Almonds. 
 
If thy Throat swell, or the Palate of thy 
Mouth be fallen down, gargarize thy Throat 
with warm Milk, wherein Figgs have been 
boil'd, or sweetned with Sugar. The Flowers 
of Phyllirea or Mock-privet, which grows in 
the Hedges, boiled, and used for a gargarism, 
heals also a sore Throat. The same doth the 
[^p.57^] 
middle rind of Oxyacantha or Haw-thorn, if 
boiled, with a little Allom dissolved in the 
Decoction. If you have the Juice of Mulberries, 
mix a little Honey of Roses with it, and 
often take a little thereof. The Roots of Sloes 
boiled in red Wine, and the Mouth often 
washed therewith, is also very good. 
 
If thou hast the Squinancy, boil Scabious 
in Meath, and drink thereof warm, when 
strain'd. Beat Turnips and fry them in Butter 
or Oyl, and clap them in a cloth round about 
thy Neck. 
 
If thou cast up blood, take Mouse-ear, 
Ground-Ivy, Cumfrey; boil them in half Wine 
and half Water, or in Meat, and Drink often 
of it. But if the Plague reign not, open 
first a Vein. 
 
For a violent Cough, boil white Turnips, 
well cleansed in common water; throw away 
this first water, pour on other water, and in it 
let the Turnips boil till they grow soft. Strain 
this water, sweeten it with Sugar, or infuse in 
it Liquorice cut small; and drink of it mornings 
and evenings warm. Or make a Decoction of 
St. Johns bread, and drink it, abstaining from 
all sour and salt things. 
 
The bleeding at the Nose is also incident to 
persons infected; which is no good sign, though 
in sound persons it often frees from the Head-ach 
and cools the Liver. If this bleeding be 
too violent, clap Ice-cold water about the Patients 
Neck, or let him put his Pudenda in cold 
Vinegar. 
 
