[^Barbette, Paul: Thesaurus chirurgiae^] 
 
[}THESAURUS CHIRURGIÆ: 
THE 
CHIRURGICAL and ANATOMICAL 
WORKS 
OF 
PAUL BARBETTE, M.D. 
Practitioner at Amsterdam. 
 
Composed according to the Doctrine of 
the Circulation of the Blood, and other 
new Inventions of the Moderns. 
Together with a Treatise of the PLAGUE, 
Illustrated with Observations. 
 
Translated out of Low-Dutch into English, 
THE FOURTH EDITION. 
 
To which is added the Surgeon's Chest, Furnished 
both with Instruments and Medicines, all useful: 
Illustrated with several Copper-Plates: And to make it 
more compleat, is adioyned a Treatise of Diseases that 
for the most part attend Camps and Fleets. 
 
Written in High-Dutch by Raymundus Minderius. 
 
LONDON, Printed for Henry Rhodes, next 
door to the Swan-Tavern, near Bride-Lane, in Fleet-Street, 
1687.}] 
 
[^A preface to the reader and a table of contents omitted.^] 
[^Extract 1, pp. 1-42^] 
 
[^p.1^] 
[}BARBETTY'S 
CHIRURGERY. 
The First Part.}] 
 
[}CHAP. I. 
Of Manual Operations in general.}] 
 
ALthough the word Chirurgery signifies 
all Manual Operations in general; yet, 
by reason of its pre-eminence above 
all the rest, it is now only given to 
that Art, which endeavours to remove the Diseases 
of the Body, by the assistance of the 
Hands. 
 
'Tis true, that External Accidents require not 
only the help of the Hands, but also Internal 
Means; therefore it is no wonder for a Part of 
Physick to require the whole: Chirurgery being 
a Part, which depends upon the Body of Physick: 
But these internal Medicines we impart to 
you, not as Chirurgeons, but as Physicians. 
 
The General Operations of this Art, to which 
all the particular ones may be reduced, are of 
four sorts: 
 
1. Synthesis, which teacheth how to unite 
parts disjointed. 
[^p.2^] 
2. Diæresis, To separate parts unnaturally 
joyned. 
3. Exæresis, To remove what is superfluous. 
4. Anaplerosis, To supply those that are wanting. 
 
[}CHAP. II. 
Of Synthesis or Unition.}] 
 
UNition is of two sorts; one regards the Hard 
and Boney; the other the Soft and Fleshy 
parts of the Body. 
 
The Unition of Bones is again twofold; the 
one, setting Bones broken; the other, reducing 
Bones wrenched or disjointed. We will begin with 
Fractures. 
 
[}CHAP. III. 
Of the Nature, Difference, Signs, Prognosticks 
and Cure of Fractures in general.}] 
 
A Fracture is a Solution of Continuity in the hard 
parts of the Body, caused by an hard Instrument 
externally forced upon the part. 
 
The Differences are taken, 1. From the Manner; 
there being some transverse, which are properly 
called Fractures; others that are made according 
to the length of the Bone, called Fissures: 
and others are Comminutions, when the Bone is 
[^p.3^] 
broken into many small parts. 2. From the Part, 
it being some times in the Head, sometimes in 
the Shoulders, Ribs, Arms, Legs, &c. 3. From 
the Accidents; there being sometimes a Wound 
accompanying it; at other times, A Dislocation, 
Inflamation, Gangrene, &c. 
 
Cause] is, Whatever is able to break, bruise, 
or cut: Sometimes also a Bone corrupted by 
the Pox, Gout, or otherwise, hath been broken 
without any external force. 
 
Signs.] A Bone being transversly or obliquely 
broke, by handling it, you perceive an inequality; 
the Patient is scarce able to move the 
Part affected, and sometimes that Part is shorter 
than the other; the Thigh, Leg or Foot being 
broken, the Patient cannot stand at all; but 
he may somewhat, though with pain, in a Dislocation: 
And this is the surest difference between 
a Fracture and a Dislocation. A Fissure is 
discerned by the thickness, pain and unevenness 
of the Part, and requireth the judgment of 
a skilful Chirurgion. A Comminution is easie to be 
perceived, the Bone being very unequal, and 
here and there yielding to the Fingers. 
 
Prognosticks] A Transverse Fracture is more easie 
to cure than an Oblique; or when accompanied 
with apparent Inequalities; that, where but 
one Bone is broken, than where two are, or 
where the Bones are much shattered; that, which 
is made in the midst of the Bone, than what happens 
to be near the Head; and a single one, than 
a compound. If the Patient remain undressed beyond 
the seventh day, the Member is in danger 
of mortifying, especially if that the Part be too 
hard bound. 
 
[^p.4^] 
The Cure.] A broken Bone requires these 
four Operations; Extention, Conjoining, Ligature, 
Well-placing; and withal, the application of outward 
and inward Remedies. 
 
Extention can hardly be performed without 
pain; which yet will be much less, if the Member 
be so extended, that the Muscles do not labour; 
that is to say, The Part must be so laid, 
that when in health, they could hold out longest 
without tiring. Sometimes the extension must 
be greater, sometimes lesser; which will be 
performed aright, if regard be had to the time 
of the Fracture, to the Age of the Patient, and 
to the greatness of the Bone. A recent Fracture, 
a tender Patient, a small Bone, require a gentler 
Extention: on the contrary, an old Fracture, a 
strong Patient, and a big Bone, a greater. The 
manner of extending I describe not, because it 
is better learnt by the frequent view of Practice, 
than by Reading. 
 
After Extention, you are to join the Bones together; 
in the doing of which, the Muscles 
must not be wrested, but retain their natural 
position and figure. 
 
Then the Part must be bound with a double 
Rowler; the first is to be rowled thrice about 
the Fracture, and then upwards. The (second 
(which must be twice as long) is to be once 
wound about the Fracture, proceeding downwards, 
and then upwards again, a little higher 
than the first Rowler; to which you will give 
more firmness, if you bind some convenient 
Splints (of Wood, or rather of Past-board) 
round about the Member. 
 
The Ligature ought not to be too strait, lest it 
[^p.5^] 
cause pain, and rob the Part of its nourishment; 
nor too loose, lest the Bones slip out of their 
place. And unless great pain, or other symptoms 
require, it must not be opened before 
the third day; and at the second dressing, it 
must be bound somewhat closer; and afterwards 
changed but once every four, five or six 
dayes. 
 
Lastly, The Part ought to be well placed, that 
is, softly, evenly, and a little raised. If you lay 
it too low, the Bone will bend outwards; if too 
high, it will bend inwards: Wherefore you 
must observe a mean. 
 
Now, whether these four Operations have 
been duly performed, may be known by the 
ensuing Signs. 
 
The Extention is well done, if the part be 
strait, and as long as its fellow; if it appear to 
outward view every where even, and a little 
hollow about the Fracture. 
 
The joining together is duly made, if the Bone 
be any thing firm, and all about the Fracture be 
found equal. 
 
The Ligature is as it ought to be, if the Patient, 
as soon as he is dressed, find the pain abated; 
if the pain do somewhat encrease the first 
and second night, and there be perceived the 
third day, without the place of binding, a little 
swelling yielding to your hands. 
 
The Bone is well placed, if in the second dressing 
you find all even. 
 
Before you rowl the Ligature about the 
Member, bathe the part with Spirit of Wine or 
Red Wine; or, with Oyl, Wine and Vinegar 
mix'd together; Or, take the White of an Egg, 
[^p.6^] 
with some Bolus, Frankincense, Dragons-Blood, 
&c. Or anoint it with Oyl of Roses, Mirtles, 
Violets, &c. or lay Plaisters on it. In Winter, 
the Oxycroceum will do well: At all times that 
which follows; 
 
Take Mastick, Frankincense, of each two 
drams, Aloes, Gum Tragacanth, Dragons-Blood, 
Bole-Armonick, of each a one dram; Lapis 
Hæmatitis, Burnt Taleh, of each one dram; 
Whites of Eggs, and Oyl of Roses, as much as 
is sufficient. Make it into a Plaister. 
 
If a Wound accompany the Fracture, then 
ought you to extend the Part first (yet somewhat 
gentler than in a simple Fracture) then 
you are to join the Bones together; next, to 
observe the Wound, to bring the Lips thereof 
together with Plaisters, rather than with a Needle, 
and to guard it with a Defensive: And lastly, 
rowl the Part, and lay it conveniently. 
 
If there be a Cominution, or great shattering of 
the Bones joined with the Wound, then endeavour 
with Forceps to remove the small loose 
Bones, leaving those to Nature that are yet any 
way fixed; for she will, though somewhat later, 
of her self throw them out; and sometimes 
she will unite them again to the whole. Yet, 
to forward her, you may assist Nature with the 
following Medicaments. 
 
Take Ashes of Earth-worms, three drams; 
Virgins-Honey, an ounce and half, mix them, 
and make an Oyntment. 
 
Or, 
 
Take Aloes, Myrrhe, of each half a dram; 
Roots of Comfrey the great, Round Birthwort, 
of each three drams, Euphorbium, two drams; 
[^p.7^] 
Turpentine and Wax, as much as is sufficient, 
with a little Oyl of Lillies, to make it into an 
Oyntment. 
 
If the Bone be bare, cover it with its own 
skin and Nuscles, and defend it from the Air as 
much as is possible. 
 
If it be bare and also started out, endeavour to 
reduce it again into its place; but if it be got 
out too far, take away the pieces thus started out, 
with Saw or Nippers. 
 
Now these Manual Operations being well performed, 
the Patient mnst observe a good Diet; 
open a Vein upon occasion, and afterwards purge 
the Blood. In the Fractures of the lower parts, 
purging is not convenient; but if the Patients 
Belly be bound, he must take a Suppository. 
 
In the Fractures of the upper parts, Purging 
or administring Clysters, is oftner necessary, and 
may be done by the ensuing compounded or 
simple Medicines, which may also serve you 
in all other Accidents that we may describe in 
this whole Treatise. 
 
[}Medicines purging Choler.}] 
 
Rhubarb, Cassia fistula, yellow Myrobalans, 
 
Tamarinds, Manna, Scammony, Syrup of 
Sicchory, with Rhubarb, Elect. Catholicum, Hiera 
picra, Lenitivum, Diaprunum solutivum, & 
Succus Rosarum, Pil. de Aloe Rosata, Aureæ, Aloephanginæ, 
Ruffi. 
 
Take Electuary Lenitive, two drams; Elect. of 
the Juice of Roses, one dram; Cassia fresh extracted, 
two drams; Cream of Tartar, two scruples; 
Succory-water, as much as is sufficient; 
Spirit of Vitriol, a little. Make it into a Potion. 
 
[^p.8^] 
Or, 
 
Take Rhubarb, Senna, of each two drams; 
Cream of Tartar, one dram; Aniseeds, half a 
dram: Infuse them two hours in a sufficient 
quantity of Sorrel-Water, let it boil a little, and 
to three ounces of the strained Liquor, 
 
Add of the 
 
Elect. of Diaprun. Sol. one dram, or a dram 
and half, and drink it. 
 
Or, 
 
Take of Pilulæ Aureæ, Extract. Catholicum, 
Rhubarb, of each half a scruple. Make them 
into seven Pills. 
 
Or, 
 
Take Cream of Tartar, Sal Prunella, of each 
xij grains; vitriolated Tartar, Diagredium, of 
each vj. grains. Make it into a Powder. 
 
[}Medicines that purge Phlegm.}] 
 
The Roots of Asarum, Mechoacan white and 
black, Hellebore, Colocinth, Myrabolani, Belliric, 
Emblici, Chebuli, Agarick, Turbith, Syrup 
of Diacarthanum, Electuaries of Hieræ with 
Agarick, Diaphœnicon, Diacarthamum, Confection 
of Hamech, Powder of Diaturbith, Pills of 
Cochiæ, Fœtidæ the greater, Aggregativæ, Lucis 
the greater, Assajeret of Avicen, Troches of Agaric, 
Alhandal. 
 
Take Roots of Grass, two drams; Flowerde-luce, 
Trochiscatum, Agarick, Turbith, of each 
one dram; Aniseeds, Fenel-seeds, of each one 
scruple: Let them infuse for three hours in a sufficient 
quantity of Parsly-water; boil it, and 
strain it; and to three ounces of it, 
 
[^p.9^] 
Add of 
 
Electuary of Diaphenicon, one dram and 
half. Make it into a Potion. 
 
Or, 
 
Take Electuary of Diacarthamum, Confection 
of Hamech, of each two drams; powder of 
Jalop; eight grains; Cream of Tartar, two scruples, 
Fennel water, as much as sufficeth. Make 
a Potion. 
 
Or, 
 
Take of Pill Aureæ, six grains; of Pill Cochiæ, 
Pill Fætidæ the greater, of each twenty 
grains. Make them into seven Pills, and gild 
them. 
 
Or, 
 
Take Extract of Catholicum, xiij grains; of 
the Troches of Alhandal, one grain. Make three 
Pills, and gild them. 
 
[}Medicines purging Melancholy.}] 
 
Roots of black Helebore, Polipody, Senna, 
Lapis Lazuli, Syrup of Roses solutive with Senna, 
Electuaries of Diacatholicon lenitive, Confection 
of Hamech. The Powder of Dia Senna, 
Pills of Lucis minoris, Troches of Alhandal, Myrobalans 
of India. 
 
Take Bark of Tamarisk, three drams; Roots 
of Polypody, two drams; Stæchas Flowers, 
half a pugil; Senna, one dram and half; Aniseeds, 
half a dram; Mirobolans of India, one 
dram: Infuse them two hours in a sufficient 
quantity of Borage-water; boyl it, and strain it; 
and to four ounces of the strained Liquor, 
 
[^p.10^] 
Add, 
 
An ounce of Syrup of Roses with Senna, Spirit 
of Salt, as much as will give it a little acidity; 
and make it into a Potion. 
 
Or, 
 
Take Electuary of Diacatholicon, one dram; 
the Electuary of Diaphœnicon, Confection of Hamech, 
of each a dram and half; Cream of Tartar, 
two scruples; Powder of Jalop, six grains; 
Whey, a sufficient quantity. Make a Potion. 
 
Or, 
 
Take of Pill Indiæ, of Aggregativæ the greater, 
of each fifteen grains: Diagridium, three grains; 
Troches of Alhandal, one grain. Make seven 
Pills, and gild them. 
 
Note, All these Receipts are set down for fullgrown 
Bodies, their quantities being to be lessen'd 
according to the younger age, and strength 
of the Patient. 
 
[}CHAP IV. 
Of particular Fractures of Bones.}] 
 
THe Fractures of the Skull are divided into 
six several kinds; A Fissure, Contusion, Fracture, 
Incision, Puncture and Contra fissure. 
 
A Fissure is made by a hard and blunt Instrument, 
and passeth sometimes through both Tables, 
sometimes through one only. 
 
A Contusion is made, when by a hard and blunt 
Instrument the Skull is so hurt, that it appears 
whole from without, but yet is sever'd from the 
[^Omitted an illustration of different instruments.^] 
[^p.11^] 
whole within: Which yet in little Children 
may be done without a Fracture. 
 
A Fracture is made, when a part of the Skull 
is separated from the whole. 
 
An Incision is made by a cutting Instrument; 
where sometimes one part of the Bone is rais'd up 
and separated, as it were, but is yet fast to the 
rest of the Bone; sometimes a part is quite taken 
away; sometimes there remains a mark in the 
Bone according to the Figure of the Instrument. 
 
A Puncture is made by a pungent or thrusting 
Instrument, and seldom passeth through both 
Tables. 
 
A Contra-fissure is made, when the part struck 
remaining whole, the opposite part is cleft. 
 
The Signs are, Swimming of the Head, dimness 
of the Eyes, Vomiting, Bleeding at the 
Mouth, Nose and Ears. The Patient grows dumb, 
and suddenly falls to the ground: whereupon 
follows Raving, a Feaver, Convulsions, Palsie. 
Any hard thing, as a piece of Wood, a Spoon, 
&c. being put into his Mouth, he is not at all, 
or hardly able to bite upon it. Here it must also 
be carefully enquired, in what manner, and 
with what Instrument he hath been hurt? Whether 
he be young or old, tender or strong, healthy 
or unhealthy? Presently after the Fall or 
Stroke, before the Part swells, you may sometimes 
feel the hurt with your Fingers; and if 
there be a Wound with it, you may either see 
it, or find it out with a Probe. 
 
Prognosticks.] The Fractures of the Skull, how 
fair soever they may look, is never without danger, 
but more dangerous, when both the Tables 
are hurt or broken; and more dangerous 
[^p.12^] 
yet, if the Dura Mater, and most dangerous, if 
the Pia Mater be also hurt. The more Symptoms 
there are, the less hope of a good event. 
If the Bone grow black in the beginning, that 
is a mortal Sign. 
 
Cure.] If the Skin be yet whole, or the wound 
not large enough, make a cross incision, and divide 
the Pericranium. If under it you find a fissure, 
put some Ink into it, and bind up the wound. 
The second day, or as soon as the bleeding is 
ceased, scrape the Skull at once, or at several 
times, until the Ink with the Fissure is altogether 
gone, and the Bone grow somewhat bloody, 
then throw the ensuing Powder upon it. 
 
Take Dragons Blood, burnt Harts-horn, of 
each one dram and half; Myrrhe half a dram; 
Frankincense, and Orrise roots, of each a dram; 
Make it into a very fine Powder. 
 
If the Fissure pass through both Tables, then 
are you to make use of Trepanning; as likewise 
in the Contra-fissure, Fracture and Contusion of the 
Skull, or else you will quickly lose your Patient. 
 
The Incision is healed like the Fissure. 
 
In the Puncture you must put the Trepan just 
in the middle, and not on the sides of the place 
hurt. 
 
If you find a Fracture with a Cominution, 
then take out all the small loose Bones, committing 
to Nature those that are yet fast to the Pericranium, 
or cannot be taken away without force. 
And then if the Fracture be so large, that you can 
free the Brains from the coagulated or corrupted 
Blood, or from the pricking Bones, Trepanning 
will be needless; but if it should happen otherwise, 
[^p.13^] 
you must, with great care, apply the Trepan, 
unless the Patient be strong, and the matter 
very little. The manner of Trepanning will 
be taught in another place. 
 
2. In a Fracture of the Nose, what is raised, 
is to be pressed down; and what is pressed inward, 
to be raised with a Spatule, or other Instrument: 
afterwards a Pipe or Quill is to be 
put up, and continually kept there, till the Cure 
be done, and a Fracture-Plaister is to be laid on 
without. If the Bone be not corrupted, it will 
be healed in ten or twelve days. 
 
3. A broken Jaw-bone is restored by ones fingers 
used both within and without the Mouth; 
and if those be too weak, then one is to draw 
the Head backward, and the Chirurgeon forward, 
and so to put it in. It is cured in twenty days. 
 
4. The Clavicle being broken, there must be 
one to draw the Arm backward, and another 
to draw the Neck or Shoulder forward; the Chirurgeon 
himself, in the mean time, drawing upwards 
what was fallen down, and downwards 
what was raised too high. If a Ball be put into 
the Arm-pit, and the Elbow be pressed against 
the Ribs, the Operation will prove more easie. 
It is cured in twenty four days. 
 
5. If the Shoulder-Blade be broken about the 
place where it is united to the Arm, then is the 
hurt for the most part incurable. If it break in 
the Acromion (which may be easily felt) then let 
the Arm or Shoulder be pulled down, either with 
Hands or Ligatures, and in the mean time set it in. 
If it be broken into several pieces, make an Incision, 
and take them out, unless they be yet fast to 
the Peri-ostium; in which case, you must leave 
[^p.14^] 
Nature to her self, which will either make them 
unite again, or throw them out. It is healed 
in forty days. 
 
6. The Sternum, or Breast-bone happens either 
to be broken, and then you'll find an unevenness, 
which being toucht, will yield to the Fingers, 
and cause some cracking; or to be pressed 
in, and then you'll feel a bending inwards, which 
will cause pain, a short breath, coughing and 
spitting blood. To restore the same, lay the Patient 
on his Back upon a great stone, pressing 
both his Shoulders downwards; then press the 
Ribs backward and forward, until the Bone be 
reduced again in its right place. This is cured 
in twenty days. 
 
7. A simple Fracture of the Ribs, which is 
without any great Contusion, or Inflamation of 
the neighbouring parts, may be healed in twenty 
days, applying the Fracture-Plaister. If the 
Ribs stand out, they must with ones Hand be 
pressed in. If they bend inward, let the Patient 
keep in his Breath, and so press the Rib outward; 
in the mean time, assisting him with your hand. 
If that succeed not, then lay a sticking Plaister 
upon it, and pull the same off so often, until 
the Rib return into its place. Cupping-Glasses 
here are of no use. 
 
8. A simple Fracture of the Joynts of the Back-bone 
is easily set again with ones finger, and is 
made whole in twenty days. But if the Marrow 
of the Back-bone be so hurt or pressed in, that 
the Arms or Legs of the Patient become lame or 
senseless, that he cannot retain his Urine, or his 
Excrement, then he seldom escapeth death. Yet 
you are to do your utmost; and if one or more 
[^p.15^] 
small Bones be altogether loose from the Periostium, 
then make Incision, and take them out. 
 
9. The same is to be understood of the Fracture 
of the Os sacrum, which alone hath this 
peculiar, that you may put your fingers into 
the Anus, and restore it to its right place. 
 
10. The Hip-bone being broken, is to be set as 
soon as possible may be, and then it will heal in 
twenty four days; otherwise you may expect 
various accidents. But if it be fractured into many 
pieces, then you are forthwith, in the first 
dressing, to make an Incision; take out the 
small Splinters, and re-place those that have yet 
any hold-fast. Yet, by reason of the multitude 
of the Tendons, Muscles, Veins, Arteries 
and Nerves, that are spread over the whole 
part, such an Incision cannot be made without 
great danger. 
 
11. If the upper Bone of the Arm be broken, 
first bend the Elbow toward the Breast, then take 
the lower part of that Bone close to the Elbow, 
pulling it straight down towards the ground, 
and so restore it; well observing here, that the 
Arm, during the whole time of Cure, must remain 
in that posture in which it was extended; 
otherwise the Fracture will, upon the least change 
of its posture, slip out again. Where yet 'tis to 
be understood, that the Chirurgeon after the second 
or third dressing, as often as after that he 
dresseth the Patient, must stretch out his Arm 
strait, to the end that the Tendons which run 
from the Arm, and are inserted below the Elbow, 
shrinking by the long lying still, may not 
cause a troublesome stiffness. However, this 
shrinking of Tendons (which are by pretenders to 
[^p.16^] 
Chirurgery, ridiculously call'd Nerves) may yet 
conveniently be cured in two or three months, 
if you make the Patient to carry every day some 
weight, and endeavor to relax and mollifie the 
Tendons with Fomentations and Embrocations, 
abstaining from the use of any Brandy, or any 
other corroborating and astringent Medicines. 
I have always found successful the following 
Unguent. 
 
Take Man's and Duck's Grease, of each one 
ounce; Oyntment of Marsh-mallows, half an 
ounce; Oyl of Earth-worms, white Lilly, and Camomile, 
of each two drams. Make an Oyntment. 
 
This broken Bone is cured in forty days. The 
restoring of the broken Thigh-bone, hath nothing 
different from this. 
 
12. The Elbow hath two Bones; of which, 
the greater is called Radius, the lesser Ulna; both 
Fociles: The small Focile being broken, 'tis easie 
to restore it. The Cure is harder, when the 
great one is broken; and yet harder, when both 
are broken: In which case, the extention is to be 
made the stronger. When they be well set, and 
bound up, then must the hand be placed a little 
higher upon the Chest than the Elbow; and afterwards, 
every second or third day (without pain 
or violence) the Arm is gently to be stretch'd out, 
to the end that the Humors flowing thither, and 
there staying too long, may not cause a concretion 
in the Bones, and a stiffness in the Arm, as not 
extensible any more. It is cured in thirty days. 
 
13. The Leg hath also two Bones, the greater 
called Tibia, and the lesser Fibula. Their Cure 
had nothing different from the next foregoing. 
 
14. If the Patella, or Knee-pan, break cross-ways, 
[^p.17^] 
the Patient commonly remains lame. If 
it break long-ways, then by the Muscles that 
draw upwards, without any great help of the 
hands, it is almost of it self restored, and cured 
in twenty days. 
 
[}CHAP. V. 
Of the Nature, Difference, Signs, Causes, 
Prognosticks, and Cure of Dislocations 
in general.}] 
 
A Dislocation is a forcing of the Bone out of its 
cavity and natural place into another, hindering 
voluntary motion. 
 
The Differences are taken, 1. From the manner; 
for sometimes the Bone is altogether forced 
out of its place, and that is properly called Luxation 
or Dislocation: Sometimes it is got out but 
a little or half, which is called Sub-laxation, or 
Elongation. 2. From the Cause; for sometimes it 
is from an external accident, as by wrestlings, 
Falls, or Blows, &c. Sometimes from internal 
Causes, by the afflux of Humors. 
 
The Causes are of two sorts; 1. External, Such 
as are Falling, Beating, Running, Wrestling, 
and vehement extention, as it often happens to 
Women in Labour, through the unskilfulness of 
Midwives; yea, by a violent stroke or fall, even the 
Bones of the Infant in the Womb, may be dislocated. 
2. Internal, By the afflux of Humors, 
which falling into the Joints, relax and resolve 
the Ligaments, and so causeth the Bones to slip 
out of their places. 
 
[^p.18^] 
The Signs, especially in a lean Body, are manifest 
enough. The Bone causeth in the place to 
which it is forced, a tumor or rising; and in that 
whence it is forced, a cavity. If there be a perfect 
Dislocation, the Member will be drawn up, and 
shorter (unless the luxation happen by the laxity 
of the Ligaments, than it becomes longer) the 
part is painful, chiefly npon motion. In a Subluxation, 
these Accidents are lesser, and seldom all 
together. 
 
Prognosticks.] In Children and other tender 
Bodies, the Bones may be reduced more easily; 
but are kept in with more difficulty; the contrary 
happens in strong and full grown persons: 
The Dislocation of the Head is mortal, that of 
the Vertebra's dangerous; and that which is inveterate 
is hard to be cured. That which proceeds 
from an inward Cause, is of a slower Cure 
and does easily return. 
 
Cure.] The Bone forced out, must be reduced 
to its place, either by the Hands, Ligatures, or 
Instruments; but by which of these three it shall 
be performed, the Nature of the affected part 
will declare. 'Tis certain, that these four Manual 
Operations (Extention, Setting, Binding and Well-placing) 
must here be used as well as in Fractures 
of Bones. 
 
Extention must be made so great, that there 
may be a cavity between the Bone that remains 
well, and that which hath been forced away, to 
the end that in the setting, the one may not rub 
against the other; whence afterwards are wont to 
rise very grievious, and sometimes incurable Accidents. 
 
In the Setting, care must be had not to wrest the 
[^p.19^] 
Bones nor the Muscles, but to keep their natural 
figure. Before you proceed to binding up the 
Member, endeavour to preserve the part from 
inflammation and flux of Humors, and strengthen 
it with the following Medicines. 
 
[}A strengthening Plaster.}] 
 
Take Frankincense, Mastick, Bole-armonick, 
Dragons-Blood, of each half an ounce; fine-Flower, 
an ounce; Roots of great Comfrey, two 
drams; Weather-Sewet, three ounces; white-Wax, 
as much as sufficeth to make a Plaister. 
 
[}Another.}] 
 
Take Litharge, Wax, Rosin, of each three ounces; 
being melted over the fire, add to them, of 
great Comfrey, Bean-Meal, Bole-armonick steeped 
in Vinegar, and dried, of each three ounces; 
Tragacanth, two ounces. Make it into a Plaister. 
 
If the pain, or other symptoms do not necessarily 
require it, you ought not to loosen the 
Bandage before the fifth, sixth, or seventh day, 
and then do it with as little motion as is possible. 
Lastly, lay the Part even, and in such a posture, 
in which, when found, it can longest remain 
without trouble. 
 
If you find the Dislocation accompanied by 
an Inflammation, beware of extending the part, 
or doing ought to it before that be removed; 
which you are to do, first with emollient, and 
afterwards with discutient, Medicines. 
 
[}An Emollient Unguent.}] 
 
Take the compound Ointment of Marsh-mallows, 
[^p.20^] 
two drams; Hogs-grease, half an ounce; 
Oyl of white-Lillies, Roses and Mirtles, as much 
as is sufficient to make it into a Linament. 
 
[}A Discutient Plaister.}] 
 
Take Colophony, Frankincense, Mastick, 
Pitch of each an Ounce; Cummin-seeds, Fenel-seeds, 
of each six drams; Wax and Oyl of 
Dill, as much as sufficeth. Mix them, and make 
it into a Plaister. 
 
[}CHAP. VI. 
Of particular Dislocations.}] 
 
1. THe Jaw-bone, except it be in young Children, 
can hardly be dislocated otherwise 
than forwards. Sometimes it is only dislocated 
one side, and is easily restored; sometimes 
both, in which case it is difficult to set, and very 
dangerous, and often mortal. 
 
It is very seldom luxated from a debility of 
Muscles; sometimes from the laxity of the Ligaments; 
for the most-part, from a too wide opening 
of the Mouth. If it be dislocated but on one 
side, it stands a-skew, and is turned towards the 
side hurt; some thing is prominent, the Teet_[^ORIG. BLURRED^] 
stand not directly under one another, nor ca_[^ORIG. BLURRED^] 
they be brought together, so that the Mouth remains 
open. You must draw it towards the opposite 
side, and reduce it to its place, which [^ORIG. BLURRED^] 
not hard to do; yea, by a stiff box on the E_[^ORIG. BLURRED^] 
it hath often been restored. 
[^p.21^] 
If it be dislocated on both sides, then does it 
fall forwards, the Mouth stands open, both the 
Apophyses are prominent, the lower Teeth stand 
further than the upper, and the temporal Muscles 
are distended. In this case, let yout Servant 
hold the Patient's Head firm, or hold it against 
a Wall; draw the Jaw-bone first downward, 
putting both your Thumbs in the Mouth, then 
backward, and lastly upward. 
 
2. The Collar-bone rarely happens to be luxated, 
and is seldom set, but it stands somewhat 
out; whereby it often comes to pass, that the 
Patient cannot lift up his hand to his mouth, 
much less to his head. For restoring it, you are 
to lay the Patient on his back and a stone under 
his shoulder; then you must draw his Arm forward 
and backward, as the Dislocation requires; 
then press the Clavicle, so raised, down into its 
place. 
 
3. The Great Bone of the Arm (Adjutorium) 
is never dislocated backward; seldom upwards 
and forwards, but for the most part downward: 
a certain sign of it is, if you find it roundish 
hardness under the Arm-pits, and on the top 
of the Shoulder a hollowness, and the Arm be 
longer, and the Patient cannot bring his hand 
to his Mouth. It may be reduced several 
ways; but these are the most convenient, and 
the most sure. 1. Let a strong man hold the 
Patient fast about the hurt Shoulder, and let 
another draw the Arm downwards; then lift the 
upper part of the Arm into its Cavity, and the 
Bone will be soon restored into its place. 2. Take 
a strong Ladder, at the foot thereof put a 
Stool for the Patient to stand upon; on the uppermost 
[^p.22^] 
step, bind something round that may 
just fit the Arm-pits; put the Patients Arm upon 
it, and draw it downward, moving the Shoulder-bone 
to and fro; let your Servant, meanwhile, 
draw the sound Arm downward, and 
withal, thrust away the Stool from under the 
Patient, that whilst he is thus pendulous, the 
Shoulder-bone may be restored. 3. Lay the Arm-pits 
of the Patient upon the Shoulder of a strong 
and taller man than himself; draw the dislocated 
Arm downward, so that he lifting up hi_[^ORIG. BLURRED^] 
own Shoulder, the Patient may remain in a pendulous 
posture: In the mean time, press his Shoulder 
downward, working the Arm to and fro, until 
it be restored to its due place. 4. The Glosso_[^ORIG. BLURRED^]mium 
described by Hyppocrates, and approved 
by Paræus, is the most convenient of all; to be 
seen in the Authors themselves. 
 
4. If the Vertebræ of the Neck be out of 
joint, the Patient is to be set upon a little low 
Stool, and his Shoulders pressed downward After 
this, his Head is to be lifted up with both 
hands, turning it to and fro (yet with as littl_[^ORIG. BLURRED^] 
force as may be) and thus they are to be reduced. 
Whereupon the Patient will present_[^ORIG. BLURRED^] 
find himself at ease, and turn his head whith_[^ORIG. BLURRED^] 
he pleaseth. 
 
5. If the Vertebræ of the Back be forced outwards, 
the Patient is to be laid upon his Bell_[^ORIG. BLURRED^] 
and by two Men and two Ligatures, one tie_[^ORIG. BLURRED^] 
under the Arm-pits, the other about the Hi_[^ORIG. BLURRED^] 
he must be strongly stretched out, and the V_[^ORIG. BLURRED^]tebræ's 
be thrust in again. If they be forced _[^ORIG. BLURRED^]wards, 
it is mortal. 
 
6. If the Os sacrum be out of joint, put yo_[^ORIG. BLURRED^] 
[^p.23^] 
fingers into the Anus, and press it from within 
as well as from without, into its place. 
 
7. A Rib dislocated, must not remain long out 
of its place, lest more grievous Accidents follow. 
If it be removed out of its Vertebra upwards, then 
hang the Patient by his Arms over a Door, and so 
press it in. If it be out of joint downward, the 
Patient must bend himself, laying his hands upon 
his Knees, and the Chirurgeon in the mean time, 
must move to and again the displaced Rib till it 
be restored to its right place. If it be dislocated 
inward, lay a sticking Plaister on it, and often pull 
it away with violence; and thus sometimes it may 
be restored; if not, it often proveth mortal, not 
being capable to be reduced by the Hands. 
 
8. The Cubitus may be dislocated forward or 
backward, inward or outward. And sometimes the 
Radius is likewise dislocated with it, sometimes it 
remains in its place; which by handling the part, 
is easily perceived. If the Cubitus be out forwards, 
the Arm thereby becomes shorter, & cannot be 
bent; the Bone stands out forwards, and behind 
there is a preternatural hallowness. The forced-out 
Bone must, as well in this, as in all other 
kinds of dislocation of the Elbow, be speedily restored; 
otherwise there will follow grievous Pain, 
Inflammation, Feaver, Vomiting of Choler, and 
sometimes Death it self. Let the Arm be extended 
obliquely, and so far, that one Bone may not 
hurt the other in the setting. If the Hands be 
not strong enough, then bend the dislocated 
Arm about a Pillar or a Bed-post, and by the help 
of a Bandage extend it, pressing the Bone 
backward, until it be replaced. If it be dislocated 
back-ward, the Arm will then also be shorter, and 
[^p.24^] 
cannot be bent, the Bone will stand out behind; 
and before there is a preternatural cavity. If it 
be inward or outward, there are the like signs; 
only the Tumor will be in the place, to which 
the Bone hath been forced; whereas the hollowness 
is there, whence it hath been forced. All 
these three dislocations may be easily cured by 
a convenient Extention, if they be not inveterate. 
The same is to be understood of the Radius, 
when forced out of its place. 
 
9. The Hip may be put out of joint four manner 
of ways chiefly; inward, outward and forward, 
but seldom backward. If inward, the Leg 
is longer, and moveth with difficulty; the Knee 
is turned outward, and the head of the Thigh-bone 
by the hands may be perceiv'd in the Groin. 
As it is difficult to put in, so easily doth it slip out 
again, whereby the Part affected is wasted, and 
the Patient lamed. To reduce it to its place, lay 
the Patient upon the midst of a Bench or Table; 
between his Legs put a strong stick, wound about 
with Linnen, and upon it let him stifly stretch out 
his Leg, and the Chirurgeon in the mean time 
with his hands set it. If outwardly dislocated, 
the Leg grows shorter, and the Foot is turned 
inwards. The Patient can then indeed bend his 
Leg, but hardly bring it to the ground. Though 
it be not set aright, yet the pain vanisheth of it 
self, and the Patient in time is able to go without 
Crutches. Lay him on a Bench or Table as 
above; let the Leg be strongly extended, either 
with hands or Bandage, and mean while reduce 
it into its place. If the Hip be forced out forward, 
the Groin is swoln, and the Buttocks fallen, 
the Leg is neither longer nor shorter, nor 
[^p.25^] 
cannot be bent but with trouble; and the Urine 
is suppressed. Though it be not set aright, yet 
the Patient in time will be able to go well enough 
upon it; though sometimes it falls out, that he must 
somewhat trail his Leg after him. To restore it, 
let the Patient lie on his sound side, and strongly 
stretch out his Leg, press it into its former place; 
and in case the hand be too weak, thrust it in with 
your Knee. If it be dislocated backward, the 
Patient can neither stretch out, nor bend his Leg, 
nor is he able to bring his Heel to the ground, 
and if he should force himself to do so, he would 
fall backward; the Leg is shorter, there is a hollowless 
in the Groins, and if the Buttocks be 
pressed upwards, you shall find an unusual swelling. 
Though it be not put in, yet the pain will 
in time vanish, and then the Leg may be bent 
again, but it remains shorter and straight, nor is 
the Foot turned inward nor outward. Lay the 
Patient on his Belly, and strongly extend his 
Leg; mean time apprehend the Thigh bone above 
the Knee; stretch it outward from off the 
sound Leg; press the Head into its Cavity, in 
which yet it will not stay, if thenceforth the 
Patient do not keep himself very quiet. 
 
10. The Dislocations of the Tibia and Fibula, 
are cured after the same manner as those of 
the Cubitus and Radius. 
 
11. If the Knee pan be out of its place, let the 
Patient stand upright, and press it in again; lay 
on the side whence it hath been forced away, a 
hollow Splint, answerable to the shape of the 
said Pan, and below in the cavity of the Leg, put 
one or more compressing Splints, binding the 
whole Leg so stiff, that the Knee may not bend. 
 
[^p.26^] 
[}CHAP. VII. 
Of Ruptures.}] 
 
HAving thus roughly handled the boney and 
hard parts of the Body, it now follows, 
that I treat the soft and fleshie more gently, and 
describe their Synthesis or re-unition again. Therefore 
I begin with the broken Peritonæum, which 
sometimes gives way to the Intestines, at other 
times to the Cawl, and not seldom to both, to 
get out of their natural place into the Groins or 
Scrotum, there causing a Rupture called Entorocele, 
or Hernia Intestinalis, if the Guts come out; an 
Epiplocele, or Hernia Omentalis, if the Omentum 
or Cawl be out. 
 
The Peritonæum is made up of two strong, but 
soft Membranes, which do so contain whatsoever 
is included in the Belly or lowest Cavity, that 
when sound, nothing can fall out. In Women, the 
Os Pubis is its utmost Limit. In Men, its outermost 
Membrane reaches farther; and constitutes 
the first proper Coat of the Testicles. In the 
Groins, it comprehends the Seminal Vessels as in 
a Sheath, called Processus, or Productio Peritonæi. 
This being stretch'd, or enlarged, or coming to 
burst, is the proximate cause to the lately mentioned 
Ruptures. The Groins therefore are the 
usual places of Ruptures: But do not imagine, 
that the Peritonæum cannot be distended or burst 
in other places, and there to cause a Rupture. 
It happens sometimes above the Navel, yet seldom: 
Beneath, and on the side of the Navel, far 
[^p.27^] 
above the Groins, I have not only seen it often, 
with many others, but seen it ordered and dressed 
just like an Abscess; the Chirurgeon giving no 
other reason for his mistake, than that it was not 
the place of Ruptures; which those that love the 
Art and their own Honour, may take notice of. 
 
Most times the Ileon falls down, yet sometimes 
the other Guts come out with it, and fall into the 
Scrotum; which cannot come to pass by a simple 
distention of the abovesaid process, but that necessarily 
in all such great Ruptures it must be broken. 
 
The Causes which make the Peritonæum to 
burst or to dilate, are Falling, Leaping, Blows, 
bearing of heavy Burdens, strong Vomiting or 
Coughing, difficult going to Stool, Winds retained, 
and all vehement Motions of the Body. 
 
Signs.] The Tumor is sometimes bigger, sometimes 
lesser, sometimes altogether vanisht, but 
with the least Motion returning. Though the 
Caul or Intestines should be fallen down never 
so much, they may easily, without any pain, be 
thrust in again, unless Wind or Excrement hinder 
it, in which case the Rupture is very painful. 
 
If the Intestines be full of Wind, the whole belly 
is tense; you may hear a noise, and the Patient 
breaks Wind upwards and downwards. If the 
Excrements be grown hard, the Patient goes 
with difficulty to Stool, and the swelling, weight 
and hardness, little by little encreaseth. If the 
Peritonæum be only relaxed and widened, then 
the Tumor from little becomes bigger by degrees; 
but if it be broken, it suddenly descends. 
 
Prognosticks.] In little Children, Ruptures are 
easily cured; in aged people, slowly or not at 
all, especially if the Peritonæum be burst. If 
[^p.28^] 
the Intestines be filled with Wind or Excrements, 
there follows pain; and if that be not 
suddenly removed, an Inflamation, Gangrene, 
and at last Death it self. 
 
Cure.] Lay the Patient on his Back with his 
Legs on high, and a little asunder, by which it 
often comes to pass, that the Caul or the Intestines 
return of themselves into their former 
place; but that not happening, press them in 
gently with your fingers. And if you cannot effect 
this, by reason of Wind or hardened Excrements, 
then use the following Medicines. 
 
[}Where the Excrements are indurated,}] 
 
Take Roots of Marsh-mallows, two ounces: 
of white Lillies, one ounce; Leaves of Mallows, 
Violets, Pellitory of the Wall, of each half a 
handful; Flowers of Camomile and Melilot, of 
each two pugils; Bran, half a handful: Boil 
them in Water, and to the Liquor, 
 
[}Add of}] 
 
Barly and Bean-meal, of each three ounces; 
Lin-seed and Fenugreek, of each two drams; Oyl 
of Roses and white Lillies, Ducks-Fat, and Hens-Fat, 
of each an ounce. Make it into Cataplasm. 
 
In case this Cataplasm be not sufficient, or 
seems not to be so, then bathe the Patient two 
or three hours in Oyl, sweet Milk, or Water, 
wherein Emollients have been boyled; not forgetting 
in the mean time Clysters and Purges. 
 
[}Against Wind.}] 
 
Take Oyl of Camomile, Rue, of each one 
[^p.29^] 
ounce; Oyl of Nard and Dill, of each three 
drams; Spirit of Wine, two drams; a little 
Wax: Make it into an Oyntment. 
 
[}Another,}] 
 
Take Oyl of Wormwood, one ounce; Oyl 
of Nard and Nutmeg exprest, of each half an 
ounce: Oyl of Mace and Carraways distilled, 
of each one dram; Malmsey, an ounce and 
half: Boil it a little, then add to it as much Wax 
as is sufficient to make it into an Ointment. 
 
Inwardly use the seeds of Anise, Fenel, Carraways, 
and others Medicines dispelling Wind; 
which also are to be mixt in the peculiar Clysters 
requisite to this purpose. 
 
Also the Cumin Plaister used by some, may 
here do good service. 
 
[}Or,}] 
 
Take the Styptick Plaister of Crollius, Gum-Caranna, 
Tacamahac, of each half a dram; 
Ol. Philosophorum, and Carraways distilled, of 
each an ounce: Make it into a Plaister. 
 
These impediments being thus removed, and 
the Caul or Intestines reduced to their place; 
you must then with convenient Bands or Trusses 
so long keep them in, until the burst Peritonæum 
be so firmly grown, either together again, 
or to the Muscles of the Belly, that nothing can 
fall out of it any more. And this you will the 
sooner obtain, if you outwardly lay on it the 
following Plaister, and inwardly assist Nature 
with appropriated Medicines. But here remember, 
that in old Ruptures, and aged People, the 
edges of the burst Peritonæum are sometimes callous, 
that how fitly soever they are brought together, 
yet they can never grow together; and 
[^p.30^] 
in that case Bands must do the best; but in young 
Children they easily grow together; and here 
Trusses are better than the best Bands: Those 
that are not acquainted with them, must confult 
those that are. 
 
[}A Plaister for a Rupture.}] 
 
Take Roots of the great Comfrey, Bistort, of 
each an ounce and half; Round Birthwort, two 
drams; Galls, Cypress-Nuts, Pomegranate-Rinds, 
of each one dram and half; Flowers of Balaustians, 
Red-Roses, Oak-Leaves, of each half a dram; 
Aloes, Dragons-Blood, Acacia, Earth-worms 
dried, Frankincense, Mastick, Myrrhe, Sarcocols, 
Mummy, of each one dram; Pitch, Colophony, 
Burnt-Talch, of each one dram; Lytharge, Bole-Armonick, 
Lap. Hematitis, prepared Steel, of 
each one scruple; Venice-Turpentine, as much 
as is sufficient to make a Plaister. 
 
[}An Apozem, that the Patient may take five ounces 
two or three time a day.}] 
 
Take Osmund-Royal, Rupture wort, of each 
one handful; Roots of the great Comfrey, Bistort 
of each one ounce and half; St. Johns-wort 
Flowers, one handful; Aniseeds, two drams; 
Boyl them in Red-Wine, and to a pint and half 
of the strained Liquor, 
 
[}Add,}] 
 
Of the Syrup of Comfrey of Fernelius, two 
ounces: Make it an Apozem. 
 
[^p.31^] 
[}Pills that the Patient may take five or six of, 
mornings and evenings.}] 
 
Take Mummy, one dram; Galbanum dissolved 
in Vinegar, two drams; Myrrhe, Filings of 
Steel, dried Hares-Dung, of each half a dram; 
Powder of Earth-Worms, two scruples: Make 
them into Pils about the bigness of a great Pease. 
 
If by a Wound, the Caul or Intestines come 
out, you are to endeavour to put them in again, 
before they lose their natural warmth or colour 
by the Air, otherwise there will remain but 
small hopes of recovery. 
 
If the Intestines be wounded, then with a waxed 
Thread stitch the Lips together, and with a 
gentle hand return it into the Body; as also the 
Omentum slipt out, unless it should have lost its 
natural colour and warmth; in which case, you 
must tie it in the place where it is sound, cutting 
off the part that is putrid, and reduce it into the 
Belly, leaving the Thread hanging out of the 
Wound, that after Suppuration, it may be conveniently 
fetcht out. 
 
And then you must stitch together the Wound 
of the Belly and the Peritonæum, which is to be 
done after this manner; Take a Needle, thred it 
with a Waxen Thread, thrust it from without 
through the Skin and Muscles unto the very Peritonæum; 
leaving it on this side untoucht, but lay 
hold on it on the other side; pierce it through, 
and the Muscles and the Skin also, drawing the 
Lips together; then passing over the space of an 
inch, thrust in the Needle on the same side again, 
on which you drew it out last, through the Skin 
[^p.32^] 
and Muscles, leaving again the Peritonæum on 
the same side untoucht, but holding it on the 
other side, thrust it through together with the 
Skin and Muscles, and so on: Then seeing that 
by reason of the continual motion of the Belly, 
your stitches may be easily undone, the rather, 
because the haste, sometimes here to be used, 
will not permit to make them with Exactness, 
it is always necessary to apply to the Wound a 
sticking-Plaister. 
 
Among these Ruptures is to be reckoned the 
Navel-Rupture (called Exomphalos, or Hernia Umbilicalis) 
which proceeds from the same cause, 
and is cured by the same means: Only you are 
here to observe, That upon the Plaister, you must 
put Bolsters of Leather, or other hard things, 
and this according to the bigness of the Rupture; 
that by this means it may be sufficiently and perfectly 
kept in. 
 
It is worthy nothing that the Peritonæum seldom 
bursts in this part. I have divers times found 
and shewed in dissected Bodies, that the Navil, 
together with the Intestine following, stood out 
bigger than a mans Head, insomuch that the 
right Muscles of the Belly were pressed to the 
side, and severed from one another; and yet 
was the Peritonæum but stretched, and no where 
broken. 
 
These are the simple and compounded Ruptures 
that are commonly described; but Practice 
shews us many others, not mention'd by Writers. 
For, Experience hath taught me, that the Peritonæum 
may burst in the back-part, and there cause 
a Rupture. We also find, that the Processus 
Peritonæi near to the Groins, may come 
[^p.33^] 
so to be lacerated, that the Guts press not into the 
Scrotum, but between the Skin and Muscles falls 
down toward the Thigh. Besides, we have more 
than once found, that the Va~s deferens was fallen twisted 
into the Scrotum, and had there made a Rupture; 
which happening, it may with the Hands 
be easily reduced, yet, goes in of it self by lying 
backward, without any further inconvenience. 
 
The manner of cure had nothing peculiar in 
it self, but that you contrive such Bands, that may 
reduce the parts fallen out into their right place, 
without prejudicing the sound ones. 
 
Among these Ruptures, are commonly reckoned 
divers Swellings, that belong to other 
Chapters; where also we intend to describe 
them. But to comply with young Students, I 
shall here enumerate those that in the modern 
Practice do occur; Namely, 
 
1. Entero-cele, Hernia Intestinalis, or the falling 
down of the Guts into the Groin. 
2. Epiplo-cele, Hernia Omentalis, or the falling 
down of the Caul. 
3. Omphalo-cele, Hernia Umbilicalis, or the 
Rupture of the Navel. 
4. Pneumato-cele, Hernia Ventosa, or the Wind-Rupture. 
5. Hydro-cele, Hernia Aquosa, Water-Rupture. 
6. Bubono-cele, Swelling of the Glandules in 
the Groin. 
7. Cirso-cele, a swelling of the Seminal Vessels 
in the Scrotum. 
8. Hernia-Veneris, an hardening of the Testicles 
by an impure Concuoitus. 
9. Hernia-Humoralis, a Repletion of the Testicles 
with unnatural Humors. 
[^p.34^] 
10. Hernia Carnosa, a fleshy Rupture. 
11. Broncho-cele, Hernia Gutturis, a swelling 
in the Throat. 
12. Spermato-cele, figuratively so called by me, 
when the Vas deferens falls twisted into the 
Scrotum. 
 
[}CHAP. VIII. 
Of the falling down of the Matrix.}] 
 
THe Matrix does not easily fall down by Relaxation, 
much less by Laceration of her 
broad Ligaments, as most Writers imagin; from 
hard Labour, or by an indiscreet drawing away 
of the Secundine. Others with me have seen, that 
the bottom of the Matrix hath been plainly inverted 
in pudendis, so that the inward part shewed 
it self as the outward. We have also found (especially 
in those that were subject to Costiveness 
or Belly-ach) that the membranes of the Pudenda 
were so far stretcht out, that the unskilful 
have taken it for the Matrix it self, and do so 
still. For though many Authors have dared to 
write, that the Womb may be cut out without 
danger of life, seems altogether impossible to 
a skilful Anatomist. 
 
To cure this Disease, lay the Patient on her 
back, with her Knees on high, and Legs asunder; 
then take a Wax-Candle of a competent thickness, 
mix therewith some Castoreum or Assa Fœtida, 
and with it gently press the Womb inward, 
and having sastened the Candle with a Bandage, 
[^p.35^] 
apply outwardly to the Belly the Emplastrum 
Barbarum, or the following: 
 
Take the Roots of Cyprus, Bistort, of each a 
dram; Galls, Acacia, of each half a dram: Cypress-Nuts, 
Date-stones, Myrtle-Berries, of each 
one dram; Pitch and Colophony, as much as 
sufficeth to make it into a Plaister. 
 
Then presently enjoyn the Patient to lie still, 
with the Legs cross, and to beware of speaking 
aloud, of scolding, and of whatever may occasion 
coughing or sneezing. 
 
Here great care is to be had, that your Wax-Candle 
be not too thick, to the end that by its continual 
friction it may not cause Fluorem Album, 
whereby the strength of the Body would certainly 
come to decay. Yet because ev'n by the greatest 
care and circumspection, this inconvenience will 
hardly be altogether or always prevented; therefore 
those do very well and discreetly, that longways 
perforat the Candle, and thereby give a convenient 
passage for the humors flowing that way. 
 
[}CHAP. IX. 
Of the falling down of the Fundament.}] 
 
IF the Gut be sunk down, anoint it with Oyl 
of Rose and Myrtle, mixing a little Powder 
of Galls amongst it, and with your Fingers and 
a small Linnen-Rag, put it in. If an Inflamation 
hinder the reducing it, then bathe the Anus 
with these Medicines, 
 
Take Flowers of Elder, Camomile, and St. 
[^p.36^] 
John's-wort, of each a handful; Red Roses, 
two Pugils; the tops of Wormwood and Melilot, 
of each half a handful: Boil therein Milk 
and Red Wine, and bathe the part. 
 
Here especially care is to be had, that no external 
cold may come to the fallen-out Anus; for 
then you may sooner than you are aware of, be 
surprized with a Gangreen. Wherefore do your 
utmost to put it in again with speed; and in the 
mean time, endeavor with the above-prescrib'd 
Bathing and warm Linnen Rags, to preserve its 
natural heat. 
 
There is yet another, though in appearance 
ridiculous, yet in reality a good way of reducing 
the Gut. With a strong hand strike five or six 
times the Patient's Buttocks, and thereby the 
Muscles, called Ani levatores, will presently draw 
the Anus into its right place again. But before 
the Patient be thus chastized, take care that the 
Gut may first be anointed with Oyl of Roses, 
or of Myrtle. 
 
[}CHAP X. 
Of the second Operation called Diæresis, or 
the seperation of what was united together.}] 
 
HItherto we have joined together again what 
had been disjoined; now it follows, that 
we separate what is united, and treat of the second 
Manual Operation, called Diæresis, which teacheth 
us the manner of Cutting and Burning, and 
that both in the hard and soft parts of the Body. 
 
[^p.37^] 
In the soft, the Cutting is called Incision. In 
the hard, it is performed four manner of ways: 
By Terebration or Perforation; by Rasion or Scraping; 
by Limation, or Filing; by Serration, or 
Sawing. Burning is done either by an Iron (which 
is the Actual Cautery) or by Medicaments (called 
the Potential Cautery) as shall be declared 
particularly hereafter. 
 
[}CHAP. XI. 
Of opening a Vein.}] 
 
BLeeding (one of the greatest Remedies in the 
Art of Physick) is sometimes highly necessary, 
but sometimes so dangerous, that it ought 
not to be used without very urgent Causes. Here 
therefore I think it will be better somewhat to 
digress for fuller information, than to leave the 
unskilful in their error. 
 
The Blood is the darling of Nature, by whose 
assistance she performeth all her Operations, 
and which can hardly be drawn from her without 
dammage; yet does Art require, that those 
who meddle with it, being neither venturous 
nor timorous, but discreet and couragious, and 
making out of necessity a virtue, do sometimes 
proceed to the opening a Vein; yet for no other 
than these four following causes. 
 
1. In a Plethora, or super-abundance of blood, 
that by this means Nature may be eased of her 
too heavy burden, and the innate heat preserved 
from suffocation. 
 
[^p.38^] 
2. For Revulsion-sake, when the blood and 
the (therein) mingled humors, by flowing too 
plentifully to this or that part, hinder the Cure: 
Here you are always to chuse a Vein of the opposite 
side, and that sometimes the farthest distant, 
sometimes the nearest. 
 
3. For the Derivation or conveyance of the 
Blood (which is already got into the part, but is 
not yet altogether setled there, nor extravasated) 
into another place; in which case a Vein is to 
be opened the nearest to the Part. 
 
4. For Refrigeration, when the heat of the 
Blood is so excessive, that it cannot be allayed 
by cooling Medicines, or not time enough. 
 
These limits are too narrow for some, who will 
needs take into those a fifth cause, which they 
make the Corruption of the Blood, held by them 
to be as great an inducement for bleeding as any 
of the four by us recited; to the end, say they, that 
Nature being rid of part of what is corrupt, may 
be the better able to correct what remains. 
 
But I much wish, 1. That they could make this 
discharge without the loss of that strength which 
is so highly necessary. 2. That they would be present 
when their Patient is to bleed, and precisely 
tell to what degree of corruption his blood is come, 
that so the Chirurgeon may know how much of 
it he is to take, and how often; forasmuch as they 
will not allow, that Bleeding is good in all sorts of 
the Blood's corruption, but in that only which 
is not gone considerably far. 3. That they would 
declare, why they will have cur'd the greater corruption 
by Purging, and the lesser by Bleeding, 
since that they give to the one as well as to the other 
(and that duly) the name of Cacho-Chimia. 
[^p.39^] 
Let them shew, that things differing only secundum 
Majus & Minus, do differ in specie, and so 
require specifically different Remedies. 
 
Others proceed yet further, and shed innocent 
Blood in all sorts of Fevers, without any consideration 
of spots of the Plague, or of Poison it self; 
thus freeing themselves from a great deal of labor 
and trouble, otherwise caus'd to the Physitian from 
the variety of Fevers. But because the nature of all 
Poyson and Malignant Humors is continually to 
assault the Heart, and suddenly to prostrate the 
strength of the strongest Persons; and since Bleeding 
doth likewise both, not only diminishing 
strength, but also drawing the malignity toward 
the Heart, and driving in again, for the oppression 
of Nature, what she had thrown out for her relief: 
I do intreat and warn all the Practisers of our Art, 
That as they love the quiet of their Mind, and 
the good of their Patients, they would beware 
of bleeding in Pestilential and other Malignant 
Fevers; as also in all cases that may befal People 
by Poyson, either inward or outward. 
 
The French, Italians, Spaniards and Portugueses 
(great Blood-letters) will, I expect, tell me; That 
Nature, when by bleeding she hath vent, and is 
somewhat discharg'd, shall be better able to throw 
out the remaining Evil. And this seems to be true, 
for the blood indeed receives Air, that the Spirits 
may the better flie away, and is robb'd of that 
strength which it so necessarily wants; whereupon 
Nature exchangeth the Life of the Patient for 
death, and extorts tears from the By-standers. 
 
Without alledging other Reasons, they ground 
themselves upon Experience. And it were to be 
wished they had that ground indeed; for we find 
[^p.40^] 
such Patients of theirs, who in the morning were 
in no danger, even after but the taking away of 
five or six ounces of Blood, to be cold and stiff at 
night. Whence it may easily be collected, what 
it is they call Experience, viz. If the Patient by 
chance escape death, then Bleeding must have the 
honor of it; but if he die, as for the most part, 
then the malignity of the Disease was the cause 
of it. Wherefore I alledge Experience against Experience, 
and praise God Almighty, that he hath 
vouchsafed to furnish all those, who without envy, 
passion, or slavish dependance upon others, 
will duly consider Diseases with surer means. 
 
The more moderate sort of them would have 
Bleeding only administred in the beginning of the 
Disease, and before the Malignity appears outwardly. 
This I shall willingly allow them; 1. In 
very hot Countreys. 2. In a Plethorick Body. 3. If 
the humors flying to the head, cause any grievous 
symptoms there; in which case, bleeding 
in the Hand or Foot may be, I think, very beneficial. 
Otherwise those that use it in all bodies, 
and without distinction in these cold and moist 
parts, will find the ill effects of it, and be puzled 
withal to give a reason for their Practice, 
allowable by Art; the rather because, by their 
own confession, they dare not use this their Darling 
of Bleeding at certain times, but find themselves 
best in the use of Sudorificks and cooling 
Drinks. But enough of this. 
 
Now how many Ounces of Blood ought to be 
taken at once; the degree of the Disease, and the 
Patients more or less strength, will indicate. And 
'tis better too little than too much. I have never 
taken more from the strongest and most plethoric 
[^p.41^] 
Person under my Cure, than twelve ounces at 
once, chusing rather, in case of need, to let out 
twenty ounces at two times, than fifteen at once; 
of which method I have found good success. 
 
As to the season of the year, and the hour of 
the day, little regard needs to be had in those 
Diseases, wherein bleeding cannot be deferred 
without danger, as in Plurisies, Squinancies, &c. 
Otherwise, the Spring and Autumn, and the 
Morning are best. 
 
The veins that are wont commonly to be opened, 
are these: In the Forehead, the Vena frontis; 
in the Temples, the Vena Temporalis; in the 
Mouth, the Vena sublingualis, or Ranularis; in 
the Neck, the Jugularis externa; in the Arm, 
the Basilica, under which lieth an Artery; the Mediana, 
under which lieth a Nerve, and under both 
of them a Tendon; and the Cephalica, which hath 
under, or near it, neither Artery, Nerve, nor Tendon, 
and therefore may safely be opened: This 
last hath but one small Branch that runs outward 
to the head, whence it hath got the name of the 
Head Vein. Without this consideration, it little 
matters which of these three be opened, in regard 
that about the Arm-pits they all acknowledge no 
more but one Branch. In the Hand, between 
the little finger and its neighbour, the Salvatella; 
in the Foot, the Saphena and Ischiatica. 
 
The manner of Bleeding is so well known, that 
I think it needless here to describe it; only I could 
wish, that some of those that let blood, would take 
care somewhat better to guess of the number of 
Ounces of Blood they take from their Patients, 
that so we might not find 12, 16, 18, yea, 
22 ounces drawn away instead of 6 or 8, that 
[^p.42^] 
were prescribed. To prevent so intolerable a mistake, 
I would advise, that small Porringers of 
Tin or Copper were made, in which the number 
of ounces were mark'd; though expert Masters 
do not at all need them, as knowing that Blood 
is really weightier, than it outwardly seems. 
 
