[^Prat, Ellis: Vade mecum^] 
 
[}VADE MECUM: 
OR, A 
COMPANION 
FOR A 
CHIRURGION. 
FITTED 
For Sea, or Land; Peace, or War. 
 
Shewing 
The Use of his Instruments, and Virtues of Medicines 
Simple and Compound most in use, and how 
to make them up after the best Method. 
 
With the manner of making Reports to a Magistrate, 
or Coroner's Inquest. A Treatise of Bleeding 
at the Nose, and directions for Bleeding, Purging, Vomiting, 
&c. 
 
By Thomas Brugis, Doctor in Physick. 
 
Being amended, and augmented with an Instistution 
of Physick, and seven New Treatises, viz. of Tumors, 
Wounds, Ulcers, Fractures, Dislocations, Lues Venerea, 
Anatomy. 
 
Whereto 
Is also added, (by way of Supplement,) 
another New Discourse called Chirurgus Methodicus, or, 
The Young Chirurgion's Conductor through the Labyrinth 
of the most difficult Cures occurring in his whole 
Art, and whereby he is distinguished from Empyricks 
and Quacksalvers. 
 
By ELLIS PRAT. M. D. 
The Seventh Edition. 
 
London, Printed for B. T. and T. S. and Sold by Fr. Hubbert, 
next the Crown Tavern in Duck-lane. 1689.}] 
 
[^A dedication to William Juxon from Little Compton in the county of Gloucester omitted.^] 
[^Extract 1, ff. A4r-a10v^] 
 
[^f.A4r^] 
[}To the Young ARTIST, 
By way of Institution.}] 
 
THat thou may'st be the better enabled to 
comprehend what's in the Body of 
this Book, which is wholly practical, I desire 
thee first to reade this theoretical System. 
 
First then know, thou intendest to employ 
thy self in part of an Art, whose Author, Necessity 
and Subject, enough commend it; i. e. 
Medicine, so call'd, a medendo; its Author is 
that of every good Gift, GOD; whom 
Moses and Syrach tell us, made Plants and 
Medicines out of the earth, and the Physician 
to be honor'd. Experience brought it first 
in use, to which daily Necessity gave occasion; 
probably first practis'd among the Egyptians, 
says the great Heurnius, for we find its chief 
axioms to come from them; as to be seen in 
Hipp. 1. Aph. 22. and Arist. 3. Polit. 11. and 
Herodotus, in Euterpe, tells us, particular diseases 
among them, had their particular Physicians; 
so for the head, teeth, eyes, &c. and 
their Land is most fruitfull in Medicines. Now 
Experience first invented the dyetetic part, 
[^f.A4v^] 
Hipp. de Vet. Med. for men changing dyet, 
when sick so recover'd; which Herodotus 
says the Egyptians did, who used every 
month to purge three days, thinking all diseases 
proceeded from dyet; for their air never 
chang'd. The Grecians make Apollo the Inventer, 
and Æsculapius the Amplifier; who 
was esteem'd a god, because he call'd to life 
Hippoclytus and Androgeus Son of Minois, 
but I suppose 'twas because he prolong'd 
their Lives by his Art. Pliny will have it 
Chyron and Centaur, whence centaury so call'd. 
Æsculapius's two sons, Podalyrius and Machaon, 
in the Trojan War, practis'd rather 
Chirurgery, than Dyet or Pharmacy. Whatever 
Mortal was the Author, we are most infinitely 
oblig'd to the Divine Hippocrates, the 
first Writer, for our knowledge therein. Next 
Galen, who expounded him, distinguish'd 
things confus'd, supply'd what was wanting, 
and may deservedly be held to have completed 
the Art; for what hath since been writ 
to purpose, is drawn from their Ocean. 'Tis 
defin'd by Hipp. l. de flatib. additio & subtractio; 
because diseases come from repletion 
or inanition, and so are cur'd, by subtracting 
what's redundant, and adding what's deficient: 
its subject for Theory and Practice, 
the macro and microcosm. 'Tis parted into 
three Sects. 
 
[^f.A5r^] 
1. Empirics, who slight Reason, and only 
build upon use, they enquire only into the 
symptoms, they try medicines, which they 
call autopsia, i.e. self-seeing, or learn them 
tryed from others, which is call'd history; or 
whatsoever they find in Books: then they use 
them by passing from like to like; either from 
disease to disease, as in erysipelas and herpes; 
or from remedy to remedy, as in mespilo and 
citoneo; or from part to part, as brachium and 
tibia, &c. Remedies, they say, are fortuita 
imitatoria, or consulto adhibita; they allow 
only of evident Reason; Acron Agrigentinus 
was the first of this Sect, who had many 
followers; and of which there are too many 
at this day, such as the Pseudochymists. 
 
2. Methodics, these mind neither part affected, 
cause, age, time, region, faculties, habit, 
nor custom of the sick, only the disease; 
wherein they consider'd communitates, i. common 
notions, whereof two are simple, one 
mixt, they'll have every disease to be either 
bound or loose, or compound of both; the 
bound they loosened, and the loose they 
bound; in mixt they helpt what urged most 
and so they said the whole Art might be 
learnt in six months; communities are either 
passive, as what's bound, loos'd, or active, as to 
hind, loose; or temporal, as the beginning, augment, 
state, declination. To heal, is to remove 
[^f.A5v^] 
what's strange, which is either extern or intern, 
that's so simple; that is so either in place, 
magnitude, or defect. Themison began this 
Sect, whom Juvenal, speaking of the incommodities 
of old Age, mentions, when he says 
they are as many attending it. 
 
Quot Themison ægros autumno occiderit uno. 
 
Thessalus Trallianus finisht it, who, in his 
Monument in the Appian way at Rome, would 
be call'd Iatronices, i. medicorum victor. 
 
3. Dogmatics, or Rationals; these inquir'd 
into all abovenam'd; Hippocrates was the 
Author of this, and Galen completed it. And 
this is to be chiefly follow'd, being compos'd 
of reason and experience: of this are 2 parts, 
Hygiene, which shews how to preserve health; 
and Therapeutic, which cures diseases. But 
these being not to be accomplish'd without 
knowledge of bodies and diseases, three other 
were added, Physiologia, which unfolds the 
natural constitutions of bodies: Pathologia, 
which looks to the nature, cause and symptoms 
of diseases. Semeiotica, which discourses 
of past, present and future signs. 
Hygiene considers six non-natural things, with 
their various use in sick and sound, old and 
young, &c. Therapeia teaches how to cure 
diseases, by Diet, Pharmacy or Chirurgery. 
[^f.A6r^] 
Now this Book being chiefly compos'd for 
the young Students in the last, I shall lay 
down a few Rules for the easier attaining to 
the knowledge thereof. 
 
Know then, with our famous Dr. Read, I 
define Chyrurgery, a branch of the therapeutical 
part of Medicine, whereby divers diseases of 
mans body are cured by manual operation. The 
first words contain the genus, the last, i.e. by 
manual operation the differentia, for of these 
two all definitions consist, according to Philosophers. 
It differs from Dyet and Pharmacy, 
in that they act not upon their subject by 
manual operation. It's etymology's obvious 
from chier, manus, and ergon, opus; and though 
formerly mean Mechanics have been call'd 
Chirurgions, yet now 'tis by excellence attributed 
only to those who work upon that divine 
subject, the body of man. 
 
Now the means to attain this Art, is by acquiring 
a competent knowledge in the forenamed 
parts of Medicine. The first whereof 
is Physiology, no one can cure aright, that 
does not well know the constitution of the 
body he has in hand; which is properly natural 
Philosophy it self, translated to a medicinal 
use: for ubi desinit physicus, ibi incipit medicus; 
but the Natural Philosopher ends not 
but in Physiology and Pathology; so the study 
of Medicine is to begin with the Semeiotica 
[^f.A6v^] 
or Therapeia. Now in Physiology are to be 
consider'd, Elements, Temperaments, Parts, 
Humors, Spirits, Faculties, Actions; of which 
in order. 
 
[}PHYSIOLOGIA.}] 
 
An Element is a simple body, out of which 
a mixt is compos'd, and into which 'tis lastly 
resolv'd; these are four, Fire, Air, Water, 
Earth, which Hippocrates l. natur. hum. call'd 
hot, cold, moist, dry, from their qualities. 
 
From these temper'd among themselves, 
rises Ovid's concordia discors, of one body, 
which, according to the quality of mixtion, 
obtains such and such a nature; whence 9 
differences of temperaments, 8 intemperate, 
4 simple, hot, cold, &c. 4 compound, hot and 
moist, hot and dry, cold and moist, cold and 
dry, 1. temperate either simply so, or according 
to weight, when the qualities are equal, 
which is rather Utopian than real, or at least 
but momentany: or according to justice; 
wherein is a moderation of Elements, agreeable 
to the nature of Man, Beast, Plant, &c. 
of this are certain limits, quos ultra citraque 
nequit consistere sanum. 'Tis divided into 
sanguin, bilious, phlegmatic, melancholic, and so 
analogous to the Elements and Humors, called 
second Elements; sex and age follow 
[^f.A7r^] 
temper; males commonly hotter than females; 
childhood to 14 years, hot and moist; 
adolescency to 25, the best temper; manhood, 
decays to old age, growing cold and 
dry. 
 
Now that all things live by an innate heat, 
and that it might penetrate all the parts of 
the body, 'tis resident in the spirits, whose 
definition (whatever Argenterius says) is 
this; A spirit is an airy, subtile, clear body like 
a vapor; the seat and bond of the faculties, 
and the first instrument of the functions; 
whereof the basis is humidum radicale. Some 
make three Spirits: 1. Vital, sent from the 
heart by the arteries to all parts. 2. Natural, 
of which the vital is begot, by inspiration 
of air: of this Galen doubted, as includrd in 
the vital, but the spirits of aliments ought 
not to be denied to the bloud, whence hotter 
bloud from wine than lettice. 3. Animal, 
made of the vital elaborated in plexu reteformi, 
sent out by the nerves for sense and motion, 
and to irradiate the parts; some hold 
only the first and last, some the last. 
 
A part is perfectly defined by the great 
Fernelius, a body adhering to the whole, endued 
with common life, ordained for its function and 
use. So hair, nails, fat, marrow, &c. nor 
Hippocrates's humors and spirits, strictly deserve 
not the name of parts. Of Parts, see 
Anatomy. 
 
[^f.A7v^] 
By Humor understand not, with Philosophers, 
a quality opposite to driness, but a 
body, yet not any, for chyle, seed, milk, 
sweat, urine, &c. are not properly humors, 
but only the alimentary with their excrements: 
'tis rashness to deny them, seeing they 
affect us in quantity, quality, &c. they're begot 
of the mixtion of aliments, four in general. 
1. Natural, going under the name of 
bloud, whose hot, cold, thick, thin parts, are 
call'd choler, phlegm, melancholy; serum's 
their vehicle, expell'd by urine, sweat, tears, 
&c. Pure bloud makes men blithe, florid, 
prudent, &c. but if it redound, foolish, &c. 
2. Excrementitious are to be voided by their 
proper places; Phlegm is, as it were, nutriment 
half cocted, so is to be alter'd, but that 
in the intestines unconcocted, is absterg'd by 
bile, and voided by siege, that that distills 
from the brain is mucus: this makes men 
slow, sleepy, &c. Bile hath its seat in the gall 
bladder, to purge the bloud from jaundise; 
and irritate the belly, and absterge phlegm; 
it makes men angry, quick wit, &c. Melancholy, 
fæx sanguinis, black, seated in the 
spleen; if not voided by hemorrhoids, &c. 
the whole body waxes black; it makes deceitfull, 
sad, envious, timidous, &c. but mixt 
with bloud or bile, constant and ingenious; 
it helps concoction, Gal. 5. de usu part. being 
[^f.A8r^] 
acid and contracting, and by its acerbtiy causes 
hunger; Soranus says these domineer in 
the body at certain times, bloud in the morn, 
bile at noon, melancholy in the evening, 
phlegm by night. Bloud natural is simply so 
call'd, but ill-affected, bilious, pituitous, melancholic, 
made so by putrefaction, adustion, 
refrigeration, or obstruction. And when it 
exceeds in quality or quantity, 'tis 3. Preternatural, 
of which Phlegm's fourfold; sweet, 
often spit out; acid, less cold than glassy, 
more than sweet; glassy, very cold, cleaving 
to the intestines, causes torments; at length 
becomes plastrous, whence tophi in articulis, 
salt, from putrefaction, or mixtion of salt 
serum. Bile fourfold, vitelline burnt in the 
veins; Porraceous, begot in the stomach; 
Æruginous; woady, sometimes begot in ventriculo, 
sometimes in venis; all call'd from 
their likeness. There is but one species of 
atra bilis, very hurtfull, sharp, fomenting the 
earth like vinegar, caus'd of adustion or putrefaction 
of other excrements: vitelline bile 
turns to porraceous, eruginous, glasteous, at 
last to black; 'tis made also of the bloud's 
thicker part, as bile of its thinner; it cannot 
be made of phlegm, unless salt. 
 
The Soul's the form, and cause of all operations, 
by which 'tis known, else its essence 
would be hid. Galen calls that temperies, by 
[^f.A8v^] 
which 'tis conserv'd intemperie fugit e~ corpore; 
but temperies and innate heat, are only the 
causæ sine qua, it stays not to operate. Faculty 
is the cause from which action proceeds, or 
the natural power of the Soul ordained to 
work by it self, from which action in active 
motion proceeds, operation is that which is 
performed by action; as flesh, bloud, &c. 
action indeed is operation, as sanguification, 
&c. not e~ contra, as flesh is the operation, not 
action of nature: faculty and action is threefold, 
1. Natural, even in Plants and Brutes, 
called the concupiscible, and altering, diffused 
in every part from the liver, has 4 subservient, 
attracting, reteining, concocting, expelling; 
some common parts have faculties, as 
stomach, &c. for themselves and others, for 
which they use fibres, but coction is performed 
by heat and faculty. 2. Vital, from the 
heart sending life; Plato called it irascible. 
5. Animal from the brain, by nerves, sends 
sense and motion. 
 
Now actions are to be considered in health 
and sickness; when unhurt and hurt they 
shew them; and for prediction. Action is 
never hurt in natural organs, where the faculty's 
insite, but a part is affected; but animal 
organs have the principle of sense and 
motion elsewhere, so action may perish the 
part unhurt. Natural faculty's action is 
[^f.A9r^] 
triple, 1. Nutrition, the turning of aliment 
into the substance of the living weight, which 
is done by a triple coction, 1. in the stomach 
chylifying, which is helpt by the liver, other 
parts heat; 'tis the seat of hunger, because of 
an exquisite sense, for hunger is a pain in desiring 
meat; it is nourished by bloud, not 
chyle, the feces mixt with chyle are thrust 
out and tinctur'd with bile; urine is an excrement 
of this coction, for every one hath 
two, thin and thick; the chyle cocted is detruded 
by pilorus to the intestines: the meseraic 
veins attract what's serviceable, and then 
'tis carried to the liver, and there turned to 
bloud; and this is the 2d coction and sends 
to all parts of the body, as in Anatomy, which 
assimilate it, which is perfect nourishment: 
thus in the veins and arteries is a nameless 
humor, not much unlike bloud, bedewing the 
parts of substance, it is called ros, cleaving 
cambium, perfectly assimilated gluten, and 
these are the Arabians secundary humors. 
Auction, which is an amplifying a body in 
length, breadth and depth, till it acquire its 
full magnitude; but calor and humor decrease 
till the weight dies. 
 
Generation is a work of the natural faculty, 
for propagation of species, or a motion to a 
new substance; when Animals are not perpetual, 
what they cannot obtain in individuals, 
they obtain in species. 
 
[^f.A9v^] 
Now generation of perfect Creatures, 
is of the males seed, and the females menstruous 
bloud, and consists of alteration, 
giving the substance and formation, conjunction 
of parts, form, site, &c. 
 
Seeds are join'd in the womb, whence follows 
conception; then the plastic faculty 
makes the 3 membranes involving the fetus, 
and forms all the parts together, for they 
want one anothers help; neither are they inform'd 
first with the vegetative soul, then 
the sensitive, and lastly the rational; for they 
are organs of all: and now having a house 
prepar'd, it begins to be nourish'd; about the 
3d month it moves, before it has neither soul, 
life nor motion; 'tis not nourish'd by the 
mouth, say some, but draws the maternal 
bloud by the umbilical vessels, which are a 
vein, two arteries, and ourachos, by which 'tis 
thought to void urine; others say 'tis nourish'd 
at the mouth by chile, till it grows bigger, 
and wants room and air, then by kicking 
breaks the membranes, &c. before the 
7th month its birth is not vital, in the 7th 
it may, if strong; else 'tis defer'd till the 
9th, 10th, or 11th; not vital in the 8th 
month out of Egypt. 
 
The vital faculty's a middle betwixt natural 
and animal; 'tis in the heart, hither is refer'd 
pulsend a respiration, of which in Anatomy. 
 
[^f.A10r^] 
The animal virtue is the principle of motion, 
sense, understanding, because join'd to 
the phansie, else 'tis not an organical faculty; 
'tis triple, 1. Sensitive, the outer senses are, 
1. seeing, whose object is any thing visible, 
color or light; its organ is the eye, chrystalline 
humor, other parts are only subservient. 
2. hearing's object is sound, its inner organ 
the membrane full of air, outward water, or 
air. 3. Smelling is objects odor, the middle 
air and water, organ's the nose. 4. tast's object 
is sapor, organ lingua; touching's objects 
are the first and second qualities, organ, 
membranes and nerves. The inner sense or 
principal faculty is triple, phansie, reasoning, 
memory, the common sense is as it were the 
others centre, and their Judge, it distinguishing 
between color, sound and other objects; 
phantasie apprehends, and distinguishes all objects 
and forms offer'd by the outer senses; 
by reasoning we meditate of conceived species: 
memory conserves things known. To 
the outward senses is refer'd sleeping and waking; 
sleep is caused of a benign vapor, obstructing 
part of the spirit's course; not all 
for they breathe, and sometime walk; 'tis 
caused also by retraction of the spirits toward 
the heart, by the senses organs; whence singing, 
music, labor, talk, earnest reading, cause 
sleep; narcotics, by staying the spirits, pain, 
[^f.A10v^] 
labor, waking, by absuming them, circular 
motions distract, coctions, frictions, lotiones 
pedum revoke, binders, obstructers, darkness, 
night, silence, bring a numness upon them. 
The loco-motive faculty is in the muscles, influenc'd 
from this spirit: of dreams, &c. in 
Philosophy. And this is the œconomy of our 
Body, according to the doctrine of the Ancients, 
I know the Moderns, as Rolfinccius 
Cartesius, Regius, Silvius, and others decree 
otherwise, as to the doctrine of chilification, 
sanguification, nutrition, generation, motion, respiration, 
sensation, &c. but whether either be 
receiv'd, yet the old method of healing is not 
chang'd by the mortification of plethora, cacochymia, 
or any cause; but the same curatory, 
preservatory and vital indications remain 
still, as Rolfinccius hath strongly insinuated; 
and his defender the most excellent Moebius, 
elegantly prosecutes, and largely: Therefore, 
says the Learned Jo. Daniel Horstius, we owe 
God thanks, that the method of curing grows 
famous daily, and is still the same, notwithstanding 
the disagreeing of so many new physical and 
anatomical Opinions. Do not, I pray, the 
Aristotelians and Democritics, sharply contend 
among themselves about Elements and Atoms? 
and yet both heal the same way, as 
plainly appears from what Leichnerus hath 
elegantly delivered Paragr. 55. and after ex 
4 de Atomis. 
 
[^f.A11r^] 
[}HYGIENE}] 
 
Next are things not natural to be consider'd, 
so called, because they are not in the 
body secundum naturam, as the faculties, nor 
præter naturam, as diseases, but in a mid way 
between both, for dyet consisting in their 
use, being well used they help, if not they 
hurt, by altering the body; for they defend 
both, and prevent diseases, therefore see their 
use in both; they are 6. the first is Air, consider'd 
in substance, quality, occasion and use; 
air pure and clear, the grounds east and north, 
high places best, hot augments bile, causes fevers, 
&c. cold distillations, hinders transpiration, 
promotes infirm coction, but hurts infirm 
bodies: Dry illustrates the spirits, hinders 
putrefaction; moist, hastens putrefaction; 
in diseases it must be of a contrary quality, 
by art or nature; light is for mild diseases, 
dark for implacid, &c. in long diseases 
'tis good to change Countries, Gal. 5. Meth. 
sent those troubled with tabes to Tabias, 
a dry Air, nigh Naples, where was plenty of 
dry herbs, so that milk was very proper in the 
cure. The Moon changes the Air with its 
quarters, the first like Spring, temperate; the 
2d Summer, hot and dry; the 3d Autunm, 
uncertain; the 4th Winter, cold and moist. 
 
[^f.A11v^] 
Motion, comprehends all exercise, whence 
three commodities, hardness of instruments 
from mutual attrition; increase of insite heat 
and vehement motion of spirits, strength of 
actions and health, follow hardness of organs 
attraction, coction, distribution, nourishment, 
expulsion, follows increase of heat; for passages 
are looser, humors melted, solid parts 
softned; and a strong spirit purges passages 
expels excrements; so Hippocrates says right 
To study health, is to be quick to labor. Exercise 
till the body be florid, sweat begin to 
flow, and motion nimbler; hot, dry bodies 
less than cold, moist; let labor precede meat 
Hip. 6. Epid. 4. Aph. ult. excrements of belly 
and bladder evacuated; who cannot exercise 
may use frictions; there are divers kinds 
of exercise, Tenis, &c. for the whole body 
riding the intestines, &c. walking and running 
the thighs, &c. reading, singing, the 
lungs; lastly, quiet may help and hurt, as well 
as exercise. 
 
Meat and drink, call'd aliments, repair our 
body; they must not be too unlike our body 
as Stones, &c. but animated, as Plants, or 
Animals, or coming of them, as milk, wine 
&c. 'tis either simple, as flesh; or medicinal 
as vegetables; which respect the cause of the 
disease; in flesh the quality is not minded 
but only the substance. Now in aliment mind 
[^f.A12r^] 
the substance, or goodness, or quality, quantity, 
custom, delight, order, time, region, 
age, &c. 
 
As for substance, it must breed good juice 
so Birds before Beasts, younger before older; 
for quality, hot heat us, &c. health must be 
preserv'd by its like, a disease mended by its 
contrary: so must resist the disease by their 
quality, but by accident; for a disease doth 
not indicate dyet, but a remedy; therefore to 
young and feverish, a moist dyet, 1 Aph. 16. 
let it be like the temper, age, region, season, 
unless the temper be to be reduc'd to its contrary; 
for in diseases it ought to be contrary, 
as moist and cold, in fevers, chiefly if the 
temper be the same, as a fever in bilious 
temper; so full of crude humors must use 
attenuaters. 
 
For quantity, it must not be more than nature 
requires, lest it cause a disease; 2 Aph. 
17. and to study health, is not to be cloy'd 
with meats, 6 Epid. Aph. 20. Repletion's the 
parent of plethora, and cacochymia; a mean 
conserves health. In acute diseases, the less 
meat; 1. Ptisan, or thin broth, 1 Aph. 7. in 
chronic not so sparing; when 'tis best to err. 
with the most, Aph. 5. yet Hippocrates doth 
not absolutely persuade a full dyet; for 
2 Aph. 30. & Gal. Comment. 52. write what 
exceeds hurt, what's wanting easier amended, 
[^f.A12v^] 
&c. in great pain and acute disease not 
good to give meat; strength is always to be 
ey'd, lest it fail, or be opprest, 1 Aph. 9. for 
this prescribes the form, quantity and manner 
of dyet; if strong, nourish well; if not, sparingly. 
In the sick 'tis to be compar'd with 
the disease and cause; for a great disease bears 
not meat, lest nature be call'd from its coction. 
In chronic a mean does well; in acute 
towards the state specially; the sharper the 
thinner dyet, when the symptoms are more 
grievous. Future strength is also to be ey'd, 
yet 'tis safer to decline to excess, than defect. 
If the strength be exhausted with watching 
great evacuation, a fuller dyet; but if by oppression 
of humors, with vehemency of symptoms, 
lessen it: for strength never urges, 
unless wasted; custom is never to be neglected, 
in sick give a grain of allowance to 
custom; for sudden changes are dangerous, 
6. Epid. 3. 21. For Order 
 
Ut vites pœnam de potibus incipe cœnam. 
 
Which is to be understood of broths, &c. 
not strong wine, &c. which hurting the nervous 
parts, breed gouts, and fluctuosities, 
then drink at last to mix all; so 
 
Incipe cum succo, succo finire memento. 
[^f.a1r^] 
for time, take not meats unseasonably, nor 
before former coction. In diseases give not 
in the Paroxism, 1. Aph. 11. 18. unless the 
Fever be caus'd of want, labor, &c. sharp juices. 
Eat sparingly in a hot Country; so 
youth eats more than old, Aph. 13. 14. to 
youth a moist dyet, 1. Aph. 16. but if hot 
and dry, cold dyet; boil'd rather than roast; 
small drink. In strong bodies, supper larger 
than dinner, for sleep concocts, watching digests; 
let him that's subject to catarrhs, sup 
sparingly. If there be want or corruption, 
eat often and much; if Paroxism, or Symptom 
hinder not. If weak, and full of humors, 
eat seldom and little; with want of 
humors and malignity, a little, and often. 
 
Drink appeases thirst, and is the vehicle of 
meat, if only water or small beer, for strong 
bodies it may be liberal, else sparing and 
often; who eat much, drink much, & contra. 
For water, fountains or river are best; 
wine and strong liquors, hurt bilious, hot natures; 
breed gouts, and scurvy diseases; for 
bread best leaven'd nourishes most, rye and 
barley less, but deterge: fresh fish beget 
phlegm; are easily corrupted; salt of bad 
juice; green fruits beget thin, ferous juices, 
temper humors, moisten. 
 
Sleep concocts meat and humors, corrects 
the diseases of the mind, moistens, 6. Epid. 
[^f.a1v^] 
sect. 5. aph. 10. labor's for the joints and flesh 
meat and sleep for the viscera, longer than 7, 
or 8 hours gathers excrements; best by 
night, hurts those whose viscera are inflam'd, 
chiefly in principio, bloud flowing to the inward 
parts, 6. Epid. sect. 5. aph. 29. and in 
the beginning of Fever fits, for when there's 
rigor, horror, or coldness of parts, heat and 
humors are drawn inward, when 'tis better 
by watching to be drawn outward, else crudities 
are multiply'd, and hard to dissolve; 
for bloud is carried outward by watching; 
6. Epid. sect. 4. aph. 12. sleep on one side; 
watching must be moderate too, for too much 
breeds crudities. 
 
Passions are turbulent and stir'd motions of 
the mind, therefore much of use in the body, 
the Stoicks would have a wise man without 
passion, but the Peripatetics allow a mean, as 
anger in phlegmy bodies: fear contracts the 
spirits, anger stirs heat; in bashfulness the 
bloud first moves inwards, but quickly returns 
again outward; if not, 'tis fear: some have 
died suddenly with fear, no body of anger; 
for by it heat's not cool'd, nor strength dissolv'd, 
or spirit recall'd, as in fear; pusilanimous 
have died of joy, the faculties being 
dissolv'd, and so of shame; therefore the passions 
are not to be neglected, but corrected, 
for they shew diseases present or future. 
[^f.a2r^] 
fear and sadness hold long, 'tis melancholy, 
Aph. 25. l. 6. & 6. Epid. sect. 828. and we 
may so know whether they come without 
cause, or not. Excreta & retenta help, if 
what's to be evacuated be so & contra; these 
are excrements of the belly, urine, insensible 
transpiration, courses, seed, hemorrhoids, &c. 
for a farewel to this, remember that saying 
of Hippocrates, labor, cibus, somnus, venus, omnia 
mediocria. 
 
[}PATHOLOGIA.}] 
 
A disease is a preternatural affection, hurting 
first the actions, of which are three kinds, 
similar, organic, and commune; whose integrity 
is requir'd in health, but one failing in 
sickness. 
 
A distemper is a similar disease, and is either 
equal in all parts, and without pain, as 
in a hectic fever, or inequal, as anasarca, 
tumors, &c. and is with or without matter, 
simple or compound, as is Physiology. 
 
Organic in ill conformation is fourfold, 
composition, number, magnitude, site; in 
composition are three species; vitiated figure, 
as a strait part made crooked, & contra, vitiated 
superficies, as a smooth one made rough, 
& contra, cavity too much dilated by anastomosis, 
&c. or bound by obstruction, compression, 
[^f.a2v^] 
contraction, subsidentia. A disease in 
number, is by defect or excess, as 6th finger 
worms, &c. In magnitude apart, bigger or 
lesser. In site, when they possess not their 
natural place, as in hernia's, &c. 
 
A disease commune to similar and organic 
parts, is call'd solution of unity; of which in 
wounds, &c. diseases of matter are organic, 
as softness, hardness of parts, &c. diseases of 
form are similar; the temper and figure of a 
part being whole, action cannot be hurt by 
the only fault of the form; agents by their 
whole substance beget ordinary diseases, as a 
malignant ulcer is a solution of continuity, 
but malignity is the quality of the cause. 
 
A cause is a preternatural affection, producing 
a disease: in generation 'tis whatsoever 
conduces any thing to the begetting a disease; 
and so it contains causa sine qua~ non; it hurts 
not the function first but by a disease; 'tis 
fourfold, material, formal, final, and efficent, 
of which last only here, 'tis that by which a 
thing is caus'd, so the subject be capable; 
whence in the same place all are not infected; 
'tis per se, apt to produce the effect, as heat of 
the Sun, causes a Fever, by hap cold obstructing 
the pores: 'tis intern and extern; this is 
without as non-naturals, &c. call'd procathartic; 
that's within the body, as plethora, &c. 
call'd antecede[^ORIG. BLURRED^] procatarct. causes not a disease, 
[^f.a3r^] 
unless in a-body dispos'd, 'tis otherwise 
call'd manifest, for 'tis always evident, none 
contra, as a Sword is the evident outer cause 
of a wound, but not the procatarct. because it 
requires not a disposition. The antecedent 
is the very morbous disposition found in humoral 
diseases, and may oft be prevented by 
remedies, that it hurt not; when it actually 
hurts, 'tis call'd conjuncta, or continens quam 
posita, ponitur morbus, sublata tollitur; 'tis ont 
as in humorals: always immediate non contra, 
as a Sword's the immediate cause of a 
wound, not the continent; plenty of meat, 
is causa procatarct. plethora antecedens, blood 
flowing to the side continens. 
 
Now the evident are contingent, as a 
Sword, &c. or necessary, as 6 non-naturals 
to which add contagion, &c. the antecedent 
offends in quantity, or 1st and 2d quality; to 
which add putrefaction! quantity's (if not in 
defect, as in a hectic's) call'd plethora, quality, 
cachochymia. Plethora's a proportional 
redundance of all humors, or blood alone; 
ad vasa distending, or ad vires oppressing 
them, caus'd by hot aliments, &c. Cacochymia, 
by fault of coction, or 6 non-naturals, 
&c. conteined are stones, worms, &c. 
 
A hot distemper's caus'd by nearness to 
hot things, stay i'th' Sun, obstruction, motion 
of body and mind, &c. cold e~ contra; 
[^f.a3v^] 
so dry and moist from contr ries; compound 
have compound causes; Humor's the cause of 
a material distemper. A formal depends on 
inward putrefaction, or from the air, caus'd 
by contact, foment, as in lues venerea, or at 
distance. In organic disseases figure is vitiated 
in the womb, by fantasie or error of the 
midwife, or after, from a fall, error of Surgery, 
&c. Passages are dilated by emollients, 
eroders, fulness, in anastomosis, diæresis, 
&c. streitned by obstructers, carancula, tumor 
growing to ligaments, call'd constipatio, vacuation 
of humors subsidentia, or after a wound, 
&c. coalescentia. Magnitude's increas'd by 
humor, tumor, or bond broke, referr'd to site 
diminish'd e~ contra. Solution of unity's caused 
f om an inciding, biting cause, &c. 
 
Accidental differences are necessary to be 
known by their causes, subjects, &c. A disease 
is caus'd by consent, by communicating 
morbific matter, diadosis, i. distribution, critically 
or symptomatically, or metastasis, i. 
translation to another part, or intercepting 
humors, &c. as in the Palsie the spirits. If the 
disposition be constant from symptoms, 'tis 
call'd deuteropathia, for sometimes a disease 
may be caus'd of a disease by connexion, nearness, 
society, likeness of parts. A disease is 
great by symptoms, cause, excellency of 
parts, &c. if short and great, 'tis acute, of 
[^f.a4r^] 
which sort are perperacuti, ending in 4 days, 
peracuti in 7, acuti in 14, after acuti ex decidentia; 
if extended to 40 chronic. continued 
and intermittent; the intermission and paroxism 
make a period; paroxism's caus'd by 
new congestion, putrefaction, or motion of 
matter. Diseases are either Sporades, i. of 
divers kinds, invading many at once, as one 
with opthalmia, another with a pleurisie; or 
communes, of the same kind, and seize divers 
at once, and are either endemii, i. familiar to 
one region; as strumæ to the Spaniards, &c. 
or Epidemii; seizing some region, either pernicious 
or not; these have common causes, 
Sporades particular. Lastly, diseases have 4 
times, according to motion of morbific causes; 
universal by reason of the whole disease, 
or particular in intermitting ones; the 
beginning's when the cause first sensibly 
hurts, or the time till coction appears; the 
augment, the increase of symptoms; state 
when the sight's most vehement; declination's 
only in salutary diseases. The paroxisms 
of intermittent have these times which 
agree with the universals. A relapse is the 
return of the same disease, though extinct, 
caus'd by morbific humor, lest after an imperfect 
crisis. 
 
A symptom follows a disease, as a shadow the 
body; of it are three sorts, of action, hurt, 
[^f.a4v^] 
diminish'd by weak faculty, deprav'd in phrensies, 
abolish'd in cold, rarely in hot distempers. 
2. of excrements offending in substance, 
when good blood's evacuated, or 
stones, worms, &c. quality as heat, putrefaction, 
&c. quantity as too much evacuation, 
retention: manner, as blood voided at the 
dugs, eyes, &c. 3. quality chang'd, from 
actions hurt, and excrements: colour vary's 
from humors, taste from them, or excrements, 
smell from putrefaction, or other affection 
of parts and humors, and so of others. 
 
[}SEMEIOTICA.}] 
 
A sign's that which shews any other thing, 
naturally as weeping, or institution as speech; 
with Physicians, causes, symtoms, effects, are 
signs, and these shew health, sickness, or 
neither; whence so call'd, as to bodies, causes, 
signs; of bodies in Physiology, Anatomy: 
of causes in Pathology, signs here Unhealthful 
signs are diagnostic, prognostic, or anamnestic; 
whence taken, see Reports. 
 
A part ill affected's known by action hurt, 
excretion, site, pain, proper symtoms; to 
which add sex, age, custom, &c. consent of 
parts; an Idiopathetic, i. primary disease is 
permanent, a sympathetic irritated by a disease 
of another part, is quiet, or afflicts by 
intervals; add things hurting or helping, as 
remedies administred to one part hurt, or 
help another. 
 
[^f.a5r^] 
The species of a disease is known by 1. excreta. 
2. pain, as a pricking one shews a sharp 
humor, stupid cold; distending water or 
wind, heavy humors. 3. nature of a part, as 
opthalmia to the eyes. 4. proper accidents, as 
qualities chang'd, actions hurt; if abolish'd, 
argue a cold; deprav'd, a hot disease. 5. from 
precedent causes, disposition of body, &c. a 
malignant one's known by its 1. nature, as 
lues venerea. 2. cause, as putrified air, corrupt 
humors, &c. 3. symptoms, if light, the patient, 
made weak, not eas'd by sweat and excretion, 
coldness of the extreme parts watchings; 
or drowsiness in the beginning, horrors, 
droping at nose, light fever, pulse like one 
sound, tongue grow black, exasperated, 
saints, 'tis malignant, & contra. of causes and 
humors before. 
 
Pulse shews the hearts strength, Urine the 
nature of the liver. spleen, reins, vessels, &c. 
both to be minded, for rarely's bad urine with 
good pulse; yet always remember this, Pulsus 
incertus, urina fallax, dejectiones fideles; but 
all subject to be alter'd by natural, non-natural, 
and preternatural things; the absolute 
differences of pulses, are taken from space of 
motion, time, middle quiet, moving faculty, 
and moveable. The respective from the 
equality, inequality, order, proportion. The 
absolute are great, strong, and shew firm faculties; 
[^f.a5v^] 
weak, &c. contra. quick, heat, fever, 
humor easily dissipable, slow, contra. often 
from a weak faculty, dangerous, hard, and 
languid together, a syncope, sic de cæteris. 
 
Urin's to be inspected in the morning cold, 
within six hours; but see the Patient if you 
may. In it consider, 1. liquor, its substance, 
if thicker or thinner, argue bad coction; thin 
obstruction of veins, much drink, weak 
coction in the liver and veins, in acute diseases, 
whence with weak faculty death, strong, 
long disease; abscess, relapse; in chronic, 
obstruction. 
 
Thick's from mixtion of humors in the beginning, 
sign of sight with disease, after thin, 
a sign of security, very thick long pains, abscess, 
relapse, from oppression of heat. 
 
Perspicuous, strength of heat; if thin and 
white too, crudity, phlegm, long disease; if 
so the 4th day in acutis, death. 
 
Thick, turbulent, from stone in the reins, 
excrements of the bladder, crudity: piss 
clear after thickens, sign of coction beginning: 
thick after clear sign of victory; secretion 
of humors, &c. thick pist to remain 
worst, shews perturbation, doubtful combat, 
delirium, imminent or present, pain in the 
head, convulsion, death. 
 
Copious, from much drink, diuretics, else 
ill; if not critical, as in ardent fevers, from 
[^f.a6r^] 
colliquation, weak retention, heat of reins, in 
diabete, little e~ contra. ill inciliosis, morbis acutis 
renum, &c. stinking smell, is from putridness, 
ulcer, ill in acute, unless critical. Color's 
from mixtion of humors. White without 
fever, crudity, obstruction of the liver, &c. 
liberal drinking; with an acute fever dangerous, 
from weak faculty; bile flying to the 
upper parts, as in pleurisie, jaundies, threatens 
a dropsie, aph. 72. l. 4. white and thick flegm 
pitchy, yellow, safrony, degrees of bile: reddish 
and thin, danger of abscess; reddish and 
thick, long disease; in fevers, inflammation 
of reins, liver, &c. length in the beginning, 
in the state death: cruent, if critic, good; else 
opening of the veins in nephritics; red from 
bile, with splendor, from bloud not. Leek-blade 
color, adust, bile, putridness; sea-green 
from melancholy, sometime death, if not 
critic; black idem, sometime from black 
mixt humors, and may be critic, and safe in 
acute and chronic; in suppression of months, 
splenetics, quartanaries; if yellow preceded, 
'tis from heat and ill. Contents are the clouds, 
meebremo, i. that swimmeth in the middle, and 
sediment. In sick, they come from a morbific 
humor, or if he live plentifully, from aliment. 
Sediment as in sound notes coction. 
In the middle less, in the cloud least; if it 
suddenly appear, shews quick crisis to health. 
[^f.a6v^] 
if laudable, if ill to death. Want of content's 
from crudity, combat of nature and disease, 
weakness, inflamation, obstruction, or great 
vacuation; not ill in sound, but oft in sick. 
If it have a good sediment, and suddenly not, 
labor and change from contumacy of the disease, 
or weak heat: red sediment long, but 
salutary disease, aph. 71. l. 4. black in acute 
worst; rough, contumacy; inequal, difficulty 
of coction; varycolor'd, now white, then red, 
&c. varyfigur'd now round then divided; in 
consistance now thick, now thin, all ill from 
difficulty of coction. Copious in the beginning 
crudity, in the declining, cæteris paribus 
good; from colliquation come fat, oleous, pultous, 
scaby, branny urines; from burning 
heat, sandy, stony, hairy: Sands sticking to 
the glass side, are from the reins, and shew 
heat, in sick, fever; purulent and fætid an 
abscess; less fætid from the reins, than bladder, 
and's more mixt, without scales, pains in 
the loins, not groins; if in neither from the 
upper parts; pinguous mostly in pestilent fevers; 
pultous sediment from colliquate flesh, 
from burnt blood only, long disease, aph. 37. 
l. 7. scaly's not fætid if from colliquation, but 
deadly; from an ulcer fætid, aph. 8. l. 4. 
branny, not from an ulcer, and scaby bladder, 
deadly, aph. 77. l. 4. bubles from wind, and 
shew head-ach. 
 
[^f.a7r^] 
In dejections note the substance, quantity, 
quality, manner of voiding; hard from heat 
inward or outward, much urine. Si intercepta, 
alvus pauca, nigra, & in spiras circunducta 
dimiserit, & per nares eruptio fiat, malum, 
ob magnum incendium viscerum. Liquid, crudity, 
in lienteria, mesentery obstructed, hindering 
the chiles passage, catarrh, colliquation; 
good in diseases if critic; not in the beginning, 
whence in Coac. perliquida dejectio 
& multa neque quiescens in acutis, mala, maxime 
si absuerit sitis, ob caloris extinctionem: bad also 
with a swoln belly; in mild diseases length; 
after long ones bad, because it comes of weakness; 
small, white, light, glutinous, bad, 
2. prog. 21. and fat from colliquation, if not 
from meat; hot, sharp, heat; cold, e~ contra, 
stink from meat or bad coction, putrefaction; 
color from humor, or medicine; versicolor'd 
ill, 4. aph. 21. if not from cathartics, then 
tends to better, 2 aph. 14. fætid, red, billious, 
eruginous, choler go upward and downward, 
deadly. If liquid with sound, bad, and void 
often and little; frothy from a defluxion a~ 
capite, mixt flegm and wind, in acute from 
colliquation, with æstuous spirit: lastly, they 
ought not to be much and oft, for dissolution 
of spirits; nor little and often, for watching. 
 
[^f.a7v^] 
In sweat regard 1. quantity, copious in the 
beginning, with strength a long disease, with 
weakness death, aph. 42. & 56. l. 4. few bad. 
2. quality, cold, bad, always in acute death; 
in mild length, aph. 374. taste, color, &c. 
from humors; stink ill, in the beginning before 
crisis. 3. time best on a critical day, else 
length and relapse. 4. it must be universall; 
particular as head, &c. in acute death, in mild 
length; from what hath been said, may judgment 
be made of Mucus narium, sordes aurium, 
saliva, sputum, &c. lacrymæ the same 
with sweat and urine. 
 
Prognostics are very difficult, they may in 
great part be made from what hath been said; 
in acute are no certain predictions of life and 
death; nor in the beginning if the disease 
ends not the 4th day. Errors of sick and servants 
chances, which the Artist can neither 
foresee nor command, and Hippocrates's aliquid 
divinum, whether from the Air, Stars; 
Devil, Witches, &c. disturb Prognostics. 
 
The manner of the event's here to be regarded; 
if by crisis or lysis, needful in prescribing 
dyet and remedies, for in an instant 
crisis thinnest dyet; nor to bleed, purge on 
critic days; a fierce fights crisis, none lysis; 
crisis is a sudden change to health, or death, 
chiefly health; 'tis nature concocts, separates, 
expels the morbific humor: 'tis perfect without 
[^f.a8r^] 
fear of relapse, or imperfect and unfaithful, 
contra. A good crisis's, 1. with copious 
excretion, or abscess; trust not them that are 
eas'd without reason. 2. signs of coction, on an 
indicating day, and critic day; for it hath 
place only in humoral diseases, and state, or a 
little before. 3. without dangerous symptoms, 
and Patients ease. 4. it must agree with the 
nature of the disease, for a burning fever ends 
in hæmorrhagia, sweat, flux of the belly, vomit; 
a chronic in abscessu. 2. Nature of the 
part, for the gibbous part of the liver's emptied 
by urine, the flat by the belly. 3. temper, 
age, region, time, custom, sex, &c. signs 
of crisis, are causes and signs, as vomit, sweat, 
&c. or signs only, as pain in the head, watching, 
tossing, either precede, accompany, or 
follow. The first shew the time, or kind, 
as sweat, &c. as if the urine have a laudable 
sediment the 4th day, 'tis judg'd the 7th, if 
no error on any hand; if the first or second, 
'tis ended the first quartanary. Grievous 
symtoms precede an instant crisis, which 
ought not to fright the Artist, if he see signs 
of coction, unless with malignity. A heavy 
night precedes a day crisis, a heavy day a night 
one: timely phlebotomy, gentle purging, as 
Hippocrates and Galen us'd, promote it, easing 
natures burden. 
 
[^f.a8v^] 
Various species of crisis, 1. by hæmorrhagia, 
its signs are plethora, &c. its in burning fevers 
and inflammations. 2. sweat, its signs are suppression 
of urine, rigor, &c. head-ach, pain 
in the stomach, trembling of the lower lip, 
nauseousness, &c. precede vomit; a suppression 
of other evacuations, shews a diarrhæa, 
the contrary a flux of urine. If none of these 
appear, a translation follows by abscess, if to 
a noble part death. A good crisis falls on a 
good day; now a days with Physicians 24 
hours, and begins from the hour the sick felt 
an assault; but in childbed, if she be taken 
with a fever long after labor, count's to be 
made from the time of the fever, not labor; 
if soon after labor, e~ contra; if 'twas not natural, 
for then the morbific humor began to 
be stir'd, if 'twas natural, begin from the 
day of the fever, for 'tis like the fever rose 
not from the agitation of the labor, but some 
other cause; so in wounds of the head, the 
count begins not from the fever, but wound; 
odd days are ouly critic and indicate; they 
fall in bilious diseases; if it begin the 3d, the 
5th, and 7th, are critic, because bile hath a 
tertian circuit. If it begin from blood, the 
next day it draws bile into its company, 
which from its certain circuit, the 4ths the 
first critic, from the beginning; but the 3d 
from biles motion, and so forward. Now days 
[^f.a9r^] 
are perfecte critici, as 7, 14, 20. or indicating 
which shew a crisis, to come the 7th, and is 
salutary with signs of coction, as urine having 
light and equal sediment, the 4th shews 
crisis will be 7th; now they are 3; quartus est 
index, 7=i=. undecimus, 14=i=. 17=i=. 20=i=. which 
days are also often critical: or they are intercident; 
which are not perfecte critici, as in the 
first week, 3d and 5th, in the 2d, the 9th 
and 13th, in the 3d the 19th, which all follow 
the biles motion, the rest are vacant, neither 
judging nor indicating, and remedies 
are safely administred in them, as the 6th, 
to the 18th. 
 
Forget not to take notice of the Hypochondria's, 
for if they be soft, equal, without pain, 
good, e~ contra, bad; so if hot, and other 
parts cold; if their pulse be great, shews madness; 
if contracted by inflammation of diaphragm, 
peritoneum, &c. schyrrus, inflated, inflam'd, 
painful, all bad. Likewise note the 
habit and actions of the body, as Hippocrates's 
face worst; wherein are sharp nostrils, fallen 
tempils, hollow eys shrivel'd ears, hard forehead-skin, 
face black, livid, provided it came 
not from watching, flux, &c. so the bulk, sect. 
2. aph. 28. whose body in fevers quickly 
diminish, shew weakness, e~ contra, length of 
disease. 
 
[^f.a9v^] 
[}THERAPEUTICA.}] 
 
The Physician's to cure cito, tuto jucunde, 
by fit remedies, and indications; now 
indication insinuates what's to be done, if 
strength be overcome nothing's to be attempted, 
the thing indicating shews what's to 
be preserv'd, or destroy'd; the thing indicated, 
helps the indicating, and's unlike the 
cause and disease, but like the faculties; coindicating's 
that which shews how, when, &c. 
any thing's to be done; what hinders, contraindicates, 
that correpugns which lets secundarily, 
as bile indicates purging, strength 
coindicates, weakness contraindicates. In 
contrary indications, that's to be prefer'd 
which urges most, as weak faculties, &c. 
 
The first indication's contrariety; removing 
the cause, is call'd preservation. A similar 
disease requires altering; but moistning 
heating's safer than cooling, drying in organics 
obstruction desires openers; in connex 
diseases sometimes one being cur'd, the other 
ceases not; as inflammation in an ulcer's first 
to be remov'd. In causes the substance, 
quantity, quality, place, motion, are to be 
regarded, stones, worms, &c. indicate ablation; 
vapor, discussion, quantity, vacuation; 
quality, alteration; motion of humors 
[^f.a10r^] 
to the stomach vomit; if immoderate, to be 
adstring'd or revel'd; so humors in the first 
region vomit or purge, in the habit sweat. 
In motion consider 1. the part mittent, indicating 
revulsion. 2. recipient, adstriction, or 
derivation. 3. the passages, interception. If 
humors are too quiet, use attenuaters; if impacted 
in the parts resolvers, sensibly or insensibly. 
Symptoms as pain, watching, &c. 
if urge, encounter first, or remove the cause 
and they cease: conserve the faculties by diet; 
the rest rather coindicate, than indicate truly. 
In parts consider 1. temper, a fever in a cold 
body's more dangerous, and requires colder 
remedies. 2. action, if private use remedies 
boldly: if public, contra; not all at once, but 
by intervals; not omitting strengthners. For 
remedies, nothing makes this noble art so 
conjectural as their quantity; the times, motions, 
symptoms of diseases shew the time of 
using them. All the rest's in the Book. 
 
Here for conclusion let me advise thee to 
beware of the Pseudochymical Cure of diseases 
by likes; for if a Flux be cur'd by 
Purge, 'tis by removing the cause, or some accident, 
&c. likewise of universal medicines, 
so much cry'd up; your diabolical charms 
and sigils, &c. the magnetic cure, which 
they call transplantion, and secrets, of which 
two last more in this Book. 
 
[^f.a10v^] 
So Reader farewell, and if these my pains 
and endeavors be accepted by thee, in the 
next Edition thou shalt have a compendious 
Treatise of Operations, and particular Diseases 
of the body, God sparing me life. 
 
