[^Cooke, James: Marrow of chirurgery^] 
 
[}MELLIFICIUM CHIRURGIÆ: 
OR, THE 
MARROW 
OF 
Chirurgery. 
WITH 
The Anatomy of Human Bodies according 
to the most Modern Anatomists; Illustraed 
with many Anatomical Observations. 
 
Institutions of Physick, with Hippocrates's Aphorisms 
largely Commented upon. 
 
The Marrow of Physick, shewing the Causes, Signs and Cures 
of most Diseases incident to human Bodies. 
 
Choice experienced Receits for the Cure of several Distempers. 
 
The Fourth Edition, enlarged, with many Additions. 
 
Illustrated in its several parts with twelve Copper Cuts. 
 
By JAMES COOKE of WARWICK, Practitioner 
in Physick and Chirurgery. 
Revised, Corrected and Purged from many Faults that escaped 
in the former Editions, by reason of the Authors great Distance 
from the Press; By Tho. Gibson, M. D. and fellow of 
the Colledg of Physicians, London. 
 
Licensed by the Colledg of Physicians. 
 
LONDON: 
Printed for W. M. and Sold by Joshua Phillips at the Seven 
Stars in St. Paul's Church-yard, MDCXCIII.}] 
 
[^Omitted approvals of the Royal College of Physicians, a dedication to Robert Lord Brook, an epistle to the reader, a letter by a reader (and the author's response), an epigram to the author, advice to young surgeons, a list of medicinal characters, a figure of wounds with explanations and an advertisement.^] 
[^Extract 1, pp. 1-25^] 
 
[^p.1^] 
[}THE 
MARROW 
OF 
CHIRURGERY.}] 
 
[}PART I. SECT. I.}] 
 
[}CHAP. I. 
Of Chirurgery in general.}] 
 
CHIRURGERY teacheth how divers Diseases of Man's 
Body are cured by manual operation. 'Tis most ancient, 
very certain; exercised especially on external 
parts: yea, internal, so far as Hand or Instruments 
may reach. 
 
The Chirurgion ought to be young or middle aged. Of Hands 
strong and steddy, and useful with both. Sight sharp, quick 
and clear. So Pitiless, as not by clamor, either to over-hasten 
or forbear his work more than necessity requires in the Cure 
under hand. 
 
Its Subject is Man's Body, an exact knowledge whereof 
may be gained by Anatomical History (of which afterward) more 
especially, by Dissection; in which, be as frequent as may be. 
 
[^p.2^] 
To give a Catalogue of all Authors, Ancient or Modern; either 
such as have writ of the whole, or of its parts, would be 
too large. Those more eminent you may see after. 
 
Women are not excluded from some operations belonging to 
their Privities, as in Child-births, &c. nor Men from the same, 
when Women may be at a loss: But as to this, after some 
considerable Practice, I seriously beg my labour might be 
spared. 
 
The Place where work is to be done, is to be such, in which 
the Patient may not be hurt by Wind, Cold, Heat, and external 
accidents; nor the Chirurgion hindred in his Work. 
 
The Light is to be either of the Day, or Candle; both which 
are to be such as are fit to discern what's to be done, and not 
offend the Patient. 
 
The Assistants are not to be displeasing or troublesome to the 
Patient, but attentive to, and ready to perform the Chirurgion's 
commands; and withal silent. 
 
The Instruments are various. Those needful to carry about, 
are, Scissors, Forceps, Spatula, Uvula-Spoon, Probe, Fleam, Speculum 
Linguæ, Levatory, Catheter, Incision-Knife, Burras-Pipe and 
Stitching-Quill both in one; with Needles, Lint, Plaister-Box, Salvatory 
furnished. The rest may be kept or hung up in some fit 
place for use. They may be ranked in general, 
 
First, according to their matter. 
 
1. Some are of Gold (but few) as Wire to fasten Teeth, Cauteries. 
 
2. Of Silver, as most of the Box-instruments; yet Needles, 
Levatory and Forceps, are best of Steel; for those of Silver 
will deceive. 
 
3. Of Peuter, as Cups, Syringes, &c. 
 
4. Of Brass, as Plates, & c. 
 
5. Of Lead, as Probes, Rings to hold the Eye firm, Mallets, 
&c. 
 
6. Of Iron, as all such as Cut, Perforate and Saw, &c. 
 
7. Of Glass, as Cups, Eyes, &c. 
 
8. Of Horn, as Cups used at German-Baths, Catheters, which 
from their flexibility (being first put in hot water) may be 
useful. 
 
9. Of Ivory, as Glyster-Pipes, &c. 
 
[^Omitted three unnumbered pages of drawings of surgical instruments.^] 
 
[^p.3^] 
10. Of Wood, as several Instruments to restore Joynts, and 
Artificial Hands, Legs, &c. 
 
11. Of Cork, Roots of Ireos, Gentian, Elder-Pith, Spunge, to 
dilate Fistula's, to keep up the Womb, and keep open Issues, &c. 
 
12. Of Lint either simple or medicated, as Tents, Searing-Candles, 
&c. 
 
13. Of Silk, for Setons, &c. 
 
14. Of Wool, as some Flannel Roulers and Bolsters, &c. 
 
15. Of Linnen, as Roulers, Stuphs, Bolsters, &c. 
 
16. Of Hemp, as Ligatures, &c. 
 
Secondly, As to Form; some are round, others oval, as Pessaries, 
&c. Some triangular, as some Cauteries, &c. Others like Bills 
of Cranes, Crows, &c. To write of all which, would be too 
prolix. 
 
Thirdly, As to use; some are to Cut, Perforate, Rasp, Dilate, 
Draw out; some are for Head-wounds, others for faults 
of the Bladder, and some are appropriated to other Parts; the 
certain number of which cannot be set down, for new ones are 
daily invented, and others made more fit for other places. With 
all which, as also with other proper Medicines, the Chirurgion is to 
perform all his Cures, speedily, safely, and easily as possibly may 
be. If any desire to see their Figures with their Uses, more 
than is or may be presented in this Marrow, consult Paræus, 
Woodal, Scultetus, and its Appendix by Lamzweerd. 
 
Variously are the parts of this Art divided; as you may see 
in Gormelanus, Jessenus a~ Jessen, Barbet, Sennertus, Van Horn, 
Read, & c. 
 
The general and particular parts are both divided. The General 
hath under it, 
 
1. Probation, made either by hand, Instrument or both; used 
to all Patients, that the work may be known. Sometimes the 
hand alone; and so 'tis either the whole hand to find out the 
Childs site in the Womb, or one or two Fingers, as in several 
Tumors, or to find out the Stone in the Bladder, by putting the 
Finger into Anus. With the Hand, instruments are also required, 
as the Probe, to know whether Bones be foul, or there be a 
Fissure in the Scull. Also to try Fistulas, Ulcers, Wounds, Caruncles, 
&c. These are also of various forms, as Catheters, speculum 
Ani, & Matricis, &c. where Diseases are, which unless 
discern'd, cannot well be cured. 
 
[^p.4^] 
2. Roulers, which vary in length and breadth, according to 
the part affected. They are to be Linnen, though I have used 
them of Flannen in Amputation: let them be clean, soft, 
without Seams or Knots; their forms you have in Scultetus. 
They are useful to hold on Medicines, prohibit flux of Humors, 
as also in Fractures and Dislocations, after the Callus is pretty 
firm. In all which, roul moderately, not too hard, lest a 
Gangreen follow; nor too loose, lest medicines fall off. If 
too hard, there's a Tumor, &c. 
 
3. Ligatures made of Flax, or Hemp; their length, thickness, 
&c. varies according to their use. Useful in V. S. Amputation 
to hinder flux of Blood from Veins and Arteries, to extend parts 
to be set, that are broke or out; to hold on Splints, &c. as also 
after Section in Ruptures, &c. 
 
4. Splints made of various matter, as Wood, Sword-Scabbards, 
&c. they are to be fitted to the part to which applied; to which 
may be added Boulsters, made of worn Linnen, fitted as before; 
as also to be put under Splints, to fill up Cavities, as in the Ham, 
&c. so under the ends of Junks, to keep on all more firmly, and 
defend the parts: some are used dry, others wet in Oxycrate, 
Red-Wine, &c. to repress, repel, and to prevent Inflammation. 
 
The special parts are exercised about Cure and Medicines to 
be applyed. 
 
Under the first there's 1. Synthesis, to unite parts disjoyned. 2. 
Diæresis, that divides parts whole. 3. Exæresis, to draw out things 
hurtful. 4. Aphæresis, to remove things superfluous. 5. Profihesis, 
to supply things wanting. 6. Diorrhosis, to help ill conformation. 
As for Remedies to be applyed, see after. 
 
[}CHAP. II. 
Of Fractures in general.}] 
 
SYnthesis, the parts disjoyned, to be united, are either hard, as 
Bones, where are Fractures, and Dislocations; or soft, as 
Ruptures and other things falling out of their places, also Tumors, 
Wounds, Ulcers, &c. 
 
[^p.5^] 
Fractures are the division of the Bones from a violent external 
Cause. Sometimes from Lues Venerea, foulness, &c. They are 
either simple or compound; both are either transverse, shattered, 
according to length, or oblique. 
 
Signs are inequality, pain, want of Motion. 
 
In handling there's Motion felt or heard, especially if shattered, 
which happens oft in Gun-shot Wounds. If cleft according 
to length, the part is thicker. 
 
Causes as before. 
 
Progn. If Transverse according to length, especially if simple, 
or when the Bones are a little, or not moved out of their places. 
If new, in the middle of the Bones, or in young Persons easie of 
Cure. But if in aged persons, bilious, be near great joynts, be shatter'd, 
oblique, both Focils be broke. If there be Wound, Contusion, 
or great Symptoms, hard. 
 
Cure in all consists in uniting the fractured Bones: to perform 
which, they are, 1. to be set together. 2. So to be kept. 3. 
Callus to be generated. 4. Supervening accidents to be corrected. 
 
The first is to be done by Extension and Conformation. 
 
Extension is to be by the Hand, Bandages or Instruments, till 
the Bones be put in their places, and the part conform; performed 
by the Chirurgions Hand, pressing them forward, backward, 
sideways, as there's need. 
 
Extension is to be Gradual, and as painless as possible. 'Tis 
best done, the Fracture being new; the second or third day may 
serve, the fourth is not so good; because Tumor and Inflammation 
may be expected. If either happen before you set, foment an 
hour with an Emollient Decoction, or which is best for that 
time, Lay the part in a hot Sheep-Skin, which is very available 
in digesting, mollifying and easing pain. In fomenting it will 
seem more tumid at first, but after it all vanisheth. If the Bones 
be small, the Chirurgion may do it himself; if great, two may 
extend whilst he sets the Bone right (in some Fractures, Bands 
and Instruments are requir'd) this done, apply a Cataplasm of 
Bole-Arm. Barly or Wheat-Meal; Whites of Eggs, and a little Camphor. 
This is to come as about the part, so three inches below 
the Fractured Bone's ends. The next Cloth double, is to ingirt 
the part, and to come three Fingers breadth or more; above, 
below, and over the former. 
 
[^p.6^] 
Some in Summer content themselves with Diapalma, in Winter 
with De minio, and like quantity of Paracelsus, which may be 
continued the whole Cure. You may know the Bone is well 
set, if it answer the figure of the sound part, if no inequality be 
felt, and the vehement pain be eased or gone, When what's bofore 
is done, put on Splints fixed, and well-arm'd with Linnen 
or Tow, tying them on with taps. On them use the Junks of 
Straw or Bents, fitly done in a Napkin, which tye on with filleting; 
not forgetting fit Boulsters under the ends of both, to defend 
the parts, &c. All this done, place the part equal, soft, and 
reasonably high, to prevent pain, slipping aside, and the Flux 
of Humors. After three or four days, remove the Medicines, and 
apply new. (If no Symptoms urge, you may forbear till the 
sixth day) and so every third or sixth day, till all Symptoms be 
removed. Observe, in simple Fractures, right reducing, and so 
kept with rest, and good looking to, is most part if not all the 
Cure. And note, to prevent Inflammation, the double Clothes 
put next the Catapl. is to be wet in Red-Wine, Whites of Eggs, 
and Oyl of Roses. Osteocolla, for some days given inwardly, and 
mixed with outward Medicines, is admirable. In place use Rad. 
sigil. Salom. Symptoms removed, you may apply this +R. Empl. 
Diap. +o vi. Cer. Nov. +o ii. Gum. Elem. Colophon. an +o i. dissol. lentis. 
igne; postea insperg. sequent. pul. Consol. major. Balaust. Nuc. Cupres. 
Ros. rub. an. +o i. Mastic. Oliban. an. +o ii. add. ol. Ros. q. s. f. Cerat. 
Empl. de Vigo. may do well. Remove them every sixth or tenth 
day till the Cure be finished. To encrease the Callus if need be; 
+R. Lap. Osteocol. præp. +o i. Cinam. Elect. +o iii. Sacch. +o ii. M. f. pul. 
subtiliss. dos. a~. +o i. ad +o ii. in jusculo singulis mane. Fast two hours 
after. When you find the Callus begin to encrease, then roul, 
lest it grow too much and deform. Let Dyet be thin, keep the 
Body open with Suppositories, Clysters, or cum Elect. Lenit. & Crem. 
Tart. in jusculo. If need, (especially if done by Gun-shot) use 
V. S. If with a Fracture there be a Wound, so order your dressing, 
that you may, if possible, dress it without removing of the 
Splints, &c. (however be careful the part be kept steady) to 
which end leave a place open in the Plaister, provide astringent 
Clothes three or four double, that may little more than compass 
the part, letting the edges ever meet at the Wound, which dress 
either cum Liniment. Arcei & Ol. Hyper. parum; especially if the 
Bone be bare, +R. Syr. de Ros. sicc. Tereb. an. +o i. pul. Rad. Ireos, Alo. 
[^p.7^] 
Mastic. farin. Hord. an. +o +s. f. Unguent. If the Bones are much 
shatter'd, with the Forceps take away those that be loose; but 
those fast leave to Nature; for in time she will either unite them, 
or cast them off. If the Bones be bare, be sure to defend them 
against the Air as much as you can. If started out, either reduce 
them, or if you cannot, take them away with a File or 
Nippers. This done, the Party is to observe a good Dyet, keep 
the Body open. For Drink may be used Tincture of Roses. Or, 
Julep. Alexandrin. For the Knitting of the Thigh is allowed 
forty or fifty days (in this be careful, the Bone it self bending, it 
be set answerable) to the Arms and Legs, thirty or forty. Observe 
what's writ may serve for Arms, Thighs, Legs: also other 
parts little varying. Were it not for brevities sake, I could 
set down several Observations of several Fractures, cured by the 
foresaid method and Medicines. 
 
Observe, 1. If on or after the third day, the Ligatures seem 
loose, and the place a little below the bending be a little swell'd, 
'tis good. 
 
2. If the Bones stand out in any part, 'tis there to be more 
strait pressed. 
 
3. After the seventh day bind more hard, the Symptoms then 
being usually past. 
 
4. In Fractures length-ways, you may bind harder, and not 
look to them so often. 
 
Symptoms to be removed are, 
 
1. Itching, removed by fomenting with warm water, tiil the 
part be reddish or little more. Its Vapor only may profit. Scrat 
not, for besides its making Excoriations, it attracts Humors, and 
causeth great pain. 
 
2. Excoriations are cured by pouring on warm water, after 
apply unguent. de Cerus. which cools and dries. 
 
3. Pain is mitigated with Hydrelea, or a Decoction of Wethers-Head 
with Chamomile Flowers. 
 
4. Slenderness of the part. If from hard bindings, let it be 
looser. If from thin Dyet, foment with hot water till the part 
be red, after apply an attractive Plaister. 
 
5. Ill Conformation, some foment with Emollients; after some 
time break the Bone, and then reduce it. But this I like not, 
it is very hazardous. 
 
[^p.8^] 
[}CHAP. III. 
Of Fractures in particular.}] 
 
THose of the Scull and Nose see elsewhere. Those of the 
Jaws restore, by putting your Thumbs and Fingers into 
the Patients Mouth, pressing them on the out and inside, till 
smooth set: if need, extend. If any of the Teeth be new shaken 
out, put them in their own Sockets where they may fix. 
The Splints may be of Leather, divided at the Chin. The Ligatures 
two fingers broad, with four ends. Two to fasten each 
side the Cap Crown, the other two to the Cap in the Neck-Nape. 
In these purge oft, because of the great Flux of Humors. 
Let Diet be liquid and sparing. 'Tis well set, the Teeth being 
in order. 'Tis knit in twenty days, if Inflammation happen 
not. 
 
Collar-Bones Fractured, reduce either by putting your Knee 
behind, over against the Fracture, strongly pulling the Shoulder 
towards you. In the interim, the Chirurgion is to place them 
with his Hands, or having whelmed a Tray on the ground, the 
back upwards, let the back part of the Shoulder over against the 
Fracture, be placed upon it, press down the Shoulder, the party 
lying all along. If a Ball be put into the Armpit, and the 
Elbow be pressed against the Ribs, the work will be more easie 
in either way; 'tis well in twenty four days. Here Plaisters, Bolsters 
and Roulers are to be used, and not loosed till the seventh 
day. The Roulers length need to be two Ells and half. 
 
Note, If any Shivers of the Bone, either here or in Fractures 
of the Ribs, cause pain and difficulty of breathing; the part 
must be opened and they removed, else Death follows. Yea, 
they are to be removed in other parts where pain in much. 
 
Breast-bones may either be broke or deprest. The first is perceived 
by inequality, and going in with noise, being pressed with 
the Fingers; spitting Blood, difficulty of Breathing, and Cough 
shew both. Being near noble parts, 'tis dangerous; here 
take the course as in the Clavicles, pressing the Ribs on both 
sides. What may ease Pain and hinder Inflammation, with 
[^p.9^] 
fit Bolsters and Roulers are to be used; 'tis knit in twenty days. 
 
Barbet in his Anatomia Practica tells us of a depression of the 
Ensifermis, which bending inward, presseth on the Stomach, causing 
Vomitting, diminution of Appetite, with constant pain of the 
Stomach, and wasting of the whole Body. It's relaxed by a great 
Flux of Humors. 'Tis easily perceived by the touch, and in few 
hours cured; otherwise the Party may be miserably troubled for 
many years. 'Tis reduced by fixing a large mouth'd Cupping-Glass 
on it, till breathing be hindred, and then suddenly remove 
it. If it return not at first, which oft it doth, repeat it once or 
twice. Then embrocate cum Ol. Ros. & Mirtil. After apply the 
next. +R. Rad. Bistort. Nuc. Cupres. an. +o i. Mastic. Thur. an. +o ss. 
Balaust. +q i. Ol. Nucist. extress. +o i. ss. pic. Naval. & Terebin. q. s. M. 
f. Empl. 'Tis to lye on several days. 
 
Shoulder-blade fractured, is difficultly set, and dangerous. If 
near the Arm, for most part incurable. If it be in the Acromion 
(which may easily be felt) then let the Shoulder be pull'd, done 
either with Hands or Ligatures, and in the interim reduce it. If 
broke into several pieces, and they torment, remove them. 'Tis 
cured in forty days. 
 
Ribs fractured, if inward, it's deadly. To restore which, apply 
the following, spread on strong Cloth, to the middle of which 
sew two strings. +R. Farin. Tritic. +o i. Ici hycc_[^ORIG. BLURRED^]l. dissol. in Aq. Scab. & 
Papav. err. +o ss. pul. Mastic. Thur. farin. Volatil. Sang. Drac. Gyps. an. 
q. s. Ciq. in aq. Papav. err. ad justam consist. & f. Empl. Apply it 
hot: after a while pluck it up violently by the strings, that so the 
Rib may follow. 'Tis to be repeated till the Party be better, and 
breathe more easily. 
 
Cups here are hurtful. Use a fit Diet. Purge, and V. S. If there 
need no Incision, anoint the whole side cum Ol. Ros. after apply a 
Cataplasm ex Farin. Hord. pul. Ros. Balaust. Nuc. Cupres. Gall. & 
Rad. Torment. cum p_[^ORIG. BLURRED^]sca & Ovo integro confect. Use it till the eighth 
day with fit Roulers presently after broke, and also twice a day 
after, give aq. Prunel. & Sienis part. æq. Those simple may easily 
be cured. If on either a Tumor happen, to resolve it, +R. Farin. 
Hord. Fabar. an +o ii. pul. flor. Cham. Melilot. Sambuc. an. +o i. Coq. in 
aq. e. s. add Ol. Cham. Ros. an. +o i. s. Catapl. If it pass to an absceess, 
open it speedily, lest the matter foul the Bones after Cure; if otherwise, 
there happens Consumption and Death. If the Fracture 
srand outward, 'tis to be pressed down warily. 
 
[^p.10^] 
Back-Bones are sometimes bruised as well as broke and strain'd. 
If broke inward, and the Marrow be hurt, so that the Party become 
lame and senseless, that he cannot hold his Urine or Fæces, 
he seldom escapes Death. Otherwise they may easily be set with 
the Fingers, and are well in twenty days. As to the first you are 
to use your best skill, and if there be any loose Bones offend, remove 
them; the process only broke, there's more pain stooping 
than standing upright. They easily heal, unless joyned with ill 
Symptoms. 
 
Os Sacrum is to be ordered as the Back-Bones, only you are 
to put your Fingers into Anus, and so restore it. The Party is to 
be kept in Bed all the Cure; and if he sit, the Seat must be perforated. 
 
Hip-Bone fractured, there's Pain, Cavity, Numness of the Leg 
on the same side. If the Shivers of the Bone be quite divided, 
they must speedily be removed by Incision, taking care of the 
Tendons, Veins, Muscles, Arteries and Nerves. Reduce it as soon 
as may be, otherwise expect various accidents. 
 
Whirl-Bone of the Knee, is oftner bruised than fractured. If 
broke, there's Cavity and Lameness; if according to Length, 'tis 
easily cured, otherwise Lameness is to be expected after set: keep 
the Leg in a strait posture, it knits in twenty days. 
 
Bones of the Hands and Feet, if broke, are obvious to sight and 
touch, not so dangerous as others. To reduce them, lay or set 
the Hands or Feet on a smooth Table, and being extended, press 
them into their places. To ease pain, use Anodynes. 
 
Bones of the Fingers and Toes, may be ordered according to the 
general Method. For the Hand, let there be kept therein a Tenis-Ball. 
To conclude, if a Gangreen be feared, instead of former Medicines, 
use Stuphs dipt and wrung out of a Lixivium, wherein is 
boil'd Vulneraries for a time. First, with it foment part, after leave 
on the Stuphs well wrung out, but for this see Gangreens. 
 
[^p.11^] 
[}CHAP. IV. 
Dislocations in general.}] 
 
DIslocation is the falling of the Joynts out of their Cavities and 
proper places, into another, hindering voluntary Motion. If 
a Bone be perfectly out, 'tis a Luxation; if imperfectly, a Subluxation. 
 
Signs in lean Bodies are manifest, especially, there's Tumor 
in the place to which the Bone is fallen, and Cavity from whence 
'tis slipt. If perfect, the Bone is drawn up, and the part is shorter 
(unless it be from a flux of Humors) there's pain in the part, especially 
in motion. If only sprain'd, the accidents are less, and seldom 
all together. 
 
Causes are either Internal, as Preternatural Laxity of the Ligaments, 
or by Humors getting by degrees into the Cavity, and 
thrusts out the Bone-Head as in the Hip. 
 
External are Falls, Blows, violent Extension and Motion. It 
may also happen in Birth; as, also Fractures: both which I have 
cur'd. 
 
Progn. 'Tis easie in Children and tender Bodies; yet harder to 
be kept in. 'Tis hard in others, as also if therewith be Pain, Inflammations, 
Wounds, Convulsions. Those of the Head are mortal. 
Of the Vertebra's dangerous; if inveterate, hard to cure. 
Those from an inward Cause, are of slower Cure, and easily 
return. 
 
Cure. The Bones forc'd out, must be put in their places the same 
way they were forced out. 
 
Those four Manual Operations used in Fractures, as Extension, 
&c. are useful here. Some advise to bathe the part first with 
Water. 
 
The Bone set, may be perceived by its likeness to its like part; 
ease of pain, and popping noise at its return. Medicines, Roulers 
and Bolsters, are seldom of use. If needful, before you roul up, 
labour to preserve the part from Inflammation, afflux of Humors, 
and strengthen the part. If there be Inflammation before set, 
remove it first, by first Emollient, and after Discussive Medicines. 
[^p.12^] 
That which I use, which easeth pain, strengthens and discusseth, is 
framed of equal parts of De min. and Paracels. If they have been 
of long standing, there's to be used an Emollient and Discussing Fomentation, 
once a day for some time, after each fomenting make a 
gentle motion, and circular; after apply this, +R. Rad. Alth. +o vi. 
Cucum. Agrest. +o iii. fol. Malv. Alth. an. M. ii. Coq. in aq. & C_[^ORIG. BLURRED^]mus. 
add. Farin. Fænugr. & sem. Lini, an. +o i. ss. Ol. Cham. +o vi. Lilior. alb. 
+o ii. M. After use fit Bolsters and Roulers; this do every morning 
till the Cavity be freed; after, 'tis to be set, and so kept. Yet after 
all, I have found the parts motion little or none, and sometimes 
more painful than before. 
 
The Accidents are Itching, Inflammation, for which see 
Fractures and Extenuation; for which use Ol. & Succ. Lumbrie. 
which is admirable, Frictions, Unguent. Dialth. & V. S. hath 
cured. 
 
If a Wound associate, so that the Joynt be barr'd and a little 
thrust out of the Skin; in great Joynts 'tis deadly, in all bad. Yea, 
after set, there oft follows Inflammation, Convulsion, &c. especially if 
withal there be a Fracture near the Joynt. This I observed in two, 
both in the Ancles. One in Warwick, the other two miles thence. 
Upon sight, I advised Amputation. An eminent Bone-Setter called, 
promised Cure; yet after some time, both of them, especially 
the Patients, from violence of Pain, afflux of Humors, &c. requested 
me to cut them off. Which I did succesfully. 
 
If Joynts well set, fall out again, from the moisture of the Ligaments, 
use great dryers. 
 
If a Tumor arise from Inflammation about the Joynts, and by ill 
care, hinders the Joynts from being kept in, use Emollients and 
Discussives. 
 
If from afflux of Humors, which laxeth the Ligaments (which is 
the worst) after Purging, V. S. (if to be born) and good Dyer, 
Cauterize, with Irons not too big, which also in Elongation of the 
part from the same Cause, is accounted the best Remedy. But 
yet considering there may be danger of the Nerves, Ligaments, 
Vessels, &c. being hurt, and of an incurable Convulsion after performed, 
as also if there be not long rest, its falling out again, and 
so being immedicable, 'tis better to be wav'd, and to apply such 
Medicines as may give less hazard. In this hot dryers are accounted 
best. Empl. ex pelle Arict. is good; but in luxation from Humors, 
see Hildan. Cent. 6. Observ. ult. where you have an excellent 
[^p.13^] 
method. And from my sad experience of a dear Child, do not by 
Women and Bone-Setters be over-perswaded to too much and daily 
motion of the Joynt; for it procures intolerable pain, and greater 
afflux of Humours. 
 
[}CHAP. V. 
Of Dislocations in particular.}] 
 
THE Jaw-Bone luxated, not set in due time, may cause Death. 
If it be only on one side, the Chin stands aside; if both, it 
hangs forward to the Breast. I have set them, being out by Yawning, 
by putting my Thumbs on the Teeth on each side; pressing 
them hard, and lifting up the Chin with the rest of my hand. Yea, 
in strong Men, if not speedily set, it may produce Vomiting, and 
draw in the Brain by consent: If only one side, set your Thumb 
on the Grinders, &c. and so reduce it. 
 
The Clavicles out, are hardly known and set; the Party cannot 
lift up his hand to his Mouth, much less to his Head. To reduce, 
observe what's said in their Fractures, especially by extending and 
moving the Arm. 
 
Vertebra's Luxated are better cured in Infants than Adults. If of 
those next the Head, Death hastens; if in the rest, there's danger: 
If in the Neck, there's pain, difficult breathing, black Face: To 
reduce, set the Party low, press down his Shoulders, pulling up 
the Head with both hands, moving it gently to and fro till set. If 
set, the Party finds present ease, and turns his Head at his pleasure. 
If below the Neck, and inwards, 'tis deadly. Yet Mr. Hales 
told me, He set this, by taking the Parties Hands about his Neck, 
(as if to be whipt) and giving a sudden jerk with his Posteriors. 
If outwards, lay them on a Table, with the Face downward, and 
having made fit Ligatures under the Arm-pits, and about the 
Flanks with long Towels, as extension if made, press them in with 
your hands, yet so, as not to hurt the Processes. 
 
Ribs Luxated, if inward, are supposed incurable. There's difficulty 
of breathing, pain in bowing down, and lifting up the Body. 
These reduce as the Ribs Fractured inward. If removed out 
[^p.14^] 
of the Vertebra upward, hang the Party by the Arms, over some 
high Door, and press it in. If downwards, let the Patient set his 
hands upon his Knees, and force it in upwards. In these make haste 
to set, lest grievous accidents happen; and after set, besides Plaisters 
use a Fomentation, ex fol. Malv. Alth. fl_[^ORIG. BLURRED^]r. Cham. & Hyp. ric. 
an. M. ii. Coq. in aq. pro fotu. After anoint cum Ol. vel Succ. Lumbric. 
Irin. Lilior. alb. an. +o ii. Unguent. Alth. +o i. Agrip. +o ss. M. 
 
Rump-bone, or Os Sacrum out, causeth weakness in the Legs, so 
that the Heel cannot be brought to the Hip, not bend the Knee 
without great violence. Reduce this as in Fractures of the same 
Bone. 
 
Shoulder Luxated. If into the Arm-pit, which is most oft and 
worst: the Arm will not lye on the Ribs. It's seldom out upwards 
and forward, never backward. In all there will be a hollowness 
on the Shoulder, and a bunching of that part where the Head of 
the Bone lies. All these were reduced by Mr. Hales thus. He took 
the Party by the Hand and laid it in his Neck, and there held it 
with his other Hand; he speedily pressed his Arms to the Ribs, and 
forced it upwards by a semicircular motion backward. That inward, 
I have oft reduced, by first fixing a Clew of Yarn in the 
Arm-pit, after laid the Arm over a high Door, one holding it and 
the Arm close to the Door on the one side; the Party standing on 
a stool on the other side, which being suddenly and unawares cast 
away, the Bone hath slipt in: If not set, let a strong Man cast his 
Arms about the Patient's Neck, pull his Shoulder forceably downwards, 
the Chirurgion being above to guide it in. Some make a 
Ligature with a soft Towel above the Elbow, and placing themselves 
and the Patient on the ground on their backs, a Clew of Yarn 
fastned as before, in extending the part with both Hands and with 
the Heel placed on the Clew, doth suddenly force it in. If these 
fail, the Glossicomium figured in Parcus and Scult. &c. must be 
used. 
 
The Elbow may be out all four ways; yet seldom being well defended, 
and hard to be set. To set which, be it out any way, the 
bunching part is to be set on your Arm, and forced to its place. If 
not speedily set, there follows grievous pain, Inflammation, Fever, 
Vomiting, Bile, and sometimes Death. There are other ways of 
restoring, the figures of which you may see in Scultet, Parcus, &c. 
which may be a special Guide. 
 
[^p.15^] 
Wrist-Bones are set either in the same manner as the Elbow; or 
else let one hold the Party a little above the Luxation, and the 
Chirurgion by the Hand, who is to move it forceably every way 
till restored. 
 
The Joynts in Hands, Fingers, Feet, Toes, may be set as the Fractures 
of these parts. 
 
The Hip-Bone, from the strength of the Muscles, abundance of 
Flesh, deepness of the Cavity, and the Ligaments, is hard to be 
luxated, and as hardly set; especially if there be any matter possessing 
the Cavity. If to the forepart, the Groin is swollen, the 
Buttocks fallen, Urine suppressed, the Leg is neither longer nor 
shorter, nor cannot be bent without trouble. To reduce, lay the 
Party on a Bench or Table, in the midst of which let be fixt a 
pretty big Pin of Wood, lapt about with Linnen, to which put the 
head of the Luxated Bone; after make Extension, and therewith 
force in the head of the Bone by bringing in the knee forceably to 
the other knee. Some thrust it in with their hand. Others use their 
knee instead of the Pin. Though this be not set right, in time the 
Party may go: But yet sometimes they draw their Leg after them. 
If backward, which is seldom; the Leg cannot be extended out. 
'Tis easily perceived, he cannot set his Leg to the ground, and the 
Leg is shorter. If not old, it's easily reduced, the Party is to be 
laid on his Face, and the part being extended, you may with your 
hands force it into the Cavity. After which he must keep himself 
quiet, though it be not put in, yet the pain may in time vanish. If 
out inward, the Leg, Knee; and Foot, bends outward, cannot bring 
his Leg to the Groin, 'tis longer, and moves with difficulty. If 
outwards, there's Tumor there, the Foot turns inward. Both these 
may be reduced, as that out forward. 
 
The Knee-Bones are not easily put forth, having two Ligaments, 
and both their Heads and Cavities double. Those, and those of 
the Ankles may be forced as those of the Elbows. 
 
The Patula or Knee-pan out, may easily be set if the Leg be 
stretched out, or the Party standing upright, it be pressed into its 
place. These are the ways I have used. If others be desired, see 
Scult. Par. &c. Only observe one or more of the Bones of the Carpus 
are oft dislocated, which if not presently set, becomes an incurable 
Evil. 
 
[^p.16^] 
[}CHAP. VI. 
Of Ruptures.}] 
 
DIsunion in hard parts dispatcht, we come to those in soft. 
Some of which have been put under things superfluous, to be 
removed as Ruptures; but being most of them are such, as are only for 
reduction, and not removing, unless from one place to another, 
we shall begin with them, their Indications so near agreeing to 
Dislocations. To these (which let not be reputed too great a 
fault in order) may be added the falling down of the Womb, &c. as 
also those more unlike, that bear the name of Bronch_[^ORIG. BLURRED^]cele, &c. that 
so you may have them all at a single view. As to some they are 
new, others old; some little, and others great. We begin with 
those which properly call for Reduction, viz. Ruptures of the Navel, 
Groin and Scrotum. I have seen them in other parts of the 
Belly, yea one in a Women that from her Groin, came down to 
the midst of the Thigh. In these the Caul, or Guts, or both, get 
out of their places, and receive names answerable to the part; whether 
falling, or into what they fall: As Omphalocele, or Navel-Rupture; 
Euterocele, or the Gut-Rupture; Epiploocele, or the Caul-Rupture, 
&c. 
 
Signs are, Tumor, sometimes little, sometimes great. Being 
pressed they return; yea, sometimes without, and as suddenly 
with the least motion return, yea sometimes without. If sudden, 
great and painful, the Rim is broke. If little, and come by degrees, 
'tis relaxed. 
 
Causes either of dilating or breaking of the Peritonæum, are Humours, 
Falls, violent Exercise, Blows, Leaping, strong Vomiting, or 
Coughing, Crying, binding of the Belly, Wind, &c. 
 
Progn. If great, old, and in aged, hard to cure, especially if the 
Rim be broke. Those in little Children may easily be cured, yea, 
in Men also; If the Rim be only relaxed, and not fallen into Scrotum. 
Which I did in my self, not full a year ago, that am now 
near 63. praised be God. If the Guts be full of Wind or Fæces, till 
both be removed, 'tis hardly reduced; they cause much pain, Inflammation, 
Gangreen and Death, especially if the passage be narrow 
[^p.17^] 
through which they fall, and both great Guts and small be 
got into Scrotum, that they cannot be reduced, nor there be passage 
for the Fæces downward; but they are hardened, and cannot 
be dissolved; and so also hinder afflux of Blood. Hence comes as 
Inflammation, and Gangreen, so Iliaca passio, and so Death. In 
this Case take heed of Fomentations applyed hot, strong rubbing 
of the part, or offering violence to reduce them; which may cause 
the foresaid Symptoms, &c. 
 
Cure in general. 1. The Guts, Caul, or both, are speedily to be 
reduced to their place. 2. So kept. 3. If the Rim be only relaxed, 
use Restrictives; if broke, Consolidatives. 
 
Observe in reduction (which is easie, if the Rupture be little 
and the Guts be empty) if there be noise, 'tis the Guts, if not, 'tis the' 
Caul. 
 
We begin with that in the Navel called Umbilicalis. If the Caul 
be lodg'd, the Tumor is soft, keeps its native Colour. If the Guts, 
'tis also unequal. There may be here also one from Blood, like 
Aneurisma; another from Flesh, which is hard: with the two last 
meddle not. To reduce the two first, lay the Patient on his Back, 
and press them in gradually: when in, apply this Plaister, Ex 
Empl. contr. Rupt. una cum Ol. Terebinth. & Bol. Arm. modic. dissol. 
'Tis excellent: on this lay a Boulster of Leather, or other hard 
thing, according to the bigness of the Rupture, and on all a fit 
Belly-band or Truss, to which, if you please, you may fix the 
Boulster. With which I have cured several Children, only applying 
Empl. Diapal. boyl'd in Red-wine, and mixed with Bole. 
Some advise, if it be very great after Reduction, to take fast hold 
of the Navel with the Hand or Forceps, and in the bottom of it 
pass through a Needle ready threaded; after make the Ligature 
very hard, and then cut off what's fitting; leaving the rest to fall: 
after Cicatrize it. But this not being easily admitted, being also 
painful and dangerous, it had better be forborn, and use all care 
in the former Method: for certainly as the part by what was got 
in was distended, so also it may contract again as well as a Womans 
Belly after delivery. To the part this also may be used, 
+R. Herb. Perfol. cum toto m. ii. Auricul. ven. Herniar. Plantag. Musc. 
Acac. nost. an. m. i. coq. in s. q. Vin. rub. s. a. & Cel. In this and 
other Ruptures take heed of Sneezing, which may be prejudicial, 
as Deck. in his Exercit. Med. Pract. acquaints us, of which he gives 
us two observations of two Women, one aged forty, who had a 
[^p.18^] 
Navel Rupture, with Wind, which by reason of Tooth-Ach, which 
was intolerable, using sneezing, the Rupture increased to a vast 
bigness, to which after he had administred such things, as did incide 
Flegm, and discuss Wind, he cured, by applying the next: 
+R Colophon. +o ii. ss. Ter. b. +o i. ss. flor. Balaust. Sang. Drac. an. +Q i. ss. 
Ol. Carv. stil. gut. xii. Mastichin. q. s. M. f. s. a. Magdaleon. This was 
continued, neither did it any more trouble her, though she after 
had two Children. The other Woman had the like Rupture, 
with which she was not much troubled, unless after eating much 
windy things, or her belly was bound, or especially if she sneezed, 
to prevent which she presently rubb'd her Eyes. 
 
In Infants the following hath oft cur'd Ruptures: +R. Adipis urs. 
n. +o i. ss. Sem perfoliat. +o ss. Tutiæ præpar. +Q iii. M. A fit Ligature 
is to be used, under which lay the leaves of Perfoliat. and give 
the Decoction inwardly. Also this hath been approved: Powder 
of Mastich mix'd with white of an Egg and apply'd: also the 
former Unguent may be mix'd with powder of Snails houses. 
 
Adder-Tongue in powder given for some days cures all Ruptures. 
 
Those called Inguinales, whether Enterocele, or Epiploocele, or either, 
if fallen into Scrotum, may receive their dispatch together: 
the greater including the lesser. In an elapse of the Gut into Scrotum, 
there sometimes fall out sad Symptoms, which must be removed 
before they are reduced. As 1. Inflammation, perceived by 
Pain, Heat, and Fever; removed with this, +R. Farin. Hord. lb i. 
Furfur. Tritic. lb ss. Ol. Ros. +o iii. Vin. rubr. q. s. M. f. Catapl. Apply 
it warm to the Groins and Cods: it greatly digests, moderately 
repels Humors, and excellently strengthens the part: remove it 
once in twenty four hours, till Inflammation be gone. If by reason 
of great heat, the Cataplasm be too dry, so as to stick hard; 
pour on it Red-Wine, and Ol. Ros. equal parts, which also easeth 
pain, and removes Inflammation. 2. Is Wind, discerned by inequality, 
stretching pain, yea also in the Belly, without Weight: there's 
also noise, and the Party breaks Wind both ways. This is to be 
discussed with Fomentations framed of sharp Lixiviums, wherein 
boyl Cummin-Seed, new Linnen-Yarn, adding a little Sack; the 
Sack only hath prevailed being used moderately hot. +R. Ol. Rutac. 
Cham. Aneth. an. +o i. Nard. +Q iii. Carv. distil. +Q i. spir. Vin. +Q ii. M. 
With this anoint the parts. Some give five or six pricks with a 
sharp needle, especially if in the Groins, which dispatcheth the 
Wind, and makes them reduceable. For Internals use those things 
[^p.19^] 
which discuss Wind. Which see in windy Tumors, and elsewhere. 
In Clysters you give, mix those things which discuss Wind. 3. Hardened 
Excrements, known by the stoppage of the Belly for two or 
three days, great hardness of the part increasing by little, there's 
grievous pain. This is most desperate, sometimes producing Iliaca 
Passio; here forbear Purgers, use Emollient Fomentations, Cataplasms, 
Lenitive Clysters, cast in in moderate quantity. With 
which I cured a very aged Man, who vomited up much hard stinking 
stuff. The Cataplasm was that of Paræus; of the same Decoction 
was made the Clyster, with addition of Diacathol. and Salt. 
In the interim, let the Patient take little, and that of good Juice. 
+R. Rad. Alth. +o ii. Lilior. alb. +o i. Herb. Malv. Violar. Pariet. an. m. ss. 
flor. Cham. Melilot. an. p. ii. Furfur. m. ss. coq. ex aq. com. & expres. 
add. Farin. Hord. Fabar. an. +o iii. lini, Fœnugr. an. +o ii. Ol. Ros. Lilior. 
alb. Axung. Anatis, vel Gallin. an. +o i. M. f. Catapl. Those being removed, 
and the Guts or Caul reduced to their place; If it be from 
Relaxation, +R. Bol. Arm. Sang. Drac. Mastic. Sarcoc. an. +Q i. Bisling. 
tegul. pul. an. +Q iii. Resin. Pin. +o i. ss. Ovor. alb. Cer. q. s. f. Cerat. Spread 
it on thin Leather, and apply it; the Hair, if on, first shaved off, 
and there let it stick till it fall. If the Rim be broke, +R. Cerat. prædict. 
Empl. Apost. Nicol. an. part. æq. & malax. cum Ol. Mastic. The 
next hath cured many, +R Plantain and Sloe-Tree-Moss, boyl them in 
Red-Wine, and beat them into a Catapl. 'Tis also excellent in Navel-Ruptures; 
after which apply this, +R. Ol. Mastic. +o i. ss. pul. Herniar. 
+o i. rad. Torment. Cumi, an. +Q ss. Cer. par. f. Unguent. +R. rad. Symphyt. 
rec. purgatam, in orbiculos scissam; quantitas hujus rad. pro una vice 
sit duorum digitorum; add Axung. porci quart. part. contund. simul in 
Mortar. lapid. vel lign. cum pistil. ejusdem. Make it into a round Ball, 
and apply it to the part, on which apply a hard Boulster or Truss; 
the Party is to lie eight days, applying fresh every day: after he 
may walk gently, applying it every 7th. day. If the Rupture be 
new, it cures in six weeks; if old, in half a year. Some use astringent 
Fomentations This I have proved; +R. Alum p_[^ORIG. BLURRED^]udered +o iv. 
boyl it in Smiths-Forge Water, lb. ii. with old Oak-pale Moss m. i. till 
half be wasted, then add a pint of Red-Wine: strain it, and use it Morning 
and Night. Cerat. ex Caran. cum sem. Nasturt. an. aprt. æq. Conquas. 
cum alb. Ov. & extend. super Alutam is good. In the interim, 
+R sem. Nasturt. +Q i. in Vin. rub. some hours before Dinner and Supper. 
Or, Doves-Foot, Cranes-Bill, a~ +q i. ad +Q i. The next hath cured, 
especially Children. Take one of the bigger Star-falls, with 
[^p.20^] 
two spoonfuls of aq. Vitæ, and Wheat-flower, sufficient to make it 
into paste. It hath cured in three days, if taken in the beginning. 
The Root boyl'd in Beer, as +R. rad. +o iv. well dry'd and cut, boyl 
it in three Measures of Beer, to ½. Dos. Coch. 1. Morning, Noon, 
and Night: 'Tis also admirable in spitting Blood. The Juice of 
Herniaria in red wine, taken for nine days, is excellent. 
 
Prevet. hath several experiments in his Medic. Paup. which see. 
Oyl of Lizards is highly commended: but note that good Truffes 
are chief in the Cure, which I have done without Remedies in 
some, in others, with applying Empl. cont. Rupt. and giving inwardly 
the Powder of Parsly-seeds; which was kept as a great 
secret by one famous. If the former means prevail not, Purge the 
Body, especially from serous Humors: Also from pituitous, after 
which may be more safely be used both external and internal Medicines. 
Herb. Pers_[^ORIG. BLURRED^]liat. the whole, given ad +Q i. in Red Wine, is 
admirable. 
 
So also Herniar. Van Helmont highly commends a draught of Wine 
wherein is boyl'd equal parts of Seeds, of Anise, Carraway, Fennel, 
and Coriander bruised; he saith it cured one as big as a Head. But 
on careful Tryal I could find no such effect. Great Mouse-ear to 
+Q i. taken in Red Wine or Comfrey-Water hath cured. Herniar. 
bruised and steept in White Wine, after pressed out and drank for 
nine days is admirable. Of the said Juice, with like part of Sugar, 
may be framed a Syrup, &c. for Children. Its Powder may be 
also given in Pap. If any desire more copious, costly, and experimented 
Remedies, see Scultetus, &c. In the Cure some have 
lain forty days, others sixty, in which time use exact Diet, shun 
all things causing Wind and crude Humors; as all green Herbs, 
Fruits, Pulse, Milk, &c. To keep the Belly soluble, use Elect. Lenit. 
Clysters, Stew'd Prunes; let Bread be well baked with Seeds of Anise, 
Cummin. &c. Meats be boyl'd, their ordinary Drink Claret, and other 
altered with appropriated Herbs. Here might be set down the 
several ways of cutting, but being almost insufferable, and as insuccessful, 
I forbear. If you have a mind to be acquainted with 
them, see Paræus, Scultetus, &c. For Barbet, I suppose he intended 
it, but did not, as any may see in his Chirurgia, page 35. at least 
not so as it should. Take heed that in Infants you take not the retraction 
of their Testicle into the Groin for a Rupture, lest you 
do more hurt than good. Vas deferens (saith Barbet) may fall twisted 
into Scrotum, which may easily be reduced, or go up of it self. 
[^p.21^] 
There are very considerable Observations in Riverius of Ruptures, 
both as to Cure and Cutting. 
 
Bronchocele is a swelling in the Throat, for most part caused from 
Preternatural Flegm, mixed with Wind, 'tis contained in a peculiar 
Bag, lies under the Muscles, having its rise from the Wind-Pipe. 
'Tis seldom cured by Medicaments, unless at first, and then 
may be used this. +R. Rad. Ire_[^ORIG. BLURRED^]s, Galang. an. +Q i. ss. Puleg. Satureiæ, 
Herniar. an. +Q i. sem. Fœnugr. Anis. an. +Q i. Petrosel. +Q ss. Piper. long. 
Spicnard. Nuc. Mosch. Cinam. an. +Q ii. Myrrh. +Q ss. Alum. ust. 
+o ss. Sacch. alb. +o iii. M. f. pul. tenuis. of this take every morning +Q i. ss. 
in White Wine. Outwardly apply Empl. contr. Rup. de Vigo cum 
Mercur. reduplic. Empl. Diasulphur. Fluxing in this Case excellent. 
Bals. Sulphur. is good. Or, +R. Gum. Ammoniac. Galban. Bdel. in Acet. 
dissol. an. +o i. pul. rad. Ireos, +Q ii. sem. Sinap. Urtic. an. +Q i. Pulp. Colocynth. 
Croc. Orient. an. +q i. Sal. Gem. Alum. an. +Q i. pic. Naval. +o vi. 
Resin. pin. +o i. M. f. Empl. If these or the like prevail not, you must 
come to remove it by Section, of which see after. 
 
[}CHAP. VII. 
Of the falling out of the Eye, Womb, Fundament.}] 
 
THAT of the Eye, is when it struts out beyond its Orbit, so 
that the lid cannot cover it. 
 
Signs are needless. 
 
Causes are inward, as resolution of the Nerves and Muscles; outward, 
as Inflammation, Blows, Strangling, hard labour. 
 
Cure. Let it be gently be put into its place (if that cannot be, 'tis 
to be removed) after keep it in by fit binding, having applyed a 
Bolster, dipt in a Decoction of Sloes, which I have tryed. Or, 
+R. fol. Cupres. +o ss. flor. Cham. +Q ii. Thur. Mastic. an. +Q i. f. Saccul. in 
aq. Gem. Querci. madefiat. Forget not a defensative to the Forehead. 
An Eye hanging out of its Orbit the breadth of a Finger, 
being put into its place, was cured with the following, without offence 
of the sight. +R. Herb. Malv. Bismalv. Rut. Semperv. an. m. i. 
alb. Ov_[^ORIG. BLURRED^]r. N. iv. Farin. Hord. Fabar. Lin. an. +o ss. Camphor. Croc. an. 
+Q ss. Ol. Rosac. +Q i. ss. Lact. Muliebr. +o ii. aq. Ros. q. s. f. Catapl. It 
was not boyl'd but mixt, yet warm applied; the next was dropt 
[^p.22^] 
into the Eye, +R. Alo. hepat. Camphor. Aristol. rot. & long. an. +Q i. 
Coral rub. præp. +Q i. ss. Seif alb. +Q iii. Croc. Mart. +q ss. Vitr. Antimon. 
gr. vi. Mel. Despumat. +o ii. ss. Sacch. Cand. alb. +o ii. par. coq. f. Unguent. 
 
That of the Womb, called Prolapsus vel procidentia uteri, some 
think is not of the Womb it self, but only of the rugous part of 
the Sheath. The innermost rugous Tunicle of the Sheath may 
be relax'd and fall down, which is not seldom taken for the Body 
of the Womb it self Causes external, may be the inconsiderate 
laying hold on it by the Midwife, either for the Child, or the After-Birth, 
and so drawing it to her, causes it to recede from its 
proper place. Internal, may be excessive Throes; the Childs 
head being more than ordinary big, may displace it: this happening 
in an unhealthful Body, store of slimy waterish or such like 
humors flowing into it, causes it to sink more and more, so that 
at last, by its bigness, it comes very much out of the Body. In 
the beginning, it may easily be cured by astringents, the part being 
put up, only let them not be used within the Month, or fourteen 
days at least; the greater it is, and the slenderer the Neck is, 
the Separation is the more easie. If it cannot be kept up, or do 
gangreen, it may be cut off, which was thus performed. First, 
was drawn out, the hanging out part so far, as to tye it with 
Tape to hinder bleeding; which done, the cutting off follow'd, 
with little effusion of Blood; after it was cleansed with the next, 
which resist Putrefaction and Stench. +R. rad. Alth. Brion. an. +o ss. 
fol. Artemis. Absinth. Rut. Laur. an. m. ss. flor. ros. rub. Lavend. an +q iv. 
Coq. s. a. in vin. Rhen. & Colat. add. unguent. ex apio +o i. ss. Mel. chelidon. 
+o i. M. f. unguent. By this she was cured, and after had her natural 
Courses; 'tis to be dressed s. a. If little, the astringent strengthening 
Decoction may be thus. +R. rad. consolid. mag. rub. Tinctor. an. 
+Q ii. fol. matric. Salv. Puleg. an. m. i. fol. Querc. m. ss. Glandium +Q i. ss. 
flor. ros. rub. balaust. an. m. ss. Sem. Cumi, Alum. crud. ana +Q ii. Contund. 
& coq. in vin. rub. lb iii. Colat. After fomenting, and the 
part trussed up, and if need be, a Ring put up, to the whole Belly 
use the next Plaister. +R. lig. Aloes, Berberis, Santal Citr. Anther. 
cinam. ana +Q ii. flor. Cham. +Q i. ss. Thur. Mastic. ana +Q i. labd. lb. i. pic. 
Naval. Resin. Pini, an. +Q ii. ol. Mastic. Castor. an. lb. ss. M. f. Empl. 
s. a. It helps the weakness of the Womb, represses the Procidentia, 
and staies immoderate Fluxes; 'tis to be spread on Leather. 
 
[^p.23^] 
In aged 'tis incurable, if of long continuance; but it may be 
supported with a Ball of the bigness of a Ducks Egge or bigger, 
dipt twice or thrice in melted Empl. Rupt. Fern. in which 
there must be a hole to discharge the Menstrua, &c. Through 
which also is to be thrust a copper Wier, with a String fastned to 
it, to draw it out of the Body more fitly. Yet have I found the 
Womb it self in several hang forth, one of which I cut off, being 
over-perswaded by the Party her self, but not with that success 
desired, for she dyed some days after; though much therein might 
be attributed to her own indiscretion after it was cut off. It's falling 
is either from the Laxation or Ruption fo the Ligaments. The 
first may be from serous or flegmatick Humors. The second from 
violent Causes, as Blows, Falls, &c. The first comes by degrees, 
the second suddenly. 
 
Progn. If either be new, or not much out, 'tis easily cured. If 
old and much, hard; if the Ligaments be broke, 'tis incurable. If 
there be Pain, Fever, Gangreen, or other grievous Symptoms, it 
may procure Death. It usually hinders from Walking, Conception, 
and Menses; and is also filthy and troublesome. 
 
Cure. Symptoms if any, are to be removed, as after which 
done, lay the Party on her Back, with her Hips up, and her Legs 
drawn asunder, and put it up gently; if it may be, with the 
Hand: if not, do it with a Pessary that may in bigness answer 
the proportion of the Sheath, fram'd of Cork, which cover with 
Wax mixed with some Castor, or Assa fœtida, which may there continue; 
let it not be too thick, and perforated lengthways for the 
Humors to pass through. The Pessary keep up with a fit 
Bandage. To the Belly may be apply'd, Empl. contr. Rupt part. ii. 
de Min. part. i. M. Or, Empl. Barbar. The Patient is to lye still 
for eight or ten days, with her Legs across, forbearing loud speaking, 
and whatsoever may cause Coughing, or Sneezing. There 
may be laid next to Vulv. an astringent Bag, as +R. fol. Plantag. 
Salic. Mespilor. Quercin. Prun. Silvest. summit. Ros. Rub. an. m. i. rad. 
Torment. Consolid. major Bistort. an. +o i. Balaust. Nuc. Cupress. an. 
+o ss. sem. Anis. +o i. ss. incid. & contund. omnia gross. modo per Saccul. 
intertext. 'Tis to be applied hot three times a day. Inwardly 
may be given, Astringents and Strengtheners; but not in time of the 
Courses. Those in Ruptures may serve to be used for twelve or 
fifteen days. Be sure to keep the Belly open with Lenitives, which 
you are to do also in that of the Eye, which may be Catharticks. 
 
[^p.24^] 
Observe 1. For Inflammation, if any, or tumify'd; remove them, 
as in Ruptures. 
 
2. If Fæces or Wind fill the Guts, remove them with a Clyster. 
 
3. Anoint the Womb with some astringent Oyls. 
 
4. If the Pessary be too thick, by its constant friction, it may 
cause Fluor albus, and so decay the strength of the Body. Several 
Men have had their devices to get it up. 
 
Zacutus, by tying a Mouse to the Thigh unknown, and so by the 
fright, the Womb went up. 
 
Roder. by making as if he would have applied a hot Iron to it, 
which prevailed. 
 
If there be Gangreen, it must be cut off, first binding it, and 
after cut off; Cauterize it, which some say, is without danger. 
This done, cure it s. a. One having it out so swell'd, that it was 
as big as a Childs Head, being also inflamed, and all the vicine 
parts tending to Blisters, Universals premised, was thus cured. +R. Ol. 
Ros. Cham. Lilior. alb. an. +o i. M. The parts were first anointed with it, 
being fomented with the following, +R Herb. Artemis. Scord. Absinth. 
Verbasc. Malv. Bis malv. Parietar. an. m. i. flor. Hyperic. Cham. Melilot. 
Sambuc. Ros. Rub. an. m. ss. coq. in Vin. rub. ad Lib. 4. Colat. add. 
Mel. Ros. +o iii. Sacch. alb. +o ii. M. f. fom. Not long since, was 
brought a young Maid, about eighteen years old, whose Womb 
was come down, and much tumified and red. I advised her Aunt 
to make a Fomentation only of Milk and Chamomel, till I my 
self could come to her, which was the next Morning. After I 
had viewed it, I gave an order to foment it with a Decoction of Malv. 
& Cham. in Beer, and to keep Stuphs to it; to give her Clysters, 
and to lye still; after which, by degrees it was put up, and so remains. 
She said it came by working. I did the more admire at 
it, being she was a Maid. 
 
The Ars-gut turning over, or coming out, is from the loosness of 
the Sphincter-Muscle, caused from too much straining, usually in 
Dysenteries, Tenesmus, &c. Also from Blows and cold; 'tis common 
in Children. 
 
Cure. If there be Pain or Inflammation, remove them by bathing 
the part with this +R. Flor. Cham. Verbasc. Sambuc. an. m. ss. rad. Alth. 
+o i. sem. Lini, Fœnugr. an. +o ss. M. & coq. ex Lacte. 
 
2. In whom was pain and swelling, was cured thus, +R. Flor. 
Cham. m. i. Vin. Malv. lb i. ss. Maceretur per hor. i. vel. ii. super carbon. 
lent. igne. In this, Stuphs being wet, was wrung out, and applied 
[^p.25^] 
as hot as could be endured. Before you put it up, anoint it 
cum Ol. Ros. & Myrtil. and bestrew it cum Alb. Græc. pul. which is 
excellent. Or, +R. Ros rub. Cortic. gran. Nuc. Cupres. Mastic. Croc. 
Mart. & Plumb. ust. an. +o ss. M. f. pul. subtilis. This done, your 
Finger being lapt in a fine linnen Rag, put it up; the Party in the 
mean time drawing up his Breath. Reduce it as soon as may be, 
for fear a Gangreen surprize. After up, there may be applied an 
Astringent-Bag, or Cataplasm, before which wipe the part very 
clean. As +R. Farin. Volatil. +Q ii. Sang. Drac. Bol. Arm. rad. Arnogloss. 
Major. an. +Q ii. M. cum Alb. Ov. parumq; Vin. rub. q. s. f. Catapl. 
These must be bound on, a Swaith being put about the middle, and 
from it fit Ligatures come between the Legs, and fastned well both 
before and behind to the Swaith; (thus do also in the Womb) 
when the Party goes to Stool. If he can, let him stand, and take 
heed of too much straining. 
 
Barbet tells us, that five or six smart blows on the bare Buttocks, 
with a strong hand, may reduce it, it being first anointed cum Ol. 
Ros. & Myrtin. Yet I fear not so sure, as it may cause smart, sorrow 
or laughter in by-standers. 
 
