[^Colbatch, John: Novum lumen chirurgicum^] 
 
[}Novum Lumen Chirurgicum: 
OR, A 
NEW LIGHT 
OF 
CHIRURGERY 
Wherein is Discover'd a much more 
Safe and Speedy way of Curing 
WOUNDS than has heretofore bin 
usually practis'd. 
 
Illustrated with several Experiments made in 
Flanders in the Year 1694. 
 
By JOHN COLBATCH, a 
Member of the College of Physicians. 
 
The Third Edition. 
 
LONDON, 
Printed by J. D. for D. Brown, 1698.}] 
 
[^Dedications to the King and the reader omitted.^] 
[^Extract 1, pp. 13-53^] 
 
[^p.13^] 
[}Novum Lumen 
CHIRURGICUM.}] 
 
HAving for a long time bin much dissatisfi'd 
with the common Methods 
of Chirurgeons in the Cure of Recent 
Wounds; and almost every 
day observing the Inconveniences that attended 
those People who had occasion to make use 
of them; for my own satisfaction, and the 
good of Mankind, I took into consideration, 
whether their Methods were agreeable to 
Reason, and the Subject upon which they 
wrought. At last I was fully satisfy'd, that 
their Practice was most unreasonable; which 
I shall endeavor to evince with as much brevity 
and accuracy, as the Unsetledness of my 
present Condition will admit: which when I 
have don, I shall lay down my own Hypothesis, 
and doubt not to confirm it both by Reason 
and matter of fact, which is the most 
clear sort of demonstration. For the right 
performance of which task, I must first give a 
short account of Nutrition, without which 
my present Undertaking will be altogether 
maimed and imperfect. 
 
To give an account of the Nutrition of Human 
Bodies, or of other Animals, in so clear a 
[^p.14^] 
manner as ought to be don, I should first begin 
with the Formation of the Fœtus, and its original 
constituent parts, with the manner of 
its Nutrition and Increase before all the parts 
are perfect, and how after, till the time of 
Birth; the performance of which task only is 
sufficient for a Volume: Therfore I shall content 
my self with observing only, how what we 
eat and drink is prepar'd in the Stomach and 
other Digestions, and so fitted to supply the 
defects of all the parts of our Bodies; which, 
tho the most hard, continually suffer both a 
decrease and increase; nay, even in the terms 
of Chirurgeons upon another occasion, loss of 
Substance, and supply of that loss. 
 
The solid Food we eat being well chew'd in 
the Mouth, is there mixed with a Juice contained 
in the Glands, which are in great numbers 
dispersed all over the Mouth and parts 
adjacent; which Juice, being what we call 
Spittle, is highly impregnated with a penetrating 
saline Spirit: a demonstration of the 
Truth of which is evident in a known and 
very common Experiment, which is as follows. 
Let a small quantity of Mercury be put 
into a Mortar, spit upon it, and grind it very 
well with a Pestle, and the Mercury will presently 
be (according to the vulgar expression) 
kill'd. The like to which nothing we know 
of will do, but those things which manifestly 
are of a saline nature, and that of the Tribe 
of Acids too; for all Alkalious Salts have a 
quite different effect. 
 
[^p.15^] 
The Meat, as above, being well chew'd, 
and afterwards convey'd into the Stomach, and 
there diluted with a proper Vehicle, as Wine, 
Ale, &c. (the more generous the better) is, 
by the means of the foresaid spirituous, saline 
Liquor, (the heat of the Stomach likewise 
assisting) divided into such minute Particles, 
as constitute that viscid Liquor we call Chyle; 
which Chyle is discharged out of the Stomach 
so fast as it is made, by means of the Liver, 
which constantly presses upon it thro the Pylorus 
into the Intestinum duodenum, where, and 
in the Jejunum, it is further attenuated by the 
intervention of the Pancreatic Juice and the 
Gall, which by the fulness of the Stomach 
are squeez'd out of those Vessels that contain 
them into the aforesaid Guts; from whence 
the finer parts of this attenuated Liquor are 
receiv'd into a certain kind of Vessels we call 
Lacteal or milky Veins, which are in vast 
numbers inserted into the aforesaid Guts: the 
grosser part, by the Peristaltic motion of the 
Guts, is carried downwards to be cast away as 
Excrement. 
 
Now what is received into the Lacteal Vessels, 
is carried on to the common receptacle of 
the Chyle in the Mesentery; from whence by a 
very large Vessel, called the Thorachic Duct, 
into the Subclavian Vein; thence, together 
with the returning Blood and Lympha, into 
the Vena Cava, and so to the right Ventricle of 
the Heart; whence, by the Systole or Contraction 
[^p.16^] 
of the Heart, thro the Arterial 
Vein, into the Lungs; where, by the Contraction 
and Dilatation of the Lungs, it is mix'd 
with the Blood, and that part of it which is 
fit for that purpose, is there made Blood: The 
rest only remains confusedly mixed with it, 
and is used for the Nutrition of the parts, being 
what we call Serum. The Blood, as I apprehend, 
is not at all made use of for the 
Nutrition of the parts, but is that red Substance, 
wherein is contain'd the Biolicnium, or 
Lamp of Life, to which it is a sort of Pabulum. 
 
I confess some say that Heat and Fire proceed 
from nothing else but the parts of Matter 
being put into violent motion; and others, 
that there can be no such thing as a Flame in 
our Blood, because a sufficient quantity of Air 
cannot pass thro the Coats of our Veins and 
Arteries, or any other way enter into the Blood 
to keep that Flame burning: so that the Heat 
we feel in our Bodies, proceeds from nothing 
else but the violent motion of the Blood thro 
the Veins and Arteries. 
 
To which I answer, that having several 
times tried, by the most violent Agitation of 
many fluid Bodies in inclosed Vessels, I could 
never perceive the least warmth; nay I have 
kept Blood as it came warm out of the Veins 
in continued violent motion, and instead of 
hindering, it has facilitated its cooling. 
 
But for that Fire, which I judg to be in the 
Blood, I suppose it quite different from common 
[^p.17^] 
culinary Fire, and burns by quite different 
means, and has a different Pabulum. For 
it is well known, that Blood by Distillation 
yields but a very little of any such substance 
as will afford supply to common Fire; and yet 
from Blood, and that Excrement of it we call 
Urin, by a peculiar management, may be obtain'd 
that substance we call the Phosphorus, 
which is as much Fire as any thing we know, 
it being so inflammable, that unless it be immerg'd 
in Water, it presently consumes all away 
in Flame. There is an old Maxim, that 
Nil dat quod in se non habet; which is very 
pertinent to the point in hand: and from 
whence I infer, that if there were not Fire in 
the Blood actually before, I cannot understand 
how this most firy Substance can be obtained 
from it. 
 
But there still lies a mighty Objection in my 
way, which I shall endeavor to clear before I 
go on. It is this: Suppose the heat of the 
Body proceeds from this firy substance in the 
Blood; how coms it to pass, that in many cases, 
as in Wounds, when matter is generating, 
&c. the motion of the Blood and heat 
of the Body is greater than at other times, 
when that matter, which enters into the 
Blood, and causes this hurry and disorder, has 
no tendency to increase the Flame? 
 
To which I answer, that tho such Particles 
entring into the Blood, may increase the heat 
and motion of it; yet it is not out of any natural 
[^p.18^] 
tendency they have per se so to do; but accidentally 
they may do it, by causing an intestin 
motion or fermentation, wherby the Cement 
of the Blood being loosned, and its Texture 
much spoiled, this Flame is at liberty to 
burn more furiously. An instance of which 
may be seen in common Fire: for if the combustible 
matter of which it is to be made, be 
laid close together, it will scarce burn at all; 
but being laid at a little distance, it presently 
burns briskly. And if it were not somthing 
more than mere motion a little excited, which 
is the cause of Fevers, I cannot understand 
how a very fat Person in a violent Fever 
should in a few days be reduced to almost nothing 
but Skin and Bones, when the visible Evacuations 
of Urin and Stool are generally less 
than at other times; which frequently happens. 
Now it is well known, that no Liquors 
will ferment, but those which manifestly 
abound with firy Particles, as all sorts of 
vinous Liquors; and the stronger all such Liquors 
are, the more readily they ferment. 
 
The confused mixture of Blood and Serum 
(I stick not to call it a confused one, because 
with good Glasses the Blood may be seen floting 
in the Serum in the form of small Globules) 
is carried back from the Lungs by the venal 
Artery into the left Ventricle of the Heart, 
and from thence protruded by means of the 
great Artery, which is immediatly divided 
into a great many branches, to all parts of the 
[^p.19^] 
Body, even the most minute; the Bones 
themselves not being destitute of Arteries to 
bring this mixture to them for their Nutrition, 
and Veins to carry back what is superfluous. 
 
The manner of Nutrition I conjecture to be 
as follows. The Arteries, which, as before 
observ'd, at their Origin are very large, are at 
last divided into an almost innumerable company 
of small Branches, even so small, that 
the best Glasses will scarce discover them to us. 
At the extremities of these small Arteries is 
that compound Liquor we call Blood, discharged 
upon or into the Muscular Fibers; and 
not only the soft parts, but even the Bones 
themselves are observed to be fibrous; which 
Fibers, tho never so small, are yet hollow. 
Now there are vast quantities of the small 
Particles, which compose not only the fluid, 
but also the most solid Parts, continually discharg'd 
by insensible Transpiration. And 
Sanctorius, that famous Roman Physician, in 
his nice Experiments observes, that we waste 
more every day by insensible Transpiration 
thro the Pores, than by the visible, sensible 
Evacuations of Urin and Stool. The waste 
made by insensible Transpiration, is repair'd 
by the homogeneous part of that Liquor, contain'd 
in the Arteries, commonly called Serum; 
which Serum is adapted or made fit by 
the Pores of the parts it is brought to, to be 
applied to such places where there is any 
[^p.20^] 
waste. But how the parts of matter are modified 
and adapted so as to constitute a Body, I 
think would be arrogance in me to pretend to 
define; but that Bodies of very different natures 
may, and do receive nutrition and increase 
from one and the same substance, which 
in it self seems to be simple and homogene, the 
following Experiments (the one a common 
one, and known to every body, the other two 
made by two of the greatest Men these last 
Ages have afforded, viz. Helmont and Boyl) 
will I suppose clearly demonstrate. 
 
Let a Crabtree stock, which has six branches, 
have into each branch a Graft set, each Graft 
of a different nature; as for instance, let three 
of the grafts be of Pears, each of a different 
sort, and the other three of Apples, som 
sweet, som sour; and the Juice brought up 
into the Stock (which, had the top bin left 
on, would only have produc'd Crabs) being 
brought now into the Grafts, is by their Pores 
so alter'd, that it affords not only nutrition 
and increase to the Grafts, but inables them to 
bring forth Fruit, each according to its kind: 
which sight I have seen with great delight. 
 
The second Experiment was made by that 
great Inquirer into Nature's Secrets, Helmont, 
as follows. He took two hundred Pound of 
Earth dried in an Oven, and having put it in-to 
an Earthen Vessel, and moisten'd it with 
[^p.21^] 
Water, he planted in it the branch of a Willow-tree 
of five pound weight; this he watered 
as need required with Rain, or with distilled 
Water: and to keep the neighboring 
Earth from getting into the Vessel, he used a 
Plate of Iron tinn'd over, and perforated with 
many Holes. Five Years being effluxed, he 
took out the Tree and weigh'd it, which, 
computing the Leaves that fell four Autumns, 
he found to weigh one hundred sixty nine 
Pounds, and about three Ounces: And having 
again dried the Earth it grew in, he found it 
wanted of its former Weight of two hundred 
Pound, only about two Ounces; so that one 
hundred sixty four Pound of the Roots, Wood, 
and Bark, which constituted the Tree, seem to 
have sprung from the Water only. 
 
The third Experiment, being Mr. Boyl's, 
was this. He ordered his Gardiner to dig up 
a convenient quantity of good Earth, and dry 
it well in an Oven, to weigh it, and then to 
put it into an Earthen Pot, almost level with 
the surface of the Ground, and to set on it a 
select Seed of Squash, which is a kind of Indian 
Pompion, that grows apace; this Seed he 
order'd him to water only with Rain or 
Spring-water. The Plant flourish'd and grew 
apace; and tho sown too late in the Year by 
two months, yet being gather'd at the proper 
Season, the Pompion, Stalks, and Leaves, 
weigh'd three Pound wanting a Quarter; 
[^p.22^] 
then he took the Earth, and dried it nicely, 
and found it weigh exactly as much as before. 
 
As a confirmation of the Truth of the two 
last Experiments, every body knows, that 
Mint, and such like Plants, being set in a 
Bottle of Water, flourish as much, or more 
than those planted in the Earth. Now these 
Vegetables, tho they receive their nutrition 
and increase from so simple and homogene a 
substance as Water; yet by a Chymical Analysis, 
there may be obtained from them such 
substances, as are not easily to be mixed with 
Water, and seem to be of a quite different 
nature from it: nay, the very same substances, 
for the most part, may be obtain'd from 
Vegetables as from Animals, if they are rightly 
managed. For tho volatil urinous Spirits 
are generally own'd to be the product of animal 
substances only; yet I well know, that 
from almost all sorts of Vegetables, without 
any addition, only suffering them to putrefy, 
may be obtained a Spirit and volatil Salt, no 
way differing from that of Hartshorn, and 
human Blood. From all which I gather, that 
if the great variety of Vegetables, which are 
of such different natures, have their nutrition 
and increase from so simple a Body only as 
Water; I know no reason to doubt that all the 
parts of a Human Body, or other Animals, 
may have their nutrition and increase from the 
Serum of the Blood, which is analogous to 
Water. 
 
[^p.23^] 
When there is, by any accident, a Division 
made in the fibrous parts of the Body, which 
is what we call a Wound, (and by the way I 
think there is no difference, only secundum 
majus & minus, between those wastes made 
by Transpiration which are natural, and a 
Wound made by Force which is preternatural) 
Nature her self would in a small time 
make a Union, if she was not hinder'd, but 
assisted. Now I shall endeavor to make appear, 
that by the common Methods and Medicins 
of Chirurgeons she is hinder'd, but 
assisted by mine; which is all not only in this 
case, but in all others where Nature is opprest, 
that is requir'd of Physicians or Chirurgeons; 
who are, or at least ought to be 
Ministers of Nature, and not her Oppressors. 
 
Now to shew wherin lies the unreasonableness 
of the common Methods of Chirurgeons 
in the Cure of Wounds, and wherin they 
hinder and oppress Nature in her most regular 
Operations: Suppose a Wound be made, and 
it's no matter where it is; for what will cure 
a Wound in one place, will do it in another, 
the matter brought for the nutrition and supply 
of all the parts being the same. The two 
Experiments before mention'd are sufficient to 
confirm, that what will afford nutrition and 
increase to a muscular fleshy part, may do the 
same to a Bone; for the Pompion is a soft Substance 
like muscular Flesh, and the Willow a 
hard brittle substance, analogous to that of 
[^p.24^] 
Bones; and yet both had their nutrition and 
increase from Water only. 
 
Now let a Wound be made where it will, 
and how it's made matters not, whether it be 
by Cutting or Contusion; only there is this 
difference between those Wounds called incised, 
and those called contused ones, (tho by 
the way, I think I may safely affirm, there is 
no Wound made by incision but may as properly 
be called a contused one, let the Instrument 
be never so keen with which it is made, 
as a Wound made with a Bullet; but not in 
altogether so eminent a manner, the difference 
being only secundum majus & minus) that 
there is a larger space between the Lips of the 
one, than of the other; and consequently 
Nature is at more charge and trouble, and requires 
longer time for making a Union of the 
one than of the other. For tho in both there 
requires the generation of fresh substance; 
yet in Gun-shot Wounds there is a greater 
quantity to be generated than in incised ones, 
the Lips of the Wound being further asunder; 
and so of consequence the more work there is 
to be don, the longer time Nature requires for 
the doing it. 
 
Let a Division be made in any of the parts 
of the Body, which, as before observed, is 
what we call a Wound (how it is made matters 
not, and whether it be by cutting or contusion) 
the nutritious Juice is immediatly 
brought to the extremities of the wounded 
[^p.25^] 
Vessels all over the Wound. Now I stick not 
to call the smallest Fiber, or Fibril, a Vessel; for 
if they were destitute of Cavities, they could 
never be nourish'd, much less admit of increase. 
Now all the Medicins us'd in the 
common Methods of Chirurgery, are of such 
a nature, as to relax the divided Fibers so 
much, that they cannot contain the nutritious 
matter brought to them, but let it pass into 
the Wound, where it is by the same Medicins 
corrupted, and turn'd into that substance 
we commonly call Matter. Now the Corruption 
of the nutritious Juice cannot be perform'd 
without a sort of Fermentation; and it 
is the fermenting Particles, that fretting the 
Fibers, cause inflammations in Wounds; and 
by entring into the Blood, and dividing its 
Texture, cause Symtomatic Fevers, which 
frequently prove so fatal. To confirm the 
truth of which, I appeal to the experience 
of all Mankind, who have ever bin wounded 
(and there is scarce one among a thousand but 
has received some sort of Wound or other) 
whether they have not felt pain, and had somthing 
of a Fever, more or less, according to 
the largeness of the Wound, during the time 
that matter was generating. Now it is evident, 
that whatever will cause such sort of 
pain, and create a Fever, must be of a 
heterogeneous nature, and an Enemy to that 
Body (for I verily believe, that only the 
Medicins applied are the occasion of all those 
[^p.26^] 
ill Symtoms that frequently attend Wounds) 
to which it is applied, or into which it is receiv'd. 
Of the truth of which, even the nature 
of a Fever is a sufficient confirmation: 
for a Fever, in the terms of many great Men, 
is nothing else but a Nixus Naturæ, or contention 
of Nature to throw off its Enemy. 
Others call a Fever Sanguipurgus, or a Purifier 
of the Blood, which is the same with the former, 
only in different words. And a late 
learned Author, the worthy Dr. Cole, in his 
Treatise of Intermitting Fevers, the only rational 
Piece in my opinion that ever was writ 
on that Subject, plainly makes it appear, that 
the seat of Agues is in the Cortex of the Brain, 
from whence, at certain periods of time, the 
matter is thrown off, by the mediation of the 
Nerves, to all the parts of the Body, which 
causes that Coldness, Rigor, and Horror perceiv'd 
at the beginning of a Fit; this matter 
being afterwards receiv'd into the Blood by the 
Capillary Veins, which are every where dispers'd, 
and being of a heterogeneous nature 
to the Blood, puts it into a violent motion and 
agitation, in order to throw it off: which irregular 
motion never ceases, till all the matter 
causing it is thrown out by the external cuticular 
Pores. I could use many more Arguments, 
to prove, that not only Symtomatic 
Fevers, but even all sorts of continued ones, 
do proceed from heterogeneous Particles being 
admitted into the Blood, which for brevity's 
sake I shall omit. 
 
[^p.27^] 
Now, after they have with so much hazard 
and trouble generated matter (tho many times 
instead of generating matter, their suppurating 
Medicins cause Mortifications in the 
parts, especially if there be an ill habit of 
Body before-hand; the bad consequences of 
which every body knows, but especially 
to their sorrow those who have experienced 
it themselves) they use mundifying Medicins; 
and when Nature is almost tir'd 
and oppress'd, weak as she is, they leave her 
to do her own work: and for my part, I don't 
at all see or understand, that she is in the least 
assisted by the Medicins they afterwards use. 
 
But what I have bin hitherto saying concerning 
their Medicins and Practice, relates 
only to external Flesh-wounds; and if such hazard 
attends the cure of these Wounds, what 
is to be expected in those within the Cavity 
of the Body, where the Lungs, Liver, Guts, 
&c. chance to be wounded? In such cases 
their Medicins are by themselves own'd to be 
insufficient. And if at any time it happens, 
that any of the forementioned parts are wounded, 
and the Party recovers, themselves account 
it almost miraculous, because such 
Wounds, by the general vogue of the greatest 
Chirurgeons, are accounted mortal, and not 
without reason: For to bring a Wound in the 
Lungs, Liver, Guts, &c. to suppuration, is 
to bring certain Death; and to cure a wound 
without bringing it to suppuration, they don't 
[^p.28^] 
pretend. So that if any of the forementioned 
Wounds are cur'd by them, it is to be attributed 
to som strange and secret Operation of 
Nature unknown to every body, and not to 
their Skill: for he only is accounted skilful in 
the cure of any Malady, the most of whose 
Patients recover; but such as have not one in 
ten of their Patients that don't miscarry, are 
not to be accounted so: And I verily believe, 
that not one in ten of those wounded in the 
Cavity of the Body, and managed after the 
common Methods of Chirurgeons, have recover'd. 
So I leave it to every man's Judgment, 
which Method is most to be confided in, 
either that where scarce one in ten miscarries, 
as in mine; or the other, where not one in 
ten recovers, as in the common Methods of the 
Chirurgeons. 
 
Besides the Inconveniences and Insufficiences 
of their Methods and Medicins already mentioned, 
there is still another as great, viz. when 
any large Blood-Vessel is wounded, how to stop 
the Flux of Blood; which is not to be perform'd 
without either actual or potential Cauteries, the 
inconveniences of which almost every body 
knows: nay, Cauteries themselves are not to 
be trusted without very strict bandage, which 
always, or for the most part, causes Mortifications; 
the necessary consequences of which 
is loss of Limbs or Life, many times both, as 
I have seen with great regret. 
 
[^p.29^] 
In all Wounds, tho but flesh ones, of any 
consequence, they confine their Patients to the 
lowest Diet imaginable, forbidding them to 
eat Flesh, or drink Wine; and tho there has 
bin great loss of Blood before at the Wound, 
yet they seldom or never fail, to the great 
weakning of their Patients, to let Blood in 
great quantities, which they often repeat, to 
prevent the increase, and for taking off the 
Fever, which always more or less attends 
them, and in spite of all they can do, frequently 
proves of fatal consequence. 
 
I have not mention'd their Tenting, Probing, 
and other nonsensical trumpery, which is still 
used by most Chirurgeons, to the great detriment 
of their Patients, because many judicious 
Chirurgeons in all places begin to leave them 
off; who, I question not, will be glad to 
change their old insuccessful way of Practice 
altogether, when once inform'd of a better and 
more certain Method. 
 
To give an account of the Methods I use in 
the cure of Wounds, will not take up much 
room, they being short and easy, and not 
round about, as the common Methods are. 
However, that I may do it somwhat clearly, 
I shall begin with incised Wounds, so called; 
and next proceed to give an account of contused 
ones, made with shot or the like: First, 
where only the muscular fleshy parts are 
wounded; and secondly, where the Bones 
are broken and shatter'd to pieces, and the 
[^p.30^] 
Tendons torn: which last sort of Wounds I 
have not touched upon in my account of the 
unreasonableness of the Methods commonly 
used in the cure of Wounds; for if there be 
such hazard and trouble in the cure of incised 
Wounds, all will allow, that it must be so 
in a much more eminent degree in such Wounds 
as these. Suppose a Wound be made with a 
Sword, or other cutting Instrument, the length 
or depth of which signifies nothing; I make a 
Solution of my Pouder in Water, for want of 
which in Urin: and as soon as conveniently I 
can, the sooner the better, I either squeeze, 
or with a Syringe, if the Wound be deep, inject 
into the Wound som of the said Solution 
I then close the Lips of the Wound together, 
which if wide and large, I stitch up. When 
I have so don, I apply a Pledget of fine Tow, 
wet in the said Solution, to the Wound, not 
letting it go into it, but only to cover the 
edges of it, and lie all over it. And if there 
chances to be any large Artery cut, I hold on 
the Pledget close with my Hand till the Flux 
of Blood ceases, which will be in a small time, 
otherwise not; afterwards I bind it on with a 
very easy Ligature, then I give my Tincture 
in Wine, and repeat it according to the Directions 
at the latter end of the Book. 
 
Now to prove my Medicins agreable to the 
Nature of Human Bodies, and of that Juice 
by which I conjecture (for to be sure I cannot) 
the Body nourish'd, and more efficacious 
[^p.31^] 
than the Medicins used by Chirurgeons, the 
following Arguments will, I suppose, evince; 
they not being the effects of Fancy, but of 
most certain and reiterated Experiments. 
 
First of all, my Medicins never cause any 
Pain, unless it be just when the external one 
is squeez'd or injected into the Wound, and 
that pain is very little more than what would 
be caused by using Spring-water in the same 
manner. 
 
Secondly, There is no Pain afterwards, but 
the parts are pliant and easy, as if not hurt at 
all. 
 
Thirdly, if there has bin great pain before, 
according as it has bin greater or less, so it has 
bin longer or shorter before taken off, but the 
greatest in a short time. As when a Wound 
had bin long receiv'd, and had other Applications 
to it before mine, had bin much inflam'd, 
and the parts adjacent much swell'd, and consequently 
the Party in great Pain; all these 
Symtoms have bin totally taken off in 24, or 
48 hours at furthest; and many times in such 
Cases, the greatest Pain taken off in a few 
minutes. But they have never bin the cause 
of pain, swelling, or inflammation; which 
by the way is a certain argument they are no 
Caustics, as som maliciously and falsly report. 
 
Fourthly, There has never any such thing 
as a Fever, let the Wound be internal or external, 
attended any who have used my Medicins 
[^p.32^] 
soon after they have bin wounded; but 
several who have bin ill manag'd before, and 
thrown into violent Fevers, have in 24 hours, 
by the use of my Medicins, bin totally freed 
from them, and that without Blood-letting, or 
abstaining from Flesh or Wine; the more of 
which they drink, so they keep within bounds, 
I always find them the better. 
 
Fifthly, In all incised Wounds, where my 
Medicins have bin soon enough used, and no 
other Application preceded, they are perfectly 
cur'd in a few days, without suppuration; 
and I have frequently observ'd that at about 
four days end, such Wounds have bin filled 
with a Substance much like Hartshorn-gelly, 
which I have conjectur'd to be young Flesh; 
and in two or three days I have found my conjectures 
true, the said Substance being converted 
into good Flesh. But where Wounds 
have bin long receiv'd, and matter generated, 
they have bin cured in a small time, without 
repeating the Application above once in three 
or four days. I have had to do with Wounds 
long receiv'd, which have bin both deep and 
large, and by the common Methods must have 
discharg'd a great quantity of matter; but the 
quantity of matter com away after using my 
Medicins has bin so small, that I have good 
reason to conjecture, it was no more than 
what was form'd before they were applied. 
 
As for Gunshot Wounds in any of the fleshy 
[^p.33^] 
parts, they are cur'd in the same manner with 
the former, and without the least ill Symtom; 
only with this difference, that wheras in incised 
Wounds, if my Medicins are applied as soon 
as, or presently after, the Wound is receiv'd, 
there is little or nothing coms away from 
them; but in Gunshot Wounds, the Glands 
and Lymphatic Vessels being broke and torn 
to pieces, there is for som time a considerable 
quantity of the watry matter contain'd in 
those Vessels discharged out of the Wound; 
and the loss of substance being great, they require 
a longer time to cure. 
 
But som may object, How is it possible, 
without bringing the Wound to Suppuration, 
to cause a discharge of extraneous Bodies, as 
pieces of Clothes, Splinters of Bones, &c. 
which for the most part are lodg'd in Gunshot 
Wounds? 
 
To which I answer, That the said watry 
Liquor being continually discharged out of 
such Wounds, and the parts adjacent not being 
swel'd, as they never are so as to close up the 
Orifice of the Wounds; by means of the said 
Liquor they are brought away without any 
hazard or trouble, and for the most part with-out 
any pain at all, especially if of a passable 
bigness; if not, the Orifice must be dilated 
to make way for them. And as for that 
Slough of which som make so great a noise, 
it is also by means of the Liquor brought away 
without any digestion, it being nothing 
[^p.34^] 
but a complication of torn and broken Fibers 
lodg'd about the sides of the Wound. As for 
broken Bones, they being put into their right 
posture, the nutritious Juice brought to them 
fills up the void spaces, and by the Texture of 
its parts in a little time grows as hard as any 
other part of the Bone. What has bin said of 
Bones and Flesh, may be said of Tendons (the 
wounding of which was heretofore accounted 
as fatal as any thing; and being of a mucilaginous 
nature, digestive Medicins were wont to 
rot and destroy them, and so cause Mortifications) 
so that their ends, if totally divided, 
can be brought any thing near together; 
which if it be not possible to be don, as for the 
most part it is, there is no other ill consequence, 
but losing the use of that part to 
which it belongs. 
 
From what has been said, I think I may rationally 
infer, that my Medicins are agreable 
to Nature, and assist her in her regular 
Operations: And on the contrary, that the 
common Medicins are disagreable to Nature, 
and hinder her in her Operations. 
 
As for instance: Two Officers of the Regiment 
of Fusileers, that were wounded, were 
in the same Tent together: the one of good 
Habit of Body, had receiv'd a slight Wound 
in the Arm; his Wound had bin receiv'd three 
weeks, and was manag'd according to the 
common Methods; his Arm was much swel'd, 
greatly inflam'd, and he in great pain, and 
[^p.35^] 
not like to be well in a long time. The other 
of a very ill habit of Body, had a Sword run 
thro the most fleshy part of his Thigh, the 
Orifices on each side 3 Inches long; and yet 
being managed according to my Methods, in 
a little above a week was perfectly well, having 
felt no pain from the beginning. 
 
Their Medicins corrupt the nutritious Juice, 
and turn it into Matter. My Medicins being 
friendly to the nutritious Juice, prevent it 
from degenerating or corrupting; by which 
it is capable of performing the work design'd it 
by Nature, which is to fill up all Vacuities, 
either naturally or forcibly made, and is performed 
in the manner following. The nutritious 
Juice being by the Arteries brought to 
the Parts, the Particles of it are by the Pores 
of the Parts so modified, as to form a Body 
like that thro whose Pores it past; from 
whence it is easy to imagin, how very large 
spaces forcibly made may be again fill'd up 
with fresh Substance, like what was there before. 
 
Their Medicins cause inflammations and 
swellings, and consequently pain in and about 
Wounds: Mine not so. 
 
Their Medicins either per se, or by accident, 
seldom or never fail to cause Symtomatic Fevers: 
Mine not so; but on the contrary either 
prevent, or take them off when fixed, with-out 
starving and destroying Nature for want 
of necessary Aliment. 
 
[^p.36^] 
By their Methods and Medicins they can't 
stop Fluxes of Blood without most dismal 
Consequences. My Medicins stop Fluxes of 
Blood with ease and safety, and at the same 
time cure the Wounds. 
 
To confirm what I have said, I refer to the 
following Experiments, of the Truth of 
which 'tis no difficult matter to be inform'd. 
 
To conclude all; I would not have any to 
understand me, as if I positively asserted, I 
can cure all sorts of Wounds, and that no one 
shall miscarry under my Hands: for whoever 
dos so is greatly mistaken; and I must own 
there may be a few unlucky Wounds within 
the Cavity of the Body that may elude the efficacy 
of my Medicins; yet that most of 'em 
may be cur'd with all the ease imaginable. 
But for External Wounds, let them be what 
they will, I think there are few or none, if 
people will be regular, but may be cur'd with-out 
hazard or inconvenience. 
 
[}Experiment I.}] 
 
JOhn Mahullon, an Irish man, in the Regiment 
of Col. Brewer, in the Company of 
Capt. Puryfye, was in a Rencounter run thro 
the left Arm, and into the left Breast between 
the second and third Rib, on which he presently 
fell down as dead. He says, he found 
the Sword pass into the inmost part of his 
[^p.37^] 
Breast. Immediatly he had a great difficulty 
in breathing, and a weight upon his Diaphragme, 
likewise a great quantity of spumous Blood 
and Air gush'd out at the Wound in his Breast; 
which Symtoms, I suppose, are a clear demonstration 
that his Lungs were wounded. 
Mr. Chomly, Chirurgeon to the Regiment, 
immediatly applied my external Medicin, 
which stopt the Flux of Blood at both parts, 
which at the Wound in his Arm was also very 
great. But he did not give the internal one, 
as he ought to have don that Night; so his 
shortness of Breath, and weight upon his Diaphragme 
continued: but the next Morning giving 
it him, he was immediatly freed from 
those Symtoms, and that day march'd on foot 
six miles with the Army, and was not in the 
least out of order, or had any thing of pain 
after; neither did he at all confine himself to 
his Tent. 
 
[}Experiment II.}] 
 
ONE Paterson a Scots-man, in the Regiment 
of the Right Honorable the Lord 
George Hamilton (now Earl of Orkney) was 
about 8 a clock one Evening run into the Belly 
about two Inches above the Navel on the right 
Side; the Sword, as himself and other Spectators 
say, enter'd at least 7 or 8 Inches, and 
being a very broad one, could not fail of doing 
[^p.38^] 
much mischief. I may conjecture, for to be positive 
no man can, that the Sword past thro the 
Liver; and the Symtoms attending him do, I 
believe, plainly demonstrate that the Intestins 
were also wounded. By his Lordship's Command 
I was sent for to take care of him; but 
not being at home, Mr. Chomly went to him, 
and in his Lordship's presence applied the external 
Medicin, and gave him the internal one 
in a large Draught of Wine as usual. After he 
had taken care of him, he immediatly applied 
himself to find me, to give me an account of 
our Patient's condition; but his Account was 
so scurvy a one, that I was sorry he had medled 
with him, which had I bin there, I should 
not have don, by reason my whole Reputation 
lay at stake; for it was but two days before 
that his Majesty was graciously pleased by 
public Orders throout the Camp, that notice 
should be given to my most worthy Friend Sir 
Henry Bellasis, of the first Man wounded, that 
he might see whether I were capable of performing 
what I pretended to. Now the 
Symtoms that attended this Man were violent 
Vomitings, and an intolerable Soreness and 
Pain about his Belly and in his Bowels; and 
for that Night he had no rest at all. In the 
morning when the General saw him, his circumstances 
were little or nothing better; but 
towards the Evening he began to rest, and 
before next Morning his ill Symtoms totally 
vanished. For two days he had no stool; and 
[^p.39^] 
when he had one, it was scarce any thing but 
coagulated Blood. On the fourth day he 
was able to go with me to Court, where 
the General and other Officers saw him very 
well. Besides the foresaid Wound, he was 
also wounded in two other places, and much 
bruised, of all which he perfectly recover'd. 
 
[}Experiment III.}] 
 
MR. Lane, a Voluntier in the Regiment 
of Sir Bevil Greenvil, was in a Rencounter 
run into the left Pap: the Sword, by 
all accounts, enter'd a great way into the Cavity 
of the Breast. The Chirurgeon of the Regiment 
was by Sir Bevil's Order sent to take 
care of him, who presently returned and told 
Sir Bevil that he was a dead Man, and all the 
World could not save him; for that he no 
sooner thrust his Probe into the Wound, but 
it was beat back by the Pulsation of his Heart: 
he likewise told the same to Mr. Willy Chirurgeon 
to Col. Selwin's Regiment, and to several 
others; but withal, in a ridiculing manner, 
said, they might send for their famous Doctor, 
meaning me, and if he could cure him, he 
would fight Duels every day. I was sent for, 
but being ill could not go; so I sent Mr. Chomly, 
who notwithstanding his ill Circumstances, 
being animated by what he had before 
seen, was not afraid to take him into his care; 
[^p.40^] 
tho the Symtoms that attended him were as 
bad as could be, and he alive. He had strong 
Convulsions, shortness of Breath, a great Load 
upon his Diaphragme, and a large quantity of 
spumous Blood gush'd out at the Orifice of his 
Wound, together with such a Blast of Air, 
that it was almost equal to an ordinary Pair of 
Bellows. He applied the external Medicin, 
and gave him the internal one, which immediatly 
reliev'd him; but for 48 hours my 
Friend Mr. Hamstead was forc'd to keep a 
Guard upon him, for fear the Chirurgeons 
should do him a mischief, who before attempted 
to play me som slippery Tricks. At the 
end of which time Mr. Lane sent me word, 
he could lie on the vvounded Part vvithout the 
least pain; and that my Friend need not give 
himself any more trouble, he being as vvell as 
ever in his Life, only vveak vvith the great loss 
of Blood: Accordingly my Friend left him. But 
the next Evening there came betvveen tvventy 
and thirty Chirurgeons, vvho by violence (I 
suppose having before made him drunk) pull'd 
off the Dressings from his Wound, vvith no other 
design, as I can imagin, than to murder 
him, having applied nothing in its room, but 
left the Wound bare; in vvhich posture it continued 
all Night. My People going next 
Morning to visit him, he told 'em the Story; 
and vvithal said that every thing vvas vvell, 
his Wound being so far heal'd before, that 
their pulling off the Dressings did him no 
[^p.41^] 
harm: hovvever, they made another Application, 
which, to the best of my remembrance, 
was the second and last that was made. But 
from the beginning he took the Tincture once 
in five or six hours in a large Draught of Wine. 
I have since seen him on the long march, walking 
on foot, when he told me he was as well 
as ever in his Life. This Man had as ill a habit 
of Body, as it was possible to have. 
 
[}Experiment IV.}] 
 
MR. Fletcher, a Lieutenant in Col. FitzPatrick's 
Regiment of Fusileers, was 
in a Rencounter run thro the most fleshy part 
of his right Thigh; after the Sword was in 
up to the Hilt, he and his Antagonist clos'd, 
and fell upon the Ground, where they continued 
strugling a considerable time, the Sword 
being still in Mr. Fletcher's Thigh: but Company 
coming in, they parted 'em, and pull'd 
out the Sword, and sent for Mr. Chomly to 
take care of him, who when he came, found the 
Orifices on each side at least three Inches long, 
and very wide; from which proceded a very 
great Flux of Blood. He first squeez'd som 
of the Solution of my Pouder into the Wound, 
then stitch'd it up, and applied som Pledgets 
of Tow, wet in the Solution, to both Orifices; 
afterwards he gave him the Tincture in 
a glass of Wine, which was repeated once in 
[^p.42^] 
5 or 6 hours, for three days. In one week's 
time he was able to walk abroad; he publicly 
declar'd that from the first time my Medicins 
were applied, he felt no more Pain in or about 
the Wound, than if he had never bin hurt at all. 
 
[}Experiment V.}] 
 
MR. Pool, a privat Gentleman in the 
Honorable Brigadier Lumley's Regiment, 
in the Troop of Capt. Billingsly, was 
near his Majesty's Quarters at Rosebeck, with 
a Sword run into the Stomach: he had immediatly 
a very great Flux of Blood, both at the 
Wound, and at his Mouth; but that at his 
Mouth was far the greatest. Several of the 
Servants belonging to his Majesty, who saw 
him bleed, do positively declare, that, according 
to a modest computation, he lost at 
both places two Field-measures, which are four 
English Quarts of Blood, before my People 
came to him. He was so convulsive, that all 
who saw him, thought it impossible for him 
to live an hour: but my Medicins being us'd 
according to the usual Method, the Flux of 
Blood immediatly stopt; and he, as almost 
all my Patients have, declar'd that within a 
minute or two after taking the Tincture, he 
found himself refresh'd and reviv'd beyond 
expression; and presently his Convulsions left 
him, and that Night he slept very well. On 
[^p.43^] 
the morrow a Rumor, by whom rais'd I know 
not, was spread about the Court, that he was 
dead; but my Friend Mr. Sell, a Page of the 
Back-stairs to his Majesty, going to the Tent 
where he lay to enquire into the truth of it, 
instead of finding him dead, saw him heartily 
knawing of tough, ill boil'd Mutton, which 
he forbad him to do; so he left off, but withal 
said, Sir, if I must not eat, I'll drink to you; 
then took up a Quart Pot of strong Mecklin 
Beer, and drank it off. About 3 days after 
the Army march'd from Rosebeck to Mount St. 
Andrew, and he in a Waggon to Tirlemont: 
But next day, there being a Rumor that the 
Army was to engage, he came from Tirlemont 
to the Camp. His Captain asked him what 
he did there; he answered, That he came to 
fight: the Captain replied, Sure you have enough 
of Fighting already; No, says he, I fear 
not Fighting now, and tho I was so lately wounded, 
and lost so much Blood, I am as able to fight 
as any Man in the Regiment. This Discourse 
between his Captain and him he told me of 
on Sunday Morning, which was but five days 
after he was wounded. About three days after 
he was seen by his Majesty and several great 
Officers, being then very well, and so continu'd 
till I left the Camp. 
 
[^p.44^] 
[}Experiment VI.}] 
 
A Privat Soldier, in the Regiment of Col. 
Collingwood, had with a broad Sword, 
his Sternum or Breast-bone divided; the Sword 
likewise past into the Body of his Lungs. 
From the Wound gush'd forth such a vast 
Quantity of Blood and Air together, that 
Mr. Chomly declared, he could scarce with his 
Hand keep on a Dressing; so to bring the 
Lips of the Wound together, with a Needle 
and Thred he sew'd up the Wound; but the 
Force of Air was so great, the Flux of Blood 
being before stopt by my Medicins, that he 
was forc'd to make his Stitches in the external 
part of the Bone, which is gristly, the Skin 
not being strong enough to hold them. The 
Man was for that Night attended with most 
dangerous Symtoms; but on the morrow, continuing 
to take the Tincture, they left him: 
He staid in the Camp three days very well, 
only weak with the great loss of Blood. The 
Army being to march, his Weakness was such 
that he could not walk far on foot; so, contrary 
to my knowlege, he was sent to the Hospital, 
but wanted no other assistance there, 
than to recover his Strength: He staid there 
som small time, but is since return'd to the 
Camp vigorous and well. 
 
[^p.45^] 
[}Experiment VII.}] 
 
A Privat Soldier, in the Regiment of Sir 
James Lesley, was also wounded in the 
Lungs; and Sir James himself told me he was 
by several Chirurgeons given over for dead. 
His Wound had bin a Fortnight or more receiv'd, 
and was in a very ill Condition: he 
had a great quantity of Blood discharg'd into 
the Cavity of his Breast, which lying there 
so long, vvas degenerated into the most stinking 
sort of Pus or Matter; and had likewise 
a most violent Fever. Yet notwithstanding 
his Condition vvas such, by the repeated 
use of my Tincture, he was in 24 hours freed 
from his Fever, and had all the corrupted 
Matter thrown out of his Breast; and his 
Wound, by twice applying my external Medicin, 
in a week's time vvas cur'd. 
 
[}Experiment VIII.}] 
 
MR. Wright, a Quarter-master in the Regiment 
of Col. Langston, vvas vvith a 
Sword run in just below the right Arm-pit; 
the Sword past thro the middle of the Lungs 
about ten Inches. He had immediatly a great 
Flux of Blood, both at the Wound and at his 
[^p.46^] 
Mouth, vvith a great shortness of Breath, and 
violent Convulsions. Lieut. Col. Morton being 
at hand, and having som of my Medicins 
by him, sent his Man for them; vvhich vvhen 
he had brought, he gave him Directions how 
to apply them. The Colonel told me afterwards, 
he never saw so sudden, and so great 
an Alteration in any one in his Life: For that 
just before he took the Tincture, he had so violent 
Convulsions, and such a shortness of 
Breath, that himself and all that saw him, 
thought him near expiring; but in a few minutes 
after taking it, those Symtoms totally 
left him. But the poor Gentleman fearing 
somthing might be omitted, sent for me; but 
I being otherwise busy, sent Mr. Chomly and 
Mr. Hamstead to him, vvho found every thing 
vvell: but for security, Mr. Hamstead staid 
that Night vvith him, and in the Morning 
brought me vvord, that for the first part of the 
Night he vvas somwhat restless; but about 
two a Clock he began to sleep, and continued 
sleeping till he came away. That day I vvent 
to visit him, and found him in a very good 
condition, free from a Fever, or any disorder 
in or about his Wound; only he spit Blood a 
little, vvhich, I suppose, vvas occasion'd by a 
Cough he had for seven Years before, vvhich 
being violent, besides the ordinary Motion of 
his Lungs, must necessarily much impede the 
healing of 'em vvhen vvounded: Notwithstanding 
vvhich, in four or five days he vvas 
[^p.47^] 
able to vvalk abroad, being very vvell, only 
vveak vvith great loss of Blood. Six weeks 
since he vvas vvounded, I frequently saw him 
at Ghent, vvhen he told me, he vvas as vvell 
as he had bin for several Years. 
 
[}Experiment IX.}] 
 
A Soldier in the Regiment of the Right 
Hon. the Lord George Hamilton (now 
Earl of Orkney) being out a foraging, vvas 
vvith a Bullet, or rather tvvo, shot thro the 
back part of his Hand; the Bones of the Meta 
Carpus vvere all shattered to pieces, and the 
Tendons much torn, vvhich vve could plainly 
see, the Wound being so very vvide. It vvas 
first drest by Mr. Willy, Chirurgeon to Col. 
Selwin's Regiment, being receiv'd about ten 
a Clock in the Morning. I being that Afternoon 
at his Majesty's Quarters, my Lord told 
me of the Accident, desiring me to take care 
of the Man: Accordingly, about nine in the 
Evening, I vvent to his Tent, and sent 
for Mr. Willy, vvho told me, that the Man's 
Hand, by the common Methods, could not 
be sav'd; but if I could do it, he vvould 
stand my Friend against all Opposers: So I 
requested him to pull off his Dressings, vvhich 
vvere only Pledgets of dry Tow; vvhich having 
don, Mr. Chomly applied my external 
Medicin, and gave him the Tincture in a large 
[^p.48^] 
Draught of Old-hock. His Hand and Arm vvere 
much swel'd and inflam'd, and he in most intolerable 
Pain. On the morrow I vvent again 
to see him, and found both Swelling and Inflammation 
gon, and he at ease. About four 
days after Mr. Chomly opened the Wound, to 
make a fresh Dressing, vvhich vve found in a 
very good Condition, and not in the least digested, 
or brought to Suppuration: but a thin 
ferous Matter, a little tinged with Redness, 
vvhich I suppose to be discharged out of the 
Glands and lymphatic Vessels, came away, 
which when it had lain som time upon the 
Dressings, vvas subject to stink; but that 
which came fresh out of the Wound, was as 
sweet as a Rose: This Substance vvas quite 
different from vvhat vve call Gleet. The next 
time it vvas drest, it look'd better than before, 
and he could begin a little to stir his Fingers; 
at this Dressing (his Comrade next to be mention'd 
being also then drest) a great many 
Gentlemen and Chirurgeons out of Curiosity 
were by, vvho all declared they never saw any 
Wounds look so vvell in their lives; and then 
he could stir all his Fingers. Within a fevv 
days the Army began to march, and he 
vvalk'd every Day of the long March, unless 
it vvas the first, vvhen I got leave for him, 
and his Comrade in Affliction, to ride three or 
four miles. Before vve came to the end of the 
long March, he told me he could lay the 
vvounded Hand on the Back of a Horse of 15 
[^p.49^] 
Hands high, and without any other assistance, 
leap upon his Back. He had at several times 
at least fifty small pieces of Bones came away; 
and after they were all discharged, his Hand 
was suddenly well. 
 
[}Experiment X.}] 
 
ANother Soldier of the same Regiment 
was at the same time wounded in three 
places of his Body. He had two Bullets, at 
about an Inch and half distance, enter'd near 
the middle of his Back on the right side, and 
were cut out by Mr. Willy about seven Inches 
from their Orifices on the same side. Another 
Bullet enter'd a little below on the same side, 
and was cut out just above the Navel, being 
about nine Inches from its first Entrance. Tho 
the other two had not, grazing upon the Ribs, 
yet I have great reason to believe this did penetrate 
the Cavity of the Body. This Man we 
found in most intolerable Misery, having a 
violent Fever; and the last mentioned Wound, 
in all appearance, began to mortify, both Orifices 
looking very black, and a very ill smell 
coming from them. Mr. Chomly applied my 
external Medicin, and gave him the Tincture, 
which, according to Custom, was repeated 
in five or six Hours. His Pain and Fever lasted 
about 30 Hours, when they both left him, 
and in three or four Days he walked abroad. 
[^p.50^] 
When he was next drest, which was about 
four Days from the first Dressing, the two first 
Wounds look'd very well, but the last not so 
well. But at the third Dressing there came 
out of the last Wound many Pieces of his 
Clothes, and that without any Digestion at 
all, only a great Quantity of the foremention'd 
ferous Matter came from all the Wounds. In 
about 3 Weeks all the Wounds were filled with 
good Flesh, and only wanted skinning; but 
being forc'd to march with the Army on Foot 
for many Days together, the great Motion of 
his Body, with the moving of his Clothes, 
fretted the wounded Parts, and kept them 
from skinning, and likewise caus'd a little 
proud Flesh to grow up, which, when he 
came to have a little Rest, soon vanished, and 
the Wounds were presently well. 
 
[}Experiment XI.}] 
 
AN Ensign in the Honorable the Lord Belcastle's 
Regiment, in defending a Pass 
against a Party of French, was with a Musket 
Bullet wounded in the Head; it entred a little 
below the Temple, past on, and tore the temporal 
Artery asunder, and graz'd further on the 
Skull about four Inches. By his Majesty's 
Order I went to take care of him; when I 
came, I found he had bin drest by the Chirurgeon 
of the Regiment, whom I sent for to pull 
[^p.51^] 
off his Dressings, which were hard Dossels of 
Tow dipt in Spirit of Wine, he having cram'd 
the Wound, which was an Inch wide, with 
'em as full as it could hold. After his Dressings 
were off, Mr. Chomly applied my external 
Medicin, and gave him the Tincture. 
His Head and Face were much swel'd, and he 
somthing feverish. On the morrow I went 
to visit him, when the swelling was quite 
gon, and his Fever left him; and in about a 
Fortnight, his Wound, tho so wide, without 
being brought to Suppuration at all, was perfectly 
well. In the mean time he never confin'd 
himself to his Tent, but march'd on Foot 
with the Army, and declared, that from the 
time my Medicins were applied, he felt no 
more Pain, than if he had never bin hurt. 
 
[}Experiment XII.}] 
 
A Privat Soldier in the Regiment of the 
Honorable Major Gen. Le Mullinier, 
was wounded at the same time with the forementioned 
Officer; but of him I had no notice 
till the Morrow, when the Major General, 
I being at the Officer's Tent, sent to me, 
desiring me to take care of him. I found he 
had before bin drest by the Chirurgeon of the 
Regiment; for whom I sent to pull off his 
own, and apply my Medicins, Mr. Chomly 
not being with me. The poor Man had one 
[^p.52^] 
Musket Ball enter'd at the corner of his right 
Eye, and passing thro the Os Spongiosum, or 
spungy Bone of the Nose, came out at the 
left Eye, tearing that all to pieces. Another 
Bullet enter'd at the last Orifice, past thro the 
upper Mandible, or Jaw-Bone, and came out 
at the corner of the under one. These two 
Wounds were cram'd as full as they could 
hold with hard Dossels dipt in Spirit of Wine, 
which I order'd to be pulled out: which tho 
perform'd with the greatest difficulty imaginable, 
and putting the poor Creature to most 
intolerable Pain; yet his Bravery of Spirit 
was such, that he never so much as smayed at 
it all the time it was doing. After the Chirurgeon 
had, as he said, pull'd out all the Dossels, 
I desired him to inject som of the Solution 
of my Pouder thro both the Wounds; 
thro the first it past very well: and tho we 
tried at both the upper and lower Orifice of 
the last, we could not get any thro; so I concluded 
there must be still som Dossels behind, 
as it afterwards appeared; but the Wound being 
very deep, he could not com at any of 'em 
with his Forceps; so we were forced to bind it 
up as it was. His Head and Face were swel'd 
to such a prodigious Bigness, that he look'd 
like a Monster; he had likewise a violent Fever, 
which by the taking of my Tincture was 
soon abated, and in two Days the Swelling of 
his Head and Face was quite gon down, and 
he free from any Pain at all, tho there were 
[^p.53^] 
still 3 large hard Dossels left in the last Wound. 
About five Days after he was wounded, the 
Army began to march, and he on Horse-back 
went the whole March; and tho exposed to 
Wind and ill Weather, felt no Pain or Disorder 
in or about his Wounds. About the sixth 
Day of the March, Mr. Chomly having pull'd 
off the Dressings to make fresh ones, the Dossels 
of the thickness of a Man's Thum came 
out at the upper Orifice of the last Wound, 
without any trouble or pain at all: At that 
time the lower one was almost clos'd up, and 
afterwards the upper one began to mend apace; 
in a little time his Wounds were cured, 
and he is now in this City very well, his Face 
not in the least disfigured, only by the loss 
of his Eye. 
 
