EN	All þe veynes I haue nowe tolde That clensen men, both yonge & olde.
EN	Drink for ordinary Dyet.
EN	It is the object of this treatise to prove, that every well educated physician, of unimpeached character, residing within the jurisdiction of the college, is entitled, independently of local study and local graduation, to be examined for admission into the fellowship of the college;
EN	Let ayre be cleare and light, & free from faultes, That come of secret passages and vaults.
EN	THE vulgar sort are so strongly prepossest (by reason of their ignorance) that Physicians can discern (by the Urine) the Disease, the conception, the sexe, the parties age, with many other such absurdities that I feare it will bee an hard matter to dispossesse them of that opinion.
EN	For swellyng of membre of man or woman.
EN	Make apowdyr of betonye rote,
EN	This disease is knowne by the patients complaints and answeres.
EN	Any of al thes may change a mannys complexion.
EN	Otherwiles the skynne is bowen inward with a stroke and not broken.
EN	About 18 months ago I dissected a poor Emaciated Creature, that dyed of a Hydrops, out of whom I took about 10 Gallons of Liquor measured:
EN	Beneth, when y=e= leuer takis harme.
EN	Brother I pray the for charite that thou write to me a fewe medecynes that I myght help pore folk that falleth into sekenes and beth vnkonnyng to helpe hem sylfen and of vnpower to huyre hem leches.
EN	So that she neadeth nothynge at all to be auansed and lyfted vp, other with any despitefull rebukes of other craftes, other with some borowed and paynted colours of the rhetoricians, or with the iugglynge castes of amplificacions.
EN	It distroith y=e= fe all be dene.
EN	It sufficeth, so that I shew the substance of the thing, and to doe it, that every one may understand it.
EN	Alle maner swete þingis, forwhi þei swelliþ, and alle maner notis and accornys of okis.
EN	Tak stronge vinegre of whit wyne, and anoynte euery day þryes or foure times þe vysage, þer hit is saucefleme; and hit wol breke out, as hit were a mesel, and when hit is so broken out, anoynte hit, as hit is y seyd by fore an syx dayes, þat þe feolþe may renne out;
EN	Sethe all togedyr in a galown of whyte wyne.
EN	The part affected.
EN	Now, by considering the peculiarity of the circumstances, situation, and way of life of these people; and by attentively observing, what at any time gives rise to this disease, what is seen to remove it, and what to increase or mitigate its malignity, we shall be able to form a judgment, not only of the principal causes productive of it, but likewise of the subordinate, or those that in a less degree may contribute their influence.
Prediction array: [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0]