EN	In equity, by a comparative statement of the claims of the licentiates and fellows.
EN	Drink half a pint of this Morning and Night.
EN	To guard therefore against such delusions, and to render the unphysical reader better qualified to decide, in an affair of so much importance, as his own health, and life, is the purport of this Essay; where by demonstrating the influence Nature has over many diseases, he may the readier judge of medical assistance in general, and on what plan, it can best be conducted.
EN	The Lungs is also divided into five Lobs, or Pellicles viz. three on the right side, and two on the left;
EN	ONE handful of Garden-Tansy, as much Sage, and twice as much Scurvy-grass, steep'd in two quarts of White-wine, or Strong Ale.
EN	And Care must be taken not to overload the Stomach, or to eat any thing but what is of good Nourishment, and easy to digest, and grateful to the Stomach.
EN	This has always appeared to me to be the case;
EN	There being not so much as one word concerning Men-midwives mentioned there that we can find, it being the natural propriety of women to be much seeing into that Art: and though nature be not alone sufficient to the perfection of it, yet farther knowledge may be gain'd by a long and diligent practice, and be communicated to others of our own sex.
EN	This is yuel for þey3en.
EN	And 3yf þer schulde be norechyd on hem ony frut it is profyt abele þat che purge er che conseyue to make clene and redy þe place þat þe seed sal ly in.
EN	This indeed is cleer enough, and obliges us to averre a greater antiquity of this operation, than before we were aware of;
EN	And drynk it w=t= water clene,
EN	AS sutures of one kind or another are found necessary, not only in every large wound, but in almost every operation of importance, the consideration of this subject seems first to require our attention.
EN	Take þe herbe celidoyne whos frute and flours been of goldyn colour, and take þereof the iiij elementz aftre þe maistrie of þe furst boke.
EN	Many þings bene profitable to þe confeccion of clisteries, if þe lech mi3t haue al redy.
EN	And as son as che purgis che is abele to conceyue.
EN	For spotes et oþer sekenesse to be don a way in þe face.
EN	Also yf the sekenes be inveterat, i.e., old, be metasentesyn.
EN	This was writen fro Mounpileris to Quene Isabel of ynglond, at þe preier of ye kyng of Fraunce, hir broþer.
EN	I haue sayd als I hafe sens;
EN	I am sad & soleynge with hewynes in thoght;For all thy body, in myddis the Arme;
Prediction array: [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0]