

[^Sample 1: article - 1731_GM_0268^]

|P_268
[}ACCIDENTS. }]
Mr. Scott, a Relation of Sir Edward Dering, fell off his horse and was kill'd. 

At Cheltenham in Gloucestershire, a storm of Thunder, Lightening, and 
Hail did upwards of 2000 l. damage to the Corn and Fruit, Windows and 
Houses. 

After the Races were over at Guilford, a Hare ran in view, which Mr. 
Luff a Brewer in Hedge Lane, following, was thrown from his Horse and 
dy'd in an hour after. 

A Clergyman fishing in a River near Uxbridge, found a dead body with 
many tokens of it's being murder'd, which prov'd to be that of one Lock, 
who was seen the day before to go out with a young woman of that place, 
on which she was taken up, with two of her intimates, and imprison'd. 

A Washerwoman in Aldersgate Street hang'd herself with a packthread. 

19. As Capt. Pigott and another gentleman were playing at Billiards at 
a Coffee-house near Leicester-Fields, the Capt. gave the boy a blow on the 
head with his Billiard Mast, of which the boy dy'd in a few hours after. 

23. Mr Stafford, a Gentleman of Quality sent one Maywaring a porter, 
who ply'd about Grays-Inn Gate, on an Errand. The porter, on his return, 
insisting on more than the Gentleman thought fit to give him, the Gentle- 
man drew his Sword and wounded him in the left side, of which he in- 
stantly died. The Coroner's Inquest gave their Verdict Wilful Murder. 

|P_269
22. Dublin. A young Catholick Clergyman was poison'd by a Receipt 
ignorantly mix'd and dy'd bleeding at ears and nose. — Four Watch- 
-men fell upon and wounded Thomas Heffran, a Taylor, who died in 24 
hours; and the Coroners Inquest gave it in wilful Murder.—24th. One 
Kerry, a Watchman was shot dead in a Fray with 4 young Sparks, 3 of 
whom were taken.—15 Officers of the Customs suspended for neglect of duty. 

21. Edinburgh. Three men fell into a Coal pit at Port Seton, and were kill'd. 
—At Cockeny some of the houses belonging to the Glass works, suddenly 
sunk down, and the water rushing up, several of the servants perished. 

26. One James Henderson a Smith, dy'd on his knees at morning pray- 
ers in St Nicholas church, in Newcastle on Tyne. 

22. Mr Robert Brough, a substantial Farmer at Winkley near Macclesfield
in Cheshire, in his return from market was barbarously murder'd by one 
Naden his servant. The villain first knock'd him down, then cut a great gash under his nose, and another on his wrist, and having almost separated 
his head from his body, left him; but being quickly pursu'd was taken. 

30. A Gentleman kill'd by a Victualler at Windsor, who on a quarrel a- 
bout a reckoning, threw him over a Table and broke his Ribs. 

