

[^Sample 1: article - 1731_GM_0451^]

|P_451
[}CASUALTIES. }]
[/1./]AT Cockthorpe in Norfolk, a Fire broke out which consumed the 
greatest part of the Town. 

A Blacksmith at Gravesend, having parted from his Wife, sent for her, 
designing 'twas thought to be reconcil'd to her, but with a Piece loaded 
with Shot, Hob-nails and pieces of Iron, shot her in the Shoulder and 
Breast, of which she died in two or three Days. 

4. On the Road betwixt Bath and Bristol, the Body of a Man was 
found, with all his Limbs cut off and mangled, and the Skin stript off 
his Face, supposed to be done to prevent his being known. 

23. A Fire broke out in the House of Mr. Bently, adjoining to the 
King's School near Westminster Abbey, which burnt down that part of the 
House that contained the King's and Cottonian Libraries: almost all the 
printed Books were consumed and part of the Manuscripts. Amongst the 
latter, those which Dr Bentley had been collecting for his Greek Testament, 
for these last ten Years, valued at 2000 l.

|P_452
A Gentleman at Hackney who kept tame Pidgeons, looking out of his 
Window in the Evening, discern'd something white at the Lockers, which 
taking for a white Cat, discharg'd his Fowling-Piece, and shatter'd his 
Son's Arm, whose Ruffles was the white he aim'd at. 

24. Timothy Gulley, Esq; of Chiswick, Captain in the second Regiment 
of Foot-Guards getting out of Bed, said to his Wife, Nanny, Good by'e, 
then shot himself in the Head with a Pistol, which lodg'd two Balls in 
the back part of his Head: The Surgeons finding it difficult to extract 
them, he call'd for his Nutcrackers, saying, he would take them out him- 
self. He liv'd two Days. 

At Gibraltar were lately executed 5 Sailors belonging to the William, 
Capt. Bennet, which sailed from Lisbon in Aug. last, bound for Genoa, 
for killing the Capt. and Mate with their Wives, and a Passenger, and 
for sinking the Ship. 

The John and Jane, Capt. Birt, from London, after an obstinate Fight 
for 4 Hours, was taken the 24th of March last, in Glover's Reef, near the 
Bay of Honduras, by a Spanish Sloop. They carry'd the Ship to Campechy, 
confiscated her, imprison'd the Men, and us'd them cruelly. 

As the Jacob, late Capt. Thurman, bound from Alexandria, with Hides, 
Coffee, Saffranon, &c. to Leghorn, lay off Monte Christo, the Saffranon 
smothering in the Hold, on opening the Hatches, the Flames burst 
out and consumed the Ship and Cargo, the Captain and Sailors hardly 
escaping. 


[^1. Oct. 3. ^]