

[^Sample 1: article - 1731_GM_0176^]

|P_176
[}CASUALTIES. }]
MR. Newcomb of Chester, who had received several threatning Letters, one 
Evening in the dark was heard to cry out help! help! and found, his 
Brains dashed out, at the bottom of the Steps, at the end of Fishmonger's Lane. 

At Caston in Norfolk, the Wife of one Thomas Denny desir'd her Nurse to go 
for Milk, in the mean while cut the Throat of her Daughter about 8 Years 
old, and of her Son about 10, who both died in two hours: After that, she 
cut her own Throat, but not effectually. 

Charles Creagh, Esq; and — Macnmemara, Esq; between whom an old grudge 
of three Years had subsisted, which had occasion'd their being bound over about 
fifty times for breaking the Peace, meeting in Company with Mr. Eyres of the 
County of Galloway, the former discharg'd their Pistols, and all three were kill'd 
on the spot. To the great joy of their peaceful Neighbours , say the Irish Papers. 

7. The Barns and Out-houses of Mr. Mackrell, High-Constable of Enfield, were 
set on fire, as supposed, by some Incendiary, by which the same, and a great 
quantity of Wheat were soon consum'd. 

8. Mr. Wollaston Shenton, one of the Cashiers of the Bank of England, shot 
himself in the Head, and died immediately. 'Tis believed that some concern 
with Mess. Woodwards, or their Servant Willet, occasion'd this sad Catastrophe. 

9. As one Edward Searle, a Barber at Leicester, was shooting a Gun up a 
Chimney that was on fire, the barrel burst and tore his Throat and Windpipe 
so, that he died in less than an hour. 

A Farmer's Boy at PowickWorcestershire, crush'd against an iron catch of a 
Stable-door, by a Horse, which penetrating his Throat, kill'd him on the spot. 

Mary Frey, a Farmer's Wife near Kengsington Square, took white Mercury, 
and died in about four hours. 

An aged Woman in little Sword-bearers Alley, near Morefields, cut her 
Throat, and died immediately. 

23. One Mr. Pottecary, a Button Seller near St. Olave's Church Southwark, 
shot himself through the Head and died immediately. 

26. Charles Cooper, a Cheesmonger's Son in Southwark not having his Task 
ready, left his Satchel and Books at a Shop, flung himself into the Thames, and 
was drown'd. 

27. One Crane flung off of a Cart near Edmonton, and kill'd on the spot, the 
Wheel running over his Breast. 

28. One Sharp, Servant to Mr. Day the Brewer in Piccadilly, fell down a pair 
of Stairs and died next Day. 

30. A Boy kill'd by falling upon Iron Spikes from a Lamp-Post, which he 
climb'd up to see Mother Needham stand in the Pillory. 

