

[^Sample 1: article - 1737_GM_0692^]

|P_692
[}A solemn Thank-offering to God for Recovery 
from the Small-Pox. }]
THoughtless of heav'n, lo! threat'ning 
illness came, 
Seiz'd ev'ry limb, and shook my youthful 
frame. 
Then struck by conscious guilt wth shud'ring dread, 
Ten thousand terrors hover'd o'er my head; 
When sudden smiling, from my saviour's face 
Darts a mild ray of unexpected grace; 
Vengeance retires, affronted heav'n forgives, 
Stupendous love! a dying rebel lives. 
The fever check'd, ye fierce disease withdrew, 
And my young powers began to act anew. 
Thanks to that kind supporter of my breath, 
That pow'r who skreen'd my guilty soul 
from death. 
But now the long expected scene appears, 
Scene all-alarming to my virgin fears: 
From him who whirls his chariot round the 
skies, 
Swifter than wind the dang'rous poison flies; 
Paints ev'ry limb, insects the vital flood, 
And swells the veins with streams of tainted 
blood. 
|P_693
The sharpest anguish all my powers sustain, 
And racking tortures thrill in ev'ry vein; 
No sympathizing parents round my bed, 
To catch my sighs, and prop my fainting 
head; 
Not med'cine's salutary aids appease, 
But add new vigour to the fierce disease. 
With mournful eyes my pitying friends stand 
by, 
But heav'n invok'd denies the wish'd supply; 
Perplex'd commotions in my bosom roll, 
And reason quits her empire o'er my soul: 
By fancy's pow'r depos'd, her antient sway 
No longer charms the passions to obey; 
Confus'd idea's crowd my struggling breast, 
And apprehensive scenes of balmy rest. 
Now flights of joy my raptur'd soul surprize, 
Now clouds of melancholy gloom arise: 
Clos'd in the confines of a narrow boat, 
Across the smiling deep I seem to float: 
Anon the treach'rous scene retires, and lo! 
A thund'ring storm, and sudden tempests 
blow; 
A direful prospect! ye small cock-boat hurl'd, 
Sport of the wind, across the watr'y world. 
— Adieu fantastic visions! kind deceit! 
I feel the powers of nature fast retreat; 
By pains awak'd, my tortur'd sense returns, 
In ev'ry vein the baleful fever burns.—
See! in compassion from his native skies, 
At heav'n's command my better angel flies; 
Controuls ye thrilling anguish, charms to rest, 
And balmy raptures kindles in my breast: 
Hail rosy health! commission'd from above, 
Pledge of a gracious God's paternal love; 
Come take possession of this fainting heart, 
Banish distress, and joy divine impart. 
Each dangerous symptom gradually with-
draws, 
(The direful scene) by supernatural cause; 
Free beats the pulse, wth ease ye currents roll, 
And native vigour prompts my active soul. 
I now perceive, and bless a chast'ning God, 
For ev'ry stroke of his paternal rod: 
Here to thy throne my saviour and my king, 
Prostrate in dust a sacrifice I bring: 
Sacred to sing her great deliverer's praise, 
My rescu'd soul devotes her feeble lays. 
O check my lusts, assert thy pleasing sway, 
And safely guide me to the realms of day; 
Disperse ye gloom yt veils my saviour's face, 
And seal a lasting pledge of pard'ning grace; 
Screen me from all the treach'rous arts of sin, 
And light devotion's purest flame within: 
Whate'er remains of guilty pride destroy, 
And warm my breast with hopes of heav'nly 
joy; 
Blessings for my repenting soul acquir'd, 
When my redeemer for my sins expir'd; 
Sustain my burthen, and support my hand, 
While weak I journey thro' an hostile land; 
Preserve from Satan's snares my wand'ring 
feet, 
And dissipate the troops of foes I meet; 
Paint in my view those glitt'ring worlds on high, 
My blissful mansion in th' eternal sky. 
Then fearless let me yield my parting 
breath, 
And smile a victor in the Arms of death. 
Amata. 

