

[^Sample 1: article - 1737_GM_0248^]

|P_248
[}On Recovery from Illness. }]
DEPREST with pains unfelt before, 
My muse her wonted strain forbore, 
Sad melancholy seiz'd my mind, 
To books or converse disinclin'd, 
And dark ideas fill'd my brain 
Of chronic ills, and years of pain: 
Whatever image pictures life 
Of grief expresive, pain, and strife; 
A journey thro' a dreary way, 
A gloomy sky, a stormy day, 
A voyage thro' impetuous waves, 
Where Scylla barks, Charybdis raves, 
Where ambush'd rocks and quicksands wait, 
And ev'ry billow threatens fate, 
These uninvited crowd my thought, 
A region all with vapours fraught. 
Yet still amid this anxious care 
I barr my bosom from despair, 
Solicit patience, heav'nly guest, 
To fortify me feeble breast. 
She, welcome friend, with lenient art, 
Can lessen pain, and ease impart, 
Or with her lore the soul incline 
To bear distress, and not repine; 
When providence this pow'r bestow'd, 
He lighten'd half our penal load: 
At her approach my throbs decrease, 
My mental tumult sinks to peace. 
Nor long my absent health I mourn'd, 
The rosey goddess soon return'd, 
My wasted strength again supplies, 
And bids my drooping spirits rise. 
Be first my thankful tribute given, 
To thy dispose, all gracious heaven! 
Thy providential care ordains 
My share of pleasures and of pains. 
Tis Thine, that first I drew my breath, 
Thine are the issues too from death. 
Nor be the due returns withheld 
To Wesley sage, in med'cine skill'd, 
Whose kindly draughts our pains asswage, 
And make diseases cease to rage, 
As heav'n were pleas'd by him to save, 
And disappoint the gaping grave. 
Ungrateful! worthless! were my lays, 
Shou'd I forget Urbanus' praise, 
'Twas owing to his friendly care, 
I breath'd at ease the rural air, 
Her ample bounds where Reading spreads, 
Where Kennet winds along the meads, 
Where Thompson the retreat approves, 
By streams refresh'd, and gloom'd wth groves, 
Where from Cadogan's lofty seat 
Our view surrounding landscapes greet. 
'Twas there he made my leisure blest, 
There wak'd the muse within my breast, 
While his improving converse joyn'd, 
At once both cheer'd and rais'd my mind. 
Sylvius 

