

[^Sample 1: article - 1737_GM_0214^]

|P_214
[}Farther Observations on the Ill Effects of 
this Liquor by a learned Physician. }]
IF Persons were but convinced of 
the ill Effects of Tea, on Those who 
Drink so very Much of it, as Numbers do, 
They would easily change it for another 
Tea, far wholsomer, and infinitely cheaper, 
because it pays no Duty to the King. As 
to Beauty (a very prevailing Motive with 
Women, they having all of them a most 
violent Passion for it) Tea increases the 
Quantity of Bile in too frequent Drinkers 
of it. Now what Physicians call Bile, is 
|P_215
a Yellow, Bitter, (and consequently Hot,) 
Liquor diffused about the Body.—And 
underneath the Fine Thin Skin of Wo- 
men's Faces, where it communicates its 
Ill-Favour'd, Dingy Colour, making Wo- 
men, if they are of Cool Constitutions, to 
look very Pale, or Tawny, or Swarthy: 
And if they are of Warmer Constituti- 
ons, Then it gives them Red, Ruby, 
Plain-looking Faces, and Red Noses. 
And the Hot Adust Quality of this Bilous
Humour in their Faces, Dries up, and 
Shrivels their Skin. And thereby brings 
Wrinkles on Women's Faces, long be- 
fore Age does. Hence Physicians call 
Bile the Mother of Deformity, and No- 
thing increases Bile more in Womens 
Faces, than too Frequent Drinking of Tea. 
So that if Women would but drink Less 
Tea, they would preserve their Beauty. 
Again: Tea being agreed upon by Physi- 
cians to be a most Abominable Impover- 
isher of the Blood (and generally Wo- 
mens Blood is Poor, Cold, and Low 
enough of itself, or else they would not 
be so much troubled with Lowness of 
Spirits, Violent Vapours, and Innumera- 
ble Hysterick Disorders as they are,) 'tis 
no Wonder that we see so many Pale- 
Looking Women, since a good Blood 
gives the most Beautiful Complexion.— 
That the too Frequent Drinking of Tea
renders Both Sexes less Fruitful, appears 
by Those Persons having the Most Chil- 
dren, who are the least Acquainted with 
Tea, or at least These have the most Heal- 
thy, and Finest Children. For the Proof 
of which, we need but see the Plenty of 
Healthy, Fine, Wholesome Children that 
want No Doctor in Country Villages, 
that are perfect Strangers to Tea. And 
Many Husbands who have been Drawn 
into the Scrape of Sipping Too Frequently
over a Tea Table, have had but very Few, 
or No Children, tho' they may have had 
Several Wives. 'Tis a Maxim in Physick, 
that People abounding with Bile, are al- 
ways less Prolifick, than Those of the Op- 
posite Constitution. And since Tea is 
such an Increaser of Bile, as Physicians 
Affirm it to be, by Consequence it Morti- 
fies, and renders Cold, Heavy, and Slug- 
gish the Mutual Passion toward Each 
Other between Man and Wife, which 
requires a Good Blood, well fill'd with 
Vigour, and Spirits, whereas Tea has 
neither Spirit, nor Life in it, and conse- 
quently can give None. 'Tis not there- 
fore to be wondered, that Women who 
are Over-great Drinkers of Tea, should 
Either have No Children at all, or but 
very Few: Or have Frequent Miscarri- 
ages. But some will ask what must they 
Drink instead of Tea? The Learned Dr 
Carr in his 3d Epistle, answers thus, I 
Affirm that did but Sage Cost as Much, 
and was but brought from as Distant Coun- 
tries as Tea is, it would by Far be the 
First in our Esteem. This Herb being of 
the utmost Service, because it Warms the 
Stomach, Dispels Wind, Opens Obstruc- 
tions, and has This Peculiar to itself, that 
it is in No Respects Hurtful, having such 
a Fine Quality, that it is attended with 
No Inconvenience . When Tea began first 
to be in Vogue in Europe, a great Reason 
for it was, Because the Dutch Changed it 
Weight for Weight with the Eastern Peo- 
ple for Our Sage, which They Value as 
much, and Drink it in the Same Manner 
as we do their Tea. All Physicians speak 
much in Praise of Sage, and commend it 
for being extraordinary good for the Head, 
Stomach, and Lungs. It Strengthens the 
Nerves, helps Palsies, and Convulsions, 
Provokes Urine, is Good for Vapours, and 
Green Sickness, and is of such a Wonder- 
ful Efficacy to cause Fruitfulness in Wo- 
men, that Physicians tell us that the Wo- 
men in the Eastern Parts of the World 
Drink it as we do Tea, to make them 
Conceive soon with Child. Its great 
Virtues has Occasioned ye following Verse, 

Cur moriatur Homo, cui Salvia creseit in Horto. 

