

[^Sample 1: article - 1737_GM_0243^]

|P_243
[}The Triumph of Health and Mirth, 
a Poem. Occasion'd by the Recovery, of 
Belinda, a Lady of Quality, at Bath. }]
By RICHARD SAVAGE, Esq; 
WHERE Thames with pride beholds Au- 
gusta's charms, 
And either India pours into her arms; 
Where liberty bids honest arts abound, 
And pleasures dance in one eternal round; 
High-thron'd appears the laughter-loving 
dame, 
Goddess of mirth! Euphrosyne her name. 
Her smile more chearful than a vernal morn; 
All life! all bloom! of youth and fancy born. 
Touch'd into joy, what hearts to her submit! 
She looks her sire, and speaks her mother's wit. 
O'er the gay world the sweet inspirer reigns; 
Spleen flies, and elegance her pomp sustains. 
Thee, Goddess! thee! the fair and young obey; 
Wealth, wit, love, musick, all confess thy sway. 
In the bleak wild even want by thee is bless'd,
And pamper'd pride without thee pines for rest. 
The rich grow richer, while in thee they find 
The matchless treasure of a smiling mind. 
Science by thee flows soft in social ease, 
And virtue, losing rigour, learns to please. 
The goddess summons each illustrious name, 
Bids the Gay talk, and forms th' amusive game. 
She, whose fair throne is fix 'd in human souls, 
From joy to joy her eye delighted rolls. 
But where (she cry'd) is she my fav'rite! she, 
Of all my race, the dearest far to me! 
Whose life's the life of each refin'd delight? 
She said—but no Belinda glads her sight. 
Swift sunk her laughing eyes in languid fear; 
Swift rose the swelling sigh, and trembling tear. 
In kind low murmurs all the loss deplore; 
Belinda droops, and pleasure is no more. 
The goddess silent, paus'd in museful air; 
But Mirth like Virtue, cannot long despair, 
Cælestial-hinted Thoughts gay hope inspir'd, 
Smiling she rose, and all with hope were fir'd. 
Straight wafted on the tepid breeze she flies, 
Where Bath's ascending turrets meet her eyes; 
She flies, her elder sister Health to find; 
She finds her on the mountain-brow reclin'd. 
Around her birds in earliest consort sing; 
Her cheek the semblance of the kindling spring; 
Fresh-tinctur'd like a summer-evening sky, 
And a mild sun sits smiling in her eye, 
Loose to the wind her verdant vestments flow; 
Her limbs yet-recent from the springs below; 
There oft she bathes, then peaceful sits secure, 
Where every gale is fragrant, fresh, and pure; 
Where flowers and herbs their cordial odours blend, 
And soul reviving virtues fast ascend. 
Hail sister, hail! (the kindred goddess cries) 
No common suppliant stands before your eyes. 
You, with whose living breath the morn is 
fraught, 
Flush the fair cheek, and point the chearful thought! 
Strength, vigour, wit, depriv'd of thee decline! 
Each finer sense, that forms delight, is thine! 
Bright suns by thee diffuse a brighter blaze, 
And the fresh green a fresher green displays! 
Without thee pleasures die, or dully cloy, 
And life with thee, howe'er depress'd, is joy. 
Such thy vast power!—The deity replies, 
Mirth never asks a boon, which Health denies. 
Our mingled gifts transcend imperial wealth; 
Health strengthens mirth, and mirth inspirits 
health. 
These gales, yon springs, herbs, flowers, and sun are mine; 
Thine is their smile! be all their influence thine. 
Euphrosyne rejoins—Thy friendship prove! 
See the dear, sickening object of my love! 
Shall that warm heart, so chearful even in 
pain, 
So form'd to please, unpleas'd itself remain? 
Sister! in her my smile anew display, 
Aad all the social world shall bless thy sway. 
Swift, as she speaks, Health spreads the 
purple wing, 
Soars in the colour'd clouds, and sheds the spring; 
Now bland and sweet she floats along in air; 
Air feels, and softening owns th' ethereal fair! 
In still descent she melts on opening flowers, 
And deep impregnates plants wth genial showers. 
The genial showers, new-rising to the ray, 
Exhale in roseat clouds, and glad the day. 
Now in a Zephyr's borrow'd voice she sings. 
Sweeps the fresh dews, and shakes them from 
her wings, 
Shakes them embalm'd; or, in a gentle kiss, 
Breathes the fire earnest of awakening bliss. 
Belinda feels it, with a soft surprize, 
Glide thro' her veins, and quicken in her eyes! 
Instant in her own form the goddess glows, 
Where, bubbling warm, the mineral water 
flows; 
Then plunging, to the flood new virtue gives; 
Steeps ev'ry charm; and, as she bathes, it lives! 
As from her locks she sheds the vital shower, 
'Tis done! (she cries) these springs possess my power! 
Let these immediate to thy darling roll 
Health, vigour, life, and gay-returning soul. 
Thou smil'st, Euphrosyne; and conscious see, 
Prompt to thy smile, how nature joys with thee! 
All is green life! all beauty rosy bright! 
Full harmony, young love, and dear delight! 
See vernal hours lead circling joys along! 
All sun, all bloom, all fragrance, and all song! 
Receive thy care! now Mirth and Health
combine; 
Each heart shall gladden, and each virtue shine. 
Quick to Augusta bear thy prize away; 
There let her smile, and bid a world be gay. 
