

[^Sample 1: article - 1737_GM_0561^]

|P_561
[}Of inoculating the Small-Pox; occa- 
sioned by its now raging in several large 
Towns. }]
1. ALL Mankind (very few excepted) 
being once in Life liable to the 
Small-Pox, the Fear thereof is to many a 
one a great Uneasiness, and even that 
Fear alone so very disturbing, that a Re- 
medy thereof must needs be very ac- 
ceptable. 

2. If the Dread of that Distemper only 
be so very troublesome, the Danger must 
be much more affecting. 

3. It seizes the Beauty, the pregnant, 
the young, the Adult, and the Aged; Tra- 
vellers also, when abroad, in dangerous 
Times and Circumstances; who then (and 
Reason good) think their Non-inoculation 
an Omission, and wish it had been duly 
done. 

4 Whenever it comes, there is always 
Pain more or less in it, and often Danger. 

It hinders near and dear Friends and 
Relations that have not had it, from vi- 
siting and assisting each other, in their so 
great Need of Aid and Succour. 

5. It is apt to continue long in a 
Town after its first Invasion, to the great 
Terror and Loss of the Inhabitants. 

7. It commonly seizes upon Childhood, 
and is found to be safer then than in ri- 
per Years. 

8. They that escape it (if Servants) 
are often not acceptable to good Services, 
till it is over with them, &c.

Since therefore an early and seasonable 
Inoculation is a sure Relief in some of 
the preceding Cases, and makes the 
aforesaid Persons easy all their Days, since 
it the sooner frees a Town from the Di- 
stemper, wch otherwise is apt to continue 
long. For had a general Inoculation 
been in Use heretofore, none, at this 
Time, but the young ones, would have 
wanted it, and Tamworth, Chipping-Norton, 
Reading, and other Towns that have had 
|P_562
it almost a Year, had been free from it 
long ago. 

Q. Whether a general Inoculation of 
Infants when it first enters a Town, be 
not therefore a good Expedient for ob- 
viating the aforesaid Inconveniences, and 
(imploring the divine Benediction) a pro- 
vident Act of Mercy, and a Duty pious, 
prudent, and therefore practicable? 

'Tis true, it don't always answer Expec- 
tation, and as true yt no one Expedient ever 
yet did.— A Person may be seized 
with an uninoculated Sort during his In- 
oculation, which no Mortal can foresee 
or prevent. As to other Accidents that 
may seem to discourage the Practice.—— 
The Inoculator acts according to the best 
of his Skill (which frequent Practice and 
Observation will improve) and according 
to 7th Note above, which is a providen- 
tial Indication of the Time of Life when 
it ought to be done, and therefore not to 
be then omitted.— He only makes 
an innocent, no mortal Incision, plants 
his Inoculate with a salutary, no wicked 
or insidious Intention in the least, but to 
preserve his little Patient from all the Mi- 
series it would otherwise be liable to. 
The rest he commits to Providence, which 
always acts for the best, whatever short- 
sighted Mortals may imagin. 

The Physician, when he gives a Vomit 
or a Purge, or opens a Vein for the Pre- 
vention of future Uncertain Ills, is not al- 
ways sure of the Success, or just Dose, 
and the Point of his Lancet goes out of 
his Sight. All other good Designs what- 
ever have their Accidents that do attend 
them, and bad ones too sometimes; nay, 
even holy Matrimony not excepted. That 
has its Allay now and then, and is another 
Inoculation that mortifies sometimes. Yet 
who foregoes it therefore? 

So that he that inoculates for the 
Small-Pox, does no more than all Man- 
kind in some Measure every Day do, in 
every particular Action of Life whatever, 
and setting (as in the present Case) natu- 
ral Affection or Life and Death aside, are 
every way as criminal. If it be a Crime, 
it is only owing to this, That we don't 
behold Futurity; and indeed it was never 
design'd we should, but to wait upon, and 
be submissive in all Things to that uner- 
ring Wisdom that does. Every good De- 
sign or Action seems to differ chiefly in 
Degree, and in a Sense may be called or 
accounted, as it were, an Inoculation, 
and every Man an Inoculator, that is, he 
projects and acts with good Intentions, 
but the Issue does not always answer Ex- 
pectation: It is not fit it always should 
his that can't determine what is best. For 
the Lot is cast into the Lap, but the whole 
Disposal thereof is done by an invisible 
Hand that can justly determine. And 
what is he that desires a Mercy, and does 
not trust in that supreme Disposer, who 
will most certainly grant that Mercy 
(with due Submission implored) or one 
superior to it; which is the happy Lot 
of every inoculated Infant, whether he 
survive his Inoculation or not; inso- 
much, that an Infant (fit for it) sustains 
no manner of Loss by Inoculation. Is it 
not a Neglect therefore, and Shame as 
great, to suffer a poor Child to go abroad 
before it be inoculated, that is, with that 
Impurity in it, which Nature one Time 
or other, will throw off, as to let it run 
out of Doors in a Dis—habille, now we 
are taught to discharge that peccant Hu- 
mour to ye future Ease, Safety and Comfort 
of ye Child? The Objection of a Return 
after Inoculation is nothing; for so it 
does sometimes after the natural way; 
however the second Invasion is found to 
be more favourable. And tho' at present 
all cannot come into the Practice, yet af- 
ter Time and Experience have improved 
it to a greater Security and Convenience, 
'tis possible it may have the same Fate 
with other Notables at their first En- 
trance; as the Use of Hops, Tobacco, 
the Bark, Wiggs, Shaving the Beard, 
&c. For once upon a Time each of 
these was criminal, and many a little 
Argument muster'd up against them; 
till a better Acquaintance and Experience 
at last prevailed over Scruples, which in 
Time vanished and dwindled into no- 
thing. 

