

[^Sample 1: article - 1737_GM_0691^]

|P_691
[}Remarks on Dr. Mead's certain Cure
for the Bite of a Mad Dog.}]
THE Hydrophoby is a Disease, most 
surprizing and terrible in its Sym- 
toms, most difficult to comprehend, and 
the most dangerous in its Consequences; 
in short, to use Celsus's Words, miser- 
rimum est Genus Morbi. A certain Me- 
thod to prevent so great an Evil (for 
its Cure, when the Hydrophoby comes 
on, we may despair ever to see) that 
we may assuredly rely upon the same, 
is certainly what every one would be 
glad to know, for we are all liable to 
an Accident of this kind. We have 
had not long since published a certain 
Cure for the Bite of a Mad Dog by a 
Gentleman, deservedly at the Head of 
Physick: But as that is proposed to 
the Common People in such a man- 
ner, as every Person may be his own 
Doctor, and therefore nothing more 
may be thought requisite to be done, I 
have only this to ask in the Name of 
the Publick, Whether that be not de- 
ficient, upon account of no notice be- 
ing taken of what is to be done to the 
Part wounded, or affected with the Bite
or Slaver. For as I apprehend, with- 
out special Regard being had to the 
Management of the Wound, all other 
Methods will be very uncertain, if at 
all to be depended upon: But if proper 
Care be taken of the Wound, the Me- 
thod proposed by the great Doctor 
Mead seems unexceptionable. My Rea- 
sons for this Doubt occurred to me, 
upon perusing and examining the most 
considerable Authors both ancient and 
modern, who have taken any notice 
of the Bite of a Mad Dog; and all, or 
the most experienced, do particularly 
advise to draw out the Poison by Cup- 
ping, Suction, or attractive Medicines, 
&c. Or, if the Place be neither ner- 
vous nor tendonous, to cauterise the 
Wound with a hot Iron, and to apply 
Digestives. I shall add, that it seems 
necessary to make Issues, or running 
Sores, upon, or very near the same Part, 
and to continue them for some Months 
at least, or a Year. If the Wound be 
at the first well managed, there needs 
nothing to be feared; for this seems 
to be the principal Part necessary to 
the Cure, and I never heard of this 
Method proving ineffectual; but it is 
generally neglected. and too much Con- 
fidence placed in Specificks, which is 
the great Reason we hear of so many 
deplorable Instances of its Fatality. As 
to internal Specificks, hitherto asserted 
to be infallible, I shall only observe 
they have had the common Fate of be- 
ing supported by great Authorities for 
a time, and afterwards falling into Dis- 
use and Oblivion. As anonymous, I 
could better deliver my Thoughts with 
a strict Regard to Truth; but I hope 
I have carefully avoided any thing that 
can give offence to any Person what- 
ever: For I abhor the common Practice 
of those that defame and write against 
Particulars, no matter in how gross a 
manner, so that they can be unknown; 
which is what ought to be carefully a- 
voided by a Christian; nay, a good 
Heathen would be ashamed of it. I 
shall conclude with what I have some- 
where met with concerning Galen wor- 
thy our Imitation: Qui nunquam ad Odium, 
neque ad Gratiam alicujus loquutus est; 
praeterea, qui nulli Haeresi, aut Sectae, 
vel Parti addictus, & consecratus; sed 
verax, Veritatisque Amator, semper ex- 
titit . 

May 10th, 1737. 
P. L. 

