

[^Sample 1: article - 1737_GM_0213^]

|P_213
Grubstreet Journal, Nº 379. 

[}Observations on the Effects of TEA. }]
THe Matter of Diet, in every Coun- 
try throughout the World, consists 
chiefly of such Animals and Vegetables 
which Experience has proved to be nou- 
rishing, without giving any Disturbance 
to the Body. Animal Food is of the high- 
est Kind, for Nourishment and Pleasure 
also, while the Appetite lasts; but when 
that is satiated, Meat is too rich to be con- 
tinued any longer out of Pleasure. Fish 
indeed is of a lower and poorer Nature; 
yet even that is sufficiently Rich to clog 
the Appetite before the Stomach can be 
said to be full. Vegetables may be eaten 
after either: For there are very few which 
are so satiating, but a Person may fill his 
Stomach with them after his Appetite has 
been satisfied with Fish or Flesh. Hence 
we may observe, that no Diet which is 
very nourishing can be eat to Fullness: 
Because those Parts which nourish are oy- 
ly and very satiating, as Flesh, Eggs, &c. 
but that Diet which is less nourishing 
may, as Vegetables in general. There is 
however in them a very great Difference. 
Providence has been so bountiful as to fur- 
nish every Country with a Mixture of 
these pleasant Things, along with those 
which are for our real Support; and this 
seems to be a Matter of Necessity: For as 
we see the different Climates frame very 
different Appetites and Constitutions; so 
it is very natural to expect, that our Pro- 
duce for Food in this Northern Isle, should 
be unfit for those in the Southern Parts. 
A Pound of roast Beef and a Quart of 
Ale, which is a common Meal for a hearty 
Man here, could hardly be eaten by, 
or if eaten, might endanger the Life of, 
an East-Indian. On the other Hand, a 
Piece of Sugar-cane, and a Cup of Wa- 
ter, which is a very good Meal there, 
would reduce an English-man some Pounds 
lighter and much weaker in a few Days. 
So that our Diet should undoubtedly be 
of home growth, 

There seems as great a Necessity too, 
that our pleasant Eatables and Drinkables 
should be of home growth: For in Bri- 
tain where we have much wet and cold, 
our very Appetites and Passions must be 
very different from those in India, where 
they have very little Wet, and almost no 
Cold. The pleasant Herbs and Fruits of 
each Country must also be so different in 
their Qualities, that it is not reasonable 
to expect, that they should agree with the 
different Inhabitants. We see this is true 
by Experience: When Englishmen go to 
the East-Indies, the Diet there is so differ- 
rent from ours here, that notwithstanding 
the English on the Spot have naturalized 
it as much as possible, yet Multitudes dye. 
Here it may be observed, that the Disor- 
ders which happen to Indians upon using 
our Country Diet, are of the Inflammato- 
ry Sort; and the Disorders which happen 
to the English upon using theirs, are of 
the colliquative Sort. This shews, that 
our Diet is richer and stronger than theirs; 
and that a changing of ours for theirs does 
not only hazard our Health, but enfeeble 
our Constitutions. Most People can dis- 
cern, that Rice is of a more insipid Na- 
ture than Wheat: It has less nutritive oily 
Parts, and so does produce weaker Blood 
and poorer Spirits. The Poorness of their 
Diet is undoubtedly the Cause of the Fee- 
bleness and Effeminacy of their Persons. 
On the contrary, our English Beef and 
Wheat-pudding for Eatables, and good 
Ale for Drinkables, has very probably been 
the Foundation of the antient English
Strength and Courage; the Decrease of 
which I cannot mention without much 
regret. If I am not misinformed, the In- 
dians drink for Pleasure very little of spi- 
rituous Things, but mostly Tea, Salop, 
Sago, and Rice Gruels, and such like 
warm watry Liquids: And their pleasura- 
ble Eatables are such as Musk and Water- 
melons, Oranges, Citrons, Pomegranates, 
Sugar-cane, &c. 

We in Britain formerly used only fer- 
mented Liquors for Pleasure, as Beer, Ale, 
Cyder, Wine, &c. and the lower Rank, 
who drank the three former of our own 
Produce, were generally a hearty robust 
People as any in the World; but the richer 
Sort who drank Wine, were liable to ma- 
ny Diseases, the Gout and Stone in parti- 
cular: hence it appears plain, that our 
Eatables and Drinkables, both for Suste- 
nance and Pleasure, should be such as ei- 
ther do, or would grow at Home. 

Tea is the Leaf of a small Shrub of 
the Kind of our Dog-tree, of an austere 
bitter astringent Taste, without any aro- 
matic Warmth. It has but very little 
Oyl in it, and that which it has is of the 
resiny Kind, is narcotic and stupefactive: 
It has also but very little Salt, and that is 
of the fixed Kind. 

If we consider the Nature of Tea with 
the Nature of English Diet, as mentioned 
before, no one can think it a proper Ve- 
getable for our Diet. We see this by 
common Experience: the first Time Per- 
sons drink it, if they are full grown, it 
generally gives them a Pain at the Sto- 
mach, Dejection of Spirits, cold Sweats, 
Palpitation at the Heart, Trembling, Fear- 
fulness; taking away the Sense of Full- 
ness, though presently after Meals, and 
causing a Hypocondriac gnawing Appetite
|P_214
These Symptoms (which are very little 
Inferior to what the most poisonous Ve- 
getables we have in England would occa- 
sion when dryed and used in the same 
Manner) do not however always follow 
the Use of it: But habituating one's self 
to drink it often, those Effects decrease, 
and at length, if the Constitution is strong, 
quite cease; unless the usual Dose be increas- 
ed, and then it disturbs as before. This is 
the Case of Tobacco, and of most other 
Narcotics, such as Poppies, Nightshade, 
&c.Tea is also like them in another Effect, 
which it has upon all Persons, that when 
they have accustomed themselves to drink 
it plentifully, they cannot with any quiet 
of Mind leave it off. Which is an Argu- 
ment against the Wholsomeness of it, full 
as strong as any of the others: For there 
is Nothing which is fit for Food, which so 
alters the Body, that the leaving it off 
gives disquiet. And here I may observe, 
that although it is a powerful Alterative, 
yet the Physicians cannot bring it into any 
steady Practice. Forty Years ago it was 
cried up vastly for Consumptions, &c. it 
was tried, when the Physicians knew much 
less from Observations on its Effects than 
they do now: But neither their former 
Trials on the Sick, uor their succeeding 
Observations of its Effects on the Well, 
have given it any Place in Practice. I 
conclude then, that Tea is utterly impro- 
per for Food, hitherto useless in Physick, 
and therefore to be ranged among the 
Poysonous Vegetables. Were it entirely 
wholsome as Balm or Mint, it were yet 
Mischief enough to have our whole Po- 
pulace used to sip warm Water in a min- 
cing effeminate Manner once or twice a 
Day; which hot Water must be supped 
out of a nice Tea-cup, sweetened with Su- 
gar, biting a Bit of nice thin Bread and 
Butter between whiles: This mocks the 
strong Appetite, relaxes the Stomach, sa- 
tiates it with trifling light Nick-nacks, 
which have little in them to support hard 
Labour. In this Manner the Bold and 
Brave become dastardly, the Strong be- 
come weak, the Women become barren; 
or if they breed, their Blood is made so 
poor, that they have not the Strength to 
suckle, and if they do, the Child dies of 
the Gripes. The poor People's Children 
which are bred with it, as they really are 
in the Cities and Towns, are only fit for 
Footmen and Chambermaids. May not 
this ill Diet be a great Cause of the Want 
we have of labouring Servants, the Rise 
of their Wages, and the Prodigality which 
the common Servants have shewn within 
these last fifty Years? It is now become 
a Part of the Covenant with labouring 
Servants truely, that they must be allow- 
ed Tea for Breakfast. If this unwholsome 
Weed is not in some Degree prohibited by 
the Government, I can expect Nothing 
less, in one Generation more, but that we 
must hire Foreigners, as they do in Spain, 
to do our hard Labour; and for the De- 
fence of the Nation. I leave any one to 
judge what Soldiers we are like to have. 
The Spaniards very likely had felt the 
Force of English Beer within this last 20 
Years, if the Use of it had not been ex- 
changed for warm Water bewitch'd with 
Indian Poyson. 

The last Thing I remark is, that the 
Numbers which drink Tea are vastly great: 
Our home Consumption plainly shews, 
that it is a general Practice. Dram-drink- 
ing has been a practice anomg the poorer 
Sort, because they could be made merry 
with distill'd Spirits cheaper than they could 
with any other Liquor; and their Want of 
Conduct, has hurt the Constitutions of 
many. But of whom? why, of a few 
poor Creatures chiefly in the City of Lon- 
don; perhaps 10 in a Parish would lie at 
the Distillers Houses, and be drunk every 
Day. Suppose that there were 5000 
which constantly used these hot Liquors 
immoderately in this City, and 15,000 
more round about the Nation; what are 
these to the Numbers which are daily hurt 
by drinking Tea, Green or Bohea? A third 
Part of the whole Nation, computed at 
about three Millions of People, may be 
supposed to use Tea constantly every Day: 
and I have heard Persons in the physical 
Way assert, that most of them are hurt 
by it. If now such a very great Number 
as three Millions of People, both rich and 
poor, are in a constant Use of a Liquor 
which enfeebles and enervates their Con- 
stitutions; it is surely of much greater 
Consequence, that as strict a Restraint be 
put upon drinking such a noxious Liquor, 
as there is now upon the drinking of Spi- 
rituous Liquors; which it is hoped may 
deserve the Notice of our Parliament. 

Yours, South Briton. 

