

[^Sample 1: article - 1737_GM_0424^]

|P_424
[}Remarks on the Observations on the 
Effects of Tea. [See p. 213.]}]
THE Author of these Observations 
in his second Paragraph says, "When 
Englishmen go to the East-Indies, the Diet 
there is so different from ours here, that 
notwithstanding the English on the Spot 
have Naturalized it as much as possible, 
yet Multitudes die. " This is not owing 
to the Change of Diet, but to the Violent 
Heat of the Country. He goes on; "Here 
it may be observed, that the Disorders 
which happen to the Indians upon using 
our Country Diet, are of the Inflamma- 
tory Sort; and the Disorders which hap- 
pen to the English upon using theirs, are of 
the Colliquative Sort. " 'Tis well known 
that the Animal Diet of our own Country 
often produces the like Disorders among 
us, epsecially when joyn'd with large 
Quantities of Salt, which our Country- 
men to their great Detriment always do; 
and as to our using their Diet causing 
Colliquative Disorders in us, it is false; 
for what does he think of Rice, Sago, 
and the like, which are often used by 
our Physicians, for People in a wasting 
Condition? 

The Lines following are, "most Peo- 
ple can discern, that Rice is of a more in- 
sipid Nature than Wheat, it has less nutri- 
tive oily Parts, and does produce weaker 
Blood, and poorer Spirits. The Poorness of 
their Diet is undoubtedly the Cause of the 
Feebleness and Effeminacy of their Per- 
sons. " Here he condemns himself, for 
he says before that the Produce of all 
Countries is suited to their Inhabitants. 
How then is the Produce of the Indies
suited to their Inhabitants, if it brings 
on them Feebleness and Effeminacy, a 
Marasmus, and many Colliquative Disor- 
ders? You say the Vegetables and Ani- 
mals of other Countries are not fit for 
their Diet: What is fit? I think that as 
God has peopled that Part of the World, 
he has sent something for their Diet. But 
he is in an Error; for their Feebleness 
and Effeminacy are caused from the 
Heat of their Country, not by their Diet, 
for that in a great Measure prevents it. 
Indeed there is not quite so much Nutri- 
tive Oil in their Rice as our Corn, yet it 
adds much to the Solids, and greatly 
strengthens them, nay, more than our 
Corn, tho' it does not make one so Fat: 
And if their Solids were not from their 
Diet Increased, Strengthened, and Sup- 
plied with Fat, they in a short Time from 
the Heat of the Country would perish. 

"If I am not misinformed ", says he,  the 
Indians drink for Pleasure very little of 
Spirituous Things, but mostly Tea, Salop, 
Sago, and Rice-Gruels, and such like warm 
watry Liquids . I wish, with all my heart, 
our People wou'd do the same; then 
we should have the Weekly Bills less, and 
not so many Murders, and yet not lose a 
Grain of our English Spirit, or become 
dastardly. In the next Paragraph he 
recommends Beer, Ale, and Cyder, the 
last of which is very good for all sorts of 
People. As for Beer and Ale, they are 
only fit for very hard Laborious People, 
and for the Valetudinary and Studious 
are very hurtful. The Remainder of this 
Author's Observations are false Prejudices 
against Tea, and an Invective against the 
Drinkers of it, which has nothing to do 
with the Virtues. Any thing may fall 
into abuse; Who can help it? What can 
be more abused than Spirituous Liquors, 
Wine, Beer, and Ale? And I think these 
last, which spoil — Servants, require 
more ye Consideration of the Parliament 
than Tea. His Prejudices and the Far- 
ther Observations on the Ill Fffects of this 
Liquor by a Learned Physician, p. 214, 
who says it increases the Quantity of Bile, 
and that too frequent Drinking Tea ren- 
ders both Sexes less Fruitful, and ends his 
Observations in Praise of Sage, I will an- 
swer together. That Physician's whole 
Doctrine is false; for Tea is the Preserver 
of Beauty, makes the Old look Young, 
fills the Body with Life and Spirit, good 
Blood, and makes the Barren Fruitful: 
There is hardly a Virtue it does not pos- 
sess. 'Tis in great esteem among the Na- 
tives of China, and Japan, and other 
Places which produce it, for its Sanative 
Properties: They use it in almost all 
their Complaints; and live to a Health- 
ful old Age by its Benefit. Schroder, or 
his Editors, have been at the Pains, in his 
Account of this Plant, to give its Use and 
Virtues in various Languages: Part of 
which I will transcribe here. "The 
|P_425
Property of this Herb is to discuss and dis- 
sipate or drive away the thinest Humours: 
Whence it follows, that in all Cases, 
when any are affected with Rheums, and 
thin and moist Humours, it may to good 
Purpose be used; whether to preserve 
from, or to cure them of the same; espe- 
cially in those Distillations of Humours 
which are called Catarrhs, from whence 
proceed Infirmities of the Head and Breast, 
Running of the Eyes, Heaviness of the 
Head, Noise in the Ears, Shortness of 
Breath, Palpitations of the Heart, &c.
'Tis also useful in the lower Parts of the 
Body, for weak Stomachs, and in want 
of Digestion; in the Weakness of the 
Joints it is likewise serviceable, as also 
for the Gout. In short, the Inhabitants 
of China, who use it much, are free from 
the Diseases of the Joints and Reins. 
'Tis good to take off the ill Effects of 
hard Drinking, and will enable a Person 
to continue a long Time without Sleep. 
To Sum up all ", says he, " it is esteemed the 
great Augmenter of human Strength, 
preserving from the Accidents which 
proceed from ill Air or otherwise; to 
which Purpose, divers Ambassadors, re- 
siding in those Quarters, use it in the 
Morning. " This Herb is wonderfully 
serviceable after Crapula's, by gradually 
helping off the viscid Remains which 
nauseate and sicken the Stomach, and a- 
gain, by drawing up its Fibres to their 
due Tone. Its Use after Dinner, or 
Eating, is of great Service in assisting Di- 
gestion, and preventing the Uneasiness 
which attends a full, weakly Stomach. 
It sates the Blood and Juices with such 
gently deterging Parts, as keep clean all 
the Emunctories; and it reckon'd by some 
to carry its Influences to the most re- 
mote Parts, and prevents Arthritic Pains. 
It promotes Urine, prevents the Stone 
and Gravel, and many Hysterical Disor- 
ders. Bohea Tea is of later Discovery 
than the Green, is very Balsamic, Analep- 
tic, and Nourishing, and good in all Con- 
sumptions, inward Wastings, Decays, and 
Ulcerations of the Lungs, which has 
made some Empirical Pretenders impose 
upon the World a pretended Spirit of 
Bohea Tea. He speaks much in praise 
of Sage, as indeed most Authors have be- 
fore him, tho' it does not deserve it, and 
tho' it has a few Medical Virtues, is not 
fit to be brought into Diet, from the ma- 
ny Mischiefs that attend it, as Colliqua- 
tive Disorders, Feverish Consumptions, 
and many other Diseases according to the 
different Habits of the People that use it, 
and is very dangerous to Women with 
Child. I knew a hale strong lusty young 
Man, who used Sage for his Breakfast, 
and as Drink to his Meals; for 2 or 3 
Days at first Use, it made him heavy and 
dull as if he had been Drunk; after this 
was over, he was seemingly in good 
Health till about 2 Months, when Pim- 
ples came out on his Face, he began to 
lose his Complection, grew costive, was 
very weak, and had violent Pains in his 
Back and Reins, and the lower part of 
his Belly; he had frequent motions to 
make Water; his Pains encreased, his Cos- 
tiveness grew worse, so that at last he 
had not a Discharge that way for five 
Days, which was to be procured only by 
strong Cathartics and Clysters, and with 
such Pain that it flung him into a Fever, 
of which he was with great Difficulty 
cured. All the time of using Sage Tea he 
had a greater Stomach than ever, yet 
was much thinner: He now drinks 
Green Tea for his Breakfast and in an 
Afternoon, and is in perfect Health. I 
am near 50, have Drank Tea twice a 
Day ever since I can remember, and ne- 
ver found any Hurt by it, nor never have 
had any Disease since I was 10 Years old, 
which was a Fever. My Wife also drinks 
Tea, and enjoys a perfect State of Health; 
we have had 14 Children, 9 of which are 
living, all strong and healthy. So I hope 
all such Persons as used to drink Tea will 
continue the same, and those that did not 
won't be frighted from its Use by ill- 
grounded Suspicions. 

A Wellwisher of the Health of Great Britain. 

