

[^Sample 1: article - 1737_GM_0757^]

|P_757
[}On seeing an Anatomy. }]
NAY,—start not at this skeleton, 
'Tis your own picture wch you shun; 
Alive, that did resemble thee, 
And thou, when dead, like that shalt be. 
Converse with it, and you will say, 
You cannot better spend the day; 
You little think how you'll admire 
The language of those bones and wire. 
The tongue is gone,—but yet each joynt 
Reads lectures on th' important point. 
When all your moralists are read, 
You'll find no tutors like the dead. 
Whether those feet were bare, or shod, 
If in the paths of peace they trod; 
If us'd to travel to the door 
Of the afflicted, sick, and poor; 
Tho' to the dance they were estrang'd, 
And ne'er their own rude motion chang'd, 
Those Feet, renew'd, may upwards fly, 
And tread the palace of the sky. 
Those hands, if ne'er with murther stain'd, 
Nor fill'd with wealth unjustly gain'd, 
Nor greedily at honours grasp'd, 
But to the poor man's cry unclasp'd; 
It matters not if in the mine 
They delv'd, or did with rubies shine. 
Here, grew the lips; and in that place, 
Where now appears a vacant space, 
Was fix'd the tongue, an organ, still 
Employ'd extreamly well, or ill. 
I know not if it cou'd retort, 
With wit, or language of the court; 
But this I safely can averr, 
That if it was no flatterer; 
If it traduc'd no one's repute, 
But, where it cou'd not praise, was mute: 
If no false promises it made, 
If it sung anthems, if it pray'd, 
'Twas a blest tongue; and will prevail, 
When wit, and eloquence shall fail. 
If wise as Socrates, that skull
Had ever been; 'tis now as dull 
As Midas's; or, if its wit 
To that of Midas did submit, 
'Tis now as full of plot, and skill, 
As is the head of Matchiavil, 
Proud laurels once might shade that brow, 
Where not so much as hair grows now. 
Prime instances of nature's skill, 
The eyes, did once those hollows fill; 
Were they quick-sighted, sparkling, clear, 
(As those of hawks, and eagles are) 
Or, say they did with moisture swim, 
And were distorted, blear'd, and dim; 
Yet, if they were from envy free, 
Nor lov'd to gaze on vanity; 
If none with scorn they did behold, 
With no lascivious glances roll'd; 
Those eyes more bright, and piercing grown, 
Shall see the great creator's throne, 
The great invisible shall view, 
And heav'nly glories ever new. 
See!—not the least remains appear, 
To shew where nature plac'd the ear! 
Who knows if it were musical, 
Or cou'd not judge of sounds at all? 
Yet if it were to counsel bent, 
To caution, and reproof attent; 
When the shrill trump shall rouse the dead, 
And others hear their sentence read; 
That ear shall with these sounds be blest, 
Well done, and, enter into rest. N. T. 

