

[^Sample 1: article - 1737_GM_0505^]

|P_505
[}Sickness and Recovery, sacred to God, 
the Preserver and Restorer. }]
By Mr. Moses Browne, Author of the Pieces 
inserted under the Name of Astrophil. 
When fev'rish poisons seiz'd my tainted blood, 
And chill and languid mov'd ye vital flood, 
From ye sad breast o'erwhelm'd wth fears and woes, 
To heav'n my feeble sighs for rescue rose. 
My God, I cry'd, oh save! all pow'rful friend! 
From the dark grave my threat'nd life defend. 
In manhood's prime, my noon of useful days 
Spare me, mild parent! for thy service raise. 
Yet unprepar'd—defil'd with conscious stains, 
A respite deign— to purge the dread remains—
He, pitying goodness! my distress survey'd, 
Heard ye griev'd pray'r, and quick relief convey'd. 
Sent the kind friend to aid my helpless hour, 
And gave to Art her salutary pow'r. 
He still'd my anguish, He my plaint supprest, 
And seal'd my sleepless eyes in balmy rest: 
Bid rosey Health a gentle cure apply, 
Flush my wan cheek, and beam my lifeless eye, 
Bid strength mature my fault'ring limbs sustain, 
And rais'd me from the bed of griefs and pain. 
Am I restor'd, kind heaven! from dreaded woes 
To health, to vig'rous strength, to fresh repose! 
O what returns are just, his grateful dues, 
Who from the tomb my wasted form renews! 
But where is she?—ah where! the lov'd, the kind! 
Long to my heart by closest ties conjoin'd, 
Who us'd my cares to sooth, my joys to raise, 
Soft, sweet companion of my pleasing days? 
Who but so late, with fondest fears possest, 
My sick'ning side wth watchful tendance prest? 
Alas! how soon in Childbed's tort'rous throws 
My suffering dear has left her life and woes. 
I heard, unhappy! her severe distress; 
Grief, wth no pray'rs, no succours could redress: 
Alone, encircled with the midnight gloom, 
Heard the faint sigh, that seal'd her hasty doom. 
Too sudden lost, her piteous plight to tell, 
To print one kiss, or breath one short farewel. 
From tendrest friends, from weeping orphans torn, 
From widow'd me—me! destin'd long to mourn. 
Ah quite bereft! — but let my murmurs rest; 
Heav'n dooms—and all his will ordains is best. 
Best, tho' severe the lot—but oh! my heart 
Feels the keen pang, the throb on nature's part—
Adieu, all lovely, grac'd with virtues dear, 
Whate'er cou'd heave the sigh, or swell the tear. 
Adieu — yet not eternal our remove; 
Soon we in happier realms shall meet, and love. 
With no mixt ills it's fervour to alloy, 
Pure shall our passion glow, nor pall our joy. 
For the soft view, that scene of blissful rest, 
Tune, heav'nly Pow'r, this inharmonious breast! 
Wean me from earth, from its delusions save, 
And point my hopes to joys beyond the grave. 
Teach me the life, so kindly spar'd, to use—
In Vice not wasted, not in Sloth to lose. 
Rul'd by thy laws, to all thy will resign'd, 
And active for the good of human kind; 
Then— pleas'd, remove me (from this lonesom cell) 
Where my dear Saint, my God & Saviour dwell. 
