

[^Sample 1: article - 1743_GM_0422^]

|P_422
[}Surprising Instances of the Effects of Musick 
in acute Fevers, and for the Cure of the 
Bite of the Tarentula. }]
SIR, 

AS the Effects of Musick in the Cure of 
several Disorders are worthy the 
Curiosity of the publick, and may on some 
Occasions be of great Use to Mankind; it 
will not be unentertaining to your Rea- 
ders to see some well attested Instances 
of this Kind upon which the learned may 
comment at their Leisure, and give us 
some Explanation of the Phenomena, that 
must unavoidably surprize those who are 
less acquainted with the Laws of Nature. 

The first of these Instances is attested 
by M. Dodart[/1./] whose skill is too well 
known to be imposed upon, and whose 
Testimony is otherwise unqueastionable. 
It is as follows.—A famous Master of Mu- 
sick, an eminent Composer, was taken ill 
of a Fever which daily increased, till the 
seventh Day, when he fell into an high 
Delirium almost without any Intermis- 
sion, attended with Cries, Tears, Trem- 
bling and continual Watchings. On 
the third Day of this Delirium, by one 
of those Instincts, which teach Animals 
when sick the Herbs proper for their 
Cure, he desired to hear a little Concert 
in his Room. His Physician with some 
difficulty consented to indulge him in his 
Request. The Cantata's of M. Bernier
were sung to him. On hearing the first 
Notes, his aspect grew calm, his Eyes 
lost their Wildness, his Convulsions quite 
left him, he shed Tears of Pleasure, and 
showed, that Musick had never been so 
charming to him as then. He had no 
feverish Symptoms during the whole 
Time of the Performance, but as soon as it 
ceased, he felt a Relapse. It was there- 
fore thought proper to continue the Use 
of a Remedy, the Success of wch had been so 
|P_423
visibly happy, tho' unexpected, and by the 
Use of which his Fever and Delirium still 
abated during the Operation; so that Mu- 
sick became so necessary to the Patient, 
that at Night he made a Kinswoman who 
attended him, sing and dance, tho' her 
Concern made her yield with Pain to 
oblige him. One Night when only 
his Nurse sat up with him, he obliged 
her to sing an old Ballad, which gave him 
some Ease. To conclude, in ten Days by 
the Continuance of Musick he grew en- 
tirely well, without any other Remedies 
but two Bleedings in the Foot, the last of 
which was followed by a strong Purge. 

The second Instance of the extraordi- 
nary Effect of Musick in the Cure of this 
Disease is a Fact related by M. Fon- 
tenelle[/2./], who had it from M. de Manda- 
jor Mayor of Alais in Languedoc, a Gen- 
tleman of Sense and Merit. A Dancing- 
Master of that Town, during the Carni- 
val of 1708, had so over-heated himself 
with the agreeable Duties of his Professi- 
on, that he fell sick the Beginning of 
Lent of a violent Fever which the 4th or 
fifth Day turn'd to a Lethargy and held 
him a long Time. When this Symptom 
disappeared he grew sullenly Mad, ma- 
king constant Efforts to leap out of Bed, 
threatning with his Head and Countenance 
those who held him or stood about him, and 
obstinately refusing to speak or take any 
Remedies offered him. M. de Mandajor, 
who saw him in this Condition, took a 
Fancy, that perhaps Musick might com- 
pose his disordered Imagination, and pro- 
posed it to his Physician, who did not 
dislike the Thing, tho' he objected to the 
Redicule that might attend such a Reme- 
dy, especially if the Patient should chance 
to die in the Operation. A Friend of the 
Dancing-master's, who was less scrupu- 
lous and play'd a good Fiddle, took up 
that of his sick Friend, which lay in the 
Room, and began to play the Tunes he 
knew he lov'd best. The Company im- 
mediately took him to be the greater Mad- 
man of the two, and began to chide him. 
But the sick Man suddenly sate up, like 
one agreeably surpriz'd, and by his Mo- 
tion endeavour'd to keep Time with the 
Airs, but as he was still held by his Arms 
he could only show his Satisfaction by his 
Head. However those who held him 
finding him no way furious, by degrees 
gave him more Liberty, till in a Quarter 
of an Hour he fell fast asleep, and had a 
Crisis, which put him past all Danger. 

Let us know see a third Example of the 
Force of Musick, which surpasses the two 
former in the surprising Manner of its
Effects. Few Persons are Strangers to the 
Tarentula[/3./], and the terrible Symptoms 
that attend its Bite, but the extraordinary 
Remedy used to alleviate and dispell them 
is not perhaps so well known. This Re- 
medy is Musick, applied in the Manner 
we shall describe. 

Soon after the Bite of the Tarentula, 
which causes a Sensation like the stinging 
of a Bee or Ant, the Patient finds in the 
Part a very sharp Pain, which in some 
Hours is followed with a Tumour. In a 
short Time he grows melancholy, with a 
Difficulty of Breathing, faint Pulse, and 
wild Look, and if not speedily assisted he 
loses all Sense and Motion, and dies. Such 
are the Symptoms of this Poison. The 
best and surest Means of Cure yet disco- 
vered are as follow. 

When the Patient is arrived at the last 
Symptoms of being insensible or motion- 
less, a Musician tries different Tunes, till 
he hits on one whose Modulation and 
Notes suit the Person affected, so that he 
begins to stir, to move his Fingers in 
Cadence, next his Feet and at last recovers 
his Limbs, so as rise and dance to the 
Air, still continuing the Exercise with 
greater Violence. There are some Pati- 
ents will dance thus for six Hours without 
Intermission. When exhausted with this 
Fatigue the Patient is put to Bed, and af- 
ter reposing a while, he is awaked with 
the same Tune to renew his Dancing, 
continuing this Method for some Days 
(often five, six, or seven) till the Patient 
finds he has no more Inclination to dance, 
which is a Sign of his Cure. For while 
the Effect of the Poison lasts, he would if 
left to himself, dance without intermission 
till he kill'd himself. As soon as he finds 
himself wearied he recovers by Degrees 
his Senses and Judgment, and like one 
awakened from a deep Sleep remembers 
nothing of what had passed in his De- 
lirium. 

Sometimes the Patient is cured on his 
coming out of the first Fit. But if other- 
wise, he still is subject to a deep Melan- 
choly, and Forgetfulness. He shuns Com- 
|P_424
pany, loves Solitude, and if not carefully 
watch'd, is apt to drown himself. An 
Aversion for the Colours of Black and 
Blue, and a Fondness for White, Red 
and Green, are some of the odd Symp- 
toms of this Distemper. If the Patient 
dies not in the Interval, the Fit returns 
about the same Time twelvemonth the 
Bite happened, and Musick and Dancing 
must be again called in. Some have had 
these regular Relapses for 20 or 30 Years 
together. Each Patient has his particular 
specific Tune, but in general, those found 
effectual are brisk and lively. These par- 
ticulars are well attested, and were con- 
firmed to the Royal Academy not only by 
M. Geoffroy, who had informed himself 
on the Spot, but by the Letters of a Fa- 
ther Jesuit of Toulon to P. Gouye, in which 
he relates the Cure of an Italian Soldier 
bid by a Tarentula, whom he had seen 
dance for several Days successively. 

These Facts may explain the Case of 
Saul who found his Indisposition relieved 
by the Musick of David; a Case which 
has nothing in it more wonderful or ex- 
traordinary than those related. I even 
think, that the Effects of Musick on the 
disordered Brain of a Man bit with the 
Tarantula, has something more inexplica- 
ble more incomprehensibly strange in it. 
Some Philosophers have attempted to ac- 
count for these Phenomena, but the secret 
Causes of them are too concealed for us 
to discover. O Nature! Nature! how 
Mysterious and inscrutable are thy Ways? 
How feeble and bounded our Knowledge. 

As Musick has in the above mentioned 
Instances been found to be a very successful 
Remedy in the several Disorders in which 
it was applied; so it is not perhaps impro- 
bable, that it might be found efficacious in 
other Disorders such as the Bite of a Mad 
Dog; especially if a Time could be hit upon 
to make the Patient dance and sweat: 
Since the Evacuation in this Manner of the 
inflammatory Fluid is, according to Dr 
Mead, the Cause of Cure in the Bite of the 
Tarentula, the Vibratious made on the 
Nerves by Tunes rightly modelled opera- 
ting as really on the Nerves, as the Im- 
perium Voluntaris can do. And M. Geof- 
frov says, the poisonous Juice giving the 
Nerves a Degree of Tension equal to 
that of some Strings of an Instrument 
puts the Nerves in Unison to certain 
Tones; and after being agitated by the 
Undulations and Vibrations of the Air 
proper to those Tones obliges them to 
shake. 


[^1. 
* Hist. de l'Academie Royale des Sciences.
An. 1707. p. 8. 
^]
[^2. 
† Hist. de l'Academie Royale des Sciences.
An. 1708. p. 27. 
^]
[^3. 
‡ The Tarentula is a large Spider, hairy and 
about the size of an Acorn, its colour various, with 
8 Eyes and 8 Feet, from its Mouth arise 2 Horns 
or Trunks, a little crooked, the Tips exceedingly sharp 
thro' which it conveys its Poison: It is found near 
Tarento, whence it takes its Name, and is to be 
met with in other Parts of Italy especially the Isle 
of Corsica. Those of Apulia are the most venemous, 
and in general those of the Plains are most dangerous, 
because the Air of Calabria is botter in the Plains 
than in the Mountains. See Hist. de l'Academ. 
Royale des Sciences. An. 1702. p. 20. 
^]