

[^Sample 1: article - 1743_GM_0484^]

|P_484
[}From the Champion, Sept. 6. No 67. }]
[}An extraordinary Case of a Fœtus, 13 
Years in the Body of a Woman. }]
IN the Month of July, 1731, I was 
call'd to the Woman mentioned p.
443, and found her Body very large and 
hard, and under great Complaints, as 
tho' it were Travel-Pains that occasion'd 
the Disorder; but, as I perceived no 
Opening of the Os Uteri Intern. by the 
Touch, nor any other Symptoms of De- 
livery, I guess'd the Case to be a Schirrus
of the Womb, together with an Infla- 
tion of the Abdominal Muscles; and ac- 
cordingly directed a Plaister of Gum 
Galb. and carminative Glysters, by which, 
seemingly, she was relieved.—Thus 
ended my Attendance for that Time,

On the 28th of July last past I was 
again employ'd, and found her Body up- 
on the utmost Stretch, accompanied with 
an anasarcous Swelling in the lower 
Limbs, therefore judged it to be an As- 
cites, and that Day tapped her, and 
took away four Gallons and a half of 
Liquor, much resembling the Matter 
that is usually discharged from ripe Im- 
posthumes, but thinner in Consistence, 
which was all I durst draw off then; and, 
as her Strength failed fast, so I desisted 
from further Attempts. 

On the 13th Instant (August) she de- 
parted, and was by me open'd, when I 
made the following Observations.— 
On dividing the outer Teguments, I met 
with an adventitious Membrane, of the 
Thickness of a Crown-Piece, immedi- 
ately under the Peritoneum, and closely 
adhering thereto, in the Forepart of the 
Abdomen, wherein was contain'd above 
five Gallons of the abovesaid Matter, 
which was left there when I perform'd 
the Paracentesis, and, in that Liquor, 
the Bones and many other Parts of a 
|P_485
full-grown Fœtus.—The said Mem- 
brane or Cover, seem'd to be the right 
Tuba Fallopiana distended to the enor- 
mous Size of holding not only the 
Child, but also the Quantity of ten Gal- 
lons of Water.—The Bottom-part of 
the Capsula, near the Ovarium, was 
more than half an Inch thick, and of a 
blackish Colour, appearing on the In- 
side, as if a Placenta had grown thereto. 
—The other Part of the said Cover, 
behind, adhered to the Mesentery, and, 
by its Bulk, had forced the Guts, &c.
backward, close to the Diaphragma, in 
such Manner that it was with much 
Difficulty, after the Child, &c. were 
removed, that I found them.—Af- 
ter the before-mention'd Cover was di- 
vided from the Peritoneum, and not 
sooner, I met with the Uterus, which 
was sound, about as large as an Hen's 
Egg, with a Cavity not capable of hold- 
ing above an Ounce of Liquid.—The 
Os Tincæ, Vagina, &c. appear'd as in a 
healthy State.—The Bones of the 
Child's Head, Arms, Thighs, Legs, and 
many others, were loose, and divested of 
their Periostea, &c. but those of the 
Neck, as well as the Vertebræ of the 
Back and Loins, were well ranged, and 
join'd to a flabby Mass of Flesh, and with- 
in it the Heart, Lungs, Liver, Stomach, 
and Guts, of the said Child, all natu- 
rally situated, were found in a tolerable 
Condition, without any offensive Smell. 

I keep all the Parts of the Child, as 
also the Case that held it, and likewise 
the Parts of Generation which belong'd 
to the Woman, in order to demonstrate 
the Reality of this Story; and with a 
View of having them delineated, if pro- 
per Encouragement could be obtained 
for that Purpose; for, I believe, a Case 
exactly tallying herewith, is scarcely to 
be met with; at least I have not met 
any thing like it, within my twenty eight 
Years Practice in Midwifry.— 

The Nurse who kept her in her Lying- 
in tells me, that the Woman, our pre- 
sent Subject, thought herself with Child 
in the Winter-Season, 1730; that she felt 
her Child stir briskly, prepar'd all things 
convenient for Lying in, and, at the Ex- 
piration of Nine Months. i. e. in July
first above-mentioned, fell into strong 
Labour, had her Midwife and Neigh- 
bours call'd to her, not only once but 
many Times, and was every Time under 
severe Throws, as tho' her Infant was 
upon the Point of coming into the 
World.—She farther saith, that the 
Woman got freed, in the said July, after 
my Attendance ceas'd, from several Pie- 
ces of clotted Blood, and Portions of 
Flesh, resembling Veal, which the good 
Woman call'd a false Conception.— 
After this Discharge she gradually grew 
better, but remain'd with as large a 
Belly, in all Appearance, as before, and 
ever after complain'd of a great Weight 
and Lump, like a Piece of Lead, or a 
Child's Head in her Body, which fell 
from one Place to another, according to 
her Change of Posture.—In this 
Condition she remain'd to her Death; 
tho' she was deliver'd of three Children 
afterwards, namely, in April, 1733, in 
March, 1734, and in October, 1739, as ap- 
pears by the Register; yet she seem'd as 
much with Child after every Delivery 
as before it. 
Yours, &c,
John Marshall. 

