

[^Sample 1: article - 1743_GM_0432^]

|P_432
[}It may be proper to add here some Obser- 
vations of the very ingenious Dr Hales, 
in his Treatise of [/1./]Ventilators, 
who writes thus, p. 76. Paragr. 100.}]
I Cannot dismiss this Subject (of free 
Air) without saying something for 
those who cannot speak for themselves. 
I mean young tender Infants, who are 
often swathed up in such a Manner, 
as must needs greatly incommode their 
Breathing, and consequently be often 
very hurtful to them; for when their 
tender Bodies are close confined in 
Swathings, neither their Breast nor 
Belly can rise so freely as they ought 
to do, when the Child draws in its 
Breath: And consequently, not only its 
Breathing, but Digestion also, are 
thereby greatly incommoded; for the 
Digestion is much promoted, by the 
Kneadings of the Midriff on the Sto- 
mach, which are no less than twelve 
Hundred in an Hour: And in Propor- 
tion as the Degree and Force of these 
numerous Kneadings are abated by 
Swathings, so will the Digestion be ac- 
cordingly retarded and incommoded; 
the ill Consequences of which to the 
poor Child's Health, few Nurses are 
aware of. Those of them who will 
not be persuaded to leave off that old 
very bad Practice, ought themselves to 
be well swathed up, to be made duly 
sensible of the Misery they would suf- 
fer thereby in one Night. 

There is another very bad Practice in 
relation to Infants, the ill Consequence 
of which few Nurses seem to be aware 
of. viz. It is well known, that for 
very important Reasons, the Skulls of 
new-born Children are not in all Parts 
turned to Bone. But ignorant Nurses 
taking the soft Part of the Skull, for a 
great Defect in Nature, are apt, too of- 
ten, to attempt to close the Mold of 
the Head, as they call it: That is, to 
compress together, by Stroking and 
Bandage, those Parts of the Skull which 
are boney, expecting thereby to unite 
those distant bony Parts together; not 
knowing, that the intermediate soft 
Parts will turn to Bone; and little 
thinking what Injury they do thereby 
to the tender Infants, by thus com- 
pressing their Brains, and thereby cau- 
sing convulsive Fits, and perhaps, some- 
times a great Tendency to Head-Aches 
during their whole Lives, &c. Where- 
as, if they would but let Nature alone, 
to do her own Work, the Head would 
have its natural Shape, and the whole 
Skull would of itself turn to Bone: 
And this without compressing the Brain, 
which is often attended with ill Con- 
sequences. 


[^1. 
* See Register of Books this Month. 
^]