

[^Sample 1: article - 1743_GM_0137^]

|P_137
[}From the Champion, March 1. }]
[}An Epistle on the Passing the Gin-Bill. }]
Infeliciter ægrotat, cui plus Periculi 
a Medico, quam a Morbo. 

My L—d, 

YOUR late strenuous Opposition to 
the Gin Bill demands our publick 
Thanks; whether we consider it as pro- 
ceeding from your distinguish'd Zeal to 
promote Religion and Virtue;—from 
your laudable Resolution to discourage 
Profaneness and Immorality;—from your 
tender Regard for the Welfare of your 
Fellow Subjects and their Posterity; or, 
from a previous Concern for the Peace 
of this Kingdom in general, and the Se- 
curity of our most excellent Constitution: 
For howsoever trifling and inconsiderable 
the passing this Bill may seem in the 
Eyes of some short-sighted Gentlemen, 
the Consequences of it appear to us to 
be dreadful, shocking, and of the utmost 
Importance; and whether the Grievance 
it is designed to redress, is in any Way 
equivalent to the Mischief it will produce, 
deserves our most serious Consideration. 

The Intention of this Bill, (as we, with- 
out Doors, are informed) is to raise a 
large Sum of M—y, Part of which is to 
be applied to the carrying on of the War 
upon the Continent. A Scheme, allow- 
ed by all Parties to be expensive, im- 
practicable, and fundamentally wrong.— 
The Method whereby this S—y must 
be advanced is, to encourage V—ll—ny, 
to licence D-b—ch-ry, and to propagate 
In-qu-ty. A Method impolitic, dangerous, 
and altogether antichristian. Poise the 
Miseries of our own People, unrestrained 
from drinking spirituous Liquors; ener- 
vating themselves, enfeebling their Chil- 
dren, and impoverishing their Families, 
with the innate Pride, inflexible Disposi- 
tion, and unavoidable Sufferings of a fo- 
reign Queen, and you must make many 
Grains of Allowance from common Pru- 
dence, brotherly Love, and Christian 
Charity to make the Scales equal; for 
tho' the Fury of a distant Enemy may 
fall heavy upon many Particulars, yet the 
dismal Consequences of an intestine De- 
pravity, are more epidemical and more 
permanent. 

It is a melancholy Prospect, My L—d, 
to look forward, and reflect upon the 
great Mischiefs which may one Day possi- 
bly befal this Nation, from a Number of 
its Inhabitants being intoxicated and in- 
flamed with this Liquid Fire, and thereby 
made capable of perpetrating the most 
enormous Wickedness; if they should at 
any Time hereafter (which Heaven avert) 
pour forth unexpectedly from their gloo- 
my Cells, as from the Body of the Trojan 
Horse, with Design to lay the City in 
Flames, that they might share in the 
Plunder, to subvert the A—n, and to 
strike at the very Foundations of Church 
and State. And, altho' we should be 
very much concern'd, we should not be 
so much surpris'd to hear, that the chief 
Pr'm't'r of this pernicious B-ll was him- 
self a—ted by the desperate Hands 
of some of his own Licenciates. Such 
and so terrible are the Effects of Profliga- 
cy, Madness, and Misery, when they are 
blended together! 

Nor are these, my L—d, the only 
Mischiefs which may be apprehended 
from the late Indulgence; with regard to 
Posterity there are still greater; for, in 
less Time than half a Century, Britons
will probably be distinguishable from o- 
ther Nations by Name and Language 
only; their Form, Strength, and Courage, 
which were the Glory of their Ancestors, 
and the Terror of their Enemies, will be 
lost; their Size will dwindle, their Vi- 
gour will decay, and their Spirits will be 
broken, by the Debauchery and Drunk- 
enness of their Parents. Our Successors 
will, by these Means, be render'd unca- 
pable of defending themselves, or even 
of guarding their own Coasts, and must 
inevitably forfeit their Freedom, quit 
their hereditary Possessions, and be made 
a Sacrifice to some foreign Invader. 

Dismal and destructive as these Events 
naturally appear, they are pass'd over wth
indifference, and look'd upon as inconsi- 
derable; and if it be not too harsh and 
shocking for your L—d—p to hear, suffer 
us to repeat what was thrown out by a 
R—t Hon—ble Advocate for this B-ll be- 
fore a certain a-g-st Ass-mbly, with Re- 
spect to the ill Consequences which might 
hereby be devolv'd to Posterity. My 
L—ds, says he, the chief Argument 
which I have heard urged against the 
passing this Bill is, that in forty Years 
Time, the Race of Mankind in this 
Island will be so degenerated, by the 
excessive drinking of sp—s Li—rs, 
that they will not be able to raise any 
Thing better among their own Inhabi- 
tants than an Army of Lilliputians for 
their Security and Defence. But how 
vain is this Argument? or how can that 
affect us? We shall be gone, let our 
Successors take care of themselves, and 
make the best of a bad Bargain, &c.'
Now, my L—d, what better could be 
expected from such Principles as these? 
Are such Persons proper G—rd—ns for 
|P_138
the Liberties of the People? Surely, No. 
They who have so little Regard for the 
Welfare and Interest of their own Chil- 
dren, will have much less for those of the 
C—n. And we should forbear any 
longer to think Mahomet an Impostor, and 
must receive the Koran for Gospel, if we 
could be convinced, that our own temporal 
Happiness is the Summum Bonum, the on- 
ly End we ought to be solicitous after. 
And these honourable Personages, my 
L—d, would certainly act more confor- 
mable to their Characters, if they would 
procure an A— of P—t to extirpate 
the Name of Protestant out of this King- 
dom, before they grant any more L-c-nc-s 
for Vice. 

But alas! my L—d, those who study 
to be Great by all Means, must by all 
Means forget to be Good: Avarice and 
Ambition know no Confinement; their 
Desires are not only insatiate, but admit 
of any Sin that will promote their Ends; 
nor is it in the Power of human Rheto- 
rick, or even of the Tongues of Angels 
to keep them within due Bounds. 

Yet certainly, my L—d, the generality 
of Mankind is much mistaken in the Va- 
lue of Power and Grandeur, which is so 
much thirsted after. They look upon its 
Glory, but forget its Frailty; they gaze 
upon its Colour, but take no Notice of 
its Weight, nay, if all those gay Things, 
which they fondly fancy to themselves, 
were really to be found in Greatness, that 
Person pays too dear who forfeits his 
Heaven for it; and he who thus buys a 
short Bliss gives not twenty or a hundred 
Years Purchase, but, perhaps, Eternity. 

Feb. 5. 

I am, Your L—d—p's 
Most obedient Servant, 
Simon Freeman, jun. 

