

[^Sample 1: article - 1743_GM_0211^]

|P_211
[}The PLAGUE of marseilles. }]
HIgh thron'd in power the everlasting Fear, 
Summon'd ten thousand hosts from ev'ry 
sphere. 
Fiercely he look'd and bent his awful brow, 
And spoke destruction to the world below. 
Shall man still dare with haughty pride defy 
My common voice, which thunders thro' ye sky? 
Shall lightnings flash in vain? shall signs no more 
Make nations tremble and the earth adore? 
Is Greece at length forgot? Are Ægypt's crimes 
Lock'd in the womb of unrecorded times? 
Or is my arm made short, unskill'd to throw 
Death-pointed vengeance on the rebel foe?—
Be witness ev'ry power, how much I bear, 
To punish slow, and ever swift to spare. 
But see, how just my destin'd judgments fall, 
So great the weight of vice, of virtue small. 
He said, and took ye scales, in which he weigh'd 
This pond'rous globe when first from nothing made. 
In this the earth was thrown, the adverse side 
The least angelick form in heav'n, supplied. 
When lo! the deep foundations upward bore, 
As if by fate from th' inmost centre tore. 
'Tis well—go hateful Plague thy strength employ, 
Fly swift as thought, and, as you fly, destroy. 
Each soul distress; but chief o'er yonder plain }
Where mirth and noise their boundless sway 
maintain, 
Let waste, confusion and wild horrour reign. 
Sphere'd in a dusky cloud the fiend descends 
Joy adds to speed, and speed to vigour lends. 
Thus the gay chariot at th' olympick games 
Rolls swift, and as it rolls, itself inflames. 
Massilia's tow'rs she seiz'd, then paus'd awhile, 
Survey'd her charge and grinn'd a ghastly smile. 
Large compasses she held, ætherial mold, 
Vulcanian work, the mass of burnish'd gold. 
One leg was fix'd, the other circling round 
Inclos'd the walls, the fields and neighb'ring ground. 
So wide the pest distends the yielding side, 
That had not Fate, almighty Fate deny'd, 
The spring she'd burst, and pass'd divine commands, 
And stretch'd the line of death to distant lands. 
But hark! alas! I hear Massilia groan, 
And curse the Plague confin'd to her alone. 
Fierce mountain beasts in toils to fury turn, 
And rays condens'd with double vigour burn. 
At first in seeming form the Fury ran, 
And pass'd with eager strides from man to man. 
Amazement wild with out-stretch'd eye-balls glar'd, 
With horrour shook, but knew not what he fear'd. 
Unseen in air the pois'nous arrows go, 
Unseen the hand, which twangs the fatal bow. 
But now by Ruin fed she stronger grows, 
Renews the stroke and wields redoubled blows. 
From ev'ry side there's one tumultuous cry, 
A thousand pray for death, a thousand cursing, dye. 
Nature, and Art, the skilful hand employs, 
Nature submits, and Art itself destroys. 
In vain the sublimated spirits roll, 
Search ev'ry vein and penetrate the soul. 
The tort'ring flames with strengthned vigour burn 
And streams of fire th' exhausted juices turn. 
In vain the artist strove; but not in vain, 
Death saw th' unfruitful labours of his brain. 
Thrice steep'd in bane, he chose a pois'nous dart, 
Direct it flew and pierc'd his trembling heart. 
The rav'nous hawk thus wheeling thro' the sky, 
Observes the bed where th' unfledg'd pheasants lye; 
Swiftly he fails with levell'd pinnions down, 
Distends his claws and claims the young alone: 
When lo! the tender parent homeward flies, 
And hov'ring round in mournful accents cries, 
Unmov'd the plunderer bears upon the prey, 
First strikes the dam, then sweeps the brood away. 
What hand can draw, what pow'r of numbers tell 
How slaughter'd thousands ev'ry moment fell? 
Here heaps on heaps in blended ruin lye, 
And cease to breathe, or breatheing poison, dye. 
The Fury swells by Desolation fed, 
Each dying gasp adds mountains to the dead. 
As when to storm some long contending town 
A bomb descends, like fiery comet, down, 
In dizzy rings it spins and ploughs the ground, 
At length to shivers bursts, and scatters death around. 
Here sons and fathers, wives and infants groan, 
And friends in death, as well as life, are one. 
A soldier there by rage extatick driven, 
Springs from the earth and charges partial heav'n. 
Have I for this so oft in battle stood, 
Its thunder heard, and bath'd in reeking blood? 
Have I for this to distant nations led 
To die inglorious on a gallick bed? 
Rather again let British lyons roar, 
And Marlbro' wave his sword from shore to shore. 
Is't thus, O sovereign pow'r! you justice show, 
And teach mankind to practise here below? 
Why groans the north wth mighty numbers prest? 
Or why unnumber'd millions load the east? 
Nor altars smoke, nor fumes of incense rise 
In circling clouds, to gain the fav'ring skies. 
This the reward of virtue? This the praise? 
Is this the just man's promise, length of days? 
Or bare thy arm where none thy godhead own, 
Or lay in peace thy mutt'ring thunder down. 
Thus he blasphemous rav'd; but rav'd in vain, 
Swift judgment seiz'd and stretch'd him on ye plain. 
The pamper'd ox thus struck for sacrifice, 
Uprears his head and bellows to the skies; 
Th' affrighted priest renews the fatal blow, 
He sinks wth quiv'ring limbs and lays his frontlet low. 
Say, Muse, you saw how first the plague began, 
What part it seiz'd to crush aspiring man. 
The head confess'd strong agonizing pain, 
Each fibre swell'd and shook the tortur'd brain. 
Wild wand'ring thoughts in dizzy mazes play, 
Run round in whirls and tear their seat away: 
Unusual visions dance before their eyes, 
A thousand phantoms sink, a thousand rise. 
Hell wide unfolds its everlasting doors, 
The chains resound, and hoarse Cocytus roars. 
Pale Fear and ghastly Terror stalk around, 
And black Despair attends from wound to wound. 
Fantastick forms, by rage and phrensy bred; 
And sprung abortive from the lab'ring head. 
From thence in hasty course the fury glides, 
Corrupts the heart and taints the vital tides. 
The infant sucks the alimental blood, 
He sucks, but loathing casts the baleful food; 
Th' infected juices turn to noisome phlegm, 
And life and death flow out in ev'ry stream; 
|P_212
The swelling tongue distills with putrid gore, 
And rhet'rick's self is heard to speak no more. 
Intolerable fate! to feel the pain, 
Yet want th' unenvied power to complain. 
No rage of heat th'exteriour surface shews; 
Within, an unextinguish'd Ætna glows; 
Nor head, nor heart, nor limbs their office know, 
All feel at once the universal woe! 
The pest assumes an unresisted throne, 
And rules o'er all, unbounded and alone: 
Nor stone, nor gout, nor swelling dropsies stay, 
They seek in distant lands the healthy prey. 
But what art thou, O Plague, whose noxious breath 
Dispells the tardy ministers of Death? 
Sad cure alas! which thus the fates employ, 
And treach'rous save, the swifter to destroy. 
As when staunch hounds persue the trembling deer 
Thro' groves and lawns and now survey him near, 
By chance a lyon breaks the neighb'ring wood, 
They fly, he tears the prey, and drinks the vital blood, 
And now to glut ye all-devouring grave, 
A meager shape forbad the plague to save, 
As death it came, with dreadful strides along, 
And rag'd resistless, thro' the vulgar throng. 
Far off at first its visage grim I view'd, 
Deep lines intrench'd, like gaping furrows shew'd; 
As near it came, large characters I spy'd, 
The marks I trembling read, and famine cry'd. 
What hopes of safety, when such mighty foes 
Leagu'd in the bands of desolation rose? 
As if the king of beasts should join the bear, 
To storm the folds and bleating lambkins tear, 
Such havock made th' infernal fiends around, 
So mourn'd the youth, expiring on the ground. 
Wherever death dissolves their black despair, 
Untomb'd they lye and taint the putrid air. 
The vulturs snuff the wind, and scent the prey, 
But e'er they reach, wing back the liquid way. 
As where hell yawning wide in rage displodes 
Sulphureous vapours on the gath'ring clouds: 
If near by chance some airy wanderer flies, 
Or swift he turns, or suffocated, dyes. 
If any yet, if any yet survive, 
'Tis hard to say if dead, or if alive, 
Here's one, t'himself the monumental clay, 
The tomb is left, the index wip'd away; 
Whatever schemes th' imagination form'd, 
Oblivion enter'd and the store-house storm'd. 
How vain thy thoughts, O man! how vain thy 
cares! 
One breath dissolves the labour'd work of years! 
Down, down then mighty pride, not made for man, 
Existence short! the emblematick span! 
Be proud the oak—his branching head he rears, 
O'er-tops the clouds, and scorns a thousand years. 
Be proud yon everlasting rock, that braves 
Stern Neptune's power and breaks the dashing waves. 
But let not man be proud, nor vainly boast 
High reason's claim, so soon to reason lost. 
View well this animated trunk, survey 
Mankind in him, the bubble of a day: 
Creation's lord himself surviving see, 
Is this his boasted immortality? 
Is this?—But hold my Muse, cease, cease to blame, 
Nor add thy insults to the raging flame.—
If chance the head escap'd the fatal blow 
The fury mov'd the siege and rag'd below; 
Or legs or arms from th' active mass disjoyn'd, 
Leave the sad sense of life and woe behind: 
As when loud Auster from deep caverns broke, 
Invades with blust'ring noise some mountain oak, 
In vain he roars, in vain invokes the pow'rs 
Of ratt'ling thunders and impetuous show'rs; 
The trunk still bears the blasts and stormy rain; 
But leaves and shatter'd branches strew the plain. 
Where, beauteous city, are thy honours fled! 
The old destroy'd, and future ages dead! 
Oh! plague tremendous! at thy blasting call 
Deep-rooted trees and tender blossoms fall! 
Let history be dumb, no annals tell 
How great Massilia stood, how wretched fell! 
Ye winds be silent! or with tainted breath 
Convey at once the tale and speedy death: 
Least idol nations, in perdition born, 
Th' omnifick wisdom and his temples scorn. 
But see! th' almighty quells th' infernal fiends, 
Infection's blasted and destruction ends. 
May all confess the wonder-working God, 
May he ne'er wave, nor we provoke the rod, 
Lest unregarded judgments vainly hurl'd 
Involve in plagues the universal world. Maro. 

