

[^Sample 1: article - 1743_GM_0189^]

|P_189
[}PROTEST II. }]
Die Veneris 25° February, 1742. 

Read a 3d. Time a Bill entitled, An Act 
for repealing certain Duties on Spiritu- 
ous Liquors, and on Licences for re- 
tailing the same, and for laying other Du- 
ties on Spirituous Liquors, and on Li- 
cences to retail the said Liquors. 

After Debate the Question was put, Whether 
this Bill shall pass? 
It was resolved in the Affirmative. 
Content 59}82 Not Content 38}55 Proxies 23Proxies 17
[}Dissentient, }][/1./]John Cant. *M. Glocester, Stanhope, Edm. London, John Bristol, Romney, N. Exon, Tho. Sarum, Aylesford, *Isa. Asaph, * Tho. Oxford, Beaufort, Tho. Norwich, Mat. Cicest. Gower, c.p.s.
1. BECAUSE the Act of the 9th of his 
present Majesty, to prevent the 
excessive Drinking of Spirituous Liquors, 
which is by this Bill to be repealed, declares, 
That the drinking of Spirituous Liquors, 
or Strong Waters, is become very com- 
mon, especially amongst the People of 
lower and inferior Rank, the constant 
and excessive Use whereof tends greatly 
to the Destruction of their Healths, ren- 
dering them unfit for useful Labour and 
Business, debauching their Morals, and 
inciting them to perpetrate all Manner of 
Vices: And the ill Consequences of the 
excessive Use of such Liquors are not con- 
fined to the present Generation, but ex- 
tends to future Ages, and tend to the De- 
vastation and Ruin of this Kingdom. 
We therefore apprehend, that if an Act 
designed to remedy such indisputable Mis- 
chiefs was not found adequate to its salutary 
Intention, the Wisdom of the Legislature 
ought to have examined its Imperfection, 
and supply'd its Defects, and not have re- 
scinded it by a Law, authorising the mani- 
fold Calamities it was calculated to prevent. 

2. Because the refusing to admit the most 
eminent Physicians to give their Opinions of 
the fatal Consequences of these poisonous 
Liquors, may be construed without Doors 
as a Resolution of this House to suppress 
all authentic Information of the pernicious 
Effects on the Health and Morals of Man- 
kind, which will necessarily flow from the 
unrestrained Licenciousness permitted by 
this Bill. 

3. Because, as it is the inherent Duty of 
every Legislature to be watchful in protect- 
ing the Lives, and preserving the Morals of 
the People, so the availing itself of the Vices, 
Debaucheries, and consequential Misery and 
Destruction of Millions, is a manifest Inver- 
sion of the fundamental Principles of nati- 
onal Polity, and contrarient to the social 
Emoluments for which Government alone 
is instituted. 

4. Because the Opulence and Power of a 
Nation depend upon the Numbers, Vigour, 
and Industry of its People, and its Liberty 
and Happiness on their Temperance and 
Morality: To all which this Bill threatens
Destruction, by authorising 50,000 Houses 
(the Number admitted in the Debate to re- 
tail a Poison, which by universal Experience 
is known to debilitate the Strong and de- 
stroy the Weak, to extinguish Industry, 
and to inflame those intoxicated by its ma- 
lignant Efficacy to perpetrate the most hei- 
nous Crimes. For what Confusion and Ca- 
lamities may not be expected, when near a 
Twentieth Part of the Houses of this King- 
dom, shall be converted into Seminaries of 
Drunkenness and Profligacy, authorized 
and protected by the Legislative Power. 
And as we conceive the Contributions to 
be paid by these infamous Recesses, and the 
Money to be raised by this destructive Pro- 
ject, are Considerations highly unworthy 
the Attention of Parliament when com- 
pared with the extensive Evils from thence 
arising; so are we of Opinion, that if the 
real Exigences of the Publick required 
raising the immense Sums this Year granted, 
they could by no means palliate the hav- 
ing Recourse to a Supply, founded on the 
Indulgence of Debauchery, the Encou- 
ragement of Crimes, and the Destruction 
of the human Race. 
Sandwich, Haversham, Bristol, Chesterfield, Dunk Halifax, Ailesbury, Talbot, Bedford, }
for the above Reasons 
excepting the second. Oxford and Mort.Ward, 

[^1. 
* Those mark'd thus *, and Ld Londsdale, 
enter'd their Dissent against the Bill being re- 
ferred to a Committee, which was carry'd by 
82 against 55. 
^]