

[^Sample 1: article - 1743_GM_0425^]

|P_425
[}Account of the [/1./]Plague by Procopius. }]
AT this Time, when the Visitation of 
Heaven upon the Island of Sicily has 
spread such general Apprehensions, and 
Mankind are inquisitive about former pesti- 
lential Contagions, it may not be amiss to 
give our Readers a Passage from Procopius, 
as related by Dr Howell, and quoted by Dr 
Friend in his History of Physic. The 
Plague he speaks of began in Procopius's 
own Time, in the Reign of Justinian; con- 
tinued after his Death, in all 52 Years; 
travell'd all over the Globe, and almost un- 
peopled the whole Face of it. That of A- 
thens, described by Thucydides, seems to 
have been less terrible. The curious may 
consult Dr Friend's Remarks on it. 

This was a Plague, which almost con- 
sumed Mankind, of which, Procopius con- 
cludes, there was no other Cause than 
the immediate Hand of God himself. For 
it neither came upon one Part of the 
World alone, nor in one Season of the 
Year, whence subtile Wits (as he saith) 
might fetch Pretensions. It afflicted the 
whole World, and all Conditions of Men, 
tho' of never so contrary a Nature, and 
Disposition; sparing no Constitution nor 
|P_426
Age. The Difference of Men, as to their 
Places of Dwelling, Diet, Complexions, 
Inclinations, &c. did no Good in this 
Disease. Some it took in Summer, some 
in Winter, and others in other Seasons. 
It began among the Ægyptians of Pelusi- 
um, and spread to Alexandria with the 
Rest of Ægypt one Way, and the other to 
those Parts of Palestine, which border 
upon Ægypt. From thence it travell'd to 
the utmost Bounds of the World, as by 
set Journies and Stages, making De- 
struction its only Business, and sparing 
neither Island, Cave, nor Top of Moun- 
tain, where Mankind inhabited; for if it 
leap'd over a Country, returning after- 
wards, it left it no Cause to rejoice above 
its Fellows. It began still at the Sea- 
craft, and thence went to the inland 
Parts. In the second Year of its Progress 
it arriv'd in Constantinople, about the 
Middle of the Spring, where it was the 
Fortune of Procopius then to reside. Ap- 
paritions of Spirits, in all Shapes human, 
were seen by many, who thought the 
Man they met struck them in some Part 
of the Body; and so soon as they saw the 
Spirit, they were seized with the Disease. 
At first when they met them, they re- 
peated divine Names, and fled into 
Churches to no Purpose. Afterwards 
they were afraid to hear their Friends call 
them, locking themselves up in their 
Chambers and stopping their Ears. Some 
dreamed they saw such Sights, others 
heard a Voice tell them they were enroll- 
ed in the Number appointed to die: But 
most without Warning became feverish 
suddenly: Their Bodies changed not 
colour, nor were hot; the Fever being 
so remiss 'till Evening, that neither the 
Patient nor Physician, by his Pulse, could 
apprehend any Danger. Yet to some the 
same Day, to others the next, or many 
Days after, arose a Bubo either in the Groin, 
the Arm-holes, under the Ear, or in 
other Parts: These were the general 
Symptoms which happened alike to all 
the visited Persons. 

There were others different; whether 
so made by the Diversity of Bodies, or 
the Will and Pleasure of him that sent the 
Distemper, our Author cannot say. Some 
were seized with Drowsiness and Slum- 
bering, others with a sharp Distraction: 
The Slumberers forgot all Things: If 
they were look'd to, some would eat; 
some, that were neglected, starved to 
Death. Those who were distracted were 
vexed with Apparitions, crying there 
were Men to kill them, and running a- 
way; being so troublesome and unruly, 
that their keepers were pitied as much as 
they themselves. No Physician or other 
caught the Disease by touching sick or 
dead Bodies; many strangely continuing 
free, though they tended and buried in- 
fected Persons, and many catching it they 
knew not how, and dying instantly. 
Many leapt into the Water, though not 
for Thirst; and some into the Sea. Some, 
without Slumbering or Madness, had 
their Bubo gangrened, and died with ex- 
treme Pain; which doubtless happen'd 
also to those that had the Phrensy, tho' 
being not themselves they understood it 
not. Some Physicians hereupon concei- 
ving the Venom and Head of the Disease 
to lie in those Plague-sores, opened the 
dead Bodies, and searching the Sores 
found an kuge Carbuncle growing in- 
ward. Such whose Bodies were spotted 
with black Pimples the Bigness of a Len- 
tile, lived not a Day. Many died of vo- 
miting Blood. Some that were given over 
by the most eminent Physicians, unex- 
pectedly recovered; others, of whose 
Recovery they thought themselves secure, 
suddenly perished: No Cause of this 
Sickness could be reached by Man's Rea- 
son. Some received benefit by Bathing, 
others it hurt. Many died for Want of 
Relief, others escaped without it: In a 
Word, no Way could there be found of 
Preservation, either by preventing the 
Sickness, or mastering the Disease, no 
Cause appearing either of their falling 
sick, or of their Recovery. 

Women with child which were visit- 
ed, certainly died; some miscarrying, 
some fairly delivered, and perishing with 
their Children: Three Women only were 
safely brought to Bed and recovered, 
their Children dying; and one died whose 
Child had the hap to live. Such as had 
their Sores great, and running plentiful- 
ly, escaped; the Violence of the Car- 
buncle being thereby asswaged; and this 
was the most certain Sign of Health. 
Such whose Sores staid as they first arose, 
underwent the miserable Accident for- 
merly mentioned. Some had their 
Thighs withered, when the Sores rose 
upon them and did not run. Some esca- 
ped with diminished Tongues, and lived 
stammering, or uttering Sounds without 
Distinction all their Days. In Constanti- 
nople this Pestilence lasted four Months, 
raging three Months with all Extremity. 
In the Beginning few died more than 
usual: Then it growing hotter and hot- 
ter, it came to five, and at last to ten 
thousand every Day. At first they buried 
their Dead carefully, but at length all 
came to Confusion, and many lay long 
unburied. Servants were without Mas- 
|P_427
ters; rich Men had none to attend them. 
In the afflicted City was little to be seen 
but empty Houses; no Trade going, or 
Shops open. The Emperor was much 
concerned, as he had Reason, and com- 
mitted the Oversight of the Poor to 
Theodorus, one of the Referendarii that sub- 
scribed the Emperor's Answers to Peti- 
tions; who, to those that were in Want, 
distributed Money out of the Treasury. 
To these Passages Procopius adds, that 
many, out of Fear, left their bad Courses 
of Life, and consecrated themselves to 
God; and many, when the Danger was 
over, fell to their old despising of God 
again. 


[^1. 
* See the Plague of Marseilles a Poem, p. 211. 
^]