

[^Sample 1: article - 1755_GM_0074^]

|P_74
Totus mundus agit histrionem. 

Mr Urban, 
B—, Feb. 8, 1755. 

I Am a constant reader of all the 
public papers of amusement, and 
observe, that although divinity and law 
have fallen under the lash of many an 
anonymous author, yet the absurdities 
of physick have been but slightly 
touched. I am myself a physician, and 
as I have the honour of the profession 
as well as the health of his majesty's 
subjects very much at heart, I am de- 
sirous as well to promote the study of 
that important science, as to correct 
the reigning fopperies of the profession, 
and this I shall attempt by an account 
of my own life. 

I had the misfortune to be the 
younger son of a gentleman in the east 
riding of Yorkshire, who had a nume- 
rous family and a small fortune: my 
disposition was always contemplative, 
which determined my father to bring 
me up to the profession of physick. 

Having finished my classical learning 
under the auspices of a neighbouring 
clergyman, I was sent to the university 
of Cambridge, where I continued till I 
received both my master of arts and 
doctor's degrees. 

I was as remarkable at college for 
my contempt of all polite amusements 
as for my close application to study, 
singularities out of which some attempt- 
ed to rally and some to reason me. 
These gave me the name of young 
Hippocrates, and those represented the 
bad effects of a sedentary life, and ur- 
ged the examples of many young phy- 
sicians, whom I knew to be men of great 
abilities, though small practice, owing, 
as they said, to their too close application 
to study, and consequent ignorance of 
the world. However, neither raillery 
nor reasoning produced any alteration 
in my conduct, being fully persuaded 
that a deep knowledge of the science I 
was to profess, was the only way to pro- 
fess it with reputation. The more I 
knew, the more I thirsted after know- 
ledge, so that I went from Cambridge to 
Edinburgh, where I continued 4 years; 
and from Edinburgh to London, where 
I attended the publick hospitals, and 
had the good fortune to be introduced 
to several of the most eminent amongst 
the faculty, whose private practice I 
was in a particular manner permitted 
to see. From London I went to Leyden, 
and Paris, where I continued a consi- 
derable time, assiduously engaged in 
the prosecution of my studies, with such 
success, that I had particular honours 
paid me by almost every professor. Be- 
ing now fully qualified for practice, I 
returned home, determined to fix my- 
self hi the first agreeable situation that 
should offer. A vacancy soon happened 
in a polite town in one of the southern 
counties; the situation was excellent, 
and the neighbourhood good. Being 
confident of my own abilities as a phy- 
sician, I was the less sollicitous to pro- 
cure recommendatory letters, and so 
contented myself with only one address- 
ed to a worthy alderman of the town. 
Upon my arrival I was very politely re- 
ceived by the gentleman to whom I was 
recommended, and in a few weeks had 
been introduced to almost every person 
of condition in the town and neigh- 
bourhood. I now expected to reap in 
gold what I had sowed in learning, but 
after a twelve months expectation, I 
found my whole practice had center'd 
amongst the poorer sort of people, who 
had nothing besides their blessings to 
bestow. I must confess I was extream- 
ly chagrin'd to see people of distinction 
have daily recourse to a neighbouring 
physician, who had nothing but old age 
and formality to recommend him. I 
now began to reflect upon the warnings 
of my fellow students at Cambridge, e- 
specially as I found myself every day 
committing gross absurdities in beha- 
viour, which I had reason to imagine 
from the smart repartees of the tea 
table, considerably lessened my character 
as a man of sense. However, that I 
might no longer suffer the torments of 
doubt, I ask'd the opinions of such 
friends as I knew were best acquainted 
with the rites and ceremonies which 
fashion has imposed on social life; by 
them I was unanimously complimented 
on my merit as a physician, but blamed 
for not setting it off by a better address. 
One very judiciously observed, that as 
age and wisdom were generally reputed 
to be inseperable, I had not taken care 
to appear as wise as I might by hiding 
my youth under the deep shadow of a 
medical perriwig; another condemned 
the slovenliness of my cloaths; a third 
blamed the aukwardness of my manner, 
and a fourth hinted at my ignorance of 
whist and dancing, by saying, that for 
his part he thought them no small tests 
of merit. My eyes now began to open, 
and the flattering illusions that had 
danced before me, vanished in a mo- 
ment; but alas! though I discovered 
and regretted my mistake, yet I found 
myself unable to retrieve it; I could 
|P_75
indeed have put on a voluminous wig, 
and worn a typical cane, but these were 
only partial improvements, and would 
only have render'd my other defects 
more conspicuous; I therefore deter- 
mined to leave the place, and betake 
myself to London in quest of those me- 
dical qualifications which in the pride 
of my heart I had neglected to procure. 
When I arrived, I took an elegant set 
of lodgings near St James's, in the 
neighbourhood of an eminent physi- 
cian, that I might have an opportunity 
of transplanting from him what was 
wanting in myself. I learn'd to dance of 
Pierot, and to fence of Bond: My cloaths 
were made in the true medical taste, 
by Lambert; my wigs by Shevreau, and 
my cane and snuff box were purchased 
of Tomkins. Thus equipp'd, I saun- 
ter'd from one coffee-house to another, 
gleaning politicks from some, and a- 
theism from others. At Sadler's Wells
and the midnight oratory I learn'd 
grimace, and at the publick theatres 
I improved in assurance. Hoyle tutor'd 
me in the several games at cards, and 
under the name of guarding me from 
being cheated, insensibly gave me a taste 
for sharping. At last, to give the fi- 
nishing stroke to my medical character, 
I learn'd the various methods of in- 
trigue, under the ingenious Mrs Doug- 
lass of Covent Garden. Thus having, 
tho' late, supplied the defects of my 
education, and happily finish'd my stu- 
dies, I once more left London, and at- 
tempted a settlement in the second city 
in the kingdom. I immediately put in 
practice all the new arts I had learned, 
and my success so much exceeded my 
expectations, that in a few months I 
had deprived an eminent physician of 
the same place, of the greater part of 
his patients, besides having obtained a 
considerable number of my own. I had 
the pleasure to be universally well re- 
ceived; I took great care never to 
give the reins to my fancy, even before 
my most intimate acquaintances, and 
was particularly attentive to preserve in- 
violated the reverential awe which the 
exuberance of my wig and the gravity 
of my deportment had acquired. Be- 
sides, in order to be as much as possible 
of a piece, I composed a heterodox sort 
of language, of Greek, Latin, French, 
and English: My philosophy was an as- 
semblage of every system that has illu- 
minated the world since Moses, and my 
religion was neither Christian, Turkish, 
Jewish, nor Heathen, but a compound 
of all. My cane became an emblem of 
wisdom, and every hair of my wig 
shewed the extent of my erudition. 
Are not these, in this discerning age, 
the just criterions of a good and learned 
physician? and are they not of more 
service to the possessor than turning o- 
ver, at midnight hours, the sacred vo- 
lumes of antiquity? The world delights 
in externals, and he who expects the 
world to please him, must please the 
world. 

In antient times when wisdom and 
learning were in fashion, the professors 
of physic were grave and rigid in their 
morals, decently plain in their dress, 
assiduous in public, and laborious in 
their private studies. View the modern 
physician in the morning, and you will 
see him picking his nails, and softening his 
delicate hands with almond paste; trace 
him from place to place thro' the hur- 
ry of the day, and you will see him 
scrupulously attentive to every minute 
punctilio of address, every species of 
obsequious flattery and officious com- 
plaisance, attentive only to write his 
prescriptions with an air of importance, 
and take his fee with a good grace. 
And view him at night you will see 
him either lolling at ease in an easy 
chair, by his own fire, musing over a 
pack of cards, or circulating his toast 
in a bumper, while the cases of the pa- 
tients he has visited never enter his 
thoughts, and the books that might 
enable him to restore their health, lie 
covered with cobwebs upon his shelf. 

But he who endeavours to appear 
neither older nor younger than he is, 
and addresses the judgment and not 
the caprices of mankind, is alone wor- 
thy of esteem and confidence. Hypo- 
crisy and disguise brought me into es- 
teem when merit failed me, but it was 
happy for many of my friends, that I had 
merit to disguise. Physic is neither got- 
ten by inspiration nor entailed upon age; 
nor can any man approach the temple 
of Æsculapius, but by hard study, quick 
apprehension, and sound judgment. 

From this extraordinary picture of 
myself I am confident many of your 
readers will be desirous of knowing my 
name, and lest they should unluckily 
mistake me for a neighbour of their 
own, I freely tell them that my name is 

Ubique. 

