

[^Sample 1: article - 1755_GM_0066^]

|P_66
[}An Account of some new Experiments on 
Human Blood. By M. Eller. }]
MR Eller considering that medici- 
nal drugs produce their various 
effects on the human body, by acting 
upon the blood in a manner not to be 
discovered by the sight, was determin- 
ed to try, what appearances an imme- 
diate admixture of them with that fluid 
would produce. For these experiments 
he chose the blood of persons in perfect 
health, which was received in proper 
vessels placed in a balneum, regulated 
exactly to the heat of the effluent blood 
during each experiment; and the sub- 
stances to be mixed with it were like- 
wise heated in the same degree. 

1. A solution of vitriol, both of iron
and copper, changed the fine red colour 
of the blood into a pale grey in an 
instant, and a muddy precipitation en- 
sued. The microscope shewed the glo- 
bules of the blood to be transformed 
into a kind of filaments, here and there 
speckled with red. 

2. A solution of alum changed the 
blood into a deep red, but of an uni- 
form mixture; a coagulation suddenly 
succeeded, but without any alteration 
of the colour. By the microscope the 
small globules were seen every where in 
contact, and formed an obscure contex- 
ture, with hardly any transparency. 

3. A solution of sea salt heightened 
and much improved the natural red of 
the blood. The mixture was not uni- 
form at first, but soon united into a 
a transparent jelly. By the microscope 
the globules were perceived to be dis- 
joined, but orderly ranged, of a yel- 
lowish hue, and transparent. 

4. A solution of nitre or salt-petre ex- 
|P_67
hibited much the same phænomena, 
except that the colour of the blood 
was still more exalted, and the coagu- 
lation did not take place till the whole 
was cold. The microscope shewed the 
globules transparent, well ranged, and 
disjoined from each other. 

5. A solution of fixt alkaline salt chan- 
ged the colour of the blood to a deep 
red, and communicated and extraordi- 
nary fluidity to the mixture, which 
subsisted several days without the least 
alteration. The globules appeared dis- 
joined in the microscope, a little yel- 
lowish, and pellucid. 

6. A solution of salt of hart's-horn, a 
volatile alcali, shewed the same appear- 
ances, except that the mixture was 
somewhat more fluid; the colour and 
the fluidity lasted several days; and the 
small globules were seen in the micros- 
cope perfectly disjoined, of a fine red, 
and transparent. 

7. A solution of sal armoniac produced a 
red still deeper than either of the fore- 
going: But the mixture, which was at 
first very thin, soon stiffened into an u- 
niform jelly of the same colour. The 
microscope at first shewed the globules 
pretty red and transparent, but they 
soon changed their spherical figure, 
becoming oblong and a little flatted, 
and seemed to roll over one another, 
but still retained their red colour. 

8. A solution of borax gave the blood 
a fine bright red; but the mixture pre- 
sently coagulated, tho' without sensibly 
altering the colour. The globules were 
seen very much separated in the mi- 
croscope; but as to their colour, they 
were perfectly white and transparent. 

9. A solution of cream of tartar did 
not at first produce any sensible altera- 
tion; but in a little while both the co- 
lour and consistence of the mixture 
were changed, the smaller portion of 
it, which rose to the top of the vial, 
was a transparent reddish serum, under 
which was a flocky unequal coagulum, 
of a blackish red, which did not easily 
shift its place upon inverting the glass. 
At first the little globules appeared 
pretty round in the microscope, whitish, 
and transparent; but they soon flatten- 
ed, and every where appeared to slide 
over one another. 

10. A solution of vitriolated tartar
mixed with the blood, made it more 
fluid, and of a beautiful carnation co- 
lour, which lasted many days, without 
the least appearance of coagulation. 
The microscope shewed the globules 
pale, yellow, transparent, and distinct- 
ly separated. 

11. A solution of sal polychrestum gave 
the same phænomena. The microscope 
shewed the globules yellow and trans- 
parent. 

12. A solution of Epsom salt render'd 
the mixture perfectly fluid, and of a 
fine even red colour. When it was cold 
the fluidity lasted many days without 
alteration. The microscope exhibited 
the globules exceeding small, of a pale 
yellow, and transparent. The sel de 
Seigneitte produced nearly the same ap- 
pearances. 

13. A solution of Glauber's sal mira- 
bile offered the same phænomena as to 
the fluidity at the first; but the mix- 
ture coagulated as soon as it became 
cold. The little globules however con- 
tinued fluid, and being examined by 
the microscope appeared whitish. 

14. Sel d'Oseille destroyed the red co- 
lour in an instant, and changed it into 
a livid pale and confused concrete; 
tho' when viewed with the microscope, 
the little globules were perceived to be 
regularly ranged, yellowish, and pellucid. 

15. To discover what effect would be 
produced by mixing several of the most 
noxious drugs with the blood, he pre- 
pared a solution of arsenic, which thick- 
ened it instantly, but gave it a fine 
bright red. The microscope shewed the 
globules very minute, and as it were dis- 
solved, but in motion, among which 
were discovered, floating here and there, 
chrystals with triangular points, like 
little javelins. 

16. A solution of corrosive sublimate
changed the colour to a reddish brown, 
or liver colour, yet the fluidity conti- 
nued even after cooling. The little 
globules viewed in the microscope seem- 
ed, while the mixture continued warm, 
to be destroyed; but as it grew cold 
these small spherical bodies became a- 
gain visible, being white and transpa- 
rent, and seemed to move and unite 
together, so as to form a kind of flocks 
like snow, among which were dissemi- 
nated some red sphericles. 

17. His next experiments were on 
corrosive acid spirits. A few drops of 
oil of vitriol made the mixture in a mo- 
ment extremely hot, and converted it 
into an hard, solid mass, of a dark- 
brown colour; yet the globules of the 
blood did not appear to be destroyed, 
as might reasonably have been expec- 
ted; but in the microscope were plain- 
ly distinguished of a yellow colour. 

|P_68
18. Spirit of nitre thickened it consi- 
derably, yet without the total destruc- 
tion of its fluidity: It became livid like 
blue clay; but the microscope disco- 
vered the globules in their natural 
shape, of a milky white. 

19. Spirit of sea salt, or common salt, 
produced the same appearance as to 
colour, but the mixture soon became 
an hard mass; the globules looking 
white and transparent in the micros- 
cope. From these experiments it ap- 
pears, that the strongest corrosives do 
not exert so much of their force on the 
fluid, as on the solid parts of our bodies. 

20. He also made several experiments 
on such essences or tinctures as have 
gained credit as medicines. These are 
the resinous parts of drugs, whether 
simple, or dissolved in spirit of wine. 
The chief are the tinctures of myrrh, 
saffron, alces, opium, ellebore, rhubarb, 
yellow amber, castor, jalap, quinquina, 
cascarilla bark, tincture of antimony, and 
Sydenham's liquid laudanum. These 
essences have this in common, that 
upon being mixed with the blood, they 
immediately produce more or less of a 
coagulation, which doubtless arises from 
the salt which the resinous particles 
meet with in the vital fluid. The co- 
lour of these coagulations differs great- 
ly. That produced by essence of aloes, 
opium, myrrh, saffron, and amber, is livid 
and disagreeable. The concretion from 
the essence of castor and jalap is a brown 
red, and that of ellebore a reddish yel- 
low. The coagulation of the essences 
of quinquina and cascarilla retain some 
degree of fluidity; the colour being of 
a dirty grey, and the globules seem dis- 
solved or white. Tincture of antimony
gives a fine bright red coagulation, and 
the globules appear of an elegant flame 
colour, and very distinct, in the micros- 
cope. The mixture with Sydenham's 
laudanum remains fluid, of a reddish 
brown, and the globules coalesce, but 
are transparent and white. It is re- 
markable that the globules of the blood 
in the thick mixture formed by the es- 
sence of opium, seem to be destroyed 
as to their nature; at least the micros- 
cope represents them under a very con- 
fused cohesion. 

21. The essences, or rather the ex- 
tracts and decoctions of the gumous 
parts of simples, made with common 
water, produce no great alteration when 
mixed with the blood, except in the 
colour, which is more or less varied, 
according to the quantity or quality of 
the thing employed; but the globules 
examin'd by the microscope are appa- 
rently the same. 

