

[^Sample 1: article - 1755_GM_0204^]

|P_204
[}On the Neglect of the Operation for the 
Bubonocele [/1./] Incarcerata. }]
WHEN I consider the frequent 
failure of other means in this 
too fatal disorder, and the almost total 
neglect of so rational an operation, it is 
to me, I confess, a matter of surprize 
and concern. It is true, the ill success 
which has sometimes attended it has 
led some of our English chirurgical wri- 
ters into enquiries after new methods, 
|P_205
but then these were proposed to take 
place in due time, before the impend- 
ing necessity of the operation, as the 
last resource; practice, however, has by 
no means warranted the sufficiency of 
any of them, but, on the contrary, has 
shewn, in numerous instances, that they 
have served only to render the patient's 
case desperate, by protracting time till 
even all hopes of success from the ope- 
ration itself were cut off. 

In the confined bubonocele there is 
an obstinate stricture of the abdominal 
ring, or rather of the neck of the her- 
nial sack, wherein there are not want- 
ing the marks of a true inflammation; 
but the prolaps'd intestine is violently 
inflamed by the compressing stricture, 
and its coats thickened and tumefied, 
a small portion of blood passing for- 
ward by arteries, but none returning 
by the veins; so that the obstruction is 
every moment increased and extended 
to the neighbouring parts. In cases 
thus circumstanced, if the stricture can- 
not be taken off, it is much to be 
dreaded, that every attempt but the 
operation itself will be in vain. All 
other milder methods, if practicable 
without much loss of time, ought first 
to be tried. Bleeding largely, or even 
ad deliquium animi, glysters, warm ba- 
thin, Heister's Clysma fumosum, suspend- 
ing the patient by the heels, and then 
endeavouring to return the intestine, 
may, some of them, possibly succeed. 
But then these, in most cases, must not 
be tried beyond 36 hours at the most. 
In some, indeed, the symptoms may 
admit of a longer delay; but the 
means proving ineffectual, the operation 
ought to take place to prevent a gan- 
grene. I would, with the honest and 
judicious Wiseman, ask our country sur- 
geons, if in such a case it be not more 
reasonable to propose in consultation 
the laying open the production, than to 
suffer the patient to perish inevitably 
under his miserable complaint? What 
can be expected from purgatives? can 
any good ensue from stimulating the 
guts, already inflamed beyond measure? 
If calomel has been found efficaceous 
in many obstructions of the guts, must 
it not yet be deadly in this particular 
one? If puncturing the tumefied in- 
testine be thought on this cannot re- 
lax the stricture, and probably may 
hasten the gangrene. If snow or cold 
water can take place, it must be howe- 
ver in the beginning, and after large 
bleeding, else a mortification may be 
expected instead of relief. 

It is objected to the operation, that it 
seldom succeeds, and this cannot be de- 
nied if we appeal to the result of hospi- 
tal practice; but it ought to be consi- 
dered, that there it is performed for 
the most part, under disadvantageous 
circumstances, often late, and after pas- 
sing through the hands of country sur- 
geons, among whom, notwithstanding, 
it has been often remembered to have a 
happy issue. It would be therefore 
highly laudable to inquire how it ever 
comes about to be successful; for this 
might probably lead to discover why it 
often is not so, and point out the way 
of avoiding danger. Above all things, 
the habit and constitution of the pa- 
tient should be carefully considered. 
We see that in well-conditioned sub- 
jects, wounds of the bladder, a part al- 
most entirely membraneous, digest with- 
out much inflammation; why may not 
those of the abdominal ring and perito- 
næum do so too? Mending the quality 
of an inflamed sizy blood by lessening its 
quantity before the operation, recruit- 
ing the person with demulcent food, and 
proceeding to the operation in time, 
seem to promise fairest for a good di- 
gestion of the wound. On the contra- 
ry, purgations and punctures of the in- 
testines must surely be bad preparatives 
for the operation. And let it be re- 
membered, that if it be deferred till a 
gangrene comes on, sphacelous mem- 
branes separate very difficultly, though 
sometimes, indeed, surprizing separa- 
tions of the mortified inteltines and o- 
mentum have happened [/2./] after this ope- 
ration; an argument of an uncommon 
power in nature. 

Country surgeons have frequent and 
pressing opportunities of exerting their 
skill to advantage in this important 
case, as having the patient under their 
own proper management from the be- 
ginning. Is the operation in itself so 
very difficult? by no means, if due 
care be conjoined with a right know- 
ledge of the anatomy of the parts con- 
cerned. Is it more severe than that of 
cutting for the stone? No, nor perhaps 
one half so painful; and yet how fre- 
quently is that practised with success; 
nay, how seldom does it fail! In a 
word, when life is at stake, the surgeon 
loses no reputation if his honest and 
well-meant efforts should not answer 
his wish: he is conscious that he acts a 
human and a christian part, and this 
should make him easy at all events. 

P— n. 


[^1. 
* A Bubonocele is a tumour of the groin, 
from a descent of the intestines or caul thro' the 
annular aperture of the epigastric muscles. 
^]
[^2. 
* The collection of such cases is now be- 
come pretty large: See Le Dran's observations, 
Cheselden, and all the writers of note. 
^]