

[^Sample 1: article - 1755_GM_0245^]

|P_245
[}Remarkable Account of the Cure of an 
Hydrophobæa, transmitted to the Royal 
Academy of Sciences at Paris, by Dr Le 
Comte, Physician at Rethel. }]
ON the 10th of Jan. 1749, the che- 
valier de ***, brig. of the French
army, as he was returning from hunt- 
ing, was suddenly attacked by a large 
house dog, which seized him by the 
left arm, and covered it with his slaver 
and foam; there was no wound, nor 
any pain beyond what might be tole- 
rably endured; and this lasted till the 
evening of the next day. The hunts- 
man, who took the dog to be mad, 
by his foaming, shot him dead. 

The chevalier, who had in a man- 
ner forgotten the accident, happening 
to hunt three weeks afterwards, was 
taken extremely ill, and fainted. His 
servants told him, that during his fit his 
countenance was terribly disfigured: 
This circumstance gave him some sus- 
picion; however, he supp'd that night 
abroad, and did not return home till 
near one in the morning, and then he 
went immediately to bed, and fell asleep. 
Two hours afterwards he alarmed the 
whole house with terrible outcries; those 
who first enter'd his chamber found him 
in a fit, extended on the floor: Such 
symptoms too plainly indicated the na- 
ture of his disorder, and he himself 
desired that they would secure him; a 
necessary precaution, for in less than 
three hours he had a 2d fit, more vio- 
lent than the former, and he was just 
got out of a 4th when Dr La Comte ar- 
rived. The patient gave him an ac- 
count of what had pass'd, and con- 
cluded with ordering him to prepare 
him a medicine, with which he had 
cured not only dogs bitten by mad ones, 
but likewise several persons, among the 
rest a girl 17 years old bit by a mad 
ox, after she had had two fits. The 
doctor fearing that the chevalier would 
exhaust his spirits by too much talking, 
interrupted him, by asking him if he had 
taken any liquor to recruit him after 
his fatigue. At the bare mention of 
liquor the chevalier turned pale, and 
his face was convulsed; but this lasted 
not above a minute. The doctor, how- 
ever, was now fully satisfied of the na- 
ture of the chevalier's disorder, and 
his deplorable situation: and tho' he 
had no great opinion of the virtue of 
the medicine he proposed, yet being at 
a loss to substitute a better in its stead, 
he consented that the brigadier should 
take it.—This remedy, if the patient 
has not had a fit, consists in four drams 
|P_246
of calcined powder of the male oyster [/1./], 
in about a gill of white wine, repeating 
it after 24 hours; if the patient has had 
a fit, it must be taken three times, at 
12 hours distance, in the same dose, 
but in a different vehicle; instead of 
wine, it must be mixed in three new- 
laid eggs, and the patient must not 
drink when he eats it, nor all the while 
the medicine is operating.—The che- 
valier took it, tho' with much difficulty, 
but this did not prevent a 5th fit, which 
was succeeded by eight more in the 
space of 16 hours.—Dr Le Comte, who 
was all the while present, says, that the 
patient was sensible of the approach of 
each fit, and would say, in a kind of 
a suffocated tone, pray retire; present- 
ly his eyes were turned upwards, and 
became inflamed; his face and whole 
body terribly convulsed; he strove to 
bite every thing near him, and barked 
like a dog, with his mouth full of foam, 
his voice hoarse and almost spent: These 
fits ended in a great lassitude, in which 
the patient seemed as a dead man, and 
he came to himself with sad inquie- 
tudes, fearing he might have bitten some 
body in his fit.—There is the utmost 
reason to think that the medicine had 
its effect. But after all, the waters of 
Plombiers quite restored him to his for- 
mer health. 


[^1. 
‡ The account does not mention the shell, 
tho' 'tis likely that is the thing meant, if not 
for the shell and fish together. 
^]