

[^Sample 1: article - 1755_GM_0111^]

|P_111
[}A succinct Account of Disorders lately cured 
at Stockholm, by Electrification; re- 
ported by M. Lindult, M. D. by' order 
of his Swedish Majesty. }]
THe tooth-ach, if proceeding from 
a defluxion of rheum, is presently 
asswaged or totally removed by this re- 
medy. A gentleman of distinction, 
who had been almost deaf a consider- 
able time with a singing in the ears, was 
cured in three or four minutes. A man 
57 years old, deaf for 32 years past, 
from a wound under the left eye, and 
much afflicted with a violent tooth-act, 
was cured of this last complaint im- 
mediately, and soon afterwards his hear- 
ing in a great measure. A young man 
of 22, who had almost lost his hearing 
for six months, by violent vomitings, 
which forced blood out at his ears, 
was cured in as little time as the for- 
mer, and continues to hear perfectly 
well. A girl of seven, born deaf, who 
consequently could not speak, began to 
hear words spoken very loud in her 
ear, and could repeat some of them in 
a few days. In the year 1744 a young 
fellow of 19 fell into a well, and con- 
tinued there above half an hour for 
want of helpt; since which time his hear- 
ing has been very weak; he has found 
much benefit from being electrified, and 
it is hoped will be perfectly cured. A 
stone-cutter, whose knees and joints of 
his toes had been rendered stiff, and 
fingers crooked, was able to go to work 
after a few days electrisation. It has 
been found to recover, or greatly abate, 
all rheumatic pains of the muscles. A 
lad who had a severe sciatica in the 
right hyp, from a fall from a scaffold, 
|P_112
so as not to bear being touched, was 
cured in a few days, so as to be able 
to walk without a staff. Another who 
had used crutches for seven years, could 
walk without them in 13 days, and 
burnt them for joy. A girl of 13, who 
had been lame after the small-pox from 
four years old, now walks without a 
staff, having been electrified no more 
than 20 times. 

N. B. All these persons were electri- 
fied under the direction, and in the pre- 
sence of the king's physicians, who at- 
tend by his majesty's orders. 

