

[^Sample 1: article - 1755_GM_0007^]

|P_7
Mr. Urban,

IObserved sometime ago in the London 
news papers and article from France, in 
which, either from ignorance or raillery, a
 discovery lately made by a French surgeon,
 was represented as an expedient to live 
without food ; it was, I believe, treated by
 many as a fable, but was founded on a
 fact, of which I send you a particular and
 faithful account, for the more rational en-
tertainment of your numerous readers.

I am, Sir, Yours, &c. T. M. 

[}An Account of an Extraordinary Alimenta- 
ry Powder, and its Effects. }]
EXperiments of this powder have 
been made first on three soldiers at 
Lisle in Flanders, and afterwards on six 
pensioners in the royal hospital of in- 
valids at Paris, and six ounces in some- 
thing less than a pint of water, were 
found to be sufficient aliment, or meat 
and drink, for one man during one day; 
the six invalids had no other provision 
than this quantity of the powder per 
diem. for 15 days, in the month of Oct.
last, and all continued hearty and well, 
tho' one was upwards of 70, the others 
were young men, but had lost some of 
their limbs. Neither old or young suffer'd 
any inconvenience either from faintness 
or hunger: they were employ'd in such 
bodily exercise as suited their years and 
strength, some walking daily many hours, 
others digging; yet many times they did 
not eat their whole allowance, and to 
prevent any fraud they were constantly 
attended by a centinel wherever they 
went. 

This powder, before it was adminis- 
ter'd, was prepared every day in the fol- 
lowing manner; Count de la Serre, gov. 
Count de la Chark, lieut. the physicians, 
surgeons, and other officers of the hospi- 
tal being present: six ounces of the pow- 
der being brought in a little bag was sha- 
ken by degrees into boiling water, which 
at the same time was stirred briskly with a 
spoon, and in as little time as would suf- 
fice to dress an egg, was fit to be eaten, 
having acquired the consistence of a thin 
|P_8
Panada, and the colour of gingerbread. 
When the powder is first stirred into the 
water a light scum rises like that which 
happens in boiling bran; it smells also 
partly like toasted bread, and partly like 
cummin-feed. 

It is insipid to the taste, but not disa- 
greeable. It cannot be absolutely affirm- 
ed to be merely farinaceous, but it does 
not appear to be compounded of any a- 
nimal substance, tho' some grains of a ve- 
ry fine sand have been discover'd in it. 

In a short time this panada grows much 
thicker, the powder imbibing all the wa- 
ter, and when it is cold it is quite hard. 
It may be prepared with cold water, but 
then in a short time it will become sour. 

This powder may be used to great 
advantage, supposing the composition to 
be cheap and easily preserved, as well at 
sea, when other provisions fall short, as by 
an army during forced marches, a garri- 
son in a besiged town, and the poor in 
times of great scarcity. It is guessed to 
be Turky Corn roasted and powder- 
ed, and mix'd with a small quantity of 
sea salt; some chrystals of which have 
been discovered in it; and is the in- 
vention of M. Boueb, surgeon major of a 
regiment in France. 

