

[^Sample 1: article - 1755_GM_0043^]

|P_43
[}ADVERTISEMENT. }]
WHereas many noblemen, gentlemen, 
and others, who in the polite world 
are distinguished by the name of men of pleasure, 
have, by fast living, now commonly called sport- 
ing, formerly stigmatized by the names of who- 
ring and drunkenness, brought upon themselves, 
at the age of 40, all the pains, aches, and in- 
firmities of fourscore; and others, by fashion- 
ably spending their whole fortunes, by contract- 
ing debts which they cannot pay, and ruining 
their wives, wards, children, and creditors, have 
incurred such reflexions as render life intollera- 
ble. And whereas it has been proved, by 
the late great Ld Bolingbroke and others, to the 
full satisfaction of all gentlemen of wit, hu- 
mour, men of pleasure, and sporters, that after 
this life there is nothing either to hope or fear; 
so that to put an end to it, in such circumstan- 
ces, is greatly for the advantage of themselves 
and the community. And whereas, such 
is the prejudice still remaining among the great 
and little vulgar, that this necessary and heroic 
act reflects indelible dishonour upon such men 
of wit, humour, and pleasure, and their families, 
and makes the expence of bribing a coroner's 
jury to perjury absolutely necessary, to prevent 
a forfeiture of their personal estate, if any such 
there be. And whereas, there is at pre- 
sent no known method, by which this necessary 
measure may be decently and privately executed, 
the razor, sword, and halter having been uni- 
versally exploded, and the effect of the pistol, 
as it is commonly used, being very uncertain, 
sometimes causing a great effusion of blood, 
sometimes blowing the brains about the room, 
spoiling the paintings and other furniture, and 
leaving the body bloody and mangled, the coun- 
tenance distorted, and the features deraced; 
and at the same time alarming not only the 
family but the neighbourhood, so that all at- 
tempts to conceal it by pretending apoplexy or 
sudden death are ineffectual; Notice is 
hereby given, that a gentleman of great study 
and experience by sea and land, as well in 
England as in foreign parts, has discovered and 
obtained the king's patent for the following 
remedies against life: 1st, his white powder, 
which throws a bullet from any fire-arm, with- 
out noise, and yet with the same force as that 
commonly used; and which, by being mixed 
with a certain chymical compound, may be re- 
gulated to any degree of strength, according to 
the tickness of the skull, so as to pass through 
the ear, or the roof of the mouth, and lodge in 
the brain, without fracturing any part of the 
bone behind, or leaving any appearance of a 
wound. 2dly, His incomparable laurel water, 
which produces its effect even while it is going 
down the throat, without noise, agony or con- 
vulsions. 3dly, His inestimable chymical spi- 
rit, invidiously called, by Dr Mead, the Stygian 
spirit, from its subtle, imperceptible, and ef- 
fectual influence upon life, a small vial of 
which may be so held by a person in the midst 
of a large circle of gentlemen and ladies, as 
instantly to kill him, without affecting any o- 
ther of the company. 

The author, upon a line post-paid, will 
attend and administer these remedies himself, 
to any nobleman, gentleman, or other man of 
wit, humour, and pleasure, who may think fit 
to honour him with his commands, provided 
a sufficient indemnity be given, and the gen- 
tleman has not courage to apply them himself; 
or they will be delivered, with a printed paper 
of directions, to any who shall ask for a dose of 
the anodyne powder, drops, or essence, at the gen- 
tlewoman's, the two blue posts, in Frith street, 
Soho, and no where else in England, at the 
price of one Guinea, which is nothing to the 
value of a cure. 

P. S. Upon a proper certificate of the pa- 
tient's life, conversation, and circumstances, 
shewing that he is a proper object of charity, 
in want of these remedies, and unable to buy 
them, they shall be delivered gratis. 

The utmost secrecy and honour may be de- 
pended on. [^A small picture of a hand pointing right with its index finger. ^] Beware of Counterfeits. 

N. B.Rock's medicines will not do; nor 
will those of any other advertising quack; for 
though they are generally effectual, yet their 
operations are so slow, and the alteration 
which they produce in the patient before death 
is so very visible, that the secret is always sus- 
pected, and often certainly known. 


Vivat Rex. 

