

[^Sample 1: article - 1755_GM_0012^]

|P_12
Mr Urban, 

I Send you a remarkable case in surgery, 
with the bone itself that came away; 
(See the Fig.) and if you think it will be 
acceptable to your readers, it is at their 
service. I am, Sir, yours, &c. 

Gloucester, 
Dec. 18. 1754. 

J. Ready. 

ELizabeth, the daughter of Edward 
Avery, of this place, aged about 
eight years, was a little before Lady-day
1749 seized with an inflammatory dis- 
order in the fore part of her left leg, 
extending from a little below her knee 
almost to her toes: It appeared more 
like the erysipelatous than phlegmonoide 
kind; the parts affected were very tense, 
hot, and red; the swelling not great, 
but the pain almost intolerable, and 
attended with a pretty high fever. 

For the space of three or four days 
attempts were made to disperse it, but 
without effect; and the next intention 
of cure being to promote suppuration, 
the common cataplasm of bread and 
milk was applied to the whole inflamed 
part, and in about eight days there ap- 
peared a pretty large collection of mat- 
ter, with fluctuation, about the middle 
of the shin. 

Without waiting, therefore, for far- 
|P_13
ther signs of maturity, I immediately 
opened the tumour in its whole extent, 
by an incision near four inches long, 
directly over and parallel with the ante- 
rior angle of the tibia, and a large 
quantity of thin matter was discharged. 

Upon inspecting the inside of the ab- 
scess, the tibia appeared divested of its 
periosteum; and by examining the parts 
above and below the opening with the 
probe, and also the lateral and hinder 
parts of the bone by bending the probe, 
I found it bare on each side quite round, 
and above and below, almost its whole 
length, but not much altered in its co- 
lour, or the smoothness of its surface. 

When the patient first complained, 
she did not recollect that she had re- 
ceived any hurt; but now, she said, she 
remembered to have received a kick 
from another girl as they were at play, 
two or three days before, which gave 
her some pain for a little while, and 
went off. But whatever was the cause 
of the disease, the rapidity of its pro- 
gress, and the condition of the parts, 
were sufficient proofs that it began ori- 
ginally in, and was really an inflamma- 
tion of the periosteum and bone itself. 
As nothing could now be expected but 
the loss of so much of the tibia at least, 
as was thus deprived of its vital fluids 
and sensation, by the loss of its perios- 
teum, there appeared but little prospect 
of saving the limb; for whenever the 
loss of a transverse portion of the tibia 
has become necessary, it has been the 
common practice to amputate the leg 
without delay, rather than wear out the 
patient by deferring the operation; and 
the reason is plain, for the fibula does 
not only appear too small to sustain the 
whole weight of the body, but it has 
no articulation with the Os Femoris, 
being only laterally connected with the 
upward and outward part of the tibia; 
besides that the motions of flexture and 
extension arise from the tibia only, in 
which the united tendon of the muscles 
that extend the leg, and all the flexors 
except one terminate. Upon these prin- 
ciples, therefore, it appears right to 
take away the leg as useless, when the 
tibia cannot be preserved; and it is 
certainly right to take away soon what 
cannot be saved at last. 

However I was inclined to hope, that 
as my patient was very young, nature 
might supply the defect of the tibia, by 
giving an extraordinary increase of 
growth and strength to the fibula: And 
that if the disorder could be prevented 
from spreading, and the upper extre- 
mity of the tibia preserved, she might 
have so far the use of her leg, as to 
render it much preferable to a wooden 
one. 

To preserve the parts of the bones, 
therefore, which were yet sound, and 
to thicken the discharge, I applied lint 
dipt in antiseptic spirituous liquors, to 
the bone and internal parts of the ab- 
scess, and cover'd it with a common 
pledgit; which method of dressing was 
pursued through the whole cure, except 
that sometimes escharotics were applied 
to keep down the fungus on the sides 
of the wound, and to prevent, as much 
as possible, the aperture from dimi- 
nishing. 

After it was opened the pain soon 
ceased; but the fever continuing, she 
took Tinct. Cort. Peruv. lightly acidula- 
ted with Elix. Vitrioli; and a diarrhæa 
also, which came on as the fever began 
to decline, was stay'd by the use of 
Fuller's decoction of Fracastorius; and 
the tincture being continued a few days 
longer, at about three weeks end, she 
was quite free from her fever, her ap- 
petite returned, she slept well, the dis- 
charge became less in quantity, and of 
a good colour and consistency, and 
there were no remains of preternatural 
colour, heat, or tension in the limb 
affected, nor any pain, except when she 
was mov'd. 

Encourag'd by these favourable ap- 
pearances, I continued the same exter- 
nal applications, I gave her internally 
the decoction of guaiacum; and per- 
severing in this method, about eleven 
months the bone began to be moveable, 
and in less than two months more it 
seemed quite loose; and in order to fa- 
cilitate its removal, I made an attempt 
to divide it in two, by the trepan saw, 
but the operation proving more tedious 
and painful than I expected, thro' the 
instability of the bone, and the attrition 
of its jagged edges against the inside of 
the wound; and the diameter of the 
cylindrical saw being too small to divide 
it intirely, I desisted, and with a knife 
and director extended the aperture to- 
wards the knee, high enough to set the 
upper end of the loose bone at liberty; 
but finding it not yet intirely separated 
at its other extremity, I kept the upper 
end of it rais'd as high or higher than 
the level of the skin, by forcing dres- 
sings of lint under it, which prevented 
its pointed extremity from injuring the 
neighbouring parts, and also secured 
it from being again inclosed by the 
healing of the upper part of the wound 
over it. 

|P_14
In about 10 days more, apprehend- 
ing it to be intirely disengaged, I drew 
it with very little violence out of the 
sinus which sheathed its lower exre- 
mity. It measured full five inches and 
a quarter in length, and is the intire 
circumference of the tibia, except what 
the disease has destroyed of its anterior 
angle and external side. 

A pretty large hæmorrhage ensued, 
occasioned by the keen edges of the 
bone lacerating the vessels, which was 
immediately suppressed by filling the 
cavity from whence it issued with lint [^An illustration showing the decayed shinbone from three different sides. ^]
and Tinct. Myrrh. c. and applying a 
pretty tight bandage. 

In a very little time after the extrac- 
tion of the bone, the middle part of 
the wound began to cicatrize, and the 
patient walked to my house daily to be 
dressed, with the assistance of a staff 
only, and which being one day forgot, 
she found she had so little occasion for 
it, that she never used it afterwards. 

The two extremities of the wound 
kept open some weeks longer, several 
small portions of bone, at different 
times, working out of them, particu- 
larly from the lower part 
one of two inches in 
length, and about the 
thicknes of a small quill, 
after which the cure was 
in a few days completed 
with a firm cicatrix; and 
from that time to this, 
which is now upwards 
of four years, she has 
continued perfectly sound

She is quite upright, 
has no defect either of 
strength or motion in her 
leg, and scarcely any 
deformity; if any thing, 
'tis a small matter big- 
ger than the other just 
above the ankle, occasi- 
oned by the exuberance 
of the callus, by which 
the remains of the tibia 
are consolidated with the 
fibula; and in the mid- 
dle of the leg, instead of 
the acute rising of the 
skin, there is a remarka- 
ble depression. The 
whole texture of the leg 
is much more dense and 
compact than usual. The 
cure took up from first 
to last near 16 months. 

Scultætus, in his chi- 
rurgical observations, No. 
Lxxx1. describes a case 
in many particulars re- 
sembling this, which I 
had never seen till after 
the cure was completed, 
otherwise I should have 
been less doubtful of the 
event. There are also 
two histories of this kind 
in the medical essays, 
Vol. I. p. 238; but in 
those the patients were 
not quite upright. We 
were informed likewise 
|P_15
by the public papers about 2 years since, 
that Mr Le Gat, a surgeon in Denmark, 
had lately succeeded in a like attempt, 
and had publickly read an account of 
it in the academy of which he is a 
member. 

Upon the whole, I am of opinion, 
that the success of this cure may in some 
measure be attributed to the length of 
time in which it was effected, the de- 
cayed bone in the mean while serving 
(like a prop to a ruinous edifice) to re- 
sist the contractile power of the muscles, 
and preserve the extension of the leg, 
till the other parts had form'd such a 
coalition, and acquired such firmness 
and callosity as enabled them to supply 
the defect of the tibia. 

[}Explanation of the FIGURE. }]
a b That side of the tibia which is 
situated obliquely in the anterior and 
internal part of the leg, where it is co- 
vered only with the skin and periosteum
a Its upper end next the knee. The 
circular groove in its middle was made 
by the trepan. 
c Is the external side.—The angle 
betwixt those two sides, which is very 
much wasted by the disease, forms the 
keen edge of the shin. 
d Is its posterior side towards the calf 
of the leg. 

