

[^Sample 1: article - 1755_GM_0503^]

|P_503
[}Dr Gilbert's Experiments, in Confirma- 
tion of Dr Pringle's, concerning the 
Putrefaction of Animal Bodies. See Vol. 
xxii. p. 33. }]
AN ounce of veal exposed to the o- 
pen air, having begun to smell a 
little putrid at the end of eight days, 
he took off the bad scent by pouring on 
it a dram of spirit of hartshorn, and 
when it smelt amiss two days after- 
wards, he made it sweet again by dip- 
ping it in the same spirit. 

A dram of the same putrified flesh 
lost its stink by sprinkling on it five 
grains of volatile sal armoniac. The 
salt rendered it drier and harder, and 
it kept fresh fifteen days longer. 

A scruple of spirit of hartshorn, and 
a dram of volatile sal armoniac, put 
separately into an ounce of blood, 
which was beginning to putrify, took 
off the ill scent, which could not be 
perceived again till two days after. 

Having mixed a scruple of crabs-eyes 
uncalcined with two drams of fresh 
bile, it began to smell putrid in four 
days; but the same quantity of fresh 
bile, and two other drams mixed in 
with the like quantity of water, with- 
stood the putrefaction several days lon- 
ger, tho' these experiments were made 
in the same chamber, and with the 
same degree of heat. 

Two scruples of salt-petre being 
mixed with half an ounce of putrid 
blood, the colour became deeper, and 
the stench was much increased, which 
afterwards abated, when at the end of 
thirty-six hours some spirit of salt-petre 
was dropped into the blood, which pre- 
sently brought on the putrefaction anew. 
The like experiment was tried with 
putrified flesh with the like success. 

These several experiments seem to 
concurr in strengthening Dr Pringle's 
paradoxical proposition, that volatile 
alkaline salts do diminish and resist pu- 
trefaction, and that on the contrary, 
the acid salts of terrestrial bodies acce- 
lerate and increase it. If the applica- 
tion were to be made to human bodies, 
'tis likely some consequences might be 
drawn, which would point out the mo- 
derate use of testaceous acids in ardent 
fevers; tho' tis possible, that the action 
of animal bodies may produce at the 
same time contrary effects. 

