

[^Sample 1: article - 1755_GM_0462^]

|P_462
Mr Urban, 

AS your useful Magazine is become the proper 
repository for every thing that tends to enlarge 
science, or preserve health, I would recommend 
particularly to your notice the description lately 
published in France by Dr Pinard, of the epi- 
demic disease which raged at Rouen in Norman- 
dy during the months of November and Decem- 
ber 1753, and which alarmed all Europe. In 
England the current report was (see Vol. xxiv. 
p. 44.) that it swept away thousands, and that 
the contagion was so violent as to putrify the meat 
in the butchers shops, which news so affected the 
ministry, that orders were on the point of being 
issued out for prohibiting all commerce with Rouen, 
had not a certificate from the English ambassador 
at Paris been obtained, in order to set the matter 
in a true light. So accurate a description, there- 
fore, of the rise, progress, and means made use of 
for the cure of this distemper, must be of infinite 
advantage to posterity; for as Dr Pinard has 
observed, there is but one disease in the whole his- 
tory of epidemics that had the least resemblance 
to this at Rouen, for which reason he has traced 
it thro' all its stages with the utmost nicety and 
precision. 

I am, Sir, yours, &c. B. J. 

[In compliance with our kind correspondent's 
hint, we have extracted from Dr Pinard's curious 
letter all that relates to the cause, description, and 
cure of this distemper; but we must refer our me- 
dical readers to the original for his judicious re- 
flections and reasoning upon so interesting a subject.] 

[}Dr Pinard's Account of the Epidemic Dis- 
ease which raged at Rouen in 1753. }]
THe continual northerly winds of the 
year 1752 occasioned a long and dry 
winter. The ensuing March was mild and 
rainy, but in April the wind fixed again in 
the northern quarter, and made the ground 
so hard, that the hopes of a plentiful harvest 
which March seemed to promise were then 
much abated. May brought on great heats, 
which continued all June, July, and the be- 
ginning of August, during which space there 
were for the most part southerly winds, with 
very little rain. It is remarkable however, that 
on June 23 the thermom. was something below 
the freezing point, and the cold so sharp, that 
the plants were frozen on our hot beds, and ma- 
ny sheep, which had been lately shorn, died in 
the meadows. But suddenly again the heat 
and drought was so considerable, that the 
herdsmen were obliged to fetch water for their 
cattle from the rivers. The corn ripened so 
fast. as to be cut a month before the usual 
time; and the vine-dresser had the satisfac- 
tion of filling his casks by the 20th of Sep- 
|P_463
tember. The autumn proved so dry as to last 
till November, but then incessant rains came 
on, except seven or eight days of hard frost. 

A thick fog arose the 21st of this month, 
in the morning, of a very stinking, sulphu- 
reous smell, which increased to that degree in 
the evening, that the lights could not be dis- 
cerned in the streets. I am apt to think it 
was much thicker in some places than in o- 
thers, and that though it might be over a- 
bout eight o'clock in some streets, yet in 
many it lasted all night, for I could discern 
nothing of it in the Rue aux Ours, but when 
I was got into that of Fordeau, not far from 
the other, I found myself surrounded with it 
again. I ground my first conjectures on the 
singular distribution of the disease in the city. 
It seized only the western half, in which two 
several parishes were almost exempt from it. 
Moreover it was remarked, that in the eastern 
side, where the three largest and most popu- 
lous parishes are, they were at this time unu- 
sually healthy. Three or four days after this 
fog our epidemic disease made its first ap- 
pearance, and advanced so rapidly as to threa- 
ten a great mortality; but, as before observ'd, 
its tyranny ended with that year, few having 
felt any of its effects since. 

Young persons of both sexes were in a 
manner the sole objects of its rage, who for 
five, six, seven, or eight days together, com- 
plained of lassitudes, slight pains in the arms 
and legs, and of a head-ach which increased 
daily. They had almost continual shiverings, 
with some loss of appetite. These symptoms, 
however, did not at first restrain them from 
following their affairs; but they were soon 
confin'd to their beds, where they were for 
the most part seized with a bilious or serous 
looseness, often accompanied with nausea's 
and vomitings. Most of them bled frequent- 
ly at the nose, but in a small quantity. The 
head-ach became violent, with a hard small 
pulse. The fever, which was slight at first, 
became violent, especially if the vessels had 
been emptied. The blood which had been 
taken away appeared destitute of serum, and 
of a gelatinous consistence. The region of 
the stomach and hypochondria was tumified, 
and in two days a considerable tension of the 
belly succeeded; but the patients felt little 
or no pain when handled. This tension was 
constantly followed by some degree of a de- 
lirium, which was only symptomatic. The 
tongue was often brown or black, but moist, 
tho' sometimes beset with little green ulcers, 
or apthæ, some of which I have also seen 
on the lips: In the progress of the disease 
many had a puffiness of the face, hands, and 
legs. Few perfectly recovered in less than 
30 or 40 days. When the tension of the 
belly did not yield to remedies, the delirium 
increased, the breast became greatly oppressed, 
and the patients died on the fifth, seventh, 
or 11th day after taking their beds. Howe- 
ver all were not carried off in so short a time; 
several held out till the 17th or 21st day, if 
the inflammation of the lower belly did not 
come on before the 10th or 12th day of the 
fever; some of these had slight miliary e- 
ruptions, which were only symptomatic. 

Opening the dead bodies plainly indicated 
the seat of the disorder, and the true cause 
of death. In every one the stomach was of 
a reddish brown complexion, livid, and be- 
sprinkled with ulcers of the size of large len- 
til seeds. The intestinal canal was mortified 
in different places, and its villous membrane 
looked as if it had been boiled, with ulcers 
here and there, like those of the stomach. 
Several had a tumifaction of the mesenteric 
glands. The membranes and substance of 
the brain afforded nothing remarkable, even 
in those that had been most delirious. 

The disease I have been describing was not 
the only one we had to deal with; the mil- 
liary fever, of which we have always had 
more or less for 30 years past, was observed 
to be more frequent and dangerous at this 
time than for several years before. The 
chief part of those who were attacked with 
it sweated much less than usual; the eruption 
of the pustles, which ordinarily happens not 
before the 11th, 14th, or 17th day, was al- 
most in all on the 5th, 6th, or 7th, and 
sometimes sooner, and quickly after the e- 
ruption, the skin grew burning and dry, which 
brought on an inquietude, that soon termi- 
nated in death, and that mostly without any 
of the common previous symptoms, such as 
head-achs, deliriums, coma's, twitchings of 
the tendons, &c.

The symptoms of this epidemic disease are 
strong characteristics of a putrid fever, where- 
in the corrosive sulphurous particles which 
occasioned it, directed their action principally 
upon the glands of the stomach and intestines, 
exciting inflammations there, whereof the 
tension of the belly, &c. were necessary con- 
sequences. 

The curative indications which presented 
themselves were all carefully pursued in the 
beginning, but without the expected success, 
and we may say, with the great Sydenham, 
who spent most of his days in strictly observ- 
ing the nature of epidemics, that notwith- 
standing the most prudent precautions, the first pa- 
tients which fall under our care in epidemic dis- 
orders will be in a dangerous situation, till by 
close reflection we are able to discover the true 
nature and genius of the distemper. 

Our college met twice whilst this rife dis- 
ease was making its havock; every one 
gave an account of his particular practice and 
the result thereof, without the least reserve. 
Upon considering duly the evacuation which 
nature seemed to indicate by stool, and the 
small degree of pain about the region of the 
belly, it was determined amongst us to pro- 
ceed in the following manner. 

As soon as we were called in, we ordered 
bleeding once or twice in the arm, according 
to the violence of the symptoms, and the 
fullness of the vessels. When the patients 
complained of nausea's it was thought ne- 
cessary to examine if there were a tension of 
the stomach and hypochondries. If these 
were found in their natural state, we prescribed 
Tartárum Stibiatum in a draught, which ge- 
nerally procured large evacuations, and abated 
the fever; but if, on the other hand, the fe- 
|P_464
ver increased, bleeding in the arm was again 
repeated, and ordered also in the foot when 
the head-ach was violent, as likewise when 
the hæmorrhage at the nose was frequent, 
without a remission of the symptoms. 

When the belly was much inflated and 
hard, the more abundant the evacuations by 
stool were, the more the tension was taken 
off, the fever abated, and the skin freed from 
its burning heat. If the patient continued 
not lax the next day, it was necessary to 
throw in clysters of mel violatum dissolved in 
whey or some emollient decoction; notwith- 
standing which precaution the tension would 
very frequently return, if purgatives were 
not repeated every two or three days. That 
which I administered most successfully was 
an ounce of pulp of cassia diluted in a pint 
of whey, wherein two drams of some vege- 
table salt had been dissolved; this dose was 
divided into five draughts, to be taken every 
half hour. If sufficient evacuations were not 
procured this way, two grains of stibiated 
tartar were added: Sometimes the Kermes 
mineral given in a small doze, in draughts 
made of the distilled water of Oxytriphyllum, 
syrup of peach flowers, and oil of almonds, 
answered well, especially if care was taken 
not to order it but when the heat was mode- 
rate, and the pulse not hard. When it was 
apprehended that this medicine might prove 
too harsh, syrup of diacodium was added, which 
wrought the desired effect, by relaxing the 
nervous fibres of the stomach and guts. 

Whey and fomentations were not omitted 
in this method, both being of use, as it was 
essentially necessary to souple the solids, which 
purgatives are often apt to irritate. 

By these helps, prudently administered, 
and varied according to the different circum- 
stances deduced from the degree of the symp- 
toms, and the age and temper of the patients, 
we had the satisfaction of recovering a very 
considerable number. 

