

[^Sample 1: article - 1755_GM_0197^]

|P_197
[}Account of the Weather continued. }]
[}March. Barometer. }]Highest 29.8. Lowest 28.8. viz. 6th.Gr. var. .7. Com. station 29.7. Total 831.7. 

[}Thermometer. }]Highest morn. 46. Noon 56. Lowest 35. 38. Greatest var. 7. 7. Com. station 38. 45. Total 1114. 1284. 
The barometer is seldom known to 
sink lower in this country than 28.8. 
to which the quicksilver fell the 6th 
inst. the wind south; but what makes 
it still more remarkable is, that the 
weather was fair, clear, and tempe- 
rate. The greatest part of the month 
was cold, cloudy, some rain, but sleet 
or snow more frequently. The town, 
however, continu'd moderately healthy, 
except the usual complaints of the sea- 
son, nothing like an epidemic appearing. 

[}Account of the Weather, &c.}]
[}April. Barometer. }]Highest 30.3. Lowest 29.7. Greatest var. 4. Com. station 30.0. Total 898.3. 

[}Thermometer. }]Highest morn. 66. Noon 78. the 21st. Lowest 45. 53. Greatest var. 6. 8. Com. station 53. 60. Total 1604. 1849. 
The conclusion of the last month 
was cold and dark for the most part, 
the winds S. W. The weather became 
milder about the beginning of this, 
but cloudy, with frequent showers, ve- 
ry high winds, the air cold, and scarce 
any appearance of spring. Towards 
the middle the weather was milder, 
and on the 20th, 21st, and 22d, might 
be said to be hot; and was both by 
the thermometer, as well as to feeling, 
as warm as the weather ever is for a 
continuance at the height of summer. 
The quicksilver in a thermometer sus- 
pended in the shade, and observed ma- 
ny years together, was on the 21st at 
noon at 65, and has not been known 
to rise above 78 in the same place on 
the hottest day in the five preceding 
summers. The preceding rains, this 
warmth, and a clear sky, have so far 
aided vegetation, that except the last 
spring, which was still much later, few 
can remember so sudden an alteration 
in the face of nature, as hath happen- 
ed here within these two weeks, so that 
another plenteous year seems advanc- 
ing, and may our gratitude keep e- 
qual pace. In general the town has 
been healthy; vernal intermittents, 
consumptions, rheumatisms, a few e- 
ruptive fevers, have been the princi-
diseases, and these less frequent than in 
some preceding years. 

[}Account of the Weather, &c. for May. }]
[}Barometer. }]Highest 30.3. Lowest 29.6. Greatest var. 4. Com. station 30.0. Total 884.7. 

[}Thermometer. }]Highest morn. 64. Noon 68. Lowest 45. 50. Greatest var. 4. 7. Com. station 52. 59. Total 1551. 1749. 
The weather in this month has been 
mostly fair, often clear, the winds nor- 
therly, and the air rather cool than 
temperate, mornings and nights espe- 
cially, some of which were frosty. Soon 
after this month began, and the nor- 
therly winds set in, intermittents, rheu- 
matisms, and peripneumonies made 
their appearance. As the month ad- 
vanced fevers became frequent, and 
the measles more common, than has 
been known for some years, but in ge- 
neral of a favourable kind; the cough 
moderate, the eruption, tho' copious, 
yet gradual and regular: Adults, who 
had not before had this distemper, 
rarely escaping it, but by keeping in 
bed a few days, drinking freely of soft 
pectoral liquids, and the mildest dia- 
phoretic medicines, sometimes with- 
out any evacuations, except a sponta- 
neous diarrhea which attended several; 
all the writer saw recovered. The fe- 
vers were for the most part allied to 
that dangerous remittent, which has 
for some years past, more or less, pre- 
vailed in different places of this king- 
dom. Sometimes the beginning was 
perceptible, by shivering, head-ach, 
weariness, sickness at the stomach, and 
heat, succeeding each other in a short 
space of time. In this case, the symp- 
toms proceeded with considerable vio- 
|P_198
lence during two or three days, when 
they seemed to give way to the reme- 
dies applied, and especially if the pa- 
tient was at first very plentifully bled; 
but in a few days the symptoms again 
returned, tho' at first mildly, neither 
the head-ach, restlessness, nor heat, 
being greater than what might easily be 
borne. The urine was mostly crude, 
and if turbid at first, grew thinner, 
flammeous, and scarce had a slight sus- 
pension, as the disease advanced. In 
many some scarlet stigmata appearing 
here and there on the breast and arms, 
gave hopes at first of a favourable erup- 
tion; but these soon disappeared, and 
in common a delirium, catchings, con- 
stant watchfulness, and extreme inquie- 
tude, took place successively, and car- 
ried the patent off at different periods: 
If much blood was taken away, the 
progress of the disease was common- 
ly both swift and fatal; especially if 
blisters were very early applied to the 
head and upper parts. The cooler the 
patient was kept, so as not to be sen- 
sible of cold, the less he was urged to 
sweat at the beginning; but all possi- 
ble ease procured by emptying the first 
passages in the gentlest manner, the less 
blood was taken away, and the later 
blisters were applied, the longer the 
disease continued, but the sick more 
generally recovered. 

The impatience of the sick, and of 
their friends often force practitioners 
against their better judgment, to give 
into measures that they cannot always 
approve; and as blisters are far from 
being a trifling application, but, con- 
trary to the vulgar opinion, are capa- 
ble of doing harm as well as good, it 
would be well if those of the faculty, 
who have some authority to inforce the 
sentiments which both reason and ex- 
perience dictate, would endeavour to 
set the public right, in respect to the 
affair of blisters, which can seldom or 
ever be proper, much less a number of 
them necessary, in the first stage of a 
fever. 

