

[^Sample 1: article - 1761_GM_0624^]

|P_624
[}Some Account of a second Essay on the me- 
dicinal Virtues of Hemlock; by Anthony 
Storck, Physician to the Empress Queen. 
(For an Account of the first Part, and of 
the Issue of some Experiments made here 
in Consequence of it, see Vol. xxx. p. 
246, and this Vol. p. 435-6.) }]
DOctor Storck observes, in his pre- 
face, that the oftener he has ad- 
ministered the hemlock, the more op- 
portunities he has had of admiring the 
virtue of the plant, and this second 
essay consists chiefly of narratives of 
cases in which he has used it himself, 
and seen the effects of it used by others. 

It appears from these cases, that the 
Hemlock has perfectly cured diseases 
so different as the gout, the scurvy, 
the rheumatism, schirrous swellings, 
and ulcerated cancers, but Dr Storck
does not therefore conclude that this 
plant will always cure these diseases. 

In different constitutions, and un- 
der different circumstances, the same 
alteration of the solids, or the same 
corruption of the fluids produce very 
different effects, so that mercury some- 
times fails to cure the venereal dis- 
ease, and the bark an intermittent fe- 
ver. For cancers, however, Hemlock 
is almost a certain and radical cure. 

The Hemlock used by Dr Storck is 
the large, common, spotted, stinking Hem- 
lock, called by Linnæus, Conium semini- 
bus striatis, and by Clusius, Cicutaria ma- 
jor vulgaris. 

For an extract, this plant is best ga- 
thered when its flowers are full blown, 
and every part of the plant, except the 
root, may be used for this purpose, and 
the extract is to be made by pressing 
the juice into a glazed earthen vessel, 
and placing it over a slow fire, taking 
care to stir it often, till it is boiled to a 
proper consistence. 

Dr Storck observes, that, in general, 
apothecaries have been too careful in 
depurating this juice, for he prefers 
that extract which is thickest, and al- 
most equal to a pulp. 

An extract may also be prepared 
from a decoction of the dried plant, 
when it cannot be procured fresh, but 
such extract will be less efficacious. 

We are also told that some hundred 
weight of the extract prepared from 
the dry plant, have been sent from Vi- 
enna into other countries, without Dr 
Storck's knowledge, and he expresses 
great uneasiness on that account. 

Among a great number of cases 
which prove the amazing efficacy of 
Hemlock, are the following: 

[}CASE I. }]
A woman about 22, had, from a 
child, been afflicted with schirrous 
swellings of the glands, under the ears 
and about the jaw: About five years 
ago a large swelling arose in her left 
cheek, which extended itself down the 
same side of the neck to her collar- 
bone, and in a short time became as 
hard as a flint, though without pain. 

Within the last three years, this 
swelling encreased to the size of a 
man's head, the glands of the arm-pits 
became also hard, and no less than 15 
schirrous tumours, the smallest of 
which was as big as a hen's egg, form- 
ed themselves on the right side of the 
neck; both her breasts also became 
schirrous. 

This woman, hideous as her appear- 
ance must be, contracted the venereal 
disease, for which she was brought to 
the hospital. 

|P_625
Of the venereal disease she was cured 
in about five weeks by antivenereal 
decoctions, purges mixed with calo- 
mel, and then a solution of the cor- 
rossive sublimate in malt spirits, with 
strong and plentiful decoctions of Bur- 
dock root. 

The schirruses, however, remained 
in the same state, and the patient re- 
fusing to continue longer in the hospi- 
tal, was dismissed. 

She was, soon after, detected in 
some crime for which she was thrown 
into prison, and was there seized 
again with a fever which brought her 
to the hospital. 

When she was cured of the fever, 
she chose rather to continue in the 
hospital than to go back to prison, and 
thus a fair opportunity offered to try 
what effect the Hemlock would pro- 
duce against swellings so large, and of 
so long continuance. 

Dr Storck administered morning and 
evening four pills of the extract, each 
weighing two grains, without making 
any external application, and in five 
days the glandulous swellings became 
moveable, and the large swelling on 
the left side of the neck, softer: By 
this it appeared, that Hemlock, admi- 
ministered only internally, was much 
more efficacious than the strongest 
preparations of mercury, however ap- 
plied: To hasten the cure, the swel- 
lings were covered with a hemlock 
plaister, and that plaister with a cata- 
plasm of the same herb, the dose of 
pills being increased at the same time. 

On the 10th day, the schirrus on 
the left side of the neck was not only 
softer, but reduced in size, and the 
same happy alteration was also produ- 
ced in both breasts. 

The rest of the swellings, though 
softer, were not diminished, and to- 
wards the surface they were inflamed 
and painful. 

On the 17th day, the schirrus on 
the left side of the neck was much more 
reduced, both the breasts were soft 
and moveable, and the other schirrus 
began to tend towards suppuration; 
the patient now took six pills in the 
morning, and six in the evening, of 
four grains each. 

On the 24th day, some of the schir- 
rus's were converted into matter, but 
were not opened, as they seemed like- 
ly to break; the swellings of the neck 
and breast still gradually diminished, 
and a few days afterwards some of the 
rest broke, the plaister and calaplasm
were continued. 

On the 36th day, some of the swel- 
lings totally disappeared, the wounds 
began to heal, and the swellings of the 
neck and breast were reduced at least 
one third. 

Five pills of four grains each were 
now administered four times a day, 
and this quantity was never encreased. 

In less than three months the neck 
and breasts returned to their natural 
state, and from being the most hideous 
object imaginable, she became rather 
agreeable than otherwise. 

[}CASE II. }]
A woman about 36 years old was 
brought to the hospital with a hard, 
painful, immoveable swelling in her 
left breast, as big as a child's head, 
which, towards tne surface, was divi- 
ded into several smaller, softer, and 
more painful lumps and protuberan- 
ces, the veins were distended, and the 
left arm was so much swelled, and so 
painful, that it could not be moved. 

To this patient Dr Storck gave mor- 
ning and evening 12 grains of the ex- 
tract of Hemlock, and a draught of 
ground-ivy tea. 

On the 4th day the breast was soft- 
er, but the lumps were bigger, and 
some ichorous matter issued from them. 
The pain was intollerable, and opiates 
became necessary. 

On the 7th day the dose was increas- 
ed to 18 grains, morning and evening. 

On the 9th, three of the lumps broke 
and discharged a great quantity of dark 
coloured stinking matter, but the breast 
became less, and the pain decreased. 

The discharge of fœtid ichor con- 
tinued, and on the 14th day a scruple 
of the Hemlock was given night and 
morning, but the patient was seized 
was shiverings, her pulse quickened, 
and she became hot and thirsty: Upon 
this the dose was decreased to ten 
grains, and a drachm of the best Peru- 
vian bark was administered every three 
hours in the day. 

The 16th day the shudderings went 
off, pus was discharged instead of i- 
chor, but the patient being still weak 
and thirsty, the same remedies were 
continued till the 21st day, then the 
quantity of Hemlock was again 
increased to eighteen grains, but a 
drachm of the bark was also given 
twice a day, a cataplasm of milk and 
hemlock was applied externally, and 
the holes in the breast were filled with 
fine lint, moistened in an infusion of 
Hemlock. 

By this treatment she grew gradu- 
|P_626
ally better upon the whole, though 
the pain was sometimes so great, that 
rest was scarce to be procured, even by 
opiates, and sometimes the shiverings 
and heat returned, which made it 
necessary for a time, to diminish the 
dose of Hemlock, and have recourse 
more freely to the bark, till these 
symptoms went off. 

A great quantity of serum came a- 
way from the ulcers, the size of the 
breast diminished, and a drachm of 
the extract was administered every 
day. 

After some time, the lips of the ul- 
cer, which had been thick, callous, 
and contracted, began to soften and 
resolve, and partly to be consumed by 
the pus, so that about the 64th day, 
80 grains of the Hemlock were admi- 
nistered every day: Recourse to the 
bark became again necessary, and the 
patient was also directed to drink 
plentifully of whey, or of a strong 
decoction of marsh mallows; the lips 
of the ulcers were covered with a 
hemlock plaister. 

About the 120th day, hard broad 
cores came away from the ulcers, and 
a great quantity of ichor was dischar- 
ged, in consequence of which, the 
breast suddenly diminished very great- 
ly; the patient, however, had fre- 
quent shiverings, and other feverish 
symptoms, so that half an ounce of 
bark and a scruple of Hemlock were 
given every 24 hours. The ulcers al- 
so were filled with lint, which had been 
steeped in a slight infusion of Hemlock 
and vinegar of litharge. 

From this time to the 150th day the 
patient became better upon the whole, 
and four scruples of the extract were 
administered every day, and a cata- 
plasm of the Hemlock alone. 

On the 170th day the ulcer was 
quite smooth, the swelling and hard- 
ness totally disappeared, and the lips 
of the ulcer wasted quite away. A- 
bout three weeks afterwards the cure 
was compleated, and no trace of the 
breast remained, so that all who saw 
the patient, thought her breast had 
been cut off. 

This cure had been performed six 
months before the publication of the 
book, and the patient remained in 
perfect health. 

From a great variety of cases, many 
of them most deplorable, and with re- 
spect to all remedies hitherto used 
hopeless, the Doctor draws the fol- 
lowing corollaries: 

1. Hemlock does not dissolve the 
blood into a putrid colliquation. 

2. Nor bring on consumptions. 

3. Nor hurt the sight. 

4. Nor take away the power of pro- 
creation. 

5. It may be safely given in schir- 
rus's of the lower belly. 

The author concludes his work with 
the following cautions: 

I have related several cases in which 
the Hemlock is beneficial; I do not, 
however, pretend, that we are to rely 
always on this plant alone. 

Other remedies must also sometimes 
accompany the Hemlock. 

It will be necessary for the physician 
judiciously to follow the respective in- 
dications. 

The surgeon must alter, add, and 
take away, according as reason, foun- 
ded on experience, dictates. 

That it cureth cancers, is a fact I 
have seen, and of which I am convin- 
ced by a multitude of experiments; 
but I do not from hence assert, that it 
is effectual against every cancer, nor, 
that from the Hemlock alone is the 
whole cure always to be expected. 

If there are persons who, on account 
of their particular constitution, or from 
a complication of symptoms, cannot 
support the Hemlock, let such refrain 
from taking it. 

If the symptoms require, also, other 
medicines, why may they not be admi- 
nistered together with this plant? 

Purgatives are often necessary. 

Sometimes it may be proper also to 
order a bleeding. 

In pleuthoric dispositions, hemorrha- 
ges should not suddenly be stopped; 
for with such patients they agree much 
better than artificial bleedings. 

In weak constitutions, on the con- 
trary, the agaric of the oak must im- 
mediately and effectually be applied. 

The agaric, however, should be on- 
ly fixed to the spot from whence the 
blood issues; extended over the entire 
ulcer, or the wound, it is pernicious, 
and often fatal. 

In some cases, cooling antiphlogistic 
remedies are indicated as well as the 
Hemlock. This happens most in the 
gout and rheumatism. 

Sometimes emollients, digestives 
sometimes, and sometimes astringents, 
are required. 

The knife must now and then also 
be employed in giving the matter a 
discharge, which I have often observed 
in the spina ventosa; in order that the 
carious and corrupted parts may be se- 
parated from the sound. 

|P_627
A fungous cancer must also be some- 
times extracted with the knife. 

But least, in similar cases, a relapse 
should happen, the Hemlock ought to 
be employed, which is sufficient to pre- 
vent it. 

It happens, in many instances, that 
the callous lips of cancers, or even 
fungous cancers themselves, are con- 
sumed by the means of the following 
remedy alone: 

Take of the plant of Hemlock two drams 
and a half; of honey of roses 3 ounces. 

These ingredients are to be spread 
on pledgets of lint, and being applied 
to the part affected, are to be renewed 
as often as prudence suggests to be 
necessary. 

When a judicious physician joins 
with an expert surgeon, in endeavou- 
ring to cure desperate disorders, they 
frequently make surprising cures. 

But if they disagree, or are igno- 
rant of the proper treatment, the pa- 
tient must necessarily suffer or expire. 

If women will but discover their 
complaints as soon as they perceive 
them, and the physicians prescribe the 
Hemlock at a proper time, I make no 
doubt but that in some years we should 
meet but with very few cancers of the 
breast. 

The Hemlock never requires a strict 
regimen to be observed. 

It allows every thing which the sto- 
mach easily digests, and which is capa- 
ble of becoming proper nourishment. 

Nor is wine forbidden, or acids 
hurtful, when taken in a moderate 
quantity. 

