

[^Sample 1: article - 1761_GM_0261^]

|P_261
Mr Urban, 
June, 1761. 

I Have, for many years, suffered a 
great deal from a stone in one of 
my kidneys, for which I tryed vari- 
ous remedies without success; but be- 
in now cured, I cannot better show 
my thankfulness to God for the ease I 
enjoy, than by desiring you to publish 
my case, as it may be the happy means 
of relieving others who are in the 
same melancholy condition. 

It is, I believe, 12 or 14 years since 
I first perceived a pain, uneasiness, and 
weight in my left kidney, which gra- 
dually increased till it made my life 
very uncomfortable. As I had known 
Mrs Stephen's medicines to have been 
very successful in many such cases, I 
applied to her, and took her remedies 
for some years, and found myself much 
better and easier for them while I con- 
tinued them, but whenever I left them 
off for any time, I had a constant re- 
turn of the same complaints. Upon 
this I left them quite off, and tried se- 
veral other things which were recom- 
mended to me, and generally found 
ease upon the first tryal of every new 
medicine, but after leaving it off for 
any little time, my old complaints re- 
turned again. It is now above a year 
ago since I left off all these medi- 
cines, and took to lemon juice and 
water, with a little sugar for my con- 
stant drink. I continued this method 
for near a year with some intervals, 
using two or three, and sometimes in 
hot weather four lemons every day, 
and I found myself grow daily easier, 
so that for many months I have had 
scarce any uneasiness in my kidney; 
and about six weeks ago I had a great 
forcing to make water, when a kind 
of jelly came from me, which, upon 
examination, seemed to be the gluten, 
which probably connected together the 
solid parts of a stone. 

I think it is the general opinion of 
our physicians, that a stone in the hu- 
man body consists of earthy parts, 
with a little alcaline salt and air, 
which are connected together by a glu- 
ten or glue; and that the alcaline me- 
dicines, such as soap and lime, dissolve 
this glue, by which means the earthy 
parts separate from the rest, and come 
away insensibly, but that acid medi- 
cines dissolve the earthy, &c. parts 
of the stone, and leave the glue un- 
touched. And Dr Lobb, in his treatise 
on dissolvents of the stone, shows us 
by experiments, that lemon juice will 
soften, and even dissolve a stone. 

I bless God I am now quite easy and 
happy, and am fully satisfied that I 
have got rid of a stone which gave me 
so much uneasiness for many years; 
and which, if I may judge by the 
largeness of the glue which came from 
me, I believe was of the size of a large 
Spanish nut. 

The remedy I used was very plea- 
sant and agreeable to me, especially in 
the summer: I generally squeezed the 
juice of a large lemon into a little a- 
bove half a pint of soft water, and 
sweetened it to my taste; and whenever 
I was faint, or it was cold at my sto- 
mach, I added a little white wine to it. 
It never gave me the cholick, which I 
find lemons do to some persons, to 
whom, therefore, this remedy would 
be very improper. 

If, Mr Urban, upon this faithful 
narrative of my case, any persons 
should try it and be cured, I hope they 
will be so good as to acquaint you of 
it, that it may encourage others also to 
try it. 

I am your constant Reader, Z.

