

[^Sample 1: article - 1761_GM_0572^]

|P_572
[}The Theory and Cure of the Distemper call- 
ed a Cold, from a late Treatise on the 
Subject: Written by John Chandler of 
London, Apothecary, and F. R. S.}]
THe matter which perspires from 
the human body is not excre- 
mentitious, but is the result of the last 
and most perfect concoction of the ani- 
mal juices; it is what remains of the 
alimentary substances received into the 
stomach after they have gone through 
the whole course of gradual transmu- 
tation, and are purified from all ex- 
crementitious particles, and it is de- 
signed for the immediate nourishment 
and repair of the body in all its parts. 

This juice therefore permeates, or 
passes through, every part of the body, 
and so much of it only as is redundant 
or superfluous, passes off through the 
pores, and excretory ducts. 

But the pores and excretory ducts, 
through which the superfluity of this 
juice passes, are not those only of the 
skin, but of the membranes that co- 
ver and line the stomach, bowels, and 
every other internal part of the body, 
so that all the surfaces of the body, in- 
ward and outward, are in perpetual 
state of perspiration, by which they 
are kept moist and supple, and pre- 
vented both from adhering, and from 
suffering a painful irritation by rub- 
bing against each other. 

This juice, as well as all other juices 
of the body, when it is first secreted 
from the capillary arteries is heated, 
and therefore in a thin fluid state; but 
afterwards it grows thicker from vari- 
ous causes, particularly from remain- 
ing at rest in its several receptacles, and 
from a dissipation or absorption of its 
aqueous particles. 

This juice may be rendered thick 
and tenacious, by natural and by su- 
per-natural causes; and one species 
of tenacity will be salutary and neces- 
sary, the other hurtful and danger- 
ous. It is rendered thick and tena- 
cious, and becomes the glandular mu- 
cous of the nose and mouth, and of 
all the canals where such a humour is 
necessary to defend their internal sur- 
face against acrid and stimulating par- 
ticles, by a natural cause, and there- 
fore is salutary and necessary. It is 
rendered thick and tenacious also by a 
preter-natural chill, in its secretory or 
excretory ducts; and by a corrugation 
or spasmodic constriction of the ducts 
themselves; it then puts a stop to the 
natural secretions and absorptions, 
consequently to the free circulation of 
the humours through the capillaries, 
which therefore extend and load the 
compound organs on which the af- 
fection falls; and, in this case, the in- 
spissated perspirable matter froms the 
tenacious substance that appears upon 
the surface of blood, which is taken from 
persons who are disordered in conse- 
quence of neglected colds, and which 
is called size; the same matter thus 
morbidly inspissated, also forms the 
tough membranes and adhesions of 
the lungs with the pluera after perip- 
neumonies and pleurisies, as well as all 
other adhesions after inflammatory disor- 
ders of different parts. 

This morbid inspissation of the per- 
spirable matter from a chill in some in- 
ternal or external part, therefore pro- 
duces the disease called a cold, and when 
it falls on the pituitary membrane, which 
is most subject to this accident, the 
most immediate and remarkable symp- 
toms of the disease are produced. 

The pituitary membrane is so called, 
because it secretes the pituita or mucus 
of the nose and mouth; part of it is 
also the immediate organ of smelling; 
it is of great extent, and lines not on- 
ly the nostrils, but all the adjacent ca- 
vities called sinusses: It is full of blood 
vessels and nerves, and the hinder part 
of it contains a great number of glands, 
each of which receives into its cavi- 
ty, the thin lymph secreted or perspi- 
red from the minute capillaries, which 
by cooling, and by the resorption of 
|P_573
its aqueous parts, becomes the mucus 
already mentioned; the capillary ar- 
teries that cover other parts of this 
membrane, also ooze out their lymph, 
which is thickened by the action of the 
air, and by its being intangled in the 
glandular mucus. 

When the pituitary membrane is af- 
fected by a cold, the capillary vessels, 
and ducts of the glands, are ob- 
structed, which produces an undue 
fullness and distention of the ves- 
sels, with a constriction of the mem- 
brane, a stimulation of the nerves, and, 
at last, an immoderate distillation and 
eflux of humour; in other words, 
the head is stuffed, the party sneezes, 
and the nose runs: All this is fre- 
quently occasioned by breathing cold air, 
and forms a disorder, which was for- 
merly called, a catarrh, and, errone- 
ously supposed to be derived from the 
brain. 

As the blood vessels which are spread 
over this membrane, communicate 
with each other, and are derived from 
different trunks, the obstruction some- 
times shifts from one part to another; 
the discharge from the nostrils will 
cease, and a hoarseness or cough come 
on, and vice versa. 

That part of the body on which cold 
is taken, or on which the perspirable 
matter is morbidly thickened by a chill, 
will first suffer, and shew the first signs 
of the disorder, which originally is 
local. 

It is common for persons coming 
out of a very warm room into the o- 
pen air, with the whole body heated 
inside and out, and the perspiration 
every where encreased, to wrap them- 
selves up, so as to prevent a chill on 
the surface of the body; but it is also 
common to take no precaution for the 
defence of the passages by which we 
breath; such persons therefore breath 
a cold damp air, which is repeatedly 
drawn up the nostrils; thus they take 
cold, which immediately affects the 
pituitary membrane; in about 12 hours 
the head is stuffed, with difficulty of 
breathing through the nose, loss of 
smell, frequent sneezing, a distillation 
of a thin humour from the nose, and a 
heaviness or pain in the forehead: If 
proper care be taken, the humour will 
flow more readily and plentifully; in 5 
or 6 days it will begin to thicken, and 
at last become concocted mucus; the 
sneezing, and pain in the forehead go 
off, the discharge of thick mucus gra- 
dually diminishes, and health is per- 
fectly restored. This species of cold is 
called, a coryza, and is a mere local af- 
fection of that part of the pituitary mem- 
brane, which is spread over the nostrils 
and frontal sinusses. 

The coryza, however, is sometimes 
produced by a more general check of 
the perspiration, from wet linnen, or 
damp beds; for this check will cause 
a super-abundance of the perspirable 
matter, by repelling what should have 
been thrown off, and nature will ease 
herself of the superfluity, where the 
readiest out-let is to be found, which, 
from some pre-disposing causes, may 
happen to be this emunctory. 

To facilitate the cure of the coryza, 
it is often necessary to take away 
blood, and to empty the bowels by 
gentle aperitives, in order to ease the 
pituitary membrane of that load and ten- 
sion, which would otherwise be too 
great for the elasticity of the vessels to 
overcome; and which, therefore, might 
multiply the obstructions, break the 
vessels, inflame the membrane, and 
produce a fever. 

If cold damp air received into the 
mouth, affects that part of the pituitary 
membrane, which lines the mouth and 
throat, the palate, the uvula, or the 
tonsils, these parts will then become 
the seat of the cold; the tonsils and u- 
vula will swell, a difficulty of swallow- 
ing and discharging the viscid phlegm, 
with which the parts are loaded, will 
come on, and the disorder is then dis- 
tinguished by the name of a sore throat. 

The sore throat, is sometimes cured like 
the coryza by resolution, relaxation, or a 
discharge of mucus, and sometimes by 
suppuration and purulent discharges. 
It sometimes also happens, but never 
without ill treatment, that the tonsils 
remain enlarged and indurated, which 
may produce bad consequences; and 
if the chill happens between the tonsils, 
and affects the protuberant mouth of 
either of the eustachian tubes, it will 
occasion an acute pain stretching into 
the ear, especially in the act of swal- 
lowing; a circumstancet which ought 
always to be attended to, lest the ob- 
struction should extend inward, and in- 
flame the tympanum. 

If the chill attacks the epiglottis, and 
upper part of the larynx, a hoarseness 
or loss of voice follows; if it pene- 
trates deeper into the glottis, a diffi- 
culty of breathing will be added; if 
the muscles of the larynx are chilled 
and stiffened, this difficulty will en- 
crease; and if the circulation of the 
blood there should be obstructed to a 
great degree, through neglect or ill 
treatment, a tumour and inflammation 
|P_574
will arise, and a true inflammatory 
quincy will be produced, one of the 
most immediately dangerous of all 
diseases. 

When the chill happens on the as- 
pera arteria, it produces and effort to 
pump up and throw off the vicid ob- 
structing mucus, which effort is called 
a cough. A cough is cured like other 
species of cold, by a resolution of the 
obstructions in the capillaries, by an 
easy expectoration, and by a recovery 
of strength in the solid parts that are af- 
fected, but great care must be taken 
not to use provocative expectorants, 
for they always do harm, and are some- 
times fatal. 

Either of these species of a cold, the 
coryza, the sore throat, and the cough, 
may happen separately, and all con- 
junctly without affecting the trunk, 
limbs, viscera, or general habit of the 
body; but when they are not soon re- 
lieved by nature or art, they lay the 
first foundation of dangerous local in- 
flammations, particularly in the head 
and lungs, and of fevers of the whole 
habit. 

A cold stream of air received on any 
part of the integuments about the eyes, 
produces that species of a cold called a 
blight. This generally goes off easily 
with proper care, but if neglected, 
sometimes degenerates into an erysi- 
pelas. A cold wind driving upon the 
inside of the eyelid, or the tunica ad- 
nata of the eye itself, will sometimes 
cause an acute pain, like that occasio- 
ned by sand, or grit, getting into the 
eye; this generally goes off in a short 
time by keeping the eye shut, and fre- 
quently applying the warm hand to 
it, but sometimes will cause a suffusion 
of red over the whole white of the 
eye with great heat and pain: This 
disorder should be immediately and 
carefully attended to; confinement, 
repose, exclusion of light and air, 
abstinence, proper evacuations, and 
lenient applications are necessary to 
prevent the most terrible mischiefs; 
and all cold styptic collyriums must 
be avoided, as pernicious in the highest 
degree. 

If the chill falls upon the lower part 
of the face, the integuments will be 
inflated from ear to ear, and the lips 
and nostrils become swelled and hard. 
This disorder is called a swelled face, 
and, if neglected, the swelling some- 
times suppurates, and breaks either 
inwardly or outwardly, with very dis- 
agreeable circumstances. 

When the chill falls on the neck, 
the glands swell and harden, and then 
gain the denomination of kernels; 
sometimes by stiffening the muscles of 
the neck, it produces what is called 
a criek. Sometimes it renders the mus- 
cles, both of the head and arms ri- 
gid; and this rigidity, if it meets with 
any idiosyncrasy of the habit, some- 
times degenerates into a species of the 
tetanus, or irresoluble rigidity, follow- 
ed by convulsions and death. 

If the chilling stroke is received on 
the ear, the wax is rendered too thick, 
and then, by obsctructing the passage, 
it dulls the hearing: If the blood, in 
the vessels of this organ, be chilled, a 
painful tumour will follow, which, if 
neglected, or ill managed, by hot a- 
crid stimulated applications will pro- 
bably terminate in inflammations, im- 
posthumations, wakefulness, dilirium, 
convulsions, swoonings, and death. 
The structure of the ear is so extreme- 
ly delicate, its parts so numerous, its 
vessels so minute, its investing mem- 
branes so exquisitely thin, and its 
connexions so important, that no rash 
emperical practices should ever be tri- 
ed upon it. 

If the chill strikes the whole trunk 
and limbs of the body, as is frequent- 
ly the case, by going warm on the ri- 
ver, sitting in damp rooms, going too 
thinly clad, or continuing up late at 
night without a fire, the whole body 
will be thrown into a spasmodic shiver- 
ing, the first and most usual sign of this 
species of a cold, which, if not imme- 
diately taken care of, is a certain pre- 
lude to a fever, if it be not a fever al- 
ready begun. 

It sometimes happens, that when a 
cold is taken, a gentle fever super- 
venes, attended with no other com- 
plaint than a slight pain stretching in 
a strait line upon the head, in the di- 
rection of the longitudinal sinus, the 
sleep is interrupted suddenly by unu- 
sual, though not by confused or fright- 
ful dreams, and in this state the disor- 
der will continue for several days, 
without alarming the patient by any 
violent symptom. Let it, however, be 
remembered, that, in this situation, he 
is in the most imminent danger, and 
that if he is not relieved by the most 
skilful assistance, a delirium will soon 
come on by fits, which, at length, will 
become perpetual, or attended by al- 
ternate stupors, and end in convulsi- 
ons and death. 

It is of the utmost importance upon 
|P_575
the first approach of a fever, to take to 
a warm bed, to use abstinence, dilu- 
ting liquors, and some appropriate e- 
vacuations, which will almost always 
carry it off in a short time; the dan- 
ger is from delay; for a fever, though 
easily cured at the beginning, will 
often baffle the most powerful reme- 
dies, administered with the greatest sa- 
gacity, when it has been suffered to 
advance without a check. 

When the body is preter-naturally 
heated, the air is always of itself suf- 
ficient to produce an obstucted and 
inspissated perspiration; for, with res- 
pect to a body so heated, the air is 
always cold. 

We should never therefore expose 
ourselves, in a state of rest, to the air, 
when we are hotter than common 
cloathing, without artificial heat or 
exercise, will make us. 

We should never accustom ourselves 
to sit in a room more than temperately 
warm, nor to sit near a fire, or hover 
over it. 

We should never go very warm into 
the cold; but wait till the state of the 
body is nearer to that of the air into 
which we are going. 

All currents of air are to be avoided. 

When we go out of a playhouse in 
cold weather, we should always throw 
on some additional garment, and never 
forget to guard the mouth and nostrils 
with a handkerchief or muff, against 
the passage of a cold air into them, and 
down the throat and windpipe. 

It is dangerous for valitudinary per- 
sons to go to church in cold weather, 
because an absurd custom universally 
prevails, of washing the church little 
more than 12 hours before the meeting 
of the congregation. In wet or damp 
weather, whether hot or cold, it is ad- 
viseable to have a fire in the rooms 
where we sit or sleep. Our cloathing 
should always be increased in propor- 
tion to the coldness of the weather. 

Luxurious meals are pre-disposing 
causes of disorders arising from colds, 
as they render persons more liable to 
take cold, by producing preter-natu- 
ral heat, and a plethoric habit. 

Upon the first symptom of a cold go 
Instantly to a warm bed in a dry warm 
room, practice strict abstinence, and 
drink warm diluting liquors, such as 
may raise and continue a moderate
sweat till the symptoms vanish, then 
dress in dry warm cloathing, and keep 
house till 24 hours or more shall shew 
longer confinement to be unnecessary. 

By this method colds, and the fevers 
they produce, so fatal when fixed by 
delay, will scarce ever fail of being 
removed: but heating liquors and 
medicines so often administered on 
this occasion, should be carefully a- 
voided. 

This little work is written with great 
knowledge of the subject, with a mi- 
nute attention to all its circumstances, 
with a benevolent solicitude for the 
ease and health of mankind, with a 
precision that may instruct the prac- 
titioner, and a perspicuity that will 
render it useful and entertaining to all 
who are sufficiently acquainted with 
the technical terms of physick and a- 
natomy, which in a work of this kind, 
it is impossible to avoid. It is also re- 
markable, for a delicacy extremely 
difficult to be preserved, and, there- 
fore, very rarely found in medical 
treatises. 

It would, however, be injurious to 
close this article, without adding, that 
it appears by a case which Mr Chandler
has related of one of his own patients 
in a note, that we owe the knowledge 
of the true nature and cure of the pu- 
trid sore throat, concerning which Dr 
Fothergill published a treatise in the 
year 1748, to the learned and ingeni- 
ous Dr Leatherland, who had made the 
discovery nine years before, on occa- 
sion of the death of the two sons of 
the late Rt Hon. Henry Pelham. 

