

[^Sample 1: article - 1761_GM_0218^]

|P_218
[}Account of the Structure of the Eye; with 
occasional Remarks on some Disorders of 
that Organ, delivered in Lectures at the 
Theatre of Surgeon's-Hall. By Tho. 
Gataker, Surgeon-Extraordinary to her 
Royal Highness the Princess of Wales. }]
MR Gataker observes in his preface, 
that, though there is very little 
known of anatomy that is not to be 
found in books, yet the manner in 
which knowledge is communicated in 
books, makes the acquisition of it fre- 
quently difficult, especially upon a 
particular subject. With respect to 
the eye, some writers have been so con- 
cise and imperfect as to be almost un- 
intelligible to those who have not al- 
ready a considerable knowledge of the 
subject; others have been so diffuse 
and circumstantial as to perplex and 
bewilder the reader with tedious cri- 
tical discussions, and an useless multi- 
plicity of names and distinctions; it 
also frequently happens, that particu- 
lar parts of the eye are described a- 
mong other things that have not any 
immediate connection with it, so that 
the reader has no clue by which he 
can be directed to them, nor will he, 
if he finds these scattered parts, have a 
regular and comprehensive view of the 
whole. 

Mr Gataker's view, therefore, in these 
lectures was, to collect and harmo- 
nize into a regular system all that has 
hitherto been known concerning the 
eye; to give a comprehensive and me- 
thodical description of the eye and eye- 
lids; and occasionally to add some re- 
marks relating to the diseases of these 
parts, and an explanation of the na- 
ture and uses of eye-waters, ointments, 
and liniments. 

The descriptive part of this work 
it is impossible to abridge, but it may 
be of some use to the public to make 
the knowledge of his remarks as ex- 
tensive as possible; the following there- 
fore, is extracted in the words of the 
author. 

"Among the variety of medicines 
which are distinguished as being good
for particular complaints, there are few 
that have been more celebrated than 
certain compositions for the disorders 
affecting the eye and eye-lids. Most 
of these are recommended indis- 
criminately for almost every com- 
plaint of these parts; in which kind 
of practice it is not to be supposed, 
that any just idea of the medicine di- 
rects the use of it. On the other hand, 
the real properties of these medicines 
are not, I conceive, sufficiently ex- 
plained, where a more intelligent me- 
thod might have been expected. Most 
writers upon the distempers of the eyes, 
recommend applications of this sort, 
but they either speak of them in too 
general terms, without attempting to 
shew wherein their proper use consists, 
or they give a partial and unde- 
served preference to some particular 
composition. In fact, these medicines 
are almost all capable of doing service, 
under certain circumstances of the 
distemper; but as the advantage ari- 
sing from a promiscuous use of them, 
must be owing rather to accident than 
|P_219
judgment, the manner in which they 
may be supposed to act ought to be at- 
tended to. If we examine into the in- 
gredients of these compositions, we 
shall find the basis of them is more or 
less of a restringent nature, and it is 
from this property that they are capa- 
ble of doing service by contracting 
and thereby strengthening the vessels, 
which have been too much distended. 
In some cases a different form of these 
medicines may agree better than o- 
thers; a liniment may be preferable to 
a water, or a water to a liniment, ac- 
cording to the nature or quantity of 
the discharge, with other circumstan- 
ces: Besides that, there is a peculiarity 
in some constitutions, which will not 
admit of the same means of cure, ei- 
ther external or internal, as are effec- 
tual in other people, and this is parti- 
cularly true in the present case, in re- 
gard to unctuous applications—So like- 
wise the strength of the medicine, with 
respect to its degree of restringency, is 
to be observed; and what is still of 
great consequence, the preparing or 
compounding these medicines ought to 
be done with the utmost exactness and 
neatness, that no rough particles may 
come in contact with the eye, which 
may create any unnecessary irritation 
there. These precautions being at- 
tended to, the applications just menti- 
oned may be often employed with the 
greatest advantage; and when the prin- 
ciple upon which they are directed is 
properly considered, it is easy to see 
that many forms or compositions of 
these medicines will equally answer the 
purpose, without attributing any spe- 
cific property to them. "

Upon the whole, this author observes 
1st, That the eye is placed in that part 
of the body which is most advantage- 
ous for commanding the view of ob- 
jects. 2. That its figure with the con- 
tained humours, is best calculated to 
receive and refract the rays of light, so 
as to form a distinct picture of exter- 
nal objects upon the bottom of it. 
3. That the eye is connected to the 
socket, so that it is properly retained 
there, and yet is capable occasional- 
ly of a free movement in different di- 
rections without pain or inconveni- 
ence. 4. That this organ is furnished 
with defence against many external ac- 
cidents, the greatest part of it being 
enclosed in a firm bony cavity, or case. 
5. That it is lodged upon a soft yield- 
ing bed of fat, which facilitates the 
motions necessary to vision, prevents 
the injuries of pressure from these mo- 
tions, and keeps the parts in a due state 
of foftness and flexibility. 6. That 
it is capable of various movements by 
means of its several muscles, accord- 
ing as the different situation of the ob- 
ject to be viewed requires. 7. That it 
is furnished with coats or coverings, 
and the substances called humours con- 
tained in those coats, for the produc- 
tion of the necessary refractions of the 
rays of light. 8, That is has power by 
the expansion and contraction of the 
pupil to admit a sufficient quantity of 
light and exclude too much, according 
to the distance or nearness of the ob- 
ject to be viewed, or according to the 
degree of light it is seen in, which is 
almost perpetually varying. Lastly, 
that it has a great number of fine blood 
vessels and nerves, which serve for the 
constant supply of the humours, and 
for the due nourishment and sensation 
of the other parts of the eye. From 
a consideration of all which, says he, 
every sensible and feeling mind will re- 
flect with pleasure, admiration, and 
reverence, on the infinite art and wis- 
dom, which are so remarkably display- 
ed in the structure and uses of this ex- 
quisite organ. 

