

[^Sample 1: article - 1761_GM_0213^]

|P_213
[}New Experiments and Observations in 
Chemistry. }]
IT is well known, that many impor- 
tant articles in the Materia Medica
consist of metalic substances in a state of 
dissolution; and that, to dissolve me- 
tals, no medium has hitherto been dis- 
covered but acids, which it is also fre- 
quently necessary to assist by fire. 

But there is great reason to believe 
that the violent qualities of acids and 
fire, sometimes impress a danger- 
ous character upon the metals which 
they dissolve, foreign to the metals 
themselves, so that their medical qua- 
lities are in some degree counteracted, 
by the very method which is used to 
give them a medical form. 

This consideration has engaged M. 
de la Garaye, a gentleman of great emi- 
nence, in France, as well for his skill 
as his humanity, to attempt the dis- 
covery of some milder agents, by 
which metals may be dissolved into me- 
dicine, without the mixture of dan- 
gerous qualities. 

With this view he began a course of 
experiments with the mildest neutral 
salts, assisted only by the warmth of 
the air; and, notwithstanding, the com- 
parative inactivity of these dissolvents, 
he succeeded. 

His first experiment was made upon 
mercury; he mixed a certain quantity 
of this metal with four times its weight 
of sal ammoniac; and having tritu- 
rated them very well together, he left 
the mixture exposed to the air in a 
glass vessel, and grinding it again, from 
time to time, he at length procured a 
saline-mercurial mass, which, put into 
a matras, with good spirit of wine, 
gave, by means of a gentle heat, gra- 
dually increased till the spirit boiled, 
a light yellowish tincture, which was 
so saturated with mercury, that it 
turned copper white, the moment it 
touched it. 

This tincture proved very efficacious 
in the cure of that almost endless va- 
riety of disorders for which mercury 
is a remedy, and was given in large 
doses, for 15 days together, without 
raising a salivation. 

It produced surprising effects in ob- 
stinate disorders of the skin, and may 
be considered as one of the best reme- 
dies of the kind in the world. It is 
however very strange, that the heaviest 
body in nature, except gold, should be 
so attenuated, and divided, as to remain 
perfectly suspended in a liquor so light 
as spirits of wine. 

A solution of mercury was procured 
in the same manner, though water 
was substituted for spirit of wine; but 
this should be administered only ex- 
ternally. 

Steel was treated in the same manner, 
and with the same success; being mix- 
ed with half its weight of blue vitriol, 
and a little common water, it first be- 
came hot, and afterwards hardened in- 
to a mass, which was left to macerate 
during 8 days in a cellar: At the end 
of this time it was beaten in a mortar, 
and alternately dried and moistened 
with water, till it took a fine colour of 
saffron of steel, the whole was then put 
again into a mortar, and, water being 
poured to it, it was beaten as long as the 
water drew from it a tincture of rust, 
and when the water came clear from 
the mixture no more was poured on: 
This rust-water, when filtered, is a li- 
quor so impregnated with steel, that 
30 or 40 drops put into a pint of wa- 
ter makes an excellent chalybeat or 
ferruginous draught. 

M. de la Garaye has also used sea salt, 
nitre, and sal ammoniac, in this process 
for the solution of steel; with sal am- 
moniac he has obtained a yellow salt, 
from which spirit of wine takes away 
the colour to itself, as well as a stiptic 
and better taste, and a quality of stri- 
king a very fine deep blue with gall 
nuts. This tincture, and those drawn 
with the other salts just mentioned, are 
very mild and gentle, and may be used 
with great success in all diseases for 
which preparations of steel are admi- 
nistered. M. le Monnier, the physician, 
considered it as a specific against a con- 
vulsive and frightful malady which is 
frequent at St Germains, and has resist- 
ed almost all other remedies. 

Copper, treated in this new manner, 
with sal ammoniac; gives a very fine 
blue to water; spirit of wine draws 
from it only a slight green, but bran- 
dy, which contains both water and 
spirit, draws from it a very fine 
greenish blue. 

This tincture, however, cannot be 
administered internally without danger, 
but externally it produces admirable 
effects; the malignant and obstinate 
ulcers in the legs, so common in Bri- 
tany, yield very soon to the power of 
this remedy. 

The chemists have hitherto thought 
it impossible to reduce the flowers of 
the Regulus of Antimony to their first 
state, but it may be done by a mixture 
of a coaly (charbonneuse) matter, and 
a little fixed alcali, which will cause 
the flowers to melt with the greatest 
facility. 

