

[^Sample 1: article - 1761_GM_0157^]

|P_157
[}Observations relating to the Cicuta, or 
Hemlock. By Wm Watson, M. D. 
F. R. S. (See Vol. xxx, p. 326.) }]
DR. Storke, who published at Vienna
last year a treatise de Cicuta, has 
lately informed a correspondent in Lon- 
don, that since the publication of that 
work he had received letters from al- 
most every part of Europe, confirming 
his good opinion of the virtues of the 
Cicuta; and that he is about to publish 
a second treatise upon the same subject, 
containing still more extraordinary re- 
lations of cures brought about by ad- 
ministering that plant. There is no 
doubt therefore but that endeavours 
will be made here to confirm the truth 
of the doctor's assertions; more espe- 
cially, as some of the diseases, in which 
Dr Storke found the Cicuta attended with 
great success, are such as are of all o- 
thers the most shocking to human nature, 
and have, by too long experience, been 
found to give way to no other means. 

Hence it is highly important to every 
one, more particularly to physicians, 
that the very plant directed by Dr 
Storke, be administered, and no other 
in the place of it, either through inat- 
tention or want of knowledge; as judg- 
ment in the physician is of no real 
service, unless his prescriptions are 
faithfully prepared. 

For these reasons it may not be im- 
proper to inform those medical practi- 
tioners, who are not conversant in bo- 
tany, and who may, nevertheless, be 
desirous of trying the effects of the Ci- 
cuta, that at this time of the year there 
is another plant, growing in the same 
places, and often mixt with it, so much 
resembling it in appearance as not with- 
out some attention to be distinguished 
from it, which however greatly differs 
from it in sensible qualities. Great 
care therefore ought to be taken that 
the one of these should be selected from 
the other. 

As Dr Storke has transmitted hither a 
specimen of the plant he has employed, 
no doubt can remain in ascertaining its 
species. It is the Cicuta vulgaris of 
the botanists, or common hemlock. 

The plant so much resembling hem- 
lock, is the Cicutaria vulgaris of the 
botanists, which, in some parts of En- 
gland, is called cow-weed, in others 
wild-cicely. Its greatest resemblance to 
hemlock is in the spring, before the 
stalks of the leaves of the hemlock are 
interspersed with purple spots, and 
therefore at that season more easily 
mistaken for it: though even then the 
leaves of the hemlock smell much 
stronger, are more minutely divided, 
and of a deeper green colour than 
those of the cow-weed. Afterwards, 
indeed, they are more easily distinguish- 
ed, as the cicutaria flowers at the end 
of April and beginning of May, and 
the cicuta not till June, when the other 
is past: To say nothing of the flower- 
ing stalk of the cow-weed being fur- 
rowed and somewhat downey; and that 
of hemlock, smooth, even, and al- 
ways spotted. These plants differ like- 
wise very essentially in their seeds, 
which in the cow-weed are long, smooth, 
and black when ripe; whereas those of 
Hemlock are small, channelled, and swel- 
ling towards their middle. 

Besides the cow-weed, there is ano- 
ther plant in appearance very like the 
Hemlock, altho' widely differing from it 
in other respects; and, unless I am very 
greatly misinformed, quantities of this 
have been collected and sold in London
for the Hemlock. This is more likely 
to be taken for the Hemlock in summer 
or autumn, as it is an annual plant; 
and is produced and flowers late in the 
season. The plant here meant is the 
cicuta minor of Parkinson, or cicutaria 
tenuifolia of Ray. This however is easi- 
ly distinguished from Hemlcok by its be- 
ing of the colour and shape of parsley, 
its flowering stalks having no purple or 
other spots, and not having the strong 
smell peculiar to Hemlock. 

To the two plants before-mentioned 
may be added a third, which very fre- 
quently, more especially about London, 
grows along with, and is mixed with 
the Hemlock. This plant is called by 
the late excellent Mr Ray, small Hemlock 
Chervill with rough seeds; and is deno- 
minated by Casper Bauhin in his Pinax 
Myrrhis sylvestris seminibus asperis. This, 
like the Cow-weed before-mentioned, 
can only be mistaken for Hemlock in 
the spring. It may be distinguished 
then from it, by the leaves of the Myr- 
rhis being more finely cut, of a paler 
green colour, and though they have 
somewhat of the Hemlock smell, are 
far less strong, and have no spots. This 
plant flowers in April, and the seeds are 
ripe before the Hemlock begins to flow- 
er; and these seeds are cylindrical, 
rough, and terminated in an oblong 
point. 

The leaves of Hemlock are most fit 
for medicinal purposes, as being in their 
greatest perfection when collected in 
dry weather from the middle of May to 
the time that their flowering stems be- 
gin to shoot: as by that time the plants 
|P_158
will have felt the effects of the warm 
sun, have acquired an highly virose 
smell, and the stems of the leaves are 
covered with purple spots, an argu- 
ment of the exaltation of their juices. 
And we should be attentive here to give 
them all advantages, as three degrees of 
latitude, and other circumstances of 
soil and situation, may occasion a very 
sensible difference in the qualities of the 
same plant. An instance of which oc- 
curs in the plant under consideration, 
and may be one of the causes why the 
effects of the Hemlock have not been 
such here, as we are assured they are 
at Vienna, viz. Dr Storke says, that the 
root of the Hemlock, when cut into sli- 
ces, pours forth a milky juice, which 
I have never seen it do here in England. 

There are several vegetables, which, 
though they thrive here apparently 
well, their productions are neverthe- 
less not the same as in other parts of 
the world, where the heat is more in- 
tense, and the summers are of longer 
continuance. It would be extremely dif- 
ficult here, tho' the plants thrive very 
well, to produce from the white poppy 
or Cistus ladanifera, either the opium or 
the labdanum, the known production of 
these vegetables in other parts of the 
world. No art can make here the tra- 
gacantha pour forth its gum, the lentis- 
cus its mastick, or the candle berry 
myrtle, of North America, its sebaceous 
concrete: To these might be added ma- 
ny others too tedious to mention. 

In such mild winters as the last, the 
leaves of Hemlock may be procured in 
any part of them; but they are not to 
be depended upon; as their specific 
smell is then comparatively weak, their 
juices poor and watry, and they are 
wholly without spots. 

