

[^Sample 1: article - 1761_GM_0493^]

|P_493
[}On the Fevers, and Coughs of Infants, and 
Children. }]
Mr Urban, 

I Propose to communicate to the 
publick, a few papers on the most 
frequent diseases, with directions for 
managing the sick, and an account of 
some of the medicines, which through 
the course of a long and large experi- 
ence, I have found most effectual for 
the cure of them. 

This service I shall endeavour to 
perform for the use of the poor, and 
of such other persons as cannot have 
better advice: And as with a desire, 
so with the hope, that thro' the divine 
blessing, they may be the happy means 
of preserving many lives. 

I chuse to put my papers into the 
channel of your Magazine, which has, 
for so many years, with uncommon re- 
putation, conveyed, not only into mul- 
titudes of families, but into many dis- 
tant cities and countries, things of 
great utility to mankind; and thereby 
very much extended their usefulness. 

As to infants, and chrildren, the 
subject of my present consideration, I 
give the following directions for the 
general management of them in time 
of health, viz.

1. That no roller be put round their 
bodies. 

2. Nor any sort of stays used; but, 
instead of them waistcoats under their 
frocks, when they are put into short 
petticoats: The human body natu- 
rally growing into its best shape, and 
proportion of its parts, when left to 
itself. 

3. That infants have no shoes nor 
stockings, till they can run about bare- 
footed; and then shoes without stock- 
ings. 

4. That the diet of young children, 
be very plain or simple, e. g. milk, 
milk and apples, sweetened with sugar 
to a pleasant taste, which is a proper 
food, not only while they are well, but 
when they have the small pox, or mea- 
sles, or other fevers: Likewise water- 
gruel made of oatmeal, with butter and 
sugar, as well as bread, when they are 
costive: or water-gruel made of fine 
wheat flower instead of oatmeal, or 
panada made with white sea-biskets, 
and sweetened with loaf sugar, when 
the stools are too many, and very thin. 
For dinner they may eat bread pud- 
dings, apple-fritters, &c. They may 
eat bread and butter, and dry bread 
sometimes. 

Their drink may be river water, or 
barley water with milk, or without it. 
But feeding young children with ani- 
mal food, before they are two years of 
age, and giving them fermented, or 
spirituous liquors, is sowing the seeds 
of diseases. 

When infants, or young children 
have a fever, whether it be continual 
or intermitting, the following general 
directions should be observed, viz.

1. To give them as plentifully as 
they will take it, some diluting liquor, 
when they are thirsty. 

2. To supply them with such nutri- 
tious food, as they will take most free- 
ly; because it abates the acrimony of 
the blood, repairs the waste of the bo- 
dy, and is one of the best cordials; 
and two or three common spoonfuls of 
small whey, made with canary or moun- 
tain wine, may sometimes be given 
them. I would observe (before I de- 
scribe the medicines that I shall recom- 
mend) that an ounce of any liquid 
mixture, contains eight drachms, or a- 
bout two common table spoonfuls; 
that one such spoonful contains four 
drachms: that one drachm, or the 
fourth part of such a spoonful, is a dose 
for an infant in the first year of its 
life: in the second year, the dose may 
be increased to half a spoonful: a 
child three years old or upwards, may 
take a whole spoonful. 

The doses are to be given four times 
a day, at four hours distance, and the 
child to drink some barley-water after 
each; there is no occasion for its fast- 
ing, but food may be given it as soon 
as it has taken its medicine. 

The medicines I recommend in the 
diseases mentioned, are the following: 

A. Take eight grains of the salt of worm- 
wood, four grains of cocheneal in fine pow- 
der, fourteen drachms of small alexiteric 
water (or common water) and two 
drachms of the balsamic syrup, of these 
make a mixture for an infant. 

For a child about two years old, this 
mixture may be prepared in double 
quantity: This mixture I have found 
very effectual for the cure of infants, 
while they live upon the breast, and 
after they are weaned, whether their 
fever be continual or intermitting: 
and often of great service against con- 
vulsions, and the cough; and in regard 
to these last symptoms, I order the 
belly, the sides, and breast of the child, 
to be gently rubbed with warm (not 
hot) oil of olives, for four or five mi- 
nutes, and then wiped off again: this 
may be done once or twice a day, or 
oftner if there should be occasion; and 
this is one good remedy against con- 
vulsion fits. 

|P_494
B. Take salt of wormwood, salt pru- 
nella, and cocheneal, of each ten grains, 
small alexiteric water (or common water) 
three ounces and a half, balsamic syrup, 
half an ounce; of these make a mixture. 

This mixture is somewhat more 
cooling than the former. 

If the child is very costive, I omit 
the cocheneal, and order the following: 

C. Take the calx of antimony, salt of 
wormwood, salt prunella, of each ten 
grains, small alexiteric water (or common 
water) three ounces and half, balsamic sy- 
rup half an ounce; and make a mix- 
ture. 

D. Take compound powder contrayerva, 
calx of antimony, salt of wormwood, (or 
the salt prunella,) of each ten grains, small 
alexiteric water three onnces, small 
cinnamon water, balsamic syrup, of each 
half an ounce; of these make a mixture. 

The phials, in which the powder 
sinks to the bottom, must be shaked be- 
fore any is poured out. The mixture 
that is used and proves beneficial, must 
be repeated, and its use continued so 
long as needful. 

When a stool shall be wanted, a 
glyster made of milk and sugar, or of 
water-gruel, brown sugar, and oil of 
olives, may be given to the child. 

When a looseness happens, and the 
stools are watry, or thin and green, 
then the following mixture is pro- 
per, viz.

E. Take compound powder of contrayer- 
va, red corall prepared, of each twenty 
grains, small cinnamon water, three ounces 
and half, balsamic syrup, half an ounce; of 
these make a mixture. 

Sometimes instead of the corall, I 
direct the same quantity of fine chalk 
in fine powder; and order, that half 
a large spoonful, or a whole one, accor- 
ding to the size of the child, be given 
it warm after every thin and griping 
stool, first shaking the phial; but ta- 
king a dose of the mixture marked A, 
every fourth hour, while the fever 
continues. 

If the child has a cough, be it hoop- 
ing or not, the mixtures marked A.
B.C. are proper remedies in regard to 
it: and while the cough continues, I 
advise giving the child two or three 
spoonfuls of a tea, made with the herb 
called cup-moss, sweetened with a de- 
coction of figs; also, a tea spoonful 
now and then, of a mixture of oil of 
olives, with sugar, to the consistance of 
a thin syrup; when the cough conti- 
nues after the fever ceases, I order two 
or three drops of the balsam of capivi, 
to be given night and morning, with 
some powder sugar, to a child about 
four years old. 

When children have the small pox, 
if the pustules are few, and continue 
increasing in bulk, and the suppura- 
tion of them proceeds well, there is no 
occasion for medicines; but a suitable 
diet, especially milk and apples, milk- 
porridge, &c. with giving the child now 
and then, a little sack or mountain 
whey, may be sufficient. 

If the pustules are very numerous, 
and the fever continues, besides the 
suitable diet, some medicines should be 
given; and the mixture marked B, or 
that marked D, may be fitly given: 
but if the disease is of the confluent 
kind, and a looseness happens, often 
very happily for young children, then 
the mixture marked C, is more proper. 

When children have the measles, they 
should be fed with the same sorts of di- 
et as in the small pox; if the fever con- 
tinues high, the mixture marked A, 
may be given, & in regard to the cough, 
which often attends this distemper, the 
directions before-mentioned, about this 
symptom, should be observed. 

The following extracts may some- 
what exemplify the advantages ob- 
tainable by the foregoing advices. 

In the latter end of February last, 
I received a letter from a gentleman 
near Biddeford in Devonshire, in which 
he writes thus, viz.

There is a boy of six years old in 
this place, that has had the hooping 
cough ever since September, he is 
now much better, but has prodigi- 
ous wind and belching on his sto- 
mach, and very severe fits of cough- 
ing at night, but no hooping. I have 
recommended him to an apothecary 
for some time, but without effect. 
His father is an industrious poor 
man. This I mention to you, and 
it would be a very good deed to re- 
commend the child to a relief; 
for you must know this is a country 
place, where if the parents could 
afford advising with a physician, 
there is none nigher than 25 miles. 

He likewise mentions, that the hoop- 
ing cough has been much in that 
country. 

February 28, I returned an answer, 
in which I wrote as follows: 

[}Against the Hooping Cough. }]
℞. Sal Absinth. ℈i. Coccinella ℈ss. Aq. 
Alexiter. simple ℥iii.ss. syr. balsamic ℥ss. 
et f.mistura. This mixture may 
|P_495
be made in the following manner: 

Take one scruple of the salt of worm- 
wood, and dissolve it in a quarter of a 
pint of pure water, then add to it ten 
grains of cocheneal in fine powder, 
and sweeten it with white sugar to a 
pleasant taste. 

Of this mixture, the fourth part of a 
common or table spoonful, may be gi- 
ven to a child within the first year, four 
times a day, at four hours distance, 
with a spoonful of barley water after 
it. To a child near two years old, 
half a spoonful may be the dose: To a 
child above four years old, a common 
spoonful may be the dose. As for the 
boy you mentioned of six years old, 
he may take a large spoonful four times 
a day: also he may take three or four 
drops of the balsam of capivi, with 
powder sugar night and morning. 
And milk and apples are a proper 
food for him, that is apples boiled in 
a pipkin (as if intended for sauce to 
roasted pork) put into very warm milk, 
and sweetened to his palate with sugar. 

In the latter end of June last, I re- 
ceived another letter, dated June 23, in 
which after an apology for his long si- 
lence, and some other matters, he 
writes thus, viz.

As to the hooping cough, its now 
out of our neighbourhood. The re- 
medy which you prescribed, had a 
wonderful effect, particularly in the 
the case of the boy I wrote to you a- 
bout of six years old, who was re- 
lieved in 24 hours, and I think cured 
in five or six days. I recommended 
it to several poor people, and will 
say, it always had success; therefore, 
in behalf of several poor distressed 
families, you have my sincere thanks, 
and may the author of all blessings, 
reward your humane and charitable 
disposition. 

I will only add, that I pray God, in- 
finitely gracious, to direct, and suc- 
ceed all my endeavours for the good of 
mankind. 
Theophilus Lobb. 

Bagnio-Court, Newgate-street, Oct. 20. 

