

[^Sample 1: article - 1761_GM_0061^]

|P_61
Mr Urban, 

THE precarious state of old peo- 
ple, as represented in your Mag. 
for October last, by the Bp of Avranches, 
is indeed a melancholy truth. You say 
he was betwixt 80 and 90 years of age 
when he wrote it. I will, however, 
give you the authority of one at his 
age, and older, who undertakes to in- 
form mankind, how to attain extreme 
old age, without being subject to those 
|P_62
gloomy terrors of sudden death. A 
man who at the age of 70, which 'twas 
thought he could not survive three 
days, could say to Death, keep thy dis- 
tance; and to the physician, I have no 
need of thee. The case was, he was run 
away with by his coach-horses, had 
one leg and one arm put out of joint, 
and was otherways violently bruised. 
The physician ordered he should lose 
blood, to prevent a fever: He allowed 
the surgeons to set his bones, but would 
not suffer them to bleed him, and soon 
recovered. At 83 years of age, he 
could mount a horse without help, was 
always merry, always pleased, always 
in humour. In summer time he tra- 
versed the fields with a setting-dog, or 
with tarriers, and visited the most in- 
genious men in the neighbouring towns, 
discoursing with them on architecture, 
painting, sculpture, mathematics, and 
agriculture, as if inquisitive after new 
discoveries. He could see and hear as 
well as he ever did in his life, and all 
his senses were perfect. The change 
of beds was no hindrance to his re- 
pose. At that age he composed a co- 
medy, which was received with ap- 
plause. Some affirm, that a man after 
he is 70, is but half alive; but in his 
treatise on long life, he says, he would 
not change his age and life for the most 
flourishing youth which lays no re- 
straint upon its senses. And what 
makes most to the present purpose, he 
adds, that he is certain he shall not fall 
sick; he is assured that he shall live se- 
veral years in health, and that he shall 
long enjoy the pleasure of being in the 
world, which is certainly very com- 
fortable, when a man knows how to 
make a right use of it. 

In the 86th year of his age, his con- 
stitution was good, his teeth, his voice, 
his memory, his heart, were in as good 
a condition as ever they were in the 
briskest days of his youth, nor had his 
judgment lost any thing of its clear- 
ness or force. Instead of drowsiness 
after meals, he was rather more chear- 
ful; and used, presently after rising from 
table, to write, or study, without pre- 
judice. 

At 91 years of age, he continued 
healthful, brisk, and airy, relished his 
food, slept quietly, and what is very 
remarkable, his voice grew more tune- 
able than ever, and he could chant his 
morning hymn more easily than he 
could in his youth; which, says he, are 
infallible signs that I have still a great 
while to live. He concludes wishing, 
that all like him may live to a happy 
old age

In a letter from his grand-daughter, 
subjoined to this work, we are inform- 
ed, he was not mistaken, but lived to 
pass his 100th year; his mind and eyes 
were clear to the last moment, and his 
exit was only like a little kind of faint- 
ing fit. 

I can easily apprehend that these de- 
clarations of his will appear excessively 
vain and presumptuous; but when this 
confidence is found to arise from ra- 
tional and natural principles, joined to 
the long experience of a virtuous and 
religious person, such censure must va- 
nish. The person I have been speaking 
of was Lewis Cornaro, a noble Venetian, 
who has left a small treatise, entitled, 
The sure way of attaining a long and 
healthful life. His instructions are plain 
and simple, and for that reason, per- 
haps, slighted, as was the Prophet's 
prescription to Naaman; for they whol- 
ly consist in strict temperance. He in- 
culcates, with as great judgment as ex- 
perience, what seems little known, or 
little regarded, that men should abridge 
their quantity of food, in proportion 
as they advance in years. In Mr Ad- 
dison's Spectator, on Temperance, he il- 
lustrates this doctrine, by the authority 
of the great example here mentioned; 
and at the same time establishes the au- 
thenticity of this little history. Cheney
frequently quotes Cornaro; but Cheney
has either grosly mistaken him, or was 
unable to reduce his enormous bulk 
within Cornaro's rules: for a belly-full 
of milk, three times a day, was incon- 
sistent with Cornaro's regimen; nor does 
it appear that Cornaro used any milk. 

In your Magazine for January 1759, 
I made some observations on the regi- 
men of old people, and gave some ge- 
neral rules, forbidding chocolate and 
eggs, not suspecting any of your readers 
living by this rule of Cornaro; for he 
could dispense with yolks of eggs; and 
if any one will reduce his quantity of 
food to Cornaro's standard, I will allow 
him yolks of eggs and chocolate too, if 
he pleases; for as you decrease in quan- 
tity, you must enrich in quality. 

Yours, &c. W.

