

[^Sample 1: article - 1761_GM_0293^]

|P_293
[}Cautions against the immoderate Use of 
Snuff. By Dr J. Hill. }]
THE Doctor's description of to- 
bacco merits attention. "To- 
bacco ", says he, " is a narcotick with pe- 
culiar acrimony. 'Tis such a body as 
art might prepare, by mixing opium 
with euphorbium. The herb itself is 
so nearly poisonous, that no physician 
gives it inwardly. When by accident 
it has been swallowed; or from exter- 
nal use on any wounded part, has made 
its way into the body, the first effort 
is that of extreme irritation; and, af- 
ter this, comes on the worst effects of 
opium, outragious vomitings, and 
purgings; and afterwards deep sleep, 
but not without convulsions. "

From these the Doctor endeavours to 
prove, that snuff, by corroding the 
nerves of the nostrils, impairs, and often 
destroys the sense of smelling; that fall- 
ing into the mouth the saliva becomes 
tinctured by it, and the acrimony of the 
tobacco so much injures the nerves of 
the tongue, that the flavour of fruits 
and the more delicate foods cannot be 
perceived; that some of the fluid 
which the glands of the nose naturally 
discharge, will be drawn, tinctured by 
snuff, with the saliva of the mouth, 
into the stomach; and tobacco will 
bring on all the mischiefs that attend 
a bad digestion; that the œsophagus, 
the passage from the mouth to the sto- 
mach, while it receive the virtues of 
the saliva impregnated with snuff, may 
at some time retain a portion of it, 
which by irritating the nerves will oc- 
casion an inflammation that no hand 
can reach. That the acrimony of 
snuff is able to produce in those parts 
with which it comes in contact dange- 
rous swellings, and excrescences; and 
that there is great reason to believe 
that polypusses in the nose are occa- 
sioned by snuff. The Doctor relates a 
case of a person who took a great deal 
of snuff, and died famished, a disorder 
in the throat hindering his swallowing. 
On opening his body, there was found 
a polypus in his throat which filled up 
the whole passage. 

Doctor Hill endeavours further to 
shew, that snuff, by causing indigestion, 
lays a foundation for the worst disor- 
ders; hence immediately arise wind, 
yawning, belching, and continual 
sickness and vomiting; and that if it 
reduce corpulence, it is by spoiling 
the digestion. He adds, that in some 
persons it evidently dulls the appre- 
hension, and by a long course brings 
on stupidity, and, as it were, a lethar- 
gy of the mind; and that if any should 
object that snuff assists, instead of im- 
pairing, the imagination, its effects in 
quickening the imagination is like 
that of a glass of spirituous liquors in 
giving chearfulness, it is a false fire in 
both; it is most perceived by those 
who are least accustomed to the thing; 
and use wears it off. 

Among other instances of the bad 
effects of tobacco, the Doctor recites 
the following. 

A young recruit who had just learnt 
to drink drams and chew tobacco, lay 
intoxicated in such a posture, that his 
saliva, tinctured strongly with the 
herb, ran for some time down his 
throat. He soon vomited, and fell in- 
|P_294
to a purging. After an hour he sunk 
into a depp sleep, but was waked by 
strong convulsions; he laughed immo- 
derately; and the next moment cried; 
his sight was almost lost; and he knew 
nothing of where he was; but seemed 
as one mad. 

'Another instance he remembers of 
a most terrible ulcer in the nose, in a 
person that took a vast quantity of 
snuff. "The person was a lady of a so- 
ber and virtuous life. She had been 
long accustomed to snuff, and took it 
in very great quantity. After the use 
of about a quarter of a pound of snuff, 
which she perceived to be particularly 
acrid, she felt a strange soreness in the 
upper part of her left nostril, running, 
as she expressed it, toward the gristle 
of the nose; she left off that particu- 
lar parcel of snuff, but continued to 
take the usual kind as much as ever. 
No swelling was perceived; but after 
a little time came on a discharge of a 
very offensive matter, not in great 
quantity, but of an intolerable smell, 
and the more so to her, as she was na- 
turally a person of great delicacy. 
The discharge encreased, and it soon 
became necessary for her to leave off 
snuff. A surgeon was employed, but 
to very little purpose; the symptoms 
continued; the ulcer encreased, and 
from time to time, pieces of the bone 
came away. Death, from another dis- 
ease, put an end to that misery, which 
all the art of physick and surgery seem- 
ed very little able to relieve. "

Many other cases are produced of 
the bad consequences attending the 
practice of snuff-taking, in creating 
disorders in the nostrils, throat and 
stomach; and he concludes with earn- 
estly recommending a forbearance from 
this pernicious herb. 

