

[^Sample 1: article - 1761_GM_0354^]

|P_354
Mr Urban, 

I Think the public much obliged to 
your correspondent who signs Z. 
(see p. 261,) for communicating the 
advantage he obtained against a stone 
in the kidneys by his use of the juice 
of lemmons with water, as his common 
drink. 

In support of his recommendation, 
I shall mention my own experience; 
but previously give some account of 
the trials I made with the juice of lem- 
mons upon several fragments of stones 
taken out of human bodies. 

In the year 1738 I made many ex- 
periments in order to discover whether 
any of our aliments have a quality dis- 
solvent of the stone, and found that 
many had such a quality, and that in 
the juice of lemmons it is very strong. 

This juice dissolves pieces of mar- 
ble, alabaster, &c. in a surprising 
manner, and any person may easily 
try the experiment: Let a piece of 
marble or alabaster be put into a wine 
glass, and covered with the juice of 
lemmons an inch or more, and they 
will see air-bubbles ascend in great a- 
bundance, and continue ascending 
many hours, and the particles of stone 
keep dividing into the apperance of 
a fine white powder. 

The effect of these experiments fill- 
ed me with great joy; now, thought 
I, this juice will be an effectual reme- 
dy for the stone. 

A little time after I began these re- 
searches, I obtained many small calcu- 
li, and fragments of greater, chiefly 
from Sir Hans Sloan, and went to work 
with them, as in the forementioned ex- 
periments, but was sadly disappoint- 
ed, for I saw no air-bubbles arise from 
the calculi: I let them stand many 
days in the juice of lemmons, and dai- 
ly viewed them, and could discern no 
alteration in the appearance either of 
the calculi or juice, but when I poured 
off the juice, and took the calculi with 
my fingers, they felt like a soft jelly; 
which proves that the union of their 
constituent parts was dissolved, and 
likewise proves, that air is not one of 
the constituent parts of the stones for- 
med in human bodies, as it is of mar- 
ble, alabaster, &c. whose interstices 
contain surprizing quantities of it. 
This discovery of a quality in the juice 
of lemmons dissolvent of the stone re- 
vived my joy. 

|P_355
In the course of my experiments I 
found that good dissolvents will not 
dissolve every sort of calculi, therefore 
those persons who are troubled with 
the stone, should make use of the dif- 
ferent sorts of dissolvents in their di- 
et, and manner of living. 

In my treatise on dissolvents of the 
stone, I have shewed which of our ali- 
ments have that happy quality; and 
have given proper directions for the 
diet of persons afflicted with the stone. 
I shall now give an account of my own 
nephritic disorders, and of what I have 
done for my relief. 

Many years ago, while I lived at 
Yeovill in Somersetshire, where the wa- 
ter is petrifying, I had terrible fits of 
the stone from very small calculi, form- 
ed chiefly in my left kidney, seldom 
bigger than a grain of wheat, or bar- 
ley; but after the little stone was mo- 
ved out of its place, while it was pas- 
sing down the ureter, till it fell into 
the bladder, I suffered the most exqui- 
site pains, which no pen can describe, 
nor any person form an adequate idea 
of, who has not felt them; but as soon 
as the calculus was in my bladder, there 
was an end of my misery. 

While the little stone was passing in- 
to the bladder, which took up near 30 
hours, sometimes more, the extreme 
pains made me sweat profusely, even 
in frosty weather, and sometimes 
brought on a symptomatic fever. 

My fits of the stone were common- 
ly preceded by an evacuation of blood, 
or a bloody, or a coffee-coloured urine; 
and when either of these symptoms 
happened, I concluded that the terri- 
ble pains were approaching. 

It seemed difficult at first to account 
for the discharge of such urins ante- 
cedent to the pains; but on consider- 
ing that point, it appeared to me that 
no nerves terminate in the membranes 
which compose the coats of the veins, 
and that this is the reason why hæ- 
morrhages, or bleedings from the 
nostrils and other parts of the body 
come without pain. 

I likewise apprehend that none of 
the nerves by which we feel do enter 
the structure of the coats of the arte- 
ries, and this seems to be one of the 
wonderful contrivances of the divine 
wisdom in the formation of human 
bodies: For if the feeling nerves ter- 
minated in the inner superficies of the 
arteries (as they do in the cutis and the 
inner superficies of the stomach and 
bowels &c. the acrid particles (which, 
when excreted to the extremities of the 
nerves, either in the outer or inner 
superficies of the body excite pain) 
would unavoidably excite pain all along 
the arteries, as they pass through them 
in their course of circulation, and raise 
painful contractions, which would put 
a stop to the circulation of the blood, 
and an end to life. 

How I managed myself under fits of 
the stone, is related in my treatise on 
painful distempers, p. 196, &c. But 
reading an account of coffee in Mr Ray's 
Historia Plantarum, I observed in his 
quotation from Muis, his mentioning 
that Muis knew some who became free 
from their nephritic pains by drinking 
coffee [/1./]. 

Hereupon, I resolved to try this re- 
medy; and drank half a pint of strong 
coffee every day. 

I had a fit of the stone in about a 
fortnight after I began the course. 

In a few months I removed from that 
town and its petrifying waters, to 
Witham in Essex, in 1722; but conti- 
nued my coffee-drinking. 

I had a fit of the stone as I remem- 
ber in 1729, and another in 1738, but 
neither of these was so violent as those 
I had at Yeovill; and I do not know 
that any calculus has since passed from 
either of my kidnies. 

Remaining free from my nephritic 
pains, I left off the use of coffee for 
some years. 

But about threee or four years ago I 
had some symptoms which made me 
apprehensive that I had the stone, not 
in either of my kidneys, but in my 
bladder; for my occasions to make 
water were much more frequent than 
usual, and the contraction of the blad- 
der, by endeavouring to discharge the 
urine, occasioned a painful pressure 
of a stone against the sphincter of my 
bladder. And when I was in my cha- 
riot, every jolt gave me much pain in 
the neck of my bladder, and I made 
bloody water for several hours after I 
returned home. 

I could bear driving a-trott in the 
country when the roads were not sto- 
ney, but could not bear going a foot- 
pace in our streets without much pain; 
though I had good springs behind it. 
Therefore, for breaking the force of 
the side and cross jolts, I directed my 
|P_356
coach-maker to put two pair of collar 
braces round the perch of my chariot, 
one pair under the fore-part, and the 
other under the hinder part of the bo- 
dy of it, and two steel springs on each 
side of the perch for the braces to go 
over; and a fifth spring I directed to 
be fixed on the upper part of the 
perch to bear against the fore-part of 
the body of the chariot, for abating 
the force of the forward jolts. These 
springs not in view, have well answer- 
ed my design, and made my carriage 
one of the easiest that is in use. 

I made bloody water frequently for 
many months after going abroad, and 
had very frequent urgings to make 
water. Every jolt, and every endea- 
vour to discharge my water, excited 
much pain in the neck of my blad- 
der; and often when pain was excited 
there, I immediately felt a painful sen- 
sation in the extremities of the nerves, 
terminating near the great toes of each 
foot. 

But when the painful pressures ceas- 
ed, my pains ceased, and I render 
thanks and praise to my merciful God 
for the shortness of my pains, and for 
preserving me from a total suppression 
of urine. 

My disorder has neither confined me 
an hour at home, nor kept me any 
night from quiet sleep. 

When I perceived the symptoms of 
a stone in my bladder, I returned to 
the use of coffee. 

And on the account of my bloody 
water, I ordered my servant first to 
make a tea with ground ivy, and then 
to make my coffee with that tea, which 
rendered the flavour to me more agree- 
able: I put about one spoonful of milk 
to a quarter of a pint dish of coffee, 
and made it very sweet to my palate; 
I drink three dishes at breakfast, and 
two in the afternoon. 

This liquor, we call coffee, as I have 
observed, does not stimulate as a diu- 
retic, nor occasion a pale-coloured u- 
rine like water, but all the proper con- 
tents of urine come off with it. 

Indeed, after drinking plentifully of 
tea, punch, cyder, &c. the urine of- 
ten comes off colourless; and when it 
so happens, the saline, the oleaginous, 
and other excrementitious parts of the 
blood are retained in it, till, by some 
other liquor or exercise, the urine is 
brought again to its proper colour. 

When such a pale urine happens, 
the liquor before drank was improper 
for the person, or was taken in too 
large a quantity- This is commonly 
the case when disorders in the passions 
of the mind did not precede. 

It is a good rule for every man's ob- 
servance, viz. to avoid such liquors as 
occasion a colourless urine, or to drink 
them in less quantity. 

My drink at dinner is about half a 
pint of new river water, with the 
juice of one lemmon, and well sweet- 
ened with sugar. 

While my pains were very sharp, as 
well as frequent, I took half a com- 
mon spoonful of a mixture made with 
four ounces of honey, and one ounce 
of the oil of olives. 

I have carefully avoided all stimula- 
ting diureticks, and have used as much 
as convenient those sorts of aliment 
which have a dissolvent quality. 

Through many months past, I have 
made no bloody water, and from this 
alteration in my case, and from the a- 
batements of my other symptoms, I 
would hope that the stone in my blad- 
der is less, though it is not gone. 

I will only add, that it will give me 
a great satisfaction if this paper proves 
beneficial to any that shall read it. 

Bagnio Court, July 30. 
The. Lobb. 


[^1. 
* Idem nonnullos inquit novi meorum fa- 
miliaram antea haud parum á nephritide cru- 
ciatos, qui nullum incommodum indé amplius
persenserunt, postquam potum coffæ satis 
magna copiâ quotidie afsumpsere, p. 85. Vide 
Ray Hist. Plant. p. 1692.
^]