

[^Sample 1: article - 1761_GM_0340^]

|P_340
Mr Urban, 

I Was much pleased to find in your 
title page for July last, Cautions a- 
gainst the immoderate Use of Snuff; but 
cannot say my expectations were whol- 
ly answered in the performance. In- 
stead of the certain consequences at- 
tending the immoderate use of snuff, 
we are entertained with an accidental 
case or two. 

Polypusses in the nose are frequent- 
ly met with; I have seen many, but 
not one that arose by snuff-taking. 
The constant application of acrimoni- 
ous bodies, should seem rather tend- 
ing to destroy, than excite those fun- 
gous excrescences, tho' an occasional 
use of snuff might encourage them in 
habits prone to their production, and 
sooner in the throat than in the nose; 
because the acrimony of the snuff must 
be so spent, ere it reach the throat, 
that it can there act only as a weak 
stimulus. 

The case of the Recruit, was the ef- 
fects of a large dose of tobacco; and 
how many purgatives are there in com- 
mon use, an over-dose whereof be- 
comes truly poisonous? Are not the 
most efficacious medicines prepared 
from strong poisons? Is it not known, 
that Hemlock, the most poisonous 
plant in England, has been discovered 
lately to cure more than ever it has 
killed? 

The Lady's case (tho' immediately 
affected with a poignant snuff) must 
take its original from an ill habit of 
body; for no ulcer is of long continu- 
ance in a good one. Nothing but a 
caustic can long remain to stimulate 
the glands of the nose: The effort of 
sneezing, attended with rheum, dis- 
charges all light substances that are not 
caustic. Euphorbium is a potential 
caustic, which affects the glands of the 
nose with an intolerable burning; and 
upon the wanton abuse of it, as snuff, 
I have known it bring on strong con- 
vulsions. Tobacco is a plant, sui ge- 
neris, there being no other publickly 
known, possessed with the same quali- 
ties. 'Tis aromatic, stimulant, and 
narcotic; 'tis a very warm detergent, 
but not properly corrosive: Used as 
snuff, 'tis a most grateful cephalic, re- 
lieving and cheering the brain instan- 
taneously, and is often a cure for the 
head-ach, to those who are not accus- 
tomed to it. To smoke it, produces 
the most agreeable, and oft-times the 
most useful effect, with those who can 
bear it. It so becomes useful in all 
rheumatic cases, that are not attended 
with a fever; and in dropsies, if they 
will forbear drinking after it. A pipe 
of it in a morning is very useful in 
gross habits; and the support it af- 
fords the spirits, longer than any one 
thing else, by chewing it, plainly 
proves it a very high cordial, which, 
like many other cordials, will intoxi- 
cate those who are not accustomed to 
them. Its narcotic quality I take to 
be accidental, and in habits that can- 
not well bear it; for the spirits being 
thereby exalted and rarefied to a very 
high degree, fly off, and necessarily 
leave the body sluggish and sleepy. 
'Tis very useful to old people in ge- 
neral, dissipating and discharging that 
rheum wherewith they abound, in 
proportion to the decay of natural 
heat. 

A physician of Newcastle under Line, 
whose lady was afflicted with an asth- 
|P_341
ma, prevailed on her to hold a little 
tobacco in her mouth, till she began 
to reach, and then put her in bed, to 
encourage sweating; which, upon a 
few repetitions, wholly freed her from 
that disorder. And I am inclined to 
think, that an extract of it would be 
more useful than the Gum Ammon. and 
Squills, so much depended on. The 
Doctor's partial declamation against 
this plant may have taken rise from an 
attempt to smoke it, and becoming 
sick: However, I very seriously join 
with him against the abuse of it. 

To young people it can be but very 
rarely useful, mostly prejudicial. To 
the young ladies, I offer the following 
observations: 

Being once in company, where, a- 
mongst a number os ladies, the toast 
was a snuff-taker, who was admired by 
all the gentlemen, and, as I observed, 
more particularly by a young gentle- 
man of my acquaintance; the next 
time I saw him, I asked him about it, 
and he owned he had been smitten; 
but waiting the opportunity for a kiss, 
proved his cure, her breath smelt so 
abominably strong of tobacco. There 
is another ill effect of snuss-taking, 
worthy their notice, that it tends to 
disfigure a pretty face with a very large 
nose, which is occasioned by the fre- 
quent squeezing and pulling it with 
the handkerchief. Moreover, the 
glands of the nose, by frequent irrita- 
tion, soon become distended, so as to 
render the voice broad and masculine, 
together with a disagreeable snuffling 
in the nose. Let them also observe, 
that blowing the nose, hawking, and 
spitting, are ever in some measure of- 
fensive. 

A gentlewoman, for whom I had re- 
spect, came on a visit to spend a few 
days with us; but the continual sounds 
of her loud coughing, hawking, spit- 
ting, sneezing, &c. became so disagree- 
able, as cured the whole family of ta- 
king snuff for a month after. 

There yet remains a superior con- 
sideration, of general importance, that 
by irritating the glands to a constant 
discharge, they anticipate the infirmi- 
ties of old age; which, if ever they 
live to see, will so oppress them with 
accumulated loads of phlegm, that the 
continuance of their lives will depend 
on the continual exercises of cough- 
ing, hawking, and spitting, which will 
terminate their days with misery to 
themselves, and all that are about 
them, and probably conclude with be- 
ing choaked by phlegm in their sleep. 

I confess myself too fond of snuff, 
and have often seriously considered the 
ill consequences of it. I find that an 
idle amusement prevails more than any 
real occasion for it; that it gives me 
more pleasure by the flavour than its 
stimulus. So I get the richest flavour'd 
snuff, and to every ounce add half a 
drachm of saffron, carefully dried and 
powdered, which makes it very rich, 
and much less of it answers my pur- 
pose. I allow myself the free use of 
it in the morning before breakfast, 
which I find useful to me; but no 
more afterwards the day throughout. 

W. 

