

[^Sample 1: article - 1761_GM_0435^]

|P_435
Mr Urban, 

[^Decorative frame around the letter "H".^]HOwever great at Vien- 
na, and elsewhere the 
success may have 
been from the use of 
Hemlock, it has not, 
as I am informed, 
been equal to the ex- 
pectations of practi- 
tioners here. I therefore send you, 
and if you please you may lay it before 
the public, thro' the means of your 
Magazine, the success of its admini- 
stration in my own case. 

Having for many years been corpu- 
lent, and being obliged to sit many 
hours every day, occasioned, several 
years since, my legs to swell, and fre- 
quently to become very hard and pain- 
ful. At times, for these four years, 
this has encreased, and several ulcers 
have broke out in both my legs, 
which, though they sometimes have 
been healed, they left my legs hard 
and swelled, and my tendons were so 
contracted from the calf to the heel, 
that I could not set my feet flat to the 
ground without the greatest pain. I 
was constrained therefore to walk upon 
my toes, supported by sticks. Since 
Christmas last, my complaints grew 
worse, my legs swelled more, the ul- 
cers broke out again, increased in their 
number, extent, and soreness; and, 
notwithstanding all the means I could 
procure, they would not heal; inso- 
much, that by the beginning of May
my legs and thighs were very greatly 
distended, extremely hard and painful, 
of a deep red colour, and numberless 
ulcers occupied both my legs from my 
knees to my ancles. Many of these 
were very large and deep, and sur- 
rounded by high callous lips, and 
gleeted a thin sharp humour, in such 
a quantity that it ran into my shoes, 
and upon the floor where I stood, and 
wherever it touched my flesh, it bro't 
other ulcers. My feet were likewise 
prodigiously swelled, and I could scarce 
move my ancles, and not in the least 
my toes. My sorrows did not end 
here, for upon lying down in my bed 
the warmth thereof made my ulcers 
yet sorer, and excited such an itching 
all over my body, that I was constrain- 
ed to leave my bed, and have set up- 
right in my chair great part of the 
night, not daring to lye down. The 
continuance in this posture made, if 
possible, my condition worse; as my 
legs grew more distended, and conse- 
quently my ulcers increased in num- 
ber, and the old ones became more 
foul, and greatly enlarged. Not on- 
ly me legs and thighs, but my arms 
and head were swelled and inflamed. 
I was hot and dry, and my spittle, 
which had for some months been 
brackish, now became very salt. I 
had been in hopes that the discharge 
from my legs would have drained off 
the humours and relieved me, but I 
experienced the reverse; for the great- 
er my discharge was, the more my 
complaints encreased. 

In this state I was in the beginning 
of May last, and as I had taken a great 
deal of purging physic, had tryed va- 
rious applications, and had gone thro' 
such other regimen as had been direc- 
ted, and remained, nevertheless, in 
this lamentable condition, I despaired 
of relief, and my life became almost 
insupportable. 

Under these circumstances, and be- 
lieving myself to be in a great degree 
dropsical, I consulted Dr Watson, who, 
after having weighed all the particu- 
lars, was of a contrary opinion, and 
directed me to lose 12 ounces of blood, 
and to take a cooling purge; he also 
prescribed that I should have my legs 
fomented every night and morning 
with a decoction of hemlock for half an 
hour, and that a poultice made of the 
boyled herb, and beat up with oat- 
meal and lard, should be applied 
|P_436
warm after each fomenting, from my 
knees to my ancles, and to be chan- 
ged twice a day. 

I must here observe, that as other 
plants are much like, and had in other 
instances been used for hemlock, the Dr 
was so obliging as to examine the herb 
I made use of, not only to satisfy him- 
self of the identity of the herb, but 
likewise of its condition. I was also 
directed to abstain for the present from 
animal food, and to drink plentifully 
of milk and water, and of any other 
diluting fluid. 

The second night after these appli- 
cations I slept in bed, which I had not 
done for a great while; and though I 
was frequently waked by the itching of 
my body, as well as by the smarting of 
my ulcers, I continued all night in 
bed. 

At the end of a week, during all 
which time I found myself growing 
easier, my perspiration in the night 
was restored, which had left me a 
considerable time. My thighs, arms, 
and head changed their deep red co- 
lour for one less intense, and were 
quite reduced to their natural dimen- 
sions. My itching was less, and my 
skin peeled all over my body; my spit- 
tle was less salt; my legs and feet con- 
tinued in the same degree of distenti- 
on, but were far less red and painful, 
and their discharge was considerably 
decreased. I could move the toes of 
one leg, but not of the other; the 
purge was repeated at intervals, and 
the fomentation and poultice continu- 
ed. At the end of the second week, 
the skin of my thighs, and upper parts 
of my body, was of its natural co- 
lour; my itching gone, and my spit- 
tle was natural and tasteless. The 
swelling of my legs and feet was much 
less, and I could move the toes of the 
other foot. I had likewise a much 
freer use of the joints of my ancles 
than I had for a considerable time. 
The discharge from the large ulcers 
was less in quantity and well concoc- 
ted; their callous lips were softened 
and of a good colour, and they gave 
me little or no pain. Besides, these 
ulcers filled up a-pace, and a vast num- 
ber of the small ones were entirely 
healed. Under these happy appearan- 
ances the fomentation and poultice 
were chearfully continued, as they 
were before directed. 

Not to be too tedious in my recital, 
I must inform you, that at the end of 
a month, during which time the dis- 
charge became less and less, every ul- 
cer in both my legs was entirely filled 
up and healed, their callous lips were 
dissolved, and, from the subsiding of 
their tumours, my legs were less than 
they had been for some years. I was 
directed, therefore, to discontinue the 
fomentation, but as there were yet 
considerable indurations in the lower 
parts of my legs, and upon my shin- 
bones, the poultice was continued. 
This I wore for a fortnight longer, or 
thereabouts, when all my ulcers being 
firmly cicatrized, and the indurations 
softened, it was left off. Though my 
legs were quite well and reduced to 
their natural size, the skin of them, 
from being so long distended, was soft 
and flabby; I was therefore directed to 
wear straight stockings, which was ac- 
cordingly complied with. I could 
now set my feet flat upon the ground, 
which I had not done for four years, 
could move my ancles and toes as well 
as ever, and I could walk with as 
much ease and freedom as ever I could 
in my life. I then was permitted to 
eat animal food, and to live as I was 
accustomed to do. However, as I am 
of a corpulent habit, by way of pre- 
caution I was directed to drink occasi- 
onally some sea water, which I have 
hitherto continued. 

It is now three months since I left 
off the pultice; my legs continue per- 
fectly well, not so much as a pimple 
has appeared upon them this autumn, 
and I never was in better health in 
my life. 

If, during this successful treatment, 
I had used a great variety of external 
and internal medicines, though I had 
been cured, I should not have known 
to which to have attributed these salu- 
tary effects; as possibly every one of 
them might, in some degree, have con- 
spired thereto; but as, throughout the 
whole, except some purges, of which 
I had taken numbers before, I used 
nothing but the fomentation and poul- 
tice of hemlock, as before-mentioned. 
I cannot but attribute my cure princi- 
pally to the virtues of the hemlock, 
which I think in my case were very re- 
markable; & as far as one instance will 
go, are a strong argument of its ex- 
cellent effects. I pretend not to de- 
termine how far it has been useful in 
other cases, and under other direction; 
and I cannot here suppress my grati- 
tude to Dr Watson for his humanity 
and kind attention to me during the 
continuance of my illness. 

Your's, &c. Henry Michell. 

From my Chambers, New Inn, Oct. 16 

