

[^Sample 1: article - 1761_GM_0488^]

|P_488
Mr Urban, 
Spring-Garden, Nov. 21. 

THE nuisance at the Bristol Hot- 
wells, has attracted the attention 
of those that can remedy it; and as 
this is owing to an article in your Ma- 
gazine for August last, many are obliged 
to you for the publication. 

Bristol Hot-wells is not only the se- 
cond medicinal spring Great Bri- 
tain, but in all Europe; it is therefore 
to be wondered, that the necessary 
improvements of this place have been 
so much neglected. 

The Bristol waters contain a small 
quantity of salt, of a peculiar nature; 
for instead of being cathartic, as the 
salts of most mineral springs are, they 
are endowed with an opposite quality, 
and happily cures or relieves such dis- 
orders in the abdomen as are the ef- 
fects of weakness. 

Many medical authors have written 
on and analysed these waters; but 
not one of them has taken notice 
of the nuisance, nor pointed out any 
improvements, neither are we yet ac- 
quainted with the true contents of the 
water itself; the numerous Tables 
which hang up in the Pump-room 
being all of them extremely errone- 
ous. 

Recommending a patient of distinc- 
tion to the care of the indefatigable 
and learned Doctor Sutherland, I had 
an opportunity to converse with him 
on this subject; and he informed me, 
that he was just finishing an analytical 
and practical work on the waters of 
Bath and Bristol, and with great kind- 
ness offered to repeat the experiments 
with me. As I had published my Pro- 
posals for printing by Subscription, a 
Treatise on Bath Waters, and was un- 
acquainted with the Bristol Waters, I 
readily consented. We examined the 
waters of both places: The experi- 
ments were made with so much care 
and deliberation, that I will venture 
to say they are incontrovertible. 

The Doctor favoured me with the 
perusal of his whole manuscript; in 
which he has given a rational de- 
scription of every disease commonly 
cured by these waters; and the effi- 
cacy of the waters is ascertained by 
histories of cures indubitably attested, 
and the uses and abuses of mineral 
waters are candidly pointed out. 

D. W. Lin den. 

