

[^Sample 1: article - 1767_GM_0411^]

|P_411
23. An Address to the Public on the pre- 
sent Method of Inoculation, proving that 
the matter communicated, is not the Small- 
Pox, because numbers have been inoculat- 
ed a second, third, and fourth time; that 
therefore it is no security against a future 
infection; with observations on the pre- 
paratory medicines, and a remarkable case 
of an eminent personage, who had the na- 
tural Small-Pox in two years and an half 
after inoculation. To which is added, an 
inquiry into the nature of the confluent-pox 
and its cure. By William Langton M. D. 
Horsefield. Price 1 s.

The remarkable case of one eminent per- 
sonage, is that of the dutchess of Boufflers, 
which the reader will find at large in the 
Magazine vol. XXXVI. p. 117. 

Dr. Langton says, that a disease is to be 
estimated as the same when it presents the 
some appearances, and vice versa; and that 
any deflections from these appearances must 
bring it under a different denomination, and 
have different indications of cure. To prove 
that the disease produced by the modern 
method of inoculation is not the true 
small pox, he enumerates the differences 
of their appearances; and when he has so 
done, he says that their appearances are dif- 
ferent because both are not the true small-pox, 
(i. e.) the disease now inoculated is not the 
small-pox, because its appearances are dif- 
ferent; and its appearances are different be- 
cause it is not the small-pox. 

His words are these; 

Patients seized with the small-pox, 
soon have a chillness succeeded by a fe- 
verish heat; a pain in the head, back, 
and stomach, a nausea and restlessness; 
the pustules are prominent, and filled 
with well concocted pus, inclining to 
yellow; there is a considerable fever, 
and the patient (is) often light-headed. 
These symptoms ever attend, in a greater 
or less degree, the benign small-pox, 
and infallibly preclude all future infec- 
tion, on the other hand, the inoculated 
small-pox, if it deserves that name, has 
not one of the preceeding symptoms, be- 
cause the inoculated matter is not the true 
small-pox. 

Dr. Langton however proceeds to observe 
that the present practise is to take the mat- 
ter from the incision the fourth day after it 
is made; and he asserts, that by this means, 
a contagious caustic water only is procured 
instead of laudable pus; and that a slight 
ferment is raised in the lymph, producing 
only a few watry blotches, instead of a per- 
fect extrusion of variolous matter: that in 
the true small-pox, a re-percussion of the 
matter inwardly produces the most dangerous 
consequences, but no ill effects follow the re- 
percussion of what is conttained in the pus- 
tules produced by this inoculation; he con- 
cludes therefore, that what these pustules 
contain is not variolous; he says that the ino- 
culated are safely exposed to the cold air in a 
rigorous season, whereas the practise would 
be fatal in the real small-pox. 

Perhaps it will not be generally thought, 
that his conclusions follow from his premises, 
and it is certain that some of his facts are 
contrary to experience. It appears by in- 
numerable experiments, that patients in the 
real small-pox, taken naturally, have been 
exposed to cold air, with great benefit. Dr. 
Baker in particular, (see Vol. XXXVI. p. 
382.) mentions the removal of some patients 
from the infirmary into the fields, and even 
under the arches of a bridge, in some of 
whom very threatening symptoms immedi- 
ately took a favourable turn. 

Dr. Langton also affirms, that if the dis- 
ease now given by the inoculation of matter 
not concocted was the small-pox, it would 
be dangerous, because an infection would be 
communicated before it could be known of what 
kind it would be. But it is generally ack- 
nowledged that the goodness or badness of 
the small-pox communicated by inoculation, 
does not depend upon the kind from which 
the matter is taken, but wholly upon the ha- 
bit and state of the patient receiving the in- 
fection; and all experience proves that ino- 
culation with unripe matter is at least nor 
dangerous, whether the disease produced is 
the small-pox or not. 

But Dr. Langton in his zeal against inocu- 
lation, sometimes decries it as producing 
the small-pox, and sometimes as not pro- 
ducing it. When danger from a second in- 
fection is to be dreaded, he affirms it is not 
the small-pox; when danger from repelling 
medicines, he supposes it is the small-pox. 

An account of the passages in which he 
supposes the small-pox not to be inoculated 
by the new method has been given already; 
the passages in which, that he may condemn 
the treatment before and after the inoculation, 
|P_412
he supposes the small-pox to be inoculated 
follow. 

In this way there is a probability of 
having the small-pox, and great danger 
by thwarting nature in her operations, by 
administering such violent medicines as mer- 
cury, tartar emetic, and drastick purges: 
the humour must be disturbed in the sto- 
mach, and from thence precipitated into 
the mass of fluids, and through the emunc- 
tories. By irritating the nervous parts 
they throw the whole system into convul- 
sions, and to the hypochondriacal and hy- 
steric are certain death. In a word, the 
weak and tender are sure of ruining their 
constitutions, and of being still liable to 
the disease. 

But if these dreadful evils are probable, 
how comes it that they never happen? What 
persons have thus suffered by the new me- 
thod of inoculation? Whom have these vio- 
lent medicines destroyed? or, among all the 
weak and tender who have been patients 
to Sutton, whose constitution have they ruined? 

It is indeed difficult to fix this writer suf- 
ficiently to examine his principles; for tho' 
in the passage above, he says, that in this 
way (Sutton's) there is a probability of having 
the true small-pox, yet in the paragraph im- 
mediately preceeding it, he says, though 
scarce one of the patients (of Sutton) will 
have the real small-pox, yet by the exhibit- 
ing mercurials he effectually prevents it. 
The plain English of which (setting aside its 
inconsistency with what follows) is, that Sut- 
ton, by the exhibition of mercurials, effec- 
tually prevents what would never happen, 
for that may be well supposed never to hap- 
pen, which he affirms would scarce happen 
to one. 

Upon the whole, the advantage or disad- 
vantage of the present method of inocula- 
tion, must be determined by experience, and 
not by the hasty and injudicious reasonings of 
persons not able to write their native lan- 
guage, without gross violations of grammar 
and common sense. 

The following extracts will justify this 
censure. 

The secret of treating this disorder, 
must be confined to a single family, and 
to men (who if they have any modesty 
will confess themselves to be) very inferior 
in natural and required attainments to many 
of the same profession. 

We have here an elegant and accurate di- 
vision of attainments into two kinds, attain- 
ments that are attained, and attainments that 
are not attained; every attainment is acquired, 
no attainment is natural. 

The author says, Dr. Baker in a neat
tract printed last year, enquires into the 
superiority of the present method of inocu- 
lation above the best practise in the natural 
way. 

In this passage method of inoculation stands 
for method of treating the disease that inoculation 
produces: and practise in the natural way, 
for practise according to regular art
on a diseasetaken in the natural way. 

He makes Dr. Woodward say of drinks, 
that it must be temperate. He says of the 
present method of inoculation that In re- 
ality it is one of the compleatest bubbles 
that ever was so universally run into. 
The image of running into a compleat bubble
is an ornament that may atone for the use 
of universally, an absolute term in a com- 
parative sense. 

The sense of the following passage is just 
opposite to what was intended. 

Oystershells, crabs claws and eyes, 
pearl, and the rest, will not dissolve in 
water, for if triturateth therewith, and 
that filtered it leaves nothing. 

The truth is, that it (the water) carrying 
nothing away leaves all, and how otherwise 
could the experiment prove these substances 
not to be soluble in water. 

Other instances of fallacious argument 
and inaccurate composition might be given 
but the task is too unpleasing to be longer con- 
tinued. 
X. 

