

[^Sample 1: article - 1767_GM_0254^]

|P_254
Mr Urban, 

EVERY lover of mankind must 
rejoice that a method has been 
discovered of preserving multitudes 
from the fatal effects of a most loath- 
some distemper by inoculation. It 
must, with all thankfulness, be ac- 
knowledged, that the inventors and 
improvers of it deserve to be ranked 
among the first benefactors of their 
fellow creatures. But, whilst we glad- 
ly pay them this tribute of gratitude, 
we cannot but lament that this prac- 
tice hath been abused and perverted 
to the destruction of many lives, 
which might have been preserved. 
Inspect the yearly bills, and you will 
find, that for an equal number of 
years, more have died of the small- 
pox within the bills of mortality, since
the practice of inoculation, than did 
before. "How is this to be accounted 
for? " The inoculated live: But num- 
bers who receive the infection from 
them, in the natural way, die. Hi- 
therto, therefore, inoculation seems 
not to have been so beneficial to this 
great city as might reasonably be ex- 
pected. If it has saved, it has also 
destroyed multitudes. It is impossible 
to determine precisely what have been 
its effects in the country, since no bills 
of mortality are there open to our in- 
spection. But we may venture to pro- 
nounce, that the methods at present 
practised, if they are not hurtful to 
mankind in general, are not so ser- 
viceable to them as they might be 
made. Inoculation introduces the 
small-pox into cities and towns which 
otherwise might be entirely free from 
that distemper. Not only private fa- 
milies are inoculated, but hospitals are 
provided, in places full of people, for 
the reception of all who have money 
in their purses, and choose rather to 
have the small pox abroad than at 
home. Hither are patients bro't from 
all parts. The consequences are, the 
stagnation of trade, an extraordinary 
dearness of provisions, even in this 
dear time, the distressing of the poor, 
and the communicating to multitudes 
this dreadful distemper. 

"Would you then put a stop to i- 
noculation? " I am not so much the 
enemy of my country. For the good 
of mankind may it generally prevail! 
But till this time shall come, let it be 
put under proper regulations. What 
these are, superior wisdom must deter- 
mine. I only beg leave humbly to 
propose one, viz. that inoculation be 
prohibited within a certain distance 
of cities, and other populous places, 
where the small-pox is not. If this 
were done, we should reap all the be- 
nefits of inoculation, without the in- 
conveniences and miseries with which 
it is at present too frequently attend- 
ed. Had this been done long ago, 
there would have been fewer orphans 
lamenting the loss of their parents, 
and fewer parents weeping over the 
graves of their children. 

Many worthy magistrates (I know) 
grieve that they cannot prevent the e- 
vil of which I have been speaking. 
|P_255
But can they only grieve? Yes, 
(thank Heaven!) they can do more; 
they can petition the legislature; and 
let them petition, or never complain 
of grievances, which only want to be 
properly represented, in order to be 
redressed. 

Could inoculation be practised no 
where but in cities, &c. the present 
fashion would not only admit of a de- 
fence, but it would deserve praise. As 
this is not the case, what, I beseech 
you, is their guilt, who destroy multi- 
tudes for their own advantage, and 
only because they can do it with im- 
punity? And what can be more un- 
reasonable than that the trade of a 
town should lie at any man's mercy? 
The trade of a town did I say? If I 
am rightly informed, as the law now 
stands, the most flourishing city in the 
kingdom may be made, and continue 
a small-pox infirmary, so long as any 
inoculator pleases. 

I am, &c. Variolanus. 

