

[^Sample 1: article - 1767_GM_0420^]

|P_420
Mr. Urban, 

AN anonymous letter was inserted in 
the Gentleman's Magazine for last 
month, calculated by it's author, I sup- 
pose from lucrative views, to deterr 
persons afflicted with the gravel and 
stone, from taking soap-lye; and in it's 
stead, to recommend a soap, prepared, 
probably by himself, for the same pur- 
pose, as more safe, and in many cases 
more officacious. 

As this letter is replete with misre- 
presentations, inconsistencies, and ab- 
surdities, if I had not inadvertently 
promised to answer it, when it was shewn 
to me in manuscript, I should have neg- 
lected it, as wholly unworthy of regard; 
especially as most, if not all the objec- 
tions against soap-lye, are obviated in 
what I have already published on the 
subject. 

That a solution of alkaline fixed salts 
and substances in water, or soap-lye, 
is an acrid corrosive substance, and if 
given indiscriminately, without regard 
to circumstances, may be productive of 
bad consequences, I do confess: But 
that if judiciously administred, such a 
direful train of disorders as are enume- 
rated will be the event, I absolutely deny. 

For not only in this, but in every 
other disease which proceeds from a too 
lax, weak, and inactive state of the so- 
lids, and consequently stagnant, inert, 
and viscid fluids, under which predica- 
ment most nephritic patients may be 
considered, alkaline fixed salts and sub- 
stances are so far from being hurtful, 
that on the contrary, if administered 
prudently, well diluted in small quan- 
tities, and continued a proper time, they 
will, by stimulating the solids, and at- 
tenuating the fluids, be of the greatest 
service; for a proof of this, I refer to 
Boerhaave's Elements of Chemistry, Vol. 
II. process 12; and to fact, for it 
has been often observed, that persons 
who took soap-lye for the gravel, have 
been freed from other disorders, such as 
entire loss of appetite, dejection of spi- 
rits, &c. 

That what is said concerning Dr. 
Jurin, is wholly a misrepresentation, 
will appear from the abstract of his 
own case, written by himself, so far as 
relates to the taking of his lixivium for 
the gravel and stone. As to the insi- 
nuation, that the Doctor killed himself, 
by the long continued and free use of 
it, as it is an assertion without proof, 
it deserves no credit. 

As to lime-water, its want of efficacy, 
if not assisted with alkaline fixed salts, 
will appear from the cases related by 
Dr. Whytte. 

As the author of the letter acquiesces 
in Dr. Hale's opinion, that the sol- 
vent power of soap could be attri- 
buted only to the large portion of 
lixivial salts that were in it, that all 
lixiviums were similar in their effects, 
and that the unctuous body necessary 
to the forming it into soap, did but 
clog, and abate the efficacy of it, 
is he not strangely inconsistent, in pre- 
ferring soap, in whatsoever manner pre- 
pared; a composition in which a rancid 
oil is by far the largest ingredient? 

As to his assertion, that a glass of 
punch will be found to be a better sol- 
vent, as a menstruum, than a liquor 
impregnated with soap-lye, I answer, 
that whoever tries the experiment, will 
find him mistaken. 

The experiment he proposes to be 
made on gutts and garbage, is so absurd, 
that it deserves no notice. 

If he thinks proper to reply, I advise 
him first to get a little better acquainted 
with philosophic and medical principles. 

Bromley, July
24, 1767. 
I am, Sir, 
your most humble servant, 
Alex. Blackrie. 

