

[^Sample 1: article - 1767_GM_0362^]

|P_362
11. An Essay on the Diseases most fatal 
to Infants. To which are added, Rules 
to be observed in the Nursing of Children: 
with a particular View to those who are 
brought up by Hand. By George Arm- 
strong, M. D. Cadell.

The author of this useful treatise re- 
marks, that though a great part of our 
species dies in infancy, yet the diseases 
peculiar to infants, are neither so nume- 
rous, nor their nature so difficult to dis- 
cover, as is generally imagined. 

In the first place, infants are not sub- 
ject to any of the diseases which grown 
persons frequently bring upon themselves 
by intemperance, or to those which are 
often the consequence of hard labour, 
violent exercise, the inclemency of the 
weather, heats, colds, damps, &c. They 
suffer nothing from anxiety or sorrow, 
which kill many thousands by bringing 
on fevers, low spirits, and all sorts of 
nervous disorders: and as to hereditary 
diseases, such as the gout, the consump- 
tion, and the palsy, few of them appear 
in infancy, and from the diseases pecu- 
liar to puberty, which in the female sex 
are various and sometimes mortal, they 
are exempted of course. The diseases 
of infants therefore are comparatively 
few, for, except what the nurses call in- 
ward fits, teething, and the rickets, chil- 
dren are subject to no disease from which 
adults are free. 

The diseases of children almost all arise 
from one common cause, their tender 
bowels being overloaded with slimy se- 
cretions from the glands of the mouth, 
fauces, gullet, stomach, and intestines, 
but above all the liver and the pancreas. 

These secretions are much larger in 
proportion in children than adults, and 
as they cannot use exercise, and the 
nurses frequently neglect to give it them 
and rub them, the contents of the sto- 
mach and bowels stagnate, and by their 
viscidity or acrimony, or both, produce 
various diseases and death. 

The first complaint that appears in 
children is generally inward fits; these, 
if not removed, degenerate into an almost 
constant drowsiness, which is succeeded 
by a fever and the trush; or terminate 
in vomittings, sour, curdled, or green 
stools, the watry gripes and convulsions, 
and indeed the thrush sometimes termi- 
nates in these symptoms. These all arise 
from the cause that has been just assigned, 
and may be considered as different stages 
of the same disease. 

To prevent inward fits, the first stage, 
Dr. Armstrong advises that the child be 
never laid down to sleep after it has 
sucked or been fed, till it has broke 
wind. To facilitate which the nurse 
should hold it sloping in her arms, dan- 
dle it, pat its back, and rub the palms of 
its hands pretty smartly. 

If inward fits are not prevented by 
these expedients, he recommends a gentle 
puke, to be repeated from time to time 
as occasion requires. The best puke, he 
says, is from 5 to 10 drops of antimonial 
wine. He has given 5 drops to infants 
a few days after their birth with success, 
and seldom gives a larger dose till they 
are about a month old; repeating it with- 
in half an hour, if the first does not ope- 
rate; after the first month he gives 7, 8, 
9, or 10 drops, and at three or four 
months old from 10 to 15. 

But there is one rule, says the doctor, 
which ought constantly to be observed 
in administring vomits to infants, as well 
|P_363
as adults; always first to open the body, 
if costive, by a gentle purge or clyster. 

To cure the thrush, he advises first to 
empty the stomach and then the intes- 
tines, and for this purpose nothing suc- 
ceeds better than the antimonial wine. 

The best topical application , he says, 
is a solution of white vitriol in common 
water, about half a scruple to 8 ounces. 
The solution is to be made a little warm, 
and a linen rag is to be dipped in it, then 
either with the finger, or laid on a bit of 
stick, the mouth is to be rubbed with it 
three or four times in four and twenty 
hours. If a little is swallowed so much 
the better. 

When a child is seized with a purging, 
of whatever kind, it is common to give 
small doses of rhubarb or magnesia, but 
Dr. Armstrong recommends as better 
than either, such a puke as is mentioned 
above, which generally operates both 
ways, and which, if the child's strength 
will bear it, should be repeated every five 
or six hours till the stools begin to change 
for the better, then every eight or ten 
hours till they return to their natural 
colour and consistence. The doctor has 
seldom found any other medicine neces- 
sary except a gentle paregoric, such as a 
drachm of the syr. papav. rheados, in a 
large spoonful of weak cinnamon-water; 
after the first passages have been cleansed, 
if the child is still griped and restless, 
to be repeated every three or four hours 
till rest and ease are procured. 

When the stools have smelt very sour, 
or have been curdled or green, three or 
four drops of the lixivium tartari, have 
been given with the emetic; and after- 
wards between whiles, the same quanti- 
ty in a little water, sweetened with sugar, 
or syrup, with very good success. This 
medicine is particularly useful when the 
milk is apt to curdle on the stomach. 

The convulsions of children are gene- 
rally symptomatic, and arise from an ir- 
ritation in the stomach or bowels, or in 
the gums in the time of teething: if the 
irritation is in the stomach and bowels, 
whatever clears the bowels of thin acid 
contents, or renders these contents mild 
and inoffensive, will remove the convul- 
sions: for these purposes the puke al- 
ready mentioned is recommended, first 
giving a clyster if the child is costive, 
repeating the puke occasionally, and 
keeping the body open between whiles 
with the magnesia or rhubarb, in small 
quantities mixed with absorbents. 

If convulsions proceed from the strik- 
ing in of the rash, or the sudden stopping 
of the salutary discharge behind the ears, 
then, besides the method prescribed above, 
it will be necessary to apply a blister be- 
tween the shoulders, or a couple behind 
the ears: in this case too the warm bath 
is sometimes of great service. 

When a child is seized with convul- 
sions without any other complaint, and 
without the drying up of the discharge 
behind the ears, it is reasonable to con- 
clude that they arise immediately from 
the brain. As to these, Dr Armstrong says, 
perhaps sharp clysters, the semicupium, 
blistering the legs or feet, or behind the 
ears, may be of use, but he says he can 
recommend no successful way of treating 
this dreadful disorder from experience. 

The danger that attends teething, the 
doctor thinks arises wholly from too 
great a fullness, or from corrupt hu- 
mours, put in agitation by the pain 
which the tooth causes in breaking its 
way out. And in either case evacua- 
tions must be of great service: the eva- 
cuation recommended is the same as be- 
fore. 

When the fever runs high, and the 
teeth are near cutting, it may be proper 
to launch the gum. 

When a rash appears, of whatever 
sort, if the child is otherwise well, it is 
best not to meddle with it. 

When the rash that frequently appears 
upon children soon after they are born 
is struck in, the warm bath has been of 
singular service, in concert with the me- 
thod before directed. 

Dr. Armstrong says, he has tried the 
antimonial solution in the whooping 
cough, with very good success, and is of 
opinion that if it is given in time, it will 
render the disorder less violent and te- 
dious. In this disease, he gives the solu- 
tion once or twice a day if the child can 
bear it, in a sufficient quantity to bring 
up the phlegm, which children always 
swallow instead of spitting out. If the 
cough is worse at any particular hour of 
the day, he gives it about an hour before 
the paroxysm is expected, and if it is 
worse in the night, about an hour before 
bed-time. When the violence of the 
cough is over, it is sufficient to administer 
the medicine once or twice a week. 

In the very dry air of Hampstead, Dr. 
Armstrong had but two patients that were 
troubled with the rickets; with respect 
to these a few gentle doses of rhubarb, 
keeping the child dry and clean, and rub- 
bing it carefully all over two or three 
times a day, together with the cold bath, 
generally effected the cure in a short 
time. 

|P_364
Of the rules for nursing given by this 
author, the following are the chief. 

Every mother who can, ought to suckle 
her child, for her own sake, at least for 
the first few weeks. 

If it is necessary to bring a child up 
by hand, it is better to feed it with the 
boat than the horn. The horn is a po- 
lish'd cow's horn, which will hold about 
a gill and an half: the small end of it 
is perforated, and has a notch round it, 
to which are fastened two small bits of 
parchments, shaped like the tip of the 
finger of a glove, and sewed together 
in such a manner as that the food poured 
into the horn can be sucked through be- 
tween the stitches. This appears to be 
a very simple and ingenious contrivance, 
and it might well be considered as an 
artificial nipple, if we had breast milk 
to convey through it; but Dr. Arm- 
strong thinks that cows milk is not a 
good succedaneum, and advises thicker 
food for the child than can pass through 
this instrument. The food he recom- 
mends is crumb of bread boiled in soft 
water, to the consistance of what is com- 
monly called pap, or thin panada: the 
crumb of a roll baked the preceeding 
day is the best. The pap should be very 
slightly sweetened with Lisbon sugar, ex- 
cept the child is of a lean habit of body, 
in which case the finest loaf sugar should 
be used, and sea biscuit should be sub- 
stituted for roll. 

If the infant is bred up by hand from 
the birth, new cow's milk, not boiled, 
should be mixed with its victuals as of- 
ten as possible, and now and then some 
milk alone should be given it to drink: 
asses milk is still better than cow's. 

If the child is troubled with wind, 
boil a few bruised juniper berries, or a 
little grated ginger, tied up in a rag, in 
its pap, and give it now and then a pap 
spoonful of weak pepper-mint water, or 
sweet-fennel water; if it is costive, the 
body must be kept open with a little 
manna, or magnesia, mixed with its 
food as occasion requires. 

When the child comes to be used to 
thick victuals, it should have now and 
then, between the times of feeding, wa- 
ter in which the upper crust of bread 
has been boiled, mixed with an equal 
quantity of new milk; or when new 
milk cannot be had, with boiled milk, 
sweetened with a very little sugar. 

When the child comes to be about 
three or four months old, if the victuals 
turns sower on the stomach, it will be 
right to use weak broth, either of chicken, 
veal, or mutton, or beef tea, instead of 
milk, in its food, or at least it may be 
fed with this once or twice a day. 

When the child is six months old, if 
it is cool, and not inclined to be fat, it 
may have at noon, once in 2 or 3 days, 
a very little bit of the white of a boiled 
chicken minced very small, and mixed 
into a kind of pap with some of the li- 
quor that the chicken was boiled in, and 
a good deal of crumb of bread. When 
it is inclined to be feverish, it must have 
nothing of this kind. 

At this age it may have a little plain 
light bread pudding now and then for 
dinner; and the nurse should every 
morning give it a piece of the upper 
crust of a loaf cut in the shape and 
about the size of a large Savoy biscuit, 
one end of it dipped in its food, or a 
little milk, the other put into its hand. 

The victuals should be made fresh 
twice a day in winter, and three times in 
summer, and the milk, if new cannot be 
had, and it is necessary to boil it, should 
never be boiled with the pap, but added 
when the child is fed. 

The child should be fed chiefly in the 
day time, and put into the habit of sleep- 
ing during the night as soon as possible; 
at first it should be fed frequently, and 
by a little at a time; but victuals should 
never be forced upon a child when it 
refuses it. 

It will greatly contribute to a child's 
resting at night, if the nurse, the last 
thing she does, takes up the child, opens 
it before the fire, turns it dry, and feeds 
it, even if it is asleep. 

As to cloathing, children should have 
nothing tight about them, and as few 
pins as possible. They ought to be 
kept rather warm for the first four 
months; because, during that time, they 
easily catch cold; for the same reason 
they ought to be carefully kept dry. 

As to sleep, Dr. Armstrong condemns 
opiates, and prefers the bed to the cradle. 

The child ought not to be jolted on 
the knee or lap, and though it should 
be dandled to divert it and keep it awake 
in the day; it should be done gently at 
first, and never with a jerk: neither 
should they be hoisted up high in the 
air between the hands, for they are very 
early susceptible of fear. The most use- 
ful exercise for very young children, is 
rubbing with the hand, which cannot be 
too often repeated, nor continued too 
long, except they have a purging, and 
then it should be forborne. 

The nurse should also every morning, 
after having well rubbed the child, wash 
its back, loins, groin, and between its 
|P_[^An illustration of a woman with a child, the child holding a small goblet, filling an entire (unnumbered) page. The caption reads "From a Drawing of Haeslen in 1701. Engraved by Basan." ^]
|P_365
thighs, also its limbs, all over with cold 
water, and afterwards dry them carefully,
The head, and behind the ears, the 
neck, arms, and hands, should be wash- 
ed in the same manner and dried. 

If the skin is chafed, it should be first 
dried with a fine cloth, and some com- 
mon powder should be applied with a 
soft puff. If it is much galled, as some- 
times happens by the heat and sharpness 
of the urine, some fuller's earth must be 
dissolved in a sufficient quantity of hot 
water, and when it has stood till it is cold, 
the galled parts must be gently rubbed 
with it once or twice a day. 

The doctor condemns the use of ceruss 
for this purpose, as pernicious to the 
nerves. 

The book is in general well written; 
there is therefore the greater reason to 
observe, that in more places than one, it 
gives countenance to a barbarism that 
seems unaccountably to be gaining 
ground in our language; the substitu- 
tion of lay for lie, the preterit for the 
present. This author says, the child 
will lay and divert itself.  So in the 
participle, every body knows the 
pernicious effects of laying in ill-aired 
sheets. 
X. 

