

[^Sample 1: article - 1767_GM_0009^]

|P_9
[}New Experiments concerning the Putre- 
faction of the Juices and Humours of 
Animal Bodies. By M Jean Baptiste 
Gaber, Translated from the Memoirs 
of the Academy of Turin. }]
THE great Lord Chancellor Bacon, 
who may be considered as the re- 
storer of Philosophy, was well appri- 
zed of the great advantages which 
medical and natural knowledge would 
derive from a judicious history of pu- 
trefaction founded upon experiment. 
I shall not, however, attempt such a 
work in its utmost extent, nor even 
to furnish materials for such a work, 
with respect to all subjects, for fear my 
attention should be too much divided 
among a great variety of facts to be 
properly employed upon any. I shall 
confine myself to the animal juices; 
and, indeed, my experiments have 
been made only on the most consi- 
derable of them, or such, at least, as 
appeared to me to be the most proper 
to throw light upon the internal 
causes of many diseases, upon their 
effects or symptoms, and the indica- 
tions of cure. 

1. A man aged about fifty years 
died of an inveterate jaundice with- 
out a fever; and his body having lain 
about 24 hours in a cold place in win- 
ter, was then opened. The large in- 
testines were found infarcted with ash- 
coloured excrements; and the small 
ones contained here and there a kind 
of yellow mucus; the gall-bladder 
was distended with a great excess of 
bile, nearly black. Some of this bile 
I received in a glass, from an aper- 
ture which I made in the vesicle, and 
found it not very fœtid, but some- 
thing glewy and tenacious. I put a 
small part of it into another vessel, 
and poured upon it a drop or two of 
aqua-fortis; the mixture immediately 
effervesced, and several air bubbles 
rose to the surface, with a hissing 
which was audible when I brought 
my ear close to the vessel, and the 
mixture became sensibly warm. 

2. I divided the remainder of the 
bile into three parts, which I placed 
in open glasses, where they were ex- 
posed to different degrees of heat, 
which answered to the 35th, 25th, and 
10th degrees of Reaumur's thermome- 
ter. At the end of twenty-four hours 
I mixed them with acids: the bile 
which had been placed in a degree of 
heat answering to 35, was most di- 
luted, and gave very slight indica- 
tions of effervescence; that which had 
stood in 25, was also diluted, and the 
acid produced a more sensible effer- 
vescence, but still very slight; and the 
bile which having been exposed only 
to the temperament of the air, which 
might perhaps vary from seven to 
ten, preserved its tenacity, and fer- 
mented as forcibly as in Experim. 1. 
This experiment was repeated a few 
hours afterwards, in the presence of 
several eminent persons, and the effect 
was the same. 

3. Some blood which was taken 
from a vein of the dead body at the 
same time, appeared to be of a yel- 
lowish red. Some of this blood being 
immediately mixed with spirit of ni- 
tre, effervesced, but much less than 
the bile. This mixture being left to 
digest for some hours, a yellow serum 
separated from the blood, and covered 
its whole surface; this blood being 
subjected to the same heat as the bile, 
and for the same time in the stove, 
appeared more disposed to efferves- 
cence than the bile; but this disposi- 
tion afterwards gradually diminished. 

4. From these experiments the fol- 
lowing observations may be drawn. 

1. That in diseased bodies the hu- 
mours may become so alcalescent as 
to effervesce with acids; for it is not 
probable, that the humours on which 
these experiments were made effer- 
vesced in consequence of any altera- 
tion they had suffered after the body 
was dead; it having been kept only 
24 hours in a cold place, and in cold 
weather, where the same humours ta- 
ken from a healthy body would scarce 
have acquired such a degree of alka- 
lescence in many days. 

2. That a very slight degree of 
putrefaction and fœtor, which is not 
sufficient to produce alcalescene out 
of the body, as appears by experi- 
ments related in the sequel, will pro- 
duce alcalescence in the body. 

3. That alcali formed in the body, 
and contained in the bile, is extreme- 
ly volatile, since a heat of 25 degrees 
made the greatest part of it evaporate; 
and that the same alcali contained in 
the blood, being a little more en- 
tangled with other elements, is, con- 
sequently less volatile; since the same 
degree of heat, continued for the same 
time, dissipated but a very inconsider- 
able part of it. 

4. This observation inclines me to 
suspect, that, in other experiments up- 
on putrefaction, in which some ope- 
|P_10
rators affirm, that they have seen in- 
dubitable proofs of the presence of 
an alcali; and others say, they have 
scarce discovered any indications at 
all; the difference is the effect of dif- 
ferent degrees of heat, the staleness of 
the substance exposed to the heat, or 
the different volatility of the alcali 
arising from its cohesion with other 
principles. 

5. The same experiments that I 
made upon morbid bile, I made also 
upon healthy bile, upon blood, and 
upon serum. I divided each of these 
liquors into three parts, which I se- 
perately exposed to the three diffe- 
eent degrees of heat mentioned a- 
bove; and having submitted them se- 
verally to the action of mineral acids, 
I found the bile most disposed to ef- 
fervesce; and Baglivi has observed, 
that it corrupts sooner than any other 
humour. I found that human bile 
was more disposed to effervesce than 
the bile of an ox; that corrupt blood 
ferments with acids still slower, and 
that serum ferments slower than blood. 
In all these experiments, the effer- 
vescence was attended with the same 
phænomena that are related, (Par 1.) 
Putrescent humours not only effer- 
vesce with mineral acids, but with 
very weak distilled vinegar. The se- 
veral portions of these humours that 
have been exposed to artificial heat, 
become fœtid, and effervesce soonest, 
and soonest arrive at the last stage of 
fermentation. When this happens, 
the fermentation ceases [/1./], though the 
heat is continued; and the smell, 
which till then is intolerably fœtid, 
becomes herbaceous, and is not dis- 
agreeable [/2./]. The fœtor manifests it- 
self sooner, and lasts longer than the 
alcalescence. 

6. To put the effervescence of pu- 
trescent humours with mineral acids 
beyond a doubt, I must now observe, 
that the aqua-fortis which I used in 
my experiments was very weak, and 
such as produced no motion in com- 
com water; and this effervescence is 
so far from being the effect of con- 
centering the acids [/3./], that, in my o- 
pinion, the acids may be so concen- 
tered as to render the effervescence 
less, principally because the animal 
humours resist effervescence, in pro- 
portion as they unite with acids spee- 
dily and intimately: for when I 
made use of distilled vinegar, not 
strong enough to coagulate the pu- 
trescent humours, I observed that the 
effervescence was equally violent, and 
I have seen distilled vinegar operate 
so powerfully upon a putrid serum, 
as wholly to convert it into froth. 

7. When I was reading Dr Pringle's 
experiments upon this subject, I ob- 
served that he sometimes exposed pu- 
trescent substances to an heat equal 
to the 100th degree of Farenheit's ther- 
mometer [/4./], which is nearly the same 
with the 30th degree of Reaumur's.— 
Now, it is certain, that at this degree 
of heat, animal humours very soon 
become putrid; but then they lose as 
soon the alcalescence which they de- 
rive from putrefaction, if this degree 
of heat is continued; so that as the 
corrupting humours manifest their al- 
calescent quality for a very short time 
only, it might easily happen that no 
sign of alcalescence appeared in his 
experiment, if it was not made in the 
critical moment: I mean, if he ex- 
amined the putrescent humours a lit- 
tle before the alcali was formed, or 
a little after it had evaporated. And 
supposing the experiment to have been 
critically made, still, as the ambient 
heat would have caused the alcali to 
evaporate almost entirely as soon as it 
was formed, Dr Pringle would have 
perceived very slight tokens of effer- 
vescence, though with a less degree 
of heat they would have been consi- 
derable: consequently, if that inge- 
nious and accurate observer had made 
his experiments with a degree of heat 
just equal to that with which I made 
mine, the result, cæteris paribus, would 
have been the same. 

8. I received some blood as it issued 
from the arm in a vial; and having 
dissolved it, or broken its texture, by 
continual agitation, I left it to pu- 
trify. I observed that its fine florid 
red colour insensibly faded to a black- 
ish brown; but this change did not 
take place in the whole mass at the 
|P_11
same time; it began at the surface, 
and gradually descended. 

9. Blood in this state does not pu- 
trify so soon, nor so soon give signs 
of alcalescence, as the red part sepe- 
rated from the serum, because the se- 
rum putrifies more slowly than any o- 
ther animal humour. 

10. After having discovered, by the 
foregoing experiments, that the alcali 
flies off with a slight degree of heat, I 
was desirous to try if I could recover 
and retain it. I therefore put into an 
alembic of glass some serum which 
had separated from blood taken a few 
hours before from a feverish patient, 
and I placed it in a degree of heat be- 
tween 25 and 28 of Reaumur's scale: 
I passed the neck of the alembic thro' 
a hole which was made for that pur- 
pose, in the wooden covering of the 
stove, that the head of it might be in 
the same temperament with the air of 
the chamber, which was equal to a- 
bout the 10th degree of the same 
scale, and that the exhaling vapour 
might condense there into liquor; to 
the spout of the head of the alembic, I 
luted a bottle as a receiver, and at the 
end of every two days I had about two 
drachms of this distilled liquor, upon 
which I poured acids, with different 
effects. That part which came over 
first, had the smell and taste of serum, 
it was clear and transparent, and did 
not effervesce either with acids or 
alcali's. The next portion was slight- 
ly fœtid, but nearly of the same taste 
and transparency as the first; the third 
differed little from the second; but 
the fourth was extremely fætid, foul, 
opake, and of a pale colour; it did 
not, however, effervesce, but acids 
slightly tinged it with red; the fifth, 
which came over after the tenth day, 
and was clear, effervesced with acids, 
and produced a hissing which became 
sensible when the ear was brought 
close to the vessel: it also produced 
bubbles and froth; the sixth portion 
was equally limpid, but effervesced 
more slightly, and when I perceived 
that nothing more would come over 
with this degree of heat, I broke the 
alembic to examine the residuum: I 
found it a viscous crust, resembling 
wax, of a reddish colour, and ex- 
tremely fœtid, but the affusion of acids 
produced not the least signs of effer- 
vescence. This experiment, I tho't, 
proved to demonstration, that alcali 
evaporates with a degree of heat from 
25 to 28; that being collected in a re- 
ceiver, it will effervesce, and that the 
residuum is a mass extremely fœtid, 
wholly destitute of alcali, and, conse- 
quently, no effervescence is to be ex- 
pected by pouring acids upon it. 

11. Some blood which I kept in a 
glass vessel close stopped, retained its 
alcalescence a long time, though it 
was exposed to a degree of heat equal 
to 25; but upon unstopping the ves- 
sel, it flew off with great violence, in 
a vapour extremely fœtid. The ex- 
plosion was probably caused by the ex- 
pansion of the air, in consequence of 
the putrefection, and this experiment 
shews why the humours that are con- 
tained in the vessels of a human body, 
become alcalescent while they are yet 
scarce fœtid, at the same time that 
drawn from the body, and kept in o- 
pen vessels, they become fœtid before 
they give signs of alcalescence. As 
soon as they begin to form alcali in 
the vessels, the alcali is retained, but 
as it exhales from a vessel exposed to 
the air, a greater quantity must be 
formed than exhales before it can be- 
come sensible. 

12. As serum subjected to the expe- 
riment in a sound state did not give up 
its alcali in less than ten days, it may 
be fairly inferred that it does not in 
less time become corrupt, it being cer- 
tain, in the first place, that humours 
corrupt slowly in a closed vessel; and, 
in the second place, that of all hu- 
mours, the serum continues longest 
uncorrupt. 

I did not doubt, but that serum, al- 
ready corrupt, would, in distillation, 
give up its alcali immediately, I there- 
fore made the same experiments upon 
corrupt serum, that I had made upon 
sound: My principal view was to de- 
termine, exactly, the time when the 
alcali would being to fly off, and after 
having collected the distilled liquor, 
to try whether it would change the 
blue vegetable colour of violets to a 
green, which the slowness of the pre- 
ceding experiment had prevented me 
from attempting. I took for this pur- 
pose some blood in such a state of pu- 
trescence as to effervesce with acids, 
and having put it into a glass alembic, 
I exposed it to the same degree of heat 
with the same precautions and appa- 
ratus as in the preceding experiments. 
The first day I collected two drachms 
of the distilled liquor, which I expo- 
sed to the action of various acids, and 
a violent effervescence ensued: I then 
poured some of the same liquor upon 
syrup of violets, and it produced as 
|P_12
fine a green as spirit of hartshorn; 
this tincture having been changed to 
a red, by the affusion of a few drops 
of aqua fortis, became again blue, up- 
on pouring into it some more of the 
distilled liquor. The liquor that di- 
stilled the five following days, gave the 
same indications of an alcali. As the 
distillation entirely ceased after this 
time, I broke the alembic, and found 
just such a residuum as before, but un- 
der it there was a small portion of li- 
quor, reduced to the consistence of sy- 
rup, which retained somewhat of an 
alcaline quality, but so weak that ha- 
ving exposed it about twelve hours in 
a window where the heat of the air 
was equal to about ten degrees of 
Reaumur's scale, the alcali totally dis- 
appeared. 

13. This effervescence and power of 
changing syrup of violets green, proves 
that putrescent humours form a true 
alcali, which exhales with a very slight 
heat. I would have made the expe- 
riment upon the syrup of violets with 
the putrid humours themselves, but 
the opacity of the serum, the red co- 
lour of the blood, and the yellowness 
of the bile, would have rendered it 
doubtful. 

14. As the residuum left in the alem- 
bic after distillation, though not alca- 
lescent, is extremely fœtid, it is evi- 
dent that though the alcali may disen- 
gage and exalt this fœtor, and render 
it more penetrating, it is not the pro- 
ductive cause of it, because the fœtor 
remains when the alcali is departed. 

15. But as both the alcalescence and 
fœtor disappear in the same degree of 
heat, if long continued (Par. 5.) it 
appears that this fœtor is produced by 
the effluvia of parts extremely vola- 
tile, but different from volatile alcali, 
which, though sooner produced, are 
more slowly dissipated, since the fœtor 
generally continues longer than the 
alcalescence. Alcalescence may, how- 
ever, be sometimes connected with a 
slight fœtor; and, on the contrary, 
extreme fœtor may subsist without al- 
calescence. This is a confirmation of 
the difference between the fœtid and 
alcaline particles, which the ingenious 
Dr Pringle has demonstrated by ano- 
ther argument; he observes, that the 
exhalations of fresh urine are not per- 
nicious, though they contain more al- 
cali than any substance in a state of 
putrefaction, the odour of which is 
pernicious in the highest degree. Pu- 
trid effluvia, therefore, are of a dif- 
ferent nature from alcaline salt. 

16. This being the fact, it follows 
that a volatile alcali is not a necessary 
product of putrefaction, and that the 
degree of alcalescence is not equal to 
that of putrefaction; but that, with 
respect to vegetable substances, neu- 
tral salts, if mixed with oil, become 
volatile by means of putrescence, tho' 
in animal bodies alcali commences by 
the action of the bowels, where en- 
veloped with other principles, it be- 
comes perfect, or manifests itself by 
putrefaction; and that for this reason 
putrefaction engenders a quantity of 
alcali more considerable in proportion 
as it finds in putrescent bodies more 
salts and other elements capable, by 
mixing with salts, of communicating 
to them an alcalescent volatility. Up- 
on the whole, if it is considered, 1st, 
That acescent plants, plants that yield 
an acid in distillation, yield very little 
of it when they are converted into 
blood or humours by the action of 
the solids in an animal body; that 
they putrify almost immediately, and 
yield in distillation instead of an acid, 
an alkali in a great quantity; 2dly, 
tha an alcali is sooner brought off by 
distillation from putrified substances 
than others. 3dly, That almost all 
salts are destroyed by the action of the 
bowels, and putrescence, and that no 
alcali is found in the ashes of bodies 
consumed by fire; and, 4thly, that 
the humours which abound with salts 
particularly the urine, afford the 
greatest quantity of alcali after putre- 
faction, I shall be justified in adopt- 
ing the opinion of the chemists, who 
suppose that volatile salts owe their 
origin to other salts which are thus 
changed by the action of the bowels 
in animal bodies, by putrefaction and 
by fire, and that totally losing their o- 
riginal form, they become alcalies. 
Upon this supposition it will be easy 
to conceive how volatile salts resist 
putrefaction, as well as salts of other 
kinds, although putrefaction produces 
them. The quantity of alcaline salts 
produced by putrefaction, is indeed 
in proportion to the quantity of natu- 
ral salts pre existing in the putrifying 
substances; but as these salts are not 
sufficient to prevent putrefaction, it is 
not surprising that the alcali which 
results, cannot arrest its progress. If 
the natural salts had been still more 
abundant, there is reason to think 
that they might have retarded its 
effects, for urine, which contains the 
greatest quantity of salts, is least sub- 
|P_13
ject to putrefaction, and when it is 
become putrid, it effluvia is less hurt- 
ful than the effluvia of any other hu- 
mour, which can be attributed only 
to the abundance of the pre existing 
salts, and the strength of the alcali that 
is formed out of them. 

17. The urine of a person in health 
will not become putrid in less than 
three days, so as to effervesce with a- 
cids; but the urine of a person sick of 
a putrid fever, will become so putrid 
as to produce that effect in four and 
twenty hours. The blood of a per- 
son so diseased will also shew signs of 
alcalescence much sooner than the 
blood of a person in a pleurisy. These 
particulars, however, belong to ano- 
ther class of experiments, which I re- 
serve till a future opportunity, and 
in which, after an examination of the 
morbific humours, and a comparison 
of the phœnomena which they exhi- 
bit, with each other, I shall endea- 
vour to deduce such consequences as 
may facilitate the discovery of the 
causes of diseases, explain their na- 
tures, and direct the method of cure. 

Of this interesting work, when it 
appears, some account shall be given. 


[^1. 
* It has sometimes happened, that serum 
exposed to an heat equal to 35, has not effer- 
vesced; which gives cause to suspect that the 
alcali contained in it dissipates in proportion 
to the force and continuance of the heat. 
^]
[^2. 
† This always happens in the process of 
vegetation. All putrescent humours deposited 
in a warm place soon become rancid, and 
contract a strong smell, which, after a long 
time, resembles that of amber. 
^]
[^3. 
* Which is the case with bile not in a 
putrescent state. 
^]
[^4. 
† The freezing point in Farenheit's is 32, 
the boiling 212. On Reaumer's the first is 
marked 0, the latter 80. 
^]