

[^Sample 1: article - 1767_GM_0502^]

|P_502
Mr. Urban, 

THE extraordinary answer to my let- 
ter on the ill effects arising from the 
imprudent and long continued use of 
lixiviums, and soap-lyes, demand from 
|P_503
me a return. Why should Mr. Alex- 
ander Blackrie be so very angry on the 
occasion? for, had he read that letter 
calmly, he would not have declared it 
replete either with misrepresentations, 
inconsistencies, or absurdities. 

He unfortunately misconceives the 
whole affair, when he thinks that letter 
calculated for lucrative views. Why 
does he allow the propriety of my argu- 
ment, and at the same time abuse it? 
I advanced, that lixiviums and soap- 
lyes, indiscriminately used, were often- 
times injurious to the constitution, and 
enumerated the various ills arising there- 
from. This, I say, he allows, and de- 
nies, in the same sentence, by the help 
of the proviso (judiciously administered) 
which provisio is here out of place, and 
his reference to Boerhaave's Elementa 
Chemica, where the process and history of 
alkaline salts are given, yields little sa- 
tisfaction on this head. He says, that 
it is an highly corrosive production, and 
particularly destructive to all animal sub- 
stances with which it comes in contact, 
(especially when joined with quick lime, 
by which the strongest caustics are pro- 
duced) as such he recommends it to be 
taken, but in very small doses, and 
chiefly when an acid is predominant in 
the body. 

To suppose that the case of Dr. Jurin
is a misrepresentation, because not to be 
found in his publication, is a compleat 
blunder, for how could the doctor write 
the history of his own case after his 
death? and if the doctor's killing him- 
self with his own lixivium may be some- 
what doubtful, I must remind Mr. 
Blackrie of the fatal effects which the 
doctor's lixivium produced on Lord 
Orford. 

If Mr. Blackrie has read Dr. Whytt
on Lyme-Water attentively, he will 
there find that soap is preferred to lixi- 
viums. He says, indeed, that lixiviums 
may be taken in small doses with lime- 
water, to advantage, in some cases, and 
he says as much of Spiritus Nitri dulcis, 
which you know, Sir, to be an acid, 
consequently diametrically opposite to 
lixiviums. 

The next sentence is tortured out of 
its true meaning, merely for the sake of 
contradiction; for, in my first letter, 
inserted in the Magazine of July, (to 
which I refer the reader) I mention that 
the use of lixiviums were brought into 
practice again, in consequence of Dr. 
Hales's experiments on erroneous prin- 
ciples; for, by the addition of an unc- 
tuous body, this corrosive medicine is 
rendered mild, and by the union, not 
less, but more effectual, in most cases 
where deobstruents can be serviceable; 
here I refer the reader to the process of 
soap in Boerhaave's chymistry, and ob- 
servations on it as a medicine, which, I 
flatter myself, will be found more satis- 
factory on this head, than Mr. Black- 
rie's reference to the same author's pro- 
cess on alkaline salts. Can it be proved 
that lixiviums are better solvents of the 
human stone, than soaps? I answer, 
No. And for this I refer to Dr. Des- 
cherney's experiments on the urine of 
such patients as took his soap medicines. 

Respecting punch being a solvent of 
human calculi, it was spoken figurative- 
ly; but, taken seriously, punch is a sol- 
vent of soft calculi, and lixiviums are no 
more, if so much so, when diluted for 
internal use; for this I refer the reader 
to Dr. Lobb's experiments on calculi, as 
read before the Royal-Society in 1738. 

Before Mr. Blackrie takes upon him- 
self to give advice to the author of that 
letter, let him remember, that scurrility 
is inconsistent with the Gentleman and 
Scholar. If he has prepared a lixivium 
which he thinks better than such as are 
used by others, far be it from me to find 
fault with his endeavours at improve- 
ment, I congratulate him thereupon. 
I am you humble servant. 

