

[^Sample 1: article - 1767_GM_0460^]

|P_460
35. A short, plain, and exact Nar- 
rative of all the Proceedings, relative to 
the two Convicts, lately respited by his 
Majesty, for the Trial of Mr. Thomas 
Pierce's Styptic Medicines, and the true 
Causes of his Disappointment shewn. 

Mr. Pierce, about the year 1761, disco- 
vered two styptics which he had great reason 
to believe, would stop not only bleedings of 
the smaller vessels whether internal or exter- 
nal, but the violent hæmorrhages which pro- 
ceed from the larger arteries, that are divi- 
ed in amputations. 

His opinion of their efficacy was founded 
upon a great variety of experiments, which 
had been made upon brutes, in the presence 
of several gentlemen of the faculty, and be- 
ing desirous of trying their effect upon the 
larger arteries of a human subject, he applied 
to the king for one of the convicts under 
sentence of death in Newgate, whose leg 
might be cut off, and the styptic only ap- 
plied, instead of taking up the vessels the 
usual way. 

He set forth in his petition, among other 
things, that his styptic had been successfully 
applied upon the amputation of the hinder 
leg of a strong dog, and the same limb of 
a full grown ass, in the presence of several 
gentlemen of the faculty, among whom 
were Mr. T. Baker, surgeon of St. Thomas's 
hospital, Mr. George Martin, surgeon, in 
Fenchurch Buildings, and Mr. Louttit, who 
subscribed an attestation of the facts in the 
petition. 

The petition was recommended by the 
sheriffs of London, Thomas Challenor, and 
Henry Banks. 

A petition was also presented at the same 
time by George Clippingdale, then under sen- 
tence of death in Newgate, setting forth that 
he most eagerly embraced that opportunity 
of beseeching his majesty to appoint him 
for the subject of the experiment. 

In consequence of these testimonials and 
petitions, his majesty was pleased to re- 
prieve Clippingdale for the experiment, and 
gave orders to lord Egremont, then secretary 
of state to acquaint the sergeant surgeons 
therewith, which he did by letter, inclosing 
the petition, and dated May 5, 1763. 

After stating the principal facts related 
above, the letter, proceeds in these terms, 
Before the king declares his further re- 
solution on this matter, it is his pleasure 
that you do, taking to your assistance any 
other gentlemen of the faculty, whom 
you shall judge proper, call upon the said 
Thomas Pierce, to state the experiment he 
intends to try, and that you do examine 
into the same, and report your opinion 
as well to the said experiment itself, as 
to the utility to be derived therefrom, as 
soon as possible. 

This order, according to Mr. Pierce, the 
sergeant surgeons did not condescend to o- 
bey, for neither they, nor any person from 
them, did ever call upon him or send to 
him, or make any enquiry concerning the 
experiment to be tried. Mr. Pierce on the 
contrary, waited several times upon Mr. 
Hawkins, but even then Mr. Hawkins refus- 
ed to enter into conversation with him upon 
the subject. 

On the 13th of May, however, the ser- 
geant surgeons Mess. Ranby, Hawkins, and 
Middleton, made their reports to lord Egre- 
mont. 

The report sets forth, that Mr. Pierce's
proposal, with the declaration of the efficacy 
of the medicine, are founded only upon ex- 
periments made upon the blood vessels of 
brutes; that they know from certain expe- 
rience, that this kind of evidence is often 
inconclusive, there being no precise analogy 
between the human arteries and the arteries 
of brutes, with respect to the violence of 
|P_461
the bleedings, and the means necessary to 
stop them, as the hæmorrhages from the arte- 
ries of brutes, are in general stopped much 
more easily, and even frequently will stop of 
themselves. That experiments upon brutes 
therefore cannot give sufficient authority for 
the sergeant surgeons to recommend making 
the experiment proposed in Mr. Pierce's 
petition; but that if his lordship would di- 
rect, and Mr. Pierce would deliver a proper 
quantity of his medicine to some of the sur- 
geons of the hospitals, they would soon 
have opportunities of making safe and suffi- 
cient experiments of its efficacy, upon the 
smaller arteries of men, and that if from 
such trials the medicine appeared to have 
more efficacy than the present known styptics, 
there would be proper encouragement to 
make further experiments upon the large 
arteries, and the convict intended for the ex- 
periment might be reserved for the making 
such trials as should be judged satisfactory 
and important. 

Upon this report it may be observed, that 
the want of precise analogy between the hu- 
man arteries, and the arteries of brutes, 
which is alledged as a reason against the 
experiment on the convict, is the strongest 
reason for that experiment. On whom ought 
an experiment to be tried, that, for all that 
can otherwise be known, may be dange- 
rous, but upon one to whom the experiment 
upon the whole, notwithstanding its danger, 
is an advantage? to the criminal it was a 
chance of life, and, as the only chance, 
earnestly solicited. Why then should this 
benefit to the criminal, which might also ter- 
minate in a very important benefit to the 
publick be witheld, upon pretence that pre- 
vious experiments ought to be made upon 
patients in an hospital? 

This report, however, having been laid be- 
fore his majesty, lord Egremont wrote a se- 
cond letter to the sergeant surgeons, dated 
May 18, to this effect. 

That his majesty approved the procur- 
ing Mr. Pierce's medicines to be tried in the 
hospital, on the smaller arteries of men, and 
desired the sergeant surgeons would accord- 
ingly apply to Mr. Pierce, for that purpose, 
in case he should be willing to put into their 
hands such a quantity as they should judge 
sufficient to make the necessary experiments 
with. That George Clippingdale being already 
reprieved, his majesty had determined he 
should not suffer, but be transported for life, 
unless it should appear to them that there 
were sufficient grounds to preserve him here, 
in order to make any important trials of Mr. 
Pierce's styptic. 

As the sergeant surgeons had not before 
thought fit to comply with his majesty's plea- 
sure, neither did they now think fit to fulfil 
his desire, no application being ever made to 
Mr. Pierce for his medicines. Mr. Pierce
however, waited on the gentlemen of St. 
Thomas's, Guy's, Bartholemew's, and Saint 
George's hospitals, and told them he was 
willing to let them have the medicines to 
make trial of, provided they would suffer 
him to be present when they were applied, 
but to this they would not consent, he did 
however, leave some at St. Thomas's hospital, 
where, instead of being used, they were, if 
Mr. Pierce has been truly informed, analysed 
in order to discover their composition; for 
this reason, he says, he refused to leave any 
with Mr. Gataker, though he candidly assured 
him he would give them a fair trial. 

On the 7th of June, the sergeant surgeons 
made their second report as follows. 

My Lord, 

We are acquainted by Mr. Peirce, that 
he is willing to deliver a quantity of his 
styptic medicines to the surgeons of the hos- 
pitals, in order to have such experiments 
made with them, as to them shall seem pro- 
per; we have likewise seen and consulted 
with several of the surgeons of the hospitals, 
who, we find, have enquired carefully into 
the experiments, upon the merit of which 
Mr. Peirce's petition to his majesty was 
founded, and they seem to apprehend those 
experiments of very little force and value. 
What effectual and safe trials may be made 
with the medicines, they have now under 
consideration. We humbly beg leave to re- 
present to your lordship, that in our own 
opinion, and upon our consultation with those 
gentlemen, we think it will be of no utility 
to the public to preserve the convict in New- 
gate for any experiment upon the subject. 

We are, My Lord, &c. 

London, June 7, 1763. 

John Ranby, 
C. Hawkins, 
D. Middleton. 

Upon comparing the two reports of the 
sergeant surgeons together, it will appear 
that neither the sergeant surgeons, nor hospi- 
tal surgeons, except Mr. Gataker, ever in- 
tended that the efficacy of Mr. Pierce's 
styptic should be determined by experiment. 

The sergeant surgeons, in their first report 
say, that the experiments on brutes are not 
a proper foundation for the experiment on 
the convict, but that opportunities of safe and 
sufficient experiments would soon offer to the 
hospital surgeons, and that if from such trials 
the medicine appeared to be more efficacious 
than others, there would be proper encou- 
ragement to make the experiment on the 
convict. 

From this part of the report it follows that 
the sergeant surgeons, notwithstanding the 
uncertainty of the experiments on brutes, 
thought that safe and sufficient experiments 
might be made on patients in an hospital; 
and that upon the issue of such experiments, the 
experiment on the criminal should de- 
pend. 

By the second report it appears, that the 
hospital surgeons declined to try experiments, 
which the sergeant surgeons were of opinion, 
might be tried safely, for the very reason 
which in the opinion of the sergeant surgeons 
made them necessary, the uncertainty of the 
experiments on brutes; and that the sergeant 
surgeons who had before certified that the 
|P_462
experiment on the criminal ought to depend 
on the experiments in the hospital, now cer- 
tified that it would be to no purpose to pre- 
serve the convict, though no experiment in 
the hospital had been made. 

After this report Mr. Pierce applied again 
to the hospital surgeons, earnestly pressing a 
trial of his medicine, but they said they would 
make no trial, except the sergeant surgeons 
would set them the example. 

Thus the experiment on the convict was 
evaded, upon pretence that previous experi- 
ments in the hospital were necessary, and 
these previous experiments were evaded, up- 
on pretence that they were not properly au- 
thorized. 

After this disappointment Mr. Pierce de- 
sisted from other solicitations, till he read a 
letter from a friend, giving an account that 
his styptic medicines had been successfully 
applied upon a young negro slave, about 19 
years old, whose leg had been bitten off by 
a shark, as he was bathing in a river. 

As this event, properly attested, seemed 
to obviate the principal objection against the 
experiment on a criminal made in the first 
report, that it was not authorized by any 
experiments on brutes, there being no pre- 
cise analogy between their arteries and 
those of men.  Mr. Pierce thought him- 
self sufficiently authorized to solicit another 
trial on a convict. 

He therefore drew up a memorial, to 
which the letter he had received was annexed, 
representing his former application and dis- 
appointment, the serjeant-surgeons declaring 
that experiments on brutes did not authorize 
an experiment on a convict; and the hospital- 
surgeons declaring that they would not make 
the experiment which the serjeant-surgeons 
supposed might be made safely, except the 
serjeant surgeons would first warrant them by 
their example; and alledging the fact related 
in the letter as obviating the first and great ob- 
jection, he prayed that his majesty would or- 
der an experiment to be made on the limb of 
some person already condemned to death; 
and that the operation might be publickly per- 
formed by a person to be appointed by the 
memorialist, every gentleman of the faculties 
of physick and surgery being at liberty to be 
present at the experiment, and to see the first 
dressings. 

This memorial was accompanied with a pe- 
tition of four convicts, earnestly beseeching 
his majesty to permit them undergo the o- 
peration. 

In consequence of this memorial and peti- 
tions, his majesty gave orders that Mr. Pierce
should take whichsoever of the petitioners he 
might think fittest for his purpose, and the 
most deserving of mercy; and Mr. Pierce fix- 
ed upon John Benham, because he was a man 
of better character than the others, had three 
children, and a wife pregnant with a fourth; 
and because being a white-smith, the 
loss of a leg would not prevent him from 
supporting his family honestly by his trade. 
When all things were in readiness, Mr. Pierce
applied to two gentlemen of eminence in the 
profession, who first consented, but afterwards 
declined to perform the operation; he then 
applied to two other gentlemen, with no bet- 
ter success, for after they had consented upon, 
condition they had an authority under his ma- 
jest's hand, they excused themselves to Mr. 
Hume, who had been applied to for such au- 
thority, upon account of supposed danger to 
their persons and characters. 

Mr. Hume then asked Mr. Pierce, if he 
chose to have the serjeant surgeons appointed 
to perform the operation? Mr. Pierce took 
two days to answer this question, what he 
determined he has not told us, but when the 
two days were expired, he went to Mr. Se- 
cretary Conway's, according to appointment, 
where he was received by Mr. Hume, who in- 
formed him that the serjeant surgeons attended 
in the next room, by the king's order, but 
that they had represented the business in so un- 
favourable a light, as greatly to have provok- 
ed Mr. Conway at his presumption in troub- 
ling him with a second application, after he 
had made one of the same kind when Lord 
Egremont was secretary of state, and which 
had been dropped in consequence of the rea- 
sons alledged against it by the serjeant surge- 
geons in their reports. 

What those reasons were the reader has just 
seen; if he does not think them satisfactory 
he will certainly be sorry that the influence of 
the serjeant surgeons was sufficient totally to 
disappoint this second application. 

The effect of their influence is certainly 
pernicious to the publick: The medicine is 
either efficacious or not; if efficacious, many 
will be deprived of its benefit, by fearing to 
use what is not established by experiment; if 
not efficacious, many will trust it to their hurt 
upon such evidence as has been often brought 
in favour of nostrums that are not only in- 
effectual, but pernicious. 

A method of securing large vessels, with- 
out the painful operation of taking them up, 
would certainly prevent infinite misery, and 
preserve many lives; but if such a method 
was actually discovered, it is impossible that 
the publick should be benefited by it, if 
the same methods are taken to prevent its be- 
ing brought to the test of experiment that 
were taken with this, which, for ought that 
appears, may be all that is pretended or de- 
sired. Nothing but a demonstration a priori
that no such medicine can exist, ought to pre- 
clude such experiments as can alone demon- 
strate whether it exists or not. If nothing can 
be inferred from trials upon brutes, and this 
is made a reason against trials upon men, all 
improvement in this important article of sur- 
gery is precluded for ever. 
X. 

