

[^Sample 1: article - 1767_GM_0316^]

|P_316
5. Medical Advice to the consumptive 
and asthmatick people of England; where- 
in the present method of treating disorders 
of the lungs is shewn to be futile and fun- 
damentally wrong, and a new and easy 
method of cure, proposed by Philip Stern, 
M. D.1s. Almon.

The purpose of this advice is to re- 
commend a nostrum invented by the 
author. It is a solution of certain 
balsams in a certain chemical liquor, 
which he says is very volatile, not at 
all inflammatory, and remarkably an- 
tisceptic, and antispasmodic. 

This medicine he applies immediately 
to the lungs by putting a few drops of 
the solution into boiling water, and 
causing the patient to draw in the 
steam with his breath; to facilitate the 
operation, he has contrived a machine, 
of which a representation is prefixed 
to his book. 

He conceals his medicine, he says, 
for no other reason than because if he 
was to discover it so as that it might 
be prepared by every apothecary, it 
would be neglected. 

If this answer is thought insuffi- 
cient, he confesses that he has no bet- 
ter to give. Another, however, tho' 
not a better, will naturally be sus- 
pected. However, it is much to be re- 
gretted, that medicines thus offered to 
the publick are not by appointment 
of the legislature examined by per- 
sons peoperly qualified to ascertain 
their inefficacy or utility. That on 
one hand, a useful discovery might 
not be disregarded as the imposition 
of a quack; and on the other, that the 
weak and credulous might not be de- 
frauded of their money for something 
that is useless, if not hurtful to their 
health. 

The pamphlet is well written, and 
the author has himself given the fol- 
lowing excellent rules for judging 
properly of medicines which are ex- 
posed to sale by persons who conceal 
their ingredients. 

The first general rule is, never to 
pay the least regard to the canting 
of those who pretend, that the good 
of mankind is their sole motive for 
offering their medicine to sale. 

Secondly, disregard all assertions con- 
cerning the excellency of a medicine, 
which are mere assertions, without 
any foundation in reason and experi- 
ment. 

Thirdly, conclude the advertiser to 
be either a knave or a fool in phy- 
sick, who pretends, that his medicine 
will cure several disorders which have 
not the least analogy to each other. 

Fourthly, give no credit to the reci- 
tal of cases, as they are generally in- 
vented by the doctor. 

And lastly, when the doctor writes 
a pamphlet, with an intention to re- 
commend his medicine, if it betray a 
manifest ignorance of his subject, of 
style, and grammar; in short, when 
|P_317
his language is evidently that of a 
porter, conclude him to be some illi- 
terate, ignorant person, whose medi- 
cine and opinions deserve no attention. 

What he says of himself it would 
be injurious to suppress. 

"Concerning myself, and the medi- 
cine I recommend, I do not expect, 
that the reader should have any depend- 
ance on what I may have asserted in the 
preceeding pages; because, if he has 
any knowledge of mankind, he has 
reason to suppose, that I have sacrifi- 
ced the truth to interest and a favourite 
hypothesis. My assertions however 
are very few, except what relates to 
the experiment to prove the antiscep- 
tic quality of this vapour; but as it 
is in every one's power to repeat the 
experiment, it will be an easy matter 
to convict me of falsehood or confirm 
the truth. All I expect of the reader 
is, that he will impartially consider the 
reasons, upon which I have founded 
my expectations of curing disorders 
of the lungs by means of this balsa- 
mic vapour. If he is of opinion, that 
I have reasoned justly, he will certain- 
ly think it adviseable for those whose 
lungs are injured, to try the experi- 
ment, especially as it cannot possibly 
be attended with any danger; and as 
to the expence, it will certainly be 
thought most inconsiderable, when 
compared with the fees of a physician, 
and the bills of an apothecary. "
X. 

