

[^Sample 1: article - 1767_GM_0072^]

|P_72
[}Observations on some extraordinary symp- 
toms, occasioned by Nutmeg taken in 
too great a quantity. By Dr Jacob 
Schmidius. }]
A Gentleman of Lower Silesia, about 
thirty-six years old, of a good 
constitution, and who enjoyed a good 
state of health, having felt, during 
some days, some cholic pains, took it 
in his head, by way of remedy, to eat 
four nutmegs, which weighed all to- 
gether two ounces, and he drank, in 
eating them, some glasses of beer; 
which he had no sooner done, but was 
seized with a great heat, a violent pain 
in the head, a vertigo and delirium, 
and we instantly deprived of the use of 
sight, speech, and all his senses. He 
was put to bed, where he remained 
two days and two nights; his body 
was oppressed with lassitude, always 
drowsy, yet without being able to sleep. 
The third day he was in that lethargic 
state which is called a coma vigil, with 
a weak and intermitting pulse. Cepha- 
lic remedies, cordials, and among o- 
thers, the spirit of cephalic vitriol, 
and the essence of castoreum, were ad- 
minister'd in good spirit of sal ammo- 
niac. The fourth day he recovered a 
little, but had absolutely lost his me- 
mory; so as not to remember the least 
thing he had done in his life. A con- 
tinued fever then came on, accompa- 
nied by an obstinate watchfulness; a 
palpitation of the heart seemed to be 
the fore-runner of other symptoms, 
and he was finally struck with a palsy 
in all his limbs. 

At the expiration of eight days, he 
recovered the use of reason, and said, 
that during the first four days of his 
illness, he seemed to himself to have 
constantly a thick veil before his eyes, 
and that a great number of sparks and 
flashes continually issued from it. All 
the bad symptoms of this malady 
yielded at last successively to the conti- 
nued use of remedies suited to his con- 
dition; and in three months time he 
was perfectly recovered, but he was 
particularly indebted, for his cure, to 
mercurial and ammoniacal remedies. 

According to chemical principles, it 
might, perhaps, be said, that the aro- 
matic and oily salt contained in nut- 
meg, of which this patient had taken 
too large a dose, had immediately ex- 
cited so great an agitation in the hu- 
mours, and so rapid a motion in the 
animal spirits, as in some measure to 
partake of the nature of fire, and that 
a viscid and narcotic sulphur, which 
resides likewise in the nutmeg, tho' in 
a less sensible manner, being carried, 
at the same time, into the mass of 
blood, by suddenly fixing the animal 
spirits, and intercepting their course 
in the nerves, had afterwards caused 
the stupor in the limbs, the aphony, 
and the palsy. But I leave others to ex- 
plain these phænomena, my only view, 
by communicating this observation, 
being to shew that the immoderate use 
of nutmeg may be attended with very 
great danger. 

