

[^Sample 1: article - 1767_GM_0545^]

|P_545
[}Recipe's for Diseases of the Breast and 
Lungs, from taking Cold. }]
THE signs of having taken cold, 
are lassitude, tickling in the throat, 
and snuffling in the nose, &c. On the 
first appearance of these symptoms, di- 
lute plentifully with weak wine whey, 
or, if costive, with tamarind whey, or 
what is commonly called imperial, viz. 
A quart of boiling water poured upon 
an ounce of cream of tartar, in fine 
powder, and a little fresh lemon peel, 
made palatable with sugar or capillaire; 
or it may be sweetened by dissolving an 
ounce of the best manna, the whole of 
which may be drank in a few hours. 
If a fever should come on, lose blood, 
and take of the following medecine, three 
large spoonfuls every four hours. 

Take salt of wormwood, two drams; the 
juice of three large lemons. Put the 
salt into a stone bason that will contain 
a quart, then pour the lemon juice upon 
it by degrees, stirring the mixture with 
an ivory spoon: after it has done fer- 
menting, add a pint of milk water, four 
large spoonfuls of capillaire, and two 
spoonfuls of French brandy. 

This will soon abate the fever, when 
the following medicine may be taken 
every four hours, to the quantity of a 
tea spoon full, or two, for a dose. 

Take of white sugar-candy, in fine pow- 
der, one ounce; of the chemical oil of ani- 
seed, 30 drops; rub them well together; 
then add of spermaceti, in powder, half 
an ounce. Mix together, & keep for use. 

If the cough should, notwithstanding, 
continue, as will sometimes be the case, 
the following will be proper. 

Take of choice olibanum, in powder, 
one ounce, flowers of benzoin, two drams, 
pure honey, one ounce. Mix them toge- 
ther in a stone (or glass) mortar, then gra- 
dually pour on a pint of the best moun- 
tain wine; put the mixture into a wide- 
mouth bottle; let it stand near the fire 
for three days, frequently shaking it, 
then strain it off. Half a table spoon- 
ful may be taken, once in six hours, in 
a gill of the following ptisan. 

Take of pearl barley, well cleansed, of 
China root, bruised, of sarsaparilla, each 
one ounce; of candied eryngo, one ounce. 
Boil these ingredients in three pints of 
soft water, to a quart; then strain off, 
and add a pint of new milk. 

This will make an excellent substitute 
for asses milk, and will not only serve as 
an admirable vehicle for the pectoral es- 
sence, but will be highly proper to be u- 
sed for common drink by consumptive 
people. 

