

[^Sample 1: article - 1767_GM_0340^]

|P_340
SIR, 

[}The Assizes for Hampshire are adjourned 
from July 17, to Sept. 2, on account of an 
infectious distemper in Winchester Goal. }]
THE public may be rather concern- 
ed than surprized at the deplorable 
consequences of goal-distempers, and at 
the fatal instances of their contagion. 
Several Judges, Sheriffs, Magistrates, 
Juries, and whole Courts of Judicature, 
have been infected by those contagious 
diseases, which caused the loss of many 
valuable lives, particularly of late years 
at the old Baily, (See vol. xx. p. 233.) 
and formerly at the Assizes in Oxford, 
(See also vol. xx. p. 235.) all owing 
to the horrid neglects of goalers, and 
even of the sheriffs and magistrates whose 
office it is to compel the goalers, by 
the most rigorous repeated orders and 
attention to do their duty, without the 
least indulgence or remission, as the goal- 
ers are (some excepted) frequently low- 
bred, mercenary, and oppressive bar- 
barous fellows, who think of nothing 
but enriching themselves by the most 
cruel extortion, and who have less re- 
gard for the life of a poor prisoner than 
for the life of a brute. 

The felons in this country lie worse 
than dogs or swine, and are kept much 
more uncleanly than those animals are 
in kennels or sties, according to all ac- 
counts, from clergymen who are obli- 
ged to go to the goals, from whom I 
have been often assured, that the stench 
and nastiness are so nauseous that the 
very atmosphere is pestiferous, and that 
no person enters there without the risque 
of his health and life, which prevents 
even many clergymen and physicians 
from going there and assisting any sick 
or dying men; so that they live and 
die like brutes, even worse than many 
beasts, to the difgrace of all humane 
sentiments. 

Every person, endowed with the least 
principle of real humanity and of true 
policy, must be affected with such bar- 
barities, neglects, uncleanliness, and 
dangers. A contagion of that kind 
may spread over a whole country, and 
kingdom; the greatest precautions ought 
therefore to be taken in time. 

The goalers ought to be forced to 
have all the rooms sprinkled and fumi- 
gated with vinegar every day; as should 
all the felons before their appearance in 
a court of judicature; for some hundred 
prisoners, particularly criminals, are 
yearly killed by a sort of pestilence and 
vermin among them, occasioned by filth, 
nastiness, and a corrupted air. 

A Philanthropist. 

P. S.  All hospitals, prisons, and 
work houses, should have bathing places, 
for the sake of cleanliness and health, 
as in Asia. 


