

[^Sample 1: article - 1767_GM_0052^]

|P_52
[}Observations concerning the Effects of 
Charcoal, and other Vapours. From 
Boerhaave's Academical Lectures 
on the Diseases of the Nerves, pub- 
lished in Latin at Leyden. }]
WHILST Van Helmont, then an 
old man, was writing on a cold 
winter's day, he saw his ink freeze, and 
he ordered a chafing-dish to be brought 
him, with coals that did not smoke.— 
He felt no harm from it; but his 
daughter, coming in shortly after, and 
saying that she perceived a strong stench 
from the coals, the father, making a 
motion for quitting the place, fell back, 
hurt the hinder part of his head, and 
was carried away for dead. It may ap- 
pear, from this singular example, that 
in a spacious place, the doors open, 
the weather cold, without the least ob- 
servation of contracting any illness, 
all the actions of a man were in a mo- 
ment abolished by nothing more than 
these fumes. Boerhaave relates of him- 
self, that being in a parlour, drinking 
tea with some ladies, where there was 
a chafing-dish of kindled charcoal for 
keeping the kettle boiling, and no 
chimney in the place, he saw all the 
ladies grow pale, and was so affected 
himself by the fumes of the charcoal, 
that had not the doors been opened, 
he felt himself tottering, and ready to 
tumble down. He likewise relates the 
same effects on some young ladies who 
lived in Leyden, and were sitting in a 
parlour, the windows of which looked 
into the street: The aunt of the mis- 
tress of the house, looking in at the 
window, gave notice of her coming by 
tapping on the glass with her fingers; 
she saw through the window all the la- 
dies seated and looking at her, but not 
one of them making the least motion; 
she repeated her taps, and so as to be 
louder, but none of them made her any 
answer; thinking they were passing 
some joke on her, she knock'd in a pas- 
sion, at the door, calling out, that the 
weather was too cold to be kept so 
long in the street. On entering the par- 
lour, she perceived the fumes of char- 
coal, and saw all the ladies pale and 
senseless; immediately she ordered the 
windows to be opened, and all their 
faces to be sprinkled with water; by 
this means all of them soon recovered, 
but one of them vomited, another had 
a head-ach, yet none of them suffered 
any thing more. 

An English gentleman, travelling by 
boat in the night, from Utrecht to Ley- 
den, took with him into his cabbin a 
stove, and ordered the door to be kept 
shut: When he came to his place of 
destination, the waterman, opening the 
door, found him dead, with no other 
apparent sign than a little froth about 
his mouth—Four peasants having made 
a fire in the hold of a ship, were all 
found dead there.—An intire family in 
the suburbs, called de Hooge Morsch, 
were found dead from this cause, by 
laying, in the winter-time, a pan of 
live coals in the midst of a room where 
there was no chimney, and the doors 
shut. 

Boerhaave says, that he experienced 
in himself, at the beginning of the ill 
effects from such vapours, an inclina- 
tion to sleep, a tensive pain in the head, 
a nausea, a vomiting of thick froth, 
and his head remaining as it were for 
many days full; but if the vapour be 
dense, nothing of these particulars is 
perceptible, but the affected die sense- 
less. This vapour, however, is not at- 
tended with any inconveniency, if a 
quantity of sea salt is sprinkled on the 
|P_53
fire, or if gunpowder is set fire to in the 
close room. But when the ill effects 
have taken place, the best remedy is to 
sprinkle cold water on the bodies, and to 
throw it upon the face and bare bosom. 
If cold water is instantly thrown upon 
animals that have died in poisonous ca- 
verns, they are immediately brought 
to life; and hence, if men, who have 
died by the vapour of coals, were as 
soon as possible treated in the same 
manner, they might also perhaps be 
brought to life. In such cases, how- 
ever, this remedy is never to be ne- 
glected; for here there is no corrup- 
tion, but a mere rest of all the moving 
parts, and in other respects nothing is 
changed; if therefore they are dipped 
into cold water, the elasticity of the 
vessels being increased by the cold, the 
blood moves towards the inner parts 
through the veins; and the motion of 
the blood through the veins resuscitates 
its action to the heart, that is, resusci- 
tates life itself. 

The effects are not less noxious that 
proceed from places newly white-wash- 
ed with lime, which diffuses a sub- 
astringent and fœtid vapour, especially 
upon the introduction of fire. For this 
reason, all newly-built houses, if too 
soon inhabited, may bring on fatal dis- 
orders, or the worst or palsies, which 
can neither be cured by fomentations 
nor baths. These ailments might like- 
wise be occasioned by burning the parts 
of animals. If a place infected with 
the nastiest insects, as bugs or fleas, is 
shut up close in all parts, and the bones 
of animals or hartshorn are laid on the 
open fire, and the smoak is hindered 
to pass out, all these animals are kill- 
ed; and larger animals may also be 
killed by the like smoak. The wings 
of partridges, which abound with a 
volatile salt, being burnt, have often 
excited hysterical passions, and epileptic 
fits, where they were not, and dissipated 
them, when they were present. A dog, 
killed in a heat of 146 degrees of Fa- 
renheit's thermometer, emitted such a 
horrid and noisome stench, that those 
who came too near it, in a moment 
swooned away. In like manner, by 
the force of fire, dreadful symptoms 
are excited from fossils. Arctæus ob- 
serves, in his chapter on Epilepsies, 
that the strong smell of the gagates 
stone had immediately brought on epi- 
lepic fits. Fire, acting on cobalt, which 
seems to be intirely inert, raises a thick 
white vapour, that kills every animal; 
and this vapour, fixing upon the ciel- 
ing of a room, concretes into a white 
flocculent matter, called Arsenic, which 
is a most potent poison. If this cobalt, 
mixed with other fossils, and wrapped 
up in a paper, be kept in a wooden 
box, it will eat through both the paper 
and the box; and if this happens in so 
small a degree of heat, what must it 
be, when this body is agitated by fire? 
How fixed is nitre, whatever way tried! 
If it melts in the fire, it remains fixed 
and mild; if bolar or uncalcinable 
earths are mixed with it, and both ex- 
posed to the fire, it will yield a spirit, 
volatile like alcohol, which corrodes 
and dissolves all things, except gold 
and glass; and it is very hurtful to the 
lungs. The same way a spirit ascends 
from sea salt, which corrodes all things. 
If sulphur be sublimed ten times, it 
remains mild, as before; but, if set on 
fire, it kills animals, and corrodes and 
constringes all things. 

