

[^Sample 1: article - 1767_GM_0535^]

|P_535
Mr. Urban. 

BEING a constant reader of your 
Magazine, I am desirous thro' your 
channel, to offer to the publick (for the 
benefit of all those who are afflicted 
with that dreadful disease, the stone and 
gravel) the following remedy, which 
was communicated to me by a gentle- 
man of America. 

|P_536
My case was so bad I was scarce able 
to walk across my room, and when I 
turned in my bed could find the stone 
roul round my bladder, which caused 
exquisite pain; I was so much dispirited 
as to have given up all hopes of cure, 
(for I had tried the soap and many other 
remedies) till I was directed by the gen- 
tleman just mentioned, to drink a glass 
of cold spring water, (about a quarter 
of a pint) the moment I rose in the 
morning, and the same the last thing 
before I went to bed at night. I fol- 
lowed this advice, and after a little trial 
found myself better, and by a continu- 
ance am so entirely freed from that dis- 
order that I can ride over the stones 
from one end of the town to the other, 
or use any sort of exercise without the 
least pain or obstruction. What is be- 
come of the stone I so long felt in my 
blader I know not, but suppose it de- 
solved and came away by the great quan- 
tity of sand voided at sundry times, for 
it is certain I have none there now; as 
I am often troubled with the gout I 
abstain from drinking the water while 
that is upon me, after which I find a 
return of the gravel, but upon drinking 
the water again, am presently relieved, 
therefore I am determined to continue 
the use of it during my life. 

As I am assured of your readiness to 
contribute to the good of all mankind, 
and as that is my only intent in this 
communication, I need make no apology 
for this trouble. 
I am, Sir, &c. 

⁂  This correspondent should have men- 
tioned particularly the waters by which he re- 
ceived so much benefit; for it is certain that 
some waters are great dissolvents. The wa- 
ters of Enix hill, near Worcester, will dissolve 
the hardest incrustations on the inside of tea- 
kettles, and perhaps the Malvern, and many 
other waters have the same quality; but there 
are waters in other places that will cause the 
stone. 


