

[^Sample 1: article - 1767_GM_0397^]

|P_397
Mr. Urban, 
Leigh, Aug. 8, 1767. 

THE Hydrops Pectoris, or dropsy of 
the breast, is a collection of matter 
in the cavity of the Thorax, which 
though a disease that seldom happens, 
yet has been but too often mistaken for 
some other disorder of that place, to 
the sad destruction of the patient. 

We had lately in our neighbourhood, 
a young gentlewoman of fortune, that 
with her husband resided chiefly at 
Westminster, who, by a blow from the 
pole of her chariot on her breast, fell 
into this kind of dropsy, and her physi- 
cians not suspecting the true state of 
her case, it proved fatal. This unfor- 
tunate accident put me upon writing on 
the subject, in order to prevent the like 
mischief for the future. 

The disease itself is only a collection 
of matter, flowing from ruptured lym- 
phatics in one or both cavities of the 
breast, on each side of the mediastinum. 

The symptoms are, oppression of the 
Præcordia, and extraordinary shortness 
of breath, which abate when the pati- 
ent is in bed, or lying in a supine pos- 
ture, and increase when he is sitting or 
standing, quite contrary to other asth- 
ma's, for which it has been mistaken; 
for in them the afflicted, during the pa- 
roxism, are not able to lie down, the 
muscles of the breast in such having a 
freer motion when erect. 

In a dropsy in the breast, the includ- 
ed water, when the body is standing or 
sitting, by its weight presses so on the 
Diaphragm or Midriff (which like a 
partition, separates the two cavities of 
breast and belly) that respiration is per- 
formed with difficulty; while by lying 
along, that floating load is so disposed, 
as to facilitate that important operation 
of nature. 

Relief on lying down may be taken 
for an infallible pathognomonic sign, to 
distinguish an Hydrops Pectoris from 
other more frequent diseases of the 
breast, that occasion also a shortness of 
breathing. 

The cure is plain and easy: only to 
give vent to the water, which produces 
death at last if not discharged, and sel- 
dom gathers again after the operation; 
if it should, the operation must be re- 
peated till the absorbent vessels reassume 
their wonted imbibing office again. 
Whence you see, if any die of this dis- 
order, it is rather from neglect, or 
want of skill, than from the nature of 
the disease. 

Use the paracenthesis by all means 
then, in all such pectoral cases (as in 
empyemas) when the disease is known, 
without which, death is almost inevi- 
table. 

This easy operation is only a small 
perforation made at once by a Tro- 
char, between the third and fourth ribs, 
counting from below upwards, about 
a finger's breadth below the point of 
the scapula, and about the same distance 
from the spine of the back, into the ca- 
vity of the thorax, just, as in tapping for 
an ascites or belly dropsy, a perfora- 
tion is made into the abdomen. It is 
effected with less pain and trouble, than 
cutting an issue, and without that trou- 
ble and tedious method of successively 
dividing every integument, flowly with 
a knife or lancet, as directed in surge- 
cal treatises. After penetration, put 
the patient in a posture to favour the dis- 
charge of the water. 

This operation will not be attended 
with danger, although no water should 
be found, and I therefore ordered it in 
a doubtful case, on Mr. J. S. when an 
infant, being, upon a supposition of an 
empyema, called in at the last to direct 
his surgeon, who either from ignorance 
or knavery, had kept his patient many 
weeks in hand, under pretence of an in- 
ward imposthume, for which he continued 
|P_398
tenting long borough holes running 
under the skin only, between the ribs, 
and not penetrating the breast, till they 
stunk immoderately. 

I ordered all the tents to be thrown 
away, and a small perforation (with a 
lancet to be made; a trochar which he in- 
tended to use being too big) to pass between 
the ribs. The result was, a few spoon- 
fuls of lymph only, and no pus was 
discharged, which at once satisfied 
us, that no corrupt matter was detained 
in the cavity. He soon did well, and 
though at that time he was almost a 
skeleton, he is now a young man vi- 
gorous and healthy. I mention this 
case, to shew that the operation may be 
performed without danger, and to en- 
courage others to do it without fear, 

Yours, S. COOK. 

