

[^Sample 1: article - 1767_GM_0360^]

|P_360
[}The Case of a Lady who died of a 
Tympany. }]
LADY Hastings, daughter of the 
late Rev. Dr. Moses Terry, of Lin- 
coln, was, in the prime of life, subject 
to the dropsy, without any very ma- 
terial decay of her health and spirits, 
which she enjoyed to an uncommon de- 
gree, notwithstanding the increase of the 
disorder. After having procured the 
advice of the best physicians, who con- 
sulted together upon her case, the disor- 
der was left to take its course. Her 
belly was swelled to an enormous size 
by the water collected between the skin 
and the flesh, and which, if struck, 
sounded like a drum. Indeed her skin 
by the swelling, was not unlike the 
parchment on the head of a drum, and 
was stretched and braced nearly as 
tight. When the disorder was about 
ten years standing, it began to bear very 
hard upon her strength (though she had 
still no complaint of sickness, or any 
thing but the cumbersomeness of her 
own weight) and she had therefore no 
power to walk, or hardly to stand. A 
chair of a convenient make and size, con- 
trived so that she might wheel herself 
about therein, was accordingly prepared 
for her, as was also a coach of uncom- 
mon dimensions, for her to ride out 
in. 

Whenever she rode in her coach she 
had always another person that used to 
sit exactly opposite to her, with her knees 
closely fixed against hers, lest any vio- 
lent motion should throw her forwards. 
Though her strength was much impaired 
under such an amazing pressure, yet she 
was very lively, and saw a great deal of 
company, and used to bear a part in con- 
versation with extraordinary chearful- 
ness. She lived very abstemiously, and 
this kept her up for many years longer, 
probably, than otherwise she would have 
sustained herself. 

During the last year of her life she 
was swelled so much that she was unable 
to move or help herself, and would 
have thought death a happy deliverance 
from a life now rendered insupportable. 
Her bulk, at the time I am now speak- 
ing of, exceeded that of large sugar 
hogshead; and, however amazing this 
may seem, there are several now living 
at Lincoln that well knew her, and saw 
her when she was in this condition, that 
can vouch for the truth of it. 

One day, as she was sitting with com- 
pany, she felt herself on a sudden so 
much easier and lighter, that she could 
not help signifying it by her countenance 
to those she was with, which she had 
hardly done before the cause of it was 
plainly discovered, by a prodigious quan- 
tity of water running upon the floor in a 
plentiful stream. She was delighted be- 
yond expression at this discharge of her 
load, and looked upon it as a favourable 
symptom that would precede a cure.--- 
But neither she, nor her friends, who 
gladly took part in her joy, obtained 
their wishes; for the flesh mortified, 
and she died the fourth day after this 
happened, a shocking spectacle indeed! 
Her belly, after this rupture, was as 
black as ink, and the fkin hung down 
over her knees upon the floor. Such an 
instance of magnitude had not been 
known by any body then living; and 
how she could carry upwards of 40 gal- 
lons of water within her will be amaz- 
ing, no doubt, to those who never before 
heard of her case; but this astonishing 
quantity absolutely came from her when 
she burst. From the time this happened 
to the day on which she died, she felt no 
pain or uneasiness, and was thorough- 
ly sensible when she fetched her last 
breath. 

She lies buried in Lincoln cathedral, 
with some notifications of the singularity 
of the distemper which ended her life. 

