

[^Sample 1: article - 1767_GM_0590^]

|P_590
Mr. Urban, 

THERE is an odd phenomenon attend- 
ing the human body, as singular as 
common: That a person is shorter stand- 
ing than lying; and shorter in the even- 
ing when he goes to bed, than in the 
morning when he rises. 

This remark was first made in Eng- 
land, and afterwards confirmed at Pa- 
ris, by M. Morand, a member of the 
the Royal Academy of Sciences in France, 
and by the Abbot Fontina likewise. 

The last mentioned person found, 
from a year's experience, that ordina- 
rily in the night he gained five or six 
lines, and lost near as much in the day. 

The cause of which effect, so ancient, 
so common, but so lately perceived, 
proceeds from the different state or con- 
dition of the inter-vertebral annular 
cartilages. 

The vertebræ, or joints of the spine, 
are kept separate, though joined by par- 
ticular cartilages, every one of which 
has a spring. These yield on all sides, 
without any inflexion of the spine, to 
the weight of the head and upper extre- 
mities; but this is done by very small 
and imperceptible degrees, and most of 
all when the upper parts of the body are 
loaded with any exterior weight. So 
that a man is really taller after lying 
some time, than after walking, or car- 
rying a burthen a great while. 

For this reason it is, that in the day, 
and evening, while one is sitting or stand- 
ing, the superior parts of the body that 
weigh or press upon the inferior, press 
those elastic annular cartilages, the bo- 
ney jointed work is contracted, the su- 
perior parts of the body descend towards 
the inferior, and proportionably as one 
approaches the other, the height of the 
stature diminishes. 

Hence is was, that a fellow inlisting 
for a soldier, by being measured over- 
night, was found difficient in height, 
and therefore refused; but by accident 
being gaged again the next morning, 
and coming up to the stature, he was 
admitted. 

On the contrary, in the night time, 
when the body is laid a-bed, as it is in 
an horizontal situation, or nearly so, the 
superior parts do not weigh, or but very 
little upon the interior; the spring of 
the cartilages is unbent, the vertebræ 
are removed from one another, the long 
jointed work of the spine is dilated, and 
the body is thereby prolonged; so that 
a person finds himself about half an 
inch, or more, higher in stature in the 
morning, than when going to bed. This 
is the most natural and simple reason that 
can be given, for the different heights 
of the same person at different times. 
J. Cook. 

