

[^Sample 1: article - 1767_GM_0595^]

|P_595
59. A Review of the Venereal Disease, 
and its Remedies. By William For- 
dyce, Surgeon. 2 s.Spilsbury. 

Among mistakes in former writers on this 
subject, Mr. Fordyce reckons the following: 

1. That any purgative long used will ef- 
fectually cure a clap. 

2. That the patient should not be blooded 
till after a month's purging, even in sanguine 
temperaments, and where the complaint is 
obstinate. Sydenham. 

3. That mercurials are never necessary in 
the first species of gonorrhea. 

4. That in the gonorrhea which affects 
Morgagni's glauds, and the seminal vesicles, 
the cure may be rested on plaisters, oint- 
ments, fomentations, pultices, the knife, the 
sweating-box, diet-drinks, abstinence, and 
salivation. Boerhaave. 

5. That in a confirmed pox, the cure con- 
sists in drawing off all the fat of the body, e- 
ven to the last particle. 

6. That a gonorrhea never terminates in a 
pox, provided the matter loaded with the ve- 
nereal infection is freely and copiously dis- 
charged. Astruc. 

Mr. Fordyce, in the course of his tract, lays 
down the following positions, which he says 
his own experience has proved to be true. 

1. When mercurial unctions are necessary, 
the salutary effect does not arise from the sa- 
livation so much as from the quantity of 
quicksilver necessary to extinguish the symp- 
toms. 

2. Swellings in the testicles which do not 
yield to the hydrargyrosis, distortions of the 
penis, nodes, gaglions, tubercles, exostosei, 
gummata, cancerous appearances, old vene- 
real sores, and ulcers in the womb, which A- 
struc pronounces to be incurable, do frequent- 
ly yield to some kinds of mineral water, 
strong decoctions of sarsaparilla, and hemlock
outwardly and inwardly applied. 

3. The solution of corrosive sublimate, re- 
commended by Vansweiten, and dispensed un- 
der as many quackish names as there are 
advertisements in the news-papers, cannot be 
depended upon for the cure of the venereal 
disease in any stage. 

4. A bad clap will frequently become a 
pox by trusting to the running. 

5. Astringents, injections, and balsamics, 
are pernicious. 

6. The purges used in this disease should be 
gentle, and by no means administered daily. 

7. Cancerous buboes, that resisted all other 
remedies, have yielded to Storck's hemlock. 

8. Pocky symptoms, when the body is other- 
wise in perfect health, yeild to a proper quan- 
tity of mercurial ointment. 

9. Guaiacum is of little use in this disease; 
so, for ought that appears to this author, are 
decoctions of bardana and mezerion, sapona- 
ria, lobelia, and many others that have been 
much cried up. 

10. A cure in a virulent gonorrhea is never 
effected, but a pox generally brought on by 
mercurial injections. 

11. Genuine mercury is to be preferred to 
its ores; the native and factitious cinnabar, 
and the antimonial kinds inwardly and out- 
wardly applied, have produced bad effects, 
both in the hands of this writer and Dr. Astruc. 

12. Mercury dissolved with acids is perni- 
cious, especially the turpeths, corrosive sub- 
limate, or sublimate dulcified by repeated sub- 
limations. and mercurials precipitated. Of 
some of these half a grain, a fourth part, or e- 
ven less, and that diluted too, will produce 
anxieties, tremblings, vomitings, hyperca- 
tharses, convulsions, aud sometimes death. 

13. All mercurial applications to a vene- 
real sore of any kind, before the infection is 
wholly conquered are pernicious. 

14. If the habit be scrophulous or scorbu- 
tic, a small quantity of mercurial ointment 
rubbed on any part of the body, will often 
produce a violent salivation of several weeks, 
and, after all, the venereal taint will remain; 
scorbutic and scrophulous dispositions, there- 
fore, must be corrected before a cure can be 
effected by mercury. 

The author's method of curing a virulent 
gonorrhea is this. 

Procure from two to four stools every other 
day, for the first fourteen days, and the same 
number every third day for the second fourteen 
days, by half an ounce of salts and manna. 
If, after this time, the running is not conside- 
rably diminished, or become of a better co- 
lour or consistence, the thighs, particularly 
the inside of them, should be rubbed with an 
ointment consisting of equal parts of crude 
mercury and hog's lard, to the quantity of an 
ounce or more, at due intervals, purging me- 
dicines being intermixed at proper distances, 
even though the chordee and heat of urine 
should still subsist; or take Bellost's pill, 
called also the blue pill, ten grains to an 
dose. Fermented liquors, rich food, and ex- 
ercise should be avoided. 

Upon this part of the author's work it may 
be observed, that whether it is indended 
for the practitioner or patient, it is de- 
fective; for although he condemns Boer- 
haave's principle, that mercurials are never 
necessary in the first species of gonorrhea, 
yet in this direction for its cure, he does not 
advise mercurials, either internally or exter- 
nally, except untoward symptoms remain after 
purging with manna and salts a month. Ei- 
ther mercurials should be administered if such 
symptoms do not remain, which is not here 
directed, or the cure is to be depended upon 
without mercurials, according to a principle 
which is condemned; and when the ease 
happens in which the author recommends 
mercury, he is not explicit with respect to the 
friction, though he is with respect to the pill. 
He says an ounce, or more, should be rubbed 
in at due intervals and that purging medicines 
should be intermixed at proper distances; but 
what those intervals and distances are, or how 
much more than an ounce may be applied, he 
has left undetermined. 

|P_596
The book is, however, written with in- 
telligence and candour; the author confesses 
his mistakes, and seems to found his princi- 
ples wholly upon experience. 

He mentions one characteristic of the ve- 
nereal disease, the knowledge of which may 
free many persons, conscious to practices that 
may have contracted it, from the most tor- 
menting anxiety upon trifling disorders that 
resemble some symptoms of that malady. It 
is, says Mr. Fordyce, always in a progressive 
state, growing worse every hour. 

He also confesses that a virulent gonorrhea 
cannot be speedily cured, if it be cured effec- 
tually; that it will often run out to two or 
three months and in some cases to five or six, 
if the severest regimen is not observed: It is 
to be hoped, therefore, that quacks and no- 
strum-mongers, who impudently pretend to 
cure it in a few days, without confinement, or 
alteration of diet, will be no longer believed, 
to the destruction of the miserable and delu- 
ded patient, & perhaps of a wife and family. 

In his last section, the author has consider- 
ed the present state of the venereal disease 
among us, and is of opinion, that so far 
from being on the decline, it is gaining 
ground, which, indeed, from some particu- 
lars in this account is very probable, for the 
author tells us of one man who got a clap by 
dining upon turtle, and of another who in- 
curred the same misfortune, by carrying some 
Cayan pepper about him in an handkerchief. 

X. 

