

[^Sample 1: article - 1767_GM_0544^]

|P_544
Mr. Urban, 

A Substance has of late years been 
introduced into the diet of inva- 
lids of this country, the right prepara- 
tion of which seems to be generally un- 
known. 

The substance I mean is the root 
called Salep or Saleb, a species of Orchis, 
growing plentifully in many parts of 
the east, in Syria and some parts of 
Persia especially. 

This root seems to be first parboiled, 
or some how exposed to the steam of hot 
water (in the manner, perhaps, in which 
the Chinese prepare their ginseng) it is 
then dried, and will keep for any known 
length of time. 

This root is of a tough, solid texture, 
and incapable of being dried to such a 
degree of brittleness, as to be reduced 
to powder, without considerable labour. 

The common way of using this pow- 
der is, to mix a tea spoonful of it with 
a quarter or half a point of hot water, 
stirring them well together, adding a 
little wine, sugar, and spice of any kind 
to the person's taste. 

It is become the practice of most at- 
tendants on the sick, in the quality of 
nurses and such like assistants, to give 
them this preparation, in all circum- 
stances and conditions, but more particu- 
larly to the feeble convalescents, as a 
restorative and strengthener. 

Salep in powder is almost insipid, and 
mixed in this manner in hot water, soon 
becomes a viscid, glutinous, tasteless mess, 
thicker or thinner as the proportion of 
water and powder are more or less. 
Wine, sugar, spices, give it any taste, 
that is desired. But still it is glutinous, 
viscid, in many stomachs quite indigesti- 
ble, and to most disagreeable. 

I am informed that the following is 
the manner in which it is prepared for 
use, in those countries where it has been 
the longest used, and where it is there- 
fore likely to be the best understood. 

Let a spoonful of the fine powder of 
Salep be well mixed with a quart of cold 
water, and then set upon the fire. It 
must be kept incessantly stirring, and 
gently boiling, till a little of it when 
cool appears a perfect jelly; thicker 
or thinner, according as it is desired. 

Before it is taken from the fire, either 
a little mace, or cinnamon or lemon peel 
is put in, or none of them, at the patient 
or prescriber's option, sugar and wine are 
added likewise, as the physicians say, 
ad libitum. 

Prepared in this manner, the Salep 
seems to be no improper addition to the 
diet of convalescents, or in hectick cases. 
But to give it promiscuously in all cases, 
as is done with herb teas, whey, barley 
water, and the like, is scarcely prudent. 
The powder mixed with warm water, 
in a weak stomach is utterly indigestible. 

Boiled in the manner above-menti- 
oned, it may stand on a level with other 
gelutinous preparations of the like con- 
sistence. It is a variety, and may be to 
some persons, and in some cases, a plea- 
sing variety; but in respect to real use, 
I think it should be rated very low in 
the scale of benefits to this country or 
its inhabitants. 

A LICENTIATE. 

