

[^Sample 1: article - 1767_GM_0542^]

|P_542
[}An Account of a Topical Remedy for the 
cure of ulcerated Cancers. By M. I. 
C. Soultzer, Councellor of the Court 
and first Physician to his Royal High- 
ness the Duke of Saxe Gotha; trans- 
lated from the French. }]
AN effectual cure for a cancer is still 
among the Desiderata of physic: 
mercury, antimony, and all other alte- 
ratives have been long tried, and often 
found to fail: I have also tried the Bel- 
ladona or night shade, and I find that 
after long fatiguing the patient by the 
great dryness which it occasions in the 
throat, it does indeed render the suppu- 
ration more laudable, and check the 
progress of the disease, but it never 
effects the cure, and the sick though they 
languish a little longer, certainly perish 
at last. The Cicuta or Hemlock is a 
more powerful remedy; but though it 
has been successfully administered in 
cutaneous disorders, though it has re- 
solved schirrouses, and, as it were pre- 
pared the body for my topical remedy, 
|P_543
yet it has but rarely cured an ulcerated 
cancer, being frequently unsuccessful in 
the hands of Mr. Storck himself, as 
appears by his own account. The topi- 
cal remedy which I now offer to the 
public is simple, harmless, and easily to 
be procured, not only by the rich but 
the poor. 

Take carrots fresh gathered, (Daucus 
sativus) and reduce them to a coarse 
powder, with a rasp such as bakers use 
for their bread; squeeze out the juice by 
pressing them in your hand, and then 
warm the pulp either on a palate or in an 
earthen pipkin, and apply it in the man- 
ner of a thick poultice; if there are holes 
or hollows of any kind, they must be 
filled so that the poultice may touch 
the ulcers in every part, and the whole 
must be covered with a napkin very well 
dried, and a little warm. 

This dressing must be renewed twice 
in every twenty-four hours, taking a- 
way the stale poultice and at the same 
time washing and cleaning the ulcer with 
some lint fastened to the end of a probe 
or some other proper instrument, dipped 
in a warm decoction of hemlock, the 
cicuta major fœtida. This application 
abates the pain, and in a few days takes 
away the loathsome and almost insup- 
portable smell, which is the constant 
concomitant of cancerous ulcers; the 
suppuration will gradually diminish, and 
instead of a sanies and ichorous matter, 
the wound will discharge laudable pus. 
The state of the patient will consequently 
become more tollerable, and if the re- 
medy produced no other good effect, it 
would be well worth attending to; but 
if the use of it is longer continued, the 
hard and callous edges of the ulcer will 
become gradually soft, the tumour will 
diminish, and at length totally disappear; 
new flesh will be generated, a cicatrix 
will be formed, and the cure of the ulcer 
will be compleated. 

This is not a vain imagination, but 
an undoubted fact, in which it is impos- 
sible that I should be deceived, for I 
have watched the effect of this remedy 
with too curious and scrupulous an at- 
tention to be imposed upon by effects of 
other causes. It is indeed true, that 
some of the patients upon whom the 
carrot poultice produced this effect, had 
before taken the extract of hemlock: 
but in one instance it had aggravated 
the symptoms, and therefore after a short 
time, was wholly laid aside; in another, 
it appeared to stop the progress of the 
disease; the pains became violent, the 
suppuration somewhat more laudible, 
but at length the patient took such a 
disgust to the medicine, that it could not 
be got down. 

Is it then necessary that the patient 
should take extract of hemlock in order 
to receive benefit from the carrot poul- 
tice? I think not: but supposing the 
contrary, the extract is a safe remedy, 
and easily to be procured, and if judici- 
ously administered, I know no active 
alterant so innocent. 

During the use of this poultice, such 
accidents as frequently supervene in ul- 
cerous cancers, must be treated accord- 
ing to their indications; one of my pa- 
tients of a lively and cholorick dispo- 
sition, who could not be persuaded to 
follow an exact regimen, very frequently 
suffered an access of a fever, which oc- 
casioned the pus to be absorbed, brought 
on diarrhæas, profuse and colliquative 
sweats, and a spitting; a discharge from 
the ulcer also supervened so violent as to 
wet several napkins quite through; some 
gentle purges, the bark, and leni- 
tives were the only remedies I had re- 
course to, and they very soon set all to 
rights. There can be no doubt but that 
the cure is greatly facilitated by a proper 
regimen. 

As this poultice produces an effect so 
salutary upon ulcers of the most malig- 
nant kind, it is probable in the highest 
degree, that it may be successfully ap- 
plied to ulcers of another species. The 
reader will recollect that I have told him 
this remedy abates the pain, renders the 
suppuration laudible, and takes away 
the disagreeable and infectious smell 
which exhales from ulcers of every kind, 
especially those of a cancer, very soon; 
but the cure is a work of time. I have 
applied my poultice more than a year to 
a very large cancer, where the tumour 
was extremely hard, before the disease 
took a turn that promised a cure, which 
however, was compleated at last, what 
effect my remedy would have in the last 
stage of a cancer when the patient is 
consumed by a hectic fever, I cannot 
tell, having never tried it in such a case. 

If I had had opportunities to make a 
greater number of experiments, my pre- 
sent to the public might have been more 
considerable, but the knowledge which I 
have already acquired, I thought it my 
duty to communicate, that other physi- 
cians might compleat what I have begun; 
as to myself, I am sure I have not been 
deceived by appearances, and whatever 
be the fate of my discovery, I shall think 
with M. Storck, that if among an hun- 
dred sick, I am the means of one reco- 
very, my time will have been employed 
to good purpose. 

|P_544
I think that the operation of the poul- 
tice which I recommend will be greatly 
facilitated, if the patient at the same 
time takes small doses of the extract of 
hemlock, the night shade, the bark, or 
such other alterant as appears to be indi- 
cated by the temperament and constitu- 
tion of the patient, and the nature of the 
disease, for all cancers are not of the 
same kind; this, however, I have not 
done myself, that I might observe with 
more accuracy, and confirm with more 
certainty, the effects of my poultice. I 
have contented myself with giving my 
patients carrots boiled in milk. 

