

[^Sample 1: article - 1767_GM_0313^]

|P_313
2. The present method of inoculating for 
the small pox; to which are added, some 
experiments, instituted with a view to 
discover the effects of a similar treatment 
in the natural small-pox. By Thomas 
Dimsdale, M. D. 2s. 6d. Owen.

All ages above two years, all sea- 
sons and all habits are proper for ino- 
culation; critical diseases only, or 
their effects, corrosive acrimonious 
humours, and manifest debility of the 
whole frame, render the patient unfit 
for the operation. 

The method of preparing the pati- 
ent, and of performing the operation, 
is the same as directed by Dr Baker, 
(see Vol. xxxvi. p. 383.) The medi- 
cines administered during preparation 
are a powder consisting of 8 grains of 
calomel, 8 grains of compound pow- 
der of crabs claws, and one-eighth 
part of a grain of emetic tartar, or in- 
stead of it, two grains of precipitated 
sulphur of antimony. 

This dose is sufficient for the most 
robust constitution; for women, chil- 
dren, and old or weakly people it must 
be proportionably less. 

This medicine is to be administered 
as directed by Dr Baker, and the next 
morning a dose of purging salts. 

But if the constitution of the patient 
is very tender and delicate, the medi- 
cines ought rather to be alterative 
than purging; and the utmost atten- 
tion must be given so to manage the 
mercurial medicine as that it may not 
salivate, which has sometimes hap- 
pened, to the irreparable injury of the 
patient. 

On the second day after inoculation, 
Dr Dimsdale gives 3 grains of the crabs 
claws, 3 grains of calomel, and 1-10th 
of emetic tartar, going to bed. On 
the next morning a laxative draught, 
consisting of two ounces of infusion of 
senna, half an ounce of manna, and 
two drams of tincture of jalap. 

These medicines are repeated as 
soon as the eruptive symptoms appear, 
if they indicate any unusual vehe- 
mence. 

When the eruption comes on, the 
patient is directed to keep in the open 
air, however cold, as much as he can 
bear, but not to stand still, and to 
drink cold water, if thirsty. 

After the eruption is compleated, 
and not before, the patient, is allowed 
animal food, boiled meat of the light- 
est kind, chicken, veal, or mutton, in 
a small quantity. 

After maturation, the diet may 
gradually be more generous, but the 
patient is urgently pressed to return 
to his ordinary diet with much cauti- 
on, and to restrain his appetite as well 
with respect to food as fermented li- 
quors. 

A rash sometimes appears with the 
small-pox, covers the whole skin, and 
has the appearance of a malignant 
confluent kind. It may be distin- 
guished from the confluent small-pox 
by the fever, restlessness, pain, and 
weakness being less, and a few distinct 
pustules, larger than the rest, may, 
upon a very critical examination, be 
distinguished. 

When this rash happens, the patient 
must neither go into the cold air, nor 
drink cold water, for these, though sa- 
lutary to the small-pox, may repel the 
rash, and do mischief. 

Sometimes eruptive symptoms hap- 
pen, and no eruption follows. Doctor 
Dimsdale, in these cases, supposes the 
patient to have no more to fear from 
the distemper than if the eruption had 
covered him from head to foot. The 
reader, however, may read an account 
of the case of the Duchess de Boufflers, 
which seems to prove the contrary in 
our Magazine, Volume xxxvi.p.
117. 

This method of inoculation has ne- 
ver been known to have bad effects 
upon the constitution. 

Dr Dimsdale has directed the same 
management to patients under the na- 
tural small-pox, and his success has 
exceeded his expectation. When he 
has not been called till the eruption 
has appeared, he has endeavoured to 
get the sick into the open air, and ge- 
nerally given the mercurial and anti- 
nomial pill, directing a laxative some 
hours after it, to procure three or four 
stools: This method he has more par- 
ticularly enjoined, and sometimes re- 
|P_314
peated, where the small-pox has been 
of a bad kind, with symptoms of great 
danger. He has followed the same 
method during the whole progress of 
the eruptive fever, with a view to a- 
bate its violence, to check the erupti- 
on, and to prevent the conflux. 

The Doctor has been so fortunate as 
not to lose one patient treated in this 
way, though the number amounts to 
forty, and some have been so weak 
when carried into the air, that they 
could not stand without support: 
They should, however, be kept mov- 
ing about between two. 

The following extracts seem to shew 
a remarkable difference between the 
inoculated and natural small-pox with 
respect to the time of their appearance 
as a prognostic. 

[}Inoculated Small Pox. }]
p. 34. If the eruptive appearances 
are observed early, a favourable event 
is implied; but if the alteration on 
the fifth or sixth day is so inconsidera- 
ble as to make it doubtful whether the 
infection has taken place, the appear- 
ance is unfavourable, and implies a 
late and more untoward disease, to pre- 
vent which, I order the powder to be 
taken every night, and an ounce of 
salts in the morning, which forwards
the inflammation; I have constantly 
observed that an early commencement 
of eruptive complaints portends that 
the distemper will be mild and favour- 
able; when they are late, the symp- 
toms are irregular and untoward. 

[}Natural Small-Pox. }]
p. 67. "The mercurial powder, and 
subsequent purge, mitigate the fever 
preceding eruption; and I will add, 
that the eruption is most certainly re- 
tarded; that is, it does not appear so 
soon after the attack of the disease, nor 
come out so precipitately when it has be- 
gun to appear as it seemed likely to 
have done, if the natural progress had 
not been interrupted, which shews the 
utility of the practice, for it is evident 
from experience, that the later the e- 
ruption shews itself, after the begin- 
ning of the disease, and the slower it 
comes out, the more mild and favoura- 
ble is the subsequent disorder. "

By these extracts it appears that the 
mercurial powders and salts forward
the inflammation in the inoculated 
small-pox, and mitigate the fever in the 
natural; that in the inoculated an 
early commencement of eruptive com- 
plaints portends that the distemper 
will be favourable: and that in the na- 
tural the eruption is favourable in pro- 
portion as it is late and slow. 

In the commonly neglected interval 
between the completion of the erupti- 
on, and the fever of maturation, Dr 
Dimsdale recommends the same mer- 
curial antimonial medicine as in the 
eruptive fever, to be repeated at pro- 
per intervals till the maturation ad- 
vances, and then to be discontinued,
He directs also a cupful of the follow- 
ing apozem to be taken, if necessary, 
after the mercurial medicine, often e- 
nough to procure two or three stools 
a day. 

Cream of tartar two drachms, man- 
na one ounce, dissolved in a quart of 
barley-water. 

In the most dangerous stage of the 
disease, that of maturation, Dr Dimsdale
recommends no medicine but the fol- 
lowing: 

Mix together one part of weak 
spirit of vitriol, and two parts of sweet 
spirit of vitriol; put half an ounce of 
this mixture to a quart or three pints 
of barley-water, & drink it at pleasure. 

The Doctor thinks that in the natu- 
ral confluent small-pox, even when 
the eruption is compleated, the altera- 
tive and purging medicines may be 
given, and the patient permitted to 
go into the open air in cold weather; 
even while the mercurial purge is o- 
perating; but in the bleeding or pur- 
ple small-pox, he says, the mercurial 
evacuating course seems to be impro- 
per, though very cold repellent me- 
thods may be tried. 

To this account of treating the dis- 
ease, whether inoculated or natural, 
several cases are added, of persons 
who, having been inoculated, had e- 
ruptive symptoms, but no eruption; 
some of these were inoculated a se- 
cond time without any effect, and one 
of them, whose breath was tainted, 
and arm inflamed, is said to have in- 
fected his wife, who attended him as 
nurse, and was supposed to have had 
the distemper before. 
X. 

