

[^Sample 1: article - 1767_GM_0413^]

|P_413
30. Thoughts arising from experience concern- 
ing the present peculiar method of treating per- 
sons inoculated for the small-pox. By W. 
Bromfield, surgeon to her Royal Highness the 
princess dowager of Wales. Dodsley Price
2 s. 6 d. 

Mr Bromfield has ranged his thoughts un- 
der the following heads: 
1. The preparation of the patient. 
2. The manner of operation. 
3. The nature of the disease. 
4. The use of cold air. 
5. The effect of retarding and lessening 
the eruption. 

1. Preparation. Mr. Bromfield thinks mer- 
curial purges not elegible as a general prac- 
tise, and has known instances of great mis- 
chief to the constitution resulting from ino- 
culation, when the patient has been reduced 
too low. 

Under this head no instance is given of 
mischief resulting from what he calls the pre- 
sent peculiar method. He observes, contrary 
to the opinion of Dr. Langton, that the 
whole depends upon the habit of body of the 
"person inoculated, " and that inoculation 
from the matter of an inoculated small-pox, 
is equally efficacious as from that of the na- 
aural sort, for that twenty children having 
been inoculated with variolous matter, taken 
from a person who was the fourteenth in 
descent from the natural sort, all of them 
took the infection, some had the disease fa- 
vourably, in others it was rather severe. 

2. The manner of operation. Mr. Brom- 
field does not under this head object to the 
performance of inoculation, from matter in 
a crude state, but thinks the introduction of 
matter between the cutis and cuticle, not so 
good a method as that usually practised: he 
is also of opinion, that inoculation in an 
hospital is not elegible, because there is 
danger of receiving the infection by the 
mouth and nostrils: but he gives no instance 
of injury thus received by any patient of those 
who inoculate in the present peculiar method. 

3. Of the nature of the disease. Under 
this head there is not even an insinuation 
that the disease produced by the present pe- 
culiar method of inoculation, is not the true 
small-pox. 

4. Of retarding the eruption. There is 
nothing under this head but what is greatly 
in favour of the new method. 

5. Of the effect of cold air. Mr. Brom- 
field does not approve the present method of 
exposing variolous patients to the cold air 
after the eruption is perfect, he recommends 
his patients, he says, to be then kept in 
bed, because the species of the disease can- 
not be then altered, and because the bed
|P_414
must, like a general pultise, forward the 
maturation. But it does not appear from 
any thing Mr. Bromfield has said, that ex- 
perience has in any instance shewn his me- 
thod to be better than that which he con- 
demns. He says indeed, that all who have 
attended the desease in the usual method, 
must have experienced, that when the pa- 
tient has been taken up to make his bed, 
he has sometimes become sick with a pain 
in the stomach and reaching, in consequence 
of checked perspiration by cold air, and 
that such threatening symptoms have not 
disappeared till he has been again put 
to bed and a necessary cordial administered. 
But he has not produced one instance in 
which it became necessary to put a patient 
to bed, who had been under the care of any 
person who inoculates in the present method
and who had, as Mr. Bromfield expresses it, 
been turned into the street as soon as the 
eruption was perfect. It follows then, for 
ought that appears in this book, that what 
cannot be safely done by those who do not 
practise, or perhaps know, the present pe- 
culiar method, may be safely, and even ad- 
vantageously done by those that do. 

5. Of the time of purging. Nothing is 
advanced under this head against the me- 
thod in question, founded either upon argu- 
ment or experience. Mr. Bromfield observes 
that the operators in this method, although 
the patient has no more than 15 pustules 
except he chuses it, do yet purge, as they say 
to prevent boils, and if the ferment is rais- 
ed, says he, and the blood not depurated 
by the skin, the residium ought to be car- 
ried off by the intestines: thus far they are 
agreed, but Mr. Bromfield then puts the fol- 
lowing question. Are there not instances 
of this said enemy being only down in the 
battle? and though he may not ever be 
able to shew his face as he intended, in 
the character of the small-pox; does he not 
sometimes, after a little recruiting, teaze 
and torment in a variety of forms, so as 
to destroy the patients, though he is 
somewhat tedious in the execution. 

This quere, whether there are not such 
instances may be answered by another, are 
there such instances; if so, let the opposers 
of the peculiar method produce them, and 
their purpose will be effectually answered, 
whether it is to benefit mankind, or to 
recover a gainful branch of practise, out 
of the hands of those that have taken it from 
them. 

Mr. Bromfield indeed says, that he has 
heard of great numbers that have suffered 
in their health ever since they were inocu- 
lated, and treated on this modern plan, but 
as hearsay is no evidence, it is earnestly re- 
commended to those who have thus suffered, 
if there are any such, to communicate their 
cases to the public as a most important duty, 
having health and life for its object, parti- 
cularly, of the rising generation. 

Under this head there is a very remarkable 
paragraph which seems to imply, contrary to
Dr. Langton's opinion, that the true small-pox, 
may be inoculated by the application of mat- 
ter in a crude state. 

At what particular period of the small- 
pox the disease is infectious cannot, I be- 
lieve, says Mr. Bromfield, be ascertained to 
the satisfaction of contending parties, but 
we have known, that when servants who at- 
tended children, have sickened with the 
small-pox, and the children have been re- 
moved to a great distance of the first suspi- 
cious symptom, such children have within a 
few days been seized with the same dis- 
ease. In this case Mr. Bromfield supposes 
the disease to have been communicated by 
the breath. 

Upon the whole, it would be strange if ig- 
norant and bold adventurers, who practise as 
much of the present peculiar method of ino- 
culation as they know, should not do some 
mischief for want of knowing more, but 
even their miscarriages are few, and if they 
were numerous, would be no objection to 
Mr. Sutton's practise. An account of par- 
ticular cases well attested, as well of such 
as have been treated by Mr. Sutton, as by 
those who have adopted his method in ge- 
neral, without knowing particularly the 
medicines he uses, would be a most useful 
work. Till such account appears, the apparent
success of what is called the present peculiar 
method must weigh more in its favour with 
every disinterested dispassionate person, than 
any reasoning however specious can weigh 
against it. Experience alone is the fountain 
of true medical knowledge. 

Mr. Bromfield is certainly a good surgeon, 
but he appears by this little tract to be a very 
bad writer, for there is scarce one period in 
it that is not rendered defective, obscure, and 
inconclusive by false concord and syntax. By 
the following specimen the reader may judge 
of the rest. 

Supposing a patient had a malignant fe- 
ver, which, after many efforts to destroy 
the patient, dame nature should kindly in- 
terfere, and produce a critical tumour; 
would any surgeon of skill prevent its 
coming to suppuration? To say that tum 
mours are resolved without ill consequence 
is not an answer, it must be the effect of 
a malignant fever, and then I think no 
man in his senses would risk the conse- 
quences. This may not be so evident to 
all, as the following fact; supposing the 
inguinal glands became the seat of the 
 of venereal virus, and matter in the 
body of the tumour, not to be felt by the 
touch, the swelling had been dispersed, 
and for a few weeks the patient has thought 
himself well; but how much more frequent 
is it, that he feels violent nocturnal pains 
in his head, arms, and shins, which be- 
ing taken by the unskilful for rheumatic 
the warm bath and sweating is advised; 
the pains are relieved by an eruption, that 
soon determines under what class to rank it. 

Every reader will discover this passage 
to be grossly inaccurate, because every rea-
|P_415
der will find it unintelligible; the particu- 
lar parts in which the inaccuracy principally 
consists, are distinguished by Italics, and it 
is presumed that a comment is unnecessary; 
perhaps the author's meaning may be ex- 
pressed by what follows: 

Suppose a tumour, in consequence of a 
venereal virus deposited upon the inguinal 
glands, and suppose that the matter not be- 
ing sensible to the touch, the tumour should 
be dispersed: the patient might perhaps 
think himself well for a few weeks, but he 
would soon, if not immediately, feel vio- 
lent nocturnal pains in his head, arms and 
shins, and if an unskilful physician or sur- 
geon should suppose his pains to be rheuma- 
tic, and order him the warm bath and sweat- 
ing, he soon would be releaved by an erup- 
tion, sufficiently characteristic to ascertain 
its species, 
X. 

