

[^Sample 1: article - 1767_GM_0554^]

|P_554
49. An Account of the Manner of ino- 
culating for the Small-Pox in the East- 
Indies. With some Observations on the 
Practice and Mode of treating that Dis- 
ease in those Parts. Inscribed to the lear- 
ned the President and Members of the Col- 
lege of Physicians in London. By J. Z. 
Holwell. F. R. S.Becket. 

The method of inoculation used by the Bra- 
mins of Indostan, time out of mind, remark- 
ably tends to support the practice now gene- 
rally followed with such marvellous success. 

In that country the small-pox is epidemi- 
|P_555
cal every seventh year. During the months of 
March, April, and May, it is then, (though at 
all other times so mild, as scarcely to be not- 
ed,) confluent, malignant, and fatal to nearly 
all that take it naturally, whether European or 
native. 

Inoculation is performed in Indostan by a 
particular tribe of Bramins, who are delegated 
annually for the service: They divide them- 
selves into small parties, and plan their cir- 
cuits, so as to arrive at their destination some 
weeks before the usual return of the disease. 

The inhabitants of Bengal, knowing when 
the inoculating Bramins annually return, ob- 
serve the regimen enjoined, abstaining for a 
month, from fish, milk, and ghee, (a kind of 
butter made generally of buffalo's milk) the 
prohibition of fish respects only the native 
Portuguese and Mahometans. 

The Bramine pass from house to house, and 
operate at the door, refusing to inoculate any 
who have not duly observed the preparatory 
course. It is no uncommon thing for them to 
ask the parents how many pocks they chuse 
their children should have; and, strange as it 
is, they hardly ever exceed or are deficient, 
in the number required. 

They inoculate indifferently on any part, 
but prefer the outside of the arm, mid-way be- 
tween the wrist and the elbow for the males; 
and the same between the elbow and the shoul- 
der for the females. Previous to the opera- 
tion, the operator takes a piece of cloth in his 
hand, and with it gives a dry friction upon the 
part intended for inoculation, for the space of 
eight or ten minutes, then with a small instru- 
ment he wounds, by many slight touches, a- 
bout the compass of a silver groat, just making 
the smallest appearance of blood, then opening 
a linen double rag, takes from thence a small 
pledgit of cotton charged with the variolous 
matter, which he moistens with two or three 
drops of water, and applies it to the wound, 
fixing it on with a slight bandage, and ordering 
it to remain on for six hours, without being 
moved, then the bandage to be taken off, and 
the pledget to remain untill it falls off itself; 
sometimes (but rarely) he squeezes a drop from 
the pledget, upon the part, before he applies 
it. The cotton is saturated with matter from 
the inoculated pustules of the preceding year, 
for they never inoculate with fresh matter, 
nor with matter from the disease caught in the 
natural way, however distinct and mild the spe- 
cies. He then proceeds to give instructions 
for the treatment of the patient through the 
course of the process, which are most religi- 
ously observed, and are as follow: 

He extends the prohibition of fish, milk, 
and ghee, for one month, from the day of i- 
noculation; early on the morning succeeding 
the operation, about two gallons of cold water 
are ordered to be thrown over the patient, from 
the head downwards, and to be repeated every 
morning and evening until the fever comes on, 
(which usually is about the close of the sixth 
day from the inoculation) then to desist until 
the appearance of the eruption (which com- 
monly happens at the close of the third com- 
pleat day from the commencement of the fe- 
ver) and then to pursue the cold bathing as 
before, through the course of the disease, and 
until the scabs of the pustules drop off. 
They are ordered to open all the pustules 
with a fine sharp pointed thorn, as soon as 
they begin to change their colour, and whilst 
the matter continues in a fluid state. Con- 
finement to the house is absolutely forbidden, 
and the inoculated are ordered to be exposed 
to every air that blows; and the utmost indul- 
gence they are allowed when the fever comes 
on, is to be laid on a mat at the door; but, the 
eruptive fever is generally so trifling, as sel- 
dom to require this indulgence. Their regi- 
men is ordered to consist of all the refrigerat- 
ing things the climate and season produce, as 
plantains, sugar-canes, water-melons, rice, 
gruel made of white poppy-seeds, and cold 
water, or thin rice-gruel, for their ordinary 
drink. The regimen they order when they 
are called to attend the disease taken in the 
natural way is uniformly the same. There 
usually begins to be a discharge from the sca- 
rification, a day before the eruption, which 
continues through the disease, and sometimes 
after the scabs of the pock fall off, and a few 
pustules generally appear round the edge of 
the wound; when these two circumstances 
appear only, without a single eruption on any 
other part of the body, the patient is deemed 
as secure from future infection, as if the erup- 
tion had been general. 

When the treatment prescribed is strictly 
followed, scarce one in a million fails of re- 
ceiving the infection, or miscarries under it; 
of the multitudes I have seen, says Mr. H.
the number of pustules have been seldom less 
than fifty, & hardly ever exceeded two hundred. 

The success of this practice may well be 
thought to preclude any reasoning to shew its 
propriety; yet Mr. Holwell has added the rea- 
sons upon which the Bramins found the seve- 
ral particulars of their practice, as follows: 

They forbid fish, because they suppose it to 
be a viscid and inflammatory diet, tending to 
produce a tough slimy phlegm in the first passa- 
ges. Milk, because by its quick assimilation 
with the blood, it has a remote tendency to in- 
flammation, when the blood is thrown into any 
preternatural ferment; and butter, because in 
common with all oily fat substances, it fouls 
the first passages more than any other aliment, 
and in the course of digestion acquires an acri- 
mony which it conveys into the blood. 

They use friction on the part where inocu- 
lation is to be made, that the circulation in the 
smaller blood-vessels may be accelerated, 
and they dilute the matter with water, that, 
concurring with such acceleration, it may be 
more readily and eagerly received. 

They direct the inoculated to be sluiced 
with cold water, morning and evening, till the 
fever comes on, which produces a much 
greater effect than bathing by immersion, in 
all cases that require the cold-bath, because 
they say the sudden shock increasing the mo- 
|P_556
tion of the blood, drives all offensive princi- 
ples from the heart, brain, and other interior 
parts, to the surface, and speedily and cer- 
tainly promotes the fermentation. 

When the fever appears, they desist from 
this use of cold water, because they say that 
when the fermentation is once begun, the 
blood should not receive any additional com- 
motion till the eruption appears; then the as- 
persion is to be continued to the end of the 
disease, that by the fresh impetus it gives to 
the blood, it may enable it utterly to expel 
the remainder of the immediate cause of the 
disease into the pustules. 

Mr. Holwell says, he has himself been an 
eye-witness, that when the pustules have sunk, 
and the patient been in the most imminent dan- 
ger, he has been instantly restored by the ex- 
ternal application of about two gallons of cold 
water, which has never failed to fill the pock, 
as if by enchantment. 

They open the pustules with a thorn while 
the mater is in a fluid state, even when the 
pustules are most distinct, from a notion that 
it effectually prevents inflammation and weak- 
ness of the eyes, boils, and other eruptions 
and disorders: In this, says Mr. Holwell, 
they are countenanced by the opinion of Tys- 
sot, and other able and ingenious writers. 

They utterly condemn bleedings and purging 
in the small-pox, which are frequently prac- 
tised in Europe, insisting that bleeding lessens 
the natural powers, and purging counteracts 
the regular course of nature, which, in this 
disease, invariably tends to throw out the of- 
fending cause upon the skin. 

X. 

