

[^Sample 1: article - 1767_GM_0339^]

|P_339
[}Strictures on the Use of Soap Lees, and 
Lixiviums, in the Cure of the Stone. }]
IT is a matter of no small moment, to 
consider how quacks, and even regu- 
lar practitioners have adobted the use of 
a medicine, so injurious to the constitu- 
tion, as Soap Lees, and Lixiviums, to 
cure the Stone; for being of a corrod- 
ing quality, it is injurious to the sto- 
mach and bowels to a very great degree, 
hurts their nerves, and robs them of their 
necessary mucus, supplied by nature to 
preserve them, ulcerates the glands, and, 
by a long continued use, will induce a 
putrescent disposition into the habit, 
which will shew itself by eruptions, and 
other symptoms common to the scurvy; 
nay, so injurious is a long continued 
use of it, that in delicate constitutions, 
it will bring on irrepairable decays; and 
after all, though it is capable of giving 
some relief, it seldom, very seldom, 
answers the purpose desired, of perform- 
ing a cure. 

This medicine was brought into prac- 
tice first by Dr. Jurin, who being much 
diseased with the stone, took Lixiviums, 
found ease by it, wrote upon it, ima- 
gining it a cure, and gave it to many 
with unequal success; and it was gene- 
rally allowed, that the doctor killed him- 
self by the long continued and free use 
of it. After which, from the chain of 
experiments made on Lime water, by 
the ingenious Dr. Whytt, together with 
the case of the honourable Mr. Wal- 
pole, the use of Lixiviums, and Soap 
Lees, was dropt, to make way for Lime- 
water, a more safe, but equally uncer- 
tain medicine. 

From this time, Lixiviums lay neg- 
lected, till Mrs. Stevens's soap medicine 
became the object; when by Dr. Hales's 
annalisation of this soap, he proved by 
experiments, that the solvent power of 
the medicine could be attributed only to 
the large portion of lixivial salts that 
were in it, that all Lixiviums were similar 
in their effects; that the unctuous body 
necessary to the forming in into soap, did 
but clog, and abate the efficacy of it; 
and as Mrs. Stevens's medicine proved 
fallible, procuring ease (generally speak- 
ing) so long only as the use of it was 
continued, it was a hint sufficient to bring 
Soap Lees, and Lixiviums, into use a- 
gain. Upon this they proceeded, but 
to lessen the biting quality of it, it was 
necessary to join the lees with mucilagin- 
ous fluids; such as broth, decoction of 
|P_340
mallows, linseed, &c. by which me- 
dium it might be taken into the sto- 
mach, without sudden injury to it; af- 
ter this manner, it is now much used 
under the notion of an improvement. 
I wish I could congratulate the gentle- 
men in physic on the supposed acquisi- 
tion; they will find that by laying aside 
the combination of an unctuous body 
with it in Soap Lees, they give a medi- 
cine capable of much injury, which if 
administered in the form of a soap, pur- 
posely prepared for medicinal uses, they 
would not only have a safe medicine, 
equally efficacious, but in many cases 
more so than Soap Lees. But before we 
quit the subject, let us try, by experi- 
ment, what benefit we can derive from 
the use of Soap Lees, as a stone solvent; 
let any person take a fragment of human 
stone, and immerse it in broth, linseed 
tea, or the like, impregnated in the 
same proportion with the like number 
of drops of Soap Lees, as the patient 
takes at one time, this let him repeat, 
and it will convince him (unless the 
stone used is of a particular soft tex- 
ture) how little the solvent power of 
Soap Lees, or Lixiviums, is to be de- 
pended upon. He will find a glass of 
punch a better solvent. 

And repeating the injury I have men- 
tioned it is capable of doing to the vi- 
scera, let him at the same time he makes 
an experiment on the stone, put a piece 
of bladder, or gut, fresh taken from 
sheep, hog, or ox, with it, and by re- 
peating the dose of Soap Lees, with 
broth poured to it, as often as he takes 
it himself, he will discover also in what 
time the gut or bladder will become 
rotten. 

[This letter having been communicated 
to Mr. Blackrie, the ingenious author of 
an essay lately published on medicines for 
dissolving the stone, in which he has ana- 
lysed Dr. Chittick's nostrum, and recom- 
mended Lixivial medicines, with proper 
caution and restrictions, he has promised 
to take some notice of the objections which 
it contains in our next.] 

