

[^Sample 1: article - 1773_GM_0553^]

|P_553
[}Case, exemplifying the effects of fixed 
air, applied by way of clyster, in 
the cure of a putrid fever. }]
JAN. 8, 1772, Mr. Lightbowne, a 
young gentleman, was seized with 
a fever, which, after ten days, began 
to be attended with those symptoms 
that indicate a putrescent state of the 
fluids. 

18th. His tongue was black, but the 
blackness went off upon drinking: 
he now took little notice of those that 
were about him: his belly was loose, 
his pulse beat 110 strokes in a minute, 
and was rather low: he was ordered, 
by Mr. Hey, to take 25 grains of Pe- 
ruvian bark, with five of tormentill 
root in powder, every four hours, and 
to use red wine and water cold as his 
common drink. 

19th. Mr. Hey visited him early, on 
account of a bleeding at the nose: 
the hæmorrhage was suppressed by 
tents made of soft lint, dipped in cold 
water strongly impregnated with tinc- 
ture of iron, which were introduced 
within the nostrils, quite thro' to their 
posterior apertures; a method which has 
never yet failed Mr. Hey in like cases. 
His tongue was now covered with a 
thick black pellicle, his teeth were fur- 
red with the same kind of sordid mat- 
ter, and even the roof of his mouth 
and fauces were not free from it: 
his looseness and stupor continued, and 
|P_554
he was almost uncessantly muttering to 
himself: he took the Peruvian bark 
with tormentill every two or three 
hours: a starch clyster, containing a 
drachm of the compound powder of 
bole, without opium, was given 
morning and evening: a window was 
set open in the room, though it was a 
severe frost, and the floor was frequent- 
ly sprinkled with vinegar. 

As he now nauseated the bark in 
substance, it was exchanged for Hux
ham's tincture of which he took a 
table spoonful every two-hours in a 
cup full of cold water. His looseness 
rather increased, and the stools were 
watery, black, and fœtid: it was judged 
necessary to moderate this discharge, 
by mixing a drachm of the theriaca 
Andromachi with each clyster. 

21st. The same putrid symptoms re- 
mained, and a subsultus tendinum came 
on: his stools were more fœtid; and 
so hot, that the nurse could not apply 
her hand to the bed-pan, without feel- 
ing pain on this account. 

Considering, therefore, that, if this 
putrid ferment could be more imme- 
diately corrected, a stop would proba- 
bly be put to the flux, and the fomes
of the disease likewise removed, Mr. 
Hey thought nothing was so likely to 
effect this, as the introduction of fixed 
air into the alimentary canal, which, 
from the experiments of Dr. Macbride, 
and Dr. Priestley, appears to be the 
most powerful corrector of putrefac- 
tion hitherto known [/1./], and, therefore, 
tried the injection of this kind of air 
by way of clyster. 

The next morning Dr. Hird and 
Dr. Crowther, attended the operation, 
and proposed the following method of 
treatment: they first gave him five 
grains of ipecacoanha, to evacuate in 
the most easy manner part of the pu- 
trid colluvies: he was then allowed to 
drink freely of brisk orange wine, 
which contained a good deal of fixed 
air, yet had not lost its sweetness: the 
tincture of bark was continued as be- 
fore; and the water, which he drank 
along with it, was impregnated with 
fixed air from the atmosphere of a 
large vat of fermenting wort: instead 
of the astringent, air alone was injected, 
collected from a fermenting mixture of 
chalk and oil of vitriol: he drank a 
bottle of orange-wine in the course of 
this day, but refused any other liquor 
except water and his medicine: two 
bladders full of air were thrown up 
in the afternoon. 

23d. His stools were less frequent; 
their heat, likewise, and peculiar fœtor
were considerably diminished; his mut- 
tering was much abated, and the sub- 
sultus tendinum had left him. Find- 
ing that part of the air was rejected 
when given with a bladder in the usual 
way, Mr. Hey took the flexible 
tube of that instrument which is used 
for throwing up the fume of tobacco, 
and tied a small bladder to the end of 
it that is connected with the box made 
for receiving the tobacco, which he 
had previously taken off from the 
tube: he then put some bits of chalk 
into a six ounce phial, until it was 
half filled; upon these he poured such 
a quantity of oil of vitriol as he 
thought capable of saturating the 
chalk, and immediately tied the blad- 
der, which he had fixed to the tube, 
round the neck of the phial: the cly- 
ster pipe, which was fastened to the 
other end of the tube, was introduced 
into the anus before the oil of vitriol 
was poured upon the chalk. By this 
method the air passed gradually into 
the intestines as it was generated; the 
rejection of it was in a great measure 
prevented; and the inconvenience of 
keeping the patient uncovered during 
the operation was avoided. 

24th. He was so much better, that 
there seemed to be no necessity for re- 
peating the clysters; the other means 
were continued. The window of his 
room was now kept shut. 

25th. All the symptoms of putres- 
cency had left him. He took nourish- 
ment to day, with pleasure; and, in 
the afternoon, sat up an hour in his 
chair. 

His fever, however, did not imme- 
diately leave him; but this we attribut- 
ed to his having taken cold from be- 
ing incautiously uncovered when the 
window was open, and the weather ex- 
tremely severe; for a cough, which had 
troubled him in some degree from the 
beginning, increased, and he became 
likewise very hoarse for several days, 
his pulse, at the same time, growing 
quicker: but these complaints also 
went off, and he recovered, without 
any return of the bad symptoms above- 
mentioned. 


[^1. 
* Since this was written, Dr. Priestley 
has discovered the astonishing antiseptic 
properties of Nitrous air, which Dr. Hey 
thinks may likewise be applied with ad- 
vantage medicinally. 
^]