

[^Sample 1: article - 1773_GM_0032^]

|P_32
[}2.Medical Transactions, 
published by the College of Physicians, 
in London, concluded from p. 479. 
Vol. LXII.}]
[}Art. XXV. (by mistake called XXIII.) 
Queries, by Dr. W. Heberden. }]
Query I. IS the sizey covering of the 
blood of any use in direct- 
ing the method of cure? 

This query is followed by several 
very judicious remarks, tending to 
shew, that this covering is not of any 
use in directing the cure; and they are 
concluded by the following paragraph: 
"The more we know of the human 
body, the more reason we find to be- 
lieve, that the seat of diseases is not to 
be sought for in the blood, to the sen- 
sible qualities of which they seem to 
have little relation; and, though it be 
supposed to hold in all maladies, yet, 
in reality, it is in but very few that the 
blood, and, I might add, the urine, 
affords a practitioner much informa- 
tion. "

Q. II. Are the dangerous symptoms, 
which attend what is called the incar- 
cerated hernia, occasioned by any pre- 
ternatural and extraordinary structure 
of the tendinous opening in external 
oblique muscles? 

This query, like the former, the 
Doctor determines in the negative, with 
apparently good reason. 

Q. III. In England, few make any 
doubt of the great damage attending 
wet rooms, and damp cloaths or beds; 
is this opinion founded upon experi- 
ence, or is it a prejudice which has been 
suffered to grow up and get strength, 
merely for want of being examined? 

Dr. Heberden seems to be of opi- 
nion, that the notion of damage re- 
ceived from wet rooms, and damp 
cloaths and beds, is a prejudice un- 
supported by facts; and, in support of 
this opinion, makes several remarks, 
to the following effect: 

The air is often as fully saturated 
with moisture, as it could be by va- 
pours rising from a chamber covered 
with water. The air from rivers and 
the sea is also probably copiously re- 
plenished with vapours, yet these va- 
pours are not known or pretended to 
produce any ill effect: on the contra- 
ry, the most celebrated of the ancient 
physicians recommended the banks of 
a running stream for the situation of a 
house, as more healthy than any other; 
and modern physicians send patients to 
the sea side, merely for the benefit of 
the sea-air. 

Venice, where all the houses, as it 
were, stand in water, is not observed to 
be less healthy than London. 

Persons who are much disposed to 
sweat lie many hours every night, for 
months, in bed-cloaths, which are im- 
pregnated with a moisture that is pro- 
bably less wholesome than that which 
would have been left in sheets half dri- 
ed after washing, yet they receive no 
injury, except the evacuation is too 
copious. 

Children, and persons troubled with 
the stone, constantly wet their beds 
with urine, yet do not appear to suffer 
in their health. 

|P_33
It is common, in certain disorders, 
to go to bed with the legs or arms 
wrapped in linen cloths, thoroughly 
soaked in Malvern water, so that the 
sheets will, in many places, be as wet 
as they can be, yet neither these pa- 
tients, nor their bed-fellows, receive 
any harm from a continuance of this 
practice for many months; yet Mal- 
vern water has no peculiarity but being 
purer than any other known in Eng- 
land. 

The greatest valetudinarians do not 
scruple to sprinkle lavender water upon 
their sheets, and yet, when the spirit is 
flown off, there is left what is as truly 
water, as if it had been taken from the 
river. 

Is it the coldness of wet linen which 
is feared? how, then, are shirts and 
sheets, colder than any unfrozen wa- 
ter, safely worn and lain in, by many 
persons, who, during a hard frost, ne- 
ver warm either? Does the danger lie 
in the dampness? how happens it, 
then, that a warm or cold bath, and 
long continued fomentations, can be 
used with impunity? Is it the cold and 
dampness together? how happens it, 
then, that the thick, cold, and long- 
continued fogs, in the north-west of 
England, produce no ill effects upon 
those who live in them? 

The writer of this epitome does not 
pretend to answer these queries; but 
he takes the liberty to subjoin the fol- 
lowing: 

Is there any such disorder as a cold? 

If there is, and it is not produced 
by cold or damp separately, nor by cold 
and damp together, how is it produ- 
ced? 

Are not fevers of various kinds the 
effects of the disorder called a cold? 
Is not a cough one of the effects which 
it seldom fails to produce? and, does 
not a cough, in young persons, very 
frequently bring on inflammations of 
the lungs, from irritation, with ulcera- 
tion, and death, from a true phthisis? 

Have not those, who, after wearing 
damp linen, and sleeping upon a damp 
bed, have always been seized with a 
sore throat, a flux at the nose, feverish 
symptoms, or, at length, a tormenting 
cough, which has lasted many weeks, 
perhaps some months, as good reason 
to suppose, that the damp linen produ- 
ced the disorder, as the physicians have, 
when they see an intermitting fever 
disappear, after the patient has taken 
the bark, to conclude that the bark 
was the cause of the cure. 

Q. IV. It has been the practice of 
physicians, to take away blood from 
the arm, or foot, in order to stop vio- 
lent hœmorrhages from some other 
parts which do not admit of a topical 
application: If it be intended, by this 
practice, to weaken the power of the 
heart, and to give the lips, or ends, of 
the broken blood-vessel a chance of 
collapfing, or of being plugged up, by 
means of a more languid circulation, 
would not all this be as likely to hap- 
pen, after the patient had been equally 
weakened, by losing the same quantity 
of blood from the original rupture; 
and, in the mean time, might he not 
stand a chance of its stopping spontane- 
ously, before he was reduced to that 
degree of weakness? 

These queries the Doctor answers in 
the affirmative, with apparently good 
reasons; for which the reader is re- 
ferred to the book. 
X. 

