

[^Sample 1: article - 1773_GM_0117^]

|P_117
[}Proposals for Establishing more Ac- 
curate and Comprehensive Bills of 
Mortality. From the Second 
Volume of Essays Medical and Ex- 
perimental, lately published by Tho- 
mas Percival. M. D. F. R. S. and 
S. A.}]
THE establishment of a judicious 
and accurate register of the births 
and burials, in every town and parish, 
would be attended with the most impor- 
tant advantages, medical, political, and 
moral. By such an institution, the in- 
crease or decrease of certain diseases; 
the comparative healthiness of different 
situations, climates, and seasons; the 
influence of particular trades and ma- 
|P_118
nufactures on longevity; with many o- 
ther curious circumstances, not more 
interesting to Physicians, than beneficial 
to mankind; would be ascertained with 
tolerable precision. In a political view, 
exact registers of human mortality are 
of still greater consequence, as the 
number of people, and the progress of 
population in the kingdom, may in the 
most easy and unexceptionable manner 
be deduced from them. They are the 
foundation, likewise, of all calculations 
concerning the values of assurances on 
lives, reversionary payments, and of 
every scheme for providing annuities 
for widows, and persons in old age. 
In a moral light, also, such tables are of 
evident utility, as the increase of vice 
or virtue may be determined, by ob- 
serving the proportion which the dis- 
eases arising from luxury, intempe- 
rance, and other similar causes, bear to 
the rest; and in what particular places 
distempers of this class are found to be 
most fatal. 

A few examples may, perhaps, con- 
firm and illustrate these observations. 
In the Pais de Vaud, a district of the 
province of Bern, in Switzerland, and 
in a country parish in Brandenburg, 
1 in 45 of the inhabitants die annually; 
and at Stoke Damarell, in Devonshire, 
1 in 54; whereas in Vienna, and 
Edinburgh, the yearly mortality ap- 
pears to be 1 in 20; in London 1 in 
21; in Amsterdam and Rome 1 in 22; 
in Northampton 1 in 26; and in the 
parish of Holy Cross, near Shrewsbu- 
ry, 1 in 33. In the Pais de Vaud, the 
proportion of inhabitants who attain 
the age of eighty, is 1 in 21½; in 
Brandenburgh 1 in 22½; in Norwich 
1 in 27; in Manchester 1 in 30; in 
London 1 in 40; and in Edinburgh 1 
in 42. These facts afford a striking, 
but melancholy proof, of the unfavour- 
able influence of large towns on the 
duration of life.—From the most ac- 
curate computation, London is found 
to contain 601,750 inhabitants; and 
from 1759 to 1768, the burials have 
exceeded the christenings every year up- 
wards of 7000; which is the recruit 
the metropolis requires annually from 
the country, to support the present 
number of its people. In 1757, a sur- 
vey was made of Manchester and Sal- 
ford. The number ot inhabitants then 
amounted to 19,839; and the burials, 
exclusive of those amongst Dissenters, 
were 778. But since that time the 
populousness of Manchester has con- 
siderably increased. Half of all that 
are born in this town die under five 
years old. The island of Madeira is 
so remarkably healthy, that two thirds 
of all who are born in it live to be mar- 
ried. Autumn is the most healthy, 
and summer the most sickly season 
there. The mortality of spring and 
summer, is to that of autumn and win- 
ter, as 115 to 100. In Manchester, 
diseases are most frequent and fatal in 
the months of January, February, and 
March; and least so in July, August, 
and September. The mortality of 
these two seasons is as 11 to 8; and of 
the first fix months of the year, com- 
pared with the last six months, as 7 to 
6. Mr. Muret, Secretary to the Oeco- 
nomical Society of Bern, informs us, 
that he had the curiosity to examine the 
register of mortality in one town, and 
to mark those whose deaths might be 
imputed to intemperance. And he found 
the number so great, as to incline him 
to believe that drunkenness is more de- 
structive to mankind than pleurisies, 
fevers, or the most malignant distem- 
pers [/1./]. Such are the important uses to 
which Tables of Human Mortality 
have been applied. 

The following plan of a more exact 
and comprehensive register, than has 
hitherto been kept, is submitted to the 
consideration and correction of those 
who undertake the charge of the Bills 
of Mortality in Manchester. 

1. Let a table of christenings, mar- 
riages, and burials, be kept in every 
church, chapel, and place of religious 
worship in the town, and delivered at 
certain stated times, to the clerk of the 
parish-church, to be formed into one 
general bill, and quarterly or annually 
published. It is of importance that 
the still-born children, and those who 
die before baptism, should also be re- 
gistered; and the midwives should be 
desired to deliver an account of 
them. Perhaps, the sextons may assist 
in ascertaining their number, as they 
are usually interred in church-yards, or 
other public burial-grounds. 

2. Let the table of christenings spe- 
cify the males and females who are 
baptized; and the table of deaths ex- 
|P_119
press the males who die, under the 
several denominations of children, 
batchelors, married-men, and widow- 
ers; the females who die under the 
corresponding denominations of chil- 
dren, maidens, married women, and 
widows. An observance of these 
distinctions will determine the compa- 
rative number of males and females
who are born; the difference between 
the sexes in the expectation of life; 
and the proportion which the annual 
births, deaths, and marriages, bear to 
each other. Thus by the Bills of 
Mortality which have been kept at 
Vienna, Breslaw, Dresden, Leipsic, 
Ratisbon, and other towns in Germany, 
it appears that the proportion of males
to the females who are born is as 19 to 
18: but the proportion of boys to 
girls who die under ten years of age, 
is as 7 to 6; and of married men to 
married women in Breslaw as 5 to 3; 
in Dresden as 4 to 1. At Vevey, in 
Switzerland, for 20 years, ending in 
1764, there died in the first month 135 
males to 89 females; and in the first 
year 225, to 162. The same accounts 
shew likewise that, both at Vevey and 
Berlin, the still-born males are to the 
still-born females as 30 to 21. In the 
parish of Holy Cross, Salop, an ac- 
count was taken by the Vicar, A. D. 
1760, of the number of males and 
females of the age of seventy and up- 
wards: The latter amounted to thirty- 
five, the former only to eight. At 
Paris, and in Sweden, it has been ob- 
served, that women not only live 
longer than men, but that married 
women live longer than single women: 
and in Switzerland it appears particu- 
larly, from the calculations of M. 
Muret, that of equal numbers of single
and married women, between the age 
of 15 and 25, more of the former died 
than of the latter, in the proportion of 
2 to 1 [/2./]. 

3. Let the ages of the dead under 
five, be specified by single years; and 
afterwards, by periods of five or ten 
years. 

4. Let the Bills of Mortality con- 
tain not only a list of the diseases of 
which all die, but also express particu- 
larly the number dying of each disease, 
in the several divisions of life and diffe- 
rent seasons of the year. To accom- 
plish this, it will be necessary for the 
Physicians of the town, to consider the 
present list of distempers; to reject all 
synonymous and obsolete terms; and 
to give a short and easy explanation of 
those which are retained: and when- 
ever a person dies, who has been at- 
tended by any of the Faculty, the Phy- 
sician, Surgeon, or Apothecary, should 
be desired to certify in writing the age 
and distemper of the deceased. 

The following Tables are con- 
structed upon this plan; and if the 
scale be enlarged, will serve for the 
Church Register, as well as for quarter- 
ly or annual publication. It appears 
to be unnecessary, and in many instan- 
ces would be exceptionable, to insert 
the names of the deceased: Their 
denomination and disease, the refore, may 
be expressed, in the columns allotted 
to each, by dots or units, which are to 
be summed up at the end of every three 
months, and set down in figures. 

The list of marriages and christen- 
ings may be kept in the common me- 
thod. 

The additional trouble which this 
more comprehensive and accurate re- 
gister will occasion to the clerks of 
the several churches, &c. may be com- 
pensated by distributing amongst them, 
at the discretion of any judicious clergy- 
man, the money which arises from the 
sale of the quarterly Bills. If a hun- 
dred of these be subscribed for, or sold 
at the price of one shilling each, the 
sum of twenty pounds per annum will 
thus be raised, without imposing any 
new burthens on the town. Every 
second, third, fourth, or fifth year, the 
bills may be collected into a volume, 
and published, under the direction of 
two or more Physicians, with observa- 
tions on the state of the weather, the 
prevalence of epidemic diseases, their 
symptoms and method of cure, and the 
increase or decrease of population du- 
ring that period. Such a work will 
afford the most important instruction to 
the public; and from the profits of it, 
a fund may be established for the bene- 
fit of the clerks, and the support of the 
institution. 

N. B. It is obvious that the plan 
here proposed is not local, and that it 
may be executed with equal facility and 
advantage every town and parish in the 
kingdom.—Bills of Mortality might be 
rendered more useful in a political view, 
by taking sometimes the number of 
houses and inhabitants, under and 
above particular ages, wherever such 
registers are established. 

|P_120
[}I. 
TABLE of DEATHS. 
January, February, March. }]Ages. Males. Females. Ages. Batche- 
lors. Married 
Men. Widow- 
ers. Maid- 
ens. Married 
Women Widows. 1 20 2 25 3 30 4 35 5 40 10 45 15 50 Total 
under 15 60 &c. 
[}II. 
TABLE of DISEASES. 
January, February, March. }]Diseases. 1 2 3 4 5 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 Casualties Apoplexy Asthma Cancer Chincough Cholic Consump- 
tion Convul- 
sions &c, &c. 

[^1. 
* Vid. a very valuable Treatise on Re- 
versionary Payments, by the Rev. Dr. 
Price; the Bern Observations for the year 
1766; Philosophical Transactions, vol. 
57 and 59; and Dr. Short's new Observa- 
tions. 
^]
[^2. 
† Vid. Dr. Price's Observations on Re- 
versionary Payments. 
^]