

[^Sample 1: article - 1780_GM_0280^]

|P_280
Mr. Urban, 

THE following authentic instance of 
longevity shews the happy effects 
of a temperate, well-ordered, and vir- 
tuous life. I do not remember seeing 
it any-where quoted, and it seems to 
have escaped notice, though recorded 
by so eminent a man as Bartholin
|P_281
concerning his own grandfather by 
the mother's side [/1./]. That one, who was 
a bookish man and an author, whose 
constitution was naturally very weak 
and delicate, and who had been posi- 
tively doomed to an early death by his 
physician, should elude the prognostic 
for no less a term than ninety-five 
years, is an encouraging circumstance 
to literary men and valetudinarians. 
For their benefit I send it. 

J. Boerhadem. 

Quantum huc [scil. ad longævi- 
tatem] conferat animus semper sibi 
similis, nullisque passionibus in trans- 
vorsum raptus, effari nequeo. 

"Avus meus maternus D. Thomas 
Finckius (priori seculo libris, geome- 
tria rotundi, horoscopia, &c. hoc se- 
culo liberis clarus; numeravit enim 
liberos, nepotes, pronepotes, abnepo- 
tes 97.) annum ingrestus erat nona- 
gesimum-sextum hâc animi constantiâ, 
& diutius vitam in senio vegetam pro- 
traxisset, nisi febris filum abrupisset. 
Per totum vitæ cursum a se pompam 
removit, & usu rerum ornamenta me- 
tiebatur. Teneram ætatem ægritu- 
dinibus habuit obnoxiam, ut Medicus 
curae illius præfectus spoponderit pa- 
rentibus, omnes itinerum vias quas 
emensurus esset, auro se obducturum. 
Cæterum a longâ peregrinatione re- 
dux, prognosticum elusit temperantiâ 
& morum facilitate. Coercuit luxu- 
riam, gulam temperavit, cui tamen 
necessaria suggessit etiam durioris sub- 
stantiæ, quæ libentius avidiusque ap- 
petebat, quam cupedias; divitias 
æquis oculis aspexit, frugalitatem co- 
luit, & animum metu vel gaudio af- 
fectum sub vinculis habuit, iracun- 
diam lenivit, adversitates sprevit, & 
quanquam liberorum, generum, ne- 
potum, abnepotum, affinium, ami- 
corumque sæpius funera audiverit, & 
inter tot vitæ grandævæ molestias ver- 
saretur, constanti tamen animo omnia 
perpessus nunquam lachrymas fudit 
nisi defunctæ uxoris & bibliothecæ 
vulcano consumptæ memoriâ re- 
currente. "

[}For the benefit of the English reader, 
the above account is thus translated: }]
"It is inexpressible how much equa- 
bility of temper unruffled by passion 
contributes to long life. My maternal 
grandfather, Thomas Fink, (who in 
the preceding century was as distin- 
guished by his learning, his skill in 
geometry, the horoscope, &c. as in the 
present by the number of his de- 
scendents, for he had children, grand- 
children, great grand-children, and 
great great grand-children, to the num- 
ber of 97,) had by this uniformity 
of temper attained to his 96th year, 
and might have reached to a vigorous 
old age, had not a fever shortened his 
days. He studiously through life 
avoided show, measuring ornament by 
use. His tender age was subject to 
illness, so that the physician who had 
the care of his health promised his 
parents that he would engage to cover 
every road he travelled with gold: 
he returned, however, from a long 
journey, having by temperance 
and easiness of temper eluded the prog- 
nostication. He checked all tendency 
to luxury, and restrained his appetite, 
frequently eating coarser food, and 
that too with greater eagerness than 
dainties. He looked on wealth with- 
out coveting it; for he studied fru- 
gality, and kept under due controul 
every motion of joy or fear; master of 
his anger, superior to disappointment; 
and, though he lost by death many 
of his children, grand-children, great 
grand-children, relations and friends, 
and in so long a life must be presumed 
to have met with many troubles, he bore 
them all with great constancy, and ne- 
ver was known to shed a tear, except 
when he recollected the death of his wife, 
and the loss of his library by fire. "

⁂  In our account of Mr. Thick- 
nesse's Valetudinarian's Bath Guide, 
p. 136, we omitted to observe, that his 
method of prolonging health and life by 
the breath of young women is no new 
discovery, but seems borrowed from 
the practice of the Jewish physicians in 
the last illness of King David, and has 
been of late years detailed with much 
serious humour by Dr. Campbell, in 
his Hermippus Redivivus: 1746, 8vo. 
enlarged 1749, 8vo. translated into Ita- 
lian, and printed at Leghorn, 1756, 4to. 



[^1. 
* Vide Tho. Bartholini Historiarum 
Anatom. Cent. quint. 
^]