

[^Sample 1: article - 1780_GM_0136^]

|P_136
[}16 Valetudinarian's Bath Guide: or, the 
Means of obtaining long life and health. 
Dedicated to the Earl of Shelburne. By 
Philip Thicknesse, Esq. Dodsley. }]
THE facetious writer of this treatise 
has brought together in a small com- 
pass a great variety of miscellaneous 
matter for the entertainment of his 
readers. He has embellished his per- 
formance with a frontispiece, which he 
calls The Genius of Nature in Contemp- 
lation of the Universe; and has dedi- 
cated it to Lord Shelburne, with a wish, 
that "the King, for his own honour, 
and the safety amd prosperity of his peo- 
ple, may soon call upon his Lordship 
to exercise those rare talents which 
God has given him for recovering 
the glory and welfare of this empire. "

In his Preface he seems to lament, 
that, notwithstanding the astonishing 
effects of the Bath Waters, those who 
prescribe them are still ignorant of their 
contents; and proposes a subscription 
to bring down some able Chemist to 
analyse them, in order to put that mat- 
ter beyond a doubt. This, he thinks, 
would be a charity that would extend 
to future generation. Were it certain- 
ly known what their impregnations 
are, an artificial water might be pre- 
|P_137
pared, from which, those whose neces- 
sities or bodily infirmities keep at a dis- 
tance, might derive almost an equal 
benefit with those who enjoy them at 
the fountain-head. 

The treatise is divided into XIII. 
Chapters. 

Chap. I. Of the Bath Waters. In 
this chapter, the writer is both jocose 
and serious, he pays no great respect 
to the memory of King Bladud, because 
he was a king; but thinks his hogs 
were to be commemorated for the dis- 
covery of the waters in preference to 
his Majesty. He advances as a cer- 
tainty, that drinking them is never of 
any service, (on the contrary, is often 
dangerous,) but when they act either 
laxatively by the bowels or kidneys, or 
are accompanied with medicines that do. 

Chap. II. Of Apothecaries. In this 
chapter, he treats Dr. Graham and 
Mrs. Macaulay with some pleasantry. 
He speaks of Physicians, whose patients 
are too far gone to receive any relief 
themselves, who prescribe merely for 
the benefit of the Apothecaries; and 
of Apothecaries, who, trusting to the 
skill of their apprentices, have sent pa- 
tients to the grave, not from the dis- 
orders they laboured under, but from 
the disorder in which their medicines 
have been prepared. He, therefore, cau- 
tions all who come to Bath to be care- 
ful to employ a physician who is above 
prescribing for an apothecary, and an 
apothecary, who is not above superin- 
tending his medicines himself. 

Chap. III. Of Physicians. The 
greatest excellence of a physician, he 
says, is to know when he can do no- 
thing, and to have honsesty enough 
to say so. He does not pay any great 
compliment to the Bath Physicians; 
but, as he takes upon himself the of- 
fice of a guide, he advises those, who 
come to Bath to drink the waters, to 
proceed with caution. He had, he says, 
the misfortune to lose a beloved bro- 
ther in the prime of life, by hastily 
drinking as much in three weeks, as 
formerly had relieved him by drinking 
moderately of them in six. He dropt 
down dead, after drinking plentifully 
of Bath waters, and eating a hearty 
breakfast of spongy rolls. 

Chap. IV. Of Bathing. He joins 
with Dr. Oliver in opinion, that bath- 
ing is the most general solvent of all ob- 
structions in the human body, whether 
natural or acquired; and, therefore, 
thinks it highly beneficial in all gouty 
and rheumatic complaints; but cau- 
tions against bathing early in the morn- 
ing, and taking the full force of the 
heat, which, instead of opening the 
pores, often shuts them up. In this 
chapter the writer indulges a kind of 
humour (which seems natural to him),
of sporting with his readers, which 
those of a graver turn will think might 
have been spared. 

Chap. V. Of Long Life and Health. 
He is in this chapter what some people 
may think no less waggish. He men- 
tions an ancient inscription, the pur- 
port of which is, that Marcus Claudius 
Hermippus lived to 115 years and five 
days, by the salutary breath of young 
virgins; and, as a proof of the reality 
of the recipe, the writer confirms it 
by his own experience. "I am, my- 
self, "says he, "now turned of sixty, and, 
in general, though I have lived in va- 
rious climates, and suffered severely 
both in body and mind, yet, having al- 
ways partaken of the breath of young 
women, whenever they lay in my way, 
I feel none of those infirmities which so 
often strike my eyes and ears in this 
great city, by men much younger than 
myself. " In this chapter he quotes 
many instances of longevity, and makes 
no doubt but that every man who has 
attained the age of 40, has it in his 
power to double that period. 

Chap. VI. Of Surgeons. The writ- 
er expresses the highest respect for men 
of this profession, and mentions seve- 
ral at Bath who are and may be of in- 
finite service to the community. 

Chap. VII. Of Bilious Disorders. 
The Bath waters, the writer says, are 
considered as particularly serviceable in 
all bilious complaints; and adds, that 
he is as well qualified to give his advice 
in that particular case as any man 
living; for which he assigns his rea- 
sons, having, he says, for more than 
twenty years, suffered at times the 
most excruciating pains, by voiding 
innumerable gall-stones. Though 
the duct from the gall-bladder is no 
bigger than a crow quill, he voided one
6-8ths of an inch one way, by 5-8ths 
the other. This chapter is full of so- 
lid reasoning and valuable instruction, 
and is of more worth than whole trea- 
tises on the subject founded on theory 
without experiment. 

Chap. VIII. Remarks on Dr. Oli- 
ver's Essay on the Use and Abuse of 
Warm Bathing in Gouty Cases. In 
this chapter the writer detects a prac- 
tice, which it is surely of the utmost 
consequence to discountenance, viz. 
|P_138
that by feeling the pulse of a serjeant, 
a guide, or a somebody about the 
King's Bath, or any of the public 
baths, the patient can procure a vio- 
lent hot one, a moderately hot one, or 
a warm one, and all his fellow-bath- 
ers must take it according to his mind. 
This certainly demands regulation. 

Chap. VIII. Of the Antiquity and 
ancient Baths of the City. This chap- 
ter is rather curious than useful. 

Chap. IX. Of Wine, and drinking 
to excess. Good wine, of a proper age, 
the writer asserts, is not only an excel- 
lent cordial, but to men of a certain 
age, it tends to the prolonging of life. 
"A man, " says he, "who loves his 
bottle in Switzerland, is highly esteem- 
ed: At Naples, or Madrid, he is dread- 
ed; but I hardly ever knew one in 
England who loved it, who was not at 
bottom a generous, honest, and well- 
meaning, if not a brilliant man. "

Chap. X. Remarks on Dr. Charle- 
ton's Analysis of Bath Waters. The 
writer does not seem to have much 
faith in the Doctors Analysis, as it 
differs from that of the late Dr. Lucas, 
who was the author's intimate friend. 

Chap. XI. Of the promiscuous 
Bathing of both Sexes. Here the 
writer takes occasion to correct himself 
for holding forth, in his IVth Chap- 
ter, the picture of a country dame, 
who found herself uncommonly agi- 
tated by treading on a particular spot. 
He tells also the well-known story of 
Nash's tossing a little gentleman into 
the bath to his own wife, who looked, 
he said, so much like an angel in 
the watery element that he wished to 
be there with her; which he had no 
sooner said, than souse he came in, and 
both fell a flouncing together, to the no 
small diversion of the numerous spec- 
tators. This chapter is closed with 
a serious remark, that the promiscuous 
bathing of the sexes did not prevail in 
Rome, till effeminacy, the forerunner 
of the downfal of all empires, had be- 
come general; and it has been observ- 
ed also, that the profligacy of women 
has been another strong mark of the 
approaching dissolution of kingdoms. 

Chap. XII. Of Music. To the 
power of music Mr. Thicknesse ascribes 
many exhilarating virtues. He ob- 
serves its effects on the youthful and 
gay, and sees no reason why it should 
not have a similar influence on the hy- 
pochondriac and valetudinarian. It is 
a cordial to the troubled breast, and is 
to the fibres of the body what tuneing 
is to the harp. 

Chap. XIII. Of the cure of the 
Dropsy, by Dr. Bacher. Mr. Thick- 
nesse concludes his miscellaneous per- 
formance with strongly recommending 
Dr. Bacher's recipe, which was pur- 
chased by the French King, and pub- 
lished for the benefit of his subjects. 
The recipe is as follows: 

℞ Extract. nostr. hellebor. 
Myrrhæ solutæ, a a ℥j. 
Card. Benedict. pulverisat. ʒ iij. ℈j. 

M. F. S. A. Massa aere sicco exsic- 
canda donec formandis pillulis apta sit 
signal ad gran. semiss. 

Of these pills ten are to be taken at 
once, and the dose repeated three times, 
an hour between each. They first 
open the belly, and then carry off the 
disorder by urine. 

These chapters are followed by an 
appendix, containing a comparison of 
some experiments made by different 
physicians to ascertain the contents of 
Bath waters. 

Upon the whole, whoever visits Bath 
will find this performance worth the 
purchase. There are, indeed, some 
things in it that might have been spar- 
ed; but those are atoned for by others 
of a very useful kind. The valetudi- 
narian will find in it the means point- 
ed out to recover health; the gouty 
patient to get ease; and those who la- 
bour under bilious complaints cannot 
advise with a better Doctor. To young 
persons who resort to Bath, it will be 
a monitor; to the stranger, a guide; 
and to those who love play, a lesson. 

