

[^Sample 1: article - 1780_GM_0276^]

|P_276
DR. Grant, in his Observations on 
the Origin, Progress, and Method 
of treating the Abrabilious Tempera- 
ment and Gout, lays down the follow- 
ing rules to those who mean to be cured 
of the gout radically: 

1. He must quit the flat fertile cul- 
tivated plains during the summer sea- 
son every year, and remove to the high- 
est parts of the country were the air is 
thin, pure, and piercing. 

2. Learn to amuse himself with con- 
trary diversions so as to fatigue himself 
every day. Of these, fishing and wa- 
ding in the clear stream is the best; 
walking is next; riding is only a suc- 
cedaneum, and a carriage is not equal 
to the intention. 

|P_277
3. Avoid populous towns and great 
cities, shun all occasions of anxiety, 
debilitating passions, noxious dissipa- 
tions, exhausting pleasures, and heavy 
mental concerns, or intense thinking, 
even on agreeable subjects. 

4. Keep to regular hours of exer- 
cise, eating, and sleeping; short sleep is 
best, on hard beds, in the early part of 
the night. 

5. Let his apartments be large, lofty, 
ill finished, and well warmed by strong 
fires. 

6. He will soon feel the advantages 
of frequent bathing, much friction, 
and warm clothing. 

7. His diet must be in proportion to 
his exercise, both in quality and quan- 
tity; but he must never quite satisfy 
his hunger at any time; in general it is 
proper to abstain from butter, fat, high- 
seasoned, salted and smoaked meats; 
some forbid black flesh and pork, but 
I do not find much difference, so that 
the fat and skin are taken away; wild 
fowl and game of all kinds are proper, 
and so is fish without butter. Animal 
food must not be used above once a day; 
four days in the week he may eat meat, 
but never mix fish and flesh in the same 
day, far less in the same meal. Butter- 
milk, whey, fruit, greens, roots, seeds, 
bread, and dishes prepared from them, 
ought to constitute the greater part of 
his nourishment, especially during the 
summer and harvest; tea and coffee, 
thin chocolate, and cocoa, agree with 
most people, mixed with milk, provided 
they eat no butter along with them. 

8. The best common drink is cold 
water, but when he takes animal food 
he may drink small-beer, cyder, wine, 
or spirits very much diluted. 

9. When he eats heartily at dinner 
he ought to eat no supper, but suffer 
the stomach to be quite empty once in 
twenty-four hours. 

10. He must be well rubbed all over 
every night and morning; and altho' 
I wish him to be warmly clothed, yet 
I think he ought to walk out in the 
air as much as may be. 

11. When he is quite free from all 
complaint, sea-bathing, or even cold 
bathing, will agree with most people, to 
restore the strength. 

12. But in all situations he must take 
care to keep his body regular by taking 
sulpher at night, when he is costive; 
and if he should be tormented with 
wandering pains, the aron-root and 
scurvy-grass will be of service to him. 

By such means as these, properly 
conducted, and steadily prosecuted for 
a length of time, a man of observation, 
by only attending to the juvantia and 
laetanda in his own constitution, will 
in general radically cure any recent 
gout, always moderate it, never injure 
his natural staie of health, or shorten 
his life. 

I do not expect that it can be in the 
power of every one of my friends to 
observe all my directions literally; but 
it is my province to draw the line, and 
them to follow it as near as circum- 
stances may permit, carefully observing 
what does and what does not agree. 

