

[^Sample 1: article - 1780_GM_0481^]

|P_481
[}72. Experiments upon Vegetables, disco- 
vering their great Power of purifying the 
common Air in the Sun-Shine, and of in- 
juring it in the Shade and at Night. To 
which is joined, A new Method of exa- 
mining the accurate Degree of Salubrity 
of the Atmosphere. By John Ingen- 
housz, Counsellor of the Court, and Body- 
Physician to their Imperial and Royal Ma- 
jestities, F. R. S. &c. &c. 8vo. Elmsly. 6s. }]
THIS learned Hollander, he tells 
us, in his dedication, was recommended 
by Sir John Pringle to inoculate such 
of the Imperial Family of Austria as 
had escaped the small-pox, so destruc- 
tive to many of them. The time which 
his "august Sovereign " allowed him 
to spend last summer in this island, he 
has employed, these pages will evince, 
to very useful and salutary purposes. 
Dr. Priestley's new division of air into 
nitrous, inflammable, phlogisticated, 
dephlogisticated, and fixed, is the ori- 
gin of these experiments, which are a 
part of the result of above 500, all made 
in less than three months. By these 
(among other things) it appears that 
the leaves of trees or plants which ab- 
sorb moisture from the air, from rain, 
and from dew, and expose their upper 
and varnished surface to the sun, yield 
dephlogisticated [/1./] air by day, owing to 
the warmth of the sun, but chiefly, 
if not only, to the light, and poisonous 
air in the night, and in the shade: this 
mischievous effect is checked by cold 
weather: they also yield poisonous air 
by the warmth of a fire. Dead leaves 
yield no dephlogisticated air; and 
beans, peaches, or any fruits, kept in 
close rooms, are so extremely noxious, 
that they would easily poison an un- 
wary person sleeping. Flowers too 
are very dangerous, as they ooze out 
both by day and night an unwholesome 
air, and contaminate common air 
equally in every situation. "But the 
mischief which trees do by night to 
the surrounding air cannot do any ob- 
servable harm to animals; for those 
mischievous exhalations being, very 
providentially, specifically lighter than 
the common air, rise at the same time 
up: and thus the lower region, in 
which we breathe, is freed from them 
almost as soon as they are produced; 
whereas the dephlogisticated air issuing 
out of the plants in great abundance 
in the day-time is specifically heavier 
than common air, and is therefore in- 
clined to remain longer among us, and 
to afford us all the benefit for which 
the Supreme Wisdom has originally 
destined it. " Roots left out of the 
ground have the same deleterious 
power. A law of nature hitherto un- 
known, or involved in darkness, Dr. 
Ingenhousz has thus discovered and 
brought to light; and he has also put 
it beyond a doubt, that "vegetables 
have a remarkable share in keeping the 
salubrity of our atmosphere, by im- 
bibing those septic, noxious, and phlo- 
gistic particles which were communi- 
cated to it by the breathing of ani- 
mals, &c. as well as by pouring down 
a most beneficial shower of purified or 
dephlogisticated air. "

For inaccuracies of language the au- 
thor, though a foreigner, has no occa- 
sion to apologise, as we have scarce dis- 
covered any but 'shook' for 'shaken,' 
and 'without' for 'unless;' solecisms 
too common to our natives. 


[^1. 
* "That pure, etherial, permanent, and elastic flaid, which was first discovered and 
so named by Dr. Priestley. It is respirable air destitute of its phlogistic or inflamma- 
ble principle, or really common air of the highest purity, such as never exists in the 
common atmosphere. "
^]