

[^Sample 1: article - 1786_GM_0637^]

|P_637
Mr. Urban, 
June 2. 

THE continual changes which appear 
in modes of dress are neither sur- 
prising nor blameable; I will even af- 
firm they are praise-worthy in a commer- 
cial nation like ours. But that physic 
should be subjected to a kind of fashion 
is a matter of more serious consideration. 
The modern practice is greatly changed 
from what prevailed some years ago. 
New medicines are substituted; the es- 
sential ones are reduced to a small num- 
ber; and, if we take a retrospective view 
of the solemn pharmacopolist in his shop 
of the last century, surrounded with alli- 
gators, &c. dried and stuffed, pillars of 
boxes, drawers, pots, and musty herbs, 
which served either to impose upon or 
raise the admiration of the vulgar, we 
ought to esteem ourselves happy that, in 
the present enlightened age, the whole 
materia medica is capable of being com- 
prised in a single chest. Chemicals have 
waged war with Galenicals, and both 
together have nearly driven out the old- 
fashioned salutiferous juices of our fields 
and gardens. If the ancient practice was 
more tedious in its course and operation, 
the effects were certainly less dangerous. 
I would always prefer a gentle sanative 
to a more active and violent medicine, 
which, in the hands of inexperience, 
might do fatal mischief. I speak here 
only in general line, without pretend- 
ing to disallow that, in acute and certain 
cases, more subtile, and even forcible, 
medicines are required. At the same 
time, we ought to reflect that, inde- 
pendent of the known powers and effi- 
cacy of such, we should not lose sight of 
the various degrees of operation in dif- 
ferent habits and under changeable cir- 
cumstances. I shall, for the present, con- 
fine my observations to the use of Opium 
only, that fashionable vade mecum, that 
wonder-working nostrum. To refuse it 
the title of 'valuable,' would be doing 
an injustice to its approved merit. This 
merit is, however, in my opinion, too far 
exalted, and that by a kind of medical 
enthusiasm. Become familiar in the clo- 
set of the hypochondriac, it is the cradle 
which rocks life away;—a temporary 
friend, with whom too long an acquaint- 
ance is more or less dangerous. In short, 
it is not to be administered, in any quan- 
tity, except in the greatest emergency, 
and with the greatest precaution, as a 
conscientious and intelligent practitioner 
assured me he never did without tremb- 
ling. It has been known, sometimes, 
not to answer the intended purposes; in 
which cases it frequently acts in opposi- 
tion, producing an insomnia, or, what is 
worse, alienatio mentis. I shall add no 
more, and only beg to be understood that 
I do not condemn the use, but the too 
general abuse, of this appeasing medicine. 
Perhaps some of your medical correspon- 
dents may join with me in these senti- 
ments. Their learned opinion on this 
subject, communicated through the chan- 
nel of your Magazine, will be highly ac- 
ceptable to 
Philomathes. 

