

[^Sample 1: article - 1786_GM_1007^]

|P_1007
Mr. Urban, 
Nov. 20. 

HEARING by chance of a human 
body in a very curious and uncom- 
mon state of preservation, in the posses- 
sion of a gentleman of fortune in West- 
minster, I procured, through the inte- 
rest of a friend, a sight of it, which 
perfectly answered the description that 
had been given me, and gratified my 
curiosity in the fullest manner possible. 
Inclosed is a very exact representation [/1./]
of it from a copper-plate of the propri- 
etor's, to which is annexed a short de- 
scription of the circumstances attending 
its discovery, &c. than which nothing 
can be more consistent with probability. 
In addition to what is there described, 
and to throw further light on so strange 
a phænomenon, it may not be amiss to 
|P_1008
say, that the extreme length is about 
four feet, the sex very clearly marked, 
and the bones every where completely 
covered but in those places where exter- 
nal violence seems to have been used 
for the purpose of laying them open. 
Of the teeth, all the incisores are want- 
ing, and but six of the grinders left, 
three in each jaw. The viscera are 
closely invested by the outer integu- 
ments, and of course dried up in the 
same manner as the other more solid 
parts, the cartilages of the ears quite 
perfect, and the shape most accurately 
preserved; the back part of the scalp is 
thinly covered with short hairs of a red- 
dish cast. That no putrefaction, even 
in the smallest degree, ever took place, 
is evident from the medullary substance 
of the eyes, which is dried like the rest, 
and still perceptible in that state. 

I understand that many human bodies, 
under the same predicament, have been 
found in a conventual vault at Toulouse, 
but do not recollect to have heard of 
any thing precisely similar within the 
limits of this island; the humidity of 
our climate, perhaps, tending in gene- 
ral to the prevention of that essect, 
which can only be produced by the ex- 
treme of a contrary principle. The 
body of Humphrey Duke of Glou- 
cester, when discovered entire at St. 
Alban's, was in a sort of pickle, upon 
the consumption of which it presently 
mouldered to dust; as was, I believe, 
that of Robert Earl of Essex, found 
some years ago at Carmarthen. Many o- 
ther bodies, that were said to have been 
entire at the time of their discovery, on 
being exposed to the air, some immedi- 
ately, and all the others at no very dis- 
tant interval of time, fell to nothing, some 
even eluding the grasp of the first disco- 
verers on the spot; whereas this is not on- 
ly perfectly solid, but of the consistency 
and toughness of strong leather through- 
out, so that the whole body, weighing 
18lb, can be suspended, and even held at 
full length, by one foot, without the small- 
est injury. The present possessor of 
this valuable curiosity is Mr. Symmons, 
of Grosvenor-house, Westminster, who 
behaved to me with very great polite- 
ness, and very liberally expressed a wil- 
lingness that it should be seen by any 
person curious in the pursuit of natural 
history. 

As your entertaining and instructive 
Miscellany is the properest vehicle for 
such information to the public, I have 
taken the liberty of troubling you with 
the above, preferably to the publisher 
of any other periodical publication. 

Yours, &c. A. Z. 


[^1. 
* We thank our correspondent for the communication; but shall content ourselves with 
copying the inscription: "This print is an exact representation of a boy about twelve years 
old, who was found erect, with his cloaths on, in a vault under St. Botolph's Aldgate old 
church, in the year 1742, and is supposed to have been shut in at the time of the plague in 
1666, as the vault had not been opened from that period till the time abovementioned, when 
the church was pulled down. The extraordinary circumstance of this boy is this, that his 
skin, fibres, and intestines, are all dried, and very little of his bones appears, and weighs 
about 18 pounds. Now in the possession of John Symmons, esq. of Grosvenor-house, 
Westminster. "
^]