

[^Sample 1: article - 1786_GM_0507^]

|P_507
[}80. Medical Sketches. In Two Parts. 
By John Moore, M. D. 8vo. }]
THIS lively and ingenious writer, 
after remarking the revolutions of sys- 
tems in medical history, and the danger 
of implicitly adopting the fashionable 
doctrines of the day, proceeds to shew, 
that physical skill is only to be acquired 
by noting the general properties of 
drugs, by acutely observing their parti- 
cular operations on the human system, 
under various circumstances, and by 
drawing judicious inferences from cau- 
tious experiments.—To follow this line 
of conduct with success requires a clear 
understanding, in a two-fold view— 
clear in the exercise of vigorous powers, 
and also clear from an obstinate, fond 
attachment to pre-conceived theories. 

From the introductory part we shall 
extract some general observations that 
may afford some useful hints to our va- 
letudinary readers; though possibly our 
author, like Dr. Buchan, may be eyed 
askance by his brethren as a betrayer of 
the mysteries of his profession. 

What is the business of a physician?— 
Why, to apply his knowledge and experi- 
ence to the cure of diseases, in which he 
must be directed by that degree of under- 
standing he possesses; and if he is deficient 
in sense, his experience will prove a source 
from which he will draw false inferences; 
and learning, if he has it, will make him 
more presumptuous, and lead him farther 
into error. 

How many practitioners do we meet 
with, who are convinced that fevers are 
cured by the draughts, impregnated with 
contrayerva root and cardiac confection, 
with which they teize the patient every two 
or three hours? And how are they con- 
vinced of this? They will answer, from 
experience; for the drugs, not having actu- 
ally killed the patient, but only retarded his 
cure, he recovers at lengthm notwithstanding 
all the draughts he has been obliged to 
swallow. The sagacious doctor imputes the 
cure to his own prescriptions, and proba- 
bly publishes the case for the benefit of 
posterity. 

I have known a very well-meaning man 
mistake a prescription of feeble efficacy for 
one of the most powerful febrifuges that 
ever was contrived; he had ordered it pro- 
bably at first, when the disease began to take 
a favourable turn, or immediately before a 
happy crisis took place, and imputed the 
whole effect to the prescription. 

He gives the same medicine in another 
instance or two, on the very day the fever 
commences; it is an ephemera [/1./]; and he 
is confirmed in his opinion of the power of 
the medicine: he proclaims it the happiest 
combination that ever was invented, which, 
by a kind of electric attraction, draws the 
morbific matter to itself, and then hurries it 
out of the body. After a few instances of this 
kind, it is impossible to open his eyes; he 
imputes the unfortunate termination of other 
cases to some latent cause, which opposed 
the salutary effects of his favourite medicine. 
That any man, particularly a man of letters, 
and bred to the practice of physic, should be 
so easily deceived, could scarcely be believed, 
if we did not see such examples frequently, 
and if we did not know with what partiality 
mankind in general view what they consider 
as their own inventions, and with what com- 
placency they embrace opinions which flatter 
their own judgment. 

Another thing which prevents some 
practitioners from knowing the futility of 
their own prescriptions, and what Nature, 
left to herself, can do, is, that they never 
leave Nature to herself. The instant they 
are called, they fall to work with their 
draughts, juleps, and apozems, and persevere, 
with unrelenting assiduity, till the disease 
terminates one way or other. If the patient 
recovers, the medicines get the credit; if he 
dies, the disease is thought to have been in- 
curable. 

The being teized to swallow drugs is a 
species of distress to which the rich are more 
exposed than the poor, provided the lat- 
ter keep out of hospitals. Nature is allowed 
to cure as many of them as she can; and 
Art, being little solicitous of seducing such 
patients out of her sister's hands, they gene- 
rally have real need of medicines before they 
are pressed to take them. But a physician, 
whose practice lies among the highest spheres 
of life, if it amounts to three thousand 
pounds yearly, is supposed, at a moderate 
computation, to receive two thousand five 
hundred of that sum for prescribing for ima- 
ginary complaints, or such as would have 
disappeared fully as soon had they been left 
to themselves. But this ought not to be im- 
puted as a crime to the physician. If an old 
lady cannot dine with comfort till he has 
felt her pulse, looked at her tongue, and told 
her whether her chicken should be roasted 
or boiled, it is reasonable he should be paid 
for his trouble. 

The difference between a good physician 
and a bad one is certainly very great; but 
|P_508
the difference between a good physician and 
no physician at all, in many cases, is very 
little. 

If, during the course of the common 
epidemic diseases which occur in this island 
every Spring and Autumn, 200 patients were 
taken promiscuously, and one half delivered 
to the care of the faculty, to be treated ac- 
cording to art, that is, as private patients; by 
whom they are fee'd every time they pre- 
scibe, and the other half delivered to the 
care of nurses, instructed to give them no 
physic whatever, but merely cooling drinks, 
and such light and simple food as the patients 
appetites might lead them to wish for, I am 
convinced the world would be a good deal 
surprised at the result of the experiment. 

It is astonishing how exceedingly apt 
medical practitioners of every denomination 
are to impute to drugs that salutary effect 
which proceeds from the universal influence 
of another cause, which cause is that inhe- 
rent bias observable in the animal œconomy 
to restore health; for, as the surface of a 
lake, which clearly reflects the sky and hills, 
and verdant scenes around its borders, when 
it is disturbed by the falling of a stone, im- 
mediately endeavours to recover its scattered 
images, and restore them to the same beau- 
teous order in which they are wont to ap- 
pear; in like manner, when the natural 
course of the animal œconomy is interrupted 
and disturbed by the disease, the powers of 
the constitution are continually endeavouring 
to restore its organs to the perfect use of 
their functions, and to recover its usual vi- 
gour and serenity. 

This vis medicatrix naturæ, this constant 
tendency in nature to overcome disease and 
restore health, was observed by the father of 
medicine; and a sentiment to the same pur- 
pose is the very first expressed by Sydenham, 
in his inestimable work, and is acknowledged 
by all candid and discerning practitioners to 
have a powerful influence in the cure of dis- 
eases. Indeed I am inclined to believe, that 
physicians, in proportion to their candour 
and discernment, acknowledge and rely upon 
this power in nature; and, in proportion to 
their selfishness and weakness, impute every 
recovery to their own prescriptions. 

A judicious and experienced physician 
considers himself merely as an assistant to 
Nature; when her force seems to be suffi- 
cient, he leaves her to perform the cure; 
when she feels too feeble, he assists her by 
every means in his power. His patients, 
therefore, are sure, in the first place, of all 
the aid which Nature can give them; and, 
as often as it is requisite, if Art has discover- 
ed or invented any thing to alleviate or re- 
move their complaint, they are sure of that 
also. 

Whereas, a physician, who has an over- 
weening conceit of his own powers and those 
of his art, is apt, by unnecessary and officious 
attempts, to interrupt the salutary process of 
Nature, and, like the inconsiderate man who 
would plunge his hand into the disturbed 
lake, in order to assist its efforts to regain its 
lost tranquillity, he only helps to increase 
the disorder and confusion he means to 
remedy. 

If well-meaning practitioners, who really 
wish to do every thing in their power for the 
recovery of their patients, and whose greatest 
errors proceed from thinking more in their 
power than there is, can do so much harm, 
how much greater mischief is to be dreaded 
from the number of cunning, unprincipled, 
interested practitioners in medicine, who, 
without being deceived themselves, impose 
upon the weakness and credulity others? 
Those, generally, are men of superficial 
knowledge, of a considerable degree of na- 
tural shrewdness, and such a portion of im- 
pudence, as sets them above embarrassment, 
even when their ignorance and fraud are 
made manifest. 

Such men study the foibles of mankind, 
fatten on the fears and hopes and caprices of 
the rich valetudinarians, and squeeze the last 
lingering shilling out of the weakened hands 
of the poor. 

There is a kind of quackery which 
some people seem to invite; they cannot be 
fully convinced of their physician's skill and 
attention without it. Proofs of this are to 
be met with every where. In a certain city 
on the Continent I happened to call upon a 
lady, who, on accout of a pain and slight 
swelling in her ancle, had consulted a well- 
known physician, who, although he is ac- 
cused by his brethren of much charlatanical 
parade in his practice, commands the admi- 
ration of his patients in a more supreme de- 
gree than any doctor I was ever acquainted 
with. He had just left her when I entered. 
She told me he had ordered a poultice of bread 
and milk to be applied to the part; and 
then, giving her watch to her maid, she de- 
sired her to take particular care that the 
poultice should be boiled exactly four mi- 
nutes and a half, for such were the express 
orders of Monsieur le Docteur. On my ex- 
pressing some surprise at the minuteness of 
these orders, she exclaimed, Mon Dieu, 
quelle precision! il calcule comme un 
ange! 

"The fortunes that have been made, 
and are still making, by men of this de- 
scription, in the cities of London and Paris, 
and by the venders and inventors of nos- 
trums, or secret and infallible cures, is 
quite astonishing. I mention Paris and 
London particularly, because, though other 
towns are in some degree exposed to the 
same evil, yet the reputation of those pre- 
tended cures is always highest where the 
field for imposition is widest, and the chance 
of detection least. "


[^1. 
* "A fever that begins and ends in the 
compass of one day. "
^]