

[^Sample 1: article - 1786_GM_0130^]

|P_130
Mr. Urban, 
Edinburgh, Jan. 14. 

YOUR correspondent Humanitas, see 
vol. LV. p. 791. 888. (with whom 
I heartily agree in reprobating the use of 
the ordinary sulphureous and mercurial 
applications) does not seem to be in- 
formed of a simple remedy, entirely 
free from the objections urged against 
those abovementioned, which has been 
lately employed, with the best success, 
in the cure of the itch: the remedy I 
speak of is the vegetable acid. Of this, 
trial was first made in the year 1780, 
by Dr. Pischecow, at that time surgeon 
at Livensk, in Russia. This gentleman, 
who came to England not long after- 
wards, has described his mode of treat- 
ment in this disease in a thesis, printed 
at Edinburgh in 1784 [/1./], intituled, 
"Tentamen Zoologico-practicum de nova 
Methodo Psoram sanandi." As the dis- 
tribution of this pamphlet has been con- 
fined to the narrow circle of a few 
friends, I should be glad to have an 
opportunity, through the medium of 
your useful Miscellany, of making the 
author's practice more generally known. 

"In the year 1780 " (says the Dr.) ", 
when I was surgeon at Livensk, in the 
district of Woronitz, I found many of 
the poorer sort of people had the itch; 
and, as there were several distilleries in 
the place, I applied to all that were in- 
fected, baths made of the residuum 
(called barda in the Russian tongue) 
after the distillation of the spirits. I 
soon discovered, after several trials, the 
efficacy of this application to be so great, 
that I did not even think of, much less 
had occasion for, any sulphureous oint- 
ments. If the eruptions did not disap- 
pear on the first use of the barda bath, 
they were sure to be removed on the se- 
cond. In villages where, on account 
of their distance from the town, I could 
not procure barda, I employed the 
common Russian drink, called Kuass or 
Quass, with the same success. Thus 
encouraged, I afterwards made trial of 
almost every other sort of vegetable acid: 
and I never found it to fail. "

"From these experiments "(adds the 
author) "frequently performed with suc- 
cess on persons infected with the itch, 
I deduce the following practical corol- 
lary, viz. that acids, applied to the hu- 
man skin, prove destructive, and, in a 
manner, instant poison, to very small 
insects, such as the acari sirones[/2./]. "

Such is the simplicity of the remedy 
which this author proposes, that, if it re- 
ally possesses the efficacy which he says it 
does, no unprejudiced practitioner can 
hesitate a moment to lay aside the ordi- 
nary unctuous applications for this dis- 
ease, and to substitute, in their place, 
the acidulated bath. In large towns, 
where there are many breweries, plenty 
of sour grains can always be had; and 
these will answer equally well with the 
Russian barda: on the other hand, in 
country places, sour milk may be em- 
ployed in their stead. When the erup- 
tion is confined to the hands, would not 
the vapour of boiling vinegar be the best 
application? 

But Dr. P. does not seem to have 
been aware that this deleterious pro- 
perty, with respect to animalcula, is 
not peculiar to vegetable acids, but is 
possessed in common by those also of the 
mineral kingdom. The oil of vitriol, 
as it is improperly called, has, in some 
cases, applied externally, removed the 
disease. I believe, indeed, that it has 
never been used in the form of a bath. 
A few drops of this oil will go a far 
greater way than a much larger quan- 
tity of the vegetable acid; and, as it is 
cheaper than vinegar, and much more 
commodious than either the grains or 
|P_131
sour milk, it will be better to employ 
it, where it can be had, in preference 
to any of them. 
Yours, &c. Medicus. 


[^1. 
* Dr. P. though he published his thesis at 
Edinburgh, took his degree from another 
university. 
^]
[^2. 
† For so the animalcula, which cause the 
itch, are called by Linnæus. 
^]