

[^Sample 1: article - 1786_GM_0688^]

|P_688
[}106. The Present Practice of Surgery. Con- 
taining the Description,Causes, and Treat- 
ment of each Complaint; together with the 
most approved Methods of Operating. By 
Robert White, M. D. and Practitioner in 
Surgery. 8vo. }]
HAVING every reason to believe 
that this volume will be both accept- 
able and useful to students and young 
practitioners, we shall let the author in- 
troduce himself. 

"The great improvements, " he says, 
 made in the art, within the last thirty 
or forty years, have rendered the practical 
part so widely different from what it is 
handed down in the writings of former 
practitioners, as to give ample room for fur- 
ther explanations and remarks.—Much, it 
is confessed, has been published upon the 
subject within that term; but some of those 
publications are too voluminous and expen- 
sive; some treat only on particular subjects; 
and others are rather confined to the im- 
provement of operations, and to hypothetical 
invention, that made subservient to general 
practice. Experience, however, and observa- 
tion, together with a competent knowledge 
of anatomy, are the leading principles upon 
which this noble art is founded, and upon 
which it ought to be supported.—In this re- 
fined age, theory has too much the ascend- 
ency. New systems are daily creating;— 
no sooner is one become fashionable and ad- 
mired, than another springs up, and indus- 
triously controverts it, if it does not overturn 
it. Education is, in fact, wrought up be- 
yond the limits of useful knowledge; and 
the most ingenious men are too often divert- 
ed by fanciful schemes, founded upon false 
principles. Hence the student is unwarily 
led into vain pursuits, and is too apt to neg- 
lect sound practical knowledge. But, allow- 
ing such attempts to be ingenious, at the 
same time there is little need of argument 
to prove their fallibility; and although they 
may be laudable, and even useful, yet it is 
likely they would be much more so, were 
they entered upon with greater caution, and 
managed with more temperate zeal. The 
surgical art has very little need of such aids, 
Non tali auxilio — 
— eget — 
The modus operandi is of little signification, 
provided success attends the means employed 
towards relief. Human reason is evidently 
too weak to investigate the mysterious course 
of nature with any degree of certainty; and 
in surgery, as in every other branch of the 
medical art, those applications which will 
most assist, and least interrupt, her efforts, 
are best entitled to preference. Common 
sense will in general be found equal to the 
task of suggesting the means, and observa- 
tion and practice will readily ascertain the 
propriety of using them. 

"For the more immediate benefit, then, 
of young practitioners, a general system, as 
compendious as its nature would admit of, 
formed from the general practice, in its present 
cultivated state, and founded upon positive 
facts, cannot surely be thought an useless per- 
formance. In the prosecution of which, the 
reader will readily imagine the necessary 
obligations which the author must lay under 
to the ingenious and useful works of several 
eminent writers upon the different subjects. 
—Upon these premises the author introduces 
a plain, concise, intelligible state of the 
most rational practice; and he has therefore 
drawn up his account of it, in what he 
deems the most ready and eligible plan, by 
dividing in into general heads, and giving a 
|P_689
regular description of each disorder, its 
causes, and mode of cure. He has also spe- 
cified a few instances of success in his own 
practice, wherein he has ventured to deviate 
from the most respectable authorities. And, 
in order to render the work more complete, 
he has added a lift of such topical and other 
remedies as are most applicable to surgical 
cases. "

As a specimen of the whole perform- 
ance, we shall select his observations on 
Venomous Wounds. 

The most formidable wound of this 
kind, which we have to guard against in 
this climate, is caused by the bite of Mad 
Animals; Dogs particularly. Its description 
and symptoms are as follow: 

No sudden effect upon the constitution 
is observed from the bite of a mad dog, and 
the wound itself is not more difficult to heal 
than lacerated wounds in general, of the 
same magnitude. The patient has also no 
particular affliction, except dejection of spi- 
rits from a dread of the consequences, till 
about a month or six weeks from the acci- 
dent, sooner or later, according to various 
circumstances; when a redness, heat, and 
tension generally attend the edges of the 
wound, and at the same time wandering 
pains and spasmodic affections diverge from 
the part; which symptoms are accompanied 
with nausea, difficult respiration, anxiety about 
the præcordia, vertigo, and loss of muscular 
strength; great depression of spirits and the 
love of solitude ensue; sleep is disturbed by 
twitchings, horrid dreams, and restlessness; 
and the pulse is all this time quick, weak, 
and irregular. 

On the first or second day the foregoing 
symptoms gradually increasing, comes on a 
peculiar affection of the pharynx and gullet, 
which, upon an attempt to drink, occasions 
a sense of suffocation, and a convulsive af- 
fection of those parts and the organs of re- 
spiration; these symptoms even the common 
air in inspiration will produce, particularly 
if the weather is moist. This anxiety, and 
not being able to drink without the greatest 
difficulty, gives the disease the appellation of 
Hydrophobia. 

As the general symptoms increase, the 
saliva is swallowed in less degree; great 
quantities of it are spit off in a viscid and 
frothy state, with powerful and repeated ef- 
forts, attended with a singular kind of noise, 
different from common hawking, which per- 
sons, prepossessed with the opinion, may con- 
clude to be like the barking of a dog: the 
light now begins to grow intolerable, and 
the urine flows involuntarily. Thus ends 
the second stage of this terrible complaint. 

At this awful period follow heat and 
flushing, with a strangulated appearance in 
the face and neck, together with a quicker 
pulse, in some weaker, in others stronger; 
with involuntary emissions. Convulsive spasms 
affect most parts of the body: some are afflicted 
with a fierce delirium, or outrageous mad- 
ness; and others shew a fixed melancholy, 
with a most pitiable countenance, having a 
perfect sense of their miserable state. At 
length the lower limbs become paralytic, 
convulsions increase, the pulse grows lan- 
guid, cold sweats ensue, and death puts an 
end to the general distress, which commonly 
happens on the 3d or 4th day from the attack. 
Such were nearly the progressive symptoms 
of a poor husbandman, who, within an hour 
of his death, called for several of his ac- 
quaintances, and sealed his last farewell by 
shaking hands with them, telling them, at 
the same time, that they need not be afraid 
of him, for he would do them no harm. 

This poor man had been for some hours 
deprived of the use of his lower limbs, which, 
in his restless state, he dragged after him 
round the room, hawking up and scattering 
about the saliva; at the same time he ex- 
pressed as great horror at the mention of a 
bed, as this pitiable class of patients are said 
to do at the sight of water; both which 
equally influenced his mind with a dread of 
suffocation. 

"Whilst he was performing the before- 
mentioned act of friendship with his fellow- 
servant, his mind being particularly agi- 
tated, a general convulsion seized him, and 
curled him up as it were in a heap, which 
was succeeded by as sudden a stretch, that 
closed the melancholy scene. "

