

[^Sample 1: article - 1786_GM_1035^]

|P_1035
Mr. Urban, 

I BELIEVE that the fashionable prac- 
tice of sea-bathing ought to be used 
with more precaution than it is. A 
thin, muscular man, as I am, may use 
freedom with cold water, when a fat, 
corpulent man should not. I have fre- 
quently gone into the water in a profuse 
perspiration, after two or three hours 
exercise; but then I stayed no longer in 
the water than I would remain in a cold 
bath. It sometimes had the sensation of 
so many pins stuck in every pore of my 
skin; when, dressing myself immediate- 
ly, and resuming my exercise, I soon re- 
covered my former heat. I took these 
liberties with myself, because I did not 
apprehend that what an old Roman, or 
a savage American, could safely bear, 
would do a temperate Englishman any 
hurt. Having always bathed for my 
pleasure, and not for my health, I must 
own I went a little out of the common 
track. I never go into the cold bath in 
winter, as the physicians prescribe, be- 
cause I have not the least inclination for 
it, and I find myself, by the cold air, 
sufficiently braced; but in hot weather, 
when, like any amphibious animal, I 
feel a longing desire to be in the water, 
I bathe to the height of my wish. I 
have sometimes gone thrice a day into 
the sea at Brightelmstone, which so ef- 
fectually cooled me, that I have had the 
most profound and refreshing sleep at 
night, while every one else was com- 
|P_1036
plaining that he could not shut his eyes 
for the heat. Though I am only tel- 
ling what a lean, temperate man has 
safely practised on himself, I believe that 
most men might save themselves from 
fevers, if they were to bathe in cold 
water when they feel a desire for it, and 
feel themselves, without exercise, into- 
lerably hot. A Director of the East In- 
dia Company has told me, that, when 
he commanded a Company's ship, he 
ordered every man on board to bathe 
once a day at least, after they came into 
a warm climate; to which custom he 
ascribed it that he lost very few men in 
any voyage, while other ships suffered a 
considerable loss. 

I said, that the practice of sea-bathing 
ought to be used with more precaution 
than it is, principally on this account,— 
because I believe the custom, if diurnal, 
is dangerous when it is suddenly left 
off. I am confirmed in this belief, not 
only from my own experience, but from 
the inconvenience or misfortune which 
others have felt. The first year I was 
at Brighthelmstone, I bathed, for two 
months, constantly every day, after 
which I was called to London in some 
haste. 

On the first and second day after I 
came to town, I had a violent head-ach, 
felt a sickness at my stomach, and an in- 
tolerable heat. My eldest boy, who had 
been with me at Brighthelmstone, and 
had bathed as constantly as myself, felt 
the very same complaints, but in a much 
stronger degree; and was affected in the 
same manner as I have known some na- 
tives of Greenland to be, who were 
brought to this warmer climate by our 
fishing ships; he vomitted, bled at the 
nose, and complained very much of his 
head. It presently occurred to me, that 
the sea-bathing having become so habi- 
tual to us, the leaving it off too sud- 
denly was the cause of these complaints. 
I carried him therefore to the river; but 
I plunged in first, to try the experiment 
upon myself. After dressing, and find- 
ing myself perfectly right, I turned my 
boy in next, and it cured him of all his 
complaints. Not that he was drowned; 
but that, after this remedy, he neither 
vomited, bled at the nose, nor com- 
plained of his head. Common sense 
told me to continue that course, every 
two or three days, till we were from the 
bathing totally disused. I told this to a 
friend of mine, whose wife had been 
some weeks at Margate, and I desired 
him to caution her not to leave off the 
bathing all at once: but having neglect- 
ed this advice, in three days after coming 
to town she was seized with a fever, and 
in ten days more she was carried to her 
grave. 

As the cold bathing in hot weather is 
beneficial, so, in cold weather, I be- 
lieve the hot bath can to many constitu- 
tions do no injury, and will to most be 
of infinite use. With regard to myself, 
I found that it removed all obstruction 
in the perspiration, and revived my na- 
tural heat. I used to take it for my 
pleasure, as, in a different season, I took 
the cold bath. I have for several weeks 
together, in the severest winters we have 
had, gone into the Kingston bath every 
other night, and I found not the least 
inconvenience in walking, the morning 
after it, two or three hours in the coldest 
frost. 
Caution. 

