

[^Sample 1: article - 1786_GM_0871^]

[}
|P_871
122. The London Medical Journal. Vol. VII. 
For the Year 1786. Parts I, II, III. 8vo. }]
THIS valuable collection of medical 
papers (of some of the volumes of which 
we have occasionally given an account) 
has been carried on with increasing re- 
putation since the year 1780, and has 
now an extensive circulation on the con- 
tinent, being, as ws are informed, re- 
gularly translated, soon after its appear- 
ance here, into the French and some 
other foreign languages. A part of the 
work is published once in three months, 
so as to make one volume annually.— 
The following are the papers contained 
in the three parts already published of 
the volume for the present year. 

I. Observations on the Use and Abuse 
of Mercury in the Cure of the Syphilis. 
Communicated, in a Letter to Samuel 
Foart Simmons, M. D. F. R. S. by Tho- 
mas Kirkland, M. D. Member of the 
Royal Medical Society of Edinburgh. 

Dr. Kirkland, who has obtained great 
reputation by several valuable publica- 
tions, here points out, from his own 
long and successful experience, the great 
efficacy of small doses of mercury in 
venereal cases. The preparation he re- 
commends is, a scruple of crude mer- 
cury, rubbed down with a drachm of 
starch, and made into twenty pills, two 
of which are to be taken daily, occa- 
sionally interposing an opening medi- 
cine —The Doctor highly extols this 
mode of practice, and observes, that 
large doses or mercury are not only 
unnecessary, but often violently per- 
nicious. 

II. Some Experiments made with a 
View to ascertain the Duration of the in- 
sertious Power of the Variolous Matter. 
By Thomas Houlston. M. D. Physician 
to the Liverpool Infirmary. 

This gentleman kept some variolous 
matter in a bottle, slightly corked, from 
1768 till 1782, when the inoculated two 
patients with it, but without effect; 
whence he infers, that the matter of the 
small pox loses its power of commuicat- 
ing infection after a certain number of 
years. 

III. Case of a Retention of Urine re- 
moved by Electricity. Communicated, in 
a Letter to Dr. Simmons, by Samuel 
Snowden, M. D. Physician at Stroud, in 
Gloucestershire. 

The good effects of electricity in this 
case were particularly striking, as the 
patient, for some time, was able to void 
his urine only while he was on the elec- 
trical stool. 

IV. Case of a Lumbar Abscess, with an 
Account of the Appearances on Dissection. 
By Mr. Laurence White Maguire, Sur- 
geon of the Navy. 

V. Case of an Abscess of the Liver, oc- 
casioned by a Blow; with an Account of 
the Appearances on Dissection. Commu- 
nicated, in a Letter to Dr. Simmons, by 
Mr. Isaac Oliphant, Surgeon in London. 

VI. An Account of a Suppression of 
Stools and Urine, occasioned by an Accu- 
mulation of hardened Fæces in the Rectum. 
By the same. 

This case is extremely curious; but 
we have not room to insert the pari- 
culars. 

VII. Two Instances of the Effects of 
drinking pure Spirits, in repeated and 
large Quantities. Communicated, in a 
Letter to Dr. Simmons, F. R. S. by John 
Rollo, M. D. late Surgeon in the Royal 
Artillery. 

A tremendous lesson for all dram- 
drinkers! 

VIII. An Account of a successful Me- 
thod of reducing the Funis, in Cases in 
which it comes down before the Head of 
the Fœtus. By Mr. Richard Croft, Sur- 
geon at Tutbury in Staffordshire. 

The method here recommended is 
new and ingenious. 

IX. Two successful Cases of Delivery 
by the Crotchet, in extreme Deformity of 
the Pelvis. Communicated, in a Letter 
to Dr. Simmons, by Mr. John Clarke, 
Surgeon in London. 

The author proves, from these cases, 
that it is possible to bring a fœtus 
through any pelvis, however small its 
dimensions may be, when the head is 
lessened; and therefore, that the Cæ- 
sarean section can hardly become neces- 
sary on account of the diminution of the 
capacity of the pelvis. 

X. On the Efficacy of Flowers of Zinc 
in the Epilepsy. By J. Lind, M. D. Phy- 
sician to the Royal Hospital at Haslar. 

XI. An Account of a remarkable Cure 
of a Dropsy, after the Patient had been 
tapped Sixteen Times. By Mr. R. Cook, 
Surgeon at Barking in Essex. 

This case is indeed truly remarkable; 
for what sixteen tappings and the assist- 
ance of the most eminent of the faculty 
had failed to produce, was at length 
(after the disease had continued near 
eight years, and the patient had voided, 
in the different tappings, above 82 gal- 
lons of water,) effected by an accidental 
motion as the patient (a widow lady 
near Rickmansworth, Herts,) was mak- 
ing her bed, for the sake of a little ex- 
|P_872
ercise. She had then a sudden inclina- 
tion to make water, and in the course 
of a day or two voided several gallons. 
The disease was happily removed in 
this manner. 

XII. Observations on the Use of the 
Globe Pessary. In a Letter to Dr. Sim- 
mons, by Thomas Denman, M. D. 

XIII. Case of a Negro Woman who 
performed the Cæsarean Operation on 
herself. 

The circumstances of this curious 
and extraordinary narrative are authen- 
ticated by Dr. Morton, a respectable 
physician at Kingston in Jamaica, who 
had the care of the patient, as well as 
by the letters of other medical gentle- 
men of eminence, who are acquainted 
with the fact. The poor Negro wo- 
man, who is the subject of the case, be- 
ing impatient of the pains of labour, 
tore open the uterus with a blunt knife, 
and let out her intestines with the fœ- 
tus. The latter died soon after its 
birth; but the mother recovered, and 
has since been delivered of a live child 
at the full term. 

XIV. An Account of a remarkable Fact 
relative to the Small Pox. Communicat- 
ed, in a Letter to Dr. Simmons, F. R. S. 
by William Wright, M. D. F. R. S. 
Physician-General in Jamaica, &c. 

This gentleman relates a curious fact, 
which proves that, in the cure of the 
small pox, a person who has already 
gone through the disease may have a 
local affection without the habit in ge- 
neral being tainted with the variolous 
poison, and yet that such local affection 
is capable of communicating the dis- 
ease.—The fact in question is as fol- 
lows: The author, many years alfer he 
had had the small pox in the natural 
way, having been attending patients la- 
bouring under that distemper, had a 
large variolous pustule on his thumb. 
From this pustule he inoculated six ne- 
groes, all of whom passed through the 
disease in the usual manner. 

XV. Remarks on Malignant Fevers; 
and their Cure, by cold Water and fresh 
Air. By the same. 

The author relates two striking in- 
stances of the efficacy of cold bathing 
(a remedy of which he points out the 
antiquity) in the malignant fevers of 
hot climates. One of these instances is 
his own case. 

XVI. Case of a painful Affection of 
the Face cured by Electricity. By Mr. 
Robert Blunt, Surgeon at Odiham. 

The painful disease here described 
was of the kind first pointed out by the 
late eminent Dr. Fothergill, who had 
in vain sought for a remedy of any cer- 
tainty in such cases. We are therefore 
happy to read this account of the im- 
mediate relief obtained from electricity, 
in the instance here recorded. 

XVII. History of a Case in which 
Symptoms of Pulmonary Consumption 
were relieved by the Expectoration of 
a Piece of curious bone. By Mr. C. 
Holman, Surgeon at Milverton in So- 
mersetshire. 

The patient was apparently in the 
last stage of a consumption, when he 
coughed up a great quantity of blood, 
and with it a piece ot carious bone, 
six eighths of an inch long, and weigh- 
ing six grains, which he remembered to 
have swallowed several years before.— 
From the time the bone was swallowed 
he had been subject to a cough, and 
other symptoms; but all his complaints 
ceased on its removal. 

XVIII. Observations on the Medical 
and Surgical Uses of cold Water. By 
Mr. N. Chavasse, Surgeon at Walsall
in Stassordshire. 

Many useful remarks occur in this 
paper. The following may be interest- 
ing to many of our readers: The 
sedative, studious, and valetudinary, 
are often afflicted with a violent and 
alarming head-ach. This disease is 
difficult to palliate when present, and 
its recurrence not easily obviated. 
For more than two years I have been 
severely handled, at times, by this 
complaint. After trying various re- 
medies without benefit, I have now 
learned to mitigate, and finally to re- 
move, it by the application of cold 
water to the head. 

XIX. An Account of a Case in which 
the Head of the Os Femoris, shattered by 
a Gun-shot, is supposed to have been re- 
generated. By Mr. Jos. Brandish, Sur- 
geon at Alcester, in Warwickshire. Com- 
municated, with an Account of a curious 
Fact relative to the Effects of Opium, in 
a Letter to Dr. Simmons, by James John- 
stone, M. D. Physician at Worcester. 

This case is an extraordinary instance 
of the powers of nature, in re-producing 
a part of one of the largest bones.—The 
fact relative to opium is also very cu- 
rious. A patient, who was accustomed 
to take a large dose of it every other 
night, for a very painful disorder (the 
stone), got no sleep the night he took 
it, but usually slept well the following 
night. 

|P_881
XX. Recommendation of Electricity for 
the Cure of a Cataract, illustrated by a 
Case. By Mr. Charles Kite, Surgeon at 
Gravesend. 

The reader will find in this paper 
some judicious observations relative to 
the application of electricity in cases of 
cataract. 

XXI. Case of a Fracture of the Skull, 
successfully treated. Communicated, in a 
Letter to Dr. Simmons, by Mr. J. Cau- 
ser, Surgeon at Stourbridge in Wor- 
cestershire. 

XXII. Experiments and Observations 
on the Contents of the Medullary Cells in 
Dropsy. Communicated, in a Letter to Dr. 
Simmons, by Mr. John Hall, Surgeon 
and Teacher of Anatomy in London. 

XXIII. Case of an Excrescence in the 
Urethra of a Female Patient, successfully 
treated. By Mr. J. C. Jenner, Surgeon 
at Painswick, Gloucestershire. 

XXIV. Account of a General Inocula- 
tion at Painswick. By the same. 

XXV. Observations and Queries on 
Animal Heat. By Mr. John Pearson, 
Surgeon to The Lock Hospital, &c. 

XXVI. Observations and Facts rela- 
tive to the Practice of Inoculation of the 
Small Pox. Communicated, in a Letter 
to Dr. Simmons, F. R. S. by Mr. John 
Covey, Apothecary at Basingstoke. 

XXVII. Case of Chorea Sancti Viti 
cured by Cuprum Ammoniacum. By R. 
Willan, M. D. Member of the Royal Col- 
lege of Physicians, London. 

XXVIII. Singular Termination of 
Dropsy. By the same. 

XXIX. Practical Observations on Am- 
putation. Communicated, in a Letter to 
Dr. Simmons, F. R. S. by Mr. James 
Lucas, one of the Surgeons of the General 
Infirmary at Leeds. 

These observations, which seem to be 
highly deserving the attention of sur- 
geons, are accompanied by an engraving 
illustrative of a particular mode of am- 
putating, recommended by the author. 

XXX. An Account of the good Effects 
of Electricity in Four Cases of a diseased 
Testicle. By Mr. G. Houndsfield, Sur- 
geon at Sheffield. 

XXXI. Case of Worms discharged 
through a Wound in the Groin. Com- 
municated, in a Letter to Dr. Simmons, 
F. R. S. by Mr. W. Coleman, Surgeon 
at Sandwich in Kent. 

XXXII. Observations on Necrosis. By 
M. Bousselin, Surgeon-Major of the 
Polish Army, &c. 

This curious disease does not seem 
to have excited the attention of sur- 
geons till of late years. In this paper 
we have a good account of the symp- 
toms and manner of treating it, illus- 
trated by eight cases. 

XXXIII. Observations on the Effects 
of Magistery of Bismuth, given inter- 
nally, as an Antispasmodic. By Lewis 
Odier, M. D. Physician at Geneva. 

The Magistery of Bismuth has hi- 
therto been employed only as a cosme- 
tic; but, from this account of it, it 
seems to be a remedy of considerable 
efficacy in certain painful affections of 
the stomach, arising from too great an 
irritability of that organ. 

Besides the articles we have parti- 
cularly noticed, we meet with several 
others, extracted from books. Amongst 
these, are several papers from the vo- 
lume lately published at Boston by the 
American Academy of Arts and Sci- 
ences; and likewise the following cu- 
rious case from a work by Dr. Wltezek, 
physician to the King of Poland. This 
is, The case of a young lady, twenty- 
three years old, who, after swallow- 
ing several keys (one of which mea- 
sured about three inches in length, 
and was with difficulty forced down 
by means of a scrotary), nails, nee- 
dles, different pieces of gold, silver, 
and copper coin, glass, &c. lingered 
twenty-two weeks; during the whole 
time of which she was afflicted with 
an incessant nausea, and with fre- 
quent and painful vomiting of a fœ- 
tid, blackish fluid. Her fæces were 
in general hard, and of a black co- 
lour. On dissection, the stomach was 
found in a very diseased state, its in- 
ner surface being every where in- 
flamed and ulcerated. It contained, 
besides the articles already enume- 
rated, two pen-knives, the blades of 
which were separated from the han- 
dles, the handles of six table-spoons, 
and the bowls of three others, which 
had been bent by the patient, to en- 
able them to pass into the stomach. 

