

[^Sample 1: article - 1786_GM_0223^]

|P_223
Mr. Urban, 
March 3. 

YOUR correspondent who signs him- 
self Veremond in the Magazine for 
1784, p. 741, having desired some o- 
pinion relative to the success that might 
be expected from the application of per- 
petual blisters, or setons, in order to 
prevent or expel morbific contagion; I 
beg leave, through the channel of your 
Miscellany, to offer a few observations 
on the hints he has offered, submitting 
them with all deference to the correction 
of your medical readers. The experi- 
ment, no doubt, is a simple one, and 
such as every person would embrace, 
provided a security could thereby be ob- 
tained; but proof must be first adduced, 
and this corroborated by the testimony of 
many who have experienced its good 
effects. 

It is true that our constitutions have a 
natural propensity to throw off some par- 
ticular and specific contagions, such as 
the small-pox, measles, &c. but what 
effort does nature make to expel the poi- 
son of a mad-dog, or the venereal virus? 
If she was equally regular in her method 
of cure in every constitution, and in 
every disease, we might then, from ana- 
logy, imitate the process with undoubted 
success. But suppose, according to Ve- 
remond, that the experiment was tried in 
the manner he recommends, and that the 
criminal escaped the contagion, even 
then we have only a negative proof of its 
utility; for surely no one would venture 
to assert, that the application of an issue 
was a certain preventative from infection, 
because it had been made on one person, 
and that person had escaped the conta- 
gion! It is well known that morbific 
miasmata will not always attack, and al- 
so, that many constitutions are proof a- 
gainst their assaults; there must be a 
pre-disposition in the habit to receive the 
infection: this is well known from the 
circumstance of the variolous matter be- 
ing often introduced into some constitu- 
tions, yet will never produce the disease. 

According to the theory of modern 
physiologists, there is nothing can, with 
greater certainty, pre-dispose the habit to 
receive contagion, than the reducing 
that habit to a state of debility; and will 
not an issue, in great measure, contri- 
bute to induce that debility? 

It is allowed, that some specific conta- 
gions act first on the part to which they 
were primarily applied. The variolous 
poison, and the poison of the mad-dog, 
are proofs of this. Of the latter, thank 
Heaven! we have not such certain evi- 
dence as of the former; but there are 
cases recorded which render it highly 
probable, insomuch, that the present 
practice of treating wounds, made by 
those animals, is entirely founded on 
that opinion. 

But as, in common, we have no proof 
of the habit having received any infec- 
tion, till (I fear) it is too late for pro- 
phylactics, so, of course, our methods of 
prevention can never be founded on a 
solid basis; for, if we consider the vari- 
ous constitutions, pre-dispositions, and 
temperaments of different persons, we 
must confess, that the same mode of 
treatment, indiscriminately made use of, 
can never properly be applicable to all. 

If it should be thought expedient to 
try the experiment which Veremond pro- 
poses, I would recommend it to be done 
thus: let half-a-dozen criminals be ex- 
posed to the infection; let the disease be 
strongly marked upon them before the 
issue is made; if then a cessation of 
symptoms shall ensue, and they all reco- 
ver without any other means, there will 
be a strong presumption that the "infec- 
tion, after having entered the juices of 
the body, " has been expelled; but, as a 
prophylactic, I am of opinion that it can 
be of no service. 

Yours, &c. Chirurgus. 

