

[^Sample 1: article - 1792_GM_0603^]

|P_603
Mr. Urban, 
Lincoln, June 23. 

A GENTLEMAN of this town, dis- 
tinguished for his humane and be- 
nevolent disposition, has just been at the 
expence of printing and distributing the 
letter here subjoined. The motive ap- 
pears to me to be so praise-worthy, that 
I have no doubt but you will give it 
fuller effect by an insertion in your 
widely-circulated Miscellany. 
J. C. 

Dear Sir, 
—, 2d July, 1777. 

About a fortnight ago I went to see Tom, 
at Bow, where he is very happy, and hath 
made great improvement, especially in the 
use of his pen. This I know will give you 
pleasure; but it will give you more to read 
the following narrative of cures performed 
by a despised weed that grows on every ditch, 
and is a nuisance in every garden, which I 
send with a request that you will make it as 
public as possible, and as speedily as you can, 
because, the plant being now in bloom, I ap- 
prehend its juices will neither be so copious 
nor efficacious after its seeds are formed; 
and I am very desirous that as many more 
proofs may be made of its virtues as possible 
during the remains of the reason. 

Tom's master, Mr. Emblin, informed me, 
that he was perfectly cured of a violent scor- 
butic complaint, which had afflicted him 
many years, notwithstanding he had taken 
Maredant's drops, other nostrums, and sea- 
water, by drinking a tea-cup-full of the 
fresh-expressed juice of Clivers, or Cleavers, 
commonly called Hariff, or Goose-grass, ten 
successive mornings. 

That, being agreeably surprised at his own 
extraordinary cure, he administered the same 
medicine to several of his boys, who were 
affected with scorbutic humours, one of them 
remarkably and severely; and they were 
cured every one. 

That a person in Bow had been afflicted 
several months with a violent pain in the 
tendons of his heels, which communicated 
all up the hind part of his legs, and was at- 
tended with a great depression of spirits; he 
was under the care of an eminent apotheca- 
ry, who treated his complaint as rheumatic, 
without giving him any relief. Early last 
spring, having heard of the cures Mr. Em- 
blin had made of himself and his scholars, by 
taking the juice of Hariff, or Goose-grass, he 
had the young plants gathered, and used 
them as tea; but so soon as they were big 
enough to furnish a proper quantity of juice, 
he took a tea-cup-full ten mornings, and is 
so far recovered that he feels nothing of his 
complaint, unless after severe or long exer- 
|P_604
cise. It is presumed this person, for so ob- 
stinate a complaint, should have continued 
the medicine longer. 

A child in Bow, a girl about two years 
old, appeared to be sinking under a compli- 
cation of diseases. She had a severe wheezing 
and shortness of breath, a rustling in her 
breast, vomited a great quantity of phlegm, 
had lost her appetite, and got very little 
sleep; consequently was very weak, and 
judged to be in a dangerous way. The 
child's nurse informed its mother that she 
served in a family where a young lady, sup- 
posed to be far gone in a consumption, was 
perfectly cured by taking, by the direction of 
a great physician, a tea-cup-full of the juice 
of Hariff, or Goose-grass, several times a 
day, after it had been boiled and scummed 
till no more scum would arise, and then close 
bottled. In consequence of this intelligence, 
the child's mother prepared and administered 
this medicine, and in less than a fortnight all 
the forementioned symptoms disappeared, 
the child recovered its appetite and sleep, 
and became quite lively. Its overjoyed pa- 
rent boasted of the recovery of her child to 
an acquaintance, who had borne and brought 
up a great number of her own, who would 
allow no merit to the medicine, but insisted 
the cure was owing to the return of warm 
weather, and the child's natural strength. 
The medicine was left off; and, behold! all 
the symptoms returned. The medicine was 
administered as before; the child recovered 
in the same astonishing manner, and is now 
very well. 

This invaluable medicine was first intro- 
duced in the neighbourhood of Bow by a 
maid-servant in a gentleman's family, the 
palms of whose hands broke out so full of 
sores that she could not use them. She told 
her mistress that she must have recourse to 
her old medicine, and that would set her to 
rights Being asked what it was, she said, 
that she had lost much of her time in service 
by the sores which used to break out, as those 
she had then on her hands, in the spring of 
the year; that she had tried abundance of 
things, but found benefit from none; that at 
last she was sent to an hospital, from which 
she was discharged as incurable; but was af- 
terwards told of the juices of Hariff, or Goose- 
grass, which she took as above, and was 
perfectly cured. This medicine was pro- 
vided; she took it ten mornings, and, to the 
surprize of her mistress and all the family, 
was perfectly cured. 

A little while after this, a lad, who work- 
ed in the linen-ground near Bow, broke out 
in sores all over his body, so dreadfully, that 
he was reduced to use crutches for his sup- 
port. Somebody, who had heard of the cure 
last related, recommended the same medicine 
to the lad, who took it, and got so well as to 
return to his work, but left the place pre- 
sently after, and hath not since been heard of. 

These two last-recited cases coming to the 
knowledge of Mr. Emblin, induced him to 
try the medicine; and he having related his 
own and the forementioned cures to me, 
whose face at that time was very sore, I took 
this simple easy draught ten mornings, and, 
I praise God! am perfectly well recovered. 

Those proofs of the extraordinary powers 
of this innocent tasteless herb, I think, are 
sufficient to awaken the attention of every 
person who shall hear of them; wherefore, 
I repeat my request, that you will make 
them public as soon as possible. Perhaps 
some gentleman, whose province it is to care 
for the health of British seamen, may take 
notice of it, and recommend its trial to the 
faculty; and if it shall be found to retain its 
sanative quality, when boiled and preserved 
in bottles, what a valuable acquisition will it 
prove! 

The idea of making the above facts known 
did not occur to me sooner, or I would have 
attempted to have done it myself; but being 
obliged to set out on my journey, and know- 
ing the benevolence of your mind, I make no 
apology for devolving the task upon you. 

Remember me to, &c. &c. 

It may be eaten with or without other ve- 
getables, as a sallad, with oil and vinegar. 

Clivers have lately been recommended in 
cancers; the juice should be drunk twice a 
day in such quantities as the stomach will 
bear, and an ointment, made by boiling equal 
parts of hogs-lard and the juice of the Clivers, 
may be applied to the affected part. 

