

[^Sample 1: article - 1792_GM_0886^]

|P_886
Mr. Urban, 
July 1. 

I HAVE always thought the duty of 
every one to be as useful to society as 
he can; on that opinion I sent you my 
Dissertation on the Gout, which you 
were so obliging to publish in your in- 
structive Magazine, p. 102, I now send 
you a physiological Essay on the vital 
powers of the human frame, wherein 
digestion, nutrition, the action of the 
nerves, and the circulation of the blood, 
are described in a plain and simple man- 
ner, and perhaps more agreeable to Na- 
ture, than has hitherto been done; 
which I hope you will be kind enough 
to insert as early as you possibly can. 
I have an Essay on Vegetation, which 
I also propose to send you soon. 

Yours, &c. P—. 

[}An Essay on the Nerves, on Digestion, Nu- 
trition, Circulation of the Blood. }]
THE heart has always been consi- 
dered as a principal part in the circula- 
tion of the blood. The heart is a 
muscle. The motion of the muscles is 
contraction; and this contraction, let it 
be voluntary or involuntary, is perfor- 
med by the nerves; therefore, the ac- 
tion of the nerves appears to be our first 
enquiry. 

The nerves are solid, fibrous vessels, 
proceeding from the brain and spinal 
marrow. These vessels differ from the 
blood-vessels, which proceed from the 
heart, in these things: the blood vessels 
are hollow, and contain a very percei- 
vable fluid, the blood; they also pro- 
ceed from the heart by a large trunk, 
and branch out into less and less 
branches, until they come to the extre- 
mities in small capillary tubes. On the 
contrary, the nerves proceed from the 
brain or spinal marrow in one small 
branch or bundle, and generally pro- 
ceed in that manner to the muscle to 
which they belong, or to the extremi- 
ties. This nervous bundle consists of a 
number of small capillary fibres without 
the least perceivable cavity for contain- 
ing or admitting any fluid. This has 
occasioned its having been disputed, 
whether the nerves act by a kind of vi- 
bration, or by a very subtile fluid pass- 
ing through them. The nerves, when 
they proceed from the brain or spinal 
marrow, are of a soft medullary sub- 
stance; and they are spread and become 
soft again at their extremities. 

The nerves are always filled with the 
nervous fluid, which fluid, it is proba- 
ble, is a modification of light, or per- 
haps light itself. As light is one of the 
first agents in this material system, it is 
not to be wondered at that we cannot 
perceive it but by its actions. But, not 
being able to perceive the nervous fluid 
or light in the nerves, many have been 
led to imagine that they contained no 
fluid at all. The experiments on light 
in electricity seem to explain the action 
of the nervous fluid in the human frame 
better than any other. I shall, there- 
fore, make some observations thereon, 
in order to explain myself the more 
fully. It must be remembered that the 
wires, which act as conductors of the 
electrical light, are filled with it from 
end to end, let their length be ever so 
great. Thus the light is one continued 
body through their whole length, in the 
same manner as a leaden pipe may be 
filled with water: thus, when more wa- 
ter is forced in at one end, the same 
quantity is forced out at the other at the 
same instant of time. Light is the same 
in electricity: as soon as the machine is 
|P_887
set in motion, the wires which commu- 
nicate with it, already full from end to 
end, instantaneously receive the push of 
light at their farther end, let the distance 
be what it will. If you cut or destroy 
the wire in any part, the power of con- 
ducting light is then destroyed; yet it is 
found by the Leyden vial, that this 
vial, being filled with the electrical 
fluid, may be taken and carried any dis- 
tance from the machine, and it will re- 
tain the light therein contained if it is 
not made to touch any proper body to 
discharge it. Having observed thus 
much, in order to explain myself the 
better, I shall return to give a descrip- 
tion of the nerves and their method of 
acting. 

The nerves derive their origin from 
the medullary substance of the brain and 
spinal marrow. Here the soul seems to 
be united to the body; here all ideas 
observed by the different sensations of 
the nerves are impressed, are remarked, 
and laid up for the soul to reason on 
and compare. Here the excited mo- 
tions of the nervous system give occa- 
sion to thought, to reason; and here the 
will gives new motions to the nervous 
system. This mutual communication or 
influence we assume as a fact. 

The nerves are white fibrous cords. 
"Within the scull we perceive the 
nerves to be the medullary substance 
continued, and the spinal marrow is all 
employed in forming nerves. Their 
fibrous texture is evident at the origin 
of most of the nerves within the scull, 
and in the spinal marrow; they may be 
divided into such small threads that a 
very good eye can scarcely perceive 
them; but these threads, when viewed 
with a microscope, appear each to be 
composed of a great number of smaller 
threads. "

Having given a description of the 
make and form of the nerves, and 
whence they proceed, I shall now en- 
deavour to shew their use and method 
of acting. 

The use of the brain seems to be de- 
signed for separating the nervous fluid 
from the blood, and the receptaculum 
or place for retaining it, till it be found 
necessary for use. The nerves appear 
to be adapted for containing and dis- 
tributing it as it is wanted! It seems to 
appear that the nerves remain always 
filled with this fluid, which is sent out 
from the brains, and never returns, but 
is wasted by the voluntary and the in- 
voluntary actions of the body; the 
nerves of every muscle are filled with it, 
which is continually wasted by their 
action. Thus, by labour or any actions 
of the muscles, the nervous fluid is con- 
tinually spent and wasted, which waste 
is continually restored from the general 
receptacle, the brain; till, by the great 
diminution, the strength and vigour of 
the body is lost, and the person becomes 
insensible about any farther action, but 
sinks under it and becomes senseless and 
falls asleep. During the night's sleep, 
the brain continues to separate and lay 
up in store a quantity of the nervous fluid, 
so that when the person awakes in the 
morning he finds himself capable of 
performing the actions similar to the day 
before. 

The nerves being always filled with 
the nervous fluid; all muscles, as the 
heart, &c. will have a spasmodic action 
after it is separated from the body, and 
this action will continue till the ner- 
vous fluid is discharged; this power of 
the nervous fluid is called by anatomists 
vis insita, or the inherent power; and 
this power with the method of action 
may be understood by observing the ex- 
periments on the Leyden vial, which 
will act till the electrical fluid is dis- 
charged; but the nerves which give 
sensations, and act with the power of 
will, must have a communication with 
the brain; for, if they are cut or tied 
tight with a ligature, they become insen- 
sible, and lose their power of action: 
thus, "when the nerves are compressed, 
cut, or in any other way destroyed, the 
parts supplied with such nerves, farther 
from the head or spine than where the 
injuring cause has been applied, have 
their sensations, motions, and nourish- 
ment, weakened or lost; while no such 
defects are seen on the parts nearer to 
the origin of the nerves; and in such 
experiments where the cause impeding 
the nerves to exert themselves could be 
removed, and the structure of the nerves 
was not injured, as for example when a 
ligature upon a nerve, stopping its in- 
fluence, has been taken away, the mo- 
tion and sensation of the parts were soon 
restored. From which it appears that 
the nerves are the principal instruments 
in our sensations, motions, and that this 
influence just now described may be 
called vis nervea, is not inherent in 
them, unless the communication between 
these cords and their origin is pre- 
served. "

"From what has been observed, it ap- 
pears that muscular motion depends on 
|P_888
the influx of the nervous fluid and the 
instantaneous construction of the muscle, 
when the mind wills to make it act, will 
be easily understood from the nerves being
always full. "

Having explained the different opera- 
tions of the nerves, and shewn that the 
nervous fluid is the cause of the actions 
of the muscles, I shall describe the other 
vital powers, as digestion, nutrition, 
the circulation of the blood, &c. and 
shall begin as soon as life commences, 
or as soon as a child becomes a perfect 
living animal. 

[}On the Life, Motions, and Actions, of the 
Animal or Human Frame. }]
WHILST the child is contained in 
the mother's womb, it is no other than 
an adventitious mass or appendage of 
the mother; but, as soon as the head is 
projected into the world, the atmosphere, 
together with the vivifying ether, enters 
its lungs, gives life to the child, and 
henceforward it becomes a perfect liv- 
ing animal; after this period, life can- 
not be sustained one minute without the 
constant supply of this vivifying ether. 
Hence, prevent air, by stopping the 
windpipe or otherwise, from entering the 
lungs, and death ensues. 

Having pointed out when animal life 
begins, I shall now endeavour to explain 
the method made use of for its growth, 
nourishment, and support. Hencefor- 
ward we find that the animal frame is 
nourished and supported by meat and 
drink taken in by the mouth, and 
thence into the stomach. I shall here 
begin my inquiry. Before I do this, it 
will be necessary to describe the method 
nature makes use of to assimilate the 
food taken in there, for the uses of the 
different parts of the body. The un- 
derstanding the method nature makes 
use of to digest the food has greatly per- 
plexed physicians; the following de- 
scription of it, perhaps, may be the 
best: it has been observed that the sto- 
mach of animals is supplied with a li- 
quid called the gastric juice; this liquid 
is of a very solvent nature, but different 
in different animals. It is probable that 
hunger proceeds from the effect this 
juice has on an empty stomach! It is of 
a different quality in different animals, 
being designed by nature to be the ge- 
neral solvent for the stomach of each 
animal; thus this gastric juice in dogs 
and other carnivorous animals will dis- 
solve even bones or ivory, but will have 
little effect on vegetables, whilst on the 
contrary this gastric juice in ruminating 
animals, as the ox, sheep, &c. will ea- 
sily dissolve vegetables, but has no effect 
on flesh; but the gastric juice of the hu- 
man stomach is capable of dissolving, 
nearly with equal ease, both animals 
and vegetables. Thus the food being 
admitted into the stomach, it is mixed 
with the gastric juice, which opens and 
dissolves its parts, and by a kind of tri- 
turation, joined to the heat and close- 
ness of the stomach, dissolves its contents, 
and brings it to a thin pulp, which it 
discharges into the duodenum; where 
it is again mixed with the gall and pan- 
creatic juice, and becomes a kind of 
froth, and by the peristaltic motion of 
the guts is forced into the dejunum and 
ileum. The greatest part of the lacteals 
enters these two guts, which penetrate 
through the whole coats of these guts 
with their roots or smaller parts, through 
which the chyle enters, and is thence 
carried to the receptaculum chyli, and 
hence into the vena cava. The aliment 
passes through these guts being distended 
with steam, the chyle-vessels are open- 
ed thereby, and the chyle forced into 
them, and thence into the blood. 

Thus digestion and nutrition appear 
to be performed; but then it seems won- 
derful that the stomach should be able 
to digest and dissolve substances more 
difficult to be dissolved than the stomach 
itself; but this difficulty is cleared up by 
the sagacious inquirer Mr. Hunter, who 
has observed, "that animals of various 
kinds, living in the stomach, are even 
hatched and bred there; but, the mo- 
ment any of these lose the living prin- 
ciple, they become subject to the diges- 
tive power of the stomach. If, says he, 
it were possible, for example, for a man's 
hand to be introduced into the stomach 
of a living animal, and kept there for 
some considerable time, it would be 
found that the dissolvent powers of the 
stomach could have no effect upon it: 
but, if the same hand were separated 
from the body, and introduced into the 
same stomach, we should find that the 
stomach would immediately act upon it: 
indeed, if this were not the case, we [/1./]
|P_889
should find that the stomach itself ought 
to have been made of indigestible ma- 
terials; for, if the living principle was 
not capable of preserving animal sub- 
stanccs from undergoing that process, 
the stomach itself would be digested. 
But we find, on the contrary, that the 
stomach, which at one instant, that is, 
while possessed of the living principle, 
was capable of resisting the digestive 
powers which it contained, the next 
moment, viz. when deprived of the liv- 
ing principle, is itself capable of being 
digested, either by the digestive powers 
of other stomachs, or by the remains of 
that power which it had of digesting 
other things. " Thus Mr. Hunter found, 
that when bodies were opened some 
time after death, whilst the stomach 
was digesting food, a considerable aper- 
ture is frequently found at the greatest 
extremity of the stomach, and the con- 
tents of the stomach are generally found 
loose in the cavity of the abdomen. In 
many subjects, this digestive power ex- 
tends much farther than through the 
stomach. I have found, says he, that, 
after it has dissolved the stomach at the 
usual place, the contents of the stomach 
had come into contact with the spleen 
and diaphragm, and had partly dissolved 
the adjacent side of the spleen.  By the 
above observations of Mr. Hunter it ap- 
pears, that by digestion continuing some 
time after death, and the living principle
being destroyed from the bottom of the 
stomach, the contents therein still con- 
tinuing their digesting power, they di- 
gested and dissolved the stomach itself, 
nay, that the digestive power was car- 
ried by the contents of the stomach to 
the spleen, and partly dissolved it. 

From what has been said it may be 
observed, that the food, after being dis- 
solved and digested in the stomach, is 
carried into the jejenum, &c. which 
are filled with chyle-vessels, by which 
the chyle is conveyed into the vena 
cava, and thence, through the pul- 
monary artery, into the lungs, the 
blood-vessels of which it completely fills 
to the smallest capillary exhalent vessels 
which enter the air-vesicles of the tra- 
chea, and the air contained in them is 
heated, rarefied, and expanded, by 
which means the moist vapour breath is 
forced out by the mouth; at this mo- 
ment the atmosphere, with all its weight 
or force [/2./], presses through the mouth 
into the lungs, and with it the vivify- 
ing ether[/3./]; this meeting the blood and 
chyle, which, together with the friction 
through the blood-vessels of the lungs, 
gives fresh heat, colour, and activity, 
to the blood. Hence, the cold atmo- 
sphere having filled every vesicle of the 
lungs, by its great weight, strength, 
and power, forces the blood from the 
small vessels of the lungs into the larger, 
and presses the blood into the four pul- 
monary veins, which open into the left 
auricle of the heart [/4./], and thence in- 
to the left ventricle, which it distends 
till its power is sufficient to open the 
valve of the aorta. As soon as this is 
done, the power of the blood distending 
the heart being removed into the aorta, 
the vis insita of the nerves forces the 
heart to contract, and throw out the 
blood it contained into the aorta; by 
which force, together with the power in 
the blood itself, and the contractive 
power of the arteries, forces the blood 
from valve to valve, and from artery to 
artery, till it arrives into the smallest 
capillary arteries on the surface of the 
body, where they unite with the smallest 
veins: but these very small arteries and 
veins are not discoverable unless in some 
particular parts of living animals, and 
in them by the microscope only; but the 
microscope itself has not enabled us to 
perceive the orifices of the exhalent
branches of arteries. The veins have 
been proved to have no inhalent ori- 
fices. The sweat is discharged by the 
arteries; they are the only vessels which 
carry fluids towards the skin. The red 
|P_890
veins and lymphaticks have their fluids 
in the opposite course, that is, towards 
the heart or centre. The small arteries, 
or their exhalents, are constantly throw- 
ing out a fluid into all the cavities of 
the body, to keep the surfaces moist, 
and make motion easy. This fluid 
would accumulate, and produce drop- 
sies, if its redundance were not carried 
off by the cellular membrane[/5./] and ab- 
sorbed by the lymphaticks. The lymph 
absorbed by the lymphaticks may be 
supposed to be particularly useful (tho' 
at present we do not know its use). Mr. 
Cruikshank suspects that this fluid is in 
part the coagulable lymph of the blood. 
This fluid is certainly different from 
that exhaled on the surfaces of the body; 
this coagulating from extravasation, or 
from rest in the dead body. 

Thus it may be observed, that the 
blood, forced by the heart and arteries 
to the smallest arteries on the surface of 
the body, part of it enters the smallest 
capillary veins, whilst other parts are 
secreted into the cellular membrane, 
and other parts are exhaled by the pores 
of the skin. The influence of the heart 
and arteries having performed their of- 
fice, another power is necessary to re- 
turn the blood through the veins to the 
heart. This is the pressure of the at- 
mosphere, together with the contractile 
power of the vessels themselves. The 
pressure of the atmosphere, as has been 
observed, is more than 3000lb weight, 
and must have great influence in forcing 
the blood from the small veins into the 
larger, and so on to the vena cava; this 
is rendered more easy as it meets with 
no resistance, but, on the contrary, 
there is a kind of attraction, as the lar- 
ger veins into which they enter are 
nearer the centre, and contain more 
heat. When they arrive at the vena 
cava, the blood, together with a fresh 
addition of chyle, is thrown into the 
heart and lungs, to undergo the same 
circulation as before. 
P—. 


[^1. 
* After long fasting, if a person eats hear- 
tily and fills his stomach, the gastric juice 
being now very active, digestion goes on 
fast; and the air contained in the food, being 
set at liberty too fast, distends the stomach 
more than the food itself, and thereby creates 
flatulency, sickness, pain, &c. 
^]
[^2. 
* Thus the hot steam exhaling from the exhaling arteries enters the bronchia, or air- 
vessels of the lungs, rarefies and expands the air contained therein, and, by its heat, causes 
a vacuum, and gives least resistance to the pressure of the atmosphere, the power of which 
is greater than it is often considered to be, its weight being more than 3000lb. and sufficient 
to raise a column of water more than thirty feet in height. This pressure is greater or less, 
in proportion to the rarefaction or heat of the blood thrown into the lungs. 
^]
[^3. 
† This vivifying ether being of a most subtile and penetrating nature enters the blood- 
vessels, and adds life and activity to the blood, and perhaps acts on it in the same manner as 
cold air or ether does when it enters a fire, which it blows up and enlivens. 
^]
[^4. 
‡ On the pressure of the air into the lungs the blood is prevented from returning back into 
the right auricle of the heart by the crescent membrane, or valve. This valve was discovered 
by Eustachius. 
^]
[^5. 
* The uses of the cellular membrane seem at present not to be perfectly understood. It 
seems to appear that, when we drink more than is necessary for the support of our body, 
and faster than it can be carried off by perspiration, it is secreted on the cellular membrane, 
and carried by that membrane to the ureters and kidneys, where it is readily and plentifully 
discharged. This appears to be the quick and easy method Nature makes use of when a 
large quantity of liquids are drunk. That the cellular membrane acts in this manner seems 
to be confirmed by scarifications on the legs of dropsical persons; those scarifications need 
to be no deeper than just through the skin, to reach the cellular membrane, by which means 
a drain or outlet for the water is made; and, as the water runs off from the parts near the 
scarifications, these voids continue to be immediately filled again by other water near them. 
This appears to be the case if you rub the arms, legs, &c. with oil of turpentine; as soon 
as its volatile parts enter the cellular membrane, it is carried, with the liquid contained 
therein, to the kidneys and bladder, and gives a violet-smell to the urine. 
^]