

[^Sample 1: article - 1792_GM_0102^]

|P_102
Mr. Urban, 
February 17. 

AS I imagine your Magazine contains 
more original essays in science than 
any other periodical publication, and is 
more universally read by persons of 
science than any other, I have sent you 
the following dissertation on the Gout, 
with a desire that you will insert it in 
your Magazine; with a hope that it may 
be of use to many of my brother suf- 
ferers. 

I think it will appear, from the fol- 
lowing dissertation on the gout, that it 
is no longer to be reckoned the opprobrium 
medicorum, and from thence that it must 
be left to Quacks and Empirics; but to be 
considered as a disorder as well understood 
as a peripneumonic, or other inflammatory 
disorder, and much better than the ge- 
nerality of chronical ones are, and may 
be assisted by the advice of the physician; 
that is, that the violence of the fits may 
be abated, and their continuance short- 
ened; and also, that when the fit is 
gone, the return of another may be either 
prevented, or the violence of it lessened. 

Yours, &c. P. 

AS there is no forming a probable con- 
jecture, who shall, or who shall not, be 
afflicted with the gout, till it makes its 
first attack, I shall therefore, then, begin 
my observations and enquiries. 

This attack is in some of the joints, 
often in the great toe or foot. The per- 
son, just before his seizure, appears ge- 
nerally in the best health and spirits. On 
his going to bed, he is seized with great 
pains, and inflammation, or redness, upon 
or about the part affected, which is exqui- 
sitely painful, particularly on the smallest 
touch. The inflammation of the part ge- 
nerally increases for the first two or three 
days; after which a swelling of the parts 
|P_103
comes on, and the pain abates. In a day 
or two more a perspiration of the parts 
commences, and thus ends the fit. Dur- 
ing all this time inflammatory symptoms 
are present; which often begin, as most 
other inflammations, by a cold, or chil- 
liness. The urine has the same appearance 
as in other inflammatory disorders; high 
coloured and clear, for the first three or 
four days; when the crisis of the fit is 
present, it becomes turbid, and lets fall 
a sediment, and thus ends the inflamma- 
tory stadium, or fit of the gout. If this 
is its first attack, the person has little 
complaint, and soon recovers to his 
healthy state. If it happens to a person 
who has been before afflicted, after a res- 
pite of a day or two, another attack is 
generally made on some other part, which 
before had no complaint; as the other 
great toe or foot. This fresh fit takes 
the same round of symptoms as the other 
had done before; and, at its proper period, 
has the same crisis; and goes off in the 
same manner. After another small inter- 
val, if it is a person who has been af- 
flicted often with the gout before, an- 
other attack on some other part or parts 
may follow; nay, sometimes the same 
toe, or other joint, may undergo a se- 
cond fit. 

The above described disease is the first 
stadium of a gouty fit, and may be pro- 
perly called the inflammatory. The pro- 
per method of treatment is the same as in 
other disorders of the same class, except 
bleeding, which experience has found not 
to be right or necessary, a plethora being 
seldom the case, as the gout attacks very 
few persons till they are near forty, and 
the strength of their constitution begins to 
abate. And some eminent physicians 
think it a disease of debility from its be- 
beginning; though, if the whole of this 
stadium is carefully observed, it must be 
allowed to be a regular inflammatory 
symtomatic fever, from the beginning to 
the end or crisis. At the crisis, great 
care should be taken to encourage the 
perspiration of the gouty matter, by co- 
vering the parts well with flannel, &c. For 
want of this care and caution, the gouty 
matter, by cold, may be prevented from 
going off in the regular and natural way, 
and so recerberate into the habit, which 
is now greatly debilitated, and unable to 
withstand it, and hence fall on some in- 
ternal part, not capable to force it out- 
ward. It may be observed, that the gout 
attacking the vital parts is most often oc- 
casioned by a wrong method of treatment. 

As it has been observed, the first attack 
of the gout goes off generally at the end 
of the first stadium, from such persons 
who never had it before, as the person 
generally is strong in habit, capable to 
withstand the second stadium which is 
always that of debility. On the going off 
of the first stadium, the second follows in 
the following manner: the inflammation 
from the joint, or joints, beng gone, and 
with it a great part of the pain; now, 
all the muscular parts bear their share 
with the joints; the person is affected, some- 
times with cold, sometimes with heat, great 
pain, aching, and soreness, in and through- 
out all the muscular parts, such as are 
felt after being beat or bruised; and con- 
tinue longer or shorter, till the remains 
of that gouty matter are thrown off by 
perspiration of the parts, or are absorbed 
by the absorbent vessels; and then either 
thrown off by the interior pores of the 
skin, or carried by the lymphaticks to 
the guts or kidneys, and there discharged. 
When this is performed, the person, being 
free of the disorder, soon recovers to his 
former state of health! 

As an improper method of treatment 
may prove of very bad consequence in 
the first stadium of the gout, so it may 
more particularly in this second. The 
first and second stadium of the gout, as 
may be observed, require quite different 
treatment from each other; the first 
stadium being symptomatic and inflam- 
matory, whilst the second is debility 
only, and must be treated as such. This 
second stadium requires cordials and opi- 
ates, with tolerable good eating and 
drinking, if the stomach desires it. Care 
should be taken not to admit the cold air 
too soon or too freely, warmth being 
still required, till the greater part of the 
gouty matter is got rid of. 

(To be continued.) 

