

[^Sample 1: article - 1792_GM_0231^]

|P_231
Mr. Urban, 
March 12. 

AN old correspondent, unwilling 
that any remedy for the cure of 
epilepsy should remain unknown to the 
publick, which it is in his power to 
communicate, begs Mr. Urban to admit 
into his valuable Miscellany the follow- 
ing simple one; the food effects of 
which the late well-known apothecary 
in the neighbourhood of St. Paul's, Mr. 
David Rice, frequently mentioned in 
conversation. A person, who had heard 
him speak of it, applied to him by let- 
ter for an exact account of it; from Mr. 
Rice's answer to which, in October, 
1772, these particulars are transcribed: 

"The operation in the ear for the cure of 
epileptic fits is very simple: the outward rim 
of the ear bends inwards; at the extremity of 
the upper part of which there is a prominent 
gristle that runs across the hollow of the ear: 
a transverse incision is to be made in that 
gristle with a penknife or scissars: in two 
minutes afterwards dress it with a little lint, 
covered with a bit of diachylon plaister. In 
two days after, make an incision in the other 
ear, and dress it in the same manner; the 
dressings to be left on till they heal. "

Every person of humanity will be in- 
duced to say of this extraordinary pre- 
scription, valeat quantum valere potest!

Yours, &c. Homo. 

P. S.  The following paragraph occurs 
in a late publication, intituled, "A 
Journey through Spain in 1786 and 
1787, &c. by Joseph Townsend, M. A. "
[See our Review, p. 244.]; and may 
not unsuitably accompany the foregoing: 

"I cannot quit this city [Valladolid] with- 
out making mention of a practice common in 
Galicia. In pleurisies they give the seeds of 
ivy, bruised, to the quantity of two tea- 
spoonfuls, repeated every eight hours; and 
this simple medicine has been found to be in- 
fallible. "

This "Journey " abounds with a va- 
riety of valuable and uncommon infor- 
mation, exhibited in a manner equally 
instructive and entertaining. 
Homo. 


