

[^Sample 1: article - 1792_GM_1202^]

|P_1202
[}279. The London Medical Journal. 
Vol. XI. Parts II. and III. 8vo. }]
ARTICLE I. A Case of Retention of 
Urine, in which a Puncture of the Blad- 
der, in the Hypogastric Region, proved, 
under very unpromising Circumstances, 
successful; to which are added, Three 
other Cases of Retention of Urine, and 
some Remarks on Diseases of the Urinary 
Bladder. By Mr. James Lucas, one of 
the Surgeons of the General Infirmary at 
Leeds. 

These cases, which are all of them 
extremely interesting, cannot well be 
abridged. 

II. An Account of the singular Effects 
of Musick on a Patient. By the same. 

The son of a respectable farmer at Hase- 
wood was seized with a slow fever in March, 
1759, by which, in eight weeks, he was re- 
duced to a very weak state. He was a stran- 
ger to any intemperance; and, although of a 
grave disposition, there was no reason what- 
ever to suspect insanity. 

On the 29th of May, a company of 
young persons passed by the house, carrying 
oaken boughs, and playing upon a fiddle: 
he no sooner heard the musick than he 
started up in bed, seemed transported with 
joy, and cried aloud, "Dance! dance! " The 
young man had played upon the flute, but 
had never been accustomed to dance. 

For two or three days he continued, al- 
most incessantly, calling out Dance! dance! 
For God's sake let me dance!  though his 
father took uncommon pains to convince him 
of the impropriety and danger of fatiguing 
himself when in so weak a condition. 

On the arrival of a musician, he exerted 
himself in putting on his cloaths; and imme- 
diately, upon hearing a string of the violin 
touched, he started back, and for a while 
stood motionless; but, upon a tune being 
played, he danced with great agility, though 
in a strange, frightful, and involuntary man- 
ner. The musick would often cause him at 
first to move a hand; then a foot; a nodding 
of the head would sometimes follow; and he 
would suddenly start from his chair, make 
the most ridiculous and antic distortions with 
the muscles of his face, and shake his limbs 
as if he was by design acting the part of a 
Scaramouch, or Merry Andrew. After he 
had fallen upon the floor, the continuing of 
the musick would repeatedly rouse him, un- 
til fatigue prevented him from being affected 
by the sound. 

To this very strange inclination he was 
subject daily for about three weeks: the af- 
fection sometimes remained from then to 
twenty minutes; at other times for two or 
three hours together. 

His furious and menacing gestures caused 
strangers to be much alarmed with him. He 
|P_1203
had a great aversion to a gloomy counte- 
nance, but seemed to be much pleased with 
a cheerful one. Although his motions were 
too rapid to be voluntary, yet they appeared 
to keep time with the musick. 

Slow tunes, or even changing the tune, 
provoked him much, unless it was to a more 
lively one: if the change was made even the 
following day, he was immediately sensible 
of it. He would, for some hours together, 
have a secret wish for musick, though he did 
not discover it until it was conjectured, by 
his silence and anxiety, that he wanted it. 

As he was once dancing with great 
alertness, it happened that a string of the 
fiddle broke; and, although the musician 
continued to play upon three strings, the 
young man stood motionless and was, for a 
long time, much out of humour, saying, that 
he was unable to describe the disagreeable 
sensations produced in him by this accident. 

The fatigue of dancing made him per- 
spire profusely, and he was frequently ob- 
liged to go to bed immediately; yet he was 
so nuch relieved by it, that he slept better, 
and in a few days after he began this exer- 
cise he was able to walk near half a mile to 
church. Upon observing that his spirits were 
low in the evening, the fiddler was mention- 
ed; when he acknowledged that he had 
been endeavouring to conceal his desire to 
have him, because it was Sunday. 

During these uncommon attacks, a tune 
called Tarantula was played to him, which 
caused him to move after other tunes had 
failed; but this was supposed to depend 
merely on its being a very lively air. When 
the fit was gone off, the action entirely sub- 
sided, and he expressed great pleasure at the 
relief which it had afforded him. 

Such severe exercise frequently produced 
a stiffness and itching in his limbs. To re- 
move this uneasiness, he would sometimes 
prick them with holly until they bled. 

Instead of the periodical inclination for 
musick, he, by degrees, became seized with 
convulsive fits, during which his hands were 
clinched, his limbs stiff and immoveable, his 
eyes rolled, his countenance was wild; he 
kicked off the bed-cloaths; would not suffer 
any one to speak to him, or so much as to 
look at him. He became insensible, speech- 
less, and had a locked jaw, which once con- 
tinued so as to prevent him taking any nou- 
rishment for at least 24 hours. 

The convulsions sometimes ceased in a 
quarter of an hour; at others continued for 
many hours. At first they were slight, and 
soon over; but were afterwards more vio- 
lent, and of longer duration. Upon his re- 
covery, he remarked, that he did not suffer 
so much during a fit as his friends seemed to 
apprehend. His spasmodic symptoms gra- 
dually abated, but were succeeded by a hectic 
fever, of which he died the latter end of 
December. 

"Dr. Dealtry, of York, and several other 
medical gentlemen, were consulted in this 
uncommon case. The disorder was said, by 
some, to be St. Vitus's dance; but, besides 
the effects of musick, the motions subsiding, 
and only returning at the time of a fit, ren- 
dered the complaint materially different. It 
did not appear that the patient had been bit- 
ten by any insect, or had read any account of 
the tarantula before the 29th of May; nor 
is it any wise probable that he was one of 
those impostors described as tarantulists. "

III. A Case of fractured Ribs, which 
terminated fatally; with the Appear- 
ances on Dissection, and Remarks Com- 
municated, in a Letter to Dr. Simmons, 
F. R. S. by Mr. George Wilkinson, Sur- 
geon at Sunderland. 

IV. Case of an Abscess in the lower 
Part of the Belly, which communicated 
with the lntestine, and terminated fatally. 
By Mr. George Grant, Surgeon. 

V. Extract of a Letter from Mr. Phi- 
lip Werner, Surgeon of the Royal Navy, 
and of the British Factory at Algiers, to 
Dr. Simmons, containing some Account 
of the Inoculation of the Small-pox at 
Algiers; together with other Miscella- 
neous Observations. 

"I have it from very good authority, "
says Mr. Werner, both from Franks or 
Europeans, and from the natives of Algiers, 
that the inoculation of the small-pox has been 
practised in that country for many centuries 
past. At present, however, it is but little 
in vogue in the capital, on account of several 
children having died by it. 

They have two ways of inoculating, viz. 
by buying [/1./] or by begging the small-pox 
from those who are affected with it. 

|P_1204
The first way is this: the parents, 
whose child is to be inoculated, send a per- 
son into a house where there is a good kind 
of small-pox, to beg the favour of them to 
sell them a ripe pustule just ready to fall off. 
The price usually paid for this is a maroon 
(about three halfpence), and they immedi- 
ately tie the pustule, thus purchased, upon 
their child's arm, which they have taken 
care previously to scratch with a pin or 
needle. 

The second way, or that of begging the 
small-pox, as it is called, is as follows:— 
The child intended to be inoculated is sent 
for a whole day into an infected house, 
where it takes the sick child (whose pustules 
are on the turn) by the hand, and begs of it 
to give him as good a sort of small-pox as its 
own. 

In either of these ways infection is ge- 
nerally communicated; but, in case it is not, 
they never repeat the experiment, being per- 
suaded, when this happens, that the child is 
not to have the disease. 

Unfortunately for those who are infected, 
the Algerines continue to follow the method 
(first introduced and still adhered to by the 
Spanish practitioners at Algiers) of keeping 
the patients closely confined in a heated 
room covered with many bed-cloaths, and 
with their own cloaths on, for these are 
never allowed to be changed till the pustules 
have entirely dried up and fallen off, by 
which means they lose a great many of 
their children. 

The Cobatls, or inhabitants of the moun- 
tains, have a quite different method from the 
two I have mentioned; for they take a nee- 
dle and thread, and pass them first through 
a ripe pustule, and then through the skin 
between the fingers of the child to be inocu- 
lated, where the thread is left, tied in a bow- 
knot. 

The operation is made in two places, by 
way of security in case one of them should 
fail. 

"These people allow the patients to walk 
about, if they are able, during the whole 
course of the disease; and neither have re- 
course to any internal remedies, nor confine 
them to any particular regimen, but suffer 
them to eat and drink as usual. "

VI. Case of a Woman who, after hav- 
ing been gored in the Abdomen by an Ox, 
in the sixth Month of Pregnancy, under- 
went the Cæsarean Operation. By Fre- 
derick Augustus Fritse, M. D. Physician 
at Dillenburgh. 

This very curious case is translated 
from the German. The subject of it 
was a poor woman at Offdillen, in the 
principality of Dillenburgh, who reco- 
vered after undergoing the Cæsarean 
operation, and died in a second lying-in, 
about a year afterwards. 

VII. An Account of the Effects of 
Laurel-water, as observed in the Bodies 
of Two Persons who died at Turin, Ja- 
nuary 22, 1785. By M. Penchienati, 
Member of the Royal Academy of Sciences 
at Turin. 

The lauro-cerasus, so called by bo- 
tanists on account of the resemblance 
there is between its fruit and our cher- 
ries, was brought from Trebizond into 
France in 1576. Its pernicious effects, 
however, when given to animals, were 
known long before to the antient Greeks 
and Romans, as we learn from the writ- 
ings of Strabo, Pliny, and others: and 
the observations of the moderns have 
shewn that the distilled water of this 
plant is one of the most sudden and fatal 
poisons hitherto discovered. Notwith- 
standing the dangerous properties of this 
water, however, it is said to be still occa- 
sionally employed in cookery; and the 
two persons whose cases are related in 
this paper were servants to a nobleman 
at Turin, who found a bottle of this 
water among some cordials intended for 
the table; and, having each of them by 
mistake swallowed about two tea-spoon- 
fuls, were instantly killed by it.—A very 
full account is given of the appearances 
that presented themselves on the dissec- 
tion of the dead bodies of these unfortu- 
nate persons. 

VIII. Observations on Gangrene. By 
Charles White, Esq. F. R. S. Surgeon at 
Manchester. 

IX. Pathological Observations on the 
Brain. By Mr. Thomas Anderson, 
F. R. S. Edin. Surgeon at Leith. From 
the Transactions of the Royal Society of 
Edinburgh. 

X. An Account of a Distemper vulgarly 
called the Mumps. By Robert Hamilton, 
M. D. F. R. S. Edin. and Physician at 
Lynn-Regis, Norfolk. From the same 
Work. 

XI. A Case of Diabetes. By Mr. Phi- 
lip Werner, Surgeon to the British Fac- 
tory at Algiers. 

XII. Description of an improved In- 
strument for the Fistula in Ano. Commu- 
nicated, in a Letter to Dr. Simmons, 
|P_1205
F. R. S. by Mr. J. Savigny, Surgical In- 
strument Maker in London. 

This description is illustrated by an 
engraving. 

XIII. An Account of Two Cases of 
Amenorrhœa; with some Observations on 
the Use of the Root of Madder in that 
Disease. Communicated, in a Letter to 
Dr. Simmons, by Mr. Peter Copland, 
Surgeon at Swayfield, near Colsterworth, 
in Lincolnshire. 

XIV. An Account of Two Cases of 
Pemphigus; to which is added, a Fact 
relative to the early Practice of Inocula- 
tion of the Small pox in Wales. Commu- 
nicated, in a Letter to Dr. Simmons, by 
Mr. John Ring, Surgeon in London. 

From the facts relative to inoculation, 
alluded to by Mr. Ring, it appears, that 
the custom of buying the small-pox has 
prevailed in South Wales from time 
immemorial. 

XV. Observations on Stone in the Uri- 
nary Bladder, and on Lithotomy. By 
Mr. James Lucas, one of the Surgeons of 
the General Infirmary at Leeds. 

This is a valuable paper, evidently the 
result of much experience, and attention 
to the subject. 

XVI. Remarks on the Treatment of 
Phthisis Pulmonalis. Communicated, in a 
Letter to Dr. Simmons, F. R. S. by Wil- 
liam May, M. D. Physician at Maidstone, 
in Kent. 

This paper, with some additional ob- 
servations, has lately been republished in 
a separate form. 

XVII. Observations on the Luxation 
of the Bones of the Pelvis. By M. Enaux, 
Professor of Midwifery, &c. at Dijon. 

These observations, which are extract- 
ed from the Memoirs of the Academy of 
Sciences at Dijon, relate seems, with 
reason, to rank among the more rare and 
extraordinary events of surgery; and of 
course they will be very valuable to 
surgeons. 

XVIII. Observations on the Diseases 
and Medical Practice of Boutan and 
Thibet. By Mr. Robert Saunders, Sur- 
geon at Boglepoor, in Bengal. From the 
Philosophical Transactions. 

XIX. A Physical Inquiry into the 
Powers and Operation of Medicines. By 
Thomas Percival, M. D. F. R. S. and 
S A. &c. 

A number of very curious facts are 
brought together in this paper; but they 
would suffer by an abridgment. 

[An account of Part IV. shall be 
given in our succeeding volume.] 


[^1. 
* Mr. Bruce, in his account of Sennar, the 
capital of Nubia, relates, that "the women, 
both Blacks and Arabs, those of the former 
that live in plains, like the Shillook, or in- 
habitants of El-aice, those of the Nuba and 
Guba, that live in mountains, all the various 
species of slaves that come from Dyre and 
Tegla, from time immemorial, have known 
a species of inoculation, which they call 
Tishteree el Iidderee, or the buying of the 
small-pox. The women are the conductors 
of this operation in the fairest and driest 
season of the year, but never at other times. 
Upon the first hearing of the small-pox any 
where, these people go to the infected place, 
and, wrapping a fillet of cotton cloth about 
the arm of the person infected, they let it 
remain there till they bargain with the mo- 
ther how many she is to sell them. It is ne- 
cessary that the terms be discussed judaically, 
and that the bargain be not made collusively 
or gratuitously, but that one piece of silver, 
|P_1204
or more, be paid for the number. This be- 
concluded, they go home, and tie the 
fillet about their own child's arm; certain, 
as they say, from long experience, that the 
child infected is to do well, and not to have 
more than the number of pustules that were 
agreed and paid for. "—Travels to discover the 
Source of the Nile, by James Bruce, of Kin- 
naird, Esq. Vol. IV. p. 484. Edit.
^]