

[^Sample 1: article - 1792_GM_0354^]

|P_354
[}67. The London Medical Journal. 
Vol. XI. Part I. 8vo. }]
ARTICLE I. A Case of Suppression 
of Urine, in which Relief was obtained 
from puncturing the Bladder above the 
Pubis, but which afterwards terminated 
fatally; with an Account of the Appear- 
ances on Dissection: and some Remarks on 
the Paracentesis of the Bladder. Commu- 
nicated, in a Letter to Dr. Simmons, 
F. R. S. by Mr. Francis Turner, Surgeon 
at Yarmouth. 

Art. II. Case of a Schirrous Affec- 
tion of the Stomach; with an Account of 
the Appearances on Dissection. By Mr. 
William Loftie, Surgeon at Canterbury. 
Communicated in a Letter to John Hun- 
ter, Esq. F.R.S. and by him to Dr. 
Simmons. 

Art. III. Farther Account of a new 
Method of treating Diseases of the Joints 
of the Knee and Elbow. Communicated, 
in a Letter to Dr. Simmons, by Mr. H. 
Park, one of the Surgeons of the Liver- 
pool Infirmary. 

In the year 1783 Mr. Park published 
a very ingenious pamphlet, pointing out a 
mode of treating some of the affections 
of the large articulations, which he then 
thought had not been before attempted 
by any other practitioner. This new 
method he illustrated by an account of a 
case in which he had adopted it with 
success. In the paper now before us he 
with great candour relates an instance of 
a second attempt of the same nature, 
which proved as unfortunate as the first 
was successful; and adds a letter from 
Mr. Filkin, surgeon at Northwich, giv- 
ing an account of a similar operation, 
performed with success by that gentle- 
man's father, about thirty years ago, but 
with which Mr. Park was totally unac- 
quainted till after the publication of his 
pamphlet. 

|P_355
Art. IV. Observations on the Use of 
Electricity in Deafness. Communicated, 
in a Letter to Dr. Simmons, by Mr. 
William Blizard, F. R. S. and S. A. 
Surgeon of the London Hospital. 

In certain cases of deafness, and of 
obstruction in the Eustachian tube, Mr. 
Blizard recommends the use of electri- 
city. In such cases he transmits the 
electric shock, by that tube, through the 
drum of the ear. Several instances of 
the good effects of this remedy are re- 
lated; and annexed to the paper is an 
engraving illustrative of this mode of 
treatment. 

Art.V. Observations on the Angus- 
tura Bark. Communicated, in a Letter 
to Dr. Simmons, F. R. S. by Augustus 
Brande, Esq. Apothecary to the Queen. 

This new and valuable drug, of which 
the first accounts appeared in The London 
Medical Journal, vol. X. may be consi- 
dered as an acquisition of no small im- 
portance to our Materia Medica. It is 
administered in cases in which the use of 
the Peruvian bark (to which it has the 
greatest affinity) is indicated; and, as a 
tonic and stomachic, it has been consider- 
ed, by many who have tried it, as being 
superior to that celebrated drug. 

Art. VI. Case of a Woman who un- 
derwent the Section of the Symphysis Pu- 
bis. By Mr. John Welchman, Surgeon 
at Kington, in Warwickshire. 

This case is extremely interesting, and 
is the only instance, we believe, of the 
operation being performed in this coun- 
try. It was unsuccessful; but the death 
of the patient must be ascribed rather to 
her own imprudence than to the ope- 
ration. 

Art. VII. Some Remarks on Hydro- 
cephalus Internus. Communicated, in a 
Letter to Dr. Simmons, F. R. S. by Mr. 
Edward Ford, Surgeon of the Westmin- 
ster General Dispensary. 

The account here given of the disease 
in question is illustrated by two cases, in 
which Mr. Ford had an opportunity of 
ascertaining the morbid appearances in 
the brain by dissection. 

Art. VIII. Some Account of a new 
Extract of Bark, prepared in South Ame- 
rica. Communicated, in a Letter to Dr. 
Simmons, by William Saunders, M. D. 
Physician to Guy's Hospital. 

[}To Dr. Simmons. }]
Dear Sir, 

Agreeably to your request, I now send 
you the following particulars relative to the 
new extract of Peruvian bark prepared in 
South America, and lately imported into this 
country from Spain as an article of com- 
merce. 

It is of a consistence between the soft 
and hard extracts of the shops; of a dark 
colour, and beautifully transparent. It is 
extremely soluble in the mouth, and has 
none of that empyreumatic or burnt taste, 
so common to all extracts, and which ob- 
scures their original powers so much as to 
have brought them into general discredit. It 
has the taste and flavour of the best Peruvian 
bark in a very concentrated form. It is very 
soluble in boiling water; and when gently 
agitated with it, in the proportion of two 
drachms to a pint of water, it gives an im- 
pregnation more powerful than that of a 
decoction of bark in the proportion of an 
ounce of bark to a pint of water, prepared 
agreeably to the usual formula for that pur- 
pose. It is more difficultly soluble in cold 
water. 

One ounce of it, softened with two 
ounces of boiling water, and digested with 
one quart of proof spirit, in a gentle heat, 
gives a more powerful tincture than that of 
the Dispensatory; the residuum left on the 
filter weighs two scruples, and is perfectly 
insipid. 

It differs very materially from all other 
extracts of bark with which it has been 
compared; and even from some which was 
carefully prepared from the best bark, and 
slowly evaporated in a water-bath. In its 
union with boiling water it resembles so 
much the decoction of the pale bark, both 
in colour and sensible qualities, that the dif- 
ference is not perceptible; and by this syn- 
thetic test it may be distinguished from all 
other extracts of bark. 

In collecting, from various druggists, 
extracts, with a view to a comparison, many 
of them evidently appeared to be sophisti- 
cated by being chiefly composed of the ex- 
tract of gentian, an article of the Materia 
Medica better formed for that process than 
almost any other. 

No information has been received rela- 
tive to the method of preparing this extract 
in South America; we are therefore left to 
conjecture that it may have the advantage of 
an aqueous solution from recent vegetable 
matter, and that the inspissation or evapora- 
tion is conducted by an exposure to air and 
the heat of the sun. 

All who have seen it admit its superior 
elegance, and that it possesses the sensible 
qualities of the best bark in the most soluble 
and concentrated form. I have made fre- 
quent trials of it both in the hospital and in 
private practice, and have uniformly found 
that it has done every thing which could be 
expected from the best Peruvian bark in any 
form. I have had the same favourable re- 
port of its operation from other practitioners. 

|P_356
It sits easy on the stomach; and in cases 
of great emergence, as in gangrene and ma- 
lignant fevers, or the putrid diseases of warm 
climates, where the life of a patient may de- 
pend on the quantity of efficacious bark 
taken in a few hours, it must have a decided 
advantage. A patient may take four ounces 
of this extract in a day, a quantity equal, in 
power and effect, to a pound and a half of 
the best bark. 

It is found efficacious in the cure of fe- 
vers, in the form of a clyster; for which 
purpose I have dissolved a drachm of it in 
four ounces of water. This method of pre- 
scribing it is well adapted to children, and 
to such patients as cannot retain bark in any 
form on the stomach. 

The quantity at present in this country, 
I am informed, is all that has been introduced 
into Europe; and, unless frauds are commit- 
ted, and it becomes the subject of adultera- 
tion, it promises to become a very important 
acquisition to the list of our useful and active 
remedies. 

The solution of it in boiling water will 
be found a ready and easy substitute for the 
decoction of bark, and at an expence not ex- 
ceeding the decoction of such bark as ought 
generally to be employed. 

I am, dear Sir, yours sincerely, 
William Saunders. 

 New Broad Street, Feb. 11, 1790. 

Art. IX. Observations on the Pro- 
perties commonly attributed by Medical 
Writers to Human Milk, on the Changes 
it undergoes in Digestion, and the Diseases 
supposed to originate from this Source in 
Infancy. By Joseph Clarke, M. D. M. 
R. I. A. From the Transactions of the 
Royal Irish Academy, for the Year 1788. 

Art. X. A botanical and medical Ac- 
count of the Quassia Simaruba, or Tree 
which produces the Cortex Simaruba. 
By William Wright, M. D. F. R. S. 
Lond. and Edin. and Physician General 
in Jamaica. From the Transactions of 
the Royal Society of Edinburgh, Vol. II. 

The first knowledge we had of the Si- 
maruba bark was in the year 1713, when 
some of it was sent to France; but the 
tree that produces it does not seem to 
have been accurately ascertained till the 
year 1772, when Dr. Wright discovered 
it in Jamaica, and sent specimens of its 
fructification, in spirits, to Europe. This 
tree, of which we have here a very satis- 
factory description, is said to be common 
in all the woodlands in Jamaica, where 
it grows to a great height and consider- 
able thickness. It is known in Jamaica 
by the names of Mountain Damson, 
Bitter Damson, and Stave Wood, which 
latter name it has gotten from its wood 
splitting freely, and making excellent 
staves for sugar hogsheads. 

With the bark of this tree, which is 
the true Cortex Simaruba of the shops, 
we have hitherto been supplied chiefly 
from Guiana; but now, it seems, we 
have it from our own islands, at a mode- 
rate expence. 

