

[^Sample 1: article - 1792_GM_0447^]

|P_447
[}81. Experiments and Observations on the Horley- 
green Spa, near Halifax. To which is added; 
A short Account of Two other Mineral Wa- 
ters, in Yorkshire. By Thomas Garnett, 
M. D. late President of the Royal Physical 
and Natural History Societies, and Member of 
the Royal Society at Edinburgh, &c. 8vo. }]
FROM experiments, which appear to 
have been accurately conducted, Dr. G. 
concludes that a wine-gallon of Horley- 
green water contains dwts. grs. Of earth of iron, or ochre, 1 0 Vitriolated iron, or sal martis, 8 8,8 Alum 2 9,2 Vitriolated lime, or selenite, 1 13 Dephlogisticated martial vitriol 0 14 
Aërial acid, or fixed air, 18 cubic inches. 

The specific gravity of distilled water 
is to that of Horley-green as 1 to 
1,0031. When the temperature of a 
neighbouring spring, equally exposed to 
the air, was 48° of Fahrenheit, that of 
the Horley-green spa was 49°. 

|P_448
This water, as is remarked by the 
author, bears a near resemblance to that 
of the Hartfell spa, near Moffat, in 
Scotland, of which an account is given 
by Dr. Horseburgh, in the first volume 
of the Edinburgh Physical and Literary 
Essays. 

From the contents of the water, it is 
evident that it must be useful as a tonic. 
Dr. Garnett observes, 

"Since it contains two substances, which 
are amongst the most powerful of the class 
of tonic remedies, viz. vitriolated iron and 
alum, hence we shall expect to find this wa- 
ter very useful in diseases depending upon 
debility, where the solids are relaxed, and 
the system weakened In the numerous 
class of nervous disorders it has been found 
highly beneficial, particularly when the or- 
gans of digestion do not perform their func- 
tions properly; such complaints are gene- 
rally attended with loss of appetite, nausea, 
vomiting, heart-burn, acid eructations, spas- 
modic pains in the stomach and bowels, and 
costiveness. These symptoms generally de- 
pend upon a debility of the stomach, and 
whole body, and may have been brought on 
by any thing that relaxes the system; such 
as intemperance, a sedentary life, and too 
close application to study or business, cold, 
the use of coffee, tea, tobacco, and spirituous 
liquors. These complaints yield readily to 
the Horley-green water, when drunk in a 
proper manner. Many scrophulous cases 
have been very much relieved, and some 
cured by a judicious use of this water. Some 
cases of diabetes have been cured by it. It 
is very useful in hypochondriac and hysteric 
cases, and in severe head-achs which are of 
the nervous kind, or proceed from a disor- 
dered state of the stomach. In some dropsi- 
cal and worm cases it has been productive 
of surprising effects, and particularly in the 
latter. "

It is likewise recommended in the 
atonic gout; in hæmorrhages attended 
with great weakness; in some consump- 
tive complaints; and in cases where the 
strength has been reduced by long and 
tedious diseases. 

The other waters which are noticed 
are, Redmire spa, situated on Romald's 
moor, near Bingley; and a spring on 
the side of a hill at Batlev, near Dews- 
bury. The former is a slight chalybeate; 
and the latter is impregnated with hepa- 
tic or sulphureous air. 

