

[^Sample 1: article - 1792_GM_0839^]

|P_839
[}179. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of 
Sickness in Ships of War; shewing the Error 
of its being chiefly ascribed to Maritime Diet, 
and that it cannot be prevented by the Acids 
so generally recommended; by what Means 
that Prevention may be most effectually attain- 
ed, and with least Expence to the State. To 
which are added, A Review of Sir John 
Pringle's Discourse on preserving the Health 
of Mariners, with other Medical Disquisitions; 
including Remarks on the new Dispensatory of 
the London College of Physicians. By Wil- 
liam Renwick, Surgeon to the Royal Navy. }]
MR. RENWICK in this work steps 
forth once more the friend of mankind, 
particularly of that deserving order of 
men the sailors, the great bulwark of this 
nation, who are so much commended and 
disregarded, whose services are so gene- 
rally overlooked and their welfare neg- 
lected. He laments and reprobates the 
parsimony of Government in giving such 
small allowance to navy surgeons as dis- 
courages men of abilities from continu- 
ing long in the service, and leaves the 
health and lives of the seamen to be su- 
perintended by persons by no means qua- 
lified for so arduous an undertaking. 
Their diseases, he says, have been gene- 
rally misunderstood, or ascribed to im- 
proper and inadequate causes; and hence 
the inefficacy of all the regulations that 
have hitherto been recommended for the 
prevention of them. He appears warm 
and zealous in the cause he has under- 
taken; and although his arguments do 
not always carry conviction, and he fre- 
quently mixes incongruous matter, yet 
there are scattered through his pages 
some observations that discover penetra- 
tion and knowledge of his subject, and, 
if adopted, might prove of considerable 
utility. He considers the mephitic va- 
pour arising from the bilge water as one 
of the most powerful agents in pro- 
ducing diseases at sea. This is some- 
times so pestilential as to kill new 
hands, men not accustomed to the sea, 
in twenty-four hours. Seasoned sailors 
are, from the same cause, affected with 
scurvy and other chronic diseases, 
which, although more slow in their ope- 
ration, are not less fatal in the end. To 
the destroying and discharging this va- 
pour, which can only be effectually 
done by means of fire, he thinks our 
whole endeavours should tend. The 
introducing sour crout, oranges, and 
other acids, has rather been productive 
of mischief than good, by turning the 
attention into a wrong channel, and 
leading us to neglect the true cause of 
the disease, which no acids, or any spe- 
cies of diet, can correct. The success 
supposed to have attended the regula- 
tions pursued by the late Capt. Cook, 
and recommended by Sir John Pringle, 
in his discourse on the methods of pre- 
serving the health and lives of seamen, 
he thinks very much over-rated; and 
the healthiness of the crews, which he 
|P_840
considers as by no means remarkable, 
ought to be attributed, he says, to very 
different causes than those there assign- 
ed; such as, to the men being all prime 
sailors, and inured to a sea-life; to 
their number being much smaller than 
is usual on board ships of that bulk, 
and, consequently, to their being less 
crowded; to their frequent debarkation, 
the land-air contributing more than any 
other agent both in preventing and cur- 
ing sea-diseases; to their frequently let- 
ting down fire-pots into the hold of the 
ships, and by that means correcting and 
expelling the mephitic vapour. This 
leads him to consider the preference that 
has bern injudiciously given to Hales's 
ventilator over the air-pipes of Sutton. 
The former, he says, can neither be 
used when there is much wind, nor 
when there is too little to keep them 
inflated: the fixing them also being at- 
tended with considerable trouble, they 
are seldom put up at night. "But it is 
necessary that the purification of the air 
should be unremitted, and that the re- 
medy should be adapted to every season, 
and be independent of manual opera- 
tion. " All these advantages Sutton's 
pipes enjoy, besides being much cheaper 
than the ventilators, and less operose in 
their structure. The returning, there- 
fore, to the use of them he considers as 
of the first importance; "for nothing 
can be more delusive, " he observes, 
"than to talk of remedies for sickness 
where the continuance of its cause must 
either counteract the efficacy of pre- 
scription, or renew the disorder as soon 
as the remedy is discontinued. " He 
considers, in succession, the several arti- 
cles of diet, particularly biscuit, which 
being saved and taken out of ships re- 
turning from a long cruize, and put on 
board others that are going out, has 
frequently entirely lost its nutritive 
quality before it is eaten. He takes no 
notice of Mr. Hervey's method of pu- 
rifying putrid waters; which is the 
more wonderful, as he, with reason, at- 
tributes so many of the diseases of sea- 
men, particularly fluxes, to the bad 
state of that element. He is very warm 
in his encomium of tea, and recom- 
mends its introduction into the navy, as 
a tonic, diaphoretic, and diuretic. It is, 
he says, the safest cordial in the uni- 
verse, constantly imparting strength and 
spirits, without any of those deleterious 
effects which vinous spirits, taken daily, 
never fail to produce.—He makes a 
whimsical observation on the common 
spirit of hartshorn, with which we shall 
close this article: "What is denomi- 
nated liquor volatilis cornu corvi, " he 
says, "might perhaps be oftener termed 
urina distillata, many chemists being 
said to obtain this volatile liquor from 
stale collections, in which the supplies, 
ex virginibus et aliis, are indiscrimi- 
nately blended. It might be worth 
while to enquire whether various dis- 
eases may not be communicated in the 
exhibition of such cordial drops, more 
especially where the stills are charged 
from the repositories of St. James's 
place. "

