

[^Sample 1: article - 1792_GM_0299^]

|P_299
Mr. Urban, 
Ulverstone, April 2. 

ON looking over the Reports of the 
Lancashire Humane Society, I met 
with a description and print of a port- 
able electrical machine, by Mr. Fell, 
surgeon, Ulverstone; which, from its 
simplicity, small size, &c. seems so well 
calculated for its intended purpose of re- 
storing suspended respiration, that it 
ought to be universally known. To 
answer this end, no mode appeared so 
likely as procuring it a place in the 
Gentleman's Magazine; I shall, there- 
fore, esteem it a favour if you will in- 
sert a plate of it in your Repository of 
useful learning, similar to the subsequent 
drawing, which I copied from a manu- 
script of the author's, with permission to 
dispose of it as I thought proper. The 
construction of this machine at the axis, 
and upper part of the pillar next the 
handle, is very improperly represented 
by the engraver in the Reports above- 
mentioned. I am but a bad draughts- 
man; however, I have endeavoured to 
copy the outline of the original with ac- 
curacy; and have likewise transcribed 
from the Reports so much of the de- 
scription of the apparatus, with additi- 
onal observations made by Mr. Fell, as 
may be necessary to illustrate the con- 
struction. (See pl. II. fig. 4).

Mr. Fell observes, that he has long 
thought, from some experiments he had 
made, that the apparatus for the recovery of 
persons apparently dead by drowning and 
other kinds of suffocation, would be more 
complete by the addition of a small electrical 
machine, calculated only to give shocks. 
This powerful auxiliary, he finds, has been 
recommended by several ingenious gentle- 
men; and we are told that a portable elec- 
trical machine has been contrived, for this 
use, by Mr. Kite, and is sold by Mr. Sa- 
vigny. As many, with himself, are stran- 
gers to the construction of this machine, he 
ventures to describe one of a small size, yet 
sufficient to produce effects adequate to the 
desired purpose. 

Description of the Machine.—Cylinder to 
be six inches long, exclusive of the necks, 
and four inches in diameter; whole length 
of each of the two glass pillars, supporting 
the cylinder, about nine inches, and one inch 
diameter at bottom, and 6-8ths at top. These 
pillars are to be covered with good sealing- 
wax, which is to be rubbed on the surface 
of the heated glass; or with amber-varnish, 
or with linseed oil, baking the glass in an 
oven until the oil be well hardened. Cushion 
to be narrow, and four inches long, and to 
be pressed against the silk and cylinder by a 
spring, as ingeniously contrived by Mr. 
Jones, optician, Holbourn. Cushion to be 
supported by a tin tube or pillar, the lower 
extremity of which is to project so far as to 
be in contact with the table on which the 
machine is to be occasionally fixed; by which 
means the necessity of a collecting chain will 
be superseded. Cylinder to be turned by a 
simple winch, which, by being made to slide 
on to the end of the axis, can be reversed in 
a moment. In the place of the positive or 
prime conductor, a jar, containing about 25 
or 30 square inches of coating, is to be fixed 
in a circular cup of tin, screwed into the bot- 
tom board. The uncoated part of this jar 
should be covered with electric varnish. The 
brass wire, which touches the inside coating, 
is to pass through cork fixed in the neck of 
the jar. That portion of this wire immedi- 
ately above the jar is, first, to sustain a Lane's 
electrometer; secondly, a brass ball opposite 
to a ball of the electrometer; and, lastly, on 
its superior extremity, a straight piece of 
brass or iron of the lenght of the cushion, 
and made with a sharp edge facing the cylin- 
der; or, instead of the sharp edge, it may be 
furnished with four or five short and pointed 
pieces of wire, to collect the electricity. 
The lower horizontal part of the electrome- 
ter, which is glass, should be covered with 
an electric varnish. It will be more eligible 
to place one of the conducting chains or 
wires at the lower part of the electrometer, 
in order to prevent the hazard of drawing or 
separating the balls of the instrument so far 
asunder as to produce a much greater shock 
than was intended; beside, in this situation 
the glass will not be in the same danger of 
being broken by any sudden effort. The 
two chains or wires to conduct the shocks 
should be about four or five feet long each. 
Directors to be each 10½ inches long, and 
without brass balls at their ends, as they are 
only to convey shocks. Their wires to be 
strong, rounded at the ends, and about three 
or four inches long. The extremity of each 
glass handle to be rounded, and half an inch 
in diameter, and to taper gradually for the 
length of an inch, in order to make them 
stand firm and upright, when not used, in 
two holes made in the bottom board on each 
side of the jar. The addition of a clamp, 
piece of tallow-candle, small box of amal- 
gam, and round piece of leather on card pa- 
per, completes the apparatus. These five 
articles may be lodged securely in excava- 
tions made in the bottom board. 

Here are no conductors to adjust, and to 
add to the weight and bulk of the machine; 
no collecting chain to fix; nor any complex 
|P_300
construction to puzzle the anxious operator 
in the moment of confusion. By thus simpli- 
fying the work, the machine, if kept dry, 
will always be ready prepared for giving 
shocks; a circumstance of importance, espe- 
cially in this case, where every attention 
should be paid to the saving of time. 

This machine may be carried, in one 
hand, in a box about 14 inches long, 12 
inches deep, and 9 inches broad. A strong 
handle must be fixed on the top of the box, 
and its lid may be fastened by two clasps or 
catches. 

"In the treatment of persons apparently 
dead by drowning, &c. our first attention 
should be directed to the inflation of the pa- 
tient's lungs. When the distension of the 
lungs is accomplished, let the powerful sti- 
mulus of electricity be applied, by passing a 
shock through the heart, the balls of the 
electrometer being no more than a third or 
half an inch from each other. Continue to 
repeat the shocks at every time the lungs are 
in a state of expansion. During these exer- 
tions, the application of heat should be at- 
tended to, which should be moderate at first, 
and afterwards gradually increased. It has 
sometimes been found necessary to persevere 
three or four hours in the use of these means 
before the first signs of life have appeared. 
The electrical shock, when it produces con- 
tractions, is considered by some as a test of 
some remains of life; but this criterion is 
doubted by others: for these reasons it will 
be prudent, in every instance, to apply, with 
skill and dexterity, the usual means of reco- 
very recommended by Humane Societies. "

Yours, &c. E. 

