

[^Sample 1: article - 1792_GM_1027^]

|P_1027
[}258. A Guide for Gentlemen studying Medicine 
at the University of Edinburgh. }]
By J. Johnson, Esq. 
IN whatever light we view this pam- 
phlet, it appears to be a very extraordi- 
nary performance. If it be meant to 
serve the interests of the medical school 
of Edinburgh, it is one of the most in- 
judicious attempts of the kind that we 
have ever seen, and such as must be re- 
jected with indignation by those to whom 
it is "with respect offered by the author. "
If it be Mr. Johnson's intention to ex- 
pose the medical professors to contempt 
and ridicule, we cannot say that his wit 
is keen or his irony delicate. He evi- 
dently wants abilities to succeed in such 
an enterprize. After briefly mentioning 
the celebrity of the university of Edin- 
burgh, he immediately throws out some 
thing like a censure on the discipline of 
our universities. 

"Gentlemen, " says he, "who attend 
the college of Edinburgh enjoy advan- 
tages which are denied them in other 
universities; they are allowed to reside 
where they please, are not distinguished 
from the other inhabitants of the town 
by any peculiarity of dress, and are con- 
fined to no particular routine of study. "
And is it indeed any great advantage to 
young men in an university that they are 
confined to no particular routine of 
study? Yes, says our author, "they 
have thus no opportunity of loitering 
away their time in licensed idleness, which 
often happens in universities where dif- 
ferent regulations prevaill" This is 
pleasant; but the joke is spoiled by an 
unlucky note, which informs us that 
"the candidates for the degree of the
doctor of medicine (we quote the ipsissima 
verba) are excepted from this rule; they 
must attend a certain number of classes 
before they can be admitted to trial. "

Contradictions and inconsistency seem 
to be favourite figures of speech with 
our guide. After praising the university 
of Edinburgh for confining its youth to 
no particular routine of study, he gravely 
tells us, that, in consequence of their 
want of discipline and regularity, "young 
men are often led astray into the enticing 
fields of fancy and speculation; and that 
even the opinions of the teachers" (by 
whom the professors must be meant, for 
the Scotch colleges have no tutors) "are 
generally biassed by prejudice or motives 
of interest! "

These judicious observations are meant 
as an introduction to "a concise descrip- 
tion of all the medical institutions at 
Edinburgh, with hints respecting the 
proper method of reaping benefits from 
them. " In the course of this description 
he sometimes instructs the students, and 
sometimes corrects the professor; but 
seems never to lose sight of his main ob- 
ject of vilifying, under the mask of the 
grossest flattery, those to whom he has, 
with matchless effrontery, inscribed his 
pamphlet. 

"The plan of Dr. Monro's course of 
lectures, " he says "is much more ex- 
tensive than that of any other lecturer on 
anatomy, perhaps, in Europe. " Having 
lavished upon a man of the first eminence 
in his profession a great deal of hyperbo- 
lical praise of this kind, which we will 
be bold to say the Doctor despises, Mr. 
Johnson, true to his cause, instances the 
professor's "preparation, as being, that 
in which he particularly excels! "' Were 
this a fact, we cannot say that it would 
raise Dr. Monro in our estimation, as his 
talents might certainly have been more 
usefully employed on other objects. But 
we have reason to believe that it is not a 
fact. The mind of the professor of ana- 
tomy is too great to permit him to seek 
fame from such mechanical pursuits; 
though, in the opinion of our author, 
"every medical practitioner ought to be 
deemed a murderer who has not consi- 
dered the appearance of anatomical pre- 
parations. " He next regrets that, "in 
the anatomical course of lectures in the 
college of Edinburgh, students cannot 
be accommodated with private dissections. 
This "(he says) "is a very great defect, 
but of no importance! " From the par- 
ticular prejudices of the low people in 
Scotland, he thinks it will never be pos- 
sible to establish a public dissecting-room 
in Edinburgh; but, in the very next pa- 
ragraph, we are given to understand, 
that "some individuals have attempted 
this project with success. " He then 
tells us, that "though twenty dead bo- 
dies cannot, by the utmost exertions of 
blameable industry, be procured annually 
for dissection in the capital of Scotland, 
yet Dr. Monro is always properly sup- 
plied with bodies for illustrating his re- 
marks, and for communicating to his 
pupil a perfect knowledge of anatomy. "

Hitherto Mr. Johnson seems to have 
made an aukward attempt at ironical 
writing; but he puts off his thin dis- 
|P_1028
guise when describing the botanical lec- 
tures of Dr. Rutherford. "In studying 
botany, " says he, "the physiology of 
plants deserves the principal concern. 
The long time, which Dr. R. needlessly 
employs in explaining the terms of the 
art, renders the study highly disgusting 
to his pupils, and prevents him from 
doing sufficient justice to the physiologi- 
cal department of the course. "

Of Dr. Black and Dr. Duncan, the 
professors of chemistry and the institutions 
of medicine, he writes, upon the whole, 
rather favourably; though, after a great 
deal of coarse and hyperbolical praise, he 
censures the former, for "not allotting 
a distinct part of his course to the late 
important and numerous discoveries 
which have been made in chemistry by 
the French; " and strongly insinuates, 
that the first part of the course given by 
the latter is altogether superfluous. 

He speaks respectfully, in his way, of 
the lectures given by Dr. Home, on the 
materia medica. "They are necessary, "
he says, "to prevent practitioners from 
the necessity of confessing their ignorance 
to apothecaries' apprentices! "

"All the classes already enumerated 
may be considered to be subservient to 
the practice of medicine. Dr. Gregory, 
whose abilities are so well known, suc- 
ceeded the celebrated Dr. Cullen in this 
charge. As he has not yet made out a 
perfect plan of lectures, very little can 
be said respecting his course. " Enough, 
however, is said of it to shew that, in the 
opinion of this Guide, it is a very imper- 
fect course. Of this we cannot pretend 
to be judges, as we never had the hap- 
piness to hear Dr. Gregory lecture, ei- 
ther from his present or his former chair. 
But, as we have read his works, we shall 
not hesitate to affirm, in the emphatic 
language of our old friend Samuel 
Johnson, that he has more mind than 
a thousand such lecturers, as he, whose 
merits, in the opinion of this author, 
alone support the fame of the university 
of Edinburgh. 

This meritorious lecturer is Dr. Ha- 
milton, professor of midwifery, a man, 
compared with whom our Guide, if se- 
rious in his encomiums, considers your 
Gregorys, and Monros, and Cullens, and 
Blacks, as mere children in medical sci- 
ence! Midwifery is the most important 
of all studies, and Dr. Hamilton the 
most eminent of all teachers! "He 
explains the peculiarity of the structure 
of women, and the diseases arising from 
that cause. He then proceeds to shew 
the effects of pregnancy, and the diseases 
in consequence, with the proper treat- 
ment. " Such is the first part of his 
course. "In the second we are told, 
that the management of all the variety of 
labours is detailed; and that in this part 
of his course Dr. H. is particularly emi- 
nent! The treatment of women in 
child-bed forms the third part of the 
course, and is a subject which has never 
been fully explained but by the profes- 
sor, who gives a very extensive view of 
it in his lectures! In the fourth part of 
this valuable course the nature and treat- 
ment of the diseases incident to children 
in early infancy are pointed out, and a 
practice founded on philosophical princi- 
ples for thte first time introduced into this 
branch of the art of healing! "

To suppose that, by all these fulsome 
encomiums, our author really means to 
serve Dr. Hamilton, is impossible; for 
he immediately proceeds to level him 
with a London quack, by advertising his 
lectures in the very style used by that 
fraternity in the wording of their speci- 
ficks. "Dr. Hamilton gives three courses 
of lectures in the year. The fees are 
three guineas for the first, two guineas 
for the second, and one guinea for the 
third course; after which, the gentlemen 
are entitled to attend gratis. The lec- 
tures should be attended by every medi- 
cal student, whatever his future prospects 
may be; for, without a knowledge of the 
subjects of them, no practitioner of me- 
dicine can expect to succeed in business!"

Our author, having wasted his irony
upon the professors in the university, pro- 
ceeds to open war with the private 
teachers of medicine. "These men, "
he says, "have not the opportunities for 
acquiring knowledge, nor the means for 
conveying instruction, which the profes- 
sors enjoy. " Of course, the far-famed 
Dr. Hamilton must, a few years ago, 
have been very inferior, in the obstetric 
art, to the late Dr. Young; and it is 
hardly to be supposed that he is equal to 
him yet, as he has not so long enjoyed 
the advantages of a professorship. "As 
the professors in the university have no 
salaries, they must possess abilities equal 
to the important duties of their charge. 
Their lectures must therefore be at least 
equal to those of any private teacher. "
There is a professor of logick in the uni- 
versity of Edinburgh; but he must be 
more contemptible in his line than Dr. 
Rutherford is said to be in his, if he 
taught Mr. Johnson to reason in this 
manner. Have private teachers salaries? 
|P_1029
and do salaries make those, by whom 
they are enjoyed, dunces? 

In his strictures upon private teachers 
it seems to be our author's aim to dis- 
countenance that useful body of men, 
though, with his usual consistency, he 
confesses that "thet stimulate the pro. 
fessors to persorm their duty with vi- 
gour. " Indeed they have contributed, 
in no small degree, to spread the cele- 
brity of the medical school of Edin- 
burgh. So thoroughly are the profes- 
sors convinced of this truth, that we 
have been credibly informed, of what, 
indeed, we should have taken for grant- 
ed, that a very eminent private teacher of 
anatomy and midwifery is publicly pa- 
tronized by the Doctors Monro and Ha- 
milton, although he has no connexion 
whatever with the unirversity, nor any 
particular relation to the infirmary. 
Those eminent men, far from dreading 
the seduction, as this author phrases it, 
of private teachers, well know that the 
greater number of opportunities which 
Edinburgh affords for the acquisition of 
useful knowledge, the greater will be 
the concourse of students to that univer- 
sity; and every man of common sense 
must know, that the students will never 
desert the schools of the public professors 
for those of private teachers, unless the 
latter be more eminent than the former 
in that department of science in which 
they lecture. 

From this impotent libel the university 
of Edinburgh has nothing to dread. The 
malice of its author is apparent, but his 
power is not great. Who he is we know 
not; but it is plain that he is no Eng- 
lishman, as he uses several phrases with 
which our language has no knowledge. 
In Oxford and Cambridge there is no 
such degree as that of doctor of medicine; 
and, notwithstanding our author's pre- 
tended knowledge of the course of me- 
dical education in the university of 
Edinburgh, we imagine that doctor of 
physick is the proper style, even in Scot- 
land. If, as we strongly suspect, he be 
an unsuccessful private teacher himself, 
his book will probably make him known; 
and in that case he will doubtless incur 
the contempt which he has so strenuously 
laboured to bring upon others. 

