

[^Sample 1: article - 1792_GM_0937^]

|P_937
[}225. A Treatise on the Management of Female 
Breasts during Childbed; and several new 
Observations on Cancerous Diseases, with Pre- 
scriptions. To which are added, Remarks on 
Pretenders to the Cure of Cancers, &c. By 
William Rowley, M. D. &c. &c. The 
Second Edition, with Additions, &c. }]
THIS experienced author has here 
given the publick a fresh testimony of 
his professional zeal, by a work in which 
he seems to have dedicated his labours 
to ascertain the reasons why the cancer 
is curable under certain circumstances, 
and why, in other instances, it must 
remain incurable. 

Nothing, certainly, can add greater 
dignity to the art of medicine than to 
declare, with precision, from facts, what 
may be rationally expected; it prevents 
delusion of false hopes, which ever 
ends in painful disappointment. 

The treatise considers, in the first 
part, the most rational methods of pre- 
venting or curing all the accidents that 
happen to the breasts in childbed, and 
particularly in preventing future can- 
cers. The directions are short, rational, 
and easily practicable. 

Dr. Rowley proceeds to examine the 
cause and cure of cancerous indurations. 
The principal views on these subjects 
are intended to prove, that cancers hap- 
pen between the age of 36 and 60; at 
earlier periods cancers scarcely ever ap- 
pear. The first species, for they are 
|P_938
divided into three, are varices of the 
veins. This species is considered cura- 
ble. The second species is the former 
joined with diseased lymphaticks. This 
is said to be more difficult of cure. The 
third species is a stony hardness, and, 
when painful, is considered the true oc- 
cult cancer, and arises from the other 
two affections, joined with an induration 
of the adeps, or fat. This is said, in 
general, to be, in its nature, incurable. 

The treatment of all these species is 
considered, both radical and palliative. 
Prescriptions are delivered. Mercury, 
given alone, or used without sulphureous 
antimonials, is condemned as injurious. 
Opium, hemlock, and all poisonous drugs, 
now so much in vogue, are considered 
highly improper, if a radical cure be at- 
tempted. The author has been at Vi- 
enna, and exposes the fallacy of the 
pretended cures by hemlock with a free- 
dom that does him honour. All the 
superstitious and other remedies are 
next examined; and their absurdity or 
cruelty appear obvious. "The unfor- 
tunate patients, " says the author, "like 
drowning men, catch at a straw, and 
often hasten death by their weakness 
and faith. "

The next chapter is on the confirmed 
cancer, in which anatomical skill and 
much observation are displayed; but it 
plainly appears, that practitioners have 
sought for, and had faith in, remedies 
in cases where no remedies could possi- 
bly act without a regeneration of those 
parts that were actually obliterated by 
the disease; which regeneration, after 
destruction, was next to impossible. 

On the operation for cancerous tu- 
mours the author gives his reasons for 
and against cutting, and concludes, that 
in very few cases the knife is necessary: 
and it is asserted, that cutting off the 
breast often causes a premature or lin- 
gering and miserable death. 

To pursue the Doctor through his 
work would be more than our limits 
could permit; but in our next the heads 
shall be recited. 
(To be continued). 

