

[^Sample 1: article - 1792_GM_0134^]

|P_134
Mr. Urban, 
February 14. 

ATTACHED to the study of medi- 
cine from my earliest years, it is 
with infinite satisfaction I observe, that 
some of your ingenious and benevolent 
correspondents have lately come forward 
with hints and recipes for the preven- 
tion and cure of that most dreadful of 
all maladies, canine madness. But, 
though I have read, with the candor and 
attention so justly due to good intentions, 
all that has been advanced on this sub- 
ject in your Magazine, and indeed most 
of the publications that have appeared 
for some years on that alarming disorder, 
I am free to confess, that I have seen no 
one completely who enters into my views 
of what may be considered as a national 
method of cure. I have long been of 
opinion, that all animal poisons operate 
nearly in a similar manner, though the 
effects they produce may be vastly dif- 
ferent: and knowing that olive oil has 
been proved to be a specific for the bite 
of the viper, by a parity of reasoning I 
have ever concluded, that it must be the 
only certain antidote for the bite of a 
mad dog too. This I have suggested to 
several medical men, and others, at dif- 
ferent times, with little success I own, 
because the most obvious things are ge- 
nerally the least regarded; and, never 
having had an opportunity of trying the 
full extent of this remedy myself, I 
should have felt much diffidence in an- 
nouncing it to the publick, had not 
Q. X. p. 43, informed us, "that he is 
assured oil has effected a complete cure, 
even after the hydrophobia had got to 
a dreadful height, by giving it inter- 
nally, and rubbing the body with it. "
This is what I always flattered myself 
would be the case; and, without ob- 
truding theory on your readers, when 
it can be confirmed by practice, I cor- 
dially unite with Q.X. in requesting 
the physician who prescribed the oil, 
|P_135
and who had the happiness to witness its 
beneficial effects, would oblige the world 
with a full account of the process. If 
I am, even in the humblest degree, in- 
strumental in obtaining this favor, or of 
calling the attention of the faculty to the 
investigation of the specific proposed, I 
shall esteem myself a benefactor to man- 
kind. 
Yours, &c. Morva. 

P. S.  I think the Dutch specific va- 
luable from the oil only it contains. 
The beetles, &c. are useless. Nature 
acts on the simplest plan; a farrago of 
medicines may impede, but seldom for- 
wards, her operations to relieve. 


