

[^Sample 1: article - 1792_GM_0043^]

|P_43
Mr. Urban, 
Jan. 10. 

THE world is much indebted to 
your benevolent correspondent Ve- 
rus, p. 1004, for communicating a re- 
medy against that most dreadful of all 
disorders, that which arises from the 
bite of a mad dog. Your Miscellany 
extends so widely, that the effects of it 
may happily be found by many. But it 
appears to be a remedy which it will be 
in vain to look for before the month of 
May; and after that, perhaps, few will 
be able to find the beetle described, and 
fewer will follow all the directions giv- 
en for the management of it. It is in- 
deed to be hoped that some medical gen- 
tlemen in the country will have the pub- 
lic spirit (I may call it) to provide the 
medicine; those in town cannot do it 
themselves, from the places where only 
the beetles are to be found. But if there 
is a remedy at all times near at hand, 
which requires no skill in the composition, 
little art in the application, should not 
the gentleman, who happily thought of 
making the experiment, make the effect 
of it as public as possible? That there 
has been a complete cure after the hy- 
drophobia had got to the most dreadful 
height, by giving oil internally, and 
rubbing the body all over with it, I am 
assured. If the very respectable physi- 
cian who prescribed the application reads 
your book, I hope, for the sake of man- 
kind, that he will send you a full ac- 
count of the process. 

If the absorption of the oil has such 
an effect in this case; if the absorption 
|P_44
of salt has it as described by your corre- 
spondent, p. 1003; allow me, who 
know nothing of medicine, to ask, whe- 
ther the absorption of bark, from a warm 
bath wherein a proper quantity of bark 
had been infused, which could be ap- 
plied immediately to the part affected, 
would not operate much more power- 
fully to stop the spreading of a mortifi- 
cation, than the internal exhibition of 
the bark can do, when it has so far to 
travel before it can reach the place of 
its destination? 

Yours, &c. Q. X. 

