

[^Sample 1: article - 1792_GM_0232^]

|P_232
[}Dissertation on the Gout. }]
(continued from p. 103.) 

HAVING given the symptoms and 
complaints throughout a fit of the 
got, I shall now endeavour to trace out 
à posteriori the seat and cause of this 
complaint. 

The first stadium of the gout has the 
symptoms and appearance of other in- 
flammations, and it is some difficulty to 
distinguish between the inflammation at- 
tending the gout, and other inflamma- 
tions; so difficult, that if a physician 
does not know his patient at first sight, 
he will seldom determine positively. 

In order to understand this case pro- 
perly, the seat and progress of inflam- 
matory swellings should be enquired in- 
to, from which enquiry it will be found 
that the cellular membrane is the part 
affected, and the seat of all. The 
anatomical account of the cellular mem- 
brane, and its uses, must therefore be 
the subject of our first enquiry. Dr. 
Monro describes it as follows: 

The membrana adiposa is an universal in- 
tegument of the human body. This is not, 
however, a single membrane, but a conge- 
ries of a great number of membranous laminæ, 
joined irregularly to each other at different 
distances, so as to form numerous interstices 
of different capacities, which communicate 
with each other. These interstices have 
been named cellulæ; and the substance they 
compose, the cellular substance. 

The thickness of the membrana adiposa is 
not the same all over the body, and depends 
on the number of laminæ of which it con- 
sists. It adheres closely to the skin, runs in 
between the muscles in general, and between 
the several fibres in particular, and commu- 
nicates with the membranes which line the 
inside of the thorax and abdomen. The cel- 
lular interstices are so many little bags, or 
sachels, filled with an unctuous or oily juice, 
more or less liquid, which is called fat. 

"This substance (fat) increases in quanti- 
ty be rest and good living; and, on the con- 
trary, diminishes by hard labour, and spare 
diet. Why nourishment should have this ef- 
fect is easily conceived; and it is likewise 
easy to see that an idle, sedentary life must 
render the fat less fluid, and consequently 
more liable to block up the passages of in- 
sensible perspiration, through which it would 
otherwise run off. Hard labour dissolves it, 
and consequently fits it for passing out of the 
body with the other matter of insensible per- 
spiration. "

From the above accurate anatomical 
description, it may be observed, that the 
membrana adiposa covers every part of 
the body directly under the skin, and is 
also distributed, not only on every 
muscle, but also between every fibre of 
the muscles, and just under the skin is 
placed a great number of small glands 
in this membrane. 

Notwithstanding this cellular mem- 
brane is so well described, and traced to 
cover every fibre, and every muscle, as 
well the whole outside and inside of the 
human body, which proves that it was 
designed for some great and particular 
use, yet little or no use has been attri- 
buted to it. I shall therefore endeavour 
to point out some of the uses belonging 
to this universal membrane. 

In the first place, it appears to be the 
parts designed by Nature to carry on the 
|P_233
increase and growth of every part of the 
body, from childhood to manhood, and 
is analogous to the smallest capillary 
fibres of the roots of vegetables. After 
the nourishment received into the sto- 
mach, and by the chyle vessels is car- 
ried into the blood by the subclavian 
vein, which empties itself into the vena 
cava, from thence to the right auricle 
and ventricle of the heart, and after 
passing through the lungs, it is sent into 
the left auricle and ventricle of the heart, 
and there distributed, by the arteries, to 
the extreme parts of the body, where it 
again meets with the resistance of pres- 
sure of the atmosphere, by which means 
it is forced by the small ramifications of 
the arteries into the small ramifications 
of the veins. If this supply is more 
than sufficient for that purpose, a part 
of it passes into the cellular membrane, 
and other parts are perspired by the pores 
of the skin. Being arrived in this mem- 
brane, every thing necessary for the in- 
crease and support of all parts of the 
body is distributed to each part from it. 
If a residue overplus remains, it is re- 
served therein in the form of fat, as in 
a storehouse, to supply any wants or oc- 
casion for it; after this, the necessary 
overplus is absorbed by the lymphatick 
glands, and carried by the lymphatick 
vessels to the kidneys and guts, and 
there discharged. 

This membrane and its absorbent 
glands, are the parts whereby pestilen- 
tial infection is received, for these in- 
fectious miasmata are here received, and 
not by the lungs, as is generally, though 
erroneoussly, supposed. Here the vari- 
olous matter for the small pox is intro- 
duced by inoculation, and here it acts; 
and after inflammation, at its crisis, mat- 
ter is formed and discharged, and the 
constitution relieved. In the same man- 
ner all inflammations are formed on this 
membrane, which must either be dis- 
persed or absorbed, and then discharged 
on the skin, kidneys, or guts, or be 
formed into pus, and then discharged; 
as, if Nature is not strong enough to 
perform this, or is overloaded, it be- 
comes putrid, and the patient sinks un- 
der it. 

Having described the membrana adi- 
posa, with its uses, and also having 
shewn that it is the seat of inflamma- 
tions and abscesses, and observing the first 
stadium of the gout to be of that kind; 
I shall next endeavour to trace out how 
the gout is generated, and how it acts, 
with the probable method of prevention 
and cure. 
(To be continued.) 

