

[^Sample 1: article - 1792_GM_0707^]

|P_707
Mr. Urban, 
July 3. 

THE extensive perusal of your Ma- 
gazine renders it a proper channel 
for communicating to the publick what- 
ever may be of general use. Falls and 
bruises frequently happen in country 
places where there may not be any me- 
dical assistance near. Accidents have 
fully convinced me of the utility that 
may attend the application of the fol- 
lowing simple practice; and I therefore 
request your inserting the following in- 
stances in your publication: 

A coachman, in a street of London, 
was, by a sudden jolt, thrown off his 
box, and in his fall his foot fell into a 
hollow in the pavement, which occa- 
sioned a sprain, attended with violent 
pain, and a considerable inflammation. 
A brother whip promised him a speedy 
|P_708
cure. He ordered a gallon of porter to 
be simmered in an earthen vessel, till, 
when cooled, it became of the consist- 
ence of a plaister. He spread this pla- 
ster on a thin old glove, and applied it 
round the ankle. In three days he 
mounted his box, being relieved of the 
swelling and pain. 

Another person, being surrounded by 
pickpockets, in endeavouring to save 
his money fell down, and struck one 
side of his loins upon a stone more pro- 
minent than the rest of the pavement. 
Considerable pain and swelling were the 
consequences; and next day his back, 
and the thigh on that side, became 
greatly discoloured. An eminent sur- 
geon was called in, who ordered such 
applications as his judgement directed. 
Having seen the success of the porter- 
plaster in the former instance, I desired 
that the porter plaster might be applied 
to part of the back and thigh, while the 
other parts were treated according to 
art, that so a comparative experiment 
might be made of the effects of each. 
The swelling subsided nearly equally in 
both; but the pain and the blackness of 
the skin went off much sooner in the 
parts covered with the plaster than in 
the other parts. Accidents have since 
afforded me several instances of similar 
success attending the application of this 
plaster. Might not we expect that suc- 
cess might attend the application of this 
plaster in other fixed pains in various 
parts of the body? 

As these accidents happened in Lon- 
don, where porter is the malt liquor 
most generally used, the plaster was 
made of it; yet I doubt not but that 
other fermented malt-liquors, used in 
the same manner, might have similar 
effects. 

Where such hurts are frequent, this 
plaster may be long kept in good con- 
dition, if it is covered with a little oil 
to prevent the evaporation of the fluid 
particles. 
S. A. 

