

[^Sample 1: article - 1792_GM_0441^]

|P_441
[}77. Observations on Maniacal Disorders; by 
William Pargeter, M. D. Reading. }]
IN the preface the Doctor endeavours 
to determine a matter which, he thinks, 
has been generally misunderstood. The 
definition of madness,  he says, by 
the consent of all writers, is delirium 
without fever: and here I cannot for- 
bear an attempt to settle a point con- 
cerning which most people have been 
too hasty in forming their opinions. 
Some few years ago a case in medicine 
occurred, which agitated this king- 
dom, and engaged the attention of all 
Europe. This case was universally, I 
believe, thought to have been mania- 
cal; and, lest this idea should be a fu- 
ture reproach to us from other nations, 
I firmly deny the position in the fol- 
lowing syllogism: 
Quid est insanitas? 
Insanitas est delirium sine febre— 
Erat ægro febris—ergo, 
Æger non erat insanus. 

It is impossible to draw a right conclu- 
sion from false premisses. And, if the 
premisses in the above syllogism are not 
true, the system of nosology is entirely 
subverted. 

|P_442
The work commences with some stric- 
tures on the luxury of the age, which 
must naturally tend to interrupt the 
animal œconomy, and to enfeeble the 
generations of men;  and although 
the practice of medicine, and the inquiry 
into the structure of the human frame, 
have received great improvement of late 
years, yet, in the course of almost 3000 
years, no medicines have been discovered 
on which reliance can be placed in the 
cure of the hideous malady which at this 
time so amazingly prevails. 

We are next presented with a portrait 
of a fellow-creature destitute of the 
guidance of that governing principle 
which distinguishes man from the infe- 
rior animals, and gives him a striking 
superiority over the beasts that perish. 
This is extremely well drawn; but our 
limits will not allow us to transcribe it. 
The inconsistencies of various nosologists, 
in arranging the several genera of the 
disease, are pointed out; and preference is 
given to Dr. Cullen, who comprehends 
his idea of the complaint in two words, 
insania universalis. The professor's 
terms of collapse and excitement are like- 
wise adopted. 

The Doctor's reasoning on the appear- 
ances of the brain on dissection are new, 
ingenious, and just. The original or 
primary cause of madness is a mystery, 
and utterly inexplicable by human rea- 
son. The remote causes are enumerated. 
The most common are, intense study 
and application of mind, and fanaticism. 
The doctrines of Methodists have a 
greater tendency than those of any other 
sect to produce the most deplorable ef- 
fects on the human understanding. Some 
cases are adduced in proof of this posi- 
tion. Under the article of pathema ani- 
mi, as a proximate cause, some elegant 
compliments are paid to the fair sex. 

We now come to the cure, which is 
rather to be effected by management than 
medicine. Four cases are subjoined, in 
which management, and especially the 
exercise of the eye, on which the Doctor 
places great stress, was attended with the 
most desireable effects. The remedies 
which have hitherto been employed, both 
by the antients and moderns, are very 
accurately examined. 

The Doctor then proceeds to the con- 
sideration of madhouses, both public and 
private, on which his remarks are ex- 
ceedingly judicious, and highly worthy 
of attention. The act for regulating 
those houses comes next under conside- 
ration; and the Doctor is convinced, 
from his own experience, of the inade- 
quacy of the statute to the purpose for 
which it was enacted. He animadverts 
with great severity on the practice of 
beating in the treatment of maniacks, 
which he condemns as erroneous as well 
as brutal, and not to be justified upon 
any principle whatever. The use of 
cords and chains, when coercion is ne- 
cessary, is strongly reprobated; and the 
Doctor's humanity has prompted him to 
construct an appendage to the straight 
waistcoat, which is intended as a substi- 
tute for galling manacles. It will be 
submitted to the inspection of those who 
have daily concern with maniacal pa- 
tients; and, if approved, it will be intro- 
duced to the notice of the publick. 

This work has a double claim to our 
approbation,—for the benevolent motives 
for which it was undertaken, and for the 
ability with which it is executed. To 
those who are entrusted with the care of 
the unhappy objects for whose benefit 
these observations are made public, they 
will prove an invaluable treasure, and 
will be exceedingly useful to medical 
practitioners in general; and it is no ex- 
travagant compliment when we assert, 
that Dr. Pargeter is entitled to a niche 
among those worthies who have so lately
distinguished themselves as the benefac- 
tors of mankind. 

