

[^Sample 1: article - 1792_GM_0211^]

|P_211
Mr. Urban, 
Dover, Feb. 8. 

IN p. 25, S. H. has particularized 
what has been said on the petrifac- 
tion of human bones, &c.; and the first 
article is an account of a small piece of 
a human body, strongly petrified, being 
found on digging in an old burial- 
ground at Folkstone in Kent. 

If you should think the following 
account of a petrifaction (which I deem 
such) found by me on the beach, in a 
line almost with the old burial-ground 
above-mentioned, I beg of you to in- 
sert it. 

Whether human bodies or bones 
have ever been found completely petri- 
fied, has been debated by several of 
|P_212
your correspondents. As I profess my- 
self a perfect novice in these sort of re- 
searches, you must be satisfied with a 
simple relation of facts only: I leave 
others to comment thereon. 

Walking upon the beach one day, a 
stone, of a brownish ash colour, attract- 
ed my notice. I took it up, and found 
it very ponderous; its form that of the 
human heart, covered with a pericar- 
dium. At the pendulous end the vena 
cava, and its companion, were pinched 
together, projecting from the heart. 

I left this curiosity at the Marquis of 
Granby inn at Folkstone till my return. 
The mistress of the house placed it up- 
on a kitchen-table: one of the servants, 
thinking it of no value, took it into the 
yard to break, which he at last accom- 
plished; fortunately, it broke transverse- 
ly. Finding it, upon my return, in this 
situation rather gave me pleasure; for, 
as the exterior was a perfect resemblance 
of a heart, which I have already observ- 
ed, the interior parts convinced me 
thereof. 

The whole of this petrifaction re- 
sembled a flint, except the ventricles, 
which were divided by the same florid 
substance as the heart was composed of, 
and filled with a shining purple spar. 

I had it by me two years. Mr. Bu- 
katy, the Polish ambassador, now at our 
Court, saw it one day, and begged it of 
me to place in the King of Poland's 
cabinet at Warsaw, where, I presume, 
it now is. 
Sam. Gramshawe. 

