

[^Sample 1: article - 1792_GM_0744^]

|P_744
[}168. Essay on Pulmonary Consumptions, includ- 
ing Histories of several remarkable Instances of 
Recovery from the most alarming Stages of the 
Disorder, by an improved Method of Treat- 
ment. By William May, M. D. Member of 
the Royal College of Physicians, London, Fel- 
low of the London Medical Society, late one 
of the Physicians to the Universal Dispensary, 
London. }]
TO divest consumption of part of its 
horrors, and to shew that it is curable 
in its worst stage, is the professed inten- 
tion of Dr. May in this little work. 
As this is contrary to the generally-re- 
ceived opinion, he begins with reciting 
a number of examples, part furnished 
by his own practice, and part extracted 
from the writings of other physicians, 
where the termination of the disease 
was favourable, under the most unpro- 
mising circumstances. What the doctor 
thinks most important in these observa- 
tions is, that the cures were effected by 
pursuing a method different from that 
generally recommended; for, instead of 
repeated evacuations, and cooling and 
antiphlogistic medicines, being prescrib- 
ed in these cases, a cordial and nourish- 
ing diet, with mild, tonic, and bracing 
medicines, were used. This leads him 
to a consideration of the nature and 
causes of pthisis pulmonalis, which has 
not hitherto, he thinks, been sufficiently 
investigated. Scrophula has long been 
considered as one of the causes of this 
disease: our author considers it as of its 
essence. To prove this, he recurs to 
the description of the two diseases, 
given by nosologists, and of the habits 
and constitutions peculiarly subject to 
them. These are, according to Cullen, 
persons of a sanguine, or sanguineo- 
melancholic temperament, having 
fine skins, rosy complexions, large 
veins, soft flesh, and a thick upper 
lip.  Having established, as he sup- 
poses, the similarity, or, at the least, the 
near connexion of these diseases with 
each other, he proceeds to shew, that 
repeated bleedings, with saline and 
cooling medicines, and a low diet, as 
they tend to weaken the stomach, im- 
pair digestion, and to debilitate the con- 
stitution, are injurious in this disease: 
on the contrary, that air and exercise, a 
more generous diet, with occasional 
emeticks, opiates, the bark, and other 
bracing medicines, will seldom fail of 
effecting a cure in the worst cases. We 
cannot prevail upon ourselves to be so 
sanguine in our expectations of always, 
or even frequently, effecting a cure in 
the worst species or stages of consump- 
tion, by any method yet known. Neit- 
her has the doctor convinced us that 
scrophula always exists in pthisical [/1./]
cases; but that the method recommend- 
ed by him has been successfully em- 
ployed, after the phlogistic symptoms 
were removed, we have had opportuni- 
ties of seeing in our own practice; and 
we believe it to be the method adopted 
by the most experienced physicians. 


[^1. 
* The number of athletic and robust per- 
sons, who become consumptive in conse- 
quence of repeated colds, or after pleuritic or 
peripneumonic affections, sufficiently evince 
that there are other causes, besides scrophula, 
capable of producing the disease; and, con- 
sequently, that no one method of cure can be 
adapted to all cases. 
^]