

[^Sample 1: article - 1792_GM_0356^]

|P_356
[}68. A Treatise on Tropical Diseases, on Military 
Operations, and on the Climate of the West 
Indies. By Benjamin Moseley, M. D. 
&c. &c. (Concluded from p. 252.) }]
THE disease next under consideration 
is the Tetanus, or Locked-jaw; in which 
Dr. M. has given an extensive view of 
spasmodic affections. He recapitulates 
all that has been said on this disorder, 
and laments that the antients have done 
but little, and the moderns less. He de- 
nies, and is the first who has denied it, 
the existence of Emprosthotonus; and he 
proves, by the laws of physiology, the 
impossibility of its existence. 

He asserts, there has been no improve- 
ment in the treatment of the tetanus 
since Hippocrates; and that all the 
vaunted methods of the moderns amount 
to nothing but deceiving those who have 
relied on them. Dr. M. recommends 
the revival of the practice of Hippo- 
crates, which chiefly consisted in pouring 
cold water on the naked body of the pa- 
tient, and covering him afterwards, to 
induce sweating. But there are many 
particulars to be observed in this prac- 
tice, which Dr. M. has explained, and 
advanced such improvements as he him- 
self has discovered in the extensive op- 
portunities which the West Indies af- 
forded him. 

Dr. M. discusses the intricate subjects 
of sensibility and irritability, produces 
some curious instances of discrimination, 
and shews that the tetanus belongs to the 
latter. He says, tetani, from obstructed 
perspiration, and night air, are frequently 
cured by warm baths, and sudorificks; 
but those from extensive wounds, and 
chirurgical operations, are seldom or ne- 
ver cured by any method. 

Dr. M. in speaking of the condition 
of the slaves in the West Indies, observes, 
that Negroes are more obnoxious to this 
disorder than white people; and that one 
of the causes of the unnecessary importa- 
tion of Negroes from Africa arises from 
the immense drawback on the population 
of the slaves on account of the deaths of 
infants by the tetanus, which is there 
called the jaw-falling. He recommends 
|P_357
to the planters means to prevent this waste 
of human beings, which, to use his own 
forcible words, strikes not less at the 
interests of policy than at the concerns 
of humanity. 

In Dr. M's dissertation on Local Can- 
cer and Cancerous Affections of the Glands, 
he has obliged us with a specifick for 
their extirpation. This is an application 
of corrosive sublimate in powder, on a 
diachylon of the gum plaster. There 
are a number of precautions necessary in 
the use of this remedy, which can only 
be decided on by the skilful, otherwise 
great mischief may ensue. Dr. M. used 
this application for the extirpation of the 
crab-yaws in the feet of the Negroes in 
the West Indies. This communication 
is honourable to Dr. M's character, as 
such powerful and easily practicable re- 
medies are generally kept secret, until, 
by falling into the hands of mercenary 
people, they become objects of private 
emolument. 

Dr. M's next dissertation is on the 
Dry Belly-ache, or Colica Pictonum. He 
has given us a true and genuine history 
of this tormenting disease, the result of 
much experience and observation. This 
may be considered as the only one that 
has ever been given to the world, if we 
except some local tracts on that species 
of the disease which is frequent in cyder 
countries. The notion, that solutions of 
lead in rum, &c. produce this disease, is 
here entirely overthrown; and the poison 
of that metal, with a proper analysis of 
its principles, and its effects on ceruse 
manufacturers, smelters, painters, and 
printers, are properly explained, and the 
reasons given for its noxious and baneful 
influence. 

This disease is critically defined by Dr. 
M. to be the offspring of diseased se- 
cretions, from debility in the stomach 
and intestines. It is endemical in the 
Weft Indies, and epidemical, or acci- 
dental, in most other parts of the world. 
It seldom attacks people newly arrived 
in the West Indies; and the natives 
and long residents are almost always 
the sole objects of it. In habits of 
body disposed to receive it, other dis- 
eases will bring it on; so will costive- 
ness, astringents, bark, acids, irregu- 
larity in diet, checked perspiration, 
anxiety, and indulging aphrodisiacal 
passion. 

Dr. M. shews the errors which inex- 
perienced and transient medical people 
have fallen into, by mistaking the bilious 
colick for this disease; and mentions 
the fatal consequences that have happen- 
ed from it. 

The following extract is peculiarly 
important to printers:— Friction from 
types in printing, together with the 
oil in the ink, and the drying of the 
types at the fire, cause an exhalation 
injurious to printers. Using the letters 
warm, has frequently caused palsies. I 
have known many printers subject to 
the belly-ach, while they remained in 
their office, and always free from it 
otherwise. A compositor, where this 
book is now printing, had the belly- 
ach for four months, and was in a mi- 
serable condition until he applied to 
me. He was cured in a few days, and 
returned to his work, and remained 
well for five months afterwards. He 
had been accustomed to moisten his 
singers in his mouth, to take up the 
letters with more facility, and also fre- 
quently to put letters in his mouth, 
while working; by which habit he 
frequently swallowed a portion of the 
solution of the metal in the impreg- 
nated saliva.  p. 540, 2d edit. 

The method of cure used by Dr. M. 
is very simple, and conformable to all his 
practice; in which, though we observe 
great decision, yet it is always united 
with perspicacity. A solution of white 
vitriol and alum is one of the principal 
remedies recommended for this disease. 

The powerful effects of this combina- 
tion, varying the quantities of the com- 
ponent articles, are mentioned on several 
occasions by our author, and particularly 
in pulmonary hæmorrhage, of which a 
melancholy history is given of his friend 
who fell a victim to this calamity. 

In this very curious and interesting 
case, it seems, the effusions of blood re- 
gularly obeyed the periodical changes of 
the moon. The case is recited in the 
most pathetic manner, and concludes the 
work. 

Through the whole of this elaborate 
performance Dr. M. has diffused an un- 
common degree of medical and chirurgi- 
cal information, exclusive of the diseases 
on which he has expressly written, unit- 
ing, what rarely happens, extensive scien- 
tifical with extensive practical know- 
ledge. The diseases which he has ex- 
pressly treated are of the most difficult 
consideration, and least understood of any 
in the history of medicine, and on which 
he could receive no suitable information 
but from his own experience and ob- 
servations. 

We need but name the Dysentery, 
|P_358
Yellow Fever, and Locked Jaw; and 
every person, versed in the science of 
physick, who shall read what Dr. Mose- 
ley has written thereon, will pronounce 
the work before us one of the most ar- 
duous undertakings that has ever been 
executed in the medical world; widely 
differing from those crude compilations 
with which the publick are frequently 
furnished, the result, perhaps, of only a 
few months voyage to the West Indies, 
or a short residence there, consequently 
not founded on practice; and which 
dangerous speculations are, without the 
least regard to the mischief they may 
produce, recommended by their authors 
as infallible guides, for the treatment of 
diseases, to the inexperienced, who can- 
not, in truth, know less of the matter 
than themselves. 

