

[^Sample 1: article - 1792_GM_0311^]

|P_311
[}Dissertation on the Gout; }]
(continued from p. 233.) 

FACTS seem to confirm, that the 
gout is hereditary in some families, 
by the make of their parts being formed 
like those of their ancestors; others ac- 
quire this disorder without the above 
claim. However, let it proceed from 
either cause, assistance may be obtained 
by a proper regimen, air, and exercise; 
but before we endeavour to point out a 
cure, an examination ought to be made, 
how and by what means the gouty mat- 
ter is generated, and on what parts of 
the body it acts, and where is the seat of 
the disease. 

It has already been observed, that the 
cellular membrane is the seat of inflam- 
mations, and the place where they act. 
The first stadium of the gout being an 
inflammation, sui generis, acts in the 
same place, though with some difference, 
as its inflammatory stadium generally at- 
tacks the joints. In all probability this 
is occasioned by the violent and particu- 
lar heat of the gouty matter in the same 
manner as heat will enter, and be greater 
on the round top of a poker, standing 
near the fire, than at any other part; 
thus the joints are formed by the firm 
and close texture of cartilages and ten- 
dons, hence none but the mere active 
part of the matter enters them; thus 
this active part of the gouty matter exerts 
its violence, and spends itself on one or 
more joints! 

After the most fiery or active parts of 
the gouty matter have spent themselves 
on the joints, and the constitution has been 
greatly debilitated thereby, the residue, be- 
ing of a mere sluggish nature, remains on 
the cellular membrane, amongst the mus- 
cles; now the patient feels the same 
pains as if beaten or bruised, the mus- 
cles not enduring the least pressure, and 
he finds himself in a state of great debi- 
lity. The second stadium, or the sta- 
dium of debility, is now present; the 
urine, which was high-coloured in the 
first stadium, now becomes pale. He 
now requires quite a different treatment 
than what he did in the first or in- 
flammatory stadium, for as that was to 
be treated by the antiphlogistick method, 
so this must be supported by cordials, 
opiates, and such a generous diet as the 
patient's stomach will require and bear; 
the parts affected must still be covered 
with flannel, and kept warm, to give a 
more easy passage to the remains of the 
gouty matter, part of which goes off by 
perspiration, and other part is absorbed 
by the glands, and carried to the kid- 
neys and guts, and passes off that way. 
As the pain and weariness of the muscu- 
lar parts abate, air and exercise should 
be made use of. 

Having described the fit or fits of the 
gout (for a person who has many re- 
turns of the gout, and is greatly afflicted 
with it, will sometimes have a re- 
turn of the gouty fits on the same 
parts again and again before he gets rid 
of it) with the method of cure; I shall 
|P_312
now endeavour to trace out what it is 
that occasions those fits, with the most 
probable method of prevention. 

It has already been observed, that the 
adipose membrane is the seat of the gout; 
that this membrane acts as a store-house 
for any overplus of nourishment receiv- 
ed into the constitution, and with it the 
seeds of the gout and many other dis- 
eases; that when a too great supply of 
nourishment is added hereto, with a de- 
ficiency of labour or exercise, Nature has 
no other method of exonerating itself of 
the gouty matter, but throwing it on the 
extremities, and there passing it off by 
perspiration, &c. 

Experience having proved that the 
gout is brought on as above, the proper 
method of prevention will be to hinder 
the generating this gouty matter, or dis- 
charging it by exercise. 

The method to prevent the generating 
of this gouty matter is to take such food 
as will not bring it on; or, if such food 
is taken, to carry off the redundancy by 
labour or exercise. In order to do this, 
physicians have pointed out different me- 
thods, as vegetables and milk produce 
less nourishment than flesh to persons 
who have been ordered to live upon 
those only; or, if animal food was made 
use of, to moderate its quantity, so as not 
to exceed what could be carried off by 
the labour or exercise of the patient. 

All experience shews us animal food 
produces a strong and rich blood, whilst 
milk and vegetables bring on a weak 
and poor one. Persons greatly afflicted 
with the gout have been willing to 
make use of any method, or to abstain 
from every thing that should be thought 
improper, for relief. On this supposition 
many have made use of milk and ani- 
mal food only, and generally have found 
relief; but I don't remember ever to 
have heard of any instance, but that it 
shortened the life of the person who tried 
it. The gout is a disorder which at- 
tacks persons past the high stadium of 
life, and whose habit is generally on 
the decline before the attack of the gout; 
therefore it should not be strictly perse- 
vered in. Neither should the opposite, 
viz. to live on animal food in great 
quantity and of high quality, with strong 
liquors. 

The most proper means of prevention 
seems to be (unless your exercise is 
strong and laborious) to eat sparingly of 
animal food; together with a proper 
quantity of vegetables. If your appe- 
tite is very good and rather great, take 
the vegetables in greater quantity, and 
the animal food less [/1./] ; but no method 
will do without labour and exercise: you 
should rather take too small a quantity 
than too large of strong drink, let the 
sort be what it will! 

From the account of the gout already 
given it may be observed, that the gout, 
as well as many other diseases, is acquir- 
ed by too great an indulgence of idle- 
ness, laziness, and luxury, particularly 
by those that eat a great deal of animal 
food, and drink a quantity of strong li- 
quors; but all persons are not equally 
affected with this disorder, as the make 
of some of the solids greatly contribute 
to the collecting such a matter from the 
nourishment received, so as to lay the 
seeds of this future disorder; hence it 
becomes hereditary after the same man- 
ner as children often have the parts of 
the body alike in shape and make with 
their parents. Thus children of large 
and strong parents are stout and lusty; 
those of small stature are diminutive. 
Parents inclinable to be fat often have 
children of the same make. Thus it 
may be observed, that all persons are not 
equally afflicted with the gout, though 
they all use the same means to acquire 
it. Such persons whose habit of body 
are inclinable to acquire gouty matter, 
acquire it together with the fat, and is 
laid up in the membrana adiposa, as in a 
store-house for future call; this store of 
gouty fat becomes more or less in the 
habit, in proportion to the nourishment 
made use of, and the labour or exercise 
used, and will increase or lessen in pro- 
portion as either of them prevail: hence 
the necessity that the exercise should be 
in proportion to the meat and drink 
made use of. If the constitution is strong 
enough, when the vis matricis naturæ
finds herself overloaded with this fat 
gouty matter, she forces some of the 
most fiery and active particles on joints 
of the extremities, which immediately 
produce an inflammation on the part; a 
symptomatic fever is brought on, and 
these active and fiery particles are thrown 
off through the pores of the skin, and the 
|P_313
remainder by urine or stod. If the con- 
stitution is so loaded with this gouty fiery 
matter, that this fit is not sufficient to 
throw off enough of it; after a little 
respite, another such fit is brought on in 
some other joint, before free of it; and 
thus fresh fits are produced till enough 
of it is discharged, when this first and 
inflammatory stadium is at an end, 
which is succeeded by the second sta- 
dium, viz. that of debility; during this 
second stadium, great pain and unea- 
siness is now formed in and throughout 
all the muscular parts affected; dur- 
ing this stadium the patient must be 
supported with a generous way of liv- 
ing, together with an opiate at night; 
till the pains and swellings are gone. 
These pains and swellings will con- 
tinue till the vis matricis naturæ has 
unloaded the cellular membrane of these 
gouty remains, which are carried off, ei- 
ther by perspiration, or are taken up by 
the lymphaticks, and discharged on the 
kidneys or guts. It will be of great 
use to guard the parts affected from 
cold, during this stadium; thereby the 
pores will be more open for the pers- 
piration of the offending matter, and 
the gouty matter not made to retrocede 
by cold. 

The gout, by bad management, or 
otherwise, retroceding falls on the vitals, 
as on the stomach, lungs, kidneys, blad- 
der, &c. particularly to those who have 
been long subjects to it, and their con- 
stitution greatly debilitated thereby; 
whenever this happens, the most speedy 
and powerful assistance must immediately 
be given, and such as will occasion the 
removing the gouty matter from the in- 
ternal, or vital parts, to the extremi- 
ties; the patient should be immediately 
placed in a hot bath, as warm as he can 
bear it with ease, and continue in 
it half an hour, more or less, as his 
strength will support it. The heat of 
the bath should be kept up, all the time 
he is in it, by adding boiling water, as 
is found necessary. By this an active 
heat or warmth will be added to the 
whole mass of blood: when he is taken 
out of the hot bath, he should be imme- 
diately put into blankets, to dry off the 
moisture on the skin as soon as possible; 
then let him have a warm and dry shirt 
on, and put into a warm bed; his arms 
and legs should be rubbed smartly with 
dry flannels; cordial medicines, with 
opiats, should be immediately given to 
encrease the internal expansion, and, if 
possible, to force the gout from the in- 
ternal to the external parts, which are 
now debilitated, and becoming flaccid 
by the perspiration of the external heat, 
and thereby leaving a vacuum, or place 
resisting less for the gouty matter to be 
forced into. Experience has shewn us, 
that a person, subject to the gout, 
spraining his ancle, whereby an inflam- 
mation is brought on, or any other in- 
flammation succeeding any accident, 
even the small inflammation which fol- 
lows a blister, a fit of the gout generally 
follows it. This points out to us, that 
blisters should be applied to the legs, &c. 
Warm aromatic and spirituous glisters, 
together with opium, will be proper to 
be made use of, in order to give strength 
to the internal expansion, and force the 
gout on the extremities. 


[^1. 
* Fish, being of a nature of food between 
animal and vegetable, producing less and 
weaker nourishment than animal, but much 
more than vegetable, are a proper food for 
such persons as are inclinable to generate and 
collect the gouty matter; but then this food, 
though it is of the most easy digestion, should 
not be made use of alone; animal and ve- 
getable should be mixed with it, according 
to the strength and appetite of every person. 
^]