

[^Sample 1: article - 1792_GM_1024^]

|P_1024
[}256. Dr. Rowley's Treatise on the Manage- 
ment of Female Breasts during Childbed, &c. 
&c. (Concluded from p. 938) }]
UNDER the next head, "On the 
Consequences of Scirrhous Breasts when 
not assisted by Medicine, or surgical or 
medical Prescriptions, or Operations, " it 
is asserted, that patients are safer with- 
out than with medical assistance, in many 
instances; diet is considered; and some 
curious and interesting examples of cure, 
with the remedies by which they were 
obtained. 

"On the Management of the Cancer- 
ous Ulcer, or manifest Cancer, of the 
Breast. " 1. The commencement. 2. The 
augmenting or separating stage. 3. The 
putrid absorbing stage. Remedies and 
forms of prescriptions, on an entire new 
plan. 

The stages of the disorder called cancer
seem to have been ascertained by long 
observations and anatomical inquiry, and 
|P_1025
may merit the attention of the faculty. 
As to remedies, the author acknowledges 
their fallibility and inadequacy to the 
disorder, in many instances; but he re- 
commends a long perseverance in mine- 
ral alteratives, according to constitu- 
tions, as the only probable means of 
preventing the rapid progress of the 
disorder. 

The medicines used for 30 years are 
freely communicated in several elegant 
prescriptions, adapted to external and in- 
ternal use. The Doctor, however, inti- 
mates, that no remedy can be useful but 
in proportion as it may be early or ra- 
tionally applied; and therefore, following 
the plan he recommends in his Treatise 
on Nervous Diseases, the application of 
medicine is advised to be different, ac- 
cording to different habits; as the robust, 
weak, pallid, florid, corpulent, lean, &c. 

The author's ideas on these subjects 
are certainly new, sensible, and judicious, 
and must carry conviction to every un- 
prejudiced mind capable of medical re- 
flection. To prescribe in all cases of the 
same disease, and expect success, he con- 
siders the height of credulity and folly. 
Every constitution, in some measure, 
differs; every constitution under disease, 
therefore, requires some variation in 
practice: this is alone to be determined 
by skill and experience in the art; in 
short, by just rules treasured up in the 
mind, from long and acute observation. 

"On the scirrhous and cancerous Ul- 
cer of the Womb. " This is divided in- 
to three stadia, or stages — the scirrhous, 
the ulcerous, and the putrid separating 
stage. 

Females often lose their lives through 
false delicacy in this dreadful disease of 
the womb. The time to expect a cure 
is in the first stage; in the second it is 
doubtful, and in the third it is absolutely 
incurable. 

In this part are many practical obser- 
vations, which shew how necessary it is 
for a physician, in such cases, to well 
understand midwifery, as well as practi- 
cal medicine. 

He condemns the use of nightshade, 
hemlock, henbane, mercury alone, bleed- 
ings, neutral salts, low diet, &c. or ge- 
neral plans of cure, which are not appli- 
cable to individuals; and declares he 
never saw such methods successful. He 
gives reasons why opium and other nar- 
coticks are likely to fix the disease.— 
Hence he proceeds to give an account of 
all the remedies he has used; and re- 
commends a perusal of his treatise on 
the cure of ulcerated legs, fourth edition, 
where may be found much reasoning on 
the necessity of changing the state of 
blood in curing ulcers and diseases of 
the lymphatic system, &c. — The re- 
medies are, 
Æthiops mineralis. 
— antimonialis. 
Hydrargyrus and antimonial sulphurs. 
Kermes mineralis. 
Nitrum. 
Merc. dulc. xij. cies sub. et lotus cum 
sulph. 
Amat. antimon. 
Camphora. 
Neutral salts. 
Antimonialia. 

The modes of using the most active 
preparations are, to prescribe, first, very 
small doses, at exact distances, and long 
to continue their use. "In short, " says 
the writer, "the general plan may be 
seen in the singular case and cure given 
in the letter on medical vanity, where an 
extraordinary cure of a cancerous womb 
and ulcer of the rectum was effected by 
alteratives. "

The author, lastly, treats of cancerous 
affections of the eyelids, ear, nose, lips, 
gums, tonsil glands, mouth, fauces, tongue, 
axilla, &c.; to comprehend which, the 
book must be consulted. A review of 
all the methods adopted for the cure of 
the cancer, for a period of 2000 years, 
concludes the present work. In the in- 
troduction to this part the writer says, 
"The learned reader will perceive, that 
the modes of treatment I have adopted 
and communicated are new; and if they 
now and then snatch an unfortunate 
victim from death, or even palliate the 
symptoms of the incurable, it will not 
only requite the author for his unremit- 
ting researches, but perhaps point out 
the paths to abler practitioners, and pro- 
mote a spirit of emulation for the ac- 
complishing future improvements. "

On the whole, this treatise well merits 
the consideration of the faculty; for, if 
it does not hold out boasting promises, 
nor feed the unfortunate with vain ex- 
pectations, yet it gives clearly the reasons 
why, under certain circumstances, it is 
the height of ignorance and folly to ex- 
pect a cure in cancers.— "The actions 
of these remedies, " says the author, 
"whether by liquifying the congested 
matter, or rendering the impervious ves- 
sels open in the tela cellulosa, and its 
minutest cells, are inquiries that have 
|P_1026
much occupied my attention; the result 
will hereafter be communicated. "

The reasons why cancers, in certain 
instances, have, and must ever remain, 
incurable, are fully explained. Then 
follow the modes of palliating symptoms 
where cures cannot be rationally expect- 
ed; with an account of symptoms at- 
tendant on cancers of the womb; as 
fevers, suppression of urine, hydatids, 
costiveness, nausea and vomiting, pur- 
gings, putrid discharge, violent pains, 
floodings, hiccups, comatose symptoms, 
&c. &c. 

Perhaps, as important a part as any in 
this work is the chapter on pretenders to 
secrets in the cure of cancers; and if we 
had room we should gladly transcribe 
the whole, as it might prevent, in future, 
many delusions practised on the unwary 
by ignorance and knavery. 

