

[^Sample 1: article - 1792_GM_0447^]

|P_447
[}80. An Analysis of the Medicinal Water of 
Tunbridge Wells. }]
"FOR many years the water was collect- 
ed in two open stone basons, perforated at the 
bottom, and so placed over the springs that, 
as the water rose, it flowed into the basons 
from below, whilst the waste water passed 
off by means of notches made in the edges 
of the basons for that purpose. But, very 
lately, one of these has been changed for a 
bason of marble, over which is fitted a mar- 
ble dome, so as to inclose it completely, ex- 
cept at the marble notch, or opening, which 
gives exit to the water nearly as usual. This 
alteration, inconsiderible as it may appear, 
has given rise to a difference of opinion; 
some conceiving, that by thus excluding the 
contact of the atmosphere, the water was 
not likely to lose so much either of the elas- 
tic fluids it contained, or of its properties as 
a chalybeate; others, that by being deprived - 
of the custom of dipping their vessels into 
the spring, as formerly, they have not the 
water from so near the fountain-head, and, 
consequently, not so fresh and efficacious. 
How far these opinions may be reconciled, 
will be seen by the analysis here submitted; 
which, it is hoped, will also determine two 
other material positions, much disputed by 
authors, whether there be any essential dif- 
ference between the waters of the two
springs as they originally stood, and what is 
the true nature of their impregnation. " pp. 
2, 3. 

"The author proved, by the most satis- 
factory experiments, that the only advan- 
tage that can be derived to the spring by a 
cover is cleanliness, and that the water is 
not alterable by its being either exposed or 
covered, so long as such covering does not 
entirely exclude the external air. The pro- 
prietor, in compliance with the general opi- 
nion, removed the cover; and the original 
object of the present publication was thus 
superseded. The author, however, finding 
himself under some sort of engagement to 
satisfy the curiosity of friends, and reflecting 
that no accurate analysis of the Tunbridge 
waters had hitherto been given, now offers 
to the publick these pages, as the result of 
careful experiments; wishing, at the same 
time, not to appear to have been inattentive 
to this particular subject, since it is not un- 
reasonable to suppose that a scientific inquiry 
into the component parts of these springs 
may, in some measure, assist us with respect 
to the right application of them in medicine. 
He likewise takes this opportunity of pub- 
licly acknowledging his obligations to the 
ingenious Mr. Babington, of Guy's hospital, 
by whose skill and dexterity in executing 
chemical experiments he was greatly assisted 
in this analysis. " Introd. p. vi—viii. 

