

[^Sample 1: article - 1792_GM_0060^]

|P_60
[}10. A Treatise on Tropical Diseases, on Military 
Operations, and on the Climate of the West 
Indies. By Benjamin Moseley, M. D. 
&c. &c. (Continued from vol. LXI. p. 1133.) }]
IN the History of Epidemic Dysen- 
teries, Dr. M. has demonstrated, that 
the disease is a fever of the intestines, de- 
riving its origin from obstructed perspira- 
tion, depending on some secret influ- 
ence in the atmosphere, or sudden 
transitions of the air, or such other 
causes as expose people to have this 
discharge hastily stopped:  and from 
the various opportunities which he has 
had of treating it, he draws the follow- 
ing important conclusion: that he has 
universally found it relieved by turn- 
ing back that discharge to its natural 
channel by the means of sudorifics, 
and that he has seldom found diffi- 
culty in removing it speedily, when 
taken in the beginning. 

After descanting on formulæ and me- 
dicines, which have been reputed spe- 
cifics in the bloody flux, Dr. M. shews 
that their beneficial effects have really 
been exerted at the cutaneous pores, as 
diaphoretics; though this fact has hi- 
|P_61
therto been overlooked by practitioners. 
This Dr. M. asserts is peculiarly the 
case with all antimonials, after their e- 
metic, or purgative, operation is over. 
Antimonials alone, or with laudanum, 
ipecacuanha, &c. varied according to 
circumstances, are the principal agents 
to be employed; but Dr. M. observes 
that the cure depends on a careful 
continued course of sudorifics, to keep 
up a sweat, in extent proportioned to 
the violence of the disease; and not 
on the trifling way of giving them in 
small doses, while the patient is ex- 
posed, and their operation neglected. 
The sudorific employed must be suit- 
able to the nature of the flux; the 
stage of it; and the habit of the pa- 
tient. 

This is the outline of the great system 
which Dr. M. has promulgated for the 
treatment of epidemic dysenteries, when 
raging in fleets, armies, and populous 
cities. Those, almost annual, dysente- 
ric complaints, which appear at the end 
of summer, he observes, are easily re- 
moved by purgatives, absorbents, and 
anodynes. 

Dr. M's practice is decidedly, in ge- 
neral, antiphlogistic; and has established 
the law of physic in the Western world. 
Such was Sydenham's, and every popu- 
lar physician's on record. The extra- 
vagant, and intoxicating doctrine of 
Ασθένι , is the offspring of inexperience 
and theory:—the mischiefs of which, 
have been more extensive that is gene- 
rally known. It is questionable, whe- 
ther practical writers in medicine have 
done more good, than theorists injury, 
to mankind. 

In theory, the bilious remittent fever, 
the putrid bilious fever, and what has 
been improperly called the yellow fe- 
ver, of the West Indies, have been 
confounded together. In the practical 
work before us, we see their specific dif- 
ference; and this knowledge seems to 
have been much wanted in the West 
Indies. 

On the last disease, Dr. M. has be- 
stowed a dissertation of considerable ex- 
tent; in which he has clearly evinced, 
that the yellow fever is an aggravated 
degree of the European causus. The 
treatise on this disease was originally 
published in Latin; and was Dr. M's 
inaugural thesis, at the University of 
Leyden, under the title, "De Causo 
Tropico Endemico, five Febre Flavâ, 
quæ in Indiis Occidentalibus observa- 
tur. "

As the Latin original is before us, 
we shall, in our next month's Magazine, 
make our extracts from that, referring 
our English readers to tiie English edi- 
tion. 

(To be continued.) 

