

[^Sample 1: article - 1798_GM_0192^]

|P_192
[}Dr. Sherwen's Letter to Dr. Mil- 
man. (Concluded from p. 108.) }]
IT would, perhaps, have been pru- 
dent in me to have rested satisfied 
with the honour or disgrace of the pro- 
posal [/1./], without presuming to point out 
the particular cases in which I may con- 
ceive such a process as that of scorbu- 
ticizing the system likely to answer a 
salutary purpose. I cannot, however, 
refrain from offering a conjecture upon 
this occasion. I have long had it in 
contemplation to propose, by means of 
scorbuticising the system, to render 
the blood a menstruum for the solu- 
tion of polypous concretions. Possi- 
bly the idea may not be so new as it 
appears to me. The view which I 
have formerly taken of this disease 
leads me to suppose, that the blood 
and juices of scorbutic patients are 
more acrimonious and saline than 
those of persons in a good state of 
health [/2./]. If such be the case, and I 
think some of the phænomena of the 
disease warrant the supposition, may 
it not be possible to dissolve a poly- 
pous concretion in the heart by using 
salt as a medicine, or salted animal 
food as diet, until scorbutic appearan- 
ces take place? To inflict one dis- 
ease with a view to lessen or alleviate 
another is no new idea in physick ; and 
the one here proposed is so much in 
our power, and so easy to be kept un- 
der controul, that a patient might be 
exposed to its influence to a certain 
degree for almost any length of time 
with safety; ripe fruits and vegetable 
acids being always at hand to be 
thrown in whenever it should appear 
to be making too rapid a progress. 

It may be alledged, that the pa- 
thognomonic symptoms of polypous 
concretions in the heart are not suffi- 
ciently distinguishable from spasmodic 
affections of that organ, to enable us to 
judge of their existence with so much 
certainty as to warrant the infliction of 
a dangerous disease, even admitting 
the probability of its aswering a useful 
purpose. I cannot, however, help 
thinking that, by a diligent attention 
to all the circumstances, and to the pa- 
tient's description of his own feelings, 
a very probable opinion may often be 
formed. The peculiar gushing and 
whizzing noise described by Mr. Hol- 
der, in the case so well related by Dr. 
Cheston, of Gloucester, in the 6th 
volume of the Edinburgh Medical 
Commentaries for 1785, appears to 
me to convey irresistible testimony to 
the existence of a polypus, or some 
mechanical obstruction, in the heart 
in that particular case. Bloody or 
grumous Polypi are doubtless most 
commonly formed in the moment of 
Death; but a firm coagulum, resem- 
bling the buff-coat of inflamed blood, 
must have existed in the heart long 
before the death of the patient in 
whom it is found. The case of Mr. 
Holder is in this respect decisive; and, 
had it been known to me in his life- 
time, would have subjected him to the 
obtrusion of this proposal. 

That polypous concretions are not 
always formed in the heart in the mo- 
ment of death will be evident from 
the perusal of a very extraordinary 
tract which now lies before me, inti- 
tuled, 

"A most certaine and true Relation of 
a strange Monster or Serpent, found in 
the left Ventricle of the Heart of John Pen- 
nant, Gentleman, of the age of 21 yeares. 
By Edward May, Doctor of Philosophy 
and Physick, and Professor elect of them 
in the Colledge of the Academy of No- 
blemen, called the Musæum Minervæ; 
Physitian also extraordinary unto her most 
Sacred Majesty, Queene of Great Britta- 
ny, &c. London, 1639. "

This tract is dedicated "to the Right 
Honourable Lord and highly renown- 
ed Peere of this Kingdome, Edward, 
Earl of Dorset, " &c. &c.; and ap- 
pears also in the form of "A Letter 
to the right worshipful Sir Theodore 
Maiherne, Knight; chiefe Physitian 
|P_[^An illustration of a heart, where a spiral-like polyp is visible. ^]
|P_193
unto his most Soveraigne Majesty, 
King of Great Brittany. "

That a substance, under the form 
described, was actually found in the 
heart of Mr. Pennant cannot be 
doubted; and the tract, being very 
scarce and curious, will justify a few 
extracts. It contains two plates, re- 
presenting, in different views, this 
polypous concretion, for such no 
doubt every modem medical reader 
will pronounce it, although it must be 
confessed the figure under which it 
appears, together with the testimonies 
and description, would almost com- 
pel one to believe it a large organized 
reptile. 

No sooner was that ventricle emptied 
but Mr. Heydon, still complaining of the 
greatnesse and hardnesse of the same, my- 
selfe seeming to neglect his words because 
the left ventricle is thrice as thick of flesh 
as the right is in sound men, for conserva- 
tion of vital spirits, I directed him to ano- 
ther disquisition; but he, keeping his hand 
still upon the heart, would not leave it, 
but said againe that it was of a strange 
greatnesse and hardnesse; whereupon I 
desired him to cut the orifice wider; by 
which meanes we presently perceived a 
carnouse substance, as it seemed to us, 
wreathed together in foldes like a worm or 
serpent, the self same form expressed in 
the first icnography; at which we both 
much wondered, and I entreated him to 
separate it from the heart, which he did, 
and we carried it from the body to the 
window, and there layed it out in those 
just dimensions which are here expressed in 
the second figure. 

The body was white, of the very co- 
lour of the whitest skin of man's body; 
but the skin was bright and shining, as if it 
had beene varnished over; the head all 
bloody, and so like the head of a serpent, 
that the lady Herris then shivered to see it, 
 and since hath often spoken it, that she 
was inwardly troubled at it, because the 
head of it was so truely like the head of a 
snake. 

The thighs and branches were of 
flesh-colour, as also all those fibres, 
strings, nerves, or whatsoever else they 
were. 

After much contemplation and con- 
jectures what strange thing that part of the 
heart had brought forth unto us, I resol- 
ved to try the certainty, and to make full 
exploration; both for mine own experi- 
ence and satisfaction, as also to give true 
testimony to others that should heare of it; 
and thereupon I searched all parts of it, 
to finde whether it were a pituitose and 
bloody collection or the like, or a true or- 
ganicall body and conception. I first 
searched the head, and found it of a thick 
substance, bloody and glandulous about 
the necke, somewhat broken (as I con- 
ceived) by a sudden or violent separation of 
it from the heart, which yet seemed to me 
to come from it easily enough. 

"The body I searched likewise with a 
bodkin betweene the leggs or thighs, and 
I found it perforate, or hollow, and a solid 
body, to the very length of a silver bodkin, 
as is here described; at which the spec- 
tators wondered. And, as not crediting 
me, some of them tooke the bodkin after 
me, made tryal themselves, and remained 
satisfied that there was a gut, vein, or ar- 
tery, or some such analogicall thing, that 
was to serve that monster for uses naturall; 
amongst whom the lady Herris and the sur- 
gian made tryall after me with their own 
hands, and have given their hands that this 
relation is true. " Pp. 5, 6, 7. 

Unfortunately the remainder of the 
account, although very copious in ab- 
struse and learned physiognomical dis- 
quisition, is very barren of the thing 
most wanted, viz. an accurate history 
of the manner of life and morbid 
symptoms of the patient. Almost the 
whole of this is contained in the fol- 
lowing paragraph: 

"But I speake more precisely and punc- 
tually, that now, in the left ventricle of the 
heart, this worme or serpent hath beene 
found; which the mother of the young 
man saith was at least of three yeares 
growth, for so long he complained of his 
breast, and as she saith would never button 
his doublet in the morning, but be open- 
breasted in all weathers, till he had washed 
his hands and face; and was subject to 
palpitations. "

That peculiar pathological state of 
the animal œconomy, which we know 
to be capable of dissolving the solid 
callus of a broken bone, or the firm 
cicatrix of an old wound, may surely 
act in the same manner upon a mere 
deposition of coagulable lymph. 

Might not the same process act upon 
the bronchial polypus; a disease which, 
I believe, never takes place but in 
such constitutions as those which have 
sizy blood. This opinion will, I 
think, be confirmed by a perusal of 
the case of bronchial polypus related 
by Dr. Warren in the first volume of 
the Medical Transactions. There is 
also a case of the same nature, and 
from which the same conclusion may 
be drawn, in the Medical Commenta- 
ries of Edinburgh for the years 1783 
and 1784, vol. IX. p. 254. The dis- 
ease is here denominated angina poly- 
|P_194
pose by my worthy friend Dr. Joshua 
Dixon, physician at Whitehaven. It 
has been asserted, that blood drawn 
from scorbutic patients is sometimes 
sizy; but I believe this to be a very 
rare circumstance, nor can I conceive 
it possible to continue long in that 
state under the influence of such a dis- 
ease. The testimony to this effect, as 
related by Dr. Donald Monro, in the 
second volume of the Medical Tran- 
sactions, is not sufficiently strong to 
admit of any conclusions being drawn 
from it. 

It is now prettv much the fashion 
for practitioners in surgery to apply 
sea-water, and solutions of common 
salt in various forms, to hard and in- 
dolent glandular swellings. There is 
reason to believe that this practice is 
sometimes attended with success; but 
I have myself always preferred a solu- 
tion of the common crude sal-ammo- 
niac. May not the efficacy of such 
applications be attributed rather to the 
saline particles being taken into the 
system by absorption, and giving acri- 
mony to the general mass of circula- 
ting fluids, than to their acting merely 
as topical applications? That they 
may be admitted into the system ab 
extra, so as to produce very powerful 
effects, will probably appear from the 
following case which fell under my 
own observation: 

A. D. 1789. Virgo quædam, anno 
ætatis suæ quadragesimo-nono, habitu 
corporis macro et attenuato, et colore oris 
obscuro, ob tumorem mammae durum, 
quem per aliquot annos antea persense- 
rat, at jam, majore affecta dolore, et tu- 
moris magnitudine crescente, extractum 
cicutæ ex ordine ingressa est. In reliquis 
valetudine bona semper potita fuerat. 

Extractum cicutæ, et cacut et stoma- 
chum dolore afficiens omittebatur, et 
chirurgi perclari consilio, thermis salis ni- 
gri (Anglice, Bay-salt) et communis mis- 
tura saturatis, uti incipiebat ægrota. Hoc 
genere thermarum bis singulis hebdomma- 
dis constanter servato, et tumore nequa- 
quam emendato valetudine quidem solita 
potius diminuta, derelictæ sunt thermæ. 

Medicina maxime putida, albo ex 
vino et pulvere verrucarum equi admise
sarii parata, quasi medicamentum cancri 
certissimum jam commendata est. Hoc 
usque utebatur quoad pulveris unciæ qua- 
tuor vel amplius exhaustæ. Hoc tempo- 
re, ægrota, gradatim et aperte, sine ullo 
alio peculiari morbi indicio, vires amitte- 
re cæpit. Tantum fuit debilitatis incre- 
mentum, ut demum erat necesse eam per 
scalas sursum deorsum portare, quamvis 
sæpe in periculo ne deficeret. 

In hoc statu dum nullo alio quam de- 
bilitatis morbo laboraret, visa est a medi- 
cinæ Doctore Reynolds, qui cum magna 
veritate atque etiam accuratione termina- 
tionem fatalem prædixit, quod accidit ad 
finem unius hebdommadæ a die quo illam 
visit. Duos ante mortem dies, sanguis ex 
gingivis constanter flucre cœpit, et minus 
unâ horâ postquam expirasset. Facies et 
corpus totum ad cæruleum perlevem mu- 
tare cœpit. Color singulis horis lividior 
fiebat donec fere extiterat penitus niger;
et quamvis corpus erat pertenue et tempus 
frigidulum (quippe medio erat Martis 
1790) putrefactio minus duobus diebus su- 
peravit omnia quæ unquam memini in 
hac regione vidisse in corporibus plenissimi 
habitus, etiamque extremo momento ante 
sepulturam vel etiam fervidissimo tempore 
æstatis. 

"Hunc fuisse casum scorbuticum insidi- 
ose tardeque repentem semper putavi ex 
quo thermæ salitæ suissent adhibitæ. Hoc 
constat thermas esse factas multo validiores 
quam chirurgus jusserat: valde suspicor sa- 
turatam fuisse solutionem, propterea quod 
ad imum balnei credo semper fuisse aliquod 
sal indissolutum. Hoc tamen pro vero non 
asseverabo. Tres fere menses post ther- 
mas derelictas terminatio supervenit fatalis: 
quam sæpe utebantur jam non constat. "

It is a fact universally known, that 
scorbutic persons are very easily acted 
upon by mercury; and there are few 
surgeons who have not had opportuni- 
ties of observing patients to whom it 
is equally difficult, and almost impos- 
sible, to communicate the mercurial 
stimulus by unction. Such patients 
would soon feel its influence if put 
upon a course of common salt or salted 
animal food. May it not be presumed 
that, before the ointment can act upon 
the system, the mercurial globules 
which it contains must undergo some 
change analogous to calcination; or, 
that they are formed in combination 
with the neutral salts of the body, 
whether ammoniacal or of whatever 
nature, into a saline mercurial com- 
pound. But the lymph and serum of 
some patients may be so bland and 
mild as not to act upon the mercu- 
rial globules. 

With all the confidence of theoreti- 
cal conjecture, I was on the point of 
proposing the same process for the 
more speedy solution or discussion of 
mesenteric and many other obstruc- 
tions and tumefactions of the lym- 
phatic glands; but experience, which 
is the best corrector of theory, obliges 
|P_195
me to speak with diffidence here; be- 
cause, very unfortunately for such 
conjecture, I find that Master H—, 
the patient who has so lately under- 
gone the scorbuticising process, has at 
this moment one of the submaxillary 
glands hard and tumid; and I also 
perceive a chain of three or four smal- 
ler glands in a state of induration im- 
mediately [/3./] behind the mastoidæus mus- 
cle in the neck, although there is no 
exulceration nor moist discharge from 
any of the neighbouring parts, nor 
has any blister been applied. It must, 
therefore, be recommended with equal 
diffidence to patients in whom we sus- 
pect the existence of tubercles in the 
lungs; but, a doubtful remedy being 
better than no remedy at all in a des- 
perate disease, such an idea may not 
be altogether unworthy of attention. 

To the candour and liberality of the 
profession I submit these crude con- 
jectures; trusting that, should they 
hereafter in any instance lead to inju- 
rious practice, they will not be treated 
with severity of criticism: they are 
offered with all the diffidence of con- 
jecture, not obtruded with confidence 
and presumption. 

Permit me, sir, before I conclude 
this tedious epistle, to remark, that, 
having in a former publication offered 
a proposal to the Lords of the Admi- 
ralty for the cure of the scurvy on- 
board ships at sea, with all the confi- 
dence of a man sure of his point, it 
may now be demanded why I have 
not made use of the same remedy in 
the cases which have so lately fallen 
under my care. To this it is only 
necessary to answer, that the cases of 
scurvy which have been here related 
came suddenly and unexpectedly under 
my notice, as they must always do in 
private practice on shore. To have 
waited, therefore, eight or ten days 
till a proper quantity of vegetating 
beans could have been procured, 
when better and more efficacious 
means were at hand, would have 
been to trifle with the lives of my pa- 
tients, merely to prove, by experiment, 
what the experience of mankind has 
already proved in ten thousand instan- 
ces, viz. that the true scurvy may 
always be speedily cured by the use of 
every kind of recent vegetable matter 
that is in its nature esculent. 

Some may be surprized to find so 
much dependance placed on beans as 
a cure for the scurvy at sea, since it 
has been clearly demonstrated, by Dr. 
Trotter, that the slaves in the African 
trade, who are chiefly nourished by 
beans and other articles of leguminous 
food, are prone to the disease, and 
often suffer severely under its ravages. 
The Voyages of Mons. Brisson afford 
a passage which will sufficiently ac- 
count for the scurvy making its ap- 
pearance amongst the negroes while 
subsisting upon leguminous food, 
which certainly can have no tendency 
in itself to generate that disease: 

"Of all diseases the scurvy is that which 
attacks the Negroes most fatally. It will 
sometimes almost depopulate a vessel in a 
few days. The Banbarras, " he adds, 
"are more subject to this plague than the 
other Negroes. Care must be taken, 
therefore, to supply them with the freshest 
provisions that can be procured, without 
paying any regard to their predilection 
for every thing that is salt; for, having no 
salt in their own country, they no sooner 
get the taste of it in their captivity, than 
they contract an immoderate liking to it, 
and mix it profusely with every thing they 
eat. Great care must be taken to prevent 
the dangerous consequences of this habit. "
Brisson's Voyage to the Coast of Africa. 

We have here one of the most po- 
tent occasional causes of scurvy added 
to poor nourishment. The translator 
injures the meaning of his author 
when he says, the Negroes ought to be 
supplied, &c. without paying any re- 
gard to their predilection for every thing 
that is salt. The original writer must 
surely have meant, that the strictest 
regard ought to be paid to this circum- 
stance, in order to prevent them from 
indulging such predilection. 

John Sherwen. 

Enfield, Apr. 21, 1797. 


[^1. 
* To render the scurvy, like salivation, 
the means of curing other diseases. 
^]
[^2. 
† This being a disputed point, candour 
compels me to acknowledge that, in the 
case of Mr. H—, the blood dropping 
from his nose had as florid a colour, and 
was apparently of as good a consistence, 
as in any oher instance of hæmorrhage 
from that part that I ever remember to have 
seen. There was also a redness on his 
cheeks, although much less now than what 
was natural to him, yet such as I should 
formerly have deemed altogether incom- 
patible with the existence of scurvy. The 
fungus excrescence on the ankle was also 
longer in getting well than the maculæ 
scorbuticæ in disappearing. This fungus at 
last yielded to pledgits of lint wet with a 
mixture of lemon-juice and tincture of 
myrrh. 
^]
[^3. 
* But these are now, March 1798, 
nearly completely vanished; and no atten- 
tion has been paid to them since the scurvy 
was cured. 
^]