

[^Sample 1: article - 1798_GM_0384^]

|P_384
Mr Urban, 
Christchurch, April 29. 

BOTH myself and many of my 
neighbours (admirers of your ju- 
dicious selections of the instructive and 
useful in every branch) have been great 
sufferers by a calamity, which, we 
doubt not, admits of a remedy, though, 
after many unsuccessful attempts, we 
cannot procure the desired arcana; 
we, therefore, determine on making 
this public enquiry, in the hope that 
some of your correspondents may have 
sufficient skill and humanity to give a 
satisfactory reply. 

Unwilling to engross more time or 
space than is unavoidable, I shall 
plainly state, that I live on an exten- 
sive common, thinly sprinkled with 
houses or inclosures, but with many 
rabbit-holes, covered by furze and 
heath-bushes, and bounded, on my 
side, by steep cliffs, topped with high 
sand-banks; all which tend to har- 
bour a species of viper that, in sun- 
shine, basks on the surface of the earth 
or in the hedges. It is about half a 
yard in length, often two inches in cir- 
cumference, and beautifully striped. 
The swelling occasioned by its bite is 
great, and most venomously painful to 
quadrupeds of every denomination, 
particularly dogs. We have seen in- 
stances of cures by the profuse admi- 
nistration of sweet oil, when the bite 
happened on any part of the animal 
except its feet, legs, or thighs; but, 
when bitten in the latter places, we 
have not yet discovered any method to 
prevent or check an immediate morti- 
fication from taking place, and ending, 
within fourteen hours, in death. 
Much valuable cattle, and many use- 
ful dogs, have thus perished. Amongst 
other sufferers, I had the ill-luck last 
summer to lose in this manner a beau- 
tiful and excellent little Spaniel, worth 
ten quineas; whilst another of her 
species, and a Newfoundland dog, re- 
covered, being only bitten about the 
head. An instant anointment of the 
poor animal with the fat of his enemy 
I have heard recommended; but 
hardly any opportunity can ever offer 
of ascertaining its efficacy, as the viper, 
after he has bitten any creature, sud- 
denly vanishes into his subterraneous 
cell. 

Should any of your numerous cor- 
respondents take the trouble, through 
this vehicle, to answer my enquiry, by 
acquainting me with a certain cure for 
viper-bites in all parts, it will at once 
evince his humanity, and infinitely 
oblige, 
A Friend to the Animal Creation. 

