

[^Sample 1: article - 1798_GM_0294^]

|P_294
Mr. Urban, 
April 10. 

YOUR Review on Dr. Bree's En- 
quiry on disordered Respiration 
induces me to send you my case, as it 
may throw some additional light on 
the subject, and assist those labouring 
under the like complaint with what I 
find relief from. Nearly 20 years ago, 
I was attacked with a pain about the 
præcordia, and a shortness of breath, 
but not constant. I applied to two of 
the faculty personally, and, by letter, 
to a third. The first said the complaint 
was seated in the heart; no immediate 
danger, but remediless. The physi- 
cian written to prescribed hemlock; 
which I took for some time without ei- 
ther good or bad effect. I began after 
|P_295
this to find all strong scents disagree 
with, me, particularly perfumes (mare- 
schalle the most terrible enemy of all); 
and all kinds of spice in food; some- 
times my speech was taken away for 
hours; at others the paroxysm so vio- 
lent as to threaten strangulation, the 
veins in my face and throat swelling 
with the convulsive struggles, and 
would long since, probably, have ter- 
minated my existence by the rupture 
of a blood-vessel, if (thanks to God, 
and the memory of a dear deceased 
physical relation,) I had not been ac- 
quainted with the virtues of laudanum. 
I take (in water) from 7 to 20, 30, 40 
drops, or more, according to the vio- 
lence or duration of the paroxysm; 
not that I, or those about me, ever 
lose time in counting the exact num- 
ber, as the quantity may be pretty 
well guessed at (though I would not 
advise any person unacquainted with 
this medicine or its effect to do so), 
which in a little time tranquillizes the 
agitation of the whole system, and I 
am restored to perfect ease and compo- 
sure, except, sometimes feeling a little 
lassitude after a very violent fit. I must 
add this particular, that, in what I 
call an extreme bad one, it so far re- 
sembles the hydrophobia (which, as 
one of your correspondents some time 
ago very justly remarked, shou'd rather 
be termed dyspepsia), the swallowing of 
liquids is so exceeding painful, from 
the difficulty of breathing, that I have 
held the cup, containing what I knew 
to be my only remedy, for a moment 
or two with a degree of dread, till I 
summoned my utmost resolution. In 
this it differs too from a fit of the asth- 
ma, that it is not relieved by a draught 
of strong coffee or tea; for, when it 
had been brought on at the time of 
drinking those refreshments by the ar- 
rival into the company of some perfu- 
med beau or belle, I have attempted 
in vain to swallow either, or to drink 
any more in the course of the day. 
And here give me leave to hint to the 
faculty to avoid the use of perfumes, 
as I have frequently suffered by those 
gentlemen. When my complaint has 
been brought on by inadvertently 
swallowing spice in cookery; I have 
sometimes found acids relieve me. I 
am very sure serous phlegm has no- 
thing to do with my disorder; nor can 
I think it any species of asthma, nei- 
ther foggy, thick, or frosty, weather 
brings it on; nor do I find it more in 
London; and I can go up a steep hill or 
stairs without the least inconvenience. I 
do not pretend to physical, much less to 
anatomical, knowledge; but I appre- 
hend the complaint is occasioned by an 
extreme quick circulation of the blood, 
as my pulse almost constantly beats 
near 100 strokes in a minute without 
being in the least feverish. When 
from any stimulation this velocity is 
increased, I imagine the impetus is too 
great for my heart, if I properly ex- 
press it, as I feel an immediate pain 
there. I do not much think there is a 
polypus, or any kind of formation, as I 
can sleep on it; besides, I should sup- 
pose, in that case, there would be a 
constant uneasy sensation and weight. 
Whether there is any degree of ossifi- 
cation, or varicose veins or arteries, 
neither I, nor the most skilful anato- 
mist, I should suppose, could ascertain 
whilst I am alive. I have no doubt of 
the soundness of my lungs, but fancy 
they are not strong, as my voice is not, 
nor can I read aloud for any length of 
time. If I am excited to laughter, it 
is rather painful; sighing exceedingly 
so; but, as the latter is a voluntary 
emotion, I can refrain from it; nor 
am I subject to a depression of spirits, 
for which, in some measure, I may 
thank the quickness of my circulation; 
though I have the vanity to think I 
possess much mental courage and reso- 
lution, if I may be allowed to make a 
difference betwixt mental and bodily 
courage. My state of health has been, 
exclusive of this complaint, good, since 
it has come upon me; I have never 
had a fever or cough, though liable to 
both when young. Accustoming my- 
self to a great deal of air preserves me 
from catching cold; and I am neces- 
sarily obliged to a moderate diet. Wa- 
ter has been my constant beverage for 
many years, though I do not find a 
glass of wine occasionally hurts me; 
but it would, no doubt, be highly im- 
proper for me to habituate myself to 
any diet that would tend to increase 
the quantity of my blood. When it 
has unfortunately happened that my 
breath has met with repeated attacks, 
and I find it continues short for some 
days together, I pursue a vegetable 
diet for a time. 

I have occasionally mentioned my 
being so disordered from the effect of 
effluvia to the Faculty (for I have ne- 
ver, since the beginning of it, con- 
sulted any for relief from it, as I form 
|P_296
no hope of a cure), when they almost 
always use that indefinite term ner- 
vous; and, some years ago, I was 
over-persuaded by a friend to take 
asafœtida drops, by recommendation 
from her apothecary, under that no- 
tion; but it had like to have effectually
cured me. Indeed, very few medi- 
cines would agree with me, either from 
their disagreeable or aromatic taste. I 
have formerly attempted both cold and 
sea-bathing; but, as it generally gave 
me an intense head-ach, especially if I 
plunged in, my deceased relation told 
me I endangered rupturing some blood- 
vessel. His last kind advice was, to use 
my own reason; which tells me to 
keep myself as tranquil as possible, 
though I cannot say a hurry of spirits 
affects my breath in particular. On re- 
perusal of your account of Dr. Bree's 
publication, I find you say you cannot 
specify with accuracy the effluvia of 
many articles you suspect injurious to 
some constitutions. In my catalogue, 
heated iron, such as Register, and Bu- 
zaglo's stoves, are inimical to me; 
warm vinegar; all fresh paint; white 
less so than coloured; bread just drawn 
from the oven; new hay; fœtid smells 
not quite so bad as those of a pleasanter 
kind, perhaps not so subtle; nor a 
smoky fire worse than in common to 
every one; rice I never found any 
smell in; only passing by a druggist's 
shop, when they have had any power- 
ful drugs opened, has given me a fit; 
and a distiller's will give me a slight 
touch, but I generally stop my nose 
and hasten by all those dangerous bu- 
sinesses. This account, Mr. Urban, I 
leave to your judgement to publish to 
your medical readers, if you think it 
will be of any utility to the investiga- 
tion of the subject. 
E. 

