

[^Sample 1: article - 1798_GM_0467^]

|P_467
Mr. Urban, 
Banks of Ken, May 1. 

BEING fond of travelling, I lately 
amused myself in a short excursion 
through the Western parts of North- 
Britain. I cannot express the delight 
I felt in contemplating the bold and 
romantic scenery which peculiarly cha- 
racterizes that part of our island; and 
which, to the Naturalist and the Poet, 
presents objects infinitely more inte- 
resting than the richest scenes of culti- 
vated nature. The stupendous moun- 
tains of granite, which every where 
strike the eye, afford awful monuments 
of those revolutions by fire which the 
earth must at some period have under- 
gone. And the Antiquary is often for- 
ced to bow with reverence at those vene- 
rable ruins where the Druids worshiped 
their gods, and taught the pure pre- 
cepts of a simple morality to a rude 
and honest race. 
Amid these dim recesses, undisturb'd 
By noisy folly, or discordant vice, 
Of Nature sung they, and of Nature's God. 

|P_468
These rural pleasures, however, ex- 
quisite as they are, will, I doubt, be 
little felt or relished by those who have 
all their lives been cooped up within 
the narrow confines of the Metropolis. 
The Philosopher, who has been accus- 
tomed from his infancy to artificial ob- 
jects, is apt to consider the delight 
which the lover of Nature experiences, 
to be merely an ideal charm, which 
exists only in the fond fancy of the 
Poet or the Enthusiast. Nor is he less 
in danger or error in his moral conclu- 
sions. Familiarized merely to the 
pomp and luxury of the "great City, "
he is apt to suppose that all mankind 
are rapidly carried down the fatal 
streams of degeneracy and corruption; 
to contrast the puny race of cockneys, 
he rencontres in Bond street or Hyde- 
park, with the antient sons of the moun- 
tains, whose frames were braced by 
temperance and toil, and whose hearts 
were ever open to benevolence and ho- 
nest virtue. 

But, sir, these prejudices will va- 
nish when he takes a minuter survey 
even of his own island. Let him view 
the Scotch peasant on his native moun- 
tains, and he will perceive the same 
honest and virtuous heart, cased in 
the same vigorous frame. To use a 
favourite stanza of Mr. Cowper, he 
will perceive, 

"An honest heart close button'd to the chin, 
Broad cloth without, and a warm heart 
within."

It is not a very unusual thing in this 
part of Scotland, to see a peasant 
healthy and vigorous in the 80th year 
of his life. Lately visiting that ro- 
mantic county of Scotland which goes 
by the name of Galloway, I met with 
a very curious fact, which strikingly 
confirms those remarks, and with 
which I shall finish my letter. After 
a journey over very steep and rugged 
mountains, I found myself at the side 
of the beautiful river Ken, which 
washes the most fertile plains of this 
county. It happened on that day, that 
a fête-champêtre was to be celebrated 
on its banks in honour of a bridge, the 
foundation of which had just been laid 
with great masonic pomp. I had the 
honour of being one of the party at 
this rural feast. Observing a groupe of 
old men making extremely merry at 
one of the tables, I enquired of the 
gentleman who presided at the feast, 
who they were, and why they were 
placed together? He informed me, 
that they were 17 old men, inhabitants 
of the small burgh of New Galloway, 
in his own estate, whose ages exactly 
amounted to 1264 years [/1./]; the whole 
inhabitants of this little town being 
only 270 souls. I believe, sir, there 
is not a town in Europe, of the same 
number of inhabitants, where so great 
a number of old men could be 
mustered, all in good health; and it 
affords a striking proof of the salubrity 
of this beautiful part of Scotland, as 
well as of the temperate lives of its 
inhabitants. Naturalists affirm that 
country to be most healthful where the 
atmosphere is kept in continual circu- 
lation, and where there is no stagna- 
ting waters. Hence the high hills 
which form the bold features of this 
country, and the number of streams 
which wash them on all sides, cannot 
fail to make it equally healthy and ro- 
mantic. For, the pure air which the 
peasant breathes from his great eleva- 
tion animates the spirits, braces the 
nerves, and strengthens the vital prin- 
ciple. 
W. G. 


[^1. 
* Bailie M'Millan, 77; Bailie Clugston, 
76; Bailie Murray, 75; Bailie Martin, 
73; Andrew Muir, 78; William M'Cly- 
mont, 70; William M'Naught, 70; 
William Steinson, 70; Robert Sinclair, 
75; John Barber, 80; Alexander M'Cluer, 
75; Thomas Scott, 75; Robert Garmo- 
ry, 77; William M'Clieve, 72; Kenmore 
Turner, 76; David Gyler, 72; Samuel 
M'Caw, 73. 
^]