

[^Sample 1: article - 1798_GM_0919^]

|P_919
Mr. Urban, 
Chard, Somerset, Nov. 14. 

WITH the sensible writer of the 
letter signed Humanus, who 
takes the lead in your last, I perfectly 
agree; for, I am convinced, having 
lately gone through your Magazines 
from their commencement to the pre- 
sent period, that they abound with im- 
portant medical hints and well-narra- 
ted cases, sufficient to fill several vo- 
lumes. With the good Humanus, I 
also am deeply impressed with concern 
whenever I recollect the ravages made, 
and that are still, I am afraid, making, 
by the Yellow Fever, since it seems to 
have baffled the united skill of Physick 
and Philosophy: Philosophers and 
Physicians appear equally ignorant of 
its nature. As to their notion of its 
arising from a diffusion of the Septic
|P_920
Nitrous Acid, this, I fear, will be 
found an hypothesis only generated by 
the ardent imagination of modern 
chemists. It is curious to observe, 
that the Gas, supposed to contain the 
germ of the disease on the other side 
the Atlantic, is the very vapour em- 
ployed here to subdue the Miasm ge- 
nerated in the progress of putrescence, 
as is shewn by a publication of Dr. 
Carmichael Smyth. 

"Who shall decide when Doctors disagree? "

It is well known, Mr. Urban, the 
most ingenious writers on Pestilence 
suppose its rise, spread, and continu- 
ance, owing to a vicious impregnation 
of the atmosphere. Indeed, that the 
air is susceptible and capable, for a 
time, of retaining highly-noxious, nay, 
deleterious taints, none, who have 
thought deeply on this subject, doubt. 
We find, when the Plague raged in 
London, it was customary to light 
large fires, in hopes to correct the mor- 
bid state of this life-sustaining fluid; a 
method, by-the-bye, of combating 
Pestilence justly condemned by the ju- 
dicious Mead and others. 

Drs. Priestley and Ingenohousz have 
proved, that Nature has furnished 
vegetables with the powers of correct- 
ing and restoring to its vital functions 
vitiated (hydrogenous) air, by having 
bestowed on them an appetite to receive 
on their pabulum foul, and, by their 
organized œconomy, to return pure 
(oxyginated) air. 

Is it improbable, that the kind and 
infinite y-wise Governor and Father of 
Nature has also directed, that a reci- 
procity of action should be continually 
parried on between the surface of the 
earth and the immediately superin- 
cumbent atmosphere, favourable to 
animal health? 

It is well known that, in seasons of 
long-continued drought, the ground 
perspires considerably (see the Bp. of 
Landaff's Chemical Essays). Morn- 
ing and evening mists hovering near 
the earth's surface are a demonstra- 
tion of this fact. It has been for 
ages a prevailing notion, and the 
opinion appears well founded, that 
ground newly turned up gives out 
something extremely salutary; since 
it is notorious that persons labouring 
under pulmonary complaints have re- 
ceived benefit; and that, even in bad 
cases, cures have been effected by fol- 
lowing the plough. One of the wri- 
ters on the Yellow Fever of Philadel- 
phia observes, that persons employed 
in digging graves remarkably escaped 
infection. 

Quere. In cities (flagrante morbo), 
the surfaces of which are, I believe, 
always closely covered with a compact 
thick pavement of granite, or ma- 
terials of the same kind, totally 
preventing all communication between 
earth and air, might not a rational 
hope be entertained of the most bene- 
ficial consequences ensuing from unpa- 
ving and ploughing up the streets, 
lanes, &c. of places infected with un- 
commonly-destructive pestilential epi- 
demics, more especially if they seemed 
endemic? The ploughing should be 
repeated every three or four days, cut- 
ting in something deeper each time; 
and the surfaces, should the weather 
be sultry and dry, frequently sprinkled 
by means of a water-cart. 

Quere. By pavements preventing 
the action and re-action of earth and 
air, may not a most salutary process in 
the œconomy of Nature be destroyed, 
and be among the causes of populous 
cities having been emphatically called 
the "graves of mankind? " Hence 
may arise, in my humble opinion, in- 
deed do arise, Fevers, and those of the 
worst type, as destructive, and there- 
fore as much to be dreaded and 
guarded against, as the genuine 
Plague. 

I am seriously impressed with a belief 
that, during the prevalence of such a 
fell ravager as Humanus justly styles 
the Yellow Fever, now, or lately, 
raging in America, the state of the 
air might be considerably meliorated, 
and the malignity of the disease (won- 
derfully because suddenly) checked, 
by the simple method which I have, 
with the best intention, pointed out. 
The known philanthropy of Mr. Ur- 
ban will, I doubt not, enable me to 
disseminate my ideas on this most im- 
portant subject; and thus convey them 
across the Atlantick; where, perhaps, 
they may catch the eye of some ma- 
gistrate, humane and sensible as the 
writer in the last Gentleman's Maga- 
zine, whose letter emboldened me to 
meet the public eye with these hints. 

Yours, &c. Medicus. 

