

[^Sample 1: article - 1798_GM_0479^]

|P_479
Mr. Urban, 
June 6. 

IN answer to your correspondent, 
p. 392, who is desirous of knowing 
a remedy for the bite of that dangerous 
reptile the viper, I beg to acquaint 
him that the fat of the animal, or vi- 
per-oil, which may always be had at 
Covent-garden of the viper-catchers, 
is said to be the only specifick used by 
them, and considered as infallible. A 
gentleman of my acquaintance says, 
that he has known goose-grease ap- 
plied to the limb bitten, and well rub- 
bed-in, cure dogs: and I was told by 
another that, in the Highlands of Scot- 
land, where they are said to be very 
numerous in the extensive heaths of 
that country, the people apply a com- 
mon oatmeal poultice, which soon dis- 
perses the swelling. In the East In- 
dies, where serpents of every species, 
and of the most deadly nature, abound, 
they have their conjurers, who pretend 
to cure the bite of the Gomunda, or 
hood-snake, by charms; but there is 
nothing they rely so much upon as an 
immediate application of the actual 
cautery, where it can be done with 
safety; and I have myself witnessed its 
beneficial effects in more than one in- 
stance. But that neither of these re- 
medies can be depended upon as speci- 
ficks to the venom of the viper, and 
to prevent its spreading itself into the 
habit, the following relation will shew. 

I had the misfortune to be bitten 
last summer by a viper on the outside 
of my right leg, a little above the an- 
cle. I did not see the reptile, as I was 
among some shrubs at the time, which 
concealed it from my view. I imagine 
I must have trod upon it, as it was 
basking in the sun. I felt a smart 
burning sensation, accompanied at first 
with an intense itching, which soon 
went off, but the burning continued, 
which I could only compare to the 
action of a caustick. I looked for the 
animal, but it was gone. There was 
a spot of blood upon my stocking, the 
size of half a crown. As I was not 
far from my house, I immediately 
went home, and, on taking off my 
stocking, I perceived the part swelled 
and livid to the circumference of two 
inches, with two punctures made by 
the teeth of the reptile; and there was 
a degree of numbness to the touch. I 
ordered a large case-knife to be made 
red hot, and immediately cauterized 
the entire surface of the part swelled 
with my own hand; and, to make 
sure, applied the knife a second time. 
I think that this operation was per- 
formed within less than a quarter of an 
hour from receiving the bite. I then 
anointed that foot and leg well with 
viper-oil, and the whole surface of my 
body with common olive-oil, both 
which I repeated that evening, and 
applied a poultice of bread and milk 
and oil to the wound. I continued the 
same applications, and repeated the oil 
universally three times the next day. 
My ancle and the lower part of my leg 
swelled considerably, became very 
painful; and, the second morning, I 
found the joint so stiff that I could not 
move it, and it was with the utmost 
difficulty I could get down stairs; and 
the burning heat in it was so great that 
I could not bear it under the bed- 
cloaths. I now began to be rather 
alarmed, and sent for my surgeon, 
who seemed to think the precautions I 
had taken sufficient, and that the pain 
and swelling might be occasioned by 
the cautery, and dressed it as a com- 
mon burn. I felt from the first a de- 
gree of irritability and quickness of 
pulse, and want of rest, and a sinking 
in the bed as if my head wanted sup- 
port, although sustained by two pil- 
lows and a bolster. The third evening 
I felt my extremities unusually cold, 
although the weather was uncommonly 
warm, the thermometer, in a North- 
ern aspect, having been that day above 
80. On going to-bed, I had the same 
sinking sensation, and soon after was 
attacked with a violent burning pain 
and contraction of the stomach and 
præcordia, as if the whole region was 
compressed with a hot iron ligature, 
attended with palpitations of the heart, 
great difficulty of breathing bordering 
on suffocation, spasms, cramps, and 
numbness, darting from the centre to 
the extremities of my hands like elec- 
trical shocks, with a disposition to con- 
tract, which I exerted my utmost mus- 
cular force to counteract. I was in 
such torture that I did not expect to 
survive till the morning. I took 40 
drops of juniper peppermint, and re- 
peated the dose, without relief. My 
wife would have sent for my doctor; 
but, as he lived at the distance of eight 
|P_480
miles, I told her that it was needless, 
for that I should be either dead or well 
before he could come. She then fo- 
mented my stomach with flannels 
wrung out of hot water; and as the 
end of an hour I felt some ease, and 
the above symptoms gradually went 
off. I then took a large wine-glass 
full of Clarke's gout cordial, and im- 
mediately felt the blood run warm to 
my extremities, which till now had 
remained cold. When I related my 
sufferings to my doctor next morning, 
he said that, if an absorption of the 
poison had taken place, I should feel it 
in the lymphaticks; and, on feeling 
the inguinal gland, I found it hard, 
sore, and swelled to the size of a nut- 
meg. I had likewise a slight numb- 
ness from my chin extending up to my 
right ear, accompanied by a slight de- 
gree of puffiness. This soon subsided; 
but the gland in my groin continued 
sore and enlarged for several weeks. 
At first the wound had only a gleety 
waterish sanious discharge; but, in 
about ten days it began to mend, but 
continued uncommonly irritable and 
sore till nearly healed, which did not 
take place till full seven weeks from 
the accident. The skin remained of a 
yellowish jaundice-like hue, wherever 
the swelling had extended, for a con- 
siderable time after, with a purplish 
spot and soreness about the ancle; and 
I felt a considerable degree of weak- 
ness in that ancle, with a slight numb- 
ness in my heel, till January last, full 
six months from the accident. I had 
several blind boils and blotches come 
out upon that leg and thigh, and one 
on the opposite ancle, in the course of 
my cure. I felt a great degree of lan- 
guor and lassitude for above a month, 
with a loss of appetite. 

You will see from the above narra- 
tive, Mr. Urban, that no precautions 
can be considered as an effectual secu- 
rity against the bite of these dangerous 
reptiles. I took nothing internally. 
No doubt, the viper-oil and unctions 
were of service; but I attribute my 
recovery principally to the cautery, 
which, I am persuaded, must have de- 
stroyed great part of the poison; and 
I have the fullest conviction in my own 
mind, that my life was preserved by 
that application, which I would strong- 
ly recommend to all persons who may 
be so unhappy as to experience the like 
misfortune; and I have no doubt that 
it would be equally effectual with ani- 
mals. 
Wm. Young. 

⁂  V. and B. says, "A solution of 
common salt in warm water, applied early, 
and continued some time to the wound, is 
the best application. "


