

[^Sample 1: article - 1798_GM_0665^]

|P_665
Mr. Urban, 
15th Day 7th Month. 

BEING an admirer of truth, I can- 
not let pass so palpable a deviation 
from it as that which appeared in your 
last monthly Miscellany, p. 479, by a 
gentleman whose signature is Young. 
He very goodnaturedly, and, no doubt, 
with a good intention, recommends, 
as the only preventative for the bite of 
a viper, its oil, or, as he styles it, the 
animal's fat. No doubt, when he is 
acquainted with the process for ob- 
taining it, he will not have the credu- 
lity to recommend this composition to 
those who may be afflicted in the same 
manner as himself. 

This is an analysis of what is sold 
by the venders of genuine vipers oil. 

2 oz. of linseed oil (ol. lini sem- 
per expressionem). 

1 oz. of rancid lard. 

Mix them together on a slow fire till 
the whole appears of an uniform mix- 
ture. This, when cold, is sold as vipers 
fat: perhaps as much efficacy in this 
as even the animal's fat itself, and, no 
doubt, a cheaper way of imposing on 
the publick. Having thus thrown 
aside the aid of quackery, must now 
adopt the reasoning of reason. In case 
of an incised wound from any poison- 
ous reptile, it can only be removed by 
sucking it with the mouth, or by means 
of a cupping glass. But the former is 
to be preferred on account of the suc- 
tion being applied immediately, and 
the adhesion of the lips and mouth 
being considerably more powerful than 
the tedious procrastination of cupping. 

Dr. Mead recommends the person 
who sucks the wound to hold warm 
oil in his mouth, as this may tend to 
obtund any slight inflammation which 
may take place on the lips in conse- 
quence thereof; and it appears, from 
his and the Abbé Fontana's experi- 
ments, that no mischief can ensue 
from retaining the poison, even in an 
undiluted state, in the mouth. The 
second means of destroying the venom 
is this, actual cautery, or the applica- 
|P_666
tion of volatile alkali, which, from its 
corrosive quality, having the power of 
altering any animal substance (when 
the cuticle is off), may thereby so af- 
fect the poison as to destroy its virulence. 

We know that a solution of emetic 
tartar (ant. tart.) dissolved in water, 
and injected into the veinous system of 
a dog, will produce convulsions and 
death. Thence possibly, as in the hy- 
drophobia, constant ablution with cold 
water may be of essential use. For 
this purpose a tea-kettle, constantly 
replenished with water, should be 
poured, the distance of two or three 
yards, on the part or parts affected, 
for the space of five or six hours toge- 
ther, and repeated occasionally. This 
may, by its condensing cold and conti- 
nual washing, prove beneficial. An 
emetic taken soon after the accident 
may, by the agitation which it pro- 
duces on the nerves, overcome those 
spasms with which the muscles, in 
consequence of fear and irritation, are 
more or less affected. Here we may 
exclaim, would that John Brown, who 
has left so great of worth and genius 
behind, had lived to throw some light 
on this melancholy subject, which, too 
frequently being left to the skill of old 
women and charms, baffles all that 
human art or humanity can suggest! 

I do not agree with V. and B. that 
oak-bark is equally efficacious as Pe- 
ruvian (cortex Peruvianus). Several 
fair trials have been made by eminent 
practitioners, and all agree in its fai- 
lure. All parts of the oak are styptic, 
binding, and useful in all hœmorrhages, 
both external and internal. The bark 
infused makes an excellent astringent 
gargarism for the relaxation of the 
uvula, or for small ulcers affecting the 
pallet, &c. 
Pupillus Chironis. 

