

[^Sample 1: article - 1798_GM_1029^]

|P_1029
Mr. Urban, 
Dec. 7. 

I AM pleased to see that my hints 
respecting the use of raw carrots
in the Sea-scurvy have served to call 
forth the attention of some of your 
readers to this disorder. It would 
seem that your correspondent (p. 945) 
imagines he has suggested a new re- 
medy against this complaint, when he 
proposes the aqua vitriolica diluta, or 
small spirit of vitriol; but I beg leave 
to inform him, that not only this, but 
other mineral acids, have been em- 
ployed for this purpose; and in many 
instances they have had a beneficial 
effect; but, on the whole, they have 
been found much less powerful in 
counteracting the Marine-scurvy than 
the vegetable acids, and more espe- 
cially than fresh fruits and fresh roots. 
The elixir of vitriol (which is nothing 
more than spirit of vitriol mixed with 
brandy or spirit of wine, spiced with 
cinnamon, ginger, &c.) was recom- 
mended long ago by Huxham; and 
Dr. Addington (father of the present 
Speaker of the House of Commons) 
proposed the spirit of sea salt, 10 drops 
of which, added to a pint of fresh wa- 
ter, give it an agreeable acidity. He 
directed 20 drops to be taken by each 
patient every day. The nitrous acid 
has been tried by others; but, next to 
the fresh juice of lemons, vinegar, spi- 
ced with ginger and mustard-seed, is 
the best acid that can be employed in 
the Sea scurvy. 

Your correspondent says, that roots 
of every kind (meaning all kinds of 
esculent roots) are antiscorbutic; and 
adds, that turneps would be as good 
as carrots. But I will give some rea- 
sons why they are not. Turneps are 
scarcely at all nutritious (though nu- 
triment is much wanted in the 
Scurvy); and they are, moreover, 
so cold and watery, that, if they were 
eaten raw (as they must be when in- 
tended to act as antiscorbutics) they 
would produce violent flatulence and 
colic, which might end in death. It 
is not so with carrots; they possess 
much nutritive power; and, being 
aromatic, may be eaten raw, in con- 
siderable quantities, without any of 
the bad consequences just mentioned. 
On account of their perishable nature, 
it would be impossible to keep turneps 
beyond a week or two at sea; few 
vegetable substance spoil and rot 
sooner than they do; whereas carrots 
may be preserved (in the way I have 
before mentioned) for the space of 10 
or 12 months. Packed up in casks, 
they would not occupy more room than 
the casks of sour-crout, oranges and 
lemons, apples, &c. which are now 
taken on-board during Winter-crui- 
ses; and, in regard to expence, they 
would certainly cost much less than 
the vegetable substances last-men- 
tioned. But your correspondent re- 
marks, that "the saccharine juices 
of carrots do not appear from experi- 
ence to be equal to acescent juices. "
I do not assert that they are equal to 
the fresh acid juices of lemons, oran- 
ges, and apples; I only maintain 
that they are superior to these acid 
juices after they have become spoilt 
by long keeping: and that, as these 
fruits are exceedingly dear, as they 
cannot always be procured in suffi- 
cient quantity, and as, moreover, they 
cannot be kept for much length of 
time without losing their salutary pro- 
perties; such roots as the garden-car- 
rots, which are not very dear, may 
always be procured in this country, 
will keep well, and are known to be 
antiscorbutic, are, all circumstances 
considered, the best vegetable sub- 
stances that can be employed for the 
prevention of the Scurvy on-board 
of our ships. When your correspon- 
dent slights the sweet juices of vege- 
tables as antiscorbutics, he seems not 
to know that melasses have been 
found of excellent dietetic use in the 
|P_1030
Marine-scurvy: and that the fresh
juice of the sugar-cane cures it effec- 
tually. 

I see no objection to letting the sai- 
lors have their daily allowance of wa- 
ter of grog moderately acidulated with 
spirit of vitriol, or spiced vinegar, at 
the same time that they are using the 
raw carrots; but it must be remem- 
bered, that the acidulated drink alone 
is not an adequate remedy. 

A Friend to the Navy. 

