

[^Sample 1: article - 1798_GM_0739^]

|P_739
Mr. Urban, 
10th Day, 9th Month. 

IN answer to the benign enquiries of 
your medical philanthropist, p. 647, 
whose empirical faith has passed such 
encomiums on Ward's Drops, may 
these stubborn truths come not too late 
to unravel the dangerous clue of phar- 
maceutical nostrums! 

When we hear a man exclaim of 
purifiers of the blood, medical science 
will pity his ignorance; but when hu- 
manity usurps the throne of Truth, 
though conscious of the error, we ad- 
mire the goodness and purity of his 
heart, and forget to censure where 
correction is due. Such do I consider 
the queries of Homo, and as such will 
I consider them in this friendly reply. 

The analysis of Ward's White 
Drops is this, as attested by himself, 
and chemically expounded. Equal 
parts of white copperas (vitriolum al- 
bum), previously calcined, and rough 
petre (nitrum crudum), reduced in 
powder, and intimately triturated. 
These are to be placed in a glass re- 
tort well luted; which ingredients, 
exposed to a continual heat, will be- 
come a powerful aquafortis. Place 
16 oz. of this caustic liquor in a bolt- 
head retort about a quarter full; add 
to this of the volatile alkali well sub- 
limed (ammonia pp'ta) 7 oz. When 
the fumes arising from this mixture 
cease, add 4 oz. of quicksilver (argen- 
tum vivum) to each 16 oz. of solution, 
letting it stand till the globular spheres 
of the mercury apparently disappear. 
Now take the materials from the re- 
tort, and place them in some open 
vessel, which set in a sand-heat, and 
evaporate till a pellicle appears on the 
surface; then remove it to some cool 
place, there to congeal in chrystalline 
prisms. Dissolve 16 oz. of this salt in 
3 pounds of rose-water (P. L); and 
this, again committed to fire and fil- 
tration, forms the glorious simple called 
Ward's White Drops. Eheu! risum 
teneatis, amici! Behold the complex 
indication of this fine antiscorbutic!
Ever mayest thou ward off its experi- 
ment. In the first place, to prove the 
stupidity of Mr. Ward, observe the 
elaborate and absurd means of procu- 
ring aquafortis, which ought to be 
pure nitrous acid (acidum nitrosum). 
To any chemical friend this observa- 
tion will be properly understood, and 
therefore requires no farther com- 
menting on. 

The use of rose-water has not the 
least shadow of reason to the efficacy 
of this uncertain composition. 

In short, this medicament is no 
more than nitrous mercuriated salt com- 
bined with nitrous ammoniacal salt. 

The medicine, thus prepared, is ne- 
ver twice of the same strength: hence 
|P_740
the fallacy of administering it. The 
dose can never be ascertained; hence 
the absurdity of prescribing it. Have 
we not pure nitrous salt (nitrum puri- 
ficatum)? Have we not mercury in the 
most simple and certain preparations? 
In short, have we not all the boasted 
panegyricks and virtues of this com- 
pendious solution in a few saline sub- 
stances? Who then, let me ask, would 
try the uncertain effects of any medi- 
cine, when the most unequivocal truths 
expose its failure? Yet, with all its 
demerits, let not the hand of illiberal 
refinement crush the good which some- 
times results from this alexipharmic in 
certain scorbutic taints; taints of a pe- 
culiar virus, which frequently receive 
more benefit from this than any other 
solution of mercuriated salt. But, ah! 
let us not give way to this reasoning, 
lest the foolish credulity of this coun- 
try should misconceive the true mean- 
ing of our candour, and prefer the 
mysterious jargon of a quack to the 
practical professor of Nature, who, 
open to conviction, rushes not blindly 
with ignorance, nor hearkens to the 
lessons of improbability. 

Thus, having shewn to the eyes of 
the bigot a few simple observations, 
I take my leave: and, that the elu- 
cidation thrown upon this subject may 
prove grateful to thy humane enqui- 
rer, is the sincere wish of thy obliged 
friend, 

Pupillus Chironis. 

