

[^Sample 1: article - 1798_GM_0823^]

|P_823
Mr. Urban, 
October 15. 

EVERY hint that has a tendency to 
better the condition of British 
sailors, the brave assertors of our coun- 
try's independence, will, I am cer- 
tain, be well received by the Editor of 
the Gentleman's Magazine. There 
are some evils to which this class of 
men are exposed, which the utmost at- 
tention on the part of Government, 
as well as on the part of their respec- 
tive commanders, cannot at all times 
prevent. You will perceive that I al- 
lude to the diseases incident to a sea- 
faring life. Among these, the most 
frequent, and that which unfits the 
greatest number of sailors for service on 
cruises that do not extend to the warm 
latitudes, is the Scurvy. Of late 
years, several naval physicians and 
surgeons have done much towards the 
prevention and cure of this disorder; 
but one of the antiscorbutics now in 
use on-board of his Majesty's navy is 
liable to spoil, and thereby to produce 
a disorder in those who take it almost 
as bad as that which it is employed to 
cure. This observation applies to the 
juice of lemons; which, in its recent 
state, is an excellent remedy, but, af- 
ter keeping in casks for some weeks, 
ferments and spoils; and in this state 
disorders the stomach and bowels of 
the patients to a very great degree. 

Reflecting on this subject, it oc- 
curred to me, that some vegetables of 
our own growth might, as antiscor- 
butics, answer as well as lemon-juice, 
while they would have an advantage 
over it in keeping better, and cost- 
ing Government less money. The 
root of the garden-carrot is that to 
which I have given the preference. 
If it possesses no acid qualities, it is 
not on that account the less proper for 
preventing or curing the Sea-scurvy. 
It abounds in a nutritious saccharine 
juice, and is slightly aromatic. These 
are desirable properties against the 
complaint under consideration; but, 
to experience the good effects of these 
properties, the roots must be eaten raw. 
There is nothing unpleasant in this; 
on the contrary, it is what the com- 
mon people often do by choice. These 
roots would keep well during the 
longest voyage, packed up in casks, 
having the interstices filled with sand. 
|P_824
Each sailor might be allowed to eat one 
root every day, or every other day, ac- 
cording to the state of their health and 
the quantity of roots on-board. This 
measure has been recommended to the 
Lords of the Admiralty. Through 
the medium of your Publication, I 
wish to make it known to the masters 
and commanders of merchant vessels. 

A Friend to the Navy. 

