[^Bailey, Walter: Three kindes of peppers^] 
 
[}A 
Short Discourse of 
the three kindes of 
PEPPERS in common 
vse, and certaine special 
medicines made 
of the same, tending 
to the preseruation 
of 
health. 
1588}] 
 
[^A preface omitted.^] 
[^Extract 1, ff. A4r-C7r^] 
 
[^f.A4r^] 
[}Of the Spice called 
Pepper.}] 
 
THAT kind of spice 
which of the Greeke 
authors is called [^GREEK OMITTED^], 
the Latin writers 
do name Piper, and 
the apothecaries do 
terme the same as 
the Latinists. After 
the Arabike speech in Auicen it is read 
Fulful, in Serapio Fulfel. Garcia a physician 
to the viceroy of India, doth write, that 
the Arabians in these daies do call it Fulfil: 
and he addeth, that the greatest quantitie 
of this spice is nowe brought into 
Europe, out of the prouince of Malauar: 
and that the same is in that countrie language 
named Molonga. We in English do 
call it pepper: and much vse of this spice 
with vs is, in making broths, and in conditing 
meates. 
 
[}The kinds of Pepper.}] 
 
HEer it is to be noted, that many herbs 
of our writers are termed by the 
name of pepper. For the herbe called in 
[^f.A4v^] 
Latin Persicaria, in English Culrage, is of 
some named water pepper. The seede also 
of the herbe called Chamelea, is knowen 
to the herbarians by the name of hil pepper. 
Likewise the herbe which we call 
Stonecrop, is also named mouse pepper. 
And som do cal diptander, herbe pepper, 
and some sauery pepperwort. So the latter 
writers shew many other herbs vnder 
the name of pepper, and vnder pepperwort. 
For they refer to pepper euery kind 
of herbe which doth bite the toong as 
pepper doth. And beside the three kindes 
of pepper, which are best knowen by that 
name, we do read in the latter writers of 
some other kinds vnder that name: and 
so we read of pepper out of Æthiopia, 
which is of the learned rather referred to 
that spice which is called Carpesium, than 
to any kind of pepper. But properly and 
in true speech, this word in Latin Piper, 
and in English pepper, is to be vnderstood 
of one of the three peppers in common 
vse, of which one is named white pepper, 
the other blacke pepper, the third long 
pepper. Of the which three kinds, and not 
of the other things falsly named peppers, 
that confection so greatly commended in 
cold affections of the stomack, called Diatrion 
[^f.A5r^] 
pipereon, is made, and kept in our Apothecaries 
shops. So that these three 
kindes of peppers most properly do deserue 
the name of pepper, and are so most 
conueniently called: and the other things 
are rather by similitude so termed, for 
yeelding some taste like pepper, and therfore 
neuer knowen by the name of pepper 
without some addition, as Piper montanum, 
Piper murinum, &c. So that when we 
do read in any author this word Piper, or 
in English pepper without addition, we 
must vnderstand the same of one of these 
three peppers. 
 
The nauigations in these latter yeeres 
made by the Portingales into the east Indians, 
and by the Spaniards into the west 
Indians, hath made manifest to vs, how 
greatly the old authors, I meane Dioscorides, 
Galen, Plinie, Auicenna, Serapio, 
and other writers of the former time were 
deceiued in and about the historie of pepper. 
For first, all the ancient writers in 
their monuments haue deliuered to vs, 
that the three kindes of pepper in common 
vse are all three the fruit of one tree. 
For (say they) the pepper tree doth bear a 
long fruit, like vnto that which doth hang 
in hasell nut trees, and birch trees. And 
[^f.A5v^] 
they affirme, that this long fruit is the first 
rudiment of the pepper, which is called 
long pepper: after that this fruit being 
more ripe is disclosed, they take the seeds 
contained in it to be the white pepper, & 
the blacke pepper: such graines which are 
not perfectly ripe, they supposed to be 
white pepper, and those which are perfectly 
ripe, to be blacke pepper. So they concluded, 
that these three kinds were all the 
fruit of one tree, and differed only in that 
one was not so ripe as the other. But by 
the nauigations of the Portingals, and of 
the Spaniards into those countries, in 
which these pepper trees do growe, it is euident 
and well knowen, that the trees 
which do yeeld these three spices are diuers 
in kind. For the trauellers into those 
countries which haue seene the trees, and 
gathered the fruits, do witnes, that not 
one and the same tree, but diuers and different 
do beare these spices. And that the 
plants which do beare white pepper and 
blacke pepper are not trees of any bignes, 
but weake shrubs, which do clime vp 
by other trees, as an Iuie doth in this our 
countrie. And haue leaues like to the apple 
tree called Malum Assyrium, and do 
carrie their fruit in clusters, like the clusters 
[^f.A6r^] 
of grapes of vine trees, which are alway 
greene vntill they wax ripe. And Garcia, 
who liued in these parts, writeth, that 
the plant which yeeldeth the white pepper, 
doth in kind differ from that which 
beareth the blacke pepper, and yet are so 
like, that no man can know the one from 
the other, but they which do dwell there. 
For (saith he) they do so differ, as the vine 
tree which beareth the white grape, doth 
differ from that which yeeldeth the red 
grape: and as we cannot know the difference 
of these vine trees, but when the 
grape is ripe, so we cannot discerne the 
plant which yeeldeth the white pepper, 
from that which beareth the blacke pepper: 
and yet (saith he) it is certaine, that 
the same tree, which bringeth foorth the 
blacke pepper, doth not yeeld the white 
pepper. He saith also, that the white pepper 
tree is not so common in these countries 
as the other is, and that the same is 
not to be seene, but in certaine places of 
Malauar and Malachæ. The same Garcia 
writeth, that the tree, of which long pepper 
is gathered, doth greatly differ from 
the other forenamed pepper trees: and 
that long pepper is a fruit depending of 
the tree in like sort, as we see things to 
[^f.A6v^] 
hang downe in our hasell nut trees, and in 
our birch trees: and that this fruit wil neuer 
yeeld either white or blacke pepper. 
By this discourse we do vnderstand, that 
the pepper tree is not like to the Iuniper 
tree, as Plinie writeth in his 12. boke. And 
Garcia also saith, that the roote of the 
pepper tree is very little. So that it is not 
like to ginger, as some beleeued in Dioscorides 
time, nor like to the roote of Costus 
as Dioscorides writeth. And heerby 
also we are to vnderstand that the old saying 
is fabulous and vntrue, that pepper is 
made blacke with fire. For the marchants 
which brought the peppers, said, that serpents 
and venemous beasts did vse much 
to be vnder these pepper trees, and that 
they were driuen to fray away those serpents 
with making fires vnder the trees, 
before they durst gather the peppers, and 
so the pepper was made black by the fire. 
But now we learne by the histories penned 
by the latter writers, that all this is 
vntrue, and that blacke pepper is of that 
colour by his owne kinde, when it is ripe: 
and so that white pepper is of his owne 
kind, euen of that colour when it is ripe. 
As the red grape hath that colour naturally 
when it is ripe, and the white 
[^f.A7r^] 
grape keepeth his colour euen to his full 
ripenes. Wherefore those writers were 
much deceiued, which affirmed, that 
white and black pepper were of one tree: 
and that white pepper was the fruit not 
throughly ripe, and that blacke pepper 
was the same perfectly ripe. For (say they) 
as in our country, when we gather apples, 
all of the same tree are not of like ripenes, 
some not full ripe, some full ripe, some ouer 
ripe, and all are gathered at one time: 
so, say these men, when the marchants do 
gather pepper, some graines are throughly 
ripe, and they black and wrinkled, some 
not full ripe, and they whiter in colour, 
and smoothe not wrinkled. But it appeereth 
by that which they haue deliuered to 
vs, which haue seene and gathered both 
these kinds of peppers, that they are gathered 
of seuerall trees, and that ech doth 
perfectly ripe in his kind, and ech retaine 
his colour: the white graine when it is 
ripe keepeth the white colour, and the 
blacke pepper when it is ripe keepeth his 
blacke colour: Euen as the white grape 
being ripe remaineth white, and the red 
grape red, and yet ech do come of seuerall 
vine trees different in kinde. So we are to 
thinke of these kinds of pepper, that ech 
[^f.A7v^] 
doth come of his proper tree, and each ful 
ripe retaineth his naturall colour: the 
white pepper his, and the blacke his colour, 
as doth euidently appeere by that 
which Garcia hath written in his first 
booke De aromat. Indiæ. 
 
That the Greeke & ancient writers did 
erre in expressing the history of these peppers, 
it is no maruel: for in that their cou~tries 
were far distant from the prouinces 
fro~ whence these peppers came, that they 
themselues could not search out a truth, 
but followed the report of marchants, 
which tell many vntruthes, they were easily 
deceiued, and so did set down in their 
bookes for verities many vntrue relations 
of the marchants. 
 
But that the Arabians did commit the 
same errors, whose countrie was not far 
distant from the places where pepper 
doth grow, their grosse negligence in searching 
the true knowledge of simples, can 
not be excused, who would rather followe 
heerein that which was written by the 
Grecians, than themselues search out a 
truth. 
 
Matthiolus in his commentaries vpon 
Dioscorides witnesseth, that many pepper 
trees are set to be seene at Naples, and 
[^f.A8r^] 
at Venice, and diuers affirme, that these 
trees are planted in diuers places in Spain 
and in Portingall. But I could neuer vnderstand 
that any pepper tree was at any 
time brought into England. I haue often 
seene at Poole in Dorsetshire, and also in 
London, the whole clusters of pepper preserued 
in brine and in salt: these clusters 
are long and thin, not so thicke togither 
as the clusters of grapes. 
 
Long pepper is to be seene in euery 
shop: for the whole fruit is brought by 
the marchants gathered togither like 
scales, rough & vneuen, biting the toung 
like the other peppers. 
 
We do read of another kind of pepper 
brought out of the Indians, which the 
Portingals called Piemento de Rabo, in Latin 
Piper caudatum, and may be englished 
taile pepper. Clusius in his annotations in 
Garcia, seemeth to haue known this kind 
of pepper, and saith that it is like to the 
cubebs, and that it hangeth in clusters, is 
very spicie, and hath a little stalke or stem. 
This kind is not now brought: for the 
king of Portingall did forbid any to bring 
it, fearing least it might decay the price 
and sale of the other kindes. 
 
Monardis also in his booke De plantis 
[^f.A8v^] 
Indiæ, maketh mention of another kind of 
long pepper, different from the common 
long pepper, and is much hotter than the 
common long pepper, and more pleasant 
to the taste than blacke pepper. Where 
the latter writers in the historie of pepper 
do diuide long pepper into the garden 
and wild, this kind written of by Monardis 
is supposed to be the wilde long pepper, 
and the common long pepper, the 
garden or domesticall. 
 
The latter writers in the historie of 
pepper, do write of another kind of pepper, 
which they call Piper corniculatum, 
some call it Siliquastrum, which may bee 
englished, Codded pepper, bicause it beareth 
his graines in a cod or huske: and 
they describe this kinde to haue leaues 
like to the herbe called Nightshade, a 
square stalk of colour greene, ful of ioints, 
white flowers, and after them commeth 
the cod, at the first greenish, and after red, 
with a perfect smoothnes and slikenes: 
within that cod are flat graines, whitish, 
yellow, more biting in taste than pepper. 
These cods are not alway of one forme: 
for in some of the plants they are greater 
and longer, in some lesser and shorter: and 
the lesser kind they call pepper of Brasilia: 
[^f.B1r^] 
the greater they call pepper of Calecut, 
named after the countries from whence 
they are brought. The herbarians of our 
time do witnes, that this plant is set in diuers 
places in Italie, Spaine and Portingal: 
for that it is a goodly plant and faire to 
the eie, and the graines are vsed for pepper 
all the yere, and are thought to commend 
meates condited with them, better than 
common pepper. I did neuer see the 
plant, but the cods are common in the Apothecaries 
shops. It is supposed of many, 
that the olde Greeke authors haue not 
written any thing of this plant, but Actuarius 
seemeth to speake of this kinde of 
pepper, vnder the name of Capsicum. Amatus 
in his commentaries vpo~ Dioscorides 
affirmeth, that this kinde of pepper is that 
which Auicen in 2. tract. lib. 2. cap. 746. 
called Zinziber caninum. Thus much of the 
true historie of pepper, as well out of the 
old as latter writers. 
 
[}How to choose pepper.}] 
 
DIoscorides writing of three kinds of 
pepper, doth giue signes and notes 
to choose onely blacke pepper: for that 
as it seemeth in his time deceit was onely 
[^f.B1v^] 
vsed in that kind of pepper. For Dioscorides 
writeth, that amongst blacke pepper 
are found certaine seedes or graines light, 
and emptie, which he calleth Bresma, and 
Plinie saith they are termed Brechmasis, 
which word doth sound, seeds vttered before 
their time. For (saith he) by vnseasonable 
time the graines sometimes do wither, 
and so are emptie, hauing in them 
no substance. But Garcia saith, that while 
he did dwel among the Indians, he inquired, 
& could not learne of any such name, 
yet acknowledgeth, that such graines like 
to pepper are often found amongst pepper, 
and are not easily knowen from pepper, 
but that they are light, and broken 
do yeeld no substance as pepper doth. 
Wherfore as in Dioscorides time, so rather 
in this our age, we ought to be diligent 
in the choise of pepper, and to haue 
some notes or signes to choose the good 
from the bad, and to know the best pepper. 
Dioscorides commendeth pepper 
when the graines are heauie, full, whole, 
not much wrinkled, new, not full of dust. 
And Galen in 4. De sanit. tuend. adddeth, 
which hath not a very thinne, nor yet a 
grosse and thicke skin. 
 
Serapio praised white pepper, which 
[^f.B2r^] 
hath a white colour, and the latter writers 
say, the whiter the better, which is smooth 
and not wrinkled. Galen in 4. De sanit. tuend. 
saith, that those grains are best, which 
are fullest and greatest. 
 
Serapio alloweth of long pepper, which 
when it is broken, doth shew his substance 
compacted, and his graines thicke ioined 
togither, which do bite the toong with 
sensible heate. Galen in the said booke De 
sanit. tuend. addeth, that long pepper must 
be whole, and not haue any holes in it, 
and not sophisticated. For (saith he) the 
marchants do bring two sorts counterfeited, 
the one is the bud of an herbe, the 
other is made in Alexandria by art. And 
in his booke De theriaca ad Pisonem, he telleth 
the maner of making of this counterfet 
long pepper. They forme it (saith 
he) of the length & bignes of this pepper, 
and then cast to it the powder of the root 
of Pyrethrum, or of mustard seed, & so deceiue 
the taste. But these deceits are easily 
bewraied: for by taste you may discern the 
right pepper from the buds of that herb, 
which are in form like to long pepper, but 
not in taste: and so by tasting, you shal discern 
the one fro~ the other. For whosoeuer 
wil with diligence obserue the tast of pepper, 
[^f.B2v^] 
he shall easily iudge that pleasant spicines 
which it yeeldeth with the biting. 
And Galen sheweth how to discerne the 
counterfeited fro~ the right, by putting it 
into water. For the counterfeited will dissolue 
in water, and so the right and naturall 
will not dissolue. Wherefore he concludeth, 
that if it hath the true taste of 
pepper, and doth not dissolue in water, 
nor hath holes in it, then that is good 
pepper. All writers do make this for a 
signe of good long pepper, when it hath 
no holes: for in deed this pepper is moister 
than any other kinde, and therefore 
will sooner mould and waxe mustie than 
the other, and so will quickly be woorme 
eaten, and full of holes. 
 
[}Of the temperament of Pepper.}] 
 
DIoscorides and Galen do yeeld to all 
the kinds of pepper a faculty to heat 
and to drie, but neither of them do declare 
in what degree they do heate and 
drie. After that Auerrhois in lib. Simplic. 
had pronounced long pepper to be moister 
than the other: And that white pepper 
was not come to his ripenes, and that 
black pepper was full ripe: He concludeth 
[^f.B3r^] 
both kinds to be hot in the third degree, 
and as some say in the fourth degree. Auicen 
in lib. 2. tract. 2. intreating of white 
and blacke pepper generally, affirmeth 
pepper to be hot and drie tending toward 
the fourth degree. And in the very next 
chapter handling of long pepper, he writeth 
that it is hot in the third degree, and 
drie in the second. Dioscorides doth not 
appoint the degrees of heat and drines to 
euery kind of pepper, yet handleth each 
very distinctly, saying, that long pepper 
doth more strongly bite: and bicause it is 
taken from the tree before it is ripe, therfore 
it remaineth a little bitter. Blacke 
pepper, bicause it is perfectly ripe, therefore 
it is well sauored, sharper than white 
pepper, & so more pleasing to the mouth, 
and more profitable to condite meates. 
The white pepper remaining a little bitter, 
is not so strong as the blacke. By this 
Dioscorides concludeth, that blacke pepper 
is the hottest, and best of all; next to 
it is long pepper, and that the weakest is 
the white pepper. Galen doth seeme heerin 
to dissent from Dioscorides. For Galen 
in 8. simpl. med. facult. doth put long pepper 
to be moister than the rest, bicause it is 
the yoong fruit, and therefore doth soone 
[^f.B3v^] 
waxe woorme eaten. And after affirmeth, 
that white pepper is more sharpe and biting 
than the blacke, and giueth this reason 
of his assertion: for that blacke pepper 
is euer heated and dried with the sun 
by long tarrieng vpon the tree: for heerby 
many of his hot and fierie parts do breath 
out, the rather bicause pepper is of a thin 
substance, that his hot parts will quickly 
consume and breath out: and so he concludeth, 
that bicause white pepper is not 
so heated and dried by the sun, but doth 
retaine and keepe al his hote parts, therefore 
it is the hotter, more biting, and the 
best better, contrarie to Dioscorides assertion. 
Brassauolus Musa going about to 
reconcile this controuersie in Galen, by 
distinguishing of the Greeke word [^GREEK OMITTED^]. 
For in that white pepper hath plentie 
of moisture in it, therefore it biteth stronger, 
and leaueth the sharpe and biting 
qualitie to continue longer: and in that 
respect it may be said to be hotter than 
the blacke pepper, hauing little moisture, 
and that much extenuated by the heate 
of the sunne, doth bite quicklier, deeper, 
and sharper: but bicause the heate of his 
biting doth not so long continue, therefore 
it seemeth not so hot as the blacke, 
[^f.B4r^] 
and yet for that it biteth deeper, therfore 
Dioscorides writeth, that it is hotter and 
stronger than the blacke. And if to trie 
the truth heereof, a man will taste both 
kinds of pepper, surely he shall manifestly 
perceiue the difference of them both. And 
so in the one sense white pepper may be 
said to be hotter and more biting, as Galen 
writeth: and in the other sense blacke 
pepper may be thought to exceede the 
white as Dioscorides affirmeth. But where 
Dioscorides saith, that white pepper is 
weaker than long pepper and black pepper, 
bicause it not being ful ripe is acerbious 
or more tart: surely his argument is 
not perfect. For as he putteth white pepper 
not so ripe as blacke, so he maketh 
long pepper not so ripe as white pepper. 
And so it must follow after his opinion, 
that long pepper should be weaker than 
white, and white than blacke pepper. So 
Hippocrates is deceiued in his owne reasoning. 
But in that it is now certaine, that 
these kinds do not differ, that the one is 
riper than the other, but each is ripe and 
perfect in his kinde: these arguments of 
more or lesse ripenes, do take no place, 
and are of no efficacie: bicause that by 
taste it is euident, that white pepper doth 
[^f.B4v^] 
bite the toong more, and the biting doth 
continue longer: therefore we may iustly 
say that white pepper is the hotter. And 
for that Galen lib. 9. De composit. sec loc. in 
the medicine of Philo affirmeth, that 
white pepper is better for the stomacke 
than blacke pepper. And in 4. De sanit. tuend. 
he saith, that white pepper doth stre~gthen 
the stomack aboue the other kinds. 
Surely the Friers writing vpon Mesue do 
truly counsell Apothecaries when pepper 
simply is read, to take white pepper. 
 
Notwithstanding in some affects long 
pepper is to be preferred before the other 
kinds, as Galen witnesseth lib. 4. De sanit. 
tuend. where he counselleth to giue long 
pepper to them which haue their sides 
blowen vp with wind, and which do turne 
all they eate to wind. For (saith he) long 
pepper doth dissolue the grosnes of wind, 
& casteth downe by the belly such matter 
which doth stay in the sides. 
 
By this discourse it appeereth, that the 
Arabians did truly set white and blacke 
pepper in the vttermost point of the third 
degree of heate and drines, or in the beginning 
of the fourth degree. And Galen 
confirmeth the same when he doth write, 
that white and blacke pepper do strongly 
[^f.B5r^] 
heate and drie. 
 
And with good reasons the same Arabikes 
do set long pepper in the third degree 
of heate, and not beyond the second 
degree of drying. For in that by all writers 
consent this kind is moister than the 
other, therefore it cannot drie so much as 
the other: for the drying qualitie must 
needs be somwhat obtunded by the moisture 
which is in this kind. And therefore 
long pepper tasted doth not by and by 
bite strongly, but after it is a little chewed, 
and then the biting doth last longer. 
And we may heerby also gather, that long 
pepper is not so subtill of substance as the 
other kinds are. 
 
Garcia writeth, that Emperikes amongst 
the Arabians & Persians do hold 
opinion, that pepper is cold: which opinion 
doth also preuaile amongst the common 
sort in this our countrie. For it is a 
common saying, that pepper is hot in the 
mouth, but cold in operation. But for as 
much as we do trie the qualitie of medicines 
by taste, these men do shew their ignorance, 
in calling that cold in operation, 
which is hot in the mouth. 
 
[^f.B5v^] 
[}The temperament of Siliquastrum, or 
Indian Pepper.}] 
 
THe Indian pepper called also Siliquastrum, 
is accounted hot and drie in 
the fourth degree, and therefore doth very 
effectually breake wind, doth heat and 
strengthen the inward parts, and is verie 
good for the breast. 
 
[}The vertues and faculties of 
Pepper.}] 
 
DIoscorides, Plinie, Auicenna, and Serapio 
do recite and number manie 
vertues and medicinal properties of these 
kindes of peppers, which I leaue the reader 
to peruse in their books. The cheefest 
vse of peppers is in cold affects of the stomacke, 
and of other parts which do serue 
for nutrition. For euery kind of pepper 
doth greatly helpe concoction, discusse 
wind, and doth occasion all grosse and slimie 
humors to discend sooner. And to 
this purpose many medicines deuised by 
physicians of these kinds of peppers are 
kept in Apothecaries shops, but amongst 
other Galen in his 4. booke De sanit. tuend. 
[^f.B6r^] 
doth chiefly co~mend three sorts. And the 
medicine termed Diatrion pipereon, in that 
it is confected of the three kindes of pepper, 
beareth the bell, and is reputed in the 
first place. And then he commendeth the 
medicine called Diacalaminthe: & thirdly, 
that which is vsed vnder the name of Diaspoliticon: 
notwithstanding each of these 
medicines is not good to the selfesame affects, 
neither are they in like sort & times 
to be vsed. Touching Diatrion pipereon, it is 
famous for to help concoction, to discusse 
wind, and to do good against cold affects 
of the stomacke, and yet not to heate the 
liuer or the blood, wherin consisteth a singular 
propertie of this medicine. For it is 
agreed vpo~ by all authors, that the heat of 
this medicine is extinguished in the belly, 
and the first veines, & is not carried into 
the whole bodie, as the heat of the medicine 
called Diacalaminthe is; so termed, 
for that it receiueth the herbe called Calaminth, 
as Gal. writeth in the said booke 
De sanit. tuend. cap. 10. where he affirmeth, 
that Diatrion pipereon is to be giuen when 
crude and slimy humors are in the stomack 
and first veines, yea both before and 
after meate. The vse of Diacalaminthe is, 
when we meane to warme further into the 
[^f.B6v^] 
bodie, and haue an intent to cut & make 
thin grosse humors in the veines. For Diacalaminthe 
doth thinne grosse and slimie 
things, breatheth out by the skin, prouoketh 
vrine, and the monethly sicknes in 
women. Therefore neither this medicine, 
neither Diaspoliticon ought to be vsed after 
meate, bicause they two hasten distribution, 
and so do hinder concoction: whereby 
we may conclude, that the medicine Diatrion 
pipereon may with most safetie be vsed 
after meate to helpe concoction. And to 
this intent Galen doth counsell to haue 
in a readines this medicine prepared in 
two maner of waies: the one simple, as 
co~sisting of fewest things; the other more 
compound: the simplier is soonest concocted; 
the other by reason of the number 
of simples is harder to be digested. And 
therefore the simplier is best for them 
which do not well concoct their meate, 
and do finde some cold temperament in 
the stomacke and bellie, and so do gather 
much slimie flegme: and the other by 
reason of many simples in it, is harder to 
be altered of nature, and so doth remaine 
longer in the stomacke when it is taken. 
So Galen doth best co~mend the frequent 
vse of Diatrion pipereo~ to remoue crudities 
[^f.B7r^] 
in the stomacke and first veines. The other 
which is more compound, hath his best 
vse in fluxes from the head to the breast. 
In these our daies the medicine Diatrion 
pipereon is in vse, made in both waies. In 
compounding the simplier, our Apothecaries 
do follow Nicolaus Myrepsicus, & 
so do make the medicine in maner as followeth: 
Taking of each of the three peppers 
one ounce, of 
[^Beginning of a list figure.^] 
ginger, 
thyme, 
anise seedes, 
persley seedes 
	of each halfe an ounce. 
[^End of a list figure.^] 
 
This description commeth nigh to the 
Diatrion pipereon of Galen. For there is no 
difference, but that Galen taketh of each 
kind of pepper fiftie drachmes, of ginger, 
thyme, anise seedes eight drachmes. Galen 
hath in his receit no persley at all: yet 
Galen admonisheth, that to 50. drachmes 
of each pepper, 16. drachmes of the other 
things may be added. And Galen willeth 
this medicine to be made with honie of 
Athens: in this our time it is compounded 
with sugar. The other Diatrion pipereon 
more compound and medicinall is at this 
time made according to the description 
of Mesue, in maner as followeth. 
 
[^f.B7v^] 
Take of the three kinds of 
pepper +Q .6. +q .ij. 
[^Beginning of a list figure.^] 
ginger, 
anise seedes, 
thyme 
	ana. +Q .ij. +q .ij. 
spikenard, 
amomum 
	ana. +Q .j. +q .j. 
cassia lignea, 
asarum, 
enula camp. dried, 
persley seeds 
seseli 
	ana. +q .ij. 
[^End of a flowchart figure.^] 
saccharum albissimum q. s. 
 
This is the same laborious confection 
set downe by Mesue, of which Galen maketh 
mention, lib. 4. cap. 11. De sanit. tuend. 
For Galen in that place doth recite by 
name euery simple: saue that Galen in 
stead of Amomum, mentioneth the seeds 
of ammios. And where our authors do 
differ in opinion, what is the right Amomum, 
and all writers do agree, that we 
haue the right ammi: I adiudge it better 
in these daies to put in this receit the 
seeds of ammi, according as Galen prescribeth, 
than amomum, as Mesue counselleth. 
So you haue both medicines in 
vse in our time made of three peppers, and 
[^f.B8r^] 
are to be sold in the Apothecaries shops, 
vnder the name of Diatrion pipereon. 
 
[}Diaspoliticon.}] 
 
THE medicine called Diaspoliticon is 
most commended to loose the belly: 
this medicine is composed of cummine 
seedes, pepper, rue, and that kinde of salt 
called Salnitre. And Galen aduiseth to 
haue this medicine also prepared in two 
sorts. First to make it of the foresaid simples 
mixed in equall parts, and so by reason 
of that salt, it wil loose the belly more: 
the second way to put to equall parts of 
the other things, but onely halfe the proportion 
of that kinde of salt. So will the 
medicine remaine longer in the stomack, 
and better further concoction, more digest 
crude and rawe humors, and wil lesse 
make the bellie laxatiue. 
 
[}Diacalaminthe.}] 
 
GAlen in his fourth booke De sanitate 
tuend. ca. 14. doth set downe the composition 
of the medicine called Diacalaminthe, 
in maner following. 
 
[^f.B8v^] 
[^Beginning of a list figure.^] 
Take of calaminth, 
[^Take^] of organy, or organmint, called Pulegiu~, 
[^Take^] of persley, which groweth in stonie places, called Petroselinum, 
[^Take^] of the herbe called Seseli, 
	of ech +o .ij. 
[^Take^] of persley seedes, 
[^Take^] of the tops of thyme, 
	of ech +o .iiij 
[^Take^] of louage, +o .16. 
[^Take^] of pepper, +o .48. 
[^End of a list figure.^] 
 
And Galen doth name the countries 
from which he counselleth to procure the 
simples, but in that they are not in these 
daies brought from those places, therefore 
it shall suffice to make choise of the 
best simples of this our countrie in confecting 
of this medicine: for this our 
countrie yeeldeth verie good of euerie 
sort. 
 
In dispensing of this medicine, our Apothecaries 
do not follow this description 
of Galen, but their Apothecary booke 
confected by Nicolaus: which composition 
doth differ from that of Galen in the 
doses of the simples, and that this of Nicolaus 
hath some mo simples than that of 
[^f.C1r^] 
Galen. The receite after Nicolaus is as 
followeth. 
 
[^Beginning of a list figure.^] 
Take of calamints 
organie, 
seselios 
blacke pepper 
petroselini 
	of ech +Q .iij. +q .ij. 
[^End of a list figure.^] 
leuistici. +Q .ij. +q .j. 
persley seede +q .j. 
[^Beginning of a list figure.^] 
ammy seede 
thime, 
annise seede 
cinnamon, 
ginger. 
	of ech +q .ij. 
[^End of a list figure.^] 
 
In this composition, persley seeds, ammy, 
annise seedes, ginger, are mo then are set 
in the description of Galen. Some learned 
men of our time do commend this receit 
of Nicolaus before that of Galen, bicause 
it hath mo simples: but for my part, I 
do rather allow of that receit of Galen, 
which for the paucitie of simples, is with 
lesse labor concocted of them, which do 
take it, and to the intent of the medicine, 
it receiueth a sufficient number of simples, 
so that they which are inserted by 
Nicolaus seeme superfluous. 
 
Galen appointeth a proportion of the 
best and chosen honie, therewith to compounde 
[^f.C1v^] 
this and the other medicines, 
which he willeth to be scummed with 
great diligence: and if the quantity of hony 
be increased, the medicine saith he will 
be more pleasing. And he here setteth a 
rule which the apothecaries are to follow 
in compounding of medicines, to make 
them so pleasant to the taste as they can, 
without weakning of their strength, or diminishing 
of their vertues. In these daies 
the most part of medicines are made vp 
with sugar in steade of honie, for sugar 
is more gratefull to the taste, and many 
can not well away with honie. And honie 
is sooner conuerted vnto choler than sugar. 
 
Touching the maner of making these 
medicines, Galen doth admonish, that 
they are not to be compounded in one 
and like sort, for in some respects the simples 
are to be pounded finely, and sersed 
with a fine serser. For saith he when things 
are finely beaten, they passe quickly into 
the whole body, things grosely powdered 
do stay longer in the belly, for the same 
cannot so easily passe through the little 
veines and small pores of the body. In 
which respect things grosely powdered 
do more loose the belly: when they are 
[^f.C2r^] 
brought into fine powder, they go sooner 
into the body, and prouoke sweate, and 
better mooue vrine, but do lesse mooue to 
stoole. Therefore in compounding of the 
medicines called Diacalaminthe Galens 
counsell is to bring all the simples into 
fine powder, that the same may the better 
passe into all parts of the body, for the vse 
of this medicine is, when we haue an intent 
to concoct and digest the crude and 
rawe humours in the inner veines and habite 
of the bodie, and so to euapore them 
by the pores of the skin, when we meane 
to prouoke sweate, vrine, and the courses 
of women, And therefore he will not haue 
this medicine often vsed after meate. In 
the medicine called Diaspolitico~, al the simples 
must be pounded in grosse maner, for 
so the medicine will more loose the belly, 
and by staieng longer in the stomack, further 
concoction, if the things be finely 
powdered into dust: as the medicine will 
little or not at all make the belly laxatiue, 
so it will prouoke vrine and sweate, to the 
intention of this medicine. 
 
The like manner is to be obserued in 
confecting of Diatrion pipereon, that if an 
intent be to haue the medicine stay in the 
stomacke and guts to warme those parts, 
[^f.C2v^] 
to digest crude humours in them, or to 
loose the belly, the simples must be pounded 
grossely: but if we haue a purpose to 
open obstructions, to warme the inner 
veines, to prouoke vrine or sweate: althings 
must be beaten into fine powder. 
By which discourse that question is easily 
answered, which some latter writers do 
moue about the beating of the kindes of 
pepper, whether the same ought to be 
beaten finely or grosly. For some do affirme 
that pepper is alwaies to be beaten 
grosly, for so it will remaine longer time 
in the stomacke, and will the lesse heate 
the liuer and the blood. Some other doo 
maintaine a contrary opinion, and that 
by Galen himselfe, who in the 5. booke 
De sanit. tuend. cap. 8. After meats which do 
bread stoppages in the body, take (saith 
he) the medicine called Diacalaminthe, and 
if you haue not it ready, take Diatrion pipereon: 
and if that be not at hand, take 
white pepper beaten into fine powder, & 
diligently sersed, & mingle the same with 
the meate, and sprinkle it to your drinke. 
And in the same booke the 10. cap. Galen 
prescribeth a ptisane in which the dust or 
fine powder of white pepper is mingled. 
And in the 6. booke De sanit. tuend. cap. 14. 
[^f.C3r^] 
Galen giueth pepper alone, as finely powdered 
as may be. By these counsels of Galen, 
these men do conclude that pepper 
ought alway to be beaten into fine powder 
by Galens doctrine. Neuerthelesse, 
these men in mine opinion, do not with 
diligent care co~sider Galens intention in 
these and the like places, neither well haue 
marked the scope and cause why Galen in 
these places doth aduise to pound pepper 
into fine powder: for if they had well considered 
that Galen writeth: they might 
haue vnderstood, that he giueth pepper so 
finely beaten, to remoue the obstructions 
and stoppages, for so before he did admonish, 
that things beaten into thin powder 
passe into the body better, and sooner 
do remoue obstructions: and contrariwise, 
that which is grosly beaten, doth 
stay in the belly longer, and better warme 
those parts, better digest crude and rawe 
humors gathered in them, and do more 
effectually discusse wind: to these latter intents 
pepper is to be beaten grosly, especially 
in this our country, in which men 
commonly do feed vpon grosse and slimy 
meats, and so do heape in the parts of the 
belly and first veines, manie crude and 
grosse humors, that pepper ought in this 
[^f.C3v^] 
region to be beaten most grosly, that it 
may therby be occasioned to stay the longer 
in the belly, so to warme the same the 
better, and the better to concoct and extenuate 
such grosse and crude humors, for 
the heat of this medicine (as Galen writeth) 
is founded in so subtil a substa~ce, that 
the same is extinguished before it can 
come to the liuer: then if you shall beate 
the medicine finely, the heate wil so soone 
be exhausted and spent, that it will neither 
sufficiently warme the belly, neither in 
good sort concoct those crude and rawe 
humors. Wherefore I do thinke it verie 
needfull for our apothecaries to pownd 
pepper alway grosly in the medicine Diatrion 
pipereon. For if we shall need withall to 
open obstructions, we may prescribe the 
medicine called Diacalaminthe, and so we 
may mingle it to Diatrion pipereon, or as occasion 
serueth giue it alone: wherefore I 
hold it best to follow Galen his precept, 
which is, that alway things be powdered 
finely and in subtill manner when our 
purpose is to remoue obstructions, or to 
digest, cut, and absterge crude, rawe, slimy, 
and grosse humors, which are in the 
inner veines and habite of the body, or 
meane to prouoke sweat or vrine; but if 
[^f.C4r^] 
our meaning be to increase heate in the 
parts of the belly, to concoct humors 
there, and in the first veines, or to make 
the bellie loose, then things are to be beaten 
in grosse powder. 
 
[}The priuate properties of the medicine 
called Diaspoliticon.}] 
 
THis medicine doth make the bellie 
loose, and bringeth out meate, which 
corrupteth in the stomacke, and is speciall 
good for them which haue a cold bellie, 
or declining to cold. For it maketh thinne 
grosse phlegme, and expelleth flatulent 
winde. See Galen in the fourth booke 
De sanitate tuenda. 
 
[}The particular faculties and properties of 
Diatrion Pipereon.}] 
 
DIatrion pipereon is of great efficacie and 
doth much good in all colde diseases 
of the stomacke, in sower belkes, in 
quartaine feauers, in palsies, in euill affected 
liuers, in them which haue their 
bellies blowen vp with winde. 
 
Diatrion pipereon confected after the description 
of Mesues, is chiefly commended 
[^f.C4v^] 
in fluxes, from the head to the breast, 
good generally to the coldnes of the 
cheste, and to coughes, which do proceed 
of a colde cause. 
 
That the excellent and rare vertues of 
this medicine called Diatrion pipereon, 
might the better be known, I thought 
good in this place to remember the 
reader what is written in the booke 
intituled Secretorum, which booke 
is ascribed to Galen, in which booke 
we reade in this maner. 
 
A certaine friend of mine being about 
the age of 70. yeeres, complained of 
a coldnes in all the parts of the bodie, insomuch 
that his memorie failed him, and 
he had paine in his ioints, and then I 
made for him this medicine called Diatrion 
pipereon, and it was a wonder to see how 
he recouered in the space of a fortnight. 
And I made triall in many which were 
sicke of diseases of the bladder, of the 
heade, and of the iointes, occasioned by 
colde and crude humors: and it is found 
speciall good in a cough of cold phlegme, 
in weakenes of the stomacke. For it breaketh 
grosse winde, digesteth meat, prouoketh 
[^f.C5r^] 
appetite, resolueth crude humours, 
strengtheneth the stomacke euerie way, 
restoreth memory, cleareth the voice, putteth 
backe grey heares, remedieth the 
goute which commeth of a colde cause: 
And in generall whosoeuer aged doth vse 
much this medicine, he shall not need any 
other helpe to preserue his health. 
 
[}The priuate properties of the medicine 
called Diacalaminthe.}] 
 
IT cutteth grosse and slimy humors, and 
occasioneth the same to be clensed by 
the skin by sweate, prouoketh vrine, and 
the monthly courses in women, as Galen 
witnesseth in the 4. booke De sanit. tuend. 
it is good for them which do abhor meat, 
for the vse of it prouoketh appetite, it remedieth 
the shortnes of breath, and helpeth 
them which finde a coldnes in their 
stomacks, and which haue their sides and 
bellies blowen vp with winde, as Mesue 
writeth. 
 
[}The maner and particular vse of the 
foresaid medicines.}] 
 
VVHen many crude and rawe humors 
do abounde in the bellie 
[^f.C5v^] 
and first veines, that in that respect it will 
not be safetie to giue a purgatiue medicine, 
then is the cheefest vse of Diaspoliticon, 
for it then giuen will safely stir nature 
to expell those humors by the siege. So in 
other cases when so euer the belly is drie, 
and doth not hir dutie, then it is expedient 
to giue Diaspoliticon. 
 
[}The vse of Diatrion pipereon, and of Diacalaminthe: 
out of Galen .4. 
De sanit. tuend.}] 
 
VVHen many raw and vndigested 
humors are gathered in and about 
the first veines, the same are to be cut 
and digested, and in so dooing speciall 
care is to be had lest the same be carried 
farther into the bodie. In this case Diatrion 
pipereon simple, is with most securitie giuen. 
And it is not enough to giue it once 
or twise euery day, but it must be taken 
often, in the morning before meate, & after 
meat, & when they go to bed, a spoonfull 
at a time, and so to yonger folke and 
which haue lesse need, the lesser quantity: 
to elder and to them which haue more 
need, the bigger quantity, so to the mean, 
[^f.C6r^] 
the meaner quantitie is to be proportioned. 
 
When crude humors are heaped in the 
inner veines, and in the habit of the body, 
the same are to be concocted, and also to 
be expelled by breathing the same thorough 
the pores of the skin, and to these 
intents there is not a more conuenient 
medicine knowen than Diacalaminthe, for 
it hath propertie to extenuate thicke, and 
slimy things, and then mooueth the same 
to be expelled by breathing out at the 
skin, and by vrine. And this medicine is 
not vnpleasant to be taken, if a good proportion 
of honie be boiled with it, but 
where some do not like of sweet things, 
and do abhor honie, to such you must put 
the lesse honie, yet oftentimes euen in this 
case it is good to boile good store of honie, 
so you boile it well, for then the medicine 
will not be ouersweet, and the honie 
well boiled doth lesse offend the stomack. 
And the vse of this medicine is in the morning 
after frictio~, before exercise, & before 
bathing. And you may vse this medicine 
dry in powder without honie in steede of 
salt for sauce to your meate, and you may 
put of it in a Ptisane in steede of pepper. 
 
This medicine is vsed not onely dry in 
[^f.C6v^] 
steede of salt, but also when honie is mixed, 
for euen so it may be vsed with meate, 
and so is it pleasing to the taste. But neither 
this, neither any other medicine 
which hath strong facultie to further distribution, 
is to be taken after meate. For 
at that time nature goeth about concoction 
of meate taken, and not to distribute 
the same, therefore immediately after 
meate, endeuor must be to further concoctio~ 
by giuing Driatrion pipereon simple, 
or to put some pepper powdered into 
your drinke. 
 
If such crudities hap to be not onely in 
the belly and first veines, but also in all other 
veines, yea in the fleshie parts of the 
bodie: in this case at the beginning of the 
cure, it is best to vse Diatrion pipereon, adding 
so much of the seeds of persley growing 
in a drie & stonie ground, as is put of 
anise seedes, thyme, and ginger, and after 
the first day, or rather after the seconde 
day, you may put a little of Diacalaminth, 
and then in a while after mingle both, I 
meane Diatrion pipereon, and Diacalaminth, 
in equall parts, and in processe of time increase 
the Diacalaminthe, so at the latter 
end of the cure, you may vse Diacalaminth 
alone. So it is to be concluded in this, as 
[^f.C7r^] 
in all maner of diets, when the effects are 
equall, the medicines to cure, are equally 
to be mixed, yet so that at the first greatest 
care be had of the crudities in the first 
veines, and at the latter end, of those crudities, 
which are in the other veines and 
habit of the bodie, in the middle time 
both are equally according to the effect 
to be mingled. Thus far Galen in his 4. 
booke De sanitate tuenda. 
 
[}FINIS.}] 
 
