[^Russel, Thomas: Diacatholicon avrevm^] 
 
[}DIACATHOLICON 
AVREVM: 
Or 
A generall powder of Gold, purging all 
offensiue humours in mans 
BODIE: 
 
Good in generall for all diseases, where 
there needeth any Purgation: 
 
As also for any sicknesse yearely incident, or 
which is feared to approach by the increase of any euill 
humour, distemperature of diet, or otherwise how so euer 
growing towards any disease, to preuent the 
same, and keepe the bodie 
in health. 
 
It may safely be taken of all maner of people, of what age so-euer, 
sucking Children, old men and women, in the 
quantitie of two, three, or foure Graines, according 
to the age, strength, and disease 
of the partie. 
 
Whosoeuer stand in neede of this powder, may haue it at the 
signe of the Hand and Pistall, neere vnto Iuie 
Bridge, for two shillings sixe pence 
the Graine. 
 
Hordea cui cordi demum serit hordea, ne tu 
Nunc aliunde pares auri primordia, in auro 
Semina sunt auri: quamuis abstrusa recedant 
Longius, & nobis multo querenda labore. 
 
LONDON 
Printed for Iohn Flasker. 1602.}] 
 
[^A dedicatory epistle to doctors, professors and students of physick and four poems omitted.^] 
[^Extract 1, ff. B1r-C4r^] 
 
[^f.Br^] 
[}DIACATHOLICON 
AVREVM: 
Or 
A generall powder of Gold, purging all 
offensiue humours in mans 
BODIE.}] 
 
[}Chap. 1. 
Whereof the powder is made, and of the Philosophicall 
preparation of it.}] 
 
WHatsoeuer the Almightie disposer of vniuersall nature, hath dispersiuely 
infused in the generalitie of naturall things, either 
celestiall or terrestriall, the same is collectiuely found in one 
particular of the same kind; as for example, what vertue, qualitie, 
or influence is dispersiuely placed in euerie Starre, Orbe, 
or bodie celestiall vnder the first mouer, the same is found vnited in one 
Sunne. What animall faculties are dispersed in all seuerall liuing creatures, 
are gathered together in one man. What hidden vertue soeuer, is 
dispersiuely infused in minerals, is collectiuely vnited in one metall, 
which is Gold, and this is the principall materiall whereof this powder 
consisteth. But for abbreuiation of time and labor, since it is hard to make 
a perfect calcination of Gold by it selfe, I haue therfore, following the opinion 
of Auicen, and wonne with his reasons, added a due proportion of 
the other perfect metall, that thereby their agent might make a better subtiliation 
of them, which agent in the composition, is the third ingredient, 
being a spiritualized metall in the forme of minerall water. These three 
ingredients onely enter this powder and no more: which I terme by the 
name of Diacatholicon Aureum, because that the chiefest thing, and most 
[^f.B1v^] 
in quantitie in the composition is Gold, being brought to that wondrous 
actiue qualitie by the true minerall fire, which is the agent and long continuall 
decoction: neither doe I vse either in my preparation or decoction, 
any thing but those three ingredients; that this is true, I can make manifest 
to any man by demonstratiue practise before his eyes, on which I wil 
engage goods, life and credite, that there neuer came either common 
Quicksiluer prepared or vnprepared, Antimonie, Stibium, meane minerall, 
vitriall, salts, powder, strong water, imperfect mettall, or any other 
such like thing whatsoeuer, but onely those three ingredients before named. 
How I came by this powder, what time I spent in the speculatiue 
part of the Magisterie, what labour and cost in the experimentall performance 
of it, how often I missed in the practise before I could attaine to 
the perfection of it, if I should here declare, would but wearie the reader, 
trouble the Printer, wast much paper, seeme to sharpe censurers, affected 
and selfe conceited discourses, in mine owne censure needlesse circumstances, 
and in the end little to the purpose. Omitting therefore all such vaine 
and needlesse discourses, I will proceede to show the vertues and operation 
of it. 
 
[}CHAP. 2. 
Of the nature and qualitie of this Catholicon Aureum.}] 
 
HIppocrates in the second Apho. of his first booke, and the 4. 5. 6. 7. 
8. and 9. Aphor. of the fourth booke, maketh mention of two sortes 
of purging medicines, the one by vomit, the other by siege: Of purging 
medicines by vomit, Mesue in his first booke, De simplicibus 
medicamentis Purgantibus, the first Theorem, maketh a threefold difference, 
taken from their facultie more or lesse. The first he termeth vehement, 
which extreamely disturbe nature, as white Hellebor, and Tithimal. 
&c. The second meane, as Nux vomica and Nitrum. The third mild, 
as Onion seed and Radish. But of simple medicines which purge by siege, 
he maketh a fourefold difference. The first, are such as purge by dissolution 
of the humours, and being dissolued by attraction of them from the vpper 
parts, or eradication from the lower parts, not that the medicine being 
receiued into the stomacke, doth penetrate the veines or the solid parts 
of the bodie to euacuate the humor, but by a certaine attractiue qualitie, 
doth draw his choyle and familiar humor through the veines and passages 
of the bodie, into the stomacke and bowels, euen as we see Jet or Amber 
draw little strawes, or the Loadstone Iron, though they touch them not: 
of this kind, are Scammonie, Colocinthis and Turbith. The second kind 
[^f.B2r^] 
of purging simples, are such as doe not draw, but onely purge by driuing 
and pressing out, drying and consuming putrid excrements, and afterward binding the bodie as Mirabolanes, and Tamaryndes. The third 
sort purge by mollifying the humors within the stomacke and bowels, as 
Cassia fistula and Manna. The fourth and last, by making them slipperie, 
as the Muscilage of Psillium and Mallowes: these three latter kinds 
of purgers haue a weake facultie, and therefore scarce peripicuous, euacuating 
onely those humors within the stomacke and bowels, which there 
they meete withall, not passing the lyuer or working anything by attraction. 
The first kind of purging medicines which worke by attraction, Galen 
in his booke entitled, Quos purgare oportet, doth pronounce that they 
are all of a hot qualitie. Omnia medicamenta purgantia facultate sunt calida, 
which in naturall Phylosophie must needes be graunted, for there are 
but two actiue qualities, heate & cold, as Aristotle witnesseth in his fourth 
booke of his Meteorologickes, the first Chapter. 
 
Now it is manifest, that it is the nature of heate alone to draw, for cold 
cannot doe it: therefore whatsoeuer purgeth by attraction, must needes bee 
of a hot temperature. This being well knowne and considered, let vs see 
how all these kind of purgers worke, and the reason why, and then come 
to shew the nature and operation of this Catholicon Aureum. Galen in 
the fift booke of the facultie of simple medicines, affirmeth, that whatsoeuer 
purgeth, hath a facultie to worke on his peculiar and proper humour, 
some on one, some on two, and some on more; and that which is proper to 
any one humour, neuer worketh on another, vnlesse the malignitie of the 
medicine, or the quantitie of the dose do too much exceede, which Galen also 
witnesseth in his booke, De purgantium Medicamentoru~ facultate. Hippocrates 
also confirmeth it in his booke, De natura humana, saying there, 
That if a medicine be administred to bring forth fleame, it onely bringeth 
out fleame: if to purge choler, it onely purgeth choler: if to euacuate melancholy, 
it onely euacuateth that humour: to whome Mesue consenteth in 
his first booke, De simp. medi. purg. the first Theorem, affirming more 
plainly, that if a medicine be giuen to purge melancholy, though choler and 
fleame abound much more in the bodie, yet it leaueth them, and purgeth 
melancholy, his own peculiar and deffinate humor: whence, they haue this 
strange facultie, the same Authors opinion is, that it proceedeth not 
from the temperature of the medicine (meaning the first qualities) nor 
from one contrarie working on another, nor from like drawing his like, 
nor as a light medicine vpward, a heauie downward, stirring the matter 
to be purged: but Quia talem cœlitus est fortitum facultatem: That the facultie 
of euerie purging medicine, proceedeth from an heauenly qualitie 
and hidden influence. 
 
Now hauing shewed the nature and differences of purging simples, after 
[^f.B2v^] 
what sort they worke, and by what meanes out of their Theoricke, it remaineth 
after perfect inuestigation both by cause and effect, to set downe 
the nature and operation of this Catholicon Aureum, or generall purging 
powder of Gold. Then, whereas I said before in the beginning, that all 
purges worke either by vomit or siege, this powder of Gold worketh 
both by vomit and siege: yet let not this derogate any thing from the excellencie 
of it, that it worketh by vomit: for although I must needes confesse, 
that euerie axion of any part made against the first ordinance of nature, is 
improsperous and vnfit, and so seeing nature did at first ordaine the Gula 
for attraction, and the Pilorum for expulsion: therefore by consequent, all 
vomits made by contrarie motion to nature, are improsperous and hurtfull: 
although I say, this be simply true and cannot be denied, yet respectiuely 
& by accident, vomits are not onely not hurtful, but verie commodious, 
and necessarie as well for the curing of diseases, as for the regiment 
of health. For when there is aboundance of light Choler, thin water, and 
fleame swimming on the top of the stomacke, the expulsiue facultie cannot 
driue them downward, by reason of their lightnesse, neither is nature 
able to digest them, so they must of necessitie be euacuated by vomit, and 
so of two euils the lesse must bee chosen, this way of purging being allowed 
and commended by Galen and Hippocrates, and mightily confirmed 
by the Academie of Salerne, prescribing for the regiment of health to 
vomit once a month. To which of the foure differences of purging medicines 
to referre this powder, is a matter verie difficult, seeing it was neuer 
yet truely and Philosophically determined by any Paracelsian, whether 
Mercurie or any minerall purge did worke Attrahendo humores, by 
drawing the humours together into the stomacke. But my assertion is, 
that this powder of Gold doth not worke Attrahendo, or Comprimendo, 
and Exprimendo, but Leniendo, and Lubricando, which I prooue thus. 
 
There is no cold medicine which doeth purge by Attraction; but the 
outward qualitie in the superficies of this powder, from whence the purging 
facultie proceedeth (as is plainely shewed in the end of the sixt Chapter) 
is cold, therefore I conclude, that it cannot draw any humors into the 
stomacke. My proposition was proued before by the naturall effectes of 
heate and cold, and by the authoritie of Galen before cited, in his booke intitled: 
Quos purgare oportet: and in his fift booke, De simp. medi. facul. 
the sixteene Chapter. My assumption I proue thus: as is the effect, so is the 
cause: but the effect which Mercurie worketh is cold, and therefore Mercurie 
it selfe is cold: My proposition is the Philosophers maxime, the assumption is proued by instance in the disease called the Palsie, and relaxation 
of the Sinewes, which we see dayly happen to those the deale much 
with Quicksiluer, as our Gilders with rich Gold, being caused by the 
[^f.B3r^] 
fume of the Quicksiluer. Now that the Palsie is a cold disease, Galen witnesseth 
in his fourth booke De causis pulsuum. My second instance is taken 
from another effect of Mercurie, which is this, When any hath taken a 
great quantitie, as much as will poyson a bodie, during all the time of the 
working of it, the partie shall neuer thirst, which if it were hot, it would 
inflame the bloud and vitall spirits, and cause intolerable thirst, as it happeneth 
after the taking of all hot poysons, for the partie will thirst euen to 
the death, which is proued by an example cited in Conciliator, in his booke 
De venenis, of an Apothecarie, who thirsting in the extreame heate of 
Summer, in the night time tooke a Pitchard of Quicksiluer in stead of 
some drinke or other, and dranke of it, forthwith it cooled his thirst, congealed 
the bloud, and destroyed the vitall spirits, and being found dead in 
his bed in the morning, his body by the aduice of a Phisicion was cut vp, 
and there was found in his stomack one pound of Quicksiluer, the bloud 
in his heart being congealed: by which the same Authour concluded, that it 
was of a cold qualitie. 
 
To these instances may be added, that it is in the forme of water altogether 
without taste, not bitter, sharpe, sowre, salt, sweete, or hauing any 
stipticitie or corrosiuenesse. Besides these probable inductions, the authoritie 
of diuers of our moderne Authors may be added, who haue diligently 
both by speculation and proofe inuestigated the nature of it, whatsoeuer 
Paracelsus through vaine subtilties and trifling arguments, goeth about 
to perswade the world that it is of a hot qualitie: then since the superficiall 
purging qualitie of this powder is cold, it manifestly proueth that it 
doth not purge by attraction. The second reason which proueth that this 
powder doth not purge by attraction, is taken from a sure demonstration 
by certaine experience, which is this. The first time that it is administred 
vnto any bodie, it will worke his effect duely as it ought to doe, euacuating 
the humours, but if it bee administred againe the next day, it will 
then verie little worke by siege or vomit, or nothing at all, by reason the 
first day it did euacuate all the humours within the stomacke and bowels, 
which it then met withall: now all other purges attractiue being taken 
againe the second day, will worke afresh, because they still drawe mo 
humours out of the veines and fleshie parts of the bodie, and if there bee 
none to draw, they dissolue and melt the flesh it selfe, draw bloud out of the 
veines, & spirits out of the arteries, and so by consequent life it selfe: which 
vice would also bee incident to this powder of Gold, if it did worke any 
whit by attraction, which seeing it doth not, it cannot hold with the naturall 
possibilitie of this powder, to produce any such fatall euent: and as it 
worketh not Attrahendo, so neither doth it worke Comprimendo, because 
it leaueth the bodie after alwayes soluble, sometimes a weeke, a 
[^f.B3v^] 
month, yea, a quarter of a yeere: by which may bee noted the excellencie 
and preheminence that this purge hath aboue all other purging medicines 
in the world: for this mast needes be graunted, which Galen himselfe confesseth 
in his booke entituled, Quos purgare oportet, That al purging medicines 
which worke by attraction, are verie offensiue to the stomacke, 
and noysome to all parts of the bodie, diuers symptomes and great inconueniences 
following them, by reason when there is such a suddaine violent 
and vnnaturall pulling, and riuing the humours from bloud wherein 
life consisteth, nature can hardly endure, this seperation being before so 
firmely vnited together, without her great detriment and losse of many 
spirits, the inconueniences and vices whereof, I will shew at large in the 
sixt Chapter. 
 
Now this purge of Gold, seeing it worketh not by attraction, cannot 
be scandalized with any of these blots, neither can any such symptomes 
follow it. But happily some may here obiect, that if it onely purge Leniendo 
and Lubricando, and not Attrahendo; how can it remoue and purge 
stubborne and rebellious humors, out of the veines and solid remote parts 
of the bodie, and then not being able to remoue them, how can it be good 
almost for any disease: and to conclude, it were as good to take a glister, 
or eate a little Cassia, Manna, or stued Pruines, as to take this golden 
purge. To this I answere, that though it purge not the humours within 
the veines and fleshie parts by attraction: yet it doth either helpe nature to 
digest them, or expell them by sweate and Urine, which is a direct course 
according to natures owne proceedings: so you see that it doth worke by 
vomit, siege, sweate, and vrine, according as nature is burdened and ouerladed: 
for if the stomacke bee oppressed with light choler, water, and 
flegme, it purgeth them by vomit: if the intestines and lower parts bee ouercharged 
with choler, water, or flegme, it worketh by siege: if either 
stomacke or bowels be ouerladen with melancholy, if euacuateth alwaies 
that humour by siege: if the bloud and the solid parts of the bodie bee oppressed 
with any of those humours, it dissolueth them and openeth their 
passage, and purgeth them by sweate and insensible expiration. If the 
Emulgent veines or reynes of the backe be burdened with choler, flegme, 
or melancholy, or haue any obstructions, it openeth the passages, dissolueth 
the humours, and bringeth them out by Urine; for it purgeth all the 
vicious and offensiue humours alike, not hauing any humour destinate to 
it, but as the body is most ouercharged, on that it worketh first. In the 
answering this obiection, a greater may arise among the learned, and that 
is this: Whereas I say that this powder of Gold dooth purge by sweate 
and Urine, how can that agree with naturall Philosophie and experience, 
that a cold qualitie (which I affirmed before this powder had) can open, 
[^f.B4r^] 
dissolue, sweate, and expell by Urine. To this I answere, that though the 
outward superficiall qualitie of this powder of Gold bee cold, from the 
Mercurialitie, yet inwardly there is a subtill aerious heate, from the Aureitie, 
which is stirred vp and animated by the naturall heate of our bodies, 
and brought in Energian. 
 
Nature being alwayes wise in her working, making seperation of the 
cold qualitie in the superficies of the medicine, to worke by vomit and 
siege: and selecting the subtill inward medicinable vertue, drawing it into 
the veynes to helpe her selfe to worke away all that offendeth her, shee being 
alwayes prone to her emendation and perfection. And thus I haue 
shewed in generall the nature and working of this powder of Gold; but 
fearing lest I haue exceeded those straite limits I alotted my selfe, I am 
enforced to omit many things that were expedient to bee spoken of this 
matter: onely touching those things, as briefe as I could, which are necessarie; 
but if there be any that rests not contented with that which here 
is said, I will by conference fully satisfie him at any occasion. 
 
[}CHAP. 3. 
How and in what quantitie this powder is 
to bee taken.}] 
 
COmmonly for a sucking child two graines will suffice, for youth 
three graines, for middle age and most sort of people foure graines, 
for strong folkes and stubborne diseases fiue graines. It may bee 
taken in a spoonefull of drinke, Aqua-vitæ, or spirit of Wine, in the 
pappe of an Apple, or a Quince, in the pulpe of Raysens or Pruines, in a 
little broth, in conserue of Roses or Barberies, or in any such like thing: 
Or if it please the Phisicion in any sirupe, powder, electuarie or potion, 
proper to that disease, or especiall humour which he doth intend to purge, 
which I leaue to the learned discretion of euerie Phisicion, who may well 
determine of euery particular patient, which in generalitie it is impossible 
for me to doe: but particularly I can direct any that shall require it for 
what intent so euer, either in Pill, Potion, Lozenge or Electuarie, according 
as shall best fit the disease, and the Patients content. 
 
[^f.B4v^] 
[}CHAP. 4. 
Of the preparation of the bodie, and time when this powder is to be taken, 
to the intent that any man may vse it, that hath not the Phisician alwayes 
at hand.}] 
 
SInce there are diuers that inhabit in the Countrie farre from any 
Phisician, which cannot easily resort to one when they stand in need: 
and diuers of the poorer sort of people, that are not of sufficient abilitie 
to pay the Phisician for his counsell, and the Apothecarie for his 
drugs, therfore I thought it conuenient to signifie thus much vnto them, or 
to any other that are determined to take it, how they shall take it, and how 
to prepare their bodie and make it fit, for what purpose so euer they 
would haue it. If there be any therefore which to the intent to keepe their 
bodies in health, or to preuent any vsuall sicknesse incident vnto them, or 
hauing alreadie any Ague, weaknesse of the stomacke, or molested with 
superfluitie of humours, or any disease mentioned in the Chapter following, 
by the opinion of the Phisician; I say, if any of these be determined to 
take of this powder, let them first consider, whether they doe intend to 
sweate much or little, at the time of the working of it: if much, let them 
keepe them warme in their bed: if little, let them sit vp by a fire in their 
Chamber: Then let them consider whether they would haue it worke 
more by vomit then siege, or more by siege then by vomit. If they would 
haue it worke more by vomit; first, let them eate a great meales meate 
ouernight: but if they would haue it worke more by siege, let them eate 
ouernight verie little or fast altogether. Secondly, if they would it worke 
more by vomit then by siege, let them a little after they haue take~ it, drink 
fiue or sixe spoonefuls of warme water, and sallet Oyle, or warme water 
alone. But if they would haue it work by more siege, let the~ presently after 
they haue taken it, drink fiue or sixe spoonefuls of cold water: but whether 
they would haue it worke by vomit or siege, let them ouernight take before 
supper, if they sup at all, or in stead of their supper, as many of these 
Pruines as they please. Take water, or Rhenish wine, or both together, 
and dissolue pure English Honie in it, or Sugar, as much as will make 
Mead, or Sirup of it, and in this Sirup, let the best damaske Pruines be 
stued. 
 
Take ouernight of these Pruines and the Sirup, as much as you will; 
or take Sirup of the infusion of Roses, or Sirup of Uineger, or any such 
gentle soluble thing to prepare the bodie before: but after they haue taken 
[^f.C1r^] 
the powder, during all the time of the working of it, drinke the whey of 
Posset drinke, made with clarified Mace, & Ale. And at dinner, eate some 
broth made with light meate at supper, and afterward vse your ordinarie 
diet, but sparingly at first. 
 
[}CHAP. 5. 
For what diseases this powder is good.}] 
 
SEeing that this powder doth purge all offensiue humours to mans 
nature, as well simple as mixed: therefore I conclude, that this Catholicon 
is good for al diseases, when as there needeth any Purgation 
of any humour, either vpward, downeward, by sweate, or Urine; 
for the cause remooued, the effect must needes cease, and in this kind it may 
haue the preheminence aboue all other purging medicines, which euer Art 
or inuention till this day found out: and although it may iustly challenge 
this preheminence both by art and nature, namely by the matter whereof 
and the meanes whereby it is made, yet are other simples and confections 
ne're the worse, nor lesse to be regarded, for euen they in their due place and 
time may bee mixed with this, to make a more peculiar purging medicine, 
more specificate to any member affected or humor exceeding. Moreouer 
it farre excelleth them all in these properties, namely in the smalnes 
of the quantitie, the aptnesse of the receite, the not offensiuenesse in taste; 
soone, safe and pleasantly working his effect, and in the wholesomnesse of 
it to mans body, euen by the testimonie of Mesue himselfe, affirming those 
to be the wholesomest purges which are sweete or without taste: For this 
being administred in the quantitie of two, three, foure, or fiue graines at 
the most, may as well be taken as a peece of bread, or spoonefull of drinke, 
and hauing no taste, neuer offendeth the Patient, as shall be shewed hereafter; 
for here with breuitie, I intend to set downe the chiefe diseases for 
which this powder is specially good, and leaue the rest to the good consideration 
of the Phisician. 
 
1 Headache proceedeth from choler, flegme, or melancholy, or 
mixt humour. 
2 Headache from an euill stomacke. 
3 Megrim. 
4 Vertigo or Turnabout. 
5 Dead sleepe. 
6 Apoplexy. 
[^f.C1v^] 
7 Frensie. 
8 Losse of memorie. 
9 Noli me tangere, Cancer. 
10 Erisipelas. 
11 Carbuncle. 
12 Elephantiasis. 
13 Pustles. 
14 Scabs and Itch. 
15 Leprosie, or any tumors against nature. 
16 Cough. 
17 Asthma, or difficultie of breathing. 
18 Inflamation of the Lungs. 
19 Spitting of matter. 
20 Ptisicke. 
21 Pleuresie. 
22 Spitting of bloud. 
23 Swounding. 
24 Weaknesse of the stomacke. 
25 Vomiting. 
26 Great thirst. 
27 Losse of appetite. 
28 Doglike appetite. 
29 Surfeting. 
30 Sighing. 
31 The night Mare. 
32 The Cholicke. 
33 Iliaca passio. 
34 Windinesse in the bodie. 
35 All sortes of Wormes. 
36 Fluxes, Lienteria, Dissenteria, and Diarrhæa, because in the 
beginning it is good to purge away the vicious humour. 
37 The Emmorrhoids or Piles. 
38 Obstructions and distemperature of the Liuer. 
39 Iaundise, yellow and blacke. 
40 The Greene sicknesse. 
41 The Dropsie, Anasarcha, Vposarcha, and Timpanites. 
42 The obstructions of the Splene. 
43 Flatus melancholicus hypoc. 
44 Vlceration of the Reynes. 
45 The Stone or grauell in the Reynes. 
46 Strangurie. 
[^f.C2r^] 
[^Beginning of a list in two columns.^] 
47 Difficultie of pissing. 
48 Pissing of bloud. 
49 For bringing down womens Flowers. 
50 Sterilitie or barrennesse. 
51 The quotidian Ague. 
[^A column change.^] 
52 The Tertian. 
53 The burning Feuer. 
54 The Quartane. 
55 The Pestilence. 
[^End of a list in two columns.^] 
 
In all these diseases it is good to take of this powder, yet imagine not 
that this of it selfe will cure them perfectly, yet many of them it will, as 
most sort of Headaches, & weaknes of the stomacke, all sorts of wormes, 
the three Fluxes with an other simple after the body is purged, the Stone 
in the reynes, womens termes, & all maner of Agues (the Feuer Hecticke, 
and Marasmus excepted) whether the humours bee enflamed within the 
veynes or without, in al maner of people, sucking children and other, commonly 
at once taking, but for the Quartan it will aske longer time. Also I 
presume it wil cure y=e= Pestilence if it be take~ in any time, & not past al help. 
 
Finally, for the French Pox or any simptome therof beginning, it is the 
most singular medicine that euer was found out, for without hot-houses, 
lothsome diet drinkes, bathing in Cornelius Tub, any other Purgations, 
annoyntments, fumes, or Suffumigations with Quicksiluer, making 
most lothsome Excoriations and painefull Exulcerations, eating the teeth 
out of the head, and dissoluing the Sinewes, and other simptomes, this 
onely of it selfe, if it be taken before the desperate symptomes doe appeare, 
will cure them, and doubtlesse excelleth all other that art or nature can 
this day afford. 
 
In like maner it may be probably coniectured, by the authoritie of diuers 
Authors, and reasoning from the materials whereof it is made, that it 
may cure the Gout, if it be not alreadie grown to a desperate period. Now 
that I haue shewed for what diseases this powder is good, some may expect 
that I should set downe the particular experiences that I haue made of it, 
to wit, the Cures which it hath performed, with the names of the parties, 
the time when, & the place of their abode, to the intent it might the better 
perswade the hard belæuing world, of the good effects of it, & giue greater 
credit to my words. But for these causes I haue wittingly & willingly omitted 
the~: first, in regard that many of y=e= parties are not willing to haue their 
names come in print, nor the diseases knowne of which they haue beene 
cured. Secondly, the rehearsal of these cures performed by my selfe and my 
friends which haue administred it, would aske a longer discourse then all 
my treatise besides. Lastly, I might haply be condemned of too much arrogancy 
& vainglory, seeming to incline for the most part to y=e= emperical sect. 
To auoid therefore imagined arroga~cie, tediousnesse in discourses, and displeasure 
to my friends, I haue purposely neglected that which might well 
here haue beene spoken of this large subiect. 
 
[^f.C2v^] 
[}CHAP. 6. 
What symptomes and accidences happen after the 
taking of this powder.}] 
 
I Think it not impertine~t to this purpose, first to shew what symptomes 
and inconueniences follow and happen to the bodie after vsuall purgations, 
that thereby the difference betweene them & this powder of gold 
may be plainely perceiued. 
 
Galen in his booke entituled, Quos oportet purgare, giueth a generall 
and true proposition of all purging medicines: Omnia purgantia medicamenta 
ventriculum vitiant, precipueq; os ipsius, &c. which Mesue largely 
confirmeth in his first booke De simp. medic. purga. the first theorem, 
whereto all other Phisicions with one consent agree, and by experience we 
see it daily verified: and they doe not onely hurt the stomacke in particular, 
but are also grieuous to nature it selfe, offending the principall parts of the 
bodie, so that the diligent searchers out of their faculties and operations 
haue noted these symptomes which vsually follow the taking of the~. The 
first is, Agues, because they doe inflame the humours. The second, Cephalalgia, by reason of their vapours fuming vp into the head. The third, Uertigo, 
caused by the circumaction of vapours raysed vp into the braine within 
his ventricles and arteries. The 4. imbecility of sight, by reason of too 
much drinesse of the parts of the eyes, which follow superfluous euacuation, 
or of the humour within the nerue optick, which those purges dissolue 
and cannot euacuate. The 5. weakenesse of the stomacke, caused diuers 
wayes by the distemperature which the medicine bred. The 6. immoderate 
thirst, caused by the saltnesse, sharpnesse, heate and bitternesse of the 
medicine. The 7. sighing, caused either of immoderate heat and acrimony 
of the medicine gnawing the stomacke, or by his drinesse drawing it together. 
The 8. payne of the stomacke, caused of the vnequall distemperature 
or exulceration which the purge made. The 9. excoriation of the bowels, 
through the corrosiue and fretting qualitie of the medicine. The 10. 
inflamation of the reynes, proceeding from the heate of the medicine. 11. 
The stone of the reynes, by reason of abunda~ce of slimy matter brought to 
that place, and by heat baked into a stone. 12. Uoyding of bloud, prouoked 
by the vlceration of the bowels. 13. Tenasmus, or a vayne desire to goe to 
stoole, by reason the spincter of muscle of the fundame~t is vlcerated through 
the acrimony of the medicine or humour voyded. 14. The Emmorhoids 
or Plies caused by such medicines as open the veynes. 15. Imbecility or 
[^f.C3r^] 
weaknesse of the whole bodie, by reason of the generall disturban~ce of nature, 
caused by the violence of the medicine. 16. Convulsion, caused of 
much matter stirred vp and drawne together, but not euacuated, which 
after hauing recourse to the sinewes and muscles, causeth convulsion. 17. 
Costiuenesse, the body being left hot and drie after the purge, and then baketh 
the excrements, which doth happen in sundrie purgations, & most Patients 
complaine of it. All which diseases do happen to them that take purgations 
for three especiall causes, being three maine vices incident to most 
of vsuall medicines that purge. The first, when they doe moue, dissolue, 
and draw together offensiue humors, and nature not able to euacuate the~. 
The second, when humours are euacuate illegitimately and with molestation 
of the Patient, which happeneth whe~ they are ministred for those humours 
which they ought not. The third, when they doe too much euacuate, 
working too violently, making excoriation of the stomack and bowels, 
and drawing the bloud out of the veynes. For the correction of these 
symptoms, the learned Phisicions in all ages, hauing especiall care of their 
Patients health, laboured by all means possible to find out Antidotes and 
correctors to withstand their inconueniences, and breake their malice: and 
in regard each purging medicine had some manifest vice or other, they did 
not onely inuent generall correctors to auoyd such capitall vices, but also 
particular for euery such medicine. Hence Aloes had Mastick, Bdellium, 
and Tragagant, to keepe it from opening of the veynes & drawing bloud 
out of them, and causing the Emmorhoids. Mirabolanes were prepared 
with oyle of sweete Almonds, and administred with iuice of Fumitary, 
Wormwood, Agarick, and Spikenard, and Diureticks, to hinder them fro~ 
causing obstructions. Scammony was corrected with iuice of Quinces and 
vineger, to breake his malice, and giuen with Aromaticks and comforters 
of the principall parts, to ouercome his enmitie to the whole bodie. Teerbith 
was corrected with Ginger, to auoyd windinesse: and so in like maner 
euery one had his particular correcter, directer, and helper to worke duly, & 
qualifie their vices. This knowne and well considered, it resteth to shew 
whether there be any such vice in this Catholicon Aureum or no; & herein 
is the difference seene betweene this and all other purges, that whereas all 
of them need correctors to breake their malice, Aromatickes to take away 
their lothsomnesse and help their working, admixture of contraries to stay 
their violent and immoderate operation, and Cordials to comfort & defend 
the principall parts: So that if the ill effects they worke, be weighed 
in an equall ballance with their good, the good will scarce counterpoyse it. 
This powder onely hath this grace, that it neuer offendeth any of the principall 
parts, neuer draweth bloud out of the veynes, neuer worketh too violently, 
euacuating more the~ is burdensome to nature, neuer inflameth the 
[^f.C3v^] 
bloud, or any part of the body, neuer maketh exulceration of the stomack & 
bowels, neuer violently draweth humours, but after a direct course helpeth 
nature to digest them or expell them by sweat, vrine, and expiration, 
neuer needeth any corrector, nor hath any such inconuenience: therefore by 
consequent, neuer raiseth any such symptoms which vsually follow the taking 
of the other purges, but contrarywise I affirme that it strengtheneth 
the heart, the liuer, the braine, and the whole body, purifieth the bloud, reuiueth 
the spirits, making them fit and apt to doe all their functions naturall. 
That this is true, I giue the learned thus much to consider. The materials 
whereof this powder consisteth in generall are two, for in it are 
two corporeall substances mixed and vnited together, not as Elementa in 
composito mixta inseperabilia, but as salt dissolued and mixed with water, 
or sugar in wine per minima as farre as that mixion and vnition may be, 
yet with more fixation and very hard (yet possible) seperation. One of 
the substances is Metalline fixed, the other Mercuriall fixed agent & patient. 
Of these two vnited together is this powder made; from these two in 
one, proceed two seuerall qualities, the one purging by siege Leniendo and 
Lubricando; by vomit Os stomachi aperiendo, and Naturam fortiter mouendo. 
The other comforting from the Aureity, and helping naturall heat 
to dissolue open, and expell whatsoeuer is offensiue either within the vessels, 
or without, by sweat and expiration: and as neither Mercury it selfe 
without his incorruptible patient can safely purge or work any good effect, 
so neither Gold without his Mercuriall agent the true minerall fire, can 
be so subtiliate as to comfort nature & expell offensiue humours, but both 
Philosophically circulate together make this perfect purge. From these 
reasons it may be gathered, why it both purgeth and comforteth, from the 
one qualitie leauing the body long after soluble, from the other qualitie 
strengthening the vitall spirits and animall faculties, restoring also naturall 
heat and radicall moysture to the temperature thereof. 
 
[}CHAP. 7. 
The conclusion.}] 
 
CUrteous Reader, I haue thus breefely and truely shewed the materials 
whereof this powder consisteth, the preparation of it, the qualities 
and operation, the differences betweene this and all other purges, 
and in what diseases it is good to take it; yet imagine not that 
it will cure them of it selfe alone, but onely seruing for a preparation to 
their cures, wheresoeuer there needeth any purging in stead of all other, 
[^f.C4r^] 
yet many of these diseases as I noted before, it will of it selfe cure, with 
diuers others which time and experience shall make manifest, and the ingenious 
Reader may easily gather fro~ the instance of those, and that with 
more effectuall, safe, pleasant and speedier working, then any other at this 
day known and inuented: and if any hereafter require farther satisfaction 
of the naturall possibilitie hereof, either by authority, reason, 
or experience, I shall bee ready at any occasion to doe it, 
eyther by word or writing; in the meane time 
commending these first fruites 
of my labours to his indifferent 
and equall 
censure, 
 
Et hic me Plato sistere iubet. 
 
[}FINIS.}] 
 
