[^Jorden, Edward: Naturall bathes^] 
 
[}DISCOVRSE 
OF 
NATVRALL BATHES, 
AND 
MINERALL WATERS. 
 
Wherein first the originall of Fountaines in 
generall is declared. 
 
Then the nature and differences of Minerals, with examples 
of particular Bathes from most 
of them. 
 
Next the generation of Minerals in the earth, from whence 
both the actuall heate of Bathes, and their vertues are 
proued to proceede. 
 
Also by what meanes Minerall Waters are to be examined 
and discouered. 
 
And lastly, of the nature and vses of Bathes, but especially 
of our Bathes at Bathe in Sommersetshire. 
 
By ED. IORDEN D=r=. in Physicke. 
 
LONDON: 
Printed by THOMAS HARPER, 
1631.}] 
 
[^Omitted a dedication to Francis Cottington, Chancellor of the exchequer and Privy council, and a verse in Latin by Iohannes Argent, Iohannes Gifforf, Simon Baskerville and Thomas Ridgeley, a second verse in Latin by Ed. Lapworth, M.D., and a third Latin verse by Io. Dauntesey.^] 
[^Extract 1, pp. 1-33^] 
 
[^p.1^] 
[}OF 
NATVRALL 
BATHES, 
AND 
MINERALL WATERS.}] 
 
[}Cap. 1. 
 
Explication of the word Bathe. The scope and argument 
of this Booke. The ancient vse and esteeme of Bathes among 
the Romans. The moderne vse of them among the 
Turkes, Of medicinable Bathes, and minerall Waters. How 
esteemed by Greekes, Latines, Arabians, & other nations.}] 
 
THE word Bathe or Balneum is of 
larger extent then I purpose to discourse 
of: for it being the name of 
a forme of remedie applied to the 
body, it may be framed either out of 
liquid things, or solid substances, or 
vapours. 
 
Liquid Substances are Water, Milke, Must, Wine, 
[^p.2^] 
Oyle: solid substances are Sand, Salt, pressed Grapes, 
Corne, &c. vapours are Stuffes and hot houses. 
 
My intent is onely to treate of waters, and principally 
of those which be called Minerall, whether they bee 
vsed in Bath or in Potion, &c. 
 
[/1./] 
These kinde of watrie Bathes haue beene in vse from 
all antiquity, and held in great esteeme. Among the ancient 
Romans there were no Buildings more magnificent 
then their Bathes, whereof there are reported to 
haue beene in Rome, 856. The chiefest of these were 
the Anthonin, and Dioclesian Bathes; the walles whereof 
were of admirable height, with an infinite number of 
marble Pillars, erected for ostentation, and not to support 
any thing, 1000 Seates to sit in; Their Caldaria, 
Lepidaria, Frigidaria, most sumptuous and stately: the 
whole fabricke so large and spacious, as they resembled 
rather Cities then Houses. And so it might well 
be, when as there were imployed for the building of the 
Dioclesian Bathes, as Baccius saith, 4000. men, but Salmuth 
saith, 14000. for some yeares together. They were 
placed where now the Church of Saint Angelo stands. 
[/2./] 
The Turkes at this day retaine that ancient custome of 
the Romans, and are in nothing more profuse, then in 
their Temples and Bathes, which are like vnto great 
Pallaces, and in euery Citie very frequent: And yet 
both the Romans and the Turkes vsed those Bathes onely 
for pleasure, and delicacy, and cleanlinesse: the Romans 
going barelegged, and their waies dusty, had need 
of often washing: and the Turkes lying in their cloathes, 
subiect to Lice and wormes, if it were not for their often 
bathing. 
 
Now if those Nations would bestow so much vpon 
their Bathes of delicacie and pleasure, which were onely 
of pure water; wee haue much more reason to adorne 
[^p.3^] 
our minerall Bathes; which (besides the former vses) are 
also medicinall and very soueraigne for many diseases, 
consisting of wholesome minerals, and approued for many 
hundred yeares, of many who could not otherwise 
be recouered. And the least wise if wee doe not beautifie 
and adorne them, yet we should so accommodate them, 
as they might serue for the vtmost extent of benefit to 
such as neede them. 
 
For there is nothing in our profession of Physicke 
more vsefull, nor in the workes of nature more admirable, 
(man onely excepted, which Plato cals the great 
miracle) then naturall Bathes, and minerall Waters. 
The nature and causes whereof haue beene so hard to 
discouer, as our ancient Authors haue written little of 
them, holding them to be sacred or holy, either for that 
they iudged them to haue their vertue immediately 
from God, or at least from the celestiall Bodies; from 
whence, both their actuall heate was thought to to be kindled, 
by lightnings or such like impressions, and other 
admirable vertues, and sometimes contrary effects deriued, 
which appeare in them: Also diuers miracles haue 
beene ascribed vnto those naturall Bathes, to confirme 
the opinion of supernaturall power in them, as Guaynerius 
[/3./] 
reports of the Bathes of Aque in Italy: and Langius 
out of Athenæus, concerning the Bathes of Edepsus, 
which both lost their vertue for a time. The one by the 
Magistrates prohibiting poore diseased people to vse 
them, the other by imposing a taxation vpon them, but 
vpon the reformation of those abuses, were restored to 
their former vertues againe. 
 
I neede not herein auerring the opinion of Diuinitie 
which was held to be in Bathes, make any mention of 
the Poole of Bethesda, written of by Saint Iohn, and 
Nonnus the Poet: nor of the riuer Iordan, which cured 
[^p.4^] 
Naman the Assyrian of his Leprosie: being indeede true 
miracles, and done by a supernaturall power: yet it is 
likely that those and such like examples bred in the 
mindes of men a reuerend and diuine opinion of all 
Bathes: especially where they saw such strange effects as 
they could not well reduce to naturall causes. 
 
And this hath beene the cause that in old time these 
minerall fountaines haue beene consecrated vnto certaine 
dieties: as Hamon in Libya, vnto Iupiter: Thermopyla, 
vnto Hercules, by Lallas among the Troglodits, 
another to the Sun, &c. And at this day we haue diuers 
Bathes which carry the names of Sunne, Moone, and 
Saints: and many Townes and Cities named from the 
Bathes in them: as Thermæ in Macedonia & Sicily, Thermidea 
in Rhodes, Aquæ in Italy, Aquisgran in Germany, 
Baden in Heluetia: and our ancient Citie of Bathe in 
Sommersetshire, in honour whereof I haue especially 
vndertaken this labour, and I perswade my selfe, that among 
the infinite number of Bathes and minerall waters 
which are in Europe, there are none of more vniuersall 
vse for curing of diseases, nor any more commodious 
for entertainement of sicke persons, then these are. 
 
Besides this sacred conceit of Bathes, wherewith in 
ancient times, the mindes of men were possest, we may 
adde this, that the nature of Minerals was not so well 
discouered by them, as it hath beene since: and therefore 
wee finde very little written of this argument, either 
in Aristotle or Hippocrates, or in Galen, who wrote 
[/4./] 
most copiously in all other points of Physicke, yet concerning 
this hath little; and neuer gaue any of these waters 
to drinke inwardly, although hee acknowledgeth 
that they were in vse: and for outward vses, held them 
all to be potentially hot. 
 
After these Grecians, the ancient Latines and Arabians 
[^p.5^] 
succeeded: Pliny, Celsus, Seneca, Lucretius, Auicen, 
Rhasis, Seraphio, Auerrhoes, in whom wee finde 
some small mention of naturall Bathes, and some vse of 
Salt and nitrous, and Aluminous waters, but nothing of 
worth towards the discouerie of the naturall causes of 
them. It is likely they did passe it ouer slightly, either by 
reason of the difficulty in searching out the causes of 
them, or that they iudged them meerely metaphysicall. 
But in later times the nature and generation of Minerals 
(from whom the Bathes proceede, and from whence the 
Bathes proceede, and from whence the whole doctrine 
of them both for their qualities, and differences, originals 
and vse, must be deriued) being better looked into, 
and obseruations taken from such as daily labour in the 
bowels of the earth, for the search of Mines, or such as 
afterwards prepare them for our necessarie vses; we haue 
attayned to better knowledge in this kinde, then the 
Ancients could haue, although in all new discoueries 
there will be defects for succeeding ages to supply, so it 
fals out in this: Dies Diem docet: Alpham Beta corrigit. 
And although Agricola, Fullopius, Baccius, Mathesius, 
Solinander, Libauius, &c. haue added much vnto that 
which was formerly knowne in this point, and reformed 
many errors and mistakings in former writers: yet 
they haue left many things imperfect, doubtfull, obscure, 
controuerted, and perhaps false, as may appeare 
in the discourse following. I doe reuerence all their 
worths, as from whom I haue learned many things 
which else I could hardly haue attained vnto; and I acknowledge 
them to haue beene excellent instruments 
for the aduancement of learning: yet I hope it may bee 
as free for me without imputation of arrogancie to publish 
my conceits herein, as it hath beene for them, or 
may be for any other: Hanc veniam petimusque damusque 
[^p.6^] 
vicissim. My end and studie is the common good, 
and the bettering of this knowledge: and if I shall bring 
any further light to increase that, I shall be glad: otherwise 
my intent being to search out the truth, and not to 
contradict others, it will or ought to be a sufficient protection 
for mee, wherefore I come to discourse of Minerall 
waters. 
 
[}CAP. 2. 
 
Definition of Minerall waters. The nature whereof cannot 
be vnderstood, except first consideration be had concerning 
simple water. Of which in this Chapter are showed 
the qualities and vse.}] 
 
[/5./] 
MInerall waters are such, as besides their owne simple 
nature, haue receiued and imbibed some other 
qualitie or substance from Subterraneall Mynes. I say, 
besides their owne nature, because they retaine still 
their liquidnesse and cold, and moysture, although for a 
time they may be actually hot from an externall impression 
of heate, which being gone, they returne to their 
former cold againe. I say imbybed, to distinguish them 
from confused waters: as earth may bee confused with 
water, but not imbybed, and will sinke to the bottome 
againe: whereas such things as are imbybed, are so mixed 
with the water, as it retaines them, and is vnited with 
it: being either Spirits, or dissoluble Iuyces, or tinctures; 
I say from Subterraneall mynes, to distinguish them 
from animall or vegetable substances, as infusions or decoctions 
of hearbs, flesh, &c. 
 
Seeing then that the Basis of these Bathes or minerall 
fountaines, is water, we must first consider the nature of 
simple water, and from thence wee shall better iudge of 
[^p.7^] 
Minerall Waters and their differences. 
 
By simple water I doe not meane the Element of water, 
[/6./] 
for that is no where to be found among mixt bodies, 
but I meane such water as is free from any heterogeneall 
admixture, which may alter either the touch or taste, or 
colour, or smell, or weight, or consistence, or any other 
qualitie, which may be discerned either by the senses, or 
by the effects. This water therefore must haue his proper 
colour and taste, without sauour, or smell, thin, light, 
cold, and moyst; if any of these properties be wanting, 
or any redownd, it is mixed and infected. 
 
Cold and moysture doe abound in water more then 
[/7./] 
in any other Element. For cold appeares by this, that 
being heated by any externall cause, it soone returnes to 
his cold nature againe, when the cause of the heate is remoued. 
And whereas Ayre is held by the Stoicks to be 
[/8./] 
most cold, and confirmed by Seneca, and Libauius, yet 
the reason they giue for it, doth proue water to bee 
more cold, because they make the matter of ayre to bee 
water, and to haue his coldnesse from thence. But Aristotle 
[/9./] 
holds the ayre to be hot from the efficient cause 
which rarefied it, being of more validitie to make it hot, 
then water (the materiall cause) to make it cold. Galen 
[/10./] 
is on neither side, for he doth not iudge it to be hot, neither 
doth he euer pronounce it to be cold: but by reason 
of his tenuity, apt to be altered either by heat or cold. As 
[/11./] 
for moysture, Aristotle holds the Ayre to be most moist, 
and water most cold. Galen holds Water to bee most 
moyst. Aristotles reason for the predominance of moysture 
in Ayre, is, because it is most hardly contained 
within his bounds: but the termination of things, proceedes 
from their opposite qualities, as moysture is terminated 
by drynesse, and drynesse by moysture: and 
drynesse doth as easily terminate moysture, as moysture 
[^p.8^] 
doth terminate drynesse. And this difficulty of termination 
in Ayre, may more properly bee ascribed to his 
thinnesse and tenuity of parts, then to his moysture. 
For dry exhalations will extend themselues as well as 
moyst vapours; and as it is density that compacts, so it 
is rarity that extends. Fire it selfe is hardly bounded, and 
[/12./] 
yet, not moyst. Those that would reconcile these differences, 
doe alledge that Galen speakes as a Physitian, 
and meant that water was humidissimum medicamentum: 
Aristotle as a Philosopher meant it to be humidissimum 
elementum. But this reconciliation giues little satisfaction. 
For how could water be humidissimum medicamentum, 
if it were not humidissimum elementum? 
We speake of the proper operation of water according 
to his naturall qualitie, and not as it may worke by accident. 
[/13./] 
Thinnesse and leuitie are two other qualities of 
simple water, which Hippocrates commends, and addes 
this experiment in another place, that it is quickly hot, 
and quickly cold. Galen addes another experiment in 
the quicke boyling of Peasen or Beanes. And it is requisite 
that water should haue these qualities, in regard of 
the manifold and necessarie vses of it, both for Man and 
Beast, and Plants: insomuch, as there is no liuing for any 
[/14./] 
creature, where there is no water. It was our first drinke 
to quench our thirst, and to distribute our nourishment 
as a vehiculum, which it doth by his tenuitie; and after 
the inuention of Wine, it was mixed therewith, as Virgil 
saith of Bacchus, poculaque inuentis Acheloia miscuit 
vuis; where, by Acheloia, he meanes not onely the water 
[/15./] 
of the Riuer Achelous in Etolia, but all other waters, as 
Macrobius proues out of Aristophanes and Ephorus. And 
since the planting of Vineyards, seeing all Countries 
could not beare Grapes, Bacchus also taught the world 
to make vinum e frugibus with water, as Diodorus 
[^p.9^] 
Siculus reports, from whence the Egyptians had their 
[/16./] 
Zithum and Curmi, the Spaniards their Cerea, the 
Turkes their Cowset, and wee our Ale and Beere; all 
which are extracted out of Corne, by the purenesse and 
tenuitie of water. By meanes whereof wee haue our 
Brothes, Syrupes, Apozemes, &c. extracted with it, as 
a fit menstruum to receiue the faculties of all medicaments 
and nourishments, especially the second qualities, 
and therefore it was anciently called Panspermia: 
besides the manifold vses in washing, dying, &c. of 
which I will not discourse farther. Leuitie is another 
note of pure water, alledged by many, and serues well 
to distinguish it from many mixed waters, whether wee 
respect the weigth of it, or the molestation which it 
breedes in the bowels. The difference of weight is hardly 
[/17./] 
discerned by ballance, both because simple waters 
doe very little differ in this point,and also many mixt 
waters, if they be onely infected with Spirits, and not 
corporall substances, retaine the same proportion of 
heauinesse with simple water: and also because it is hard 
to haue great ballances so exact, as a small difference 
may be discerned by them, yet Agricola reports that a 
[/18./] 
cotyle of the water of Pyrene and Euleus, did weigh a 
dram lesse then the water of Euphrates, or Tigris, and 
therefore the Kings of Persia vsed to drinke of it, and 
held it in great account, as also the water of the Riuer 
[/19./] 
Coaspis. Thus much for the qualities which simple 
water should haue, for such as it should not haue, I shall 
not need to spend time in discourse, being either such as 
the senses will discouer, if it bee in taste, colour, smell, 
or touch; or the effects, if it be purgatiue, vomitory, venomous, 
&c. 
 
[^p.10^] 
[}Cap. 3. 
 
Of the three originals of simple waters.}] 
 
[/20./] 
NOw it followeth that we shew from whence these 
waters haue their originall, which is no other then 
of the mixt waters, sauing that the mixt waters doe participate 
with some minerals which are imbybed in 
them. 
 
They haue three seuerall Originals: the one from 
moyst vapours congealed by cold in the ayre: the second 
from the earth; the third by percolation from the 
Sea. 
 
For the first, it is certaine that our Springs and Riuers 
doe receiue great supply of waters from the Ayre, 
where vapours being congealed by cold, doe fall downe 
vpon the earth in raine, or snow, or haile, whereby the 
ground is not onely made fertile, but our Springs are 
reuiued, and our Riuers increased. As wee see the Rein 
and Danubius to swell more in summer then in winter, 
because then the snow which continually lyeth vpon 
the Alpes, doth melt by the heate of the sunne, and fils 
those Riuers, which haue their Originals from thence 
vp to the brinkes. Also we see daily after much raine, our 
small Lakes and Riuers to be very high. Also vpon much 
dryth our Springs faile vs in many places, which vpon 
store of raine doe supply vs againe with water. And this 
is the cause that in most parts of Africa, neere the Equinoctiall, 
where it raines little, they haue little water; and 
many times in two or three dayes iourney, can hardly 
finde to quench their thirsts and their Camels. Leo Africanus 
speakes of an Army wherein were many Camels, 
which in their marching, comming to a Riuer 
(perhaps it was but a Brooke) did drinke it dry. So that 
[^p.11^] 
we must acknowledge that the earth receiues much water 
this way. But how this should serue the bowels of 
the earth with sufficiencie for the generations there, 
and for perpetuall springs, is very doubtfull; whereas 
Seneca saith that these waters doe not pierce aboue ten 
[/21./] 
foot into the earth: neither if there were passages for it 
into the bowels of the earth, can the hundred part of it 
be imployed this way, but is rudely conueyed by Riuers 
into the Sea. Wherefore although much water bee 
yeelded to the superficies of the earth by raine, and 
snow, and haile from the ayre, yet not sufficient to maintaine 
perpetuall Springs; seeing many times, and in many 
countries these aeriall supplies are wanting, or very 
spare, and yet the Springs the same. Wherefore Aristotle 
[/22./] 
his opinion, which attributes all to aeriall water and 
vapours, from thence, is iustly reiected by Agricola, and 
by our country-man Master Lydiat. So that wee must 
[/23./] 
finde out some other Originals, or else wee shall want 
water for the manifold vses the earth hath of it: from the 
earth they make another originall of perpetuall Springs 
and Riuers, seeing the first seemes to be ordained by nature 
onely for the irrigation of the superficies of the 
earth, which else would be in most places destitute of 
water, where Springs are not, and so would be barren, 
plants and trees wanting due moysture for their nourishment. 
Wherefore for the perpetuitie of fountaines, 
and for Subterraneall generations, which cannot proceede 
without water, they haue imagined a generation 
of water within the earth; some holding that the earth it 
selfe is conuerted into water, as elements are held to be 
mutable and conuertable, the one into the other. But 
neither fire will be conuerted into any other element, being 
superiour vnto the rest, and not to be mastered by 
cold, which onely must be the agent of the conuersion 
[^p.12^] 
of it by condensation: neither will earth be conuerted 
into water, for either heate or cold must conuert it. Heate 
cannot doe it, although it rarifie and attenuate, both for 
that it consumes moysture, and also because water is 
[/24./] 
cold, which it should not be, if it were made by heat; for 
euery naturall Agent workes to that end that it may 
make the Patient like it selfe: and heate may conuert 
earth into fume and dry exhalations, but not into water, 
for all water which is not eternall, is from cold; 
likewise cold cannot conuert earth into water, because 
cold doth congeale, condense, and congregate, and indurate, 
and not dissolue and attenuate, &c. as wee see in 
Amber and Gummes. Others will haue great receptacles 
of ayre within the earth, which flying vp and 
downe, is congealed by the coldnesse of Rockes into 
[/25./] 
water, to supply all wants. Others imagine huge Lakes 
and Cisternes, primarilie framd in the earth and supplied 
with water, either from vapour or ayre, or from 
the sea; which water either by agitation, by winds, or 
by impulsion from the sea, or by compression of Rocks, 
is eleuated to the Superficies of the earth: or els vapours 
from thence, made by attenuation, either form the Sun 
and Starres, or from Subterraneall fire kindled vpon 
Sulpher and Bitumen; which vapours ascending to the 
tops of mountaines, are there congealed into water by 
the coldnesse of the Rockes; where there must be other 
Cesternes or Castles in the ayre to feede the inferiour 
Springs. These and such like deuices are produced for 
the maintaining of thei_[^ORIG. BLURRED^] Originall; which as they are all 
insufficient to afford such a proportion of water as is requisite, 
so most of them are so improbable, and full of 
desperate difficulties, as I am vnwilling to spend time 
in the rehearsing of them, or their Authors, much more 
vnwilling in confuting them, to trouble my selfe and 
[^p.13^] 
offend my Reader, onely the poynt of Subterraneall 
fire which hath taken deepest impression in most mens 
mindes, I shall speake of hereafter, when I come to shew 
the causes of the actuall heate of the Springs. The third Originall 
is from the Sea, a sufficient storehouse for all vses, 
and whereunto the other two may be referred. For that 
which fals from the ayre, and that which is bred in the 
earth, doe proceed principally from the Sea. Agricola 
[/26./] 
for feare of wanting water for his Springs, is contented 
to admit of all these Originals, although he relyeth least 
vpon the Sea, because he knowes not how to bring it vp 
to the heads of his fountaines, but is contented it should 
serue for lower places neare the Sea coste. As I remember 
I haue seene in Zeland at Westcapell, fresh Springs 
colated from the Sea, through bankes of sand. But I 
make no doubt but that the Sea water may serue all other 
Springs and Riuers whatsoeuer, although both 
farre remote form the Sea, and high in situation. Neither 
shall we neede to flye for helpe to those monstrous 
conceits of Agitation, Compulsion, Compression, 
Suction, Attraction by the Sunne, &c. But holding the 
sacred Canon of the Scriptures, that all Riuers are from 
[/27./] 
the Sea, &c. I perswade my selfe, that there is a naturall 
reason for the eleuating of these waters vnto the heads 
of Fountaines and Riuers, although it hath not yet 
beene discouered. For those opinions formerly mentioned 
will not hold water. 
 
My conceit therefore is this, that as we see in Siphunculis, 
that water being put in at one end, will rise vp in 
the other pipe, as high as the leuell of the water (whether 
by his waight, or by the correspondence with his 
leuell, I will not dispute) so it may be in the bowels of 
the earth; considering that the passages there are more 
firme to maintaine the continuitie of the water with the 
[^p.14^] 
Sea, then any leaden pipes can be, being compassed on 
euery side with many Rockes: as we see in Venis, fibris & 
commissuris saxorum. Now although perhaps this water 
enters into the earth very deepe, yet the leuell of it 
must answer to the superficies of the Sea, which is likely 
to be as high as the superficies of the Land, seeing the 
natural place of waters is aboue the earth. And although 
neere the Coasts it bee depressed and lower then the 
Shoare, yet there is reason for that, because it is terminated 
by the dry and solid body of the earth: as we see in 
a Cup or Bowle of water filled to the top, we may put 
in a great bulke of siluer in pieces, and yet it will not run 
ouer, but be heightened aboue the brims of the bowle. 
If this be euident in so small a proportion, we may imagine 
it to bee much more in the vast Ocean: and our 
Springs being commonly at the foot of hills, may well 
be inferiour to the Globe of the Sea, if any bee higher, 
they may perhaps be fed from raine and snow falling 
vpon the mountaines. But if Iosephus a Costa, his assertion 
bee true, that the Sea towards the Equinoctiall, is 
higher then towards the Poles, then the leuell of the 
Sea may be much higher then the top of our highest 
hils, but this is a doubtfull assertion: yet I dare beleeue 
that if it were possible to immure a Spring without admission 
of ayre, which might breake the continuitie with 
the Sea, our Springs might be raised much higher. At 
Saint Winifrids Well in Flintshire, though there be no 
high land neere it, yet the Springs rise with such a violence, 
and so plentifully, that within a stones cast, it 
driues a Mill. It is likely that this Spring might be raised 
much higher. And whereas we see that Riuers doe run 
downewards to the Sea per decliue, it doth not proue 
the Sea to be lower then the Land, but onely neere the 
shore where it is terminated, and in lieu of this it hath 
[^p.15^] 
scope assigned it to fill vp the Globe, and so to be as high 
as the Land, if not higher. For if a measure should bee 
taken of the Globe of the earth, it must be taken from 
the tops of the Mountaines, and from the highest of the 
Sea, and not from the Vallies, nor from the Sea-coasts. 
This conceit of mine I was fearefull to publish, and 
therefore had written vnto Master Brigges, mine ancient 
friend, for his aduice in it, being a point wherein he 
was well studied: but before my Letter came to Oxford, 
he was dead. But now I haue aduentured to publish 
it, to stir vp others to search out the causes hereof, 
better then hath yet beene discouered. Exors ipse secandi, 
fungor vice cotis. 
 
[}CAP. 4. 
 
Diuision of Minerall Waters. Minerals described. 
Their kindes recited. Of earth, simple and mixed. Whether 
it giue any medicinable qualitie to water. And so of 
the rest in the following Chapters.}] 
 
THus much of simple waters, and their originals, 
which may serue as Polycletus his rule to iudge mixed 
and infected waters by: as Galen in many places 
speakes of an exact and sound constitution of body, as a 
rule to discerne distempered and disproportionated bodies. 
And thus much in explication of the Genus, in the 
definition of Minerall waters. 
 
Now I come to Minerall Waters, and to the other 
part of the definition which wee call difference, &c. 
from Subterraneall Mynes by Imbibition. 
 
These Minerall waters are either simple or compound; 
simple, which partake but with some one Subterraneall 
Minerall; compound, which partake with 
[^p.16^] 
moe then one. And these waters partake with Minerals, 
either as they are confused with them, or as they 
are perfectly mixed. Also these minerall waters, whether 
simple or compound, are actually either hot or cold; the 
reason whereof must proceede from some Subterraneall 
cause, as shall be shewed hereafter. 
 
Wherefore wee must first know the nature of these 
Subterraneall Minerals, and their generation, from 
whence Minerall waters receiue their difference, from 
common simple water, before wee can iudge of the nature 
and qualitie of them, either Actuall or Potentiall. 
 
By Minerals, we vnderstand all Inanimat perfect bodies, 
bred in Mynes within the bowels of the earth. I 
dare not vndertake to muster these in due order by 
Dicotomyes, seeing neither Agricola nor Fullopius, nor 
Libauius, nor any other that I know, haue exactly done 
it, nor satisfied either others or themselues in it: and seeing 
there are diuers Minerals lately discouered, and perhaps 
more may bee hereafter, which haue not beene 
knowne in former times, and therefore not mentioned; 
as Calæm in the East Indies, Rusma and terra ghetta in 
Turkey, &c. Wherefore I will make bold to reckon 
them vp as they come to hand in seauen rankes. 
 
The first shall be Earth. 
 
Earth whether it be bred ab exhalatione sicca refrigerata, 
or ex mistis per putredinem in fimum co~uersis, or ex lapidibus 
sole aut calore coctis & deinde aqua solutis, &c. 
it is all inconcrete. As a little water gleweth it together 
in Lutum, so a great deale dissolues it. But this is no proper 
dissolution, but onely a disioyning of parts by Imbybing 
the moysture which conioyned them, into a 
greater proportion of water; for waters doe naturally 
runne together, like drops of quicksiluer, or melted 
mettall. Wherefore seeing the moysture which is in 
[^p.17^] 
the earth, is not naturall, but aduentitious, not vnited 
essentially, but onely mixed accidentally, it may well be 
called an inconcrete substance, whose moysture is easily 
drawne from it, being readie to vnite it selfe with other 
moysture, and leaue his old body as it found it, that is, 
dust: yet so as that water retaines with it some taste or 
[/28./] 
qualitie which it receiued from the earth. This dust is 
neither a simple body, as Elements are, nor permanent 
in one and the same kinde: but as it participates with 
animales vegetables, and minerals, so it is apt to bee 
transmuted into any of them, being both Mother and 
Nurse to all terrestriall bodies. 
 
Simple earth, if it be not mixed with other substances, 
is dry and cold, and Astringent. But if it bee mixed, as 
commonly it is, it altereth his qualitie according to the 
mixture. Mine intent is to write of it as it is simple, and 
so of the rest. 
 
Simple earth yeelds but a muddie water of it selfe, and 
of no vse in Physicke, but if it be mixed with other Minerals, 
it makes the water to participate with the quality 
of those Minerals also. As if it be mixed with niter, as in 
Fullers earth and Marle, it makes the water abstergent 
like Soape. If with Allum or Copperesse, astringent and 
more desiccatiue, as in all sorts of Boles. If with Bitumen, 
fattie and Vnctious, as in Turfe and Peate, &c. 
We haue diuers examples of all sorts. The Bath of 
[/29./] 
Mount Othon in Italy is full of clay, which is a kinde 
of Bole. The Bath Caldaria, full of Ocre. The Bath 
of Saint Peter full of a yellow earth, tincted belike 
with some other Minerals. Wherefore these are to bee 
iudged of according to the seuerall Mineralls which they 
containe. But seeing earth it selfe makes little impression 
into water, neither doe wee make any Physicall vse of 
waters, which containe nothing but earth, I neede not 
spend any time about them. 
 
[^p.18^] 
[}CAP. 5. 
 
Of Stone.}] 
 
[/30./] 
THe second shall be Stone. Stone is another Minerall 
substance, concrete and more heauie then earth, 
and our Minerall men confound themselues much in the 
definition of it. Wherefore Fallopius implores the helpe 
of Marcus Antonius Iunica about it, as one of the most 
difficult points in Philosophie: but in the end, defines it 
by his want of dissolution, either by heate or moysture. 
And whereas it is manifest that some stones will melt, 
he imputes it to the admixture of some mettall, among 
which he receiueth glasse. Others define it by his hardnesse, 
wherein commonly it goeth beyond other Minerals. 
But you shall haue some stones softer then some of 
those, and therefore the definition is not good. Others 
by this, that being broken or calcind, they will not bee 
consolidated againe into their former consistence or 
shape. But for breaking, the reason of that, is want of fusion; 
for without fusion or ignition, which is a kinde or 
degree of fusion; Mettals also being broken, will not be 
consolidated into the same Masse againe. And there is no 
more difference in the nature or essence, betweene a whole 
stone and a broken, then there is betweene a masse of 
Mettall, and the powder or filings of the same. As for 
calcination, other minerals may bee so far calcind, and 
brought to a Crocus by fire, as they will be irreducible, 
therefore this is not p_[^ORIG. BLANK^]oper to stone. Wherefore I am of 
Fallopius his opinion in this point, and the rather because 
otherwise there would seeme to be a species in nature 
wanting, if there were not Minerall Species wanting, 
dissolution by heate or moysture, as well as there 
are, hauing such dissolution. And this vacuum which 
[^p.19^] 
nature abhorres, is not onely to be vnderstood of a locall 
vacuitie, but also of a want of such species as are in 
natures power to produce, for the ornament of the 
world. For if it be a naturall passion to be dissolued, it is 
likewise a naturall passion not to bee dissolued: and if 
some things will bee dissolued both by heate and moysture, 
as Salts, why should there not be other substances 
which will be dissolued by neither of them. And this 
must be stone, for nature affords none other. Moreouer 
according to Aristotle: Quæ concreuerunt a frigido & a 
calido, a nullo istorum dissoluuntur. Of this kinde are 
Stones which could neuer attaine to such puritie as many 
of them haue, if they were not congealed by heate as 
well as by cold. Also vnder what species shall we comprehend, 
Diamonds, Talcum, Magnetis, Glymmer, 
Katzensilber, pyrimachus, amiantus, alumen plumosum, 
saxum arenarium mortuum, &c. if not among Stones? 
yet these are confessed to be inuincible by fire or water. 
Also all pretious Stones, the more noble and pretious 
they are, the more they resist dissolution either by fire 
or water: for this qualitie sheweth the perfection of 
their mixture. True it is that some stones wilbe dissolued 
by fire or water, and therefore Pliny and Agricola diuide 
Stones into into fusible and infusible: but this is in regard 
of other substances bred in the stone, which if it be 
Metall, the fusion will be Metallin: If Niter or meane 
minerals, it will bee vitrificatorie. As pliny reports of 
the inuention of Glasse by certaine Merchants, who melting 
Niter vpon the sand in Siria, where with clods of 
Niter they had made a furnace for their necessary vse; 
found that cleere mettall which we call glasse, Ecce liquato 
nitro cum arenis visi sunt riui fluxisse nobilis liquoris. 
 
If Sulphur, as in pyrite, it will likewise melt and strike 
[^p.20^] 
fire. And whereas the striking of fire out of a flint or pyrits, 
is held by all men to proceede from the kindling of 
ayre, by the collision of two hard substances together, 
they are mistaken. For then Diamonds, Chrystall 
Glasse, &c. should strike fire as well as flints, but it is the 
Sulpher contained in them: And G. Fabricius in his obseruations, 
although hee obserues not the reason of this 
fire, yet he confesseth that out of any Pyrites e quo excutitur 
ignis, etiam excoquitur sulphur. Pliny giues the 
reason of the name, quia inest ignis illi. The like we obserue 
in Indian Canes, and some Woods that are vnctuous, 
and full of oyle, which will yeeld fire by frication, 
or collision, not by kindling the ayre thereby, but the 
inflamable oyle in them. If other concrete iuyce bee 
mixed with stone, as Salt, Allum, Vitrioll, &c. it makes 
them to relent in water or moyst ayre; and these stones 
are neuer good to build withall. But let vs take stone as 
[/31./] 
it is in it selfe, without the admixture of other Minerals, 
and we shall find it to be indissoluble and inuincible, either 
by fire or water. Metallurgians and Refyners may 
make vse of this for their Shirbs, Tiegles, Hearths, 
Tests, &c. Stones are naturally dry and cold, and astringent 
like a concrete earth. 
 
Simple Stones which haue no other Minerals mixed 
with them, and are come to their perfection, being indissoluble, 
either by fire or water, can yeeld no qualitie 
or vertue to Bathes, and therefore hee that seekes to 
draw any vertue from stone into water, doth lapidem 
lauare, that is, labour in vaine. But by reason of admixtures, 
they may, or whilest they are succo lapidescente, 
before they are concreted. For if it be certaine that mettals 
may yeeld vertue to Bathes, being alike indissoluble 
by water, there is no reason but stones also may. Fullopius 
is against it in both, but contradicted by Iulius 
[^p.21^] 
Cæsar, Claudius, and diuers others: yet hee confesseth 
[/32./] 
that Balneum montis Grotti, hath Gypsum: and Gesner 
affirmes the same of the Baths of Eugesta. Also he findes 
ramenta marmoris in Balneo Corsenæ & Agnano, but 
he iudgeth that they receiue no qualitie but from the 
iuyce, and I doubt not but he is in the right. And for 
succus lapidescens, we haue many examples in Agro 
Pisano & Lucensi in Italy, in Auernia in France, where 
this iuyce is so plentifully brought by a cleare Spring, 
that after it is congealed, the people digge the stones, 
and haue made a great bridge of them. Also neere Vienna 
in Sauoy, in a village called Giaret, is a cleare fountaine 
which turnes to stones as hard as flints: Pliny makes 
mention of the like Springs in Eubea, which are hot: 
and Vitruuius of the like at Hieropolis in Phrygia: Also 
Iosephus a Costa of the like hot Springs in Guaniauilica 
in Peru, which turnes to stone, whereof they build 
their houses. Anthonio de Herreza, cap. 20. tels of the 
same Spring at Guainia velica, which turnes to stone 
as it ariseth, and kils those that drinke of it. Also this 
Succus lapidescens is obserued in the Bathes of Apono, 
where it is conuerted into stone vpon the sides of the 
Bath. Also in the Bath of Rancolani, where this iuyce is 
not confused, but perfectly mixed with the water, & being 
imbybed by plants, it hardens them like stone. Baccius 
[/33./] 
tels vs of a Caue by Fileg in Transiluania, which 
turnes water into stone. The like is found at Glainstaynes 
in Scotland, as Hector Boetius reports. In England 
also we haue many fountaines which turne wood 
into stone: which must be by reason of this succus lapidescens 
mixed with the water. Corall also being a plant, 
and nourished with this iuyce, turnes to a stone: so doth 
the seede of Lithospermon or Gromell. Thus much of 
stone. 
 
[^p.22^] 
[}CAP. 6. 
 
Of Bitumen. His kindes, qualities. Of Camfor in particular. 
That Bitumen is predominant in the waters of 
Bathe.}] 
 
NExt I come to those Minerals which we call Bitumina, 
which are Minerall substances that burne 
and waste in the fire without metallin fusion, or ingression. 
The greatest affinitie they haue, is with Sulphur: 
but this hath ingression into mettall, and Bitumen hath 
none. Of this kinde some are solid, and some liquid. Solid, 
as Succinum, gagates, ambra, camphora, terra ampelitis, 
Lithanthrax, siue carbofossilis, &c. Liquid, as 
petroleum and naphtha. All these are great fuels to 
fire, especially those that are liquid, which are thought 
to draw fire vnto them, if it be within their effluuium: 
So Pliny reports that Medea burnt Creusa by anoynting 
her Garland with Naphtha: and Strabo tels how Alexanders 
Bath-master, Athenophanes, had almost burnt 
Stephanus, a boy in the Bath, by sprinkling Naphtha 
vpon him, if it had not beene suddenly quenched. And 
this is that iuyce or thicke water which Plato in Timeo 
reckons among fires, and which the Egyptians vsed in 
[/34./] 
their sacrifices, and was hidden by the Iewish Priests 
in a dry pit for 70. yeares, and afterwards found by 
Nehemias. 
 
But whereas it is a common receiued opinion, that 
some of these Bitumina will burne in water, I cannot beleeue 
it: although Plynie and Agricola, and most that 
haue written since, out of them doe auerre it, and bring 
arguments and examples to proue it. For although water 
were a fewell to fire, as oyle is, yet there can bee no 
fire without ayre, and water excludes ayre: and so doth 
[^p.23^] 
oyle, if the fire be beneath it, and couered with it. As 
for their arguments, they say that Bitumen being besprinckled 
with water, burnes more, and therefore water 
is a fewell to it: as we see that Smiths cast water vpon 
their Sea-cole in their Forges: but the reason of this 
is because their Coale being small like dust, the water 
makes it to cake and bake together, where otherwise 
the blast would blow it away: also it hinders the quicke 
burning of it, and so makes it continue the longer: so in 
a Vulcano after raine, they finde the fire to burne more, 
when the Bitumen is small, and in dust. Although this 
may be a reason of it, that the Lyme which hath there 
beene calcined, being by raine dissolued, increaseth the 
fire. And whereas they say that water will kindle Bitumen, 
and quench Sulphur, it is not so: neither doth their 
example of Wilde-fire proue it. For in Wild fire, besides 
Bitumen and Campher, there is quicke Lyme, 
which by reason of the sodaine dissolution of his Salt, 
by the affusion of water, is apt to kindle any combustible 
matter; not by reason of any Bitumen in the Lyme, 
as some imagine, nor of any Empyreuma which the fire 
hath left in it, as Tracastorius thinks: for, how can 
[/35./] 
there be any Bitumen left in the Lyme (if there were any 
at first) after calcination: the fire would haue consumed 
that before anything else. And as for any Empyreuma, 
it is certaine that the more any thing is burnt, 
although the fire leaue an adustion in it, the lesse apt 
it is to burne againe, especially being burnt and calcind 
ad calcem aut cineres, where all the combustible matter 
is spent. Wherefore it must needs bee by the violent 
motion which is in the suddaine dissolution of the salt 
in it, as appeares by the crackling it makes: Et ex motu 
fit calor. The like we obserue in Pyrite sterili whereof 
they make Vitrioll, which being broken and laid vp 
[^p.24^] 
in heapes, and moystned with water, will gather heat, 
and kindle any combustible matter put to it. The like 
also we finde in Allum myne, &c. where those minerall 
iuyces being concrete in the Myne, when they come to 
suddaine dissolution doe grow hot, and will kindle fuell. 
And as for the example of the salt Lake whereof 
[/36./] 
Agricola writes, betweene Strapela and Seburgh, which 
burnes the fishermens nets if they be put neare the bottome: 
and of the like Sputa, in Media, mentioned by 
Strabo, which burnes clothes put into it: I take that to 
be by reason of the corrosiue quality of the salt which 
frets them, being stronger neare the bottome; and not 
form Bitumen, as Agricola thinks. The like I iudge of 
the Lake by Denstadt in Turingia. And it is very probable 
that salt being heauier then water, wilbe most towards 
the bottome: as it is reported of the fountaine 
 
Achilleus in Mileto, whose water is very sweet and 
fresh aboue, and very salt towards the bottome. So is 
the water of Agnano in Italy, as M. Sandys reports in 
his trauels. And the more heauy and terrestriall any 
salt is, the more corrosiue it is: and so contrariwise, the 
more corrosiue, the more heauy. Aristotle affirmes the 
[/37./] 
sea water to be more salt at the bottome then aboue: and 
so doth Pliny, who likewise makes mention of the Lake 
Ascanius in Chalcide, whose top is sweet, and bottome 
nitrous. Baccius writes the like of a Well neare Toletum 
[/38./] 
in Spaine, the water whereof is sweet aboue, and 
corrosiue beneath: which he iudgeth to be from Quicksiluer. 
[/39./] 
Fullopius is also of opinion, that Bitumen doth 
not only burne in water, but is nourished by water, because 
it makes the fire to last longer. But I haue shewed 
the reason to that before. And for the burning in water, 
he should haue said vpon the water; for there it wil burn 
as long as it swimmeth; but dip it vnder the water, and 
it is presently extinquished. 
 
[^p.25^] 
And whereas some report that Queene Anne of 
blessed memory, being in our Kings Bath, there arose a 
flame of fire like a candle from the bottome of the Bath 
to the top neare vnto her, they must giue mee leaue not 
to beleeue it, but rather to thinke they were mistaken: 
for, I am not bound to beleeue any thing against reason, 
which God hath giuen mee to bee my guide. It 
might haue beene some bubble of winde which is frequent 
in our Bathes, or some Bitumious matter not dissolued 
in the water did arise, and being at the top, dissolue 
it selfe vpon the surface in the forme of a circle: 
but it could not be kindled. And if it might bee kindled 
in the water (which were impossible) yet in all likelyhood 
it would haue burnt better aboue the water 
then within it, and not be presently extinct, as they report. 
These Bitumiana (excepting Camfer) are potentially 
hot and dry in the second or third degree; but 
concerning Camfer there are two doubts. First, whether 
it be a Bitumen or a Gum. Secondly, whether it be 
hot or cold. The Arabians affirme it to bee the Gum 
[/40./] 
of a huge tree with white leaues, vnder whose shadow 
many wild beasts may lie: and that after earthquakes 
there is great plenty found; that it is in quality cold and 
dry in the third degree; some late writers follow them 
in their opinion of a Gum, as Mathiolus, Amatus Lusitanus, 
Garrius ab horto, &c. Platearius holds it to bee 
the iuyce of an herbe. But we must consider that they 
make two sorts of Camfer, the one of Borneo, the other 
of Chyna. For that of Chyna they confesse it is adulterated 
with Bitumen: and that is the only Camfer in vse 
with vs. But that of Borneo to bee a simple Gum, and 
that a pound of this is valued as deare as an hundred 
pound weight of the other. So that all the doubt lyeth 
in this Camfer of Borneo; which whether it be a Gum 
[^p.26^] 
or no, is still in controuersie. For the Arabians not trading 
into those parts, had the notice hereof only from 
others, as Serapio and Avicen doe confesse: and Amatus 
[/41./] 
Lusitanus saith that the inhabitants will not suffer strangers 
to come ashore to see it. So as we haue beene kept 
in ignorance a long time from the true knowledge of it. 
[/42./] 
And Garrius ab horto tels vs, that all his knowledge of 
it, is but by relation: himselfe not being able to trauell 
to see it; partly by reason of his age, and partly for his 
continuall imployment about the Viceroy. Only Eduardus 
Barbosa reports that he did see the place in Borneo, 
and found it to be of a minerall nature. I procured 
some of that Camfer to be brought from thence by my 
worthy friend Captaine Best, but whether it be a Gum 
or a Bitumen, by the view I cannot discerne. But if it be a 
Gum, why should it abound more after earthquakes? 
and why should it burne and not dissolue in water? 
No Gums will burne, and all Gums will dissolue in water: 
and earthquakes make no trees friutfull, but may 
[/43./] 
cast forth minerals. That there is a Naturall Bitumious 
Camphire, I make no doubt: and Agricola proues it 
sufficiently: And the Bath in Romandiola neare Rhegium 
shewes it. Also the Well by Muntzbach where Taberni 
[/44./] 
montani saith there is minerall Camphir. Averroes 
saith it is affinis Bitumini. 
 
Now for the qualities of it, the most generall and truest 
opinion is, that it is cold and dry. Matthiolus iudgeth 
[/45./] 
it to be hot for three especiall reasons. First, because 
it burnes, and is a great fuell to fire. If this argument 
bee good, then flax, and straw, and paper, and touchwood, 
and spunck should be hot, for they are apt fuels 
to fire. Secondly, because it is odorata, and hee holds 
[/46./] 
all odorata to be calida: Galen is of another opinion, 
and holds the iudgement of simples by sauour to be vncertaine. 
[^p.27^] 
And as for Campher, Galen knew it not. Avicen 
saith expressely of Campher, that although it bee 
[/47./] 
odorata, yet it is frigida. And if Matthiolus his reason 
were good, then Roses, and Violets, and Vinegar 
should be hot; for they are odorata. It is true that all 
sauors arise from heat, as Galen saith, and all compounded 
bodies haue some hot parts: but wee speake of the 
predominancy in the subiect. Thirdly, because it bytes 
the tongue. So doth iuyce of Limons, and Barberies, 
and Vinegar, &c. and yet they are cold. Wherefore I 
conclude our Campher to be a Bitumen, and in quality 
cold and dry; and of very subtill parts. These Bitumina 
being vnctuous and oylie, dissolue not of themselues in 
water, without the helpe of some minerall iuyce, but 
may be confused with it. And wee haue many fountaines 
and lakes which participate with them. In Shropshire 
at Pitchford is a spring that casteth forth Bitumen 
swimming vpon the water. The like we read of in Avernia 
in France betweene Claremond and Monferan, 
where people gather it for their vses. In Italy there 
are many fountaines yeelding Bitumen, at Maianum, 
and Sassoli, and Salsa, and Herculanum at the foot of the 
mountaine Vesuvium, at Baia, and also at the cape of S. 
Helena, and in the Isle of Woolfs there are fountaines of 
pitchie Bitumen, which are vsed to pitch ropes and 
tackling, as Iosephus a costa reports. And we haue that 
[/48./] 
famous lake Asphaltites in Iudæa so full of Bitumen, that 
it hardly suffers any thing to sincke in it. The riuer Liparis 
in Cicilia by reason of a spring neare Solos is so 
[/49./] 
full of liquid Bitumen, as they which swim or wash in 
it seeme to be anointed with oyle. Also there are Bitumious 
springs in Saxony at Bruno, in Sweuia, the lake 
Tegera at Gersedorf vnder the mount Iurat; In Asia 
by Tralleis and Nissa. Also in the West Indies there 
[^p.28^] 
are many found which they put to vse for shipping. 
And this Bitumen is the chiefe ingredient in our Baths 
at Bath in Somersetshire, although dilated with much 
Niter, which makes the solution the better, and the water 
more cleare. That Bitumen is predominant in these 
our Baths, may bee proued by the effects, because wee 
finde them exceedingly to comfor the nerues, supple the 
ioynts, dry vp rheumes, cure Palsies, and Contractions, 
being distincty vsed, tinct siluer into the colour of gold, 
&c. Also by the Bitumeous sauour of them, and by 
the neighbourhood of Cole mines in those parts. All 
which doe argue Bitumen to abound in them. And 
whereas Doctor William Turner in his treatise of these 
Baths, thinketh Brimstone to bee the chiefe minerall, 
and Copper next, I am out of his opinion. The actuall 
heat is no argument of Brimstone, as shall bee shewed 
when I come to that point: nether doth the sauour bewray 
it. But his reason for Copper is very weake. He 
found a Marchesit vpon one of the hils, which hee 
thought to hould Copper. But Marchesits although 
they shew yellow, yet they seldome hold Copper, or 
[/50./] 
any other metall. But his discourse hath perswaded 
Iohn Bauhinus to publish it confidently to the world. 
I shall haue occasion to speake more of this hereafter. 
And thus much of Bitumina. 
 
[^p.29^] 
[}CAP. 7. 
 
Of Minerall iuyces concrete: called by the Alchimists, 
Salts. The foure principall sorts of them; Salt, Niter, 
Allum, Vitrioll.}] 
 
A Fourth sort of minerals are concrete iuyces which 
are minerall substances dissoluble in water. These 
[/51./] 
the Alchimists call Salts, and are the meanes of communicating 
all other minerals with water. For as water 
is apt to dissolue and extract vegetables, so are these 
concrete iuyces apt to dissolue and extract minerall substances. 
And although they are found sometimes liquid 
being dissolued by moisture: yet we call them concrete, 
because they will be concrete when the aduentitious 
moisture is remoued. Our minerall Authors doe 
make many sorts of these according to the seuerall minerals 
which they imbibe: but in truth they may bee 
all reduced to foure heads; Salt, Niter, Allum, and 
Vitrioll. And each of these hath diuers species, as Geber 
and Casulpinus say of Salt, quot genera calcium, tot 
genera salium. Concerning Vitrioll there may bee some 
doubt whether it be a distinct species from Allum, and 
and haue receiued only some tincture from Copper, or 
Iron, or from some of their brood, which are called excrements. 
For in distilling oyle of Vitrioll, the lute 
wherewith the glasses are ioyned, will yeeld perfect Allum. 
And Vitrioll being boyld ariseth in balls as Allum 
doth, and shoots like Allum in globos; as Salt doth 
in tesseras, and Niter in stirias. Among these concrete 
iuyces Agricola reckons Sulphur, Bitumen, Auripigmentum, 
[/52./] 
Sandaracha, Chrisocola, Erugo, Mysi, Sori, 
Melanteria, &c. But if wee examine them aright, wee 
shall finde, that either they are not dissoluble in water as 
[^p.30^] 
concrete iuyces should be, or they are some of those 
iuyces tincted or incorporated with other mineralls. 
All these minerall iuyces are accounted hot, and dry, 
and astringent, and detergent, some more, some lesse: 
and we take it so vpon trust. But this point requires 
further consideration and distinction. 
 
Salt is astringent, detergent, purging, dispersing, repelling, 
attenuating, makes an escar, and preserues from 
[/53./] 
putrifaction, as Dioscorides informes vs, and Galen confirmes 
the same, adding that it is hot. But we must vnderstand 
Galen with this limitation, lib. 6. cap. 30. 
That the more it is detersory, the lesse it is astringent. 
And all astringent things are cold, as hee auoucheth, 
lib. 4. cap. 6. Acida, acerba, & astringentia omnia frigida. 
Now if salt be astringent, it must bee cold by Galens 
owne rule, and it is not enough to say it hath warme 
parts in it, but being an vniforme substance, wee must 
determine of it ex prædominio. Also Galen lib. 1. Symp. 
cap. 4. comparing pure water with sea water, seemes to 
affirme that sea water, before it haue receiued any great 
aduentitious cold, may coole our bodyes. And so this 
place is vnderstood by Anthonius Maria Venustus in 
consilio pro Petro Picardo, The repelling quality, and the 
making an escar, and the preseruing form putrifaction, 
are arguments of drinesse, and not of heat. For as heat 
and moysture are principall agents in generation and 
corruption; so cold and drinesse in preseruation. Also 
I should impute the purgatiue and detersorie qualities in 
salt rather to the tenuity of parts, and the stimulation 
which it hath from thence, then to any heat; for then 
as Sennertus saith, all hot things should purge; Instit. 
lib. 5. part. 1. cap. 11. Valeriala in Gal. de constit. artis 
pag. 447. And Mesne Canon. universal. cap. 1. reiects 
all elementary qualities, temperaments, similitudes, or 
[^p.31^] 
contrarieties of substances &c. in purging medicines. 
Also Tamarinds, Myrabolans, and Antimony doe 
purge, and yet are cold, Venustus pag. 132. But the purgatiue 
faculty of medicines is from stimulation of the 
expulsiue faculty of the stomach and guts, and not from 
attraction by heat of peculiar humors, as hath beene 
imagined. Heat may serue as an instrument to actuate 
stimulation, as cold doth dull and benumbe all faculties, 
but neither heat nor cold are principall agents in 
this worke. And whereas Reubarb is thought to 
purge coller only, Sene and Polipody melancholy, Agarick 
phlegme, &c. because wee see the excrements 
tincted with the same colors, it is a deceit: for these purgations 
doe colour humors in that manner. Yet I doe 
not deny a distinction to be made of purgations in other 
respects. And our ancient Physitians through 
long experience haue found out the right vse of purging 
medicines, and their true distinctions for seuerall 
vses for mens bodies: as that some doe purge grosse 
humors, and some thin, some are strong, and some 
weake: some are comfortable to the stomach, or liuer, 
or spleen, &c. and some hurtfull to some of those parts: 
some are too hot in some cases, and some temperate, &c. 
But they haue not discouered the true cause of this 
purging quality: some attributing it to a celestiall influence, 
some to a hidden quality, which is as much as if 
they had said nothing: some to a Sympathy, Antipathy, 
&c. For my part I hold the purgatiue quality of 
mixt bodies to lie principally in the terrestriall part of 
them, which is their salt: and therefore the Chymists 
vse to actuate the purging extracts with their proper 
salts. It were much better if they could make their 
salts without calcination: for then they should retaine 
the tast of the Simples, which lyeth in the salt, and 
[^p.32^] 
much other vertue which the fire consumes in calcination. 
And I am likewise of opinion, that as their purgatiue 
qualitie lyeth in the Salt, so it workes by Stimulation, 
a qualitie most proper to Salt, whereby it furthers 
all generations, &c. 
 
Niter doth dry and attenuate more then salt, and although 
it hath not so much astriction as Salt is said to 
haue, yet it seemes to coole more then Salt, perhaps because 
it is of thinner parts, and penetrates more, and 
that is the reason it serues better for the dissolution 
of Mettals. In physicke we finde our Sal nitrum (which 
is a kinde of it) to coole the body mightily, and therefore 
vsed in Iuleps: Allum and Vitriol are much alike, 
but that Vitriol hath a garbe form Copper or yron. 
These are very astringent, and without doubt cold, 
whatsoeuer hath beene held of them. The waters or 
phlegmes distilled from them doe exceedingly coole in 
[/54./] 
Iuleps, as Quercitan and Claudius Dariot haue obserued, 
and we also by daily experience doe finde true: by 
reason of the intense aciditie they haue, being distilled 
from their Terrestriall parts. Also those acidula which 
the Germans call Saurbrun, proceeding from these iuyces, 
are much vsed to quench the heate of feuers. It may 
be obiected, that they are Corrosiues, and will eate into 
mettall, and therefore must bee hot. But by the same 
reason, the iuyces of Limmons, Barberies, Howsleeke, 
&c. should be hot, for they will carue iron. To bite and 
eate as a Corosiue, are not arguments of heate, but of 
piercing: Wherefore Hippocrates saith, Frigus vlceribus 
mordax, and frigus est principium destructiuum, vt 
calor generativum. And therefore it is more probable 
that these corrosiues are more cold then hot. These two 
minerall iuyces are not so readily dissolued in water, as 
the other two, and will be more easily precipitated by 
[^p.33^] 
any opposite substance that is more familiar to water. I 
omit the seuerall sorts of these concrete iuyces and their 
admixtures with other minerals, as impertinent to my 
purpose: wherefore I will shew some examples of each 
of them in naturall Springs. 
 
