[^Lockyer, Lionel: Advertisement concerning pills^] 
 
[}AN 
ADVERTISEMENT, 
Concerning those most Excellent 
PILLS 
Called 
Pillulæ Radijs Solis Extractæ. 
BEING 
An Universal Medicine, especially in all 
Chronical and difficult Distempers, as by the 
Ensuing Discourse will most clearly appear. 
 
Truly and only prepared by Lionel Lockier, Licensed 
PHYSITIAN.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 1-17^] 
 
Courteous Reader, 
 
HAving through the blessing of God (From whom alone 
cometh every good and perfect Gift) been so successful in my 
Endeavours, especially in the Chymical Preparations of 
Minerals, which hath been found, and is generally acknowledged 
by the most experienced Practitioners in all ages, to be 
[^p.2^] 
most effectual for the extirpating and rooting out of the ground of 
all Chronical Distempers, which for the difficulty of their Cures 
arising from the want of good Medicaments, are generally the 
shame of Physicians. 
 
Having I say (through His goodness) attained to the singular 
preparation of a Medicine thence which for its excellent efficacy, 
deservedly merits that Title, by which I would more peculiary 
express or give you to conceive by way of Analogy, of its 
excellent properties, which are of a solar Nature, dispelling of 
those Causes in our Bodies, which continued, would not onely 
darken the Lustre, but extinguish the Light of Our Microcosmal 
Sun; which however, that it may more perspicuously appear, 
I shall give you to understand its Medicinal Properties, which I 
in my self have experienced for confirmation of the same; premising 
only by way of Induction, the manner and form of its 
Administration, which is so Highly prepared, that it may very 
conveniently, as well as safely, be administred to all kind of persons 
whether young or old; strong or weak; Infants new born, 
or old men where Nature is much decayed; and that in so small 
a quantity, that four of these small Pills is a good ordinary Dose, 
the which contains some six Grains. It neither troubles the stomack, 
or offends the Eyes, as your usual Purging Potions do, 
the very sight of which makes Nature Loath it, that they are 
ready to Vomit before the taking of it. 
 
The manner or way to take them, is thus; In the Morning 
fasting; about four or five a clock, take two of these Pills, and 
fast four hours from Meat or Drink, and so increase one Pill every 
day until you come to five or six Pills, and so take them 
some three days and rest one, and then to it again: Some have 
taken of these Pills twelve at a time, and had no hurt by them: 
There is a Shoomakers Child in Barnabees Street, a boy of seven 
years old, unknown to his Father, took ten of these Pills at one 
time, and had no hurt by them. 
 
I cannot but commend this medicine to all tender mothers of 
Children, which although they seem to be very Lusty, yet are 
suddenly snatcht away by death, having the Convulsion Fits, and 
in this distemper, you may give to a child of a month old, the 
eight part of one of these Pills in a little of the mothers Breast 
[^p.3^] 
Milk, and after resting three or four daies, you may safely give 
it the Child the second time, but if in the Process of time it shall so 
happen that the Fits return again, you may increase the Dose, 
and give the Child a little more then at the first time, and so 
continue as the Childs body can bear, until the Disease be totally 
vanquished. 
 
Moreover, this Medicine is far more secure, safe and effectual, 
than all other Medicines whatsoever, for it resists and prevails against 
all the obstructions of the Spleen, which is the common 
Sewer or Scavenger of the Body; As namely, for Melancholy, and 
also all obstructions of the Liver, the which unremoved corrupteth 
the blood, from whence flows Grievous Diseases, as the continual 
pain in the Head, (the which causeth many a young Maid 
to descend into her Grave, there being the vacuity of the course 
of Nature) In Women, the Suffocation of the Matrix, Suppressions 
of the Monthly Flowings, Tremblings, Palpitations of the 
Heart, Swooning, Vertigo, of the Head, and especially that hedious 
Torment (in that part commonly called) the Mother, concerning 
which Distemper, there came a Person of Note to me, and did 
leave with the Symptomes thereof, concerning a Friend of his 
that was molested with the same, and I sent him to One that 
had been in the same Nature and kind, much distempered, (yet 
by the Lords blessing) and my Pill, it was perfectly cured, and 
many since have been cured of the same Distemper. 
 
[}The Symptomes of the Fits of the Mother.}] 
 
IT arises with a trembling on the left side, with cold windy Vapours, 
and after the cold fit is over, (the which, sometime lasteth 
an hour two or three) then an hot fit ariseth, one after another, 
that the party is all in a Water with it, and sometime 
with a flushing from the Soal of the Feet all over, with a lightness 
in the Head, and stranglingt Vapours lying in the Throat, as 
hard as a Stone, ready to set breath, remaining six hours together; 
and when the hot fit goes down again, the Vapours forceth 
down to the bottome of the Belly, as if one should draw a 
thing down with a Cord, and then having not its right course 
[^p.4^] 
downwards, it returns up to the throat again ready to choack her. 
 
All these and many other such like Diseases, known and unknown, 
being without name or number; This Medicine is a full 
and effectual healer: These Pills are ministrable in a spoonful of 
Drink, Broth or Milk, or without either; The Pills may be taken 
alone, and if the Dose be precisely observed, the operation will be 
almost insensible, because it works so gently that it is A Restorative 
to Nature, it Restores the Radical Moisture which is the 
Magazeen of Life, and in a wonderful manner expels all that is 
Obnoxious out of the body, and will not leave a sluttish Corner 
unswept, in any part thereof; it being taken two or three days, 
and then rest one day, and then to it again, And so proceed as 
the Infirmity shall require, and the conditions of the Diseased shall 
seem meet, 
 
It is a Preservative from all Accidents, as Contagious Aires, 
for it stands Centinel in the body, and will not admit any Enemy 
of Nature to enter; If you increase the Dose, its operation 
will be the more Active and Visible, exercising its Vertues upon 
the body, by expelling the Disease, Sometimes it works upwards 
and sometimes downwards, and it may be, both Waies at one 
but without any Violence. For it sweeps every hole clean, and 
carrieth away what thing soever is offensive or destructive to Nature: 
And according to the Dose, it works more or less, but always 
without any violence: I have seen it conquer many peoples 
Diseases in a very small Dose, and without any visible Operation. 
 
It demolisheth and vanquisheth Most, if not all manner of 
Distempers, notwithstanding there are certain Infirmities which 
have been of long continuance, which have taken Root as it 
were, in the Body; and these do require a more visible Operation, 
and cannot be expelled with a small Dose; Therefore every 
one that makes use of my Pill, must use discretion in the Dose, 
as the strength of the Person and the Disease shall require, and 
then the Patient shall not fail of his end or desire, nor the Administer 
of Credit and Honour. 
 
Its excellent against the Leproseie, and such like Detestable 
Diseases, where no part is sound; There is not in the world a 
Surer, Safer more Efficacious and speedier Remedy, Provided 
[^p.5^] 
that Nature be not utterly spent in them that take it. 
 
And as for that irksome and unclean Disease, so commonly 
called the POX, there is nothing more safe and sure, so that 
the Patient take it in a proper Dose: That is, he begins with two 
Pills, and so increasing one Pill every day, until he comes to six 
or seven, that he may Sweat, and that the Medicine may have 
its Operation both by Vomit and Stool, and so continuing, with 
resting one day in A week, and the Cure shall be very well perfected 
upon him without any other means at all. 
 
Now the great difficulty many men make, in curing of this 
Disease, and the great charges they put People upon, make 
them slow and ashamed to go to any for remedy until they are 
almost rotten, the which I know might be prevented, If the 
Party at the first feeling of himself ill, will take but one of these 
Boxes of Pills according to the order here prescribed; The Pills 
Prices are but small, considering the worth of them, in which 
Box there is one quarter of an Ounce of Pills the which in number 
amounts to above One hundred Pills (sometimes more and 
sometimes less, according as they are in bigness) which will last 
the party about three weeks, In the which he may be throughly 
Cured of that Disease. 
 
The Gout, Leprosie and Dropsie are esteemed Diseases (for the 
most part incurable) Towards the Cure of which and Such Diseases, 
this Medicine is wonderful prevalent beyond credit, and 
it worketh in a short time more then any Medicine in the world 
ever did: for in a very small time it extracts from the whole body 
all turbulent, Pestilentious, Infectious Humors, and that insensibly, 
and yet Fully and perfectly, but so Mildly that it is hardly 
perceiveable; and so all true Cures should be wrought; It is not 
convenient, but Destructive, to lay violent Hands upon Nature; 
For all her ways are Gentle and Mild, and so should Her Cures be. 
 
And so in the Cure of the Gout, the wringing Pains thereof 
are intolerable, yet it shall day by day hereby be a little mitigated 
and asswaged, the Fits everyday decreased, and return not so 
frequent at at the first, and Gradually vanish quite away, never to 
return again, which is a blessed Riddance. 
 
Now all that take these Pills for the Gout and Dropsie, let them 
take three or four Pills every day; It cureth all sorts of Agues 
[^p.6^] 
and Feavers: Many people of late, after they have lost their Ague 
have been very much troubled with the swelling in their 
Legs, which this Pill hath soon cured, and if they had taken it 
sooner, it would not only have cured the Ague, but prevented 
the swelling in their Legs, It cureth the Scurvey and Iaundies 
Black and Yellow. 
 
In children it most effectually cures the Rickets, also a most 
wonderful operation it hath to produce Fertility or Fruitfulness 
in the most Barren of Women, Provided the Cause be in them-selves, 
Its most Excellent to cure the Stone in the Reins and 
Bladder; This medicine, doth so wonderfull purifie the whole 
Body of man that no Disease (Gods appointed time being not 
come) is able to withstand it: This Pill is very necessary for 
those that take long Voyages by Sea, as to the East and West Indies, 
In which Voyages, both the Souldiers and Marriners are 
much weakned, and sorely troubled with the Scurvey, and have 
no Remedy with them, that can do them any or very little 
good; Whereas this Pill will enable them to finish their Journey 
with joy and comfort, both going thither, and also coming 
Home, by the blessing of God. 
 
Truly in the Universal Nature, I have not hitherto found any 
medicine near equal to this, by many degrees, which doth so 
effectually resist All Putrefaction both of the blood and bowels; 
And this medicine both Souldier and marriner may carry, though 
never so far: It resists also all Obstruction, the prime cause of 
most Infirmities; Also it never corrupts, though kept an hundred 
years, which Druggs will quickly do, and lose both Savour and 
Virtue. But this as I said, and say again, is a sure medicine, alwaies 
at hand, easily Administred and Administrable; In the Effects 
there is no medicine in the whole World more healthful. 
 
The Marriner who continues at Sea many months, and the 
Souldier in the Camp, suffering there all possible or imaginable 
inconveniences, cannot want, because this is a medicine without 
Plaister, it is in it self instead of a Plaister, and will cure 
Wounds or old Ulcers being taken inwardly; Therefore Chirurgeons 
in Ships, and they in the Camp, should take care to be 
provided with this one medicine above all other, for by it they 
might preserve the lives of thousands, marriners and Souldiers, 
[^p.7^] 
which are under their Care and Tuition; and one only Ounce 
alone of these Pills, which is but a very small price, will make 
above an Hundred Doses, and cure the sick with more facility, 
than they can do otherwise by all their Art, though furnished 
with Chest-fulls of medicines; yet not valuable in comparison or 
competition with this: If Physicians or Chyrurgeons in the 
Camp, or Navy, were provided but with some few Ounces of 
these Pills, they might save the lives of ten thousands, which 
miserably perish through want thereof. It is the duty of a General 
of an Army, to provide for his Soulders under his Command, 
For when they are afflicted with the Plague, Scurvey, 
Fluxes, and other Epidemical Diseases, falls like leaves in Autumn 
from the Trees, or like Flies in Winter, when the cold 
weather comes, they dye by heaps for want of help, whereas 
this incomparable medicine might save the Lives if not of all, 
yet the greatest part of them. For this very cause, and in commiseration 
of mankind, who is subject to so many Casualities 
and Infirmities, I will hereafter be sufficiently stored with this 
medicine, that they which will, may make use of it; It is a medicine 
so useful, powerful and precious, and yet not costly, that 
there is not the like. 
 
One thing I shall acquaint you of, concerning one Mrs. Dixon 
that was troubled very sadly for two years at the least, with a 
griping gnawing pain in the Belly, and by the use of my Pills, 
and Gods blessing upon it, was cured: For before she had taken 
of my Pills six times, she had alive Worm came from her by 
Siege four yards long, the woman lives in Dead mans Place in 
Southwark near unto the Colledge-Gate, her Age is about thirty 
two years, the worm came from her the latter end of May 
1662. If any desire to see the worm I have it by me. 
 
A word or two to my kind Countreymen, that live in Country 
Villages far from Physician or Apothecary, when sickness 
comes upon them, their Wives, Children or Servants, then for 
a Carduus Posset, and if that do it not, they are at a straight and 
know not what to do, whereas if they had but one of these Boxes 
of Pills they might do their Family much good and their 
poor Neighbours which are about them, if the Lord give them 
hearts so to do, and in so doing, you shall manifest your selves 
[^p.8^] 
to be like unto our Saviour Christ, whom the Holy Scriptures 
Record of, That he went about doing good, Act. fo. 38. And this 
is the Practice of some Merchants in this City, and likewise 
some Gentlemen in the Countrey which have many Boxes of 
these my Pills to give away to poor people. 
 
There is one Iames Carr, who had a Cancer in his Nose, 
which had eate a piece of his Lip away, and after long time being 
under the hands of Doctors and Chirurgeons, they told him he 
could never be cured, who then came to me and took but two 
Boxes, which by the blessing of God cured him, This Cure was 
done the Summer 1662. The man is now living in St. Anns 
Lane in Westminster over against the Gun. Now for any that 
are in health, and desire so to be, it will be good to take these 
Pills once every week, and this is my own practice, with my 
Servants. 
 
One thing more I shall acquaint you withal, concerning one 
Mr. Tomlinson at the sign of the Golden Hat and Feather in 
Barnaby Street, who had an Ulcer in his Head, which for three 
years time put him to great misery, and no small Expence of 
money, in which time he had made use of Doctors and Chirurgeons, 
but none could reach his Distemper, but by the blessing 
of God, taking my Pills, they have done it, which is such a cure 
that makes all men that know it wonder; for I think such a cure 
can hardly be produced, I could say much more if I would, but 
if any man do desire to be better informed concerning this cure, 
I say to them as the Parents of that Child said, which was born 
blind, John the 9. 21. He is of Age let him speak for himself, 
The man is known to be an honest man, and he will speak nothing 
but the truth concerning this business; this cure was done 
the Summer 1662. 
 
In this Tract I have presented several cures to you, but I could 
name a thousand more if I would, but I would not have named 
these, if any means else could have cured them, for he that was 
least, was two years under Cure, and all those were cured by my 
Pills, without using any other thing, neither were any of the 
persons hindred from following their business, if their strength 
would permit them to go abroad. But if any man shall imagine or 
[^p.9^] 
presume upon my Commendation of this Pill, that therefore any Disease 
though never so inveterate, may be removed, he is deceived, and in 
this doth err, For I speak here only of such Diseases as by natural 
means and Gods blessing, may receive and admit of Cure, for in some 
cases the internal parts, the Bowels, are so stuffed and obstructed with 
ill Humors, that no Medicine will prevail: In some their Lungs are 
rotten and putrified, and the Liver also, before they think of a Physician 
or call for help: In such a case what Physick can help or restore a principal 
member when it is quite lost, or make new Bowels when the old 
are perished. 
 
And sometimes it pleases God to strike a man immediatly with a 
Disease which no man can heal, whereof divers examples are Extant 
in the word of God, as we may read of Iehoram, it is said, That the 
Lord smote him in his Bowels with an incurable disease, and in two years 
his Bowels fell out, 2. Chron. 21. 18. Likewise Ierobohams hand dryed 
up, 1 Kings 13.4. And likewise Gehasies Leprosie, 2 King. 5 v. 27. 
Acts 12. v. 23. and such Diseases imposed by a Divine Hand, no humane 
power can mitigate, only Saul's Evil spirit, of a melancholy 
Divel, Davids Harp did mitigate, but did not Cure, 1 Sam. 16. 23. 
To God All things are possible, whose hand can only Help what 
the same hand Harms; as Miriam's Leprosie was cured by the Prayer 
of Moses, Num. 12. 13. Hence it is to be concluced that some Diseases 
are Incurable, and there my Pill must needs fail, but in Natural 
distempers they fail not. Viz. the Quartil Feavour, Leprosie, Gout, 
Falling-Sickness, Dropsie, Frenzie, Vertigo, the Palsey, Rhumes, Defluctions, 
Headach of all kinds, Convulsion Fits, Difficulty of Breathing, 
Stoppages of the Stomack, Cough, Ptisick, Inflammation of the Lungs, 
Consumption, want of Apetite, bad digestion, pain in the Stomack, 
Worms of all kinds, the Scurvey, Colick, Inflamation and Obstruction of 
the Liver, Corruption and Putrefaction of Blood, Iaundies Black and 
Yellow, Hard swellings, Timpanies, Pain and inflammations of the 
Spleen, Overflowing of the Gaul, Tremblings of the Heart, Swoonings, 
Stoppage and scalding of the Urine, Bloody Flux, Gravel and Stone, in 
the Reins and bladder, Rickets in Children, Kings Evil, The Gonoreah, 
or running of the Reins, the Violent Hectick Feaver, Agues, Quotidian, 
Tertian, Quartan, Green sickness, the Fisteloe, the Cancer, the 
Emrods and Piles, Sopping of the Termes and Whites. 
 
And although I have named most of these Diseases in the former 
part of this Book, yet I thought it fit here to insert them more 
[^p.10^] 
particularly, for your better observation and memory. And whereas 
I have mentioned many particular Diseases I might have saved that 
Labour, for I know these Pills they will cure any Disease (God 
willing) that is to be cured by Physick. In my book Printed November 
the 5th. 1662. I have there forbidden these Pills to be taken at 
Night; But being better Informed from my own experience, and several 
others, I shall now give you to understand, That many take One 
or Two at Night, and Two or Three in the morning; But you may use 
which way you will; For my part I take them so, once every Week, 
though I am not troubled with any Disease, only for my Healths 
sake, and to prevent Diseases, and I find much good by them; For 
about the sixtieth year of my age, I felt some stiffness in my Limbs, 
and in regard of my age, I was afraid I should have fallen into such 
a Distemper as I had twenty years ago, for then I was so lame (and 
nothing seen) yet in so much pain, that I desired Death rather than 
Life; But as God would have it, it departed from me; And as it came 
of it self, I knew not by what means, so (by the Blessing of God) I 
cured my self of that Distemper: that is, I applyed my self to these 
Pills, and by the Blessing of God upon them I was set at liberty, and 
my Limbs were as nimble as they were thirty years ago; for now I 
can Leap, Walk or Run, with ease and refreshment, which before was 
a Burthen to me; and I find them in my self to be a great Restorer of 
Nature, for I have used no other Physick but these Pills about these 
three Years, and I intend to use them as long as I live, for I find that 
they strengthen me Very much, ever since I began to take them: and 
at this time (through the goodness of God) I am not sensible of any 
Distemper upon me: and although the Winter 1662. was cold and 
long, yet no Wastcoat hath come upon my back, day nor night, which 
had not gone without for thirty Years before: One thing also in regard 
of my Age makes me marvel that I am grown two inches bigger 
in my body within these twelve months. Also I know, it wonderfully 
Restores and Exalts the Generative Virtue, either in Man or Woman, 
and is a great Cordial for Venus Darlings, enabling them wonderfully 
for those close fights, and Nocturnal Encounters. 
 
You may read also in this book, a little before, that there was a 
Worm came from a Woman, four yards long: The same Woman took 
five of my Pills, on the 15th. of April, 1663. at five a Clock in the 
morning, and two hours after she had a Worm came from her by stool, 
seven Yards long, I have both the worms by me to be seen. 
 
[^p.11^] 
There was a Linnen Drapers Wife within the City of London, came 
to me for some of my Pills, and changing many words with her, she 
told me, that she could not beleive that my Pill could cure all diseases, 
I replied and told her, that I could work no Miracles, to make her 
beleive it, but this I desired of her, that she would send unto me any 
poor Creature, let the Disease be what it will, even so bad, that her 
self with others judged it past Cure, I would through Gods blessing 
Cure it, and not put the party to a penny charge: She sends me a man 
that was troubled with a sore distemper in his Head, for Twelve years, 
and many times he fell down in the Street, and my Pills (through the 
blessing of God) cured him of that distemper, without any other means. 
Should I have been paid for my Pills, they came but to six shillings, he 
came and gave God and me thanks, which was all I lookt for: The 
man lives in Pudding Lane, near little Eastcheap, his name is Benoni 
Barksdale, by Trade a Cooper, his age about thirty two years. 
 
I have also a Preparation from the same matter of this Pill, with a 
little Addition to it, will cure those that have been deaf for many years. 
these Pills are to be taken as the other, and the price 5. s the box. 
 
And ile tell you, as these Pills are Extracted from the best of Minerals 
so they are the best of Medicines, and not to be made without great 
Expence, much Pains, Time and Operating in the Fire, the which is 
somthing tedious now to me in this my Old age, for I was sixty four 
years of age the 16.th of October 1664. for then (as I am informed) I 
have been so many years baptized: And I have lived in the Parish 
where now I live these 12 years, and have wrought from Animals, 
Vegitables, and Minerals; and although I have found out many pretty 
Experiments from the two former, yet I affirme, Experimentally, 
None like the Mineral Kingdome for Medicines; from which (through 
the goodness of God) I have gained this great Secret, which is the 
Best that ever I knew, or Care to know. 
 
A Friend of mine coming into the company of a young man who having 
the POX, made his condition known to my friend, who 
gave him but Two Boxes of my Pills, and in three weeks time he was 
perfectly cured, although he scarce went to bed sober all that time: and 
within three weeks after he married a Wife, and both of them very 
well to this day. this was done in December 1662. 
 
One thing more I cannot pass by, to acquaint the World withall; 
Concerning a man in a very sad Condition: For the first time that I 
came to him, I found him sitting in a Chair, and his Legs laid up upon 
another Chair, and so full of Pain that he was not able to rise out of 
[^p.12^] 
the place, but by the help of his Wife and Servants: He had kept one 
in his house some Five Months who did Administer unto him, but in 
all that time he found No good; then he took One Box of my Pills, 
and he took them from Two to Three, Four, Five and six, and so on daily 
increasing, till he took fourteen at one time, and in taking out the 
whole Box they never gave him a Stool extraordinary (as he thought) 
nor any Vomit, neither could he find himself One jot the better. Small 
incouragement (a man would think) to take any more; but I told 
him, if ever he were Cured it must be by these Pills, then he took another 
Box, and whereas he took till he came to Fourteen of the first 
Box, he could take of the second box but three or four, because they 
then wrought so strongly upon him both by Vomit and stool; and then 
was the man in good hope of Cure. Well he took a third box, and 
before that was Half spent, they broke him out all over his body, into 
Scabs, and sent out his Distemper with a POX. 
 
I set down these Examples, to convince some persons of their 
Folly, who have had some Distempers upon them many years, and 
they think by taking of my Pills Four or Five times, to be cured, and 
if things be not Presently, according to their expectation, neglect and 
slight them: Not considering that a Tree and so a Disease, that hath 
had a long time in Rooting will require so much the longer time to 
Root out again: But to all such Persons I say, I had rather they would 
let alone my Pills and keep their money, and their Diseases too. 
 
And for asmuch that my Pill is well know through most parts of the 
World, to be a Soveraign Remedy for any Disease; Seamen and Merchants 
(from experience) having communicated them almost into all 
parts; Some there are that seek to Countrefeit my Pill, which Pill they 
understand as well as Walthams Calf, for it requireth a better Witt than 
lieth in any of their Heads, to know the Materials, the Fire and the 
Water, the Order and the Time to be observed in making thereof; which 
I have not gained easily, but by long and chargeable experience: But if 
any of them be able to convert the blood of the Serpent into a Salamander, 
able to endure a violent Fire, and take from him his blood, soul and 
spirit, and throwing him headlong into the Salt Sea, that man shall be 
like another conquering Iason, deserving great Honour. 
 
I understand also by some Persons, that there are great Disputes and 
Conjectures amongst men, what my Pill is made of, Some say it is 
made of Turpethum Minerale, Others, of Sulphur of Antimony, And 
some say it is made of Crude Mercury or Quick-silver: But not one 
[^p.13^] 
Grain of Either of these did I ever use to the making of my Pill. So 
much for the Negative. It matters not what its made of it being so 
safe and harmeless that Women with child do constantly take them, and 
much good they find by them, for they strengthen both them and 
the Child. And I do conclude in the Affirmative it is good for any 
Disease (as I said before) Curable by Physick. 
 
Now that none may be deceived for after time in buying Pills for 
Mine, which are not, I therefore first declare to all that shall read these 
Lines, that the Pill was never taught me by Man, neither did I know 
any man that can make them but my self. But since the Printing of 
my book May the 2. 1664. I have given my Secret to three persons 
whom in regard of their Greatness, I dare not mention, considering 
what Soloman saith, The Kings wrath is as the Roaring of a Lion, but 
His Favour is as dew upon the grass, Prov. 19. 12. And again, that 
none may have any mistrust, to think those which sell them for 
me do any person wrong, I have sealed them up fast in Latten Boxes, 
with my Coat of Armes (being three Boars Heads) thereon; and 
books given with them, (if they take a whole Box) which hath the 
same Impression: And the Price (without contending) is four shillings 
the Box. 
 
And if any cannot swallow these Pills as they are, they may beat 
them smaller, and take them in some Liquid thing, as is before expressed. 
they need not except they will use Posset drink, or Broth, or forbear 
sleeping. 
 
And for asmuch as it is objected by some, that the Pill in some bodies 
doth not operate upwards and downwards, as some Physick usually doth 
Yet my Pill, under God, (though insensible, it may be in some bodies) 
the operation may not be over in a day, two or three after: It works 
by expelling Wind, Water and by Sweat, and (if need be) in due time by 
Purge or Vomit, (if there be cause.) But, if they would have them 
work sooner by stool, or more certainly, bruise the Pills to Powder, 
and put them into a quarter of a spoonful of Honey. 
 
And for asmuch that my aim was in making this Medicine, that all 
might have Benefit thereby, I have so ordered the business, that my Pills 
are to be sold in several places of the Nation for me, that who so pleaseth, 
may have the benefit of them and never send to London, which will 
be a very great ease to them. But be careful to buy the Pills of those 
whose names are in my book, the reason why, is in regard of many 
Letters that are sent unto me by persons that scrupel to buy Pills of 
any whose names are not in my Book; and well they may, for it is the 
[^p.14^] 
ready way to be cheated, and for the future, take notice of it I shall allow 
none to leave my Pills to be sold for them but Mr. Eues, who makes 
it his whole imploiment to furnish several places with them. 
 
The Pills may be taken at any time of the Year, in Hot or cold seasons: 
Only This I would advise all that take them, the first time, to 
keep the house that day; In the next place not to take them upon a 
Full stomack: And to prevent all errors and mistakes whatsoever in 
taking of them, be careful to observe the Rules given in this Book, 
which bids you begin with Two Pils, and three the next day, and four or 
five the next day, if those which you took before do not work to your 
mind, and then rest one or two daies, and by this time you will know 
what number best agreeth with your bodies, and so you shall not need 
to go back again and begin with two, as at the first time, but keep to 
that number which will best agree with your bodies. 
 
I have, and still do, suffer Abuse by some persons about my Pills, 
whose names I scorn to mention, because some of them upon Examination 
were asham'd to own their Own names. And I may say of them 
as one said, in these words, They that are younger then I, have me in 
Dirision, or mock me, (as it is in some translations) Whose Fathers I 
would have disdained to have set with the dogs of my flock, Job 30. V. 1. 
 
One thing more I shall commend unto your consideration as a Conclusion 
to this Book, which is this, I have observed, (but with grief of 
my heart to hear) that many Women in a difficult Labour for some 
daies have died in Child-Bed, which I know (by the Blessing of God 
might be prevented, for I know that I can administer a small thing to 
her in a Glass of Sack or Whitewine, that shall cause her to be delivered 
within the space of an Hour, for surely the Medicine being as yet 
in the Stomack, the mouth of the Share is opened, and the folding 
doors of the Os sacrum are open'd in the Loines, and the young is presently 
expelled: And indeed, the Medicine never failed me. Now, many 
for want of this Medicine do perish, which might be preserved alive, to 
the mutual comfort of themselves, their Husbands, Children, and other 
their near and dear Relations, and so prevent those multitudes of 
tears from all those who are Sad Spectators of Women in so much misery: 
And this I have Divulged willingly, that she who is in Labour 
may not henceforward undergo the danger of her life. 
 
Lastly, those that are desirous to enjoy these Pills, they may repair 
to the Discoverer thereof, and to these places following, Where they 
[^p.15^] 
are to be had, and no where else, unless you will be cheated. 
 
[^Beginning of a list figure.^] 
At Mrs. Harfords at the Bible in Heart in Little Brittain where also you may have any sort of Tokens made of Copper of Brass for private necessary Change. 
[^At^] Mr. Brugis Printer, next door to the Red Lyon Inn, in Newstreet Near Fetter Lane. 
[^At^] Mr. Rich. Lownds at the White Lion in St. Pauls Churchyard Book-seller. 
[^At^] Mr. Russels in Mugwel street, near unto Cripple-Gate. 
[^At^] Mr. Randals at the three Pigeons a little beyond St. Clements Church Strand, on the backside. 
[^At^] Samuel Hagars at the Green Bank in Wapping. 
[^At^] Mrs. Baldwins at Rochester in Kent. 
[^At^] Mrs. Nortons at Feversham [^in Kent.^] 
[^At^] Mr. Robert Browns at St. Margarets in Norwich. 
[^At^] My Cousin Lockiers at the Katherine Wheel by St. Iames's House. 
[^At^] Iohn Partridge's at North Perrot in Somersetshire. 
[^At^] Meadflower Nicolls's, and Iames Bevin's, both of Stony Stratford. 
[^At^] Mr. Iohn Eues of Flower, Grocer in Northamptonshire. 
[^At^] Ioh. Trotters at Iames Wests in the Castle, near the East Gate in Bristol. 
[^At^] William Hermitage of East-Dean in Sussex. 
[^At^] Mr. Robert Clemence of Chadlington In Oxford shire. 
[^At^] Ioseph Reeve in Trinity Parish by the Bell in Colchester. 
[^At^] Mr. Savage at Lewis in Sussex, Grocer, near the Market-place. 
[^At^] Mr. Iohn Duncomb at his shops at Wendevor, Tame & Tring. 
[^At^] Mr. Tho. Stockwel at Newbery. 
[^At^] Iohn Lees in Guildford. 
[^At^] Mr. Paul Richards in Portsmouth. 
[^At^] Micha. Sanders at the lower Detford, at the Still and three Goates Heads. 
[^At^] Mr. Benjamin Marten at his house in the City of Oxford. 
[^At^] William March at Cranebrook in the County of Kent. 
[^At^] Will. Babbs at Dunmow in Essex. 
[^At^] Mr. Tho. Collins of the town of Stafford. 
[^At^] William Robins at Town Malling in Kent. 
[^At^] Marmaduke Morley of Sherbourn in Yorkshire. 
[^At^] George Bucknel of the Town of Shrosbury. 
[^p.16^] 
At Mr. Tho. Coates in Hull. 
[^At^] Frances Drury living with Mr. Iohn Richardson at the Angel Gate on the Market Hill in Cambridge. 
[^At^] Mr. Abraham Peirce of the City of Solesbury. 
[^At^] Mr. Tho. Carter, Linnen Draper in Warmister, who is to sell none of my Pills in Solesbury. 
[^At^] Mr. George Fishers in High-street Merchant, in Dublin in the Kingdome of Ireland. 
[^At^] Mr. Iohn Bissite in St. Peters Parish in Canterbury neer Kings Bridge. 
[^At^] Mr. Iames Hill at Worksworth in Darby sheire. 
[^At^] Iohn Walloxal of Bremicham in Warwick shiere. 
[^At^] Robert Fincer Clothier of the City of Worcester. 
[^At^] Mr. John Hill in the City of Hereford. 
[^At^] Mr. Tho. Bayley in the City of Gloucester. 
[^At^] Mr. Rich. Hawkes at the Black Raven in Warwick. 
[^At^] Tho. Wand alias Morrow Carrier of Cambridge in Green street. 
[^At^] Mr. Will. Wildman Fishmonger of Saffron VValden in Essex. 
[^At^] Ralph Brewit of Dunmow in Essex. 
[^End of a list figure.^] 
 
Absolom, because he had no Son to keep his name, he Erected a Pillar and called 
it after his own Name, 2 Samuel C. 18. v. 18. 
 
And I have had Sons, but They are not, And so I shall call the Pill after my own 
Name. 
 
LOCKIERS PILL. 
 
Written from my Laboratory in St. Thomas in Southwark, over against the Meal-Market, 
at the Sign of the three Boars Heads, Nov. 2. 1665. 
 
I have been at great Cost and Pains in writing and Printing Books, to give 
men plainly to understand that my Pill will do any thing that is to be done by 
Physick, I have likewise declared to the World how they must be used, for all 
Persons and Diseases. And to prevent all Jealousies of Counterfeits (though with 
great Cost) hath added to all the Books bearing this Date my Effigies, And yet 
for all this, persons trouble themselves and me, in writing Letters unto me, who 
am a Man full of business & know how to spend my time better then to answer 
20. or 30. letters in a week, but for the future, I intend not to answer any Letter 
that shall be sent unto me upon the account of my Pills, Namely how to take 
them. 
 
THere is lately come out a scurrillious pamphlet written by a pittiful rayling 
Sneak (witness his book, Dedicated to Alderman Tichbourn dated 1657.) 
which I scorn at present to take any further notice only then to acquaint, 
the World with a Letter I received from a person of Quality that had the perusal 
of it. which is as followeth. 
 
[^p.17^] 
Honoured Doctor, 
 
I have lately read a Scurrillous Pamphlet, in which 
the Author doth endeavour to render your Pill Truculent, 
and himself the only Chymist, and a Pediseque 
of Helmont. As to the first, that he may make 
the world believe he speaks truth; he pretends 
Knowledge of each particular Concret that are Ingredients 
of your Pill; but in this he forgot the Adage, 
Ne futor ultra crepidam, for I having had the Honour to be at Southampton 
House the 13. of Iune, 1664. when you Calci'nd your powder, for the 
Composing of your Pill, before the Kings most Excellent Majesty, several 
Princes, Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen, am able to say he is mistaken in 
the Foundation of the composition, and hath plaid the Fool in earnest, in 
writing against that he never understood, but this Adage may be applied 
in his excuse, Hominem experiri multa paupertas jubet: To tell you my 
mind, in all that he hath done against you, he hath imitated the Dog in 
Plutarch, that spends his time in barking at the Moon, being enraged 
more at her light that offends his eyes, than at the black spots she weareth, 
but you are above, whilst he is below, making good the Adage, Canes 
timidi vehementius latrant. Next as to his Chymistry, the Skinner in 
Walbrook sufficiently Experimented it to the damage of 975 l. and loss of 
his life afterward with grief. He can Transmute Metals, if you will beleive 
him? and yet is a pittiful Fellow, or else he would not have been so 
often in Prison for his Cousenage, in so much that he is as well known in 
Newgate, as most of the Common Rascals, Qui mendax, idem furax. 
Lastly, his being the only man understands and imitates Helmont. Helmont 
was a very Holy man, witness his Prayers, his Visions, and his gifts, 
and particularly in pag. the 19. where he saies, Concidi in faciem & dixi 
domine ignosce, si favor in proximum extra limites abripuit, condona, condona 
domine indiscretæ charitati meæ, nam tu es radicale bonum ipsiusmet bonitatis, 
and so onwards, and towards the end of the Chapter, he saies, Et quem 
Dominus Iesus vocaverit ad sapientiam, ille & non alius venturus est: and can 
the world be so blind as to think this Sot is so called, who accounts it 
his Glory by the Circean Charms of Liquor to be Metamorphosed into a 
Spunge, which is fit for little else but to suck in & spue out, that will drink 
and vomit, and vomit to drink again, and so continue the sport, making 
good the Adage, Parthi quo plus biberent, co plus sitiunt. A pretty fellow, 
and likely to be called by the Lord Jesus, and Raphael to be bestowed on 
him: It is confest he borrows Helmonts glorious names, and imposeth 
them on his Trifles, but a Bristol Stone is no more then a Bristol stone, 
although a fool saies it is a Diamond, and Counterfeit Pearls are but 
counterfeit, though they may make a Fidlers Daughter look like a German 
Princess. And this is the condition of our pageant Helmont, Aut 
Helmont aut Asinus. And thus I leave him till he gives the next occasion 
to be slasht, and rest your friend, 
 
G. S. 
Nov. 7. 1664: FINIS. 
 