[^Daffy, Anthony: Elixir salutis^] 
 
[}Elixir Salutis: 
THE 
CHOISE DRINK OF HEALTH, 
OR, 
Health-Bringing Drink. 
 
BEING 
A Famous Cordial Drink, found out 
by the Providence of the Almighty, and Experienced 
a Most Excellent Preservative of 
Man-kind, 
 
A SECRET 
Far beyond any Medicament yet known, 
And is found so agreeable to Nature, That 
it Effects all its Operations, as Nature would 
Have it, and as a Vertual Expedient proposed by 
her, for reducing all her Extreams unto an equal 
Temper; the same being fitted unto all Ages, Sexes, 
Complexions and Constitutions, and highly fortifying 
Nature against any Noxious humour, invading or 
offending the Noble Parts: 
 
Never Published by any but by Me 
ANTHONY DAFFY, Student in Physick. 
 
LONDON, 
Printed with Allowance for the Author by T. Milbourn, 1673.}] 
 
[^A preface to the reader omitted.^] 
[^Extract 1, pp. 3-8^] 
 
[^p.3^] 
[}Elixir Salutis: 
OR, 
A Famous, and most Choise Cordial 
Drink, &c.}] 
 
THe Excellent uses and transcendent Vertues of this Inestimable 
Jewell, Proved by the happy and successfull experiences 
of many Credible Persons, being now Healthfull 
and living Monuments to Gods Praise, hereunder 
named and Described, are (amongst diverse others, too long here 
to mention) these, viz. 
 
[}The Gout.}] 
 
THis Choise Preservative (if duly prepared) effectually and perfectly 
cures the Gout, as hath (through Gods blessing) been 
happily experienced, and will be testified (amongst others) by 
Benjamin Hope of Camberwell in the County of Surrey, Mr. Peirce 
of Newington Butts-Cawsey, his Wife having been cured, who 
both were very sorely afflicted with this Torturing Malady. 
For, this my Drink stifles the Gout in its birth, and kills it in its 
[^p.4^] 
strength; extracting out of all parts of the Patients body, those 
crude and viscous humours, which are the spawne and nourishing 
cause of this greivous Disease; and frees the Joints of all 
other Diseases and pains, to Admiration. 
 
[}The Stone and Gravel in the Reins, 
or an Exulceration in the Kidneys or 
Mouth of the Bladder.}] 
 
THis Drink Dissolves, and perfectly cures the Stone and gravell, 
and hath been by Gods blessing found an effectual Remedy 
against it in Men, Women & Children: It wonderfully cleanseth 
the Reines of all foulness and imperfections, forcing urine, never 
failing to cure the Gravell in the Reines, Kidneys, or Bladder, 
though ulcerated, and the Patients urine like blood: These Excellent 
vertues of this my Drink have to admiration been found 
eminently successful by very many persons in diverse Countries, and 
this City: As, for Instance, by Mrs. Katherine, the Wife of Mr. Tho. 
Daffey of Redmill in the County of Leicester, and Mr. William 
Crawley of Luton in the County of Bedford, who may once a fortnight 
be found at the Three Broad Arrowes in Golden Lane, London; 
who by Gods blessing upon this my Drink voided above an 
Hundred Stones; whereof the first, as Bigg as the Middle part 
of a Tobacco Pipe, and about an Inch long; and so soft at its 
coming away, that one might crumble it betweene the fingers; 
most of the other Stones Smaller, some of the bigness of an Horse-bean, 
some as little as a Pea, all rendred soft, and of a crumbling 
nature. 
 
Mistress Tanner, living within the New Postern, over against 
Aldermanbury, London, hath likewise found my Drink, under 
God, effectual to the cure of this grievous painful Distemper, in 
bringing away above sixty stones, one whereof as big as a Date-stone. 
 
Also the aforesaid Thomas Hinde; when all other Means and 
Physitians (from one to another) in five years sore affliction, 
proved unsuccessful to him, either for help or ease; Nine spoonfulls, 
[^p.5^] 
or three Doses of this my Drink (as I prepared it) did by the 
Lords blessing, bring him to void a stone three-forked, like the 
end of some Tobacco Stopper, about the bigness of an horse bean; 
which hath been seen by sundry persons of Note in this City and 
elsewhere: And of his Cure by my Drink I have his Certificate 
(ready to shew) as aforementioned (if need need require.) Many 
more living Testimonies might be named of the incredible and excellent 
vertues of this Drink, bringing away the Stone, Sand and 
Gravell, when Congealed, the Sand and Gravell brought away as 
soft, as Meal or Flower under the finger: And if the same be Congealed, 
it sometimes brings it away on a suddain hard as a Pibble, 
as the aforesaid Mr. Crawley hath experienced. 
 
[}Against Languishing and Melancholly.}] 
 
IT Raiseth Languishing Natures, and Melancholly Drooping 
Spirits; it fails not of curing the Hypocondriack- Melancholly, 
and most powerfully opposeth all black and Mixed humours (as 
Natures grand Enemie) Continually drawing them out of the 
veines and Arteries into the Stomach, and from thence sends 
them away: And after their expulsion, Nature rejoyceth. 
 
[}Shortness of Breath, Collick, Griping 
in the Guts.}] 
 
THis Drink doth by the Lords blessing, suddainly help bad 
Digestion, or Stoppage of the Stomach and shortness of 
Breath, causing a good appetite, and defending the head from all 
vapers ascending from the Mother and Spleen: It is found a 
most certain Remedy for the Collick and any Griping of the Guts, 
and stayeth vomitting; which Vertues have been successfully experienced 
by the aforesaid Benjamin Hope of Camberwell Mr. 
Layton of Chick-Lane, London, Cordwayner, Mrs. Petit in Cursiters-Alley, 
and my own Family. 
 
And many others also, will testify, That the same takes away all 
pains from the heart, and perfectly cured them, when they were 
sorely stopt with Phlegme; yea, when they feared Choking, and 
[^p.6^] 
were accustomed in their sleep to be near Stifling for want of 
Breath. 
 
[}The Ptissick.}] 
 
IT gives much relief and ease to Aged People, afflicted with the 
Ptissick, but perfectly cures such, as have strength of Nature, 
and are not too far Spent in that sad Distemper. 
 
This harmless and pleasant Cordial, is so good a friend unto 
Woman kind in all conditions, and hath been so experienced, 
That they cannot treasure up a Richer Jewel by them, or have a 
more acceptable gift presented them: The vertues of it being found 
effectual in clearing them of all obstructions, fitting and enabling 
them for conception. 
 
[}The Green-sickness.}] 
 
IT also certainly and Speedily cures the Green-sickness, (of any 
Kind or nature, whatsoever) not failing to bring Virgins to 
their Maiden-blush, rendring painting altogether out of fashion; 
making the Face well Coloured, the breath Sweet, and the body 
Lusty. 
 
[}Against Surfets.}] 
 
IT pursueth Surfets from one place to another in the body; 
yea, though the body be swollen up, it doth by Gods help 
speedily raise the Patient from a bed of Languishing; as hath been 
happily experienced by one Mr. De-Hewes, a Glass-maker, in 
Winchester yard, South-wark, who found the same admirably 
successfull in his Speedy and compleat Recovery from that dangerous 
Distemper. 
 
[}Scurvy and Dropsy.}] 
 
THis Cordial Drink wonderfully acquits the body of the 
Scurvy, root and branch; and hath also been found (to Admiration) 
successfull in the perfect cure of the Dropsie, and other 
Distempers, accompanying the same, as hath been happily experienced 
by the aforesaid Mr. Layton of Chick Lane, the said 
Mr. Dehewes and others (too many here to mention). 
 
[^p.7^] 
[}Coughs, Wheesing, and Consumption.}] 
 
IT hath been found through Gods Blessing, an effectual Remedy 
against Coughs of all Sorts, yea in the heighth of extremity; 
It also removes & takes away the Causes of all Wheesings, 
and hath to Admiration cured Consumptive persons, Nature being 
not too far spent. 
 
[}Mother and Spleen.}] 
 
THis Cordial Drink admirably frees the Liver and Spleen of 
all Obstructions, and is found a proper Expedient and effectual 
Remedie against the Mother and Spleen. 
 
It is also of Excellent use for Wett Nurses, cleansing their bloud, 
and rendring their Milk wholsom and Nutritive to the Sucking 
Babe. 
 
[}Against Rickets.}] 
 
IT Cures the Rickets and other distempers in children, by opening 
and removing Obstructions in them. 
 
It keeps a clear passage between the head and heart, not admitting 
of any Noxious humour, that annoyes those Noble 
parts. 
 
It admirably keeps off Frightfull fears and griefs from seizing 
on the heart, by removing those noxious and sharp humours, that 
occasion the same. 
 
It also takes away the Cause of, and cures the extream burnings 
in the bottomes of the feet and palmes of the hands, which sorely 
Afflict the Heart. 
 
Finally, it highly exalts the Generative vertue, and Restoreth 
Radical Moisture, cleansing and strengthning the Seminal vessells 
in both Sexes. 
 
And in a word, Amongst all the Diseases and Distempers incident 
to humane Bodies, which I have read or heard of in these 
parts of the world, whether of Men, Women, Children, or Babes, 
I do in the presence of God, upon many years experience of the 
vertues of this Cordial Drink affirm, There is not one Disease able 
to withstand, but is through Gods Blessing Subject unto this 
my Drinks, innocent, powerful and miraculous operation (Gods 
[^p.8^] 
appointed time for the Patients Dissolution being not come). 
 
I might without ostentation, or any vaine Glory (if brevity 
were not designed) give instances of persons that have (by Gods 
Blessing upon the seeming improbable means of this my Drink) 
been cured of the Pestilence; some of Agues, and of others, that 
by this Drink have been cured of the King's evill (so by its several 
symptomes generally judged of:) whereof persons applying 
themselves to me, may have full satisfaction. 
 
And I do in the presence of the Almighty Searcher of hearts, 
faithfully promise, That this my pleasant Inoffensive Drink, is 
with much carefulness and Integrity duly prepared by me; so that 
I have (through the Lords goodness) successfully given the same 
unto my wife (Lying in) and unto Babes in the Moneth, (so 
qualified, as in My Directions for taking the same, is particularly 
exprest.) 
 
Moreover, for prevention of fraud, each Bottle of this my 
Drink shall be sealed with my Coat of Armes, according to its 
Impression in the Title, and is to be sold at Five Shillings the 
Pint, or two shillings six pence the half pint Bottle, at Mr. Lowes 
a Shoomaker within Aldersgate directly against the Fountain Tavern. 
Mr. Milwards shop, a Book-seller at Westminster Hall 
Gate, at Mr. Benedict Barnhams Coffee-House at the upper end of 
Bishops-gate Street, nigh Leaden-hall Corner. At Mistress Anne 
Butchers, a Distiller at the Still & Tobacco-Roll at Margarets hill 
in Southwark nigh the Queens head Inn; at Mr. Woodwards a Potter 
at the Three Sugar-loaves nigh the Kings Bench; at Mr. Booths a 
Baker at the Axe in East-Smithfield nigh the May-Pole; at Mr. 
Greens a Stationer, over against the three Mariners nigh Radcliff 
Cross. At Mr. Brights at the Last in Tooley street, Southwark; 
at Mr. Passmores at the Georg in St. Martins Le-Grand. at Mr. 
Minnikins a Picture-shop in St. Martins Le-Grand; at Mr. 
Billingsleys at the Printing-Press at the Royal Exchange. 
 
And at my own House at the lower end of Fleet-Lane in 
Cock-Court the second house on the left hand. 
 
At which several places above mentioned, All persons that are 
desirous of this Cordial Drink, may, together with a Bottle of 
the same, receive one of these printed Books, together with 
printed Directions for the use and application thereof, proper 
to each Distemper, and the Patients condition and strength 
of Body. 
 
