[^Nendick, Humphrey: Popular pill^] 
 
[}A 
COMPENDIUM 
OF THE 
VERTUES, OPERATIONS, and USE 
Of that 
Applauded ANTIPANCRONICON 
CALLED 
NENDICKS - POPULAR - PILL: 
DELIVERED 
In a plain and easie Method, whereby the different 
Causes, Symptoms and dangers of all 
Chronick and REIGNING Diseases, 
AS 
SCURVY, SPLEEN, Setled Humours, 
and Foulness of Bloud, are truly discovered. 
TOGETHER 
With Observations upon Several Diseases and Cures, 
wrought by those Infallible and Incomparable 
POPULAR-PILLS, the Only Medicine 
that hath gained such applause over Italy, and 
now of known Use against all difficult Diseases, 
where other Common Medicines 
prove Ineffectuall. 
 
Prepared only by Dr Nendick, and published for publique 
benefit, and are to be sold at his House, at the White Ball, 
within the Petty-Canons Court, betwixt S. Pauls Churchyard 
and Pater-noster Row. 
 
LONDON, Printed, 1674.}] 
 
[^A preface to the reader omitted.^] 
[^Extract 1, pp. 1-14^] 
 
[^p.1^] 
[}ANTIPANCRONICON.}] 
 
BEfore I come to write in particular of the admirable Vertues 
of my Pills, I will first set down their Vertues in generall: 
They have a peculiar faculty to discharge the body of mixt and ill 
humours, working wonders by stool, powerfully removing all 
Setled humours and old aches, bringing away congeled bloud 
and filth by Urine and stool: They open Obstructions in all passages, 
especially in all womb-diseases, and Urinary passages, so 
far as is possible for an active Medicine to reach: it expells Vapours 
and Winde upwards and downwards, and hinders the 
Spleen, Mother, and other stiches and passions proceeding from 
Vapours, seldom leaves the Patient dissatisfied, after its use, For 
it is much celebrated (in most parts) for its success against all 
Symptoms gendred from Vapours. It singularly rectifies the Heat 
and foulness of bloud, too frequently raised by excessive drinking 
and debauching, which occasions several sorts of Diseases, as 
Dropsies, Gouts, Scurvy, &c. 
 
It kills all manner of tetters, Scabs, scalds, and breakings forth; 
likewise Worms it kills, burns, and brings them away in skins. 
It is an admirable head Purge, also an excellent and safe Medicine 
for those who are naturally costive or hot bodies. The 
wonderful vertues of this Pill against that predominant disease 
the Scurvy, and that difficult and reigning disease the Pox, and 
all other curable diseases cannot be reckoned up, which I shall in 
the particulars, seconded with Examples and Cures, as they 
have fallen out in my many years practise in these parts, mention, 
the better to set forth the Verity of the Vertues of these Pills, 
which not only perfectly Cure these Diseases, but if timely and 
seasonably taken, likewise prevent them. 
 
Spring and Fall being the chief times to purge in, to carry off 
the relicts of any disease, or to prevent any old distemper a man 
is subject to have, or fears he may fall into, I cannot but commend 
to all the through triall of these pills, whose Operations and 
successes will commend themselves. 
 
By this course many have freed themselves from joynt pains, 
head-aches, Scurvies, Jaundies, Dropsies, and other difficult 
[^p.2^] 
Diseases, that they thought impossible ever to be prevented or 
cured, being distempers they expected every Spring and Fall, this 
was happily proved by Mr. Daws in Grubstreet Baker, who taking 
these Pills for a stuffing at his stomach and Vapours in the head, 
being advised to my pills as excellent Head-pills, and against Vapours, 
having also an aguish lingring and melancolly Indisposition 
of body, not only removed these Indispositions, but also prevented 
himself from falling into the Dropsy, although his leggs 
began to swell and pitt, who doubting he might fall into the 
same again or any other disease, resolves (all-though in perfect 
health,) to keep some by him in reserve against any occasion. 
 
Likewise the Son of M. Willet Carpenter at the Maze in South-wark, 
about 12. years old, who had, many years if not from his 
Cradle, been troubled Spring and Fall with abundance of dry 
burnt Scabs in the head, and body, that proceeded from a scorbutick 
saltness or leprous foulness of the bloud, much help had 
been sought, divers tampered with diet-drink, oyntments, Pills, 
some tried one way, some another, but to little or no purpose, 
till beyond the expectation of his friends, who desired to make 
triall of my Pills, he was made perfectly well in a few daies. 
 
Moreover let me perswade any one finding themselves suddenly 
ill, or indisposed, Speedily to be so provident towards their 
own wellfare as to prevent the approaching disease, by taking a 
full doze of my Pills, which will discharge the body of infection 
and humours as nature could not carry away, and so would lie in 
the vessels and corrupt, and in few dayes would turn into a surfet, 
feaver, plurisie, or some other acute disease, to the eminent hazzard 
of the Patients life, so great a preservative is this Pill. 
 
I remember a widdow who lodges at Mrs Fosters in Welches 
Rents, by Safron-hill, who was brought very low in few 
dayes, with Vomitting, gripes, in a high feaver, and restless, 
talked delirious, being in an excessive dangerous condition, 
that little hopes of life remained, was however (by some who 
had made trial of my Pills) preswaded to take my Pills, as the 
Only medicine to be hoped in for her recovery, and forthwith 
sent to me for some of my Pills, she being so bad could take but 
one Pill, and that she could not Swallow, but bruised and in 
Syrup, which wrought upwards and downwards, without violence, 
she slept well that night, and quickly recovered of that 
[^p.3^] 
dangerous fit, which might have been a long fit, and that might at 
first have been by a doze or two prevented from invading so far. 
 
Any by enquiry may know the truth of this cure. 
 
Whereof I advise all persons (although all diseases, cannot 
be cured, nor more cannot be expected then from naturall 
means,) in any desperate case to use my Pills: for they have 
not only cured diseases where the cause hath not been rightly 
known by reason of much Tampring and many diseases mixed together, 
and where many magnified medicines have failed, and 
recovered many who have thought they were incurable, and had 
tried all things, but some given over in the eye of man have they 
Cured: for in some cases their Operation is rather miraculous 
then reasonable, in making the lame to walk, and raising the sick 
from their bed so suddenly. 
 
Also many after they are recovered of fitts of sickness, as Feavers, 
surfets, Agues, Small pox, are subject to relapse, or fall 
into Stoppages, Swelled legs, Dropsie, or Agues, for want of 
purging, so soon as any such person can bear a purge, let 
them take my Pills, whose power is such, that they will speedily 
discharge the relicts, set nature free, and the patient upon his 
legs again. 
 
Note, for the Cure of diseases, neither the depth of winter, or 
height of the dog-days hinders their Operation, 'Tis true, Spring 
and Fall are the properest to take to prevent, but he that sickens 
is to regard the danger he is in, and the necessity he hath to be rid 
of his disease; but they may safely be taken, as necessity requires, 
in all ages, constitutions, seasons, and diseases, Observing from 
the beginning to the end of the cure, the length of the disease, the 
Strength of the patient, and the doze, and not to give quite over 
upon present ease, but Continue and be perfectly cured; alwaies 
remembring this: 
 
Be not Sick too late - nor Well too soon. 
 
As one Christiana, a servant at the Coffee house in Fullers Rents 
in Holburn, who after a surfet received, and upon venturing 
out before she was well, was struck with a lameness in 
her limbs, with Violent pains, insomuch as she could not go, 
She relapsed into very Dangerous Symptoms, and making 
great enquiry after help, heard of the wonderfull effects of this 
Pill, sent for a box, and took a large doze, which wrought well, 
[^p.4^] 
and found the Pills answer that report given of them, came and 
gave me thanks, and now remains well in Baldwins Gardens at 
the Golden Wheat-sheaf. 
 
Because many are freed from their diseases by a few dozes, 
therefore many expect it to be so in all, which cannot be reasonably 
expected, that diseases rooted in the body by long continuance 
can be cured in as little time as acute diseases of small standing; 
therefore notwithstanding the vertues of my Pills are absolutely 
Antipancronick, that is, against the worst and crabedest diseases, 
yet in long and difficult diseases it must require time to lessen 
the Symptoms and take away the cause by degrees: again, 
some bodies are more ill disposed to physick then others, and melancholly 
humours are harder to work on then either phlegm or 
choller, although it must be no small disease that stoops not immediately, 
as Gouts, old Aches, Pox, Dropsies Scurvy, &c. 
 
Mr. Nicolas Dobson Bayliff, at the Sparrows nest in Drury-lane, 
had the gout in his leggs, with such intolerable pain, and had 
been in hand, and given over by so many, that he preferred death 
before life, the pains were extream wracking, and much afflicted 
with the scurvy, who reading the directions and Vertues of my 
Pill in the hands of a friend, sent for my Pills, made triall, and 
found such ease, that he was scarce sensible of any distemper upon 
him, from the time of taking it till he was cured, which was 
in small time, although this was no small distemper. 
 
Also Mr. John Smith Clockmaker in Branford, who was afflicted 
in a high degree with the Scurvy and Melancholy, that it 
rendred him remiss in his concerns, having tried much means, 
and no help, at last hearing my Pills highly commended against 
the Scurvy, melancholy and Spleen, Stoppages and Vapours, 
and had before spared no cost, was by these Pills, little time and 
small charge, freed from that reigning disease, the Scurvy, a 
distemper few or none are in this Nation free from, in one degree 
or other, more or less, which is a great cause many diseases 
are left off as incurable, because they use not Medicines against 
the Scurvy, and so mistake the Disease and medicine together. 
 
And here I shall acquaint all persons with what hath not only 
been apparently demonstrable to me in my many years practice, 
but likewise hath been observed by very learned Physitians, who 
have with me examined into the nature of this disease, that it is a 
[^p.5^] 
melanchollie disease, doing great mischief by Vapours that afflict 
the upper parts, like the Spleen or Hypochondriac melancholly. 
 
But the scurvy having a malignant Vapour, gendred from the 
putrefaction of juices obstructed in the Vessells, hath peculiar 
and worse Symptomes then that old disease the Hypochondriac 
melancholly, and Spleen, whose Characters it bears, causing Vapours, 
stiches, cramps, fits, risings, &c. but hath others, as spots 
in those overgrown of divers colours, generally attended with 
loose teeth, bloudie gums, stinking breath, weariness in the limbs, 
twitchings and pains in the leggs, according to the constitution of 
the bodie it hath insinuated it self into, so it appears: for it is like 
the gout in some, like the pox in others, like running pains in others, 
like the Spleen in others, and many hundreds are deceived 
in the cure of those diseases, and the Patients think they have the 
gout or some bad disease on them, whenas the disease wants Antiscorbutick 
Medicines to root it out of its holds: nay when it is to 
a heighth, and hath got hold and throughly mixed it self, if alters 
the whole body makes new alterations and diseases, and becomes 
a most implacable and slie disease. 
 
As much might be said of that disease the French Pox, which 
likewise insinuates it self into all diseases, and for want of medicines 
of this kinde these diseases take their progress in the bloud 
of mankinde, and undoubtedly will produce Strange and new diseases 
if not prevented by proper Antipangallic Medicins. 
 
The want of Medicins for these diseases, which will not leave 
their holds without such powerfull and penetrative medicins, and 
the difficulty that is found in many cures by persons not suspecting 
these diseases to be the cause, hath occasioned me to be so 
positive in the use and Vertues of my Pill. 
 
The goodness and usefullness of this medicine cannot be valued 
by Marriners and such as go long Voiages, who partly from 
bad diet, alteration of air, and climates, sea-fogs and forreign 
liquours, are subject to many dangerous diseases, as Fluxes, Calentures, 
Scurvy, Pox, Poyson, &c. in these cases this hath been 
a tried Medicine, and whosoever hath it, hath his Doctor alwaies 
with him; and a better Medicine cannot be prescribed, for whatever 
can be done by man or Medicine, may be expected from this 
Pill, in such Voyages; as the relation of those Merchants and 
Marriners as have carried it into the remotest parts, doth testifie, 
[^p.6^] 
and have found it so absolutely usefull in the resisting poyson, and 
the recovery of Strange and wonderfull diseases, that the like 
was scarce ever known by any Medicine yet made publique. 
 
[}The Abstract of a Letter from Mt. George Macey Marchant 
of London. Point Cagua, 14. Jan. 1672. Jamaica.}] 
 
Dear Doctor, 
 
THis is the first conveyance, we had a very long passage of 16 weeks 
from S. Thomas to Antiqua, where (missing Barbados) we fell 
down here this Nineth instant. This is to acquaint you of the excellency 
of that popular Pill, with which you furnished me a small parcell, and 
it wrought strange and Unthought of Cures. Our Doctor being sick 
of a Callenture, his boy dead, and others aboard diseased of the Scurvy, 
Flux, Pox, &c. so that I was necessitated for the healths of our 
men and slaves, and fearing to use any of the Chest Medicines, I had 
no Knowledg in, I chose to adventure on your Pills, because I had your 
directions, which truly in less then a weeks time gave perfect Cure to 
most of our Ships Companie. Further, our Doctor and three more 
drinking ashore of palm-Wine, with the Negros, had all of them a 
fettish given them, which is usual with the Blacks to do with any they 
bear a grudge unto, it is a Weed or herb when bruised, they either 
Cunningly conveigh it into the Callabash or cup, or else keep it under 
their nails and infect the brims more or less according as they designe 
to Poyson in short or long time after: for they can order it to prove mortall 
as they please. Our Doctor and these men knowing no remedie, 
prevailed with me to practise my Medicine on them again, and did 
immediatly recover them. My antidote got so much fame that I was 
Courted by many of note for some it, but parted with what I had, to 
none unless to Myn Heer General Van Gansepoel of Morea Castle. 
I could relate you divers great Cures; In short, it cannot be extold beyond 
its worth to my own experience. This came by Captain John Collins 
of the Providence. 
 
Whether there be any such poyson in nature or can be so prepared 
by art, that shall kill at a certain prefixt time, either sooner 
or later, it's a controverted theme, the affirmative is maintained 
and seconded by several instances, as that of Claudius in Tacitus, 
Annal. Lib. 12. as also that practice of Cæsar Borgia in Jovius 
Histor. part. 1. lib. 3. producing the authority of Theophrastus, 
[^p.7^] 
that in 9. de hist. plant. c. 16. who maintains, that they may be so prepared 
and mixt that they may prove mortall, in two three or one 
months time, or at a year or two years end. And lastly, that of 
Drusus in Tacit. lib. 4. Annot. where it is affirmed, that he died in 
this manner of poysoning. More I could instance, and Especially 
one, who having had a fettish given him by the Indians, hath 
since constantly once a year raised a salivation to prevent; Still 
suspecting the secret Venene, but hath now resolved to confide in 
my Pills. This is sufficiently known unto those who have been in 
those parts: yet by reason many buy my pills to send into other 
parts, and many notwithstanding here doubt of it, and many 
would willingly be further informed, hath Obliged me to mention 
so much, of this, that may concerne so many. Therefore 
whoever desires to furnish themselves or others for any plantation 
or forreign part, will finde it a commoditie, that will answer expectation, 
and may be furnished with what quantities they 
please. 
 
This is a Notable and safe Medicine in all cases, rectifying the 
bloud from all foulness, which is undeniably the best way in the 
world for the cure of any disease, and expelling all poysonous 
physick, bringing those to a good constitution that have been 
spoiled by Mercury in Medicines, which often happens to those 
who have had the Pox or Running of the Reins, and fallen into 
the hands of those that spoil them with ill Mercurial Medicins, by 
rash fluxing, unadvised Salivations, whereby the pocky humours 
are mixed with the poyson of the mercuriall fumes, and so begett 
pains in the head, noise in the eare, soar throats, and all those other 
disgracefull consequents, as loss of Speech, pallat, nose &c. 
 
Whosoever hath formerly had any of these diseases, have had 
it stopt too soon, dread a relapse, or have received hurt by Over-drying 
diet-drinks, and immoderate sweats, or suspects it not 
well cured, or fears the Mercury not well carried off, lest it settle 
it self in pains in the shins, or any other Symptom, let the patient 
confide in my Pills, and take then in the largest doze they 
finde they can bare, and commonly a boz or two is sufficient to 
compleat a Cure, and sometimes less, but in some diseses it 
must require Fifteen or Twenty dayes, allthough some of the 
same diseases may be cured sooner: yet (as is said before) many 
are more indisposed to phisick, and many have more of the scurvy, 
[^p.8^] 
or other diseases mixed, &c. 
 
Mr James Parsons in Bell-Court in Carter-Lane, who was troubled 
with the gravell and stone from his Cradle, made commonly 
much bloudie Urine, with miserable heat, pricking pains in making 
water, Voided much matter from an Ulcer the kidnys, being 
advised to my Pills, brought away much urine filth and Congealed 
bloud and gravell, and made urine plentifully, it was a Cure indeed 
almost impossible to be effected, but was in few dayes, and 
is now well. 
 
Mr John Eaton Victualler, over against May pole in the Strand 
had for two years Violent head-ach, with a Cancer in the nose, 
which did eat and devour, that it endangered the eye, it bled 
extreamly to the hazzard of the Patient, it seemed incredible to 
those that had him in Cure, or that saw him, ever to be cured, but 
meting with one of my papers that directed to my Medicin, 
chearfully underwent a few dozes of my Pills, and received present 
ease, and great abatement of the Violence, and daily gained 
ground on the Cancer, and was Cured in little time. 
 
Will. Kirk the Count. of Lincolns Gardiner, had a humour fell 
into his hand with violent pain to his shoulder, it was in a miserable 
condition, much help had he sought far and near, and much 
money had he Spent on Doctors and Chyrurgions, but in vain: 
it threatned the loss of his hand, the foulning of the bone, was 
launced and could not be got well, notwithstanding the means 
used, at last was wished to me, I gave him my Pill, which presently 
Checked the humours, Swelling and pain, that it began to 
heal, and the use of his hand was recovered, when it was little expected 
to be Cured in so few days as it was; and hath never complained 
of it since. 
 
More might be said of these Cures, were I minded to dilate 
them at large: also I could instance hundreds of cures, with particular 
poofs of their wonderfull success in all diseases, by letters 
and accounts which is dayly brought me; of the great good 
they do in most parts in this Kingdom, being sent for farr and 
neare as is experienced by persons of all ranks and qualities, 
doing incredible Cures on all manner of diseases incident to men 
women and Children, but by reason many are ready to judge it 
cannot be good for so many diseases, I am sparing in the reports 
of its vertues, yet to such I answer, as many diseases may be 
[^p.9^] 
occasioned from one and the same cause, so many diseases may be 
cured by one and the same Medicine. 
 
I shall here adde, that these Pills above any Medicine cleanse 
the foulness of the Stomach, and remedie a stinking breath, sowr 
and cholerick, watry Vomittings and reachings subject to over-much 
drinking: the world hath not a better Medicine to open 
stoppages in maids who have the green sickuess, or any white flux 
or disease of the womb, for it seldom misseth of doing its work in 
any of these cases, and by consequence barrenness, it certainly 
cleanseth those noble parts, the liver and Spleen, and those fountains 
of Vapours, Dropsies and Jaundies, and in singular manner 
scowers the bloud ftom all heat and foulness, which occasions 
scurff, mange, kings-evill, tettars, scabs and all other breakings 
out: I need not insert any more, a doze or two will convince any 
one, beyond a whole course of phisick, therefore I desire those 
who receive good to communicate it to them who probably are 
out of hopes, because they have tried much, and are left off as 
incurable. 
 
I am not ignorant that it's scandalous to nominate any I have 
cured of the foul disease, yet where I have consent, or what is 
notoriously known, or what I have done out of charity, for these 
reasons and no otherwise shall I mention a cure or two of that sort. 
 
To shew rhe effects of my Pills upon that disease the Pox, 
(which if it be of any continuance) it hath pains in the head, shins 
and shoulders, which hinder rest, because they rage worst when 
the Patient is warm in bed, others break out in scabs, soars, warts, 
soar throats, and swellings, and many more horrid Symptoms 
attend this disease, which were endless to rehearse, but all these, 
after all the Medicines commonly known have been used, as 
purging, blouding, sweating, Vomiting, drinks, fluxing, fuming 
and salivation, to little or no purpose, this only Pill hath perfectly, 
in small time: here observe, that in the Pox, or running 
of the reins they must take the Pills in the largest doze, and continue, 
raise the doze or lessen it, as the strength and disease requires, 
and so likewise in any other stubborn disease. 
 
Anno 1673. was brought to me a girl about thirteen years old, 
Named Mary Crosby in Harrow-Alley in Great Queen-street, who 
had two years and upwards, been tormented with night-pains in 
her head, and brow, this girl had by the advice of eminent Phisitians 
[^p.10^] 
been recommended to divers Surgeons to cure an Ulcer which 
broke out on the upper lip, but none could be found that could do 
her any good, it grew to that condition that all the bone of the 
nose came away, and the forhead bone fouled, and the roof of 
the mouth fouled. the ulcer threatned the eating the upper lip, 
the breath stunk with these soars that it exceeded carrion 
in pickle, and was shunned by all persons, as a miserable peece 
of mortallity; this I undertook, and the Strangeness and impossibility 
of the Cure drew divers Artists to be Spectators, and particularly 
that ingenious person Esq. Harwood who lodges in Milford-lane 
New buildings; who out of Curiositie saw the effects of 
my Pills in a few weeks, which Girle is not lusty, and well, 
who was skin and bones: any person may be further satisfied in 
the truth at the place afore mentioned, this distemper was no 
otherwise then Hereditary by all that I could gather. 
 
One Cure more I shall relate to Vindicate my self of an aspersion, 
that I should cut off part of a mans yard and expose it to 
View, I need not specifie the particulars of the Patient: it's sufficiently 
known that I did such a cure in Scroops-Court over against 
St. Andrews Church in Holborn: it was thus: the Patient fainted, 
I left him a sleep, in the intrim the Chair-woman came and found 
it, but it was in my absence: this sprung from a small matter 
first, that had he come to me, or brought my Pills, had prevented 
the same. I could name diseases in this sort, that scarce the 
like can be produced. 
 
Advantagiously are these Pills administred, and rightly used to 
pains of all sorts, or to carry away any setled humours. Kills 
any tetters, Scabs, scalds, It Cures ths Kings evill with soars, 
or without, provided it be not with kernells in the throate, of long 
continuance: Dropsies, Jaundies, gouts, and reigning distempers, 
where all common Medicins have proved ineffectual. 
 
[}The Method for taking the Pills.}] 
 
1. They are composed to the highest pitch in nature for Convenience, 
and may be taken by themselves or in a little Ale or any 
convenient liquor, or the pap of a codling or a rosted apple, marmalad, 
honey, or bruised into pouder mixed, and so taken. Further 
the Patient may drink after them a small draught of Ale, for 
[^p.11^] 
it's so safe a Medicin, that any one using discretion, may use their 
liberty, so they take the Medicine. 
 
2. The Ordinary doze is 4. Pills, to be taken going to bed, 
two or three houres after supper, if these bring not away the 
quantity of humours as might be expected from the constitution 
of the Patient, next doze, bruise the Pills, which is a sure way to 
make them work sufficiently; in short, let every person begin at 
the least doze, till they finde the doze that best agrees with the 
Patient, and so raise the doze, to six or seven, lessen it, continue 
it two or three days together, or give it off, as conveniencie and 
strength will bear. 
 
Those who easily purge, may take half over night & half in the 
morning, if the Pills taken over night works early in the morning, 
take them later next night, or else the full doze, as they finde 
best agrees early in the morning: no danger ensues upon sleeping 
upon them, for it moves the party to a brething sweat; Let the 
Patient fast till noon, but in working between whiles drink posset 
drink, broth, mace Ale, or warm Ale. Moreover if the Patient be 
thirsty, dry or sick at stomach, or maukish, by stiring of the humours, 
he may refresh himself with what drink he best fancies 
without prejudice, none need be confined to keep their chamber, 
unless it be for conveniency, or be tied to broath, or posset drink, 
if they can compass warm Ale. 
 
As they are small in quantity, they are great in quality, working 
that way which nature is most inclined to discharge the ill humours. 
When it begins, it works roundly, although quicker 
with some then with others, when nature is prone to Vomit, it 
promotes it with ease, which is alwaies a benefit to the patient, 
because it brings away very slimie bitter humours, but it Vomits 
not, but when the Stomach is foul, the doze large, and nature 
much inclined that way, and then without Violence; and when 
nature could not discharge her self any other way: for it answers 
in all her motions, somtimes by stool & urine, sometimes upward, 
sometimes more, sometimes less, yet alwaies answerable 
to the doze and the disease, and never leaves the bodie bound 
afterwards like other physick, but always leaves nature in a good 
condition. 
 
To children about four or five years old, give half or three 
quarters of a Pill: to elder more; the Srength being a surer guide 
[^p.12^] 
then the age: all children being not so lusty at an age. 
 
During the time of taking my Pills, (as in some diseases) avoid 
all excess in drinking in general, and particularly in Ulcers 
of the Kidneys, Running of the Reins, Heat of Urine, Gravell, 
Strangurie, and avoid claret, windy and all Salted Meats, because 
these things passing through these Vessels enrage and encrease the 
sharpness of Urine or Ulcers, or swellings, or warts in those parts, 
yet notwithstanding these hindrances, my Pills will take effect, 
for many have been cured of slieght injuries, and never observed 
any order of diet, yet let every one further his Cure, as much as 
in him lieth, if any soars, warts, or scabs be troublesom, or any 
swelling, steep one of these Pills in a spoonful of whit-wine all 
night, and wet with this the soars, warts or scabs, and lett it dry 
in, and it will be the best outward means, but if it require more 
speed and the Patient Concerns press for it, any person may have 
his expectations answered, if he comes for my advice, which 
some particular cases may require. 
 
Note, there is by ill curing of running of the reins oftentimes a 
gleeting left, called a Gonorrhæa lachrimalis, it is clear, and extream 
difficult to cure, that is that which requires the utmost art, 
where curable, which I will resolve any persons that is in that 
condition, to their great satisfaction after the use of my Pills. 
 
Many (because mention is made of that detestable disease the 
Pox) may judge it a discredit to read, or use a Medicin good for 
that disease: Know the reading will infect none, and the Medicine 
will hinder any one who hath the disease, from infecting others, 
or being Spoiled themselves; For it is apparent, that many 
sober persons have escaped the sin, yet have not escaped the disease, 
it being got many ways. Next it's a disease that the Medicine 
that will cure that, will reach any disease, and the Medicine 
likewise will not infect any, and for these reasons have I been so 
large about this disease and the Cure. 
 
To Conclude, this is that Medicine which hath gained such 
Universall esteem, by general approbation over Italy, the only 
Medicine in use at the Lazaretto in Venice, and deserves to be 
made more publique, for it seldom goeth off without desired effects 
to the Patients content, when other cryed up Medicines have 
failed both Patients and Physitians it's a Medicine not only of general 
use (in all families) to be in a rediness, and especially to 
[^p.13^] 
those who live near the seas, who are so much subject to the Scurvy, 
and agues. It would not only prevent many fitts of sickness 
occasioned by ill ayr, to such as come either out of the Countrey 
or home from sea, but also may be of great use to any consciencious 
Artist, or others, who desire to have good Medicine by them. 
 
Therefore any Shop-keeper or others, dwelling in any 
convenient Market-town, that desires for the good of many, to sell 
my Pills, may, sending up their Names and dwellings be also furnished. 
They are of small value, considering their wonderful Vertues 
and Operations. They are Sealed up in Tin boxes, with my 
own Seal, being Two Crosses, a demi-griffin and launce crest, and 
forty Pills in number, within one or two, more or less, being Three 
Shillings a box, & no less, and will be delivered unto any Messenger, 
for convenience of persons at what distance soever. 
 
That all persons may with convenience be supplied, and help 
themselves, I have appointed them to be sold at these 
Following Places. 
 
Mr Furly Barton, Stationer, at the Queens-Armes at the lower 
end of Cornhill. 
Mr William Hope, Book-seller, at the Entrance into the Royall-Exchange, 
in Thred-needle-street. 
Mr Henry Young, Distiller, at the Signe of the Still, near Bedlam-gate, 
in More-fields. 
Mr John Thornton, Next to the Globe in the Minories. Platt-maker. 
M. Samuel Abram in Barking-Alley, behinde Barking-Church, 
in Tower-street, Cutler. 
M. Zebadiah Pritchard, Mathamaticall-Instrument-maker, next 
the Golden Cup, on London-Bridge. 
M. Thomas Lacy, at the Golden Lion, about the Meal-Market 
in Southwark, Stationer. 
M. Abra. Glage, in Maiden-lane near the Bear-garden Grocer. 
M. Charles Ledsam, at the Hand and Pen, at the End of S. Martins-Lane, 
near Charing-Cross, Stationer. 
M. John Nest, at Westminster-hall-gate, Cutler. 
M. Thomas Dicker, at the Black Raven on Snow hill, Cutler, 
M. William Allansons, at the Anchor and Crown in Russell-street, 
near Covent-Garden, Milliner. 
[^p.14^] 
M. William Thape, over against Blackamore-street End, in Drury-lane, 
Broker. 
M. Hercules Rookes, near White-hall-gate, Miliner. 
M. Robert Robinson, near Grays-Inne-gate in Holborr, Book-seller. 
M. John Thorowgood, near the Kings-head Inne in Smithfield, 
Cutler. 
Mr. John Smith, in New Brantford, Clock-maker. 
Mr. Sharp in Leadenhal street against the Saracens head Inn neer 
Aldgate, Mathematical-Instrument-maker. 
Mr. Dring at Chancery-lane End, against the Temple, Bookseller. 
Mr. Pitch at the corner of Bedford-street in Covent-gard. Oylman 
M. More in Princes-street near Drurylane, Bookseller. 
M. Brown, between Christs Church and the Lame Hospital, Books. 
M. Grinway, at the Still in Ratcliff-High-way, Instrumentmaker. 
M. Thomas Hancox, in Hereford, Bookseller. 
M. Christopher Leage Barberchirurgion in Lower Deptford. 
M. Jonathan Jefferys in Church-street in Greenwich. 
M. Thomas Debidge at the Chirurgions Signe in Woolwich, over 
against the Pillory. 
Mr. William Mountague Tobacconist, at the Corner of Shoe-lane 
in Fleet street. 
Mr. Edwin, Bookseller at the three roses in Ludgate-street 
Mr. Matthew Roycroft, at the Corner of Grace-Church-street 
above Cornhill, near Leaden-hall-gate, Stationer. 
 
And all other places Appointed by me H. Nendick Physician, for 
publique Sale. 
 
[}An Advertisement.}] 
 
MAny who are Overgrown in some of the aforesaid diseases, as 
Scurvy, Dropsie or such pains; and desire to intermit the Pills 
and would sweat: to them I would communicate thus much. Take 
Venice Theriacle a dram, or a dram and a half, or Phylonium 
Persicum, a scruple, get it at the Apothecaries, and take it on those 
days that they design to sweat. 
 
[}FINIS.}] 
 
