[^Packe, Christopher: Mineralogia^] 
 
[}Mineralogia: 
OR, 
An Account of the Preparation, 
manifold Vertues and Uses of a Mineral 
Salt, both in Physick and Chyrurgery; 
which is so safe, pleasant and effectual 
in its Operation, that it may be 
taken by those of all Ages and Constitutions 
with great Benefit, and without 
Danger of the least Prejudice. 
 
To which is added, 
 
A short Discourse of the Nature and 
Uses of the Sulphurs of Minerals and Metals, 
in curing the most Chronical and pertinacious 
Diseases. 
 
By Chr. Packe, Philo-Chymico-Medicus. 
 
LONDON: 
Printed and are to be sold by D. Newman, at 
the Kings-Arms in the Poultry, 1693.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 1-25^] 
 
[^p.1^] 
[}An Account of the Vertues and Use 
of Sal Solutivum, 
 
Prepared only by Chr. Packe, at his Laboratory, 
next Door to the Gun in Little-Moor-Fields 
near Moorgate.}] 
 
AFTER many years Experience 
of the vertues and worth of this 
Medicine, in helping and curing 
many Diseases, to which the Body 
of man is subject, which of late I have also 
much improved and exalted in its Vertues; I 
have determined at length for a publick Benefit 
(and to excuse my self from writing 
many Letters) to publish the following Account 
of it. 
 
I. It is a Salt prepared of Mineral Subjects, 
by apt Mediums purify'd and reconciled 
to the Archeus, or Aura vitalis of the Humane 
Body, (which is the adequate object of 
Medicine) and thereby becomes a Salutiferous 
remedy enobled with Vertues sufficient 
for the curing of many Diseases. This Definition 
ariseth from its Subject, Object, and 
End. 
 
[^p.2^] 
II. It is neither an Acid nor an Alcaly, but a 
Salt of middle Nature, being able to pass the 
several Digestions unchanged, and in its passage 
to resolve and absterge all Preternatural 
Coagulations, for which Reason I call it Sal 
Solutivum. 
 
III. It is endowed with those Four general 
Properties, viz. Cathartick, Diuretick, Deobstruent, 
and allaying of all Preternatural heat 
and Acrimony: Besides which, as I have 
now exalted and improved it with the noble 
Sulphur of Venus, it is a general easer of 
Pain, and Extinguisher of Venereal Venoms, 
that are not grown to confirm'd Pox, as is 
manifest by what it effects now in alleviating 
the Pains of the Gout, Rhumatism, Tooth-ach, 
Collick, Griping of the Guts, Virulent Ghonnorhæa's, 
&c. beyond what it could have 
done heretofore. 
 
Having thus briefly premised its Nature 
and Qualifications in general, for the satisfaction 
of such Physicians as may desire to 
make use of it; I shall now Address my self 
more particularly to shew its Virtues and 
manner of using. 
 
1. Sal Solutivum purgeth the gross Excrements, 
and most viscous Humours of the first 
passages without Nauseating the Stomach, or 
the least griping Pains. 2. It is singular in 
opening Obstructions of the Vessels and Viscera. 
3. It purifies and invigorates the 
[^p.3^] 
whole Mass of Blood, and restores it to its 
natural State; for being an amicable Salt, it 
hath admittance into the Blood, and reacheth, 
as Helmont saith of fixed Alcalyes made 
Volatile, usque ad limen quartæ Digestionis. 
But this is deny'd to all ordinary purging Medicines, 
which if through any inadvertency 
of the Archeus, they chance to flip into the 
lacteal Veins, and so into the Blood; they 
cause griping Convulsive pains, Stiches, Flux 
of Blood, Faintings, &c. till Nature hath again 
discharged her self of them; and so instead 
of purging the Blood, too often both 
corrupt and exhaust it. And these two Properties 
are well worth the observing, being 
not to be met with even in the mildest of the 
common Catharticks. For this cause it is of 
great use in Fevers, neither disturbing the 
Juices, nor accending the Blood. I have 
seen many Fevers proceeding from Surfeits, 
both in eating and drinking quickly cured by 
it, and even Hectick Fevers themselves in a 
longer time, but such as I judged to proceed 
from a Scorbutick or venereal Cause: As for 
those which are wont to accompany a Pthisis, 
I have had no Experience of it in them, yet 
I doubt not but even in those it would allay 
the Preternatural heat. 
 
But that this Medicine may be given to the 
best advantage, it is necessary in the Administring 
it, to have regard to two special Intentions, 
which Physicians are wont to observe 
in the curing Diseases, viz. 1. The 
[^p.4^] 
purging the first passages, the Stomach and 
Intestines of gross Excrements and Filths. 
2. To open and dissolve all Stagnant and obstructing 
matter in the Viscera, as the Pancreas, 
Mesentery, Liver, Spleen, Reins and 
Womb, and to correct and purifie the Blood, 
when it decllnes from its natural Crasis. The 
ordinary Dose of this Salt to purge according 
to the first Intention (which only is purging 
according to common Acceptation) is 
from half an Ounce to six Drams, dissolved 
in a Pint, or a Pint and a half of warm 
Posset-drink, new Whey, or pure Water, and 
drank in the Morning fasting. Those that 
cannot take such a quantity of Liquor, may 
dissolve their Dose in half a Pint (which will 
presently dissolve it if it be warmed) and 
drink another half Pint presently after it, and 
a third half an hour after that, and fast till 
Dinner-time, except the Patient have a mind 
to take a Porrenger of Water Gruel, or thin 
Broth; neither will a draught of Ale, or a 
Dish of Tea at all hinder, but promote the 
working of it. Those who like neither Posset-drink, 
Whey or Water, or want the Conveniency 
of getting them, may take it in Ale, 
and it will do well enough; although in some 
few Persons I have known it cause a Drowsiness 
when taken in spirituous Liquors; the 
Reason of which is its partaking of the Anodyne 
Narcotick Sulphurs of Mars and Venus, 
which readily associate themselves with the 
vegetable Sulphurous Spirit, by which they 
[^p.5^] 
are quickly carried to the Brain: yet the use 
which may be made of this in some Cases, is 
not inconsiderable as is well known to Physicians. 
 
This Medicine doth not only gently dissolve 
and expurge the Excrements of the Stomach 
and Guts, but it also corrects the violence 
of all Preternatural Purges, if you put 
but two Drams of it in their infusion, or drink 
the same quantity in a draught of warm 
Posset-drink after Pills which gripe and operate 
Churlishly; It hath also a power of 
stopping the working of Vomits, some of 
which greatly incommode the Stomach, by 
Vellicating its Membranes, and impressing 
them with a Nauceating Character; to prevent 
which let two or three Drams of the 
Sal Solutivum, be dissolved in half a Pint of 
cold water, and drank about half an hour 
before the Vomit is taken. Or in case a Vomit 
be taken which worketh too violently, or 
too long, that is when the Stomach is wholly 
emptied, and yet the Patient continueth to 
reach, let a Dram and a half, or two Drams 
of the Salt be dissolved in a large Glass of 
warm Posset-drink, or rather warm Water, 
(because Posset-drink may at that time be 
disgustful) and be drank off. Do the same 
when a Vomit hath done working, and yet 
the Patient finds a swimming or Giddiness in 
the Head, or a Nauseousness, or disposition to 
Vomit, for the Salt will free the Tunicles of 
the Stomach, and contract and corroborate 
[^p.6^] 
them, precipitating the offending Particles 
per inferiora; but I add not this to encourage 
any Body to meddle with such Physick without 
due Advice, but to shew the safety and 
efficacy of the Medicine. N. B. This Salt never 
leaves the Belly bound as the common 
Purges do, but always soluble, and is the best 
Remedy that I know against a Costive Temper 
of Body. 
 
The second Intention is to alter, and open 
Obstructions in the Liver, Spleen, Pancreas, 
Mesentery, Reins, Bladder, and Womb; 
from which proceed many tedious and stubborn 
Diseases, as the Scurvy, Dropsie, Jaundies, 
Hypocondriack Melancholy, Vapours, Green-sickness, 
Rhumatism, inveterate Head-ach, Restlessness, 
Sleepiness, Vertigo, Phrenzy, Cramps, 
Convulsions, Internal Inflammations, and Aposthumes, 
Piles, Exulcerations of the Kidneys 
and Bladder, Gravel, stoppage of Urine, &c. 
together with many others arising from Obstructions, 
and Acrimony of the Blood, and 
vital Juices. 
 
In all which the chief end of this Medicine 
being to resolve and attenuate the thick 
and stagnant Juices, or Excrements of the 
several Digestions which lye in the smallest 
passages, to Contemper any excess of quality 
in the Bile, Lympha, and Blood, by mingling 
it self with the Chyle and Blood, and insinuating 
it self into the more inward recesses 
of the Body, this method is to be observed. 
 
[^p.7^] 
First purge the Body with half an Ounce, 
five or six Drams of the Salt (according to 
the Patients age and strength) dissolved either 
in Posset-drink, Whey, or Water, as you 
please, to carry off the gross Excrements of 
the first passages, and to make way for the 
better Penetration and distribution of the 
Remedy into all the parts of the Body. If 
the first Dose purge not to your mind, take 
another the next day, that the aforesaid end 
may be answered. Then dissolve the same 
quantity of the Salt you gave to purge in a 
Quart or three Pints of Pure water, and let 
the Patient take a third part of it the same 
Night, after the purge three hours after Supper, 
another third part the next Morning 
early before he riseth, that he may sleep upon 
it, and the remaining third part in the 
Day-time between Meals, and this to be continued 
for a Week, Fortnight or three Weeks, 
&c. as occasion shall require. But because 
some Patients cannot drink any considerable 
quantity of water, without nauseating or other 
inconveniency to their Bodies, the Physician 
may accommodate the quantity of water 
to his own liking, provided he order 
but enough to dissolve it well, that it may 
not taste too strong. 
 
This Salt answers all the ends of the Mineral-Waters, 
both purging and Chalybeat; 
besides, and beyond which it hath some Advantages, 
one of which is the certainty of its 
Nature and Operations, the which cannot 
[^p.8^] 
be affirmed of any of the Mineral Springs; 
seeing that there may be a growth, or accidental 
Concourse of various matter in the 
passages of the Earth, which may variously 
impregnate the waters passing through them, 
and make some Alteration in their Properties. 
Besides the Patient is obliged to drink a large 
quantity of the Mineral Waters, or they will 
not work, which if they do not, they cause 
Gripings, Stiches, Sleepiness, Feverish Dispositions, 
and other inconveniences, arising from 
the Crudity of the Minerals, as well as from 
the quantity of the Water; especially the 
Chalybeat, which also require purging before, 
and after a Course of drinking them, 
to prevent some hurts, which otherwise might 
arise by their use; which every one is excused 
from in the use of this Salt, for where a large 
quantity of water is not convenient for the 
Patient, a Quart, a Pint and a half, yea even 
a Pint may serve, this being also its own 
purge: Besides it being free from Mineral 
Crudity, and wholly pure and friendly to 
Nature, can never do hurt, but always good, 
by being long retain'd in the Body. Nor is 
it to be reckoned amongst the smallest Advantages 
to those who are confin'd to a place 
by Business, or by the Narrowness of their 
Fortune, that they may take this artificial 
Mineral-Water, at all times of the year, and 
in all places, without loss of time, hinderance 
of business, or the charge of Coach-hire to 
and from the Wells, or more chargeable 
maintaining themselves there. 
 
[^p.9^] 
If you would use it instead of the purging 
Waters, as Epsome, Dulwich, Northall, &c. 
dissolve six Drams, or three quarters of an 
Ounce of the Salt, in the same quantity of 
pure Spring-water, as would be fit for the Patient 
of any of the purging Waters, viz. from 
three Pints to three Quarts, ordering him to 
drink it by degrees in the Morning, in the 
space of an hour and a half, or two hours, 
and to walk, or use some Exercise in the open 
Air (provided it be in the Summer time) and 
to order himself as if he were drinking the 
Mineral purging Waters. 
 
But if you would have it answer the end 
of the Chalybeat waters; as the German-Spaw, 
Tunbridge, Islington, &c. viz. to purge 
but little by Stool, but to alter and open Obstructions, 
then use it as in the second general 
Direction already given. 
 
Now although this Salt be of great use and 
service in very many diseases, yet I have by 
long Experience observed, that in some it is 
specifically potent; as in the Scurvy, Jaundies, 
Dropsie, Hysterical Suffocations, Melancholy 
Vapours, Green-sickness, stoppage of the 
Menses, Piles, Ghonnorrhæa, Collick, Diarrhæa, 
Bloody Flux, Griping of the Guts, Worms of 
all sorts, old Head-achs, Inflammations and 
Rhumes of the Eyes, Itch, and Cholerick Eruptions 
of the Skin, stoppage and heat of Urine. 
In all which Cases I may truly say, it hath 
signaliz'd it self, and often exceeded my Expectations. 
And although from the Directions 
[^p.10^] 
already given, any one may easily collect 
the way of giving it in those Diseases, 
yet for the publick Good I shall be somewhat 
more particular. 
 
In the Scurvy, I first purge the Patient with 
a Dose or two of Sal Solutivum, as at the beginning 
of the second general Direction; then 
I dissolve an Ounce of it in a Quart of pure 
water, by shaking them together in a Bottle 
till all the Salt is dissolved, and then order 
the Patient to drink half a Pint of the same 
at night going to Bed, and another half Pint 
early in the Morning, so that half an Ounce of 
the Salt is taken in a day, and this I continue 
daily for a Month or six Weeks, according to 
the age and strength of the Disease, ordering 
the Patient besides to drink a pure and well 
rectify'd Volatile Spirit of Salt, in all his drink 
as well at meats as at other times, ten or 
twelve Drops at a time or more, so that he 
may drink the quantity of forty or fifty 
Drops in a day, (which Spirit of Salt may be 
had at my House sealed up in Glasses with 
printed Directions for its use. Price of each 
Glass a Shilling) for such as have the Scurvy 
manifested in their Mouths, by Soreness of 
the Gums, and their readiness to bleed upon 
every light occasion; I order an Ounce 
of the Salt to be dissolved in a Pint of 
warm water, and the Mouth to be well 
washed with some of that water warm two 
or three times a day. 
 
[^p.11^] 
In the Jaundies, I give it in Summer in 
Water or Whey, in Winter in warm Posset-drink, 
every other day five or six Drams, or 
two days together (according as it works) 
then intermit a day and give it again, and 
on the intermitting days half the Dose, continuing 
the use of it, till the Yellowness and 
Faintness cease. 
 
In the Dropsie, I give it in the same manner 
as in the Jaundies, only in a less quantity 
of the Vehicle. I have cured both the Ascites 
and the Anasarca with it, but whether it will 
do ought in a Tympany, I know not; having 
never given it that I remember in that Disease, 
for in that I am wont to use my Arcanum 
Universale, Species Universalis, and Tinctura 
Regalis. But in an Ascites, whether it proceed 
from an Obstruction of the Liver, Kidneys, 
or Ureters, or from a Rupture of the 
Vasa Lymphatica, from their two great Repletion; 
(from which last I perswade my self 
more Dropsies do arise than from any other 
cause) this Medicine answers all the Intentions 
of cure, because it not only opens all 
Obstructions, and pleasantly reduceth the 
water, but also by its strengthning and Balsamick 
Virtue, Conglutinates the breaches of 
those Vessels, and Remedies the too great 
laxity of the Viscera, having all the Vertues 
of a compleat vulnerary Medicine, as I shall 
have occasion to shew by and by, when I 
come to speak of its external use. 
 
[^p.12^] 
In Hysterical Suffocations, commonly called 
Fits of the Mother, and Melancholy Vapours, 
I give two or three Drams dissolved in a Pint 
and a half, or a Quart of pure water upon 
the approach of the Fit, or if that cannot 
be, as soon as the Fit is off, and in the time 
of the Fit (when greater quantities cannot 
be got down) I order the Dissolution of the 
Salt in water to be given by Spoonfulls. The 
next day I purge with the whole Dose dissolved 
in a Quart of water. And for as much 
as those suffocating Fumes are caused by Obstructions, 
and Fuliginous matter remaining in 
the small Vessels, where they ferment from 
time to time, causing a puffing up, and Sense of 
fulness (especially sometime after eating) it 
is necessary to take the Salt daily for sometime, 
to open and carry off the Obstructions 
as in the second general Direction; by this 
means their frequent Returns may be prevented, 
by extirpating the Evil which frequently 
(in those dismal oppressions to the 
poor female Sex) is but only palliated. 
 
In the Green-sickness in Maids, it is necessary 
to dissolve an Ounce of the Salt in a 
Quart of pure water, and to take half a Pint 
of the water at night going to Bed, and the 
same quantity early the next Morning, continuing 
this Course daily for three, four, or 
five Weeks if need be, not omitting to purge 
the Patient first with a full Dose or two at 
the beginning, as in the second general Direction, 
as also two or three days before the 
[^p.13^] 
full of the Moon, that Nature may be the 
more effectually helped in this way of operating. 
Where the Menses are only stopt, it 
is to be taken as in the second general Direction 
for Obstructions; besides which the Patient 
is to be purged once or twice with the 
full Dose, two or three days before her monthly 
time of Expectancy. This Medicine is 
also of singular use for those Women whose 
Months are about to leave them, in preventing 
many disorders which are occasioned 
thereby; in which case it is to be taken once 
or twice to the quantity of half an Ounce, 
or five or six Drams for three or four Months 
successively, about the time when they ought 
to flow. I have known some Women of Fifty 
years of Age, who have by the use of this 
Medicine seemed again in that respect to 
grow young. I have also easily and effectually 
with this Salt delivered some Women of 
false Great Bellies. 
 
About two Months since, I gave three 
quarters of an Ounce of Sal Solutivum to a 
Maid about twenty one years of Age, who 
had a very ill habit of Body, and a pale 
sickly Complexion, having never had the 
Course of Nature in due order or quantity, 
and for some Months past totally suppressed. 
She was now seized with a grievous pain in 
her Right side, emulating an illegitimate Plurisie, 
which (as she told me) had frequently 
assaulted her for some Months past, for the 
removing which Pain I gave her the Salt, 
[^p.14^] 
which gave her seven or eight Stools before 
Noon without any Sickness or Griping, by 
which time her Pain was quite gone out of her 
side: She eat some Dinner, and about two hours 
afterwards discharged her Stomach by Vomit 
of a great quantity of filthy green Matter, 
after which she had two or three Stools 
more, with which her Menses came down 
plentifully, which with her often going to 
the Vault occasioned her catching of Cold, 
and a sore Throat. I ordered she should 
have somewhat warm and comfortable, and 
go to Bed, and keep very warm the next 
day which she did; the Night following 
(she still complaining of her Throat, and a 
Soreness all over her Bones, (as she phras'd it) 
I ordered her ten Grains of my Pilula Balsamica 
which sweat her very plentifully; during 
her sweating her natural Purgations were 
but little, but as soon as that was over they 
returned again, continuing for a due time, 
since which she hath remained well. 
 
It is a singular Remedy for the Worms of 
all sorts, killing them and resolving them into 
Slime, and purging their putrid Matter 
out of the Body. To Children from 
three years of Age to seven, I give from a 
Dram and a half to three Drams, from seven 
to fourteen, half an Ounce, from fourteen 
to twenty, or more, from half an Ounce, to 
three quarters of an Ounce, or six Drams 
dissolved in fair Water, Whey or Posset-drink, 
and continued every day for a Week together. 
[^p.15^] 
Where it is difficult to get Children to take 
it, a little Sugar may be added to the Dissolution 
to make it the pleasanter. My Volatile 
Spirit of Salt also effecteth the same in a 
longer time in those Children which cannot 
be perswaded to take the Salt, which they 
may take in all their drink, and not discern it. 
The Salt and this Spirit used together are still 
more effectual. 
 
In the Piles I give a quarter of an Ounce 
of the Salt dissolved in half a Pint of water in 
Summer time, or warm Posset-drink in Winter, 
which just keeps the Belly soluble, and 
by dulcifying the Acrimony of the protruded 
Blood takes away the Pain and Inflammation; 
besides which, if the Piles be outward, 
I order them to be often embrocated with my 
Aqua Phagadenica, and fine Rags to be laid upon 
them wet in the same water: but if they be 
within the Anus, then I order the same water 
to be warmed, and injected by a Syringe 
twice or thrice a day, and a Rag three or 
four times double well wetted in the same to 
be applied outwardly, and by this Course the 
Piles by degrees dwindle and shrink up like 
dryed Grapes. This Course hath never failed 
me, but hath been effectual even when the 
Piles have been inveterate and fistulated. To 
those who are subject to the Piles, I advise 
the daily use of my Volatile Spirit of Salt in all 
their Drink, to the quantity of thirty or forty 
Drops a day, it is far better in this Disease 
than any Diet-drink. 
 
[^p.16^] 
In Virulent Ghonnorhæas or Claps, I give first 
six Drams of the Salt dissolved in fair water 
in Summer, or in a Pint of warm Posset-drink 
in Winter, ordering the Patient to drink 
another Pint within an hour after, then I 
give half an Ounce so dissolved every Morning 
in a Pint of the Vehicle continuing it till 
all the heat and sharpness is gone, and the 
Gleet fit to be stopt, which sometimes will be 
in a Week, sometimes a Fortnight or three 
Weeks, according as it is of shorter or longer 
standing, or the Diseasyfying-power milder 
or stronger; for it pleasantly and effectually 
educeth the venereal Venome, purifyeth the 
Seed, and strengtheneth the Spermatick Vessels. 
But when the Issuing is fit to be stopt, I give 
my Balsamum ad Ghonnorhæam every night at 
going to Bed, from twenty to forty Drops 
mixt with a little Sugar, and half an Ounce 
of the Salt every other Morning. But where 
a Ghonnorhæa hath not been taken in time, 
or hath been unduly stopt, so that it be turned 
into an incipient Pox, and I find by giving 
six or seven Doses of the Salt that it cannot 
reach it, then I have recourse to purging 
and sweating, alternately with my Manna 
Mercurii, and Aurum vitæ Bezoardicum, which 
usually effects the Cure to satisfaction But in a 
Ghonnorhæa unduly stopt, (known for the most 
part at the first by a painful Tumour in the 
Groyn) when it hath not exceeded a Month, 
three, four, or five Doses of this Salt will set it a 
running again, and afterwards Cure it, being 
[^p.17^] 
used as above with the Balsome, but in longer 
time. I have known some who have fallen 
into the hands of Men either unskilful in this 
matter, or worse, who have endeavoured to 
discuss those Tumours, which themselves have 
made by their unseasonable stopping of a 
Ghonnorhæa, and have sometimes effected it 
so well, as when the Patient hath thought 
himself cured of a Clap, he hath soon after 
been attacked by the Symptoms of the Pox, 
and so the last Error of the Physician was 
worse than the first. 
 
In the Chollick or Griping of the Guts, where 
there is great pain, I dissolve six Drams or 
three quarters of an Ounce of the Salt in a 
Quart of hot spring water, and order the 
Patient to drink three or four Glasses in the 
space of half an hour, as hot as he can: But 
if there be Vomiting let it be drank more leisurely, 
viz. A quarter of a Pint once in a 
quarter of an hour till the Vomiting cease, 
then take notice how much of the Medicine 
hath been vomited up, and give so much again, 
that the Patient may have the full Dose. 
If in the water you intend to dissolve the Salt 
in, you first boyl the bruised Seeds of Anise, 
sweet Fennel, Carraway and Coriander, a Dram 
or two Drams of each, to a Quart of water, 
it will be the better, because those 
Seeds have a peculiar Virtue of pacifying the 
Exorbitant fury of the Pylorus; you may put 
in the Salt in the boyling, which will extract 
the Vertues of the Seeds, sooner and better 
[^p.18^] 
than water alone can do. But beware that 
you neither boyl, infuse or warm any Liquor 
in which the Salt is, in Brass or Copper Vessels, 
but in Silver, Tin or Earth, lest it attract 
from the Metal somewhat disagreeable 
to the Stomach. It usually easeth the pain in 
two or three hours time, sometimes sooner, 
but where the Stomach will not retain it, or 
it doth not overcome and expell the obstructing 
matter, in a few hours time, I give a second 
Dose, and if that fail (as I have some 
few times seen in the dry gripes and Wind 
Chollick) then I have recourse to my Arcanum 
Universale, which (Blessed be the Almighty) 
hath not that I remember ever failed me. 
Note that after the Pains are allay'd, it is necessary 
to purge the Body divers times, with 
the Salt dissolved in the aforementioned Decoction 
of Seeds, to carry off the remaining 
Excrements, which otherwise, retaining a 
diseasy Ferment, may soon cause a fresh disorder. 
But in a bilious Chollick, known by 
bitterness of the Mouth, Vomiting, Yellowness 
of the Skin, &c. you may leave out the Seeds 
and give it in water only, the Seeds being more 
precisely adapted to the help of the Wind 
Chollick, Gripes, Illiack Passion, &c. yet they 
are endowed with a general Vertue of pacifying 
the Pylorus. 
 
In the Diarrhæa or common Looseness, boyl 
some Bran in pure water, strain the Decoction, 
and in a Pint of it dissolve three Drams 
of the Salt, and drink it up at twice, at three 
[^p.19^] 
or four hours distance: do this three or four 
times over if need be. But in a Dysentery or 
Bloody-Flux, I give the Salt dissolved in a Decoction 
of red Rose leaves: half an Ounce 
a day as long as it is required, after both 
which, the Patient must be purged with the 
whole Dose dissolved in a Quart of the same 
Decoction, in which it was given before to 
sweeten the Acrimony. In the Bloody-Flux, 
I have given six Drams of it Clyster-wise in 
the foresaid Decoction, besides giving it at the 
Mouth by two Drams at a time twice a day, 
and that with great Success. 
 
In Headachs, Inflammations and Rhumes in 
the Eyes, I give five or six Drams every other 
day so long as there is need, many of which 
it hath taken away at three or four times taking. 
But as an Auxiliary Topick, in Inflammations 
and Rhumes of the Eyes, I order a few 
drops of my Aqua Opthalmica, to be dropt into 
the Eyes two or three times a day. 
 
In the Itch, Botches, Boyls, and other Cholerick 
Eruptions of the Skin, I give half an 
Ounce or five Drams every day, dissolved in 
a Quart or three Pints of water or New 
Whey in the Morning, as the Mineral-Waters 
for a Week, Fortnight, Three weeks, or 
a Month together, as the greatness of the 
Disease requires: In those Cases it cannot be 
enough commended. It hath cured some 
that have been adjudged Leprous. In those 
Diseases I order together with it my Volatile 
Spirit of Salt to be taken inwardly, as in the 
[^p.20^] 
Scurvy, and my Aqua Phagadenica to be used 
outwardly, by washing with it twice a 
day. 
 
In Heat or Gravel in the Kidneys, or stoppage 
or heat of Urine, first I purge the Body 
with one whole Dose, then dissolve an Ounce 
in a Quart of water in Summer, or warm 
Posset-drink in Winter, and let the Patient 
drink half a Pint at night going to Bed, and also 
early in the Morning; besides which I order 
thirty or forty drops a day of my Volatile Spirit 
of Salt, continuing the use of those, till all 
the Preternatural heat be gone, the Obstructions 
opened, or Gravel ceaseth to come 
away. 
 
Thus I have in as brief a manner as I could, 
set down my Experiences of the internal use 
of this Medicine, wherein I am not Conscious 
to my self, that I have in any thing commended 
it beyond its just merit. I shall in the next 
place add somewhat concerning its external 
Vertues and Use; to which by way of Conclusion 
and Confirmation, I shall subjoyn the 
Observations of some learned and skilful 
Physicians concerning its Vertues, which 
they have been so kind to Communicate to 
me for the publick Good. 
 
[}Of the External use of Sal Solutivum.}] 
 
This Salt hath its peculiar Excellencies in 
Chyrurgery, as well as in Physick; it presently 
stops bleeding; cures an ordinary 
[^p.21^] 
Wound, whether incised or contused, at one 
single dressing, but if the Wound be large and 
lacerated (provided it be timely and duly 
applyed) at two or three dressings, as I my 
self have divers times seem. It takes away 
all Inflammation and pain from the Wound 
in half an hours time, never suffering it to 
come to Suppuration, but cures it by the first 
Intention. There are three ways of preparing 
it, to apply it to Wounds. 
 
The first is to take some of the Chrystalline 
Salt in the Summer time, and spread it thin 
in a broad Glass dish, or Earthen one glazed, 
and expose it to the Sun all day, stirring it 
now and then, and covering it with a clean 
Paper, to keep any dust from falling into it, 
and in a few days you will have it come to 
a Powder like fine Flower, when it is brought 
to this state, I believe it will perform all 
things which are rightly ascribed to the Sympathetick 
powder; but this I leave and recommend 
to the Tryal of the ingenious; among 
which, if any shall be so generous to 
Communicate to me any effects of this Salt, 
which may be of further use to the publick, 
they shall be thankfully received, and again 
improved to that end. The Second way is to 
put some of the Salt into double Papers, about 
half an ounce or less in a paper, and wear 
it some time in the Pocket, that the warmth 
of the Body may supply the place of the Suns 
heat, and in like manner bring it to an impalpable 
powder, and this may be done in the 
[^p.22^] 
Winter-time without attendance or trouble. 
The third way is to dissolve four Ounces of 
the Salt in a Quart of warm water, put into 
a Bottle and shaking it till it is all dissolved, 
and keeping it close stopt for use. The first 
way it is most powerful, the last, of the least 
Efficacy, but either way will well serve. 
 
For a small Wound or Hurt take a little of 
the powder of the first or second Preparation, 
and lay it upon the Wound pretty thick, 
and bind it on close, so that no Air may come 
in, and let it continue on till 'tis healed, which 
will quickly be, but it is convenient to let it 
remain on for two or three days, that it may 
be confirmed. If at any time when you take 
off the dressing, you find in a Cut that it is not 
sufficiently consolidated, or in a Bruise, that all 
the Soreness and Blackness is not gone, presently 
apply a little more of the Medicine, and 
let it lye till the Hurt is quite well. But if you 
have not the powder of the first or second 
Preparation, then take a pledget of Lint or 
fine Tow, or a fine linnen Rag three or four 
times double, which let be well and throughly 
wetted with the water of the third Preparation, 
and apply that to the Hurt as the other, 
which once in twelve hours or oftner, 
if need be, you may moisten all over with 
some of the same water, without opening it 
if the Wound be large. Where the Wound 
is large or lacerated, first let it be clean washed 
with warm Urine, so that it may be freed 
from Dirt or other extraneous Matter, then 
[^p.23^] 
take such a quantity of the powder, as you 
think necessary well to cover the Wound, 
and mix it with so much of the White of an 
Egg (first well beat till it be thin) as will 
make it into the Consistency of a pretty thin 
Liniment, which spread upon fine Tow, or 
fine Linnen, and apply it to the Wound with 
convenient Bandage, letting it remain two 
or three days before you open it, except 
in that time you find any considerable pain, 
which if you do, it is a Sign that the Air 
hath access to the Wound, and then open it 
and presently apply a fresh dressing, as close 
as possibly you can. Note, that if there be 
in the Wound such torn ragged Flesh, that 
hath taken Air, and you judge uncapable of 
Conglutination, take it off with your Scissers 
before you apply the dressing. If you have 
not the powder, then use the water as above 
directed. The powder will answer all the 
Intentions of cure in an Amputation, being 
duly applyed with good Bandage. 
 
It cures Ruptures in Children, if the Rupture 
be first put up, and then the powder 
mixt with the White of an Egg (as for a 
Wound) and applyed to the Scrotum or Navel 
(as the Rupture is) with convenient Bandage, 
and renewed every fourth day, and the 
Salt daily taken inwardly dissolved in a Decoction 
of Comfry-Roots, so much as may 
just keep the Belly loose, but not purge; for 
the straining of the Abdominal Muscles in going 
to Stool is a great hinderance to Agglutinating 
[^p.24^] 
of Ruptures. Suppose the Child 
be two or three years of Age, dissolve half an 
Ounce of the Salt in a pint of the Decoction, 
and give the Child three Spoonfuls of it 
Night and Morning, renewing the Decoction 
and Salt against that is done, and continue 
the Course for six weeks, and by Gods 
blessing the Cure will be effected. If the 
Child be younger two Spoonfuls may be enough, 
if elder, you must give it more according 
to the Rules before given, varied with 
Discretion. 
 
It also effects the same in Fractures of Bones, 
being used in the same manner, both inwardly 
and outwardly, for it powerfully assisteth 
Nature, in forming the Callous, and also preventeth 
Fevers, which not seldom happen 
upon those Accidents. 
 
Half a Grain or a Grain at a time, of the 
Powder may be blown up into the Nostrils 
daily Night and Morning, to serve as an Errhine 
or sneezing Medicine, for it pleasantly 
and copiously evacuateth superfluous Moisture, 
by which it cureth Catarrhs, it being also 
taken inwardly every other day for some 
time, in such a quantity as may give three or 
four Stools, which is ordinarily done with 
half an Ounce. It gives present ease in the 
Toothach, about a Dram of the powder being 
tied up in a fine Rag, and apply'd to the 
pained Tooth; but this is to be understood 
when the Toothach proceeds from a sharp Humour, 
irritating the Nerves which are inserted 
[^p.25^] 
into their Roots, but not of the pain of a 
hollow or rotten Tooth, excepting that in those 
it may give some short ease: but it is necessary 
besides to purge two or three times with the 
full Dose of the Salt, to dulcifie and carry off 
the sharpness which causeth the Pain. 
 
I could here set down many more Uses of 
this benign Salt; but because they are not 
precisely useful to a Physician or Chirurgeon, 
I shall leave them to some other opportunity, 
till I see what Reception the things I have 
already published concerning it, will meet 
with, and subjoyn the following Accounts 
which I have received of it from others. 
 
[^Letters from users of the Salt omitted.^] 
 
[^Extract 2, pp. 45-65^] 
 
[^p.45^] 
[}A short Discourse of Mineral Sulphurs.}] 
 
IN my Catalogue of Medicines Printed in 
the Year 1684. I made mention of some 
Sulphurs of Minerals and Metals, prepared 
by me, which were adapted to the curing of 
radicated and stubborn Diseases; and such as 
are too Ideal or spiritual to submit, or hearken 
[^p.46^] 
to Sal Solutivum, which are Medicines so 
small in Dose, so easie to take, and so effectual 
in their Operations, that I cannot but 
wonder no more use hath been made of them. 
Perhaps one reason may be, that I have not 
described their Vertues and Uses particularly; 
but having there said somewhat of their Preparation, 
Vertues and Doses in general, I had 
well hoped that it might have met with divers 
Physicians in this Nation, who so well understood 
such Medicines, as to have been glad 
to know where they might have them for 
their use; or at least such as upon the Credit 
of the higher Forms of Chymical Medicines, 
would have given them a fair Tryal. I am 
sure if they had taken the Advice of the noble 
Helmont, these neat and efficacious Preparations 
had not been so long neglected, and the 
more especially because never any in England 
(that I know of) besides my self ever pretended 
to make and publish such Mineral and 
Metallick Sulphurs. 
 
Helmont's words are these: In his Treatise 
or Chapter Entituled, In Verbis, Herbis, & 
Lapidibus Magna est Virtus: Ipsum Morbum totum, 
ejusque remedia Considero in Archeo alterato 
vel pacato, adeoque minimo attactu, vibratione, 
jaculatione, imo~ radiatione sive illuminatione 
perfici ac compleri sanationes, non habito 
causarum occasionalium respectu; idque potentius 
aspicio in Mineralium remediis Sulphureis, puta~ 
in Sulphure veneris, stibii, ac potissimum in 
[^p.47^] 
Sulphure Glauræ Augurelli, quæ Nympha alio 
nomine proprio caret hactenus, &c. Hortor 
itaque Tyrones, addiscant Sulphura spoliare vi 
peregrina~ ac virulenta~, sub cujus nimirum Custodia~ 
abditur ignis vitalis, Archeum in scopos 
desideratos placidissime deducens: sunt Videlicet 
sulphura quædam, quibus Correctis atque perfectis 
tota Morborum Cohors auscultat, utpote pluralitas 
in unitatem Archei tanquam pugnantem 
pugnum contrahitur. Hoc pacto in ipsa animæ 
sede Combinatoque Duumviratu, Amentiæ, Apoplexiæ, 
Caduci, Paralyses, Vertigines, Asthmata, 
Hydropes, Atrophiæ, immanesque defectus annihilari 
vidimus, stupente scilicet ipsa natura. i. e. 
 
I consider the whole Disease it self, and its 
Remedies to be placed in the Archeus altered 
or appeased, so that Cures are compleatly 
performed by the least touching, Vibration 
or Jaculation, yet only by Irradiation or Illumination, 
without any regard to their Pro-catartick, 
or occasional causes; the which I 
see more especially effected by the Sulphurous 
Remedies of Minerals, viz. the Sulphurs of 
Venus, and Antimony, but most powerfully by 
the Sulphur Glaur of Augurellus, which 
Nymph hath not hitherto been called by a 
proper Name; &c. Therefore I exhort young 
Artists, that they learn to spoil Mineral Sulphurs 
of their strange and poysonous Faculty, 
under the Custody of which is hidden a vital 
Fire, which pleasantly bringeth the Archeus 
[^p.48^] 
unto the desired Ends: yea, there are some 
Sulphurs, to which (when they are corrected 
and advanced to their perfection) the whole 
band of Diseases gives way, because their Plurality 
is contracted into the Unity of the Archeus, 
like a Fist clutched to fight. By this 
means we have seen Madnesses, Apoplexies, 
Falling-sickness, Palsies, Vertigoes, Asthma's, 
Dropsies, Atrophy's, and other very cruel defects 
to be annihilated in the very Seat of the 
Soul, and combined Duumvirate, even to the 
Amazement of Nature her self. 
 
By which excellent Discourse, that noble 
Philosopher setteth forth two things: First, 
that the Sulphurs of Metals and Minerals being 
corrected by the Artist, and brought to 
the highest perfection, viz. Fixation do then 
universally cure all Diseases. Secondly, that 
they exert this wonderful Vertue after the 
manner of a shining light, which enlighteneth 
all dark places and corners, that even so 
the Mineral Sulphurs, purify'd corrected and 
fixt, by their Splendour and Light (which the 
Almighty hath endowed them with) do irradiate 
and enlighten the Archeus, which is 
darkned and obumbrated by Diseases, injecting 
new Powers of light into it, and raising 
it as it were to a new Life. For the Nature of 
all Metallick and Mineral Sulphurs is like unto 
that of the Stars; for as the Stars are fire and 
light, so likewise the Sulphurs, as those do 
warm and enlighten, so these; as the Nature 
[^p.49^] 
of those is to vivifie and quicken, because 
they are altogether light and life, a Spring of 
quickening Vertue, so likewise the Sulphurs, 
when freed from their Impediments, can do 
no other, but warm enlighten and vivifie. 
But that the subject of my Discourse may be 
the better understood, I think it necessary 
here briefly to declare what I intend by Mineral 
Sulphurs: know then that I understand 
a soft Fat, or Oleaginous inflamable Matter 
created of one Substance, to wit, of the grosser, 
thick or earthy, or lower Fire, which remained 
in the Severation of the Chaos, which 
I take to be the Mother and first Rise of all 
the Mineral Sulphurs; which are totally of 
one Nature, Descent and Original, and of 
one Substance; even as the Stars are created 
of one and the same Substance, viz. of the 
more subtil and celestial Fire, which in the 
moving of the Fiat upon the Chaos mounted 
upwards; so that the Stars and the Sulphurs 
agree in the two Properties of warming and 
enlightening. This Sulphurous substance being 
by Vertue of the central Fire always upon 
motion in the Bowels of the Earth, meets 
with the Metalline or Mineral Juices, generating 
in their proper Matrixes, adheres to 
them, coagulates them, and continually abides 
with them, until they have attained to perfection; 
or else being taken immature out of 
their Mines, is in part forced from them by 
the Fire of melting, which together with their 
[^p.50^] 
mineral Earth, turns into an Opake Glassy 
Cinder; the other part abiding still with the 
refined Metal or Mineral, which is that which 
I call a Metalline or Mineral Sulphur, Denominating 
it in particular, according to the Metal 
or Mineral, to which it is joyned, as the Sulphur 
of Venus, Sulphur of Antimony, &c. This 
Sulphur I take to be the Agent or Fire of Nature 
by which Metals are in their Mines first 
coagulated, then gradually and continually 
cocted and maturated, till by length of time 
they acquire a Metallick hardness, and Malleability, 
or else obtain the ultimate perfection 
of Metals, which is purity and fixity, and 
then having no further need of this Sulphurous 
Agent it is Spontaneously separated from 
them, as is manifest in the Oars of Gold and 
Silver (Gold especially) those Metals being 
sometimes found in pure Bodies, their Agent 
being totally separated. 
 
That this Sulphurous Agent is part remains 
closely combin'd with the inferior Metals after 
their smelting from their Oars, appears 
in the hard Metals as Mars and Venus by their 
being scorify'd in their Ignition, or by the 
Scales that fall from them, when heat red 
hot and hammered upon an Anvil; the same 
thing may be observed in the Flux of the soft 
Metals; for if you melt Tin or Lead with 
such a Fire as will keep it red hot, and when 
the Metal flows keep it continually stirring 
in a short time all the Metal will be reduced 
[^p.51^] 
to a Calx or Ashes. Now if any one shall 
think, that this Incineration of the Metal is 
to be attributed only to the power of the Fire, 
and not to its Sulphur, let him try if he can 
by any degree of Fire thus reduce Gold and 
Silver to a Calx, which want this external 
Sulphur, having laid it aside as a useless Garment. 
If he shall reply, that as the Bodies 
of Gold and Silver being perfect, are not altered 
by the Fire, so neither are they hurt by 
Sulphur (especially Gold which is not at all 
diminished by suffering a Cementation with 
Sulphur) and therefore it is not Sulphur in the 
inferior Metals, that reduceth them into Scoria 
or Ashes, but the Action of the Fire which 
transposeth the parts, or altereth the Texture 
of those Metals, which are unfixt and imperfect, 
and therefore want a stability to resist the 
Power of the Fire. I answer, tis true, the 
perfect Metals are not destroyed by Sulphur, 
but are again set free from it upon the Test 
by Saturn, to which it presently adheres, turning 
it into Scoria, and leaving the Gold or 
Silver unaltered. But notwithstanding this, 
there is no Goldsmith but will tell you to his 
trouble, how eager or brittle Sulphur will 
make Silver and Gold: And indeed so brittle, 
that if upon Silver or Gold in Flux, Sulphur 
be multiply'd, the Metal may be beaten to 
Powder in a Mortar, which is enough for 
my purpose, viz. to prove the Existence of 
a Sulphur in the inferior Metals, by its 
[^p.52^] 
Power of scorifying or incinerating their Bodies. 
Another way by which these Sulphurs 
are manifest is by their Flame, when the Metals 
are in a strong Fire; Copper emits a 
green flame, Tin a purple-colour'd one, &c. 
 
Some of the ancient Philosphers have 
called this universal Sulphurous Agent, Dæmogorgon, 
or the God of the Earth, and attributed 
to it Health, Wealth, Honour, &c. 
and without doubt they wanted not their 
Reasons for so doing: but my present purpose 
being only to shew that this Terrestrial 
Fire, as it adheres to Metals and Minerals 
affords an excellent Medicine against Diseases, 
I shall not enquire into its further Qualifications. 
 
And although those Sulphurs be necessary 
to the Metals, as a digesting, maturating or 
ripening Agent, yet I think them not to be 
of the Essence of the Metal, to which they 
so closely adhere, but to be highly endowed 
with Vertues for curing Diseases; having besides 
their common Power of warming and 
enlightening, received special Gifts and Dignities 
from the Astrums of those Metals with 
which they are con-coagulated: for if the external 
Sulphurs were Essential to the Metallick 
form as the Internal are, then they could not 
be separated from the Metal nor any part of 
them, but the Metal would be destroyed, 
but I have divers times seen the contrary, 
whence I conclude, that they are not Essential 
[^p.53^] 
to the Metal. For I have sometimes by 
Calcination with Niter, sometimes by other 
Salts separated much of the sulphur from Tin; 
afterwards I have reduced the Tin again to 
a Body (although it be somewhat difficult, by 
reason of the Action of the burning Sulphur) 
and have found it so far from being destroyed, 
that it hath been much mended both in 
the Colour, Hardness, and Sound; in which 
it hath in some degree emulated Silver. I 
have also by the help of a certain Menstruum 
known to me, separated the Sulphur from 
Copper, but the form of the Copper was not 
destroyed but meliorated, the Metal being 
more Ductile and of a greater Splendour 
than in was before, and if the Menstruum be 
divers times repeated upon the Calx, till all 
the external Sulphur be separated, and the 
Calx then again reduced to a Metal, that Metal 
will be white, hard, and ductile like Silver, 
but yet formally distinct from Silver as wanting 
a due Fixity: Neither can those Sulphurs 
when thus separated, by any Art be reduced 
per se into a Metal: Hence I conclude, that 
they have other Ends and Appointments 
from the great Creator, than what are limited 
to the Metals; to wit, to cure the Diseases 
of humane Bodies. This opinion of mine 
is confirmed by the excellent Helmont, de Lithiasi, 
Cap. 8. §. 8. speaking of the Sulphur of 
Venus, where he hath these Words: Cum 
Sulphur istud externum, quale e~ Cupro trahitur, 
[^p.54^] 
non sit Necessarium Metallo perfecto; Cupro autem 
istud Sulphur, sit a~ Deo inditum, ergo necesse 
est istud Sulphur habere suos fines ad Necessitates 
hominis ingrati conducentes, pro infirmitatibus 
scilicet humanis, supra omnem Metallicæ 
perfectionis dignitatem. 
 
"Seeing that the external Sulphur (such 
"as is drawn from Copper is not necessary 
"to a perfect Metal; but is joyned 
"to the Copper by God, therefore that Sulphur 
"must necessarily have its own Ends, 
"conducing to the necessities of ungrateful 
"Man, to wit, for his Diseases and Infirmities, 
"above all Dignity of the Metallick perfection. 
 
And this is not only true of the Sulphur 
of Venus, and the other inferior Metals, that 
God hath appointed them for Medicine, but 
of Minerals also, even from common Sulphur, 
to the Sulphur of the Electrum Minerale immaturum 
or Lili of Paracelsus, which are the 
highest and lowest Boundaries of the Dignity 
of mineral Sulphurs, notwithstanding 
which those Sulphurs differ greatly among 
themselves in their Dignity and Power: for 
the Sulphur of Antimony exceeds the Common 
Sulphur in light and vertue, as far as 
Nature in their first Generation hath 
more highly stated, and nobilitated the former 
than the latter; the difference being the 
same as between a raw and a roasted piece 
of meat for the nourishing of our Bodies. For 
although the Sulphur of Antimony, be as well 
[^p.55^] 
Volatile and Combustible as the Common Sulphur, 
and so no difference between them as to 
their fixity and maturity; yet such a difference 
there is in their Vertue, that the Sulphur 
of Antimony as soon as it is separated 
from its mercurial Body, being given to the 
Patient without any further Preparation is 
of much quicker and powerfuller Operation 
than the Common Sulphur, although often sublimed; 
which proceedeth from no other, but 
its inbred Excellency wherewith it hath been 
endowed by Nature: so also the Sulphur of 
Venus hath a greater Vertue than that of Antimony, 
and that of the Electrum Minerale 
immaturum hath a Power and Vertue more 
eminent than any of the rest. For as the 
Almighty God in the beginning created all 
the Stars of one Matter and Substance, i.e. 
of a subtile Fiery light, and yet made one 
more glorious, powerful and splendid than 
another; even so hath he done with the Metallick 
and mineral Sulphurs, which he hath 
also created of one Substance, viz. of a gross 
and earthy thick Fiery light, but yet withal 
hath framed the one more glorious and more 
vertuous than the other, attributing to each 
its particular Glory, which it cannot exceed, 
though prepared and perfected as much as is 
possible by Art; insomuch that no Sulphur 
can take more Vertue than the Creator hath 
endowed it with in its first Formation: and 
as you see that one Star exceedeth another in 
[^p.56^] 
Beauty and Splendour, so likewise one Sulphur 
surpasseth another in its Vertue and 
Energy of healing. 
 
Now as you see that among the Stars the 
most glorious is the Sun, which greatly surpasseth 
all the rest in Light Vertue, and Splendour, 
being the Root, Source and heart of the 
Stars, whence they all did flow, and is as 
their Father in regard of their Original, and 
their King in respect of its great Pre-eminence 
in Splendour: even so the Metals and 
Minerals also have their King and Father, 
which surpasseth them all, and therefore is 
by Paracelsus, and Helmont, called Electrum 
Minerale immaturum, Metallus Primus, Metallus 
Masculus, which signifieth the first, or the 
Father of the Metals; and so of right may be 
called the King of the mineral Kingdom, in 
regard this proceedeth from it: even as 
a Tree springeth from its Root; for which 
reason Helmont sets down this heavenly Tincture, 
in the Front of his Catalogue of the 
Arcanums of Paracelsus, calling it Essentia Membrorum, 
because that nothing doth so compleatly 
strengthen all the Members as this 
Royal Tincture, when brought unto its perfection. 
 
From what hath been said, we may Collect, 
1. That Mineral Sulphurs are Subjects 
endowed by the Almighty, with great Vertue 
in the curing of Diseases. 2. That this Vertue 
is environed, and kept from us by a Malignant 
[^p.57^] 
virulency, so that none of them can 
be of Medicinal use to us without due Preparation, 
their inward Light and Vertue, being 
guarded by a virulent Poyson, like the 
paradisical Tree of Life by a flaming Sword. 
3. That this Exotick virulency being removed, 
and the Sulphurs perfected, they cure Diseases 
ad Modum Radii, without being diminished 
either in Substance or Weight, but pass 
through the several Digestions of the Body 
unaltered in their quantity, and unchanged 
in their Celestial Power and Vertue. 4. That 
those great Powers and Vertues have their 
Rise from the invisible heavenly Substance 
of the Sulphurs, having their Root nearer to 
the interior heavenly World, than all other 
visible, tangible and corruptible things, and 
therefore nearer to the Divine Goodness, as 
those words of Helmont intimate. Adeoque 
testantur ejusmodi Arcana, se infinitæ bonitati 
propinqua, &c. 
 
Now as those prepared Sulphurs act 
efficiently, ad Modum Luminis in Archeum, 
striking at the very Ideas of Diseases, so they 
induce and enable the Archeus, or Vital 
Spirit to perform its own Acts, and do Instrumentally 
warm, digest, concoct, resolve, transpire, 
dulcifie, &c. whence the material cause 
of Diseases, or diseasy Matter, in which the 
Idea acts, is gradually altered and separated, 
by the daily taking of these Sulphurs for a 
due time; whence the Palsy, Epilepsy, Convulsion, 
[^p.58^] 
Consumption, Asthma, Dropsy, Leprosy, Gout, 
and other grievous Diseases may be eradicated. 
And to this purpose any of the mineral or metalline 
Sulphurs may be used, provided they 
are duly prepared, for we are not obliged to 
seek such a Sulphur in Gold, nor is there a 
necessity of using that of the other hard Metals, 
(although they well recompence the Labour 
and Charge of extracting and preparing) 
but our merciful Creator hath been very bountiful 
in giving us great Variety of Subjects, 
from which this Sulphur may be gotten besides 
the Metals, as Common Sulphur, Vitriol, 
Lapis Hæmatitis, Lapis Calaminaris, Antimony, 
Zink, Native Cinabar, Magnesia, &c. But 
with this difference, that the one excells the 
other in its degree of Vertue as I have shewed 
above; as also that some of them are Specifiedly 
potent in some Diseases, as the Sulphur 
of Vitriol in Epilepsies, that of Antimony 
in Diseases of the Paps and Womb, as Imposthumations, 
Ulcers Cancers, &c. in those 
parts; the Sulphur of Mars in the Dropsie 
and Green sickness, the Sulphur of Jupiter 
in the Asthma, and Consumption, that of 
Venus in the Scrophula and Diabetes, &c. 
 
Now these Mineral Sulphurs, shew forth 
their Vertues in healing more or less eminently, 
according to the degree of their Preparation, 
by which they more or less approach 
their ultimate perfection: these Degrees of 
Preparation, I consider under three several 
[^p.59^] 
Ranks or Classes. The first of these contains 
the Sulphurs separated from their Bodies, opened 
and unlocked, Volatile and Inflamable, 
digested, corrected, and spoyled of their 
mineral Malignancy, and made safe and effectual 
Remedies for the curing of Diseases; 
whose Dose is small, being for those of ripe 
years, but from two to four Grains, or six at 
the highest, and pleasant in Operation, working 
for the most part by gentle breathing 
Sweats, or insensible Transpiration, never by 
Vomit, unless where Nature is predisposed to 
that Evacuation by some indigested or offensive 
Matter in the Ventricle; but when Nature 
hath once made her intended Separation, 
they then cause Vomiting no more. In acute 
Diseases, as Fevers, Fluxes, Plurisies, Imposthumations, 
&c. they are to be taken a Grain 
or two every three or four hours in a spoonful 
of a suitable Vehicle, so long till the 
Disease is overcome, and signs of Recovery 
appear, and then once or twice a day till 
perfect Restoration. In Chronick Distempers 
two Grains in the Morning fasting, and three 
or four Grains at Night going to Bed, in a 
Glass of Canary or Sherry; but that which 
is elicited from the Common Sulphur, being less 
active than the rest, may be taken from six 
to twelve Grains. 
 
This appearance of the Sulphurs is in the 
form of a subtile tinging Powder, and thus 
prepared; I constantly keep by me the Sulphurs 
[^p.60^] 
of Venus, Mars, and Antimony, and 
purpose to do the like by those of Vitriol, Zink 
and native Cinabar, having at divers times 
heretofore prepared them all by the help of 
the same Alcahestick Menstruum: I call the 
Menstruum Alcahestick, because in many 
things it agrees with the Alcahest of Paracelsus 
and Helmont, but not in all the Properties 
which are attributed to that, wherefore I do 
not believe it to be the same; but in separating 
the Sulphurs from Minerals and Metals, 
and correcting their virulency it is equal to 
that, and to me much better, who am a 
Possessor of this, but pretend not to that. 
This I thought necessary to mention in this 
place, to save my self and others the trouble 
of curious Questions. 
 
The second Rank or Order of these Sulphurs, 
is the Preparation of the first Order, 
Philosophically dissolved and brought over 
the Helm, in the form of an highly tinged 
red Oyl or Tincture, which is dissolvable in 
Wine and other Liquors, but may be most 
commodiously taken upon the point of a Knife 
mixed with a little fine Sugar. The Dose is 
from 10 to 20 Drops. In this form it is more 
penetrant, and its light much more diffusive 
than in the former, and therefore much more 
prevalent in the Cure of the Chronick and fixt 
Diseases, as the Epilepsy, Palsy, Asthma, Ptisick, 
Dropsie, Gout, Rhumatism, and other pertinacious 
Diseases of the Genus-Nervosum, and 
[^p.61^] 
Viscera. N. B. That when the Sulphurs are 
brought to this form, Basilius calls them Animæ 
Metallorum, and Helmont, their Elementum 
Ignis. And thus far my Experience hath 
reached in the Preparation of these Sulphurs; 
and in this form also I intend (God willing) 
to prepare them and keep them by me, for 
the Assistance of such Physicians as are minded 
to use them. And here I cannot pass by 
somewhat worthy of Note, which I have 
lately observed of the red Oyl, or Anima of 
Venus, which is, that a little of it mixed with 
some other convenient matter, and rubbed 
upon Rhumatick and other pains hath given 
present ease, and in two or three days hath 
quite removed them: and I am in great hopes 
that it will give ease in the dolorous Gout, to 
such a Degree that the Patient may constantly 
persist in the use of such inward Remedies 
as may remove the cause, of which sort 
are the Sulphurs of which I am Discoursing. 
But of this I have not yet had an opportunity 
to be made certain by Tryal. 
 
The third Order or Degree is, when the 
red Oyl or Anima of the second Degree, is 
brought to a State of Incombustibility and 
Fixity, and then it is, and not till then, 
that they have attained those Superlative Vertues 
in healing, which Helmont attributes to 
them; yet the lowest of those Orders is not 
without its eminent Vertues (compared with 
ordinary Medicines) in curing Diseases. But 
[^p.62^] 
the bringing the Sulphurs, or any of them, to 
this fixed and permanent State, which is their 
ultimate perfection, I do not pretend to have 
done, for it requires more time, and perhaps 
more Art than I am furnished with to handle 
them, neither do I profess to prepare the 
Sulphur, Electri Mineralis immaturi sive Metalli 
Masculi, concerning which Subject, Men 
that have ventured to name it, I find have 
greatly differed. But among my Preparations 
of mineral Sulphurs, I content my self 
by way of Eminency or Preference, with my 
Astrum Minerale, whose Dose is from three 
to six Grains in the first form above-mentioned, 
and from ten to twenty Drops in the 
second form. But as that is the most eminent 
in Vertue of the Sulphurs which I prepare, 
so it also is the dearest, being to be made 
but in small quantities with much labour and 
time: but my Species Universalis, having all 
the Properties of the mineral Sulphurs, may 
serve Instar omnium, where they cannot be 
had; the difference being only in the Dose, 
which is much larger than that of the Sulphurs, 
and the Vertue somewhat less potent 
as being more extended. Also my Tinctura 
Metallica, being a Solution of the more subtile 
parts of Metallick Sulphurs in Spirit of 
Wine, may be used in Diseases of the Nerves, 
and all others arising from Congelation, instead 
of the Animæ Metallorum of the second 
form, and is a very pleasant and efficacious 
[^p.63^] 
Medicine; the Vertues and Uses of which, together 
with the Species Universalis are describ'd 
at large, in the Appendix to my Catalogue 
of Medicines, Printed Anno 1684, to which I 
refer the Reader; which Directions may also indifferently 
serve for the use of the mineral Sulphurs, 
either in the form of Powder or Drops, 
by observing their Doses above set down, and 
varying them in proportion with the Species 
and Tincture. But if it shall please God to 
grant me Life, and prosper my Labours and 
Studies; I hope I may hereafter be able to 
give such an Account of some of the higher 
Arcana in Medicine, as may be profitable 
to the Miseries of the Sick, and afford some 
satisfaction to well-minded Physicians. 
 
I think it here convenient to advertise 
that in Chronic Diseases, where the mineral 
Sulphurs are to be used, if the first passages 
of the Body be well cleansed by the Sal Solutivum, 
and the Obstructions of the Viscera 
and Vessels opened, the Sulphurs will much 
more readily display their Vertues, and the 
time of the Cure will be shortened. 
 
I have spent many years in the search of 
a safe, pleasant, and effectual Preparation of 
the vulgar Mercury, that might like the Arcanum 
Corallinum, or Mercurius Diaphoreticus, 
of Paracelsus and Helmont, cure 
the Pox, Cancer, Noli me tangere, &c. and 
although among the many Tryals I have 
made, I have obtained somewhat which 
[^p.64^] 
hath done things notable, yet it hath not 
compleatly answered the End of my Enquiries. 
But I have at length found out a mercurial 
Medicine, which I hope will fully 
answer my longing Expectation: It is sweet 
in Taste, and fixed, although not with a 
compleat Fixity so as to abide a very strong 
Fire, for I have sometime pleased my self 
with such a fixed Mercury, as would abide 
the Fire of a Coppel in form of a Powder, 
but I could observe but little effect it had in 
Physick. This of which I am now speaking 
operates very gently, sometimes by Stools, 
and sometimes by Sweats, and according to 
the Tryals I have yet had of it, doth neither 
Vomit nor Salivate; as to its particular 
Vertues, Dose, and manner of administring, if 
it shall after reiterated Experiments compleat 
my Desires, I shall publish an Account thereof, 
together with my Balsamum Veneris 
Anodynum above-mentioned, which is also 
now under Probation. And in order to this, 
I make it my request to such ingenious Physicians, 
as love the Propagation and Improvement 
of Medicine, that they would give 
those two Medicines a fair Tryal, and make 
such report thereof to me, as they shall be 
found to merit; by which means I shall be 
able to furnish the said Account much sooner 
and better than my own single Observations 
will enable me to do. But I shall here say 
no more of them, lest I fall under the same 
[^p.65^] 
reproof with him who Sold the Bears skin 
before he had killed the Bear. 
 
My Arcanum Universale, Pillula Balsamica, 
Manna Mercurii, &c. being sometimes mentioned 
in this Book, they who desire to be 
further informed of the Vertues and Uses of 
those, and other of my Medicines, may have 
recourse to a small Physical Treatise, published 
by me some years since, called Praxis 
Catholica, where they may find satisfaction; 
which Book is to be sold by Mr. J. Lawrence 
at the Angel in the Poultry. 
 
The price of Sal Solutivum is one Shilling 
the Ounce; of the Sulphurs, in form of Powder, 
Five Shillings a Dram, in form of Tincture, 
Ten Shillings an Ounce. The Species 
Universalis Six Shillings an Ounce. The 
Tinctura Metallica Five Shillings the Ounce; 
with an Allowance to Physicians, who use 
them in quantities. 
 
I am sorry I had not time to enlarge 
somewhat more concerning Mineral Sulphurs, 
but my daily Avocations being many, and 
the Press now staying, I must here make 
 
[}THE END.}] 
 
From my House next 
Door to Gun Ally in 
Little-Moor-Fields, 
4th. May. 1693. 
 
