[^Jones, John: Galens bookes of elementes^] 
 
[}GALENS BOOKES 
Of Elementes, as they be in the 
Epitome (whiche may very aptly, 
in my iudgement, be Entituled, for the 
better vnderstanding of the Readers, The Originall 
of all thinges naturall in the vvhole vvorlde: 
Confuting, as well the errours of all them that 
went before time, as that hath, or shal folowe hereafter 
of the Paracelcians: marueilous pleasaunt, 
and most acceptable for all sharpe wittes, 
desirous of wisedome,) published 
foorth of Latine into English, 
By John Jones, 
Phisition. 
 
Imprinted at London, by 
VVilliam Iones, dwelling in Paules 
Churche yarde, at the Southvvest 
doore of Paules, and are 
there to be solde. 
1574.}] 
 
[^A dedicatory epistle to the Earl of Shrewsbury omitted.^] 
[^Extract 1, ff. 1r-6v^] 
 
[^f.1r^] 
[}Galeni Pergameni, de 
Elementis Liber primus.}] 
 
SEing that an Element is the 
leaste portion of the thing 
whiche it ordayneth, neyther 
is that same it which is seene 
in deede, very small, it manifestlye 
appeareth, that the 
sense is not a Iudge of them 
whiche be the very Elementes, 
according to the very nature 
of euery thing. Therefore wee with Hipp. ouerpassing 
those which be firste in the iudgement of sense, 
and moste simple, will enquire for those, whiche are in 
deede Elementes of mans life, and whiche can not bee 
dissolued into other: and be no lesse necessarye to cure 
sicknesses, then those whiche to the sense seeme suche: 
that is, whether it be one truely in kinde, or els more, 
and vnlike. If so be, that they be not onely one, but 
moe, and diuers Elementes, wee muste seeke againe 
how many they be, as what, and of what sort, and what 
fellowship they haue together. Therefore, that the first 
Element, of which both our bodyes, and also the bodies 
of all other doo consiste, is not one, eyther in fourme or 
power, Hipp. teacheth by this reason. 
 
If a man were one thing, he shoulde not be greeued, 
and if so be he were greeued, it shoulde require one and 
onely medicine, comprising wel and briefly the summe 
of the mater. For if a man were one thing that is framed 
of one Element, there shoulde be nothing, through 
whiche he should feele payne. 
 
If so be that he were afflicted with any griefe, there 
were but one waye, and one medicine to cure him. For 
when as he coulde not be hurte through any outwarde 
[^f.1v^] 
cause, it ought necessarily to suffer inwardly of his own 
nature. And when as there is one onely nature of euery 
one, there shalbe one affecte, and the waye to returne 
to the naturall state, shalbe one: whiche is a verye absurditie, 
seeing there be infinite kindes, as well of sicknesses, 
as of remedyes. By the same reason also you 
may reprooue the reasons of them, whiche haue brought 
in, that motes without all qualitie, and alteration, and 
also bodyes vnmade, to be the beginning of all generation. 
For a man shoulde not be greeued, if his nature 
were such, seeing that it is necessary, that it which greeueth, 
shoulde be a receyuer both of sense and alteration. 
 
If so be, that it be without all alteration, it will alwaye 
keepe the same state, whiche it had from the beginning. 
And nowe if it be chaunged, and yet there be 
not in it naturall power of feeling, it can nothing more 
feele the affections, then stoanes doo feele. 
 
Therefore, seeing that bothe these are required in 
these chaungings, and in bodyes truely, if wee did grow 
eyther of them, or any suche like, or vnifourme nature, 
wee shoulde not be greeued. Therefore wee truely are 
not made of any vnifourme, or simple substance. Furthermore, 
seeing there be two instrumentes, by whiche 
all opinions be founde out, that is, reason, and experience. 
Neither of these wil so serue them, that they shal 
finde any thing made of them, whiche are altogether 
impatible or vnsufferable, and without sense, whiche 
after wil be suffering and partaker of feeling. Nay verily, 
although al those motes had an ingraffed sense, and 
were impatible, and not able to be pierced, so that of the 
onely mutuall ioyning of them, the fleshe it selfe should 
be engendred. Neuerthelesse, wee shoulde not feele a 
needle impacte, or pricte any more, then when wee seperate 
the fingers ioyned therewith. Therfore it resteth, 
that a feeling bodye shoulde eyther be of those, whiche 
likewise haue force to feele and suffer, or of those whiche 
[^f.2r^] 
can suffer, but after haue no sense. 
 
And wee will weigh anone whether of these is true: 
If therefore an Elemente can not be impatible, it also 
shal not be one in kinde. If so be, that which is one, is 
alwaye vnsufferable, seeing there is nothing left, into 
which it may be chaunged, or of which it may suffer, for 
what soeuer is chaunged, is chaunged into an other, and 
that which suffereth, suffereth through an other. Therfore, 
seeing it is nowe prooued, that there be many Elementes, 
let vs enquire for the number of them: yet first 
let vs distinguish the sectes of them, whiche vniuersally 
dispute of Elementes: for they are brought into foure. 
The firste of whiche, is that whiche he pronounceth to 
consiste of thinges voyde of sense, and also vnsufferable. 
The other whiche consisteth of thinges indewed 
with sense, but yet vnsufferable: whiche be subiecte to 
alteration. Both which in this doe agree, that they both 
stande of thinges vnsufferable. Wherfore, seeing they 
teache them to be vnpossible, let vs let them passe. 
 
There be therefore behinde two: the one, whiche 
constituteth a feeling bodye, of the firste Elementes, hauing 
facultie both of suffering and feeling: An other of 
thinges suffering, but without sense, both agreeing, that 
they consist of thinges sufferable: betweene eyther of 
whiche sectes, what possible thing doth it contayne. For 
if you wil trye, and examine by reason the partes, those 
whiche be of bodyes, hauing power of feeling. If so be, 
that you shall trye the first elementes, it may easily be, 
that although they be sayd to haue no sense, so that they 
can mutually, and manyfoldely doe, and suffer vppon 
them selues, some bodye endewed with sense, maye be 
engendred thereof, many particular alterations comming 
betweene. For as oft as any thing is made of many 
thinges, if those thinges whiche come into the composition, 
suche as they be, shall dure such vnto the ende, 
that shal neuer attayne any new or purchased fourme, 
[^f.2v^] 
whiche was not before in those thinges of which it was 
made. But if they many wayes be varied, chaunged, 
and mingled, then there maye something arise in the 
thing compounded, whiche may be of an other kinde, to 
those whiche were founde in the firste Elementes of it. 
Wherefore, they that will haue a body to be engendred 
of Fire, Ayre, Water, and Earthe mutually chaunged, 
and altered, and brought to a certaine temperature, endewed 
with a sensitiue facultie, they doe pronounce 
thinges agreeable vnto truthe. 
 
But they whiche pronounce of them remaining, as 
they be, and mingled onely, as Wheate, and Barley, 
and Beanes are in an heape, they truely doe followe 
those thinges, whiche can not be done. 
 
By these therefore it is shewed, that Elementes are 
moe then one, and also that they can suffer, which Hipp. 
confirming, saith: Howe, I pray you, can it be, that any 
thing, may of one thing be compounded? seeing of many 
thinges it can not, except they be well tempered. But 
whether sensible bodyes doe consiste of the firste Elementes, 
in all the whiche there is force of feeling, or of 
those rather whiche doe wante them, it is not yet shewed. 
 
Furthermore, that many doo lacke sense, it is thence 
euidente, that some of the compounde be suche. This 
therefore is a foolishe opinion, as well of the naturall 
Philosophers, as of the Phisitions, whiche doo affirme, 
that there is one Element of man, or of all thinges vniuersal. 
For Thales, Anaximenus, Anaximandes, & with 
them Heraclitus doe endeuour to shewe, because of the 
mutuall alteration of Elementes, they see all thinges to 
growe out of kinde, into other that be neere them, euery 
one of them to be an vniuersall Elemente: yet so that 
one appoynteth one thing, an other, an other. All the 
whiche doe seeme to mee, to haue dreamed of that firste 
mater subiect to all Elementes, whiche they sawe to be 
[^f.3r^] 
one: so also they suppose an Element to be one. But 
they whiche pronounce all thinges to be one thing, doo 
destroye the beginning of natural Philosophie, and also 
of Phisicke, and therefore against them wee muste not 
dispute. And this is contrarye to all reason, if because 
there is seene none of the foure Elementes in the body, 
pure and sincere, a man woulde denye, that they all are 
not founde in a man. For why, will you in the bodyes 
of liuing creatures, finde earth, for example, vnmingled 
and pure, seeing in the whole, suche cannot be shewed of 
them: for what soeuer parte of it you shal take, that wil 
be partaker of suche heate, or humour, and ayre substaunce, 
yet that earth which wee suppose to be an Element, 
is moste thicke, heary, and besides that, colde and 
drye. If so be, that thou shalt in all the world, shewe me 
a stoane, an earthy body, truely, I will shewe thee in the 
bodyes of liuing creatures, some thinges like vnto it, 
that is, the kinde of boanes, the heares, the gristles, and 
stoanes. Seeke not therefore in the bodyes of liuing 
creatures, any thing vnmingled, seeing you shall not 
finde that in the whole worlde, without counterfeiting. 
But as often as you shall see any colde parte drye, and 
thickie, let it be ynough to call into thy memory, earth, 
and let it be ynough to behold any moyste thing, thinne 
and flowing, to conceiue in thy minde water. Also the 
heate of the liuing creature. Let it present vnto thee 
Fire, and also the nature of the breath, without the whiche 
a liuing body cannot consist, let it bring to your memory 
firste Ayre, then Fire. 
 
Neither can you denye, that all fruictes are engendred 
of the earth, and of the water, seeing of them they 
may seeme to haue their beginning, & that they be partakers 
of Fire, and Ayre tempered vniuersally. 
 
Hence you maye gather, that if you macerate, or 
steepe earth in water, you shal make it nothing but clay, 
and fruictes be not claye. If therefore fruictes doo take 
[^f.3v^] 
their beginning of the vniuersalitie of Elementes, there 
is not, why you shoulde doubt of liuing creatures, but 
that of them they may be nourished. 
 
Therefore, boldly it is to be professed, that Fire, 
Water, Ayre, and Earthe, to be the firste, and the common, 
and moste simple Elementes, and beginniners of 
all thinges, of whiche verily, both Plantes, and also all 
liuing creatures, are engendred, nourished, and encreased, 
for in them alone you shall finde the chiefest qualities, 
without any mingling, or temperature. 
 
In Earth, especially colde and drithe, in Fire especiall, 
heate and drithe. In the other, the other qualities, 
according as euery ones nature dothe require. But to 
esteeme any Element to be especially moyste, and also 
to suppose that to be some thing diuers from water, is a 
pointe of extreme foolishnesse. 
 
Furthermore, that the especiall heate is simpler 
then Fire, and that by it added to the mater, the Fire is 
engendred, it is confessed of all Philosophers, whiche 
truely dooe confesse vniuersally, that a certaine mater 
without qualitie, (which is subiecte to all Elementes) 
and also an especiall heate, which is produced in it, is to 
Fire the beginning of generation, and also that the 
mater it selfe, is free from all generation, & corruption: 
and the qualitie to be that, whiche in it is bothe engendred, 
and perisheth. But an Element in that dothe differ 
from a beginning, that beginnes, shoulde be in the 
same kinde with those, whose beginninges they be, and 
Elementes doo alwayes appertayne to the same kinde, 
for a simple qualitie, is the Elemente of a compounde 
qualitie, and a simple bodye, of a compounde bodye. Seeing 
therefore, hote, moyste, colde, and drye may be three 
wayes saide, that is, either as a qualitie, or els, as an 
vnmingled bodye, or as that whiche is mingled, and the 
qualitie not seeme to be an Element, nor yet a mingled 
or temperate bodye. 
 
[^f.4r^] 
It is too common, that wee saye, an Elemente to be 
that bodye, whiche is without mingling and temperature, 
and also simple of qualitie. Wherefore, at the 
length we are come necessarily to Fire, Ayre, Water, 
Earth, in whom firste there is especiall heate, especiall 
colde, especiall moysture, especiall drithe. Which Elementes 
altogether, or some one alone, we doo commonly 
vse as water, daylye when wee doo drinke, or be washed, 
Ayre, whiche doth enuiron vs, while wee drawe it 
in by breathing, Fire also, when wee are colde, wee vse 
that wee may be hote. 
 
Furthermore, liuing creatures, which eate, eyther 
sande, earth, stoanes, clay, yea, or boanes, doo plentifully 
bring earth into their bodyes. Wherfore, I truely doo 
not see; why many men doo saye, that neyther Fire, nor 
Water, nor Ayre, or Earth be taken away, or added to 
our bodyes, and therfore that they be not Elementes of 
our bodyes. 
 
If so be, that any doo therfore thinke, that we do not 
shewe in our bodyes any Element, because no man is 
so heated, that he burneth, or drinketh vntil he be burst, 
they doo not vnderstand, that if one Element doo perishe, 
the liuing creature likewise perisheth. And the old Element 
shall perish, if it be turned: the hote, if it be ouer 
cooled: the moyste, if it greatly waxe drye: the drye, if it 
more then meete is, be moystened, Wherupon the mater 
sta~deth otherwise then they think: for alwaies there 
is eyther some Element added to the body, or els taken 
away, that which must be moderately done of them that 
will the liuing creature to be kept sounde: If so be, that 
immoderate vse of Elements breedeth to death. Therfore, 
seeing no qualitie can be founde aparte from substaunces, 
wee are compelled to receyue them together 
with the substaunces, and so to geue them to the bodies, 
which made them: whiche if they require them especially, 
wee minister the Elemente it selfe. I saye, Fire, 
[^f.4v^] 
Ayre, Water, Earth. But when a meane qualitie is 
necessary, we vse a medicine mingled of the Elements, 
and sometime of a nourishment. Neyther is the Element 
at any time profitable, as a medicine, but when 
the body needeth an especiall qualitye. And that Hipp. 
by the name of qualitye doeth vnderstande often times 
a bodye endued with an especiall qualitye: we maye gather 
by this saying. If so be where he saieth, when a 
man dyeth, it is necessarye that euerye part returne to 
his owne nature, the drye to the drye, the moiste to the 
moiste, the hote to the hote, the coulde to the coulde. He 
calleth drye moyste, hote and coulde, not onely qualities, 
but also substaunces, in which those qualityes are 
founde: for those they be whiche the Creature being 
deade, doe departe, and are mingled to the Elements 
of vniuersalitye. 
 
But wee will saye that the qualityes, the Creature 
being dead, do dye, but not to returne to theyr owne nature. 
Wherefore there is not why any man any more 
shoulde goe about to perswade that hee supposeth liuing 
Creatures to bee begotten of qualities, which can not 
consist a parte from the bodyes, but of bodies in which 
those especiall qualityes bee, for they are common Elementes 
of all. And those which for any excellencye of 
these are called Whote, Colde, moyste or dry, are proper 
to euery one. 
 
A man therfore consisteth of most simple and sensible 
Elementes, which are called similar, or simple, or lyke. 
And they againe of the fowre humors, which also doe 
take their beginnings of things to be eaten and dronke. 
But these are engendred of Fire, Ayre, Water, and 
Earth, which truely be constituted of no body any more, 
but of mater and qualities onely, which we graunt to be 
the beginnings of them, but not at all the Element: neuertheles 
the Element hath of the qualities that he is an 
Element. 
 
[^f.5r^] 
If so be that especiall heate be added, that whole Elemen 
wilbe Fire, and so we must saye of the other three 
qualityes. And of none other qualitie, but of these fowre 
an Element is iudged. 
 
But of the proper Elemens of Creatures, that is, of 
humors we must intreate in the next co~mentaries, for 
of that the similar parts are engendred. These agayne 
meeting together, that first most simple instrument is finished, 
which for the great function or office of one, is by 
nature prouduced, then when these are framed together 
another greater instrument is made, & then the perfectnes 
of the whole body. Therfore that we may repete the 
whole disputacion, if we be greeued, our substaunce shal 
not be one in kinde, nor yet vnsufferable. But wee be 
greeued, therefore it shal not be one in kinde, nor sufferable. 
Againe, if it suffer, it behoued that it heated, cooled, 
moistened, or dried, should suffer, seeing those which be 
next cannot by any other meanes be altered. Whole by 
whole, wherfore it is euident that heate, cold, moisture, 
& drines, doe constitute or frame the substaunce of euery 
thing. But how those which are mingled may be mingled, 
the whole by y=e= whole, whether by the only quality, 
(as Arist. supposeth) or whether the substances, they mutually 
entering into them selues, it is not needefull for a 
Phisition to trye. Yet let this suffice to haue spoken in 
this present, that if wine (for example) be mingled with 
water, the partes of both these are scattered into the 
smallest, and by & by, they doe mutually doe and suffer 
togeather, and so much the easier they do communicate 
the qualities mutuallye vntill they be brought into lesse 
through longer mouing and mingling. For in time of 
necessity the partes of those thinges which are mutually 
mingled will exactly worke vpon them selues, and 
exactly suffer, and so all that wilbe one, and on 
euerye parte like it selfe. 
 
[^f.5v^] 
[}Galeni Pergameni, de 
Elementis. lib. 2.}] 
 
THerefore as hote, drye, cold, 
and moiste are the common 
Elementes, beginners of all 
thinges, so Blood, Flegme, & 
blacke Coler and Yelow are 
the proper Elements or beginning 
of thinges endewed 
with blood. But proper to 
men be the similar particles, 
although these be co~mon to many endewed with blood, 
as Oxe, Dogge, and Horse, yet not like to men. But veryly 
that the partes of all Creatures hauing blood be engendred 
of their mother blood, it is euident inough, whiche 
seeing it is partaker of Flegme, and also of other coler 
it is shewed, by which reason Hipp. perswaded, 
hath taught that the foure humors be the matter to engender 
man. Furthermore, Fleshe and Sinowes bee 
partes similar or simple, and seeing the Fleshe is Blood, 
and beside softe and hote, but the Sinowe without blood, 
hard & cold, and also other parts haue other differences. 
It seemeth agreeable vnto reason, that wise nature at 
what time shee framed the issue or infant of the mothers 
blood to haue drawen that which was thicker to constitute 
sounder bodies, that which was thinner to the softer, 
and that which was hotter to the hotter, that which 
was colder to the colder. 
 
And in the time folowing, that euery one of the parts 
fourmed had his proper Eliment or nourishment, and 
encrease, of proper and particuler matter, for euen as 
in Milke there is founde both milke, and also a certaine 
cheesie substaunce, so in blood you may finde a certaine 
[^f.6r^] 
thinne liquour much like the whea of blood, and also as it 
were a certaine mudde and beside, the fibres which being 
taken from the blood, as the blood shall no more encrease, 
so also it shall in colour bee varied, wherevppon 
the blood is not simple. Otherwise it shoulde be alwaies 
like both in men and beastes. But by experience 
wee maye knowe the contrarye, bothe of the varietye of 
colours, and especially of thinges which are euacuated 
by purging Medicines. Whiche truely if they be well 
ministred, they wyll drawe vnto them according to the 
differences of sicknesses iuyces perticular and differing. 
Against whiche Asclepiades endeuoureth to perswade, 
that is, that the medicines doe not drawe vnto the 
familiar iuyces, but to chaunge and to corrupt them, 
and to alter them into theyr owne nature, which truely 
as they bee most absurde, so those thinges which daylye 
we see done by immoderate purgations, doe shewe most 
euidentlye howe euery medicine doeth drawe their proper 
humors. If so be that as often as any man hath receyued 
a medicine which hath power to clense choler, 
first it shal expel such humor, by vomitte, after Flegme, 
then blacke choler, lastly pure blood, which being euacuated, 
the soule departeth. If you giue a medicine dissoluing 
Flegme, that shall first bee emptied, then Yelowe 
coler, because, it is easie to be brought forth, after blacke 
very stubburne and resistyng. And laste of all blood is 
alway brought foorth because it is set very neere nature. 
 
Therefore, when that first humor is euacuated, the liuing 
Creature cannot then bee in health, when it hath 
loste one of his Elementes, but it is altogeather dissolued 
and perisheth. And then out of the rest there floweth 
humor which is more fit to bee clensed, because there is 
a certaine naturall power to euery thing to draw those 
thinges which be conuenient for it. As in the Loadestone 
there is force to drawe vnto it Yron. And through 
this facultye, both nourishmentes and euacuations are 
[^f.6v^] 
made, it drawing alwayes that which is expedient, yet 
often with this, something which is not expedient, so 
that sometime it commeth in vse to haue purging medicines, 
which truely when they haue drawen that flegme 
or coler which doeth abounde, they catche vnto them 
some peculiar humor of the sounde partes, by a certaine 
force and dissoluing, and melting them, and bringing 
them to Elements, and committing the creature 
to death, and another certaine humor followeth 
the violence of this attraction 
of affinitye vnto it, which first 
was drawen by 
force. 
 
[}FINIS.}] 
 
