[^Batman, Stephen: Batman vppon Bartholome^] 
 
[}BATMAN 
vppon Bartholome, 
His Booke 
De Proprietatibus Rerum, 
 
Newly corrected, enlarged and amended: 
with such Additions as are requisite, 
vnto euery seuerall 
Booke: 
 
Taken foorth of the most approued Authors, the like heretofore 
not translated in English. 
 
Profitable for all Estates, as well for the benefite of 
the Mind as the Bodie. 
1582. 
 
LONDON 
Imprinted by Thomas East, dwelling 
by Paules wharfe.}] 
 
[^Omitted a dedication to Lord Henrie Cary, a preface to the reader, a prologue by the translator, information on the authors cited in the book, a table of contents, an index, and an alphabetical list of technical terms. Also omitted book one on trinity and book two on angels.^] 
 
[^Extract 1, ff. 12r-19r^] 
 
[^f.12r^] 
[}INCIPIT LIBER 
TERTIVS.}] 
 
[}Of the properties of the soule 
reasonable.}] 
 
BY the help of Iesu Christ, 
in the foresaid bookes, we 
haue brought in brieflye 
some properties of bodilesse 
substance, or y=e= essence 
of God, & qualitie of Angels: 
Now with his helpe we shal turne 
our stile to bodily creatures, and we shal 
begin at the worthiest of creatures, that 
is man, that hath kinde and propertie as 
well of bodies as of spirits. 
 
[}Of the description of man, 
Chap. 1.}] 
 
A Man is of all other creatures neerest 
[/1./] 
in likenesse vnto God, milde after 
kinde by the lawe of reason, receiuing 
doctrine and skill, hauing the Image 
of God by the might of knowledge, and 
the likenesse in power of louing. Farther 
to the intent the properties of men shuld 
be the more openly known to vnlearned 
me~ & simple, of his parties, of y~ which he 
is made & co~posed, we shal shortly begin 
to intreat: and first of y=e= worthier kind, y~ 
[^f.12v^] 
is the soule, by the which man agreeth 
with Angells. For by the soule man is 
lift vp to heauenlye thinges, aboue the 
kinde of bodie. For as Isidore sayth, by 
a misse vse, Homo, a man, hath y=e= name 
of Homo, the earth: sith that he is not 
made only of body, but composed of body 
& of soule. And therefore a man is called 
[/2./] 
Antropos in Greeke: By Antropos is 
vnderstoode vprightlye formed. For the 
spirit is lifted vp by gouernaunce, to the 
contemplation of God his maker: wherfore 
the Poet saith. 
 
Pronaq~; cum spectant animalia cetera terra~, 
Os homini sublime dedit cœlumque videre, 
Iussit & erectos ad sidera tollere vultus. 
 
The meaning is thus, other beasts 
looke downeward to the earth. And God 
gaue to man an high mouth, and commaunded 
him to looke vp and beholde 
heauen: & he gaue to men visages looking 
vpwarde towarde the starres. And also 
a man shoulde seeke heauen, and not put 
his thought in the earth, and be obedient 
to the wombe as a beast. Isidore speaketh 
[/3./] 
of a double manner man, of the inner 
man, and vtter man. And first 
wee shall treate and proceede of the inner 
man. 
 
[}Of the inner man, the soule. 
Chap. 2.}] 
 
FIrst it is to vnderstand, what thing 
the reasonable soule is, and of what 
disposition, & what is the meaning of the 
Etimelogie, and the pronouncing of this 
name, Anima, a soule. Then of the might 
& vertue therof. And thirdly of the effect 
& working therof. Fourthly, of the perfection 
and comparison, that is to witte, 
what is the propertie thereof, when it 
is ioyned to the bodie, and when it is 
departed from the bodye. The reasonable 
soule, of the which we intend heere 
to speake, is defined of some Saintes 
and Philosophers, as a spirit: And of 
some other, as Anima et spiritus, soule 
and spirite. In that the soule hath the 
kinde of a spirit, S. Austen defineth it in 
libro de motu cordis. 
 
[}Yet of the Soule. 
Chap. 3.}] 
 
A Soule is an vnbodilye substaunce 
intellectuall, that receiueth lyght of 
the first, by the last relation: By this 
definition we know the first and cheife 
propertie of the soule. For mans spirit 
receiueth the lyght of God next after 
Angells. Also in that it is a soule, it is 
defined in two manners. For it is ioyned 
to the bodie in two manners, that 
is to vnderstand, a mouer to the thing 
that is moued, and also as a shipman is 
setteled to the shippe. And thereto according 
Remigius defineth a soule in this 
manner. A soule is a bodilesse substance 
ruling a bodie. And Saint Austen in 
the booke De anima et spiritu, saith in 
this manner. A Soule is a certeine substaunce, 
partener of reason, betaken to a 
bodie that shall be ruled. Of the which 
definition some propertie is taken: 
That is, that the soule by a certeine necessitie 
of loue & gouernaunce is kindly 
giuen to the ruling of the bodie, that 
is ioyned thereto. And heereby it appeareth, 
that the soule is not streighted, neither 
spread in length, neither in bredth 
in the bodie, that he ruleth and gouerneth: 
but by the vertue of the soule the 
body all about is ruled and moued. As 
Calcidius putteth example in Commento 
super Thimeum, of the Spider that 
sitteth in the middle of the web, & feeleth 
all manner of mouing, & toucheth the 
webbe either within or without: So 
the soule, abiding in the middle of the 
heart, without spreading of it selfe, giueth 
lyfe to all the bodie, and gouerneth 
and ruleth the mouing of all the lims. 
In that it is compared to the body, that 
it is ioyned vnto, as forme and perfection. 
It is defined of the Philosopher in 
lib. de Anima, in this manner. A soule 
is Endelichia, that is, the first act or perfection 
of a kindly bodie, that hath lims 
and might to haue life. By which definition 
it is manifest, that though the soule 
be ioyned to the bodie, it may not be fastened 
to all manner of bodyes, but onely 
to a kindly bodie, that hath limmes, 
[^f.13r^] 
and is first kindlye disposed to receiue a 
reasonable soule. Also in y~ it is a soule 
and spirit, it is defined foure manner of 
wayes. First in comparison to creatures 
generally, as in the booke De anima & 
spiritu, Austen saith in this manner: A 
soule is made to the likenesse of all wisdome, 
and beareth in it selfe the liknesse 
of all things. For it is like to the earth 
by Essentia: to water, by imagination: to 
Aire, by reason: to the Firmament, 
by vnderstanding: to the knowledge of 
heauenly ioyes. In the sixt manner it is 
defined in comparison to God, as to his 
maker, thus. A soule is like to God, a 
quickening of lyfe. Heereby we knowe 
that the soule is not begotten of the father 
and mother, but it is compound and 
created of God to the liuing of the bodie. 
Also in the seauenth manner it is 
described in comparison to God, as to 
the end that he is made, thus: A soule is 
a spirit intellectuall, ordeined to blisse in 
it selfe. Heereof shineth the propertye 
of the soule, that is to meane, that the 
soule beeing departed from the body is 
not onely beautified with Angelles, or 
as an Angell is, but the felicitie thereof 
is inlarged, and in the bodie glorified. 
Iohannis Damascene. Homel. 26. comprehendeth 
all these differences and definitions 
vnder a generall discription, 
and sayth, That a soule is a substaunce 
liuing, simple, and bodilesse, in his own 
kinde vnseene with bodilye eyen, neyther 
shall die, and is the reasonable vnderstanding, 
without shape of limmes. 
And it vseth a bodie, and giueth thereto 
heart of lyfe, and of growing and 
of begetting, and hath none other vnderstanding, 
but in it selfe it is most 
pure and cleane. And as the eye is in 
the bodie, so is the intellect vnderstanding 
in the soule, and it hath free aduisement 
and will, and is chaungeable 
by couenable will. For it maye 
freelye take eyther refuse. All these 
the spirit taketh of his grace, that made 
him, and of him hee hath beeing and 
kinde. Hetherto speaketh Iohn Damascene. 
Bernard describeth a right such 
properties and saith. O thou soule, beautified 
and made fayre with the Image 
and lykenesse of God, spoused in spirit, 
with Faith: bought with Christs owne 
bloud, assisted with Angells, pertaker 
of blisse, heyre of saluation, and partener 
of reason. What hast thou to doe 
with the flesh? By which thou sufferest 
much. By these many and diuerse 
definions, and descriptions, diuerse and 
sundrie properties of the soule be knowen, 
touching his beeing of kinde and 
of grace. 
 
[}How the soule is of Philosophers 
described. Chap. 4.}] 
 
BUT what thing a Soule is, it is 
vnknowen to many men. For in 
this matter wee reade, that olde Philosophers 
gaue diuerse, and as it were 
contrarie determinations. In liber de 
Anima, Aristotle rehearseth that Plato 
sayde, that a soule is a beeing mouing 
it selfe. And Zeno sayth, that a soule is 
a number that moueth it selfe. Pythagoras 
calleth the soule Harmonie, a concord 
of melodie. Paphinons calleth it 
Idea, a manner example. And Asolepides 
calleth it a manner of corde, that 
setteth the fiue wittes a worke. Hipocras 
calleth it a subtile spirite spread 
through all the bodie. Eraclius the Philosopher, 
calleth the soule a lyght, or a 
sparcle of beeing. Democritus calleth 
it an vncerteine spirite Athomis, 
a little thing, as it were of the 
moates in the Sunne beame, and so 
hee sayth, that all the bodye of the soule 
is such a lyttle thing. Permenides saith, 
that it is made of earth and of fire. 
Epicurus sayth, that the soule is a manner 
kinde of fire and ayre. Ipertus saith, 
the soule is a firye strength. Iuxta illud: 
Igneus est illis vigor et cœlestis 
origo. Sith that wise men haue 
spoken so many wayes, and so diuersely 
of the soule: at this time onelye this 
shall suffice that is sayde of holy men. 
That the soule is a manner of spiritual 
and reasonable substaunce, that GOD 
maketh of naught for to giue lyfe and 
perfection to mans body. And because 
it is a substaunce that maye receyue 
contraryes: It receiueth vnderstanding, 
[^f.13v^] 
and yet is subiect to forgetting, 
vertue and mallice without chaunging 
or leesing of his substaunce. And because 
it is bodilesse, it is not spread in 
length neither in breadth in the bodily 
wits. Inasmuch as it is simple in kinde, 
therfore it may grow and ware, neither 
more neyther lesse one time then at an 
other. And therefore in the greater bodye 
it is no greater, nor in the lesser bodie 
lesser, as sayeth Austen. Also 
though it bee simple and not chaungeable 
in his substaunce, yet it hath many 
sundry mights and vertue. For multitude 
in might and vertue, maketh 
him neither more ne lesse in kinde, but 
the multitude of might and vertue belongeth 
to the dooinges and effects. And 
so hee is not more in three vertues then 
in one, neither lesse in one then in three: 
And thus it is known, that y=e= soule hath 
many propertyes and definitions, touching 
what thing the Soule is, and the 
condition of the Soule shall bee more 
cleerelye knowne by the setting of the 
name. 
 
[}How the Soule tooke name 
of the Gentiles. 
Chap. 5.}] 
 
ISidore sayeth, that Anima the 
Soule, was named of the Gentiles: 
For that by their opinion it is winde 
& breath: For we by drawing of ayre at 
the mouth seeme to liue. But this opinion 
is openlye false, for the Soule is put 
into the bodye, long before the ayre bee 
taken at the mouth. For it liueth beeing 
in the mothers wombe, when our 
Lorde maketh the Soule, and putteth 
it therein. And it is called Soule because 
it liueth, and it giueth lyfe to the 
bodie, that it is put in. And it is called 
spirit, because it hath in it selfe, spirituall, 
animall, and kindlye lyfe: And because 
it maketh the bodye Spirare, that 
is, to breath. Also the same thing is 
Anima and Animus: but Anima leadeth 
the lyfe by reason, and Animus by 
counsaile and guiding. Therefore Philosophers 
saye, that Anima, that is a 
lyfe, abideth with Animus, that is counsaile. 
Also Anima the Soule, is called 
Mens, the Minde, because it appeareth 
aboue as head, or because it mindeth. 
By the Soule, man is the Image 
of God. Also many names of the soule 
bee so coupled together, so that oftentimes 
one name is put for another, and 
the Soule that is one, is called by diuerse 
names in diuerse respectes. It is 
called Anima, while it is in the bodye 
and giueth it lyfe. Mens whilest it 
hath minde, Animus, whilest it hath 
will: Racio while it deemeth or iudgeth 
rightfully: Spiritus while it breatheth: 
Sensus while it feeleth. And for these 
propertyes of the Soule, cunning, that 
is the qualytie of the Soule, is called 
Sciencia, and hath the name of Sensus, 
feeling. Hetherto speaketh Isidore. 
liber. 15. Chap. 14. 
 
[}Of the powers of the Soule. 
Chap. 6.}] 
 
THE Soule is one in substaunce, 
and hath many vertues, and many 
manner of workings: thereby it 
needeth to shewe diuerse parting of his 
might and vertues. The Soule is compared 
to the body, and to this end, and 
to this act. Touching the comparison 
to the bodie, the Soule hath fine manner 
of mightes and vertues. The first 
whereof, as Austen saith, is feeling, 
and by that vertue the Soule is mooued, 
and taketh heede to the bodylye 
wittes, and desireth those things, that 
belong to the bodye. By this vertue 
a beast is mooued to desire the thing that 
is lyking, and to eschewe the thing 
that is grieuous. The seconde power 
is wit: that is the vertue of the soule, 
whereby shee knoweth things sensible 
and corporall, when they bee present. 
The third is imagination, whereby the 
Soule beholdeth the lykenesse of bodylye 
thinges when they bee absent. The 
fourth is Racio, Reason, that deemeth 
and iudgeth betweene good and euill, 
truth and falsenesse. The fifte is Intellectus, 
vnderstanding and inwit. The 
which comprehendeth thinges not 
[^f.14r^] 
material but intelligible, as God, Angel, 
and other such. The three first vertues, 
feeling, bodily wit, and imagination, 
are scituate in the soule, that it is 
coupled to the body, and giueth life and 
innerwit & vtter wit to perfection of the 
body. And these three vertues be common 
to men and to other beasts: But the 
other vertues, Racio and Intellectus, be 
in the soule, in that it may be departed 
from the body, and abide departed as an 
Angell, and that by two manner of respects. 
For it beholdeth the higher things 
and so it is called Intellectus: and beholdeth 
the neather things, and so it is 
called Racio. In that the soule is compared 
to this end, it hath three manner of 
vertues, one is Racionalis, whereby it 
taketh heede to the thing that is true: 
The other is called Concupicibilis, 
whereby it taketh heed to the thing that 
is good, the third is called Irascibilis, and 
thereby it taketh heed to y=e= thing that is 
great and huge, and to the thing that is 
euerlasting. In the Rationali is knowledge 
of the truth, in Concupiscibili, wil 
and desire of good thing: in Irascibili is 
flight of contrary, that is, of euill. And so 
euery vertue thus considered taketh in 
this manner knowledge of the truth, either 
that it desireth good, either indeuoureth 
to flie harme. All the wits come of 
that vertue Rational and apprehensiue. 
All affections and desire, of Concupiscibili 
and Irascibili. Which affections bee 
foure, that is to say, Ioy, Hope, Dreade 
and Sorrowe. The first two come of 
Concupiscibili, for of the thing that we 
couet and desire, we haue ioy, and in ioying 
we hope. The other two, dread and 
sorrow, come of the Irascibili. For of 
things that we hate we haue sorrowe, 
and in sorrowing we dread. These foure 
affections be the matter of all manner 
vices and vertues, as it is in another 
place shewed, and that appereth by Austen 
in the booke De Anima & spiritu, 
where all those thinges are declared. 
 
[}Of the powers of the soule. 
Chap. 7.}] 
 
IF we take heed to the soule in comparison 
to his working, wee finde 
three manner of vertues, Vegetabilis, 
that giueth lyfe, Sensibilis, that giueth 
feeling, Racionalis, that giueth reason. 
In diuerse bodyes the soule is sayde to 
be three folde, that is to saye, Vegetabilis 
that giueth lyfe, and no feeling, and 
that is in plants and rootes, Sensibilis, 
that giueth life & feeling, and not reason, 
that is in vnskilfull beasts, Racionalis 
that giueth lyfe, feeling, and reason, and 
this is in men. The Philosopher lykeneth 
the soule that is called Vegitabilis, 
to a Triangle. For as a Triangle 
hath three corners, this manner soule 
hath three vertues, of begetting, of 
nourishing, and of growing. And this 
soule Vegetabilis is lyke to a Triangle 
in Geometrie. And hee lykeneth the 
soule Sensibilis, to a quadrangle square, 
and foure cornerd. For in a Quadrangle 
is a line drawne from one corner 
to another, before it maketh two Triangles 
and y=e= soule sensible maketh two 
triangles of vertues. For where euer 
the soule sensible is, there is also the 
soule Vegetabilis, but not backwarde. 
And hee lykeneth the soule Racionabilis 
to a Circle, because of his perfection 
and conteining. For of all the figures 
that be called Isoperimetra, that is of al 
the figures of the same length the Circle 
is most, and most conteineth. 
 
Though the soule reasonable be made 
perfect in cunning and vertues, as it is 
sayde in Liber de Anima: it is most perfect, 
and most may conteine in the manner 
of a Circle, touching the kindly vertues. 
And therefore who that hath the 
soule reasonable, hath also the power 
Sensibilis and Vegetabilis, but not contrariwise. 
 
[}Of the Soule Vegetable. 
Chap. 8.}] 
 
THen the Soule Uegetable, that 
giueth life, hath vertue of begetting, 
that is needefull to multiplye 
and bring forth his kinde, vertue of 
nourishing to keepe a singular thing in 
[^f.14v^] 
kinde, and vertue of waxing and 
growing, to the perfection thereof. Also 
to this vertue Vegetabilis: that giueth 
life, serue foure vertues, that is to be vnderstoode. 
 
The vertue of appetite, that taketh 
what is needfull to foode: the vertue 
of Digestion, that parteth the thing 
that is couenable, from a thing that is 
not couenable in foode: retentiue, which 
transmitteth or conueieth it, that is conuenient 
in foode, to all the partes in 
beasts, and to all the boughes, twigges, 
springs, and plants, and fastned to them, 
to restore the lust or liking say or iuyce 
as well in plants, as in beasts: The vertue 
Expulsiue is, which expelleth and 
putteth awaye that that is vnconuenient 
and hurtfull to kinde. Also there bee 
other vertues that serue and minister to 
the vertue Vegetabilis, Immutatiue, 
Informatiue, Assimulatiue, Perforabilis, 
Aspera, Leuis: the differences of 
which is not our intent to pursue: For 
they be openly knowen in Liber Iohannicij. 
Chap. 2. 
 
Therefore gather you shortlye 
of this that is sayde, that the soule by 
the vertue Vegetable in plantes, bringeth 
forth other of the same kinde, 
and multiplieth and keepeth that that 
is brought foorth in kinde. And whatsoeuer 
is needfull to foode, it desireth, receiueth, 
incorporateth, and inioyeth. 
And it putteth and excludeth awaye 
that that is not according. Also by the 
vertue Generatiue, to whome serueth 
Pascitiue, it multiplyeth and bringeth 
forth things of kinde. And by the vertue 
Nutritiue, it comforteth and feedeth 
kindes that bee multiplied. Also by 
the vertue that is called Augmentatiua, 
it maketh the bodie increase and 
growe, and bringeth it to a due stature 
and quantitie, and maketh it perfect. 
 
Also by age and passing of time this 
manner soule faileth, & at the last when 
the bodie dieth, it consumeth. And these 
things that be sayd heere of the soule, 
called Anima Vegetatiua, shall suffice. 
 
[}Of the soule sensible. 
Chap. 9.}] 
 
DE Anima sensibili, of the Soule 
that giueth feeling, somewhat shall 
shortlye be sayde, touching the diuersitie 
of the might and vertues thereof. 
For the vertue of feeling hath place 
in the most subtile Chambers of the 
braine, and giueth quicke moouing and 
feeling in all the limmes, and that by 
sinewes and small vaines that spring 
out of the braine, and spreadeth into 
all the partes of the beast. The Soule 
sensible, that giueth feeling, hath double 
might and vertue, that is to wit, 
of apprehending and of mouing. The 
vertue of apprehending, that is a manner 
knowing, is departed in twaine: 
into common or innerwitte, and into 
perticular or vtter wit. The vtter wit 
conteineth the sight, hearing, smelling, 
tasting, and touching. And this 
wit in his Organes is brought to effect 
in this manner. There is a sinew 
that in the crafte of Anathomia, is 
called Obticus, and is an hollowe sinewe, 
[/4./] 
and commeth from the braine 
to the eyes, or to the blacke of the eien, 
parting. 
 
And an other commeth to the eares: 
and the thirde to the nosethrilles: the 
fourth to the tongue, and to the roofe 
of the mouth, and the fifte brauncheth 
and commeth in cordes to the instrumentes 
of touching, and spreadeth 
through all the bodye. By these sinewes 
the spirite of feeling is dispearsed 
into all the bodye: and by vertue 
thereof all the bodye is able to feele 
and to moue. And so by vertue of spreading 
and of shedding of that spirite 
into all the sinewes, arterye vaines 
or Muscles, all the matching or making 
of the bodye, is founde able to 
moue. 
 
[}Of the inner Sense. 
Chap. 10.}] 
 
THE inner vertue is parted in three, 
by three diuisions in the braine. 
For in the braine bee three small celles, 
[^f.15r^] 
that is to say, the formost in which the 
vertue Imaginatiua worketh. There 
those things that the vtter wit comprehendeth 
without, be ordeined and put togethers 
within, as saith Iob. The middle 
[/5./] 
chamber termed Logica: therein the 
reason sensible or vertue Estimatiua is a 
maister. The third and the last, which 
is Memoratiua, the vertue of the mind. 
That vertue holdeth and keepeth in the 
treasure of the minde, and knowne by 
imagination and reason. 
 
[}The vertue of the sensitiue imagination 
and memorie. 
Chap. 11.}] 
 
THE vertue of feeling that commeth 
of the soule sensible, is a vertue, by 
which the soule knoweth & iudgeth of 
coulours, of sauours, and of other obiects 
that be knowne by the vtter wits. The 
vertue imaginatiue is it, whereby wee 
apprehend likenesse and shapes of things 
of perticulars receyued, though they bee 
absent: As when it seemeth that we see 
golden hils, either else when through the 
similitude of other hills we dreame of 
the hill Pernasus. The vertue Estimatiue, 
or the reason sensible is it, whereby 
in being heedfull to auoide euill, & follow 
that is good, men be prudent & sage. And 
this vertue Estimatiue is common to vs 
& to other beasts: As it is seene in hounds 
& also in wolues: but properly to speak, 
they vse no reason, but they vse a busie & 
strong estimation, but heereof we shall 
speake in another place. But Memoratiua 
is a vertue conseruatiue or recordatiue, 
wherby the likenesse of things, least 
they should be forgot, we lay vp & safely 
reserue. Therefore one said, the Memory 
is the coffer or chest of reason. 
 
[}Of the sensible vertue motiue. 
Chap. 12.}] 
 
VErtue sensible that moueth is parted 
in three. One parte is called Naturalis, 
the other Vitalis, and the third Animalis. 
The vertue that is called Naturalis, 
moueth the humours in the body of 
a beast by the vaines, & hath a principall 
place in the liuer. For that it worketh 
there principally. The vertue that is called 
Vitalis, is the vertue of life, & hath 
mouing by the throat, or artery pipes, in 
the which it moueth the spirits y~ commeth 
from the hart. For this vertue hath 
place in the heart. And of the heart springeth 
the hollow or artery pipes, as the 
vaines spring out of the liuer. The heart 
is so hot, y~ if it wer not slaked with cold 
aire and breathing, it should be stifeled 
in it selfe in the same heate. Therfore it 
needeth to breath & to drawe in aire by 
the lungs and organe, to slake the heat & 
the burning thereof. The vertue that is 
called Animalis motiua, hath place in y=e= 
small chambers of the braine. Out of the 
braine all the sinewes spring by meane 
of the ridge boane, and of the marrowe 
of the bones therof. This vertue moueth 
all the lims. For first it moueth the sinewes, 
muscles, and brawnes: and these 
moued, they moue other limmes speedely 
in euery parte. And for that, that it 
moueth the handes, it is called vertue 
operatiue working. And for that that it 
extendeth to the feete, and moueth them 
to walke, it is called the vertue progressiue, 
going. For thereby beastes haue 
their kindly mouing and going. Then 
gather briefly the properties of the soule 
sensible, that belongeth to this treatise. 
The soule sensible that giueth feeling, is 
a certeine spirituall substaunce more noble 
and more worthy then the soule Vegetabelis, 
that giueth life: And lesse noble 
and lesse worthy then the soule Rationalis, 
that giueth reason. For the being 
and the working of this soule, that is 
Sensibilis, is dependant of the bodie, that 
it is in, and maketh it perfect. Therefore 
when the bodie dieth, the beeing and 
working thereof dieth also of the Uegetatiue 
spirit departed from the bodie. 
But while it is in the bodie it hath many 
noble workings and dooings. For it 
maketh the bodies of beastes to haue feeling, 
and maketh perfect the inner kinde 
and the vtter knowing, as to y=e= lims require, 
& mouethth all y=e= lims in euery part. 
Also it dealeth & spreadeth his vertue into 
al the parts of the body. Also as y=e= lims 
be more noble, so it doth more noble deeds 
[^f.15v^] 
in the bodie. Also it is the cause of sleeping 
and of waking in beasts. Also if the 
vertue thereof be gathered into the inner 
places of the bodie, it worketh the more 
strongly. And when it is spread into the 
vtter offices, and occupied in many places, 
it worketh the more feeblye: For 
while it taketh heede to the sight, it feebleth 
and slaketh in the hearing, and so 
of other. Therefore it is sayd. 
 
Pluribus intentus, minor est, ad singula se~sus. 
 
That is to vnderstand, the wit, that 
taketh heede to manye things, taketh 
the lesse heed to euery therof. Also in the 
vttermost and in the more excellent feelings, 
the vertue thereof is dulled, but it 
hath liking in meane feelings. Also the 
vertue and working thereof is a let, to 
the spirit sensible, when his waye and 
passage is foretolde and warned by stopping 
of the wayes, poores, and small 
holes in the bodie, as it falleth in them 
that haue the Palsie or Epilepsia, that 
is the falling Euill, or other such diseases. 
And the vertue thereof is dissolued 
and vnloose, by too great heate, that 
dissolueth and stretcheth the poores, or 
small holes in the bodie: as by to great 
colde, constraining, shutting, or stopping 
the small holes, it is let to spread 
it selfe into the partes of the bodie. Also 
by sweete smelles, the vertue in a 
beast, that was lost, is restored: as it is 
corrupt and grieued by stinking smells. 
But now of the vertue sensible this shall 
suffice. 
 
[}Of the soule reasonable. 
Chap. 13.}] 
 
THe soule reasonable, or the vertue 
of vnderstanding that is called Intellectus 
in Latine, is separated by two 
chiefe workinges, in one manner it is 
called Intellectus speculatiuus, and in another 
manner it is called Intellectus 
practicus. In that it vseth contemplation 
it is called Speculatiuus. In that it worketh 
it is called Practicus. And by this 
roote mans lyfe is separated a sunder, 
that one is called Vita actiua, life of 
working, and that other is called Vita 
contemplatiua, lyfe of contemplation. 
Then the reasonable soule is euerlasting, 
incorruptible, and may not die, 
Wherefore his principall act and deede, 
that is Intelligere, to vnderstand, is not 
dependaunt of the bodie. And it liueth 
perfectlye, and vnderstandeth when it 
is departed from the bodye, yea, and 
the more it drowneth it selfe into the 
bodie, the more slowly and the lesse perfectly 
it vnderstandeth. And the more it 
withdraweth from the bonds and liking 
of the flesh, the more easilye and cleerely 
it vnderstandeth. Heere I call drowning, 
either by imagination of fantasie, 
or by liking of the flesh, or by loue of 
worldly alluring. Wherefore Gregorye 
saith. As a man is made in the 
middle betweene Angelles and beasts 
to be lower then Angelles, and higher 
then other beastes: so hee hath somewhat 
that accordeth with the highest, 
and somewhat that agreeth with the 
lowest. With Angell the spirt hath, 
that he maye not die: and with other 
beastes he hath a bodie, that must dye. 
And therefore if the soule by reason turneth 
toward God, it is adorned, illuminate, 
and amended, and made perfect. 
But if it tourne by affections towarde 
creatures, it is made darke, corrupte, 
and debased. Though the soule in it selfe 
be euerlasting, and not deadlye, yet it is 
passible and must suffer through the 
bonde of the bodie, that it is ioyned to. 
Therefore in liber de Anima & spiritu, 
Austen sayth, that soules that liue 
in bodies, by loue of sensible things they 
loue bodyly lykenesse and formes: and 
when they passe out of the body, in the 
same bodilye liknesse, they suffer as it 
were bodily paines And therefore there 
they may be holde in bodily paines: for 
that they were not heere cleansed of the 
corruption of the bodie. Heereby it is 
knowne, that though the soule be cleane 
and pure in his owne kinde, it taketh 
vncleannesse of the flesh, sith it is originally 
infected. As wine and other licour 
taketh infection of a vessel that is fustie. 
And therefore when it is departed from 
the bodie, it beareth with it selfe the bodies 
filths. Declaring that after this life 
there is no redemption, for in this lyfe 
all the penitent are cleansed and newly 
reuiued vnto God by grace. 
 
[^f.16r^] 
Then gather thou heereof, that among 
all creatures, the reasonable soule presenteth 
most openly, the lykenesse of the 
Image of God: and that because it hath 
three manner of mights and vertues, 
though it be one and simple in kinde. Also 
it containeth in it selfe the lykenes of 
all things: and therefore the soule is 
named the lykenesse of all things, as 
Austen saith. Also the soule being once 
made shall endure euermore in bodie or 
out of bodie. For as Cass. saith, It shuld 
neuer be sayde, it was made to the Image 
of God, if it wer closed within the 
bond of death. Also it is the perfection 
of a kindly body with lims: and therefore 
the more verelye it maye make all 
the bodie perfect in euery part. Also by 
his owne kinde it maye kindlye determine 
a lyking to good and euill, truth or 
lyes. Also by diuers vertues it maye 
knowe lykenesse and shapes of diuers 
things both present and absent. For it 
knoweth things materiall, present & absent, 
by hir owne natural shapes: and he 
knoweth vnmaterial things, by hir own 
presence, as Austen saith. Also by the reflection 
of it self aboue it self, she knoweth 
it selfe, as the Philosopher saith. For 
seeing & vnderstanding she knoweth hir 
selfe. Also as a Table she taketh kindly 
illuminations and impressions of diuers 
things, and for that it coueteth kindlye 
to be incorporated, & to be ioyned thereto, 
it desireth kindly the felowship w~ the 
body. And kindly it desireth good & flyeth 
euill, though it choose euill other while 
for want of aduisement: but by kinde 
it forsaketh euill, and grudgeth there against, 
as Saint Austen saith. So the 
[/6./] 
soule vegetatiue desireth to be, the sensible 
desireth to be wel, and the resonable 
soule desireth to be best: and therefore 
it resteth neuer, till it be ioyned 
with the best. For the place of the reasonable 
soule is God, to whom warde it 
is moued, that it may rest in him. And 
this mouing is not by changing of place 
but rather by loue and desire. These properties 
of the soule that be rehearsed before, 
shall suffice. 
 
[}Of the vertues of the soule, ca. 14.}] 
 
NOw after we haue circumspectlye 
spoken of the properties of y=e= soule, 
in it selfe and in hir body: there remaineth 
to see and to treate of the vertues, 
by the which she is mightie to vse working 
in y=e= body. This vertue is a might 
of the soule essentially giuen to worke 
and doe hir deedes in the body. For by 
this vertue she giueth y=e= body lyfe, draweth 
togethers, and openeth the heart, the 
organe, and small wayes in the bodye 
alway, and giueth to the body that hath 
a soule, feelyng and skilfull mouing, as 
Con. saith lib. 13. Also this vertue hath 
three parts: one is called naturall, and 
is in the lyuer, the other is called vitall, 
[/7./] 
or spiritall, & hath place in the heart, the 
[/8./] 
third is called Animal, & hath place in y=e= 
brayn. In beasts & in plants y=e= working 
[/9./] 
of the vertue y=t= is called naturall is the 
common working, that ingendereth, feedeth, 
and maketh to growe, as Constant 
saith, and hir ingendring or generation 
(as it is heere taken) is the 
chaunging and tourning of the substance 
of the humour, or the seede into the substaunce 
of a beast or of a plant, done by 
worke of kinde. And this vertue beginneth 
to worke from the time of ingendring 
to the perfecting of the plant or 
beast. But to this kindly generation, two 
vertues serue, that is to wit, Immutatiue 
and Informatiue: For the vertue 
Immutatiue is she, that turneth & changeth 
the substaunce of the seede, into the 
substaunce of all the partes of the plant 
or of the beast. And this vertue maketh 
this chaunging and turning, by meanes 
of y=e= foure first qualities, y=t= is to wit, hot, 
[/10./] 
colde, wet, and dry. For by heate & wet 
she worketh y=e= softer substance, as flesh 
in beasts, flowers and sap in trees: by 
hot and drye, she worketh the rootes in 
plants, and the heart in the beastes: by 
wet and colde, she worketh leaues in 
plantes, and haire in beastes: by colde 
and drye, she worketh in sinewes and 
boanes of beastes, and in stockes and 
ryndes of trees and of plantes. But the 
seconde vertue that is named Informatiua, 
is needfull to the kindly working 
in generations. 
 
[^f.16v^] 
For this vertue ordeyneth and distinguisheth 
the forme and shape of things, 
that is gendred couenably in all y=e= parts. 
For this vertue pearceth what shall be 
pearced, and holloweth what shalbe hollowed, 
and smotheth what is rough, and 
the ouersmooth maketh rough, and shapeth 
and maketh perfect the vtmost side 
of euerye parte. These two vertues, 
Immutatiua and Informatiua work no 
longer then the thing that is ingendred, 
as beast or plant, be fully brought into 
being of kinde. And therefore it needeth 
that the vertue Nutritiua follow anone 
to the same, and keepe the thing that is 
engendred. For the vertue Nutritiua, is 
helper and seruaunt to the vertue Generatiua, 
and maketh the thing that is 
ingendred, growe and stretch in length, 
bredth and thicknesse. And the vertue 
Pascitiua helpeth and serueth to the vertue 
Nutritiua. For she setteleth and maketh 
lyke in the lims the meate that the 
beasts tooke: and repaireth and restoreth 
what that is dissolued & lost by strength 
of heat, or by any passion of y=e= aire. And 
therefore wonderfull kinde made this 
vertue of feeding, helper to the vertue of 
nourishing, and made both seruaunts to 
[/11./] 
the vertue of gendring. Wherefore to 
this vertue of feeding, foure particular 
vertues serue, that is to wit, the vertue 
of appetite, that draweth to the lymmes 
kindly foode. And to the food of the flesh 
it draweth temperaunce of bloude, to 
the foode of the braine and of the lunges, 
temperaunce of fleame, and so of other. 
Also the vertue digestiue helpeth therevnto, 
and departeth in the foode kindlye 
from vnkindly, and deuideth pure from 
vnpure. Also the vertue holding, which 
keepeth the food that is digested, & it that 
is now by worke of kinde concocte or 
sodde, she sendeth to all the limmes, and 
incorporateth and maketh it lyke, & moueth 
it. Also the vertue Expulsiua, putteth 
off the superfluities, that the lyms 
draweth to them, and be not worthy to 
be knit to the lyms. And therefore as 
the vertue of appetite worketh with hot 
and drye, and the vertue digestiue with 
heat and wet, and the vertue retentiue 
with cold and dry: so the vertue expulsiue 
worketh with cold and moyst. 
 
[}Of the vertue vitall. Cap. 15.}] 
 
AFter the vertue of kinde followeth 
the vertue vitall, that giueth lyfe to 
the bodye, whose foundation or proper 
place is the heart: out of the hart commeth 
lyfe to quicken all the lyms. The 
vertue of quick and kindly mouing, helpeth 
the working of this vertue, whereby 
the hart and organe, and smal wayes 
be opened and spread, and drawen together. 
And this dilation or spreading, is 
called the mouing of the heart from the 
middle into all the vtter partes. And so 
contrariwise constriction or the drawing 
together, is called, the mouing from the 
vtter parties towarde the middle of the 
hart, as it is seene in belowes of smiths. 
This vertue of lyfe openeth the heart 
by working of the lunges, and draweth 
in aire to the heart, and sendeth it foorth 
from the hart to y=e= other lyms by small 
wayes. And this vertue by the helpe of 
the vertue that closeth and openeth the 
heart, worketh and maketh breathing 
in a beast. And by breathing the breast 
moueth continually, but the sinewes and 
fleshly parts be first moued. But this 
blast or breath is needfull to the slaking 
of vnkindly heate, and to the food of the 
spirite of lyfe, and also to the gendering 
of the spirit, that is named Animal, that 
giueth feelyng and moouing. For the keeping 
of the kindly heate, is a temperate 
indrawing of colde ayre, and the keeping 
of the spirite that is called Spiritus vitalis, 
of whose temperaunce the spirite 
is increased that is called Animalis. And 
therefore nothing is more needfull to 
keepe and to saue the lyfe, than breath 
well disposed and ordeined in all points. 
All this saith Constantinus in Pantign. 
Without meate and drinke a beast may 
liue for a time, but without breth drawing 
of colde aire, a beast maye not 
endure in good case long, but the breath 
is corrupt and destroyed by straightning 
the pores, through the which the beast 
by a kinde of stranglyng, dyeth. The 
breath is corrupt first by euill disposition 
of the brayne, for if the brayne be 
[^f.17r^] 
let of his office in any wise for defaulte 
of influence of spirites, then opening and 
closing of the heart fayleth: and then 
needes must the beast be stiffeled, as it 
is seene in Apoplexia, and in other such 
causes. TREVISA. Apoplexia is 
an euill, that maketh a man leese all 
manner feeling. Also the same falleth by 
hurting of the heart, when the humours 
be voyded, that should kindly be therein: 
for so the spirites be voyded, and the attraction 
of the aire hath no place. And 
it fareth so in sodain smiting of the kind 
heate into the inner parts of the heart, 
as it happeneth in fearfull men in letting 
bloud, that other while fayle and 
sowne. And so it happeneth of the infection 
of the lyuer. For corruption of 
the lyuer taketh awaye generation of 
cleane pured bloud, that feedeth kindlye 
heate: and if kinde heate fayle, the spirite 
vitall fayleth, and consequently the 
breath particularly or vniuersally is let. 
And so it happeneth in searching & pearcing 
of the lunges, as it fareth in them 
that haue the Tisike, in whom the breth 
straighted, vanisheth awaye by priuie 
hoales, and is not sufficient to temper 
the heate of the heart. And so it fareth 
in all repletion, and specially by sodayne 
filling of the inner veynes of the body: 
as appeareth in them that be sodaynlye 
stiffeled in the water: in whome the 
pores being let, the breath by a vyolent 
ouercomming and renting of the inner 
powers is stopped. Also by great corruption 
of the aire as in pestilence time, and 
in corrupt aire, when the spirite vitall 
eschewing his contrary, closeth himselfe 
in the inner parts of the heart, and so being 
ouerset with aire that is corrupt, may 
not rule the heart and other lymmes of 
the body, but faileth in himselfe, and as 
it were, sodainly vanisheth alwaye: and 
then thereof commeth death. Also of infection 
and corruption of the humors of 
the breast, and of the breast plate and 
bone, as it is seen among those that haue 
the dropsie, pore, scurffe, canker, woolfe, & 
leprosie. Also by the stopping of the organe 
& wayes that commeth from the 
lungs, as appereth in them that haue 
the pirre & stifles, & be putrified and thicke 
breathed, and other such. Also by speciall 
corruption of the heart, as by biting of 
an Adder, or of anye other venemous 
worme: whole venyme pearcing to the 
heart, ouercommeth the kindly heat, and 
so stoppeth the way of the breath. Also 
by too much refraction of hot aire, as 
chaunceth in ouer hot stewes or baths, 
or in the most feruent heate of y=e= Sun, 
that rerefieth & openeth the pores ouer 
measure, and so maketh too great exhalation 
and wasting of the kinde heate: and 
so the colde aire that is drawen in, sufficeth 
not to slake the heate superfluous, 
that is not of kinde, and so the breath is 
let. Also the same chaunceth of the ouer 
colde aire y~ draweth together y=e= brawns 
and the sinewes of the breast: and thereby 
the vertue of breathing is let, as it 
chaunceth in them that sleep vpon snow. 
And the same other while chaunceth by 
stopping of a veyne of the heart, that is 
called Vena concaua, the holow veyne: 
when that veyne is stopped and closed, 
the way of the passage is let, by y~ which 
way and passage, the bloud must go from 
the liuer to the heart, to feede and nourish 
the spirite vitall. For when the 
heate waxeth abundaunt, and the humor 
is withdrawen, the beast is stiffeled: for 
the breath sufficeth not to coole the hart. 
And so it fareth by ouerburdening of 
cholar or of other humors, in the most 
subtill, veynes of the heart, as appeareth 
in sharpe feuers, in the which the breath 
faileth. Also by ouer vyolent strayning 
of the throte and of the arteries: as we 
may see in them that be hanged & strangled, 
in the which the breath being stopped, 
the heart sodainly burneth, & so the 
beast dyeth forthwith. By these meanes 
and many other, the vertue, vitall is let 
by default of breath. Of the vertue spirituall, 
commeth wrath, fighting, indignation, 
spite, and such passions, that arise 
in brute beastes through mouing of the 
spirital vertue with vehemencie, & without 
discretion: but in men such passions 
be ordred and ruled by a certaine reason 
of wit. And of the vertue spiritall or vitall, 
that is said shall suffice. 
 
[}Of the vertue Animall. 
Cap. 16.}] 
 
[^f.17v^] 
THe vertue that is called Virtus animalis, 
hath seate and place in the 
ouermost part of a man, that is to wit, 
in the brayne, and hath three parts. Ordinatiua, 
sensitiua, & motiua. That part 
that is named Ordinatiua, fulfilleth the 
brayne by it selfe alone. For in the first 
part in the formost chamber it ordeineth 
the fantasie or imagination: in the middle 
chamber it ordaineth the vertue estimatiue 
and reason. And againe in the 
vttermost chamber, it maketh perfect the 
memorie, and the memoriall acte: For 
what the vertue imaginatiue shapeth & 
imagineth, she sendeth it to the iudgement 
of reason. And what that reason 
taketh of the imagination, as a Iudge, 
iudgeth & defineth it sending to the memory: 
y=e= memory receiueth those things 
that were put in the intellect or vnderstanding, 
& keepeth & saueth the stedfastly, 
til shee bring them foorth in act and in 
deede. The second vertue that is Sensitiua, 
is formed in this manner. By 
meane of sinewes that be very tender, 
the spirite Animalis passeth forth out of 
the innermost chambers of the braine, 
of whom the sense is formed, and some 
be sent with the spirite Animalis to the 
eyen, to quicken the sight, and some to 
the nosethrilles to increase the smelling, 
and so of the other. Of the wittes, the 
sight is most subtill, for the kinde thereof 
is firie. The hearing hath much of 
the ayre, for it is a sound of y=e= aire, striken, 
& then the more subtill is the smelling, 
for the kinde thereof is smoakie. 
Then y=e= taast, the kinde thereof is watry. 
And the last & most boystous of all, 
that is the feelyng: for the kinde thereof 
is earthie, and is needful to feele hard 
things, as bones and sinewes, rough and 
smooth, colde and hot. Of these senses, 
euery one hath his office, to haue y=e= likenesse 
and shape of the obiects: and what 
they take of that they feele, they present 
to the inwits. TREVISA. The 
obiect of the eye, is all that maye bee 
seene: and all that may be heard is obiect 
to the hearing: and all that maye 
be smelled is obiecte to the smelling, 
and so of the other senses. 
 
[}Of the vertue visible. Cap. 17.}] 
 
THe sight is most simple, for it is firie, 
[/12./] 
and diserneth sodainely things that 
are farre off. The sight is formed after 
this manner. In the middle of the eye, 
that is the blacke thereof, is a certaine 
humour most pure and cleare. The Philosophers 
call it Christalloides, for it 
taketh sodainly diuers formes & shapes 
of colours, as Christall doth. The sight 
is a wit of perceiuing and knowing of 
colours, figures, & shapes, and vtter properties. 
Then to make the sight perfect, 
these things are needfull, that is to wit, 
the cause efficient, the lymme of the eye 
conuenient to the thing that shall bee 
seene, the aire that bringeth the likenesse 
to the eye and taking heede, & easie moouing. 
The cause efficient, is that vertue 
that is called Animalis. The instrument 
and lymme is the humor lyke Christall 
in either eye cleere & round. It is cleere 
that by the cleerenesse thereof, the eye 
may shine about the spirite and aire: It 
is round, that it be stronger to withstand 
griefes, for a rounde shape hath no sides 
or corners, that containeth superfluityes 
that should grieue it. The vtter thing, 
helping to worke, is the aire, without 
which being a meane, the sight maye not 
be perfect. In some beastes to profit the 
sight, needeth the cleerenes of aire, and 
in some the darknesse, and in some the 
meane, not too darke nor too cleere. For 
in Cats needeth darknesse, in Reremice, 
or Bats and in other flieng beasts needeth 
meane, as it shall be shewed heereafter. 
And it needeth to take heede, for if 
the soule be occupied about other things 
then belongeth to the sight, the sight is 
the lesse perfect, for it deemeth not of the 
thing that is seene. And easie mouing is 
needfull, for if the thing that is seene, 
moueth too swiftly, the sight is combred 
and disparced with too swifte and continuall 
mouing, as it is in an eare, that 
seemeth broken in the water, through 
the swifte mouing of the water. Likewise 
also an euen long tree moued swiftly 
seemeth rounde. How the sight is 
made, olde men had diuers opinions. 
 
[^f.18r^] 
In pri. cap. Perspectiue, the Philosopher 
saith, that in three manners the sight is 
made. One manner by straight lynes, 
vpon the which, the lykenesse of y=e= thing 
that is seene, commeth to the sight. Another 
manner vpon lynes rebounded againe: 
when the lykenesse of a thing 
commeth there from to a shewer, and is 
bend, and reboundeth from the shewer 
to the sight. The thirde manner is by 
lynes, the which though they be not bent 
and rebounded, but stretched betweene 
the thing that is seene and the sight: yet 
they passe not alwaye foorthright, but 
other while they swarue some whether 
aside from the straight waye. And that 
is when diuers manner spaces of diuers 
cleerenesse and thicknesse, be put between 
the sight and the thing that is seene: and 
sometime the spaces be of diuers kindes, 
as when one is thicker, another thinner. 
And sometime there commeth a 
meane of another kinde, but the beame 
or bright likenes is broke, but if it come 
vpon a line that falleth straight, & Perpendiculariter 
vppon the same middle 
second occurring. And I cal a line to fall 
Perpendiculariter vpon a plaine thing, 
Ad angulos rectos, that is straight and 
a crosse wise: and vpon a round thing, 
if it fall into the middle thereof. 
 
To the sight, for to speake in the first 
manner, need nine things principally, as 
they be rehersed ther. The first is firmnesse 
or good disposition of the organe or 
instrument of sight. The seconde is a 
thing that may be seene set afore y=e= sight: 
for in y~ manner the sight seeth nothing. 
[/13./] 
but if the same thing, from the partes, 
wherof commeth likenes vpon y=e= straight 
lynes, that fall into the middle of the 
[/14./] 
eye. All which lynes drawen from all 
the parts of the thing that is seene, make 
one steeple, the poynt whereof is in the 
blacke of the eye, and the broad end in 
the thing that is seene as appeareth in 
this figure. 
 
[/15./] 
[^Omitted a figure with an eye inside a circle and above a triange. The figure is labelled by letters A, B, C and D in clockwise direction beginning from the upper left-hand side.^] 
A and B be the Axiltrees, 
when the seeing directlye 
beholdeth the poynt, C. 
when it beholdeth y=e= point 
D. Then these two B C proceeding fro~ 
the eyes, be called axiltrees, for they proceede 
immediatelye from the eyes, by 
meane to the thing seene. The third is 
distance proportional. The fourth D C 
is a certaine stede or place, not too farrre 
from the lyne of the sight. For though a 
thing be right before the eye, if it be too 
far ther from, it is not distinctly known. 
Axis visualis is the cleere beame or line, 
the which is vnderstood to be deduct from 
the middle of the sight, to the poynt of 
the thing seene directly to the opposite, in 
the mids of the sight, as appereth in this 
figure A B. The fift is sadnes or thicknesse 
of the thing that is seene. For if it 
be all cleare and without thicknesse, as 
the aire is, then that is not seene, as saith 
the Author of the science Perspectiue, 
that is, the science of the sight. The sixt, 
is due greatnesse of the thing y=t= is seene. 
For a thing may be so lyttle, y=t= it cannot 
be seene in no space: for there is no sight 
but by appearance shapen top wise, that 
commeth to the eye, y~ which if it be very 
little, it shal occupie a very smal part 
of the sight, & the sight may not see, but 
when a part of the vttermost thereof is 
changed to the likenes of the thing that 
is seene. The vii. is clearnesse of y=e= space, 
that is betweene the eye & the thing that 
is seene: for if the space be thick, it letteth 
the likenesse of that thing, that it may 
not come lightly & in due manner to the 
black of the eye. The viii. is light: for the 
visible lykenesse of the thing, can not 
chaunge the sight without lyght. The 
ninth is time for the sight must haue 
time, as it is proued in Perspectiue: for 
though a thing come sodainly before the 
sight: it is not knowne readily and distinctly 
without some aduisement had, 
the which needeth time and leasure. 
And therefore it needeth also that the 
soule take heede, as it is sayde before. 
Also the Philosopher sayeth, That not 
onelye the lykenesse of the thing seene 
commeth to the sight after a steeple 
wise, but also the lykenesse of the sight, 
strotcheth to the thing that is spread, vppon 
such a steeple in the same place. In 
lib. 19. De Animalibus, Aristotle saith, 
That seeing is nought els, but that 
the sight passeth out to the thing that is 
seene. 
[^f.18v^] 
And thereto agreeth Austen super Genesis, 
lib. pri. & vi. musice, wher he saith, 
that nought commeth from the thing 
that is seene, but the likenesse thereof, 
nor from the sight to the thing that is 
seene, but the lykenesse of the sight. For 
nothing of the substance of the eye commeth 
out, but out of the eye commeth a 
small appearaunce, that is shapen as a 
steeple or a top, and the broad end thereof 
is spread vpon all the vtter parte of 
the thing seene. Also the Author of Perspectiue, 
li. i.proueth, That nothing is 
seene, but by sight that ariseth vpon the 
thing that is seene, & is multiplyed speedelye 
from the saide thing to the eye. 
Therefore needes is required the thirde 
steeple of the same light. And of all these 
three steeples, the poynts are in the eyen, 
and the broad endes in the things that 
be seene. Therefore when the lykenesse 
of the thing commeth to the sight vpon 
these three steeples, then the likenesse of 
lyght and colour, passe by the small fortells 
and humors of the eye, euen to the 
humor that is called Christallinus, like 
Christall, and there the soule beginneth 
to giue iudgement of the thing that is 
seene by that lykenes, but there it is not 
fulfilled and complete, but the lykenesse 
is multiplied forth, euen to the sinewe, 
[/16./] 
that is called Obticus, an hollow sinew, 
that is hid in the vtter part of y=e= braine: 
and ther is the vertue of sight in maure 
and roote in the first and principalll subiects, 
and is one: for els euery thing that 
is seene should seeme two things, because 
of the two eyen, if they continued not 
to one lymme, in the which is the onely 
well of the vertue of sight, and springeth 
to the blacknesse of the eye. The Author 
of Perspectiue sheweth all this. Hee 
sheweth & expresseth another reson of the 
sight. li. 3. ca. 11. He saith, that y=e= spirit visible, 
y=e= eye & the aire, be cleere bodies, the 
whith lyghten euery other, & make euery 
like to other. For the aire, that is 
next the thing that shall be seene, taketh 
a likenesse of the propertie of that thing: 
and in that lykenesse the aire profereth 
it selfe to the eye, whereof the spirit visible 
taketh a lykenesse. For this vertue 
of sight, shewing it selfe to the vttermost 
part of the black of the eye, is ioyned 
to the aire, and is likened and made 
as it were one therewith: & by meane 
of the aire, the color is brought and presented 
to the iudgement of the soule. 
For the aire is lightly chaunged and likened 
by diuersitie of shapes, that are 
therein. As we see, that the aire that is 
nigh the Sunne beame, is coloured and 
dyed, by red cloath set betweene. And 
therefore it is no wonder, though y=e= eye 
take likenesse and shape of a cleere thing 
that is next thereto. Then touching this 
worke it is now to gather shortly, that 
the sight or vertue visible is more subtill 
and more liuely than the other wits, 
and Visus, the sight, hath the name of 
Viuacitas, that is, liuelinesse, as saith Isidore. 
Also it is more worthie than the 
other wits, and therefore it is set aboue 
the other. Also in effect, as it were a 
vertue of fire, it is more mightie than the 
other wits: For the other wits knewe 
things that be neerer, but this wit by his 
vertue comprehendeth things farthest of, 
vnder a right corner and steeple sight, 
iudgeth and discerneth after the nobler 
kinde and disposition of the organe, and 
discerneth in an easie manner betweene 
things to be seene. Wherefore Aristotle 
lib. 12. saith, that good sight and sharp, is 
of temperate humour. And therefore 
Fowles (as the Eagles) with crooked 
clawes, be sharpe of sight. And that is 
through the pure and subtill humour, 
and temperate being, and purifieth that 
that is in the organe of the sight. And 
such Fowles see their pray out of farre 
and more high places. And such Fowles 
flye higher in y=e= aire than other fowles. 
But Fowles that remaine on y=e= ground, 
be not sharpe of sight: therefore they see 
their meate nigh and not farre. Also, 
Lib. 19. he saith, that yeolow eyen be not 
sharpe of sight by daye, nor blacke by 
night, for scarsitie of humors. The yeolow 
eye moueth greatlye, and therefore 
the vertue of sight is feebled. Blacke eyen 
moue lesse, for multitude and plentie 
of humors, and the sight of the night is 
feeble, and the humour by night moueth 
heauely. Therefore the spirite visible is 
closed in, and by humor letted. Also the 
[^f.19r^] 
sight of olde men is not sharpe, because 
their skins are riueled. Whereby it appeareth, 
that the vertue of the sight is 
feeble or strong, by goodnes or feeblenes 
of the lymme. And he saith, When the 
eyen of beasts haue lyds, and the humor 
in the blacke of the eye is cleane and 
temperate, and soft mouing, and the skin 
vpon the blacke, tender, supple or thinne, 
then the sight is sharpe and may see far. 
But yet he discerneth not perfectly farre 
off betweene coulours and difference of 
the body: but yet the sight of such beasts 
is better, than the sight of them that 
haue much humour in the eyen, & haue 
no heling nor eye lyddes. For by continuall 
opening, the spirite Visibilis is to 
diminish, and the blacke of the eye is 
lyghtly grieued and hurt, and so the sight 
is let. But in men helyngs and eye lids 
cause the contrarie. Also there it is sayd, 
that cause of a sharpe sight, in seeing a 
farre, is for the place of the eyen: For 
big and ouerswellyng eyen, be feeble of 
sight, and see not so well a farre: but 
deepe eyen see perfectlye a farre of. For 
the mouing thereof is not departed, nor 
consumed, but goeth foorth right, and the 
spirite visible passeth straight forth to the 
things that be seene. And so if there bee 
no heling nor couering without the eye, 
needes the sight must be feebled, and shal 
not see a farre. Hetherto speketh Aristotle 
lib. 12. & 19. And this that is said generally 
of the properties of the sight, shal 
suffice at this time. For other things 
shall be knowen heerafter, wher we shal 
treate of the propertie of the eye. 
 
