[^Fioravanti, Leonardo: Discourse of the secrets^] 
 
[}THREE 
EXACT PIECES 
OF 
LEONARD PHIORAVANT Knight, 
and Doctor in PHYSICK, ViZ. 
His RATIONALL SECRETS, and 
CHIRURGERY, Reviewed and Revived, 
Together with a Book of Excellent 
EXPERIMENTS 
AND 
SECRETS, 
Collected out of the Practises of severall 
Expert men in both Faculties. 
 
Whereunto is Annexed 
PARACELSUS his One hundred and fourteen 
EXPERIMENTS: 
With certain Excellent Works of B. G. 
a Portu Aquitano. 
Also Isaac Hollandus his SECRETS concerning 
his Vegetall and Animall Work. 
With Quereetanus his Spagyrick Antidotary for GUN-SHOT. 
 
LONDON, 
Printed by G. Dawson, and are to be sold by William Nealand, at his Shop 
at the Sign of the Crown in Duck-lane, 1652.}] 
 
[^Omitted a dedication to the reader, a table of contents, an animadversion on a book by Noah Biggs, a dedication to Culpeper and an epistle to the reader.^] 
[^Extract 1, pp. 1-31^] 
 
[^p.1^] 
[}A SHORT 
DISCOURSE 
OF THE 
SECRETS 
OF THE 
Most Famous Knight and Excellent 
Physitian and Chirurgion, Lord 
PHIORAVANTE.}] 
 
[}CHAP. I. 
What thing infirmitie is, and whereof it proceedeth.}] 
 
SIcknesse or Infirmitie is no other thing then a 
distemperature of humours in the bodies of 
creatures, as well reasonable as unreasonable, 
which are subject to sickness and to death. 
And these doe not proceed of any other 
thing, then of the divers and sundry disorders committed 
many waies, which disorders every man might very well defend 
himself from, if he would. And these disorders which 
are thus committed are very many, whereof I will name 
you a few, and will tell you also of the infirmities which 
follow them. 
 
There are many which disorder themselves in their eating, 
[^p.2^] 
and in the varietie and superfluitie of meats, and so corrupt 
themselves; and of such corruption engendreth ill disposition 
of the stomack, and losse of appetite, and thence commeth 
the Itch, and diseases of the legs, and other like matters, 
which commonly proceed of much repletion. Others disorder 
themselves in the excess of Lecherie, of which disorder 
cometh debilitie of the Reins, want of the sight, weakness of 
the brains, and oftentimes diseases about the Yard, and other 
kinde of infirmities hanging upon the French sicknesse. 
Some disorder themselves in fishing, standing much in the 
water; and of this accesse cometh coldnesse of the Nerves, 
pains of the legs and feet, and such other things which such 
accesse causeth. Other some disorder themselves in hunting, 
in such sort, as they take heat, cold, weariness, hunger and 
thirst; of which disorder there followeth Agues, Opilations, 
Rheums, Numnesse, and such like things; which, with such 
disorder and great travell, commonly are wont to bee caused. 
And in divers other manners men may disorder themselves, 
which at this time I will omit, because I will not be overtedious 
to the Reader. It sufficeth, so that I shew the substance 
of the thing, and to doe it, that every one may understand 
it. If then the causes are infinite, by which infirmities 
or sickness come, and the remedies a great many more 
then enough to cure them: I mean therefore to set down in 
the Chapters following the infirmities, together with the 
remedies, with the which they may be healed, beginning 
with the infirmities which men have from their birth unto 
their death, discoursing of them one after an other. And first 
I will speak of Infants and children, which happen into the 
falling sicknesse assoon as they are born. 
 
[}CHAP. II. 
To help the falling sickness in young Children.}] 
 
THe Falling Sickness is a disease, the which in young Children 
is caused of great humiditie in the head, and the 
cure thereof according to our Order, is with drying things 
[^p.3^] 
which dissolveth that humiditie, and the Remedie is this: Take 
our Cerot Magistrale, and spread it on a cloth the breadth 
of two fingers square, and strew thereon the powder of 
Cantharides: the which of his own quality and nature is attractive, 
and bringeth forth great quantity of water: then lay 
this Cerot in the nuke of the neck, and there let it lye at the 
least eight or ten daies, taking it off every day, and making 
it clean, then lay it on that place again. Likewise you shall 
annoint the head with Oleum Petroleum, the which is very drying 
and penetrative; because it cometh forth of a Mine under 
the earth, the which continually doth boil, and so cometh forth 
with the water, and then is separated. This Oil hath a marvellous 
vertue in himself, that it defendeth the fire, for if a 
man annoint his hands therewith, he may wash his hands with 
molten Lead presently, and never hurt him: and that cometh 
through a certain hidden vertue in that Oil. Also you shall 
understand, that this Oil will burn being set on fire, and yet 
it will not hurt or scald any thing which it falleth on, or 
toucheth it. 
 
[}CHAP. III. 
To help young Children of certain grosse Scabs, that come in the 
head and face.}] 
 
THese grosse scabs that come in the head and face, are 
caused of abundance of fatness, and moisture of the milk 
of the Nurse; for the child being tender and weak of complexion, 
is not apt to digest that superfluous humour, and so 
Nature driveth it forth in that order, with great abundance 
of humiditie, And the best remedie is, That you shall give 
the child every morning one scruple to drinke, of our Elixar 
vitæ, because it is a friend to Nature, and nourisheth the 
bodie, and drieth up superfluous moisture, and so the child 
shall be holpen. Also you shall annoint the child with our 
Magno liquore, the which is temperate of nature, and doth penetrate, 
and so causeth solution of that humour. 
 
[^p.4^] 
[}CHAP. IV. 
To help young Children of the Rupture.}] 
 
THe Rupture is caused two waies, the one through weaknesse 
of the place, and the other through much crying, 
and the remedie is thus: You shall make a Trusse fit for the 
childe that shall come very close, and then let them use our 
Electuarie of Consolida majore, the which is written in my discourse 
of Chirurgerie, with divers of my Medicines: And also 
you shall give the child to drink the powder of Alkimilla 
in wine; and every night you shall annoint the Rupture 
with out Oleum Philosophorum, made of Turpentine and 
Waxe: the which is so peircing, that it warmeth the place that 
is broke, and helpeth it to siccatrize. And so using these three 
Medicines, thou shalt help him quickly, for this have I proved 
an infinite of times, and alwaies have had good successe, 
thanks be to God. 
 
[}CHAP. V. 
Of the small Poxe that come to Children.}] 
 
THe Small Pox are caused of superfluous choller and flegm, 
the which is mixed with the bloud, and so continuing a certain 
time it doth encrease so much, that Nature cannot bear 
it, and so driveth it forth with a great accident of a Fever, 
the which commonly doth continue four or five daies together, 
and then cometh forth certain wheals or bladders full of corruption, 
which within three daies will break and run forth, and 
many drie. You shall understand that there are some so weak of 
Nature that they cannot come forth, but remain within, and so 
having no evaporation outwardly, it doth choak them, and 
so die, and that is the cause why so many creatures from four 
yeers old to ten doe die without help. And therefore I considering 
the true cause of the disease, I have also found out 
the true remedie to help them, and that is this. When the 
child feeleth that Accident, give him presently one drachm 
[^p.5^] 
of our Aromatico to eat: The which hath such force and vertue 
attractive, that it joyning unto the stomack draweth unto it all 
the humours that offend, and carrieth them forth both by vomit 
and sege, and so leaveth Nature eased, and the partie out of 
danger. Then after that anoint him four evenings with our 
Balsamo artificiato, and lay him down to sweat, and so he 
shall be well. 
 
[}CHAP. VI. 
Of the Fersa or Measels that come to young Children.}] 
 
THe Measels that cometh to Children, commonly cometh 
after the small poxe one yeer or two, or three, and is 
caused of the aforesaid cause; and there is no other difference 
between them, but that the person is of more age and 
strength, and both come with an accident of a Fever, but in 
this cause they come forth thicker, and they dry without 
breaking or running. Neverthelesse, this many times causeth 
death, if it be not holpen quickly, and with the remedies appropriate. 
You shall understand that this doth not come with 
so great vehemencie as the other doth. You shall onely defend 
the heart and preserve the stomack from corruption, and 
putrefaction, and so you shall help them quickly. The Remedies 
are these: You shall give them four or five mornings 
this drinke: Take Julep of Violets, +o ii. Rosewater, +o iiii. Oile 
of Vitriol four grains, mixe them and drink it cold: for this is 
a rare Medicine. 
 
[}CHAP. VII. 
Of Waxing Kernels, which are called of some Scrophulæ.}] 
 
THese Kernels that commonly come in the throat of young 
Children, are caused of superfluous melancholy humours 
corrupted, and are a kinde of Ulcer, very hard to be holpen, 
and evill to have, for when they are broke they cause excessive 
pain, because thereunto runneth great abundance of humours, 
[^p.6^] 
and are so hot and corrupt, that it is impossible to 
help them with outward Medicines onely, because they proceed 
of an inward cause. Therefore if thou wilt help them, 
first remove the Cause, and then cure the Effect. 
First therefore thou shalt give them our Sirrup against Melancholick 
humours, written in our discourse of Chirurgerie, 
and then give him a Dose of our Aromatico fasting, and that 
will evacuate the stomack of choler and flegm, and drie up 
those humours that run to the sores. The Medicines that 
you shall use to the sore, are two: The first is our Costick, 
which being laid on the sore, doth mortifie it in four and twentie 
hours, and taketh away the corruption. Note, that you 
may not take away the Askar, untill such time as it falleth 
out of himself, then lay thereon the black Cerot of Godfredo 
de Medic the which Cerot is written also in Galen. And 
in short space it will be holp, as I have proved divers times. 
 
[}CHAP. VIII. 
Of divers sorts of Scabs, and their Remedies.}] 
 
SCabs proceed of divers and sundry causes; Neverthelesse, 
they all are caused of putrefied blood, as you may see by daily 
experience. But the said putrefaction may be caused of 
divers accidents, as by eating much moist and fat meat. It 
may be caused of a corrupt humour of the French Pox, and 
of divers other causes, which I will leave at this time. I herefore 
if thou wilt help any of the aforesaid causes, it would 
be necessary to use Purgations, and Unctions. The Purgations 
are two, and the Uuctions also two. The first Purgation is 
half an ounce of our Electuario Angelico, which take in the 
morning fasting thereon at the least four hours: then take 
for ten daies together our Soluble Sirrup; the dose is from 
+o. iiii. to +o. vi. And then if the Scabs come of the Pox, you 
shall annoint them five or six nights with our Unguento magno, 
and they shall be holpen. But if the scabs come of any 
other cause, you shall annoint them with Unguento de Lithargiro 
simple, after they are well purged. The Uuguent is 
[^p.7^] 
made with Vineger, with the Oil of Roses, and with Litarge. 
 
[}CHAP. IX. 
Against Worms in Children.}] 
 
THis is a rare secret against the Worms, the which I have 
used a long time, and alwaies have had good successe. 
Take the seed of Levant, the which is sweet, and is called in 
Italian Sementina, and the seeds of Carduus Benedictus, and of a 
certain Herb growing on the Sea, called Corolina, ana: stamp 
it very fine, and give thereof one drachm in honey, and it will 
kill the Worms, also thou shalt understand that I have a great 
secret against the Worms, the which I will shew thee; for it 
may be used more safer then any of these Hearbs above named: 
You shall annoint all the bodie over (leaving no part) 
with our Balm Artificiall, and give the Patient thereof to 
drink +Q. i. with Wine or Broth. Thou shalt understand, though 
the child have no Worms, yet the Medicine will doe him 
great good, because it helpeth against all manner of diseases 
that may happen unto children, and also to other persons. 
 
[}CHAP. X. 
Of certain Warts or Carvoli, that come on the Yard of a man.}] 
 
VVHen Children have passed the foresaid diseases, and 
that they come to the age of fourteen yeers, or fifteen, 
or more, and that they begin to fall among women, many times 
by some accidents, they get these Carvoli, or Warts on the 
Yard. And they are of divers kinds, for some come on the very 
skin, and some come on the flesh or end of the Yeard. Some 
are as though they were burnt or scorched, and other like 
Ulcers, and other like Warts. Those that come as though they 
were scorched are of small importance, and may be easily helped, 
for if you touch them once or twice with our Aqua reali, 
they will be whole. Those which are Ulcerated are evil to heal, 
[^p.8^] 
yet you shall use no strong Medicines thereto, but onely dresse 
them with our Magno liquore, and in short time they will be 
whole. Those that are like Warts are very evil to be help'd, for 
you must mortifie them with our Costick, one after another. But 
if they be not mortified at once, touch them again, and again, 
if need require; and when they are mortified, help them 
onely with our Magno liquore, untill they be whole: And with 
this Order I have cured a number. 
 
[}CHAP. XI. 
Of the Running of the Reins.}] 
 
THe running of the Reins most commonly cometh of the 
much use of women, or because those women are corrupted 
with a certain distemperature of heat, that is able to 
corrupt a man using with her. And of this running there 
may grow divers diseases, as you may see by those that are 
troubled therewith, if they be not helped as they ought to 
be. One of the diseases that may come of this, is great pains 
in the back, because it doth weaken the vertue of the Reins. 
There may come also a great burning in the Yeard, and 
botches in the Groin, and such like, all which are hard to bee 
dissolved. The cure of this disease is, You shall take three 
times our Pills called Pillolæ Aquilonæ, every third day once, 
that being done, he shall use this Electuarie seven or eight 
daies together. 
 
Take a certain shell which is smooth, and is called of 
some Calcinelli, and of some Toninole, and of some Telline; 
Take them and burn them, make it into fine powder, 
and take thereof +o i. the buds of Cankers or wild Eglantine 
that the Rose cometh of, it is called in Italian Rose 
canine, +o. di. Hysope of the Mountain +Q. ii. white honie crude 
+o. vi. Make thereof an Electuarie without fire. The dose is, 
+o. i, in the morning fasting, and at night before meat. Note, 
that when you use this Medicine, you shall eat no Pork, nor 
Fish, nor slimie things. 
 
[^p.9^] 
[}CHAP. XII. 
Of a Botch which is caused of a corrupt humour, which is a kind 
of Pox.}] 
 
I Would here shewe the cause more plainer, but that there are 
divers which have shewed it plaine enough: but I will shew 
thee the true secret and remedy to help them. First, Thou 
shalt give them ten mornings together our Soluble Sirrupe, and 
then take our Aromatico three times, that being done, and that 
the botch is open, you shall dresse it with our Magno liquore 
upon a tent, and lay upon the sore our Magistrale Cerotte, and 
with these two medicines thou shalt help it from the beginning 
to the ending, as I have seen the experience divers times. 
 
[}CHAP. XIII. 
Of Pellarella that causeth the haire to fall off.}] 
 
PEllarella, or Morphewe, is a kind of Pox, and is one of the 
first Presagia of that disease, and is a corrupt humour, and 
so drying, that in short time it mortifieth the haire of the head 
and beard, and eye-browes, and causeth them to fall off. You 
shall understand that this disease is such a thing, that it cannot 
be helped by any meanes, except it be taken in time, before 
the haire be mortified. Neverthelesse I will shew a secret unto 
the World, to know when a man hath that disease or no, and 
in what time he may help it that they shall not fall. The secret 
is this, Thou shalt understand, that the beginning of Pellarella, 
is one Carvoli or more that cometh upon the Yeard, the which 
seemeth to be of little importance, because they are holpen 
with ease, but within ten, or fifteen daies after they are whole, 
there will come a certaine alteration in the throate, which will 
not suffer him to swallow his meat, which doth indure commonly 
eight or ten daies, and so goe away by it selfe without 
any medicine, and in that time the haire is mortified, and 
then within two or three moneths the haire will fall: so that 
[^p.10^] 
this is the cause why they cannot be help'd when they fall away, 
for the time was passed before, and the rootes mortified. Therefore 
if thou wilt keep thy self from running into such a great 
danger, thou maiest do it easily if thou take it in time: and 
the remedie is this. When you have had any of these Carvoli, 
and that after there cometh an alteration in the throate, 
then presently purge, and use a defensive unction that the haire 
may not mortifie. You shall purge him nine dayes every 
morning with our Sirupo Magistrale, and fast thereon four 
houres. The dose is from +o iii. to +o vi. that being done, you 
shall give him +o. di. of Electuario Angelica, according to the 
recept, and in the mean time annoint all his face and head with 
our Magno liquore, and doing thus, it is not possible that the 
haire should fall off. This is a secret, the which few men have 
known, and never written of any before this time, and is of so 
great importance, that it were necessarie to be known for an 
universall health, that every man might keep himself from 
this disease. 
 
[}CHAP. XIIII. 
Of Scabbes that come through the Pox.}] 
 
THe Scabbes that come through the Pox, are of divers sorts; 
as you may see by experience: yet all may be helped with 
one order of medicine, because they proceed of no other thing 
then of the evill disposition of that disease. And these most 
commonly do proceed and come after Pellarella, and this is the 
cure. You shall give him our Soluble Sirrup every morning 
warm, with two ounces of Mel Rosarum, and lay him down to 
sweat, and cover him well, and then at night annoint him with 
Vnguento di Lithargiro, and thus doing five, or six daies, he shall 
be helped. For with this order I have helped an infinite number, 
to my great honour, and satisfaction of the Patient. 
 
[^p.11^] 
[}CHAP. XV. 
Of certaine Tumours, or swellings in divers parts of the body.}] 
 
SWellings, which use to come to man, are called Tumours against 
nature, and may come of divers causes, as by cold, 
and they do cause inflammations without paine, and most commonly 
they come in the articular parts: There are others 
which are caused of hot humours, and those are called Risepelli: 
There are other that come of the Pox, and these come in the 
head, and on the legges and armes, and are of evill digestion, 
because they are engendered of corrupt, viscous, and crude 
humours. You shall understand that these three kindes do differ 
in qualitie, and are also helped with sundry medicines. 
Those that come of cold, are windie humours, and may be helped 
with bathes of hearbes, and hot unctions that have virtue to 
dissolve the wind. The hearbes to make the bath, are these: 
Nettles, Mallowes, Pelletory of the wall, Bran and Ashes, and 
make thereof a bath; and then annoint them with our Oleum 
Philosophorum, made of Turpentine and Wax. Those that 
come of hot humours, you shall wash with Aqua Vitæ, because 
it openeth the pores, and dissolveth that heat. Those that 
are come of the Pox, are evill to heale, and his cure must be 
with great purging: and the chiefest thing that you can give 
him, is our potion of Lignum Vitæ, because it doth make thin 
those gross humours, and dissolve the swellings, if it be taken 
according to the order of the recept, the which is written in 
this Book. And so with this order thou shalt help them perfectly. 
 
[}CHAP. XVI. 
Of Ache in divers parts of the body.}] 
 
AChes, that come to divers parts of the Bodies, do spring of 
divers causes, as it is said before of the Swellings, or Tumours: 
but for the most part now in this our time, they are 
[^p.12^] 
caused of the Pox, and those kinds of Aches are evill to be 
helped, because they are engendered of viscous humours, 
and putrefaction of the bloud, and of evill disposition of the 
Liver. And the cure of those Aches, is to purge the body, and 
purifie the Liver: and that thou shalt do with our Soluble Sirrupe, 
taking it ten dayes: and then take our Electuario Angelica, 
or Pillole Aquilone, and then use your wine of Lignum 
sanctum, and sweat therewith as much as thou canst, for it is 
warm and drie, and apperative, and provoketh sweate, and so 
they shall be helpt. But if it happen that this will not help, 
then annoint them three or four times with our Vnguento magno, 
and without all doubt by Gods grace, they shall be helped and 
sound of that disease. 
 
[}CHAP. XVII. 
Of the Cough in the stomack.}] 
 
THe Cough cometh divers and sundry waies to the stomack, 
as by cold, and that is one of the most common 
causes that may be, and is of small importance, because it will 
goe away of it selfe without medicine. There is another kind 
of Cough that troubleth much old folke, and that is of a Catarrhous 
humour. The third kind of Cough written of by us, 
is that which cometh to those that have the Fever Hectick. 
Also there is another kind which is caused of the French Pox. 
And these are the foure kindes of Coughes that do commonly 
happen vnto men and women. The first kind of Cough that 
happeneth unto man through cold, is easie to be helped, for nature 
of it self will help it without any other helpe: but if thou 
wilt helpe nature thou maiest with ease, and that shall be with 
eating drie and apperatiue meates, and drinking good wine, 
and so the Cough will goe away quickly. But the Cough which 
cometh to old folk, is caused of a Catarrhous humour, which 
is nothing else but debilitie of nature, for lack of naturall heat, 
the which causeth the stomack that it cannot digest his meate 
in such order as it should, but ingendreth those superfluous 
humours, that cause the Cough. And this must be helped with 
[^p.13^] 
keeping of diet; that is, to eat little meat, and to use thing 
that warm the stomack and help digestion, and this thou 
shalt doe in this order. Take +Q. ii. of our Aromatico, which 
hath vertue to evacuate the stomack, and then use our 
Quintessence of Wine, and annoint the stomack with our 
Balm artificiall, and so shalt thou help this kind of Cough. 
The third kind of Cough, which is caused of the Fever Hectick, 
is of evill nature, that I dare say nothing nor shew a 
Medicine, because the most part that are troubled therewith, 
go to Church and never return again to their houses, as you 
may see by experience. The fourth kind of Cough is devilish 
and evill to help, because it is caused of the Pox, and 
doth not onely hurt the stomack, but causeth great pains to 
the partie beside. Neverthelesse, thou shalt understand that 
this is easie to he helped by Gods grace, for them that know 
the true secret, which is thus: You shall give him eight or ten 
daies together our Soluble Sirrup, then take two drachms of 
our Aromatico, and then perfume him with Cinabar five or six 
mornings, or so long untill that he feel pain in his gums, and 
then hee shall be whole. For this is a great secret, to help 
that kind of Cough caused of the Poxe, as I have proved a 
thousand times with good successe. 
 
[}CHAP. XVIII. 
Of the white Scab that cometh in the Head.}] 
 
THis Scab is of an evill corruption in the superiour parts, 
which is caused of abundance of moisture, and heat of the 
Stomack, which sendeth these vapours up to the head, and so 
goeth out that way. This is of two kindes, the one is hot and 
dry, and that is with a certain white crust, without any other 
kind of putrefaction: the other kind is hot and moist, and 
that causeth a certain crust, which is full of matter under it; 
so that as they differ in qualitie, they differ also in cure. 
Those that are hot and dry, must have Medicines that cool 
the heat, and extinguish the drinesse, and this thou shalt doe 
with Sirrup of Citarch, and purge often with Cassia, and use 
[^p.14^] 
cooling things, as Succorie, Melons, Lettice, and such like. The 
other kinde which is hot and moist, you must first help 
the heat, and then dry the humiditie, which you shall doe 
with vomiting, and purging, and keeping diet, and eating of 
drying meats. The first drying scab you shall annoint onely 
with our Magno liquore, which without help of any other 
thing, will cure it after they be purged, as is before said. 
The second kind you shall help, after the bodie is purged 
with our Cerot Magistrale, strewing thereon Cantharides in 
fine powder, which have vertue attractive; by which means 
it mundifieth the head of that superfluous humiditie, and 
then annoint him with our Vnguento magno, and in short 
space it will be whole, because it is cold and drie. And so 
by this means thou mayest heal these two kinds of Scabs, as 
I have done divers times, having respect to the cause. Ye 
shall understand that this disease is many times taken from the 
Nurse, the which is infected with the Pox, and so her milk 
being corrupted, it corrupteth the child, and therfore there 
must be good consideration thereof in the cure. 
 
[}CHAP. XIX. 
Of Risipella.}] 
 
THis Risipella is an inflammation with swelling and rednesse, 
the which commonly cometh in the face, arms and 
legs, and in no other places of the bodie, and it is caused of 
alteration of the blood, as I will shew you an example by a 
pot that you seeth your meat in: When it is set on the fire, 
and is full of liquor, lacking one or two inches of the top, 
and when it beginneth to boil through the great heat of 
the fire, it runneth over the pot: and so by the like example 
we may say, that Risipella is a great alteration of the blood, 
through superfluous heat; and this occasion of heat proceedeth 
of great quantitie of flegm, that is in the stomack; for 
because assoon as they have vomited the flegm, they are 
helped of Risipella, for I have seen the experience thereof 
divers times. Therefore give them of the juyce of Elder-Roots 
[^p.15^] 
+o. iiii. and of Honie of Roses +o. ii. in the morning fasting, 
for this purgeth the Stomack of flegm, and cooleth the 
blood, then hold the parts over the fume of hot water, and 
bathe it with pure Aqua vitæ, distilled without flegm: for 
this is one of the most excellent Medicines that can be found, 
because it is aperative and attractive, and presently dissolveth 
that alteration, and taketh away the pain. Also it would be 
good to use five or six mornings to drinke +o. i. of Julep of 
Violets, with six grains of Vitriol, for this mundifieth 
the stomack, and causeth digestion, and of himself is most 
wholsome, for that it mortifieth all hot diseases. 
 
[}CHAP. XX. 
Of the Squinancie.}] 
 
THe Squinancie is a certain alteration in the throat, which 
is caused of a flatuous or windie humor, and this cometh 
with such a vehemencie, that if it be not holpen quickly, it 
will choak him, for it stoppeth the conduites where the breath 
cometh through, and letteth a man to swallow his meat, and 
the Remedie is this: Take of our Electuario angelica, +o. di. 
and then touch the throat within with our Aqua reale three or 
four times, and without annoint it with Oleum Philosophorum 
of Turpentine and Wax, because it is very drying: And thus 
using the aforesaid remedies, thou mayest help them without 
letting blood, or any other thing in short space: for 
herewith I have cured a great number. You shall understand, 
that oil of Linseed is very appropriate to that matter, if you 
give the Patient four ounces. Also the tooth of a Bore made 
in powder, and drunk the quantitie of +Q. ii. in Linseed oil 
helpeth the Squinancie. These I have proved divers times. 
 
[^p.16^] 
[}CHAP. XXI. 
Of the Emerodes that come in the Fundament.}] 
 
THese in Naples be called Moricole, and in Venice; Maroelle; 
and in Spain, Almorane; and are an alteration of blood 
in the Emorodiall veins, which many times come forth in 
the lower parts with great pain, and these are caused of 
putrified humours of the bodie, and corruption of the blood, 
which corruption many times cometh of the Pox, or such 
like diseases. There are also divers kinds, but principally 
two: The one sort is within the fundament, and causeth great 
pain when they go to stool: the other sort cometh forth 
of the fundament, and are not so painfull as the other are. 
To cure them that are within the Fundament, you shall give 
the Patient eight or ten mornings our Syrupo Magistrale, and 
then let him take of our Aromatico, +Q. ii. and use Glisters 
wherein is put half an ounce of Aqua reale at a time, and so 
thou shalt help them. The best remedie for those that come 
forth is to make incision, or to make a little hole in them, 
that the blood may come forth which is putrified, and so by 
evacuation thou shalt help them. Also thou shalt understand, 
that vomiting is necessarie in the cure of them both, because 
it openeth the veins. Also oil of Eggs, and oil of Frankincense, 
and oil of Linseed are very profitable to annoint 
them therewith to ease the pain. 
 
[}CHAP. XXII. 
A goodly and easie way to help all sorts of Fevers according to 
our Order.}] 
 
THe Fever Quotidian or continuall Fever, or any other kind 
whatsoever, do proceed onely of two principall causes, that 
is, of corruption and putrefaction, as you may perceive how 
that when the Fever is entred, the Patient is all corrupted, 
beginning at the stomack, the which is first corrupted. For 
proof you may alwaies see that assoon as a man is sick, presently 
[^p.17^] 
he looseth his appetite and cannot eat; afterward it 
corrupteth the blood, for by experience, if you let them blood, 
it is alwaies found corrupted, and not as it is in a sound 
bodie. It corrupteth also the senses, so that the sick is not stable 
senced, nor cannot sleep, or rest by any means whilst he 
hath that accident. That it is caused also of Putrifaction 
you may see by them that have the Fever. For alwaies when 
the Fever cometh, presently the stomack doth putrifie, and spitteth 
forth filthy spittle: Also it doth putrifie the bodie, because 
their Excrements that they void are putrified and stinking more 
then others, and their Urine putrified and alterated from his 
naturall course. Then seeing the Fever is caused of corruption 
and putrifaction, there are four things necessarie to be done in 
the cure thereof. The first is, to evacuate the stomack: The second, 
to purge by urine: The third, to evacuate the bodie: And 
the fourth is, to purge by sweat: Which four operations may 
be done one after another with great ease, and will restore 
the Patient to his health. But you shall understand, that all 
cannot be holp, for that Cod almightie hath made us to die, 
and when that time cometh, medicines will doe no good, but 
if that time be not yet come, by the help of God, with these 
Medicines he shall be restored to his former health. The first 
thing, as I said, is to take a vomit, which doth evacuate the 
stomack of choler and flegm, that doth much offend the bodie 
diseased: After that, evacuate the bodie with those things 
that the Physician thinketh most convenient for that purpose, 
for there be many purgations to dissolve the body, and to 
evacuate malign humours: After that, make him purge by 
urine. Fourthly, and last of all, give him medicines that open 
the pores, and that provoketh sweat. And thus with 
these four operations, the most part shall be holp of that 
infirmitie with great ease, and in short time: And as I have 
said, this is a most true order that never faileth, except (as I 
said before) when the Lord will call them. And as for these 
medicines, you shall find them written in this book severally 
with their uses and quantities. 
 
[^p.18^] 
[}CHAP. XXIII. 
Another cure of the said Fevers,}] 
 
IF thou wilt help the said Fevers according to our order: 
when the Patient is greatly alterated therewith, thou shalt 
use five waies wherewith thou shalt easily help them, the which 
are these. The first as I said before is Vomit: the second evacuation 
of the body: the third evacuation by urine: the 
fourth to provoke sweat: and the fifth by unction. Neverthelesse 
each of these alone is sufficient to help the said Fever: but yet using 
them all five, there is no doubt but thou maiest dissolve any 
evill sort of maligne Fever, except as I said before, God will call 
them out of this World: but to the purpose of the cure. First thou 
shalt set on five or six boxing glasses, according to the complexion 
and age of the infirmed: then the next morning give 
him one dose of our Electuario angellica, with Sirrup of Sorrell, 
and water of Sorrell. Then the next morning following give 
him some Sirrup appropriate for that disease, and put thereto 
+o. ii. of Sirrupo Magistrale, with Rhabarbe: that being ended, 
give him three or foure times Julep of Violets with Oyle of 
Sulphur, made per Campana, the dose of the Julep is +o ii. and of 
the Oyle of Sulphur four or five graines mixed together, and 
this you shall take in stead of Sirrup betimes in the morning, 
and it will make them sweat and purge by urine, which are most 
necessary for the sick: and in the mean season you shall annoint 
them every night with Magno liquore, which will make them rest 
well, and take away all their paines throughout the body, and 
so by this meanes the Fever shall be perfectly taken away. Also 
take great heed that you take no more blood then is necessary, 
neither let them keep any straight Diet, but let them keep 
a good regiment of Life. But when this Feaver doth come 
through some other cause, then it were necessary to remove 
the principall cause, if thou wilt cure them: For if it be caused 
of a Catarre, of necessitie you must dissolve the Catarre first, 
and then help the Fever. Also if the Fever be caused of a 
wound; it were necessary first to take away the pain of the 
[^p. 19^] 
wound, and then the Fever will depart. And thus in every 
kind of Fever, it is most necessary to know the originall from 
whence it is caused: And this is the true way to cure these infirmities, 
which I have proved infinite times. 
 
[}CAAP. XXIIII. 
Of the continuall Fever.}] 
 
THere are many kindes of Fevers, therefore I will mention 
of them that are most known unto the world, and first of 
the continuall Fever, that is of those that are onely hot, and 
continue in one order both day and night, the which is caus'd 
of alteration and corruption of the humours in the body, which 
engender so much corruption in the stomack, and in the blood, 
that they cause that accident of Fever: And the very order to 
cure it is this. In the beginning of the alteration let him keep 
a good diet, and drink no wine: and that is done because that 
corruption is apt to corrupt all that entereth into the body during 
that alteration, and therefore meates of great substance 
or nourishment, are sooner turned into greater putrifaction in 
the body: But when the third day of the Fever is past, then 
take of our Aromatico +Q. ii. which will evacuate the stomack 
of that corruption: and that day that you take this Aromatico, 
drink as much crude water as you will: which is done because 
the stomack shall remaine cleare washed of that corruption, 
which being done, you shall give him three or four mornings 
our Soluble Sirrup, and give him good meates, and let him 
drink Wine, because it cannot hurt in any wise, for it cannot 
putrife in the body: For the sirrup doth evacuate every day 
the corruption: and when the blood is alterated of that putrifaction, 
it goeth to the veines, and so disperseth through the 
whole body. It would be good to set on boxing glasses to 
take away blood, and also to use drying unctions, as our Balsamo 
artificato, and Oyle of Turpentine and Wax, and thus doing 
(if the Patient be not called of God) thou shalt helpe 
him within short space. And this is the true secret to use for 
[^p.20^] 
that Fever, which I have revealed unto the world, that every 
one might have it at their pleasure. 
 
[}CHAP. XXV. 
A great Secret that helpeth the continuall Fever.}] 
 
THese Fevers that are not accidentall, that is, not caused of 
a wound or imposthume, or other kind of infirmitie apparent, 
are caused of a certaine humour between the skin and the 
flesh, which would have exhalation: as you may see by experience 
in this kind of Fever, how that sweats and boxing is 
very appropriate to their solution. And in this case I will 
shew thee a great remedie, with which after convenient purging 
thou mayest helpe in manner all those kindes of Fevers. 
And this is the remedie: Take Oippa ofir, the which is a simple 
well known to all the world, take of that hearb a small quantity, 
and stampe it a little, and lay it upon the wrist, and bind it 
hard, and there let it lye untill it have made a blister full of 
water, which you shall break, and there will come forth great 
abundance of water, and by that place the Fever shall be dissolved. 
And the reason is, because it evacuateth that humour 
which engendereth the accident: then the cause being removed, 
the effect will cease, and the Patient shall be whole. 
 
[}CHAP. XXVI. 
Of the Fever Tertian.}] 
 
THe Fever Tertian doth not continue in one manner, but 
cometh and goeth, and is caused of chollerick humours: 
for assone as the fit cometh it moveth choller, and in many 
it provoketh vomite. There are two sorts of those Fevers, 
The one cometh with an accident, first cold, and then hot: 
and the other sort cometh alwaies hot, when the accident cometh: 
and sometimes that accident cometh twice a day, and that 
is called a double Tertian, which is hard to helpe, because letting 
blood, the diet, and purging of the body are all hurtful and 
[^p.21^] 
contrary to that disease, therefore I will open to thee a secret 
wherewith thou shalt help them. Thou shalt give him three hours 
before the fit +Q +s. of Eleborus niger in powder, with +o. i. of Mel 
Rosarum: and after it drink +o. i. of common water, and this 
you shall take twise, and then use this potion ten dayes every 
morning. Take Julep of Violets +o. i. fine Aqua vitæ +o. di. 
Oyle of Sulphur, that is perfect iiii. graines, and mixe them 
together, this mundifieth the stomack, and purgeth by urine, 
and provoketh sweate, and warmeth the blood: which effects 
are necessary to the solution of that Fever, giving you great 
charge that you keep no straight diet in any wise, because it 
weakneth the stomack, cooleth the blood, and hindereth nature, 
so that the Patient can scarce be helped. But with our 
order thou shalt help the most part of that Fever. 
 
[}CHAP. XXVII. 
Of the Fever of Repression.}] 
 
THis Fever is an alteration of the blood, which is caused of 
being over hot, and then cold and this is called a Fever propter 
accidens, and is not holp as the other Fevers are: for thou shalt 
help onely the Repression, and the Fever will go away without 
any other help. Thou shalt give the Patient of our Aromatico, +Q. 
ii. that being done, give him two Sirrups every day, the one in 
the morning, the other at night two houres after Supper, as 
hot as you may suffer to drink, and these are the Sirrups. 
Take Sirrup of Quinces, Stecados, Mel Rosarum, ana, +o. i. 
new Muste boyled, +o. vi. and in the mean time while you take 
this Sirrup, it were necessary to make a moist bath with hearbs, 
as Nettles, Mallowes, Egrimonie, Carduus Benedictus, Rosemary, 
Origanum, and Calamint, ana +L. iii. Commin, Anniseede, Coliander, 
Sileris montani, ana +L. i. then boyle all those in a great 
Kettle with water, and then let the Patient sit over the fume, 
and cover him with clothes untill he sweat. And thus you 
shall do three times one day after another: and thou shalt 
helpe him perfectly, as I have had experience. 
 
[^p.22^] 
[}CHAP. XXVIII. 
Of the Fever Hectick.}] 
 
THis Fever is a viscous and putrified humour in the stomack 
and lunges, the which is caused of a debility and weaknesse 
of nature that cannot digest the offensive humours. 
There are divers sorts of this Fever, neverthelesse they are all 
evill to be holpt, and are counted uncurable. Neverthelesse, 
I will shew thee some excellent remedie very wholsom, that may 
pleasure them, although they are nigh their death. The first 
medicine that shall do them good, is our Electuario angellica, 
of which you shall give halfe an ounce in the morning fasting, 
for this presently joyneth unto the stomack, and draweth to 
it all the offensive humours, and carrieth them forth by vomit 
and seege, and so leaveth the stomack eased and clean, that 
the Patient thinketh himself whole: But yet the stomack beginneth 
againe to fill with a great suffocation, that will not let 
the Patient take rest, so that this medicine may well ease them, 
but not helpe them quite. Also our Elixar vitæ doth much 
good in this disease, and also our Balme artificial: if you annoint 
the stomack therewith at night when you go to bed. Also use 
our distillation for the Hectick: these may all helpe a little 
but not cure. The Fever Hectick may come also of a Catarre, 
of the Pox, and such like causes, and then they require medicines 
according to the cause: as if the Fever be caused of a 
Catarre, let them use our Magno liquore to drink, the dose is one 
ounce at a time, with halfe an ounce of Mel Rosarum, and these 
use for a moneth at the least. And if it be caused of the Pox, 
let him take Sarsaparilla, or Lignum vitæ, Pillole Aquilone, or 
such like that will helpe the Pox: and thus doing, the cure 
will have good successe: but when it is caused of debility of 
Nature (as is said before) they spit blood untill the end. 
 
[^p.23^] 
[}CHAP. XXIX. 
A new order wherewith thou maist cure and help the most part of the 
Fever Hectick.}] 
 
MAny have thought that the Fever Hectick is altogether 
desperate and uncurable, and that by no meanes it might 
be resolved: But because it is caused of divers and sundry accidents, 
I say that many kindes may be helped and cured: For 
I find it may come of infinite causes, as aforesaid. There is 
one kind that cometh through the weaknesse of nature it self, 
and that beginneth to destroy the Lunges, and that kind I find 
to be incurable, because it is caused of the evill nature of the 
man, and not through any accident, and in that case I beleeve 
it cannot be dissolved by any meanes. Also there are many 
other Hecticks caused of the French-Pox, of which I have seen 
and cured an infinite, and they are easie to cure: For curing 
the Pox, the Fever will be dissolved. There is another kind 
that dependeth of a salt humour, and some other of a Catarre, 
and of many other things: Therefore if thou wilt help 
the said Fever, it were necessary to know the true cause whereof 
it dependeth, the which in my judgement is hard to be 
known, if that the Patient himself do not tell it: and therefore 
it is nccessary for the Physitian to examin them well, and to 
enquire whether they have had any kind of spice of the Mal 
Francese before, whereof the said Fever might have his original: 
and so doing, he with his judgement may be resolved of the 
nature of that infirmity: and if it chaunce that the said Fever had 
his originall of the Pox, the Phisician may resolve it with medicines 
appropriate for that disease, with purging him strongly, 
and giving him Lignum Sanctum, or Salsa pariglia, and 
also perfume him with Olibanum Sinaber and Mirrha, ana: and 
so by the help of God, and meanes of these medicines thou 
shalt help them all, or at least the most part of that kind of 
Fever Hectick. But if the Phisician find that kind of Fever 
to be caused of a Catarre, then use the medicines that help 
the Catarre, and so the Fever shall be whole. But when he 
[^p.24^] 
findeth it to be of the weaknesse of Nature, in that case there 
is no help that is sure. Neverthelesse, I have cured some of 
them with great difficultie, and with Medicines of great efficacie: 
And that was with giving them every morning one 
drachm of good Sope in tablets according to our invention, 
and that they used for a moneth together: the which Sope 
hath vertue to drie that abundance of spittle, and to heal 
the Lungs ulcerated, and it also strengthneth the Stomack 
marvellously: After that I caused them to use our distillation 
of a Hen for the Hectick, and this they did continually drink: 
Also I caused them to use our Balsamo artificiato to annoint 
therewith every night after Supper, the which is peircing, 
and comforteth and augmenteth naturall strength, and comforteth 
much the infirmed: Also I caused them to use Aromatico 
Rosato, the which comforteth the weak Stomack. 
And by this meanes I have help'd some of them as it is well 
known. 
 
[}CHAP. XXX. 
Of the Fever Quartane.}] 
 
THe Fever Quartane is a motion of a certain accident cold 
and hot, which is caused of melancholie humours corrupted 
and putrified, the which every third day doth cause that accident 
to come, and beginneth with great cold and continueth 
a good while, and then cometh hot. And this Quartane 
both the ancient Doctors, and these in our time doe count 
in a manner uncureable. Neverthelesse, I that have sought 
alwaies to help those diseases which were counted uncurable, 
amongst the rest have found the true and perfect cure for the 
Quartane Ague, and to dissolve the melancholie humours, 
which is done with three Medicines that are rare and marvellous 
to dissolve any Quartane. The first is, Mercurie Precipitate 
without corrosive, giving thereof ten grains, with half 
an ounce of Sugar Rosate, and that day eat little meat; that 
being done, take a pound of Iva Artetica, and boit it in eight 
pound of white wine, and common Honey one pound, untill a 
[^p.25^] 
third part be consumed, and of that drink morning and evening 
six ounces warm one hour after supper: And in the 
mean time annoint every night his Reins with our Balsamum 
artificiall. Thus doing thou shalt help any Quartane. I have 
also found other rare waies to cure this Fever Quartane, as 
hereafter followeth. 
 
[}CHAP. XXXI. 
The Order to help the Fever Quartane of all sorts, in short 
time.}] 
 
THe Fever Quartane is caused of a melancholie humour 
as aforesaid, with a continuall distillation of the head, descending 
to the stomack, and augmenting the evill disposition 
of the body; and by reason of that distillation, provoketh 
much sweat when the accident of the Fever cometh: And 
likewise that distillation causeth such cold in the Marrow of 
the Reins and Back, and an infinite of other disorders which 
trouble the bodie greatly. But to avoid all these inconveniences, 
and to dissolve wholly that accident of the Quartane 
according to our order, because I have helped more then 
any Physitian of our time. I will shew thee how with these 
Remedies following thou shalt help them, though not all, yet 
the greater part truly most miraculously, and the Order to 
dissolve it is thus. You shall give the Patient a dose of our 
Aromatico in the morning to eat, and drink thereon two or 
three ounces of good wine, and fast thereon six hours, and 
this Medicine is most convenient the day of the fit, because 
the infirmitie removeth great quantitie of humours, and the 
medicine evacuateth them; and thus giving it three times in 
the day of the fit, it will work a great operation. But if 
the Fever be in a person of melancholie complexion, then 
it is where it would be; for you may see that in a melancholie 
person, the Fever hath more force, then in any other 
complexion, which proveth, that that Fever, and that complexion 
are most like: But in that case you shall cure them 
in this Order. You shall give him ten or fifteen daies our 
[^p.26^] 
Sirrup against the melancholie humour, which is written in 
this Book, which you shall take two hours before day hot, 
and then sleep one sleep thereon, and thus doe every morning, 
and every night annoint all the parts of the body with 
our Balsamo artificiato, and he shall be holpen. But if it happen 
that this doth not cure him, let not to give him this remedie, 
which most surely (God willing) will help him, and that 
remedie is our Aqua Balsami, of which he shall take every 
morning two Drachms fasting, and so continue untill the Fever 
be gone quite: so that of force using all the aforesaid remedies, 
the Fever must needs depart. And the reason is this, 
that our Aromatico evacuateth the stomack of all impediments 
by vomit, and letteth the descension of the head, which 
causeth the accident. Our Syrrup evacuateth the melancholie 
humour, and dissolveth it by his proper qualitie. Our Balsamo 
the which is subtile and penetravive drieth and comforteth 
the place offended, in such order, that it casteth forth all 
the matter that may offend Nature. Our Aqua balsami also 
being drunke, doth dry the evill humours, and augment 
strength, in so much that it quite extinguisheth the said Quartane. 
And this may be used in all manner of persons, and in 
all times of the year without any doubt of inconvenience: 
and it is a new remedie that never was set out before of the 
Ancients, which I have used to the great profit of the Patients. 
 
[}CHAP. XXXII. 
Another discourse of a marvellous secret against the said Quartane.}] 
 
THe Fever Quartan is caused of melancholie humours, 
which hath his fit coming every third day, first cold 
with great thirst, and then cometh the heat, which remaineth 
with some longer then with other some, and the cause, 
hereof is hard to be known. Neverthelesse, I seeking out continually 
naturall things, and the qualitie of the accidents, I 
doe find that this Fever beginneth alwaies in some particular 
[^p.27^] 
place, as in the head with a certain pain round about it, or 
in the nose and ear, or in the Reins and Legs: And therefore 
he that can find out the place where first beginneth the 
accident, may easily help them, because the Fever is dissolved 
with two things onely, that is, exhalation and exsication, and 
herein consisteth the secret. The order to make the Exhalation 
shall be thus: Make a Cerot of Frankincense, Pitch, 
Wax, Turpentine, Myrrh and Aloes, upon the which Cerot 
you shall put the powder of Cantharides, and then lay 
it upon the place where they feel the Fever come first, that is 
on the particular part where the accident cometh, and this 
you shall change twice, except the first day of the Fever. And 
to make the exsication, give him every day in the morning to 
drinke, +o. di. of our Aqua balsami for twelve daies, and with the 
Balsamo artificiato annoint every night his Stomack and 
Reins, and so he shall be helped, giving you charge also 
that before you use these Medicines, that he take three times 
our Aromatico, and so he shall be quite helped. 
 
[}CHAP. XXXIII. 
A secret to help all Fevers in their beginning.}] 
 
VVHen the Fevers are new begun or taken, and that the 
putrefaction is not yet confirmed, then may it be helped 
with great ease, but after they have taken their beginning, 
they are hardly helped. Therefore when the Fever is new begun, 
you shall give them +Q ii of our Aromatico fasting in the morning: 
and the next day about the same hour you shall give them +o. i. 
of our Vegitabile Sirrup: and the third day you shall give 
them four Drachms of our Electuario angelica with broth, 
the which taketh away the Fever altogether. And this operation 
intendeth onely to the continuall Fever, Quotidian, Tertian, 
and putrified or pestilentiall, but not to the accidentall, 
or Hectick, nor Quartane: For these three kinds are much 
differing from the rest, because the accidentall is caused of 
another infirmitie anterior or going before. The Fever Hectick 
[^p.28^] 
is caused of weaknesse of nature, and the Quartane is 
caused of great quantitie of melancholicke humours, and they 
are cured by contrary meanes unto the first. The accidentall 
are cured with helping the principall infirmitie: The Hectick 
is cured by helping of Nature, and preserving the Liver and 
Lungs from putrefaction: The Quartane is cured with Vomits, 
Unctions, Cerottes, and drying drinks, and these are great 
secrets to be known: For in this Chapter consisteth a great 
part of Physick, and Chirurgery if you consider well thereon. 
 
[}CHAP. XXXIIII. 
A Secret of one Simple that helpeth in manner all Fevers.}] 
 
THere are an infinite of medicines that dissolve the Fever, 
but above all other this seemeth to me of great authority, 
because it helpeth it with such ease, that it is to be wondered at. 
With this remedie through the Divine goodness, I have cured a 
great number, and the Secret is this. You shall gather in the Moneth 
of August a certain hearb, which the Italians do call Oreula, 
which you shall drie and make into powder, of the which you 
shall give the sick as much as will lie upon a sixpence, with water 
or wine, and give it warm in the morning, and fast thereon 
three or four houres, and thus doing, the Patient shall be 
helped with great ease, and in short time: for this is a great 
secret which may be used in all times and in every occasion, 
and alwaies it worketh an operation in one manner. 
 
[}CHAP. XXXV. 
Of the Gout.}] 
 
THe Gout which cometh to men, is a distemperature and 
alteration, which is caused of corrupt and undigested humours, 
and also of feeding on meats that nourish much, and 
then to use no exercise, as you may see by the most part of 
them that be troubled with that disease. Also this disease, 
both of the old and new Doctors hath been counted uncurable, 
[^p.29^] 
as it is known to every one: But yet I, which have done 
nothing else but sought out the nature and qualitie of things, 
have found divers inventions in sundry Arts, as thou mayest 
read in my Caprici Medicinali, and so amongst the rest, I have 
found (through the help of God) the true and perfect Secret 
to help the Gout, so that it shall never come again: Of which 
disease I have cured a great number in divers Cities of the 
world, as in Palermo, in Sicilia, in Messina, and in divers places 
of Calabria, in Naples, in Rome, and in Venice, as it is well 
known unto the most part of the Inhabitants of those Cities. 
 
[}CHAP. XXXVI. 
A Note concerning the Cure of the Gout, taken out of a Letter which 
this Authour wrote unto a certain noble Seigniour, the Duke of 
Vrbine.}] 
 
First you shall understand, that the Gout of what kind soever 
it be, either hot or cold, or of any other temperature, 
they all come of one onely cause, although they work divers 
Effects, which Effects come through the complexions of them 
that have that infirmitie: As for example, to shew it more 
plainly, you may see that in fat men, the Gout cometh alwaies 
with inflammation and redness and great pain: In lean persons 
it cometh alwaies with pains, but with lesse inflamation. In cholerick 
and melancholie persons, it cometh with tumours, and 
that is Nodosa. And the cause of this infirmitie is, of an evill 
qualitie ingendered in the stomack, in the Liver, and in the 
blood: And the cure thereof, is to ease the stomack of that 
evill, and to purge the Liver and the blood, and to mittigate 
the pain: All which thou mayest doe with these three Remedies 
following, viz. our Pillole Magistrale, our Vnction for 
the Gout, and our Quinta essentia solutivo: for the Pills doe 
discharge the stomack, and our Quinta essentia solutivo purgeth 
the Liver and the blood, and our Vnction taketh away the pain, 
for if you remedie the cause which is onely one, the effect will 
cease. As concerning the Gout you shall cure it in this Order: 
First, when you feel the pain begin to come, you shall 
take two doses of those Pills in the morning fasting, one day 
[^p.30^] 
after another, or if you will, rest a day or two according to 
your strength, that being done, you shall take every morning 
+Q. ii. of our Quinta essentia solutivo in half a Porringer 
full of the broth of Veal, and a little Sugar, and this take 
five hours before meat; and keep no streight Diet, but eat reasonably, 
and every night after Supper annoint the grief with 
our Unction for the Gout, and thus through the help of God, 
and the vertue of these Medicines, the Gout shall be cured. 
 
[}CHAP. XXXVII. 
Another Discourse upon the same infirmitie of the Gout, and the 
Order to cure it, taken out of his Book called, Thesaurro della 
Vita Humana.}] 
 
ALthough the wise & learned of the world, have alwaies beleeved 
that the Gout is of divers kinds, yet they have all 
been deceived; for that infirmitie is one onely, and cometh of 
one onely cause, although in some it come in manner of Phlegmone, 
and in some other like Risipilla, and in other Nodosa, and in 
other with pain without alteration, and in some other in divers 
manners; all which is caused through the diversitie of complexions, 
for that one man is flegmatick, the other sanguine, 
the other cholerick, and the other adust, and thus by these 
means, many have thought the Gout to have been of divers 
kindes, whereas indeed it is onely one, and is cured with one 
onely order, and dissolved altogether for ever; for that infirmitie 
is caused of no other then of rotten humours caused 
of indigestion, and to say truth, we see that the said infirmity 
never commeth in manner, but unto those persons that 
feed well on meats of great nourishment, which for want of 
exercise, that Nature might digest it, they wanting naturall 
heat, cannot have their orderly digestion, and for that cause 
the humours doe ingrosse out of measure, and ingender that 
infirmitie, and then Nature that alwaies seeketh to ease her 
self of that which offendeth her, driveth forth that humour 
unto the extream parts, as the hands, and feet, or other particular 
[^p.31^] 
parts, and this is the Gout: And these humours many 
times are cause of Mal francese, and this is all the secret. He 
therefore that is advertised by me, shall be most cunning in 
curing of it. 
 
