[^Couch, Robert: Praxis catholica^] 
 
[}Praxis Catholica: 
OR, THE 
COUNTRYMAN'S 
Universal Remedy: 
WHEREIN 
Is plainly and briefly laid down the 
Nature, Matter, Manner, Place and Cure 
of most DISEASES, Incident to 
the Body of Man; 
 
Not hitherto discovered. 
 
Whereby any one of an ordinary Capacity 
may apprehend the true Cause of his Distempters, 
wherein his Cure consists, and the Means to effect 
it; together with Rules how to order Children in 
that most violent Disease of Vomiting and Looseness, 
&c. useful likewise for Seamen and Travellers. 
 
Also an Account of an Incomparable Powder for 
Wounds or Hurts which cure any ordinary ones at once 
dressing. 
 
Written by Robert Couch, sometimes Practitioner in 
Physick and Chyrurgery, at Boston in New-England. 
Now published with divers useful Additions (for 
publick benefit) by Chr. Pack, Operator in Chymistry. 
 
Etenim si dare vitam proprius Dei munus est, certe datam 
tueri, jamq; fugientem retineri, Deo proximum fateamur 
oportet. Erasm. 
 
London, Printed for Robert Harford, at the Angel in 
Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1680.}] 
 
[^A dedicatory epistle to colonel Francis Willis, a preface to the reader, a dedication to students and practitioners in physick and chyrurgery, a dedication to countrymen, an advertisement and a table of diseases treated in the book omitted.^] 
[^Extract 1, pp. 1-52^] 
 
[^p.1^] 
[}Praxis Catholica: 
OR, THE 
COUNTRY-MAN'S 
Universal 
REMEDY.}] 
 
IT was the custom amongst the ancient 
Greeks, that if a sure Cure was found 
for any Disease, the party was 
bound to write it on a Table, and 
hang it up in the Temple of Diana 
at Ephesus; that every one labouring with 
that Disease, might afterwards repair thither, 
and receive their Remedy. 
 
Soon after did they digest the Art of 
Healing into a fatal Method, as a Directory 
to the true knowledge of Curing; 
[^p.2^] 
whereby a further enquiry into Medicines 
came to be neglected, and so this false 
Doctrine of the Greeks spread it self amongst 
the Arabians, Romans, and then 
amongst the Christians, and is still in use 
amongst us to this day, to blind us from 
the knowledge of true and perfect Remedies 
for curing our Diseases; whereby 
we see many yearly swept away from us, 
through some accustomed Diseases, as 
well as new ones, and especially that amongst 
Children, of a Griping, Vomiting 
and Scouring, which gives me great 
cause to mistrust, that either the true 
cause of this is not understood as well as 
the rest, or a fit Remedy not yet found out. 
 
Nor is it Children alone, that this 
Fever, the Prince of Diseases, doth appear 
unto in those bloody manners, but 
to some of full Growth and Strength. It 
doth assault us in various Shapes and Habits. 
This Disease is a grand Enemy to 
man; for there is hardly a Distemper but 
is accompanied with a Fever, either going 
before, or following after it. 
 
Wherefore I shall a little anatomize it 
unto you, and shew you its Rise, the 
place where it commonly abides, and 
what it feeds on, and so describe it as you 
[^p.3^] 
may know it at a distance, and not only 
this, but most of our Serpentine Enemies. 
 
I shall observe that method in treating of 
them, as I do in curing of them; which is, 
to have respect unto that first which doth 
most press; amonst which, I think that 
peracute Disease of Children is most urgent, 
so my method leads me to begin with 
a child, whom I shall trace unto his old age, 
where I shall leave him to that great Physician, 
whose Servant I am not worthy to 
be. 
 
First it will be necessary that I give a 
preparative (to your understanding, in 
unfolding the right use of two or three 
principal parts, whose proper uses have 
not yet been discovered) before you enter 
upon the main Body; viz. 
 
The Spleen. 
Liver: and 
Gaul. 
 
From these three comes Life and Death, 
Health and Diseases, as they are disposed, 
either well or ill. These are the Pillars 
that do support the Fabrick of the Microcosm. 
 
The two first do principally respect the 
[^p.4^] 
preservation of Health; the last is of a 
more Balsamical Nature, which doth as 
well prevent Diseases, as restore health 
when it is wanting. 
 
Understand by a Ferment 
 
A Special Virtue or Power which every 
part is endued withal, that whatsoever 
is transferred through them 
[/1./] 
is transmuted into their 
fermental quality, as the 
Aliment in digesting in the 
Stomach is sow'r; then, when 
the Chyle passeth through 
the Guts, Duodenum and 
Ileon, it is faltish, and being 
more elaborated in the Meseraick and 
Milky Veins, becometh more salt, which 
is a preparation for Sanguification, which 
is perfected in the Liver, and so assimilated 
by every part. 
 
The whole Body is seasoned and tinctured 
with the Ferments of those three principal 
parts, viz. sharp from 
[/2./] 
the Spleen, Salt from the 
Liver, and bitter from the 
Gaul. To begin with 
the First. 
 
[^p.5^] 
[}The Spleen.}] 
 
This part hath been hardly censured by 
many to be the receptacle of the Fæces of 
the Blood, the mother of black Choler, or 
Melancholy, the Sink and Fountain of 
many stubborn and rebellious Diseases, 
and to be a Bowel of no great use; only 
to elaborate this more feculent Blood, 
and give a small nourishment to some of 
the natural parts: likewise the efficient 
cause of Madness and Dotage, &c. Some 
have not stuck to say, that if ever nature 
made any thing to hurt her self, it was this, 
and if she had found out some other way 
for discharging of this Excrement, as she 
hath done the rest, she had eased her self 
of abundance of trouble, &c. but I rather 
think the contrary, there is not any 
part within us, nature hath been so liberal 
unto, as to this, nor hath bestowed 
such special favour on: it is 
[/3./] 
enriched with ten times, at 
least, as many Arteries as any 
other part. 
 
There is life peculiarly 
due unto it more than sensitive; for it is 
[^p.6^] 
extant long before quickening. 
[/4./] 
It hath a double Ferment; 
there is a Vital from 
the Arteries, and the digestive 
faculty of the Stomach 
which is made by an acid juice sent from 
it; and for that great concernment which 
is committed unto its charge, it is termed 
the President of the Stomach. I cannot 
think that any excrementitious matter can 
reside, where it hath so worthy a place 
for its Emunctory, as the Stomach; the 
Arteries fetch from the Stomach of their 
purest Chyle, and sanguisie it for their pleasure; 
and it may be by their too liberal attraction, 
may debilitate their Ferment, 
that so they may require an assistance from 
the main Body, whereby the Stomach may 
be neglected, with a due quantity of this 
juice; whence lack of appetite and crudities 
do arise, and so this Ferment may be 
exorbitant in the Spleen; from whence 
comes bloody and black spitting into the 
stomach (which some have judged black 
Choler) which is nothing but an expurging 
and renewing of nourishable blood 
from the Spleen it self; the Humour, Melancholy 
and black Choler was never yet 
found in nature, nor indeed is there any 
[^p.7^] 
such thing extant: wherefore whatsoever 
distemper may arise from the Spleen, it is 
from a vitiated or debilitated Ferment: 
not from a peccant matter, which doth 
offend only in quality, not in quantity. 
 
Again, if the distemper of the Spleen 
be the cause of Madness, then in its right 
order, there is a sound and judicious understanding 
due to the same place: according 
to that Maxim of the Ancients, 
Ejusdem partis atque potestatis sit functio sana, 
cujus est vitiata ac vicissim, i.e. There 
is a sound function of the same part and 
power, whereof there is a vicious one, and 
on the contrary. 
 
I could speak much in the defence of the 
Dignity of this noble part, but at present 
shall conclude with this: the great Offices 
that proceed from it, and that rich and 
noble Retinue that attends it, speaks it no 
less than the pallace where the sensitive 
soul keeps her Residence. 
 
[}Of the Liver.}] 
 
I shall but only hint at this because I shall 
speak more largely of it when I come to 
treat about Dropsies, and other Diseases 
that are falsely fathered on it, what a 
[^p.8^] 
common complaint is there about a hot 
Liver, and a cold Stomach: when as I 
shall demonstrate, that the Liver is never 
hotter than is necessary, nor the Stomach 
never colder: though it may seem so by 
imperfect or weak digestion. 
 
And although Sanguification is not begun 
in it, yet it is the perfecter and rectifier 
of it: whereby the Blood is assimilated 
and conveyed into every part through 
the Veins. In a word, the Liver is the Administrator 
to all the natural parts in man. 
 
[}Of the Gaul.}] 
 
In the first Disease that I shall speak unto, 
I shall be enforced to anatomize this 
Bowel, only by the way take notice, that 
this Gall is the great Balsom of Nature, 
as well for preventing and destroying 
of Diseases, as the curing our 
Wounds. 
 
Understand, that whatsoever is 
done by nature (in any thing of this kind) 
is performed by this great Balsom: nor 
hath this as well as the rest been free from 
the Calumniations of the ignorant, in making 
it guilty of causing several sharp Diseases, 
&c. But more of this in the next. 
 
[^p.9^] 
[}Of Fevers.}] 
 
I Shall speak a word in general, then 
come to particulars, all Fevers are of 
the same essence and name: and differ 
not so much in the matter as place. 
 
[}Place.}] 
 
The Place it acts in, is the Stomach 
mostly. 
 
The Cause is from the error and estranging 
of the Faculties; or from things undigested 
and untransmuted; or else from 
Excrements not being rightly subdued, or 
separated, and orderly evacuated. 
 
Division: there are two sorts, continual 
and intermitting. 
 
From the first there are several Species, 
viz. some very malign; others accompanied 
with less Malignity: others with none 
at all. 
 
Intermitting ones, are of three sorts 
(Legitimate) Quotidian, Tertian and 
Quartan. 
 
[^p.10^] 
Not to trouble you to treat of any contagious 
and pestilential Fevers: none hath 
yet been amongst us, God still keep them 
from us, and remedy them where they are. 
 
I shall therefore begin with malignant 
Fevers, which are very rife in this Country, 
especially amongst Children. 
 
A malignant Fever differs from a Synochus, 
or Burning, or any other Fever in 
this, that it draws its putrefaction immediately 
from its own matter: for indeed 
putrefaction is joyned with it. 
 
A burning Fever, and other Fevers do 
not derive their putrefaction immediately 
from their matter, but gradually and casually 
either from the peccancy of the matter, 
or debility of the Ferment where it resides, 
those are of a less malignity, and 
bound in a less quantity of the matter offending. 
 
Ephemera, or an one days Fever is more 
from a disposition or inclination to a Disease; 
for that morbisick matter in the stomach 
is soon cast up by Vomit, or digested, 
I rather call it a Distemper than a Disease. 
 
But more particularly. 
 
[^p.11^] 
[}A Malignant Fever in Children.}] 
 
AS I have shewed that a Malignant Fever 
is from the present putrefaction 
of its own matter; so this 
[/5./] 
violent Disease in Children 
is of that nature, which is 
clearly demonstrated from 
the Sypmtoms in the first assault; 
that within forty eight hours putrefaction 
hath been nigh perfected, as is 
perceived by a coldness in the extreme 
parts, and cold sweats, &c. 
 
[}Cause.}] 
 
It is from some thing received which 
may contain some vicious quality, or abounding 
in quantity; or from an ill disposition 
of the digestive Ferment; for it often 
happens, that when the season is most 
hot, then the digestion is weakest, and then 
crude Fruits, and things hard to digest 
take advantage of the stomach. 
 
But above all, I look at Milk and Sugar 
[^p.12^] 
to be the greatest cause; for Milk is the 
general Food of Children, and there is 
such a propensity in its own nature to curdle, 
that if it be not quickly digested, it 
obeyeth the acid Ferment of the place, 
which soon is coagulated, and a Curd 
made like new tough Cheese, which doth 
strongly resist digestion, especially in a 
weak and tender stomach, and if it be not 
speedily vomited up, it soon begets a putrefactive 
Fement, and then soon after 
those terrible Symptoms are produced, as 
Vomiting, Scouring, Griping, &c. 
 
Now Nature, which is 
[/6./] 
the Physician to Diseases, 
unites her force, and takes 
with her a quantity of this 
Gaul-balsom to rectifie this 
Malignity, and eradicate the Morbifick 
Matter; and whatsoever this Balsom doth 
incorporate with, it hinders its putrefaction 
(as Salt doth in Flesh or Fish) and seasons 
it with its taste, and colours it with 
its tincture, as a little Wormwood doth any 
thing it is commixt with, and a little 
Saffron doth Milk, &c. and what part of 
it is separated for its putrefactive Body, 
nature endeavours to cast forth, and by 
reason it still retains its acquired sharpness 
[^p.13^] 
from the putrefactive Ferment falling 
down upon the Pylorus, or lower mouth 
of the stomach, stirreth up those violent 
motions; and what part of it passeth 
through the Intestines, it abstergeth and 
scoureth away that mucous or phlegmatick 
matter which nature hath lined the Guts 
withal; for a twofold end: first, to hinder 
Obstructions, that the Chyle may 
have a more speedy and slippery passage: 
Secondly, to defend them from any sharp 
or corrosive quality that may be in the 
Chyle, which is transferred through 
them. 
 
Which slimy matter is commonly seen 
to scour from them in this Disease, and 
this being gone, this excrementitious matter 
doth easily corrode by its sharpness, 
which is the cause of those Tortures and 
Gripings. 
 
And in regard that this peccant matter 
which is cast forth, is tinctured by this 
Balsom, it hath deceived many, who have 
taken it to be the Gaul it self. 
 
'Tis true, there are Excrements in 
Children, from eating Milk, not perfectly 
digested, which are of this Tincture, 
but of no bitterish Taste, it is brownish in 
the stomach, yellow in the Ilion, and green 
[^p.14^] 
in the blind Gut, yet they may not be 
sick. 
 
And no marvel, that there is little or 
none of this Balsom found in its Receptacle 
or Bladder in dead Children; for if 
this be spent, Death immediately follows, 
according to that Proverb: 
 
When the Gaul is broken, the drowned 
Carcase riseth to the top of the Water, 
when it can no longer withstand putrefaction. 
 
Those Sacrilegious Jews knew that this 
Gaul was a great Cordial for the preserving 
and continuing life; wherefore they gave 
our Saviour Vinegar and Gaul: Vinegar to 
excite the faculties of the stomach, for the 
Gauls quicker passage into the vital spirits 
to prolong his life, that they might the 
longer torment him under his pains before 
death. 
 
But to stay no longer here, it follows in 
the next place to treat about the great 
Heat and Cold which happens by Intervals, 
as well in most other Fevers as in 
this; and likewise of that inordinate 
Thirst. 
 
[^p.15^] 
[}Of Heat.}] 
 
THough Heat and Fever are counted 
Synonyma's of one and the same 
name, individual companions, &c. yet I 
say, this Heat is not of the Quiddity or 
Essence of the Disease, neither is it the 
cause of any Disease, but is caused by the 
stirring up of that vital aiery spirit, the directoress 
of life; which spirit 
[/7./] 
it is that makes the assault: 
now this spirit being provoked 
by the Disease, allarms 
all the Faculties, Virtues 
and Powers both Vital and 
Natural, which it doth unite unto it self, 
and so furiously assault his mortal Enemy, 
as many Coals of Fire raked together, and 
blown up, make a great heat, so doth this 
heat proceed from this inflamed Spirit. 
 
[}EXAMPLE.}] 
 
A Thorn or Splinter being got into the 
Finger or Hand presently a heat, pain 
[^p.16^] 
and pulsation is felt, which this spirit or 
Archæus stirreth up, for the expelling of 
that extraneous Body: now this heat is 
not a product of the Thorn, but casually 
from this spirit, and occasionally only from 
the Thorn: therefore heat is a latter accident, 
and subsequent upon the essence of a 
Fever. 
 
[}Cold.}] 
 
COld is the Diseases Colours, or Banner, 
under which it fights, but it is 
not either the Disease, nor Cause, but a 
product and effect of the 
[/8./] 
Disease, putrefaction brings 
in coldness, the Ferment of 
Putrefaction is sharp and 
cold: as we have an ocular 
Demonstration in Gangrenes 
and Mortifications, whilst it is 
but in fieri a Gangrene, what a hard task 
it is to revive it by the hottest and most 
penetrating Medicines we can get; nay 
[^p.17^] 
and fain to scarrifie deeply too, lest it 
should hinder their operation; or if it 
fouls a bone, no less than a Medicine that 
is hot in the highest degree can effect it, 
and when a Sphacelus, or Mortification is 
confirmed, without natures 
[/9./] 
Second comes in speedily to 
her rescue, and dismember 
it, it would soon run her to 
the heart; and did not putrefaction 
work by a cold, a Body would 
be hotter after it was dead, than it was before; 
but we see the contrary, when putrefaction 
grows stronger, the Body 
grows colder: I could evidence by many 
demonstrations more, that the Heat is not 
of the essence, neither the cause, nor occasion 
of a Fever, and likewise, that Cold 
is meerly the effect of the Disease: but I 
think this sufficient. 
 
[}Thirst.}] 
 
This great Thirst in Fevers doth not 
proceed from Heat and driness, as in a 
true and natural Thirst; for this will not 
be allayed by drinking, as that will; but 
this Thirst is deceitful, and is produced 
by some excrementitious matter, which 
[^p.18^] 
adheres to that sensitive faculty, and deludes 
the Organ, as if a 
[/10./] 
great dryness had suddenly 
come unto it, as I have observed 
in a very malignant 
Fever, which the Army in 
Flanders was infected with, being always 
cold, and very thirsty; as likewise in the 
cold Fit of an Ague, &c. and so this is 
evident, that heat in Fevers is not the 
cause of that inordinate Thirst; besides 
I have extinguished this 
[/11./] 
Thirst by those things 
which have been virtually 
hot; which, if heat had been 
the cause, would rather have exasperated. 
 
Thus you have the matter, manner, and 
Concomitants of this Disease. 
 
The Schools have observed some Heads, 
from whence they have derived many Species 
of Fevers, (which I shall not insist on 
because they depend upon one and the 
same way and means of Cure) without 
mention of an Hectick, or intermitting 
Fever, which differ only in the place they 
reside, which I shall speak to in their proper 
places. 
 
It is my chief design to do good unto my 
[^p.19^] 
Countrymen, who (I know) would rather 
have somehing to ease them, and be 
rid of their Diseases, than to hear curious 
and learned Discourses, or quaint Distinctions; 
and in pleasing them, I care 
not whom I displease. 
 
As I have put the knowledge of the 
cause into your Heads, so I shall put a remedy 
into your Hands. 
 
[}Cure.}] 
 
You may clearly see what first is to be 
done, and wherein the Cure doth consist, 
which is, in removing the cause or matter 
offending; the neglect whereof hath 
suffered such an infinite Slaughter, which 
gives me reason to think, that either the 
cause is not known, or a fit Remedy not 
yet found; for unless there be a proportion 
between the Remedy and the Disease, 
It will do but little good. 
 
Diseases which come suddenly, if they 
are rightly understood, they 
[/12./] 
are soon gone, though they 
may be extreme sharp whilst 
they continue. 
 
I know it is the practice here to look 
more unto the Effect than the Cause, in 
[^p.20^] 
correcting the Symptoms than the matter 
whereof they are produced; 
[/13./] 
which is a very pernicious 
course, and contrary 
unto reason, and all 
principles in Healing. 
 
And that you may the better 
understand your error, 
I shall recite your practice. 
 
When first any one is taken with this, 
or the like Distemper, either Child, or 
those of full Growth, first you run and 
fetch Mint Water, and a little Syrup to 
stay the Vomiting. 
 
Secondly, then Cinnamon Water and 
Syrup of Quinces, or Myrtle Berries to 
stay the scouring. 
 
Then, it may be, you give a Carminative, 
or Clyster to expel Wind, and correct 
the Griping. 
 
That done, you give some cooling Julep 
to allay its Heat, and to quench its 
Thirst. 
 
And when it is cold, you give a little 
Mithridate, or Theriack of Andronica, or 
London Treacle, and lay a Plaister of it to 
his Stomach. 
 
And then lay a Spell against the Fever 
to the Wrists, &c. 
 
[^p.21^] 
And so you keep doing, till you can 
do no more; just as a man who hath lost 
himself in a Wood, he keeps going, but 
whither he knows not. 
 
You see all those things do but respect 
the effect, here is nothing hath any regard 
at all unto the Cause. 
 
And should things answer the intention 
for which they were given the party, either 
Child or Man would presently die. 
 
To hinder the evacuating of this morbisick 
matter, is directly against 
[/14./] 
the intention of nature; 
for the evacuation of 
this matter is to be looked 
at as the Crisis of Nature, 
and whosoever shall recover, 
all this matter is to be brought out, 
and whoever goes about to stop it in the 
beginning, works against nature. What 
a vain thing therefore is it to think to take 
away the Gripings, before the matter be 
gone that causes it; and to corroborate 
the stomach, or to refresh its Spirits, so 
long as the Enemy beareth sway. 
 
To give the Child Mithridate, or lay a 
plaister of it to the stomach, which is 
worse, becomes another Disease; or any 
thing else that is nauseous, whilst Nature & 
[^p.22^] 
the Disease are struggling: and to give 
cooling things to correct the heat, is to 
weaken nature and strengthen the Disease. 
 
Obj. But you will tell me many have recovered 
by the use of those means. 
 
Answ. And many more had been, had 
they never been used (with submission to 
providence) but (quoad homines) after 
the manner of men, I admire that any 
should recover that ever was affected with 
this Disease, for they are ever giving, and 
all to hurt it; seeing the best Friends become 
the worst Enemies, which makes 
good that old Saying, 
 
When God cuts off man's thread of life, 
His dearest Friends do bring the knife. 
 
But many things are wrought by accident, 
as we have known many have been 
recovered from a Fever by drinking cold 
water. 
 
Obj. From whence some have asserted 
that this Heat is of the Essence of the Disease. 
 
Answ. But this Cure is not wrought by 
the Water, as it is cold and moist, for 
Sack or strong Beer would have performed 
[^p.23^] 
it, and a great deal better; but it is from the 
great quantity of it, which doth so replete 
the stomach, that some of the peccant matter 
which doth adhere unto the Fibres 
thereof, the Water hath loosened, and so 
its brought away with it. 
 
I suppose whosoever hath been cured 
by Water, it hath been when the Disease 
hath been on him some considerable time, 
and not in the beginning. I have prescribed 
Water several times in the end of 
a Fever, to this intent, and I ever found 
it very successful; but I suppose the parties 
that have taken it upon their own sensual 
inclination, it was hap-hazard with 
them, for to take Water in the beginning 
of a Fever, either kills them, or strikes 
them into an Ague, or some other long 
Sickness. 
 
To drink it in a contagious, pestilential 
Fever, or any Fever that tends much 
to putrefaction, hastens death. 
 
I do not speak this as not approving of 
the use of Water; but I declare the contrary, 
for I have found as strange events 
by drinking Water, as ever I saw by any 
Physick: I have known a man cured very 
soon of an Atrophia, or Consumption, 
only by the drinking of pure Rock Watar: 
[^p.24^] 
and in many other cases have I used 
it: but great consideration is to be had in 
the giving of it. 
 
But to return, by applying a nauseous 
or fœtid Medicine to the Stomach, whilst 
the morbisick matter resides there; nature 
thinking she is assaulted by another Distemper, 
unites all her strength and force, 
and desperately attemps both her Enemies 
with this resolution, to extirpate them, 
or sink her self, whereby she may, by exasperating 
of her new Enemy, cast forth the 
old, and then this amongst the ignorant is 
cryed up for a laudable Medicine, when 
as such things are dony by chance, for 
where one hath recovered by this means, 
twenty have died. 
 
Thus you see what a blind course hath 
been taken for the curing this, or any other 
Disease. The meer pity that I bear 
to poor Infants, hath extorted this from 
me, to whom I have often been sent for, 
to see them die, when their spirits have 
been so far spent, that I have not dared 
to give them any thing to take off the Disease, 
to the great grief of my spirit, for 
without the Disease be taken away, to 
small purpose do we use Cordial Means to 
refresh their Spirits. 
 
[^p.25^] 
[}DIRECTIONS.}] 
 
I shall now direct you to a better way, 
viz. 
 
1. When you are assured this Disease is 
on them (which is known first by a scouring 
away of a slimy matter, then a discolouring 
of the Excremenrs, as yellow, 
green, &c. and a griping in the Belly, being 
very hot and cold by Intervals: press 
not any manner of Meat 
[/15./] 
upon them, as you tender 
their lives; this very 
thing hath destroyed thousands. 
For to give Meat 
whilst the Disease is on them, when the 
stomach is not fit to receive it, nor hath 
strength to digest it, without it be speedily 
vomited up again, it becomes a Recruit, 
or supply to the Disease. 
 
2. Neither administer, nor apply any 
thing external, or internal, that is any way 
nauseous or ungrateful to the stomach, 
for nature hates and abhors such things; 
for though it be laid upon the stomach, 
[^p.26^] 
yet the taste of it is in the stomach, as 
though it were contained there, especially 
in young and tender Skins; for to have a 
thing that is nauseous to the stomach, and 
ungrateful to the smell, constantly to lie 
on, would be troublesome to one that is 
in health, much more to him that is sick. 
Give not the Child any Milk, and if it 
suck, wean it; for Milk is the first matter 
and foundation this Disease is raised on, 
and it bears still an affinity with it, and is 
presently converted into its poisonous nature, 
and likewise let it forbear Water 
and Beer, either cold or warm: keep 
the sick party (either Child or otherwise) 
in a breathing sweat, which is done by 
drinking warm Posset-drink, the Milk being 
turn'd with White Wine, or Sack, or 
Beer sharpened with Vinegar; let the party 
drink of it as warm as he can take it: 
this is far better than any Cordial or Julip 
whatsoever in a putrid Disease, between 
whiles the Child may drink a good draught 
of Sack, raw, and without Sugar is best; 
and if it tends to coldness, either in Face, 
Nose, Hands or Feet, you may safely give 
it a liberal draught of Brandy, with a little 
white Sugar, though the Child be not 
two months old, and likewise make a Toast 
[^p.27^] 
of old stale Bread, or a piece of Rose-Cake, 
and soak it in warm Brandy, wherein 
a little white Sugar hath been dissolved, 
and put it to the Child's Stomach, and let 
it lie on for twenty four hours, and if the 
coldness is not removed, you may reiterate 
it. I have a specifick Water for that end, 
which doth much revive and cherrish nature. 
 
What though it exasperateth and maketh 
more hot? That is well recompensed; 
for it mightily strengthens and refresheth 
nature. 
 
Observe, that a hot and feverish temper, 
is the most laudable and best temper 
the Child can be in, whilst the Disease 
remains. 
 
When the morbisick matter is gone, you 
may give a little salt of Pearls; Corral, Amber, 
or Wormwood, which are very good 
in a Cordial Electuary, to kill that putrefactive 
Ferment in the place where the Disease 
lay, that may lie behind lurking; 
which is the cause of most Relapses, and 
long and tedious Sicknesses and Consumptions. 
 
'Tis not enough to remove the effect, 
or matter produceth, nor the cause producing, 
but the principal producer must be 
[^p.28^] 
rectified before health be perfectly restored. 
 
Thus I have directed you in the best 
course you can take; and be sure you will 
do nothing that will hurt, but rather to 
strengthen and refresh nature. 
 
Obj. But you will ask me, what shall 
we do to remove the cause? 
 
Answ. That is the principal Verb indeed, 
I know a more proper and safe Medicine 
to effect it, than I can direct you 
unto, in all the Dispensitory. 'Tis true, 
there are a great many good Medicines, 
though good for little, without it be the 
Laudanum of Paracelsus, and some few 
Chymical Preparations: the rest are hardly 
worth a man's knowledge. 
 
That Physician that hath not found out 
better and more specifical means than what 
are there, is like to make but a sad practice. 
 
But I shall speak it to your comfort, 
God hath given me the knowledge of such 
a Medicine as will effect it; and not only 
this, but it doth also eradicate and extirpate 
the cause of most Diseases incident 
unto our frail Bodies, as you will hereafter 
perceive. 
 
It is a Powder without either smell or 
[^p.29^] 
taste, and the highest dose or quantity is 
but five or six Grains to the most robustive 
or strong Body, and so downward to half 
a Grain, which a Child of two days old 
may safely take, its operations are various, 
according to the nature and place where 
the peccant matter resides. How you 
shall take it, and what is to be done and 
observed in the taking of it, I shall give 
directions in the latter end of this Book. 
 
And as it is an effectual, so it is a safe 
Medicine; for I have given it unto three 
or fourscore several Children in and about 
the Town of Boston, and indeed I know 
not of any one that died, that ever took it, 
except one: the spirits of which were 
quite spent before I gave it, that it was 
not able to retain it in its stomach, but immediately 
brought it up again. 
 
There is an eminent person in this 
Country, whose knowledge is great in the 
most curious and best Arcanums, or secret 
Medicines that are used, he could tell you, 
it is as safe as good, who was an eye-witness 
unto a wonderful operation it had in 
a most contagious and malign Disease, 
which was the Small Pox, which struck in 
among the Passengers in Captain Lord's 
Ship, coming from England two years 
[^p.30^] 
since, that not one died that took it, two 
only died, and neither of them took it, as 
the Chyrurgion, Mr. Whiting can testifie, 
I gave him some of this Powder, and bade 
him give to every one that was infected 
with that Disease, which he did accordingly; 
though he gave it to some that was 
blind, to others after they appeared 
twenty four hours, and very ready to be 
suffocated, and very soon made them all 
perfectly well, which was well known unto 
all the Passengers in the Ship, as well as 
unto themselves that took it, which are dissipated 
through this Country; and I question 
not but this Paper will find out some 
of them, who can well witness this truth. 
 
By this you may judge of its efficacy in 
any other Disease of a malignant nature. 
 
I shall tell you what I have observed 
from it in some other Maladies. 
 
I have cured all sorts of Fevers with 
this Arcanum universale, in all Ages and 
Sexes; for continual burning Fevers, 
whether putrid or not, are frequently taken 
off by it with one Dose, in the beginning, 
or at the most by two, so that the 
Patient may be well before the time of the 
expected Crisis. The same Benefit I have 
often observed when given in the state of 
[^p.31^] 
the Disease, that it hath been presently 
taken off, although then nature is obliged 
to take a longer time to renew the 
strength, than she would have needed, if 
she had been assisted with this Medicine in 
the beginning. How common a thing it 
is to make a Month or six weeks work in 
curing a Fever, although peradventure 
nature it self hath overcome the Disease 
in twelve or fourteen days, but the diseasie 
matter formed, and some symptoms of effects 
must entertain the Physician a great 
while longer. For if the Fever were putrid, 
then the Stomach and Lungs remain 
loaden with much pituitous matter, to 
carry off which, the common practice is 
to follow the Patient close with Expectoraters, 
such are their Pectoral Electuaries, 
Decoctions, Syrups, Lohochs, &c. the which 
are so far from answering that end, as 
really to add to the matter they are designed 
to expel, for they not being Agents 
impowered to alter or rectifie any 
Ferment, as soon as they come into the 
Stomach, either nauseate it with their 
Load, and so are cast up, or if they stay, 
submit to the depraved digestion of the 
Stomach, and there make an increase of 
the diseasie matter, whence an extraordinary 
[^p.32^] 
spitting continues till nature it self, 
by degrees retrieves the natural Ferment, 
and frees her self from the diseasie matter, 
and the pretended remedy together. But 
if this seem too long a doing, (that no 
piece of Art may be wanting) there is another 
way at hand, and that is to exhibit 
purging Medicines to carry it downwards, 
the which is more pernicious than the 
former, for the Purge drawing a great 
quantity of sordid matter from the Thorax 
to the Guts, and nature not having yet 
recovered her right Regiment may admit 
some of this matter (by the Meseraick or 
Milky Veins) again into the Blood, 
whence may succeed again a Fever de novo, 
called a Relapse, or (if the lately tired 
spirit take not the present Assault) then 
the occasional cause of a Dropsie, Hectick, 
Consumption or some other Cronick Diseases; 
All which iseasily prevented by taking 
a Dose or two of this Arcanum, 
which evacuates the present matter by vomit, 
and rectifies the vitiated Ferment of 
the Stomach, and other parts, whence 
the power of making such matter is quite 
taken away. This I have had very large 
experience of. But a few days before the 
writing of this, I was sent for to a lusty 
[^p.33^] 
young man, who had laboured under a Synochus, 
about a week having, for during 
that time been treated by an Apothecary, 
first with cooling Juleps, which were continued 
all the while, then strongly sweat by 
a Sudorifick, and the next day blooded; 
but the Disease notwithstanding increasing 
(as being newly changed from a 
non putrida to a putrid, when I came) 
made the Apothecary, it seems, weary or 
doubtful of his work; for he desired the 
Man's Wife to send for a Physician, or a 
Second, (who was a Friend of his, 'tis 
like for the Bills sake) but the Woman having 
formerly had some experience of my 
Medicines, sent to me about five or six 
that Afternoon, I presently ordered him 
four Grains of this Powder, which wrought 
once only by Vomit, and discharged the 
stomach of that Diseasie matter, which before 
felt to him like a great weight, the 
pain in his Head presently abated, and that 
night he rested pretty well (for he had 
no sleep worth mention since he was ill) 
the next morning I sent him four Grains 
more of the Powder, which gave him 
three Vomits and two Stools: about six 
in the Afternoon I went to visit him, and 
found him about his Chamber, saying, he 
[^p.34^] 
thought he was as well as ever, his Stomach 
being returned, and he very hungry. 
Thus you see a Fever cured in eighteen 
hours, or less, which in all probability 
would have been at the least three or four 
weeks (if recovered at all) before nature 
by such enfeebled helpers, or rather, hinderers 
(as are the common Medicines) 
could have freed her self from the Disease. 
I could instance many the like cases were 
it needful. This Medicine hath (besides 
its other gifts) such a general tendency for 
the curing of all Fevers, that upon the first 
knowledge of it in practice, I called it my 
Species Febrifuga, by which name I published 
it in my Catalogue of Medicines, Printed 
in the year 1676, although I had then 
seen this little Book of the Authors. I 
shall here subjoyn a short Discourse of intermitting 
Fevers or Agues, in which Mr. 
Couch is silent, except in the name, yet I 
cannot doubt but he must be well acquainted 
with the power of this Medicine in curing 
them. 
 
[^p.35^] 
[}Of Agues.}] 
 
GReat Diversity hath been, and yet is 
among Authors concerning this 
Disease, some holding one thing, and some 
another concerning its Seat and Causes; 
but I without reciting their differences or 
contending with any man's opinion (either 
of which is no way profitable) shall briefly 
endeavour to give you my own sentiment. 
It needs no Definition, being sufficiently 
known here; neither Division; 
seeing all the sorts thereof proceed from 
one cause, and may be cured by the same 
Medicines. 
 
[}Seat.}] 
 
The Place or Seat of Agues is the Pancreas, 
or Sweet-bread; for all the parts of 
Man's body being considered, which only 
by intervals may transmit the cause of intermitting 
Fevers to the Heart, none is 
found to which not only the Focus or 
source of those Fevers, but also the causes 
[^p.36^] 
of all their Symptoms may be ascribed, 
besides the Pancreas or Sweet-bread. 
 
[}Cause.}] 
 
The Cause is an Obstruction of one or 
more of the Lateral Ducts or Branches of 
the Pancreas, by reason of Phlegmatick 
Matter carried thither in too large a quantity, 
and there detained, the which being 
separated from the Blood (together with 
the Pancreatick Juice) by the Glandules 
of the Pancreas, and sent to the main 
Duct or Pipe thereof causeth an Obstruction 
there, and detaineth the juice of the 
Pancreas (contrary to nature) which 
ought continually to flow into the thin Gut, 
called the Duodenum. This Juice being 
thus stagnated, quickly grows acrimonious, 
or sharp, and acquires a putrefactive 
Ferment, whence at length it makes way 
through the obstructing Phlegm, and is effused 
into the Duodenum, where meeting 
with the Bile or Gall, it stirs up a vicious 
and preternatural Ferment, from whence 
comes the Ague Fit with all its Symptoms, 
as in the beginning, horrour, chilness, 
cold, shaking, &c. then presently reachings, 
yawnings and vomiting of bitter or 
[^p.37^] 
four relish, and afterwards burning heat, 
the causes of Heat, Cold, Thirst, &c. you 
have in the foregoing Chapter of Fevers: 
but if any desire further satisfaction, concerning 
the reasons of the differences of 
Agues, and the constant or various access 
of their Fits with the particular causes of 
Symptoms, they may read it at large in 
Regnerus de Graaf, in his Book intituled, 
de succo Pancreatico, published by me in the 
year 1676, to which I refer the Reader, 
not having room here to be any larger. 
 
[}Cure.}] 
 
The Cure consists in opening the Obstructions, 
changing the diseasie Ferment, 
and expelling such matter as the Disease 
hath rendred incapable of being redintegrated 
and taken into the communion of 
life. All which intentions are truly and 
radically performed by this Powder; for 
an Ague being removed by the due use of 
this Medicine, returns not again, neither 
leaves any danger of its degeneration 
into another Disease, both of which too 
frequently happen after the use of some 
Medicines which take off the Fit only by a 
kind of soporiferous quieting the present 
[^p.38^] 
fury of the Archæus. If it be taken before 
the Ague hath exceeded three Fits, one 
only Dose is usually sufficient to carry it 
away; if six or seven Fits, two Doses or 
three at the most; yea, I have cured divers 
at twice or thrice giving it that have 
had it six or eight weeks; but if it be a 
year old or more, the continuance of its 
use but a reasonable time (with the help 
of the Balsamick Pill) will not fail to 
cure it. I have also known it to cure Agues 
when it hath had no other sensible operation 
than Breaking of Wind. 
 
A person living in Greenwich who had a 
Tertian Ague, and sometimes a Quotidian 
all the last Winter, was cured this 
Spring by three Doses of the Powder 
which never had any sensible operation, 
and two Doses of the Balsamick Pill, so 
that in eight or ten days he was abroad about 
his Affairs, and never had any Fit 
since, although he was before so low 
brought, that he could not sit up any longer 
than while his Bed was made, notwithstanding 
the constant advice of an eminent 
Physician of that Town, which he 
had used. 
 
It is to be taken in a Spoonful of Drink, 
or Posset drink about an hour before the 
[^p.39^] 
Fit comes, for two or three Fits together, 
according as the Ague is in continuance. 
If the Patient be weak, or of a tender habit 
of Body, let him take a Dose of the 
Balsamick Pill the same night after the 
Powder hath been given, when he goes to 
Bed, with a draught of warm Ale, or a 
Glass of good generous Wine, which Pill 
will mightily corroborate and refresh his 
Spirits; and also tends much to the Cure, 
if the Ague have been of a long continuance, 
or be a Quartan, or fourth Ague, 
then after the Patien hath taken the Powder 
three times, if the Fit still remain, 
then let him take a full dose of the Balsamick 
Pill, two or three hours before the 
coming of the next Fit, and goe to Bed, 
and dispose himself to sweat before the Fit 
comes, the which if he do, its ten to one 
but the Fit comes no more; but if there 
should be a failure of sweating timely enough, 
then let him take the powder before 
one Fit, and the Pill before the next, 
till it be gone; but not one Ague in twenty 
will need to be thus treated. 
 
[^p.40^] 
[}A general Direction in Fevers.}] 
 
TO drink liberally of such Liquor as 
is most convenient, is good: I like 
not Beer of any Liquor in a Fever, before 
the peccant matter (wherein the Disease 
doth subsist) be evacuated, because it 
hath a nutriment from the Grain it is made 
withal, which doth add unto the matter 
of the Disease, whereby Thirst is exasperated, 
as is commonly seen. 
 
I rather advise to drink Wine and Water, 
two parts Water, and one Wine, 
sharpened a little with the Spirit of Vitriol, 
or Sulphur, if it be per campanam, 
which is drawn from a Bell Still, it is the 
better, which is a singular Medicine to 
allay and correct the inordinate Thirst and 
Heat in Fevers. Medera, Fial, French, or 
Sherry Wines, you may use, Malaga or any 
Sweet Wine is not so good, neither 
Syrups, or any Sugared or Honeyed Meat, 
or Drink. And when they begin to recover, 
the plainest Broths and Gruels are 
the best; till then a little is too much, 
[^p.41^] 
and if you did use Salt and Vinegar instead 
of Spices and Sugar, the sick would 
like it better; and it would be better 
for them; a few Prunes and Currants, if 
the sick like them, may be used. 
 
But some may say, How shall we do that 
live far up the Country, where we have 
no Wines, nor can get neither of those 
Spirits? the best that I can advice you to, 
is Milk boiled, and turned with some Vinegar 
or Verjuice, the Curd being taken 
away, whereof he may drink freely, but 
he is to take it alway hot, and the hotter 
the better. 
 
This course is to be taken after the cause 
is removed by my powder, or something 
else (but I know not what) otherwise 
this, or any other, is like to do but little 
good. 
 
Bleeding, Purging, Clysters, Cordials, 
Juleps, &c. are but Trifles in curing a Fever, 
they do at best but correct the Symptoms 
or Effects; I will do more good 
with one dose of my Powder, and one of 
my Pills, than they with all those in a 
Month. 
 
If the Fever be continual, and come by 
a Surfeit, or otherwise, so that the Patient 
[^p.42^] 
feel a Load or Weight at his Stomach, or 
hath a propensity to vomit, the first thing 
to be done is to give a Vomit, whereby 
the Stomach and first passages may be freed 
of the grossest of the Diseasie Matter 
wherein the Fever sits, or hath taken up its 
Inn, to which purpose you may give half 
an ounce of the Infusion of Crocus Metallorum, 
or six Drams, or a whole Ounce 
(according to the age and strength of the 
Patient) in a small Draught of warm Posset-drink; 
but if you know any better Antimonial 
Preparation, then give it. That 
being done, +R Tartar. Vitriolat six 
Grains, Volatile Salt of Amber and Hartshorn, 
each seven or eight Grains, mix them, 
and give the mixture twice a day in a little 
thin Broth, or Water Gruel. This is abstersive 
and Diuretick, and will cleanse the 
Stomach and Intestines of the remaining 
Sordes, and expel them by Urine. For the 
Feverish Thirst give the dulcified Spirit 
of Nitre, or of Salt, in Posset drink, and 
all the Liquids they take, from five or six 
to ten or twelve drops at a time. Keep the 
Patient in a small breathing Sweat, either 
with the Posset-drink, before-mentioned 
by Mr. Couch, or with Treacle-water and 
Powder, or rather the Tincture of Virginia 
[^p.43^] 
Snake-root, or which is most excellent 
(if you can get it) the Aqna Prophylactica 
of Sylvius de le Boe, of which Take three 
Ounces, Water of Carduus and Borrage, each 
one Ounce, Syrrup of Citron Peels an ounce 
and an half, mix them, and take it often by a 
spoonful or two at a time. But instead of 
this, if the Fever be malignant, give Bezoardicum 
minerale to eight or ten Grains 
every third or fourth hour in a spoonful or 
two of good Canary. 
 
But because the Aqua Prophylactica mentioned 
is rarely to be had at any shop, I will 
here describe the making thereof for the 
sakes of those who are willing to make it. 
+R Roots of Angelica, Zedoary, of each an 
ounce, Butterbur two ounces, the leaves of 
Rue four ounces, of Balm, Scabious and 
Marygold Flowers, each two ounces, unripe 
Walnuts, cut two pounds, fresh Citrons cut 
one pound. Let them be all beaten together, 
and pour upon them six quarts of the best distilled 
Wine-Vinegar, let them stand in digestion 
all night, and then distil them by a very 
easie fire (without burning) till they be dry, 
and keep the distilled liquor for use. It is very 
profitable in all Fevers, especially in those 
which are malignant and the Plague. 
 
In the declining of the Fever, if sleep be 
[^p.44^] 
wanting, this following mixture will 
much avail, both to cause rest, and refresh 
the Spirits, +R of Treacle water an ounce, 
the thin Syrup of Corn Poppies, an ounce, or 
an ounce and a half, Laudanum Londinens. or 
rather that of Paracelsus two grains, mix 
them, and let the Patient drink it at the hour 
of Sleep. But give nothing wherein there 
is Opium or Poppies in the beginning of a 
Fever, because they tie up the Archæus of 
the Stomach and first passages, thereby 
hindering him from separating and expelling 
the occasional cause of the Disease. 
 
For Agues, or intermitting Fevers, whether 
they be Quotidians, Tertians or Quartans, 
proceed as followeth: 
 
+R Of Salt of Amber twenty grains, Tartarum 
Vitriolatum six grains, Diagridium 
seven, eight, nine or ten grains, according to 
the strength of the Patient; mix them into a 
Powder, and give it in a little Posset-drink, or 
thin Broth, four or five hours before the time 
of the Fit. 
 
Repeat it two or three times, if need 
be; but of the Ague be not then gone, 
give the following mixture about an hour, 
or an hour and an half before the Fit comes; 
the Patient being in Bed, and disposing 
himself to sweat. 
 
[^p.45^] 
+R of Carduus Water two ounces, Treacle 
Water two drams, Salt of Wormwood half a 
dram, Spirit of Salt Armoniac ten grains, 
Syrup of Corn Poppies half an ounce, mix. 
This, if the Patient sweat well with it, 
frequently removes the Ague. 
 
This following also hath cured many 
without any other Medicine. 
 
+R of the Salt of Wormwood and Carduus 
each fifteen grains, Tartar Vitriolat. six 
grains, Sugar of Pearls half a dram; powder 
and mix them, and give it half an hour, 
or an hour before the Fits access. 
 
The Juice of Featherfew being drank 
(about half an ounce) in a glass of 
Wormwood Wine, is profitable against 
the Quartan or fourth Ague. 
 
These Remedies I have used with good 
success, but never found any thing so certain 
and effectual in Fevers, as my Species 
Febrifuga, and Pillula Balsamica. 
 
[^p.46^] 
[}A Dropsie.}] 
 
There are three sorts of Dropsies, viz. 
Anasarca, Ascites and Timpanites the 
two first are most from Water. The 
last, Timpany is more from Wind. 
 
Anasarca, is when the extreme parts 
swell; but when the Belly, then it is Ascites. 
 
The Cause, I do not believe, (as hath 
generally been received) that it proceeds 
from a Distemper of the Liver, and that 
to be the principal part affected; but I 
have more reason to think it to proceed 
from an obstruction or impediment in one 
of the Kidneys: for commonly they that are 
troubled with Gravel and Stone in the 
Kidneys are Hydropical; and seldom any 
that have been affected with either Anasarca 
or Ascites, but they have observed a 
Dolor in their Reins to precede it; and so 
that Water which should be transferred 
through the Kidneys, to be evacuated by 
the Bladder is forced out at the Abdomen. 
And it hath lately appeared by dissection, 
[^p.47^] 
that those who have died of those Distempers, 
the fault hath been through the 
Kidney, which is most agreeable to reason. 
 
And undoubtedly that operation in an 
Ascites, in making a hole to let out the 
Water, doth but only respect the effect 
not taken away, (and yet not inconsistent 
to that Maxim, Take away the cause, and 
the effect ceaseth: which is to be understood 
of that which is to come, and not of what 
is past, as Helmont well observes) and so 
that operation might happily perfect a 
Cure in taking the effect for the Cause. 
 
I have cured a man of an Anasarca, 
(whose Thigh hath been near as big as his 
middle) with one Dose of this Powder he 
was presently made perfectly well; that in 
the operation of this Medicine, his Legs & 
Thighs fell, and never swelled after, you 
would have admired (had you seen) what 
abundance of Water came from him, both 
by Urine, and Vomiting; and at night I 
gave him a Pill (which I usually do after 
this Powder) to refresh his Spirits, and 
seetle his Body in a right temper. 
 
This was all the Physick he took from 
me, though he had spent many pounds before 
in fruitless endeavours. And I know 
[^p.48^] 
not any thing to the contrary, but it may 
do as well in an Ascites, or Timpanites, if it 
hath not continued too long. 
 
First it is necessary to begin the Cure 
with gentle purging; for strong Purges, 
(especially in weak and tender Bodies) do 
far more harm than good, by resolving 
and expelling the Blood, and good juices 
with the peccant matter, thereby dejecting 
the strength, and depauperating the 
vital spirit. 
 
+R of the Roots of Orris an ounce and a 
half, Parsley Roots half an ounce, Leaves of 
Agrimony a handful, clean Senna an ounce, 
best Rhubarb half an ounce, Agarick three 
drams, Cinnamon two drams, Cloves one 
dram, cut the Roots, with the Rhubarb and 
Agarick into thin slices, bruise the Spices, and 
put them all into a little Bag, infuse them twenty 
four hours in two quarts of the best White 
or Rhenish Wine, then let the Patient drink every 
morning five or six ounces, or as much 
as will give four or five Stools. It is pleasant 
to take; but if you please, you may 
also add Sugar to it. 
 
For such as had rather take Pills, those 
following are good. 
 
+R Rosin of Scammony and Jallap, or each 
[^p.49^] 
half a dram, Tartar Vitriolat, Mercurius 
dulcis of each two scruples, Oil of Juniper 
Berries twenty drops, of the purest Venice 
Turpentine a sufficient quantity to make the 
powder into a Mass for Pills, the which 
make into thirty small Pills, and give 
three, four or five of them, according to 
the Patients Age and Strength every morning. 
After purging, 
 
The Salt of Broom or Amber, of 
Bean-stalks, or of Pidgeons dung are profitable, 
either of them being taken twice a 
day in warm Broth, or which is better, 
the Spirit or Volatile Salt of humane Urine. 
In a Tympany the dulcified Spirit 
of Nitre is excellent, being taken in Broth 
or Sack three or four times a day, from 
six to twelve drops at a time- 
 
A Gentleman, a Friend of mine, living 
in Greenwich, cured a man of the Dropsie 
with the Pill alone. This man had an Ague 
first, which either went off it self, or 
were moved by some common Remedy; 
about seven weeks after which, he began to 
swell, and also was sorely afflicted with 
Gripings and Flux for a great while, which 
had brought him so low, that he had not 
been out of this Bed for three weeks. The 
first Dose of the Pill that was given him 
[^p.50^] 
took away the Gripes, and in a great measure 
stayed the Flux; but then he swelled 
so much in his Breast, that he could not 
lie down in his Bed, but his Breath would 
be gone, the second Dose freed him from 
that, and made him able to rise and dress 
himself, and by a short continuance of it 
was cured. 
 
[}Epilepsie, or Falling Sickness.}] 
 
I Had a Maid since I came to this Town, 
that was turned over from one to another, 
no one cared to have her, by reason she 
was violently troubled with the Falling 
Sickness: at length I bought her, to whom 
I gave only one dose of this Powder, which 
freed her from her Fits, though she had 
them before almost continually, day and 
night, that whosoever had her, kept one 
to watch her, for she would be ready to 
destroy her self; I kept her about a quarter 
of a year, and she never had a Fit that 
I know of, I perswaded her to take another 
[^p.51^] 
Dose two or three days after, but she 
would not; she told me she needed not, 
for she was confident she was perfectly cured. 
Since I hear she is married some 
where in the Country, and whether she had 
them since, I know not 
 
By the operation of this Medicine I 
judged by what came from her, that the 
primary cause was not in the Brain, but in 
the Stomach, or some place near adjacent 
thereunto; and that the Brain suffered only 
by consent. 
 
Purging in this Disease (when it is simple) 
seldom or never doth any good, as 
also Blood-letting, but both are very injurious, 
as many have found to their great 
prejudice. But when it proceeds from 
the Stomach (as may be known by the 
Patient, perceiving in himself a pain, 
soreness, and distention about the mouth, 
or pit of the Stomach and Heart-strings, 
especially when they are fasting) before 
the Fit they have a disposition to vomit, 
with pain and palpitation of the Heart, 
and the Fit ends with vomiting, in such, I 
say, a Vomit may be available, either 
with the infusion of Crocus Mettallorum, or 
the Salt of Vitriol; but they are warily 
[^p.52^] 
to be administred, and not without the direction 
of a Physician. All four and sharp 
things are hurtful in this Disease, as Oranges, 
Lemons, Vinegar, &c. In the time 
of the Fit you may use the following Liniment 
to anoint and chafe the Temples, 
Nostrils, Wrists and Coronal Suture, or 
Seam of the Skull upon the top of the 
Head. 
 
+R Unguentum Nervinum two ounces, melt 
it gently in a Gally pot, then put to it Oyl of 
Amber and Rosemary of each two drams, 
Spirit of Sal Armoniack one dram, stir them 
well together, and use it warm. 
 
Take of Oil of Tartar per deliquium an 
ounce, Salt of Harts-horn and Amber each a 
scruple, mix them, and let the Patient take 
from ten to twenty drops in Broth, or Black-cherry 
Wine four times a day. 
 
The dung of a Peacock, or Liver of a 
Raven being gently dried, and powdered, 
and given twice a day to two Scruples, or 
a dram at a time are very good, but it 
were better, if their Volatile Salts were 
extracted. 
 
But the Flowers of Sal Armoniack excel 
all the rest, being given three times a day, 
from then to fifteen or sixteen grains at a 
time in Broth or Sherry Wine. 
 
