[^Pechey, John: Store-house of physical practice^] 
 
[}THE 
Store-house of Physical Practice: 
Being a General 
TREATISE 
OF THE 
Causes and Signs 
OF ALL 
DISEASES 
AFFLICTING 
Human Bodies. 
 
TOGETHER 
With the Shortest, Plainest and Safest way 
of Curing them, by 
Method, Medicine and Diet. 
 
To which is added, for the Benefit of Young 
Practisers, several choice Forms of Medicines 
used by the London Physicians. 
 
By JOHN PECHEY, of the College of 
Physicians in London. 
 
LONDON: 
Printed for Henry Bonwicke, at the Red Lyon in 
St. Paul's Church-yard, MDCXCV.}] 
 
[^A preface and an index omitted.^] 
[^Extract 1, pp.1-29^] 
 
[^p.1^] 
[}THE 
STORE-HOUSE 
OF 
Physical Practice.}] 
 
[}Diseases of the HEAD.}] 
 
[}CHAP. I. 
Of a Phrensie.}] 
 
A Phrensie, in Latin, Phrenitis, is twofold, True 
and Spurious. A true Phrensie is an inflamation 
of the Brain and Membranes of it, with a perpetual 
Delirium, and a continual Acute Feaver. 
A Bastard Phrensie proceeds from an hot imtemperies communicated 
to the Brain from the whole Body; as in Burning 
Feavers, or from the inflamation of some particular 
part, as of the Liver, Lungs, and especially the Diaphragm. 
 
The Causes of a true Phrensie proceed from Cholerick 
Blood extravasated. 
 
The Signs of an approaching Phrensie, are Watchings, 
disturbed Sleep, immoderate Speech, Urine first Thick, 
then Thin and Clear; Heat and Pain in the Head, and 
the like. 
 
[^p.2^] 
A Phrensie is known by perpetual Raving, restless 
Watching, and by drawing the Breath deep, and seldom, 
and the Sick does not call for Drink; though there are 
great and apparent causes of Thirst; the Pulse is small, 
frequent, and quick; the Feaver is continual, and the 
Tongue black, yellow or rough. 
 
A Phrensie is generally deadly, because the Noble Parts 
are generally affected: But there is most hopes of Recovery 
when they Laugh, and when all the symptoms are moderate, 
and when the Strength is good; and if after the 
Disease is at height, some evacuation happens, as by Sweat, 
Bleeding at the Nose, or a Loosness: The following Signs 
shew it to be deadly, trembling of the Hands and Tongue, 
gnashing of the Teeth, Convulsion, and a shaking at the 
beginning of it, catching of the Cloaths, black Blood dropping 
from the Nose, white Stools, and a pale Urine. 
 
CURE. The Blood flowing to the Head must be 
evacuated, repelled, intercepted, and a revulsion of it 
must be made. That which is already flown in must be 
evacuated and discussed; the intemperies of the part must 
be corrected, and the strength of it, and of the whole 
Body must be preserved. All these things may be performed 
by the following remedies: But first of all, and at 
any time of the day, Bleeding must be used. 
 
If it be occasion'd by a suppression of the Lochia, or of 
the Courses, or of the Hemorrhoids, the Vein call'd Saphena 
must be open'd in the Foot; afterwards you must 
open a Vein in the Arm, to evacuate the Blood that is put 
off upon the Head, Bleeding is to be repeated twice, thrice, 
or more, according to the height of the Disease, and the 
Age, and Strength of the Patient. 
 
Note in opening of the Vein, the Orifice must be small; 
for otherwise the restlesness of the Sick will force the Blood 
out, and so make it joyn the sooner; you may apply a 
Plaister to it made of Aloes, the White of an Egg, and 
Hares Down. 
 
After Bleeding you must endeavour to procure Sleep, 
by applying cooling things to the Forehead and Temples, 
and Anodine Medicines must be given inwardly. 
 
Take of Lettice and Purslain Water each one Ounce, of Diacodium 
half an Ounce, or six Drams, of Syrup of Lemons 
half an Ounce, make a Draught to be taken at Bed-time. 
 
[^p.3^] 
The Sick may take often of the following Julep. 
 
Take of the Waters of Lettice, Purslain, Roses, red Poppies 
each three Ounces, Syrup of Violets and Pomgranats each 
one Ounce and an half, of Sal prunella three Drams, make 
a Julep. The Dose is three or four spoonfuls at a time, four 
or five times a day. 
 
When Bleeding cannot be used, Cupping-glasses must 
be applied, with deep Scarification, first to the lower Parts, 
viz. the Thighs, &c. then to the upper Parts, viz. to the 
Shoulders, &c. And afterwards you may apply them without 
Scarification to the Legs and other parts: Blisters may 
be also conveniently applied to the Shoulders and Arms, 
and a cooling Glyster must be daily injected. For instance. 
 
Take of the common decoction for Glysters one Pint; dissolve 
in it one Ounce of Lenitive Electuary, and four Ounces of 
Brown Sugar; make a Glyster. 
 
Note, That the quantity of the Glyster must be varied, 
according to the Age and Bigness of the Patient. 
 
Bleeding in the Nose, by pricking often with a Lancer, 
the Nostrils where the Hairs grow, does much good; and 
also Leeches applied behind the Ears, to the Nostrils and 
Forehead. 
 
[}CHAP. II. 
Of Madness.}] 
 
MAdness, in Latin, Mania. This Disease does not kill 
of it self, yet it is very difficult to Cure, especially 
if it be hereditary. 
 
CURE. Bleeding, Vomiting, and strong Purges are 
to be frequently used; with which, and severe Discipline, 
it is frequently Cur'd: But if the Disease be mild, kind 
words and good usage, and gentle Physick does oftentimes 
the business: But in most Bleeding must be us'd to a great 
quantity in the beginning of the Disease, sometimes in the 
Arm, and sometimes in the Jugular Vein, in the Forehead, 
Foot, or drawn from the Hemorrhoidal Veins by Leeches. 
Vomits do also a great deal of good: But such as are 
[^p.4^] 
Chymical are best, because they work most powerfully, 
and the Sick may be easily cheated with them. 
 
Take of Sulphur of Antimony eight or ten grains, of cream of 
Tartar half a Scruple; mix them and give it in a spoonful 
of Broth, or with Bread: Repeat this Vomit once in four 
days. 
 
Strong Purges are also frequently used: As, 
 
Take of extract of black Hellebore, and Calamelanos each 
one Scruple, mix them, and make a Bolus to be taken in 
the Morning. 
 
Betwixt the Evacuations, such things may be used as 
attemperate the Blood, if the Sick will take them, as Steel-waters, 
Whey, and the like. 
 
For preservation, such People as are subject to Madness, 
should Purge and Bleed Spring and Fall. 
 
[}CHAP. III. 
Of Giddiness.}] 
 
GIddiness, in Latin, Vertigo. There are two sorts of 
it; in one the Sight is taken away; in the other it 
is not. The Cause of Giddiness is a circumvolution of 
the Spirits. An idiopathick Giddiness is known by Pains, 
and dulness in the Head,a dulness of the Sight, noise in 
the Ears, Deafness, and the like. The peccant Matter is 
discovered by the following Signs; dulness of the outward 
and inward Senses, Sloth, much Sleep, much Spitting, 
want of Appetite, and of Thirst; a white and crude 
Urine shew that Flegm abounds; watching, anger, activity 
of Body, thirst, a quick Pulse, thin and yellow Urine, 
signifie that Choler is peccant; fear, sadness, disturbed 
thoughts, long watching, dreadful Dreams, soure belchings, 
and the like, signifie Melancholy abounds: The bigness 
and stiffness of the Veins, a florid Countenance, and heat 
of the Face, beating of the Temples, dulness of the Head, 
weariness, or a red and thick Urine, and sometimes a 
thin, when there is a translation to the Head, signifie that 
Blood abounds. 
 
[^p.5^] 
A sympathetick Giddiness is known by the absence of 
the Symptoms that proceed from the Head, and when 
there is no apparent Disease in the Brain. 
 
Want of Appetite, nauciousness, soure Belching, Pain, 
or Wind in the Stomach, signifie that it proceeds from the 
Stomach; that a Giddiness proceeds from the Liver, Spleen, 
or Womb, is known by the following Signs: When it 
proceeds from the Spleen there are frequent and large evacuations 
of Wind, inflation of the Belly, soure Belchings, 
and the like; when from the Womb, there is stopage of 
the Courses, or Hysterick Fits. 
 
A Giddiness that is recent, and seldom invades, and 
that which is occasioned by external Causes is light, and 
easily Cured; that which is inveterate and frequent, most 
commonly ends in the Falling Sickness, or Apoplexy. 
 
CURE. The Cure is much the same with the Falling 
Sickness: which see in the Chapter of the Falling Sickness: 
But when it is small it does not need so large a course of 
Physick as is requisite for the Cure of the Falling Sickness. 
But those things will be sufficient which I shall here set 
down. 
 
First therefore, if Blood abounds, inject a pretty sharp 
Glyster, and afterwards Bleed; then Purge with the 
following Pills. 
 
Take of the fetid Pills two Scruples, of Resin of Jalap five 
grains with a sufficient quantity of Galbanum dissolved 
in Briony Water; make seven Pills to be taken in the 
Morning; repeat them Thrice. 
 
But if the Patient cannot take Pills, the following Purging 
Potion may be given instead of them. 
 
Take of Gerions decoction six Ounces, boil in it of the Fibres 
of black Hellebore, and of Agarick each one Dram 
and an half; strain it, and add an Ounce of the Syrup 
of Roses Solutive, and two Drams of Compound Briony 
Water. Make a Potion. 
 
Afterwards let the Patient use the following Sneesing 
Powder. 
 
Take of the Leaves of Marjoram, Sage, Rosemary dried, 
each half a Dram, of the Roots of Pellitory of Spain and 
white Hellebore each one Scruple, of Musk three Grains; 
make a Powder. 
 
[^p.6^] 
Cupping-glasses with and without Scarification, frictions 
of the extream parts, Bleeding from the Hemorrhoidal 
Veins may be used to cause revulsion. Blisters are 
also of use for derivation. Afterwards use such things as 
are proper to strengthen the Head, which you will find in 
the Chapter of an Epilepsie. The Conserves of the Flowers 
of Marrygolds is counted by some a Specifick for Giddiness. 
 
[}CHAP. IV. 
Of the Falling Sickness.}] 
 
THE Falling Sickness, in Latin, Epilepsia, is an universal 
and violent Convulsion; the Fit most commonly 
comes of a sudden, and precipitates in the twinkling 
of an Eye to the Earth, and deprives a Man of 
Sense and Understanding; for they seem rather forcibly 
thrown down, than to fall; and that part which first 
comes to the Ground, is most commonly bruised or wounded. 
They gnash with their Teeth, foam at the Mouth, 
and often beat their Heads against the Ground; their Arms 
and Legs either become rigid, or tossed here or there. 
Some beat their Breasts violently, and some cast their 
Bodies impetuously hither and thither: But in most the 
Belly swells much. After some time, sometimes sooner, 
sometimes longer, the symptoms suddenly cease, as if the 
Tragedy were just ended, and then the Sick come to 
themselves again, and are sensible; but there remains after 
the Fit is gone off a pain in the Head, and a dulness in 
their Senses, and often a Giddiness. 
 
The Fits are sometimes wont to come at set times of the 
day, month, or year; but most commonly according to the 
greater turns of the year, or according to the Conjunctions, 
or opposite Aspects of the Moon, or Sun, they return 
more certainly, and afflict more violently; and sometimes 
the Fits are uncertain, and come as occasion is offered, and 
according to the variety of evident Causes. Sometimes 
they are gentle, sometimes violent; sometimes, though 
rarely, some Signs forewarn the Epileptick person of a 
[^p.7^] 
Fit before he falls, as a dulness of the Head; sparkling 
of Fire before the Eyes, Noise in the Ears, and the like. 
 
Sometimes a Convulsion in some outward part, as in 
the Arm, or in the Leg, or in the Back, or in the Hypochondres, 
precedes, which rising from thence like a cold 
Air towards the Head, occasions the Fit. 
 
CURE. You must begin with Purging; but if the 
Sick bear Vomiting well, a Vomit must be first given, and 
must be repeated for several months, four days before the 
Full Moon. Wine of Squills mixed with fresh Oyl of 
Sweet Almonds; or half a Scruple or a Scruple of Salt 
of Vitriol may be given to Infants: But for grown People, 
and such as are of a strong Constitution, the following 
forms of Medicines may be prescribed. 
 
Take of Crocus Metallorum, or of Mercurius Vitæ four 
or six grains, Mercurius dulcis fifteen Grains, or a 
Scruple, grind them together upon a Stone, mix them 
with the Pap of a roasted Apple, or Conserve of Borrage; 
make a Bolus. 
 
Or give half an Ounce, one Ounce, or one Ounce and an 
half of the infusion of Crocus Metallorum, or of Mercurius 
Vitæ, made in Spanish Wine, according to the 
Strength of the Sick: Or, 
Take of Emetick Tartar four or six grains. 
 
They that are of a weak Constitution may take a Scruple 
or half a Dram of Salt of Vitriol, and half an hour after 
let them drink several Pints of Posset-drink; and then 
with a Feather, or with the Finger, let them provoke 
themselves to Vomit often. The next day after the Vomit, 
unless any thing forbid, draw Blood from the Arm, or by 
the Sucking of Leeches from the Hemorrhoidal Veins; 
and the next day after Bleeding, give a Purging Medicine, 
which afterwards must be constantly repeated four days 
before the New Moon. 
 
Take of Rosin of Jalap half a Scruple, of Mercurius dulcis 
one Scruple, of Castor three Grains, of Conserve of the 
Flowers of Peony one Dram; make a Bolus to be taken in 
the Morning: Or, 
 
Take of the Fibres of black Hellebore infused in Vinegar, 
dried and pouder'd half a Dram, of Ginger half a Scruple, 
of Salt of Wormwood twelve Grains, of Oyl of Ambar 
two drops; make a Pouder, give it in the Pulp of a roasted 
Apple in the Morning. 
 
[^p.8^] 
Of the days the Sick does not Purge, especially at the 
Seasons of the Moon, give Morning and Evening specifick 
Remedies. 
 
Take of the Roots of male Peony dried and poudered, one, 
two, or three Drams; give it twice a day in the following 
tincture, at eight in the Morning, and at four in the 
Afternoon. 
 
Take of the Leaves of Misleto of the Oak two Drams, of 
the Roots of Peony cut, half an Ounce, of Castor one Dram; 
put them into a Glass, and pour upon them, of Bettony 
Water, or of simple Peony Water, and of White Wine 
each a Pint, of Salt of Misleto of the Oak, or of Common 
Salt two Drams: Digest them in a close Vessel in 
the heat of Sand for two days. Give three Ounces with a 
Dose of the Powder above prescribed. 
 
At the same time make a Necklace with Peony Roots 
sliced, and hang it about the Neck, and the Roots fried or 
boiled till they are soft, may be eat daily with the Meat. 
 
Take of Man's Skull prepared one Ounce, of misleto of the 
Oak, factitous Cinnabar, and of Elk's Hoof, each half 
an Ounce. Dose, half a Scruple, or one Scruple. 
 
Some find benefit by Shaving the Head, and by applying 
to the forepart of it a Plaister. 
 
Take of the Roots and Seeds of Peony, of Castor, of Misleto 
of the Oak, and of Man's Skull finely powder'd, each one 
Dram, of the Plaister of Bettony two Ounces, of Carrana 
Tacamahaca, each two Drams, of Balsam Copaiba 
a sufficient quantity: make a Plaister spread on Leather, 
and apply it to the Sutures of the Head. 
 
Anoint the Temples and Nostrils often with Oyl of 
Ambar, either by it self, or mixed with Oyl of Copaiba, 
Sneesing Powders, and Apophlegmatisms must be used 
every Morning. 
 
Take of white Hellebore one ounce, of Castor and Euphorbium 
each half a dram, of sweet Marjoram, and the 
Leaves of Rue each two drams, make a Powder, which 
you may dissolve with Mustard in a decoction of Sage, or 
hyssop, and with it wash and gargle the Mouth. 
 
Glysters may be used daily upon occasion. 'Tis said that 
six or eight Ounces of the decoction of Gujacum taken twice 
a day, and the second decoction of it used for ordinary 
drink, as is used in the French Pox, will Cure this Disease. 
 
[^p.9^] 
[}CHAP. V. 
Of Childrens Convulsions.}] 
 
CHildrens Convulsions, in Latin, Epilepsia puerorum, 
are so frequent, that it is almost the only Species of 
Convulsions. 
 
They are chiefly subject to them in the first Month, 
and at the time they breed Teeth; but they also happen 
at other times, and proceed from other causes in such are 
disposed to them: Sometimes they do not come presently 
after the Birth, but lye hid until the breeding of Teeth, 
or not till a great while after, and take their rise from 
other evident Causes either Internal or External; as 
from an Unhealthy or Big-bellied Nurse, from Milk coagulated 
or corrupted in the Stomach, from a Feaverish 
Disposition, from Ulcers or Scabs of the Head, or of 
other Parts suddenly disappearing; from changes of the 
Air, or from the Conjunction or opposite Aspects of the 
Sun and Moon. 
 
We must endeavour to prevent these Convulsions in 
Children and Infants, or to Cure them when they are 
come; for if the former Children of the same Parents 
have been subject to Convulsive Fits, this Disease ought 
to be prevented, by the early use of Remedies, in such as 
are born after: To this end it is customary to give to 
new-born Babes, as soon as they begin to breath, some 
Medicine proper for Convulsions: Some, upon this occasion, 
give some drops of pure Hony; others a Spoonful 
of Canary-wine sweetned with Sugar, or Oyl of Almonds 
fresh drawn; others give a drop of Oyl of Ambar, or 
half a Spoonful of Epileptick water. Besides these things 
used at first, which certainly do good, some other Remedies 
ought to be administred; for instance, give a Spoonful 
twice a day of the following Liquor: 
 
Take of the Waters of Black Cherries and Rue, each one 
Ounce and a half; of Langius's Antiepilectick Water, 
one Ounce; of Syrup of Coral, six Drams; of prepared 
Pearl, fifteen Grains; mingle them in a Viol. 
 
[^p.10^] 
The third or fourth day after the Birth, make an Issue 
in the Neck, and if the Countenance be florid, evacuate 
by bleeding, an Ounce and an half or two Ounces of 
Blood from the Jugular Veins, but take care that too 
much Blood do not flow out in sleep; rub gently the 
Temples with the following Linement. 
 
Take of Oyl of Nutmegs by expression two Drams, of Balsam 
of Copaiba three Drams, of Ambar one Scruple, mix them. 
 
Hang round the Neck the Roots and Seeds of Male-peony, 
and a little Elks hoof sewed up in a Rag: Moreover 
Medicines proper for Convulsions must be given daily 
to the Nurse. 
 
Let her take Morning and Evening a Draught of Whey, 
wherein the Roots of Male-peony, or the Seeds of Sweet 
Fennel have been boiled. 
 
Take of the Conserves of the flowers of Bettony, Male-peony, 
and Rosemary flowers, each two Ounces; of the Powders 
of the Roots and Flowers of Male-peony, each two Drams; 
of red Coral prepared, and white Ambar, each one Dram; 
of the Roots of Angelica and Zodoary prepared, each half 
a Dram; with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of Peony, 
make an Electuary. Let her take the quantity of a Nutmeg 
Morning and Evening, and be very orderly in her Diet. 
 
But if any Infant be actually seized with Convulsions, 
because the Issue does not run well, you must apply a 
Blister to the Neck or behind the Ears; and if the Infant 
be not of a cold Constitution, Blood must be drawn from 
the Jugular Veins by Leeches, and Linements must be used 
to the Temples, Nostrils and Neck, and to the Soles of 
the Feet; and Glisters which empty the Belly plentifully 
must be injected: Moreover, often in a day, namely 
every sixth or eight hour, Specifick Remedies must be 
given. 
 
Take of Oyl of Copaiba, and of Castor, each two Drams; 
of Ambar half a Dram; make a Linement. 
 
Apply to the Soles of the Feet the Plaister, with Euphorbium 
spread on Leather. 
 
Take of prepared Pearls, of the Powder de Gutteta, each 
one Dram, mingle them for twelve Papers, whereof 
let him take one Morning and Evening in a Spoonful 
of the following Julap, drinking after it one or two 
Spoonfuls. 
 
[^p.11^] 
Take of the Waters of Black Cherries, and of Lilly of the 
Vallies, each two Ounces; of Fennel-water, and Compound 
Peony water, each two Drams; of Syrup of red 
Poppies, six Drams. 
 
Take of the Powder of the Seeds of Rue, of Castor, of Assafætida, 
each a sufficient quantity, mingle them and tye 
it up in a Rag, sprinkle it with Vinegar, and put it often 
to the Nostrils. 
 
Untzerus commends much the Gall of a Sucking Kitlin, 
all the Juice being taken out of the Bladder, and mixed 
with a little water of Lime-flowers, and given to the 
Child: An excellent Physician lately told me, that he 
had known several Children cured with this Remedy. 
When by reason of breeding Teeth difficultly, Convulsions 
happen, this Symptom is Secondary and less Dangerous, 
and therefore does not require first and chief 
work of Healing; for sometimes we are more Solicitous 
to ease the Pain, and take off the Feaverish Disposition. 
And therefore a thin and cooling Diet is ordered for the 
Eruption of the Teeth, either by rubbing or cutting the 
Gums, and things that are anodine are applied to the 
swelled and pained Parts; and here Glisters and Bleeding 
are often used; and we ought to procure Sleep, and to 
qualifie the Fury of the Blood; in the mean while Temperate 
Medicines for Convulsions, and such as do the least 
stir the Humours, are to be used, and Blisters, because 
they evacuate the Serum too apt to be poured upon the 
Head, do often give relief. 
 
When Children are seized with Convulsions, not presently 
after the Birth, or upon breeding Teeth, but from 
other Occasions and Accidents; the cause, for the most 
part of such, is either in the Head or in the Bowels; 
when the former is suspected, as is wont to be known by 
the signs which shew watry Humours heap'd up in the 
Brain, the Medicines above mentioned must be used: 
Moreover, for those who bear Purging well, a Vomit or 
gentle Purge must be prescribed, Wine and Oxymel of 
Squills, also Mercurius dulcis, Rubarb, and Rosin of Jalap 
are of good use, when the cause of the Convulsions seems 
to be lodged in the Bowels, or when Worms or sharp 
Humours in the Belly are the cause: For Worms, a 
Purge of Rubarb, or of Mercurius dulcis, with the Rosin 
[^p.12^] 
of Jalap must be given, and the following Medicines are 
also of use. 
 
Take of the Roots of Virginian Snake-weed powdered one 
Dram, of Coral calcined till it is white half a Dram; 
make a Powder. The Dose is half a Scruple or a Scruple 
twice a day for three days following, drinking upon it the 
Decoction of the Roots of Grass. 
 
Take of Hiera pitra, and of Venice-Treacle, each one Dram; 
make a Plaister for the Belly. 
 
If the Convulsions are thought to proceed from sharp 
Humours disturbing the Bowels or Stomach, Purging upward 
and downward by turns is to be observed; to this 
end a gentle Vomit of Wine of Squills, or Salt of Vitriol, is 
to be given. 
 
Take of Syrup of Peony three Ounces, Salt of Vitriol two 
Scruples, of Compound Lavender-water one Dram, mingle 
them, give a Spoonful three or four times in an hour, till 
the Child has once Vomited or went to Stool once. 
 
But if Evacuation downward seem most proper, give 
the Infusion of Rubarb, or the Powder of it, or Syrup of 
Succory with Rubarb, or Syrup of Roses with Agarick: 
And moreover Glisters are to be used frequently in this 
case, and External Medicines are to be applied to the 
Belly. 
 
Take of the leaves of Camomil cut small, two handfuls, put 
them into two Bags made of fine Cloth or of Silk, which 
being dip'd in hot Milk and pressed out, are to be applied 
successively to the Belly. 
 
[}CHAP. VI. 
Of the Night-Mare or Incubus.}] 
 
IT is commonly supposed by the ordinary sort of People, 
that this Disease is occasioned by the Devil, or an Evil 
Spirit's lying upon their Stomachs, which perhaps may 
be so sometimes; but it also comes from meer Natural 
Causes, as is supposed, though what those are, or where 
the Morbisick Matter is placed, is not known, when it 
[^p.13^] 
is thought to come from Natural Causes, the Cure is to 
be undertaken in the following manner, Bleeding and 
gentle Purging is first to be used, and afterward things 
proper for the Head, as Powders of Ambar, Coral, Pearls, 
the Roots of Male-peony, Dittany of Crete, Contra yerva, 
and other things prescribed in the Chapter of the Apoplexy, 
and the like: But an orderly Diet is first to be prescribed; 
windy Meats, and such as are hard of Digestion 
are to be avoided, and Sleep must not be indulged after 
Eating or Study, and large and late Suppers, and lying on 
the Back must be forbid. 
 
Infants and Children are often troubled with this Disease, 
the sign whereof, is their starting in their Sleep, 
and crying out violently; and after they have had these 
Fits often they fall into Convulsions, wherefore a right 
Method of Cure ought to be administred as soon as they 
seem to be disordered in their Sleep: Inquiry must be 
made concerning the Milk they Suck, whether it be good 
or not, and whether it agrees with their Stomachs; 
after they have Sucked plentifully, they must not be 
suffered to sleep, the Nurse must use an orderly Diet, 
and let her take also Morning and Evening a Dose of 
a Powder or Electuary that is proper for the Head, 
drinking upon it a Draught of Posset-drink, wherein the 
Leaves of Sage or Bettany, or the Roots or Seeds of Peony 
have been boiled. Let the Infant take twice a day a 
Spoonful of Black-Cherry-water; let an Issue be made 
in the Neck, and let it lye sometimes on one side, sometimes 
on the other, and seldom or never upon the Back: 
And Coral, or the Seeds of Male-peony being hanged 
about the Neck, or upon the Pit of the Stomach, may do 
some good. When they start violently often in their 
Sleep, apply a Blister to the Neck or behind the Ears. 
Moreover, Morning and Evening daily give half a Scruple 
of the Powder de Gutteta in a Spoonful of Lime-flower-water. 
 
[^p.14^] 
[}CHAP. VI. 
Of Sleepy Diseases, Coma, Lethargy, Carus 
and Apoplexy.}] [^Should be chapter 7.^] 
 
THere are four sorts of Preternatural Sleep, Coma, 
Lethargy, Carus and Apoplexy, which because for 
the most part they proceed from the same Causes, and 
require the same Methods of Cure; therefore they shall 
be treated of together in this Chapter. 
 
The first and principal cause of these Diseases, is a Flegmatick 
or Watry Humour, contained in the Brain contrary 
to Nature. 
 
Secondly, Sleepy Diseases are wont to be generated by 
Blood abounding in the Brain, and from extravasated 
Blood stopping or oppressing the Ventricles of the Brain, 
sleepy Disease, and especially an Apoplexy is sometimes 
occasioned. 
 
Thirdly, It is certain that a Comatose Disease proceeds 
from a Tumor that oppresses the Brain by its weight. 
 
Fourthly, Immoderate Vapors carried to the Head, may 
be the cause of a Sympathetick Coma. 
 
Fifthly, From the immoderate use of Narcotick Medicines 
inwardly taken, so deep a Sleep is occasioned, 
that many, by the imprudent use of Opium, have slept 
their last. 
 
That Sleepy Diseases are occasioned by Flegmatick 
Humours stagnating in the Brain, is known by a Flegmatick 
Habit of Body, by old Age or Childhood, by a cold 
or moist Season or Country, by the Suppression of the 
Excretion of Flegm, by the Mouth and Nostrils; and for 
that the Sick, before the coming of this Disease, was 
afflicted with a Dulness of the Head, Dimness of Sight, 
and Unaptness for Motion; and because in the Disease 
Flegm flows from the Mouth and Nostrils, or falling upon 
the Throat, is frequently swallowed down by the Sick. 
 
That Blood produces a sleepy Disease is known by a 
Plethorick Disposition, by Redness of the Face, and by a 
Pain in the Head foregoing this Disease: That the Sympathetick 
[^p.15^] 
Disease arises from Vapors elevated to the Brain, 
is known by the absence of those Signs, which signifie an 
Idiopathetick Disease, also by the signs of the peculiar 
disorder of the Parts, from whence Vapors are transmitted 
to the Brain. 
 
A very thin Diet is to be ordered at the beginning of 
these Diseases, and when the Fit is off, the Sick, to prevent 
a Relapse, must forbear all strong Liquors, and be 
fed with Barly and Oat-meal Broths, or with Chicken 
Broth; and sometimes, especially when he Purges, with 
Chickens, Lamb, and the like. 
 
When a Physician is first called to a Patient, that is 
seized with a sleepy Disease, he must endeavour by all 
means to rowse him, by offering Violence to all his Senses; 
and therefore he must expose his Eyes to the Sun-beams, 
or to a clear Light; his Ears must be filled with violent 
Noises and Clamours, and the Sick must be sure to be 
called aloud by his own name; sharp things are to be 
blown up his Nostrils; the Sense of Touching is to be 
revived by Frictions, Vellications, plucking of the Hair, 
Ligatures, Squeesing of the Fingers together, and the like; 
he must be presently Blooded if he has Strength; but his 
Strength is not to be judged of by the present Circumstances, 
but by such as he was in before the Disease invaded 
him. You must first Bleed in the Arm, and then 
in the Jugular Vein, presently after give the following 
Vomit. 
 
Take of the Blessed Wine one Ounce and an half, of Carduus 
water one Ounce, of Spirit of Juniper-berries two drops; 
make a Vomit. 
 
Inject two or three sharp Glisters in a day. 
 
Take of the Carminative Decoction, with Bay-berries and 
Juniper-berries ten Ounces, of the Electuary of Bay-berries 
one Ounce, of Vinum Benedictum three Ounces, 
and of brown Sugar three Ounces, of Chymical Oyl of 
Juniper ten drops; mingle them, make a Glister. 
 
If the Glister be not rendred in due time, provoke the 
Belly by a Suppository. 
 
Take of Hiera picra half an Ounce, of Sal Gemma one 
Dram, of Hony a sufficient quantity; make Suppositories. 
 
The Spirit of Sal Armoniack must be held to the Nostrils, 
and things of all kinds that cause Revulsion must be 
[^p.16^] 
used, not only Frictions and Ligatures, but also Cupping-glasses 
set on the Back, Shoulders, Arms and Thighs: 
But in an Apoplexy you must not apply Cupping-glasses 
to the Back, or to the Hypochonders, least the Muscles of 
the Breast and Belly should be contracted, and so Respiration 
more hindred: Cupping-glasses applied to the Head 
are counted very proper; apply a Blistering Plaister with 
Euphorbium to the Neck: Some, according to the Custom 
of the Ancients, hold a red-hot Frying-pan to the Head, 
at such a distance as it may burn the Hair but not the 
Skin. 
 
Take of the Waters of Rue, Balm and Black-Cherries, each 
three Ounces; of Compound Peony water, and of Compound 
Syrup of Peony, each one Ounce and a half; of Tincture 
of Castor one Dram, of Spirit of Sal Armoniack 
half a Dram; mingle them, make a Julep, give four or 
five Spoonfuls often. 
 
In the general Cure of these Diseases you must take 
notice, than in those which proceed from Blood, Medicines 
that heat the least are to be used; but Bleeding is to be 
used more freely, and afterwards the Vein in the Forehead 
is to be opened, and things that purge Choler are 
to be mixed with those that purge Flegm: If the Brain 
be very much cooled, the Sick, after universal Evacuations, 
may use Tablets made in the following manner. 
 
Take of Amber-grease half a Scruple, distilled Oyl of the 
Seeds of Anise, Cinnamon and Nutmegs, of each three 
drops; Oyl of Cloves one drop; of Sugar dissolved in 
Orange-flower water, four Ounces; make Tablets, let him 
take a dram or two drams every Morning. 
 
The following Powder is also commended and is much 
in use. 
 
Take of white Ambar half an Ounce; of the Powder called 
Diarhodon Abbatis two drams; of the Roots of Peony one 
dram and an half; make a Powder, whereof give a dram 
in two Spoonfuls of Simple Peony water before the New 
Moon. 
 
It is also proper to hold Nutmeg often in the Mouth, 
and to chew it; and Perfumes are to be held often to the 
Nostrils, especially Apoplestick Balsam; Spices are to be 
used with Meats, and the following Digestive Powder 
after Meals. 
 
[^p.17^] 
Take of the Seeds of Coriander, sweet Fennel, Caraways' 
each fifteen Grains, of white Ambar one Dram, of th=e= 
yellow peel of Citrons, and flowers of Rosemary each on=e= 
Dram and an half, of Nutmegs half a Dram, of 
white Sugar three Ounces; powder them grosly, and give 
half a spoonful after Meals. 
 
If from too great a quantity of Blood a sleepy Disease 
is feared, the Patient must be sufficiently Blooded, and the 
utmost endeavours must be used to make the Hemorrhoids 
flow, than which nothing can be more advantageous. 
 
Purging is to be ordered to prevent a Relapse. 
 
Take of the Pill of Ambar, and of the lesser Cochie, each 
two Scruples, of the best Castor six Grains, of Oyl of Ambar 
a sufficient quantity; mix them and make 12. Pills. 
Take six for a Dose, and the other six three days after. 
Or, 
 
Take of the Pill of Ambar one Scruple, of Rosin of Jalap six 
Grains, of Tartar vitriolated eight Grains, Spirit of Lavender 
eight drops, of Elixir Proprietatis a sufficient 
quantity; make 4 or 5 Pills to be taken in the Morning. 
 
After Purging prescribe the following Medicines. 
 
Take of the Conserves of the Flowers of Male peony, and of 
Rosemary each one Ounce, of the Bark of Citron Candied 
six Drams, of the Species Diambra, and Dianthes, each 
one Dram, of Castor powdred two Scruples, of Compound 
Spirit of Lavender half a Dram, with a sufficient quantity 
of the Syrups of Gilliflowers, and Compound Peony; 
Make an Electuary, give the quantity of a Nutmeg 
Morning and Evening daily; and let the Sick take four 
spoonfuls of the following Julep after it. 
 
Take of the Waters of Black Cherries, Rue, Pennyroyal each 
three Ounces, of Compound Peony Water, and Langius's 
Epileptick water, each one Ounce, of the Syrup of the 
Flowers of Male Peony one Ounce, mingle them. Or, 
 
Take of the Powder e gutteta three Drams, of Castor 
half a Dram, of Syrup of the Flowers of Peony a sufficient 
quantity; make forty Pills, whereof let him take 
four every Night at Bed-time, drinking upon them two 
spoonfuls of the following Julep. 
 
Take of the Waters of the Flowers of Peony, Black Cherries, 
Rue, Pennyroal, each two Ounces, of Compound Peony 
Water, and of Compound Briony Water, and Tincture 
[^p.18^] 
of Castor, each one Ounce, of Syrup of Male Peony an 
Ounce and an half, mingle them. 
 
Take of Ambar one Ounce, sprinkle the fourth part of it 
every Night at Bed-time upon the Head. 
 
[}CHAP. VIII. 
Catalepsis, or Catoche.}] 
 
THis Disease is very rare and very wonderful. Galen 
mentions an Observation of one of his Scholars, who 
upon hard Study was seized with a Catalepsis. He lay, 
says he, like a piece of Wood, extended, rigid, and inflexible; 
his Eyes were always kept open, but he could 
not speak. 
 
When he recovered, he told us he could hear us speak, 
though not plainly; he remembred what was done, and 
saw all that were with him; but he said he could not 
speak nor move a Limb: And Fernelius mentions two Observations 
of this kind: He says, that a person studying 
very hard was seized with this Disease, and that he was 
so stiff, that sitting with his Pen in his Hand, and looking 
earnestly upon his Book, he was supposed to be hard at 
Study; till being called, and pull'd, he was perceived to 
have no Sense nor Motion. Another lay as it were Dead, 
who neither saw nor heard, nor felt when he was pricked. 
He breathed well; and whatever was put in his Mouth 
he readily swallowed: Being taken out of his Bed he stood 
alone; and being push'd he went forward; and in what 
manner soever his Hand, or Arm, or Leg was Bent, it stood 
fix'd; so that he look'd like a Statue. 
 
The like Observations are to be found in many other 
Authors; from whence you may gather, that there is most 
commonly an abolition the internal and external Senses, 
and a stiffness of the Limbs: But sometimes the Senses 
are not wholly abolished; for sometimes they can hear, 
and their Limbs may be moved by the By-standers, 
 
The Cure is twofold, one in the Fit, the other out of 
the Fit: In the Fit, those things are proper which are 
[^p.19^] 
prescribed for Sleepy Diseases. Out of the Fit, such things 
as are used for Cure of Melancholy are proper; for from 
thence it most commonly proceeds: But if it come from a 
Cold intemperies, such things are proper as serve to mend 
such a Constitution; if it proceed from abundance of 
Blood, Bleeding is to be used. 
 
[}CHAP. IX. 
Of a Palsie.}] 
 
A Palsie, in Latin, Paralysis, is a privation of Sense and 
Motion, by reason the influx of the Animal Spirits is 
hindred. There are various differences of it; for either it 
seizes all the parts of the Head, then it is called Paraplegia; 
or only half the Body, then it is called Hemeplegia; 
or it seises only one part, then it is called a particular 
Palsie. It is also called perfect, and imperfect: It is said 
to be perfect when Sense and Motion are wholly abolished; 
imperfect when the Functions are weakned: And then it 
is also called Numbness, which is a fore-runner of a Palsie. 
There is also another Species of an imperfect Palsie, when 
Motion is hurt, and the Sense remains perfect; and so on 
the contrary. 
 
The Causes of a Palsie in general, are all those things 
which hinder the influx of the Animal Spirits into the 
Nerves and Muscles; the most frequent of all is a Flegmatick 
Humour; which by obstructing, compressing, 
thickning or cooling the Nerves, hinders the said influx of 
the Animal Spirits. 
 
The Pituitous humour flows from the Brain into the 
Nerves and spinal Marrow; so a small Apoplexy degenerates 
into a Palsie; because the humour occasioning it is 
cast from the Brain upon the Marrow, or beginning of the 
Nerves; and so it either insinuates it self into the substance 
of them, and shuts the insensible passages through which 
the Spirits pass; or passing by the Vertebra's of the Back, 
and spinal Marrow, and following the Course of the 
Nerves compresses them, and so hinders the passages of 
[^p.20^] 
the Animal Spirits; and the same Humour may thicken 
the substance of the Nerves by its Coldness; so that it 
cannot make way for the Animal Spirits. 
 
There are other Causes of a Palsie, but they are not so 
common; as taking Cold, a Blow or Fall, the frequent 
handling of Quicksilver, tumors near the Spine or Nerves; 
cutting of the Nerves, dislocation of the Vertebra, or other 
Joints. The kind of the Disease is easily known; for want 
of Motion and Sense may be soon perceived; but the 
knowledge of the part affected is more difficult: But it 
may be known by those that are skilled in Anatomy, who 
know the Originations and Insertions of the Nerves. For 
if the right part of the Face becomes Paralytick, or the 
left, the other parts being sound, they know the Brain is 
only affected according to that part from whence the 
Nerves are carried to those parts: But if the parts under 
the Head are also afflicted with the Face, the Brain and 
the Spine of the Back are also affected; and if the parts 
below the Head are seised, and the Face well, the fault is 
only in the Spine; and in the beginning of it, if all the 
Parts are affected: But if only half the Body is Paralytick, 
only half the Spine is affected. When the Legs are Paralytick, 
the seat of the Disease is about the end of Spinal 
Marrow, near the Vertebra's of the Os Sacrum; and 
so in the rest, the place is to be sought for from whence 
the Nerves arise. And sometimes enquiry after the external 
Cause much helps to find out the Part affected; of 
which there are two Instances in Galen, one of a certain 
Man, who in a Cold and Rainy Season wore a long while 
a wet Neckcloath about his Neck, his Hands became Paralytick. 
The other is of one who lost the Sense of three 
of his Fingers; and when Galen understood that he fell 
out of a Cart upon his Back, he conjectured that some 
Part was hurt by the Fall under the seventh Vertebra, 
where the Nerve begins; and therefore he applied the 
Medicine which was used before to the Fingers, to no purpose, 
to that part. 
 
The knowledge of the Causes is to be fetched from the 
Procatarctick Causes, the foregoing Diseases, and the Constitution 
of the Sick; and so the external cooling and moistening 
Causes going before, Old Age, a Flegmatick Constitution, 
Winter, cold and moist Diet: An Apoplexy 
[^p.21^] 
going before, signifie that the Disease proceeds from a cold 
imtemperies, and a Flegmatick humour. 
 
Feavers foregoing, and sometimes a present Feaver, 
Cholerick, or Melancholy Constitution, Summer-time, or 
Autumn, the use of Spices, of Salt or hot Meats, violent 
and long Passions of the Mind, the excretion of Cholerick 
and Melancholy humours, or of Acid, or Acrid Serum, 
hot defluxions upon various parts, and Pains arising from 
thence: And lastly, when Pain and Convulsions accompany 
the diminution of Sense and Motion; and when such as 
are so afflicted are injured by hot and drying Medicines, 
are relieved by cooling and moistening Remedies, the 
Palsie proceeds from Cholerick or Melancholy humours. 
Tumors, and luxations; and Wounds causing a Palsie are 
easily known. 
 
[}The Prognostick Signs.}] 
 
A Palsie coming from a pituitous humour fluffing the 
substance of the Nerves, is difficult to Cure. A Palsie 
following an Apoplexy is seldom Cured, and most commonly 
turns to an Apoplexy again. A trembling coming 
upon a Palsie is good: If the paralytick Part be hot there 
is hope of Recovery; but if it be always cold it is hardly 
Cured. A wasting of the Part, and great Paleness renders 
it incurable. If the Eye of the Paralytick side be lessened, 
there is little hopes of a Cure. A Palsie of the Legs or 
Feet is easier Cured, than of the upper Parts. A Palsie 
in old People is incurable. A Palsie cannot be Cured in 
the Winter. A violent Feaver coming upon a Palsie is 
good, so is a Loosness coming upon a small, and new Palsie. 
 
The Cure of a Palsie is to be varied according to the 
variety of the Causes; but because it chiefly comes from 
Flegm, and a cold intemperies, we must chiefly endeavour 
to remove this Cause, and you must begin with an universal 
evacuation of the whole Body: As to Bleeding that 
can scarce do any good, for the Blood is not in the fault, 
but Flegm; and for the most part this Disease seises Old 
People, such as are Flegmatick, and naturally Cold: But 
if an abundance of crude Blood should seem to produce 
the Flegmatick Humour, and to nourish it, a Vein may 
be opened in the Arm of the well-side: But Blood must 
be drawn sparingly, left the languid Heat should be extinguished. 
 
[^p.22^] 
Therefore Bleeding being omitted, or used as is said 
sparingly, the Cure must be begun by removing the antecedent 
Cause, which is a cold intemperies of the Brain. 
To which end the following Remedies must be used. 
 
Take of the Roots of Cyperus, Florentine Orris, Angelica, 
Zedoary, Elecompane, each one Ounce, of the Leaves of 
Bettony, Marjoram, Balm, Peniroyal, Calaminth, each 
one handful; of the Tops of Thym, and Sage, each half 
an handful, of the Seeds of Anise, Sesely, and Fennel, 
each tree Drams; of Liquorish rasped, of Raisins of 
the Sun cleansed, each one Ounce; of the Leaves of Senna 
cleansed, and sprinkled with Aqua Vitæ two Ounces; 
of the Seeds of Carthamus bruised, and of fresh Polypody 
of the Oak, each one Ounce; of Agarick newly trochiseated; 
of Turbith, and Hermodactil's, each three 
Drams; of Ginger and Cloves, each one Dram; of the 
Flowers of Stæchas, of Rosemary, Sage and Lavender, 
each one pugil; boil them in a sufficient quantity of 
Water to a Pint; dissolve in it four Ounces of White 
Sugar, clarifie it, and aromatize it with two Drams of 
Cinnamon, and make an Apozem for four Doses, to be 
taken in a Morning. 
 
In the first and last Dose dissolve three Drams of Diaphænicon. 
Or, 
 
Take of the Mass of Pill Cochiæ Minor two Scruples, 
moisten them with Bettony Water; make five or six 
Pills, guild them, and let him take them early in the 
Morning. 
 
The Pills of Agarick, and of Cochiæ major are used for 
the same purpose. 
 
Take of Gujacum, and of Sarsaparilla, each two Ounces; 
infuse them twenty four hours in two Quarts of Fountain 
Water over hot Ashes, then boil them over a gentle fire 
to the consumption of half, strain it, give half a Pint 
hot in the Morning, and cover the Sick well that they 
may Sweat. The use of this may be continued for fifteen 
or twenty days, or longer. 
 
In the use of Sudorifick Decoctions, this is always to 
be observed, viz. let some Purging Medicine be given 
once a Week, omitting for that day the Sudorifick Potion. 
Sneezing, Apoplegmatisms, Blisters, Head Powders, and 
Baths are also used. After the use of the Diet Drink, give 
the following Pills once a Week. 
 
[^p.23^] 
Take of the fætid Pill, Coch. Minor, each half a Dram: 
Troches of Albandal four Grains; mingle them, and make 
Pills to be taken in the Morning. 
 
But because the Humour wants preparation before every 
Purge, therefore two or three days before every Dose of the 
Pills, give three or four Ounces of the following Water, 
in the Morning, two hours before Eating. 
 
Take of Gujacum four Ounces, of the Bark of the same one 
Ounce, of Sarsaparilla one Ounce and an half, of China 
one Ounce, of Sassafras six Drams, of Wood of Aloes, 
and of Galingal each one Dram and an half, of the Roots 
of Angelica, Peony, and Fennel, each three Drams 
and an half, of the Seeds of Peony two Drams, infuse 
them twenty four hours in six Pints of Fountain Water, 
and two Quarts of White Wine. Afterwards add the 
Leaves of Bettony, ground Pine, Sage, each one handful; 
of the Flowers of the Lime-tree, Primrose, Stæchas, 
and Rosemary, each two Pugils; of Lavender Flowers 
one Pugil, of Old Venice Treacle half an Ounce, of the 
Seeds and Bark of Citron each two Drams and an half, 
of Polypody half an Ounce, of Cinnamon six Drams; 
distil them in a Bath, to two Pints and an half of the 
Liquor, add four Ounces of Penids. 
 
If the Purges abovementioned are not successful, it will 
be convenient to give Chymical Vomits, as Vinum Benedictum, 
and the like, if the Sick is able to bear them. 
 
After general Evacuation, we must use Topicks, both 
to the Paralytick part to recall the Heat and Spirits, and 
to the Spinal Marrow; where for the most part resides 
the Cause of the Disease; therefore let the part affected 
be rubbed daily gently with hot Cloaths, and let Cupping 
Glasses be applied to the Heads of the Muscles of the part 
affected, let them have a marrow Mouth, and much 
Flame: But they must not be kept on long, lest what is 
attracted should be dissipated. Afterwards apply a 
Plaister of Pitch and Rosin of the Pine; that what is attracted 
may be kept in. All the Paralytick part may be 
Stung gently with Nettles. Afterwards the part affected 
may be anointed with proper Oils, Ointments, and Balsams. 
The following Ointment is very good in this 
case: 
 
[^p.24^] 
Take of the Juice of Squills four Ounces, of the Juice of 
Wild Cucumber, and of the Juice of Rue each one 
Ounce, of Euphorbium, Castor, Sagapenum, Ammoniacum, 
Bdelllium, dissolved all in Vinegar, each one 
Dram and an half; of Myrrh, Frankincense, Pellitory 
of Spain, Niter, each one Dram; of Oils of Elder, 
Turpentine, and of Euphorbium, each half an Ounce, 
of Wax a sufficient quantity to make an Ointment. 
After the anointing the part, wrap it about with hot 
Cloaths. 
 
If the Disease goes not off by these means, Plaisters are 
to be applied to the Spine of the Back; the following is of 
excellent use for this purpose. 
 
Take of Ship-pitch, Galbanum, Sagapenum, and Gum 
Ammoniack, each one Ounce, of the Roots of Pellitory 
of Spain, and of Mustard Seed each half an Ounce, of 
Euphorbium two Drams, of Yellow Wax three Drams, 
of Oyl of Turpentine a sufficient quantity; make a 
Plaister. 
 
It is also very good to Sweat the Part affected by the 
Vapours from a Decoction of Cephalick Herbs and Roots 
made in White Wine; but the Decoction must not touch 
the Part. A Decoction of the Roots of Burdock is also 
much commended in this Case: These sorts of Baths are 
to be used twice or thrice a Week; and after Bathing you 
must put the Sick to Bed, and give him a Dram of Venice 
Treacle. The green Leaves of Tobacco infused in Malago 
Wine, and the Parts bathed with it after Sweating, is 
reckoned the best outward Remedy for a Palsie. 
 
But lastly, the Bath Waters are best; if the Sick drink 
of them some days, Bath and Wash the Head with them, 
and afterwards rub the Parts with the Infusion of Tobacco 
Leaves. 
 
The Paralytick Parts must be always kept warm: If 
it can be, with the Skins of Foxes, Hares, or Lambs. 
 
[^p.25^] 
[}CHAP. X. 
Of a Convulsion.}] 
 
A Convulsion, in Latin, Spasmus, is an involuntary and 
perpetual Retraction of the Nerves and Muscles towards 
their Original. 
 
It is twofold, one properly so called, to which the Definition 
above mentioned agrees; the other is rather a Convulsive 
Motion; and they are thus distinguished: In a true 
Convulsion, the retraction of the Muscle is continual, and 
the Member immoveable: In a Convulsive Motion, 
the Member is variously agitated, as in the Falling-sickness. 
 
They also differ in their Causes; for a true Convulsion 
proceeds from fullness or emptiness, a Convulsive Motion 
from Irritation. 
 
A true Convulsion is divided into universal and particular; 
an universal takes its rise either from the Brain, and 
then the Muscles of the Face are also seised with Convulsions; 
or it arises from the beginning of the Spinal Marrow, 
then the Muscles of the Head, or those that move the 
Spine forward or backward are seised with Convulsions; 
Upon which account there are three sorts of Convulsions; 
the first is called Emprosthotonos, wherein the Body with 
the Head and Neck are violently contracted forward, so 
that the Chin touches the Breast, and the Body represents 
the Keel of a Ship, and sometimes is bent like a Bow, 
and the Head touches the Knees: In this sort, two Muscles 
that bend the Head forward are chiefly affected. 
 
The second is called Opisthotonos; and in it the Body is 
bent backward: The twelve Muscles that extend the 
Head, or some of them, being Convulsed. 
 
The third is called Tetanos, wherein the Muscles before 
and behind are equally contracted, and the Parts kept as 
it were in Æquilibrio. This is the strongest of all; it arising 
from a Contraction of all the Muscles. 
 
A particular Convulsion is caused by the Contraction of 
some one part, the Nerve that serves for its Motion being 
ill affected, which has sometimes a peculiar Name from 
[^p.26^] 
the effect or symptom; as a Convulsion of the Muscles 
moving the Eyes is called Strabismus, that of the Jaws and 
Muscles of the Temples [^GREEK OMITTED^]. A Convulsion of the 
Mouth, from a Contraction of the broad Muscle arising only 
from one part, is called the Dog Convulsion: But if there 
be a Contraction in both sides, it is call'd Risus Sardonicus; 
but sometimes the Mouth is distorted by the Palsie, by 
Relaxation of the other Muscle. A Convulsion of the 
Yard is call'd Satyriasis, or Priapismus. Other Convulsions 
have no proper Names. 
 
The immediate Causes of a true Convulsion, according 
to Hippocrates and Galen, are repletion and inanition, 
the mediate Causes which occasion a repletion, and inanition 
are various; a Flegmatick humour flowing into the 
Nerves is supposed to distend them, as to their Breadth, 
and so they must be necessarily contracted as to their 
length. Another cause of Convulsion from repletion, is 
an inflamation of the Nervous Parts. 
 
The Causes of Convulsions by Emptiness, are all immoderate 
Evacuations by Bleeding, Vomiting, Sweat, and a 
Consumption of innate Moisture, which is occasioned by 
Burning and Coliquative Feavers, by immoderate Labour, 
by Watchings and Cares, and immoderate Venery. 
 
A Convulsive Motion proceeds from Matter that Vellicates 
and Pricks the Nervous Parts, which most commonly 
is malignant; for such a humour commonly happens in 
malignant Feavers: It is also occasioned by Worms, Poison, 
and by Hysterick Fits. 
 
A Convulsion which seises many Parts, especially near 
the Head, is dangerous; and that which seises the Muscles 
of the Breast, is also dangerous; for the Sick may be 
suffocated by it. 
 
A Convulsion arising from great Fluxes of Blood, or 
over-purging is dangerous, if not deadly; so is a Convulsion 
arising from a Phrensie, and upon a Feaver. Hypocrates 
says, that those who are seised with a Tetanos, die within 
four days; but that if they live longer, they recover. 
 
CURE. The Cure of this Disease is to be varied according 
to the variety of the Causes. That which happens 
from Emptiness is incurable. After Bleeding, or it 
being omitted, if it be not convenient, strong Purges must be 
used: but respect must be had to the strength of the Patient: 
[^p.27^] 
After Bleeding, apply Cupping-glasses, with Scarification, 
if Blood has not been drawn before, otherwise 
without Scarification: They must be first applied to the 
remoter parts, afterwards to the parts near the affected 
part: But if the Legs are Convulsed, they must be applied 
to the Buttocks and Loins; if the Arms, to the 
Neck and Shoulders: Blysters are also applied with good 
success to the parts opposite to the part affected. In the 
mean time, after the first Purge, the Matter is to be prepared, 
with Medicines proper for the Head. Note, that 
Castor ought to be added to Purges in this case. Sharp 
Glysters are frequently to be injected, such as were mentioned 
in the Chapter of an Apoplexy. The part affected 
must be anointed with the following, or some other proper 
Linement. 
 
Take of the Oyntment of Marsh-mallows six Ounces, Oyl 
of Turpentine and Camomile each one Ounce, Oyl of 
Lavender three Drams, of Oyl of Foxes half an Ounce, 
Liquid Storax two Ounces, wherewith anoint the affected 
part, and the Spine of the Back frequently, with a 
hot Hand. 
 
After anointing the parts, wrap them in a warm Sheep-Skin, 
just taken from the Sheep. Sheeps Lungs, Pidgeons 
or Hens cut in the middle, and applied hot, are also good. 
It is also good to put the affected part into the Belly of 
an Ox, or Sheep newly kill'd, and keep it there as long as 
it is warm: but the use of Sulphurous Baths is most successful. 
 
When a violent Pain accompanies the Convulsion, use 
the following Linement. 
 
Take of the Oyls of Violets, Lillies, Camomile, each one 
Ounce and an half, of Oyl of sweet Almonds, Mastich, 
and Roses, each one Ounce; mingle them, and anoint 
the part affected. 
 
Sneesing Powders and Apophlegmatisms are also proper 
in this Case. 
 
[^p.28^] 
[}CHAP. XI. 
Of Trembling.}] 
 
TRembling, in Latin, Tremor, is a depraved Motion of 
the Members, whereby they are involuntarily moved. 
The chief Cause of it is weakness of the Nerves, occasioned 
by Old Age, by long Sickness, by immoderate Venery, 
by Fear, and other passions of the Mind; or by 
such things as are wholly offensive to the Nerves, as the 
Fume of Quicksilver. Hard Drinking will also occasion 
it, and a partial Obstruction of the Nerves by gross 
humours. 
 
CURE. It is Cured by the same Medicines that are 
used in the Palsie. 
 
[}CHAP. XII. 
Of a Catarrh.}] 
 
A Catarrh, in Latin, Catarrhus, according to the Ancients, 
is a preternatural fluxion of Humours from the 
Head upon the Lower Parts: But the ingenious Dr. Lower 
is of the Opinion, that it is put off by the Blood upon the 
Glands that are seated in the Throat and Jaws; and he 
says there are no passages to convey it from the Head. 
 
CURE. Whatever precipitates the Serum through 
the Reins, or carries it off by Stool, or by Sweat, is good 
in this case, or whatever else lessens the Serum. 
 
Wherefore, nothing is better for Curing a Catarrh, if 
a Feaver does not accompany it, then abstaining a long 
while from Drink; for several have been Cured, by not 
drinking in three or four days time; for by this means 
the source of the Disease is dried up; just as Rivulets become 
dry for want of Rain. 
 
But if you have reason to imagin from the Pulse, the Urine, 
or restlesness of the Body, that there is some Feaver: 
[^p.29^] 
Having first purged the Body, you must presently Bleed, 
and the Sick must be kept to a thin Diet; and other things 
are to be done which the Cure of the Feaver requires: but 
respect must be had to the Flux of the Serum. 
 
But if by reason of abundance of Serum, the Catarrh 
continue obstinate, in this case nothing is better, then after 
Purging to use Diureticks; if the Catarrh yet continue, 
you must make Issues in the Neck, Arms, or Legs, or apply 
Blisters there. 
 
But because these things require time to do the business, 
if need require; or if there be danger of Suffocation, 
you must Bleed again, and presently Sweat the Patient 
once, or twice a day, if his Strength will bear it; which 
by casting forth the serous Humour through the Pores of 
the Body, will perform the Cure. 
 
Take of the decoction of Senna Gerionis four Ounces, of 
Syrup of Buckthorn six Drams, of Spirit of Sulphur five 
Drops, of Aqua Mirabilis one Dram, mingle them, and 
make a Potion to be taken in the Morning. 
 
At Bed-time after Purging, give the following Pills. 
 
Take of Pill Storax eight Grains, of the Juice of Liquorish 
half a Scruple; make three Pills: Repeat the Purging 
Potion every third day for thrice. 
 
Of the days the Sick does not Purge, let him take of 
the following Electuary. 
 
Take of the Conserve of Red Roses vitriolated, of the Electuary 
of Sassafras one Ounce, of Frankincense powder'd 
one Dram, of Diacodium a sufficient quantity, make an 
Electuary; let him take the quantity of a Nutmeg Morning 
and Evening, drinking upon it three Ounces of the 
following Decoction. 
 
Take of the pectoral Decoction one Pint, add to it in boiling, 
of Balsam of Toln three Drams, of the Leaves of 
Ground-Ivy half a handful. To the strained Liquor, 
add two Ounces of Diacodium, and one Ounce of Spirit 
of Carraways; mingle them. 
 
Diureticks, and Diaphoreticks must also be used. Lastly, 
He that would wholly prevent this Disease, must be well 
Cloathed, and must remove into a hot and dry Country. 
 
