[^Sydenham, Thomas: Compleat method of curing^] 
 
[}Dr. Sydenham's 
Compleat Method 
OF 
CURING 
Almost all 
DISEASES, 
AND 
Description of their Symptoms. 
 
To which are now added, 
Five Discourses of the same Author 
concerning the Pleurisy, Gout, 
Hysterical Passion, Dropsy and Rheumatism. 
 
Abridg'd, and faithfully Translated 
out of the Original Latin. 
 
With Short and Useful Notes 
on the former part, written by a 
late learned Physician, and never 
before Printed. 
 
LONDON. Printed for H. Newman, 
at the Grashopper in the Poultry; and 
Rich. Parker at the Unicorn, under the 
Piazza of the Royal Exchange, 1695.}] 
 
[^A preface and an advertisement omitted.^] 
[^Extract 1, pp. 1-43^] 
 
[^p.1^] 
[}Concerning the Composition 
of Remedies.}] 
 
[}The Common-Purging Potion.}] 
 
TAke half an ounce of Tamarinds, two 
drams of Sena Leaves, one dram and a 
half of Rhubarb; boil them in a sufficient quantity 
of Spring-water to three ounces: Then 
strain them, and dissolve in the Liquor, Manna 
and solutive Syrup of Roses, of each one ounce. 
Mix them for a Potion. 
 
[}The Common Vomit.}] 
 
Take of Carduus Benedictus water two ounces, 
the Infusion of Crocus Metallorum one ounce, Syrup 
of Clove-gilliflowers half an ounce; mix 
them for a Vomit, which is to be taken about 
four a Clock in the Afternoon, drinking a large 
Draught of Posset after every Vomiting. 
 
[}The Pearl Julep.}] 
 
Take Black-Cherry water, Milk water, of 
[^p.2^] 
each three ounces; Barley-Cinnamon water, 
one ounce, Prepar'd Pearl a dram and an half, 
Sugar-candy as much as is sufficient; add Damask-rose-water 
half a dram. Mix them for a 
Julep. Dose four or five spoonfuls in Sickness, 
or fainting Fits. 
 
[}The Cordial Julep.}] 
 
Take Milk water, Black-cherry water, of 
each three ounces; Plague water, Syrup of 
Clove-Gilliflowers, Syrup of the Juice of Citrons, 
of each half an ounce. Mix them, and 
make a Julep, which is to be taken frequently. 
 
[}The Decoction for a Diet Drink.}] 
 
Take Roots of Sarsaparilla, six ounces; Sassafras 
and China, of each two ounces; Liquorish, 
one ounce; boil them in two Gallons of 
Spring water for the space of half an hour, 
after which let them stand in a close Vessel on 
hot ashes twelve hours; then boil them again 
to the consumption of a third part of the 
Water? and assoon as you take the Liquor from 
the fire, infuse into it half an ounce of Anise-seeds: 
after it hath stood two hours more, strain 
it, and let it stand till it grow clear, then pour 
off the Liquor into Glass-bottles well stopp'd, 
and reserve it for use. This is to be us'd for 
ordinary Drink, and continu'd Thirty Days. 
 
[^p.3^] 
[}The Opening and Antiscorbutic Apozem.}] 
 
Take the Roots of Grass, Cichory, Fennel 
and Asparagus, of each one ounce; Currans and 
Raisins ston'd, of oach two ounces; Leaves of 
Liverwort, Harts tongue and Maiden-hair, of 
each one handful; Leaves of Brook-lime (added 
towards the end) two handfuls; boil them 
in a sufficient quantity of Spring-water to a 
quart, to which toward the end add half a pint 
of Rhenish Wine. Then strain them, and 
while the Liquor is yet hot, infuse in it for 
two hours in a close Vessel one handful of the 
Leaves of Garden-Scurvygrass. After which 
strain again, and add Syrup of the five Roots, 
Syrup of Orenge juice, of each two ounces; 
Barley-Cinnamon water, one ounce. Mix 
them, and make an Apozem, the Dose of which 
is half a pint every morning, and at five in the 
afternoon, for Fourteen days together. 
 
[}The thickening Eclegma (or licking Medicine) for 
a Cough.}] 
 
Take Oil of Sweet Almonds, one ounce; 
Syrups of Red Poppy, of Purslain and of Jujubes, 
and (the licking Medicine call'd) Lohoc 
Sanum, of each half an ounce; Sugar-candy a 
sufficient quantity. Mix them in a Marble 
Mortar for the space of an hour, and make a 
perfectly mix'd Licking Medicine, which is to 
be kept in a Galley-pot for use. It is to be 
taken frequently, licking it off of a Liquorish 
stick. 
 
[^p.4^] 
[}An Eclegma that thickens more powerfully.}] 
 
Take Conserve of Red Roses, Syrup of Violets 
and of Meconium, of each one ounce; White 
Poppy Seeds, three Drams. Beat them together, 
and strain them through a Hair Sieve, then add 
express'd Oyl of Nutmeg, six grains. Make an 
Eclegma. 
 
[}In a thin Defluxion.}] 
 
Take conserve of Red Roses, two ounces; 
Syrup of Meconium and of Jujubes, of each one 
ounce, Olibanum, Mastic and Amber, of each 
one dram,; express'd Oil of Nutmegs, six grains 
Mix them and make a Lohoch, which is to be 
lick'd often. You may take twice every day a 
spoonful of this Eclegma, pouring in to it Balsam 
of Sulphur anisated from eight to twelve 
drops. 
 
[}Purging Ale.}] 
 
Take Polypody of the Oak, one pound; 
Roots of Monks Rhubarb, Sena Leaves, and 
ston'd Raisins, of each half a pound, Rhubarb 
slic'd and Horse-Radish Roots, of each three 
ounces; Leaves of Garden-Scurvy grass and 
Sage, of each four handfuls, four Orenges slic'd. 
Infuse them in five or six Gallons of Ale while 
it is fermenting, and when it is ripen'd, use 
it instead of your ordinary Drink for fourteen 
or one and twenty days, especially drink a 
draught of it every morning. 
 
[^p.5^] 
[}The Histerical Plaister}] 
 
Take Galbanum dissolv'd in Tincture of 
Castoreum and strain'd, three drams; Tachamahac, 
two drams. Make a Plaister for the Navel. 
 
[}A Purging Medicine for young Infants.}] 
 
Take one small spoonful of Syrup of Cichory 
with Rhubarb. 
 
[}The Bitter Purging Decoction.}] 
 
Take of the Bitter Decoction prepar'd with a 
double quantity of Sena four ounces; Syrup 
of Buckthorn, one ounce; Electuary of the 
juice of Roses, two drams. Mix them for a 
Potion. 
 
[^p.6^] 
[}Of the Disease called in Women 
the Hysterical, in 
Men the Hypochondriacal 
Passion.}] 
 
WHen the Mind is disturb'd by some grevious 
Accident, the animal Spirits run into disorderly 
motions; the Urine appears sometimes 
limpid, and in great quantity; the sick persons 
cast off all hope of recovery; and portend the 
most dismal Events to themselves. Whatsoever 
part of the body the Disease doth affect 
(and it affecteth many) immediately the Symptoms 
that are proper to that Part appear; in 
the Head, the Apoplexy, which ends in a Palsy 
of one half of the Body, comes presently 
after Child-bearing; sometimes they are seiz'd 
with Convulsions, that very much resemble 
the Epilepsy, and are commonly called the 
Suffocation of the Womb, in which the Belly 
and Entrails rise upwards towards the Throat: 
At other times they are miserably tormented 
with the Hysterical Clavus, in which there is a 
most vehement pain in the Head, which you 
may cover with your Thumb, the sick person 
in the mean time vomiting up green Matter 
like to that sort of Choler that has its name 
from Leeks. The Paroxysm doth also counterfeit 
the Palpitation of the Heart, the Cough, 
the Colic, and Iliac Passions, the Stone and 
[^p.7^] 
Suppression of Urine: it is attended with prodigious 
Vomitings, and sometimes with a Diarrhæa; 
outwardly in the musculous Flesh it 
causes sometimes Pains, and sometimes Swellings. 
In the Legs it is like a Dropsie, nor 
(which is wonderful) doth it leave the Teeth 
untouch'd. The Back is often cruelly pain'd; 
and almost always the external parts are so cold; 
that a dead Body is not more. The sick persons 
break out ridiculously into excessive Laughter 
and Tears without any cause; and are sometimes 
troubled with Spitting to such a degree, as 
were enough to make one believe, that they had 
been anointed with Mercury. Hysterical Pains 
whatsoever part they affect, leave a Tenderness 
behind them that cannot endure to be touch'd, 
as if the Flesh had been beaten. 
 
Let eight ounces of Blood be taken away. 
 
Apply the Plaister of Galbanum to the Navel: 
And next morning let the sick person begin 
to use the following Pills. 
 
Take of the Pills call'd Cochiæ the greater 
two drams; Castoreum powder'd two grains; 
Balsam of Peru, three drops: Make twelve 
Pills; of which take four every morning, or 
every second day, according to your strength, 
about four or five of the clock in the morning, 
sleeping after them. 
 
Take Rue water four ounces, compound 
Briony water two ounces, Castoreum tied in a 
knot, and hung in the Glass, half a dram; Sugar-candy 
a sufficient quantity. Of this take 
four or five spoonfuls in every Fit. After the 
Pills take what follows. 
 
[^p.8^] 
Take Filings of Steel eight grains, and with 
a sufficient quantity of Extract of Wormwood, 
make three pills; which must be taken early in 
the Morning, and repeated at Five in the Afternoon, 
for thirty days, drinking after them a 
Draught of Wormwood Wine. 
 
If a bolus be more acceptable. 
 
Take Conserve of Roman Wormwood, and 
Conserve of the yellow part of Orenges of 
each one ounce; candy'd Angelica, candy'd 
Nutmeg, Treacle of Andromachus, of each half 
an ounce; Compound powder of Aron three 
drams, candy'd Ginger two drams, with a sufficient 
quantity of the Syrup of the juice of Citrons, 
or (in want of that) Syrup of Orenges, 
make an Electuary. 
 
Take of this Electuary two drams, Filings of 
Steel eight grains, and with a sufficient quantity 
of Syrup of Orenges make a Bolus, which is to 
be taken Morning and Evening, drinking after it 
a Draught of Wormwood-Wine, or six spoonfuls 
of the following Infusion. 
 
Take Roots of Angelica, Elicampane, and 
Masterwort, of each one ounce; Leaves of common 
Wormwood, lesser Centory, white Horehound 
and Germainder, of each one handful: 
the Barks of two Orenges slic'd; pour upon 
them so much Spanish Wine as will rise two 
Inches above them, and strain it at the time of 
using it. Or, 
 
To delicate Persons the Steel may be given by 
way of Powder, as follows. 
 
Take Filings of Steel finely powder'd one 
ounce, compound Powder of Aron six drams, 
Coriander-seed prepar'd, Seeds of Anise and 
[^p.9^] 
sweet Fennel, of each half an ounce; the best 
Cinnamon, red Coral prepar'd, of each three 
drams, Nutmeg two drams: Beat them all 
to a very fine Powder, to which add of the finest 
white Sugar to the weight of all the rest. Take 
half a dram of this Powder in a Spoon, twice a 
day, four days together, and afterwards a whole 
dram twice every day for forty days, drinking 
after it six spoonfuls of the following Julep, or 
of Wormwood Wine. 
 
Take Milk water twelve ounces, compound 
Gentian water four ounces, Wormwood water 
of the greater composition two ounces; White 
Sugar a sufficient quantity: Make a Julep. Or, 
 
Take half a Pint of Rhenish Wine prepar'd 
with Wormwood, compound Gentian water 
two ounces, Syrup of Clove-Gilliflowers one 
ounce: Make a Julep. 
 
Take choice Myrrh, Galbanum, and Assa fœtida, 
of each one dram; Castoreum half a dram, with 
a sufficient quantity of the Balsam of Peru; make 
them up into Pills, twelve out of every dram; of 
which take three every night, drinking after them 
three or four spoonfuls of compound Bryony 
water, during the whole progress of the cure. 
 
If these Pills move the Belly, use those that 
follow. 
 
Take Castoreum, one dram; Volatil Salt of 
Amber, half a dram; with a sufficient quantity 
of Extract of Rue, make four and twenty Pills; 
of which take three every night, drinking after 
them three or four spoonfuls of the Hysterical 
Julep. 
 
Spirit of Harts-horn exhibited frequently to 
sixteen or eighteen drops, is of excellent use. 
 
[^p.10^] 
But if the Disease doth not yield to these remedies, 
then take the following Pills. 
 
Take Troches of Myrrh powder'd, one scruple, 
Balsam of Sulphur terebinthinated four 
drops; with a sufficient quantity of Gum Ammoniac 
dissolv'd make four Pills; which must 
be taken morning and evening, drinking after 
them four or five spoonfuls of the Hysterical Julep, 
with twelve drops of Spirit of Harts-horn. 
 
The Antiscorbutic Electuary, with the Water 
there described, is good also in this Disease, 
and likewise the corroborating Electuary, with 
the addition of Conserve of Garden Scurvy-grass 
one ounce? compound powder of Aron, 
six drams, drinking after it the fore-mentioned 
Water. 
 
But if all these Remedies prove ineffectual, 
you must have recourse to the Waters that partake 
of Iron; and if these also do no good, to 
those that are sulphureous, such as are the Bath-Waters. 
 
Concerning the use of the Mineral Waters 
these things are to be observed. If any bad 
Symptom appear, which may be ascribed to the 
drinking of the Waters, in such a case you must 
abstain from them, till the Symptom disappear. 
Continue the use of them for six weeks at least, 
or rather two months. Eat now and then candied 
Ginger, or confected Caraway seeds to 
warm the stomach. You may also take three of 
the Hysterical Pills the first ten nights, drinking 
after them four or five spoonfuls of the Hysterical 
Julep. 
 
As for the Bath Waters, you must drink them 
two days, and bath in them the third, proceeding 
[^p.11^] 
thus alternately six weeks or two-months. 
 
If the Steel heat the Body too much, then during 
the use of it drink every fourth morning 
four pints of Mineral purging waters: Which 
though they move the Belly, yet cause no agitation, 
as the purging Medicines of the Shops 
usually do. 
 
[}Of the Depuratory, or cleansing Fever of the Years 
1661, 62, 63, 64.}] 
 
If the sick person be young, he must be let 
blood in the Arm, and the same day some hours 
after, or the next day, two hours after a light 
Dinner let him take a Vomit of the Infusion of 
Crocus Metallorum, and after that has done working, 
drink a Pacific Draught, such as that which 
follows. 
 
Take Black-Cherry water one ounce and a 
half, Plague water half an ounce, liquid Laudanum 
sixteen drops: Mix them for a Draught. 
 
From this to the eleventh or twelfth day, the 
following Clyster is to be injected every morning. 
 
Take of the common Decoction for a Clyster 
one pint (or the like quantity of Cows Milk) 
Brown Sugar, and Syrup of Violets, of each two 
ounces. Make a Clyster. 
 
After that day, suffer his Belly to be constipated, 
that so the Febril Matter may the sooner 
be concocted, to which purpose also moderate 
Cordials exhibited during these last days, are 
very useful; as. 
 
Take Powder of Crabs claws compound fourteen 
grains, Electuary de Ovo half a scruple with 
a sufficient quantity of Syrup of Clove-gilliflowers 
[^p.12^] 
make a Bolus, which may be taken every 
eight hours, drinking after it five or six spoonfuls 
of the following Julep. 
 
Take Milk water, Black Cherry water, of 
each three ounces; Plague water and Syrup of 
Clove-gilliflowers, of each one ounce: mix them 
and make a Julep, or such like. 
 
If you diligently observe this method, you 
will usually about the fifteenth day perceive 
(both by the laudable Breaking of the Urine, 
and the manifest Remission of all the Symptoms) 
that it is time to exhibit the Common purging 
Portion. 
 
[}Of the Pestilential Fever of the Years, 1665, 66.}] 
 
After the sick person hath been let blood in 
his Bed, let him be cover'd all over with Cloths, 
and his Forehead bound about with a piece of 
Woollen Cloth: and then if he doth not vomit, 
let some Medicine to procure Sweat be exhibited 
to him; as 
 
Take Treacle of Andromicus half a dram, 
Electuary de Ovo one scruple, Powder of Crabs-claws 
compound twelve grains, Cochinel eight 
grains, Saffron four grains, with a sufficient 
quantity of the juice of Kermes, make a Bolus, 
which must be repeated every sixth hour, drinking 
after it six spoonfuls of the following Julep. 
 
Take Carduus Benedictus water, and compound 
Scordium water, of each four ounces; distill'd 
Treacle water, two ounces; Syrup of 
Clove-gilliflowers, one ounce: mix them for a 
Julep. 
 
[^p.13^] 
But if he be troubled with Vomiting, the 
Sudorific ought not to be given till the weight 
of the Cloths alone make the Sweat begin to appear, 
his Face being in the mean while cover'd 
with part of the Sheets. 
 
The Sweat thus begun must be promoted 
with repeated Draughts of Sage-Posset, or Beer 
boil'd with a little Mace, and continued in this 
manner the space of a natural day, or 24. hours; 
during which time he may be allow'd some comfortable 
Broths for his Refreshment. 
 
After the breaking forth of a Swelling, I 
durst not open a Vein. Let the sick Person keep 
his Bed four and twenty hours after the Sweating 
is over, and diligently avoid all manner of 
Cold, suffering his Shirt to dry of it self upon 
his body. Let him drink nothing but what is 
Hot, and still persist in the use of Sage-Posset: 
Next morning let him take the commin purging 
Potion. 
 
The Years 1667, 1668. produc'd the Small-Pox, 
and a Fever partaking of their nature. 
 
In the Years 1669, 70, 71, 72. A Dysenterical 
Fever reign'd. 
 
And the Years 1673, 74, 75. were infested 
with a Comatous or Sleepy Fever. 
 
I do not insist upon the cure of these Fevers, 
because I am of opinion that they might have 
been cur'd by the Method describ'd in the account 
of the Fever of the Years 1685, &c. 
 
[}Of the Intermitting Fevers.}] 
 
They begin with Cold and Shivering, which 
is immediately followed by Heat, and that 
[^p.14^] 
by Sweating, after which the Fever disappears, 
though during the first days of the Disease, especially 
in Autumn, there sometimes happens a 
Remission, rather than a proper Intermission of 
the Fever. Both the cold and hot Fits are for 
the most part attended with an Inclination to 
vomit, vehement Sickness, Thirst and Driness of the 
Tongue. The swelling of the Abdomen in Children, 
and of the Feet in Men, signify the solution 
of the Fever. A Pain in the Jaws, Hoarseness, 
Hollow Eyes, and a ghastly Countenance 
portend Death. 
 
Take of the Peruvian Bark in fine Powder, 
one ounce, and with a sufficient quantity of Syrup 
of Clove-gilliflowers, or of dry'd Roses, 
make an Electuary, to be divided into twelve 
Doses, of which one is to be taken every four 
hours, drinking after it a draught of any sort 
of Wine, beginning immediately after the Fit. 
 
But if these Bolus's move the Belly, pour ten 
drops of liquid Laudanum into the draught of 
Wine after every second Dose, as you see occasion. 
 
To prevent Relapses (especially of Quartans) 
the foregoing process must be thrice repeated in 
the three following Weeks. 
 
If the form of Pills be more grateful, 
 
Take the Peruvian Bark in powder, one 
ounce; and with a sufficient quantity of Syrup 
of Clove-gilliflowers make Pills of a moderate 
bigness; of which take six every four hours. 
 
Take Powder of the Peruvian Bark, two 
ounces, Rhenish Wine a quart. Let them stand 
together in a cold Infusion, and strain them 
through a Woollen Cloth. Dose three ounces 
every four hours. 
 
[^p.15^] 
[}Another method of curing Tertians.}] 
 
Take Virginian Snakeweed in fine powder, 
fifteen grains, White-wine three ounces: Give 
it to the sick person two hours before the Fit, 
and covering him with cloaths let him sweat 
three or four hours: Repeat the same Doses 
the two following Fit-days in the same manner. 
 
[}Of intermitting Fevers in Children.}] 
 
Take Black-Cherry water, and Rhenish Wine, 
of each two ounces; the Peruvian Bark in fine 
powder, three drams; Syrup of Clove-gilliflowers 
one ounce: Mix them, and make a Julep. 
Dose, a spoonful or two, according to the Child's 
Age, every four hours, till the Fits return no 
more; pouring into every second Dose, if there 
be a Diarrhæa, one or two drops of liquid Laudanum. 
 
[}Of the present Fever from the year 1685 to 90.}] 
 
The signs are, Heat and Cold, coming by turns, 
Pain in the Head and Limbs, the Pulse in the mean 
time almost well, sometimes a Cough, a Pain about 
the Neck and Jaws, the exacerbation of the Fever 
towards night, Unquietness, Thirst, the 
Tongue either moist and cover'd all over with a 
white and rough Film, or dry and of a dark colour 
in the Middle, which is compast about with 
a whitish Border. They that constantly keep 
their Beds are thereby expos'd to Coma's and 
Phrensies, and Spots, Purple Specks, Miliar 
[^p.16^] 
Eruptions (as they are call'd) which are redder 
than Measles, irregularity of the Pulse, starting 
of the Tendons, and at last Death are the effects 
of a hot Regimen. In the beginning Symptomatical 
Sweats appear, which it provok'd by Art, 
break forth clammy in the Head, and translate 
the Morbific matter to the Head or Limbs. 
 
Let the sick Person be let blood in the Arm, 
and ten ounces of Blood taken from him; which 
must be repeated, if difficulty of Breathing, a 
rending Pain in the Head, with a Cough, and 
other signs of a bastard Peripneumonia appear. 
For in this case both the letting of Blood and 
Purging must be constantly repeated till the sick 
Person recover. 
 
At night let a Blistering Plaister be apply'd 
and the next morning a Lenitive Potion prescrib'd, 
which must be thrice repeated every second 
day; and always after Purging a composing 
Draught is to be taken at night. 
 
Take Cowslip water three ounces, Syrup of 
Meconium one ounce, juice of Limons newly 
prest out, two spoonfuls: Mix them for a 
Draught. 
 
Blisters in the Mouth and Throat, as also 
the Hicough do sometimes come of themselves 
after the Fever is cur'd, and usually go away of 
themselves quickly after. But if they stay long, 
they may be easily driven away by one ounce of 
the Peruvian Bark, reduc'd into an Electuary or 
Pills with the Syrup of Red Poppies, drinking 
after every Dose a draught of Whey. This Remedy 
will most certainly prove effectual, if its 
vertue be not eluded by constant lying in Bed. 
 
[^p.17^] 
In those days that are free from Purgation, 
the following things are to be prescrib'd. 
 
Take Conserve of Wood-Sorrel, of Sweet-briar, 
of each one ounce; Conserve or Barberies 
half an ounce, Cream of Tartar one dram; 
with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of Limons 
make an Electuary; of which take about the 
Bigness of a Nutmeg thrice in the day, drinking 
after it six spoonfuls of the following Julep. 
 
Take Water of Purslain, of Lettuce and of 
Cowslips, of each three ounces; Syrup of Limons 
one ounce and a half, Syrup of Violets 
one ounce: Mix them and make a julep. 
 
If the Stomach be so disorder'd by the Fever, 
that it cannot retain a Potion, prescribe the Pills 
Cochiæ the greater, two scruples for a dose, and 
also a Medicine to procure Sleep; for example, 
one grain and a half of London Laudanum, with 
the like quantity of Mastic, or eighteen drops 
of liquid Laudanum in one ounce of Barley-Cinnamon 
water. 
 
Let the sick person drink the white Decoction, 
and Small Beer also at pleasure. 
 
[}Of the Fever of the present Constitution in Children.}] 
 
Let two Leeches be applied, one behind each 
Ear, and a Blistering Plaister to the hinder part 
of the Neck. 
 
Let them be purg'd with the Infusion of 
Rhubarb in Beer. 
 
If after purgation the Fever seem to intermit, 
give them the julep with the Peruvian Bark, describ'd 
in the Chapter of Intermitting Fevers in 
Children. 
 
[^p.18^] 
[}Of the Scarlet Fever.}] 
 
Children are chiefly infected with it about the 
latter end of Summer. At the first they are seiz'd 
with a Coldness and Shivering, yet they are not 
very sick. The whole Skin is spotted with little 
red Specks, that are thicker, broader, and of a 
redder colour than in the Measles. They continue 
two or three days, and then disappear, and 
the uppermost Skin falling off, that which is under 
it appears stain'd with Mealy Scales. 
 
Take burnt Harts-horn and compound Powder 
of Crabs claws, of each half a dram; Cochinel 
two grains, Sugar-candy one dram; mix 
them, and beat them to a very fine Powder, to 
be divided into twelve Papers, of which one is 
to be taken every six hours, drinking after 
them two or three spoonfuls of the following 
Julep. 
 
Take Black-Cherry water, Milk-water, of 
each three ounces; Syrup of the juice of Citrons 
one ounce: Mix them and make a Julep. 
 
Also let a blistering Plaster be apply'd to the 
hinder part of the Neck; and every night exhibit 
a composing Draught of Syrup of Meconium; 
and, the Symptoms ceasing, prescribe a 
Purging Medicine. 
 
[}Of the Pleurisie.}] 
 
It reigns between the Spring and Summer. It 
begins with Coldness and Shivering, which are 
quickly accompanied with Heat, Thirst, Unquietness 
and the other Symptoms of a Fever. 
[^p.19^] 
After a few hours a pricking Pain is felt in one 
of the Sides, about the Ribs, which sometimes 
stretches it self towards the Shoulder-blades, 
sometimes to the Back, and sometimes towards 
the Breast. The Matter that is cast forth with 
the Spittle in the beginning of the Disease appears 
thin and in little quantity, and is often mixt with 
Particles of Blood; but afterwards it is rais'd 
more copiously, is better concocted, and still 
appears mixt with Blood. The Fever holds 
pace with the Cough, Spitting of blood and Pain, 
and, according as the Expecoration is more or 
less free, abates by degrees. The Belly is sometimes 
constipated, and sometimes too loose. The 
Blood of Pleuritic persons resembles melted 
Tallow, when it is cool'd. 
 
Let a Vein be opened in the Arm on the affected 
Side, and ten ounces of Blood extracted. 
 
Take Red Poppy water four ounces, Sal 
Prunellæ one dram, Syrup of Violets one ounce: 
Mix them for a Draught to be taken immediately 
after the first Blood-letting. 
 
Take five Almonds peel'd, Seeds of Melons 
and Pompions, of each half an ounce; white 
Poppy Seeds three drams, Barly-water one 
pint and an half; Rose water two drams, with 
a sufficient quantity of Sugar-candy make an Emulsion 
according to art. Dose four ounces 
every four hours. 
 
Take of the Pectoral Decoction a quart, Syrup 
of Violets and of Maiden-hair, of each an 
ounce and a half; mix them and make an Apozem. 
Dose half a pint thrice in the day. 
 
Take Oil of Sweet Almonds two ounces, Syrup 
of Violets and of Maiden-hair, of each one ounce: 
[^p.20^] 
Sugar-candy as much as is sufficient: Mix them 
and make an Eclegma or licking Medicine to be 
frequently used. 
 
Oil of Sweet Almonds by it self, or Linseed 
Oil may also be exhibited. 
 
Take Oil of Sweet Almonds, of Lillies, and 
the Ointment Dialthææ, of each one ounce; mix 
and make a Liniment, with which the affected 
Side may be anointed Morning and Evening, laying 
over it a Cabbage Leaf, 
 
The letting of Blood must be repeated yet 
three times more, extracting still the same quantity 
of Blood for four days together; if the pain 
and Difficulty of Breathing seem to require it. 
 
[}Of the Bastard Peripneumonia.}] 
 
It begins to appear upon the approach of 
Winter, and oftentimes towards the end of it. 
At the first, the Sick person is hot and cold by 
turns, he cannot stir without being troubled with 
Dizziness or Swimming of the Head; his Cheeks 
or Eyes are red and inflam'd; he coughs, and 
in coughing is tormented with a rending pain in 
the Head; he Vomits up liquid things; his Urine 
is Thick, and very Red, his Blood resembles 
that of a Pleuritic Person; he breaths thick 
and short, with a Pain in his Breast. This 
Disease is plainly distinguished from a dry Asthma 
in which no signs of Fever appear, but in this 
are manifestly discover'd, though they are much 
more obscure and less violent than in a true Peripneumonia. 
 
Let the sick person be let blood in the right 
Arm, to the quantity of ten ounces, and the next 
day take this Potion. 
 
[^p.21^] 
Take extracted Cassia one ounce, Liquorish 
two drams, four fat Figs, Leaves of Sena two 
drams and a half. Troches of Agaric one dram: 
Boil them in a sufficient quantity of Water to 
four ounces; then strain, and disolve in the Liquor 
Manna one ounce, Solutive Syrup of Roses 
half an ounce. 
 
But if he cannot take a Potion, let him take 
two scruples of the Pills Cochiæ the greater, at 
four in the morning. 
 
The Day following let a Vein be open'd again, 
and the same quantity of Blood extracted as formerly, 
and the Day after let the purging Medicine 
be again exhibited, and afterwards repeated 
once in three days: If the consideration of his 
strength do not require longer Intervals to be allow'd 
him. Moreover, if the Symptoms still 
continue, he must be again let blood once, twice 
or oftner, interposing always some days, as you 
see occasion; but for the most part the second 
Letting of Blood will be sufficient. In the mean 
time, while this Method is persu'd, let him 
use the Pectoral Decoction, Eclegma and Oil 
of Sweet Almonds, prescrib'd in the foregoing 
Chapter, especially in the days that are free 
from Purgation. 
 
[}Of the Rheumatism}] 
 
In this Disease they are first taken with Coldness 
and Shivering, and the other Symptoms of 
a Fever; and after a day or two (sometimes 
sooner) they are seiz'd with a most sharp pain, 
sometimes in one part and sometimes in another, 
but especialiy in the Wrist, Shoulders and 
[^p.22^] 
Knees, which it leaves and assaults by turns, the 
part last affected remaining for some time after 
red and swoln. The Fever wears off by degrees, 
the pain still continuing, yea and sometimes raging 
more cruelly than before. In Rheumatic 
Aches of the Loins, there is a most violent pain 
that remains fix'd about the region of the Loins, 
and resembles the Stone; only the sick person 
is not troubled with a desire to vomit. He cannot 
lie in his Bed, but either leaps out of it, or 
sits upright in it, perpetually tossing his body, 
backwards and forwards. The Blood is like 
that in a Pleurisie. 
 
Let ten ounces of Blood be taken from the 
Arm of the side affected. 
 
Take Water of Lettuce, Purslain and Water-Lillies, 
of each four ounces; Syrup of Limons 
one ounce and a half, Syrup of Violets one 
ounce: Mix and make a Julep to be drank at 
pleasure. 
 
Prescribe an Emulsion of the four greater 
cold Seeds; and a Cataplasm of the Crums of 
white Bread and Milk, ting'd with Saffron, to 
be apply'd to the Part affected. 
 
The day after let the same quantity of Blood 
be taken away as before, which must be repeated 
after a day or two, and the same operation 
must be reiterated four times, or oftner, if need 
require: Observing that after the second time 
the intervals must still be longer. 
 
In the days that are free from Phlebotomy, 
let a Clyster of Sugar'd Milk be sometimes injected, 
or that which follows. 
 
Take of the common Decoction for a Clyster 
one pint, Syrup of Violets, and Brown Sugar, 
[^p.23^] 
of each two ounces: Mix them for a Clyster. 
 
If the Patients Weakness will not permit the 
repeated taking away of his Blood, then after 
the second or third time, the Cure is to be thus 
attempted. 
 
Let him take the common purging Potion 
every second day, while his illness continues, 
and the same nights a composing Draught of the 
Syrup of Meconium. 
 
But if these remedies prove ineffectual, and 
the Feebleness of the Patient be such, that he cannot 
bear any Evacuations, let him use the Antiscorbutio 
Electuary and Water describ'd in 
the Chapter of the Scurvy, which are also useful 
in the Scorbutic Rheumatism. 
 
In young persons, and such who are not much 
addicted to Wine, the Rheumatism may be as 
happily cured by a very cooling and indifferently 
nourishing Diet, as by repeated letting of Blood, 
which they cannot so well bear. For example, 
 
Let the Patient live only upon Whey four 
days together; and afterwards besides his Whey, 
he may, once in the day, instead of a Dinner, 
eat a little Bread made of fine Flower, till he 
perfectly recover: Only during the last days of 
his Illness, he may be allowed to eat another 
piece of Bread for his Supper. After the ceasing 
of the Symptoms, he may eat boil'd Chickens, 
and other Meats of easy digestion, observing 
every third day to feed only upon Whey, till 
he be perfectly restor'd to his former Health 
 
[}Of the Erysipelatous Fever.}] 
 
All the Parts of the Body especially the 
[^p.24^] 
Face, are swoln, red and full of pain. The 
Face and Head are overspread with little thick 
pimples, which sometimes rise into Blisters, 
the Eyes are hid under the Swelling; Coldness, 
Shivering and other signs of a Fever do also appear. 
There is another Species of this Disease, 
caus'd by the drinking of attenuating Liquors, 
in which there is a slight Fever, accompany'd 
with Wheals, like the pushes that are caus'd by 
the pricking of Nettles, which sometimes rise 
up into Blisters, then immediately vanish, and 
lurking under the Skin, where they occasion a 
very troublesome Itching, after scratching they 
appear again. There is also another kind of 
Eruption, which usually breaks out in the 
Breast; and is a broad spot that hardly rises 
above the skin, being scurfy and full of yellow 
Scales. The person affected with it is well so 
long as it continues, but after its disappearing 
there follows a slight Sickness, and the Urine 
looks troubled and yellow. It is cured with the 
same Remedies that are prescrib'd for a confirmed 
Itch. Let the patient drink Wine, and 
feed upon Meats of easy Digestion. 
 
Let a Vein be open'd in the Arm, and nine 
or ten ounces of Blood taken away; the next 
day let the common purging potion be exhibited. 
 
Take of the Roots of Marsh-mallows and 
Lillies, of each one ounce; Leaves of Mallows, 
Elder, and Base Mullein, Flowers of Cammomil, 
and Melilot, Tops of St. Johns-wort and 
Lesser Centory, of each one handful; Lin-seed, 
Fenugreek seed, of each half an ounce. Boil 
them in a convenient quantity of Water to three 
[^p.25^] 
pints; strain out the Liquor, and when you 
use it add to every pint two ounces of Spirit 
of Wine. Dip pieces of Woollen Cloth in this 
Decoction, and having squeez'd them, apply 
them hot twice every day, anointing the part 
affected, after fomentation, with the following 
mixture. 
 
Take half a pint of Spirit of Wine; Treacle 
of Andromachus two ounces, Powder of Long 
Pepper and Cloves, of each two drams. Make 
a Mixture, in which dip a piece of Brown Paper, 
and wrap about the part affected. 
 
If the first Letting of Blood be not sufficient 
let it be repeated; and if the Disease still continue, 
the same must be reiterated yet once and 
again, interposing always one day. 
 
In the days that are free from letting of blood, 
prescribe a Clyster of Milk with Syrup of Violets, 
and cooling Emulsions and Juleps 
 
[}Of the raging Itch, and other inveterate Diseases of the 
Skin, which are not curable by Letting of Blood 
and Purging.}] 
 
Take Treacle of Andromachus half a dram, the 
Electuary de Ovo one scruple, the Root of Virginian 
Snakeweed in fine Powder fifteen grains; 
Oriential Bezoar, five grains: with a sufficient 
quantity of the Syrup of Citron-pickle, make a 
Bolus, to be taken at the time of going to Bed 
one and twenty days together, drinking after it 
six spoonfuls of this Julep. 
 
Take of Carduus Benedictus water, six ounces, 
distill'd Treacle water, Plague water, of each 
[^p.26^] 
two ounces; Syrup of Clove-gilliflowers, one 
ounce: mix and make a Julep. 
 
Let the Patient drink every morning half a 
pint of warm Posset, and sweat an Hour after 
it. 
 
This course being ended, if the Pimples 
still remain, let the parts affected be anointed 
with the following Liniment. 
 
Take of the Ointment of sharp-pointed Dock, 
two ounces; Pomate, one ounce; Flowers of 
Brimstone, three drams; Oleum Rhodij, half a 
scruple: Make a Liniment. 
 
But these Remedies ought not to be used; till 
the Patients Body hath been first duly prepar'd 
by letting of Blood and Purging. 
 
[}Of the Quinsy.}] 
 
The Quinsy doth most frequently occur betwixt 
the Spring and Summer. The first assault 
of the Fever is seconded by a pain and inflamation 
of the Jaws; which, together with the swelling 
of the Uvula, Tonsils and Larynx, renders 
the sick Person unable either to swallow or 
breath. 
 
Let a Vein be open'd in the Arm, and a 
great quantity of Blood taken away. Let the 
inflam'd parts be touch'd with Honey of Roses, 
impregnated to a very high degree of accidity 
with Spirit of Vitriol, or of Sulphur, or with 
Spirit of Vitriol alone. Presently after let the 
following Gargarism be prescribed, to be used, 
not after the usual manner, but held in the 
mouth, without any agitation, till it grow hot 
and then spit out, and ever and anon repeated. 
 
[^p.27^] 
Take Plantain water, Rose water, and Frogs 
Sperm water, of each four ounces; the Whites 
of three Eggs, by shaking reduc'd to Water; 
Sugar-candy three drams: Mix and make a 
Gargarism. 
 
Let the cooling Emulsion prescrib'd for the 
Pleurisy be daily used. 
 
Next morning, unless the Fever and Difficulty 
of Swallowing be abated, the Letting of 
Blood must be repeated, and the Purgation delay'd 
till the day after, which otherwise ought 
to have been attempted with some lenitive Medicine. 
 
If after all the Disease doth continue (which 
happens very rarely) both the Letting of Blood 
and Purging must be reiterated. Let a large 
and sharp Blistering Plaister be aplied to the 
hinder part of the Neck after the first Letting 
of Blood. 
 
Every day that is free from purging, let a 
cooling and softning Clyster be injected in the 
morning. Let the Patient use a thin Diet, and 
abstain from his Bed every day for some Hours. 
 
In all these Fevers which I call Intercurrent, 
as also in that of the present constitution, it is 
diligently to be observed, that the sick person 
must abstain from his Bed a great part of the 
day, and that he must feed upon Barley or Oatmeal 
Broths, and such like things, and use Small 
Beer hopp'd and Milk and Water for his ordinary 
Drink. 
 
[}Of the Measles.}] 
 
They chiefly invade Children. The first day 
[^p.28^] 
they are taken with a chilness and shivering, and 
grow hot and cold by turns. The second day the 
Fever is at the height, and the following Symptoms 
appear. Vehement Sickness, Thirst, Want 
of Appetite, the Tongue is white (but not dry) 
a little Cough, Heaviness of the Head and Eyes, 
and an Inclination to sleep, a Humour perpetually 
dropping from the Nose and Eyes, which 
Tears are a most certain sign of the Measles. As 
also Sneezing, Swelling of the Eye-lids a little 
before the Eruption, Vomiting, a Diarrhæa or 
Loosness, Greenness of the Excrements, especially 
in Children that are breeding Teeth. The 
Symptoms increase till the fourth day, in which 
(and sometimes in the fifth) the Forehead and 
Face begin to be mark'd with little red Specks, 
not unlike to Flea-bitings, which being afterwards 
augmented both in bigness and number, 
run together in Clusters, and stain the Face with 
great red Spots, that are made up of small Pushes 
raised so little above the Skin, that you can 
hardly perceive the protuberancy of them with 
your Eye, tho you may feel it by slightly 
touching them with your finger. 
 
From the Face, where at the first they only 
appear, they spread themselves over the Breast, 
Belly, and last of all the Legs, in which parts 
they are broad and red, and rise not above the 
surface of the Skin. After the Eruption of the 
Measles the Symptoms are not mitigated, as in 
the Small-Pox. The Vomiting indeed ceases, 
but the Fever, Cough and Difficulty of Breathing 
are increas'd, and the Defluxion upon the 
Eyes, the Drowsiness and Dejection of Appetite 
still continue. On the sixth day, or thereabout, 
[^p.29^] 
the Forehead and Face grow rough, the Wheals 
dying away, and the uppermost skin being broken, 
in the rest of the Body the Spots appear very 
broad and red. About the eighth day these in 
the Face vanish, and scarcely are there any to 
be seen in the rest of the Body. The day following 
they disappear entirely, leaving behind 
them certain mealy Scales in the Face and Limbs, 
and sometimes over all the Body; and at this 
time the Fever, Cough, and difficulty of Breathing 
increase. In adult Persons that are kept hot, 
the Spots grow first livid, and then black. 
 
Take of the Pectoral Decoction a Pint and 
a half; Syrup of Violets, and of Maiden-hair, 
of each an ounce and a half: mix and make an 
Apozem. Dose three or four ounces, three or 
four times in the day. 
 
Take of Oil of sweet Almonds, two ounces; 
Syrup of Violets, and of Maiden-hair, of each 
an ounce; White Sugar-candy, as much as sufficeth: 
mix and make an Eclegma, to be taken 
often licking, especially when the Cough is 
troublesome. 
 
Take of Black-Cherry water, three ounces; 
Syrup of Meconium one ounce: mix them for 
a Draught, which is to be taken every night, 
from the beginning to the end of the Disease, 
augmenting or lessening the Dose according to 
the Age of the Patient. 
 
Let the sick persons keep their Beds two days, 
after the first Eruption of the Spots. 
 
If after the disappearing of the Measles, they 
be succeeded by a Fever, difficulty of Breathing, 
and other Symptoms counterfeiting a Peripneumonia, 
in such a case a Vein in the Arm is to be 
[^p.30^] 
open'd and a great quantity of Blood taken away 
once, twice, or thrice, as the occasion shall require, 
interposing always a convenient space of 
time betwixt. Let the Patient also continue 
the use of the Pectoral Decoction above describ'd 
as also of the Lohoch, or Oil of Sweet Almonds, 
by it self. And about the twelfth day from the 
first beginning of the Disease, let him be purg'd 
with a Lenitive Medicine. 
 
The Diarrhæa or Looseness, that comes after 
the Measles, is cured by letting of Blood. 
 
[}Of the Small Pox.}] 
 
They are of two kinds, the Distinct and Running 
(commonly call'd Flux'd) Pox. The first 
at the beginning are attended with Chilness 
and Shivering, intense Heat, vehement pain of 
the Head and Back, disposition to vomit; in 
Adult persons, with a great propensity to sw_[^ORIG. BLURRED^]at 
(from whence you may conclude, that they will 
not run together), a pain under the hollow part 
of the Breast if it be prest with the Hand, 
Dulness and Sleepiness, and sometimes Epileptic 
Fits (especially in Children) which if they 
come after the breeding of Teeth is over, you 
you may foretel that the Small Pox is at hand; 
insomuch that if the Epileptic Fit happens over 
night, the Pox will shew themselves next morning, 
and are for the most part of a mild sort, 
and very rarely run together. On the fourth 
day inclusively from the beginning, and sometimes 
later, but rarely sooner, the Pox break 
out, at which time the Symptoms either abate 
or entirely disappear. At the first Reddish 
[^p.31^] 
Pushes appear scatter'd over the Face, Neck 
Breast and the whole Body; then comes a Pain 
in the Jaws, which increaseth as the Pox rise 
higher. About the eight day from the first invasion 
of the Disease, the Intervals between 
the Pimples, which were hitheto white, begin 
to be red and swoln, and affected with a stretching 
pain; the Eye-lids swell, and like blown 
Bladders cover the Eyes. Next after the Face 
the Hands swell, and the Fingers are distended; 
the Pox in the Face which before were smooth 
and red, now appear rough (which is the first 
sign of Maturation) and whitish: Moreover 
they cast forth a yellowish Juice, in colour not 
unlike a Honey-comb. The Inflamation of the 
Face and Hands being now at the height, the Intervals 
between the Pimples appear of a florid colour, 
like that of Damask Roses, and the Milder, 
the Pocks are, so much the more lively do both 
they and the skin between them express that colour. 
The Pimples in the Face grow still rougher 
and yellower as they grow riper; but in the Hands 
and the rest of the Body, they daily grow whiter 
and less rough. The eleventh day, the Swelling and 
Inflamation abates, and the Pox being ariv'd 
at their due maturity and bigness (which equals 
that of the greater sort of Pease) wither and fall 
off. On the 14th and 15th they perish entirely; 
but they that are in the Hands are of a more 
obstinate nature; and being still white and fresh 
they continue a day or two longer, after which 
they break; whilst these that are in the Face 
and the rest of the Body fall off in Scales, which 
in the Face are succeeded by Holes or Pits. During 
the whole course of the Disease, the Belly is 
[^p.32^] 
either quite constipated, or very rarely performs 
its Office. The greatest part of those to 
whom this Disease proves mortal, die on the 
eighth day in the Distinct, and on the eleventh 
in the Running Kind. For when, in the first 
sort of Pocks, Sweating is promoted with Cordials 
or a hot Regimen, on the foremention'd day, 
the Face, which should be swoln and inflam'd in 
the distances between the Pimples, on the contrary 
appears flaccid and whitish; whilst in the 
mean time the Pocks are red and high, and even 
continue to be so after death: That Sweat also, 
which had hitherto flow'd abundantly, suddenly 
disappears: The Sick person becomes light-headed, 
vehemently sick and anxious, tosses his 
Body, pisseth little and often, and within a few 
hours expires. 
 
In the Running kind the Symptoms are the 
same, but more violent: The Fever (for example) 
Anxiety, Sickness, Disposition to Vomit, 
&c. do more cruelly torment the diseased person; 
but there is not the same propension to 
sweat, as in the other kind. A Looseness sometimes 
comes before the Eruption of the Pocks 
and continues a day or two after, which scarce 
ever happens in the Distinct sort. On the third 
day, or sooner, rarely later, they break out, and 
the sooner they appear, the more they run together. 
Sometimes their Eruption is retarded 
till the fourth or fifth day, by the violence of 
some Symptom, such as (for example) a pain 
in the Loins, Side o Limbs, counterfeiting the 
Stone, Pleurisy or Rheumatism, or in the Stomach 
with Vehement Sickness and Vomiting. 
The Symptoms abate not immediately after the 
[^p.33^] 
coming out of the pocks, as they do in the other 
kind; but the Fever and the rest also continue 
to afflict the sick person many days afterwards. 
Sometimes they break forth after the manner of 
Erysipelas, and sometimes like the Measles, but 
are plainly distinguish'd by the time of the Eruption. 
During the progress of the Disease they 
do not rise to any considerable height, but being 
intangled together in the Face, like red Blisters, 
they cover the whole Countenance, which swells 
sooner than in the Distinct kind. Afterward 
they appear-like a white skin glu'd to the Face, 
and are not much higher than the surface thereof. 
The eighth day being past, the white Film 
grows daily rougher by degrees, and of a brown 
colour. The pain in the skin is more intense, 
till at last the scales fall off, which in so cruel a 
Disease happens not till after the twentieth day. 
This in the mean time is worthy to be observ'd, 
that by how much nearer the ripening pimples 
approach to a duskish colour, so much more 
dangerous are they, and disappear more slowly; 
but the yellower they are, they run the less together 
and vanish more quickly. After the Film 
is fallen off there appears no roughness in the 
Countenance, but it is immediately overspread 
with mealy scales of a very corrosive nature 
which leave pits behind them, and oftentimes 
Scars. Sometimes the Skin of the Shoulders 
and Back comes off. The Dangerousness of the 
Disease is to be estimated by the number and 
frequency of the pimples in the Face alone. 
These that are in the Hands and Feet are biggest 
and the higher you ascend from the extremities 
of the Limbs, the lesser and narrower they 
[^p.34^] 
grow. In adult persons, Salivation, and a 
Looseness in Children (tho not so certainly) accompanies 
the Running Kind. The Salivation 
sometimes begins at the time of Eruption, sometimes 
two or three days after, the sick person 
spitting at the first a thin matter, which on the 
eleventh day grows more viscous, and is voided 
with great difficulty. He is thirsty, hoarse, extremely 
dull and sleepy; the Cough sometimes 
surprizes him as he drinks, and the Liquor returns 
through his Nostrils. Then the Salivation 
usually ceaseth, and unless the Swelling of the 
Face and Hands now notably beginning, and 
considerably lasting, supplies its room, the sick 
person forthwith dies: for though, according 
to the Genius of the Disease, the Swelling of 
the Face should abate somewhat on that very 
day, yet ought it not intirely to disappear till 
a day or two after. The Diarrhæa surprizes 
not Children, so early as the Salivation does 
Men. In both these Kinds of Small Pox, the 
Fever reigneth from the beginning to the time 
of the Eruption, from which to the time of the 
Maturation of the Pimples it abates, and, that 
being finish'd, vanishes. The bad Regimen, or 
Government of the sick Person, occasions divers 
irregular Symptoms: such as the Flaccidity 
and falling down of the Pocks, Phrensy, Coma 
or perpetual Sleepiness, Purple Spots scatter'd 
between the Pimples, and little black Spots 
on the tops of them, subsiding in the middle, 
pissing and spitting of Blood about the beginning 
of the Disease, suppression of Urine, &c. 
 
The Separation and Febril Ebullition are 
transacted in the first three or four days. The 
[^p.35^] 
Expulsion is perfected in the following days by 
means of little Abscesses arising in the Skin. 
 
Let a Vein be open'd in any of the three first 
days, and nine or ten ounces of Blood taken away; 
and afterwards exhibit a Vomit of an 
ounce, or an ounce and a half of the infusion of 
Crocus Metallorum. 
 
During the first days let the Blood be diluted 
by frequent Draughts of Small Beer hop'd 
 
Assoon as all the Pocks are come forth (which 
is usually on the sixth day of the Disease) let an 
ounce of Syrup of Meconium be Given at night, 
which must afterwards be repeated every night 
to the tenth day after the Invasion. Let the 
Dose be augmented that night (if the Pocks be 
of the running kind) to an ounce and an half, 
and one ounce in the morning, and continued in 
like manner till the Patient be recovered from 
his sickness. 
 
If the Syrup of Meconium do not agree with 
him, you may substitute Liquid Laudanum in its 
place, viz. eighteen Drops for an ounce of the 
Syrup, and five and twenty Drops for an ounce, 
and an half. In the mean while it is to be observ'd, 
that, if the quieting Medicine given 
twice a day be not sufficient to allay the Commotion 
(as it oftentimes happens about the end 
of the Disease, when the Pocks run notably together) 
in that case it ought to be repeated every 
eight Hours, or oftner, if need require. 
 
But when the Pocks are distinct, it will suffice 
to exhibit a Composing Draught once every 
night, after the full Eruption; and also in a 
smaller Dose. 
 
[^p.36^] 
But of whatsoever kind the Pocks are, and in 
whatsoever time of the Disease a Phrensy supervenes, 
it is altogether necessary to curb the 
disorderly motion of the Spirits, and therefore 
if the former Quieting Dose prove ineffectual, 
it must be repeated again and again, till the Tumult 
be wholly asswag'd; interposing always a 
convenient space between the Doses, that we 
may be able to discern, whether the last Dose 
hath already perform'd as much as we desire, 
before we proceed to exhibit another. 
 
If the Urine be totally supprest, let the sick 
Person be taken out of his Bed, and made to 
walk a little. 
 
If the Spittle by reason of the Heat be so 
tough, that it cannot be expectorated, let a Gargarism 
be frequently injected into the Throat 
with a Syringe. It may be made of Small Beer 
or Barly Water with Honey of Roses: Or 
thus. 
 
Take of the Bark of the Elm-tree six drams, 
Liquorish Roots half an ounce, twenty ston'd 
Raisins, Red Roses two Pugils; boil them in 
a sufficient quantity of water to a pint and an 
half; in which being strained out, dissolve Oxymel 
simple, and Honey of Roses, of each two 
ounces. Mix them for a Gargarism. 
 
If upon the eleventh, or any other succeeding 
day, the Secondary Fever, with Unquietness, 
Tossing of the Body, and such like other Symptoms, 
be so fierce and high, that all the Pacific 
Medicines (how often soever repeated) are not 
able to put a stop to its Fury, and Death seems 
to be at hand, let a Vein be immediately open'd, 
and Blood copiously extracted, viz. to about 
[^p.37^] 
twelve ounces, and the same once or twice repeated 
in the following days, if the consideration 
of the foremention'd Symptoms require it, 
but not otherwise. And in this case, after the 
Letting of Blood, the Patient may be gently 
purg'd on the thirteenth, or any other succeeding 
day, but not before; as for example, let him 
take an ounce of the Lenitive Electuary, dissolved 
in four ounces of Cichory or Milk-water. 
But neither the Letting of Blood nor Purging 
doth forbid the use of Composing Medicines, 
which (these notwithstanding) ought to be exhibited 
both largely and frequently, if need be: 
For after all we must constantly have recourse 
to them in this disease. 
 
When the Pocks are perfectly dry'd up, let 
the Face be anointed with a Liniment made of 
equal parts of Oil of Sweet Almonds and Pomate, 
two days, and no longer. 
 
On the twenty first day of the Disease let a 
Vein in the Arm be open'd, and the day after 
let a Purging Medicine be exhibited, and thrice 
repeated every second day. 
 
As for the Government of the sick Person, 
let him abstain from his Bed till the sixth day, 
after the first Invasion of the Disease; and afterward 
keep his Bed till the seventeenth day, being 
cover'd only as he was wont to be, when in 
Health. 
 
Let him feed upon Oat-meal and Barley-Broths, 
boil'd Apples, and Small Beer, and after 
the eleventh day, let him drink if he pleases, 
four or five spoonfuls of Spanish Wine, twice 
every day. 
 
[^p.38^] 
If the Swelling in the Legs yield not to the 
Evacuations above prescrib'd, it may be easily 
driven away with Fomentations of Mallows, 
Base Mullein, Elder, and Laurel Leaves, with 
Flowers of Cammomil, and Melilote, boil'd in 
Milk. 
 
If during the first days of the Disease the Patient 
spit or piss Blood, let the Powder and 
Mixture, prescrib'd in the Chapter of Spitting of 
Blood, be carefully exhibited every sixth hour, 
till these Symptoms entirely disappear: In 
which case also large Doses of Composing Medicines 
may be given. 
 
[}Of St. Vitus's Dance.}] 
 
'Tis a sort of Convulsion, that infests Children 
from ten years old to the Age of Puberty. It 
is known by their Limping, or by the instability 
of one of their Legs, which they draw after 
them, after the manner of Fools. If the Hand 
of the same side be laid upon the Breast, or 
any other part of the Body, they cannot keep it 
a moment in the same posture, but it will be 
distorted by the Convulsion into another situation 
and place, whatsoever efforts they make to 
the contrary. Before one of these can put a Cup 
to his Mouth, he useth a thousand ridiculous 
Gestures, and Jugler-like Tricks: For he doth 
not bring it to his mouth in a straight line, but 
his hand being strangely drawn aside by the 
Convulsion, he tosses it a good while hither and 
thither, till at last as it happens to come near to 
his Lips, he suddenly throws the Liquor into 
his mouth, and greedily swallows it down, as 
[^p.39^] 
if he intended to make Sport to the Spectators. 
 
Let eight ounces of Blood be taken away, 
more or less, according to the Age of the Patient, 
by opening a Vein in the Arm. 
 
The day following let him take one half of 
the Common Purging Potion, or somewhat 
more, with respect to his age, and at night the 
following draught. 
 
Take Black Cherry water one ounce, Langius 
his Epileptic water three drams, Treacle of 
Andromachus one scruple, liquid Laudanum eight 
drops for a draught. 
 
Let the Purging Potion, with the pacific 
draught at night, be thrice repeated, once every 
second day. 
 
Afterwards let more Blood be taken away, 
and the purging Potion repeated as before, reiterating 
on this wise the letting of Blood and 
Purgation, to a third or fourth time, and allowing 
always a convenient respite between the 
Evacuations, that the Patient be not expos'd to 
danger. 
 
In the days that are free from Purgation, prescribe 
as follows: 
 
Take Conserve of Roman Wormwood, and 
of the yellow part of an Orenge, of each one 
ounce; Conserve of Rosemary flowers, half an 
ounce; old Treacle of Andromachus, and candied 
Nutmeg, of each three drams; candied Ginger 
one dram; with as much as sufficeth of syrup 
of the juice of Citron make an Electuary 
Dose as much as a Nutmeg in the morning, 
and at five a clock in the afternoon, drinking 
after every Dose five spoonfuls of the following 
Wine- 
 
[^p.40^] 
Take of the Roots of Peony, Elicampane, 
Masterwort and Angelica, of each one ounce; 
Leaves of Rue, Sage, Betony, Germainder, 
white Horehound, and the tops of lesser Centory, 
of each a handful; Juniper Berries six 
drams; the Pills of two Orenges. Let all be 
slic'd and infus'd cold in three quarts of Canary 
Wine. When you use it, strain out so much 
as you intend to drink. 
 
Take of Rue water four ounces; Langius his 
Epileptic water, and compound Bryony water, 
of each one ounce; Syrup of Peony six drams; 
mix and make a Julep. Dose four spoonfuls 
every night at the time of going to Bod, with 
eight drops of the spirit of Hartshorn. 
 
Let a Plaster of Caranna be apply'd to the 
soles of the Feet. 
 
The next year, about the same time of the 
year that the Disease first appear'd, let a Vein be 
again open'd, and a purging Medicine exhibited 
some days, for prevention of a Relapse 
 
It seems probable to me, that the Falling 
Sickness in adult persons might be cur'd by this 
method, which nevertheless I have not yet experienc'd. 
But since it is accommodated to the 
tender ages of those that are wont to bt infested 
by St. Vitus's Dance, if it be apply'd 
to the Cure of Epilepsies in persons grown up, 
both the quantity of the Blood that is to be taken 
away, and the Doses of the Purging Medicines 
ought to be augmented. 
 
[^p.41^] 
[}Of the Apoplexy.}] 
 
It consists in a most profound Sleep, and total 
privation of Sense and Motion, excepting only 
Respiration, which is still perform'd, but with 
Difficulty and Snoring. 
 
Let a Vein be instantly open'd in the Arm, 
and twelve ounces of Blood taken away, and 
afterwards eight ounces more out of the Jugulars. 
Immediately after exhibit a Vomit of an 
ounce and an half, or two ounces, of the Infusion 
of Crocus Metallorum, 
 
Let a large and sharp blistering Plaster be 
applied to the hinder part of the Neck. 
 
While these things are doing, let the sick person 
sit upright in his Bed, not oppressed with 
too great a burthen of Cloaths. 
 
Let Spirit of Sal Armoniac excellently rectified, 
be held to his Nose. 
 
After the operation of the Vomit is finished, 
let three or four spoonfuls of the following Julep 
b efrom time to time exhibited. 
 
Take Rue water four ounces; compound 
Bryony water, and Langius his Anti-epileptic 
water, of each one ounce; Spirit of Hartshorn 
twenty drops; Sugar-candy, as much as sufficeth, 
make a Julep. 
 
Or a Spoonful of compound Spirit of Lavender, 
may be given twice or thrice by it self, during 
the Fit, Interposing the space of an hour, 
or half an hour, betwixt the Doses, 
 
Observe heedfully, that Cordials ought not to 
be exhibited too frequently, and such as are too 
[^p.42^] 
hot not at all, as it is the custom to do: For, 
after all, whatever specific vertue they may seem 
to be endu'd withal, they do more mischief 
than good, by melting the humors, and consequently 
augmenting the Disease: which inconvenience 
also is no less occasion'd by too great a 
burthen of Cloths. 
 
After the Paroxysm is over, to prevent a Relapse, 
let these things be prescrib'd. 
 
Take of the pills Cochiæ the greater, two 
scruples for a Dose, to be repeated six times, 
once every third day, at Four of the clock in the 
morning, sleeping after them. 
 
Take Cons_[^ORIG. BLURRED^]ve of Sage Flowers, and of Rosemary 
Flowers, of each one ounce; Conserve of 
the yellow [^ORIG. BLURRED^] of an Orenge six drams; candied 
Nutmeg, and candied Ginger, of each 
half an ounce; old Treacle of Andromachus two 
drams; the powders of the Electuaries Diambræ, 
and Diam_[^ORIG. BLURRED^] Dulcis, of each one dram, with a 
sufficient quantity of the Syrup of Citron-pickle 
make an Electuary. Dose as much as a Chesnut, 
every morning and evening, drinking after 
it two spoonfuls of Langius his Epileptic 
water 
 
Take of Ambergris half a dram; the distill'd 
Oils of Anise-seed, Cinnamon and Nutmeg, of 
each two drops; Oil of Cloves one drop, Sugar 
dissolv'd in Orenge flower water as much as 
sufficeth to make Tablets according to Art; Let 
the patient eat one at pleasure. 
 
Let him abstain from all manner of strong 
Drink, and eat Broths made of Barley, Oats 
or of Chickens; and sometimes even the Flesh 
of Chickens and Lambs, and such like Meats of 
[^p.43^] 
easie digestion, especially while purging Medicines 
are exhibited. 
 
