[^Harvey, Gideon: Vanities of philosophy and physick^] 
 
[}THE 
VANITIES 
OF 
Philosophy and Physick: 
TOGETHER WITH 
 
Directions and Medicines easily prepared 
by any of the least Skill, whereby to preserve 
Health, and prolong Life, as well in those that 
live Regularly, as others that live Irregularly. 
 
Comprizing moreover 
 
HYPOTHESES different from those of the 
Schools throughout almost the whole Art of Physick, 
and particularly relating to Indigestion, and 
other Diseases of the Stomach, Fevers, Consumption, 
Stone, Gravel, Suppression of Urine, Apoplexy, 
Palsie, Madness, Diseases of the Eyes, and others: 
With Variety of Medicines, and Rules whereby 
to make particular Choice out of them. 
 
The whole being a Work very useful to all, but especially 
to those that have any Relation to the Art of Physick, 
 
By GIDEON HARVEY, M.D. 
The KING's Physician to the TOWER. 
 
The Second Edition, much enlarged. 
 
LONDON: 
Printed for W. Turner at the Angel, at Lincolns-Inn-Back-gate. 
1700.}] 
 
[^An introduction omitted.^] 
[^Extract 1, pp. 1-33^] 
 
[^p.1^] 
[}THE 
VANITIES 
OF 
Philosophy and Physick.}] 
 
[}CHAP. I. 
 
Representing some Vanities of common Receipts, 
Herbs, and Herbals.}] 
 
1. THo' all Nations are imbued with various 
Specifick Qualifications, wherein each 
differ from the other, yet that of Credulity, 
or an easie rash and inconsiderate 
Belief may be conceived, to be universal to 
Mankind, and to which not improbably ought to 
be imputed the sequel of the most frequent and 
greatest Errors, Deceits, and Impostures, most Men 
are daily and hourly plunged in, as the source and 
spring of all, as may be plainly Evidenced in each of 
the Three subsequent Faculties, I mean Divinity, 
Law, and Physick. The Popish, Mahometan, Sun, 
Moon, and Devil Worshipping Religions, embraced 
by such innumerable Multitudes, also all Heresies, 
[^p.2^] 
Schisms, pretended Witchcrafts, Sorceries, and Exorcisms, 
howsoever erroneous, imposing, and deceitful, 
these all may be censured, flow from no other 
head or fountain, than an easie inconsiderate Belief 
given to the Insinuations of cunning subtil little 
Priests; And he that gives a precipitant credit to 
the Language of a Seller of Lands, Houses, or 
other Merchandizes, doth not rarely repent his rash 
Belief, especially when he adds to his Error, his too 
easie acceptance of relief, from the doubtful Remedies 
of a vulgar Lawyer: But it is the third Topick 
before-mentioned, is design'd for the chief Subject 
of the present Discourse, which I shall endeavour to 
explain in its extent. 
 
2. That most of Men do very readily take upon 
trust any Remedies or Receipts, that are confidently 
recommended to them, can scarce be contradicted; 
and their fond passion in the inconsiderate belief of 
'em is so great, that without any loss of time, they 
are to be Registred in their Book of Receipts, handed 
to them possibly by their Grannam, and Archive like 
to be lock'd up in their Desk, secur'd in a lock'd 
Closet, within a lock'd Room. Three such Locks 
being broke open by a notorious Thief, Stole thence 
a Hundred Pounds in Moneys numbered, and a Book 
of Manuscript Receipts finely covered. The Party 
injured condoled the loss of his Remedy-Manuscript 
to such a Degree, that it wholly drowned the loss of 
his Money-bag, which he would readily have compounded 
for the restroring of the Book, which the 
blank Paper in it excepted, would have been overvalued 
at Two Pence. 
 
3. The next recital coming within my knowlege, 
will give you a farther taste of this sort of foolish 
Credulity. The Servant of a Linnen-Draper had so 
great an Interest in her Mistress, as to borrow out of 
her Husband's Closet a Book of scribled Receipts, 
which through a Communicative kindness to one of 
my Maid-Servants, was entrusted with her to be 
Transcribed; but the Master daily conversing in his 
Closet, soon missed what he so frequently eyed, and 
[^p.3^] 
valued above all what was in it; upon a strict enquiry 
after the matter, his Wife as soon qualified his 
uneasiness, by acquainting him where this valuable 
Treatise was to be found, who not long after accosted 
my Maid several days, being delayed for want 
of an opportunity of Transcribing. The Person 
being tired by unsatisfactory Answers, resolved to 
disclose to me the cause of his so frequent Conferences 
with this Menial of mine; and promising to 
use my Authority with her, I did not doubt, but I 
should oblige him with the return of his Book next 
Morning at a certain Hour, at which time precisely 
he came, when I did not fail to discharge my promise, 
in repossessing him with his Book, which he 
received from me with all the respectful Reverence, 
that Hands and Knees could express. You will not 
judge it improbable, that my Curiosity should lead 
me to inspect these Papers, which to the best of my 
Memory contain'd an excellent way to Stew a Calves-Head 
with Oysters, another to make Fritters, and 
some other pieces of Cookery; also a Salve for Chilblains, 
a Plaister for all sorts of Swellings, an infallible 
Drink for the Stone, a most certain Remedy 
against a Consumption, and all sorts of Coughs of 
the Lungs, being a Syrup jumbled of most strange 
Materials. Varieties of other Infallibilities of Remedies 
equally foolish I pass by, and shall only remark 
the immensity of this Man's Belief, by his 
Mournful Countenance, whilst his Book of Secrets 
was absent from him, and to what Serenity he was 
restored upon his Reinstatement. 
 
4. Suppose one of these Medecines were to be taken 
out of this Magazine of Health, and to be applied 
against a Consumption, Stone, or any thing 
else, the failure he would most certainly attribute to 
the want of some of the Ingredients, their too long 
being gathered, too much or too little being boiled, 
or to a hundred other Miscarriages, insomuch, that 
it would not give the least shock to the stability of his 
belief, which might not be singular in this person, 
but general in thousands. 
 
[^p.4^] 
5. It would by many be Censured an Usury in a 
Person, that from the Expence of 30 or 40 Shillings, 
in the purchase of a Gerard's Herbal, or such like 
Picture Book, he should expect such an excessive Interest 
for his Money, as the value of knowing the 
faces, and vertues of so many hundreds, or rather 
thousands of Plants doth amount to: And indeed, the 
Bargain of that Plant-Book would prove extraordinary 
Cheap, did what is contain'd in the hundredth 
part of it, answer to Truth in matter of Fact, which 
gives me occasion to make this Inference; that Herbals 
are fitter for Gardiners than Physicians, in furnishing 
the former with a Scheme of Figures of so 
many thousand Weeds there described, and consequently 
ought to be thrown out of their Manures, 
as Absorbers of the juice of the Earth, that should 
give Nourishment to their Esculents. However, 
to prevent contradicting the Old Phrase, Natura nihil 
facit frustra, it may not untruly be affirmed, that 
the generality of Herbs growing in Fields, Meadows, 
and Hills, Nature seemed chiefly design'd to 
bestow upon Beasts. It would therefore be an Employment 
fitter for Boys, that love rambling and 
santring about Feilds, and Hedges, to go upon Simpling, 
(as our Botanists do term it) than for Men, to 
make such needless, and not unchargeable Journeys, 
to the remotest Hills, and Woods, only to be acquainted 
with some New faces of Plants, and take 
the Portrait of 'em, to be placed together in some 
bulky Volume, whose immensurable industry doth 
no more than equal those, that have taken the pains 
to abstract the Pictures of variety of Beasts, Fishes, 
Birds, Flies, and other Insects, in the manner of Aldrovandus 
and his Mimicks, who in that sort have 
passed their Lives in doing of nothing. 
 
6. What respect is paid to Hippocrates and Galen, 
for their Services in Medicine, and to Geber or Paracelsus 
in Chymistry, Dioscorides may Challenge in 
Herbary, he being by Profession an old Soldier, and 
word out by the fatigues of Campaignes, with the 
assistance of his Crutches and Stumps made a shift 
[^p.5^] 
to Perambulate Woods, Hills, and Dales, in pursuit 
of Herbs and Weeds, with a design to get his 
Bread by Experimental Application in the Cure of 
Diseases, wherein he attained the success of Gypsies, 
that by foretelling the ignorant their good or bad 
luck, sometimes hit, and sometimes missed. Their 
casual hitting gives them Reputation enough, to 
persuade People, that their missing is occasioned by 
their misunderstanding the Southsayer's Predictions, 
or their own forgetfulness of what was told them, 
so that many do readily believe these Gypsies to be 
never-failing Prognosticators, not unlike Dioscorides 
his Herbal Performances, who by his green Remedies 
observing some Diseases disappearing, made no 
doubt of ascribing their Cure to 'em, and as boldly 
to hand the Probatums to suuceeeding Ages, which 
as confidently without the least scruple, even to this 
day do receive them, not thinking that lenghth of 
time, change and spareness of Diet, alteration of 
the Air and Season, universal and particular Evacuations 
might perform the main part; the Truth 
of which seems by many instances to appear to me. 
That Betony, Rosemary, Sage, Lavender, Mother of 
Tyme, French Lavender, Piony, May-Lilly, Lime-Tree-Flowers, 
and the like, upon the use of 'em, by direction 
of the Learned, for many Days, Weeks, 
and Months, have failed in the Cure of Head-Aches, 
Tremblings, Swimmings of the Brain, Convulsions, 
and other Distempers of the Head, can best 
be attested by the Advisers; though it cannot be 
denied, that some of these Diseases have gone off 
in very few, upon the application of the foresaid 
Vegetables; but whether to be imputed to the virtue 
of these, may be matter of Inquiry: However, 
hit once and miss a hundred times, is a sign of no 
great infallibility. 
 
7. That a Million of Consumptives labouring of 
an ulcerous Disposition of the Lungs, have been 
frustrated by a very long use of Ground-Ivy, Maiden-Hair, 
Ysop, Seabious, Lung-wort, Colesfoot, Sanicle, 
Golden-Rod, Ladies-Mantle, Bugle, and forty 
[^p.6^] 
more, tho' used in all forms and shapes, is sufficiently 
recorded in most of the Church-yards of this 
Island. 
 
8. The Stone-grinding and Piss-driving-Herbs, 
as Saxifrage, Maiden-Hair, Speedwell, Horse-Radish, 
Fennil, Persly, Broom, Gromwell, Daucus, Butchers-Broom, 
Cicers, Winter-Cherries, and the rest, are not 
much depended upon by those that have made trial 
of 'em for four or five Months successively, though 
now and then one or other, that hath fancied a 
great relief, doth revive their dying Reputation. 
These and the like instances do aptly compare the 
practice of Physick to a Lottery, where one Fortunate 
Adventurer saves the sinking Credit of that 
Cheating Mystery, against a hundred blank Miscreants, 
by being proclaimed such by sound of 
Trumpet. 
 
9. To Madder, and many other Vegetables is ascribed 
Opening, Stopping, Binding, curing of the 
Jaundice, removing Obstructions of all sorts, suppressing 
the Menstrua, Loosenesses, and all sorts of 
Bleedings, besides many other feats, that are contrary 
to each other. As for Amulets and other Transplanting 
and wonderful Deeds, they are appropriated 
to abundance of Plants, of which, and several 
Physick Golden Legends the Herbarists speak wonders, 
if you can believe them. As for my own particular, 
beyond forty of fifty Vegetables, tho' I have 
made trial of hundreds of 'em, I find no great occasion 
for them, and therefore shall supersede taking 
any farther notice in this place. 
 
[^p.7^] 
[}CHAP. II 
 
Of the Insignificancy of the Old and New 
Philosophy.}] 
 
1. THings in Philosophy and Medicine, which we 
do not know, are beyond all manner of Comparison 
more than those things we do know. 
 
From this Axiom I do infer, that it is highly incumbent 
upon all, that would endeavour the advancement 
of Physick, to make a further inquiry 
into Diseases, their Causes, and Medicines to oppose 
them. 
 
2. The greatest part of those things in Medicine, 
which we pretend to know, in conjectural, and uncertain. 
 
3. Many, if not most of these things, which we do peremptorily 
affirm to be this, or that, to be caused by this, 
or that, or to cause and effect this or that, are, or may be 
proved, to be false, or erroneous. 
 
These Positions being only my particular Creed, 
whereinto the weakness of my capacity hath been 
wrought by thousands of instances, I shall undertake 
to offer only some few, the shortness of my purpose 
no otherwise permitting. 
 
1. Natural Philosophy is propounded under Two 
Heads, viz. Physica generalis, & Specialis; that is to 
say, General Natural Philosophy, and particular. The 
former expounds in general terms, what a Natural 
Body is, namely, That it is a thing extended, moved, 
or quiet, figured, and so or so placed, situated, or 
posited. Corpus Naturale est res quanta, mota, vel 
quieta, figurata, & taliter, vel taliter posita. 
 
2. What is all this but Metaphysicks, namely, General 
Notions drawn from all particular Bodies? A 
Natural Body doth consist of Quantity, that is, Extension 
into length, breadth, and depth, mensurability, 
[^p.8^] 
or divisibility into Particles, (it's much as one 
in the Original) of motion, or rest, of figure, and 
position or scituation. Upon these five Topics follows 
a very long Cant, and of little more signification 
than the Predicaments, or Materia, Forma, and 
Privatio. But its a wonder to my crude Thoughts, 
Number was left out, since there is no compleat Natural 
Body, but doth consist of a definite number of 
Particles; however it may be presumed, that Number 
is comprehended under Extension, fc. Quantitas 
discreta. 
 
3. The Physica Specialis depends upon the application 
of the forementioned, to every Subgenus, 
Species, and individual Body, and by that you are 
to know, what any particular Body is, of what it 
doth consist, and how each is differenced from the 
other. 
 
4. What sound this modern Science of Bodies 
makes upon an Anvil, the following recital will inform 
you. A Smith being very sedulous in the management 
of his hot Iron, found himself much interrupted 
by the importunities of a begging Scholar, 
inforcing his Argument for an Alms of a small piece, 
with an Harague of his Merits, arising from his being 
a Master of Arts, of I know not how many years 
standing, a Doctor in Philosophy, embroider'd with 
Latin, Greek, Hebrew, and abundance of other Giblets 
of Learning. The Smith to free himself of all 
this impertinence, asks, what that red hot thing was, 
he held in his Tongs, what it was made of, and what 
difference there was between that and Copper; to 
which the Beggar replied, it was Iron, a Mettal, or 
a Business dug out of the Ground, that will melt, 
and can be hammer'd; and so is Copper, infers the 
Smith: Ergo, Copper is Iron. No Master, saith the 
Mendicant, there is a vast discrepancy between them 
in their insensible Particles, which are of different 
insensible Extensions, insensible Figures, insensible 
Positions, insensible Motions, and insensible Immobilities. 
Ergo, then saith the black Opponent, no 
two Bodies can be alike; two drops of Milk, of 
[^p.9^] 
Water, or Wine, or any liquid may be insensibly 
different. Thou art a most insensible Philosopher, 
a Man is not a Horse, a Sow is not an Elephant, 
Wood is not Cheese, and so of all others, because 
their Particles are of various insensibly Figures, Positions, 
&c. The most subtil Particles of the Forgefire, 
and the insensibilities of this Arts Master, had 
by this time fermented Vulcan into a torrent of Maledictions, 
crying out, you are a Cheat, to defraud 
the impotent Poor of what they may justly crave 
from the Charity of all Men; a lazy, slothful, unthankful 
Knave, enjoying the fruits of thy laborious 
Mother Earth, without returning the Gratitude of 
a days Plowing, or Dunging, which you are made 
for, an incorrible sturdy Beggar; See how the Sleeves 
of your totterdemalion Gown are cram'd from the 
Elbow to the ground with Pie crust, and pieces of 
Roast-Beef, and what's here in the bottom? a couple 
of silver Spoons, two laced Handkerchiefs wet, 
as if newly stolen off of some Hedge. You pilfering 
Dog, disrobe that Friar Bacon's Livery, off with your 
square Pancake Bonnet, and put on that old Coat of 
mine there, and this old Hat; blow the Bellows, 
and I will teach you an Art beyond all your Masterships 
idle foppish Arts and Sciences, that shall get 
you an honest Livelihood, or else away to the House 
of Correction, what will soon drive out your insensible 
Particles, and make you sensible of what it is to 
Beg, Cheat, Pilfer, and Steal. 
 
5. To what degree of satisfaction this Globular 
sort of Philosophy, pretending by its insensibilities 
to explicate the Principles, Causes, and Affections 
of natural Bodies, doth superate the old pedantick 
Sophistry of matter, form, privation, and the four 
Elements, together with their assigning the effects of 
natural Bodies to occult qualities, may justly be inquired 
into, since the answer is equal, that such or 
such things are caused by occult Qualities, or by insensible 
Particles, of insensible blind Figures, and unknown 
Positions. However, both the Globular and 
Peripathetick Philosophy afford matter sufficient to 
[^p.10^] 
Chatter, Cavil, and Trifle away the flower of a Man's 
time, as if design'd only for an Employment to divert 
from Idleness and Debauchery, not unlike sending 
Children to School, to prevent them from Carts 
and Coaches in the Streets of High-ways. Those do 
properly enough come within the saying of Salust, 
Vitam silentio veluti pecora transeunt; especially when 
continuing in an University, and possibly in a Fellowship, 
till their Bodies are grown rusty with Sloth 
and Laziness, and their Heads turn'd mouldy with 
grey Hairs; whose Studies indeed ought to have been 
determined in seven Years, were it only to quicken 
their Industry, and make way for other indigent 
Students to succeed them. A Peacock in all his gaudy 
Plumage is a Creature less stately and proud, than a 
Master of Arts treading to the Schools in his Formalities; 
and though Homage be paid him in his way 
thither by Undergraduates, and Batchelerios, his refined 
Manners will scarce allow his Mastership to 
touch the Angle of his Bonnet. Clarissime Magister 
quare rides? Rideo, quia Magister sum. 
 
[}CHAP. III. 
 
Of the Digestion and Indigestion in the Stomach, 
and the Vanity of the causes thereof.}] 
 
IT might be reasonably expected from the Tradition 
of so many Ages, and the Studies of six or 
twelve Months of so many Masters of Arts of seven 
Years standing or walking, before they assume the 
tufted Gown, that Galen's Theory would be render'd 
as Diaphanous, and demonstrable as Euclid; yet to my 
dim Oculation, many, if not most of their Notions, 
seem still to be plunged in a dark Chaos; for as obvious 
as the Digestion of the Food in the Stomach 
may be, though it be the first Operation in the Body 
of Man, and therefore ought to be better understood, 
[^p.11^] 
yet to me seems now, nothing can be worse explained, 
than by asserting the Dissolution into Chyle, 
to be performed by the natural and adventitious heat 
of the Stomach, brought to it by the Arteries and 
warm coverings of the Liver, Spleen, and other adjacents. 
A Sharc, Sea-Wolf, and other Fish, if Credit 
may be given to all those Writers of India, Voyages, 
have been found to contain in their Bellies a 
whole Man, being thrown over-board, with all his 
Cloaths upon him, great Joynts of stinking Beef, 
with their huge Ox Bones in them, and Carcasses of 
Sheep with their Wool on their Back, all which 
were discerned almost digisted into a thick slimy 
Juice, without observing any sensible heat, but rather 
coldness. The like may in proportion be instanced 
in a fresh water Sharc, I mean the Pike, whose vigour 
in digesting an Ox Paunch, and other Garbadge, 
likewise Boney Fish of considerable bigness, without 
any sensible heat in his Bowels, or any steaming 
warmth, is an Argument that inforceth the former. 
The heat in the Maws of Poultrey, which is 
inferiour to that of the Stomach of Man, cannot 
be conceived in any wise proportionable, to dissolve 
the husks of Barley or Oats, (which notwithstanding 
they perfectly digest to an exact smoothness) and 
especially small Pebbles, which the extremity of Fire 
may melt, but not dissolve, and yet the heat of the 
Stomach of a Horse, though much more intense, 
doth make much less impression upon Grain, which 
commonly slip away untouch'd with their Dung. 
It hath likewise been decided by common Observation, 
that those who heat their Stomach at Meals 
with Wine, or soon after with Brandy, have a more 
difficult Digestion that others, who moisten their 
Victuals with small Beer, Wine diluted with Water, 
or only Water, as is usual to three fourths of the 
Universe. 
 
Most Esculents seem to me to contain some Gummous 
juice in them, that tieth their parts together, 
which Water will readily dissolve, and Wine, or 
the Spirits of Wine do harden. This Gummous 
[^p.12^] 
clammy juice being dissolved, the parts which it cemented 
and kept together must necessarily fall asunder 
into a sort of Batter. But where the parts of 
Alimentary substance are cemented together by a resinous 
juice, then most certainly Wine or its Spirits 
would more readily dissolve them, and Water would 
harden them. 
 
Fish is apt to be hardened in the Stomach by 
drinking Wine upon it, and consequently is longer 
in its Dissolution, as appears in many that are sick at 
their Stomach, or very uneasie and heavy in the 
Digestion of it; whereas those that drink only small 
Beer, or Wine and Water upon it, digest it very easily. 
In the Northern Parts, as Holland, Zealand, 
and Maritime parts of Germany, where People do 
very much sustain themselves by eating Fish; they 
generally drink very small Beer upon it, and notwithstanding 
digest it easily, grow strong, and impinguate. 
Likewise its observed, that Fish that's 
Boil'd with Wine and Water, as some do out of 
Luxury, is hardened, which rendring it more solid 
and fibrous, gives the gustative part of the Mouth 
the most delight in the chawing it, though greater 
labour to the Stomach to digest it; whereas being 
Boil'd in Water, becomes soft, and more easily digestible. 
But Wine drunk two hours after, doth 
much promote the fermentation, (that as I said before 
arrives towards the latter end of digestion) and 
distribution of the Chyle through the alimentary or 
milky Vessels. After all, I do know, that use and 
custom doth much prevail in that part; and therefore 
those that are from an ill Custom used to drink 
Wine upon Fish, are apt to be sickish without it, 
tho' with it they are much longer in digesting of it 
than Flesh Meat. 
 
Fish seems to contain a very strong gummy Juice, 
a strong Glue, (ichthiocolla) being made out of it, and 
therefore is much more easily dissolvable or digestible 
by Water, or waterish Liquors, than by Wine, 
or other strong Drinks. 
 
[^p.13^] 
2. Neither am I convinced, that those who ascribe 
the Energy of Concoction to an Acid Ferment, have 
in any wise hit their Mark; for considering fermentation 
imports properly an insensible, and in some 
things a sensible small ebullition or simpering, or any 
natural, or artificial, mixt, or compound liquid, 
soft, or consistent Body, which by rarefaction, or 
widening and opening the close parts, doth let out, 
or expel such Particles or Bodies, that a Heterogeneous, 
whereby a depuration of the said mixt body 
is attained: And if this rarefaction, or widening, 
and multiplying of the pores of the Body, be protracted 
to too long a continuance, or performed with 
too great violence, the most subtil particles of that 
body, which are the chief constituents of it, are 
forced, or let out together with the Heterogeneous, 
whereupon a dissolution, putrefaction and corruption 
of the whole mixture must necessarily ensue, as 
appears in the fermentation of Wine, Beer, Cider, &c. 
which being rais'd too high, or continued too long, 
doth most certainly convert them into Vinegar. 
Dow by yist or levain is huft up, (or in the common 
phrase doth rise) or rarefied, that is, opened, 
or widened in all its pores and oft multiplied, whereby 
the most subtil particles, or matter of the fire (being 
the heat of the Oven) is let in, which together 
with the constituent most subtil particles of the Dow 
do expel the nitrous, and other heterogenous slymy 
parts, which otherwise would prove very offensive 
to the Stomach, and in some be render'd indigestible. 
Now if the Dow continue too long in rising, or rise 
too fast, ot soon falls, and is apt to turn Soure, and 
being then put into the Oven, can never be well 
baked, and doth in a short time turn mouldy. 
 
3. To say then, that Bones, Grissels, or any other 
hard matter, is rarefying in a Dog's stomach, meaning 
thereby fermenting, and consequently digesting, 
to me seems a very improper way of speaking; for 
Fermentation doth in my Opinion ever follow Solution, 
in order to depurate and render homogeneous, 
that is dissolved; how then can those Bones be said 
[^p.14^] 
to be fermenting; before they are dissolved and digested. 
 
4. It is to the Spittle many Physicians of good 
Fame do attribute the chief, or rather sole power of 
dissolving the Victuals in Chyle, by raising a Fermentation 
in the Meat and Drink, that's swallowed 
down into the Stomach; for being chawed, crush'd 
rowl'd, and turn'd about in the Mouth, it's mixed 
with such a proportion of Spittle, which by its Spirits 
and saline Particles, assisted somewhat by the native 
and ambient heat of the Stomach, penetrating 
through the pores of the Victuals, raises a sort of a 
small ebullition, whereby they are dissolved. But if 
you consider the nature and use of Spittle, probably 
this matter may appear otherwise, Spittle cannot 
properly be called an Excrement, which is of no use, 
and ought to be thrown out and expelled; but a Recrement, 
which is of use, and ought not to be expelled, 
unless it be abounding, and after it hath performed 
what its intended for. Horses, Cows, and other 
Animals have their Mouths and Throat always 
moistned with Spittle, but which is seldom or never 
expelled by them by sputation, as very oft it is by 
the Humane kind, when its become superfluous; 
which is an Argument, its no Excrement. The use 
of it to me appears, to moisten the several parts of 
the Mouth, Gullet, and Windpipe, and to keep 
them constantly glib, smooth, and soft; for otherwise 
the Tongue and Jaws by their frequent motion, 
and the steems that continually pass out of the Lungs 
in the expiration, would render those parts to dry, 
stiff, rough, and unpliable, that they would become 
useless. The Windpipe would be so corrugated and 
contracted, that it would put a stop to the respiration; 
the Gullet would likewise through want of Spittle 
suffer such a streightning and roughness, that it 
would be utterly incapable to give passage to the Victuals. 
Touching the nature of Spittle, it is in no 
wise different from Lympha, which is contained in 
other Lympha ducts, the Ductus Salivales being no 
other, and as long as it continues in the said Ductus, 
[^p.15^] 
its much fuller of volatile saline Spirits, which renders 
it limpid, fluid, and thin; but being come to 
the Mouth and the other parts, out of the said Ductus, 
those volatile saline Spirits do soon evaporate, and fly 
away, whereby the Spittle becomes thick, mucilaginous, 
and oft frothy, by the admixture of extraneous 
Air, and other slimy Particles, it meets about the 
Mouth and Throat. So that if Spittle be of this nature, 
it must rather hinder Fermentation, and consequently 
the pretended Solution into Chyle, which 
that it doth, is manifest in those Melancholians, that 
are commonly termed Spitters, who generally have 
a very bad Digestion. But suppose a Man that abounds 
with Spittle, should spit a quantity of it warm 
out of his Mouth into a warm bolt head hermetically 
closed, containing a small bit of Meat that had been 
well grinded is a warm Mortar, and then this mixture 
being put into a warm sand Bath, do you believe, 
here would happen either a Fermentation, 
Ebullition, or Solution into Chyle, though it were 
to continue there six Weeks? Or, suppose a Man 
should swallow several great lumps of Flesh, without 
chawing of it, or mixing it with his Spittle, do you 
not think he would digest into a Chyle, though it 
might take up some longer time, than if his Meat 
was chawed? What Spittle doth a Sharc or Pike mix 
with those great pieces of Flesh and Bones, which 
they swallow without chawing, and yet digest them 
sooner than any other Creature could, as they are in 
the Water? 
 
4. That the Lympha in all the Lymhic ducts, (and 
the Spittle also though more sparingly) is perfused 
with some remaining proportion of volatile saline 
(that is Animal) Spirits, appears to me by the similitude 
of Argument, for establishing the circulation 
of the Blood out of the Arteries into the Veins, and 
thence into the Arteries again. The chief motive 
to me being, that the Heart throwing at every Pulsation 
such proportions of Blood into the Arteries, 
these must of necessity swell to an extremity and burst, 
[^p.16^] 
were there not other Vessels, namely, the Veins, 
ready to receive and unload the Arteries; as for the 
swelling of the Arteries on the side towards the 
Trunc, and of the Veins towards the Extremities of 
the Body, upon a Ligature made on any of the Joints; 
or the Arterial Blood upon Arteriotomy flowing from 
the Trunc, and the Venal Blood upon Phlebotomy 
flowing towards the Trunc, would scarce be persuasive 
enough to me to receive that Doctrine, since other 
Reasons might be given for those different Intumescencies 
upon a Ligature, or the different issuings 
out of the Blood out of the Arteries and Veins. In 
like manner I do suppose, that the Nervous Lymphs, 
which is the Vehicle, and containing Liquor of the 
Animal Spirits, is always flowing or dripping from 
the Brain, and Medulla Spinalis to most parts of the 
Body through the Nerves; and cannot be supposed 
to return back again naturally, which therefore must 
of necessity extreamly swell, and stiffen the Nerves, 
unless received and disburden'd by some other Vessels, 
which in all probability must be the Lymphæ ducts, 
containing in substance, tenuity, clearness, penetrative 
vertue, and other qualities, a Lympha not unlike 
the Gleet, that distils from a wounded Nerve. Moreover, 
considering the valves in the said Lymphæ-ducts, 
opening towards the Trunc, and shutting towards 
the Extremities doth add to the apparency of the 
forementioned supposition, implying there is a circulation 
of the Animal Spirits and Lympha. The foresaid 
Lympha being received by the Lymphæ-ducts, must 
necessarily be much impoverish'd in its volatile saline 
Spirits, and consequently have lost its power of apporting 
of motion and sense, though otherwise of very 
great use, almost in the same proportion, as the 
Blood in the Veins hath lost of motion, and is very 
considerably retarded, in respect of the quick and rapid 
motion of the Blood in the Arteries. 
 
5. Neither can I conceive, that the Stomach is capable 
to contain any Acid Juice powerful enough to 
dissolve Bones, Grissels, Sinews, Skin, and all sorts 
of Flesh without hurt, and danger of perforating its 
[^p.17^] 
Membranes, being much softer and easier to be 
dissolved, than Bones or Sinews. If you pour the 
strongest Vinegar, or Aqua fortis, upon those Edibles 
beforementioned, and set them over any degree of 
Fire in a Vessel, stop'd as close as if Hermetically 
Sealed, for the space of ten or twelve Hours, you 
will scarce find any Solution, or at least not comparable, 
to what a sound Stomach performs in two 
or three Hours. Moreover, where any Person by 
sower Belches perceives his Stomach to be charged 
with a sowre Juice, his Victuals will scarce be digested, 
or dissolved into a good Chyle, but into that 
sort of slime, which Physicians term Cruditas acida. 
And I have frequently observed, that many upon 
Drinking sower Beer, or eager Wines, or using sower 
Sauces to their Victuals, have not only undergone a 
very laborious and painful Digestion, but oft-times 
been forced to throw up their whole Cargo. 
 
6. The Stomach doth sometimes receive such sorts 
of Aliment, as Pudding, Pancake, Custard, Tansie, 
Minced Pie, Plum Broath, Plum-Cakes, and the 
like, which in most Persons will ferment, and be rarefied 
to a degree, that will huff up, distend, and 
swell not only the region of the Stomach and Hypochonders, 
but also their whole Belly, to an extension 
and uneasiness, that will oblige them to unbutton, 
and widen their wasteband. Those recited, and the 
like Edibles containing a fermentative Spirit in them, 
seldom fail in fermenting, during which, as it suspends, 
or at least retards the Concoction, (notwithstanding 
they seem matters so easily digestible, and 
incomparatively less difficult than Beef, Pork, &c.) 
yet the solution cannot, or is seldom perform'd with 
vigour, until the foresaid fermentation ceases, which 
is perceived by the subsiding and relaxing of their 
drum Bellies. Hence it is, that many do find, they 
cannot digest so easily upon drinking a bitter or sowre 
Small Beer, or strong Ale, Beer, or Wine, as a small 
alish smooth Beer, Water, or Wine and Water, because 
the former contain such a large proportion of 
fermentative Spirits. And it is upon the same consideration, 
[^p.18^] 
that new Drink not being sufficiently 
cleared of its yist, and other seculencies, proves so 
offensive to Digestion; Besides, strong Beer, Wine, 
and Brandy, also all sowre Drinks do harden the 
Victuals in the Stomach, which Water and small 
Drinks soften and dissolve, as you may read, together 
with the Reason thereof, in the 2d Paragraph 
of this Chapter. Nevertheless, to some Constitutions 
that are slabby, cold, and moist, and accustomed 
to strong Drinks, this may be much more agreeable. 
 
7. Since I can in no wise apprehend the dissolution 
of Victuals in the Stomach to be caused by heat, 
fermentation, or any corroding acid Juice, no more 
than Gold, which the extremity of heat will melt, 
and not dissolve, nor will a strong corroding Aqua 
Forcis touch it, yet a small proportion of fluid Mercury, 
(which in that form hath no manner of a corrosive 
sharpness in it) with the assistance of a very little 
warmth, doth in a short interval of time very expeditiously 
and potently, by its most subtil Particles 
insinuating into its Pores, though more close than in 
any body whatsoever besides it self, tare it asunder, 
dissolve, and divide it into the minutest Particles. 
In the same manner I do conceive, that all sorts of 
Victuals, be they hard of soft, are as easily and readily 
digested in strong and sound Constitutions, by 
the most subtil saline Particles of the Body, (which 
are the Animal Spirits) steaming in clouds out of 
those large Nerves of the sixth pair, that are inferred 
into the Stomach, and their numerous branches that 
are disseminated through its Tunics, which forcing 
into the pores of the alimentary Substances, tare them 
asunder, divide, and dissolve them into the minutest 
Particles, and being mixt with the moisture of your 
Drink (especially small Drink contributing much to 
the Solution of the gummous matter, that very probably 
is contained in most sorts of Edibles, as hath 
been hinted before) are converted into that Juice 
we call Chyle; Hereunto the warmth of the Stomach 
derived from the Arteries, and cirrounding 
[^p.19^] 
Bowels, is very assistent, though it hath been oft 
observed, that some whose Stomach hath been commonly 
felt very cold by themselves, yet nevertheless 
had a very potent digestive faculty, that would subdue 
the hardest and rawest of Meats. 
 
The colour of Chyle in commonly of a greyish white, 
occasioned by the rarefaction of its body into wide 
pores, which being adapted to admit the light from 
without copiously to a great depth, makes it appear 
of a whitish colour; whereas the density of a body 
disposeth it to blackness, by excluding the luminous 
particles in the Surface. The Objection that Gold 
ought to appear black, because its Body is the most 
condensed of any, is easily answered, by supposing, 
That if its Body were absolutely condensed, it must 
be black; but granting also that it must be indued 
with some pores to admit a proportion of luminous 
rays, which I will only suppose to be extreamly white, 
and white in some proportion added to the black, renders 
a yellow, and if equal, in many things makes a 
red: But observe, that part of this Paragraph is only 
a Supponendum. 
 
8. Now when the inward coat of the Stomach 
(Tunica rugosa) is cover'd with too much slime, (for 
ist necessary it should be cover'd with a little, to defend 
it from the sharpness and roughness of all sorts 
of Victuals it receives) so as to stop and plaister up 
the pores of the Nerves, whereby the foresaid most 
subtile saline Particles are in some proportion hindred 
from flying out, the digestion becomes slow, 
laborious, painful, and difficult, confecting a slimy 
Chyle, which in process of time doth turn into many 
sorts of Diseases. 
 
9. Of those that drink thick, austere, or adstringent 
Wines at, or soon after Meals, or close their Repasts 
with Quince-Marmelade, Chesnuts, Almonds, 
or the like, I have experimentally found, that in 
many, to whom either the lessening the use, or wholly 
weaning themselves from those Things hath been 
advised, their digestion hath been soon reduced to its 
former Vigour, which before, by the continual closing 
[^p.20^] 
of the Pores of the Stomach-Nerves, was 
exceedingly debilitated, by the foresaid closing, and 
adstringent things. 
 
10. It is likewise as consonant to experience, that 
those who usually drink any Wines, not being diluted 
with Water, or that commonly conclude their 
Dinners or Suppers with Banquets of Sweet-meats, 
Custards, Cheescakes, Creams, and Gellies, do weaken, 
and in time destroy their Concoction, so as few 
of them are found to be long livers; because those 
before-mentioned materials containing a fermentative 
Juice, by raising a Fermentation, do extreamly 
interrupt and impede the dissolution of Aliments in 
their Stomach. Those Fermentations in the Stomach, 
upon Fermentative Edibles, are frequently causes, that 
produce those flushings in the Face soon after Meals, 
and at other times in many Women, and some Men, 
that have weak Digestions, and contain something in 
their Stomachs that is Fermentable, against which 
drinking of Water, or Water mixt with very little 
Wine, hath oft proved an effectual Remedy. 
 
11. Some that have for several Years been afflicted 
after Meals with pain and disturbances in their Heads, 
drowsiness, uneasiness in their Limbs, palpitations, 
faintnesses, belches, huffings up, and tensions in their 
Hypochonders, and Bellies, have been totally cured 
of all their turbulent Symptoms, by throwing off all 
Malt-drinks, and Wine, and gradually using themselves 
to drink Water, when all other Remedies 
were so far from giving them relief, that they rather 
aggravated their Complaints. But what is more, it 
hath been observed, that Chronical-Coughs of many 
Years continuance, have been not only removed, 
but perfectly cured, by exchanging of Malt-drinks 
and Wine into Water, or into Water refresh'd with 
a little Wine. And those that have travell'd through 
Germany, and the Low-Countries, might have observed, 
that the strongest and healthfulest Bodies 
are found among the Boars, who for their ordinary 
Drink are scarce acquainted with any thing but 
Whey, or clear Water, which contributing so much 
[^p.21^] 
to perfection of Digestion, may very reasonably be 
esteemed the true cause of their Health, Vigour, 
and long Life. These and many more like instances 
do force this concession from me, that the 
choice of Drinks is of greater importance than of 
Edibles. When Fermentative Drinks, as strong 
Beer, and Wine, shall disturb and retard Digestion, 
and cold Water which suppresses Fermentations 
(as appears in many Hysteric Women, that by 
drinking a Glass of fair Water, so in a moment 
turn off a fit) shall in many promote and enliven 
Digestion, how can it then be thought, that Digestion 
is caused by the heat of the Stomach, or by 
Fermentation? 
 
12. Though drinking Water hath on several occasions 
proved successful to admiration, yet particular 
regard must be had to the Climate, season of 
the Year, Age, Sex, Custom, and other Circumstances; 
for should drinking Water be recommended 
to one, who from his Infancy hath been used to 
small Beer, and living in a Northern cold Climate, 
in a rough friezing season, and of a tender Constitution, 
very unhappy consequences must be expected 
from such unadvisedness. Wherefore, where 
change of Drink shall be judged necessary, from 
the continual use of strong Beer, or Wine, you 
may descend to small Beer, Barley-Water, clarified 
Whey, a weak Mead, thin Grewel, or the like, 
in Winter; and to some others to Spring Water in 
the Spring and Summer, which may prove yet safer 
upon premising some small Bleeding in replete 
Bodies, and gentle laxatives in foul and depraved 
Constitutions. 
 
[^p.22^] 
[}CHAP. IV. 
 
Of the passing of the Chyle into the Guts, 
and its Depuration there.}] 
 
1. FRom what is here incidently discoursed, I return 
to a farther Explication of the Digesture 
of the Stomach, where the Victuals being dissolved, 
and by continuance of Concoction smoothed, and 
brought to an Equation, the Chyle doth then require 
depuration, which is a separation of the thiner and 
finer parts from the groser and feculent, by a fermentative 
Juice, which I suppose to be an Acid, 
joyn'd to igneous Spirits, by an intermedium of some 
glutinous emplastic, or gummous Particles, as may 
be discovered in Yist, or Levain. This Fermentation 
(I will only suppose) happens at the close of the 
Digestion, and begins to rarefie and huff up the 
Chyle in the Stomach, whereby the lighter and thiner 
parts become rising and swelling and gradually work 
over the Pylorous into the small Guts, the Stomach in 
the same proportion contracting it self into a lesser 
and shallower compass, as it is emptying and growing 
less full, and less distended, by which means the 
trajection of the Chyle is facilitated, until there is 
nothing left, but a gross and feculent acid Juice, serving 
to assist as a dissolvent to digest what may remain 
more difficult, be it some grisly or sinewy, or 
other tough hard part of the Victuals, Pye-crust, or 
any thing else that is more difficult to digest, than 
what is already wrought over the Pylorus into the 
small Guts; which being performed, the same acid 
Juice by its sharpness pricks and stimulates the Fibres 
of the Stomach, (contracting it self into a very narrow 
volum) throws that also, together with what 
it hath dissolved, over the Pylorus. Whence I do give 
my self a probable reason; why the latter part of the 
[^p.23^] 
Digestion, and at the beginning of the fermentation 
of the Chyle upon its arrival in the small Gutts, 
is always acid, and why at that time we are 
subject to foure Belches, and how it happens, that 
the fullness and distention of the Stomach, which 
most are sensible of at the end of their Meals, doth 
gradually lessen, and as soon as the foure appears is 
quite allay'd, and the digestion finish'd. And if I 
attribute not too much to fancy, I do observe, that 
many Persons towards the end of Concoction, do 
perceive an uneasiness of heat all over, especially in 
their Faces, extremities of their Hands and Feet, but 
particularly those that are weakly, as Hypochondriacks 
and Hystericks, who about that time, and a 
good while after, are subject to have flushings in 
their Faces, and their Symptoms (as faintnesses, palpitations, 
roaring Winds, &c.) set in motion; all 
which to me seem to be occasioned by the foresaid 
fermentation, through the quickness of motion of 
the fermentative Particles, exciting a heat and warm 
steaming Effluvia, rarefying the whole Mass of Blood 
and other Liquors. 
 
2. Upon the dripping of the Chyle into the small 
Guts, the Fermentation is considerably augmented, 
by the meeting with the excrementitious Juices from 
the Glanduls of the Pancreas, and Mesentery, mixt 
with Gaul from the biliary Vessels, whereby the 
Chyle is wholly depurated of all its feculencies, 
which being separated, are term'd Excrements of the 
Belly. That there is such a fermentation in the 
Guts, appears by the tension and intumescence of the 
Belly, in some more, in others less, which may be 
perceived 2, 3, or 4 Hours after Meals, according 
to the expedition of their digestion, separation, and 
subsequent fermentation. 
 
3. As I am not very flexible to recede from the 
general opinion of the very Antients and Moderns, importing, 
that the first Concoction is performed, either 
by virtue of the heat of the Stomach, or by 
force of Fermentation, as it is asserted by most of the 
learned, that were Cotemporaries with the famous 
[^p.24^] 
Dr. Willis, and others that do succeed him: Neither 
am I willing to be thought so criminal, as to be 
contumatiously guilty of Heresie in Physick, yet its 
pardonable, if not allowable, to be Schismatical in 
ones proper opinion, which in all Mankind is free, 
and not to be compelled, and therefore I do declare, 
that nothing but late Experiments of no small number, 
do induce me to retract my former sentiments 
of this, and many other matters in Medicine, as 
firmly believing, what I have expressed concerning 
the first Concoction, and Fermentation, as that the 
Sun is the cause of Day-light: though at the same 
time it is very possible for me to be under a mistake. 
But whether all this be really true, or only in appearance, 
I am thence provided with the Solutions 
of hundreds of difficulties, offering themselves on 
those Subjects, and the full and plain discovery of 
the causes of many, if not most Diseases, and what 
is beyond all, not unsuccessfully conducted in the 
practical part; which to me is a satisfaction beyond 
what I have met with, either in conversing with 
Printed Authors, or with Men reputed very learned 
and experienced in the Faculty. 
 
4. Upon the well beginning depends the well finishing 
and compleating, the Stomach being the beginning 
of the whole Body, it is from the true knowledge 
of its Fabrick, Constitution, Action, or Operation, 
the knowledge of the Constitution of all the 
Bowels, their Actions, and Operations of the whole 
Animal is derived. The Stomach is the only and 
true tuning part of the whole Body, which being 
well or ill tuned, causeth a Harmony or Discord of 
all the Bowels. The Stomach being strong and vigorous, 
performing its Office, or Action, and Operation 
in perfection, renders the Body Strong, Healthful, 
and long Liv'd; but in proportion, as it is defective 
in any part of its Office, Diseases in it self, 
and all other parts of the Body are engender'd, answerable 
to the degree and quality of its defect, and 
to the dependency all the Bowels have on it; for 
being the Laboratory of the whole, whatever is ill 
[^p.25^] 
prepared here, cannot be mended afterwards, by 
any of the succeeding Bowels, the Chyle being vitious 
or corrupted, can never be converted into good 
Blood, nor that into good Animal Spirits, no more 
than you can make good Butter or Cheese out of 
soure or corrupted Milk. And as most, if not all 
internal Diseases, (Endemic and Epidemic excepted) 
are Originally produced in the Stomach, they are 
likewise to be cured by the Stomach, internal Remedies 
exerting their first and stronger force upon it, 
the virtues whereof it afterwards transmits to the 
part Diseases. Neither is it to any purpose, to pretend 
to cure any internal Disease, without first of 
all having put the Stomach into good order, which 
done, most Diseases are ready to go off of themselves. 
 
5. The Stomach bears an adequate Analogy to 
the root of a Tree, and may properly enough be 
called the Root of a Man; for as the root of a Tree 
is the beginning of it, receives or draws the juice of 
the Earth, to prepare and convert it into Food for 
the Trunc, and all the Branches, and being well digested, 
transmits it to all the parts; in like manner, 
when the Tree is observed not to be thriving, 
or the Branches to be decaying, changing of colour, 
withering, or dying, where do they look for 
the Cause, but at the Root of the Tree? even so is 
it with the nourishing of the parts of the Body, and 
the Diseases they are subject unto, in relation to the 
Stomach. 
 
[^p.26^] 
[}CHAP. V. 
Describing Medicines to preserve Health, and 
their Preparations.}] 
 
BY the deduction from the preceding Discourse, 
my Opinion persuades me, that the weakness of 
the Stomach, and its faintly performing its Office, is 
only occasioned by the debility of the Stomach 
Nerves, and its numerous Branches, by being plaister'd 
up by too much Fleam, gross acid Dregs, indigestible 
Meats, or offensive Drinks, or other matter 
admitted into the Stomach, which by lodging there 
too long, assume a corroding Quality; or by too 
much heat, and too little moisture, are converted 
into a midorous crudity. This supposed, I do believe, 
and have experimentally observed, that 
all those Corroboratives of the Stomach, whose 
vertue is commonly asserted, to consist in a gentle 
restrictive and warming Quality, whereby those 
slimy Humours are more firmly cemented, such 
as Aromaticum Rosatum, Caryophyllatum, Cinnamon-Water, 
those hot spicy Brandy-waters, a red Tincture 
of Roses, Methridate, Treacle, all those Compound-Electuaries 
framed of heating Conserves, 
Condits, and Peptick Pouders, are so far from contributing 
the least stregth to the Stomach, that rather 
a contrary effect hath ensued, and being long 
continued, do carry danger with them. The only 
means I have hitherto found to strengthen the Stomach, 
are proper abstersive Medicines, gently wiping 
off those clammy substances from the tunics of 
the Stomach, and the terminations of the Nervous 
branches, and among these I have not yet detected 
any thing, equal to a good Elixir Proprietatis, well 
prepared by a long Digestion in a Sand-bath, the proportion 
of the Ingredients being somewhat altered 
from the common, and something also substituted in 
place of the Myrrh: A drop of this shall exceed a 
[^p.27^] 
pound of Peptick Pouders, Electuaries, and other 
top Stomachicks. Do only keep your Stomach clean, 
you will certainly preserve its Strength, and prevent 
most Diseases. 
 
2. It is not to be understood, where a heap or 
weight of Crudities is accumulated, so gently absterging 
a Remedy can have a power to disengage 
the Stomach, no more than a wet Mop can be supposed 
to rid a Room of a heap of Rubbish, in which 
case something more stimulating is required, that may 
be used in all Seasons of the Year, be it sultry or 
friezing, without the inconvenience of confinement 
to Diet, or warmth of the Air, and without offence 
to the Stomach, or putting the Body into any disorder, 
to which purposes, the Pill I here now describe, 
I have Experimentally found to be effectually 
answering in most respects. 
 
3. Take one Ounce of the clearest shining Aloes, 
which at the Druggists will cost about a Groat, or 
sometimes Six-pence an Ounce, and which being free 
from any considerable dross, will not require any depuration. 
Pouder it in a Mortar, covered over with 
a brown Paper, having a hole in the middle for a 
passage to the Pestil, to prevent the little pieces of 
the Aloes from leaping up, while you are in the beginning 
of your pounding; for afterwards the Paper 
may be removed. Observe to anoint thinly the bottom 
of the Mortar and Pestil with a little Florence 
Oil, to keep it from sticking to the bottom. When 
its reduced to a gross Pouder, by grinding it with the 
Pestil you must bring it to a smooth fineness. Put 
the Pouder into a small glazed flat-bottom'd earthen 
Pan, that will contain about half a pint, pouring 
upon it about a quarter of a pint of fair water, wherein 
hath been dissolved two Drams of Spanish Juice of 
Liquorish, which is done by slicing it very small, 
and setting the Water in a Porringer over a gentle 
heat; place this small earthen Pan into one somewhat 
bigger, having Sand in the bottom to the height 
of an inch, and afterwards filling it up to the brim. 
Set them over two piles of Bricks, of three or four 
[^p.28^] 
Bricks high, laid flat. The Piles must stand at such 
a distance, that they may reach the edges of the 
bigger pan, to support it. Then make a moderate 
fire of Charcoal under it, to heat the Sand, to cause 
the superfluous moisture to be evaporated, until the 
Aloes is brought to the thickness of Honey. Or you 
may by dropping two or three drops on the back side 
of a Place to cool, make trial, whether it be reduced 
to the consistency of Dow; for if it be overdone, 
the mass being render'd brittle, will not only 
lose most of its virtue, but also its aptness of being 
framed into Pills; and if it be not evaporated enough, 
it will be sticky, and not apt to be brought to a 
Mass. 
 
4. The lesser Pan being taken off, when the evaporation 
is sufficient, before its quite cold, you must 
with a Spatula, or slice, take out the Mass, and between 
your Fingers, being a little anointed with Florence 
Oil, or Oil of Sweet Almonds, to prevent the 
sticking, rowl it into a round ball, which you may 
keep in a Sheep's Bladder, being likewise thinly 
wetted over on the inside with the same Oil, for many 
Months, if necessary, without any great impair 
of its vertue. 
 
5. A small piece of this Mass being form'd into 
six, seven, eight, or nine little Pills, of the bigness 
of a Pepper-corn, is a Dose sufficient to give two or 
three motions, according to the number of Pills, and 
the loose or costive Constitution of him that takes 
them. The safety of this Medicine adds much to 
its Character, since the taking of one Pill or two 
more or less, imports as little hazard, as the taking 
it very oft, or in any kind of Season, be it hot or 
cold, unless your Body be subject to a Looseness, or 
the Hemorrhoids, or your Constitution be thin, hot, 
and dry. 
 
6. By the addition of the Juice of Liquorish, the 
Aloes is design'd to be obtused in its too pungitive 
quality, whereby its apt to raise the Piles, and becomes 
somewhat less precipitating, and consequently 
hindered from lessening expectoration, 
[^p.29^] 
which in this Climate is so necessary in Coughs and 
Phthysicks. 
 
7. The same correction may also be attained, by 
dissolving the same proportion of clean Aloes, in half 
a pint of Juice expressed from the contusion of an 
Ounce of Bugloss, or Borrage Roots, or a large handful 
of their Leaves, and stirring half a pint of warm 
Water with them in the bruising, and clarified by 
subsidence, in letting it stand in a Cellar for a day or 
two, and pouring it off the Fæces or Dregs in the 
bottom. This evaporated in the same manner will 
produce a Mass, almost equal in goodness with the 
former. 
 
8. I cannot hitherto observe, that the use of these 
Pills, though frequently taken, either once in a week, 
fortnight, or a month, according to the time, the 
Stomach by reason of its degree of weakness in the 
digestive faculty may require, doth in any wise debilitate 
those, that may properly use them; but on 
the contrary, rather corroborate their Stomach, by 
assisting it to throw off that heap of rubbish, and crude 
Humours, which those that eat and drink plentifully, 
and either live sedentary Lives, as many that are 
Educated to Professions, or others that are not used to 
exercise or labour, are subject to engender, especially 
if naturally of a weak Constitution, or of an advanced 
Age. 
 
9. For three or four days succeeding the use of 
these Pills, a good Elixir Proprietatis taking Morning 
and Evening, in a proportionable Dose, hath by 
my Observation ever had the good effect of preserving 
Health and preventing Diseases. 
 
10. To what I have mentioned touching the advantages 
of a familiar Acquaintance with those Mundifyers, 
both the Pills and the Elixir, the inquiry I 
made of a fresh colour'd vigorous Dutch Burgher, I 
casually met in my Travels, who exceeded the Age 
of fourscore, may in somewise add a confirmation. 
He did likewise aver to me, Bona~ fide, That for 40 
Years last past, he had seldom or never omitted once 
in a fortnight, or sometimes sooner or later, according 
[^p.30^] 
to the direction he received from his marks of fulness 
and uneasiness, to cleanse with Seny stewed with 
Prunes, from which custom he did derive his capacity 
of Eating a hearty Meal of any thing he liked, 
without advising of the wholesomness, or easiness of 
Digesture, and at times of drinking a Glass of Wine 
to an Altitude, to accommodate his Friend. 
 
11. As lesser Purgatives do rather contribute 
strength by their consequence, so the greater being 
properly used, do not carry that danger with them 
People commonly imagine, since I have known many, 
that for three months successively, have taken 
strong churlish purging Pills every morning, some 
few days only omitted; I may say, some have swallow'd 
a pottle of strong Purgative Pills in a few years, 
and lived in full health to a remarkable Age, and not 
without a Libertine Mode of Eating and Drinking. 
Whence its apparent, that the toughness of the 
Nerves, upon which the strength and action of the 
Bowels only depend, doth suffer as little by the strongest 
Purgatives, as an India Cane by a thousand times 
bending, which notwithstanding will recover its former 
figure and full strength. It were to be wish'd, 
that Bleeding could be administred with the same 
safety, of which it may be justly said, that the Lancet 
hath, and doth in proportion, kill more Men than 
the Sword; and it's as commonly observed, that those 
Physicians who do so generally practice it, know little 
else what to do; and on the other hand, their 
Patients are as rash and prodigal of their Lives, to 
submit to their heedless Advice. As the first and second 
Bleedings may be of great use to many Bodies 
and Distempers in the colder Climates, so I have ever 
remark'd, that the third and fourth have proved as 
detrimental, and not seldom fatal; having observed, 
that with two Bleedings at most, succeeded with other 
Remedies, incomparatively more continual Feavers, 
Rheumatisms, Pleurisies, and Pthysicks have been 
cured; then have survived those frequently reiterated 
Bleedings, which in common Practice usually give 
the parting blow. 
 
[^p.31^] 
12. Its a consequence an Ideot inferrs, because a 
Person having been blooded eight or ten times in a 
great Distemper, doth recover his Health, he owes 
the benefit of it to the bleedings, whereas it ought 
rather to be said, neither the Distemper nor Bleeding 
could kill him. 
 
13. To return from this Deviation to the use of 
Purgatives; tho' those that are strong, are required 
in great Diseases, they ought to be avoided in lesser 
Distempers, or where prevention is only intended; 
for all Purgatives deriving their power from a specifick 
fermentative Spirit, or Salt, by rarefying or huffing 
up morbifick Humours, and afterwards by stimulating 
the Nerves to throw them off alter Separation, 
when strong ones are taken, where no Disease 
is engender'd, they are apt to cause one by fermenting, 
or rarefying and stimulating the laudable Juices 
or operating upon those dormant humours, which 
by strength of Nature, or assistance of mild preventing 
Purgatives, and abstersive Corroboratives, might 
easily have been worn off. Thus it hath oft been observed, 
that some by taking Extractum Rudij, have 
soon after fallen into continual Feavers; others 
through a preventing care to avert the Gout, have 
immediately fallen into a violent fit, upon taking 
Elixir Salutis, Bromfield's Pills, Golden Spirit of Scurvy 
Grass, or the like empirical Medicines, which is not 
all the mischief such sort of Purgative vendibles have 
occasioned, as being unskilfully invented, and more 
unskilfully prepared, since not a few have been 
thrown into mortal Diseases by the use of them. Yet 
I stand more amazed at the folly of Mankind, that is 
so easily assured by vain boasting and mendacious Encomia's 
upon Laudanum liquidum plainly prepared, or 
disguised by a solution of Opium into volatile oleaginous 
drops, to the frequent and constant use whereof, 
a Man being once debauch'd under pretence of ease, 
and quieting himself of a few Gripes, Fumes, or 
Vapours, he can no more leave it off for a fortnight, 
a week, or a day, than a Labourer his Bread and 
Cheese; or a Man throw off his Coat and Wastcoat 
[^p.32^] 
in a hard Winter, or a Brandy-Drinker forsake his 
Spirits and return to small Beer. Using ones self to 
such plain or disguised Opiates, is like making a contract 
with the Devil, to live easie and well for a few 
Years, upon condition he shall have his Soul to torture 
afterwards: For certain it is, that the familiar 
use of Opiates, after some Months, or very few 
Years, either doth wholly desist from being friendly, 
by suffering your trouble or Distemper to return 
in a more horrible manner, or create a new one, incomparably 
worse than the former, or strangles you 
with an Apoplexy, or some other soporous Distemper, 
which is most amply proved by those, that make 
Opium their Sacred Refuge in every fit of the Cholick, 
Gout, or Stone, who seldom or never fail of a 
speedy Exit, by some incurable Disease of the Brain, 
in very few Years; and those that do advise such a 
lethiferous remedy for a common use to their Patients, 
have a greater title to a Halter, labell'd with 
an Inscription of Mathews's Pills, or Pacifick Drops, 
than those that murther a Man in the High-way. 
In short, Opium, Laudanum Iliquidum, Diacodium, 
and all other strong narcotic Medicines, do destroy 
the Brain and the Nerves, and consequently occasion 
weakness and tottering of the Stomach, Nerves, Numbness, 
Palsies, Lethargies, loss of Memory, and dulness of 
Understanding; diminish and deprave all the Offices, 
Actions or Operations of the Bowels, suppres the 
Appetite, occasion a wildish countenance and paleness, 
and at last upon long usage usher in Death. 
In what manner those fits or Gout, Stone, Cholick, 
and other sharp torturing Gripes, appear to me to be 
occasioned, and by what causes, I shall give my opinion 
after this following Interlocution. 
 
14. I have in the preceeding Discourse given you 
my Sentiment, that to preserve Health, and prevent 
Diseases in veletudinary Constitutions, (for strong 
vigorous Bodies stand in no need of other preservatives, 
or preventives, than moderation in their Non-naturals, 
the knowledge and sense whereof, Nature 
hath implanted in all other Animals, as well as in 
[^p.33^] 
Men,) no better ways and means can be used, than 
applying at certain intervals, to those cleansers or 
abstersives here before mentioned; as for Aurum Potabile, 
or any protended Lapid Philosophorum, or all 
Faber's Quintessences, upon their just trials, they have 
been found to contain less vertue in preserving 
Health, than a good Chicken Broth. 
 
15. You may remember a caution was given in 
one of the foregoing Paragraphs, interdicting all 
Aloetics to thin, hot, and dry Bodies, and such also 
as are subject to the Hemorrhoides; and in regard 
that such Constitutions, especially when promoted 
in Years, do also require the keeping the Stomach, 
clean; and free from all slimy and nidorous crudities, 
I do recommend a good Lenitive Electuary, not 
the common, which is so ill contrived, and filled 
with rubbish. This following description gives you 
the form of an easie, gentle and effectual Laxative. 
Take four Ounces of the best Cassia Fistularis newly 
drawn, and evaporated to a consistency, (the manner 
of doing it you may read in a Treatise, called, 
the Family Physician and House Apothecary,) Rhubarb 
pouder'd, white Mechoacam grated and pouder'd, 
and clean Rhenish Tartar pouder'd, of each a quarter 
of an Ounce, sweet Fennil-Seeds pouder'd, a Dram 
and half, Syrup of Marsh-mallows, as much as will 
suffice to make it into an Electuary. You may take 
hereof a quarter, or half an Ounce, or sometimes a 
whole Ounce, dissolved in a quarter of a pint of thin 
Grewel, Barley-Water, Posset, or thin Chickenbroth. 
once in a week, fortnight, or a month, according 
to the direction given concerning the Aloetics. 
 
16. Rhenish Tartar I do prefer for a Laxative, far 
before Cream of Tartar, which doth lose all or a great 
part of its solutive vertue in the preparation. 
 
