

[^Sample 1: article - PT22_0797^]

|P_797
[}I. An Account of a Polypus taken out of the Vnena Pulmoalis, 
and of the Structure of that Vessel. By Will. Cowper, F. R. S. }]
I Send you herewith the account and Figure of a Poly- 
pus, which I took out of a Child of about a year old. 
Its first observable disorders were a quick Pulse, and a dif- 
ficulty of breathing. In about four days the Gums were 
observ'd to be swell'd, for which they were cut, and all 
symptoms disappear'd for five or six hours, after which 
they return'd. Notwithstanding Blood-letting, and the 
application of other Remedies, the Difficulty of Breath- 
ing encreas'd, the Pulse became still lower and quicker, 
and in four days more the Child dyed. 

The Body was open'd, and the Viscera of the lower 
Belly were found well constituted. 

In the Thorax the Thymus exceeded the natural size even 
in Children. The fore part of the Lungs appear'd to be 
well dispos'd, but the back parts were very hard, and 
much inflam'd. Making Incision on the diseas'd part, 
Purulent matter followed the Knife in such quantity from 
divers Cells, that it fill'd the wounds as fast as made, and 
pieces cut from it sunk in water. But as we approached 
nearer to the parts unaffected, the pieces became gradual- 
ly more buoyant, till at length we came to the fore part, 
which floated. 

The Cavities of the right Auricle and Ventricle of the 
Heart were fill'd with a Polypus, which was continued 
into the superiour and inferiour Trunk of the Vena Cava. 

Opening the Vena Pulmonaris at the Basis of the Heart, 
I found it there compleatly fill'd with a Polypus (or co- 
agulation of Blood) which was continued into all the 
large branches of it in the Lungs, and were easily drawn 
out, and when display'd, appear'd as express'd Fig. III. [^An illustration of the child's pulmonary veins and their branches on a separate fold-out page. ^]

This Polypus affords us a better Idea of the contrivance 
and structure of the Pulmonary Vein than any Figures of 
that Vessel yet publisht: For tho in different subjects of 
the same species we meet with frequent varieties in the de- 
stribution of the Blood-vessels, especially of the Veins; 
we no where find a more consrant Regularity and Uni- 
|P_798
formity than in the trunks and large branches of the Pul- 
monary Vein; of which I have added two Figures (vid.
Fig. I. and II.) drawn after a Preparation of that Vein 
injected with Wax, and freed from the Lungs of an Adult 
Humane body. The Original Preparation is to be seen 
among the Anatomical Collections of the Accurate 
Dr. Tyson. 

Among many very considerable parts of the Humane 
Body, not ill exprest in the Tables published by Bidloo, 
and overlookt, or not known by him, this Trunk of the 
Pulmonary Vein is one; unless he may be allow'd to call 
it the Left Ventricle of the Heart, as he has done Tab. 22. 
Fig. 7. A. which mistake and omission, tho very gross, I 
corrected, without reflecting, or taking notice of the fault 
of the Professor, and some hundred others of that work, 
tho I could not possibly avoid naming him on near forty 
other such occasions, in my explication of those Tables, 
published not long since in English, of which and the rest 
perhaps more hereafter. 

The Trunk of this Vein is very ill exprest in the xxxth 
Table of Kerckringius's Anatomical Observations, as will 
appear by comparing it with those here. However, some 
later writers of Anatomy have been contented to borrow 
it, without observing the fault. 

The Left Auricle of the Heart (vid. Fig. I. II.) in Hu- 
mane Bodies being much less than the Right, it was neces- 
sary that the part of this Vein next the Basis of the Heart 
should be very large; (ib. A A B) lest the sudden strong 
motion of the Systole should cause the Refluent blood to 
recoil in the branches of this vein (ib. D D E E) and pre- 
vent a ready supply in the succeeding Diastole of the Heart. 
But the weight of so much Blood lying in the trunk of 
this Vessel (ib. A A. B) does effectually prevent its retro- 
cession in the lateral branches within the Lungs; (ib. DD. 
EE.) and the more, because the Orifices of those branches 
(ib. DD.) are not diametrically opposite (at A A. Fig. ib.) 
to the mouth of the Vessel on the Basis of the Heart (ib. B) 
its lateral branches making Acute angles with the Trunk, 
as represented Fig. I. 
[^Two illustrations (from different points of view) of the pulmonary veins and the left atrium of the heart of an adult, on a separate fold-out page. ^]
