

[^Sample 1: article - PT22_0897^]

|P_897
[}I. A Letter from Dr Davies to Sir Charles Holt, 
containing a relation of a person who voided ma 
ny Hydatides in her Urine. }]
A Gentlewoman between 40 and 50 years of age, in 
the Autumn 97, drank some Aluminous Waters for 
a month or five weeks, and in a months time after the 
use of these Waters, found a pain in the Renal region, 
where she never had been afflicted with any before; this 
pain returned after the first Paroxysm in about a months 
time, and afterwards more frequently, till about the Christ- 
mas following it visited her every day; about which time 
she sent for me; and had when I came to her the Symp- 
toms of a Stone in her Left Kidney, viz. a grinding, and 
sometimes a very acute pain on that side of the Spina 
Dorsi, a Vomiting, her Urine during the Paroxysm tinged 
with Blood, and in it Bloody Ramenta; but what most 
surprized me, a dozen at least of Hydatides, some of the 
biggest of them 1 ½ inch long, their circumference equal- 
led that of an ordinary Goose-quill; in shape they exact- 
ly represented the Vesiculæ Natatoriæ in Fish, growing 
smaller about the middle, as those generally do, and 
were filled with a Liquor, which my taste and smell made 
me believe to be Urine; I never discovered any Pus in 
her Urine, nor had she any pain at the Sphincter of the 
Bladder, nor in the Meatus Urinarius, either before, at, 
or after making Urine. The Paroxysm lasted generally 3 
or 4 hours; as soon as these Hydatides came away, (which 
they did not all at once making water, but at several 
times) the pain in her Back, &c. abated very sensibly, 
and she continued easie and well the rest of the day, ex- 
cepting an external soreness, which the pain had caused. 
|P_898
I thought these Vesiculæ at first to be Membranous, since 
their consistence was so tough as to bear taking out of 
the Chamber-pot and gentle handling, but afterwards was 
convinced that they ow'd their origin to a glutinous slimy 
matter, because upon long standing in Urine or fair Wa- 
ter they quite disappeared and were dissolved, making the 
Water or Urine to look thick and turbid. By the use of 
Medicines all these Symptoms disappeared, and she conti- 
nued well when I last heard from her, which was about 
two months ago. 

Birmingham in Warwickshire, July 14. 99. 

