

[^Sample 1: article - PT23_1279^]

|P_1279
[}IV. A Letter from Mr James Young, F. R. S. to Dr 
Edward Tyson, F. R. S. concerning a Ball, extract- 
ed from a Person, who had suffered by it 30 years, in which 
was a Plumh-stone, }]
Plymouth, Sept. 6. 1702. 

Worthy Sir, 

WHen I had last the Honour to be at a meeting of the 
Royal Society in Gresham College, there happened 
in a discourse concerning Plumbs, which gave me occasion to 
tell you of one detained in the Guts of a Woman above 30 
years, causing strange and grievous accidents, till I drew it 
out ex Ano. 

According to my promise then, I send you now a more 
particular account of that wonderful case and cure than I 
could give by meer memory. 

Her name is Sarah Swayn, of a thin habit and middle sta- 
ture, who when but six years old, was first afflicted with a 
violent pain, together with a large hard swelling on the 
left side of her Belly, which lasted twelve hours, and then 
went off without use of any Remedy or sensible evacuation; 
and at the end of three months returned, lasted and went off 
as before. 

Several years it observed that Period, and then changed 
its intermission from 3 months to 3 weeks, and so continned
till she was 35 years old, in which time she married, and 
bore one Child, the pain of which she averr'd to be much 
less than what these Paroxisms gave her. 

During her pregnancy, her Pains nor Intermissions had no 
alteration, and in her whole Life she found no Diet disturb'd 
her but Milk and Salt Meats. 

|P_1280
About 9 months before she was cured, the Pain and Tu- 
mour encreased to the bigness of a mans two Fists, she en- 
deavoured by many Remedies to get ease, but in vain, till 
the torment and watching had so weakned her, that she 
could not rise out of her Bed nor lie down in it. 

In this deplorable condition she was advised by a Wo- 
man to take a dose of Powder'd Jalop, what the quantity 
was I could not learn, but it operated violently, and sud- 
denly drove the pain from her side down to the Anus, where 
it resembled a Tenesmus, viz. a constant and violent inclina- 
tion to stools without being able to force off any thing, and 
after she had been thus crucified four days her Urine also 
stopt, and two days after that the charitable Neighbours, 
who had all along given her their best assistance craved 
mine. 

I perceived by their report of the matter, that something 
obstructed the passage of her Excrements, and soon found it 
so by a probe; I then anointed the passage with Populkeum, 
and taking hold of the substance with a pair of large For- 
ceps, made to extract Stones from the Bladder after Litho- 
tomy, I drew it forth. 

Abundance of Wind and Excrements gusht out, and con- 
tinued to flow till her Guts were emptied of all the matter, 
which had been so long retained; after which I ordered her 
an Anodine Clyster, and a composing draught, and ever 
since (being several years) she continueth well. 

The thing extracted was round, somewhat oblong, ha- 
ving on it some such impressions, as mens Fingers make on 
Wax or Plaister. It then weighed 10 Drachms, now scarce 
an Ounce, it was 5 inches in circumference, and altho it felt 
and otherwise appeared a Stone, it swam on Water, which 
made me see the inside of it by cutting it in two with a Knife, 
externally it was black, and smooth as if varnisht, and no 
thicker, which made me before I had considered the whole, 
think it the expanded skin of the Plumb indurated; next to 
this thin blackness was a crust of matter like Brick, the thick- 
|P_1281
ness of an half Crown, within that appeared a substance 
resembliug Paste-board or chewed Paper, and within that 
lay a Prune or withered Plumb, with the Stone and Kernel 
cut asunder by my Knife. 

I have sent it for the R. Society to examin, who I pre- 
sume will think that all those wonderful accidents, which 
so long molested this poor Woman, were occasioned by this 
Plumb swallowed so many years before; but how those 
different accretions were made to it in such a place as the In- 
testines? how it ceased to torment her at so many and such 
different Intervals? where it lurked between those Fits, and 
how the Pain and Tumour observed such exact Periods for 
so many years; at first every three months, and afterward 
every 3 weeks? are questions I am not able to resolve. 

Many Authors tell us of various Stones ejected by Stool, 
and of late many of them have been found to come out of [/1./]
the Gall Bladder through the Cholerick Channels of Jaun- 
diced People. I have seen two such bigger than any I have 
read of, one so big as a Pullets Egg, which came from a 
Lady in the operation of a strong Cholagogue taken for a 
Jaundice that had resisted many other Remedies, the other 
as big as a large Nutmeg, driven out by the same means from 
an aged Man languishing in the same distemper, and both 
of them for many days after those Stones came off, eva- 
cuated great quantities of Choler by Stool, and were freed 
of the Disease. 

That those two Stones were generated in the Folliculus 
Fellis or ductus Choledochus, no man will doubt who con- 
siders the consequence, and knows that in colour, taste, weight 
and shape, they resembled such as are found in those parts 
upon dissection of Jaundiced Bodies. I once saw near an 
handful of them taken out of the Gall Bladder of the Por- 
tugal Ambassador that dyed in London, 1679. and we are 
lately told by Baglivius, that the famous Malpighius's was 
full of them, they usually are of subcitrin colour, resemble 
bright Myrrh, and seem an aggregate of small Stones, which 
|P_1582
perhaps are made singly in the vesicula, and Coalesce in the 
Ductus. 

The consequence of their coming off shews, that they 
eaused the Jaundice in those two persons I have mentioned, by 
obstructing the Channels thro which the Bile passeth from the 
common receptacle into the duodenum. It may perhaps seem 
impossible to some men, that substances of that magnitude 
could pass thorough a Meatus so small as the common Ductus
is. But it hath been no wonder to me this twenty years, 
since I dissected a Physician of this place, who dyed of the 
Jaundice, and found the Ductus Communis large enough to 
admit my greatest Finger, as 3 Physicians and one Surgeon 
besides myself, saw to our great surprize. 

Those Stones which are generated in the Gutts are of 
another sort, and easily distinguishable from those I am 
Writing of. Beckers speaking of some Stones voided by 
Stool, said — Calculos illos in Intestinis genitos esse, quia 
Colore, pondere & figura a choledohis lapillis distincti Arbi- 
tratus sum . Those generated in the Gall cause the Jaundice, 
those in the Guts, beget Cholical, Splanchnical, Hypocondria- 
cal Pains, and sometimes Nephritical, all which vanish 
when they are ejected. 

[/2./]I have seen Lumps of Stones in a Herse as big as a Tennis 
Ball taken out of a Bullocks Guts. The Authors of the 
German Miscellany write of one very much bigger. L. Ri- 
verius of a man that continually with all his Stools voided 
[/3./]Stones like those generated in the Kidneys. T. Bartholine
mentions several, one particularly notable, being so big as 
a Pidgeons Egg, which was purged off from a Woman by a 
gentle Pill. —in exteriore superficie subcinereum, & dum a 
me clavo ferreo in duas aquales partes diffringitur interius instar 
crystalli albicantem & Rutilantem, ita ut qui olim ex Enni
starcore aurum, hic colligere potuisset gemmas. 

There are many such in the Miscell. Cur. and which re- 
[/4./]sembles mine, vol. 7. obs. 90. but there is one much 
|P_1283
more so in Ambr. Pary, lib. 25. cap. 19. but neither of them 
so strange in cause or effects as mine. 

It's not for want of old Authorities that I have here 
quoted few but Moderns; I know Galen, Crato, Sennertus, 
M. Donatus, Z. Lusitanus, Fernelius, G. Horstius, Schenckius, 
and many more before this Age, who have told the world 
of Stones generated in, and ejected from the Intestines of 
diseased people, but none that I know with such surprizing 
circumstances as this sent you by 

SIR, 
Your most humble Servant, 
James Yonge. 

The Ball intire is figured No 3, and its inside and Plumb- 
stone by it. 
[^Illustrations of the ball from the outside, of the plum stone, and of the ball cut open, on a separate fold-out page. ^]

[^1. 
Miscell. Cur. 
vol 2. obs. 89. 
136. 
Act. Med. 
Barth. vol. 5. 
ob. 65. ^]
[^2. 
Vol. 3. obs. 
110. ^]
[^3. 
Ad. Med. vol. 
1. obs. 100. 
vol. 5. ob. 65. ^]
[^4. 

19. ^]