

[^Sample 1: article - PT24_1595^]

|P_1595
[}VI. An Extract of a Letter from Mr Ralph Thores- 
by, F. R. S. to Dr Nehemiah Grew, Fellow of 
the College of Physicians and R. S. concerning a Ball 
voided by Stool. }]
A Poor Apprentice Girl at Rawden, 4 miles from Leedes
in Yorkshire, about 14 years of Age, having been 
tormented with Colical, and, as was suppos'd, Ne- 
phritick Pains for some time; at length voided a round- 
ish Ball, per Anum, as hard to feel upon as a Stone. 

After a while, the Pains returning with greater vio- 
lence, so as to make her roul upon the ground, she 
voided another as hard, and much bigger. 

Upon which, one Mrs Ward a neighbouring Gentle- 
woman, who had been much afflicted with Gravel, gave 
|P_1596
her some of those Medicins which she us'd to take her 
self. Whereupon the Girl voided a third Ball, also per 
Anum, with less pain, yet the greatest of the three. 

The first of these Balls is smooth and glossy, of the 
colour of a right Hazel nut, 3 inches about, and somewhat 
compressed. The other two rough and gritty, and in 
like manner a little compressed into a kind of obtusely 
triangular figure. The 2d, is 4 inches and a half round 
about; the last, 5 inches and a half. 

Considering their bulk, all 3 are very light, especially 
the 2 latter and greater ones, of which the last weighs but 
5 Drams 36 Grains; and both of them swim in water. 

This lightness proceeds from the Matter whereof they 
consist; which, in some places is purely Downey or Fuz- 
zy; in others, mixed with a Gritty substance, yet not 
confusedly, but regularly mixed. The Fuzzy parts possest
the central part of the Ball, with a small particle of black- 
ish Glass or other Vitrify'd substance in the very Centre 
it self. Over which are several Coats, gritty and fuzzy, 
alternately ending in the circumference with a grit, much 
resembling the Ground-work and Superstructure of the 
Oriental Bezoar-stone. 

The Powder of one of these Balls scraped off with a 
Knife, is no way mov'd or affected with any sort either of 
Alcaline ir Acid Liquor dropp'd thereupon. Neither being 
burn'd doth it stink, it consisteth therefore of no Animal 
substance; but the Girl being of the Green-sickness age, the 
gritty parts (with the glassy particle in the Centre, as the 
most ponderous and least moveable) seems to be broken 
off of Tobacco-Pipes, and grownd small between her 
Teeth; the downy or fuzzy to be lick'd or scrap'd off 
the Lean of Mutton, or the Rind of Peaches, or some
other Part or Plant. Her Stomach kneading the Mat- 
ter into a Coat, as her changeable Appetite supply'd it 
alternately with one or the other sort. 

