

[^Sample 1: article - PT25_2233^]

|P_2233
[}III. A Letter from Dr William Musgrave, Fellow of 
the College of Physicians, and R. S. to Dr Hans 
Sloane, R. S. Secr. concerning the Jaundice, occa- 
sioned by a Stone obstructing the Ductus commu- 
nis bilarius, which was afterwards voided by Stool. }]
SIR, 

BEing of late at Clifton, in Dorsetshire, the Seat of Mr 
Harvey, Nephew to the Celebrated Physician of that 
Name, I was there shewn a Curiosity, which I thought 
remarkable, and may perhaps be worthy your notice. 

It is a Stone, that Gentleman voided, some years since, by 
Stool; and which he represented to me, as having come 
from the Ductus communis bilarius: But the Largeness of 
it is such, as made the latter part of the account seem, at 
first hearing, somewhat dubious. 

The Figure of this Stone is Oval; the Length almost an 
Inch; the Breadth, (or shortest Diameter) 7/10 of an Inch: 
It weighed 59 Grains, when I saw it; but, at its coming 
off, was (as I am inform'd) above a Dram in weight: 
|P_2234
Some part of it being, by frequent handling, rubb'd away. 
The Surface rough, unequal, divided into several lit- 
tle Risings, each about the size of half a Vetch, or some- 
what less. 

You have in Fig. 7. Y. Z. The Proportions exactly drawn. 
[^An illustration of an oval stone, its surface covered with little bumps, on a separate fold-out page. ^]
The many strong annular Fibres, which appear not only 
at the Orifice, where the Ductus communis opens into the 
Duodenum; but also all along the oblique passage, of that 
Ductus, between the Coats of the Intestine, (which pas- 
sage is, according to Dr Glisson's measure, about half an 
inch in length) do, by way of Sphincter, keep this end 
of the Ductus communis very strait and close. And be- 
sides this straitness of the Ductus, the two Oblique In- 
sertions, it makes at some distance from one another, thro' 
the two outer Coats of the Duodenum, render it yet more 
difficult, for a substance of any Bulk, to pass this way. So 
that, however great Stones may be generated in the Gall- 
Bladder, Ductus Cysticus, Hepaticus, or Communis, it is not 
easy to conceive, How a Stone of the Magnitude here de- 
scrib'd, could possibly, through a passage of itself so very 
narrow, strait, and difficult, be conveyed into the Duo- 
denum. 

From these Considerations, I was extreamly desirous to 
hear, what could be said, to Prove, That this Stone was not 
form'd in the Fistula alimentaris, but (large, as now it is) 
came this way into it. In answer to which Inquiry, the 
Gentleman was pleas'd to let me know, 

That, before the Discharge of this Stone, He had the 
Jaundice; which came suddenly on him, and continued 
several months, in a severe, and most excessive manner. 

That this Jaundice, beside the discolouring of his Urine 
and Skin, to a very great degree; beside Loss of Appetite, 
Faintness, and many other Symptoms, usual in this Di- 
stemper; was also accompanyed with a Pain (in, or) near 
the Stomach. 

|P_2235
That, during this Jaundice, his Stools were of a white 
colour, as having very little, or no Mixture of Choler in 
them. 

That, Travelling under these circumstances, more espe- 
cially with a constant Pain, (as before mention'd,) in his 
Coach from London to Clifton; and, after a little time, to 
Bath; he found, a little after his Arrival at Bath, this Stone
come off by Stool; and, together with it, almost a Spoon- 
ful of Gravelly Matter; and a considerable qnantity of 
Choler, as appear'd from the yellowness of the Stools: 
All which happen'd so soon after he came to Bath, as 
Evidently to prove, the Discharge of both [Choler and 
Stone] to proceed from the motion of the Coach. 

That his deliverance, from the Jaundice, commenc'd 
from the Expulsion of this Stone: For, soon after that, the 
Colour of the Skin and Urine, indeed all the ill Symptoms 
vanish'd; and, in a very little time, (Weakness only ex- 
cepted) He recovered. 

These Propositions, put together, make a considerable 
Argument, That the Orifice of the Ductus communis (how 
strait, and how strong soever) was, in this Gentleman, so 
far dilated, as to give way to the Stone, here described; 
that is, dilated to a Circle, in Diameter 7/10 of an Inch, in 
Circumference one whole Inch and ¾. 

The Jaundice is often observ'd, to be a most stubborn 
Distemper, not easily yielding to our most probable 
Methods; and many times to none at all. Riverius posi- 
tively affirms, That, when it proceeds from a Stone ob- 
structing the Current of the Choler, it is incurable: Urg- 
ing this reason for his opinion; Calculus, cum dissolvi non 
possit, morbum facit incurabilem . Capite de Ictero. 

When the Jaundice is thus difficult of Cure, especially 
when there is a probability (whether from a Pain fixt in, 
or near the Region of the Liver, or from any good Ar- 
gument whatsoever) That it arises from the Cause now 
mentioned; rather than to Beat over the same ground to 
|P_2236
no purpose, or other ground equally improbable; it may 
not be amiss, to advise Exercise on Horseback, in Coach, 
or any other such way, as shall be likely to dislodge the 
Stone, and bring it off. 

But, to make this Exercise effectual, it ought to be Vio- 
lent, as the Patient can well bear it; and in such manner, 
as may, by much agitation of the Body, be most condu- 
cing to the Design in hand. 

The History, here mentioned, does sufficiently recom- 
this Gymnastic Course; as capable of relieving, in some 
Cases of the Jaundice, when the best methods of Physick 
(for such we ought to suppose this Gentlemen had pre- 
scrib'd himself) fail of success. 

Exon.Feb. 23. 1705-6. 

