

[^Sample 1: article - PT29_0326^]

|P_326
[}III.Ventriculus cordis sinister stupendæ magni- 
tudinis, lately communicated to the Royal-Society
by James Douglass, M. D. and R. S. S.}]
I Lately opened a young Man in St. Bartholomew's Hos- 
pital, that died of the Palpitation of the Heart, whose 
violent beating and prodigious subsultory Motion, for 
some Months before his Death, was not only easily felt 
by laying the Hand on the Region of the Heart; but 
seen to rise and fall by raising the Bedcloaths that cove- 
red it. And, which is almost incredible, at sometimes the 
trembling and throbbing made such a Noise in his Breast, 
as plainly could be heard at some Distance from his Bed- 
side. This was accompanied with frequent Deliquiums, 
sometimes slow, sometimes swift, and often intermitting. 

Johannes Fernelius in his Pathologia lib. 5. cap. 12. gives 
us an Observation of a very uncommon and surprising Case 
of this kind; where he says the frequent Concussion of the 
Heart was so violent and powerfull, as not only to dis- 
place or luxate, but even to break some of the adjoining 
Ribs. 

Franciscus de la Boe Sylvius, another Writer of unquesti- 
onable Integrity, has a parallel Observation in his Account 
of this Disease. 

Theodorus Kerkringius relates the History of a Woman 
he opened, whose Heart was of a prodigious Bigness, in 
his Spicilegium Anatomicum, Obs. 16. 

And to mention no more, Monsieur Dionis, at the End of 
his Anatomy, gives a large Description of a very uncom- 
mon Case, in which the right Auricle of the Heart was pro- 
digiously dilated to the Bigness of the Head of a new born 
child. 

|P_327
In the Dissection of this morbid Heart I observed the 
following remarkable Particulars. 

1. That the Pericardium or Capsula Cordis was very thick 
and firmly adhered or grew by a fibrous Connexion to 
all the outer Surface of the Heart. 

2. Instead of the Water called Liquor Pericardii, there was 
only in some places about the Basis of the Heart a muci- 
laginous clear Substance like a Gelly. 

3. In the right Auricle lay'd open there was nothing 
preternatural. The ascending and descending Cava open- 
ed into the same as usual. The Vestigium or Mark of the 
Foramen ovale with its semicircular limbus was very plain. 

And the Orificium of the Vena Cordis Coronaria was ex- 
treamly large, yet its Valve was less than usual. 

4. In the right Ventricle layed open, the Valvulæ called 
tricuspides were configurate after the usual manner. The 
sides of this Cavity were thin and full of small fleshy Co- 
lumnæ as they commonly are, with great variety of Fur- 
rows and little holes. The three sigmoide or semilunar 
Valves in the Mouth of the arteria pulmonalis, were as 
they always are in a natural State. 

5. The left Auricle was not much bigger than ordi- 
nary: but its muscular Appendage, called the Bulb of the 
Pulmonary Vein by the late Mr. Cowper, was extraordinari- 
ly dilated and enlarged beyond any thing that I ever 
saw. 

6. The left Ventricle, whose Capacity in a natural State 
is always less than the right, was here considerably larger. 
And if the Experiment had been made, before Dissection, 
of filling both with any Liquor, this had certainly con- 
tained three times more than the other. 

7. The Valvulæ called Mitrales, placed at the Orifice of 
this Ventricle, are much thicker in Substance than ordina- 
ry; and the two fleshy Columns, called by Nicolaus Massa, 
almost 200 Years ago, duo parvi musculi, which send out 
|P_328
abundance of small Tendons to be inserted into these 
Valves, were proportionably augmented in Bigness. 

8. The semilunary Valves in the Mouth of the Aorta, 
or of that great Vena pulsatilis that dispenses the Blood to 
all the several parts of the human Body, were very much 
preternaturally affected; as would easily appear upon 
comparing them with those in the Orifice of the pulmona- 
ry Artery, in which they are thin and very broad, so as to 
be able to shut the Cavity of that Vessel and hinder the 
Blood from returning back into the Ventricle, and like- 
wise transparent: but in this they are very thick, contra- 
cted as it were, and furled together, and of a whitish 
Colour; and in all appearance, if the Person had lived 
longer, they had turned boney or undergone a Petrifi- 
cation. 

This uncommon Structure of the Heart being thus de- 
monstrated, let us endeavour to account for the follow- 
ing Phænomena. The first is the Palpitation of the Heart, 
which was the chief Symptom and Complaint of the sick 
Person. The second is the preternatural Dilatation and 
Enlargement of the left Ventricle. It is not impro- 
bable but the firm adhesion of the Capsula Cordis membrano- 
la to the substance of the Heart, occasioned that un- 
common trembling and throbbing thereof: its free and 
easy Motion being hindered by that thick involucrum
which surrounded it so close on each side. The learned 
Dr. Lower, in his elaborate Treatise de Corde humano
gives us such an instance, and explains the Palpitation 
after this manner. 

As for the second, viz. the Dilatation of the left Ven- 
tricle and muscular Bag of the Pulmonary Vein; that is al- 
together owing to the ill configuration of the Valves we 
have now described: for as the great Artery or Aorta ari- 
ses out of this Ventricle, it has three Valves which sepa- 
rating give passage to the Blood from the Ventricle into 
|P_329
the Vessel; and in a natural State they shut that Passage, and 
so prevent the Blood from recoiling into the same, if it 
should endeavour to return. But in this case, by reason 
of its contracted Narrowness and Thickness, not being 
able to close or shut the Passage, the Blood flowd back 
again into the Cavity, which it had gradually enlarged, 
and dilated to the Bigness we see. Besides the Muscular 
Valves not being duly qualified for the Performance of 
their Office, the Blood recoiled into the Auricle, which it 
had distended in the like manner. This constant Re- 
gurgitation or Reflux of the Blood is besides sufficient of 
its self, to produce this extraordinary trembling or ωαλ- 
μός χαρδίας, as the Greeks call it. 

