

[^Sample 1: article - PT31_0044^]

|P_44
[}I. Part of a Letter from Mr. Deveral Surgeon at 
Bristol; concerning a Case in Chirurgery, which 
is commonly mistaken for a Fracture of the Pa- 
tella. }]
RICHARD BURT, a Gardiner, living with Mrs. 
Lloyd of Stoke near Bristol, was thrown from his 
Horse, and in the fall receiv'd such a hurt in one of 
his Knees as made him incapable of remounting: He 
felt somewhat crack in that Knee (as he express'd it) 
before it touch'd the ground. Upon examining the 
Part I found (as I then thought) the ends of the 
broken Bone drawn above four fingers distance from 
each other: But upon a stricter examination of the 
parts, I found the Patella (which was drawn upwards 
by the extensors of the Leg) retain'd its natural Figure, 
and that the hardness which was felt below was the 
end of the torn Ligament that ties it to the Tibia. 
The ends of the Ligament were brought as near as 
possible, and kept so about three Weeks without any 
very remarkable accident intervening. He then began 
to walk, which was a little too soon, causing thereby 
some pains, and loosening the Cicatrix, which made 
it the longer before it was perfectly firm; however he 
walks without any perceptible lameness. I have met 
with two others in the same case, the one a Person of 
distinction, who has not met with the good Fortune of 
walking so well as she used, tho' not for want of all 
the care and circumspection imaginable; for it is hardly 
to be expected that one in ten, to whom this Acci- 
dent happens, should ever go right, it being next to 
|P_45
an impossibility that the ends of the torn Ligament 
should be so exactly plac'd, and retain'd as not to lie 
one over the other. 

Pareè in the 22d Chapter of his 15th Book af- 
firms, that he never saw one of those who have had 
this Bone broken, but that halted during the rest of 
their lives: I am very apt to believe what this ex- 
cellent Author affirms about the halting, and am sorry I 
must dissent from his notions of the case, and the 
cause of the Lameness. Hildanus in his Observationes 
Chirurgicæ. Cent. 5th. Observ. 88. P. m. 485, has given 
us a History of a transverse Fracture of this Bone, which, 
after all the Symptoms were remov'd, was cur'd. Sed 
claudicatio ac summa imbecillitas totius cruris secuta est, 
ita ut non nisi maxima cum difficultate ambulare possit. 
He afterwards mentioning the cause of the Lameness 
makes a Quæry, if what Pareè (to whom this Observa- 
tion is dedicated) says in his Exc. lib. de ossibus, lib. 4. 
cap. 2. can be the cause of the Lameness; his words 
are, Etsi vero Opinionem hancce rationi consentaneam esse 
in dubium revocare minime' conabor, unus tamen restat 
scrupulus, videlicet, an, fractâ patellâ, extuberantia calli 
talis esse possit, ut cavitatem hancce (que inter femur & os 
tibiæ magna est) adeo adimpleat, ut motum actionemque ge- 
nu impedire possit? Videmus enim ut plurimum in reliquis 
ossium fracturis, (nisi contritio ossis & periostei fuerit max- 
ima) naturam tam decenter & eleganter connectere ossa, ut 
rarò relinquatur vestigium fracturæ. Periostium enim, quam 
diu integrum est, materiam calli retinet, quo minus in ex- 
tuberantiam excrescere possit, nisi, &c. Deinde in hoc nostro 
Ægro callum non fuisse causam claudicationis ex sequen- 
tibus apparebit: quapropter distinctione hie opus est.  Af- 
ter this he goes on to show us how many ways this 
Bone may be fractur'd, but doth not observe that he 
ever saw it any other way broken, (unless in a Gun- 
|P_46
shot-wound) than transversly; if he had, I am persua- 
ded, that this curious Observator would never have 
omitted it in his Observations. 

Ruysch in his Centuria observationum Anatomico-Chirur- 
gicarum 4c. observatio 3, writes as follows. Patellam 
propter duritiem suam haud frangi posse nonnulli perverse 
asserunt. Nos vero eandem non solum à casu graviori 
in genu frangi experti sumus, verum etiam sine casu; cu- 
jus rei Historiam recensere animus est. Ante tres 
præterpropter annos, visitavi cum Magistro Petro Adri- 
ani filio, virum satis robustum, qui a ponte descendens in ter- 
ram ferè ceciderat; uno pede lubrico, resistens tamen quan- 
tum potuit, in Terram non fuerat prolapsus; sed ab illa re- 
sistentia vehementissima transversim fracta ejus patella, & 
adeo quidem evidenter, ut inter utrumque locari potuerit 
manus, una onim supra altera infra genu sentiebatur. 

This Observation is so like in all its circumstances 
to that which I related above, especially in that the 
Fracture was made without a fall, that I am very apt 
to believe it is the same; and do imagine the might be 
deceived by mistaking the hard end of the Ligament for 
the broken Bone. 

And when these sort of Accidents, which are now 
called Fractures of the Patella, come to be nicely ex- 
amined; they will perhaps be found to be generally 
of the same Nature. 

