

[^Sample 1: article - PT32_0387^]

|P_387
[}V. An Account of an Extra-Uterine Fœtus, taken 
out of a Woman after Death, that had continued 
five Years and an half in the Body. By Robert 
Houstoun, M. D. }]
I Was sent for in August 1717, to a Woman near 
Newport-Market, who had been married eighteen 
Years to a Native of the East Indies, by whom she 
had eight Children, besides two Miscarriages. At my 
visiting her, now, she was with Child in a second Mar- 
riage, and her Husband a vigorous young Man. 

She was near her full Time, and had felt Pains for 
several Days, which, returning by Intervals, she con- 
cluded, would, as usual, bring on her Delivery. Her 
Mother and her Midwife, apprehending no Difficulty, 
assured those about her, that only Time was wanting. 

But I found, on Examination, that her Womb was 
of no Bulk to contain a Child near its Time; and that 
its Neck, of an uncommon Hardness, was also clos'd so 
straitly, as to refuse the least Admission, even of a 
small Probe or knitting Needle. 

I declared upon this, that her Delivery was impos- 
sible; because the Child was not within the Womb, 
but between the Womb and the Guts: That it might 
be remov'd by a Passage to be made for it, without 
any great Pain, and with Safety to the Mother. I of- 
fer'd to undertake it, and assur'd them, that this was 
the only Opportunity; and that if she neglected it, it 
|P_388
would hereafter be out of the Power of Art to give 
her the Relief, she must languish for till Death, unless 
favour'd by some unlikely and extraordinary Accident. 

However confidently I affirm'd it, they listened with 
a Mixture of Disbelief and Amazement, and rejected 
my Assistance. At that Time, in Probability, it would 
have been successful; for she was a slender well-shap'd 
Woman, in good Habit of Body, and of a sprightly 
Disposition. 

It was a Year after this, when Mrs. Hexel, a noted 
Midwife in St. James's Parish, desir'd me again to vi- 
sit her. I found her much disorder'd by a growing Im- 
posthumation in her Belly: I order'd her some cordial 
Stomachicks, Cassia, and such gentle Lenitives; and 
they met a Success beyond my Expectation: So that, 
by aid of a regular Diet, and the watchful Exactness 
of a very tender Mother (a Nurse of above thirty Years 
Experience about this City) I restor'd her to such 
Strength, that she went chearfully Abroad, and re-ap- 
ply'd herself to Business. I told her she might frankly 
benefit herself by my Advice, or my Medicines: And 
she call'd as she found Occasion. 

But about fifteen Months from the Time when I 
visited her first, her Mother came from her to entreat 
my Assistance: She complain'd of a great Pain in the 
lower Part of her Abdomen; and I found a Tumour of 
a conick Form, projecting about an Inch beneath the 
Umbilicus: Its Inflammation, with Tension, and a Fe- 
verishness attending it, so plainly indicated Suppura- 
tives, that I was not surpriz'd to hear, in a few Days, 
that it had broke, as I wish'd. 

I proposed to lay it open, both to give a free Emis- 
sion, and prevent its becoming fistulous; but she was 
apprehensive, that I would, as she call'd it, cut open 
|P_389
her Belly: So that not being able to prevail with her, 
I order'd a Pot of Unguent, and some Plaisters. 

The Ulcer soon grew fistulous, and so continued 
till she dy'd, which was on the 23d of March last, in 
the 41st Year of her Age. 

For above five Months before her Death, she voided 
her Excrements by this Vent, and all the soft Parts of 
the Fœtus, with some small Bones of its Fingers. But 
the rest of the Skeleton remaining entire, I took it out 
of her Body, together with the Vagina, Uterus, Re- 
ctum, &c. wherein it had involv'd itself, as may be 
seen more particularly in the Figure annexed. 

[}Explication of the Figures. }]
[}Fig. 21. }]
A The Clitoris. 
BB The Nymphæ. 
C The Rima, or Entry into the Vagina. 
D The Bladder. 
EE The Ureters cut off. 
F The Uterus sound and entire. 
G The Left Ovarium. 
HH The Tubes. 
I Part of the Colon cut off. 
K Part of the Peritonæum. 
L Part of the Ileum cut off. 
M Part of the Cæcum. 
O Part of the Cranium that plainly appears. 
P The Ulcer, through which the Excrements pass'd, 
with some small Bones. 
QQQQ The Bulky Mass, wherein the Skeleton is 
contain'd, between the Uterus, part of the Vagina, 
and Rectum. 
RR Part of the Cutis. 

|P_390
She was full nine Months gone in August 1717, 
and dy'd the 23d of March 1723, on which Day I 
took it out. 
[^An illustration of various female viscera showing the effects of an ectopic pregnancy, from the front, on a separate fold-out page. ^]
[}Fig. 22. A Lateral View. }]
A Orificium Vaginæ. 
B Anus. 
C Intestinum Rectum. 
DDD The Mass, wherein the Skeleton is contain'd. 
E The Costæ plainly appearing. 
F The Bladder laid aside. 
G The Ureter cut off. 
H The Uterus. 
I The Ovary. 
K The Tube. 
L Part of the Colon. 
M The Ulcer, through which the Excrements pass'd, 
about one Inch beneath the Navel. 
N Bones in the Orifice of the Ulcer. 
[^An illustration of various female viscera showing the effects of an ectopic pregnancy, from the side, on a separate fold-out page. ^]
