

[^Sample 1: article - PT34_0211^]

|P_211
[}II. An Account of a large Stone voided through 
the Urinary Passage, by a Woman. Communi- 
cated by Dr. Richard Beard, F. R. S. Physician 
at Worcester. }]
Worcester, Jan. 29, 172[6/7]. 

SIR, 

AMidst the variety of Observations, that have been 
made on the extraordinary Powers of Nature, 
that which follows may deserve a place. A poor Woman 
in the Parish of Fladbury in this County, aged 63, 
about 3 Years ago, was afflicted with the usual Symp- 
toms of a Stone in the Kidneys, and afterwards in the 
Bladder. The Fits of Pain occasioned by its increas'd as 
its Bulk did; till she was so emaciated by 'em, that 
her Case was judg'd desperate. Finding relief (to- 
wards the end of last Summer) by a plentiful use of 
Mallow-Tea, she persisted in it for a while; when on 
a sudden, in the presence of some Women she per- 
ceived an uncommon weight and force within, which 
assisting with all the Strength and Breath she had 
left, a Stone came away with a Noise that ve- 
ry much surpriz'd the whole Company, and with 
less Pain and Effusion of Blood then, or Sore- 
ness afterwards, that might have been expected. 
She is since easy and in health and feels no o- 
ther Inconvenience now, but that unavoidable one, 
an Incontinentia Urinæ. 

|P_212
The Stone (of which I send you the side-View 
Fig. 1. drawn as near to the Life as we could) is of 
the same Colour and Texture with others of this kind 
that I have seen, formed in humane Bodies. Its 
weight, as I at present find it, is ℥ ij. ʒ j 55 gr. Avoird. 
When first voided, 'twas considerably more, several 
Pieces having been rubb'd off at c c, and likewise on 
the other side: The greatest Circumference is 7 In- 
ches and ½; 'tis 4 Inches ¾ round at the thickest place, 
and the length on the Convexity is 4 Inches ⅞; the 
parts of the Stone at a a a are somewhat jagged and 
stain'd with Blood, as is the little Protuberance on the 
opposite side b. Here I suppose, it met with the most 
resistance, at the time of its Expulsion thro' the Urinary 
Passage. 
[^An illustration of the stone on a separate page. ^]
