

[^Sample 1: article - PT37_0258^]

|P_258
[}VIII. Three Cases communicated by Claudius 
Amyand, Esq; F. R. S. Serjeant Surgeon to 
his Majesty. }]
[}I. Concerning a Child born with the Bowels 
hanging out of the Belly. }]
[}II. Of an extraordinary Cause of a Suppression 
of Urine in a Woman. }]
[}III. Of a Stricture in the middle of the Stomach 
in a Girl, dividing it into two Bags. }]
I. THE 18th of December, 1730, Mr. L—'s 
Child was born with the greatest Part of the 
Bowels hanging out of the Belly, by an Aper- 
ture about half an Inch in Diameter on the Right 
Side of the Navel String. The Birth was natural 
and easy. 

Being called, I found the Aperture lined with a 
Skin, and a Ligament that opposed the Reduction; 
|P_259
the Parts livid, and tending to Mortification; yet the 
Child lived near three Days. 

Upon opening, I found the Prolapsus to consist of 
all the small Guts, except the Duodenum, and of all 
the large ones, except of a small Portion of the Rectum; 
the Gaul-Bladder was about two Inches long, one half 
of which stood out of the Abdomen, and a small 
Portion of the Stomach: All these were so co- 
alesced together, and confounded, that it was impos- 
sible to separate them; though upon blowing, the In- 
testinal Pipe seemed to have its usual Length. The 
Liver was much thicker and larger than usual, and 
convex in that Part of it, that is naturally concave: 
And the Uterus and Bladder pressed on the left Side, 
by the Weight of the Bowels pressing on the Right. 

The Mother could ascribe no Cause for this præter- 
natural Formation. The Child came at full Term, 
but its Inquietudes for some Months before the Birth, 
made the Mother apprehend he was not well. Saving 
this, nothing extraordinary appeared. 

II. I was lately called to a Woman who had a Sup- 
pression of Urine, occasioned by the Menses collected 
in the Vagina, pressing upon the Urethra. She had 
been delivered eight Months before of two Children; 
after which the Caruncalæ Myrtiformes had joined 
together so closely, that there was no room for any 
Evacuation of the Menses. I made a cross Aperture, 
whereby near three Quarts of the Menses collected 
were discharged; the Suppression of Urine was imme- 
diately removed, and the Patient cured. 

|P_260
III. Upon opening the Body of a young Country 
Girl, dead of a Consumption, I found her Lungs su- 
purated in many Places, and a Stricture in the mid- 
dle of the Stomach, dividing this Viscus into two 
Bags. This Stricture appeared to have been of some 
Standing, and likely to have occasioned some Difficulty 
in Digestion; but upon Enquiry, her Mistress and 
Fellow Servants said, that her Appetite and Digestions 
were natural, and that she had continued in a good 
Plight, till upon coming to London she contracted a 
Cough, that had brought on the Consumption. 

