

[^Sample 1: article - PT39_0291^]

|P_291
[}X. An Account of what was observ'd 
upon opening the Corpse of a Person 
who had taken several Ounces of 
crude Mercury internally; and of a 
Plumb-Stone lodg'd in the Coats of the 
Rectum. Communicated in a Letter 
from the late Dr. Madden, Physician 
at Dublin, to Sir Hans Sloane, Bar . 
Pres. R. S. }]
SIR, 

THE Internal Use of crude Mercury is be- 
come so frequent of late, that I believe it 
may produce some great Benefit to Mankind here- 
after, if a careful Collection was made of all the 
extraordinary Cases relating to the good or bad Ef- 
fects of this Practice. 

There are some Circumstances in the following 
Case, which were not owing to the internal Use of 
Mercury; yet there are many others which were 
undoubtedly occasioned by it. 

Some time ago I was present, with Dr. Robinson, 
and Mr. Nichols, our Surgeon-General, at the open- 
ing the Body of a Gentleman of Note in this Town, 
who, for several Years, had found great Difficulty 
in going to Stool. This Disorder increased upon 
him towards the latter End of his Life, and he 
was seized with a violent Distemper, of which 
|P_292
I can give you no Description, having never attended 
him. 

In order to procure a Passage downward (which 
I suppose was a principal Complaint) he took, by 
the Advice of a Physician, since dead, several Ounces 
of crude Mercury, at different times, without any 
Relief, and at length died. 

Upon opening the Abdomen, which was very 
much distended, there burst forth a great Quantity 
of Wind, though the Guts and Stomach were not 
wounded. 

The Stomach was empty; and upon opening it 
we found the inner Coat very much inflamed from 
one End to the other. We observed in several 
Places of the small Guts, some scatter'd Grains of 
crude Mercury, and along with them we generally 
found a black gritty Powder, very like Æthiops 
Mineral, which was, without doubt, the Mercury
changed into that Consistence. 

The Colon was distended, at its Origin, to 
twice the Thickness that an ordinary Man's Arm 
has about the Shoulder. This extraordinary Thick- 
ness extended itself about the Length of ten or 
twelve Inches; from hence it gradually decrea- 
sed, and where it was attached to the Stomach, 
it had not above a third Part of that Size. 

It was much inflamed at its Origin, and con- 
tained at least six Quarts of liquid Excrement, in 
which we observed crude Mercury, and also some 
of the black Powder mentioned above. 

The Colon, where it parted from the Stomach, 
and diverged toward the left Kidney, adhered 
|P_293
about the Space of three Inches to the Omentum; 
and upon separating the Adhesion, we found an Ab- 
scess and Inflammation, which had communicated 
itself to those Parts of the Ileon, which were con- 
tiguous to the Colon. 

The Colon had in this Place a Perforation about 
three Quarters of an Inch in Diameter, and four 
smaller Perforations, about the Size of a Goose's 
Quill, through which some Excrement had passed 
into the Abdomen. 

The Coats of the Colon, as it approached the 
Intestinum rectum, began to grow scirrhous, about 
the Space of six Inches, and the Capacity became 
gradually smaller. 

The Valves of the Colon, about this Place, were 
of a reddish Colour, and were more scirrhous 
than the other Parts of the Intestine. The Coats 
of the Colon, where it was continued to the 
Rectum, were at least half an Inch thick, and its Ca- 
pacity was not above the fourth Part of the natu- 
ral Size

Upon cutting the Gut horizontally hereabout, 
we perceived a Body which stopped the Pas- 
sage, and seemed to the Touch almost of a car- 
tilaginous Consistence. Having opened the Gut 
Lengthways, we found it was no more than two 
of the Valvulæ Conniventes Coli, which were 
grown scirrhous, and were protruded downward 
into the Rectum. 

We also found a small Plumb-Stone in this 
Place, which was quite buried in the Tunica Vil- 
losa, and had made tself a Bed between the Coats 
|P_294
of the Rectum. It had likewise formed a small 
Abscess, which discharged itself into the Cavity of 
the Pelvis, but had not any Communication with 
the Cavity of the Rectum. 

