

[^Sample 1: article - PT39_0287^]

|P_287
[}VIII. An Account of the Bones of Ani- 
mals being changed to a Red Colour by 
Aliment only. By John Belchier, 
Surgeon, F. R. S. }]
THAT the Circulation of the Blood is carried 
on through the Bones, is evident from many 
Phœnomena observable in Surgery; but that the 
Circulation is universally and intimately distributed 
through the most solid and compact Substance of 
the Bones (tho' hitherto by some made a Matter of 
Doubt) will appear undeniably from the Instances 
here produced; which are the Bones of several 
Hogs, of a different Breed, changed to a deep red 
Colour meerly by Aliment. And what makes this 
|P_288
still more surprising is, that neither the fleshy nor 
cartilaginous Parts suffer the least Alteration in Co- 
lour or in Taste. 

The Diet with which these Hogs are fed is Bran, 
after it has been boiled in a Copper with printed 
Callicoes, in order to clean them from a dirty red 
Colour occasioned by an Infusion of Madder Root, 
which is made use of to fix the Colours printed on 
the Cloth; some of which Colours are made with 
Preparations from Iron, others with a Mixture of 
Alum and Sugar of Lead. The Parts printed with 
the Preparation of Iron produce Black and Purple; 
those printed with the Mixture of Alum, Red of 
different Degrees, according to the Strength of the 
Mixture. The Bran having absorbed the red Co- 
lour discharged from the Cloth, is mix'd with the 
common Food of the Hogs, and produces this 
Effect on their Bones. 

Upon examining these Bones, I observe in gene- 
ral the solid Parts to be most tinctur'd, and the 
Teeth particularly, except the enamell'd Part, which 
is of a different Substance; and upon sawing them 
through, I find the internal Parts equally tinged, ex- 
cept at the Ends of the Bones, where the Sub- 
stance is more spongy. And in order to discharge the 
Colour, I have macerated them in Water for many 
Weeks together; have boil'd them often, and steep- 
ed them in Spirits, but all hath prov'd ineffectual; 
nor is the least Tincture given to any of the Li- 
quids, in which I have made Experiments. 

Whether this Colour is produced from the Mad- 
der only, or from all the Colours blended together, 
I pupose to make further Experiments. 

