

[^Sample 1: article - PT39_0049^]

|P_49
[}IV. The Case of a Cataleptick Woman: Com- 
municated to the Royal Society by Richard 
Reynell, Apothecary, London. }]
ANN Bullard, a Servant, about one and twenty 
Years of Age, had been for some time irregular 
in her Menses, and very much afflicted for the Loss 
of a Friend. July the Tenth, 1730. she complain- 
ed of a Pain in her Head, Sickness in her Stomach, 
|P_50
with a general Disorder; and took Gascoign's Pow- 
der for a Sweat: Next Morning, July the Eleventh, 
about Nine o'Clock, she was found in Bed, sense- 
less, stiff, and void of Feeling, with her Eyes shut; 
and, upon the first Surprize, it was thought she was 
dead. When I came, I found her in a true Cata- 
leptick Fit, senseless, without Motion, her Limbs 
very stiff, but warm, and not easy to be bent; but 
in whatever Posture any Limb was put, it continued 
in the same, whether erect, or reclined: Her Respi- 
ration was good, but her Pulse low, and irregular; 
she had no Catchings, or convulsive Motions, but 
could not, by any Means used, be brought to her- 
self (in any respect.) A Vein was opened in the 
Arm, and twelve Ounces of Blood taken away; 
she bled freely, and came a little to herself, but 
could not speak. I then gave her this Draught: 
℞ Aq. Menth. Rutæ. Bryon. Co. ā. ʒvj. Sal. volat. 
Corn. C. ℈ß. Sacchar. Albiss. ℈ij. f. haust. and 
five Spoonfulls at pleasure of the following Julep: 
℞ Aq. Puleg. Rutæ. Menth. ā. ℥ij. Aq. Bryon. Co. 
Nephrit. ā. ℥iß Tinct. Castor. ʒij. Sacchar. Albiss. 
q. s. f. Julapium. In a few Hours she came to 
herself: I then asked her, whether she knew how 
she was taken? She replied, that she had been 
restless and uneasy till about Four o'Clock in the 
Morning, when she believed she fell into the Dis- 
order she was found in; but remember'd nothing 
that had happened besides. She complained of a 
Dizziness in her Head, with a violent Pain in the 
Fore-part of it, and Sickness in her Stomach, and 
was a little feverish. I gave her the following Vomit 
at Four o'Clock in the Afternoon: ℞ Aq. Cardui 
|P_51
bened. ℥j. Pulv. Ipecacuanh. ʒß. Vitriol. alb. depurat.
gr. vj. Oxym. Scillit. ʒiß f. haust. The Vomit 
work'd kindly, and she seemed relieved by it: 
About Six o'Clock in the Evening another Fit re- 
turned, much in the same Manner as before; but 
she soon came out of it, and then took the Draught 
with the Volatile Salt of Harts-horn, as before; and 
I applied a large Blister to her Back, and two more 
to her Arms: About Nine the same Evening she 
had a strong Convulsion Fit, with Catchings, Grind- 
ing of the Teeth, and a great Tremor, neither of 
which she had had before: she had a Stool the 
preceding Night, but none that Day. I gave her 
the Draught as follows, at Night going to rest: 
℞ Tinct. Hier. cum Vino fact ℥ij. Aq. Menth. ʒvj. 
Spt. Lavend. Co. ʒß f. haust. and she continued 
taking the Draught, with the Volatile Salt, &c.
every four Hours. July the Twelfth, she had been 
light-headed all Night, with little or no Rest; the 
Blisters were dressed, which discharged plentifully, 
and the Tincture had given her three Stools in the 
Night, which had made her a little faint; her Pulse 
was low, and her Water pale. I saw her in the 
Evening, when she had slept pretty well, with 
which she was refreshed; the Pain in her Head but 
little, her Stomach easy, and I found her in every 
respect better. The Draughts were continued every 
six Hours, and she took of the Julep before men- 
tioned, when faint or ill. July the Thirteenth in 
the Morning, I found her Head easy, her Water 
higher coloured; she was allowed Broth, and Food 
of easy Digestion, which agreed very well with 
her: She sate up in the Afternoon, but was faint, 
|P_52
and her Head giddy; but when in Bed, she was 
better: She had no Stool that Day. I gave her a 
Draught with the Volatile Salt, &c. at Night going 
to rest, and the following Purge the next Morning. 
℞ Tinct. Hier. cum Vino fact. ℥iß Syr. è Spinâ 
Cerv. Aq. Puleg. ā. ʒvj Spt. Lavend. Co. ʒj f. 
haust. cum regimine cap.July the Fourteenth, the 
Purge worked five times; she eat a light Dinner, 
and was easy; but upon walking about the Room, 
her Head was giddy, and she trembled very much, 
but when in Bed, she was better. I gave her the 
following Draught at Night going to rest: ℞ Aq. 
Rutæ Puleg. Bryon. Co. ā. ʒvj. Spt. Corn. C. opt. 
gutt. 40. Tinct. Castor. ʒj. Sacchar. Albiss. paulu- 
lum f. haust.July the Fifteenth she complained, 
when up, of a Numbness in her Legs, and a Prick- 
ing in them, like to what happens when the Legs 
are what we commonly call asleep: Her Appetite 
was better, and she was in every respect amended. 
She took the following Medicines: ℞ Pulv. rad. 
Valerian Sylv. ℈ij. P. Castor. Russ. ℈j. Asæfœtid. ʒj. 
Tinct. Castor. q. s. f. Massa Pilular. cujus formen- 
tur Pilul. No. 40. of which she took four twice 
a day with a small Draught of this Julep: ℞ Aq. 
Ceras. Nigr. ℥vj. Aq. Rutæ. Pæon. Co. ā. ℥ij. Spt. 
Lavend. Co. ʒvj. Syrup. Caryoph. q. s. f. Julap.
of which she took likewise five Spoonfuls at plea- 
sure. The Blisters were kept running as long as we 
could; and when they were dried up, July the 
Nineteenth, I gave her the same Purge as before. July
the Twenty-second, she had continued very well, 
without any Return of a Fit; but upon cutting an 
Issue in her Arm, she fell into a third Fit, in which 
|P_53
she continued near two Hours, but then came to 
herself, and was well that Evening. July the Twenty- 
ninth the Purge was repeated. August the Sixth she 
complained of a Pain in her Head, Sickness in her 
Stomach, and some Days before, she had a Shew of 
the Menses, and had vomited near a Pint of Blood, 
and was costive: I then advised her to take two 
Spoonfuls of Tinctura Sacra, every or every other 
Night going to Bed, as she found it necessary, and 
forty of the following Drops: ℞ Spt. C. C. opt.
ʒiij. Tinct. Helleb. Nigr. ʒv. to be taken twice a Day 
in Chamomile-Tea. She took these Medicines about 
three Weeks, which answered Expectation, and I 
left her well. I saw her about twelve Months after, 
and she told me, she had continued very well ever 
since. 

Catalepsis tam rarus affectus est, ut credant in- 
ter centum, imò Sexcentos, vix unum Medi- 
cum reperiri, qui Catalepticum aliquem vi- 
derit; ideóque Historiæ Catalepticorum, si 
occurrant, diligenter annotandæ. 

Sennertus, Med. Pract. lib. 1. c. 30. 

