

[^Sample 1: article - PT41_0844^]

|P_844
[}XXVI. A Description of a Catheter, made to 
remedy the Inconveniencies which occasioned 
the leaving off the High Operation for the 
Stone; by Archibald Cleland, Surgeon to 
General Wade's Regiment of Horse. }]
AS this Operation was left off very precipitately, 
in order to introduce that Method now called 
the Lateral Operation, which has been practised for 
some time with good Success; notwithstanding, had 
the Operators at that time had the Advantage of this 
Instrument I here offer to this Honourable Society, 
I am persuaded the Advantage would have been more 
than equal in favour of this High Operation, and pre- 
ferable to any other Method yet practised: And I 
humbly hope, that the Description, and the Method 
of using this Catheter, will be a means of reviving 
an Operation so happily begun, and calculated for 
the Good of those that are afflicted with the Stone in 
the Bladder. 

This Catheter is made either of Silver or Steel, of 
different Sizes, to suit different Ages; and has the 
outward Appearance of a common Catheter [Tab. 
VII.Fig. 1.], and will answer the same Uses: But, in 
respect to this Operation, it differs from the common 
in this, that it is composed of Two Legs [Fig. 2.], with 
blunt Points, a long Tube, a Sliding bolt; and a Handle, 
which serves to open and shut the Legs: The Bolt, 
which is fixed to the Extremity of the Tube, goes 
into Two Holes, fixed in the Plate of the Handle: The 
|P_845
one serves to keep the Legs close during the time it 
is to be introduced into the Bladder, the other to 
extend the Points at the Distance of an Inch or more, 
during the time the Operation is performing. 

The Method of using this Catheter is, first, (after 
having taken the necessary Precautions, and filled the 
Bladder) to introduce the Catheter into the Bladder, 
then unbolt it at the Handle, and by holding the Tube 
in one Hand, and the Handle that moves the Legs in 
the other, then turn or open the Legs, till the Bolt 
becomes opposite to the Second Hole upon the Plate 
into which the Bolt must be thrust; then by pressing 
gently the Handle downwards betwixt the Patient's 
Legs, the Two blunt Points will be easily felt above 
the Os Pubis, in the Protuberance made by the In- 
jection into the Bladder. 

The Advantages I propose by using this Instru- 
ment, are these: First, To be a Director for the Ope- 
rator, in determining the Place where the Puncture 
is to be made in the Bladder; it also serves as a Sup- 
port to the Bladder, when the Water flows out; and 
keeps it from subsiding during the Time of the Ope- 
ration, and till the Stone is extracted: It serves like- 
wise to resist the Pressure of the abdominal Muscles 
and Peritoneum, and also hinders the Intestines from 
being forced down upon the Knife; and keeps the 
Orifice open, till the Stone or Stones are brought 
away. And, lastly, by the Help of this Instrument it 
may be discovered, whether the Bladder is indurated 
or scirrhous. 

The Method of performing this Operation, with 
Safety, is, after having introduced and fixed the Ca- 
theter with its Legs open, to feel for the Two Points 
|P_846
above the Os Pubis, and place the Finger and Thumb 
gently upon them; then give the Handle to an As- 
sistant, to keep it firm in that Position; then, with the 
Knife in the Right Hand, make a Puncture at once 
into the Bladder, exactly in the Middle betwixt the 
Points; but, for the more Security, somewhat lower 
nearer the Os Pubis; and, without drawing out the 
Knife, make a large Incision downwards, inclining 
under the Arch of the Pubis, in proportion to the 
Bigness of the Stone, taking care not to wound the 
Cartilage that joins the Bones together, when the 
Knife is withdrawn: The Bladder being thus sup- 
ported, the Stone may be extracted with the Fingers, 
or with a small Pair of Tenets, there being little 
Danger of breaking it in this Method. When the 
Operation is finished, raise the Handle of the Ca- 
theter, and unbolt it; shut it close and fix it so; then 
withdraw the Catheter, and dress the Patient. 

April 5. 1739. 

[}See Tab. VII. }]
Fig. 1. The Catheter, as it is to be introduced into 
the Bladder, the Two Legs A and B being 
closed together. 
[^An illustrations of the catheter, with its legs closed, on a separate fold-out page. ^]
Fig. 2. The Catheter, its Two Legs A, B, being open. 
C, D, The Tube. 
E, The Sliding bolt. 
F, The Two Holes into which the Bolt is 
to be slid. 
G, The Ears fixt to the Tube C, D, which 
is all of one Piece with the Leg A. 
H, The Handle, which opens the Legs; 
this Handle is all of one Piece with 
|P_847
the Leg B, which Leg B is a Conti- 
nuation of a Wire, that runs through 
the Tube C D, and is fastened to the 
Handle H, and turns with it. 
[^An illustrations of the catheter, with its legs open, on a separate fold-out page. ^]
