

[^Sample 1: article - PT42_0054^]

|P_54
[}XV. An Account of the Case of William Payne, 
with what appeared upon examining his 
Kidneys and Bladder, when his Body was 
opened; by Mr. George Bell, Surgeon. }]
[/1./]WIlliam Payne, aged about 71, had 
been afflicted with the Stone in his 
Bladder, and other calculous Complaints, 
for several Years: He had taken Mrs. 
Stephens's Medicines for 15 Months. See Hartley's 
View, &c. p.8. Case III.

He was subject also to a scrotal Rupture on the 
Left Side, from which however he suffered no great 
Inconveniency, unless upon Neglect of his Truss, which 
he had been directed to wear; and even then, if the In- 
testines came down, he used to return them with Ease. 

About the Beginning of January last, he was at- 
tacked with a severe Fit of the Stone, attended, upon 
every Attempt to make Water, with a strong Tenesmus, 
that forced into the Scrotum a considerable Quantity 
of the Intestines, which exceeding his Skill to reduce, 
he sent for me. I found the Tumour large and unequal, 
but without much Tension or Inflammation; his Pulse 
low, with clammy Sweats; he complained of violent 
Pains in his Back, propagated thro' the whole Length 
of the Ureters, accompanied with Nausea and Vomit- 
ings; he felt exquisite Pain about the Neck of his Blad- 
der and Glans, with an unusual Weight in Perinæo; 
he had frequent Inclinations to make Water, but sel- 
dom made above a Spoonful at once, and that Drop 
|P_55
by Drop, with much Pain, and sudden Stoppings: The 
Urine was extremely fetid, sometimes mixed with pu- 
rulent Matter, at others tinged of a Coffee Colour. 

He had received, just before I saw him, a Clyster, 
which produced two Stools, and encouraged me to 
hope might facilitate the Reduction of his Rupture. I 
attempted it by all necessary means possible, but with- 
out Success: For altho' the largest Part receded and 
gave way, yet a considerable Portion remained, which 
I could not possibly return. I therefore concluded, as 
the Intestines performed their Office, and were free 
from Tension, Inflammation, &c. that the Parts ad- 
hered; so left him, with Directions for a Bag-Truss to 
support them. 

January the 22d, being informed of his Death, I 
applied for Leave to open him, which was granted. 
In examining the Contents of the Abdomen, I found 
the Left Kidney quite wasted, scarce any thing remain- 
ing except the Coats, and those filled with Blood and 
purulent Matter; the Ureter very much inlarged above 
its natural Capacity, and full of the same. 

The Right Kidney was ulcerated in several Places, 
and full of purulent Matter, mixed with Grit; several 
Hydatids appeared upon its external Surface; the 
Ureter was somewhat inlarged. 

I next examined the Bladder, which was exceeding 
large, and contained above three Pints of clear Urine; 
upon opening it and introducing my Hand, I found 
two smooth flattish Stones, somewhat larger than 
common Windsor Beans: I discovered a third in the 
Neck of the Bladder, which probably had been forced 
there during the Paroxysm, and appeared to me to be 
|P_56
the immediate Cause of his Death: It was about the 
Size of a Filbert, and had quite corked up the Passage. 

Upon dissecting the Hernial Bag, the first Part that 
presented was a large Piece of Fat, about half a Pound; 
and immediately underneath it lay a large Portion of 
the Colon, in Length about 10 Inches; the internal 
Surface of the Peritoneum was strongly attached to 
the Colon by several Filaments, and to the Scrotum by 
its cellular Substance. 

All the other Viscera were in a natural State. 


[^1. Read Feb. 4. 
1741-2. H This 
should have 
been inserted at 
p. 27. Art. X.^]