

[^Sample 1: article - PT42_0011^]

|P_11
[}III. A Letter from Edward Nourse, F. R. S. 
Surgeon to St. Bartholomew's Hospital, to 
the President and Fellows of the Royal 
Society, giving an Account of several 
Stones found in Bags formed by a protrusion 
of the Coats of the Bladder, as appeared upon 
opening the Body of one Mr. Gardiner. }]
[/1./]PErmit me to lay before you the 
Bladder of Mr. Gardiner, who was, 
the 5th of March 1739. before the Trustees ap- 
pointed by the Parliament to inquire into the Effi- 
cacy of Mrs. Stephens's Medicines, produced as an 
Instance, where they had been effectual in dissolving 
the Stone in the Bladder. 

Mr. Gardiner was searched by me on Saturday
the 30th of December 1738. I felt a Stone the Mo- 
ment my Instrument was introduced; which was 
likewise felt by Mr. Wall, his Apothecary, then 
present. 

The Tuesday following, he began to take Mrs. 
Stephens's Medicines, and continued them eight 
Months. 

On the 30th of November 1739. I saw him at 
Child's Coffee-house, when he told me, he was quite 
free from his usual Disorders: I there searched him 
again, in the Presence of several Physicians and Sur- 
geons, who likewise felt for the Stone, but none 
could be found. 

|P_12
Mr. Gardiner dying on Saturday the 2d of Ja- 
nuary 1741-2. the next Morning, in the Presence of 
Mr. St. Hill, and Mr. Wall, I opened his Bladder, 
and therein observed six preternatural Apertures of 
different Sizes, the biggest capable of admitting the 
Top of my finger. Each of these Openings led to a 
separate Bag, formed by an Inlargement of the in- 
ternal Membrane of the Bladder, protruded between 
the Fibres of its muscular Coat. 

These Bags are to be seen on the back Part of the 
Bladder, a little above the Vesiculæ Seminales; and 
when viewed on the Outside, seem to be but Two; 
though they are in Number equal to the Openings 
within, already mentioned; and divided from 
one another by the Duplicature of the internal Mem- 
brane, which forms a Septum between each of 
them. 
In these Sacculi, or Bags, are contained nine 
Stones; the largest about the Size of a small Nut- 
meg; and with what Facility some of them moved 
out of, and returned into, the Sacculi, the following 
Circumstance will clearly evince. 
When I had open'd the Abdomen, Mr. St. Hill, 
handling the Bladder, brought two of these Stones 
up to its Fundus, where they were felt by Mr. Wall
and myself.— We then examined the Kidneys: 
The Right contained a little Matter, otherwise it 
was as it should be: But of the Left, Two-thirds 
were wasted; its Pelvis was contracted in Propor- 
tion, and the Ureter almost impervious.— Upon 
rehandling the Bladder, neither of us could feel any 
Stone; I therefore laid it open, and we found them 
all in the Sacculi. The Stones that are in one of 
|P_13
these Sacculi, have been so much inlarged since their 
Lodgment, that without Force and Laceration they 
cannot be got out. 

Jan. 7. 1741-2. 

I am, 
Gentlemen, 
Your most obedient, 
and most humble Servant, 
Edward Nourse. 

[}Figure the First, (See TAB.) }]
Shews the Bladder cut open. 

1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. The preternatural Apertures opening 
 into so many Sacculi , in which the 
Stones were contained. 
7. 8. The two Ureters. 
9. 10. Their Openings into the Bladder. 
11. The Opening from the Bladder into the Urethra. 
12. The prostate Gland, which was scirrhous and 
inlarged. 
13. The Urethra cut off. 
[^An illustration of the bladder cut open, showing the insides, on a separate fold-out page. ^]
[}Figure the second, }]
Shews the Back-part of the Bladder, upon which 
the external Membrane being taken away, the 
Fibres of its muscular Coat are very apparent. 
A. The Fibres of the Detrusor Urinæ. 
|P_14
B. B. The Sacculi formed by the internal Membrane, 
protruded between the Fibres of the De- 
strusor Urinæ. 
CCCCCCCCC. The Stones, as they appear in the 
Sacculi, Eight in one, and One 
(the largest No 6.) in the other. 
D D. The Ureters. 
EE. The Vesiculæ Seminales turned back, to shew 
the whole Extent of the Sacculi. 
FF. The Vasa Deferentia. 
G. The Back-part of the prostrate Gland. 
1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. The Stones whch came easily out of 
the Sacculi. 
7. One of the Stones sawed, the Nucleus of which 
appears white, and the Surface of them all ap- 
pears reddish. 
[^An illustration of the back part of the bladder, with the sacks containing the bladder stones, on a separate fold-out page. ^]

[^1. Read Jan. 7. 
1741-2.^]