

[^Sample 1: article - PT42_0628^]

|P_628
[}XV. Two remarkable Medical Cases, one of 
an Extraordinary Hæmorrhage, the other 
an Ascites cured by Tapping; communicated 
by Henry Banyer, M. D. Extra-Licentiate 
of the College of Physicians, London, to 
C. Mortimer, M. D. Secr. R. S.}]
[/1./]IN the Month of January 1729. Da- 
niel Goddard, a Gardener, about the 
Age of Twenty-four Years, at Wisbech in the Isle of 
Ely, Cambridgeshire, happened of a slight Puncture 
from a rusty Nail in the Sole of his Right Foot. And, 
notwithstanding there was not wounded any Tendon, 
or Blood-vessel, larger than small Branches of Veins, 
the whole Foot was immediately swelled to a very 
unusual Degree, without any Fever, or other apparent 
Cause for it. It was also attended with great Pain, 
and an extraordinary Pulsation upon the Part, as in 
Wounds of Arteries; and so distended as if the Blood 
would burst out of its Vessels. 

Accordingly, after Two Days, upon opening a super- 
ficial Sinus, to inlarge the Wound, there rushed out 
immediately such an obstinate Flux of Blood, as would 
not yield to any styptic Means, longer than the 
Bandage was holden on by some strong Hand. And, 
although, by this Incision, no Vessels were wounded, 
but Capillary Veins; yet this Hæmorrhage continued 
to shew itself as violent as at first, for Six Days suc- 
cessively, whenever the necessary Means were relaxed. 
Upon which, for the sake of Revulsion, the Patient 
|P_629
had a Vein opened on the Arm of the opposite Side; 
and it had such a sudden and surprising Effect, that the 
Flux of Blood in the Foot instantly ceased, and the 
Wound healed very soon without any further Trouble; 
but the Flux of Blood, consequent upon Venesection, 
became equally as difficult to restrain, as that in the 
Foot, for the Space of Four Days; all which time it 
would have continued to flow most violently with- 
out the strictest Bandage, as the same Care of the 
Hand, as before. Perhaps the Period of this Hæmor- 
rhage might have been much longer, if I had not 
suffered the Ligature on the Arm to be loosened now- 
and-then, as I judged the Redundancy of Blood re- 
quired, for the sake of some Evacuation, at each time. 
After the Bleeding, he soon recovered his Strength, 
so as to do his Business in the Gardens; and con- 
tinued very well till the Month of March 1730. 
About the Middle of this Month, he complained of 
Sleepiness, and a particular Heaviness all over his 
Body; which was followed, in Three Days time, by 
a violent Hæmorhage from the Nose. This Flux, in 
spite of all Means being tried, except Venesection, 
continued Seven Days, and could never be totally 
stopped, all this time, for one Hour together. He re- 
covered again in a very short time, and was able to 
work in the Summer-season, without any Complaints, 
till October following. Then the Hæmorrhage re- 
turned again at the Nose, as before, with all the same 
Circumstances, and in Defiance of all Endeavours, 
continued the Period of Seven Days. Thus it re- 
turned in like manner of Bleeding, by Stools, in the 
Middle of March 1731, and continued to discharge 
this Way great Quantities of Blood, in one Motion, 
|P_630
and sometimes two Motions every Day for Seven Days 
together, in Opposition to the most efficacious Restrin- 
gents. Also it made its regular Return by vast Pro- 
fusions of Blood from the Intestines, in the Begin- 
ning of October following, to the End of the first 
Period of Seven Days, without Gripings, or any such 
uneasy Sensations. Thus, again, it kept as orderly 
Returns about the Vernal and Autumnal Equinoxes of 
the Years 1732, 1733, with vast Profusion of Blood by 
Stool, for the usual Term of Seven Days, agreeing in 
all Circumstances with the preceeding Years. Likewise 
at, or very near these two grand Seasons, in the Years 
1734, 1735, this habitual Hæmorrhage broke away 
by the Kidneys and urinary Passage; and still con- 
stantly, for these Two Years, kept its old stated Time 
of Seven Days, without any other Variation. 

This young Man was seized in Dec. 1735, with 
the Small-pox, of the Distinct Kind, which produced 
such a Change in his Constitution, that he escaped 
those periodical Hæmorrhages, or any other sponta- 
neous Evacuations equivalent thereto, for the Two 
Seasons of the Year 1736; and remained in very good 
Health till Christmas following, being above Thirteen 
Months free from any Symptoms of his old Eruption. 
But, upon December the 27th, without any previous 
Notice of Heaviness and Sleepiness, the Hæmorrhage
returned by the urinary Passages; but much more 
favourably, and continued only Three Days. Again, 
on May the 13th following, 1737, he then felt the 
previous Warnings, and bled again by Urine to the 
20th of the same Month; with this Difference, that 
for Three Days the Urine was only Coffee-coloured, 
but afterwards, for Four Days longer, every Discharge 
|P_631
resembled an Effusion of Blood from a Vein just 
opened. He presently recovered his Strength, even 
although the Air was exceeding warm at this Time; 
and I saw him Five Months after, very robust and 
healthy, and, as he told me himself, was free from 
all kinds of Tendency towards his old Complaint. 
But he had always the Appearance of too much Ful- 
ness, though I am of Opinion, that his Constitution 
did not suffer so much as might reasonably be ima- 
gined, from such prodigious Hæmorhages. Of my 
own Knowlege, he had no Return of his Bleeding, 
or any thing like it, the ensuing Autumn; but re- 
mained perfectly well all the following Winter Sea- 
son. Afterwards I had no Opportunity of making 
further personal Inquiries, but was informed by an 
intelligent Man, that in March 1738 this unfortunate 
Person got a slight Wound again, somewhere upon 
one of his Legs, which proved equally as difficult, 
with respect to the Flux of Blood, as the first Puncture 
in his Foot. And, whether from too strict as Restraint 
of the Hæmorrhage, or for want of Venesection, he 
fell into very violent Convulsions for Four or Five 
Days, and died in a manner like Suffocation, from 
too much Redundancy of Blood. 

As this Hæmorrhage never once depended upon 
any other Distemper, or observed any regular Con- 
currence with the Revolutions of the Moon, it ap- 
pears to be a very extraordinary simple Plethora. 
During the Four Years that this Flux of Blood came 
from the Nose and Intestines, the Urine was never 
of a higher Colour than Amber; nor was there any 
Symptom of a Fever by the Pulse, or otherways, for 
the whole Term of the Disorder. 

|P_632
January the 6th, 1743. 

ON March the 26th, 1739, the Wife of Mr. Matth. 
Wilkinson, of Long-Sutton, in Lincolnshire, was 
tapped for an Ascites, proceeding from frequent Hæ- 
morrhages, and a too liberal Use of small Liquors. 
She was between 30 and 40 Years old, of a very low 
Stature, and always of a weak Constitution. The 
Water was all taken away at one Time, and mea- 
sured Five Gallons. She was very faint immediately 
after the Operation, and remained so for near Three 
Weeks after. But, by great Abstinence from Liquids, 
excepting Lower's bitter Infusion, and sometimes a 
Spoonful or Two of Cordial Julap, she perfectly 
recovered her Health again; and to a much better 
Degree of it, than she had enjoyed for many Years 
before; without any Appearance at all of a Return 
of the abdominal Tumour to this Day. The Water 
was clear, and readily turned to a strong Jelly upon 
heating it; and I am very certain, there was unavoid- 
ably left in the Abdomen a Quantity sufficient to 
prove the Existence of absorbent Vessels. Perhaps 
those Patients, in this Distemper, whose Water turns 
to a Jelly, have a better Chance to be cured by Pa- 
racentesis, than others, whose Discharge is more like 
Urine, and will never curdle by Heat. But Time, 
and repeated Observation, must confirm this Opi- 
nion. 

|P_633
Postscript against Empiricism. 
NOtwithstanding the great Usefulness and Ten- 
dency of successful Observations in Physic and 
Surgery, to encourage Practitioners in a Perseverance 
in their Duty, even where the regular Prognostics 
stand against them; yet I cannot forbear taking this 
Opportunity to assert the Impossibility of any Per- 
son's obtaining a competent Knowlege of the Art of 
Healing, by Practice only; without a previous Know- 
lege of Anatomy, and the Animal Oeconomy. 

Hence have I met with an old Practitioner, of very 
extensive Business, who had never been educated in 
this fundamental Qualification, and who, for want of 
it, was treating his Patient with Cataplasms and Fo- 
mentations, to cure that Numbness in the Thigh 
which is a certain Diagnostic of a Nephritic Case. 
And I have more than once seen a Dysuria under 
the Treatment of a gravelly Case, when it has plainly 
arisen from the Venæ Hæmorrhoidales having been 
too much swelled towards the urinary Passages. 
Thus, where Men are not qualified to distinguish at 
all upon the Symptoms of a Distemper, from some 
true Knowlege of the Parts concerned, they must 
necessarily be often mistaking the Symptoms for Dis- 
tempers, and so vice versa, after this Manner; inso- 
much that their longest Practice will be little better 
than a Multiplication of Blunders, without much 
Chance to be wiser by Time and Experience.—Huic 
Ratiocinationi adstipulatur Experientia, qua sine 
vana omnis Theoria, bella sit utcunque. 



[^1. Read Dec. 22. 
1743. ^]