

[^Sample 1: article - PT44_0617^]

|P_617
[}X. An Account of a Child being taken out 
of the Abdomen, after having lain there 
upwards of 16 Years, during which time 
the Woman had 4 Children, all born alive; 
by Starkey Myddleton M. D. }]
Gentlemen, 

[/1./]THE Records of your Society furnish 
us with several Cases of extra-ute- 
rine Conceptions; one of which I communicated 
to you March 28. 1745. [/2./] nevertheless I could not 
help flattering myself that this Case also might be 
worthy your Notice. 

IN April 1731. Mrs. Ball, without Bishopsgate, 
perceived (by the usual Symptoms) that she was preg- 
nant; and in October following, being then in the 
sixth Month of her Pregnancy, she had a Child died 
in her Lap of Convulsions, the Surprize of which 
occasion'd a great Fluttering within her, attended 
with a sensible Motion of the Child, which Motion 
continued, tho' gradually weaker and weaker, for 
about 6 or 7 Days, after which she did not per- 
ceive it to move any more; but from this time she 
had constant Pains attending her, which appear'd 
like Labour-Pains. Her Midwife, for several Days, 
expected a Miscarriage; but finding herself disap- 
pointed, advised her to apply to Dr. Bamber, whose 
known Abilities in the several Branches of Physick, 
joined to his great Experience and Judgment in 
|P_618
Midwifry, made him unquestionably the most pro- 
per Person to be consulted, as the Case appear'd so 
very uncommon in its Circumstances, at the same 
time that his great Humanity always gave the most 
free Access to the Poor in their Distresses. 

The Doctor (after a proper Examination) finding 
sufficient Indications of a dead Child, order'd her 
some forcing Medicines; upon taking which about 
three times she discharg'd something, which the Wo- 
men suppos'd to be Part of an After-birth, accom- 
panied with a small Quantity of Water: In conse- 
quence of this Discharge her Pains ceased, but with- 
out any visible Diminution of her Belly. 

After some time she again apply'd herself to the 
Doctor, who thought it most adviseable to discon- 
tinue her Medicines, and leave the Affair intirely to 
Nature. 

In this State she continued for about 20 Months 
viz. to July 1733. which was 2 Years and 3 
Months from her first Reckoning, she then again 
apply'd herself to Dr. Bamber, acquainting him, that 
she was not yet deliver'd of the Child she so long 
since came to consult him about, and that her Pains 
were lately return'd, and daily increased without any 
Intermission, upon the Doctor's examining her, he 
thought it proper to send her home immediately, 
directing her to promote her Pains, by frequently 
supping some warm Caudle, &c. by the Use of 
which her Pains became more regular, and the next 
Day the Doctor made her a Visit, and was informed 
she had discharg'd two Waters, but nothing more: 
He then carefully examined her again, and plainly 
felt a Child through the Integuments of the Abdo- 
men, but could not give her any Assistance. 

|P_619
It was about this time that Dr. Bamber first ac
quainted me with the Case, and desired that I would 
attend her as often as Occasion might require, and that I 
would acquaint him, if any thing like Labour, or other 
remarkable Alteration should offer. Accordingly I 
made her a Visit, and after a proper Examination, 
was convinc'd of the Certainty of the Doctor's As- 
sertion. 

Her Pains now began to abate, and she grew to- 
lerably easy; but about the latter End of January
1733-4. she conceived again with Child, and was 
deliver'd on the 28th of October following by Dr. 
Bamber, who sent for me to attend him in her 
Labour: The Doctor soon deliver'd her of a fine 
Boy, and after having brought away the Placenta, 
he search'd for the other Child, which he had before 
felt through the Integuments of the Abdomen, but 
found it was lodg'd in the Cavity of the Abdomen, 
and beyond the Reach of human Art to relieve her. 
This Fact every one then present was made sen- 
sible of. 

October 22. 1735. I was sent for to her in her 
Labour, but before my Arrival she was deliver'd of 
a Boy; but I brought away the Placenta, which 
gave me an Opportunity of examining for the other 
Child, and fonnd it in the same Situation as for- 
merly. 

October 9. 1738. I was again sent for to her, when 
in Labour, but she was deliver'd of a Boy before I ar- 
rived. Upon examining the Womb, and the State 
of the Abdomen, the Child appear'd just as before, 
without any Alteration. 

June 17, 1741. I was again sent for in her La- 
bour, but found her just deliver'd of a Girl; and 
|P_620
upon examining the Parts, every thing appear'd as 
before. 

October 14. 1747. being greatly emaciated by 
constant Pains, &c. she was admitted a Patient in 
Guy's Hospital, where she died the 7th of Novem- 
ber following, after having labour'd under the Dis- 
tresses and Uneasiness of carrying a dead Child 
within her, in a manner loose, in the Cavity of the 
Abdomen upwards of 16 Years. 

The Day after her Death I open'd her, in the Pre- 
sence of Dr. Nesbit, Dr. Nichols, and Dr. Law- 
rence, when the Uterus, and the several other Con- 
tents of the Abdomen appear'd (nearly) in their na- 
tural State, but on the right Side within the Os 
Ilium a Child presented itself, which was attach'd 
to the Ilium and neighbouring Membranes by a Por- 
tion of the Peritonæum, in which the Fimbria and 
Part of the right Fallopian Tube seem'd to lose 
itself. 

The Child seem'd no-ways putrid; but the Inte- 
guments were become so callous, and chang'd from 
their natural State, that the whole seem'd to resem- 
ble a cartilaginous Mass, without Form or Distinc- 
tion: The Legs indeed were distinguishable, though 
they were much wasted and distorted. 

Upon opening the callous Integuments of the 
Head and Face of the Child, the Bones appear'd per- 
fectly form'd, with a few Spots of tophous Concre- 
tions on them. 

This Account may serve to convince those who 
are of Opinion that Boys are conceived on the 
right Side, and the Girls on the left; as this Wo- 
|P_621
man had three Boys, and one Girl, after the Fallo- 
pian Tube on the right Side had lost its Action. 
I am, 

Decem. 17. 
1747. 

Gentlemen, 
With great Respect, 
Your most obedient and 
Most humble Servant, 
Starkey Myddleton. 


[^1. Read Dec. 17. 
1747. ^]
[^2. 
* See Philos. Trans. No. 475. p. 336. 
^]