

[^Sample 1: article - PT44_0337^]

|P_337
[}II. An uncommon Dropsy from the Want of a 
Kidney; and a Description of a large Saccus
that contain'd the Water, by Samuel Glass, 
Surgeon, at Oxford; sent to Dr. Mead. }]
November 11, 1746. 

[/1./]MARY Nix, who lived at Hampton- 
Poyle, a small Village in Oxford- 
shire, had been remarkable all her Life for the pre- 
ternatural Size of her Belly. After her Death, I had 
the Curiosity, together with some learned Gentlemen 
of the University, to inspect her Body. Her Mother 
was then present, and inform'd us, that this her 
Daughter was born dropsical; that she herself had 
been ill of the same Disease for some time before, 
and during, her Pregnancy; but, on the Birth of 
this Child, she was freed from that Disorder. 

The Child, tho' born dropsical, prov'd otherwise 
healthy; and, notwithstanding the Disease continu- 
ally increased as she grew up, liv'd to be near twenty- 
three Years of Age. 

She was a tall well-proportion'd Woman, except 
with Regard to the enormous Size of her Belly; and, 
for one of so unwieldy a Bulk, healthy, brisk, and 
active. Her Appetite was always good, and she was 
never more than ordinarily thirsty; had no remarkable 
Difficulty of Breathing, not even when she lay su- 
pine, nor did her Thighs or Legs ever swell. Her 
Menses, which appear'd at the usual Time of Life, 
continued regular, till within eight Months of her 
Death. The only Complaint was now-and-then a 
|P_338
Pain in making Water; and the Quantity she made 
was commonly about four or five Ounces. 

Upon the Suppression of her Catamenia, there suc- 
ceeded a Dyspnœa, Loss of Appetite, Emaciation of 
the superior Parts, and a Tumefaction of one of her 
Legs with Ulcerations. These Symptoms gradually 
increased till her Death. 

Upon taking the Dimensions of her Body before 
Dissection, we found the Circumference of her Ab- 
domen to be just six Feet four Inches, and from the 
Xyphoid Cartilage to the Os Pubis it measur'd four 
Feet and half an Inch. The cutaneous Vessels, dis- 
tributed upon the Abdomen, were remarkably large, 
and distended with Blood, and the spurious Ribs 
were pressed greatly outwards and upwards. 

After this general View of the external Parts, we 
began the Dissection, by dividing the Cartilages of 
the six superior Ribs, and raising the Sternum. The 
Thorax being laid open, we observed that the Dia- 
phragm was forcibly protruded into that Cavity. 
The Base of the Heart lay under the right Clavicle, 
and its Apex upon the most convex Part of the Dia- 
phragm; which Convexity advanced as high up as 
the third superior Rib. The Lungs were surprisingly 
small, scarce exceeding in Magnitude those of a new- 
born Child. The right Lobe slightly adher'd to the 
Pleura, the left was free, and both were in a sound 
State. Within the Pericardium was found, as usual, 
a small Quantity of Liquor, but none in the Cavity 
of the Thorax. 

We next perforated the Abdomen in the most con- 
venient depending Part, and evacuated from thence 
a surprising Quantity of Water, which was lightly 
|P_339
tinged of a Coffee-Colour, limpid as Urine, and not 
in the least fetid. This Water was carefully mea- 
sur'd, and found to be not above a Pint less than 
thirty Gallons Wine Measure; which must weigh, 
according to the common Calculation, near 240 l.

We afterwards made an Incision into the Abdo- 
men along the Linea alba. The Integuments 
upon the epigastric Region were very thin; the ab- 
dominal Muscles much extenuated; and above the 
Umbilicus the Tunica cellulosa contain'd no Fat; but 
from the Navel to the Os Pubis, the Panniculus 
adiposus was half an Inch thick. Upon dilating the 
Incision, the large membranous Bag that contain'd 
the Water presented itself to View, adhering trans- 
versly about ten Inches to the anterior Part of the 
Peritonæum. 

This Adhesion being separated, we had a full 
View of this wonderful Reservoir, which was of an 
enormous Size, and had almost occupied the whole 
Cavity of the Abdomen. In Figure, Colour, Thick- 
ness, Number, Magnitude, and Distribution of Blood 
vessels, it very much resembled the Uterus of a 
Cow at the End of Gestation. The whole Inside was 
scabrous, and look'd as if parboil'd; and here and 
there was observ'd a small Quantity of a Coffee- 
colour'd Sediment. On the left inferior Part was 
discover'd the Orifice of a Duct, which open'd ob- 
liquely into the Cavity of the Saccus, and would 
easily admit of a large Goose Quill. From this Open- 
ing the Tube advanc'd about twelve Inches between 
the Membranes of the Bag obliquely upwards, and 
towards the right, from whence it was inflected 
downwards, and pass'd between the Duplicature of 
|P_340
the Ligamentum latum Uteri, to be inserted into 
the Bladder of Urine. The Saccus was connected to 
the Ligamentum suspensorium Hepatis, to a consi- 
derable Part of the Mesocolon, to the Peritonæum
on the right Side in two or three different Places, 
to the same Membrane the whole Length of the 
Spine, and to the Ligamentum latum Uteri on the 
right Side of the Body. 

The Liver was sound, but less than in a natural 
State; and its convex Part adher'd closely to the 
Diaphragm. The Stomach, Spleen, Omentum, small 
Intestines, and the upper Part of the Colon, were 
thrust very high up into the left Hypochondrium. 
The Convolutions of the lower Part of the same 
Intestine were intirely obliterated; and that, toge- 
ther with the Rectum, formed one continued strait 
Tube, from the left Hypochondrium down to the 
Anus. The left Kidney, with its emulgent Vessels 
and Ureter, were in their natural State and Situation. 
The Uterus, Tuba Fallopiana, and Ovarium, on the 
same Side, had nothing preternatural; but, on the 
right Side, the Fallopian Tube and Ovary were dis- 
pos'd in a very extraordinary Manner. The Tube, 
by means of the Adhesion of the Ligamentum latum 
Uteri to the Saccus, was extended to three times its 
ordinary Length. The Ovary was likewise, by the same 
Cause, render'd very preternatural, being no less 
than five Inches three Quarters long, one Inch broad, 
two Tenths of an Inch thick, and two Inches and 
half distant from the Uterus. The Bladder of Urine 
was very small, but appear'd to be sound. 

We then made an accurate Search for the right 
Kidney; but, to our great Surprize, found no 
|P_341
such Viscus, nor any thing analogous to it, unless 
the Saccus that contain'd the Water already de- 
scrib'd, may be esteemed such: And what seem'd to 
favour this Opinion, was the Disposition of the 
emulgent Vessels on the right Side, which were pro- 
pagated from the Aorta and Vena cava to this Sac- 
cus, in the same manner as to the Kidney on the 
opposite Side; and, after having ran twelve or four- 
teen Inches between the Membranes of the Bag with- 
out any Ramifications, were distributed all over it 
in the Manner before-mention'd. 

From the foregoing Account the following Que- 
ries are naturally suggested, which I leave to the 
Determination of the Learned: 

Query 1. Was not the Saccus originally a mis-shapen 
Kidney, and the Duct a Ureter? 
Query 2. Was not the Water contained in the Sac- 
cus prevented from growing putrid, by being con- 
tinually drain'd off thro' the Duct into the Bladder 
of Urine, and by being afresh supplied by the 
emulgent Artery; and more being secreted than 
was evacuated, the Quantity thereby continually 
increased? 
Query 3. Was not this the Reason why the Patient 
had never any anasarcous Swellings of her Thighs 
or Legs, nor any Thirst, or other Signs of a con- 
firm'd Dropsy? 
Query 4. Were not the Lungs prevented from grow- 
ing by the great Diminution of the Cavity of the 
Thorax, and the Pressure they sustain'd from the 
distended Abdomen? And might not their never 
having occupied a larger Space than they did at 
Birth, be the Reason she never labour'd under any 
Difficulty of Breathing? 
|P_342
Query 5. Was not the Bladder of Urine likewise by 
the superincumbent Weight, prevented from di- 
lating itself; and that the Reason why the Water 
was often made, and always in so small a Qnan- 
tity? 

In order to convey a more clear Idea of the seve- 
ral Parts already describ'd, to those who may not 
have an Opportunity of inspecting them (they being 
properly preserved for that Purpose), and being sen- 
sible of the great Difficulty of clearly representing by 
Words such Things as are out of the ordinary Course 
of Nature, I must beg Leave to refer the Reader to 
the Figures hereto annex'd. 

[}See Tab. I.}]
[}Fig. 1. }]
aaaa, The great Saccus that contain'd the Water. 
bb, The greater Diameter of the Saccus. 
cc, The lesser Diameter. 
d, A prick'd Line shews the Entrance of the emul- 
gent Vessels. 
ef, Shews the Course of the Duct between the Mem- 
branes of the Saccus. 
f, The Orifice opening obliquely into the Cavity. 
eg, The inflected Part of the Duct, after its Egress 
from the Saccus, which passed between the Liga- 
mentum latum Uteri to the Bladder of Urine. 
g, The Duct, divided near the Bladder, where its 
Cavity was so small as only to admit of a com- 
mon-siz'd Probe. 
[^An illustration of a spherical, veined bag, on a separate fold-out page. Annexed is a scale, which shows the bag to be approximately two feet in diameter. ^]
|P_343
[}Fig. 2. }]
Represents the posterior View of the Uterus, Fal- 
lopian Tubes, and Ovary. 
aa, The Uterus. 
A, The Os Tineæ. 
bc, The Fallopian Tube in a natural State. 
c, The Morsus Diaboli. 
d, The left Ovary in a natural State. 
ee, The Ligamentum rotundum. 
fg, The right Fallopian Tube. 
g, The Morsus Diaboli. 
hh, The right Ovary. 
ii, The Ligamentum rotundum. 
kkkk, The Ligamentum latum Uteri. 
ll, Its Adhesion to the Saccus. 
[^An illustration of the above-mentioned reproductive organs, the right side of which is disproportionately stretched, on a separate fold-out page. ^]

[^1. Read Jan. 8. 
1746-7. ^]