

[^Sample 1: article - PT44_0193^]

|P_193
[}V. Some Observations on the Spina ventosa; 
by the late Claudius Amyand, Esq; F. R. S. 
and Serjeant-Surgeon to His Majesty. }]
[/1./]WHAT Practitioners generally under- 
stand by the Spina ventosa, is a 
Caries in the Bone, from the Extravasation of some 
sharp Juices within it relaxing the Tone of the Fi- 
bres, and swelling and increasing its Bulk beyond the 
natural Bounds. 

In this Case, the Humour, or extravasated Juices, 
pent in the Bone, works it Way out of it, through the 
external Cortex, or into the Joints, or both. By 
Detention it acquires an Acrimony; and, like Vine- 
gar, and other acrid Juices, it not only relaxes the 
Tone of the bony Tubes, by mollifying them, but 
also, like a Caustic, it tears and lacerates them. At 
this time the Bone swells, tumefies, and spreads; and 
the Sap flowing, running out through the lacerated 
Tubes, overspreads the Surface, and adds to the Tu- 
mefaction, as the liquid Matter, forming a Callus, is 
indurated there. So that, when this happens at or 
near the Joints, the Bones in Contact are knit toge- 
ther, and the Cariosity is incrusted and cover'd with 
an Exostosis, in as many Places as the Matter con- 
fined within the Bone, upon breaking the Cortex of 
|P_194
it, will work its Way out at. And thus this Distem- 
per may be consider'd differently, as it happens to 
be in the different Stages of it. 

The Alteration which the Bone suffers from the 
extravasated Matter lodged within the Substance or 
Cavities of the Bone in the first Stage of a Spina 
ventosa, becomes the Occasion of some Exfoliation 
or Detachment from it. As that Matter acquires a 
greater Acrimony, the Texture of the Bone being 
relaxed, and the Lamellæ made soft and yielding, the 
Bone is enlarged in its Dimensions; and, in the last 
Stage of it, wherein the Bone is carious, the corro- 
sive Matter destroys the Continuity, as it makes its 
Way thro' the Cortex, and into the Joints. At this 
time Impostumations appear in as many Places as the 
Matter can make its Way out at. The callous Mat- 
ter lodged under the Periostium, gradually ossifying, 
covers the Bone more or less with Exostoses; and 
the Joints are stiffned, by the Extravasation and In- 
duration of the Sap flowing out of the Bone there. 

The Impostumations that happen in the Bone to- 
wards the Centre of long Bones, are always attended 
with additional Mischief, as the working out of the 
Matter there meets with a greater Resistance from 
their Lamellæ, which lie close, and are compact; 
the Exfoliations made in the first Stage, and, as it 
were, in the Beginning of the Spina ventosa there, 
being frequently confined and locked in by the Cor- 
tex of the Bone, or some callous Expansion on the 
Surface of it. In the last Stage of this Distemper in 
this Place, the Bone is usually perforated with large 
Holes, tubulous Cavities, and fistular Openings, and 
the main Bone rotten, at a time that the Exfoliations 
|P_195
inclosed preserve their primitive State and Solidity. 
The Patient then cannot survive it long: For, as a 
hectic Fever and Diarrhœa are fed by the continual 
Absorption of some of the Matter into the Blood, so 
the Body is drained by the large Discharge from such 
Wounds. The Amputation of the Limb is then the 
usual Remedy; but a better may be hoped for, be- 
fore it comes to this Pass, as will appear from the 
following Observations. 

[}Observation I. }]
One Thomas Pentney, a Shepherd in Norfolk, 
aged about 22, was admitted into St. George's Hos- 
pital, towards the Beginning of August 1739, and 
committed to Mr. Middleton's Care. Five Years be- 
fore, upon the Crisis of a Fever, he had felt a great 
Pain in the Os Humeri of his right Arm, which con- 
tinued several Months; during which, the Dimen- 
sions of this Bone were so increased, that, towards 
the End of the Year, it was half as big again as is 
usual in the natural State. About this time the Bone 
impostumated; and the Matter being discharged by 
the breaking of the Integuments on the Outside of 
the Arm, the Patient was eased, so as to have been 
able to attend his Flock as before. 

When he came to the Hospital four Years after 
this, he had above twelve Holes thro' the Integu- 
ments on the Outside of the Arm, answering to, and 
corresponding with, as many leading into the me- 
dullary Cavity of the Bone; some of which were 
large enough to admit the Finger. These Impostu- 
mations had been most vexatious of late. There was 
an Anchylosis at the Elbow; and, for two Years last 
|P_196
past, he neither could bend his Arm, nor use it in 
Pronation and Supination. The whole Bone felt 
thick and unequal up to the Shoulder, where the 
Articulation was free. The Patient now did not 
complain much. The Discharge from the Wounds 
was moderate; his Rest, Stomach, and Pulse, as well 
as could be expected; and therefore he was deter- 
mined to forego any thing, rather than submit to the 
Amputation that was proposed. 

In Consultation with Mr. Pawlet, Mr. Wilkie, Mr. 
Middleton, and Mr. Hawkins, we agreed to make an 
Incision from the Deltoid Muscle down to the Elbow, 
thereby to lay the distemper'd Bone bare, so far as it 
appear'd to be affected; and, with the exfoliative 
Trepan, to make a fair Opening into the medullary 
Cavity of the Bone, by taking off so much of it as 
was perforated in the external Part of the Arm, and 
so to make way for the Application of the actual 
Cautery, if that was found necessary. 

The two first Operations were performed with 
Ease: For, as in the Incision the Periosteum was readily 
detached from the Bone, so the Bone in View, being 
nearly of a cartilaginous Nature, and making little 
Resistance, was soon removed, by the repeated Ap- 
plication of the exfoliative Trepan. In the Course of 
the Operation, Mr. Middleton found a Bone loose, 
which hitherto had lain concealed under the Cortex
of the Bone; which, being taken out intire, mea- 
sured above seven Inches in Length, and more than 
two in Circumference; the Centre forming a tubu- 
lar Chanel, wherein the Medulla of the Bone had 
formerly been inclosed. This was an Exfoliation 
fairly separated from the Surface of all the medullary 
|P_197
Cavity of the Bone, bur improperly called an Exfo- 
liation, as the Thickness of the Bone throughout was 
as thick as a Shilling: It was more substantial in 
some Places than in others, and open'd here and 
there, so as not to be a complete Tube. But what, 
perhaps, may be thought to deserve more notice is, 
that this loose Bone, tho' it had for many Years been 
soaking in the Matter lodged in the Bone (which, at 
times, had worked its Way out, by perforating the 
Surface of the Os Humeri externally), yet this Ex- 
foliation was in no-wise alter'd, or tainted with Ca- 
riosity, as the main Bone was; but in every respect 
so sound, as to give Ground to hope the posterior 
Part of the Os Humeri might be so; but it happen'd 
otherwise. 

Upon the Removal of this Exfoliation, the whole 
internal Surface of the Bone was found of a Sub- 
stance like a Cartilage: It was bare in some Places, 
and cover'd with Flesh in others. The Flesh was fun- 
gous in the lower Extremity of the Bone that was 
carious; firmer towards its upper End, where it was 
sound; and callous towards the Middle, which was 
degenerated into a cartilaginous Substance. 

The Removal of this Exfoliation having laid open 
the whole Bone, in the inferior Part of it was found 
a Sinus leading into the Articulation with the Cubit, 
and a Cariosity in the Bone there; and, in the upper 
End, where the Bone appeared now sound, but for- 
merly was distemper'd, several Foramina, which 
were filled up with Flesh, under Cover of the Del- 
toid Muscle. 

At this time the Surface of the Wound was very 
large, and the Discharge from it greater than the 
|P_198
Patient could support. His Stomach hitherto had been 
good; but that being defective, and a hectic Fever 
with a Diarrhœa attending, the Amputation of the 
Limb was concluded on. It was taken off near the 
Articulation with the Scapula, where the Bone was 
sound. The Patient did not survive it long; for the 
Diarrhœa increasing, he died spent, within four 
Days after the Operation. 

In the Explanation of the annexed Figures, Tab.
II. No. 1. and No. 2. a further Account will be given 
of the State of the Bones in the amputated Limb. 
The Humerus next to the Shoulder-Joint did not, 
after the Patient was dead, appear so sound as it had 
during Life: For the Matter proceeding from the 
Bone, which was found, in two or three Places of it, 
under the Deltoid and Pectoral Muscles, shew'd, that 
this Part of the Bone was not in that sound State it 
appeared in, when the Amputation was made. 

[}Observation II. }]
Upon the 5th of November 1739. Mr. Johnson, 
about 26 Years of Age, having complained for 12 
Months last past, of a Swelling in the Bone of his 
right Arm, which seemingly had been the Cause of 
several Impostumations he had had thereabouts since, 
then applied to me for Cure. He could assign no 
Cause for this Swelling, saving his taking Cold, as 
he imagines, after having exercised himself by fling- 
ing heavy Stones at a great Distance: For that soon 
after he was seized with a Fever, and a great Swell- 
ing from the Neck to the Finger's End of this Arm; 
which settling towards the Middle of the Os Humeri, 
|P_199
where several fistular Openings now were, and com- 
ing to Suppuration thereabout in a short time after, 
a great Quantity of Matter was discharged by Inci- 
sion in Nottingham; whereupon the Surgeon had 
told him, that the Bone was bare; and soon after 
had cut another Opening in the hind Part of his 
Arm, where there was another Gathering, and the 
Bone also laid bare, and dressed both Wounds, as 
expecting the Bone to scale off; but that meeting 
with no Cure, and, on the contrary, the Wounds 
to break open as oft as they had been healed up, and 
that Matter was still gathering in new Places, and the 
Swelling in the Bone to increase, had determined 
him to look for a Cure in London. 

At this time there were five or six fistular Openings 
leading to the Bone distilling a sanious Matter on the 
Sides of the Tendon of the Deltoid Muscle, and the 
hind Part of the Arm, where the Bone was principally 
enlarged; tho' it was very remarkably increased in Bulk 
the whole Way down to the Elbow. I could not 
with my Probe discover the State the Bone was in; 
but, being satisfied it was carious, and that this Dis- 
temper was a Spina ventosa, proposed, for the Cure, 
the laying open all the Bone in the anterior Part of 
the Arm; which the Patient readily submitted to. 

This Distemper was found to be a Spina ventosa, 
or Cariosity in the Body of the Os Humeri, whereby 
above four Inches of the solid Bone had been de- 
stroyed; all which was cased in by an Exostosis, or 
callous Expansion; saving in a few Places, where the 
Matter flowing from the medullary Cavity of the 
Bone had preserved an Opening. 

|P_200
This Spina ventosa was treated nearly in the same 
manner as the above-mention'd, and the Cure per- 
formed as follows. It was enter'd upon th 7th of 
November, by making an Incision to the Bone upon 
the external Part of the Arm, about six Inches long, 
and one broad, beginning it above the Place in the 
Bone where the Deltoid Muscle is inserted; but, 
on the Side of it, almost down to the Supinatores 
Radii; and then, by destroying with the Lapis in- 
fernalis all the Flesh growing on the Exostosis or 
callous Expansion incompassing round, and, as it 
were, incasing the carious Bone, which the next Day 
being scraped off, the fistular Opening leading into 
the medullary Cavity then came in View, and the 
Probe going a great way therein, I immediately pro- 
ceeded to the trepanning of the Bone, and inlarging 
that fistular Opening into it with the exfoliative Trepan, 
perforating through the callous Expansion or Exos- 
tosis, which was spread externally almost a Quarter 
of an Inch upon it, quite into the medullary Cavity. 
The next Day I applied this Intstument above and be- 
low the preceding Perforation; and, by cutting and 
paring off the Angles betwixt them and the Sides of 
the Perforations, with an Instrument the Engravers 
make use of, then made a fair Opening into the me- 
dullary Cavity of the Bone, and a convenient one 
too; for the Discharge of the Matter hitherto con- 
fin'd within it, which, whilst pent in, had occasion'd 
the Cariosity, and the Progress of it, now found to 
have destroyed above four Inches of its Body; and 
also for the Removal of the Fragments and loose 
Bones confined in the medullary Cavity, and the Ap- 
plication of the necessary means, as well to stop the 
|P_201
Progress of the Evil, as the promoting the casting off 
of the morbid Bones. 

But the Work was far from being finished, as, 
upon the Extraction of the foremention'd loose Bones, 
it appeared that we had a Fungus sprouting as well 
from the Circumference of the medullary Cavity 
above and below that Part of the Bone we had ope- 
rated upon, as from the callous Expansion over its 
outward Surface occasioning a greater Discharge of 
Sanies than our Patient's Strength could support; 
that our Opening in that Cavity was not yet suf- 
ficient to discharge all the Matter that was deposited 
in it, as well through a fistular Opening in the in- 
ternal Part of the Bone answering to the Axilla, as 
another somewhat lower over the large Vessels that 
run upon the Surface of the Bone internally, that, 
being shelter'd above and below, we could not come 
at them without inlarging further the Opening we 
had in the Bone externally. This laid us under the 
Necessity of inlarging this Opening in its upper and 
lower Part, so as to bring in View the fore-mention'd. 
These were inlarged with a Terebellum, without any 
Hazard of wounding the large Blood-vessels, which 
were shelter'd by the callous Expansion lining the 
carious Bone on this Side: And having thus render'd 
easy the Discharge from all these Cavities, we had 
nothing to struggle with then but the Running; 
which from this time became daily less; that from 
the internal Part of the Arm, by the Matter having 
a more easy Vent for itself; and that from the Fun- 
gus on the Bone by a Solution of the Lapis infer- 
nalis it was dressed with. Mr. Singleton, Surgeon in 
Aldersgate-street, being consulted upon the Case, 
|P_202
the 18th from the first Operation, was of Opinion, 
that the Amputation was hardly practicable; the Sinus
into the medullary Cavity shewing that the Cariosity 
was up to the Head of the Bone; but that, if it was 
practicable, he thought the Patient had far better 
chance for his Life, by pursuing the Cure in the Way 
he was in. At this time we had but in part subdued 
the Fungus that was continually sprouting up from 
the sinuous Vacuity in the upper Part of the Bone, 
where the Medulla was all wasted, as well as from that 
which was yet growing without the Bone from the 
callous Expansion the carious Bone was cover'd by: But 
this was so effectually overcome and conquer'd by 
the repeated Application of the actual Cautery, and 
by it the Bone dried up so, that, in less than two 
Months from its Use, all the morbid Bone did cast 
off. 

The Quantity of the morbid and carious Bone taken 
out at divers times, being about 4 Inches of the so- 
lid, was effectually repaired, by the Matter flowing as 
well from the Circumferenece of the callous Expan- 
sion about it, which all along had steadied the Pa- 
tient's Arm so, that he could pull his Stockings on 
and off, as from the Matter flowing from the Ends 
of the Os Humeri into the Cavity formed round this 
incasing or incircling Bone. If we had been linger- 
ing in our Proceedings, it is likely the great Dis- 
charge would have exhausted the Strength that was 
necessary to carry on this Cure, before we could have 
got through so many that were unavoidable; and that 
the Flesh growing from the Edges of the external 
Wound would have render'd more painful and dif- 
ficult the several Operations on the Bone. By this 
|P_203
Proceeding, this difficult Cure was ascertained in less 
than a Month, and intirely finished in six; the Pa- 
tient having now the Power of his Arm as complete 
as ever. Nor is the Limb at all disfigured or short- 
ended; the expanded incircling Bone attached to the 
Ends of the Os Humeri preventing this; so that the 
only appearing Defect is, that the Bone about the 
Wound is thicker than usual; but that strengthens it, 
and supplies a Defect in the anterior Part of the 
Arm, where there is a considerable Hollowness. 

In favour of the young Surgeons I shall close this 
Account with a few Remarks, by way of Infe- 
rence; and describe the Figures of some Bones, 
which that expert Surgeon and Anatomist Mr. Haw- 
kins, Surgeon to His Royal Highness the Prince of 
Wales, shew'd upon this Occasion. 

1º. That 'tis highly probable, a suppurated Phleg- 
mon in the Marrow, upon the Crisis of a Fever, 
hath been the original Cause of the Spina ventosa
in the two Cases before us; and that, if the Bone 
had been denudated, and the Opening made thro' 
it inlarged, when the Matter first made its Way 
thro' the Integuments, that the Progress of the Evil 
had been prevented in both, and the Cure brought 
about in the last Case with a far greater Ease. 

2º. That a large Opening is always more advan- 
tageous than many smaller, seemingly equal to it. 
And this appears plain in the two Cases mentioned, 
inasmuch as the Matter which was discharging thro' 
the many large Foramina in the Bones correspond- 
ing with the medullary Cavity in them, have not 
prevented the Progress of the Evil; and therefore 
we may conclude, that as a large Opening in the 
|P_204
Bone, by giving a free Vent to the Matter, will af- 
ford us the nearest Prospect of a Cure in the Spina 
ventosa of all Bones, so that must be the Work of 
the Surgeon, when that Distemper breaks out to- 
wards the Centre of long Bones. 

3º. That, in the Spina ventosa affecting long 
Bones towards their Centre, the Application of the 
Trepan, or of any other Instrument as shall take away 
a considerable Portion of the Substance, is particularly 
necessary, were it only to make way for the Removal 
of such Exfoliations as are detached from the inner 
Cavity of the Bone in the first Stage of the Distemper; 
which, in the two Cases before us, were concealed 
and shut in; and, in many others, may be wedged and 
locked in by the Induration of the callous Matter 
on the Surface of the Bone, as may appear in the Fi- 
gures annexed, Tab. II. Fig. 3. BB.

4º. That, in a Spina ventosa, in the Centre of 
long Bones, tho' the Discharge attending it is not 
great, if any of their Joints are made stiff by an 
Anchylosis, viz. by a callous Expansion that shall sol- 
der together the Bones in Contact, the only Resource 
will be the immediate Amputation of the Limb; for- 
asmuch that, if that is delayed till the Patient labours 
under a hectic Fever, colliquative Sweats, a Diar- 
rhœa, or such Symptoms as denote a Reflux of the 
Matter pent up in the Bone into the Mass of Blood; 
the Operation then will afford us very little Hopes 
of Success: Whereas the Spina ventosa that affects 
the Extremities of long Bones only, and that which 
appears in scrophulous Cases in the Bones of the Car- 
pus and Tarsus, when the Discharge is not great, 
|P_205
are best cured by lenient Means, and the most paci- 
fic Methods. 

5º. That, in that Stage of the Spina ventosa, 
wherein the Bone is carnified, that is, turned into 
Flesh, with a painful Fungus shooting out, as well 
from the callous Matter spread over the carious Bone 
changed into Flesh, as from the carious Bone itself 
degenerated, that, in this Case, as there can be no 
Hopes of restoring it to itself, the Removal of the 
Bone so degenerated, is the only Method to be pur- 
sued; as that will make way for the Application of 
the actual Cautery, wherein the Cure principally 
consists: And if this does not succeed, we must pro- 
ceed to Amputation. This was the Case of Mr. Co- 
reho in St. Mary Axe, whose Thumb Mr. Sainthill
took off the 26th of October, 1739, Mr. Ferne and 
I being present: The last Bone of which, affected 
with a Spina ventosa about 18 Years, was so swelled 
out, and changed into Flesh, that not the least Part 
of this Bone, as a Bone, was found, but only its car- 
tilaginous Covering, in the Articulation with the se- 
cond Internode; all the Bone itself being nothing else 
but a Lump of Flesh. 

[}Explanation of the Figures in Tab. II.}]
[}Fig. 1 and 2. }]
Represent a Spina ventosa in the Os Humeri of the 
right Arm, after an Operation performed upon it, 
during Life, with the exfoliative Trepan. The 
Distemper in the Bone being complicated with an 
Anchylosis and Cariosity of the Head of the Cubi- 
tus and Radius in the Articulation of the Elbow, 
|P_206
occasioned by the nutritive Juice in the inner 
Cavity of the Bone, where the Medulla was wasted 
by an Ulcer, running out thro' several Holes made 
by it directly into this Joint. Fig. 2. represents the 
Exfoliation, which lay concealed within this Bone, 
until the Time the Operation above-mentioned, it 
was taken out by, was performed. This exfoliated 
Bone being harder than the main Bone itself it was 
inclosed in, and seemingly sound, whilst the latter 
was carious: Notwithstanding the cast-off Bone 
had been soaking longest in the Matter extravasated 
and pent up in the medullary Cavity, which was 
the Original of the Spina ventosa, this Exfoliation, 
which was the first Consequence of the extrava- 
sated Matter within the Bone having, as it were, 
been detached from the main Bone, which was 
dissolved by it, some time before it could possibly 
reach the Body of the Bone itself. 

Fig. 1. The Os Humeri amputated near the Shoulder- 
Joint b, with the two Bones of the Fore-Arm 
sawed off in E F. a a a a, Several large Openings 
in the Bone below and under the Deltoid Muscle, 
where the Bone had formerly been distemper'd and 
affected by the Spina ventosa; this Part of the 
Bone appearing sound, and seemingly restored to 
its natural State; whilst all the rest of it down- 
wards is strangely alter'd by the Humour occa- 
sioning it, and degenerating, as it were, into a 
cartilaginous Substance, or such a one as could 
readily be cut with a Knife; the interior being 
destroyed by a Cariosity, and the exterior, which 
was spread out beyond its natural Dimensions, in- 
crusted by a callous Expansion sticking to it, made 
|P_207
solid, and forming a Body with it, saving where 
the Periostium was strongly adhering, the Cortex
of the Bone, after the Exostosis, or callous Shell 
spread over it was taken off, being perforated with 
many Blood-vessels, which were larger, and more 
in Number than usual; these Vessels perforating 
it, as it was render'd soft and yielding, and the 
indurated callous Matter sticking to it, as well 
within as without, was cover'd with a callous Flesh 
sprouting from it. 

BB, A large Opening made in the external Part of 
the Bone by the Trepan, wherewith the whole 
medullary Cavity of it was laid open; this Open- 
ing taking into its Scope 10 or 12 large Holes in 
the Bone, all leading into that Cavity thro' which 
the Matter pent in, and causing the Spina ventosa, 
at times had worked its Way out by; which, when 
laid into one by the Operation, favour'd the Ex- 
traction of the tubular Exfoliation, Fig. 2. which, 
tho' it was intirely loose in, and detached from 
the Circumference of, the medullary Cavity, yet 
was so concealed in it, by the Fungus's obturating 
the Foramina in the Bone, as not to have been 
discover'd before the Opening, it was taken out 
by, was made in the Bone. 

C, A large Hole in the Place where the external 
Process of the Humerus formerly stood; that hav- 
ing been destroyed, by the Matter causing a great 
Cariosity here; which also running out of the 
Bone thro' the Foramina made into the Joint, had 
occasioned the Anchylosis, and the Cariosity of all 
the Bones there. 

|P_208
G, An Exostosis, or callous Expansion on the exter- 
nal Surface of the Os Humeri, attached to it by 
a cartilaginous Substance forming a Crest there, 
about two Inches long, and half an Inch high; 
which, being wedged in between the Interstices of 
the Muscles, by their Motion hath been kept in 
some measure loose upon it. 

It is observable, that, during Life, the Substance of 
this Bone had been render'd so soft, as to have yielded 
when pressed upon, if it had not been stiffened by the 
indurated callous Shell, or Exostosis, spread over it, 
wherewith it was incrusted from one End to the other: 
And this indurated callous Substance, seemingly im- 
bodied in the Bone internally, ending externally in 
a grisly, fleshy, and gelatinous Substance: All which, 
sticking to the Bone, added greatly to the apparent 
Tumour of it; as doubtless, in time, that would have 
been one with it; it appearing that all these Substances 
would have acquired the Consistency of it; tho', as yet, 
they had only attained that of a Callus in its Infancy. 
[^An illustration of a disfigured humerus (upper arm bone) on a separate fold-out page. ^]
[}Fig. 2. }]
A tubular Exfoliation from all the Circumference 
of the medullary Cavity of the Os Humeri, se- 
ven Inches in Length, and near two in Circum- 
ference; which, lying loose and detached from 
the main Bone, was extracted whole thro' the 
large Opening made in it. 

And thus, upon the Whole, it appears, that the In- 
flammation, Suppuration, and Ulcer in the Medulla, 
in the first place, has brought about the Consumption 
of the Medulla with the Bone; and, soon after, 
such an Alteration in it, as hath given Cause to the 
|P_209
Exfoliation that hath happened: And that the Matter 
confined, in time having acquired a greater Acri- 
mony, hath gained the Power of softening, dissolving, 
and destroying entirely the Bone, wherein the Cir- 
culation of the Juices was preserved exclusive of any 
other Bone, that hath been laid out of the Way of 
that Circulation, or hath happened to be detached 
from it: Tho' this last evidently hath lain more under 
the Power of the Matter than the main Bone itself was; 
and to have been soaking longest in that very Matter, 
which hath destroyed that Bone wherein that Circu- 
lation of the Juices hath been preserved; and there- 
fore, that the Way to a speedy Cure of the Spina ven- 
tosa, is, the making, as soon as possible, a fair Open- 
ing into the medullary Cavity of the Bone that is 
affected with it. 
[^An illustration of a hollow tube, its surface rough and pocked, on a separate fold-out page. ^]
[}Fig. 3. }]
Represents the anterior Surface of the left Tibia of 
a young Person affected with a Spina ventosa, in- 
closing an Exfoliation detached from all the Cir- 
cumference of the Medulla, about seven Inches 
in Length; which is to be seen through a great 
Number of Openings in the Cortex of it. 

AA, An Exostosis, or Incrustation in the Bone in- 
larged, with an Opening in it four Inches long, 
and one broad, through which the inclosed Exfo- 
liation BB appears; the Caries of the Bone in the 
Joint of the Knee, and nine large Openings in the 
Body of it, having been made by the Matter dis- 
charging from the medullary Cavity, and causing 
a Cariosity in the inclosing Bone only; whilst the 
exfoliated within is preserved in its natural State. 
|P_210
C, The Cariosity of the Bone in the Joint of the 
Knee, communicated to the Os Femoris where- 
with it is anchylosed in D. 
D, The Epiphysis of the Os Femoris in the Joint 
of the Knee, destroyed by the Cariosity. 
E, The lower End of the Bone, as yet in a natural 
State, with its Epiphyses forming the internal 
Ankle. 
[^An illustration of a shinbone with a large opening in its middle on a separate fold-out page. ^]
[}Fig. 4. }]
A A, The anterior and internal Surface of the left 
Tibia, cut off in B, where the Bone was sound: 
The opposite End being carious, and perforated 
with many large Foramina or Openings made by the 
Matter flowing into the Joint of the Knee, from the 
medullary Cavity in the Bone. The Exfoliation, 
c c c, seemingly sound, is detached from the Cavity; 
but is locked and wedged in by the Exostosis, or cal- 
lous Matter indurated on the Surface, in such 
manner that it cannot be taken out without cut- 
ting off the Edges of it. 

dddd, The upper Part of the Bone, carious within 
and without, made rough and unequal by the Ex- 
ostosis, or callous Expansion render'd carious. 
[^An illustration of a shinbone with a large opening in its middle and one end badly decayed on a separate fold-out page. ^]
[}Fig. 5. }]
A, Represents a Portion of the Os Humeri sawed off, 
at the time of the Amputation of the Limb; which 
is solder'd by an Anchylosis with the Cubitus B, and 
Radius C, in D; E being a large Exfoliation de- 
tached from them, where those Bones had been 
shatter'd, which is wedged in by a callous Expan- 
sion, in such manner that it could not be taken out. 

|P_211
E, The Exfoliation from the Cubitus, three Inches 
long, adhering to an Exfoliation from the Radius
of the same Length, not seen; both which, being 
almost of the Substance of the whole Bone, are 
knit together by a Callus: So that their Re-union 
is prior to the Cause which has occasioned the 
Exfoliation. 

FFF, A callous Expansion, inclosing the Bones which 
are detached within, not hardened in the Middle 
G; and partly cartilaginous there: So that, in 
this Place, the Bones made up by the callous Ex- 
pansion could play upon each other. 
[^An illustration of the two long forearm bones (ulna and radius), both badly disfigured, on a separate fold-out page. ^]

[^1. Read May 15. 
1746 ^]