

[^Sample 1: article - PT45_0131^]

|P_131
[}I. An Abstract of the remarkable Case and 
Cure of a Woman, from whom a Fœtus
was extracted, that had been lodged thirteen 
Years in one of the Fallopian Tubes; sent 
from Riga by Dr. James Mounsey, Phy- 
sician to the Army of the Czarina, together 
with the Bones of the said Fœtus, as a Pre- 
sent to the Royal Society of London, and 
delivered accordingly in his Name, by 
Henry Baker, F. R. S. }]
[/1./]THE Particulars of this extra- 
ordinary Case are set forth 
at large in [/2./]Dr. Mounsey's 
Paper, the Substance where- 
of is as follows: 

A Soldier's Wife, of Abo in Finland, of a mid- 
dling Stature, and who had been the Mother of two 
Children, being pregnant a third time in the Year 
1730. was afflicted with violent Pains and Twistings 
in the Bowels, swooning Fits, Vomitings, and great 
Disorders in her Back and lower Belly. These 
Symptoms, and Complaints of several other kinds, 
continued to make her uneasy, till she found her 
|P_132
Burden increase, which fell from Side to Side as 
she changed the Posture of her Body, and could be 
pressed by her Hand from one Place to another, but 
rather chose to remain on the right Side. 

After Quickening her Health became better, she 
grew bigger belly'd than ordinary, and was supposed to 
carry Twins. About the time her delivery was ex- 
pected, she was taken ill with violent Pains by Fits 
across her lower Belly; but had none in her Back, nor 
any Forcings downwards; and the next Day these Pains 
went off, which made her suppose she had mis- 
reckon'd. But after his her Breasts swell'd, and gave 
Milk in plenty; and her Menses came on, attended 
with more violent Pains than she had had before; 
and such large Discharges of Blood from time to 
time, that she could neither speak nor move; and 
even after the Floodings were stopp'd, her Blood 
and Strength seem'd quite exhausted: She often 
fainted away, and was sometimes thought to be dead. 

She continued very sickly for ten Years afterwards; 
during which Time her Burden was moveable, and 
fell from Side to Side. But in the Month of Sep- 
tember 1741. she felt a Pain beneath the Navel, 
with a Swelling and Redness, which in about three 
Weeks appear'd like a small Boil. This she pierced 
with an Awl, and a yellow-colour'd Water ran 
from it without any Smell, and continued so to do 
for near three Weeks more, when it discharged a 
purulent stinking Matter. 

In the Month of June two small Bones came 
out, which were given to the Surgeon that visited 
her; who only applied a Piece of Plaister, persuading 
her that a Cure was impossible. Other small Bones 
|P_133
work'd themselves out afterwards, till October 1742. 
when the Head-Quarters of the Russian Army being 
at Abo, this unhappy Woman applied to Dr. Moun- 
sey, who, after a careful Examination, undertook 
to deliver her. And accordingly, desiring the As- 
sistance of Mr. Geitle, Surgeon to the Regiment of 
Abo, a grooved Probe was thrust into the Fistula, 
and an Incision made with a Bistory, upwards and 
obliquely, from the Linea alba into the Cavity of 
the Abdomen; but she being unruly, and the Ope- 
ration not going on to the Doctor's Liking, he pro- 
ceeded no farther till the next Day; only some loose 
Bones were extracted, and the Wound dressed with 
Tents and Compresses, to hold in the Omentum, 
and keep the Wound open. 

At the next Operation the Incision was carried 
downwards, and then another Incision continued 
from the first was conducted upwards, and slanting 
at a small Distance from the first; taking care to keep 
as near as possible the Direction where the Adhesion 
of this Body to the Peritonæum appeared to be, and 
avoiding to make the external Wound larger than 
absolutely needful, lest the Omentum and Guts should 
fall out; and particularly lest the Suppuration should 
exceed the Strength of Nature, which was here al- 
ready nearly exhausted. 

A large Opening was now made, but the Fœtus
being closely enveloped by its containing Sack, 
the Doctor durst not venture to draw it out by 
Force, for fear some of the naked Bones might la- 
cerate the internal Parts: Wherefore, dilating this 
Sack with the Points of a Pair of Probe-Scissars, di- 
rected by the Fingers of the left Hand, he pierced 
|P_134
and cut in Pieces the Skull, which afterwards he ex- 
tracted piece-meal. 

The Matter that first issued out had a very nause- 
ous Smell, and consisted of Membranes, Fat, and 
corrupted Flesh. On opening the Cranium, the Ce- 
rebrum appeared of its natural Colour. The Opera- 
tion having been long, and the Woman fainting 
away, the Wound was dressed, without attempting 
to extract more at that time. In the Evening she 
was taken with Vomitings; but by proper internal 
Medicines, and Flannel Stoups wrung out of hot 
Wine, applied over the whole Belly, and often re- 
new'd, she found Ease, and grew better. — The 
Loss of Blood, during the whole Operation, was 
inconsiderable,

Next Day the Bones of the Trunk, and most of the 
other large ones, with their Ligaments and rotten 
Flesh, were taken out. The Matter discharged for 
several Days was of a dark-brown Colour, occasion'd 
by Blood issuing from the dilated Pores of the in- 
ternal Surface of the Sack, which render'd the Mat- 
ter at first of a deep-red Colour; but that changed 
daily and gradually, till at last it became white. The 
Doctor imagines this Discharge to resemble the Lo- 
chia after Child-birth; for after the Fœtus was ex- 
tracted, the Woman's Breasts swell'd, and gave Milk 
in Plenty for two Months, in Quantity, Colour, 
and Consistence, as if after a Delivery at the proper 
Time. 

The Doctor examined this Sack very diligently 
with his Fingers, whilst thin, and not contracted, but 
formed into Wrinkles, through which he felt the 
Rectum, the Vesica urinaria, and, as he thought, 
|P_135
the Fundus Uteri. Many small Bones lay in the 
Folds; but, as she complained not of Pain, they 
were left till the Suppuration began, excepting those 
the Sack in contracting itself threw out. 

Besides Fomentations, Balsamics, proper Bandages, 
&c. vulnerary detergent Injections were found very 
useful, thrown in in large Quantities, both to wash out 
the putrid Flesh, and bring away the Scales of Bones 
which were still concealed in the Folds of this 
Sack. 

The Sack contracted itself daily, grew smooth and 
white within, and narrower as it approached the 
Uterus, which gave Reason to believe it one of the 
Fallopian Tubes. 

The Wound was cured in about six Weeks, and 
the Woman deliver'd from a long State of Misery 
grew fat and lusty, and now enjoys good Health. 

Comparing these Circumstances together, it seems 
reasonable to believe this Fruit never was in the 
Cavity of the Womb, but that the impregnated 
Ovum was stopt in its Passage through one of the 
Fallopian Tubes, where it grew, and was detained 
so many Years; and that the Inflammation, which 
happened below the Navel, was not owing to the 
Rottenness of the Fœtus, or to its bare Bones seek- 
ing a Discharge, but rather to some accidental Fric- 
tion of the containing Sack against the Peritonæum, 
thereby producing Adhesion, Obstruction, Inflamma- 
tion, &c. The Fœtus, before this Accident, must 
have remained all these Years intire, and without 
perfect Corruption: For it took no less Time, after 
its Communication with the common Air, before it 
|P_136
shewed Marks of Putrefaction, than a fresh Subject, 
kept in the same Degree of Heat, would have done. 

The Doctor's Observations of the Bones are: That 
they have a full Proportion to those of a Child at nine 
Months, and that the Fibres are more compact, and their 
Articulations stronger. The Sockets for the Teeth 
are six on each Side of the Jaws; the Dentes Inci- 
sores of the upper Jaw are high and large; the Mo- 
lares have almost all begun to ossify in their Al- 
veoli; at least the Crown, which is the cortical 
Part, is form'd, and they are fill'd internally with a 
cretaceous Substance. In new-born Children those 
Parts are seldom found so far advanc'd, which gives 
Reason to believe this Child did not die within the 
ordinary Time of Pregnancy, and that the different 
Accidents, before-mention'd to have happen'd, were 
chiefly owing to the preternatural Situation of the 
Fætus. 

Some Places in the Skull appear to have been 
carious, and corroded by some sharp Humours; and 
Nature, supplying its ossifying Juices, has repaired 
these Places, and render'd them more solid and 
whiter than the rest, but very uneven and scabrous, 
from the different Times and Directions of the bony 
Sproutings. There are likewise Exostoses on the 
Ends of the Thigh-Bone, and some other Bones. 

'Tis very difficult to determine about what Time 
the Growth of these Productions began or ended. 
Supposing it from the Time of the Disorders that 
happened in the first Months of Pregnancy; would 
not such a Disease have caused Death to the Fœtus, 
before it had come thus to a full Growth? If it was 
the Consequence of the violent Accidents which 
|P_137
happen'd about the Time of the natural Birth, the 
Child then must have continued alive some consi- 
derable Time afterwards, during which these bony 
Excrescences were formed; there being a perfect 
Ossification, as performed by the Laws of Circula- 
tion, and not by any vegetative or petrifying Power, 
as in inanimate Bodies. 

Two or three of the lateral Processes of the Spine 
were what first passed thro' the little Ulcer; the rest of 
the Bones (except a few that were lost in cleansing) were 
presented by the Doctor to the Museum of the Royal 
Society. They retain a very strong and singular 
Smell, though they were immediately cleansed from 
the rotten Flesh, and well washed. 

The Woman came by Sea to Stockholm above a 
Year after this Cure, and was presented to the Aca- 
demy in good Health; and the Doctor believes she 
is still alive and well. 


[^1. The Original read 
at a Meeting of the 
Royal Society, Feb. 
4. 1747-8. ^]
[^2. 
* It is likewise printed in the Swedish Language, in the Acts 
of the Royal Academy at Stockholm. 
^]