

[^Sample 1: article - PT46_0072^]

|P_72
[}XVI. A Letter from Dr. le Cat F. R. S. to 
C. Mortimer M. D. Secret. R. S. concern- 
ing the Cure of Dry Gangrenes: together 
with a Description of a new-invented In- 
strument for the Extirpation of Tumours
out of the Reach of the Surgeon's Fingers. }]
[}Transsated from the French by Ph. H. Zollman Esq; F. R. S. }]
SIR, 

[/1./]FOR some Years past, in curing 
the dry Gangrene, I have made 
some Progress, of which I think I ought to inform 
the Royal Society. 

From the Year 1725 to the Year 1733, when I fre- 
quented the Hospitals of Paris, I saw that a great many 
Persons there died of a dry Gangrene, and even 
that nothing was done to them. I knew that Ampu- 
tation had been attempted in vain; but I did not see 
any of the Practitioners endeavour to cure that Dis- 
temper by Remedies; nor did I think that Cure im- 
possible. I suspected, that the Cause of the dry Gan- 
grene was the want of a Flow of the arterial Blood 
and of the Spirits into the Part affected: And this 
Want, as it accounts for the Deadness, which cannot 
miss befalling the Part, and the Dryness which at- 
tends this sort of Mortification; whereas in the hu- 
mid Gangrene, it is chiefly the Return of the Blood 
which is hindered, and thereby the Fluids are accu- 
mulated, that swell and distend the Part. 

Two Causes so opposite must demand also very 
different Cures. The Distension which characterizes 
the humid Gangrene shews the Necessity there is for 
|P_73
Scarifications and Evacuations; as the Dryness of the 
other Gangrene points out the Uselessness of these 
Operations in this sort. 

In the humid Gangrene the Solids are choaked up, 
and overflowed with the accumulated Liquid; the 
Nerves are there stupefied and benumbed: What can 
be more proper then after Scarifications, which dis- 
gorge and relax those Regions, than to apply stimu- 
lating Topics? Tonics, which restore the Spring, the 
Tone of the solid Parts; help them to expel those 
superfluous Liquors, the Spirits of which are as it 
were drowned and suffocated; and in short the De- 
fect being local, if those Succours do not suffice, it 
is very common to cut off a Limb; the Loss of which 
may bring on that of the whole Person. 

On the contrary, in the dry Gangrene the Solids 
are void of Fluids of all sorts. The neighbouring 
Regions, which begin to share of that Want, are af- 
fected with the most cruel Pains: If you attack those 
Parts with the cutting Instrument, you increase the 
Irritation of the Solids, the Constriction of the Vessels, 
the Want of Fluids, the Exsiccation, and hasten Death. 

On the contrary, the general Indication, which 
this Distemper affords us is therefore to soften, to re- 
lax the Vessels, to draw thither the Liquors by To- 
pics, whilst inwardly all Remedies must be given 
that are capable of bringing the Blood and the Spirits 
from the Center to the Circumference. 

If this Method is not successful, Death is inevita- 
ble; for even supposing that the Amputation was 
not liable to the dismal Consequences just now spe- 
cified, there is no Room for this Operation in an 
internal Defect, which depends on the whole 
|P_74
Habit, as the Case is with the dry Gangrene. And 
supposing that there are dry Gangrenes purely local, 
as the critical Depositums of certain malignant Fevers, 
you may assure yourself, that the very same Nature 
which has caused this Crisis, if you assist her but a 
little, will be also to separate this Mortification 
from the sound Parts; and she will do it more gently 
and more dextrously than we. 

These were the Notions I had formed to myself 
of these two sorts of Gangrenes; I only waited for 
Opportunities to make the Trials which this Theory 
suggested to me. 

I did not find any before 1738. in the Person of 
a Wood-Merchant of our Town, called Mrs. Four- 
naise. She was then 65 Years of Age, extremely 
corpulent; the Gangrene seized her at the Heel, by 
a black and round Blotch, of two Inches Diameter, 
without any Tumour, with some small scorbutic 
Spots, great Pains, and a little Fever. 

The Plethora made me begin with Bleeding and 
Purging; the latter I repeated every 8 Days. 

I applied all over the Foot and Part of the Leg, a 
Pultis made of Herbs and Farina's, emollient, re- 
solving, and aromatic, the suppurative Ointment, and 
Storax. 

I gave inwardly diaphoretic Ptisans: In the Morn- 
ing, Broths of Vipers, of Crayfish prepared with pro- 
per Herbs, and above all with Water-cresses: In the 
Evening a Bolus of Theriaca. In short, I followed 
intirely the Theory I had formed to myself about 
the dry Gangrene, and in 9 or 10 Days I saw the 
Suppuration formed; so that my Patient was per- 
fectly cured in about 2 or 3 Months. 

|P_75
This Success has been followed by many others, 
both in our Town and in our Hospital. I have been 
particularly successful in the latter Place, because I 
am more Master there than any-where else, to see 
my Method exactly followed, which I have still im- 
proved since 1738. 

The Report of these Cures having spread itself as 
far as Paris, I was sent for thither in February
1746. to attend M. Rondé, Treasurer-General of the 
Fortifications of France, who was at the last Extre- 
mity, by a dry Gangrene, which had sphacelated his 
Foot; the Cause of which had kept him in a lan- 
guishing Way for 4 Years. M. Rondé was in a 
dreadful Condition, and I was vexed at having been 
sent for in so desperate a Case: I declared it to his 
Relations, and to the eminent Surgeons who at- 
tended him: I therefore applied my Remedies to 
the Patient, at the Request of his Relations, only 
by way of Trial, which I publicly declared to be 
most doubtful. However, contrary to our Expecta- 
tion, from the 3d Day there appeared plainly a Be- 
ginning of Suppuration, and a Separation of the 
Eschars. On the 9th Day there was a complete 
Suppuration, and the Regeneration of the Flesh was 
even so far advanced, that the Singularity of it raised 
the Curiosity of some of the first Surgeons of Paris. 
At last, on the 15th Day my Patient found himself 
in a more favourable Crisis; which, according to 
the Testimony which M. Morand, an assiduous 
Spectator of my Cure, publicly gave of it, gave 
Hopes of Recovery in a Case that had hitherto 
been thought desperate . 

|P_76
The Suppuration, the Separation of the Eschars, 
and Regeneration of the Flesh, being all that a 
Surgeon can desire in a like Cure, I then thought 
that my Mission was fulfilled, and that I might re- 
turn home, whither I was called by more material 
Affairs. I had Reason to repent of this Journey: 
My Patient having naturally a very voracious Appe- 
tite, I had confined him to a severe Diet; but he 
could hold out no longer; and, by the Connivance 
of his Nurse, he took various Food, and that plenti- 
fully too. This Conduct had soon ruined our Pro- 
gress. I returned to Paris; my Representations 
were useless: The Patient had shaken off the Yoke 
of the Faculty, and of Reason. Indigestions ensued 
one upon another. The Looseness, which never left 
him after, totally suppressed the Suppuration, and 
made him void the Matter quite crude by Stool, and 
at last he died. 

I was scarcely returned to Rouen, when there came 
to my Hospital a Patient seized with the dry Gan- 
grene, and who so perfectly resembled M. Rondê, 
that we commonly called him the Rondé of Rouen. 

This Cure being extremely interesting in all its 
Circumstances, I think, Sir, it is fit to transcribe for 
you the Observation taken from a Letter which I 
wrote on the 28th of November 1746. to M. Morand, 
and which he has since made public. 

As this Letter has been made public by Mr. Morand, 
I shall not fill up this Transaction with a Trans- 
lation of a long Letter already in Print, but 
only give a short Account of the Case. 

"C. M. "

|P_77
THomas le Monnier, a Carpenter, aged 66, was, 
in December 1744. seized with violent Pains in 
his right Foot resembling those of the Gout, but with- 
out swelling, and not preceded by any Sickness. He 
had work'd hard at his Trade, and still carried it on 
in marshy Places, and in bad and cold Weather, 
when he was seized with this Pain. He took various 
Remedies to no Effect. In November 1745. his 
great Toe turned black; which Blackness gradually 
spread to the other Toes, to the whole Foot, and at 
last to the Ankle. He was sent to the Hotel Dieu
at RoanMay 19. His Foot was intirely gangrened, 
black and dry; his Pulse was low, and a little fever- 
ish; he never slept but 2 Hours a Night, suffered 
cruel Torments, was greatly emaciated, and of a yel- 
low and leadish Complexion; his other Foot was 
œdematous. M. le Cat says, he would not attack 
this Case Steel in Hand, by Scarifications or Am- 
putation; cruel and murthering Methods! which 
quite extinguish the Springs of Life in the nervous 
System, which is already but too much ruffled. 
A barbarous Surgery! which Prejudice, Ignorance, 
and Unskilfulness alone can adopt, and by which I 
have seen Patients die, when there were great Hopes 
of their Recovery.  See le Dran's Operations, 
p. 30. Saviard's Observations, p. 98. and de la Motte
Obs. 303. especially p. 371. Tome III. 

As this Disorder arises from internal Causes, its 
Cure is chiefly to be attempted by internal Remedies; 
and of these I give Cordials, Diaphoretics, and such 
as are capable of reviving the drooping Spirits, and 
of quickening the Circulation even to the Extremities: 
|P_78
To which should be joined Medicines adapted to 
the particular Habit of each Patient, whether it be 
scorbutic, scrophulous, or any other, which may 
have contributed to have brought on this particular 
Species of Gangrene: At the same time emollient, 
attractive, external Remedies, moderately warmed 
with Spices, applied to the Part, concur to the same 
Intention, by facilitating the Flow of Blood and Spi- 
rits; the Interception of which makes the distinguish- 
ing Characteristic of the dry Gangrene. Spirituous 
and aqueous Topics, impregnated with Volatiles, 
charged with saline, active, violently stimulating Par- 
ticles, and others in Use in ordinary Gangrenes, are 
to be avoided like deadly Poisons; for such Applica- 
tions would rather contract and dry up the Part the 
more, and increase the painful Irritations, and dis- 
pose the contiguous Parts to a dry Gangrene. He 
gives us Hopes of a Treatise expresly on this Sub- 
ject. 

But to return to the Case. The Suppuration began 
to appear, and the Eschars distinguished themselves 
from the live Flesh the very first Days of the Cure; 
and, after the Time usual in the like Suppurations, 
the Foot and lower Part of the Ankle separated of 
themselves; and afterwards, healing over intirely, 
left a Stump quite cover'd over with a Covering of 
Flesh, except some Points of Bone, which were not 
easily to be seen, but might be felt, by passing the 
Finger over this new Flesh. 

After this Separation the Tendons of the Muscles, 
which lie along the Leg, formed Abscesses and 
Sinus's. Some Practitioners would have laid open 
these Sinus's their whole Length; but such large 
|P_79
Incisions would have so affected the System of the 
Nerves, as to have brought back the gangrenous Dis- 
position into the internal Parts, and so have destroy'd 
the Patient; as M. le Cat says he has seen it very 
lately happen by the like Practice: Wherefore he lets 
the Matter gather in those Sinus's, till it forms a 
Bag, and greatly thins the Skin, when he opens 
them almost without Pain, in the Place only where 
they point. These Openings are sufficient both for 
the Discharge of the Matter, and for the coming 
away of the Tendons; which no sooner happens, 
but the Integuments, whether open'd or not, unite 
and cicatrize. Thus, at the End of 6 or 7 Months, 
the Stump itself cicatrized, and the Patient was quite 
recover'd. 

So long a Cure could not but be liable to some 
Accidents: The Patient was one who would indulge 
in his Diet, and the Hospital is open for any one to 
come in and visit their Friends: He had several strong 
Accesses of an accidental Fever, and five or six vio- 
lent Indigestions; one in July kept him insensible 
for 20 Hours, and was attended with a Defluxion 
on the Lungs, accompanied with such Expectora- 
tions as gave the worst Prognostications. These were 
Incidents which render'd his Recovery the more re- 
markable. He has pick'd up his Flesh, and promises 
to enjoy a good Habit of Body; so that probably he 
may live to a good old Age. Several that have been 
cured by the Doctor of this Disorder have lived to 
upwards of 70. 

Thus, says he, the common Opinion, that it is 
impossible radically to cure the dry Gangrene, is as 
false, as the ordinary Method of treating it is bad. 
|P_80
He does not establish his Method as infallible; but 
assures us, that, in 8 or 9 Years Practice it has not 
failed curing any Persons who exactly followed it, 
and observed the Regimen prescribed. 

"We now return to Dr. le Cat's own Words. "

I shall here subjoin the Description of an Instru- 
ment of Surgery, which I have lately invented. 

[}Forceps for the Extirpation of Tumours too remote 
from the Surgeon's Fingers. }]
When the Fingers can lay hold of an Excrescency, 
the Surgeon need not think of making use of Ma- 
chines for it; he will never find any convenient 
enough; but all Tumours that are to be extirpated 
are not within the Reach of the Fingers: There are 
even many of them which the Fingers can reach, 
but where they cannot lay hold of them, nor work 
as the Extirpation requires. Such are the Ex- 
crescences situated a little deep in the Anus, in the 
Vagina, in the Throat, &c. For the like Extirpations 
I have been obliged to invent the Forceps which I 
am going to describe. 

Fig. 1. The first Figure represents the Forceps shut, 
as they are when the Instrument is closed, or when 
it holds a small Excrescency. 

A C is the Extremity designed for laying hold of 
the Excrescency: It is of Silver, pliant as far as a a, 
in order to be able to give to these Cheeks the dif- 
ferent Figures which those of the Tumours to be 
extirpated may require. The Inside of these Branches 
|P_81
is lined with a Slip of Buff-Skin, or close Shamoys 
(K K, Fig. 2. Tab. III.) to prevent the Tumour's 
slipping when once it has been laid hold of. 

B D is the Extremity of the Forceps, to be held 
in the Hand of the Operator. 

E F, G H, are the Pieces which connect the two 
Parts of the Instrument, instead of the common Joints 
or Rivets of the other Forceps, in a very advantageous 
manner. These Pieces make the principal Utility of 
this Invention. 
[^An illustration of the forceps on a separate fold-out page. ^]
Fig. 2. Tab. III. represents the Pincers taken to pieces 
in two Parts. 

One easily sees that the Piece E is to go into the 
Notch gg, so that the Screw f may pass through its 
Slit, and that the Nut F, put on upon that Screw 
f, is to keep the Whole together: But one thing 
which the Figure cannot shew, is, that this Piece E is 
moveable in the Direction lengthways of the Forceps, 
to answer the different Openings of the Cheeks. You 
may observe in b the Pin upon which this Piece 
turns. 

The Piece G likewise receives the Screw h into 
its Slit; and the one and the other is stopped by the 
Nut H. But an essential Remark with regard to the 
Piece G, is, that it must have the Figure of an Arch 
of a Circle, the Radius whereof is the Instrument 
itself; that is to say, it ought to be the Portion 
of an Arch of a Circle, the Center of which is at the 
Extremity of the Instrument; and this to the end 
that in the small Extremity of the Pincers, the Ends 
of the Cheeks find themselves over-against each other, 
whatever Opening one may give to the larger Extre- 
mity, or to the Handle G H. 
[^An illustration of the forceps, its two parts separated from each other, on a separate fold-out page. ^]
|P_84
To explain the Use of these Forceps: 

I suppose I am to extirpate an Excrescence, a Con- 
dyloma, of two Inches Depth in the Rectum. I can- 
not lay hold of this Tumour with the Fingers, nor 
make it come out; yet it is very troublesome to the 
Patient, and one is disposed to slit or lay open the Anus, 
to make room for this Extirpation. With our For- 
ceps we shall avoid this cruel Preparative, and shall 
with great Ease make the Extirpation. 

First, I introduce the Fore-finger of the left Hand 
into the Rectum over the Tumour that is to be ex- 
tirpated, to make myself sure of the Situation: With 
the right Hand, I take the Part of my Forceps C D, 
Fig. 2. and thrust it into the Rectum, under the Fin- 
ger which is already there, and make it slide along 
the right Side of the Tumour, which to me is the 
left Side. 

With the Fingers of the left Hand I support this 
Instrument in its Situation, whilst with the right 
Hand I introduce the other Part of the Forceps A B, 
Fig. 2. and let it slide along the left Side of the 
Tumour, which is over-against my right Hand. 

Without taking the Forefinger of my left Hand 
out of the Rectum, I put together the Parts of the 
Instrument. I press between its Cheeks the Tumour 
by its Root; after which I draw the Fore-finger out 
of the Rectum. I take with the left Hand the Han- 
dle of the Forceps B D, Fig. 1.; I thrust along the 
right Side of their Cheeks underneath the Knife 
Fig. 3. the Button A being turned against the Cheeks, 
and the Back C D towards the Inside of the Rectum. 

I push this Instrument as far as beyond the Tumour 
under the Extremity of the Cheeks of the Forceps, 
|P_85
of which I can make myself sure with the Fore- 
finger of the left Hand.— Then I raise towards the 
upper Part the Cheeks of the Forceps, in order to 
prolong as much as possible the Root of the Ex- 
crescence; and in this Condition I pull towards my- 
self, with the right Hand, the Knife; which does 
not fail cutting the Tumour. 

There are Cases, in which the Instrument, Fig. 4. 
will be of more convenient Use. This cuts only by 
its Crescent a b, push'd forward, and mov'd alter- 
nately from one Side to the other, to assist its 
Cutting. 
[^An illustration of an instrument with a small concave blade on one end on a separate fold-out page. ^]
There are Circumstances, wherein the Knife Fig. 5. 
may be preferable. 
[^An illustration of a curved knife, with a pointed head, on a separate fold-out page. ^]
In fine, there are others, wherein all these Instru- 
ments are of Service in one Operation, which hap- 
pen'd to me in October 1748. in the Extirpation of 
a scirrhous Polypus in our Hotel Dieu; in which 
Operation I employ'd not only all the Instruments 
above described, but also a cutting Forceps, which I 
had contrived in 1735. for the Extirpation of Fun- 
gus's of the Bladders; and which alone was proper 
to take off one Part of this Tumour, that was as 
large as a Goose's Egg, and was falling into the 
Throat. 

I suffer the Wound to bleed a little, and then dress 
it with all the Precautions usually taken against Hæ- 
morrhages in the Operation of the Fistula in the 
Anus. 

|P_84
[}Forceps for extracting Stones, and other foreign 
Bodies, lodged in the Parts where the common 
Forceps are of no Use. Fig. 6. Tab. III.}][^An illustration of the forceps on a separate fold-out page. ^]
The same Mechanism just now described in the fore- 
going Forceps, may be applied with Advantage to the 
Forceps with which the Stone is pulled out, and to 
other Instruments designed for extracting Bullets, 
Splinters of Grenadoes, Pieces of Iron, and other fo- 
reign Bodies. 

There are several Cases in the cutting for the Stone, 
in which no Use can be made of the common For- 
ceps: The most frequent is this; when a Stone, laid 
hold by the ordinary Forceps, escapes from the In- 
strument half-way, and so remains engaged in the 
Incision. The Expedient commonly taken, is to push 
the Stone back into the Bladder, in order to have 
again the necessary Room for managing the Forceps; 
But besides the cruel Pain in thus pushing back the 
Stone into the Bladder, this foreign Body may enter 
into the cellular Texture which surrounds the Blad- 
der, and lodge itself there, and then the Forceps
not having any longer that Play which was endea- 
voured to procure to them, the Stone will remain in 
that fatal Lodgement, without Possibility of pulling 
it out, and the Patient will die. This has been seen 
many times. 

The Stone having stopp'd in the Passage of the 
Incision, you slide along the Body of it one of 
the Cheeks of our Forceps, A or C, well-oiled, 
which will be done without much Trouble, as I 
have experienced it; the other Cheek afterwards will 
|P_85
pass on the other Side; after which you join them, 
as has been shewn above, taking care to press close 
the Extremity AC upon the Stone, and to leave the 
largest Opening on the Side of the Handle BD, as 
in Fig. 7. both to hinder the Stone from escaping, 
and to widen its Passage; then, having well-secured 
the Screw G, you leave the Screw F almost at Li- 
berty. You grasp the Instrument with both Hands, 
as near the Stone as you can, and you draw that 
Body out, managing it as is usual with the common 
Forceps. 

A second Case of cutting for the Stone, where 
these new Forceps will be of great Use, is this; 
when the Stone is exactly embraced by the internal 
Coat of the Bladder; be it that it completely fills 
this whole Organ, or that it fills Part of it, which 
may have closed itself upon the Stone; as has hap- 
pen'd to Joseph Bunel, whom I cut at Andelys in 
1743. of which I have communicated the Observation 
to the Royal Society; or that the Stone has made 
to itself a Lodgement or Bed in the inside Coat of 
the Bladder, prolonging itself towards the cellular 
Texture, which surrounds a small Part of those in- 
side Coats; as I saw it in the Bladder of M. Pigache, 
an eminent Counsellor of our City of Rouen. 

In short, every foreign Body lodged in the Sub- 
stance of any Part of the human Body, be it of what 
Nature it will, becomes the Object of our Instru- 
ment; and the Extraction of it will, in my Opinion, 
become much more easy by the means of these For- 
ceps, than by the Bullet-drawers, and most of the 
other Instruments invented for that Purpose; pro- 
vided however one gets Forceps made of all sorts 
|P_88
of all sorts of Lengths and Bigness, in short, of all 
the Shapes which the different Cases may require. 

I have the Honour to be, &c.

Rouen, May 20. 
1748. N. S.

— Le Cat. 
[^A horizontal line spanning the whole page. ^]
Addition to the Description of the Glasses for pre- 
serving things in Spirit of Wine, by Dr. le Cat, 
pag. 6. 
In using the Bottle, of which I have given a De- 
scription, I found that it was attended with one In- 
convenience. 

The circular Groove, the Edge of which was 
turn'd up on the Inside of the Bottle, retained a small 
Quantity of the Water, when I emptied and rinsed 
it; so that it was impossible to do it thoroughly. 

Wherefore I caused this Vessel to be made, as repre- 
sented in the annexed Figure, Tab. I. Fig. 1. which 
is a Section of it; and where it appears that the Groove 
AA is placed on the Outside of the Edge of the Bot- 
tle. By this means every Drop of the contain'd 
Fluid can be pour'd out. 

It is easy to see that the circular Border BB of 
the Cover is to enter into these Grooves AA, which 
are fill'd with Oil or Quicksilver; and that the Hook 
C, of the same Cover, is destined to suspend in the 
Liquor such Pieces as are to be preserved in it. 
[^A cross-sectional illustration of a jar and its cover on a separate fold-out page. This page is not included in the pdf-file of this text, however it can be found in the pdf of the previous text in the corpus from the Philosophical Transactions, 1749_pt46_0024.pdf. ^]


[^1. Read March 9 and 16. 
1748-9. ^]