

[^Sample 1: article - PT47_0092^]

|P_92
[}XIII. The Case of a Woman, from whom the 
Bones of a Fœtus were extracted. By Mr. 
Thomas Debenham, Surgeon, at Deben- 
ham in Suffolk. Communicated by the Rev. 
Mr. J. Clubb, Vicar of that Parish, to 
William Battie M. D. F. R. S. }]
[/1./]ON the 25 of April 1749, the wife 
of one Benjamin Last, a cooper, 
in the parish of Debenham, in the county of Suf- 
folk, aged about 34 years, being pregnant of her 
eighth child, had all the symptoms of a woman in 
|P_93
labour. Accordingly, a midwife was sent for; who, 
from the violence of the pains, expected, that she 
would soon be delivered; but, to her great sur- 
prize, nothing ensued but a loss of blood, and the 
pains were considerably abated. A fever immedi- 
ately came on, which cast her into an excessive 
faintness, and loss of strength, accompanied with a 
nausea. 

On the 26 of May, I was desired by her husband 
to visit her; and, by the account she gave me, I 
much suspected, that she must have miscalculated 
with regard to her time; and I proposed to examine 
her: but she, out of a mistaken modesty, not com- 
plying, I contented myself with cooling injections, 
mild cathartics, and cordial powders, &c.; by the 
use of which medicines she grew better; and, on the 
26 of March following, undertook to walk a journey 
of 15 miles. 

I heard no more of her for the present; but, on the 
27 of April 1750, the pains returned, very much like 
those of labour; which obliged her husband to call 
me out of bed. I immediately gave her an ano- 
dyne, which abated her pains, and composed her to 
rest. 

On the 14 of May, she felt a pricking pain in her 
navel, with a swelling and redness, which, in a few 
days, appear'd like a boil; when, being desired to 
inspect the tumour, I applied an emollient cataplasm. 
The next morning, upon removing my dressings, a 
fetid matter ensued; whereupon, dilating the small 
sinus with my scissars, the scapula of a fœtus pre- 
sented itself. On the 25 of July, by the direction 
|P_94
of a physician, I undertook, by making a circular 
incision round the navel, to enlarge the orifice into 
the cavity of the abdomen, in order to extract the fæ- 
tus that way: but the woman being very weak, and 
much emaciated, I could now only take off the sca- 
pula. 

The next day, I extracted one whole arm, some 
ribs, part of the vertebræ, &c. and, the day follow- 
ing, the greatest part of the remaining fœtus, except 
the cranium, which seem'd to adhere to the intestines. 
This determined me to proceed very cautiously, and 
not to attempt the removal of it at once, but piece- 
meal, and by degrees, as opportunity would give me 
leave; which I did with my forceps: but, notwith- 
standing all my care, the sharp edges of the broken 
pieces of the cranium tore the intestines, so that the 
fæces issued from the wound at every dressing for 
several weeks together. 

The wound was daily dress'd with dry lint, spi- 
rituous fomentations, and cataplasms. Injections, 
made of sack and warm water, were found of 
great use, thrown in in large quantities; and (what 
is well worth observation) several parts of the bones, 
as the tibia, fibula, &c. were discharg'd by the 
vagina. 

By the means above-mention'd, and proper band- 
ages, the wound was thoroughly deterged, incarned, 
and, by the use of epulotics, completely cicatrized; 
and the woman is now perfectly recovered, and since 
grown fat." 

|P_95
N. B. After the discharge of the whole fœtus, the 
patient had milk in her breasts, as upon a natural 
delivery. 


Debenham, Jan. 18. 
1750-51. 

Tho. Debenham. 


[^1. Read Febr. 7. 
1750. ^]