

[^Sample 1: article - PT50_0518^]

|P_518
[}LXVI. An Account of the Case of a Boy 
troubled with convulsive Fits cured by the 
Discharge of Worms. By the Rev. Ri- 
chard Oram, M. A. Chaplain to the Lord 
Bishop of Ely. }]
[/1./]JOseph, son of John and Mary Postle, 
of Ingham in the county of Norfolk, 
was subject to convulsive fits from his infancy; 
which were common and tolerable till he was about 
seven years of age. About that time they began to 
attack him in all the varieties that can be conceived. 
Sometimes he was thrown upon the ground; some- 
times he was twirled round like a top by them; at 
others he would spring upwards to a considerable 
height, &c. and once he leaped over an iron bar, 
that was placed purposely before the fire to prevent 
his falling into it. He was much burned; but was 
rendered so habitually stupid by his fits, that he ne- 
ver expressed the least sense of pain after this acci- 
dent. His intellect was so much impaired, and al- 
most destroyed, by the frequency and violence of his 
fits, that he scarce seemed to be conscious of any 
thing. He did not acknowledge his father or mother 
by any expressions or signs; nor seemed to distinguish 
them from other people. If at any time he escaped 
out of the house without the observation of the fa- 
mily, he had not understanding to find and return to 
it; but would pursue the direction or road he first 
took, and sometimes lose himself. Once he was 
missing for a whole night; and found the next 
|P_519
morning in the middle of a fen, stuck flat in mud as 
deep as his breast. He was very voracious, and would 
frequently call for something to eat; which was the 
only indication he gave of his knowing any thing. No 
kind of filth or nastiness can be conceived, which he 
would not eat or drink without distinction. He ap- 
peared to be as ill as he really was; for he was become 
a most shocking spectacle. He was so much emaci- 
ated, that he seemed to have no flesh upon his bones; 
and his body so distorted, that he was rendered quite 
a cripple. His parents consulted a physician at Nor- 
wich, who very judiciously (as it will appear) con- 
sidered his disorder as a worm-case, and prescribed 
for it accordingly; but (being afraid, I presume, to 
give too violent medicines to the boy) without suc- 
cess. In short, he was so singularly afflicted, that 
his parents told me they could not help thinking him 
under some evil influence. 

It was observed, that his disorder varied, and grew 
worse, at certain periods of the moon. 

In these miserable circumstances the poor boy con- 
tinued to languish, till he was about eleven years of 
age (July 1757), when he accidentally found a mix- 
ture of white lead [/2./] and oil, which had some time 
before been prepared for some purpose of painting, 
set by on a shelf, and placed, as it was thought, out 
of his reach. There was near half a pint of this 
mixture when he found it; and, as he did not leave 
|P_520
much, it is thought he swallowed about a quarter 
of a pint of it. There was also some lamp-black in 
the composition; which was added to give it a pro- 
per colour for the particular use it was intended for 
in painting. It was, as I suppose it usually is, linseed 
oil, which had been mixed with the lead and lamp- 
black. 

The draught began to operate very soon, by vomit- 
ing and purging him for near 24 hours in the most 
violent manner. A large quantity of black inky 
matter was discharged; and an infinite number of 
worms, almost as small as threads, were voided. 
These operations were so intense, that his life was 
despaired of. But he has not only survived them, 
but experienced a most wonderful change and im- 
provement after them: for his parents assured me in 
November 1757, when I saw him, that he had daily 
grown better from the time of his drinking the mix- 
ture, both in body and mind. Instead of a skeleton, 
as he almost was before, he is become fat, and ra- 
ther corpulent: and his appetite is no longer raven- 
ous, but moderate and common. His body too is 
become straight and erect. His understanding is at 
least as much benefited by this peculiar remedy. It 
cannot be expected, that he should already have at- 
tained much knowledge, as he seemed, before he was 
so wonderfully relieved, to be almost destitute of 
ideas. But he appeared, when I saw him, to have 
acquired nearly as much knowledge in four months, 
as children usually do in four years; and to reason 
pretty well on those things, which he knew. He is 
now capable of being employed on many occasions; 
is often sent a mile or two on errands, which he dis- 
|P_521
charges as carefully, and then returns as safely, as 
any person. 

It is farther remarkable, that the boy's mother, 
her father, and sister, are frequently infested with 
worms. Her father, tho' about 60 years of age, is 
still much troubled with them: the worms, which 
he voids, appear flat, and much larger than those, 
which his children have observed. Her sister is often 
exceedingly disordered by them. About three months 
since they threw her into violent convulsions, and for 
some time deprived her of her senses. But the mo- 
ther of the boy has been affected in a more extraor- 
dinary manner than the rest. About 20 years ago 
she voided some worms, which forced their way 
thro' the pores of the skin, as it is supposed; for 
they were found in small clusters under her arms. 
As she was very young then, she does not remember 
how she was particularly affected; only, that she 
suffered violent struggles and convulsions. She is 
still, about five or six times in a year, seized with 
fainting fits, which usually attack her in bed, and 
last three or four minutes; but she cannot certainly 
say, tho' there is very little reason to doubt, that 
they are occasioned by worms. 

[}An Account of the same Subject, in a Letter from 
Mr. John Gaze, of Walket, in the County of 
Norfolk, to Mr. Wm. Arderon, F. R. S. Com- 
municated by Mr. Henry Baker, F. R. S. }]
[/3./]JOseph Postle, son of John Postle, of 
Ingham in Norfolk, until about the 
age of seven years was an healthy well-looking 
|P_522
child; but about that age was afflicted with stoppages, 
which often threw him into convulsive fits, and at 
last rendered him quite an idiot. He continued in 
this condition for about four years, eating and drink- 
ing all that time any thing that came in his way, 
even his own excrements, if not narrowly watched. 
His father took the advice of several eminent physi- 
cians, both at Norwich and elsewhere; but all their 
prescriptions proved of no service. 

About the beginning of August last he happened 
to get at a painting-pot, wherein there was about a 
pound of white lead and lamp-black mixed up with 
linseed oil. This he eat almost all up before he was 
discovered. It vomited and purged him, and brought 
away prodigious numbers of small worms. In a 
few days he grew well, his senses returned, and he 
is now able to give as rational answers as can be ex- 
pected from a boy of his age. His appetite is good, 
he is bery brisk, and has not had the least return of 
his former disorder. 

I heard of the above by several people; but not 
being satisfied, got my friend to go to Mr. Postle's 
house, of whom he had the foregoing account. 

January 12th, 1758. 


[^1. Read Jan. 26, 
1758. ^]
[^2. 
* It is not improbable, that a considerable portion of whiting 
might be used instead of pure white lead, which is frequently 
done: and this supposition is favoured by the mixture's not proving 
fatal to the boy, as such a quantity of white lead in all probability 
would. 
^]
[^3. Read Jan. 26. 
1758. ^]