

[^Sample 1: article - PT51_0304^]

|P_304
[}XXXIV. An Account of Two Stones of re- 
markable Shapes and Sizes, which, for the 
Space of Six Years, were firmly lodged in 
the Urethra of a young Man, and at length 
successfully cut out from thence. Addressed 
to the Royal Society, on Thursday Decem- 
ber 13, 1759 , at which Meeting the Stones 
themselves, and a Drawing of the Stones, 
were presented to the Fellows of the Society, 
by Joseph Warner, F. R. S. and Surgeon 
to Guy's Hospital. }]
[/1./]THE formation and confinement of 
stony concretions in the different 
parts of the organs of urine, to wit, in the kidneys, 
ureters, bladder, and urethra, are diseases, which are 
frequently observed to happen to both sexes of all ages 
and constitutions: for this reason I am apprised, that 
there are few instances can be given of such peculia- 
rities attending these cases, as may reasonably be 
esteemed worthy the attention of the curious. But 
when matters of fact, however common in them- 
selves, are so circumstanced, as to assume extraordi- 
nary appearances, the uncommon phænomena accom- 
panying such facts, when capable of being pointed 
out, will, I believe, be always considered by the 
Royal Society, as a sufficient apology for the freedom 
of the communication. Upon this presumption, I 
have taken the liberty of laying before the Fellows of 
|P_305
this Society the following short account, and, at 
the same time, of submitting to their inspection as 
much of the case, as the nature of the affair could ad- 
mit of being exhibited. 

[}Case. }]
Thomas Bingham, a very healthy young man, 20 
years old, came from Yarmouth to London, in Sep- 
tember 1759, and put himself under my care, to be 
cured of a swelling, which he had in his urethra. 
Upon questioning the patient, I was informed by 
him, that he had little or no pain; that he had never 
perceived the least difficulty in voiding his urine, nor 
had he ever had the least involuntary efflux of it: he 
had not at any time suffered in the least but from 
the bulk and weight of something that grew in his 
urinary passage (urethra), which, upon exercise of 
late, proved troublesome to him. Upon inspection, 
I discovered a considerable prominence betwixt the 
testicles and anus. Upon feeling the part with my 
fingers, there appeared a very evident hardness and 
tumor. 

By introducing a large, smooth, and ductile, probe 
into the urethra, it was evident there was a stone or 
stones lodged in that passage. I advised the cutting 
the tumor out, which was complied with; and in the 
following manner I proceeded to the performance of 
the operation. 

The patient being supinely placed upon a steady 
table, of a convenient height, covered with a double 
blanket, and a pillow put under his shoulders, I 
caused his hands and feet to be tied together; and, by 
proper assistants, he was held in the same position as 
|P_306
is done in the operation of cutting for the stone in the 
urinary bladder. I then proceeded to divide the ure- 
thra longitudinally by incision. The extent of the 
incision was from one end of the swelling to the 
other: the lenght and size of the wound enabled me 
to take away the stones without any violence or diffi- 
culty. 

After the stones were removed, I brought the lips 
of the wound together, and, with the twisted suture, 
I retained them in that situation. By this method, 
and by occasionally passing a bougie of a proper size 
into the urethra, beyond the farther extent of the in- 
cision, the patient went happily on, till the cure of the 
wound was completed, which was effected in about 
three weeks; and there afterwards remained no incon- 
venience at all to the patient in voiding or retaining 
his urine. 

N. B. As the identical calculi are presented to the 
Fellows of the Royal Society for their inspection, 
so that the exact sizes, shapes, and external forma- 
tions, of these stones may be seen; I think it quite 
unnecessary to give a written account of these par- 
ticulars. However, as it may probably give some 
satisfaction to the curious to be informed of the spe- 
cific gravities of these stones, I have subjoined 
these particulars to this memoir, and have like- 
wise, for the same reason, caused an engraving of 
these stones to be made, and added to this paper. 

|P_307Weight in air. in water. Spec. gravity. Large stone 308 5 92 85 1.431 Small stone 42 35 10 4 1.326 Both stones 350 8 102 9 1.415 
Quære. Is it not probable, that the generation of 
these stones might originally have begun in the ure- 
thra, as the patient did not ever remember to have 
had the least complaint in his loins, or in any part of 
his bladder? Or is it more reasonable to suppose, 
that the stones were first of all formed in the kidney, 
or urinary bladder, from thence conveyed with the 
stream of urine, when very small, and lodged in the 
urethra, till they had arrived to these sizes? 

Either of these suppositions to me appears reason- 
able. 

However, as hypotheses of this kind are with dif- 
ficulty ascertained, and as a discovery of the fact, 
could it be determinately made, would prove of very 
little consequence to the improvement of the art of 
surgery, I think it quite unnecessary to dwell upon a 
part of this subject, in which the benefit of mankind 
appears to be so little concerned. 

Plate VIII. Fig. 1. represents the upper parts of 
the two stones, as they were found lying loosely to- 
gether in the urethra. The longest end, that is, the 
smallest of these two stones, was situated nearest to 
the neck of the bladder, or orign of the urethra. It 
may be observed, that, on the superior part of these 
stones, there are two long grooves or chanels, which 
were gradually formed by the streams of urine, that 
were occasionally discharged from the bladder. 

|P_308
It may farther be observed, that the whole sur- 
faces of these two stones, except the parts of them 
where they lay in contact with each other, or where 
they continually pressed upon the lower surface of the 
urethra, or bed, which they had formed for themselves 
in this chanel, are rough, and have several inequa- 
lities, or eminences arising from them. 
[^An illustration of the two stones, joined together, on a separate fold-out page. ^]
Fig. 2. represents the inferior smooth parts of the 
two stones, as they appeared when separated from 
each other, as well as the smooth or polished surfaces 
of the ends of these stones, which lay in contact with 
each other, and upon motion rubbed against each 
other. 
[^An illustration of the two stones, separated from each other, on a separate fold-out page. ^]

[^1. Read Dec. 13, 
1759. ^]