

[^Sample 1: article - PT52_0265^]

|P_265
[}LI. Observations concerning the Body of his 
late Majesty, October 26, 1760 , by Frank 
Nicholls, M. D. F. R. S. Physician to his 
late Majesty. }]
[}To the Right Honourable George Earl of Macclesfield, 
President of the Royal Society. }]
My Lord, 

[/1./]THE inclosed papers have been laid 
before the Lord Chamberlain, for 
his Majesty's inspection; and his Majesty's answer 
was, That he saw no reason, why they may not be 
made public. 

The bursting the ventricle of the heart is a case 
entirely unknown in physical writers; and must de- 
pend on many circumstances, which rarely coincide. 

I have used my best endeavours, to give a clear 
and satisfactory account of this very extraordinary 
affair; and I hope I have succeeded: but, if any 
|P_266
thing abstruse should appear, I trust, it will be attri- 
buted rather to the nature of the case, than to any 
want of consideration or respect for your Lordship, or 
the Society, in, 

My Lord, 
Your Lordship's 
most obedient, 
and most humble servant, 

October 20, 1761. 

Fran. Nicholls. 

[}To the Right Honourable the Earl of Macclesfield, 
President of the Royal Society. }]
My Lord, 

THE circumstances attending the death of the 
late King being such, as are not (I apprehend) 
to be met with in any of the records of physical cases, 
and such, as, from the nature of the parts concerned, 
are not easily to be accounted for; I presume it will 
be agreeable to your Lordship, to the Society in 
which you preside, and to the learned world in ge- 
neral, if I lay before your Lordship, and the Society, 
a minute detail of what occurred on that remarkable 
and melancholy occasion; with such explanations, as 
arise from the circumstances of the case. 

According to the report of the pages then in wait- 
ing, about seven in the morning, Saturday, Octo- 
ber 25th, a noise was somewhere heard, as if a large 
billet had tumbled down; and, upon enquiry, his 
|P_267
Majesty was found fallen on the ground, speechless 
and motionless, with a slight contused wound on his 
right temple. He appeared to have just come from 
his necessary-stool, and as if going to open his escri- 
toir. Mr. Andrews (at that time surgeon to the 
houshold) attempted to take away some blood; but 
in vain, as no signs of sense, or motion, were ob- 
served, from the time of his fall. 

The next day, (Sunday, October the 26th) by 
order of the Lord Chamberlain, I attended, with 
the two serjeant-surgeons, who were directed to open 
and embalm the Royal Body. 

On opening the abdomen, all the parts therein 
contained were found in a natural and healthy state, 
except that some hydatides (or watery bladders) were 
found between the substance of each kidney, and its 
internal coat. These hydatides might, in time, have 
proved fatal, either by compressing and destroying 
the kidnies, so as to bring on an incurable suppression 
of urine; or, by discharging a lymph into the cavity 
of the abdomen, might have formed a dropsy, not to 
be removed by any medicines: but, in the present 
case, these hydatides were of no consequence, as none 
of them exceeded the bulk of a common walnut. 

On opening the head, the brain was found in a 
healthy state, no-ways loaded with blood, either in 
its proper vessels, or in the contiguous sinuses of the 
dura mater. 

Upon opening the chest, the lungs were in a na- 
tural state, free from every appearance of inflamma- 
tion, or tubercle: but upon examining the heart, its 
pericardium was found distended, with a quantity of 
coagulated blood, nearly sufficient to fill a pint cup; 
|P_268
and, upon removing this blood, a round orifice ap- 
peared in the middle of the upper side of the right 
ventricle of the heart, large enough to admit the ex- 
tremity of the little finger. Through this orifice, all 
the blood brought to the right ventricle had been dis- 
charged into the cavity of the pericardium; and, by 
that extravasated blood, confined between the heart 
and pericardium, the whole heart was very soon ne- 
cessarily so compressed, as to prevent any blood con- 
tained in the veins from being forced into the auricles; 
which, therefore, with the ventricles, were found ab- 
solutely void of blood, either in a fluid or coagulated 
state. 

As, therefore, no blood could be transmitted 
through the heart, from the insant that the extrava- 
sation was completed, so the heart could deliver none 
to the brain; and, in consequence, all the animal 
and vital motions, as they depend on the circulation 
of the blood through the brain, must necessarily have 
been stopped, from the same instant; and his Majesty 
must, therefore, have dropped down, and died in- 
stantaneously: And as the heart is insensible of acute 
and circumscribed pain, his death must have been at- 
tended with as little of that distress, which usually ac- 
companies the separation of the soul and body, as was 
possible, under any circumstances whatsoever. 

The above-mentioned appearances (as they shewed 
the immediate cause of his Majesty's death) were 
thought sufficient to form the report to his present 
Majesty, and his Council. But as the very eminent 
and amiable character of his late Majesty must make 
the nature of his death the object of every one's atten- 
tion and inquiry; and as the case was exceedingly 
|P_269
singular and extraordinary in itself; and as the heart 
must have been merely passive, and, consequently, 
there must have been some other concurrent circum- 
stances necessary to produce such an effect; I judged, 
at the time, when the report was drawn, that a more 
minute and exact detail would not only be expected 
by the world, but would be highly proper, as our in- 
quiry furnished sufficient matter. 

Two questions naturally arise upon the face of our 
report; viz. by what means the right side of the 
heart became so charged with blood, as to be under 
a necessity of bursting? and how it could happen, 
that, as the ventricle (when under great distensions) 
generally makes one continued cavity with the auricle, 
and is much thicker and stronger than the auricle, 
the blood should, nevertheless, force its way, by 
bursting the ventricle, rather than the auricle, seem- 
ingly in contradiction to the known property of fluids, 
to force their way, where the resistance is least? 

Upon examining the parts, we found the two great 
arteries, (the aorta and pulmonary artery, as far as 
they are contained within the pericardium) and the 
right ventricle of the heart stretched beyond their na- 
tural state; and, in the trunk of the aorta, we found 
a transverse fissure on its inner side, about an inch and 
half long, through which some blood had recently 
passed, under its external coat, and formed an elevated 
echymosis. This appearance shewed the true state of 
an incipient aneurism of the aorta; and confirmed 
the doctrine, which I had the honour to illustrate, 
by an experiment, to the satisfaction of the Society, 
in the Year 1728; [See the Philosophical Trans- 
actions, No 402.] viz. that the external coat of the 
|P_270
artery may (and does) often controul an impetus of 
the blood, capable of bursting the internal (or liga- 
mentous, coat; although this last is by much the 
thickest, and seemingly, the strongest. 

In regard to this distention of the aorta; as his 
Majesty had, for some years, complained of frequent 
distresses and sinkings about the region of the heart; 
and as his pulse was, of late years, observed to fall 
very much upon bleeding; it is not doubted, but 
that this distension of the aorta had been of long 
standing, at least to some degree; and, as the pul- 
monary artery was thereby necessarily compressed, 
and a resistance, greater than natural, thereby opposed 
to the blood's discharge out of the right ventricle, it 
is reasonable to conclude, that a distension and con- 
sequent weakness of the pulmonary artery and right 
ventricle, to some degree, were nearly coeval with 
that of the aorta. But that the aorta had suffered a 
more extraordinary and violent distension, immedi- 
ately antecedent to the bursting of the ventricle, is evi- 
dent, from the recent fissure of the aorta, and the 
consequent extravasation of blood between its coats. 
Now, as this increased and violent distension of the 
aorta must have been attended with a proportionate 
pressure upon the pulmonary artery, and, conse- 
quently, an increased opposition to the passage of the 
blood out of the right ventricle; so that distension of 
the aorta must be considered, as the immediate cause 
of the right ventricle's being surcharged with blood, 
and consequently of its bursting. 

The immediate cause of this distension of the aorta, 
as likewise of its being determined to that particular 
time, are naturally explicable, from his Majesty's 
|P_271
having been at the necessary-stool; as the office then 
required cannot be executed, but by such a pressure 
on all the contents of the lower belly, and, conse- 
quently, on the great descending artery, as must, of 
necessity, subject the trunk of the aorta, and all its 
upper branches, to a surcharge with blood continually 
increasing, in proportion as the pressure may happen 
to be continued longer, or exerted with greater vio- 
lence, in consequence of a costive habit, or any other 
resistance. 

As to the second question; viz. how it could 
happen, that the blood should force its way rather 
through the side of the ventricle than of the auricle? 
since it is well known, that when the ventricle is fully 
distended with fluids, they will easily pass back into 
the auricle; so that under such a distension, as the 
ventricle must have suffered, before it burst, it should 
seem to have made one continued cavity with the 
auricle; of which cavity, the auricle, being by much 
the weakest part, must have been the most liable to 
a rupture. This certainly is the circumstance, in 
which the very great singularity of the case before us 
consists; and many difficulties offer against any ob- 
vious explanation. 

Two circumstances, however, seem to throw some 
light on this obscure and difficult question. The first 
consists in the texture, connexions, and capacity, of 
the pericardium; the second, in the order, in which 
the several surcharges must have arisen. 

The pericardium is a strong tendinous membrane, 
inelastic in every direction, containing the two auricles, 
the two ventricles, and the two great arteries, as in a 
purse: it is fixed to its contents at the back of the 
|P_272
two auricles, where, by its connexion, it surrounds 
the two venæ cavæ: hence, passing along the arch 
formed by the aorta, it descends to the pulmonary 
artery, and continues round the orifices of the pul- 
monary veins, firmly attached to these several parts 
in its passage. By these connexions, these parts are 
all fixed in their several stations, incapable of sepa- 
rating from each other, or shifting their situations, 
however they may happen to be compressed. The 
pericardium is generally said to serve as a defence to 
the heart; but that defence seems to consist chiefly, 
in preventing the right auricle from being stretched 
by the depressions (or complanations) of the dia- 
phragm, in hunger and inspiration, and, by its bear- 
ing firmly against the sides of the auricles, to support 
and strengthen them against too great distensions: 
for the cavity of the pericardium seems to be but little 
more, than commensurate to the bulk of its contents, 
when one half of them are filled, and the other half 
empty. This will appear, upon endeavouring to fill 
the heart, with its auricles, and its two great arteries, 
with wax, at the same time, while it is inclosed in 
the pericardium; in which experiment, one or other 
of these cavities will be found to have been so com- 
pressed by the pericardium, as to have refused a free 
admittance to the wax, and will, therefore, be found 
proportionally empty. 

The inelastic texture, connexions, and capacity, of 
the pericardium, being thus stated, let us now con- 
sider the order, in which the several distensions must 
have arisen, in the two great arteries and cavities of 
the heart, with the necessary effects of those disten- 
|P_273
sions on the pericardium, and the parts which it con- 
tains. 

The first distension (and this a great and violent 
one) must have arisen in the aorta; and the conse- 
quent pressure on the pulmonary artery (by the aorta 
so distended) must have been sufficient (either by de- 
grees or at once) to stop the blood's discharge out of 
the right ventricle and pulmonary artery, and to di- 
stend both those cavities greatly beyond their natural 
state of repletion. So that, under these circumstances, 
the two great arteries, and the right ventricle, must 
have been under an extraordinary and continued di- 
stension (and, consequently, an increase of bulk) at 
the same time; whereas, in the natural state of the 
body, these three cavities are alternately dilated and 
contracted, and the right ventricle is always propor- 
tionally diminished in bulk, as the pulmonary artery 
in increased, and vice versâ. So that, with respect to 
these three great cavities, (supposing that their several 
distensions had been no greater than natural) the pe- 
ricardium must have been obliged to contain one third 
more in proportion, than its capacity was formed to 
receive. During this time, the blood being stopped in 
its passage through the lungs, and its afflux to the left 
auricle and ventricle must have remained in a con- 
tracted state; in consequence of which, the right ven- 
tricle had ample space in the pericardium, to admit 
that degree of distension, which was previously requi- 
site for its bursting. But the right auricle (being fixed 
to its station by its connections with the left auricle 
and the pericardium, and being firmly compressed 
|P_274
against the pericardium, by the aorta, the pulmonary 
artery, and the right ventricle, all which appear to 
have been, at this time, greatly distended beyond their 
natural bulk) must have been thereby deprived of the 
space in the pericardium, necessary to admit of its 
being distended; and the whole surcharge and di- 
stension must, by the pressure of the pericardium on 
the auricle, necessarily have been confined to the right 
ventricle, till it burst. 

Had these surcharges arisen in any other order, 
their effects must have been greatly different: as for 
instance, if the surcharge in the right ventricle had 
arisen from any other pressure, than from a disten- 
sion of the aorta, the extraordinary bulk of the 
aorta, and its pressure against the pulmonary artery, 
would not have existed, and the right auricle, not 
being then compressed against the pericardium, would 
have been at liberty to distend, till the blood had 
made its way through its sides. 

In confirmation of this power, here attributed to 
the pericardium, of strenghtening and supporting its 
contained parts, let it be observed, that, in the case 
under consideration, the place of the fissure in the 
aorta is precisely where the pressure of the pericardium 
is kept off from the aorta, to a considerable degree, 
by the situation of the right auricle and the pulmonary 
artery. 

My Lord, in order to give a clear and distinct idea 
of this very extraordinary case, I have here annexed 
two prints; [Vide Tab. XI. & XII.] the first of 
which shews the heart, as it appears when all its 
cavities and blood-vessels are filled with wax [^An illustration of the heart on a separate fold-out page. ^]; the 
other is the same print, having the orifice in the right 
|P_275
ventricle, and the extravasation covering the fissure in 
the aorta, exactly marked, as they appeared to, [^An illustration of the heart, holes being evident in both the right ventricle and the aorta, on a separate fold-out page. ^]

My Lord, 
Your Lordship's 
most obedient 
and most humble servant, 
Frank Nicholls. 


[^1. Read Nov. 26, 
1761. ^]