

[^Sample 1: article - PT52_0143^]

|P_143
[}XXVIII. A further Account of the Case of 
William Carey, whose Muscles began to be 
ossified: In a Letter to the Right Honour- 
able the Lord Cadogan, F. R. S. from 
the Rev. William Henry, D. D. F. R. S. }]
My Lord, 

[/1./]I Should have long before this time ac- 
knowledged your Lordship's Letter, 
of the 19th of February, and your inquiries concern- 
ing William Carey, the ossified young man; but as 
your letter came to me in the country, where I was 
|P_144
at a considerable distance from all opportunities of 
making a full and satisfactory inquiry, I judged, that 
it would be more acceptable to your Lordship, that I 
should defer giving you trouble, until I could give 
you a satisfactory answer. 

In March 1759, I had this young man brought 
up to Dublin, and admitted into Mercer's hospital. 
The physicians and surgeons put him under a sali- 
vation; and afterwards applied, to his arms and joints, 
mercurial plaisters. The good effects of this process, 
was the drying up the great discharge of humour, 
which he had at his elbows and wrists, and an im- 
mediate check to the progress of the ossification. 

In June following, he was discharged from the 
hospital, being furnished with mercurial plaisters, 
and directions. By the advice of the physicians, he 
went to his own place, near Ballyshanon, on the 
western ocean; and there, in pursuance of their di- 
rections, bathed in the ocean twice a day, during 
that whole summer and harvest, and constantly 
rubbed his whole body and limbs over with the juice 
of the quercus marina, immediately after coming 
out of the sea. 

In consequence of this course, he happily ex- 
changed his ghastly hectic countenance, for an 
healthy and athletic complexion, which continued 
until March 1760. 

About this time his cough returned, his sores be- 
gan to run, and the ossification to return. In this 
distress, he came to me to Dublin. With some dif- 
ficulty I got him admitted again into Mercer's hospi- 
tal; where he continued for some months, and was 
again treated with mercurial medicines and applica- 
|P_145
tions, as before. After being discharged, he returned 
to his former course of bathing in the ocean, and 
anointing his body with the quercus marina. 

This process restored his health, and intirely 
stopped the progress of the ossification. He also re- 
covered the use of some of the ossified joints, par- 
ticularly of his wrists and fingers; and his knees and 
legs grew so relaxed, by the dissolution of the callus, 
that he was able to walk twenty miles in a day. 

I feared, that his disorder might return this spring, 
as it did in 1760; but it has not returned. That I 
might be the better certified, I wrote to Sir James 
Caldwell. The answer I received was, that he had 
been, a few days ago, at Castlecaldwell, and found 
himself so well and strong, as to importune Sir James 
to admit him into his body of the Enniskillen light- 
horse. The poor man thinks the ossification intirely 
stopped; yet, by the appearance of his arms and wrists, 
he seems to be mistaken. The first hardness still con- 
tinues; and all the muscles from his elbow to the 
wrist, seem to be one solid bone. It is very happy 
for him, that it has been hitherto stopped from pro- 
ceeding any farther; and that, from his present state 
of good health, there is reason to hope, that it will 
not increase. I am, 

With all respect, and gratitude 
for your many obligations, 
Your Lordship's 
most obedient 
and most humble servant, 

Kildare-Street in Dublin, 
April 16, 1761. 

William Henry. 


[^1. Read April 30, 
1761. ^]