

[^Sample 1: article - PT64_0096^]

|P_96
[}IX. Farther Proofs of the Insalubrity of 
marshy situations. In a Letter from the 
Rev. Dr. Price to the Rev. Dr. Horsley. }]
dear sir, 

[/1./]DR. priestley's paper, on the 
noxious effects of stagnant waters, 
read last Thursday to the Royal Society, brought 
to my remembrance to a table; exhibiting the rate 
of mortality in a parish situated among marshes, 
which I have seen in Mr. Muret's Observations, 
published in the Memoirs of the Oeconomical So- 
ciet at Bern, for 1766. I have since reviewed 
this table, and found that it affords a full confir- 
mation of Dr. Priestley's assertions. This parish 
is a part of the district of Vaud, belonging to the 
canton of Bern, in Switzerland; and contains 
169 families, and 696 inhabitants. Mr. Muret's 
table, of the rate of mortality in it, is formed from 
a register of the ages, at which all died in it for 15 
years. With this table he has also given tables, 
from like registers, of the rates of mortality in 
seven small towns; in 36 country parishes and 
villages; in 16 parishes situated in the Alps; in 
12 corn parishes, and in 18 vintage parishes.— 
From comparing these tables, it appears, that 
|P_97
the probabilities of life are highest in the most 
hilly parts of the province, the lowest in the 
marshy parish just mentioned. The difference is 
indeed remarkable, as will appear from the follow- 
ing particulars. One half, of all born in the moun- 
tains, live to the age of 47. In the marshy parish, 
one half live only to the age of 25. In the hills 
one in 20, of all that are born, live to 80. In the 
marshy parish, only one in 52 reaches this age. 
In the hills, a person aged 40 has a chance, of 80 
to 1, fro living a year. In the marshy parish, his 
chance for living a year is not 30 to 1.— In the 
hills, person aged 20, 30, and 40, have an even 
chance for living 41, 33, and 25 years respec- 
tively. The the fenny parish, persons, at these ages, 
have an even chance of living only 30, 23, and 
15 years.— In short, it appears, that, though the 
probabilities of life, in all this country except this 
once parish, are much higher than in London; 
yet here, after 30, they are much lower. Before 
the age of 30, they are indeed higher in this 
parish; the reason of which must be, that the 
London air and customs are particulary noxious 
to children. 
[/2./]
I am sensible, that observations, for only 15 years, 
in one small parish, do not afford as decisive and 
ample an authority, in the present case, as there 
is reason to wish for; and that, therefore, the per- 
fect exacness of the particulars I have recited, 
cannot be depended on.— They are, however, suf- 
|P_98
ficiently near the truth to demonstrate, in general, 
the unhealthfulness of a marshy situation, and as 
the register form whence they are derived is the 
only one, in such a situation, which I have ever 
met with, and Dr. Alexander's experiments may 
lead some to very wrong conclusions on this 
subject; I could not help thinking, that there would 
be no impropriety, in fending you the account, I 
have now given. If you think it of any impor- 
tance, I shall be obliged to you for reading it to 
the Royal Society. 

I cannot help taking this opportunity to add 
my wishes, that such registers of mortality, as those 
published by Mr. Muret, were established in every 
part of this kingdom. We might then determine 
immediately every such question, as that which has 
occasioned this letter; and know certainly, what 
influence different airs and different situations have 
on the duration of life. Two ingenious physicians, 
Dr. Percival at Manchester, and Dr. Haygarth
at Chester, have lately, with much zeal, promoted 
institutions of this kind; and a great deal of useful 
information may be expected, from the accurate 
and comprehensive registers of mortality, which, 
under their direction, have been established in these 
towns. But the instruction arising from these 
establishments cannot be complete, till they be- 
come universal. 

I am, Sir, 
Your most obedient 
and humble Servant, 

Newington Green, 
Dec. 21, 1773. 
RICHARD PRICE. 


[^1. Redde, Jan. 13, 
1774. ^]
[^2. 
* In London, one half of all that are born, die under 3 
years of age. But this is not peculiar to London. In Berlin 
the same proportion dies under three; and at Vienna under two. 
^]