

[^Sample 1: article - PT66_0226^]

|P_226
[}XIII. Observations on Respiration, and the Use of the Blood. 
By Joseph Priestley, LL. D. F. R. S. }]
[/1./]THERE is, perhaps, no subject in physiology, 
and very few in philosophy in general, that 
has engaged more attention than that of the use of respi- 
ration. It is evident, that without breathing most animals 
would presently die; and it is also well known, that the 
same air will not long answer the purpose: for if it has 
been frequently respired, the breathing of it is as fatal as 
the total deprivation of air. But by what property it is, 
that air contributes to the support of animal life; and why 
air that has been much breathed will no more answer 
the purpose, seems not to have been discovered by any of 
the many philosophers and physicians who have pro- 
fessedly written upon the subject; and it might have con- 
tinued to elude all direct investigation, when it discovered 
itself, without any trouble or thought, in the course of 
my researches into the properties of different kinds of 
air, which had at first quite another object. 

In these experiments it clearly appeared, that respiration 
is a phlogistic process, affecting air in the very same manner 
|P_227
as every other phlogistic process (viz. putresaction, the 
effervescence of iron-filings and brimstone, or the calcina- 
tion of metals, &c.) affects it; diminishing the quantity of it 
in a certain proportion, lessening its specific gravity, and 
rendering it unfit for respiration or inflammation, but 
leaving it in a state capable of being restored to a tolerable 
degree of purity by agitation in water, &c. Having dis- 
covered this, I concluded, as may be seen Phil. Trans. vol. 
LXII. p. 187. and Observations upon Air, vol. I. p. 78. 277. 
that the use of the lungs is to carry off a putrid effluvium, 
or to discharge that phlogiston, which had been taken 
into the system with the aliment, and was become, as it 
were, effete; the air that is respired serving as a menstruum
for that purpose. 

What I then concluded to be the use of respiration in ge- 
neral, I have now, I think, proved to be effected by means 
of the blood, in consequence of its coming so nearly into 
contact with the air in the lungs; the blood appearing to 
be a fluid wonderfully formed to imbibe, and part with, 
that principle which the chemists call phlogiston, and 
changing its colour in consequence of being charged with 
it, or being freed from it; and affecting air in the very 
same manner, both out of the body and in the lungs; and 
even notwithstanding the interposition of various sub- 
stances, which prevent its coming into immediate con- 
tact with the air. 

As it may not be unpleasing or unuseful, I shall, 
before I relate my own experiments, briefly recite the 
principal of the opinions which have been held con- 
|P_228
cerning the use of respiration, from haller's excellent 
System of Physiology, and some others of the most eminent 
writers upon that subject. 

hippocrates reckoned air among the aliments of the 
body. But it was more generally the opinion of the an- 
cients, that, there being a kind of vital fire kept up in the 
heart, the heat of the blood was tempered in the lungs. 
galen also supposed, that there was something equiva- 
lent to a fire constantly kept up in the heart; and that 
the chief use of the lungs was to carry off such vapours 
as were equivalent to smoke thrown off from that fire. 
haller, vol. III. p. 354. cartesius maintained the 
same vital fire in the heart, supposing that air was ne- 
cessary for cooling and condensing the blood. Ibid. p. 343. 

Of the more modern physiologists, some have thought 
that the air itself is taken into the lungs; others, that it is 
only something extracted from the air, as the more subtle 
parts of that fluid, an ether, or aerial nitre; while others 
suppose it to be the air itself, but dissolved in water, and 
therefore in an unelastic state, ibid. p. 321. 

Most of those who think that air is taken into the 
blood suppose it to be taken in by the lungs, ibid. p. 
330. Some suppose, that the effect of the admission 
of this air into the blood is a fermentation, p. 332. 
Others suppose, that it acts by its spring, preventing 
the too close contact of the globules, and thereby pre- 
serving its fluidity, intestine motion, and heat, ibid.ber- 
tier supposed, that the circulation of the blood was, in 
a great measure, owing to the admission of air into it. 
van helmont ascribed the volatility of the fixed ele- 
|P_229
ments in the food to this air, p. 336.; and stevenson
thought, that the air which had circulated in the blood, 
and which had heated the blood too much, was exhaled 
by the lungs, p. 355. 

Others say, that the air itself is not admitted into the 
blood, but only some active, spirituous, and ethereal par- 
ticles; that this vital spirit passes from the lungs to the 
heart and arteries, and at length becomes the animal spi- 
rits, which are by this means generated from the air, p. 
333. Others, who do not admit that the animal spirits 
are derived from the air, still say that some other vital 
principle comes from thence. This vital principle mal- 
pighius supposes to be a saline vapour; lister, a hot, 
inflammable, sulphureous spirit; vieussenius, a volatile 
acid salt, which keeps up the fermentation of the blood; 
and bryan robinson, the aerial acid, which preserves the 
blood from putrefaction; preserves also its density, and 
strengthens the animal fibres. For this reason he sup- 
poses it is that we feel ourselves refreshed in cold air, as 
it abounds with a more plentiful acid quality, p. 334. 
They who suppose that nitre is taken from the air into 
the blood, ascribe to that principle its fermentation, its 
heat, and its density, p. 334. 

It is a received opinion, that one use of the lungs is to 
attenuate the blood, p. 359; and malpighius adds, 
that by this means, the different particles of the blood 
become thoroughly mixed together; while others think 
that the blood is condensed in the lungs; and others, that 
the globules, and all the finer humours, receive their con- 
figuration there, ibid. Some, without considering the 
|P_230
air as of any other use than to put the lungs in motion, 
think, that heat is produced in the lungs by the attrition 
of the blood in passing through them. Misc. Taurin. vol. 
V. p. 36. The red colour of the blood has been thought 
by some to be caused by this attrition in the lungs; but 
lower refuted this notion, chiefly by observing, that the 
attrition of the blood is greater in the muscles, from 
which, however, it always returns black, Ibid. vol. I. p. 74. 

Dr. whytt thought there was something of a vital 
and stimulating nature derived from the air into the 
blood, by means of which it made the heart to contract, 
haller, vol. III. p. 336. 

boerhaave says, that air not changed is deadly; not 
on account of heat, rarefaction, or density, but for some 
other occult cause. Misc. Taurin. vol. V. p. 30. 

Dr. hales, who has thrown much more light upon 
the doctrine of air than all his predecessors, was equally 
ignorant of the use of it in respiration; and at different 
times seems to have adopted different opinions concern- 
ing it. 

In his Statical Essays, vol. II. p. 321. he supposes, that 
air is rendered alcaline by breathing, and corrected, in 
some measure, by the fumes of vinegar. 

In agreement, as he observes, with boerhaave, he says, 
p. 100. that the blood acquires its warmth chiefly in the 
lungs, where it moves with much greater rapidity than in 
any other capillary vessels of the body, vol. II. p. 87; 
but that one use of the air is to cool the blood, p. 94; and 
he makes an estimate of the degree of this refrigeration. 
The red colour of the globules of blood, he says, p. 88, 
|P_231
intimates their abounding with sulphur, which makes 
them more susceptible and retentive of heat than those 
bodies which have less of it. 

He also supposes, p. 102, that another great use of the 
lungs is to attenuate and separate the globules of blood; 
and that the floridness of the arterial blood above the ve- 
nal may, in a good measure, be owing to the strong agita- 
tion, friction, and comminution, which it undergoes in 
passing through them. In like manner, in a experiment 
which he made for the purpose, blood much agitated in a 
close glass vessel was observed to be very florid, not only 
on its surface, but through its whole substance, as arterial 
blood is, vol. II. p. 102. I would observe, however, that 
in this expement, the blood must have acquired its florid 
colour from the air with which it was agitated. 

He adds, that it is probable, that the blood may, in the 
lungs, receive some other important influence from the 
air, which is in such great quantities inspired into them. 
In other places, however, he explodes the doctrine of a 
vivifying spirit in the air. It has long, he says, been the 
subject of inquiry to many, to find of what use it is in 
respiration; which, though it may in some respects be 
known, yet it must be confessed, that we are still much 
in the dark about it, vol. II. p. 102. 

Suffocation, he says, vol. II. p. 271. consists chiefly in 
the falling flat of the lungs, occasioned by the grossness 
of the particles of a thick noxious air, they being, in that 
floating state, most easily attracted by each other, as we find 
that sulphur, and the elastic repelling particles of air are; 
|P_232
and consequently unelastic, sulphureous, saline, and other 
floating particles, will most easily coalesce, whereby they 
are rendered too gross to enter the minute vesicles, which 
are also much contracted, as well by the loss of the elasti- 
city of the confined air, as by the contraction occasioned by 
the stimulating acid sulphureous vapours. And hence it 
is not improbable, that one great design of nature in the 
structure of this important and wonderful viscus, was to 
frame the vesicles so very minute, thereby effectually to 
hinder the ingress of gross, feculent particles, which 
might be injurious to the animal economy. 

Lastly, he concludes, that the effect of respiration is to 
abate, and in part destroy, the elasticity of the air; and as 
this was effected by suphureous vapours, and he could 
breathe for a longer time air that had passed through 
cloaths dipped in a solution of salt of tartar, he con- 
cluded, that the air had been mended by the tartar hav- 
ing strongly imbibed the sulphureous, acid, and watery 
vapours, vol. I. p. 267. 

haller, after reciting the opinions of all that had 
gone before him, supposes, with Dr. hales, that, in con- 
sequence of the air losing its spring in the lungs, they 
cannot be kept dilated; and therefore, they must collapse, 
and the circulation of the blood be impeded, vol. III. p. 
258. When he states his opinion concerning the use of 
the lungs more fully, he says, that the true use of 
them is partly inhaling, and partly exhaling, p. 351. 
That the lungs inhale both water and air; but that in the 
lungs the air loses its elastic property, so as to be easily 
soluble in water of vapour, p. 352.: and he thinks it 
|P_233
probable, that this air serves as a cement to bind the 
earthy parts together. He also makes no doubt, but that 
various other matters, miscible with water, are inhaled 
by the lungs; and he even thinks it not improbable, that 
the air may carry some electric virtue along with it. The 
principal exhalation of the lungs, he thinks, to be water, 
abounding with oily, volatile, and saline principles; and 
these oily and fetid vapours, he thinks, to be the fuligines
of galen and other ancients, p. 354. 

Mr. cigna of Turin, has given much attention to this 
curious subject, as appears by two Memoirs of his; one 
in the first volume of the Miscellanea Taurinensia, in which 
he very well accounts for the florid red colour of the 
blood; and the other, which is a much more elaborate 
Memoir, intitled, De Respiratione, in the fifth volume of the 
same work, just published, or about to be published, the 
copy of the article having been sent to me by the author. 

He takes it for granted, that air which has once been 
breathed is unfit for farther respiration, on no other ac- 
count than its being loaded with noxious vapours, which 
discover themselves by a fetid smell. Misc. Taurin. vol. 
V. p. 30. And he takes it for granted, that the elasticity 
of air is diminished by respiration, though he does not 
consider that diminution of elasticity as the cause of its 
noxious quality. He therefore concludes, that air which 
has been breathed, suffocates by means of the irritation 
which it occasions to the lungs, by which the bronchia, 
and the lungs themselves, are contracted, so as to resist the 
entrance of the air; and therefore, that respired air is 
|P_234
noxious on the same account as mephitic vapours, or those 
of burning brimstone, p. 31; that, in frequently breath- 
ing the same air, it becomes so loaded with these vapours, 
as to excite a convulsion in the lungs, and thereby render 
them unfit for transmitting the blood, p. 42. 

This philosopher supposes that air enters the pores of 
the blood, retaining its elastic power, p. 50. and that it 
continues at rest there, because its endeavour to escape is 
counteracted by the equal pressure of the ambient me- 
dium, p. 52. This air, he supposes to be introduced into 
the blood by the chyle, and never by the way of the 
lungs, except when, by some means or other, the equili- 
brium between the air in the blood and the external air 
is lost, p. 57. If the external air be rarer than the inter- 
nal, the air in the blood, expanding itself, will inflate the 
animal, and have the same effect as air introduced into 
the veins. 

What we are chiefly indebted to M. cigna for, is his 
decisive experiments with respect to the florid colour of 
the blood, which he clearly proves to be caused by the 
contact of air; though he afterwards seems willing to de- 
sert that hypothesis. It was often imagined, that the 
reason why the lower part of a quantity of blood was 
black, while the surface was red, was, that the black par- 
ticles, being heavier than the rest, subsided to the bot- 
tom; but this opinion our author clearly refutes. He 
found, that when he put a little oil upon a quantity of 
blood, it remained black throughout; but that when he 
took away the red part, and exposed to the air the lower 
|P_235
laminæ, which were black, they also became successively 
red, till the whole mass acquired that colour, Misc. Tau- 
rin. vol. I. p. 73. Also, at the request of M. cigna, Fa- 
ther beccaria tried what would be the effect of exposing 
blood in vacuo; and he found, that in those circum- 
stances, it always continued black; but that, by exposing 
it again to the air, it became red, p. 68. 

M. cigna concludes his first dissertation with observing, 
that it is not easy to say how it comes to pass, that the lower 
part of a mass of blood becomes black, whether by the air 
which it had imbibed escaping from it, or by its deposit- 
ing something saline, necessary to contribute to its red- 
ness, or by the pressure of the atmosphere; but he in- 
clines to think, that air mixed with blood, and interposed 
between the globules, preserves its redness: but that by 
concreting it is expelled from it, or becomes so fixed as 
to be incapable of making it red. This opinion, he 
thinks, is rendered in some measure probable, by the in- 
creased density of concreted blood, and by the emission 
of air from other fluids in a concrescent state, p. 74. 

Notwithstanding what he had advanced in his first 
Memoir, yet in the second, which was written several years 
after it, he doubts whether the change of colour in the 
blood takes place in the lungs; but if it does, he inclines 
to ascribe this effect to the evaporation from the blood 
in the lungs: and though he always found, that the co- 
lour of the blood was changed by the contact of air, yet 
when he considered that evaporation must, as he thought, 
necessarily attend the contact of air, he imagined, that this 
|P_236
effect might equally be attributed to this circumstance. 
But he acknowledges, that this hypothesis ought not to 
be received till it be confirmed by experiments, Misc. 
Taurin. vol. V. p. 61. 

Upon the whole, he concludes, that the principal use of 
air to the blood, is to preserve the equilibrium with the ex- 
ternal air, and to prevent the vessels from being rendered 
unfit to transmit the blood, on account of the external 
pressure; whereas, by means of the air they contain, the 
fluids move in their proper vessels as freely as in vacuo, 
and the membranes and viscera also easily slide over each 
other, p. 63. And with respect to the use of the lungs, 
since he imagined that air is not introduced into the blood 
by means of them, he thinks, that because such lungs as 
those of man are given to the warmer animals only, the 
chief use of respiration is exhalation, and consequently 
the cooling of the blood, p. 65. 

The last writer whom I shall quote upon this subject, 
is the late ingenious Mr. hewson; who says, in his Ex- 
perimental Inquiry into the Properties of Blood, p. 9. 
As the colour of the blood is changed by air out of the 
body, it is presumed, that the air in the lungs is the 
immediate cause of the same change in the body. 
That this change is really produced in the lungs, he is 
persuaded, he says, from experiments, in which he dis- 
tinctly saw the blood of a more florid red in the left au- 
ricle of the heart than it was in the right; but how this 
effect is produced, he says, is not yet determined. 

|P_237
Since some of the neutral salts, and particularly 
nitre, has a similar effect on the colour of the blood; 
some, says he, attribute this difference to the nitre ab- 
sorbed from the air, while in the lungs. But this, he 
adds, is a mere hypothesis, for air contains no nitre, 
and most of the neutral salts produce the same effect in 
some degree. 

Since, however, a solution of nitre does produce this 
effect upon blood, instantly making the very blackest of 
it of a beautiful florid red, though this effect is not pe- 
culiar to nitre (for a solution of common salt does nearly 
the same thing) I own I am inclined to ascribe this effect 
to the air; especially since I have proved, as I apprehend, 
that atmospherical air consists of earth and spirit of nitre. 
Possibly, therefore, the air we breathe may be so far de- 
composed, as to communicate something of nitre to the 
blood, in its passage through the lungs. 

After this review of the observations and opinions of 
others on this important question in physiology, I shall 
proceed to recite my own. It may appear something ex- 
traordinary, that among such a variety of opinions concern- 
ing the use of respiration, the right one should never have 
been so much as conjectured, though unsupported by the 
proper proof. But indeed, this animal function, and the 
phlogistic processes in chemistry, especially that of the 
calcination of metals, which is, perhaps, the most simple 
of them, are to appearance very different things; and 
therefore, it is the less to be wondered, that no person 
|P_238
should have imagined, they would produce the same 
effect on the air in which they were performed. 

That respiration, however, is, in reality, a true phlogistic 
process, cannot, I think, admit of a doubt, after its being 
found, that the air which has served for this purpose is 
left in precisely the same state as that which has been ex- 
posed to any other phlogistic process. And since all the 
blood in the body passes through the lungs, and, accord- 
ing to Mr. hewson's observations and others, the re- 
markable change between the colour of the venal and 
arterial blood takes place there, it can hardly be doubted, 
that it is by means of the blood that the air becomes 
phlogisticated in passing through the lungs; and there- 
fore, that one great use of the blood must be to discharge 
the phlogiston with which the animal system abounds, 
imbibing it in the course of its circulation, and imparting 
it to the air, with which it is nearly brought into contact, 
in the lungs; the air thus acting as the great menstruum 
for this purpose. 

Though I had no doubt concerning this conclusion 
from my former experiments, I thought so great a pro- 
blem deserved as much illustration as could be given to it; 
and therefore I was willing to try, whether the blood was 
of such a nature, as to retain any of this power of affec- 
ing air when congealed, and out of the body, that it has 
when it is fluid, and in the body; and the experiments 
have fully answered my expectations. 

Having taken the blood of a sheep, and let it stand till 
it was coagulated, and the serum was separated from it 
(after which the surface, being exposed to the common 
|P_239
air, is well known to assume a florid red colour, while the 
inside is of a much darker red, bordering upon black) I 
introduced pieces of the crassamentum, contained in nets 
of open gauze, or of wire, sometimes through water, and 
sometimes through quicksilver, into different kinds of air, 
and always found that the blackest parts assumed a florid 
red colour in common air, and more especially in de- 
phlogisticated air, which is purer and more fit for respi- 
ration than common air (and accordingly the blood al- 
ways acquired a more florid colour, and the change was 
produced in less time in this than in common air) whereas 
the brightest red blood became presently black in any 
kind of air that was unfit for respiration, as in fixed air, 
inflammable air, nitrous air, or phlogisticated air; and 
after becoming black in the last of these kinds of air, it 
regained its red colour upon being again exposed to com- 
mon air, or dephlogisticated air; the same pieces becom- 
ing alternately black and red, by being transferred from 
phlogisticated to dephlogisticated air; and vice versâ. 

In these experiments the blood must have parted with 
its phlogiston to the common air, or dephlogisticated air, 
and have imbibed it, and have become saturated with it, 
when exposed to phlogisticated, nitrous, inflammable, or 
fixed air. The only difficulty is with respect to the fixed 
air; for all the other kinds certainly contain phlogiston. 
But, as I have observed in the account of my experi- 
ments on vitriolic acid air, phlogiston seems to be neces- 
sary to the consitution of every kind of air; and besides, 
the blackness of the blood may arise from other causes 
|P_240
than its acquiring phlogiston. gaber, for instance, ob- 
serves, that blood becomes black when it begins to pu- 
trify, as does also whenever it is dried and hardened 
near the fire. Father beccaria also found, as I have ob- 
served, that red blood continued (and he could hardly fail 
to observe also, that it became) black in vacuo, where it 
could not have imbibed phlogiston. This I found to be 
the case when the blood was covered two inches and a 
half with serum; but it regained its florid colour when 
it was exposed to the open air. 

In general, however, it cannot be expected, that when 
blood has become black without having received phlo- 
giston ab extra, it will recover its florid colour by being 
exposed to the air. For the delicacy of its texture, and 
consequently its capacity of being easily affected by phlo- 
giston, may be essentially altered by internal causes of 
blackness. This is even the case when blood has become 
black by being exposed to nitrous and inflammable air, 
though this change is probably effected by its imbibing 
phlogiston. 

I exposed pieces of the same mass of red blood to these 
two kinds of air, and also to fixed air at the same time. 
They all became black: but that which was in the in- 
flammable air was the least so, and none of them reco- 
vered their florid colour in the open air. But at another 
time, a piece of crassamentum, which had become black 
in fixed air, did, in some measure, and very slowly, reco- 
ver its florid colour in dephlogisticated air. Perhaps 
the pieces that had lost their colour in the nitrous and 
|P_241
inflammable air might have recovered it by means of this 
more powerful menstruum. 

Since, however, blood, after becoming black in phlo- 
gisticated air, is always capable of resuming its red co- 
lour on being again exposed to pure air, it may be con- 
cluded, that the preceding blackness, discharged in the 
pure air, and producing the constant effect of phlogiston, 
in depraving the air, was owing to the phlogiston it had 
imbibed in the former situation, and which it parted with 
in the latter. And this is remarkably the case when 
blood is transferred from phlogisticated into dephlogisti- 
cated air. Even the circumstance of the deeper colour is 
sufficient to give a chemist a suspicion that it contains 
more phlogiston than blood of a lighter colour. 

When I had found how readily pieces of blood changed 
their colour, according to the quality of the air to which 
they were exposed, I proceeded to examine the state of 
that air, in order to observe what change had taken place 
in it; and as dephlogisticated air admits of a more sensi- 
ble change of quality than common air, I gave it the pre- 
ference in this experiment; putting a piece of crassa- 
mentum, about the bigness of a walnut, into the quantity 
of about five ounce measures of this air. 

This process I continued for the space of twenty-four 
hours, changing the blood about ten or twelve times; 
after which I found the air so far depraved, that whereas, 
at the beginning of the experiment, one measure of it and 
two of nitrous air occupied the space of no more than 
half a measure, the same mixtures afterwards occupied 
|P_242
the space of a measure and a half. Now since air is uni- 
versally depraved by phlogiston, and in this sense, I be- 
lieve, by nothing else, it is evident, that this black blood 
must have communicated phlogiston to the air; and con- 
sequently its change of colour from black to a florid red 
must have been occasioned by the separation of phlo- 
giston from it. 

The next day, when, of course, the blood was nearer 
to the state of putrefaction, in which every kind of sub- 
stance, without exception, will injure respirable air, I put 
a quantity of red blood, tinged in a few places with black, 
which I could not easily separate from it, to about the same 
quantity of the same dephlogisticated air, and suffered it 
to stand, without changing, for the same space of time; 
when it was so little injured, that the measures abovemen- 
tioned occupied the space of only two-thirds of a measure. 

That blood has a power of taking phlogiston from 
air, as well as imparting phlogiston to air, I satisfied my- 
self by exposing blood of a very beautiful florid colour 
to nitrous air, inflammable air, and phlogisticated air. 
The two first mentioned kinds of air were considerably 
diminished by the process, which was continued two 
days, during which time the blood had been changed 
five or six times. 

The nitrous air, by this means, lost a great proportion 
of its power of diminishing, that is, phlogisticating, 
oommon air. For now two measures of common air and 
cne of this occupied the space of 2¼, instead of 1¾ mea- 
sures. The inflammable air, though still inflammable, 
|P_243
was rendered in some degree wholesome by the process; 
being, after this, considerably diminished by nitrous air, 
which is a state to which it is brought by agitation in 
water, and which, continued longer, deprives it of its in- 
flammability likewise. It cannot be doubted, therefore, 
but that, in both these cases, the red blood, by becoming 
black, received phlogiston from these two kinds of air. 

With respect to the phlogisticated air, I only observed 
that, after a few hours exposure to the red blood, it was 
sensibly, but not much, diminished by nitrous air, which 
otherwise it would not have been in the least degree. 
This blood, however, was of the lightest colour; that is, 
according to my hypothesis, the most free from phlo- 
giston, of any that I have ever seen; and I have tried the 
same thing, without success, with blood of a less florid 
colour, though as florid as the common air could make it. 
But it should be considered, that the proper function of the 
blood is not to receive phlogiston from air, not meeting 
with any phlogisticated air in the course of its circula- 
tion, but to communicate phlogiston to air; and there- 
fore, there is by no means the same reason to expect, that 
air will be mended by red blood, as that it will be injured 
by black blood. 

It may be objected to this hypothesis, concerning the 
use of the blood, that it never comes into actual contact 
with the air in the lungs, but is separated from it, though 
as Dr. hales states it, at the distance of no more than a 
thousandth part of an inch. The red globules also swim 
|P_244
in a large quantity of serum, which is a fluid of a quite 
different nature. 

In order to ascertain the effect of these circumstances, 
I took a large quantity of black blood, and put it into a 
bladder moistened with a little serum, and tying it very 
close, hung it in a free exposure to the air, though in a 
quiescent state; and the next day I found, upon exami- 
nation, that all the lower surface of the blood, which had 
been separated from the common air by the intervention 
of the bladder (which is an animal membrane, similar to 
that which constitutes the vesicles of the lungs, and is at 
least as thick) and likewise a little serum, had acquired a 
coating of a florid red colour, and as thick, I believe, as 
it would have acquired, if it had been immediately ex- 
posed to the open air; so that this membrane had been no 
impediment to the action of the air upon the blood. In 
this case it is evident to observe, that the change of co- 
lour could not be owing to evaporation, as Mr. cigna con- 
jectures. This experiment I repeated, without previously 
moistening the bladder, and with the very same result. 

I observed also, that when I cut out a piece of the 
crassamentum, and left the remainder in the vessel 
with the serum, not only that part of the surface which 
was exposed to the air, but that which was surrounded 
with serum, and even covered with it to the depth of se- 
veral inches, acquired the florid colour; so that this deep 
covering of serum, which must have effectually prevented 
all evaporation, was no more an impediment to the mu- 
tual action of the blood and the air, than the bladder had 
|P_245
been. The serum of the blood, therefore, appears to be 
as wonderfully adapted to answer its purpose, of a vehicle 
for the red globules, as the red globules themselves: for 
the slightest covering of water, or saliva, effectually pre- 
vents the blood from acquiring its florid colour; and Mr. 
cigna found that this was the case when it was covered 
with oil. 

That it is really the air, acting through the serum, and 
not the serum itself, that gives the florid colour to the blood, 
is clearly ascertained by the following experiment. I 
took two equal portions of black blood, and put them 
into equal cups, containing equal quantities of serum, 
which covered them to the depth of half an inch. One 
of these cups standing in the open air, and the other being 
placed under an exhausted receiver, the former presently 
acquired a florid colour, while the other continued twelve 
hours as black as at first. Being taken out of the receiver, 
it stood all night in the open air without becoming red, 
and continued black ever after, even when the serum was 
poured off. 

I also more completely satisfied myself of the influence 
of the air upon the blood, through a body of serum, by 
the reverse of this experiment. For I found that red 
blood became black through the depth of two inches of 
serum, when the vessel containing it was exposed to 
phlogisticated air; so that the red globules of the blood 
both receive, and part with phlogiston by means of the 
air, notwithstanding the interposition of a large body of 
the fluid in which they naturally float. 

|P_246
Except serum, milk is the only animal fluid that I have 
tried, through which the air can act upon blood: for 
black blood became red when it was plunged in milk, in 
the same manner as if it had been covered with serum. In 
urine, indeed, black blood becomes instantly red; but 
this is not owing to the action of the air, through the 
urine, but to the saline nature of that fluid. 

In some cases, care must be taken to distinguish the 
floridness with which some detached parts of a quantity 
of blood are tinged, from that which penetrates the solid 
parts of it. In saliva, and in water impregnated with 
alkaline salt, fixed or volatile, and also in spirit of wine, 
the extreme angles and edges of pieces of crassamentum 
and small detached parts, floating in those liquors, will 
appear of a very florid red, while the compact mass of 
blood continues dark. The florid colour of the promi- 
nent and detached parts, in these cases, seems to be the 
mere effect of the minute division of the parts of the 
crassamentum in the fluid in which those parts float; 
when at the same time it has no such effect on those 
parts which remain compact, nor has the air the least 
power of acting on the blood through the liquor. 

I had imagined, that since black blood contains more 
phlogiston than red blood, that difference would have 
appeared in the air produced from them, either by being 
simply dissolved in spirit of nitre, or when dried and 
made into a paste with that acid. But the difference was 
too small to be sensible to this kind of test. For this 
purpose, however, I had some blood drawn from the vein 
|P_247
of a sheep, and also took some that came first after killing 
it, as the butchers usually do, by dividing the carotid ar- 
tery; but though I dissolved the black part of the for- 
mer, and the red part of the latter, in equal quantities of 
the same spirit of nitre, I found no sensible difference in 
the air that they yielded. The air that I got from them 
when dried, and made into a paste with spirit of nitre, 
was likewise equally indistinguishable. The quantity of 
air from this process was very great, and was produced 
irregularly, as I have observed it to have been when pro- 
duced by a solution in spirit of nitre without drying. 
Observations on Air, vol. II. p. 155. Half of this pro- 
duce was fixed air, and the rest phlogisticated, except that 
a candle burned in it with a lambent blue flame. It is 
evident, however, from this experiment, that even the 
most florid blood contains a considerable quantity of 
phlogiston; for, otherwise, this air would have been de- 
phlogisticated. 

I would conclude this paper with observing, that I 
have found a very great difference in the constitution of 
blood with respect to its property of being affected by the 
influence of the air; some becoming very soon of a light 
florid colour, and the stratum of this colour soon grow- 
ing very thick; whereas, in other cases, the colour of 
the blood, in the most favourable circumstances, has con- 
tinued much darker, and the lighter colour have never 
penetrated very far. 

As the principal use of the blood seems to be its power 
of receiving and discharging phlogiston, and the degree 
|P_248
in which it possesses this power is easily ascertained by 
the eye, it might not, perhaps, be unworthy of being par- 
ticularly attended to by physicians. To estimate the 
goodness of blood, according to this criterion, nothing is 
requisite but to observe the lightness of the colour, and 
the depth of the light-coloured stratum, after it has been 
exposed to the air for a given time. In cases in which 
the blood is unusually black, and but little affected by 
common air, it should seem, that breathing a purer air 
might be prescribed with advantage. 

In general, the blood that I have been able to procure 
in the city has not been so good as that which I have got 
in the country; owing, perhaps, to the cattle having been 
much driven, and heated before they were killed. 


[^1. R. Jan. 25, 
1776. ^]