

[^Sample 1: article - PT69_0325^]

|P_325
[}XXII. Account of the Manner in which the Russians treat 
Persons affected by the Fumes of burning Charcoal, and 
other Effluvia of the same Nature. In a Letter from 
Matthew Guthrie, M. D. to Joseph Priestley, LL. D. 
F. R. S. }]
[}Read March 4, 1779. }]
dear sir, 
St. Petersburg, 
October 12, 1778. 

I SHALL endeavour to recollect, according to your 
desire, the particulars of that part of my former let- 
ter which related to the mode of recovering people in 
Russia, who are apparently deprived of life by the prin- 
|P_326
ciple emitted from burning charcoal, or by the in- 
crustation formed upon the insides of the boors huts 
when it thaws. 

People of condition in this country have double win- 
dows to their houses in winter; but the commoner sort 
have only single ones, which is the reason that, during a 
severe frost, there is an incrustation formed upon the in- 
sides on the glass windows. This seems to be composed 
of condensed breath, perspiration, &c. as a number of 
people live and sleep in the same small room, especially 
in great cities. This excrementitious crust is farther im- 
pregnated with the phlogiston of candles, and of the 
oven with which the chamber is heated. 

When a thaw succeeds a hard frost of long duration, 
and this plate of ice is converted into water, there is a 
principle set loose, which produces all the terrible effects 
upon the human body which the principle emitted from 
charcoal is so well known to do in this country, where 
people every day suffer from it. However, the Russians 
constantly lay the blame upon the oven, when they are 
affected by the thawing of the crust, as the effects are 
perfectly similar, and they cannot bring themselves to 
believe, that the dissolving of so small a portion of ice 
can be attended with any bad consequence, when they 
daily melt larger masses without danger: yet the oven 
|P_327
does not at all account for the complaints brought on at 
this period; for, upon examination, they generally find 
every thing right there, and still the ugar, or hurtful 
vapour, remaining in the room. 

As the effects of both are similar, as I have said above, 
and likewise the mode of recovery, I shall only give you 
an account of the operation of the principle emitted by 
burning charcoal, and of the method of bringing those 
people to life who have been suffocated by it (as I think 
it is erroneously termed); this will supersede the neces- 
sity of giving the history of both, or rather it will be 
giving both at the same time. 

Russian houses are heated by the means of ovens; 
and the manner of heating them is as follows. A num- 
ber of billets of wood are placed in the peech of stove, 
and allowed to burn till they fall in a mass of bright red 
cinders; then the vent above is shut up, and likewise the 
door of the peech which opens into the room, in order to 
concentrate the heat; this makes the tiles of which the 
peech is composed as hot as you desire, and sufficiently 
warms the apartment; but sometimes a servant is so 
negligent as to shut up the peech or oven before the 
wood is sufficiently burnt, for the red cinders should be 
turned over from time to time to see that no bit of wood 
remains of a blackish colour, but that the whole mass is 
|P_328
of a uniform glare (as if almost transparent) before the 
openings are shut, else the ugar or vapour is sure to 
suceed to mismanagement of this sort, and its effects are 
as follows. 

If a person lays himself down to sleep in the room ex- 
posed to the influence of this vapour, he falls into so 
sound a sleep that it is difficult to awake him, but he feels 
(or is sensible of) nothing. There is no spasm excited in 
the trachea arteria or lungs to rouse him, nor does the 
breathing, by all accounts, seem to be particularly af- 
fected: in short, there is no one symptom of suffocation; 
but towards the end of the catastrophe, a sort of groan- 
ing is heard by people in the next room, which brings 
them sometimes to the relief of the sufferer. If a person 
only sits down in the room, without intention to sleep, 
he is, after some time, seized with a drowziness and in- 
clination to vomit. However, this last symptom seldom 
affects a Russian, it is chiefly foreigners who are awaked 
to their dangers by a nausea; but the natives, in common 
with strangers, perceive a dull pain in their heads, and if 
they do not remove directly, which they are often too 
sleepy to do, are soon deprived of their senses and power 
of motion, insomuch, that if no person fortunately disco- 
vers them within an hour after this worst stage, they 
are irrecoverably lost; for the Russians say, that they 
|P_329
do not succeed in restoring to life those who have lain 
more than an hour in a state of insensibility. 

The recovery is always attempted, and often effected, 
in this manner. They carry the patient immediately out 
of doors, and lay him upon the snow, with nothing on 
him but a shirt and linen drawers. His stomach amd tem- 
ples are then well rubbed with snow, and cold water, or 
milk is poured down his throat. This friction is conti- 
nued with fresh snow until the livid hue, which the body 
had when brought out, is changed to its natural colour, 
and life renewed; then they cure the violent head-ach 
which remains by binding on the forehead a cataplasm 
of black rye bread, and vinegar. 

In this manner the unfortunate man is perfectly re- 
strored, without blowing up the lungs, as is necessary in 
the case of drowned persons; on the contrary, they be- 
gin to play of themselves so soon as the surcharge of 
phlogiston makes its escape from the body. 

It is well worthy of observation, how diametrically 
opposite the modes are of restoring to life, those who 
are deprived of it by water, and those who have lost it 
by the fumes of charcoal: the one consisting in the inter- 
nal and external application of heat, and the other in that 
of cold. It may be alledged, that the stimulus of the cold 
produces heat, and the fact seems to be confirmed by 
the Russian method of restoring circulation in a frozen 
|P_330
limb by means of friction with snow. But what is sin- 
gular in the case of people apparently deprived of life in 
the manner treated of is, that the body is much warmer 
when brought out of the room than at the instant life is 
restored, and that they awake cold and shivering. The 
colour of the body is also changed from a livid red to its 
natural complexion, which, together with some other 
circumstances, would almost lead one to suspect, that 
they are restored to life by the snow and cold water some 
how or other freeing them from the load of phlogiston 
with which the system seems to be replete; for although 
the first application of cold water to the human body 
produces heat, yet, if often repeated in a very cold at- 
mosphere, it then cools instead of continuing to heat, 
just as the cold bath does when a person remains too long 
in it. 

In short, I think it is altogether a curious subject, whe- 
ther you take into consideration the mode of action of 
the principle emitted by burning charcoal, and our phlo- 
gisticated crust; or the operation of the snow and cold 
water. However, I shall by no means take upon me 
to decide, whether the dangerous symptoms related 
above are produced by the air in the room being so satu- 
rated with phlogiston as to be unable to take up the pro- 
per quantity from the lungs, which occasions a sur- 
charge in the system, according to your theory, or whe- 
|P_331
ther so subtle a fluid may somehow find its way into the 
circulation, and thereby arrest the vital powers; nor 
shall I determine whether the livid hue of the body 
when brought out is changed into a paler colour by the 
atmosphere somehow or other absorbing and freeing the 
blood from the colouring principle, as you have shewn 
to be the case with blood out of the body: these are cu- 
rious inquiries that I shall leave to your investigation. I 
have only endeavoured to collect facts from a number of 
natives who have met with this accident themselves, or 
have assisted in restoring others to life. It is so common 
a case here that it is perfectly familiar to them, and they 
never call in medical assistance. 

I am, &c. 
[^An illustration of what appears to be an obelisk and a trophy on a pedestal, surrounded by trees and shrubbery. ^]
