

[^Sample 1: article - PT71_0372^]

|P_372
[}XXIII. Account of a Child who had the Small-pox in the Womb. 
In a Letter from William Wright, M. D. F. R. S. to John 
Hunter, Esq. F. R. S. }]
[}Read May 21, 1781. }]
Southampton-buildings, Holborn, 
Feb. 27, 1781. 

sir, 

I HAVE read with much pleasure and information Mrs. 
ford's case, which you published in Phil. Trans. vol. 
LXX. p. 128. From the facts you have adduced it amounts 
to a certainty, that her fœtus had received the variolous in- 
fection in the womb. 

This induces me to lay before you a singular case, that fell 
under my care some years ago. I am sorry I cannot be more 
particular, having unfortunately lost all my books and my 
notes of practice of this case and several others, by the capture 
of the convoy on the 9th of last August. 

In 1768 the small-pox was so general in Jamaica that very 
few people escaped the contagion. About the middle of June 
Mr. peterkin, merchant at Martha-brae, in the parish of 
Trelawney, got about fifty new negroes out of a ship: soon 
after they landed, several were taken ill of a fever, and the 
small pox appeared; the others were immediately inoculated. 
Amongst the number of those who had the disease in the 
natural way, was a woman of about twenty-two years of age, 
and big with child. The eruptive fever was slight, and the 
|P_373
small-pox had appeared before I saw her. They were few, 
distinct and large, and she went through the disease with very 
little trouble, till on the fourteenth day from the eruption she 
was attacked with the fever, which lasted only a few hours. 
She was, however, the same day taken in labour, and deli- 
vered of a female child with the small-pox on her whole body, 
head, and extremities. They were distinct and very large, 
such as they commonly appear on the eighth or ninth day in 
favourable cases. The child was small and weakly; she could 
suck but little; a wet nurse was procured, and every possible 
care taken of this infant, but she died the third day after she 
was born. The mother recovered, and is now the property of 
alexander peterkin, Esq. in St. James's Parish. 

In the course of many years practice in Jamaica, I have re- 
marked, that where pregnant women had been seized with the 
natural small-pox, or been by mistake inoculated, that they 
generally miscarried in the time of, or soon after, the eruptive 
fever; but I never saw any signs of small-pox on any of their 
bodies, except on the child's above mentioned. 

I am, &c. 
[^An illustration of what appears to be an obelisk and a trophy on a pedestal, surrounded by trees and shrubbery. ^]
