

[^Sample 1: article - PT78_0350^]

|P_350
[}XXI. An Account of a remarkable Transposition of the Viscera. 
By Matthew Baillie, M. D. In a Letter to John Hunter, 
Esq. F. R. S. }]
[}Read May 8, 1788. }]
[}to john hunter, esq. f. r. s. }]
dear sir, 

A VERY singular variety having occured lately in the 
structure of the human body, I beg leave to communi- 
cate an account of it by your means to the Royal Society, 
if you should think it worthy of their notice. It happens 
by a very uncommon concurrence of circumstances, that 
while I am naturally led by the ties of affinity to apply to 
you upon this occasion, I can gratify my pride by thinking it 
is at the same time to the person who is possessed of the first 
reputation for his unwearied researches in one of the most ex- 
tensive, as well as interesting, parts of the system of nature. 
I am, &c. 
M. BAILLIE. 

Great Windmill-street, 
April 12, 1788. 

|P_351
THERE is nothing which tends more to illustrate the 
powers and the wisdom of nature than the investigation of the 
structure of animals. We there find a most wonderful deli- 
cacy of mechanism, and exquisitely adapted to a variety of 
purposes. This, however, is not to be better seen by following 
nature in her common tract than by observing her wanderings. 
In these she often shews more particularly the extent of her 
powers, and throws light on her ordinary plans. It is such 
circumstances which gave importance or value to the observa- 
tion of singular phænomena. The variety in animal structure, 
an account of which I have the honour of presenting to this 
learned Society, is a complete transposition in the human sub- 
ject of the thoracic and abdominal viscera to the opposite side 
from what is natural. 

It is so extraordinary as scarcely to have been seen by any of 
the most celebrated anatomists, and indeed has been but very 
generally noticed at all. The circumstance has been men- 
tioned, but it has not been particularly described so as to make 
it thoroughly known, or to establish its certainty. It was 
hanging in the minds of many as doubtful, whether such a 
variety did really exist. There is one circumstance that attends 
the account of the present case, which has not always hap- 
pened in the record of singular phænomena, viz. that is has 
been examined by physicians and surgeons of the first reputa- 
tion in this large town, and has been in some measure open to 
the gratification of public curiosity. Such a circumstance (were 
it necessary) would give the stamp of authenticity to appear- 
ances even much farther removed from the ordinary plans of 
nature. 

|P_352
I have been at the pains to consult many authors upon this 
subject, but with very little satisfaction. I shall not enter into 
a detail of what I have met with in the course of these re- 
searches, but shall briefly notice, that when any lusus of this 
sort is mentioned, it is commonly in a single sentence or two, 
and the transposition is not marked as universal, or it is a 
change in the situation of some viscus from disease. In short, 
I have only found this singular lusus naturæ described by Cat- 
tierius, M. Mery, and M. Daubenton; but by none of 
them is it sufficiently particular. Enough has been said to 
point out that they had exactly met with the same sort of mon- 
strosity; but many circumstances have been omitted, which I 
hope will be supplied by the present account, which I proceed 
immediately to lay before the Society. 

The person who is the subject of this Paper was a male, 
near forty years of age, somewhat above the middle stature, 
and of a clean active shape. He was brought for dissection in 
the common way to Windmill-street. Upon opening the 
cavity of the thorax and abdomen, the different situation of the 
viscera was so striking as immediately to excite to the attention of 
the pupils who were engaged in dissecting it; and Mr. Cruik- 
shank, as well as myself, were very soon informed of the sin- 
gularity. We were much surprized as well as pleased with 
the appearance, and I began immediately to examine every 
part of the change with considerable attention: for this pur- 
pose, after desiring a drawing to be made of the appearances 
as they were found upon opening the body, I next day in- 
jected it. The repeated dissections have furnished various 
views, which are represented faithfully by drawings, and 
which I hope will enable me to give a tolerably distinct ac- 
count of this singular lusus naturæ. I shall not enter in my 
description into unnecessary minutiæ: this would render the 
|P_353
Paper less suited to the Society, would not convey more infor- 
mation to persons thoroughly acquainted with anatomy, and 
would rather tend to obscure what is more important to those 
who have not given so much attention to subjects of this na- 
ture. It may not be improper to observe, that, besides the 
transposition in the viscera of this person, there are several 
peculiarities which sometimes occur. I have taken notice of 
them in my description, although they are entirely indepen- 
dent of the transposition. 

[}Description of the thorax. }]
The mediastinum, or anterior duplicature of the pleura se- 
parating the two cavities of the chest from each other, was 
found to incline obliquely downwards to the right-side fully 
as much as it does commonly to the left-side of the chest. 
The pericardium too inclined obliquely to the right-side. On 
pressing it gently away from the lungs the phrenic nerves came 
distinctly into view, in their common situation; but the right 
phrenic nerve ran more obliquely, and was longer than the 
left. The lung upon the right-side was divided by a single 
oblique fissure into two lobes, having at the same time a defi- 
ciency opposite to the apex of the heart; and the lung on the 
left-side was divided into three lobes, exactly contrary to what 
is found in ordinary cases. 

On opening the pericardium the apex of the heart was found 
to point to the right-side nearly opposite to the sixth rib, and 
its cavities as well as large vessels were completely transposed. 
What are commonly called the right auricle and ventricle were 
situated on the left-side, and the left auricle and ventricle on 
|P_354
the right. The pulmonary artery ascended towards the right- 
side of the chest. The aorta was also directing its arch to the 
right; and the vena cava superior, as well as inferior, were 
seen opening into their auricle on the left-side of the spine. 
There was nothing remarkable in the size or general figure of 
the heart. 

On the outside of the pericardium the transposition of the 
larger vessels was very striking. The longer sub-clavian vein 
was passing from the left-side obliquely to the right before the 
branches which are sent off from the arch of the aorta. The 
left carotid and sub-clavian arteries were found to arise from 
the arch of the aorta by one common trunk; the right carotid 
and sub-clavian separately. 

In the duplicature of the pleura behind, or what may be 
called the posterior mediastinum, there was a change cor- 
responding to what we have already described. The descend- 
ing aorta was found passing on the right side of the spine. The 
œsophagus was before it, inclining more and more to the right 
towards its lower extremity, and it at length perforated the 
diaphragm somewhat on the right-side of the spine [/1./]. The 
thoracic duct was seen in the middle between the descending 
aorta and the vena azygos in some places forming a plexus of 
small branches, in another dividing itself into two branches, 
which afterwards re-united in a common trunk, and at length 
climbing up to terminate in the angle between the jugular and 
sub-clavian veins on the right-side of the body. The recur- 
rent nerve of the parvagum on the right-side passed round the 
beginning of the descending aorta, and on the left passed round 
|P_355
the common trunk of the carotid and sub-clavian arteries. The 
large intercostal nerves being exactly under the same circum- 
stances on each side, it was impossible there could be any trans- 
position in them. It appears then, from the foregoing descrip- 
tion, that every thing admitting of such a change was com- 
pletely transposed in the thorax. 

[}Of the abdomen. }]
The liver was situated in the left hypochondriac region, the 
small lobe being towards the right, and the great lobe in the 
left-side. The ligaments uniting it to the diaphragm cor- 
responded to this change, the right transverse ligament being 
longer, and the left being shorter, than usual. The suspen- 
sory ligament could undergo little change, except being pushed 
to the left-side along with the liver. On pressing upwards the 
liver, so as to exhibit its posterior and under surface, the gall 
bladder was seen on the left-side preserving its proper relative 
situation to the great lobe of the liver, and the vessels of the 
portæ were found upon dissection to be transposed correspond- 
ing to the change of circumstances. The hepatic artery was 
found climbing up obliquely from the right towards the left, 
before the lobulus spigelii, and entered at the portæ into the 
substance of the liver by two or three branches on the right of 
the other vessels. The ductus communis cholidochus was on 
the left of the other vessels, being formed from the ductus 
hepaticus and ductus cysticus in the common way, and it passed 
obliquely downwards on the left, to terminate in the duode- 
num. What was most remarkable, of which indeed I never saw 
or heard of any instance before, it terminated in the fore-part of 
the duodenum. The vena portarum passed behind the hepatic 
|P_356
artery and ductus communis cholidochus, ascending obliquely 
towards the left-side. 

The spleen was situated in the right hypochondriac region, 
adhering to the diaphragm in the common way. What was 
very remarkable was, there being three spleens, nearly of the 
size of a pullet's egg, found adhering to the larger spleen by 
short adhesions, besides two other still smaller spleens which 
were involved in the epiploon at the great end of the stomach. 
I never saw so many small spleens in any one subject. The 
pancreas was found on the right-side behind the stomach, run- 
ning obliquely from the spleen to the curvature of the duo- 
denum, and had its duct entering in common with the ductus 
communis cholidochus into the cavity of that intestine. The 
splenic vessels were passing along the upper edge of the pan- 
creas to the right-side, corresponding to the change of situation 
in the pancreas and spleen. 

The stomach was situated on the right-side, partly hid by 
the small lobe of the liver passing to the left, and terminating 
in the pylorus, rather on the left side of the spine. The duo- 
denum took a most singular course; it first passed to the right- 
side, behind the small end of the stomach; it then turned 
upon itself, towards the left-side; it afterwards took its proper 
sweep to the right-side, passing behind the superior mesenteric 
artery and mesaraica major vein. The mesentery began to be 
formed on the right-side, instead of the left, as in ordinary 
cases. The ilium terminated in the great intestine on the left- 
side, and there was in it a diverticulum of considerable size, a 
lusus not unfrequently occurring. The cæcum was situated on 
the left psoas magnus and iliacus internus muscels. The 
transverse arch of the colon passed from the left to the right- 
|P_357
side of the body, and the sigmoid flexure crossed over the right 
psoas, to get into the cavity of the pelvis. 

The kidnies had their vessels transposed, as we shall remark 
more particularly afterwards; the renal capsules had undergone 
no change, as no variety could be produced by a transposition. 

The aorta passed between the crura of the diaphragm into 
the cavity of the abdomen, and adhered in its course to the 
spine on the right-side of the vena cava inferior. Its branches 
were directed in their course corresponding to the peculiar 
situation of the viscera. The splenic and coronary arteries 
were passing to the right-side, and the hepatic artery obliquely 
to the left. The superior and inferior mesenteric arteries were 
directed to the right-side. There was no change in the sper- 
matic arteries, any transposition in the testicles (if such a 
thing could take place) not being capable of affecting them. 
The lumbar arteries could also undergo little change, except 
that the left lumbar arteries must necessarily, from the peculiar 
situation of the aorta, be the longest. The vena cava inferior 
perforated the tendinous portion of the diaphragm, and ad- 
hered in its course to the spine on the left-side of the aorta. 

The right emulgent vein was much longer than usual, passing 
from the right kidney before the aorta to terminate in the vena 
cava superior; and the left emulgent much shorter, passing from 
the left kidney to the vena cava, which was situated on the left 
side of the spine. The right spermatic vein was found to open 
into the right emulgent, and the left into the vena cava infe- 
rior, about an inch under the left emulgent. The vena por- 
tarum was changed from its natural course, passing obliquely 
upwards to the left-side, and its large branches, viz. the vena 
splenica, mesaraica major and minor, were all directed towards 
the right-side of the spine. 

|P_358
There was no change in the intercostal nerve within the 
cavity of the abdomen; nor does it seem to be capable of 
being affected by any transposition of parts. We see then, 
that there was a complete transposition of the abdominal vis- 
cera, each of them preserving its proper relative situation to 
the others. 

I examined the brain, organs of sense, of generation, the 
muscles and blood vessels of the extremities, but found nothing 
in them remarkable. Indeed, I had no expectation of it; for 
all these parts perfectly independent of thoracic or abdo- 
minal viscera; but I did it to satisfy myself and the curiosity 
of others, who might wish to put such a question, or have 
such a question arising in their minds. 

The person seems to have used his right-hand in preference 
to his left, as is usually the case, which was readily disco- 
vered by the greater bulk and hardness of that hand, as well 
as the greater fleshiness of the arm. It was not to be ex- 
pected he should be left-handed; but I mentioned this circum- 
stance too, with a view to satisfy a curiosity which I know 
has been excited in many who have heard of this lusus. 

I have been at considerable pains to learn something of the 
history of this person during life; but the particulars I have 
heard are applicable only to the circumstances of common men, 
having no connection with singularity of structure, and there- 
fore, I think, it would be abusing the time of the Society to 
give any account of them. One thing it may be right to 
mention is, that the person, while alive, was not conscious of 
any uncommon situation of his heart; and that his brother, 
whom I have seen, has his heart pointing to the left-side as in 
ordinary cases. Indeed, there was little reason to expect that 
we should meet with any thing particular in the account of his 
|P_359
life. His health could not be affected by such a change of 
situation in his viscera; nor could there arise from it any pecu- 
liar symptoms of disease. Still less could there be any con- 
nection between such a change and his dispositions, or external 
actions. He might have known that his heart was directed 
towards the right-side; but if we consider how little every 
person, especially those of the lower class, are attentive to 
circumstances not very palpable, it was scarcely to be expected 
he should know of it. If I had met with any thing in his life 
which was at all referable to the singularity of structure, I 
should have been very glad to have gratified the public curiosity 
by giving an account of it [/2./]. 

Every singular phænomenon in animal structure is worth 
remarking, even if it should not lead immediately to any use- 
ful observation; but it becomes more important if it should 
tend to throw any light upon the principles of nature in the 
formation of animals. It is reasonable to think, that nature 
should follow some general plan in her operations. There is 
some effect which she has in view, and she will generally em- 
ploy the same means to produce it. In the structure of any 
animal, her view is to form such a combination of parts as to 
render the animal fitted for certain purposes. She will com- 
monly form the same combination where the same purposes 
are to be served; or, in other words, there will be the same 
structure in the same species of animals. The same effect 
however may be produced, without a strict adherence to the 
employment of the same means, as we find to be the case 
|P_360
in all human inventions, and therefore there is no reason why 
nature should not sometimes deviate from her ordinary plans. 
Accordingly we find there is much variety in animal structure; 
but this does not commonly affect the animal functions. 
Under this restriction the variety is so great in the appearances 
of every part of an animal, that it is almost impossible to exa- 
mine any two animals of the same species without remarking 
many differences. 

In the bony compages of an animal we find little variety in 
the extremities of bones where there is the apparatus of a joint, 
because a particular shape is best adapted to a particular kind or 
latitude of motion. In other parts of the bones, where a 
difference of features is not material, there is great variety, as 
in the foramina, depressions, ridges, and sutures of bones. 

The same general rule will apply to variety in muscles. The 
principal object is a certain insertion near a joint, so as to give 
a determined direction of motion. With respect to such in- 
sertions, there is, comparatively speaking, little variety; but 
there is a great difference in the bodies and connections of mus- 
cles, which have no share in the regulation of the motion. 

There is no part of an animal where there is a greater lati- 
tude of variety than in the distribution of blood vessels. The 
reason of it is very obvious. The only object in the distribu- 
tion of blood vessels is, to carry blood to every part of the 
body and bring it back to the heart. The parts of an animal, 
in order to be supported, must be visited by successive changes 
of fresh blood; but it surely cannot be an object of impor- 
tance whether the blood passes by one rout or another. Hence 
the variety in blood vessels is extremely great. Still, however, 
there is a method in the deviations of nature, so that they 
|P_361
may be marked or noted, the same varieties occuring in dif- 
ferent animals. 

It cannot be at all important to the function of a viscus, 
whether it be in one mass, or in separate portions. The struc- 
ture being the same, the same action will take place. Hence 
we often find the two kidnies joined together, forming one 
mass; and not unfrequently two or three spleens besides the 
common one. Neither can it be important, whether a viscus 
should always be of the same shape, because its functions do 
not depend on shape, but on structure: we find accordingly, 
in this particular, much variety. 

There are many of the viscera which are connected together 
in their functions, or by the junction of large blood-vessels, 
in such a way as to require nearly the same relative situation 
among themselves. This becomes also necessary in order to 
preserve the general shape of the animal. Accordingly we 
find, that when any important viscus is changed in its situa- 
tion, it affects the situation of other viscera, requiring in them 
a similar change. We saw in the person who is the subject 
of this Paper, that a change in the situation of the heart and 
liver was accompanied with a change of situation in the sto- 
mach, spleen, pancreas, and in short the whole abdominal 
viscera. This, however, is a great deviation in nature; for 
it is nothing less than changing almost the whole vital system 
in an animal, and therefore it rarely happens. 

In such a change it does not appear, that the functions can 
be affected, as they depend on structure and situation, which 
are both preserved. Hence the person who is the subject of 
this Paper arrived at the age of maturity, and might have 
continued to live to an extreme old age. 

|P_362
The human machine might have been constructed in this 
way generally, and under such circumstances what is now 
called the natural situation of parts would have been as singu- 
lar as the present phænomenon. 

There appears to be less variety in the nervous system of 
animals of the same species than in most parts of the body. 
There is scarcely any difference in the appearance of the brain, 
and much less in the distribution of the nerves than of the 
blood-vessels. 

There is also little in variety in the organs of sense: perhaps 
the mechanism in both these is nicer, so that a considerable 
deviation would interfere with their peculiar functions. 

The most common great deviations which nature produces 
in the structure of an animal are various kinds of monstrosity, 
by which the animal becomes often unfit for continuing its 
existence. Why nature should in its greater deviations fall 
into a very imperfect formation, much below the standard of 
her common work, does not appear very obvious. 

It seems that there might have been many varieties where 
the functions could have been preserved. Perhaps it is with a 
view to check the propagation of great varieties, so as to pre- 
serve an uniformity in the same species of animals. 

It has been much agitated, whether monstrosities depend on 
the original formation, or are produced afterwards in the gra- 
dual evolution of an animal. 

This does not appear to be a question of much importance; 
nor perhaps can it be absolutely determined. But upon the 
whole it is more reasonable to think, that the same plan of for- 
mation is continued from the beginning, than that at any sub- 
sequent period there is a change in that plan. 

|P_363
It may be observed, that it is exactly the same creative action 
which produces the natural structure, or any deviation from it; 
for in cases of deviation the action is either carried too far, 
ceases too soon, or is diverted into uncommon channels. This 
will explain the various kinds of monstrosity from redundancy, 
deficiency, or transposition of parts. 


[^1. 
* The vena azygos was on the left-side of the spine opening in the common 
way into the vena cava superior, which we formerly mentioned to be also 
transposed in its situation. 
^]
[^2. 
* Since the above lusus has occurred, I have seen, in the possession of Mr. 
Payne, Surgeon, a fœtus at the full time, with the viscera transposed. In the 
Anatomical Collection of Christ Church, in Oxford, there is a heart transposed 
that had belonged to a very small fœtus; but the fœtus itself is not preserved. 
^]