

[^Sample 1: article - PT87_0416^]

|P_416
[}XIX. Observations and Experiments on the Colour of Blood. 
By William Charles Wells, M. D. F. R. S. }]
Read July 6, 1797. 

Dr. Priestley is, I believe, the only person who has hi- 
therto attempted to shew by what means common air brightens 
the colour of blood, which has been for some time exposed to 
it. [/1./] His opinion is, that the air produces this effect by de- 
priving the blood of its phlogiston; for blood, according to the 
same author, is wonderfully fitted both to imbibe and to part 
with phlogiston, becoming black when charged with that 
principle, but highly florid when freed from it. Various ar- 
guments may be brought to prove that this opinion is erro- 
neous, even upon the admission of such a principle of bodies 
as phlogiston. It may be said, for instance, that it is contrary 
to the laws of chemical affinity, that the same mass should, at 
one time, convert pure into phlogisticated air, by giving out 
its phlogiston, and immediately after reconvert phlogisticated 
into pure air, by imbibing that principle; both which changes 
are supposed by Dr. Priestley to be induced by blood upon 
those airs. Again; it may be urged, that, since the neutral 
salts, and the different alkalis, when saturated with fixed air, 
produce the same effect as common air upon the colour of 
blood, if common air acts by attracting phlogiston, those other 
bodies must have a similar operation. But surely it cannot be 
|P_417
thought, that the mild volatile alkali, which has been supposed 
by chemists to superabound with phlogiston, can yet attract it 
from blood. It appears to me, however, unnecessary to bring 
any further arguments of this kind against the opinion of Dr. 
Priestley, since the following experiments will, I expect, be 
thought sufficient to shew, in opposition to what is taken for 
granted by him in the whole of his inquiry, that the alteration 
induced upon the colour of blood, both by common air and the 
neutral salts, is altogether independent of any change effected 
by them upon its colouring matter. 

I infused a piece of black crassamentum of blood in dis- 
tilled water, and immediately after covered the containing 
vessel closely, to prevent the access of air. Having obtained 
by this means a transparent solution of the red matter of blood, 
nearly free from serum and coagulable lymph, I exposed a 
quantity of it to the open air, in a shallow vessel, and poured 
an equal quantity into a small phial, which was then well 
closed. When the first portion of the solution had been ex- 
posed to the air for several hours, I decanted it into a phial, of 
the same size and shape as that which contained the second 
portion, and having added to it as much distilled water as was 
sufficient to compensate the loss it had suffered by evapo- 
ration, I now compared the two together, with regard both to kind and 
degree. I afterwards poured two other equal quantities of the 
red solution into two phials of the same size and shape. To 
one I added a little of a solution of nitre in water, and to the 
other as much distilled water. Upon comparing the two mix- 
tures together, I found that they also possessed precisely the 
same colour. Lastly, I cut a quantity of dark crassamentum 
|P_418
of blood into thin slices, and exposed them to common air. 
When they became florid, I put them into a phial containing 
distilled water. I then took as much of the same crassamen- 
tum, which was still black, and infused it in an equal quantity 
of distilled water, contained in a phial similar in size and shape 
to the former. The two solutions which were thus obtained, 
one from florid blood, the other from black blood, were, not- 
withstanding, of precisely the same colour. These experiments 
were frequently repeated, and were attended with the same 
results, as often as I used certain precautions, which shall be 
mentioned hereafter, as the reasons for them will then be more 
readily understood than they can be at present. 

Assuming therefore as proved, that neither common air, nor 
the neutral salts (for all those I have tried are similar to nitre 
in this respect) change the colour of the red matter of blood; 
I shall now attempt to explain the manner in which those sub- 
stances give, notwithstanding, to black blood a florid appear- 
ance; premising, however, some observations upon the colours 
of bodies in general. 

It was the opinion of Kepler, [/2./] that light is reflected with- 
out colour from the surfaces of bodies; which he says is easily 
proved, by exposing to the sun's light a number of cups filled 
with transparent liquors of different colours, and receiving the 
reflexions from them upon a white ground in a dark place. 
Zucchius, who was younger than Kepler, but for some time his 
cotemporary, taught more explicitly, [/3./] that the colours of bodies 
depend, not upon the light which is reflected from their anterior 
surfaces, but upon that portion of it which is received into their 
|P_419
internal parts, and is thence sent back through those sur- 
faces. The following are some of the experiments, upon which 
he founded this doctrine. He exposed small round pieces of 
transparent glass, tinged with various colours, to the light of 
the sun, and received what was reflected from them upon white 
paper, in a darkened part of his room. He then found, that 
each glass produced two luminous circles, which, when the 
paper was sufficiently remote, were entirely separate from each 
other; and that the circle which proceeded from the upper 
surface of the glass was altogether without colour, while that 
which arose from the under surface, was of the same colour as 
the glass exhibited, when held between the light and the eye. 
From these experiments Zucchius also concluded, first, that 
every coloured body must be in some degree transparent, since 
a body absolutely impenetrable to light, could only reflect the 
colours of other bodies, but possess none of its own; and, se- 
condly, that all bodies, which appear coloured when seen by 
reflected light, must be in some measure opake; for as the 
light which is reflected from their surfaces comes untinged to 
the eye, if that part of it which penetrates their substance 
were afterwards to proceed in it without impediment, no co- 
lour could be exhibited by them. [/4./]

|P_420
When Sir Isaac Newton began his experiments upon light 
and colours, it was generally believed, that colours in opake 
bodies arise from some modification given to light, by the 
surfaces which reflect it. In opposition to one part of this 
opinion, our great philosopher maintained, that such bodies are 
seen coloured, from their acting differently upon the different 
colorific rays, of which white light is composed; but having 
established this point beyond dispute, he seems to have ad- 
mitted, without inquiry, that colours are produced at the sur- 
faces of the opake bodies to which they belong. For his expe- 
riments do not necessarily lead to such a conclusion; on the 
contrary, they are not more consistent with it, than they are 
with the opinion of Kepler and Zucchius. This opinion, 
indeed, he appears not to have known; since he has taken for 
granted, what is contradicted by the experiments upon which 
it is founded, that the tinging particles of transparent bodies 
reflect coloured light. [/5./]

The very splendour of Sir Isaac Newton's discoveries in 
optics, has probably done some injury to this branch of know- 
ledge; for soon after they were made public, it became a 
common opinion, that the subject of light and colours had 
been exhausted by that great man, and that no writer upon it 
before him, was now worthy of being read. The former part 
of this opinion has long been generally acknowledged to be 
unjust; but the latter part of it is still maintained by many, 
|P_421
among whom may be placed the learned Mr. Delaval. This 
gentleman has lately published [/6./] a very elaborate treatise to 
prove, that the colours of opake bodies do not arise from the 
rays of light which they reflect from their anterior surfaces; 
but from that portion of it, which, having penetrated their an- 
terior surfaces, is reflected by the opake particles which are 
diffused through their substance. But had the learned author 
not believed, that no European writer upon colours, before Sir 
Isaac Newton, contained any valuable information upon that 
subject, he would probably have discovered, that both Kepler
and Zucchius had long ago maintained the very opinion which 
he now advances, and that they had built it upon experiments 
similar to his own. The merit of the invention of this theory 
belongs, therefore, to the great Kepler; but still much praise 
is due to Mr. Delaval, both for reviving and confirming it; 
since, though it be not free from defects in some of its parts, it 
affords solutions of several optical difficulties, which, as far as I 
know, admit of an explanation from no other source. Among 
these I regard the phænomenon which is the subject of the 
present inquiry. 

To shew then, from the theory of Kepler, Zucchius, and 
Delaval, how common air and the neutral salts may brighten 
the appearance of blood, without producing any change upon 
its colouring matter, I shall first suppose that all its parts have 
the same reflective power. The consequence will be, that a 
mass sufficiently thick to suffocate the whole of the light which 
enters it, before it can proceed to the posterior surface, and be 
thence returned through the first surface, must appear black; 
|P_422
for the rays which are reflected from the first surface are without 
colour, and, by hypothesis, none can be reflected from its inter- 
nal parts. In the next place, let there be dispersed through this 
black mass a small number of particles, differing from it in re- 
flective power, and it will immediately appear slightly coloured; 
for some of the rays, which have penetrated its surface, will 
be reflected by those particles, and will come to the eye ob- 
scurely tinged with the colour, which is exhibited by a thin 
layer of blood, when placed between us and the light. Increase 
now by degrees the number of those particles, and in the same 
proportion as they are multiplied, must the colour of the mass 
become both stronger and brighter. 

Having thus shewn that a black mass may become highly 
coloured, merely by a considerable reflexion of light from its 
internal parts; if I should now be able to prove, that both 
common air and the neutral salts increase the reflexion of light 
from the internal parts of blood, at the same time that they 
brighten it, great progress would certainly be made in esta- 
blishing the opinion, that the change of its appearance, which 
is occasioned by them, depends upon that circumstance alone. 
But the following observations seem to place this point beyond 
doubt. 

I compared several pieces of crassamentum of blood, which 
had been reddened by means of common air and the neutral 
salts, with other pieces of the same crassamentum, which were 
still black, or nearly so; upon which I found, that the red- 
dened pieces manifestly reflected more light than the black. 
One proof of this was, that the minute parts of the former 
could be much more distinctly seen than those of the latter. 
Now this increased reflection of light, in the reddened pieces, 
|P_423
could not arise from any change in the reflective power of 
their surfaces; for bodies reflect light from their surfaces in 
proportion to their density and inflammability; and neither of 
those qualities, in the reddened pieces of crassamentum, can 
be supposed to have been augmented by common air, or a 
solution of a neutral salt in water. The increased reflection 
must, consequently, have arisen from some change in their 
internal parts, by means of which much of the light which had 
formerly been suffocated, was now sent back through their 
anterior surfaces, tinged with the colour of the medium through 
which it had passed. 

The precise nature of the change which is induced upon 
blood by the neutral salts, is made manifest by the following 
experiment. I poured upon a piece of printed card as much 
serum, rendered very turbid with red globules, as barely al- 
lowed the words to be legible through it. I next dropped upon 
the card a little of a solution of nitre in water; when I obser- 
ved, that, wherever the solution came in contact with the 
turbid serum, a whitish cloud was immediately formed. The 
two fluids were then stirred together; upon which the mixture 
became so opake, that the printed letters upon the card could 
no longer be seen. I have not hitherto been able to devise any 
experiment, which shews the exact change induced by common 
air; but it is evident that air must also, in some way, increase 
the opacity of' blood, since it can, by no other means, increase 
the reflection of light from the interior parts of that body. 

This theory explains another fact respecting the colour of 
blood, which might otherwise seem unaccountable. If a small 
quantity of a concentrated mineral acid be applied to a piece of 
dark crassamentum, the parts touched by it will for an instant 
|P_424
appear florid; but the same acids, added to a solution of the red 
matter in water, do nothing more than destroy its colour. 
Upon examining the crassamentum, a reason for this difference 
of effect is discovered; for the spots, upon which the acid was 
dropped, are found covered with whitish films. From which it 
seems evident, that the acid had occasioned an increase of opa- 
city in the crassamentum, more quickly than it had destroyed 
its colour; and that the red matter, from having been in con- 
sequence seen by a greater quantity of light, had in that short 
interval appeared more florid than formerly. 

The change which, I think, I have proved to take place in 
blood, when its colour is brightened by common air and the 
neutral salts, is similar to that which occurs to cinnabar, in the 
making of vermilion. This pigment, it is known, is formed 
from cinnabar, merely by subjecting it to a minute mechanical 
division. But the effect of this division is, to interpose among 
its particles, an infinite number of molecules of air, which, now 
acting as opake matter, increase the reflection of light from 
the interior parts of the heap, and by this means occasion the 
whole difference of appearance which is observed between those 
two states of the same chemical body. 

I expect, however, it will be said, in opposition to what I have 
advanced, that, granting an increased reflection of light takes 
place from the interior parts of blood, in consequence of the ap- 
plication of common air and the neutral salts, still this is not a 
sufficient cause for the production of the colour which they occa- 
sion; for the colour of blood, after those substances have acted 
upon it, is a scarlet, which, agreeably to the observation of a 
learned and ingenious Fellow of this Society, Dr. G. Fordyce, [/7./]
|P_425
differs not only in brightness, but also in kind, from the ordi- 
nary colour of that fluid, which is a Modena red. 

My answer is, that there are examples, beside that to which 
the objection is made, of dark blood appearing florid, merely 
from its colouring matter being seen by means of an increased 
quantity of light. One is afforded by rubbing a piece of the 
darkest crassamentum with a proper quantity of serum; for a 
mixture is thus formed, in a few seconds, possessing a colour 
similar to that which is given to crassamentum by common air. 
But here we certainly do nothing more, than interpose among 
the red globules a number of the less dense particles of serum; 
which, in their present situation, act as opake matter, and con- 
sequently, increase the internal reflections. A second example 
occurs, when we view, by transmitted light, the fine edges and 
angles of a piece of crassamentum in water; for, in this si- 
tuation, their colour appears to be a bright scarlet, though all 
the other parts of the same mass are black. These facts seem 
sufficient to prove, that the immediate cause I have assigned 
for the production of the florid appearance in blood, which has 
been exposed to the action of common air and neutral salts, is 
adequate to the effect; but I shall advance a step further, and 
shew how the Modena red is converted in to a scarlet. 

Blood, as I have found by experiment, is one of those fluids 
which Sir Isaac Newton has observed appear yellow, [/8./] if 
viewed in very thin masses. When, therefore, a number of 
opake particles are formed in it, by the action of common air 
and the neutral salts, many of them must be situated imme- 
diately beneath the surface. The light reflected by these will 
consequently be yellow; and the whole effect of the newly- 
|P_426
formed opake particles, upon the appearance of the mass, will 
be the same, as if yellow had been added to its former colour, 
a Modena red. But Modena red and yellow are the colours 
which compose scarlet. [/9./]

I shall now relate the cautions to be observed in making the 
experiments, which are described in the beginning of this 
paper. 

The first is, that the blood should be newly drawn, and the 
weather cool. For as the solution of the red matter is not to 
be filtred, but must become transparent by the gradual sub- 
siding of whatever may render it turbid, if the blood be old, or 
the weather warm, it will often assume, before it be clear, a 
dark and purplish hue. When exposed in this state to the 
atmosphere in a broad and shallow vessel, its colour changes 
to a bright red, which, however, is not brighter than the pro- 
per colour of the solution. The dark purplish hue seems owing 
to some modification of sulphur; for the solution possessing it 
smells like hepatic air, particularly when agitated, and tarnishes 
silver which is held over it. Neutral salts produce no change 
upon this colour. 

The second caution is, that the neutral salts be not added 
to the red solution, except when perfectly transparent; for if it 
be not so, the salts will render it more turbid, and the mixture 
will appear brighter, if seen by reflected light. 

The last I shall note is, that the red solution ought to be 
poured gently from the vessel in which it has been made. If 
it be not, as it is a mucilaginous liquor, it is apt to entangle 
small particles of air, which by acting as opake matter, will for 
some time alter the appearance of the solution. 

|P_427
I proceed next to offer a few observations upon the cause of 
the red colour of blood. 

It has of late been very generally supposed, that blood derives 
its colour from iron. As far as I know, however, no other argu- 
ment has been given in support of this opinion, than that the 
red matter is found to contain that metal. But there is certainly 
no necessary connection between redness and iron; since this 
metal exists in many bodies of other colours, and even in va- 
rious parts of animals without colour, as bones and wool. 
More direct reasons, however, may be given for rejecting this 
opinion. 

1. I know of no colour, arising from a metal, which can be 
permanently destroyed by exposing its subject, in a close vessel, 
to a heat less than that of boiling water. But this happens 
with respect to the colour of blood. 

2. If the colour from a metal, in any substance, be destroyed 
by an alkali, it may be restored by the immediate addition of 
an acid; and the like will happen from the addition of a proper 
quantity of alkali, if the colour has been destroyed by an acid. 
The colour of blood, on the contrary, when once destroyed, 
either by an acid or an alkali, can never be brought back. 

3. If iron be the cause of the red colour of blood, it must 
exist there in a saline state, since the red matter is soluble in 
water. The substances, therefore, which detect almost the 
smallest quantity of iron in such a state, ought likewise to 
demonstrate its presence in blood; but upon adding Prussian 
alkali, and an infusion of galls, to a very saturate solution of 
the red matter, I could not observe, in the former case, the 
slightest blue precipitate, or in the latter, that the mixture had 
acquired the least blue, or purple tint. 

|P_428
Upon the whole it appears to me, that blood derives its 
colour from the peculiar organization of the animal matter of 
one of its parts; for whenever this is destroyed, the colour dis- 
appears, and can never be made to return; which would not, 
I think, be the case, if it depended upon the presence of any 
foreign substance whatsoever. 

I shall conclude this paper with relating several miscellaneous 
facts respecting the colour of blood, and some conclusions 
which may be formed from them. 

Dr. Priestley has mentioned, [/10./] that the only animal fluid, 
beside serum, which he found to transmit the influence of 
common air to blood, was milk. But I have observed, that the 
white of an egg possesses the same property, notwithstanding 
its great tenacity. Now as serum contains an animal substance 
very similar to the white of eggs, it occurred to me as a ques- 
tion, whether, in transmitting the influence of air to blood, it 
acts by its salts only, or partly by means of the substance of 
which I have just spoken. I took therefore a quantity of urine, 
which is known to contain nearly the same salts as serum, and 
having added to it as much distilled water as rendered its taste 
of the same pungency as that of serum, I poured the mixture 
upon a piece of dark crassamentum of blood. I then put to 
another piece of the same crassamentum an equal quantity of 
serum, and exposed both parcels to the atmosphere. The 
result was, that the blood in the diluted urine did not become 
nearly so florid as that in the serum. I have found also, that a 
solution of sugar in water conveys the influence of air to blood; 
from which it seems probable, that milk owes its similar pro- 
perty to the saccharine matter which it contains. Black blood 
|P_429
exposed to the atmosphere under mucilage of gum arabic, does 
not become florid. 

It has been said, [/11./] that neither serum, nor solutions of the 
neutral salts, dissolve the red matter of blood. But this in- 
duction has been made from too small a number of experi- 
ments. For saturate solutions of all the neutral salts, which 
I have tried, will extract, though slowly, red tinctures from 
blood, some of which are very deep; and neither they, nor 
serum, added in any proportion to a solution of the red matter 
in water, alter its colour or transparency, except by diluting 
it. The following experiments, however, will place this point 
in a clearer light. 

I added a drachm of distilled water to an ounce of serum, 
and poured the mixture upon a small piece of crassamentum. 
Upon an equal piece of crassamentum I poured a drachm of 
water, and after some time added an ounce of serum. Each 
parcel, therefore, contained the same quantity of crassamen- 
tum, serum, and water; but the crassamentum upon which the 
mixture of serum and water had been poured, communicated 
no tinge to it; while the other piece, to which water had been 
first applied, and afterwards serum, gave a deep colour to the 
fluid above it. I made similar experiments with crassamentum, 
water, and a dilute solution of a neutral salt, which were at- 
tended with the same results. 

Since then neither serum, nor a dilute solution of a neutral 
salt, will extract colour from blood, though they are both ca- 
pable of dissolving the red matter, when separated by water 
from the other parts of the mass, it follows, in my opinion, 
that what are called the red globules consist of two parts, one 
|P_430
within the other, and that the outer, being insoluble in serum 
or dilute solutions of neutral salts, defends the inner from the 
action of those fluids. It is remarkable, that microscopical ob- 
servations led Mr. Hewson to the same conclusion, namely, 
that the red globules consist of two parts, [/12./] which, according 
to him, are an exterior vesicle, and an interior solid sphere. 
But the same writer, upon the authority of other microscopic 
experiments, asserts that the vesicles are red. If they be so, 
there must exist two red matters in the blood, possessing dif- 
ferent chemical properties; which is certainly far from being 
probable. 

The exterior part of the globule appears to be that ingre- 
dient of the blood upon which common air and the neutral salts 
produce their immediate effect, when they render the whole 
mass florid; for I have shewn they do not act upon the red 
matter itself, and I have not found that they occasion any 
change in coagulated lymph or serum. The only matter then 
which remains to be operated upon, is that which I have men- 
tioned. It seems evident also, from what has been just stated, 
that there exists an animal matter in the blood, different from 
the coagulable lymph, the coagulable part of the serum, the 
putrescent mucilage, and the red particles, which, I believe, 
are all the kinds it has hitherto been supposed to contain. 

The microscopical observations of Mr. Hewson appear like- 
wise to furnish a reason, why both water, and a saturate solution 
of a neutral salt, can extract colour from the red globules, 
though a mixture of those fluids be incapable of the same 
effect. For water applied to the red globules, separates the 
exterior vesicles from the red particles, which are therefore now 
|P_431
open to the action of any solvent. [/13./] The addition, however, 
of a small quantity of a neutral salt to the water enables the 
vesicles to preserve their shape, and to retain the inner sphe- 
rules. [/14./] Upon the addition of a greater quantity of salt, the 
vesicles contract, and apply themselves closely to the red par- 
ticles within. [/15./] Thus far Mr. Hewson's observations extend. 
Let it now be supposed that the vesicles contract still more, 
from a further addition of salt to the water; the consequence 
must be, that, as the internal particles are incompressible, the 
sides of the vesicles will be rent, and their contents exposed to 
the action of the surrounding fluid. Both water and a strong 
solution of a neutral salt may, therefore, destroy the orga- 
nization of the vesicles, though in different ways, and thus 
agree in bringing the red matter in contact with a solvent; 
while a mixture of those two fluids, namely, a dilute solution of 
a neutral salt, will, by hardening the vesicles, increase the de- 
fence of the red matter against the action of such substances 
as are capable of dissolving it. But all reasoning founded upon 
experiments with microscopes, ought perhaps to be regarded 
as, in great measure, conjectural. 


[^1. * Phil. Trans. for 1776. 
^]
[^2. 
* Paralipomena in Vitellionem, p. 23 et 436. 
^]
[^3. 
† Optica Philosophia, Pars I. p. 278 et seq.
^]
[^4. 
* The works of Zucchius seem very little known, though they contain a consi- 
derable number of original experiments, and though it is probable that he was the 
inventor of the reflecting telescope. For he says (Pars 1. p. 126.) it had occurred to 
him so early as 1616, that the same effect which is produced by the convex object- 
glass of a telescope, might be obtained by reflexion from a concave mirror; and that, 
after many attempts to construct telescopes with such mirrors, which proved fruitless 
from imperfections in their figure, he at length procured a concave mirror very accu- 
rately wrought, by means of which, and a concave eye-glass, he was enabled to prove 
his theory to be just. He does not mention at what precise time he constructed this 
|P_420
telescope; but his book was printed in 1652, eleven years before the publication of the 
"Optica Promota" of James Gregory. I have not met with any account of Zuc- 
chius, in Montucla's or Priestley's histories; in the article "telescope, " in 
the French Encyclopedia; or in any biographical dictionary which I have consulted. 
^]
[^5. 
* Optics, Book i. Part II. Prop. 10. 
^]
[^6. 
* Manchester Memoirs, Vol. II. 
^]
[^7. 
* Elements of the Practice of Physic, p. 13. 
^]
[^8. 
Book i. Part II. Prop. 10. 
^]
[^9. 
* Fordyce's Elements of the Practice of Physic, p. 14. 
^]
[^10. 
* Phil. Trans. for 1776, p. 246. 
^]
[^11. 
* Fordyce's Elements of the Practice of Physic, p. 14. 
^]
[^12. 
* Hewson's Works, Vol. III. p. 17. 
^]
[^13. 
* Hewson's Works, Vol. III. p. 17. 
^]
[^14. † Ibid. p. 40. ^]
[^15. ‡ Ibid. p. 31. ^]