

[^Sample 1: article - PT90_0001^]

|P_1
[}I. The Croonian Lecture. On the Structure and Uses of the Mem- 
brana Tympani of the Ear. By Everard Home, Esq. F. R. S. }]
Read November 7, 1799. 

The subject of inquiry appointed by the Croonian Institution, 
has been greatly elucidated at different times by ingenious mem- 
bers of this learned Society. A large field, however, still re- 
mains open; and, respecting future investigations, I shall have 
occasion to offer a fresh proof of the aid to be derived from 
comparative anatomy, in ascertaining the structure of parts 
which, from their minuteness and situation in the human body, 
admit with much difficulty of being explored. 

The principal object of the present lecture is to communicate 
a discovery of the structure of the membrana tympani; which, 
in some respects, affords a new and very curious instance of 
the application of muscular action, and may conduce to account 
for certain phænomena in the sense of hearing, in a more satis- 
factory manner than has hitherto been proposed. 

The membrana tympani has always been considered as a 
|P_2
common membrane, which, by means of muscles belonging to 
the malleus being stretched or relaxed, became fitted, in its 
various degrees of tension, to convey the vast variety of ex- 
ternal sounds to the internal organ. Its shape, situation, and 
office, have procured it the name of drum of the ear; and the 
muscles of the malleus having been deemed sufficient for bra- 
cing and unbracing it, less attention was bestowed on the struc- 
ture of the membrane itself: to which may be added, that in 
the human ear, and generally in the ear of quadrupeds, the 
membrane is so extremely small and thin, and in its situation 
so peculiarly confined, as not to be got at for inspection but with 
much difficulty. 

The case is different in the elephant, where this membrane 
is so very large, that the parts of which it is composed are 
readily distinguished: they are even conspicuous to the naked 
eye; and muscular fibres are seen passing along the membrane, 
in a radiated manner, from the bony rim which surrounds it, 
towards the handle of the malleus, to which the central part of 
the membrane is firmly attached. 

This discovery in the elephant having led to that of a simi- 
lar construction in the human membrana tympani, it may not 
be improper to relate the circumstances by which I became 
engaged in the investigation of the organ of hearing in that 
animal. 

Three different opportunities have occurred of dissecting the 
elephant in London, by the deaths of those which had been 
presented to his Majesty, and were kept at the King's stables 
at Pimlico. One of them was given to the late Dr. Hunter; 
one to his brother Mr. J. Hunter; and the third to Sir Ashton 
Lever. 

|P_3
From my being connected with Mr. John Hunter's pursuits 
in comparative anatomy, I was employed throughout the whole 
of these dissections, and became extremely desirous of exami- 
ning the internal parts of the ear, the structure of that organ in 
the human body having at a very early period particulary en- 
gaged my attention; [/1./] but neither Dr. Hunter nor his brother 
could be prevailed upon to sacrifice so large a portion of the 
skull as was necessary for the purpose. 

When Mr. Corse arrived from Bengal, last year, and men- 
tioned his having brought over a number of skulls of elephants, 
in order to show the progress of the formation of their grind- 
ing teeth, [/2./] the desire to examine the organ of hearing in that 
animal recurred to me so strongly, that I requested to have one 
of the skulls for that purpose, and Mr. Corse very readily and 
obligingly complied with my request. 

After having examined the organ in the dried skull, the want 
of the membrana tympani, and of the small bones, made the 
information thus received of a very unsatisfactory nature, and 
increased the desire of seeing these parts in the recent head. In 
considering how this could be done, I recollected a mutilated 
elephant's head, preserved in spirits, which had been sent to 
|P_4
Mr. Hunter, but, from the multiplicity of his engagements, 
had remained neglected in the cask at the time of his death, and 
in the following year was dried, to show the proboscis, that it 
might not be altogether spoiled. 

Upon examining this dried head, the bones had been so much 
broken, that one of the organs of hearing was altogether want- 
ing: the other, however, was fortunately entire; and the mem- 
brana tympani and small bones, having been little disturbed in 
the drying of the parts, remained nearly in their natural situation. 

The membrana tympani, and every other part of the organ, 
were found to be much larger in proportion than in other qua- 
drupeds, or in man; differing in this respect from the eye of 
the elephant, which is unusually small, when compared with 
the enormous bulk of the animal. 

The membrane was found of an oval form; the short dia- 
meter of the oval rather more than an inch in length; the long 
diameter an inch and 7/20ths. 

In the human ear, the membrana tympani is nearly circular; 
the longest diameter is 8/20ths of an inch; the shortest 7/20ths. 

As the membrane in the elephant exceeds that of the human 
ear in thickness as much as in extent, which is as the squares 
of their diameters, or in the proportion of 135 to 14, it is natu- 
ral to conclude that the muscular fibres which are to stretch the 
one, must greatly exceed in strength those capable of producing 
the same degree of tension in the other. 

From this statement, the muscular structure in the human 
membrana tympani will necessarily be so much less distinct 
than in the elephant, as scarcely to be visible to the naked eye, 
and will easily be overlooked by the most attentive observer, 
who is not directed by some previous information to examine 
|P_5
it under the most favourable circumstances; but, when these 
are attended to, it can be perceived without the aid of glasses. 

If the membrana tympani of the human ear is completely 
exposed on both sides, by removing the contiguous parts, and 
the cuticular covering is carefully washed off from its external 
surface, then, by placing it in a clear light, the radiated direc- 
tion of its fibres may be easily detected. If a common magnify- 
ing glass is used, they are rendered nearly as distinct as those 
of the elephant appear to the naked eye; their course is exactly 
the same; and they differ in nothing but in being formed upon 
a smaller scale. 

When viewed in a microscope magnifying 23 times, the 
muscular fibres are beautifully conspicuous and appear uni- 
formly the same throughout the whole surface, there being no 
central tendons, as in the diaphragm; the muscular fibres ap- 
pear only to form the internal layer of the membrane, and are 
most distinctly seen when viewed on that side. 

In examining this membrane in different subjects, the parts 
were frequently found in a more or less morbid state. In one 
instance, the membrane was found loaded with blood-vessels, 
was less transparent than usual, and was united by close adhe- 
sion to the point of the long process of the incus. In another 
instance, there was a preternatural ossification adhering to it, at 
a small distance from the end of the handle of the malleus. 

As muscles in general are supplied with blood-vessels in pro- 
portion to the frequency of their action, it is an object of im- 
portance to determine the vascularity of the membrana tympani. 
Upon this subject, my own want of information has been amply 
supplied by Dr. Baillie, who, in a communication upon this 
subject, showed me a preparation of the membrane, in which 
|P_6
the vessels had been most successfully injected with coloured 
wax. 

In this preparation, the most beautiful of the kind I ever saw, 
the vessels in their distribution resembled those of the iris, and 
were nearly half as numerous: they anastomosed with one an- 
other in a similar manner, and their general direction was from 
the circumference to the handle of the malleus; from near this 
handle, a small trunk sent off branches, in a radiated manner, 
which anastomosed with those which had an opposite course. 

This correspondence, in the number and distribution of blood- 
vessels, between the membrana tympani and the iris, is a strong 
circumstance in confirmation of that membrane being endowed 
with muscular action. 

In the horse, the membrana tympani is smaller than in man; 
its long diameter is 8/20ths of an inch; the short one 6/20ths; and 
it is almost quite flat, while in man it is concave, which makes 
the difference of extent considerably exceed the difference in the 
diameters. In the horse, the fibrous structure is not visible to 
the naked eye; it is even indistinctly seen when viewed through 
a common magnifying glass; but in a microscope it is very 
visible, and in every other respect agrees in structure with the 
membrane in the human ear, and in that of the elephant. 

In birds, the membrana tympani is larger in proportion than 
in the quadruped, and more circular in its shape. 

In the goose, it is 6/20ths of an inch in its longest diameter, and 
5/20ths in its shortest diameter. In the turkey, 7/20ths by 5/20ths. 
It is thinner in its coats in birds than in the horse, and to the 
naked eye has no appearance of fibres; but, when viewed in a 
microscope, there is a visible radiated structure, not very unlike 
the wire marks upon common writing paper. 

|P_7
In a former Lecture upon the Structure of Muscles, [/3./] in 
which a comprehensive view was taken of the subject, it was 
stated, that the organization necessary for muscular contraction 
could exist in an apparent membrane, and that a fasciculated 
structure was only necessary when muscular action was to be 
enabled to overcome resistance. The coats of the Tænia hydati- 
gena were mentioned as an instance of the first; and the human 
heart as the most complex of the second. In comparing the 
membranæ tympani of different animals, they afford a beautiful 
illustration of the truth of this position. 

In birds, where from the smallness of its size the resist- 
ance is very trifling, the membrane is very similar to the coat 
of an hydatid, only still thinner. In the elephant, fibres form- 
ing fasciculi are very distinct. The membrane of the horse, 
and that of the human ear, form the intermediate gradations. 

The knowledge of a muscular structure in the membrana 
tympani, enables us to explain many phænomena in hearing, 
which have not hitherto been accounted for in a satisfactory 
manner. It is principally by means of this muscle that accu- 
rate perceptions of sound are communicated to the internal or- 
gan, and that the membrana tympani is enabled to vary the 
state of its tension, so as to receive them in quick succession 
in which they are conveyed to it. 

In the human ear, and in that of birds, the radiated fibres of 
the membrana tympani have their principal attachment to the 
extremity of the handle of the malleus, which is nearly in the 
centre of the membrane. 

In the membrane of the elephant, which is oval, the attach- 
ment to the handle of the malleus is at some distance from the 
|P_8
centre. In the horse, deer, and cat, which have the membrane 
still more oval than the elephant, the handle of the malleus is 
situated in the long axis of the membrane, with its extremity 
extending beyond the centre, reaching nearer to the circumfe- 
rence; and the fibres of the radiated muscle are not only at- 
tached to its end, but also laterally to nearly the whole length 
of its handle. 

This oval form of the membrana tympani, in those quadrupeds, 
and the very extensive attachment of the fibres of the radiated 
muscle to the handle of the malleus, may be the reason why 
their ears are not equally fitted to hear inarticulate sounds, as 
the ears of birds and of man. 

Should this radiated muscle of the membrana tympani (which 
is probably the smallest in the body that has a distinct action) 
be thought too insignificant to have an office of so much con- 
sequence assigned to it, let it be remembered, that the size of 
muscles is no indication of their importance, but only of the 
resistance to be overcome by their action; and that the more 
delicate actions are performed universally in the body by very 
small muscles, of which the iris in the eye furnishes a very con- 
spicuous example. 

Before the mode in which the radiated muscle adapts the 
membrana tympani to different sounds can be explained, it is 
necessary that the more important parts of the organ should be 
enumerated, and the use commonly assigned to each of them 
pointed out. 

In man and the more perfect quadrupeds, this organ consists 
of the following parts: the membrana tympani, situated be- 
tween the external passage and the cavity of the tympanum; 
four small bones, which form a chain across the tympanum, 
|P_9
connecting the membrana tympani with another membrane 
lining the foramen ovale, which opens into the vestibulum, a 
more internal part of the organ of hearing. 

The bones are, the malleus, which is united to the membrana 
tympani by a portion of its handle, and to the second bone or 
incus by its head. The incus, which is connected to the mal- 
leus by a capsular ligament, forming a regular joint, the sur- 
faces of the bones being covered with cartilage, but they have 
only a tremulous motion on one another. The incus is also 
attached to the side of the cavity of the tympanum, where the 
mastoid cells open, by a ligament on which it moves back- 
wards and forwards: it is united by its long process to the 
orbicular bone, which is the smallest in the body, and connects 
the incus to the fourth bone or stapes, which has its base ap- 
plied to the foramen ovale, or opening leading into the cavity of 
the vestibulum. 

The cavity of the tympanum, in which these bones are si- 
tuated, communicates with the external air by means of the 
Eustachian tube, so that there is always air behind the mem- 
brana tympani. 

The malleus has three muscles, by which it is moved; one 
of them is called the tensor, from its pulling the malleus in- 
wards, and tightening the membrana tympani: the other two 
act in an opposite direction, and relax the membrane; the lar- 
gest of these is called the obliquus, and is the antagonist of the 
tensor muscle; the other is very small, and is called the laxator. 

The stapes has one muscle, which acts upon it by bringing 
its basis closer to the foramen ovale. 

The vestibulum, which is completely separated from the 
tympanum, by the membrane that lines the foramen ovale, com- 
|P_10
municates freely with the cochlea and semicircular canals; but 
these cavities are filled with a watery liquor, and have no com- 
munication (as the tympanum has) with the external air. 

This fact was ascertained in the horse, by the following ex- 
periment, repeated several times. The organ of hearing was 
separated from the skull immediately after death, and the ca- 
vity of the tympanum exposed; the parts were then immersed 
in water, and the stapes removed; by which means, the mem- 
brane of the foramen ovale was destroyed, but no globule of 
air was seen to escape through the water. [/4./]

The following uses have generally been assigned to the parts 
now mentioned. 

The membrana tympani was supposed to be adapted to re- 
ceive impressions, by the combined action of the tensor and 
laxator muscles varying the degree of its tension, so as to bring 
it in unison with different sounds: these impressions were con- 
ducted, by the chain of bones, to the vestibulum, cochlea, and 
semicircular canals; in which cavities, particulary the cochlea, 
they were supposed to undergo some modification, before they 
were impressed upon the nerves spread upon the linings of 
these cavities. 

The function of modifying impressions of sound was assign- 
ed to the cochlea, partly from the delicacy of its internal struc- 
ture, supposed to resemble a musical instrument, and partly 
from there being no other part of the organ apparently suited 
for repeating the variety of delicate sounds which pass into the 
ear: the changes that could be produced upon the membrana 
|P_11
tympani by the muscles of the malleus, being considered as in- 
capable of answering that purpose. 

This slight sketch of the organ of hearing, and of the uses, 
as they are generally understood, of the different parts, will 
enable me to point out, with more clearness, what parts of the 
theory appear defective, and what improvements may be made 
on it. 

It is true that the membrana tympani is stretched and re- 
laxed by the action of the muscles of the malleus, but not for 
the purpose alleged in the commonly received theory. It is 
stretched, in order to bring the radiated muscle of the membrane 
itself into a state capable of acting, and of giving those diffe- 
rent degrees of tension to the membrane which empower it to 
correspond with the variety of external tremors: when the 
membrane is relaxed, the radiated muscle cannot act with any 
effect, and external tremors make less accurate impressions. 

The membrana tympani, with its tensor and radiated muscles, 
may not be unaptly compared to a monochord, of which the 
membrana tympani is the string; the tensor muscle the screw, 
giving the necessary tension to make the string perfrom its 
proper scale of vibrations; and the radiated muscle acting upon 
the membrane like the moveable bridge of the monochord, ad- 
justing it to the vibrations required to be produced. The com- 
bined effects of the action of these muscles give the perceptions 
of grave and acute tones; and, in proportion as their original 
conformation is more or less perfect, so will their actions be, 
and, consequently, the perceptions of sound which they com- 
municate. 

This mode of subdividing the motions of the membrana 
tympani between two sets of muscles, allotting a portion to 
|P_12
each, is not peculiar to this part. A remarkable instance of it 
appears in the rapid movements of the fingers, in performing 
several actions, and particularly in playing on a musical instru- 
ment. In all such rapid motions, the fingers are bent to a 
certain degree by the long muscles that lie upon the fore-arm, 
to the tendons of which a set of smaller muscles are attached, 
called lumbricales. These last are unable to produce any effect 
on the fingers, till elongated in consequence of the action of 
the long muscles in bending the other joints; the lumbricales 
then become capable of bending the fingers a little more, and 
of acting with great rapidity. It is a curious circumstance, 
that a similiar application of muscles should be employed to fit 
the fingers to produce a quick succession of sounds, and to 
enable the ear to be impressed by them. 

From the explanation given of the adjustment of the mem- 
brana tympani, the difference between a musical ear and one 
which is too imperfect to distinguish the different notes in 
music, will appear to arise entirely from the greater or less nicety 
with which the muscle of the malleus renders the membrane 
capable of being truly adjusted. If the tension be perfect, all 
the variations produced by the action of the radiated muscle 
will be equally correct, and the ear truly musical; but, if the 
first adjustment is imperfect, although the actions of the ra- 
diated muscle may still produce infinite variations, none of them 
will be correct: the effect, in this respect, will be similar to that 
produced by playing upon a musical instrument which is not in 
tune. The hearing of articulate sounds requires less nicety in 
the adjustment, than of inarticulate or musical ones: an ear 
may therefore be able to perceive the one, although it is not 
fitted to receive distinct preceptions from the other. 

|P_13
The nicety or correctness of a musical ear being the result 
of muscular action, renders it, in part, an acquirement; for, 
although the original formation of these muscles in some ears 
renders them more capable of arriving at this perfection in their 
action, early cultivation is still necessary for that purpose; and 
it is found that an ear, which upon the first trials seemed unfit 
to receive accurate perceptions of sounds, shall, by early and 
constant application, be rendered tolerably correct, but never 
can attain excellence. There are organs of hearing in which 
the parts are so nicely adjusted to one another, as to render 
them capable of a degree of correctness in hearing sounds 
which appears preternatural. 

Children who during their infancy are much in the society 
of musical performers, will be naturally induced to attend more 
to inarticulate sounds than articulate ones, and by these means 
acquire a correct ear, which, after listening for two or three 
years to articulate sounds only, would have been attained with 
more difficulty. 

This mode of adapting the ear to different sounds, appears 
to be one of the most beautiful applications of muscles in the 
body; the mechanism is so simple, and the variety of effects so 
great. 

Several ways in which the correctness of hearing is affected 
by the wrong actions of the muscles of the tympanum, that 
appeared to be inexplicable, can be readily accounted for, now 
that the means by which the membrane adjusts itself are un- 
derstood. The following are instances of this kind. 

Case 1. A gentleman thirty-three years of age, who possess- 
ed a very correct ear, so as to be capable of singing in concert, 
though he had never learned music, was suddenly seized with a 
|P_14
giddiness in the head, and a slight degree of numbness in the right 
side and arm. These feelings went off in a few hours, but on 
the third day returned, and for several weeks he had returns of 
the same sensations. It was soon discovered that he had lost 
his musical ear; he could neither sing a note in tune, nor in the 
smallest degree perceive harmony in the performance of others. 
For some time he himself thought he had become a little deaf, 
but his medical attendant was not sensible of that in conversa- 
tion. Upon going into the country, he derived great benefit 
from exercise and sea-bathing. 

Twenty months after the first attack, he was capable of sing- 
ing a Scotch air with tolerable exactness, though he could not 
sing in concert. He continued to improve in his health, and 
in the course of two or three years completely recovered his ear 
for music. 

In this case, there appeared to be some affection of the brain, 
which had diminished the actions of the tensor muscles of the 
membranæ tympani, through the medium of the nerves which 
regulate their actions; this gradually went off, and the muscles 
recovered their former action. 

Case 2. A young lady was seized with a frenzy which last- 
ed for several years. Previous to her derangement, she was 
incapable of singing in tune, from the want of an ear for 
music; but in the course of her madness she frequently, to the 
astonishment of her relations, sung a tune with tolerable cor- 
rectness. 

This case is the reverse of the former; and, as it arose from a 
directly contrary affection of the brain, may be considered as the 
result of an unusual degree of action in the tensor muscles, giv- 
ing the membrane a more correct adjustment than it had before. 

|P_15
Case 3. An eminent music master, after catching cold, found 
a confusion of sounds in his ears. Upon strict attention, he dis- 
covered that the pitch of one ear was half a note lower than that 
of the other; and that the perception of a simple sound did not 
reach both ears at the same instant, but seemed as two distinct 
sounds, following each other in quick succession, the last being 
the lowest and weakest. This complaint distressed him for 
a long time, but he recovered from it without any medical 
aid. 

In this case, the whole defect appears to have been in the 
action of the radiated muscle, exerted neither with the same 
quickness nor force in one ear as in the other, so that the sound 
was half a note too low, as well as later in being impressed 
upon the organ. 

This affection of the muscle of the membrana tympani is 
very similar to an affection of the straight muscles of one of 
the eyes, producing double vision, which I have noticed in a 
former lecture, when treating of the wrong actions of that 
organ. [/5./]

In endeavouring to explain the uses of the more internal parts 
of the ear, considerable advantage may be derived from class- 
ing them in two divisions; namely, those which are formed for 
the purpose of receiving impressions conveyed through the me- 
dium of liquid or of solid substances; and those adapted to re- 
ceive impressions made by the impulses of an elastic fluid, as 
the common air. 

This can be done very correctly. Fish, which are formed to 
hear in water, can have only the parts belonging to the first 
division; while all the parts found in the ears of birds and 
|P_16
quadrupeds, that are not met with in fish, must belong to the 
second. 

In fish, the organ consists of a vestibulum and three semi- 
circular canals, and these are met with in all fish. In some 
genera there is an external opening, and substances of a hard 
nature are found lying loose in the vestibulum: these, how- 
ever, cannot be considered as essential parts of the organ, from 
their not being common to fish in general. 

Birds have the vestibulum and semicircular canals in com- 
mon with fish, but they have also a membrana tympani; a 
slender bone connecting that membrane with the vestibulum; 
and an Eustachian tube. In birds, the membrana tympani is 
convex externally, being pushed forwards by the end of the 
slender bone abovementioned. 

In quadrupeds and man, besides the vestibulum and canals 
met with in fish, the membrana tympani, the bone connecting 
it with the vestibulum, and the Eustachian tube, found in birds, 
there is a cochlea. The membrana tympani is either flat or 
concave externally; the bony connection between it and the 
vestibulum is made up of several bones, supplied with muscles 
to move them in different directions. 

The parts which compose the organ of hearing in fish, must 
be intended for receiving impressions conveyed through water: 
those additional parts met with in birds, and the still greater 
additions which are found in the quadruped and man, must be 
intended by nature for rendering more perfect the impressions 
conveyed to the ear through the medium of the external air. 

Fish, from the structure of the organ, can only hear sounds 
which agitate the water immediately in contact with the head 
of the fish; so that the impulse is conveyed, without inter- 
|P_17
ruption, from the liquid in which they live, to the organ of 
hearing. 

Man is capable of hearing in a similar manner to fishes, when 
a communication of solid parts is kept up between the sounding 
body and the bones of the skull: experiments of this kind must 
have been made by many members of this learned Society. 

One of the most common is, applying a watch to the fore- 
head, and stopping the ears, which does not prevent the ticking 
from being heard: the sound is still more distinct when the 
watch is applied to the mastoid process. Here, as the sound 
can neither pass through the meatus externus, nor by the Eus- 
tachian tube, while the mouth is kept shut, it evidently must 
be conducted through the bones of the skull. 

When the sound produced by boiling water is brought to the 
ear, by one end of an iron rod resting upon the side of the kettle 
and the other kept in contact with the teeth, the sound is con- 
ducted in the same way, although in this case it has by some 
been supposed to pass through the Eustachian tube. 

In this mode of hearing, the vestibulum and semicircular 
canals are probably the only parts of the organ which are ne- 
cessary to convey the impression to the expansion of the audi- 
tory nerve. 

In hearing in air, the use of the membrana tympani in man 
and quadrupeds has already been explained. Its office in 
birds is precisely the same; but as in birds this membrane has 
no tensor muscle to vary its adjustment, but is always kept 
tense by the pressure of the end of the slender bone, the scale 
in birds cannot descend so low as in the human ear; and the 
intervals in their scale will be more minute, in consequence of 
the slightest tremor communicated by the action of the radiated 
|P_18
muscle to one end of the slender bone being immediately con- 
ducted to the internal organ; while in the human ear it has to 
pass from one bone to another, before it arrives at the vestibu- 
lum. 

The cochlea has been considered by all physiologists as one 
of the most intricate and curious parts of the ear, and, on that 
account had a most important office assigned to it. This, how- 
ever, is now to be transferred to the membrana tympani; and, 
upon attentive consideration of the subject, it will appear im- 
possible for the cochlea to be of any use in modulating sounds, 
since the ear is only intended to convey impressions received 
from external bodies; hence, no impression can be communi- 
cated to the cochlea, which has not been transmitted by the 
membrana tympani. But, if all the varieties of sound are re- 
peated by the membrana tympani, no modulation in the cochlea 
is required; and, when it is considered that the cochlea contains 
water, instead of air, the effect upon every part will be found to 
be simultaneous. 

That the cochlea is neither absolutely necessary to fit the 
organ to be impressed by sounds communicated through air, 
nor to render it what is termed a musical ear, is sufficiently 
proved by that part being wanting in birds, whose organ is par- 
ticulary adapted to inarticulate sounds. Some birds, particularly 
bulfinches, can be taught to sing various airs, although it will 
be always in high notes. 

If it should be found that birds hear less accurately than 
quadrupeds, it will favour the idea that the great delicacy of 
structure of the cochlea, is intended to render the nerves which 
are spread upon it more readily impressed by weak tremors, 
than those in either the vestibulum or semicircular canals. 

|P_19
The cochlea and semicircular canals must be considered as 
two of the most important parts of the ear; their peculiar forms 
are no doubt adapted to some essential purposes; but, what are 
the precise advantages derived from their particular shape, is at 
present unknown. There is, however, much ground to believe, 
that a more extensive knowledge in comparative anatomy, join- 
ed with future observations, may clear up this very curious and 
obscure part of the physiology of the organ of hearing. 

In the elephant, the small bones, the cochlea, and semicircu- 
lar canals, are larger than those in the human ear, nearly in the 
same proportion with the increased size of the membrana tym- 
pani. In that animal, there is a very remarkable peculiarity; 
which is, a cellular structure occupying the upper and posterior 
part of the skull, inclosed between the two tables, communi- 
cating by a considerable aperture with the cavity of the tympa- 
num, and lined by a similar membrane: the cells commu- 
nicate freely with one another at their lower extremities, but 
not near the upper, forming irregular cylinders, placed in a 
converging direction, towards the cavity of the tympanum. 

There is no middle bony septum, separating the cells of the 
skull belonging to one ear from those which open into the 
other, but a ready communication between them. 

On the anterior part of the skull there is also a similar cel- 
lular structure, only much smaller, which communicates with 
the nose, but is entirely separate and distinct from that which 
forms an appendage to the organ of hearing. 

That the elephant hears better than other animals, is gene- 
rally asserted by those who have had opportunities of making 
observations on the subject. As this opinion has been ad- 
vanced by men who had no knowledge in anatomy, and had 
|P_20
no previous theory to bias their judgment, it is deserving of 
credit. The organ of hearing being now found more perfect, 
and formed upon a larger scale than in any other animal with 
which we are acquainted, considerable weight is given to this 
opinion. 

Mr. Corse, who resided many years at Tiperah, in Bengal, 
and paid particular attention to the manners and habits of ele- 
phants, concurs in the belief of their hearing being more acute 
than that of man. The following circumstances are mentioned 
by him in proof of it. 

A tame elephant, who was never reconciled to have a horse 
moving behind him, although he expressed no uneasiness if the 
horse was within his view, either before or on one side, could 
distinguish the sound of a horse's foot at a distance, some time 
before any person in company heard it: this was known by his 
pricking up his ears, quickening his pace, and turning his head 
from side to side. 

A tame female elephant, who has a young one, was occa- 
sionally sent out with other elephants for food, without the 
young one being allowed to follow. She was not in the habit 
of pining after her young one, unless she heard its voice; but 
frequently, on the road home, when no one could distinguish 
any sound whatever, she pricked up her ears, and made a noise 
expressive of having heard the call of her young. This having 
occured frequently, attracted Mr. Corse's notice, and made 
him, at the time the female elephant used these expressions, 
stop the party, and desire the gentlemen to listen; but they were 
unable to hear any thing till they had approached nearer to the 
place where the young one was kept. 

The foregoing observations, the object of which has been to 
|P_21
prove that the membrana tympani of the ear has a muscular 
structure, have already exceeded the limits of a lecture, which 
prevents us from going further at present into the considera- 
tion of this very curious and important organ. The general 
analogy between the uses of its different parts and those of the 
organ of vision, and the similar variations of their actions when 
under the influence of disease, furnish materials which, on 
some future occasion, may be laid before this learned Society. 


[^1. 
* In the year 1776, I injected the cochlea and semicircular canals of the human ear 
with a composition of wax and rosin. This was done by placing the temporal bone in 
the receiver of an air pump, the upper part of which was in the form of a funnel, ren- 
dered air-tight by a cork being fitted into its neck, and surrounded with bees' wax. 
After the air had been exhausted, the hot injection, poured into the funnel, melted the 
wax, and the cork was pulled out by means of a string previously attached to it; the 
injection immediately rushed into the receiver, and was forced, by the pressure of the 
atmosphere, into the cavities of the temporal bone. 
^]
[^2. 
† On this subject, a very ingenious paper has been since published by him, in the 
Philosophical Transactions for the year 1799. 
^]
[^3. * Philosophical Transactions for the year 1795. 
^]
[^4. 
* This experiment was made by Mr. Clift, who superintends Mr. Hunter's col- 
lection, and who has afforded me material assistance in the different parts of this 
investigation. 
^]
[^5. * Vide Philosophical Transactions for the year 1797. 
^]