[^Mulcaster, Richard: Training vp of children^] 
 
[}POSITIONS 
VVHEREIN THOSE PRIMITIVE 
CIRCVMSTANCES 
BE EXAMINED, WHICH ARE NECESSARIE 
FOR THE TRAINING 
vp of children, either for skill in their 
booke, or health in their bodie. 
 
VVRITTEN by Richard Mvlcaster, master 
of the schoole erected in London. anno. 1561. in the parish 
of Sainct Laurence Povvntneie, by the vvorshipfull 
companie of the merchaunt tailers of the said citie. 
 
Imprinted at London by Thomas Vautrollier 
for Thomas Chare. 
1581.}] 
 
[^Omitted a dedication to Queen Elizabeth, a poem in Latin, a table of contents, three chapters introducing the book, topics and authorities and two chapters on the natural ability of children to learn.^] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 40-66^] 
 
[^p.40^] 
[}Chapter 6.}] 
 
[}Of exercises and training the body. How necessarie a thing exercise 
is. What health is, and how it is maintained: what sicknesse 
is, how it commeth, and how it is preuented. What a 
parte exercise playeth in the maintenaunce of health. Of the 
student and his health. That all exercises though they stirre 
some one parte most, yet helpe the whole bodie.}] 
 
THe soule and bodie being coparteners in good and ill, in 
sweete and sowre, in mirth and mourning, & hauing generally 
a common sympathie, & a mutuall feeling in all passions: 
how can they be, or rather why should they be seuered in 
traine? the one made stronge, and well qualified, the other left 
feeble, and a praye to infirmitie? will ye haue the minde to obtaine 
those thinges, which be most proper vnto her, and most 
profitable vnto you, when they be obtained? Then must ye 
[^p.41^] 
also haue a speciall care, that the bodie be well appointed, for 
feare it shrink, while ye be either in course to get them, or in 
case to vse them. For as the powers of the soule come to no 
proofe, or to verie small, if they be not fostered by their naturall 
traine, but wither and dye, like corne not reaped, but suffered 
to rotte by negligence of the owner, or by contention in 
chalenge: euen so, nay much more, the bodie being of it selfe 
lumpishe and earthy, must needes either dye in drowsinesse, or 
liue in loosenesse, if it be not stirred and trained diligently to 
the best. And though the soule, as the fountaine of life, and the 
quickner of the body, may & will beare it out for some while, 
thorough valiauntnesse of courage: yet weaknesse will not be 
alwayes dissembled, but in the ende will and must bewraie her 
owne want, euen then perauenture, when it were most pittie, 
Many notable personages for stomacke and courage, many excellent 
men for learning and skill, in most and best professions 
haue then left their liues, thorough the plaine weaknesse, of 
their contemned bodies, when they put their countries in most 
apparent and gladsome hope of rare and excellent effectes, the 
one of valiantnesse and manhood, the other of knowledge and 
skill. Seing therfore there is a good in them both, which by 
diligent endeuour may be auaunced to that, for which it was 
ordained, and by negligent ouersight, doeth either decaye 
quite, or proues not so well, as otherwayes it might, I maye 
not slightly passe ouer the bodies good, being both so neare, 
and so necessarie a neighbour vnto the soule: considering I 
haue bestowed so much paines already, and must bestow much 
more, in the seruice of the soule: nay rather considering I deale 
with the bodie but once, and that onely here, wheras I entreat 
of the soule, and the furniture therof in what so euer I shall 
medle with, in my whole course hereafter. If common sense did 
not teach vs the necessitie of this point, and extreme feeblenes 
did not force men to confesse, how great feates they could do, 
and how actiue they would proue, if their weake limmes and 
failing ioyntes, would aunswere the lusty courage, and braue 
swinge of their fierie and fresh spirites: I would take paines to 
perswade them by argumentes, both of proofe in experience, 
and of reason in nature, that as it is easie, so it were needefull 
[^p.42^] 
to helpe the body by some traine, not left at randon to libertie, 
but brought in to forme of ordinarie discipline, generally in 
all men, bycause all men neede helpe, for necessarie health, 
and ready execution of their naturall actions: but particularly 
for those men, whose life is in leasure, whose braynes be most 
busied, and their wittes most wearied, in which kinde studentes 
be no one small part, but the greatest of all, which so vse their 
mindes as if they cared not for their bodies, and yet so neede 
their bodies, as without the strength and soundnesse wherof, 
they be good for nothing, but to moane themselues, and to 
make other maruell, why they take no more heede, how to do 
that long, which they do so well, being a thing within compasse 
of their owne care, and knowledge. For who is so grosse, 
as he will denie that exercise doth good, and that so great, as 
is without comparison, seing olde Asclepiades is by Galene confuted, 
and stawled for an asse: as Erasiltratus also his dissembling 
freind? or who is so sore tied either to studie, or to stocks, 
as he cannot stirre himselfe if he will, or ought not if he may? 
But the matter being confessed, euen by the most idle, and vnweildy 
to be healthfull and good, I shall neede no more reason, 
to procure assent, and allowaunce for exercise. My whole 
trauell therfore must be to finde out, and set foorth, what shalbe 
requisite to the perfourmaunce of this point, concerning the 
traine and exercising of the body, that it may proue healthy, & 
liue long: and be ready to assist, all the actions of the minde. 
 
Wherein therfore consisteth the health of the bodie, and 
how is it to be maintained vntill such time, as nature shall dismantle, 
and pull it downe her selfe? To aunswere this question, 
and withall to declare, how great an officer to health 
exercise: I will first shew, wherin health doth consiste, and 
[/1./] 
how diseases do come: then how health is maintained, and 
[/2./] 
disease auoided: Last of all how great a parte is appointed for 
[/3./] 
exercise to plaie in the perfourmaunce therof, bycause I saye, 
and not I alone, but Galen also that great Physician, neither 
[/4./] 
Galen onely, though sufficient alone, but all that euer liued, 
& were cheife of that liuerie, that who so can applie the minde 
well with learning, and the bodie with exercise, shall make 
both a wise minde, and a healthfull bodie in their best kinde. 
[^p.43^] 
Wherefore seing I haue set downe wherein the traine of the 
minde doth consist, so much as the Elementarie course doth 
admit, and must perfourme, and so farre as these my Positions 
require at this time, whose profession is not to tary, though it 
tuche them: I wil now handle that other part of exercise, wherwith 
the bodie is either to be kept in health, or to be helpt to 
health: and that not onely in the Elementarie, to whom this 
treatise should seeme to aunswere, but also in the generall student 
during his whole life: which must alwaye rule himselfe 
by those circunstances, which direct the application of exercise, 
according to time age, & c. and shalbe handled hereafter. 
 
There be in the bodie of man, the force of foure elementes, 
[/5./] 
fire and aire, water and earth, and the pith of their primitiue, 
& principall qualities, heat and couldnesse, moysture and drynesse, 
which the Physicians call the similarie partes, of the similitude 
and likenesse that they haue, not the one to the other, 
but the partes of eche to their owne whole, bycause euerie 
least part, or degree of these great ones, beare the name of the 
whole, as euerie part or parcell of fier, is called fier, no lesse 
then the whole fier, of water, water, of aier, aier, of earth, earth, 
and euerie degree of heat, is heat, of cold, is cold, of moysture, 
is moysture, of drynesse, is drynesse, though greater and smaller, 
lesse and more, be epithetes vnto them, as either their quantitie, 
or qualitie doth sprede or close. 
 
There be also in the same bodie certaine iustrumentall 
partes, compounded and consisting in substance of the similarie, 
which the bodie doth vse in the executing of the naturall 
functions, and workinges therof. Now when these similarie 
partes be so tempered, and disposed, as no one doth excede any 
other in proportion to ouerrule, but all be as one in consent to 
preserue: and the instrumentall partes also be so correspondent 
one to an other, in composition and greatnesse, in number and 
measure, as nature thorough the temperature of the first, may 
absolutely vse the perfectnesse of the last, to execute and perfourme 
without let or stoppe, what appertaineth to the maintenaunce 
of her selfe: it is called health, and the contrarie, disease, 
both in the whole bodie, and in euery part therof. In the 
whole bodie by distemperature of the whole, in some part, by 
[^p.44^] 
composition, out of place, and disioynted, by greatnes, being to 
bigge or to small: by measure, being misshapen and fashionles: 
by number, being to many and needlesse: or to few, and failing. 
This health whether it be in the middle degre, wherin all executions 
be complete without any sensible let: and no infirmitie 
appeareth, that the bodie feeles with any plaine offence: 
Or if it be in the perfectest degree, which is so seldom, as neuer 
any saw, bycause of great frailty, and britlenesse in our nature: 
it neuer continueth in one estate, but altereth still, and runnes 
to ruyne, without both speedy and daily, nay without hourely 
reparation. 
 
The causes which alter, and chaunge it so, be somtime from 
within the bodie, and were borne with it: sometime from without, 
and yet not without daunger. From within, the verie propertie 
and pithe of our originall substance, and matter whence 
we grew, altereth vs first, which as it beginneth, and groweth 
in moysture, so it endeth, and stayeth in drynesse, and in the 
ende decayeth the bodie with to much drynesse, which extreame 
though naturall withering, we call olde age, which 
though it come by course, and commaundement of nature, 
yet beareth it the name, and title of disease, bycause it decayeth 
the bodie, and deliuerth it to death. From within also, 
the continuall rebating, and falling awaye of somwhat from 
the bodie, occasioneth much chaunge, nay that is most cause 
of greatest chaunge, and killeth incontinent by meere defect, 
if it be not supplyed. 
 
To these two causes of inward alteration, there aunswere 
two other forreine causes, both vnholesome, and perillous, 
the aire, which enuironneth vs, and violence, which is offered 
vs. The former of the two, decaing our health with to much 
heat, cold, drynesse, and moysture of it selfe: or by noysomnesse 
of the soile, and corruption in circunstance. The second, by 
strong hand brusing, or breaking, wounding or wiping awaie, 
of some one part of the bodie, or els killing the whole consort 
of the bodie with the soule, and taking away life from it. These 
foure ouerthrowes of our bodies and health, olde age, waste, 
aire, and violence, finde by helpe of nature, and arte, certaine 
oppositions, which either diuert them quite, if they maye be 
[^p.45^] 
auoided, or kepe them of longer, if they maye be differed, 
or mittigate their malice, when it is perceiued. For forreine 
violence, foresight will looke to, where casualtie commaundes 
not, and cannot be foreseene. For infection by the aire, that 
it do not corrupte and marre so much as it would, wisedome 
will prouide, and defende the bodie from the iniuries, and 
wronges therof. That olde age grow not on to fast, circunspectnes 
in diet, consideration in clothes, diligence in well 
doing, wil easely prouide, both for the minde not to enfect, first 
it selfe and then the bodie: and for the bodie not to enforce the 
minde, by too impotent desires. That waste weare not, meat 
takes in chardge, to supplie that is drye, and decayeth: drinke 
promiseth to restore moysture, when it doth diminishe: the 
breath it selfe, and arteriall pulse, looke to heating and cooling. 
And Physick in generall professing foresight to preuent 
euills, and offering redresse, when they haue done harme, so 
not incurable, doth direct both those and all other meanes. 
Now in all these helpes, and most beneficiall aides of our afflicted 
nature, which deuiseth all meanes to saue her selfe harmelesse, 
and deliteth therin, when she is discharged of infirmities, 
to much stuffes and stiffles, to litle straites and pines, both 
vndoe the naturall. To much meat cloyes, to litle faintes, both 
perishe the principall. To much liquour drownes, to litle 
dryes, both corrupt the carcasse. Heat burnes, cold chilles, 
in excesse both to much, in defect both to litle, and both causes 
to decaie. Mediocritie preserueth not onely in these but in 
whatsoeuer els. 
 
But now what place hath exercise here? to helpe nature by 
[/6./] 
motion in all these her workinges, and wayes for health: to 
encrease and encourage the naturall heat, that it maye digest 
quickly and expell strongly: to fashion and frame all the 
partes of the bodie to their naturall and best hauiour: to helpe 
to rid needelesse, and superfluous humours: reffuse and reiected 
excrementes, which nature leaues for naught, when she hath 
sufficiently fed, and wisheth rather they were seene abrode, 
then felt within. And be not these great benefites? to defend 
the body by defeating diseases? to stay the minde, by strengthening 
of her meane? to assist nature being both daily, and 
[^p.46^] 
daungerously, assailed both within and without? to helpe life 
to continue long? to force death, to kepe farre a loufe? 
 
Now as all constitutions be not of one and the same mould, 
and as all partes be not moued alike, with any one thing: so 
the exercises must alter, and be appropriate to each: that both 
the constitution may be continued in her best kinde, and all the 
partes preserued to their best vse, which exercises being compared 
among themselues one to an other, be more or lesse, but 
being applyed to the partie kepe alwayes in a meane, when 
[/7./] 
they meane to do good. Concerning students, for whose health 
my care is greatest, the lesse they eate, the lesse they neede to 
voide: and therfore small diet in them, best preuenteth all 
superfluities, which they cannot auoide, if their diet be great, 
[/8./] 
and their exercise small. Their exercise must also be very moderate, 
and not alter to much, for feare of to great distemperature 
[/9./] 
in that, which must continue moderate: and with all it 
should be ordinarie, that the habit may be holesome, and sudden 
chaunge giue no cause of greater inconuenience. Wherfore 
to auoide distemperature the enemie to health, and so 
consequently to life, and to maintaine the naturall constitution 
so, as it may serue to the best, wherin her duetie lyeth, and liue 
to the longest, that in nature it can, besides the diet, which 
must be small, as nature is a pickler, and requires hut small 
pittaunce: besides clothing which should be thin euen from 
the first swadling to harden, and thick the flesh: I do take this 
traine by exercise, which I wishe to be ioyned with learning, 
to be a marueilous furtherer. 
 
But for diet to auoide inward daungers, and clothing to 
auert outward iniuries, and all such preuentions, as are not proper 
to teachers, though in communitie more proper then to 
any common man: I set them ouer to parentes, and other well 
willers, which will see to them, that they faile not in those 
thinges: and if they do, will fly to Physicians, by their helpe 
to salue that, which themselues may forsee. For exercises I will 
deale, which to commend more then they will commend them 
selues, when I shall shew both what they be, and the particular 
profites of euery one of them, which I chuse from the rest, were 
me thinke verie needlesse, and cheifly to me, which seeme sufficiently 
[^p.47^] 
to praise them, in that I do place them among principles 
of prerogatiue. But as in the soule I did picke out certaine 
pointes, whervnto I applyed the training principles: so likewise 
in the bodie, may I not also seuer some certaine partes, whervnto 
my preceptes must principally be conformed? that shall 
not neede. For as in the soule the frute of traine doth better 
and make complete euen that which I tuched not, and so conseque~tly 
the whole soule: so in the bodie, those exercises which 
seeme to be appointed for some speciall partes, bycause they 
stirre those partes most, do qualifie the whole bodie, and make 
it most actiue. Wherefore as there I did promise not to anatomise 
the soule, as neither dealing with Diuines nor Philosophers: 
so do I not here make profession to shew the anatomie 
of the bodie, as medling neither with Physicians nor Surgeans, 
otherwise then any of them foure can helpe me in exercise. To 
the which effect, and ende, I will onely cull out from whence 
I can, such speciall notes, as both Philosophers, and Phisicians 
do know to be most true, and both the learned, and vnlearned, 
will confesse to be for them: and such also, as the training maisters 
may easely both helpe, and encrease in their owne triall. 
For both reason, and rule, do alwaye commaunde, that the 
maister be by, when exercise is vsed, thorough whose ouerlooking 
the circunstance is kept, which helpeth to health, and the 
contrarie shunned, which in exercise doth harme. In the elder 
yeares, reason at the elbow must serue the student, as in these 
younger, the maisters presence helpes to direct the child. 
 
But to ioyne close with our traine. What partes be they in 
our bodie, vpon whom exercise is to shew this great effecte? 
or what be the powers therof, which must still be stirred, so to 
stay, and establish the perpetuitie of health, not in themselues 
alone, but in the whole bodie, by them? Where ioyntes be to 
bend, where stringes to tye, where synewes to stirre, where 
streatchers to straine, there must needes be motion: or els 
stifnesse will follow, and vnweildynesse withall: where there be 
conduites to conuey the blood, which warmeth, canales to 
carie the spirite, which quickneth, pipes to bestow the aire, 
which cooleth, passage to dismisse execrements which easeth, 
there must needes be spreding, to kepe the currant large, and 
[^p.48^] 
eche waie open, for feare of obstructions, and sudden fainting. 
Where to much must needes marre, there must be forcing out, 
where to litle must nedes lame, there must be letting in: where 
thickning threates harme, there thinning fines the substance: 
where thinning is to much, there thickning must do much, and 
to knit vp all in short, all those offices, whervnto our bodie 
serueth naturally, either for inward bestowing of nurriture, and 
maintenaunce of life: or for outward motion, and executions 
of vse, must be chearished and nusled so, as that they do by 
nature well, and truely, they may do by traine, both long, and 
strongly. I shall not neede to name the partes, all in one ruk, 
as of set purpose, which be knowen by their effectes: and the 
exercises also themselues will shew for whom they serue. But 
for example first in the partes let vs see, whether we can discern 
them by their working, and properties, that therby the exercise 
may be pickte, which is most proper to helpe such effectes. 
 
[/10./] 
Who doth not streight waye conceiue, that the lunges 
or lightes be ment, when he heareth of an inward part, which 
prouideth winde for the harte, to allay his heat, and to minister 
some clammy matter vnto it, whence he may take aire, 
most fit for his functions, and not at the sudden be forced to 
vse any forreine? 
 
[/11./] 
Or who doth not by and by see, that the harte is implyed, 
when he heareth of an other inward part, which is the spring, 
and fountaine, of the vitall spirite and facultie, the seat and sender 
out of naturall heat, the occasion and cause of the arteriall 
pulse, which by one arterie, and way, receiueth cooling from 
the lunges, by an other, sendeth the vitall spirite, the hote, 
and hurling blood, thorough out the whole bodie? 
 
[/12./] 
Or who is so grosse, as not to gesse at the liuer, when he 
heareth of an other inward part, which is the cheife instrument 
of nurriture, the workhouse of thicke & grosse blood: that feedeth 
the life and soule: when it desireth meat, and drinke, 
and what is els necessarie: which conueieth blood thorough the 
veines to nurrish all partes of the bodie, with the naturall spirit 
in it, if there be any, verie darke and heauie? 
 
[/13./] 
Nay hath he any braine, which seeth not the braine plainly 
laid before him, when he heareth a part of mans bodie named, 
[^p.49^] 
which breedeth a sowlish, and life spirite, as most pure, so 
most precious, and rather a qualitie then a bodie, and vseth it 
partly to further the working of that princely, and principall 
part of mans soule, wherby he vnderstandeth and reasoneth: 
partly to helpe the instrume~tes of sense, and motion, by meane 
of the sineues, neuer suffering them to lacke spirite: which is 
the cheife and capitall cause, why these instrumentes do their 
dueties well? And so forth in all the partes aswell without, as 
[/14./] 
within sight, whose properties when one heareth and finding 
that they be helped by such a motion he can forthwith say, that 
such an exercise is good for such a part: 
 
Now againe for exercises. Who hearing that moderate 
[/15./] 
running doth warme the whole body, strengthneth the naturall 
motions, prouoketh appetite, helpeth against distilling of 
humours and catarres, and driueth them some other waie: 
 
Or that daunsing beside the warmth, driueth awaye numnesse, 
[/16./] 
& certaine palsies, comforteth the stomacke, being cumbred 
with weaknes of digestio~, & confluence of raw humours, 
strengtheneth weake hippes, fainting legges, freatishing feete: 
 
Or that ryding also is healthfull for the hippes and stomacke: 
[/17./] 
that it cleareth the instrumentes of all the senses, that 
it thickneth thinne shankes: that it stayeth loose bellies: 
 
Or that loud speaking streatcheth the bulke exerciseth the 
[/18./] 
vocalle instrumentes, practiseth the lungues, openeth the bodie, 
and all the passages therof: 
 
Or that loud reading scoureth all the veines, stirreth the 
[/19./] 
spirites thorought out all the entraulles, encreaseth heat, suttileth 
the blood, openeth the arteries, suffereth not superfluous 
humours to grow grosse and thicke: who, say I, hearing but of 
these alone in taste for all, or of all together by these alone, 
doth not both see the partes, which are preserued, the exercise 
which preserueth, and the matter wherin? 
 
Wherfore seing exercise is such a thing, that so much enableth 
the bodie, whom the soule hath for companion in all 
exploites, a comfort being lightsome, a care being lothesom, a 
courage being healthy, a clog being heauie, I will, bycause I 
must, if I meane to do well, plat forth the whole place of exercising 
the bodie, at ones for all ages. 
 
[^p.50^] 
[}Chapter 7.}] 
 
[}The braunching, order, and methode, kept in this 
discours of exercises.}] 
 
BYcause the speciall marke wherat I shoote, is to bring the 
minde forward to his best, by those meanes which I take 
to be best, wherin I must of force continue verie long, as in my 
principall and cheife subiecte, and in no place sauing this, entreat 
of the bodie, but onely how to apply that to it, which I 
pitche downe here: I thinke it good therefore in this place to 
perfit, and handle at full the whole title of exercises with all 
the circunstances belonging thervnto, so sufficiently and fully, 
as my simple skill can aspire vnto: & as the present occasion of 
a position or passage vseth to require, leauing that which I do 
not medle with, to those that shall professe the thing, ether 
for their owne, or for their childrens health, wherin I will kepe 
this methode and manner of proceeding. First I wil note somewhat, 
[/20./] 
generally concerning all exercises. Secondly I will chuse 
[/21./] 
out some especiall exercises, which vpon good consideration 
I do take to be most proper, and propitious to schooles, and 
scholers. Thirdly I will applye the circunstances, required in 
[/22./] 
exercise to euerie of them, so neare as I can, that there be no 
error committed in the executing. For the better the thing is, 
if it hit right, the more dangerous it proueth, if it misse of that 
right. Last of all I will shew the training maister, how to furnish 
[/23./] 
himselfe thoroughly, in this professed exercising: bycause 
he must both applie the minde with learning, and the bodie 
with mouing, at diuerse times, refreshing himselfe, with varietie 
and chaunge. 
 
But in handling of these foure pointes, I meane to rippe vp 
no idle question: I terme that idle, where health is the ende, 
and the question no helpe to it, but cause to discours, and delaye 
of precept. Such questions be these: who first found out 
the arte of exercise called Gymnastice, or whether it belong to 
the Physician or no: being a preseruatiue to health: or who 
first deuised the particular exercises: or who were most famous 
for the executing therof, and a number of such like discoursory 
argumentes, which learned men hauing leasure at will, as a 
[^p.51^] 
schoolemaister hath not, and willing to wade farre, as my selfe 
could wish, haue mined out of the bowelles of antiquitie, and 
entraules of authoritie, sometimes sadly, and saing in deede 
much, vpon euident and apparent testimonies, sometimes simply, 
and surmising but some such thing, by very light and slight 
coniectures: oftimes supported by bare guesse, at some silly 
word, or some more naked warrant. Wherfore to the matter. 
 
[}Chapter 8.}] 
 
[}Of exercise in generall and what it is. And that it is Athleticall 
for games, Martiall for the fielde, Physicall for health, præparatiue 
before, postparatiue after the sta~ding exercise: some 
within daores, for foule whether, some without for faire.}] 
 
ALL exercises were first deuised, and so in deede serued, either 
[/24./] 
for games and pastime, for warre and seruice, or for 
suretie of health & length of life, though somtime all the three 
endes did concurre in one, sometimes they could not. For why 
might not an healthfull, and a sound body, both serue in the 
fielde for a soldiar, and in the sand for a wrastler? But we seldom 
reade, that the athleticall constitution whose ende was 
gaming, whose exercise was pastime, whose diet was vnmeasurable 
for any ma~ to vse, did either deliuer the world an healthfull 
body, being strained beyond measure, or a courageous 
soldiar, being vnweildy to fight, as one compounded & made 
of fat and fog, brawnie and burdenous. 
 
The athleticall and gaming exercises, were in generall 
[/25./] 
assemblies, to winne some wager, to beare awaie the prise, to 
be wondered at of the world, or to set foorth the solemnities 
of their festiuall seruice, and ceremonies in the honour of their 
idoles: or in the publike spectacle to adourne and set foorth, the 
triumphant and victorious shewes, the sumptuous and costly 
deuises of their princes and states. Wherin we reade, that particular 
men haue shewed such effectes of strength, & sturring, 
by the helpe of exercise, and traine, as nature her selfe could 
neuer attaine vnto, though she furthered the feat, and got her 
selfe the worst, both by empairing of health, and hastning on 
of death, thorough straining to much. It is more then marueilous 
[^p.52^] 
to thinke on, and yet we finde it of verie good recorde, 
what and how incredible weight, both of liuing creatures, and 
massier mettal, one mans force hath bene noted to haue borne, 
by being only vsed to that burthen. Would any man beleue it, 
if it were not of good writen credit, that one Milo so strutted 
himselfe, so pitcht his feet, so peysed his bodie, as he remained 
vnremoueable from his place, being haled at and pulde by a 
number of people. Actiuitie hath wrought wonders, swiftnesse 
incredible thinges, and what propertie what not? where nature 
and ambition were backt with exercise and good will, to 
do but one thing well. 
 
[/26./] 
For the vse of warre, and defence, it is more then euident, 
that exercise beares the bell: Can one haue a bodie to abide 
cold, not to melte with heat, not to starue for hunger, not to 
dye for thirst, not to shrinke at any hardnesse, almost beyond 
nature, and aboue common reache, if he neuer haue it trained? 
will nimblenesse of limmes awaie with all labour, surpasse all 
difficulties, of neuer so diuers, and dangerous groundes, pursue 
enemies to vanquish, reskue freinds to saue, retire from danger 
without harme, thrust it selfe into daunger without daunger, 
where no traine before made acquaintaunce with trauell? 
Whervpon called the Romaines their whole armie Exercitus, 
but bycause it consisted of a valiant number of exercised and 
trained men? which were not to seeke at a sudden, bycause 
they had vsed armes before? how could common weales where 
the territory was but small, and the enhabitantes few, haue still 
deliuered themselues from mightier assailantes, then they seemed 
defendantes? or in continuall threates, of ieleous neighbours, 
how could they still haue kept their owne, if that small 
territorie, had not bene thoroughly employed, and that petie 
paucitie gallantly trained? wherby it was able for hardnesse 
and sufferance to abide what not? For actiuitie and manhood, 
to haue mastered whom not? or at the least had good meanes, 
not to receiue any foile, where onely the huger number, and 
the vntrained multitude, were to trie the masterie in fielde against 
them? 
 
[/27./] 
For health it is most manifest that exercise is a mighty great 
mistresse, whether it be to confirme that which we haue by 
[^p.53^] 
nature, or to procure that which we haue not by nature: or to 
recouer that by industrie, and diligence, which we haue almost 
lost, by misfortune & negligence. The exercises which do serue 
to this healthy end, do best serue for this my purpose, & though 
an healthfull body be most apt and actiue, both for gaming to 
get wagers, and for warring to winne victories, yet in my exercises, 
I neither meane to dally with the gamester, not to fight 
with the warrier, but to marke which way I may best saue studentes, 
who haue most neede of it: being still assailed by those 
enemies of health, which waxe more eager and hoat, the 
more weake and cold that exercise is. 
 
[/28./] 
This exercise of ours by forme of definition, is said to be a 
vehement, & a voluntarie stirring of ones body, which altereth 
the breathing, whose ende is to maintaine health, and to bring 
the bodie to a verie good habit. Doth not exercise at this her 
first entry offer to performe so much as I did vndertake for her? 
health of the body, & an healthy habit of all the limmes: which 
two effectes, bycause they be good, who doth not desire them? 
and being got by exercise, why is it not in price? and being 
reducible to order, why should it not be in traine? They that 
[/29./] 
write of exercise, make three degrees in it, wherof they call 
the first a preparatiue, in Greek [^GREEK OMITTED^], the next simply 
by the name of exercise [^GREEK OMITTED^] the third a postparatiue, 
[/30./] 
in Greek [^GREEK OMITTED^]. The preparatiue serued, not to 
passe rudely, and roughly into the maine exercise, without 
qualifying the bodie by degrees before, bycause sudden alteration 
[/31./] 
workes ill disposition. The postparatiue or apotherapeutike 
followeth the maine exercise, to reduce the body by 
gentle degrees, to the same quietnesse in constitutio~, wherin it 
was, before it was so moued. Which two pointes bycause they 
rest most in the maisters consideration, which is to ouersee the 
traine, I commit them to his care: so to applie his cunning as 
he shall see cause in exercising his charge. And yet herein I 
entend to helpe him, when I shall handle the circunstances 
which direct exercises. 
 
The third degree, which is enclosed betwene these two, is 
[/32./] 
that same exercise, which I praise so much, and vpon whom 
the other two waite, wherof, as writers make to many, and to 
[^p.54^] 
finely minced distinctions, so I make account but of one at 
this time, wherof I do make two braunches, or spieces, the 
one to be vsed within dores, and the other abroade, that whether 
the weather be faire or fowle, the execise in some kinde 
may neuer faile. 
 
[}Chapter 9.}] 
 
[}Of the particular exercises, why I do appoint so manie, and 
how to iudge of them, or to deuise the like.}] 
 
I will not here runne thorough all the kindes of exercises that 
be named either by Galene or any other writer, wherof many 
be discontinued, many be yet in vse, but out of the whole 
heape I haue pickt out these for within dores, lowd speaking, 
singing, lowd reading, talking, laughing, weaping, holding the 
breath, daunsing, wrastling, fensing, and scourging the Top. And 
these for without dores, walking, running, leaping, swimming, 
riding, hunting, shooting, and playing at the ball. Wherof though 
the very most be vsed oftimes, not in nature of exercises, but 
either of pleasure, or necessitie, yet they be all such, as will serue 
well that waie, and be so made account of among the best writers, 
that deale in this kinde: and for that some of them maye 
be said to be most proper to men, and farre aboue boyes plaie: 
you must remember, that I deale for all studentes, and not for 
children alone, to whom it is in choice, besides all these to deuise 
other for their good, as circunstance shal lead them. There 
may also be reasons, to perswade some men to mislike of, I do 
not thinke all, but I suppose some, of these thinges, which I do 
appoint, as both commendable and profitable exercises, with 
whom I will not here striue, but desire them to iudge of me, 
without preiudice, and to stay their sentence, vntill they see 
in what sorte I allow them. For knowing the cause of offence, 
I might seeme very simple, if I should simply allow that, which 
is disallowed vpon reason, and not misliked without manifest 
shew of probable cause: and so to reserue the thing, as I did 
not remoue the blame. They must also thinke that nothing is 
abused, but that both may and ought to be well vsed, which 
well, they must vse, and refuse the ill: seing where misuse 
draweth blame, there right vse deserueth praise. 
[^p.55^] 
Therfore I wishe those that be of yeares, & abilitie to guide 
themselues to call circunstance to counsell, and consideration 
to aduise. For as consideration shapeth the circunstance, so circunstance 
is a thing, which maketh all that is done, either to 
please or displease: to be sent awaie with a cutting checke: or 
to be bid tarie, with a cheary contenaunce. As for the child in 
whom wisdom wanteth, to way with discretion, what it is that 
he doeth, the maister alone must supplie all wantes, or beare 
all blames, though it be but a simple recompence, to blame 
wante of consideration, when harme is receiued. Some man 
may also say, what needes so many, and mislike the multitude. 
Of many to chuse some, is vsuall in all choice, and where store 
is, why should choice be stinted? he may lessen the number, 
that alloweth but of one, and I haue pickt out the likest, to satisfie 
all in diuersities of liking, who so shall like any of these, 
may vse them with me, or vpon the like ground, may deuise 
himselfe other. In handling of eche of these, I will first shew 
for what partes, to what end, and in what manner, they be profitable 
and holesome being moderatly vsed: then for whom, 
and with what daunger, they be strained to the contrarie. 
 
[}Chapter 10.}] 
 
[}Of lowd speaking. How necessarie, and how proper 
an exercise it is for a scholler.}] 
 
THe exercise of the voice which in Latin they name vociferatio, 
in Greek [^GREEK OMITTED^], as them [^GREEK OMITTED^], which were 
the training maisters, in English maye be tearmed lowd speaking, 
of the height: for though it vse all the degrees, which be 
in the voice, yet is it most properly to take his name, of the 
lowdest and shrillest, as the most audible in sound, and therfore 
fittest to giue the name, as all thinges els receiue theirs, 
of some one qualitie of most especiall note. The auncient Physicians 
entertaine it among exercises, bycause it stirreth the 
bulke, and all those instrumentes, which serue for the deliuerie 
of voice, and vtterance of speeche: bycause it aideth, dilateth, 
and comforteth the lunges in his windworke, it encreaseth, 
cleanseth, stre~gtheneth, and fineth the naturall heat: it maketh 
[^p.56^] 
the sound and soueraigne partes of the bodie strong and pure: 
and not lightly to be assailed by any disease: it mendeth the colour, 
and cheareth the countenaunce. Now that it hath these 
properties they do proue by naturall argumentes. That it practiseth 
and stirreth the inward partes, and vocall instrumentes, 
no man may denie, which will confesse, that the mouth alone, 
is the onely port and passage for speeche. That it encreaseth 
the naturall heat, the breath it selfe doth most euide~tly declare, 
bycause it is alwaye exceeding warme, when one exerciseth 
the voice, it is so thronged and crusshed with taking in and 
letting out. That it cleanseth and cleareth, there be two causes 
to proue: the one is, bycause it maketh the flesh more fine 
and thinne, and smoother to the hand, not onely thorough 
stretching and straining the skinne, but by remouing excrementes, 
which naturally thicken and make rugged. The other 
is, for that by mouing the vocall instrumentes the inward moysture 
consumeth and wasteth, as it doeth appeare by that 
thicke and grosse vapour, which proceedeth out of his mouth 
that speaketh alowd, and other congealed excrementes resting 
of olde in other passages, which this exercise expelled 
from the inward partes. That it both fines and strengthens the 
naturall heat, hereby it is more then plaine. For that the inward 
vesselles and pipes be scoured thereby, and sundry superfluities 
expelled both at the nose, and mouth, which as they 
darkened, weakned, and thickned the naturall heat, when they 
were within the bodie: so being dismissed themselues, they 
leaue it pure, fine, and strong, whereby the partes being sound 
and cleare more strength groweth on to healthward, and lesse 
to disease. Hervpon it falleth out, that this exercise of the voice, 
must needes be a singular helpe for them, which haue their 
inwarde partes troubled with moysture, and be of cold co~stitution, 
as also for such, as be troubled with weaknesse, or pewkishnesse 
of stomacke, with vomiting, or bytter rifting, with 
hardnesse of digestion, with lothing of their meat, with feeding 
that feedes not, with faintnesse, with naughty constitution, that 
corrupteth the blood, with dropsies, with painfull fetching 
their breath, or but then easely, when they sit vpright, with 
consumptions, with any long disease, in the breast or midrife, 
[^p.57^] 
with apostemes which are broken within the bulke, with quartane 
agues, with fleame, and also for all those, which be on 
the mending hand, after sicknesse: for those that are troubled 
with the scurfe, or Egyptian lepre, called Elepha~tiasis, or whose 
bellies be so weake, as they cannot auoide, but watry and thin 
excrementes, for the hikup, for the voice, and her instrumentes, 
whether naturally resolued, or casually empaired. 
 
Now as this exercise aduisedly, and orderly vsed, is verie 
good for those effectes in these partes, so rashly and rudely 
ventured vpon, it is not without daunger of doing harme, and 
cheifly to those which neuer vsed it before: it filleth the head 
and makes it heauie, it dulleth the instrumentes of the senses, 
which are in the head. It hurtes the voice, & breakes the smaller 
veines, and is verie vnwholesome for such, as are subiect to 
the falling sicknesse, bycause it shaketh the troubled partes too 
sore: it is daungerous when one is troubled with ill, and corrupt 
humours, or when the stomacke is cumbred, with great 
and euident crudities, and rawnes, bycause thorough much 
chafing of the breath, and the breath instrumentes, it disperpleth, 
and scattereth corrupt humours, thorough out the whole 
bodie. And as the gentle exercising of the voice, with oft enterlacing 
of graue soundes, is wholesome, so to much shrilnesse 
straynes the head, causeth the temples pante, the braines to 
beate, the eyes to swell, the eares to tingle. Further it is verie 
vnwholesom after meat, bycause the breath being chased partly 
by reason of late eating, partly by lowdnesse of the voice as 
it passeth thorough, gawlleth the throte, and so corrupteth the 
voice. It is also enemie to repletion, to wearinesse, to sensualitie: 
for that in those people, which are subiect to those infirmities, 
the great & forcible straining of the voice, doth oftimes 
cause ruptures and conuulsions, so that the commodities, and 
incommodities of the exercise do warne the training maister 
to vse it wisely and with great discretion. The vse of it for the 
motion is this, that I haue said, but for the helpe of learning, 
it is to some other verie good and great purpose, to pronounce 
without booke, with that kinde of action which the verie propertie 
of the subiect requireth, orations and other declamatory 
argumentes, either made by the pronouncer him selfe, or 
[^p.58^] 
borowed of some other, but cheifly the hoatest Philippik, Catilinarie, 
and Verrine argumentes, and the rest of that race, either 
out of many Greeke oratours, or our one and onely Latin 
Tullie, and whether ye list to prose alone, or to be bold with 
Poetes, and vse their meeter. Cœlius Aurelianus an auncient 
[/33./] 
Romane Physician, though borne at Sicca in Aphricke speaking 
[/34./] 
of this exercise vseth these wordes. They did vtter their beginninges 
or prohemes with a gentle and a moderate voice, their 
narrations, and reasoning discourses with more straining, and 
louder: their perorations, and closinges, with a discent, and 
fall of the voice. And is not that to my saying? 
 
The manner of this exercise, which Antyllus a verie olde 
[/35./] 
Physician doth shew in Oribasius, that wrate his bookes vnto 
Iulian the apostate, whose Physician he was, agreeth also with 
mine opinion. For hauing appointed certaine preparatiues for 
nimbling, and spreding the vocall powers, he sayth, that such, 
as exercised the voice, did first begin lowe, and moderatly, 
then went on to further strayning, of their speeche: sometimes 
drawing it out, with as stayed, and graue soundes, as was possible, 
sometimes bringing it backe, to the sharpest and shrillest, 
that they could, afterward not tarying long in that shrill sound, 
they retired backe againe, slacking the straine of their voice, 
till they fell into that low, and moderate tenour, wherwith 
they first began. Which wordes do not onely shew, that it was 
thus vsed, but also how the voice is to be vsed, in this exercise 
generally. But vpon what matter, and argument was all this 
paines bestowed? Those which were vnlearned said such things 
as they could remember, which were to be spoken aloud, and 
admitted any change of voice in the vttering, now harshe and 
hard, now smoothe and sweete. Those that were bookish recited 
either Iambike verses or Elegies, or such other numbers, 
which with their currant carie the memorie on, but all without 
booke, as farre surmounting any kinde of reading. I haue 
dwelt the longer in this exercise, bycause it is both the first 
in rancke, and the best meane to make good pronouncing of 
any thing, in any auditorie, and therfore an exercise not impertinent 
to scholers. 
 
[^p.59^] 
[}Chapter II.}] 
 
[}Of loude singing, and in what degree it commeth 
to be one of the exercises.}] 
 
IT were to much to wishe, that Musick were the most healthy 
exercise, as it is the most pleasaunt profession, bycause either 
to much delite would drowne men in it alone, or to much 
cloying would cause it be quite contemned. Wherfore as it 
may not diminish other of their due, by occupying to much 
roome, so by change after other, and distance in it selfe, it continue 
h in her owne credit. For both varietie refresheth, and distance 
reneweth, where still the same dulles, and continuance 
wearies. As Musick is compounde of number, melodie, and 
harmonie, it hath nothing to do with gymnastick and exercise, 
but serueth in that sense either for delite & pleasure, and exerciseth 
desire: or in some respectes concerneth the manering 
and training vp of youth in matter of knowledge, as I said before. 
Whervnto I was induced not onely by argument, and nature 
of the thing, but by great authorities of Plato, and Philo, 
[/36./] 
of Aristotle and Galene, and whom not? out of all antiquitie, 
[/37./] 
which both allow of the thing in nature, and admit it in pollicie, 
into the best common weales, as a great worker of much 
good. But for as much as singing vseth the voice for her meane, 
and the voice instrumentes for her vtteraunce, and medleth 
with all sortes, and degrees in sounde base, meane, and triple, 
[/38./] 
which in deliuerie do labour, and trauell the pipes, it is receiued 
among exercises of health, though it be not so forcible, 
[/39./] 
nor can pearce so farre, as loude speaking doth, which doth 
not much care for any fine concent, so it vtter strongly, and 
straine within compasse: wheras Musick to the co~trary standes 
not much vpon straining or fullnesse of the voice, so it be delicate 
and fine in concent. And yet in Aristotles opinion, it both 
[/40./] 
exerciseth, and preserueth the naturall strength bycause it standeth 
vpon an ordinate, and degreed motion of the voice. We 
finde in our owne experie~ce, that it sturreth the voice, spreadeth 
the instrumentes therof, and craueth a cleare passage, as it also 
lightneth the laborer, and encreaseth his courage, in carying 
of burdens. It was vsed in the olde time Physicklike, to stay 
[^p.60^] 
mourning and greife, for the losse of deare freindes, or desired 
thinges. In curing diseases, which rise vpon some distemperature 
of the minde, the temperature of time iudicially applyed, 
hath bene found both a straunge and a strong remedie. Alwaye 
prouided, that whether ye say loud, or sing loud, ye neither 
say to long, nor sing to much, for feare of a worse turne, 
if any entraill teare, with to much straining, as some times 
hath proued to true, for the afflicted partie. But to make an 
ende of Musick at this time, though it be neither so strong, nor 
so stirring an exercise, yet it hath made a great purchace, that 
it is allowed for one, & therby esteemed a double principle, of 
more value, where her force is more, in matters of the minde, 
of very good worth, though of much lesse worke in the health 
of the bodie. Which seeing it is an exercise within dore, it gaineth 
with the place a good footing to grow fairer: for whether 
ye allow it for a cunning exercise, or an exercised cunning, it 
exerciseth cunning, and encreaseth by exercise. 
 
[}Chapter 12.}] 
 
[}Of loude and soft reading.}] 
 
REading is a thing so familiarly knowne, as there needeth 
no great proofe, that it exerciseth the voice, and therwith 
all the health, wherof the Physicians admit two kindes, into 
the raunge of exercises, which be furtherers to health. The one 
quicke, cleare, & straining, the other quiet, caulme, and staing, 
[/41./] 
The cleare and straining kinde of reading, bycause it stirreth 
the breath, not sleightly nor superficially, but sheweth what it 
can do, in the verie fountaine and depth of all the entrailles, 
it encreaseth the naturall health, maketh the blood suttle and 
fine, purgeth all the veines, openeth all the arteries, suffereth 
not superfluous humours to thicken, neither to congeale and 
freese to a dreggie residence within any of those places, which 
do either receiue and lodge, or distribute and dispose, the meat 
[/42./] 
and nurriture. Whervpon Cornelius Celsus an eloquent Romain 
Physician accounteth it one of the finest and fairest exercises. 
[/43./] 
To proue that it is holesome for the head, what more credible 
witnesses neede we, then Cœlius Aurelianus, a diligent 
[^p.61^] 
Physician, and Annæus Seneca a deepe Philosopher? Cœlius 
[/44./] 
holdeth this kinde of reading to be verie soueraine not onely in 
headaches, but also in frensies and troubled mindes. Seneca vsed 
it to stay the rewme, and distillation from the head, which 
troubled him fore, as a man being both of eager conceit, and 
earnest studie. where by the waye, Cœlius giueth this note, 
whether ye meane to reskew the pacient, from the headache, 
or the frantike from madnesse, by this exercise of reading, that 
the matter which is read, be pleasaunt and plaine, and nothing 
hard to vnderstand, to cause the witte to muse. For that such 
obiectes do no lesse trouble the weake braine, then sore shaking 
or hard iogging doth the wearied body. Moreouer cleare 
reading and loude, doth refreshe not onely the inward partes 
of the breast, but the stomack also: and comforteth it in feeblenesse, 
bycause therby phlegmatike excrementes, are without 
paine both thinned and consumed: whervpon it is held to be 
verie holesome, to mend a feeble voice, to helpe the colicke, 
occasioned by cold humours, & to check some consumptions. 
And to that ende the young Plinie writeth, that his vncle did 
vse it. Whe~ I haue said that it is also good for the drie cowghe, 
I neede not say any more good of it here. Auicen the Arabian 
[/45./] 
and princely Physician speaking herof, sayth that in the beginning, 
this reading must be soft and caulme, then mount by degrees, 
and when the voice seemeth to be in his strength, growing, 
and long, that then it is hie time, to staie for that time, nor 
to straine till ye sticke, but to leaue with some list, and abilitie 
to do more. The quiet and staid kinde of reading, sauing that 
[/46./] 
the working is weaker, doth the best that it can, about all this 
that is said: and in one pointe it hath obtained a prerogatiue 
aboue the loude, that it is admitted and allowed streight after 
meat, when the other is licensed and allowed to depart. The 
maister may so vse these two exercises of reading and speaking 
as besides the health of the bodie, whervnto they are deputed, 
they may proue excellent and great deliuerers of cunning, 
and well beseeme the schoole: as to much in either doth trouble 
the scholer to much, which yet boyes would defend, by the 
countenaunce of a commended exercise, were it not, that in 
boyes exercises, I do require the maisters presence, who will 
[^p.62^] 
refourme that exercise against their will to his owne discretio~. 
Thus much concerning this exercise, wherby the training maister 
may perceiue, both what the learned haue thought of it, 
and how much the learners are like to gaine by it. 
 
[}Chapter 13.}] 
 
[}Of much talking and silence.}] 
 
TAlking in Latin Sermo, as it is accounted an exercise for 
succouring some partes, so both for eagernesse, and heat, 
in the nature of speeche, though not of passion, it comes farre 
behinde others, and is therfore regestred among the meane, 
& weake exercises. It is thought verie fit for such, as be drousely 
giuen: which haue their senses daunted, either thorough 
dreaming melancholie, or dulling phleame. For such kinde of 
people by talking be cleared, their mindes awaked, their 
senses freed from the burden of their bodies. That talking 
spendes phleame there is no plainer proofe, the~ that they which 
talke much spit stil, which as it commeth partly from the head, 
partly from the stomacke, partly from the chest: so it declareth, 
that those partes delite in speeche, and receiue comfort 
from speeche, which makes roome for health, where reume 
kept residence. But as in these cases, it is counted healthfull: so 
hath it a force to fill the head, with somwhat more then dinne, 
and to make it dumpishe. And therefore in aches, and distemperatures 
of the head, clattering is commended to the 
cloakbag by Physick. It is also a poyson to the pained eyes: ill 
for them that voide blood either at the nose or from the bulke. 
Whervpon in any such bleading silence is enioyned. And as 
silence is a meane both to stay bleading, and to slake thirst, so 
talking dryes the toungue and prouockes thirst, openeth the 
passage, and promoteth bleading. In so much as Pline writeth, 
[/47./] 
that one Mecenas Messius, a noble Romain, betooke him selfe 
to voluntarie silence, the space of three yeares, to staie the casting 
of blood, which he fell into by reason of some straine. 
To be short, as silence remedyeth the cough and hikup: so 
talking pulleth downe, and paines the patient, when agues 
grow vpward, and be in the encrease. Herevpon I conclude, 
[^p.63^] 
that talking hath great meane either to make or marre, not 
onely for the subiect, wheron the toungue walketh, but also 
for the obiect, wherin health resteth. 
 
[}Chapter 14.}] 
 
[}Of laughing, and weeping. And whether children be to be 
forced toward vertue and learning.}] 
 
IF laughing had no more wherfore to be enrouled in the catalogue 
of exercises, then weeping hath, they might both be 
crossed out. And yet as they be passions, that tende in some 
pointes, to the purging of some partes, so some may thinke it, 
a verie strange conceit, to laugh for exercise, or to weepe for 
wantonnesse. For as laugh one may, with an hartie good will, 
so weepe none can, but against their wil, to whom it is allotted 
in the nature of an exercise, and not quite questuarie, as to 
those wailing women, which wepte for the deade, whom they 
knew not aliue. There be manie and very easie, and much desired 
meanes, to make one laugh though they haue small 
cause, and lesse deuotion to be mery at all, but to make one 
weepe, is stil againe the haire. For ill newes or matter to weepe 
for, neither children, nor olde folkes, will thanke you at all. 
If you meane to make them weepe for ioye, or crye for kindenesse, 
that is an other matter. If the maister should beate his 
boye, and bring no cause why, but that he sought to haue him 
weepe, so to excercise him to health, and to ridde him of some 
humours, which made him to moist, the boye would beshrew 
him, and thinke his maister beate him so, to exercise himselfe, 
though at the verie co~ceit of his maisters mad reason, he might 
brust out in laughing streight after his stripes, and so become a 
patrone to the co~trary exercise: a great deale more gracious & 
more desired in nature, whose enemie greife is, and weeping also: 
as a plaine argument of an vnpleasaunt guest. Howbeit 
seing they be both set downe, by the name of pettie, and pretie 
exercises, let them haue that is giuen them, seeing they are 
thought to stirre, and cleare some partes: laughing more and 
better: weeping lesse and worse. And therfore the more children 
laugh for exercise, the more light some they be, the more 
[^p.64^] 
they weepe if it be not in ieast, so much the worse in very good 
earnest. For I can hardly beleue that much laughter can auoide 
a foole, if it be not for exercise, which is also somwhat rare: 
or that but a foole can weepe for exercise, which deserues the 
bat, to make him weepe in earnest. 
 
But for laughing in the nature of an exercise and that healthful, 
can there be any better argume~t, to proue that it warmeth, 
then the rednesse of the face, and flush of highe colour, when 
one laugheth from the hart, and smiles not from the teethe? or 
that it stirreth the hart, and the adiacent partes, then the tickling 
and panting of those partes themselues? which both beare 
witnesse, that there is some quicke heat, that so moueth the 
blood. Therfore it must needs be good for them to vse laughing, 
which haue cold heades, and cold chestes, which are troubled 
with melancholie, which are light headed by reason of some 
cold distemperature of the braine, which thorough sadnesse, 
and sorrow, are subiecte to agues, which haue new dined, or 
supped: which are troubled with the head ache: for that a 
cold distemperature being the occasio~ of the infirmitie, laughing 
must needes helpe them, which moueth much aire in the 
breast, and sendeth the warmer spirites outward. This kinde 
of helpe wil be of much more efficacie, if the parties which desire 
it, can suffer themselues to be tickled vnder the armepittes, 
for in those partes there is great store of small veines, and litle 
arteries, which being tickled so, become warme themselues, 
and from thence disperse heat thorough out the whole bodie. 
But as moderate laughing is holesome, & maketh no too great 
chaunge, so to much is daungerous, and altereth to sore. For 
besides the immoderate powring, and pressing out of the spirites: 
besides to much mouing and heating, it oftimes causeth 
extreame resolution and faintnesse, bycause the vitall strength 
and naturall heat driue to much outward. Whervpon they that 
laugh, do sweat so sore, and haue so great a colour, by the ascending 
of the blood. And as the naturall heat, and fire it selfe 
do still couet vpward, as to their naturall place. so must it 
needes be, that the lower roomes lie open, and emptie in their 
absence, wherby whether soeuer motion be marred, the naturall 
heat dyeth, and the vitall force faileth. Besides this, no 
[^p.65^] 
man wil denie, but that this kinde of laughing, doth both much 
offende the head, and the bulke, as oftimes therewith both the 
papbones be loosed, and the backe it selfe perished. Nay what 
say ye to them that haue dyed laughing? where gladnesse of 
the minde to much enforcing the bodie, hath bereft it of life. 
 
For weeping in the nature of an exercise, there is not much 
[/48./] 
to be said, but that it is accompanied with crying, sobbing 
groning and teares, wherby the head, and other partes are rid 
of some needlesse humour: though the disquieting do much 
more harme, then the purging can do good, and the humour 
were a great deale better auoided some other waye. Wherof 
some children seeme to be exceeding full, when feare of beating 
makes them straine their pipes. Aristotle must beare both 
most blame for this exercise, if it displease any, and most 
praise, is it profit any, who in the last chapter of the seuenth 
[/49./] 
booke of his politikes writeth thus of it, and for it. That they 
do not well which take order, that children straine not themselues, 
with crying and weeping, bycause that is a meane to 
their growing, in the nature of an exercise. And that as holding 
the breath doth make one stronger to labour: so crying and 
weeping in children, do worke the same or the like effectes. 
And yet me thinke it should be no exercise, by the verie definition. 
For if it were vehement, yet is it not voluntarie, and 
though it did alter the breath, yet it bettereth not the bodie, 
howsoeuer it serue the soule. 
 
But seeing the gymnastikes haue it, let vs lend it them for 
their pleasure, though we like it not for our owne. It is generally 
banished by all Physicians as being the mother to manie 
infirmities, both in the eyes and other partes: neither if it could 
be auoided in schooles were it worthy the looking on: being 
the heauy signe of torture and trouble. And though it somtime 
ease the greiued minde to shedde a few teares, as some for extreme 
anguish cannot let fall one, yet children would be lesse 
greiued if they might shedde none, as some hold it a signe of 
a verie shrewd boye, when he deserues stripes, not to shew one 
trikle. Some Physicians thinke by waye of a conserue to the 
minde, that it ought to be vsed in schooles sometimes, though 
not voluntarie, yet in forme of an exercise to warme shrewd 
[^p.66^] 
boyes, and to expell the contagious humours of negligence, 
and wantonnesse, the two springes of many streaming euilles: 
as playing would be daily, at some certaine houres, then to vse 
these exercises, when bookes be out of season. 
 
