[^Manning, James: Complexions castle^] 
 
[}A NEW BOOKE, 
intituled, 
I am for you all, Complexions castle: 
as well in the time of the pestilence, as 
other times, out of the which you may learne your 
complexion, your disease incident to 
the same, and the remedies for 
the same. 
 
Published by IAMES MANNING, 
minister of the word. 
 
Morbus cedat medico, arti nusquam mors. 
 
PRINTED BY IOHN LEGAT, PRINter 
to the Vniuersitie of Cambridge. 1604. 
 
And are to be sold at the signe of the Crowne in Pauls 
Church-yard by Simon Waterson.}] 
 
[^A dedication to Lord Mayor of London, a preface to the reader and a table of contents omitted.^] 
[^Extract 1, pp. 1-30^] 
 
[^p.1^] 
[}COMPLEXIONS 
Castle. 
CHAP. 1.}] 
 
WHereas the beginner, and preseruer 
of all things, in his word doth will vs 
to consider his creatures, euen to the 
least, Ecclus. 42. v. 22. Oh how delectable 
are all his workes, and to be considered, 
euen vnto the sparks of fire: and so 
praise him without beeing wearie, Ecclus. 
chap. 43. v. 30. then how much 
more ought men daily with chearefulnes, and diligence, 
consider and regard the wonderfull order of himselfe, euen 
vnto the least and basest member, or part, which is of more 
estimation, then a thousand sparkes of fire, and more to be 
wondred at then any one element, because it consisteth most 
wonderfully of all the elements, and is that, for which they 
all, and all other things were made and ordained. Then seeing 
there is no earthly thing, that man should more regard 
and consider then himselfe, what meanes should any man 
thinke to be too much, to preserue this rare and wonderfull 
order of man, in conuenient, comely, and healthfull manner? 
May not they be suspected for murtherers of themselues, 
which for idlenes, will not seeke, for sparing cost, care 
not to seeke, which vpon malitious stomacke, and brasen 
courage, contemne to seeke in time, the meanes the Lord 
hath left, to preserue and continue that wonderfull matter 
of man, in conuenient order? Vnto these it happeneth most 
commonly, when extremitie of sicknes hath entred their castle, 
and ruine beginne to rush in, then none more diligent, 
[^p.2^] 
none more liberall, none more calme and tractable, when all 
labour, cost, willingnes, and paines cannot preuaile. May 
not they be suspected of murther, who knowing a place infected 
with the pestilence, will presume to enter, either by 
reason or intemperancie, not fearing, or for gaine giue the 
aduenture? May not they likewise be suspected of murther, 
which knowing their houses infected, not indeauor to vse 
the ordinarie meanes, either to shut it vp, and to flie from it, 
cito, longe, tarde, or necessitie constraining to tarrie, then, and 
there, to seeke the best meanes they may? May not they be 
condemned for murtherers, which hauing plague soares, 
will presse into companies to infect others, or wilfully pollute 
the ayre, or other meanes, which others are daily to vse 
and liue by? The word of God commanded the leper to 
haue his head bare, a couering for his lippes, his garments 
burnt, and to crie, I am vncleane, I am vncleane, Leuit. 13. 45. 
to the ende he should be knowne, and not infect the ayre 
with his breath: then how much more ought they, to note 
themselues by especiall signes, and to keepe them from infecting 
the ayre, hauing soares much more readie to infect 
then any other disease. Furthermore, if man will not be carefull 
and consider this wonderfull order of his bodie, because 
he knoweth that it must perish, he must know that he must 
neither appoint nor preuent the time: beside he must know 
that it is the cage of his soule, which must liue for euer, & 
therefore in honour of that beeing the image of God, 
keepe the cage as cleane as he can, neither breake or dissolue 
the same, least his soule, as an vntimely bird flie vnto the hill. 
No bodie polluted with grosse humours, either with excesse, 
or defect of any humour, but it is more apt to grieue 
the soule, defile the soule, and offend the creatour of bodie 
and soule. Doth not excesse of choller cause men to rage? 
of phlegme to be dull & sleepie? of melancholie to phrensie? 
and subtiltie of blood to wantonnesse? then perilous 
is the state of the bodie, whose spirits are possessed 
with the infection, a propagation many times to despaire, 
and to forget all dutie, without Gods especiall grace. Is not 
he a simple man, which will entertaine a daily aduersarie to 
[^p.3^] 
dwell with him, which they doe, that admit bad humours to 
haue domination in them, violating nature, or altering her, 
so as shee is compelled to bring forth fruit like vnto her 
changed state, that it may be said of some children in whom 
excesse of raging, dulnes, craftines, wantonnesse, dropsie, leprosie, 
phrensie doe raigne: while my parents slept, and 
were not watchfull to purge their natures, the enemie, the 
malignant matter caused these tares of bad fruit to be sowne 
in me, which except grace doe gouerne, will exceede, so as 
there will be little hope of any good fruit of me, because my 
soyle is natural to bring forth bad fruit, being thus caused 
by my parents: quod natura mihi dedit aliernari nequeat, 
except Gods holy angel watch ouer me, and with the 
blast or breath of the holy spirit winnow away my corruption. 
Now therfore it behooueth parents to be no lesse carefull 
to purge and make cleane their bodies from hurtfull humours, 
the causes of ill effects, then the husbandman hath to 
purge and cleanse his seede. If we haue a trespasse, or misdemeanour 
done in our goods or houses, we seeke to amend 
it, but if bad humours doe hazard our bodies, and aduenture 
our bodies to bring forth bad fruit, or infruitles, before our 
time hazard death, we deferre the ordinarie meanes, disaduantaging 
nature, and art, her minister: carelessely cutting off 
the number of our daies, which God hath numbred in his 
fore-knowledge, and by mediate meanes to be continued 
with our great care, because he first cared for vs, and daily 
continueth the same. 
 
[}CHAP. 2.}] 
 
THe law of nature calleth for a speciall care and regard, to 
preserue euery member in order: for if shee be distempered 
in the least, the principall members are disquieted, and 
consequently the whole bodie: then what speciall care 
ought man to haue in preseruing the naturall, vitall, and animall 
members, the cause of increasing, liuing, moouing, continuing, 
and beeing, not onely in office and dutie one for an 
other, but all of them for man, and man for his maker. Many 
are not onely carelesse to helpe nature in her order, but 
by excesse daily doe hurt her in themselues and others. God 
[^p.4^] 
hath giuen her to thee, for thee, in thee, and with thee, to continue 
his appointed time, and hath made her a meanes to entertaine 
strength, wisdome, knowledge, learning, delights, 
and pleasures: all which doe lurke, if shee doe lower, all 
which doe leaue to be, if shee be not to liue, beeing the naturall 
life of man, Iob. 34. v. 14. and in Levit. 17. v. 14. shee is 
called a spirit, the next worthiest vnto the soule in the seruice 
of God, thereupon it is said in the Psalme, My soule doth 
magnifie the Lord, and my spirit hath reioyced in God my Sauiour. 
This spirit which is the vapour of blood, and becommeth 
vitall, and animall, is the cage wherein the soule mooueth: 
the liuer, heart, and head, are the principall regions 
from whence the spirit into all other members and parts doe 
passe, with the soules power and effect, either good or bad, 
so that no member, neither the spirit, nor the soule can say to 
either, thou diddest this wickednes, or goodnesse without 
me, and therefore must receiue alike. Now then for the excellencie 
of natures order pollute her not, distemper her 
not, but indeauour to continue her, as God hath framed and 
ordained meanes for her. 
 
[}CHAP. 3.}] 
 
THe law of man requireth of thee to consider, and indeuour 
to preserue thy body in conuenient order: for the 
stipend it alloweth for him, that murdereth himselfe, is base 
regarded, and vnreuerent vsage of the corps, by markes vpon 
their graues, in void and vild places, besides the losse of 
goods from wife and children. Let men therefore take heede 
least by their negligence, wilfulnes or couetuousnes, they 
be not guiltie thereof, before God and in their consciences, 
and so be preuented of their continuall ioy, for preuenting 
the Lords purpose heare a litle while, which is to haue a man 
to liue the number of his daies in holines towards him, and 
in dutifulnes to dispatch, what God himselfe, what king, 
countrie, and parents plead for: which they cannot doe, 
that wilfully will take the meanes to shorten their daies, or 
negligently omit the meanes, to hable them to recouer to 
continue their daies. Thou art not only iniured, either by 
taking the foresaide meanes, or likewise omitting the 
meanes: but God, the parents, king, and countrie may be 
[^p.5^] 
iniured, for great might be the glory, which God might 
gayne by the rest of thy daies, much might be the ioy and 
comfort to thy parents, king and countrie: therefore shorten 
not thy daies wilfully, neither omit the meanes whereby 
there may be hope to redeeme what wilfullie or negligently 
thou hast hazarded to loose of thy appoynted time. Furthermore, 
man is not onely charged with this watchfulnes, 
and care ouer himselfe, but he is charged with a care ouer others, 
especially ouer such as he hath charge: for if thou 
knowest the meanes to helpe to continue the number of anothers 
daies, and be hable thereunto, thou must indeauour 
to doe it, because thou must doe, as thou would be done vnto, 
and also hope of some of the fruites before named to 
come from that body: nay office, and dutie, driueth euery 
one to helpe others, from sicknes, soares, or dangers. Art 
not thou which art a master or superiour, bound to greeue 
for thy seruant, and to releeue thy seruant or inferiour languishing, 
and yet labouring about thy busines? art not thou 
inferiour likewise bound to greiue, and indeauour to releiue 
thy superiour languishing, and yet counsayling and caring 
for thee? Now therefore let superiour, and inferiour indeauour 
to continue the number of their daies, which to God 
(as I said) is certainly knowne, and to man vncertaine: yet 
men must certainely knowe, that it is the ordinance of god, 
then not to be resisted, but in others, as well as in our selues 
to be continued, by our best indeuours, because we are 
members one of another, and therefore ought sensiblie to 
feele ech others greife and passion. 
 
[}CHAP. 4.}] 
 
THe soule crieth vnto thee to correct bad humours, and 
not admit them to raigne: for when she would be gentle, 
mild, and patient, the excesse of choller, constrayneth to 
rage and reuenge, when she would watch and pray, the excesse 
of phlegme, causeth sleepines, and dulnes: likewise the 
excesse of other humours, or the confounding of humours, 
worketh effectes more vnkindly against the soule, for whatsoeuer 
is of the flesh, is oppugnant to the spirit, or soule, vntill 
it hath conuerted it, to bring forth together the fruits of 
[^p.6^] 
the flesh, which are badges not onely of an vnregenerate 
man, but of a miscreant in soule and bodie. Seeing then the 
lawe of God, thy owne soule, nature, the law of man, parents, 
king, and country, commaund, and call vnto thee to 
endeuour to preserue thy bodie, by the almightie his meanes 
left vnto the, and by his meanes to correct excesse of bad 
humours, and to amend their confusion, least they here confounding, 
soule, conscience, and vnderstanding, god at thy 
first death confounde thy soule, and in the last generall 
iudgement, thy confounded soule carry thy flesh vnto the 
place of confusion. Therefore it is most necessarie for thee to 
know thy complection, to know what humours abound in 
thee, or are deficient, or whether they, or any of them be 
confounded or shuffled with nature, causing alteration or 
confusion. 
 
[}CHAP. 5.}] 
 
TO define the pestilent feuer, is but to reiterate others 
actions, neither much profitable to the vnlearned: therefore 
I purpose to spend the time in that, which may tend 
vnto the good of the most, with the least suspect detraction 
or ambition. The pestilent feuer is taken not onely by 
infection in the ayre, infused by celestiall orbes, and from 
putrified places, in and vpon the earth: but also by bad humours 
about the heart and ill affected spirits in the heart, 
whose aptitude doth entertaine the said infection, yet not 
alike in all, for all then should die alike: but according to the 
complection, it is taken sooner or slower, in greater quantitie 
or lesse, and according to the virulent qualitie, or quantitie 
in the ayre, taken sooner or slower, and according to the 
subiect sooner or slower destroying: as in the humours about 
the heart, and the spirits in the heart, in the one slower, 
in the other sooner, because the vitall and animall are destroyed 
more speedily: thereupon it commeth when any 
are thus wise affected, they are exceeding hot, they rage, 
they cannot stand, and die quickly, or suddenly, in the other, 
soores often times doe saue, because nature doth purge hir 
selfe, by the emunctory places. But if they doe not breake 
forth, the virulent matter returning to the places about the 
[^p.7^] 
heart, there doth remaine, and kindleth exceeding heat 
whereby the heart & spirits therein contained are inflamed 
and all naturall humiditie thereby consumed. 
 
[}CHAP. 6.}] 
 
THe qualities vnnaturally working in the ayre from the 
celestiall orbes, and massie globe, are ouer much hotnes 
and moystnes, actiuely working in the ayre, and all three in 
the humours and spirits of man: the sooner, by the aptitude 
of complection and season, or the time of the yeare, altering 
the qualities naturall, both in complection and ayre, in sommer 
sooner, in winter slower, in the one, because there is exhalation 
of putrified vapours, and heate exceeding, causing 
it to be more virulent: in the other, because of the antiperistasin 
of the could qualitie in the ayre, which doth alter 
the hotnes infused from aboue, and diuert or turne back the 
hot putrified qualitie lower into the earth, where the coldnes 
of the earth doth alter it, and the drynes retayne it. 
 
The substance or matter putrifying in the humours or 
spirits of man, is ayre impure: thicker then ayre naturall, by 
reason of moisture, yet not so thicke as water or mysts; by 
reason of heat: hotter then ayre naturall, yet not so drie by 
reason of excesse moisture. 
 
[}CHAP. 7.}] 
 
THe reason wherefore it doth putrifie in the humours or 
spirits of man, is the excesse of heat or moisture, putrified 
in the aire, conueied thither: the one in flaming, the other 
cause of continuing or retaining, by reason of the densitie or 
thicknes. Secondly, aptnes in the subiects to entertaine the 
same. And thirdly large passages to conuey the same to the 
subiects, and in all, a disparance from the substance and qualities 
of the ayre, and of the naturall humours and spirits in 
man. 
 
[}CHAP. 8.}] 
 
IF the substance of the ayre be infected, then not onely 
men, but birds, beasts, hearbs, and plants will die. 
 
[}CHAP. 9.}] 
 
IF the aire be infected in qualitie, then men, and birdes 
may die by it, more or lesse, sooner or slower, according 
[^p.8^] 
to the quantitie of the virulent matter receiued, & according 
to the quantitie of virulent and putrified matter in the receiuer, 
and according to the aptnes in the subiects, either by 
large passages letting it in, and beeing within, inhabilitie of 
contrarie qualities to expell the same. 
 
If putrefaction be in the qualite of the ayre, that it is ouer 
hotte and grosse, or more hot then grosse, as commonly it 
is, then it is good for the cholericke and sanguine, to dwell 
in low roomes. 
 
[}CHAP. 10.}] 
 
THese are signes, shewing the ayre to be infected in qualitie 
the next yeare following: in autumne before, there 
will be flashings of fyre, and many meteors of vnequall 
shapes, in the spring following could and little rayne, in the 
spring and sommer, the wind most South-ward, great heate 
in the day, and the night very cold. 
 
[}CHAP. 11.}] 
 
THese are the signes shewing the ayre to be infected in 
substance and qualitie, the effect continuing sommer 
and winter, and the next spring following: the reason 
is, if the ayre, the winter before, had beene infected only in 
qualitie, then the contrarie would haue corrected it, which 
to iudgement whas as hable, as in other winters. Secondly, 
passions sensible felt and seene, in bodies, in the hearbs, in 
the ayre, and from the earth, like as was the yeare or spring 
before. Thirdly, the euent in places more generall, where 
no meanes came, but the ayre to infect. 
 
[}CHAP. 12.}] 
 
IF the putrefaction proceedeth most of the earth or vppermost 
partes of the earth, as from stinking channells, standing 
lakes, priuyes, or other polluted places, as dunghills, 
vncleane kept houses, and such like, then there will be felt 
many sudden great stinches, and vnsauerie smells, such as 
cannot be distinguished, or discerned, what it is, or whereof 
it commeth, because it is confounded, beeing made of diuers 
stinches: in that yeare there will be many frogges, toades, 
venemous wormes, fleas and flyes. 
 
[^p.9^] 
[}CHAP. 13.}] 
 
IF the putrefaction proceedeth from within the earth, then 
venemous beasts and wormes will be seene more commonly 
aboue the earth, and will breede vpon the earth, and 
many of them will die. 
 
[}CHAP. 14.}] 
 
THe putrefaction of virulent matter of infection now, is 
from celestiall orbes principally, also from corrupt places, 
partly from corrupt humours in man, begotten by the 
two former, and ill order in feeding and sleeping, in idlenes 
and late walking abroad, and sitting vp. 
 
[}CHAP. 15.}] 
 
THe infection taken at the nostrills is more daungerous 
then otherwise, because there are two organes or passages 
that lead to the heart, from thence more, then from the 
mouth. 
 
[}CHAP. 16.}] 
 
THe putrified aire cannot passe so speedily to mans heart, 
as to diuers other creatures by the instrument of smelling, 
which is couered with a pellicle or filme, which is to be 
lifted vp before he can smell by the ayre or fume: and that 
pellicle is grosser in man then in other creatures: and therefore 
requireth the hotter or stronger fume to mooue it. Secondly, 
the instrument of smelling is placed deeper in the 
head, then in any other creatures. Thirdly, the instrument 
of smelling is nigh the braine in man, which with the moysture 
doth hinder the naturall complexion of the instrument 
of smelling, which is hot and drie, attractiue or drawing 
vnto it. 
 
[}CHAP. 17.}] 
 
IF the putrefaction in the ayre be more hot then moist, 
then it is more apt to destroy, and to be taken by the nostrills: 
first, because the heat is subtile, and passeth vp speedily 
to the pellicle, and mooueth with the fume or moisture, 
Secondly, for that the heat doth resist the coldnes and moisture 
of the braine, the which are hinderers of smelling. 
 
[}CHAP. 18.}] 
 
The complexion aptest to be infected, is the sanguine, 
[^p.10^] 
first, because the qualities in that complexion are like vnto 
the qualities in the ayre, hot and moist, and therefore doth 
entertaine the ayre the apter. Secondly, because these two 
qualities in this complexion maketh it more conuertible, 
like the ayre, which will sooner be made hotter or moister 
then any of the other elements. Thirdly, because in this 
complexion, the passages leading to the humours about the 
heart, and to the vitall spirits in the heart, are more large and 
spatious then in any other. The reason is, for that blood naturall 
is not without his vapours, which cause motion, and 
where most motion of blood is, there is cause of extention, 
and the same is in this complexion. 
 
[}CHAP. 19.}] 
 
The aptest time for this complexion to entertaine the virulent 
matter into the humours, is in the former spring especially: 
for then blood increaseth, and passeth vp and downe, 
beeing not thoroughly refined, and made the readier by his 
motion and impuritie to receiue it. 
 
The aptest time for this complexion to entertaine the virulent 
matter into the spirits vitall is sommer, by reason that 
the blood beeing made hot, and the spirits likewise hot, and 
ayre continually heating. 
 
[}CHAP. 20.}] 
 
This complexion may take the infection, although not 
at the nostrills or mouth, yet it may take it at the emunctorie 
places, and at the pores in the skin in other places, which 
are more large and readier to be opened, then in other 
complexions. 
 
[}CHAP. 21.}] 
 
The signes shewing this complexion. Visage, white and 
ruddie, most redde in the cheekes, eyes orderly placed, yet 
somewhat large ofttimes, vaines blew and full, pulse full and 
great, vrine plentie, redde and ofttimes grosse, seege, and 
sweat exceeding, digestion perfect, apt to bleeding and sleeping, 
willing to mooue, yet abstaining from motion, by reason 
of heate and sweating, subiect to dreame of bloodie 
things, and amorous toyes, affable, affectionate, yet to be remooued, 
well spoken, chaungeable in opinion, apt to haue 
[^p.11^] 
the yellow iaundes, heat vnder the lites, at the heart, and 
raines, stitch in the right side, subiect to the chollicke, and 
then the hands and face will be full of frecks in many a one, 
of meane stature and comely for the most part, a louer of 
musicke and wines, effeminate, beard large and comely, delightfull 
in himselfe, a louer of companie and conuertible 
with them, merrie for the most part, haire of colour red or 
yellowish, subiect to the feuer called Synocham. This complexion 
hauing taken the infection in the humors about the 
heart, in the emunctorie places, or at the pores in the skin, 
beeing come vnto the blood, may best of any complexion 
haue vaine opened. 
 
[}CHAP. 22.}] 
 
IF this complection or any other, haue the blood infected, 
the vaines will be blackish, and not so full, as before in 
health, for that the good blood flyeth inward to the sediment 
from the infection, and there remaineth subiect to infection 
by little and little, as it goeth outward, or as the other 
runneth inward, the liuer will be worse in this complection, 
and consequently digestion imperfect, the body hot all ouer, 
more then in other complections, because blood infected 
hath larger passage, then in other complections. For asmuch 
as good blood is not without good vapour, and both 
of them, cause of vitall spirit, and that cause of the animall 
spirits, by which two man liueth, and mooueth, and is made 
more hable to resist the virulent matter of pestilence: therefore 
it behooueth euery complection to clense his blood, & 
purge it from humours hurtfull vnto it, which these receipts 
following by Gods helpe will performe. 
 
[}CHAP. 23.}] 
 
TAke of cassia new extracted one ounce, of hony halfe an 
ounce, of sugar two drammes, infuse these seuen or eight 
howers, in fowre ounces of borrage water, and fower ounces 
of violet or endiue water: if you can, get a fingerfull of 
liuerwoort, and first bruise it a little, then infuse it with the 
cassia, it will be very proper, (especially if it be in sommer) 
then strayne all together, and drinke of it euery morning 
fasting, three howers before meate, the quantitie of two or 
[^p.12^] 
three ounces, vntill you feele your blood reasonable cooled, 
and the stomack not impayred. 
 
[}CHAP. 24.}] 
 
IF this complection doth learne or perceiue, that choller 
raigneth in the blood, then let them take the quantitie of 
Cassia, hony, and sugar before mentioned, and of Rhubarbe 
three dra~mes, of the sweete rush called squinant, one dra~me, 
pound them all gross, then infuse them seauen or eight 
howers in seauen ounces of water of endiue, or cichorie, or 
for want of these, in the decoction florum & fructum, to the 
which put of syrupe of roses laxatiue, and of syrrupe of violets 
of either halfe an ounce: take it two mornings or three 
together, warme it a little before you take it, & take it somewhat 
colder then blood-warme. 
 
[}CHAP. 25.}] 
 
IF this complexion doth spie, that phlegme be mixt with 
the blood, then let him take of Turbith, or Agaricke, two 
drammes, ginger two scruples, and pound them gross, or 
slice them thin, and infuse it with halfe an ounce of Cassia 
and an ounce of hony if it be in winter: at other times take 
as much cassia as hony, and infuse all together in eight or 
nine ounces of sweete wine, or Oximell, that is, one part 
vineger, twyse so much hony, foure times so much water 
boyled vntill the third part be wasted, and cleane skimmed: 
take this two mornings fasting. 
 
[}CHAP. 26.}] 
 
IF melancholie raygne take of cassia and hony one ounce, 
& of polypody one dramme, a scruple and a halfe of ginger, 
cut the polypody and ginger very thin, and infuse them 
altogether, in six or seauen ounces of fumitory water eight 
howers: then strayne them and drinke it warme fasting two 
mornings together: when you take any of these you must sit 
a quarter of an hower, the~ walke as long, then lie vpon your 
right side, then vpon your left as long, that done, then sit vp 
right halfe an hower, after that walke and sit at your pleasure 
in your chamber. 
 
[}CHAP. 27.}] 
 
Hauing cleansed your blood, and auoided the bad humours, 
[^p.13^] 
which most annoy you, (which is meete to be 
done, in euery one once a yeare, in many twise, in the former 
and latter spring, (and in some oftener) then will your 
blood and spirits be lesse capable of the infection, and better 
hable to expell it, hauing taken it, and so much the lesse 
capable and hable, by how much you shall be carefull to 
vse these receiptes following, best fitting for your complexion. 
 
[}CHAP. 28.}] 
 
FIrst a receipt very proper to be taken, not onely, as a defensatiue 
euery morning fasting, but for your resolution 
to knowe, whether you be infected, for then you will vomite 
or at least be very full, and desirous to vomite, by reason 
of the contrarietie of the qualities in these substances, & 
the virulent heate in your owne substance. Send vnto the 
Apothecaries billes made as followeth: R. Santalorum omnium, 
Boliarmenei ana scr. 2. aq. rosar. dr. 2. aq. violarum dr. 3. vini 
albi. dr. 5. infuse these in the waters and the wine 7. or 8. 
houres, then straine them through a very course strainer, 
and drinke it fasting, or before supper an houre and halfe. 
 
[}CHAP. 29.}] 
 
A Pome very comfortable, and necessarie for this complexion 
to vse at all times, and especially in the time of 
pestilence. R. Santalorum omnium dr. 2. florum Boraginis, Violarum, 
Rosarum rub. ana dr. 1. s. rad. Cichorij dr. 1. Macis dr. 2. 
Cort. mali citri dr. 1. s. Camphuræ dr. 2. Ladan. d 1. Papaneris 
albi scr. 1. Ambræ gra. 2. Cinamomi d. 5. c_[^ORIG. BLURRED^] Teribenthina in aq. 
rosarum, Lot. in qua fiat dr. 1. storacis infusio hor. 7. Smell 
vnto this any time, but cheifely fasting, and when meate is 
digested. 
 
[}CHAP. 30.}] 
 
A Water to sprinckle vpon cloathes, and in the house, 
meete for this complexion at all times, and in the time of 
pestilence most necessarie. R. olei violarum, Nenupharij ana d. 
2. olei rosarum vn. s. Camphuræ vn. 5. omnium Santalorum vn. 
2. Thuris dr. 2. Myrrhæ vn. s. Cort. Limonum citrinorum & 
granatum ana dr. 1. Tamarise, Ribes. Coriand. ana vn. s. When 
you haue gotten these, or so many as you can of them, then 
[^p.14^] 
cut them or pound them grosse, and boile them in two 
quarts of vineger, or one quart of vineger, and the other of 
water, vntill a pint be consumed, then put in your oyles and 
gummes, and stoppe the vessell very close, and let the~ boile 
halfe a quarter of an houre. Straine it before it be colde 
through a coarse strainer very hard, then put to it of rosewater 
vn. 2. and mixe it well with it then put it into a glasse 
stopped close, and set it out of the sunne: when you would 
vse it, stirre it well together before you put in the brush or 
sponge, because of the oyles which will flote and be vppermost. 
This may serue any complexion, the better for the 
chollericke, if you doe adde more of the cold and moyst 
things, as of the oyle of lillies, violets, of the lemmons, oringes, 
and pomegranates, and such like, which the Apothecaries 
may doe, if you informe them of your complexion: the 
better for the phlegmatike, if he diminish of the cold and 
moist things, the quantitie following, and adde of these 
things; origani p j. Thuris dr. 2. cipressi dr. 2. Iuniperi dr. 3. the 
better for the melancholie, if you adde of oyle of sweete almonds, 
and oyle of nutmegges, dr. 3. of muske gr. 4. coste 
dulc. gr. 2. 
 
[}CHAP. 31.}] 
 
A Perfume proper for this complexion, and good for all, 
to alter the virulent qualitie in the aire about thee. R. nucis 
moschat, caphur, nardi, garyopillorum, ana dr. s. ladani, calamit, 
ana dr. 1. stiracis dr. 3. santali albi odoriferi, bensonini ana 
dr. 3. ciperi dr. 1 s. fol. rosarum rub. dr. 2. masorani, fol lauri ana 
dr. s ligni aloes dr. s. omnia in puluerem redact. commixtaq~ 
cum aqua rosarum, in qua tragagant, gummi arabicum, siue caphura 
maduerint, formenter pastilli, siue orhiculi pro suffimento. 
Then may you at pleasure take some of it and perfume with 
it, as with other perfumes. Vse this perfume in the forenoone, 
then the water in the afternoone: let all the houshold 
be present to take the perfume, especially those of this complexion. 
This will last or continue three daies in your 
roomes, or in your apparell, the longer if you vse the water 
presently after the perfume, for the oyles, and the apparell 
will retaine it a long time, which others that come nigh you, 
[^p.15^] 
or talke with you will discouer, especially if the water prescribed 
for the plegmatike be vsed. 
 
[}CHAP. 32.}] 
 
These pills are good for this complexion, but best towards 
winter, or in winter: for the often vsing in sommer 
may procure a feuer. R. aloes dr. 2. lot. in vino alb. & aqua 
violarum siue Endiuie, succi acaciæ. dr. s. myrrhe, cinamoni ana 
dr. 1. fiat massa pillularum cum vino & aqua boraginis, siue 
cichorij. If you haue the hemorehoids, or if women haue their 
sicknes, then tell the Apothecaries, and will him to adde to 
the former, bdellij subalbidi. dr. s. and thereby you shall be 
sure of no harme to the intralls: adde this Dragaganthi dr. 5. 
take the waight of halfe a dramme in pills, before you goe 
forth, or before supper, but drinke presently after a little 
draught either of ale or white wine. Whosoeuer doe vse 
these pills, they shall finde for their complexion a great benefit 
to the head and spirits. 
 
[}CHAP. 33.}] 
 
IT is very good for this complection in sommer to vse this, 
R. Tamarirind. dact. vn. 2. fiat infusio siue decoctio in sero 
lactis lib. 1. s. and drinke of it two mornings, you may take 
this, when you will, so that it be not presently after supper 
or dinner before digestion be made: if you will haue it tast 
sharpe, put into it the more of the Tamarindes. I would 
wish euery complection in the time of pestilence in sommer 
to vse this, but mooue not violently presently after you haue 
taken it: this will procure appetite and coldnes, and kindlie 
purgeth coller. 
 
[}CHAP. 34.}] 
 
IF this complection suspect, that they haue taken the infection, 
then let them put their legges in warme water, & 
be let blood in the vaines, which lead from the heart and 
head. 
 
[}CHAP. 35.}] 
 
IT is very good in the time of pestilence for this complexion, 
to vse frication in the morning, especially of their 
thighes and legges. 
 
[^p.16^] 
[}CHAP. 36.}] 
 
IT is good for this complection to drinke in the afternoone 
of a ptisme made of barly, adding to it a little vineger, 
to euery pynt halfe a spoonefull. 
 
[}CHAP. 37.}] 
 
IT it good for this complection, to vse vineger in their 
meates, and to wet their chamber flores with vineger. 
 
[}CHAP. 38.}] 
 
THese things are at no time conuenient for this complexion 
to vse, but worst in the time of pestilence, for their 
exceeding heat, beeing hot in the fourth degree: garlicke, 
leekes, garding cresses, pepperwort, onyons, radish roots, 
neither are these conuenient especially in the time of pestilence, 
because they properly heate the liuer, and inflame the 
blood, wormewood, egrimonie, fennell, hyssope, spike, 
margerom, folefoote, time, harts tounge, all hearbes, which 
are hot in the third degree, as rhue, sauine, cloues, mynt, 
penyriall, veruin, smalledge, perslie, centorie, laurell, three-leaued 
grasse, saffron, spourge, the flowers of eldern are ill 
for the liuer, because they heat it, the flowers of betonie, Camomill, 
centorie, the flowers of Squinant called the sweete 
rush. 
 
[}CHAP. 39.}] 
 
These hearbs are good for this complexion especially in 
the time of pestilence, beeing colde in the second degree; 
Lettice, cichorie, sorrell, beetes, Endiue, liuerwoort, crowtoes, 
fleewoort, plantin, knotgrasse: and these likewise are 
good because they properly coole the the liuer: fumitorie, waterlillies, 
purslayne: but most properly these coole the liuer 
beeing eaten: cichorie, lettice, enduie, liuerwoort, the flowers 
of cichorie, water lillies, and red roses are likewise good 
to coole the liuer. 
 
[}CHAP. 40.}] 
 
THese are not conuenient for this complexion: flesh of 
old beastes, vdders, braynes, fat (especially of flesh) hot 
bread, much sleep, bloodinges, or intralles of beastes, marrow, 
rawe hearbes, (except borage, cichorie, or lettice) nue 
ale, hard cheese, Fennish flowers are ill. 
 
[^p.17^] 
[}CHAP. 41.}] 
 
THese are good for this complexion, bread of wheate 
somwhat leauened, well baked, not ouer ould: wines 
well fined, and of meates, those which are of good digestio~, 
not ouer sweete, nor ouer easely to be digested. 
 
[}CHAP. 42.}] 
 
OF fruites sealdome vse these: Iuniper buries, cloues, 
for they are hot in the third degree, but lesse seldome 
these, long pepper, white pepper, blacke pepper, for they 
are hot in the fourth degree. 
 
[}CHAP. 43.}] 
 
EAte seldome figges, capers, dry meats, for these are hot 
in the second degree, and so are nutmegges, which heate 
the heart very much in this complexion. 
 
[}CHAP. 44.}] 
 
OF fruites these are good for the liuer: barberries, guords, 
cucumbers, for they properlie coole the liuer, so are 
limonds, millions, prunes, peaches pomegarnets, oringes 
somewhat tart, these are cold in the second degree. 
 
Of seedes these are ill for this complexion, for they heate 
the liuer: anise seede, persely seede, cummin seede, fennell 
seede, wild smalledge seede, caraway seede, garding pepper 
seede, persnipp seede. These seedes coole the liuer: guord, 
cucumers, endiue, lettice, milion, purslanie, citron seedes. 
 
[}CHAP. 45.}] 
 
OF rootes these are ill for this complxion, for they heate 
the liuer: smaledge, fennell, persely, sparage, rhue, 
butcher broome. 
 
[}CHAP. 46.}] 
 
SIchorie rootes and such like before mentioned, are good 
to coole the liuer. 
 
[}CHAP. 47.}] 
 
THe vse of these wooddes are good for this complexion: 
cypresse, the tamariske, santalum rub. alb. citrimum. 
 
[}CHAP. 48.}] 
 
THese not so good: the iuniper, guiacum, the wood aloes, 
the hebene tree, box tree, red styrax, milleldine, the 
cedar tree. 
 
[^p.18^] 
[}CHAP. 49.}] 
 
These gummes for this complexion are good: the Arabicke 
and Camphure. 
 
[}CHAP. 50.}] 
 
These ill: the gumme of the Cedar, and the gumme Ammoniacum, 
beeing hot in the third degree; but these worst of 
all, Euphorbium, and the gumme Belzoin, for they are hot in 
the fourth degree. 
 
[}CHAP. 51.}] 
 
Let this complexion take heede in taking Methridate, 
treacle, saffron, and such like, which oft times are meanes to 
inflame, and procure sores, whereas there would be none, 
and the malignant matter, by lesse dangerous meanes, or by 
natures habilitie might be preuented. 
 
[}CHAP. 52.}] 
 
The phlegmaticke complexion is so called, by the two 
qualities in the water, cold and moistnes, combined and predominant 
in a bodie; consisting likewise of the other three 
elements, yet principally participating of this, and thereupon 
hath the denomination phlegmaticke, videl. cold & moist 
for the most part. 
 
[}CHAP. 53. 
Signes to know this complexion.}] 
 
The substance soft, foggie, quauing: the colour of the 
substance whitish, the proportion large, for the most part, 
or els exceeding grosse: veines hardly seene, blood waterish, 
pulse slowe, the bodie slowe in motion, sleepie, dull, haire 
plaine, sieldome bald, not apt to learne, cowardish, spittle 
white, and after motion very frothie: vrine grosse & white, 
especially after great labour; subiect to dreame of waterie 
things, as of fish and ponds: much superfluitie or excrements 
by spitting and sweating: the feete stinking, especially 
after motion: the bodie subiect to his naturall infirmitie 
in Februarie betweene the tenth day and the twentieth: this 
complexion is subiect to paine in the head, loynes, knees, 
priuities, armes, and feete, by phlegmatike humours taking 
cold: fearefull, timorous, the breast commonly without 
haire, sieldome angrie, not retaining anger, soone cold, the 
[^p.19^] 
breast commonly narrow, and these are subiect to the sicknes 
of the heart, and much subiect to a quotidian feuer. 
 
[}CHAP. 54.}] 
 
This complexion is aptest to breede the infection, because 
moisture doth cause putrefaction, especially in the latter 
spring, and winter: because then phlegme raigneth, causing 
grosse humours, that is to say, making blood thicke, 
phlegme thicke, and choller grosse, retaining heat vnnaturall, 
which by heate in sommer is made more hot and virulent 
expelling putrefaction. You must vnderstand, that I 
write vpon the phlegmatike bodie, as he is said so to be naturally 
of phlegme, which is cold and moist, sweete, & white, 
without distinction in tast, for that tasteth all other things: 
the substance, the forme, the passions, the accidents of the 
phlegmaticke, which hath phlegme vnnaturall, are diuers: 
for some is slimie, some salt, some viscous, some sower, plasterie, 
stipticke, thicke, grosse, some thin: before all or any of 
the which phlegme naturall was, and by distemperature, it 
becommeth as before, which for the most part, is by excesse 
of phlegme naturall, and by accidents comming to it. 
 
[}CHAP. 55. 
The diet for the phlegmaticke.}] 
 
HOt things moderately vsed are good for this complexion, 
for they doe attenuate and digest phlegme. Eate of 
one meate at a meale, if not, then eate the finest first, els the 
grosse meates suffocate, and the finest lie vndigested, by reason 
of the coldnes in the stomacke, which cannot digest the 
grosse meates so speedily as other complexions. They must 
abstaine from such meates as ingender phlegme ouermuch, 
and are cold and slimie, clammie or clung: new cheese ill, all 
fish for the most part, the best are small fishes fried: the inwards 
of beasts ill, repletion or feeding to the full ill, for 
concoction in the phlegmaticke is slower then others, and 
therefore they ought of all others to satisfie nature, not appetite. 
Idlenes is ill, for agitation procureth heate and concoction, 
although it may be alledged that the stomacke is 
neuer idle, nor out of motion in any complexion, and therefore 
not onely the stomacke, but all the bodie desireth not 
[^p.20^] 
to mooue, but to be quiet and still: euen as the water which 
mooueth not, except the winde mooue it, or the straightens 
or highnes of the place force it to mooue. 
 
[}CHAP. 56.}] 
 
These mineralls are ill for this complexion to vse, in regard 
of their coldnes: quicksiluer, lead, white lead, burnt 
lead, spume of siluer, or the dragges of lead. 
 
[}CHAP. 57.}] 
 
These stones are likewise ill for their coldnes: the carbuncle 
called a corneol, the saphyre stone, the christall, the 
granat stone, and this worst, the diamant, for it is cold in the 
fourth degree, likewise corall pearle is ill. 
 
[}CHAP. 58.}] 
 
Things cold in the first or second degree, or moist in the 
first or second degree, are not vtterly to be forbidden to this 
complexion; because they worke not extremely, but may 
properly be corrected, by things hot and drie in the second 
degree, and so made temperate. But things moist, or cold in 
the third or fourth degree, are sieldome or neuer to be vsed: 
for their correctiues must be equipollent, and then very often 
there happeneth to the qualities of the other humours, 
no little distemperature. Vse this sieldome, Mandrags, 
houseleeke, henbane; these neuer, humblocke, poppie, golden-hearb 
(otherwise called orch:) forbeare sorrell, lettice, 
purslaine, violets, waterlillies, endiue, cichorie, fumitorie, 
plantin, borage, nightshade, white roses and redde. Eate sieldome 
of sharpe oringes, peares, prunes: more sieldome of 
gourds, cucumers, of apples sharpe and moist, pomegranets, 
lemmons, millions, peaches, grapes. Vse these sieldom, 
barly, millet (otherwise called Turkish wheat) mallowseed, 
rapeseede. Refraine from cypresse wood, the Tamariske 
tree, lignum trium santalorum, veriuice, vineger, and the iuice 
of opium, the iuice of an Indian tree called sanguinem draconis, 
campher. Those things which are cold and drie in the 
first or second degree, or cold in the first and second degree 
and drie in the third, may best be tolerated to be vsed in the 
time of pestilence of this complexion, then at other 
times. 
 
[^p.21^] 
[}CHAP. 59.}] 
 
These are conuenient for this complexion, because they 
abolish phlegme from the liuer and blood; wormewood, egrimonie, 
fennell, hyssope, spicke, margerom. These are conuenient, 
because they doe correct the colde qualitie of 
phlegme at the heart: balme, mynt, sage, borrage, buglosse, 
basell. 
 
[}CHAP. 60.}] 
 
These likewise are conuenient for the breast; horehound, 
betonie, mayden haire, the nettle, dragonwoort, and of these 
many are conuenient for the head and other places. It is 
good for this complexion to vse Cinamon, Frankincense, 
hoppes, calamynt, and sometime Rhue, and mace is good, 
(although it be hot in the third degree) because it is aromaticall 
and cordiall, water-germander, colewoort, penyriall, 
persly, the rootes of penyriall, carriot rootes, galinga, fennell, 
rapes, zedoarie, persly, the sea onyon, coriander seede, 
dill seede, anise seede, smalledge, rocket, persly seede, sweete 
Almonds, Iuiubs, cypresse nuts, figges, capers, nutmegges, 
cloues now and then, flowers of rosemarie, and lauender, 
saffron, but not often in the time of infection, melilot, flæchados, 
buglosse, cammomill, the flowers of the sweet rush, 
the flower of our ladies rose, garding pepper, Iamine, sweete 
amber, and sperma cæti, (or parma cæti) the drie skumme or 
froth of the sea; it is good to vse the stone that glasiers cut 
their glasse with, called an emrod, Ancarcasite or fire 
stone, the blood stone. 
 
[}CHAP. 61.}] 
 
THis complexion may eate onyons, and garlicke orderlie, 
so as there is no distemperance, in the naturall humors 
by choller. Much vse of salt, grosse pepper with meates are 
conuenient: greeneginger, and myrabolans condite, very 
conuenient: keepe the head and feete warme: dwell in high, 
and dry places: moderate sweating is good. 
 
[}CHAP. 62.}] 
 
IT is very meate for this complexion, to purge once a 
yeare at the least, in the first spring when it is well entered, 
with this receipt following, finding no speciall cause to the 
[^p.22^] 
contrarie. 
 
R. Turpeti dr. 5. fol. fen. dr. 10. polypodii dr. 2. Hermodact 
dr. 2. s. Rhabarb dr. 2. Zuigib dr. 1. cinamomi anisi ana scr. 5. 
when you haue all these, slyce them, and pound the anise-seede 
grosse, then seeth them in a pynt and halfe of water, 
vntill the third part be consumed, then take of it fasting three 
ounces, and put to it an ounce of syrype of roses laxatiue: 
take this three mornings together if you see that your body 
be not sufficiently purged in two mornings: which the excrementes, 
and your drynes or sleepines will shewe: if that 
slyme, or water come not, or slime somwhat yellowish cometh 
and no waterish, or white slime matter, then purge no 
more. So soone as you haue done purging take this, R. Iulap 
yiolat vn. 5. aq. cinamomi aq. borag. siue endiuiæ vn. 5. this 
will qualifie the distemperature made by the purge, and will 
comfort properly. 
 
[}CHAP. 63.}] 
 
VVIthin a fortnight after, to clense the blood, take 
this receipt: R. Cassiæ nouiter extractæ, mellis ana. 
vn. 5. infuse it in halfe a pint of sweete wine, in vn. 2. of borage 
water, drinke this two mornings fasting. 
 
[}CHAP. 64.}] 
 
THe water, proper to this complexion for vse in the time 
of pestilence, or at other times, make it as it is for the sanguine 
complexion adding vnto it, of oyle of sweete almondes 
vn. 1. of frankenscence dr. 3. iuniper, vn. s. of cipres 
vn. 1. of cloues vn. s. of oyle of dill vn. 1. sweete amber 
dr. 2. let there be a pint of vineger, and a pynt and a halfe of 
rose water put vnto it. 
 
[}CHAP. 65.}] 
 
The perfume for this complexion, is to be made, and 
vsed as for the sanguin, sauing, in stead of gum arabicke, vse 
the gum myrrhe, and storax, or in stead of them gummi ammoniacum, 
as much as is conuenient for the making of the 
masse somewhat liquid. 
 
[}CHAP. 66.}] 
 
A Pome for this complexion: R. Santalorum odoriferum 
d. 2. sol. rosarum damasc. d. 2. Ambr. odor. gr. 3. calamynt. dr. 2. 
[^p.23^] 
gummi Thuris dr. 2. macis d. 1. f. Anethi dr. 1. nucis moschat. d. 
2. gariophillorum dr. 1. galing. d. 1. s. florum Chammomil. d. s. stirac. 
d. s. cinamom d. 2. mosc. gr. 2. ladani d. 1. cum Terebint. in 
aq. rosarum & milissa lot. vel potius in liq. stiracis, fiat pom. 
 
[}CHAP. 67.}] 
 
The pylls for this complexion: R. Aloes lot. in vino odorifero, 
& in aqua Chammomelini, siue betonie. d. 2. myrrhæ cinamomi 
d. 1. siucci fæniculi d. s. fiat massa cum aq. fæniculi ac boraginis. 
Take it in such wise as is shewed in the sanguine complexion. 
 
[}CHAP. 68. 
For the Collericke Complexion.}] 
 
VVHereas some may thinke, that I should haue placed 
choller next vnto blood (according to the 
order of some writers:) first because choller, is the next proper 
begotten humour of blood: secondly, because his cell 
or receptacle, is the nearest to the blood: thirdly, because it 
is of the qualitie of the fyery eleme~t, which is as they account 
the worthier element, beeing the preseruer, and purger, of 
most things: fourthly, because it is the beautifullest, and 
the highest element in place. Yet because phlegme is the beginner, 
and begetter of blood, and blood of Choller, and 
melancholie: therefore, I accoumpt it, prius tempore, & ordine, 
sustinendo, although not ordine honoris & dignitatis, in 
making man: for when it taketh beeing in the wombe, then 
are all humours together in that masse or lumpe, or els much 
of it perisheth, yet one predominant, secundum ordinem naturæ 
producentis & effectam coeuntium & planetarum infusionem: 
so that none can be said to be before another, or more 
vnworthie: because one without the other neither three 
without one can make a body neither continue it:therefore 
I thinke it no errour. 
 
[}CHAP. 69.}] 
 
CHoller exceding in a bodie, giueth to the bodie, denomination 
accordingly, and causeth the bodie to haue 
these two qualities exceeding the other, vz. hotnes, and drynes, 
whose properties are attractiue to draw vnto it, therefore 
this complexion is apt to drawe the infection and to 
[^p.24^] 
ioyne with it, because of the hot qualitie in the ayre naturall, 
and moysture naturall, conueighing the vnnaturall heate, 
and moysture into the body, which heate naturall and vnnnaturall 
in the ayre, is entertained of this complexion, not 
onely for the agreement of the qualitie in heate, but also, 
for the contrarie qualitie of moystnes to drynes, which 
would consume and destroy each other, as in fire and water, 
for euery qualitie would haue euery substance to entertaine 
it, and therefore cold, heat, moistnes and drynes doe infuse 
themselues into substances: and heat, cold, moystnes and 
drynes the one contrarie coueteth to depriue the other: as 
heat to depriue naturall coldnes, and moysture naturall drynes, 
so doth vnnaturall heat and moystnes, depriue naturall 
could, and drynes, as in the pestilence. 
 
[}CHAP. 70.}] 
 
Signes shewing this complexion: leane, of meane or little 
stature, haire black or darke, most commonly curled, 
eyes quick, colour of skin salow, and in some bodies ruddish, 
voyce sharpe, vrin high coloured and cleere, sharpe or 
quick, of stout courage, soone angry, little sleepe, dreames 
of fire, or fighting, pulse swift, and strong, subiect to the 
gout, especially in the legges, subiect to a tertian feuer, delight 
in warres, liberall in their youth, and midle age, but in 
ould age couetous, desire to trauell, desirous of venerie, subiect 
to palsie, apoplexies, and trembling. 
 
[}CHAP. 71. 
The diet for this complexion.}] 
 
Abstaine from all occasions which may mooue vnto anger, 
for that doth consume naturall humiditie. Abstaine 
from much carnall copulation, for the exceeding heat doth 
send forth ouermuch humiditie. Fast not long, for choller 
must haue to retaine it, or els it consumeth naturall moysture. 
Eate the grosse meates first, (as the phlegmatike must 
eate the finest) because the grosse will be vndigested in the 
bottome of the stomack, and the finest digested aboue, causing 
annoyance by phlegme, by reason of the coldnes of the 
stomacke: so in the stomacke of the cholericke, if he eate 
the finest first, it will be scorched while the grosse is digesting. 
 
[^p.25^] 
[}CHAP. 72.}] 
 
IF thou beest of this complexion, and haue the head hot, 
vse not the flowers of these: sage, melilot, lauender, betonie, 
chamomill, rosemarie, the sweete rush, squinant, 
balme, scabiones: if thy brest be hot, vse not the flowers of 
betonie, the sweete rush, balme, nor scabiones: if thy heart 
be hot, vse not rosemarie flowers, balme, spikenard, buglosse, 
saffron, borrage: if thy stomacke be hot, vse not the 
flowers of the sweete rush, squinant, rosemarie, neither 
the flowers there of: if thy liuer be hot, abstaine from centorie, 
elder buddes, betonie, chamomill, spike, the sweete rush, 
squinant: if thy splen be hot, take heed of the flowers of betonie, 
and the flowers of the vine, or ripe grapes: if thy reines 
be hot or the bladder, vse not the flowers of melilot, squinant, 
mallowes, spike: if the matrix be ouer hot, vse not the 
flowers of betonie, squinant, sage, spikenard, flowerdeluce: 
if the ioyntes be ouer hot, vse not the flowers of chamomill, 
melilot, rosemarie flowers, the primerose, or cowsloppe. 
 
If thy head be ouer hot, abstaine from these hearbs: calamint, 
fennell, bay leaues, margerom, penyriall, ruhe, sauorie, 
and from the hearbes which beare the flowers before 
forbidden for the head: if the brest be ouer hot vse not betonie, 
maydenhaire, hyssope, balme, horehound, nettle, 
scabions: if the heart be ouer hot, vse not these, borage, buglosse, 
balme, rosemarie, Ennia campana, Basil. 
 
[}CHAP. 73.}] 
 
IIf thy stomack be ouer hot, refraine from these hearbes, 
woormewod, fennell, mynt, sage, time If the liuer be hot, 
refraine from Egrimonie, fumitorie, hysop, spike margerom, 
fennell, wormewood, folefoote. If thy splene be ouer hot, 
abstaine from calamint, doder, Egrimonie, cresses, especially 
garding cresses, (for they are hot in the fourth degree) 
time, woormewood, hartes tongue. If thy reines be ouer 
hot, abstaine from Rocket, fine leaued grasse, saxifrage, 
spikenard, pellitorie. If the matrix be ouer hot, abstaine 
from mugwoort, calamint, rhue, sauin, penyriall: if thy 
ioynts be ouer hot, abstaine from chamomill, mleilot, cresses, 
[^p.26^] 
rhue, sage, Egrimonie, S. Iohns woort, costmarie. 
 
[}CHAP. 74.}] 
 
Vse these sieldome, galinga, cummin seede, anise seede, 
nutmegs, dill, smalledge, solindine, pepperwoort, ameos, sothernwood, 
mustard seede, garlicke, onyons, rocket, mullin, 
leekes, costmarie, the roote of gladin, of garden ginger, of 
doronicke, of radish, or galinga, the roote of water Robin. 
 
[}CHAP. 75.}] 
 
Abstaine from the rust of brasse, the scales of brasse, burnt 
brasse, sulphur, much salt, stone salt, salt peter, oker, arsinick, 
the spume of the sea, sperma cæti, sweete amber. Vse sieldom 
cinamon, frankincense: abstaine from burnt wines, and hot 
wines. Abstaine from these gummes, the gumme Ammoniacum, 
the liquor of the cedar tree, but carefully abstaine 
from the gumme Euphorbium, and the gumme Belzoin. Of 
mettalls, these you may better indure then any complexion, 
the drosse or spume of siluer, quickesiluer, and the dregges 
of lead, white lead. 
 
[}CHAP. 76.}] 
 
Of stones vse these, the christall, the carbuncle, the rubin, 
the stone sardin, the granat stone: in sommer the diamant, in 
winter the saphyre, the Emeraud, the Hyacynth. 
 
[}CHAP. 77.}] 
 
Of plants, vse Endiue, cichorie, lettice, plantin, myrrhe, 
fleewoort, beetes, sorrell, knotgrasse: when heat exceedeth 
vse these, hemlocke, poppie, but with direction. Of flowers 
vse these commonly, roses, violets, waterlillies, (and wild 
poppie with direction:) for excessiue heat, vse the henbane 
flowers by direction. 
 
[}CHAP. 78.}] 
 
Of fruits vse these, peares, prunes, sharpe oringes, lemmons, 
guords, pomegranats, cucumers, myllions, peaches. 
Of seedes vse these, barly, milion, cichorie, sorrell. Of rootes 
mallowes, cichorie, mandrag. Of woods the cypresse, santal. 
tri. Tamarssk. Of gummes Camphure, and the gumme Arabicke. 
 
[}CHAP. 79.}] 
 
This will purge all humours in this complexion, but 
[^p.27^] 
most properly choller: R. Rhabarb. dr. 3. spic. Indic. vel cinamomi 
dr. 1. Turpet. Polypod. ana. dr. 2. Hermodact. dr. 1. fol. sene 
vn. 1. zingib. scr. 2. anise scr. 1. coquantur in lib. & sem. aq. ad tertia 
partis consumptionem: & de colatura, dintur vn. 3. addendo 
syrup. rosarum lax. syrup. Endiuiæ vel Cichorij vel de succo Endi. 
ana vn. s. Take this three mornings or fowre together. 
 
[}CHAP. 80.}] 
 
Then within seauen or eight daies after, purge your blood 
with this, R. cassia vn. mellu vn. s. saccar. dr. 2. infuse this in 
vn. 4. of Endiue water, or cichorie water, and of violet water 
and borage water ana vn. 2. or in 8 ounces of Endiue or 
cichorie water. 
 
[}CHAP. 81.}] 
 
The water to sprinkle vpon your clothes, or other places, 
make it as for the sanguine, adding of Cypresse vn. s. and of 
camphure dr. 2. let one halfe be water, the other vineger, 
adde of the fiue cold oyles of each vn. s. and led the water be 
red rosewater which you put in. 
 
[}CHAP. 82.}] 
 
The perfume prescribed for the sanguine will serue, adding 
of Camphure dr. 2. santalorum trium, Tamarisc. ana dr. 2. 
of roses, violets, dr. 2. s. 
 
[}CHAP. 83.}] 
 
The bole. R. bol. Armen. siue terra sigillat. scr. 1. santalorum 
omnium scr. 2. dissolue these in aq. violarum & Endiu. vn. s. vini 
albi. vn. s. aq. rosarum vn. 1. this may you take at any time, 
but best fasting. 
 
[}CHAP. 84.}] 
 
The pills for this complexion; R. Aloes lotum in aq. Endiuiæ 
siue cichorij, vel in decoctione prunorum damasc. myrrha 
dr. 1. camphur. scr. 1. cinamomi dr. 2. cum aqua borag. & Endiu. fiat 
massa pro pill. For the vse hereof looke in the sanguine complexion. 
 
[}CHAP. 85.}] 
 
The pome for this complexion vse that in the sanguine 
compl. adde fllorum nitiuph. dr. 1. radici cichor. dr. s. cypressi dr. 
2. cort. lemmon. dr. 1. make it as before in the sanguine compl. 
adding to it in the making, of white lead dr. s. 
 
[^p.28^] 
[}CHAP. 86. 
The Melancholicke complexion.}] 
 
Melancholie naturall, is a humour, whose qualities are 
cold and drie, of the nature of the earth, the dregs of blood 
setled and seuered from blood (as blood is from phlegme 
and choller from blood) all which at one time, were in one 
cell, the liuer, and by ebullition or concoction, caused by 
contrarietie of qualities in one substance and place, to be seuered 
ech from other to their proper cells: blood to the liuer 
and vaines, choller to the gall, and melancholie to the 
splene, phlegme to the lungs. 
 
[}CHAP. 87.}] 
 
This complexion is least apt to take the infection for 3 
causes: first the passages are straighter and narrower leading 
to the heart, and to the humours about the heart, then 
in any other complexion. Secondly by reason of the power 
and the qualities in the substance, cold and drines, which 
are opposite vnto the virulent qualitie in the ayre, excessiue 
heat or moisture one or both continually resisting. Thirdly 
in regard of the disabilitie of the qualities, vnapt to take impression; 
as in cold marble, cold earth, & such like. The aptest 
times for this complexion to take it, is when heate and 
moisture most abound, as in the springs, for then is the qualitie 
in the ayre and in the humours most powerfull to alter 
and ouercome. 
 
[}CHAP. 88.}] 
 
Signes shewing this complexion, leannes, hardnes of 
skinne, colour duskish or whitely; pulse little, haire plaine, 
sieldome laughing, vrine waterie and thinne, excrements 
seege or sweating, little and stinking: much watchfulnes, yet 
not so much as in the cholerick: dreames feareful, in opinion 
stiffe, digestion slow and ill, timerous, long in anger or dislike 
if it be begunne, fretting much, subiect to one daies feuer, 
by the vnnaturall heat in the spirits of the heart, then is 
the colour most pale: mooueth slowly, shortnes or straightnes 
of breath, heauines of head, and then the vrine is ouer 
high coloured more then before, some heate is then ouer all 
the bodie: haire brownish, and sometime mixt with white 
[^p.29^] 
haires. If this humour abound, then are fearefull dreames, as 
feare of hurts or harme, death of friends, of pitts and darkenes, 
long feare without cause, cramps without repletion, 
heauines of mind, sleepines in the members. 
 
[}CHAP. 89.}] 
 
These things are conuenient for this complexion; sweete 
almonds, almond milke, yeolkes of reare egges, milke from 
the vdder with sugar in it, wheat bread. Of foules; fesant, 
henne, capon, field birds. Of fish; roches, dares, gudgines, 
loches, and such like: veale, yong porke, redde deere, swines 
feete, calues feete, pease, pottage with mynt, figges, raisons 
before meate, mynt, rice, lettice, cichorie, grapes, wines moderatly 
and well fined, beare or ale not ouer strong, mirth, 
braines of hens, chickins and yong geese; it is good to keepe 
this humour thin. 
 
[}CHAP. 90.}] 
 
These are ill, hard meates, drie meates or salt, sower, or 
scorched meates: colewoorts, mustard, radish, garlicke (except 
windines annoy the bodie) much studie, feare, sorrow, 
wrath, compassion, care, much rest: things grieuous to see, 
to smell, or to heare, darknes ill, drying of the bodie howsoeuer, 
by watching, care, or lecherie: musch vse of things hot & 
drie, especially if choller adust be in the bodie. 
 
[}CHAP. 91.}] 
 
Vse these commonly: wormewood, borage, buglosse, 
beetes, colewoorts, cammomill, Egrimonie, melilot, tinaria, 
spicknard, hearts-tongue, pellitorie, endiue. 
 
[}CHAP. 92.}] 
 
Vse these likewise but not so commonly, Angelica, mugwoort, 
betonie, balme, horehound, myrrhe, rosemarie, sage, 
scabions, lupulus, Iuie, peucedanium, water germander, S. 
Iohns woort, lettice, violets, arage, beetes: as for other things 
which are hot in the third or fourth degree, vse them with 
aduise, when cold exceedeth. 
 
[}CHAP. 93.}] 
 
VSe these commonly: sweete almondes, iuiubes, the 
cypresse nut. 
 
[^p.30^] 
[}CHAP. 94.}] 
 
THese are good to warme the splene: bitter almondes, capers, 
anise seede, caraway seede, watercresses seedes, sparage 
seede, fennell seede, gentian, the rootes of penyriall, 
gladin. 
 
[}CHAP. 95.}] 
 
Things good for the liuer, are likewise good for the splene, 
because the splene is hurt from the liuer, and receiueth 
good from thence: therefore looke in the sanguine complexion: 
things cold or dry in the second, or third degree, 
are not commonly to be vsed: and things cold and dry, in 
the third degree vtterly to be refused, except in the time of 
pestilence, and except they be corrected neuer vse them in 
winter. 
 
[}CHAP. 96.}] 
 
THese will purge all humours, but especially melancholie: 
R. Polypodij dr. 3. fol. senæ. dr. 11. Turpet. dr. 3. Rhabarb. 
hermodact. ana. dr. 1. s. iugib. scr. 2. Cinamomi anisi. ana 
scr. 1. s. concisa, coquantur in lib. 1. s. ad tertiæ partis consumptionem, 
& de colatura denter vn. 3. tempore matutino, a dendo 
syrupi rosarum laxat. syrup. fumiter, ana vn. s. take this 
three mornings together, if you doe not see by your excrement 
the contrarie, which ceaseth to be duskish. 
 
[}CHAP. 97.}] 
 
Then within seauen or eight daies after, take this receipt 
to clense the blood: R. Cassiæ mellis ana vn. 1. saccar. dr. 3. infuse 
these in water or fumitorie, vn. 6, or 7. if it be winter in 
aq. Epythimi. vn. 8. drinke it two mornings together blood-warme. 
 
[}CHAP. 98.}] 
 
For the water to sprinckle vpon your cloaths, or in your 
chambers, vse as before in the sanguine complex. taking 3. 
parts water, and one part vineger: adding to it, of oyle of 
Chammomill vn. 2. and subtracting as much of the other 
oyles: if it be in winter, adde oyle of spike, dr. 2. adde vnto it 
of rosewater, violet water ana vn. s. of balme water, dr. 2. subtract 
as much out of the other cold waters: adde of Tragagant. 
dr. 1. cedri liq. dr. 2. Thuris dr. 2. s. 
 
[^p.31^] 
[}CHAP. 99.}] 
 
The suffumigation vse as before in the sanguine complexion, 
adding vnto it of spike dr. s. if in winter adde dr. 2. 
of frankenscense, dr. s. 
 
[}CHAP. 100.}] 
 
The bole. R. boli armenij, siue terr. sigillat. scr. 2. santalorum 
ommium. scr. 2. dissoluantur in aq. rosarum dr. 1. s. aq. melissæ 
violar. ana dr. 2. vini albi dr. 4. mulsi dr. 1. the order for 
making of this is to be obserued as in the other complexions. 
 
[}CHAP. 101.}] 
 
The pills. Of Aloes dr. 2. lot. in vino odorifer. aq. violar. 
aq. meliss. siue Epythymi ana. part. equal. myrrh cinamomi ana dr. 
1. fiat massa pillularum eum aq. predict. sit quantitas vt in presedent 
scr. vel. dr. 1. 
 
[}CHAP. 102.}] 
 
The pome. R. santalorum odorifer. florum rosarum, violar, 
chamomeli ana dr. 1. s. melissæ dr. 1. cort. citri. dr. 1. s. macis 
dr. 2. myrrhæ dr. 1. s. camphur. dr. 1. s. ladani dr. 1. papauer 
scr. s. Ambr. gra. 3. cinamomi gra. 4. nucis mosc. dr. 1 cum Terebint. 
lot. in aq. rosærum violarum melisse, adde si posis de liq. 
cearipartem vnam cum aq. predict. 
 
