[^Joannes de Mediolano: Schoole of Salerne^] 
 
[}THE 
ENGLISHMANS 
DOCTER. 
OR, 
The Schoole of Salerne. 
OR, 
Physicall Obseruations for the perfect 
Preseruing of the body of Man in continuall 
health. 
 
LONDON 
Printed for Iohn Helme, & Iohn Bushby 
Iunior, and are to be sold at the little shoppe 
next Cliffords Inne gate, in Fleetstreet. 
1607.}] 
 
[^A dedication by the printer to the reader and three poems by anonymous writers omitted.^] 
[^Extract 1, ff.A6r-C7r^] 
 
[^f.A6r^] 
[}THE SALERNE SCHOOLE.}] 
 
The Salerne Schoole doth by these lines impart, 
All health to Englands King, and doth aduise 
From care his head to keepe, from wrath his harte. 
Drinke not much wine, sup light, and soone arise, 
When meat is gone long sitting breedeth smart: 
And after noone still waking keepe your eies, 
When mou'd you find your selfe to Natures Need 
Forbeare them not, for that much danger breeds, 
Vse three Physitians still, first doctor Quiet, 
Next doctor Mery-man, and doctor Dyet. 
 
Rise early in the morne, and straight remember 
With water cold to wash your hands and Eyes, 
In gentle fashion retching euery member, 
And to refresh your braine when as you rise, 
In heat, in cold, in Iuly, and December, 
Both comb your head, & rub your teeth likewise: 
If bled you haue, keepe coole, if bath'd, keepe warm, 
If din'd, to stand or walke will do no harme. 
3. things preserue y=e= sight, Glasse, Grasse, and Fountains 
At Eue'n springs, at morning visit mountaines. 
 
[^f.A6v^] 
If R: be in the mouth, their iudgements erre, 
That thinke that sleepe in afternoone is good, 
If R: be not therein, some men there are, 
That thinke a little nap breeds no ill blood, 
But if you shall heerein exceed too farre, 
It hurts your health, it cannot be withstood: 
Long sleep at afternoones by stiring fumes, 
Breeds Slowth and Agewes, Aking heads & Rheums, 
The moysture bred in Breast, in Iawes, and Nose, 
Are cold Catarrs, or Tysique, or the Pose. 
 
Great harms haue grown, & Maladies exceeding 
By keeping in a little blast of wind, 
So Cramps, & Dropsies, Collicks haue their breeding, 
And Mazed Braines for want of vent behind. 
Besides we find in stories worth the reading, 
A certaine Roman Emperor was so kind, 
Claudius by name, he made a Proclamation, 
A Scape to be no losse of reputation. 
Great suppers do the stomacke much offend, 
Sup light if quyet you to sleepe intend. 
[^f.A7r^] 
To keepe good dyet, you should neuer feed, 
Vntill you find your stomacke cleane and voide, 
Of former eaten meats, for they do breed 
Repletion, and will cause you soone be cloid, 
None other rule but appetite should need, 
When from your mouth a moisture cleare doeth void. 
All Peares and Apples, Peaches, Milke, & Cheese, 
Salt meats, red Deere, Hare, Beefe, and Goat: al these 
Are meats that breed ill blood, and Melancholy, 
If sicke you be, to feed on them were folly. 
 
Egges newly laid, are nutritiue to eat, 
And rosted Reere are easie to digest. 
 
Fresh Gascoign wine is good to drink with meat 
Broth strengthens nature aboue all the rest, 
But broth prepar'd with flowre of finest wheate: 
Well boyld, and full of fat for such are best. 
 
The Priests rule is (a Priests rule shold be true,) 
Those Egges are best, are long, and white, & new, 
Remember eating new laid Egges and soft, 
For euery Egge you eat you drinke as oft. 
[^f.A7v^] 
Fine Manchet feeds to fat, Milke fills the vaines, 
New Cheese doth nourish, so doth flesh of swine, 
The Dowcets of some beasts, the marrow, brains, 
And all sweet-tasting-flesh, and pleasant wine, 
Soft Egges (a cleanly dish in house of Swains), 
Ripe Figs and Raysins, late come from the Vine: 
Chuse wine you meane shall serve you all the year, 
Well-sauour'd, tasting well, and color'd cleere, 
Fiue qualities there are, wines praise aduancing, 
Strong, Beawtyfull, and Fragrant, coole, and dauncing. 
 
White Muskadell and Candy wine, and Greeke, 
Do make mens wits and bodies grosse and fat: 
Red wine doth make the voyce oft time to seek, 
And hath a binding quality to that, 
Canary and Madera, both are like 
To make one Leane indeed, (but wot you what,) 
Who say they make one leane wold make one laffe 
They meane, they make one leane vpon a staffe. 
Wine, women, Baths, by Art or Nature warme, 
Vs'd or abus'd, do men much good or harme. 
 
[^f.A8r^] 
Six things that heere in order shall insue, 
Against all poysons haue a secret poure, 
Peares, Garlick, Reddish-roots, Nuts, Rape, and Rew, 
But Garlicke cheefe, for they that it deuoure, 
May drink, and care not who their drink do brew 
May walke in ayres infected euery houre: 
Sith Garlicke then hath poure to saue from death, 
Beare with it though it make vnsauoury breath: 
And scorne not Garlicke like to some, that think 
It onely makes men winke, and drinke, and stink. 
 
Though all ill sauours do not breed infection, 
Yet sure infection commeth most by smelling, 
Who smelleth still perfumed, his complexion 
Is not perfum'd by Poet Martials telling, 
Yet for your lodging roomes giue this direction, 
In houses where you mind to make your dwelling 
That nere the same there be no euil scents 
Of Puddle-waters, or of excrements. 
Let ayre be cleare and light, & free from faultes, 
That come of secret passages and vaults. 
 
[^f.A8v^] 
If wine haue ouer night a surfet brought, 
A thing we wish to yon should happen seeld 
Then early in the morning drinke a draught, 
And that a kind of remedy shall yeeld, 
But gainst all surfets vertues schoole hath taught, 
To make the gift of temperance a sheeld: 
The better wines do breed the better humours, 
The worse, are causes of vnwholesome tumors: 
In measure drinke, let wine be ripe, not thicke, 
But cleere and well alaid, and fresh, and quicke. 
 
The like aduice we give you for your beere, 
We will it be not soure, and yet be stale, 
Well boyld, of harty graine, and old, and cleare, 
Nor drinke too much, nor let it be to stale: 
And as there be foure seasons in the yeare, 
In each a seuerall order keepe you shall. 
In Spring, your dinner must not much exceed, 
In Summers heat, but little meat shall need: 
In Autumne, ware you eat not too much fruit, 
With Winter's cold, full meats do fittest sute. 
 
[^f.B1r^] 
If in your drinke you mingle Rew with Sage, 
All poyson is expeld by power of those, 
And if you would withal lusts heat asswage, 
Adde to them two the gentle floure of Rose: 
 
Who would not be Sea-sick when seas do rage, 
Sage-water drinke with wine before he goes. 
 
Salt, Garlicke, Parsely, Pepper, Sage, and Wine, 
Make sawces for all meats both coarse and fine, 
Of washing of your hands much good doth ryse, 
Tis wholesome, cleanly, and releeues your eyes. 
 
Eate not your bread too stale, nor eat it hot, 
A little Leuend, hollow-bak't and light: 
Not fresh, of purest grain that can be got, 
The crust breeds choller both of brown & white, 
Yet let it be well bak't or eat it not, 
How ere your tast therein may take delight. 
 
Porke without vvine it not so good to eate 
As Sheepe with wine, it medicine is and meate, 
Tho Intrailes of a beast be not the best, 
Yet are some intrayles better then the rest. 
 
[^f.B1v^] 
Some loue to drinke new wine not fully fin'd, 
But for your health we wish that you drinke none, 
For such to dangerous Fluxes are enclin'd, 
Besids the Lees of vvine doth breed the stone. 
Some to drinke onely vvater are assign'd: 
But such by our consent shall drinke alone, 
For vvater and small beere vve make no question 
Are enemies to health and good digestion: 
And Horace in a verse of his rehearses, 
That Water-drinkers neuer make good verses. 
 
The choyse of meats to health doth much auayle, 
First Veale is holsom meat, & breeds good blood, 
So Capon, Hen, and Chicken, Patridge, Quaile, 
The Phesant, woodcock, Lark & Thrush be good, 
The Heath-cock holsom is, the Doue, the Raile, 
And all that do not much delight in mud, 
Fair swans, such loue your beuties make me bear you, 
That in the dish I easily could forbeare you, 
Good sport it is to see a Mallard kild, 
But with their flesh your flesh should not be fil'd. 
 
[^f.B2r^] 
As choyce you make of Fowle, so make of Fish, 
If so that kind be soft, the great be best, 
If firme, then small, and many in a dish: 
I need not name, all kinds are in request, 
Pyke, Trowt, and Pearch, from water fresh I wish, 
From Sea, Bace, Mullet, Brean, & Soules are best: 
The Pyke a rauening tyrant is iu water, 
Yet he on Land good meat yeelds neare the later. 
If Eeles and Cheese you eat, they make you hoarse 
But drinke apace thereto, and then no force. 
 
Some loue at meals to drink small draughts & oft, 
But fancie may heerein, and custome guid, 
If Egges you eat they must be new and soft, 
In peaze good qualities, and bad are tryed, 
To take them with the skin that growes aloft, 
They vvindie be, but good without their hide. 
In great consumptions learn'd physitians thinke, 
Tis good a Goat or Camels milke to drinke, 
Cowes-milke and Sheepes do well, but yet an Asses, 
Is best of all, and all the other passes. 
 
[^f.B2v^] 
Milke is for Agues and for Headache naught, 
Yet if from Agues fit you feel you free, 
Sweet-Butter wholesome is, as some haue taught, 
To clense and purge some paines that inward be: 
Whay, though it be contemn'd, yet it is thought, 
To scoure, and clense, and purge in due degree: 
For healthy men may cheese be holesome food, 
But for the weake and sickly tis not good, 
Cheese is an heauie meat, and grosse, and cold, 
And breedeth Costiuenesse both new and old. 
 
Cheese makes complaint that men on wrong suspitions 
Do slander it, and say it doth such harme, 
That they conceale his many good conditions, 
How oft it helpes a stomacke cold to warme, 
How fasting tis prescrib'd by some Phisitions, 
To those to whom the flux doth giue Alarm: 
We see the better sort thereof doth eate, 
To make as twere a period of their meat, 
The poorer sort when other meat is scant, 
For hunger eate it to releeue their want. 
 
[^f.B3r^] 
Although you may drinke often while you dine, 
Yet after dinner touch not once the cup, 
I know that some Physitions do assigne 
To take some liquor straight before they sup: 
But whether this be meant by Broth or wine, 
A controuersie, t'is not yet tane vp: 
To close your stomacke well, this order sutes, 
Cheese after Flesh, Nuts after Fish or Fruits. 
Yet some haue said (beleeue them as you will), 
One Nut doth good, two hurt, the third doth kill. 
 
Some Nut, gainst poyson is preseruatiue, 
Peares wanting wine, are poyson from the tree, 
But bak't Peares counted are restoratiue, 
Raw-Peares a poyson, Bak't a Medicine be: 
Bak't Peares, a Weak-dead-stomacke do reuiue, 
Kaw-Peares are heauy to digest we see, 
Drinke after Peares, take after Apples order 
To haue a place to purge your selfe of ordure. 
Ripe Cherries breed good blood, & help the stone, 
If Cherry you do eat, and Cherry-stone. 
 
[^f.B3v^] 
Coole, Damsens are, and good for helth by reason 
They make your intrailes soluble and slacke, 
Let Peaches steepe in vvine of newest season, 
Nuts hurt their teeth, y=t= with their teeth the~ cracke, 
With euery Nut tis good to eat a Reason, 
For though they hurt the splene they help the back 
A plaister made of Figges by some mens telling, 
Is good against all kirnels, Boyles, and swelling, 
With Poppy ioyn'd, it drawes out bones are broke~ 
By Figs are lice engendred, Lust prouoken. 
 
Eat Medlers if you haue a loosenes gotten, 
They bind, and yet your vrine they augment, 
They haue one name more fit to be forgotten, 
While hard and sound they be they be not spent, 
Good Medlers are not ripe till seeming rotten. 
For meddling much with Medlers some are shent. 
New Rhennish-wine stirs vrine, doeth not binde 
But rather loose the belly, breeding wind, 
Ale, humours breeds, it addes both flesh & force, 
Tis loosing, coole, and vrine doth inforce. 
 
[^f.B4r^] 
Sharpe Vinegar doth coole, withall it dries, 
And giues to some ill humor good correction: 
It makes one melancholy, hurts their eyes, 
Nor making fat, nor mending their complection: 
It lessens sperm, makes appetite to rise: 
Both taste and scent is good against infection. 
 
The Turnep hurts the stomack, wind it breedeth 
Stirs vrine, hurts his teeth thereon that feedeth: 
Who much thereof wil feed, may wish our Nation 
Would well allow of Claudius proclamation. 
 
It followes now what part of euery beast 
Is best to eat: first, know the Hart is ill, 
It is both hard, and heauy to disgest, 
The Tripe, with no good iuice our flesh doth fill: 
The Lites, are light, yet but in small request: 
But outer parts are best in Physickes skill. 
 
If any braines be good, (which is a question,) 
Hennes braine is best, and lightest of disgestion: 
 
In Fennell-seed this vertue you shall find, 
Forth of your lower parts to drive the wind. 
 
[^f.B4v^] 
Of Fennell vertues foure they do recite, 
First, it hath power some poysons to expell, 
Next burning Agues it will put to flight, 
The stomacke it doth clense, and comfort well: 
And fourthly it doth keepe, and clense the sight, 
And thus the seed and herbe doth both excell. 
Yet for the two last told; if any seede 
With Fennell may compare, tis Annis-seed: 
Some Anny seeds be sweet, and some more bitter, 
For pleasure these, for medicine those more fitter. 
 
Dame Natures reason, far surmounts our reading, 
We feele effects, the causes oft vnknowne, 
Who knows y=e= cause why Spodiu~ sta~cheth bleeding, 
(Spodium, but ashes of an Oxes bone.) 
We learne herein to praise his power exceeding, 
That vertue gaue to vvood, to herbes, to stone. 
The Liuer Spodium: Mace, the hart delightes, 
The braine likes Muske, and Lycoras the Lites, 
The spleen is thoght much comforted with Capers. 
In stomacke, Gallingale allayes ill Vapors. 
 
[^f.B5r^] 
Sauce would be set with meat vpon the Table, 
Salt is good sawce, and had with great facility: 
Salt makes vnsauoury vyands, manducable, 
To driue some poisons out, Salt hath ability, 
yet things too salt are nere commendable: 
They hurt the sight, in nature cause debility, 
The scab and itch on them are euer breeding, 
The which on meats too salt, are often feeding: 
Salt should be first remou'd, and first set downe, 
At Table of the Knight, and of the Clovvne. 
 
As Tasts are diuers, so phisitions hold 
They haue as sundry qualities and power, 
Some burning are, some temperate, some cold, 
Cold are these three: the Tart, the sharpe, the sour: 
Salt, bitter, biting, burne as hath bin told, 
Sweet, fat, and fresh, are temprate euery houre. 
 
Foure speciall vertues hath a sop in wine, 
It maketh the teeth white, it cleeres the eyne, 
It addes vnto an empty stomacke fulnes, 
And from a stomacke fil'd, it takes the dulnes. 
 
[^f.B5v^] 
If to an vse you haue your selfe betaken, 
Of any diet, make no sudden change, 
A custome is not easily forsaken, 
yea though it better were, yet seemes it strange, 
Long vse is as a second nature taken. 
With nature custome walkes in equall range. 
 
Good dyet is a perfect way of curing, 
And worthy much regard and health assuring. 
A King that cannot rule him in his dyet, 
Will hardly rule his Realme in peace and quyet. 
 
They that in Physicke will prescribe you food, 
Six things must note we here in order touch, 
First: What it is: and then, for what tis good, 
And When; and Where; How often; and how much, 
Who note not this, it cannot be withstood, 
They hurt, not heale, yet are too many such. 
 
Coleworts broth doth loose, the substance bind, 
Thus play they, fast and loose, and all behind. 
But yet if at one time you take them both, 
The substance shall giue place vnto the broth. 
 
[^f.B6r^] 
In Physicke Mallowes hath much reputation, 
Their very name of Mellow seemes to sound, 
The roote thereof will giue a kind purgation, 
By them both men and women good haue found. 
To womens monthly flowers they give laxation, 
They make men soluble that haue been bounde, 
And least we seeme in Mallowes praises partial. 
Long since hath Horace praised them & Martial. 
 
The worms that gnaw the womb & neuer stint 
Are kill'd, and purg'd, & driue~ away with Mint. 
 
But who can write thy worth (o soueraigne sage,) 
Some ask how men can die, where thou dost grow 
Oh that there were a Medicine curing age, 
Death comes at last, tho death come nere so slow: 
sage strengths the sinews, Feauers heat doth swage, 
The Palsie helpes, and rids of mickle woe, 
In Latine (Saluia) takes the name of safety, 
In English (Sage) is rather wise then crafty: 
Sith then the name betokens wise, and sauing, 
We count it natures frend, and worth the hauing. 
[^f.B6v^] 
Take Sage and Primrose, Lauender, and Cresses, 
With Walwort that doth grow twixt lime and stone 
For he that of these hearbes the iuice expresses, 
And mix with povvder of a Castor-stone, 
May breed their ease whom Palsie much oppresses, 
Or if this breed not helpe, then looke for none. 
 
Rew is a noble hearbe to giue it right, 
To chew it fasting it will purge the sight, 
One quality thereof yet blame I must, 
It makes men chast, and women fills with lust. 
 
Fayre Ladies if these Phisicke rules be true, 
That Rew hath such strange qualities as these, 
Eat little Rew, least your good husbands (REVV) 
And breed betweene you both a shrow'd disease. 
Rew, vvhets the wit, and more to pleasure you, 
In water boyl'd, it rids a roome of fleas. 
I would not to you Ladies, Onyons praise, 
Saue that they make one fayre (Æsclapius saies) 
yet taking them requires some good direction, 
They are not good alike for each complexion. 
 
[^f.B7r^] 
If vnto Choller men be much inclin'd, 
Tis thought that Onyons are not good for those, 
But if a man be Flegmatique (by kind) 
It does his stomacke good, as some suppose, 
For Oyntment Iuice of Onyons is assign'd 
To heads whose hayre fals faster than it growes: 
If Onyons cannot helpe in such mishap, 
A man must get him a Gregorian cap. 
But if your hound by hap should bite his master, 
With Hony, Rew, and Onions make a plaister. 
 
The seed of Mustard is the smallest graine, 
And yet the force thereof is very great, 
It hath a present power to purge the braine, 
It addes vnto the stomacke force and heat: 
All poyson it expels, and it is plaine, 
With sugar tis a passing sawce for meat. 
She that hath hap a husband bad to bury, 
And is therefore in heart not sad but merry: 
yet if in shew good manners she will keepe, 
Onions and Mustardseed will make her weepe. 
 
[^f.B7v^] 
Though Violets smell sweet, Nettles offensiue, 
yet each in seuerall kind much good procure, 
The first doth purge the heauie head and pensiue, 
Recouers surfets, Falling sicknes cures: 
Tho Nettles stinke, yet make they recompence, 
If your bellie by the Collicke paine indures: 
Against the Collicke Nettle-seed and Hony, 
Is Physicke: better none is had for money, 
It breedeth sleep, staies vomits, flegme doth softe~, 
It helpes him of the Gowt that eats it often. 
 
Cleane Hysop is an Herbe to purge and cleanse, 
Raw Flegmes, & hurtfull humours from the breast, 
The same vnto the Lungs great comfort lends, 
With Honey boil'd: but farre aboue the rest, 
It giues good colour, and complection mends, 
And is therefore with women in request: 
With Hony mixt, Cinquefoyle cures the Canker, 
That eats our inward parts with cruell ranker, 
But mixt with Wine, it helpes a greeued side, 
And staies the vomit, and the Laske beside. 
 
[^f.B8r^] 
Ellecompane strengthens each inward part, 
A little looseness is thereby prouoken: 
It swageth greefe of mind, it cheeres the heart, 
Allayeth wrath, and makes a man fayre spoken: 
And drunke with Rew in Wine, it doth impart 
Great helpe to those that haue their bellies broke~, 
Let them that vnto choller much incline, 
Drink Penny-royall steeped in their wine, 
And some affirme, that they haue found by tryall 
The paine of Gowt is cur'd by Penny-royall. 
 
To tell all Cresses virtues long it were, 
But diuers patients vnto that are debter, 
It helpes the teeth, it giues to bald men haire, 
With Hony mixt, it Ring-worme kils & Tettar: 
But let not women that would children beare, 
Feed much thereof, for they to fast were better. 
An herbe there is takes of the swallowes name, 
And by the Swallowes gets no little fame, 
For Pliny writes (tho some thereof make doubt), 
It helps young Swallowes eies, when they are out. 
 
[^f.B8v^] 
Greene Willow though in scorne it oft is vs'd, 
yet some there are in it not scornfull parts, 
It killeth wormes, the iuice in eares infus'd, 
With Vineger: the barke destroyeth Warts. 
But at one quality I much haue mus'd, 
That addes and bates much of his good desertes, 
For writers old and new, both ours and forren, 
Affirme the seed make vvomen chast and barren. 
Take Saffron if your hart make glad you will, 
But not too much, for that the heart may kill. 
 
Greene Leekes are good as some Physitians saie, 
yet would I choose, how ere I them belieue, 
To weare Leekes rather on Saint Dauids day, 
Than eat the Leekes vpon Saint Dauids Eue, 
The bleeding at the nose Leekes iuice will stay, 
And women bearing children, much releeue. 
Blacke Pepper beaten grosse you good shall find 
If cold your stomacke be, or full of wind: 
white Pepper helps the cough, & fleam it riddeth, 
And Agues fit to come it oft forbiddeth. 
 
[^f.C1r^] 
Our Hearing is a choyce and dainty sence, 
And hard to mend, yet soone it may be mard 
These are the things that breed it most offence, 
To sleepe on stomacke full, and drinking hard: 
Blowes, fals, and noise, and fasting, violence, 
Great heat, and sudden cooling afterward: 
All these, as is by sundry proofes appearing, 
Breed tingling in our eares, and hurt our hearing: 
Then thinke it good aduice, not ydle talke, 
That after supper bids vs stand or walke. 
 
You heard before what is for hearing naught, 
Now shall you see what hurtfull is for sight: 
Wine, Women, bathes, by art or nature wrought, 
Leekes, Onions, Garlicke, Mustard-seed, fire & light: 
Smoake, Bruises, dust, Pepper to powder brought, 
Beans, Lentils, strains, Wind, Tears, and Phœbus bright, 
And all sharpe things our eie-sight do molest: 
Yet watching hurts them more than all the rest. 
 
Of Fennell, Veruin, Kellidon, Roses, Rew, 
Is water made, that will the sight renew. 
 
[^f.C1v^] 
If in your teeth you hap to be tormented, 
By meane some little wormes therein do breed, 
Which paine (if heed be tane) may be preuented, 
By keeping cleane your teeth, when as you feede: 
Burne Francomsence, (a gum not euil sented) 
Put Hen-bane vnto this, and Onyon-seed, 
And with a Tunnel to the tooth thats hollow, 
Conuey the smoake thereof, and ease shall follow. 
 
By Nuts, Oyle, Eeles, and cold in head 
By Apples and raw fruites, is hoarsnes bred. 
 
To shew you how to shun raw running Rheumes, 
Exceed not much in meate, in drinke, and sleepe, 
For all excesse is cause of hurtfull fumes, 
Eate warme, broath warme, striue in your breth to keep 
Vse exercise, that Vapors ill consumes, 
In Notherne winds abroad do neuer peepe. 
 
If Fistula do rise in any part, 
And so procure your danger, and your smart, 
Take Arsnicke, Brimstone, mixt with lime & sope, 
And make a Tent, and then of cure theres hope. 
 
[^f.C2r^] 
If so your head to paine you oft with aking, 
Faire water, or small beere drinke then or neuer, 
So may you scape the burning fits and shaking, 
That wonted are to company the Feuer: 
 
If with much heat your head be in ill taking, 
To rub your head and Temples still perseuer, 
And make a bath of Morrell (boyled warme) 
And it shall keepe your head from further harm. 
 
A Flix a dangerous euill is, and common, 
In it shun cold, much drink, & strains of women. 
 
To fast in Summer doth the body drie, 
Yet doth it good, if you thereto invre it, 
Against a surfet, vomitting to try, 
Is remedy, but some cannot indure it: 
Yet some so much themselues found help thereby, 
They go to sea a purpose to procure it. 
 
Foure seasons of the yeare there are in all, 
The Summer, and the Winter, Spring and Fall: 
In euery one of these, the rule of reason, 
Bids keepe good dyet, suiting euery season. 
 
[^f.C2v^] 
The Spring is moist, of temper good and warme, 
Then best it is to bath, to sweat, and purge, 
Then may one ope a veyne in either arme, 
If boiling bloud or feare of Agues vrge, 
Then Venus recreation doth no harme, 
Yet may too much thereof turne to a scourge. 
In Summers heat (when choller hath dominion) 
Coole meats and moyst are best in some opinion, 
The Fall is like the Spring, but endeth colder, 
With wines and spice the winter may bee bolder. 
 
Now if perhaps some haue desire to know, 
The number of our bones, our teeth, our veynes, 
This verse ensuing plainely doth it shew, 
To him that to obserue it taketh paines: 
The Teeth thrice ten, and two twice eight a row, 
Eleuenscore bones saue one in vs remaines: 
For veynes that all may vaine in vs appeare, 
A veyne we haue for each day in the yeare: 
All these are like in number and connexion, 
The difference growes in bignes and complexion. 
 
[^f.C3r^] 
Four Humors raigne within our bodies wholy, 
And these compared to foure Elements, 
The Sanguin, Choller, Flegme, and Melancholly, 
The later two are heauy, dull of sence, 
The tother are more Iouiall, quicke, and Iolly, 
And may be likened thus (without offence) 
Like ayre both warme and moyst, is Sanguin clear, 
Like fire doth Choller hot and dry appeare, 
Like water, cold and moist (is Flegmatique), 
The Melancholy cold, dry earth is like. 
 
Complexions cannot vertue breed or vice, 
Yet may they vnto both giue inclination, 
The Sanguin gamesome is, and nothing nice, 
Loues wine, and women, and all recreation. 
Likes pleasant tales, and newes, plaies cards and dice, 
Fit for all company, and euery fashion: 
Though bold, not apt to take offence, nor irefull, 
But bountifull and kind, and looking chearefull: 
Inclining to be fat, and prone to lafter, 
Loues myrth, and Musick, cares not what comes after. 
 
[^f.C3v^] 
Sharpe Choller is an humour most pernitious, 
All violent, and fierce, and full of fire, 
Of quicke conceit, and therewithall ambitious, 
Their thoughts to greater fortune still aspyre, 
Proud, bountifull enough, yet oft malicious, 
A right bold speaker, and as bold a lyer, 
On little cause to anger great inclin'd, 
Much eating still, yet euer looking pin'd, 
In younger yeares they vse to grow apace, 
In elder hairy on their breast and face. 
 
The Flegmatique are most of no great growth, 
Inclining rather to be fat and square, 
Giuen much vnto their ease, to rest and sloth, 
Content in knowledge to take little share, 
To put themselues to any paine most loth, 
So dead their spirits, so dull their sences are: 
Still either sitting like to folke that dreame, 
Or else still spitting, to avoid the flegme, 
One quality doth yet these harmes repayre, 
That for most part the Flegmatique are fayre. 
 
[^f.C4r^] 
The Melancholy from the rest do varry, 
Both sport, and ease, and company refusing, 
Exceeding studious, euer sollitary, 
Inclining pensiue still to be, and musing, 
A secret hate to others apt to carry: 
Most constant in his choise, tho long a choosing, 
Extreame in loue sometime, yet seldom lustfull, 
Suspitious in his nature, and mistrustfull. 
A wary wit, a hand much giuen to sparing, 
A heauy looke, a spirit little daring. 
 
Now thogh we giue these humors seueral names, 
yet all men are of all participant, 
But all haue not in quantity the same, 
For some (in some) are more predominant, 
The colour shewes from whence it lightly came, 
Or whether they haue blood too much or want. 
The watry Flegmatique are fayre and white, 
The Sanguin, Roses ioyn'd to Lillies bright, 
The Chollericke more red: the Melancholy, 
Alluding to their name are swart and colly. 
 
[^f.C4v^] 
If Sanguin humour do too much abound, 
These signes will be thereof appearing cheefe, 
The face will swell, the cheeks grow red & round, 
With staring eies, the pulse beat soft and breefe, 
The vaines exceed, the belly will be bound, 
The Temples, and the fore-head full of griefe, 
Vnquiet sleeps, that so strange dreames will make 
To cause one blush to tell when he doth wake: 
Besides the moysture of the mouth and spittle, 
Will taste too sweet, and seeme the throat to tickle. 
 
If Choller do exceed, as may sometime, 
your eares will ring and make you to be wakefull, 
your tongue will seeme all rough, and oftentimes 
Cause vomits, vnaccustomed and hatefull, 
Great thirst, your excrements are full of slime, 
The stomacke squeamish, sustenance vngratefull, 
your appetite will seeme in nought delighting, 
your hart still greeued with continuall byting, 
The pulse beat hard and swift, all hot, extreame, 
your spittle soure, of fire-worke oft you dreame. 
 
[^f.C5r^] 
If Flegme abundance haue due limits past, 
These signes are here set downe will plainly shew, 
The mouth will seeme to you quite out of tast, 
And apt with moisture still to ouerflow; 
your sides will seeme all sore downe to the wast, 
your meat wax loathsome, your disgestion slow, 
your head and stomacke both in so ill taking, 
One seeming euer griping tother aking: 
With empty vaines, the pulse beat slow and soft, 
In sleepe, of Seas, and Ryuers dreaming oft. 
 
But if that dangerous humour ouer-raigne, 
Of Melancholy, sometime making mad, 
These tokens then will be appearing plaine, 
The pulse beat hard, the colour darke and bad: 
The water thin, a weake fantasticke braine, 
False-grounded-ioy, or else perpetuall sad, 
Affrighted oftentimes with dreames like visions, 
Presenting to the thought ill apparitions, 
Of bitter belches from the stomacke comming, 
His eare (the left especiall) euer humming. 
 
[^f.C5v^] 
Against these seuerall humors ouerflowing, 
As seuerall kinds of Physicke may be good, 
As diet-drink, hot baths, whence sweat is growing 
With purging, vomiting, and letting blood: 
Which taken in due time, nor ouerflowing, 
Each Malladies infection is withstood. 
The last of these is best, if skill and reason. 
Respect age, strength, quantity, and season, 
Of seuenty from seuenteene, if blood abound, 
The opening of a vaine is healthfull found. 
 
Of Bleeding many profits grow, and great, 
The spirits and sences are renewed thereby, 
Though these mend slowly by the strength of meat 
But these with wine restor'd are by and by: 
By bleeding, to the Marrow commeth heat, 
It maketh cleane your braine, releeues your eie, 
It mends your appetite, restoreth sleepe, 
Correcting humors that do waking keepe: 
All inward parts and sences also clearing, 
It mends the voyce, touch, smell, & taste, & hearing. 
 
[^f.C6r^] 
Three speciall Months, September, Aprill, May, 
There are in which tis good to ope a vain, 
In these 3. months the Moon bears greatest sway, 
Then old or young, that store of blood containe, 
May bleed now, though some elder wizards say, 
Some daies are ill in these, I hold it vaine: 
September, Aprill, May, haue daies a peece, 
That bleeding do forbid, and eating Geese, 
And those are they forsooth of May the first, 
Of tother two the last of each are worst. 
 
But yet those daies I graunt, and all the rest, 
Haue in some cases iust impediment, 
As first, if nature be with cold opprest, 
Or if the Region, Ile, or Continent 
Do scorch or freez, if stomacke meat detest; 
If Baths, or Venus, late you did frequent, 
Nor old, nor young, nor drinkers great, are fit, 
Nor in long sicknes, nor in raging fit. 
Or in this case if you will venture bleeding, 
The quantity must then be most exceeding. 
 
[^f.C6v^] 
When you to bleed intend, you must prepare 
Some needfull things both after and before, 
Warme water, and sweet oyle, both needfull are, 
And wine the fainting spirits to restore, 
Fine binding cloths of Linnen, and beware, 
That all that morning you do sleepe no more, 
Some gentle motion helpeth after bleeding, 
And on light meats a spare and temperat feeding 
To bleed, doth cheare the pensiue, and remoue 
The raging furies bred by burning loue. 
 
Make your incision large, and not too deepe, 
That blood haue speedy yssue with the fume, 
So that from sinnewes you all hurt do keepe, 
Nor may you (as I toucht before presume) 
In six ensuing hours at all to sleepe, 
Lest some slight bruise in sleepe cause an apostume. 
Eat not of milke, nor ought of milke compounded; 
Nor let your brain with much drinke be co~fou~ded, 
Eat no cold meats, for such the strength impayre, 
And shun all misty and vnwholesome ayre. 
 
[^f.C7r^] 
Besides the former rules for such as pleases, 
Of letting blood to take more obseruation, 
Know in beginning of all sharpe diseases, 
Tis counted best to make euacuation: 
To old, to young, both letting blood displeases, 
By yeares and sicknes make your computation, 
First in the Spring for quantity, you shall, 
Of blood take twice as much as in the fall: 
In Spring and Summer, let the right arm blood, 
The Fall and Winter for the left are good. 
 
The Hart and Lyuer, spring & summers bleeding 
The Fall and winter hand and foot doth mend, 
One vaine cut in the hand doth helpe exceeding, 
Vnto the Splene, voice, breast, and Intrailes lend: 
And swages griefes that in the hart are breeding, 
But heere the Salerne Schoole doth make an end: 
And heere I cease to write, but will not cease 
To wish you live in health, and die in peace: 
And ye our Physicke rules that friendly read, 
God graunt that Physicke you may neuer neede. 
 
FINIS. 
 
