[^Venner, Tobias: Via recta ad vitam longam^] 
 
[}VIA RECTA AD 
Vitam longam, 
OR 
A PLAINE 
PHILOSOPHICAL 
DISCOVRSE OF THE 
Nature, faculties, and effects, of all such things, 
as by way of nourishments, and Dieteticall obseruations, 
make for the preseruation of Health, with their 
iust applications vnto euery age, constitution 
of bodie, and time 
of YEARE. 
 
WHEREIN ALSO, BY WAY OF 
Introduction, the Nature and Choise of Habitable 
Places, with the true vse of our famous 
BATHES of BATHE is perspicuously demonstrated. 
 
BY 
TO: VENNER, Doctor of Physicke, at Bathe 
in the Spring, and Fall, and at other times in the Burrough 
of North-Petherton neere to the ancient Hauen-Towne 
of BRIDGEWATER in 
Somerset-shire. 
 
LONDON 
Printed by Edward Griffin for Richard Moore, and are to be sold 
at his shop in S=t= Dunstans Church-yard in Fleet-street. 
1620.}] 
 
[^A dedication to Francis, Lord Vervlam, Lord high Chancellor of England omitted.^] 
[^Extract 1, pp.1-31^] 
 
[^p.1^] 
[}OF THE NATVRE 
AND CHOISE OF 
HABITABLE PLACES. 
 
Whether a temperate aire be the best and wholsomest 
for the preseruation of life?}] 
 
SEeing that, for the continuance of 
life and health, there is so great respect 
to be had of the ayre (for 
without it we can scarcely liue a 
moment of time) and place of habitation, 
as of the meats we eat; 
I therefore thought it meete to expresse, 
by way of Introduction, the 
knowledge of those things that 
demonstrate the salubritie of habitable places, which is 
expended cheifely in three things; in purnesse of the aire, 
qualitie of the soyle and situation, and wholsomnes of the 
water: from which euery man may easily gather and conceiue 
of the healthfulnes of his habitation. And first as 
concerning the ayre, that is the best and wholsomest to 
preserue life, which is subtile, bright, and cleare, not mixt 
with any grosse moisture, or corrupted with filthy or noysome 
vapors, which also with calme & pleasant winds (for 
great & boisterous winds are to the lungs, eyes, and eares 
[^p.2^] 
hurtfull) is gently moued: for such aire is in substance pure, 
in qualities temperate, and therefore most wholsome. But 
the aire that is infected with corrupt & filthy vapors, euaporating 
or breathing out of standing pooles, channels, or 
other impure places, or which is so shut vp with hills 
or mountaines, that it cannot be freely perflated and purified 
with the winds, is not fit for preseruing of health; 
like as neither that, which is affected with too much heat 
or cold, or suffereth often and suddaine mutations. For 
as a pure, cleare and temperate aire is good for euery age 
and constitution: euen so impure, grosse, cloudie and intemperate 
aire is to euery age and constitution hurtfull. 
Therefore touching the knowledge of the goodnes of the 
aire, it must be considered that it be not vaporous, moist, 
or putride, not too hot or too cold, not ouer-moist, or 
[/1./] 
dry: for a vaporous, cloudy, grosse or putride aire doth 
cause rheumes, annoy the lungs, corrupt the humors, infect 
the heart, deiect the spirits, and subuert the habit of 
the whole bodie. 
 
Aire too hot doth relaxe the ioints, resolue the humors, 
[/2./] 
and spirits, cast downe the strength, greatly weaken the 
concoction, with all other functions of the vegetall facultie, 
because it dissolueth and draweth out the naturall heat. 
Moreouer it maketh the colour yellow, because it corrupteth 
the bloud which rubifieth the colour, and causeth 
choler to exceede other humors. Last of all, it heateth the 
heart with an vnnaturall heat, it dissolueth, wasteth, and 
consumeth the humors, and causeth them to putrifie, and 
flow to the concauities and weake parts of the bodie; and 
therefore it is not agreeable to healthy bodies: Notwithstanding 
it is auaileable for ouer cold, moist, hydropicke, 
and paraliticke bodies, and such as are affected with the 
crampe proceeding of too much cold and moisture. 
 
But aire temperately hot doth maintaine the naturall 
[/3./] 
heat, confirme the strength, and maketh all the operations 
of the bodie more liuely: it is very comfortable and agreeable 
to euery constitution. 
[^p.3^] 
Aire too cold is of a congelatiue power, and therefore 
[/4./] 
weakneth the sinewes, and greatly hurteth the braine, 
breedeth catarrhes, and [/5./] asthmaes, and extinguisheth the 
naturall heat, especially in weake bodies, by congealing 
the substantiall moisture thereof, and consequently it being 
not able to actuate as it ought, putrifieth. It is lesse 
hurtfull, nay sometimes profitable to bodies that are exceeding 
hot: and to sound bodies it is more conuenient 
and agreable then aire that is ouer hot. 
 
But aire meanely cold is healthfull, because it impelleth 
the naturall heate into the inner parts, and so causeth a 
strong digestion, prouoketh the appetite, and maketh all 
the hidden operations of nature more effectuall: For 
such a coldnesse is proportionably contrary to the naturall 
heate, by reason whereof, the naturall and genuine heate 
[/6./] 
is by an Antiperistasis fortified, and the digestion, which is 
the roote of life, confirmed. 
 
Aire too moist, such as is commonly in marish & low 
[/7./] 
places, is to all bodies most hurtfull, because it too much 
lenifieth and moistneth the bodie, and filleth it with excrementall 
humors, and causeth distillations, the very roote 
almost of all diseases of the braine and sinewes, as cramps, 
palsies &c. with paines in the ioints; and to speake all in a 
word, a generall torpiditie both of minde and bodie. 
 
[/8./] 
But that aire which is meanely moist, especially in the 
summer time, is agreable to most complexions; for it maketh 
a good colour, softneth the skin, and openeth the 
pores, whereby is caused the better difflation, and discussion 
of vaporous superfluities; but yet it somewhat maketh 
the humors prone to putrefaction. This aire verily 
is very agreable to bodies of a dry constitution, but vnto 
other, by reason that it soone causeth putrefaction of humors, 
it is far lesse conuenient. 
 
A dry aire is contrary vnto this, and it is most agreable 
[/9./] 
to moist constitutions. 
 
Now these things, which I haue hitherto declared, concerning 
the election of aire, being considered, it doth 
[^p.4^] 
plainely appeare, that of the same a temperate mediocritie 
in caliditie, frigiditie, humiditie, and siccitie, as much as 
possibly may be; besides the lucide and cleare substance 
of it, is for the preseruation of health to be desired, because 
such aire doth cause and conserue the health of the inhabitants. 
For nothing verily causeth the bodie more liuely 
and iocunde, and lesse dull and vnapt about the voluntarie 
and animall motions, then to liue in a pure, cleare, and 
temperate aire, which hath in it no mixture of any filthy or 
[/10./] 
offensiue vapour. And there are two things that doe 
plainely manifest the wholsomnes of such aire, as first, places 
free from very low valleys, and moores, and foggie 
mistes in the night; then the bodies of the inhabitants, 
as an acute wit, a sound and liuely colour, a stable integritie 
of the head, quicke sight, perfect hearing, sound smelling, 
cleare voice, and no difficultie of breathing, or vnlustinesse 
of the limmes: For by these signes the wholsomnesse 
of the aire is approued, and by the contrary the offensiue 
and noisome breath thereof is detected. 
 
But seeing that it is not euery mans lot to liue in a pure 
and healthy aire, and such is the necessitie of the aire, that 
euen for a moment of time it cannot be eschewed, it must 
needs follow, that from it our bodies receiue very great alterations: 
Wherefore the euillnesse of the aire being 
knowne, and the alteration which it maketh in our bodies 
considered, it may be easie in our meat, drinke, exercise &c. 
to obiect the contray, which may much hinder, infringe, 
and attemper the action and power of the aire; but yet I 
counsell all such as are truly generous, that they make 
their habitations, so much as may be, remote from low, 
fennie, and moorish places; for the health of the bodie 
ought to be preferred before any pecuniarie profits. 
 
[^p.5^] 
[}Whether the habitation that is somewhat eminent, be for 
health the best approued?}] 
 
WIth good reason did our Auncestors build their 
houses towards the South and the North, because 
through the northerne windowes, the north winde might 
in the summer passe in, to coole the bloomie aire in them, 
and that the sunne, which rectifieth the aire, might through 
the southerne windowes in the winter enter into euery 
roome. For otherwise they cannot haue the benigne and 
sweet aspect of the sunne and the pleasant and healthfull 
blasts of the North winde at those distinct times of the 
yeare. But they did, for the most part euilly set them 
(more regarding their commoditie then health) in deepe 
and crooked places, because in such places they cannot be 
freely perflated and purified with the winds. Neither is 
that house or place of habitation to be commended, that 
lyeth open to the West, because it is perpetually subiect to 
the moist and excrementall blasts of the West winde. But 
in mine opinion those houses and habitations are best, 
[/11./] 
which are somewhat eminently situated on pure & firme 
ground, far off from low, marish, or other filthy places, 
(for there the aire is for the most part temperate, subtile 
and pure, seldome infected with vaporous blasts) hauing 
springs or brookes of pure water neere adioyning, lying 
open to the South and East, with hills (which may somewhat 
hinder and keepe backe the vaporous West winde, 
and the sharpe North winde in the winter) a little remote 
on the West and North side, hauing windowes looking 
not onely towards the South and North for the reasons 
aforesaid, but also, so much as may be, towards the East, 
because the sunne in the beginning of the day, arising vpon 
them, doth excellently clarifie, and purge the aire of them, 
and is all the day after better exposed to the most wholesome 
blasts of the East winde. But here aduertisement 
must be giuen, that the Easterne windowes or casements, 
[^p.6^] 
be not set open, before the Sunne hath somewhat purged 
the aire, and dissipated the clowds, especially in moyst seasons: 
for the morning aire, by reason of the coldnesse and 
moysture of the night, is grosse and impure, very hurtfull 
to them that haue weake braines, & subiect vnto rheumes, 
vntill it be illustrated by the presence of the Sunne, and purified 
by his heat and splendor. 
 
And heere I would not, that the Reader should so conceiue 
me, as that I iudge the West-winde, to be at no time 
wholsome: verily, I thinke nothing lesse, for it is somtimes 
wholsome enough, as if in the time of its blowing, the aire 
be bright and cleere, especially if it blow in the declining 
of the day, and the beginning of the night: for then it is 
the purer and lesse grosse, by reason of the presence of the 
Sunne in the west part, which attenuateth the blasts of it. 
Wherefore I doe conclude, that in an house, to the end it 
may be perflable, it is expedient to haue windowes on euery 
side, which may, ad placitum, bee opened and shut vp 
againe. 
 
[}Why are those that inhabit eminent places in a free and open aire, 
of a more long and healthy life, and also of a more acute, generous, 
and magnificent minde, then those that inhabit crooked, 
low, and marish places?}] 
 
THis question consisteth of two parts: the reason of the 
first is, because the aire in eminent and open places, 
both by reason of the continuall motion of it, as also of 
the firme solidity of the earth, is more subtill and pure, 
whereby it commeth to passe, that the inhabitants, are euen 
to extreme old age, seene to enioy very good and perfect 
health. 
 
But in crooked, low, and marish places, for such verily 
are the spirits, as is the aire which is inspirated: the Inhabitants 
are sickly, and haue turbid and obfuscated spirits, by 
reason of the grosnesse and impurity of the aire. For, impure, 
grosse, and intemperate aire doth corrupt the spirits 
[^p.7^] 
and humours: from whence proceede infinite diseases, 
and vntimely old age. Therefore eminent Regions, because 
they are with pure windes freely perflated, are more 
healthy, then low and marish places, and in them men liue 
not onely more healthfully, but also longer, and from 
hence it was, that Plato wrote, that hee euer found the longest 
liuers in high and temperate Regions. 
 
Therefore hee that desireth to liue a long and healthy 
life, must dwell in an eminent and champion countrey, or 
at least, in a place that is free from muddie and waterish 
impurities: for it is impossible, that a man should liue long 
and healthily in a place, where the spirits are with impure 
aire daily affected. Wherefore I counsell them, that wish 
to enioy true health, and a firme state of body, to take speciall 
care that they liue not in waterish places, or in a grosse, 
corrupt, and filthy aire, or otherwise subiect to vaporous 
blasts, which annoy the spirits, breede rheumes, and are 
very pernicious to the lungs. 
 
Now the reason of the second is euident, by that which 
hath beene shewed concerning the former: for those that 
liue in eminent and champion countries, by reason of the 
tenuitie, puritie, and wholsomnesse of the aire in such places, 
haue cleare, pure, and subtill spirits, from whence it 
commeth, that they are witty, nimble, magnanimous, & 
alta petentes. But the contrary is seene in low and marish 
places, for there, the Inhabitants, by reason of the euilnesse 
of the aire, haue grosse and earthy spirits, whereof it is, that 
they are for the most [/12./] part men, humum tantum sapientes, 
dull, sluggish, sordid, sensuall, plainely irreligious, or perhaps 
some of them, which is a little worse, religious in shew, 
externall honest men, deceiptfull, malicious, disdainefull. 
Wherefore, seeing that the diuersity of spirits, and differences 
of wits and manners, doe so much proceede from 
the condition and nature of the aire, I doe here againe aduertise 
all such as are ingenious, generous, and desirous of 
perfection, both in minde and body, that they endeauour 
by all meanes, to liue in a pure and healthy aire, and so seldomly 
[^p.8^] 
as may bee, frequent places, where the aire is wont 
to be infected with vaporous impurities. 
 
[}Whether fountaine water, in goodnesse and wholsomnesse, 
excell other waters?}] 
 
THat water is esteemed to bee the best and wholsomest, 
which is most cleare and thin, pure in taste and smell, 
altogether clean from any impure, terrene, or other dreggy 
mixture. And such is, before all other, fountaine water, if 
it rise in a pure, high, and open place, and that against the 
East, for then it is the better depurated with the morning 
Sunne, and pure orientall windes. Of fountaine waters, 
those that rise against the North, because they haue not the 
radiant aspect of the Sunne, which purifieth the waters, are 
least commendable, for they are not easily concocted, they 
weaken the stomacke, and cause fluctuations, and flatuousnesse 
in the body. But there are some fountaine waters, not 
to be allowed for alimentary vses, and such are those, which 
rise from sulphurous, bituminous, or metalline places, or 
which are carried thorow like veines of the earth, because 
they receiue an vnpleasant sauor and smell, and also an euill 
quality from those things that they issue from, or runne 
thorow. 
 
Next vnto fountaine water in goodnesse, is raine-water, 
so it fall not in a boysterous or troublesome aire; for the 
Sunne, from all waters and humid places, draweth vp the 
thinner and purer portion resolued into vapours, which is 
the matter of raine to come. Notwithstanding, the goodnesse 
[/13./] 
therof doth alter according to the diuers parts of the 
yeere; for that is the best, which falleth from the middle 
of the Spring, to the middle of Autumne, because in those 
seasons, the aire is for the most part pure, seldomly corrupted 
with noysome vapours, which defile the raine-waters. 
And there are some, to whose opinion a man may 
easily, without errour subscribe, which thinke, that such 
raine-water is not inferiour in goodnesse to fountaine water. 
[^p.9^] 
But the waters which fall with great tempests of winds, 
haile, thunder, and lightnings, are, by reason of many confused 
vapors and exhalations collected in the aire, impurer, 
and therfore not so well to be approoued for the health 
of mans body. 
 
Riuer water hath the third place of goodnes, both by 
[/14./] 
reason the action of the Sunne vpon it, as also because that 
by motion, it becommeth thinner, except it bee polluted 
by the mixture of other things, as it commeth to passe in 
riuers, that runne thorow marish places, or neere vnto populous 
Townes or Cities: for then, by reason of all manner 
of filth running, or cast into them, they become very 
corrupt and vnwholsome. Therefore where the Inhabitants, 
through the want of most wholsome fountaines, are 
constrained to make vse of riuer water, let them take especiall 
care, lest insteede of that which is wholsome, they take 
that which is corrupt and very offensiue to the health of 
their bodies: Wherfore let them make choyse of that riuer 
water, which is not subiect to the aforesayd hurts; but 
runneth with a full streame vpon grauell, pebble-stones, 
rockes, or pure earth: for that water, by reason of the purity 
of the place, motion, and radiant splendor of the Sun, 
is thinner, sweeter, and therefore more pure, and wholsomer, 
and in my opinion, it is doubtfull, whether fountaine 
waters surpasse in goodnesse such riuer waters. But if the 
riuer waters shall not be cleere, but slimie and muddie, and 
the same, for want of better waters, necessarily vsed, as in 
many low and marish places, then let them be kept so long 
in some vessell, till that the grosse part rest and settle in the 
bottome, for by this meanes, the thin and purer part of the 
water may be taken and vsed, and the grosser cast away. 
 
Well-water is iudged inferiour to the former, in purity 
[/15./] 
and wholsomnesse, not onely because it is voyd of motion, 
but also because it is not illustrated of the Sun; notwithstanding, 
if the Well bee digged in pure earth, and the 
mouth open to the aire, not shut vp in a darke obscure 
place, not beset with a filthy bottome, but a pure, grauely, 
[^p.10^] 
or rocky, then the water, especially if it be often drawen, is 
very good and wholsome. 
 
[/16./] 
And heere vnderstand, that the waters that are drawen 
thorow pumps, because they are shut vp from the aire, are 
worse then other Well-waters, for they more quickly putrifie, 
[/17./] 
and acquire an ill quality. The like may bee said of 
Cisternewaters. Neither are the waters which are carried 
thorow pipes of lead, so wholsome as they are supposed to 
be, not onely because they are shut vp from the aire, but 
also because they are thought to acquire an vnwholsome 
quality from the lead: they are troublesome to the stomacke, 
and ponderous to all the bowels; but these hurts 
in their boyling, are well remooued. 
 
[/18./] 
All standing waters, as of pooles, motes, and of pits, 
which in low and marish places, are very vsuall, are most 
vnwholsome, and altogether (as pestiferous) to bee auoyded 
and eschewed, for in that they are standing, or creeping 
with a very slow pace, the parching heat of the Sunne 
often working vpon them, doth more mightily pierce to 
the bottome, and so leauing the grosser part, draweth vp 
the thinner, whereby it commeth to passe, that the waters 
appeare muddy, and of a leadish colour, corrupted both in 
[/19./] 
smell and taste. Waters that are taken neere vnto the sea-shores, 
or armes of the same, are for the most part corrupt, 
and of a stinking smell, and vnpleasant sauour, and therefore 
naught and vnwholsome for mans body. 
 
[}Whether Snow waters be in goodnesse matchable 
to riuer water?}] 
 
NO, and the reason is, because that while the snow is 
ingendred, the thinner part of the matter, is (as it 
were) pressed forth of the cold, and conuerted into clowds, 
the grosser part remaineth, and is turned into snow: wherof 
it commeth, that snow-waters are grosse and ouer cold, 
and therfore hurtful to mans bodie; for they cause rheumes, 
and greatly hurt the sinewes. Moreouer, they breed spleneticke 
[^p.11^] 
passions, by causing the spleene to grow great, they 
confound the breast and liuer, cause asthma's, and fill the 
stomacke with flateous crudities: wherefore the vse therof, 
especially in elder yeeres, doth vndoubtedly induce exitiall 
affects to the sinewes, ioynts and bowels. But snow water 
is, of some in these daies, greatly esteemed of, to coole 
and extinguish thirst. Perhaps, in hot countries, and in hot 
seasons, it may bee for some bodies agreeable; but in our 
northerne countries, it is at no hand to be allowed, except 
to such as are impensiuely hot; for it is onely profitable to 
a stomacke that estuateth with heat. 
 
[}Whether in waters that are naturally warme, which wee call hot 
Bathes, it be healthfull for healthy men to bathe?}] 
 
WAters naturally hot, and of a medicinable faculty, 
such as are our famous bathes of Bathe, are of singular 
force, not onely against diseases gotten by cold, or 
proceeding from a cold and moyst cause, but also bring in 
time of health, exceeding comfort and profit, to all cold, 
moyst, and corpulent bodies: for they open the pores, 
resolue, attenuate, digest, consume, and draw forth superfluities, 
and withall, strongly heat and dry the whole habit 
of the body. They are of excellent efficacie against all diseases 
of the head and sinewes, proceeding of a cold and 
moyst cause, or of a cold only, or moyst only, as rheumes, 
palsies, epilepsies, lethargies, apoplexies, cramps, deafnesse, 
forgetfulnesse, trembling, or weaknesse of any member, 
aches and swellings of the ioynts, &c. They also greatly 
profit windie and hydropicke bodies, the paine and 
swelling of any part of the bodie, so that it proceede not 
from an hot cause, the sluggish & lumpish heauinesse of the 
bodie, numnesse of any member, paine in the loynes, the 
gout, especially the Sciatica, cold tumors of the milt and 
liuer, the yellow Iaundice in a bodie plethoricke or phlegmaticke. 
[^p.12^] 
They are also very profitable for them that 
haue their lungs annoyed with much moisture, because 
they consume and drie vp that moisture: and to make 
slender such bodies as are too grosse, there is nothing more 
effectuall then the often vse of these waters. Wherefore let 
those that feare obesitie, that is, would not waxe grosse, be 
carefull to come often to our Bathes: for by the often vse 
of them, according as the learned Physition shall direct, 
they may not onely preserue their health, but also keepe 
their bodies from being vnseemingly corpulent. They 
are also singularly profitable to women, for they helpe 
them of barrennesse, and of all diseases and imperfections 
of the matrice, proceeding of a cold and moyst cause. 
They also cure all diseases of the skin, as scabs, itch, old 
sores &c. All which to be true, we daily finde with admiration 
to the exceeding great comfort of many, who 
with deplored diseases, and most miserable bodies resort 
to our baths in Bathe, and are there, by the helpe of wholsome 
physicke aud vertue of the Baths, through the blessing 
of Almighty God, recouered to their former health. 
[/20/] 
But hot bathes, to bodies naturally hot and dry, are generally 
hurtfull, and so much the more, as the bodie is drier 
and the bathe hotter, because it distempereth and consumeth 
the very habit of the bodie, and maketh it carraine-like 
leane. Wherefore seeing that naturall bathes are not 
indifferently agreable to euery constitution, I doe aduise 
that not any one goe into them rashly, or vpon an approperous 
iudgement, but that he be first aduised by some 
faithfull, iudicious and expert Physition, and to him expose 
the state of his bodie, whereby he may vnderstand, 
whether or no it may be expedient for him to attempt the 
same. And whereas in Bathe there are diuers bathes, and 
they differing in their heate, he must also from the learned 
Physition be directed in which to bathe; neither must he 
onely vnderstand which Bathe to vse, as most conuenient 
for his present state of bodie, but also when and how often 
to vse the same. Besides this, he must (according as his 
[^p.13^] 
state of bodie shall require) be purged before he enter into 
the bathe, and be also directed in other things how to order 
himselfe, before he goe into the bathe, while he is in the 
bathe, and after that he is come out of the bathe, and when 
he leaueth the bathe. And must also, in the intermitting 
times of bathing and sweating, take such physicke, as his 
disease and present state of bodie shall require. The neglect 
of all these, or of some of them, either through ignorance 
or voluntarie wilfulnes, may be the cause that some that 
take great paines to come to the bathes, are not by them 
healed of their infirmities, but oftentimes neuer returne to 
their homes againe; or if they doe; it is most commonly 
with new diseases, and the olde worse then euer they were: 
Whereas many of a generous and religious vnderstanding, 
vsing the true helpes of physicke with the bathes, are of 
their diseases perfectly cured. And here I exhort the Physitions, 
in regard that the Bathes, which proceed from Sulphur, 
or from it, take their chiefest vertue and strength (as 
our Bathes in Bathe doe) doe weaken and subuert the stomacke, 
especially of some bodies, that they haue an honest 
care to corroborate the same by such meanes as shall be 
best fitting for the present estate of the bodie. Here also 
I aduertise such as in the declining or fall of the yeare, 
which we call the Autumne, shall for the health of their 
bodies repaire to our Bathes, that they deferre not their 
comming till the middle of September or after, as many 
ignorantly doe; but that they rather be there by the end 
of August, that they may haue the commoditie of the 
Bathes before the aire grow to be too cold for bathing in 
hot Bathes, as commonly it is in October, especially toward 
the end thereof: for if they shall make vse of the 
Bathes when the aire is cold and moist, or very inclinable 
thereunto, they shall receiue (the pores of the bodie being 
open by reason of the efficacie of the Bathe) farre greater 
hurt then commoditie. But perhaps some out of an ignorant 
timorousnes will obiect, that to come to the Bathes 
at the end of August is too soone vpon the Dogge-dayes. 
[^p.14^] 
Herein they are more scrupulous, then iudicious; but to 
yeeld them satisfaction, I answer, besides the alteration of 
seasons from their ancient temperature, in this decrepit age 
of the world, that though the middle part of the day, about 
the beginning of September, shall be hot; yet the mornings 
and euenings, which are the times for bathing, are 
rather cold or declining to a temperature, and the heat of 
the day following vpon bathing, is that which we specially 
respect for the health of our Patients, for whom we approue 
the vse of the Bathes. And verily, whosoeuer shall 
but consider the great variablenes, and inconstant disposition 
of the Spring, from its ancient temperature, especially 
of later yeares, must (in my opinion) confesse, that the 
moneth of September is most commonly, in regard of the 
disposition of the aire, so fit for bathing in hot Bathes, as 
any in the Spring. Wherefore such as for the health of 
their bodies repaire to our Bathes, shall, if they be there by 
the end of August, receiue a double commoditie: For 
first, they shall haue the whole moneth of September very 
conuenient for bathing, and physicke also, as shall be 
occasion, yea and part of October, as the disposition 
of the aire shall permit: next, sufficient time for their returne 
to their homes, before the aire grow too cold, or 
the weather distempered: for to expose their bodies to 
trauell in foule and intemperate weather, vpon the vse of 
the Bathes, induceth, (the pores being open) besides feuerous 
distemperatures and ventosities, oftentimes very 
great and dolorous affects of the braine, breast, sinewes, and 
ioynts. Thus much I thought fitting to aduise concerning 
the vse of our Bathes, and the rather that such as preposterously 
vse them, may not erroniously detract from 
the admirable vertues of them. 
 
Now I will in one thing giue my aduise to the Gouernors 
of the place, in which I shall nothing doubt of their 
vnanimous assent, as also of the approbation of all truly 
generous and religious Gentlemen and Gentlewomen, 
that shall for the health of their bodies resort thither, 
[^p.15^] 
which is, that the immodest custome of men and women 
promiscuously at one time going into the Bathes, may be 
reformed, which (in my iudgement) may with no lesse fitnes, 
then decencie easily be effected. For whereas there 
are foure publique Bathes for strangers to bathe in, (of 
which the Kings Bathe is the hottest, and it is for largenes 
and efficacie a kingly Bathe indeed: next vnto it for efficacie 
of heat is the hot Bathe, and the Bathe that is adioyning 
to the Kings Bathe now called the Queenes Bathe: 
these two Bathes are neere of one temperature. The 
Crosse Bathe is for heat the mildest; it is very temperately 
warme: the vse of this Bathe may, by the aduise of a discreet 
Physition, sometimes be very profitably admitted 
euen to hot and drie bodies) I would; that men onely vse 
the Kings Bathe one day, and women another, that all occasion 
of offence might thereby be remoued: and because 
the Crosse Bathe, and Hot Bathe are neere togither, I 
would that the day that men vse the Crosse Bathe, women 
vse the Hot Bathe, and the day that women vse the Crosse 
Bathe, men vse the Hot Bathe: which order may be likewise 
obserued in the vse of the Kings Bathe, and of the 
other adioyning to it. For by this meanes such as please, 
or rather shall be so aduised by their Physition, may without 
all offence, vse one Bathe or another euery day. 
 
But perhaps some will obiect against me, that they came 
far, and with great expense to seeke their health at the 
Bathes, and therefore that I doe them great wrong to seeke 
to bar them of the vse of the Kings Bath euery second day. 
 
To whom I answer; that not the immoderate and preposterous 
vse of the Bathes, (for that is pernicious) but the 
tempestiue and moderate vse of them doth acquire their 
health: for to vse the Kings Bathe oftner then euery second 
day, and to sweat 2, or 3 houres vpon the bathing, 
as shall by the aduise of the learned Physition be thought 
meete, for the particular state and constitution of the bodie, 
besides other fitting courses of physicke, is more, if 
you rightly weigh the great heat and efficacie of the Bathe, 
[^p.16^] 
then in any state or constitution of bodie can be well allowed, 
except perhaps in a few, that shall be of a very cold and 
moist temperature, for whom there may be a toleration. 
Now by that which I haue written of our Bathes of Bathe, 
it may plainely vnto all men appeare, of what excellent 
efficacie they are, if they be rightly and iudiciously vsed: 
and seeing that in the true vse of them, there are many 
things, as I haue partly before touched, to be considered; 
I doe therefore againe aduise all such as are respectiue of 
their health, that they enterprise not the vse of them 
without the counsell of some honest and learned 
Physition; which if they doe, 
the incommodum may be maius 
commodo. 
And so I conclude this Introduction. 
 
[^p.17^] 
[}OF THE DIVERS 
kindes of Bread. 
 
SECT. I. 
Whether Bread that is made of the middle and purest part of 
the meale not separated, be the best and wholsomest?}] 
 
AMong the things which serue for meate, 
I may with very good right giue the 
first place vnto bread, for it is the simplest 
nourishment, and to our nature 
very familiar: if it be well made and 
prepared, the nourishment which it 
yeeldeth is very substantiall and exceeding 
good. But the vertue and goodnes of the bread is 
to be taken from the nature of the graine, and manner of 
preparation. Concerning the preparation, I will onely 
touch it a litle hereafter, where I will shew the properties, 
that ought to be in the best and wholsomest bread. And 
whereas there are diuers sorts of graine wherewith bread 
may be made, yet we most chiefly vse three, Wheat, Rie, 
and Barly, for we neuer vse Beanes, or Otes, except in a 
very great scarcitie of the former. For Bread made of 
Beanes is very dry, by reason whereof it is brittle, vnpleasant, 
and hard to digest, it can in no wise be wholsome, 
for it filleth the bodie full of winde, and is voide of any 
good alimentall iuyce. Of Oates in Wales, and some 
[/21./] 
of the Northerne Shires of England, they make bread, 
especially in manner of Cakes, which kinde of bread is of 
light digestion, but windie, and yeeldeth a weake nourishment 
to the bodie: while it is new, it is meetly pleasant, 
[^p.18^] 
but after a few dayes it waxeth dry and vnsauoury: it is a 
bread of light nourishment, and (in my opinion) not 
agreable for men, especially for such as haue not bin from 
their youth accustomed thereunto. But these and the 
like sorts of bread, I separate from this Treatise, both because 
that in regard of our great plenty of Wheat, Rie, and 
Barley, it is lawfull euen for our poore people to make of 
them, or of the mingling of them, bread abundantly; as 
also, because that other sorts of bread are with vs growne 
out of vse, wherefore of these onely will I entreat. Of 
these three, the bread which is made of Wheat is by reason 
of its moderate temperature, the best and worthiest 
of praise, for it is easily digested, and very strongly nourisheth 
the bodie; but it is purer or impurer, according to 
the finenes or coursenes of the flower whereof it is made. 
For of the meale there are foure parts: Pollen, Simila, Secundarium, 
and Furfures. 
 
Pollen is the purest part of the meale, that is, the finest 
part of the flower; of this is made the whitest and purest 
bread, very profitable for thin, weake, loose, and extenuated 
bodies; but not so commendable for those that 
are healthy and strong, and therefore if any such vse it, they 
are more curious then iudicious. 
 
Simila is that part of the meale, which is the meane betweene 
the finest part of the flower and the coursest, which 
is called Secundarium of this togither. With the finest part 
of the flower is made the wholsomest and best nourishing 
bread, and it is in greatest vse among the better sort of 
people. 
 
Secundarium is that part of the meale, whereof yeomanbread 
[/22./] 
is made, which some call second bread. This bread 
because it hath in it the finer part of the bran, doth not 
giue to the bodie so great nor so good nourishment as the 
former; but it quickly descendeth from the stomacke, and 
maketh the bodie soluble, and therefore sometimes good 
for such as are wont to be costiue; and if a quantitie of 
Rie flower be added to it, there will be made of them both 
[^p.19^] 
an yeoman-bread, for strong and healthy bodies very 
conuenient. 
 
Bread made onely of the brannie part of the meale, 
[/23./] 
which the poorest sort of people vse, especially in time of 
dearth and necessitie, giueth a very bad and excrementall 
nourishment to the bodie: it is well called panis canicarius, 
because it is more fit for dogs then for men. But if the 
grossest part of the bran be separated by a Searce, and Rie 
flower, or else Barley flower and Rie flower togither be 
added to that which is sifted from the grossest bran, there 
[/24./] 
will be made a browne houshold bread agreable enough 
for labourers. Sometimes onely the grosser part of the 
bran is by a Searse separated from the meale, and a bread 
made of that which is sifted, called in some places, One 
way bread, wholsome enough, and with some in very familiar 
vse: it nourisheth lesse then that which is made of 
purer flower; but by reason of some part of the bran 
which is conteined in it, it doth sooner descend and moue 
the belly, for there is a kinde of abstersiue facultie in the 
braine: wherefore, for those that are healthy, and yet subiect 
to costiuenesse, and also for such as would not waxe 
grosse, it is most profitable. 
 
In time of scarsitie of corne, bread is also wont to be 
made of the whole meale, from which the bran is not separated, 
[/25./] 
and it is well called panis confusaneus, because all 
the meale, no part thereof being by sifting taken away, goeth 
into the making of the bread: this bread speedily 
descendeth and yet it is troublesome to the stomack, and 
filleth the belly with excrements. 
 
Bread made of Rie is in wholesomnes much inferiour 
[/26./] 
to that which is made of wheat: it is cold, heauy, and hard 
to digest, and by reason of the massiuenes thereof, very 
burdensome to the stomacke. It breedeth a clammie, 
tough, and melancholicke iuyce; it is most meete for rusticke 
labourers, for such by reason of their great trauaile, 
haue commonly very strong stomacks. Rie in diuers 
places is mixed with wheat, and a kinde of bread made 
[^p.20^] 
[/27./] 
of them, called Messeling bread, which is wholesomer 
then that which is made of Rie, for it is lesse obstructiue, 
nourisheth better, and lesse filleth the bodie with excrements. 
 
Some vse to make bread, especially in the times of scarsitie, 
of Rie and Barley mixed togither; but this kinde of 
bread is more excrementall then the former, yet better 
then that which is onely made of Barley: for Barley bread 
[/28./] 
is lesse nourishing then Rie bread; it is cold and dry, hard 
of concoction, and breedeth not a tough iuyce, but rather 
somewhat clensing, and therefore it hath speedier distribution 
through the bodie, then Rie bread hath; but it giueth 
a dry and excrementall nourishment to the bodie, filleth it 
with winde, and greatly hurteth the stomacke. 
 
[}How many properties ought there to be in the best and 
wholsomest Bread?}] 
 
[/29./] 
SEuen: The first is that it be made of the best wheat; 
for according to the difference of the wheat, is the 
goodnes or badnes of the bread. That wheat is best which 
is of yellow colour, of a close and compacted substance, 
cleane, weighty, and so hard, that it will not easily be broken 
betweene the teeth: contrary to this is that which is 
of a laxe and open substance, such as is commonly growen 
in low and vliginous places. And if wheat that hath all 
the aforesaid properties cannot conueniently be had, yet 
let it be such as is of an hard compacted substance, and 
weighty: for it is generally to be obserued in euery kinde 
of wheat, that the better and wholsomer bread is alwaies 
made of the weightier and more compacted wheat, and 
the worser of that which is more light and open. 
 
[/30./] 
The second propertie is, that it be fitly leauened; for 
the leauen causeth the bread to be of thin parts, by reason 
whereof, it is more easily digested, and breedeth better 
[^p.21^] 
humors. But the leauen must be fitly proportioned, because 
common experience proueth in mens stomacks, that 
bread much leauened is of heauy digestion, and of no 
commendable nourishment. All the ancient Physitions 
deemed vnleauened bread to be very vnwholesome, because 
it is of hard digestion and breedeth obstructiue humors. 
Howbeit we daily proue that no bread is lighter of 
digestion, or giueth better nourishment to the bodie, then 
our manchet, which is made of fine flower of wheat, hauing 
in it no leauen, but in steede thereof a little barme. 
But by this I reiect not the vse of leauen, to the making 
either of manchet bread or of greater loaues, as a thing 
very profitable and good; but I leaue it as a thing indifferent, 
and euery good housewife to her owne custome 
herein: onely I aduertise, that the leauen and barme be 
fitly proportioned. And by the former rule of the ancient 
Physitions, all sorts of cakes, simnels, wafers, fritters, 
pancakes, and such like, are to be reiected, if they 
bee not well corrected with some other good ingrediences. 
 
The third propertie is, that it be temperately seasoned 
[/31./] 
with salt, for bread ouer sweat is of hard digestion, and 
breedeth obstructiue humors, and bread ouer salt is a 
dryer, and breedeth aduste and melancholicke humors. 
But that which consisteth in a meane betweene both, is 
pleasant to the taste and more acceptable to the stomacke. 
 
The fourth propertie is, that it be light, and somewhat 
[/32./] 
open, and such, although it be great in shew, yet it is of 
small weight, and therefore easily digested, and easily distributed 
from the stomacke. 
 
The fift propertie is, that it be very well wrought and 
[/33./] 
laboured with the hands and brake, and not ouer-liquored, 
as many negligent and slothfull seruants oftentimes doe, 
to saue that labour; for then it is heauy to the stomacke, 
and breedeth clammie and naughty iuyce. 
 
The sixth propertie is, that it be well baked; for bread 
[/34./] 
that is ill baked, whether too much or too litle, is of ill 
[^p.22^] 
digestion, of ill distribution, and therefore very troublesome 
to the stomacke. 
 
[/35./] 
The last propertie is, that it be not eaten ouer new, as 
while it is hot, nor when it is stale and growne dry. It must 
not be eaten hot, because it will fluctuate in the stomacke, 
slowly descend, oppilate, and abundantly breede winde in 
the bowels, by reason of a vaporous humiditie that is in it 
while it is hot, which in cooling euaporateth: and because 
it furneth vpward, it causeth drowsinesse, confoundeth the 
senses, and very greatly hurteth the braine it selfe. Wherefore 
bread while it is hot, although it be to some mens pallats 
very pleasant and acceptable, yet it is to the bodie vnprofitable, 
because it breedeth flatulent and obstructive 
humors. In like manner, bread that is stale and growne 
dry, because it hath lost his naturall temperature, is vnprofitable; 
for it is hardly digested, and yeeldeth litle nourishment, 
and the same not good, but melancholick. Wherefore 
it followeth, that the bread ought not to be too olde, 
nor too new: and to auoide all the aforesaid discommodities, 
I hold; that the bread ought to be kept the space of 
24 houres, or at least one night in some cold place after 
the baking, before it be eaten; and also that it be not aboue 
two or three dayes olde in the summer, especially if it be 
made in the forme of manchet or smaller loaues; nor aboue 
foure or fiue dayes olde in the winter; for by how 
much more it is dryed and indurated, by so much the 
worse it nourisheth, and is of harder concoction. 
 
[}Whether Bisket Bread yeeld to the bodie any profitable 
nourishment.}] 
 
BIsket bread is onely profitable for the phlegmaticke, 
and them that haue crude and moist stomacks, and 
that desire to grow leane, because it is a very great dryer; 
and therefore let such as are cholericke and melancholicke 
[^p.23^] 
beware how they vse it. The like may be said of the crust 
of bread; for it is also very hardly digested, and breedeth 
choler adust and melancholike humors. Wherefore let 
the vtmost and harder part of the crust be chipped away, 
of which let such as are by nature cholericke and melancholicke 
haue speciall care. But it is good for the phlegmaticke, 
& for such as haue ouer-moist stomacks, and yet 
healthy, and desirous to grow leane, to eat crusts after 
meat, the very superficiall and burnt part of them onely 
chipped away, because they presse downe the meate, 
and strengthen the mouth of the stomacke, 
by drying vp the superfluous moisture 
of it. 
 
[^p.24^] 
[}OF THE DIVERS 
kindes of Drinke. 
 
SECT. II. 
Whether it be wholsome for northerne people, that inhabit cold 
countries, to drinke water at their meales, in steed of Beere?}] 
 
ALthough Water bee the most ancient 
drinke, and to those that inhabit hot 
countries, profitable and familiar, by 
reason of the parching heat of the 
ambient aire, which doth exceedingly 
heat, inflame, and dry their bodies; 
yet to such as inhabit cold countries, 
and especially not accustomed therunto, 
nor the constitution impensiuely hot, requiring and 
forcing the same, it is by the contrarie, in no wise agreeable: 
for it doth very greatly deiect their appetite, destroy 
the naturall heat, and ouerthrow the strength of the stomacke, 
and consequently, confounding the concoction, is 
the cause of crudities, fluctuations, and windinesse in the 
bodie. 
 
[}What, in generall are the commodities of wine?}] 
 
MAnie and singular are the commodities of wine: for 
it is of it selfe, the most pleasant liquour of all other, 
and was made from the beginning to exhilarate the heart 
of man. It is a great encreaser of the vitall spirits, and a 
wonderfull restorer of all powers and actions of the bodie: 
it verie greatly helpeth concoction, distribution, and nutrition, 
[^p.25^] 
mightily strengtheneth the naturall heat, openeth 
obstructions, discusseth windinesse, taketh away sadnesse, 
and other hurts of melancholy, induceth boldnesse and 
pleasant behauiour, sharpeneth the wit, abundantly reuiueth 
feeble spirits, excellently amendeth the coldnesse of 
old age, and correcteth the tetrick qualities which that age 
is subiect vnto; and to speake all in a word, it maketh a 
man more couragious and liuely, both in minde and body. 
These are in generall the commodities of wine, which are 
so to be vnderstood, as that a meane and frugality bee had 
in the vse of it, not intemperancie and drunkennesse; otherwise 
what can be more hurtfull then wine, seeing that the 
same immoderately taken, destroyeth the life aud prosperous 
[/36./] 
health, disturbeth the reason, dulleth the vnderstanstanding, 
confoundeth the memorie, causeth the lethargie, 
palsie, trembling of the hands, and a generall weaknesse 
of the sinewes. Wherefore let wine bee moderately vsed, 
that neither distillation, nor inflammation, nor exiccation, 
or drunkennesse follow; for if it be taken beyond measure, 
it will not be a remedie and comfort for the strength, but 
rather a poyson and vtter ouerthrow. But seeing that there 
are diuers sorts of wine, and the same not indifferently agreeable 
to euerie age and constitution, I will therefore 
(that euery man may make choyse of those wines that are 
best agreeable for him) speake of the particular differences 
of them, according to their seuerall qualities, especially of 
such wines, as with vs are most vsuall. 
 
White-wine and Rhenish-wine, doe least of all wines 
[/37./] 
heat and nourish the bodie, they consist of a thin and penetrating 
substance, wherefore they are quickly concocted, 
and very speedily distributed into all parts of the body, 
and therefore they lesse annoy the head, then any other vrine. 
They cut and attenuate grosse humors, prouoke vrine, 
and cleanse the bloud by the reines. They moysten 
the bodie, and canse sleepe, mitigate the paines of the head, 
proceeding from a great heat of the stomacke, but especially 
the Rhenish-wine. They are most accommodate for 
[^p.26^] 
those that are young, for hot constitutions, for hot countries, 
and for the hot times of the yeere, and for those that 
would bee leane and slender: They are lesse hurtfull, for 
such as are feuorous, then other wines are; but being well 
mixed with water, they are very profitable for all hot distemperatures. 
It is verie expedient to drinke White-wine 
or Rhenish-wine in the morning fasting, and also a little 
before dinner and supper, with a limmon [/38./] macerated 
therein, and the iuyce pressed forth, especially for them 
that haue hot and drie stomackes, or are subiect to obstructions 
of the stomacke, of the mesaraicke veines, of the liuer, 
and of the reines: for it greatly refresheth an hot and 
dry stomacke, stirreth vp the appetite, cleanseth away the 
sl mie superfluities of the stomacke, mesaraicke veines, and 
other obstructiue matter in the passages, by way of vrine. 
But it is very hurtfull to drinke White-wine or Rhenish-wine 
with meat, or at the meales, or presently after meale; 
except for such as are affected with too much astriction of 
[/39./] 
the stomacke, because they deturbe the meats from the stomacke, 
before they are concocted, and so cause them to 
passe crude and indigested, whereby it commeth to passe, 
that the whole bodie doth greatly abound with flateous 
crudities. 
 
White and Rhenish wines are very pernicious for such 
as are rheumaticke, and subiect to fluxion of humors into 
the ioynts, or other parts of the body, and therfore let such 
very carefully eschew the vse of them. 
 
[/40./] 
Claret wine is very neere of a temperate nature, and 
somewhat of an astringent faculty, as the sauour of it 
doth plainely shew: it breedeth good humours, greatly 
strengtheneth the stomacke, quencheth thirst, stirreth vp 
the appetite, helpeth the concoction, and exhilarateth the 
heart, it is most profitable for them that are of an hot constitution, 
for young men, and for them that haue hot stomackes, 
which it doth excellently refresh. But it greatly 
offendeth them that are of a cold and moyst constitution, 
that abound with crude humours, and that are subiect to 
[^p.27^] 
distillations from the braine, especially if it bee taken immoderately, 
or not with meat: for it, being taken with excesse, 
or out of meale, is of all wines (in regard of the rheumaticke 
nature of it) the most pernicious: and therefore 
let such as are subiect to cold and rheumaticke diseases, beware 
how they vse it. But verily, it being moderately taken 
at meales, it is for temperate bodies, so as it be a pure 
and quicke wine, scarsely inferiour to any of the regall 
wines of France: and for such as are inclined vnto heat, so 
they are not much subiect vnto rheumes, excelleth both 
them, and all other: for it notably rectifieth the stomack, 
and wonderfully comforteth the same, breedeth most 
healthfull bloud, and acceptable to the heart. It is of all 
wines the best for cholericke bodies, and the worst for 
phlegmaticke. 
 
Sacke is compleatly hot in the third degree, and of thin 
[/41./] 
parts, and therefore it doth vehemently and quickly heat 
the bodie: wherefore the much and vntimely vse of it, 
doth ouer-heat the liuer, inflame the bloud, and exciccate 
the radicall humour in leane and dry bodies: wherefore 
to them that are young, and all such as are of an hot and 
dry temperature, it is greatly hurtfull. But if it bee moderately 
taken of them, for whom it is agreeable, it maketh 
the stomacke strong to digest, helpeth the distribution of 
the meats vnto all parts of the body, concocteth crude humours, 
and consumeth the excrementall; and to speake all 
in a word, it mightily strengtheneth all the powers and faculties 
of the bodie. It is most accommodate for old men, 
for grosse men, for stomackes that are weake, and full of 
cold and crude humours, and for all that are of a cold constitution, 
and also for cold countries, and for the cold and 
moyst seasons of the yeere. It is cheifely to bee drunken 
after the eating of meats of grosse substance, and such as 
[/42./] 
consist of an excrementall moysture, as Porke, fresh fish, &c. 
 
Some affect to drinke Sacke with sugar, and some without, 
and vpon no other ground, as I thinke, but that, as it is 
best pleasing to their pallates. I will speake what I deeme 
[^p.28^] 
thereof, and I thinke I shall well satisfie such as are iudicious. 
Sacke taken by it selfe, is very hot and very penetratiue, 
being taken with sugar, the heat is both somewhat 
allayed, and the penetratiue quality thereof also retardated. 
Wherefore let this be the conclusion: Sacke taken 
by it selfe, without any mixture of sugar, is best for 
them that haue cold stomackes, and subiect to the obstructions 
of it, and of the mesaraicke veines. But for them 
that are free from such obstructions, and feare lest that the 
drinking of Sacke, by reason of the penetratiue faculty of 
it, might distemper the liuer, it is best to drink it with sugar, 
and so I leaue euerie man that vnderstandeth his owne state 
of bodie, to bee his owne director heerein. 
 
[/43./] 
Malmesey is in operation very hot, and by reason that 
it is sweet, it nourisheth very much, and therefore the vse 
of it is exceeding profitable for old, cold, weake, and decayed 
bodies, for it mightily cherisheth the naturall heat, 
and fortifieth all the powers of the bodie. It is conuenient 
for all cold bodies; but for such as are hot, it is greatly hurtfull, 
because it is very easily conuerted into red choler. It 
killeth wormes in children, by a certaine naturall and hidden 
property, if they drinke it fasting. 
 
[/44./] 
Muskadell is euen in all respects equall to Malmesey, 
and therefore if that bee wanting, this may well supply 
the turne: the vse of it is good for old and cold bodies; but 
very hurtfull to such as are of an hot temperature. 
 
[/45./] 
Bastard is in vertue somewhat like to Muskadell, and 
may also insteed therof be vsed: it is in goodnesse so much 
inferiour to Muskadell, as the same is to Malmesey, the 
vse thereof is likewise hurtfull to young and hot bodies. 
 
[/46./] 
Canarie-wine, which beareth the name of the Ilands 
from whence it is brought, is of some termed a Sacke, with 
this adiunct sweet, but yet very improperly, for it differeth 
not onely from Sacke, in sweetnesse and pleasantnesse of 
taste, but also in colour and consistence, for it is not so 
white in colour as Sacke, nor so thin in substance; wherefore 
it is more nutritiue then Sacke, and lesse penetratiue. 
[^p.29^] 
It is best agreeable to cold constitutions, & for old bodies, 
so that they bee not too impensiuely cholericke, for it is a 
wine that will quickly inflame, and therefore very hurtfull 
vnto hot and cholerick bodies, especially if they be young. 
 
Tent is a grosse nutritiue wine, and is very quickly concocted 
[/47./] 
into bloud, but the same is oppilatiue, and therfore 
it is very hurtfull for such as are subiect to obstructions. It 
is fit for them that are extenuated and weake, and stand in 
neede of much nourishment, and the same somewhat astrictiue. 
 
Greeke wine, which is of a blackish red colour, is of a 
[/48./] 
very temperate nature, hotter then Claret, and sweeter, yet 
with some pleasing sharpnesse adioyning, it breedeth very 
good bloud, reuiueth the spirits, comforteth the stomack 
and liuer, and exceedingly cheereth and strengtheneth the 
heart. For aged people, and all such as are naturally of a 
weake state of body, it is most profitable. 
 
Wine of Orleance is stronger then any other French 
[/49./] 
wine, and very pleasant withall in taste: it is for goodnesse 
scarsely, or not at all, inferiour to Muskadell: It is hurtfull 
to the cholericke, and all such as haue hot liuers and weak 
braines, for it doth quickly ouer-heat the liuer, and assault 
the head. But for other bodies, especially if they encline 
to a cold constitution, and for cold and weake stomackes, 
there is not a better wine, if there be so good. For it doth 
not onely comfort the stomacke, help the concoction, and 
viuifie the spirits, by reason of a generous heat in it, but also 
furthereth the distribution of the meats, and consequently 
a good nutrition through the mediocrity of its substance. 
It is very hurtfull to them that are young, and that are of 
an hot and cholericke temperature; but to the aged and 
phlegmaticke very profitable. 
 
There are also other French wines (would to God they 
[/50./] 
were so common as Claret) which for pleasantnesse of 
taste, mediocrity of colour, substance and strength, doe for 
most bodies, for ordinary vse with meats, far excell other 
wines: such are cheifly Vin de Coussy, and d'Hai, which to 
[^p.30^] 
the Kings and Peeres of France are in very familiar vse. 
They notably comfort the stomacke, help the concoction 
and distribution of the meats, and offend not the head 
with vaporous fumes. They are Regall Wines indeede, 
and very conuenient for euery season, age, and constitution, 
so they might be had. 
 
[/51./] 
Red wine is of an austere sharpe taste, of an astringent 
faculty, and therefore onely good for physicke vses, to stop 
cholericke vomitings, and fluxes of the belly. There are 
also other sorts of wines, altering according to the diuers 
nature of the vine, soyle and aire, whose differences may 
by their colour, taste and consistence, easily bee discerned. 
And heere I would haue you generally to obserue in the 
vse of wines, that those wines, which are more milde, temperate, 
and least assaulting the head, are more wholsome 
for the body: and those more hurtfull, that are strong, 
acute and vaporous, especially if there bee not a meane in 
the vse of them, and a respect also of the age, complexion, 
and time of the yeere. 
 
[/52./] 
Moreouer, it is to be vnderstood, that wines differ very 
much, according to their age: for wines that are new, are 
vnwholsome, and the more new, the more vnwholsome, 
for they haue in them little heat, and consist of a grosse 
and excrementall substance; wherefore they doe not help, 
but much hinder the concoction and distribution, cause 
fluctuations in the body, and cholick-torments, and abundantly 
breede obstructions of the liuer, milt and reines. 
But their superfluous and excrementall moysture is, in 
processe of time, concocted and ouercome of the heat, and 
then they become more hot, more pure, and much more 
wholsome. 
 
[/53./] 
And heere it is to be obserued, that all wines haue not 
the same time of continuance; for there are some, which 
by reason of the weaknesse of their heat, cannot long bee 
kept, as Whitewine, Rhenish wine, and Claret; for these, 
and such like, doe in six or seuen moneths, or within, according 
to the smalnesse of them, attaine vnto the height 
[^p.31^] 
of their goodnesse; and after a yeere, doe begin to decline, 
and lose much of their goodnesse, especially the 
smaller sort of them. But the stronger sorts of wines, as 
Sacke, Muskadell, Malmesey, &c. are best, when they are 
two are three yeares old: for these, by reason of their strong 
heat, doe a long time reserue their perfect vigor. And as 
these wines, being too new, are vnwholsome, so bee they 
also, if they be too old, as when they haue passed foure or 
fiue yeeres, because they heat beyond measure; for the older 
they grow, the more heat they acquire, and in processe 
of time, the siccitie of them is correspondent to their heat. 
Wherefore such wines, are rather meerely to bee reputed 
among medicaments, then aliments, because they haue a 
farre greater faculty of altering the bodie vnto heat and 
[/54./] 
siccity, then they haue of nourishing. The vse of them, especially 
if it be often, is hurtfull to the sinewes, and an enemy 
to procreation, because they dry vp the geniture, perturbe 
the vnderstanding, and by reason of their tart and vehement 
fumes, affect the membranes of the braine with a 
cruell pungitiue paine. They are only, in the way of physicke, 
good for weake and moyst bodies, that are decayed 
of their naturall heat. Wherefore wines that are ouer old, 
or too new, are to bee eschewed; for those doe too much 
heat, and these doe nothing at all, so long as they bee new, 
and are so farre away from helping the concoction, as that 
euen themselues are with difficulty digested. It remaineth 
therefore, that neither the wine which is too new, nor that 
which is too old, but that which is a meane betweene both, 
to be the most wholsome. 
 
