[^Ghesel, John: Rvle of health^] 
 
[}THE RVLE OF 
HEALTH. 
Wherein are contained divers 
instructions for the preservation of 
the life of Man. 
 
Set forth by IOHN GHESEL, 
Physitian, borne in 
HELVETIA; written first by 
him in high Dutch, afterwards 
translated into French, and now 
published in English. 
 
Labilis vt vita est, infirmum est labile corpus, 
Sic tua quæ firment me_[^ORIG. BLURRED^]ra, vereremmus. 
 
ECCLESIAST. 38. 4. 
 
The Lord hath created Medicines 
out of the earth; and he that is wise, will 
not abhorre them. 
 
Anno M.DC. XXXI. 
Ægrotos MeDICIna IVVat sI VIXeris apte. 
 
OXFORD, 
Printed by Iohn Lichfield}] 
 
[^A dedication to the lovers of health omitted.^] 
[^Extract 1, ff. A3r-B4v^] 
 
[^f.A3r^] 
[}The Rule of Health.}] 
 
Temperantia est mater sanitatis. 
Temperance is the mother of 
health. An eminent witnesse 
hereof is that of the wise: Be 
not vnsatiable in any dainty thing, nor 
too greedy vpon meats; for excesse of 
meats bringeth sicknes, and surfetting 
wil turne into choller: by surfetting haue 
many perished; but he that taketh heed, 
prolongeth his life. 
 
[}Of the causes of sicknesses and diseases 
in generall.}] 
 
Wee put it without all question, being 
herein seconded by most sure grou~ds 
of divinity, that had it beene but for the 
fall of our first father Adam, all of vs had 
bin free from corruption, who being 
placed in the highest step of blisfulnesse, 
did not knowe the happinesse he then injoyed, 
and that now we are subiect to 
[^f.A3v^] 
dissolution, and thousands of corporall 
infirmities, which hastily bring on death 
vpon vs. This liablenesse of ours vnto 
corruption the Philosopher speaks of, in 
that to him Omne sublunare est corruptibile; 
all sublunarie things are perishable. 
Therefore doth God and nature it selfe 
continually arouse and stirre vs vp to the 
vse of remedies and lawfull meanes for 
our owne preservation, and to the imployment 
of all diligence for the keeping 
vp of our life, & that by moderatenesse 
of diet, which principally consists 
in sobriety. Optima sanitatis tutela est non 
satiari cibis, & ad labores esse impigrum; 
The best preservation of health is in avoyding 
of surfetting, and idlenesse: for 
want of which we are assaulted so frequently 
with dayly infirmities and diseases, 
which shew themselues, as lightnings 
before thunder, by drousinesse of 
the head, wearinesse of limbs, faintnesse 
after meats, oppression of the stomacke, 
obstructions of body, headach, indisposition 
to appetite, want of sleepe, and 
[^f.A4r^] 
many enormous alterations, nature being 
hindered in her course; together with 
vnusuall sweats, failing of the heart, 
fearefull dreames, much gaping & yawning, 
in truth most evident signes to 
make vs feare, as being certaine presages 
and most commonly the fore-runners of 
dangerous maladies. 
 
And no marvaile, that so frequently 
we are overtaken with such and the like 
mishaps, seing that to satisfie our sensual 
and vnruly appetite, we are so given and 
carried away to all kinds of excesse, specially 
of drinking and variety of meats, 
wherewith we so burthen and load our 
selues, as if we were to make provision 
for our stomacks of I know not how 
long a time, laying about for delicacies, 
things betweene themselues cleane contrary, 
and hurtfull, and full of crudities, 
tending to the destruction and ruine of 
our health. Non est sapientis dicere, non 
putaram. It is no poynt of wisdome to 
say, I was not aware of it. Wherefore 
well may we wonder at the blindnesse 
[^f.A4v^] 
and folly of men, who, not considering 
that little will serue to content nature, 
through a vitious and customary neglecting 
of themselues, having neither appetite 
nor rellish to their meats, giue neverthelesse 
to their stomacke more in 
one day, then it is able to subdue within 
a seve~night; by reason whereof we are so 
tardie and slow in our enterprises and 
callings: so that those two vertues so recomendable, 
I meane sobriety and continencie 
are vtterly changed into intemperance 
and luxurie, the source of all 
manner of vitiousnesse, the losse and vtter 
ruine of our liues. For which cause 
our Saviour so earnestly, bids vs take 
heed, least we be by a suddaine and vntimely 
death surprized: for certainly nothing 
more dulls, and enfeebles the heart 
and all the nobler parts of mans body, 
then this vice of luxurie: nay many a 
time it causes apoplexies and suddaine 
death. A notable example whereof in 
our time will be worthy the observation. 
At Milaine the chiefe Citty of 
[^f.A5r^] 
Lombardie a stately banquet was made 
in the Palace of one of the Nobles of 
O modei; the Master of the feast being about 
thirty yeares of age, then lusty and 
of good health, dyed vpon a suddaine 
sitting at the table with his Guests vpon 
his chaire; who afterwards being vnbowelled, 
his heart was found exceeding 
drie, and black of colour: for a sad remembrance 
of which disaster this noble 
family beares vntill this day in their 
Armes this motto: E stote sobrij, cavete. 
Be sober and wary. The remembrance of 
that miserable downfall of a mountaine 
vpon that rich & wealthy towne of Pleurs 
in the countrie of the Grisons neare 
the Valtoline, which in the middest of 
the intemperant and riotous jollities of 
the inhabitants, was in an instant covered 
therewith, not one of them escaping, 
would make vs tremble, and watch for 
sobrietie. 
 
I haue not yet done with this discourse 
about intempera~ce: to be brief then. Passions 
of the mind, excessiue choller, astonishment, 
[^f.A5v^] 
feares, fearefull thoughts, 
sadnes, drie vp and dismoisten notablely, 
and by little and little spoile and robbe 
those noble spirits of their heat; and also 
thicken & engrosse the radical humours, 
to the great anoyance of memorie and 
reason. No lesse doe we endammage our 
selues by too soone sleeping after meats, 
or betweene meats, chiefly in summer & 
in the sunne. Avoyd idlenes with all diligence; 
vse moderate exercise. The day 
was made to worke in, the night for rest. 
Thus thy body shall recover strengh, thy 
digestion will be perfected and augmented, 
thy spirits comforted. Temperance 
allayes & mitigates all the paines of the 
body, and preserues the naturall heat. 
Whereas contrarily, it forcibly annoyes 
the body, if with full stomacks, we giue 
and force our selues to wantones & pleasure, 
whereby we doe expose our selues 
to greater danger, then we are aware of. 
All variety of meats idoth wonderfully 
hinder the digestion, & sensibly shorten 
and cut off our dayes. The people of Island 
[^f.A6r^] 
come ordinarily to the age of 130. 
and 140. yeares, which liue for the most 
part vpon drie fishes. Many there are, 
who for loue to see their Children grow 
bigge in body and limbs, do so stuff and 
fill the~ vp with meats, as their stomacks 
are not able to conquer; whereas in the 
meanetime for very fondnes of loue, as 
the Ape her whelps, they even choake 
& smother their childrens naturall heat, 
and so become the prime cause of their 
ruine. For hence it is that they are so 
sickly & weake, so pale in their faces, of 
such stupidity & vnaptnes to learne: hence 
all kind of putrefaction, and breeding of 
wormes. Moderata durant. Moderate 
things are durable. Also nothing is more 
hurtfull to the radicall humours, wherein 
the sole root & footing of our life doth 
consist, then this destroying vice of luxurie. 
All of vs do covet lenght of life, & 
desire to be free from sicknesses & diseases, 
without making vse either of Physicall 
Art, or of medicines God hath furnished 
vs withall; meane while blaming 
[^f.A6v^] 
the Physitian for vnskilfullnes in the secret 
operations & works of medicines. 
 
But if you shall weigh with your selfe 
your estate & manner of living, you will 
easily confesse with me & lay the blame 
vpon your selfe for such mischiefes. I do 
not direct my speech only to those who 
are already affected with sicknes, but to 
them rather which yet inioy their good 
and perfect health, to the end they may 
serue themselues with meanes proper to 
maintaine the same. For how pretious & 
deare a treasure it is to be of good health 
we then begin to acknowledg, when it 
once begins to faile & to decay. And 
thus when you shal haue through knowledg 
of those signes and marks, you will 
stand vpon your guard and take good 
heed, least from a small disease you fall 
into a greater & which will proue incurable, 
even to the great hazard of your 
life. A small sparke not looked vnto may 
kindle too great a fire. Doe not we see 
how infinite sorts of sicknesses are caused 
for want of digestion, & feeblenes of 
[^f.A7r^] 
stomack. All superfluities of humours 
cause vapours and winds in the head, 
which being congealed & converted into 
water, become the mother of innumerable 
rheumes & defluxions, which at 
lenght still downe from the head into 
the lungs, not without imminent danger 
of life. Destillatio est mater omnium fere 
morborum, Defluxion "is the mother" of 
most diseases. Defluxions cause coughs, 
rottennesse of the lungs, the dropsie, the 
goute, the jaundis, & all sorts of agues, 
the falling-sicknes, spitting of blood, & 
at last the beginnings of a lingring consumption, 
which will guide you to your 
graue, while you flight the meanes and 
care of recovering; not vnlike the vnskilfull 
Pilot, who then first confesseth himselfe 
faulty, when hee commeth to suffer 
shipwracke. No lesse should old men 
looke to themselues; Senectus enim ipsa 
est morbus; Old age is of it selfe diseasefull 
& sickly. For he that is come to his 
fiftie yeares, is passed the line of Ioviall 
pleasures or strenght of younger yeares 
[^f.A7v^] 
and entred already into Saturne, the continuall 
guide and companion of old age. 
They ought carefully to shun all wantonnesse, 
in regard their radicall humours, 
which stand them in so deare a 
price, are therewith irreparably consumed 
away. Take they a view of their 
constitutions by the vegetables & plants 
which in their season doe bud forth & 
flourish, but in winter are cold and frozen. 
The vitall spirits, being destitute of 
their convenient moistnesse, are extinguished, 
neither can the nourishment of 
the body be duely altered, if the heat of 
the stomack be wanting. Likewise they 
ought to haue a singular care to vse 
meats of good moisture & easy digestio 
therewith to strengthe~ & beare vp their 
age, the youlk of an egge is of as much 
nourishment as weight. But contrary to 
this they eftsoones rule themselues by 
the custome & vnwarrantable practice of 
those that are sick, alwayes more eagerly 
lusting after that which will harme 
them most. So that no wonder it is, if 
[^f.A8r^] 
Physitians come not to their intended 
aime; sith they are not masters over, but 
rather servants to nature. 
 
I find seaven causes or principall reasons, 
wherefore many sick persons are 
not cured by the Art and experience of 
good Physitians. 
 
1. The first of all is the vnsearchable 
will & power of God, mentioned also 
by Hippocrates & others by the name of 
[^GREEK OMITTED^], which the Heathen Physitians attribute 
to heaven it selfe, whose influence 
& airie substance being many times 
bent against man, are an offence vnto 
health, & an occasion of diverse sicknesses. 
But we may more truly ascribe it 
vnto the divine power & justice of God, 
who sometimes thus sets himselfe against 
the curing of diseases, that neither 
the cunning of the Physitian, nor any 
sort of medicines are able to afford any 
help. Who then can raise him vp, whom 
God hath cast downe? Here no Physick 
will be availeable. Prayers must doe all. 
A Physitian is sometimes to haue recourse 
[^f.A8v^] 
to some higher causes, then are to 
be found but in the naturall sphere of 
Physicall rules. For there are some hainous 
vices, which carrie in & drag down 
vpon themselues singular & supernaturall 
inflictions of diseases, the grounds 
and reasons whereof we must leaue 
knowne only to God. In all diseases 
 
Ni Deus affuerit, viresq~ infuderit herbis, 
Quid rogo dictamus, quid panacæa iuvant? 
 
2. The second cause ariseth from the 
indiscretion & selfe-conceite of the sick, 
who single out for themselues such medicines, 
as will not be offensiue to their 
palates, & vse them only in their extremities, 
when all help is in vaine, & they 
scarce haue the time allotted to them, to 
thinke of spirituall medicines for the 
curing of their soules. 
 
3. The third reason is, that after they 
haue vfed some vseful remedies of good 
vertue & operation, by the order and direction 
of some expert Physitians, then 
they begin to alter and serue themselues 
by the advice of some ignorant man or 
[^f.B1r^] 
other, to the great charges of the Patient 
& further incurablenes of the desease. 
Speso in darno se sospira, then all thy rewfull 
sights will be to no purpose. 
 
4. The forth is, because of the too freqent 
vse of letting blood, which not only 
endangers our health and heaps vp sicknesses 
vpo~ vs, but it is also a maine cause 
to shorten & breake our life of, specially 
when it is done without taking advice, 
out of time and season, when age doth 
not admitt of it, without some purgation 
premised, not regarding the waxing 
or waning of the moone, or the complection 
of body, whether or no the sicknes 
require it, & very often without measuring 
the strenght of the Patient. Againe 
in case of vrgent necessity, it being warily 
vndertaken, letting of blood hath saved 
many a mans life in burning feavers 
and the like, as at sundry times I haue 
had the experience in them, that never 
had let blood before. Sanguinem incisa 
væna mittere novum non est; sed nullum 
pene morbum esse, in quo non mittatur 
[^f.B1v^] 
novum est. To let blood is no strange 
thing, but to let blood in every disease is 
very strange. 
 
5. Fiftly, there is a kind of foule disease, 
called most truely the Indian disease, 
now too well knowne in many 
Christian Countries, most dangerous of 
infection; & therefore the more heedfully 
to be avoided. A man may be tainted 
therewith, if he doe but eat or drinke 
with one infected with such a disease, 
much more lying & sleeping in the same 
bed, or sitting downe in the same seate. 
We ought to be circumspect, what manner 
of people we converse with. There 
be other diseases, not much vnlike to 
this. It is a thinge most to be heeded, to 
what Nurces you committ your Children 
for suck; for by the~ I haue knowen 
whole houses or families to be infected. 
I cannot be of many words in this small 
treatise: thus much will suffice for warning. 
For the remoueall and curing of 
those I haue a medicine of admirable 
vertue and power. 
 
[^f.B2r^] 
6. The sixt reason will be: That now 
adayes abundance of people are so much 
busied in dressing vp and keeping handsome 
the outside of their bodies; also in 
scowring and polishing their dishes and 
other such houshold-stuffe, least it take 
rust; but carelesse in purging and clensing 
the inside, and scowring off the inward 
corrosiues, which, farre more then 
rust doth iron, consume and rott the inner 
parts of the body? Vnlesse you clense 
first the old vessell, it will be for no vse, 
though you fill it with never so good a 
liquour. Let but your owne water stand 
a few dayes in the pott, & then see, whether 
a crust will not stick to the sides of 
it. What then doe you thinke will in so 
many yeares stick to the sides of your 
entrails? All such things may in good 
time be prevented, and by meanes of 
Physick expelled out of the body, if an 
expert Physitian timely be sought vnto, 
and made good vse of. There be alwayes 
some reliques left by nature, which it is 
not able to digest or thrust out. 
 
[^f.B2v^] 
7. The seaventh cause or originall 
of diseases proceeds from the mixture 
and falsifying of syrrupes and other Apothecary-wares, 
where many a time 
they take quid pro quo, one thinge for another. 
Honour is due to that Apothecary, 
that labours to satisfie himselfe, 
his neighbour, and his conscience. It is a 
poynt of great moment, that our Apothecaries 
should be provided with fresh, 
as much as is possible, and good wares, 
and they themselues skillfull of their 
compositions, and faithfull in the keeping 
and preparation of them: least the 
Physitian thereby loose his credit, and 
the Patient together with the losse of his 
expences, his hope of recovery. 
 
What remaines now, but that I acquaint 
you with some singular remedies 
and secrets, which it hath pleased our 
good God to communicate vnto me. 
 
1. You shall then be advertised, that I haue a 
plaister of admirable vertue for the breast and 
stomacke, indeed worthy the name of an Arcanum 
a secret. For it is of power and faculty so 
proper and sympathizing with the naturall heat 
[^f.B3r^] 
of the stomack that I assure myself for the experience 
I haue made thereof, that those which vse 
the same, be it for to strenghten or to restraine, to 
restore, & to keep from vomiting; and principally 
those who after a long sicknesse cannot recouer 
their appetite and bodily strength, be they young 
or old, men or women, they shall haue occasion to 
giue God thankes, and highly to commend my 
Art. Experience makes me bold to say so; for 
I neuer applied it to any but with a good and 
happy successe. 
 
Secondly, I haue a Syrrup or golden water, 
which drawes vnto it, as Loadstone doth the 
jron, all hurtfull and vicious humors, from all 
parts of the body, and that with great ease without 
impayring the good humours. So that both 
young infants and men of riper age at the very 
point of death haue beene maruilously relieued 
and comforted thereby. It workes in some by 
sweate, in others by vomiting, by the stoole, or only 
by the vrine. Lastly, where it findes nature 
disposed, it refresheth much the party, and preserues 
him from falling into perillous diseases: 
likewise it purifies the grosser and melancholike 
blood of the Spleene. As for the vse of this Syrrup 
it is most easy, and nothing better or more 
convenient for to take. 
 
3. Againe I haue a present remedy against all 
wind and paines or pinching in the belly, wherewith 
[^f.B3v^] 
young children and infants are grieviously 
vexed; without taking it inwardly into the body, 
but by anoynting only the navill and belly therewithall. 
Many haue laboured to find out such 
a medicine, but hithero in vaine? Also I haue an 
other plaister, which being applied vnto the navill, 
killes all sorts of wormes. 
 
4. Concerning the weake digestion or concoctiue 
facultie of the stomacke, I haue a Composition in 
the forme of a race of Ginger, which is made of 
diuers noble kindes of Aromaticall spices. You 
may take it after supper, and drincke a little 
draught vpon it. It resolues all kinds of windines 
cold and moist, it is a wonderous help to the digestiue 
vertue, procures a good stomacke, takes 
away drought and bitternesse in the mouth; it 
consumes the sharp, and and biting humours. 
 
I cannot but make mention of an other excellent 
composition in forme of a nutmeg, of a most 
singular power for the enliuing and restoring of 
naturall heate and the radicall humours, if taken 
with the yolke of an egge. I chiefely commend 
it to old men. It doth wonderfully refresh 
them. 
 
Also I haue a certaine Manna, which we 
call Manna Persica Artificialis, The which I 
make in forme of a trochiske or a littlerundle: 
you may call it angelicall or cœlestiall for the 
good effects and operations it hath to the good of 
[^f.B4r^] 
those who complaine of a weake memory, and are 
troubled with dimness of sight, or which are of 
a slow imagination. The infirmities doe most 
follow them, who are much giuen to their books, 
by their vncessant labours resolving and consuming 
the choice of their spirits. Memorie also 
perisheth by reason of some long sicknesse, or old 
age, or by raw and cold humors; to the strenghning 
thereof I haue a rare medicine of noble æffects. 
I will be sparing in commending my selfe, 
desiring rather to haue those medicines and 
comfortable helps commended by those, who after 
triall made will, be good witnesses of their severall 
good effects and operations. 
 
In the meane time, whomsoeuer it shall please 
to repaire vnto me, and to treat with me, he shall 
receiue all contentment and satisfaction: and I 
will shew in effect, God assisting, that I haue both 
cured and will cure many maladies, if curable, 
with their convenient & proper antidotes, without 
all danger, having before well thought [^ORIG. BLURRED^] 
the circumstances both of the Macro- & Microcosmus, 
the greater and lesser world. 
 
As for the dispositions and natures of diuerse 
men, feeling the pulse, diversity of vrine, and such 
other, practise hath given me sufficient knowledg. 
I make not profession to cure all diseases 
with one only medicine, as many make vaunt to 
doe, pretending to make of a Fly an Elephant. 
 
[^f.B4v^] 
Non verba, sed rescurant, Not words, but medicines 
cure. 
 
Accidit in puncto quod non speratur in 
Anno: 
Accidit in puncto quod non reparatur in 
Anno 
Melius est considerate agere, quam considerare 
prudenter 
 
Besides these, I haue many other rare inventions 
and secrets; a Catalogue of which I haue 
to shew to those that shall be desirous to knowe 
them. Thus I cease, humbly praying you to 
take in good part this my small treatise; which 
tends to no other end, then to your good and the 
preservation of your health; still resting yours 
in all serviceablenesse at command. 
 
Haue care of your Health. 
Vale, te ipsum ne negligas. 
 
NIL VaLent DIVItIa VnIVersæ, 
NIsI habeas In pretIo abstInentIaM. 
MDCXXXI 
 
