[^Maynwaringe, Everard: Method and means^] 
 
[}THE 
Method and Means 
Of Enjoying 
HEALTH, 
Vigour, and long Life. 
 
Adapting peculiar Courses, for different 
Constitutions; Ages; Abilities; Valetudinary 
States; Individual Proprieties; habituated 
Customs, and Passions of Mind. 
 
Suting Preservatives, and Correctives; to every 
Person, for attainment thereof. 
 
By Everard Maynwaringe, M. D. 
 
Non accepimus brevem vitam, sed fecimus. 
 
LONDON, 
Printed by J. M. for Dorman Newman, at 
the Kings-Arms in the Poultrey, 1683.}] 
 
[^A dedicatory epistle to members of the Inner Temple, a preface to the work and a table of contents omitted.^] 
[^Extract 1, pp. 1-36^] 
 
[^p.1^] 
[}SECT. I. 
The natural Duration; casual 
Abbreviation; and industrious 
Prolongation of Mans 
Life.}] 
 
IN the Primitive Age of 
the World, mans life was 
accounted to be almost 
1000 Years: but after 
the Flood, the Life of 
Man was abbreviated half; 
and none then attained to 
the term of the first Age, except Noah, who 
lived 950 Years. 
 
And, after three Generations from the 
Flood, their lives were reduced to a fourth 
[^p.2^] 
of the Primitive Age; and their lives ordinarily 
exceeded not two hundred Years. 
 
About Moses his time, the Age of Man 
was yet shorter, commonly not exceeding 
120 Years, which also was his Age when he 
died: yet we find upon Record in Sacred 
Writ, and from Ecclesiastical Writers, that, 
after Moses, some lived 240 and 260, yet 
that was rare; but more frequently 120, 
which was then the common Age. 
 
Now the Age of Man is reduced to half 
that: 60 or 70 years we count upon. 
 
But although in general we find this gradual 
declension and abbreviation of mans 
Life, in the several Ages of the World; yet 
we must understand, it was not equally so 
in all parts of the World together; but places 
and climates, and the manner of living of 
a people, cause much difference in the protraction 
of their lives; that, at the same time, 
some people of peculiar places, were longer-lived, 
by a third or fourth part, then others 
of another Climate or Region, as the Northern 
People. 
 
And in colder Countreys, they are longer-lived 
than in the hot Climates; and this 
by reason of the heat that opens the Pores, 
and causeth so great a transspiration, that 
exsiccates and enervates the body: but a 
cooler Air prohibits and restrains such immoderate 
[^p.3^] 
transspiration and exhaustion; 
keeps the spirits vigorous and united; and 
preserves the alimentary Juyces of the body 
from too frequent and immoderate exsudation. 
 
If we examine into the Ages of other 
Creatures, we find little difference in their 
durations, to what they were in the Primitive 
Times, and infancy of the World; who, 
keeping to the Rule of Nature implanted in 
them, do preserve their Beings, and degenerate 
little from the integrity of their Durations, 
allotted to them from the beginning. 
 
Now why Man's days should be thus abbreviated 
and shortned from what they were 
and the term of his life reduced to so short 
a continuance, gradually declining in the 
several Ages of the World; is fit matter to 
inquire into. 
 
The causes of the abbreviation of mans 
life will appear, if we compare the manner 
of our living now, with that of the first Age 
of the World; and from thence, how every 
generation, have worsted themselves by a degenerate 
condition of life, unsutable to the 
institutions of Nature. 
 
And since we must of necessity allow and 
admit of hereditary infirmities, and traductive 
debilities of Nature; we cannot but 
[^p.4^] 
exspect (unless by great reformation of the 
injurious customs and vices of these latter 
Ages) but that we and our posterity, shall degenerate 
yet still into a worse and sooner-fading 
state of life. For, as the principles of 
our Nature are more infirm, tainted, and 
debauched from our Parents and Progenitors, 
than those of former Ages, of more vigour, 
soundness and integrity; so they are 
likewise more propense, and liable worse to 
be depraved and degenerate; and consequently 
of shorter duration and continuance. 
 
Now if we inquire into the condition and 
manner of living of the Antients, comparing 
with the customs and fashion of this Age; we 
shall find so much difference and irregularity 
from the appointment and injunction of 
Nature, that may give full satisfaction to 
the Quæry and matter in hand. 
 
In the infancy of the World, Man provided 
and sought after the necessary requisites 
for his Being, and was contented with a 
competent subsistence which Nature did purely 
require: but in process of time, Man was 
not satisfied with the bare reparations, and 
necessary props of Nature, most wholesome 
and conservative of his Being; but hunted 
after variety and excess, to please and gratifie 
his sensitive Appetite. Thus one Age 
[^p.5^] 
taught another to be irregular and disordered; 
and still dictated novel Inventions to 
the succeeding Generation, to fill up and 
perfect what their Predecessors had prompted 
and begun; whose lives were not long 
enough to lay a compleat platform of debauched 
Nature, but must transmit their ruining 
practices to the following Ages to imitate 
and compleat. 
 
Hinc illæ lachrymæ, - Thus, and after 
this manner, by such means, is mans life beset 
with many cruciating maladies, which 
have shortned the days of his abode here; 
and, in latter Ages, acts but a short part upon 
the stage of the World. 
 
And this is procured, first, by the variety 
and excess in meat and drink. 
 
Secondly, By unseasonable and immoderate 
sleeping and watching; turning day into 
night, and night into day. 
 
Thirdly, By sluggish and unwholesome 
ease, instead of due exercise and motion: or 
toyling unseasonably, and wearing out the 
body when it requires natural rest and refreshment. 
 
Fourthly, By living in unwholesome places, 
sucking in noysome destructive Air; preferring 
profit and by-interests, before health 
and long life. 
 
Fifthly, Indulging Venus too much, by 
[^p.6^] 
immoderate and too frequent repeated acts; 
thereby enervating all the faculties, dispiriting 
and wasting the body. 
 
Sixthly, By wearing and fretting the mind 
with various passions; changing from one 
excess to another, and wracking the body 
with several disturbing moods, and passionate 
humours. 
 
Seventhly, By exhausting the strength, in 
a prodigal expence of the vital stream, with 
frequent and unnecessary Phlebotomies. 
Eighthly, By infecting the body, and 
stamping exotick impressions, too frequently, 
with the common virulent purgatives, that 
alienate the crases or ferments of the parts; 
and such like injurious Drugs, not rightly 
corrected; and ill-prepared Medicines, that 
bring detriment and damage to the body by 
their use. 
 
Lastly, To these may be added the injurious 
mannagement of Infants, by careless or 
ignorant Nurses; and fond Mothers greatly 
injuring their Children by a destructive indulgence, 
and erroneous affectionate usage, in 
the ordering and educating them, who for 
the most part live not so long as others. 
 
Having set forth how mans Life hath declined, 
and shortned in the several Ages of 
the World, and pointed at the chief procuring 
Causes, of such abbreviation and change, 
[^p.7^] 
(which hereafter we shall prosecute more 
fully) it remains to tell you how this evil 
may in part be remedied, and something regained 
that hath been lost, and is still upon 
the losing side, except recovered by a more 
diligent and prudent course. 
 
And here I must premise a few things before 
I come to the point, prescribing the 
Rule to walk by, and means for attaining 
long life. 
 
All the Creatures have their definite times 
of duration allotted them by Nature, some 
longer, others a shorter term: and this from 
the principles of their composition and seminality 
from whence they spring. 
 
In the Mineral Family, we find the longest 
durations; being solid, dense bodies, of 
more simple natures, and homogeneous; do 
therefore preserve their Beings longest from 
ruine and dissolution. 
 
Vegetables are of a shorter duration, yet 
not all alike; some preserve their Beings 
hundreds of years, as the Cedar and Oak: 
Others continue but a few years; some a 
year. 
 
Amongst the sensitive Creatures, we find 
that several species have their peculiar durations, 
which in the common course of nature 
are observed to continue; some a longer 
Age, others a shorter. 
 
[^p.8^] 
The Mineral is slowest in rising to maturity 
and perfection, but continues longest in 
that state. 
 
The Vegetable (in the generality) is quickest 
in the ascent to the top of perfection, but 
keeps not its station long: some whereof 
fade and wither every year, but renew their 
verdure again at the Spring, until a few years 
hath spent that seminal power and fertil 
blooming virtue. 
 
The Sensitive Creatures and perfect Animals, 
are slower in their rise to perfection; 
which having attained, stay but a while in 
that full strength, do gradually descend again, 
decline, and perish. 
 
So that all living Creatures by nature have 
their risings and settings, and definite times 
fixed for their growth and duration. From 
their beginning they have a gradual ascent, 
until they have attained the vigour and exaltation 
of their Natures; and having gained 
the top of their perfection, they stay not 
long there, but gradually descend again, and 
are degraded of the honour and perfection of 
their Natures, and tend to their ruine and 
dissolution. Nor are Creatures limited alike 
to the same duration, but do extend, and 
are shortned variously, according to their 
Principles and Foundation of Being, as Nature 
hath furnished them with a provision 
[^p.9^] 
permanent and sutable for such a duration 
and subsistence. 
 
Now of all Creatures, we find Man most 
uncertain in his being and continuance, (although 
the Age of Man be limited to sixty 
years) and is most liable to alteration and a 
perishing state, upon these four accounts. 
 
First, Because Man derives from his Parents 
by a seminal propagation, and inherits 
the Diseases of their vitious depraved Natures, 
radicated in him: to which his own 
enormous acts being added, do multiply 
and heighten the corruption of his Nature; 
hence the succeeding Generations become 
more degenerated, infirm, diseased, and consequently 
of shorter duration than the former. 
 
Secondly, For that the structure of his 
Body, is the most wonderfully contrived of 
all the Creatures; contains the greatest curiosity 
and variety of machination; such admirable 
Conduits and Contrivances; such Offices 
and places of elaboration, subservient to 
each other, and communicable: that therefore 
this Machine is most difficult to keep in 
order, and soonest put out of frame. 
 
Thirdly, In that he does require, and use 
more variety of supports, and necessary requisits 
to preserve and supply him; and therefore 
more subject to errors, failings, and discomposure. 
 
[^p.10^] 
Fourthly, Because Man wilfully, carelesly, 
or ignorantly, does not regulate and govern 
himself, according to the Law of Nature 
dictated to him; but deviating from those 
Rules of preservation, does discompose the 
regular Oeconomy of his Body, and introtroduce 
various Diseases and disorders; 
which precipitate Nature in the current 
and course of life, that otherwise more equally 
and evenly would glide on: and 
sometimes, by violence offered to Nature, 
in some strange unnatural actions and exorbitancies, 
the life is forced out, and death 
oft procured. 
 
Now other Creatures are so tyed up to 
the Rule of Nature, which they cannot 
but observe for their preservation both individual 
and specifick; and have not a 
power of electing good and evil to themselves; 
but naturally and spontaneously do 
prosecute that which is proper and conservative, 
and avoid what is noxious. 
 
But Man having a greater liberty by the 
prerogative of his rational Soul, does make 
his choice, and wanders amongst varieties 
both good and evil, and often deceives 
himself, chusing what is destructive to his 
Being: So that breaking the Law of Nature, 
which he ought to observe as Bounds 
and Rules to his actions, making them sanative 
[^p.11^] 
and preservative; does on the contrary 
alter and change those necessary appointments 
and supports; renders them destructive 
by his irregular incongruous use, vitious 
customs, and imprudent choice. 
 
The most considerable things to be observed 
by Man, as conducing and tending to 
the lengthening or shortning of his life, according 
to their management and procurement, 
well or ill, do fall under these Heads. 
 
Meat and drink; place of abode; sleep 
and watching; exercise and rest; excretions 
and retentions; passions of mind; all usages 
and customs. 
 
In the moderation, use and choice of 
these (which particularly hereafter shall be 
handled) consists the length and brevity of 
life, per modum assistentiæ, and as causa sine 
qua non; being auxiliary requisites, and 
necessary supports of life, appointed by Nature 
for the continuation, assistance and preservation 
thereof. 
 
But the length and brevity of life, fontaliter 
& radicaliter, consists in the fundamental 
Principles, and vital powers variously radicated 
and planted ab ortu, in man's generation 
and fabrication. But this being not in the 
choice and power of man to alter or change, 
we shall prosecute upon the former Heads. 
 
Man consisting of Soul and Body; and 
[^p.12^] 
this body compounded of heterogeneous and 
dissimilar parts, destinated to various actions 
and offices, dependent in Being and 
conservation; will necessarily require variety 
of assistance and supply, proportionable 
and suiting to their several purposes, faculties, 
properties, and temperatures; in matter, 
manner, times, and order; as well for 
their maintenance and sustentation in the 
integrity of their actions, offices and duties; 
as constitutional dispositions and Crases; peculiarly 
conservative of themselves, respectively 
and consequently of the whole. 
 
And by the Law of Nature (being subject 
to corruption and dissolution, through 
the fragility of constitutive parts, connexion 
and fabrication) is bound to observe Rules, 
Orders and Customs most consonant for preservation 
and continuance in Being. 
 
Now if there be a disproportion or unfitness, 
in the matter or quantum; or irregularity 
in the manner, times, or order of the 
auxiliary requisites and conservatives; contrary 
to what the Law or necessity of his 
Nature requires and commands; there arise 
Distempers, Ataxies and discord, the præludiums 
to ruine and dissolution. 
 
And this body being in a continual flux 
and reflux, conversant in vicissitudes and 
variations of opposites, dissimilars, contraries, 
[^p.13^] 
and privations; as heat and cold, siccity 
and humidity; filling and emptying; rest and 
motion; sleeping and waking; inspiration 
and exspiration, and the like; this body 
could not subsist amidst these various subalternations 
and changes, if they were not 
bounded and regulated by due order of succession 
to fit and convenient times; that 
they might not clash, interfere, and encroach 
upon each others priviledges, due times and 
proprieties. 
 
If heat exceeds; the natural moisture dries 
up, the spirits evaporate, and the body withers. 
If cold; the faculties are torpid and benum'd, 
the spirits being frozen up to a cessation 
from their duties. 
 
If moisture prevails; the spirits are clogged, 
suffocated and drowned in the chanels 
of the body. 
 
If siccity and dryness; the organical parts 
are stubborn, unpliable and uncapable of 
their regular motions and due actions; the 
vital streams being drunk up that should 
irrigate, refresh, and supple them. 
 
Were the body always taking in and 
sending nothing forth, it would either increase 
to a monstrous and vast magnitude; 
or fill up, suffocate and stifle the soul: were 
it always in excretion and emission, the body 
[^p.14^] 
would waste away and be reduced to 
nothing. 
 
Nor is the receiving in of any thing, sufficient 
and satisfactory to the body for its 
preservation; but that which is appointed 
by Nature, proper and sutable: nor emission 
or ejection of any thing, but that which is 
superfluous and unnecessary to be retained. 
 
If Sleep prevails contrary to the Law of 
Nature; the body in a lethargick soporiferous 
inactivity, stupefied and senseless, lies 
at the gates of death. 
 
If Watching exceeds the limits, transgresseth 
and steals away the due time for sleep; the 
faculties are debilitated and enervated, the 
spirits tired, worn out, and impoverished. 
 
If Inspiration were constant without intermission; 
the body would puff up and be 
blown like a Bladder. 
 
If Expiration were continual; the soul 
and spirits would soon quit their habitation 
and come forth. 
 
If always Exercised in motion; the body 
would pine and wear away: if always at 
Rest; it would corrupt and stink. 
 
There is a rule therefore, proportion, measure 
and season, to be observed, in all the 
requisite supports and auxiliary helps, belonging 
to our preservation; and by how much, 
or often, any of these necessary alternative 
[^p.15^] 
successions are extravagant and irregular, exceeding 
the bounds and limits prescribed by 
Nature, and justling out the successive appointed 
action, duty, or custom, from its 
seasonable exercise and due execution; by so 
much is the harmony of Nature disturbed, 
vigor abated, and duration shortned, by 
these jars, discords and encroachments. 
 
The thwarting and crossing of Nature in 
any thing she hath enjoyned, either in the 
substance or circumstance, is violence offered 
to Nature; and is destructive more or less 
according to the dignity or quality of the 
thing appointed. 
 
For, Nature was not so indifferent in the 
institution of these duties and customs, that 
they might be done or not done; or so careless 
and irregular, to leave them at your 
pleasure, when and how; or to be used promiscuously 
and preposterously without order, 
at the liberty of your will, fancy and occasions. 
 
And, as you may see in all other creatures, 
exactness of rule, method and constant 
order impressed upon, and radicated in their 
natures, by which they act always sutable, 
regular, and constant: you may not imagine 
so choice and exquisite a piece as Man 
is, to be left without a Law and Rule to 
guide and steer him in the necessary actions 
[^p.16^] 
concerning Life; and that he should rove 
in uncertain, unconstant, unlimited quantities, 
times, orders, manners, and the like; 
but is bounded and restrained upon penalties 
and forfeitures of Being, well-being, and long-being; 
to the nice and strict observance of 
these laws and customs necessary for the tuition 
of Life, and defence of humane frailty. 
 
As moral good actions are placed in a 
mediocrity between two vitious extreams; 
so natural actions and auxiliary requisites, 
conservative of life, have their golden Mean; 
digression from which, on either side, leads 
to ruine and destruction. 
 
Too much Sleep, or too little; too much 
Meat and Drink, or too little; too much 
Rest, or too much Motion; too much Air, 
or always close pent up; too great Excretions, 
or too long Retentions; too much Heat, 
or too much Cold; either of the extreams 
lead to ruine. 
 
And as Nature hath not appointed any 
thing, or every thing to be food, but this 
and that; so likewise not at any time to be 
received, not in any quantity, after any manner 
prepared, or in what order you please; 
but proportionable, suteable and convenient. 
 
As there is variety of dispositions and inclinations 
of mind agreeing with, and likeing 
[^p.17^] 
one thing; but disagreeing, resisting, 
and disliking another: so is it in the variety 
of bodies and food: one body is of this 
constitutional propriety, temper and appetite; 
will sute and agree well with this 
meat, and disagree with another; for if all 
meats were convenient for all bodies, to be 
used promiscuously without choice, how 
comes it to pass the antipathy, resistance, and 
abhorrency of some bodies against some particular 
meats? And this not from a fancy 
and conceit, but so radicated in the constitution; 
that if it be eaten, though unknown, 
shall produce Fluxes, Vomitings, 
Swoonings, and such like effects. 
 
From hence is manifested the opposition, 
disagreement, and distance between this constitution 
and this kind of meat; which being 
so great, that the dislike and discordancy 
appears presently; other disagreements 
which are in a lower degree of opposition, 
do not manifest themselves immediately, 
yet they produce ill effects in the 
body, plus minus, pro viribus, some Disease 
or Distemper, which discover themselves 
gradually, at times, seasons, and occasions 
given: If you acknowledge the former, 
you must admit of the latter, the reason is, 
a majori ad minus. 
 
As Sleep is appointed by Nature, to refresh 
[^p.18^] 
the spirits, and repair lost strength: 
so the time for sleep is appointed and limited; 
not when you please: the Sun, that 
glorious Light, was not made for you to 
sleep by; nor the night for sports, and revels, 
or lawful business, but for rest. 
 
Nature does not only command what to 
be done, but when; how much, how long, 
after what manner, in what order: the modification, 
circumstances and requisite qualifications, 
as well as the thing it self, are to 
be regarded. 
 
And therefore by a diligent inquisition, 
and curious speculation into the works of 
Nature, you may as much admire the manner 
of preservation, government, order, weight, 
and measure, regular vicissitudes, alternations 
and successions; as the excellency and contrivance 
of the things themselves in their 
creation and generation. 
 
Whatever is appointed by Nature as necessary 
for conservation and support of Being, 
though never so good; yet if it be unseasonable, 
out of course, immoderate in quantity, 
quality, or duration; it alters the property 
and intention of Nature; converts 
good purposes to bad effects. 
 
We say, Every thing is best in its own 
kind; and of continuance in its own Element: 
and Nature is most chearful, vigorous 
[^p.19^] 
and durable in the course and method 
of her own injunctions: but being put by, 
thrust out of her own way, is not of long 
duration: the Birds cannot live in the Sea, 
nor the Fish upon the Land; nor your 
Nature continue long in an unnatural way 
against her self. 
 
Are you composed of natural principles, 
and will you not live conformable to what 
you are? Do you not live by Natures assistance 
and natural means, and do you 
think to continue long in a Counter-motion 
against the nature of your Composition? 
 
They that invert Natures course, preposterously, 
promiscuously, and incongruously 
using the necessary conservatives of 
life; not only are deprived of their benefit, 
but also receive a positive hurt; disordering 
the constant regular motions in the 
body, and discomposing the harmonious 
and sociable assistance of the parts in their 
Offices to each other. 
 
There is a rule therefore, method, measure, 
and season, in all the requisite supports 
and auxiliary helps belonging and necessary 
unto life, or natural actions and customs 
whatsoever; which duly observed, are of 
much advantage for the preservation of the 
body in its true natural state, vigor and 
[^p.20^] 
prolongation of Being: but otherwise, immethodically 
and inordinately used, disturbs 
Natures course, uniformity and regularity of 
operations; raiseth unnatural motions, commotions 
and cessations; introduceth disorders, 
and disjoins the frame of Nature; 
accelerates and hastens the dissolution of the 
body. 
 
[}SECT. II. 
Of Health, and the Excellency 
thereof.}] 
 
DIV & bene valere; To live long and 
in health, said Plato, is the best 
thing in the World: and Thales Milesius, 
one of the seven Greek Sages, being asked, 
Who was the happy Man? Answered, He 
that hath a healthy body: preferring health 
before riches and honours, or any earthly 
enjoyment. 
 
The truth of this Opinion will best be 
discovered and proved, by consulting with 
the sick man; who is best able to judge of 
health, and knows rightly the value of it: 
Experimentally he hath found, that a Crown 
and Scepter give no content, nor ease to a 
[^p.21^] 
pained languishing body: and beauty brings 
no pleasure to a sick Bed: and dainty Dishes 
affect not the distemper'd Palate with delight: 
Nor the sweetest Musick can recreate 
a restless faint-sick-man: but the enjoyment 
of health alone is more sweet and pleasant, 
and far more desirable than all these without 
it. 
 
Yet who is he that values health at the 
rate it is worth? Not he that hath it; he 
reckons it amongst the common ordinary enjoyments; 
and takes as little notice of it, or 
less regards it, than his long-worn Cloaths: 
perhaps more careful of his Garments, remembring 
their price; but thinks his health 
costs him nothing; and coming to him at 
so easie a rate, values it accordingly, and 
hath little regard to keep it; is never truly 
sensible of what he enjoyed, until he finds 
the want of it by sickness; then hoc unum 
[^GREEK OMITTED^], health above all things is earnestly 
desired and wished for. 
 
This great concernment, Health, falls under 
a threefold consideration. 
 
First, In its causes, from whence it does 
immediately arise in the body. 
 
Secondly, In its effects, the consequents 
and benefits that accrue to us by it; and 
what is the state of a healthy man. 
 
Thirdly, The right course to obtain, and 
[^p.22^] 
means to preserve this invaluable treasure, so 
long as the capacity of human nature will 
admit. 
 
And first, Here we must distinguish of 
Health; which may be taken either strictly, 
or largely: Health in the strictest acceptation, 
admits of no organical indisposition, morbous 
effect, or morbifick Seminary to abide 
in the body; that although no sensible injury, 
or inconvenient alteration may appear; 
yet notwithstanding a person may be 
said not to be in perfect health: for although 
the latent seminaries of Diseases are 
not budded, do not sprout forth so as to be 
dolorous, impedite any faculty, or make 
some disturbance or alteration; yet they 
are planted in the body, and have a real 
Being: as hereditary Diseases, whose seminaries 
are obscured, do not come to maturity 
of production until such an Age of the 
Person; or some irritating occasion given to 
produce it sooner or later, as the person is 
ordered well or ill, in the diætetick regiment. 
 
So likewise, the first ground-work and 
foundation of the Stone is not perceptible, 
until some time and progress give it perfection; 
during which time that person is 
not in a state of health in a strict sense. And 
likewise some Diseases do lie dormant for a 
[^p.23^] 
time, and discover nothing during that season, 
and have their periodick motions, wherein 
they awake, and are stirred up to shew 
themselves, upon some irritating provocations 
and occasions given: as the Epilepsie, 
the Gout, Hysterical passions, and such like, 
that have their times of cessation and returns: 
yet these, during their intermissions 
and cessations from hostility, are in being; 
although they do not act so as to injure and 
deprave any function sensibly. 
 
Secondly, Health may be taken largely, 
and in the common acceptation: as when 
no function is impedited, or sensible alteration 
from a good state does appear: we say 
then, Such a man is in health. In the first 
and strictest sense, few can be said to be in 
health; but in the latter, many are to be 
accounted healthful. And this is the state of 
health understood by Galen, Avicen, and Averroes, 
in their definitions of it: Which 
imports thus much. 
 
Health is a due power and aptitude for 
the exercise and discharge of all the faculties 
in the body: So that when every part 
and faculty perform their duty regularly and 
vigorously, that man is said to be in health: 
but when any faculty is impedited, and part 
ill affected, or depraved in its function; the 
man then is not in perfect health: So that 
[^p.24^] 
the actions of the body and mind are 
the chief discoverers of health and sickness: 
And here we see that health is seated 
in the faculties, and does assurge or result 
from the regular discharge of their functions. 
 
As when the appetite is sharp; the digestion 
not sluggish and heavy: the belly soluble; 
the senses perfect, free from pain in 
all parts: the wind pleasant; sleeps quiet; 
the spirits brisk and lively; the whole body 
strong, nimble and vigorous in motion; 
these are signs of Health: so that examining 
all parts and faculties, when we find nothing 
preternatural or irregular; but in 
every part and faculty a good discharge of 
their Office; then that person is to be accounted 
in a right state of health, so far as 
is discoverable by any manifest, or conjecturial 
sign. 
 
The benefits and excellencies of this health, 
are best known to those that have lost it; 
Carendo magic quam fruendo & quid valeat, 
cognoscimus: You that have it and know 
not how to prize it, I'le tell you what it is, 
that you may love it better, put a higher 
value upon it, and endeavour to preserve it 
with a more serious, stricter observance and 
tuition. 
 
Health, is that which makes your meat 
[^p.25^] 
and drink, both savoury and pleasant; else 
Natures injunction of eating and drinking, 
were a hard task and slavish custom. 
 
Health, is that which makes your bed 
easie, and your sleep refreshing: that renews 
your strength with the rising Sun; 
and makes you chearful at the light of another 
day: 'tis that which fills up the hollow 
and uneven places of your Carcase, and 
makes your body plump and comely: 'tis 
that which dresseth you up in Natures richest 
Attire; and adorns your face with her 
choicest colours. 
 
'Tis that which makes exercise a sport; 
and walking abroad, the enjoyment of your 
Liberty. 
 
'Tis that which makes fertile, and encreaseth 
the natural endowments of your 
mind, and preserves them long from decay; 
makes your wit acute, and your memory retentive. 
 
'Tis that which supports the fragility of 
a corruptible body; and preserves the verdure, 
vigour, and beauty of Youth. 
 
'Tis that which makes the Soul take delight 
in her mansion; sporting her self at 
the Casements of your Eyes. 
 
'Tis that which makes pleasure to be 
pleasure, and delights delightful; without 
which you can solace your self in 
[^p.26^] 
nothing of terrene felicities and enjoyments. 
Having cursorily glanced at the excellencies 
of Health, in this short Narrative and 
Epitome of its worth; it remains we should 
next draw forth and present to your view, 
the doleful condition of sickness, and a valetudinary 
drooping Life: shewing you the 
great difference between that decaying 
condition, and a chearful state of Health: 
which Antithesis will prepare and stir you 
up to the reasonable strictness of duty; 
make you more cautious, and sollicitous 
for the preservation of your Health; and to 
prize it as the summum bonum, your chiefest 
enjoyment in this Life. 
 
[^p.27^] 
[}SECT. III. 
Of Sickness, and a Valetudinary State.}] 
 
IN the preceding Section, having taken 
a brief survey of natural life in the best 
estate; graced and adorned with the society 
of health, and its great Attendants, 
the concomitant benefits, priviledges and 
enjoyments: Now take a view of your 
self when health hath turn'd its back upon 
you, and deserts your company; see then 
how the Scene is changed; how you are 
robb'd and spoiled of all your comforts and 
enjoyments. 
 
The want of health makes food to lose 
its wonted relish, and is become disgustful 
and unsavoury: the stomach now refuseth 
to receive its daily charge; no longer able 
to peform the task, but desires a quietus 
est, from the office. 
 
Sleep that was stretcht out, from evening 
to the fair bright day, is now broken into 
pieces, and subdivided, not worth the accounting: 
the night that before seemed 
short, is now too long; and the downy bed 
presseth hard against the bones. 
 
Exercise now is toyling: and Walking 
abroad the carrying of a burthen. 
 
[^p.28^] 
The body that moved so light, and readily 
obeyed the steerage of the Pilot; is 
now over-ballac'd with its own weight, and 
slowly tugs, as against the stream. 
 
Conjugal imbraces are now but the faint 
Offers of love; the shadows and representations 
of former kindness. 
 
The body that had the magnetism and secret 
attraction of souls; may now be approached 
without loss; or danger of being 
snared and fettered as a bond-slave. 
 
The Lily and the Rose, that Nature planted 
in the highest Mount, to shew the world 
her pride and glory; is now blasted and 
withered like long-blown flowers. 
 
The Eye that flasht as lightning, is now 
like the opacous body of a thick Cloud: 
that rolled from East to West swifter than 
a Celestial Orb; is now tired and weary 
with standing still: that penetrated the 
Center of another Microcosm; hath lost its 
Planetary influence, and is become obtuse 
and dull. 
 
The hollow sounding breast that echoed 
to the chanting Bird; and warbled forth 
delightful tunes; now runs divisions with 
coughing strains, and pauses with a deep-fetch't 
sigh for breath, to repeat those notes 
again. 
 
The Venal and Arterial Rivulets that 
[^p.29^] 
ran with vital streams, bedewing the adjacent 
parts with fruitful moisture, is now 
drunk up with parching heat; or muddied 
and defiled with an inundation of excremental 
humors. 
 
The want of health converts your House 
into a Prison; and confines you to the narrow 
compass of a Chamber; 'tis that which 
sours the sweetest and most beloved enjoyments: 
'tis that which disunites and breaks 
the league of copartnership between soul and 
body; alienates and makes them at jarrs; 
discomposes their harmony, and makes them 
weary of their wonted sweet society. 
 
A sick man is like a Clock out of order 
and due motion; which is of little worth 
or use, so long as it continues in that condition; 
so is Man useless both to himself, 
and others in such a state: one Wheel being 
faulty or defective, puts the rest out of 
order and regularity, that depend upon that 
motion: and one part or faculty of Mans 
body being disordered and irregular; several 
others consent with, or share in the 
discomposure more or fewer; as the part 
is more noble and principal, commanding 
some chief Region of the Body; or inferior, 
and of a lower orb, or private station. 
 
The reason of this sympathy and consent 
[^p.30^] 
of parts is; First, From the general agent 
and principle of life, which is one and the 
same throughout the whole. 
 
Secondly, Because all the parts of mans 
body, though they have their peculiar and 
different motions to themselves and special 
properties; yet they are all concurrent and 
co-operating; co-ordinately or subordinately, 
serving to the general design of 
Nature, and maintenance of the whole 
body; and are so concatenated and linked 
together, in the Oeconomy of office, that 
their motions are dependent, and of mutual 
Concern for each others welfare. 
 
If the Foot complains, the Head is busied 
for its relief: and the Heart suffers until 
the grief be past: and the whole man 
uneasy, until the pain be gone or allayed. 
 
Thus you see that a diseased valetudinary 
state, is a weary and irksom condition: 
and that Health is the pleasure and contentment 
of life, or rather the life it self: 
Nam vivere non est vita, sed valere: and 
since Health is of great value, and sickness 
so deplorable and comfortless; I shall shew 
you how to obtain and preserve the one, 
and how to defend you from the other; all 
which is to be done by the ways and means 
hereafter following. 
 
[^p.31^] 
[}SECT. IV. 
The Method and Means for Preservation 
of Health.}] 
 
HEalth, as it is the result of Nature in 
her integrity and perfection, is maintained 
and kept in that order and due Oeconomy, 
by the regular and right use of those 
natural supports that our bodies daily require 
and do depend on in Being: as Air, 
Food, Sleep, Exercise, &c. 
 
Now those things that do necessarily belong 
and daily attend us, ought so to be 
chosen and managed, as does best conduce 
and sute with the institution of Nature, to 
which they are appointed; but if otherwise, 
unseasonably, disorderly or immoderately 
used; they then prove pernicious and 
destructive, more or less, according to the 
degree, and continuance of their irregularity 
and incongruousness. 
 
Nature hath appointed both times and 
order, and set a regular course, how and 
when every thing should be used in its 
proper mode and season. 
 
There is a moderation also enjoyned, and 
limits prescribed by Nature in the use of 
[^p.32^] 
these things, which if we exceed and run 
into excess, we then put Nature out of her 
mediocrity and equality; in which course she 
cannot long continue; and that continuance 
also with much trouble to us, by bodily 
diseases and infirmities, the usual and 
frequent consequents of such irregularities. 
 
The Body of Man is as a curious Engine 
or Clock-work, moving with divers 
Wheels, and various internal motions, subordinate 
to each other, and conducing to 
the general design of the whole; in a compleat 
order and exquisite method of contrivance, 
promoting and moving one another 
in their distinct Offices. Now if one 
Wheel goes too fast, too slow, or stops; the 
rest that depend upon that motion also, 
are disordered and move irregularly. 
 
So is it in the Body of Man: If the Stomach 
be clogged, and the digestion sluggish; 
the supply from thence will not come 
in due time to the other faculties to operate 
upon: and if the Chyliferous matter 
sent from the Stomach be not well transmuted 
and qualified, the rest of the digestive 
faculties cannot so well perform their 
task, because the alimentary matter is not 
transmitted to them proper and sutable, but 
imperfect, aliene and degenerate. 
 
Most men experimentally and sensibly 
[^p.33^] 
know; that meat and drink transgressing 
either in quantity or quality, or unseasonably 
taken, does abate and injure a good 
Stomach, and depraves the digestion: which 
defect redounds to the detriment of the 
whole, and all the body suffers by it, and 
every faculty in time will share in the prejudice: 
So that of necessity there must be 
rules observed, and bounds set in the use of 
these things, without which mans body is 
soon put out of frame, and the regular Oeconomy 
thereof discomposed and disordered. 
 
To prove and illustrate this farther by 
instance: fresh Air is necessary to ventilate 
the body, and chear the spirits of man; 
and he that is pent up within doors, is deprived 
of that great enlivener and refresher 
of Nature: but on the contrary, he that 
is exposed abroad to the night Air, is as 
much damaged as the other; and both 
prove injurious and destructive: So that although 
the open Air be good and necessary 
for the healthful being of Man; yet not at 
all times, not in any condition, and upon 
any terms; but sutable and convenient with 
the state of our bodies, as Nature hath appointed 
for you, and not otherwise. 
 
So likewise for Exercise and Rest, Method 
and Rule is to be observed: for if 
[^p.34^] 
there be not seasons allotted, and a moderation 
used in these; they both are destructive, 
though in a contrary way, and by 
different mediums. 
 
To sleep when you should wake, or wake 
when you should sleep, are both injurious 
and impairing of health: to invert the order 
of Nature, by sleeping in the day, and 
watching in the night, is incongruous and unsutable 
with your bodies; because it crosseth 
the designment of Nature. 
 
When the Sun riseth, the spirits of Men 
are then most apt and fit for Action; are 
then most lively, brisk and chearful in their 
functions: but when the Sun sets, and the 
Air is cloathed with darkness; the spirits 
then begin to droop, grow more dull and 
heavy, incline to rest, retirement, and a 
cessation. 
 
Now to spur up and rouze the spirits, 
when they naturally would be taking their 
ease and respite; or laying a clog upon 
them, by your sluggishness and somnolent 
postures, when Nature calls upon them for 
action, (by darting the glittering light 
through the Air, with which they are affected 
and raised up) these are great injuries 
and affronts to Nature, in acting counter 
to her commands and institutions; for 
which you must suffer the penalty; and 
[^p.35^] 
that is the forfeiting your health, for this 
unnatural disobedience, and these irrational 
courses. 
 
These Precautions and Rules, I will assure 
you are not our inventions, to curb 
your darling inclinations, and restrain you 
of your just liberty; but they are the Institutions 
and Law of Nature, enjoyned to 
be observed, for your own preservation and 
well-being; and as bounds set to check your 
extravagant pernicious actions; and all for 
the tuition and safety of your life and health; 
and to preserve the regular harmony through 
the whole course of Nature. 
 
And although it be an old saying, as 
foolish as common; Qui Medice vivit, misere 
vivit; He that lives strictly by rule, lives 
miserably: yet I must affirm the contrary, 
grounded upon pure reason, and the preceding 
discourse; that he which does not 
observe the injunctions, the due method and 
regular course of Nature; does both shorten 
his life, and takes away much of the pleasure 
of it, by procuring an uncomfortable 
and unhealthy body. 
 
I know, Every of you would live long; 
but especially in health: you would fain 
continue and prolong your youth; your 
beauty and ability of parts: you are frighted 
at the thoughts of a wrinkled face, or a 
[^p.36^] 
restless bed; an unwholsom diseased body, 
and a decripid loathsom old Age: But yet 
you will not avoid these evils that you so 
much fear: you will not take the pains to 
prevent them, and secure your self: you 
rather take more pains, and undergo more 
trouble to procure them, than there can be 
in avoiding them: nay, you lose the true 
pleasure of your life to purchase these Inconveniencies. 
 
But what those things are, which so warily 
and chiefly you are to observe, (wherein 
consists your health and well-being) have 
now been hinted but generally; the due 
method, course, and cautions, you are to 
take in the use of them, particularly; shall 
be handled in their due place, and order 
following. 
 
[^Extract 2, pp. 154-177^] 
 
[^p.154^] 
[}SECT. XVII. 
The four Constitutions; or different 
variation of Bodies, distinguished.}] 
 
THat the Condition, Properties, and 
Habit of Bodies, do much differ one 
from the other; and also the same Body, by 
time, doth vary and alter much from what 
it was; is that which I need not insist on 
the proof; every one almost will confess 
the [^GREEK OMITTED^], and is convinced of this truth. But 
how this comes to pass, and the reasons of 
this difference and variation; are not unanimously 
agreed upon, but great dissenting 
about the matter. 
 
The Galenists do comprise the diversity 
of bodies under four Constitutions; Sanguine, 
[^p.155^] 
Phlegmatick, Cholerick and Melancholick. 
And this they will have to arise from 
the difference of bodies in mixtion; according 
to the different proportions they 
receive of the four Elements, participating 
more of some, than the other. 
 
The Chymical Philosophers; some of them 
will have the difference of bodies to assurge 
out of three Principles; Sal, Sulphur, 
and Mercury: Others increase that number, 
and will have them five; Spirit, Salt, 
Sulphur, Water and Earth. But I must not 
now ingage in the controversie between 
the Chymists and Galenists; or make another 
party to oppose both; but reserve that 
as more proper for a Polemical Tract: This 
Work being not intended controversal, but 
Canonical; I therefore pass on to state the 
Matter. 
 
These four terms of Sanguine, Cholerick, 
&c. although I do not adhere to them in 
the common acceptation, and in every 
point as the Galenists use them; yet they 
being so familiar, and well known to such 
for whom chiefly this work is intended; I 
shall retain these names, with distinction 
and limitation, to serve our present purpose; 
rather than impose new words upon 
you, not so well understood. 
 
I do not therefore understand by Phlegm, 
[^p.156^] 
Choler, &c. that every body is composed of 
these four humours, as their constitutive 
parts; resulting from proportionate, and disproportionate 
mixture, and combination of 
the four Elements: But that persons may 
participate of, or abound with a degenerate 
humour; and that the succulencies of 
the body, may incline to such a condition, 
affine and analogous; or having such properties; 
as that which is assigned to, and 
called Phlegm, Choler, &c. may well be 
asserted; and we may call them by such 
names. 
 
But you must also take notice, that the 
degenerate matter in mans body is so various, 
that you must not think to reduce all 
such depraved Juices exactly to these three 
heads; of Choler, Phlegm, and Melancholy; 
and if you add twice three more; the number 
would not be sufficient: But since there 
are not peculiar appellations to distinguish all 
precisely by; better have some general 
terms than none. 
 
The variation of bodies, in relation to 
Temperament, Habit, and Constitution; does 
arise immediate from the variation of digestions, 
and the different products from 
thence: so that one and the same person 
shall by time be of different constitutions; 
according as the functions of the 
[^p.157^] 
body are performed, well or ill. 
 
The changing or establishing of Constitutions 
procatarctice; does depend upon 
subjection and obedience to the Diætetick 
Rules. As every one is ordered prudently 
and regularly, or negligently and incongruously, 
shall be disposed to this or that 
Constitution. If a man live idle, plentifully 
feeding, indulging himself in raw Fruits, 
and sleeps much; this disposeth him to be 
Phlegmatick: that is, his digestions shall 
not be so good; and there will be crude 
relicts abounding, such as are called Phlegm. 
 
If a man be of an active cogitative spirit, 
eager in business, giving himself little rest, 
accustomed to Wine, and high seasoned 
Meats: This manner of life fires and heats 
the body; the Juices then will not be so 
mild, temperate, and balsamick: but acrid, 
hot and sharp; and this person then may 
be said to be, of a cholerick constitution, or 
condition of body. 
 
If a fresh sanguine person, of a pure 
wholesom body; be oppressed with care 
and grief; live a sedentary life; or too 
much given to study and serious contemplation, 
and feed grosly: This course of life 
shall change and alter the best constitution: 
the sanguine brisk airy person shall by these 
means, be of a dull heavy disposition, and 
[^p.158^] 
sad mind; the body also shall degenerate 
from its purity, and the humours become 
more fixed and feculent. 
 
The Soul being the great Spring or Wheel, 
that keeps all the functions in motion, upon 
which they do depend, primo & principaliter, 
as the Fountain of all Vital Actions: 
If this be dejected and taken off its 
speed; the functions are then performed 
very heavily, as if weights and clogs were 
hung upon them; and then the elaboration 
of food is not well performed, nor a pure 
alimentary Juice produced; but a degenerate 
succus of a heavy oppressing nature 
not duly fermented by the Spleen; (dyscrasyed 
by the preceding Causes) from 
whence a melancholy constitution is begotten, 
and may so be denominated for distinction. 
 
The diversity of Constitutions being thus 
understood; we may make use of, and retain 
these distinguishing terms, at this 
time to serve the business in hand; since 
they are so familiar by use, and easie to be 
apprehended, by such for whom this is intended. 
But although I can close with 
them, in relation to this purpose I am now 
upon; to order and appoint a Diætetick 
Regiment for different bodies; yet I think 
them not of that concernment, for a Physician 
[^p.159^] 
to tye himself strictly to their observance, 
in the designment of Cures; these 
notions being too superficial and remote 
from the quiddity, essence and spring of the 
Disease; are but Characteristical and Signal, 
to note how, and which way the vital 
Powers do deviate and swerve from their 
integrity; are but the Producta Morbi; 
the Products and Effects, separable, and 
the Disease may remain behind. 
 
Wherefore I cannot allow them, as they 
are severally injoined in the Methodus Medendi 
for indications, to sute Purgatives 
elective, and other Medicines to, by peculiar 
appropriations; nor concur with some 
Hypotheses that are founded upon this Doctrine 
by the Galenists to steer them in 
their Therapeuticks; which indeed runs 
them upon great errors in the Cure of most 
Diseases; being so nice in temperaments, humours 
and qualities, and eying them so 
much; that they neglect the spring from 
whence they do arise, and where the 
greatest stress of Cures do lie. Morbi in 
initiis vitalibus radicem habent. 
 
And although I have distinguished food 
for several constitutions or conditions of 
body, as most proper and fit for them; 
and commonly most agreeable and appetible; 
yet I do not thereby strictly enjoin, or restrain 
[^p.160^] 
any one of a dissenting appetite, from 
some things greatly coveted and suteable 
by experience; although appointed for 
another person of a different constitution: 
but that every person seeing the general 
Rule, may something be guided thereby; 
and examining his peculiar propriety of 
Body, undiscernable to others; whether 
it will comply freely, or with reluctance. 
In such case where there is a refusal of this 
or that, as not suting, but disgustful; you 
are not to impose upon your Nature forcibly, 
though injoined by the general Rule: 
But where you are at a stand in things indifferent, 
what to chuse when either will 
comply and sute your appetite, then follow 
the Rule as advantagious. Moreover the 
strong robust bodies, active and laborious; 
are not so strictly enjoined to observance, 
as tender weak bodies; which soon are discomposed 
and altered by ill diet; or 
that is incongruous for their condition of 
body. 
 
If a person have a cold, waterish, Phlegmatick 
Stomach; those Meats, and Drinks, 
and Sauces, are not so agreeable and requisite 
for him, as will well agree and sute 
with a Cholerick, hot, and dry parching Stomach. 
A Phlegmatick man, most commonly 
takes no delight, in Milk and Whey, cold 
[^p.161^] 
Meats, and cooling Drinks, or cooling 
Sauces: but he loves seasoned hot Meats, 
strong Drinks, Spices, and hot Herbs; to 
make his Meat savoury and acceptable to 
his Stomach: But the Cholerick Man shall 
delight in the other; and they shall sute 
best with him, being temperately and discreetly 
used. 
 
So that a Diætetick Regiment, well appointed 
and observed; is physical to discrasyed 
and distempered bodies; to contemperate 
and allay the luxuriance of some 
predominant Humour; and something dispose 
the faculties to produce the alimentary 
Juices of another nature: which by time 
will alter and change the constitution, or 
condition of Body, from what it was; and 
reduce it nearer, to what it ought to be. 
 
[^p.162^] 
[}SECT. XVIII. 
The sanguine Constitution; or purest state 
of Body; how generated, and preserved.}] 
 
THis Constitution does result from the 
integrity of the faculties, and due 
Crases of the Parts, performing their offices 
rightly: When Food is well elaborated and 
transmuted in such manner as is proper for 
each digestion; then a good constitution 
and good habit of body is established. The 
Mass of blood then hath its pure tincture; 
and all the liquors of the body their peculiar 
properties, suteable to the intentions of 
Nature: But if the Crases of the Parts be 
perverted, by a spontaneous detection and 
imbecillity of the faculties; or otherwise 
procured to irregularity; by bad food, intemperance, 
and the Diætetick Rules not 
observed; then the alimentary Juices do 
degenerate from their purity; the mass of 
Blood, and nervous liquor are depraved; 
the constitution and whole habit of body 
altered and changed for the worse. 
 
The sanguine person enjoys the best state 
and condition of body; does not abound, 
[^p.163^] 
or is molested with crude, Phlegmatick or 
acrid Cholerick Juices, or otherwise degenerate; 
but hath the succulencies of body, 
in their right and proper natures; as is 
most fit for every Vessel and part of the 
body: hence it is, that this person is more 
fresh, temperate, lively, and florid; of a 
more pleasant mind, and good disposition; 
having pure blood, and other good Juices 
to supply the Body; from whence the spirits 
are generated both plentifully, and of 
a good extraction. 
 
This State and Constitution of Body, is 
best preserved and continued so from degeneration, 
by a good Diætetick Regiment; 
disposing all the requisite supports of Life, 
Customs and Actions whatsoever; that 
they be moderate, seasonable and suteable to 
such Natures; contributing their assistance 
wholly, and not being any ways detrimental, 
by their ill management. 
 
The Sanguine Person will continue long 
in that condition and good state of Body; 
by a due observance of Dyet, Exercise and 
Rest, Sleep and Watching, Excretions and 
Retentions, passions of Mind: For any of 
these irregular and unsuteable, will alter 
and change the best tempered body, into 
some other depraved condition, answerable 
to their Causes: as the intemperate Air 
[^p.164^] 
of a hot Climate, or sudden change of Weather 
not regarded; violent and unseasonable 
Exercise, night-watchings, ill-dyet, &c. introduce 
a depraved alteration and degeneration 
of the blood: and therefore most 
commonly sickness soon follows such injurious 
Courses. I might here forbid the 
smoaking of Tabaco; the common Purgatives 
falsly denominated, but rather and 
more properly Corruptives; which stamp 
an ill impression upon the parts, and vitiate 
alimentary Juyces of the Body: but the 
injuries procured from Tabaco, and these 
Drugs, are declared at large in my Tract 
of the Scurvy; Therefore I need not repeat 
here. 
 
For the Election and Choice of Food; 
for quantities, and due times in Eating and 
Drinking; for the choice of Air, and place 
of Abode; for Exercise, Sleep, &c. consonant 
and most agreeable to this constitution 
and best state of Body; are to be 
sought in the general Hygiastick Rules before-mentioned; 
which are most proper 
and applicable to this state and condition 
of Body; as being the Rule or Standard 
to measure others by: And by how much, 
others vary from this temperature and good 
condition of Body: by so much are they 
to be accounted intemperate and deviating 
[^p.165^] 
from integrity; and do therefore require 
some particular Rules or Exemptions form 
the general, to regulate them apart; because 
bodies in a right and good state, are 
not to be governed by the same strictness 
of Law; but must have some allowance and 
exceptions; which shall be observed in the 
particular constitutions following. 
 
[}SECT. XIX. 
The Phlegmatick Constitution: managed 
for a reduction.}] 
 
THE Phlegmatick Person is such whose 
nature is not so vigorous and acute 
in the digestive faculties; and makes a 
transmutation of food not so perfect as the 
Sanguine, but something crude and raw. 
This Constitution abounding with superfluous 
moisture, and being cooler in temperature, 
(except upon occasions distempered, 
and the Archeus disturbed) commonly hath 
a slower Pulse; not so lively, active and 
brisk as the Sanguine person; prone to 
sleep and ease; of colour paler; by hot 
things benefited, by cold things prejudiced. 
[^p.166^] 
And thus it is; by reason the vital powers 
are remiss and sluggish, or perverted, and 
the several functions of the body not performed 
vigorously and compleatly: which 
ariseth from an innate disability; or irregularity, 
and disregard to the Diætetick 
rules. 
 
Now this Constitution of body being 
fallen a degree from the integrity of Nature; 
and swerving from the best condition 
and state of body, which is the Sanguine, 
and finding by these Characters how 
Nature is defective, and which way declining: 
You ought so to order all your actions 
and customs, as may tend to the rectifying 
of this deficiency, and be auxiliary 
for a reduction to the best state; at least 
prevent what may succeed worse, and stop 
the increase. And herein it will be no small 
advantage, to know what is assisting and 
helpful to Nature in this case; and what is 
injurious. 
 
Meats agreeable and convenient for this 
condition of body; are such as be light 
and digest well because the Stomachs ferment 
is not so acute: yet if the Stomach 
covets what is not of facil digestion, let it 
be made savoury and seasoned: And then a 
Phlegmatick raw stomach may better venture 
upon such. But Brawn, Pig, Goose, 
 
[^p.167^] 
Duck, Water-fowl, and such like, are not 
agreeable to a Phlegmatick Stomach: Also 
Eeles, fresh Herrings, Makerel, Lobster, fresh 
Salmon, Sturgeon, are injurious and difficult 
to be digested. But if you must please 
your palate, drink Wine with these meats 
for a corrective. 
 
Let your dyet be warm Meats, oftner 
roast than boyled. 
 
Butter, Oyl, and Honey is good for you; 
Mustard, Salt and Spices are necessary for 
your use: especially with meats of slow digestion; 
and that abound with much moisture, 
and are apt to clog the Stomach. 
 
Refuse Milk and Milk Meats; Curds, 
new Cheese, Butter-milk and Whey. 
 
Olives, Capers, Broom buds, Sampire, are 
good Sauce; also Garlick, Onions, Leeks 
in Broths, seasonings or Sauces, for a relish, 
but not raw. 
 
Refrain cold Herbs and Sallads; as Lettuce, 
Purslan, Violet-leaves, &c. except Sorrel, 
which although cold, yet a sharpner 
of the appetite: but freely use Mint, Sage, 
Rosemary, Time, Marjerome, Parsley, Pennyroyal, 
and such hot Herbs. 
 
Abstain from raw Fruits; Apples, Pears, 
Plums, Cucumbers, Mellons, Pumpions, &c. 
But you may eat new Wall-nuts, Filberds, 
Almonds blanched, Ches-nuts, Fistick-nuts, 
[^p.168^] 
Dates, Figs, Rasins. 
 
Drink strong Beer more frequently than 
small; and sometimes Sack. Not French 
Wine if you be Rheumatick. 
 
Indulge not your self in lying long in 
Bed; or Afternoon-sleeps; and too much 
Rest and Ease: they dull the spirits, increase 
flegm, and superfluous moisture. 
 
But frequent Exercise; and moderate 
abstinence in Meat and Drink; are great 
preservatives of your Health. 
 
Chuse a warm Air and dry Soil; remote 
from Waters; the best place for your Abode. 
 
Hot Baths are profitable; seasonable and 
moderate Venus a friend: the former cherisheth 
the spirits, open the pores for a 
transpiration and emission of superfluous 
moisture: the latter suscitates and raiseth 
the spirits, alleviates nature, and helps 
Concoction. 
 
[^p.169^] 
[}SECT. XX. 
The Cholerick Constitution: altered, 
and allayed.}] 
 
THE Cholerick Person is more hot and 
dry than the Phlegmatick; eager 
and precipitate in action; froward, hasty 
and angry; lean of body and slender: the 
Veins big, a hard Pulse, and quick: of colour 
pale of swarthy; propense to waking 
and short sleeps; subject to Feavers, or febrile 
æstuation upon small occasions. 
 
That some bodies are in this state and 
condition, is apparent and certain: but whether 
by innate Principles so disposed, or 
otherwise procured and adventitious; we 
will not controvert here: but shall proceed 
as granted, that a Diætetick Regiment, well 
or ill managed; shall make this person or 
condition of body, better or worse. Wherefore 
I advise such to these observations. 
 
Use a cool and moistning dyet; most 
frequently boyled meats, rather than rost 
or baked; but fryed or broiled meats 
never. 
 
Eat Broths often made with cooling 
Herbs; Rice-milk, Cock-broth, or Barly-broths 
[^p.170^] 
with Rasins, Currans and Prunes. 
 
For flesh, chuse young tender and juicy; 
as young Beef, Veal, Mutton, Lamb, Kid, 
Pork, Green-geese, Turkie, Capon, Chickens, 
and such like. 
 
Observe fish dayes as good dyet: and 
then you may eat fresh Salmon, Lobster, fresh 
Herrings, Crabs, Prauns, fresh Cod, Thornback, 
Soles, Plaise, Whiting, Smelt, Oisters, 
Pike, Trout, Tench, and other fresh fish; 
Eeles not excepted which are unwholesom 
to others. 
 
But refrain salt Meats, and dryed; as 
Bacon, old Ling, Haberdine, salt Cod, pickled 
or red Herrings; pickled Scalops, Oisters, 
Anchoves, Sturgeon, hang'd Beef, dryed 
Tongues, and such like. 
 
Milk and Milk meats are pleasant and 
good; as Custard, White-pots, new Cheese, 
fresh Cheese and Cream. 
 
For your Sauces; use Verjuce, Sorrel, 
Orange, Lemmon, Apples, Gooseberries, Currans, 
Prunes, pickled Cucumbers: as boyled 
Veal and Green-sauce; rost Veal and Orange; 
boyled Mutton with Verjuce and its 
own juice; rost Mutton and Cucumbers; 
green-Geese and Gooseberries; Stubble 
Goose and Apples; Pig and Currants; Pork 
and green-sauce; boiled Chickens with 
Gooseberries or Sorrel-sops; Calves feet 
[^p.171^] 
stewed with Currans and Prunes: And 
your meat thus Cook'd, is both food and 
Physick. 
 
Take a lawful freedom, and please your 
self with these Fruits; Citrons, Pomegranats, 
Oranges, Lemmons, Quince, Pearmains, 
Pippins, Cherries, Mulberries, Grapes, 
Damsins, Bullaces, Prunellæs, Respass, Currans, 
Barberries, Strawberries: they cool 
and quench thirst, contemperate and asswage 
hot cholerick humours, and give 
a great refreshment to the parched spirits. 
 
Eat Sallads of Lettuce, Sorrel, Purslane, 
Spinage, and Violet-leaves; they are medicamental 
aliment; but be sparing in Mustard, 
Salt and Spices. 
 
Butter-milk, Whey and Cider allay preternatural 
heat; check the effrenation of 
Choler, and are refreshing to you. 
 
Refuse the fat, and brown out-side of 
meat: also the crust of Bread: and be sparing 
in Butter and Oyl. 
 
Drink Wine, Spirits, and strong Liquors, 
but as Physick; to refresh and assist a weak 
stomach, and not otherwise. 
 
Fast not, but satisfie the Stomach, when 
it vellicates and calls for meat; biting choler 
must have something to feed on, or it 
will disturb the body. 
 
[^p.172^] 
Cherish and indulge sleep, it cools and 
moistens; but let it not exceed in length; 
which puts Nature by her due times for necessary 
evacuations. 
 
Be not too eager and constant in study; 
nor use late sitting up: both exasperate this 
condition of body, and make it worse. 
 
Use very gentle Exercise; and be not 
laborious or toyling, but take your ease; 
avoid violent motion; for it fires the spirits, 
and heats the body, which is very injurious 
to this Constitution. 
 
Frequent Venus is most pernicious. 
 
Cold Baths are profitable, and refresh 
much; by cooling the blood, allaying the 
spirits, and concentring them. 
 
Banish anger, immoderate care, peevishness 
and fretting; which discompose the 
spirits, heat and waste them; augment 
Choler, dry the body, and hasten old 
Age. 
 
Refrain Tabaco as a very injurious custom; 
it exasperates Choler by heating, 
drying, and evacuating dulcid Phlegm; 
which contemperates, bridles and checks 
the fury of acrid bilious humours. 
 
[^p.173^] 
[}SECT. XXI. 
The Melancholy Constitution, directed 
and governed.}] 
 
BY Melancholy Constitution; I here understand 
such a condition of body; 
as is procured, and most commonly is the 
consequent of habituated Melancholy; or a 
melancholy heavy Soul, and a discrasied 
Spleen. 
 
To pass by the controversies that might 
arise here from the distinction of melancholy 
by the Galenists, as one of the four 
constituent humours: I shall take for granted 
on both sides, as well Chymists, as them; 
that the aforesaid causes do beget such a 
constitution or condition of body, as may 
well require a peculiar Diætetick Regiment; 
as an allay or mitigation of those preternatural 
Symptoms, that necessarily follow such 
Causes: at least that they may not be 
aggravated by an injurious course of living. 
 
A melancholy, studious and sedentary life, 
does much abate and suspend the emanative 
vigour and activity of the Soul; equally distributed 
(geometrice) amongst the several 
[^p.174^] 
faculties, as the spring of their motion and 
actions: from which abatement and depression 
of their power, the functions are 
not discharged so exactly, vigorously and 
unblamably; but more or less, according 
to the aggravation, or intention and remission 
of those Causes. Now as the Spleen is 
more eminently the seat of that passion; and 
commonly a part most apparently injured, 
leading the rest into disorder; We shall 
appoint such a government, or prudent 
election and modification of such things, 
comprised in the Diætetick part of Physick; 
as may best sute with such a condition 
of body. 
 
The melancholy splenetick person; whose 
digestive faculties are debilitated, must 
feed more tenderly and nicely than another; 
else, that flatulency and oppression 
(which commonly does attend this condition 
of body) will be aggravated and much 
more molesting: For by a gross and plentiful 
feeding, are those evils increased. 
 
Let not your common dyet be of such 
Meats, as are hard and difficult to digest; 
that lie long upon the stomach, and require 
a strong incising ferment for separation 
and transmutation: as Meats long salted, 
dryed, fryed, or broyled. &c. but keep 
to such as are light and of facil digestion; 
[^p.175^] 
that soon yield in fermentation, and are 
transmuted, without great labour and trouble. 
Meats thus distinguished, you will 
find set down in the 54, 55, and 56. pages 
preceding, where you may make Election. 
 
If you have a hot and dry costive body; 
use Barley-broths, with Prunes, Rasins 
and Currans: and you may eat sometimes 
Pippins, Pearmains, Cherries, Respas, Strawberries, 
and such like good fruits to cool 
and moisten. 
 
Take not a full meal at Supper, nor late; 
but eat sparingly: And if that be too much, 
as may easily be discovered; then forbear 
Suppers wholly. 
 
Capers, Broom-buds and Sampire, are 
good Sauce; they please the Palate, quicken 
the Appetite, open Obstructions, and 
help Digestion: all which are profitable 
for this condition of body. 
 
Also Borrage, Bugloss, Endive, Cichory, 
Baum, Fumitory, Mary-gold-flowers, Violets, 
Clove-gilliflowers and Saffron, are of 
good use. 
 
Drink Cider sometimes, and small White-Wine; 
also Whey, if your stomach agrees 
with it. 
 
Keep the body soluble; your Head will 
be more free from pains, fumes, and heaviness: 
[^p.176^] 
Also the lower Region of the Body 
will not so frequently be disturbed with 
flatulent rumblings, distention and windy 
eruptions. 
 
Cherish Sleep; it refresheth the spirits, 
pacifies a troubled mind, banisheth cares, 
and strengthens all the faculties: but tiresome 
waking in the night, is a great Enemy 
to a melancholy person. 
 
Fly Idleness, the Nurse of Melancholy; 
but exercise often, and follow business, or 
recreations. 
 
Walk in the green Fields, Orchards, 
Gardens, Parks, by Rivers, and variety of 
places. 
 
Change of Air is very good. 
 
Avoid solitariness, and keep merry Company. 
 
Be frequent at Musick, Sports and 
Games. 
 
Recreate the spirits with sweet, fragrant 
and delightful smells. 
 
Banish all passions as much as in you lies; 
fear, grief, despair, revenge, desire, jealousie, 
emulation, and such like. 
 
Opus est te Animo valere, ut Corpore possis. 
 
Give not your self to much study, nor 
night-watchings; two great Enemies to a 
melancholy person. 
 
Refrain Tabacco, though a seeming pleasant 
[^p.177^] 
Companion; the phancy is pleased but 
for a short time; and the ill effects are durable. 
 
