EN	Many þings bene profitable to þe confeccion of clisteries, if þe lech mi3t haue al redy.
EN	Now, whatever be our exercise, those whom good fortune has enabled to take it or not, would do well to attend to the following observations.
EN	forgif me if it be wrang, And excuse me sere frend, for the mater was hard & strang.
EN	Brother I pray the for charite that thou write to me a fewe medecynes that I myght help pore folk that falleth into sekenes and beth vnkonnyng to helpe hem sylfen and of vnpower to huyre hem leches.
EN	Drink half a pint of this Morning and Night.
EN	This was writen fro Mounpileris to Quene Isabel of ynglond, at þe preier of ye kyng of Fraunce, hir broþer.
EN	For the same.
EN	BY the term rupture, hernia, or descent, is meant a tumor produced by the falling down or protrusion of some part or parts which should naturally be contained in the cavity of the belly.
EN	This indeed is cleer enough, and obliges us to averre a greater antiquity of this operation, than before we were aware of;
EN	That the Air we breathe in may be wholesome, all Things, that may advance or add to the corruption of it, should diligently be removed; our Houses, and Streets kept clean;
EN	There was some other small matters to be seen, not worth while for me to mention to you.
EN	Being a discovery of the Body of Man, exactly delineating all the Members, Bones, Veins, Sinews, Arteries, and parts thereof, from the Head to the Foot.
EN	The filmes of the braine are very much troubled with this paine, which by reason of their tendernesse, euen the least paines are sharpe and irksome to them.
EN	Drink for ordinary Dyet.
EN	Þis is kynde makyng of nervale certayne.
EN	The body of a man was thrown up at Puddle-dock by the tide, having a deep wound in his neck near his windpipe, besides several other wounds and bruises; had nothing on but the collar of his shirt, and shoes, and stockings.
EN	and amongst other things, the smell of Sope-Suds, and Lye, in the washing of Clothes, be avoided;
EN	Beneth, when y=e= leuer takis harme.
EN	I could instance many more, which Authors do wrongfully apply, as instance they attribute angelica, sage, box, and such like to be under the planet Saturn whereas the herbs are all hot and dry especially box who is hot and dry in the fourth degree, both the first plants are without question under the dominion of the Sun, as being of a good smell and taste and are of known virtues to comfort the heart, arteries, and vital spirits and to resist poyson.
EN	Blode is hot and moyst in his kynde and therfor men that ben sangweyne in complexion ben hot and moist in his kynde for plente of blood that they haue.
EN	I haue sayd als I hafe sens;
LA	Deus p~pici~ esto michi pcco~ri D~ne ihu~ xp~e Ego cognosco me grauiter peccasse.
LA	Ungwentum fuscum: Resspice celodonie .vi., de mastic .ii., de mitre .ii., cere .ii., olei libri .vi., quod priusquam in coctura ponatur, dissolvatur (prout mundari poterit) et aliquantulum super ignem in aliquo vase locato prout poterit mundari, cum aqua frigida super asspergatur, et sic mundatum confice sic in ollam, oleum inponatur et sic adjungatur lento.
LA	In manus tuas d~ne co~mendo spiritu~ meu~.
LA	eiusmodi
LA	nervus audibilis
LA	laus sit tibi p~ amara passione tua.
LA	qualiter fiat auditus
LA	Item ad interficiendum ranam in stomaco vel alios vermes:
LA	Accipe viride lyngnum abietis et cum ardet tolle illud quod fluit in posteriori parte lingni et admisse favum mellis.
LA	Hic sutus/ fallax/ irascens/ prodigus/ audax/ Astutus/ gracilis/ succus/ croceiq~ coloris.
LA	Tere agrimoniam et inde fac unum playstrum et appone loco.
LA	Quid pro quo,
LA	Ex his fiat puluis subliss.
LA	Hoc fiet lassum, si te non illa grauabunt.
LA	Item abrotanum bibat et liberabitur.
LA	et in hora mortis suscipe.
LA	secundum justitiam
LA	Sequitur de (missione) sanguinis.
LA	tu nos ab hoste p~tege.
LA	Item contra omnes capitis dolores: Folia edere trita molissime aceto et oleo roseo mixta fronte illiniatur.
LA	Ad plagam capitis profundam et si testa rupta fuerit in primis:
LA	Postea extrahe et iterum pone in aceto et ita ter coque in furno hoc modo.
LA	Castor gaudet equis, ouo prognatus codem, Pugnis, quot viuunt capitum, totidem studiorum Millia.
LA	Ut pili nascantur: Agrimoniam cum lacte caprino pone super locum sine pilis, et nascentur.
LA	Incipit Liber Cerebri
LA	Olibani p. ij.
LA	Lucidus & mundus sit rite habitabilis aer, Infectus neque sit, nec olens fætore cloacæ.
LA	et libenter volo me emendare p~ gra~q~ tua~ Miserere mei p~pt~ amara~ passione~ tua~.
LA	Ad idem.
LA	Salus populi
LA	De~ p~pici~ esto m~ pcco~ri
LA	Pater nr~
LA	Dragancia femina
LA	Item plantaginem et ederam in mortario tere et salem et oleum et vinum misse et calidum super capud pone.
LA	Item radicem feniculi tere et cum eo capud inunge.
LA	Item ad vertiginem: Unaquaque die iii. guttas de urina propria super capud infirmi infunde mane cum sit jejunus.
LA	Pro passione gutturis vel oris.
LA	Item lacte canis inunge et non cressent pili evulsi.
LA	id est sanguis
LA	qualiter visus oculis adveniat
LA	Ad capud purgandum.
LA	Item ruta trita cum sale et melle mixta sanat.
LA	de comune sapore coitus
LA	primi libri regalis disposicionis,
Prediction array: [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1]