EN	There being not so much as one word concerning Men-midwives mentioned there that we can find, it being the natural propriety of women to be much seeing into that Art: and though nature be not alone sufficient to the perfection of it, yet farther knowledge may be gain'd by a long and diligent practice, and be communicated to others of our own sex.
EN	Take lynseed &~ letuse, and stampe hem to gedre, and ley to þe stomak, &~ vse þis medicine til þou be hool.
EN	3e that wyll lette gude men blode, And vaynes wyth al 3owre liues fode, Some vaynes, vse 3e, And mony other lette 3e be.
EN	The filmes of the braine are very much troubled with this paine, which by reason of their tendernesse, euen the least paines are sharpe and irksome to them.
EN	So that she neadeth nothynge at all to be auansed and lyfted vp, other with any despitefull rebukes of other craftes, other with some borowed and paynted colours of the rhetoricians, or with the iugglynge castes of amplificacions.
EN	After ix daies þer nature is of o substance jwys
EN	It ys made by antepasyn when minucion is made, and anthepasyn ys sayd as wer contrare pascions.
EN	This is yuel for þey3en.
EN	Take an Egge, make a hole in the top of it, take out the white, and the yolk, and fill the shell only with Saffron; roast the shell and Saffron together, in Embers of Charcole, untill the shell wax yellow;
EN	And having thus saluted me, presents me the Urine, saying, Sir I desire your opinion of this water, and to tell me (though the sick partie know that too too well already) what the partie ayleth, and what the Disease is;
EN	There was some other small matters to be seen, not worth while for me to mention to you.
EN	Many þings bene profitable to þe confeccion of clisteries, if þe lech mi3t haue al redy.
EN	Ri3t dere frende Nero as it acordeþ þe significaciouns of wyrchyng for to be considered of þe essencion or beyng of kynde and of þe sekenes so it is nedeful þat þe science or þe connyng of þe þings with which curacioun or helyng schal be giffen for to be perceyued of þe same essencion or beyng.
EN	THE vulgar sort are so strongly prepossest (by reason of their ignorance) that Physicians can discern (by the Urine) the Disease, the conception, the sexe, the parties age, with many other such absurdities that I feare it will bee an hard matter to dispossesse them of that opinion.
EN	Þis is kynde makyng of nervale certayne.
EN	For to make a good entret.
EN	The Lungs is also divided into five Lobs, or Pellicles viz. three on the right side, and two on the left;
EN	It is the object of this treatise to prove, that every well educated physician, of unimpeached character, residing within the jurisdiction of the college, is entitled, independently of local study and local graduation, to be examined for admission into the fellowship of the college;
EN	Now, by considering the peculiarity of the circumstances, situation, and way of life of these people; and by attentively observing, what at any time gives rise to this disease, what is seen to remove it, and what to increase or mitigate its malignity, we shall be able to form a judgment, not only of the principal causes productive of it, but likewise of the subordinate, or those that in a less degree may contribute their influence.
EN	Tak ache seed, lynseed and comyn ana, stampe hem to gedre wel, and 3ef þe seek wyþ hote watur.
EN	I haue sayd als I hafe sens;
LA	co~tine~tia
LA	'Quominus nil pacior paciendi me tenet horror':
LA	Jus absinthei sume, jus marubii, jus feniculi, centum grana piperis, farine fabarum, anglice 'flour-ben', siccate duo coccliaria despumate mellis, tantum quantum de jure erbarum et coque simul in olla ad spissitudinem mellis.
LA	vena cephalica
LA	PRimus gradus siccitatis & caliditatis est cum aliqua res habeat vna~ portionem frigiditatis et duas caliditatis/ tunc res illa dicitur esse calida in primo gradu.
LA	qualiter fiat auditus
LA	secundum justitiam
LA	qualitas uvulae et organorum respirationis
LA	Pro surditate.
LA	id est sanguis
LA	Temperantia est mater sanitatis.
LA	Vt ignis exeat de vase pleno aque.
LA	Item ruta trita cum sale et melle mixta sanat.
LA	qualitas cordis
LA	Ungwentum fuscum: Resspice celodonie .vi., de mastic .ii., de mitre .ii., cere .ii., olei libri .vi., quod priusquam in coctura ponatur, dissolvatur (prout mundari poterit) et aliquantulum super ignem in aliquo vase locato prout poterit mundari, cum aqua frigida super asspergatur, et sic mundatum confice sic in ollam, oleum inponatur et sic adjungatur lento.
LA	Accipe panem siliginis bene fermentatum et acrem et cum exeat a furno, pone in forti aceto et cum bene biberit de aceto, deinde ponatur in furno et iterum coquatur.
LA	Dragancia femina
LA	De humana natura.
LA	s~ p~miu~ mort~ sacre p~ennis instet gloria.
LA	Cu~ gratia et priuilegio a rege indulto.
LA	Ad idem.
LA	Postea appone albumen ovi et condiendo simul et postea cola per pannum et fac unum plaistrum cum lino et pone super anteriorem partem capitis.
LA	pulmonica mediana.
LA	Si plaga sit in capite et fracta sit taga, est incurabilis; set si taga sit sana, curabilis est.
LA	Cur moritur homo dum salgia crescit in orto?
LA	qui bene degerit, ingerit, egerit, est homo sanus.
LA	spiritus sanctus est remedium
LA	In noi~e pri~s et filij & spu~s sancti ame~.
LA	Gratia dei maior
LA	sanguis menstruus
LA	Quid pro quo,
LA	Ignis ardens super aquam & natans hoc modo fit sicut ignis volans in aere sed cauda debet esse ad longitudine mvnius palme & debet poni super aquam & sine dubio ardebit super aquam & desuper.
LA	Postea inpone broceam usque ad terciam diem.
LA	Hoc facto conditum est.
LA	Herba cruriatica
LA	De spermate hominis
LA	Item si capud videtur sindi pro dolore: Succum edere mixtum cum oleo et aceto et nares unge pacientis.
LA	Item rutam, abrotanum, salgiam, ederam terestrem, trifolium simul tere et distempera cum aqua et bibe.
LA	Item ad vertiginem: Unaquaque die iii. guttas de urina propria super capud infirmi infunde mane cum sit jejunus.
LA	Explicit Liber Cerebri
LA	Item rutam et feniculum coque in aqua et cum ea lava capud tuum.
LA	'Sequere me'
LA	Ex his fiat puluis subliss.
LA	Pilulæ Angelicæ, Aloes Rosata, Pilulæ Tartareæ, Grana Angelica, &c.
Prediction array: [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1]