EN	If you be sick after meat, use this.
EN	and about a month ago a Child which had an Involution of the Intestines; which, I believe, the Vulgar means, and calls the Twisting of the Guts.
EN	Alle maner swete þingis, forwhi þei swelliþ, and alle maner notis and accornys of okis.
EN	Otherwiles the skynne is bowen inward with a stroke and not broken.
EN	Sethe all togedyr in a galown of whyte wyne.
EN	forgif me if it be wrang, And excuse me sere frend, for the mater was hard & strang.
EN	And drynk it w=t= water clene,
EN	Al bowyd is þe rygge so þat ny3e rounde it is Man wher of is þi pryde ther is none jwys
EN	Now, by considering the peculiarity of the circumstances, situation, and way of life of these people; and by attentively observing, what at any time gives rise to this disease, what is seen to remove it, and what to increase or mitigate its malignity, we shall be able to form a judgment, not only of the principal causes productive of it, but likewise of the subordinate, or those that in a less degree may contribute their influence.
EN	The body of a man was thrown up at Puddle-dock by the tide, having a deep wound in his neck near his windpipe, besides several other wounds and bruises; had nothing on but the collar of his shirt, and shoes, and stockings.
EN	Also the Gout is a greife in some by way of distention, whereas the body being replete with abundance of humors, the upper and stronger parts put downe their offending fulnesse unto the lower, which descending, the veines, and sinewes, and arteries procure this paine of distention.
EN	And 3yf þer schulde be norechyd on hem ony frut it is profyt abele þat che purge er che conseyue to make clene and redy þe place þat þe seed sal ly in.
EN	Let ayre be cleare and light, & free from faultes, That come of secret passages and vaults.
EN	I am sad & soleynge with hewynes in thoght;For all thy body, in myddis the Arme;
EN	Drink half a pint of this Morning and Night.
EN	BY the term rupture, hernia, or descent, is meant a tumor produced by the falling down or protrusion of some part or parts which should naturally be contained in the cavity of the belly.
EN	Aboue y=e= thovme is the make;
EN	Therefore it behoveth all Persons, as well Poor as Rich, to be furnish'd with Remedies against that Contagious Disease; and certain Rules, or a Method how to use them:
EN	A barge-man fell into the dock at Queen-hythe, and was drowned.
EN	The filmes of the braine are very much troubled with this paine, which by reason of their tendernesse, euen the least paines are sharpe and irksome to them.
EN	The part affected.
LA	Hinc stygias Ebrius hausit aquas:
LA	Vt ignis exeat de vase pleno aque.
LA	'Sequere me'
LA	s~ p~miu~ mort~ sacre p~ennis instet gloria.
LA	de aetate planetarum in embryo
LA	Lucidus & mundus sit rite habitabilis aer, Infectus neque sit, nec olens fætore cloacæ.
LA	Ipse repertorem medicinæ talis & artis, Fulmine Phœbigenam stygias detrusit ad vndas,
LA	de coniunctione spermatis
LA	ad Aemilianum cæcum consolatio
LA	Item pro eodem.
LA	nervi odorabiles
LA	quibus partibus gustabilem praestent
LA	ossa petrosa
LA	De condicionibus planetarum septem.
LA	Salus populi
LA	Secundus gradus est qua~do habeat vnam portionem frigiditatis et quattuor caliditatis/ tune dicitur esse calida in secundo gradu.
LA	Explicit tractatus Johannes de barba vel Johannis de Burdegalia editus contra morbum pestilencialem et est morbus epidemialis Anno domini Millesimo trecentesimo nonagesimo.
LA	qualiter fiat auditus
LA	Sequitur de (missione) sanguinis.
LA	Item rutam, abrotanum, salgiam, ederam terestrem, trifolium simul tere et distempera cum aqua et bibe.
LA	nervi gustabiles
LA	Explicit de condicionibus planetarum.
LA	Secunda calida et sicca.
LA	puluis
LA	Incipit Liber Cerebri
LA	Accipe panem siliginis bene fermentatum et acrem et cum exeat a furno, pone in forti aceto et cum bene biberit de aceto, deinde ponatur in furno et iterum coquatur.
LA	sanguis menstruus
LA	et in hora mortis suscipe.
LA	Septem grana juniperi vel ix confortant cerebrum, sensus recuperant, visum donant, pectus mundificant, vocem clarifecant, ventum depellunt, degestionem faciunt, lapidem frangunt, colorem renum curant, contra venenum valent, spiritum letiferum paralisim curant, avalitum dulcorant, eloquenciam dant.
LA	Quartus gradus est quando habeat vnam portionem frigiditatis et sexdecem caliditatis/ tu~c dicitur esse calida in quarto gradu.
LA	dies creticus est dies evasicuis ab infirmitate fine ad vitam, fine ad mortem.
LA	Carmen ad fluxum sanguinis: 'Domine Deus meus, adiutor sis famulo tuo .N. sicud strinxsisti [\f. 19rb\] fluvium Jordanis quando Christus baptizatus fuit, sic disstringe venas famuli tui .N. plenas sanguine'.
LA	Amen Explicit.
LA	Dragancia femina
LA	Iacea alba
LA	Ut pili nascantur: Agrimoniam cum lacte caprino pone super locum sine pilis, et nascentur.
LA	Item si capud videtur sindi pro dolore: Succum edere mixtum cum oleo et aceto et nares unge pacientis.
LA	Item radix plantaginis collo appensa dolorem tollit.
LA	Quo dicto et si absens sit, liberabitur.
LA	Postea appone albumen ovi et condiendo simul et postea cola per pannum et fac unum plaistrum cum lino et pone super anteriorem partem capitis.
LA	Labilis vt vita est, infirmum est labile corpus, Sic tua qu firment me_ra, vereremmus.
LA	Hoc fiet lassum, si te non illa grauabunt.
LA	Postea inpone broceam usque ad terciam diem.
LA	'Quominus nil pacior paciendi me tenet horror':
Prediction array: [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1]