EN	Drink half a pint of this Morning and Night.
EN	BY the term rupture, hernia, or descent, is meant a tumor produced by the falling down or protrusion of some part or parts which should naturally be contained in the cavity of the belly.
EN	Beneth, when y=e= leuer takis harme.
EN	For swellyng of membre of man or woman.
EN	Ri3t dere frende Nero as it acordeþ þe significaciouns of wyrchyng for to be considered of þe essencion or beyng of kynde and of þe sekenes so it is nedeful þat þe science or þe connyng of þe þings with which curacioun or helyng schal be giffen for to be perceyued of þe same essencion or beyng.
EN	The true causes of the disease, from observations made upon it, both at sea and land.
EN	This has always appeared to me to be the case;
EN	This is yuel for þey3en.
EN	It is the object of this treatise to prove, that every well educated physician, of unimpeached character, residing within the jurisdiction of the college, is entitled, independently of local study and local graduation, to be examined for admission into the fellowship of the college;
EN	Take an Egge, make a hole in the top of it, take out the white, and the yolk, and fill the shell only with Saffron; roast the shell and Saffron together, in Embers of Charcole, untill the shell wax yellow;
EN	The body of a man was thrown up at Puddle-dock by the tide, having a deep wound in his neck near his windpipe, besides several other wounds and bruises; had nothing on but the collar of his shirt, and shoes, and stockings.
EN	Also the Gout is a greife in some by way of distention, whereas the body being replete with abundance of humors, the upper and stronger parts put downe their offending fulnesse unto the lower, which descending, the veines, and sinewes, and arteries procure this paine of distention.
EN	And drynk it w=t= water clene,
EN	Take þe herbe celidoyne whos frute and flours been of goldyn colour, and take þereof the iiij elementz aftre þe maistrie of þe furst boke.
EN	A barge-man fell into the dock at Queen-hythe, and was drowned.
EN	and about a month ago a Child which had an Involution of the Intestines; which, I believe, the Vulgar means, and calls the Twisting of the Guts.
EN	AS sutures of one kind or another are found necessary, not only in every large wound, but in almost every operation of importance, the consideration of this subject seems first to require our attention.
EN	forsoþe þat þe significacions of helyng or curyng and þo þing with which it is helyd or cured be diuerse.
EN	In equity, by a comparative statement of the claims of the licentiates and fellows.
EN	And thus much of the Breast and Heart, which are under the signes Cancer and Leo.
EN	I graunt it is the power of the mynde whiche seeth, it is the power of the mynde whiche seeth, it is the power of the mynde which heareth, but yet if any infirmitie take the eyes, if the poores and issues of the eares be stopped & beseged w=t= any grosse humour, i~ vayne & al for nought hathe the mynde his power.
LA	Explicit de condicionibus planetarum.
LA	nervi petrosi
LA	Quo dicto et si absens sit, liberabitur.
LA	Pro carentibus appetitu.
LA	Fenugrecum
LA	(monumentum ære perennius)
LA	Item ad capud purgandum et vocem clarificandam et raucas reprimendas voces:
LA	Et cum opus fuerit, da jejuno coccliar unum et caveat hiis diebus a lardo et butiro et oleo et ab omnibus salcis.
LA	Accipe betam viridem bene tritam et cum succo inunge tempera.
LA	Capitulum Secundum
LA	Item radix plantaginis collo appensa dolorem tollit.
LA	Item contra omnes capitis dolores: Folia edere trita molissime aceto et oleo roseo mixta fronte illiniatur.
LA	edere terrestris
LA	Item ad vertigines at capitis dolores:
LA	'Ebrietas frangit quicquid sapiencia tangit'
LA	Item rutam, abrotanum, salgiam, ederam terestrem, trifolium simul tere et distempera cum aqua et bibe.
LA	inominata
LA	Si plaga sit in capite et fracta sit taga, est incurabilis; set si taga sit sana, curabilis est.
LA	Contra surditatem:
LA	vena concava.
LA	Item ne pili contrarii nascantur: Ova formicarum, lacrimam edere i. jus, archemeseam equo pondere, hec omnia in vino quiesse et locum vulneris tange et pili nuncquam renascentur.
LA	Postea ungwentum fuscum qualibet die apponatur.
LA	et nome~ dm~ inuocabo.
LA	Carmen ad fluxum sanguinis: 'Domine Deus meus, adiutor sis famulo tuo .N. sicud strinxsisti [\f. 19rb\] fluvium Jordanis quando Christus baptizatus fuit, sic disstringe venas famuli tui .N. plenas sanguine'.
LA	laus sit tibi p~ amara passione tua.
LA	Granum solis
LA	'Virtutem primam puta esse compescere linguam':
LA	noli me tangere.
LA	puluis
LA	Ungwentum fuscum: Resspice celodonie .vi., de mastic .ii., de mitre .ii., cere .ii., olei libri .vi., quod priusquam in coctura ponatur, dissolvatur (prout mundari poterit) et aliquantulum super ignem in aliquo vase locato prout poterit mundari, cum aqua frigida super asspergatur, et sic mundatum confice sic in ollam, oleum inponatur et sic adjungatur lento.
LA	Alsa pulmonica
LA	co~tine~tia
LA	qualiter odoratibus naribus adveniat
LA	Deinde purga pocione.
LA	Deinde commedat paciens de illo pane et nichil bibat nisi fortissimum acetum, set cum jejunare facias per diem vel duos et item acerimo aceto et ab pane siliginis acerino interficietur.
LA	Capillos tunde, deinde mundum panniculum .i. est absque ullo medicamine, vel lardi a linthe juxta plage quantitatem in ipso hiatu ossis, ne sanies iruens in juncturas suas putredinem extendat.
LA	Prima etas lune calida est et humida.
LA	herba pulmonis
LA	nervi gustabiles
LA	Item pro eodem.
LA	Hoc fiet lassum, si te non illa grauabunt.
LA	Verbi gratia:
LA	Ad capud purgandum.
LA	secundum justitiam
Prediction array: [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1]