EN	About 18 months ago I dissected a poor Emaciated Creature, that dyed of a Hydrops, out of whom I took about 10 Gallons of Liquor measured:
EN	THe Small Pox are caused of superfluous choller and flegm, the which is mixed with the bloud, and so continuing a certain time it doth encrease so much, that Nature cannot bear it, and so driveth it forth with a great accident of a Fever, the which commonly doth continue four or five daies together, and then cometh forth certain wheals or bladders full of corruption, which within three daies will break and run forth, and many drie.
EN	Take lynseed &~ letuse, and stampe hem to gedre, and ley to þe stomak, &~ vse þis medicine til þou be hool.
EN	And som hafe it lengere as þei þat be of hye complexioun and be norysched with hote metys and drinkys, and lyuoun yn mych rest, and þey hafe þis purgacyoun euery moneth oones, but when þey ben with childe ore þat þey be of drye complexioun and laboure muche.
EN	By it passeth all the chilosity of the meat from the stomack to the Liver.
EN	Also the Gout is a greife in some by way of distention, whereas the body being replete with abundance of humors, the upper and stronger parts put downe their offending fulnesse unto the lower, which descending, the veines, and sinewes, and arteries procure this paine of distention.
EN	The true causes of the disease, from observations made upon it, both at sea and land.
EN	To guard therefore against such delusions, and to render the unphysical reader better qualified to decide, in an affair of so much importance, as his own health, and life, is the purport of this Essay; where by demonstrating the influence Nature has over many diseases, he may the readier judge of medical assistance in general, and on what plan, it can best be conducted.
EN	and amongst other things, the smell of Sope-Suds, and Lye, in the washing of Clothes, be avoided;
EN	I am sad & soleynge with hewynes in thoght;For all thy body, in myddis the Arme;
EN	This was writen fro Mounpileris to Quene Isabel of ynglond, at þe preier of ye kyng of Fraunce, hir broþer.
EN	In equity, by a comparative statement of the claims of the licentiates and fellows.
EN	Brother I pray the for charite that thou write to me a fewe medecynes that I myght help pore folk that falleth into sekenes and beth vnkonnyng to helpe hem sylfen and of vnpower to huyre hem leches.
EN	I could instance many more, which Authors do wrongfully apply, as instance they attribute angelica, sage, box, and such like to be under the planet Saturn whereas the herbs are all hot and dry especially box who is hot and dry in the fourth degree, both the first plants are without question under the dominion of the Sun, as being of a good smell and taste and are of known virtues to comfort the heart, arteries, and vital spirits and to resist poyson.
EN	This indeed is cleer enough, and obliges us to averre a greater antiquity of this operation, than before we were aware of;
EN	Wommen of relegion purge noght because of rysyng o nyght and synggyng and ocupacyon in her seruyse her blod wastyth.
EN	In the left hande for the mylte;
EN	And 3yf þer schulde be norechyd on hem ony frut it is profyt abele þat che purge er che conseyue to make clene and redy þe place þat þe seed sal ly in.
EN	A barge-man fell into the dock at Queen-hythe, and was drowned.
EN	forgif me if it be wrang, And excuse me sere frend, for the mater was hard & strang.
EN	Ri3t dere frende Nero as it acordeþ þe significaciouns of wyrchyng for to be considered of þe essencion or beyng of kynde and of þe sekenes so it is nedeful þat þe science or þe connyng of þe þings with which curacioun or helyng schal be giffen for to be perceyued of þe same essencion or beyng.
LA	Ungwentum fuscum: Resspice celodonie .vi., de mastic .ii., de mitre .ii., cere .ii., olei libri .vi., quod priusquam in coctura ponatur, dissolvatur (prout mundari poterit) et aliquantulum super ignem in aliquo vase locato prout poterit mundari, cum aqua frigida super asspergatur, et sic mundatum confice sic in ollam, oleum inponatur et sic adjungatur lento.
LA	Dimitte nobis debita nra~ sicut & nos dimittim~ debitorib~ nri~s.
LA	Ad sanandum scabiem: Super omniam contra huiusmodi passionem humoris inter cutanei.
LA	Granum solis
LA	De spermate hominis
LA	Item radicem feniculi tere et cum eo capud inunge.
LA	Hoc fiet lassum, si te non illa grauabunt.
LA	Contra surditatem:
LA	Corporis & debes non intermittere curam, Inque cibo potuque modus sit, gymnasiisque.
LA	Si nucem poterit frangere vel nodum straminis, tunc est curabilis.
LA	Postea extrahe et iterum pone in aceto et ita ter coque in furno hoc modo.
LA	eiusmodi
LA	'Deridens alios non inderisus abibit'
LA	nervus audibilis
LA	Explicit de condicionibus planetarum.
LA	Fenugrecum
LA	tu nos ab hoste p~tege.
LA	De humana natura.
LA	Accipe panem siliginis bene fermentatum et acrem et cum exeat a furno, pone in forti aceto et cum bene biberit de aceto, deinde ponatur in furno et iterum coquatur.
LA	Item pulegium cum oleo coque et cum eo capud et tempera unge.
LA	Jus absinthei sume, jus marubii, jus feniculi, centum grana piperis, farine fabarum, anglice 'flour-ben', siccate duo coccliaria despumate mellis, tantum quantum de jure erbarum et coque simul in olla ad spissitudinem mellis.
LA	Iacea nigra
LA	Item trifolium in aqua coque et tempora illini.
LA	Verbi gratia:
LA	sanguis menstruus
LA	et libenter volo me emendare p~ gra~q~ tua~ Miserere mei p~pt~ amara~ passione~ tua~.
LA	Experimentum si taga sit fracta cum nuce:
LA	nervi petrosi
LA	Ad occidendum vermes in cilijs oculorum.
LA	(monumentum ære perennius)
LA	Postea ungwentum fuscum qualibet die apponatur.
LA	Pone in aquam testam oui plenam calcis vivae & sulphuri vivi & ignis exibit.
LA	Deus p~pici~ esto michi pcco~ri D~ne ihu~ xp~e Ego cognosco me grauiter peccasse.
LA	co~tine~tia
LA	Accipe betam viridem bene tritam et cum succo inunge tempera.
LA	Si plaga sit in capite et fracta sit taga, est incurabilis; set si taga sit sana, curabilis est.
LA	Salus populi
LA	Pro ossibus inpressis in capite vel in alio loco corporis:
LA	Dragancia femina
LA	'Sequere me'
LA	Calcis ex ouorum testis, p. iij.
LA	Hic sutus/ fallax/ irascens/ prodigus/ audax/ Astutus/ gracilis/ succus/ croceiq~ coloris.
LA	Accipe viride lyngnum abietis et cum ardet tolle illud quod fluit in posteriori parte lingni et admisse favum mellis.
LA	Trahit sua quemq~ voluptas.
Prediction array: [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1]