EN	Behind the Lungs passeth Isofagus of whom its spoken before, and there passeth also veins and Arteries, and all these with trachia arteria do make a stoke repleat unto the gullet, with Pannicles, strong Ligaments, and glandulus flesh to fulfill the voyd places.
EN	Blode is hot and moyst in his kynde and therfor men that ben sangweyne in complexion ben hot and moist in his kynde for plente of blood that they haue.
EN	Þis is kynde makyng of nervale certayne.
EN	This is good for þe y3en.
EN	Tak ache seed, lynseed and comyn ana, stampe hem to gedre wel, and 3ef þe seek wyþ hote watur.
EN	In the left hande for the mylte;
EN	THE vulgar sort are so strongly prepossest (by reason of their ignorance) that Physicians can discern (by the Urine) the Disease, the conception, the sexe, the parties age, with many other such absurdities that I feare it will bee an hard matter to dispossesse them of that opinion.
EN	3e that wyll lette gude men blode, And vaynes wyth al 3owre liues fode, Some vaynes, vse 3e, And mony other lette 3e be.
EN	Being a discovery of the Body of Man, exactly delineating all the Members, Bones, Veins, Sinews, Arteries, and parts thereof, from the Head to the Foot.
EN	3if y=u= of vomites wylt hawe bote,
EN	And 3yf þer schulde be norechyd on hem ony frut it is profyt abele þat che purge er che conseyue to make clene and redy þe place þat þe seed sal ly in.
EN	And som hafe it lengere as þei þat be of hye complexioun and be norysched with hote metys and drinkys, and lyuoun yn mych rest, and þey hafe þis purgacyoun euery moneth oones, but when þey ben with childe ore þat þey be of drye complexioun and laboure muche.
EN	To guard therefore against such delusions, and to render the unphysical reader better qualified to decide, in an affair of so much importance, as his own health, and life, is the purport of this Essay; where by demonstrating the influence Nature has over many diseases, he may the readier judge of medical assistance in general, and on what plan, it can best be conducted.
EN	Also yf the sekenes be inveterat, i.e., old, be metasentesyn.
EN	There being not so much as one word concerning Men-midwives mentioned there that we can find, it being the natural propriety of women to be much seeing into that Art: and though nature be not alone sufficient to the perfection of it, yet farther knowledge may be gain'd by a long and diligent practice, and be communicated to others of our own sex.
EN	This is yuel for þey3en.
EN	And drynk it w=t= water clene,
EN	So that she neadeth nothynge at all to be auansed and lyfted vp, other with any despitefull rebukes of other craftes, other with some borowed and paynted colours of the rhetoricians, or with the iugglynge castes of amplificacions.
EN	There was some other small matters to be seen, not worth while for me to mention to you.
EN	I wyl y=e= telle by & by As I fond wrety~ in abok, Y=t= in borwyng I be tok Of agret ladyes prest Y=t= of gret name bar y=e= mest.
EN	For the same.
LA	Fenugrecum
LA	Item abrotanum bibat et liberabitur.
LA	Puluis sine pari
LA	Dialthææ
LA	DE COMMVNI VINCVLO,
LA	qualiter visus oculis adveniat
LA	licium
LA	Item contra omnes capitis dolores: Folia edere trita molissime aceto et oleo roseo mixta fronte illiniatur.
LA	co~tine~tia
LA	Item oleo facto de nucibus maioribus capud inunge.
LA	Hoc facto lokechestre vivens coque et succum eius adde predictis et mitte in aures et curabitur surditas.
LA	'Pede super colles pedes vbi pedere nolles.'
LA	Quid pro quo,
LA	Item plantaginem et ederam in mortario tere et salem et oleum et vinum misse et calidum super capud pone.
LA	Alsa pulmonica
LA	Postea ungwentum fuscum qualibet die apponatur.
LA	Postea appone albumen ovi et condiendo simul et postea cola per pannum et fac unum plaistrum cum lino et pone super anteriorem partem capitis.
LA	Pone in aquam testam oui plenam calcis vivae & sulphuri vivi & ignis exibit.
LA	Item rutam, abrotanum, salgiam, ederam terestrem, trifolium simul tere et distempera cum aqua et bibe.
LA	Item ne pili contrarii nascantur: Ova formicarum, lacrimam edere i. jus, archemeseam equo pondere, hec omnia in vino quiesse et locum vulneris tange et pili nuncquam renascentur.
LA	et nome~ dm~ inuocabo.
LA	Hoc facto conditum est.
LA	pulmonica mediana.
LA	Et tunc tolle de igne ut frigeat sicque in pixide pone.
LA	Largire claru~ vespere.
LA	De~ p~pici~ esto m~ pcco~ri
LA	Item sume recentem angwillam et excoriatam, ossa et sanguinem collige in vase mundo.
LA	Daucus asininus
LA	Deus p~pici~ esto michi pcco~ri D~ne ihu~ xp~e Ego cognosco me grauiter peccasse.
LA	Ungwentum.
LA	qui bene degerit, ingerit, egerit, est homo sanus.
LA	de aetate planetarum in embryo
LA	Et modo incipit de condicionibus planetarum septem.
LA	In primis pro oculis Aqua facialis preciosa dicta.
LA	D~ne ihu~ redemisti nos in sanguine tuo.
LA	Deinde purga pocione.
LA	Tertia frigida et humida.
LA	sanguis menstruus
LA	secundum artem.
LA	Explicit Liber Cerebri
LA	Experimentum si taga sit fracta cum nuce:
LA	Dirupisti dn~e vincula mea. tibi sacrificabo hostia~ laudis.
LA	Salus populi
LA	Valere dicitur fumus terrae in kaluris sub fumigan communibus in aporimatibus; & syropis potus enim datus scabiem pustulas a prurigine inundat Humores superflues inter carnem & cutem desiccat vel ad lepram exposites iuvat
Prediction array: [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1]