EN	For spotes et oþer sekenesse to be don a way in þe face.
EN	For to make a good entret.
EN	Therefore it behoveth all Persons, as well Poor as Rich, to be furnish'd with Remedies against that Contagious Disease; and certain Rules, or a Method how to use them:
EN	So that she neadeth nothynge at all to be auansed and lyfted vp, other with any despitefull rebukes of other craftes, other with some borowed and paynted colours of the rhetoricians, or with the iugglynge castes of amplificacions.
EN	Ri3t dere frende Nero as it acordeþ þe significaciouns of wyrchyng for to be considered of þe essencion or beyng of kynde and of þe sekenes so it is nedeful þat þe science or þe connyng of þe þings with which curacioun or helyng schal be giffen for to be perceyued of þe same essencion or beyng.
EN	In equity, by a comparative statement of the claims of the licentiates and fellows.
EN	I could instance many more, which Authors do wrongfully apply, as instance they attribute angelica, sage, box, and such like to be under the planet Saturn whereas the herbs are all hot and dry especially box who is hot and dry in the fourth degree, both the first plants are without question under the dominion of the Sun, as being of a good smell and taste and are of known virtues to comfort the heart, arteries, and vital spirits and to resist poyson.
EN	Drink half a pint of this Morning and Night.
EN	Alle maner swete þingis, forwhi þei swelliþ, and alle maner notis and accornys of okis.
EN	Al bowyd is þe rygge so þat ny3e rounde it is Man wher of is þi pryde ther is none jwys
EN	And 3yf þer schulde be norechyd on hem ony frut it is profyt abele þat che purge er che conseyue to make clene and redy þe place þat þe seed sal ly in.
EN	I wyl y=e= telle by & by As I fond wrety~ in abok, Y=t= in borwyng I be tok Of agret ladyes prest Y=t= of gret name bar y=e= mest.
EN	Any of al thes may change a mannys complexion.
EN	It ys made by antepasyn when minucion is made, and anthepasyn ys sayd as wer contrare pascions.
EN	For þe sengles.
EN	It is an admirable head Purge, also an excellent and safe Medicine for those who are naturally costive or hot bodies.
EN	and about a month ago a Child which had an Involution of the Intestines; which, I believe, the Vulgar means, and calls the Twisting of the Guts.
EN	About 18 months ago I dissected a poor Emaciated Creature, that dyed of a Hydrops, out of whom I took about 10 Gallons of Liquor measured:
EN	Tak aloen and stamp it and do it in his mouþe and alsone he shalle speke.
EN	For swellyng of membre of man or woman.
EN	The body of a man was thrown up at Puddle-dock by the tide, having a deep wound in his neck near his windpipe, besides several other wounds and bruises; had nothing on but the collar of his shirt, and shoes, and stockings.
LA	'Pede super colles pedes vbi pedere nolles.'
LA	Ad deponendum telam in oculo.
LA	Cu~ gratia et priuilegio a rege indulto.
LA	qualitas uvulae et organorum respirationis
LA	Iacea alba
LA	(monumentum ære perennius)
LA	Pro carentibus appetitu.
LA	Alsa pulmonica
LA	laus sit tibi p~ amara passione tua.
LA	spiritus sanctus est remedium
LA	Item ad vertiginem: Unaquaque die iii. guttas de urina propria super capud infirmi infunde mane cum sit jejunus.
LA	'vincat opus verbum, minuit iactantia famam';
LA	Labilis vt vita est, infirmum est labile corpus, Sic tua qu firment me_ra, vereremmus.
LA	De~ p~pici~ esto m~ pcco~ri
LA	Experimentum si taga sit fracta cum nuce:
LA	quo vita nusq~ decidat.
LA	Jus absinthei sume, jus marubii, jus feniculi, centum grana piperis, farine fabarum, anglice 'flour-ben', siccate duo coccliaria despumate mellis, tantum quantum de jure erbarum et coque simul in olla ad spissitudinem mellis.
LA	ad Aemilianum cæcum consolatio
LA	Mors furit, urbs rapitur, Seuit mare, sol operitur, Regnum mutatur, plebs peste fame cruciatur.
LA	et in hora mortis suscipe.
LA	Verbi gratia:
LA	Vita, Lucrum, Fratres, Parentes, Nati, Valetudo,
LA	Et menta & granum juniperii simul & anfert fetorem anelitus gingivas putridas purgat Juniperus
LA	lutum
LA	Item ad vertigines at capitis dolores:
LA	Pro le scaldynge virge quod vocatur apegalle.
LA	Item ne pili contrarii nascantur: Ova formicarum, lacrimam edere i. jus, archemeseam equo pondere, hec omnia in vino quiesse et locum vulneris tange et pili nuncquam renascentur.
LA	Calcis ex ouorum testis, p. iij.
LA	Ex his fiat puluis subliss.
LA	Dragancia femina
LA	Fumus terre
LA	Adiuro te, infirmitas, per Patrem et Filium et Spiritum Sanctum ne hic remaneas + Absterge, Domine, maculam ab occulo famuli tui + agios + agios + agios + sanctus + sanctus + sanctus + Christus vincit, Christus regnat, Christus imperat.
LA	sanguis menstruus
LA	'Quominus nil pacior paciendi me tenet horror':
LA	inominata
LA	Oleum Siriacum
LA	Oleum Rhodij
LA	de aetate planetarum in embryo
LA	De condicionibus planetarum septem.
LA	In noi~e pri~s et filij & spu~s sancti ame~.
LA	Multi multa sciunt, sed nemo Omnia.
LA	vena cephalica
LA	Item rutam et feniculum coque in aqua et cum ea lava capud tuum.
LA	Olibani p. ij.
Prediction array: [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1]