EN	It is the object of this treatise to prove, that every well educated physician, of unimpeached character, residing within the jurisdiction of the college, is entitled, independently of local study and local graduation, to be examined for admission into the fellowship of the college;
EN	Take green Vitriol calcin'd, Saltpeter, and Sulphur, of each a pound, beat them well together, and keep it for use.
EN	Wommen of relegion purge noght because of rysyng o nyght and synggyng and ocupacyon in her seruyse her blod wastyth.
EN	This has always appeared to me to be the case;
EN	Sethe all togedyr in a galown of whyte wyne.
EN	The filmes of the braine are very much troubled with this paine, which by reason of their tendernesse, euen the least paines are sharpe and irksome to them.
EN	There being not so much as one word concerning Men-midwives mentioned there that we can find, it being the natural propriety of women to be much seeing into that Art: and though nature be not alone sufficient to the perfection of it, yet farther knowledge may be gain'd by a long and diligent practice, and be communicated to others of our own sex.
EN	This is good for þe y3en.
EN	this, Experience has taught to be very dangerous;
EN	forsoþe þat þe significacions of helyng or curyng and þo þing with which it is helyd or cured be diuerse.
EN	Also yf the sekenes be inveterat, i.e., old, be metasentesyn.
EN	And som hafe it lengere as þei þat be of hye complexioun and be norysched with hote metys and drinkys, and lyuoun yn mych rest, and þey hafe þis purgacyoun euery moneth oones, but when þey ben with childe ore þat þey be of drye complexioun and laboure muche.
EN	Tak aloen and stamp it and do it in his mouþe and alsone he shalle speke.
EN	and about a month ago a Child which had an Involution of the Intestines; which, I believe, the Vulgar means, and calls the Twisting of the Guts.
EN	The body of a man was thrown up at Puddle-dock by the tide, having a deep wound in his neck near his windpipe, besides several other wounds and bruises; had nothing on but the collar of his shirt, and shoes, and stockings.
EN	Let it sethe tyl halfe be wastyd.
EN	At betonye I wyll be gyn~e Y=t= many vertewys hath hy~ w=t= i~ne, Betonye sothy~ yese lechys bedene Yat kepyth ma~nys body clene, Who so betonye on hym bere Fro wykked sperytis it wyll hy~ were.
EN	THe Small Pox are caused of superfluous choller and flegm, the which is mixed with the bloud, and so continuing a certain time it doth encrease so much, that Nature cannot bear it, and so driveth it forth with a great accident of a Fever, the which commonly doth continue four or five daies together, and then cometh forth certain wheals or bladders full of corruption, which within three daies will break and run forth, and many drie.
EN	And Care must be taken not to overload the Stomach, or to eat any thing but what is of good Nourishment, and easy to digest, and grateful to the Stomach.
EN	I wyl y=e= telle by & by As I fond wrety~ in abok, Y=t= in borwyng I be tok Of agret ladyes prest Y=t= of gret name bar y=e= mest.
EN	Now, by considering the peculiarity of the circumstances, situation, and way of life of these people; and by attentively observing, what at any time gives rise to this disease, what is seen to remove it, and what to increase or mitigate its malignity, we shall be able to form a judgment, not only of the principal causes productive of it, but likewise of the subordinate, or those that in a less degree may contribute their influence.
LA	pulmonica mediana.
LA	Item oleo facto de nucibus maioribus capud inunge.
LA	'Pede super colles pedes vbi pedere nolles.'
LA	'Sequere me'
LA	Item minta trita timpora line.
LA	Quo dicto et si absens sit, liberabitur.
LA	Prima etas lune calida est et humida.
LA	Item radicem feniculi tere et cum eo capud inunge.
LA	Explicit de condicionibus planetarum.
LA	Secunda calida et sicca.
LA	Granum solis
LA	PRimus gradus siccitatis & caliditatis est cum aliqua res habeat vna~ portionem frigiditatis et duas caliditatis/ tunc res illa dicitur esse calida in primo gradu.
LA	Septem grana juniperi vel ix confortant cerebrum, sensus recuperant, visum donant, pectus mundificant, vocem clarifecant, ventum depellunt, degestionem faciunt, lapidem frangunt, colorem renum curant, contra venenum valent, spiritum letiferum paralisim curant, avalitum dulcorant, eloquenciam dant.
LA	Jus absinthei sume, jus marubii, jus feniculi, centum grana piperis, farine fabarum, anglice 'flour-ben', siccate duo coccliaria despumate mellis, tantum quantum de jure erbarum et coque simul in olla ad spissitudinem mellis.
LA	In primis pro oculis Aqua facialis preciosa dicta.
LA	qui bene degerit, ingerit, egerit, est homo sanus.
LA	s~ p~miu~ mort~ sacre p~ennis instet gloria.
LA	Item ob vertiginem capitis qui pre nimio dolore quasi mentes suas amittunt: Selidonia cum radice sua subfumigetur et infirmus per triduum ipsam herbam circa collum ligatam ferat.
LA	Deus p~pici~ esto michi pcco~ri D~ne ihu~ xp~e Ego cognosco me grauiter peccasse.
LA	Item pro eodem.
LA	Aqua vitæ,
LA	Iacea nigra
LA	Dimitte nobis debita nra~ sicut & nos dimittim~ debitorib~ nri~s.
LA	De etate lune quando est sicca vel calida.
LA	Pro ossibus extrahere illesis.
LA	primi libri regalis disposicionis,
LA	Ignis ardens super aquam & natans hoc modo fit sicut ignis volans in aere sed cauda debet esse ad longitudine mvnius palme & debet poni super aquam & sine dubio ardebit super aquam & desuper.
LA	Ad capud purgandum.
LA	Hoc facto conditum est.
LA	Parisiensis Explicit primus liber de Secretis secretorum, secundum translacionem Johannis de Caritate.
LA	Dragancia femina
LA	Item pulegium coctum in aceto ad narez pone calidum, ut odor intret de ipso et fac coronam de eodem et capiti calidam circum appone.
LA	licium
LA	Ad occidendum vermes in cilijs oculorum.
LA	Oleum Rhodij
LA	'Ebrietas frangit quicquid sapiencia tangit'
LA	Ille sanguis ponatur in saniorem aurem surdi et valebit ut probatum est.
LA	Ut pili nascantur: Agrimoniam cum lacte caprino pone super locum sine pilis, et nascentur.
LA	Ungwentum fuscum: Resspice celodonie .vi., de mastic .ii., de mitre .ii., cere .ii., olei libri .vi., quod priusquam in coctura ponatur, dissolvatur (prout mundari poterit) et aliquantulum super ignem in aliquo vase locato prout poterit mundari, cum aqua frigida super asspergatur, et sic mundatum confice sic in ollam, oleum inponatur et sic adjungatur lento.
LA	Pilulæ Angelicæ, Aloes Rosata, Pilulæ Tartareæ, Grana Angelica, &c.
LA	Ungwentum.
LA	Adiuro te, infirmitas, per Patrem et Filium et Spiritum Sanctum ne hic remaneas + Absterge, Domine, maculam ab occulo famuli tui + agios + agios + agios + sanctus + sanctus + sanctus + Christus vincit, Christus regnat, Christus imperat.
LA	qualiter visus oculis adveniat
LA	Contra surditatem:
Prediction array: [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1]