EN	It is the object of this treatise to prove, that every well educated physician, of unimpeached character, residing within the jurisdiction of the college, is entitled, independently of local study and local graduation, to be examined for admission into the fellowship of the college;
EN	I could instance many more, which Authors do wrongfully apply, as instance they attribute angelica, sage, box, and such like to be under the planet Saturn whereas the herbs are all hot and dry especially box who is hot and dry in the fourth degree, both the first plants are without question under the dominion of the Sun, as being of a good smell and taste and are of known virtues to comfort the heart, arteries, and vital spirits and to resist poyson.
EN	And som hafe it lengere as þei þat be of hye complexioun and be norysched with hote metys and drinkys, and lyuoun yn mych rest, and þey hafe þis purgacyoun euery moneth oones, but when þey ben with childe ore þat þey be of drye complexioun and laboure muche.
EN	and about a month ago a Child which had an Involution of the Intestines; which, I believe, the Vulgar means, and calls the Twisting of the Guts.
EN	Wommen of relegion purge noght because of rysyng o nyght and synggyng and ocupacyon in her seruyse her blod wastyth.
EN	And having thus saluted me, presents me the Urine, saying, Sir I desire your opinion of this water, and to tell me (though the sick partie know that too too well already) what the partie ayleth, and what the Disease is;
EN	THe Small Pox are caused of superfluous choller and flegm, the which is mixed with the bloud, and so continuing a certain time it doth encrease so much, that Nature cannot bear it, and so driveth it forth with a great accident of a Fever, the which commonly doth continue four or five daies together, and then cometh forth certain wheals or bladders full of corruption, which within three daies will break and run forth, and many drie.
EN	It is an admirable head Purge, also an excellent and safe Medicine for those who are naturally costive or hot bodies.
EN	3if y=u= of vomites wylt hawe bote,
EN	Take lynseed &~ letuse, and stampe hem to gedre, and ley to þe stomak, &~ vse þis medicine til þou be hool.
EN	In the left hande for the mylte;
EN	That the Air we breathe in may be wholesome, all Things, that may advance or add to the corruption of it, should diligently be removed; our Houses, and Streets kept clean;
EN	By it passeth all the chilosity of the meat from the stomack to the Liver.
EN	BY the term rupture, hernia, or descent, is meant a tumor produced by the falling down or protrusion of some part or parts which should naturally be contained in the cavity of the belly.
EN	About 18 months ago I dissected a poor Emaciated Creature, that dyed of a Hydrops, out of whom I took about 10 Gallons of Liquor measured:
EN	The filmes of the braine are very much troubled with this paine, which by reason of their tendernesse, euen the least paines are sharpe and irksome to them.
EN	And if þou take þe mawe of a sowkynge hare, or of a sowkyng calfe and bren it alto powdere, medell þe poudre with þe forsayde pille, þei are mych betture.
EN	I graunt it is the power of the mynde whiche seeth, it is the power of the mynde whiche seeth, it is the power of the mynde which heareth, but yet if any infirmitie take the eyes, if the poores and issues of the eares be stopped & beseged w=t= any grosse humour, i~ vayne & al for nought hathe the mynde his power.
EN	Take an Egge, make a hole in the top of it, take out the white, and the yolk, and fill the shell only with Saffron; roast the shell and Saffron together, in Embers of Charcole, untill the shell wax yellow;
EN	There being not so much as one word concerning Men-midwives mentioned there that we can find, it being the natural propriety of women to be much seeing into that Art: and though nature be not alone sufficient to the perfection of it, yet farther knowledge may be gain'd by a long and diligent practice, and be communicated to others of our own sex.
EN	The thyrde water of seyunte Gyle ys for to distroye many infirmiteys with in a mannys bodye, and hit ys clepid amongyste clerkes and doctoris aqua potabilis and hit ys made in this wyse.
LA	Item ob vertiginem capitis qui pre nimio dolore quasi mentes suas amittunt: Selidonia cum radice sua subfumigetur et infirmus per triduum ipsam herbam circa collum ligatam ferat.
LA	Item pulegium cum oleo coque et cum eo capud et tempera unge.
LA	Salus populi
LA	Tertia frigida et humida.
LA	co~tine~tia
LA	De~ p~pici~ esto m~ pcco~ri
LA	primi libri regalis disposicionis,
LA	Olibani p. ij.
LA	id est sanguis
LA	Diues inaccessos vbi Solis filia Lucos, &c.
LA	Item trifolium in aqua coque et tempora illini.
LA	Ignis ardens super aquam & natans hoc modo fit sicut ignis volans in aere sed cauda debet esse ad longitudine mvnius palme & debet poni super aquam & sine dubio ardebit super aquam & desuper.
LA	Deus p~pici~ esto michi pcco~ri D~ne ihu~ xp~e Ego cognosco me grauiter peccasse.
LA	Item absintheum, rutam et ederam terrestrem tere cum melle et albumine ovi et indutum lintheo capiti appone.
LA	Hoc facto lokechestre vivens coque et succum eius adde predictis et mitte in aures et curabitur surditas.
LA	Pro surditate.
LA	D~ne ihu~ redemisti nos in sanguine tuo.
LA	Item pro eodem.
LA	Herba cruriatica
LA	Explicit Liber Cerebri
LA	lactea porta
LA	inominata
LA	Granum solis
LA	id est fluxus
LA	Pro dolore in dorso vel spina.
LA	Ut pili nascantur: Agrimoniam cum lacte caprino pone super locum sine pilis, et nascentur.
LA	De condicionibus planetarum septem.
LA	Oleum Rhodij
LA	Contra surditatem:
LA	Verbi gratia:
LA	nervus audibilis
LA	ad Aemilianum cæcum consolatio
LA	Item minta trita timpora line.
LA	Item ad vertigines at capitis dolores:
LA	De spermate hominis
LA	incendiu~ sodomoru~,
LA	Dragancia femina
LA	'Sicut ad omne quod est mensuram ponere prodest, Sic sine mensura deperit omne quod est'
LA	'Deridens alios non inderisus abibit'
LA	de modo orandi deum
LA	Ipse repertorem medicinæ talis & artis, Fulmine Phœbigenam stygias detrusit ad vndas,
LA	Vt ignis exeat de vase pleno aque.
LA	Accipe rutam, erbam jovis, que dicitur 'humlock', radicem feniculi et levestici, anglice 'þouþistele', equali pondere.
LA	Experimentum si taga sit fracta cum nuce:
Prediction array: [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1]