EN	Tak stronge vinegre of whit wyne, and anoynte euery day þryes or foure times þe vysage, þer hit is saucefleme; and hit wol breke out, as hit were a mesel, and when hit is so broken out, anoynte hit, as hit is y seyd by fore an syx dayes, þat þe feolþe may renne out;
EN	I wyl y=e= telle by & by As I fond wrety~ in abok, Y=t= in borwyng I be tok Of agret ladyes prest Y=t= of gret name bar y=e= mest.
EN	Also the well annointing with oyle of Nutmegges, or Mace adding a few drops of oyle of Cloues Chymicall doth much comfort, keeping the grieued part extraordinary warme.
EN	So that she neadeth nothynge at all to be auansed and lyfted vp, other with any despitefull rebukes of other craftes, other with some borowed and paynted colours of the rhetoricians, or with the iugglynge castes of amplificacions.
EN	Take þe herbe celidoyne whos frute and flours been of goldyn colour, and take þereof the iiij elementz aftre þe maistrie of þe furst boke.
EN	And if þou take þe mawe of a sowkynge hare, or of a sowkyng calfe and bren it alto powdere, medell þe poudre with þe forsayde pille, þei are mych betture.
EN	I could instance many more, which Authors do wrongfully apply, as instance they attribute angelica, sage, box, and such like to be under the planet Saturn whereas the herbs are all hot and dry especially box who is hot and dry in the fourth degree, both the first plants are without question under the dominion of the Sun, as being of a good smell and taste and are of known virtues to comfort the heart, arteries, and vital spirits and to resist poyson.
EN	Otherwiles the skynne is bowen inward with a stroke and not broken.
EN	Wommen of relegion purge noght because of rysyng o nyght and synggyng and ocupacyon in her seruyse her blod wastyth.
EN	Beneth, when y=e= leuer takis harme.
EN	ONE handful of Garden-Tansy, as much Sage, and twice as much Scurvy-grass, steep'd in two quarts of White-wine, or Strong Ale.
EN	I graunt it is the power of the mynde whiche seeth, it is the power of the mynde whiche seeth, it is the power of the mynde which heareth, but yet if any infirmitie take the eyes, if the poores and issues of the eares be stopped & beseged w=t= any grosse humour, i~ vayne & al for nought hathe the mynde his power.
EN	And as son as che purgis che is abele to conceyue.
EN	Also the Gout is a greife in some by way of distention, whereas the body being replete with abundance of humors, the upper and stronger parts put downe their offending fulnesse unto the lower, which descending, the veines, and sinewes, and arteries procure this paine of distention.
EN	It distroith y=e= fe all be dene.
EN	Therefore it behoveth all Persons, as well Poor as Rich, to be furnish'd with Remedies against that Contagious Disease; and certain Rules, or a Method how to use them:
EN	And having thus saluted me, presents me the Urine, saying, Sir I desire your opinion of this water, and to tell me (though the sick partie know that too too well already) what the partie ayleth, and what the Disease is;
EN	By it passeth all the chilosity of the meat from the stomack to the Liver.
EN	THE vulgar sort are so strongly prepossest (by reason of their ignorance) that Physicians can discern (by the Urine) the Disease, the conception, the sexe, the parties age, with many other such absurdities that I feare it will bee an hard matter to dispossesse them of that opinion.
EN	THe Small Pox are caused of superfluous choller and flegm, the which is mixed with the bloud, and so continuing a certain time it doth encrease so much, that Nature cannot bear it, and so driveth it forth with a great accident of a Fever, the which commonly doth continue four or five daies together, and then cometh forth certain wheals or bladders full of corruption, which within three daies will break and run forth, and many drie.
EN	In the left hande for the mylte;
LA	Hoc facto conditum est.
LA	quibus partibus gustabilem praestent
LA	Temperantia est mater sanitatis.
LA	Ut pili nascantur: Agrimoniam cum lacte caprino pone super locum sine pilis, et nascentur.
LA	Daucus asininus
LA	Prima etas lune calida est et humida.
LA	De spermate hominis
LA	Pro ossibus extrahere illesis.
LA	'Deridens alios non inderisus abibit'
LA	Pro le scaldynge virge quod vocatur apegalle.
LA	Cernis vt ignauum corrumpant otia corpus, Vt capiant vitium ni moueantur aquæ.
LA	Pater nr~
LA	De condicionibus planetarum septem.
LA	Capillos tunde, deinde mundum panniculum .i. est absque ullo medicamine, vel lardi a linthe juxta plage quantitatem in ipso hiatu ossis, ne sanies iruens in juncturas suas putredinem extendat.
LA	Pro carentibus appetitu.
LA	Vita, Lucrum, Fratres, Parentes, Nati, Valetudo,
LA	De~ p~pici~ esto m~ pcco~ri
LA	incendiu~ sodomoru~,
LA	In noi~e pri~s et filij & spu~s sancti ame~.
LA	Verbi gratia:
LA	'vincat opus verbum, minuit iactantia famam';
LA	Oleum Rhodij
LA	Fenugrecum
LA	Ad sanandum scabiem: Super omniam contra huiusmodi passionem humoris inter cutanei.
LA	et nome~ dm~ inuocabo.
LA	de sensibus animalibus
LA	Multi multa sciunt, sed nemo Omnia.
LA	Dragancia femina
LA	de coniunctione spermatis
LA	Accipe panem siliginis bene fermentatum et acrem et cum exeat a furno, pone in forti aceto et cum bene biberit de aceto, deinde ponatur in furno et iterum coquatur.
LA	De humana natura.
LA	Oleum Siriacum
LA	ad Aemilianum cæcum consolatio
LA	Parisiensis Explicit primus liber de Secretis secretorum, secundum translacionem Johannis de Caritate.
LA	Deinde commedat paciens de illo pane et nichil bibat nisi fortissimum acetum, set cum jejunare facias per diem vel duos et item acerimo aceto et ab pane siliginis acerino interficietur.
LA	Item pulegium cum oleo coque et cum eo capud et tempera unge.
LA	nervus audibilis
LA	Accipe viride lyngnum abietis et cum ardet tolle illud quod fluit in posteriori parte lingni et admisse favum mellis.
LA	Item ad interficiendum ranam in stomaco vel alios vermes:
LA	sanguis menstruus
LA	Item centauriam in vino coctam et calidam bibe.
LA	Sequitur de (missione) sanguinis.
LA	Tere agrimoniam et inde fac unum playstrum et appone loco.
LA	Tertius gradus est quando habeat vnam partem frigiditatis et octo caliditatis/ tune dicitur esse calida in tertio gradu.
Prediction array: [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1]