EN	Take þe herbe celidoyne whos frute and flours been of goldyn colour, and take þereof the iiij elementz aftre þe maistrie of þe furst boke.
EN	If you be sick after meat, use this.
EN	THe Small Pox are caused of superfluous choller and flegm, the which is mixed with the bloud, and so continuing a certain time it doth encrease so much, that Nature cannot bear it, and so driveth it forth with a great accident of a Fever, the which commonly doth continue four or five daies together, and then cometh forth certain wheals or bladders full of corruption, which within three daies will break and run forth, and many drie.
EN	There being not so much as one word concerning Men-midwives mentioned there that we can find, it being the natural propriety of women to be much seeing into that Art: and though nature be not alone sufficient to the perfection of it, yet farther knowledge may be gain'd by a long and diligent practice, and be communicated to others of our own sex.
EN	BY the term rupture, hernia, or descent, is meant a tumor produced by the falling down or protrusion of some part or parts which should naturally be contained in the cavity of the belly.
EN	At betonye I wyll be gyn~e Y=t= many vertewys hath hy~ w=t= i~ne, Betonye sothy~ yese lechys bedene Yat kepyth ma~nys body clene, Who so betonye on hym bere Fro wykked sperytis it wyll hy~ were.
EN	Take lynseed &~ letuse, and stampe hem to gedre, and ley to þe stomak, &~ vse þis medicine til þou be hool.
EN	and about a month ago a Child which had an Involution of the Intestines; which, I believe, the Vulgar means, and calls the Twisting of the Guts.
EN	I graunt it is the power of the mynde whiche seeth, it is the power of the mynde whiche seeth, it is the power of the mynde which heareth, but yet if any infirmitie take the eyes, if the poores and issues of the eares be stopped & beseged w=t= any grosse humour, i~ vayne & al for nought hathe the mynde his power.
EN	Also the Gout is a greife in some by way of distention, whereas the body being replete with abundance of humors, the upper and stronger parts put downe their offending fulnesse unto the lower, which descending, the veines, and sinewes, and arteries procure this paine of distention.
EN	I wyl y=e= telle by & by As I fond wrety~ in abok, Y=t= in borwyng I be tok Of agret ladyes prest Y=t= of gret name bar y=e= mest.
EN	Make apowdyr of betonye rote,
EN	The body of a man was thrown up at Puddle-dock by the tide, having a deep wound in his neck near his windpipe, besides several other wounds and bruises; had nothing on but the collar of his shirt, and shoes, and stockings.
EN	Let ayre be cleare and light, & free from faultes, That come of secret passages and vaults.
EN	This suture is accordingly now very rarely practised, and it is probable that it will be soon laid entirely aside.
EN	Aboue y=e= thovme is the make;
EN	Tak stronge vinegre of whit wyne, and anoynte euery day þryes or foure times þe vysage, þer hit is saucefleme; and hit wol breke out, as hit were a mesel, and when hit is so broken out, anoynte hit, as hit is y seyd by fore an syx dayes, þat þe feolþe may renne out;
EN	For þe sengles.
EN	It is an admirable head Purge, also an excellent and safe Medicine for those who are naturally costive or hot bodies.
EN	forgif me if it be wrang, And excuse me sere frend, for the mater was hard & strang.
EN	Þis is kynde makyng of nervale certayne.
LA	qualiter odoratibus naribus adveniat
LA	Ad capud purgandum.
LA	Pro le scaldynge virge quod vocatur apegalle.
LA	Multi multa sciunt, sed nemo Omnia.
LA	incendiu~ sodomoru~,
LA	Postea appone albumen ovi et condiendo simul et postea cola per pannum et fac unum plaistrum cum lino et pone super anteriorem partem capitis.
LA	Gratia dei maior
LA	secundum justitiam
LA	'vincat opus verbum, minuit iactantia famam';
LA	Quid pro quo,
LA	laus sit tibi p~ amara passione tua.
LA	Item ad capud purgandum et vocem clarificandam et raucas reprimendas voces:
LA	Explicit de condicionibus planetarum.
LA	Item ne pili contrarii nascantur: Ova formicarum, lacrimam edere i. jus, archemeseam equo pondere, hec omnia in vino quiesse et locum vulneris tange et pili nuncquam renascentur.
LA	Dragancia femina
LA	'Sicut ad omne quod est mensuram ponere prodest, Sic sine mensura deperit omne quod est'
LA	De etate lune quando est sicca vel calida.
LA	Ungwentum fuscum: Resspice celodonie .vi., de mastic .ii., de mitre .ii., cere .ii., olei libri .vi., quod priusquam in coctura ponatur, dissolvatur (prout mundari poterit) et aliquantulum super ignem in aliquo vase locato prout poterit mundari, cum aqua frigida super asspergatur, et sic mundatum confice sic in ollam, oleum inponatur et sic adjungatur lento.
LA	Experimentum si taga sit fracta cum nuce:
LA	edere terrestris
LA	Dirupisti dn~e vincula mea. tibi sacrificabo hostia~ laudis.
LA	Lucidus & mundus sit rite habitabilis aer, Infectus neque sit, nec olens fætore cloacæ.
LA	Crocus Metallorum
LA	de aetate planetarum in embryo
LA	Septem grana juniperi vel ix confortant cerebrum, sensus recuperant, visum donant, pectus mundificant, vocem clarifecant, ventum depellunt, degestionem faciunt, lapidem frangunt, colorem renum curant, contra venenum valent, spiritum letiferum paralisim curant, avalitum dulcorant, eloquenciam dant.
LA	inominata
LA	Ad deponendum telam in oculo.
LA	Item trifolium in aqua coque et tempora illini.
LA	quo vita nusq~ decidat.
LA	'Virtutem primam puta esse compescere linguam':
LA	Temperantia est mater sanitatis.
LA	In noi~e pri~s et filij & spu~s sancti ame~.
LA	Deus p~pici~ esto michi pcco~ri D~ne ihu~ xp~e Ego cognosco me grauiter peccasse.
LA	Item radix plantaginis collo appensa dolorem tollit.
LA	Pro carentibus appetitu.
LA	Mors furit, urbs rapitur, Seuit mare, sol operitur, Regnum mutatur, plebs peste fame cruciatur.
LA	Ille sanguis ponatur in saniorem aurem surdi et valebit ut probatum est.
LA	filius est vita
LA	Diues inaccessos vbi Solis filia Lucos, &c.
LA	Oleum Siriacum
LA	(monumentum ære perennius)
LA	s~ p~miu~ mort~ sacre p~ennis instet gloria.
LA	Et modo incipit de condicionibus planetarum septem.
LA	'Pede super colles pedes vbi pedere nolles.'
Prediction array: [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1]