EN	After ix daies þer nature is of o substance jwys
EN	Aboue y=e= thovme is the make;
EN	Sethe all togedyr in a galown of whyte wyne.
EN	There being not so much as one word concerning Men-midwives mentioned there that we can find, it being the natural propriety of women to be much seeing into that Art: and though nature be not alone sufficient to the perfection of it, yet farther knowledge may be gain'd by a long and diligent practice, and be communicated to others of our own sex.
EN	Any of al thes may change a mannys complexion.
EN	THe Small Pox are caused of superfluous choller and flegm, the which is mixed with the bloud, and so continuing a certain time it doth encrease so much, that Nature cannot bear it, and so driveth it forth with a great accident of a Fever, the which commonly doth continue four or five daies together, and then cometh forth certain wheals or bladders full of corruption, which within three daies will break and run forth, and many drie.
EN	By it passeth all the chilosity of the meat from the stomack to the Liver.
EN	This is good for þe y3en.
EN	The thyrde water of seyunte Gyle ys for to distroye many infirmiteys with in a mannys bodye, and hit ys clepid amongyste clerkes and doctoris aqua potabilis and hit ys made in this wyse.
EN	all Filth, and whatever may cause noisom smells, be taken away;
EN	Now, whatever be our exercise, those whom good fortune has enabled to take it or not, would do well to attend to the following observations.
EN	It ys made by antepasyn when minucion is made, and anthepasyn ys sayd as wer contrare pascions.
EN	BY the term rupture, hernia, or descent, is meant a tumor produced by the falling down or protrusion of some part or parts which should naturally be contained in the cavity of the belly.
EN	I graunt it is the power of the mynde whiche seeth, it is the power of the mynde whiche seeth, it is the power of the mynde which heareth, but yet if any infirmitie take the eyes, if the poores and issues of the eares be stopped & beseged w=t= any grosse humour, i~ vayne & al for nought hathe the mynde his power.
EN	Drink for ordinary Dyet.
EN	And thus much of the Breast and Heart, which are under the signes Cancer and Leo.
EN	Also the Gout is a greife in some by way of distention, whereas the body being replete with abundance of humors, the upper and stronger parts put downe their offending fulnesse unto the lower, which descending, the veines, and sinewes, and arteries procure this paine of distention.
EN	ONE handful of Garden-Tansy, as much Sage, and twice as much Scurvy-grass, steep'd in two quarts of White-wine, or Strong Ale.
EN	Blode is hot and moyst in his kynde and therfor men that ben sangweyne in complexion ben hot and moist in his kynde for plente of blood that they haue.
EN	It distroith y=e= fe all be dene.
EN	So that she neadeth nothynge at all to be auansed and lyfted vp, other with any despitefull rebukes of other craftes, other with some borowed and paynted colours of the rhetoricians, or with the iugglynge castes of amplificacions.
LA	de coniunctione spermatis
LA	Item centauriam in vino coctam et calidam bibe.
LA	De gradibus siccitatis et caliditatis sciendum est.
LA	De~ p~pici~ esto m~ pcco~ri
LA	De humana natura.
LA	Ungwentum fuscum: Resspice celodonie .vi., de mastic .ii., de mitre .ii., cere .ii., olei libri .vi., quod priusquam in coctura ponatur, dissolvatur (prout mundari poterit) et aliquantulum super ignem in aliquo vase locato prout poterit mundari, cum aqua frigida super asspergatur, et sic mundatum confice sic in ollam, oleum inponatur et sic adjungatur lento.
LA	nervus audibilis
LA	De condicionibus planetarum septem.
LA	De spermate hominis
LA	Quarta frigida et sicca.
LA	Item absintheum, rutam et ederam terrestrem tere cum melle et albumine ovi et indutum lintheo capiti appone.
LA	Fenugrecum
LA	Ut pili nascantur: Agrimoniam cum lacte caprino pone super locum sine pilis, et nascentur.
LA	Explicit de condicionibus planetarum.
LA	Hinc stygias Ebrius hausit aquas:
LA	Oleum Siriacum
LA	Tertia frigida et humida.
LA	Salus populi
LA	Hic sutus/ fallax/ irascens/ prodigus/ audax/ Astutus/ gracilis/ succus/ croceiq~ coloris.
LA	de aetate planetarum in embryo
LA	Ille sanguis ponatur in saniorem aurem surdi et valebit ut probatum est.
LA	qualitas uvulae et organorum respirationis
LA	Carmen ad fluxum sanguinis: 'Domine Deus meus, adiutor sis famulo tuo .N. sicud strinxsisti [\f. 19rb\] fluvium Jordanis quando Christus baptizatus fuit, sic disstringe venas famuli tui .N. plenas sanguine'.
LA	Capillos tunde, deinde mundum panniculum .i. est absque ullo medicamine, vel lardi a linthe juxta plage quantitatem in ipso hiatu ossis, ne sanies iruens in juncturas suas putredinem extendat.
LA	Item minta trita timpora line.
LA	Deinde commedat paciens de illo pane et nichil bibat nisi fortissimum acetum, set cum jejunare facias per diem vel duos et item acerimo aceto et ab pane siliginis acerino interficietur.
LA	Item contra omnes capitis dolores: Folia edere trita molissime aceto et oleo roseo mixta fronte illiniatur.
LA	Parisiensis Explicit primus liber de Secretis secretorum, secundum translacionem Johannis de Caritate.
LA	In primis pro oculis Aqua facialis preciosa dicta.
LA	Item pulegium cum oleo coque et cum eo capud et tempera unge.
LA	Incipit secundus liber uricrisiarum, primum capitulum:
LA	qualiter visus oculis adveniat
LA	Explicit Liber Cerebri
LA	Septem grana juniperi vel ix confortant cerebrum, sensus recuperant, visum donant, pectus mundificant, vocem clarifecant, ventum depellunt, degestionem faciunt, lapidem frangunt, colorem renum curant, contra venenum valent, spiritum letiferum paralisim curant, avalitum dulcorant, eloquenciam dant.
LA	Mors furit, urbs rapitur, Seuit mare, sol operitur, Regnum mutatur, plebs peste fame cruciatur.
LA	Alsa pulmonica
LA	Item radix plantaginis collo appensa dolorem tollit.
LA	Postea appone albumen ovi et condiendo simul et postea cola per pannum et fac unum plaistrum cum lino et pone super anteriorem partem capitis.
LA	Oleum Rhodij
LA	Experimentum si taga sit fracta cum nuce:
LA	Item abrotanum bibat et liberabitur.
LA	Item pulegium coctum in aceto ad narez pone calidum, ut odor intret de ipso et fac coronam de eodem et capiti calidam circum appone.
LA	Ad sanandum scabiem: Super omniam contra huiusmodi passionem humoris inter cutanei.
LA	Dimitte nobis debita nra~ sicut & nos dimittim~ debitorib~ nri~s.
Prediction array: [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1]