EN	THE vulgar sort are so strongly prepossest (by reason of their ignorance) that Physicians can discern (by the Urine) the Disease, the conception, the sexe, the parties age, with many other such absurdities that I feare it will bee an hard matter to dispossesse them of that opinion.
EN	Tak ache seed, lynseed and comyn ana, stampe hem to gedre wel, and 3ef þe seek wyþ hote watur.
EN	Otherwiles the skynne is bowen inward with a stroke and not broken.
EN	I could instance many more, which Authors do wrongfully apply, as instance they attribute angelica, sage, box, and such like to be under the planet Saturn whereas the herbs are all hot and dry especially box who is hot and dry in the fourth degree, both the first plants are without question under the dominion of the Sun, as being of a good smell and taste and are of known virtues to comfort the heart, arteries, and vital spirits and to resist poyson.
EN	this, Experience has taught to be very dangerous;
EN	At betonye I wyll be gyn~e Y=t= many vertewys hath hy~ w=t= i~ne, Betonye sothy~ yese lechys bedene Yat kepyth ma~nys body clene, Who so betonye on hym bere Fro wykked sperytis it wyll hy~ were.
EN	I am sad & soleynge with hewynes in thoght;For all thy body, in myddis the Arme;
EN	After ix daies þer nature is of o substance jwys
EN	It distroith y=e= fe all be dene.
EN	For þe sengles.
EN	So that she neadeth nothynge at all to be auansed and lyfted vp, other with any despitefull rebukes of other craftes, other with some borowed and paynted colours of the rhetoricians, or with the iugglynge castes of amplificacions.
EN	Also the well annointing with oyle of Nutmegges, or Mace adding a few drops of oyle of Cloues Chymicall doth much comfort, keeping the grieued part extraordinary warme.
EN	Al bowyd is þe rygge so þat ny3e rounde it is Man wher of is þi pryde ther is none jwys
EN	This indeed is cleer enough, and obliges us to averre a greater antiquity of this operation, than before we were aware of;
EN	All þe veynes I haue nowe tolde That clensen men, both yonge & olde.
EN	and amongst other things, the smell of Sope-Suds, and Lye, in the washing of Clothes, be avoided;
EN	and in this I am more confirmed by observing that almost all the infants that are ruptured within the first five or six months of their life, are males.
EN	I graunt it is the power of the mynde whiche seeth, it is the power of the mynde whiche seeth, it is the power of the mynde which heareth, but yet if any infirmitie take the eyes, if the poores and issues of the eares be stopped & beseged w=t= any grosse humour, i~ vayne & al for nought hathe the mynde his power.
EN	Take lynseed &~ letuse, and stampe hem to gedre, and ley to þe stomak, &~ vse þis medicine til þou be hool.
EN	THe Small Pox are caused of superfluous choller and flegm, the which is mixed with the bloud, and so continuing a certain time it doth encrease so much, that Nature cannot bear it, and so driveth it forth with a great accident of a Fever, the which commonly doth continue four or five daies together, and then cometh forth certain wheals or bladders full of corruption, which within three daies will break and run forth, and many drie.
EN	If you be sick after meat, use this.
LA	Deinde semini appone cumque liquefactum fuerit, ceram mitte ea que liquefacta, ceterorum pulverez mitte sub intervallo et tune dimitte bullire quousque coctum tibi videatur.
LA	Deinde commedat paciens de illo pane et nichil bibat nisi fortissimum acetum, set cum jejunare facias per diem vel duos et item acerimo aceto et ab pane siliginis acerino interficietur.
LA	Item pro eodem.
LA	Item rutam, abrotanum, salgiam, ederam terestrem, trifolium simul tere et distempera cum aqua et bibe.
LA	PRimus gradus siccitatis & caliditatis est cum aliqua res habeat vna~ portionem frigiditatis et duas caliditatis/ tunc res illa dicitur esse calida in primo gradu.
LA	ad Aemilianum cæcum consolatio
LA	Hinc stygias Ebrius hausit aquas:
LA	quibus partibus gustabilem praestent
LA	Accipe viride lyngnum abietis et cum ardet tolle illud quod fluit in posteriori parte lingni et admisse favum mellis.
LA	'vincat opus verbum, minuit iactantia famam';
LA	Trahit sua quemq~ voluptas.
LA	et in hora mortis suscipe.
LA	Fenugrecum
LA	Item sume recentem angwillam et excoriatam, ossa et sanguinem collige in vase mundo.
LA	qualiter visus oculis adveniat
LA	qualitas cordis
LA	incendiu~ sodomoru~,
LA	Iacea alba
LA	Accipe betam viridem bene tritam et cum succo inunge tempera.
LA	(monumentum ære perennius)
LA	primi libri regalis disposicionis,
LA	secundum artem.
LA	Mors furit, urbs rapitur, Seuit mare, sol operitur, Regnum mutatur, plebs peste fame cruciatur.
LA	Ipse repertorem medicinæ talis & artis, Fulmine Phœbigenam stygias detrusit ad vndas,
LA	Item ad vertiginem: Unaquaque die iii. guttas de urina propria super capud infirmi infunde mane cum sit jejunus.
LA	Ex his fiat puluis subliss.
LA	et nome~ dm~ inuocabo.
LA	Pro carentibus appetitu.
LA	edere terrestris
LA	qualiter odoratibus naribus adveniat
LA	De gradibus siccitatis et caliditatis sciendum est.
LA	s~ p~miu~ mort~ sacre p~ennis instet gloria.
LA	Item contra omnes capitis dolores: Folia edere trita molissime aceto et oleo roseo mixta fronte illiniatur.
LA	'Quominus nil pacior paciendi me tenet horror':
LA	herba pulmonis
LA	Item plantaginem et ederam in mortario tere et salem et oleum et vinum misse et calidum super capud pone.
LA	Parisiensis Explicit primus liber de Secretis secretorum, secundum translacionem Johannis de Caritate.
LA	Quo dicto et si absens sit, liberabitur.
LA	Verbi gratia:
LA	Postea inpone broceam usque ad terciam diem.
LA	quo vita nusq~ decidat.
LA	Quod caret alterna requie durabile non est.
LA	et libenter volo me emendare p~ gra~q~ tua~ Miserere mei p~pt~ amara~ passione~ tua~.
LA	Largire claru~ vespere.
Prediction array: [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1]