EN	The body of a man was thrown up at Puddle-dock by the tide, having a deep wound in his neck near his windpipe, besides several other wounds and bruises; had nothing on but the collar of his shirt, and shoes, and stockings.
EN	Now, by considering the peculiarity of the circumstances, situation, and way of life of these people; and by attentively observing, what at any time gives rise to this disease, what is seen to remove it, and what to increase or mitigate its malignity, we shall be able to form a judgment, not only of the principal causes productive of it, but likewise of the subordinate, or those that in a less degree may contribute their influence.
EN	Drink for ordinary Dyet.
EN	And som hafe it lengere as þei þat be of hye complexioun and be norysched with hote metys and drinkys, and lyuoun yn mych rest, and þey hafe þis purgacyoun euery moneth oones, but when þey ben with childe ore þat þey be of drye complexioun and laboure muche.
EN	This has always appeared to me to be the case;
EN	forsoþe þat þe significacions of helyng or curyng and þo þing with which it is helyd or cured be diuerse.
EN	I could instance many more, which Authors do wrongfully apply, as instance they attribute angelica, sage, box, and such like to be under the planet Saturn whereas the herbs are all hot and dry especially box who is hot and dry in the fourth degree, both the first plants are without question under the dominion of the Sun, as being of a good smell and taste and are of known virtues to comfort the heart, arteries, and vital spirits and to resist poyson.
EN	Take lynseed &~ letuse, and stampe hem to gedre, and ley to þe stomak, &~ vse þis medicine til þou be hool.
EN	Ri3t dere frende Nero as it acordeþ þe significaciouns of wyrchyng for to be considered of þe essencion or beyng of kynde and of þe sekenes so it is nedeful þat þe science or þe connyng of þe þings with which curacioun or helyng schal be giffen for to be perceyued of þe same essencion or beyng.
EN	A treatise on clysters.
EN	This was writen fro Mounpileris to Quene Isabel of ynglond, at þe preier of ye kyng of Fraunce, hir broþer.
EN	Now, whatever be our exercise, those whom good fortune has enabled to take it or not, would do well to attend to the following observations.
EN	Let it sethe tyl halfe be wastyd.
EN	For þe sengles.
EN	For to make a good entret.
EN	So that she neadeth nothynge at all to be auansed and lyfted vp, other with any despitefull rebukes of other craftes, other with some borowed and paynted colours of the rhetoricians, or with the iugglynge castes of amplificacions.
EN	Also this medcyne nowe helyth the lepner and the fyer of helle and the grekys fyer and the fyer of Sodom.
EN	Take green Vitriol calcin'd, Saltpeter, and Sulphur, of each a pound, beat them well together, and keep it for use.
EN	this, Experience has taught to be very dangerous;
EN	At betonye I wyll be gyn~e Y=t= many vertewys hath hy~ w=t= i~ne, Betonye sothy~ yese lechys bedene Yat kepyth ma~nys body clene, Who so betonye on hym bere Fro wykked sperytis it wyll hy~ were.
EN	and in this I am more confirmed by observing that almost all the infants that are ruptured within the first five or six months of their life, are males.
LA	Fenugrecum
LA	Herba cruriatica
LA	Hæc reuocat vires, fessaque membra leuat.
LA	De spermate hominis
LA	qualiter visus oculis adveniat
LA	Et tunc tolle de igne ut frigeat sicque in pixide pone.
LA	Hinc stygias Ebrius hausit aquas:
LA	De disciplina scolarium
LA	'Sequere me'
LA	Deinde commedat paciens de illo pane et nichil bibat nisi fortissimum acetum, set cum jejunare facias per diem vel duos et item acerimo aceto et ab pane siliginis acerino interficietur.
LA	De etate lune quando est sicca vel calida.
LA	Item radix plantaginis collo appensa dolorem tollit.
LA	Item sume recentem angwillam et excoriatam, ossa et sanguinem collige in vase mundo.
LA	Item pro eodem.
LA	Iacea alba
LA	Item ob vertiginem capitis qui pre nimio dolore quasi mentes suas amittunt: Selidonia cum radice sua subfumigetur et infirmus per triduum ipsam herbam circa collum ligatam ferat.
LA	Ungwentum.
LA	Item ad vertiginem: Unaquaque die iii. guttas de urina propria super capud infirmi infunde mane cum sit jejunus.
LA	Castor gaudet equis, ouo prognatus codem, Pugnis, quot viuunt capitum, totidem studiorum Millia.
LA	Pater nr~
LA	qualitas cordis
LA	Hoc fiet lassum, si te non illa grauabunt.
LA	Oleum Rhodij
LA	electuarium rosarum
LA	Capitulum Secundum
LA	Item ad interficiendum ranam in stomaco vel alios vermes:
LA	Et menta & granum juniperii simul & anfert fetorem anelitus gingivas putridas purgat Juniperus
LA	Puluis sine pari
LA	de comune sapore coitus
LA	Accipe panem siliginis bene fermentatum et acrem et cum exeat a furno, pone in forti aceto et cum bene biberit de aceto, deinde ponatur in furno et iterum coquatur.
LA	Incipit secundus liber uricrisiarum, primum capitulum:
LA	Sequitur de (missione) sanguinis.
LA	Postea ungwentum fuscum qualibet die apponatur.
LA	Cur moritur homo dum salgia crescit in orto?
LA	Pro ossibus extrahere illesis.
LA	vena concava.
LA	sanguis menstruus
LA	Quod caret alterna requie durabile non est.
LA	id est fluxus
LA	Jus absinthei sume, jus marubii, jus feniculi, centum grana piperis, farine fabarum, anglice 'flour-ben', siccate duo coccliaria despumate mellis, tantum quantum de jure erbarum et coque simul in olla ad spissitudinem mellis.
LA	Largire claru~ vespere.
LA	Item rutam et feniculum coque in aqua et cum ea lava capud tuum.
LA	dies creticus est dies evasicuis ab infirmitate fine ad vitam, fine ad mortem.
LA	et libenter volo me emendare p~ gra~q~ tua~ Miserere mei p~pt~ amara~ passione~ tua~.
Prediction array: [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1]