EN	And som hafe it lengere as þei þat be of hye complexioun and be norysched with hote metys and drinkys, and lyuoun yn mych rest, and þey hafe þis purgacyoun euery moneth oones, but when þey ben with childe ore þat þey be of drye complexioun and laboure muche.
EN	3e that wyll lette gude men blode, And vaynes wyth al 3owre liues fode, Some vaynes, vse 3e, And mony other lette 3e be.
EN	Brother I pray the for charite that thou write to me a fewe medecynes that I myght help pore folk that falleth into sekenes and beth vnkonnyng to helpe hem sylfen and of vnpower to huyre hem leches.
EN	Otherwiles the skynne is bowen inward with a stroke and not broken.
EN	Aboue y=e= thovme is the make;
EN	Also this medcyne nowe helyth the lepner and the fyer of helle and the grekys fyer and the fyer of Sodom.
EN	AS sutures of one kind or another are found necessary, not only in every large wound, but in almost every operation of importance, the consideration of this subject seems first to require our attention.
EN	BY the term rupture, hernia, or descent, is meant a tumor produced by the falling down or protrusion of some part or parts which should naturally be contained in the cavity of the belly.
EN	Drink half a pint of this Morning and Night.
EN	forsoþe þat þe significacions of helyng or curyng and þo þing with which it is helyd or cured be diuerse.
EN	And drynk it w=t= water clene,
EN	THE vulgar sort are so strongly prepossest (by reason of their ignorance) that Physicians can discern (by the Urine) the Disease, the conception, the sexe, the parties age, with many other such absurdities that I feare it will bee an hard matter to dispossesse them of that opinion.
EN	Let ayre be cleare and light, & free from faultes, That come of secret passages and vaults.
EN	That the Air we breathe in may be wholesome, all Things, that may advance or add to the corruption of it, should diligently be removed; our Houses, and Streets kept clean;
EN	This has always appeared to me to be the case;
EN	Wommen of relegion purge noght because of rysyng o nyght and synggyng and ocupacyon in her seruyse her blod wastyth.
EN	Alle maner swete þingis, forwhi þei swelliþ, and alle maner notis and accornys of okis.
EN	I wyl y=e= telle by & by As I fond wrety~ in abok, Y=t= in borwyng I be tok Of agret ladyes prest Y=t= of gret name bar y=e= mest.
EN	I graunt it is the power of the mynde whiche seeth, it is the power of the mynde whiche seeth, it is the power of the mynde which heareth, but yet if any infirmitie take the eyes, if the poores and issues of the eares be stopped & beseged w=t= any grosse humour, i~ vayne & al for nought hathe the mynde his power.
EN	I am sad & soleynge with hewynes in thoght;For all thy body, in myddis the Arme;
EN	The body of a man was thrown up at Puddle-dock by the tide, having a deep wound in his neck near his windpipe, besides several other wounds and bruises; had nothing on but the collar of his shirt, and shoes, and stockings.
LA	Et modo incipit de condicionibus planetarum septem.
LA	Septem grana juniperi vel ix confortant cerebrum, sensus recuperant, visum donant, pectus mundificant, vocem clarifecant, ventum depellunt, degestionem faciunt, lapidem frangunt, colorem renum curant, contra venenum valent, spiritum letiferum paralisim curant, avalitum dulcorant, eloquenciam dant.
LA	Parisiensis Explicit primus liber de Secretis secretorum, secundum translacionem Johannis de Caritate.
LA	spiritus sanctus est remedium
LA	Pro surditate.
LA	In primis pro oculis Aqua facialis preciosa dicta.
LA	Ut pili nascantur: Agrimoniam cum lacte caprino pone super locum sine pilis, et nascentur.
LA	Cur moritur homo dum salgia crescit in orto?
LA	Postea extrahe et iterum pone in aceto et ita ter coque in furno hoc modo.
LA	Et tunc tolle de igne ut frigeat sicque in pixide pone.
LA	Item lacte canis inunge et non cressent pili evulsi.
LA	Fenugrecum
LA	Dimitte nobis debita nra~ sicut & nos dimittim~ debitorib~ nri~s.
LA	nervus audibilis
LA	Carmen ad fluxum sanguinis: 'Domine Deus meus, adiutor sis famulo tuo .N. sicud strinxsisti [\f. 19rb\] fluvium Jordanis quando Christus baptizatus fuit, sic disstringe venas famuli tui .N. plenas sanguine'.
LA	Item ad vertigines at capitis dolores:
LA	Item pulegium coctum in aceto ad narez pone calidum, ut odor intret de ipso et fac coronam de eodem et capiti calidam circum appone.
LA	Explicit Liber Cerebri
LA	Pro dolore in dorso vel spina.
LA	Item abrotanum bibat et liberabitur.
LA	ad Aemilianum cæcum consolatio
LA	vena cephalica
LA	qualiter odoratibus naribus adveniat
LA	Pro ossibus extrahere illesis.
LA	'Quominus nil pacior paciendi me tenet horror':
LA	sanguis menstruus
LA	Postea inpone broceam usque ad terciam diem.
LA	qualitas cordis
LA	Adiuro te, infirmitas, per Patrem et Filium et Spiritum Sanctum ne hic remaneas + Absterge, Domine, maculam ab occulo famuli tui + agios + agios + agios + sanctus + sanctus + sanctus + Christus vincit, Christus regnat, Christus imperat.
LA	Vt ignis exeat de vase pleno aque.
LA	de modo orandi deum
LA	Valere dicitur fumus terrae in kaluris sub fumigan communibus in aporimatibus; & syropis potus enim datus scabiem pustulas a prurigine inundat Humores superflues inter carnem & cutem desiccat vel ad lepram exposites iuvat
LA	Item plantaginem et ederam in mortario tere et salem et oleum et vinum misse et calidum super capud pone.
LA	Item rutam et feniculum coque in aqua et cum ea lava capud tuum.
LA	Item rutam, abrotanum, salgiam, ederam terestrem, trifolium simul tere et distempera cum aqua et bibe.
LA	de sensibus animalibus
LA	'Pede super colles pedes vbi pedere nolles.'
LA	Calcis ex ouorum testis, p. iij.
LA	Ad deponendum telam in oculo.
LA	ossa petrosa
LA	Sequitur de (missione) sanguinis.
LA	Postea ungwentum fuscum qualibet die apponatur.
LA	qui bene degerit, ingerit, egerit, est homo sanus.
LA	Item trifolium in aqua coque et tempora illini.
Prediction array: [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1]