EN	Blode is hot and moyst in his kynde and therfor men that ben sangweyne in complexion ben hot and moist in his kynde for plente of blood that they haue.
EN	It is the object of this treatise to prove, that every well educated physician, of unimpeached character, residing within the jurisdiction of the college, is entitled, independently of local study and local graduation, to be examined for admission into the fellowship of the college;
EN	this, Experience has taught to be very dangerous;
EN	I am sad & soleynge with hewynes in thoght;For all thy body, in myddis the Arme;
EN	Let ayre be cleare and light, & free from faultes, That come of secret passages and vaults.
EN	That the Air we breathe in may be wholesome, all Things, that may advance or add to the corruption of it, should diligently be removed; our Houses, and Streets kept clean;
EN	A treatise on clysters.
EN	A barge-man fell into the dock at Queen-hythe, and was drowned.
EN	There being not so much as one word concerning Men-midwives mentioned there that we can find, it being the natural propriety of women to be much seeing into that Art: and though nature be not alone sufficient to the perfection of it, yet farther knowledge may be gain'd by a long and diligent practice, and be communicated to others of our own sex.
EN	Take þe herbe celidoyne whos frute and flours been of goldyn colour, and take þereof the iiij elementz aftre þe maistrie of þe furst boke.
EN	This was writen fro Mounpileris to Quene Isabel of ynglond, at þe preier of ye kyng of Fraunce, hir broþer.
EN	If you be sick after meat, use this.
EN	THe Small Pox are caused of superfluous choller and flegm, the which is mixed with the bloud, and so continuing a certain time it doth encrease so much, that Nature cannot bear it, and so driveth it forth with a great accident of a Fever, the which commonly doth continue four or five daies together, and then cometh forth certain wheals or bladders full of corruption, which within three daies will break and run forth, and many drie.
EN	THE vulgar sort are so strongly prepossest (by reason of their ignorance) that Physicians can discern (by the Urine) the Disease, the conception, the sexe, the parties age, with many other such absurdities that I feare it will bee an hard matter to dispossesse them of that opinion.
EN	It sufficeth, so that I shew the substance of the thing, and to doe it, that every one may understand it.
EN	By it passeth all the chilosity of the meat from the stomack to the Liver.
EN	BY the term rupture, hernia, or descent, is meant a tumor produced by the falling down or protrusion of some part or parts which should naturally be contained in the cavity of the belly.
EN	Otherwiles the skynne is bowen inward with a stroke and not broken.
EN	forsoþe þat þe significacions of helyng or curyng and þo þing with which it is helyd or cured be diuerse.
EN	It is an admirable head Purge, also an excellent and safe Medicine for those who are naturally costive or hot bodies.
EN	Take green Vitriol calcin'd, Saltpeter, and Sulphur, of each a pound, beat them well together, and keep it for use.
LA	Fenugrecum
LA	Item rutam, abrotanum, salgiam, ederam terestrem, trifolium simul tere et distempera cum aqua et bibe.
LA	Item ob vertiginem capitis qui pre nimio dolore quasi mentes suas amittunt: Selidonia cum radice sua subfumigetur et infirmus per triduum ipsam herbam circa collum ligatam ferat.
LA	Ad faciendum bonum entret.
LA	Item pulegium cum oleo coque et cum eo capud et tempera unge.
LA	Trahit sua quemq~ voluptas.
LA	Capillos tunde, deinde mundum panniculum .i. est absque ullo medicamine, vel lardi a linthe juxta plage quantitatem in ipso hiatu ossis, ne sanies iruens in juncturas suas putredinem extendat.
LA	quo vita nusq~ decidat.
LA	Pro surditate.
LA	Hoc fiet lassum, si te non illa grauabunt.
LA	Accipe panem siliginis bene fermentatum et acrem et cum exeat a furno, pone in forti aceto et cum bene biberit de aceto, deinde ponatur in furno et iterum coquatur.
LA	Deus p~pici~ esto michi pcco~ri D~ne ihu~ xp~e Ego cognosco me grauiter peccasse.
LA	Pro passione gutturis vel oris.
LA	Granum solis
LA	de coniunctione spermatis
LA	Pilulæ Angelicæ, Aloes Rosata, Pilulæ Tartareæ, Grana Angelica, &c.
LA	Herba cruriatica
LA	vnguentum calidum
LA	Quartus gradus est quando habeat vnam portionem frigiditatis et sexdecem caliditatis/ tu~c dicitur esse calida in quarto gradu.
LA	Pro ossibus inpressis in capite vel in alio loco corporis:
LA	licium
LA	Ignis ardens super aquam & natans hoc modo fit sicut ignis volans in aere sed cauda debet esse ad longitudine mvnius palme & debet poni super aquam & sine dubio ardebit super aquam & desuper.
LA	Hic sutus/ fallax/ irascens/ prodigus/ audax/ Astutus/ gracilis/ succus/ croceiq~ coloris.
LA	'Pede super colles pedes vbi pedere nolles.'
LA	'vincat opus verbum, minuit iactantia famam';
LA	Labilis vt vita est, infirmum est labile corpus, Sic tua qu firment me_ra, vereremmus.
LA	Gratia dei maior
LA	Item minta trita timpora line.
LA	(monumentum ære perennius)
LA	De condicionibus planetarum septem.
LA	Ex his fiat puluis subliss.
LA	Uxor, Mors, Pietas, Regnum, Benefactaq; Carcer.
LA	Pro ossibus extrahere illesis.
LA	lutum
LA	Ad sanandum scabiem: Super omniam contra huiusmodi passionem humoris inter cutanei.
LA	vena concava.
LA	Item centauriam in vino coctam et calidam bibe.
LA	Tere agrimoniam et inde fac unum playstrum et appone loco.
LA	Multi multa sciunt, sed nemo Omnia.
LA	Cu~ gratia et priuilegio a rege indulto.
LA	Si plaga sit in capite et fracta sit taga, est incurabilis; set si taga sit sana, curabilis est.
LA	Ut pili nascantur: Agrimoniam cum lacte caprino pone super locum sine pilis, et nascentur.
LA	Dirupisti dn~e vincula mea. tibi sacrificabo hostia~ laudis.
LA	Item pulegium coctum in aceto ad narez pone calidum, ut odor intret de ipso et fac coronam de eodem et capiti calidam circum appone.
Prediction array: [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1]