[^Philosophical Transactions, volume 1, number 20^] 
 
[}PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSACTIONS. 
Munday December 17. 1666.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, 366-367^] 
 
[^p.366^] 
[}III. GUSTUS ORGANUM per Laurentium Bellini novissime 
deprehensum.}] 
 
This Author proposing to himself to discover both the principal 
Organ of the Taste, and the nature of its object, begins 
with the latter, and examines first, what is Taste? He judges 
that it is caused by nothing but Salts, which being variously figured, 
affects the tongue variously: alledging this for his 
chief reason, that the Salt which is extracted by Chymists out 
of any mixt body whateuer it be, carries away with it all its 
taste, and that the rest remains taste-less. He adds that the 
Teeth in grinding the Food, serve much to extract this Salt: 
And he notes by the by, that the Teeth are so necessary for 
preparing the aliment, that certain Animals which seem to 
have none, have them in their stomach; and that nature has 
put at the entry of the palat of those that are altogether destitute 
of them, certain moveable inequalities, which are to them 
instead of Teeth. 
 
But then secondly, concerning the Organ of Taste, he esteems, 
that 'tis neither the Flesh, not the Tongue, nor the Membrans, 
nor the Nerves found there, nor the Glanduls, called Amygdalinæ; 
but those little eminences, that are found upon the tongue 
of all Animals. To obtain which, he observes, 
 
1. That from the middle of the Tongue to the root, as also 
towards the tip, ther are found innumerable little Risings called 
[^p.367^] 
Papillares; but that from the tip of the Tongue unto the 
string there is observed none at all. 
 
2. He hath experimented, that if you put Sal Armoniack upon 
the places of the Tongue, where those Eminencies are not, 
you shall find no Taste; but that you will find it presently, assoon 
you put any such Salt, where they are to be met with. Ergo, 
saith he, those Eminencies are the principal Organ of Taste. 
 
3. He assures, that with a Microscpe may be seen in those 
Risings many little holes, at the bottom whereof there are small 
nerves, terminating there: But he directs, to observe this in 
live and healthy, not in dead of sick Animals. 
 
Having laid down these Observations, he concludes, that the 
manner, after which Taste is perform'd, is this, That the particles 
of Salt passing through those pores, which pierce the Papillary 
Eminences, and penetrating as far as to the nerves, that 
meet them there, do by the means of their small points prick 
them; wich pricking is called the Taste. 
 
In the mean time he acknowledges, that before him Signior 
Malpighi, Professor at Messina, had made some of these discoveries. 
 
The notice of these two last Books we owe to the French 
Journal. 
 
