[^Philosophical Transactions, volume 1, number 8^] 
 
[}PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSACTIONS. 
Munday, Januar. 8. 1665/6.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 133-137^] 
 
[^p.133^] 
[}Of a remarkable Spring, about Paderborn in Germany.}] 
 
An inquiring Gentleman of those parts writes to his Friend 
in London, as follows; 
 
In this Diocess of Paderborn, about 2 leagues from that 
Town, is a treble Spring call'd Metborn, which has three 
streams, two wherof are not above one foot and and a half 
distant from one another, and yet of so differing qualities, 
that whereas one of them is limpid, blewish, lukewarm, 
bubling, and holding Sal-armoniack, Ochra, Iron, Vitriol, 
[^p.134^] 
Allum, Sulphur, Niter, Orpiment, used against Epilepsies 
bad Spleens, and the Wormes; the other is Ice-cold, turbid 
and whitish, much stronger in tast, and heavier than the former, 
holding much Orpiment, Salt, Iron, Niter, and some 
Sal-Armoniack, Allum and Vitriol; Of this all Birds, observed 
to drink of it, doe dye; which I have also privately 
experimented by taking some of it home, and giving it to 
Hens, after I had given them Oates, Barly and Bread-crums: 
For, soon after they had drunk of it, they became giddy 
reeled, and tumbled upon their backs, with convulsion-fitts, 
and so dyed with a great extention of their leggs. Giving 
them common-salt immediatly after they had drunk, they 
dyed not so soon; giving them vineger, they dyed not at all, 
but seven or eight days after were troubled with the Pipp. 
Those that dyed, being open'd, their Lungs were found quite 
shrivelled together. Yet some men, that are troubled 
with Worms, taking a litle quantity of it, and diluting it 
in common water, have been observed by this means to kill 
the Worms in their bellies, so that a great number of 
worms come from them; whereupon though they are sick, 
yet they dye not. As to the third stream, that lyes lower 
than the other two, about 20 paces distant from them, it is 
of a greenish colour, very clear, and of a sowre sweet tast, 
pleasing enough. It hath about a middle weight between 
the other two; whence wee guess, that it is mixed of them 
both, meeting there together: to confirm which, we have 
mixed equal quantities, of those two, with an addition of a 
litle common well-water, and have found that they, being 
stirred together and permitted to setle, made just a water 
of the same colour and tast of this third stream. 
 
[}Of some other not-common Springs at Basel and in 
Alsatia.}] 
 
A Curious Person writes from those Places in manner following; 
 
[^p.135^] 
At Basel the Spring, running in the Gerbergasse (or Tanners-street) 
from St. Leonard's Hill, is of a Blewish colour, 
and somewhat troubled, holding Copper, Bitumen, and Antimony, 
about 3 parts of the first, one of the second, and 
two of the last, as has been examined by skilful Persons. 
Our Tanners do water their Skins in it; and being a well-tasted 
and wholsome Water, it is both much drunk, and used 
to Bath in. It mingles with another Spring water, call'd 
the Birsick, and with it, between the Salt-tower and the 
Rhine-gate runs into the Rhine. 
 
In the same Town (which abounds with Spring-waters) 
there are two, among the rest, called Bandulph's-well, and 
Brun Zum Brunnen, that are more observable then the other; 
the former of them having a Camphory and drying Quality, 
and used against Hydropical Distempers; the latter containing 
some Sulphur, Saltpeter and Gold, and being an excellent 
Water to drink, much used in the principal Tavern of 
the City, where the chief of the Town do resort, and near 
which it runs. 
 
In Alsatia in the Valley, called Leberthal, near Geesbach 
(an ancient Mine-work) there runs out of a Cavern a foul, 
fattish oily Liquor, which, though the Country-men of 
that place employ to the vile use of greasing their Wheels, 
instead of ordinary Wheel-grease; yet doth it afford an excellent 
Balsom, by taking a quantity of it, and putting it in 
an Earthen Pot well luted, that no steam may exhale; and 
then with a gentle Fire at first, but a stronger afterwards, 
boyling it for three hours together; in which space it will 
boyl in a fourth part, and an Earthen Matter, like Pitch, will 
settle it self at the bottom: but on the top thereof, when 
cold, there will swim a fatty Substance, like Lyne-Oyl, 
limped and somewhat yellowish, which is to be decanted 
from the thick Sediment, and then gently disitilled in an Alembick 
in Arena; by which means, there will come over 
two differing Liquors, one Phlegmatick, the other Oily, 
[^p.136^] 
which latter swimming on the Phlegm, is to be severed from 
it. The Phlegm is used as an excellent Resister and Curer 
of all the Putrefactions of the Lungs and Liver, and it heals 
all foul Wounds and Ulcers. The Oily part, being diluted 
with double its quantity of distilled Vineger, and brought 
three times over the Helm, yields a rare Balsom, against all 
inward and outward Corruptions, stinking Ulcers, hereditary 
Scurfs and Scabs: 'Tis also much used against Apoplexies, 
Palsies, Consumptions, Giddinesses, and Head-aches. 
Inwardly they take it with Succory-water against all corruptions 
of the Lungs. It is a kind of Petroleum, and contains 
no other Mineral Juice, but that of Sulphur, which seems 
to be thus distilled by Nature under ground; the distillation 
of an Oyl out of Sulphur by Art, being not so easie to perform. 
 
[}Of the richest Salt-Springs in Germany.}] 
 
An Account having been desired of those two chief Salt-Springs 
in Germany, at Hall and Lunenburg, it was lately 
transmitted thus: 
 
The Salt-Springs at Hall in Saxony are four, called Gutiaur, 
the Dutch-Spring, the Mettritz, and the Hackel-dorn; 
whereof the three first hold near the same proportion of Salt; 
the last holds less, but yields the purest Salt. The three first 
hold about seven parts of Salt, three of Marcasit, and fourteen 
of Water: They are, besides their Oeconomical use, 
employed Medicinally to Bath in, and to draw a Spirit out of 
it, exhibited with good success against Venom, and the putrefaction 
of the Lungs, Liver, Reins, and the Spleen. 
 
The Salt-Water at Lunenburgh, being more greenish then 
white, and not very transparent, is about the same nature 
and hold with that of Hall. It hath a mixture of Lead with 
it, whence also it will not be sod in Leaden Pans; and if it held 
no Lead at all, it would not be so good, that Mettal being 
judged to putrifie the Water: whence also the Salt of Lunenburg 
[^p.137^] 
is preferred before all others, that are made of Salt-Springs. 
 
