[^Philosophical Transactions, volume 1, number 20^] 
 
[}PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSACTIONS. 
Munday december 17. 1666.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, 353-358^] 
 
[^p.353^] 
[}The Method observed in Transfusing the 
Bloud out of one Animal into another.}] 
 
THis Method was promised in the last of these Papers. It 
was first practised by Doctor Lower in Oxford, and by him 
communicated to the Honourable Robert Boyle, who imparted 
it to the Royal Society, as follows; 
 
First, take up the Carotidal Artery of the Dog or other 
Animal, whose Bloud is to be transfused into another of the 
[^p.354^] 
same or a different kind, and separate it from the Nerve of the 
Eight pair, and lay it bare above an inch. Then make a strong 
Ligature on the upper part of the Artery, not to be untied again: 
but an inch below, videl. towards the Heart, make another 
Ligature of a running knot, which may be loosen'd or fastned 
as there shall be occasion. Having made these two knots, 
draw two threds under the artery between the two Ligatures; 
and then open the Artery, and put in a Quill, and tie the Artery 
upon the Quill very fast by those two threds, and stop the Quill 
with a stick. After this, make bare the Jugular Vein in the other 
Dog about an inch and a half long; and and at each end make a 
Ligature with a running knot, and in the space betwixt the two 
running knots drawn under the Vein two threds, as in the other: 
then make an Incision in the Vein, and put into it two 
Quills, one into the descendent part of the Vein, to receive the 
bloud from the other Dog, and carry it to the Heart; and the 
other Quill put into the other part of the Jugular Vein, which 
comes from the Head (out of which, the second Dogs own 
bloud must run into Dishes.) These two Quills being put in and 
tyed fast, stop them with a stick, till there be occasion to open 
them. 
 
All things being thus prepar'd, tie the Dogs on their sides towards 
one another so conveniently, that the Quill may go into 
each other, (for the Dogs necks cannot be brought so near, but 
that you must put two or three several Quills more into the first 
two, to convey the bloud from one to another.) After that, 
unstop the Quill that goes down into the first Dog's Jugular 
Vein, and the other Quill coming out of the other Dog's Artery; 
and by the help of two or three other Quills, put into each 
other, according as there shall be occasion, insert them into one 
another. Then slip the running knots, and immediately the 
bloud runs through the Quills, as through an Artery, very impetuously. 
And immediately, as the bloud runs into the Dog, 
unstop the other Quill, coming out of the upper part of his Jugular 
Vein (a Ligature being first made about his neck, or else his 
other Jugular Vein being compress'd by ones Finger;) and let 
his own bloud run out at the same time into Dishes (yet not 
constantly, but according as you perceive him able to bear it) 
[^p.355^] 
till the other Dog begin to cry, and faint,and fall into Convulsions, 
and at last dye by his side. 
 
Then take out both the Quills out of the Dogs Jugular 
Vein, and tye the running knot fast, and cut the Vein asunder, 
(which you may doe without any harm to the Dog, one 
Jugular Vein being sufficient to convey all the bloud from 
the Head and upper parts, by reason of a large Anastomosis 
whereby both the Jugular Veins meet about the Larynx.) 
This done, sow up the skin and dis-miss him, and the Dog will 
leap from the Table and shake himself, and run away, as if nothing 
ailed him. 
 
And this I have tryed several times, before several in the 
Universities, but never yet upon more than one Dog at a time, 
for want of leisure, and convenient supplyes of several Dogs 
at once. But when I return, I doubt not but to give you a 
fuller account, not only by bleeding several Dogs into one, 
but several other creatures into one another, as you did propose 
to me, before you left Oxford; which will be very easie 
to perform; and will afford many pleasant and perhaps not 
unuseful Experiments. 
 
But because there are many Circumstances necessary to be 
observ'd in the performing of this experiment, and that you 
may better direct any one to doe it, without any danger of 
killing the other Dog, that is to receive the others bloud, I 
will mention two or three. 
 
First, that you fasten the Dogs at such a convenient distance, 
that the Vein nor Artery be not stretched; for then, 
being contracted, they will not admit or convey so much 
bloud. 
 
Secondly, that you constantly observe the Pulse beyond the 
Quill in the Dogs Jugular Vein (which it acquires from the 
impulse of the Arterious bloud:) For if that fails, then 'tis a 
sign the Quill is stopt by some congealed bloud, so that you 
must draw out the Arterial Quill from the other, and with a 
Probe open the passage again in both of them, that the bloud 
may have its free course again. For, this must be expected, 
when the Dog, that bleeds into the other, hath lost much 
bloud, his heart will beat very faintly, and then the impulse 
[^p.356^] 
of bloud being weaker, it will be apt to congeal the sooner, 
so that at the latter end of the work you must draw out the 
Quill ofter, and clear the passage; if the Dog be faint-hearted, 
as many are, tough some stout fierce Dogs will bleed 
freely and uninterruptedly, till they are convuls'd and dye. 
But to prevent this trouble, and make the experiment certain, 
you must bleed a great Dog into a little one, or a Mastive into 
a Curr, as I once try'd, and the little Dog bled out at least 
double the quantity of his own bloud, and left the Mastive 
dead upon the Table, and after he was untyed, he ran away 
and shak'd himself, as if he had been only thrown into water. 
Or else you may get three or four several Dogs prepared in 
the same manner; and when one begins to fail and leave off 
bleeding, administer another, and I am confident one Dog 
will receive all their bloud, (and perhaps more) as long as 
it runs freely, till they are left almost dead by turns: provided 
that you let out the bloud proportionably, as you let it goe 
into the Dog, that is to live. 
 
Thirdly, I suppose the Dog that is to bleed out into dishes 
will endure it the better, if the Dogs that are to be administred 
to supply his bloud, be of neer an equal age, and fed 
alike the day before, that both their blouds may be of a neer 
strength and temper. 
 
There are many things I have observed upon bleeding Dogs 
to death, which I have seen since your departure from Oxford, 
whereof I shall give you a relation hereafter; in the mean 
time since you were pleased to mention it to the Royal Society, 
with a promise to give them an account of this experiment, 
I could not but take the first opportunity to clear you from 
that obligation, &c. 
 
So far this Letter: the prescriptions whereof having been 
carefully observ'd by those who were imployed to make the 
Experiment, have hitherto been attended with good success; 
and that not only upon Animals of the same Species (as two 
Dogs first, and then two Sheep) but also upon some of very 
differing Species (as a Sheep and a Dog; the former Emitting, 
the other Receiving.) 
 
Note only, that in stead of a Quill, a small crooked thin 
[^p.357^] 
Pipe of Silver or Brass, so slender that the one end may enter 
into a Quill, and having at the other end, that is to enter 
into the Vein and Artery, a small knob, for the better fastening 
them to it with a thread, will be much fitter than a strait 
Pipe or Quill, for this Operation: for so they are much more 
easie to be managed. 
 
'Tis intended, that these tryals shall be prosecuted to the 
utmost variety the subject will beare: As by exchanging the 
bloud of Old and Young, Sick and Healthy, Hot and Cold, 
Fierce and Fearful, Lame and Wild Animals, &c. and that 
not only of the same, but also of differing kinds. For which 
end, and to improve this noble Experiment, either for knowledge, 
or use, or both, some Ingenious men have already proposed 
considerable tryals and inquiries; of which perhaps an account 
will be given hereafter. For the present we shall only 
subjoyn some 
 
[}Considerations about this kind of Experiments.}] 
 
1. It may be consider'd in them, that the bloud of the Emittent 
Animal, may after a few minutes of time, by its circulation, 
mix and run out with that of the Recipient. Wherefore 
to be assured in these Tryals, that all the bloud of the Recipient 
is run out, and none left in him but the adventitious 
bloud of the Emittent, two or three or more Animals (which 
was also hinted in the method above) may be prepared and administred, 
to bleed them all out into one. 
 
2. It seems not irrational to guess afore hand, that the exchange 
of bloud will not alter the nature or disposition of the 
Animals, upon which it shall be practised; though it may be 
thought worth while for satisfaction and certainty, to determine 
that point by Experiments. The case of exchanging the 
bloud of Animals seems not like that of Grafsing, where the 
Cyons turns the Sap of the Stock, grafsed upon, into its nature; 
the Fibres of the Cyons so straining the juice, which passes 
from the stem to it, as thereby to change it into that of the 
Cyons, whereas in this transfusion there seems to be no such 
[^p.358^] 
Percolation of the bloud of Animals, whereby that of the one 
should be changed into the nature of the other. 
 
3. The most probable use of this Experiment may be conjectured 
to be, that one Animal may live with the bloud of 
another; and consequently, that those Animals, that want 
bloud, or have corrupt bloud, may be supplyed from others 
with a sufficient quantity, and of such as is good, provided the 
Transfusion be often repeated, by reason of the quick expence 
that is made of the bloud. 
 
