[^Philosophical Transactions, volume 2, number 26^] 
 
[}PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSACTIONS. 
Munday, June 3. 1667.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 479-481^] 
 
[^p.479^] 
[}Extract of a Letter, Written from Paris, containing an Account 
of some Effects of the Transfusion of Bloud; and 
of two Monstrous Births, &c.}] 
 
I was present, when M Gayant shew'd the Transfusion of the 
Bloud, putting that of a Young Dog into the Veins of an Old, 
who, two hours after, did leap and frisk; whereas he was almost 
blind with age, and could hardly stirr before. 
 
In the House of M. Bourdelots was shew'd a Monster in form of 
an Ape, having all over its shoulders, almost to his middle, a 
mass of flesh, that came from the hinder part of its head, and 
hung down in form of a little Cloak. The report is, that the 
Woman that brought it forth had seen on a Stage an Ape so 
cloathed: The most remarkable thing was, that the said mass 
of flesh was divided in four parts, correspondent to the Coat, 
the Ape did carry. The Woman, upon inquiry, was found to 
have gone five months with Child, before she had met with the 
accident of that unhappy sight. Many questions were on this 
occasion agitated: viz. about the Power of Imagination; and 
[^p.480^] 
whether this Creature was endow'd with a humane Soul; and 
if not, what became of the Soul of the Embryo, that was five 
months old. 
 
A little after, another Monster was produced, which was an 
Infant come to maturity, having instead of a Head and Brains, 
a Mass of flesh like any Liver; and was found to move. And 
this Fætus occasioned a Question for the Cartesians, how the 
motion could be performed, and yet the Glandula pinealis, or 
Conarium be wanting; nor any Nerves visible, which come from 
the Brain? The marrow in the Spine was of the same substance. 
It liv'd four days, and then dyed: It was anotomized by M. 
Emmerez in presence of the Assembly. 
 
There came a Letter from Florence, Written by M. Steno, 
which has also somewhat perplext the followers of Des Cartes. 
A Tortoise had its head cut off, and yet was found to move its 
foot three days after. Here was no Communication with the 
Conarium. As this seems to have given a sore blow to the Cartesian 
Doctrine, so the Disciples thereof are here endeavouring to 
heal the Wound. 
 
[}An Account of two Monstrous Births, not long since produced 
in Devonshire; communicated by M. Colepresse.}] 
 
1. One Robert Cloak a Joyner (whom I know) of Clamick 
in the Parish of Beer-Ferris in Devonshire, had on Febr. 24. last, 
a Monstrous black Ram-Lamb fallen with one head, but two distinct 
Bodies, with eight Legs; which Bodies were joyned in 
the Neck: It had two Eyes, and as many Ears, in the usual places; 
and one extraordinary Eye in the Niddock, with one single 
Ear, about an inch distant from the Eye backwards: Its Dame, 
which was White, usually brought forth two Lambs every year, 
as she did this year also a White one, which with the Ewe remains 
alive. But whether this Monster was produc'd dead or alive, is 
not known, it being found dead by the hedge, and soon after 
put into the Earth. There were ten White Ews accompanied 
with three White Rams. 
 
2. One John Cauce, Servant to Mr. William Knighton of Lockridge, 
likewise in Beer Ferris; had among his Sheep, on the 
seventeenth of Febr. last, a White Lamb faln on a Common in the 
said Parish, with two distinct heads and Necks, Joyned at the 
[^p.481^] 
shoulders, but one only Body, and that well form'd, yet having 
double entrals in all respects. The Ewe remains well. The Monster 
dyed, and is now in my Custody, after it hath been dried in 
an Oven, and by the Sun. 
 
