[^Philosophical Transactions, volume 2, number 27^] 
 
[}PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSACTIONS. 
For the Months of July, August, and September. 
Munday, Septem. 1667.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 506-512^] 
 
[^p.506^] 
[}II. DISQUISITIO ANATOMICA DE FORMATO 
FOETU: Authore Gualtero Needham, M.D. Londini, in 8=o=}] 
 
THis Disquisition consists of seven Chapters, full of the Learned 
and Ingenious Author, who was lately elected a Fellow of the 
Royal Society, his own Experiments and Observations. 
 
In the first he inquires into the Passages, by which the Nourishing 
Juyce is conveighed into the Womb of the Animal: where he examines 
the Assertion of Everhard, importing, that some of the Lacteous 
Vessels carry the said Juyce to the Uterus; which vessels are pretended 
to have been seen by himself in the dissection of Rabbets. Which 
engaged our Author to take up again the Anatomical knife, and to dissect 
with all possible accurateness both some of the bigger Animals, as 
Cows and Mares, and some of the smaller kind, as Rabbets, which are 
instanced by Everhard. 
 
But having spent all his labour and care herein in vain, and besides, 
evinced by Ligatures, that the pretended Vessels are neither those that 
are described by Bartholin under the name of Lymphatick, nor others, 
presumed to be known by Everhard alone, as immediately carrying 
the Chyle out of its Receptacle to the Womb and Breasts; he imputes 
the cause of this mistake to the Trunk of the Lymphaticks, running over 
the Vena cava into the Receptacle near the Emulgents, which Ductus 
he affirms to have often found filled with Chyle from the Intestinum 
Rectum, or the Ileum or Cæcum a Dog having no Colon;) but maintains 
withall, that by Ligatures it is manifest, that that Ductus goes to the 
Receptacle, and there deposites its liquor; which he proves to be alike 
true of all the Milky vessels, so that they carry nothing back and consequently 
are unfit to conveigh any thing to the Womb. This he illustrates 
by a Noble Experiment of that Learned and Expert Anatomist, 
Dr. Lower, using to open sometimes the right side of the Thorax, 
[^p.507^] 
and with his fingers to break the Receptacle; and sometimes on the 
left side the Ductus Thoracicus, a little under the Subclaviar; whereby 
it hath come to pass, that Dogs, well fed all the while, have thrown 
out all the Chyle into the opened part of the Thorax, and, though plentifully 
fed, were starved within three daies: there appearing mean 
time in the Veins opened a crass bloud, destitute of Serum, but not 
any mixture of transmitted Chyle. 
 
Having rejected the Lacteous and Lymphatick vessels from this office, 
he declareth, that we must rest in the Ancient Doctrine, which 
layeth the task of conveighing the Succus nutritius, to the Breasts and 
Womb, upon the Arteries; unless the Nerves be call'd in for aid, for 
conveighing some of the Spirituos Juyce, to be mixed with the Nutritious, 
to give life and vigour; And having proved this, he takes notice 
of the Anastomoses, remarkable in the womb of pregnant Creatures; 
and subjoyns a discussion of the way how the Alimental Juyce 
is in the womb severed from the mass of the bloud: whether by meer 
Percolation, or by some Ferment, working upon the Bloud, and thence 
precipitating what is proper for the use of that part. 
 
In the Second Chapter he treats of the Placenta's and Glandules, and 
shews, How many waies the Juyce is derived from the Womb to the 
Fœtus: First, simply from the Membrane of the Uterus to the Membrane 
of the Fœtus; as in all Oviparous Creatures; and among Viviparous, 
in a Sow all the time of her bearing; in a Mare, for half the 
time; and in a Woman, the first month only. Secondly, by a Mass of 
flesh, filtring the Juyce; as in all Cake-bearing (called by the Latines, 
Placentifera) and in all Kernel-bearing (called Glandulifera) or Ruminating 
Animals. Where he giveth a particular account of the double 
Placenta or Cake, to be found in Rabbets, Hares, Mice, Moles, &c. and 
examines the learned Dr. Whartons Doctrine, assigning a double Placenta 
to at least all Viviparous Animals, so as one half of it belongs to 
the Uterus, the other to the Chorion: shewing how far this is true, 
and declaring the variety of these Phænomena, together with a very 
ingenious assignation of the Cause of that variety. Where do occur 
many uncommon Observations concerning the difference of Milk in 
ruminating and other Animals; the various degrees of thickness of the 
Uterin liquor in Oviparous and Viviparous creatures; the property 
of the humour, turning into Eggs, with a hint of the cause of their being 
excluded, and not quickned and formed within; as also, of the 
cause of Moles in the womb, and of many kernelly and fleshy substances 
[^p.508^] 
in other parts of the body: where he takes notice of a concretion 
seen by himself grown to the Cone of the Heart, of nine ounces weight 
in an healthy Body, that died of a violent death; and of the like adhering 
to the Spleen, Kidneys, Liver, without any perceived trouble to 
the Animal; yea, of some found within the heart it self. 
 
He adds the Number, Shape, and Use of these Placenta's; and first 
observes that those that are Kernel-bearing Animals, or chewing the 
Cud, have many, and those that are Cake-bearing, have for the most 
part, one Cake for each Fœtus; but a woman commonly but one, though 
she happen to have many Embryo's. 
 
He annexes a particular description of the Placenta of a Woman, 
as the most considerable, and teaches, how it may be most conveniently 
severed from the Vessels, to render them conspicuous, which are a 
numerous off-spring of Arteries, Veins, and Fibres; of the last whereof 
he inquires, whether they be the capillaries of the Arteries, and 
Veins, or nervous. 
 
The Shape of that in a Woman is Orbicular, about a foot large, and 
two inches thick; one of its Superficies's, convex, but uneven, the 
other concave, and every where sticking close to the Chorion. 
 
The Use of the Placenta's is known to be, to serve for conveighing 
the aliment to the Fœtus. The difficullty is only about the manner. 
Here are examined three opinions, of Curvey, Everhard, and Harvey. 
The two former do hold, that the Fœtus is nourished only from the 
Amnion by the Mouth; yet with this difference, that Curvey will have 
it fed by the Mouth when it is perfect, but, whilst it is yet imperfect, 
by filtration only through the pores of the body, and by a kind of juxtaposition: 
but Everhard, supposing a simultaneous formation of all 
the instruments of nutrition together at first, and esteeming the Mass 
of bloud by reason of its asperity and eagerness unfit for nutrition, and 
rather apt to prey upon than feed the parts, maintains, that the liquor 
is sucked out of the Amnion by the mouth, concocted in the stomach, 
and thence passed into the Milky Vessels, even from the beginning. 
Mean time they both agree in this, that the Embryo doth breath, but not 
feed, through the Umbilical vessels. 
 
This our Author undertakes to disprove; and having asserted the 
mildness of, at least, many parts of the bloud, and consequently their 
fitness for nutrition, he defends the Harveyan doctrine, of the Colliquation 
of the Nourishing Juyce by the Arteries, and its conveyance to the 
Fœtus by the veins. 
 
[^p.509^] 
In the third Chapter, the Membranes and Humors of Embryo's are 
considered, The Membranes are in some, three, in others, four, in an 
Egg, six. All Placentiferous Animals (if I may assume this word) he 
affirms to have three Membranes, and Sows, Mares, and Women also; 
but only two Humors. Again, Bitches, Cats, and Conies, four Membranes, 
and three Humors; so that the Number of the Membranes hath been 
hitherto observed alwaies to exceed that of the Humors. 
 
Giving the History of both, he begins from Sheep, Cows, and other 
Ruminating Animals, describing first the Chorion, assigning its Use, and 
comparing it with that in Deer, Sows, Mares, Women, Rabbets, Bitches, 
and Cats, when with young. Then he proceeds to the description of 
the Allantoides (the Membrane immediately encompassing that skin, 
wherein the Fœtus is wrapped) and thence to that of the Amnion, 
wherein the Embryo it self lieth, swimming in its aliment liquor. And 
lastly to that which is observed to be in Bitches, Cats, and Rabbets, and 
contains a very good and nourishing Juyce; which how it comes 
thither, is a difficult inquiry, as well as that other, how the liquor gets 
into the Amnion. To resolve both which our Author, having disproved 
the Filtration of the liquor, held by Curvey and Everhard out of 
the Chorion into the Amnion, and evinced, that the liquor in the Allantoides, 
interjected between these two is Urinous, he concludes, that 
the alimentary Juyce passes through the Umbilical Vessels by a proper 
Artery, depositing it in those Membranes we speak of, and reserving 
it there for the use of the Fœtus. 
 
Concerning the Humors, he affirms, that all of them in all Animals 
are Nutritive, except that in the Allantoides. He observes also, that 
most of Oviparous Fishes have Eggs or Spawn, as to sense of one only 
colour, and but one humor; yet that the Spawn of a Skate hath a White 
and a Yolk. Birds have mostly three nutritious substances, that are visible, 
viz. a Yolk and a double White: to which upon incubation, 
comes a fourth, co liquated out of the former; the tender Embryo 
feeding upon the two Whites, till they being consumed, the Yolk of 
the Chick now to be hatcht, is shut up in the Abdomen and thence by 
a peculiar Ductus conveighed into the guts; and so serves the young 
bird for breasts, it is fed by, until the twentieth day. 
 
In Viviparous Creatures are found sometimes two, sometimes three 
humors, and in Bitches, Cats, and Rabbets four; which perplexeth the 
Author, as to the giving a reason for it. These Humors, he saith, he hath 
examined, by concreting, distilling, and coagulating them; where he 
[^p.510^] 
furnishes the Reader with no vulgar Observations. He concludes this 
Chapter by observing, that there is also Air in the said Membranes; 
which besides other Arguments, he proves from the crying of Infants 
in the Womb (of which he alledges a memorable and well attested 
example in a Child of an English Lady in Cheshire, the Child being 
yet alive and in good health;) and from Chickens, often heard to 
peep in the Egg, both before the breaking of the shells, and after, the 
Membranes being yet entire; adscribing the production of this Air to 
the spirituous liquor in the Membrane, apt to ferment, and thereby 
causing store of exhalations. 
 
The fourth Chapter discourses of the Umbilical Vessels; and observes 
first, that they differ in different Animals, and hold proportion 
to the Membranes and Liquors, so as those that have two Liquors, have 
four Membranes, and three Liquors have six: the Oviparous also being 
furnished with a Ductus, passing to the Guts, because they want 
breasts, and their yolk is shut up in the belly. 
 
The Umbilical Arteries, belonging to the Placenta, and commonly 
said to be derived from the Crurals, are by him affirmed to proceed 
from the end of the Aorta. They are here described, and their several 
portions distributed for the Chorion and Amnion. Then an account is 
given of the Hepatick Vein, corresponding to the Arteries. It is in Viviparous 
Animals inserted into the Vena Porta, passing again with the 
remaining Bloud thorow the Canalis Venosus into the Cava, without 
percolation made in the Liver. In Birds it enters not into the Liver, but 
passes over its convexity into the Cava. A description is also made of 
the Urachus, found in all Viviparous Creatures, though by many Writers 
denied to be in Man, who notwithstanding hath need, as well as 
other such Animals, somewhere to lodge his Urine. The Oviparous 
want this Umbilical funiculus, but yet are furnished with fit sanguineous 
Vessels, which here also are explained; especially the Ductus Intestinalis, 
said to be omitted by Dr. Harvey, and to have been known 
to the Author long before Mr. Steno claimed the discovery of it; for 
which he appeals to the testimony of Mr. Boyle, and three worthy Physicians, 
Willis, Millington, and Lower; as lao to that of two ingenious 
Frenchmen, Guison, and Fiard, to whom our Author affirms to have 
shewed Anno 1659, when they were going over into Holland, not 
only this Ductus, but also the Ductus Salivales, and the Passages of the 
Nostrils, published afterwards by the said Steno. 
 
The use of this Ductus Intestinalis is esteemed to be conveighing 
[^p.511^] 
of the Yolk into the Guts for a second coction, there made by the Pancreatick 
Juyce, acknowledged to be excellently handled by the Learned 
Sylvius, and his ingenious Scholar, De Graeff, from the former of 
whom our Author yet dissents, about the mixture of the Gall with the 
said juyce in the Heart refuting it by several Experiments. 
 
The fifth, explains the Communion of Vessels in Embryo's: In whom, 
he saith, three Anastomoses are usually observed, which, as soon as the 
Fœtus is born, are closed. They are called Foramen Ovale, Canalis Arteriosus, 
and Venosus. The two former to be met with about the Heart; 
the last in the Liver. All three here described by the Author, who also 
compares, as Harvey does, the Fœtus yet in the Womb with the 
manner of operation of those Animals, that are provided but with one 
cavity in the Heart, and with no Lungs; the bloud of the Fruit, as long 
as it is unborn, passing neither through the Parenchyma of the Lungs, 
nor that of the Liver. Lastly, the necessity of Respiration is explicated, 
and how the defect of the Lungs, and of one of the Ventricles of the 
Heart, is supplied in Fishes, viz. by comminuting and mixing the bloud 
in the Gills. To which is annexed the manner of Respiration in Amphibia's, 
which are furnisht with Lungs and two Ventricles of the 
Heart, and yet, if Bartholin misinforms us not, keep the Foramen Ovale 
all their life time open; which yet our Author calls in question, alledging, 
to have seen no Diving Animals, which had not the said Foramen 
closed after their being born. 
 
The Sixth makes a digression, to discourse of the Biolychnium, and 
the Ingress of the Air into the Bloud, for the Generation of Spirits, and 
the pretended kindling of a vital Flame. But our Author can see nothing 
that may prove either the existence, or the necessity of such a 
Flame: On the contrary, he finds the Bloud unfit for taking Fire, and 
judgeth it very difficult to assign either the place or the manner of this 
accension; which is not made in the Lungs, nor in the Heart, which 
he holds to be destitute of all ferment. To which he adds, first, that the 
Heat of the Bloud is not sufficient to cause such an inflammation, seeing 
how much even good Spirit of Wine must be heated, before it will 
flame, which it doth not without the actual application of fire. Next, 
That Examples are very rare of Liquors kindled by ventilation. Further, 
That Fishes and Frogs, which yet have life, motion, and sense, 
are not thought to have this flame, as being actually cold. Besides, 
That the Animal Spirits are not found in the form of flame; which he 
endeavours to prove from the Willisian doctrine of the manner, in which 
[^p.512^] 
they are in the Brain severed from the Bloud. Lastly, That it is doubted 
by some, whether any Air at all is received into the mass of bloud, 
which yet is not questioned by our Author, who only doubteth whether 
through the Lungs there be a high way for the Air to the Bloud. 
 
After this, our Author gives his thoughts both of the true Use of the 
Lungs, and of Sanguification. 
 
The Lungs, he saith, serve chiefly, by their constant agitation to 
comminute the bloud, and so to render it fit for a due circulation; 
which office he thinks to be performed in Fishes by the continual motion 
of their Gills, a Succedaneum to Lungs. 
 
Sanguification, according to him, is chiefly performed and perfected 
by the frequent pulsions of the Heart, and the repeated contractions 
of its left Ventricle at the passing of the Sanguineous liquor from 
thence into the Aorta. 
 
The Seventh and last Chapter contains a Direction for the younger 
Anatomists, of what is to be observed in the dissection of divers Animals 
with young: and first, of what is common to all the Viviparous; 
then, what is peculiar to several of them, as a Sow, Mare, Cow, Ewe, She-Goat, 
Doe, Rabbet, Bitch, and a Woman: Lastly, What is observable 
in an Egg, Skate, Salmon, Frog, &c. 
 
All is illustrated by divers accurate Schemes. 
 
