[^Fairfax, Nathanael, Philosophical Transactions, volume 2, number 29^] 
 
[}PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSACTIONS. 
Monday, Novemb. 11. 1667.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 546-551^] 
 
[^p.546^] 
[}Anatomical Observations on a Humane Body, dead of odd Diseases; 
as they were communicated by Dr. Nathanael Fairfax.}] 
 
A Young Maid of Rumborough in Suffolk, when she was about 
thirteen years of Age, took Chalybeats for the Green-sickness, 
and found some relief by it, but was after much pent in her 
wind. From 16 to 22 she much afflicted her self for the Death 
of her Father and Mother, and the misbehaviour of a Brother; 
during which time, she had every year an acute Disease or two. At 
18, she was very weakly, clogg'd in her Chest, and melancholy. 
If she went out in a windy day, she was fain to make hast in, for 
the Wind, she said, was ready to choak her. She was a very slow 
walker, going up Hill or up Stairs with much difficulty. She 
was now observed to be very thirsty, usuall drinking at Bed-time, 
and in the night too, sometimes; else, she said, she should 
be choakt with drought. Between 21 and 22 of her age, going 
down stairs she heard a frightful jolking in her Breast; which 
she then made known to the rest of the house, who when she 
shew'd them the manner of it by shaking her Body, joyn'd all 
with her in the wonder, concluding (as most would have done by 
the noise) that her Breast was almost full of Water. She took several 
[^p.547^] 
things of Dr. Browne and others at Norwich for about six 
Months time, without finding Relief. Half a year after, toward 
Michaelmas, upon taking a slight cold, she was so stopt up, that 
she could only whisper; nor could she lie flat, but rear'd up with 
pillows. I being sent for, caused presently a Vein to be open'd, as 
an Expedient only to make way for a freer Circulation, and 
room for Nature to disburthen her self. Within less than an hour 
she got breath, and soon after grew as well as she was before. 
She affirm'd, she never sweat in her life, nor could it be procur'd 
by ordinary Sudorificks. Being desirous to add an Empirical 
remedy, I gave her three of Matthew's Pills, which did sweat her 
lightly, but beyond what ever she remember'd. Sevaral daily 
Doses of Lockier's Pills, 4 per Dose, remov'd the julking, as she said, 
lower to the Midriff: when she, fearing an Hyper-catharsis, laid 
them by for two or three days, and then taking them up again, 
could find no further alteration by them. She could never lie on 
her left side. In the 23d year of her Age, in Winter, she had a 
dangerous Feaver, with a Diarrhæa, but came off. In her 24th, in 
Winter again, she got cold, was quite stopt up, after five or six 
days fell into a Convulsion e're she was bled, through want of care 
in those about her. By late bleeding he had present ease, and 
chear'd up in the Evening, but died the next Morning. 
 
I had leave from her self, whilst living, and from her Relations, 
when dead, to open her Body; which I did accordingly. 
 
First therefore I cleav'd asunder the Breast-bone from the Cartilage, 
called Ensi-formis, to the Neck; when, laying open the 
hollow of the Thorax, there steam'd out at first a very offensive 
smell, notwithstanding the sharp frost there was at that time, it 
being about Christmas. Then making way to lay open either side 
of the Sternum, I was surprised to see (as I thought) almost the 
whole Cavity of the Thorax empty above, (as the Body lay supine) 
and filled with nothing but thick Milk beneath. But searching 
further, I found there was only all the right side of the Chest, 
and about a third part of the left, in that condition. It took up 
in the part to the Neck-ward a hand-breadth, and ran three fingers 
thickness to the left of the Mediastinum. The Liquor was 
like Cream, or rather like a size of Spanish White, having a cast 
of yellow like Beestings; for putting a spoon into it, from the 
[^p.548^] 
bottom I took up a thick clammy matter, just like that Spanish 
White, that sinks to the bottom of its size. In quantity it might 
be about three Pints, contain'd in a Bag, which was capable to 
hold as much more and better. The bag ran along from the left 
shoulder, to the utmost of the right side of the Midriff; not 
streight along, nor stifly stretcht, but about a hand-breadth from 
its rise it went directly down to the Midriff, with which it closed 
all along. Its skin or coat was thicker than that of the stomach, 
as well as its capacity larger, in as much as the Flexures of the 
Ribs joyn'd with it, and made up above half the compass. Where 
it adher'd to the Midriff, 'twas near a finger thick: And in one 
place, where I endeavour'd to separate it from the Midriff, I hit 
upon a thinner Bag, whence issued out two or three spoonfuls of 
sheir water: How it got in, I found not. The Mediastinum was 
either wholly wasted, or else woven into the thickness of the Bag, 
as was also the Pleura, as far as the Bag reach'd. It lay loose and 
slapping from the left Axillar to the Chest, having been before 
filled and distended either with Lenid or the Liquor. All the hollow 
was bedabled with the wallowing of the Liquor about, as 
is the Ouse by the Ebbings and Flowings of the Tide in a Channel. 
That Lobe of the Lungs, which should have been on the 
right side, was gone, and that on the left, wasted to near a third 
part. In the Lower Belly all was well. 
 
Dr. Brown saith, he hath met with like in an Italian Author. 
His opinion was to salivate her. I had thoughts of a Paracenthesis, 
or Tapping between the Ribs; for by the noise of 
the Liquor, and by her not enduring to lye on the left, I concluded 
it must be in a Cystis on the right. But if that had been done, 
the Bag being too thick might have mortified. The Jolking 
was exactly like that of Water or Milk. This Woman was as 
Flat-breasted as a Man. Whether the Liquor proceeded from the 
falling down of the Chyle from the Axillars, is a Quære, but seems 
to carry in it somewhat of probability. But I must not reflect. 
 
[}Two other Anatomical Observations, imparted by the same hand.}] 
 
1. A certain Serving-man about 27 years of age, died Hydropical, 
which Disease he was molested with 4 years before his death. He 
[^p.549^] 
was ever a listless, dull, and melancholy fellow, never chearful nor 
smiling, especially for ten years before he died. His words came 
from him as if forced, and speaking but a little, he would end 
with a sigh. When open'd, he was found to have the left Lobe 
of the Lungs almost quite wasted; but no Ulcer, nor ought preternatural 
appearing in the remaining part, except its wasting. 
The heads of the Vessels and branches of the Wind-pipe as big as in 
the other Lobe. That Lobe of the Liver, which buts on the 
Mid-riff, was black outwardly for about a hand breadth, and about 
a thumbs breadth within the Parenchyma. Other parts sound. 
 
2. The other day I took notice in the Corps of a Felon, that 
whereas ordinarily the Preparing Vessels arise on the right side, 
out of the Cava, as on the left, out of the Emulgent, his right 
Vas preparans sprang clearly from the right Emulgent. 
 
[}Divers Instances 
Of Peculiarities of Nature, both in Men and Brutes; communicated 
by the same.}] 
 
1. One Mr. Morley of Bury St. Edmonds, in an Asthmatick distemper, 
was advised by some to take down a spoonful of 
good English Honey; which being done, the Patient fell into an 
Universal swelling, as if he had swallow'd the worst of Poysons. 
Mr. Goodrich being hastily called in to save life, prescribed him a 
common Sudorifick, which in competent time relieved him. They 
then made enquiry at the Apothecaries, Whether nothing were 
amiss in the Honey? and they protested, it was altogether right. 
But to be assured of it by Experiment, they afterwards got the like 
quantity at another place, which was given with the very same 
frightful event, and the party was cured 
by the same Chirurgeon (who is my 
Author) with the same kind of sweat. [/1./] 
 
2. Mr. Twisse, a Minister of Metigham 
in Suffolk, about forty years of 
age, having been accustomed for some 
time to drink warm or rather hot Beer, 
[^p.550^] 
and coming from his House about Midsummer to a House near 
Rumburch-Church, where he was offered a Cup of cold Beer, out 
of modesty, or a humour to prevent the being wonder'd at, took it 
off thus cold, after he had taken a Pipe of Tobacco. Which done, 
he presently took Horse, and rode with other Company towards 
Framlingham. Coming at Haleswith, he found himself sick, his 
stomach much out of order. He lighted once or twice by the 
way and vomited, but coming at his Journeys end, his vomiting 
grew worse, and he was constrained to betake himself to his bed. 
Next day he grew yet worse, could find no help by Physick, but 
died the very next morning. 
 
It may be worth noting (adds the Author) that one, who is 
wont to drink cold Beer, is not, for ought we know, endanger'd 
by a draught of hot Beer: But I cannot tell, whether it may be 
thence inferr'd, that hot things are more agreable to the natural 
Tone of the Stomach, than cold. That it was not barely the 
coldness of Particles, sensible to the Touch, appears, because 
the same Party could drink cold Wine, as I was informed from 
my own Father. 
 
3. Madam Mary Brook of Yoxford hath such an Aversion to 
Wasps, that whilst their season of swarming about in Houses lasteth, 
she is forc'd to confine her self to a little close Chamber, 
and dares not then come out to Table, lest their coming there 
should put her into such Distempers, as Cheese doth those, who 
have an utter Antipathy against it. 
 
4. Mrs. Raymund of Stow-market, when ever she hears Thunder, 
even afar off, begins to have a bodily distemper seize on 
her. She grows faint, sick in her stomach, and ready to vomit. 
At the very coming over of it, she falls into a right-down Cholera, 
and continues under a Vomiting and Loosness as long as the Tempest 
holds, and that in a more violent way than is commonly procured 
by such Medicaments as are usually exhibited for those very 
purposes. And thus it hath been with this Gentlewoman from 
a Girl. 
 
5. I know a Woman in Stow-market, who, during her Green-sickness, 
was invited by their by her Pica or longing to suck the Wind out 
of Bellows, which, as often as she could, she took into her Body 
with open mouth, forcing it in by blowing with her own hands, 
[^p.551^] 
the Bellows inverted. I know another that was for crackling 
Cinders under her feet. From which kind of Instances I am inclin'd 
to doubt, whether that Distemper begins at the Depravation 
of the Acid liquor in the Stomach, and not rather at the Uterus, 
which next infects the Brain, such kind of things gratifying 
the Fancy some ways misled, more than the Appetite natural 
any ways depraved. 
 
6. Somewhat like to this is to be found in Brutes. In May last 
a Greyhound Bitch at Brightwel-Hall, about five or six days 
before she cast her Whelps, had such a wild kind of Hunger, 
(though she was fed sufficiently every day with usual food) that 
finding another Bitches Whelps, she devoured them all (4 or 5, 
as I remember) and fell next upon the Bitch her self, who made 
a shift to get from her as well as he could, being helped. From 
this and, and from Sows devouring whole Litters of Pigs, I am prone 
to think otherwise of the Longings of Teeming-Women, than is the 
common opinion. 
 
