[^Philosophical Transactions, volume 2, number 30^] 
 
[}PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSACTIONS. 
Monday, December 9. 1667.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 576-579^] 
 
[^p.576^] 
[}II. THOMÆ CORNELII Consentini PROGYMNASMATA 
PHYSICA.}] 
 
This Author, a Friend to the Cartesian Philosophy, entertains 
the Curious in this Book with seven Exercitations, viz. 
 
1. De Ratione Philosophandi: Where in the genuine Students of 
Natural Philosophy he first requires the study of Mathematicks, 
to accustom their Minds to a fixed Attention, and to strict Reasoning; 
and next directs them to study Nature it self, and to labour 
after a true History of Nature: recommending lastly and 
particularly the use of Chymistry, as an excellent key to open her 
Treasures, and the study of Mechanical Principles, as nearly allied 
to those of Nature. 
 
[^p.577^] 
2. De Rerum Naturalium Initiis: Where he mentions the several 
Hypotheses and Principles of Philosophers, and approves of 
the Cartesian, esteeming, that none ever looked so like truth, as 
those; though he thinks them defective in this, that how well 
soever they shew the production of things out of Matter variously 
modified, yet they seem not to have sufficiently accounted 
for the efficient power thereof. 
 
3. De Universitate: Where he seems to be in a Maze, and 
thinks, That the Structure of the Universe hath not been understood 
hitherto, nor will easily be hereafter. 
 
4. De Sole: Which Luminary he is inclin'd to believe to be a 
kind of flaming Fire, appearing in a Telescope, like a Caldron full 
of boyling Metal; where also he discourses of the nature of Light, 
Heat, and Flame; and affirms Light (as other sensible Qualities) 
to be not in the Object but the Sentient; as Pain is not in the 
Sword, but in the Animal wounded by the Sword. 
 
5. De Generatione Hominis: Where, distinguishing between 
Genitura and Semen, and making the former to be that substance, 
which either Sex furnishes to the Fœtus, and the latter, the Concrete 
of both Parents, He is of opinion, that that which he calls 
Genitura, consists of two things. Vid. a Crasse liquor, manifest to 
sense; and of a very subtil and refined substance, containing 
all the virtue of Generation, and lodged in the formes as its receptacle: 
Which having establish'd, he affirms, that grosser part 
of the Geniture not to be Blood elaborated, but a Juice, secreted 
from the Blood, and being strained through the Corpus varicosum 
or plexus pampiniformis (wherein the seminal Arteries are 
by innumerable Anastomoses so combined and interwoven with 
Veins, that very hardly any naked eye can discern a Vein from an 
Artery) it passeth into peculiar fit Vessels, and is of a colour like 
that of the White of an Egg. As to the Formation of the Fœtus, 
he esteems That, before the appearance of any Blood, or the framing 
of any Member, there are form'd all the Lineaments of the 
Animal to come, though indiscernibly; which he endeavours to 
make out very particularly, interweaving some Animadversions 
on Authors of differing sentiments, and mentioning several not 
unphilosophical Hints. 
 
6. De Nutricatione: Here the Author observes some things in 
[^p.578^] 
the Structure of the Stomach, which he thinks highly considerable 
for the understanding of the action and use of this Viscus, and 
hitherto not taken notice of by others that he knows. Then he 
teacheth, that the Food is not digested in the Stomach by Heat, 
nor by acid dissolving Juices only, but that many Causes concurring 
to that digestion, the Aliment is there fermented both 
by the warmth of the Stomach it self, and of the neighbouring 
parts, but especially by the acrimonious steams that pass through 
the Gastrick and Splenick Arteries into the Stomach, which advances 
also its Concoction by its compressing and relaxing motions, 
and is assisted by an apt Liquor, bedewing, dissolving, and 
diluting the Meat, and so converting it into a Pulse or Creamlike 
substance. Next, he teacheth, that the Chyle passeth not 
through the milky Veins (so called by Asellius) to the Liver, 
nor all of it through the Channel of Pecquet to the Heart, but a 
great part of it through the common Veins of the Stomach and 
the Mesentery, to the Liver. Nor will he admit, that the Sanguification 
is performed in any one part of the Animal, as the peculiar 
Shop or Elaboratory of it, whether Liver, Heart, Spleen, 
&c. Nor that the parts are increased and nourished by the red 
part of the Blood; but that, as to the former action, it is done 
by the means of a Liquor, and by hot steams, giving the red colour 
to the Chyle, as Chymists use to change white Juices into red, 
by the affusion of Oyl of Sulphur, or the like Liquors; that redness 
being much advanced by the motion and agitation of the 
blood in the Veins and Arteries. But as to the latter, vid. the 
Nutrition, it is performed by that whitish Juice, which is mixed 
with the Blood, and separated from it by the straining Glandules 
of the Body. 
 
To these particulars he adds several not unconsiderable remarks 
touching the Gall, Spleen, Lymphatick Vessels, &c. Observing 
also, that the whole kind of Birds is destitute of milky Vessels; 
and occasionally taking notice, that Worms are bred in almost 
all the parts of Animal Bodies; of which he alledges very 
odd Observations and Histories. 
 
7. De Vita: This he affirms to consist in the continued motion 
of the Blood, depending from that of the Heart; yet so, 
that this latter proceeds not from the heat of the Blood (as Des 
[^p.579^] 
Cartes would have it) but the moist steams and expirations of 
the Heart. 
 
As for Respiration, he thinks it a vain opinion, that thereby the 
heat of the Blood is temper'd and allay'd; but affirms, that it is 
therefore necessary, because that the Blood, which out of the 
right Ventricle of the Heart is propelled into the Lungs, in such 
Animals, as are furnish'd with them, cannot pass into the left, unless 
the Air, breathed in, do swell and distend the small branches 
of the Windpipe; it being from thence, that the ramifications 
of the Arterial Vein, through which the blood must pass, are 
compress'd, and the blood therein inclosed is protruded into the 
branches of the venal Artery: For the proof of which, he alledges 
divers Observations. Adding withall, that since Animals, 
whilst they are in the Womb, respire not, there being peculiar 
ductus's, by which the blood passeth into the Aorta, without passing 
through the Lungs, as it always doth in Animals destitute of 
Lungs; he doubts not, but that with art and care those Channels 
may be preserved unabolisht, and made to grow and to be perfected 
with the other parts of the Animal, so that grown men 
may be brought to live the life of Amphibious Creatures. Nor 
doth he think this very difficult, in regard, that if their mouths 
and noses were from their very infancy often stopt every day, and 
their breath so long intercepted, whilst the blood passeth through 
those Ductus's into the left Ventricle of the Heart and the great 
Artery, the said passages would never be dried up: To confirm 
the possibility whereof, he alledges Examples of divers, who 
from their Childhood being given to swimming and diving and 
so to the holding of their breath, did thereby so preserve those 
Channels from being dried up, that upon occasion they could 
stay a great while under water, as Amphibiums use to do. 
 
