[^Philosophical Transactions, volume 2, number 25^] 
 
[}PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSACTIONS. 
Monday, May 6. 1667.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 449-452^] 
 
[^p.449^] 
[}An Account 
Of an easier and safer Way of Transfusing 
Blood out of one Animal into another, viz. 
by the Veins, without opening any Artery of 
either.}] 
 
THis Way was first practised (for ought we know) by Doctor Edmond 
King, and the success thereof in two Experiments, communicated 
by him to the Royal Society, as follows, 
 
1. I took a Calf and a Sheep, both of the larger sort, and having 
prepared a Jugular vein in each, I planted my Pipes and 
Quills, as is usual, both in the Jugular Vein of the Calf (designed 
to be the Emittent) and in that of the Sheep (intended for 
the Recipient.) Then I took out of the Sheep 49 ounces (Haver 
de pois weight) of blood, before any other blood was let in; about 
which time, the company concluding the Sheep to be very faint, 
and finding the blood to run very slowly, I stopp'd the Vein of 
the Sheep, and unstopp'd the Pipe in the Calf, letting run out 
10 ounces into a Porringer, which was done in about 40 seconds 
of a Minute. Then I convey'd Pipes from the Emittent Calves 
Vein, into the Recipient Sheeps Vein, and there ran a good free 
stream of blood for the space of 5 minutes (though perhaps lesse 
swift than the first 10 ounces.) And not to be deceived in the running, 
I did often strike with my finger the upper part of the 
emitting Vein, and thereby easily felt every stroke answered on 
the Recipient Vein, just like a Pulse. And now supposing that by 
this time (viz. the lapse of 5 minutes) the Sheep had received as 
much, if not more blood, than it had lost, we stopp'd the current 
of blood from the Calf, and closed also the Vein of the 
Sheep, and then having untied her, and set her down in the room, 
she went about and appeared to have as much strenght, as she had 
before the loss of her own blood. Then resolving to bleed the 
Sheep to death, we bound her the second time, and open'd the 
emittent part of the Vein again; whereupon having bled about 
60 ounces, she fell into Convulsions; and after the loss of about 
5 ounces more, she died upon the place: and being dress'd by the 
Butcher, there did not, in all the usual places, appear above 
3 ounces of blood; and the whole Sheep look'd of a lovely white; 
and the meat of it (to the taste of those, that eat of it) was very 
sweet. 
 
The Sheep being dead, we resolv'd likewise to see the Calf 
bleed to death; but he having bled 10 ounces, and then for the 
space of 5 minutes more into the Sheep, and rested a good while, 
the blood by that time began to coagulate in the Vein; which 
made me open the Carotid Artery, letting thence run out about 
25 ounces of blood, of a very lovely and vivid colour, vastly excelling 
[^p.451^] 
therein the blood of the Vein. The Calf, when dress'd, 
had, by the information of the Butcher, as little blood as the 
Sheep; and we saw him look whiter, than usually they do in the 
ordinary way of killing. 
 
2. I took out 45 ounces and better, of blood, out of the Jugular 
Vein of a Sheep, of a lesser size than the former; by which 
time, the Spectators, as well as my self, found her exceeding faint, 
and some thought her pass'd recovery, without a supply of blood. 
Then I convey'd blood from the Jugular Vein of a Calf into that 
of the Sheep, for the space of 7 minutes, when we did believe, by 
the continuance of a good stream from the Calf, that the Sheep 
had already received more blood, than she had lost. Whereupon 
we set her free, and she had no sooner got her liberty, but seeing a 
Dog near her (which was a Spaniel, that had formerly suffered the 
transmission of Sheeps-blood into him) she butted with great violence 
at him three or four times, not appearing at all concern'd at 
what she had endured in the Experiment. We keep this Sheep 
alive, she being sent to grass again, and seeming hitherto very 
strong and lusty. 
 
The Calf was much larger than the Sheep. We bled the Calf 
to death, and received from him six Porringers full of blood, after 
the Sheep had been suppleid, each Porringer containing 
11 1/4 ounces of water. The Sheep lost four of the same measures 
full of blood; which being supply'd by that of the Calf, we 
reckon, that the Calf lost 10 such measures in all. 
 
[}An Account 
Of another Experiment of Transfusion, viz. 
of Bleeding a Mangy into a Sound Dog.}] 
 
This was made by Mr. Thomas Coxe, and imparted likewise 
to the Royal Society in manner following. 
 
I procured and old Mungrell Curr, all over-run with the Mainge, 
of a middle size, and having, some hours before, fed him plentifully 
with Cheese-parings and Milk, I prepared the Jugular Vein, 
[^p.452^] 
as we use to do the Carotidal Artery of the Emittent Animal, not 
designing any thing further, than to determine by Experiment the 
Infection of the Recipient's blood. Then I made as strong a Ligature 
upon the Dogs Neck, as I durst, for fear of choaking him, 
to the end, that the Venal blood, which is much more sluggish in 
its motion and evacuation, than the Arterial, might be emitted 
with the greater advantage of Impetus. 
 
Then I took a young Land-Spaniel, of about the same bigness, 
and prepared his Jugular Vein, as is usually done in the Recipient 
Animal; the heart-ward part of the Vein to receive the Maingy 
Dog's blood, and the head-ward part of it to discharge his own into 
a Dish. 
 
Having thus prepared them both, and placed them in a convenient 
posture one to the other, I let slip the running knots, and 
by frequent compression of the Neck (besides the Ligature I 
had made) by reason of the tardy running of the Venal blood 
out of the Emittent, transfused about 14 or 16 ounces of the 
blood of the Infected, into the Veins of the Sound Dog, as neer 
as I could guess by the quantity of blood, which ran into a 
Dish from the Recipient; supposing the Recipient Animal to 
lose near about the same proportion to what the Emittent supplies. 
 
The effect of which Experiment was, no alteration at all, any 
way, to be observed in the Sound Dog. But for the Maingy Dog, 
he was in about 10 dayes or a fortnights space perfectly cured: 
which might with probability enough, I think, have been expected 
from the considerable evacuation, he made; (perhaps the 
quickest and surest remedy for the cure of that sort of disease, he 
was infected with, both in Man and Beast.) 
 
