[^Philosophical Transactions, volume 2, number 31^] 
 
[}PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSACTIONS. 
Monday, January 6. 1667/8.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 600-602^] 
 
[^p.600^] 
[}An Account of two Books.}] 
 
[}I. PARTHOLOGIÆ CEREBRI & NERVOSI GENERIS 
SPECIMEN: in quo agitur de MORBIS CONVULSIVIS 
& SCORBUTO, studio THOMÆ WILLIS, M.D.}] 
 
WHat this excellent Author formerly promised of the whole 
Pathology of Brain and Nerves, he gives in this Book a 
very considerable Specimen of. The knowledge of the Diseases 
which use to affect these parts, is esteemed very difficult and intricate, 
and particularly the true causes of Convulsions are of a 
very deep search. For the clearing them up, this Author Philosophiseth 
[^p.601^] 
after this manner. He teacheth, that there are indeed 
Animal Spirits; that they constitute the Being of the Corporeal 
Soul, and are also the next and immediate Instruments of all Animal 
motions, producing them by a kind of Explosion or Shooting; 
upon which Elastick or Explosive Power, he establishes his whole 
Doctrine of Convulsions. To which, he annexes a Disquisition of 
the Scurvey, as being near of kin to the same Doctrine, and 
grounded upon the same Hypothesis. 
 
[}The First Part consists of XII. Chapters.}] 
 
1. Of Convulsive Motions in general. 
2. Of the Epilepsy or Falling-sickness. 
3. Of the differences of the Epilepsy, and the Causes of some 
of the Symptoms thereof; together with a Draught of the method 
of curing this Disease. 
4. Of the other kinds of Convulsions, and particularly of 
those in Children. 
5. Of the Convulsive-fits in grown and aged persons, proceeding 
chiefly from the vitiated Origin of the Nerves. 
6. Of those Convulsive Motions, whose Cause lies about the 
Extremities of the Nerves, or within the Plexus nervei. 
7. Of those that are caused by Liquors, bedewing the nervous 
Bodies, and irritating the whole processes of them into Convulsions, 
where are considered the Cramps that arise from Poysons. 
8. Of the Universal Convulsions that are wont to be caused 
in malign, or ill-judged, and some anomalous Feavers; where 
are described the Epidemical and Malign Convulsive Distempers 
formerly reigning in some parts of Germany, as also that Epidemical 
Feaver which raged Ann. 1661, in England, and did principally 
afflict the Brain and Nerves. 
9. Of those that proceed from the Scorbutick Disposition of 
the Neruous Juice. 
10. Of Hysterick Passions, where he maketh the Womb plead 
Not guilty. 
11. Of those Passions that are vulgarly called Hypochondriacal, 
shewing, that they are chiefly Convulsive, where by the by he 
treateth of Chalybeat Remedies. 
12. Of Convulsive Coughs and Asthma's, and their Cure. 
 
[^p.602^] 
[}The Second Part contains XI. Chapters.}] 
 
1. A Description of the Scurvy; its internal and next Cause 
to be principally in the Blood, and sometimes in the depraved 
Juice of the Nerves. 
2. Of the remoter Causes of the Scurvy, and whence the Mass 
of the Blood, and consequently the Nervous Liquor, receive its 
depravation. 
3. Of the Differences of the Scurvy, its Signs and Symptoms, 
and chiefly such as arise from the Blood being tainted. 
4. Of those Accidents which happen in the Scurvy, by reason 
of the Brain and the Nervous Stock being vitiated. 
5. Of the Symptoms that arise from the conjoined Distempers 
of the Blood and the Nervous Juice. 
6. Of the Prognosticks of the Scurvy; where he takes notice, 
that a prevailing Scurvy at last ushers in a Dropsie or a Consumption. 
7. Of the Cure of the Scurvy; where, among other Remedies, 
he mentions several Specificks for this Disease. 
8. Of such Medicaments as respect the Scurvy, caused in a hot 
Constitution, and in a Sulphury-saline Distemper of the Blood. 
9. Of the Cure of the various and urging Symptoms of the 
Scurvy; as, difficult Respiration, Scorbutical Cholick, Fluxes, 
Giddiness, Hemorrhagies, loose and rotten Gums and Teeth, 
Pains in all the Limbs; besides the Scorbutick Gout, Convulsions, 
Palsies, Atrophy, Feaver; as also Rheumatisms, Dropsies, 
and the Noise in the Bones; which some are troubled with in this 
Disease. 
10. Of the Vital Indication, declaring by what Method and 
Medicines either the fainting Patient may be supported, or his 
decayed Forces restored; where he discourseth of Cardiacal 
Opiat Medicines, and of the Diet that is fit for Scorbutical persons. 
11. Some rare and very considerable Relations and Cases of 
Scorbutick Men and Women. 
 
