[^Philosophical Transactions, volume 3, number 41^] 
 
[}PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSACTIONS. 
Monday, Novemb. 16. 1668.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 833-835^] 
 
[^p.833^] 
[}An Account of two Books.}] 
 
[}I. TRACTATUS DUO, prior de RESPIRATIONE; alter 
de RACHITIDE, A. JOH. MAYOW, &c. Oxon. 1668. 
in 8=o=.}] 
 
THe Author in the former of these Tracts, having first given an account, 
how the Air by its Elastick force is inspired, and upon 
the dilatation of the Chest, caused by the intercostal Muscles, drawn 
upwards, rushes into the Lungs, which are thereby expanded, being 
nothing else but a Body made up of very thin little Membranes, in the 
form of innumerable small bladders; delivers his thoughts of the Use of 
Respiration, waving those opinions, that would have Respiration serve 
either to cool the heart, or to make the Bloud pass through the Lungs 
out of the right ventricle of the heart into the left, or to reduce the 
thicker venal blood into thinner and finer parts; and affirming, That 
there is something in the Air, absolutely necessary to life, which is conveyed 
into the Blood; which whatever it be, being exhausted, the rest of 
the Air is made useless, and no more fit for Respiration. Where yet 
he doth not exclude this Use, That with the expelled Air, the vapors 
also, steaming out of the Bloud, are thrown out together. 
 
And inquiring, what that may be in the Air, so necessary to life, he 
conjectures, that 'tis the more subtile and nitrous particles, the Air abounds 
with, that are through the Lungs communicated to the Bloud: And this 
Aereal Niter he makes so necessary to all life, that even the Plants 
themselves do not grow in that Earth, that is deprived thereof, which 
yet, being exposed to the Air, and afresh impregnated by that fertilizing 
salt, becomes fit again to nourish those Plants. 
 
And considering further, what part this Nitrous Air acts, and what 
operation it performs in the Animal Life, he is of opinion, that this 
Niter, mixt with the sulphureous parts of the Bloud, causeth a due fermentation, 
which he will have raised, not only in the Heart alone, but 
immediately in the Pulmonary vessels, and afterwards in the Arteries no 
less than in the heart. Examining also the reason, why Death so suddenly 
ensues upon Respiration suppressed, the Bloud being then not yet 
unfit for motion, he inquires yet after another Use of Respiration, which 
maketh it so very necessary to Life. And considering with himself, that 
the Life of Animals consists in the Distribution of the Animal spirits, 
for the supply of which is required the Pulsation of the heart, and the 
Afflux of the Bloud to the Brain, it seems to him, that Respiration is 
highly necessary to the motion of the heart, forasmuch as the heart is 
one of the Muscles, the motion of every one of which absolutely requires 
this Aereal Niter, so that without the same, even the beating of 
the Heart cannot be performed. 
 
[^p.834^] 
But here he declareth, that he seeth not, how that Explosion, by which 
the Muscles are so suddenly inflated and contracted, should proceed from 
the Arterious Bloud and the Nervous juyce. He esteems rather, that the 
nitrous particles proceeding from the inspired Air, do by the Afflux of 
the Arterious bloud everywhere flow between the fibres of the Muscles, 
and lodge therein; and that the animal spirits, made up of a very volatile 
salt, and not much differing from the distilled spirit of bloud, highly 
rectifi'd, do, as often as they are sent from the Nerves for motion, 
meet with the former nitrous and differing particles; by which mixture 
of a kind of Volatile Spirit of bloud, and a Salin liquor, united together, 
is caused that sudden explosion, and consequently the inflation and contraction 
of the Muscles. To which Ebullition, he saith, may perhaps 
something also conduce the Bloud, forasmuch as its sulphureous particles, 
conjoyn'd with the Niter inspired, may render that juyce Nitro-sulphureous, 
and yet more explosive. And thus he thinks the motion made 
in the heart, (a musculous substance) to be done no otherwise, than 
that in other Muscles. Whence he concludeth, that upon the suppressing 
of Respiration, when that darting Niter,, so requisite to all motion, 
is deficient, the Cardiaque Nerves convey their influx in vain, so that 
the pulsation of the heart ceasing, and consequently the afflux of the 
Blood to the Brain, Death must needs follow; but yet that the Animal 
may live a while without Respiration, forasmuch as the Bloud contained 
in the vessels of the Lungs, and impregnated with Air enough, 
may suffice to maintain for some few moments the motion of the heart. 
 
And thus much of the first Tract, the other treating of the Rickets, 
examins in the first place, wherein Nutrition consists, and finds, That 
the Nervous Juyce performs not alone the whole office of that operation, 
in regard that besides it, the Bloud diffused through the Arteries, hath no 
small share in that work, seeing that the nervous liquor mixt with the bloud, 
causeth a certain effervescence, whereby the matter, fit for nutrition, is precipitated, 
and that for want of this nervous liquor, the Bloud in this distemper 
of the Rickets, though it be laudable enough, yet being destitute of 
its one ferment, is not able to excite Heat in the parts, nor to execute 
the office of Nutrition. So that the Rickets, in the opinion of this Author, 
are a disease, caused by an unequal distribution of the Nervous 
juyce, from whose either defect or superabundance, some parts defrauded 
of nourishment, are emaciated, others, being surcharged, grow 
into a disproportionate bigness. Proceeding to assigne the Cause of this 
inequality in the distribution of the Aliment, he finds it not in the influx 
of the Brain, but in the obstruction of the spinal Marrow, whence 
it happens, that, that high way of the passage of the spirits being damm'd 
up, the parts, to be sustain'd and cherish'd by that nutritious Juyce, must 
needs languish, and fall into an Atrophy and the highest Consumption. 
 
[^p.835^] 
Having assign'd this cause, he endeavours from thence to deduce all the 
Appearances and Symptomes peculiar to this Disease, and suggests that upon 
that ground it ought to be the main intention of the Physitian, to remove 
such Obstructions, and to strengthen the Nerves: subjoyning a general 
method for curing this Infirmity, and specifying the principal remedies, 
both Internal and External to be used therein; among which he chiefly recommends 
the spirits of Sal Armoniack, Harts-horne, Blood, Urine, Soot, 
as such, that by the high volatility and subtleness of their parts are able 
to dislodge those Obstructions, which cause this Disease. 
 
