[^Philosophical Transactions, volume 3, number 34^] 
 
[}PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSACTIONS. 
Monday, April 13. 1668}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 663-664^] 
 
[^p.663^] 
[}II. REGNERI De GRAAF, M.D. EPISTOLA, De non-nullis 
circa Partes Genitales Inventis Novis. Ludguni Batav. In 
16 A. 1668.}] 
 
[}III. JOHANNIS Van HORNE, M.D. Observationum suarum 
circa Partes Genitales in utroque sexu, PRODROMUS. 
Ludg. Batav. in 15. A. 1668.}] 
 
It seemes, that the two Authors in these two Papers have 
met with almost the very same Observations; which they account 
New, about the Genitals in both Sexes; and that, the former 
having appeared in Print before the latter, the latter thought 
himself obliged, the self same day that the Epistle of De Graaf 
came out of the Press (as himself intimateth) to declare in this 
his Prodromus, that, though he knowes not, whether the Observations 
of the former be altogether the same with his, yet, to avoid 
dispute hereafter, he thought fit, in this Paper of his, to represent 
the short of his own un-borrowed Observations, concerning that 
Subject, till he should be able to publish a full History of the 
structure of those parts. 
 
Touching De Graaf, he 1. Rejects the opinion of those, that 
teach a Conjunction of the Seminal Arteries with the Veins by 
visible Anastomoses, and that reckon the Testicles among Glanduls. 
2. He affirms, that he hath often unravell'd totam substantiam 
testiculorum in ingentem longitudinem. 3. He asserts to have 
shew'd by a short way, Vesicularum seminalium cum vasis deferentibus 
communionem, magnitudinem, figuram, carumque in Urethram 
exitum. To which he saith to have added a very easie 
way of examining the Body of the Prostatæ. From the consideration 
of all which he concludes, Unam esse solummodo materiam 
seminis, eamque in testibus generari, in vesiculis excipi, & inde 
in Urethram ejici, non per unum, ut vult Veslingius, sed duo foramina. 
4. He affirmes to have an easier and more accurate way 
of dissecting the Penis than any other Anatomists he knows; and 
that he assignes to the Muscles thereof a farr other use, than hath 
been done hitherto. Of all which he intimateth, that he is ready 
to publish a Book, after he shall have received the thoughts of Dr. 
Sylvius upon the Manuscript thereof. He concludes, that he 
hath contrived a New Instrument, whereby every one may give 
himself a Clyster without any Denudation of the parts, or change 
of posture. 
 
[^p.664^] [^Original misnumbered as p.604.^] 
Concerning Van Horne, he also refutes the above-mention'd 
Anastomoses between Arteries and Veins; then describes the 
Spermatick Arteries and Veines; the Pyramidal-Figure, they 
make, where they meet near the Testes, the direct and retrograde 
passage of the said Artery's through the Testes, and such a strange 
Anastomosis between the Spermatick Veines, that they represent 
a kind of rete mirabile most elegantly. He also will not admit 
the Testes to be Glandular, but affirms, (which is the same 
with the Doctrine of De Graaf) totam Testium molem nil esse aliud, 
quam congeriem minutissimorum funiculorum, habentium seriem 
continuatam, atque concavorum, pro seminis materia devehenda: 
adding, that if the greater Globe of the Epididymis be well examin'd, 
there will appear through its Membrane such anfractus 
and funiculorum gyri, as resemble those of the Brain. He holds 
triplicem materiam seminis, unam, quæ venit a~ Testibus; alteram, 
quæ a Vesiculis; tertiam, quæ ex prostatis in Urethram propellitur. 
He deduceth from the wonderfulness of the Structure of the 
Penis, Tensionem ejus, & impetuosam seminis per eundem ejaculationem. 
 
After this, he intimates briefly the Observables in Partibus 
Genitalibus Mulierum, and among other things remarks (what 
was lately also noted out of Steno's Myologia, Numb. 32. p. 628.) 
Mulierum testes esse Ovario in Oviparis analogos, they containing 
perfect Eggs, full of Liquor, and encompassed with a skin of their 
own, whereof he affirms to have yet some by him, &c. 
 
