[^de Bills, Louys, Philosophical Transactions, volume 3, number 40^] 
 
[}PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSACTIONS. 
Monday, Octob. 19. 1668.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 791-792^] 
 
[^p.791^] 
[}An Extract 
Of a Letter, lately written by Monsieur Louys de Bills to 
D. Tobias Andreæ Professor of Physick and Philosophy 
at Duysborgh on the Rhyn; touching the true 
Use of the Lymphatick-Vessels, &c.}] 
 
THe Vessels, commonly called Lymphatick, have two Coates, 
betwixt which there are innumerable very smalll and very 
fine vessels like Filaments, resembling the Mosse of Trees, without 
any Valves, containing a nutritious Juyce convey'd into all 
the parts of the Body by a motion thereof from the center to 
the circumference; but returning through the inner pipes (furnisht 
with Valves,) of the same Water-vessels; at which time 
they are no more to be call'd Water or Dew, but Ferment, the 
vessels deserving also the name of Ferment-vessels. This Ferment 
serves to keep the Blood, and to ferment the same, being 
convey'd into it by a motion contrary to the former, viz. from 
the circumference to the center; which I can prove by Ocular 
demonstration, having already shew'd it to Dr. Stalparts Van der 
Wiele and many others, in the jugular Glanduls taken out of a 
Dogg; wherein I shew'd them, that these Lymphatick vessels 
carry their dewy particles about the Glanduls between the two 
Tunicles, and that in the lowermost end of these Glanduls the 
Ferment-vessel takes its beginning, being inclosed in these Dewy 
Vessels, and so constituting the inner pipe together with the 
Valves, which are of another forme, than hath been known hitherto. 
 
To your Quære, VVhether the said Ferment-vessels discharge 
at last all their Ferment into the Ductus Thoracicus, thence to be 
carry'd directly to the Heart, there to increase and to ferment 
the Blood, or whether they communicate their Ferment to other 
parts also? I answer, that most of the Juyce of the Milky 
vessels is discharged between the Tunicles of the Veines, Arteries, 
Lymphaticks, Membrans, and the vessels in the Mesentery, 
to be conveyed into all the parts of the Body, both Internal 
and External. For even in bearing Females the Fruit is not 
nourish'd by any Blood, but by the nutritious Juyce, conveyed 
[^p.792^] 
to it; as also by the moisture contained in the Amnion, which is 
no Urine nor Sweat, as some imagine; we having yet lately seen 
in the House of the said Dr. Stalpart at the Hague in a new-born 
Child, that his Urachus had no cavity at all, through 
which the Urine could passe out of the Bladder into the Amnion. 
The remaining and least part of the liquor of the Milky vessels 
is transmitted through the Ductus Thoracicus by the Jugular 
vein into the Blood. 
 
Besides these Vessels there are yet others, that do not exonerate 
themselves into the Blood, viz. the Ductus Virsungianus, which 
delivers it self into the Duodenum; and the Ductus Salivales, 
whereof the Saliva does no less, than the Juyce in the Ductus 
Virsungianus, serve for Ferment, to wit, the one in the Stomach, 
and the other in the Intestins, From whence you may easily 
conclude, not that I hold (as it seems I have been understood) 
that the least part in the Ferment-vessels concurs to the making 
of Blood, but that the least part of the Juyce in the Milky 
vessels is discharged into the Blood. 
 
Concerning the other Quære, VVether also the distribution 
of this Ferment is made through the Testicles, Kidneys, Breasts, 
and Salival Glanduls, &c. I answer, that the Salival Glanduls 
carry their Spittle or Ferment into the Mouth, and that the rest 
which returns back through the Testicles, Breasts, and other 
Glanduls, is carried to the Cistern. 
 
