[^de Letterati, Giornale, Philosophical Transactions, volume 3, number 42^] 
 
[}PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSACTIONS. 
Monday, Decemb. 14. 1668.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 840-841^] 
 
[^p.840^] 
[}An Extract 
Out of the Italian Giornale de Letterati, about two considerable 
Experiments of the Transfusion of the Blood.}] 
 
ANno 1667. May 8. Here was made in Bononia at the house 
of Signior Cassini this Experiment, viz. There was open'd 
the carotid Artery of a Lamb, when the bloud was let run 
as long as it could, into the right branch of the Jugular Vein of 
another Lamb, from which there had before been drawn so much 
bloud, as was judged, it could be supplyed with from a Lamb of 
the like bigness, whose bloud should be let out till it dyed. After 
this, there were made two ligatures pretty near to one another, 
in the vein of the Lamb, that had received the bloud; and this 
vein was quite cut thorow between the two ligatures, to see 
what would happen thereupon. This done, the Lamb was untyed, 
which without any appearance of feebleness, went about, 
following those that had made the operation. It lived a long 
[^p.841^] 
while after, and its wound being healed up, it grew like other 
Lamb. But the 5th of January 1668, it dyed, and its stomach 
was found full of corrupt food. Its neck being dissected, 
to see what had happen'd to the vein cut through, it was found, 
that it had joyned it self to the next Muscle by some fibres, and 
that the upper part of that vein had a communication with the 
lower, by the means of a little branch, which might in some 
manner supply the defect of the whole trunck. 
 
There was made another Experiment the 20th of May last at 
Udine, at the House of Signior Griffoni, by the transfusing the 
blood of a Lamb into the veins of a Spaniel, of a middle size of 
that kind, 13 years old, who had been altogether deaf for above 
3 years, so as what noise soever was made, he gave not any sign 
of hearing it. He walked very little, and was so feeble, that 
being unable to lift up his foot, all he did was to trail his body 
forward. After the Transfusion practised upon him, he remained 
for an hour upon the Table, where he was yet untied; but 
leaping down afterwards, he went to find his Masters, that were 
in other Chambers. Two dayes after he went abroad, and ran 
up and down the streets with other Dogs, without trailing his feet, 
as he did before. His stomach also returned to him, and he began 
to eat more and more greedily than before. But that, which 
is more surprising is, that from that time he gave signes, that 
he began to hear, returning sometimes at the voice of his Masters. 
The 13th of June he was almost quite cured of his deafness, 
and he appeared without comparison more jocund than he 
was before the operation. At length, the 20th of the same 
Month he had wholly recovered his hearing, yet thus, that when 
he was called, he turned back, as if he that had called him, 
had been very far off. But that hapned not alwayes; in the 
mean time he heard always when he was called. 
 
