[^Philosophical Transactions, volume 2, number 32^] 
 
[}PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSACTIONS. 
Monday, February 10. 1667/8.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 627-628^] 
 
[^p.627^] 
[}IV. NIC. STENONIS MUSCULI DESCRIPTIO 
GEOMETRICA, Florentiæ in 4. Ann. 1667.}] 
 
The Author of this Book declareth, that his design in composing it was 
to shew, that in a Muscle neither the Parts of it can be distinctly named, nor 
its Motion duly considered, unless the Doctrine thereof become a part of 
the Mathematicks. And he is of opinion, that there is no other cause of 
the many Errors, which spoil the History concerning the Humane Body, 
than that Anatomy hath hitherto disdain'd the Laws of the Mathematicks: 
And therefore inviteth those that are studious in that part of Philosophy, to 
consider, that our Body is an Engine made up of a thousand subordinate 
Engines, whose true knowledge whoever thinks that it can be investigated 
without Mathematical assistance, must also think, that there is matter 
without Extension, and Body without Figure. 
 
Hereupon he shews, that the very Fabrick of the Muscles imposeth a kind 
of necessity upon considering Writers to explicate them Mathematically: In conformity whereunto, he pretends to have found, that in every Muscle 
there is one Parallelepiped of Flesh, and two Tetragonal Prisms of Tendons, 
defining a Muscle to be a Body composed of divers Series's, or ranks of Fibres, 
equal, like, and parallel among themselves, and so immediately placed 
upon one another, that whole Ranks are congruous to whole Ranks. 
Here he explains the Dimensions of a Muscle, its Contraction and Strength; 
and adds, that the use of this new discovery of the structure of the Muscles, 
is to demonstrate, That they may swell in their Contraction without the 
Accession of new Matter. 
 
He subjoins a Letter to Monsieur Thevenot, in which, among other things, 
he alledges several Experiments, to shew, that the motion of the Heart is 
like the motion of Muscles; and answers those who pretend, that the true 
Fabrick of the Heart hath already been observed heretofore; and those 
likewise who think, that these new Observations of the Muscles are uncertain, concluding this Subject with an enumeration of the Particulars, 
yet remaining to be search'd into in the History of the Muscles. 
 
To all these things he adds two Narratives; one, of a dissected Head of 
a Shark, which he calls Canis Carcharia, where he delivers many curious Observations of the Skin, Eye, Optick Nerves, Ocular Muscles, exceeding 
[^p.628^] 
smallness of the Brain, as also of the Mouth, and strange Teeth of this Fish 
examining withall, whether the Glossopetræ be the Teeth of this Creature, 
or Stones produced by the Earth; in which Controversie he takes their 
part, who maintain, that those and divers other substances found in the 
Earth, are parts of the Bodies of Animals, and endeavours to prove, that 
such sorts of Earth may be the sediments of Water, and such Bodies, the 
parts of Animals carried down together with those Sediments, and in 
progress of time reduced to a stony hardness. [/1./] 
 
The other Narrative is of a Female Dog-Fish, dissected also by himself, 
where do occur no less remarkable Observations than in the former, both 
of the parts in the Head, and of those in the Body, as touching the small 
weight of the Brain of this Fish, compared to the weight of its Body; 
several little Fishes found in the Stomach, untouch'd by any Teeth; the 
Ureters, the Ovarium, and Ovidictus, where he digresses to shew, Mulierum 
testesesse Ovario analogos, and refers for further proof of this to his intended Treatise, which is, to give an account de partium Genitalium Analogia. 
 
