[^Philosophical Transactions, volume 3, number 38^] 
 
[}PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSACTIONS. 
Monday, August 17. 1668.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 750-752^] 
 
[^p.750^] 
[}An Account of Two Books.}] 
 
[}I. R. de GRAAF Med. D. de VIRORUM ORGANIS GENERATIONI 
INSERVIENTIBUS, &c. Ludg. Bat. 1668. in 12=o=.}] 
 
This Treatise was promised by the Author in a printed Epistle 
of his, which we gave an account of in April last, Num. 34. 
p. 663. There being at the same time publisht a Prodromus of 
Joh. Van Horne, suspecting, that the Observations of De Graef 
were much the same with his upon this Subject; we do now upon 
the perusal of this Book, find chiefly these considerable Differences 
between them. 
 
[^p.751^] 
First, the said Van Horne makes the Spermatick Artery in man 
to goe to the Testicles in a winding, but De Graaf, in a streight way. 
Secondly, the former affirms, that the vasa deferentia have no 
communication with the vesiculæ seminales; but the latter maintains, 
and demonstrateth it to the Ey, there is so great a commerce 
betwixt them, ut semen dum a~ Testibus per vasa differentia affluens 
in Urethram effluere nequit, propter carunculam clausam; necessario 
influat in Vesiculas, in iisque pro futuro coitureservetur. 
 
Thirdly, the former is of opinion, triplicem esse materiam seminis; 
but the De Graaf will have but one only; answering the Arguments, 
used both by Van Horne and Dr. Wharton to prove that triplicity. 
 
But that, which De Graaf much insists on in this Book, is, 
to shew what is the true Substance of the Testicles, and to vindicate 
the Discovery thereof to himself; affirming positively, that 
no man, before him ever knew the truth 
of it. [/1./] For the making out of which he first denyeth, 
that the Testes are glandulous, or pultaceous; 
and then affirms that their substance is nothing else 
but a Congeries minutissimorum vasculorum semen 
conficientum, quæ si absque ruptione dissoluta sibi invicem adnecteretur, 
facile viginti ulnarum longitudinem excederent. Which 
he affirms, he can prove by ocular Demonstration. 
 
Then he sheweth, how the seminal vessels pass e~ Testibus ad 
Epididymides, vid. not by one Trunck (as Dr. Highmore thinks) 
but by 6. or 7. small ductus's; assigning the cause, why Doctor 
Highmore did not see them. 
 
Further he examines, An semen in testibus conficiatur; 
utrum ex Sanguine vel ex Lympha? quomodo elaboretur, crassescat, 
lactescat: qua via a~ Testibus ad Urethram excurrat. 
 
Moreover he endeavours to prove, Vesiculas seminales ordinatas 
esse non seminis generationi, sed receptioni & asservationi. 
 
He also observeth concerning the seminal matter, that 'tis composed 
ex duplici materia, which after Aristotle, he calls [^GREEK OMITTED^], 
considering this twofold matter like 
Dough and Ferment, this infecting and quickning that, and the 
grosser part being a conservatory and vehicle to that, which is most 
elaborate. 
 
When he examins the Penis, he taketh notice, Omnes hactenus 
[^p.752^] 
Anatomicos perperam assignasse usum musculorum Penis, quos 
Erectores appellant; Eorum quippe provinciam non esse, Penem erigere, 
& dilatare Urethram, cum omnis Musculi actio sit contractio, 
quæ extensioni contraria est; eos potius Penem versus interiora 
retrahere quam erigere: Interim, hosce Penis Musculos, coarctando 
corpora nervosa circa corum exortum, materiam seminalem versus 
Penis partem anteriorem propellere, atque hac ratione corporum nervosorum 
distensione erectionem angere. 
 
Before we conclude this Account, we cannot but take notice, 
that the Author occasionally inserts in this Book divers curious 
and remarkable Examples and Observations; some whereof 
are. 
 
1. Concerning those, that are born, either absque Testibus; 
or cum Testiculo uno; or, cum tribus, idque hæreditario per aliquot 
familias, admodum fæcundas. 
 
2. About the situs præternaturalis Testiculorum, generationis 
tamen virtutem non impedientis. 
 
3. Concerning lactescent Bloud in a man living at Delft in Holland, 
whose Bloud alwayes turn'd into Milk, when let out either 
by venæ-sections, or by bleeding at the Nose, or by a wound. V. 
pag 84, 85. Compare Numb. 6. pag. 100, 117, 118. and Numb. 
8. pag 139. of these Transactions. 
 
4. Concerning the strange alteration made in Femals, ab Aura 
seminali: quod confirmat exemplo felis, diu sugentis (idque 
ad integram fere sui nutritionem) lac mammarum caniculæ, per 
aliquot annos a~ coitu prohibitæ; deinceps vero, postquam catella 
admiserat canem, nunquam ab eo tempore lac ex mammis ejus exsugere 
volentis. 
 
5. About a strange Hæmorrhagy per Penem, which amounted 
to 14. pound, in a Porter of 52. years old, falling down with a 
heavy load upon a board, laid over a ditch, and so turning about, 
when the said porter trod upon it, that it cast him down upon its 
edge, turn'd between his legs; yet the Patient by the skill and 
care of our Author recover'd. 
 
6. Various Observations of Clysters and Suppositories, cast up 
by Vomits, p. 195, 196. 
 
7. Several wayes of performing unbloudy dissections of Animals, 
p. 228, 229, &c. 
 
