[^Philosophical Transactions, volume 4, number 45^] 
 
[}PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSACTIONS. 
March 25. 1669.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 909-912^] 
 
[^p.909^] 
[}II. Tractatus de CORDE; item de motu 
& Colore SANGUINIS, &c.}] 
 
A. Richardo Lower, M. D. Londini in 80, impensis Jacobi 
Allestry, 1669. 
 
THe Learned Author of this Treatise (a Member of the 
R. Society) considering with himself, how important it 
was, for the attaining a full knowledge of the Nature and Qualities 
of the Blood, to investigate, besides the Circular Motion 
thereof, the Origin and Celerity of that Motion, and the various 
Changes thereof, together with the Causes of them; as also, to 
make an estimate of the Quantity of that Liquor emitted at 
every Pulsation; thought it very well worth while, to give, from 
his own best Observations, a clear and particular account of that 
whole matter. And for as much as he conceives, that the Motion 
of the Blood depends on that of the Heart, he begins with a 
Discourse concerning the Situation and Structure of the Heart, to 
[^p.910^] 
shew, How exactly these two are calculated for its Motion, and 
how well adapted to distribute the Bloud into the parts of the 
whole Body. 
 
In the First Chapter then, he considers the Diversity of the 
Situation of the Heart in different Animals, and the Reason thereof; 
proceeding to discourse of the Pericardium and its Use, 
together with the Origin and Vse of the Serum therein; and 
why in Man onely that Case of the Heart grows to the Midriff, 
and what makes it to do so; as also, why the Cone in an Humane 
Heart bends much more to the Left side, than in Brutes: Then 
shewing, that Arteries have their rise from the Heart, but Veins 
terminate in it, and how and by what Vessels the Heart is nourisht 
by the Alimentary Juyce: treating also of the Vessels 
of the Heart, its Nerves, and the various Influx of the Animal 
Spirits through the Nerves into the Heart, according to the 
various shapes of Animals, together with the Cause thereof: 
Proving further, that the substance of the Heart is perfectly Muscular, 
and in perfection surpassing all other Muscles of the Body 
(where he exspatiates into un-common Observations concerning 
Muscles in general;) then descending to a Minute Explication 
of the parts of the Heart, and there particularly shewing 
the Mechanical Contrivance of the Heart for its Systole and 
Diastole, together with an accurate description of the Foramen 
Ovale, and its Vse in the Fœtus, and the Clausure of the same in 
Animals born. 
 
In the Second Chapter he treats of the Motion and Office of the 
Heart; Where, as he admits not of any Ferment or Ebullition of 
the Bloud in the Heart (which he affirms would be an Obstacle to 
its Systole, as 'tis needless to the Diastole,) so he assents, that the 
Motion of the Heart depends not from such an Ebullition (which 
he proves by Experiments, and vindicates from Objections;) but 
that the genuine and immediate Instruments of the Heart's Motion 
are its Fibres, Nerves, and Spirits flowing through them, the 
action of the Heart being altogether conform to that of other 
Muscles: Where he takes occasion to make it out, that the Motion 
of Muscles is not caus'd by their being inflated, nor by any 
Explosion of the Spirits passing through them, but after the manner, 
as two men taking one another by their hands draw themselves 
[^p.911^] 
close together into mutual embraces: Whence he goes 
on to shew That the whole Motion of the Heart consists indeed 
in the Systole, that of the Diastole being onely a Motion of Restitution. 
Further, that there is a necessary Commerce betwixt the 
Heart and Brain (the Cause of all Sense and Motion:) but that 
both ultimately depend from the Stomack as the constant Purveyor 
and Furnisher of Matter for Bloud and Spirits. 
 
In the Third Chapt. he teacheth, with what Celerity all the 
Bloud passeth through the Heart, and what difference there is between 
the Venal Bloud and the Arterial. As to the former, 
he calculateth, that all the Bloud passeth through the Body, 
thirteen times, (not Six, as 'tis misprinted in the Book 
it self) in one hour. And concerning the latter, he is of 
opinion, that the Purpureous and florid color of the Blood in the 
A_[^ORIG. BLURRED^]teries proceeds not from its Accension in the Heart (if there be 
any such thing) but depends altogether from the Lungs, and the 
Admixture of the Air with the Bloud there: which he proveth by 
considerable Experiments; refuting withal the opinion of those 
that will derive it from the Comminution of the Bloud in the 
Lungs. 
 
In the Fourth Chapt. he gives an Accompt of the Rise, Progress 
and Use of the Invention of Transfusing Bloud out of one 
Animal into another: though in the History of this particular 
he commits (I know not by what over-sight) a mistake, in relating, 
that Monsieur Denys (call'd by him Dionysius) arrogateth to 
himself that Invention, whereas he onely tells us that some of his 
Nation do so. B_[^ORIG. BLURRED^]sides which, we must needs take notice of another 
mistake in this part of the Book, viz. that the Author taking 
occasion to speak of the Philos. Transactions, calls them the 
Transactions of the Society; which certainly he would not have 
done, if he had either but taken notice of what is said in Numb 
II. of the same; or else consider'd, that so Illustrious and so 
Learn'd a Body would certainly, if they thought fit to publish 
any thing as theirs, entertain the knowing World both with sublimer 
Matter, and with a sutable Eloquence: But this by the by. 
 
In the Fifth Chapt. he treats of the Chyle, and its Change into 
Bloud; where he observeth, that nothing passes from the Spleen 
through the Vas breve into the stomack; but that the Ferment 
[^p.912^] 
of the stomack proceeds immediately from the Blood it self: 
Explaining further, How the Separation of the Chyle is perform'd 
in the Intestins, and how the same, to facilitate the more its 
passage, is diluted and refined by the Iuyce of the Pancreas, secreted 
into the Duodenum: Rendring also the Cause, Why all 
the Glanduls in the Abdomen and in all the lower parts of the Body 
do deposite their Lympha or Juyce into the Common great 
Receptacle of the Chyle, and Why that Receptacle is plac'd between 
the Tendons of the Daphragime; as also, Why those 
Channels, which convey the Chyle into the Subclavial Vein, 
are double. To which he adds, That all the Chyle is by the 
Ductus Thoracicus alone transmitted into the Bloud and Heart, 
which he proveth by several considerable Experiments, with 
some reflexion on the Bilsian Experiment alledged for the contrary. 
All which he concludes by shewing the degrees and ways 
of Change, whereby the Chyle is at last converted into Bloud; 
and how it serveth for the Nourishment and the several parts of 
the Body. 
 
The Whole receives a singular Elucidation and Ornament by 
the Accurate Figures, in 6. Tables annexed. 
 
Many Curious and important Observations are occasionally 
interspersed; such as are: That the Capillary vessels (of the 
same sort) do open into one another in all the parts of the Body: 
That all the Muscles of the Body, are Biventers or double-belly'd: 
That as the Motion of the Heart and Bloud is Circular, 
so the Fibres, as tke Moving Engines of them, are about the 
Cone of the Heart brought into a Circle and Center: That the 
Motion in the Muscles is not like Shooting, but Fencing; and 
many more, for which we must referr to the Book it self. 
 
[}FINIS.}] 
 
