[^Philosophical Transactions, volume 4, number 51^] 
 
[}PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSACTIONS. 
September 20. 1669.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 1034-1037^] 
 
[^p.1034^] 
[}An account of two Books}] 
 
[}I. DISCOURS de M. STENON sur L'ANATOMIE 
du CERVEAU. A Paris 1669. in 12.}] 
 
IN the beginning of this Discourse the Author represents, that 
those, who search after solid knowledge, will find nothing 
satisfactory in all that hath been hitherto written concerning the 
Brain: that all, which Anatomists agree in, is only, that it 
consists of two Substances, a White and a Grayish, and that the 
former is continued with the Nerves, that are distributed 
through the whole Body; and the latter serves in some places 
for a kind of Cortex to the White, and in others, severs the 
white filaments from one another. But that they are yet ignorant, 
what those substances are; in what manner the Nerves 
are Joyned in the White; and how farr their extreamities advance 
in it; from which disposition yet depends all the diversity 
and variety of our sensations and motions. And as for 
the Ventricles or Cavities of the Brain, he affirmes them to be 
no less unknown, than its Substance; some Anatomists lodging 
[^p.1035^] 
in them the Spirits, others making them the receptacles of 
the Excrements of the Brain; and both perplext in assigning 
the source and Issue of the Excrements, and the Spirits, and the 
manner of the production of the latter. 
 
Besides this, he finds a great defect in the way of dissecting 
the Brain, and having shewed the imperfection in the common 
ways, he proposes and recommends that (though difficult one) 
of continuing the filaments or threds of the Nerves through the 
Substance of the Brain, to see, where they pass, and where 
they terminate. 
 
N_[^ORIG. BLURRED^]xt, he entertains the Reader with an Enumeration of the 
chief Errors of Anatomists touching the brain. And here he examins 
particularly the Systemes of Dr. Willis and Monsieur Des-Cartes. 
In the former he takes special notice, that the Author 
thereof lodges the Common Sense in the corpus Striatum; the Imagination 
in the Corpus Callosum; and the Memory in the Grayish Substance 
which encompasses the White. But then he declares, that 
these assertions are very obnoxious; for, whereas Dr. Willis describes 
that Corpus striatum, as if there mere two sorts of Streaks 
or Rays, some ascending, some descending, he finds, that a 
separation b_[^ORIG. BLURRED^]ing made of the Gray body from the White, those 
Rays will be found to be all of the same nature, that is, they 
make part of the White substance of the Corpus Callosum which 
passes towards the Marrow of the Back, separated in divers 
Layers by the intervening of the Grayish Substance. Which 
being so, saith he, with what certainty can we be made to believe, 
that those th_[^ORIG. BLURRED^]ee Operations are performed in those three 
Bodies? And who can tell us, whether the nervous Fibres have 
their beginning in the Streaked Body, or whether they rather 
pass through the Callous Body into the Gray Substance? 
 
In the latter of M. Des Cartes, he finds, that that Philosopher 
hath rather devised, in his Treatise of Man, such an Engine, 
that performs all the actions, Men are capable of, than 
described Man, as really he is; which he undertaketh to prove 
by divers instances, taken from the Cartesian fabrick of the 
parts of the Brain: in the doing of which our Author showes 
great dexterity, skill, and accuratenes. And from hence he 
proceeds, 
[^p.1036^] 
To observe the want of exactness in the Cutts or Figures, hitherto 
givin of the Brain: and although he acknowledgeth, that the 
best Figures, hitherto made of that part, are those of Dr. Willis, 
yet he finds several faults committed here and there, 
and conceives, there are many things to be added for making 
them perfect: which certainly this able Anatomist will consider 
further, and according to his Ingenuity, as he shall see cause, 
rectify, if the Author of the Book, reflected on, prevent 
him not. 
 
Having thus discussed the hitherto practised way of dissecting 
the Brain, and the litle light to be derived thence, together 
with the defectiveness of the Figures belonging thereto, he leaveth 
it to the Consideration of Judicious men, what faith is to 
be given to the Explications made upon such unsolid foundations; 
and that done, he declares, which are the two only ways 
for attaining the true knowledge of an Engine; viz. One, by 
having the contrivance of it discovered by the Auth_[^ORIG. BLURRED^]r himself; 
the other, by taking it in pieces to the very least parts, and 
examining them all both severally and joyntly. The former 
not being to be expected, he excites the Lovers of real knowledge 
to the careful performance of the latter; excusing in the 
mean time those two sorts of persons, that hitherto have addicted 
themselves to Anatomical researches, viz. Physitians 
and Chirurgions, for not having made satisfactory discoveries 
by their labors, and alleadging on their behalf their want of 
time requisite for this purpose; the ill consequence of which he 
represents to be, that they often undertake to cure a Body, of 
which they know not the Structure, which is no better, (saith 
he) then if a man would repair or wind up an Engin, the parts 
of which he is ignorant of. And as for Professors of Universities 
or other Schools, he Judges them not so proper for that 
particular application, and the variety of methods of dissecting; 
both which is necessary for examining every the smallest part, 
and the observeables thereof; there being sometimes required 
whole years for finding out one onely thing, that perhaps may 
afterwards be demonstrated to others in one hour; which he exemplifyes 
by divers instances of Discoveries, made by some 
of the modern Anatomists. 
 
[^p.1037^] 
He concludes his Discourse by recommending the method 
which seems best and most convincing to him, for making true 
Discoveries in Anatomy; where he adviseth, that for obtaining 
the true history of the parts, we should examine and accordingly 
draw them in that State, in which they are found naturally, 
without at all forcing them; thereby to find, whether the parts 
are indeed joyned together or separated, and what situation is 
assigned them by Nature it self. Where he desires, that the 
Anatomist would not only be intent upon the part, on which 
he is for the present employed, but also reflect upon all the Operations, 
he hath made before he came to that part, which may 
have caused some change or other in the same, as to its scituation, 
connexion &c. Of which he also alledges divers Examples, 
especialy as to the Brain. 
 
Besides this exact attention on all the Operations, he further 
counsels the Change of the ways of Dissecting, and deduceth 
the ill consequences of binding ourselves to certain fixt Laws of 
dissecting each part; this benefit resulting from that Change, 
that if it doth not always discover something new, it lets us know 
at least, whether we have been deceived in what we have seen 
formerly, especially in things dubious and contested. Of the 
necessity of this Change he brings manifest proofs; and having 
done so, he alledges the reason why he says nothing of the Use 
of the parts of the Brain, nor of the actions called Animal; it being 
impossible to explain the motions, that are made by an Engin, 
if the artifice of the parts be not known, and those Anatomists 
rendring themselves ridiculous, that discourse so magisterially 
of the Use of the parts, of which they know not the structure. 
 
Last of all, he observes, that when all this, he hath discoursed 
of, is done, that is but the least of what is to be done; in regard 
that for the acquiring of some good Knowledge of the Brain, 
there must be Dissections and Examinations made of as many 
Heads, as there are different species's of Animals, and different 
States and Conditions of each kind; since that in the fetus's of 
Animals it will be seen, How the Brain is formed; and what could 
not be seen in sound and entire Brains, may be seen in such, as 
have been changed by sickness. 
 
