[^Philosophical Transactions, volume 4, number 54^] 
 
[}PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSACTIONS. 
December 13. 1669.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 1094-1097^] 
 
[^p.1094^] 
[}VI. THEODORI KERCKRINGII D. M. 
SPICILEGIUM ANATOMICUM, continens 
Observationum Anatomicarum rariorum Centuriam 
unam, nec non OSTEOGENIAM FÆTUUM. 
Amstelodami, A 1670. in 4=o=.}] 
 
THis seems to be a very Curions Collection; to 
which the Author premiseth in the Preface his 
opinion concerning the Renes succenturiatos, viz. 
That they seem to be Cases, wherein is elaborated 
a Bilious Juyce; which afterward by the Emulgent 
veine, or often immediately, passeth to the Cava and 
thence conveyed to the Heart, raiseth there that Effervescence, 
which Sylvius contends to be in that part excited 
by the mixture of a saltish liquor with an Acid: for 
[^p.1095^] 
although Experiment do contradict the Conveyance 
of the Juyce out of the Liver, through the Cava, yet 
(saith he) may that effervescence in the heart (on which 
the whole Systeme of Sylvius in grounded) still hold, 
if this opinion about the use of these Kidneys be true, 
especially since there needs but little Leven to ferment 
a great Mass; there being required but a very little 
Salt of Tartar to be mixt with a good quantity of Spirit 
of Vitriol, to cause a vehement and durable Fermentation, 
though a considerable plenty of the latter, 
mingled with a small quantity of the former, produceth 
but a languid and short Effervescence. 
 
As to the Collection it self, it consists of divers uncommon, 
and very considerable Remarks, delivered 
by the Authors own Observation; E. G. A Dutch 
Stuyver swallowed down, and by closing the Pylorus 
of the Stomach, killing the Patient in ten days; on 
the contrary, a small Brass-coyn being swallowed, was 
after a Moneths time voided by Purges, and the Patient 
saved, the Coyn being so worn in the Stomach, 
that the same hardly appeared: Item, Of a Tumor on 
the Back, resembling a Sack filled with Corn, formed 
there by the force of Imagination: Examples of Superfœtation, 
and Ambiguous Births; of Animals bred 
in the Ear, and Worms come out of the Nose; of two 
Niples in one Brest; of divers very odd Monsters; 
of Infants born with Teeth; of a periodical spitting 
of Blood; of Stones growing upon the Wind-pipe, 
in the Brain, and the Heart, and killing the Patients; 
of a double Vena Cava, of a treble Ductus Thoracicus; 
[^p.1096^] 
of four Spermatick Arteries found without 
Spermatick Veins; of a portion of a Secundine, 
voided uncorrupted and innoxiously, four Moneths 
after the production of the Childe; of a Woman, 
frighted by the prediction, made by a Beggar, of the 
day of her death, and dying on that very day; of a 
very stooping and crooked Man, not above forty 
years of age, made streight again by purging away 
tough humors, besiedging the Muscles; of a Boy, 
and of several Sheep destitute of Brains; of many 
Observables in one and the same Body; of various 
complicated and odd Diseases in one Patient; of a 
Woman gone about seven Moneths, who being exceedingly 
frighted at the hearing of her Daughters 
falling down Stairs upon her Head, and breaking the 
hind part of the Skull, was a few days after delivered 
of a dead childe, wanting the whole Bone of the 
same part; of the Catamenia flowing thorow the 
Crown of the Head; others, thorow the right hand; 
others, from the very time of a Childes Nativity; of 
a Childe inclosed in a Mola; of a means of restoring 
the Sight, deprived of its Chrystalline, and the other 
Humors. 
 
The other part of this Book treats of the gradual 
and successive Growth of the Bones in a Fætus; for 
the better observation of which, the Author affirms 
to have by him Sceletons from the second Moneth after 
the Conception, to the very Ninth Moneth, assuring 
the Reader, that he delivers nothing, but 
what he knows by his own clear inspection; which 
[^p.1097^] 
he performs in such a manner, that he onely relates 
the more rare particulars, wherein the Fætuss do 
differ from adult Bodies, or he in the Doctrine of the 
Bones of Fætuss from other Authors, or which being 
un-observed of others, he hath observed more accurately; 
now and then also confirming, what others, 
by reason of the odness of the thing, yet 
doubted of. In short, he deduces the increase of the 
Bones through their several intervals of Times, and 
gives an accompt, How they are constituted in the 
first two Moneths, in which there hardly appeareth 
any thing of Bones distinguishable; then what of 
them, about the Third, fourth, and the rest of the 
Moneths, is ordinarily changed, added, or taken away, 
at least in the Fætuss of these Climats. The 
sum is, That there is a Transmigration of Membranous 
parts into Cartilagineous, and from them into Bony 
ones; performed by Nature with such silent steps, 
that the most quick-sighted, and the most patient 
Eye shall never see it doing, though it may evidently 
see it done. 
 
