[^Beale, J., Philosophical Transactions, volume 4, number 56^] 
 
[}PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSACTIONS. 
Februar. 17. 1669/70.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 1131-1134^] 
 
[^p.1131^] 
[}The Causes of Mineral Springs further inquired: And the strange 
and secret Changes of Liquors examined; by Dr. J. Beale, to 
the Publisher.}] 
 
Sir; 
I Am much obliged to my honored Friend Dr H. for his Analysis 
of Mineral Springs, and his Animadversions relating to 
that Argument. I offer no Objection against the Note, that 
some Waters do lick up the Salts, before they be perfectly fixt in 
the Materials of Metals: Only this I humbly propose for further 
Inquiry; Whether some Waters, by their long passage through 
sub-terraneous steams of divers kinds, and by heats and coolings, 
and by many changes of these, and by several kinds of 
strainings, by collisions, and manifold alterations of the contexture 
of their minute parts may not first acquire some Metallin 
Tincture; and thence assist the Generation of Perfect Metals, 
if they meet with fit materials; Or if they should be further concocted, 
before they be intercepted by opening the Spring? If 
this may sometimes fall out, then we may in such cases avoid 
the difficulty of undertaking, that Metals, there continued hundreds 
of years, are imperfect and in fieri And perhaps the Chalybeat 
and other Metalline Spirits may be purer and more throughly 
deopilative, before they be embodied into firm Metals, than 
after they are by Fire extracted. And then this may be a secret 
cause, why some Springs prove effectually Medical, when other 
Medicins do faile. 
 
Learned Varro saith, Tellus Mater omnium. And we can easily 
apprehend, that all solid Bodies, even Gold and firmest 
[^p.1132^] 
Jewels, though they seem strong enough to hold out a Platonical 
Revolution, do nevertheless naturally tend to a Terrestrial 
Dissolution. And some of the Antient Philosophers have conceived, 
that Water is the Mother to Earth itself, And they 
seem to have the greatest Authority, as well as good Reasons 
on their side. And Honourable Mr Boyle hath by choice Experiments 
taught us, that Water may have her turn to put in 
her claim for a Maternal right; and to be as much a Principle, as 
any of the other which we call Elements. And it seems to hold 
a kind of Middle Station between Earth and Air; apt to be condensed 
into the former or to be expanded into the latter; and to 
have a nearer allyance to running Metals, splendid Gems, and 
transparent Minerals, than Earth can have. 
 
But Tachenius in your Numb. 50. offers more closely, the 
Various Salts, especially of the Alcaly's, and Acids, to be the 
Principles of all mixt Bodies. I cannot doubt, but that they 
are generally necessary Ingredients and powerful Agents for 
Generation: And perhaps there are as many kinds of Salts, as 
there are Earths, Minerals, Stones, Metals, Vegetables, Tasts, &c. 
from the sweetest Sugar to the most dispatching Menstruum; 
Yet many of them by their expedit Volatility, and some by 
by their inclination to unite firmly with water, as in Glass, do 
shew a more than ordinary congeniality and friendly agreement 
with the purest liquids, Air and Water. 
 
But to decline intricate Theory's, and therewithal the subtilties 
and difficulties of determining, Whether Salt or Water be 
the nearer or more original Principle; or the more copious, more 
active, or more influencing in this or that Body: This we have 
before our eyes; The Birch and Alder feed more kindly on a 
thin uliginous moisture, the Elme, Pine, Firr, Pitch, and Cypress, 
chuse a stronger liquor; yet these and many more of the 
widest difference, are sometimes seen to draw their whole sustenance, 
bulk and ornaments, whether annual or perennial, from 
the liquors they find in the same piece of ground, and from 
the ambient Air, and Dews; when as yet by our best diligence 
we cannot distinguish the Liquors or Salts closely approaching 
their several Roots. And we may exchange all the Earth totally 
from the Roots of Trees, whose Barks, Sap, Fruit, and 
[^p.1133^] 
Seed have very much differing Salts, and are of very different 
kinds; and yet see each Tree prosper the better by the 
Exchange. Hence we may suspect, that the very contextures 
of their Bodies, from the first spirting of their seed, and as 
they are form'd gradually from the Invisible Principles or Spirit 
and vigor of their Seeds, however small and imperceptible, 
are the natural Limbecs, where the common Raine, Water, 
and Air, are digested into very much differing Leaves, Fruit, 
Seed, Resins, Gums, cooling Julips, &c. perhaps as the Cow's 
belly converts the common juyce of all sorts of Grass into Milk; 
or as the Bee ferments the dew of all Flowers into Hony and 
Wax. 
 
We see also, that an handful of Mosse, sometimes above a 
span long, and resembling Vegetables, grows out of a small 
Oyster-shel, without Earth, dirt, or sand for the relief of the 
Root; Trees out of bare Rocks, and the annual attire of Harts 
and Bucks out of their bony Heads. Whence we may easily appreend, 
how the Seeds in their time, and afterwards the Roots, 
Stems and Leaves of Trees, may be the proper Strainers to 
generate the peculiar Saps and Juyces; and perhaps to ferment 
and boyle the Liquors into their several Salts. It may pass 
for a resemblance, if not for an instance, that the Juyce of 
some sweet Pears may be dryed into a very sweet Sugar; and 
the Juyce of some other Pears is so fierce, that at the very opening 
of the Rind with the teeth, it doth almost suffocate, as 
if it would kill dead immediately; and yet this Juyce by time 
and seasonable maturation becoms sweet, winy, and luscious. 
And we hear of divers Exotick fruits that will kill outright; and 
that so quick, as may challenge the fiercest Menstruum of an 
expert Chymist. Now, as the Horns of a Stagg have their 
whole growth aud vetue from the protruding Bloud and Spirits 
of the Animal, the Mosse (as by the Microscope appears, 
when withered) from the inward shel of the Oyster and 
the Marine Water; so in Plants, the Sap may by Heats and 
Coolers, and other changes in Summer, Autumn and Winter, 
by Winds, and compressing Air, be hardened into 
the Timber, Seeds and their Stones and Kernels. All 
seems to be but Sap at the first draught, or little else besides 
[^p.1134^] 
pure Air and Water, till these be concreted into peculiar 
Salts by more curious Strainers, and by more subtil Boylers 
than Art hath hitherto devised. And with no less probability 
Mineral Waters may acquire their proper Salts in their subterraneous 
passages by their Strainers and Conveyances, by 
the various Temper they meet with, and by their dashes, 
and following changes of contexture. But this I leave 
to further inquiry. 
 
And this was my Ayme in your Tract 43. p. 855; where 
by a slight and cursory allusion I compared the Motion of Sap 
in Vegetables to the descent of Liquors in an Alembick. I 
had no thought of squaring the comparison to agree in all circumstances. 
And here also I pretend to very little more than 
allusions all along. It requires deeper work, a larger compass, 
and a closer attention to establish a General Theory upon the Intrigues 
of Vegetation, and of all Saline Operations: The 
very Air may (for ought I know) afford store and variety 
of Salt to dash the Foundations of my Overtures, at least as 
far as pertains to Vegetables. And the Mineral Salts have 
their recesses deeper, than I can dive, and their activities are 
swifter, than I have skil or leisure to trace. 
 
Neither had I any phancy, that the Sap in Winter 
descended to the Root, since I saw an Aple-tree, that yielded 
4 or 5 Hogsheads of strong Cider yearly; and a Pear-tree, 
that yielded more Perry; yet both growing on a dry ground, 
where they could get no other liquor then what the Clouds and 
the Air afforded: Yet I conceive, that these Trees have 
an intercourse of peculiar Spirits some way linked together, 
and vigorously co-operating, from the very Fibers of the lowwest 
Roots to the Top-leaves. And of this I had some waririness, 
when I expressed the correspondence between the Timber 
and Seeds in these terms - more immediate and peculiar, 
Numb. 46. p. 920. 
 
But I have no fondness for those Notes, which bear my 
name in your Tracts of N. 43. and 46; They were hastily 
dictated, neither reviewed, nor fitted for the publick; otherwise 
I should have promis'd less and perhaps prov'd more. 
If the Impertinences, Incoherences and dislcolations may be pardon'd 
I can ask no other favour for those Scribles. 
 
