[^Tonstal, George, Philosophical Transactions, volume 7, number 85^] 
 
[}PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSACTIONS. 
July 15. 1672.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 5019-5021^] 
 
[}An Accompt of some Books.}] 
 
[}I. SCARBROUHG SPAW Spagyrically Anatomized, An. 1670; 
And a NEW-YEARS-GUIFT for Dr. Witty; London 1671: 
Both in 12=o=. by George Tonstal Doct. of Physick.}] 
 
THE Examination of Medical waters being so useful 
both for the improvement of Physiology, and the 
Relief of the Health of man; we cannot but take publick notice 
in these Tracts of the discourses of that Subject, that come 
abroad by the Press: wishing only, that the Examiners of 
such matters, as well as of all others, would consider them 
without partiality and invectives, with all possible care and sincerity; 
thereby to stock the Philosophical Magazeen, that is 
now every where a furnishing by Experimental Philosophers, 
with such observations as commend themselves by their Truth 
and Exactness: For the finding out of which in the matter of 
the Scarbrough Spaw, treated of in these two pieces, and controverted 
between their Author and Dr. Witty; it seems to be 
very necessary to commit the examination of what they both 
have deliver'd thereon to some as well impartial as intelligent 
Naturalists, to review what they have written, and to repeat 
the Trials they have made, the better to enable themselves to 
decide the dispute. 
 
In the mean time it may not be amiss to give some account 
here both of the state of the Controversy, as 'tis delivered in 
these two discourses, and of the Assertions made by Dr. Tonstal 
concerning these waters. 
 
The Controversy is, whether the Scarbrough-Spaw do contain 
for Ingredientes, Particles of Stone, a Nitro-aluminous Salt, and 
a Glebe of Allom; and consequently be apt, upon the account 
of that Stone-Powder and clay, to breed the Stone? This is 
denyed by Dr. Witty, who judgeth its material principles to 
be cheifly, Allom, Nitre, and Vitriol of Iron, which he saith he hath 
extracted out of it. Whereas Dr. Tonstal positively affirms, 
that the Scarbrough-water hath no vitriol or iron in it, but a 
Stone-powder, and a clay, leaving sand at the bottom of the 
[^p.5020^] 
Vessel, when it is boiled, like the dropping well at Knaisborough; 
and that consequently it hath a Lapidescent Juice, and therefore 
is petrifying, and bad for the stone, Gout, and Jaundice: 
maintaining, that that which Dr. Witty calls a little insipid 
earth, (remaining upon the dissolution of the first extract of 
this Spaw, and the filtration of it) is a great deal of gretty 
Stone-powder; and adding further, that 'tis the peculiar Character 
of the same Spaw, whereby it is distinguish't from other 
Spaws in use, to take a resty fit sooner or later, so as that it will 
neither go backward nor forward, by siege or urine. 
 
Having made it his business to prove this both by a Chymical 
Analysis, and by Experience of his own and others, importing 
that they never had any fit of the Stone till he and 
they drank of this Scarbrough-water; he further observeth, 
 
1. That Allom-Stone dissolved in water yields a Purple tincture 
by Gall; and that, this Allom-Stone being acknowledged 
by Dr. Witty to be in Scarbrough, therefore the Tincture 
by Gall is no argument for Vitriol in that Spaw. 
 
2. That all waters have dissolved Iron, have Vitriol also 
as the product of that dissolution. 
 
3 That all the Salt that sprouts out of the Scarbrough-cliff, 
is Nitro-alluminous, and not Vitriol. 
 
4. That the precipitated powder found at the bottom of 
the vessel, after that Scarbrough water hath stood in it two or 
three dayes, is Glebe of Allom. 
 
5. That if Vitriol be joyned with Niter in Scarbrough (as 
Dr. Witty will have it) it becoms a corrosive water, whereby 
(saith Dr. Tonstal) it would be made worse that by all he 
hath written against it. 
 
Whilst our Author is thus examining the Scarbrough-Spaw, 
he taketh occasion to say thus much of that Knaisborough, that 
its worth and excellency is, that an Embryonate Sulphur hath 
corroded Iron in it; which, saith he, makes it Stomachical, Opening, 
Diuretical, and strengthening all the noble parts. 
 
Having thus represented the sum and substance of what 
Dr. Tonstal hath alledged against Dr. Witty upon this Spaw; 
we wish for further examination of this water, to be undertaken 
[^p.5021^] 
in an amicable and unbiassed way, and by the conjunction 
of some able and discreet Persons with these two disputants, 
that have hitherto very unbecommingly inveighed against 
one another. 
 
