[^Bolnest, Edw., Philosophical Transactions, volume 7, number 85^] 
 
[}PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSACTIONS. 
July 15. 1672.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 5023-5024^] 
 
[}III. A Rational way of preparing ANIMALS, VEGETABLES 
and MINERALS for a Physical use: by Edw. Bolnest Med. 
Reg. Ord. London, 1672. in 12=o=.}] 
 
THis Author, having some years since in his Medicina 
Instaurata given a brief accompt of the Excellency of 
well-prepared Chymical Medicines, with the reasons why they 
were and ought to be esteemed such; did then promise this 
Piece, wherein he undertakes to teach the Manner of their 
Preparation, by which he esteems they are made most efficacious, 
safe and pleasant Medicines for the preservation and restauration 
of the Life of man. In the doing of which, he giveth 
both general instructions, and particular Examples in each 
kind, and of each Kingdome, as they speak; which though 
not many, yet are by him conceived as sufficient guides to a 
larger progress. 
 
He begins with the general way of preparing Animals into 
a true medicine; and then descending to the preparation of a 
particular Animal, he would have Students of Chymistry consider, 
what vertues Physitians have adscribed to it, together 
with its dose according to occasion, and the strength, age, 
and constitution of the Patient, and a fit vehicle. It were to 
be wished, that since this Author often speaketh of the Fixed 
Salt drawn from Animals, he had obliged the curious Reader 
with specifying, what quantity of such Salt he had by his own 
Operations obtained from Animals. 
 
He proceeds next to the manner of preparing Vegetables, observing, 
that in them lies hid a very subtil and pure æthereal, 
and a fixed substance, the cherisher and supporter of life, the 
food and nourishment of natural heat, the root and foundation 
of all its faculties: which substances whilst they are abounding 
trees flourish and bring forth fruit; but once decaying, 
they grow unfruitful, wither and dye. 
 
[^p.5024^] 
Lastly, he teacheth his way of preparing Metals and Minerals 
for the health of man, assuring the ingenious Searcher after 
this knowledg, that he may with confidence have recourse to 
it, both for safety and efficacy, beyond the common Preparations 
now in use; and adding withall, that, because he knows 
many Practitioners may want either time or conveniency 
to provide themselves with such Medicines, he promises 
herewith, that he will, upon their desire, spare them 
such Medicines as he hath prepared for his own use, whether of 
the more common preparations but better elaborated, or 
other particular remedies; and that, upon a friendly account, 
the Medicine rightly considered: Declaring moreover his 
willingness to afford any Learned Physitian the satisfaction of 
seeing his Laboratory, or the Preparation of any medicine 
he shall desire at seasonable times. 
 
Here, when he treateth of the Preparation of Mercury, he intimates 
that that being well perform'd it will yeild a Medicine 
much availeable in the cure of very many diseases, and that cito~, 
tuto~, & jucunde~; whereas otherwise, if Mercury be only changed 
in form, it may, being imprudently and rashly used, do 
more hurt than good. Whereupon he sets down some of such 
Processes and preparations of this odd Metal, as he judgeth 
most safe, and fit for internal Medicines: Which seem to deserve 
the consideration of sober and intelligent Readers. 
 
