[^Philosophical Transactions, volume 7, number 83^] 
 
[}PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSACTIONS. 
May 20. 1672.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, p. 4077^] 
 
[}III The CHIRURGICAL and ANATOMICAL 
Works of Paul Barbette M. D. Practitioner at Amsterdam; 
together with a Treatise of the PLAGUE. English'd out 
of Low-Dutch. London 1672. in S=o=.}] 
 
THE skilful and diligent Author of this Book seems to have 
set down therein that Practice, which Reason and Experience, 
after a careful reading of the best Authors, and an exact 
Observation of several Operations, had taught him to be the 
safest, convenientest, and most easie. This he hath done in a few 
Chapters, rather inserting in short his Observations in the very 
descriptions of the Diseases, than to waste the Readers time with 
a prolix Discourse; to the end he might not repeat in particular 
Diseases, what he had first set down in generals. 
 
Tumors, Wounds, and Ulcers, which neither in Cause nor Cure 
differ, he hath reduced under one head; contrary to what most 
Writers use to do, who only from the difference of the Part and 
Member affected difference the Diseases, which afterwards, giving 
them new names, they multiply without any use; and so they 
render that Art, which is difficult enough of it self, much more 
difficult. 
 
Those Medicaments, which he hath delivered in this Book, 
though they be few in number, yet are by some able Judges esteem'd 
of great vertue; which the Author affirms to have found 
out by vast pains and no small charges, and for the safety of which 
he alledgeth the confirmation of daily practice. 
 
And because Anatomy is the main foundation of Chirurgery, the 
Author hath thought good to annex so much of it, as may be 
necessary for the Art; of all which he shews the Uses of it in the 
same. 
 
He subjoyns also a small Treatise of the Plague; discoursing 
of its Causes, Symptoms, Observations, and Cure; and illustrating 
all with divers select Practical Observations. 
 
