[^Philosophical Transactions, volume 7, number 84^] 
 
[}PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSACTIONS. 
June 17. 1672.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 4098-5001^] 
 
[^p.4098^] 
[}II Johannis Swammerdami M. D. UTERI MULIEBRIS Fabrica; 
una~ cum Methodo nova Cavitates corporis ita præparandi, 
ut suam semper genuinam faciem servent. Lugduni Batav. 
1672. in 4=o=.}] 
 
THE Publisher of these Tracts thinks himself obliged in a 
particular manner to do right to the Learned Author of 
this Book, as well upon the account of the matter contained 
therein, as his obliging way of dedicating it by a Letter of June 
14. 1672. to the Royal Society; in the doing whereof he shews 
himself so generous and candid, as notwithstanding the present 
Rupture between the two Nations, England, and the United 
Provinces (of which latter he is a Subject) he scruples not 
solemnly to acknowledge, Nescire se (to give you his own 
words) quo factum sit fato, ut, quemadmodum Christianus 
Orbis non minima Religionis suæ incrementa Anglicæ genti debet; ita 
ultimis difficillimisque his temporibus apud Eam inventa sit ratio, qua~ 
missis inanibus Scholasticorum disputationibus, bonæ artes & scientiæ 
in solido locentur: Quod ipsum ut non postremam gloriæ Britannicæ 
partem absolvit, ita in causa esse ait, ut in Naturalis Philosophiæ negotio 
ad nullum aliud quam Regiæ Societatis Tribunal provocare vel 
ausit vel debeat. 
 
But to pass to the particulars of the matter it self, they are 
chiefly two: First, he comments upon the Prodromus of that famous 
Anatomist D. Joh. Van. Horne, printed 1668; treating de 
partibus Generationis in utroque sexu: Unto which he adds such 
things as himself had observed on that subject; not allowing 
to the said Van Horne, that the Spermatick Artery hath no cavity; 
denying the Spermatic Vein to agree any waies with the 
Scheme of De Graaf; affirming the processes of the peritonæum 
in men and women not to go beyond the inguina; observing 
that De Graaf is not well acquainted with the ductus of the veins 
and arteries in testiculis; doubting yet, where, and how the vasa 
testicularia do unite with the præparantia; denying, that the 
same vasa testicularia have a connexion with the ductus Highmorianus, 
and affirming them to be continued with the Epididymis; 
denying likewise, that the vasa deferentia have a communication 
[^p.4099^] 
with the vesiculæ seminales, against Dr. De Graaf; maintaining, 
that there is (not a threefold Seed, but) a threefold matter of 
Seed, if not a fourfold; taking notice of the admirable structure 
of the spermatick Artery in Tauris; mentioning divers 
curious particulars in pene; as also in the structure of the vesiculæ 
seminales, especially in Moles; offering to verifie his 
Schemes of the Uterus muliebris, here delineated, by the part it 
self; and excepting against those of De Graaf; animadverting 
in some figures of that accurat Anatomist, Malpighi, especially 
as to the Spermatick parts of the Male, and the Spinal Marrow; 
affirming positively, testiculos mulierum instar ovarij esse, & structura~ 
sua cum reliquis animantium ovariis convenire, and withal examining 
the manner of the motion and passage of Eggs out of 
the Ovarium into the Uterus; which he finds as obscure in creatures 
that are by all acknowledged to be Oviparous, as in the 
other femals; forasmuch as he cannot find any more connexion 
between the Ovarium and Infundibulum in Poultry, &c. than 
in Women: And if it have been observed, that in Hens the 
said Infundibulum hath with its membranous expansions embraced 
the Ovarium; he believes, that the same comes to pass 
in Women tempore conceptionis, and that then the tuba Fallopiana, 
being applied to the testicles, receives by its orifice the very 
Egg, that is to breed the fœtus. Where he taketh special notice 
of Frogs, that at once lay many hundreds of Eggs, which do 
singly follow one another through the ovi-ductus; in which 
Creatures he meets with the same difficulty, since the orifice of 
the tubæ is not only near two inches distant from the ovarium, 
but also very straight, and withall seeming immovable, and 
un-applicable to that ovarium. He examins also that Observation 
of Kerkringius about a fœtus of three daies old. 
 
Moreover he promises, that he intends in his curious Anatomical 
Treatise, which he designs to publish, to restore to the 
Liver its office of Sanguification; wherein he promiseth to 
himself the greater applause, because none (as he saith) hath 
hitherto been able to shew, that the Chyle is conveyed so far 
as to the lacteous vessels primi generis, as he calls them: which 
makes him to esteem, that 'tis nothing but a whitish lympha, that 
appears in the lacteous veins, and issueth out of the glanduls 
[^p.5000^] 
of the Intestins, that receive their Juice from the Arteries. 
 
After this he represents the uterus humanus in three very curious 
Schemes; one is of the facies anterior; the other of the 
facies posterior uteri puerperæ; the third of an uterus Virginis. 
 
Where he inserts a very odd History of the force of Imagination 
in breeding Women, which is this: That a woman at Utrecht 
in such a condition, being surprised with the sight of a 
Negro, and so exceedingly frighten'd as to become speechless 
for the time, had a strong fancy she should bring forth a black 
child; but, having recollected her self, did by as strong a fancy 
devise a remedy to defeat the former; which was with hot water 
to wash away that blackness. And having, whilst she was 
thoroughly possessed with this latter fancy, washed her self accordingly 
from top to toe; she was at length delivered of a 
child that was indeed white, yet those parts excepted, where 
the water in the washing had not touched; such as the interstices 
of the fingers and toes and some other places, where the 
manifest tokens of blackness appear'd; as this Author had 
been informed by the very Mother of this child. 
 
The second main particular in this Book is, the Description of 
a way, so to prepare the Veins and Arteries and other hollow 
Vessels in an Animal, that they may appear in their genuin 
shape, whereby their structure, scite, ductus, insertion, rise, and 
the like, may clearly be seen. This way we shall give you at 
length in his own words; there being as yet but this one Copy, 
whence this account is given, in England, for ought we know. 
 
Recipe Ceræ albæ quantum videbitur, eamque liquefactam rubro, 
flavo, viridi, vel quolibet alio colore convenienti tinge; & siphone, 
qui cochlea~ adstrictum tubulum habeat, properanter excipe, atque in 
majorem venæ vel arteriæ uteri ramum injice, cavendo ne intercedens 
Aer progressum ceræ impediat: Ac, ne quid impedimento sit, sanguinem, 
priusquam operi te accingas, ex venis quantumpote exprime, utut rami 
majores alias facillime~ distendantur. Perinde autem est, sive per Arteriam 
spermaticam sive hypogastricam Cera injiciatur: Idemque in 
venis obtinet, tantum ut valvulæ obtuso stylo pertundantur; quo facto 
una~ injectione omnes uteri venæ, earumque partes vel ab uno latere impleri 
possunt. Idem in Arteriis fieri potest, si tamen visibles earundem 
Anastomoses satis magnæ sint, nec Aer progressum ceræ impediat. 
[^p.5001^] 
By this method he affirms to have laid open even the smallest 
ramifications of the Arteria hepatica, that cannot be bared of 
the flesh, and that are possibly more in number, than those of 
the vena porta and cava put together. 
 
