[^Willis, Thoma, Philosophical Transactions, volume 7, number 83^] 
 
[}PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSACTIONS. 
May 20. 1672.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 4071-4073^] 
 
[^p.4071^] 
[}An Account of some BOOKS.}] 
 
[}De ANIMA BRUTORUM Exercitationes duæ, 
prior PHYSIOLOGICA, altera PATHOLOGICA, 
Auth. Thoma Willis M.D. Philos. Natur. Prof. Sidlej. Oxon. 
nec non Med. Coll. Lond. & Soc. Reg. Socii. Oxonii, A. 1672. 
in 4=o=.}] 
 
WHat the Learned Author of this difficult Argument had 
heretofore promised, he now in this Book with much 
care performeth; which is the Pathology of the Brain, and the Nervous 
kind, explicating the Diseases that affect it, and teaching their 
Cures; together with some previous Physiological Considerations 
of the Soule of Brutes. 
 
And because it may, by some, be thought somewhat paradoxical, 
that he assigneth to that Soul, whereby both Brutes and Men 
have life, sense, and local motion, not only extension, and as 
'twere Organical parts, but also peculiar Diseases, and appropriate 
Cures; and because also he distinguishes this meerly vital and 
Sensitive Soul from the Rational, to which he makes it subordinate, 
and so maketh man a Double-soul'd animal; he maketh it 
first of all his business to clear these matters, and to free them from 
what may seem offensive in them. 
 
In the doing of this he denieth not the Corporeity of the Brutal 
Soul, esteeming, that both by considerable Arguments, and by 
very ample, ancient and modern, Suffrages, the same may be evinced; 
and besides, that its Bipartition is by a necessary consequence 
deducible from the flammeous Life of the Bloud, and the lucid or 
Æthereal substance of the Animal Spirits; both which he hath 
formerly asserted, and endeavoured to prove. For, if it be granted 
him, that the Vital portion of this Soul, lodging in the Bloud, 
be a kind of Fire, and the Sensitive part be nothing but an Aggregate 
of Animal Spirits, diffused all over in the Brain and 
Nerves; he draws this consequence, That the Soul of a Brute, 
co-extended to the whole Body, hath not only many and distinct, 
but also somewhat dissimilar, parts. And if it be objected, that 
the Soul of a Brute is immaterial, because it perceiveth, or is 
aware that it feels, Matter seeming incapable of Perception; he 
[^p.4072^] 
answers, That that would be very probable, if that Perception 
did exceed the bounds of things material, and were of a higher 
pitch, then what is generally ascribed to Natural Instinct, or 
Idiosyncrasis: Adding, that none is like to undertake to prove, 
that the Omnipotent Maker, and First Mover, and Constant Governour 
of all things should not be able to impress such powers 
upon Matter, as might be proper and sufficient to perform the 
functions of the Sensitive life. 
 
And as to what he further asserts, That some people are more, 
yea sooner and rather sick in their Soul, than in their Body; 
(whereas Physitians do commonly in Schools refer the principal 
Seats of all Diseases to the solid parts, and the humors, and vital 
spirits;) in this he speaketh consonantly to his Hypothesis: For, 
since that that Soul hath a material Being co-extended to the Body, 
and peculiar parts, powers and affections, he rationally concludeth, 
that it is subject also to preternatural affections, and frequently 
needs the Physitians aid. 
 
Besides, he esteems to have made it out in his Pathology, That 
the Corporeal Soul extends her Diseases not only to the Body, but 
also to the Mind or the Rational Soul, and often involves the same 
in her defects and perturbations. 
 
Moreover, he thinks to have also proved from reason and authority, 
That there are in Man two distinct Souls, subordinately; 
and esteems this opinion to be so far from being Heretical or pernicious, 
that on the contrary he hopes, it will prove altogether 
Orthodox, and conducive to a good life, and a powerful confutation 
of Atheism. 
 
But to the end that the Author might the better inform his 
Reader of the Corporeal Nature, and the flammeous and lucid 
parts, and the affections of the same, he found it necessary both to 
describe the vital Organs of divers Animals, by whose operation 
the Lamp of Life is maintained; and to represent also the Brains 
of those they call perfect Brutes, and of Man, discovered by him 
as to their inmost recesses, and their secret and smallest ductus's. 
By which manifold and comparative Anatomy, as the manifold 
and wonderful wisdom of the Creatour is manifested; so are by 
the same discovered, even in the smallest and most despicable Animals, 
not only mouths and limbs, but also hearts, being as 'twere 
so many altars and hearths to perpetuate this vital flame. Here 
[^p.4073^] 
the Reader will meet with very skilful and accurate Dissections of 
the Silk-worm, Oyster, Lobster, Earth-worm; as also of divers 
Brains; and first, of that of a Sheep, in a manner excarnated, to make 
the Medullar streaks, and its inmost fabrick to be seen: And secondly, 
of a new one of an Humane Brain; where, a Section being made 
through the falx, the Corpus callosum and the Fornix, and their 
parts displayed and orderly laid open, are exhibited the streaked 
bodies, as also the Optick and Orbicular prominencies, &c. That 
so by confronting these Brains, the vast difference of the Soul of a 
Brute and that of a Man may the better be shewn. 
 
Concerning the Pathology of this Author, he confesseth, that 
in delivering the Theories of Diseases he hath relinquish'd the 
Old way, and produced mostly new Hypotheses; which being 
founded and established upon true Anatomical Observations, give 
a better account of the Phænomena of the sick, indicate more 
aptly the causes of symptoms, and suggest properer waies of 
curing them. But as to Remedies and his Therapeutical Method, 
though therein he doth not with others scrupulously insist in the 
footsteps of the Ancients; yet he rejects nothing that hath been 
setled by sober Authority, and by long Experience; adding thereunto 
many things invented by late Experience, and by Analogy. 
All which he hopes will prove useful both for improving Medical 
knowledge, and the happier curing the Diseases of the Head; 
which he enumerates, and discourses upon, both as a Naturalist 
and a Physitian. 
 
