[^Listers, Philosophical Transactions, volume 7, number 83^] 
 
[}PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSACTIONS. 
May 20. 1672.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 4062-4064^] 
 
[}An Account of a Stone cut out from under the tongue of a Man; lately 
sent in a Letter of Mr. Listers to his Grace the Lord Arch-Bishop 
of York.}] 
 
May it please your Grace, 
IN obedience to your Grace's Commands, I have penned the 
Circumstances of a not common Medical observation, viz. 
the Excision of a stone from under the tongue. And I here with 
present your Grace also with the stone its self, as I had it from 
the person it was taken. [/1./] 
 
As to the occasion and time of its birth, he tels 
me, (My Lord, you may be pleas'd to give firm 
Credit to every particular, that he hath answered 
me at your Grace's instance) it was from a 
winter Sea-voyage, which lasted much longer 
than he expected, and wherein he suffered an exceeding cold; 
and that, not long after his landing, he found a certain Nodus 
or hard lump in the very place whence this stone was cut. There 
was about 8 years betwixt its breading and being taken away. 
 
As to its growth, and the inconveniences thence ensuing; he 
further saith, that upon all fresh cold-taking, he suffered much 
pain in that part especially; and yet, that cold once being over, 
that part was no more painful than the rest of his mouth. He 
adds, that towards the 7th and 8th year it did often cause sudden 
[^p.4063^] 
swellings in all the Glanduls about the mouth and throat 
upon the first draught of beer at meals; which yet would in a 
short time fall again. 
 
Lastly, as to the particulars remarkable at the time of its being 
taken away, he relates; That it began its work with a sudden 
vertigo; which vertiginous disposition continued more or 
less from Spring 'till August; in which month, without any 
prævious cause save riding, the place where it was lodged suddainly 
swelled, and ran purulent matter at the aperture of the 
ductus Whartonianus: that it suddainly stopped of its running 
(which he cannot attribute to any thing but Cold) and swelled 
with a great inflammation, and very great danger of choaking; 
it being scarce credible, what pain the party suffered in endeavouring 
to swallow even beer, or any liquid thing. 
 
This extremity lasted 5 days, in all which time, the party had 
so vast a flux of spittle runing from him, that it was not possible 
for him to repose his head to sleep, without wetting all the bed 
about him; insomuch as that it was very much questioned by 
some friendly visitants, whether he had not of himself, or by 
mistake, made use of some Mercurial medicine. 
 
The varieties or degrees of this spontaneous salivation were such, 
that he urged me not to omit them in the relation I was to make 
to your Grace, as thinking them very notable. 
 
The first day, the saliva ran thin and transparent, almost like 
water without any bubles. The 2 day it ran frothy; it tasted salt, 
(which yet he is apt to think hot rather that really salt, because 
that day the inflammation was at the height). The 3 day it roaped 
exceedingly; on which day a small pin-hole broak directly over 
the place of the Stone and ran with purulent matter as formerly. 
The 4 day the saliva ran insipid, sensibly cold in the 
mouth; (which again confirms me in that opinion, that the 
former sharp tast was the effect of heat, and not the immediate 
quality of a salt humour;) very little frothy. The 5 day (which 
was the day of the incision,) it ran as on the 4th but left an extream 
claminess on the teeth, insomuch that they often clave 
together, as though they had been joyned together with glue. 
 
Upon the incision, which proved not wide enough, the membranes 
or baggs, wherein the stone lay, came away first. As to the 
Stone it self, it was so hard as to endure the forcipes in drawing it 
[^p.4064^] 
forth: it was covered over with grass green matter, which soon 
dryed, and left the stone of a whitish colour, as it is to be seen. 
It is but light in proportion to its bulk, weighing about 7 grains; 
and 'tis much of the shape of our ordinary horse-beans. There 
are visible impressions upon it of some Capillary and small vessels, 
it was bred amongst. Lastly, it is scabrous or rough, sand-like, 
although the substance is Tophaceous. 
 
The Accidents accompaning the working away of this Stone, 
(for the incision was meerly obstetrical,) and the place of its 
birth give occasion to call the distemper a Ranula. Yet in truth 
this was nothing else but one of those Tumours caller Atheroma; 
and therefore we will name it lapis Atheromatis. 
 
