[^Kerkringius, Philosophical Transactions, volume 7, number 81^] 
 
[}PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSACTIONS. 
March 25. 1672.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 4018-4026^] 
 
[^p.4018^] 
[}An Account of what hath been of late observed by Dr. Kerkringius 
concerning Eggs to be found in all sorts of Females.}] 
 
ALthough we have already (N=o=. 70) taken notice in brief 
of what the Inquisitive Kerkringius hath discoursed of, 
concerning Ovaria and Ova in all sorts of Femals; yet, to excite 
the more vigorously our eminent Anatomists here to a 
further search into this matter, as those of that profession in 
many forrain parts, as France, Italy, Holland, &c. employ 
themselves to find what truth there is in it; we thought, it 
would not be unwelcome to the Curious of all sorts of this 
Country, to give them here in English a particular description 
of what the said Kerkringius hath from his own Observations 
[^p.4019^] 
delivered on this subject: In the doing of which we shall not 
scruple to follow the French Philosophical Journals, published 
March 15. 21. and 22, to this effect; 
 
What Doctor Kerkring, (saith one of them) hath from his 
curious Observations advanced, viz. That man hath his origin 
from an Egg, hath been very differently received, some appearing 
surprised at it, others rallying with it, and many being 
induced thereby to make further inquiry into it. This 
great diversity of sentiments made me think, I should do well 
for the satisfaction of all sorts of people, to insert here the 
particulars themselves, observed by the said Dr. Kerkring, and 
to add hereafter some Reflections, that may seem necessary 
to remove the principal difficulties occurring in this matter. 
 
But since the things to be said do suppose some knowledge 
of the Parts, where these Eggs are formed and perfected, it 
will not be amiss, beforehand to cast your Eyes upon the Figures 
of Table II, of which the 1st represents a Matrix with 
its chief dependances: where 
 
[^Beginning of a list in two columns.^] 
B. is the Matrix 
C. the Bladder of Vrine, fastned to 
the neck of the matrix. 
D. D. the two testiculi, or rather 
the repository's, which contain the Eggs 
spoken of. 
E. E. the two Tubes of the Matrix. 
[^A column change.^] 
F. F. the two vasa deferentia, 
steemed by Anatomists to convey semen 
testiculorum in uterum. 
G. G. the two vasa præparantia, 
for preparing the matter, to be 
perfected in testiculis. 
[^End of a list in two columns.^] 
 
Fig. II. represents Eggs of different bigness, as Dr. Kerkring 
affirms to have found them in the testicles of a Woman. 
 
Fig. III. shews a bigger Egg, such an one as we have found 
at Paris in a Woman of 40 years of age, and in those of a Maid 
of 18 years. 
 
Fig. IV. exhibits smaller Eggs, of which we have found a 
good number in the testicles of a Cow. 
 
Fig. V. represents an Egg, which D. Kerkring affirms to have 
opened three or four days after it was fallen into the matrix of 
a Woman, and in which he saw that little embryon marked 
B, whereof he found the Head begun to be distinguished from 
[^p.4020^] 
the Body yet without a distinct preception of the organs. 
 
Fig. VI. shews a bigger Egg, which D. Kerkring did open 
a fortnight after conception, finding in it these particulars; 
 
[^Beginning of a list in two columns.^] 
A. a little Secondine. 
B. B. B. B. the membrane, Corion, 
divided in four places. 
C. C. C. C. the membrane, Amnios, 
divided so too. 
[^A column change.^] 
D. the Navel-string, by which the 
Child is fastned to the Secondine. 
E. a Child of 14 days after Conception, 
in which the face begins to appear, 
together with the principal parts of the 
Body. 
[^End of a list in two columns.^] 
 
Fig. VII. represents the Sceleton of an Infant, found by the 
same in one of these Eggs three weeks after Conception. 
 
Fig. VIII. exhibits the Sceleton of an other Child, found also 
by him in an Egg, a moneth after Conception. 
 
Fig. IX. represents the Sceleton of an Embryon, found by 
him in an Egg six weeks after Conception. 
 
Though this Opinion (saith Kerkringius) about the first formation 
of Man in an Egg, as that of all Fowl, is not common, 
yet 'tis true; and if any find it difficult to believe, he may cast 
his Eyes upon Fig. II where he will see of those Eggs represented 
after the life, as I have found them my self in the body of 
many Women open'd by me. 
 
These Eggs are to be met with, not only in the testicles of 
Women married, but also in those of Maids, even as young 
Hens will lay Eggs without any commerce with a Cock. 
 
These Eggs are of the bigness of a pea, and they contain a 
glutinous liquor, which will be hardn'd by the fire, just as the 
White and Yolk in other Eggs. The tast of them is flat and 
unpleasant enough; they are invested with one or two fine 
skins, which strech themselves a little while after the Eggs 
are fallen into the Womb, and change into two membranes, called 
Amnios and Chorion. And as these two membranes are alwaies 
found afterwards, enwrapping the Child; so 'tis very probable, 
that the Eggs of Women are also cover'd with two skins 
from their beginning; though by reason of their fineness I could 
not distinctly see them. 
 
It seems, that Fallopius hath seen these Eggs before me; as 
appears in his Anatom. Observations. And as to their 
Use they have in Generation, it seems easie to be determined, 
[^p.4021^] 
by reflecting on what that very expert Anatomist Thomas Wharton 
teacheth in his Treatise of Glandulls ch. 33. concerning 
the manner of Conception. For, according to him, Semen 
Viri penetrat in testes fæminæ per uteri Tubas. Now there it is 
joyned with the Egg, in such a manner, which hath not been 
explained till now, but is never the less certain, and much resembling 
to what comes to pass in the other oviparous animals. 
 
The Egg being made thus fecond, descends into the womb 
through the vasa deferentia, and in two or three days grows 
of the bigness of a black Cherry.When they fall down, they 
are a little bigger than we have represented them; but being 
soft, they are easily flatned, and never remain round. If in 
falling they are handled and slightly pressed, there will stick a 
little skin to the finger, which shews that 'tis not seed, nor any 
thing like it, but of such Eggs, as we speak of. Fæminæ dijiciunt 
hæc Ova imprimis tempore menstruorum, vel in Iræ vehementia. 
 
I have had (said Kerckringius) an occasion favorable enough 
for examining that Germe of three or at most four daies, 
represented Fig V. A married woman dyed 3 or 4 daies 
post fluxum menstruum. I assisted at the opening of her Body, 
and having found in the matrix a little round mass of the bigness 
of a great black Cherry, I took the husband aside, and 
asked him, Num a~ tempore fluxus menstruorum uxorem cognovisset? 
And having received for answer, that he had, I pray'd 
him to let me carry home with me this little ball, which I had 
found in her womb. I was no sooner come home but I open'd 
it, and found, that nature had wrought with so much activity 
in so small a time, that one might already see the first lineaments 
of a Child, since we observed in it the head as distinct 
from the Body, and in the head we took notice of some traces 
of its principal organs. As for the rest of the body, it was nothing 
as yet but a masse grossly wrought, as you may see in 
this Figure. 
 
But further, the Embrio represented in Fig. VI. was only 
of 15. daies, when in its Head there were noted the Eyes, Nose, 
Mouth, and Ears; and the Body began to have Leggs and 
[^p.4022^] 
Armes, as well distinguishable as appears in this Figure; which 
represents it just as it was given me. I durst not yet attempt to 
separate the Flesh from these little Bones, or rather from these 
small Cartilages, which in time become Bones; all these parts 
being yet too tender to make an accurate dissection of them. 
 
In Figure VII. is delineated a child, which is already furnished 
with all its Cartilages, though it had been conceived but three 
weeks. It being fallen into my hands, I attempted to sever 
the skin and the flesh from the Cartilages, holding the place 
of the Bones, and I succeeded well enough in it, and keep still 
by me the Sceleton thereof, truly represented in this Figure. 
The Head, wherein the Brain is to lodge and all mans 
wisdome, is nothing but a simple membrane inflated with wind 
or Spirits. The Armes are distinct from the Body, and the 
Hands have now their fingers perfectly distinct. One 
may easily count in this contexture of Cartilages, how many 
Ribbs there will be. And lastly the distinction of the Toes 
of the Feet is as perceptible, as that of the fingers of the Hands. 
But we must add withall, that all these parts are no longer 
then hairs, and consequently a great dexterity and niceness is 
to be used for displaying them. 
 
Figure VIII. represents a fætus of a moneth, having now the 
whole humane shape, and the bones thereof firm enough in many 
places to support the parts. Behold the figure well, which 
represents this litle Engin in its natural size. It already in a 
manner sustains it self. The two Jaw-bones appear; the clavicles 
are formed; and all the Ribbs are very distinct, except 
the first and last; which are not wont to have, even in the 
Second moneth, the consistence of Bones. One may see in the 
Armes the Joynts of the Shoulder-bones and of the Elbows; as 
also the Thighs and both the Leggs, together with their 
bones, called Focils; which I had not observed, when I wrote 
my treatise of the Generation of the Bones. All what you see of 
white in this eight figure, hath at this time the quality of bones. 
Where I have a fair occasion to enlarge and to discuss that great 
question, whence proceeds the hardness in Bones? And I could 
not give a better, nor a more curious reason for it, than by 
alledging the doctrine, that serveth for a ground to all Chymistry; 
[^p.4023^] 
which is that there is an Acid Spirit, universally diffused 
through the world, which giveth solidity not only to 
Bones, but also Minerals and Mettals, and to all Vegetables; 
penetrating all, fixing all, and being the Father of the Hardness 
and Solidity in all bodies. 
 
Fig. IX. represents a Child of six weeks after Conception: 
where it is to be noted, that comparing together the Bones of 
divers fœtus's it will be found, perhaps to admiration, that 
that which have been conceived but a little time after an other, 
hath yet the bones in proportion twice as big. That 
which is here exhibited by Fig. IX. appears much lesser than an 
other of two months, as appears in my Book of the Generation 
of Bones; but the Bones are for all that no less remarquable: 
for whatever hath the hardness and consistence of 
Bones in that, hath already the nature of Cartilages in this. 
The inferior jaw-bone is most observable in this Child of 6. 
weeks, marked A, it being at this age composed of six little 
bones, which when it is born are all joyned together, and 
make but one. 
 
If it be asked, How I come to know, that these degrees of 
growth come to pass exactly within those times recited; especially 
since in abortions we often see Embrio's of 4 moneths 
and above, that are not so big as those spoken of? I might answer 
by repeating all I said before, when I compared the proportions 
of those different Germes. To which I shall only add, 
that Embrio's which miscarry have often remain'd a long while 
in the Body before they came forth, or have lived there so 
sickly as not to draw perhaps half the nourishment, necessary 
for them, and therefore much less than else they would 
be. 
 
So far Kerkringius; on whose discourse are made these Reflexions 
by Monsieur Denys. 
 
1. That those Eggs are generated in Fæminarum testiculis, 
and thence made to descend per tubam into the matrix, in coitu, 
per vim spirituosam seminis masculi, per uteri tubam 
penetrantis. 
 
2. That those Eggs are of different bignesses; since those 
of the third Fig. represent one according to the life, as it 
[^p.4024^] 
was found with 9 or 10 lesser ones in a woman of 40 years of 
ge. Such as were found by him in the testicles of a Cow, 
are duly exhibited in Fig. fourth. If any do wonder, that in 
so big an animal they should be so much smaller then in a Woman; 
he will have more cause to admire, that Women have 
them so little in comparison of those of Ducks, Hens, &c. the 
first beginnings of things not bearing alwaies a proportion to 
their state of encrease; as Beanes and Peas (e. g.) whence 
grow plants but of a very midling size, are much bigger seeds, 
than the kernels of Apples and Pears, which do produce considerably 
big Trees. Besides, it may be, that Cowes, when 
in their heat, may afford bigger Eggs. Mean time the reason 
why the Eggs of Fowl are alwaies proportionably bigger than 
those of Women and of Quadrupeds, is, that they, when laid, 
must contain the matter not only for forming, but also for feeding 
the young animal. 
 
3. That this Opinion is not so new, as some imagine; since 
Fallopious in Observ. Anatom. Bartol. Anat. reform. l. 1. c. 26. 
Riolan. Ench. anat. l. 2. c. 37. Laurent. Anat. l. 7. c. 10. make 
mention of them. 
 
But here we shall observe the True state of the Question out 
of the Journal of Monsieur Gaulois, saying, that the vesicles or 
Eggs in all sorts of femals, are to be considered in three conditions: 
1. When they are fastn'd to the place where nature hath 
lodg'd them as in a repository. 2. When they are loosn'd from 
thence. 3. When they enclose the Embrion. The first of these, 
namely, that there are vesicles in all sorts of Femals, fastn'd 
to their Bodies, is certain, and not new; as appears by the Authors 
jnst now quoted. It is also certain, that after conception, 
that which encloseth the Fœtus, is almost like an Egg; 
but this is not new neither, seeing that Hippocrates hath observed 
it lib. de natura puer; and Aristotle hath said it more 
than once, viz. l. 7. hist. Anim. c. 7. and l. 3. de gener. Anim. 
c. 9. To which also the moderns agree and amongst others 
the famous Harvey Exper. 68. de gener. Anim. The Question 
therefore is only, Whether these Vesicles, fastn'd to the body 
of Femals, are loosn'd from it; and whether that kind of 
Eggs, wherein the Embrion is form'd, is one of the vesicles 
[^p.4025^] 
loosn'd? And here Kerkringius asserts the affirmative; as hath 
been seen above. Those that are of the contrary Opinion, say, 
that it is sure, that that bladder, like an Egg, in which the 
fætus is form'd, coms not from elsewhere, since 'tis known, 
that it is produced in the place of conception, and even how 
it is there produced; as appears out of Harvey, ibid. & tract. de 
Concept. Besides, say they, the vesicles found in the body 
of Women, are so fastn'd there, that naturally they cannot be 
separated from thence; and suppos'd they were loosn'd, there 
is in the same place, where they are, no passage large enough 
to get through. They add, that it you will give the name of 
Eggs to all the vesicles, to be found in the parts of Generation, 
there would also be Eggs in the body of Men, it being 
known, that at the side of the vasa deferentia there are found 
divers vesicles, which Anatomists compare to a Cluster of Grapes 
by reason of their figure. 
 
The Reader, saith this Journalist, is left to decide this 
Question. He only intimates, that in the many Animals, 
dissected in the Royal Philosophical Academie at Paris there 
were never found any vesicles actually loose. But that, as to a 
passage for them, there had been, 3 years since, dissected a 
Woman, and found in each of the tubæ uteri a manifest cavity 
going into the bottom of the matrix: Adding, that though 
these conduits appear not open ordinarily, they may yet dilate 
themselves at the time of the Conception: As the conduit, 
through which the Eggs of the Fowl do pass out of the ovarium 
into the matrix, is usually very close; but yet opens sometimes. 
 
4. To return to M. Denys, he observeth, that all other animate 
creatures (not to speak now of Plants) are produced 
by the meanes of Eggs; as Birds, Insects of all sorts, Fishes 
(of which last sort though Whales, Sea-Calves and Dolphins 
bring forth live creatures of their kind, yet they first breed 
them within their Bodies in Eggs:) And why not Quadrupeds 
also and the Femals of Mankind? 
 
5. As for Eggs, said by Kerkringius to have been found in 
Virginibus, the same M. Denys esteems that probable enough. 
For, saith he, though we had not the instance of Hens, laying 
[^p.4026^] 
Eggs without any congress of a Cock; the place where 
they are bred shews enough, that Man contributes nothing 
to their production; all that he can do, being nothing but an 
attraction of the Eggs out of their Conservatory, and 
the making them descend into the uterus, ut ibi irrorentur a~ 
semine, & fæcunditatem acquirant; even as the Juices of the 
Earth do vivifie all the Plants by insinuating themselves into 
the grains, and penetrating their skins. And it may be, it is 
the alteration that befalls these Eggs, when they are retained 
too long, which causeth the abundance of Vapors and 
disorders, which other parts are accused of. On which occasion 
he alledgeth a notable example of a young maid of 
quality, that lately died in the 18th year of her age; who 
was subject to very frequent Hysterical fits of vapors, of 
which she was one day assaulted with so great violence, that 
it cost her her life. Her Body being opened, Testiculus dexter 
erat flaccidus, & figuræ solitæ; at sinister adeo tumidus & inflatus, 
ut Ovi Anatis æquaret magnitudinem: Eoque aperto, Ovum 
fuit intus repertum, Olivam figura~ & magnitudine referens, & 
separatu nequaquam difficile. This, he saith, is still kept by 
Monsieur Charas. 
 
N. B. Since these particulars were sent to the Press, there 
came to the Publishers hands the very lately printed Book 
of that diligent and expert Anatomist Regnerus de Graaf, intituled 
Tractatus novus de Mulierum Organis generationi inservientibus; 
in which the above-recited difficulties, moved by 
M. Gaulois, and others also, are amply taken notice of, and 
ingeniously solved: Concerning which, we may by the next 
opportunity give the Curious Reader a fuller accompt; 
as also, wherein the said De Graaf differs from Kerkringius, in this 
matter, which, for want of time, could not be done 
at present. 
 
