[^Philosophical transactions, volume 7, number 88^] 
 
[}PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSACTIONS. 
November 18. 1672.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 5105-5106^] 
 
[^p.5105^] 
[}II, THESAURUS MEDICINÆ PRACTICÆ; studio & opera Thomæ 
Burnet Scoto-Britanni, M. D. & Medici Regis Ordinarii: Londini 
impensis R. Boulter apud insigno Capitis Turcæ in vico dicto 
Cornhill, 1672. in 4=o=.}] 
 
THis Learn'd and Industrious Author, having considered the feveral 
abilities of Physicians, and the different ways of their 
writings respectively; some delivering Medical Institutions and 
Controversies; some commenting upon Hippocrates and Galen; others 
publishing Methods of Curing Diseases and Practical Physicks; 
others augmenting the Medical matter, and teaching the way of Preparing 
Medicines; many improving Anatomy; and not a few recording 
Observations and Consultations: Having, I say, considered 
this variety and diversity, he preferrs the last way of all as appearing 
to him most usefuf to Mankind; and therefore undertaketh in this 
Work of his to give us a Treasure of Practical Physick, collected 
from the Observations and Advices of a great number of Physical 
Writers, both Ancient and Modern, such as he esteemed to be most 
considerable of that profession. In the doing of which, he enumerates 
in an Alphabetical order about 410 kinds of Diseases of humane 
Bodies, partly inward, partly outward; describing their nature 
and symptomes, and declaring withal the ways of cure, as they are 
[^p.5106^] 
to be met with in those many Authors, he affirms to have carefully 
consulted: Of which there are by him alledged no less than 117. 
 
Amongst all these Chapters of Diseases and their Cures there are 
interspersed many not common Observations of Nature, such as are: 
That the force of Castoreum is such, That about the Isles of Fero, the 
Fishermen, when their Boats are endangered by Whales, throw some 
of that substance into the Sea-water, which being beaten with it, the 
Fish immediately sinks to the bottom: That Vinegar may be preserv'd 
from all worms, by mixing a little Theriac therewith, and so exposing 
it in a close vessel to the Sun for a moneth, daily shaking it, and 
afterwards percolating it when setled: That there are men, that ruminate 
properly speaking, like Beasts that chew the Cud, and that 
some of such persons when opened after death, have either their æsophagus 
every where fleshy like a Muscle, or their stomach 
very rough and large; Where 'tis also observed, that one of such 
ruminating men, did not at all chew the cud when sick, just like Oxen 
and Cows, that are said by country-people to do so neither, when 
they are not well: That a certain Sea-man, that had lived long at Sea, 
and contracted from a continual defluxion a Cough, which exercised 
his Lungs for two years, did at length cast out, together with 
blood, two considerable ramifications of veins, separate from all parenchymatous 
matter, shewing the corruption of the whole substance 
of the Lungs: That it hath been observed to be dangerous, to have 
a vein opened at once in both arms, or leggs, which is here called a 
Neronian Venæ-section, &c. 
 
