[^Philosophical transactions, volume 7, number 87^] 
 
[}PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSACTIONS. 
For the moneths of September and October. 
Octob. 14. 1672.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 5079-80^] 
 
[^p.5079^] 
[}III. Marcelli Malpighii Phil. & Medici Bononiensis Dissertatio 
Epistolica de Formatione pulli in Ovo: Londini apud Joh. Martyn 
Soc. Reg. Typographum, ad insigne Campanæ in Cæmeterio 
S. Pauli, 1672. in 4=o=.}] 
 
THis excellent Philosopher and Accurate Anatomist, a 
very Industrious and useful Member of the R. Society, having 
in a Manuscript presented that Illustrious body with his 
Observations upon the Formation of a Chick in an Egg as well 
before as after Incubation; and that Company having esteemed 
them very worthy the Press; as well to do the Author right, 
as to give occasion to others to inquire further into a matter 
so conducive for finding out the nature of Generation: We 
shall here give some accompt of this well-consider'd discourse; 
after we have intimated, that an English Physitian, a worthy 
[^p.5080^] 
Member also of the faid Society, (Dr. William Croon,) hath likewise, 
by a curious examination of Eggs not yet incubated, very 
happily found, in conformity to the discovery of Signor 
Malpighi, the Rudiments of a Chick actually existent in the 
Egg even before incubation: Of which he produced a written 
discourse before the said Society March 14. 1671; which he 
affirmed to have been written a good while before, and which 
was read in part March 28. 1672. at the publick Meeting of 
the said Society: who do hope, that the said Doctor will make no 
difficulty, for confirmation and further excitement, to communicate 
also to the publick his learned Observations upon this 
subject. Which being thus premis'd, we shall now proceed 
briefly to take notice, that this Exercitation of Signor Malpighi, 
which came to the R. Society, Feb. 22. 1631/32, contains an accompt 
of his having, by carefull and diligent Observations, 
discover'd, that in fecond Eggs, as well before as after incubation, 
the first Rudiments and Lines of the principal parts of the 
Chick are contained in the Eggs; whereas in Subventaneous or 
Adle Eggs, instead of such a formation, there is found nothing 
but an un-form'd globous ash-coloured body, like a mola. Of 
these prima stamina or beginnings, this Author hath traced the 
progress, by observing their changes, after incubation, every 
six hours, for the two first days; and, after that, every 12 or 24, 
or 48 hours. In the doing of which, he hath observ'd many 
very curious and remarkable particulars, especially about the 
Priority of the Motion of the Heart before the production of true 
blood, though that liquor, before it becomes red, be, according, 
to him, before the motion of the heart; as also about the said 
liquor first emerging, viz. whether it be a simple colliquamentum, 
or a liquor vitalis, or a sanguis inchoatus: concerning which he 
asserts, that the Carina, and the beginnings of the head, brain, 
and Spinal Marrow, do manifestly appear before the Collection 
of that Liquor, and its motion, and change into the nature 
of Blood: For which, and many other considerable particulars, 
since they cannot be treated in such an abstract as this 
without prejudicing the whole, we are obliged to remit the 
Reader to the entire discourse it self. 
 
