[^Philosophical transactions, volume 7, number 87^] 
 
[}PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSACTIONS. 
For the moneths of September and October. 
Octob. 14. 1672.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 5076-5077^] 
 
[^p.5076^] 
[}An Accompt of some Books.}] 
 
[}I. Tractatus de NATURA SUBSTANTIÆ ENERGETICA, 
seu de VITA NATURÆ, ejusq; Tribus primis Facultatibus; 
Perceptiva, Appetitiva, Motiva, &c. Auth. Franc. Glissonio, 
Med. D, & P. & Coll. Med. Lond. Socio, nec non Societatis Regalis 
Collega~. Londini. A. 1672. in 4=o=.}] 
 
THe famous Author of this Philosophical Treatise endeavors 
to make it out, that matter is the Prime and Radical 
subject of Life; or, that Life is the inmost essence of matter, and 
inseparable from the same: And, because the very Essence of 
matter is subject to various Modifications, that thence its life 
also is capable of being variously modified, so as to be different 
in Plants and Animals; being in all their kinds varied by a 
strange diversity of Structure and Organization. 
 
This Life our Author esteems to be the very Energetical nature 
of a substance, whereby it is fitted for Operation, that is, 
made a Principle of Perception, Appetition and Motion; not 
producible in his opinion by any external power, motion, texture, 
figure, organization, proportion, or connexion of parts, 
but by the sole First Cause of all things. 
 
The same Life, as 'tis essential to matter, is here distinguish't 
from the Senses; which to our Author are not the very first and 
simple perception of Nature, but some Organical Modifications 
thereof; forasmuch as, in his opinion, if there were no 
Natural perception, no modification or organization of matter 
would be able to change it into Animal or Sensitive; but 
a Natural one being given, this, flowing immediately from the 
substantial nature of the matter, will be subject to as many 
kinds of Modifications, as the matter it self is capable of. And 
it seems, that the main scope of this book was, to investigate 
those various Modifications of life; though the Author ingeniously 
confesseth, to have met with such difficulties in this 
argument, that as yet he hath not so much as gone through all 
the variations of Inanimat Substances; much less through those 
very subtile Formations of Plants and Animals. 
 
If it be asked, How this Natural Perception becomes Sensitive 
or Animal; the Doctor answers, That disposed matter, 
finding it self capable, so far to raise its perceptions, as to redouble 
it, whereby it may be enabled to judge of its own 
acts and to behold them with delight, falls upon organizing, 
[^p.5077^] 
and adapts for every Sense as 'twere a double Organ, an internal 
and external; and the same matter perceiving withal, that 
'tis needless, there should be an internal one, appropriate for 
every external, it forms one only internal, Common to all the 
external, and by proper nerves connects each external to it. 
And this to him constitutes Sensation, which he saith is not performed 
without redoubling the act of Perception; since, if a 
Nerve, by whose means Perception is redoubled, be any way 
intercepted, as in a Gutta serena, or in a Paralitick Member, 
there is no Sensation. So that, according to our Author, Sensation 
is Perception enobled and exalted, able to judge of its 
object, to reflect upon it with complacency, to suspend its 
action, to avert it self from one object to another; whence 
Brutes themselves are by him observ'd to be in some measure 
capable of Discipline, and of reward and punishment. 
 
From all which it appears, that here is asserted such a Natural 
Perception, as is anterior to, more general, and more simple 
than that of Sense; in which perception, accompanied with 
appetition and motion, our Author makes Original Life to consist, 
which to him is nothing else but the Energelical nature of 
any being subsisting by it self, since he understands not, that 
so noble a being as that is which subsists by it self, should be useless, 
and fit for no operation. 
 
If any do object, that these general notions are too soon 
brought upon the Stage, and that Particular Forms are to be 
found out first, and thence we are to rise to the Universal, forasmuch 
as there is nothing in the Understanding which has not 
been first in the Sense; our Author thinks this ratiocination to 
be grounded upon a false supposition, as if the particular reasons 
of things did incurr into our senses before the universal. 
 
There are too many things in this Treatise for such a Breviat 
as this must be, to take notice of them all. One particular 
there is, that seems very paradoxical; which I shall but touch, 
and then conclude, it is, That this Author judgeth it to be more 
Philosophical, to hold a Penetration of Substances than a Vacuum; 
and that a Motion not being to be denied, and consequently either 
a Vacuum, or such a Penetration to be asserted, the former 
of these being by him, as he thinks, disproved, the latter (Penetration) 
must take place. 
 
