[^Josselin, John, Philosophical Transactions, volume 7, number 85^] 
 
[}PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSACTIONS. 
July 15. 1672.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 5021-5023^] 
 
[}II. NEW-ENGLANDS RARITIES discover'd; together with 
the Remedies used by the Natives to cure their Diseases, Wounds 
and Sores, &c. By John Josselin Gent. London 1672. in 12=o=.}] 
 
THese Observations are the fruits of the Authors eight 
years travel in New England: They concern (besides 
the Geography of that Country, and the temperature of the 
Air, and the most common Diseases) the natural Productions 
of that English Plantation: And those 1 Animals; viz. Birds, 
Beasts, Fishes, Serpents, Insects. 2 Plants, and these either 
such as are common with us; or proper to that Country, both 
with, and without names; or such as have sprung up since the 
English planted there; or lastly such Garden-herbs (amongst 
us,) as do thrive there, and of such as do not. 3. Fossils, as 
Stones, Minerals, Metals, and Earths. 
 
To make these Observations of Nature the more considerable 
and useful, the Observer subjoins to them their respective 
uses in Physick, Chirurgery, Dying, &c. e. g. To cure 
consumptions by eating Land-Turtles: To heal Scalds and Burns 
with the Oyl of the Sea-Calf; or with a strong decoction of 
Tobacco, washing the Sore therewith, and strewing Tobacco-powder 
thereon: To heal Bruises and Aches with the Oyl 
of the Sperma-ceti-Whale; which, saith the Author, being put up 
into Hogsheads, and stow'd into Cellars for some time, candieth 
at the bottom about one quarter, and then the oyl being 
drawn off of the candied stuff, put up into convenient vessels, 
proveth to be right Sperma Ceti, and is sold for such, being admirable 
for the already mention'd uses: Item, To remedy the 
biting of a Ratle-Snake by bruising its Liver and applying it 
to the wound: To strengthen the Limbs by anointing them 
with an Oyl, drawn out of the white Oak acorns, boiled in a 
Lixivium made of the Ashes of rotten Maple-wood, untill the 
Oyl swim on the top, which is so clear and sweet, that the Indians 
[^p.5022^] 
eat it also with their meat: To heal bruised Limbs and Cuts 
with the bark of the Birch, boyled very tender, and stamped between 
two Stones to be a plaister, and the decoction thereof 
powred into the wound: To take off a Pin or web, or any kind 
of film growing over the eye with the calcin'd and pulverized 
shell of a Sheath-fish, which is very plentiful in New-England; a delicate 
fish, cover'd with a thin shell and of the colour of a 
Musle. 
 
Among the Animals, there are some that deserve to be taken 
notice of above the rest; as 1. A Dear, call'd the Moose-dear, 
some of which are described to be twelve foot high, with exceeding 
fair Horns with broad palms; some of them two fathoms 
from the tip of one Horn to the other: They have commonly 
three Fawns at a time, which are, to our Observers 
Palate, and incomparable dish. 2. A monstrous great Bird, call'd 
Pilhannaw or Mechquan, a kind of Hawk, four times as big as 
a Gos-Hawk, with a head as big as a Childs of a year old, a very 
Princely Bird; at whose soaring abroad, all sorts of feather'd 
creatures hide themselves; though she never preys upon 
any of them, but doth upon Fawns and Jaccals. 3. The Scarlet-Muslle, 
having a purple vein, which being prick't with a needle 
yeilds a perfect Purple or Scarlet Juyce that will not be washt 
out of the Linnen died therewith; found at Paschatawey, a Plantation 
about 50 Leagues by Sea East-ward from Boston, in a 
small Cove, call'd Baker's Cove. 4. A little Beast call'd a Muskquash, 
feeding upon the bastard Calamus Aromaticus, hath Cods senting 
that as sweet and strong as Mush, and lasting thus a long time, 
wrapt up in Cotton-wool. 
 
Among plants there is one, taken by some to be a kind of 
Golden-Rod, by others for Sarazens Consound, by the Author for 
a kind of Sun-flower, or West-Indian Marigold; of which the 
stalk beneath and above the knob is cover'd with a multitude 
of small Bugs, about the bickness of a great Flea, which order'd 
as they should be before they come to have wings, the 
Observer presumes will make good Cochineel; they yeilding 
a perfect and durable Scarlet-colour. 
 
The New England Pease are said by our Author not only 
to be the best in the world, but free from being worm-eaten. 
 
[^p.5023^] 
Rue he noteth for an herbe hardly growing there; Rose-Mary, 
Lavender, Southern-wood, not at all; Blood-wort and Celondine, 
but sorrily; Muskmelons better than in old England, &c. 
 
