[^Philosophical transactions, volume 9, number 101^] 
 
[}PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSACTIONS. 
March 25. 1674.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 15-20^] 
 
[^p.15^] 
[}III. EPHEMERIDUM MEDICO-PHYSICARUM Germaniæ 
ANNUS TERTIUS, &c. Lipsiæ & Francofurti, 
1673, in 4=o=.}] 
 
THese Miscellanies consisting of so great a number of Observations 
as amount to 350; the narrow bounds of 
this Tract will permit us to take notice but of a few of so 
many; viz. 
 
That a Stone hath been successfully cut 
from under the Tongue [/1./]: That the powder 
of the Muscus terrestris clavatus is a good 
Antepileptick: That, in an Epidemical 
Dysentery of more than four hundred persons afflicted with 
that distemper, not one woman with child, and sick of the 
same disease, dyed: That a girl, after she was recovered of 
the small pox, did sweat blood out of the toes of both her 
feet: That a man, being opened after his death, was found to 
have not above ten pound of flesh about him, all the rest being 
fat, and very slender bones, and the Muscles rather membrans 
than flesh: Of one, that had so copious and strong a 
transpiration, that his hand, being a pretty while inclosed in 
a glass, appeared moist all over, and the sides of the glass bedewed 
with small drops; he also never voiding any thing by 
siege above once a week: Of an Heart altogether wasted, and 
dried up like an empty purse, shrunk together: That one of 
the best remedies against the Pleurisie is Antimonium Diaphoreticum, 
prepared as 'tis here prescribed in Obs. 74: That 
Balsom of Peru is of great efficacy in Dysenteries: Of a woman, 
in whom, after she had been brought to bed, and cured 
of grievous Epileptique fits, were left by a crisis several glanduls 
in her left arm, which as often as they disappeared and 
vanished, she felt very great head-ache and other troublesome 
distempers, but when they re-appeared, she found her self 
well again: Of many, cured of a Tertian ague by an infusion 
of stircus suillum in Rhinish wine: Of a female-child 
without any brains, (as appeared afterwards, when it was 
[^p.16^] 
dead, and open'd) the mother having, about the middle 
time of her child-bearing, seen men fight, and one of them 
wounded in his head, the blood trickling down on every 
side, at which she scratched her head: Of one, that having 
sneesed, at three several nights, above 300 times each night 
without intermission, was freed for a while from that sneesing 
by a Palsie of her left side; yet as soon as her head was 
heated by Motion or the Sun, or affected by a cold air and 
wind, fell a sneesing again; which was cured by applying 
some leaven and amber to the crown of her head; on which 
there was at length found a soft tumor, got by a grievous 
fall and knock, the matter of which being heated, did by 
dilatation, or, being cooled, did by constriction, and both 
wayes by its acrimony, vellicate the parts, to cause the 
symptom: Of divers diseases removed by a change into 
other distempers; as Convulsions into a Fever, a Fever into 
the yellow Jaundice, Frensie into a Dysentery, Headache 
into an Hæmorrhagy of the nose; Deafishness, Spitting 
of blood and Soreness of eyes into a Looseness, &c: Of 
a child, that had by mischance swallow'd a piece of lead, 
such as is commonly fastned for a mark to cloath, which 
child was saved by giving it some vinegar, which open'd 
the body of the Lead: Of one that cured himself of the 
Hungarian distemper by drinking large draughts of Rhinish 
wine, and thereby provoking copious sweats: Of several 
persons of such a temper, that they were purged, some of 
them, by the meer smell of a purgative, one, by the bare 
hearing, another by only dreaming, of the medicine [/2./]: 
That in Livonia the people are very 
seldom afflicted by the Stone; which is ascribed 
to their way of brewing their beer all over the Country with 
red-hot flints: That Fontanels or Issues are very powerful 
to remove Head-aches, stubborn Defluxions, Podagrical humors, 
Sciatica's; as also to prevent Apoplexies, Epilepsies, 
Palsies, &c: That 'tis a vulgar error, that Hares do change 
their Sex: Of an odd effect of Lightning, which striking 
into the Turret of a Castle, did no mischief, but only made a 
small hole in a silver coin, kept in the purse of the watchmans 
[^p.17^] 
wife: Of a grievous Megrim, removed by Vesicatories, 
and Spirit of Sal Armoniac drawn in by the nose; which 
proved so effectual, that the patient soon after voided at the 
nose a whole quart of water, and so was cured: Of a man, 
that spent a whole fortnight without any sleep, and yet found 
no inconvenience in his vital and animal functions by it: Of 
one, that for several weeks had had an ague only in his right 
Arm, which came regularly about seven a clock in the morning, 
the rest of his body remaining all the while in its natural 
temper: Of one, that upon plunging himself several times, 
when he had fits of a Tertian upon him, into a river near him, 
was cured; (but beware of imitation:) Pleurisies, and Hydropical 
swellings, cured by the use of Lin-seed oyl: Hæmorrhoids 
cured by the smell of Myrrhe, Frankincense and 
Mastick: Of one in Denmark, whose spitle is as sweet as 
sugar, though he love things acid: Of Salts concreted into a 
Glassy flexil plate [/3./], by mixing Spirit of 
wine camphorated with spirit of Hartshorn, 
and powring it upon ignited parts 
of Iron; from which mixture the Camphire 
first, being got out of the pores of the Spirit of wine, 
made the whole body of the liquor troubled and look like a 
snowy lanugo or cloud; and then it subsided, leaving the liquor 
all clear; but, some days after, the said mixture being 
gently stirred, a very thin plate, like Muscovia Talk, perfectly 
diaphanous, like glass, was observed to swim therein; 
and to shew, that this proceeded not from the refraction 
of the rays from the surface of the liquor, the Observer 
did several ways change his position, and that of the supposed 
glass, towards the light; whereupon not only the appearance 
of the said plate did not disappear, but a manifest undulation 
and flexibleness of its own in the midst of the liquor, 
it answer'd to every undulation of the liquor, caused by the 
gentle agitation of this glass. 
 
But to proceed to some other observations, we shall further 
take notice; Of one, that once in all his life-time, for 
the space of a whole moon (which was that of March,) could 
see nothing at all by Candle-light, but saw very well as soon 
[^p.18^] 
as the Sun was risen: Of a Lixivium of Quick-lime sulphurated, 
that changed Spirit of Niter into a solid lapideous 
salt, whereas, when the Lime was not sulphurated, it 
changed it only into a saline gum: Of a young man, who, 
without an apparent cause, was after his sleep found both 
speechless, and destitute of all feeling, in what part of his 
body soever he were pricked with pins, though all his other 
senses were unviolate, and he did eat, drink, walk, and 
sleep very well; which distemper, both of his speechlesness, 
and want of feeling, was perfectly cured by bleeding him in 
the ranala's of his tongue: Of two Puppys, cut out of their 
dams belly, that not only lived a quarter of an hour after 
their hearts had been cut out [/4./], but 
also made a kind of creeping noise: 
Of three child-bearing women, whereof 
one, longing for Strawberries, 
and having got them, was the next 
day deliver'd of a child, whose 
back seemed to be sprinkled with 
whole and fresh strawberries; the other, who longing for 
green herbs, after she had eat some, was the next day 
brought to bed of a child, the crown of whose head lookt 
as cover'd with small pieces of green herbs cut; the third, who 
at the instant of her travel longing for wheaten flower, and 
being satiated therewith, brought forth a child, half an hour 
after, that held in his knit fist something like dry flower: 
Of leggs broken, perfectly healed with a kind of Moss, called 
by Botanists Muscus pulmonarius terrestris sanguineus, 
made into an unguent with the roots of Consolida major, 
finely pulverised together, and boiled with hoggs-grease in a 
glased and well-closed pipkin: Of a boy, that quite lost 
his tongue by spitting it out, when he had the small pox, 
but was yet able, without the help of any art, not only to 
taste, swallow, and spit, but to speak so as to be well understood; 
which is the same History with that of Jac. Rolandus de Belebad, 
Chirurgion of Saumur, who publisht it 
in French under the Title of Aglosso-Stomographia, which is by 
our Ephemerist turned into Latin. 
 
[^p.19^] 
Besides these Authors, we are concerned to take notice 
of those Generous persons of London, who shew their Love 
to their Country by devising, proposing and solliciting the 
best Expedients for the Improvement of England and other 
his Majesties Dominions, by Trade, Agriculture, or any 
Commerce, Artifice, or Manufacture. At present I shall 
only name two: 
 
The first is, Englands Interest and Improvement, consisting 
in the Increase of the Store and Trade of this Kingdom, by 
SAMUEL FORTREY Esquire. Which Tract was 
first published A. 1663; and is again newly addressed to 
his Majesty. In two or three sheets it contains, I think, 
a great Treasury. 
 
And secondly, as a principal branch of Englands Treasury 
we must recommend, A Discourse of the FISHERY, briefly 
laying open not only the ADVANTAGES and FACILITY 
of the Undertaking, but likewise the absolute NECESSITY 
of it, in order to the Well-being both of the King and 
People; asserted and vindicated from all material Objections, by 
ROGER L'ESTRANGE Esquire. In one single 
sheet he saith, in our opinion, more to the purpose than some 
would have done in a large Volum. 
 
Let me add, on this occasion, in reference to Georgicks, 
that some have had the boldness to affirm, that there is surer 
and more useful Physiology in Learned Varro's three books 
De re Rustica, than in Aristotle's eight Books Physicorum, or 
in Plato's intricate Sublimities. And we have not been wanting, 
upon occasions to cast in our small mite, in recommending 
the Culture of Gardens, n. 45. n. 46. n. 53. n. 84. Vineyards, 
n. 15. Cider-Orchards, Groves, the Improvements 
of Forests, Mulberies, n. 2. n. 5. n. 12 . n. 53. Agriculture 
in general, n. 5. Granaries, to provide corn in times of plenty 
for years of dearth, n. 25. Remedies or Preventions of Dearth 
proposed, n. 90. The salubrity of an unwholsome place, 
how to be recover'd, n. 66. Sand-flouds by land, how to be 
[^p.20^] 
stopp'd, and improvements in such places. n. 37. Salt, who 
made in the coasts of France by the Sun, n. 51. The Salt-works 
at Nantwich described, n. 53. and 54. Tidings of a 
Salt-rock in Cheshire, n. 66. Materials for Ships offer'd from 
Virginia, to preserve the Timber of England against a time of 
need, n. 93. And such extraordinary Artifices, as Ingenious 
Travellors have communicated to us. Our aim being for the 
general benefit of Mankind, it is fit, we should begin at our 
own doors, and offer an Example, or, at least, follow the 
best. 
 
