[^Royal Academy of Sciences at Paris, translated by Alexander Pitfield and Richard Waller, Philosophical transactions, volume 16, number 189^] 
 
[}PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSACTIONS. 
For the Months of September and October, 1687.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 371-376^] 
 
[^p.371^] 
[}Memoirs for a Natural History of Animals; containing the 
Anatomical Descriptions of several Creatures, dissected 
by the Royal Academy of Sciences at Paris; Englished by 
Alexander Pitfield, Esquire, R. S. Soc. To which is added, 
An Account of the Measure of a Degree of a great Circle 
of the Earth: Published by the same Academy, and 
Englished by Richard Waller, Esquire, R. S. Secr.}] 
 
THis Book, containing the Anatomical Observations of 28 
Species of Animals, and about 70 Individuals, was 
published in two very large Folio's by the Royal Academy at 
Paris, and owned by them, as their united Labours, as they 
are a Body. The Difficulty of procuring Copies of the French 
Edition, few of the Learned having ever seen the Book, tho' 
Printed some Years since, was no small Inducement, as the 
Translators say, to their Undertaking. 
 
[^p.372^] 
Waving what may be said as to their Preface, and of the 
first 12 Species of Animals; viz. two Lyons and a Lyoness, a 
Camelion, a Dromedary, a Bear, five Gazella's or Antilopes, a 
Chat Pard, a Sea-Fox, a Castor, an Otter, two Civet Cats, an 
Elke, and a Coati mondi, of all which, a large Account has 
been already given by Mr. Oldenburg in his Philosophical 
Transactions, Numb. 49. & 124. to which I refer the Reader; 
I shall proceed to give some Account of the sixteen remaining 
Species, all which were published in the Second Volumn of 
the French Edition. 
 
The Thirteenth Species then is the Sea-Calf, which, from 
Rondeletius, they observe to be of two kinds, the larger from 
the Ocean, the lesser from the Mediterranean, of which sort 
this was. That which is most extraordinary in it, was the 
Epiglottis, much larger than in other Animals; its Ventricle 
like an Intestine: it had all the Organs for Secretion of Urine, 
and the Kidneys seemed composed of several Glands, each provided 
with a particular Pelvis: it had Lungs like other Amphibious 
Animals; and the foramen Ovale giving Passage to the 
Blood from the Cava to the Aorta. It had the Cristalline more 
convex before, which is not common, and several Particularities 
in the Formation of the Eye favouring the Opinion of 
the Reception of the visual Species on the Retina. 
 
The Fourteenth, the Barbary Cow, an Animal something resembling 
a Deer: it had but two Teats, four Ventricles like 
other ruminating Animals, a very large Cæcum, and no distinct 
Lobes in the Liver. It was in several Particulars like the common 
Cow. 
 
The fifteenth is the Cormorant, wherein the shortness of the 
Legs is remarkable, and structure of the Feet for swimming 
with one Foot while the other holds the Prey: the largeness of 
the Oesophagus: want of the two Cæcums, found in most Birds: 
the Kidneys separated from the other Viscera by a particular 
Membrane: the Tongue and Eye very small, this Water-Fowl 
being to feel for its Food under the Water, rather than discover 
it from afar. 
 
[^p.373^] 
The Sixteenth, the Chamois or Rupicapra, in whose Ventricle 
a Ball was found; whence they take occasion to discourse 
of the Balls found in the Stomachs of Creatures, as Cows, 
Horses, &c. and observe that they are compos'd of lignous Fibreo 
and not Hair, as is usually thought: besides several other 
Observables, the Cornua uteri were very long and winding; 
the Heart had a Callous Apophysis, &c. 
 
The seventeenth and Eighteenth are the Porcupine and 
Hedg-hog, a comparison being made between these two Animals. 
They observe the external Ear of the Porcupine to be 
like a Mans; the end of the Tongue armed as it were with 
Teeth; the Skin provided with an extraordinary Muscle for 
Ejaculation of the Quills. Of these they dissected six. In comparing 
the Hedg-hog with them, they describe the Musculus 
carnosus, which serves to bring the Head round into the Breech 
like a Foot ball; whereas in the Porcupines the Cæcum was very 
large, in the Hedg-hog there was none at all; the Epididymis, 
in the Porcupine, was separate from the Testis; in the Hedg-hog 
united to it: in the Hedg-hog they observed a large Crystalline 
filling almost the whole Globe of the Eye. 
 
The nineteenth are four Monkeys; where they in general 
observe, that this Animal more resembles Man in his outward 
shape than inward Formation of the Parts, which in many 
things are like a Dog, the genital Parts of the Male like 
neither; of the Female much like Woman; the Anfractuosities 
of the Brain like Mans, but the Processus mammillares were 
hard and membranous, which they are not in Man: they conclude 
with a comparison of the Muscles, which very much resemble 
those of Men. 
 
The Twentieth is the Stag of Canada and Sardinian Hinde. 
In the Stag, the length of the Intestines is observable, being in 
all 96 feet; and indeed, generally all grasing Animals have 
long Guts. In the Hinde, the four Ventricles were more distinguishable 
than in the Stag; the Cornua uteri long and winding, 
as in the Chamois: in the Trunks of the Jugulars were 
found 16 Valves, which were in situation contrary to the Circulation 
[^p.374^] 
of the Blood. In the Carotides were observed several 
transverse Incisures. 
 
The Twenty first, ten Pintadoes; where, after a full description 
of the outward Form, they describe several Parts like 
the common Hen; the Pancreas wanting: the Bladders in the 
lower Belly were raised by blowing into the aspera Arteria, 
whence they hint at the use of Respiration. 
 
The Twenty second, three Eagles: after having discoursed 
of the six kinds of Eagles, according to Aristotle and Pliny; 
they observe, That the Intestines, after the usual manner of 
voracious Animals, were slender and short, as also the Kidneys; 
some had the Cæcum, others none: the Globe of the Eye was 
large, and the Cornea very prominent. In this Subject they 
first discovered that the Spinal Marrow in the middle of the 
Back was divided in two, with a Ventricle like those in the 
Brain betwixt: this was afterwards found common to all Birds. 
 
The Twenty third, two Indian Cocks, not our Turky Cocks. 
They were both Males: in one there was two Pancreas's, with 
three Cholidoci, and two Pancreatici ductus into the Intestine: in 
the other was but one Pancreas, and a single ductus: the Intestines 
were 12 feet long, and Cæcum six: the Aspera Arteria 
made a fold in the Craw bone, after a most particular manner. 
 
The Twenty Fourth, six Bustards; in which the Craw was 
scarce distinguishable from the OEsophagus, and furnished with 
a great number of Glands most conspicuous in this, but to be 
found in most Birds: a particular description of the Gizzard 
follows, and of a third Cæcum near the Rectum or the Bursa 
Fabritii: between the Cornea and Sclerotica a cartilaginous 
Circle was observed. They end with the discovery of a black 
Purse in the Eyes of Birds. 
 
The Twenty fifth, six Demoiselles of Numidia, a kind of 
Crane, in which they found the Liver very large, and without 
Gall-bladder in some Subjects. In the Female a kind of 
Gland besides the Ovary, resembling the Testicles of the Male. 
Amongst other Observables, the Structure of the Wind-pipe 
was very unusual, entering with a winding into the Bone of 
[^p.375^] 
the Sternum: at its Union with the Lungs it had a kind of 
Larynx: the Punctum Lachrymale in the Eye was double, &c. 
 
The Twenty sixth, eight Ostriches, in which they very 
largely discourse of the make of the Feathers of Birds, and 
joyning of the Fibres of each Feather to one another; a great 
part of which, seems to have been taken out of Mr. Hook's ingenious 
Book of Microscopical Observations, tho' they have not 
thought fit to own it. The Foot of this Animal seems contrived 
for a speedy Course, in which its Wings are of great 
use: the different length of the Intestines is observable, in 
some being 50, whereas in another they were but 29 feet; the 
Cæcum, which was double, was wreath'd like a Screw, and the 
inside of the Colon provided with Valves or semilunar leaves, like 
Membranes. At the extremity of the Rectum was found a Bladder 
filled with Urine. In this Description they discourse largely 
of the Ureters and genital Parts of Birds, as likewise of 
the Lungs, and its Divisions or Diaphragmes, and its Communication 
with the Bladders containing the Ventricle and Intestines: 
together with the manner and use of Breathing in Birds, 
explaining it by a pair of double Bellows, &c. 
 
The Twenty seventh, the Cassowar, a Bird but lately known 
to the Europeans: it has no Quills nor Feathers for flying, and 
indeed but short Wings: that which was most unusual was 
the want of a musculous Gizzard, tho' a granivorous Animal; 
which might in some sort be supplied by the number of Ventricles. 
In this Subject they more particularly insist on the Muscles 
of the Thorax necessary for Respiration, and a curious description 
of the Parts of the internal Eye lid in Birds, as to its 
Mechanism and Use. 
 
The Twenty eighth. They conclude these Discourses with 
that of a very large Land Tortois, being four foot and 1/2 from the 
extremity of the Head to the Tail. Amongst the Internal Parts, 
the Structure of the Urine Bladder is very curious for its exteriour 
Tunicle being membranous: the inside was strengthened 
with an infinite number of musculous Fibres, not unlike those 
in the Ventricles of the Hearts of Animals. This Contrivance 
[^p.376^] 
seems necessary for the pressing out of the Urine in this Animal, 
which has an unyielding Belly, not capable of Compression; 
nor was the formation of the Heart less observable: it 
had three Ventricles communicating with each other by holes 
in the Septum: the Vena Cava had two Branches into two of 
the Ventricles, which likewise received Blood from two Venæ 
pulmonares to be transmitted to the Aorta, &c. Having been 
already too large. I shall pass by what was observed of the extraordinary 
Structure of the Lungs, with a Discourse of the 
Lungs of Animals in general, which they reduce to three sorts; 
treating next of Respiration, together with an Experiment 
of blowing up the Lungs of a Dog with a 
pair of Bellows; but I shall refer, as to the other 
Particulars in this and the former Anatomical Discourses, 
to the Book it self, very well deserving the 
Perusal of all Persons curious in Anatomy and Chirurgery, 
containing many useful Remarks and natural Discoveries, 
of which this is but a very imperfect Account. 
 
I shall say nothing of the Measure of the Earth added to the 
end of this Edition, a very full Account having been given of 
it in the Philos. Trans. Numb. 112. to which I refer the Reader: 
only the Translators thought fit to annex it, the Curiousness of 
its Subject, and exceeding Scarcity, being sufficient to recommend 
it to this Learned and Inquisitive Age. 
 
