[^Tyson, Edward, Philosophical transactions, volume 16, number 188^] 
 
[}PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSACTIONS. 
For the Months of July and August 1687.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 332-334^] 
 
[^p.332^] 
[}Observations of what did præternaturally occur in the 
opening of the Body of Mr. Smith of Highgate, 
July 8th. 1687. Communicated by that learned 
Physitian Dr. Edward Tyson Reg. Soc. Soc.}] 
 
IN the first place dividing the Abdomen, immediately 
upon Incision made into the Peritonæum, we discovered 
the Bladder very Schirrous and thick, viz. 1/4 of an Inch; of a 
Præternatural Figure, and distended to the bigness of a 
Child's Head: And at the entrance of the Ureters on each 
side were two Protuberancies, of the bigness of a Hen's Egg 
each; the Ureters were of the largeness of the small Gutts 
in Children, so that they could easily admit two fingers into 
their Cavity. They were both replete with Urine or 
a serous matter; which upon pressure did easily regurgitate 
into the Kidneys, but would not pass at all into the 
Bladder. The Kidneys were of their Natural bigness and 
Figure, but so emaciated that they were rather large 
Baggs than of a fleshy Substance; the Cavity of the Pelvis 
being so large as to contain above 3 ounces of Water: 
But to return to the Bladder; therein upon Apertion we 
discovered a very strange sort of Cystes or Bags, of the exact 
Figure of Eggs of several dimensions, some larger 
than Goose Eggs, others as big as Hen Eggs to the number 
of twelve in all; and about eight of them whole and 
replete with a Limpid Serum: The Coats of these Bladders 
were some of them considerably thick, others very thin 
and tender; all of them loose and free without the least 
adhæsion, either to one another or to the Coat of the Bladder. 
There was little or no Urine in the Bladder but 
[^p.333^] 
what was contained in these Bags. Nor could we Imagine 
that this miserable Patient could possibly make any 
Water, but what happened upon the breach of some of 
these Watery Tumours, when the Bladder was crouded 
beyond its dimensions: for that the passage by the Ureters 
into the Bladder was impervious: And though the Ureters 
were full of Serum, yet could none be forced into the Cavity 
of the Bladder. 
 
This Liquor contained in these Bags, we did conjecture 
to be of the Nutritious juice of the Body; and upon 
tryal of boyling a small quantity of it, we found it thicken 
and come to the consistence of a stiff and glutinous Gelly. 
These Vesiculæ were undoubtedly formed from the tenacity 
of the matter between the Membranes of the Bladder, 
in its oblique passage through them; for that being 
so glutinous, it was here detained till its Superficies were 
condensed into a firm Coat, and so by the coming of more 
matter was forced into the Cavity of the Bladder. This I 
suppose from our finding two of these Ova in a distinct Sinus 
from the rest, between the Coats of the Bladder, at the entrance 
of each Ureter. 
 
The Liver we found very large and hard, of the Colour 
and Substance of a boyled one. It adhered to the Peritonæum 
on the external part, and by its vast bigness had so 
straitned the Thorax, that there was very little room for the 
Lungs. 
 
The Lungs we found of a livid Colour, adhering close to 
the Pleura on the right side; upon Incision we found them 
wholly repleat with a Purulent matter, and a Stone of the 
bigness of a Cherry-Stone in one Lobe. 
 
Dividing the Pericardium we found a Fungous Substance 
covering the heart all over; and Fibres from it that rann to 
the Pericardium in a great number; so that they were by 
these Fibres every where united. 
 
The Heart was very large, the right Auricle and Ventricle 
were one large undivided Cavity, and therein a large Polypus; 
[^p.334^] 
which run up the descending Branch of the Vena Cava 
to the very Jugular, another part was distributed to the 
Pulmonary Artery. 
 
In the left Ventricle was another Polypus not so large as 
the former: It had two Branches, one in the Pulmonary Vein, 
another in the Arteria Magna, or Aorta. 
 
One of the Vesiculæ being opened had a large cluster of 
small Ova as big as Grapes, all repleat with Liquor: All the 
rest contained nothing but Serum. 

