[^Philosophical transactions, volume 17, number 196^] 
 
[}PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSACTIONS. 
For the Month of January, 1692/3.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 611-614^] 
 
[^p.611^] 
[}The WISDOM of GOD manifested in the Works 
of the Creation; in Two Parts. By John Ray, Fellow 
of the Royal Society. The Second Edition very much 
enlarged. London, Printed for Samuel Smith: 
in 8=o=. 1692.}] 
 
THE Design of our Author in this Treatise, is manifest by the Title 
it self, which he endeavours to make good from several Heads, as 
first, from the Multitude of the Creatures, cœlestial and terrestrial, 
and from the possibility, that the fixt Stars may be so many Suns, attended 
with the like Train as we find our Center, The Ruler of our Motions, is accompanied 
with. Hence he proceeds to guess at the number of Terrestrial 
Bodies, animate and inanimate: Of Beasts known and described about 150; 
of Birds about 500; and of Fishes the like number; Insects are more numerous; 
of Butterflies and Beetles 300; and if Caterpillars are reckon'd as a 
distinct Species, that number is doubled, and the Fly-kind at least equals 
both the other: Creeping Insects very numerous. In short, if as he conjectures 
the British Insects amount to 2000 the total sum of those of the whole 
Earth may be 20000, if they hold the same proportion as the British and 
Foreign Plants do. Of Plants, he thinks, there are not fewer in the World 
than 18000: And lastly, of Fossiles, Stones, and the like, he gives no guess 
at their number, but concludes it very great. 
 
Next he proceeds to censure the Aristotelian, Epicurean, and Cartisian 
Hypothesis, as uncapable of explaining the Phœnomena of Nature; and for the 
formation of the Bodies of Animals, he has recourse to the Sensitive Soul, if 
it be immaterial; but if material, to a Plastick Nature. And here he treats 
in short of the Souls of Brutes. At the 48th Page he seems to encline to the 
Atomical Hypothesis, as to the ranging inanimate Bodies, and explaining 
some of their Operations. Our Author then enters into a more particular 
Account of some of the Creatures as the Sun, Moon, &c. and holds the gravitating 
Principle to be the Band that keeps the Universe in order, though 
he attempts not to explain what it is, or how caused. He proceeds to the 
Uses of the four Elements, as Fire, Air, Water, and Earth, hinting at the life 
of the Fœtus in utero, pag 65. and from the motion of the Water gives the 
reason why most Water-Plants grow flat, their edges more easily cutting 
the Stream, that if they were round. He then touches upon the Meteors, as 
Rain, Wind, &c. and next of inanimate Bodies; where, as to formed Stones 
he determines not the business of Petrification, enlarging upon the use of the 
Loadstone. He proceeds to Metals. 
 
[^p.612^] 
As to Plants, he refers their Constancy in continuing their Species to a 
Plastick Nature, as well as their Stature, Figure, and the like, and ends 
with the uses of the several parts thereof. 
 
Treating of Animals, he thinks it probable, that the Females as well of 
Beasts as Birds, have in them, from their first formation, the Seeds of all 
the young they shall ever produce; and sets it down as a manifest Argument 
of Divine Providence, that Birds are not vivaparous, so as that they 
have no hindrance in their flying and way of living: Observing further the 
strange Memory and Order Birds have in feeding their Young, not omitting 
or forgetting one, but feeding them all gradually; with several other curious 
Remarks of the building of their Nests, Brooding, &c. and by the way 
treating of the Juice afforded by the Glands of the Stomach, he hints at the 
notable Vertue of the insipid Saliva, in its killing Quicksilver, fermenting 
Dough, taking away Warts, &c. He admires the Curiosity and Contrivance 
of the Honeycomb, and particularly the Tree-Bee, which Insect he describes, 
with the manner of its generation. He proceeds to Quadrupedes, and 
concludes this Head with the finess of the Parts of several Animals, for their 
particular Natures and ways of living, viz. in the Mole, Antbear, Chamalion, 
Woodpecker, and Swallow; observing that the reason why Swallows fly 
low before Rain may be from the Insects, which they prey upon, which 
being sensible of the Vapors of the superiour Regions of the Air, descend 
nearer to the Earth at such times. Next, that the Parts of Birds are all 
fitted for flying, as those of Fish are for swimming; observing, that though 
no Land-Fowl have short Necks and long Legs, yet the contrary is seen in 
many whole-footed Water-fowl, Nature providing them with a long Neck, 
that they may fish therewith at the bottom of the Water. 
 
Next our Author answers an Objection too long to be here inserted; and 
having touch'd upon some other Heads, as the Discoveries made by Dr. Hooke, 
and Mr. Lewenhoek, by the Microscope, in minute Animals and their parts, 
he proceeds to some Practical inferences, and having selected two particular 
Pieces to insist more largely upon, viz. The whole Body of the Earth; as 
to which, he remarks, its Spherical Figure fitted for Motion and Strength, 
and shews its diurnal and annual motions no way dissonant to the Scriptures. 
Coming to the outward face thereof, he instances in the admirable 
use of some Plants, and concludes this first Part with the necessity of Mountains, 
for the production of Springs and Minerals, the Conveniencies for Habitation, 
delightful Prospects, production of variety of Plants, entertainment 
and maintenance of several Beasts, Birds, and Insects, with the hindering 
the evagation of Vapours to the North and South, from the hot Countries, 
where they are most needful. 
 
In the Second Part of this Work our Author prosecutes the same subject 
from the consideration of Man, and that from eight general Observations, 
1st, Of his Erect Posture, which he shews to be natural from the length of 
the Legs, and strength of their Muscles, position of the Face, &c. 2dly, In 
that nothing is wanting, or redundant. 3dly, The Parts are most conveniently 
placed for use and ornament. 4ly, The Provision made for the Security 
of the Principals, as the Heart, Brain, and Lungs. 5ly, The most 
useful parts being provided against Accidents, by their being in pairs; and 
the many Conveniences they have to get rid of what offends them. 6ly, The 
[^p.613^] 
Constancy observed in the principal parts which cannot proceed from Chance, 
whereas there is a great variety in the less necessary, as in the Ramifications 
of the Veins, Arteries, and Nerves, wherein Nature seems to sport 
her self. 7ly, Pleasure annext to those actions that support the individuum 
as Eating, Drinking, and those that continue the Species. 8ly, The Multitude 
of Intentions to be regarded in the forming of our Bodies for the various 
motions and operations thereof. Coming to particulars, he observes the 
great Variety in the Faces of Men, and the Capacity of the Head from its 
Spherical Figure, to contain a large Brain: In the next place he enlarges on 
the Eye, and its several parts endeavouring at a reason why Objects seem not 
inverted, though they are so painted on the Retina, which seems to need a 
farther Explication. He observes from Nuck's Experiment on a Dogs-Eye, 
that the Aqueous Humor is repairable, as being most subject to Casualties. 
As to the Ear, he observes, that if the external Ear (which by degrees 
contracts and draws the sound inwards) be cut off, the Hearing has been 
much impaired, if not quite spoiled; and takes notice of the alteration of its 
Figure from the distance of the Sound he refers for a more particular Explication 
of this part, and its use to Monsieur Du Verney's Treatise of the 
Ear. Next as to the Teeth, having recapitulated Mr. Boyl's Seven Observations 
of them, he adds, That the Molares are placed nearest to the Center 
of Motion, where there is the greater strength required. And lastly, The 
motion of the Jaws is transverse, as most proper for chewing. Treating 
of the Tongue, he notes with Des Cartes, that Brutes have no cogitation 
since none of them can be brought to signifie their Conceptions by artificial 
Signs, either Words or Gestures, the Signs which they use being 
motions of some of the Passions. Having touched at the use of the Saliva, 
for digestion of the Food, he observes the Annular Formation of the 
Windpipe, whose Rings are not entire, lest it should press too hard upon the 
Gullet. Treating of the Heart, he allows it not to be conservatory of the 
vital Flame, the Lungs serving rather for the accension and maintaining 
of that Flame, but shews its admirable contrivance from its Muscles, Valves, 
and the like, to be a proper Machine to continue the circulation of the 
Blood, assisted much by the quadruple Coat of the Arteries, especially its 
third or musculous one, first discovered by Dr. Willis, effecting a Contriction, 
or kind of Peristaltick Motion. Having treated of the Structure and 
Uses of the Hand, and of the Vertebræ of the Back-bone, he observes the 
Provision that is made for the more easie motion of all the Joynts, and 
prevention of heating and fretting, by an oily and a mucilaginous Juice. 
There are several other Remarks on the Thorax, Belly, Bladder, Liver, 
Kidneys, and the like, which I omit; and coming to the Bones and Muscles, 
he affirms, that there seems to be therein more Geometry than in all the artificial 
Engines in the World. Which he leaves to the Mathematicians to handle, 
as has been attempted by Borelli and others. 
 
Our Author waves the consideration of the Formation of the Fætus, and 
supposes Impregnation to proceed from some contagious Vavour, or subtile 
Effluvium of the Male Seed. Which he believes have a great stroke in generation, 
in that the Mule and other Creatures most resemble the Male Parent. 
Taking occasion here to speak of spontaneous Generation, he affirms, that there 
is no such thing in Nature; but that all, nay, the most contemptible Insect, is 
[^p.614^] 
generated by the Animal Parents of the same Species. The same he confirms 
as to Plants, by an Experiment of Malpigius, who covered Earth taken from 
a deep place with Silk many times doubled, which though it admitted the 
Air and Water, yet produced not any Plant; and concludes, that a spontaneous 
Generation of Animals and Plants will be found, upon due examination, 
to be nothing less than a Creation of them. He enforces this Opinion by 
the Suffrages of the most Experienc'd in this matter, as Swammerdam, Malpighi, 
Lister, &c. For this he brings several Arguments, and answers the most 
material Objections, and as for the raining of Frogs and other Insects, he believes 
it with the same Faith, as that Spanish Gennets are begotten by the 
Winds, since each Story is attested, as he says, by good Authors, and he 
that can swallow this, hath, he thinks, made a fair step towards believing it 
may rain Calves too, since it is reported that one fell out of the Clouds 
in Avicenna's time. Here he takes notice of the long Venereal Embrace of the 
Frogs, for at least a whole month indefinently. As to Insects produced in 
Animal Bodies, he concludes them not spontaneous, from their exact agreement, 
and perpetual similitude, in the shape and figure of their Bodies, and 
concludes, that the Eggs which produce them are taken in with the Food of 
the Animal in which they are found. 
 
In the next place he gives several Miscellaneous Observations of the Structure, 
Actions, and Uses of some Parts of Animals, omitted in the precedent Discourses; 
as, That God effects the same thing by different means instanced in 
the Varieties of Digestions in the Stomachs of several Animals, and the like. 
By the way he says, that Swine wallow in the Mire, and Poultry bask themselves 
in the Dust, not to cool themselves, but to destroy and choak the Lice 
and other importunate Insects. Our Author has other Observables, touching 
Respiration, the Foramen Ovale in amphibious Animals, the Epiglottis, 
which part the Elephant has not, neither needs it, there being no Communication 
betwixt his Lungs and Oesophagus. Some Instances of the Sagacity 
of the Tortoise; of theirs and the Armadillo's Armour, which latter contracts 
it self into a round Ball, by the means of a notable Muscle on each side, consisting 
of many Fibres, decussating each other like the letter X. Next he 
hints at the Uses of the Fat, and the nictating Membrane in the Eyes of Beasts, 
and Birds, transcribing a large account of this part out of the Parisian Anatomy 
of Animals. Next of the sudden growth of Flesh-Flyes, which he finds 
necessary for their production; with some Particularities tonching other 
Animals.He conjectures, that Cartilagineous Fish raise and sink themselves 
to any Depth, by the Water which they take in and let out again at pleasure, 
by the help of Muscles for that purpose, at two holes in the lower part of their 
Belly. 
 
Speaking of Plants, he says, it is the descending Juice which is taken in 
by the Leaves that nourishes both the Fruit and Plant. There are several 
other particulars worth the Reader's perusal, and after all he concludes with 
many practical Inferences and Deductions from the whole. 
 
The whole Treatise, though it be of a Philosophical Nature, seems to be of 
great use for such as make popular Discourses; and as it is not far above the 
Capacity of the Meaner, so there are several Passages that will at least give 
hints and assistance to the greatest Theologues. 
 
