[^Philosophical transactions, volume 17, number 199^] 
 
[}PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSACTIONS. 
For the Month of April,, 1693.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 729-730^] 
 
[^p.729^] 
[}Catalogus Plantarum Horti Academici Argentinensis, 
in usum rei Herbariæ Studiosorum, Adcurante 
Marco Mappo Med. Doctore & Professore 
Seniore, & Archiatro Argentinensi Argentorati 
apud Jo. Fredericum Spoor, 1691. in 
12=o=.}] 
 
THE Author in his Preface tells us, that Physicians 
have been obliged of late very much to enlarge 
their Enquiries, beyond what in times past was customary 
with them: So that it is now required of them not 
only to make a more exact Search into the Mysteries of 
the Parts and Humours of Humane Bodies by Anatomy 
into Cosmetics, they being frequently advised with on 
their uses, but also to remedy the Body even after 
Death, by teaching to embalm and preserve the same. 
Amongst these Studies is the knowledge of Exotick 
Plants, which has receiv'd very considerable Accessions 
by Physitians and Apothecaries, whom Necessity forcing 
to the knowledge of the parts of their own, and 
Exotic Plants in common and ordinary use, they are 
thereby help'd to judge of the Virtues of others of the 
same kind coming from abroad: And seeing this Study 
is very large, those who are addicted to it ought to be 
very thankful to any, who by their provident Care and 
Charges furnish their Gardens with the most elegant 
Plants of Asia, Africa, America, or distant places of 
Europe, amongst which this Garden of Strasbourg our 
Author gives the Catalogue of, is one. 
 
He publishes this Catalogue on two Accounts; the 
first and chief of which is for the keeping a mutual 
Commerce between the Author and those who keep 
[^p.730^] 
Gardens of the same kind, for the furnishing others 
with what he has, and being supplied with what he 
wants from them. The other reason is, the use of those 
who design to attain to the Knowledge of Plants, on whose 
Account he has only given (for the most part) one single 
Name, he observing that the multitude of Names 
given the same Plant by several Authors, in differing 
Kingdoms, having respect to their various Properties, 
Forms, Virtues and lesser Accidents, has given great 
disturbance to the Learners: On which score this Author 
almost only uses the Names of Caspar Bauhin in his Pinax 
and Dr. Herman's Catalogue of the Garden of Leyden, 
preferring the Names given by Caspar Bauhin, being now 
commonly used by most Herbalists, even before those 
very long Names who are since given them, for very 
small reasons, in place of his. For the Plants not known 
in Bauhin's time he uses the Names in Dr. Herman's Catalogue, 
as well as for those whose Names are to be 
reform'd, to which he subjoins Bauhin's Name likewise. 
 
The Book it self gives the Names of the Plants in the 
Garden Alphabetically, wherein are some curious Plants 
gathered from near home and from far, amongst which 
are few Non-descripts, or such as have not been taken 
notice of by other Writers, some of which may perhaps 
be Varieties, as may be seen more at large in the Book. 
 
