[^Philosophical transactions, volume 17, number 206^] 
 
[}PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSACTIONS. 
For the Month of December, 1693.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 1002-1004^] 
 
[^p.1002^] [^Original misnumbered as p.1003.^] 
[}II. Phthisiologia Lancastriensis, cui accessit 
Tentamen Philosophicum de aquis Mineralibus, 
&c. Aut. Carolo Leigh, M.D. Lond. 
Impensis S. Smith & B. Walford, &c. In 
8vo. 1694.}] 
 
THE Author divides the Medicinal part of this 
Treatise into several Heads; and Discourses first 
of the various Kinds and Causes of the Phthisick, observed 
by himself in that County, which are either Scorbutic 
Strumose or Chylose, and are often the attendants 
of Fevers epidemic or intermittent, Dropsies, Rickets, 
Drunkenness, Stoppages Fluores albi, Jaundice, Rheumatisms, 
&c. He begins with the Scorbutic proceeding 
from the ill Temperature of the Air, the Parents or Errores 
sex non naturales: Giving some Experiments of the 
Alteration of the Saliva by a few Drops of several Vitriolic 
Liquors, he infers that the Air being fill'd with 
such Steams, and conveigh'd to the Blood is a great occasion 
of this Distemper: He observes farther that Maritine 
places are infested with Sulphureous steams, as 
well as Salt ones discoverable by the Ignes fatui in the 
Night, Stinks, &c. and pronounces such places unhealthy. 
As to the Hereditary, by the way he observes, 
that this Disease is generally owing to the Father, and 
that tho' the Mother were of an healthy Constitution. He 
proceeds to give the Symptoms and their Causes in the 
beginning of the Distemper, such as want of Appetite, 
Sweats, Turbid Urine, Diarrhœa's, &c. touching in 
Transitu at the Proclivity of the People of Bristol to 
this Distemper. Next, of the Symptoms when the Disease 
has gotten more strength, copious spitting, Asthma's, 
Shiverings and irregular Fevers, &c. in the 4th. Chapter 
he proposes several general Rules according to the several 
[^p.1003^] 
States of the Disease, and proceeds to the Method 
of Cure both in the beginning, the confirmed State, 
and more desparete State of the Disease, delivering the 
Forms of several Recipe's proper for each particular State. 
Then he presents the Reader with several curious Observations 
of Persons under the several States of the Disease, 
with the Remedies made Use of and Success. The other 
Species of the Distemper being explicable by the same 
Causes, he passes them over, and gives an account of the 
several particular Phthisicks, and Observations thereon, 
as Phthisicks from Spitting of Blood, vomitting of Blood, 
Hæmorragia uterina, an Impetigo, or red Pimples and itching 
Scurf on the Face and other parts of the Body, from 
a Scorbutic Rheumatism, the Rickets, Fluor albus, Obstructions, 
&c. and concludes this Treatise with the Chylose 
Phthisick. 
 
Our Author divides his Philosophical Essay on Mineral 
Waters into several Chapters; and in the first treats 
of a Vitriolick Spring near a Cole-Pit, which grows 
black with Galls, which in 24 Hours is precipitated, and 
the Water turns greenish, it ferments with an Alcali, &c. 
This Water as he affirms against Dr. Lister, contains a 
perfect Vitriol. The Second Chapter is of the Acidulæ in 
general; in many of which he likewise affirms a true 
green Vitriol is found, which with Ocre and Sulphur he 
makes the Principles of these Waters. The Third Chapter 
treats of several particular Springs in Lancashire, in 
the bottom of one whereof Sea-shells are found; of all 
these he made Experiments before and after Distillation, 
and affirms them Vitriolic. In the Fourth Chapter he 
tells us, That in the Parish of Brindel, near the River 
Darwen is a Mineral Rock, which from the Taste and other 
Phænoemana he says is Vitriolic; this macerated in 
common Water gives it the Qualities of the several Medicinal 
Springs he had before described. Of which he 
gives many Experiments; from all which he draws several 
[^p.1004^] 
Conclusions of the Vitriolick Nature of Waters, &c. 
and answering some Objections proceeds to Salt Springs, 
none of which, except Vitriolic, give a blackish Tincture 
with Galls as he avers. He treats next of a Sulphureosaline 
Spring, a Sulphureous Spring, a Spring impregnated 
with the Natron of the Ancients, &c. Lapidescent 
Springs, he says are from a certain Halitus rising from 
Alum and Vitriol, which passing through takes along 
with it some Particles of the Lime-stone, which being 
mixt with the Water per Minima seems to give it the 
petrifying Quality; this he confirms by some Observations 
and Experiments. He speaks in the next place of 
Acid Springs, and ends with an Appendix of cold Baths, 
the Diseases for which they seem most proper; and the 
Manner or Reason of their Cure by these Baths. So much 
may suffice for a short Account of this Book, which it 
were to be wisht the Author had wrote in English. 
 
[}FINIS.}] 
 
