[^Philosophical transactions, volume 17, number 200^] 
 
[}PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSACTIONS. 
For the Month of May, 1693.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 762-767^] 
 
[^p.762^] 
[}VI. An Account of BOOKS.}] 
 
[}I. Horti Indici Malabarici. 
 
Pars Septima, Octava, & Nona; with some 
Remarks upon them.}] 
 
THE Six first Tomes being abbreviated in the Philosoph. 
Transact. N. 145, and N. 198. This proceeds 
with the 7th, 8th and 9th, the fruitful Product of that 
great Mæcenas of the Botanick, and other Natural Studies, 
the Noble Heer Van Rheed, whose vast Designs being 
not confin'd to Asia alone, have already survey'd 
and describ'd the most luxuriant part of Africa, which 
he intends to publish (after the finishing of these his 
Oriental Discoveries) with the same Fidelity, Exactness 
and Magnificence that we see in the admirable Work 
before us. 
 
The 7th Part treats of Scandent and Bacciferous 
Shrubs, the greatest part whereof were never taken 
notice of by any Writer, or else but very imperfectly 
touch'd upon: As the Natsjatam or Battavalli, which is 
the Cocculus Indicus of our Shops, us'd in Ointments 
or Pastes for the intoxicating of Fish, and driving away 
Lice and Vermine. It is semper-virent, and grows in 
sandy places up and down the Kingdom of Malabar, and 
other Eastern Countries: The Leaves are thick set, of 
the shape of a Heart, and of a bitter taste. The Flowers 
come out in Clusters, are monopetalose, with five Laciniæ 
or Incisures, all reflected, like those of the Nightshade, 
sending forth an Odour like that of Eldar. To 
[^p.763^] [^Original misnumbered as p.793.^] 
these succeed the Fruit, resembling Grapes, only 'tis monococ; 
first green, then white, afterwards red, and lastly 
(when ripe) black. The Indians beat the whole Plant 
up with Ginger, spread it upon Flanel, and so take off 
their Corns, and soften their Feet; sometimes they use 
only the Fumigation of the Root burnt with Bufalo's Excrements 
and the Bambou Reed. After the History of 
the Coculus Indicus, the Publisher gives us 4 sorts of Caniram, 
all a-kin to the Nux Vomica of our Shops, of 
which more in the next. 
 
Schembra-valli, and Vallia-Pira Pitica seem to be 
two wild Vines, climbing up the Trees in thick Woods; 
they (as also many other Plants in the hot Climates) 
are never divested of Leaves and Fruit, (of which there 
will be both green and ripe at the same time) always 
flowring and bearing through the whole year under a 
kind Sun, whose Influence is not so bountiful to the European 
Regions. 
 
Malago Codi is our round, black and white Pepper, 
which are the same, only the latter is decorticated. Cattu-Tirpali 
is the long Pepper of the Indians, which 
they chew with Calx and the Nut Taufel, (the Fruit of 
a Palm named Arequa) colouring their Spittle with a 
red Tincture. These three Species of Pepper, with 
two more of the same Family, are all fully describ'd, and 
exactly figur'd in this 7th Tome. 
 
Cari villandi, a sort of Sarsaparilla, for which 'tis 
us'd by the Natives of Malabar; 'tis not unlike the 
American Smilax, call'd Jupecanga by Margrave and Piso, 
and Macapatli by Hernandez and Recchus, who make 4 
Species of Sarsa, all bacciferous. 
 
Mendoni, or the Lilium Superbum Zeylanicum, one of 
the choicest Ornaments of the English and Dutch Gardens, 
growing up to a very high stature. The Gentiles 
ascribe strange Vertues to the Root in Sympathy, Incantations, 
and other Magick Operations. The Fruit 
[^p.764^] 
(or rather Excrescence) sticking to the Root, stops and 
curbs the proud Flesh of Ulcers, and is successfully given 
in difficult Births. 
 
To these we might add many other rare Plants contain'd 
in this 7th part: As 4 sorts of Indian Ivy, not 
unlike our Trifoliate and Quinquefoliate Creepers: Several 
Exotick Night-shades, one resembling our Dulcamara; 
great variety of Battata's, or Ricophora's, very 
near a-kin to our Potatoes, being also of general use in 
the Kitchins of India. A curious sort of Cuscuta or 
Dodder, running up and choaking the Boughs of Trees. 
A beautiful Scandent Reed like the Rotang, with many 
others. 
 
[}Horti Malabarici. 
Pars Octava.}] 
 
THE 8th Tome describes and figures 51 herbaceous 
and arborescent Plants, the greatest part of 
them pomiferous or leguminose. 
 
The first 23 Species may be all referr'd to the Pumpions, 
the Coloquintida's, the Cucumbers, the Balsom 
Apples, the Passion Flowers or Maracocks, of all which 
there are great Varieties in both the Indies. 
 
Modira caniram, Tab . 24. pag. 47. contains in its 
Fruit the round flat Stone or Seed, commonly call'd in 
our Shops the Nux Vomica: The Wood of this Tree is 
said to be the True Lignum Colubrinum, a-kin to the Caniram 
of the First Tome of this Work, Fig, 37. pag. 67, 
68. which is the Famous Antidote or Specifick against 
the Bitings of that Indian Serpent, call'd by the Portugueses 
[^p.765^] 
Cobra Copello, whose flat Head is mark'd with the 
Figure of a pair of Spectacles. This Viper or Serpent 
I have seen in Mr. Charlton's excellent Museum. The 
Juice of the Leaves (though poysonous) apply'd externally, 
drives away the Gout call'd Valvida by the 
Indians of Malabar. Breynius in his Second Prodromus 
makes the Caniram, and Modita-Caniram to be Tree 
Night-shades, Solanum arboreum Indicum maximum foliis 
Oenopliæ sive Nepecæ, &c. pag. 92, 93. But whether the 
Nux Vomica is properly the Seed of a Solanum, I leave 
to the more nice Botanists to determine. 
 
Amongst the Leguminose Plants of this 8th Part, the 
Perim-kaku-valli is remarkable, which bears a prodigious 
large Lobe, containing 30 great flat Beans, out of 
each whereof they make entire Purses and Snuff-boxes: 
These Seeds are call'd by some Cor Sancti Thomæ, and 
by others Fabæ purgatrices. They are so common and 
plentiful in the Islands and Continent of India, that 
whole Ships may be loaded with them. 
 
Nai-Coranna is the Phaseolus Surattentis Siliqua~ hirsuta~ 
pungente, or our Couage, whose blistering or pricking is 
soon cur'd by the Herb call'd Thumba. The Pod and 
Seed of this Kidney-bean are esteem'd high provocatives 
to Venery, (perhaps by the same reason that Cantharides 
are) and a successful Medicine in Dropsies. There 
is another Species of this pungent Couage in Malabar 
call'd Kaku-valli, a-kin to, if not the same with the Macouna 
of Brasil, describ'd by Margrave and Piso. 
 
Schanga-Cuspi is the Flos Clitorius of Breynius, the 
Juyce is Vomitive, and the root Purgative. Konni a 
sort of Abrus or Liquorice, whose Bean is commended in 
the Hæmorrhoids. Ana-Mullu, call'd by the Portugueses 
Hasticanto and Fabas Turquesca, remarkable for its many 
Galls or Excrescencies full of Insects, as also for its strong 
sharp Prickles, with which the Indians bore their Ears 
for the hanging of their various Pendents of Gold and 
[^p.766^] 
Precious Stones. Paeru and Katu Paeru, call'd by the 
Chineses Lak Goetum, two most delicious Phaseoli, or 
Kidney-beans, cultivated by the Orientals with extream 
diligence as the best sort of nourishment. Penarvalli 
resembling the Ahovai of Thevet in its Fruit, hanging 
down like Bandaliers, hence call'd Fruita Bandoliera by 
the Portugueses. This Plant is us'd as a powerful Antispasmodick 
by the Indians. The rest of the Herbs in 
this 8th Tome may be referr'd to the Halicacabum, Aristolochia 
Clematitis, and the Phaseolus, of the last of 
which there are many Species in this Volume. 
 
[}Horti Malabarici. 
Pars Nona}] 
 
THE 9th Part gives us the full History of 87 Plants 
with their lively Icons. The first 17 are all Apocynum's, 
some creeping, others scandent, and some arborescent, 
resembling Neriums or Oleanders; of these 
there is a wonderful Variety in Malabar, differing in 
their Lanigerous or Cotton-like Seed Vessels; their milky 
Juyces are generally corrosive and poysonous. 
 
The Todda vaddi of our Author, Tab. 19. is the 
Herba Viva of Acosta, which grows in many Provinces 
of Persia; 'tis esteem'd as a great Traumatick and Lithonthriptick. 
 
Coletta-Veetla, call'd by Dr. Herman Eryngium Zeylanicum 
febrifugum, floribus luteis. The Indians chew 
the Leaves instead of Betel with the Faufel or Arequa, 
and give the Juice in the Apthæ or Thrush. 
 
There are also in this 9th Volume several sorts of 
Trifoliate and Quinquefoliate Sinapistrums, many papilionaceous 
and winged Plants referable to the Ferrum Equinum, 
[^p.767^] 
Astragalus, Onobrychis, to the Æschynomene's, Herba 
Casta, Mimosa's, to the Sensitive and Humble Plants, 
to the Genistella Tinctoria. Of the Crotalaria (call'd so 
from the ratling of the Seed, which the little Indians 
play with) there are 5 or 6 different kinds. The 
rest are a-kin to the Euphrasia, Pulmonaria, Verbascum, 
Persicaria, Digitalis, Hedera terrestris, Lysimachia. Of 
the Sesamum we have two distinct Species in this part, 
as also of the Teucrium, &c. with accurate Descriptions, 
Figures and Uses; for all which the Work it self may 
be consulted. 
 
