[^Philosophical transactions, volume 17, number 206^] 
 
[}PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSACTIONS. 
For the Month of December, 1693.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 1000-1001^] 
 
[^p.1000^] 
[}An Account of 2 Books.}] 
 
[}I. Pharmacopœia Bateana; or, Bate's Dispensatory, 
Translated into English by William 
Salmon, Professor of Physick: Lond. Printed 
for S. Smith and B. Walford, 1694. in 8vo.}] 
 
THE Translator of this Work, in his Preface, 
gives first an Account of the Original, that it is 
a Collection of most excellent Recipe's made by Mr. James 
Shipton, who was the Preparer and Maker up of the 
greatest part of them, tho' their Author was the Famous 
Dr. Bate, whom to name is sufficient, by whose Knowledge 
and Experience this Work was produced. 
 
The first Edition was so well received by the Learned, 
that they were soon presented with a second, with an 
Addition of not only above 100 more of Dr. Bate's Recipe's, 
but also of the Arcana Goddardiana from the Author's 
own Mss. which much advanced the Value of the Book, so 
that at least 6000 of this Latin Edition were sold; which 
was digested in an Alphabetical Method with the Arcana 
Goddardiana at the end thereof, which were only nominal 
without their Preparations: Whereas in this English 
Edition they are at large, and interspersed in their proper 
places: The Method of the Book is likewise altered 
classically, according to the Method and Order of the 
Chapters of the London Dispensatory. 
 
The Work in the Latin being thus approved of by 
the Learned, and especially Physicians induced our Author 
to publish this English Edition, as he says, for its 
more general Use and Entertainment. Adding some 
Preparations never before Printed, as Goddard's Drops, 
Russel's Powder, Emplastrum Febrifugium, with near 50 
more valuable Recipe's out of the Collectanea Chymica, 
[^p.1001^] 
and other Authors, of which he gives a Catalogue both 
of the Ancient and Modern which he has consulted in this 
Undertaking: Which is not a bare Translation, a Comment 
being added upon each particular, especially upon 
all the Chymical Processes which he has searched out from 
their original Fountains, and explicated the Process it 
self, adding as a Supplement a Rationale upon the same, 
and having examin'd the Prescripts of other Authors, he 
shews wherein they chiefly differ from these, and gives 
their Processes at large, if new. 
 
He promises also a second Part, being the Officina Chymica, 
or a Compleat Body of Chymistry, explicating, 
1. The Principles of Natural Bodies. 2. The Fornaces 
and Instruments of Art described with their Figures in 
Copper Plates. 3. The Operations of Chymistry per se. 
4. The Preparations of Metals and Minerals. 5. The 
Preparation of certain Vegetable and Animal Substances. 
 
Next, he obviates some Objections against the Publishing 
this Work in English, and discovering the Secrets 
of the Art to the Vulgar, which he hopes he has made 
some amends for, by divulging several Secrets not generally 
known even by the Learned; amongst which is 
the Prince's Powder, once accounted a great Secret, and 
sold for above 5 l. a Dose; the Preparation whereof is 
Lib. 1. Cap. 9. Sect. 80. Pag. 526. which happens to be 
omitted in the Table. And as a general Answer adds, 
that all particular Interests should be sacrificed to the 
Common Good, which ought to be preferr'd before any 
Private one how dear and valuable soever. And justifies 
himself in this, by the Examples of Hippocrates, Gallen, 
Paracelcus, Celsus and others, who all publisht a System 
of Physick in their own Languages; as likewise from 
the present Usage of the French, who now treat of all 
Subjects in their own Tongue; and as he conceives, 
they are not to be imitated only in their Vices. 
 
