[^Boccone, Paul, Philosophical Transactions, volume 18, number 207^] 
 
[}PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSACTIONS. 
For the Month of January, 1693/4.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 33-37^] 
 
[^p.33^] 
[}An Account of BOOKS. 
 
I. Osservationi Naturali, ove si contengono materie 
Medico-Fisiche, &c. Natural Observations, 
containing several Medico-Physical 
and Botanical Matters, with divers Natural 
Productions, several sorts of Phosphori, Subterraneous 
Fires in Italy, and other Curious 
Subjects, in Familiar Letters, by Signior Paul 
Boccone, M. D. Printed at Bononia in 12 =o=. 
1684.}] 
 
OUR Commerce with the Italian Booksellers having 
been for several Years less constant, it may 
not be amiss to present the Reader with an Account of 
some of the most Curious relating chiefly to Natural 
History or Philosophy. 
 
I shall begin with an Abstract of this Miscellaneous 
Treatise of the Ingenious Boccone, written in Italian, 
and containing Twenty Six several Observations. The 
Author had formerly publisht in French Natural Enquiries 
and Observations on Corall Astroites, &c. at Paris, 
Anno 1671. reprinted afterwards at Amsterdam in 1674. 
and at Oxford his Icons and Descriptions of the rare 
Plants of Sicilia, &c. were Printed Anno 1674. 
 
In the First of the Observations contained in this 
Tract the Author treats of the Effects, Causes, and Preparationn 
of the Noctiluca or Phosphorus Ae~rous, as it was 
made by the Honourable Boyle. The 2d. Obs. is of Subterraneous 
Fires and their Phænomena and Cause from 
the Effervescence of an Acid and Alcali, with an Ethereal 
or Subtile Matter interposed. The 3d. Obs. is of 
[^p.34^] 
Cures and Preservatives from the Plague, where he so 
much extols Vesicatories, which in the Year 1656 preserved 
as many as made use of them, when the Plague 
was very hot at Genoa. And here he Observes by the 
way, that the Root of Colchicum is no other ways a good 
Remedy in this case, than as being a sort of gentle Vesicatory, 
from the Acrious Particles of which it consists, 
and not as an Amulet, as some have supposed. In the 
4th. Obs. He Discourses of the Iron Rings made of the 
Nail (taken out of a Stone-Horse's near Foot before) 
by hammering only without Fire, as good for the Cramp 
and Giddiness, worn on the Ring-Finger, which if of 
any prevalency, he says it is from the Volatile Particles 
it received from the Horse's Hoof, and not as any Charm. 
The 5th. Obs. Contains a Catalogue of Natural Effects 
usually attributed to Sympathy. The 6th. Obs. Treats 
of a Succedaneum to Crabs-Eyes, of the little Chalky 
Stones found on the outsides of the Scait Fish on the Pastinaca 
Marina, &c. The 7th. Obs. Is of several rare Plants, 
and some Empirick Remedies chiefly against Witchcraft. 
The 8th. Obs. Describes a certain Smoaking Liquor 
made of Mercury and Tin. The 9th. Discourses of yellow 
and black Amber found in divers Places of Italy, a 
new Discovery to most. The 10th. Obs. Is of the 
Bed of a certain Insect (not unlike those with several 
little Cellules made by Bees or Flies in hollow Trees, or 
on the Leaves of Plants) found in the midst of an 
Oyster-shell in Mount Marius. The 11th. Obs. Is of several 
Animalcules found in little shelly Tubes. The 
12th. Treats of the Vertues of several Plants for divers 
Diseases of Beasts. The 13th. is of a certain Man that 
after his Wifes Death suckled his Child at his own Breasts, 
Anno 1633. which he confirms by a Credible Testimony. 
The 14th. Obs. Gives us an Account of the 
several Museums or Repositories of Curiosities to be seen 
in Italy. The 15th. Obs. Discovers the Author's Method 
[^p.35^] 
of Preparing the Bononian Stone or Phosphorus: to 
which is subjoyned a Curious Observation communicated 
to him by Joh. Baptista Martelli, concerning Humane 
Urine. The 16th. Obs. Enumerates several Earthy 
Concrets, good for absorbing and correcting Acids. The 
17th. Obs Defends the harmless use of Antimony, much 
esteeming the Panacæa made of crude Antimony with 
fixt Nitre, described by Fr. Lana, in his Prodromus, p. 
126. The 18th. Obs. Discovers the wonderful Texture 
of the Root of the Perfoliata Alpina latif. min. Bauhini, 
made up of many Membranes curiously complicated together; 
by which Signature he supposes it good for Ruptures, 
and the rather because another Species of Perfoliata, 
by Chabreus called Auricula Leporis, has been used 
with Success in that case. The 19th. Obs. is concerning 
a Spring, called Pliny's, and the River by the Inhabitants 
now named Torbidone; which Fountain in April, 
Anno 1680. in a quarter of an hour rise three Inches 
perpendicular, and sunk down again in half and hour's 
time, repeating this Flood and Ebb alternately every 
two hours; which Phænomenon was observed not two 
days, as is usually there thought, but only a few hours 
before a shower of Rain. In the 20th. Obs. He shews 
that the Musky smell coming from some Pismires and 
Flies of Pisa, proceeds only from Sulphureous Particles 
mixt with a Volatile Salt in the Dung of those little 
Animals. In the 21st. He gives four Reasons why some 
Plants are green all the Year. 1. From the abundance 
of Oily Particles, as in Tansey, &c. 2. A more Crass 
and Viscous Substance, as in the Semper-vivum maj. &c. 
3. A very much interwoven texture of the Fibres of 
the Leaves, as in Opuntia, Aloe Americana, &c. 4. A 
more hard and close outward Skin, with which the Leaves 
are covered, as in the Laurus Alexandrina, Box, &c. 
The 22th. Obs. Describes a peculiar sort of Insect, which 
he found on the Leaves of the Myrtus Tarentina at Rome, 
[^p.36^] 
Anno 1678; they were of a grey colour, and a convex 
figure, like the half of an Hempseed, and by the Microscope 
shewed scaley or plated like the Millipedes; being 
rub'd and bruised on a Paper, they gave it a curious 
Purple colour, whence he conjectures they are a-kin to 
the Cochinille Insect, which Paulus Ammannus in Manuduct 
ad Materiam Med. likens to the Cimices, and says, 
that they are found on the Ficus Indica. In the 23d. 
Obs. He adds some other Reasons of the continual greenness 
of some Plants, which, though defended with but a 
thin Skin, yet resist the cold of the Winter, by reason 
of its being of a like texture with that of a Man's, 
which the Microscope discovers, and so is capable of affording 
the same defence; such are Arum, vulg. Brasica, 
&c. But some Plants, though of a solid texture, cannot 
endure the alterations of the Seasons, from the vehemence 
of the South Winds, and want of sufficient 
Moisture in themselves. In the 24th. Obs. Several Prodigious 
Effects of Sulphureous Exhalations in divers 
Parts of Italy, are related. In the 25th. Obs. He adds 
some more thoughts concerning the Sal Ammoniac he 
found on Iron-Scoria thrown up by Ætna in the Year 
1669, to those he had formerly publish'd in Disquisit. 
& Observ. Physicis circa Corallium, &c. Edit. Amst. p. 47. 
Answering a Question proposed by Menzelius about the 
Bononian Stone. Lastly, In the 26th. Obs. He asserts 
the great Vertue of a Mineral Bezoar found in Sicily, 
confirming it with the Cure of an Epidemick Fever in a 
Virgin of Nineteen Years old, when all other Alexipharmicks 
had proved unsuccessful, provoking a considerable 
Sweat, and throwing off the whole Cuticula; and shews 
the reason of this Cure. 
 
The Ingenious Searcher into Nature, not satisfied 
with what he has already presented the Curious, in a 
Letter dated at Palermo, Decemb. 4th, 1693. directed to 
the Secretary of the Royal Society, promises in a short 
[^p.37^] 
time to Publish another Book of 250 new Plants lately 
gathered by himself in Sicily, graved on 120 Copper 
Plates; of which the Title will be, Museo di Fisica e 
di Esperienze, arrichito di Figure di Piante nove, Osservazione, 
Note Medicinali, e Ragionamenti, secondo i Principii 
di Neoterici, disposito in Decade VIII. 
 
In the same Letter he tells us, that the Lychnis Pseudomelanthio 
similis Affricanus glaber angusti-folius, Pauli 
Hermans, is the same with the Lychnis Calyce duriori 
Bocconi Ic. & descr Rar. Plant. The Stachis Betonicæ 
folio subincano P. Herman. is the Horminum Spicatum Lavendulæ 
odore Bocconi: And that these with several other 
rare Plants described by late Authors, are found frequently 
in Sicily. 
 
He likewise Proposes a new Scorbutic Plant, which 
from the Analogy of several external Notes and Characters 
he thinks may prove a very good Succedaneum, 
where the Cochlearia folio subrotundo Casp. Bauhini is less 
plentiful, viz. Thlaspi Leucoii folio latifolium platicarpos 
Siculum, semper virens & semper florens. This Plant having 
a very biting taste, a thick leaf, and smell like the 
Cochlearia, confirms his Conjecture, besides the Generical 
Note of the Seed, the most certain Indication, and 
sure Guide to discover the Qualities of unknown Plants, 
according to Fabius Columna, and Andreas Cæsalpinus. 
This he submits to the Tryal of Physicians; observing 
that they choose out amongst the several Species of the 
Anagallis aquatica that called Anag. aqu. maj. folio subrotundo, 
C. B. Pin. possibly because of the Saline, Nitrous, 
and Acid Volatile Particles found in its Leaves, 
which abound also in Scurvy-grass, and this Sicilian 
Thlaspi. 
 
