[^Philosophical Transactions, volume 18, number 207^] 
 
[}PHILOSOPHICAL 
TRANSACTIONS. 
For the Month of January, 1693/4.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 38-40^] 
 
[^p.38^] 
[}II. Lezioni intorno alla Natura delle Mosette, &c. 
Discourses concerning the Nature of Damps, 
by Leonardus Capuanus, a Member of the 
Academy of the Investigantes. Naples, in 4=to.= 
1683.}] 
 
IN the Preface to this Treatise, the Son, who is the 
Publisher thereof, gives us the History of the Beginning 
and Fate of the Academy of the Investigantes, 
whereof his Father, the Author of this Book, was one, 
in short, thus: Marquess Andreas Concubletti, after the 
Example of the Royal and Florentine Societies, invited 
the Learned Men of Naples to meet on certain days at 
his House to Discourse of and to Cultivate Learning and 
Knowledge; these assumed the Name of Investigantes, 
with an Hound for their Impress, and Lucretius's word, 
Vestigia lustrat, for their Motto. Scarce had this Society 
met four or five times, from which some promised 
themselves great Matters, but it was again broken in 
pieces, by the removal of the chief Person under whose 
Protection they met. It was more than Twenty Years 
before this Piece, containing some of the Lectures made 
in that Assembly, were publish'd in Memory of the being 
of such a Society, and Dedicated to the Queen of 
Sweden. In the first of these the Author enumerates 
the chief Places that formerly, or at this day exhale a 
noxious Vapour, treating largely of the Caves and Lakes 
near Naples, Puzzuoli, Baiæ, and Cumæ, making the 
Lake Avernus differ from these Damps, in that it is mischievous 
only to Birds, whereas the other are so to all 
Creatures. Next, he gives the Opinions of the Old 
and New Philosophers concerning the causes of these 
Damps. In the Second Lecture, supposing Life to consist 
[^p.39^] 
in the due Fermentation of the Blood, and other Juices 
of the Body, he shews how necessary the Air is for the 
continuing of Life, both in Plants and Animals, which 
the former that want Lungs, do yet receive in Vessels 
Analogous thereto; having shewn that a Vivifick 
Spirit or Aura, generated out of the Blood by the Brain, 
is the Principle of Motion in Animals; and that the dilating 
of the Thorax in breathing depends on this Aura 
only, which by the direction of the Soul is sent into the 
Nerves of all the Members, so causing Respiration 
(which he makes a voluntary Action) and accompanies 
the Air, received by the Vessels, to the Blood. In the 
Third Lecture he Examines the several Effects of the 
Caves exhaling these Damps, attempting to explain their 
causes, viz. Lighted Torches are extinguisht by the 
thick and compact Mineral Exhalations which oppose 
the Particles giving or composing Fire, and compress 
them so, that they are forced to give way, and are dissipated. 
That in Animals these Vapours rising by little 
and little out of the Veins of the Earth, and united together 
in these Subterraneous Caverns, forcibly enter the 
Organs of Respiration, and either wholly conquer or 
drive out the Vivifick Aura, or at least contract it, 
and lessen its Power, as to stop the Motion of the Blood, 
and indeed all other Motions, and Life it self. That 
deadly Lakes kill only the Birds that fly over them, by 
reason of the Mineral steams that from the bottom penetrating 
the Water, arise in a thin weakened Exhalation, 
and Birds requiring a more refined and purer Air than 
other Animals, are soonest affected by it. Then he Queries 
upon what Account Avernus, formerly from its 
deadly Quality dedicated to Pluto, is now so altered, as 
to have been hurtless both to Fish and Birds for a long 
time, and subscribes to their Opinion who refer the cause 
to the burning of the adjacent Gaurus, now called Barbarus, 
and suppose that the Mortal Vapours formerly penetrating 
[^p.40^] 
these Waters, are now burnt out. There are 
several Curious and Learned Particulars interspersed in 
this Treatise relating to Natural History, concerning 
several Bodies hidden in the Bowels of the Earth, nearly 
agreeing with those daily in our view. 
 
