en	And if þou take þe mawe of a sowkynge hare, or of a sowkyng calfe and bren it alto powdere, medell þe poudre with þe forsayde pille, þei are mych betture.
en	Therefore it behoveth all Persons, as well Poor as Rich, to be furnish'd with Remedies against that Contagious Disease; and certain Rules, or a Method how to use them:
en	And som hafe it lengere as þei þat be of hye complexioun and be norysched with hote metys and drinkys, and lyuoun yn mych rest, and þey hafe þis purgacyoun euery moneth oones, but when þey ben with childe ore þat þey be of drye complexioun and laboure muche.
en	Also the well annointing with oyle of Nutmegges, or Mace adding a few drops of oyle of Cloues Chymicall doth much comfort, keeping the grieued part extraordinary warme.
en	A barge-man fell into the dock at Queen-hythe, and was drowned.
en	Al bowyd is þe rygge so þat ny3e rounde it is Man wher of is þi pryde ther is none jwys
en	This has always appeared to me to be the case;
en	and about a month ago a Child which had an Involution of the Intestines; which, I believe, the Vulgar means, and calls the Twisting of the Guts.
en	Sethe all togedyr in a galown of whyte wyne.
en	Any of al thes may change a mannys complexion.
en	BY the term rupture, hernia, or descent, is meant a tumor produced by the falling down or protrusion of some part or parts which should naturally be contained in the cavity of the belly.
en	The true causes of the disease, from observations made upon it, both at sea and land.
en	Let ayre be cleare and light, & free from faultes, That come of secret passages and vaults.
en	This suture is accordingly now very rarely practised, and it is probable that it will be soon laid entirely aside.
en	Also yf the sekenes be inveterat, i.e., old, be metasentesyn.
en	Also this medcyne nowe helyth the lepner and the fyer of helle and the grekys fyer and the fyer of Sodom.
en	It distroith y=e= fe all be dene.
en	The thyrde water of seyunte Gyle ys for to distroye many infirmiteys with in a mannys bodye, and hit ys clepid amongyste clerkes and doctoris aqua potabilis and hit ys made in this wyse.
en	At betonye I wyll be gyn~e Y=t= many vertewys hath hy~ w=t= i~ne, Betonye sothy~ yese lechys bedene Yat kepyth ma~nys body clene, Who so betonye on hym bere Fro wykked sperytis it wyll hy~ were.
en	And Care must be taken not to overload the Stomach, or to eat any thing but what is of good Nourishment, and easy to digest, and grateful to the Stomach.
en	and amongst other things, the smell of Sope-Suds, and Lye, in the washing of Clothes, be avoided;
la	Secundus gradus est qua~do habeat vnam portionem frigiditatis et quattuor caliditatis/ tune dicitur esse calida in secundo gradu.
la	Et cum opus fuerit, da jejuno coccliar unum et caveat hiis diebus a lardo et butiro et oleo et ab omnibus salcis.
en	Hoc fiet lassum, si te non illa grauabunt.
en	Dirupisti dn~e vincula mea. tibi sacrificabo hostia~ laudis.
la	Cernis vt ignauum corrumpant otia corpus, Vt capiant vitium ni moueantur aquæ.
la	Ad plagam capitis profundam et si testa rupta fuerit in primis:
la	Deus p~pici~ esto michi pcco~ri D~ne ihu~ xp~e Ego cognosco me grauiter peccasse.
en	id est fluxus
la	Si plaga sit in capite et fracta sit taga, est incurabilis; set si taga sit sana, curabilis est.
en	Contra surditatem:
en	De~ p~pici~ esto m~ pcco~ri
en	inominata
en	puluis
la	Diues inaccessos vbi Solis filia Lucos, &c.
en	herba pulmonis
la	In manus tuas d~ne co~mendo spiritu~ meu~.
la	Lucidus & mundus sit rite habitabilis aer, Infectus neque sit, nec olens fætore cloacæ.
la	Vt ignis exeat de vase pleno aque.
la	Pone in aquam testam oui plenam calcis vivae & sulphuri vivi & ignis exibit.
en	secundum justitiam
en	lactea porta
en	co~tine~tia
en	Puluis sine pari
la	Accipe betam viridem bene tritam et cum succo inunge tempera.
la	Item abrotanum bibat et liberabitur.
la	Explicit tractatus Johannes de barba vel Johannis de Burdegalia editus contra morbum pestilencialem et est morbus epidemialis Anno domini Millesimo trecentesimo nonagesimo.
en	Uxor, Mors, Pietas, Regnum, Benefactaq; Carcer.
la	Item pulegium coctum in aceto ad narez pone calidum, ut odor intret de ipso et fac coronam de eodem et capiti calidam circum appone.
en	qualiter visus oculis adveniat
la	Item ob vertiginem capitis qui pre nimio dolore quasi mentes suas amittunt: Selidonia cum radice sua subfumigetur et infirmus per triduum ipsam herbam circa collum ligatam ferat.
en	Oleum Siriacum
en	Pro surditate.
la	Septem grana juniperi vel ix confortant cerebrum, sensus recuperant, visum donant, pectus mundificant, vocem clarifecant, ventum depellunt, degestionem faciunt, lapidem frangunt, colorem renum curant, contra venenum valent, spiritum letiferum paralisim curant, avalitum dulcorant, eloquenciam dant.
la	qui bene degerit, ingerit, egerit, est homo sanus.
la	Incipit secundus liber uricrisiarum, primum capitulum:
en	Ipse repertorem medicinæ talis & artis, Fulmine Phœbigenam stygias detrusit ad vndas,
la	Hoc facto conditum est.
en	pulmonica mediana.
en	Ad faciendum bonum entret.
la	Item si capud videtur sindi pro dolore: Succum edere mixtum cum oleo et aceto et nares unge pacientis.
en	de comune sapore coitus
en	Fumus terre
la	Valere dicitur fumus terrae in kaluris sub fumigan communibus in aporimatibus; & syropis potus enim datus scabiem pustulas a prurigine inundat Humores superflues inter carnem & cutem desiccat vel ad lepram exposites iuvat
en	Amen Explicit.
Prediction array: [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 0]