en	THe Small Pox are caused of superfluous choller and flegm, the which is mixed with the bloud, and so continuing a certain time it doth encrease so much, that Nature cannot bear it, and so driveth it forth with a great accident of a Fever, the which commonly doth continue four or five daies together, and then cometh forth certain wheals or bladders full of corruption, which within three daies will break and run forth, and many drie.
en	For to make a good entret.
en	He is A vayne of nobill fame;
en	Behind the Lungs passeth Isofagus of whom its spoken before, and there passeth also veins and Arteries, and all these with trachia arteria do make a stoke repleat unto the gullet, with Pannicles, strong Ligaments, and glandulus flesh to fulfill the voyd places.
en	Beneth, when y=e= leuer takis harme.
en	BY the term rupture, hernia, or descent, is meant a tumor produced by the falling down or protrusion of some part or parts which should naturally be contained in the cavity of the belly.
en	The filmes of the braine are very much troubled with this paine, which by reason of their tendernesse, euen the least paines are sharpe and irksome to them.
en	There was some other small matters to be seen, not worth while for me to mention to you.
en	It sufficeth, so that I shew the substance of the thing, and to doe it, that every one may understand it.
en	And thus much of the Breast and Heart, which are under the signes Cancer and Leo.
en	AS sutures of one kind or another are found necessary, not only in every large wound, but in almost every operation of importance, the consideration of this subject seems first to require our attention.
la	In þe name of þe fader and þe sonne and þe holy gost; and write þes names in perchemyn:
en	Also this medcyne nowe helyth the lepner and the fyer of helle and the grekys fyer and the fyer of Sodom.
en	Let ayre be cleare and light, & free from faultes, That come of secret passages and vaults.
en	forgif me if it be wrang, And excuse me sere frend, for the mater was hard & strang.
en	Tak ache seed, lynseed and comyn ana, stampe hem to gedre wel, and 3ef þe seek wyþ hote watur.
en	Drink half a pint of this Morning and Night.
en	And having thus saluted me, presents me the Urine, saying, Sir I desire your opinion of this water, and to tell me (though the sick partie know that too too well already) what the partie ayleth, and what the Disease is;
en	After ix daies þer nature is of o substance jwys
en	So that she neadeth nothynge at all to be auansed and lyfted vp, other with any despitefull rebukes of other craftes, other with some borowed and paynted colours of the rhetoricians, or with the iugglynge castes of amplificacions.
en	THE vulgar sort are so strongly prepossest (by reason of their ignorance) that Physicians can discern (by the Urine) the Disease, the conception, the sexe, the parties age, with many other such absurdities that I feare it will bee an hard matter to dispossesse them of that opinion.
en	de coniunctione spermatis
la	'Quominus nil pacior paciendi me tenet horror':
la	Et cum opus fuerit, da jejuno coccliar unum et caveat hiis diebus a lardo et butiro et oleo et ab omnibus salcis.
la	Adiuro te, infirmitas, per Patrem et Filium et Spiritum Sanctum ne hic remaneas + Absterge, Domine, maculam ab occulo famuli tui + agios + agios + agios + sanctus + sanctus + sanctus + Christus vincit, Christus regnat, Christus imperat.
la	Cur moritur homo dum salgia crescit in orto?
la	De gradibus siccitatis et caliditatis sciendum est.
la	Castor gaudet equis, ouo prognatus codem, Pugnis, quot viuunt capitum, totidem studiorum Millia.
en	Postea inpone broceam usque ad terciam diem.
la	'Deridens alios non inderisus abibit'
en	Oleum Siriacum
la	Item radix plantaginis collo appensa dolorem tollit.
en	vnguentum calidum
en	primi libri regalis disposicionis,
la	Quartus gradus est quando habeat vnam portionem frigiditatis et sexdecem caliditatis/ tu~c dicitur esse calida in quarto gradu.
la	Multi multa sciunt, sed nemo Omnia.
la	ad Aemilianum cæcum consolatio
la	Item plantaginem et ederam in mortario tere et salem et oleum et vinum misse et calidum super capud pone.
en	Herba cruriatica
la	Et modo incipit de condicionibus planetarum septem.
en	Contra dolorem aurium.
la	Prima etas lune calida est et humida.
en	qualitas cordis
la	Deus p~pici~ esto michi pcco~ri D~ne ihu~ xp~e Ego cognosco me grauiter peccasse.
en	Alsa pulmonica
la	et in hora mortis suscipe.
la	Item lacte canis inunge et non cressent pili evulsi.
en	Verbi gratia:
en	Puluis sine pari
en	qualiter visus oculis adveniat
la	Item trifolium in aqua coque et tempora illini.
en	Daucus asininus
en	Hoc fiet lassum, si te non illa grauabunt.
en	Explicit de condicionibus planetarum.
la	'Ebrietas frangit quicquid sapiencia tangit'
la	ossa petrosa
la	Ille sanguis ponatur in saniorem aurem surdi et valebit ut probatum est.
la	Quod caret alterna requie durabile non est.
la	Item seledonia cum melle trita et capiti vulnerato inposita optime sanat.
en	qualiter odoratibus naribus adveniat
en	Pro dolore in dorso vel spina.
en	laus sit tibi p~ amara passione tua.
la	Item pulegium cum oleo coque et cum eo capud et tempera unge.
en	Ad capud purgandum.
la	Deinde commedat paciens de illo pane et nichil bibat nisi fortissimum acetum, set cum jejunare facias per diem vel duos et item acerimo aceto et ab pane siliginis acerino interficietur.
Prediction array: [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 1]