en	And drynk it w=t= water clene,
en	ONE handful of Garden-Tansy, as much Sage, and twice as much Scurvy-grass, steep'd in two quarts of White-wine, or Strong Ale.
en	Sethe all togedyr in a galown of whyte wyne.
en	Behind the Lungs passeth Isofagus of whom its spoken before, and there passeth also veins and Arteries, and all these with trachia arteria do make a stoke repleat unto the gullet, with Pannicles, strong Ligaments, and glandulus flesh to fulfill the voyd places.
en	Aboue y=e= thovme is the make;
en	forgif me if it be wrang, And excuse me sere frend, for the mater was hard & strang.
en	In the left hande for the mylte;
en	And som hafe it lengere as þei þat be of hye complexioun and be norysched with hote metys and drinkys, and lyuoun yn mych rest, and þey hafe þis purgacyoun euery moneth oones, but when þey ben with childe ore þat þey be of drye complexioun and laboure muche.
en	It is an admirable head Purge, also an excellent and safe Medicine for those who are naturally costive or hot bodies.
en	About 18 months ago I dissected a poor Emaciated Creature, that dyed of a Hydrops, out of whom I took about 10 Gallons of Liquor measured:
en	The thyrde water of seyunte Gyle ys for to distroye many infirmiteys with in a mannys bodye, and hit ys clepid amongyste clerkes and doctoris aqua potabilis and hit ys made in this wyse.
en	Alle maner swete þingis, forwhi þei swelliþ, and alle maner notis and accornys of okis.
en	Take green Vitriol calcin'd, Saltpeter, and Sulphur, of each a pound, beat them well together, and keep it for use.
la	In þe name of þe fader and þe sonne and þe holy gost; and write þes names in perchemyn:
en	THe Small Pox are caused of superfluous choller and flegm, the which is mixed with the bloud, and so continuing a certain time it doth encrease so much, that Nature cannot bear it, and so driveth it forth with a great accident of a Fever, the which commonly doth continue four or five daies together, and then cometh forth certain wheals or bladders full of corruption, which within three daies will break and run forth, and many drie.
en	Make apowdyr of betonye rote,
en	I could instance many more, which Authors do wrongfully apply, as instance they attribute angelica, sage, box, and such like to be under the planet Saturn whereas the herbs are all hot and dry especially box who is hot and dry in the fourth degree, both the first plants are without question under the dominion of the Sun, as being of a good smell and taste and are of known virtues to comfort the heart, arteries, and vital spirits and to resist poyson.
en	AS sutures of one kind or another are found necessary, not only in every large wound, but in almost every operation of importance, the consideration of this subject seems first to require our attention.
en	This disease is knowne by the patients complaints and answeres.
en	This was writen fro Mounpileris to Quene Isabel of ynglond, at þe preier of ye kyng of Fraunce, hir broþer.
en	There being not so much as one word concerning Men-midwives mentioned there that we can find, it being the natural propriety of women to be much seeing into that Art: and though nature be not alone sufficient to the perfection of it, yet farther knowledge may be gain'd by a long and diligent practice, and be communicated to others of our own sex.
en	inominata
en	de comune sapore coitus
la	et in hora mortis suscipe.
la	Et cum opus fuerit, da jejuno coccliar unum et caveat hiis diebus a lardo et butiro et oleo et ab omnibus salcis.
la	'Virtutem primam puta esse compescere linguam':
la	Et menta & granum juniperii simul & anfert fetorem anelitus gingivas putridas purgat Juniperus
la	Deus p~pici~ esto michi pcco~ri D~ne ihu~ xp~e Ego cognosco me grauiter peccasse.
en	Fenugrecum
la	Item seledonia cum melle trita et capiti vulnerato inposita optime sanat.
en	De humana natura.
la	De disciplina scolarium
en	Ad capud purgandum.
la	Item radix plantaginis collo appensa dolorem tollit.
en	De~ p~pici~ esto m~ pcco~ri
en	Ex his fiat puluis subliss.
la	qui bene degerit, ingerit, egerit, est homo sanus.
en	Dirupisti dn~e vincula mea. tibi sacrificabo hostia~ laudis.
la	Ille sanguis ponatur in saniorem aurem surdi et valebit ut probatum est.
la	Pro le scaldynge virge quod vocatur apegalle.
en	Incipit Liber Cerebri
en	laus sit tibi p~ amara passione tua.
en	Item oleo facto de nucibus maioribus capud inunge.
la	dies creticus est dies evasicuis ab infirmitate fine ad vitam, fine ad mortem.
la	Item pulegium coctum in aceto ad narez pone calidum, ut odor intret de ipso et fac coronam de eodem et capiti calidam circum appone.
en	Largire claru~ vespere.
la	Cur moritur homo dum salgia crescit in orto?
la	Valere dicitur fumus terrae in kaluris sub fumigan communibus in aporimatibus; & syropis potus enim datus scabiem pustulas a prurigine inundat Humores superflues inter carnem & cutem desiccat vel ad lepram exposites iuvat
la	Ut pili nascantur: Agrimoniam cum lacte caprino pone super locum sine pilis, et nascentur.
la	Ignis ardens super aquam & natans hoc modo fit sicut ignis volans in aere sed cauda debet esse ad longitudine mvnius palme & debet poni super aquam & sine dubio ardebit super aquam & desuper.
en	Vita, Lucrum, Fratres, Parentes, Nati, Valetudo,
la	Pro passione gutturis vel oris.
la	Deinde commedat paciens de illo pane et nichil bibat nisi fortissimum acetum, set cum jejunare facias per diem vel duos et item acerimo aceto et ab pane siliginis acerino interficietur.
la	Multi multa sciunt, sed nemo Omnia.
la	Cernis vt ignauum corrumpant otia corpus, Vt capiant vitium ni moueantur aquæ.
en	Daucus asininus
en	Pro surditate.
en	qualiter odoratibus naribus adveniat
en	puluis
la	Corporis & debes non intermittere curam, Inque cibo potuque modus sit, gymnasiisque.
en	Herba cruriatica
la	Experimentum si taga sit fracta cum nuce:
la	Hoc facto conditum est.
la	Cu~ gratia et priuilegio a rege indulto.
la	Quo dicto et si absens sit, liberabitur.
Prediction array: [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 0, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1]