en	And drynk it w=t= water clene,
en	and about a month ago a Child which had an Involution of the Intestines; which, I believe, the Vulgar means, and calls the Twisting of the Guts.
en	this, Experience has taught to be very dangerous;
en	To guard therefore against such delusions, and to render the unphysical reader better qualified to decide, in an affair of so much importance, as his own health, and life, is the purport of this Essay; where by demonstrating the influence Nature has over many diseases, he may the readier judge of medical assistance in general, and on what plan, it can best be conducted.
en	The filmes of the braine are very much troubled with this paine, which by reason of their tendernesse, euen the least paines are sharpe and irksome to them.
en	If you be sick after meat, use this.
en	Ri3t dere frende Nero as it acordeþ þe significaciouns of wyrchyng for to be considered of þe essencion or beyng of kynde and of þe sekenes so it is nedeful þat þe science or þe connyng of þe þings with which curacioun or helyng schal be giffen for to be perceyued of þe same essencion or beyng.
en	Let ayre be cleare and light, & free from faultes, That come of secret passages and vaults.
en	The Lungs is also divided into five Lobs, or Pellicles viz. three on the right side, and two on the left;
en	ONE handful of Garden-Tansy, as much Sage, and twice as much Scurvy-grass, steep'd in two quarts of White-wine, or Strong Ale.
en	Tak ache seed, lynseed and comyn ana, stampe hem to gedre wel, and 3ef þe seek wyþ hote watur.
en	Also the Gout is a greife in some by way of distention, whereas the body being replete with abundance of humors, the upper and stronger parts put downe their offending fulnesse unto the lower, which descending, the veines, and sinewes, and arteries procure this paine of distention.
en	BY the term rupture, hernia, or descent, is meant a tumor produced by the falling down or protrusion of some part or parts which should naturally be contained in the cavity of the belly.
en	Sethe all togedyr in a galown of whyte wyne.
en	all Filth, and whatever may cause noisom smells, be taken away;
en	Drink half a pint of this Morning and Night.
en	For the same.
en	Al bowyd is þe rygge so þat ny3e rounde it is Man wher of is þi pryde ther is none jwys
la	Many þings bene profitable to þe confeccion of clisteries, if þe lech mi3t haue al redy.
en	It ys made by antepasyn when minucion is made, and anthepasyn ys sayd as wer contrare pascions.
en	Wommen of relegion purge noght because of rysyng o nyght and synggyng and ocupacyon in her seruyse her blod wastyth.
la	Secunda calida et sicca.
en	Pater nr~
en	Largire claru~ vespere.
la	De condicionibus planetarum septem.
la	Aqua vitæ,
la	Item abrotanum bibat et liberabitur.
la	'Quominus nil pacior paciendi me tenet horror':
la	Ad plagam capitis profundam et si testa rupta fuerit in primis:
la	Item contra omnes capitis dolores: Folia edere trita molissime aceto et oleo roseo mixta fronte illiniatur.
la	Item si capud videtur sindi pro dolore: Succum edere mixtum cum oleo et aceto et nares unge pacientis.
la	Septem grana juniperi vel ix confortant cerebrum, sensus recuperant, visum donant, pectus mundificant, vocem clarifecant, ventum depellunt, degestionem faciunt, lapidem frangunt, colorem renum curant, contra venenum valent, spiritum letiferum paralisim curant, avalitum dulcorant, eloquenciam dant.
en	Daucus asininus
la	Item ad vertiginem: Unaquaque die iii. guttas de urina propria super capud infirmi infunde mane cum sit jejunus.
la	Tere agrimoniam et inde fac unum playstrum et appone loco.
en	Oleum Siriacum
la	Cu~ gratia et priuilegio a rege indulto.
la	Multi multa sciunt, sed nemo Omnia.
la	de modo orandi deum
en	edere terrestris
en	Sanguis draconis p. j.
en	Ad capud purgandum.
en	Iacea nigra
la	Secundus gradus est qua~do habeat vnam portionem frigiditatis et quattuor caliditatis/ tune dicitur esse calida in secundo gradu.
en	Ad faciendum bonum entret.
la	Prima etas lune calida est et humida.
la	Postea appone albumen ovi et condiendo simul et postea cola per pannum et fac unum plaistrum cum lino et pone super anteriorem partem capitis.
la	Item sume recentem angwillam et excoriatam, ossa et sanguinem collige in vase mundo.
la	Si plaga sit in capite et fracta sit taga, est incurabilis; set si taga sit sana, curabilis est.
la	Quartus gradus est quando habeat vnam portionem frigiditatis et sexdecem caliditatis/ tu~c dicitur esse calida in quarto gradu.
en	quibus partibus gustabilem praestent
la	Ad sanandum scabiem: Super omniam contra huiusmodi passionem humoris inter cutanei.
la	spiritus sanctus est remedium
la	Diues inaccessos vbi Solis filia Lucos, &c.
la	Explicit tractatus Johannes de barba vel Johannis de Burdegalia editus contra morbum pestilencialem et est morbus epidemialis Anno domini Millesimo trecentesimo nonagesimo.
en	sanguis menstruus
en	nervi petrosi
la	Dimitte nobis debita nra~ sicut & nos dimittim~ debitorib~ nri~s.
la	Item ad capud purgandum et vocem clarificandam et raucas reprimendas voces:
en	Amen Explicit.
la	Et menta & granum juniperii simul & anfert fetorem anelitus gingivas putridas purgat Juniperus
la	Accipe betam viridem bene tritam et cum succo inunge tempera.
la	Pro le scaldynge virge quod vocatur apegalle.
en	Item ad vertigines at capitis dolores:
la	electuarium rosarum
Prediction array: [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1, 0, 1]