en	Now, by considering the peculiarity of the circumstances, situation, and way of life of these people; and by attentively observing, what at any time gives rise to this disease, what is seen to remove it, and what to increase or mitigate its malignity, we shall be able to form a judgment, not only of the principal causes productive of it, but likewise of the subordinate, or those that in a less degree may contribute their influence.
en	THe Small Pox are caused of superfluous choller and flegm, the which is mixed with the bloud, and so continuing a certain time it doth encrease so much, that Nature cannot bear it, and so driveth it forth with a great accident of a Fever, the which commonly doth continue four or five daies together, and then cometh forth certain wheals or bladders full of corruption, which within three daies will break and run forth, and many drie.
en	Make apowdyr of betonye rote,
en	And Care must be taken not to overload the Stomach, or to eat any thing but what is of good Nourishment, and easy to digest, and grateful to the Stomach.
en	The filmes of the braine are very much troubled with this paine, which by reason of their tendernesse, euen the least paines are sharpe and irksome to them.
en	This has always appeared to me to be the case;
en	Sethe all togedyr in a galown of whyte wyne.
en	And som hafe it lengere as þei þat be of hye complexioun and be norysched with hote metys and drinkys, and lyuoun yn mych rest, and þey hafe þis purgacyoun euery moneth oones, but when þey ben with childe ore þat þey be of drye complexioun and laboure muche.
en	It ys made by antepasyn when minucion is made, and anthepasyn ys sayd as wer contrare pascions.
en	Let it sethe tyl halfe be wastyd.
en	Take lynseed &~ letuse, and stampe hem to gedre, and ley to þe stomak, &~ vse þis medicine til þou be hool.
en	So that she neadeth nothynge at all to be auansed and lyfted vp, other with any despitefull rebukes of other craftes, other with some borowed and paynted colours of the rhetoricians, or with the iugglynge castes of amplificacions.
en	The Lungs is also divided into five Lobs, or Pellicles viz. three on the right side, and two on the left;
en	Drink half a pint of this Morning and Night.
en	Take green Vitriol calcin'd, Saltpeter, and Sulphur, of each a pound, beat them well together, and keep it for use.
en	Behind the Lungs passeth Isofagus of whom its spoken before, and there passeth also veins and Arteries, and all these with trachia arteria do make a stoke repleat unto the gullet, with Pannicles, strong Ligaments, and glandulus flesh to fulfill the voyd places.
en	A treatise on clysters.
la	Many þings bene profitable to þe confeccion of clisteries, if þe lech mi3t haue al redy.
en	And thus much of the Breast and Heart, which are under the signes Cancer and Leo.
en	BY the term rupture, hernia, or descent, is meant a tumor produced by the falling down or protrusion of some part or parts which should naturally be contained in the cavity of the belly.
en	It sufficeth, so that I shew the substance of the thing, and to doe it, that every one may understand it.
la	Item folia vervene cum sale trita ossa illisa extrahunt ex qualibet fractura ac vulneri et cum auxungia veteri inposita vulnera sanant et capita mundant.
la	Castor gaudet equis, ouo prognatus codem, Pugnis, quot viuunt capitum, totidem studiorum Millia.
en	noli me tangere.
la	Ad occidendum vermes in cilijs oculorum.
la	Quo dicto et si absens sit, liberabitur.
la	Secundus gradus est qua~do habeat vnam portionem frigiditatis et quattuor caliditatis/ tune dicitur esse calida in secundo gradu.
la	quod qualitas tactabilis toti corpori praestetur
la	Dialthææ
en	Deinde purga pocione.
la	Valere dicitur fumus terrae in kaluris sub fumigan communibus in aporimatibus; & syropis potus enim datus scabiem pustulas a prurigine inundat Humores superflues inter carnem & cutem desiccat vel ad lepram exposites iuvat
la	Quartus gradus est quando habeat vnam portionem frigiditatis et sexdecem caliditatis/ tu~c dicitur esse calida in quarto gradu.
la	Postea appone albumen ovi et condiendo simul et postea cola per pannum et fac unum plaistrum cum lino et pone super anteriorem partem capitis.
la	Item trifolium in aqua coque et tempora illini.
en	et nome~ dm~ inuocabo.
la	Dimitte nobis debita nra~ sicut & nos dimittim~ debitorib~ nri~s.
la	Cu~ gratia et priuilegio a rege indulto.
la	Cur moritur homo dum salgia crescit in orto?
en	Fenugrecum
la	Jus absinthei sume, jus marubii, jus feniculi, centum grana piperis, farine fabarum, anglice 'flour-ben', siccate duo coccliaria despumate mellis, tantum quantum de jure erbarum et coque simul in olla ad spissitudinem mellis.
la	Deinde commedat paciens de illo pane et nichil bibat nisi fortissimum acetum, set cum jejunare facias per diem vel duos et item acerimo aceto et ab pane siliginis acerino interficietur.
la	Multi multa sciunt, sed nemo Omnia.
la	Pilulæ Angelicæ, Aloes Rosata, Pilulæ Tartareæ, Grana Angelica, &c.
la	'Quominus nil pacior paciendi me tenet horror':
la	Postea ungwentum fuscum qualibet die apponatur.
en	Pro carentibus appetitu.
la	et in hora mortis suscipe.
la	Pone in aquam testam oui plenam calcis vivae & sulphuri vivi & ignis exibit.
la	PRimus gradus siccitatis & caliditatis est cum aliqua res habeat vna~ portionem frigiditatis et duas caliditatis/ tunc res illa dicitur esse calida in primo gradu.
la	Parisiensis Explicit primus liber de Secretis secretorum, secundum translacionem Johannis de Caritate.
en	Ad capud purgandum.
en	Dirupisti dn~e vincula mea. tibi sacrificabo hostia~ laudis.
en	De humana natura.
la	Item si capud videtur sindi pro dolore: Succum edere mixtum cum oleo et aceto et nares unge pacientis.
en	Item ad vertigines at capitis dolores:
en	nervi gustabiles
la	qualitas uvulae et organorum respirationis
la	Item ad vertiginem: Unaquaque die iii. guttas de urina propria super capud infirmi infunde mane cum sit jejunus.
la	Postea extrahe et iterum pone in aceto et ita ter coque in furno hoc modo.
en	Hoc fiet lassum, si te non illa grauabunt.
la	Explicit tractatus Johannes de barba vel Johannis de Burdegalia editus contra morbum pestilencialem et est morbus epidemialis Anno domini Millesimo trecentesimo nonagesimo.
en	id est fluxus
la	Ille sanguis ponatur in saniorem aurem surdi et valebit ut probatum est.
en	Incipit Liber Cerebri
en	Amen Explicit.
Prediction array: [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 0]