en	At betonye I wyll be gyn~e Y=t= many vertewys hath hy~ w=t= i~ne, Betonye sothy~ yese lechys bedene Yat kepyth ma~nys body clene, Who so betonye on hym bere Fro wykked sperytis it wyll hy~ were.
en	BY the term rupture, hernia, or descent, is meant a tumor produced by the falling down or protrusion of some part or parts which should naturally be contained in the cavity of the belly.
en	And som hafe it lengere as þei þat be of hye complexioun and be norysched with hote metys and drinkys, and lyuoun yn mych rest, and þey hafe þis purgacyoun euery moneth oones, but when þey ben with childe ore þat þey be of drye complexioun and laboure muche.
en	Therefore it behoveth all Persons, as well Poor as Rich, to be furnish'd with Remedies against that Contagious Disease; and certain Rules, or a Method how to use them:
en	It is an admirable head Purge, also an excellent and safe Medicine for those who are naturally costive or hot bodies.
en	To guard therefore against such delusions, and to render the unphysical reader better qualified to decide, in an affair of so much importance, as his own health, and life, is the purport of this Essay; where by demonstrating the influence Nature has over many diseases, he may the readier judge of medical assistance in general, and on what plan, it can best be conducted.
en	Behind the Lungs passeth Isofagus of whom its spoken before, and there passeth also veins and Arteries, and all these with trachia arteria do make a stoke repleat unto the gullet, with Pannicles, strong Ligaments, and glandulus flesh to fulfill the voyd places.
en	About 18 months ago I dissected a poor Emaciated Creature, that dyed of a Hydrops, out of whom I took about 10 Gallons of Liquor measured:
en	So that she neadeth nothynge at all to be auansed and lyfted vp, other with any despitefull rebukes of other craftes, other with some borowed and paynted colours of the rhetoricians, or with the iugglynge castes of amplificacions.
en	A treatise on clysters.
en	By it passeth all the chilosity of the meat from the stomack to the Liver.
en	Sethe all togedyr in a galown of whyte wyne.
en	THE vulgar sort are so strongly prepossest (by reason of their ignorance) that Physicians can discern (by the Urine) the Disease, the conception, the sexe, the parties age, with many other such absurdities that I feare it will bee an hard matter to dispossesse them of that opinion.
en	Also the well annointing with oyle of Nutmegges, or Mace adding a few drops of oyle of Cloues Chymicall doth much comfort, keeping the grieued part extraordinary warme.
en	Now, by considering the peculiarity of the circumstances, situation, and way of life of these people; and by attentively observing, what at any time gives rise to this disease, what is seen to remove it, and what to increase or mitigate its malignity, we shall be able to form a judgment, not only of the principal causes productive of it, but likewise of the subordinate, or those that in a less degree may contribute their influence.
en	That the Air we breathe in may be wholesome, all Things, that may advance or add to the corruption of it, should diligently be removed; our Houses, and Streets kept clean;
en	3if y=u= of vomites wylt hawe bote,
en	And 3yf þer schulde be norechyd on hem ony frut it is profyt abele þat che purge er che conseyue to make clene and redy þe place þat þe seed sal ly in.
en	There was some other small matters to be seen, not worth while for me to mention to you.
en	It sufficeth, so that I shew the substance of the thing, and to doe it, that every one may understand it.
en	Any of al thes may change a mannys complexion.
en	Ipse repertorem medicinæ talis & artis, Fulmine Phœbigenam stygias detrusit ad vndas,
la	Corporis & debes non intermittere curam, Inque cibo potuque modus sit, gymnasiisque.
la	Septem grana juniperi vel ix confortant cerebrum, sensus recuperant, visum donant, pectus mundificant, vocem clarifecant, ventum depellunt, degestionem faciunt, lapidem frangunt, colorem renum curant, contra venenum valent, spiritum letiferum paralisim curant, avalitum dulcorant, eloquenciam dant.
en	Pro dolore in dorso vel spina.
la	Tere agrimoniam et inde fac unum playstrum et appone loco.
en	Oleum Siriacum
la	Quo dicto et si absens sit, liberabitur.
en	Incipit Liber Cerebri
la	Accipe panem siliginis bene fermentatum et acrem et cum exeat a furno, pone in forti aceto et cum bene biberit de aceto, deinde ponatur in furno et iterum coquatur.
la	Prima etas lune calida est et humida.
la	Et menta & granum juniperii simul & anfert fetorem anelitus gingivas putridas purgat Juniperus
en	DE COMMVNI VINCVLO,
en	puluis
en	et libenter volo me emendare p~ gra~q~ tua~ Miserere mei p~pt~ amara~ passione~ tua~.
la	Item rutam, abrotanum, salgiam, ederam terestrem, trifolium simul tere et distempera cum aqua et bibe.
la	Item lacte canis inunge et non cressent pili evulsi.
la	Carmen ad fluxum sanguinis: 'Domine Deus meus, adiutor sis famulo tuo .N. sicud strinxsisti [\f. 19rb\] fluvium Jordanis quando Christus baptizatus fuit, sic disstringe venas famuli tui .N. plenas sanguine'.
la	'Deridens alios non inderisus abibit'
en	qualiter odoratibus naribus adveniat
en	Iacea nigra
en	nervi odorabiles
la	'Quominus nil pacior paciendi me tenet horror':
la	Labilis vt vita est, infirmum est labile corpus, Sic tua qu firment me_ra, vereremmus.
la	Et modo incipit de condicionibus planetarum septem.
en	De~ p~pici~ esto m~ pcco~ri
en	'vincat opus verbum, minuit iactantia famam';
la	Castor gaudet equis, ouo prognatus codem, Pugnis, quot viuunt capitum, totidem studiorum Millia.
la	Ut pili nascantur: Agrimoniam cum lacte caprino pone super locum sine pilis, et nascentur.
en	lutum
en	qualiter fiat auditus
en	Ex his fiat puluis subliss.
en	et nome~ dm~ inuocabo.
la	Ad plagam capitis profundam et si testa rupta fuerit in primis:
la	Ignis ardens super aquam & natans hoc modo fit sicut ignis volans in aere sed cauda debet esse ad longitudine mvnius palme & debet poni super aquam & sine dubio ardebit super aquam & desuper.
en	Pro ossibus extrahere illesis.
la	Ungwentum fuscum: Resspice celodonie .vi., de mastic .ii., de mitre .ii., cere .ii., olei libri .vi., quod priusquam in coctura ponatur, dissolvatur (prout mundari poterit) et aliquantulum super ignem in aliquo vase locato prout poterit mundari, cum aqua frigida super asspergatur, et sic mundatum confice sic in ollam, oleum inponatur et sic adjungatur lento.
en	Dirupisti dn~e vincula mea. tibi sacrificabo hostia~ laudis.
la	Quarta frigida et sicca.
en	vena concava.
la	Accipe viride lyngnum abietis et cum ardet tolle illud quod fluit in posteriori parte lingni et admisse favum mellis.
la	Item ne pili contrarii nascantur: Ova formicarum, lacrimam edere i. jus, archemeseam equo pondere, hec omnia in vino quiesse et locum vulneris tange et pili nuncquam renascentur.
la	Item centauriam in vino coctam et calidam bibe.
en	id est sanguis
la	De etate lune quando est sicca vel calida.
Prediction array: [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1, 0, 1]