[^Ruscelli, Girolamo: Secretes of Alexis of Piemovnt^] 
 
[}The secretes of the 
reverende maister alexis of piemovnt. Containing excellente 
remedies against diuers diseases, woundes, and other accidents, 
with the manner to make distillations, parfumes, confitures, 
diynges, colours, fusions and meltynges. A worke well 
approued, verye profitable and necessarie for euerye man. 
Newely corrected and amended, and also somewhat 
enlarged in certaine places, whiche wanted in 
the fyrst edition. Translated oute of 
Frenche into English,by 
William Warde.}] 
 
Imprynted at London by Rouland Hall, 
for for Nycolas England, dwellynge in 
Pater Noster rowe. 
 
1562. 
 
[^Extract 1, ff. A1r-D2r^] 
 
[^f.A1r^] 
[}THE SECRETES 
of the reuerent Master Alexis 
of Piemont. 
 
THE FIRST BOKE. 
 
The maner and secrete to conserue a mannes youth, and to holde 
backe old age: and to maintain a man alwayes in health and 
strength, as in the fairest flower of his age. 
 
All this is taken out of the long study, and diuers experiences, that 
a gentle man made by the space of many yeres, in the seruice of 
a noble Lady. Beyng a thing moste certaine, that an old man, of thre 
skore and ten yeres all withered with age, of a very euil complexion, 
and subiect to diuers kindes of diseases, was altred and chaunged, 
as into the age of sixe or eight and twentie yeres.}] 
 
FIrst, men ought to haue allwayes in remembraunce 
and before their eies, that no 
grace, gifte, or commoditie, is to be hoped 
for, but of God onely. In whose greate clemencie 
and goodnesse, the great prophet, 
being assured, and stablished in conscience, 
through his perfect faith, cried, saiyng: Renouabitur, sicut aquilla, 
inuentus mea. And by the same mercye and goodnesse, 
he prolonged, so many yeres, the lyfe of Ezichias: and made 
Moises liue a hundred and .xx. yeres and more, and not 
one of his teethe, at any time mouyng: without any dimnes 
of sight, or ache of heade. He then, as a moste mightye 
creatour, and father of all, hauyng assigned vnto man, the 
terme of his life, & left him to the arbitremente of his owne 
wil: and also hauing geuen vertue, strength & properties 
vnto thynges, & leauyng them to execute ordinarily, their 
mouinges & nature, hath also left power vnto humane creatures, 
to preserue themselues in health, vntill ye terme & 
prefixed ende of our life, bothe vniuersally & particularly. 
 
[^f.A1v^] 
But, for asmoche as we know not how to employe things, 
according as thei are conuenable & mete for our nature, & 
our chaunces or necessities, our disordinate maner of lyfe 
maketh vs to liue the moste parte in diseases, to precipitate 
our yougthe, and to abbreuiate muche our lyfe. Then, hauyng 
our thought and mynde alwayes firme and sure in 
hym, and replete with faith and deuotion, sayinge in the 
name of his infinite goodnesse vnto our selues: Longitudine 
dierum replebo eum, et ostendam illi salutare meum. We wyll 
commence and beginne as inspired with him, and assured 
to helpe our selues, with the vertue and strength of 
thinges, created in the worlde by his diuine power, onely 
for our benefite. And mindyng for a publike profite, to 
communicate some thing, as well searched and found out 
of my selfe by long experience, as lately obtained and gotten 
of a speciall frende of mine whiche also by greate diligence 
and experience, hath by the space of seuen yeres: 
proued this maner of preseruing & stablishing the health 
and yougth, I will first giue you the maner, howe to make 
a miraculous licour, conseruatiue, and restoratiue of the 
naturall heate, and radicall humour, in the whiche twoo 
thinges consisteth principally the health, the vigour, the 
strength, and the lyfe of man. 
 
[}To make a precious licoure, and of inestimable vertue: the whiche 
taken at the mouthe, strengtheneth and augmenteth the naturall 
heate, and radicall humiditie, purifieth the blood, and clenseth 
the stomacke from all superfluitie of humours: and by that meane 
conserueth the health and yougth, and prolongeth the lyfe of him 
that vseth it.}] 
 
IN the moneth of May, at the Sonne rysyng, thou shalt 
take vp in a peuter dishe, or some vessell of glasse, 
being very cleane, the dewe that is fallen vpon Rosemarie, 
Borrage, and other good herbes (Sage onely excepted) 
for it is a thing moste certain, that vnder Sage certain 
venemous beasts are wont to assemble, whiche infect and 
poison it, with their breathe: and though that the leaues, 
[^f.A2r^] 
may by wasshinge be purified and cleansed, from suche exhalatio~ 
and breathing, yet neuerthelesse, if the dewe that 
falleth vpon the leaues, chaunce to take suche venime and 
poison, it is not possible by any meanes to purifie it: and 
therefore you shall not take vp the dewe of Sage. Then, 
after hauynge gathered as moche dewe, as you thinke 
good, haue three glasses ready, of such greatnesse as you 
will, the which glasses you shall fill, somewhat more then 
halfe ful: the one with Suger, and the other wyth Manna, 
and the thirde with Honny, the rest of the glasses remayning 
still emptie and voide: and then fill them all vp, full 
with the sayde dewe, stopping them fast w=t= white waxe, 
and couer them with a linen clothe: Kepe them also in a 
cupborde, or some other place out of the Sonne, as longe 
as nede shal be to vse of it, as we will declare afterward. 
And then take the iuice of quinces, & haue readie in a litle 
glasse, some good Agaric, broken in pieces onely, and not 
in poulder: the which you shall couer, with the said iuice 
of Quinces, in such sorte as you haue done with the Suger, 
and other thinges in the glasses, and kepe it well couered. 
Then, take the iuice of all these thinges followyng, 
of redde Roses or incarnate, of Succory, of Endiue 
of Fumiterie, of Buglosse, of Borage, of Mallowes, of 
Hoppes, of the leaues & flowers of Marche violettes: and 
of eche of these iuices a like quantitie: then mixe them wel 
together. That doen, take a pound or two of Aloes Epaticum 
or as moche as you wil: for the more there is, the better it 
shal be, because that the sayd Aloe beyng so steeped, watered, 
and prepared, as we wil shewe you, is a verye exquisite 
and familier medecine, to kepe in a house, and take of it 
by litle lumpes or pilles, ones in the weeke when a man 
goth to bed: for it kepeth the body from putrifaction, and 
from all euill humours: and is very profitable and good, 
against the ache or paine in the ioyntes, and also for the 
Frenche Pockes, as herafter we will declare orderly. 
 
Take of the sayde Aloe of the best and the freshest, 
suche a quantitie as you will, and put it in a cup of glasse, 
or cleane platter, as is aboue said, and set it in a windowe 
[^f.A2v^] 
or some other place in the Sonne, watringe or steppyng it 
in the said iuices mingled together, giuing it therof as often 
as shalbe sufficient to make it moyst, and to make of it 
as it were a thicke sirop. Then couer the cup with a clene 
linen cloth, or paper, to kepe it onely from the duste, and 
leaue it so in the Sonne. And when it is almoste waxen 
drie, embibe or water it again as before, and let it stand in 
the Sonne. This shall you doe, so often, vntill you haue 
made it soke and drinke vp as moche iuice, as the weight 
of halfe the Aloe onely: that is to say, if the Aloe weyghe 
twoo pound, make it drinke vp at diuers times, one pou~d 
of the said iuices. This doen, take these thinges followyng, 
Turbit halfe and vnce, fine Sinamom, Spica Nardi, 
Fole foote, alias Astrabacca, Squinantum, Carpobalsamum, 
[/1./] 
Xilobalsamum, Lignum Aloes, Bdelliu~, Mirrhe, 
Mastic, of eche of them an vnce, with half an vnce of Safron: 
All these thynges beinge well beaten into pouder, 
and put into a cleane panne, you shall powre into theym, 
so much common water, that it surmount the sayde matters, 
a good hande breadthe, lettyng them boyle with a 
a small fyre, the space of an houre or more. After thys you 
shall straine the sayed decoction, and by litle and litle, water 
from tyme to tyme, the said Aloe in the Sonne, as you 
haue afore doen: and this you shall doe so longe, vntyll the 
Aloe haue dronke vp all the decoction. This doen, take it 
out of the Sonne, and it shal be a precious thing, to keepe 
in your house, as we haue alreadie declared, whiche also 
maintayneth the body in health, kepeth the head cleane, 
and causeth to haue a good colour, and a quicke and liuely 
spirite, to them that vse of it. He that is not of abilitie 
to make this mixtion, in the maner aboue said, may make 
it in this wise. Kepe diligently the saied Aloe, in litle disshes 
of woode, to make this that wee will speake of, here 
followyng. Take Aqua vite, not to fyne, nor of the 
first stillyng, but stilled twise, or thrise at the moste. And 
put in diuers litle violles of glasse (the one bigger then 
the other) all these thynges folowyng, well beaten into 
pouder, at the left those that maye be beaten, puttyng also 
[^f.A3r^] 
in eche of theim, asmoche of the Aqua vite, as shall bee 
three fingers aboue them in the Violles, doyng as hereafter 
foloweth. Take an vnce of smalle fine Perles, well 
wasshed three or fower tymes in cleare water: and then 
beyng dried, and laied in the iuice of Lemons, or Cytro~s, 
well strained, leaue theim so by the space of three daies: 
and so put the saied perles, that thei may be with the said 
iuice, remaining in the glasse, putting to them Rose water, 
three fingers high or aboue, the perles, as is afore me~tioned. 
Then take an vnce of fine read Corall, and put it 
likewise in the Iuice of Lemons or Citrons, vsyng it in 
al poinctes, like as ye did the perles, puttyng it in a glasse 
by it self with Rose water, with fower vnces of blew Vitriol, 
well burned in a close pot. This doen, take the flowers 
& tender toppes of Rosemarie, of Burrage, of Buglosse, 
of Sage, of Selandine, of Isope, of Scabiose, of 
Rue, of sainct Ihons worte, of primroses, together with 
all the tender leaues of the saied herbes: and then stampe 
them slightly, in a morter of stone or wood, and put them 
altogether into one glasse, or into diuers, with as moche 
Aqua vite, as will be aboue them, three or fower fingers, 
as we haue saied of the other thinges, and let them stand 
so in the glasse, wel stopped with waxe or bombase. Take 
after this, halfe an vnce of Saffron, well beaten into pouder, 
and put it in a glasse by it self, with Rose water, after 
the maner of the other thynges: then put to it fower vnces 
of Triacle, with Rose water, in an other glasse, after 
the foresaied maner: and take one vnce of fine Cinamon, 
a quarter of an Vnce of Cloues, an Vnce of Lignum Aloe 
an vnce of Anise seede, and vnce of Fenell seede, halfe an 
vnce of Smallage seede, fiue or sixe vnces of Ieniper berries, 
halfe an vnce of Cheruell seede of, the seede and bark 
of a Cedar tree, of eche of them twoo vnces, halfe an vnce 
of Myrrhe, a quarter of an vnce of Storax or Styrax Liquida, 
an Vnce of Bengewine, an vnce of Sandali, of all 
sortes of Mirabolanes, of eche of the~ three vnces, of Pine 
apple kernelles mondified three vnces, of yelowe Ambre 
whiche the Apoticaries call Carabe, twoo vnces, thre vnces 
[^f.A3v^] 
of white Dittanie grene or drie, the eight parte (or as 
litle as you will) of an vnce of Muske. Let all these thynges 
bee well stamped, and mixed together, and putte in a 
glasse with their Aqua vite, as is saied of the other. You 
must then stoppe well all the saied violles or glasses, or other 
vesselles, with waxe or bombase, and with parechement 
ouer it: and so set them a daie in the Sonne, and the 
night followyng, in the aire abrode. The morowe after, 
take some great vessell of glasse, as thicke as you can get, 
hauyng no couer, bicause you maie alwaies loke into it: 
and thereinto you shall powre faire & softly the Rose water, 
that is in all the glasses, eche of them beyng coloured 
with their substaunce, in soche maner that no part of the 
substaunces, whiche are in the bottome, be mixte with it. 
And after, hauing put al the saied Aqua vite, into the said 
vessell, as is aboue said, ye shal set it in some place, where 
as no Soonne can in any wise come vnto it. But beware 
that the three first glasses, that is to saie, with the Suger, 
the Ma~na, and the Honie in the dewe, ought neuer to be 
set in the Sonne, but must be kept vntil you put it in vre, 
as we wil shewe you. And after that you haue poured the 
Aqua vite, out of all the saied glasses, ye shall put in other 
freshe, and set them well stopped in the Sonne, and in the 
night in the arie, as is afore saied. Then put them all together 
with the other, in the said vessell of glasse, and put 
again in euery violle other Aqua vite, and doe as before: 
and thus must ye doe eight or tenne tymes, or till you see 
that the Aqua vite, will bee no more coloured, or haue taken 
all the substaunce of the drooges, that are in the violles. 
A man can not chaunge the saied Aqua vite to often, 
bicause ye must passe all the saied waters of life, through 
a bath called Balneum Marie, as wee will hereafter declare 
by the whiche ye maie passe, as well a greate quantitie as 
a smalle, and by this meane also, ye shall lose no parte of 
the vertue, or substaunce of the said thinges, hauyng drawen 
and taken it all with the saied Aqua vite, of the whiche 
ye must first haue made prouision, of fower or fiue flagons. 
Then, ye must take all the saied Aqua vites, being 
[^f.A4r^] 
put into one vessell, and mixte theim well together, with 
the three first violles, where the Suger, the Manna, and 
The Ho~nie, with the dewe, is: and then the violle with the 
Agaric, and three vnces of the saied Aloes, prepared and 
watred. After this, put all these thinges in a greate violle 
made of good and thicke glasse, to thende it be not in dau~ger 
of breakyng, in handelyng of it. And to be more assured, 
after ye haue well mixed all together, ye maie deuide 
all the substaunces, into diuers smalle glasses, or violles, 
to passe them through the saied Balneum Marie, at sondry 
times, or at ones in diuers litle fourneises, in this maner. 
You shall set and trimme the violles with strawe 
or Towe, in the bottome of a panne or caudron, wherein 
there must be water, and set the saied caudron vpon a furnaise 
of yearth, and this is called stillyng per Balneum 
Marie: Then set vnto the violle, his Limbecke, with his 
recipient that the substaunce take no winde or vent: then 
you muste make your fire so, that the caudron maie seeth 
or boyle faire and softly, and so shall you distille and make 
come into the recipient, all the Aqua vite, as clere as Cristalle, 
the whiche, bicause it hath been passed through, by 
distillation diuers tymes, will bee better for all thynges 
then the other, and principally to be taken at the mouthe, 
bicause it kepeth parte of the vertue and strengthe of the 
thinges, that it was put into. Also you must vnderstande 
that of the fiue partes onely, of all the substaunce, whiche 
shall be in the violle or violles three or fower partes must 
bee distilled: and the rest to remaine in the bottome of the 
saied violles. This doen, let the ouen or fornaise and the 
caudron coole, and in vndoing the Limbecke, and the recipient, 
ye shall take awaie the violles, kepyng well this 
distilled water for to serue you, as wee haue afore saied: 
and then put all the substaunce, whiche remaineth in the 
said violles not distilled, into some other greate and thick 
violle or glasse, wel couered or bound in wicker or osiers, 
stoppyng it well with waxe or bombase, and aboue that, 
with a double parchemente, and locke it handsomely in 
some place, farre from the Soonne, and out of all heate. 
 
[^f.A4v^] 
This licoure hath not his like in vertue, the whiche take 
euery weke ones or twise, the qua~titie of a sponefull, preserueth 
health, driueth awaie all euill complexions from 
the body, maintaineth and strengthneth so the naturall 
heate, and radicall moistnesse, and vpholdeth a ma~ in his 
strengthe and vigoure of the heade, and of the witte, maketh 
the visage well coloured, the breath swete, the bodie 
yong and lustie, that a ma~ is not able worthely to esteme, 
or iudge the vertue thereof: and lesse able to expresse and 
praise the greate goodnesse of God the creatoure, that giueth 
soche vertue vnto thynges created, and openeth the 
witte and vndertstanding of man to knowe theim, and to 
vse them to the profite and commoditie of his creatures. 
 
Now the maner how to vse it, is this: In the Spryng 
time, ye maie take it alone, or with a litle broth of Veale, 
Pigeons or Chickens, or els in Maluoisie, or some other 
good white wine. In Sommer, ye must take it with water 
of Buglose, or the decoctio~ of Borrage, Buglose, Lettese, 
Succorie, Endiue, or els some of the said herbes: and 
at all tymes it is good to take of it a sponefull, putte into 
halfe a glasse ful of the milke of a woman, new brought a 
bed of a man child, or of a nurrice that giueth a man child 
sucke, or els in Gotes milke. And the qua~titie & oft vsing 
of it must be obserued, accordyng to the persones, & tyme: 
for, vnto a weke and aged man and those that haue been 
lately sicke, or weake of nature, ye muste giue it oftener, 
and a greater qua~titie, then vnto a yong and lustie man. 
Also a man maie take of it oftener, and more in Winter, 
then in Sommer. Now ye must vnderstande, that all the 
flowers, herbes, and other thinges rehersed, are not fou~d 
together in one time and season: wherefore the said licour 
can not be made at one tyme, but beginnyng the firste or 
seconde weeke of Maie, it shall be at the least, the ende of 
September or October, before ye can make an ende: and 
therefore you must gather from time to time, eche thing 
in his season, as you may get them, and put them in some 
vessell, euery one by them selues, or with the other thynges 
that thei ought to be ioyned with, after the maner aboue 
[^f.A5r^] 
saied: and vse to dresse and trimme the said thynges, 
according to the time that you may get them in. And yet 
if you can not furnishe your self, with al soche thinges as 
I haue declared, take those that you can gette, prouided, 
that the reste whiche you can not get, bee not of to greate 
importaunce: but it should be more expedient and sure, to 
haue of all, seyng there is nothyng of any greate coste or 
charge, or to hard to be gotten. Moreouer, if you wil haue 
your matter in good perfection, there resteth but to make 
a naturall dissolutio~ of fine gold: and when you will take 
of it, take twoo partes of the said licoure, & one part of the 
dissolutio~ of the gold, whiche we will teache you to make 
hereafter: although that in this presente booke, wee will 
make no mention of the perfitest maner of making soche 
a dissolution, whiche we haue gotten by great studie, and 
obseruation, and by often experie~ce of the thyng, that we 
will doe, as well for not being verie possible to shewe it by 
writyng, without makyng demonstration thereof: as for 
other causes, but we wil put here some other maners and 
waies, bothe good & true, and of soche importaunce, that 
peraduenture better hath not vnto this daie, been found. 
 
[}A potion or drinke, to be vsed in steade of Sirop, good for men of 
al ages and complexio~s, that will be purged: the whiche, taken 
what daie you will, driueth awaie the euill humours, withoute 
mouyng or troubling the good, or doing any hurte: And is also very 
good for the greate Pockes, and all infirmities, as well of the stomacke, 
as of the heade: & is like wise profitable for them that be 
in health, to take twise in the yere, in steade of an ordinary purgation, 
that is to saie, in the Spryng time, and in September.}] 
 
Take Mallowes, and boile them in water, vntyll 
they bee softe, that they can almoste bee no softer: 
then straine the decoction, and take pouder of 
Sene, and of y=e= barke of Lignum sanctum, called Guaiac, 
of eche of them seuen vnces, well beaten to pouder, and 
clensed or sifted, Salt Armoniac twoo dragmes: & in the 
meane time, set the decoction of the Mallowes vpon y=e= fire, 
with halfe a pound of Honie, and let the saied decoction 
[^f.A5v^] 
be aboute twoo common glasses in quantitie, whereunto 
ye must put halfe a pounde of tartell, and then let it 
boyle fayre and softly, the space of halfe an houre, skimmyng 
well the honnie. After this, ye must straine it, and 
put it hotte as it is into a potte by litle and litle, where 
the foresayed thynges be, that is to saie, the Sene, the 
Guaiac, and Armoniac salte. Now in powryng, you must 
alwayes sturre the sayed thinges with a Spone, or some 
other thyng. And then immediatly ye must couer the 
pot with hys couer, in shuttyng it close, and closyng 
it vp with claye, round aboute the sides, so that nothyng 
maye breath or respire out, and so set the pot vpon the 
fire, by the space of twoo Pater nosters, and no more. 
Then take it from the fyre, and wrap it in a pillowe of 
fethers, well warmed by the fyre, or in a tubbe or barrell, 
full of branne well heated, or in some clothe very 
hote, to thende it maie be well nurrished and kept warme 
and leaue it so by the space of ten or twelue houres. Then 
afterward ye must open the pot, and straine the saied substaunce, 
through a strainer or thicke canuesse, & you must 
haue ready before, halfe a glasse of white wine, and in the 
same three or fower vnces of Rubarbe, cut in smalle pieces, 
and that the Rubarbe haue been in it, the space of a 
daie or twoo before: the whiche wine ye shall powre into 
the decoction of the said thinges, as sone as it is strained, 
as is aforesaied: and put thereunto an vnce of Aloe Epaticum, 
prepared and ordered, as is aboue saied: or at the lest 
as the Apoticaries doe sell it, and call it Aloe Lotum, with 
the iuice of Roses, or other wise, the whiche ye muste put 
in, well beaten to pouder, with halfe an vnce of Cassia Lignea, 
and kepe all this co~position in a violle, or other vessell 
well couered. The maner of receiuyng it, is to heate 
it a litle at the breake of the daie, and to take halfe a glasse 
ful or more of it, accordyng to the exigent of the sicknesse, 
and the qualitie of the persone, & hauing taken it, he must 
kepe his bedde a while, and slepe, if it be possible: and the~ 
rise and walke aboute the house, or els where at his pleasure. 
Neuerthelesse, it were better that he kept the house, 
[^f.A6r^] 
and specially bicause of the mouyng of the body. And this 
maie he vse .v .vii .ix. or .xj. morninges: for the pluralitie 
can not hurte. Also this potion or drinke, is of soche exquisite 
bou~tie for mannes body, that we nede to vse none 
other maner of purgation, or medicine. 
 
[}A verie easie and good remedie, for to heale all maner of Pockes, 
whiche is made with litle cost, & requireth not that a manne kepe 
his bedde or his house, but maie vse it going in the streetes: And 
it is also verie good for all sortes of grief in the iointes, in what part 
of the bodie so euer it be.}] 
 
TAKE .iij. poundes of rawe Honnie, and a pound 
of the Iuice of the flowers of an herbe called Primula 
veris, whiche hath his leafe somewhat long, fatt, or full 
of carnosite, & somewhat white, his flower Yelowe, fassioned 
like a belle: and for lacke of the flowers, the Iuice of 
the herbe: then take halfe a pounde of Lignum Sanctum, beaten 
into pouder, and hauing let it boile in common water, 
a good while, ye must straine it, and put the said iuice 
with the saied Honnie, into a pot, puttyng to it three vnces 
of Aloe epaticum, ordered as is afore said, or as the Apoticaries 
sell it, wasshed with the Iuice of Roses. And 
then, vpon the saied Aloe beaten to pouder, ye must poure 
as moche of the saied water, wherein the Guaiacum hath 
boiled, as wyll mounte in the potte fower or fiue fingers 
high: then adde thereunto twoo vnces of the Vineigre of 
[/2./] 
Squilla, and lette it boile faire and softly, by the space of 
halfe an houre, or a litle more, skummyng well alwaies 
the Honnie, and when it hath almoste boiled inough, put 
vnto it three vnces of fine Sinamo~, well beaten into pouder, 
set it again a while vpon the fire: then, hauyng taken 
it of, and setten it vp to keepe, ye muste heate of it in the 
morning a glasse full: and after you haue dronken it, eate 
a litle piece of a Quince, or of a fruite called in Latine 
Sorbum, in Frenche Corme, or grene Grapes, Pome Granade, 
or of some other bindyng thyng, what ye will: and 
keepe your bedde, sleapyng as long as you will: and also 
[^f.A6v^] 
after you be risen, and haue doen your businesse, yea, out 
of the house, if it come so to passe. But (as we haue said) 
to keepe your bedde or house, is alwaies the best for you, 
when ye vse Phisicke. And this potion or drinke, muste 
you take from daie to daie: but if the paine be not to vehement, 
it shall suffice being taken twise in the weeke: and 
this doyng, you shall see a wonderfull operation, and ye 
shall not nede to vse Lignum sanctu~, nor any other thing. 
This remedy onely is sufficiente for all menne, and hath 
been proued and experimented diuers tymes, and vpon 
diuers persons. 
 
[}To dissolue and reducte gold into a potable licoure, whiche conserueth 
the youth and health of a manne, as well taken by it selfe, as 
mingled with the foresaied licoure, spoken of in the second Chapiter 
of this presente booke, & will heale euery disease that is thought 
vncurable, in the space of seuen daies at the furthest.}] 
 
TAke a glasse full of the Iuice of Limons, and heate 
it ouer the fyre, vntill it beginne almost to seeth: 
then take it from the fyre, and strain it three or 
fower times through a Linnen clothe, and afterwarde 
distille it through a long gutter of Felte: then take 
twoo pounde of rawe Honnie, and sette it on the fire in a 
pot, mixyng with the said Iuice of Lemons, and adding 
thereunto halfe a pounde of common salte, that is clene, 
white and well beaten: mixe well all together, and let it 
seeth faire and softly, vntill there remaine no more skum 
of the Honnie. Then take that that remaineth in the pot, & 
distill it in a vrinall of glasse, makyng but a smalle fire at 
the beginning, encreasyng it by litle and litle, and at the 
ende greate and sharpe: and whe~ all is cooled again, open 
the violle, and powre the water out of the recipient, into 
an other violle, stoppyng it sure for takyng vente. This 
dooen, ye muste breake the vrinall of glasse, and take the 
lies that shal remain in the bottome, and put it into a couered 
pot, the whiche pot you muste couer ouer and ouer 
with claie or morter, to the entente it maie the better endure 
[^f.A7r^] 
the fire: and after put it into some fournesse, where 
glasse is made, or into a potters fournesse or lyme kill, or 
some other semblable thing, so that it maye be in a greate 
fire, by the space of two or three daies. And after that the 
saied substaunce shal be taken out again, stampe it well, 
and for a pounde of the same, put in foure vnces of Manna, 
and two vnces of Suger Candie, and if there be more 
or lesse of the substaunce, ye must put in a good proportio~ 
of the Manna and Suger Candie, in equall quantitie with 
the substaunce. Then put al into an other vrinall of good 
glasse, well claied, and powre vpon it the water, whiche 
you kept before in the violle, putting thereunto twise as 
much fine Aqua vite, as was in the saied first violle. And 
hauynge trimmed and set the vrinall of Glasse vpon the 
fournesse, with his limbecke, and his recipient, and well 
closyng all the iointes with clay or morter, ye shall make 
the matter distill faire and softly, with a smalle fyre: for it 
will easely distill: & when it will distill no more, augment 
your fire, so that ye maye distille all that is possible. But 
you must leaue the water, with the violle, vpon the fournesse, 
without mouing it any whit, vntill you will put it in experience. 
This done, take fine golde foile, that is of xxiiij. 
Carates well fined with some Cyment or with Antimonium: 
and take of ye saide foile, what quantitie you will, in 
a cup of glasse in minglyng them well wt Honnie, or wt Iulep roset 
or Violet, as men are wont to dresse it to write withall, 
whereof we will put parfitely all the maners and fashions, 
in the fift booke of this volume. And after you haue 
well vnmixed, and purged it from the sayde Honnye with 
whotte water, as shall be saide in the same place, you shall 
put them to stil in a violle of glasse: and than hauing taken 
of the recipient, put the sayde water into a long necked 
glasse well stopped with white waxe, hauyng fyrste 
put vpon the saide gold, whiche is in the violle, the height 
of fiue fingers of the saide water: and then set to the limbeck 
with his recipie~t, stoppyng well with claye the ioyntes, 
makyng the water which shall be vpon the sayd golde, 
to distill with a smale fyre, not augmentyng it at the end, 
[^f.A7v^] 
to make all to distill: and care not if the gold remain some 
what moist. This done, take away the limbecke from the 
Violle, without takyng awaie or vntiyng the recipiente 
from the said Limbeck, not sturring the water out of the 
recipient. But take some man to helpe you, who, whyles 
you take the limbeck of from the Vrinall, shall powre vpon 
the said golde the same water that you kept in the violle, 
stopped with white waxe: & let him put in as muche 
as at the first time, that is to saye, the heyght of fyue fyngers: 
then immediatly set the Limbecke vpon the Vrinall 
again, closing wel with clay the ioyntes or sides a newe, 
making the distillation as afore, and so consequently vntill 
all the water of the said violle, bee distilled vpon the 
saied golde. And finally, ye shal powre the gold out of the 
violle into a glasse, somewhat great to holde the water 
that you haue distilled into it at diuers times, as we haue 
said in the Chapter before: then set to the Limbecke with 
his recipient, and see that by the space of .xv. or .xx. daies, 
the water of the bathe be hotte, without seethyng, so that 
yet nothing maye distill. Then after make the water to 
seeth, and distille all that may be distilled: and in the bottome 
of the violle, the golde will remaine dissolued into a 
licour moste precious, whiche you must keepe in some litle 
glasse well stopped. And if you will haue it yet fyner, 
you may make it without taking it out of the said glasse, 
in puttyng it again into the said water, and distilling it afreshe, 
not keping (for all that) the water from seetthyng, 
as you did before, but make it seeth and distille all at ones 
and this distilling may you reiterate as ofte~ as you will: 
for the oftener it is distilled, the better it is. Thus doing 
ye shall haue a right, naturall and perfite potable golde, 
whereof somewhat taken alone, euerye monethe ones or 
twise, or at the least with the saide licoure, whereof we 
haue spoken in the seconde Chapiter of this booke: is verie 
excellent to preserue a mannes youth and health, and 
to heale in fewe dayes any disease rooted in a manne, and 
thought incurable. The saied golde will be also good and 
profitable, for diuers other operations & effectes: as good 
[^f.A8r^] 
wittes & diligent searchers of the secretes of nature, may 
easely iudge. In this same maner (obseruyng all thynges 
diligently) a man may make of siluer beaten into foile, to 
haue likewise a potable suluer, of a merueylous vertue, 
yet not soche as the golde: And I assure you, that I sawe 
aboue .v. yeres ago, an Englishe man haue a water made 
of siluer, peraduenture trimmed & dressed after an other 
sort, accordyng to diuers differe~t waies, te~ding (notwithstanding) 
all to one ende, with the which water the sayde 
Englishe man did many thinges, estemed as miraculous, 
in healing many painfull diseases and infirmities of ma~. 
 
[}To heale an excrescens or growing vp of the fleshe, within the yarde 
of a man, albeit it were rooted in of a long tyme.}] 
 
TAKE the lees of Honnye distilled, or, yf you can not 
haue suche, take Honnye, and burne it in a potte: 
and putte the blacke lees that shal remayne in the 
bottome, into another potte, or into an yron panne, and 
sette it to burne or calcine in a vernishers fournesse, or 
suche other, in a great fyre, by the space of three or foure 
dayes, wherof ye shall haue a substaunce as yelowe as 
Golde, the whiche will bee excellent, to laye vpon all maner 
of woundes: for it eateth awaye the euyll fleshe, 
mondifieth and healeth the good, wythoute payne or 
griefe, whiche maketh to bee muche better for all woundes, 
then is the Precipitatum, that the Chyrurgens commonly 
vse. Take then of thys Pouder an vnce, of Dogges 
turdes twoo vnces, lees of wyne halfe a Dragme, 
which is the halfe of the eight part of an vnce, fine suger a 
dragme, roche Alume burned a dragme, of Tutia a dragme 
let all these thinges be well beaten to pouder, and sifted 
through a fine seeue & then take grene leaues of an Oliue 
tree, and beate them in a morter of stone, moisting them a 
litle with wyte wyne, the whiche being well stamped, ye 
must strain in a presse, or betwene two trenchers for to get 
out the iuice, and putte to it as muche plantayne iuice: 
then set it to the fire in a litle potte, and afterward put in 
it by litle and litle the said pouder, mingling altogether 
[^f.A8v^] 
continually: And last of al you muste adde vnto it, a lytle 
grene waxe, and a very lytle Honye roset, that it maye be 
a liquide oyntemente, and so keepe it. This oyntemente 
is verye precious, to consume all maner of excrescence, or 
growing vp of fleshe, in anye tender place of the bodye, as 
in the secrete members or in the nose: whereunto a man 
dare not applicque any strong or smartyng thyng. Nowe 
when ye muste vse it for the carnositie within a mannes 
yarde, you shal take firste of all a Squirte, and fill it wyth 
whyte wine wherein drie Roses, and plantaine leaues 
haue bene sodden and boiled wherewith also ye shall mixe 
a litle womans milke, or the milke of a Gote: then washe 
well the mannes yarde within, with this Squirte: After 
this take a litle waxe candell somwhat long, and of soche 
greatnesse as it maye enter into hys yarde, at the poyncte 
whereof ye shall put a lytle of the sayde oyntemente, warming 
it a lytle and thrust it as farre into his yarde as you 
can vntil you feele the Carnositie, and leaue the said ointmente 
within the yarde a lytle whyle: then take it out again, 
and doe thus mornynge and euenynge, liyng a bedde 
his bealie vpward, when ye shall put in the candell wyth 
the oyntment, and you shall see a merueylous effecte: for 
it shall heale hym throughly in fewe dayes, without anye 
daunger. 
 
[}To heale all maner of inflamation and euil disposition of the 
lyuer, and by this same secrete haue been healed certain persones, which 
had their faces as it were Leparie, greate swollen legges, theyr handes 
inflamed, and rough within syde}] 
 
TAke flower, or Amilum made of Barley, whiche ye 
shall easely fynde at the Apoticaryes, & seeth it halfe 
an houre in common water: then strayne it, and put 
it in another newe potte that is cleane and neatte, puttynge 
to it a fewe Mallowes, Succorye, Hoppes, Endiue, 
and Burrage: and seeth all these together, vntyll 
it bee dissolued, and adde to it an vnce of Sandall: and 
then strayne all, and take in a lynnen clothe, as muche 
Cassia extracta, as wyll goe in to twoo Nuttes, and put it 
[^f.B1r^] 
within the saide linen clothe with the Cassia, whyle the 
water be hote, pressinge it so harde betwene your twoo 
fingers, that all the substaunce of it, maye goe into the 
saide water: then putte it to the Suger or Penides, as much 
as you wyll. Of this drinke, whiche is of a verye amiable 
sauoure, you muste take from daye to daye, a lytle 
glasse full in the mornyng, lying in your bedde, with your 
brest vpwarde: then laying some linnen cloth vpon your 
stomacke slepe if you can, and take of it also after you be 
vp, and haue dooen your necessaries, the whiche doynge 
you shall finde your selfe very well healed in fewe dayes. 
But here note that this muste be done in Sommer, and 
not in Winter: and he that hath his stomacke very colde, 
maye weare before his brest, some pece of Scarlat, or other 
clothe, and sometyme annoynte his stomacke with 
an oyle, made for the weakenes of it, the perfect composition 
whereof, we will put hereafter. 
 
[}To heale the Emorhodes or Piles in a nighte, a rare 
secret and very excellent.}] 
 
TAKE the leaues of grene Elder, and boyle them in 
water, vntyll they bee dissolued: Than take a piece 
of redde clothe, a lytle bigger then the palme of your 
hande, and stretche it a long vpon your palme. Nowe, 
must the pacient bee in his bedde with his bealye downewarde, 
because ye must laye the sayde leaues vpon the Emorhodes, 
hot as thei were taken out of the caudron, hauyng 
layed vpon them before, a litle oyle Oliue. Then 
take another litle piece of clothe, with other leaues and 
take awaye the fyrst, continuynge thus, and chaungyng 
alwayes the leaues (if not all the nighte) at the least as 
long as ye maye: and also in the meane tyme, ye muste let 
the pacient slepe as muche as he will, who, in the mornyng 
shal finde him self as lustie, and as well disposed as 
if he had neuer had the disease. 
 
[}A synguler ointment, whiche healeth all burnynges wyth fyre, not 
leauyng any cicatrice or skarre where it hath bene.}] 
 
[^f.B1v^] 
TAke the whyte of two Egges, two vnces of Tutia Alexandrina, 
two vnces of quicke Lyme wasshed in nyne 
waters, an Vnce of newe Waxe, with as much Oyle 
Rosatte, as shall suffice, and make thereof and oyntment, 
whiche ye shall fynde very good, for this that we haue spoken 
of. 
 
[}A perfect and proued remedye for them that be weake of 
stomacke, and can not kepe theyr meate, wythout vomityng 
it vp agayne.}] 
 
HAuyng taken two pounde of redde Waxe, and made 
prouision of a dishefull of Oyle Olyue, take pieces 
of Alablaster and heate them in the fyre, and then 
quenche them in the sayde Oyle: heate them againe, and 
quenche them as before: and so three or foure tymes. 
This doen beate the Alablaster to pouder, and mixe it 
with the saide waxe and Oyle, wherein it was quenched: 
then put all to distill through a croke necked violle 
lyke a Bagge pype, clayed rounde aboute, sauinge the 
bottome, whiche distillers beyonde sea doe vse, the 
Frenche men call Retorte or cornue, and make suche a fyre, 
as the Oyle maye distille, with all the rest that possible 
maye bee distilled: and then keepe it, puttynge to it halfe 
an vnce of Myrrhe, beaten in pouder. And when you will 
put it in effecte, ye muste take a litle panne of brasse or 
Iron: and hauing the toppes and leaues of Wormewood 
whiche is a bitter herbe, putte them in the saiyde Oyle, 
and seeth or frie all together: than take it whotte as it is, 
and rubbe the patientes brest with it, vp to the throte, doing 
thus alwayes at night, when he is in his bedde, and 
it shall make his stomacke stronge. He must vse in his 
meate, as muche Rosemary as he can, be it rawe or otherwise, 
and speciallye in his drinke. He muste vse lykewise 
the moste excellente Aqua vite, whereof we will speake 
hereafter. 
[}An excellente remedye, wherewith a woman of .xxxvi. yeres 
was healed, that had so marred her stomacke, that in the space of two 
yeres and an halfe, she neuer naturally purged douneward: and 
as sone as she had eaten any thyng, she vomited it vp agayne, so 
that she became yelowe, and as drye as a stycke.}] 
 
[^f.B2r^] 
A Monke, of the order of saincte Augustine, a man of 
great knowledge, and full of merueylous secretes, 
healed the sayd woman with this remedy folowing: 
and in the space of eyghtene dayes, made her as whole 
and sounde, faire and wel coloured, as she was before 
her sicknesse. 
 First of all, he had made a litle ouen, like vnto suche 
as men bake breade in, the which he did heate with rosemarie: 
and the saide Ouen was in fashion like a Bakers 
Ouen, wherein he baked litle pretie loaues and cakes, 
which he gaue her alone, without any other thing to eate, 
eight or ten daies, and gaue her whyte wyne to drynke 
withoute water. He gaue her also gentle meates, with 
Sinamom and Suger: and euery mornyng gaue her in 
a glasse aboute a finger heighte of water, made after this 
maner folowinge. Aqua vite halfe a glasse full, wherin 
he putte the yelowe pille of halfe a Citron, or Orenge 
cutte in pfieces, the flowers of Rosemary a handfull, fine 
Sinamom an vnce, Safron a quarter of a dragme, Bengewin 
a dragme, with a litle Muske: and made her to be 
washed ouer and ouer, or bathed in the decoction of Rosemariye, 
and other sweete Herbes, once a weeke: and euery 
nighte annoynted her breaste with the sayde Oyle, distilled 
and sodden wyth Wormewodde. And aboue al thinges, 
commaunded her to keepe a Cushen vpon her stomacke, 
in the nighte time, and caused her to lye longe a 
bedde in the morning: he made her also eate the confectio~ 
of Diambre. And in this wise he made her in xviii.dayes 
as whole and as faire, as she was before, whome no Phisicion 
coulde euer fynde remedye for, during all the tyme 
of her sickness. 
 
[}Three remedies verie good against the wormes in lytle children.}] 
 
TAKE the flower of Wheate well boulted, as muche 
as will lye vpon three crounes of golde, and put it 
in a glasse, and powre vnto it well water, or fountain 
water, so muche as will steepe the sayde flower, and 
make it loke lyke as it were milke, and no thinner: then 
giue the childe drinke of it, and you shall see that with 
 
[^f.B2v^] 
his siege, the Wormes will come forthe starke deade, 
whiche is a very good remedy. 
 
[}The seconde remedye.}] 
 
TAke a Citron or Orenge, and make in him a hoole, 
as bigge as a penny, by the whiche hole with wringing, 
ye shall make the licour come out: and hauinge 
made a hole into the middle and moore, ye shall powre into 
it oyle of Baye tree or leaues, the iuice of Rue, the 
iuice of Wormewood, Triacle, flower of a kynde of 
poulse corne, called Lupinum or Lupinus in Latine, hauynge 
one stalke, the leafe in fiue diuisions, the codde creuised 
aboute, hauyng in it fyue or syxe graynes, harde, broade, 
and redde. They bee common in Fraunce and Italy, but 
here vnneth knowen. And seeth all this a whyle: and 
then powre it in a dishe, and annoynt therewith the childes 
nauell, stomacke, temples, nosetrelles, and the vttermost 
parte of hys poulses, and ye shall immediatly see a wonderfull 
operation. 
 
[}The thyrde remedye.}] 
 
FOr chyldren that be so lytle, that a man can not minister 
the medecine in at the mouth: you shall take verye 
good Aqua vitae, wherewith ye shall washe or 
weate the stomacke or the brest of the chylde: then pouder 
ouer the sayde places, with the pouder of fyne Myrrhe 
and laye the chylde downe a lytle whyle, with hys brest 
vpwarde, and you shal see incontinent, that wyth the 
dunge of the chylde, the worme shall come out dead. 
 
[}To heale children of the Lunatike disease, whiche happeneth vnto 
them, by reason of a worme wyth twoo heades, that breedeth 
in theyr bodyes, the whiche worme, commynge vnto the 
hart, causeth them to haue suche a passion, that often tymes it 
kylleth theim.}] 
 
[^f.B3r^] 
TAKE the tender stalkes of a Wildyng tree, and 
drie them in the shadowe: then stampe them wel, 
and sifte theim, and take of the saied pouder, and 
the roote of Gentian, and of long Peonie, of eche of them 
a quarter of an vnce, and halfe a quarter of an vnce of 
Mirrhe. All these thinges well beaten in pouder, ye 
shall put in a disshe, or in some other vessell, as you 
thinke good: moist them with a litle water: then take 
of it wyth your twoo fyngers, and weate the lyppes 
and the mouthe of the child. Doe this three or fower times, 
and you shall see the worme come out deade with 
his siege. This haue I often tymes seen by experience, 
and many children, whiche, for lacke of good help, haue 
died with soche maner of Wormes, the whiche afterwarde 
beyng opened, menne haue founde the Worme 
stickyng vpon their hartes. And for the same accidente 
the other remedies, whiche we haue written before, against 
the Wormes, be also very good. 
 
[}A remedie for the fallyng sickenesse.}] 
 
TAKE Germander gathered in May, when it is in 
blosome: drie it in the shadowe, and make it in pouder. 
And when you will vse it, take the yelke of an 
Egge or twaine, and sturryng or breakyng it with a 
sponefull of the saied pouder: then seeth it, and giue it 
to the paciente to eate. Dooe this, Morning and Euening, 
eight daies lo~g: but all this while he must abstaine 
from wine, and, & carnall company of women, from all 
sorte of poulse, as Beanes, Peason, Fitches, Tares, 
and soche other, from Salades, salte Fleshe, and from 
all other thinges, whiche are of a harde concoction or digestion. 
A verie goodly and notable secrete. 
 
[}To make oile of Brimstone, to heale all maner of Cankers diseases 
or sores, whiche come of a putrified humoure, and renne 
continually, commonly called Fistules, and also to heale olde 
and inueterate woundes.}] 
 
[^f.B3v^] 
TAKE Brimstone beaten in pouder, and hauyng 
steeped and mollified it, with common oile, put it 
in a Gourde, apte to still out of, so that it bee brought 
as it were like paste, the whiche you shal distil through 
the mouthe of the said Gourde: and the oile that shall 
drop out, ye shall put into a violle, fillyng it halfe full: & 
afterwarde fill vp the said violle with Plantan water, 
and with the Iuice of Cardus benedictus, and so let it boile 
a pretie while. Then washe the wounde with Aqua vite, 
or white wine, and laie to it of the said oile, and in fewe 
daies ye shall heale it parfitly. 
 
[}To take awaie the venim or poison from a wounde, made by 
some poysoned weapon or arrowe.}] 
 
TAke Assa Fetida, and a gomme called Galbanum, of eche 
of them an vnce, and steepe them in Vinaigre, the 
space of a night, then sette it to the fier to dissolue, 
and straine it through a Linen clothe, mixing with it 
two vnces Vnguentu~ diabasilicu~: and laie it to the wounde, 
and incontinent the said ointmente will drawe vnto it 
self, and kill all the venim, so that the wounde may afterward 
be healed, as all other maner of woundes bee: 
and in case ye lacke, or can not get Galbanum, it shall suffice 
to haue onely Assa Fetida, to drawe the venim out of 
the saied wounde. 
 
[}Against the bityng of all venemous beastes.}] 
 
AS soone as the person feleth hymself bitten, with 
any venimous beast (or at the leaste as sone as is 
possible) take grene leaues of a figge tree, and presse 
the milke of them, three or fower times in to the wou~de. 
And for this serueth also Mustard seede, mingled with 
Vinagre. 
 
[}To drawe an arrowe heade or other Iron, out of a wound}] 
 
TAKE the iuice of valerian, in the whiche ye shall 
weate a tente, and put it into the wounde, laiyng 
the said herbe stamped vpon it, then make your binding 
[^f.B4r^] 
or bande, as it appertaineth, and by this meanes 
ye shall drawe out y=e= Iron. And after heale the wounde 
accordyng as it shall require. 
 
[}Against a vehement cough of yong children.}] 
 
TAke the Iuice of Persely, pouder of Commin, womannes 
milke, & mixe all well together: then giue 
the childe drinke thereof, and after, make this 
ointment folowing. Take the seede of Line or Flaxe, 
and Fenigreke, and seeth them in co~mon water: then 
presse with your hand, the substaunce of y=e= saied herbes, 
which you shall mingle w=t= Butter, and so annointe the 
childes breast with it, heating it often times. 
 
[}For hym that hath a bunche or knobbe in his heade, or that 
hath his heade swollen with a fall.}] 
 
TAke an vnce of Baie salt, rawe Honie thre vnces, 
Commin three Vnces, Turpentine two vnces, intermingle 
all this well vpo~ y=e= fire: then laie it abrode 
vpo~ a linen clothe, and make thereof a plaister, y=e= whiche 
ye shall laie whote to his heade, & it wil altogether 
aswage the swellyng, and heale hym cleane and nete. 
 
[}A good remedie for one that is deffe.}] 
 
TAke Mint, Sage, Penniroiall, Rosemarie, Isope, 
Mugworte or Motherworte, wilde Minte, Calaminte, 
Camomille, Millefoile, Yarrow or Noseblede, 
herbe saincte Ihon, Wormewood, Southern 
wood, Centorie, of eche of them a handfull: Seeth 
them in a cleane pan, wyth as muche good white 
wyne, as there be herbes, and let it seeth altogether, 
vntil the third part be diminished: then cause these 
oiles folowing, to be made at the Apoticaries: old Oile 
two vnces, oile of Leekes, oile of Almondes, of eche of 
them an vnce, of the iuice of Rue halfe an vnce, of Maluoisie 
an vnce and a halfe: put al these thynges in a lo~g 
neckt glasse or violle, and let it seeth with a smalle fier, 
vntil the Iuice and the Maluosie bee almoste all consumed: 
[^f.B4v^] 
then take it from the fire, and putte in to it these 
Drogges folowyng, well beaten into pouder that is to 
saie, Spiknard, Coloquintida, the stone of a Beuer, called 
Castoreu~, Mastic, of eche of them a grain and a halfe: 
stoppe wel the said violle, that nothing maie take vent: 
then put it in a pan full of water, and make it seeth the 
space of three howers. Then take it from the fire, and 
powre the said licours in some platter, whiche you shal 
set in the sonne, and leaue it there vntill it shall become 
verie cleare, and hauing strained it through some fine 
linen cloth, and pressed well the substaunce, ye shal put 
a grain and a half of Muske in a disshe, and incorporate 
it well by litle and litle, with the saied Oile, and then 
keepe it in a violle, well stopped with waxe and Parchmente. 
After this, take the pan with the saied herbes, 
and heate them vpon the fire: then take, for a couer or 
lidde, a fonnell made of white Iron: and when ye go to 
bedde, couer the pan with the saied fonnell, and see that 
the pan be good and hote: then, by the litle hole aboue, 
let the patient take the smoke into his eare, by the space 
of halfe an hower. This doen, heate the said oile, vntill 
it be luke warme, and let it droppe into his eare two or 
three droppes: and stoppe his eare with a litle Musked 
bombase, or Cotton, and let him slepe therevpon. Now 
he muste, in receiuyng the parfume or smoke into his 
eare, haue in his mouth some drie Beanes, and after he 
hath chewed them, spit them out again, to thende that 
in chewing, he maie open the conduites of his Eares. 
And with the grace of God, he shall find himself healed 
in fewe daies, prouided, that the disease be in aniwise 
curable. If in case this helpe not, ye neede not seeke any 
other remedie in the worlde. If a man haue also anye 
hummyng or noyse in his eares, let him vse the sayde 
medecine, & you shal see, with Gods helpe a wonderfull 
thinge: for it will heale the defenesse of a man, though 
he haue had it .xxx. yeres, so that he be not borne deafe. 
Let him vse also to take pilles to purge his head, and to 
eate good meate alwaies. 
 
[^f.B5r^] 
[}To heale a woman that hath the Matrice out of her nanaturall 
place.}] 
 
TAke a Flinte stone that hath bene alwayes in 
the earth, and not taken the ayer, and put it in 
some basket, couered in a greate fyre: and whan 
it is verie hote, put it in a litle Tubbe or barrell, and 
wette it wyth Vinagre cast vpon it, and cause the woman 
to stand ouer it, to receyue the smoke or parfume 
of it, and than let her go to bed, for this must be doone 
at night. Ye shal, after thys, take of the Iuice of Rue, 
and make a litle rounde balle of Cotton, wherunto ye 
shall tie a threede: and than dippe the saied balle in the 
sayd iuice of Rue, and put it into the mouth of the Matrice, 
the which wil incontinent take the balle, & draw 
it in, and than it wil returne into his naturall place againe. 
But you muste binde and tie the balle sure and 
well, least paraduenture it should remaine within. After 
this, make an oyntment as foloweth, wherwith ye 
shall anoynte the reynes or her backe. Take an herbe called 
in Greeke Ciclaminos, of the Latines Rapum, Tuber 
terr, or Vmbilicus terr, of the Apoticaries Panis porcinus, of y=e= 
Frenche men Pain de Porc, in Englishe sowes breade and 
Rue, as muche of one as of the other, and stampe them 
well: and than seeth it in a pan with olde oyle, vntill y=e= 
whole be diminished by the thirde part. This doone, 
let it coole agayne, and hauing pressed out all the substaunce, 
ye shal power it into an other new pan, adding 
to it a litle new waxe, and heating it al together, vntill it 
be wel incorporated: tha~ annoynte her raines with all, 
and lay hote Tow vpon it, & than swaddel her as women 
do yonge infantes. And so she must be layed in her 
bed, with her belly vpwarde, and her head lower than her 
buttockes. This must ye do from night to night, three 
times, & she shal be healed. She must also eate whote 
thinges in operation, as Pigeons, & Hennes, with spices 
and other like thinges. She shall be healed without 
any greefe, and if she had had it .xxx. yeres. 
 
[^f.B5v^] 
[}To make a womans milke to come and encrease.}] 
 
TAke the greene leaues of Fenell, and make thereof 
a decoction, be it in wine or water, wherof ye shall 
geue the woman drinke, as wel at her meales, as 
other wise, as often as may be, and she shall be abondant 
in milke. Furthermore, if the woman haue not ordinarilie 
her naturall purgacion called Floures, this 
will serue her for a good medecine. 
 
[}A verie goodly secrete for the gommes or burgeons that remaine 
of the great Pockes, as well olde as new.}] 
 
[/3./] 
Take Bole armenick, Vinagre, and oyle Roset, 
and make thereof a defensife, or oyntment, annoynting 
the burgeons round aboute .iij. or. iiij. 
fingers large: tha~ take .ii partes of the oyle of an herbe 
called Euphorbium, first founde out by Iuba the kyng of 
Libia. Looke Ruellius, Lib. 3. cap. 53. and one part of oyle 
Violet: and mixe them together, and annoynt the burgeons 
with all, hauynge fyrst well wasshed them with 
Redde wine, verie hote. And whan you haue thus annoyted 
them, with the sayde oyle of Euphorbiu~, lay vpon 
it some litle bande annoynted with Butter, leauing it 
so three or foure houres, or as longe as you will: than 
vncouer the Burgeons, and if you finde no bladders, 
do once agayne as before, vntill you se some. And than 
you maie pricke and breake the saied bladders, or let 
them breake of them selues: & than ye may heale them 
with some healyng oyntment. 
 
[}Another remedie for the same bourgeons of the Pockes.}] 
 
WAshe the burgions with Wine, and make the defensif 
aboue saied: than take .iii. partes of Vnguentum 
aureum, and one parte of Sublimatum, well broken 
or beaten: mengle the saied Sublimatum with the 
said oyntment, and lay it with a plaster vpon the burgeons, 
leauing it therupon, a day or more, if you can, & 
[^f.B6r^] 
ye shal find the burgeons or buddes, and the flesh fayre 
and neate, whiche will seeme to be a miraculous thing, 
and if it worke not well at the first, ye must renew it againe, 
twise or thrise, according as the burgeons shalbe 
hard & olde. Now, whan they be thorowlie dissolued 
and leused, take Butter wasshed w=t= Wyne, and lay it 
vpon a linnen cloth, and put it vpon them, and so shall 
you heale them perfectlie. Note also that the saied ointment, 
with the Sublimat, will draw vnto him all the 
aquosite, and euil humours of the arme or legge, whervnto 
it is layde. Wherfore it will not onelye heale the 
place where you laye it, but will also purge the whole 
member of all euill humours, that is in it, and therfore 
there is a verie good water confect and made of it, for 
to heale scabbes, as we will tell you afterwarde. It 
healeth also al other accidentes, wherupon you make 
any outwarde application: and (as we haue sayed) draweth 
to him selfe al the watrishnes, and humour of the 
member, wherupon it is layde. Now, whan you wyll 
lay it vpon the burgeons, or vpon anie corrupte place, 
weete wel the linnen cloth, and the band that you will 
binde it withal, weete well also rounde aboute the infect 
or sore place: for the said medecine, will draw al the 
corruption thorow the saied places. And this is a verie 
worthie and exquisite secrete, for all thinges, so that it 
be wel vsed, made and applied. 
 