[^Bright, Timothy: Sufficiencie of English medicines^] 
 
[}A TREATISE: 
wherein is declared the 
sufficiencie of English 
Medicines, for cure of all 
diseases, cured with 
Medicine. 
 
AT LONDON, 
Printed by Henrie Middleton 
for Thomas Man. 
ANNO. 1580.}] 
 
[^A dedication to Lord Zouch and a preface to the reader omitted.^] 
[^Extract 1, pp. 7-31^] 
 
[^p.7^] 
[}A TREATISE, WHEREin 
is declared the sufficiencie 
of English Medicines, for cure of all diseases 
cured with Medicine.}] 
 
ALTHOVGH I be not ignorant that 
trueth oft purchaseth hatred, not of 
her owne nature, (then which nothing 
is more amiable and gratious, but by 
reason of the great corruption of mankinde, 
whereby, as men are plunged in 
blindnesse and errour, so they dasle 
with their eyes at the light of trueth, 
and sauour the things onely which agree with their corruption) 
although I say this hath bene alwayes the condition of 
trueth in the world, and such euill grace findeth it with the 
most of men, especially when it first offereth it selfe to be acknowledged 
for that which it is in deede: yet for the loue I 
beare it, being a Philosopher by profession, & for the publike 
benefite, being borne vnder that condition of men, whereby 
one is bound to imploy his gifts for the benefite of an other: 
I haue ventured vpon the displeasure and disgrace of men, & 
haue taken some paines to bring to light one daughter of 
Truth, of Time seeming to haue bene forgotten, which if she 
be receiued and embraced of thee gentle Reader, as she deserueth, 
shall requite thee with no lesse pleasure and profit, then 
many of her elder sisters. For what can be more pleasant vnto 
thee, then the inioying of medicines for cure of thine infirmities 
out of thy natiue soyle, and countrie, thy Fielde, thy 
Ortchard, thy Garden? and what more profitable vnto thee, 
then thereby to auoyde the infinite charges rising vpon the 
vse of straunge and foreigne medicines, whereby not onely 
thy substance is wasted, but thy health oft times greatly impaired? 
This is then that trueth which I commend vnto thee. 
As England aboundeth plentifully with all things necessarie 
for thy maintenance of life, and preseruation of health, so needeth 
it not, partly through natures instinct, partly by the industrie 
of men, sufficiencie of medicine to cure the sicknesses 
and infirmities, wherevnto our nation is subiect: which my 
opinion and iudgement, considering the vse and custome hath 
long bene to place greatest value in straunge medicines, and 
[^p.8^] 
the practise of the most doth ratifie the same, I knowe must 
needes seeme strange vnto thee, but read, consider, and then 
iudge, and at the least let me enterchange my paines with thy 
attentiue waying of that which thou shalt reade, preiudice set 
aside: and that a way may be made for the playner handling 
of this matter, I briefly define a remedie, a medicine, a disease 
after this sort as followeth. First beginning with a remedie 
which I cal the work of the Physician, wherby health may be 
repaired. Physicke is an art which taketh charge of y=e= health of 
man, preseruiug & mainteining it present by the right vse of 
meate, drinke, and exercise, with other such helpes of nature: 
and restoring the same decayed, by diet, medicine, helpe of 
hand, or surgerie instrument seuerally vsed, or by ioynt force 
applyed. Which three are Physicke instruments, whereby the 
action of curing is perfomed, which action I call a remedie. 
And y=e= second of these instruments, namely a medicine, I define 
an aduersarie force of some naturall thing, equally matching 
y=e= proper or next cause of y=e= disease. Of which medicines, 
Hearbes, Trees, Stones, Mineralls and metalls, Earthes, Waters, 
and all Fruites, are matter onely, and not the very medicines 
them selues, for as Physicke it selfe is an art, and the action 
artificiall, and not of nature, so are the instruments of the 
same action artificiall, and not natural. And as nature affourdeth 
not to vs of her owne worke, either garments, or houses, 
or any kinde of instrument, but onely the matter whereof 
such instruments may be made, leauing with vs an industrie 
rightly to frame them, and wisdome to vse them: so, no more 
is Lettis, Poppie, Rhewbarb, or Scammonie a medicine, then an 
Oake a Table or Ship, or a quarrie of stones, an house. Moreouer, 
all medicines standiug in a kinde of relation to the disease 
which by meanes of the patients age, sex, time of the 
yeare, custome, and such like occasions greatly varie, no nature 
which alwayes keepeth constant in the owne kinde can therefore 
either be a medicine, or properly beare the name therof: 
which I wish to be noted, least it be thought the simples, and 
such other naturall things were medicines, bicause commonly 
they carrie the names of them. And thus much shall bee 
sufficient to haue saide of the nature of a medicine. Nowe a 
disease (which remaineth last to be defined) is such state of 
the bodie, as thereby it is vnabled to performe aptly the actions 
thereto belonging or those actions which the soule doth 
accomplish, by the iustrument of the bodie. Thus much 
briefly concerning the explication of the termes wherein 
[^p.9^] 
this trueth is propounded. Nowe the reasons, whereby both I 
am moued to be of this iudgment, & am so hardie as to propound 
it to others to be receiued, wherof the first riseth from 
the Christian doctrine of Gods prouidence, which as it serueth 
greatly to establish the chiefe pointes in Philosophie, so 
being drawne, and more particularly applyed to the maintenance 
of mans life, carieth with it as a sufficient prouision for 
maintenance and preseruation of health, a like furniture, and 
as aunswerable to the necessitie of the patient, health beeing 
decayed. I will not staud to intreate of prouidence being well 
knowne to Christians, & being a trueth in Diuinitie, & Christianitie, 
can not be false in Philosophie. Although the best of 
the auncient Philosophers and Poets haue alwayes kept it as 
a sure ground, who as they serue little to establish vs, hauing 
a surer foundation, yet may they iustly condemne the Atheist 
of this age, who so farre hath quenched those remnants of 
the light of the first creation, that all thinges seeme to him 
Fortune and Chaunce. There is no nation vnder heauen so 
poore and destitute, but it hath of the owne countrie soyle sufficient 
to content nature with of foode and apparell, which 
as they bee two pillers of life, so from them are taken the 
meanes of preseruation of health, which as to beastes are applyed 
by naturall instinct, so are they vsed of man by reason, 
the temperer of appetite and affection. This prouision of 
sustenance is most agreeable with the goodnesse of the Creator, 
who as he is authour of being to the Creature, so fayleth 
he not to maintein and preserue the same Creature the whole 
terme of the being thereof, and bycause the necessitie of the 
Creature is perpetuall, his wisedome hath also foreseene, and 
prouided a perpetuall supplie of such sustenance, as is fit for 
that nature which standeth in neede thereof: and bycause the 
neede is not once for all, but parted into times, varying, according 
to the diuers disposition and nature of that for which 
this prouision is made, he hath also so bestowed his goodnes 
in this point, that at all times to all things, necessarie sustenance 
should not be to seeke, and this extended not to men 
onely, but euen to bruit beastes, and all things which require 
nourishment. The end of this prouision is the preseruation of 
y=e= Creature, which Nature most carefully studieth (if it might 
be perpetuall and eternall) thereto to bring it, the goodnesse 
of the Creator, will nothing wanting, his wisedome will haue 
it waite vpon the necessitie of the Creature: wherefore as the 
Earth is called the mother of all things, not bycause it bringeth 
[^p.10^] 
them foorth onely, but yeeldeth them perpetuall nourishment, 
so is the countrie of all people to them named, the 
parent of all parents. Then by natures lawe, all things being 
aboundantly ministred vnto vs for the preseruation of health 
at home in our owne fieldes, pastures, riuers, &c. howe can 
the wisedome of God, and his goodnesse stande with the absence 
of Medicines and remedies necessarie for the recouerie 
of health, the neede being as vrgent of the one as of the other: 
and so as great an occasion of practise of the same goodnesse 
and wisedome in the one as in the other? which beeing 
most plaine and euident, it followeth necessarily that the 
medicine should be as readie for the sicke, as meate and drink 
for the hungrie and thirstie: which except it bee applied by 
the natiue countrie, can not be else performed. It is knowne 
to such as haue skill in nature, what wonderfull care she hath 
of the smallest of creatures, not onely giuing to euery part of 
them a carefull discharge of sundrie duties, as of attraction, 
retention, concoction, expulsion of excrements, distribution, 
and such like, but also to the whole creature, a knowledge 
of medicine to helpe them selues, if haply diseases anoy them: 
neither out of India, nor Arabia, but from their very haunt: 
which being not denyed to them, much more is graunted to 
vs, in so much as (the worke of nature being most excellent 
in man) she is more vigilant ouer mankinde then ouer other 
creatures, as by the shape thereof most plainely appeareth. 
The Swallow cureth her dimme eyes with Celendine: the Wesell 
knoweth well the vertue of Hearbgrace: the Doue the Veruen: 
the Dogge dischargeth his mawe with a kinde of Grasse: 
the Spider is Triacle to the Munkey: the Hippopotamus dischargeth 
y=e= aboundance of his bloud by opening a vaine: & Ibes is 
said to haue shewed the vse of the Clyster: and too long it were 
to recken vp all the medicines which the beastes are knowne 
to vse by natures direction onely, and those not so farre fetched 
as our drugges, but familiar with them, and taken from 
the place of their foode: it being very probable she hath bestowed 
this gift euen vpon al, one hauing interest in natures 
care as well as an other. By this then may we gather, if nature 
faile not the very beastes in this behalfe, neither sendeth them 
to borrowe a farre of, much more is that performed vnto vs 
the Lordes of all the creatures, and for whose vse all thinges 
were created: except we be thought lesse subiect to diseases 
then they, wherein we be so little priuiledged, that no creature 
in that respect is so fraile as we, and those most subiect 
[^p.11^] 
to infirmities, which are gouerned & dieted by vs. So that we 
of all creatures haue greatest neede of Natures liberall hand 
in this behalf. For be it for the most part, we are more healthfull 
then sickly, and so haue greater vse of the meanes of keeping 
health, then of restoring, yet hardly can a man say which 
of them is more necessarie to be readie and prest at hande, the 
daunger of diseases being alwayes imminent, although diseases 
them selues be not alwayes present. Nowe, if to any the 
reason seeme weake from that which should be to inferre a 
being therof, we are to vnderstand in the workes of God, what 
so euer should be, is: he being a workman of an absolute power 
and cunning. But saith one, the East and West Indies, Arabia, 
Barbarie, the red Sea, are the Mines, as it were, and the 
fountaines of medicines, and Spaine, Portugale, and Venice, the 
ventes of such thinges, and Nauigation the meanes to obtaine 
them. It can not be denied, but those countries yeelde 
many straunge thinges, whereof we take vse with great delight, 
and Nauigation serueth greatly for communicating 
of commodities and enterchange of merchandise: but howe 
farre, and of what commodities? Verily of such as if our delicacie 
would giue vs leaue, we might wel spare, being things 
rather of superfluous pleasure then necessarie reliefes, and seruing 
rather for a certeine pompe, then for maintenance of 
life: and which without great working of the wittes, might be 
proued to bring more harme to our countrie men, then commoditie: 
both in respect of the diuersitie of complexion of 
our bodies from those of straunge nations to whome they 
properly belong, the corruption of their outlandish wares, 
the selling of one thing for an other, and the withholding 
from vs the best of choyce. but of this hereafter.Moreouer, 
Nauigation being of a later inuention then the necessitie 
of medicine, neither practised of many nations at this 
day, can not supplie this want, or if men began then first to be 
diseased, when they beganne to find wayes in the Sea to those 
farre countries, doth it not greatly detract from that prouidence 
whereby all thinges are guided, to lay the recouerie 
of mans health vpon the aduentures of Merchantes? and 
the disease beeing in the one parte of the worlde, 
to haue the medicine in the other, yea, as farre distant 
as the East is from the West, and the life and death of 
a man to stande vpon a halfepenie weight of Scammonie, or 
dramme or twaine of Rhewbarb. Nay, which is yet more 
absurde, that the health of so many Christian nations 
[^p.12^] 
should hang vpon the courtesie of those Heathen and barbarous 
nations, to whome nothing is more odious then the very 
name of Christianitie? And who of malice do w=t=hold from 
vs such medicines as they knowe most for our vse? Wherevpon 
the Turke denyeth vnto the Christians at this day the 
Terra Lemnia, a medicine to be preferred before the chiefe of 
those we persuade our selues to inioy. The corruption of their 
drugges, is it not so great, that in this light of all knowledge, 
scarce is one able to discerne the right Bolus Armena, from the 
Ocre of Apulia, or to discouer the adulterating of Ambergreece, 
and Muske, with a number of other corruptions, which haue 
gotten strength by custome of errour? Thamarinds are counterfeted 
with Prunes, Scammonie with the milke of Spurge, 
Manna with Suger and the leaues of Sene, Aspalathum with the 
inward part of the root an Oliue tree, Frankence~ce with Rosin, 
Bdellium and Sarcocalla with gooms: for Bolus Armena is solde 
a red earth out of Apulia, for Malabathrum a leafe of a Limon or 
Orange, for Turpeth some other roote dipped at both endes in 
Goom. Which be as like in vertue to the simples whereof they 
beare the visard and maske, as Chalke to Cheese, according to 
the prouerbe. And greatly thou art deceiued, to thinke our 
Nauigations store vs with auncient Medicines, wherewith 
Physicke in olde time hath bene furnished. For at this 
day neither is Balme knowne vnto vs, neither Pylobalsamum, nor 
Cardamomum, nor Amomum, neither Costus, neither Calamus odoratus, 
Aspalathus, Agallocum, Narcaphthum, with the most of the 
noble auncient Medicines, so that Nauigation hath not at any 
time supplied this want vnto vs, and howe it should hereafter 
I knowe not, except Galen take paines againe to saile into 
Cyprus, into Palestine, and Lemnos, to gather and make choice 
with his owne handes. For what hope is there to be had of 
the prouision made by Merchants? who buy to sell onely, 
and thereof to reape gaine, and by reason they be vnlearned 
if they would be faithfull, yet must they faile greatly in this 
point, and then must we vse such Medicines as we can come 
by, and the patient recouer such health as he may. For the 
most part, these drugges come out of Spaine or Portugale, eyther 
fetched of vs or brought of them, yet neither of the~ euer 
hath borne name of yeelde of the best simples, so that if they 
be of those countries, then they are not such as they should 
be: If Spaine and Portugale fetch them else where, then lyeth 
y=e= assurance vpon their credite. Or let me know how they discerne 
the Coriander of Ethiopia, the blacke Helleborus of Cyrene, 
[^p.13^] 
the Amomum of Scythia, the Myrrha Troglodytica, the Opium of 
Apulia, (which are counted the best) from the same growing 
in other places, which neuer caried name of commendation 
for such simples. The Coloquintida growing alone vpon the 
plant, is much suspected of good Physicians, the Squilla that 
hath no fellowes, is thought to sauour of a venemous nature, 
likewise the Thymelea: now, when these are gathered to y=e= Merchants 
hand, who shall tell him how they grewe, or who shal 
inquire but the Philosopher that knoweth what may come 
thereby to these simples, neither is the daunger lesse in the 
manner of laying them vp, and keeping them ouer long: besides, 
the iust time of gathering being either ouerpassed, or 
preuented, greatly diminisheth the vertue of the Medicines. 
As the vse of Euphorbium is perillous before it be a yeare olde, 
and after three yeares it is naught worth, so Agaricke gathered 
before it be ripe, or kept past two yeres, becommeth vnwholsome. 
And as the Peonie roote is to be gathered in the wane of 
the Moone, and the Crayfish to be taken after the rising of the 
Dogge Starre, the same entering into Leo, so are there many 
other, which if they misse their due time of gathering, faile 
greatly in their vertues. To these corruptions moreouer may 
be added the washing of the sea, the long iourneys they are 
brought, whereby it should seeme nature had denyed vnto vs 
the vse of them, as to whome they were not of her yeelded, 
with such difficultie, and as it were, by constraint, they come 
to vs. Then if the best of ancient simples be partly vnknowne 
and wanting, partly adulterated, partly by age and other 
meanes spent before they come to our vse, what shall we say 
to our compounds and mixtures, which rise of these simples? 
Can the temper mende them? or a quid pro quo, as they call 
them, serue the turne? No verily, not our turnes, to whome 
the substitute Medicines, as I may cal them, were not appointed, 
beeing in great part as hard to come by, as the Medicines 
whose substitutes they are, and as much vnknowne vnto vs. 
As for Agallocu~ Calamus odoratus, for Amomum Acorus, for Castorium, 
Bilphium, for Crocamagmo, Agallocus, with a number of the 
same sorte, which these fewe leaues of paper will not admit. 
Neither is it to be thought these Lieutenant Medicines 
serue at all turnes in the place of the right Medicines, for so 
should Ginger serue the turne of Folefoote to purge by vomite, 
which it can not, no more then curds of Cowe milke can 
soften and supple like butter, or the dunge of the stocke Doue 
purge like Euphorbium, or the Docke roote draw flegme from 
[^p.14^] 
the head like Pellitorie, which Galene notwithstanding maketh 
substitutes of these medicines which haue such operation. I 
conclude therefore, seeing Nauigation can not affoord vs either 
the simples which we seeme to neede, and those which it 
doth, both corrupt and counterfet in the greatest part, we haue 
neither to craue thereof in this point aide, much lesse to trust 
thervnto. Now y=e= simples being but (for the most part) bastard 
ware, howe can the compoundes that amount of the same be 
other then counterfet? Wherevpon as Cardanus saith in his 
Methode of curing, the wise Magistrates of Venice haue oftentimes 
forbidden the making of Triacle and Mithridatum, bycause 
the simples could not be had, whereby they should be 
compou~ded. which if Venice, y=e= greatest Mart in this part of the 
world of such wares can not auouch, what can we hope for 
from other places? that a man would maruell to see the great 
store of them in all shops of Apothecaries vnder the names of 
Triacle and Mithridatum of Andromachus, and it being required 
in Triacle before it be vsed, it should haue a time, as it were, of 
mellowing, which of Galene in his booke of Triacle to Piso is 
extended to 12. yeares, and of Paulus Egineta in his 7. booke by 
7. yeares, for those that are bitten or stonge of venemous beastes, 
or haue dronke poyson, or are infected with y=e= pestilence, 
and in other diseases, from ten yeares till it be 20. of age. I 
maruell what assurance we haue of the age of this Triacle, 
which is ordinarie in vse, or if we haue none, howe we dare vse 
it at aduenture, knowing by age the vertue thereof hath no 
small alteration. I would these inconueniences were the smallest, 
which I haue but briefly, and as it were, for a taste run ouer, 
yet were euen they sufficient to stay our ouerhastie vse of 
such straunge Merchandise, and to moue vs to betake vs to 
those wee knowe both in the blade and in the seede, in the 
roote, and in the fruite, and knowe the aire, the hill, the valley, 
the medowe where they growe. But this trust vpon, outlandish 
Medicines hath much more neerely touched vs then so. If a 
man would say by this ouerhastie embracing, what so euer 
straunge nations doe as it were, purge ouer vnto vs, we drinke 
diuers times rancke poyson in steede of wholsome medicine, 
I trow it would iustly moue vs to be aduised, and not to passe 
ouer the enquirie of a reason, why such a one should thinke 
so, being one whose vocation tendeth to y=e= charge of y=e= health 
of mens bodies. The right Hermodactils are commended for 
excellent medicines against al paines in the ioynts, as y=e= Gout, 
y=e= Schiatica, & such like, from which they purge grosse flegme. 
[^p.15^] 
Doronicum Comanum hath great commendation for comforting 
the heart, expelling poyson, against the Cough, for auoyding 
of humors which ouercharge y=e= Chest, which are great vertues 
doubtles in them both. Now if they in the shops, as thei beare 
the name of these medicines, so caried not with them in steede 
of these vertues daungerous poyson, then should I haue lesse 
cause to exhort our nation to betake them to their Gardens, 
and Fieldes, and to leaue the bankes of Nilus, and the Fens of 
India. The common Hermodactils being a kind of poison called 
Exhemerum, so named, bicause with such swiftnesse it chargeth 
& ouerchargeth our vital spirits, that it killeth him that hath 
taken it in one day. The other commonly called Doronicum 
Romanum, and vsed for an especial cordial, so that it hath place 
in the electuarie of pretious stones, in the electuarie of Amber, 
in the cordiall pouder, this Doronicum, I say, called of Mathiolus 
Demoniacum, that is to say, diuelish, noting thereby the vertues 
thereof, is no baser poyson then a very kinde of Aconitum, by 
Mathiolus experience, which he confesseth himselfe (before hauing 
ben abused by the common errour) first to haue learned 
of Iacobus Antonius Cortusus, a man very skilfull in the nature 
of simples, which Iacobus taught him the experience b giuing 
it to dogs, which it killeth. Nowe if by reason no such daunger 
hapneth to vs, by the vse of them, they seming not so dangerous: 
we are to vnderstand they be giuen in smal quantitie, 
and mixed with diuers remedies against poison, y=e= good prouidence 
of God prouiding so, that otherwise they should not 
be ministred, as in y=e= purging electuary of Diaconin, Hermodactils 
are bridled with Cinamon, & y=e= pouder of Diatragatanthu~ frigidu~, 
where in deede it hath somewhat too large scope, being better 
tempered in Benedicta, with Cloues, Parsely seede, Galanga, and 
Mace, and in the pilles of Hermodactils with Aloe, Mirobalans, 
Bdellium, the seede of Herbgrace, which haue force against poyson, 
the which small quantitie of them being bridled, & dulled 
with other medicines, especially such as resist the force of 
poysons, is not deadly vnto vs, although great hurt thereof 
must needes ensue. I haue stoode the longer vpon this point of 
straunge medicines, in answering the supplie by Nauigation, 
the rather, bicause it seemeth most to make against vs in the 
maintenance of our home medicines, & breedeth, as it were, a 
lothsomnes of those blessings of God, which we daily may at 
co~mandment enioy. But hitherto hath only ben shewed y=e= corruptions 
& counterfeting of foreigne medicines which belo~geth 
to certeine only, & not to al: (although those certein be y=e= 
[^p.16^] 
chefe, and of greatest price) and that being foreseene, the prouision 
out of straunge and farre distant nations, may seeme 
wel to stand with that prouidence wee speake of: and except 
they be in respect of their straungenesse hurtfull or vnprofitable 
vnto vs, the skill of sayling being a meanes to present 
them at our neede, natures care should seeme no whit to bee 
blemished. The reasons which I haue before alledged, I leaue 
to the indifferent Reader to consider of, and bycause I am so 
farre vrged, I easily sticke not to holde, we receiue no samll 
hurt from all the kindes of straunge medicines, whereof I 
yeelde these fewe reasons which followe. 
 
Our English bodies, through the nature of the region, our 
kinde of diet and nourishment, our custome of life, are greatly 
diuers from those of straunge nations, whereby ariseth 
great varietie of humours, and excrements in our bodies fro~ 
theirs, and so the causes of diseases rising vpon breach of diet, 
(the diet being of an other sort) must needes be vnlike, wherupon, 
although their humours be in kinde, and in a generalitie 
agreeable to ours, as bloud, choler, flegme, melancholie, & 
such like, yet rising vpon other matter then the same in vs, and 
otherwise framed by a farre other state of bodie, by reason of 
a diuers kinde of life, the Medicines which helpe them must 
needes hurt vs, not finding the like causes to striue with: and 
this no doubt is the cause why we are not able to beare such 
dose or quantitie of their Medicines as those nations are to 
whome they be natiue. Besides, they worke in our bodies after 
a farre more vnkinde manner then they report them to do 
in theirs, nay, they destroy vs, and helpe them, which is an argument 
to me, that euery Medicine hath a relation to the 
diseases of the inhabitant, which if it be profitable to straungers, 
yet doeth it by a constraint and not halfe so kindly. The 
Greekes, as it may appeare by Dioscorides in his fourth Booke 
and a hundreth and two and fiftie Chapter, intreating of Scammonie, 
are able to beare a greater quantitie, yea, double then 
we of Scammonie, which is an ordinarie purger with vs. Who 
saith, 30. graines therof may be giuen with 20. of blacke Helleborus, 
& 60. of Aloe to make a iust purgation, & of Scammonie 
alone 60. graines. Nowe common experience teacheth vs the 
great oddes betwixt Scammonie rawe, as they call it, and the 
same corrected, which we name Dacrydium, both in vehemencie 
of purging, and tormenting the body: yet hardly dare we 
passe aboue 20. graines of the same, and this mixed with Cordialls 
and stomach Medicines. Moreouer, their slender correcting 
[^p.17^] 
of it, doth argue it to be farre lesse noysome to them 
then to vs, who correct it onely, or at the least, are contented 
with the correction thereof by a little Salt and Pepper, 
or a little Ginger: who for the plentie of excellent simples, 
which we both want and knowe not, and for their skill in 
the nature of those we correct with, might as well haue 
qualified it as we, who first wash it in Rosewater, wherein 
Cytrea Myrobalanus, Spike, and Cinamon haue bene boyled: 
in which also we let it steepe foure and twentie houres, 
then drye it, then mixe it againe with oyle of sweete Almonds, 
and some Goom for Agacantha, and last of all bake it 
in a Quince, couered round with paste. who hath not horror 
of the torments which both the Hellebores bring to the 
body? yet saith Paulus Egineta in his seuenth Booke, and 
fourth Chapter, the blacke Helleborus purgeth yellow choler 
from the whole body without paine: which can not be 
verified of our bodies, how so euer it be in theirs, and therfore 
we feare to minister the pouder thereof in any sort, 
but the steeping only of the barkes of the roots, from 20. 
graines to 60. they being bolde to take a whole dramme 
thereof in substance, which is more then treble y=e= quantitie, 
for one dose. These straunge workings of these foreigne 
drugges in our bodyes, and a more gentle and kinde working 
in theirs, doth it not manifestly declare vnto vs, that 
they were not created for vs? doe they not force vs oftentimes 
with perill of our liues to giue them ouer? 
that the patient knoweth not diuers times whether hee 
should stand rather to the courtesie of his disease, then of 
his potion? There is a simple which hath not many yeres 
bene in vse, brought out of India, and highly commended, 
called Mechoaca, it purgeth gently say they, without vexing 
or grieuing the body, without annoying the stomake 
greatly, and ceaseth purging at your pleasure, with a little 
supping. These be great vertues doubtlesse, and I wish we 
could find them in Mechoaca. For experience the touchstone 
hath bewrayed it in our bodies, to be of a farre other 
operation, it tormenteth the body, it annoyeth y=e= stomake 
much, neither doth a supping stay the vehemencie of purging, 
and this haue I partly by mine owne experience 
found in Mechoaca, and partly by the experience of my 
friendes, who vpon the vse thereof haue much complained 
of these accidents. That iuice or rather milke of Poppie, 
[^p.18^] 
which is brought out of Asia named Opium, it is not vnknowne 
to all the world, what a maruellous force it hath 
in benumming the sence of feeling, and vtterly extinguishing 
the naturall heate of the body, so that we feare to 
giue thereof into the bodye aboue the weight of two 
graines, & those corrected with Saffron, Castorium, and such 
like, least it cast the patient into such a sleepe, as hee needeth 
the trumpe of the Archangell to awake him. Nowe, 
the same Opium being taken of the Turkes, Moores, and 
Persians, bringeth to their wearied and ouertrauelled bodyes, 
a maruellous recreation, in such sort, as they ordinarily 
vse it therefore as a present remedie, not in the quantitie 
of two graines or twentie, but euen an whole ounce 
or twaine at once. And Hollerius in his Scholia vpon his 
chapter of Phrensey, saith, that Rondelet a learned Physician, 
and the French kings Professour at Montpellier, reported 
vnto him, that he had seene a Spaniard take thereof 
in his body halfe an ounce at one time, without hurt. 
Wherefore if the difference of our bodyes from those 
of straunge nations be so great, that the thing which helpeth 
them, destroyeth vs, that cureth them without anoyance, 
doth vehemently torment vs: I would wish vs to bee 
better aduised, then to be so readie to embrace them, as to 
contemne in comparison of them, the medicines which 
receiue, as it were a taming, and are broken vnto vs by our 
owne soyle: neither art thou here to looke the wisedome 
of the Physician should consider the varietie and diuers 
dispositions of the bodyes by age, complexion, region, 
sex, &c. and thereafter to temper these medicines, and so to 
auoyde the daungers, for the question is not of the maner 
of vsing these thinges, for then should such consideration 
haue place, but euen of the very nature, which no manner 
of vse can alter. Yet are these simples excellent creatures 
of God, made for the vse of men, but not for all men, and 
although we may receiue helpe from them, by a certaine 
generall communitie that our bodyes haue with those of 
Arabia, Barbarie, and the rest, yet no dout, as I haue shewed 
in a fewe, so we receiue by the vse of them so much the 
lesse good by them, as we most differ from them, and that 
which wanteth of the performance of good to vs, must 
needes turne vs to much harme, the vnhelping part, (as I 
may call it) alwayes working, and so euer harming. Neither 
[^p.19^] 
doe I see why the medicines of India or Aegypt should 
be laide vpon vs, more then the Indian or Aegyptian diet, 
which is to eate Lisards, Dragons, and Crocodiles: for if 
the proper medicine doth alwayes regard his proper aduersarie, 
which causeth the disease (as no doubt it shoulde 
doe) then there being a great difference betwixt our humours 
and theirs, as much in a manner as is betwixt the 
flesh of a Crocodile and of a tender Capon, our medicines 
which are to fit vs, must needes be of an other kinde then 
theirs, which in our bodies not finding such humours and 
excrements, as that straunge diet doth ingender, must needes 
seaze vpon the very substaunce of our bodies, to haue 
somewhat to worke on: which painefull working especially 
of the purgers, causeth the common saying among 
the people, to the great discredite of our art: there is not a 
purgation but it hath a smacke of poyson. Trueth it is, no 
purgation can worke without natures anoyance, being in 
part a pricke of nature to auoyde her excrements: but 
when she is so prouoked that she sweateth colde sweats, 
that she giueth ouer, that the patient swoundeth not by 
the excesse of purging only, but for the most part through 
the euill qualitie of the medicine, it is surely an argume~t, 
it wanted his proper subiect to worke in. If needes wee 
will take vnto vs the practise of such straunge medicines, 
(I call them medicines according to the common phrase, 
else properly bee they matter onely) it were to bee desired 
(which in part is performed) y=t= such medicines as bee so perillous, 
might be planted in our natural cou~try, y=t= through 
the familiaritie of oure soyle, they might first growe 
into acquaintance with vs, before wee entertaine them, 
not into our bosomes, but into our heartes, and chamber 
them with our vitall spirites. And as it is saide of the 
tree Persea, which in Persia being poyson, translated into 
Aegypt, becommeth wholesome, bearing fruite to bee 
eaten, & good for the stomake: so those natures receiuing 
such mitigation of our soyle, might in time better fit vs 
then they doe. which as it can not alter their nature being 
impossible to be done by chaunge of place, so doubtlesse 
might it purge away that euill qualitie which anoyeth vs, 
and seemeth rather to bee an euill complexion, and as it 
were a cacochimie and disease of the thing, them any necessarie 
[^p.20^] 
proprietie belo~ging to y=e= nature. This which hath bin 
sayd of Persia, is also to be seene in other simples, which in 
other places are poyson, and kill with the very shadowe, 
yet brought into England & planted with vs, cleane change 
that venemous qualitie. Vgh called Taxus, of Dioscorides 
is saide to be so dangerous, and of such venemous nature, 
that in Nauarre the very shadowe thereof poysoneth him 
that sleepeth vnder it: and Egineta saith, being taken inward, 
it strangleth, and swiftly killeth. This Taxus notwithstanding, 
being so perillous in other places, our English 
soyle hath so reformed, that boldly our children doe 
eate of the fruite thereof without daunger: the like may 
bee verified of our Hemlocke, which although it bee to bee 
numbred among the poysoning hearbes, yet it is farre behinde 
that which groweth in Candie, or Megara, or Cilicia, 
scarse to bee accounted poyson in comparison of that in 
those countries. Now if thou shalt thinke (gentle Reader) 
as the change of region altereth some qualities, so all, and 
thereby empayreth the vertue of the medicine: thou maist 
easily be deceiued. For as they depend not one vpon an other, 
so may the one be well without the other, though by 
one common forme, they seeme to be linked together to 
make one nature. Rhewbarb is knowne to haue two qualities, 
one contrarie to an other, of purging the body, and 
stopping: yet by steeping may the one be separated from y=e= 
other, the purging vertue being drawne out by steeping, 
and the stopping still remaining in the substance steeped: 
so likewise may the noysome qualitie of the medicine be 
eschewed, the wholesome and medicinable vertue notwithstanding, 
being in full force, yea greater retained, I 
say greater, in so much as the hurtful qualitie would hinder 
the operation of the healthfull, which being freed, and 
vnyoked from the other, doth farre better accomplish his 
worke. Of all kindes of Honie that of Greece, and namely 
of Attica and Hible are most commended, the next price is 
giuen to the Honie of Spaine and Nauarre: yet it is certainly 
knowne by experience, that the English Honie is most agreeable 
to our English bodyes, and greater quantitie 
thereof may be taken, with lesse anoyance, yea none 
at al to those which are not of too hot a temper: the other 
kindes being more fierie, more apt to engender choler, 
and to inflame the bloud, and more vnfit to loose the body. 
[^p.21^] 
whereby we may euidently see, that Nature vseth 
not one shooe for euery foote, but either ministreth a diuers 
commoditie in kinde, or else by the countrie aire, and 
soyle, doth so temper it, that greater vse may be thereof to 
the inhabitant of the same countrie. By this then which 
hitherto hath beene saide, it is manifest wee receiue great 
hurt by the vse of straunge medicines, and not vpon reason 
onely, but from plaine experience, euen with hurt to our 
owne bodyes, which as it is the greatest price of knowledge, 
so therefore ought we the more to set thereby, and 
more carefully to seeke to auoyde the daunger. Againe, 
it is euident, that the planting of straunge simples frameth 
them more to our vse. Wherefore as there be many excellent 
Gardens in England, especially in London, replenished 
with store of straunge and outlandish simples, it were 
to bee wished such endeuours were of others followed, 
that so we might acquaint vs better with these straungers, 
and by Vsu copiæ make them our owne. But what soyle wil 
brooke all things? it is true, yet no doubt of those that it 
will brooke, which I dare say are foure or fiue hundreth, 
this frugalitie of nature toward vs as it is thought, might 
beare a greater shewe, and we more safely vse them, especially 
the purgers, which carie with them greatest anoyance. 
Nowe if it be obiected, the force of outlandish simples 
are thereby more feeble, as we finde the Organ of Candie 
surpassing ours in strength, I meane the same kind with 
that of Candie planted in our Gardeins, which may be said 
also of other straunge hearbes planted by vs. It can not be 
denyed but they are so, neither can the straunge simple in 
all pointes be equall with his kinde keeping his natiue 
soyle, yet is the difference scarse halfe a degree vnder, or if 
it were a degree full out, what reason were it to fetch that 
one degree with much perill, and charge, as farre as Candie, 
Spaine, or Venice, or from an other world: whereas a little 
increase of the quantitie of the thing, would easily supplie 
that want, though I mention not the gaine of freshnes of 
the same,which maketh no small recompence of wanting 
in the force: neither is the nature or vertue of a medicine 
to be esteemed by taste or smell, neither by the force it 
hath against the disease, the nature of a medicine lying in 
an equall matching of the cause of the disease, which if it 
ouermatch, so farre off it is from the praise of an wholesome 
[^p.22^] 
medicine, that it becommeth a cause of a contrarie 
disease. wherefore the commendation of a medicine lyeth 
not in force, but in such force. and therefore the counsel of 
y=e= best Physicians is, if the disease will beare any delay, as y=e= 
most doe, rather to apply a medicine of weaker force, then 
at once with a vehement one, to shake the frame of nature. 
And the weaker medicine being weake, either in respect 
of the nature of the simple, or the small quantitie, they 
counsel rather to vse y=t= kind of curing which is by the feebler 
medicine in kind, then by reason of y=e= vnder quantititie. 
For what skilful Physician would cure a small distemper 
of heat, and as it were in the first degre, with a smal quantitie 
of Opium, or Mandrake, or Henbane, being colde in the 
fourth degre, rather then with the iust quantitie of Endiue, 
or Succorie? or diminish a small excesse of humours, with 
an vnderquantitie of Coloquintida or Scammonie, rather then 
with y=e= iust quantitie of a feebler medicine? Wherfore vpon 
good reason they conclude it to be farre safer for the 
patient, to cure with contraries of feebler force, either often 
repeated, or in a greater quantitie applyed, then with a 
maine force of a medicine of equall strength at once to 
expell the disease, nature abhorring all vehement and souden 
either emptying or filling, heating or cooling, or any 
other kinde of souden alteration, which being grounded 
vpon good reason, the delaying of the force of straunge 
medicines by our soyle, serueth greatly for the commendation 
both of planting them with vs, and of the medicines 
them selues planted. The simple still keeping within 
the compasse of matter of a medicine, neyther beeing so 
diminished, but that by increase of the quantitie it may 
match with the disease, which no man with reason can denye. 
Nowe, if the greatnesse of the quantitie happily procure 
loathsomnesse to the patient by extraction, that inconuenience 
may easily be auoyded: by which meanes a 
pound may be brought to an ounce, an ounce to a dram, 
and a dramme to a fewe graines, to please the patient 
with. Such of straunge medicines as will not brooke our 
climate, thereby declare the euill disposition they haue 
to cure the infirmitie of our bodyes. Euery medicine is 
as it were a meane betwixt nourishmentes and poysons, 
excepting those medicines which are applyed outwardly, 
which may both bee of nourishments and poysons. 
[^p.23^] 
In this meane betwixt these extremes, there is such a scope 
and breadth, that some medicines incline to the one, and 
some to the other. nowe the best are such as rather incline 
to nourishments then poysons, which as they doe fight against 
the disease, so haue they a certaine token and 
pledge of agreement betwixt our bodyes and theirs: 
whereby they acknowledge vs for friendes, and not 
common enimies with the disease the other medicines 
which haue no such token and earnest, being apt, as well 
to destroy vs, as to take away the disease, and so ioyne fellowship 
with ranke poysons. Then our natiue soyle 
being by the ordinaunce of GOD the fittest to yeelde 
vs nourishment, from which our cattell and fruites haue 
a nutritiue or nourishing iuice, which render the same 
againe to vs, what can wee thinke of those medicines to 
whome our soyle hath not a droppe of iuice to yeelde vnto, 
and giueth no entertaynement. Verily we are both 
to learne thereby, that nature doeth furnish vs otherwayes, 
and also greatly to suspect them to bee of an extreme 
kynde of medicines, the spices onely excepted, and 
such as are saide to be sympatheticall to certeine partes of 
our bodies. which notwithstanding, lesse serue that vse, the 
more strange and foreigne they be. what should I speake 
of the vnmeasurable charge and cost these strange medicines 
put vs vnto? in my opinion, if it were but that, wee 
might be stirred vp to this or such like co~sideration: Hath 
God so dispensed his blessings, that a medicine to cure the 
iawndies, or the greene sicknes, or y=e= rheume, or such like, 
should cost more oftentimes then one quarter of the substance 
y=t= the patient is worth? & the prouision of an whole 
yere, wherof wife and children & the whole familie, shuld 
with things necessarie be mainteined in health, be wasted 
vpon y=e= curing of a Palsey, or a Cholike, or a swimming of 
y=e= braine, or any other disease whatsoeuer? is Physicke only 
made for rich men? & not as wel for the poorer sort? doth it 
only waite vpon Princes palaces, & neuer stoope to y=e= cottage 
of the poore? doth it onely receiue giftes of the king, 
and neuer thankes and prayers from him that hath but 
thankes and prayes to bestowe? or doth the Lords goodnesse 
passe ouer them of lowe degree? hath hee respect of 
persons? yea, hath GOD giuen the beaste a remedie out 
of his owne foode and pasture (as it is most certainely 
[^p.24^] 
knowne) with a skill to vse it, and hath he set a iourney as 
far as from the Sunne rising to y=e= going downe, as it were 
a wall of brasse, and the fierie sword of a Cherubim to 
keepe vs from the atteining of salues for our sores? iustly 
may we thus complaine, especially those of the poorer 
sort. And if Physicke (as it is in deed) be an art common to 
all kinde of men, all sorts of nations, all estates, and conditions 
of men: I would knowe why the meanes also of performing 
the actions belonging to the same art should not 
bee as common? And if it bee ordinarie to all nations to 
fetch their medicines farre, let me knowe why, as we cease 
not to trauell for to store vs with outlandish drugges,wee 
carie not thither also our countrie medicines for chaunge, 
or they of those nations giue not the like aduenture for 
ours? but they are contented with their owne store, and so 
ought we with ours. If it be not ordinarie, why should it 
be more extraordinarie to one then to an other. The most 
of our Apothecarie ware is brought from the most vile & 
barbarous nations of the world, and almost all from the 
professed enemies of the Sonne of GOD: shall we say 
the Lorde hath more care, or setteth more store by them 
then by his owne people? that he so furnisheth them, and 
leaueth vs destitute? or shall we rather condemne the vanitie 
of our owne mindes, who vnsatiably desire straunge 
things, little regarding, or rather loathing that which is 
alwayes at commaundement. But God (saith one) hath not 
bestowed all things vpon all nations, but hath left some 
thing to be supplied by the commodities wherewith one 
nation aboundeth, and an other wanteth, that therevpon 
mutuall duties arising, the societie of men might be vpholden. 
Which obiection, if it caried with it what things 
they were, and of what kinde, that one nation supplyeth to 
an other,and what sort of commodities they be that one 
nation needeth the helpe of an other in, a more direct answere 
might be made then otherwise I may hit vpon: but 
I gesse it is neither of water nor fire, nor yet of aire, nor 
of any thing necessare for maintenance of life. otherwise 
should the natiue countrie of each one be rather a 
stepdame to vs then a naturall mother, but it is of those 
thinges only which with healthfull, and lustie bodies wee 
might be without, if custome had not too much preuailed 
with vs. And to go no farther then to the vse of Wine in 
[^p.25^] 
England, in many respectes it greatly hurteth vs, yet our 
ordinarie vse thereof hath giuen vs such a longing thereafter, 
that we thinke if we should want it, many of our 
dayes were thereby abridged. whereby notwithstanding 
rhewmes are mightily increased, the sinewes feebled, the 
naturall moysture and heat of the body ouerhastily wasted, 
and swift olde age brought vpon vs, with an infinite 
number of discommodities besides. Which the nations 
finding where we haue it, do so delay it, y=t= rather thei seeme 
to drinke wined water, then watered wine, except the aged 
or such as are feeble stomaked. And diuers nations which 
may haue of the best, bicause they would be sure to banish 
the vse of it, count it sacriledge to taste it: as the Turkes at 
this day, who vse in steede thereof a distilled water of Rice 
steeped in Milke, thereby supplying the vse of wine. Neither 
do we find this disco~moditie of wine by the abuse of 
dronkennesse or surffeting only, but euen keeping within 
the three cuppes that Eubulus powreth out to wise men: 
wherof the first is of health, and nourishment: the second 
of myrth, and ioy of heart: and the thirde of sleepe, so that 
a drought or twaine doth maruellously distemper our bodyes: 
which inconuenience we finde not by our ordinarie 
drinke, yea, though it be stronger then wine. If I should 
compare our Mede with the best wine, and the Metheglin 
of the Welchmen, with Malmsey, I could take great arguments 
from the nature of Honie to proue it. especially 
being tempered with certeine wholesome hearbes, which 
haue vertue to strengthen the partes of the body. And by 
experience it is knowne, that Honie mixed with water, 
turneth in time to a wholesome liquor, in taste much like 
to wine. Wherevpon Pena in his Chapter of Honie, folio 
22. doubteth not to affirme, that the Mede of the Polonians 
and Muscouites, and the Metheglin of the Welchmen, are 
more wholsome and pleasant, then many of the best kinds 
of wines, he him selfe being a French man, and therfore in 
his iudgement lesse partiall. Wherefore to conclude this 
argument, seeing wine (which is the glorie of straunge 
merchandise) is but an hurtfull superfluitie, the rest must 
needes be farre other then necessaries. But medicines being 
such as without which our health and life runneth into infinit 
perills, by causes inward & outward, through breach 
of diet, vnwholsomnesse of meate, woundes, bitings of venemous 
[^p.26^] 
beastes, infections of the aire, and such like, it followeth 
necessarily, that they be not such as God would 
haue one nation gratifie an other with, which if thei were, 
greater reason were it to charge the neighbour nations 
therewith, that thereby their mindes might with performance 
of such mutuall duties so necessarie, be in streighter 
amitie and peace linked, who cease not for the enlarging 
of limites to vexe one an other, rather then the nations 
so farre distant, who haue neither fellowship of loue, 
nor quarell of hatred equall with the borderers. Neither 
would I be so taken, as though I knew not at some times, 
that one nation hath neede of an other, euen in things necessarie, 
as the supplie made by Ioseph to his father Iacob, & 
other nations out of the store of Aegypt, but the controuersie 
is of an ordinarie course, which the Lorde vseth in 
bestowing his blessings, wherewith he doth fully satisfie 
the neede of all nations with thinges necessarie, sauing 
when he punisheth with famine or want of victuals, which 
is extraordinarie in respect of his accustomed course of 
preseruing his creatures. Nowe, if the straunge medicines 
(for the moste part hotte) shoulde seeme rather in the 
whole kinde, then by reason of aboundance superfluous 
to them, and so more fit for vs, being of a colder temper: 
we are to consider the vse of them, is manifolde to the 
inhabitants, and not onely to warne them, as the Aethiopians 
called Troglodites, although they be parched with vehement 
heat of the Sunne, are saide to liue with Pepper, not 
to correct the distemper of their bodyes, which would rather 
increase it then diminish, but to correct their euill 
waters, and waterish fruites, wherewith they in part doe 
liue. Againe, we are to vnderstand, that the disease which is 
most agreeable with age, sexe, region, custome, complexion, 
is alwayes most daungerous, as ingendered by an exceeding 
vehemencie of the cause, whereto nature hath 
yelded, & so requireth a like veheme~t medicine: wherfore 
if the Arabian, the Indian, the Spaniard, fall into colde diseases, 
or such as followe colde: no maruell though nature 
hath ministred vnto them plentie of strong wines and 
spices, which the Northren nations need not. Who as they 
be more apt to fall into such diseases then they, their temper 
thereto agreeing, the aire and region furthering the 
same, so are they not thereof so dangerously sicke as they 
[^p.27^] 
of the South countries, and therefore require not so forcible 
a medicine. But I minde not to stande to shewe 
the vse which foreigne nations haue of their co~modities, 
let them see to it. Hitherto hath bene shewed, both that 
they be hurtfull vnto vs, and that it is not absurde for hot 
regions to abound with hot simples, the vse of them being 
diuers, both in respect of curing their bodyes, and other 
vses without the compasse of Physicke. These be the 
reasons which moue me to suspect the vse of straunge 
drugges, and driue me to thinke, that Nature hath better 
prouided for vs, and as the Indian, Arabian, Spaniard, haue 
their Indish, Arabian, and Spanish medicines, so also the 
Germane hath his, the French man his, and the English 
man his owne proper, belonging to each of them. I know 
gentle reader, nothing doth more hinder the accepting of 
truth diuers times, (especially such as see with other mens 
eyes) then the person of him who first propoundeth the 
matter, being taken rather to be an opinion of one, then 
an vndoubted trueth to be cherished of all, as who haue 
interest therein. wherefore that such might be satisfied, I 
will adde to my former reasons taken from the nature of 
the thing, the authoritie of moe doctours then one, who 
agreeing with this which I holde, may be a meanes to 
drawe the gentle reader the more seriously to consider of 
this matter, and trueth may take some strength thereby, 
and winne the more credite. Plinie in his foure and 
twentie Booke of his historie, and first Chapter, hath this 
sentence, thus much in English: Nature would that such 
onely should be medicines, that is to say, which easily 
might be come by of the common people: easie to be 
found out, without charge taken from the things whereby 
we liue, but in processe of time, the craft of men, and 
sleightes of their witts, found out these shoppes of strange 
drugges, in which a sale of mens liues is offered, wherevpon 
confections, and infinite mixtures beganne to be extolled, 
India and Arabia a man would thinke he were in 
them, and for a little gall or small vlcer, a medicine must 
be fetched from the redde Sea: whereas euery day the 
poorest doe suppe with true medicines. And in his two 
and twentie Booke, and foure and twentie Chapter, We 
doe not medle (saith hee) with the medicines taken from 
the merchandise of India or Arabia, or of the new world, 
[^p.28^] 
they are not fit for medicines and remedies. they growe 
too farre off, they are not for vs, noe, not for the nations 
where they growe, else would they not sell them away. 
If we shall needs vse the~ (saith he) let them be bought for 
sweet perfumes, and sweete oyles, and dainties, or to serue 
superstition, bicause when we pray we burne Fra~kensence & 
Costus. And thus much out of Plinie, whose iudgement as it 
is auncient of a 1000. yeares, so is it of him, who most diligently 
sought out the mysteries of nature, and published 
them for the vse of posteritie. Nowe if haply it be obiected, 
that Plinie might well verifie that of Italie which 
England can not performe, we must vnderstand, that Plinie 
reasoneth from nature, which serueth for al nations of the 
world as wel as for Italie, and directeth his penne not only 
against the medicines straunge to Italie, but euen against 
all that are farre fetched and dearely bought, as appeareth 
plainely by his wordes. To this sentence of Plinie, 
I will adde the iudgement of two Physicians of late 
time, least Plinie being no Physician, should be thought 
an vnsufficient testimonie. Fuchsius in his first booke of 
compounding of medicines, and 76. Chapter: thus agreeth 
with Plinie. If we were not so carried away with the admiration 
of straunge things, and were not fooles (saith he) 
who had rather vse medicines fetched from straunge and 
farre countries, (contemning our natiue medicines) then 
such as grow in our gardens: we might make Honie serue 
in steed of Manna. But with the exceeding cost and charge 
which those medicines put vs vnto, we are worthily punished 
for our follie. Loe, here two witnesses, the one a 
great Phylosopher, and the other both a Philosopher and 
a Physician, comparable with the best of late dayes. 
 
The thirde witnesse with Plinie and Fuchsius, is Martino 
Rulandus, to whome the students of Physicke owe much 
for his Medicina practica, and other workes. This Rulandus in 
his preface to Medicina practica, hath these wordes: thus in 
English: We haue simple medicines (easily had, homely, 
of our owne countrie of Germanie, to be bought with litle 
monie or none at all) ready (saith he) and intreated of 
in writing, by which onely all kindes of diseases are certainely 
and vndoubtedly cured, oftentimes better and 
much more easily (beleue reason and experience saith he) 
(and that with no hurt or daunger) then with the long 
[^p.29^] 
compoundes of the Apothecaries, which are costly, euill 
gathered without knowledge of the Physician oftentimes 
vnperfectly mixed, and vnskilfully confused, and as vnskilfully 
boyled, oftentimes putrified, and by age of force 
wasted, slouenly and with great negligence confected. In 
which wordes Rulandus briefly hath comprehended in a 
manner all the discommodities of straunge medicines. 
These testimonies I rather haue alledged gentle reader, 
that thou mayest knowe this my opinion is not mine only, 
and newe sprung vp from the leasure of a student, who 
might easily be ouertaken with a speculation which neuer 
could be showne on vse and practise, but hath with it the 
voyce of authoritie, and suffrages of excellent Philosophers 
and Physicians, although they haue not of purpose 
and in a set treatise handled this argument, as thou seest: 
which notwithstanding contayneth indeede the matter of 
a great volume. Hitherto hath bene shewed the great inconueniences 
and dangers which rise of the vse of strange 
medicines, by reason, by experience, by authoritie of Philosophers 
and Physicians. If my reasons be euill gathered, 
the experience false, the authoritie not authenticall, what 
haue I lost thereby? a fewe houres meditation, and a fewe 
lines writing, or my credite impaired will some say. If 
my credite could either buy such vertues to straunge medicines 
as they carie the name, or purge the shops of counterfet 
stuffe, or redeeme the harmes they haue done, I 
would verily esteeme as much of the chaunge, as he which 
made exchange of brasse for golde. Although I weene it 
be a proprietie to mans weaknesse vnauoydable of any to 
erre, and therefore if obstinacie be not therewith coupled, 
alwayes found pardon. But if my arguments rise from the 
causes and effectes of these foreigners, and causes and effectes 
of our bodyes, which are of all arguments the most 
forcible to establish or ouerthrowe any thing to be decided 
by reason, and the authorities such, as iustly exception 
can not be taken against: blame me not (gentle reader) 
though I be caried into this persuasion my selfe, and of a 
loue and zeale to benefite thee, haue published that which 
I haue conceiued of this argument. If I be deceiued in my 
iudgement of straunge drugges, (which I wish with all 
my heart I were) these reasons, the wofull experience, the 
authoritie of such men haue induced me. which if all may 
[^p.30^] 
be answered, that which seemed more then doubtfull before, 
shall by this controuersie shine most cleare, and truth 
as it were wrought with the fire of reason, receiue greater 
strength and perfection. Thus much touching the vnablenesse 
of strange merchandise to performe vnto vs sufficiencie, 
yea, any measure of medicines, as belonging vnto 
vs properly, and the discommodities of them. Nowe, if 
straunge medicines serue not our turnes, and al medicines 
be either straunge or home borne, it must needes follow, 
that the home medicines are most naturall and kinde to 
vs, except a man would say all medicines bring harme vnto 
vs, which is not of the nature of a medicine, being an 
instrument of perfourming remedies vnto vs, or if it were 
so, yet haue we this by experience, that straunge medicines 
doe more anoy vs then straungers, yea, destroy vs, and restore 
them: wherfore home medicines and of our countrie 
yeelde, of equitie must necessarily performe the same to 
vs, which their medicines doe to them. Else I would know 
why we should be inferior vnto them, or one nation more 
priuiledged that way then an other, the need beeing common, 
and the prouidence of God all one, yea such as rather 
then remedie should neede the chariot of the Sunne 
to fetch in from one end of the world to the other, or be so 
farre to seeke as our common drugges are, he hath linked 
the remedie in many things so streightly to the cause of 
our hurt, that euen the selfe same which harmed vs, carieth 
with it amendes. As the Scorpion rubbed vpon his 
stinging, cureth the same. Likewise the Ranie diuided and 
applyed hot to the wound, cureth her venemous biting, & 
so the Pastinaca marina as it bringeth most daungerous 
hurt, it refuseth not (being thereto applied) to minister remedie. 
Which practise of nature might verily moue vs to 
thinke her meaning is not to send vs either into Arabia or 
India for ayde of our griefes, but thereby to commend 
her care vnto vs, and giue occasion of praysing Gods prouidence, 
and stirring vs vp to make diligenter search into 
our owne prouision, and to take better triall then we are 
wont of the same. Wherein the great liberalitie of GOD 
appeareth in such large measure, that rather superfluitie 
then sparing may be noted herein: in that both one simple 
nature carieth with it the vertue of many medicines, and 
many simples, remedies against such diseases as we might 
[^p.31^] 
be thought like neuer to be subiect vnto, and such things 
as in respect of their nature might seeme vile vnto vs, affoorde 
vs (being skilfully applyed) most souereigne medicine: 
whereof for a taste I giue two or three examples: 
Milke is either to be considered in all the partes together, 
or them seuered. Al kinde of Milke boyled, especially burned 
with stones taken from the sea shoare, helpeth all inward 
vlcers, chiefly of the iawes, the lunges, the guttes, the 
blader, and the kidneys, it is good against the itch and 
wheales, and it helpeth bloudie flixes. Newe Milke is good 
against frettings made with poysons receiued inward: as of 
Cantharides and such like: it is profitably gargled against 
swellings and frettings in the iawes. The whay of Milke is 
good to purge the body, especially of such as be melancholike, 
and disposed to the falling sicknesse, leprosie, and 
breaking out with scabbes. The cheesie part of it, as curds, 
fresh without salt, softneth the belly, which pressed & broiled 
stayeth the laxe. Cheese laide on, helpeth the inflamation 
of the eyes. The butter of Milke dronke, softneth the 
bellie, and serueth against poyson for want of oyle, rubbed 
vpon their gooms with honie, helpeth the toothing of 
children, and cureth the itching of their gooms and soares 
of their mouthes. It helpeth such as are bitten of the serpent 
called Aspis. The soote of butter is very effectuall against 
watering eyes, and swiftly skinneth sores. 
 
