[^Culpeper, Nicholas: London dispensatory^] 
 
[}A 
PHYSICALL 
DIRECTORY 
OR 
A translation of the LONDON 
DISPENSATORY 
Made by the Colledge of Physicians in London. 
 
Being that book by which all Apothicaries are strictly commanded 
to make all their Physick with many hundred additions 
which the reader may find in every page marked with 
this letter A. 
 
Also there is added the use of all the simples beginning at the 
first page and ending at the 78 page. 
 
By Nich. Culpeper Gent. 
 
Persius. Disce, sed ira cadat naso, rugosaque sanna. 
Cicere. Non nobis solum nati sumus sed etiam patria~. 
 
LONDON, 
Printed for Peter Cole and are to be sold at his Shop 
at the sign of the Printing-presse near to the 
Royall Exchange 1649.}] 
 
[^Omitted a note by the translator Nicholas Culpeper, a list of the names of the doctors of the society, an epistle from the college to the reader, a brief of his majesty's proclamation commanding all apothecaries to follow the pharmacopoeia, and an explanation of weights, measures and some technical terms.^] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 1-18^] 
 
[^p.1^] 
[}A 
CATALOGVE 
OF THE 
SIMPLES 
CONDUCING TO THE 
DISPENSATORY.}] 
 
[}THE PREFACE.}] 
 
BEfore I begin the Catalogue I thought good 
to premise a few words to the Reader: 
1. Let him have a care he mistake not one 
thing for another, viz. Herbs for Roots, or 
either of them for Flowers: If he cast but 
his eye up to the top of the Page, he shall 
there see which it is. 
 
2. Let a due time be observed (cases of necessity excepted) 
in gathering all Simples; for which take these few Rules: 
All Roots are of most vertue when the sap is down in them, 
viz. toward the latter end of summer, or beginning of the 
spring, for happily in winter many of them cannot be found; 
you may hang up many of them a drying, by drawing a string 
through them and so keep them a whol year. 
 
[^p.2^] 
Herbs are to be gathered when they are fullest of juyce, before 
they run up to seed; and if you gather them in a hot sunshine 
day, they will not be so subject to putrifie; the best way 
to dry them, is in the sun, according to Dr. REASON, 
though not according to Dr. TRADITION: Such Herbs 
as remain green all the year, or are very full of juyce, it were 
a folly to dry at all, but gather them only for present use, as 
Houseleek, Scurvy-grasse, &c. 
 
Let Flowers be gathered when they are in their prime, in a 
sunshine day, and dryed in the sun. Let the seeds be perfectly 
ripe before they be gathered. 
 
3. Let them be kept in a dry place, for any moisture, though 
it be but a moist air, corrupts them, which if perceived in 
time, the beams of the sun will refresh them again. 
 
4. Take notice, that only the Latin names, were quoted by 
the Colledge and are to be seen at the beginniug of each Simple 
in a different letter, the English name together with the 
Temperature and Vertues were added by the Translator, he 
hopes for the publick good. 
 
5. All the Lattin names to one Herb are not set down, 
that would have done no other good in the world than took 
up more paper, and by consequence made the Book the 
dearer. 
 
[^p.3^] 
[}ROOTS.}] 
 
ACanthi, Brancæ ursinæ. Of Bears-breech, or branck-ursine; 
it is meanly hot and dry, it helps ach and numnesse 
of the joynts, and is of a binding quality, good for 
wounds and broken bones. Dioscorides saith, they are profitable 
for Ruptures, or such as are bursten, or burnt with fire. 
 
Acori, Veri, Peregrini, Vulgaris. &c. See Calamus, Aromaticus. 
I shall not, nor dare not make a long paraphrase about the 
sorts of it, one of which is the water-flag, or flower de luce, 
which is hot and dry in the second degree, binds, strengthens, 
stops fluxes of the belly, and the immoderate flowing of the 
terms in women. 
 
Allium. Garlick. It is hot and dry in the fourth degree, 
breeds naughty and corrupt blood, yet is an enemy to all 
poysons, and such as are bitten by [/1./] cold venemous beasts, 
it provokes urin, and expels wind. 
 
Alcannæ. Of privet. See the leaves. 
 
Althææ Of marshmallows, are meanly hot, of a digesting softning 
nature, ease pains, help bloody-fluxes, the stone & gravel. 
 
Angelicæ. Of Angelica, is hot and dry in the third degree, 
strengthens the heart exceedingly, and is a singular remedy 
against pestilence and poyson. 
 
Anchusæ. Of Alkanet, cold and dry, binding, good for old 
ulcers. 
 
Anthoræ. An outlandish root, the counterpoison for Monks-hood, 
it is an admirable remedy for the wind-cholick, and 
resists poison. They that would know more of it, let them 
reade Guainerius, and Solerius, both which lived neer the places 
where it plentifully grew. 
 
Apii. Of smallage, see the Barks. 
 
Aristolochiæ. Of Birthwort: of which are three sorts, long, 
round, and climing. All hot and dry in the third degree. 
 
The long, being drunk in wine, brings away both birth 
[/2./] 
and after-birth, and whatsoever a careless Midwife hath left 
behind. 
 
[^p.4^] 
The round, being drunk with wine, helps (besides the former) 
stuffings of the lungues, hardnes of the spleen, ruptures, 
convulsions; both of them resist poison. 
 
I never read any use of the climing Birthwort. 
 
Artanitæ, Cyclaminis &c. of Sow-bread: hot and dry in 
the third degree, a most violent purge, dangerous; outwardly 
applied to the place it profits much in the bitings of venemous 
beasts, also being hung about women in labor, it causeth 
speedy deliverance. See the herb. 
 
Arundinis, Vallatoriæ, & Saccharinæ. Of common Reeds and 
suger Reeds, the roots of common reeds, draw out thorns, ease 
sprains, the ashes of them mixed with vinegar: Take scurf 
or dandrif off from the head, and prevent the falling off of the 
hair, they are hot and dry in the second degree according to 
Gallen. 
 
I never read any vertue of the root of Suger Cane. 
 
Ari &c. of Cuckow-pints, or Wake-Robin, [/3./] hot and 
dry in the third degree. I know no great good they do inwardly 
taken, unless to play the rogue withal, or make sport: 
outwardly applied, they take off Scurf, Morphew, and Freckles 
from the face, and cleer the skin, and cease the pains of 
the Gout. See Gersa serpentaria. 
 
Asclepiadis, vincetoxici. Of Swallow wort, hot and dry, good 
against poison, and gripings of the belly, as also against the 
bitings of mad-dogs. 
 
Asari. Of Asara bacca, the roots are a safer purge than the 
leaves and not so violent, they purge by vomit, stool, and urine, 
they are profitable for such as have agues, dropsies, 
stoppings of the liver, or spleen, green sickness. 
 
Asparagi. Of Sparagus, or Sperage: they are temperate in 
quality, opening, they provoke urine, and cleanse the reins 
and bladder. 
 
Asphodeli, hastæ Regiæ, foem. Of Kings spear or foemal Asphodel. 
I know no physical use of the roots, probably there is: 
for I do not beleeve God created any thing of no use. 
 
Asphodeli, Albuci, maris, of male Asphodel. Hot and dry 
in the second degree. Inwardly taken, they provoke vomit, 
[/4./] 
urine, and the terms in women: outwardly used in ointments, 
[^p.5^] 
they cause hair to grow, cleanse ulcers, take away morphew 
and freckles from the face. 
 
[/5./] 
Bardane &c. Of Bur, Clot-bur, or Bur-dock. temperately 
hot and dry. Helps such as spit blood and matter, bruised 
and mixed with salt and applied to the place, helps the 
bitings of mad dogs. It expels wind, easeth pains of the teeth, 
strengthens the back, helps the running of the reins and the 
whites in women. 
 
Beben. alb. Rub. Of Valerian, white and red. Mesue, Serapio 
and other Arabians say they are hot and moist, in the 
latter end of the first or beginning of the second degree, and 
comfort the heart, stir up lust. The Græcians held them 
to be dry in the second degree, that they stop fluxes and provoke 
urine. 
 
Bellidis. Of Dazies, see the leaves. 
 
Betæ, nigræ, albæ, rubræ. Of Beets, black, white, and red, 
as for black Beets I have nothing to say, I doubt they are 
as rare as black Swans. The red Beet root boyled and preserved 
in vineger makes a fine cool, pleasing, cleansing, digesting 
sawce. See the leaves. 
 
Bistortæ &c. Of Bistort, or snakeweed, cold and dry in the 
third degree, binding, resists pestilence and poyson, helps 
ruptures, and bruises, staies fluxes, vomiting, and the immoderate 
flowing of the terms in women, helps inflamations and 
sornes of the mouth, and fastens loose teeth. 
 
Borraginis. Of Borrage, hot and moist in the first degree, 
[/6./] 
cheers the heart, and helps drooping spirits. 
 
Brioniæ &c. Of Briony both white and black, they are 
both hot and dey, some say in the third degree, and some 
say, but in the first, they purge flegm and watery humors, 
but they trouble the stomack much, they are special good 
for dropsies, the white is most in use, and is admirable good 
for the fits of the mother, both of them externally used, take 
away freckles, sun-burning and morphew from the face, and 
cleanse filthy ulcers. 
 
Buglossi. Of Bugloss, its vertues are the same with Borrage, 
and the roots of either sildom used. 
 
Bulbus vomitorius. a vomiting root. I never read of it else 
where by this general name. 
 
[^p.6^] 
Calami Aromatici. Of Aromatical reed, or sweet garden 
flag, It provokes urine, strengthens the lungues, helps bruises, 
resists poyson &c. In beating of it be very speedy, for the 
strength will quickly fly out. 
 
Capparum. Of Caper roots, are hot and dry in the second 
degree, cutting and cleansing, they provoke the terms, help 
malignant ulcers, ease the tooth-ach, aswage swellings, and 
help the rickets. 
 
Caryophillatæ &c. Of Avens, or hearb Bennet, The roots 
are dry, and something hot, of a cleansing quality, they keep 
garments from being motheaten. See the leaves. 
 
Caulium, of Coleworts. I know nothing the roots are 
good for, but only to bear the hearbs and flowers. 
 
Centaurij majoris, Of Centaury the greater, the roots help 
such as are bursten, such as spit blood, shrinking of sinnews, 
shortness of wind, coughs, convulsions, cramps. 
 
Cepæ, Of Onions, are hot and dry (according to Gallen) 
in the fourth degree, they cause driness, and are extreamly 
hurtful for chollerick people, they breed but little nourishment, 
and that little is naught, they are bad meat, yet good 
physick for flegmatick people, they are opening, and provoke 
urine, and the terms, if cold be the cause obstructing, bruised 
and outwardly applied they cure the bitings of mad dogs, 
rosted and applied they help boils, and Aposthumes, raw 
they take the fire out of burnings, but ordinaryly eaten they 
cause head-ach, spoil the sight, dull the sences, and fill the 
body full of wind. 
 
Chameleontis Albi, nigri &c. Of Chameleon white and 
black. Tragus calleth the Carline Thistle by the name of 
white Chameleon, the root whereof is hot in the second degree, 
and dry in the third, it provokes sweat, kills worms, 
resists pestilence and poyson, it is given with success in pestilential 
feavers, helps the tooth ach by being chewed in the 
mouth, opens the stoppings of the liver and spleen, it provokes 
vrine, and brings down the terms. As for the black 
Chameleon, All Physicians hold it to have a kind of venemous 
quality, and unfit to be used inwardly, Both Gallen, 
Clusius, Nicander, Dioscorides, and Ægineta. Outwardly in 
[^p.7^] 
oyntments it is profitable for scabs, morphew, tettars &c. 
and all things that need clensing. 
 
Chelidonij, majoris, minoris. Of Celondine the greater and 
lesser, The greater is that which we usually call Celondine, 
the root is manifestly hot and dry, clensing and scouring, 
proper for such as have the yellow Jaundice, it opens obstructions 
of the liver, and if chewed in the mouth it helps the 
tooth-ach. 
 
Celondine the lesser is that which usually we call Pilewort, 
which though Gallen, and Dioscorides teach to be hot in the 
fourth degree, and might happily be so in those countries 
where they lived, yet with us it scarce exceeds the first degree, 
the Juyce of the root mixed with hony and snuffed up the 
nose purgeth the head, helps the Hemorrhoyds or Piles being 
bathed with it, as also doth the root only carried about one, 
being made into an oyntment helps the [/7./] disease in the neck 
commonly called the Kings Evil. 
 
China, wonderfully extenuateth and drieth, provoketh 
sweat, resisteth putrifaction, it strengthens the liver, helps 
the dropsy and malignant ulcers, leprosy, itch, and the 
French-pocks, and is profitable in diseases coming of fasting. 
 
Cichorij. Of Succory, cools and dries in the second degree 
strengthens the liver and veins, it opens obstructions, stoppings 
of the liver and spleen. 
 
Colchici. Of medow-saffron, the roots are held to be hurtful 
to the stomack, therefore I let them alone. 
 
Consolidæ, majoris, minoris, Consolida major, is that which 
we ordinarily call Comfry, it is of a cold quallity, yet pretty 
temperate, of such a gluttenous quallity that according to 
Dioscorides they will joyn meat together that is cut in sunder, 
if they be boyled with it, it is excellent for all wounds both 
nternal and external, for spitting of blood, ruptures or 
iburstness, pains in the back, it strengthens the reins, it stops 
the terms, and helpeth the hemorrhoyds. 
 
Consolida minor is that we call, Self-heal, and the Lattins 
Prunellla. See the hearb. 
 
Costi utriusque. Of Costus both sorts, being roots coming 
[^p.8^] 
from beyond sea, hot and dry, break wind, being boild in 
oyle it is held to help the gout by anointing the greived place 
with it. 
 
Cucumeris agrestis. Of wild cucumer roots, or cowcumber as 
the vulgar call them, they purge flegm and that with such 
violence, that I would advise the country man that knows 
not how to correct them to let them alone. 
 
Cinaræ &c. Of Artichokes, the root purgeth by urine 
whereby the rank savor of the body is much amended. 
 
Cynoglossæ &c. Of Houndstongue, cold and dry, being rosted 
and laid to the fundament helps the Hemorrhoyds, is also 
good against burnings and scaldings. 
 
Curcumæ. Of Turmerick, hot in the third degrree, opens 
obstructions, is profitable against the yellow jaundice, and 
cold distempers of the liver and spleen. 
 
Cyperi utriusque, longi, rotundi. Of Cyperus grasse or English 
Galanga, both sorts, long and round, is of a warming nature 
provokes urine, breaks the stone, provokes the terms, the ashes 
of them (being burnt) is used for Ulcers in the mouth, 
Cankers &c. 
 
Dauci. Of Carrots, are moderately hot and moist, breed 
but little nourishment and is extream windy, I omit what 
vertues Gallen writes of them, as being confident there was 
such a difference between them that our Carrots will never 
answer those effects. 
 
Dentariæ majoris &c. Of Toothwort, toothed violets, or 
Coralwort, they are drying, binding, and strengthening, are 
good to ease pains in the sides and bowels, also being boyled 
the decoction is said to be good to wash green wounds and 
ulcers with. 
 
Dictamni Of Dittany, is hot and dry in the third degree, 
[/8./] 
hastens travail in women, provokes the terms. See the leaves. 
 
Doronici. Of Doronicum, a supposed kind of wolf-bane, I 
am of opinion that Serapio and Avicenna and other Arabian 
Physitians did not intend that root we now use for Doronicum 
when they wrote so much against it, I shall adhear to the 
judgment of Gesner, which is verified by daily experience, It is 
hot and dry in the third degree, strengthens the heart, is a soveraign 
[^p.9^] 
cordial, and preservative against the pestilence; It 
helps the vertigo or swimming of the head, is admirable against 
the bitings of venemous beasts, and such as have taken 
to much opium, as also for Lethargies, the joyce helps 
hot rhewns in the eyes. 
 
Dracontij, Dracunculi. Diverse Authors attribute diverse 
hearbs to this name, it is most probable to me, that they mean 
Dragons, the roots of which cleanse mightily, and take away 
proud or dead flesh, the very smell of them is hurtfull 
for women with child, outwardly in oyntments they take away 
scurf, morphew and sunburning, I would not wish any 
unless very well read in Physick to take them inwardly. 
 
Ebuli. Of Dwarf Elder, Walwort, or Danewort, hot and 
dry in the third degree, the roots are as gallant a purge for 
the dropsie as any is under the Sun, which besides the Authority 
of the Ancient, was often proved by the never dying Dr. 
Butler of Cambridge, as my self have it in a manuscript of 
his. 
 
Echij. Of Vipers Bugloss, or Wild Bugloss: I warrant 
you if Authors had not differed about this hearb, the Colledge 
would have set down five or six names to have explained 
their meaning, as they usually do where they need not, 
I have set down the most usual name, and alwaies quote the 
vertues to what I set down: They say the root of this being 
carried in ones hand, no venemous beast will bite him, (and so 
they say of Dragons which forgot before) so that you may 
walk without danger amongst adders, vipers, and serpents, 
(but I beleeve you had best have a care you do not tread upon 
them) this root is cold and dry, good for such as are bitten 
by venemous beasts, either being boyled in wine and drunk, 
or bruised and applied to the place, being also boyled in wine 
and drunk, it encreaseth milk in nurses. 
 
Ellebori, Veratri, albi, nigri. Of Hellebore white and black. 
The root of white Hellebore, or Sneezwort, being grated and 
snuffed up the nose, causeth Sneezing, kills Rats, and Mice 
being mixed with their meat: it is but a scurvy, churlish medicine 
being taken inwardly, and therefore better let alone 
than used; and yet Dr. Bright co~mends it for such as are mad 
through Melancholly. 
 
[^p.10^] 
Black Hellebore, Bears-foot, or Christmas-flower; both 
this and the former are hot and dry in the third degree. This 
is nothing so violent nor dangerous as the former: Both Gallen 
and Julius Alexandrinus report the roots of this boyled in 
vineger to be an admirable remedy against inveterate Scabs, 
Itch and Leprosie, the same helps the Tooth-ach, being held in 
the mouth, and dropped into the ears helps deafness coming 
of Melancholly, and noise in the ears, [/9./] corrected with a little 
Cinnamon (in pouder) it purgeth Melancholly, resisteth 
Madness. Also Pliny, Absyrtus, and Columella, affirm that a 
piece of the root put into a hole made in the ear of a beast 
troubled with the Cough, or that hath taken any poison, and 
drawn quite through next day about that time, helpeth them: 
out of question it is a special thing to rowel cattel withal. 
 
Enulæ Campanæ, Helenij. Of Elecampane, is hot and dry in 
the third degree, wholsom for the stomach, resists poyson, 
helps old coughs and shortness of breath, helps ruptures and 
provokes lust: in ointments, it is good against scabs and 
itch. 
 
Endiviæ &c. Of Endive, Garden Endive which is the root 
here specified, is held to be somewhat colder, though not so 
dry and cleansing as that which is wild, it cools hot stomachs 
hot livers, amends the blood corrupted by heat, and therefore 
must needs be good in feavers; it cools the reins, and therefore 
prevents the stone, it opens obstructions and provokes urine. 
 
Eringij. Of Eringo, or Sea-holly, the roots are moderately 
hot, something drying and cleansing, bruised and applied 
to the place they help the Scrophula, or disease in the throat 
called the Kings Evil, they break the stone, increase seed, stir 
up lust, provoke the terms, &c. 
 
Esulæ, majoris, minoris. Of Spurge the greater and lesser, 
they are both (taken inwardly) too violent for a vulgar use, 
outwardly in ointments they cleanse the skin, and take away 
sunburning. 
 
Filicis &c. Fearn, of which are two grand distinctions, viz. 
male and fœmale, I suppose they intend the male here, because 
they adjoyn some other names to it, which the Greeks 
[^p.11^] 
attributed only to the male, the fœmale is that which we 
call Brakes, both of them are hot and dry, and excellent 
good for the Rickets in children, and diseases of the spleen, 
but dangerous for women with child. 
 
Filipendulæ. Of Dropwort, the roots are hot and dry, in 
the third degree, opening, cleansing, yet somewhat binding, 
they provoke urine, ease pains in the bladder, and are a good 
preservative against the falling sickness. 
 
Foeniculi. Of Fennel, the root is hot and dry, some say 
in the third degree, opening, it provokes urine, and the 
terms, stregthens the Liver, and is good against the 
Dropsie. 
 
Fraxini. Of Ash-tree, I know no great vertues in Physick 
of the roots. 
 
Galangæ, majoris, minoris. Galanga commonly called Galingal, 
the greater and lesser, they are hot and dry in the third 
[/10./] 
degree, and the lesser are accounted the hotter, it strengthens 
the stomach exceedingly, and takes away the pains thereof 
coming of cold or wind, the smel of it strengthens the brain, 
it releeves faint hearts, takes away windiness of the womb, 
heats the reins, and provokes lust. 
 
Gentianæ. Of Gentian, called so from [/11./] his name that first 
found it out, some call it Feldwort, and Baldmoney. It is 
hot, cleansing, and scouring, a notable Counterpoyson, it 
opens obstructions, helps the bitings of venemous beasts, and 
mad dogs, helps digestion, and cleanseth the body of raw humors, 
our Chyrurgians use the root in form of a tent, to open 
the sore, they are also very profitable for ruptures or such 
as are burst. 
 
Glycyrrhizæ. Of Liquoris, the best that is grows in England, 
it is hot, and moist in temperature, helps the roughness 
of the windpipe, Hoarceness, diseases in the Kidneyes 
and bladder, and ulcers in the bladder, (which in my opinion 
is a very difficult thing to cure, although curable) it concocts 
raw humors in the stomach, helps difficulty of breathing 
is profitable for all salt humors, the root dried and beaten into 
pouder and the pouder put into the eye, is a special remedy 
for a pin and a web. 
 
[^p.12^] 
Graminis. Of Grasse such as in London they call Coutch-grasse, 
and Squitch-grasse, in Sussex Dog-grasse. It gallantly 
provokes urine, and easeth the Kidneyes oppressed with gravel, 
gripings of the belly, and difficulty of urine. bruised 
[/12./] 
and applied to the place they speedily help green wounds. 
 
Hermodactyli. Of Hermodactils, they are hot and dry, 
purge flegm, especially from the joynts, therefore are good 
for gouts, and other diseases in the joynts. their vices are 
corrected with long peppar, Ginger, Cinnamon, or Mastick. 
 
Hyacinthi. Of Jacinths, the roots are dry in the first degree, 
and cold in the second, they stop loosness, bind the belly. 
 
Iridis, vulgaris, et Florentinæ &c. Orris, or flower-deluce 
(after the French name) both that which grows with us, and 
and that which comes from Florence. They are hot and dry 
in the third degree, resist poyson, help shortness of breath, 
provoke the terms, the root being green and bruised takes away 
blackness and blewness of a stroak being applied to it. 
 
Imperatoriæ &c, Of Masterwort, the root is hot and dry in 
the third degree, mitigates the rigor of Agues, helps Dropsies, 
provokes Sweat, breaks Carbuncles, and Plagues-sores being 
applied to them, it is very profitable being given inwardly 
in bruises. 
 
Isatidis, Glasti. Of Woad, I know no great Physical vertue 
in the Root, see the hearb. 
 
Labri veneris, Dipsaci. Fullers-Thistle, Teazle. The Root 
boyled in wine till it be thick (quoth Dioscorides) helps by 
unction the clefts of the fundament, as also takes away warts 
and wens. Gallen saith they are dry in the second degree, and 
I take it all Authors hold them to be cold and dry. 
 
Lactucæ. Of Lettice, I know no Physical vertue residing in 
the Roots. 
 
Lauri. Of the Bay-tree. The bark of the root drunk with 
wine, provokes urine, breaks the stone, opens obstructions of 
the liver and spleen, But according to Dioscorides is naught 
[/13./] 
for women with child. 
 
Lapathi acuti, Oxylapathi. Sorrel, according to Gallen, But 
Sharp-pointed-dock, according to Dioscorides, But which the 
[^p.13^] 
Colledge intends, I know not, The Roots of Sorrel are held 
to be profitable against the Jaundice, of Sharp-pointed-dock, 
cleanse, and help Scabs and Itch. 
 
Levistici. Of Lovage, they are hot and dry and exceeding 
good for any diseases coming of wind. 
 
Lillij Albi. Of white Lillies, the root is something hot and 
dry, helps burnings, softens the womb, provokes the terms, 
if boiled in wine, is given with good success in Feavers, Pestilences, 
and all diseases that require suppuration, it (being 
outwardly applied) helps Ulcers in the head, and amends the 
ill colour of the face. 
 
Malvæ. Of Mallows, they are cool, and digesting, resist 
poyson, and help Erosions, or Gnawing of the bowels or any 
other part, as also Ulcers in the bladder. 
 
Mandragoræ. Of Mandrakes, a root dangerous for its coldness, 
being cold in the fourth degree, the root is scarcy, and 
dangerous for the vulgar to use, therefor I leave it to those 
that have skill. 
 
Mechoachanæ &c. Of Mechoacan, It is corrected with Cinnamon, 
is temperate, yet drying, purgeth flegm chiefly from 
the head and joynts, it is good for old diseases in the head, 
and may safely be given even to Feaverish bodies, because of 
its temperature; It is also profitable against Coughs and 
pains in the Reins, as also against the French-pox. 
 
Mei &c. Spignel, the roots are hot and dry in the second 
or third degree, and send up unwholsom vapours to the head, 
and therefore seing God hath alotted such plentiful remedy 
for those maladies, this root conduceth to the cure of; I pass 
it by with silence. 
 
Mezerei &c. Of Spurge-Olive, or Widdow-wail. See the 
Herb, if you think it worth the seeing. 
 
Mororum Celsi. Of the Mulberry tree, The bark of the root 
is bitter, hot and dry, opens stoppings of the liver and spleen, 
purgeth the belly, and kills worms, boyled in vinegar helps 
the tooth-ach. 
 
Morsus Diaboli, Succisæ &c. Devils-bit. See the hearb. 
 
Nardi Spicæ, Indicæ, Celticæ. Of Spiknard, Indian, and 
Celtique. Celtick Nard, according to Rondeletius wonderfully 
[^p.14^] 
provokes urine, They are both hot and dry, but I let 
the degree alone, till the learned are agreed about it, the Indian 
also provokes urine and stops fluxes, helps windiness of 
the stomach, resisteth the pestilence, helps gnawing pains of 
the stomach, and dries up rewms that molest the head, the 
Celtick Spiknard, performs the same offices though in a 
weaker measure. 
 
Nenupharis, Nymphææ. Of Water lillies, they are cold 
and dry, and stop lust, I never dived so deep to find any other 
vertue the roots have. 
 
Ononidis, Arrestæ Bovis &c. Of Cammock, or Rest-Harrow, 
so called because it makes the Oxen stand still when they are 
ploughing, The roots are hot and dry in the third degree, it 
breaks the stone, (viz. the bark of it) the root it self, according 
to Pliny, helps the falling-sickness, according to Mathiolus, 
helps ruptures. 
 
Ostrutij. Masterwort, given once before under the name of 
Imperatoria. But I have something else to do than to write one 
thing twice as they did. 
 
Pastinacæ, Sativæ, et silvestris. Garden and wild Parsnips, 
they are of a temperate quality enclining something to heat, 
the Garden Parsnips provoke lust, and nourish as much and 
more too, than any root ordinarily eaten, the Wild are more 
physical, (and so usually are all wild plants, I could give 
reasons for it if I durst spend time and paper) being cutting, 
cleansing, and opening, they resist the bitings of venemous 
beasts, ease pains and stitches in the sides, and are a soveraign 
remedy against the Wind chollick. 
 
Pentaphylli. Of Cinkfoyl, commonly called five-leaved or 
five-fingered grass, the root is very drying, but very moderately 
hot, It is admirable against all fluxes, and stops blood 
flowing from any part of the body, it helps infirmities of the 
Liver and Lungues, helps putrified ulcers of the mouth, the 
root boyled in vineger is good against the Shingles, and appeaseth 
the rage of any fretting sores. 
 
Petasitæ, Of butter-bur, the roots are hot and dry in the 
second degree, they are exceeding good in violent and pestilential 
Feavers, they provoke the terms, expel poyson, and 
kill worms. 
 
[^p.15^] 
Peucedani, foeniculi porcini, Of Sulphurwort, Hog-fennel, 
or Horestrange, it is very good applied to the navils of children 
that stick out, ruptures, held in the mouth it is a present 
remedy for the fits of the mother, it being taken inwardly 
gives speedy deliverance to women in travail, and brings away 
the after birth. 
 
Poeoniæ, maris, foemellæ. Of Peony, male and fœmale, they 
are meanly hot, but more drying, the male is more effectual 
in operation than the fœmale, the root helps women not 
sufficiently purged after travail, it provokes the terms, & helps 
pains in the belly, as also in the reins and bladder, Falling-sickness, 
and convulsions in children, being either taken inwardly 
or hung about their necks. 
 
Phu, Valerianæ, majoris, minoris. Valerian, or Setwal, greater 
and lesser. They are temperately hot, the greater provokes 
urine and the terms, helps the strangury, staies rewms in the 
[/14./] 
head, and takes away the prickling pains thereof, The lesser 
resists poyson, aswageth the swellings of the cods, coming 
either through wind or cold, helps cold taken after sweating 
or labor, Wind chollick, outwardly it draws out thorns, 
[/15./] 
and cures both wounds and ulcers. 
 
Pimpinellæ &c. Of Burnet, It doth this good, to bring 
forth a gallant physical hearb. 
 
Plantaginis. Of Plantane, the root is something dryer than 
the leaf, but not so cold, it opens stoppages of the liver helps 
the Jaundice and ulcers of the reins and bladder. Dioscorides 
affirmeth that one root helps a quotidian ague, three a tertian, 
and four a quartan, which though our late Writers hold 
to be fabulous, yet there may be a greater truth in it than 
they are aware of, yet am I as loth to make superstition a 
foundation to build on as any of them, let experience be 
judge, and then we weigh not modern Jury-men. 
 
Polypodij. Of Polypodium, or Fearn of the Oak, It is a 
gallant though gentle purger of Melancholly, Also in the 
opinion of Mesue (as famous a Physitian as ever I read, for a 
Gallenist) it dries up superfluous humours, takes away swellings 
from the hands, feet, knees, and joynts, stitches, and 
pains in the sides, infirmities of the spleen, rickets: correct 
[^p.16^] 
it with a few Annis seeds, or Fennel seeds, or a little Ginger, 
and then the stomach will not loath it. 
 
Poligonati, sigilli Solomonis &c. Of Solomons Seal, Let it 
be no dishonor to Gallen nor Dioscorides that English men have 
found out in late daies that these roots may safely be given 
inwardly, Intruth they may be excused if the difference of 
the climates they and we lived and now live in be but considered, 
neither I hope will my country men blame me for following 
only Dr. Experience in the vertues of this root, stamped 
and boyled in wine it speedily helps (being drunk I mean 
for it will not do the deed by looking upon it) all broken 
bones, it is of an incredible vertue that way, as also being 
stamped and applied to the place, it soon heals all wounds, 
and quickly takes away the black and blew marks of blows, 
being bruised and applied to the place, and for these, I am 
perswaded there is not a better medicine under the Sun, or as 
Copernicus and Kepler will have it, above the Sun. 
 
Porri. Of Leeks, they say they are hot and dry in the fourth 
degree, they breed but ill favored nourishment at the best, 
they spoil the eyes, heat the body, cause troublesom sleep, and 
are noisom to the stomach, yet are they good for something 
else, than only to stick in Welchmens hats, for the juyce of 
them dropped into the ears, takes away the noise of them, 
mixed with a little vinegar and snuffed up the nose, it staies 
the bleeding of it, they are better of the two boyled than raw, 
but both waies, exceeding hurtful for ulcers in the bladder, 
and so are Onions and Garlick. 
 
Prunellarum Silvestrium. Of Sloe-bush, or Sloe-tree, I think 
the Colledge set this amongst the roots only for fashion-sake, 
and I did it because they did. 
 
Pyrethri Salivaris &c. Pelitory of Spain, it is hot and dry 
in the fourth degree, chewed in the mouth, it draws away 
Rewm in the tooth-ach, bruised and boyled in oyl, it provokes 
sweat by unction, inwardly taken, they say it helps Palsyes 
and other cold effects of the brain and nerves. 
 
Rhapontici. Reupontick, or Reubarb of Pontus, it takes away 
windiness, and weakness of the stomach, sighings, sobbings, 
spittings of blood, diseases of the liver and spleen, rickts 
&c. 
 
[^p.17^] 
Rhabarbari. Of Reubarb, It gently purgeth choller from 
the stomach and liver, opens stoppings, withstands the dropsie, 
and Hypocondriack melancholly, a little boyling takes 
away the vertue of it, and therefore it is best given by infusion 
only, it leaves a binding quality behind it, therefore dried a 
little by the fire and beaten into powder it is usually given in 
fluxes. 
 
Rhaphani, Domesticæ et sylvestris. Of Radishes, Garden and 
Wild. Garden Radishes provoke urine, break the stone, and 
purge by urine exceedingly, yet breed very bad blood, are offensive 
to the stomach, and hard of digestion, hot and dry in 
quallity. Wild or Horse Radishes, such as grow in ditches, 
are hotter and drier than the former, and more effectual in 
the premises. 
 
Rhodiæ, rad. Rose root, called (I suppose) by that name 
because of its sweetness. Stamped and applied to the head it 
mitigates the pains thereof, being somewhat cool in quality. 
 
Rhabarbari-Monachorum. Patience, Monks-Reubarb, or Bastard-Reubarb, 
it also purgeth, cleanseth the blood, opens 
obstructions of the liver. 
 
Rubiæ tinctorum. Of Maddir, In this were Gallen and Dioscorides 
quite beside the cushion, in saying this root was opening, 
and cleansing, when clean contrary, it is both drying, 
and binding, yet not without some opening quality, for it 
helps the Yellow Jaundise, and therefore opens the obstructions 
of the liver and gall, it is given with good success to such 
as have had bruises by falls, stops loosness, the Hemorrhoids, 
and the Terms in women. 
 
Rusci. Of Knee-holly, or Butchers-broom, or Bruscus, 
they are meanly hot and dry, provokes urine, break the stone, 
and help such as cannot piss freely. 
 
Sambuci. Of Elder, I know no wonders the root will 
do. 
 
Sarsæ-Parigliæ. Of Sarsa-Parilla, or Bindweed, somewhat 
hot and dry, helpful against pains in the head, and joynts, 
they provoke sweat, and are used familiarly in drying Diet-drinks. 
 
[^p.18^] 
Satyrii utriusque. Of Satyrion, each sort, they are hot and 
moist in temper, provoke lust, and increase seed, each branch 
beareth two roots, both spongy, yet the one more solid than 
the other, which is of most vertue, and indeed only to be used, 
for some say the most spongy root is quite contrary in 
operation to the other, as the one encreaseth the other decreaseth, 
yet if in your eye they contend for dignities, put them 
both in water, and the most solid which is for use will sink, 
the other swim. 
 
Saxifragiæ albæ. Of white Saxifrage, in Sussex we call them 
Lady-smocks, the roots powerful break the stone, expel wind, 
provoke urine and cleanse the reins. 
 
Sanguisorbæ. A kind of Burnet. 
 
Scabiosæ. Of Scabious, the roots either boyled or beaten 
[/16./] 
into pouder and so taken, helps such as are extreamly troubled 
with scabs and itch, are medicinal in the Frech-pocks, 
hard swellings, inward wounds, being of a drying, cleansing 
and healing faculty. 
 
Scordii. Of Scordium, or water-Germander: see the 
hearb. 
 
Scillæ. Of Squills, see the vineger, and wine of Squills in 
the compounds. 
 
Scrophulariæ &c. Of Figwort, The roots being of the same 
vertue with the hearb, I refer you thither. 
 
Scorzoneræ. Of Vipers-grass, The root cheers the heart and 
strengthens the vital spirits, resists poyson, helps passions and 
[/17./] 
tremblings of the heart, faintness, sadness, and melancholly, 
opens stoppings of the liver and spleen, provokes the terms 
easeth women of the fits of the mother, and helps swimmings 
in the head. 
 
Seseleos. Of Seleli, or Hart-wort, The roots provoke urine 
helps the falling sickness. 
 
Sisari, secacul. Of Skirrets, they are hot and moist of good 
nourishment, something windy as all roots are, by reason of 
which they provoke lust, they stir up apetite and provoke 
urine. 
 
I hope I may without offence forbear mentioning, Comfry, 
and black Briony, twice, though the Colledg did not. 
 
[^Chapters on barks, herbs, flowers, fruits, seeds, minerals and stones omitted.^] 
[^Extract 2, pp. 78-94^] 
 
[^p.78^] 
[}COMPOVNDS 
CONTAINED IN THE 
DISPENSATORY}] 
 
[}A PREFACE.}] 
 
I Shall desire only to give the Reader notice: 
 
1. That I left out all the Simple distilled waters, quoted by 
the Colledge; many of which were ridiculous, the simples being 
not to be obtained green in this Land: And sure none in 
Bedlam are so mad as to go about to distil simple water out of dry 
things. 
 
2. If any desire to know the vertues of distilled waters, let them 
repair, to the Herbs themselves, part of the vertues of which the Waters 
have, though (I am of opinion) not so much as people think they 
have. 
 
3. The best way (that I know) to distil Simple Waters, is, To 
bruise the Herbs or Flowers, of what you would distill, and having 
pressed out the juyce, distil it in a Glass-stil in sand; and so will the 
Water be better by odds than if distilled in a Peuter-stil as usually 
they do. 
 
4. Only and barely the Receipts themselves were quoted by the 
Colledge; the Vertues of them, as also the Marginal Notes, and whatsoever 
sentences are marked with a capital A. are Additions. The 
Colledge when they made this Dispensatory, never intending their 
Country so much good as to quote the Vertues. 
 
[^p.79^] 
[}AN INTERPRETATION OF CERTAIN 
COMMON NAMES.}] 
 
[^Beginning of a list in two columns.^] 
The five Cordial Flowers. 
 
Of Roses, Violets, Borrage, 
Buglosse, Rosemary, or 
Bawm-flowers. 
 
The five Emollient Herbs. 
 
Marshmallows, Mallows, 
Beets or Brank-Ursine, 
Mercury, Violets, or Pellitory 
of the wall. 
 
The four greater hot Seeds. 
 
Of Annis, Fennel Caraway, 
Commin. 
 
The four lesser hot Seeds. 
 
Of Bishops-weed, Amomum, 
Smallage, Carrots. 
 
The four greater cold Seeds. 
 
Of Gourds, Citruls, Cucumers, 
Melons. 
 
The four lesser cold Seeds. 
 
Of Endive, Succory, Lettice, 
Purslain. 
 
The five greater opening Roots. 
 
Of Smallage, Sparagus, Fennel, 
Parsly, Bruscus. 
 
The two Roots. 
 
Of Fennel, Parsly. 
 
The five lesser opening Roots. 
 
Of Grass, Eringo, Capers, 
Rest-harrow, Madir. 
 
[^A column change.^] 
The five capillary Herbs. 
 
The four sorts of Maiden-hair, 
Cetrach. 
 
The four Pluretical Waters. 
 
Of our Ladies-Thistle, Dandelion, 
Carduus-Benedictus, 
Scabios. 
 
Common hot flowers. 
 
Of Chamomel, Meliot, Orris 
 
Three stomach Oyls. 
 
Of Wormwood, Quinces, 
Mastich. 
 
Four hot Ointments. 
 
Of Agrippa, Althea, Aregon, 
Martiatum. 
 
Four cold Ointments. 
 
Album Camphoratum, Populion, 
Refrigerans Galeni, 
Rosatum. 
 
Four Ointments fit for 
Chyrurgians. 
 
Basilicon, to digest. 
Viride Apostoloru~, to clense. 
Aurium, to breed flesh. 
Album, to skin. 
 
Precious Fragments. 
 
Of Saphire, Granate, Emerald, 
Jacynth, Sardine, 
Ruby, Pearls, Amethist. 
[^End of a list in two columns.^] 
 
[^p.80^] 
[}COMPOVND 
VVATERS.}] 
 
[}Wormwood Water, the lesser Composition.}] 
 
TAKE of dried [/18./] Wormwood two pound, Annis seeds 
bruised half a pound, infuse them in six [/19./] congies of 
[/20./] smal wines for 24. hours, then draw out the spirit with 
an Alembick, adding to the distillation so much Sugar as is 
sufficient. 
 
After the same manner is drawn Water of Angellica Roots, 
Annis-seed Water, Orrange pill Water, Lemmon-pill Water, 
Bawm Water, Mint Water, Rosemary Water, Sage Water, &c. 
 
A. If you desire the vertues of these waters see the vertues of 
the herbs and pills &c. and then your reason will tell you the 
waters have the same opperations, and may happily produce 
a better effect upon cold stomachs. 
 
[}Wormwood Water the greater Composition.}] 
 
Take of Roman and common Wormwood, of each a 
pound, Sage, Mints, Bawm, of each two handfuls, Galanga, 
Ginger, Aromatical reed, Alicampane roots, of each three 
drachms, Liquoris, an ounce, Raisons of the Sun three 
ounces, Annisseeds, sweet Fennel seeds of each six drachms, 
Cinnamon, Cloves, Nutmegs, of each two drachms, Cardamoms, 
Cubebs, of each one drachm, Let the things be cut 
that are to be cut, and the things bruised that are to be bruised, 
all of them infused in 20. pints of Spanish wines, for the space 
of 24. hours, and then distilled in an Alembick according to 
art, and sweetned with Sugar. 
 
[^p.81^] 
A. This water is excellent good for cold stomachs, & (taken 
with discretion) helps digestion in such in whom it is weak, 
it kills worms in the belly, easeth pains in the teeth, and given 
in convenient mixtures, is profitable in feavers. 
 
[}Angelica Water the greater Composition.}] 
 
Take of [/21./] Angelica two pounds, Annis-seed half a pound, Coriander & Carawaies of each four ounces, Zedoary bruised, three 
ounces, infuse them 24. hours in six congies of small wines, then 
draw out the spirit, and sweeten it with sugar. 
 
A. It comforts the heart, cherisheth the vital spirits, resisteth 
[/22./] 
the Pestilence and Infection. 
 
[}Langius his Bezoar Water.}] 
 
Take of [/23./] Chelondine w=th= the roots, three handfuls and 
an half, Rue a handful, Scordium two handfuls, Dittany 
of Creet, Carduus Benedictus of each one handful and an half, 
Zedoary and Angelica roots of each three drachms, Citron 
and Lemmon pils of each two drachms and an half, Clove-gilliflowers, 
Roses of each two drachms, Cinnamon, Cloves, 
of each five drachms and an half, Venice treacle three ounces, 
Mithridate an ounce and an half, Camphire two scruples, 
Troches of Vipers, Mace of each a drachm and an half, Wood 
of Aloes two scruples, Yellow sanders a drachm and an half, 
Conserves of Clove-gilliflowers two ounces, Carduus seeds 
an ounce, Pouder of Electuary [/24./] Liberantis five scruples, Filings 
of Unicorns-horn, or Harts horn a drachm and an half: 
Let these Ingredients (being cut and bruised) be infused for 
three daies in the spirit of Wine and Malaga Wine, of each 
three pound, then stil'd in a Glasse-Stil in [/25./] Balneo Mariæ according 
to art. 
 
After it is half stilled, that which remains in the Stil may 
be strained through a linnen cloath, and by evaporation reduced 
to the thicknesse of Honey, and called by the name of 
Bezoartick Extraction. 
 
After the same maner may Extractions be made of almost 
all Compound Waters. 
 
[^p.82^] 
A. Extracts have the same vertues with the waters they are 
made from, only the different form is to please the quaint 
pallates of such whose fancy loaths any one particular 
form. 
 
A. This Bezoar water strengtheneth the heart, Arteries and 
spirit vital. It provoketh sweat, and is exceding good in 
pestilential feavers, in health it withstands melancholly and 
consumptions, and makes a merry blith cheerful creature. 
 
[}Mathiolus, his Bezoar Water.}] 
 
Take of Mathiolus his great Antidote, syrup of Citron 
pills, of each one pound, spirit of wine distilled five times over, 
five pound, put all these in a glasse that is much to big to 
hold them, stop it close that the spirit fly not out, then shake 
it together, that the Electuary may be well mingled with the 
spirit, so let it stand a month, shaking it together twice a week 
(for the Electuary will settle to the bottom) The month being 
ended, powr off the cleer water into another glasse to be 
kept for your use, stopping it very close with wax and parchment 
else the strength will easily fly away in vapours. 
 
A. Mathiolus is very large in commendation of this water, 
for (quoth he) four drachms (that is half an ounce) of this 
water being taken, either by it self or in the like quantity of 
good wine, or any other cordial water, so absolutely & speedily 
cureth the bitings of any venemos beasts whatsoever that 
although the danger of death be such that the patient hath 
lost his speech, sight, & almost al the rest of his sences, yet wil 
he be roused up like a man out of his sleep, to the wonderful 
admiration of the beholders, which he saith he hath proved 
a [/26./] thousand times. It draws away poyson from the heart, 
and cures such as have drunk poyson, it calls poyson out of 
the stomach by vomit, and helps such as have the pestilence. 
 
A. For my own particular part, thus much I can testify by 
experience in the commendations of it I have known it given 
in acute, in peracute feavers with gallant successe as also in 
consumptions, yea, in Hecticks, and in Gallens supposed 
[^p.83^] 
[/27./] incurable Marasmos, neither hath it missed the desired effects, 
and therefore out of question it strengtheneth the heart 
exceedingly, and the spirit vital. 
 
And then your own genius will tell you, this is fittest for 
cold complexions, cold diseases, and such diseases as the 
heart is most afflicted in. 
 
[}Capon Water.}] 
 
Take a Capon, (the bowels and fat being taken away) cut 
him in bits, and boyl him sufficiently in a [/28./] sufficient quantity 
of water, according to art. 
 
Take of this broth being strained, two pound and a half, 
Borrage, and Buglosse water, white Wine, of each one pound 
and an half, Flowers of Roses, Violets, Borrage, and Buglosse 
of each two drachms, Crumbs of new bread, half a 
pound, bruised Cinnamon an ounce, distill it in Glasse Still 
according to art. 
 
A. Divers Physitians have written several recepts of this water, 
as Gesner, Andr. e Lacuna, Med. Florent. and Coloniens. But 
the truth is this recept (although our Physicians conceal it) 
was borrowed from the Augustan Physitians, and only because 
they thought (as I suppose) a Capon must not be eaten 
without bread, they added the bread to it, the rest is verbatim 
from the Augustan Physitians. 
 
A. The Simples are most of them apropriated to the heart, 
and in truth the Composition greatly nourisheth and strengtheneth 
such as are in consumptions, and restoreth strength 
lost, either by feavers or other sicknesse, It is a soveraign remedy 
for Hectick feavers, and marasmos which is nothing else 
but a consumption coming from them, let such as are subject 
to these diseases hold it for a Jewel. 
 
[}Cinnamon Water.}] 
 
Take of bruised Cinnamon a pound and an half, Spanish 
wine 12. pints: Infuse the Cinnamon in the wine 24. hours, 
then distil them in an Alimbick; draw out three pints of 
[^p.84^] 
strong waters, (and small as much as you think sufficient) 
sweeten it with sugar sufficiently, and so keep it for your use. 
 
A. The vertues are the same that Cinnamon it self hath, to 
which I refer you. 
 
[}Mathiolus his Cinnamon Water.}] 
 
Take of bruised Cinnamon a pound, put it into a Glasse-Still, 
powring upon it four pints of Rosewater, a pint and 
an half of Spanish wine, stop the Still body close, and place it 
in a warm bath 24. hours, then put on the Still-head, lute it 
wel and distil it according to art. 
 
A. Mathiolus appoints Wine of Creet 4. pints, and that is 
al the alteratton. 
 
A. The Authors own Judgment is, That it strengthens the 
brain, heart, liver, stomach, lunges spleen and nerves, quickens 
the sight, resisteth poison, helpeth bitings by venemous 
beasts, causeth a sweet breath, bringeth down the terms in women, 
and hath vertue, attenuating, opening, digesting and 
strengthening. 
 
A. The truth is, I beleeve it prevails in cold diseases, being 
orderly regulated in quantity, according to the nature of the 
disease, the age and strength of the patient, and the season of 
the year. 
 
[}Cinnamon Water made by Infusion.}] 
 
Take of Cinnamon bruised, four ounces, Spirit of Wine, 
two pints, infuse them together 4. daies, in a large glasse close 
stopped with cork and a bladder, shaking the glasse twice 
a day. 
 
Dissolve half a pound of white sugar Candy, in a quart of 
Rose-water, then mix both these liquors together, then put 
into them four grains of musk, and half a scruple of Ambergreese 
tied up in a fine rag and hung to the top of the glasse. 
 
A. In my opinion this latter water is more prevalent for 
heart-qualms, and faintings than Mathiolus his. 
 
[^p.85^] 
[}Aqua Ceolestis. Mathiolus.}] 
 
Take of Cinnamon an ounce, Ginger half an ounce, white 
red and yellow Sanders, of each six drachms, Cloves, Gallanga, 
Nutmegs, of each two drachms and an half; Mace, 
Cubebs of each one drachm, both sorts of Cardamoms, Nigella 
seeds of each three drachms, Zedoary half an ounce, 
seeds of Annis, Sweet-Fennel, Wild-Parsneps, Bazil, 
of each a drachm and an half, Roots of Angelica, Avens, 
Calamus Aromaticus, Liquoris, Valerian the lesse, the leaves 
of Glary, Time, Calaminth, Peny-royal, Mints, Mother of 
Time, Marjoram, of each two drachms; the flowers of Red-Roses, 
Sage, Rosemary, Betony, Stœchas, Bugloss, Borrage, 
of each one drachm and an half; Citron pils, three drachms: 
Let the things be bruised that are to be bruised and infused 
15. daies in 12 pints of the best spirit of wine, in a glasse body 
wel stopped, and then let it be distilled in Balneo Mariæ according 
to art. Adding to the distilled water, Pouders of Diambra, 
Diamoscu dulce, Armaticum Rosatum, Diamargariton 
frigidum, Diarhodon Abbatis, pouder of Electuary de gemmis, 
of each three drachms; yellow Sanders bruised two drachms, 
Musk, Ambergreese, of each a scruple tied up in a fine ragg, 
cleer Julip of Roses a pound; shake them wel together, stopping 
the glasse close with wax and parchment till it grow 
cleer to be kept for your use. 
 
A. It comforteth and cherisheth the heart, reviveth drooping 
spirits, prevaileth against the plague and al malignant 
Feavers, preserveth the sences, and restoreth such as are in 
Consumptions. 
 
A. Only take this Caution, both concerning this and al other 
strong waters; They are not safely given by themselves in 
Feavers, (because by their hot quallity they inflame the blood 
and ad fuel to the fire) but mixed with other convenient cordials, 
and consideration had to the strength, complection, 
habit, age, and sex of the patient, for my own part, I aim sincerely 
at the publick good in writing of this, and therefore 
as I would not have Physitians domineer; so I would not 
have fools turn Physitians. 
 
[^p.86^] 
[}A Cordial Water.}] 
 
Take of Angelica leaves half a pound, Carduus leaves six 
ounces, Bawm, and Sage, of each four ounces, Angelica 
seeds six ounces, sweet fennel seeds nine ounces, let the herbs 
(being dry) and the seeds be bruised grosly, to which add, the 
pouders of Aromaticum Rosatum, and Diamoscu Dulce, of each 
an ounce and an half, Infuse these two daies in 32. pints of 
Spanish wine, then distill them according to art, draw out 
ten pints of strong spirit, which sweeten (after two daies standing) 
with a pound and an half of Sugar, dissolved in [/29./] 
Rosewater over the fire. 
 
Of the smaller spirit you may draw out six pints or 
more if you please for the [/30./] mixtures of other Cordials. 
 
A. The chief end of composing this medicine was to strengthen 
the heart, and resist infection, and therefore is very 
wholsom in pestilentiall times, and for such as walk in 
stinking aires. 
 
[}Aqua Cordialis frigida Saxoniæ.}] 
 
Take of the juice of Borrage, Buglosse, Bawm, Bistort, 
Vervain, [/31./] Sharp-pointed Dock, Sorrel, Goats-Rue, Mirrhis, 
or sweet Chervil, Blew-bottle great and smal, or the double 
quantity of the small, Roses, Marigolds, Lemmons, Citrons, 
of each six ounces, juice of Burnet and Cinkfoyl, of each 
three ounces, white wine Vinegar a pint, Purslain-seeds, 
Water-lillie Flowers, of each two ounces, Earth of Lemnos, 
Silecia, and Samos, of each an ounce and an half, Pouder 
called Diatrion Santalon, six drachms, Pearl prepared with 
juice of Citrons, three drachms, Infuse al the Pouders, Flowers, 
and Seeds, (the Earths and Pearls excepted) in the juyces, 
and Vinegar, for three daies, then distill it in water in 
a glasse-Still, and add to the distilled water, the Earths and 
Pearls in fine pouder, shake it together, and let it stand till it 
be cleer, and keep it for your use. 
 
[^p.87^] 
A. It mightily cools the blood, and therefore profitable 
in feavers, and all diseases proceeding of heat of blood, it 
provokes sleep. 
 
[}Langius his Ant-Epileptical Water.}] 
 
Take of the Flowers of [/32./] Line tree, three handfuls, Lillies 
of the vally five handfuls, peony seeds half an ounce, infuse 
them eight daies, in five pints of the best White-wine, then distill 
them in Balneo Mariæ, with a gentle fire, Afterward 
 
Take of the flowers of Rosemary, half a handful, of the 
flowers of Lavender a handful, Rue a handful, Betony half a 
handful, Stœchas of Arabia one pugil, Peony roots two 
drachms and an half, Dictamny two drachms, Squils prepared 
one drachm and an half, Pellitory of Spain half a drachm, 
Misletoe of the Oak two drachms, Castorium one drachm, 
Cubebs, Cardamoms of each one scruple, Mace half a dram, 
Cloves two scruples, Nutmegs one scruple, let al these being 
bruised, be infused in the water aforesaid, (and shaken wel together) 
for six daies, then distilled again in Balneo Mariæ, 
and the water kept in a glasse stopped. 
 
You may with one and the same labor prepare and extract 
which wil be very efficacious. 
 
A. If the authority of Erastus, or daily experience will 
serve the turn, then was this reciept chiefly compiled against 
the convulsion fits, but the derivation of the word 
notes it to be prevalent against the falling sicknesse also, for 
[^GREEK OMITTED^] in Greek signifies the Falling sicknesse, and indeed 
Erastus & experience pleads for this also: It is true the 
compostition of Erastus differs from this, and so doth another 
recited by Johannes Langius, but it seems our Physitians, for 
some reasons best known to themselves, esteemed this the 
best. 
 
A. Well then, having now learned the vertues of the water, 
a word or two of the use will not be amisse. Erastus 
was of opinion that both these diseases were caused by the 
Moon (and so am I of that opinion also, for I know some at 
this time that are constantly troubled with the Falling-sicknesse, 
[^p.88^] 
only at the new and full Moons, I could give reasons 
for this judgment of Erastus, but I am unwilling to be tedious.) 
Then saith he, if the disease come daily, let a spoonful to 
it be taken morning and evening, if weekly, then let it be 
taken only at the new and full Moon, and at her quartiles to 
the Sun, if it begin to wear away, then only twice a month, 
viz. at the new and full Moon wil suffie. It profits also in 
time of the fit, by rubbing their temples, nostrils, and jaws 
with it. 
 
[}Aqua Hysterica.}] 
 
Take of the Juyce of Briony roots four pints, the juyce of 
Rue and Mugwort, of each a quart, dried Savin leaves three 
handfuls, Featherfew, [/33./] Nep, Penyroyal, of each two 
handfuls, Basil, Dictamny of Creet, of each a handful and an 
half, fresh [/34./] Orange pills four ounces, Mirrh two ounces, 
Castorium one ounce, Canary Wine twelve pints, Infuse the 
simples in the Wine four daies, then distill them in a bath, 
and keep the distilled water for your use, When it is half stilled 
you may prepare and Extraction of the residue, for the 
same use the water is. 
 
A. It wonderfully prevaileth against the fits of the mother 
and such like diseases incident to women, and is a most excellent 
remedy to bring away dead children and the after 
birth, a spoonful or two of it, being given: and therefore 
let Midwives make much of it. 
 
[}Imperial Water.}] 
 
Take of Citron pills dried, Orange pills, Nutmegs, Cloves 
Cinnamon, of each two ounces; Cyperus, Orris Florentine, 
Calamus Aromaticus of each an ounce, Zedoary, Galanga, 
Ginger, of each one ounce, Tops of Rosemary, Lavender, of 
each two handfuls, The leaves of Bay, Marjoram, Hysop, 
Bawm, Mints, Sage, Time, of each one handful, fresh Roses 
White, and Damask, of each half a handful. Rosewater four 
pints, of the best white Wine eight pints, The things to be 
bruised, being bruised, let them be infused twenty four hours 
[^p.89^] 
in a glasse Still over hot [/35./] ashes, and then distilled according 
to art. 
 
A. You must distill it in a bath and not in sand, It 
seems the Colledge were but mean practicioners in Alchymy, 
but in this and many other recepts, trusted to that monster 
called Trædition, therefore take this for a general Aphorisme, 
All grosse bodies, stilled in sand will stink egregiously. 
 
A. It comforts and strengthens the heart against faintings 
and swoonings, and it is held to be a preservative against 
consumptions and apoplexies. 
 
[}Bawm Water: The greater Composition}] 
 
Take of Bawm a pound, Time, Penyroyal, of each three 
drachms, Cinnamon, two drachms, Cardamoms the lesse 
one drachm: [/36./] Grains of Paradice, half an ounce: Sweet 
Fennel seeds an ounce, Nutmegs, Ginger, of each a drachm, 
Galanga, six drachms, Calamus Aromaticus, Cyprus, of 
each a drachm and an half, Dictamni, half a drachm, let all 
of them be bruised and infused in eight pints of Spanish Wine 
and six pints of strong Ale, for 24. hours together, and then 
distilled by an Alembick, draw out of the stronger water three 
pints. 
 
A. The Simples seem chiefly apropriated to the stomach, 
and therfore must needs strengthens cold & weak stomachs, & 
help digestion, besides Authors say, It restoreth memory lost, 
quickens all the sences, keeps away gray hairs and baldnesse, 
strengtheneth the brain, makes the heart cheerful, and helps 
the lisping of the tongue, easeth the pains of the teeth, and 
causeth sweet breath. 
 
[}Aqua Mariæ.}] 
 
Take of Sugar Candy a pound, Canary Wine six ounces, 
Rose Water four ounces, boyl them to a Syrupe, to which ad 
Aqua Coelestis two pound, Amber-greece, and Musk, of each 
eighteen grains, Saffron fifteen grains, Yellow Sanders two 
drachms, make of them a cleer water.[/37./] 
 
[^p.90^] 
A. It is of more vertue than Aqua Coelestis to resist feavers, 
to strengthen the heart, to releeve Languishing nature. 
 
[}Aqua Mirabilis.}] 
 
Take of Cloves, Galanga, Cubebs, Mace, Cardamoms, 
Nutmegs, Ginger, of each one drachm, juyce of Chelondine, 
half a pound, Aqua-vitæ, a [/38./] pound, White Wine three pints 
(or three pound which you please) Infuse them twenty four 
hours, and then draw a quart of water from them, by an Alembick. 
 
A. The Simples also of this regard the stomack, and therefore 
the water heats cold stomachs, besides Authors say it preserveth 
from Apoplexies, and restoreth speech lost. 
 
[}Rosa-Solis.}] 
 
Take of Nutmegs, Annis seeds, Coriander seeds, of each 
an ounce, Galanga, Ginger, Cloves, of each half an ounce, 
Red-rose leaves a handful, Ros-solis six handfuls, Liquoris 
two ounces, Cardamoms, Zedoary, Grains of Paradice, 
Calamus Aromaticus, of each a drachm, Yellow Sanders 
two drachms, Red Sanders, Cinnamon, of each an ounce 
and an half, Of the best Aqua-vitæ, twelve pints, make an 
infusion of them for eight daies, then strain it and ad to the 
liquor, a pound and an half of Sugar. 
 
A. The Basis of this medicine, seems to be the herb Ros-solis, 
which is of a drying and binding quality and apropriated 
to the lungues, and therefore must needs be available for 
Phtisicks, or consumptions of the lungues, and because this 
herb provokes lust exceedingly, I suppose therefore the rose 
leaves were added, which according to [/39./] Authors resist lust. 
 
[}Dr. Stephens Water.}] 
 
Take of Cinnamon, Ginger, Galanga, Cloves, Nutmegs, 
Grains of Paradice, seeds of Annis, Fennel, Caraway, of each 
one drachm, Herbs of Time, Mother of Time, Mints, Sage, 
[^p.91^] 
Pennyroyal, Pellitory of the wall, Rosemary, Flowers of 
Red roses, Chamomel, Origanum, Lavender, of each one 
handful, infuse them twelve hours in twelve pints of Gascoign 
Wine, then with an Alembick, draw three pints of 
strong water from it. 
 
A. Authors hold it profitable for women in labour, that 
it provokes the terms, and brings away the afterbirth. 
 
[}Aqua Protheriacalis.}] 
 
Take of the leaves of Scordium, Scabious, Carduus Benedictus, 
Goats Rue, of each two handfuls, Citron pills, and 
Orrenge pills dried, of each two ounces, the seeds of Citrons, 
Carduus, [/40./] Hartwort, [/41./] Treacle Mustard, of each one ounce, 
The Flowers of Marigolds and Rosemary, of each a handful, 
Let the things to be cut, be cut, the things to be brused be 
grosly bruised, and infused in four pints of White Wine, and 
a quart of Carduus Water, and (being put into a convenient 
glasse) digested either by the heat of the sun or of the fire 
certain daies, often shaking it, Then distilled in Balneo Mariæ, 
reserve the two first pints by it self, & the remainder by it self, 
at last with every pound mix an ounce of Julapium Alexandrinum 
and a spoonfull of Cinnamon Water. 
 
It is not hid from our eyes that there are very many Simples in the 
[/42./] 
Composition of Treacle, the vertues of which cannot be exactly drawn 
out by distillation in Balneo Mariæ, and therefore we of purpose subscribed 
this, that the rational Physitian may at the time of giving it, 
appoint Treacle, or Diascordium, or any convenient syrup: notwithstanding 
lest we should seem different from all, we have added on recept 
of Treacle water by distillation. 
 
A. Aqua Protheriacalis, signifies a Water for Treacle, so then 
if you put Diascordium to it, it is a water for Diascordium, 
well then, we will take it for a general water for all Physick. 
 
[}Aqua Theriacalis: by infusion.}] 
 
Take of the best distilled Wine, Wine of Creet, sharp Vineger 
(in which half an ounce of Rue seeds have been boyled) 
[^p.92^] 
of each two pound, Venis Treacle, and Methridate, of each 
half a pound, mix them all together and warm them a little 
either in the Sun or in a bath, and keep the tincture for your 
use. 
 
[}Aqua Theriacalis: distilled.}] 
 
Take of the juice of green Walnuts four pound, the juyce 
of green Rue three pound, Juyces of Carduus Benedictus, 
Marigolds, Bawm, of each two pound, The roots of Patasites 
or Butter burs fresh and green, a pound and an half, the 
Roots of Burs one pound, Roots of Angelica and Master-wort 
green, of each six ounces, Scordium four handfuls, old 
Venis Treacle and Methridate, of each eight ounces, Canary 
Wine twelve pints, white Wine Vineger six pints, Juyce of 
Lemmons a quart, Digest them for two daies in horse dung, 
or else in a bath, let the vessel be well stopped, then distill it 
in sand, and in the distillation you may make an Extract called 
Extractum theriacale. 
 
A. That this latter water far exceeds the former, in vertues 
every way, I think no man that is well in his wits will deny, 
therefore I quote only the vertues of this, if any will use the 
former, I will not burden their conscience. 
 
A. This water is exceeding good in all Feavers, especially 
pestilential, it expelleth venemous humors by sweat, it 
strengtheneth the heart and vitals, it is an admirable counterpoyson, 
special good for such as have the Plague, or are 
poysoned, or bitten by venemous beasts, and expelleth virulent 
humors from such as have the French Pocks, If you desire 
to know more vertues of it, see the vertues of Venis Treacle. 
 
[}Ordinary Aqua vitæ.}] 
 
Distill Ale and lees of Wine in an Alembick (whose worm 
runs through cold water) into small Wine, in ten Congies of 
which infuse a pound of bruised Annis seeds, for twenty four 
hours then still it again into strong water. 
 
[^p.93^] 
[}Aqua vitæ compound.}] 
 
Is made of small Wines, in six congies of which, infuse 
Annis seeds half a pound, seeds of Fennel, and Caraway, of 
each two ounces, Cloves, Cinnamon, and Ginger, of each 
one ounce, and then draw the strong spirit from it. 
 
A. This is excellent good in my opinion for such as are 
troubled with wind. 
 
[}Spirit of Castorium.}] 
 
Take of Castorium four ounces, Lavender flowers, one 
ounce, the Tops of Sage and Rosemary, of each half an 
ounce, Cinnamon six drachms, Mace, and Cloves, of each 
two drachms, Spirit of Wine rectified six pints: Digest all 
these in a glasse being filled only to the third part, stopped 
close with cork and bladder, in warm ashes, or sand, then stil 
it in a glasse Alembick in Balneo Mariæ well luted, and let it 
be kept close stopped. 
 
A. It resisteth poyson and helps such as are bitten by venemous 
beasts, it causeth speedy delivery to women in travail, 
and casteth out the after-birth, it provokes the terms in women, 
and helpeth the fits of the mother, it helps lethargies, 
convulsions, and in some cases is profitable for mad people, 
but in all, let it be mixed with convenient medicine for the 
purposes. 
 
[}Vsquebach.}] 
 
Take of strong Aqua vitæ 24. pints, in which, for four 
daies infuse a pound of Liquoris, Raisons of the Sun half a 
pound, Cloves half an ounce, Mace, Ginger, of each two 
drachms, strain it and keep it for your use. 
 
A. It strengthens the stomach, and helps indigestion coming 
of flegm and cold. 
 
[^p.94^] 
[}Fallopius his Allum-Water.}] 
 
Take of Plantane and Red-rosewater, of each a pound, viz. 
a pint, Roch Allum, Quick silver, and Sublimatum, of each 
two drachms, grind the Allum and the Sublimate very fine, 
then let them boyl altogether in a [/43./] glasse with a narrow 
mouth till half be consumed, then let it stand five daies that 
the Sublimate, and the drosse of the Allum may sink to the 
bottom, then pour off the cleer water and keep it for your 
use. 
 
A. Fallopius invented this for an unction for the French-pocks, 
but in my opinion it is but a childish recept, for the 
Quick-silver, will most assuredly fly out in boyling. 
 