[^Elkes, Richard: Approved medicines^] 
 
[}Approved Medicines 
OF 
Little cost, to preserve health 
and also to cure those that are 
SICK. 
 
Provided 
For the Souldiers Knap-sack, and 
the Country mans Closet. 
 
Written by RICHARD ELKES Gent. 
Student in the Art of Physick, living 
at Bagshot in the County of Surry. 
 
Medicos & Chirurgos subinde mutare; ægris tædium 
non levamen est. 
Eccles. 38. 4. 
The Lord hath created Medicines out of the 
earth, and he that is wise will not abhorre 
them. 
 
LONDON 
Printed for Robert Ibbitson and are to be 
sold by Tho: Vere at the Angel in the Old-Baily. 
1651.}] 
 
[^A letter to the Honourable Court of Parliament omitted.^] 
[^Extract 1, pp. 1-44^] 
 
[^p.1^] 
[}The Directions of an old 
Souldier in Ireland about forty 
years since, which became a Physitian 
there.}] 
 
AS I travelled through the 
Countie of Clare, I heard of 
an excellent Physitian which 
had accomplished manie rare 
cures, but especially the Bloody 
Flux. After some time spent I found 
the man, and conferred with him touching 
his Art, which he seemed willing to impart, 
requesting the like of me, and said about 
fortie years before that time, he came 
out of England a Souldier into that Country, 
which was in Queen Elizabeths daies; 
before a month was expired the Bloodie 
Flux seized upon him, and as he supposed 
it came by eating fo fresh meat, fresh fish, 
lying upon the ground being hot, and such 
like; he remembred some directions that 
[^p.2^] 
was given to him before he came out of 
England, That when you eate, give over 
with an appetite, drinke no more but to 
quench thirst, if you drink when you are 
hot, march after it, or stirre your body, 
when you rest at your fires sit not upon the 
cold ground, but upon wood, straw, or such 
like; put off your wet cloathes, and especially 
your Stockings and dry them, &c. 
 
And carrie in your Knap-sacke a peece 
of steele to heat red hot, and quench it in 
your beer, water or milke, and as you travel 
gather the leaves and bark of the Oake, 
and the leaves of the black-Thorn, a bagge 
of Salt and Oatmeale, that if the Flux 
should take you, you might helpe your 
selfe. So this old Souldier remembred his 
directions, and observed it diligently, when 
he came to their fires, to dry his cloathes, 
and sit upon wood, or such like, and he cast 
his peece of steele into the fire to warme 
his drink, and when they had fish or flesh 
boiled, he would cast into the boiler, a 
handfull of Oaken leaves, or bark of the 
Oak, or a handful of leaves of Black-Thorn, 
Salt and Oatmeale; and grated into his 
[^p.3^] 
beer some of the Oake bark; this being 
observed, cured himselfe, and many of his 
fellow Souldiers. The Wars being ended, 
he became a Physitian, and gained 
both monie and credit, by curing the Flux, 
and some other infirmities. 
 
Thus may any Souldier observe and do 
for their healths in England, Ireland, and 
Scotland, if need require. Also the Souldiers 
may provide in their Knap-sacks three 
sorts of Earth, that is Terra Lemnia, it is 
called in the Apothecaries shops, Terra 
Sigillata, Bolarmonicke, and Chalke; 
this Terra Lemnia commeth out of the 
Island of Lemnos in the Turkes Dominion, 
the quantity of a Bullet swallowed whole 
or beaten topowder, and taken in Broth or 
other liquor fasting, it cureth the Flux, and 
preserveth from the Pestilence; the best 
Bolarmonick commeth out of Spaine, and 
may be taken fasting in like quantity, or in 
some broth, the quantity of two Bullets 
to cure a Flux; the common Chalke which 
we have in England may be beaten to powder 
and boiled in milke or broth, and taken 
fasting it cureth a Flux, if it be often 
[^p.4^] 
taken the quantity of a spoonfull twice in 
the day. Thus much medicines with little cost. 
 
[}2 To proceed to the cure of the Flux, methodically 
according to Art.}] 
 
YOu must consider what kinds of Flux the 
parties are grieved with, and the complexion 
that doth predominate; first, whether 
it be the Flux Diarrhea, Lienteria, or Dysenteria, 
if it be Dysenteria which is most 
dangerous, I have read of foure kinds, but it 
requires a long discourse concerning al the 
sorts, but I omit that, because the cure differeth 
but little, only this, if you find the exhulceration 
to be in the upper & smal guts, you 
must minister medicines at the mouth, but 
if it be at the bigger or lower bowells, you 
must cast in glisters often, if the party be 
without a Feavour, give him milke newly 
milked, wherein a gad of steele hath been 
quenched, you may make Suppings or 
Broth with Quinces, Knot-grasse, Plantain-leaves, 
Willow-leaves, Cumfrey-roots, 
and such like, you may make Rice-Milke, 
or boile white Starch in Milke, 
eate no flesh but Partridges, Culvers, or 
[^p.4^] 
Birds of the mountaine, Goates and Hares 
flesh may be permitted; a good diet wel observed, 
the cure is halfe accomplished. 
 
If strength doe permit, you may purge 
down the vicious humors with two drams 
of Rubarb, infused in halfe a pint of white 
wine, with Currans and sweet Fennell 
seeds, and drink it fasting to purge the vicious 
humors, after purging, take a dram 
of Diascordium, thus may you purge every 
other day; for in a week after this, make 
a drink with running water of two quarts, 
put seeds of Sorrell, Pumgranat rindes, 
Knot-grasse, Cumfery roots, Bryer roots, 
Plantain leaves, Cinamon, Bolarmonicke, 
Dragons blood, and Sugar; drinke this as 
an ordinary drinke: Likewise you may 
make a drink with red wine, Cinamon, Sugar, 
Knotgrasse, and Cumfery roots to drink 
three times a day four spoonfuls at a time. 
 
[}2 To make a Glister glutinous.}] 
 
REc: three pints of water, quench steel 
in it, untill one third part be wasted 
then boile in it Cumfery roots, Knotgrasse, 
Bryer leaves, red Rose leaves, and Plantain 
leaves, of each a little handfull of Acatia, 
[^p.6^] 
hypocischidis, ana. +q ij. Bolarmonack; Sanguis 
Dragonis: ana +q j. the juyce of Quinces 
+Q j. Goates Tallow, +o j. if it may be had, 
and yolkes of three eggs, commixe this together 
and make a Glister, administer this 
as often as you shall see cause. 
 
[}3 For an Implaister.}] 
 
REc. of the Oyles of Quinces, Roses, 
Mastick ana. +o j. of the meale of Fenny 
Greeke and Barley +Q j. Sanguis Dragonis 
Balaustia +Q +s. Bolarmonicke +o j. acalia +Q ij. 
as much wax and Rosen as is sufficient, and 
make a Plaister, spread it upon leather, and 
apply it to the Navill over the neather 
Ventrick where the party complaineth 
most. Much more might be spoken but I 
leave it to the ingenious practitioner, and 
wish all men to be temperate, for intemperance 
is the cause of this and many other 
incurable diseases. 
 
[}4 Of the Pestilence or Plague.}] 
 
THe Pestilence is a Fevor in the highest 
degree, which may bee taken severall 
waies, by living amongst sick people, by a 
corrupted Aire, by rotten and corrupt Dyet, 
which filleth the body with rotten 
[^p.7^] 
and corrupt humors, but some bodies are 
stronger then others, some are more temperate 
in eating and drinking then others, in 
them rotten humours abound not, and, the 
infection fasteneth not so strongly upon 
them, but nature expelleth it, this is the 
reason that some people never catcheth the 
Pestilence, though all be in a roome together, 
sometimes the infection happeneth, 
by living with the sick, and lodging in bed 
with them, drawing the breath that commeth 
from the sick party, if they approach 
near to them; as the office of the Lunges 
is to draw in fresh Aire to comfort the 
heart, instead thereof it drawes in a venomous 
breath, which may be the destruction 
of the heart: the cause of a corrupted Aire, is 
by standing Ponds, or Marshes in the heat of 
Sumer, rotten Coleworts, rotten Roots, and 
fruits, & many people continuing in a close 
room, many dead Bodies unburied: which 
may happen in the time of War, dead Carrion 
and such like, immoderate heate of 
the Aire, and moisture in Summer time, 
thick Mists, especially about Autumn, that 
in a morning it may be smelt. The cause 
[^p.8^] 
of corrupt humors in the body, is by eating 
corrupt meates and drinks, as flesh long unsalted, 
rotten fruits, Cole-worts, and rotten 
Cabbig, and roots: and corrupt water, or 
wine, or beer made with evill water, breeds 
rotten humors in the body, which I wish al 
men to have respect unto, and the best 
means to preserve their bodies from the 
Pestilence that is, is not to continue in a pestilent 
Aire, make fires often, burne Rosemary, 
Sage, Juniper-wood and Berryes, 
Frankincense, Myrrh, Pitch, and such like, 
what you eate let it be wholesome, gluttonizing 
doth corrupt the blood & produce 
dangerous diseases, as the Measles, the Pox 
which are the fore-runners of the Plague, 
alwaies eate with your meate sharp things, 
as Vineger, Vargis, Oringes, Lemons; let 
your pot-hearbs be Sage, Isope, Balme, 
Buglosse, and Burrage, drinke no wine but 
alay it with good water, eate Terra Lemnia 
or fine Bolarmonack as before is shewed, 
carry in you Knap-sack a Box of Diascordium, 
and Methridate, a handfull of 
Rue the root of Setwall, in shops Zedoary, 
and Elicampane roots, take either of these 
[^p.9^] 
it may preserve from the Infection, but above 
all, if you come into a house, or place 
that you doubt you have taken the Infection, 
go presently and dig a hole in the fresh 
earth, put in your mouth and nose, and 
breath into it a quarter of an hour, then remove 
from that place and dig another hole 
and do likewise, this you may do three or 
four times, and by Gods blessing the fresh 
earth will draw the venome from your 
heart, which I have proved also, if a man 
be in a sound, or choked in a roome, where 
a multitude of people are, it will as it were 
fetch life againe. 
 
Further if you go into a roome which is 
infected, hold a turffe of fresh earth to your 
mouth and nostrills, it will preserve you 
from the contagion, as I have proved: you 
must avoid Bathing, Venus, and violent exercise, 
which openeth the Pores, then the 
venomous Aire will have no entrance into 
the body to destroy it: to be Costive is 
hurtfull, for prevention thereof you may 
give a soft Glister or Purge, with 
Piludie Rufi, also it is good for young people 
to be let blood, but remember to use 
[^p.10^] 
a good dyed after it, and keep in untill the 
blood be settled again: and avoid all perturbations 
of the minde, as wrath, melancholly, 
and such like: Many more remedies 
might be showed, which for brevity 
I omit; only this antidote you may cause to 
be made at any Apothecaries to carry in 
your Knap-sack, and for the Country man 
to keep in his house, to use if occasion be; 
Rec: of Saffron +Q +s. of Alloes Epaticke of 
Mirrh +Q ij. Mastick +q j. Bolearmonacke +Q j. Terra 
Lemnia +Q ij. harts-horne burnt +Q j +s. the 
bone of the Harts-heart, red Corrall ana. 
+q j. Walnuts in number 20. Figs 13. Bay salt 
+Q j. of Rue a little handfull, Roots of Scabius 
Aristolochia Rotunda +Q ij. Tormentil and 
Pimper-nell, ana. +Q v. Bitany +Q j. Zedoary +Q j 
Seeds of Sorrell, and Seeds of Purslain, ana: 
+Q +s. and make all these into an Electuary 
with clarified hony, or with Syrrup of 
Gillyflowers, and Marygolds, take every 
morning upon the poynt of a knife, the 
quantity of a Nut, it wil preserve from the 
infection, in like manner you may take it 
at any time when you come among infected 
persons: thus farre I have shewed you 
[^p.11^] 
how the Pestilence happeneth, and how 
to prevent it; Now I will shew you briefly 
the simptomes and signes of it, and proceed 
to the cure. When the wind is often in 
the South and West, the Aire much altered, 
specially in Autumn, many pimples 
rising: the Measles and Pox in divers places 
increasing, are the signes of the Pestilence 
ensuing: the simptomes are, the extreame 
parts of the sick person wil be cold, and the 
inward parts very hot; heavinesse, lazy and 
sleepy with a great pain the the head; sometimes 
sadnesse, sometimes raving, vomiting, 
purging, losse of appetite, great thirst, 
the Pulse frequent low and deep, the tongue 
red, at first growing black; the Urine thick 
and troubled, but sometimes like the Urine 
of a healthy man, (therfore I wish 
you to observe other signes) most specially 
if there be any risings behind the eares, 
armepits, or groine, these are cheifly to be 
observed: And now I proceed to the cure. 
 
[}5 The Cure of the Plague.}] 
 
IF you come to the sicke party, the 
first or second day of falling sicke, the 
common use hath been to open a veine in 
[^p.12^] [^Original misnumbered as p.13.^] 
that side that the Botch appeareth, or that 
side he complaineth of: for if you let blood 
in the contrary side, you draw venome over 
the heart, and destroy the body, also if 
the greife be above the shoulders, cut the 
Cefallick veine, if below the shoulders, cut 
Basilica, so if it be below the neather Ventrick, 
cut the vein in the Ham, or the Anckle; 
but the practice of some is not to bleed, 
you may apply cupping-glasses: if the Pestilence 
should seize upon a man at dinner, 
or Supper, give him a vomit: If it happen 
other times, you may give the party of 
the Antedote before written, the quantity 
of a Nut in some Scabius water, and cover 
him very warm to sweat an hour, and 
cool him gentlely, it will both cure and defend 
him from it: or you may give this 
Medicine following: Rec: Methridatum +q j. 
Theriaca Londinensis +q ij. Bolearmonack prepared 
+q j+s. waters of Buglosse and Scabius 
as much as is sufficient to make it into an 
Electuary, give to the sick the quantity of 
a dram, and lay him in a warme bed, and 
cover him with clothes that he may sweat 
four hours, then let him be cooled gentlely 
[^p.13^] 
by taking off the clothes one after another; 
this being done, use the same the 
second day, and by Gods blessing it may 
drive the venome from the heart, unto 
the extreame parts, which I wil direct for 
the cure thereof hereafter: you may also 
take Electuarium de ovo the quantity of a 
dram or a scruple, according to the 
strength of the party, it is commended above 
all by some Physitians; but Bolarmonick, 
or Terra lemnia, I have proved them 
the quantity of a nut given in posset-drink 
or in surrup of Gilloflowers, and 3 grains 
of Saffron powder, this will drive out the 
venome into Botches like Carbunckles 
when other Medicines be wanting, so the 
party hath recovered, it is also good to 
drive out the Measels and the Pox, remember 
in the time of sweating, you must not 
let the party sleep, nor in six houres after; 
you may give him Julips, made with 
waters of Scabius, Sorrel, Endive and Succory, 
surrup of Gilloflowers, of Wood-sorrel, Lemons, 
Violets, and such like, for his meate, 
you may boile a Chick, with Sorrel, the 
juice of Lemons, and Burrage-flowers, or 
[^p.14^] 
Marigold-flowers are very good; also you 
may dissolve a little Saffron in his Vineger 
to dip his meat in it, but let the Saffron 
be very finely poudered, or tyed in 
a linnen cloth (as Saffron is a Cordinal, so 
it much be taken it hurteth) Many other 
cordial things may be used, wood of Aloes 
and Sanders grated into his beere is commended. 
 
[}6 The Cure of the swelling or Plague sore 
in the extream parts.}] 
 
IF the swelling wil not break it selfe, you 
may apply that plaister called Diachylon 
compositum, or Galbanum spread upon Leather, 
and applyed to the place: or an Onyon 
cut off the top, and dig out the middle, 
and put in London Treacle, and three or 
foure leaves of Rue, put this to the fire and 
roste it, when it is wel rosted, lay it warm 
to the Botch or swelling, if it break put 
in a Tent, and let it run what it wil, when 
the corruption is out; Diachilon wil heale 
it up againe, also you may use this; Rec. 
great Raisons halfe an ounce, Bay salt +Q j. 
Figs 6 Oyle of Cammomell, and hony, as 
much as wil make this into a Playster, many 
[^p.15^] 
other medicines might be set downe, 
but these wil easily be gotten; if you desire 
further, repaire to your learned Physitian. 
 
[}7 Of the Calenture and spotted Feavor.}] 
 
THese Feavors are very near unto the 
Pestilence, which doth often happen 
unto Mariners at sea, by feeding upon salt 
Beefe, Bacon, salt Fish, and evil water, pulse 
and worm-eaten bread, which cannot be avoided 
at Sea, this Feavor is known, by feeling 
the outward me~bers cold, & those within, 
as the Pestilence, sleepy, and heavie, the 
pulse very low: This Feavor bringeth death 
in 24 hours many times if not speedily prevented: 
furthermore, you shal perceive the 
Patient as it were distracted, ready to leap 
into the Sea, sometimes vomit, the tongue 
white underneath, and black at the top, 
cold sweats, cramps, with many other accidents, 
like as in the pestilence: For the 
cure thereof, if the patient be able to endure 
Flebothomy, open a vein in the arme, 
if he complain most in the head, cut the 
veine called Cephalia, if at the chest, the 
Basilicke vein, remove the sick into a fresh 
[^p.16^] 
room, make a fire in it first, then put out the 
fire, and refresh the room with sweet waters, 
or what else may be had at the Sea; 
if at Land cast Rushes in the Roome, and 
green Boughs; if the Aire be hot, misty, 
and moist, shut the windowes, if clear and 
pure let in the fresh Aire to comfort the 
heart: At the first you must not let the 
sick sleep overmuch, that will draw the 
venome to the heart, until it is defended 
by giving cordials, such as is prescribed before 
in the chapter of the Pestilence, his dyet 
must be Broth, made with cordial Flowers, 
and a little Saffron tyed in a cloth, 
after the third day you may give crums of 
Bread in his Broth; for the cure, if time 
wil permit, give him a Glister before letting 
blood, in this manner make your decoction 
with cordial flowers, after boyling dissolve 
into it Diascordium, surrup of Violets, 
Roses and such like; after Phlebothomy give 
him a cordial, and lay the party to sweat, 
as is taught in the chapter of the Plague: 
After sweating and Phlebothomy, the sick 
may drinke Barly-water, made with coole 
[^p.17^] 
hearbs, Raisons of the Sun stoned, and a 
scruple of Saffron tyed in a cloath and 
boyled in the water, Lemons boyld in 
Milke both rinde and pulpe, untill it is 
turned to Curds, and Whay, drinke the 
Whay continually as you thirst, I have 
proved it of good effect. 
 
And when he hath recovered a little 
strength, and the venome expelled from 
the heart, let him be purged with this 
Potion; Rec. a quart of running water, 
or more, a handfull of cordiall Flowers, a 
little Cardus Benedictus, a root of Tormentil, 
a legg of a Poultry, these being boyled, 
take a pint of that liquor or thereabout, 
dissolve in it of Diaphenicon, +Q j. Diacatholicon 
+Q j +s. electuary of Roses +Q ij. give the sick this 
to purge the dregs of the Feaver, as you shal 
see cause, adding some cordial surrups after 
purging, made with Diascordium, Amber 
Beaser, surrup of Violets, and surrup of 
Lemmons, waters of Buglosse, Burrage 
and Wood Sorrell, to drinke at night, so 
by the blessing of God the sick may recover 
health againe. 
 
[^p.18^] 
[}8. Of the Scurvie.}] 
 
THere is the sea Scurvie, and the land 
Scurvie, both of these are a putrifaction 
of bloud which commeth by the 
neglect of exercising the body, and eating 
rotten meates, and corrupt drinke, or water, 
as is shewed in the former Chapter; 
the obstructions of the Spleen doe increase 
this evill, and the Morphew and blacke 
foult, the simptoms are these; the gums 
swell, the teeth loose, the leggs wil swell, 
and have spots about the anckles, some 
will have many tawny spots about their 
breast, other some have complained with 
a great paine in the head, with a sorenesse 
all over the head; I cured a Tanner 
that laboured with this evill seven yeares, 
chiefly in the Springe, and at the fall of 
the Leafe; by his owne relation in his 
youth he was laborious, but after he had 
gained a competent estate he took ease, 
and eate much, but of grosse meat; his 
drinke was made of standing water, which 
as he supposed made the strongest drinke, 
his bread was made with Barme, or Yeast, 
but in his youth he eate leavened bread, 
[^p.19^] 
so from this and such other of the same I 
have observed, that evill water, and unleavened 
bread doe breed this and many 
other dangerous diseases, for drink made 
of such water, the venome doth purge by 
the Barme, and is in it, of which bread is 
made, and he that eateth such bread (especially 
in Cities and Townes) may have 
the Scurvie, and Feavers of all sorts, for 
if there be any venome in the drinke it 
will be in the Barme; therefore I wish all 
men to eate leavened bread if he can have 
it, and drinke made of cleare water ten 
dayes old at least. 
 
[}9 For the Cure of the Scurvie.}] 
 
THe first intention is to keep a good 
dyet, and exercise the body moderately, 
his meat must be meates of 
the best nourishment, as Birds of the 
Field, Mutton, or Veale, Rabbets, and 
Chickings, broath made with Agremony, 
Avins, Scabius, or Bitony, and such like; 
all salt meats must be avoyded, the first 
three dayes let him take a draught of 
Oximell in the morning fasting, and last 
at night, which is to be made in this manner; 
[^p.20^] 
Rec. a quart of cleane water, a root 
or two of Fennell, three or foure roots of 
Parsley, a sprigge of Rosemary, a little 
Fumotery if it be to be had, Fennell-seeds, 
and Parsley-seeds of each a Dram, three 
spoonfuls of the best Honey, let this boyle 
gently, and scum it, and in the boyling 
put into it two spoonfuls of Vinegar, after 
this hath been taken three dayes, take of 
Rubarbe +Q ij. of Sena +Q j. 40 Raysons of the 
Sun stoned, a race of Ginger sliced, sweet 
Fennel-seeds, Annis-seeds of each +Q j. let 
these be infused all night upon Coales, the 
next morning take halfe a pint of this and 
dissolve in it a Dram of Diacatholicon, take 
this three mornings, after this let Bloud 
if need require; the body being thus prepared, 
make your Scurvye-grasse Drinke 
in this manner: Take a peck of Scurvie-grasse, 
and a gallon of Water-cresses, and 
a gallon of Brook-limes, one handfull of 
Egremony, one handfull of Tamariske, or 
the buds or barke of the Ashe, Raysons of 
the Sunne stoned a pound, of Licorish 
halfe a pound, contused Fennell roots peethed, 
and Parsley roots, Annis-seeds, and 
[^p.21^] 
Fennell seeds a quarter of a pound, put all 
these into a thin Bagge, in five gallons of 
Beere or Ale, put the Bagge into the 
Barrell when the drinke is ready to be 
tunned, with a stone in the bottome of the 
Bagge, let it hang within three or foure 
inches of the bottome of the Barrell, let 
this drinke worke with these ingredients 
in it, then stop it close, and at eight or ten 
dayes drinke of it and none other (except 
a little at meate) untill the Party be well; 
most especially in the morning drinke a 
pint, and exercise untill the party is ready 
to sweat, and keep him warme after it; 
the spoon-wort is good for the land Scurvie, 
used as before is directed, and taken 
forty dayes together. 
 
[}10 Of the Flux called, the Plague 
in the Guts.}] 
 
THis Flux in England which is called by 
many, the Plague in the Guts, is contagious 
as I conceive, a venomous matter 
cleaving to the neather or great Guts for 
the most part, some seeme to have no 
Feavor, other some have a Feavour, and 
complaine most in the middle Ventricle; 
[^p.22^] 
in briefe, I suppose the Cure is accomplished 
by giving Cordials, and sweating, 
and by Glisters, if the Flux appeare to be 
bloudy, or like scraping of Guts; without 
a Feavour, you may proceed as I directed 
before in the Chapter of the Flux 
Dysenteria; at the first comming of this 
Flux, take a quart of Milke, boyle in it a 
handfull of Marigold Flowers, Sage, and 
Rosemary, Bryer leaves, and knot grasse, 
this being boyled take one pint of this, 
put into it surrup of Slowes, surrup of Gilly-flowers, 
anna +o j. the yolke of an egge, 
and a dram of Diascordium, give this 
bloud warme, the next day if strength permit 
give the other pint of Milke in a Glister 
as before is directed, but after the 
first Glister hath done working, give a 
Cordiall thus prepared, take of the water 
fo Burrage, Scabius, and Marygolds, and. +o j. 
Diascordium +o j. Confectio Alcermis +q j. Mithridates 
+q +s surrup of Violets, surrup of 
Gillo-flowers, ana. +o j. commix all this together 
and drinke it warme, presently after 
let the sick be covered warme, to sweat 
two houres if strength permit; in sweating, 
[^p.23^] 
drinke Posset wherein Saffron is boyled, 
this being used three times may cure 
it, for it hath recovered many of the above 
named Flux, keeping a good dyet 
without flesh; thus briefly of the Pestilence, 
which destroyeth many, if meanes 
be not used to prevent it in time. 
 
[}11. The cure of the Itch, and Lice.}] 
 
FOr cure thereof Methodically, is first 
to observe a good dyet (that is to say) 
you must eate and drinke such things that 
breed good bloud, and to avoyd all things 
that breeds evill and rotten humours, as 
you may see in the Chapters before going; 
then purge the body with pilule de fumo 
terræ, or pilule Inde haly, which you may 
have at any Apothecaries, the second 
day let bloud in the Basiliske veine, then 
make this water following; Rec. A gallon 
of running water, or the water that 
Smiths use, and quench in it a gad of 
steele red hot untill halfe the water be 
wasted, then boyle in it a quarter of a 
pound of leafe Tobacco, of Dock roots, 
Willow leaves, and leaves of the Birch, of 
each a handfull, of Brimstone tyed in a 
[^p.24^] 
Cloath +Q ij. wash the sore places twice in 
the day and you shall be cured (except 
the Itch be incorrigible, which with long 
continuance doth bring it to passe; also if 
you make so much of this water as will 
wet your shirt twice in the weeke, the 
shirt being cleane washed and dryed, then 
dipped in this liquor, and dry it againe, it 
will both kill the Itch, and destroy the 
Lyce that are about you) I have read a 
story of some Souldiers that would boyle 
Saffron, Pepper, and Graines in running 
water, and in that liquor dip their shirts 
twice in the weeke, it will make the shirt 
yellow, but it destroyed Lice and Itch; others 
of the inferiour sort would boyle 
Staveacre and Tobacco in water and dip 
their shirts in it, and cure both Itch and 
Lice. Many more Medicines for the Itch 
have been used, as Brimstone pounded to 
Powder with Ginger, and tyed in a cloath, 
and infused in sallet Oyle nine dayes in 
the Sun, annoynt the sore places with 
this oyle and be whole (but this will 
smell) also Mercury sublimate +o +s. beaten 
to powder, and put into a quart of 
[^p.25^] 
Running water three or foure dayes, then 
with a little cloth wet the sore places, it 
may cure the Itch, but it is dangerous, 
and must not be used unto raw places, for 
it may poyson the blood, therefore I wish 
that none would use it without the advice 
of his Chyrurgion. 
 
So I come to speake of the incorrigible 
Scab called by some the Naopolitan disease, 
which happen, and hardly found out, the 
first cure (as Vigo saith) of this foul disease is 
called Morbus Gallicus, I wil speak little of 
the cure in this place, because divers have 
written largely of it, and the maledy being 
Chronicled it wil require a long time 
to perfect, I will onely give you some cautions 
to preserve from the infection; if 
you be infected before it be confirmed, to 
expell it: The infection of this evill commeth 
cheifly 4 wayes, but seldome or never 
by eating and drinking, with the diseased 
as many think, the most dangerous 
way of catching this Maledie is by a clean 
body carnally acting with an unclean body; 
the next way of taking it is, man and 
man, or woman and woman lying in 
[^p.26^] 
bed, the one cleane the other uncleane, 
the heate of their bodies do as it were participate 
of each others Itch, Scab, Pox or 
Pestilence; The third way of taking this 
Infection, is by approaching so near the diseased 
party, as to draw in its corrupt 
breath, as in the Pestilence; The fourth 
way is, Infants sucking an unclean woman. 
Signes how to know this disease, if it be 
newly taken not so easily discerned, if of 
long continuance, the face of some will be 
wan and pale, the eies hollow, and blew, 
some scabs about the nose, sometime Vlcers, 
sometimes no Ulcers, a full paine in 
the head, great paines in the joynts, especially 
in the night, the Shin bones continually 
pained, th Vvula and neck swoln, 
the Spade bone and sinewes in pain, Lazy, 
and Lumpish, Gonorrhea swelling, in the 
Arme-pits little Knobs or Ulcers, about 
the privy Members, and Fundament, sometimes 
Scabs over all the body, with many 
more. 
 
[^p.27^] 
[}12 For cure hereof newly taken, and not 
confirmed.}] 
 
FIrst of all you shal observe a good dyet, 
that is, eate Veale, Mutton, rosted 
Birds of the Mountaine, Hens, Chickings, 
Partridges, or Phesants, and such like: 
All salt meat is hurtful, al fish, but Cra-fish; 
Garlicke Onyons, Salt, Pepper, Swines-flesh, 
and White-meates, and Venus is forbidden; 
sometimes the Patient may use 
Burrage, Lettis, White-beets in Rice 
broth, when he is wearyed with meat 
dry rosted; The second intention is to digest 
the corrupt Matter with surrup of Violets, 
surrup of Fumotary, of each halfe 
an ounce, water of Endiffe, and Maiden 
haire, a spoonfull of Vineger, let this be 
taken over night, the next morning give 
him this potion, take a handfull of Burrage 
Flowers, a handfull of Mary-goldes: 
40 Raysons of the sun stoned, boile them 
in a quart of water, to a pinte, then take 
a dram of Rubarb, and infuse in it all 
night, in that pinte of liquor, dissolve of 
Diacatholicon and Diaphenicon, of each half 
an ounce, in the same liquor, and take it 
[^p.28^] 
fasting, and fast two houres, in the interim 
provide some thin Broth to drinke as he 
Purgeth, after purging give some Cordial 
surrups with Diascordium; the second 
day Purge againe, the fourth day Sweat 
4 hours, the sixth day Sweat 4 houres, and 
the eighth day sweat 4 houres; in this interim 
provide this drink, take of Lignum 
vite li. j. of the Barke of the said wood 
li.. +s. Raisons of the Sun stoned, li. j. Chinaroot 
+o ij. Sassafras +Q vj. Salsaperilla +Q ix. Cardus 
Benedictus, and Maiden-haire Mj. of Liquorish, 
and Annyseeds li. +s. of each, and 16 
pintes of water, put all these in a pot very 
close stopped, and let it stand upon the 
coales 24 hours to infuse, then let it boyl 
24 houres gently; in the boiling, put in of 
white wine a quart, scum it, and save the 
scum, to apply to the scabby or soare places, 
strein this liquor and keep it in a vessel, 
close stopped, drink this drink and no 
other 40 dayes (except at meate) a little 
smal drink may be permitted, thus have I 
cured many, at the first, before the evil be 
confirmed; also this drink wil cure al diseases 
of the Liver, as the Dropsie, &c. if rightly 
[^p.29^] 
used: Further, if the party be Scabby, 
or Itchy, make this Bath following, Rec. 
of the Roots and Leaves of Docks, Chickweed, 
Fumoterry, of each a little bundle, 
Lentils, and Lupins, four handfuls bruised, 
Elicampane Roots, Walwort, or the roots 
instead of Walwort, Elder, li. ij. Black helibor 
+o iiij. Kneeholme li. ij. Brimstone li. ij. 
boyle all these in so much water as will 
bath a man, when the third part is wasted, 
then let the diseased Bath and sweat 
in it, two or three times in a week, after 
Bathing, let the patient go to bed, and 
keepe warme, and drinke the aforesaid 
drinke, this hath cured many but if the 
Scab be more inveterate, use this unction, 
Rec. of Quick-silver killed with fasting spittle, 
+o j. in a readinesse, then take the Oyle of 
Bayes, and Masticke of each an ounce, and 
of the liquor of the Bath aforenamed a 
pinte, of fresh Butter, and Swines grease, 
+o iij. of each; seet all these until the liquor 
be wasted, then adde clear Turpentine 
+o j. of Storax liquidam +o +s. White wax 
+o iiij. Rock Allum burnt +o j. Litarge of gold 
and silver +o ij. of each, of Myrrh and Frankensence, 
[^p.30^] 
ana. +o ij. juyce of Lemons, +o iij. commixe 
all these together with the Quick-silver 
quenched, and annoynt the Scabs, this 
will cure; if you annoynt and sweat untill 
the Flux be moved, but if this evill be confirmed 
and ulcerated it will require a longer 
discourse, which you may have hereafter 
if time permit; thus briefly I thought 
good to direct the Souldier, and others to 
prevent the danger thereof. I have read 
that Charles the eighth, King of France, 
comming to Rome, and Naples with his 
Souldiers, they brought this Disease into 
France, the Spaniard instead of Silver and 
Gold, brought it from the Indies, but 
I hope better of our Country-men, and 
rest, &c. 
 
[}13. Of the Flux of bloud in wounds, 
and the remedies thereof.}] 
 
IF the Flux be little it is the easier restrained, 
but if it flow out abundantly, 
there must be speedy remedy, for bloud is 
the treasure of life, sometimes it chanceth 
in the inward parts, sometimes outwardly, 
inwardly by violent moving, and such 
like may breake a veine, outwardly by 
[^p.31^] 
Swords, Guns, Pikes, and other Instruments; 
also it doth happen by venomous 
medicines applyed to wounds, corrupting 
the veines, which cause a Flux; if the Flux 
happen in the inwards parts, as in the Liver, 
Lungs, Reines, and Bladder, it is of 
hard curation, yet it must not be neglected, 
for which purpose all stipticke and 
conglutinating things must be used, as Cumfrey 
roots, knot-grasse roots, Gum Dragagante, 
Terra Lemnia, Bolearmoniacke, 
Rice, Quinces, Lentils, Pomgranats, and 
such other cooling drinkes are best, and 
broths made with the above-named simples 
may help forward the cure, but this 
Medicine following I have proved; Rec. 
Pomgranat Rindes +o j. Pulveris. Bolearmonack 
+o +s. Terra Sigillata +o ij. Knot-grasse and 
Cumphrey roots pounded, and the juyce pressed 
out, Gum Dragagante +o ss. infused 
in that juyce, make the said Powders into 
Pills, like little Bullets with this infusion, 
and give the sick six of them in a day, three 
fasting in the morning, and three of them 
last at night, continuing this ten dayes, 
and it will make you whole. 
 
[^p.32^] 
[}14. The Flux in outward wounds.}] 
 
ARe chiefly two, if it flow from the 
veines it is grosse and red, if it come 
from the Arteries, it is of a purple colour, 
and commeth out by heaps, both these 
must be speedily cured, if the Orifice be 
large; to cure this, take of Bolearmoniack, 
Terra Sigillata, ana. +o j. Dragons bloud, +o ss. 
Alloes, and Frankensence, ana. +o ij. Hares 
haire cut in peeces, of Spunge of the Sea 
dryed and burnt, Dragagant brayed, mingle 
all these together and binde it to the 
wound, and let it rest to the third day; so 
mans bloud dryed into powder will stench 
the bloud, the wound being filled: also, if 
need require you may binde the extreame 
parts, or open a veine in the contrary 
part, as if the right Arme be wounded, open 
a veine in the left; you may cautorize 
the place, wet Lint in Vinegar, or a cloath 
wet in Vinegar and put about the Codds, 
hath been used with good effect; besides 
all these, Gerrard in his Herball speakes of 
an Herbe called Clownes all-heale, that was 
found out by a Mower which wounded 
himselfe with his Sithe dangerously, he 
[^p.33^] 
not having any Chirurgion neare, by 
accident gathered an Herbe which stenched 
the bloud, and after made a Medicine of 
the same Herbe and healed the wound; 
this being knowne to Gerrard he called it 
Clownes all heale, this I have proved. Also it 
hapned that I was comming from Winchester, 
I met with a Souldier comming from 
a Fight neare Ailsford, which was wounded 
largely in the neck, so that the Flux 
of bloud could not be stopped, I remembered 
an Herbe shewed me by an old Midwife 
that groweth in shadowed places, I 
searched under an Apple-tree and found 
the same Herbe, and gathered a handfull, 
and rubbed it in my hands, and filled the 
wound there-with, it stenched immediatly, 
after I made a Salve of the same Herbe, 
and cured the wound in 14. dayes, only I 
annoynted it with Oyle of Hipericon the 
second dressing, and gave directions to 
him to doe likewise; the same Souldier 
came to my dwelling in 14. dayes perfectly 
whole, and gave me thankes; this I 
have often proved since that time, the name 
of the Herbe is, Archangel, or dead Nettle, 
[^p.34^] 
which carryeth a purple Flower, this I 
made triall of then all other Medicines 
could not be gotten; I write this because 
any Country people and souldiers may 
finde this Herbe when Chirurgions be not 
present, and other Medicines farre distant, 
unlesse the Souldier carry them in his 
Knap-sack, and the Country-man keepe 
them in his Closet untill time of need. 
 
[}15 Of Wounds.}] 
 
VVOunds in generall are according to 
the severall Members, as wounds in 
the head, face, neck, shoulders, and armes, 
&c. but Wounds chiefly to be observed 
are two, that is, Mortall, and Curable; 
also wounds curable may be made mortall 
by ignorant Chirurgions, therefore I wish 
all men to hasten to an able Chirurgion. As 
wounds that are mortall is in the Braine, 
the Heart, the stomack, the small Guts and 
the Bladder, neverthelesse I wish all Chirurgions 
not to neglect the meanes, for I 
have seen Gods mercy wonderfully shewn 
in giving strength to Nature, when the 
judgement of man faileth; As touching 
wounds superficiall or deep after the Flux 
[^p.35^] 
of bloud is stopped as before directed, and 
that your Chirurgion cannot be had; first 
consider whether there be any dislocation 
of bones or fractures, or whether any 
veines, Arteries, sinews, ligaments, tendons, 
or Muscels be wounded, if you finde any of 
these you must proceed to the Cure very 
carefully, or else you may make that 
wound gangred or rotten, which at the 
first might be cured; this I have seen by 
ignorant people, applying hot Medicines 
to hot and chollerick wounds, and cold 
Medicines to the cold causes, as Hemlock, 
Henbane, and such others, which I omit, 
and come to show you whether there be 
any Dislocation or Fracture; First, compare 
one member with the other, as if the 
shoulder be depressed it will be lower then 
the other, neither can the party lift it to 
his head; if the elbow be out of joynt, the 
hand cannot be turned about, neither wil 
it be like the other, for the reducing of 
such a member, hasten to your Bone-setter, 
but in his absence if such a thing happen 
in the fingers, toes, or the elbow, two 
men grasping the member very fast, a third 
[^p.36^] 
man directing them to pull in the joynt, 
and the said third man with his right 
thumbe upon the place, the left hand 
turning the member into his right place, 
which the Patient will soone finde ease, if 
rightly performed. Further, if the shoulder 
be out, let that man put his arme over 
the round of a Ladder, or over the head 
of another man that is higher than he 
that is dislocated, the Chirurgion, or he 
that setteth the joynt put both his thumbs 
to the place, a second minister or two 
holding fast the lame Arme over the Ladder, 
or over the same mans head, so the 
sick may be above the ground, and the 
weight of his body with this help may reduce 
this joynt into his proper place; many 
other wayes there are, but I omit, and 
come to Fractures, which must be very diligently 
placed, if in the thigh, or above 
the elbow where is but one bone it may be 
broke short off, so the member wil be shorter 
then the other; this must be drawn into 
his proper place as before be shewed, if 
riven or shaken into splinters, they must be 
all placed and bound up in some frame or 
[^p.37^] 
spleets, past-board, or Iron made according 
to the form of the member, if wounded 
through the flesh, there must be a place 
left for the dressing of the wound, and an 
implaister made with Bolearmoniack, Terra 
sigilata, Gum Dragagante, Dragons bloud, 
whites of Eggs laid upon Flax, and applyed 
round the member grieved, put into 
the wound Oyle of Elder, and Oyle of 
Hipericon, also make Tents with Lint 
rowled in the same Oyle (but be sure 
make them so, that you leave none of them 
behind when you take them out of the 
wound;) above all be sure that no dust nor 
haires fall in the wound, nor Lint left behind 
that commeth off the Tent; also 
there must be care had of wounds of dry 
bodies, and of moyst bodies, as tender bodies 
are more moyst then those that labour 
and travell, if you finde them to be 
moyst bodies, you may use drying powders, 
and Bolearmoniack, if proud flesh, or dead 
flesh, then use burnt Allum, or Precipitat, 
or you may make this powder: Rec. Sarcocolle, 
+o j. Oliban. +o ij. Aloes Epatick +o iij. Mastick 
+o j. Frankinsence, +o ij. Dragons bloud +o j +s. 
[^p.38^] 
Balaustia +o j make this into fine powder and 
it will incarn wounds, if you finde the 
wound to be dry you may use the said oyle 
of Hipericon, oyle of Lillies; if the sinews 
be wounded, oyle of Elder is very good. 
To preserve a wound from Imposthumation, 
Rec: of Mallowes, Beets, Violet leaves, 
and Landebeef, of each a handful, boyle 
them until they be soft, then put in oyle 
of Roses, and white Lillies, make a Cataplasme 
or Poultis, with Roses, Rye meale 
or Barley meale, adding some Hoglard, 
apply this warme until the Impostume be 
removed, for no wound can heale until the 
Impostume be cured. 
 
Likewise a Member may Cancern if 
not speedily removed, that Member must 
be taken off; to prevent this you must observe, 
whether the Member about the 
wound, do alter in coulour, glissen and of 
a blew colour, the member doth not 
quite rot, but the spirits being hindred 
from comming to that place, it doth mortifie; 
which commeth by applying venomous 
Medicines, sometimes by overtying 
of a member when a bone is broken; 
[^p.39^] 
sometimes by applying things that are 
cold, stipticke, and sharpe, these and 
such others may cause Cancerna, now to 
preserve the Member wounded from cancerna; 
Rec. oyle of Roses, Umphacin, oyle 
of Mirtive ana: +o iij. the juice of Plantaine 
and Nightshad, ana: +o ij. +s. let them seeth all 
together until the juice be wasted, then 
put to white Wax +o j. +s. Flower of Beanes, 
Lintiles, and Barley ana: +o ij. ss. of all the 
Sanders pulverised ana: +o j. ss. Bolarmonacke 
+o j. graines and mirtiles a Dram, make this 
into a Plaister, with oyle of Elder, labour it 
in a morter into a plaister, besides all these, 
there happneth Feavors, Cramps, Convulsions, 
and many other by applying evil Medicines 
to a wound which must be removed, 
before the cure wil be ended; if there 
be a Feavor, you must give cooling Glisters 
and purge with Potions following, make 
a decoction with Cordiall flowers, in a 
ciate ful of that decoction, dissolve of 
Diæcatholicon of Diaprunis, ana: +o ss. surrup 
of Roses +o ss. take this fasting as a potion, 
if pained in the head, take Pilule chochie 
or Pilule aure, and such like; if the 
[^p.40^] 
Crampe assaile the body, rub the member 
with warm clothes, or oyle of Hedghog; 
if a Convulsion, rub the pole and the 
member with oyle of Castoreum and Sage. 
These impediments being removed, I proceed 
with the Cure as followeth; If the 
wound be large or dangerous, let his dyet 
be good Broths, and meats of easie digestion, 
as Birds of the Hils, Mutton, Veale, 
Chickins and Rabbits; he must avoid salt 
meates, Beefe, Poulse, Cabbig, and windy 
meates, as fruits, nor drink no inflaming 
drink: The next intention is to keep the 
body soluble, with potions, Pils, or Glisters, 
then you must wash the wound with 
this lotion, take Plantain water, Buglosse, 
or Burrage water, odoriferous Wine, Pomgranet 
flowers, Plantain leaves, the flowers of 
St. Johns wort, boyle this together and 
wash the wound, then make Tents and 
roule them in oyle of Hipericon, and fill 
the hollow places with them, then make 
Plaisters to mundifie: Rec. of clear Turpentine 
+o ij. Hony of Roses +o j. Smallege +o j. let 
them boyle together a little time, adde 
thereto the yolke of an egge, Saffron, a 
[^p.41^] 
little Myrrh +o ij. of Alloes +o j. make this 
into a stiffe Plaister, with oyle of Roses, 
and flower of Barley, this wil mundifie 
and clear a wound in two daies, if not very 
foule; after the wound is clear, you may 
proceed again with healing Medicines; if 
not mundified, you may use Unguentum Egiptiacum, 
or unguentum Basilicum; and for 
a healing-Plaister, the wound being mundified 
take of Clownes all-heale, falilly, 
Archangell, ana: one handful, pound them, 
and boile it in Hoglard, then straine it, let 
it stand to be cold, take the top of it, poure 
away the bottome, and boile it with wax 
and Rosen, so much as is sufficient to make 
a Plaister, this, or one of these Hearbs made 
in a Salve, will heale a green wound, or 
you may have this Implaister made at any 
Apothecaries, Rec. Salet oyle +o iiij. white Wax 
+o j. Turpentine +o +s. Green Pitch, +o j. Frankinsence, 
and Mastick ana: +o j Saffron +Q j. mingle 
these and boile them upon a gentle fire, 
and make Plaisters: So I end for old Ulcers, 
you may mundifie the Soare with 
White wine, and Aquavitæ, or with the Mundificatives 
before written, as Egiptiacum, 
[^p.42^] 
or Unguentum apostolorum, and finish the 
Cure with the above named Medicines. 
 
[}16 To cure a Gun-shot.}] 
 
THe Chyrurgeons first intention must be to stop 
the Flux of blood, next to search diligently, whether 
the bullet do remain in the member wounded, or 
whether the bullet have carryed any thing before it 
into the wound, as Paper, cloath or such like; if so, the 
next intention is, with a Terra-bellum or other Instrument 
to take it out. Make this Digestive, Rec: 
Turpentine washed in Aquaviter +o iv. Vitelorum ovorum 
number ij. oyle of Roses +o ss. Precipitat twice 
calcined +q j. Saffron +Q j. commix this and make a 
Plaister, after this you may wash the wound with 
Plantain water, red Rose water, with oyle of Roses 
and oyle of Elder, after mundifie the wound with 
this: Rec: Venice Turpentine washed in Aquaviter 
+o iij. oyle of Egges +o j. or Yolkes of Egges number 
ij. Hony of Roses, and surrup of Roses, ana: +o ij. the 
bran of Fetches, Frankinsence, Mastick of each +o ss. 
cover your Tents, and make Plaisters, until the wound 
bee cleane, then you may proceed to end the cure 
with the forenamed oyle of Hipericon, and healing 
Salves. 
 
[}17 To cure Burning with Gun-Powder, or burning 
with fire and scalding.}] 
 
IF it happen that any part of the body be burned 
with Gunpowder or fire; take the Juyce of Onyons 
+o iv. and common salt +o ss. beat them well together, 
[^p.43^] 
and if the burn be blistered, anoint it three 
or four times in a day, for three dayes, then you 
shall proceed as followeth: but if the skin be burnt, 
and made raw, you must cover it all over with the 
finest Lawn and, anoynt it with the Juice of Onyons, 
and Salt, letting the Lawn lye upon the wound, untill 
it is whole; but if deeply burned, use this following, 
Rec. the finest Hoglard li. iv. Linseed oyle 
li. ij. oyle of Roses li. ss. of Mallow-leaves, Violet 
leaves, the Brood of Bees; Plantain leaves, Burnet, 
Peny-wort, Tulson, Live-ever ana: Mj. infuse these 
6 dayes upon a gentle fire, adde thereto white Wax 
li: ss, white Niter +o vj. also you may put to Shoomakers 
peece-greace, this being used will cure it, 
chipping off the Lawne, as it healeth: if there be 
Blisters you must not cut them, it wil be painefull: 
you may make part of this Medicine if you need 
not the whole Receipt; Also if the burn or scald be 
not much, you may pound Onyons, and a little Salt, 
or Leeks with a little Salt, so much as will cover the 
soare, and let it lye 24 houres, in the interim, take 
a handfull of House-Leek, and the inner bark of the 
Elder, bruise it and boyle it in a quart of Creame 
into an oyle, scum off the cleare oyle as it ariseth, 
keep it and anoynt the soare place twice or thrice in 
the day, and it wil be whole, this I have often proved: 
You may beate into the Cream the white of 
an Egge, if your eyes or eye-lids should be burned. 
Rec: Rose water +o iij. Womans Milke +o ij. the oyle of 
whites of two Eggs, Sugar Candy halfe a quartern, 
[^p.44^] 
mingle these and make an oyntment and annoynt about 
the eye-lids, and about the eyes: or you may 
make this, Rec: oyle of Roses +o vj. white Lead 
washed in Red Rose water +o ij. white Wax, oyle 
of the Whites of four Egges, the Gum called Campher, 
make this into an Unguent, to take away the 
spots and scarres, take oyle of Egges, and oyle of Almonds, 
and wash the face it cleareth the skin. 
 
Courteous Reader, Seeing many people, as wel Souldiers 
as others, have neglected the means in time of 
danger to preserve their health, I thought good to 
show you briefly some easie medicines, which may 
be had most of them with little cost (other Medicines 
may be made for you at the Apothecarys) to 
keep in your Closets, or Knap-sacks untill time of 
need to make use of them in the absence of your Physitian 
or Chyrurgion, which I wish you to hasten 
unto for advice. 
 
[}FINIS.}] 
 
A Table of the Weights used by Physitians, 
 
[^Beginning of a list in two columns.^] 
A Scruple. +Q 
A Dram. +q 
An Ounce. +o 
A Pound. li. 
[^column break^] 
A Quarter. q. 
A Halfe: ss. 
A Handfull. M. 
Of every one. ana. 
[^End of a list in two columns.^] 
 