[^Culpeper, Nicholas: English physician^] 
 
[}THE ENGLISH 
PHYSICIAN 
OR AN 
Astrologo-physical Discourse of 
the vulgar Herbs of this 
NATION. 
 
Being a compleat Method of Physick, 
whereby a man may preserve his Body in 
health; or cure himself, being sick, for 
three pence charge, with such things onely 
as grow in England, they being most fit 
for English Bodies. 
 
Herein is also shewed, 
 
1. The way of making Plaisters, Oyntments, Oyls, 
Pultisses, Syrups, Decoctions, Julips, or Waters of 
all sorts of Physical Herbs, that you may have them 
ready for your use at all times of the year. 
2. What Planet governeth every Herb or Tree 
(used in Physick) that groweth in England. 
3. The Time of gathering all Herbs, but vulgarly, 
and astrologically. 
4. The way of drying and keeping the Herbs 
all the year. 
5. The way of keeping the Juyces ready for use 
at all times. 
6. The way of making and keeping all kinde of 
usefull Compounds made of Herbs. 
7. The way of mixing Medicines according to 
Cause and Mixture of the Disease, and Part of 
the Body afflicted. 
 
By N. Culpeper, Student in Physick and Astrology. 
 
LONDON, 
Printed for the benefit of the Commonwealth 
of England. 1652.}] 
 
[^A preface to the reader, a list of authors cited in the book and a list of herbs and plants and their relation to planets omitted.^] 
[^Extract 1, pp. 1-22^] 
 
[^p.1^] 
[}The English Physician.}] 
 
[}Adders Tongue.}] 
 
Description. THis small Herb hath but one 
Leaf; which grows with the 
stalk a fingers length above 
the ground, being fat, and a 
fresh green colour, broad, like 
the water Plantane (but less) 
without any middle Rib in it: from the bottom of 
which leaf on the inside, riseth up (ordinarily) one, 
sometimes two, or three small slender stalks, the upper 
half whereof is somewhat bigger, and dented with 
small round dents of a yellowish green colour, like the 
Tongue of an Adder or Serpent (onely this is as usefull 
as they are formidable) The Root continues all 
the year. 
 
Place. It groweth in moist Meadows, and such like 
places. 
 
Time. And is to be found in April and May, for it 
quickly perisheth with a little heat. 
 
Virtues and Use. It is temperate, in respect of heat, 
but dry in the second degree. The juyce of the leaves 
drunk with the distilled water of Horstail is a singular 
remedy for all manner of Wounds in the breast, bowels, 
or other parts of the body, and is given with good 
[/1./] 
success unto those who are troubled with Casting, Vomiting, 
or bleeding at the mouth or nose, or otherwise 
downwards. The said juyce given in the distilled water 
of Oaken buds is very good for Women who have 
their usual Courses, or the Whites flowing down too 
abundantly. It helps sore eyes. The leaves infused or 
boyled in Oyl Omphacine, or unripe Olives set in the 
Sun for certain days, or the green leaves sufficiently 
boyled in the said Oyl, is made an excellent green 
Balsom, not onely for green and fresh Wounds, but also 
for old and inveterate Ulcers, especially if a little fine 
clear Turpentine be dissolved therein: it also stayeth 
and represseth all Inflammations that arise upon pains, 
by hurts, or wounds. 
 
It is an Herb under the dominion of the Moon in 
Cancer, and therefore if the weakness of the retentive 
faculty be caused by an evil Influence of Saturn, in any 
part of the body governed by the Moon, or under the 
[^p.2^] 
dominion of Cancer, this herb cures it by sympathy: It 
cures those Diseases before specified in any part of the 
Body under the influence of Saturn, by antipathy. 
 
What parts of the Body are under each Planet and 
Sign, and also what Diseases may be found in my 
astrological judgement of Diseases, and for the internal 
work of Nature in the Body of man, as vital, animal, 
natural, and procreative Spirit of man, the apprehension, 
judgement, memory, the external Senses, 
viz. Seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, and feeling; 
the Virtues, attractive, attentive, digestive, expulsive, &c. 
under the dominion of what Planets they are, may be 
found in my Ephemeris for the year 1651. in both which 
you shall finde the Chaff of Authours blown away by the 
fame of D. Reason, and nothing but rational Truths 
left for the judgement of the ingenious to feed upon. 
 
Lastly, to avoid blotting Paper with one thing 
many times, and also to ease your purses in the price 
of the Book, and withal to make you studious in Physick, 
you have at the latter end of the Book, the way of 
preserving all herbs either in juyce, Conserve, Oyl, 
Oyntment, or Plaister, Electuary, Pill, or Troches. 
 
[}Agrimony.}] 
 
Description. THis hath divers long leaves (some greater, 
some smaller) set upon a stalk, all of them 
dented about the edges, green above, and greyish underneath, 
and a little hairy withall: among which 
ariseth up usually, but one strong, round, hairy, brown 
stalk, two or three foot high, with smaller leaves set 
here and there upon it, at the top whereof grow many 
small yellow flowers one above another in long spikes: 
after which come rough heads of seeds hanging downwards, 
which will cleave to, and stick upon Garments, 
or any thing that shall rub against them. The Root is 
black, long, and somewhat woody, abiding many years, 
and shooting afresh every Spring, which Root, though 
small, hath a reasonable good scent. 
 
Place. It groweth upon banks near the sides of 
hedges, or pales. 
 
Time. And it flowereth in July and August, the seed 
being ripe shortly after. 
 
[/2./] 
Virtues and Uses. It is of a cleansing and cutting 
faculty without any manifest heat, moderately drying 
and binding; it openeth and cleanseth the Liver, 
helpeth the Jaundice, and is very beneficial to the 
bowels, healing all inward Wounds, bruises, hurts, and 
other distempers. The decoction of the Herb made 
with Wine, and drunk, is good against the stinging and 
biting of Serpents, and helps them that have foul, 
troubled, or bloudy waters, and makes them piss clear 
speedily; it also helpeth the Chollick, cleanseth the 
breast, and rids away the Cough. A draught of the 
decoction taken warm before the fit, first removes, and 
[^p.3^] 
in time rids away the Tertian and Quartan Agues: the 
leaves & seed taken in Wine, stayeth the bloudy Flux. 
Outwardly applied, being stamped with old swines 
grease, it helpeth old sores, Cancers, and inveterate 
Ulcers; and draweth forth thorns, splinters of wood, 
nails, or any other such thing gotten into the flesh; it 
helpeth to strengthen the members that be out of joynt; 
and being bruised and applied, or the juyce dropped in, 
it helpeth foul and imposthumed ears. 
 
The distilled water of the Herb is good to all the 
said purposes, either inward or outward, but a great 
deal weaker. 
 
It is an Herb under Jupiter, and the sign of Cancer, and 
therefore strengthens those parts under that Planet and 
sign, and removes diseases in them by Sympathy, and 
those under Saturn, Mars, and Mercury, by Antipathy. If 
they happen in any part of the body governed by Jupiter, 
or under the signs, Cancer, Sagittary, or Pisces, 
and therefore must needs be good for the Gout, either 
used outwardly in an Oyl, or Oyntment, or inwardly in 
an Electuary, or Syrup, or concreated juyce, for which 
see the latter end of the book. 
 
It is a most admirable remedy for such whose Livers 
are annoyed either by heat or cold. The Liver is the 
former of bloud, the nourisher of the body, and Agrimony 
and strengthner of the Liver. 
 
I cannot stand to give you a reason in every Herb 
why it cureth such diseases, but if you please to peruse 
my judgement in the Herb Wormwood you shall 
find them there, and it will be well worth your while 
to consider it in every Herb, you shall finde them true 
throughout the book. 
 
[}Alehoof, or Ground-Ivy.}] 
 
Description. THis well-known Herb, lieth, spreadeth, and 
creepeth upon the ground, shooting forth 
Roots, at the corners of the tender joynted stalks, set all 
along with two round leaves at every joynt, somewhat 
hairy, crumpled, and unevenly dented about the edges 
with round dents: at the joynts likewise with the leaves 
towards the end of the branches come forth hollow 
long flowers of a bluish purple colour with small white 
spots upon the lips that hang down: the Root is small 
with strings. 
 
Place. It is commonly found under hedges, and on 
the sides of ditches, under houses, or in shadowed Lanes, 
and other waste grounds in almost every part of the 
Land. 
 
Time. They flower somewhat early, and abide so a 
great while; the leaves continue green untill winter, 
and sometimes abide, except the winter be very sharp 
and cold. 
 
Virtues and Use. It is quick, sharp, and bitter in 
taste, and is thereby found to be hot and dry, a singular 
[^p.4^] 
Herb for all inward wounds, exulcerated Lungs, or 
[/3./] 
other parts, either by it self or boyled with other the 
like Herbs: and being drunk, it in short time easeth 
all griping pains, windy and Chollerick humours in the 
stomach, spleen, or belly: helps the yellow Jaundice 
by opening the stoppings of the Gaul and Liver, and 
Melancholly by opening the stoppings of the Spleen, 
expelleth venom or poyson, and also the plague, it 
provoketh Urine, and womens Courses. The decoction of 
it in wine drunk for some time together procureth ease 
unto them that are troubled with the Sciatica or Hip-gout, 
as also the Gout in the hands, knees, or feet: and 
if you put to the decoction, some honey, & a little burnt 
Allum, it is excellent good to gargle any sore mouth or 
throat, and to wash the sores and Ulcers in the privy 
parts of Man or Woman: it speedily healeth green 
Wounds being bruised and bound thereunto: the 
juyce of it boyled with a little Honey and Verdigrees, 
doth wonderfully cleanse Fistulaes, Ulcers, and stayeth 
the spreading or eating of Cancers and Ulcers; it helpeth 
the itch, scabs, wheals, and other breakings out in 
any part of the body. The juyce of Celandine, field 
Daysies, and Ground-Ivy clarified, and a little fine Sugar 
dissolved therein, and dropped into the eys, is a sovereign 
remedy for all the pains, redness, and watering 
of them; as also for the Pin and Web, skins, and films 
growing over the sight; it helpeth beasts as well as 
men; the juyce dropped into the ears doth wonderfully 
help the noise and singing of them, and helpeth 
the hearing which is decayed. It is good to tun up 
with new drink, for it will so clarifie it in a night, 
that it will be the fitter to be drunk the next morning; 
or if any drink be thick with removing, or any other 
accident, it will do the like in a few hours. 
 
It is an Herb of Venus, and therefore cures her diseases 
by Sympathy, and those of Mars by Antipathy; 
how to preserve it all the year you shall finde at the 
latter end of the book. 
 
[}Alexander.}] 
 
[/4./] 
Description. It is usually sown in all the Gardens in Europe, 
and so well known, that it needs no further 
description. 
 
Time. They flower in June and July, and the seed 
is ripe in August. 
 
Virtues and Use. It warmeth a cold stomach, and 
openeth stoppings of the Liver and Spleen, it is good 
to move womens Courses, to expell the After-birth, to 
break winde, to provoke Urine, and help the Strangury; 
and these things the seeds will do likewise, if either 
of them be boyled in Wine, or being bruised and 
taken in Wine, it is also effectual against the biting of 
Serpents. And now you know what Alexander-pottage 
which is so familiar in this Citie is good for, that you 
[^p.5^] 
may no longer eat it out of ignorance, but out of 
knowledg. 
 
[}The black Alder-tree.}] 
 
Description. THis Tree seldom groweth to any great bigness, 
but for the most part abideth like a 
hedg, bush, or tree, spreading into branches, the 
wood of the body being white, and of a dark, red core 
or heart; the outward Bark is of a blackish colour, 
with many white spots thereon: but the inner Bark 
next unto the wood is yellow, which being chewed 
will turn the spittle near into a Saffron colour. The 
Leaves are somewhat like those of the ordinary Alder-tree, 
or the female Cornel, or Dog-berry-tree, called in 
Sussex Dog-wood, but blacker, and not so long. The 
flowers are white, coming forth with the Leaves at the 
joynts, which turn into small round berries, first green 
afterwards red, but blackish when they are through 
ripe, divided as it were into two parts, wherin 
is contained two small round and flat seeds: the 
Root runneth not deep into the ground, but spreadeth 
rather under the upper crust of the earth. 
 
Place. This tree or shrub may be found plentifully 
in St. Johns wood by Hornsey, and in the woods upon 
Hamsted-Heath, as also at a wood called the old Park 
in Barcomb in Sussex, near the Brooks side. 
 
Time. It flowers in May, and the berries are ripe 
in September. 
 
Virtues and Use. The inner yellow Bark hereof 
[/5./] 
purgeth downwards both Choller and Flegm, and the 
watry humours of such as have the Dropsie, and 
strengtheneth the inward parts again by binding. If 
the Bark hereof be boiled with Agrimony, Wormwood, 
Dodder, Hops, and some Fennel, with Smalledg, 
Endive, and Succory-roots, and a reasonable draught 
taken every morning for some time together, it is very 
[/6./] 
effectual against the Jaundice, Dropsie, and the evil disposition 
of the body, especially if some suitable purging 
Medicine have been taken before to avoid the 
grosser excrements; it purgeth & strengtheneth the Liver 
and Spleen, cleansing them from such evil humours, 
and hardness as they are afflicted with: it is to be understood 
that these things are performed by the dried 
Bark, for the fresh green Bark taken inwardly provoketh 
strong vomitings, pains in the stomach, and gripings 
in the belly: yet if the Decoction may stand and 
settle two or three days until the yellow colour be 
[/7./] 
changed black, it will not work so strongly as before, 
but will strengthen the stomach, and procure an appetite 
to meat. The outer Bark contrariwise doth binde 
the body, and is helpfull for all Lasks and fluxes thereof, 
but this also must be dried first, whereby it will 
work the better. The inner Bark hereof boiled in 
Vineger, is an approved remedy to kill Lice, to cure 
[^p.6^] 
the Itch, and take away scabs by drying them up in 
a short time: it is singular good to wash the teeth, to 
take away the pains, to fasten those that are loose, to 
cleanse them, and keep them sound. The Leaves are 
good Fodder for Kine to make them give more milk. 
 
If in the Spring-time you use the herbs before mentioned, 
and will but take a handfull of each of them, 
add to them a handfull of Elder-buds, and having 
bruised them all, boyl them in a Gallon of ordinary 
Beer when it is new, and having boyled them half an 
hour, add this to three Gallons more, and let them work 
together, and drink a draught of it every morning 
half a Pint or thereabouts; it is an excellent Purge for 
the Spring, to consume that flegmatick quality the 
Winter hath left behinde it, and withall keep your body 
in health, and consume those evil humours which 
the heat of Summer will readily stir up: esteem it as a 
Jewel. 
 
[}The common Alder-tree.}] 
 
Description. GRoweth to a reasonable heighth, and spreads 
much if it like the place; it is so generally 
well known unto Countrey people, that I conceive it 
needless to tell them that which is no news. 
 
Place and Time. It delighteth to grow in moist 
Woods and watery places, flowering in April or May, 
and yielding ripe seed in Sptember. 
 
Virtues and Use. The Leaves and Bark of the Alder-tree, 
[/8./] 
are cooling, drying, and binding; the fresh 
Leaves laid upon swellings, dissolveth them, and stayeth 
the Inflammations; the Leaves put under the bare 
feet gauled with travelling are a great refreshing to 
them: the said Leaves gathered while the morning 
dew is on them, and brought into a Chamber troubled 
with Fleas, will gather them thereinto, which being 
suddenly cast out will rid the Chamber of those troublesom 
Bed-fellows. 
 
It is a tree under the Dominion of Venus, and of 
some watry sign or other, I suppose Pisces, and therfore 
the decoction, or distilled water of the Leaves is 
excellent against burnings, and Inflammations, either 
[/9./] 
with Wounds or without, to bath the place grieved 
with, and especially for that Inflammation in the breast, 
which the vulgar call an Ague. 
 
If you cannot get the Leaves, as in Winter it is impossible, 
make use of the Bark in the same manner. 
 
[}Angelica.}] 
 
TO write a Description of that which is so well 
known to be growing in almost every Garden, I suppose 
is altogether needless: yet for its virtues it is of 
admirable use. 
 
In time of Heathenism when men had found out 
[^p.7^] 
any excellent herb &c. they dedicated it to their gods, 
as the Bay-tree to Apollo, the Oak to Jupiter, the 
Vine to Bacchus, the Poplar to Hercules: these the Papists 
following as their Patriarchs, they dedicate them 
to their Saints, as our Ladies Thistle to the blessed Virgin, 
St. Johns Wort to St. John, and another Wort to 
St. Peter, &c. Our Physicians must imitate like Apes, 
(though they cannot come off half so cleverly) for 
they blasphemously call Pansies, or Hearts-ease, an Herb 
of the Trinity, because it is of three colours: and a 
certain Ointment, an Ointment of the Apostles, because 
it consisteth of twelve Ingredients; Alas, poor 
Fools, I am sorry for their folly, and grieved at their 
blasphemy; God send them the rest of their age, for 
they have their share of ignorance already; O! why 
must ours be blasphemous because the Heathens and 
Papists were idolatrous? Certainly they have read so 
much in old rusty Authours, that they have lost all 
their Deomity, for unless it were amongst the Ranters, 
I never read or heard of such blasphemy: the Heathens 
and Papists were bad, and ours worse, the Papists 
giving idolatrous names to herbs for their virtues 
sakes, not for their fair looks: and therefore some 
called this an herb of the Holy Ghost, others more 
moderate called it Angelica, because of its angelical 
virtues, and that name it retains still, and all nations 
follow it so near as their Dialect will permit. 
 
Virtues and use. It resists poyson by defending and 
[/10./] 
comforting the heart, bloud, and spirits, it doth the 
like against the Plague, and all epidemical diseases if 
the Root be taken in pouder to the weight of half a 
dram at a time with some good Treacle in Carduus 
water, and the party thereupon laid to sweat in his 
bed. If Treacle be not at hand, take it alone in Carduus 
or Angelica-water. The stalks or roots candied 
and eaten fasting, are good Preservatives in times of 
Infection; and at other times to warm and comfort a 
cold stomach. The root also steeped in Vineger, and a 
[/11./] 
little of that Vineger taken sometimes fasting, and the 
Root smelled unto is good for the same purpose. A water 
distilled from the Root simply, or steeped in Wine, 
and distilled in Glass, is much more effectual than the 
water of the Leaves; and this Water drunk two or 
three spoonfuls at a time, easeth all pains and torments 
coming of cold and winde, so as the body be 
not bound, and taken with some of the Root in pouder 
at the beginning helpeth the plurisie, as also all 
other diseases of the lungs and breast, as Coughs, 
Pthisick, and shortness of breath; and a Syrup of the 
stalks doth the like: it helps pains of the Chollick, 
the Strangury, and stopping of the urine, procureth 
womens Courses, and expelleth the after-birth, openeth 
the stoppings of the Liver and Spleen, and briefly 
easeth and discusseth all windiness, and inward swellings. 
The decoction drunk before the fit of an Ague, 
that they may sweat (if possible) before the fit come 
[^p.8^] 
will in two or three times taking rid it quite away: 
it helps digestion, and is a remedy for a surfet. The 
juyce or the water being dropped into the eys or ears, 
helps dimness of sight & deafness: the juyce put into 
the hollow teeth easeth their pains. The Roots in 
pouder made up in a Plaister with a little Pitch, and 
laid on the biting of a mad Dog, or any other venomous 
creature, doth wonderfully help: the juyce or 
the water dropped, or tents wet therein, and put into 
[/12./] 
old filthy deep ulcers, or the pouder of the Root in 
want of either doth cleanse and cause them to heal 
quickly, by covering the naked bones with flesh. The 
distilled water applied to places pained with the 
Gout or Sciatica, doth give a great deal of ease. 
 
The wilde Angelica is not so effectual as the Garden, 
although it may be safely used to all the purposes aforesaid. 
 
It is an herb of the Sun in Leo; let it be gathered 
when he is there, the Moon applying to his good 
Aspect; let it be gathered either in his hour, or in the 
hour of Jupiter, let Sol be angular. Observe the like 
in gathering the herbs of other Plants, and you may 
happen do wonders. In all epidemical diseases caused 
by Saturn, this is as good a Preservative as grows. 
 
[}Apples.}] 
 
A Word or two of the most usual kindes of Apples, 
though the Colledge of Physicians make use of 
none but such as [vulgo vocati], Pearmains, [vel] Pippins. 
 
Apples in general are cold and windy, and being of 
sundry tastes, Galen sheweth thereby how to distinguish 
them: some have a sharp taste, and are good for fainting 
[/13./] 
stomachs and loose bellies; others sowre, good to 
cool and quench thirst; some sharp, fit to cut gross 
flegm; some sweet, some distributed in the body, and 
as soon passed away, yet sooner corrupted in the stomach 
if they be staid: the best sorts, before they be 
throughly ripe, are to be avoided, then to be roasted or 
scalded is the best way to take them, and a little Spice 
or seeds cast upon them and taken after meat, do 
[/14./] 
strengthen both stomach and bowels, especially in 
those that loath, or hardly digest their meat, or are given 
to casting, or have a flux or lask: those that are 
a little sowre and harsh used in that manner are fittest; 
sweet Apples loosen the belly and drive forth 
Worms; sowre Apples stop the belly, and provoke 
urine; and Crabs for this purpose are fittest: the 
sweet Apples, as the Pippin and Pearmain, help to dissolve 
melancholly humours, and to procure mirth, and 
therefore are fittest for [Confectio Alkermes] & [Syrupus 
de pomis.] The Leaves boiled and given to drink 
in hot Agues, where the heat of the Liver and stomach 
causeth the lips to break out, and the throat to 
[^p.9^] 
grow dry, harsh and furred, is very good to wash and 
gargle it withall, and to drink down some. This may 
to good purpose be used when better things are not at 
hand, or cannot be had. The juyce of Crabs either Verjuyce 
or Cider, is of singular good use in the heat and 
faintings of the stomach, and against casting to maake a 
[/15./] 
Posset with, or taken some of it alone by it self. The 
juyce of Crabs, or Cider applied with wet cloaths therein 
to scalded or burnt places, cooleth, healeth, and 
draweth forth the fire. A rotten Apple applied to eys 
bloud-shotten, or inflamed with heat, or that are black 
and blue about them by any stroke or fall, and bound 
to all day or night, helpeth them quickly. The distilled 
water of rotten Apples doth cool the heat and inflamations 
of sores, and is good to bath foul creeping 
Ulcers, and to wash the face to take away spots, freckles, 
or other discolourings. The distilled water of 
good and sound Apples is of special good use to procure 
mirth, and expell melancholly. The oyntment 
called Pomatum, if sweet and well made, helpeth the 
chops in the lips or hands, and maketh smooth and 
supple the rough skin of the hands or face parched 
with winde or other accidents. 
 
Thus my Authours. 
 
All that I can say of Apples is this. 
 
1. That they are extream windy. 
 
2. That they provoke Urine, being roasted (especially 
Pomewaters) and mixed with fair water, and drunk 
up at night going to bed; half a dozen great ones 
mixed with a quart of water, excellently provokes 
Urine, if there be no material stone in the body: 
This I had of Gerhard, and have often known it 
proved, and always with good success. All Apples 
loosen the belly, and pleasure the stomach by their 
coolness. 
 
[}Arrach wilde and stinking.}] 
 
Description. THis hath small and almost round Leaves, yet 
a little pointed and without dent or cut, of 
a dusky mealy colour, growing on the slender stalks 
and branches that spread on the ground, with small 
flowers in clusters set with the Leaves, and small seeds 
succeeding like the rest, perishing yearly, and rising 
again with its own sowing. It smells like old rotten 
fish, or something worse. 
 
Place. It grows usually upon dunghils. 
 
Time. They flower in June and July, and their seed 
is ripe quickly after. 
 
Virtues and Use. Stinking Arrach is used as a remedy 
to help Women pained, and almost strangled with the 
Mother, by smelling to it: but inwardly taken, there is 
not a better remedy under the Moon for that disease. 
I would be large in the commendation of this Herb, 
were I but eloquent. It is an Herb under the dominion 
[^p.10^] 
of Venus, and under the sign Scorpio: it is common almost 
upon every dunghill. The works of God are given 
freely to man, his medicines are common and cheap, 
and easie to be found: it is the medicines of the Colledge 
of Physicians that are so dear and scarce to finde, 
I commend it for an universal medicine for the womb, 
[/16./] 
and such a medicine as will easily, safely, and speedily 
cure any disease thereof, as the fits of the Mother, Dislocation, 
or falling out therof; it cools the womb being 
over-heated. (And let me tell you this, and I will 
tell you but the truth. Heat of the womb is one of the 
greatest causes of hard labour in Child-birth) It makes 
barren women fruitfull, it cleanseth the womb if it be 
foul, and strengthens it exceedingly; it provokes the 
Terms if they be stopped, and stops them if they flow 
immoderately. You can desire no good to your womb, 
but this Herb will effect it; therefore if you love Children, 
if you love health, if you love ease, keep a Syrup 
always by you made of the juyce of this Herb and Sugar 
(or Honey if it be to cleanse the womb) and let such 
as be rich keep it for their poor neighbours, and bestow 
it as freely as I bestow my studies upon them, or else let 
them look to answer it another day when the Lord 
shall come to make inquisition for bloud. 
 
[}Archangel.}] 
 
TO put a gloss upon their practice; the Physicians 
call an Herb (which Countrey people vulgarly 
know by the name of Dead Nettle) Archangel, wherein 
whether they favour of more superstition or folly I 
leave to the judicious Reader. There is more curiosity 
than courtesie to my Countreymen used by others in 
the explanation, as well of the names, as description of 
this so well known an Herb; which that I may not also 
be guilty of, take this short description first of the 
Red Archangel. 
 
Descriptions. This hath divers square stalks somewhat 
hairy, at the joynts whereof grow two sad green 
Leaves dented about the edges, opposite to one another, 
the lowermost upon long foot-stalks, but without 
any toward the tops which are somewhat round, yet 
pointed, and a little crumpled and hairy: round about 
the upper joynts where the Leaves grow thick, are sundry 
gaping flowers of a pale reddish colour, after which 
come the seeds three or four in a husk. The Root is 
small and thriddy, perishing every year: the whole 
Plant hath a strong scent, but not stinking. 
 
White Archangel hath divers square stalks not standing 
straight upright, but bending downward, wheron 
stand two Leaves at a joynt, larger and more pointed 
than the other, dented about the edges, and greener 
also, more like unto Nettle-leaves but not stinking, yet 
hairy: At the joynts with three Leaves stand larger and 
more open gaping white flowers, in husks round about 
[^p.11^] 
the stalks (but not with such a bush of Leaves, as flowers 
set in the top, as is on the other) wherein stand small 
roundish black seeds: the Root is white, with many 
strings at it, not growing downward, but lying under 
the upper crust of the earth, and abideth many years 
increasing: this hath not so strong a scent as the former. 
 
Yellow Archangel is like the white in the stalks and 
Leaves, but that the stalks are more straight and upright, 
and the joynts with Leaves are further asunder, 
having longer Leaves than the former; and the flowers 
a little larger and more gaping, of a fair yellow colour 
in most, in some paler. The Roots are like the white, 
onely they creep not so much under the ground. 
 
Place. They grow almost every where, (unless it 
be in the middle of the street) the yellow most usually 
in the wet grounds of Woods, and sometimes in the 
drier, in divers Countries of this Nation. 
 
Time. They flower from the beginning of the Spring 
all the Summer long. 
 
Virtues and Use. The Archangels are somewhat hot 
and drier than the stinking Nettles, and used with better 
[/17./] 
success for the stopping and hardness of the Spleen, 
than they by using the Decoction of the Herb in Wine, 
and afterwards applying the Herb hot unto the Region 
of the Spleen as a Plaister, or the Decoction with 
Spunges. The flowers of the white Archangel are preserved, 
[/18./] 
or conserved to be used to stay the whites and 
the flowers of the red to stay the Reds in women. It 
makes the heart merry, drives away melancholly, quickens 
the spirits, is good against quartan Agues, stancheth 
bleedings at mouth or nose, if it be stamped and applied 
to the nape of the neck: the Herb also bruised, 
and with some Salt and Vineger, and Hogs grease laid 
upon any hard tumour or swelling, or that which is 
vulgarly called the Kings Evil, doth help to dissolve or 
discuss them, and being in like manner applied doth 
much allay the pains and give ease to the Gout, Sciatica, 
and other aches of the joynts and sinews: it is also 
very effectual to heal all green wounds, & old ulcers 
also to stay their fretting, gnawing, and spreading; it 
draweth forth splinters, and such like things gotten into 
the flesh, and is very good against bruises and burnings. 
But the yellow Archangel is most commended for 
filty corrupt sores and ulcers, yea, although they grow 
to be hollow, and to dissolve tumours. The chief use 
of them is for women, it being an Herb of Venus, and 
may be found in my Guide for Women. 
 
[}Arsmart.}] 
 
[}Description of the Milde.}] 
 
THis hath broad Leaves set at the great red joynts of 
the stalks, with semicircular blackish marks on them 
usually, yet sometimes without: the flowers grow in 
[^p.12^] 
long spikes usually either bluish or whitish with such 
like seed following. The root is long with many strings 
thereat perishing yearly; this hath no sharp taste (as 
another sort hath, which is quick and biting) but rather 
sower like Sorrel, or else a little drying or without 
taste. 
 
Place. It grows in watery plashes, ditches, and the 
like, which for the most part are dry in Summer. 
 
Time. It flowereth in June, and the seed is ripe in 
August. 
 
Virtues and Use. It is of a cooling and drying quality, 
[/19./] 
and very effectual for putrified ulcers in man or 
beast, to kill the Worms, and cleanse the putrified 
places: the juyce thereof dropped in, or otherwise applied, 
consumeth all cold swellings, and dissolveth the 
congealed bloud of bruises by strokes, falls, &c. A piece 
of the Root, or some of the seed bruised and held to 
an aching tooth, taketh away the pain. The Leaves 
bruised and laid to the joynt that hath a Fellon thereon, 
taketh it away. The juyce destroyeth Worms in the 
Ears being dropped into them: if the hot Arsm_[^ORIG. BLURRED^]rt be 
strewed in a Chamber it will soon kill all the Fleas; 
and the Herb or juyce of the cold Arsmart put to Horses 
or other Cattels sores will drive away the Fly in the 
hottest time of Summer: A good handfull of the hot 
biting Arsmart put under a Horses Saddle will make 
him travel the better, although he were half tired before: 
the milde Arsmart is good against hot Imposthumes 
and Inflammations at the beginning, and to heal 
green Wounds. 
 
All Authours chop the virtues of both sorts of Arsmart 
together, as men chop Herbs for the Pot, when 
both of them are of clean contrary qualities; the hot 
Arsmart groweth not so high or tall as the milde doth, 
but hath many Leaves of the colour of Peach-leaves, 
very seldom or never spotted, in other particulars it is 
like the former, but may easily be known from it, if 
you will be but pleased to break a Leaf of it cross 
your Tongue, for the hot will make your Tongue to 
smart, so will not the cold; if you see them both together 
you may easily distinguish them, because the milde 
hath far broader Leaves: and our Colledge of Physicians, 
out of their learned care for the publick good, 
Anglice, their own gain, mistake the one for the other 
in their new master-piece, whereby they discover, 
1. Their ignorance, 2. Their carelesness, and he that 
hath but half an Eye may see their pride without a 
pair of Spectacles. I have done what I could to distinguish 
them in their virtues, and when you finde not the 
contrary named, use the cold. The truth is, I have not 
yet spoken with Dr. Reason, nor his brother Dr. Experience, 
concerning either of them both. 
 
[^p.13^] 
[}Asarabacca.}] 
 
ASarabacca hath many heads rising from the Roots, 
from whence come many smooth Leaves, every one 
upon his own foot-stalk, which are rounder and bigger 
than Violet Leaves, thicker also, and of a darker green 
shining colour on the upper-side, and of a paler yellow 
green underneath, little or nothing dented about the 
edges; from among which rise small, round, hollow, 
brown, green husks, upon short stalks about an inch 
long, divided at the brims into five divisions, very like 
the cups or heads of the Henbane seed, but that they are 
smaller; and these be all the flowers it carrieth, which 
are somewhat sweet, being smelled unto, and wherein, 
when they are ripe, is contained small cornered, rough 
seeds, very like the kernels or stones of Grapes or Raisins. 
The Roots are small and whitish, spreading divers 
ways in the ground, and increasing into divers heads; 
but not running or creeping under ground, as some 
other creeping Herbs do; they are somewhat sweet in 
smell, resembling Nardus, but more when they are dry, 
than green; and of a sharp, but not unpleasant taste. 
 
Place. It groweth frequently in Gardens. 
 
Time. They keep their Leaves green all Winter, 
but shoot forth new in the Spring, and with them come 
forth those heads or flowers which give ripe seed about 
Mid-summer, or somewhat after. 
 
Virtues and Use, This Herb being drunk, not onely 
[/20./] 
provoketh vomiting, but purgeth downward, and by 
Urine also, purging both Choller and flegm: if you add 
to it some Spicknard, with the Whey of Goats Milk, or 
Honeyed water, it is made more strong, but it purgeth 
flegm more manifestly than Choller, and therefore doth 
much help pains in the Hips and other parts; it being 
boyled in Whey, wonderfully helpeth the Obstruction 
of the Liver and Spleen, and therefore profitable for 
the Dropsie and Jaundice being steeped in Wine and 
drunk. It helps those continual Agues that come by 
the plenty of stubborn humours: An Oyl made thereof 
by setting it in the Sun, with some Laudanum added 
to it, provoketh sweating (the ridge of the back being 
anointed therewith) and thereby driveth away the 
shaking fits of Agues. It will not abide any long boiling, 
for it loseth its chiefest strength thereby; nor much 
beating; for the finer pouder doth provoke Vomits and 
Urine, and the courser purgeth d_[^ORIG. BLURRED^]wnwards. 
 
The common Use herof is to take the juyce of five 
or seven Leaves in a little drink to cause Vomitings: 
The Roots have also the same virtue, though they do 
not operate so forcibly, yet they are very effectual against 
the bi_[^ORIG. BLANK^]ing of Serpents, and therefore is put as an ingredient 
[/21./] 
both into Mithridate and Venice Treacle. The 
Leaves and Roots being boyled in Ly, and the head 
[/22./] 
often washed therewith, while it is warm, comforteth 
the head and brain that is ill affected by taking cold, 
and helpeth the memory. 
[/23./] 
 
[^p.14^] 
I shall desire ignorant people to forbear the use of 
the Leaves, the Roots purge more gently, & may prove 
beneficial in such as have Cancers, or old putrified Ulcers, 
or Fistulaes upon their bodies, to take a dram of 
them in Pouder in a quarter of a pint of white Wine 
in the morning. The truth is, I fancy purging and vomiting 
Medicines as little as any man breathing doth, 
for they weaken nature, nor shall ever advise them to 
be used, unless upon urgent necessity. If a Physician be 
natures servant, it is his duty to strengthen his Mistriss 
as much as he can, and weaken her as little as may be. 
 
[}Asparagus, Sparagus, or Sperage.}] 
 
Description. IT riseth up at first with divers whitish green 
scaly heads, very brittle or easie to break 
while they are young, which afterwards rise up into 
very long and slender green stalks, of the bigness of an 
ordinary riding Wand at the bottom of most, or bigger 
or lesser, as the Roots are of growth; on which are set 
divers branches of green Leaves, shorter and smaller 
than Fennel to the top, at the joynts whereof come 
forth small, mossie yellowish flowers, which turn into 
round Berries, green at the first, and of an excellent red 
colour when they are ripe, shewing like beads of Corral, 
wherein are contained exceeding hard black seeds. 
The Roots are dispersed from a spongeous head into 
many long, thick, and round strings, whereby it sucketh 
much nourishment out of the ground, and increaseth 
plentifully thereby. 
 
[}Prickly Asparagus, Sparagus, or Sperage.}] 
 
Description. IT groweth usually in Gardens; and some of it 
grows wilde, in Appleton meadow in Gloucestershire, 
where the poor people do gather the buds, or 
young shoots, and sell them cheaper than our Garden 
Asparagus is sold at London. 
 
Time. They do for the most part flower, and bear 
their Berries late in the year, or not at all, although 
they are housed in Winter. 
 
Virtues and Use. The yong buds, or branches boyled 
[/24./] 
in ones ordinary broth, maketh the belly soluble 
and open, and boyled in white Wine, provoketh Urine 
being stopped, and is good against the Strangury, or difficulty 
of making water; it expelleth the Gravel and 
Stone out of the Kidneys, and helpeth pains in the 
Reins: and boyled in white Wine or Vineger it is prevalent 
for them that have their Arteries loosened, or 
are troubled with the Hip-gout, or Sciatica. The Decoction 
of the Roots boyled in Wine and taken, is good 
to clear the sight, and being held in the mouth easeth 
the Tooth-ach: and being taken fasting several mornings 
together stirreth up bodily lust in man or woman 
[^p.15^] 
(whatsoever some have written to the contrary.) The 
Garden Asparagus nourisheth more than the wilde; yet 
hath it the same effects in all the aforementioned diseases. 
[/25./] 
The Decoction of the Roots in white Wine, and 
the back and belly bathed therewith, or kneeling or 
lying down in the same, or sitting therein as a Bath, 
hath been found effectual against pains of the Reins and 
Bladder, pains of the Mother and Chollick, and generally 
against all pains that happen to the lower parts 
of the body; and no less effectual against stiff and benummed 
Sinews, or those that are shrunk by Cramps, 
and Convulsions, and helpeth the Sciatica. 
 
[}Ash-tree.}] 
 
THis is so well known that time wil be mis-spent, 
and Paper wasted in writing a Description of it, and 
therefore I shall onely insist upon the virtues of it. 
 
Virtues and Use. The young tender tops with the 
[/26./] 
Leaves taken inwardly, and some of them outwardly 
applied are singular good against the biting of the Viper, 
Adder, or any other venomous beast: and the water 
distilled therefrom, being taken a small quantity 
every morning fasting, is a singular Medicine for those 
that are subject to a Dropsie, or to abate the greatness 
of those who are too gross or fat. The Decoction of the 
Leaves in white Wine, helpeth to break the Stone, and 
expell it, and cureth the Jaundice. The ashes of the 
bark of the Ash made into Ly, and those heads 
bathed therewith which are leprous, scabby, or scald, 
they are thereby cured. The kernels within the husks 
commonly called Ashen-keys, prevaileth against stitches 
and pains in the sides proceeding of winde, and avoideth 
away the stone by provoking Urine. 
 
I can justly except against none of all this save onely 
the first, viz. That Ash-tree Tops and Leaves are good 
against the biting of Serpents and Vipers, and I suppose 
this had its rise from Gerard, or Pliny, both 
which hold that there is such an antipathy between 
an Adder and an Ash-tree, that if an Adder be compassed 
round with Ash-tree Leaves, she will sooner run 
through the fire than through the Leaves, the contrary 
to which is the truth, as both my eyes are witnesses: 
the rest are virtues something likely, onely if it be in 
Winter when you cannot get the Leaves, you may safely 
use the Bark instead of them, the Keys you may easily 
keep all the year, gathering them when they are 
ripe. 
 
[}Avens.}] 
 
Description. THe ordinary Avens hath many long, rough, 
dark green, winged Leaves, rising from the 
Root, every one made of many Leaves set on each side 
[^p.16^] 
of the middle rib, the largest three whereof grow at the 
ends, and are snipt or dented round about the edges: the 
other being small pieces, sometimes two, and sometimes 
four standing on each side of the middle Rib underneath 
them; among which do rise up divers rough 
or hairy stalks about two foot high branching forth 
with Leaves at every joynt, not so long as those below, 
but almost as much cut in on the edges, some into three 
parts, some into more: on the tops of the branches 
stand small, yellow, pale flowers consisting of five leaves, 
like the flowers of Cinquefoil, but larger in the middle, 
whereof standeth a small green head, which when the 
flower is fallen, groweth to be rough, and round, being 
made of many long greenish purple seeds (like grains) 
which wil stick upon your cloaths. The Root consists 
of many brownish strings or fibres, smelling somewhat 
like unto Cloves, especially those which grow in the 
higher, hotter, and drier grounds, and in the freer and 
clearer air. 
 
Place. They grow wilde in many places under 
hedge-sides, and by the path-ways in fields, yet they rather 
delight to grow in shadowy than in sunny places. 
 
Time. They flower in May and June for the most 
part, and their seed is ripe in July at the furthest. 
 
[/27./] 
Virtues and Use. It is good for the diseases of the 
Chest or Breast, for pains and stitches in the sides, and to 
expell crude and raw humours from the belly and stomach 
by the sweet savour and warming quality; it dissolveth 
the inward congealed bloud, hapning by falls 
or bruises, and the spitting of bloud, if the Roots either 
green or dried be boyled in Wine and drunk, as also all 
manner of inward wounds or outward, if they be wash'd 
or bathed therewith. The decoction also being drunk 
comforteth the heart, and strengtheneth the stomach, and 
a cold brain, and therefore is good in the Spring-time to 
open Obstructions of the Liver, and helpeth the winde-chollick; 
it also helpeth those that have fluxes, or are 
bursten, or have a Rupture: it taketh away spots or 
marks in the face, being washed therewith: the juyce of 
the fresh Root or pouder of the dried Root hath the 
same effect with the decoction. The Root in the Spring-time 
steeped in Wine doth give it a delicate savour and 
taste, and being drunk fasting every morning comforteth 
the heart, and is a good Preservative against the Plague, 
or any other poyson; it helpeth digestion, and warmeth 
a cold stomach, and openeth the Obstructions of the Liver 
and Spleen. 
 
It is very safe, you need have no Dose prescribed; 
and is very fit to be kept in every good bodies house. 
 
[}Balm.}] 
 
THis Herb is so well known to be an inhabitant almost 
in every Garden, that I shall not need to write 
any Description thereof, although the virtues thereof, 
which are many, may not be omitted. 
 
[^p.17^] 
Virtues and Use. The Arabian Physicians have extolled 
[/28./] 
the virtues hereof to the skies, although the 
Greeks thought it not worth mentioning. Serapio 
saith, it causeth the minde and heart to become merry, 
and reviveth the heart fainting into swownings, 
especially of such who are overtaken in their sleep, and 
driveth away all troublesom cares and thoughts out of 
the minde arising from melancholly, or black Choller; 
which Avicen also confirmeth. It is very good to 
help digestion, and open obstructions of the brain; 
and hath so much purging quality in it (saith Avicen) 
as to expell those melancholly vapours from the spirits 
and bloud which are in the heart and arteries, although 
it cannot do so in other parts of the body. 
Dioscorides saith, that the Leaves steeped in Wine, 
and the Wine drunk, and the Leaves externally applied, 
is a remedy against the sting of Scorpions, and 
the bitings of mad Dogs, and commendeth the decoction 
thereof for women to bath or sit in, to procure 
their Courses; it is good to wash aching teeth therwith, 
and profitable for those that have the bloudy 
flux. The Leaves also with a little Nitre taken in 
drink, are good against a Surfet of Mushroms, helps the 
griping pains of the belly, and being made into an Electuary 
is good for them that cannot fetch their breath: 
used with Salt, it taketh away Wens, Kernels, or hard 
swellings in the flesh or throat; it cleanseth foul sores 
and easeth pains of the Gout: it is good for the Liver 
and Sple_[^ORIG. BLURRED^]n. A Tansie or Caudle made with Eggs, and 
the juyce thereof while it is young, putting to it some 
Sugar and Rose-water, is good for women in Child-bed 
when the After-birth is not throughly avoided, 
and for their faintings upon, or after their sore travel. 
The Herb bruised and boyled in a little Wine 
and Oyl, and laid warm on a Boil, will ripen and 
break it. 
 
It is a Herb of Jupiter, and under Cancer, and 
strengthens nature much in all its actions; let a Syrup 
made with the juyce of it and Sugar, (as you shall be 
taught at the latter end of the book) be kept in every 
Gentlewomans house, to relieve the weak stomachs and 
sick bodies of their poor sickly neighbours; as also the 
Herb kept dry in the house, that so with other convenient 
simples you may make it into an Electuary with 
Honey, according as the disease is, and as you shall be 
taught at the latter end of the book. 
 
[}Barberry.}] 
 
THe shrub is so well known to every boy and girle 
that hath not attained to the age of seven years, that 
it needs no description. 
 
Virtue and Use. Mars owns the shrub, and presents 
it to the use of my Countrey-men to purge their bodies 
of Choller. The inner rinde of the Barberry-tree 
[^p.18^] 
boiled in white-wine, & a quarter of a pint drunk each 
[/29./] 
morning, is an excellent remedy to cleanse the body of 
Chollerick humours, and free it from such diseases as 
Choller causeth, such be Scabs, Itch, Tetters, Ring-worms, 
yellow Jaundice, Boils, &c. It is excellent for hot 
Agues, burnings, scaldings, heat of bloud, heat of the Liver, 
bloudy flux, for the Berries are as good as the Bark, 
and more pleasing; they get a man a good stomach to 
his victuals, by strengthning the attractive faculty, 
which is under Mars, as you see more at large in y=e= 
latter end of my Ephemeris for the year 1651. The hair 
washed with the Ly made with the ashes of the Tree 
and water, wil make it turn yellow, viz. of Mars 
his own colour. The fruit and rinde of the shrub, the 
flowers of Broom and of Heath, or Furz, cleanse the body 
of Choller by Sympathy, as the flowers, Leaves, and 
Bark of the Peach-tree do by Antipathy; because these 
are under Mars, that under Venus. 
 
[}Barley.}] 
 
THe continual usefulness hereof hath made all in general 
so acquainted herewith, that it is altogether 
needless to describe its several kindes hereof plentifully 
growing, being yearly growing in this Land. The 
virtues whereof take as followeth. 
 
Virtues and Use. Barley in all the parts & compositions 
thereof (except Malt) is more cooling than Wheat, 
and a little cleansing: and all the preparations therof, 
as Barley-water and other things made thereof, do give 
great nourishment to persons troubled with Feavers, Agues, 
[/30./] 
and heats in the stomach. A Pultis made of Barley-meal 
or flour boyled with Vineger and Honey, and 
a few dry Figs put into them, dissolveth all hard Imposthumes, 
and asswageth Inflammations being thereto 
applied: and being boiled with Melilot and Chamomel 
flowers, and some Linseed, Fengreek, and Rue in pouder, 
and applied warm, it easeth the pains in the sides and 
stomach, and windiness of the Spleen. The Meal of Barley 
and Fleawort boiled in water, and made into a 
Pultis with Honey and Oyl of Lillies, applied warm, cureth 
swellings under the ears, throat, neck, and such like: 
and a Plaister made thereof with Tar, Wax, & Oyl, helpeth 
the Kings Evil in the throat: boiled with sharp 
Vineger into a Pultis, and laid on hot, helpeth the Leprosie: 
being boiled in Red wine with Pomgranate-rindes 
and Mirtles, stayeth the Lask or other flux of the 
belly: boiled with Vineger and a Quince, it easeth the 
hot pains of the Gout, Barley-flower, white Salt, Honey & 
Vineger mingled together, taketh away the Itch speedily 
and certainly: the water distilled from the green Barley 
in the end of May is very good, for those that have 
defluxions of humours fallen into their Eyes, and easeth 
the pains being dropped into them: or white bread 
steeped therein and bound on the Eys, doth the some. 
 
[^p.19^] 
[}Garden Bazil, or Sweet Bazil.}] 
 
Description. THe greater ordinary Bazil riseth usually with 
one upright stalk diversly branching forth on 
all sides, with two Leaves at every joynt, which are 
somewhat broad and round, yet pointed, of a pale green 
colour, but fresh, a little snipt about the edges, and of 
a strong heady scent: the flowers are small and white 
standing at the tops of the branches, with two small 
Leaves at the joynt, in some places green, in others 
brown, after which come black seed. The Root perisheth 
at the approach of Winter, and therefore must be 
new sown every year. 
 
Place. It onely groweth in Gardens. 
Time. It must be sowed late, and flowers in the heat 
of Summer, being a very tender Plant. 
 
Virtues and Use. This is the Herb which all Authours 
are together by the ears about, and rail at one 
another like Lawyers: Galen and Dioscorides hold it 
not fitting to be taken inwardly: and Chrysippus rails 
at it with down-right Billingsgate-Rhetorick. Pliny, 
and the Arabian Physicians defend it. 
 
For my own part I presently found that speech true; 
 
[Non nostrum inter nos tantas componere lites.] 
 
And away to Dr. Reason went I, who told me it was 
an Herb of Mars, and under the Scorpion, and perhaps 
therefore called Basilicon, and then no mervel if it 
carry a kinde of virulent quality with it: being applied 
to the place bitten by a venomous beast, or stung 
[/31./] 
by a Wasp or Hornet, it speedily draws the poyson to 
it; every like draws his like. Myzaldus affirms, that 
it being laid to rot in Horse-dung it wil breed venomous 
beasts. And Hollerius a French Physician affirms 
upon his own knowledge, that an acquaintance of his 
by common smelling to it, had a Scorpion bred in his 
brain. Something is the matter this Herb and Rue will 
not grow together, no, nor near one another: and we 
know Rue is as great an enemy to poyson as any grows. 
 
To conclude; it expelleth both birth, and after-birth; 
and as it helps the deficiency of Venus in one 
kinde, so it spoils all her actions in another. I dare 
write no more of it. 
 
[}The Bay-tree.}] 
 
THis is so well known, that it needs no description; 
I shall therefore onely write the virtues thereof, 
which are many. 
 
Virtues and Use. Galen saith, that the Leaves or 
[/32./] 
Bark do heal and dry very much, and the Berries more 
than the Leaves; the Bark of the Root is less sharp 
and hot, but more bitter, and hath some astriction 
withall, whereby it is effectual to break the Stone, and 
good to open the Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, 
[^p.20^] 
and other inward parts, which bring the Dropsie, 
Jaundice, &c. The Berries are very effectual against all 
poyson of venomous Creatures, and the stings of Wasps 
and Bees, as also against the Pestilence, or other infectious 
diseases, & therefore is put into sundry Triacles 
for that purpose: they likewise procure womens Courses; 
and seven of them given to a woman in sore travel 
of Child-birth; do cause a speedy delivery, and expell 
the after-birth; and therefore not to be taken by such 
as have not gone out their time, lest they procure abortment, 
or cause labour too soon: they wonderfully help 
all cold and rheumatick distillations from the brain to 
the eys, lungs or other parts: and being made into an 
Electuary with Honey, do help the Consumption, old 
Coughs, shortness of breath, and thin rheums; as also 
the Meagrim, they mightily expell winde, and provoke 
Urine; help the Mother, and kill the worms: the Leaves 
also work the like effects. A Bath of the decoction of 
the Leaves and Berries, is singular good for women to 
sit in that are troubled with the Mother, or the diseases 
thereof, or the stoppings of their Courses, or for the 
diseases of the bladder, pains in the bowels by winde, 
and stopping of Urine: a decoction likewise of equal 
parts of Bay-berries, Cummin-seed, Hysop, Origanum, 
and Euphorbium, with some Honey, and the head bathed 
therewith doth wonderfully help distillations 
and rheums, and settleth the pallat of the mouth in its 
place. The Oyl made of the Berries is very comfortable 
in all cold griefs of the joynts, nerves, arteries, stomach, 
belly, or womb, and helpeth Palsies, Convulsions, 
Cramps, Aches, trembling and numness in any part, weariness 
also, and pains that come by sore travelling: all 
pains and griefs likewise proceeding from winde, either 
in the head, stomach, back, belly, or womb, by anointing 
the parts affected therewith: and pains in the ears 
are also cured by dropping in some of the Oyl, or by 
receiving into the ears the warm fume of the decoction 
of the Berries through a funnel. The Oyl takes away 
marks of the skin and flesh by bruises, falls, &c. and dissolveth 
the congealed bloud in them; it helpeth also 
the Itch, Scabs, and Wheals in the skin. 
 
I shall but only add a word or two to what my friend 
hath written, viz. that it is a tree of the Sun, and under 
the Celestial sign Leo, and resisteth Witchcraft very potently, 
as also all the evils old Saturn can do to the body 
of man, and they are not a few, for it is the speech of 
one, and I am mistaken if it were not Myzaldus, that 
neither Witch nor Devil, Thunder nor Lightning will 
hurt a man in the place where a Bay-tree is. 
 
[}Beans.}] 
 
BOth the garden and field Beans are so well known, 
that it saveth me labour of writing any description 
of them: their virtues briefly are as followeth. 
 
[^p.21^] 
The distilled water of the flowers of garden Beans is 
good to cleanse the face and skin from spots and wrinkles, 
[/33./] 
and the meal or flower of them, or the small, 
doth the same. The water distilled from the great husks 
is held to be very effectual against the Stone, and to 
provoke Urine. Bean-flower is used in Pultisses to asswage 
Inflammations rising upon wounds, and the swelling 
of womens breasts, caused by the curding of their 
milk, and represseth their milk: the flower of Beans 
and Fenugreek mixed with Honey, and applied to Fellons, 
Boils, Bruises, or blue marks by blows, or the Imposthumes 
in the kernels of the ears, helpeth them all: 
and with Rose-leaves, Frankincense, and the white of 
an Egg being applied to the Eys, helpeth them that are 
swoln, or do water, or have received any blow upon 
them, if used with white wine. If a Bean be parted in 
two, the skin being taken away, and laid on the place 
where a Leech hath been set, that bleedeth too much, it 
stayeth the bleeding. Bean-flower boiled to a Pultis 
with Wine and Vineger and some Oyl put thereto, 
ceaseth both pain and swelling of the Cods: the husks 
[/34./] 
boiled in water to a consumption of a third part thereof 
stayeth a Lask: and the ashes of the husks made up 
with old Hogs grease, helpeth the old pains, contusions 
and wounds of the sinews, the Sciatica, and Gout. The 
field Beans have all the forementioned virtues as the 
garden Beans. 
 
Beans eaten are extream windy meat, but if after the 
Dutch fashion, when they are half boyled you husk 
them, and then stew them, (I cannot tell you how, for 
I never was Cook in all my life) they are wholesomer 
Food. 
 
[}French Beans.}] 
 
Description. THe French or Kidney Beans ariseth up at first 
but with one stalk, which afterwards divideth 
its self into many arms or branches, but also weak 
that if they be not sustained with sticks or poles, they 
will lie fruitless upon the ground: at several places of 
these branches grow forth long foot-stalks, with every 
one of them three broad round and pointed green 
Leaves at the end of them, towards the tops whereof 
come forth divers flowers made like unto Pease blossoms, 
of the same colour for the most part that the fruit 
will be of, that is to say, white, yellow, red, blackish, 
or of a deep purple; but white is most usual; after 
which come long and slender flat Pods, some crooked, 
some straight, with a string as it were running down 
the back thereof, wherein are contained flattish round 
fruit made to the fashion of a Kidney; the Root is long, 
and spreadeth with many strings annexed to it, and perisheth 
every year. 
 
There is also another sort of French Beans commonly 
growing with us in this land, which is called the 
Scarlet-flowered Bean. 
 
[^p.22^] 
This ariseth up with sundry branches as the other, 
but runs up higher to the length of Hop-poles, about 
which they grow twining, but turning contrary to the 
Sun, having foot-stalks with three Leaves on each as on 
the other: the flowers also are in fashion like the other, 
but many more set together, and of a moist Orient Scarlet 
colour. The Beans are larger than the ordinary 
kinde, of a deep purple colour, turning black when it 
is ripe and dry: the Root perisheth also in Winter. 
 
[/35./] 
Virtues. The ordinary French Beans are of an easie 
digestion, they move the belly, provoke Urine, inlarge 
the breast that is straitned with shortness of breath, ingender 
Sperm, and incite Venery. 
 
And the Scarlet coloured Beans, in regard of the glorious 
beauty of their colour, being set near a Quickset-Hedge, 
will bravely adorn the same, by climbing up 
thereon; so that they may be discerned a great way, not 
without admiration of the beholder at a distance. 
But they will go near to kill the Quicksets by cloathing 
them in Scarlet. 
 
