[^Porta, Giambattista della: Natural magick^] 
 
[}NATURAL 
MAGICK 
BY 
John Baptista Porta, 
A NEAPOLITANE: 
IN 
TWENTY BOOKS: 
[^Beginning of a list in two columns.^] 
1 Of the Causes of Wonderful things. 
2 Of the Generation of Animals. 
3 Of the Production of new Plants. 
4 Of increasing Houshold-Stuff. 
5 Of changing Metals. 
6 Of counterfeiting Gold. 
7 Of the Wonders of the Load-stone. 
8 Of strange Cures. 
9 Of Beautifying Women. 
10 Of Distillation 
[^A column change.^] 
11 Of Perfuming. 
12 Of Artificial Fires. 
13 Of Tempering Steel. 
14 Of Cookery. 
15 Of Fishing, Fowling, Hunting &c. 
16 Of Invisible Writing. 
17 Of Strange Glasses. 
18 Of Statick Experiments. 
20 Of the Chaos. 
[^End of a list in two columns.^] 
 
Wherein are set forth 
All the RICHES and DELIGHTS 
Of the 
NATURAL SCIENCES. 
 
LONDON, 
Printed for Thomas Young, and Samuel Speed; and are to be 
sold at the three Pigeons, and at the Angel in St. 
Paul's Church-yard. 1658.}] 
 
[^A preface to the reader omitted.^] 
[^Extract 1, pp. 217-232^] 
 
[^p.217^] 
[}THE 
EIGHTH BOOK 
OF 
Natural Magick: 
Of Physical Experiments.}] 
 
[}THE PROEME.}] 
 
I Intended to pass by these following Experiments in Physick, because I have everywhere 
mentioned them in my History of Plants; and we have not omitted any thing, that was 
certain and secret in them that we knew, unless it be such things as could not be brought 
into that rank. And though other things shall be described in my Book of Distillations, 
yet that this place of Physick be not left empty, I changed my opinion, and have set down 
some of them here. 
 
[}CHAP. I. 
Of Medicines which cause sleep.}] 
 
THat we may in order set down those Experiments, of which we 
intend to speak, We will begin with those Diseases which happen 
in the Head; and first, with Sleep: for Soporiferous Receits 
are very requisite to be placed amongst these Arcana, and 
are of very great esteem amongst Physitians, who by Sleep 
are wont to cheat their Patients of pain: and not of less, amongst 
Captains and Generals, when they practice Stratagemes 
upon their Enemies. Soporiferous Medicines do consist for 
the most part of cold and moist things. Plutarch in Simpos. 
saith, That Sleep is caused by cold; and therefore Dormitives have a cooling quality. 
We will teach, first, how 
 
[}To cause Sleep with Mandrake.}] 
 
Dioscorides saith, That men will presently fall asleep in the very same posture wherein 
they drink Mandrake, losing all their senses for three or four hours after; and 
that Physitians do use it, when they would burn or cut off a member. And skilful 
men affirm, That Mandrake growing by a Vine, will transmit its Soporiferous quality 
into it; so that those that who drink the Wine that is made thereof, shall more 
easily and readily fall asleep. Here we will relate the pleasant stories of the Mandrake 
out of Authors of Stratagems. Junius Frontinus reports, That Hannibal being 
sent by the Charthagenians, against some Rebels in Africa; and knowing they were 
a Nation greedy of Wine, mixed a great quantity of Mandrake with his Wines; 
the quality of which, is between poysonous and sleepy: then beginning a light Skirmish, 
he retired on purpose; and in the middle of the Night, counterfeited a flight, 
leaving some Baggage in his Camp, and all the infected Wine. Now when those 
Barbarians had took his Camp, and for joy, had liberally tasted of that treacherous 
Wine; he returned, took and slew them all, as they lay dead as it were before. Polinaeus 
the same. And Caesar sailing towards Nicomedia, was taken about Malea by 
some Cilician Pirates: and when they demanded a great Ransome for his Liberty, 
he promised them double what they asked. They arrived at Miletum: the people 
[^p.218^] 
came out of the Town to see them. Caesar sent his Servant, being a Milesian, named 
Epicrates, to those of the Town; desiring them to lend him some money; which 
they presently sent to him: Epicrates, according to Caesar's command, brought the 
money; and with it, a sumptuous Banquet, a Water-pot full of Swords, and Wine 
mixed with Mandrake. Caesar paid to the Pirates the promised sum, and set the 
Banquet before them; who, being exalted with their great Riches, fell freely to 
it; and drinking the infected Wine, fell into a sleep: Caesar commanded them to 
be killed sleeping, and presently repaid the Milesians their own money. Demosthenes, 
intending to express those who are bitten as it were by a sleepy Dragon, and are 
slothful, and so deprived of sense that they cannot be awakened; saith: They seem 
like men who have drunk Mandrake. Pliny affirmeth, That smelling to the Leaves 
of it, provoketh sleep. 
 
[}For the same, with Nightshade.}] 
 
We may make the same of Nightshade, which is also called Hypnoticon, from the 
effect of it: a Drachm of the Rinde, drank in Wine, causeth sleep, but gently and 
kindely. This later Age, seemeth to have lost the knowledge of Solanum Manicon: 
for in the very description of it, Dioscorides seems to be mad. But in my 
judgement, (as I have elsewhere said) he describes two several Plants in that place: 
Fuschius his Stramonium, and the Herb commonly called Bella Donna, whose qualities 
are wonderfully dormitive: for they infect Water, without giving it either taste or 
sent; so that the deceit cannot be discovered, especially, considering it must be 
given but in a very small quantity. I prepared a Water of it, and gave it to a Friend 
for certain uses; who, instead of a Drachm, drank an Ounce; and thereupon lay 
four days without meat or motion; so that he was thought dead by all; neither 
could he be awakened by any means, till at last, when the vapours were digested, 
he arose: although Dioscorides threatneth nothing but death from the immoderate 
use of it. The same may be made also 
 
[}Of Poppy}] 
 
In a Lohoch. Take the Heads of Poppy, and cut them cross-ways, with a tender 
hand, lest the knife enter too deep: let your nail direct the issuing juice into a Glass; 
where let it stand a while, and it will congeal. The Thebane Poppy is best. 
You may do the same with Nightshade, Henbane. Of all these together, you 
may make 
 
[}A Sleeping Apple.}] 
 
For it is made of Opium, Mandrake, juice of Hemlock, the Seeds of Henbane; 
and adding a little Musk, to gain an easier reception of the Smeller: these being made 
up into a ball, as big as a mans hand can hold, and often smelt to, gently close the eyes, 
and binde them with a deep sleep. Now shall be shown 
 
[}A wonderful way to make one take a sleeping Medicine in his sleep.}] 
 
Those things which we have already spoken of, are easily discovered after sleep, 
and bring a suspicion along with them. But out of many of the aforenamed dormitive 
menstrues, there may be extracted a Quintessence, which must be kept in Leaden 
Vessels, very closely stop'd, that it may not have the least vent, lest it should flie out. 
When you would use it, uncover it, and hold it to a sleeping man's Nostrils, whose 
breath will suck up this subtile essence, which will so besiege the Castle of his senses, 
that he will be overwhelmed with a most profound sleep, not to be shook off without 
much labour. After sleep, no heaviness will remain in his Head, nor any 
suspicion of Art. These things are manifest to a wise Physitian; to a wicked One, 
obscure. 
 
[^p.219^] 
[}CHAP. II. 
To make a Man out of his senses for a day.}] 
 
AFter these Medicines to cause sleep, we will speak of those which make men 
mad: the business is almost the same: for the same Plants that induce sleep, if 
they be taken in a larger proportion, do cause madness. But we will not tell those 
things which breed it for ever, onely which may make us sport for a day, and afterwards 
leave no harm. We will begin with, 
 
[}How to make men mad with Mandrake.}] 
 
We have told you, That a small dose brings sleep; a little more, madness; a larger, 
death. Dioscorides saith, That a Drachm of Morion will make one foolish: we 
will easilier do it with Wine, which is thus made: Take the Roots of Mandrake, 
and but put them into new Wine, boyling and bubling up: cover it close; and let 
them infuse in a warm place for two months. When you would use it, give it to somebody 
to drink; and whosoever shall taste it after a deep sleep, will be distracted, 
and for a day shall rave: but after some sleep, will return to his senses again, without 
any harm: and it is very pleasant to behold. Pray make trial. We may do the 
same 
 
[}With Stramonium, or Solanum Manicum:}] 
 
The Seeds of which, being dried and macerated in Wine, the space of a night, and 
a Drachm of it drank in a Glass of Wine, (but rightly given, lest it hurt the man) 
after a few hours will make one mad, and present strange visions, both pleasant and 
horrible; and of all other sorts: as the power of the potion, so doth the madness 
also cease, after some sleep, without any harm, as we said, if it were rightly administred. 
We may also infect any kinde of meat with it, by strowing thereon: three 
fingers full of the Root reduced into powder, it causeth a pleasant kinde of madness 
for a day; but the poysonous quality is allayed by sleep, or by washing the Temples 
and Pulses with Vinegar, or juice of Lemmon. We may also do the same with another 
kinde of Solanum, called 
 
[}Bella Donna.}] 
 
A Drachm of the Root of which, amongst other properties, hath this; that it will 
make men mad without any hurt: so that it is a most pleasant spectacle to behold 
such mad whimsies and visions; which also is cured by sleep: but sometimes they 
refuse to eat. Nevertheless, we give this præcaution, That all those Roots or 
Seeds which cause the Takers of them to see delightful visions, if their Dose be increased, 
will continue this alienation of minde for three days: but if it be quadrupled, 
it brings death. Wherefore we must proceed cautiously with them. I had a 
Friend, who, as oft as he pleased, knew how 
 
[}To make a man believe he was changed}] 
 
into a Bird or Beast; and cause madness at his pleasure. For by drinking a certain 
Potion, the man would seem sometimes to be changed into a Fish; and flinging out 
his arms, would swim on the Ground: sometimes he would seem to skip up, and 
then to dive down again. Another would believe himself turned into a Goose, and 
would eat Grass, and beat the Ground with his Teeth, like a Goose: now and then 
sing, and endeavour to clap his Wings. And this he did with the aforenamed 
Plants: neither did he exclude Henbane from among his Ingredients: extracting 
the essences by their Menstruum, and mix'd some of their Brain, Heart, Limbs, and other 
parts with them. I remember when I was a young man, I tried these things 
on my Chamber-Fellows: and their madness still fixed upon something they had 
eaten, and their fancy worked according to the quality of their meat. One, who 
had fed lustily upon Beef, saw nothing but the formes of Bulls in his imagination, 
[^p.220^] 
and them running at him with their horns: and such-like things. Another man also 
by drinking a Potion, flung himself upon the earth, and like one ready to be drowned, 
struck forth his legs and arms, endeavouring as it were to swim for life: but when 
the strength of the Medicament began to decay, like a Shipwrack'd person, who had 
escaped out of the Sea, he wrung his Hair and his Clothes to strain the Water out of 
them; and drew his breath, as though he took such pains to escape the danger. 
These, and many other most pleasant things, the curious Enquirer may finde out: it 
is enough for me only to have hinted at the manner of doing them. 
 
[}CHAP. III. 
To cause several kindes of dreams.}] 
 
NOw we will endeavour to shew how to cause pleasant, sad, or true dreams. But 
that we may more certainly effect it, it will be good first to know the causes. 
The meat in concoction must be corrupted, (this must be taken for granted) and 
turned into vapors; which, being hot and light, will naturally ascend, and creep 
through the Veins into the Brain; which being always cold, condenseth them into 
moisture, as we see Clouds generated in the greater World: so by an inward reciprocation, 
they fall down again upon the Heart, the principal seat of the senses. In 
the mean while, the Head grows full and heavy, and is overwhelmed in a deep 
sleep. Whence it comes to pass, that the species descending, meet and mix with 
other vapors, which make them appear preposterous and monstrous: especially, in 
the quiet of the night. But in the morning, when the excrementitious and foul 
Blood is separated from the pure and good, and become cool and allayed; then 
pure, and unmixed, and pleasant visions appear. Wherefore I thought it not irrational, 
when a man is overwhelmed with drink, that vapors should arise participating, 
as well of the Nature of what he hath drank or eat, as of the humours which 
abound in his body, that in his sleep he should rejoyce or be much troubled: that 
fires and darkness, hail and putrefactions, should proceed from Choler, Melancholy, 
cold and putrid humors. So to dream of killing any one, or being besmeared with 
Blood, shews an abundance of Blood: and Hippocrates and Galen say, We may judge 
a man to be of a sanguine Complexion by it. Hence those who eat windy meats, 
by reason thereof, have rough and monstrous dreams: meats of thin and small vapours, 
exhilarate the minde with pleasant phantasms. So also the outward application 
of simples, doth infect the species while they are a going to the Heart. For 
the Arteries of the body, saith Galen, while they are dilated, do attract into themselves 
any thing that is next them. It will much help too, to anoynt the Liver: for 
the Blood passeth upward out of the Stomack by evaporation, and runneth to the 
Liver; from the Liver to the Heart. Thus the circulating vapors are infected, and 
represent species of the same colour. That we may not please the Sleepers onely, 
but also the Waking, behold 
 
[}A way to cause merry dreams.}] 
 
When you go to bed, to eat Balm, and you cannot desire more pleasant sights then 
will appear to you; Fields, Gardens, Trees, Flowers, Meadows, and all the Ground 
of a pleasant Green, and covered with shady Bowers: wheresoever you cast your 
eyes, the whole World will appear pleasant and Green. Bugloss will do the same, 
and Bows of Poplar; so also Oyl of Poplar. But 
 
[}To make dark and troublesome dreams,}] 
 
we eat Beans; and therefore they are abhorred by the Pythagoreans, because they 
cause such dream. Phaseoli, or French Beans, cause the same: Lentiles, Onyons, 
Garlick, Leeks, VVeedbine, Doryonium, Picnocomum, new red VVine; these infuse 
dreames, wherein the phantasms are broken, crooked, angry, troubled: the 
person dreaming will seem to be carried in the Air, and to see the Rivers and Sea 
flow under him: he shall dream of misfortunes, failing, death, cruel tempests, 
[^p.221^] 
showers of Rain, and cloudy dayes; the Sun darkned, and the Heavens frowning, 
and nothing but fearful apparitions. So by anointing the aforesaid places with 
Soot, or any adust matter, and Oyl, (which I add onely to make the other enter the 
easier into the parts) fires, lightnings, flashings, and all things will appear in darkness. 
These are sufficient: for I have already shewed in my Book Phytognom. how to 
procure true dreams. 
 
[}CHAP. IV. 
Excellent Remedies for the Eyes.}] 
 
HEretofore, being much troubled with sore Eyes, and become almost blinde; 
when I was given over by Physitians of best account, a certain Empyrick 
undertook me; who, putting this VVater into my Eye, cured me the very same 
day: I might almost say, The same hour. By Gifts, Entreaties, Cunning and 
Money, I gained the Secret, which I will not think much to set down, that 
every one may use it at their pleasure. It is good for Inflammations, Blearness, 
Mists, Fistula's, and such-like; and cureth them certainly the second day; if not the 
first. If I should set down all those whom I have cured by it, I should be too tedious. 
Take two Bottles of Greek-VVine, half a Pint of White-Rose-water; of 
Celendine, two Ounces; of Fennel, Rue, Eye-bright, as much; of Tutty, half an 
Ounce; of Cloves as much; Sugar-Candy of Roses, one Drachm; Camphire, 
half a Drachm; and as much Aloes. Tutty is prepared after this manner: 
Let it be heat and extinguished six times in Rose-water, mixed with Greek-Wine; 
but let the water at last be left out: powder what are to be powdered finely; and 
mix them with the waters. Aloes is incorporated with waters thus: because it 
will not be powered, let it be put into a Mortar with a little of the forementioned 
waters, and beat together until it turn to water, and swim about in ropings, and 
mix with the waters: then put it to the rest. Set them all in a Glass-Bottle, close 
covered, and waxed up that it do not exhale abroad in the Sun and Dew for forty 
dayes, still shaking them four times in a day: at last, when it is well sunned, set it 
up and reserve it for your use. It must be applied thus 
 
[}In Inflammations, Blood-shots and Fistula's,}] 
 
let the Patient lie flat on his back; and when a drop of this water is put upon his 
Eye, let him open and shut his Eye-lids, that the water may run through all the cavities 
of his Eye. Do this twice or thrice in a day, and he shall be cured. But thus 
it must be used for 
 
[}A Pearl in the Eye.}] 
 
If the Pearl be above or beneath the Cornea, make a Powder of Sugar-Candy of 
Roses, burnt Allome, and the Bone of a Cuttle-Fish, very finely beat and searched 
exactly; and when the Patient goeth to Bed, sprinkle a little of this Powder upon 
his eye, and by and by drop some of this water into it, and let him shut his Eyes and 
sleep: for he will quickly be cured. 
 
[}CHAP. V. 
To fasten the Teeth.}] 
 
I Could finde not any thing in all this Physical Tract of greater value then this 
Remedy for the Teeth: for the water gets in through the Gumms, even to the 
very Nerves of the Teeth, and strengthens and fasteneth them: yea, if they are 
eaten away, it filleth them with Flesh, and new cloaths them. Moreover, it 
maketh them clean, and white, and shining like Pearls. I know a man, who by 
this onely Receit, gained great Riches. Take therefore three handfuls of Sage, 
[^p.222^] 
Nettles, Rosemary, Mallows, and the rinde of the Roots of Wall-nut wash them 
well, and beat them: also, as much of the Flowers of Sage, Rosemary, Olive and 
Plantaine Leaves; two handfuls of Hypocistis, Horehound, and the tops of Bramble; 
one pound of the Flower of Mirtle; half a pound of the Seed; two handfuls 
of Rose-buds, with their Stalks; two drachms of Saunders, Coriander prepared, 
and Citron-Pill: three drachms of Cinnamon in powder; ten of Cypress Nuts; 
five green Pine-Apples; two drachms of Bole-Armenick and Mastick. Powder 
them all, and infuse them in sharp black Wine, and let them macerate three dayes: 
then, slightly pressing the Wine out, put them into an Alembick, and still them with 
a gentle fire: then boyl the distilled water, with two ounces of Allome till it be 
dissolved, in a Vessel close stopt. When you would use it, suck up some of the 
water, and stir it up and down your mouth until it turn to Froth: then spit it out, 
and rub your Teeth with a Linen-cloth. It will perform what I have promised: 
for is fasteneth the Teeth, and restoreth the Gums that are eroded. Now we will 
deliver other Experiments 
 
[}To fasten the Teeth.}] 
 
Macerate the Leaves of Mastick, Rosemary, Sage, and Bramble; in Greek-Wine: 
then distil it with a gentle fire through a Retort: take a mouthful of this, and stir 
about, till it turn to Spittle; it fasteneth the Teeth, maketh them white, and restoreth 
the Gums. The Root of Pellitory bruised, and put into the Teeth, takes 
away the pain: so doth the Root of Henbane. For the bleeding of the Teeth, I 
have often made trial of Purslaine, so much commended. 
 
[}For the swelling of the Gums,}] 
 
beat the Roots and Leaves of Plantaine, and lay them to the swelling when you go 
to bed; and in the morning you shall finde your Gums well. 
 
[}CHAP. VI. 
For other infirmities of Mans Body.}] 
 
I Will heap together in this Chapter, some Remedies not to be passed over, which 
I know to be certain, by continual Experience made; and although some of them 
are common, yet are they true. And first, 
 
[}For the Head-ach,}] 
 
There is a certain Essence, of the colour of Blood, extracted out of Roses, of a 
wonderful sweetness and great strength. Wet a cloth in this Liquor, and lay it to 
your Fore-head and Temples; and if sometimes it doth not quite take away a pain 
of long continuance, yet it will mollifie it. If the cloth be dried before your pain 
cease, wet it again. I have often known the Ophites, or Serpentine Marble applied 
to the Head, both to take away, and mollifie the pain. The Vertigo, I have seen 
it cured also, by applying the Hoof of an Elk, and by a Ring of it worn on the 
Finger. 
 
[}Against the chopping of the Lips}] 
 
the Seeds of Henbane are good: for being cast upon live Coles, if you receive 
the rising vapor through a Paper-Tunnel, upon the chopping of your Lips, as hot as 
you can endure, it appeaseth the swelling presently, and healeth the Clefts, that they 
will never more trouble you. 
 
[}Against the clefts of the Fingers.}] 
 
It is a most admirable Experiment, which I learned of Paracelsus; but have often 
practiced it my self: for it taketh away the swelling and pain, and cureth the 
Nail. Take a Worm, which creepeth out of the Earth; especially, in moyst 
[^p.223^] 
Grounds: for if you search and dig there, you may easily finde them; winde him, 
being alive, about your Finger, and there hold him till he be dead, which will be 
within an hour. The pain will presently cease, the matter dry away, and in a short 
time be cured: Indeed I do not know a more admirable Remedy. 
 
[}For a Pleurisie.}] 
 
I found out a most powerful Remedy made of the Flowers of wilde Poppy. Gather 
them in the Month of May, before the rising of the Sun, and their opening: 
for, being thin Leaves, they are easily dried with a little heat, and shed: dry them 
in the shade, and lay them up for your use. Or else, still the Flowers, and keep 
the water. If any one taketh a drachm of the powder in Wine, and some of the 
water; or in the water alone: or shall apply a Plaister of the Powder to the place, 
the pain will presently cease, to the admiration of the Beholders. Missleto of the 
Oak infused in Wine, and drunk, doth the same. There is a Stone also brought 
out of the West-Indies, called in Spanish, Della Hijada; much like an Emerald: 
which being worn in Silver, upon the Arm, is accounted a preservative against this 
Disease. 
 
[}Against the Colick}] 
 
Civet is most excellent in this Disease: for the quantity of a Pease, applied to the 
Navil, and a hot Loaf out of the Oven clapt over it, presently easeth the pain: the 
Patient must ly on his Belly upon the Bread before it be cold. 
 
[}Against Crab lice.}] 
 
The Dust which falls from the Curry-Combs, while the Ostler dresseth Horses, or 
such kinde of Beasts, cureth them without any pain. Or the Powder of Lithargy, 
Aloes, Frankincense, Verdegreese, and Alome, beaten and mixed together with Oyl 
of Mastick, and anoynt the place. The Powder of Mercury præcipitate, is best by 
far, being applied. 
 
[}To bring away the Stone,}] 
 
Take Saxifrage, Maiden-hair, Pellitory of the wall, Parsely, Pimpernel and Ceterach; 
distil them in Balneo Mariæ, and let the Patient drink of it every other day: 
for it corrodes and eats away the Stone, though never so great; and by daily experience, 
you will see in his Urine, Gravel and Fragments of the Stone voided out. 
Moreover, the Fruit and Leaves of the Mulberry gathered before Sun-rising, and 
distilled or dried in the shade; if it be drank in Wine, or a proper water, early in 
the morning, doth wonderfully remove the Stone. Mushromes growing on a Rock, 
reduced into Powder, or dried in the shade, or a warm Oven, and drank with Wine 
in a morning, is very Soveraign against the Stone. If the Kernels of a Peach-Stone 
be bruised, and macerated two dayes in the distilled water of Bean-Cods, and then 
distilled again, and drunk, bring down the Stone. The Hedge-Sparrow, which 
Aetius mentioneth, I know to be good against the Stone in the Kidney or Bladder. 
It is the least of all Birds, liveth in Hedges, carrieth his Tail upright; on the top 
of his Wings, there are some streaks of Ash-colour; of a short flight: and lastly, 
much like a Wren. He hath a vertue against the Stone beyond all the rest, eaten 
either raw or boyled, or dried or salted, or taken any way; also reduced into Powder, 
being made up close in a Pot covered and clayed up, that the vertue may not expire; 
and so set over the fire. I have also tried a water against this Disease, running 
out of a certain Vein, described by Vitruvius: which when I had diligently sought 
after, and found out, made me exceedingly rejoyce. The words of Vitruvius are 
these: There are also some Veins of acide Springs, as at Lyncestum; and in Italy, at 
Theano in fertile Campania; and many other places: which being drunk, have a 
vertue to dissolve Stones which breed in the Bladders of men. And this seems to 
be naturally done, because there lieth a sharp and acide juice under the Earth, 
through which, these Veins passing, receive a tincture of sharpness; and so, when 
they come into the Bodies of Men, they dissolve whatever they finde there 
[^p.224^] 
congealed or setled. But wherefore acide things should dissolve them, we may 
thus guess the Reason: An Egg laid in any Vinegar some time, will wax soft, and 
his shell will dissolve. Also Lead, which is the toughest and heaviest, if it be laid 
in a Vessel of Vinegar, and closed up, will dissolve, and become Ceruss. By the same 
means, Copper, which is of a more solid Nature, if it be ordered as the former, 
will melt, and become Verdegreese. Likewise Pearl, as hard as Flint, which neither 
iron or fire can dissolve of themselves, when they are heat by the fire, and 
then sprinkled with Vinegar, break and dissolve. Therefore, when we see these 
things done before our eyes, we may infer by the same Reasons, that the Stone may 
naturally be dissolved by acide things, through the sharpness of their juice. Thus 
far Vitruvius. The place where the Vein is now to be found, is called commonly 
Francolise, about a mile from Theano, and runneth along the way towards 
Rome. 
 
[}To strengthen the Stomach.}] 
 
We will not omit a wonderful Oyl, which helpeth concoction, and taketh away the 
inclinations to vomit: it is thus made: Pour half a Pint of the best Oyl into a brass 
Pot, tinned within, and of a wide mouth: then take fifteen pound of Romane-Mint, 
and beat it in a Marble-Morter, with a VVooden-Pestle, until it come to the 
form of an Oyntment; add as much more Mint and VVormwood, and put them 
into the Oyl: mingle them, and stir them well: but cover the Pot lest any durt should 
fall in; and let them stand three dayes, and infuse: then set them on a gentle fire, 
and boyl them five hours for fifteen dayes together, until the Oyl have extracted all 
the vertue of the infused Herbs: then strain them through a Linen-cloth in a press, 
or with your hands, till the Oyl be run cleer out: then take new Herbs, beat them, 
and put them into the strained Oyl; boyl it again, and strain it again: do the same 
the third time; and as often as you renew it, observe the same course until the Oyl 
have contracted a green colour: but you must separate the juice from the Oyl very 
carefully; for if the least drop do remain in it, the Oyl will have but small operation, 
and the whole intent is lost. A certain sign of perfect decoction, and of the 
juice being consumed, will be, if a drop of it, being cast upon a plate of iron red-hot, 
do not hiss. At last, Take a pound of Cinnamon, half a pound of Nutmegs, as much 
Mastick and Spikenard, and a third part of Cloves: poun them severally; and being 
well seirced, put them into the Oyl, and mix them with a VVooden-stick. Then 
pour it all into an Earthen Vessel glazed within, with a long Neck, that it may easily 
be shut, and stopt close; but let it be of so great a capacity, that the third part 
of it may remain empty. Let it stand fifteen days in the Sun, alwayes moving, and 
shaking it three or four times in a day. So set it up for your use. 
 
[}CHAP. VII. 
That a Woman may conceive.}] 
 
THere are many Medicines to cause Conception spread abroad, because they 
are much desired by Great Persons. The Ancients did applaud Sage very 
much for this purpose: And in Coptus after great Plagues, the Egyptians that 
survived, forced the Women to drink the juice of it, to make them conceive, and 
bring forth often. Salt also helpeth Generation: for it doth not only heighten the 
Pleasures of Venus, but also causeth Fruitfulness. The Egyptians, when their Dogs 
are backward in Copulation, make them more eager by giving them Salt-meats. 
It is an Argument also of it, That Ships in the Sea, as Plutarch witnesseth, are alwayes 
full of an innumerable company of Mice. And some affirm, That Female-Mice 
will conceive without a Male, onely by licking Salt. And Fish-wives are insatiably 
leacherous, and alwayes full of Children. Hence the Poets feigned Venus to 
be born of Salt or the Sea. The Egyptian Priests (saith the same Author) did most 
Religiously abstain from Salt and Salt-meats, because they did excite to lust, and 
cause erection. 
 
[^p.225^] 
[}A remedy to procure conception.}] 
 
This I have tryed and found the best; when a womans courses are just past, let her 
take a new-laid egge, boil it, and mix a grain of musk with it, and sup it up when she 
goes to bed. Next morning take some old beans, at least five years old, and boil 
them for a good space in a new pipkin, and let the woman when she ariseth out of 
her bed, receive the fume into her privities, as it were through a tunnel, for the 
space of an hour: then let her sup up two eggs, and go to bed again, and wipe off 
the moisture with warm clothes: then let her enjoy her husband, and rest a while; 
afterwards, take the whites of two eggs, and mix them with Bole-armenick and Sanguis-draconis, 
and dip some flax into it, and apply it to the reins; but because it will 
hardly stick on, swathe it on from falling: a while after, let her arise, and at night renew 
the plaister. But when she goeth to sleep, let her hold ginger in her mouth. 
This she must do nine days. 
 
[}CHAP. VIII. 
Remedies against the Pox.}] 
 
SInce this disease hath raged so cruelly amongst men, there have been invented a 
multitude of most excellent remedies to oppose it. And although many have 
set out several of them, yet I will be contented with this one only, which we may 
use, not onely in this disease, but almost in all other: and I have seen many experiences 
of it. It is easily made, and as easily taken. Take a pound of lingnum Guaiacum, 
half a pound of Sarsaperilla beaten small, five ounces of the stalks and leaves of Sena, 
one handful of Agrimony and Horse-tail, a drachm of Cinnamon, and as much 
cloves, and one nutmeg: Poun them all, and put them into a vessel which containeth 
twenty gallons of Greek wine; let it stand a day, and then let the patient 
drink it at meals, and at his pleasure: for it purgeth away by degrees all maladies, 
beside the French-pox. If the patient groweth weak with purging, let him intermit 
some days. In the summer time leave out the cinnamon, and the nutmeg. I have 
used it against continual head-aches, deafness, hoarsness, and many other diseases. 
 
[}A preservation against the Pox,}] 
 
which a man may use after unclean women. Take a drachm of hartwort and gentian, 
two scruples of sanders and lignum-aloes, half a drachm of powder of coral, 
spodium, and harts horn burnt, an handful of sowthistle, scordium, betony, scabious, and 
tormentil; as much of roses, two pieces of Guaiacum, two scales of copper, a drachm 
and a half of Mercury precipitate; a pint of malmesey, a quart of the waters of sowthistle, 
and scabious: mix the wine and waters, and lay the Guaiacum in it a day, and 
then the rest; then boil them till half be consumed; strain them, and lay a linnen-cloth 
soaking in the expression a whole night; then dry it in the shade: do this 
thrice, and after copulation, wash your yard in it, and lay some of the linnen on, 
and keep it close. 
 
[}CHAP. IX. 
Antidotes against Poyson.}] 
 
IT is the common opinion of all Physitians, that those herbs, stones, or any other 
thing, which being put into a Serpents mouth, doth kill him, is an Antidote 
against his poyson. We read in Dioscorides of the herb Alkanet, which is very efficacious 
against the poyson of Serpents; and being chewed and spit out upon a Serpent, 
killeth him. Upon this, I thrust half a drachm of treacle or mithridate, mixt 
with Aqua vitæ, into a vipers mouth, and she died within half an hour. I made water-serpent 
swallow the same, but she received no hurt by it, onely lay a small time 
stupified: wherefore I pressed some oyl out of the seeds of citron, and orange or 
[^p.226^] 
lemons, and dropt it into the serpents mouth, and she died presently. Moreover, 
a drachm of the juice of Angelica-roots will kill a serpent. The Balsame, as they 
call it, which is brought from the west-Indies, is excellent against them; for when 
I anointed their mouth and jaws with it, they died in half an hour. Balsame of the 
east, is a present remedy against poyson by oyntments, or the biting of a serpent, 
saith Ætius. In Arabia, where it groweth, there is no fear of poyson, neither doth 
any one dye of their bitings; for the fury of this deadly poyson, is allayed by the 
feeding of the serpents upon this pretious Balsame. But I have found nothing more 
excellent than the earth which is brought from the Isle of Malta: for the least dust 
of it put into their mouths, kills them presently. I have tried the same vertue in 
Lithoxylon, which Physitians use for the worms in children. There is a stone called 
Chelonites, the French name it Crapodina, which they report to be found in the head 
of a great old Toad; and if it can be gotten from him, while he is alive, it is soveraign 
against poyson: they say it is taken from living Toads, in a red cloth, in which colour 
they are much delighted; for whilst they sport and open themselves upon the 
scarlet, the stone droppeth out of their head, and falleth through a hole made in 
the middle, into a box set under for the purpose, else they will suck it up again. But 
I never met with a faithful person, who said that he found it: nor could I ever find 
one, though I have cut up many. Nevertheless, I will affirm this for truth, that those 
stones which are pretended to be taken out of Toads are minerals; for I remember 
at Rome I saw a broken piece of stone, which was compacted of many of those stones, 
some bigger, some less, which stuck on the back of it like limps on a rock. But the 
vertue is certain: if any swallow it down with poyson, it will preserve him from 
the malignity of it; for it runneth about with the poyson, and assawageth the power 
of it, that it becometh vain and of no force. 
 
[}A most perfect oyl against poyson,}] 
 
often tryed in repressing the violence of it. Take three pound of old oyl, put into 
it two handfulls of the flower of St Johns wort, and let them macerate in it for two 
months in the sun. Then strain out the flowers, and put into the oyl two ounces 
of the flowers of the same herb, and set it to boil in Balneo Mariæ a quarter of a day. 
Stop the bottle close, that it may have no vent, and set it a sunning for fifteen days. 
In the moneth of July, take three ounces of the seed, stamp it gently, and steep it 
in two glasses of the best white-wine, with gentian, tormentil, white dittany, zedoary, 
and carline gathered in August; red sanders, long aristolochie, of each two drams: Let 
all these mecerate in the wine for three days; then take them out, and put them in 
the oyl, and boil them gently in Balneo for six hours; then strain them in a press. 
Adde to the expression an ounce of saffron, myrrhe, aloes, spikenard, and rubarb, all 
bruised, and let them boil in it for a day in B. M. at last treacle and mithridate, of 
each two ounces, and let them also boil in it six hours as before: then set it forty 
days in the sun. It must be used thus: In the plague-time, or upon suspition of poyson, 
anoint the stomach and wrists, and the place about the heart, and drink three 
drops of it in wine. It will work wonders. 
 
[}CHAP. X. 
Antidotes and preservatives against the Plague.}] 
 
I Have spoken of poysons, now I will of the plague, being of the same nature, and 
cured almost by the same Medicines. I will set down onely them, which in our 
time have been experimented by the Neapolitanes, Sicilians, and Venetians (whilst 
the plague was spread amongst them) to resist the contagion of that epidemical plague, 
and preserve their bodies from infection. 
 
[}A confection of Gillyflowers against the plague, of wonderful operation.}] 
 
Gather some clove-gilliflowers in the moneth of May, of a red and lively colour, 
because they are of the greater vertue; pull them out of their husks, and clip off the 
[^p.227^] 
green end, then beat them in a marble mortar with a wooden pestle, until they become 
so fine as they may hardly be felt. In the mean while, take three pound of sugar 
for one of the flowers; melt it in a brass skillet, and boil it with a little orange-flower-water, 
that may quickly be consumed. When it is boiled sufficiently, put 
in some whites of egges beaten, enough to froth and clarifie it, still stirring it, and 
skimming off the froth with a spoon, until all the dregs be taken out. Then put in 
the due weight of flowers, and stir it with a wooden slice, till it turn red: when it is 
almost boiled, adde thereunto two drachms of cloves beaten with a little musk, the 
mixture of which will both add & excite a sweet sent and pleasantness in the flowers. 
Then put it into earthen pots, and set it up: if you add a little juyce of lemon, it will 
make of it a more lively blood-colour. We may also make Lozenges and round 
Cakes of it, by pouring it on a cold marble. If any would do it after the best manner, 
they must extract the colour of the flowers, and boil their sugar in that infusion, 
for so it will smell sweeter. Some never bruise the flowers, but cut them very 
small with sizers, and candy them with sugar; but they are not very pleasant to eat. 
This confection is most grateful to the taste, and by reason of the sent of the cloves, 
very pleasant. The vertues of it are these, as I have found by experience: it is good 
for all diseases of the heart, as fainting, and trembling thereof; for the megrim and 
poyson, and the bitings of venimous creatures, and especially against the infection 
of the plague. There may be made a vinegar, or infusion of it, which being 
rub'd about the nostrils, is good against contagious air, and night-dews, and all effects 
of melancholy. 
 
[}Against the Plague.}] 
 
Gather Ivy-berries in May, and wilde Poppies before the sun rise, lest they open; 
In April gather goats rue: dry them in the shade, and make them into powder. One 
drachm of it being drank in wine, is excellent against infectious diseases. The Bezoar 
stone, brought from the west-Indies, being hung about the neck nigh to the 
heart; or four grains of it in powder, being taken in wine, is good against the plague, 
and the infection of all pestilential feavors, as I can testifie: And taketh away 
soundings, and exhilarateth the heart. The water or oyl, extracted from the seeds 
of Citron, is a very strong Antidote against the plague. Apparitius Hispanus, his 
oyl is also approved against the same. 
 
[}CHAP. XI. 
Remedies for wounds and blows.}] 
 
THere are some remedies for wounds and blows, which shall not be omitted, 
for I have found some of them to be of wonderful vertue. 
 
[}The oyl of Hispanus for wounds and other things.}] 
 
Take two pound of new wax, four ounces of wax, as many of linseed, two ounces 
of rosemary-flowers, and bay-berries, as many of betony; of chamomil-flowers, 
or the oyl of it, three ounces; of cinnamon an ounce and a half, as much of St Johns 
wort, or the oyl of it, two ounces of old oyl. Dry the flowers and herbs in the 
shade; and when they are withered, beat them, and feirce them through a sieve. 
Melt the wax on the fire, then pour in the oyls, next the powders, still stirring 
them with a stick. At length, pour it on a marble, and cut it into small slices, and 
put it into a glass retort; stop it close with straw-mortar, and set it on the fire with 
his receiver; stop the joynts, and give the inclosed no vent, lest the virtue flye out 
and vanish away. First, by a gentle fire draw out a water; then encreasing it, and 
changing the glass, draw a red oyl; stop them close, and keep them for use: the qualities 
of it are heating; by anointing the neck, it cureth all creeks that are bred by 
cold; it healeth wounds, helpeth the contraction of the nerves caused by cold; it 
mollifieth cold gouts, and taketh away the trembling of the hands; It may be drank 
for the Sciatica, taken in wine; it helpeth the quinsie: by anointing the reins of the 
[^p.228^] 
back, and the belly, or by drinking the water or oyl in wine, it will break the 
stone and bring it down, and asswageth poyson. For deafness, you must steep some 
wool in it, and stop the ears with it: anoint the belly and back in any pain there. 
Being drunk in vinegar, it cureth the falling sickness, and restoreth lost memory; it 
provoketh the menstrues in women, by anointing their privities with it, or by drinking 
some drops of it in wine; taken in the same manner, it provoketh appetite, being 
taken early in the morning; and is good against the bitings of Scorpions: Drink it 
going to bed, or when you arise in the morning, and it will cure a stinking breath. 
 
[}For cold aches.}] 
 
Oyl of Herns is excellent to allay and remove all cold aches, the gout, sciatica, 
griefs of the sinews, convulsions, pain in the joynts, cold defluctions, and other diseases 
of moisture and cold. In the Diomedian Isles, now called Tremity, in the Adriatique 
Sea, there are birds, commonly called Hearns, who breed there, and continue 
there, and are to be found nowhere else: they are a kind of Duck, feeding 
on fish, which they catch in the night: they are not to be eaten, though they be very 
fat, because they savour of the rankness of fish. Kill these birds, and pluck off their 
feathers; draw them, and hang them up by the feet, there will drop from them a 
certain black yellowish oyl, very offensive to the nose, being of a noisome fishy smell. 
This oyl being applied to any place, as much as you can endure, will do the effects 
before mentioned, and more: but it is very hurtful for any hot maladies. There is 
a water also 
 
[}For old Sores.}] 
 
Take lime unkilled, and dissolve it in water; stir it three or four times in a day; then 
when it is settled and cleared, strain it and keep it; wet a linnen cloth in it, and apply 
it to a wound or sore, and it cureth them. I will not omit 
 
[}The vertues of Tobacco.}] 
 
Out of the seeds of it is expressed an oyl, three ounces out of a pound, which allays 
the cruel tortures of the gout: the juyce clarified and boiled into a syrup, and 
taken in the morning, maketh the voyce tunable, clear and loud; very convenient 
for singing Masters. If you bruise the leaves, and extract the juyce, it killeth lice in 
childrens heads, being rubbed thereon. The leaves cure rotten Sores and Ulcers, 
running on the legs, being applied unto them. The juyce of this herb doth also presently 
take away and asswage the pain in the codds, which happeneth to them who 
swimming do chance to touch their codds. 
 
[}CHAP.XII. 
Of a secret Medicine for wounds.}] 
 
THere are certain Potions called Vulnerary Potions, because, being drunk, they 
cure wounds: and it seemeth an admirable thing, how those Potions should 
penetrate to the wounds. These are 
 
[}Vulnerary Potions.}] 
 
Take Pirole, Comfrey, Aristolochy, Featherfew of each a handful; of Agrimony two: 
boil them in the best new Wine: digest them in horse-dung. Or take two handfuls 
of Pirole, of Sanicle, and Sowe-bread one, of Ladies Mantel half one. Boil them 
in two measures of Wine, and drink it morning and evening. Binde the herbs, 
which you have boiled, upon the wound, having mixt a little salt with them: and in 
the mean while use no other Medicine. 
 
[}The Weapon-Salve}] 
 
Given heretofore to Maximilian the Emperor, by Paracelsus, experimented by him, 
and always very much accounted of by him while he lived: It was given to me by a 
[^p.229^] 
noble man of his Court. If the Weapon that wounded him, or any stick dipt in his 
blood be brought, it will cure the wound, though the Patient be never so far off. 
Take of the moss growing upon a dead man his scull, which hath laid unburied, two 
ounces, as much of the fat of a man, half an ounce of Mummy, and man his blood: 
of linseed oyl, turpentine, and bole-armenick, an ounce; bray them all together in 
a mortar, and keep them in a long streight glass. Dip the Weapon into the oyntment, 
and so leave it: Let the Patient in the morning, wash the wound with his own 
water; and without adding any thing else, tye it up close, and he shall be cured without 
any pain. 
 
[}CHAP. XIII. 
How to counterfeit infirmities.}] 
 
IT hath been no small advantage to some, to have counterfeited sicknesses, that they 
might escape the hands of their enemies, or redeem themselves for a small ransom, 
or avoid tortures; invented by former ages, and used by these latter. I will first teach 
you 
 
[}How to counterfeit a bloody Flux.}] 
 
Amphiretus Acantius, being taken by Pirates, and carried to Lemnos, was kept in 
chains, in hope that his ransom would bring them a great sum of money. He abstained 
from meat, and drank Minium mixt with salt water. Therefore, when he went to 
stool, the Pirates thought he was fallen into a bloody Flux, and took off his irons, 
lest he should dye, and with him their hopes of his ransom. He being loose, escaped 
in the night, got into a Fisher-boat, and arrived safe at Acantum: so saith Poliaenus. 
Indian Figs, which stain the hands like ripe Mulberries, if they be eaten, cause the 
urine to be like blood: which hath put many into a fright, fearing they should dye 
presently. The fruit of the Mulberry, or Hoggs blood boiled and eaten, maketh 
the excrements seem bloody. Red Madder maketh the urine red, saith Dioscorides. 
We may read also, that if you hold it long in your hand, it will colour your urine. I 
will teach you also 
 
[}To make any one look pale.}] 
 
Cumine taken in drink causeth paleness: so it is reported, That the Followers of 
Portius Latro, that famous Master of Rhetorick, endeavored to imitate that colour 
which he had contracted by study. And Julius Vindex, that assertor of liberty from 
Nero, made this the onely bawd to procure him an executorship. They smoke themselves 
with Cumine, who disfigure their faces, to counterfeit holiness and mortification 
of their body. There is an experiment also, whereby any one may know how 
 
[}To cause Sores to arise.}] 
 
Take Perwinckle, an herb of an intolerable sharpness, that is worthily named Flammula; 
bruise it, and make it into a plaister, and it will in a short space ulcerate, and 
make blisters arise. Cantharides beaten with strong water, do also raise watry blisters, 
and cause ruptures. 
 
[}CHAP. XIV. 
Of Fascination, and Preservatives against inchantments.}] 
 
NOw I will discourse of inchantment; neither will I pass over in silence, who 
they are whom we call Inchanters: For if we please to look over the Monuments 
of Antiquity, we shall finde a great many things of that kind delivered down 
to posterity. And the tryal of later ages doth not altogether explode the fame of 
them: neither do I think that it derogateth from the truth of the stories, that we 
cannot draw the true causes of the things, into the streight bonds of our reasons, because 
there are many things that altogether impede the enquiry: but what I my self 
judge of others opinions, I thought fit here to explicate. You may find many things 
in Theocritus and Virgil, of this kind: whence that verse arose: 
 
[^p.230^] 
There's some, I know not whose unlucky eye 
Bewitcheth my yong Lambs, and makes them die. 
 
Isigonus and Memphodorus say, There are some families in Africa, that bewitch with 
their tongue the very Woods: which if they do but admire somewhat earnestly, or 
if they praise fair trees, growing corn, lusty children, good horses, or fat sheep, they 
presently wither, and die of a suddain, from no other cause or harm: which thing 
also Solinus affirmeth. The same Isigonus saith, there are amongst the Triballians and 
Illyrians, certain men, who have two pupils in each eye, and do bewitch most deadly 
with them, and kill whatever they look earnestly on, especially with angry eyes: 
so pernicious are they: and yong children are most subject to their mischief. There 
are such women in Scythia, called Bithiae, saith Apollonides. Philarchus reporteth of 
another kind, called Thibians in Pontus, who had two pupils in one eye, and in 
the other the picture of a horse; of which Didymus also maketh mention. Damon 
relateth of a poyson in Ethiopia, whose sweat would bring a consumption in all bodies 
it touched: and it is manifest, that all women which have two pupils in one eye, can 
bewitch with it. Cicero writeth of them; so Plutarch and Philarchus mention 
the Paletheobri, a Nation inhabiting in part of the Pontick Sea, where are Inchanters 
who are hurtful, not onely to children that are tender and weak, but to men 
of full growth, who are of a strong and firm body; and that they kill with their looks, 
making the persons languish and consume away as in a consumption. Neither do they 
infect those onely who live among them, but strangers, and those who have the least 
commerce with them; so great is the power and witchcraft of their eyes: for though 
the mischief be often caught in copulation with them, yet it is the eyes that work: 
for they send forth spirits, which are presently conveyed to the heart of the bewitched, 
and so infect him. Thus it cometh to pass, That a yong man, being full of thin, 
clear, hot, and sweet blood, sendeth forth spirits of the same nature; for they are 
made of the purest blood, by the heat of the heart: and being light, get into the uppermost 
parts of the body, and flye out by the eyes, and wound those who are most 
porous, which are fair persons, and the most soft bodies. With the spirits there is 
sent out also a certain fiery quality, as red and blear eyes do, who make those that 
look on them, fall into the same disease: I suffered by such an accident my self: for 
the eye infecteth the air; which being infected, infecteth another: carrying along 
with it self the vapors of the corrupted blood, by the contagion of which, the eyes 
of the beholders are overcast with the like redness. So the Wolf maketh a man dumb; 
so the Cockatrice killeth, who poysoneth with looking on, and giveth venimous 
wounds with the beams of his eyes: which being reflexed upon himself, by a looking-glass, 
kill the Author of them. So a bright Mirror dreadeth the eyes of an unclean 
women, saith Aristotle, and groweth cloudy and dull, when she looketh on it: 
by reason that the sanguine vapour is contracted by the smoothness of the glass into 
one place; so that it is spotted with a kind of little mist, which is plainly seen; and 
if if be newly gathered there, will be hardly wip'd off. Which thing never happeneth 
on a cloth or stone, because it penetrateth and sinketh into the one, and is dispersed 
by the inequality of parts in the other. But a Mirror being hard and smooth, collecteth 
them entire; and being cold, condenseth them into a dew. In like manner 
almost, if you breath upon a clear glass, it will not wax moist as it were with a sprinkling 
of spettle, which condensing will drop down: so this efflux of beams out of the eyes, 
being the conveyers of spirits, strike through the eyes of those they meet, and flye to 
the heart, their proper region, from whence they rise; and there being condensed 
into blood, infect all his inward parts. This stranger blood, being quite repugnant 
to the nature of the man, infects the rest of him, and maketh him sick: and there this 
contagion will continue, as long as he hath any warm blood in his body. For being 
a distemper in the blood, it will cast him into a continual feaver; whereas, if it had 
been a distemper of choler or flegme, it would have afflicted him by intervalls. But 
that all things may be more distinctly explained, you must know first, that there are 
two kind of Fascinations mentioned by Authors: One of Love, the other of Envy or 
[^p.231^] 
Malice. If a person be ensnared with the desire of a fair and beautiful woman, although 
he be caught at a distance, yet he taketh the poyson in at his eyes, and the 
Image of her beauty settleth in the heart of this Lover, kindleth a flame there, which 
will never cease to torment him: For the soft blood of the beloved, being strayed thither, 
maketh continual representations of her: she is present there in her own blood; 
but it cannot settle or rest there, for it continually endeavoureth to flye homeward, 
as the blood of a wounded person spirts out on him that giveth the blow. Lucretius 
describeth this excellently: 
 
He seeks that body, whence his grief he found; 
For humors always flow unto a wound. 
As bruised blood still runs unto the part 
That's struck, and gathers where it feels the smart: 
So when the murtheress of his heart's in place, 
Blushes arise, and red ore spreads in his face. 
 
But if it be a Fascination of Envy or Malice, that hath infected any person, it is very 
dangerous, and is found most often in old women. Neither can any one deny, but 
that the diseases of the minde do distemper the body; and that the good disposition 
of it, doth strengthen and corroborate the same; and it doth not work this alteration 
onely in its own body, but on others also, by how much it stirreth up in the heart inward 
desires of love and revenge. Doth not the covetousness, grief, or love, change the 
colour and disposition? Doth not envy cause paleness and meagerness in the body? 
Doth not the longing of the mother, imprint the mark of what she desired upon the 
tender Embryo? So when Envy bends her fierce and flaming eyes, and the desire of 
mischief bursts thereout, a vehement heat proceedeth from them, w=ch= infecteth those 
that stand nigh, especially the beautiful; they strike them through as with a sword, 
set their entrails on fire, and make them wast into a leanness, especially if they be 
of a cholerick or sanguine complexion; for the disease is easily fed, where the pores 
are open, and the humors thin. Nor is it the passions of the mind onely, that affecteth 
the body thus: but the body it self, as Avicenna proveth, may be endued with venimous 
qualities: many are so by Nature; so that it cannot seem a wonder, if sometimes 
some are made so by Art. The Queen of India sent to Alexander a very beautiful 
maid, anointed and fed with the poyson of Serpents, as Aristotle saith, and Avicenna 
from the Testimony of Rufus. Galen Writeth of another, who eat Henbane 
without any harm; and another, Woolf-bane; so that a Hen would not come near her. 
And Mithridates (as old Histories deliver it to us) King of Pontus, had so strengthened 
himself against poyson, that when he would have poysoned himself, lest he should fall 
into the hands of the Romans, nothing would do him any hurt. If you give a Hawk 
a Hen fed with snakes or lizards flesh, or with barly boiled in the broth of them, 
it will make him mew his feathers betimes: and many other such things are done, 
which are too long to be recounted. So many men are of such a nature, that they will 
cure some diseases onely with their stroaking. Many eat Spiders and wilde Olives, 
and care not for the biting of Serpents, nor suffer any wasting or consumption, if they 
be of such a nature, that their looks or breath will not onely blast men, but plants 
and herbs, and any other thing, and make them wither away: and oftentimes, where 
such kind of creatures are, you may find blasted corn, poysoned and withered, meerly 
by the contagion of their eyes, the breath that cometh from them. Do not women 
in the time of their courses, infect cucumbers and melons, by touching or looking 
on them, so that they wither? Are not children handled with less prejudice by 
men then women? And you will find more women then men witches, by reason of 
their complexion; for they are farther distant from a right temper, and eat more unwholesome 
food; so that every moneth they are filled with superfluities, and purge 
forth melancholy blood: from whence vapors arise, and flie out through their eyes, 
poysoning those that stand nigh them, and filling them with the same kind of blood. 
Hence sanguine complexioned men, and somewhat cholerick, who have large, shining, 
gray eyes, and live chastly (for too often copulation exhausteth the moisture) who by 
[^p.232^] 
frequent glances, and continual imagination, encounter point to point, beams to 
beams, eyes to eyes, do generally stir up love. But why a man is taken by this Fascination 
with one, and not another, appeareth by the former, and this reason: for it 
happeneth from the intention of the Inchantor, who by those spirits or vapors, is 
transmitted into the bewitched person; and he receiving them, is made like unto him: 
For the infection seizing on his mind, and fixing in his imagination, becomes a permanent 
habit, and maketh the spirits and blood obedient to it; and so bindeth the imagination, 
and inflameth them with the thing beloved. Although the mind (which opinion 
is fathered upon Avicen, neither doth it want his authority) can of its own will 
and power, produce such passions. Musæus will have the eyes to lay the foundation 
of Love, and to be the chief allurements of it. And Diogenianus saith, That Love is 
begotten by looks, affirming that it is impossible for a man to fall in love unawares. 
So Juvenal placeth that Lover among prodigies, 
 
[}Who burnt with Love of her he never saw:}] 
 
For the bright glances of the eyes, driveth the Object into a kind of madness, and 
teach the rudiments of Love. The other parts are scarce any cause of Love, but provoke 
and entice the beholder to stay, and gaze a while upon their beauty, whilst the 
eyes wound him; for there they say, Cupid lieth in ambush with his bowe, ready to 
shoot his arrows into the beholders eyes, and set his heart on fire. For thy eyes slide 
in through my eyes (saith Apuleius) and raise a cruel fire within my heart. Now I have 
discovered the original of it unto you; unless you are quite mad, you may many ways 
fortifie your self against it. But many one may well wonder, considering those diseases 
which come by infection, as the itch, scabbiness, blear-eyes, the plague, do infect by 
sight, touching or speaking, and presently cause putrefaction, why Love's contagion, 
which is the greatest plague of all, doth not presently seize upon men, and quite consume 
them: Neither doth it infect others onely, but sometimes it returneth upon it 
self, and the persons will be ensnared in their own charms: It is reported by the 
Antients of Eutelides, that he bewitched himself by reflection in water, looking-glasses, 
or fountains, which returned his own shadow upon him. So that he seemed 
so beautiful unto himself, that falling in love with that wherewith he used to entrap 
others, he lost his former complexion, and died a Sacrifice unto his own Beauty. So 
children oftentimes effascinate themselves, when their parents attribute it to haggards 
and witches. Now take 
 
[}Some Preservatives against Love.}] 
 
There are many prescribed by wise antiquity. If you would endeavor to remove the 
charms of love, thus you may expel them. Turn your face away, that she may not 
fasten her eyes on yours, nor couple rays with you; for you must remove the cause 
from the place, where it useth to make its impression: forsake her company, avoid idleness, 
employ your mind in business of concernment; evacuate blood, sweat, and other 
excrements in a large quantity, that the infection may also be voided with them. 
 
[}A Preservative against Envy.}] 
 
If it be the witchcraft of Envy, you may know it thus. The infected loseth his colour, 
hardly openeth his eyes, always hangeth his head down, sighs often, his heart 
is ready to break, and sheddeth salt and bitter tears, without any occasion or sign of 
evil. To disencharm him, because the air is corrupted and infected, burn sweet perfume 
to purifie the air again, and sprinkle him with waters sweetned with cinnamon, 
cloves, cypress, lignum aloes, musk, and amber. Therefore the old custome 
is continued until this day, and observed by our women, to smoke their children, and 
rowl them about in frankincense. Keep him in an open air, and hang Carbuncles, 
Jacinthes, or Saphires about his neck. Dioscorides accounteth Christs Thorn, wilde 
Hemp, and Valerian, hung up in the house, an amulet against witchcraft. Smell to 
Hyssope, and the sweet Lilly; wear a ring made of the hoof of a tame or wilde Ass; 
also Satyrion, the male and female, are thought the like. Aristotle commendeth Rue, 
being smelt to. All these do abate the power of witchcraft. 
 
