[^Woolley, Hannah: Gentlewomans companion^] 
 
[}THE 
Gentlewomans Companion; 
OR, A 
GUIDE 
TO THE 
Female Sex: 
CONTAINING 
Directions of Behaviour, in all Places 
Companies, Relations, and Conditions, from 
their Childhood down to Old Age: 
VIZ. As, 
[^Beginning of a list in two columns.^] 
Children to Parents. 
Scholars to Governours. 
Single to Servants. 
Virgins to Suitors. 
Married to Husbands. 
[^A column change.^] 
Huswifes to the House. 
Mistresses to Servants. 
Mothers to Children. 
Widows to the World. 
Prudent to all. 
[^End of a list in two columns.^] 
With LETTERS and DISCOURSES 
upon all Occasions. 
Whereunto is added, A Guide for Cook-maids, Dairy-maids, 
Chamber-maids, and all others that go to Service. 
The whole being an exact Rule for the Female Sex in General. 
 
By Hannah Woolley. 
 
LONDON, Printed by A. Maxwell for Dorman Newman 
at the Kings-Arms in the Poultry, 1673.}] 
 
[^A dedicatory epistle to young ladies, gentlewomen and maidens, a table of contents, chapters giving instruction to gentlewomen and maidens and non-medical recipes omitted.^] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 161-184^] 
[}An Introduction to Physick and 
Chyrurgery.}] 
 
AS it is a very commendable quality in Gentlewomen, 
whether young or old, to visit 
the sick; so it is impossible to do it with that 
charity some stand in need of, without some 
knowledg in Physick, and the several operations 
of Herbs and Spices: But since it will take 
up too much room to insert here what may make 
you a compleat Herbalists I shall refer you to 
such who have largely treated on that Subject; viz. 
Mr. Gerhard, and Mr. Parkinson, with many more 
expert in the knowledg of Vegetables. Wherefore 
since the knowledg of sundry sorts of Spices 
is very requisite both for persons diseased, 
and in health, I shall begin with them. 
 
Pepper is a spice of the most common use, hot 
and dry to the fourth degree almost. The black is 
that which is generally coveted; but inconsiderately 
by the younger sort of people, it being 
hurtful to them, though comfortable to old Age. 
When you use it, beat it not too small, for fear of 
inflaming the blood, otherwise it cutteth gross 
flegm, dispelleth Crudities, and helpeth Digestion. 
 
The next thing, which is hotter than Pepper, 
is Ginger; not that it is really so, but because 
the biting heat of Ginger is more lasting 
and durable. This spice is not so much used in 
[^p.162^] 
dressing meat, as the other; however it is very 
good for concoction, and opens obstructions, and 
is very expedient for the expulsion of Wind. 
Green Ginger in the Indies preserved, is excellent 
good for a watry and windy stomach, if taken 
fasting; the better sort is unfleaky, and so clear 
that you may almost see through it; but there is little 
good made in England. 
 
Cloves is an excellent Spice for the head, heart, 
stomack, and the eyes, which are much 
benefited thereby, and Nature strengthned. In 
Swoonings and Fainting-fits they are very good, 
or against the Plague, or any other infectious disease 
whatsoever, or fluxes of the belly proceeding 
from cold humors. They are good against strengthning 
the retentive faculty, and sweetning the 
breath; but let young Sanguine and Cholerick 
Complections use them and all other spices very 
sparingly. 
 
Nutmeg is hot and dry in the second degree, 
and is accounted a spice of the like nature and 
property, with what are before mention'd. It is 
astringent, and good for Flegmatick Constitutions, 
cold Diseases and Fluxes. Nutmegs whilst green 
and covered over with an husk or shell like our 
Walnuts, are preserved in the Indies as Ginger is, 
and are very comfortable to the Head and 
Stomack. 
 
The covering of the Nutmeg is the Mace, 
which partakes of the same nature with it, 
strengthning the animal parts; and it is good 
against fluxes and spitting of blood. 
 
Cinamon is the inward bark or rind of a Tree 
growing in the Indies, and is accounted to be hot 
[^p.163^] 
and dry in the third degree. This spice by reason 
of its fragrancy and palatable taste, may justly 
challenge the pre-cellency of most other Spices; it 
comforteth the spirits, and opens obstructions 
both in Men and Women; it helpeth a Woman 
in her delivery, furthereth Urine, and is good 
for Concoction. 
 
We have a Spice growing here at home called 
Saffron, which need not give place to any of the 
former; it is hot in the second, and dry in the 
first degree: It is a great Cordial, and a help 
against obstructions; it is good against the Jaundies, 
and unstuffs the pipes of the Lungs: It is 
good to bring down the Menstruum, and facilitates 
the Birth, if taken moderately. And since I 
have spoken of a thing of our own growth, let 
me add another, which is Honey, hot and dry in 
the second degree, and is better boiled that raw; 
it is very restorative, and therefore good against 
Consumptions and Phlegmatick Constitutions, 
but dangerous to be used much by hot Complexions, 
for thereby it is soon converted into Choler. 
The best is very sweet, pleasant of smell, of a 
clear and yellowish colour, pretty stiff, and firm, 
and yieldeth but little scum on the top when 
boiled. Garden-honey is the best, and is clarified 
by adding a little water to it, about the 
fourth part, and so scum it whilst any froth ariseth, 
or till the water be evaporated, which is 
known by the bubbles rising from the bottom; 
if you will have it more pure, put into every 
pound of Honey the white of an Egg, and afterwards 
scum it again in the boiling; then use it 
against all pectoral infirmities, as the Cough, 
[^p.164^] 
shortness of Breath, the Pleurisie, &c. 
 
Sugar is the next thing we treat of, which is 
generally esteemed and used, and now more than 
ever; since the Ancients knew not the right way 
of preparing it as it is now-a-days. 
 
Sugar is neither so hot and dry as Honey; 
the brownest or coarsest is most cleansing, and is 
good for abstertions in diseases of the Breast or 
Lungs; but as it is opening and cleansing, so 
the immoderate use thereof is dangerous, for it 
will rot the Teeth, and taint the Breath, ingender 
Jaundies and Consumptions; and Physicians 
verily believe, that the major part of those 
who die of the Consumption in the City (the 
constantly great numbers whereof may be seen 
in the Weekly Bills of Mortality) are such 
who eat Confections, and such as like sweet things 
immoderately. 
 
And since I have spoken of Sugar, pray take 
special notice of this remark, That the most 
part of our finest Sugar, and which is most 
coveted, is refined and whitened by the means 
of the Lee of Lime; how prejudicial that may be 
to the Body, I will leave it to the Rational to 
consider. 
 
Thus I have given you a small touch of the 
nature of Spices; I think I need not acquaint 
you, that we have here at home in our own 
Gardens many excellent Aromatical Plants, such 
as Rosemary, Lavender, Tyme, Savory, Sage, 
Mint, Penny-royal, Basil, sweet Cerfuel, Avens, 
Angellica, with many more which you may find 
in Culpeper's English Physician, with their nature, 
use, and disposition. 
 
[^p.165^] 
The great plenty we have of these excellent 
Plants hath made many judicious persons admire, 
that being supplied at home with such admirable 
Simples, we should hunt so eagerly after 
Outlandish Spices, which by difficulty of transportation, 
length of way, and carelesness of the 
Merchant, are frequently imported rotten, or 
worm-eaten; or so long before they come to our 
hands, that they have lost half their virtue. 
 
[}What is to be observed by a Gentlewoman before 
she undertakes the administration of Physick.}] 
 
The first inconvenience you must shun (which 
I have observed in most Physical Practitioners) 
is the vulgar error of not suffering the diseased 
or sick person to change his Linnen often; and I 
know not by what unreasonable prescription 
they will not suffer a diseased female to change 
her head-cloathes, till it too sensibly offend the 
noses of the Visitants. Their common objection 
is, That the sick by that means may catch cold; 
and next, That there shifting much weakneth 
them. 
 
To this I answer, That it is only the foolish conjecture 
and groundless fear of some old Dotard 
of our sex; for a good fire will easily prevent 
catching of cold; and in the next place, their 
often shifting hath apparently proved the means 
of their strengthning; besides it much discourageth 
and dejecteth the sick person to lie in 
foul linnen, making them even loath themselves 
in that stinking condition. To make this the 
more easily understood, take notice, that in humane 
[^p.166^] 
bodies there is a threefold Concoction; 
the first in the stomack, which is commonly called 
the Chyle, and hath for its excrement that 
which is convey'd to Colon or the great Gut; 
the second concoction is in the Liver, and hath 
for its excrement the Urine; the last is called Nutrition 
and hath for its excrement certain fuliginous 
vapours, which by insensible transpiration 
do breathe out themselves through the pores of 
the body, and by the sweat, which is apparent to 
the eye. Now in times of Sickness, especially 
in all sorts of Fevers (which are the usual diseases 
which invade English bodies) this last excrement 
doth very much abound, and doth extreamly 
and speedily foul the Linnen of the 
sick person; for which cause reason tells us, that 
the Linnen should be often shifted, especially 
if they sweat much, lest the sweat continuing 
about the body, it should be drawn in by the 
same way it had its passage out. For know, the 
Arteries of the body have a double motion, one 
whereby they expell the Excrements, already 
mention'd; and the other whereby they attract 
into the body the ambient Air to refresh the 
blood: Now observe, whatsoever Air is next 
unto them, whether good or bad, they draw it 
in; and therefore if this foul sweaty Linnen do 
lie about, or upon them, undoubtedly the noisome 
airs will be drawn in by the Arteries, 
and so prolong the distemper. To make further 
proof hereof, I have heard it reported by 
an eminent Physician, that let any person newly 
come out of the Bath go into a place where 
quantity of dust is rais'd, and he shall instantly 
[^p.167^] 
feel an universal pricking over his whole body, 
which is nothing else but the Atoms of dust 
drawn in by the Arteries. By this then you 
may understand, that the skin ought to be cleansed 
from all corruption, and the pores and passages 
to be kept open and clean; for which cause 
it was that the Romans of old had their bodies 
frequently rubbed with a coarse cloth. Thus 
much I have added likewise, to let Gentlewomen 
see how much they are abused by their 
credulous and ignorant Nurses. 
 
Should I add other observables, with the 
Symptomes of Diseases, I should swell this small 
Treatise into a greater Volume than is requisite. 
I shall therefore desist and give you my collection 
(with my own observation) of the 
choicest Receipts in Physick and Chyrurgery I 
could meet with in my strictest indigation. 
 
[^p.168^] 
[}Choise and Experimental Observations 
in Physick and Chyrurgery, such which 
rarely fail'd any who made trial thereof.}] 
 
[}A most approved Receipt for a Quartan Ague.}] 
 
PRocure a white flint-stone (for that will best 
endure the fire without breaking) and let it 
lye in a quick fire till it be red hot, then take 
some small beer and quench it therein; when 
the fit is coming, let the diseased drink a good 
draught thereof, and another in the midst thereof; 
let this be done four several days both in 
the fit, and when the fit is coming. This I have 
been credibly inform'd was a receipt a woman 
had her livelihood from, in curing several when 
all other means proved ineffectual. 
 
[}For a sudden and violent bleeding at the Nose.}] 
 
Take an Egg-shell and burn it to a coal, 
then pulverize or beat it to a fine powder, and 
let the person snuff it up his Nostrils, or take 
your two thumbs and press them hard against 
the Temples of the Bleeder, and you will admire 
how speedily it will divert the course of 
the blood. For those that are accustomed thus 
to bleed, let them make an ordinary Posset, taking 
off the curd, let the juice of Liverwort beaten 
be added thereunto, and so drink morning and 
evening. 
 
[^p.169^] 
[}To stop the Bleeding of a Wound.}] 
 
Take Vervine dried, and reduce it to powder; 
or take the sole of an old stocking and burn it, 
put the ashes of the one, or powder of the other, 
to the wound, and it will leave bleeding. 
 
[}An approved Medicine of London-Midwives to 
break and heal Womens sore breasts.}] 
 
Take red Sage and Oatmeal the finest you can 
get, and boil them together in Spring-water, till 
you have boil'd them to a consistency, that is as 
thick as to make a Plaister; then add thereunto a 
fit proportion of Honey, having boil'd a little 
while together, take it off the fire, and whilst it 
is boiling-hot, make it indifferent thick with the 
best Venice-Turpentine, then spread it on fine 
leather, or linnen-cloth, and laying it on the 
sore breast it will first break it, and afterwards 
perfectly heal it. 
 
[}An excellent way to dry up a Womans Breast.}] 
 
Of Linseed-Oyl and English Honey, take of each 
a peny-worth, of white-wax half a peny-worth, 
and half a quarter of a pound of sweet Butter, 
boil all these together, spread a Plaister thereof, 
and lay it on the breast. Probatum est. 
 
[}An infallible receipt to increase milk in 
Womens breasts.}] 
 
Take Chickens and make broth of them, then 
add thereunto Fennel and Parsnip-roots, then 
take the newest-made Butter you can procure, 
and butter the roots therewith; having so done 
let her eat heartily, and her expectations therein 
will be speedily satisfied. 
 
[^p.170^] 
[}Against a Stinking breath.}] 
 
To prevent a Stinking-breath, you ought to 
keep your teeth very clean by rubbing them 
every morning with water and salt, which will 
also cure the scurvy; you may if you please try 
Mr. Turners Dentifrices, which are every where 
much cryed up. But if your breath be tainted, 
proceeding from some other cause, take Rosemary-leaves 
with the blossoms, if to be had, and 
seeth them in White-wine, with a little Myrrh, 
and Cinamon, and you will find the effect to 
answer your desires if you use it often. 
 
[}For a Cancer in a Womans Breast.}] 
 
Take Goos-dung and Cellydony, stamp them 
well together, and lay them Plaisterwise on the 
sore; this shall cleanse the Cancer, kill the Worm, 
and heal the Sore. For a Cancer in the Mouth 
take the juice of Plantane-Vinegar, and Rose-water, 
mingle together of each a like quantity, 
and wash the mouth often with them. 
 
[}For young Children who by reason of the weakness 
of their Limbs can neither stand nor go.}] 
 
Take Marjoram and Sage, of each a like quantity, 
beat them well together, then strain 
out the juice, and put it into a double Glass-Vial, 
filling the Glass as full as it will hold; 
stop it then with paste very close all over, set it 
into an Oven, and there let it stand the time of 
an Houshold-loafs baking; taking it out, let it 
stand till it be cold; then breaking the paste 
round about it, see if the juice be grown 
thick; if so, break the Glass, and put what was 
[^p.171^] 
therein contain'd, into a Gally-pot, and keep it. 
When you use it, take the quantity of two spoonfuls 
at a time, and as much Marrow of an Ox-leg, 
melt them together, and mingle them well, 
and both morning and evening anoint therewith 
(as warm as can be endur'd) the tender 
parts of the Childs legs, knees and thighs, 
chasing them well with your hands; and in a 
short time (Deo volente) the child will be able 
to go and stand; this Receipt hath been ever 
found successful. 
 
[}An approved China-broth for a Consumption.}] 
 
Take two Ounces of China-root sliced thin, 
and let it be steept twenty four hours in fair 
water, let it stand warm all the time close covered 
in an Earthen Pipkin, add thereunto a 
couple of Chickens, or a Cockerel, cleanly dressed, 
to these put half a handful of Maiden-hair, the 
like quantity of fine leav'd grass, and Harts-tongue; 
twenty sliced Dates, three or four 
blades of Mace, and the bottom of a Manchet, 
let all these stew together till there be but a 
quart of liquor left, then strain it and take all 
the flesh and bones, and beat them in a Stone-Morter, 
then strain out the juice into the aforesaid 
broth, then sweeten it with two ounces of 
powder'd Sugar-candy. Take hereof half a pint 
in the morning warm, and sleep after it if you 
can; you will not do amiss to add two drams 
of white and red Sanders to steep with your 
China-root. 
 
[}A most excellent Jelly for the Consumption.}] 
 
Take a new kill'd Cock, scald him, and wash 
[^p.172^] 
him clean; then take a Leg of Veal, and take 
away all the fat from it, and let them lie in 
water five or six hours, then seeth them together 
in a gallon of Spring-water, scum clean 
the fat off; thus let it seethe over a soft fire 
till the liquor be half consumed; then put in 
a pottle of White-wine, and let it boil to a 
quart; add hereunto the whites of new-laid 
Eggs, clarifie it and let it run through a Jelly-bag, 
then set it on the fire again, and put into 
it an ounce of gross Cinamon, and a pound 
of fine Sugar, and let it run twice or thrice 
through a Jelly-bag again; having made a Jelly 
hereof, eat thereof cold. 
 
[}An excellent Comforter of the Stomach, and 
helper of Digestion.}] 
 
Take two ounces of good old Conserve of 
Red-roses, of chosen Mithridate two dramms, 
mingle them together, and when you are going 
to bed eat thereof the quantity of an Haselnut. 
This will expel all flatulency or windiness 
off the Stomach, drives away raw humours, and 
venemous vapours; helpeth Digestion, drieth 
the Rheum, and strengthneth the Sight and 
Memory. 
 
[}A well-tried Medicine for the Corns on 
the Feet or Toes.}] 
 
Pare your Corns well, then take a black snail 
and bruise it, and put a drop or two thereof 
on the place grieved; adding thereto a little 
powder of Samphire; this I can assure with 
constant use in a little time will take away the 
Corn. 
 
[^p.173^] 
[}An excellent Diet-drink for the Spring to 
purge the Blood, and cleanse it.}] 
 
Of Scurvy-grass take half a peck, Broodlime, 
Water-cresses, Acrimony, Maiden-hair, Liverwort, 
Borrage, Bugloss, Betony, Sage, sweet 
Marjoram, Sea-wormwood, Tops of green-hops, 
Fumitory, of each a good handful; of Ivory, 
Harts-horn, and yellow Sanders, of each one 
ounce; Red dock-roots two ounces, Parsley, 
Fennel, Asparagus-roots of each an ounce, Raisins 
half a pound; boil these very well in a 
gallon of Beer, then stamp and strain them, and 
put it into three gallons of new Beer to work 
together. 
 
[}A Remedy for the Dropsie, whether hot or cold.}] 
 
Take of the tops of red Mint, of Archangel, 
or blind nettles, and red Sage, of either a small 
quantity, stamp them together, and strain the 
juice of them into some stale Ale, so much as 
will serve to drink morning and evening, do 
this for ten days together, and (God willing) it 
will effect the Cure. 
 
[}Another for the Dropsie, which hath cured many a 
Person when they were left and forsaken by 
Physicians.}] 
 
Take green Broom and burn it in some clean 
place, that you may save the Ashes of it; take 
ten or twelve spoonful of the same Ashes, and 
boil them in a pint of White-wine, till the virtue 
thereof be in the Wine, then cool it, and 
drain the Wine from the dregs, and make 
three draughts of the Wine, one fasting in the 
[^p.174^] 
Morning, the other at three in the Afternoon, 
and the other when you go to Bed, this seldom 
fails in its desired effect. 
 
[}For the Web or Pin in the Eye.}] 
 
Take the Gall of a Hare and clarified Honey, 
of each a like quantity, mingle them well together, 
and anoint the Web with a feather dipped 
in the same, and in three or four days it 
will be gone. 
 
[}To cleanse the skin of the face, and make 
it look beautiful and fair.}] 
 
Take Rosemary and boil it in White-wine, 
with the juice of Erigan put thereunto, and 
wash your face therewith Mornings and Evenings. 
If your Face be troubled with heat, take 
Elder-flowers, Plantane, white Daisie-roots, and 
Herb-Robert, and put these into running-water, 
and wash your Face therewith at night, and in 
the Morning. 
 
[}How to ripen and heal a Felon or Whitclof.}] 
 
Take some white flower and boil it in Claret-wine 
to a Poultess, then spread it very thick, and 
apply it as hot as you can endure it, this will 
asswage the throbbing pain of the Whitclof, 
break and heal it. 
 
[}How to cure the bloody Flux.}] 
 
There are two sorts of Fluxes, the one proceedeth 
from the evil quality or temperament 
of the Liver, and is called in Latin, Fluxus Hepaticus; 
the other cometh from the great heat 
[^p.175^] 
and distemperament of Nature, and is called 
Dysenteria; that is, the distemper of the Guts; 
some cure this distemper with repression and restrictives, 
but many more hundreds are cured by 
Aromaticum Leonardi, with three or four doses 
of his Syrupus solutivus. You may try this way, 
which I shall assure you is both safe, and good: 
Take Frogs and distill them as you do Herbs and 
Flowers, or any thing else, but put nothing to 
them but a little water; take two or three 
spoonfuls of this distillation in any thing you 
drink, and it will give you present ease. 
 
[}A Cure for every sort of Gout.}] 
 
The Gout whether hot or cold, or whatever 
temperature, ariseth from one and the same 
cause, though the effects seem different. As for 
example, Fat-men have it with much inflamation, 
redness, and great pain; in leaner Persons 
it is discovered with less inflamation, though 
not with lesser pain; it afflicteth Cholerick and 
Melancholick men with nodes and tumours. 
The cause of this distemper cometh from an 
evil quality engendred in the Stomack, Blood 
and Liver, the cure thereof must be then the 
removal of this ill quality from the Stomack, 
and the purgation of Blood and Liver. Wherefore 
when you perceive the pain approaching, 
take two Doses of Pillula Magistrales Leonardi in 
the morning fasting one day after another; 
or if you will intermit a day, then take drams 
of Quinta essentia solutiva Leonardi, in half a 
Pottinger of Veal-broth sweetned with Sugar; 
take this five hours before you eat any thing; 
[^p.176^] 
then every night after Supper take a little of the 
Unguentum Leonardi, and anoint your grief, and 
you will find your speedy recovery. 
 
[}How to cure the Green-Sickness.}] 
 
Laziness and love are the usual causes of these 
obstructions in young women; and that which 
increaseth and continueth this distemper, is their 
eating Oatmeal, chalk; nay some have not forborn 
Cynders, Lime, and I know not what trash. 
If you would prevent this slothful disease, be sure 
you let not those under your command to want 
imployment, that will hinder the growth of 
this distemper, and cure a worser Malady of a 
love-sick breast, for business will not give them 
time to think of such idle matters. But if this 
Green-sickness hath already got footing in the 
body, use this means to drive it away: Take a 
Quart of Claret-wine, one pound of Currans, 
an handful of young Rosemary-tops, with half 
an ounce of Mace, seeth this to a pint, and 
let the Patient drink thereof three spoonfuls at a 
time, Morning and Evening, and eat some of 
the Currans after. 
 
[}An Universal Medicine of wonderful use 
both for Man and Woman.}] 
 
Take ten ounces of the seeds of Quinces, six 
ounces of the Pills of Citrons; Balm and Nettles, 
of each four ounces; beat all these grosly, and 
infuse them in six quarts of good White-wine, 
thus let it remain six days, then distill it with 
six ounces of Honey, and fifteen ounces of Sugar, 
until you have received a quart of water; 
[^p.177^] 
then put it in a place to cool, the add thereunto 
eight grains of Musk dissolved, with about 
two ounces of Rose-water put thereunto, two 
scruples of oyl of Vitriol, and incorporate them 
well together; then keep this water in a Glass 
well closed to keep out the air; and of this 
take one ounce in the Morning, and fast thereon 
two hours. This Experiment is a wonderful 
preserver of health, and continuer of life to 
long age, if constantly used, which may appear 
by the excellency of the Ingredients; for the 
Quince-seeds are admirable for the removing of 
ill humours which clog the Stomach, and are 
very cordial; the Pome-citron-pills preserve and 
help digestion; the Balm purifieth the Blood, 
healeth the Liver, incourageth Concoction, 
and comforteth the heart; the Nettles provoke 
Urine, mundifie the Reins, and correct the malignity 
of the sinews; as for the Wine, you cannot 
be ignorant of its Virtues; Musk purgeth 
the Blood of Windiness; the oyl of Vitriol 
healeth all the excoriations of the Mouth, Breast, 
and Stomach, and is excellent against malign 
humours that oppress it. 
 
[}An admirable Remedy against the yellow Jaundies.}] 
 
Take an handful of Red-nettle-tops, Plantane, 
and Saffron, and boil them well in a pint of 
Ale, then strain it, and drink five or six days 
thereof, and you will find it a present remedy; 
let not the cheapness of its Ingredients occasion 
this composition to be slighted. 
 
[}Against the Itch.}] 
 
Take sweet Butter, unwrought Wax, Vinegar, 
[^p.178^] 
Brimstone, a little Rose-water, and red Cloves 
whole, boil them together till they be like Salve, 
then anoint the flesh three sundry nights by 
the fire therewith, and no more, and you need 
not question a cure. 
 
[}Against Kibed Heels a certain Remedy.}] 
 
Make a hole in the top of a Turnip, take 
out some of the pith, and pour into the hole 
oyl of Roses, then stop the hole close, and 
roast it under hot Embers; when it is soft, apply 
it Plaisterwise to the Kibe as hot as can be 
endured. 
 
[}What is best to be administred to one sick 
of the Measels.}] 
 
In this distemper, as in the small Pox, it is only 
necessary to defend the Heart, and preserve the 
Stomach from putrefaction and corruption; if 
young, to hinder the hands from murdering a 
good face; and then give the diseased a Julip, 
made of two ounces of Violets, four ounces of 
Rose-water, and four grains of Oyl of Vitriol, 
mix them and let them be drunk cold: It is as 
good a receipt as any for this distemper. 
 
[}To cure the Fits of the Mother.}] 
 
Some, nay most use burnt Feathers, or Assafœtida, 
applyed to the Nose of the distemper'd 
person, not without success; but your better 
way is to take six or seven drops of the spirit 
of Castoreum, in the beginning of the Fit, in 
two or three spoonfuls of Ale-posset, and apply 
a Plaister of Gavanum to the Navel. 
 
[^p.179^] 
[}To take away the Heat of a Burn or Scald.}] 
 
Roast Eggs as hard as a Stone, then take out 
the yolks of them, then fry the yolks of these 
Eggs in a Frying-pan till they turn to an Oyl; 
then strain it, and anoint the Burn or Scald 
therewith, then lay on a Bladder anointed with 
Sallet-oyl, and this will speedily asswage the pain, 
and heal the Scald or Burn. 
 
[}For a Scald-head.}] 
 
Take a Candle, and let it drop upon it as 
hot as you can, in so doing it will scale off; 
then take the Stale of a Cow and the furring 
of Chamber-pots, boil these together and wash 
the place, and it will speedily cure it. 
 
[}A very good receipt for one hurt with 
Gun-powder.}] 
 
Take twelve heads of Housleek, one handful 
of Groundsel, one pint of Goose-dung, as 
much Chicken-dung of the newest that can be 
gotten; stamp the Herbs very small, then put 
the dung into a Mortar, temper them together 
with a pottle of Bores-grease, stir them together 
half and hour, then strain it through a 
Canvas-bag, and so preserve it for your use; 
it will keep two years and be not the worse. 
 
[}A very safe Clister to be used by either Man 
or Woman, who is much bound or costive.}] 
 
Take Mallows and Mercury unwasht, of each 
two handfuls, half an handful or Barley; clean 
rubbed and washed, and boil them in Spring-water, 
from a pottle to a quart, then strain out 
[^p.180^] 
the Water, and put it in a Skillet, and put to 
it three spoonfuls of Sallet-oyl, two spoonfuls of 
Honey, and a little Salt, then make it luke-warm, 
and with your Pipe administer it. 
 
[}How to cure old Sores in the Legs, which have been 
of so long standing that the Bones have appeared.}] 
 
Take a quantity of sweet Cream, and as much 
Brimstone beaten into fine powder as will make 
it thick like Paste; then take so much sweet 
Butter as will work it into the form of an 
Oyntment, and herewith anoint the place grieved 
twice a day, and in a short time the cure 
will be effected. Probatum est. 
 
[}An excellent way to dissolve the Stone.}] 
 
Take a peck of Green-bean-cods without 
dew or rain, and two good handfuls of Saxifrage, 
lay the same into a Still, one row of 
Saxifrage, and another of the Green-bean-cods; 
and so distill in this manner a quart of Water; 
and then distill another quantity of Water from 
the Bean-cods alone, and use to drink of these 
two Waters. If the Patient be most troubled 
with the heat of the Reins, then let him most 
frequently drink of the distilled Bean-water, and 
upon coming down of the sharp gravel or stone, 
let him drink the other. 
 
[}A way not only to prevent but to cure the Tooth-ach, 
or to make an aking-Tooth fall out of it 
self.}] 
 
Every Month, twice or thrice therein, wash 
[^p.181^] 
your Mouth with White-wine, in which Spurge 
hath been boil'd, and you shall never be troubled 
with the Tooth-ach. If your Tooth be 
hollow, and paineth you much, take this Herb 
called Spurge, and squeeze it, and mingle Wheat-flower 
with the Milk which issueth thence, with 
this make a Paste, and fill the cavity of your 
Tooth therewith, leaving it there a while, 
changing it every two hours, and the Tooth 
will drop out. 
 
[}How to order a Woman with Child, before, 
in, and after her Delivery.}] 
 
To preserve the Infant, and prevent Abortion, 
take Coriander-seed prepared two drams, 
of the roots of Bistort, the shaving of Ivory, 
and red Coral of each a dram, of white Amber 
and Crystal, of each a scruple; Alkermes 
half a Scruple, Sugar dissolv'd in four Ounces 
of Rose-water, make tables each of them weighing 
a dram. Let the Woman with Child take 
one of them every other day, morning and 
evening; between whiles let her sup a new-laid-Egg, 
thickned a little with Magisterium of 
Pearl, or red Coral. But if her Breasts after 
their filling should begin to lessen or fall, it is 
a sign of future Abortion; to prevent which, 
let her take root of Bistort and Corianders, of 
each two Drams; of unripened Gales, and red 
Sander, and Hippocestidos, of each one dram; 
Gum-Labdanum and Mastick of each half an 
ounce; choice Frankincense and Bdelium, of each 
two drams; of Coral, Amber, one dram of each; 
powder those which are to be powder'd, and 
[^p.182^] 
with Oyl of Turpentine and Wax, make two 
or three Cere-cloths, apply them sometimes to 
her Loynes and Sides, and sometimes under the 
Navel. She must avoid all violent and sudden 
motions, both of the Mind and Body, as Coughs, 
Sneezings, Frights, also Spices and Wine. Thus 
much before Delivery. 
 
In Labour, if you will facilitate the Birth, 
and give speedy ease, take three or four drops 
of the distilled Oyl of Nutmegs in a spoonful of 
White-wine, or take white Dictamn-root, stones 
of Dates, and Borax, of each two Scruples; Cinamon, 
Cassia-Lignea, Amber, fine Pearl, of each 
one Scruple; Saffron half a Scruple, make a 
small powder of these, and divide them into two 
equal parts, and let her take the one part in a 
draught of Lilly-water, or Ale posset made 
with Rhinish-wine; and the other part let her 
take in like manner six hours after if need require. 
If she be subject to swooning or fainting 
before or after Labour, give her a spoonful 
of this excellent Cordial following. 
 
[}An excellent Cordial for Women troubled 
with Swooning-fits in Travel.}] 
 
Take Borage-water, Rose-water, Strawberry-water, 
and Rhinish-wine, of each two Ounces; 
Species of Diamargaricum frigidum, one Scruple; 
make a warm infusion for the space of an hour, 
then strain it, and add thereunto Manus Christi, 
made with Pearl, four Ounces; Oriental Bezor, 
Unicorns-horn, and Ambergriece, of each six 
Grains; of these make a Cordial-Julip. 
 
Great pains frequently follow Women newly 
[^p.183^] 
brought to Bed; for which there it nothing 
better that this plain Receipt; viz. Drink a good 
draught of Beer boil'd with a spoonful of Camomile-flowers; 
and in greater pains let her 
drink six Ounces of the Oyl of sweet Almonds 
fresh drawn. 
 
If the Woman delivered have no mind to 
give suck, and that she will have her Milk speedily 
dried up a quick and safe remedy is, new 
Spunnges wet in Vinegar, where a handful of 
Cummin-seed boiled is bruised, tyed close to the 
Breasts, anointing them with Unguentum Populeum. 
 
To procure store of Milk, use Posset-drink 
boiled with Fennel, with the seeds thereof, and 
Anniseeds. These Remedies are known to be safe 
and effectual. 
 
Thus much for Physick and Chyrurgery; having 
given you only some of the choisest Receipts 
I could procure; if you desire a larger 
knowledg herein, you would do well to acquaint 
your self with the Composition of Mans 
Body, and the Diseases incident to every part; 
which you may gather from several Books of 
Anatomy, either that of Dr. Read, or Dr. Riolanus, 
I think as good as any extant. 
 
If you would know the nature of Plants, 
Gerhard and Parkinson write incomparably on that 
Subject, but if they are too bulky, and so may 
seem tedious, you may make choice of lesser 
Herbals, as Adam in Eden; or a small Manuel, 
written by Mr. Lovel. 
 
[^p.184^] 
I you would have a Salve for every sore, as 
the Proverb expresseth, and a Receipt for every 
Distemper, consult the general practice of Physick, 
Riverius his Practice of Physick translated 
by Mr. Culpeper; with many more of the like 
Subject. 
 
The next Qualifications which accomplish a 
Gentlewoman, are, Candying, Conserving, Preserving 
and Distilling. 
 
[^Non-medical recipes omitted.^] 
 
[^Extract 2, pp. 195-199^] 
 
[}Of DISTILLATION.}] 
 
LAdies, before you come to the knowledg of 
distilling Waters, you ought in the first place 
be furnished with good Stills, which Stills must 
either be of Tyne, or sweet Earth, wherein you 
may distill all manner of Waters, either for the 
health of your own Family or others. 
 
Now by the way observe, you may easily make 
your Waters look of what colour you please, if 
you will first distill your Water in a Stillatory, 
and then put it in a great Glass of strength, and 
fill it full of those Flowers whose Colours you 
desire, then stop it and set it in the Stillatory, and 
let it distill, and you shall have their perfect 
colour. 
 
Of precious and excellent Waters there are 
thousands, wherefore I shall only set down here 
some of the choicest and most valuable. 
 
[}Dr. Stevens his famous Water.}] 
 
Take a gallon of Gascoin-wine, of Ginger, 
Gallingal, Cinamon-Grains, Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, 
Anniseeds, Carraway-seed, Coriander-seed, 
Fennel-seed, and Sugar, of every one a dram; then 
take of Sack and Ale a quart of each, of Camomile, 
Sage, Mint, Red-roses, Tyme, Pellitory of 
the Wall, wild Marjoram, Wild Tyme, Lavender, 
Pennyroyal, Fennel-roots, Parsley-roots, and Set-wall-roots, 
of each half a handful; then beat the 
Spice small, and bruise the Herbs, and put them 
all together into the Wine, and so let it stand 
[^p.196^] 
sixteen hours, stirring it now and then, then distill 
it in a Limbeck with a soft fire, the first pint 
of the Water by it self, for it is the best. 
 
The principal use of this Water is against all 
cold Diseases, it preserveth Youth, comforteth the 
Stomack, cureth the Stone of what nature soever, 
using but two spoonfuls in seven days: It preserved 
Dr. Stevens ten years Bed-rid, that he lived 
to Ninety eight years. 
 
[}Aqua Mirabilis.}] 
 
Take three pints of White-wine, of Aqua-vitæ, 
and Juice of Saladine, of each a pint; one 
dram of Cardamer and one dram of Mellilot-flowers, 
Cubebs a dram, of Gallingale Nutmegs, 
Cloves, Mace and Ginger, of each a dram; 
mingle all these together over night, the next 
morning set them a Stilling in a Glass-Limbeck. 
This admirable Water dissolveth the swelling of 
the Lungs, and restoreth them when perished; 
it suffereth not the Blood to putrifie; neither 
need he or she to breathe a Vein, that useth 
this Water often; it cureth the Heart-burn, and 
purgeth Melancholy and Flegm; it expelleth 
Urine; it preserveth a good Colour in the Face; 
and is an utter enemy to the Palsie; take three 
spoonfuls of it at a time, morning and evening 
twice a week. 
 
[}A most approved Water for the Eyes.}] 
 
Take a new-laid Egg and roast it hard, then 
cut the shell in the midst and take out the yolk 
and put some white Copporis where the yolk 
was, then bind the Egg together again, and let 
[^p.197^] 
it lye till it begin to be a Water, then take the 
white forth from both sides of the Egg, and put 
the same into a Glass of fair running water, and 
so let it stand a while; then strain it through a 
fair Linnen-cloth, and keep it close stopped in 
a Glass, and therewith wash your Eyes morning 
and evening. 
 
[}An admirable Water against the Stone 
in the Kidneys.}] 
 
Take of the middle rind of the Root of Ash 
bruised two pound; Juniper berries bruised 
three pound; Venice-Turpentine of the best, two 
pound and an half; put these into twelve pints 
of Spring-water in a Glass-vessel well closed, and 
there let them purifie in Hors-dung three Months, 
then distill them in Ashes, and there will come 
forth an Oyl, and a Water; seperate the one from 
the other; ten or twelve drops being taken of 
this Oyl every morning in four or six spoonfuls 
of the said Water, dissolves the Stone and Gravel 
in the Kidneys most wonderfully. 
 
[}An excellent Water for the Worms.}] 
 
Take of Worm-seeds bruised, eight ounces; 
the shaving of Harts-horn, two ounces; of 
Peach-flowers dri'd, an ounce; of Aloes bruised, 
half an ounce; pour on these the Waters of 
Tansie, Rue, Peach-flowers, and of Wormwood, 
of each a pint and half; let them be digested in 
a Glass-vessel three days, then distill them; cohobate 
this Water three times. This Water may 
be given from half an ounce to three ounces, 
according to the age and strength of the person. 
[^p.198^] 
A small quantity for young Children will work 
the desired effect, it infallibly kills Stomack-worms, 
Maw-worms, or any other inwardly 
infesting the Body. 
 
[}An excellent artificial Wine like Claret, but much 
better, and by many degrees brisker.}] 
 
Take two gallons of your best Sider (some 
esteem Worcester-shire Red-streak the best) and 
mingle it with six gallons of Water, put thereunto 
eight pound of the best Malaga Raisins bruised 
in a Mortar; let them stand close covered in 
a warm place, for the space of a fortnight, stirring 
them every two days well together; then press 
out the Raisins, and put the liquor into the same 
Vessel again; to which, add a quart of the juice 
of Raspberries, and a pint of the juice of black 
Cherries; cover this liquor with Bread, spread 
thick with Mustard, the Mustard-side being downward, 
and so let it work by the fire-side three or 
four days; then turn it up, and let it stand a 
week, and then bottle it up, and it will taste as 
quick as the briskest liquor whatever, and is a very 
pleasant drink, and much wholsomer than French-Wine. 
 
[}An Ointment for any Wound or Sore.}] 
 
Take two pound of Sheep-suet, or rather Deers-suet, 
a pint of Candy-Oyl, a quarter of a pound 
of the newest and best Bees-wax, melting them 
all together, and stirring them well; and put to 
them one ounce of the Oyl of Spike, and half 
an ounce of the Goldsmiths Boras; then heat 
them again, and stir them all together; put it 
up in a Gally-pot and keep it close stopped, till 
[^p.199^] 
you have cause to use it. This is an approved 
Ointment for any Wound or Sore, new or 
old. 
 
[}A Searcloth for all Aches.}] 
 
Take Rosin one pound, Perrosin a quarter of 
a pound, as much Mastick, Deers Suit the like, 
Turpentine two ounces, Cloves bruised one ounce, 
Mace bruised two ounces, Saffron two drachms, 
boil all these together in Oyl of Camomile, and 
preserve it for your use. This hath done many 
good when nothing else would. 
 
Now, that I may not seem wholly to apply my 
discourse and study for the benefit of young 
Court-Ladies and City-Madams, I shall descend 
into the Country, and find out something worthy 
the observation of a Rural Gentlewoman. 
 
