[^Laurentius, Andreas: Preservation of sight^] 
 
[}A 
DISCOVRSE 
OF THE PRESERVATION 
OF THE SIGHT: 
of Melancholike diseases; of 
Rheumes, and of Old age. 
 
Composed by M. Andreas Laurentius, ordinarie 
Phisition to the King, and publike professor 
of Phisicke in the Vniuersitie of 
Mompelier. 
 
Translated out of French into English, according to the last Edition, 
by RICHARD SVRPHLET, Practinioner 
in Phisicke. 
 
AT LONDON 
Imprinted by FELIX KINGSTON, for RALPH IACSON, 
dwelling in Paules Church yard at the signe of 
the Swan. 1599.}] 
 
[^Omitted a dedication to Lord de la Ware Thomas West and his wife by the translator as well as a preface to the reader, a dedication to the duchess of Uzes by the author, a preface by the author to the reader, six commendations in verse and a table of contents.^] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 1-12^] 
 
[^p.1^] 
[}THE FIRST DISCOVRSE, 
WHEREIN IS INTREATED OF THE 
excellencie of the sight, and the meanes 
to preserue it.}] 
 
[}That the braine is the true seate of the Soule, and that for this occasion 
all the instruments of the sences are lodged 
round about it. 
 
CHAP. I.}] 
 
THe Soule of man (that most noble and perfect 
forme, that is vnder the face of heauen, 
bearing for a signe and token of his excellencie, 
the liuely and true image of the Creator) 
although it bee in all poynts like vnto it selfe, 
not consisting of matter, or subiect to any 
diuision, and by consequent whole in all the 
bodie, and wholie in euery part of the same: yet the case so standeth, 
that in respect of the diuersitie of his actions, of the difference 
of his instruments wherewith it serueth it selfe, and of the 
varietie of obiects set before it: that it may seeme and appeare to 
the common people (after a certaine maner) to consist of diuers 
parts. The Philosophers themselues seeing the noblest powers 
thereof to shine more in one place then in another, haue gone about 
to lodge, and (as it were) to bound the limits thereof within 
the compasse of one onely member: in like maner as the Diuines 
(carried away by the wonderfull things which more cleerely manifest 
themselues in the heauens, then in any other part of the 
world) doe say that the heauens are the throne of God, although 
his essence bee infinite, incomprehensible, and stretching it selfe 
[^p.2^] 
[/1./] 
through euery thing that is). For Herophilus beleeued that the 
Soule was lodged onely in the lowest part of the braine: and Zenocrates 
(on the contrary) in the vppermost part thereof: Erasistratus, 
in the two membranes couering the braine, called of the Arabians, 
Mothers: Strato, betwixt the browes: Empedocles, suborned 
by the Epicures and Egyptians, in the breast: Moschion, in 
the whole bodie: Diogenes, in the arteries: Heraclitus, onely in 
the circumference of the bodie: Herodotus, in the eares: Blemor 
an Arabian, and Syreneus a Phisition of Cypers, in the eyes, because 
that men in them as in a glasse, doe behold all the passions 
of the soule: but all these in my iudgement are nothing els but 
[/2./] 
fantasies and meere fooleries. There is a great deale more likelihood 
in the opinion of Aristotle, that great expounder of nature, 
who thought that the soule had his proper seate in the heart, because 
that naturall heate, the principall instrument of the soule, is 
found in the heart, and this (saith he) liueth first and dyeth last, the 
onely storehouse of spirit, the originall of veines, arteries and sinewes, 
the principal author of respiration, the fountaine and welspring 
of all heate, containing within the ventricles thereof a subtile 
and refined blood, which serueth as a burning cole to kindle 
and set on fire all the other inferiour and smaller sorts of heate, and 
to bee briefe, the onely Sunne of this little world. And euen in 
like sort, as the heauens are the principals, whereon depend and 
[/3./] 
rest all other elemental generations and alterations: so the hart is 
the first and principall originall of all the actions and motions of 
the bodie. The heauens bring forth their wonderfull effects, by 
their motions, heate and influence: the heart by his continuall 
mouing (which ought no lesse to rauish vs, then the flowing and 
ebbing of Euripus) and influence of his spirits, doth put life into 
all the other parts, endoweth them with this beautiful and vermillionlike 
colour, and maintaineth their naturall heate. The mouing 
and light which are in the superiour bodies, are the instruments 
of the intelligences and of the heauens: of the intelligences 
as being the first cause of mouing in others, being themselues 
immoueable: of the heauens, as first mouing the other, and being 
themselues moued. The mouing of the heart and vitall spirit, 
which distributeth it selfe like vnto light, throughout, and that as 
[^p.3^] 
it were in the twinkling of an eye, are the instruments of the mind 
and heart: of the minde, which is a chiefe and principall mouer, 
and yet not moued: of the heart, as of a chiefe and principall mouer 
which is moued of the minde. It is therefore the heart, according 
to the doctrine of the Peripatetikes, which is y=e= true mansion 
of the soule, the onely prince and gouernour, in this so excellent 
and admirable disposing of all things in the gouernment of the 
bodie. Chrysippus and all the Stoikes haue followed the same opinion, 
and doe beleeue that all that region which containeth the 
parts which wee call vitall, is named of the Grecians and Latines 
Thorax, because it keepeth within it, as it were vnder lock, this 
heauenly vnderstanding (so called of Anaxagoras): this burning 
heate, (so called of Zeno) replenished with a million of sciences: 
this admirable fire, which Prometheus stole out of heauen 
to put soule and life into mankinde: this altering spirit, whereof 
Theocritus made so great account. Behold how these Philosophers 
haue diuersly spoken of the seate of the soule. It is not my 
minde to bestow any time in the particuler examination of all 
these opinions, neither is it mine intent in this place to enter into 
any dispute, intending to content my selfe with the simple deliuerie 
of the trueth. For I assure my selfe that it shall be strong enough 
[/4./] 
to ouerthrow all these false foundations. I say then that 
the principall seate of the soule is in the braine, because the goodliest 
powers thereof doe lodge and lye there, and the most worthie 
actions of the same doe there most plainly appeare. All the 
instruments of motion, sence, imagination, discourse and memorie 
are found within the braine, or immediatly depending therevpon. 
Anatomie manifesteth vnto our eyes, how that there issue 
[/5./] 
out from the lower part of the braine seuen great paire of sinewes, 
which serue at a trice to conuey the animall spirit vnto the instrument 
[/6./] 
of the sences, and doe not any of them passe out of the head 
except the sixt paire, which stretch out themselues to the mouth of 
the stomacke. We see also that from the hindermost part of the 
braine (where the great and little braine doe meete together) doth 
proceede the admirable taile, the beautifull and white spinall marow, 
which the Wiseman in his booke of the Preacher calleth the 
siluer threed, how it is carefully preserued within a sacred chanell, 
[^p.4^] 
as Lactantius calleth it. From the same, men see that there rise a 
million of little sinewes, which conuey the powers of mouing and 
feeling, vnto all such members as are capable of the same. Men 
[/7./] 
doe also perceiue the outward sences placed round about the 
braine, which are as the light horsemen and messengers of the 
vnderstanding, the principali part of the soule. Philo saith, that 
when men come within the view of a princes guard, they thinke 
himselfe not to bee farre off: we see all the guard and seruants of 
reason, as the eyes, the eares, the nose, the tongue, to bee situated in 
the head: whereupon by consequent we ought to iudge that this 
princesse is not farre off. Experience also giueth vs to vnderstand, 
[/8./] 
that if the braine haue his temperature altered: as for example, if 
it be too hot, as it falleth out in such as are franticke: or ouer cold, 
as it falleth out in melancholick men; it corrupteth presently the 
imaginatiue facultie, troubleth the iudgement, weakeneth the 
memorie: which is not incident in the diseases of the heart; as 
namely, either in a hectick feuer, or when a man is poysoned. The 
soule (saith that diuine Philosopher Plato) doth not please and 
[/9./] 
content it selfe with that braine which is too soft, too close and 
compact, or too hard: it requireth a good temperature. If the 
proportion of the head be but a little out of square, so that it be 
either too great or too little, or too coppeld, as that which men 
reade of Thersites in Homer: or altogether round and not flat 
on the sides, as naturally it ought to be: men may perceiue all the 
actions of the soule to be depraued, and thereupon doe call such 
heads, foolish, without iudgement, without wisedome: all which 
ought to make vs as well to beleeue that the braine is as much the 
organe and instrument of all these actions, as the eye is the instrument 
of sight. 
 
Furthermore, this kind of round shape which is peculiar vnto 
[/10./] 
mankinde, this head thus lifted vp to heauen, this great quantitie 
of braine (which is almost incredible) doth shew very well that 
man hath something in his head, more then other liuing creatures. 
The wise Sages of Egypt haue very well acknowledged 
the same: for they did not sweare by any other thing but by their 
head, they ratified all their couenants by the head, and forbad the 
eating of the braines of liuing creatures: for the honour and reuerence 
[^p.5^] 
sake which they bare to this part. I thinke also that the 
falling sicknes was not for any other reason called sacred of the 
ancients, but because it did assaile the soueraigne and sacred part 
of the body. Let vs then acknowledge the braine to be the principall 
seate of the soule, the originall of mouing and feeling, and of 
all the other most noble functions of the same. I know well that 
some curious spirits will aske me, how it can bee the author of so 
many goodly actions, seeing it is cold, and that the soule can doe 
nothing without heate. But I answere, that the braine hath not any 
[/11./] 
particuler feeling, for that it being the seate of common sence, 
must iudge of all such obiects, as about which sence is occupied. 
But a good iudge ought to bee free from all passions, and euery 
organe (sayth Aristotle) must bee without qualitie, according 
whereunto agreeth that, that the christalline humour hath no colour, 
the eare hath no particuler sound, nor the tongue any taste. 
But and if it come to passe, that any organicall part decline from 
his nature, as if the christalline become yellow, all whatsoeuer 
presenteth it selfe to the sight of that eye, will seeme to bee of the 
same colour. As then the braine neither seeth nor heareth, nor 
smelleth nor tasteth any thing, and yet notwithstanding iudgeth 
very rightly of colours, sounds, smels and tasts: so neither was it 
any reason, that it should haue any particuler sence of feeling, 
which should cause it to feele the excesse of those qualities, which 
are tearmed the obiects of feeling and handling; it is sufficient for 
it to haue the knowledge and discerning thereof. As touching 
the other poynt, I affirme that the braine is in very deede hot, and 
that it cannot be called cold, but as it is compared with the heart. 
It behoued it of necessitie to bee of this temperature, that so it 
might temper the spirits which were of a fierie nature, thereby the 
[/12./] 
better to continue the kindes of liuing creatures, and to preserue 
them long aliue. For and if the braine were as hot as the heart, 
there would day by day arise trouble and sedition amidst the noblest 
powers of the soule: all the sences would be straying and 
wandring, all the motions would bee out of square, all our discourses 
mixed with rash headines, and our memories very flote 
and fugitiue, euen as betideth vnto franticke ones. Let nothing 
then hinder vs from acknowledging the braine to bee the most 
[^p.6^] 
noble part of the whole body. This is that magnificent and stately 
turret of the soule, this is that goodly royall palace, the consecrated 
house of Pallas, this is the impregnable fort, enuironed with 
bones, as with strong walles, wherein is lodged the soueraigne 
power of the soule, (I meane reason) which comprehendeth and 
compasseth as with imbracing armes, the whole vniuersall world 
in a moment, without touching of the same, which flieth through 
the ayre, soundeth the depths of the sea, and surmounteth at the 
same instant, the pauements of the heauens, and which walking 
vpon their stages, measuring their distances, and communicating 
with the Angels, pearceth in euen vnto the throne of God, and 
at such time as the body is asleepe, suffereth it self by a holy flight, 
or delectable and sweete rauishment, to be carried euen to the beholding 
of God, according to whose image it was first framed. 
To be short, it is all in all (as sayth Aristotle) for that by the power 
it hath, it possesseth all, as being the place wherein (I say) this 
great princesse would rest her self as within her castle, from thence 
to commaund the two inferiour regiments, to hold in subiection 
the two lower forces, (I meane the Irascible and concupiscible) 
which would euery day be ready to fall away and reuolt. And yet 
I dare be bold to adde further, and (in stead of hauing named it among 
the chiefe and principall) to say that there is not any other 
part of the body besides the braine, which can truly be called noble 
and soueraigne, and that because all the other parts are made for 
the braine, and pay tribute thereunto as to their king. Behold here 
[/13./] 
the strength of my argument, which in my iudgement is as cleere 
as the Sunne in his brightest shine. Mankinde differeth not from 
beasts in any thing but reason: and the seate of reason is in the 
braine: It is requisite the more commendably to reason and discourse, 
that the imaginatiue part of the minde should set before 
the vnderstanding part of the same the obiects whereabout they 
be occupied altogether simple without mixture, without matter, 
and freed from all corporall qualities. The Imaginatiue part can 
not conceiue them of it selfe, if the outward sences (which are his 
trustie spyes and faithfull reportsmen) make not certificate of the 
same. Hence then rise the necessitie of framing the instruments 
of the sences, the eyes, the eares, the nose, tongue and membranes 
[^p.7^] 
as well inward as outward. The sences the better to take acknowledgement 
of their obiects, haue need of a local motion. For man, 
if he should not stirre from one place, but abide immoueable like 
an image, should not be able to conuey any store of varietie vnto 
the imagination. It is necessary then for the benefit and perfecting 
of the sences, to haue certaine instruments of motion: these instruments 
are two, the sinewes and the muscles: the sinewes by 
reason of their continued coniunction and adherence vnto their 
originall, (being like vnto that of the Sunne beames with the Sun) 
doe conuey from the braine that mouing power, seated in a most 
subtile bodie, namely, the animall spirit: the muscles after the 
maner of good subiects obey vnto their commandement, and 
incontinently moue the member either by stretching it forth or 
bowing it in, as the appetite or imagination shall wish and desire. 
The braine then (as is manifest) commandeth: the sinewes carrie 
the embassage, and the muscles obeying thereunto, expresse the 
intent of the minde. And euen in like sort as the skilfull horserider 
manageth the horse with the bridle, causing him to turne on the 
right hand or on the left, as best pleaseth him: euen so the braine 
by the sinewes boweth or stretcheth the muscles. These two instruments 
of voluntarie motion, should not know either how to 
be, or vndergoe these their offices, if they were not fixed vnto some 
solide and immoueable body. Therefore it was behouefull to raise 
vp pillers, such as are the bones and cartilages, from whence the 
muscles doe rise, and into which they do insert themselues againe: 
and for that the bones could not bee ioyned or fastned together 
without ligaments, it must needes follow that they should haue 
their membranouse coates to couer them withall. And all these 
parts for their preseruation, stoode in neede of naturall heate and 
nourishment: this heate and nourishment being deriued from 
elsewhere, must needes haue their passages prepared by certaine 
pipes, and those are the veines and arteries: the arteries draw their 
spirits from the hart, the fountaine of the same: the veines receiue 
their blood from the common storehouse of the same which is the 
liuer. And thus returning by the same steps, by which wee came 
[/14./] 
hither, wee shall well perceiue, that the heart and liuer were not 
made for any other thing, but to nourish the heate of all the parts: 
[^p.8^] 
the bones and cartilages, for rests and props vnto the muscles and 
sinewes the instruments of voluntary motion: the muscles and 
nerues for the perfecting of the sences: the sences, to set before the 
imaginatiue power of the minde their outward obiects: the imagination 
to carrie along the formes of things voide of substance, 
to be more deeply weighed of reason, which thereupon commendeth 
them to the custodie of memorie her treasuresse. Thus euery 
thing yeelding obedience vnto reason, and the braine being the 
principall seate of reason, we must needs affirme, that all the parts 
of the body were made for the braine, and must therfore acknowledge 
it as their chiefe and Soueraigne. 
 
I will yet adde one other plaine and euident argument (which 
in my iudgement is not common) to testifie the excellencie of this 
part: which is, that it giueth shape and perfection vnto all the rest. 
For it is most certaine, that of the shape and quantitie of the 
braine, dependeth the grosnes, greatnes, smalnes: and in a word, euery 
maner of proportion hapning to the head, forasmuch as euery 
containing thing doth conforme it selfe continually vnto the 
contained, as the thing for which it was created and made. Joyntly 
after the head, followeth the backe bone, which is framed of foure 
and twentie vertebres, besides the bone called Sacrum, and maketh 
that which men call the truncke of the body. If that hole in 
the head through which the marrow of the backe falleth be great, 
then must also the vertebres bee large. Vpon this backe bone doe 
all the rest of the bones stay and rest themselues, as the vpper timbers 
doe vpon the keele of a ship. As by name vpon high the shoulder 
bones, (whereunto are fastned the armes aswell on the one 
side, as on the other) and the twelue ribs: and below the bones of 
the small guts and hips, into whose hollow cauities the heads of 
the bones of the thighes are inserted: so that if all their proportions 
be duly obserued, it will appeare that the greatnes and grosnes 
thereof is answerable to that of the head, and by consequence 
to that of the braine, as the chiefe and principall. Vnto the bones 
are fastned the muscles, the ligaments, and the most of the other 
parts of the body doe rest themselues thereupon, and within their 
circuite and compasse are shut and made sure the most noble 
parts and the bowels. In few words: the bones impart vnto the 
[^p.9^] 
whole bodie the shape which themselues haue receiued from the 
braine. This is the same which diuine Hippocrates hath very well 
obserued in the second booke of his Epidemiques, saying, that of 
the greatnes and grosnes of the head, a Phisition might iudge of 
the greatnes of all the other bones and parts also, as veines, arteries, 
and sinewes. Let vs therefore conclude with the trueth, that 
the braine hauing such aduantage against the other parts, ought 
to be esteemed the chiefe and principall seate of the soule. 
 
[}CHAP. II. 
 
How the outward sences, the proper messengers of the soule, are only 
fiue, and all placed without the braine.}] 
 
SEeing it is most euident that the soule is shut vp 
within the bodie, as it were in a darke dungeon, and 
that it cannot discourse, neither yet comprehend any 
thing without the helpe of the sences, which are 
as the obedient seruants and faithfull messengers 
of the same: it was needfull to place the instruments of the sences 
very neere vnto the seate of reason, and round about her royal pallace. 
Now the sences which we call externall are onely fiue; the 
[/15./] 
sight, the hearing, the smelling, the taste and handling, of which 
altogether dependeth our knowledge, and nothing (as saith the 
Philosopher) can enter into the vnderstanding part of our minde, 
except it passe through one of these fiue doores. Some men striuing 
to shew reason for this number, say that there are but fiue 
[/16./] 
sences, because that whatsoeuer is in the whole world, is compounded 
and made of onely fiue simple bodies, as the foure elements 
and the firmament, which they call the fift simple nature, 
being much of the nature of the ayre, free from all impurities, and 
abounding with shining lights. The sight (say the Platonists) 
which hath for his instrument these two twinne-borne starres, all 
full of bright straines and heauenly fire, which giueth light and 
burneth not, representeth the skie, and hath the light for his obiect. 
The hearing, which is occupied about nothing but sounds, hath 
for his obiect the beaten ayre, and his principall instrument (if we 
[^p.10^] 
beleeue Aristotle) is a certaine ayre shut vp within a little labyrinth. 
The smelling participateth the nature of fire: for smels 
haue their being only in a drie qualitie caused through heate, and 
we receiue it for a principle, that all sweete smelling things are 
hot. The taste hath moysture for his obiect. And handling the 
earth for his. 
 
[/17./] 
Othersome say that there be but fiue sences, because that there 
are but fiue proper sorts of obiects, and that all the accidents 
which are to be found in any natural body, may be referred, either 
to colours, or sounds, or smels, or tasts, or to those qualities wher-about 
touching is occupied, whether they be those which are principall, 
or those that spring of them. 
 
[/18./] 
Some there be which gather the number of the sences to bee 
such, from the consideration of their vses, which are their finall 
ends. The sences are made for the benefit of man: man is compounded 
of two parts, the body and the soule: the sight and hearing 
serue more for the vse of the soule then of the body: the taste 
and touching more for the body then the soule: the smelling for 
both the twaine indifferently, refreshing and purging the spirits, 
which are the principall instruments of the soule. But of the fiue 
sences I say that there are two altogether necessary and required, 
to cause the being and life simply: and that the three other serue 
onely for a happie being and life. Those without which one can 
not be, are taste and touching. Touching (if we will giue credit to 
naturall Philosophers) is as the foundation of liuelihood (I will 
vse this word, because it expresseth the thing very excellently). 
The taste serueth for the preseruation of the life. The sight, hearing 
and smelling serue but for to liue well and pleasantly. For 
the creature may be and continue without them. The two first 
(for that they were altogether necessarie) haue their meane inward, 
and so ioyned to the member, as that it is (as a man would 
say) inseparable. For in tasting and touching, the Phisitions doe 
make the meane and the member all one. The other three haue 
their meane outward, and separated from the instrument, as the 
sight hath the ayre, the water, and euery such body as is through 
cleere, for his meane. Aristotle in the beginning of his third booke 
of the soule, hath plaid the Philosopher in more serious sort then 
[^p.11^] 
any of all these, but yet so darkly, as that almost all his interpreters 
haue found themselues much busied to find out his meaning, 
in such maner, as that he may seeme to haue gone about to hide 
the secrets of nature and mysteries of his Philosophie, not with the 
vaile of fained fables, as doe the Poets; neither yet with any superstitious 
conceit of numbers, as Pithagoras his sect were wont 
to doe; but by an obscure breuitie: resembling the cuttle fish, 
which to the end that she may not fall into the hand of the fisher, 
casteth vp a blackish water and so hideth her selfe. The sences 
[/19./] 
(sayth Aristotle) are but fiue, because the meanes by which they 
worke, cannot be altered any moe then fiue wayes. The meanes 
[/20./] 
by which we haue the vse of our sences, are onely two, the one 
is outward, the other is inward: the outward is the ayre or the 
water: the inward is the flesh or the membranes. The ayre and 
water do receiue the obiects that are outward, either as they are 
transparent, and then they serue the sight; or as they are moueable 
and thin bodies, and then they serue the hearing; or as moist ones 
doe receiue and embrace that which is drie, and then they be the 
subiects of smelling. The flesh or membranes may be considered 
of two maner of wayes; either according to the temperature of 
the foure elementall qualities, and then they bee the subiects of 
feeling; or els according to the mixture of the qualities drie and 
moyst, and then they are the subiects of relishes for the taste. But 
howsoeuer the case standeth for the reason of this number, we see 
there are but fiue externall sences, which are all placed without 
the braine. These are the proper posts and messengers of the 
soule; these are the windowes by which wee see cleerely round about 
vs. These are the watch or doore keepers which make vs way 
into their most priuie closet: if they performe their faithfull seruice 
vnto reason, then do they set before her a million of delightsome 
obiects, whereof she frameth marueilous discourses. But 
(alas and woe is me) how oft doe they betray her? Oh how many 
dangers do they inwrap her in, and how subiect are they vnto corruption? 
 
It is not without cause that this thrice renowmed Mercurie 
[/21./] 
doth call the sences tyrants, and the cutthrotes of reason: for oftentimes 
doe they make captiue the same vnto the two inferiour 
[^p.12^] 
powers; they make her of a mistresse a seruant; and of a free woman, 
a drudge and thrall to all slauerie. She may well commaund, 
but she shall be obeyed all one, as lawes and Magistrates are in an 
estate troubled with ciuill dissentions. Yea tell me, how many 
[/22./] 
soules haue lost their libertie through the sight of the eyes? Doe 
not men say that that little wanton, that blind archer doth enter 
into our hearts by this doore, and that loue is shaped by the glittering 
glimces which issue out of the eyes, or rather by certaine subtile 
and thin spirits, which passe from the heart to the eye through 
a straite and narrow way very secretly, and hauing deceiued this 
porter, doe place loue within, which by little and little doth make 
it selfe Lord of the house, and casteth reason out of the doores? 
How oft is reason bewitched by the eare? If thou giue thine eare 
to hearken vnto these craftie tongues and cogging speeches, vnto 
these cunning discourses full of honie, and a thousand other baits, 
doubt not, but that thy reason wil be surprised: for the scout watch 
being fallen asleepe, the enemie stealeth vpon them softly, and becommeth 
master of the fort. The wise Vlisses, did not he stop the 
eares of his companions, fearing least they should bee bewitched 
and besotted with the melodious tunes and sweete songs of the 
Syrens? The licorishnes of the taste, surfetting and drunkennes, 
haue they not spoyled many great personages? And the sence of 
feeling, (which nature hath giuen to liuing creatures, for the preseruation 
of their kinde) being the grossest and most earthly of all 
the rest, and so by consequent the most delicate of al the rest, doth 
it not oftentimes cause vs to become beasts? Reason then is neuer 
ouertaken, but through the false and treacherous dealing of 
these doore keepers: no man can at any time come within her 
pallace, but by the priuitie of these watchmen, for that (as I haue 
sayd in the beginning of this chapter) the soule being fast shut 
vp within the bodie, cannot doe any thing but by the aide and 
assistance of the sences. 
 
[^Extract 2, pp. 72-84^] 
 
[^p.72^] 
[}THE SECOND DISCOVRSE, 
WHEREIN ARE HANDLED THE 
diseases of melancholie, and the meanes 
to cure them.}] 
 
[}CHAP. I. 
 
That man is a diuine and politike creature, endued with three 
seuerall noble powers, as Imagination, Reason 
and Memorie}] 
 
ABdalas the Sarrasin being importunatelie 
pressed, and as it were forced to speake and 
tell, what it was that hee found to bee most 
wonderfull in all the world: answered at last 
with great commendation, that man alone 
did surpasse all other wonder whatsoeuer. An 
answere in trueth beseeming a great Philosopher, 
rather then a rude and vnlettered man. For man hauing the 
[/23./] 
image of God engrauen in his soule, and representing in his body 
the modell of the whole world, can in a moment transforme himselfe 
into euery thing like a Proteus, or receiue at an instant the 
stampe of a thousand colours like to the Chamelion. Phauorine 
acknowledged nothing to be great here on earth but onely man. 
The wise men of Egypt haue vouchsafed him such honour, as to 
call him a mortall God. Thrice renowmed Mercurie calleth him 
the liuing creature full of diuine parts, the messenger of the Gods, 
the Lord of the things below, and fellow companion with the 
Spirits aboue: Pithagoras, the measure of all things: Synesius, the 
Horizon of things hauing and not hauing bodies: Zoroaster in a 
certaine kinde of rauishment proclamed him, the mightie worke 
[^p.73^] 
and wonder of nature: Plato, the marueile of marueiles: Aristotle 
the politike liuing creature, furnished with reason and counsaile, 
which is all, as possessing all things by power, though not really 
and in very deede (as Empedocles would haue it to be) but by the 
comprehending and conceiuing of the formes and seuerall sorts 
of things: Plinie the ape or puppie of nature, the counterfeit of 
the whole world, the abridgement of the great world. Amongst 
the Diuines, there are some which haue called him, euery maner of 
creature, because he hath intercourse with euery maner of creature; 
he hath a being, as haue the stones; life, as haue the plants; 
and sence or feeling as the beasts; and vnderstanding, as haue the 
Angels. Othersome haue honoured him, giuing him the title of 
vniuersall gouernour, as hauing all things vnder his empire and 
iurisdiction, as being he to whom euery thing yeeldeth obedie~ce, 
and for whose sake the whole world was created. In briefe, this is 
the chiefe and principall of Gods worke, and the most noble of all 
other creatures. But this his excellencie, whereby he is more glorious 
[/24./] 
then all the rest, is not in respect of his bodie, although the 
shape thereof bee more exquisite, better tempered, and of more 
comely proportion then any other thing in the world, seruing as 
Polycletus his rule for the fashioning of other things, and being 
as a platforme, whereby the master builders may frame and contriue 
their buildings. This noblenes (I say) commeth not of the 
bodie, which consisteth of matter and is corruptible: no, the extract 
thereof, or that which is indeede excellent therein, is further 
fetcht: It is the soule alone whereby he is so renowmed, being a 
[/25./] 
forme altogether celestiall and diuine, not taking his originall 
from the effectuall working of any matter, as that of plants and 
beasts doth. It is created of God, and commeth downe from heauen 
to gouerne the bodie, so soone as the members thereof are 
made: the effects thereof doe sufficiently proue vnto vs, the worthines 
of the same. For besides the vegetatiue and sensitiue facultie, 
it inioyeth three speciall powers and faculties, which extol 
and aduance man, aboue all other liuing creatures: and these 
three are the Imagination, Reason, and Memorie. Of these, reason 
[/26./] 
is the principall and chiefe: the other two, because they are her 
ordinary handmaides, (the one to report; the other, to register 
[^p.74^] 
and write downe, doe enioy the priuiledges of renowmed excellencie, 
doe lodge within her royall pallace, and that very neere 
her owne person, the one in her vtter, and the other in her inner 
[/27./] 
chamber. The imaginatiue facultie doth represent and set before 
the intellectuall, all the obiects which she hath receiued from the 
common sence, making report of whatsoeuer is discouered of 
the spies abroad: vpon which reports the intellectuall or vnderstanding 
part of the minde, frameth her conclusions, which are 
very often false, the imagination making vntrue reports. For as 
the most prudent and carefull Captaines vndertake very oft the 
enterprises which proue foolish and fond, and that because of 
false aduertisement: euen so reason doth often make but foolish 
discourses, hauing been misse-informed by a fayned fantasie. 
 
[/28./] 
Some Greeke Philosophers there be, which would debarre the 
imagination of her reputed renowne and excellencie, straining 
themselues to make her as base as the other actions of the sences: 
and I haue in place where, read two seuerall opinions to that end: 
the first is of such as thinke that the imagination and common 
sence is all one: the other is of them, which affirme that brute 
beasts haue an imagination as well as men; and that either of 
these two being true, there is not any cause why it should be inthronized 
[/29./] 
among the worthies. But I will cause it to appeare manifest 
vnto euery one, how fondly they haue suffered themselues to 
be abused. 
 
All such as haue applied themselues to play the Philosophers after 
the most commendable sort and maner, doe holde it for granted 
and out of all question: that the imagination is a certaine 
thing surpassing the common or inward sence, which iudgeth of 
all outward obiects, and vnto which as vnto their center, all the 
formes of the other sences doe betake themselues: for the common 
[/30./] 
sence, receiueth at one and the same instant with the outward 
sences the formes of things, and that (if I may be allowed 
to vse schoole tearmes) with the reall power of the obiect, but the 
imagination receiueth and reteyneth them without any presence 
of the obiect. The imagination compoundeth and ioyneth together 
the formes of things, as of Golde and a mountaine, it maketh 
a golden mountaine, which the common sence cannot doe: 
[^p.75^] 
for the inward sence cannot take holde of any thing, saue tha=t= 
which the outward sences perceiue, but the imagination proceedeth 
further: for the sillie Sheepe hauing spied the Wolfe, getteth 
himselfe by and by out of his way, as from his enemie; this enimitie 
is not knowne by the sence, for it is no obiect of the sences, 
but it is the meere worke of imagination to know the same. This 
then is a power farre differing from the common sence, which in 
deede is found truely to be in beasts, but the other cannot possiblie 
be found in them in that degree of excellencie that it is in 
men. I would that euery one should see the difference betwixt 
that imagination which is in men, and that which is in beasts. 
The imagination which is in beasts, serueth them onely to follow 
[/31./] 
the motions and passions of their appetite, and is not imployed, 
but onely about action, that is to say, either in following that 
which may doe them good, or in auoiding of that which may annoy 
them. The imagination of man serueth both for action and 
[/32./] 
contemplation. The imagination of beasts cannot counterfeite 
[/33./] 
any thing further, then as it is present and before their eyes; but 
man hath the libertie to imagine what he listeth, and although 
there be no present obiect, yet it taketh out of the treasurie, which 
is the memorie whatsoeuer may content it. The beasts haue their 
[/34./] 
imagination occupied onely when they are exercised, and not 
when they are out of worke and labour; but man hath the vse of 
imagination at all times, and at euery houre. The beast hath no 
[/35./] 
sooner imagined, but he moueth himselfe by and by, and goeth after 
that which his appetite stirreth him vp vnto; but man followeth 
not alwaies the motions of his appetite, he hath reason to bridle 
the same with all, as when it findeth out any error therein. The 
imagination of beasts cannot frame to it selfe any mountaines of 
[/36./] 
golde, neither yet can it faine the things that are darke and subtile, 
or flying asses, as the imagination of man can. Finally, the imagination 
[/37./] 
of man seemeth to enter into some maner of discourse 
with the vnderstanding. For hauing beheld a painted Lyon, it 
perceiueth that it is not a thing to be feared, and at the same time, 
ioyning it selfe vnto reason, doth confirme and make bolde. Beholde 
now, how the imagination of man doth magnifie it selfe aboue 
that of beasts, and for what cause I haue set it in ranke aamongst 
[^p.76^] 
the excellentest and noblest powers of the minde. The 
[/38./] 
Arabians haue so highly commended it, that they haue verely beleeued, 
that the minde by vertue of the imagination could worke 
miracles, pearce the heauens, commaunde the elements, lay 
plaine the huge mountaines, and make mountaines of the plaine 
ground: and to be short, that vnto the iurisdiction thereof were 
subiect, all maner of materiall formes, and they called all the 
three powers of the minde, most excellent and renowmed minds, 
and therefore that which is called imagination, is the first facultie 
or power of the minde. 
 
The vnderstanding followeth next in order, and awaketh at 
[/39./] 
the knocke of imagination, it maketh things sensible, vniuersall, 
discourseth, gathereth conclusions, reasoneth from the effects to 
the causes, and from the beginnings, euen to the middest, and so to 
[/40./] 
the ends and issues of things. The Philosophers distinguish this 
vnderstanding power, into a suffering and doing power: the suffering, 
is that which receiueth the formes of things, pure and free 
from all matter, and is as it were the subiect of all maner of 
[/41./] 
formes: the doing power is as it were a light, which maketh cleere 
and perfect the suffering: in such maner, as that the one doth as it 
were serue in stead of the matter, and the other of the forme, and 
both ioyned together, doe perfite and make vp reason the soueraigne 
[/42./] 
and predominant power of the minde, proper vnto man, 
which can doe much without the bodie, and vnto which the bodie 
very oft is a let and hindrance, being that alone which is without 
matter, being also not subiect to passions, immortall, differing 
[/43./] 
from the sences, and all other corporall actions, because the sences 
are lost by the violence of some great obiect, as the hearing, 
by a strong and forcible sound, the taste, by tasting some extreame 
fauour; the sight by an excessiue whitenes; witnes hereof 
is the Sicilian tyrant, who by cunning practise put out the eyes of 
all his prisoners: but the vnderstanding, the more excellent and 
surpassing that the obiect is, the more it sheweth forth his owne 
perfection and noblenes, the contemplation of high and diuine 
things doth rauish it, yea herein it findeth greatest contentation, 
herein it placeth his chiefest felicitie. This is that onely power 
which groweth more and more, when the bodie declineth, which 
[^p.77^] 
then is in his chiefest strength, when the bodie groweth faint and 
feeble: which becommeth strong and lustie, when all the sences 
grow weake and feeble, which whirleth through the ayre, and 
walketh ouer the wide world, when the bodie is immoueable, 
which causeth vs when we are in sleepe, oftentimes to see some 
glaunces of his diuine nature in foretelling things to come, and, if 
if bee not ouerwhelmed with the Sea of vapours, rising of excessiue 
cramming in of bellie cheere, it lifteth it selfe aboue the 
world, and euen aboue his owne nature, and beholdeth the glorie 
of the Angels and mysteries of heauen. Finally, reason hauing 
thus swiftlie conueyed her selfe to take the view of whatsoeuer is, 
and hauing discoursed and conceiued a million of goodly and 
pleasant formes, being vnable any longer to retaine them, committeth 
them to the custodie of memorie, which is her faithfull secretarie, 
[/44./] 
and wherein, as in a place of greatest trustines to keepe 
the same the most precious treasures of the soule are placed. This 
is that rich treasurie, which incloseth within one only inner roome 
all the sciences, and what else soeuer hath passed since the creation 
of the world, which lodgeth euery thing in his seuerall place, 
not shufling them vp disorderly together, which obserueth time, 
circumstances and order, and which is (as Plato tearmeth it) a cesterne 
to containe the running streames of the vnderstanding: 
this facultie is called remembrance, and is proper vnto man alone: 
for beastes haue likewise a certaine kinde of memorie, but 
they cannot call to minde the time, order and circumstances, this 
cannot be accomplished without a Syllogisme. See here the mind 
of man attended by these three famous faculties, the imagination, 
reason, and memorie, all which three are lodged in one selfesame 
[/45./] 
palace, and within this round towre, which we call the head: but 
whether this fall out to be in all the braine equally, and alike, or 
that euery one of them should haue his seuerall chamber, it is not 
fully resolued vpon. I know very well that there is a great quarell 
[/46./] 
betwixt the Greeke and Arabian Phisitions, about the lodgings 
of these three princesses, & that no man hitherto hath bin able to 
reconcile them. The Greekes would lodge them in euerie part of 
the braine; the Arabians quarter out euery of them by it selfe. 
The Greekes maintaine that in all places where the reason is, that 
[^p.78^] 
there the imagination and memorie doe accompanie it, and that 
al the three are as much before as behind: finally, that they be al of 
them in all and euery part of the braine. They alleage for one principall 
reason on their side, that euery similar action is wholie and 
intirely in euery part of his subiect, as for example, nourishment is 
equallie and alike in all the bone, and whatsoeuer part of the bone 
it be, there is to be found continuallie these foure faculties, that is, 
[/47./] 
the attractiue, retentiue, digestiue and expulsiue. On the contrary 
the Arabians will haue, that euery one of these faculties enioy his 
proper seate: and they haue very goodly reasons for that which 
[/48./] 
they holde. First, it is very certaine, that there are diuerse pettie 
chambers in the braine, which the Anatomists call Ventricles, 
these chambers are not for nothing, yea and there is no man that 
can thinke, that they were made for any other vse, then to be lodgings 
for these three faculties: and that, as though the imagination 
should be lodged in the two first, Reason in the middlemost, 
and Memorie in the hindermost: and the appearance of the truth 
of this thing is very great: for the imagination receiueth all the 
obiects of the sences, and therefore ought to be placed very neere 
vnto the sences: but so the case standeth, as that all the sences are 
in the forepart of the head: the imagination presenteth all these 
obiects vnto the reason, which maketh them voide of matter and 
vniuersall, so that of necessitie it must follow as second. The reason 
hauing after some time serued and satisfied it selfe of these 
pleasant formes, committeth them to the custodie of memorie: 
whereupon it followeth of necessitie, that it should be placed behinde, 
[/49./] 
and as it were in her inner chamber. Furthermore, imagination 
being effected by receiuing in of formes, must haue his seat 
in the softest part of the braine, because the prints of pictures are 
most easilie set in a soft bodie: Memorie which keepeth and retayneth 
the formes, craueth a more hard part, for else the picture 
would be defaced by and by after that it should be printed: Reason, 
as the greatest of renowne ought to be placed in such a part 
of the braine, as is most temperate. But there is no doubt, but the 
forepart of the braine is the softest, and the hinder part the hardest, 
and the middlemost the most temperate: so then we must 
beleeue that imagination is before, and memorie behinde. 
 
[^p.79^] 
Philosophers that haue written of Phisiognomie, say that such 
[/50./] 
as haue the hinder part of the head hanging out much, haue a good 
memorie; that such as haue large and high foreheads, and therewithall 
as it were bossed, are of pleasant imagination: and that 
such as in whom these two eminences are wanting, are blockish, 
without imagination, and without memorie. If we will (saith Aristotle 
[/51./] 
in his Problemes) enter into any serious and deepe conceit, 
we knit the browes and draw them vp: if we would call to mind 
and remember any thing, wee hang downe the head, and rub the 
hinder part, which sheweth very well that the imagination lieth 
before, and the memorie behinde. Men haue very often marked, 
[/52./] 
that if the hinder part of the head be hurt, the memorie is lost at 
the very same time. I will adde further for the more strengthning 
[/53./] 
of the side of the Arabians, that the fashion and widenes of the 
ventricles of the braine, doe serue to poynt out with the finger, the 
places of these three faculties. The fourth ventricle is somewhat 
sharpe poynted, to the end that formes may be the better vnited, 
and that the reflexe thereof may the more fully cast it selfe vpon 
the third, wherein reason lodgeth: the two first are the widest, for 
that they receiue the first obiects which are not as yet refined: 
that in the middest was fittest for reason, because it might receiue 
the images or formes of the two first, and hauing forgotten them, 
might seeke them out, as it were in her most close and secret place 
of custodie, contriued for that end behinde. Finally, that which 
[/54./] 
hath made the Arabians to stand so stiffelie in their opinion, and to 
maintaine that these three faculties, haue euery one their seuerall 
lodging, is because they haue oftentimes obserued, that one of 
these three may be hurt, and not the other; the imagination is very 
oft corrupted, the reason standing sound and intier: and contrariewise, 
how many franticke and melancholike men be there, 
which discourse very excellently, notwithstanding their foolish 
and vaine imaginations. Galen writeth two histories of two 
franticke men, the one of which had his imagination troubled, 
and his reason sound, the other his reason troubled, and 
his imagination sounde. Wee see an infinite number which 
haue vtterly lost their memorie, and yet faile not to discourse very 
well. Thucidides mencioneth, that in that great plague which 
[^p.80^] 
dispeopled almost al Greece, there were moe the~ a million, which 
forgot euery thing euen to their owne name, and yet notwithstanding 
did not thereupon become fooles. Messala Coruinus in his 
recouerie of a certaine sicknes, did not remember his own name. 
Trapezontius was very wise whilest he was young, but drawing 
neere vnto old age he quite forgot all. Seeing therefore that one 
of these faculties may be hurt without the other, we must beleeue 
[/55./] 
that euery of them hath his particular place. If it were committed 
to me to giue iudgement in this controuersie, I should say that 
the Greekes had plaide the more subtile Philosophers, and that 
their opinion is the more true: but that that of the Arabians will 
euer be more followed of the common people, for that it hath in 
it a greater shew of euident cleerenes. I will not draw on this disputation 
to any greater length: it is enough for me to make it appeare 
that the minde hath three most excellent faculties, al which 
lodge within the braine, and cause man to appeare more admirable, 
then any other creature, which inable him also to gouerne 
all the world, and which giue him the title of a sociable and politike 
liuing creature. 
 
[}CHAP. II. 
 
That this liuing creature full of the image of God, is now and then 
so farre abased, and corrupted in his nature, with an infinit 
number of diseases, that he becommeth 
all like vnto a beast.}] 
 
COmming to extoll man vnto the highest degree and 
step of his glorie, beholde him I pray thee the best furnished 
and most perfect of all other liuing creatures, 
hauing (as I haue sayd) in his soule the image of God, 
[/56./] 
and in his bodie the modell of the whole world. And now I intend 
to set him out vnto thee as the most caitife and miserable 
creature that is in the world, spoyled of all his graces, depriued of 
iudgement, reason and counsaile, enemie of men and of the Sun, 
straying and wandring in solitarie places: to bee briefe, so altered 
and chaunged, as that he is no more a man, as not retaining any 
[^p.81^] 
thing more then the very name. This alteration is seene oftentimes 
[/57./] 
in the soule alone, the bodie standing sound and without 
blemish: as when a man by his malicious will becomming an apostate 
and reuolt, defaceth the ingrauen forme of the Deitie, and 
commeth by the filth of sinne to defile the holy temple of God, 
when through an vnruly appetite, he suffereth himselfe to be carried 
in such headlong wise after his passions, either of choler, enule 
or gluttonie, as that he becommeth more outragious then a lyon, 
more fierce then a tyger, and more filthie and conte~ptible then a 
swine. I goe not about to redresse this deformitie, I leaue the discourse 
for the learned Diuines. Yea and if a man doe but take 
some paines in morall Philosophie to reade it, he shall finde right 
holesome precepts, for the staying and brideling of these foolish 
passions. 
 
I come to the other deformitie, which is violently throwne vpon 
[/58./] 
man, and may happen vnto the most religious, being, when the 
bodie, which is as it were the vessell of the soule, is so greatly altered 
and corrupted, as that all the noblest faculties of the same, are 
likewise corrupted, the sences seeme all of them to wander and 
goe astray, euery motion to be out of order, the imagination troubled, 
the reason foolish and rash, the memorie altogether giuen 
to let slip and flie away whatsoeuer it should retaine. The first deformitie 
deserueth correction, as comming of a malicious minde 
and voluntarie action: but as for this which is constrained and 
violently inflicted by diseases, it deserueth to bee weighed of euery 
one with a tender and charitable compassion. But the diseases 
[/59./] 
which doe most sharply assaile our mindes, and captiuate and 
make them thrall vnto the two inferiour powers, are three; the 
frensie, madnes, and melancholie. Looke vpon the deedes of 
frentike and mad men, thou shalt not find therein any thing worthie 
of a man, he biteth, he shriketh, he belloweth out a wilde and 
sauadge voyce, rowleth about his fierie eyes, setteth vp his haire, 
runneth himselfe headlong into euery thing indifferently, and very 
oft murthereth himselfe. See how melancholike men do now 
and then so cast downe and abase themselues, as that they become 
companions to the brute beasts, and haue no pleasure to bee any 
where but in solitarie places. I am about to describe him out vnto 
[^p.82^] 
thee in most liuely manner, and then thou shalt iudge what a 
maner of man he is. The melancholike man properly so called, 
[/60./] 
(I meane him which hath the disease in the braine) is ordinarilie 
out of heart, alwaies fearefull and trembling, in such sort as that he 
is afraid of euery thing, yea and maketh himselfe a terrour vnto 
himselfe, as the beast which looketh himselfe in a glasse; he would 
runne away and cannot goe, he goeth alwaies sighing, troubled 
with the hicket, and with an vnseparable sadnes, which oftentimes 
turneth into dispayre; he is alwaies disquieted both in bodie and 
spirit, he is subiect to watchfulnes, which doth consume him on 
the one side, and vnto sleepe, which tormenteth him on the other 
side: for if he think to make truce with his passions by taking some 
rest, behold so soone as hee would shut his eyelids, hee is assayled 
with a thousand vaine visions, and hideous buggards, with fantasticall 
inuentions, and dreadfull dreames; if he would call any to 
helpe him, his speech is cut off before it be halfe ended, and what 
he speaketh commeth out in fafling and stammering sort, he can 
no liue with companie. To conclude, hee is become a sauadge 
creature, haunting the shadowed places, suspicious, solitarie, enemie 
to the Sunne, and one whom nothing can please, but onely 
discontentment, which forgeth vnto it selfe a thousand false and 
vaine imaginations. 
 
Then iudge and weigh if the titles which I haue heretofore giuen 
to man, calling him a diuine and politique creature, can any 
way agree with the melancholike person. And yet I would not 
[/61./] 
haue thee (O thou Atheist whosoeuer thou art) hereupon to conclude, 
that the soule of man suffereth any thing in his essence, and 
thereby to become subiect to corruption: it is neuer altered or 
changed, neither can it suffer any thing, it is his instrument that is 
euill affected. Thou maist vnderstand this matter if thou wilt, 
by a comparison drawne from the Sunne: for euen as the Sunne 
doth neuer feele any diminishment of brightnes, although it 
seeme oftentimes to be darke and eclipsed; for this happeneth either 
by the thicknes of the clowdes, or by reason of the Moone 
comming betwixt it and vs: and so our soule seemeth ofentimes 
to suffer, but indeede it is the bodie which is out of frame. There 
is an excellent sentence in Hippocrates, in the end of his first book 
[^p.83^] 
of diet, which deserueth to be written in letters of gold. Our soule 
[/62./] 
(saith he) cannot be changed in his essence, neither by drinking nor 
eating, nor by any excesse, we must impute the cause of all his alterations, 
either to the spirits wherewith it chiefly hath to deale, or 
vnto the vessels, by which it diffuseth it selfe throughout the body. 
Now the instrument of these noble faculties is the braine, which is 
considered of by the Phisition, either as a similar part, whose health 
and welfare consisteth in a good temperature; or as an instrumentall 
part, and then the health and welfare thereof consisteth 
in a laudable shape both of the bodie, as also of the ventricles of 
the same. And both these two sorts are requisite for the well executing 
[/63./] 
of these three faculties: It is most true that Galen attributeth 
more to a good temperature, then to a commendable shape, 
and in one whole booke maintaineth with strong and firme argument, 
that the maners of the soule doe follow the temperature of 
the bodie, as thou shalt see in the chapter following. And yet I 
[/64./] 
for my part wil not yeeld so much either to temperature or shape, 
as that they can altogether commaund and ouer-rule the soule. 
For such qualities as are naturall, and as it were borne with vs, may 
bee amended by those qualities which the Philosophers call acquisite, 
or purchased and gotten by other meanes. The historie 
[/65./] 
of Socrates maketh this plaine enough. Zopyrus a great Philosopher, 
taking vpon him to iudge and know at the first sight, the disposition 
of euery man, as vpon a day he had beheld Socrates reading, 
and being vrgently pressed of all them that sate by to speake 
his opinion of him: answered at last, that he well knew that hee 
was the most corrupt and vicious man in the world. The speech 
was hastily carried to Socrates by one of his disciples, who mocked 
Zopyrus for it. Then Socrates by the way of admiration cried 
aloude; Oh the profound Philosopher, he hath throughly looked 
into my humour and disposition; I was by nature inclined to all 
these vices, but morall Philosophie hath drawne me away from 
them. And in very deede Socrates had a very long head and ill 
shaped, his countenance vgly, and his nose turning vp. These naturall 
inclinations then which proceede of the temperature and 
shape of the bodie (foreseene that these two vices bee not exceeding 
great, as in melancholike persons) may bee reclaimed and 
[^p.84^] 
amended, by the qualities which we get vnto our selues by morall 
Philosophie, by the reading of good bookes, and by frequenting 
the companies of honest and vertuous men. 
 
