[^Drage, William: Daimonomageia^] 
 
[}DAIMONOMAGEIA 
A Small 
TREATISE 
OF 
Sicknesses and Diseases 
FROM 
Witchcraft, 
AND 
Supernatural Causes, 
Never before, at least in this comprised 
Order, and general Mannes, was the 
like published. 
Being useful to others besides Physicians, 
In that it Confutes 
Atheistical, Sadducistical, and Sceptical 
Principles and Imaginations. 
 
LONDON, Printed by J. Dover, living in 
St. Bartholomews-Close, 1665.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 3-27^] 
 
[^p.3^] 
[}DAIMONOMAGEIA: 
A SMALL 
TREATISE 
OF 
Sicknesses and Diseases 
FROM 
Witchcraft.}] 
 
[}DEFINITION.}] 
 
A Disease of Witchcraft is a Sickness that arises 
from strange and preternatural Causes, 
and from Diabolical Power in the use of 
strange and ridiculous Ceremonies by Witches 
or Necromancers, afflicting with strange 
and unaccustomed Symptoms, and commonly 
preternaturally violent, very seldom or 
not at all curable by Ordinary and Natural 
Remedies. 
 
[}SIGNS DIAGNOSTICAL.}] 
 
I. If the Sick voids things that naturally cannot be bred in the Body, 
[^p.4^] 
nor put therein from without, distrust Witchcraft: If they void Rose-Bryars 
an hand length, Sticks, Thorns, and Bones by Stool; as Thomas 
Bromhall of strange Apparitions, testifies, page 122. 
 
If after, and with violent and preternatural pains, the Sick vomits 
gallons of Blood, or the like goes by Urine, and so continues day by 
day, and void 1200 Worms at a time, or several hundreds, and so continues, 
judge it Fascination: That there have been such, see Tho. Bartholin, 
Historiæ Anatomicæ, and Sebastianus Brand. 
 
A Physician of my Acquaintance told me he examined strictly Eye-Witnesses, 
in one Town where he was, and where it was a report, that 
a Maid bewitched, vomited Wool, Hair, Needles, Pins, &c. and they 
assured him of the Truth, that it was so; and the like have I heard of 
some tried formerly at some Assizes of this Kingdom. 
 
One vomited Thorns of the Sloe-Tree, and Hooks, as Christoph. Rumbaus 
in Obs. testifies. 
 
Another vomited Cloth, pieces of Iron, Stones, and Bones; and a 
Maid voided downwards Pitch and Soap, Stones, and pieces of Bones, 
which also she cast up by vomiting, being much pained at Stomach, and 
made very lean, died at last, Forestus, Obs. Med. Lib. 18. Schol. ad 
Observ. 26. 
 
But, One Swallow (as the Proverb is) makes no Summer: Vis unita 
fortior, & quæ non prosunt singula juncta juvant; In the multitude of Witnesses 
there is sure Testimony; specially they not allured by Gain, or 
obliged by Interest, or superstitionated by Education, or forced by rigour 
of Authority, but one writ in one place, another in another; one in one 
Country, another in another; one in one Age, another in another; one 
the Judge, the other the Physician: so that they held no confederacy to 
cheat future Ages, but writ their clear Experience; which Experience 
induced them to believe such things; as indeed what can any man know 
truly, but by Experience? for else it is but Imagination, Conceit, or 
Phansie, which onely casually, and by chance is true: And if our Country 
and Age did not witness to what Authors have writ in other Countries 
and Ages, it might be suspected; yet we have not one Witch to 
one hundred that be in other Countreys, and fewer than formerly; and 
therefore the fewer are bewithed: But there are many bewitched which 
are not thought so, and consequently not cured, that otherwise might; 
and there are divers thought so, that are not, but their Sickness is referable 
to natural Causes, and found by the Scrutinous in the legitimate 
Order of Nature. We will draw up all Observations to this first Diagnostick 
Sign briefly. 
 
Those that vomit, or void by stool, with greater or less torments, 
[^p.5^] 
Knives, Scissars, Bryars, whole Eggs, Dogs Tails, crooked Nails, Pins, 
Needles, sometimes threaded, and sometimes with Hair, Bundles of 
Hair, pieces of Wax, pieces of Silk, live Eels, large pieces of Flesh, 
Bones and Stones, and pieces of Wood, Hooks, and pieces of Salpeter: 
conclude they are bewitched; and that such have been vomited, or voided 
by stool, and that from Witchcraft. See Alexander Benedictus, Lib. 
7. Cap. 25. of his Practice, Tho. Bartholinus, in Histor. Anatomicis, Antonius 
Benivenius, Obs. Med. Cap. 8. Cardanus de varietate Rerum, Lib. 
15. Vierus, de præstig. Daemonum, Nicolas Remigius de Dæmolatreia, 
Forestus in Obs. Med. Lib. 18. Langius, Lib. 1. Epist. 38. Cornelius Gemma, 
Lib. 2. de Divinis Naturæ Characterisimis, Cap. 4. Laurentius Scholtzius 
in Epistolis, Greg. Horstius in Epist. Jacobus Deidetius in Epistolis, and 
others, Witnesses enough, and men of credit enough. 
 
The Reader is here to be advertised, that he mistake not; He must inquire 
what went before, what was eaten, and if a suspected Witch was 
offended: Secondly, He must consider whether such might not be generated 
in the Body: Thirdly, He must see how many such strange things 
they vomit or egest; none vomited all the aforesaid things, and all vomited 
some of them; commonly they vomited three of four kinds; one 
vomited Glass, Nails, and Hair together; another vomited often Gobbets 
of Flesh, Brass Pins, with Wax and Hair folded up together, and 
crooked Nails. Guess at the rest, by these. 
 
Some died, and cold not get up nor down these things; as Alexander 
Benedictus shews; some were opened, as Ulricus Newsesser, as Johannes 
Langius, and Vierus affirm; there were found in his Stomach four Iron 
Knives, partly sharp, and partly like Saws, long and smooth pieces of 
Wood, such as possibly could not be swallowed or vomited forth; two 
rough Iron Tools, each a span long, and a bundle of Hair: If Ulcers, 
Boiles, or Apostems, have in them any of these preternatural things that 
were never swallowed, if other things correspond therewith, suspect 
Witchcraft. See Joh. Langius of a Woman of Bononia, Epist. 38. Lib. 
1. and Vierus, Lib. 3. Cap. 12. 
 
Object. There are those that go up and down, that swallow Pebbles, Coals, 
Pieces of Iron, Bones, &c. and these may by use so facilitate their Stomach, 
that they may vomit them when they will, and so be either admired, or pittied 
and relieved. 
 
Answ. Such have been: But, 1. Abundance of these things for 
their sharpness, roughness, and largeness, could never be swallowed. 
 
2. The Persons that voided them, and in whom such were found being 
dissected, were silly Men, Women, and Maids, and then they would 
[^p.6^] 
not have been so sick, and vomited them so difficultly, and so long together, 
and have lain so long miserably tormented, yea, and to die at 
last. 
 
II. Strange and wonderful Convulsions, indomitable and inexpressible 
Torments, with other things preceding, or supervening, gives suspicion 
of Witchcraft: One Judith, a religious Maid, was bewitched, as 
Vierus, Lib. 3. Cap. 13. relates; Her Jaws were contorted, and clave 
together, and sometimes her Gullet, that she could not swallow, and 
sometimes her Tongue was so convulsed that she could not speak. 
 
A convulsion of the whole Body by intervals, shaking of the Head, 
pains in all the Joynts and Limbs most vehement, stoppings of the Ears, 
blaring out of the Tongue, with hideous clamours adjoyned, with noise 
therein, like barking of Dogs, supervened with vomiting of Chesnuts, 
Balls of Hair, large pieces of raw Flesh, and Bones, or like to this, 
which Jacobus Seildelius in his Observations experienced, you may be sure 
there is Fascination. 
 
Whosoever after long and violent pains vomits or ejects things preternatural 
to be bred in the Body, or unlikely to be received thereinto, 
suspect Witchcraft. 
 
III. If the Sick complaineth of such a Woman or Man suspected for 
a Witch, and saith, There he (or she) stands; or, Now he (or she) comes, 
though no Body else see any thing; for such is the power and cunning of 
the Devil, and consequently of his Agents (as Bodinus, Vierus, Grillandus, 
Remigius, Peter de Loier, now rendered in English, and Others, do 
demonstrate) that some may see a Spirit, others in the same Room, at 
the same time, shall not; and some that had very good skill in Magick 
would undertake by the Physiognomy to tell who should see Visions of 
Spirits, or Angels, which are onely distinguished from other Spirits by 
their Office; for [^GREEK OMITTED^] comes from [^GREEK OMITTED^], to declare, or be sent on a 
Message; so that one Spirit may be an Angel at one time, and another 
at another; also they will undertake to discover who shall never see Apparitions, 
though they be in the Room with others that see them: If as 
soon as the sick Party cryeth out of such a one, like a Mouse, or Fly, or 
any other Creature, entereth into the Mouth, or goeth to the Body of the 
Sick, which sometimes onely the Sick seeth, and the Sick is raised, and 
hoven up in his Body, and Brest moves high and laboriously, and somewhat 
seems to rise up to suffocate him, with or without, the noise of Dogs 
barking Cats mewing, Hogs grunting, Cows lowing, or their like, heard 
in him; for these are more common to one peculiarly possessed of the 
Devil, as also is the long lying in a trance thereupon, as if the party was 
dead, and then with leaping and raving the fit may go off; Judge this 
[^p.7^] 
certainly to be by the power of the Devil, and commonly to be administred 
by Witches through malice, by the performance of foolish Ceremonies. 
 
These things I have gathered from information of our own Countrey 
People as well as Authors. 
 
IV. A fourth sign of Witchcraft is, if the sick Prophesy, and foretel 
truly things that afterward come to pass, and speak beyond the course 
of Nature (Gods Law, beyond which no man lawfully can go) things 
they never heard, felt, saw, or understood, and Languages they never 
learned; as divers chiefly in some sickness that have spoke Latin that 
they never learned, or other Nations Tongues they never were taught, 
and afterward, for the most part, they forget all again, if with these, or 
without these, for there is difference in all; the Sick fly, or run up the 
Walls with their Feet uppermost, or leap from one place to another, 
strongly and fiercely, at a great distance: Be sure it is not naturally; 
if not naturally, preternaturally; if preternaturally, either by God or 
the Devil; if of the Devil, they tend to advance his Interest or Kingdom, 
and so do these Practices. 
 
1. That several have spoke strange Tongues they never learned, 
we shall endeavour to satisfie the Reader, and also that some Prophesy. 
 
Cordanus de Rerum variet. Lib. 8. Cap. 43. Relates how Phliarius 
Poletanus, an Italian, distempered in Body, spoke the Dutch Tongue 
perfectly that he never learned; he by Physick voided many Worms, 
and could afterward speak only his Native Language. 
 
Sigeberti Continuator, saith, Norbert of Nigella, from the Devil, did 
repeat the Canticles from one end to another, in the Latin and Germane 
Tongue, and afterward being cured, his new speaking strange Languages 
was took away. 
 
Cedrenus and Zonarus, Tomo. 3. Report a Servant of Michael Curopalates, 
at an Eclipse, or, Conjunctionem Soli cum Luna, was struck with 
Madness, and would Prophesy things they found to come to pass, and in 
strange Tongues. 
 
Manlius relates of a Maid, that never learnt Latin, that being asked 
which was the best Verse in all Virgil, said, 
 
Discite justitiam monite & non temnere divos. 
 
She was apparently by other things possessed by the Devil. 
 
Petrus Apponensis, Com. ad Problema. 1. Sect. 3. of Aristotle, Observed 
a Woman in a melancholly sickness to speak Latine, which she 
[^p.8^] 
never learned, and as soon as her sickness was gon, she could not speak 
one word. 
 
See Lævinus Hemnius, Lib. 2. Cap. 2. de Occult. Natur. Mir. and 
Guainerius, Tract. 15. de Cap. dol. c. 4. & Gentilis, how many bewitched 
may foretel things to come, Alexander and Rhasis mention it; but 
Witches leave the Body, and their Souls go into far Countries for 
two or three or more dayes, and then they return to their Body again, 
which lay all this while as dead or in a trance; and then they make report 
of what is done, or to be done, before any news can come, a week 
or fortnight perhaps, the way is so far for Post, or ordinary Messengers 
to bring a Relation; and so they are thought to foresee or foreknow 
many times, when they are not. Nic. Remigius, Peter de Loier, An 
History of Naples, and Bodinus in Dæmonomaniæ, Lib. 2. Cap. 4. confirm 
it by many Histories and Examples; and our Countrey Witches 
have testified the same: It is preternatural indeed, and done by the 
Devil, to have theit Souls at last to live in Vassalage with him. 
 
2. That Witches, or the bewitched, can fly from House to House, 
or leap many yards, which naturally they cannot, nor in health could 
not, and run up the Walls with their Feet uppermost, without holding, 
by Diabolical power, we shall bring several Testimonies. It 
would be too tedious to write fully all the Examinations and Informations 
I have took concerning our own Countrey Witches: and also the 
Reader may suspect either my true Information, or Sophistication of my 
delivering it; therefore I shall rather desire to satisfie by the Authority 
of Authors Experience chiefly. Their Adversaries contradict their 
Experience only by their Incredulity: and how slight an evincement 
that is, let all judge. I would be loth to give just occasion to the Reader, 
to suspect me desirous of gaining Proselites by the imposition of 
Lies and fained Fables, for I have heard many Relations from sober 
People touching these things, that I shall here omit describing, lest I 
should be charged with too great Credulity towards the one, and a delusive 
Imposition towards the other. 
 
Vierus lib. 3. cap. 9. brings several Examples of the Nunns of Ventetus 
in the County of Horn, how they were molested with evil Spirits, 
and were sometimes lift up above a mans height from the ground, they 
climbed to us like Cats, and were sometimes carried over mens heads, 
and sometimes fell down again headlong; they would sometimes goe 
on the tips of their toes, as well as others on their feet. 
 
Sylvula de Historiis Mirabilibus, writes of a Woman called the Lady 
Rose, that would of a suddain by Diabolical Power be snatch'd away, 
[^p.9^] 
and bound to a bed, a tree; sometimes an hair or a little flax was seen 
to hold her. 
 
Magdalena Crucia, a famous Witch, whom Dr. Henry More in his 
Antidote against Atheism mentions, an Abbess, in such estimation she 
was for her miracles, she would sometimes in a pomp on a Festival Day, 
be lift up several Cubits above ground, so staying her self, holding in 
her arms the Image of the Child Jesus, her eyes pouring out tears, and 
her mouth counterfeiting Devotion. 
 
But some may object, This shews not exactly, that Witches can make 
others fly, or subsist in the ambient Air. 
 
Dr. Henry More only mentions Mr. Phrockmortons Children nigh 
Huntington, I suppose he meant, as I have heard, how they would fly, 
and run up walls, being bewitched: Even as Elizabeth Day, (whom I well 
knew, as her Kindred with whom she lived inform'd me) did, She would 
run up the walls with her feet, laying no hand, and on the Seiling with 
her head downwards, which she could never do before nor since; like a 
Mouse leap'd from her, with a Suffumigation, a Physician made, and 
some Ceremonies. 
 
The Boy of Northwich twelve years old, that Mr. Bruen, a pious man, 
of Bruen Stapleford, recorded, would fly from Bed to Table, and from 
Table to Window, at a great distance, and yet his legs grown up to his 
Buttocks. 
 
The carrying of Mr. Silk from his Companion, Mr. Marshall, in the 
Fens, on his Horse back in the Air diverse miles, till he lighted into 
Sr. Oliver Cromwels Yard, leaping over one wall, and then another, 
leaving here a Glove, and there another, and elsewhere his Hat, could 
be no Delusion. I had it from a sober Gentleman, who took it from 
their mouths. Doubtless some Witch did it. 
 
I since heard, the last Spring at New-Market, a Noble Man's Horse 
ran away with a Lad, leaped an immense way each step, ran by steep 
Hill sides, and then ran his head against a bank and killed himself. The 
Spectators never saw Horse do so before. And some say Stakes were to 
be set at each leap for commemoration. 
 
So do Pigs and Hens when bewitched, often leap and dance. 
 
V. A fifth Sign of Witchcraft is, If the Sick is twisten, contorted, 
and his Chin drawn to his Forehead, and neck turned behind him, 
or face rather, though the common expression is the other, and lye long, 
as if dead, and the like. But these may more particularly be termed, 
Possessed; Of which anon. 
 
VI. A great Sign is, If any thing that comes from the Sick be burnt or 
harmed, and the suspected Woman suffers in such manner, or comes to 
[^p.10^] 
the House; or if after she is so served, or scratch'd till blood comes, or 
threatened, the Sick is eased much and clearly, suspect her for a Witch, 
and the Disease to be from her, Consideratis considerandis. 
 
Besides the many Testimonies of our own Country, Sprangerus and 
Nicol. Remigius in his Dæmonalatry, and Tho. Barthol in his Anatom. 
Histories mention the same. 
 
VII. All Diseases that are caused by Nature, may be caused by 
Witchcraft; But all that are caused by Witchcraft, cannot be caused 
by Nature. 
 
Barrenness, Lameness, Madness, Sterrility, and Impotentia Coeundi, 
Cholicks, Fainting and Sweating, &c. we shall relate in the Description 
of Causes, how Witches cause them. 
 
[}DIFFERENCE.}] 
 
Now here it remains that we make Distinction, if any is to be made, 
betwixt the obsessed or possessed with evil Spirits, and the bewitched 
by Ceremonies. 
 
Betwixt the extream of Greatness in one, and the extream of Smalness 
in the other, there is little difference, even in all other Diseases; 
also betwixt some kind of Obsession, and some kind of Incantation is 
less difference, then betwixt some Obsession and other Obsession, or 
betwixt some Incantation or Witchcraft, and other Incantation; but 
the Causes betwixt Possession and Bewitching, do commonly clearly 
differ in Manner and Nature, the Witches using idle Similitudes, foolish 
Ceremonies, and sensless Words to Inchant the devilish Spirits, to 
enter the Body in shape of a Fly; yet sometimes the Witches send their 
Imps, which do so; and I question whether any Evil Spirit can enter 
any man, without command from some man; but with that not 
alwayes, for God gives not leave, but that is secret; sometimes on a 
worse man they have no power, and yet bewitch a better, or possess 
the Religious. 
 
These are more peculiar to Possession, Flying, Leaping at an huge 
distance, Speaking, the Tongue of the Sick being held; and sometime 
they use his Tongue; also speaking Blasphemy, Raving, and Lying, 
and telling things done far off at the moment, and what will be by Vaticination; 
also the sick Roar like Bears, Bark like Dogs, Mew like 
Cats, Grunt like Hogs, &c. They sometime lie as if dead, stiff, their 
Head wreathed backward, Chin and Nose drawn together, or whole Face 
drawn up like a Purse, with foaming and frothing, and raging most, and 
tormenting the sick Party exceedingly when any pray or speak of God. 
 
[^p.11^] 
A young Gentlewoman told me at Ipswich, she was in Prison with a 
Witch, who was exhorted to repent, and did endeavour it, and then 
the Devil made her fume and sweat, and stopped her breath almost; 
and after half an hour she came to her self, and being asked if the 
Devil did not possesse her, to diverts her from Repenting, she answered, 
Yea. 
 
So Ramigius the Judge of Lotharingia observed, that at the Bench, 
or in Prison, or at their Liberty, (as we have also heard Relations thereof) 
the Devil would come and stop their Ears, or almost choak them, or 
anoy them like a swarm of Flies, or throw them along, when they 
had good Counsel given, or intended to lay hold on God's Mercy, whom 
they had at their Witch-making-covenant so solemnly renounced, together 
with all Faith in him, and Religion towards him. See the Story 
of Ann Bodenham, of the Maid she made a Witch, that repented, in 
Henry More his Antidote. 
 
Concerning the Nature of Possession, to be as we have writ, see 
Master Clark, in the second part of the Marrow of Ecclesiastical History, 
and Life of Master Bruen, a Pious Man, it is his relation; also the Observation 
of Felix Platerus, a wise and sober Physitian, which he saw, 
and the Relation is to be seen in his Observations, page 20. de mentis 
consternatione. Also the Story of a Smiths Daughter in the Valley 
Joachim, possessed in, 1559. by Jobus Fincelius, lib. 3. Micaculis: 
See also Vierus, lib. 3. cap. 10. de præstigiis Dæmonum. Also Fernelius, de 
abditis morborum causis, lib. 2. 
 
[}DIFFERENCE.}] 
 
Also we must make distinction betwixt those that are possessed and bewitched, 
and those that are killed by evil spirits; I know not, but 
most kind of spirits that appear will harm us, if we resist them; and it 
is to be doubted that God will give them permission, if we affront them 
on bad grounds. A sober learned Man, told me, His father lying at an 
Inn, heard some body in the Chamber, though it a Thief, and rose to 
resist the Spirit, as it proved, gave him a blow, small, but of force 
enough to cause Sickness, and his death. A sober and learned, Esquire of 
Northampton-shire, told me his man was coming early over New Market 
Heath, it was light when he felt somewhat strike him on the back, no 
body there, he came home, sickened and died; they never looked to see 
if the mark of the blow might be seen in his flesh. 
 
Doctor More, lib. 3. cap. 2. of his Antidote against Atheisme, saith, 
That Mistris Dark of Westminster told him, that her Husband very well 
[^p.12^] 
went through some Streets in London, and was strook on the thigh 
with an invisible hand; he came home to Dinner, was sick, and dyed 
within three dayes, being dead; on the place, he said, the Spiritual 
hand struck him, was clearly seen the Figure of a Mans hand, 
with the four Fingers, Thumb, and Palm, looking black, and impressed 
deep in the Flesh. 
 
So Histories mention, and Doctor More quotes them, that Phillip 
Melanctons Kinswomans Husband, being dead, in a few dayes appeared 
to her, being Solitary and grief-ful, and took her by the hand and 
comforted her, but her hand, was black alwayes after. 
 
The Barbers Boy, about 1660, that was killed in Cambridge by a 
Spectral woman that haunted him, sometimes alone, and sometimes 
with a Man in Trunk Breeches, adds to these; He had the exact mark 
in his forehead, being dead, where that Spiritual Woman did hit him 
alive; he came from the Isle of Ely on purpose to be forsaken by the 
Spectral woman, several Scholars took Notes in writing thereof; but 
we write all as short as may be, so that some may object and except 
against the Concordance and Dependance of one thing with another. 
 
The Devil, upon some affront, dashes out the Brains: those that 
read conjuring Books, or otherwayes call him to jeer to him, are sometimes 
so served. 
 
Some that are hurt by Spirits, look strangely, their Hair stands upright, 
Mouth or Cheek drawn awry, or Eye-lid down to the Mouth; as 
the Minister of a Neighbour Town lately told me of one of his Parish, 
strook by a Spirit in the night, upon no occasion given; some are dumb, 
some Rave, and all almost differing: but we shall not insist on these, 
though we could bring many considerable Observations. 
 
[}Of the Cause of Witchcraft.}] 
 
THe first and movent Cause is, the Witch some way offended, and 
she doth ill by Revenging her self; but sometimes their Imps 
force and perswade them, as Sarah Boatman of Mourden confessed. 
 
We will first relate some, ridiculous Ceremonies we have heard from 
learned men, and other sober People, of Witches confession and conviction, 
about the way they bewitch men and cattel. 
 
Some take a Beast Skin or Hide, and stick it full of Thornes, or Pins, 
and call it such an ones Skin, and that party is wonderfully pricked and 
pained in the Superficies of his Body, but it is very like they mutter 
some Diabolical words in the doing it. 
 
[^p.13^] 
Some take a wooden bowl and a knife, and dagg the knife point into 
the bottom of the bowl, and it becomes full of blood, and such an 
Horse as they name, pisseth blood, until he dyes, or as they please, 
with consent of the Devil, and Limitation of God, the first, the 
greatest, and the best, to be praised for evermore. 
 
Others to annoy Houses with Flies, or to choak People, take a Seive 
and put dust in it, and sift it, and throw up this dust, with some Diabolical 
Sentences, and it turns to Flies. 
 
One bewitched her Neighbours Cows Bags to rankle, and to be knorted 
and to gangrene; she sent her Child into the Field for some Bryars and 
made like the form of a Cow, and called it such an ones Cow, and 
struck the Bagg diverse times with those Bryars, and their Neighbours 
Cows Bagg swelled, and rankled. 
 
But it is the Devil that doth these things; for such Ceremonies do 
nothing, or at least most of them, in other Peoples hands; the Devil 
and they make a Bargain, he to help them to Money, or Revenge, and 
they to give him their Souls at last, to live in servitude and Vassalage 
eternally with him. 
 
We read how Moses and the Egyptian Magicians did many preternatural 
things, by that Magick that is called Rabdomantia, or Rod-magick, and 
the Ceremonies both used were much alike; so did Jeremiah, Ezekiel 
and Isaiah, many Ceremonies or Similitudes, as eating of Books, setting 
on Pots, making like Seige, and Leaguers, going barefoot, and the 
like; all Causes are Gods, and are good, but the Devil knows them 
and abuses them. 
 
The blind man in Matthew, cured with Clay and Spittle; Ezekiah 
cured with Figgs of his dangerous Sickness; Naaman, washing in 
Jordan, cured of his Leprosie, were but Ceremonies; but used in the 
Power of God, which can effect all things. 
 
Neither do all natural Causes produce onely natural Effects; nor 
do all Preternatural Effects, arise only from Preternatural Causes. 
 
Natural Causes used by Spirits, may produce effects above the Power, 
merely of those natural Causes; indeed Witches use such things but as 
Obsignatories. 
 
Now let us see what Authors have set down briefly, how Witches 
cause sickness, and bring death, and what kinds of sickness. 
 
I. First most chiefly and familiarly they use certain Ceremonies, 
foolish Superstitions, and senceless words; sometimes calling on the 
Devil. 
 
Duffus King of the Scots, was pined away and wasted with a sweating 
sickness; by fits he sweat hugely and languished, & by fits he was cooled, 
[^p.14^] 
and refreshed. The Governour of Moravia, his enemy set Witches to 
hurt him; they made his Image of Wax, and did roast it on a Spit; and 
as that began to melt, so the King melted; removed from the fire, the 
King was refreshed. See Hector Boetius, Histor. Scotorum, lib. II. I have 
heard such a thing by a waxen Image done in England, both from a 
Physitian, and Divine; but much according to Hector Boetius his 
Story. 
 
To take away virility, and that a man and his wife should not copulate, 
and though they had erection, and provocation, they could not eject 
Semen; or if so, not into their own Veins, Witches use certain words, 
which they mumble, and tie a knot, whiles the parties are married; or 
take a Lock, and assoon as the parties are married, shoot it; they tie 
this knot many wayes, and sometimes hinder copulation; sometimes 
give leave to copulation, but hinder generation: One was so bound by 
an earthen Pot, threw by a Witch into his Well, with some Ceremonies. 
See of these tuings Tho. Barthol. hist. Anatom. the Book called 
Malleus Veneficarum. cap. 7. pag. 2. also Bodinus, lib. 2. cap. 1. Sometimes 
the Genitals are shrunk up, and scarce to be found, as Baptista Codronchius, 
lib. 3. cap. 6. de morbis veneficis ac veneficijs, and Bodinus testifie, 
with others; Wierus, lib. 3. cap. 18. de Dæm. Præstig shews more, and Alexander 
Benedictus, lib. 24. cap. 14. de medendis morbis, hath an example of 
one made unable by a Charm in verse, others by Characters. 
 
A Woman of Onipontus, wonderfully tortured, was freed by taking 
away a waxen Image an hands length, laid under the threshold of the 
door by a Witch; the Image was bored through, and two pins stuck 
in each side, which so tormented this Woman. Another laid a beast 
like a Toad, under the threshold of a door, and made Barrenness to 
all the house. 
 
Remigius saith, The Devil gave one Woman a little Hay, which she 
was to put into her Neighbours Thatch; and the house would be soon on 
Fire. 
 
Their Ceremonies for raising Winds, Thunder and Lightening, 
Storms and Hail, Earthquakes, and Fires, were as ridiculous and insignificant, 
as those whereby they caused sickness; the Devil wished 
them to perform such Ceremonies, and such effects should come to 
passe. 
 
In the fifth Book of Inquisition of Witches, it is recorded, that 
Anna de Mindelen and Ague went into the Field, digged an hole, put 
water therein, stirred it about, and using some words, calling on the 
Devil-huge Storms arose, and Thunder. 
 
Pontanus, lib. 5. Relates of great Rains caused by Witches, by drawing 
[^p.15^] 
about the Crucifix in the Streets, with great Railings, and Blasphemies, 
and giving the consecrated Host to an Asse, and leading him to 
the Church Porch. 
 
Towards the end of the History of John Lee of Africa, of the Religion 
of the Gentiles of Africa, mention is made of the Portugalls in 
Angola, desirous to see the Gaughe, or Priests, raise Storms and 
Thunder; In 1587. One with little Bells, Skipps, and Trinkets, and 
Superstitions words, in half an hour raised Thunder, and many black 
Clouds. 
 
Henry More, chap. 3. lib.3 saith, What is casting of Flint Stones behind 
their backs toward the West, or flinging a little Sand in the Air, or 
striking a River with a Besome, or Rod, sprinkling the water towards 
Heaven, the stirring of Urine, or water, with their finger in an hole 
in the ground, or boiling of Hoggs bristles in a pot? what are these 
fooleries available of themselves to gather Clouds, and cover the Air 
with darkness, and then to make the ground smoak with peales of Hail 
and Rain, and to make the Air terrible, with frequent Lightenings and 
Thunders. 
 
II. We shall shew, that the Witches send their Imps, or young Spirits, 
into some, sometimes in form of Mice, sometimes of Flies, or 
sometimes give the party a piece of bread to eat, or the like; But in our 
differencing Possession from Effascination we have hinted some things 
hereof, which need not be repeated; it will be needful to add, how 
many spirits may be in one: whether they are alwayes commissionated, or 
sent by Witches, we cannot Determine; sometimes they are, as we 
have received information of the Maid Mary Hall, now possessed, as the 
Spirits say, with two; and she said she saw two Flies come down the 
Chimny to her, before she was distempered; she lives at, or nigh 
Gadsden, nigh Dunstable: Elizabeth Day, who lived once in this Town, 
that I knew, had one that leaped forth like a Mouse, upon suffumigation; 
she was bewitched: So one at Harborough, divers years since, 
Master Gibbons cured; so another in the Isle of Ely, that a sober Antient 
Man of this place well knows, being bewitched, had a Mous like Spirit 
entred him. Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, testifie that there may 
be more evil spirits then one, at once, in one; out of Mary Magdalene 
was seven Devils cast; one was called Legion, because he had so many 
in him; now a Legion is ten thousand or many thousands: the Boy 
that Master Bruen wrote of, said he had three evil Spirits in him. 
 
But whether these be, or so alwayes, the Imps of Witches that 
suck their Teats, found in several parts of their bodies, is questionable, 
or whether all Witches have such Imps, and consequently Teats to be 
[^p.16^] 
sucked by them, is questionable; perhaps some that deny there to be 
any Witches, and consequently any to be bewitched, deny onely the 
suckling of Imps, or infernal Spirits, acknowledging and allowing that 
there be Necromancers, Sorcerers, and those that have familiar Spirits, 
or familiarity with Spirits; and that these act by, and have covenanted 
with Diabolical Spirits, by oath to the Devil, Renuntiation of 
GOD, and Bond writ in their blood, or otherwise; onely denyiug that 
any have Teats, and cannot sink, and give suck to Spirits, and do mischief: 
The chief thing that makes a Witch, is a solemn Bargain and 
Covenant with infernal Spirits; and we know, Denominatio sumitur a 
majori, et pars pro toto. Let but any allow me the Thing, and they must 
of necessity allow the Variety and Degrees thereof. 
 
These Imps that the Devil commands some Witches to nourish, do 
instigate them to give them command to do evil, and they have some 
two, some three, and possibly some more, some fewer; one is to 
bewitch Cattel, another Men, a third Plants and Fruits of the 
Earth; and they call them by several names: it is most probable 
that Witches send these in form of Flies, or Mice, into those they 
Envy, and wish Revenge. But, as Remigius well observed, they must 
at their Nocturnal Conventicles acquaint the Devil, and he bids them 
do thus, and so; and they boast of their wickedness there, as we do 
of our goodness here; Paulus Grillandus de Sortilegiis, Bodinus, and 
Vierus, testifie the same things; as how also Witches are punished 
and jeered, when they come to the Debolical Assemblies, if they have 
done no mischief. 
 
III. Tertium causarum genus: a third kind of Cause is, how by their 
voyce and eyes some do bewitch; this seems strange, but some of the 
aforementioned Authors testifie it; some have two Pupils, and look 
crosse, others by praise inchant; we know some charming words will 
do much, not as they are words, but Charms. 
 
Greg. Horstius. Epist. Med. sect. 7. saith, If the look will do it, in all 
reason much more the touch; but that I do not know, Reason is not 
Reason, that follows not Experience; for matter of doing, the Conscience 
is Reason, but Experience only, for matter of knowing, is Reason; 
otherwise Reason is but a pleasing phansie, which one man thinks 
Reason, and another not; Biermannus, and Vierus, by their experience 
find neither Aspect nor Contact to bewitch; this I do believe, many 
women may bewitch those they have not seen, but it is rarely seen; 
sometimes they intend (as the two Spirits in Mary Hall in August 1664. 
about Gadsden did expresse; they were sent to her father, but had not 
power, given of God,) to bewitch one, and cannot, and so bewitch 
[^p.17^] 
another of the family. So I have been told of a Child so bewitched for 
another, in these parts. 
 
IV. A Fourth kind of Cause is, a casual advantage that Witches take 
upon Men nigh to some danger; as a sober Divine told me, his Brother 
was in a Scots ship, when a Witch transformed her self into a Crow, 
and was in the Air to raise a Wind to cast it away, out of Envy 
she bore to the Mariners; but her mother, a Witch, withstood it. So 
Remigius relates how Witches from their own confession, being brought 
afore him, did intimate that they took advantage on mens nearness to 
danger, as one being on a Cart, they made fall, and break his Limbs; 
another going amongst Trees, they caused a rotten bough to break off, 
and with a wind directed it to his Eye, and so put it out. 
 
V. They kill some by anointing them; what these Oyntments be, I 
know not; there be, I suppose, no such in a Apothecaryes shops, the 
force is from the Devil; nor do they use these to kill, so much as to 
flie withall; and whom they anoint with this oyntment, they will make 
to flie; indeed, as Remigius well observed, whom they say it shall 
kill, but especially their powder, it kills; and whom they say it shall 
hurt so, it hurts in such a manner and measure: they do often mutter 
some words, when they anoint themselves with it to flie. That we do 
not speak these things onely of our self, the Reader may see by reading 
Remigius his Dæmonolatry, Bodinus his Dæmonomany, Vierus de Præstigiis, 
Grillandus de Sortilegiis, John Meyerus in Historia Flandriæ, and Jac. 
Sprangerus. 
 
VI. A Sixth way they have to cause sickness, and bring death, to 
destroy Cattel, and fruits of the Earth, is a Powder; this they sometimes 
strew on men in bed, or Children; or if they sprinkle it, they 
that go over it are subject to that mischief the Witch appoints that scatters 
it; or they bury it in ground, and Beasts that go over it are hurt; 
if they sprinkle it on fruits, they die: they receive it of their evil spirits, 
and, as Remigius well observes, it never hurts them, let them touch it 
how they will; and it hurts others onely as they do appoint it; Bodinus 
saith, On the 11. of January, 1577. a Witch was sentenced to die, that 
confessed she had killed three men, by casting a Powder wrapped in Paper, in the 
way they were to travell; saying, IN THE NAME OF ALL DEVILS. 
 
At Pictavium in the year 1564. were rhtee men and one woman condemned 
to be burned; they confessed they hid dust under thresholds, 
and Sheep-Coats, whereby they hurt men and Beasts; that the Devil 
gave them this Powder thus; After they had all anointed themselves, 
or flyen on Goats, Besoms, or the like, enchanted by their Diabolical 
Arts to carry them either high or low, that is, on the ground, or aloft in 
[^p.18^] 
the Air, exceeding swift, they came into huge meetings, where one 
Devil in shape of a Goat sat on a Throne, to which all did Homage 
and kissed his filthiness; then they danced, had carnal Copulation with 
other Devils, feasted, and last of all, the principal Devil did burn his 
body to Ashes, of which every Witch took some, that she might destroy 
withall; the Devils uttering these words, Revenge your selves, and 
slay: They did all renounce God, and deny all Faith in him, and Obedience 
towards him; and if any did not observe the Devils commands, 
and do mischief, they were punished; nor durst they abstain from their 
Nocturnal Coventicles. Many Histories confirm these things; we make 
but a brief Abstract of them, the foresaid Authors may satisfie the 
Reader fully therein. 
 
VII. Sometimes they make natural Remedies to produce preternatural 
Effects; as by giving the party somewhat to eat, but that that is eaten 
hath no power to raise such strange Symptomes, but rather gives power 
to the Witch, by giving any to, or receiving any thing from the party that 
is to be bewitched; and until then, some Witches have confessed that 
they could not have their minds, or power to bewitch; so a Neighbour 
of mine tells me concerning his Sister, long intended to be bewitched by a 
Witch; and of one in the Isle of Ely, I heard the like, who could not 
be bewitched until the Witch had got him to eat meat with her: The 
Proverb is, It is ill medling with edged Tooles; or Bad daring to catch 
a Bear by the Tooth; it is worse daring, to have to do with the DeDil. 
 
VIII. Witches have another way, when these will not do, or at 
least so suitably as the occasion stands, that is, to Metamorphose or 
transform themselves into Cats, Rats, Flyes, Bees, Wolves, &c. 
and sometime they lie in lurking holes (as Remigius pathetically describes) 
seeking our ruine and mischief, while we sleep securely, little 
distrusting any thing when we lie down; Therefore (saith he) it is best for 
us to commit and commend our selves to God in our Prayers when we lie down, 
and desire his Protection; for there have been of all sorts of men, both for 
goodness and greatness, harmed by them. He relates of one that confessed she 
transformed her self into the shape of a Cat, and the People of the 
house let her run up and down, not thinking any thing; and when they 
were gone out of the house, with a Powder she had in the bottom or 
claw of her foot, she sprinkled the face of the Child in the Cradle, and 
it died. 
 
A Lawyer told me, at an Assizes of this County, he heard a Witch 
say at Bench, before the Judge and her Accusers; She was sure not to die 
yet: for all the mischief she had done, was in transforming her self into the 
[^p.19^] 
shape of a Bumble Bee; and biting the Maids thread often in pieces as she 
spun; which Maid came in against her. It would be too tedious here to 
descry how Witches can thus alter their bodies, or in a manner annihilate 
them. This world was made of nothing, by Spiritual Power, and may 
be resolved into nothing again by the same Power; and we can resolve 
dense Bodies into Air, and coagulate Air into Water; and the Devil, 
quatenus a Spirit, can do that, that a Spirit can do; but as being the 
worse, and weaker then God, he varies; but by Gods permission he is 
able to do much. 
 
Lest any should doubt of the Transformation of Witches, and how 
they are sensible in the shapes of Wolves, Cats, Mice, Dogs, Hoggs, &c. 
and act the parts of sensitive Creatures therein, and copulate with the 
Creatures of the shape they assume, and eat sometime such meat, and 
devour Children in the shape of Wolves, let them read Remigius his 
proper chapter, Peter de Loyer, John Triremius, Bodinus, Herodotus, 
Pompolius Mela, Solinus, Master Gage of the VVest Indies, and others: 
as Sprangerus, Vierus, and Vincentius, witnesses enough; who also 
testifie the ability of VVitches, through Diabolical Power given them, 
to transform and metamorphose any men or women they have power 
to hurt into what shape they please, commonly holding similitude with 
some of Gods created Animals. 
 
And in the shape of VVolves have divers VVitches lacerated and 
eaten those they thirsted to be revenged of, or those that casually 
fell into their hands, I should rather say their Clawes; which when 
Michael Verdunus, and Peter Burgotus (as Vierus lib. 6. cap. 13. 
testifies) first saw, they were afraid of their new form they had brought 
themselves into, thus destroying Men and Cattel, they thought not to 
be found out by the secular Authority, and so to raign securely in their 
Homicide. 
 
[}Of the Cure of Diseases Caused by Witchcraft.}] 
 
I. Of the Cure of possession, [^GREEK OMITTED^]; some are cast out by 
Prayers, some by Necromancy; one Dæmon commands another; there 
be several Charms and Rites to which Spirits are subject, and by 
which they are bound; as the conjuring down those that walk into such 
a ground, or Sea, for such a term of years; and the Devils are forced 
to live under Laws, and to be commanded by those Men that without 
the Extraordinary Mercy of GOD, must serve them in Vassalage 
and slavery for ever hereafter. 
 
[^p.20^] 
Herbs are boiled in a Pot, over which the bewitched do hold their 
heads, when the fit approaches; Master Gibbons of Harborough cured 
one so; and like a Mouse leaped forth of her mouth, and she was absolutely 
freed; a Gentleman living nigh Huntingdon, who told me, 
was Spectatour. 
 
Others were with some stinking Suffumige cast on Coals; so was a 
Maid I knew cured, a Mouse in similitude, leaped from her Mouth, 
held open when the fit approached. 
 
A sober Antient Gentleman told me, he intimately knew one in the 
Isle of Ely, whose name he told, but now I have forgot it; he was bewitched, 
and before strange fits he had like a Mouse came to him, which 
none could hinder; he sent to a white Witch, or Necromancer, 
Sorcerer, Magician, or what you please to call him; he gave him an 
Amulet or Charm to hang about his neck, and so long as he wore that, 
he was freed; he durst not leave it off; this Wizard asked if they 
were wicked People, else, he said, he could not, or would not help 
them. 
 
Anne Bodenham, we read in Henry More, when she raised Spirits, 
made a stinking perfume on Coals, after her Circle was drawn, and 
conjuring Charmes in her Book read; the Devil loves, it seems, 
evil base Odours, aud Sluttishness is commanded, as Regmigius was 
told by them. 
 
2. Of the Cure of plain Witchcraft, wherein nothing palpably enters 
the Sick, or is alive within them; and first of preservation. 
 
Divers things are traditionally delivered, as Preservatives against 
Witchcraft, wore about us, and offensive to Devils, therefore I believe 
came Rosemary, Misselto, and Jvy, to be hung up in Houses, because 
the Antients judged those to defend Houses from evil Spirits; Lævinus 
Lemnius, in one of his last Chapters of his Book of the Wonders of 
Nature, hath divers such, as he and others, wish to wear Corral, 
Lapis Amianthes, Graines of Paris, Piony, and Rhue, to defend 
from Witchcraft; one of London, a German Physitian, highly extolls 
Corral, and told a friend of mine he cured one bewitched 
with it. 
 
Our best way is to desire GOD's Protection, and pray to him, and 
keep our selves from wickedness; and to have nothing to do with those 
that have reason to be suspected for Witches, or to do preternatural 
Acts; though indeed the stupid and superstionated Vulgar, judge onely 
that honest, many times, that is within the reach of their Capacity and 
Experience onely. 
 
2ly. Concerning the Cure of Witchcraft, we shall divide it into these 
[^p.21^] 
seven heads, because Experience hath shewen they have been helped so 
many several wayes. 
 
1. To punish the Witch, and that two wayes, 1. Either her own 
Body, or 2. The thing bewitched. 
 
2. Call upon GOD. 
 
3. Use Specifical Medicines, antipathetical to Dæmons, if there be 
any such. 
 
4. Use, or make the Witch use the Ceremonies of ridding the Sickness. 
 
5. Make her, if the other fail, either to take the Disease her self, 
or transfer it to some Dog, or Brute. 
 
6. Search, if there be no Charmes, or things resembling the Sick, 
laid about the house. 
 
7. If the Witch is imprisoned, she is void of hurt, and Satan leaves 
her. 
 
First, Briefly to demonstrate all these, the afore named Authors can 
justifie all these, which we need not here reiterate. 
 
If any is troubled, as our Diagnostick Signs Demonstrate, one thing 
being compared with another, and the subsequents with the Precedents, 
 
1. Punish the Witch, threaten to hang her if she helps not the Sick: 
scratch her, and fetch blood, for so, saith Thomas Bartholinus, Witchcraft 
is held to be dissolved; and so I heard from a sober Physitian, a 
Child bewitched by Magaret Bell, nigh Lutterworth in Leicestershire, was 
delivered. 
 
2. Punish the thing bewitched; putting red hot Iron in the Churm, 
when Butter would not come, hath burned her in the Guts; burning 
the Excrements of one bewitched, hath made her Anus sore; tying the 
Fat or Cauldren of Drink hard with Cords, that hath boiled over when 
scarce any Fire was under, hath made the Witch be sore girt and pained; 
stopping up Bottles of that Drink that hath been bewitched, hath made 
the Witch able neither to urine or deject, until they were opened; if 
an Horse or Hen, &c. be bewitched to death, if they are burnt alive, 
and in the fit, the Witch comes, and complains: These are all Examples 
that I, by my diligent Inquisition into these things, have been 
informed of; But Authors in other Ages, and other Countryes, will 
bear me out in the truth hereof. 
 
2ly. Call upon GOD; pray earnestly & uncessantly; we are in no case 
to throw away Faith, and not in any to take Presumption: let none think, 
I am better then such an one, and GOD ought to defend me, and I am 
sure I shall not be hurt if I go amongst Witches or Spirits, this is Presumption; 
[^p.22^] 
better than thee have suffered worse: for matter of driving 
out Devils, Prayer avails more than in ordinary Witchcraft, yet some 
cannot be cured at all; and Remigins saith, In one the Devil answered, 
Because the Sick had never prayed to God for restauration; but the Witches 
gave other Reasons, why they could not cure others; such things are 
secret to us, yet common in the Councels of Spirits; and Witches 
cannot cure, nor cure by any other way, than that their Fiends or Familiar 
Spirits order and command, or at least this is most common. 
 
Thirdly, Use Specifical Medicines, antipathetical to Dæmons, if any 
be so qualified, and effectually so: Corral, Ætites, Emerods, Rhue, 
Piony, Rosemary, Misselto, and Birch, were used by the Antients: 
some of the Antients thought all Convulsions and Epileptick passions, 
Vertigoes, and Hystericks, to arise from Dæmons and Spirits; and tying 
these about their necks, and giving them inwardly, they were 
helped; so that false Foundations must needs have rotten Superstructures. 
 
Pliny, lib. 30. cap. 2. Relates that Cynocephalæa, an Hearb that is called 
in Egypt Osirites, prevails against all Witchcraft; and that the Grammarian 
Appion raised the Ghost of Homer by it, to tell him what 
Country man he was, but received no answer, as he durst relate. 
 
Malthiolus saith, The Seed of the Hearb True-love, +Qi at a time drunk 
for twenty dayes, cures Diseases caused by Fascination. 
 
Lobelius, pag. 87. saith, the Herb Priamis, with white Pepper and 
Wines, looses Witchcraft. 
 
Thomas Bartholin, for such as cannot copulate and eject sperme, 
with their own Wives through Witchcraft, praises from others Birch 
Tree. 
 
For Love-Enchantment, Skenkius, Observ. Medecinal: pag. 515. enjoyns 
to take of Unious Stones, and Saint John's-wort, called Fuge Dæmonum, 
equal parts, and a little Balm, give them in drink, and hang 
the Loadstone, Amulet-like, about their necks. 
 
P. Droetus cap. 8, Consilii novi de pestilentia, saith, An Amulet of Quicksilver 
prevails against Plague and Witchcraft: An ignorant Physitian I 
know, layes it under the Pillow in a quill. 
 
Marcellus Donatus in Medica Historia Mirabilis, hath discussed many 
things concerning Witches and Dæmons: amongst the rest he questions 
whether Galen did believe there were any Dæmons or no, and he brings 
this Sentence in his Book of Medicines easie to be prepared, to prove he 
did, Caridion, et latum cuminum, et zochii radicem ad tertiam partem decoque, 
et ex vino veter, potui da, gestet et glaneum ossa, hæc enim suffita Dæmones 
abigunt. See lib.2.cap.1. 
 
[^p.23^] 
Greg. Horstius: Sect. 7. quest. et Epistol. Med. writing to Hector Schlanhovius 
in Answer to his, disputes the Case, Whether Natural Remedies 
may cure a Disease from a Preternatural Cause, and it may sometime; 
Ulcers have been cured, so writes Schlanhovius, Petrus Pomponatius 
lib de Incantationibus; and Horstius reckons two, one that had a sore 
Breast, out of which came a long piece of Glasse, another of an Opthalmy, 
voided pieces of the Besome, and they lost the Besomes they had 
newly bought, the Witch used them; but it is but sometimes, and most 
in outward Ails, that common Medicines will cure. 
 
Fourthly, Use lawful, and make the Witch use those Ceremonies 
she knows to Cure the Sick. Master Culpeper relates how one tied in Pudendis 
Virilibus so that he could not joyn with his wife, was freed by 
making Urine through his Wives Wedding Ring, Barthol. mentions the 
like of pissing through a Birch Besome. 
 
One white Witch is recorded to Cure by the heads of Crows and 
Braines of Cats: And if Natural Remedies can have a Preternatural 
force given by VVitches, to cause Diseases; why not as well, when 
they please, to Cure Sicknesses? As Mrs. Bodenham of Salisbury, 1653. 
sent five ragged Boyes (Spirits) (it seems the Devil is poor, he can keep 
his servants no better cloathed) with Mris. Goddards Maid, to gather 
in Wilton-Meadow, Dill and Vervain, together with which, she gave 
the paring of her Nails; some were to give in broath to rot their Guts, 
the other to rub about the Pot sides, to make their Teeth fall out; these 
spiritual ragged Boyes were also so hungry, that Mrs. Bodenham threw 
them some bread, and they eat it, and danced; they could not tell 
where the Hearbs in the Meadow were, till they removed the Snow, and 
looked about as others may do; young Daemons! from all such, and participating 
in their actions, the Lord deliver us and defend; for, it is 
He that worketh in us both to will and to do, even of his good pleasure; and it 
is not in man to direct his wayes; for, in him we live, move, and have our 
being. 
 
Some use writ Charms, Verses, and Characters: Paracelsus had some 
knowledge in such, VVitches do nothing by the Stars, they are GOD's 
Creatures, of noble use, and for mans use. 
 
Fifthly, the VVitch is sometimes forced to take the Disease her self, 
and sometimes is sick, as the party she afflicted was; sometimes dies; 
when she is cast into Prison the Sick are sometime delivered; sometime 
he or she (they are most Females, most old women, and most poor) must 
transfer the Disease to other persons, sometimes to a Dog or Horse, or 
Cow, &c. Threaten her, and beat her, to remove it. For the verification 
of these, read Authors. 
 
[^p.24^] 
Search and see if under the threshold of the Door, in the Thatch, or 
in the dust of the house, as Witches Powder is laid, whether there be 
no Charmes, Images, Writ Characters, or other Telesms; for these 
took away and destroyed, the Effascination ceases; Master Lilly in 
his Judgement upon the twelve Astrological Houses, in his Introduction to 
Astrologie, hath set down diverse Natural Remedyes against Witchcraft. 
 
Seventhly, Get the Witch, put her in Prison, her Power then 
ceases, Satan leaves her; sometimes she then acquits those she hath bewitched, 
if Satan will give leave; however, her bewitching of others 
is prevented. 
 
I have been brief, otherwise things might have been described more 
cleerly, and fully: Zoilus and Momus may carp. 
 
Velle sum cuiq; est nec voto vivitur uno. 
 
[^GREEK OMITTED^] 
 
BEcause there be many that will not believe the manifold and manifest 
Experience, many in all Ages and Countryes have had 
of these things; yet when they see the Scriptures (to which 
most, if not all, yield a reverence to, and belief in) in plain 
words and Historical expressions to make out the same, they may be 
convinced of their former rigid Incredulity: Wherefore we drew out 
these places of Scripture, to offer to the Readers perusal and consideration; 
literally they are so to all; but if they are to be interpreted, 
why may not I have the liberty to interpret them to the best of my knowledge, 
as well as another, for the defence of his way? 
 
1. That there be Witches, or those that have familiarity with Spirits, 
or familiar Spirits, Wizards, Conjurers, Diviners, &c. See 2 Chro. 33. 
16.2 Kings 21.6.2 King. 23, 24. 1 Sam. 28.7,8,9 Acts 8, 9,10, 11. 
Exod. 22.18. 
 
2. That Natural Remedies expell Devils, and help the bewitched, 
Tobit. 6.2,7,15,16,17. and Tob. 8.1,2,3. 
 
3. That the Power the Devil gives, is on condition of worship to 
him; Luke 4.6,7. 
[^p.25^] 
4. That Witches can make inanimate things Animate, turn water 
into blood, make the bodies of the dead arise, foretell things to come, 
&c. through the Power the Devil giveth them by the permission of God, 
Exod.7.20,22. and vers. 12. Exod. 8.7. Num. 23.8,9,10. 
 
5. That Spirits Immediately, as well as Mediately, by Humane 
Agents, may hurt and disease: Job 2.7. Luke 1.19,20,22. 
 
6. That the best of Men may be hurt by ill Spirits, by the permission 
of God: Job 2.6,7. Job 1.12,13,14. Matth. 4. 
 
7. That Spirits commonly work by stirring up Natural Causes, Job. 1. 
16,19. 
 
8. That they act by Ceremonies, the good as well as bad, Exod. 7.11,12,22. 
Exod. 8.6,7-17. Isaiah 6.6,7. Jerem. 13. vers. 1, to the 12. 
Jerem. 24. vers. 1. to 10. Jer. 27.2.& 28.10. Jer. 51. vers. 60.63,64. 
Ezek 4. and 5 chapters. Ezek. 12.18. & chap. 24. vers. 3, to 6. chap.37.16,17. 
Joh. 9.6,7. Acts. 2.2,3. 
 
9. That all have not Power, as to bewitch, so not to heal, or cast 
out Devils, by the means and Ceremonies that others may, Mat. 10.1. 
Mark. 9.18,19. Acts 19.16. 
 
10. That many Devils may be in one body; in some seven, as 
Mark 16.19. or one alone, as Tobit 8.3. Acts 19.15,16. A Legion, 
that is, many thousands, Luke 8.30. 
 
11. That the Devil may possesse Man, see all the aforesaid places, 
and also Beasts, Luke 8.33. compared with Matth. 8.28,30. 
 
12. That all are not possessed alike, that are alike possessed, Mar. 9.17. 
to 29. Luke 8.30 some are Dumb, as Mark 9.17. some speak, as 
Luke 8.30. 
 
13. That the evil Spirits may torture, and would destroy Man, 
Mark 9.22. 
 
14. That the Symptoms from Preternatural Causes, are more violent 
and strange then from Natural, Mark 9.10,20,26. Luke 8.30. Mar. 5. 
3,4,5. 
 
15. That those possessed may do Preternatural acts, often beyond 
the Power of Men to do, Luke 8.29. 
 
16. That the evil Spirits can go no farther then God permits, Exod. 
8.18,19. Luke 8.33. Job 1.12. Job 2.6. 1 King. 22.19, to 23. 
 
17. That good Spirits, and also bad, quatenus Spirits, have done, 
and consequently may raise Earthquakes, and Winds, and make, and 
appear in Fire, Job 1.16,19. and Job 31.1. Numb. 9.15. Exod. 24.17. 
Exod. 13.21. 
 
18. That one Spirit may destroy an Army of men, Isai. 37.36. 
 
19. That Spirits can see all the world in a moment, Luke 4.5. 
 
[^p.26^] 
20. That Spirits both good and bad can make the natural fleshy bodies 
of Men to flie in the Air, Matth. 4,5,8. Acts 8.39. 1 Sam. 28.14. and 
that very swift, Luke 4.5. 
 
21. That there be degrees of Spirits, even as there be greater and 
lesse, so better and worse, Matth. 12.24. Jude vers. 9. Revel. 12.17. 
 
22. That Armies of Spirits, horsed and armed, may fight and run 
to and fro in the Air. 2 Maccabees 5.2,3. 
 
23. That Spirits may raise Natural Bodies, and use Natural Weapons, 
and do therewith Actions on Earth, 2 Maccabees 3.24,25,26. 
2 King.2.11. 
 
24. That the good and evil Spirits may be sometimes together, Job 1. 
6. Job. 2.1. Jude vers. 9. 1 King. 22,19. to the 23. 
 
25. That Spirits are not tied to one place, but wander up and down, 
Job 1.7. Job 2.2. God is every where, 2 Chron. 7.18. 
 
26. That a million of Spirits may be in one room or place, Luke 8. 
30. 
 
27. That Spirits may assume Natural Bodies as ours, and put them 
off again, 2 Maccabees 3.24,25,26. Gen. 18.2. Gen. 19.1. Judg.13.3,19, 
20. Exod. 24.10,11. 
 
28. That Spirits appear after diverse manners and shapes, Dan. 5 5. 
Gen.3.1,2. Job 4.14,15,16. Ezek. 1.4. to the 14. Acts 2.2,3. Exod. 3.2. 
Acts 9.3. to 7. Exod. 24.9.10,11. and chapt. 13.21. 
 
29. That the Bodies and Instruments Spirits raise, when they would 
perform Actions here on Earth, are sometimes so material, that they are 
tangible as well as visible and audible, 2 Maccabees 3.24,25. Tobit 6.5, 
10. Gen. 19.10. Luke 24.39. Tobit 5.6.2 Maccabees 5.2,3. Joh. 20.20, 
27. compared to Luke 24.39,40. 
 
30. That Spirits are sometimes only audible, not visible nor tangible. 
1 Sam. 3.4,5,6. Acts 9.7. 
 
31. That Spirits, with the bodies they raise, perform divers Humane 
Actions, Tobit. 3.17. Tobit 6.8. 
 
32. That they sometimes eat and drink, Tobit. 6.5. Luke 24,41,42, 
43. compared with John 21. vers. 5. to 15. Gen. 19.3. Gen. 18.5. to the 9. 
 
33. That they be guides in Journeyes, Exod.13.21. Tobit 5.6. 
 
34. That they have washed their feet, and lyen down like Men, 
Gen. 18.4. chapter 19.2,3. 
 
35. And it may be construed that they use coition, and beget, from 
Gen, 6.4. 
 
36. That Spirits appear more or fewer; 2 Macc. 5.2,3. an army 
appeared; Gen.18.2 three Spirits, & Gen. 19.1. two appeared, & Tobit 3. 
17. but one; and what is not in Scripture by manifest expression, may be 
[^p.27^] 
argued from thence by necessary Deduction; and what is said of Angels, 
is referable to Spirits, for all Angels are Spirits, but all Spirits are 
not Angels. 
 
The Power of Spirits is not to be compared to, nor limited by the 
Power of Natural Causes; and if the motion of one natural thing cannot 
be solved by the motion of another, much lesse may supernatual be 
solved by natural Causes. 
 
And if Lightning will so soon exanimate Men, and they die suddenly, 
no wound seen, but only black; and drink up Buckets of Water, 
not hurting the Bucket; or contrariwise, breaking a Barrel, and fixing 
the Beer in it that it shall not run forth; or melt the Sword in the Scabbard, 
the Sheath it is in, unhurt; or Gold to be melted in the Chest, 
that being safe, or if Herb Moonwort will unshoe the Horse and loose 
his fetters, or Herb Loosestrife tied about Oxens necks make them agree; 
or if Herbs, or Lozenges of Roots of Ciclamen, or Caro Bufonum will 
cause Love; Darnell, madness; Wine, mirth and alacrity; and Corral, 
Miselto, and Wood-Nightshade, release the bewitched, and drive away 
Fiends; or if the Loadstone can draw Iron, or Gold Quicksilver; or 
if a few Graines of prepared Gold will blow up an house, or Wolves 
Guts, unseen, astonish Horses, or the looks of the Basilisk, kill Men; or 
Unicorns Horn, Spiders; or if the Ash-Tree will kill Adders or Serpents; 
the Remora stop the Ship in its carrear: or Torpedo-fish, benumb 
the hands that holds the angle, at the hook of which she is hung; or if 
an Air or suddain blast can take away all mens Limbs, and sometimes 
Senses, and make Apoplectick; or the fume of Char-coal in a close 
roome make lethargick; if Apium Risus, or Herb Sardis, will make 
Men die convulsive and laughing: if these, I say, and thousands 
their like, be really true, (which our other Writings may manifest, if 
they come ever to be published) let these first be solved by Reason and 
by the course in Nature on other things, before supernaturals come to 
be compared by natural, and to be denyed to be, by reason of the impossibility 
of their cause. 
 
