[^Harvey, Gideon: Morbus anglicus^] 
 
[}Morbus Anglicus: 
OR, 
THE ANATOMY 
OF 
CONSUMPTIONS. 
CONTAINING 
The Nature, Causes, Subject, 
Progress, Change, Signes, Prognosticks, 
Preservatives; and several 
Methods of Curing all Consumptions 
Coughs, and Spitting of Blood. 
With Remarkable Observations touching the 
same DISEASES. 
To which are Added, 
Some brief Discourses of Melancholy, Madness, 
and Distraction occasioned by Love. 
Together with certain new Remarques 
touching the Scurvy and Ulcers of the Lungs. 
 
The like never before published. 
 
By GIDEON HARVEY, M. D. 
 
London, Printed for Nathaniel Brook at 
the Angel in Cornhil. 1666.}] 
 
[^Omitted an advertisement to the reader, covering 6 pages.^] 
[^Extract 1, pp. 1-60^] 
 
[^p.1^] 
[}THE 
ANATOMY 
OF 
CONSUMPTIONS.}] 
 
[}The Proem.}] 
 
COntingent (accidental) Death 
seems to be the sole adæquate 
(justly fitting) object of popular Courage; 
but a necessary and unavoidable 
coffin strikes paleness into the stoutest 
heart, and beyond all other swifter 
terribles, the lazy but sure paces of a 
Consumption, which we observe oft 
willingly inclines those to imbrace vain 
[^p.2^] 
pity, whose resolution Fire nor Sword 
can relaxe. This so mortal an Enemy 
to humane life doth the more earnestly 
implore succour from Charitable Physicians, 
the ambition to which Character 
hath wrested these Medical (Physical) 
pages (leaves) from our lucubriations 
(night Studies). 
 
[}CHAP. I. 
Of the Original, Contagion, and frequency 
of Consumptions.}] 
 
IT's a great chance we find, to arrive to 
ones grave in this English Climate, 
without a smack of a Consumption, Death's 
direct doore to most English hard Students, 
Divines, Physicians, Philosophers, deep 
Lovers, Zelots in Religion, & c. London's 
Weekly Bills number deep in Consumptions; 
the same likewise proving the inseparable 
accidents (attendants) to most of the other 
[^p.3^] 
Diseases; which instances do evidently bring 
a Consumption under the notion of a Pandemick, 
or Endemick, or rather a Vernacular 
Disease (a disease alwayes reigning in a 
Countrey) to England; that is a common 
disease owing its rise to some common external 
and perennal (lasting all the year) 
cause of a Countrey; as a Consumptive Air, 
or a Consumptive Dyet. viz. eating much 
Flesh, drinking Hopt drink, & c. And beyond 
this denomination the disease may not 
improperly be stiled Epidemick (popular,) 
that is, surprizing many at a certain season 
of the year; as we may observe Consumptions 
to be most raging about the Spring and 
Fall, according to the dictate of the Divine 
old man (Hippocrates,) Malum ver tabidis, 
itemq~ autumnus. that is, the Spring is 
bad for Consumptives, and so is the Fall. 
And considering withall its malignity and 
catching nature, it may be connumerated 
(numbred) with the worst of Epidemicks 
(popular diseases,) since next to the Plague, 
Pox, and Leprosy, it yeilds to none in point 
of Contagion (catching;) for it's no rare 
observation here in England, to see a fresh 
[^p.4^] 
coloured lusty young man yoak'd to a 
Consumptive Female (Wife,) and him 
soon after attending her to the Grave. 
Moreover nothig we find taints sound 
Lungs sooner, than inspiring (drawing in) 
the breath of putrid (stinking and beginning 
to rot) ulcer'd, or Consumptive Lungs; many 
having fallen into Consumptions only by 
smelling the breath or spittle of Consumptives, 
others by drinking after them; and 
what is more, by wearing the Cloaths of 
Consumptives, though two years after they 
were left off. 
 
The disease descending frequently from 
Consumptive Parents to their Children, 
speaks it Hereditary (gotten as it were by 
inheritance from ones Parents,) insomuch 
that whole Families, sourcing (descended 
from tabefyed (consumed and dryed away) 
progenitours (ancestors,) have all made 
their Exits (dyed) through Consumptions; 
and in that order and Sympathy of consanguinity 
(near Relation,) that I have heard 
of six Brothers Parisians (Inhabitants of 
Paris) all expired of Consumptions exactly 
six months one after another. Besides, I have 
[^p.5^] 
known several, Father and Son, Mother and 
Daughter, tabefyed (consumed) within 
Twelve months one of the other. 
 
Most contagious Maladies (catching diseases) 
have their Original recorded, the 
Leprosie in the primitive generation of the 
Jews, the Pox in the year 1494. the Scurvy 
in 1495; but the Consumption o'retops 
them all in antiquity, that questionless being 
the primitive disease before all others, 
which in all probability put a period (end) 
to our Protoplasts (first formed) Adam 
and Eve's days; for they being disseised 
(turn'd out) of their most happy seat Paradise, 
and so far discarded (cast out) out 
of Gods favour, could not but fall into a 
most dismal, sad, and melancholique drooping, 
for the loss of their happiness, the 
occasional cause and forerunner of a Marcour, 
or drying and withering of their flesh 
and radical moisture (the deep oyly moisture 
of the parts,) or otherwise they might have 
Spun the thred of their lives much longer, 
their principles of life being created in 
them to extend to an Eval duration (lasting 
without end.) 
 
[^p.6^] 
[}CHAP. II. 
Of the various acceptions of Consumptions.}] 
 
THe common chink, through which 
errors and erroneous opinions do and 
have slipt into the Scholastique republique, 
to the endangering and enfoncing (drowning) 
of truth, is the too frequent misapprehension 
of the name of a thing, which being understood 
in one sense by me, and in another by 
you, must necessarily occasion us to discrepate 
(disagree) in the thing it self; and this 
certainly is the great cause of so many controversies 
and disputes between the Learned, 
and such others as are equally ballanced in 
right reason: now were not the misconception 
of the name various between them, 
being considered really rational, they could 
not but agree in the thing it self, or otherwise 
they could not be estimated both rational. 
When my self was a Student in the Universities, 
[^p.7^] 
and oft being desired to oppose ex 
tempore, did no more than wilfully misapprehend 
the names of things contained in 
the question, and upon those false nominal 
mis-conceptions, could with the greatest 
ease imaginable perform that task as long 
as I pleased, and so may you, or any man 
else. Being now conscious of the great 
errors and dangers, that may result out of 
a mis-conception of the names of things, 
shall so much the more apply my endevours 
to a distinct explanation (explaining) of the 
names of my Subject, which usually are 
variously understood. Physicians in their 
Physical discourses, make use of several 
names, which are all translated into this 
one word of a Consumption, as if they bore 
no different significations; such are Phthisis 
Phthoe, Pye, Tabes, Morbus tabisicus, 
Marcor, Marasmus, a Marcid Feaver, an 
Hecktick Feaver, and an Atrophia. 
 
The first denomination, to wit Phthisis, 
an Athenian word, is generally taken for any 
kind of an universal diminution (lessening) 
and colliquation (melting) of the body, 
which acception its Etymology (derivation) 
[^p.8^] 
[^GREEK OMITTED^], to consume, implyes; 
but some are of opinion the word 
[^GREEK OMITTED^] ought to be written [^GREEK OMITTED^] with an 
[^GREEK OMITTED^], deriving it from [^GREEK OMITTED^] to spit. 
 
Hippocrates 7. Aph. 16. by Phthisis (Consumption) 
intends only such a diminution 
or shrinking of the Body, as follows incurable 
Ulcers of the Lungs, that are accompanyed 
with a small Feaver. Cornelius 
Celsus applyed the word Phthisis to these 
three Diseases. 1. to an Atrophia, and in 
that signification did Aristotle also take it, 
when he wrot in 28. Probl. 1. that Dionysius 
dyed of a Phthisis. 2. To an Ulcer of the 
Lungs. 3. To a Cachexia, or ill habit of 
body; but the Greek Physicians were wont 
to call any one [^GREEK OMITTED^]; i. e. Phthisicus, 
who was either grown lean only, or who 
was taken with a proper Phthisis, and consumed 
away; or who was naturally inclined 
to a proper Phthisis, namely by having a 
long Neck, a narrow Chest or Breast, 
Shoulders sticking out like wings, (whence 
they named such a one [^GREEK OMITTED^], that is, 
winged) a weak Brain, apt to send down 
Rheums or Catarrhs, and weak Lungs, that 
[^p.9^] 
are disposed to receive Rheums and humours 
from the Brain. Lastly, Phthisis is 
properly and strictly taken according to 
Hipp. for a Consumption of the Body, following 
an incurable Ulcer of the Lungs, and 
attended with an Hectick Feaver. 
 
Phthoe is likewise an Athenian word, 
importing a proper Consumption, occasioned 
by an Ulcer of the Lungs; but Galen 5. 
Met. 15. by Phthoe intends the spitting of 
blood. 
 
Pye is by Aretæus (lib. 1. de caus. & 
sign. diut.) used for a proper Consumption. 
 
Tabes is the Latin word responding (answering) 
to Phthisis, and implyes the same 
proper and improper significations. Hippocrates 
makes mention of six sorts of Tabes, 
or proper Consumptions: viz. first libr. 2. 
de Morb. he affirms that the body oft wasts 
by reason of a thick Phlegm, being retained 
within the Lungs, and there putrefying; 
according to which sense he writes, that a 
Distillation in the Lungs is suppurated 
(turn'd to matter) in twenty days. 7. Aph. 
38. The second he terms a Consumption 
of the Kidneys. Thirdly, the word Tabes 
[^p.10^] 
is oft understood by him for a Consumption 
of the Lungs without being ulcerated, and 
depending upon a hot and dry Distemper 
of the Lungs, or an Hectick Feaver. 
Fourthly, by Tabes he doth also conceive a 
Consumption of the Lungs with an Ulcer 
and Hectick Feaver. Fifthly, lib. 2. de 
Morb. he inserts another kind of Tabes, 
which he calls a Tabes Dorsalis, or 
Consumption of the back. Sixthly, 3. Aph. 
10. & 13. he proposes two kinds of Tabes 
or Consumptions, the one being a wasting 
of the body, occasioned by any internal 
cause, the other happening through some 
Ulcer in the Lungs. Morbus tabisicus 
is a term expressed by Hippocrates, 
denoting any kind of Extenuation or Consumption. 
 
Marcor, sive ex ægritudine Senectus, 
sen ex Morbo Senium, is an extreme 
diminution or Consumption of the body, 
following the extinction (quenching) of 
the Innate (born and bred in us) heat, much 
like to a tree, that's withered or dryed 
away by excess of heat, or length of time. 
The said Marcour may likewise be caused 
[^p.11^] 
by Famine or over abstinence from food. 
Read Galen lib. de Marcore. 
 
A Marasmus, imports three significations, 
viz. 1. A Consumption following a 
Feaver. 2. A Consumption or withering of 
the body by reason of a natural extinction of 
the native heat, which commonly happens 
in those that dye of old Age. 3. An extenuation 
of the body, caused through an immoderate 
heat and driness of the parts, 
which sort is common to young and old 
folks. A Marasmus is otherwise distinguish'd 
into true and false. The former is an equal 
diminution of all the parts of the body; the 
latter is an extenuation (shrinking) of a 
single part only; as, the Stomach and Liver 
are oft observed to be consumed or withered 
in those, that dye of an Hectick Feaver; 
the like extenuation doth frequently happen 
to the breast, Mesentery (a thick Skin of 
the Belly that tyes the Guts) Colon, Jejunum, 
(both names of Guts) and Kidneys; 
but the Diaphragma (the Midriffe, being 
a thick Musculous Skin that separates the 
breast from the Belly) is only exempted 
from a Marasmus, or withering, because 
[^p.12^] 
that would necessarily intercept the breath, 
or occasion a Phrensie, before it could arrive 
to such a dryness. Lastly, a Marcour is 
either imperfect, tending to a greater withering, 
which is cureable; or perfect, that 
is an entire wasting of the body, excluding 
all means of Cure. 
 
Febris Marasmodes, sen febris marcida, 
according to Galen lib. de Marcore cap. 5. 
is an equal withering or drying up of all the 
parts of the body, it's ordinarily a consequent 
of a burning colliquative (melting) 
Feaver, whereby the humours, grease, fat, 
and flesh of the body are melted, and afterwards 
flow into the capacity (hollow) of 
the Belly: The softer and moister parts 
being thus melted away, the Febril (Feaverish) 
heat continuing its adustion (burning) 
upon the dryer fleshy parts, changes 
into a Marcid Feaver, which said parts 
wasting gradually throught an insensible 
evaporation of their subtiler particles, are 
at length dryed up into the hardness and 
toughness of Leather. 
 
An Hectick Feaver implyes a twofold 
sense. 1. It's taken for any confirm'd, 
[^p.13^] 
fix'd, and durable Feaver, admitting of no 
easie cure, or rather a Feaver that's grown 
habitual, in opposition to a Schetical (superficial 
or moveable) Feaver, which being 
but lately arrived is easily expelled, as a 
Diary or Putrid Feaver. 2. It's more generally 
understood for a Feaver in the solid 
parts, into whole Penetrails (depth) and 
essential principles insinuating, is there as 
it were planted or rooted, and consequently 
proves the most stubborn to Cure 
of all other Diseases. What is meant by the 
solid parts and the Essential principles you 
may know in the next Chapter. 
 
An Atrophy is by some taken for a diminution 
of the body, for want of good and 
laudable nutriment (food,) which being 
rejected by the parts, must necessarily shrink 
for want of better nutriture. By others 
it's understood for a Consumption of the 
parts of the body, weakly or depravately 
(wrongly,) or not at all attracting 
nutriment, whether it be good or bad, or 
insufficient in quantity. Lastly, it implyes 
a diminution of the body, happening by 
reason of some fault in the Excretive (expelling) 
[^p.14^] 
faculty of the parts, excerning or 
evacuating more than necessary. Peruse 
Galen de Sympt. differ. cap. 4. The said 
Consumption may also be supposed to arrive 
through fault of the Retentive (retaining) 
faculty of the parts, not retaining the nutritive 
(nourishing) humours long enough. 
Thus much for differencing those terms, 
which otherwise might erroneously be taken 
for one and the same kind of Consumption. 
 
[}CHAP. III. 
Of the Fundamental Principles, or 
Balsamick Mixture.}] 
 
BEfore we make a further inroad into 
this Treatise, it will be material to 
acquaint my Reader with the sense of 
these terms, which we have familiarly made 
use of throughout this discourse, namely 
Fundamental or Essential Principles, Essential 
or Balsamick mixture, Innate heat and 
[^p.15^] 
Radical or Balsamick moisture: all these 
though differing in words, import the same 
signification, as we shall now discover to 
you. In order to this, you are to take 
notice, that an Infant in the Womb principally 
receives its first constitution or 
generation from the Sperm (or Seed) of 
its Father, injected (cast into) into the 
Womb of its Mother, which (to wit the 
Womb) contributes little else to it, than 
the earth to the Seed, that's shed or sown 
in her, namely keeps the Seed close together, 
that the Spirits may not evaporate 
(fly out in vapours,) cherishes it by her own 
Innate (rooted and fix'd) and Influent (sent 
from the heart) heat and spirits, thereby 
stirring, strengthening, and assisting the 
spirits of the Seed in the Womb, in forming 
the parts of the Infant intended; and lastly, 
transmits blood to the Seed to give the parts 
so formed an increase. The Seed consisting 
of a glutinous (glewy) or Balsamick (thick 
and cleaving like to a Balsam) moisture, 
and a turgency (fulness) of Spirits, displays 
it self (being now thus inclosed and stirred 
in the Womb) into several parts of various 
[^p.16^] 
(different) figures and shapes, as, into a 
Heart, Brain, Liver, Spleen, Arms, Legs, & c. 
These parts being of a very small proportion, 
as formed out of a small quantity of 
Seed, are no more than Foundation Piles of 
the ensuing body; which are afterwards to 
be increased and raised to a greater bulk, 
by the affluent (flowing to) blood, that's 
transmitted (sent down) out of the Mothers 
body through proper Veins and Arteries 
into the Womb, where it's glewed fast to 
those said foundation (rather fundamental) 
parts, and soon after assimilated or converted 
into flesh, and other similar substances, 
whereby I say every part grows bigger. 
 
The Infant being thus arrived to a competent 
Mole (bigness,) makes its sally out 
of the Womb, that's now grown too little 
to give it any longer harbour; and having 
thus passed the Streights, it's tossed into the 
wide world, where it has got room enough 
to grow into its full dimension (measure,) 
which is performed by the daily ingestion 
(swallowing down) of milk and other food, 
that's in a short time after digested into 
blood which being diffused (spread abroad) 
[^p.17^] 
through the Arteries and Veins to all the 
parts of the body, is, as we instanced before, 
agglutinated (glewed) to those upper parts, 
that were immediately agglutinated to the 
foundation parts in the Womb: and thus 
you see the Infant grows bigger out of the 
Womb, by agglutinating one affllux of 
blood to another. Upon this premitted 
illustration it's no hard task to express to you 
the meaning of Fundamental or Essential 
Principles, which imply nothing else than 
the forementioned Foundation parts. So likewise 
the Essential or Balsamick mixture 
denotes nothing but the Sperm or Seed, 
whereof the fundamental parts consist; and 
it's called Balsamick mixture, because it's 
a glewy spumous matter, mix'd with a 
great quantity of Plastick spirits (or spirits 
of the Sperm, that form the shape of the 
parts in the Womb) into the consistence of 
a Balsam, and may not improperly be 
named Essential, from its constituting the 
essence of the parts. The said Plastick 
spirits are concomitated (attended) with a 
powerful heat, which is therefore denominated 
(named) the Innate heat (or heat 
[^p.18^] 
born in us,) because its rooted and fix'd in 
the fundamental parts, and is inseparable 
from them during life. The Balsamick 
moisture expresses the glewy spumous matter 
of the Sperm, which is termed Radical, 
or the root moisture, because it's the root and 
foundation of all the parts of the body. 
 
Finding you thus conducted through a 
smooth way, we'll instantly open a door, 
to give you passage to a more abstruse 
(hidden,) but pleasant speculation, viz. the 
manner of a proper and improper Consumption, 
together with the reason of the incurability 
of the former, and facil (easie) cure 
of the other. The Sanguin parts, that are 
superstructed (built) upon the said Spermatick 
(seedy,) or rather Fundamental 
parts, out of the continual afflux (flowing 
to) of blood to them, may per-chance be 
wasted or diminish one day for want of 
materials, namely blood, or by reason of 
some indisposition or fault in the blood; the 
next day possibly those defects of the blood 
may be supplyed by a copious (plentiful) 
afflux of good blood, whereby the preceeding 
diminish'd parts happen to re-increase. 
[^p.19^] 
Which ebbing and flowing of the 
parts may in no wise be censured a Consumption, 
improper or proper. But supposing 
the forementioned Consumption 
should prove so durable, as to absorb (dry 
up) and extenuate (diminish) the said Sanguin 
parts to an extreme degree, it's evident, 
that the Fundamental parts must 
necessarily come into danger, which being 
once attaqued (forcibly enter'd upon,) and 
considerably consumed, the superstructure 
(or the whole body, that's built upon the 
Fundamental parts,) must unavoidably fall 
and come to ruine; which degree of Consumption 
we term proper Consumption, as 
obtaining its seat in the foundation of the 
body, and admitting for the most part of no 
cure, or at least a very difficult one. We 
may appositely (to our purpose) compare 
this discourse of a proper and improper Consumption 
to a decaying house, which though 
decaying or falling away by losing a roof, 
or a wall, comes in no great danger; but 
if neglected, the house begins to totter, and 
continuates its rupture (breach) to the very 
foundation, which once wasted or endammaged, 
[^p.20^] 
the house must necessarily fall; 
and so the case stands with a superficial or 
improper, and a fundamental or proper 
Consumption of the body. So that as you'l 
read in the next ensuing Chapter, it's not 
every over-fasting, or over-labouring, or 
Physicking, that renders a man lean, and 
extenuates his parts, comes within the 
Sphere of a Consumption, since such an 
impair is soon rectifyed again; but as I 
inferted in the 4. Chapter, it's a durable 
and somewhat an habitual extenuation (or 
wasting) of the Sanguin or Fleshy parts, 
that are not easily reduced to their pristine 
(old) constitution, by reason of some 
habitual fault or disease of an Entrail, moving 
directly to the Fundamental parts, 
where it may effect a perfect Consumption. 
 
[^p.21^] 
[}CHAP. IV. 
Of the nature of a Consumption in 
general.}] 
 
THe word Consumption being applicable 
to a proper and improper, or true and 
Bastard Consumption, requires from us a 
Generical (general) description, quadrate 
(fitting) to both. So that a Consumption 
in that respect, is a counter-natural 
(against nature) Hectick (deeply fix'd) 
latent (hidden) and equal diminution, 
extenuation, or rather a wasting of all the 
parts of the body, notwithstanding the daily 
ingestion (taking) of food with appetite. 
Whence appears, that the diminution or 
wasting of ones flesh in Feavers, is not to 
be termed a Consumption, because that 
extenuation is acute, and Schetical (superficial,) 
that is violently quick, not lasting, 
and of no difficult cure; whereas in a Consumption 
the diminution is slow, durable, 
fix'd and habitual, and yeilding to no easie 
cure. Neither can it be reputed a Consumption, 
[^p.22^] 
where the body is suddenly extenuated 
by fasting, that being rather a disease of the 
mind, refusing a timely supply of food to 
the body. Moreover it's requisite that extenuation 
(wasting) should be universal, and 
not of some parts only, as in a Dropsie, 
where the upper alone do undergo a diminution, 
and the lower an increase (or swelling;) 
nor of a single part, in which case it's stiled 
an Atrophy, or withering of a part; as an 
Atrophy of an Arm, Leg, Toe, or Finger. 
Lastly, the diminution of parts must be 
latent (hidden,) not caused by an overlabouring, 
or want of sleep, or by being 
over liberal in satisfying Womens impertinences, 
the causes whereof as they are externally 
obvious, so they imply no Consumption; 
though indeed there be a manifest 
shrinking of the flesh, especially in the last 
instance, viz. excess of Amours [/1./] (lust) 
which in many we may observe to cause the 
appearance of a perfect Consumptive, or 
Hippocratical face, as hollow Eyes, a sharp 
Nose, shrunk Visage, & c. Insomuch that 
it's impossible to distinguish them from the 
last degree of Consumptives, but by their 
[^p.23^] 
having a livid circle about their Eyes, (a peculiar 
sign of a goatish extenuation) their 
Schetical (sudden) leanness, and the absence 
of an Hectick Feaver. 
 
Many through their extenuation by a 
course of Physick do oft put a fallacy upon 
peoples fancies, that judge them Consumptive, 
and particularly those that are Physick 
for a Clap, whose specifick (particular) disposition 
of body at that time is in a fortnights 
Physicking to be reduced to an Hippocratean 
(shrunck Consumptive) Visage, in such 
sort, that their acquaintance do usually give 
them up for lost; but herein their state is 
differenced from a proper Consumption, 
that upon their entrance into a course of 
Physick, they are apt in a very short time 
to lose their flesh, so as to counterfeit Anatomies, 
and afterwards upon the least intermission 
of their Medicines to impinguate 
(grow fat) to admiration; besides their 
facil (easie) support of churlish Remedies, 
which none but Pockifyed Patients could 
sustain with so small an impair of strength. 
 
[^p.24^] 
[}CHAP. V. 
Of the nature of a Proper and True 
Consumption}] 
 
IN the preceeding Chapter, we have set 
down a description of a Consumption in 
general, comprehending a Proper or True, 
and Improper or False Consumption. Our 
present purpose is to begin with the first, 
and give you a brief, but plain, explanation 
thereof. Wherefore note, that Physicians 
when terming a Disease, (but in their sense 
it's rather a Symptom) a Consumption, do 
for the most part intend a Proper Consumption, 
which we do here describe, To be an 
habitual (or hectick, confirm'd or radicated) 
slow extenuation against nature; or rather 
a devouring of the Fleshy and Spermatick 
parts of the body, through an immediate slow 
corruption of the Essential mixture, viz. the 
Radical moisture, and the Innate heat. 
Whence you may deduct, that ordinary 
[^p.25^] 
extenuations of a Month or two, more or 
less, are not to be nominated Proper Consumptions, 
which relating to the profound 
Balsamick mixture speak great danger of 
death, difficulty of cure, and implicitly a 
long space of time before any such offence 
against nature can be offer'd, because of the 
deep latency (hidden situation) of the 
substantial principles. 
 
Consumptive extenuations must be against 
nature, to exclude natural ones, occasioned 
through want of food, required to fill up the 
vacuities (empty spaces between the Pores) 
of the parts, that happen through their daily 
dissipation (or dissolution;) but it's rather 
an Absorbing (sucking up) or devouring of 
the parts by Corrupting their Fundamentals, 
whereby every part doth not only shrink, 
but grows sensibly less in its substance, so as 
the parts, as far as they are consumed, can 
never be recovered, or made greater, by 
reason of the dissolution and corruption of 
their Fundamental mixture, and the return 
of their substantial principles into their first 
elements; unless it were possible to infuse 
new substantials into them, which to imagine 
[^p.26^] 
faisible, portends a man to want a grain of 
his right Reason; and certainly none but 
such, as pretend to be meer Chymists, would 
assert, that Potable Gold (aurum potabile, 
or Gold Chymically reduced to a liquor, or 
a thin oyle, thereby being render'd potable, 
or fit to be dranck) contains a vertue of 
recruiting or augmenting Natures Essentials; 
which if possible, it's requisite the said Potable 
Gold should be endued with a capacity of 
being agglutinated (glewed,) and assimilated 
(converted into a likeness), to the Innate 
heat and Radical moisture; or at least be 
virtuated with a power of generating the said 
essentials out of the humours within the 
Vessels. The former of these instanced 
ways is rejected, because it's impossible a 
mineral (as Gold is) that is inanimate, (dead) 
and incapable of receiving life, and of another 
genus (kind,) should be converted into 
the highest and purest degree of an animate 
substance, as the Spermatick essentials are; 
for if minerals are not convertible into another 
Species, though of the same Genus, much 
less can they be surmised reducible into a 
Species of another Genus. Certainly what 
[^p.27^] 
can not be expected from animated plants, 
yea Animals (living moving Creatures,) 
which though belonging to the same Genus 
are only convertible into flesh and other 
dissipable parts, but not into Spermatick 
ones) it's a vanity to look far in dead minerals. 
Touching the vain effects of Aurum 
potabile you may read more at large in the 
second part of my Philosophy Book 1. Chap. 
1. Par. 5. In summa, unless it were imaginable 
to infuse the same animate living Sperm 
into the substance and penetrails (depth) of 
the parts, it's ridiculous to expect reparation 
from any other means; which makes it 
apparent, that it's more easie to generate a 
new man, than to repair one, that's partly 
consumed in his substantials. This by the 
way; but to return to the explanation of the 
forestated description: Putrid Feavers depend 
upon the putrefaction (or a tendance to 
Corruption) of the blood, whose immediate 
effect is the corruption of the said nutritive 
(nourishing) humours, but mediately and 
swiftly (if tending to death) corrupting the 
essential principles of the parts; whereas in 
a Proper Consumption the corruption is 
[^p.28^] 
immediate, and slow. Likewise other 
Diseases, as Dropsies, Jaundises, Ptisicks, & c. 
to arrive to the period of life, must necessarily 
cause a corruption of the essentials, 
though slow, yet not immediately, but mediately 
by corrupting the blood. 
 
Not to be deficient in any thing, that may 
add to the illustration of the subject of this 
Chapter, we shall annex Galen's definition 
of a Simple Tabes, or perfect Consumption; 
lib. de Tabe. A Consumption is the dying of 
a living Creature through dryness. This 
description is generical, extensible to Consumptions 
of Ulcerated Lungs, and those 
that attend simple Hectick Feavers; and so 
far it's agreeing to ours, that it confirms the 
latter branch, viz. that it's a devouring 
corruption of the essential mixture, which 
consisting chiefly of an oyly moisture is corruptible 
through dissipation, or being dryed 
away, which Galen here intends by dryness, to 
wit the drying away of the Balsamick moisture. 
Moreover Galen's Commentators make 
mention of a two fold dryness, the one concomitated 
with a heat, which they call a 
Torrid Tabes; the other with a coldness, 
[^p.29^] 
termed Ex morbo Senium, when the parts 
are consumed through extinction of their 
native heat, and dissipation of their Radical 
moisture. Gal. in the forecited Book subjects 
all the parts of the body to a simple Consumption 
or Tabes, excepting the Lungs, 
which being of a moist and soft temperature 
seem not at all disposed to suscept any dryness. 
But on the contrary, it's ordinary for 
Smiths, Cooks, and others, whose imployment 
is conversant about the Fire, to 
incurre such an extreme dryness of their 
Lungs, that in the dissection of their Carcasses, 
they appear liker Spunges than moist 
Lungs; the like observation you'l read 
below touching the withered Lungs of one 
Pendarves. 
 
[^p.30^] 
[}CHAP. VI. 
Of the nature and kinds of Bastard 
Consumptions.}] 
 
IMproper or Bastard Consumptions are 
only slow growing extenuations (or wastings) 
of the fleshy parts, directly moving 
to a True and Proper Consumption, by reason 
of some indisposition of the intern parts, 
humours, and influent spirits. In proper 
Consumptions there is a devouring of the 
Spermatick parts, and essentials, here only 
of the flesh and humours. So that a Bastard 
Consumption is curable with ease, because 
it's no more than a superficial and growing 
malady, relating to the consumed fleshy 
parts; but the other implyes a very difficult 
cure, not by restoring the Spermatick 
parts, (which as we shewed in the preceeding 
Chapter is impossible;) but only by 
stenting and removing the corruption of the 
forementioned essentials. 
 
[^p.31^] 
A Bastard Consumption chiefly comprehends 
these following. 1. An Hypochondriack 
Consumption. 2. A Scorbuick Consumption. 
3. An Amourous Consumption. 
4. A Consumption of Grief. 5. A Studious 
Consumption. 6. An Apostematick Consumption. 
7. A Cancerous Consumption. 8. An 
Ulcerous Consumption. 9. A Dolorous Consumption. 
10. An Aguish Consumption. 
11. A Febril Consumption. 12. A Cachectick 
Consumption. 13. A Verminous Consumption. 
14. A Consumption of the Rickets. 15. A 
Pockie Consumption. 16. A Poysonous Consumption. 
17. A Bewitch'd Consumption. 
18. A Consumption of the Back. 19. A 
Consumption of the Kidneys. 20. A Consumption 
of the Lungs. 
 
All these tending to a True Consumption, 
unless anticipated (prevented) by a mortal 
acute Disease, do justly come under the notion 
of Bastard, or growing Consumptions. 
Neither is't our purpose to treat farther of 
of these Diseases, than relating to Consumption, 
the manner whereof, how they may be 
conceived to cause such extenuations, we 
shall succinctly (in short) set down in 
particular Chapt. 
 
[^p.32^] 
[}CHAP. VII. 
Of an Hypochondriack Consumption.}] 
 
AN Hypochondriack Consumption is an 
extenuation of the fleshy parts, occasioned 
by an infarction (clogging and over 
filling,) and obstruction of the Spleen, 
pancreas, mesaraick, and Stomachick Vessels, 
through melancholly, or gross, dreggish, 
tartarous humours; whereby it happeneth, 
the blood is not sufficiently defæcated, or 
clarifyed, but remains muddy, and ditchy, 
which stagnating (standing still without motion) 
thus for a while turns saltish and 
acrimonious, offending and perverting the 
Stomach, Spleen, and Liver in their Offices, 
a necessary precedent of vitiated (foul) 
blood, which being rejected by the parts, 
the body must needs fall away for want of 
better nutriture (nourishment.) This salin 
sap of the Vessels for being refused reception 
of the parts, indues daily a greater 
[^p.33^] 
ferocity (fierceness,) and declares it self in 
a more hostile (like an Enemy) manner, 
by insinuating (peircing) into the profundity 
(depth) of the parts, and so drying, 
absorbing (sucking up,) and consuming the 
Radical moisture and Innate heat, arrives to 
a Proper Consumption. Add hereunto the 
continual vigilies (overwaking, or want of 
sleep,) melancholique, sorry, dull, lingring 
passions, the said Hypochondriack patient 
is præcipitated (forced) into, whereby the 
spirits being rendred dull, stupid, languid 
(fainting), and suppressed, are deserted (left) 
incapable of ventilating (breathing) and 
purifying the blood, and debilitated (weakened) 
in attracting (drawing) nutriment 
for the parts, which consequently must 
wither and shrink. It's no wonder therefore 
so many Melancholicks do daily drop 
into perfect Consumptions, since their prævious 
(foregoing) indisposition doth so directly 
tend to an absolute marcour (dryness. 
 
Among the rest of the Entrails, we have 
inserted the Spleen the chief seat of this 
Hypochondriack evil, against which assertion 
[^p.34^] 
may be objected; that the Spleen rather 
seems to be superadded for some use, than 
any publick function of defæcating (clarifying,) 
or engendring blood. The use 
allotted for it, may be to fill up that empty 
space, that would be, if the Spleen were 
wanting, or to transmit heat to the Stomach 
for to promote digestion, and to serve for a 
supporter to the Veins and Arteries, that 
pass throught it to several parts of the body. 
That its not destined for any absolute necessary 
function of generating or clarifying the 
blood, is inferred from that ancient custome, 
Plautus, Haliabbas and Pliny lib. 11. cap. 37. 
speak of, where they were wont to burn the 
Spleen of their foot coursers, that used to 
run for sport or wagers, and some they would 
quite cut out their Spleen, to make them run 
lighter, and render them long winded; because 
the Spleen is otherwise apt to weigh 
down the Diaphragma (Midriff,) which 
is a chief instrument of Respiration. Ronsæus 
in his Treatise de Part. Cæs. Sect. 4. 
cap. 5. inserts an observation of several, 
whose Spleen were cut out; and of another, 
whose Spleen was quite worn or dryed 
[^p.35^] 
away, and nothing remaining but the outward 
skin. We do easily admit of the possibility 
of the foresaid practice, since I have 
seen a tryal made of it upon a Dog, but with 
this consequence, that it certainly shortens 
life, and renders the remaining course implexed 
with sundry troubles and diseases. In 
the mean time that office, which we allow 
the Spleen, is performed by the Liver, 
Pancreas, and other parts, though with some 
difficulty, because they are overtask'd; for 
doubtless in that case the grosser part of the 
blood is evacuated by the Hæmorrhoids, as 
it's usual in other accidents, when the body 
is mutilated (deprived) of an Arm or Leg. 
So that it appears, the Office of the Spleen 
is of great importance, though it may be 
supplyed by other parts in case it be diseased, 
obstructed, or exected (cut out.) The same 
exception might be started against the Liver; 
for were it not for the effusion of blood of 
those great veins, that have their root in it, 
(or according to others terminate there,) 
which would necessarily follow an exection, 
the Liver might not only be exected, but 
it's Office likewise supplyed by the Spleen 
[^p.36^] 
and the other parts. Since I have drawn 
my Reader a little out of the way by this 
objection, I shall conduct him back to the 
remainder of this Chapter, which is a brief 
inventory of the Signs of an Hypochondriack 
Consumption, that so he may not be surprized 
with the fate of it. 1. There is a 
frequent rumbling noise under the Stomach, 
thwarting from the right side to the left, and 
thence back again. 2. Pinching pains about the 
Stomach, as if they would girt a mans body 
close together. 3. Glowing heats under the 
short Ribs. 4. Frequent belchings, that 
smell sowre, or stink. 5. A windiness and 
puffing up of their Stomach, especially after 
dinner, and in the morning after they wake. 
6. Much spitting. 7. Vomiting, or at least 
an inclination to Vomit. 8. If upon these 
Signs you find a wasting of your flesh, than 
look about you, especially if troubled with 
a Cough. 
 
[^p.37^] 
[}CHAP. VIII. 
Of a Scorbutick Consumption.}] 
 
THe Scurvy is discovered a Melancholique 
Disease through its dreggish tartarous 
Eruptions, as course boils, pustles, & c. 
wherein it's differenced from Hypochondriack 
melancholy, whose tartar (melancholy) 
is retained within the body, & for that 
reason proves by far more incommodious (as 
appears by those doleful passions,) which if 
it were propelled (cast forth,) in Boils, Botches, 
or Ulcers, as in the Scurvy, would 
rather conduce to health, those sharp scorbutick 
dregs imitating the nature of yist, in 
causing the blood to ferment or work out into 
those eruptions (breakings out,) whereby 
the blood is wonderfully clarifyed and purged. 
Hence it is, that many Melancholiques 
and Splenetick persons are of an exceeding 
merry and cheerful disposition; by reason 
their melancholy by causing their blood to 
[^p.38^] 
work, doth so much clarify it, whereout the 
spirits must needs afterwards be generated 
very clear, lucid, (light) and lively. 
 
But of this I have discoursed more at 
large in Venus unmask'd, Book 1. Art. 37. 
Par. 134, 135. however though the Scurvy 
proves so healthful during its commencement 
(beginning) and augment (increase,) 
yet being once advanced to a state, is found 
to have indued a more disobliging and corroding 
nature, (as appears by those arthritick 
(gowty) night pains, and Phagedenick (raw) 
Ulcers it causes: Read my Vener. Discovery 
Book 1. Art. 9. Par. 39.) through the permutation 
(change) of its Nitrous and Vitriolat 
salt into an Armoniack, which partaking 
of so penetrating and corrosive a nature, 
doth soon attaque the fleshy, and 
immediately after make towards the corrupting 
of the Fundamental parts. 
 
A Scorbutick Consumption is easily discerned 
by observing a lingring wafting of 
ones flesh upon a prævious (foregoing) 
Scurvy, attended with a Cough; the Signs of 
a Scurvy I have set down in Venus Unmask'd. 
 
[^p.39^] 
[}CHAP. IX. 
Of an Amorous Consumption.}] 
 
OF all Bastard Consumptions none doth 
more rapidly (swiftly) occasion an 
extenuation of the flesh, than an Amorous 
Condition, which where it doth fasten, immediately 
causes a very sensible falling of 
the countenance; whence it's a common 
objection, when Maids do suddenly grow 
thin-jawed and hallow-eyed, they are certainly 
in Love. Neither is there cause wanting 
for so subitous (sudden) an alteration, 
where there is such a lingring, fighthing, 
sobbing, and looking after the return of the 
absent object, the thoughts so fix'd, that they 
are imployed upon nothing but the past 
Vision; & the mind all that while so disturbed 
and perplex'd with hopes, doubts, fears, 
possibilities, and improbabilities, that the 
heart strikes five hundred sorts of Pulses in an 
hour; and hunted into such continual palpitations 
[^p.40^] 
through anxiety (oppression) and distraction, 
that (as the saying is) fain would 
it break if it could. By means of all which 
alterations, violent motions, frights, fears, 
and other passions, the Animal (spirits of 
the brain) and Vital (of the heart) spirits 
suffer such losses and dispersions, that we see 
its ordinary for young Wenches to be reduced 
to faintings, sownings, and extreme 
weaknesses, to the admiration of their parents, 
whence such subitous and effrayable 
(frightful) symptoms should source (take 
their rise.) Galen among the rest of his 
remarques (lib. de præcogn. ad Posthum. 
cap. 6.) tells us of a Woman patient of his, 
whom he found very weak in bed, continually 
tossing and tumbling from one side to 
the other, and totally deprived of her rest. 
No extern or intern cause could he discover 
of this malady, neither would she contribute 
any thing of her own confession, though he 
oft required it of her, which kind of mute 
(dumb) deportment gave him suspicion of 
some melancholy, or love business the woman 
was troubled with; however he repeated 
his visits the second and third time, 
[^p.41^] 
though with as little satisfaction as before; 
but at last it happened one came to visit her, 
and told her she had been at the Theater, 
where she had seen Pylades (one of the 
Players) dance, whereupon Galen observed 
her to change her countenance, and immediately 
feeling her pulse, found it to beat 
very various and disturbed, a sign of some 
trouble of the mind, and so perceiving the 
same disturbance of her pulse, as oft as Pylades 
was discoursed of, was confirm'd in 
his opinion, that all those symptoms were a 
product (effect) of her love. Aretæus lib. 3. 
cap. 3. instances likewise a young man, 
involved in the same passion, and surprized 
with the worst of symptoms. And beyond 
all this Valer. Max. lib. 5. cap. 7. records 
Antiochus the only Son of the King Seleucus, 
deeply fallen in love with Stratonica his 
Mother-in-law, who piously dissembling his 
burning passion, præcipitated himself into a 
most dangerous Consumption, the cause 
whereof his Physitian Erasistratus could in 
no-ways descry, before such time as Stratonica 
entring the room, moved a blushy 
colour in his face, and rendred his aspect 
[^p.42^] 
vivacious (lively,) but deserting him, he 
soon relapsed to the same paleness and languor 
(faintness;) which ebbing and flowing 
of his countenance with the uncertainty of 
his pulse, certifyed Erasistratus, of some 
love wound his Mother had struck upon his 
heart; and declaring this accident to the 
King his Father, almost cast down with 
grief for his Son, now ee'n strucken with 
his last fate, he soon yeilded his dearest wife 
for a remedy to Antiochus, considering it 
was chance, striving with his unparallel'd 
modesty and bashfulness, had reduced him 
to that extremity. Hippocrates shewed himself 
no less skilful in discerning the discriminous 
(dangerous) state of Perdiccas King 
of Macedonia, occasioned by the doting 
love he harbour'd in his breast for Phila, one 
of his Fathers Concubines, whose presence 
at any time excited a great alteration of his 
pulse. But these passages that resent so much 
of natures impressions, do in no wise merit 
to be admired at, when brutish dotings 
prove so efficacious in impelling bodies into 
a marcour (extreme leanness;) as Historians 
verifie of a rich Athenian, and indifferently 
[^p.43^] 
descended, who spying a marble 
Statue erected in a publick place of Athens, 
and very curiously wrought, grew so passionate 
upon it, that he spent whole nights in 
imbracing it, at last desirous to impropriate 
this object to himself, wooed the Senat 
to part with it, offering to lay down a 
treble value; but they censuring it impious, 
to make Merchandize of what belonged to 
the publick, denyed his importune request, 
whereupon he increased in fondness, and 
bestowed a Golden Crown upon it, Cloathing 
it also with rich and costly Apparel, 
adored, and oft prostrated himself before 
it, which the Senat judging indecent, forbad 
him making any more addresses to their 
Statue. The young Athenian finding himself 
deprived of his joy and delight, fell into 
a Consumption, and before that could limit 
the course of his life, he cut his own throat. 
This passion was not so ridiculous, but it 
was exceeded by the King Xerxes, whom 
many Authours affirm to have been strangely 
inamoured upon an Oak, which he would 
oft hug and kiss, as if it had been some pretty 
Woman. Many more modern instances 
[^p.44^] 
we could produce to illustrate the force of 
this sort of passion upon bodies, which we 
refer to another place. These commotions 
of the mind and body do after a short continuance 
menace (threaten) a Consumption, 
by oppressing the heart and its vital spirits 
with such throngs of blood and spirits, that 
are impelled and propt into its Ventricles, 
(small hollow rooms within the heart) whereby 
the heart is choak'd and obstructed in its 
pulsation (beating,) and consequently hindred 
from transmitting vital blood to the 
parts, which for want thereof must necessarily 
wither and dry away; moreover in that 
case the blood grows thick and muddy for 
want of motion, and so acquires an ill quality, 
and causes obstructions, as we have 
expressed in the preceding Chapter; besides 
the spirits growing dull and stupid do not 
perform their office in drawing the blood to 
the several parts, which must necessarily add 
very much to the wasting of the body. Lastly, 
if those love frights prove very violent, the 
blood and spirits returning in great streams 
to the heart, may not only suddenly choak 
it, but also extinguish its Innate spirits, and 
[^p.45^] 
so that doting passion happens to terminate 
(end) into a mortal Syncope (swoun;) thus 
Euryalus a Knight belonging to the Emperour 
Sigismund, taking leave of his Mistriss 
Lucretia of Siena, præcipitated her into 
such a Love fit, that within a few hours after 
she Ghosted; which course Euryalus was like 
to have steered, upon the news of that sad 
accident, had his passion not been diverted, 
by some recreation his friends gave him. The 
like fate befell a Dutch Gentlewoman, upon 
the sudden death of her Puppy dog, which she 
doted upon beyond imagination, as the 
Scene afterwards attested. 
 
But young blossom'd Girls seem to be 
troubled with another Divil within 'em, to 
augment (increase) the fire of their doting 
hell, and that's their Mother, which must 
ever and anon be a fuming up to their throats 
upon the least disturbance of their Amours 
(love,) as I have oft been a Spectator of 
several, that fell into most terrible fits of the 
Mother, five or six in a day, upon a rupture 
of Marriage. I shall finish this Chapter with 
a short observation of the Prognosticks 
(foresayings) of this Amorous Consumption. 
[^p.46^] 
Young wenches once thoroughly smitten 
with Love darts, seldome or never 
lose that first impression, though they may 
be diverted by their parents, in shewing 
them an imparity (unsutableness) in their 
Fortunes, Families, Persons, & c. and therefore 
must be compelled to marry such 
others, as their Parents please, perhaps being 
perswaded by some Bawdy-Broaker, who 
(according to the ancient custome) takes ten 
in the hundred for so much portion he Procures, 
and so much Joynture answerable to 
the current rate of the market, much after 
the form Cows are sold in Smithfield, according 
to the goodness of their Hides and 
Tallow. In the mean while these poor 
Lasses droop away, between a lingring after 
their first Loves, and a certain chastity that 
forbids 'em eating Fish and Flesh in one 
day. The only prevention of this great 
mischief is, to imitate the Jewish custome, 
to pen up their Daughters, and let them be 
acquainted with none, but such as they certainly 
intend for their Husbands; for beyond 
contradiction their first Love stands against 
all opposition of imparities of fortunes, 
[^p.47^] 
families, or any thing whatsoever, as this 
narrative witnesses of a Princess of France, 
who walking melancholique alone in the 
field, fell in discourse with a Flemish Shepherds, 
and finding his person, talk, gesture, 
and tone of speech quite different from the 
Court Company, began to admire him, 
and grew so much enamour'd upon him, that 
before their parting, they design'd their secret 
transportation into Flanders; to which 
purpose she put her self into the Garb of a 
Shepherdess, and in that disguise lived many 
years; but discovering her self a little before 
her death, did profess her self the happiest 
person alive, not for her condition, but in 
injoying him she first loved, and that she 
would rather ten Thousand times choose to 
live a Shepherdess (notwithstanding the hardness 
and vileness that attend so despicable a 
life) in the contentment and satisfaction of 
her Shepherd, than the glorious life of a 
Princess. If upon this you require a censure, 
I can but say, it was the humour of a Woman. 
Neither do I find men less estranged 
to extravagancies in this particular; Lucius 
Vitellius, the Father of Vitellius the Roman 
[^p.48^] 
Emperour, a Sage and Prudent person, 
was so affectionately taken with a common 
Strumpet, that he would never suffer her to 
spit on the ground, but alwayes saved her 
spittle in a golden Vessel he carried about 
with him for the same purpose, whereunto 
he added so much Honey as would make it 
into a Syrup, which he was wont to lick with 
the greatest delight imaginable. This relation 
doth not so much savour of folly, as that 
of Galeazo (Duke of Mantua) of madness, 
he whilst sojourning at Padua had so 
enslaved himself to a fond passion upon a 
Wench, that upon her commanding him to 
drown himself, he immediately gave Spur 
to his Horse, and so plunged himself headlong 
into the River. The great Charlemain, 
who was master of the better part of Europe, 
yet could not Master the passion he bore to a 
Gentlewoman, whom after she was dead, 
he would not suffer to be removed out of 
his Bed-Chamber in order to her Funeral, 
and though she stunk like a Carrion, yet 
sented to him like a Violet. What treachery 
men harbour within their breast to betray 
'em to their greatest Enemy, Death! what a 
[^p.49^] 
strange inchantment, that renders men thus 
wilfully sottish, melancholique, mad, and 
desperate! Certainly this must be some kind 
of curse intailed upon mankind, for having 
originally grossely transgressed in that particular. 
But what remedy to resist so great 
an evil? Women in this case require the 
precedency of cure, as being the first occasion 
of that sin, and first cause of the curse, 
witness else their mother Eve, who could 
she but have passed by that sinful curiosity, 
God Almighty in his wisdome had reserved 
a more noble way of man's propagation, in 
lieu, that whereas man is now begotten in the 
burning Sin of lust like a beast, and born 
creeping out of his mothers belly downwards 
towards the earth with shame, he 
would have been begotten in a more spiritual 
manner, and have been born gloriously, 
making his first ascension towards the heavens 
to salute his Creator. But to our dooms 
we do still find the daughters of Eve persisting 
in their mothers curiosity, in alluring the 
poor Sons of Adam to all manner of lasciviousness 
and debauchery; and to that purpose 
they plaister their faces with patches, 
[^p.50^] 
rub their skin with white Lead, and go naked 
to the very Paps (and they are like they say 
in France, to fall into the Amazones model 
of waring short coats to reach no farther 
than their knees;) and in this posture will 
they be leaning out of their Balcones and 
Windows, frisking and gigling, that they 
would e'en tempt a Saint; 
 
Ten teems of Oxen draw much less 
Than one hair of a Womans tress. 
 
But all this is but speculation or dumb lechery; 
the practick part consists in their goatish 
discourses, winking at Church, going to 
Dancing-Schools, Plays, Spring-Gardens, 
Taverns, and where not. 
 
Kissing though repeated hundred times 
over, is a piece of their Dancing-School 
breeding, that's not to be refused; and what 
saith the Italian to this, Donna basciata e~ 
mezzo guadagnata, a woman kissed is half 
conquer'd. How these creatures may be 
reformed, has been the study of many ages, 
though as we see to little purpose. 
 
Thus far they all agree, women ought 
[^p.51^] 
to keep within and seldome stir out; and 
when they go forth, the Italians will have 
them to have neither eyes nor ears: that is, 
they must not stair men in the face like 
bucks, nor listen after idle talk. Neither 
do they think it necessary for 'em to go to 
Church, imagining a Woman doth very well 
merit her salvation, in doing penance of 
keeping her self honest at home; besides, in 
imitation of Ovid's dictate, Otia si tollas 
periere cupidinis arcus, they would have them 
imployed twenty hours a day in Spinning, 
Knitting, & c. the rest of the time in 
eating and sleeping. 
 
In short, these three Devises are necessary 
to make an honest Woman; Retiredness, 
Religion, and Employment. On the contrary, 
where a Woman is used to Company, 
and little regards Religion, and is less imployed, 
there's you know what. 
 
However, notwithstanding all these divertisements, 
they will now and then take an 
occasion to fall in Love, though it be but by 
hear-say, as Guyon, writes in his divers Lecons 
1. part fol. 365. of three Gentlewomen, 
that fell strangely in love with one and the 
[^p.52^] 
same person. The Story runs thus: It happened 
that a Waiting-Gentlewoman to the 
Duchess of Urbia, took a great liking to a 
Gentleman, belonging to the same Court; 
but her modesty being such, as would not 
suffer her to declare her affection immediately 
to him, advised with another Gentlewoman 
a friend of hers about it, to whom she 
opened her breast, expressing likewise the 
merits and personage of the Gentleman; 
whose Characters agreeing so well with her 
own Phansie, she (namely the second Gentlewoman) 
grew furiously inamour'd upon 
the party described, and thereupon in stead 
of solliciting for her friend, she put Pen to 
Paper and wrote a most passionate Letter for 
her self, and addressed it to the foresaid 
Gentleman; this letter fell accidently into 
the hands of a third Gentlewoman, who 
upon the reading thereof was inflamed in 
Love to the same person, beyond any of the 
others, and began to push hard for herself: 
But fortune proved so just to them all, that 
because of their rash indiscreet passions, they 
lost their pains, and went all without him. 
Valent. Bruchus a Spaniard relates a passage 
[^p.53^] 
not unlike this, of a Duchess of Savoy, who 
fell desperately in Love with a Knight of the 
Family of Mendoza, only by hearing his 
Sister say, Would to God this Princess were 
Married to my Brother, and they would make 
the most glorious couple in the world, for 
perfection and beauty. This succeeded so 
happily, that some time after (as the common 
saying is) they had one another. These 
two Narratives afford us another moral to 
be added as a fourth to the three forementioned 
devises, to wit a young Maid must 
not only be kept in perpetual retirement, 
devotion, and constant imployment, but 
must not so much as be entertained with a 
discourse of love, or young men, for fear 
of raising that evil spirit, which afterwards 
would not be easily allayed. 
 
Now, though a sole rectification of Womens 
corrupt passions (they by their allurements, 
gesticulations (wanton actions) 
sleering looks, and lascivious discourses, being 
the prime movents, and inciters of this 
cursed inclination) were a means efficacious 
enough to prevent mens sottish affections, 
yet we will appose an instance or two, 
[^p.54^] 
whereby you may observe how easily men 
are checked in their amorous appetites. 
 
Raimundus Lullius, a great proficient in 
Chymical Philosophy, chanced to be furiously 
taken with the beauty of a certain 
young Woman, and being impatient of his 
Love flames, did vehemently importune 
her to allay his passion; whereupon she prefixt 
a day, which Raimund in no wise forgot 
to pass by, but presented himself at the very 
moment: The fair Lady, like a Goddess of 
chastity, in stead of gratifying his beastly lust, 
suddenly flung open her bosome, and offer'd 
a most filthy, stinking, ulcer'd Cancer of 
her Breast to his view, in design to relax, or 
rather break the strings of his Satyrick 
passion, which took so good an effect, that 
Raimund now bore greater respects to her 
for her chastity, than ever he did for her 
beauty. But because a sole example is so 
scant an illustration, I shall not think it 
much to contribute another no less remarkable 
than the former. Hypatia the Phenix 
of her time, both for her incomparable wit, 
and excellent beauty, had the fortune of 
being most fondly doated upon by a young 
[^p.55^] 
Scholar; the force of whose inclinations 
was so puissant (strong,) that it was like to 
impell him to a distraction: the unparallel 
chastity of this virtuous Female could in no 
kind be prevailed with to favour him in what 
he so passionately aimed at, though her compassion, 
sensible of the torment he endured 
in that amourous hell, would have complyed 
in whatever had been consistent with 
the nature of modesty. At length she discovered 
to her self an ingenious cure, to remedy 
the poor Schollar of his menaced infany 
(madness,) in order whereunto, knowing 
him to be master of a great deal of reason, 
she muster'd a great bundle of her menstruous 
rags together (as the wise man calls 
them, and spread them all open before 
him; saying, you men that do so admire at 
the Elegant shape, and Nitourous Complexion 
of Womens upper parts, behold 
now, O Scholar! the constitution of their 
lower, the object of all your Lascivious 
Loves; what a filthy, nasty, detestable sight 
is here? whereat the ingenuous Scholar took 
such a regret, having been hitherto deluded, 
in crediting this dictate of Hermes, Quod 
[^p.56^] 
est superius, est sicut inferius. That is, whatever 
is above is like to what is below; that 
ever after he abhorred the sight of a Woman. 
If arguments of this kind, drawn from the 
false appearance of Women, would take 
with the generality of men, there's enough 
to be said to fling 'em all out of favour. But 
enough of this. 
 
[}CHAP. IX. 
Of a Consumption of Grief.}] 
 
GRief protracted to some space of time, 
doth inevitably (unavoidably) absorb 
(suck up) the fleshy parts of the body, and 
strait-way hasten to a perfect Consumption. 
Grief is a pain of the soul for the absence of 
some good thing, or the presence of an evil 
thing. Now, as far as the sould o'retops the 
body, so far its pains, or rather mournful 
sensations, exceed those of the Carcasse; A 
Gowt, a Colick, the cutting off of an Arm 
or Leg, or searing the Flesh with an hot 
[^p.57^] 
Iron, are but Fleabits to the grieving pains 
of the Soul; for she being only chearful, 
doth as easily conquer, as endure them. But 
it's otherwise with the body, that immediately 
shrinks under the least pain of the 
Soul. 
 
Among the varieties of Grief, the controversie 
of the greatest, is solely depending 
between Grief taken for a disgrace, and 
Grief for the loss of a Relation: And both 
these are such, as will attaque (fall upon) 
and conquer the wisest and most couragious 
of either Sex; Reason in either of these cases 
can produce no other, than trifling arguments 
to suppress 'em. All ranks of Nobles 
and Ignobles are observed, to yeeld to the 
fury of these Soul-pains. Bajazed the Turkish 
Emperour, and Tamerlan's Prisoner, 
rather than to sustain the disgrace of being 
carried about in an Iron cage, chose death, 
by running his head against the Grates. 
 
Senca's Wife prefer'd dying with her 
Husband, before she would survive to grieve 
for his death. 
 
Cecinna Petus being sentenced to death, 
but with a reservation, that he might make 
[^p.58^] 
choice of his own way of dying, Arrion his 
Wife came to him, though full of grief, 
and in his sight drew a Dagger, and stabbed 
her self, crying out, the wound I have made 
doth not pain me, but the wound that thou 
wilt make, O Pete! pains me. 
 
To give you an Emblem of a more Chronical 
(of a longer time) operation of grief, 
wee'l commend a Narrative or two more 
to your Reading. 
 
One Captain Munck a Dane, famous 
for the Expedition he performed to the 
North, to discover a nearer passage to the 
Indies, after a most dangerous Winter-quarter 
returned home, to give an account 
of his Voyage to the King of Danemark his 
Master; who being dis-satisfied at his deportment, 
thrusted the said Captain from 
him with his Cane, whereupon he took his 
leave, and went home, but with such a 
resentment of the disgrace, that some few 
dayes after he put forward to another 
world. 
 
The like Scene we observe in Don Olivares 
the great Favourite of Spain, who soon rendred 
his life to the conquest of grief he took 
[^p.59^] 
for the disgrace of being deposed of all his 
Offices and Dignities. 
 
Fates not much differing from this befell 
also Cardinal Woolsey, and many other Grandees, 
upon the like occasions. 
 
In fine, it's a common observation 
among the Spanish Polititians, that the surest 
Stratagem, to be quite rid of a Statesman, 
that stands in the way, and besides to avoid 
popular clamours and censures, is to depose 
him of all his dignities, and imprison him, 
where without question the apprehension of 
his disgrace, or the pernicious air of a Prison, 
will soon set a period to the course of his 
days, or at least put him upon some revengeful 
attempt, whereby he may be rendred a 
riper object for a publick Scene. 
 
This by the way, to illustrate to you the 
danger of a pain in the Soul, and the near 
sympathy there is between her and the body. 
 
Touching the manner of causality, whereby 
grief effects such fierce symptoms, viz. a 
sudden Death, and a lingring Consumption, 
may be collected out of the preceding discourse 
upon an Amorous Consumption, to 
wit, the former is caused, through a full and 
[^p.60^] 
sudden irruption (breaking in) of thick Melancholique 
blood into the Ventricles (narrow 
rooms) of the heart, thereby choaking 
the vital spirits, and putting a stop to the 
hearts pulsation, which if intermitted but 
three or four Pulses, portends a certain death. 
The latter is atchieved by a gradual suppression 
of the vital spirits, through heavy 
tartarous (dreggish) blood, which (namely the 
spirits) defecting, must necessarily cause an 
extinction of the innate heat and spirits, for 
whose nutrition they are designed, and so consequently 
a perfect Consumption must be the 
ultimate issue. Add hereto the restlesness 
and intermission from sleep grieved persons 
are molested with, whereby the blood 
is much dryed, the spirits consumed, and 
melancholy increased. 
 
Moreover, as melancholick blood doth so 
much suppress the vital spirits, so it's very 
unapt for ministring matter for new spirits, 
or being converted into flesh, because of its 
grosseness and crudity. Neither doth that 
blood continue long so, as I said before, but 
acquires an acrimony, whereby it's much 
intended (heightned) in its devouring and 
consuming quality. 
 
