[^Cockburn, William: Continuation of the account of distempers^] 
 
[}A 
CONTINUATION 
Of the Account of 
The Nature, Causes, 
Symptoms and Cure 
OF THE 
DISTEMPERS 
That are incident to 
Seafaring People. 
 
Illustrated with some remarkable 
Instances of the Sicknesses of the 
Fleet during the last Summer, historically 
related. 
 
To which is prefix'd, 
An Essay concerning the quantity of 
Blood that is to be evacuated in Fevers. 
Being the Third Part of the Work. 
 
By William Cockburn, of the College of 
Physicians, London; Physician to the 
Blue Squadron of his Majesty's Fleet, and 
Fellow of the Royal Society. 
 
LONDON, 
Printed for Hugh Newman, at the Grashopper 
in the Poultry, 1697.}] 
 
[^A dedicatory epistle, a preface and a table of contents omitted.^] 
[^Extract 1, pp. 1-52^] 
 
[^p.1^] 
[}A 
CONTINUATION 
OF THE 
History of the Diseases 
IN HIS 
Majesty's Navy, &c.}] 
 
I Endeavour'd last year, to give a 
genuin and true account of the 
rise and nature of the Sicknesses 
at Sea, from considerations about the 
way of their living; and the Indications 
of Cure, which were the results 
of that Reasoning: and to these I added 
the historical observations of that 
year, which made a more particular 
and practical part of that Book: And 
[/1./] 
now being to illustrate that first part, 
and perform my promise in the second, 
[^p.2^] 
I will confine my self to the 
Method I proposed for relating these 
Observations, and pursue it with all 
the Candidness and Integrity that can 
be expected, without repeating any 
thing that has been mention'd already: 
and therefore I must desire every 
one that will judge of this, to recollect 
the general Theory in the first, 
and the most reasonable Indications 
in the second Part, as the best way to 
prevent mistakes and obscurity. Only 
I must confess, that tho I have put 
it beyond exception, by arguments 
from reason and experience, that 
Evacuation in the case of Fevers is 
absolutely necessary towards their 
Cure, and tho I have also declar'd 
that this Evacuation is to be proportionable 
to the interrupted perspiration, 
that causes our Fevers, that is, either 
in the same quantity, with the 
detained steams, or at least in such a 
quantity as may procure more liberal 
secretions; so that if the quantity 
that is evacuated be not equal to the 
quantity of detain'd steams, yet making 
the secretions more freely, there 
may be a quantity evacuated equal to 
these steams, by the secretions that 
[^p.3^] 
are now begun: Yet I say, I must 
confess that I may seem to be wanting 
in setting a standard, or certain mark, 
which may direct our Surgeons in the 
difficult stages of these Evacuations, 
with as much certainty as a fix'd mark 
in the Heavens directs our Sailers in 
their Voyages. 'Tis true I might alledge 
that the profound intricacy of 
so particular a part of knowledge, 
and the many blunders I have observ'd 
in the most learned Authors 
that have but touch'd upon these difficulties, 
tho never so slightly, have 
deterr'd me from venturing upon so 
nice a Task; and after so reasonable 
an excuse I cou'd not be blam'd for 
any considerable neglect or omission. 
But since this knowledge, tho never 
so hard, is extremely necessary for the 
fixing of a certain Method of practice, 
I'le set out for once, and if I do miscarry, 
'twill be in good company, among 
the masterly Heroes in Medicin. 
 
Since the quantity to be evacuated 
[/2./] 
is proportionable to the detain'd 
steams, and the quantity of staems 
may be very easily valued, (as I hope 
I shall prove in its proper place), as I 
[^p.4^] 
have already intimated in the general, 
that it exceeds not two or three 
pounds; 'tis plain that either two or 
three pounds are actually to be evacuated, 
or such a quantity that may 
procure new secretions which will 
evacuate the requir'd quantity. And 
'tis no less certain that this is to be 
perform'd according to the different 
strength and constitutions of our Patients, 
and with such Instruments as 
may not require a larger Evacuation 
by rarefying and giving a new motion 
to the Blood. 'Tis here the difficulty 
lyes, to know what quantity our 
Patients strength will allow to be 
evacuated, and to make an estimate 
of the instruments we use on this occasion, 
and of the effects they produce, 
besides our primary intention. 
Now 'tis the uncertainty of the Sweating 
Medicins we use for compassing our 
design of evacuation that occasions 
this great difficulty in our first intention, 
because sometimes they are given 
without any success, but heighten 
the Pulse, and encrease the other 
severe symptoms we see in Fevers; and 
at other times taking effect, and causing 
an excessive evacuation through 
[^p.5^] 
the pores of our Body, they send our 
patients out of the world another 
way, instead of curing them by a due 
quantity, which no man can pretend 
to expel by these Medicins, which we 
are so little Masters of, that we are 
not able to foretel, with any tolerable 
exactness, the quantity of steams 
discharg'd that way, nor the additional 
heat produc'd by their small parts. 
Next to them are purging medicins, of 
which tho we are a great deal more 
certain, yet they are not exempted 
from some of the difficulties that attend 
the others. So that the surest 
instrument for performing our design 
is Phlebotomy or Bleeding, tho' even 
this may create a stronger pulse, a 
greater heat, and the like, than 
was before, after losing ten or twelve 
ounces of blood in a certain circumstance, 
which I shall have occasion to 
speak of here. And therefore bleeding 
being the most certain way, I will for 
once suppose all the rest as certain, 
or at least signify by this more certain 
way what we intend by the rest when 
we apply them to evacuate the 
quantity we desire, according to the 
strength and constitution of our patient. 
[^p.6^] 
And now when I am to apply Venesection 
to this design, I must confess I can 
hardly forbear running out into a long 
digression concerning some noble 
Theorems about the great and different 
effects of bleeding, that depend 
entirely upon the infinitely useful demonstration 
of the circulation of the 
Blood, that crowd into my thoughts; 
but I must at present restrain my 
self now, because the general accounts 
we find in Authors about 
bleeding are only as it evacuates such 
a quantity; I will shew in the first 
[/3./] 
place how imperfect and useless the 
advices of our great Masters are in 
this affair, and then inform the Reader, 
what other ways are to be taken 
for attaining a greater certainty, tho 
the more particular account can never 
be properly apply'd in this place; 
and this will exactly answer what I 
proposed. 
 
The Rules and Advices which Writers 
in Medicine have given us in this 
matter, are to let blood according to 
the strength of the Patient; till he faint 
away, till we have taken away enough, 
and till it change its colour from 
worse to better, from black to red; and 
[^p.7^] 
lastly, some others who think they 
have given the last touch to this question, 
take their marks from the bigness 
and fulness of the Vessels, and so 
take away as much as a man may be 
supposed to lose in a day without 
dying, and this way they pretend to 
confirm by some instances from practice, 
in which, tho I hope they succeeded 
in their own practice, yet I 
doubt not but I shall convince the Reader, 
of the unhappy state of those sick 
people that are drain'd of their Blood, 
by such unsteady and uncertain rules. 
 
[/4./] 
But to enquire into the first of 
these, which advises us to let our Patients 
blood according to their strength, 
'tis certain that must never be exceeded; 
yet there are a great many designs 
in bleeding, in which that is 
not so often to be respected. Not 
but that if the quantity to be let, 
should exceed the Patient's strength, 
that consideration would become the 
first and greatest; yet, I say, there 
are a great many designs in bleeding, 
that the quantity to be taken away 
is so small, that the strength of the 
Patient can never be brought into 
question: For instance, in making a 
[^p.8^] 
revulsion, an old and confirmed operation 
and practice, tho never to be 
accounted for, but by supposing 
Harvey's noble Theorem of the circulation 
of the Blood, however contrary 
to that Doctrine, the most of 
our modern Physitians have been 
pleased to think it. I say in making 
a revulsion, or by determining the 
motion of the Blood, more towards 
one part than another, which is to be 
practiced upon a thousand occasions; 
the quantity to be let, if other circumstances 
are observed, very often 
exceeds not six or eight Ounces in 
the strongest constitutions; now such 
a quantity can never be supposed to 
bring our Patients strength into doubt, 
'tis evident that in such cases this 
great rule is, (I had almost said) of 
no use at all to us. But next, if our 
Patient be troubl'd with a Distemper 
that proceeds from too much blood, 
and we desire to be so nice, as to relieve 
him of all the offending quantity, 
and not to impair his strength, or having 
others sicknesses that require Phlebotomy 
for their cure, and the strength 
of the patient comes in competition, 
so that is never to be injur'd; yet this 
[^p.9^] 
Rule is so precariously injoin'd, that 
no Physician can be instructed, how 
to put it in practice; which the learned 
Galen willingly confesses. Nullam 
rem, says he, æque artem medicam conjecturalem 
facere, quam Medicamentorum 
quantitatem. That nothing makes the 
Physicians Art more conjectural than 
the dosing of Medicins. De curat. rat. 
per sang.miss. c I2. But this appears 
more evidently by Physicians Consultations 
in acute Diseases, concerning 
a healthy young Man affected, for example 
with a Fever, Pleurisie, or 
Quinsie, they all agree, and are of one 
judgment, that nothing can so securely 
rescue him from this imminent 
danger, than the taking away of as 
much blood as his strength can bear: 
yet assoon as the Vein is opened, and 
the Patient has lost some nine or ten 
ounces of blood, one of 'em begins 
immediately to try by his Pulse how 
far his strength in impaired; and after 
a round Trial has been made by them 
all, they can come to no positive agreement 
about their Rule; while one 
thinks there is too much, another too 
little, and a third just enough taken 
away; so that however they seem'd 
[^p.10^] 
agreed about letting him blood in the 
general, and in as great a quantity as 
his strength could bear; yet they cannot 
condescend about the time of 
of stopping it, and the rise of all this 
difference is only from their ignorance 
of their Patient's strength, which they 
thought so easy, as to settle it for a 
Rule in this operaration. 
 
[/5./] 
Now perhaps they are to measure 
the strength of the Patient by bleeding 
him till he faint away; and if this 
be set up, as more evident than the 
first, 'tis so far from being so, that 'tis 
a great deal more obscure: for very 
many who are to be let blood till they 
put on this emblem of pale Death, 
faint away, not only after losing a 
very moderate quantity, but even after 
the loss of two or three ounces; or 
immediately after the vein is cut; or 
even by seeing any other persons 
blood, or the Lancet it self. What's 
then to be done? nothing; but the 
wound must be tied up, and the bleeding 
delay'd till a fitter opportunity. 
'Tis true, the bleeding may be put off, 
but the cause of the Disease will not 
adjourn, but double its force and dispute 
the command of the subject. Upon 
[^p.11^] 
the other hand, there are many 
who could suffer all the blood in their 
Body to run out, before they faint away, 
which often happens to those 
whose dressings fall off in their sleep, 
and make their Bed swim with blood, 
tho sometimes they themselves recover. 
 
The third rule is just as satisfactory 
[/6./] 
as the other two; for when they 
advice us to let so much as we may 
think enough, it is evident that there 
will be as many opinions about this 
enough as there are Physicians, and 
perhaps more; for while some are 
for bleeding and others not, they 
that agree in their judgments for 
letting Blood, differ about the quantity, 
and very often the business is carried 
by him, whom age alone gives 
the killing authority, or an habituated 
impudence has taught to overtalk 
the rest; so that we may very well 
say with the learned Galen, Fortunatum 
esse ægrotantem qui in manus boni 
Medici inciderit, aut cui fortuna seu Deus 
potius ita faveat, ut eam cæteris prævalere 
sententiam faciat, quæ fit utilior: 
' That sick person is very lucky who 
' falls into the hands of a good Physician, 
[^p.12^] 
' or whom fortune or rather God 
' Almighty favours so much, that he 
' makes that opinion prevail, which is 
' the most useful. Now this third Rule 
is certainly true, but at the same time 
'tis very obscure and hard to be understood; 
this is an aim or design in 
every bodies eye, but it is not so easily 
performed by most Physicians, for 
the reasons we gave before, and 
what more learning does a Doctor 
show, when he orders a Surgeon to let 
so much as is sufficient, than a Woman, 
who seeing the blood run out, 
desires them to take no more than 
may be enough. Yet this enough is 
only presum'd to be known, by the 
other signs we have just now condemn'd, 
and therefore 'tis plain, how 
well 'tis like to be done; and how 
certain a Rule this will prove. 
 
And when they persuade us, with 
Hippoc. to make the colour of the blood 
[/7./] 
the rule and standard of the quantity 
that is to be taken away, they confine 
this useful and noble operation within 
too narrow bounds; and to say no 
more, if the blood was only to be 
taken away when it is black, tough, 
and seizie, and till it become red; 
[^p.13^] 
the redness of the blood being the 
mark beyond which we are not to go, 
'tis evident that when the blood is so, 
there will be no want of bleeding. 
Yet, in a great many Apoplexies, Fevers, 
&c. the blood is not often discoloured, 
at least not very considerably, 
and yet this operation is extremely 
useful and necessary. Besides, when 
one of the best habit of body has just 
fallen from a high place, a wise Physician 
easily foresees that the vessels of 
those parts that come first to the 
ground, will be considerably comprest, 
and that by this compression the 
blood cannot move so easily through 
those parts, and by its stopping there, 
will produce terrible symptoms, according 
to the greatness of the compression, 
and the office of the part 
whose vessels are thus compress'd: 
And therefore, he thinks it necessary, 
both for lessening the quantity, and 
perhaps quickening the motion, to 
cause this person to be let blood, and 
that in a considerable quantity, with 
very great success. Yet the blood in 
those people, immediately after the 
fall, is not much, if at all, altered 
from what it was before the fall, and 
[^p.14^] 
being then suppos'd to be of a good 
colour, or red, 'tis evident that by 
this Rule he could not lose an ounce, 
and the consequence would be, most 
troublesome and dangerous contusions, 
Apoplexies, Rheumatical and Pleuritical 
pains, difficulties of breathing, a Fever, 
and the like, which we see happen 
upon such occasions. But upon the 
other hand, let us suppose that blood 
was never to be taken away, but in 
this ill colour of the blood (which we 
see is not so) and till it has acquir'd 
a better one, yet they cannot so qualify 
this Rule, that we may know the 
degrees of this ill colour, and how 
much blood we may take away before 
it acquires a better one, and whether 
the blood that seems necessary to be 
evacuated, can be spared by the Patient, 
which would have been highly 
useful, and even necessary for making 
their Rule complete; whereas by our 
historical account of the last year, 'tis 
evident that the blood may be mightily 
chang'd by an interruption of perspiration, 
and now in case of a fall, in less 
than 24 hours, and that bleeding may 
actually dispose the blood for becoming 
better, by promoting the secretions, 
[^p.15^] 
and recovering its colour and 
strength in almost as short a time as 
they were lost. 
 
Now one that speaks very high on 
this subject, and whom the rational 
bleeders at this time follow, says we 
can never fail, if we have respect to 
the fulness of the vessels, and the quantity 
of blood a man may be reckoned 
[/8./] 
to spare. But this Rule is too general 
to be put in practice: 'tis true, as he 
says, that fat people, whose veins are 
generally small, and consequently cannot 
contain much blood, if they be 
drain'd of an indifferent quautity, will 
feel the inconveniences of the want of 
blood, or of a dispirited blood, very 
soon and fatally, by cachectical diseases 
and a Dropsie: Yet it is no less 
certain, that melancholy splenetick men, 
or women that are troubled with vapours, 
whose vessels are generally wide, 
and actually contain a great deal of 
blood, and by this Rule can spare the 
most; yet they, for the most part, can 
never bear so large a bleeding, even 
as those fat people we just now spoke 
of, and very seldom can endure the 
loss of ten or twelve ounces of blood 
without a sinking in their heart (as they 
[^p.16^] 
call it) dimness of sight, or as it is expressively 
called by the French, une Defaillance 
des esprits; so that their overmuch 
comes sooner than that of the fat 
people themselves, which plainly contradicts 
this Rule. Now, I would 
gladly ask any of those Authors, whether 
or not the other part of the Rule, 
What a man can spare, be not the same 
with that of the strength of the Patient, 
which we find to be very true, but 
not plain enough to be of any use: Or 
if they think they may take as much 
blood away, as we find people have 
lost by wounds, bleeding at the Nose, 
Piles, &c. without losing their Life; 
they may if they please, but I shall 
never think it reasonable to have recourse 
to a Remedy, which no less 
than the distemper must always require 
the help of a Physician. 'Twas upon 
[/9./] 
this precarious and general way of 
practice, I saw a learned man, and a 
Physician too, who had been sick of 
a Looseness for some weeks, if I may 
not say months, by which he was 
brought to a very low condition; yet 
I know not what odd fancy possest 
him who was call'd to his assistance, 
to take from him 12 or 14 ounces of 
[^p.17^] 
blood at that time, and I think repeated 
it next day, contrary to the 
rules of common sense, as well as of 
Physick, with as great boldness as indiscretion, 
and of which the Sufferer 
was so sensible, that when I was propos'd 
to be sent for by some of his 
friends, he said he was convinc'd of 
their mistake, but that it would disoblige 
men of their Character and 
Dotard Seniority to fend for a younger 
Physician; and so he ended his days 
with a vast deal of Ceremony. I am 
sorry I must relate so ungrateful a 
story, but 'tis but one of too many I 
have seen, tho I must confess there 
are as great mistakes, and greater, 
occasion'd by the neglect of bleeding; 
and therefore since on both sides, they 
are fatal and pernicious, 'twou'd be 
needless to observe, that there ought 
to be a great deal of care taken about 
it, not only in performing the operation, 
which is the easiest that can be, 
by an Instrument; but in determining 
the just quantities in different Patients, 
which you see Authors have endeavoured 
by desiring us to let them 
blood according to their strength, as 
much as is sufficient, as much as they can 
[^p.18^] 
spare, which are all the same thing; only 
I think better express'd in the first. But 
the question at first ask'd was, what 
will the Patients strength bear, what is 
sufficient, and what may be spare, which 
is lest in as great obscurity as when 
they begun it. 
 
Now to clear this a little better than 
it has been by others, 'twould be necessary 
not only to write a Book of 
Phlebotomy, but for greater distinctness 
to apply the consequences of its noble 
Theorems to particular diseases, constitutions 
of our Patients, seasons of the year, 
&c. which 'tis plain are foreign to my 
subject. Yet to direct my Brethren 
in the Navy in their thoughts and 
practice, as well and shortly as this confinement 
will allow me, that they 
may make evacuations fit to discharge 
the excessive quantities of detained 
steams, without impairing or destroying 
the strength of the Patient, I 
shall propose these two ways, which 
[/10./] 
if rightly enquir'd into and thought 
upon, cannot miss of success. 
 
And first, since the strength and 
velocity of the blood, is to be understood 
by the Pulse, 'tis to That we must have 
regard, that we may know how far 
[^p.19^] 
they either exceed or are lower than 
their ordinary measure; and proportionably 
to the number of pulses; more 
than in a natural state, so to let blood, 
that the blood after venesection may 
come to a greater cohesion, may not 
be so much attrited and broken down, 
and so there may not be separated so 
great a quantity of animal spirits. Or 
the pulse being, depress'd, very full, and 
not so frequent, we ought to let blood, 
not only in a quantity able to raise 
the pulse, and make it more frequent, 
but even afterwards to abate this frequency 
by a larger bleeding as before: 
For there is nothing more ordinary 
than in the most natural fullness (if 
I may so say) where there is a Plethora 
ad vasa (as Physicians term it) a 
great abundance of the best blood, the 
fittest, of its own nature, to make 
animal spirits, and to produce all the 
consequences that follow upon good 
blood and a great abundance of spirits; 
I say there is nothing more ordinary 
than to have a depress'd pulse as 
I describ'd but now, in a natural or 
artificial fullness; for the blood is so 
confin'd within its own vessels, and its 
parts so crowded one upon another, 
[^p.20^] 
that there is not a sufficient secretion 
of its fine and subtle parts, but ev'n 
by this great quantity the distractile 
blood-pipes being very much distended, 
compress the nerves over all the 
body, and hinder the conveyance of 
the animal spirits into, and thro these 
vessels, according to their force of 
going outwards, and the resistence of 
these in the different parts; so that 
tho there is a greater quantity of blood 
contain'd in the vessels, yet that being 
propell'd or driven forwards with 
less force, will occasion a full, tho 
slow, pulse: and therefore since this 
less secretion of animal spirits, their 
slower motion, etc. proceeds entirely 
from the quantity of blood contain'd 
in the veins, but especially the arteries, 
and produces the effects of a real want, 
yet its motion is only to be heightned, 
its sense of greatness: to be advanced, by 
taking off such a quantity that may 
remove this huddling up the blood, 
and make the secretions more free; 
that so there may be a greater quantity 
of spirits deriv'd into, and determin'd 
thro, the whole series of the 
nerves, upon which there will follow 
a quicker and greater pulse; tho if it 
[^p.21^] 
exceeds its natural state in these properties, 
another bleeding must be appointed 
in pursuance of the above-mentioned 
design, which will prevent 
the use of bleeding in Fevers, as 
we use a charm to blood, and that 
all. 
 
Now in both these cases you see 
the natural pulse is the standard, and 
before you can know whether it is 
depress'd, slower or quicker, you must 
know that which is natural to which 
the rest are referr'd; and not only so, 
but before you can determine any 
quantity of blood to be taken away in 
either of these cases, you ought to 
know what cohesion, what loosoness is fit 
to make the pulse so much quicker, 
or depress'd, or to make an estimate 
of the number of pulses by the blood 
in the best state, and of their strength: 
the last of which I intend to attempt 
in a Review of my OEconomia Animalis, 
that it may want nothing of the 
perfection I can give it, and may become 
more worthy of the learned 
Mr. Bridgeman, under whose protection 
it ventur'd into the world with so 
great advantage. 
 
[^p.22^] 
Yet the first is very considerable, 
and ev'u necessary for its use; for unless 
we know the natural pulse of 
every single Man, we are call'd to, 
we can never know, when it is sickly 
and defective; for example, supposing 
that more especially the number 
of pulses peculiar to men were of 
three sorts, as I have endeavoured to 
prove them to be in my Animal Oeconomy, 
viz. from 55 to 65 in some, 
from 60 to 70 in others, from 70 to 
80 in a third sort, and all in the same 
part of time, viz. a minute; 'tis evident, 
that if he who has sixty for his 
natural pulse, comes ever to beat 
eighty, the motion of his blood must 
certainly be more than naturally augmented, 
that is, he has a Fever; since 
that is only an immoderate velocity or 
quickness of the motion of the blood, 
accompany'd with heat. 'Tis no less certain, 
when a pulse that beats naturally 
80 in a minute, comes down to 60, 
that the person labours under some 
cachectical Distemper, and a want of 
spirits, except his pulse be depress'd: 
yet both these are the natural pulses 
of several people, beyond which 'tis 
not convenient to go, and to which 
[^p.23^] 
their other pulses are to be compar'd. 
And therefore it would be necessary 
to settle this affair, and to enquire 
into the peculiar pulses of every constitution, 
that by them and other 
concurring signs, we may be infallibly 
guided, not only in Evacuations, but 
other administrations in Medicin. 
However, I shall forbear to proceed 
in this Enquiry, since I have treated 
designedly, and at large upon that 
subject, in my OEconomia Corporis Animalis, 
to which I refer those that love 
to be informed, and do hope to see 
that matter more fully done, in some 
practical Treatise of pulses, with 
which some generous Promoter of 
useful Knowledge may one day oblige 
the public. 
 
The second thing I would propose 
as useful in this matter, is the application 
of the Thermometer; for since 
the warmth of our blood, another 
pathognomical sign of a Fever, 
depends upon its motion, as I 
have often proved; if we can settle 
the warmth that is proper to every 
constitution, or proportion the warmth 
to the certain numbers of pulses in 
the particular constitutions; we may, 
[^p.24^] 
by applying the Thermometer, not 
only know how far the blood has exceeded 
its natural motion and warmth, 
but even, in other cases, how much 
it has fallen from them too; and because 
the only difficulty in discovering 
this excess and diminution, may 
consist in the comparison with that 
warmth, which is peculiar to every 
constitution and number of pulses, 
which has never been particularly 
consider'd, I will endeavour to lay 
down my observations on this subject. 
And first, the heat of a man's body, 
whose pulse is of the first sort raises 
the Oil in the Thermometer to about 
16 or 16 3/4 degrees, the pulse of the 
second to 17 5/8 degrees, and that of 
the third to about 20 or 21 1/4 degrees. 
And therefore the differences of the 
degrees will not only make up the 
true warmth and different pulses, but 
comparing the warmths upon occasions 
in Fevers we can find how much 
more it is than that which is natural, 
and even the exceeding numbers of 
pulses, which will not only be of 
infinite use for evacuating in Fevers 
which we propose, but if we compare 
the different and vast excesses of heat 
[^p.25^] 
that may be in our body, will soon 
be convinc'd, that the most violent 
symptoms may proceed from them, 
tho they seem never so opposite to 
each other in the judgmen of the unskilful: 
and this still the more easily, if 
we observe how different the effects 
seem to be, which proceed from the 
various degrees of the Sun's heat; for 
example, the Summer's heat in the air 
raises the Oyl in the Thermometer 
to 7 gr. 1/2, The heat of a man's skin 
whose natural Pulse is sixty in a Minute, 
to 16 gr. 3/4, The heat of boiling 
water, to 52 gr. The heat of red hot 
Iron, to 156; wherefore according to 
this calculation, our natural heat is 
double the Summer's heat, and scalding 
water is only somewhat above three 
times hotter than our skin; and lastly, 
the heat of red hot Iron is almost 
ten times greater than the heat 
of our Skin; yet there are no symptoms 
in a Fever so different, as these 
which are produced by the heat 
of our Skin, and that of red-hot Iron, 
tho they only differ in degree. But 
not to insist further upon this use, 
I may conclude that the true mark of 
letting Blood, or evacuating in Fevers, 
[^p.26^] 
is more truely regulated by these 
ways, I have now hinted, which are 
truly the Strength of the Patient, we 
are all puzzled so much about, yet 
never otherwise to be known; and 
I hope I have explained them too as 
fully, as my time and subject, and 
my resolution to avoid incroaching 
too far upon the true doctrine of 
Pulses and Phlebotomy will allow: 
and therefore I shall proceed to the 
Cure of our sicknesses this year, 
which is the main design of this 
work. 
 
[}Observation I.}] 
 
The first, then, I was called to 
this year, was a Dutch Captain, Commander 
of the Amsterdam, upon the 
fourth of March, who had lain ill 
three or four days of a continu'd 
Fever; the pains in the head, back, 
and other parts that begin these Fevers 
were vanish'd, his Pulse beat very 
high and frequent, his thirst was 
very great, he watch'd most part of 
the night, and was now and then 
delirious. He had taken all that 
time nothing but a sort of a disagreeable, 
[^p.27^] 
immiscible mixture of oc. 
canc. sang. Drac. camphor. sperm. cet. 
ant. Diaph. all jumbled together with 
some White Wine; some sunk, some 
swam a top, and the Wine was left 
clear in the middle. His ordinary 
drink was Rhenish Wine, he was 
not let blood, neither vomited, nor 
so much as had a Clyster, tho he had 
not gone to stool during all that 
time. Seeing him, then, in these 
circumstances, I order'd him immediately 
to be let blood, to the quantity 
of ten ounces, and next day to 
take this vomit, then to begin the 
Testaceous powde_[^ORIG. BLANK^]s. 
 
+R Vin emetic. +o j. oxym. scyllit. +Q vi. 
aq. theriacal +o +s. M. ac capiat cras mane 
cum regimine. 
 
+R oc. 69. ppt. +Q lj. pulver. rad. serpent. 
Virginian. sal. absynth. an +Q +s. M. ac 
divid. in ix part. æq. Quarum unam capiat 
ter in die. 
 
+R Tamarind. optim. +o +s. hord. muudat. 
M. +s. boq. in s. q. aq. font ad hord. crepituram, 
Colatur. +o vi. calid. affund. folsenn. 
virent. +o +s. cin. acerr. Crem. Tartar. 
an gr. xii. Stent per noct. in infus. ac 
mane colatur. add. syr. de spin. cerv. +Q lj. 
M. f. potio quam capiat die quarto consumptis 
[^p.28^] 
pulveribus. Potus fit decoctum 
hordei cum aceto probe acidulatum. 
 
These are the Medicins I prescrib'd 
him, but his Surgeon knowing 
all the Medcins and their quantities, 
but not one word of Latin, I was 
forced to leave him directions in 
Dutch by the help of one of the Lieutenants, 
who spoke very good Latin, 
and so I left him, with a design to 
see him by that time he had taken 
all those Medicins; but the weather 
was so very stormy for 5 days, that 
no Boats could go off from a Ship. On 
the tenth, the Sea not being so great, 
they sent their Boat for me, and 
when I came aboard, I found he had 
not taken one half of his powders; 
he had taken no vomit, and but one 
half of his purging potion, which 
wrought twice, and his drink was 
still Wine. His Pulse was great, 
and very frequent, he was very delirious, 
and had a violent thirst. I 
desir'd he might continue the powders 
prescrib'd before, and the drink, 
of which he should not only drink as 
often as he call'd for it, but should be 
remembred to drink of it: and if he 
did not go to stool once or twice a 
[^p.29^] 
day, to have a Clyster. Besides, I 
order'd strong blistering Plaisters to 
be apply'd; one to the nape of his 
Neck, and one behind each Ear, to 
be removed next morning, applying 
to the sore part the simple Melilot 
Plaister: before I left the Ship, I saw 
the Surgeon mix the Plaister, but 
when he spread it upon the Leather, 
'twas not bigger than a Filberd nut, 
so I shap'd the Leather and spread 
him large Plaisters, leaving him to 
apply them, and intended next day 
to see the sick person, but it blew so 
very hard, that I had not opportunity 
to see him, till at our return to 
the Downs, it proving easie weather, 
I went on board that Ship, and tho 
it was least three days since I was 
there before, the Plaisters were not 
remov'd: the two behind his ears 
had risen very well, but the largest 
that was to be apply'd to the nape 
of his Neck, being laid among the 
hair, the skin lookt scalded, but 
had never risen. He had not even 
then taken his Medicins as directed, 
yet his pulse was slower and great 
enough, and he was not quite so 
delirious. I desir'd the Surgeon 
[^p.30^] 
to be more careful about the 
use of the former Medicins, to shave 
his Neck, and to apply there a great 
and strong blistering Plaister, and so 
took leave; but after we came into 
the Downs, we had again very blowing 
weather, and the first news I 
had of my Patient was, that he was 
dead; which was not so surprizing 
to me, as that he had lived so 
long, with such management. 
 
[}Observation II.}] 
 
..... Robie, being about fifteen 
years of age was taken ill, on board 
the Edgar, on the 27th of April last, 
with a pain in his head, back, and 
loins, a coldness, sudden weakness, a 
slow pulse, and want of appetite; all 
which kept him three days, then he 
was hotter, had a quick pulse, a great 
drought, and could not sleep. 
 
He was let ten ounces of blood 
next day, and the morning after he 
took three grains of Tartarum emeticum, 
which made him vomit about 
a quarter of an hour after he took it; 
and being well ply'd with thin water-gruel 
between the times of his vomiting, 
[^p.31^] 
he vomited four times and 
had one stool, and was much easier 
that day. He had no paregorick, 
which too commonly is made the 
constant attendant of a vomit, or 
purge, because of the recommendation 
of some of the best Physicians; 
but I not only give none my self in 
the Fevers, of which I write, but must 
ev'n desire every body to abstain 
from that practice, who would not 
surrender the management of his Patient 
to the hurry of an impetuous 
blood, and a deprav'd delirium. 
 
On the thirtieth he began to take 
the following powders. 
 
+R oc. 69. ppt. +Q j +s. sal. prunel. +Q ij. sal. 
tartar. +Q +s. M. ac divid. in ix. part. æq. 
Capiat unam ter in die, donec consumantur 
integræ doses novem. 
 
His ordinary drink for the time 
was Barley Decoction sharpen'd with 
Vinegar, which I think better than 
either spirit of Vitriol or oyl of Sulphur 
per. camp. 
 
By these his blood was kept very 
moderate, he had a stool every day, 
and on the first of May at night he 
slept a little: on the third, in the 
morning, he took the following laxative. 
 
[^p.32^] 
+R Decoct. senn. Gereon. +o iv. syr. rosar. 
solutiv. +o +s. aq. Cinam. hordeat. +Q i. M. ac 
capiat mane cum regimine. 
 
It purg'd him six times, and abated 
his thirst, and other feverish symptoms; 
he slept easily that night, and 
next day awakening very hungry, I 
allowed him some water gruel. On 
the fifth and sixth in the morning, he 
had six ounces of the bitter draught 
without the purgatives, and recovered 
every day, till eating a hearty 
dinner of salt beef, he fell into an 
Ague, for which he took another 
vomit on the tenth of May, and then 
the following electuary. 
 
+R. Cons. ros. rub. +Q vi. pulver. Quinquin. 
subtiliss. pulverat. +o +s. Theriac. Andromach. 
+q ij. Syr. cujusvis grati q. s. 
selectuar. quod consumat in intervallo paroxysmi. 
 
The Fit not returning three days 
after, as it would, otherwise, have 
done, he only liv'd more cautiously 
and recover'd his health. 
 
[}Observation III.}] 
 
Laurence Douthey, a Marine Souldier, 
about twenty three years of age, 
[^p.33^] 
complain'd of a violent pain in his 
head, and back, a pain in his bones, 
and want of appetite: he was costive 
and very weak; in a day or two his 
Pulse became frequent, he had a great 
drought, his tongue was very white 
and chinkie; he could not sleep, and 
was delirious. 
 
On the 11th of April he was let 
blood to the quantity of twelve 
ounces, and that evening had a suppository, 
which gave him two stools: 
on the 12th he took 5 grains of Emetick 
Tartar, and drinking Water-gruel, 
as in that case, he vomited six 
times, and had three stools: he took 
the preceding testaceous Powders for 
three days, and drank Barley decoction 
acidulated as before, the whole 
time; and on the 16th took this 
Purge. 
 
+R pulv. rad. jalapp. +q ij. Crem. Tartar. 
+q i. M. ac capiat multo mane cum regimine. 
 
He had eight stools with this, and 
was very easy; in a day or two he 
began to crawl about upon Deck, an 
hour or two in the warmest time of 
the day; but, coming up a little too 
soon, he catch'd cold and relapsed on 
the 24th, and was obliged to go over 
[^p.34^] 
the former course, as near as his 
weaker body would allow; but on 
the 27th he turn'd very delirious, and 
had a very quick Pulse; he could not 
sleep and had an unsatiable drought. 
I allowed him as much of the Barley-decoction 
as he would drink, and 
ordered his Mess mate who attended 
him, to give it him unaskt, if it was 
a great while before he askt it. On 
the 28th in the evening, I caused a 
large and strong Blister to be laid upon 
the nape of his Neck and downwards, 
which rose very well, and was 
removed, applying a Plaister of Melilot 
to the part next day; he was 
mightily relieved by it, his Delirium 
abated, and his Pulse was not so frequent, 
but still he could not sleep, 
which puzzled me extremely, finding 
the ill consequences of Opium, or 
Opiats, the Medicins which Physicians 
depend on for the removal of this 
symptom; and therefore reflecting 
upon the Theory of this symptom, as 
I demonstrated it in the first part of 
my Book of Sea Sicknesses for 1695, 
I could not think of any thing that 
would be so reasonable an indication 
from that Theory, as the applying of 
[^p.35^] 
a double Linnen Cloth dipt in Oxycrat 
round his head, which I ordered 
to be done with so great success, that 
he slept almost all that night, and was 
mightily refresht. I ordered his 
blister'd Neck to be kept as long running, 
as possible; and to drink the 
Decoctum amarum alterans for four days, 
and on the fifth to add the Purgatives 
that he might have four or five stools, 
which being done, he recovered 
without any further trouble. 
 
[}Observation IV.}] 
 
Francis Marpole, aged twenty six 
years, whose natural pulse beats about 
sixty in one minute, was taken ill, on 
board the Edgar, April the 29th, of 
a pain in his head, and bones; he 
was weak, had no appetite to his 
victuals; his pulse beat but 45 in a 
minute, and he was very cold; The 
next day after, he was let blood, his 
pulse was more frequent, and even 
exceeded its natural number; he was 
very hot, and restless, had a great 
drought, and could not sleep. 
 
On the 30th he was let blood in 
his right arm to the quantity of ten 
[^p.36^] 
ounces, and next day took 5 grains 
of the vomiting Tartar; and being 
treated as people ordinarily are, after 
they have taken a vomit, it wrought 
six times, and gave him seven stools. 
Next day he began the following 
powder. 
 
+R oc. 69 ppt. +Q i. pulv. fl. chamom. 
+q ij. sal. prunel. +Q ij. M. ac f. dos. ix. ut 
capiat unam ter in die. 
 
His ordinary drink, all the time 
he was taking these powders, was 
Barly decoction sharpened with Vinegar, 
of which he drank as much and 
as often as he pleased. On the 4th 
of May he took his purge. 
 
+R pulv. Cornachin. +Q +s. tartar. vitriol. 
gr. vii. M. ac capiat mane cum regimine. 
 
This purg'd him seven times, and 
he was very easy thereafter. Only I 
must tell you, that all the time he was 
taking the powders he was restless, 
and did not sleep in the night, till by 
applying the Oxycrate, he was very 
quiet and recovered without any other 
help than drinking half a pint of 
the altering bitter decoction every 
morning, for four mornings. 
 
[^p.37^] 
[}Observation V.}] 
 
John Kock, a Man of three or four 
and twenty years of Age, complaind 
on May 8th, of a giddiness in his head, 
a coldness, sudden weakness, and 
want of appetite; his pulse was low 
and depress'd, yet, in a day or two 
after, it grew very frequent and strong; 
he was very hot, had a great drought, 
and could not sleep. 
 
'Tis plain from this description, 
that this Man was taken ill of a Fever, 
the symptoms of which I have 
already resolv'd and demonstrated; 
yet in this case there being an unusual 
symptom, not yet accounted for, I 
cannot omit explaining it, however 
hard it may be, and maintain my 
design of plainess, which I have hitherto 
endeavoured. 'Tis known that 
those who are giddy or vertiginous, 
have such a sensation, as if every thing 
they see were turning round, however 
fixt and immoveable it be; and 
truly this Phænomenon, tho it may 
often happen in Fevers, yet either as 
a symptom of them, or as it is an essential 
Disease, has not too often had 
[^p.38^] 
the good fortune to be sufficiently 
explain'd; and if I except two or 
three, I may venture to say, that among 
so many thousand Authors who 
have written Medicinal Treatises there 
is not one that has spoken common 
sense upon this subject; we may hear 
what a late learned Author, who is 
thought to speak the fullest and most 
satisfactorily, says; that the immediate 
subject of this disease are the animal spirits, 
the more mediate those parts of the 
Brain, where imagination and common 
sense reside, and from whence the nearest 
way is into the Nervous kind, which are 
the callous and strious Bodies; for in 
these parts they love to range and divert 
themselves as in a spacious field, and pass 
thro all the pores and thickest passages of 
the Marrow, with full force like a ray 
of light: hence it is that, while they glide 
along in the same Line, from the utmost 
borders of the Callous Body towards its 
middle part, they represent pleasant appearances 
and imaginations; and whilst 
they flow, in another line, (perhaps thro 
other passages, from the middle of the Callous 
Body into the gyri of the Brain) they 
transfer thither the marks of Notions to be 
laid up for our future remembrance; and, again, 
[^p.39^] 
whilst they pass into the Strious Bodies, 
and the beginning of the Nerves, they 
actuate all the moving parts, and carry 
to them, upon occasions, the instincts of 
the motions they are to perform 
 
But in the Vertigo theseequal emanations 
of the Spirits seem to be intercepted, and 
variously perverted in different places, 
because some quantities of the Spirits are 
obscured, others are determined into other 
ways, and turned to and fro in so many 
Vortices one over another. Wherefore 
confused phantasms, wandring, and &c. 
 
Here is a most poetical flash of a 
description, but how true, every one 
must see, that will give himself the 
trouble to remember the Anatomy 
of the Brain, and since its make will 
not at all allow of such a roving and 
sporting expansion, or so melancholy 
a circumgyration or turning round, 
we must seek its cause some where 
else, and yet this sense is not afforded 
us from the object it self, which 
we suppose to be, and often is immoveable, 
and therefore, since this 
sense is not caused by a turning round 
of the Animal Spirits, nor by the 
object that is thought to turn round, 
it can be no where else than in the 
[^p.40^] 
Optick nerve, the Eye it self, or something 
that goes to its construction. 
And first, it is evident that any object 
will seem to turn round, if the images 
that come from it fall successively 
upon different parts of the retina, going, 
viz. from the left, while the 
object is not really moved, and the 
images that come from it represent 
always the same distance; I say that 
object will seem to be turned round 
from the left to the right; for the 
images have a contrary posture in the 
retina, yet this may be done while 
the motion is only in the Eye, the object 
remaining unmov'd; for whether 
the object be moved while the 
Eye is quiet, or the object be quiet 
while the Eye is moved, the rays 
that come from the object, will not 
fall upon the same part of the bottom 
of the Eye; and therefore since we 
judge of the change of place where 
the object exists, by the change of 
place upon which the object is describ'd, 
'tis plain that the object which 
has no motion will seem to move, 
and may be thought to turn round to 
the Eyes that are moved Moreover, 
the object and Eye may be both unmov'd; 
[^p.41^] 
for if the optick nerve be 
only moved, the rays will not always 
fall upon it in the same situation; 
and therefore since a direct and 
oblique falling do not affect the 
Nerves alike, but excite different 
sorts of motions; then, the object 
that is quiet will seem to have 
chang'd its place, when only the optick 
nerve is mov'd, the representation of 
the place where it was being changed. 
And therefore 'tis evident that any 
thing that can move the Eye, Optick 
nerve, or Retina may cause this Giddiness, 
tho the object be not moved. 
Now there are a thousand things that 
may produce this effect, but nothing 
can more readily press upon the Brain 
than the distended arteries that are 
next the optick nerve; and since we 
have seen how the fulness of all the 
vessels is occasioned by an interruption 
of perspiration, the cause of our Fevers; 
there can be no further doubt, 
but that this fulness may occasion the 
Retina's being remov'd from its place, 
together with the optick nerve, so 
that it cannot receive the rays from 
the objects at the same part of the 
bottom of the Eye; and consequently 
[^p.42^] 
while the Images change their place 
in the Retina, the objects are represented 
to our mind, as if they were 
constantly moved. This being premis'd. 
 
He was let ten ounces of Blood on 
the 9th, and on the tenth, he had five 
grains of Tartarum Emeticum, which 
made him vomit half an hour after 
he took it. He drunk large draughts 
of thin water-gruel after every time 
he vomited till it had done working; 
which it did very well and made him 
go twice to stool; next day he began 
the testaceous powders, and on the 
fourteenth he had the following 
purge. 
 
+R. pulv. rad. jalapp. +q i. resin. jalapp. 
gr. vii. Crem. Tart. gr. xv. M. ac capiat 
cum regimine. 
 
It purged him eight times, and he 
found himself very easie; but since he 
had no inclination to sleep, I caus'd 
a doubled linnen wet in vinegar and 
water to be laid round his head, by 
which he slept, and awak'd very 
much refresh'd on the sixteenth. 
 
All this time he drunk water-gruel 
sharpned with vinegar; and, after his 
Fever was gone off, the decoctum amarum 
[^p.43^] 
every morning for four days, 
and recover'd a pace, 'till, I cannot 
tell by what accident, he dies apoplectical, 
and very suddenly. 
 
[}Observation VI.}] 
 
Edward Powis, a man about twenty 
years of age, and never at Sea before 
this Summer, was taken ill on board 
the Edgar, the twelfth of May, of a 
Coldness, want of Strength, and 
appetite for his victuals, his pulse 
was low and depress'd, he complain'd 
of violent pains in his head, back, and 
bones: In a day or two his pains 
went off, his pulse was high, he was 
very hot and had a great drought. 
 
On the 13th he was let twelve 
ounces of blood, and next day took 
four grains of emetick Tartar, and 
vomited 6 times, and went thrice to 
stool. I always use to give them vomits 
in the beginning, for they mitigate 
all the Symptoms through the 
whole progress of the sickness, and 
the Patients are more easily managed: 
on the fifteenth he began to 
take these powders. 
 
[^p.44^] 
+R. oc. 69 ppt. +Q j. sal absynth. pulv. sl. 
chamom. an. +q ij. rad. serpentar. virginian 
pulverat. +Q +s. M. f. pulv. divid. in tres p. 
æ. Capiat omnes die crastino tribus vicibus. 
 
The day after, he drunk this purgative. 
 
+R. tamarind. +o +s. hord. mund. M. f. 
Coq. ad hord. crepitur. in s. q. aq. font. 
Colatur. +o iv. affund. fol. senn. +o +s. semin. 
anis. contus +Q +s. crem. tartar. +q i. maneant 
per noctem in infusione, maneque liquori 
colato add. syr de rham. +Q i. M. ac 
capiat cum regimine, 
 
This purg'd him eight times, and 
having applied the Linnen dipt in 
Oxycrat, he slept all night, and recover'd 
daily. His Drink at the time 
of his sickness was as much of the 
Barley Decoction sharpened with 
Vinegar as he would; and half a pint 
of the decoctum amarum for four days 
after his Fever was gone off; after 
which he began to recover. 
 
[}Observation VII.}] 
 
Thomas Poste, being about 26 years 
of age, was taken ill, on board the 
Edgar, where he was the Captain's 
Cook, of a pain in his head, and over 
[^p.45^] 
all his body as if he had been 
beaten, his pulse was depressed, he 
was costive, and had no stomach for 
his Victuals; in a day or two his pains 
left him, he grew very hot, he had 
an insatiable drought, and could not 
sleep. 
 
On the 6th of May he was let 12 
ounces of blood, and in the evening 
had a Clyster which gave him two 
stools; next day he took the tartarum 
emeticum which vomited him very 
well, and made him go to stool; so 
that on the eighth he began the use of 
these powders. 
 
+R oc. cancr. ppt. +Q ij. pulv. fl. chamom. 
+Q j. sal. prunel +o +s. M. ac divid. in ix 
partes æquales, ac capiat dosin unam ter 
in die. 
 
He took all these Powders, and 
then this Purge. 
 
+R. pulv. rad. jalap. +Q +s. tartar. vitriolat. 
gr. viii. M. ac capiat cum regimine. 
 
It purged him six or seven times, 
and he was pretty easie that evening, 
and the most of the next day, till on 
the 12th in the evening he began to 
be delirious, and his pulse beat very 
quick; so I order'd a large Blister to 
[^p.46^] 
be laid to the nape of his neck, and 
one behind each ear, and to remove 
them next morning, dressing the blistered 
parts with the Melilot Plaister. 
The morning comes, but the Blisters 
had not risen; I was told of this in 
the afternoon, and when I went to 
see him his sight was dim, he could 
hardly speak, and lookt almost like 
one who is apoplectical: I caus'd 
6 ounces of blood to be taken out of 
his jugular vein, for the reasons I will 
give in the case of an Apoplexy that 
happen'd to a Sailer this Summer, 
and order'd him immediately to begin 
the following powder. 
 
+R. Rad. serpentar. Virginian. pulverat. 
fl. chamom. sal. absynth. an +o +s. antimon. 
diaphoret. +q i. M. ac divid. in tres part. 
æq. quas consumat partitis vicibus, capienda 
dosin quarta quaque hora; in cochleari 
julap. seq. superbibendo alterum. 
 
+R aq. lact. alexiter. +o iij. decoct. hord. 
+o i. aq. epid. +Q i. syr. pœon. +Q ii. M. f. 
julap. 
 
I saw him at eight a clock that 
evening, and he spoke easily enough, 
tho weakly; and therefore I only 
order'd a piece of Linnen wet 
in Oxycrate to be laid round his 
[^p.47^] 
head. He slept all that night, and 
till ten a clock ne_[^ORIG. BLANK^]t day, when he 
awak'd, and desiring something to 
eat, I order'd him some Water-gruel 
with the juice of a Limon squeez'd 
into it, whereof he took half a dozen 
spoonfuls, and fell asleep; he slept 
again till six in the evening, and had 
more Water-gruel prepar'd as before, 
when he awak'd; and thus he slept 
for almost two days, and recover'd 
very fast; his ordinary drink, during 
his whole sickness, was Barley decoction 
sharpned with Vinegar; and 
sometimes Water, Sugar, and the 
juice of Limons. 
 
Since that time I ordered the Surgeon's 
Mate always to observe when 
their pulse began to grow low, whether 
their face was reder than ordinary, 
whether their eyes began to 
stare, or whether they complain'd of 
an illness or heaviness about their 
head; which I conclude to be the 
symptoms of the blood's going slower 
thro the carotid arteries of the face, 
and brain; and, in this case, I desir'd 
him always to open the jugular 
vein, and to let out 6, 8, or 10 ounces 
of blood, according to the urgency of 
the symptoms. 
 
[^p.48^] 
[}Observation VIII.}] 
 
William Mayes, being about twenty 
years of age, May 29th, complain'd 
of a violent pain in his head and 
bones; he was very cold, his pulse 
weak and depress'd; then he was hot, 
very restless, his pulse quick, had a 
violent drought, and his tongue was 
very white. 
 
On the 30th he was let +o xij of 
blood, and next day took five gr. of 
tartar. emetic. which made him vomit 
six times, and go twice to stool; he 
drank Water-gruel plentifully during 
the time of its working, and brought 
up with the nasty stuff several large 
Worms, some of which had flat 
heads, and some sharp. On the first 
of June he began the following powders. 
 
+R oc. 69 ppt. aut testar. ovor. pulverat. 
+Q ii. sal. prunel. +o +s. M. ac divid. in ix 
part æq. ut capiat unam ter in die in cochl. 
decoct. hord. 
 
After he had taken these powders 
for three days, he took this purge. 
 
[^p.49^] 
+R. Pulver. Cornachin. +Q +s. resin. jalapp. 
gr. iii. Tartar. Vitriolat. gr. v. M. ac 
capiat cras mane cum regimine. 
 
This purg'd him six times and he 
was pretty easy that night, yet his 
Fever did not take leave of him; so 
we continu'd the testaceous powder 
prescrib'd before, and finding his 
pulse grow quicker towards the evening, 
and his face very red, I began to 
suspect that he was inclining to be 
delirious, and therefore I caused six 
ounces of blood to be taken out of his 
Jugular Vein; he was quieter all that 
night, and next day, and on the 7th 
I purg'd him again, whereby he voided 
a great abundance of the small 
Worms they call Teretes, and was 
very well. All the time of his Sickness 
he drunk as much as he pleased 
of the Barley-decoction sharpen'd 
with Vinegar; and half a pint of the 
decoctum amarum alterans when he began 
to recover, which prevented his 
falling into the Melancholia Hypochondriaca, 
as some are apt to do upon 
their Recovery, if we do not help 
them in their digestion. 
 
[^p.50^] 
[}Observation IX.}] 
 
Thomas Tyes, a lusty Man, and never 
at Sea before, nor ever afflicted 
with sickness, was taken ill on the 5th 
of June with a pain in his bones, a 
heaviness and pain in his head, a sudden 
weakness, his pulse was deprest, 
and he had no appetite for victuals; 
but in a day or two he became extraordinary 
hot, his pulse was frequent 
and great, he had a great drought, he 
was delirious and could not sleep. On 
the 6th he was let 12 ounces of blood, 
and on the 7th took the Tartarum 
Emeticum, which wrought very well, 
drinking great draughts of thin Water-gruel 
in the intervals of his vomiting; 
it purg'd him but once, and he was 
a great deal easier in all his pains. On 
the 8th he began to take this powder. 
 
+R. Oc. 69 pptorum, aut testar. ostrecrum 
sine igne præparatarm +Q ij. sal. prunel. 
+Q iss. Crem. Tartar. +q ij. M. ac divid. 
in ix doses, quarum unam capiat ter 
in die in cochl. cujusvis liquoris convenientis. 
 
[^p.51^] 
On the 9th he had a gentle Clyster, 
because he had not gone to stool since 
his vomiting; and on the 10th in the 
morning, having been furiously delirious 
the night before, he was let 
7 ounces of blood out of the Saphæna 
of the Right Leg, which bled freely 
without being put into warm water, 
and that evening had the Oxycrat 
applied to his Temples and round his 
Head, and next day was to be purg'd 
if his Delirium should not go off; he was 
easier that night, but being still light-headed, 
I caused 6 ounces of blood 
to be taken out of the Jugular Vein 
on the 11th, and the Oxycrat to be 
continu'd that night, which he past 
in quiet sleep, and awakening easy 
next morning took the following 
Purge. 
 
+R. Decoct. senn. Gereon. +o iv. syr. de 
spin. Cervin. +Q i. M. ac capiat cum regimine. 
 
It purg'd him five times, and he 
had a good nights rest thereafter; 
next day he awak'd very hungry, and 
had some Water-gruel. 
 
[^p.52^] 
He drunk all the time of his Sickness 
a great deal of Barley Decoction 
sharpned with Vinegar, and sometimes 
some Sal Prunellæ. dissolv'd in 
a Spoon, given him in a draught of 
the Decoction. 
 
