[^Culpeper, Nicholas: Semeiotica uranica^] 
 
[}CULPEPER'S 
Semeiotica Uranica: 
OR, AN 
ASTROLOGICAL 
JUDGEMENT 
OF 
DISEASES 
 
From the Decumbiture of the sick 
much Englarged. 
1. From Aven Ezra by way of Introduction. 
2. From Noel Duret by way of Direction. 
 
Wherein is laid down, 
The way and manner of finding out the 
Cause, Change, and End of the disease. Also 
whether the sick be likely to live or die; and the time 
when Recovery or Death is to be expected. 
 
With the Signs of Life or Death by the body of the Sick 
party, according to the judgment of Hippocrates. 
 
Whereunto is added, 
A Table of Logisticall Logarithmes, to find the exact 
time of the Crisis. Hermes Trismegistus upon the first Decumbiture 
of the sick: shewing the signs & conjectures 
of the disease, and of life and death, by the good or evil 
position of the Moon at the time of the Patients lying 
down, or demanding the question: Infallible signs to 
know of what complexion any person is whatsoever: 
With a compendious Treatise of Urine. 
 
By NICHOLAS CULPEPER Gent. 
Student in Physick and Astrologie. 
The third Edition. 
 
London, Printed for Nath. Brooke at the Angel 
in Cornhil, neer the Royal Exchange, 1658.}] 
 
[^A portrait of Culpeper, a dedication to the astrological physicians in England, a preface and a table of contents omitted.^] 
[^Extract 1, pp. 1-44^] 
 
[^p.1^] 
[}Semiotica Uranica: 
OR, 
CULPEPPER'S Judgement 
of Diseases much enlarged. 
ABRAHAM AVENEZRA, 
Of Critical Days.}] 
 
[}LIB. 1.}] 
 
IT is a palpable and apparent 
truth that God carries men to 
the Principles of grace by the 
Book of the Creatures; For this 
beginning of Abraham Avenezra 
an Arabian Physitian, and a 
singular Astrologer (whom the Priests of our 
times call a Heathen) favoureth of the things 
beyond Heathenism; for in this Treatise of 
Critical days, he begins thus: 
 
I entreat the Lord God, that he would enlighten 
my heart with his light and truth, so 
long as my Spirit remains in me, for his light 
is very delightful and good for the eye of my 
soul to see by; for so shall the night be enlightned 
to me as the day, neither shall the 
clouds shadow it; it shall not be like the light 
of the Sun by day, because it shall not be clouded; 
[^p.2^] 
nor like the light of the Moon, because it 
shall never be diminished as her light is. God 
hath made these lights as he hath made man, 
and he appointed the greater light to rule the 
day, and the lesser to rule the night: Hence it 
appears, the Sun was made to rule the day, and 
not to give light to it only, as the Priests affirm; 
and the Moon was made to rule the night, not 
to give light to it onely, as appears Gen. 1. because 
she hath no light to give; also he hath 
made the whole host of Heaven, the fixed Stars 
and Planets, and gave them vertues, together 
with the Luminaries; but their vertues are not 
so great as the vertues of the Luminaries; neither 
is the vertue of the Moon so great as the 
vertue of the Sun, because she borrows her light 
from the Sun; also the whole host of Heaven, 
that is, the fixed Stars, move all in the same 
Sphere; and therefore their distance is always 
the same the one from the other, and their latitude 
is always the same; but it is not so with 
the Planets; for their course is various, and so 
is their distance the one from the other, and so 
is their latitude; for sometimes they are upon 
the Ecliptick, sometimes North from it, sometimes 
South, sometimes Retrograde, sometimes 
direct, sometimes in conjunction one with another, 
sometimes in opposition, sometimes in 
other aspects; the reason of this is, because the 
Sphere of one is lower then the Sphere of the other, 
and the lower the Sphere is, the sooner 
they make their revolution. 
 
The neerest to the earth of all the Planets is 
[^p.3^] 
the Moon, and therefore her course is swiftest: 
and besides her difference in Longitude and Latitude, 
there happen other accidents to her 
which are not visible to other Planets; for somtimes 
she encreaseth, sometimes decreaseth, and 
sometimes she is invisible or faileth in light: the 
reason why the Planets are not seen horned as 
the Moon, is, because their distance is greater 
from us; all the planets seem biggest when they 
are at their greatest distance from the Sun, or 
when they are neerest to the earth, according to 
Copernicus; also sometimes the Moon is Eclipsed, 
but not in the same manner as the Sun; for 
the Sun never loseth its light, but is onely shadowed 
from a particular people or place, by the 
body of the Moon; but the Moon Eclipsed totally 
loseth her light; and the reason is, the 
Sun's light is his own, but the Moon is a borrowed 
light. 
 
This being premised, consider that all things 
under the Moon universally, whether men, 
beasts, or plants, are changed, and never remain 
in the same state, neither are their thoughts and 
deeds the same: take counsel of your head, and 
it will certifie you what I speak is true, and they 
are varied according to the various course and 
disposition of the Planets: look upon your own 
genesis, and you shall find your thoughts moved 
to choler, so often as the Moon transites the 
place where the body or aspect of Mars was in 
your genesis; and to melancholy when she doth 
the like to Saturn; the reason is, because the 
Moon is assimilated to the body of man: whose 
[^p.4^] 
vertue as well as her light increaseth and diminisheth; 
for she brings down the vertue of the 
other Planets to the creatures, and to man if he 
lives upon the earth. 
 
The Sun causeth heat and cold, day and night 
Winter and Summer. When he arrives to the 
house of his honour or exaltation, to wit, Aries, 
then the trees spring, living creatures are comforted, 
the birds sing, the whole creation rejoyceth, 
and sicknesses in the body shew themselves 
in their colours: Also when he arrives at 
his fall, to wit, Libra, the leaves of the trees fall, 
all creatures are lumpish, and mourn like the 
trees in October. 
 
Also another notable experiment is, usually 
sick people are something eased from midnight 
to noon, because then the Sun is in the ascending 
part of the Heaven; but they are most troubled 
when he is descending, that is, from noon 
to midnight. 
 
The course of the Moon is to be observed in 
many operations both in the Sea and Rivers, 
Vegetables, Shel-fishes, as also in the bones and 
marrow of men, and all creatures; also seed 
sown at the wain of the Moon, grows either not 
at all, or to no purpose. 
 
Also wise men have experiences of many vertues 
of the Stars, and have left them to posterity: 
and Physitians in old time (when they 
were minded to be honest) have found out the 
changes and terminations of diseases by the 
course of the Moon: Wherefore the 7, 14, 20; 
or 21, 27, 28, or: 9 days of sicknesses are called 
[^p.5^] 
Critical Days, which cannot be known but 
by the course of the Moon; for let not your 
brain rest in the number of the days, because 
the Moon is sometimes swifter, sometimes 
slower. 
 
As for such diseases as do not terminate in 
a moneth (I mean a Lunar moneth) viz. the 
time the Moon traceth round the Zodiack, 
which is 27 days, some odd hours, some few 
minutes; you must judge of these by the course 
of the Sun. The day is not called Critical, because 
it is the seventh day from the decumbiture, 
as if the vertue lay in the number 7. but 
because the Moon comes to the Quartile of the 
place she was in at the decumbiture, its no matter 
whether it be a day sooner or later. 
 
When she comes to the opposition of the 
place she was in at the day of the decumbiture, 
she makes a second Crisis, the third when she 
comes to the second quartile, and the fourth 
when she comes to the place she was in at the 
decumbiture, and its well she can make so 
many. 
 
The reason of the difference of the Moons 
motion is the difference of her distance from 
the Earth; for when the center of her circle is 
nearest to the center of the Earth, she is swift in 
motion; and hence it comes to pass that sometimes 
she moves more then 15. degrees in 24. 
hours, sometimes lesse then 12. therefore if she 
be swift in motion, she comes to her own quartile 
in six days; if slow, not in seven; therefore 
must you judge according to the motion of 
[^p.6^] 
the Moon, and not according to the number 
of the days. 
 
Upon a Critical day, if the Moon be well aspected 
with good Planets, it goes well with 
the sick; if by ill Planets, it goes ill; but I 
know you would be resolved in one particular, 
which is, If the Crisis depend upon the motion 
of the Moon, and her aspect to the Planets, what 
is the reason, if two men be taken sick at one 
and the same time, that yet the Crisis of the one 
falls out well, and not so in the other? 
 
I answer, The vertue working is changed according 
to the diversity of the vertue receiving; 
for you all know the Sun makes the Clay hard, 
and the Wax soft; it makes the Cloth white, 
and the Face black; so then, if one be a child 
whose nature is hot and moist, the other a 
young man, and the third an old man, the Crisis 
works diversly in them all, because their ages 
are different. 
 
Secondly, the time of the year carries a 
great stroke in this businesse; if it be in the 
String-time, diseases are most obnoxious to a 
child, because his nature is hot and moist; a 
disease works most violently with a cholerick 
man in Summer; with a melancholy man in 
Autumn; with a flegmatick man by reason of 
age or complexion in Winter. 
 
Thirdly, To this I add, suppose at the beginning 
of a disease the Moon was in the 
place of Mars, in the genesis whose nature is hot 
and dry, if the disease be of heat, it mightily aggravates 
it; not so if it be of cold; and you 
[^p.7^] 
shall seldome find two men that had Mars in 
one and the same place in their genesis, fall sick 
together, and the disease differ neither at the 
middle nor at the end. 
 
Quest. Put the case the age of the people, 
and season of the year be the same, and the 
disease be the same, would the Crisis be the same, 
yea or no? 
 
I answer thus, Their complexions may be 
different, the one hot and dry, the other cold 
and moist: If the diseases be hot and dry, the 
effect will not be so violent upon a cold and 
moist body, as it will be upon a hot and dry; 
the fire will sooner seize upon that which is 
hot and dry, then that which is cold and 
moist. 
 
2. Imagine the complexions to be the same 
upon both parties? I answer, 
 
That is impossible, there must be some difference 
upon complexions; for though they may 
be the same in the universal, yet in particulars 
there must needs be some difference, by reason 
of their different dyet, exercise and climate, unless 
they be born and brought up altogether 
under one latitude. 
 
3. Let us imagine they be all alike, yet divers 
things may intervene and alter the Crisis; 
their nativities may not agree; for example, If 
the Moon be in the place of Saturn or Mars in 
the nativity, the disease is dangerous: not so if 
she be in the place where Jupiter or Venus was in 
then; or it's possible Jupiter or Venus may hurt 
in the Nativites of such to whose ascendents 
[^p.8^] 
they are inimical or posited in the sixth or 
eighth houses. 
 
5. Again, Saturn may be Lord of the one 
nativity, and not of the other; and then he may 
hurt the one and not the other, whose nativity 
he is Lord of; for the Divel will not hurt his 
own: the like of Mars. 
 
Innumerable such things may be added, as 
that the one may provide for the sicknesse before 
hand, not the other, but it is needless. 
 
Object. But then you will say, there can be no 
certainty at all found in the Crisis? 
 
I answer, Astrologers passe judgement two 
manner of ways in diseases. 
 
The first we call Universal, and so Saturn 
rules Consumptions, Mars Feavers, Venus over 
women, Mercury over Schollars, & c. 
 
The Second is particular, and the Seventh 
house hath dominion over women, the ninth 
over Schollars, & c. 
 
Now no particular can destroy an universal; 
for example, if Venus be ill seated in a nativity, 
and the Lord of the Seventh well seated, we say 
the native shall generally incur evil by women, 
though some particular good may incur from 
them; in like manner judge in this case by the 
general significators of sickness, viz. Saturn 
and Mars. 
 
But Secondly, if you can possibly get the nativities, 
you shall not erre: And now give me 
leave to quote one experiment of my own. If 
the Nativities be one and the same, the Crisis 
will be one and the same: For example, I know 
[^p.9^] 
three Children born at one and the same time 
(as the event proved;) at five years of age they 
all three had Convulsions, whereby they were 
all three lame of one leg, the boys on the right 
leg, and the girl on the left; at 14 years of age 
they died altogether in one and the same day 
of the small pox. 
 
Thirdly, if the Nativity cannot be gotten, 
view the urine, and erect a cœlestial Scheme upon 
the sight of it, and if you have the decumbiture, 
compare the decumbiture with the celestial 
Scheme at the view of the urine, and you may 
judge clearly of the Crisis. 
 
To proceed to the matter, if the Moon be 
strong when she comes to the Quartile, or opposition 
of the place she was in at the decumbiture, 
viz. in her house or exaltation, the sick 
recovers, if she be aspected to no Planet. 
 
Judge the like of the Sun in Chronical diseases, 
but judge the contrary if either of them 
be in the detriments of falls; for there is as 
much difference between them as there is between 
the Zenith and the Narder: if the Moon 
be void of course at the beginning of a disease, 
the sign is neither good nor bad. Look then to 
the sign ascending at the beginning of a disease, 
and let the Moon alone for a time. 
 
If the Moon be angular at the decumbiture 
and in the Ascendent, judge of her alone, and 
make use of no other significator; if she be not 
so, joyn the Lord of the Ascendent with her in 
your judgement. 
 
[^p.10^] 
'Tis very dangerous when the Moon is Eclipsed, 
when she comes to the quartile or opposition 
of the place she was in at the decumbiture, 
for usually at such a time death turns 
Physitian. 
 
If in the beginning of a sickness the Moon be 
in a moveable sign, the sickness soon moves to 
an end one way or other: fixed signs prolong 
sickness, and common signs set a stop to the wisest 
brain in the world. 
 
Also this is a certain rule, as sure as the Sun 
is up at noon day that diseases of plentitude are 
very dangerous, when a man is taken sick upon 
a full Moon, Diseases of fasting or emptiness 
are most dangerous, when a man is taken sick 
upon a new Moon. Let me intreat you to give 
Physick for a disease of emptiness when she is 
near the Full. And for diseases of fulness when 
the Moon hath lost her light. 
 
Diminish a humour when the Moon diminisheth 
in light: Increase when she increaseth in 
light: Flegm opposeth Choler, Melancholy 
opposeth Bloud: 'Tis none of the worst ways 
to diminish choler by increasing flegm; a word 
is enough to the wise. 
 
'Tis very bad when in the beginning of a 
sickness the Moon is in a sign of the nature of 
the humour offending. 
 
Naturally when she is in a fiery sign, amend 
a disease of flegm; but if choler abound, 'tis 
very good if she be in a watry sign; you may 
know by a penny how a shilling is coyned. 
 
If the Moon be in conjunction or aspect with 
[^p.11^] 
any Planet, and neither of them have latitude, 
the Crisis will be firm: if they differ much in 
latitude, the Crisis will be weak. 
 
The Moon in conjunction with Saturn at the 
decumbiture shews long sickness; and if Saturn 
be slow in motion, so much the worse (and bad 
is the best) at all times in such a case. 
 
If Saturn be retrogade when he comes to the 
opposition of the Sun, beware of a relapse. 
 
If Saturn have North Latitude, be sure the 
sick is bound much in body. If the Moon be 
joyned to a retrogade Planet, the sick vomits 
up his Physick. 
 
Venus helpes more in the Sicknesses of young 
men and women, then she doth in old. 
 
If the disease come of heat, Venus helps more 
then Jupiter; if the disease comes more of cold, 
Jupiter helps more then Venus. If the disease 
comes of Love, there is not a more pestilent Planen 
in the Heavens then Venus; then call for 
help of Jupiter: in persecutions of Religion 
Jupiter is little better then the Divel; call help 
of Venus in such a case. 
 
Mercury occidental and strong, signifies good 
in diseases. 
 
If Mars cause the disease, Venus helps more 
then Jupiter; if Saturn, then Jupiter more then 
Venus. 
 
If in the beginning of a Sickness the Moon be 
in conjunction with any fixed stars of the first 
magnitude, whose latitude from the Ecliptick 
is but small, you may safely judge of diseases 
by the nature of that Star she is joyned to: suppose 
[^p.12^] 
he be of the nature of a Planet good or 
bad; take him according to his nature. 
 
When the Moon is joyned to any planet by 
body or aspect in the beginning of any Sickness, 
if she aspect that Planet when she comes 
to the quartile or opposition of the place, the 
Crisis will be firm and stable, and 'twill move 
no faster then a house, and 'twill not be altered 
be it good or bad. 
 
But if when she comes to the quartile or opposition, 
she meets with another Planet, be 
sure the disease changes either to better or 
worse, according to the nature of that star she 
meets withall 
 
And this will appear in the sick party, or else 
in the Physitian, or in the course of Physick. 
 
See what house the Planet she meets withall 
at the Crisis is Lord of in the decumbiture, and 
judge accordingly; and so a sick person may 
happen to have more wit then an old doting 
Physitian. 
 
If it be a fixed star of another nature to that 
fixed star she was withall at the decumbiture, it 
will not alter so much, or at least there will not 
be a universal alteration of the disease; and 
my reason is, because the fixed stars are so far 
from the Earth. And the last thing is, 
 
What soever is said of the Moon in acute diseases, 
will hold as true of the Sun in Chronick 
Diseases. 
 
[^p.13^] 
[}LIB. II.}] 
 
[}Astrological Judgement upon 
DISEASES: 
OR, 
A Methodical way to find out the 
Cause, Nature, Symptoms, and change of a 
Disease, together with the parts of the 
afflicted, the exact time of recovery, 
or dissolutions by the Decumbiture; 
Amplified by 
Examples.}] 
 
THE Basis of the Story was borrowed 
from Noel Duret Cosmographer 
to the King of France, and 
the most excellent Cardinal the 
Duke of Richelieu. 
 
Tis' confest, in some places I have abbreviated 
him, in others corrected him; let another doe 
the like by me; What I have done, I have done, 
and am not ashamed the world should see it. 
Through the never failing mercies of God, I 
had an opportunity put into my hand to finish 
this so much desired, so long wished-for work; 
[^p.14^] 
if there be any weaknesse in it, it is my owns 
if there be any excellency in it, give God the 
glory. 
 
He that writes Ignominy upon the backside 
of another mans book, never setting forth any 
of his own, let the name of Ignominy be branded, 
and not ingraven upon his Sepulchre. 
 
I would fain see the piss Prophets of this age 
deliver such a judgement of diseases by the Urine; 
he that can doe so, Erit mihi magnus Apollo. 
Why do I trouble my head with the Physicians, 
whose Covetousnesse or Lazinesse, or both, 
or something worse, will not suffer them to 
study those Arts which are essentially to their 
Monopolized calling; but I will be silent, for 
their fall is approaching by reason of their 
pride, if he wrote true that writes, that pride 
goes before a fall, and a haughty mind before 
destruction: my Genius is too dull to commend 
my Author, or to give him the thousanth part 
of his due praise. I desire to be censured by Dr. 
Experience, who will give judgement without 
partiality: and I hope 'tis no disparagement to 
Monsieur Duret that I deliver him in my own 
language. 
 
[}CHAP. I. 
The definition of the word Crisis, its Use, Cause, 
Kinds, Division and Difference.}] 
 
CRisis according to Gallen, is a swift and 
suddain change of any disease, whereby the 
sick is either brought to recovery, or death, 
[^p.15^] 
and a sick man can be brought to nothing else, 
unlesse you will make him a beast of a man. 
For every swift and suddain change whereever 
it happens, whether in the Moon or the Air, 
or sick body, Galen plays the man and calls a 
Crisis, and from this Crisis is judgement given, 
whether the sick be likely to live or die. 
 
The word Crisis is a Greek word derived 
[^GREEK OMITTED^] which signifieth to judge or discern, 
or passe sentence upon a thing; therefore 
Critical dayes are nothing else but dayes 
wherein a man may discern a disease, or give 
judgement upon it, be it good or bad, it matters 
not much, 'tis taken by a Metaphor from 
the judicial Court to the Art of Physick, because, 
'tis something like to plead a mans cause 
for his life, and to labour acutely under a disease 
to be drawn by inimical accusers before 
the judgement Seat, and to run the hazzard of 
life, with a cruel and hostil Disease. Moreover 
there are three things requisite to a judicial 
Court, the Accuser, the Person indicted, and 
the Judge. So likewise are there three things 
by which the Art of Physick consisteth, and by 
which every cure is perfected: 1. The Disease. 
2. Nature, and the Physitian, which is natures 
servant, or at least should be so; and 3. the accidents 
which manifest what the disease is, and 
stand as witnesses. 
 
The cause of the Crisis is twofold, inward, 
outward, the internal cause is taken from its 
own proper principle, if you will believe Hippocrates, 
and that is double or twofold: for 
[^p.16^] 
either nature labours to expell the humour that 
causeth the disease, or else the humour it self 
being drawn to a place, and not fit for Excretion, 
by its own weight or quality, burdens nature, 
and so break out. Hippocrates was but a 
man, and I am no more; a man saith he, is 
troubled when he is in a Feaver, and the sign 
is horror, tremblings, running hither, and thither 
throughout the Microcosm, the is one 
internal cause. 
 
[}The second internal cause.}] 
 
Others there be, 'tis no matter who, that ascribe 
the efficient cause of the Crisis to nature 
it self. Nature if she be strong, is a good Physitian 
for all diseases, and concocts the humour 
which causes the disease, and separates that 
which is good from that which is bad, and having 
done so, prepares that which breeds annoyances 
for Excretion, and at last makes a shift 
to cast it out. 
 
The external cause of the Crisis, is caused by 
an alteration of the Aire, whence ariseth an 
alteration of the breath a man draws in, from 
cold to heat, from dry to moist, or the contraries 
to them both. 
 
For Hippocrates himself in his sixt Aphorism, 
and in his Treatise de natura humana speaks in 
down dunstable language, that heat and moisture 
in the body, moves forward the Crisis: 
for diseases, some saith he, come by ill Dyet, other 
by the Air we draw in. 
 
So then the Dyet as it breeds such and such 
humours in the body, is internal, but the Air 
[^p.17^] 
we draw in, is the external cause of the Crisis. 
 
And now give me leave to leave my Author, 
and yet I will not forget him quite neither. 
The lord eternal in the beginning when 
he made the Creation, made it of a composition 
of contraries; discord makes a harmony as in 
musicke, if the world be composed of a composition 
of contraries, various must needs be the 
disposition of mans life: Hence comes sometimes 
health, sometimes sicknesse: sometimes 
melancholy, sometimes choler to the body of 
man, and happy is that man that knows himself: 
 
These qualities in man being altered by the 
various influences of the Stars, the Sphere of the 
one carrying a swifter motion then the sphere 
of the other, then various must needs be the disposition 
of mans body. 
 
The Luminaries carry the greatest strength 
in the heavens, and so do the time servers in the 
State, and this needs not be doubtful to any 
body, if you consider that the sound of a Drum 
or Trumpet incites a man to valour, and the 
sound of a Fiddle to dancing. Besides, other 
manifest effects of the Luminaries appeare to 
our eyes. Who makes hours and dayes, and 
seasons in the year? is it not the Sun who 
makes alterations in the Aire, in Plants, and 
in living Creatures? what is the reason that 
Oysters are fuller at the full moon, then at the 
new? To the number of Oysters, joyne Crabs 
and Lobsters, nay the marrow in the body of 
Man; is it not the Moon? A man if he pleaseth 
[^p.18^] 
may say his right hand is his left, and a prating 
Priest may preach his pleasure ; let Doctor Experience 
be judge. Now then we have brought 
the matter to this purpose, that the universal 
cause of the Crisis is the influence of the Heavens: 
for the Celestial bodies, either by heat, 
light, motion, or aspect, configuration, or all 
of them, or some of them, act not only in the 
four Elements, but Elementary bodies; for if 
they act in the one, they must needs in the other, 
and then by consequence in man, which is 
but compounded of Elements. 
 
The Earth is a great lump of dirt rolled up 
together, and by an only wise God hanged in 
the Air: The Stars are no more, neither is the 
Moon; only what mettle the Sun is made of I 
know not. 
 
If the bodies of men are elementary, composed 
of Fire, Air, Earth, and Water, he must 
needs participate in one measure or other, of all 
these Elements. The Elements being contraries, 
cannot alwayes agree; hence comes the 
cause of health, sometimes of sickness, sometimes 
death it self; and Aristotle was half of my opinion 
when he wrote these words: From the rain 
and dew of Heaven both good and bad things 
are caused to bud. 
 
The kinds of Crisis are two; 
[/1./] 
one in acute diseases; and they 
are to be judged by the Moon; the other in long 
and lasting, or chronick diseases, which are to 
be judged of by the Sun: For those Crises which 
come from their own proper principle, are from 
[^p.19^] 
the internal cause depending only upon the 
motions of the Moon, and her Configurations 
and Aspects to the place she was in at the Decumbiture. 
 
But you must note in acute diseases, the aspects 
or radiations of the Moon, to wit, her 
Quartile or Opposition, are not taken from the 
Conjunction of the Moon to the Sun, as they 
are in Almanacks or Ephemerides, which is but 
the Father of an Almanack, but from the place 
in which the Moon was found at the Decumbiture, 
as shall appear by a few examples hereafter. 
 
There are Acute and Chronick diseases, 
 
Of Acute diseases, some are simply acute, others 
are peracute, others are very acute, per-per-acute, 
or exceeding acute. 
 
Those which are simply acute, are finished in 
8. 10. 11. 14. 20. 21. dayes, and they are called 
monthly diseases by some, and lunary by others, 
and they none of the greatest fools neither; they 
are terminated in the time the Moon traceth the 
12. Celestial Signes of the Zodiack, which is in 
27. dayes, some odd hours, and some odd minutes. 
 
Those acute diseases which suffer changes, or 
degenerate, are to be judged of by an imperfect 
way; for sometimes they increase, sometimes 
they are remitted; they are as fickle as a weather-cock, 
according as the Moon meets with 
the beams either of good or evil Planets: and 
that is not all the trick they have neither. For 
sometimes they change out of Acute diseases 
[^p.20^] 
into Chronick diseases; and so a continued Fever 
may change into an Hecktick Fever; or an 
intermitting Fever into a continual Fever; and 
these diseases terminate in forty days; very acute 
diseases, such as are concluded in 5. 6. 7. 8. 
dayes, among which is the disease the Greeks 
call [^GREEK OMITTED^], an inflammation of the Lungs. 
 
Exceeding acute diseases, they are such which 
end in three or four dayes at furthest, as Pestilencies, 
Apoplexies, & c. 
 
Chronick diseases follow the motion of the 
Sun, and 'tis about ninety days before the first 
Crisis appears; for in that time the Sun comes to 
the proper quartile of the place he was in at the 
Decumbiture, as appears in Hecktick Fevers, 
Dropsies: but when he comes to his Sextile, or 
Trine Aspect of the place he was in at the Decumbiture, 
some motion appears whereby a man, 
if he have any guts in his brains, may judge of 
the Crisis to come. 
 
It falls out well, if the Sun be well aspected 
by good Planets; and worse if to evil Planets; 
and this holds true, if you consider it from the 
Nativity, throughout all the whole course of 
a mans life: for diseases are particular attendants 
on a mans life, if Doctor Experience tell 
truth. 
 
Moreover of the Crises, some are perfect, some 
are imperfect. 
 
A perfect Crisis is when the disease appears 
intirely, and perfectly to be judged of; and this 
is sometimes hopefull, sometimes desperate: 
hopefull, when there is great probability of 
[^p.21^] 
health and recovery; desperate, when there is 
palpable signs of death. 
 
An imperfect Crisis, is when the disease is 
changed upon every light occasion; and if 
Mars be Author of the disease, and in a signe 
of a double body, upon my life you shall not 
fail; for the Crisis happens as true as the Weather-cock. 
 
Your safest way then to judge of the disease, 
is by the Aspects of the Moon to the Planets: 
when the Moon meets with the inimical or hostile 
beams of Saturn or Mars, have a care of your 
Patient: And, if you know what hinders, 
by the same reason you may know what helps. 
Physitians in former times, when they were wise, 
and minded the common good, and not their 
own gain, they distinguished the Crisis of diseases 
thus: 
 
Some were safe, some doubtful; some fit to be 
judged, and some not fit to be judged. 
 
That Crisis is safe which comes without great 
and pernicious aspects. 
 
It is doubtful, suspicious, I had almost said 
dangerous, which comes with great pernicious 
aspects. 
 
The disease is fit to be judged, when signs of 
Concoction come the fourth day, and then certainly 
the Crisis will appear the ninth. The 
Moon moves not upon an equal motion; therefore 
you had best trust to her motion rather then 
the dayes. 
 
The Sun hath dominion in Chronick diseases, 
the Moon in acute; if you be a wise man, 
[^p.22^] 
Your judgement shall be as sure as the Sun, and 
that never fails without a miracle. 
 
In times of yore, when knowledge was scant, 
men went a begging for it; and they that had 
gotten knowledge, monopolized it. A few glimpses 
of Adams happiness in Paradise, which 
happiness all the world have been reaching after 
ever since. 
 
They knew well enough the Moon moved so 
many degrees in so many days: an evil Angel 
(I had almost said the Devil) perceiving there 
was want of knowledge in the world, goes and 
transforms himself into and Angel of light, and 
taught men to count the time by days: 'Tis no 
great marvel the Ægyptians should worship Garlick 
and Onyons for Gods, when we deifie 
Christmas-day, though perhaps it may be cloudy. 
 
What I have spoken, I have only spoken to 
shew that it is the motion of Sun & Moon that 
produceth the Crisis in diseases, and not the 
number of days. 
 
I must return to the place I intended; Of 
days, some are called by their own name, Critical 
days; other are called Judicial days, and 
they are so called, because upon them dame Nature 
and her son Dr. Reason would make manifest 
what the disease is, and Dr. Experience tells 
me 'tis true. 
 
Another time is called Intercidental, which 
is a time falls out between the Judicial dayes 
and Critical. Upon these Intercidental days, 
the disease is usually remitted; if so, then a 
good Crisis may be expected; if not, an evil. I 
[^p.23^] 
shall explain these terms before I go further; a 
mah falls sick, there is the first Crisis, let the 
cause of the disease be what you will; when the 
moon comes to the same degree of the next sign 
she was at in the Decumbiture, there is the Judicial 
day; for in that time the disease shews it 
self in its colours, with bag and baggage. When 
the moon comes to her Sextile, it brings the Intercidental 
day, and should mitigate the disease; 
if she do not, she is aspected to evil Planets: 
and if she be aspected to ill Planets, an 
ill Crisis is to be expected, and so the contrary; 
and you shall never find this fail. 
 
[}CHAP. II. 
The way to finde out the Critical dayes, and also the 
Decumbiture, both by Ancient and Modern 
Writers.}] 
 
ANcient Physitians, because they were ignorant 
of the motion of the Moon, though 
not of her operation, as many of our modern 
are, made their account by number of dayes; 
and in so doing, erred egregiously: And although 
Duret my Author quotes their opinions, 
I hold it not worth time to recite mens failings. 
But of the certain term or time when 
the Critical days begin, I shall quote these few 
words. 
 
When any notable disease comes, if you would 
[^p.24^] 
discern whether it tends to Health, Death, Mutation, 
or Continuance, it is necessary that you 
begin at the first punct of time of the invasion 
of the disease. This Galen saith is very hard, 
if not impossible to find; 'tis taken pro confesso, 
that it may be easily known, when a man takes 
his bed in his sicknesse; but when the beginning 
of the sicknesse is, that's the question: For a 
lusty stout man bears the disease longer, and is 
longer before he takes his bed, then a puny 
weakly sickly man is: a meer suspition of a 
Sicknesse will send faint-hearned man to bed; 
you may perswade him he is sick, whether he be 
or no. 
 
Notwithstanding this is most certain, that in 
most acute diseases, as also in many other diseases, 
as the Falling Sicknesse, Palsies, Apoplexies, 
Pluresies, & c. 'tis an easy thing to find out 
the beginning, or the precise time of the invasion 
of the disease. 
 
The common opinion of such as are learned 
in Astrology is, and according to their opinion 
I affirme, that the moment of time is to be 
taken for the beginning of the disease, in which 
a man finds a manifest paine or hurt in his body: 
for instance, when a man hath got a Fever, 
usually the head akes certain dayes before; 
this is not the Fever, but a Messenger or forerunner 
of the Fever; the true beginning of the 
Fever is when the disease appears sensibly, or 
when a horrour or trembling invades the Sick, 
as does usually in the beginning of a Fever; 
that is the beginning of the disease, when the 
[^p.25^] 
disease appears manifest to sense; and this was 
the judgment of Hippocrates, one of the honestest 
of Physitians: And you shall find this always, 
that the more acute the disease is, the 
more manifest the beginning of it is to sense: 
yea so manifest, that it is almost impossible that 
the beginnng should lie hid from any one that 
wants reason, if he have but sense. 
 
[}CHAP. III. 
Of the sympathy and Antipathy of the Signes 
and Planets.}] 
 
BEfore we come to Prognostick, we must 
know that there is a Sympathy between Celestial 
and Terrestrial bodies; which will easily 
appear, if we consider that the whole creation is 
one entire and united body, composed by the 
power of an All-wise God, of a composition of 
discords. 
 
Also there is friendship and hatred between 
one sign of the Zodiack and another; for fiery 
signs are contrary to watry, and nocturnal to 
diurnal, & c. 
 
The Planets are also friendly and inimical 
one to another; but in their friendship and 
enmity, whatever the matter it, I cannot agree 
neither with ancient nor modern Writers. And 
when I cannot do so, I'le fly to Dr. Reason for 
advice; they hold Mars and Venus to be friends. 
[^p.26^] 
And what your opinion is of all the rest, you 
may find by Mr. Lillies Introduction; My own 
opinion grounded upon reason, is this, that 
there are two causes of friendship and enmity 
between Planets, Essential and Accidental: Planets 
are Essentially inimical three ways. 
 
First, when their Houses or Exaltations are 
opposite one to the other; and so Saturn is an 
enemy to both Luminaries, Jupiter to Mercury, 
and e contra Mars to Venus. 
 
2. Planets are inimical one to the other, when 
their temperatures or qualities are opposite; 
and so Jupiter is an enemy to Saturn, he being 
hot and moist, Saturn cold and dry: So Mars is 
enemy to Venus, he being hot and dry, she cold 
and moist. 
 
3. Planets are inimical when their conditions 
differ; so there is enmity between Sol and Saturn; 
for one loves the Court, and the other the 
Country; Jupiter is enemy to Mars, for he loves 
peace and justice, Mars violence and oppressions; 
Mars is enemy to Venus, for he rejoyceth 
in the field, she in the bed; he loves to be publique, 
she plays least in sight. And thus you see 
in every respect, what a difficult thing it is to 
make Mars and Venus rationally friends. 
 
Accidental inimicalness to Planets, is when 
they are in square or opposition, & c. the one 
to the other. Also Inimicalness must needs be 
in the Signs; for if cold and heat, moisture and 
dryness be inconsistent together in one and 
the same place, as your eyes will tell you, if you 
will but please to take a pail of water & throw 
[^p.27^] 
it into the fire, then can they not be in one and 
the same place in the heavens. And if so, as is 
most true, then must signs be, some cold, some 
hot, and some moist: one sign must needs cherish 
one quality more then another: and seeing 
the first qualities are adverse the one to the other, 
there is a necessity, that sometimes one 
must yield, and sometimes overcome: and this 
is the reason of the corruption, generation, and 
vicissitude of things. 
 
Moreover, the Moon constituted in a sign, 
commonly strikes upon the nature of the sign, 
she is in: as if she be in a fiery sign, she stirs up 
Choler, & c. 
 
Also as every Element hath two qualities, 
so hath every celestial sign; the Aerial signs 
are hot and moist, the Earthly signs cold and 
dry; the Fiery signs hot and dry, the watry 
signs cold and moist: And thus you see how 
the concords are made of discords: For Aery 
signs are joyned to fiery by heat, and to watry 
by moisture, and to earthly by coldness; the 
Earthly are joyned to the watry by coldness, 
and to fiery by dryness: this is an old true maxime 
of Philosophers, which I shall not at this 
time be captious against. 
 
Besides, the congress and configurature of 
the Planets and fixed Stars is diligently to be 
heeded: of these, some are obnoxious and hatefull: 
a Quartile and Opposition, as also the 
Conjunction of bad Planets; others are healthful, 
as Sextile and Trine, and Conjunction of 
good Planets; and indeed the chiefest part of 
[^p.28^] 
Astrology consisteth in the due observation of 
configurations; for by these come alterations 
in things below, either to better or worse, according 
to the nature of the Planets or Stars 
that signifie them: for when two Stars are joyned 
with, or aspected to one another, they seminate 
something in Sub-Lunary bodies according 
to their own nature: If dissention be 
between the stars, the sperm proves malicious 
and destructive, and tumultuous; even as the 
opposition of winds, especially the North and 
South winds, produceth thunder, lightning, and 
pestilential vapors: and this we find never fails, 
if the South-wind prevails, and the Moon and 
Mercury behold one another. 
 
Thus you see a reason., if you know but 
what a reason is, or ever heard of such a thing, 
why diseases in the body of a man are either exasperated, 
or remitted, according to the good 
or evil meeting of the Planets. 
 
Of the Aspects, Opposition is the worst of all, 
not by any contrariety or diversity of nature 
of the Signs in which the Oppositions fall out; 
but in respect of the Planets themselves opposing, 
which being at greatest distance are most 
inimical they being in a posture to outface 
one another, and this is the most principal cause 
of enmity. 
 
A Quartile is inimical, because the Stars 
so aspected be in signs of contrary nature; 
as Sol in Aries, Luna in Cancer, the aspect is 
hateful, because Aries is hot and dry, Cancer 
cold and moist: Aries masculine, Cancer feminine; 
[^p.29^] 
Aries diurnal, Cancer nocturnal. 
 
And now by the leave of my Author, and also 
of great Ptolomy himself, and of all the sons of 
art this day living, who build their judgment on 
Dr. Tradition, and not upon the sound principles 
of Dr. Reason, if this be the Original of 
the enmity of a square aspect, as is agreed upon 
on all sides. 
 
Then, why do they hold that a Quartile in 
Signes of long ascentions is æquivalent to a 
Trine, and a Trine in Signs of short ascentions 
as pernicious as a Square? put the rest of the 
non-sence into the bundel, and when you have 
done, look upon it a little while; and when 
you have viewed it a little, tell me I pray; Doth 
the longness or shortness of the ascentions adde 
or take away any thing from the quality of the 
Signs? 
 
Is not this the way, the onely way to bring 
the Art into a Labyrinth, if not into a confusion? 
In truth, in my opinion it is. This I will 
confess, and give you my reason for it when I 
have done; one Square is not so bad as another; 
as from Aries to Cancer, is worse then from Cancer 
to Libra, because the signs Cancer and Libræ 
are in better harmony, as agreeing in passive 
qualities, namely, moisture; whereas Aries and 
Cancer disagree totally. By this rule you may 
find out the rest. 
 
Also this I affirm, and will prove it when 
I have done, that some Semisextiles are worse 
then some Quartiles: for Pisces is more inimical 
to Aries then to Capricorne; first because it is 
[^p.30^] 
the twelfth Sign from him: 2. besides disagrees 
more in qualities. 
 
A Sextile Aspect is good, because the Signs 
which are in Sextile the one to the other, are 
both of the same active quality, both of a sex, 
both of a time; for example, Aries and Gemini 
are both masculine, both Diurnal; Taurus and 
Cancer are both cold, both Feminine, both 
Nocturnal; but because they differ all in passive 
qualities, it is not altogether so friendly as 
Trine aspect is; for that consists altogether of 
Signe of the same nature, sex, quality, and 
time, and are correspondent the one to the other 
every way. 
 
A Conjunction or Synod is the strongest of 
all, and cannot properly be called an aspect. A 
Conjunction of good Planets with good, is 
exceeding good, it is good in the highest degree; 
a Conjunction of bad Planets with bad Planets, 
is as bad, as the former was good; a Conjunction 
of good Planets with bad, is no ways commendable. 
I have now done, if you will be pleased 
but to take notice, that the conjunction of 
all Planets with the Sun is bad, because the Sun, 
who gives them their efficacy, takes it away at 
such times. I could be Critical at this, but I shall 
forbear it at this time. 
 
[^p.31^] 
[}CHAP. IV. 
The way of finding out the Critical and Judicial 
dayes by a Figure of eight Houses.}] 
 
THis is the method of Hippocrates, and from 
him Galen used, and it is to be done in this 
manner. 
 
1 Make your Scheme of eight equal parts. 
 
2 Search out the Sign, Degree, and Minute the 
Moon was in at the beginning of the sickness. 
 
3 Place the sign, degree and minute the Moon 
was at in the beginning of the sickness upon the 
cuspe of the first house, as though that were ascending 
at the time. 
 
4 Add forty five degrees to this; you need not 
regard the latitude of the Region, for it is of no 
use in Critical Figures; but take the degrees 
barely from the Ecliptick, when you have added 
forty five degrees to the place of the Moon 
at the decumbiture; the point of the Zodiack 
answerable to that shal make the cuspe of the second 
house. 
 
5 Forty five degrees more added to that, will 
bring you to the Cuspe of the third House, to 
which when the Moon comes, she comes to the 
Quartile of the place she was in at the decumbiture; 
and this makes the first Crisis. 
 
6 Forty five degrees more added to this, makes 
the fourth House; 45. degrees more added to 
[^p.32^] 
that points out the place of the true opposition 
of the Moon to the place she was in at the Decumbiture; 
and this makes the second Crisis. 
The second Quartile of the Moon to her own 
place at the decumbiture, makes the third Crisis: 
And the fourth is when she comes to the same 
sign, degree, and minute, that she was in at the 
decumbiture. 
 
The time or houses noted betwixt the Crisis, 
are called the judicial times, or such times 
wherein a man may judge what the disease is, 
or what it will be; remember this all along in 
such kinds of judgement; and do not forget not 
to number the time by dayes, as the ancients 
did; for they were either ignorant, or regardlesse 
of the course of the Moon; for the Moon 
comes to the Judicial or Critical days sometimes 
sooner, sometimes later, as she is either 
swifter or slower, in motion. 
 
Now the time called Critical, is always evil, 
because of the contrariety of the sign the Moon 
is in then to the sign she was in before, or the 
contrariety of her nature to the opposite place: 
at such a time there ariseth a controversie or 
battell, as it were between the disease and nature; 
the Moon maintains nature in acute diseases: 
And now you have the reason why, that 
if she be afflicted upon a Critical day by the 
bodies, or ill beams of Saturn and Mars, or the 
Lord of death, (which is always Lord of the 
eighth House, and sometimes Lord of the fourth 
House, will serve the turn, if he be a malevolent, 
because he signifies the grave,) the disease increaseth, 
[^p.33^] 
and sometimes the sick dies: But if 
the Moon at the time of the Crisis: beholds the 
Lord of the Ascendent, or the fortunes fortunately, 
health ensues; for the malady is vanguished 
and routed in the conflict. 
 
If the disease terminate upon the first Crisis, 
see how the Moon is configurated on the second 
Crisis, and judge then by the same rules. 
 
If it terminate not then neither, as sometimes 
such a thing happens, view the third Crisis, and 
judge by that the same way; if your judgement 
ballanced by reason, and the former rules, 
certifie you the disease will not end one way nor 
other, neither in health nor death; see what 
you can say to the Moon when she returns to the 
place she was in at the Decumbiture, which is about 
twenty seven days, eight hours, and some 
minutes; and see how the Moon is then seated, 
and to what Planets she is configurated then: 
and this of necessity must be the ende of all acute 
diseases. 
 
Thus you see an acute disease can last but a 
moneth at longest; not one in a hundred lasteth 
so long; not one in twenty lasteth above half so 
long. 
 
If the disease end not then, the acute disease 
is turned into a Chronick disease; and all Chronick 
diseases must be judged of by the Sun. The 
rules of judging of Chronical diseases by the 
Sun are the same by which we judge of acute 
diseases by the Moon. 
 
As for Judicial days, I suppose he means the 
Intercidental time which fall out between the 
[^p.34^] 
first and judicial dayes in Crisis) which fall out 
just in the midst betwixt the Critical days, I shall 
passe them by at this time, because I fancy not 
this way of judgment by a Figure of eight houses; 
yet I shall not passe them by, but that I shall 
remember them in this Treatise. 
 
[}CHAP. V. 
The former rules illustrated by an Example.}] 
 
A Certain man fell sick of an acute disease 
at Paris in France, Anno 1641. Jan. 12. about 
eight of the clock in the afternoon, at which 
time the Moon was posited in Aquarius, 10, 19. 
This I place in the Ascendent. 
 
To this Aquarius 10. 19. I adde 45. degrees; 
the product is Pisces 25. 19. which makes the first 
judicial time. 
 
To which adding 45. degrees more, it will 
bring you to Taurus 10. 19. to which place 
when the Moon arrives, she comes to the exact 
quartile of the place she was in at the decumbiture, 
and makes the first Crisis. 
 
Adde 45. degrees to that and it produceth 
Gemimi 25. 19. which is the second judicial 
time. 
 
If you would know when the second Crisis 
comes about, it is but only adding 45. degrees 
to that, and you will find the result to be Leo 10. 
19. just the place opposite to the Moon at the decumbiture. 
[^p.35^] 
The remainder are found out in the 
same manner. 
 
When you have done so, it is no more but 
this. 
 
First, Seek the time when the Moon comes to 
Taurus 10. 19. and you shall find it comes upon 
the 19. of Jan. about eight of the Clock at 
night. 
 
Secondly, View first the face of heaven, Secondly 
the position and configuration of the 
Planets one with another at the same time. Vide 
George Wharton Hemeroscopeion, 1652. his Discourse 
at large. 
 
[^p.36^] 
[^Blank page.^] 
 
[^p.37^] 
[^A table titled "A Synopsis or joynt view of the Calculation" omitted.^] 
 
[^p.38^] 
The History of this observation is of a certaine 
person, who by reason of great wearinesse 
in a journey, was supprized with a Fever 
at the time before mentioned: together with 
his Fever he had a Cough and a Plurisie: The 
Fever came to a [^GREEK OMITTED^]. I never read of this 
name in Galen, as I remember; I take it both 
by Monsieur Durats description, and also by 
his Figure of Heaven, to be the very same which 
Galen calls [^GREEK OMITTED^]. 
 
The original of this disease is Choler putrified 
with blood in the veines, and Is the most 
violent of all Fevers. The night after the decumbiture 
the Fever appear'd, although on the 
third day all shaking left him, yet felt not the 
Patient the least intermission, the Moon being in 
Aquarius 10. 19. Aquarius being also a signe of 
infirmity, the Moon being in Sextile to Mars 
applying to Venus and Saturne, Mars afflicting 
the Sun with a Quartile, as also Jupiter and 
Mercury who were in combustion. 
 
The 16. day of the same moneth of January 
the disease increased, at which time the Moon 
came to a Semi-quadrat making the first judicial 
time. And meeting then with never an Aspect, 
the Crisis could be expected no other then 
doubtful and unfortunate. 
 
The 19. day of the same moneth at eight of 
the clock in the afternoon, the first Crisis came 
about, some little sweat the diseased had. And 
if I may be bold to leave my Author for a little 
time, if you view the presages of Hippocrates, 
which you shall find at the latter end of this 
Book: 
 
[^p.39^] 
The words run thus, or to this purpose: It 
is very hopeful when a man sick of a Fever 
sweats upon a Critical day, however my Author 
confesses, that both his Cough, and his 
paine in his side left him, though his Fever still 
remained, nay increased, by reason of the Quartile 
of Mars and Venus at the same time, Mercury 
being Lord of the Ascendent at the Decumbiture. 
Also it is worth noting, that the Moon 
being in Aquarius at the Decumbiture, and 
comes to Taurus at the first Crisis, both Taurus 
and Aquarius are signes of infirmity; yet 
you see the Plurisie left him, the Moone being 
strong in her exaltation, though void of 
course. 
 
I pass by my Authors infirmities in this and 
other things. 
 
January 23. When the Moon by transit made 
the second judicial time, she was afflicted by the 
Trine of Saturne, which prognosticates cause enough 
of fear in the second Crisis. 
 
January 27. at 5. 50. in the morning, the Moon 
came to the true opposition, to the place she was 
in at the decumbiture, she being then without any 
Aspect, either good or evil; this brought no 
hopes to the sick man of cure at that time; and 
indeed the sick was at that time very bad; yea, 
so bad that his Physitians were in doubt whether 
he would live or die. 
 
January the 30. at 3. houres 44. minutes after 
noon, comes about the third judicial time, at 
which time the Moon was in Trine to Jupiter, 
which gives strong hopes that a healthful and 
[^p.40^] 
propitious Crisis would ensue, and so it did, for 
upon 
 
February the second, at nine a clock after 
noon, the Moon comming to 10 degrees 9 minutes 
of the Scorpion, where she made the second 
Quartile to the place she was in at the decumbiture; 
and the third Crisis she applyed to 
the Trine of beautiful Venus, his Fever began to 
leave him, and he began to attain to his pristine 
health. 
 
By this one example you may see the wonderful 
harmony and consent of diseases with 
the motions of the Heavens, which that it may 
appear more clear, and be visible to all, unless 
it be to such as are so blind they will not see; 
my Author adjoyns a rational Figure of the 
Decumbiture, and gives his Judgment uponit. 
 
[^p.41^] 
A Rational Figure upon the Decumbiture: 
 
[^Figure omitted: the eight houses with the information for January the 8th 1641, 8.00 PM.^] 
 
[}An Astrological Judgement upon the face of Heaven 
at the Decumbiture.}] 
 
THe chief Significators of this Figure are 
the Ascendent and Mercury Lord of it, 
Retrograde in Capricorne, a moveable 
Signe in the 5th house of the Heaven, and in the 
House of Saturne. 
 
The 6th house and his Lord Saturne in 
Aquarius, in the 6th House strong and potent. 
 
[^p.42^] 
The Moon in the 6th house upon the cuspe 
of it; Sol in the 5th House with the Lord of 
the eighth afflicted by the Quartile of Mars in 
a fiery Signe; this plainly shewes a disease of 
Choler. 
 
Jupiter in a moveable Signe in the 5th. 
House, who rules the Stomack, Liver and Sides, 
combust and in Quartile to Mars, stirred up a 
Plurisie, and Mercury afflicted shewed a dry 
Cough. Hence it appeares that Monsier Duret 
was no Physitian; for if he had, he would easily 
have known that a Plurisie never comes without 
a dry cough; the most excellent of men may 
have failings. 
 
The Moon in Aquarius applying to Saturn 
at the beginning of the disease, showes the disease 
comes of wearinesse, according to the 
Doctrine both of Hippocrates and Hermes; but 
here arises another question; Shall the disease 
be long or short? This is answered thus: the fixed 
Signe upon the cuspe of the 6th House shewes 
length of the disease. 
 
Saturne in the 6th House shews no lesse, but 
tells the same tale. 
 
Again Saturn Lord of the 6th. stronger then 
the Lord of the Ascendent, shews a violent increase 
of the disease. 
 
Seeing Mars in a fiery signe afflicts both Luminaries, 
the Sun by a Quartile, and the Moon 
by a Sextile; hence we may safely gather, that 
Saturn and Mars are Authors of the disease, and 
to part stakes between them; the one made it 
violent, the other continuing. 
 
[^p.43^] 
Give me me leave now a little to passe my judgment 
upon this Figure: when first I viewed 
the Figure, upon the first blush I admired the 
man should live, the Lord of the Ascendent 
being combust, and applyed to the Sun, Mars 
casting Antiscion to the Sun, the Moon upon 
the Cuspe of the 6th. cum multis aliis; The onely 
reasons that I could finde of the life, were 
these; 
 
1 Saturne and Mars are both strong, and neither 
of them Lord of death, though both of them 
shew themselves like potent enemies, that are able 
to hurt their foe, but scorn it; though they 
are enemies to life, yet they are honorable enemies, 
because strong. 
 
The Moon applies not immediately to Saturne, 
but to the body of Mercury, who is Lord 
of the 10. which shews the disease might be cured 
by Physick if a wise Physician had it in hand. 
 
3. There is a Reception between the Sun and 
Mars which tyes the Sword of Mars from killing. 
 
4. Venus beautifieth the signification of the 6th 
house, almost as much as Saturne deforms it. 
 
5. Neither Saturne nor Mars behold the Ascendent, 
and thats good. 
 
6. The disease came by the mans own misguiding 
himself, because the Lord of the 12. and 
Ascendent are together. 
 
7. The Moon applies to a fortune which hath 
triplicity in the Ascendent, though in an ill 
House. 
 
8. I am confident the man journyed again so 
[^p.44^] 
soon as he was well; First, because Mars Lord 
of the end, is near the House of journyes at the 
decumbiture; Secondly, because the Moon applies 
to the Lady of the third House at the decumbiture, 
which is Venus. 
 
