[^Culpeper, Nicholas: School of physick, urinal^] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 222-226^] 
 
[}Urinal Conjectures. 
 
Brief Observations, with some Probable Predictions 
on the Sick Patients Stool or 
Water.}] 
 
I Must acknowledge that in my Judgement, 
I do in general, as concerning the uncertainty 
of Urine concur with learned Dr. 
Read; but not so, as in some particularly, 
evident, and remarkable distempers wholly to 
slight the Urinals Prophesie: I shall therefore 
onely set sown some useful Observations, and 
refer them to the Censure of sober and serious 
Practitioners. Urine is the clearer and lighter 
part of Blood proceeding from the Reins, which 
if endeavoured to be suppressed, causes the Chollick 
or Stone. At the first evacuation most 
Urines appear thin so long as they retain any 
heat, which whilest it prevails, suffers not the 
Urine to grow thick, or congeals. Sometimes 
the Patients Urine comes thicker from him, afterwards 
clearer. Some remain still as they were 
made: those that have Urine clear, will soon 
collect that which is thick into the bottom of 
the Urinal: Others remain troubled, the grosness 
notwithstanding gath_[^ORIG. BLURRED^]red in the bottom, 
[^p.223^] 
insomuch that these diversities of thin and subtle 
humours ought to be perceived of things 
conceived in the Urine. Some descend to the 
bottom, called in Greek, Hypostasis, in English 
the Grounds, which if white rising up from 
the bottom like a pear, signifie health; if of another 
colour, some distemper: if like things are 
seen in the middle of the Urinal, they are called 
sublutions: if they approach to the highest Region 
of the Urine, they are in Latine called Nubilæ, 
in English Clouds; the grounds and residences 
imperfect, like little red Vetches, in Latine 
called Orobea: some like to Bran of ground 
Wheat severed from the Meal, in Latine called 
Furfurea. Other Urines resemble Plates, having 
breadth without thickness, in Latine called Laminea: 
some are more like to Meal, Wheat, or 
Barley, in the Latine called Similacea. 
 
There are sometimes discerned in the Urine 
things that resemble white heats, some longer, 
some shorter; some like to Rugs almost red: 
there is also sometimes seen in the uppermost 
part of the Urine a foam or a froath in bells or 
bubbles: sometimes there swims in the Urine 
the resemblance of a Cobweb; at other times 
there is about the Circle, as it were the renting of 
Cloth, or the resemblances of the Motes of the 
Sun, things like the corruption of a Sore, or the 
masculine seed; sometimes gravel or sand: in 
these there may be divers colours, some white, 
some red, some yellow, some gray, some black. 
These Colours must be strictly observed, whosoever 
will undertake from them a confident determination 
[^p.224^] 
of the Sickness. I refer all these to the 
judgement of wise persons, what subtilty and 
cures in such niceties ought to be used. 
 
There is for this purpose to be considered, that 
judgement may not be wanting; first whether 
the Ordure be thin, or very thick, what other 
matter issueth out with it, what colour it is of, 
what the savor is, how little, or how strong, how 
easie, or how painful. Secondly, the sweat, 
what colour it is of, of what smell, whether the 
taste be salt, bitter, sower, or unsavory. Thirdly, 
the evacuation of it be of one colour, or of many; 
if it doth smell very strong, what humour 
it did most abound with, whether fasting, or after-meals, 
painful or easie. Fourthly, whether 
the Spittle is thick or thin, mixt with blood, corrupt 
like the humor issuing out at the Nose; and 
if that be blood, whether it be red, watry, or 
black. Lastly, it is to be observed what the diet 
of the Patient hath been before, as also in his 
sickness, his age, the strength of his body, exercise, 
and the air he lives in, where he continued 
longest in his youthful years, whether in high or 
low, watry or dry, hot or cold Countreys; these 
generals might suffice. I shall conclude for the 
Students better satisfaction with some other, 
from time to time, retained tradition, which in my 
judgement some of them are worthy of serious 
consideration, White Urine signifies rawness and 
indigestion of the Stomach; red, heat; thick like 
Puddle, excessive labour or sickness; white or 
red gravel appearing in the bottom of the 
Urinal, threatens the Stone in the Reins; black 
[^p.225^] 
or green coloured Urine, is ominous, commonly 
signifying death. 
 
[}Of Vomits.}] 
 
IS the expulsion of bad humors contained in 
the Stomach; upward it is accounted, if 
wisely administred, as to the mitigation of the 
violence rightly considered of, to be the wholesomest 
kinde of Physick, for those which are 
gross, or full of humors: For that which a Purgation 
leaves behinde, a Vomit roots up; if the 
party vomit too much, rub his feet with hot and 
sweet water; and if it cease not, apply a gourd 
to the mouth of the Stomach. Sometimes without 
any Physick at all, one may fall to a customary 
vomiting, then it proceeds from the hot 
complexion of the Stomach; if from a cold, 
you may help it by a bag of Wormwood, dry 
Mints, or Marjoram, of each alike; one handful of 
Nutmegs, Cloves, and Galingal, half a dram of 
each one: let all of them be dried and powdered, 
and put betwixt two linnen clothes with 
Cotten interposed, and basted, and then let 
them be applied upon the Stomach; or else you 
may apply the said Herbs alone, dried upon a 
hot Tile-stone, put betwixt two linen cloths upon 
the Stomach; let the stomach be fortified with 
the syrup of Mints, or Wormwood, or Lozenges. 
If the Vomiting proceeds from a hot complexion, 
you may help it by a Plaister applied to the 
stomach, of Oyl of Roses, Mints, or Barley-flour, 
with the white of an Egg; the water of Purslain 
may be taken in drink to quench the thirst. 
 
[^p.226^] 
[}Of the Excrements.}] 
 
EXcrements, some are necessary, and some superfluous, 
as they proceed from too much 
blood; yet nevertheless nourish, when other nourishment 
fails, the seed, spearm, milk, or fat, which 
are superfluous, and do not proceed from blood, 
nor can nourish; but rather being separated from 
the blood, are either moist, earthy, black, melancholly: 
sweat, urine, proceeds from the nose, 
spittle, &c. Earthy or dry Excrements, as Warts, 
Nails, Corns, and such like. Aristotle reckoneth 
the Marrow of the body amongst the Excrements, 
but as the bones are nourisht by it, even 
as the body is nutrified by the blood, it cannot 
be acknowledged for any other, then a nourishment. 
Blood is the very essence of life, which 
diminished, the spirits must consequently be dissolved; 
in consideration whereof, I counsel them 
that use any moderate exercise, not in any case to 
be let blood, lest that corrupt matter succeed in 
the place of pure blood; but if there be abundance 
of blood, or if it be putrefied, or burnt, if 
other medicines avail not, this ordination of 
mine must needs be infringed with better judgement, 
as it may be safer to use Horsleeches, especially 
at the Fundamental Veins, which are called 
the sink of the body: By this way, the Scurvey, 
Gout, Dropsie, and Melancholly may be prevented, 
being applied in the Spring, or Fall, or 
oftner. If the Blood which is let out appear 
red, and white water overflow with it, the body 
is sound; if bubbling blood, the stomach is diseased; 
if green, the heart is afflicted. 
 
