[^Maynwaringe, Everard: True purgation^] 
 
[}THE 
Efficacy and Extent 
OF TRUE 
PURGATION. 
 
SHEWING, 
I. What this Operation is; not as Vulgarly understood. 
II. How Performed in Human Body. 
III. By what Means fitly to be done. 
IV. When; How oft; and in what Cases to be used: 
And what to be avoided; in this most frequent, and 
helpful Administration. 
 
Distinguished from Promiscuous Evacuations; injuriously procured, 
and falsly reputed PURGING. 
 
BY 
EVERARD MAYNWARINGE, M. D. 
 
LONDON, 
Printed for D. Browne, at the Swan without Temple-Barr; 
and R. Clavel, at the Peacock near St. Dunstan's Church 
in Fleet street, 1696.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 1-28^] 
 
[}THE 
Efficacy and Extent 
OF TRUE 
PURGATION.}] 
 
OF all the Physical Operations in Order to Curing; and 
to prevent Diseases approaching or feared; Purgation 
is the most general, useful, and advantagious: 
For this alone, being well and truly performed, seldom 
fails to give good Relief, and great Assistance; in most, 
and almost all the Complaints of diseased, and infirm Bodies. 
 
Hence it is; that this Operation is so frequently appointed, 
and used by all Physicians, in their Undertakings of the Sick; as 
most necessarily required, in the various Methods, and Designs 
of Curing: The Energy and Effects whereof are so conducing 
to Cures; that look through the whole Catalogue of Diseases, and 
their Methods used, in any of the great Practical Authors; you 
will rarely find Purgation omitted: But on the contrary; more 
often repeated, and insisted on, than any other Operation performed 
by Physick. 
 
And most People of their own Inclination, and Choice; have 
Recourse to this Help (without the Advice of a Physician) when 
they find themselves, heavy and indisposed; full at Stomach; Appetite 
abated; restless, or pained in any Part. And in so doing; 
they design rationally, and well for themselves; but they 
miss it, in the Performance; not knowing with What, or How to 
do this Work, as it ought to be done: For, of all the Operations 
procured by Physick, none so much abused and mistaken, 
[^p.2^] 
as Purgation; not only by the Unskilful in this Art; but also by 
the Learned; as appears upon the Enquiry and Examination 
anon. 
 
Indeed, there are many sufficient Reasons; why Purgation 
should be so frequently used, and confided in for Help in various 
Cases; both as Preventive and Curative means. 
 
First; Because Nature in her common Course, daily requires 
Evacuation that way; is thereby unloaded and alleviated by such 
discharge of the excremental Fæces; which if they are retained 
beyond due Time, and longer than usual; Man is not so light, 
easie, and pleasant; but finds some Alteration and Discomposure 
in the Body. 
 
Secondly; Diseases take their Rise, more often from depraved 
Matter, the Relicts of vitiated Digestions; not being duly separated, 
and sent away by Stool; but remaining in the lower Region 
of the Body, infesting those Offices and depraving the nutrimental 
Juices which supply the Bloud: From hence, the vital Stream 
becomes degenerate and impure; producing various Diseases, and 
symptomatical Appearances in divers Parts of the Body. 
 
Thirdly; Nature by her own Effort and Ability to strive; 
more often frees her self, from the Oppression of peccant Matter, 
by casting it forth at the Back-Door; than by any other 
way. 
 
Fourthly; A Purgative Operation leads foremost, and begins the 
Method regularly in most Cases (very few excepted:) And is 
more often repeated than any other Operation, by the Learned 
and most Experienced Practisers: For if the Disease do not lye 
(in primis viis) in the Stomach, Pancreas, Mesentery, or Guts; 
but seated in some remoter Part; yet the lower Region of the 
Body must first be unloaded, and the foulness of those Parts abstersed; 
before Medicine can arrive at the Part remotely affected: 
Which being well performed; you may then hopefully expect, 
what other Medicinal Operation the Case may properly require, 
will be effectual; (if farther Prosecution be necessary) having 
thus far rightly proceeded, and laid a good Foundation for 
Cure. 
 
Fifthly, Purgation being in Imitation of Nature's Performance; 
or an Assistance of Nature to do that Work effectually, 
where in she hath been deficient; is probably and rationally the 
best Operation; to restore her into the Rectitude of Government; 
for a due execution of all the Bodily Functions. 
 
[^p.3^] 
Sixthly; True Purgation is so Catholick and Comprehensive; so 
powerful and prevailing in its Operation; that it checks and 
abates Diseases considerably, acting alone, by its single Virtue and 
Power: And sometimes does perform the whole Work, that nothing 
more is needful to be done. And farther; this Operation, 
being seasonably and duly made use of; is the best Preventive to 
keep of Diseases; and to Preserve Bodies in a good state of 
Health. 
 
Since Purgation is of such Importance; so necessarily required 
in the Cure of Diseases; and also for Preservation from Diseases: 
You are then rightly to understand, 
 
1. What this Purgation is; in its proper signification, and the 
true Operation thereof. 
2. How, or after what Manner, it is performed in the Body. 
3. By what fit Means or Medicines, it ought to be done; that 
truly and fully answers, the Intention of this most effectual Operation. 
4. When seasonably and fitly, Purgation is to be used: And 
what Contraindications do forbid it. 
5. What Diseases, and Cases do require it. 
 
Purgation, by the Import of the Word, is Purification; and 
Purging is Purifying. That is a separating, and cleansing away of 
impure, feculent, and preternatural Matter, that vitiates and depraves 
the nutritious Juices; and is unfit for the Service of the 
Body. And without such Purification, there is no true Purgation; 
but the Operation frustrate; as not effecting what it was intended 
for. Therefore all Evacuations, procured by Physick at the Fundament; 
are not Purging properly and truly: But which are so 
performed, as to depurate, and render the Body more clean, sound, 
and wholesome. 
 
From this Doctrine, I shall make some Observations, as cautionary 
and useful; to distinguish the Abuses and Counterfeits, from 
true and effectual Purgation. 
 
That a number of Stools procured by Physick, does not always 
perform the Intention and Office of Purgation; nor is benefit to be 
expected thereby: But such an Evacuation as is promoted by 
wholesom good Medicine; causing a gentle fermenting Secretion, 
and separation of peccant unserviceable Matter, calmly sending it 
[^p.4^] 
forth. This is the only Purging that gives Relief; and great 
Benefit will follow from such amicable Operations, in most Cases 
that present: And by Purgation after this manner (though often 
repeated) Nature is not impaired or weakened; but alleviated, refreshed, 
and more able. 
 
But by forced promiscuous Evacuations; hurrying out all that 
lies in the way, both good and bad together; though the Body is 
unloaded thereby, and perhaps some good may be done by chance; 
but more certainly some Hurt; and probably this hath the greater 
share, in such rude Operations, as often it falls out so: For, after 
those churlish Doses, made up of malign Ingredients; the pale 
thin Faces do appear, to testifie how ill they have been treated in 
Physick: But they let fly lustily, and Fools think that was bravely, 
having forgot the Gripes and the sick Fits; thinking it was all as it 
should be; and do not suspect any mischief done thereby: But they 
will find the Effects afterwards; and must take Physick again, for 
the Disease of Physick. 
 
Many People esteem their Purging Medicine, by the Number of 
Stools: If it works half a score, or dozen Times; then they have 
made a good Day's Work; and think their Time and Money well 
bestowed. But a Medicine that operates, but four or five times in 
a Day; they make no Account of; and have not Patience to prosecute 
their Diseases with such slow Purgers: They must have 
their Business done speedily; and probably that's the way, not to 
have it done; for commonly, and in this case especially; the more 
Haste, the worse Speed. For if Purgation be a fermentative Motion, 
procuring a Secretion, Reason and Experience tells, that is 
not a quick, hasty Work. They don't consider, and they have 
not been well taught; that gentle Purging, and oftner taking; 
deliberately and gradually collecting depraved Matter; and placidly 
conveying it forth by wholesome good Medicine; this is the 
most hopeful, and helpful Operation. 
 
Eradicativa Evacuatio, optime per plures Evacuationes Minorativas 
perficitur. 
 
Therefore when much emptying, and many Stools are required, 
to compleat the Work of Purgation; let that Operation be gentle, 
and repeated the more often (with Intermission and Respite) until 
Purification be perfected: In so doing, the Life will not be tired 
and weakened; nor the Body exhausted and impaired; by such 
gradual selecting, and moderated discharging of unserviceable Matter 
only. 
 
[^p.5^] 
[}After what manner PURGATION 
is performed in the BODY.}] 
 
It was the Opinion of the Ancients; and so continued by many 
at this time; that Purgatives operate (elective) by attracting 
this or that Humor peculiarly; and that by their different formal 
Propriety and specific Qualities, they do attract (Sympathetice) 
a different Humor or Matter: Some Water, others Choler; 
some draw out Phlegm, others Melancholy. Thus Hippocrates 
and Galen taught; from which Judgment, diversity of 
Purging Medicines have been contrived, to fit several Constitutions 
(as they suppose.) Some Bodies abounding with Choler, 
others with Phlegm, &c. Therefore it was thought reasonable, 
that Purging Medicines should be divers: And from hence the 
reputed Purgatives have been distinguished and distributed into 
several Classes: Phlegmagoga, Cholagoga, Melanagoga, Hydragoga 
All which will appear but an Accumulation of Errours. Dato uno 
absurdo; multa exinde consequuntur. 
 
Contrary to this Opinion; Paracelsus, Joubertus, and others, 
have asserted; Purging Medicines to operate (per Antipathiam) 
in a hostile manner; that they do prosecute, expel and drive out 
noxious Humors, as having Enmity therewith, and performing 
after the manner of Alexipharmacals. 
 
But neither of these Opinions will stand good upon Examination 
and strict Enquiry; as having no sound Foundation to support 
either of them; but involved with many Difficulties, as not rationally 
to be maintained: Notwithstanding, upon such supposed 
Truths; pretended Purgative Operations hath been designed and 
grounded thereon, to the Prejudice of Millions of People: For, if 
manifest Evacuation were but procured, by the common injurious 
Means; it always passed currently for Purgation; not being able 
to discern and distinguish, between Evacuating promiscuously, and 
Purging. 
 
The two former Opinions being set aside; I shall produce a third, 
more rational, and clearer from Intanglements. 
 
Purgation being an Operation, imitating Nature in her ordinary 
daily course; setting forth the Causes, and Order of natural Evacuations; 
illustrates and declares the Manner of Purgation artificially 
procured by Medicine. 
 
[^p.6^] 
Food received into the Stomach, is there digested by Fermentation, 
into a Chyle or Juice; then sent out into the Guts: where 
the Alimentary Part thereof, is conveyed by proper Vessels, for 
the use and supply of the Body: The excrementitious and unserviceable 
Part, is carried down for expulsion. The motion 
for conveyance out of the Stomach, is performed by Fibers contracting 
and compressing that Bag; the lower Orifice of the Stomach 
then opens, and transmits into the Guts; where also the 
Fibers of the Intestines contracting, do cause a vermicular motion, 
protruding the Contents from Part to Part, until the Fæces arrive 
at the Fundament for excretion. Thus much only in short, which 
at large might be set forth, if necessary. 
 
In like manner Purgation is performed (but more vigorously, and 
oftner evacuating) which is a Repetition of doing Nature's Work, 
to perfect by Medical Assistance, what could not be done without 
such Help. A Purgative Medicine being received into the Stomach, 
causeth a Fermentation there; raising up indigested Relicts, 
and subsiding depraved Matter, cleaving to the corrugated 
Tunicles of the Ventricle; and puts it upon motion to be sent 
downwards into the Guts; there to be distributed as aforesaid. 
 
But this is not All; Purgation extends yet farther: For, the 
Stomach being the Center of the Life, where the Regimen of the 
Body is more eminently managed; this principle Part; or rather 
the Principle of Human Nature, being there affected with the 
Purgative; causeth the whole Body to be drawn into Consent and 
Co-operation; by Unity and Identity, of the ubiquitary vital 
Principle: So that this depurating Fermentation is promoted by 
the Life, in all the Veins and Arteries; some Branches whereof, 
having their Insertions into the cavity of the Guts; impure and 
useless Matter is brought from all Parts, to be discharged into the 
Kennel, or Sink of the Body, and sent forth by that common 
Outlet, the Fundament. Thus the whole Mass of Bloud, is defecated 
and cleared, from heterogeneous Admixture, by Purgation; 
after this manner performed, and not by Attraction, as commonly 
supposed. 
 
The Regimen of the Life, is not always necessitated and obliged 
to visible Organs; but acts sometimes influentially, without 
visible corporeal Mediums; and therefore in the Oeconomy of 
Human Nature, many Actions are performed at distance, without 
the connexion of Tubes or Vessels for conveyance. But our traditional 
[^p.7^] 
Learning gives no such Information; and therefore extraordinary 
Enquiries have been made in Anatomy (where it is not 
to be found) that they may render an Account of such internal 
Operations; as they can give no Reason for otherwise. 
 
Thus they would have the World believe; that by an exact 
Knowledge in Anatomy; satisfactory Accounts may be given, 
for all the preternatural Phœnomena, and Defections of Human 
Nature: And how Medicine is transmitted, to operate upon every 
Part of the Body. But herein they are more industrious for enabling 
themselves to talk finely; than to design curing successfully: 
Or give the true Account of Diseases; and how curing is performed 
in the Body: Forgetting, or neglecting this Axiom; Natura 
est Morborum Medicatrix: (And sometimes Morborum Factrix) 
which caused a Reproof from an intelligent Observator, for 
their over-Curiosity and expence of Time in Dissections. Sufficiebat 
namque pro Anatome; situm, colligationem, & usus Partium: 
Non autem tota vita Cadaverum Lanicnam, ad minimæ venæ ductus 
inveniendos, exercuisse. Joan. Van Helmont. 
 
The denominating Principal Part of Human Nature (the Regent 
vital Spirit, that makes, mends, and maintains Bodies) hath not 
been regarded and enquired into as ought; being the Efficient and 
Rector of all Human Actions; internal and external; both in the 
state of Health, and Sickness. But they think themselves concern'd, 
no farther than Humors, and Organs; and by them to 
set forth a full Account of Humanity, and morbous Alterations; 
as also the manner of Curing, 
 
Purgative Fermentation begun in the Stomach, is promoted 
through the Body; not by Consent of Parts, and Communication 
by Vessels of Conveyance, as vulgarly so accounted: But 
(per Indentitatem Medii) by Continuity and Unity of the Life; 
spreading and residing in every Part of the Body. From whence 
it is; that the Life being touched in the Center, with a sermenting 
Purgative Virtue; is also affected likewise, to the Confines of 
vital Government. But the common Learning does not acknowledge, 
and teach any Communication or Conveyance; but by 
visible Ductures and Conduits, transmitting from Part to Part. 
 
That this may not seem strange; but probable and practicable, 
for Nature (the Life) to operate after such a secret manner; 
take these following Examples as parallel, to confirm the 
Verity thereof. The first an Operation artificially procured 
by Medicament, for Purification: The latter, meerly natural 
[^p.8^] 
and spontaneous by Aliment, for Refection and Restauration. 
 
1. A Sudorifick Medicine being received into the Stomach; 
the virtue thereof is diffused sometimes in an hour, or two; and 
affects the whole Body; causing a moist Transpiration in every 
Part: And this must be by Irradiation, not by a long passage of 
Circulation, through visible Ductures of Conveyance: For, it 
cannot rationally be supposed, that in so short space of Time; 
the Medicine can be carried materially into every Part of the 
Body; but is virtually conveyed, by influencial Power of the 
vital regent Principle; residing in the Stomach, (there eminenter) 
and præsidiug over all the Faculties. And to perform this Operation, 
there needs no Vessels of Conveyance out; because 
the whole Body is prompt and ready, for such a vaporous Transmission: 
Totum corpus est perspirabile. 
 
2. When a Person is faint and feeble by too long fasting; 
Meat and Drink, then received into the Stomach; enlivens and 
strengthens all Parts immediately (long before the Food can be 
distributed through the Body) and only by refreshing the Life in 
the Center: Such radiant Iufluence streams from thence, as to affect 
the whole Body. So Purgative Virtue is diffused, and communicated 
from the Stomach; causing a fermentative motion in the 
Veins and Arteries; arriving there in much shorter Time, than 
with common Conveyance by the known Vessels; which would 
be long and tedious to expect. 
 
Hence it does appear, how Purgative Fermentation is raised, 
and extended at distance influentially, by conduct and co-operaration 
of the Life; without visible Ductures: But the feculent 
Matter separated for Excretion, is exported manifestly by 
Vessels. 
 
From this Doctrine you may understand; that the World hath 
been deceived in the great Business of Purgation: For, Practisers 
not having a right Notion thereof in the manner of Performance 
in the Body; they could not well adapt a Purgative Medicine 
for the true Execution of that Operation: And Failure therein, 
hath given great Delays and Disappointments, in the Practice of 
Physick: Forasmuch as true Purgation contributes mainly in the 
cure of all Diseases, arising from, or depending upon depraved 
humoral Matter; and gives the deepest stroak, in eradicating the 
Seminaries thereof. 
 
[^p.9^] 
[}By what means True PURGATION 
is to be Effected.}] 
 
Since it is manifest, that Purgation operates by Fermentation 
to produce Purification: Then we are to enquire, what Properties 
a Medicine is to be endowed with, that really and effectually can 
perform that Work. 
 
The primitive Professors having no Guide to direct, nor Footsteps 
to trace and follow; but making the first Attempts in designing 
Purgation; did venture upon divers Experiments; and 
what raised a Disturbance in the Body, forcing Nature to expel 
downwards and evacuate; was then noted for a Purgative. The 
Ancients, as Hippocrates, Galen, &c. coming after the first Projectors: 
They revised those rough inartificial Exemplars; and 
produced something better: And Modern Practisers have made 
some Amendments; but fall short of compleating true Purgative 
Medicines: That we can only say; the latter Inventions are not 
so bad as the first; or what they were a Thousand Years ago; but 
not what they ought to be now. 
 
If a placid and benign Fermentation, is prævious; the direct 
and only way to design Purgation, which is Purification: Then 
no Medicine composed of virulent, or malign Ingredients; is a 
proper and fit Instument to perform that Work: Nor is it resonable 
to expect so good an Effect, should be wrought by such 
bad Means. We may from hence conclude; that all those Purgatives 
(so called) which in their Nature have malign injurious 
Qualities to Human Bodies; are improper and mistaken to produce 
such an Operation as Purging; which is Purifying. 
 
Now we are to examine, the common reputed Purgatives; so 
much esteemed, and so often used, by Practisers in this Age; 
that we may see how far they answer the Title given: Whether 
they be innocent, wholesom, and harmless; as true Purgatives ought: 
Or otherwise; affecting the Body with their ill Qualities, and 
operating by stimulating and noxious Impressions upon the 
Life. 
 
In the Number of common reputed Purgatives, are Euphorbium, 
Scammony, Colloquintida, Hellebore, Elaterium, Jallap, Briony, Gutta 
Gamandræ, Turbith, Sena, &c. many others: Wherein there are 
degrees of Badness; some not so mischievous as others are: But 
none to be called wholesom and purely good; but what hath some 
[^p.10^] 
ill Quality injurious to Human Nature: And are not what true 
Purgatives ought to be; which I shall prove, 
 
1. By the manner of their Operations. 
2. By their Effects. 
3. By the Account given of them, from Authentic Writers, Ancient 
and Modern. 
 
The Operation of common Purgatives, is usually attended with 
Uneasiness, Dullness, and Lassitude; nauseating, or vomiting; 
grinding or griping Pains; exhausting Evacuations and Excoriations; 
raking, and sometimes racking the Bowels: Some of these 
at least; and sometimes all of these, are concomitant Symptoms: 
Which do manifest their discordant, and malign Properties; inimical 
and destructive to Human Nature. 
 
Few there are that have been used to Physick; but can attest some 
Part hereof, by their own Experience: And some of them, will 
tell dreadful Stories; how they have been abused by purging Physick. 
 
Secondly: The ill Effects wrought from virulent Impressions of 
the common reputed Purgatives, that pervert the Digestions, and 
vitiate the Blood: They do not appear presently, but some Time 
after; and then not suspected, from whence or what Cause, such 
Alterations do come: For, after the irksom Operation is over; 
the next Day, perhaps, the Patient Sufferer is more at ease; and 
then begins to have a good Opinion of his Purge (when the Storm 
is over) and says it has done him good. And I can tell how much 
good that is: The Body being unloaded thereby; and probably 
some of the morbifis Matter complained of, may be carried out, 
(if it lie in the way ready for Passage;) and this makes a mitigation 
of former Pains, and at present the Patient is better. And 
this is the best of it, that can be told: Which happens but sometimes: 
As when the diseased Person is strong and able to bear 
bad Medicines; and the cause of Complaint not so considerable, 
as to require much Physick. 
 
But if the Disease be great; radicated and stubborn to yield; 
that there is need of repeated, and often Purgations: Then, and 
in such Cases; the common Purges, do shew their Hostility to 
Human Nature; leaving the Characters of their Malignity behind 
them. Such as are so engaged into a Course of Physick; change 
their former Countenance, for pale, thin Chaps: Strength wears 
[^p.11^] 
away, and feeble Legs are the effects of that kind of Purging. So 
it is with the stronger sort; that are able to walk about, when 
their Disease makes a Cessation. 
 
And if you count the Number of those that receive no Benefit; 
but are rather worse; you will find them to be many: As when the 
Patient is Sick and weak; that wants a true Purgative, a Medicine 
extraordinary good; or no good to be done otherwise: Then in 
such cases, the common Purges sets the Sick and Feeble forward, 
towards their long Home. But such as do recover (by good Providence) 
from Sickness, and seemingly are well; and have escaped 
the evil of bad Purgatives at present: Yet all the mischief is not 
past; there comes an after Reckoning to account for: The Relicks 
and Impressions of your virulent Purges, hath laid the Foundation 
of another Disease, which you will hear of in a little time; and 
you cannot imagine how it should come. 
 
Most People have this Apprehension, that Purging Physick is next 
to Poyson; and therefore if it does not work, they are dreadfully afraid; 
and well they may: But if it does operate; then they 
think all is well enough: but not so safe as they think: For tho' 
there be Evacuation sufficient, as to the number of Stools; yet the 
Taint impressed upon the Body, both continent and contained; 
and also upon the Life, to alienate and infect the Regent Spirit: 
There must be a Depravation from thence; the effects whereof 
will not be smothered; though the cause you do not imagine, when 
those effects do appear, a good while after: For, although some 
part of the Purgative Venom, comes away by Stool the Day of Purgation; 
yet there is a Remainder that infects the Bloud, and will 
produce various ill effects, in divers parts of the Body. 
 
That it does mix with the Bloud, and by that vehicle is carried 
into all parts of the Body: I find a late Author of the same Opinion; 
where he saith, 
 
"Extra dubium ponatur, Medicamenti Purgantis corpuscula quædam 
in sanguinem admitti, perque totum ejus liquorem diffundi. 
D. Willis. And soon after these words do follow: Quippe necesse 
erit quasdam Cathartici particulas, succo nutricio permistas, 
per vasa lactea obrepere." Idem. 
 
Now since it is so; that the Purgative Venom commixeth with 
the Bloud, and therewith runs through the whole Body; how careful, 
and fearful ought People to be in the matter of Purgation: 
But when the ill effects of former Purgatives do bud forth, they 
have no other Remedy, but to the same, and such like Purges again: 
[^p.12^] 
They know not how to get better; they are such as the 
Shops are furnish'd with; and such as are Prescribed to the Shops, 
upon all occasions. What do you think will be the end of such Accumulation 
of Errours? or how soon the end may come? 
 
Here by the way, I must Remark, and set down this injurious 
Repetition, for one eminent cause, of Man's infirm diseased Nature; 
and consequently hath contributed much, to the Abbreviation 
of Life: and the Off-spring in Ages to come, will degenerate 
yet more, and be of shorter Duration; being descended from such 
depraved Progenitors. 
 
Is it reasonable to suppose, that one virulent Medicine; should 
rase out the Impressions of another, that went before? If the Axioms 
be true; Natura est Morborum Medicatrix: We cannot in 
Reason think, that Nature will, or can work with such bad Tools: 
Purification cannot be effected, by depraving and corrupting Medicines. 
 
And the fore-named Author; giving an Account of Purgation; 
yields in a great measure, to this censure of Purgatives: "Nec 
enim de nihilo est quod vulgus adeo pertimescat, fi quando Medicemen 
minus operetur; ne virulentia exinde contracta, & derelicta, 
postquam diu in corpore delituit, tandem aliquando affectus malignos 
produceret: a tali namque occasione, interdum pathemata quasi 
leprosa excitantur. D. Willis. "It is not without cause, that 
People are afraid, when their Purge works not sufficiently; least 
the virulency thence contracted, and remaining in the Body; at 
some time or other (tandem aliquando) should produce malignant 
Affects: from such an occasion sometimes Leprous Maladies 
do appear." 
 
He owns Purgatives to be virulent; which virulency, if it comes 
not out, but lodgeth in the Body, it produceth mischief: And 
I cannot see how it should be otherwise: For if it be true as this 
Author affirms; that some part of the Medicine is carried by the 
Bloud all over the Body; it is not like to come out again presently; 
not that Day of Operation; the Venom then lies a breeding; 
and will bring forth in time. So that, when you Purge; you must 
take another to fetch out the virulency of the former: But if the 
second be no better than the first; you must then take a third 
Dose: And so you may Purge all the Year long at that rate of 
Purging, and be never the better, but much worse hereafter. 
 
After this manner, there will be no end of Purging; but there 
may be an end of the Patient. If it be so, and I think it is plainly 
[^p.13^] 
so; Then such pretended Purgations, is but Tinkerly Doings 
Physitians and Pothecaries are very honest Men; but Physick cheats 
all the World. 
 
It is plain from the Words of the foregoing Author; what Opinion 
he had of the common reputed Purgatives: Yet being urged 
to use them, for want of better, and more safe; he also did 
comply, with what his Judgment had condemned: As his Purgative 
Exemplars following do declare; and also his Prescripts in 
Practice upon several Diseases, in his Works extant. 
 
And other Men of repute in this Faculty, are of the same Sentiment 
in this matter; and have acknowledged as much: But for 
(a Salvo Judicio) to excuse themselves from persisting in known 
Errour; and to render the common Purgatives tolerably useful; 
until wholsomer, and safer be found out: They tell you of Correctives, 
invented to subdue the Venom; to curb and tame the extravagant 
molesting Qualities of the Purgatives; that they shall 
perform the Office of Purging, and not disgust or molest you in the 
Operation. 
 
True, part of this may be; and the Purgatives still what they 
ought not to be. Perhaps the Patient does not find present Inconvenience 
or Disturbance: But that does not prove the Innocency 
and Wholsomness of the corrected Purgatives; and yet most commonly 
it is otherwise, and the Operation unpleasant. Injurious 
and unwholsom Diet does not shew its ill effects presenly: You eat 
and drink with Pleasure, and perceive no Hurt; but you will find 
it afterwards; perhaps a good while after: And so it is with bad 
Medicines, such as stand in need of Correctives. 
 
Now this Question ariseth; whether the Correction given to virulent 
Purgatives, be due Correction, or only a Palliation? Whether 
your Correction does rase out, and extinguish the Venom; as to 
make the Concrete purely innocent and wholsom? I believe not so. 
 
You may possibly correct, or smother some extravagant Quality 
more eminent, and apparently noxious to Human Bodies; but 
you do not change the whole Nature thereof, which is Malign and 
Hostile. If you correct the smell of a T--- with Musk and Civet; 
that the offensive scens thereof is not perceived; yet it is a T---- 
still; an impure Excrement. 
 
So you may correct some of the first, or second Qualities of the 
Purgatives, that are not sufferable in the Operation: But being 
malign (tota substantia) in their whole Nature; the Correctives 
are not sufficient security to save harmless, from future Damage. 
[^p.14^] 
You may allay, and blunt the edge of some fierce Punging, or Lancinating 
Property, and make the Operation more placid, and painless; 
but there may be other injurious Qualities, which are dormant 
at present; and may produce ill effects, some Weeks, or 
Months after. If you knock out one Teeth; there are more left 
that will bite, and do hurt. 
 
After this manner you may eat a Toad, and have a correcting 
Antidote, that it shall not poyson you. But I don't like such Food, 
that wants so much Correction; Nor such Physick: For when you 
think all the danger is past; there may be mischief breeding. So 
that you cannot say you are secure; though at present you are 
seemingly well. 
 
Some that are dextrous in Poysoning; can give that which does 
not soon discover its venemous Nature to hurt you: But after some 
Time, it will operate upon you sensibly, and by Degrees; continuing 
to tabefie the Body and so infest the Life; that you shall 
dwindle away, and know not what was the cause. 
 
Some Poysons are Mortal, and kill presently: others not so 
Mortal, but very hurtful; acting slowly and gradually: Disguised 
under the Name of some common Disease; producing different 
effects. Some cause Dulness, Melancholly, and Stupidity: others 
provoke Laughter, Lust, or Fury: and some cause Convulsions, 
Dysenteries, Inflammations, &c. 
 
Some Poysons more peculiarly and immediately affect the Heart; 
others seize the Brain; some invade the Liver; others the Lungs: 
some hurt the Bladder, as Cantharides: others dart their Venom 
chiefly upon the Genitals, and disable either Sex, causing Barrenness. 
All which is confirmed by Authors of Repute. 
 
I shall not point at the Parts of the Body, particularly this or 
that Purgative, shall more especially injure: But we may conclude it 
will fall somewhere; and you must take it for your Pains, as it falls out 
 
Your Correction sometimes is before Composition; and then you 
do something to meliorate, at least mitigate: yet, after you have 
done all you can; 'tis but (minus malum) not so bad as it was; 
and that's the best that can be said. But who is the Supervising 
Corrector, in these weighty Matters; that require much Care, and 
Skill? The Doctor he referrs all, and trusts the Apothecary; the 
Apothecary trusts the Boys: Then the Patient he must Trust in God; 
for there is no Trust in Man. 
 
He that Purgeth with Medicine, that requires so much Correction, 
and is not Operator himself; He also deserves Correcting Reproof. 
 
[^p.15^] 
But more often, the Correctives are added in composition: 
And such are not properly so called; but are only Palliatives: 
For, being thrust into the Croud of Ingredients, they do not 
expunge or rase out the Venom of Purgatives; but only enable 
Nature to bear the Assaults; to resist and expel downwards, for 
to free her self by Evacuation. And such palliating Correctives 
are the Aromatics and Cardiacs; that are associated with the 
malign Purgatives; that the Patient shall not be so sensible of the 
mischievous Properties of the Medicine in the Operation; and 
for a quick and expeditious Expulsion. 
 
By this same Art of Sophistication; an ingenious Cook will 
prepare you a Mess of Pottage, made with tainted unwholesom 
Flesh; corrected with a high Season of well-savour'd Herbs, Onions 
and Spices, and such-like Correctives. The Broth may be 
pleasing enough to the Palate, and nothing ill discernable: But you 
may judge they cannot produce wholesom Nourishment. And so 
adulterate Wines are made palatable and pleasant in the drinking; 
but the ill Effects come after. And thus it is, with virulent Purgative 
Medicines. 
 
I think it unreasonable, that the Work of Purgation, which is 
cleansing and purifying; should be intended and attempted to be 
wrought, by such means as stain, vitiate, and defile the Body; if 
not expelled and cast out. And all this hath ariseth from a Mistake; 
supposing every thing that causeth Evacuation, does perform the 
Office of Purgation: But that's a grand Error; which hath introduced 
so many virulent Productions of Nature (designed for other 
Uses) to be reputed and established, in the Classes of Purgatives. 
 
In the Works extant of our Predecessors; that have been Physicians 
to Emperors, Kings, and Princes, I find their Practice hath 
been managed by such injurious Purgatives, (very likely it is so 
now:) And we may reasonably conclude; that those greatest 
Men of the World; had their Share, and their Fate; 
in such mischievous Drugs: For, had their Physicians known 
better; they would have been more benign to Mankind, than to 
have concealed them; and recommend that which is worse to Publick 
Use. 
 
If the Topping Men of Government be so served; How are their 
Fleets, and Armies provided for? Bad enough I know; and too 
bad. The Soldiers, and the Sea-men, they have Physick, such as 
it is; and that must serve. But how can it be otherwise? since 
[^p.16^] 
the Inspection, and Care is committed to them, that know no 
better: And therefore all is approved very well. 
 
I do assert; and not without good Reason and Experience; that 
Curing may be managed, without virulent Purgatives, or loathsom 
nasty Physick; and that much more pleasing to Patients, and more 
hopeful in Effect: But Dogs-Tird, Horse-Dung, Piss, and many 
such sordid Inventions; I don't like, nor use: But they that know 
no better, must make use of such. Because some in their necessity 
have been constrained to use such, for Help in their Extremity, 
(not knowing what was more wholesom and pleasing to Nature) 
and casual Success hath hapned thereupon: This is set down in 
Receipt-Books, and noted for specific Remedies in such Cases; as 
if nothing else could do it; at least, nothing so well. As if there 
were not Physick sufficient in the wholesom Stores of Nature, to 
perform all necessary Operations in Curing; but we must seek among 
the Venoms, and Excrements of Animals, to fetch it from 
thence, for internal Medicine; tho' unwholesom, or loathsom 
and disgustful. 
 
Thirdly; From the Censure, Cautions, and Corrections of the 
evil Qualities, of reputed Purgatives; by Physicians of Note, 
that have used them in former Ages; and also by such, as do continue 
the use of them at this Time. 
 
Scammony is a Purgative most frequently used; and is in most 
of the purging Medicines, both Electuaries and Pills of the Shops. 
The Ancients, and among them Ægineta and Mesue; sets down 
Five great Faults in Scammony, which Fritagius rehearseth, and 
concludes; 'Scammonium nunquam esse exhibendum, quin sit Correctum; 
nisi Animas negotiari, & Christianam charitatem abjicere 
decretum sit.' Auror. Med. lib. 2. cap. 13. And therefore great 
Cautions, and Inventions are used, to correct the virulent and malign 
Qualities of this Drug: And about these Corrections, there 
are different Opinions among Physicians, how rightly and best to 
be done; which I forbear to recite. 
 
Turbith, another Purgative much used; hath its Faults too: 
Tres inesse noxas in Turpetho ferunt sapientes, says Fritagius. Which 
I forbear to set down for brevity sake. And that this hath had a 
bad Name in the World, the old Verse doth witness: 
 
Nolo damnosum Turbith, mea Viscera turber. 
[^p.17^] 
And because it nauseates and offends the Stomach; some will have 
the Word Turbith, derived a turbando; says Fallopius. But correctves 
must help all these Faults: And therefore it is put into several 
of the Shop-Compositions; as a good Ingredient. 
 
Coloquintida is a Purgative very often used; an Ingredient in 
many of the common purging Medicines. The virulence and violence 
thereof is noted by mny Authors. Fallopius he saith, Est medicamentum 
periculosum, nisi maxima adhibeatur custodia. And Solenaxder, 
in the the last of his Counsels, calls Coloquintida (Poma Diaboli) 
the Devil's Apples. Mesue gives it the Name of fel terræ, 
& mors Plantarum: Because it kills the Plants that grow near 
it. 
 
Freitagius reckons up the evil Qualities of this Drug. Observatione 
constat, ventriculo, jecori, & cordi admodum nocere; hoc 
malignitate sua oppugnare, omniaque viscera mirifice disturbare; 
Stomachum valde concutere, ejusque & Intestinerum parietes vellicare, 
arrodere & eradere; vasorum & vinarum oscula reserare, &c. p. 336. 
Since it is manifestly so; then they consult how to master this 
Devil, that he shall not do so much mischief: Some will fetter 
him after this manner; others think it more secure, another 
way. 
 
Scammony, Turbith, and Coloquintida; these three famous Drugs 
are in use: Being in divers Compositions of the Shop-Medicines; 
both in the Electuaries, and Pills. 
 
As Benedicta Laxativa; Diacharthamum; de Citro solutivum; Confectio 
Hamech; Hiera Logadii, &c. Pilulæ Aggregativæ; Pil. Cochiæ; 
Pil. Fœtidæ; Pil. de lapide Lazuli; Pil. ex Duobus; Pil. Rudii, 
where is more of Art: But after all the Labour by Trituration, Infusion, 
and Distillation, it is but a rude Medicine; not a true Purgaive. 
Who can bring a clean thing, out of an unclean? Nil dat, 
quod non habet. 
 
These Inventions surpass my Understanding, and every one 
else; to give a rational Account of the Designs thereof. 
 
There is much to be said upon the Examination of these Compositions 
(if it were my Business now) and I could allow Time to 
enquire into the Reasons of their several Associations of Ingredients; 
and to note their incongruous and superfluous Additions: 
Which proceed from Imbecillity of Judgment, to compose a regular 
true Medicine; or else designed to amuse the World, in 
compounding and confounding Ingredients, good and bad together 
discordantly. 
 
[^p.18^] 
Such farraginous Mixtures caused Helmont's Dislike and Complaint: 
'Commiseror in Officinis tot Simplicium connexiones, & confusas 
miscellaneas, proditrices ignorantiæ & incertitudinis: sperant 
enim Scholæ, Si non juvet unum, alterum juvaturum: sicque multa 
associant invicem.' Van Helm. Pharmacopolium. And in the same 
Page, these Words do follow: 'Undiquaque enim pro suo Nummo 
decipitur Æger; tam scilieet fide ac fraude Seplasiæ, quam jurejurando 
Doctoratus.' 
 
Esula is the genus of Tithymals, comprising under that Name several 
sorts: Bad is the best. Esula minor is accounted the safest, 
and most in use; supposed to purge watery Humors: But it must 
be corrected; else it will do great hurt. Quod Cordi, Epati, Ventriculo, 
Visceribusque noxia vim alioquin inferret maximam; Intestina 
raderet, nobiles interiorum partes inflammaret, Venarum ora 
reseraret, Febres excitaret, Sperma exsiccando consumeret, potentiamque 
Aphrodisiam extingueret. Freitag. pag. 414. A foul Account 
of this noble Purger: One of the Ingredients of these Medicines. 
Pilulæ Mechoacanæ; Pil. Fœtidæ; and Electuar. Benedict. 
Laxativa; that blessed Electuary: (A fair Title to a foul Medicine.) 
But how oft it comes into the Recipes, I cannot 
say. 
 
Euphorbium, a condensate Juice; supposed to purge Phlegm, 
and watery Humors; is commended and used against Apoplexies, 
Palsies, soporiferous Diseases, Convulsions, Tremors, Dropsies, and 
Gout. These are great Diseases; and therefore it was thought, 
they must have Medicines extraordinary, (but let them be extraordinary 
good then) not extraordinary dangerous, as this Euphorbium 
is; more likely to make a Disease than to cure one: And 
therefore it is cautiously to be dealt with, and so advised. 'Circumspecte 
per omnia ejus usus est ineundus; quod Fauces inflammet, 
interiora vellicet, urat & arrodat, Stomachum & Epar mirifice lacessat; 
adeo ut sudorem frigidum, summam Cordis angustiam, & demum 
syncopen concitet, &c.' Freitag. auror. Med. pag. 341. 
 
Now you see what a hopeful Account is given of this Purgative, 
But for a Mitigation, and to bridle the Fury of this Drug; there 
are several ways proposed for Correction, according to the different 
Judgments of Physicians. Mesue, Avicen, Serapio, Manardus, 
Quercetan, and others. But I intend never to use it internally; 
and therefore shall not examine the Corrections, which is 
best: For I think it best not to meddle with it internally. But it 
may be used outwardly in Epipastic Plasters, to raise Blisters; as 
[^p.19^] 
it is so used sometimes. But I find it an Ingredient in Pil. Fœtidæ; 
and de Hermodactilis: Probably it comes sometimes into the Recipes; 
for I meet with a Correction of it in the Pharmacopœia Londinensis; 
and for external Application, there needs no Correction. 
 
I might proceed on, and go through the whole Catalogue of reputed 
Purgatives; after this manner to shew their Virulency; or 
Insufficiency to perform the Work of Purgation, by such ill Qualities 
they are pregnant with: But that would be tedious to examine 
all of them, singly by their Names, and recite the Censure 
that is given of them, by Physicians that have used them: I shall 
therefore give the Character of them in the gross; according to 
the Sentiment of some Authors. 
 
Van Helmont giving Judgment upon Medicines, hath these 
Words: 'Laxativa peculiariter sensi operari duntaxat, proper latens 
intus sibi venenum.' That the common Purgatives operate 
as Venoms. And soon after he adds: 'Sensi ideo Laxativa putrefacere 
vitales Succos.' That they putrefie the vital Liquors. Potestas 
Medicaminum, pag. 383. 
 
And another Author, whose Writings are well known, and 
esteemed in this Kingdom and abroad, saith: 'Porro alia Cathartica, 
uti Jalapium, Colocynthis, Elaterium, & quædam Mercurii præparatu, 
particulis acrioribus & non raro septicis constant; quæ propterea 
ab Intestinis suscepta, indeque sanguini transmissa, Massam ejus insigniter 
fundunt, & in serositatem valde præcipitant; imo interdum 
quasi venenant, & Crasin ejus corumpunt.' Dr. Willis de Purg. 
pag. 71. 
 
This is muchwhat to the same purpose, as the foregoing Author 
determined of Purgatives. And a little after (pag. 72.) relating 
how two Children were killed with a Mercurial Pouder, by an Empyrick 
at Oxford: 'Nec tantum a mercurialibus, sed ab aliis interdum 
Catharticis, e vegetabilium familia de sumptis, Massa sanguinea 
ita depravatur, ut non nisi longo tempore restitui aut renovari 
possit.' Not only mercurial, but vegetable Purgatives, sometimes 
do so deprave the Mass of Blood; that it will be a long time before 
it can be restored. Dr. Willis. 
 
Then he confirms what Helmont had said of the common Purgatives, 
in these Words: 'Adeo non immerito prorsus Calumniatur Helmontius 
dicens Pharmaca Cathartica non semper, aut solummodo 
humores in corpore prius existentes educere; sed potentia sua corruptiva, 
depravatos efficere.' Idem, ibidem. 
 
[^p.20^] 
Now what do you think of the common Purges; made with half 
a douzen, or half a score, of such Ingredients as have been discoursed 
on? Magis a Remedio, quam ab ipso Morbo timendum sit. If you 
like 'em, much good may do you; but I do not not, and never shall; 
because I know better things. 
 
You may see now, (if you have Eyes and Understanding) what 
Effects are to be expected from such Purgatives; how apt they are 
to deprave, instead of purifying the vital Juices, for reducing an 
ill habit of Body to a sound state: And 'tis the Judgment of the 
Learned; but they have a learned way of Correction; that they 
shall not do so much Hurt, as otherwise they would. 
 
There is another Help found out; and that is the cause why 
Physicians send so many to the Waters: To rinse out, and fetch 
off the Stains, and virulent Impressions of counterfeit Purgatives. 
I should like the Waters well enough; it they would operate, 
and perform the Intention in a lesser Quantity: But to pour 
down two or three Quarts in a Forenoon; to charge and chill 
the Body with so much; tho' some do bear it pretty well; yet 
others receive Prejudice, instead of a Benefit. He that is Master 
of a wholesom Purgative, will do better Service, than all the Waters 
in England. 
 
Purgative, is a promising good Name; which invites, and 
makes the pretended Purgatives go down the better. They are 
such as the World hath been used to; and the People take them; 
because others have taken them before: They know no better, 
and therefore these are the best, and they must try their Fate 
with them. They are such as Tradition hath handed down from 
Age to Age; to the present Time; and Custom hath made them 
familiar: They are recommended (sometimes discomended) and 
appointed by the Learned in vogue; and therefore they are willingly, 
and readily received, as if they were sent by Divine Appointment, 
to heal the Infirmities of human frail Nature. 
 
But all this is, no convincing Argument; to prove their sufficiency 
and fitness, for the important Work of Purgation; Errour is 
as old as Time it self; but such false Substitutes, will wear out of 
Date, and out of Use; when better shall appear manifestly and 
convincingly; as by comparing these pretended and fallacious; 
with what is purifying and truly purgative, as followeth. 
 
Having shewed negatively, what true Purgatives are not; by 
examining and setting forth the malign Nature of common reputed 
Purgatives: In their Operations; in their Corrections; by their 
[^p.21^] 
Effects; by the Judgment and Censure, of Ancient and Modern 
Physicians. 
 
I come now to assert positively; and set down the Qualifications 
of a true Purgative Medicine; that performs the Office of Purgation, 
according to the Intent, and Meaning of that Operation, 
in due Manner, and also in Effects. 
 
A Medicine adapted truly Purgative, is endowed with these eminent 
and excellent Properties. 
 
1. Balsamic, wholesom and harmless in all the Ingredients. 
2. Fermentative, to separate and depurate; wherein is comprised 
Aperitive and Abstersive Faculties. 
3. Lenitive and Placid in Operation. 
4. Catholic and Comprehensive; as adapt and applicable to all 
Cases, requiring Purgative Energy 
 
First: A true Purgative wants no Correction, as being wholesom, 
and innocent in all the Parts of Composition: That's a 
Medicine amicable and pleasing to Nature. And if no good can 
be done, (as in Cases irremediable, and past hope) it will do no 
hurt; but give you the Satisfaction of a Tryal. And in Diseases 
obstinate, and difficult to be removed; requiring a Method, and 
Medicines of a different Operation to be assistant; then the Purgative 
performs only a Part; but necessarily conducing to the 
Cure; and without this probably no perfect Cure. But where 
there is a capacity to receive Relief; you may be bold in the repeated 
use thereof, for obtaining the desired Effect. 
 
But if it wants this wholesom Qualification, it cannot be a true 
purifying Purgative: And that Defect, makes a great Abatement 
in Virtue; or Frustration of the Intention. 
 
Secondly: A true Purgative acts by a benign and placid fermentative 
Operation; which is diffusive through the Body; opening 
and searching into all Parts; separating that which is bad, to be 
brought down, and sent away by the Intestines; leaving that which 
is good, to support and maintain the Body: Does not contaminate, 
nor drain out the alimentary Juices; from whence Alleviation 
does follow, and natural Strength preserved. 
 
And every Evacuation, that is not performed after this manner; 
cannot rightly be called Purgation; nor in Reason can you expect 
the good Effects otherwise: For, true Purgation is not a promiscuous 
[^p.22^] 
Evacuation; an emptying of the Guts only; or a draining 
of the Body by force, without distinction of Matter: But separating 
all useless, superfluous, and degenerate Humors; that the 
vital Liquors may be preserved pure. 
 
Thirdly: A true Purging Medicine, operates gradually and 
gently; takes Time to search out, and fetch out the morbific 
Matter. Moderate and gentle Evacuation, is one sign of a true 
Purgative: But you do not deserve a good Medicine; if you will 
not allow Time sufficient for the Operation. 
 
A good wholesom Medicine is working secretly within the Body, 
all the Intervals of Evacuation; collecting impure Matter together 
out of divers Parts; and in due time sends it forth calmly 
without disturbance: For if it do not work moderately and deliberately, 
it cannot perform the Office of true Purgation: This is 
an Operation of Time, and no hurrying Business. 
 
Many People are for a Purge that works quick and often; and 
are very impatient if it operates little, and slowly: They must 
have a galloping Purge; one of the virulent and worser sort; such 
they like best. It is not the many Stools, that makes Purging so 
advantagious in Curing; but matter offending collected in a few 
Stools; is that which makes Evacuation helpful and successful. 
 
If you spurr Nature, with a stimulating venemous Purgative, 
our of her own gentle Pace; you must not expect Purgation (which 
is Purification) from such rough, rude, hasty Proceedings: You 
have then but a promiscuous Evacuation; good and bad together; 
and that may be more injurious, than beneficial. 
 
A Placid and Moderate Evacuation, proceeds from wholesom Purgatives: 
But when they are venemous, and disgustful; Nature cannot 
suffer them to abide long in the Body; but labours vigorously 
to expel in great haste: And that's one sign of a bad Medicine; 
not a true Purgative. 
 
Fourthly: A true Purgative Medicine, so qualified as before related; 
is also Catholic and Comprehensive, in the Classis of Purgation. 
 
Purgation is a Catholic and Comprehensive Operation; required 
and useful in all Cases, and Diseases: Either singly, and to perform 
alone; or is premitted, and leads foremost in a Method: Or is 
used intermittingly in the Course; or else comes in at the latter 
end, to carry off the Relicts of a Disease; and is so used as necessary, 
in the most malignant Cases, Small Pox and Pestilential Fevers. 
 
If Purgation be so efficacious and extensive; as requisite in all 
Diseases; then a Purgative and Depurative Medicine, that performs 
[^p.23^] 
this Office well and truly; deserves the Title of Catholic, 
for being serviceable and useful in all Cases. But although Purgation 
may be granted such a Latidude of Operation; yet Universality 
of a single Medicine, few there are, can allow of that; and are 
more ready to deride, than approve of such an Expedient; for the 
Learned in Physick never taught them so: And they say, there is no 
such thing in Nature. 
 
This is not the first time, the Learned have been mistaken: I 
am not guided by all what they say; but sometimes by my own 
Reason, and Experience herein: And therefore I do assert, (against 
any traditional, false-bottom'd Learning) That a true Purgative, 
and Purifying Medicine; performs that Office in all Persons and 
Cases. But this is against the Physicians Interest; and therefore 
they will not have it so; that the Design of Adaptation to differentt 
Constitutions, might pass unquestioned. I have much to say upon 
this Intrigue, if I would ravel into it, and examine the Politicks 
thereof: But let it pass. 
 
This Practice, of appropriating Purges to Constitutions; was 
rational enough, and then necessary; when Purgatives were 
supposed to operate (elective) by attracting peculiarly this, or 
that different Humor, luxuriant and infesting several Bodies: But 
now the Case is alter'd; and Purgatives are acknowledged to operate 
(fermentative) by Fermentation; thereby to separate and cast 
off any Humor abounding, or degenerate Matter. 
 
True Purgative Fermentation, does not respect and level at this, 
or that particular Humor; but separates all superfluous and degenerate 
Matter; makes it ready for Protrusion, and Exclusion. 
Quali quisquis Humore abundaverit; talis evacuatur. Now elective 
Purgation is out of Doors; fermentative Purification comes in; as 
a more generous, general, and comprehensive Operation. 
 
I meet with an Author concurring herein, and asserting much 
what to this purpose. Nec quidem Philosophum, aut quempiam 
[^GREEK OMITTED^], & ratione utentem decet asserere, Pharmaca ulla propter substantiæ 
similitudinem, aut virtutes nescio quas specificas, in determinatum 
quemvis humorem agere, eumque sincerum & peculiarem foras 
educere. Dr. Wilis de Purg. p. 70. 
 
Although this Author did not intend by those Words, to prove 
what I now drive at; yet they are useful for my Purpose, and 
confirming what I have asserted; touching Universality of a single 
Medicine in Purgative Operation: For, if no Purging Medicine 
acts peculiarly upon; or selects and draws out any Humor from 
[^p.24^] 
the rest; but only raiseth a Fermentation, and excites Nature 
thereby to separate, depurate, and exclude what is peccant and 
disturbing: Then that Medicine which doth procure, such a Fermentation 
benignly and placidly; performs the Work of Purgation, 
to all Intents and Purposes, in divers Persons, and various Cases. 
 
From hence you may understand; there is no necessity of forming 
Purgative Medicines to Constitutions, and different Diseases; 
but that a true Purgative is Catholic, and advantagiously useful in 
all Cases whatever, requiring such an Operation: Yet I do allow 
that such a general Medicine, of that Latitude and Comprehension; 
may be specificated, as pointing and aiming at, more directly 
and specially. 
 
[}When; how oft; and in what Cases, Purgative 
Operation ought to be used.}] 
 
There are two principal Occasions requiring Purgation: One 
is Preservative, or Preventive; the other Curative. 
 
Preservation from Diseases is very requisite: As when any Person 
finds some unwonted Alteration, or Indisposition; 'tis a good 
Time then, to use preventing means: For, it is much better, 
and safer to prevent Sickness; than to delay until it seize you. 
Ægrius ejicitur, quam non admittitur hostis. 
 
All that we receive into the Body, is not fit to be retained; 
but Part of our Food, is transmuted, and assimilated as useful 
to maintain the Body: And Part is rejected, separated, and cast 
forth, as excrementitious and useless; by Stool, by urinary Ductures, 
by the Pores, and other Emunctories. When Nature keeps 
this course duly; and being able to perform this daily Work 
steadily and constantly; there will be no need of Purging: But 
from Intemperance; improper and injurious Food; vitious or evil 
Customs; Debility of Nature, and Casualties: The Order, and due 
Execution of Bodily Functions is thereby subverted; from whence 
Relicts, or degenerate Matter, remains and infects several Parts 
of the Body; which ought timely to be evacuated and discharged; 
or else Sickness and Diseases will arise from thence variously; according 
to the Nature of the humoral Matter tainting the Blood, 
and Condition of the Part, where it infects, or affects; idiopathically, 
or sympathically. Venienti occurrite Morbo. 
 
[^p.25^] 
But most commonly this Caution, and Advice of Prevention, 
is put off, and neglected: The Prosecution of Pleasure, or Profit; 
will not give Time for this necessary Work of preventive Purgation: 
But they suffer afterwards for their Folly. Sickness surprizeth; 
and then they are forced into Physick; but now perhaps 
a great deal will not do; what a little might have done 
before. 
 
All Bodies contract a Foulness within; some more, some less: 
Some are strong, and bear it out longer; others weaker of Nature, 
and the sooner fall into Sickness; or disposed thereto by the 
different Formation, and natural Condition of Body: Therefore 
to purge and purifie with a wholesome true Purgative Medicine; is 
the best Preventive to keep off Diseases; to preserve the Body 
sound, in a healthful and vigorous state. But if your Purges be 
of the common Sort, virulent and unwholesom; that imitate and 
counterfeit the Office of Purging, but performs it not: I cannot 
say, they are true Preservatives of Health; nor may you expect 
the laudable Effects of purgative Operation, from such seigned, 
deceitful Medicines. 
 
For prevention, most People commonly chuse the Spring, or Autumn, 
to purge and cleanse their Bodies; and they do well, and 
wisely therein: But if any Alteration should come, in the Intervals 
of those Seasons; you may safely purge with a true purifying 
Medicine, at any Time of the Year; and with more safety probably 
than to forbear, and deferr it until Spring, or Fall: For, 
though your Indisposition be but small at first, and may pass off; 
yet you know not what it may prove, and how it may encrease: 
But let it prove how it will; you commit no Errour, in taking a 
wholesom cleanser, be it Frost, or Dog-Days; only order your 
self, as those different Times do require: In Winter a warm 
Room; in Summer be moderate in motion, that may not cause 
Sweat; and then purgative Operation, will be kindly and beneficial, 
at any Time of the Year. 
 
The Caution that was given by the Ancients, to forbear purging in 
the Dog-Days; does not concern us in this Latitude we live in; 
much different from the Heat of that Climate where they lived, 
Canis non mordet in Anglia. 
 
For the Time of Day, most fit for Purging Medicines to be given; 
the Founders of this Art, appointed the Morning, as most convenient: 
And considering what rough sort of Purges they gave, 
that would not lye long in the Body, but fall to working soon; that 
[^p.26^] 
Time was most proper: But a Purgative, that lyes eight or ten 
Hours quiet, before it operates; the Morning is not convenient: 
Because the Medicine will put you by the due Time for Sleep; 
and will be working, when you should be at Rest the Night following: 
And therefore the Hour of the Day is to be fixed, as best suting 
with the Nature of the Medicine. 
 
The Catholic Medicine I appoint to be taken at Night going 
to Bed; because it hinders not, but rather procures quiet Sleep; 
being wholesom and amicable to Nature, placid and gentle in secret 
Operation: And makes no Evacuation, until next Morning; 
perhaps near Noon, with some costive Bodies. But if you pretended 
Purge be of the common virulent sort; the sooner it comes 
out, the better; for such Purgatives ought not to lye in the Body 
all Night. 
 
Having shewed how proper and convenient Purging is, for prevention 
of Diseases; making signs of their Approach by some 
Alteration or Indisposition of Body: We are next to consider, 
and determine of Purgation, how it may be advantagious, when 
Diseases are apparently seated, and actually molesting, or threatning. 
And now you are to be directed by Indications, suggesting 
and declaring when to Purge. 
 
Ill Humors indicate and prompt Purgation; (nemine contradicente) 
so agreed of all sides: And such depraved ill Humors, by a 
general Consent also; are adjudged the Causes of most Diseases; 
and fomenting or aggravating all the rest. But notwithstanding; 
the Rules of Art offers Contraindications, to barr the use of Purgation, 
at certain Times, and under some disagreeing Circumstances: 
So that Purgation comes in necessarily to all, as a Catholic 
and General Remedy, only with this difference; That the 
Times convenient, for that Operation in every Disease, may duly 
be distinguished. 
 
And here I shall not need to speak particularly to every Disease 
by their Names; but will take them in the gross; and consider 
them in their Nature, by which they are allied to each other; as 
having their Rise, and Dependance upon humoral Causes; and do 
therefore require Purgation. For, such as have Affinity and Alliance 
in Causation; may have, and very fitly, the same Means 
for Curation: Since Purgatives do not attract (elective) this or 
that Humor particularly; (as before proved) but by Fermentation, 
which operates generally and comprehensively, by separating all 
peccant Humors, in order for their exclusion. 
 
[^p.27^] 
Names of Diseases are different and various from Parts affected, 
and Functions impeded; when humoral Causes are the same; 
and therefore the purgative Indication for Curing, will be the 
same also. Diseases being thus akin, by their humoral Causes generating 
and continuing; their Cures will not lie so far asunder; 
but may be yoaked together in their going off. 
 
The People chatter as they are taught (by those who want 
teaching themselves) and are wheedled into a Belief; that every 
Disease which hath a particular Name, must also have as necessarily 
requiring; peculiar and different Medicines from all the 
rest: This Mistake, or Design; hath filled the World, and confounded 
the People, with Thousands of superfluous, dubious, and 
sometimes dangerous Medicines. You are not therefore obliged 
to change your Medicines, that perform the general and principal 
Operations, (Purgative or Sudorific) so oft as Diseases change 
their Names, yet retain their humoral Nature; which antecedent 
Cause, fixing here or there; infesting this, or that part 
of the Body, gives occasion for a new Denomination, although arising 
from the old perambulating peccant Matter. 
 
I own that Diseases may so differ, as to require a different Method; 
but notwithstanding they may have the same Medicines, properly 
and fitly, though not in the same Order. Purgatives most 
commonly begins the Cure; Sudorifics follow, if requisite to be 
used: But when Diseases are malignant, peracute, and dangerous; 
then a Sudorific leads foremost. 
 
Foulness of Body, and Obstructions; are the two general Indications, 
prompting and pointing at Purgation: And therefore if 
you look through the Practice of Physick; let the Disease be in 
any Part of the Body; Purging is appointed most commonly, as 
one of the first and chiefest Remedies; And is oftner repeated, and 
more relied on, than any other Operation. 
 
Ill Humors beget Obstructions: Therefore absterse, and evacuate 
the depraved Humors by Purgation; then you open Obstructions, 
and purifie the Body with one Operation. 
 
Since degenerate humoral Matter, injurious and unserviceable, is 
brought forth by purgative Fermentation; and most Diseases arise 
from, and have their Dependance upon such Causes (by Consent 
and Judgment of the Learned.) Then it follows necessarily; that 
a Medicine performing that Operation, well and truly; is serviceable 
and helpful in all those Diseases, caused by such degenerate 
[^p.28^] 
Humors, and depraved Matter; let the Disease be called and distinguished, 
by what Name soever. 
 
But here I would not be so understood; as if I laid the whole 
Stress of Curing in all Cases, upon Purgation; but to let you know 
the Efficacy, and Extensive Power of this Operation; being seasonably 
and duly used in all Diseases; and that in the most Cases, it 
is mostly, and advantagiously used, above any other Operation: Yet 
there is a Time to forbear, and fit Times when to prosecute with 
Purging. 
 
And now we are to say somthing concerning Contraindications; 
that do forbid Purgation at some unfit Times; which require another 
Operation to be then used more properly: And this is called 
Method; whereby different Operations may come in seasonably and 
duly, not præposterously and interfering. 
 
The grand Question herein to be determined, is this: Will the 
peccant Matter conveniently go downwards by Purgation; or 
must it be sent away from all Parts by Transpiration? Diseases 
that have Malignity; as Small Pox, Measles, Malignant and Pestilential 
Fevers; when the Life is seized, and oppressed with such 
venemous, suffocating Matter: Then sudorific Operation is the 
chiefest, and most secure Help to rely on; for that disperseth the 
infectious Miasm, and throws of (per porous) on every side: And 
when Nature (the Life) is disentangled, and hath prevailed by 
such means; then a true purgative and purifying Medicine, comes 
seasonably afterwards, to perform the rest: And this is so necessary, 
to be well and sufficiently performed; else the Dregs and 
Impurities remaining behind, will produce other Diseases of very 
ill Consequence, as it hath often proved so to many; by neglect 
of sufficient and true Purgation, which is Purification: But when 
they have taken, two or three Purges, of the contaminating reputed 
Purgatives; they think all is then done, that ought to be; but 
that's a great Mistake, which will appear so, by the ill Effects that 
follow, some time after. 
 
