[^Colbatch, John: Physico-medical essay concerning alkaly and acid^] 
 
[}A 
Physico-Medical 
ESSAY 
CONCERNING 
ALKALY and ACID, 
SO FAR 
As they relate to the Cause or Cure of 
DISTEMPERS. 
 
WHERIN 
Is endeavored to be prov'd, that Acids are not 
(as is generally and erroneously suppos'd) 
the Cause of all or most Distempers, but 
that Alkalies are. 
 
WITH 
An Account of som Distempers, and the Medicins, 
with their Preparations, proper to 
be us'd in the Cure of them. 
 
AS ALSO 
A Short Digression concerning Specific Remedies. 
 
By JOHN COLBATCH, a Member 
of the College of Physicians. 
 
The Third Edition with som Additions. 
 
LONDON, 
Printed by J. D. for D. Brown, 1698.}] 
 
[^A dedication to Sir Henry Bellasis and a preface omitted.^] 
[^Extract 1, pp. 101-146^] 
 
[^p.101^] 
[}A 
Physico-Medical 
ESSAY, &c.}] 
 
[}CHAP. I. 
Of the Small Pox.}] 
 
THE first thing I shall begin with, is 
the Disuse of Alkalies in the Small-Pox, 
that fatal Distemper to three 
Kingdoms, and even all Europe; in 
that God was pleased therby to deprive us of a 
Princess, whose Worth was such, that a sufficient 
Value can never be set upon it, nor 
her Loss be enough lamented. 
 
It is common both with Nurses and the generality 
of Practitioners, as soon as they perceive 
the least Symtoms of this Distemper, to 
give Gascoin's, Countess of Kent's, Lapis de 
Goa, or som other Testaceous Pouder, which are 
known Alkalies. The one Party pretend 
therby to drive the Malignity from the Heart; 
the other to correct the Acidity which they 
conjecture (beyond which they can't go) to 
be in the Blood. 
 
[^p.102^] 
In the subsequent Discourse, I shall endeavor 
to shew on what false Suppositions both 
Parties go. 
 
For the first sort it will not be worth while to 
spend much time, because every one will readily 
grant, they generally act on wrong and mistaken 
Notions. And as for any Malignity lodg'd in 
the Heart more than in any other part, 'tis altogether 
impossible, by reason the Blood moves 
ten times at least faster thro the Heart than any 
other part, the Lungs excepted: And the 
Cavities being large, no Stagnation is to be 
feared, and consequently no danger. If there 
be any fear of the Malignity's setling any 
where, it must be in those parts where the 
Vessels are very small, and the Blood moves 
but slowly, which must be near the extreme 
Parts. 
 
For the second sort, who give the same Medicins, 
but with quite different Intentions; I 
shall endeavor to prove, that their Suppositions 
are altogether as groundless as the former. 
They give their Alkalious Medicins to correct 
the Acidity they suppose to be in the Blood, 
which is, as they pretend, the occasion of all 
the ill Symtoms that attend the Small-Pox. 
Now I could never hear of any one, that by 
analyzing the Blood of Persons in the Small-Pox, 
could ever find the least Footsteps of Acidity 
in it; tho, on the contrary, it appears 
after many Trials, that the Blood of such abounds 
more with Alkalious Particles than that 
[^p.103^] 
of sound People: and consequently, the giving 
Alkalies in this case must be at least superfluous, 
if not highly pernicious, as I have 
frequently observ'd, and shall instance in som 
Particulars. 
 
The cause of the Small-Pox, common with 
most other Fevers and acute Distempers, I suppose 
to be from a quantity of such Particles 
being som way or other admitted into the 
Blood, which being of a quite different Texture 
from the Blood, and so not capable of mixing 
with it, cause a hurry and disorder there; 
which is what I [/1./] elswhere observe 
to be the occasion of both continued 
and Symtomatic Fevers. Now it is 
well known a Fever always precedes the Eruption 
of the Pustles in the Small-Pox: And 
when the Pustles are well com out, that is, 
when the heterogeneous Particles, or such as 
are of a different Texture from those of the 
Blood, are thrown out to the Surface of the 
Body, the Fever ceases. 
 
Now to assist Nature in throwing those heterogeneous 
Particles out of the Blood to the 
extreme Parts, which they pretend to be 
mightily hinder'd by a great quantity of Acids 
in the Blood, they give repeated and large 
quantities of Testaceous Alkalious Pouders, 
and other Diaphoretics; which indeed seldom 
fail of answering their Intentions, in throwing 
out large quantities of Pustles, even more than 
Nature is able to supply or bring to maturity; 
[^p.104^] 
and if she chances to cope with 'em, 'tis the 
only occasion of spoiling so many Angelic Faces, 
as we daily observe. But the spoiling of 
Faces is not all, for besides the throwing out 
so great a quantity of Pustles by breaking the 
Globules of the Blood, when brought to the 
Cutaneous Glands, instead of those Glands separating 
the excrementitious Serum, which 
in a state of Health is all or most part of it carried 
off by Sweat or insensible Transpiration, 
but at this time to supply the Pustles till brought 
to maturity; I say, by breaking the Globules 
of the Blood when in its confused state, Serum 
and all together, the excrementitious Serum 
only, according to the Rules of Nature, ought 
to be separated, those Glands being so many 
Strainers fitted to receive into them the Serum 
only, and not the least drop of Blood when 
in its natural State, and its Globules unbroken. 
I can liken the separation of the Serum from 
the Blood, by the mediation of the cuteneous 
Glands, to nothing better than a Mixture of 
Oil and Water, made by continued agitation, 
when that compound Mixture seems to be one 
intire white Liquor; tho with good Eyes or 
a good Glass, the Oil may be seen floting in the 
Water in small Globules, as the Blood doth in 
the Serum, as I elswhere [/2./] observe: 
Yet this Mixture of Oil and Water, 
let it be don never so exactly, if pour'd into a 
Funnel lined with brown Paper, wet beforehand, 
the Pores will be so disposed, as to let 
[^p.105^] 
all the Water run thro, tho not the least Particle 
of the Oil; yet if there be som Alkalious 
Salts boil'd with this Mixture of Oil and 
Water, the Globules of the Oil will be so 
broken, as to pass readily with the Water thro 
the brown Paper, which before it would not 
in the least. In like manner, the Globules of 
the Blood being broken by the means of Alkalious 
Medicins, together with too great a 
quantity of Alkalious Particles being before 
admitted into, or rather detained in it, are 
therby made capable of being received into 
the cutaneous Glands, which is the only occasion 
of those purple Spots on the surface of the 
Skin, not only in the Small-Pox, but other 
Fevers; which Spots seldom or never fail of 
being the certain tokens of future Death. 
 
But this is not all, for by the said breaking 
the Globules of the Blood by Alkalious Medicins, 
these small broken Globules getting into 
the little Meanders of the Brain, hinder the 
Motion of the Animal Spirits thro the Nerves, 
and so cause Deliriums, and all those fatal Disorders 
of the Brain too frequently seen. 
 
Likewise the Blood, which is not capable of 
being contained in its proper Channels, is the 
occasion of violent Bleeding at the Nose, 
bloody Urin, &c. which are none of the best 
Symtoms, but what too often happen by the 
said means. 
 
Besides breaking the Globules of the Blood, 
and causing the foresaid ill Symtoms, with 
[^p.106^] 
many others I don't think fit to enumerat; 
by their Diaphoretic Quality there is so great 
a waste made of the Serum of the Blood, that 
there is not a sufficient quantity left to supply 
and bring to maturity those many Pustles 
(even more than Nature designed) that these 
Medicins alone had thrown out: So that about 
the ninth, eleventh, or thirteenth day, for 
want of sufficient quantity of Serum to supply 
them, the Pustles fall, and the acrid corrosive 
Matter being absorbed into the Blood, 
causes secondary Fevers, which oftentimes 
prove very dangerous. I might expatiate 
much more, but I design brevity. 
 
It may be said I have gon far enough in 
condemning the ordinary Practice as to the use 
of Alkalies and Diaphoretics, not having substituted 
a better and safer Method and Medicins 
in their room: but not too fast, that follows 
in its proper place. 
 
The Small-Pox is a Distemper that requires 
the giving of as few Medicins as any Distemper 
whatever, unless is som extraordinary 
Cases; but yet I think it most unreasonable, 
that People (as is the common practice) 
should be left to the sole management of old 
Women and Nurses; which alone I verily believe 
has destroy'd more than the Sword it self. 
And tho but a few Medicins, as I said before, 
are generally necessary, yet the Ey of a careful, 
skilful Physician, and that from the beginning, 
is as convenient as in any Distemper 
[^p.107^] 
whatever, that seeing Nature's Operations, 
he may also observe the fit time to give the 
Medicins requisit. I confess I have heard som 
complain that such a Physician has had so many 
Fees, and never wrote one Bill for them. 
For such People, let me tell them, they complain 
without cause: for in many cases, especially 
in this, the Physician deserves his 
Fees better for not writing at all, than otherwise. 
 
I own my self a profest Chymist, and in 
many things, tho not all, a Disciple of Helmont, 
and know nothing so delightful to me, 
as Chymical Operations: Yet in this case, nor 
indeed scarce in any acute Distemper, do I 
judg Chymical Medicins, at least the elaborate 
ones, to be absolutely necessary, tho many of 
them may do well, and are somtimes to be used: 
But I know no reason to fly to elaborat 
Preparations, when Nature has provided Medicins 
ready to our hands. Acids skilfully and 
timely given, I have seen, not only by my 
own, but by several Great Mens Practice, to 
be the only safe, effectual, and seldom or never 
erring Medicins in this Distemper; and 
why should we fly to Acids chymically prepared, 
when, as I said before, Nature has 
provided Oranges, Lemons, Citrons, Limes, 
and a great many more not necessary to mention, 
which for the most part answer our intentions, 
if skilfully given by an experienced 
hand? And as I hope I have shewn sufficient 
[^p.108^] 
Reasons to dissuade from the use of Alkalies 
and Diaphoretics, from the many direful 
effects that daily attend their use; so I hope 
to give as cogent ones to inforce the use of Acids, 
from the laudable, good effects I have 
seen from them: for in at least five hundred 
Patients that I have had of all Qualities to do 
with in this Distemper, in Worcester and London, 
to the Year 1695, when called in at the 
beginning of the Distemper, I know not that 
I have had one that has died, or bin disfigur'd; 
nay som that were brought into very ill circumstances 
by the use of Testaceous, Alkalious 
Pouders and Diaphoretics, I have retriev'd 
from the jaws of impending Death by 
fit and proper Acids. 
 
[And in the Small-Pox that has raged during 
this present Year 98, I have not lost above 
three Patients, and the occasion of their Deaths, 
as I have all the reason in the World to believe, 
proceeded from Irregularities committed by 
their Friends before I was called in, viz. 
their giving them sweating Medicins upon 
their first being taken ill, which I earnestly 
caution all People against, as a thing that frequently 
proves fatal, as it also dos during the 
whole Course of the Distemper. But further, 
why should Diaphoretics be given at first to 
hasten the eruption of the Pustles, when it is 
evident to all cautious, observing Practitioners, 
that the only dangerous Small-Pox is that 
where the Pustles appear within a day or two 
[^p.109^] 
after the Patient is taken ill; whereas those 
that are four, five or six days before they appear, 
are generally free from all ill Symtoms? 
Therefore if we would imitate Nature in her 
regular operations, we should rather moderate, 
than rashly push forward the eruption of 
the Pustles.] 
 
It may be wonder'd at that I make a difference 
between Testaceous Pouders and Diaphoretics, 
when the Testaceous, especially the 
compound ones, as Gascoin's, Countess of Kent's, 
Lapis de Goa, &c. are accounted Diaphoretics, 
and indeed are so: but my reason is, because 
for the most part, besides the said Alkalious 
Pouders, other more forcible Diaphoretics are 
also given. 
 
Having in short given som hints concerning 
the cause of the Small-Pox, I need not again 
repeat them, but shall immediatly proceed to 
the method I take in the cure of it, which being 
according to the Nature's dictates, is short 
and easy: For Nature in performing her Operations 
makes short and easy cuts; it being in 
the cure of Diseases, as in finding out and giving 
an account of the Phenomena of Nature 
by Philosophical Disquisitions, they that go 
upon the fewest Principles, generally discover 
most of her Secrets, and are capable of giving 
the best and most rational account of them; 
wheras they that are clog'd with multiplicity 
of Principles, and wander in tedious and uncouth 
Paths, thinking therby to get admission 
[^p.110^] 
into Nature's Cabinet, after they have spent 
much time, and taken a great a deal of pains, at 
last sit down as wise as when they began, and 
not one jot wiser. 
 
First, when I com to a Patient who has the 
Symtoms of the Small-Pox, which are so well 
known even to Nurses, that I need not spend 
any time about them: In the first place, 
if there be any manifest signs of the Stomach's 
being opprest and clog'd with viscous Matter, 
as generally it is, I give a gentle, easy Vomit, 
sutable to the age and constitution of the Patient; 
and after that has don operating, som 
Syrupus e~ Meconio, or any other proper Opiat 
in due proportion. Afterwards, to allay the 
disorder in the Blood, occasioned by the intromission 
of Heterogeneous Particles, which 
Nature endeavors to throw out; and to confirm 
the Texture of the Blood, so as to inable 
it to rid it self of its Enemy, I give large quantities 
of any of the following Juleps. 
 
+R Succi Aurantior. Unc. sex, 
Aq. Hordei lib. duas, 
Sacchari albi q. s. ad gratam saporem. 
M. f. Julap. Vel 
 
+R Succi Limon. Unc. quatuor, 
Aq. Hordei lb duas. 
Cinnamomi Fortis Unc. semis, 
Syr. E Rubo Idæo Unc.tres. 
M. f. Julap. Vel 
 
[^p.111^] 
+R Aq. font. lb unam semis, 
Vini Rub. lb Semis, 
Syr. E Rubo Ideo. +o iii. 
M. f. Julap. Vel 
 
+R Aq. Cinnamomi Hord. lb ii. 
Succi Limon. Unc. quatuor, 
Syrup. de Succo Lujulæ Unc. tres. 
M. f. Julap. 
 
Of any of these Juleps I let my Patients 
drink as oft and as freely as they will; drinking 
likewise small Beer with Juice of Oranges 
in it, in as large quantities as they please: But 
during the whole course of the Distemper, all 
sorts of Flesh ought to be avoided. 
 
To poor people, instead of the said Juleps, 
and to save charges, I order large quantities 
of small Beer, acidulated with Oil of Vitriol, 
or else Vinegar, or Verjuice Posset-drink, to 
be drank frequently, and in large quantities. 
 
But if in the beginning, or afterwards, the 
Brain be much disturbed, and the Patient delirious, 
for the most part I find it absolutely necessary 
to let Blood, and that in a good quantity; 
and then to use more powerful Acids, 
giving the following Juleps in large quantities; 
which presently calm the violent Motion and 
Agitation of the Blood and Spirits, and set all 
to rights in a small time. 
 
[^p.112^] 
+R Aq. Cinnamomi Hord. lb unam, 
Syrup. de Rubo Idæo Unc. unam sem. 
Sp. Vitrioli Volat. Drach. sem. 
M. f. Julap. Vel 
 
+R Aq. Cinnamomi Hord. lb unam, 
Syr. de Rubo Idæo Unc. unam. sem. 
Gas Sulphuris q. s. ad. acidum Saporem. 
M. f. Julap Vel 
 
+R Aq. Hordei lb duas, 
Epidem. Unc. duas, 
Syr. Lujulæ Unc. tres; 
Sp. Nitri, vel Vitrioli Dul. scrupulos duos. 
M. f. Julap. Vel 
 
+R Flor. Rosarum Rub. Drat. sex, 
Aq. Fontan. Bullientis lb duas, 
stent in infusione in Vase vitreo clauso per 
quadrantem horæ, postea affunde Ol. Vitrioli 
vel Sulphuris per Campan. Scrupulos 
duos: macerantur per alterum quadrantem 
horæ, & coletur, colaturæ claræ adde 
Sacchari albissimi q. s. ad gratum saporem. 
 
In all the Liquor they drink, I order a few 
drops of Spiritus Nitri, or Oleum Vitrioli dul. 
 
If I find my Patient's Spirits languid and 
low, I give 3 or 4 spoonfuls of the following 
Cordial at due intervals, especially towards 
[^p.113^] 
the end of the Distemper, when Cordials are 
most wanted. 
 
+R Aq. Mirabilis, 
Epidem. ana Unc. tres. 
Spirit. Citri Unc. sem. 
Aq. Melissæ Unc. octo. 
Syr. Garrioph. Unc. unam sem. 
M. f. Julap. Cardiacum. 
 
[Where there are any Symtoms of what is 
commonly called Malignity, I give either of 
the following Medicins during the whole 
course of the Distemper. 
 
+R Rad. Angelicæ Hispan. +o i. 
Fol. Rutæ, 
Scordii ana M. +s. 
Vini albi, 
Aceti Acerrimi, ana Unc. sex. 
Infunde clause~ & calide~ in Vase vitreo vel terreo 
per horas tres, & coletur, colaturæ cap. Cochlearia 
sex quarta~ vel sexta~ qua~q; hora~. Vel 
 
+R Aq. Theriacalis Unc. quatuor vel sex, 
Aq. Rutæ Unc. sex, 
Syr. Lujulæ Unc. unam. 
M. f. mixtura in quatuor partes æquales distrib. 
quarum cap. unam quarta~ vel sexta~ quaq; hora~. 
 
They may also take 10 or 15 drops of my 
Elixir of Vitriol three or four times a day in 
any convenient Vehicle. 
 
[^p.114^] 
If they are subject to be loose, I give the 
quantity of a Nutmeg of Conserve of Sloes, 
a little aromatized with Oil of Cinnamon, 
once in two or three hours, ordering them to 
drink afterwards a Draught of Tincture of 
Roses. 
 
By this Method I have brought my Patients 
thro the Distemper, without scarce so much as 
any uneasiness, or being confin'd to their Beds, 
or the least fear of a secondary Fever, which 
frequently proves most fatal. 
 
After the Pustles are quite gon, I take care 
of purge 'em well five or six times with gentle 
and easy Purges, after each Purge giving a 
Hypnottic. After I have don Purging, for som 
time I give corroborating, strengthning Medicins, 
to confirm the Texture of the Blood and 
Juices, and bring them to their, natural State, 
wherby I prevent ill accidents, that somtimes 
succeed the Small-Pox. 
 
I have not given a full History of this Distemper, 
that being contrary to my design, but endeavored 
to deter People from the use of such 
Methods and Medicins as have prov'd fatal to 
many, and to advance a better and safer Method 
in their room; yet I would not have people 
wholly rely on the Method here set down, 
but always have a Physician by to obviate any 
unusual Symtoms that may appear contrary to 
what generally dos; and where Life lies at 
stake, people can't be too cautious: But if the 
good old Women and Nurses, in spite of all 
[^p.115^] 
than can be said, will be still tampering, I must 
needs say, if my Method be exactly follow'd, 
I verily believe there would not one in ten die 
that have formerly by the use of Alkalies and 
Diaphoretics. 
 
As I have before exploded the use of Alkalies, 
and given my Reasons for it; so I shall 
now give som Reasons for the Method I take 
with the great use of Acids in this case. 
 
I judg the cause of the Small-Pox, as I before 
observ'd, to be from an intromission of Heterogeneous, 
or Particles of a different Nature 
and Texture from the Blood, into it; wherby it 
is put into a great hurry and disorder, in order 
to throw off its enemy; and that the place, 
by which Nature designs the discharge of these 
Particles, is the cutaneous Glands. Now the 
Inconveniences I observed to attend the use of 
Alkalies, were the throwing out of more 
Pustles than Nature intended, the destroying 
of the Globules of the Blood, and a waste of 
too great a quantity of Serum. I before forgot 
to mention one dismal effect of Alkalies 
and Diaphoretics, viz. that by destroying or 
breaking the Globules of the Blood, instead 
of regular Pustles being thrown out to the Surface 
of the Skin, the divided broken Globules 
are together with the morbific matter thrown 
out, as in the - and so causes an Erisipelas or 
St. Anthony's Fire, which seldom or never fails 
of proving fatal. 
 
[^p.116^] 
Now I defy any one to say he ever observed 
such Symtoms as these, when Acids were us'd 
from the beginning, which are of that nature 
as to confirm the Texture of the Blood, which 
is that red substance wherin is contain'd the 
Byolycnium [/3./] or Lamp of Life; and 
by so doing Nature is capable of 
throwing out the extraneous Particles 
in a sutable way, without the inconveniences 
that attend the other Method: For the 
Texture of the Blood being confirm'd, and 
moving regularly and naturally in its proper 
Channels, the morbific Particles are only 
thrown out, and such a quantity of Serum left 
as is sufficient to supply the Pustles, and bring 
them to maturity without any fear of their 
flatning, or the acrid Matter being again absorb'd 
into the Blood, and causing secondary 
Fevers. Besides, the Globules of the Blood 
being kept together unbroken, there is no danger 
of their being extravasated, and causing the 
fatal Purple Spots; nor of being thrown out together 
with the morbific Matter, and so causing 
an Erisipelas or St. Anthony's Fire; neither are 
Hemorrhagies, at the Nose, bloody Water, &c. 
in the least to be feared; nor, by being admitted 
into the small Meanders of the Brain, to 
cause Deliriums, and those other Symtoms that 
attend it. 
 
I might expatiate on continued Fevers, and 
other acute Distempers; but that would be to 
be guilty of Tautology: For I assign but one 
[^p.117^] 
general Cause of 'em, tho I own the extraneous 
Particles causing 'em may be somwhat various; 
and according to the different size of 
the extraneous Particles, the parts affected may 
be different; as in the Small-Pox, the size of 
the Particles are such as to fit them to be 
thrown out by the cutaneous Glands to the 
surface of the Skin; in other Fevers they are 
thrown out, somtimes one way, somtimes another, 
according to their size. For instance, 
somtimes they are thrown out by critical 
Sweating, somtimes by Urin, somtimes by 
the Glands of the Mouth in spitting, and so 
on, according to the different disposition of 
the Particles causing the Distemper, which are 
fitted to be discharg'd thro the Pores of different 
Parts; and whatever way we find Nature 
inclin'd to act, we must assist her in it, 
but not spur her on, unless she be too sluggish, 
nor on any account whatever hinder or thwart 
her in her Operations. 
 
In most continued Fevers we have found 
Alkalies as pernicious as in the Small-Pox, and 
Acids as advantageous; of which I shall give 
an instance or two. 
 
After I came from Flanders in 1694, having 
discours'd with a certain Physician about a 
Fever that raged that Summer in London, and 
of which many died; he told me, when he 
found his Patients under such and such Circumstances, 
he as much gave them up for dead, 
as if a Dagger were run thro their Hearts. I 
[^p.118^] 
ask'd him what those Symtoms were, that 
render'd his Patients circumstances to be 
so dangerous? He replied, When he found 
them delirious, and had Spasms and Convulsions 
of the Nerves. I inquir'd of him, 
what Medicins he gave? He told me, a 
Composition of Gascoin's Pouder, Virginian 
Snake-Root, &c. which he solely relied on, and 
is the same, or of the like nature with what is 
generally given. I ask'd him, whether he had 
never found his Medicin serviceable to him? 
He ingenuously confest, when his Patients 
were under those Circumstances, it never did 
him any service. I again ask'd him, why he 
did not vary his Method? His Reply was, his 
Medicin was a most noble Alkaly and Alexipharmic, 
and what was generally us'd, and 
therfore he did not think fit to vary from an 
establish'd Method. 
 
A few days after I was called in to a Gentlewoman 
exactly under the same Circumstances 
before related; she was delirious to the highest 
degree, had violent Spasms and Convulsions 
of the Nerves, and all other Symtoms of 
a Malignant Fever. I despair'd not of her 
Life; and by the plentiful use of proper Acids, 
all Symtoms soon vanish'd, and in a 
week she was fit to go abroad. 
 
Besides, I could instance in a hundred Cases 
of the same nature, but that I design brevity. 
 
[^p.119^] 
I must own other Distempers may be complicated 
with the Small-Pox, and other continued 
Fevers and acute Distempers; or from a 
different Constitution of the Air, &c. unusual 
Symtoms may appear; in which cases a 
general Method must not be relied on, but 
recourse must be had to proper Specifics. 
 
I have so little reason to recant what I have 
said concerning the Cure of the Small-Pox 
and Fevers by Acids, that every day's experience 
confirms me in the truth of it: and were 
it not that I design a particular Tract of Fevers, 
I could expatiate here largely concerning 
the reasonableness of my Proceedings. 
 
[}CHAP. II. 
Of the Scurvy.}] 
 
I Now com to treat of the disuse of Alkalies 
in the Scurvy, that reigning Distemper, 
from which few are altogether free; and is by 
most accounted incurable, or at least for the 
most part proves so. 
 
But here I expect the cry of all Mankind against 
me; What! say there is no Acidity in 
the Blood in the Scurvy? What but an Acidity 
in the Blood causes the breaking out of Scabs, 
Pimples, Blotches. &c. on the Skin? What 
but a Sharpness in the Blood occasions those 
[^p.120^] 
wandring Pains, and a thousand other Symtoms of 
which people laboring under this Distemper 
complain? 
 
My Friends, have patience, and I will presently 
make it appear, that those Symtoms are 
not occasion'd by Acids, but by Acrid, Lixivious, 
Alkalious Particles; which I doubt not 
to evince by plain matter of fact. 
 
First of all, by a Chymical Analysis it appears 
that the Blood of Scorbutic Persons has 
a far greater quantity of Volatile Alkalious 
Particles, than that of sound Persons; together 
with som quantity more or less of a Lixivious, 
fixt Alkaly, of which, for as much as 
ever I could find, the Blood of sound Persons 
is altogether destitute. 
 
And by the way let me add this: If Physicians 
would chymically analyze the Blood of 
Persons in all Distempers, and make nice Observations 
of the different substances obtained 
from it, the cause of Distempers would be 
clearly known, and by consequence the cure 
of them much more certain than now it is. 
But that I may return to my business. 
 
Another considerable Argument, besides 
that beforementioned, to prove the Scurvy 
has its rise from Alkalious Substances in the 
Blood, and not from Acids, is this which follows. 
 
I have bin frequently told by som Seamen 
and Surgeons, that have had long Voyages at 
Sea, especially towards China and the Indies, 
[^p.121^] 
that of a hundred Men in a Ship, not two of 
them but have bin almost eaten up with the 
Scurvy, their Skin squalid and full of Blotches, 
their Gums eaten away, and their Teeth 
ready to drop out, Pains and Aches all over 
their Bodies, &c. and yet on their landing at 
Cadiz, or therabouts, where is plenty of Oranges 
and Lemons, and eating large quantities 
of them, in one fortnight's time at farthest 
scarce one has fail'd of being perfectly cur'd. 
This is not a Relation of one or two Persons 
only, but what is generally agreed upon, and 
allowed by all to be Truth. 
 
Tho these moderat Acids plentifully used 
may have such effects in that hot Country, yet 
I have not observ'd that in our cold Climat 
they have always, always I say, the same effect: 
because in slight cases they generally do 
well; yet in more stubborn ones we are forc'd 
to have recourse to more powerful penetrating 
ones. 
 
As for Alkalies, I don't believe ever any one 
was cur'd by 'em of this Distemper; tho I 
have known som that have taken a vast Farrago 
of Testaceous Pouders, &c. without any 
good effect, which afterwards has bin don in a 
little time with a small quantity of proper Acids. 
 
Before I conclude, I shall insert a Preparation 
of Antimony, which I have found of extraordinary 
use in the most inveterat Scurvies. 
 
[^p.122^] 
[}Tinctura Antimonii.}] 
 
+R Flor. Albor. Antimonii unc. octo, 
Spiritus Tartari volatilis lb duas, 
ponantur in Phiola~ vitrea~ forti cum Collo 
oblongo; simul misceantur, & optime~ 
agitantur; postea digerantur leni Calore 
Balnei per dies quatuordecem, tunc decanta 
Spiritum rubro colore tinctum a Floribus. 
Spiritus vero~ tinctus, e Cucurbita~ 
vitrea~ per Alembicum abstrahendus a 
Tinctura~, usq; ad medietatem cum igne 
lenissimo; Tinctura remanens, reservetur 
in Phiola~ cum obturatorio vitreo optime~ 
clausa~. Spiritus, distillatione abstractus, 
potest iterum usurpari in eodem negotio. 
 
[}Spiritus Tartari volatilis Præparatio.}] 
 
+R Tartari Rhenani purissimi lb viginti, colloca 
in Cucurbita~ ferrea~, cui adaptatur 
Alembicum aut ferreum aut cupreum; 
collo Alembici potest applicari Serpens stanneus 
aut cupreus, collocatus in Dolio aqua~ 
frigida~ repleto: Juncturæ ubivis locorum 
rite~ recte~q; sint munitæ cum optimo 
Luto; quando Lutum optime~ siccatur, 
tunc distilla, primo~ igne lento, postea 
fortissimo, & continuatur donec nibil 
ampliu~s elici potest. Spiritus prædictus, 
ab oleo fætido liberatus, potest misceri 
[^p.123^] 
cum libris tribus Capitis Mortui ad albedinem 
calcinati, & ad medietatem usque, 
in Balneo Mariæ abstrahere e~ Cucurbita~ 
vitrea~ per alembicum quorum juncturæ 
sint rite~ munitæ, & suum retinebit calcinatus 
Tartarus Fetorem una cum Phlegmate, 
stillante Spiritus parte solummodo 
puriore & subtiliore; qui denique cum lb 
duabus Capitis Mortui calcinati miscendus, 
& per Alembicum recentem rectificandus. 
Atque hic est Spiritus ille Tartari, cum 
quo prædicta extrahitur Tinctura, & quidem 
non solum hæc, sed etiam cunctorum 
Metallorum aliorum, id quod nullus præstare 
potest alius. 
 
Of the aforesaid Tincture I use to give about 
four, six, eight or ten Drops, according to the 
age and strength of my Patients, Morning and 
Evening, in about half a pint of strong Infusion 
or Decoction on Juniper Berries, without 
any precedent Purgation; this Medicin performing 
that Office where there is occasion: 
it answers every thing generally said of a true 
Panacea, somtimes working by Vomit, somtimes 
by Stool, and somtimes by Urin, but 
mostly by a gentle Diaphoresis or Sweating. 
I once knew it to cause a Salivation, without 
any of the ill Symtoms that usually attend it, 
when rais'd by Mercurial Medicins. Whoever 
has a mind to see more of this Tincture, 
may read Glauber Op. Mineral. Par. Prim. from 
[^p.124^] 
whom I had it, tho I vary somthing from him. 
I have found it of great use, not only in the 
Scurvy, but many other Chronical Distempers, 
as Rheumatisms, Sciaticas, Dropsies, 
etc. and by som few Observations I have made, 
I believe it may do great things even in the 
Gout it self. 
 
That I may excite People to use of this 
noble Medicin, I shall presume to transcribe 
what Glauber declares of it, who I believe has 
said no more than it deserves. 
 
' This noble Tincture of Antimony (says 
' he) above all other Medicins, dos wonderfully 
' evacuate all vitious Humors, and insensibly 
' purify the impure Blood; it opens 
' all Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, Kidneys, 
' and all the other Viscera of a human 
' Body, drawing from them all Malignity, 
' leaving no Impurities there. And because it 
' purifies the Blood, it cures the Leprosy, 
' the French Pox, the Scurvy, and all other 
' Diseases proceeding from the Impurity of the 
' Blood. By its penetrative and attenuating 
' Virtue it resolves all Tartarous Humors, and 
' evacuates those that generat the Gout, and 
' the Stone in the Kidneys and Bladder. 
' But it dissolves not Tartar perfectly coagulated, 
' but only mitigates the pain proceeding 
' from it, and hinders its increase; to wit, attracting 
' and evacuating from all the Viscera 
' both radically and fundamentally that which 
' is not perfectly indurated and coagulated. It 
[^p.125^] 
' takes away all Fevers, and other Distempers 
' proceeding from a superfluity of Humors. 
' It sweetly evacuates Water contain'd between 
' the Skin both by Urin and Stool. In short, 
' it strengthens and purges the principal Parts, 
' and preserves them from all preternatutal Accidents. 
' It is the best Preservative in time 
' of the Plague, and all other contagious Distempers; 
' and to those that are taken with 
' any of them, a most excellent curative Remedy, 
' driving out and evacuating the Malignity. 
' In a few words, it is a universal, 
' and even the best of all Medicins, being most 
' profitable both for Young and Old, as it is also 
' the most safe; but yet with caution to be 
' administer'd, by reason of the most potent 
' Qualities with which it is endow'd, it being 
' as it were a greater Fire extinguishing or 
' swallowing up a lesser. A better Medicin 
' than this certainly cannot be desir'd, which 
' is got out of a mean Subject in a short time, 
' and with very little charge. I ingenuously 
' confess I never saw the like, and I doubt not 
' but it is one of the best of Medicins. Thus 
far Glauber himself, with a great deal more 
worth any Man's reading: Vid. Op. Mineral. 
part. 1. p. 35, 36, &c. 
 
[I confess since I have left off the preparing 
my own Medicins, I could never get this Tincture 
so made as in any measure to answer my 
intentions: nay since I have by large experience 
found the extraordinary use of Cremor Tartar, 
[^p.126^] 
and highly acidulated Tartarum Vitriolatum, 
in these cases I have not bin over anxious about 
it, it being a Medicin of difficult preparation, 
and the others easily to be procured 
at all times, and in all places.] 
 
In Scorbutes attended with Pains, I have frequently 
known the following Tincture of admirable 
use, as I have also don in som sort of 
Gouts, in my Tract of which Distemper I 
have made mention of it. 
 
+R Gum. Guaiaci pul. Unc. duas, 
Succi Liquiritiæ Hispan. in. ten. taleolas 
incis. unc. quatuor. 
Sp. Vini rect. lb unam. 
Infunde clause & calide~ per duos dies, postea decantetur 
Tinct. clara. 
 
The Dose of this Tincture is a Spoonful 
Morning and Evening, either in a Glass of 
warm Ale, or the following Infusion. 
 
+R Rad. Eringii unc. unam. 
Lig. Sassafras Dracm. sex 
Vini Rhenani lb unam 
Aq. Font. lb unam sem. 
Infunde clause~ & calide~ per hor as quatuor, & coletur, 
colatura reservetur ad usum. 
 
In Scorbutical Cases I have also found Cremor 
Tartar and Tartarum Vitriolatum, taken 
for a considerable time, to be of extraordinary 
[^p.127^] 
use. And I verily believe if Cremor Tartar 
alone was given in large quantities to our Seamen 
who go long Voyages, it would in a great 
measure, if not altogether, prevent the many 
Inconveniences that attend them by their Scorbutic 
Habits, which frequently so afflict them, 
that they are made altogether uncapable of 
doing their Business. Nay, I believe it would 
also prevent Calentures, and other fatal Distempers 
that destroy so many of our Men, either 
in long East or West-India Voyages; and 
by its cheapness it seems rather adapted for 
the Necessities of the Poor, than of the Rich. 
But tho it be cheap, yet if we consider but the 
Nobleness of its Extract, that alone is sufficient 
to set a Value upon it: For what is it but 
the essential Salt of the most noble of all vegetable 
Productions, viz. the Juice of the Grape, 
that which rejoices the Heart of Man, and 
makes the Peasant equal with his Lord, and 
the afflicted Man forget his Misery? As for my 
self I had rather be without a great part of the 
Materia Medica, than Cremor Tartar; for considering 
it as a simple Remedy, it is of the 
most universal extent of any thing I know. 
Without doubt it is the finest Purge in Nature 
given in a due quantity, it performing that Office 
without any griping or uneasiness; and in 
a less quantity is a most noble Alterative, it 
strengthning the Stomach, and helping Digestion. 
It allays all violent and unnatural 
Fermentations of the Blood; it is a fine Diuretic. 
[^p.128^] 
To be short, I question whether there be 
any one natural Production now known or in 
use, that in all respects is so adapted to do Mankind 
service as this Medicin is. 
 
I confess it has for many Ages bin in use; 
but how? it has only bin trifled with, being 
given by Grains and Scruples, wheras it 
ought to be by Drams; and even Ounces on 
occasion: and unless it were Angelus Sala, I 
remember none I ever met with that has prescrib'd 
it in large quantities besides my self; 
and I confess I was first excited to it by what 
Angelus Sala said concerning the cure of himself, 
when he labor'd under a most dreadful Colic, 
which had like to have cost him his Life, 
from which he was presently deliver'd by taking 
(as I remember) six Drams of Cremor Tartar. 
The like Effect I have frequently seen of 
it in the most violent Colics imaginable, either 
given in a large quantity at once, or else 
two drams at a time, repeated every two, 
three or four hours, according to the urgency 
of the Case. 
 
Helmont somwhere says, that every Poison 
carries along with it its own Antidote; and 
tho Wine drank in moderat quantities be one 
of the most noble Cordials in Nature, yet the 
drinking of too large quantities causes as many 
Inconveniences as any one thing: nay I believe 
there are more Chronical Diseases occasion'd 
by drinking of Wine and Vinous Liquors 
to excess, than from any thing else. 
[^p.129^] 
Now I believe there is no one thing so adapted 
to prevent the Inconveniences that attend 
hard Drinking, as Cremor Tartar is, which 
is nothing but the Product of Wine it self. 
Nay, it not only prevents the Inconveniences 
of hard Drinking, but for the most part carrys 
off the Diseases already form'd, that are 
caused by it. 
 
[I have within this two or three years given 
som hundred Weights of Cremor Tartar both 
in Chronic and acute Cases, and don't remember 
that I ever observed any in inconvenience by 
it. And for a Purge it is the most delightful 
in the World; none of the purging Salts, about 
which there is now so much Noise made, 
being in the least comparable to it. Nay, I 
am sure that after Ages will thank me for recommending 
so cheap and useful Remedy to 
the World.] 
 
It would take up too much to say all that 
might be of this noble Medicin, and I must 
beg the Reader's Pardon for this Digression in 
saying so much as I have. 
 
Before I conclude, I shall mention one Objection 
more against my Opinion, made to me 
by several, viz. That a more than ordinary 
Saltness is to be perceiv'd in the Blood of Scorbutic 
Persons, and this Saltness they take to be 
an Acidity. But if they would enquire narrowly 
into the matter, instead of finding it to 
be an Acid Saltness, it will appear to be a 
Lixivious, Alkalious one. 
 
[^p.130^] 
[}CHAP. III. 
Of the Gout.}] 
 
I Shall here make only som few Observations 
concerning the Gout, it being Cousin 
German to that of the Scurvy: and by 
what I have seen, I am fully convinced, it is 
not from Acids, as is generally said, that this 
troublesom Distemper is occasioned. 
 
I have observ'd considerable large Nodes, 
in which are somtimes contain'd a hard chalky 
Substance, and of which I have seen large 
quantities extracted, which by many Experiments 
I have found to be as much an Alkaly as 
either Crabs Eyes, Coral, Pearls, &c. which I 
suppose no man will deny. 
 
Now it being granted, that the matter contained 
in the aforesaid Nodes is an Alkaly, 
how it is possible for this Distemper to proceed 
from Acids, when in those very parts 
where the Distemper most violently rages, 
there are produced such large quantities of an 
Alkalious Substance? For if the Distemper 
proceeds from Acids, as 'tis generally agreed, 
the Patient need not clog his Stomach with 
Alkalies, as is usually practis'd, there being 
a Remedy already placed in the part affected: 
And I verily believe, the only reason why this 
[^p.131^] 
Distemper has bin accounted among the Opprobria 
Medicorum, is from their mistaken Notions 
concerning it. 
 
But if Men will still persist to assert that 
this Distemper proceeds from Acids, and at 
the same time own the chalky Substance beforemention'd, 
which is only the Morbific 
Matter indurated, to be an Alkaly, they must 
tacitly believe the Doctrine of Transmutation, 
tho openly they are asham'd to own it, and 
will ridicule those that do. 
 
But this is not all; for suppose the Acid 
Matter causing this Distemper to be transmuted 
into a chalky, alkalious Substance, the 
Distemper must never more pretend to com in 
or near the part where this Substance is lodg'd, 
it being placed as a Sentinel to guard it off: 
Nay, the Blood at times must all, or at least a 
great part of it, pass thro the Part or Parts 
where this chalky Substance is lodg'd, by 
which means one would think it should be sufficiently 
guarded from any more growing Acid; 
and so by consequence, when the chalky 
Nodes are once settled, people have no reason 
for the future to fear the return of their Distemper; 
the contrary to which many honest 
Gentlemen to their sorrows experience. So 
that a man would think these very Nodes alone 
were sufficient, were there no other reasons 
to be given, to satisfy one who is master of 
his Reason, that Acids are not, but Alkalies 
are the cause of this distemper. And if the 
[^p.132^] 
Blood abounds with too many Alkalious Particles, 
the giving of Alkalies must be preposterous, 
it being to add Fuel to the Flame, 
which instead of quenching or extinguishing, 
makes it so much greater. 
 
It may not be amiss to take notice, that 
few are troubled with the Gout, but those 
who drink large quantities of Wine, or som other 
generous Liquors abounding with vinous 
Spirits; so that the Blood and other Juices being 
impregnated with the said vinous Spirits, 
these Spirits meet with the volatil, alkalious 
Salt, of which even the Blood of sound People 
is never destitute; wherby the vinous Spirit 
is coagulated, and turn'd into that substance 
(or somwhat like it) which Helmont calls his 
Offa Alba: which coagulated substance not being 
capable of moving with the Blood and 
Juices thro the small Vessels, causes Obstructions 
and violent Pains, and in time, by the 
addition of other gross, terrestrious Particles, 
the forementioned chalky Substance. 
 
By the foresaid Coagulation of vinous Spirits 
with the volatil Alkaly of the Blood, may a 
very good reason be given for the Generation of 
the Stone in the Bladder and Kidneys: And 
Mr. Boyl tells us (being what Helmont had before 
don) that having obtain'd som Stones of 
a certain Lythotomist, he put 'em into a Retort, 
and expos'd 'em to a strong Fire, and found the 
better half consisted of a volatil, alkalious Salt, 
like that obtainable from Human Blood, and 
[^p.133^] 
a considerable quantity of heavy Oil; so 
that it is plain the Generation of the Stone is 
not from Acids but Alkalies. 
 
From which may be infer'd, that it is not 
from the Acidity of Rhenish Wine that the 
drinking of it is pernicious to Gouty People, 
but from its abounding with spirituous Particles 
more than most other Wines. 
 
I shall here presume to supply a few Omissions 
in my Tract of the Gout, which I doubt 
not will gain more and more Reputation every 
day, the Method there laid down being what 
will generally answer expectation. 
 
I have (pag. 79.) given an account of a Balsam 
of admirable use in taking off the most violent 
and tormenting Pains; which after it has bin 
used som time, will cause little Pimples and 
Blisters on the Part: Now as soon as the Blisters 
are once rose, the use of the Balsam must 
be left off, which I forgot to mention, and not 
be repeated again, till the Blisters or Pimples 
disappear. 
 
The strengthning of the Stomach, and 
helping Digestion, being what generally gos a 
great way in the Cure of Chronical Distempers; 
therefore to people who either labor under 
a Fit of the Gout, or are subject to it, I 
prescribe the constant use of the following 
Digestive Pouder, both while they labor 
under a Fit, and when free from it. 
 
[^p.134^] 
+R Crem. Tartari Dracm. sex, 
Cardamomi Cubebarum, 
Galangæ ana Dracm. duas, 
Sacchari rosati Unc. unam sem. 
M. f. Pul cap. quantum Mucroni Cultri contineri 
potest sæpiu~s in die. 
 
Instead of the Elixir Sulphuris, mentioned 
pag. 90. I frequently give the following Elixir 
Vitrioli, tho the Intentions of both are the 
same. 
 
+R Garriophillor. Piperis nigri, 
ananon contus. Unc. duas. 
Spirit Vini Rect. lb unam. 
digerantur leni calore arenæ, in Vase vitreo optime~ 
clauso per dies septem; tune guttatim instilla 
Ol. Vitrioli optime~ rectisicati Uncias quatuor; 
digerantur iterum per dies septem in ea~dem calore, 
postea decantetur Elixir clara. Dosis est a gut. 
15. ad 20 vel 30. 
 
This Elixir is a noble Stomachic, and of 
admirable use in other Distempers besides the 
Gout. 
 
Tartarum vitriolatum and Cremor Tartari I 
much rely on in the Cure of this Distemper; 
but this ought to be observed, that during the 
Fit they must be given in such quantities as 
will procure the Patient three or four Stools in 
the 24 hours, and no more, at least after the 
[^p.135^] 
the second or third day: But if for the first 
two or three days they occasion more Stools, it 
will rather be an advantage than otherwise. 
Therfore that things may be exactly reguated, 
the Proportions I have prescrib'd must be varied 
according to peoples Constitutions and 
Strength. 
 
When the Pain is not very severe, the Proportion 
of Ol. Vitrioli in the Balsam may be 
less than I have set down, viz. two Drams of 
Ol. Vitrioli to two Ounces of Ol. Olivarum: 
Let them be well mixt together in a glass 
Vessel, till they com to the consistence of a 
Balsam. With this Balsam I have two or three 
times seen somthing extraordinary don in ædematous 
Tumors; as I have also in easing other 
Pains besides that of the Gout. 
 
[It being a year since the second Edition of 
this Essay came abroad, I have now several 
Observations to add to my Tract of the Gout; 
but considering that is also reprinting, I shall 
add no more in this Place.] 
 
[^p.136^] 
[}CHAP. IV. 
Of Rheumatisms.}] 
 
THIS is another Distemper generally said 
to proceed from Acids in the Blood, but 
very falsly, as I hope fully to make appear, 
having had to do with multitudes under this 
Distemper, and thanks to God, with good 
success. 
 
I shall not inquire into the original Causes 
of this Distemper, which are various, that 
being forein to my design; but immediatly 
proceed to the business I have undertaken. 
 
First of all; having by the Fire Analyz'd 
the Blood of Rheumatic Persons, I have 
found it to abound more with Alkalious Particles 
than that of sound Persons, but not the 
least grain of an Acid Substance in it: from 
which alone it may readily be infer'd, That it 
proceeds not from Acids, but from Alkalies. 
 
But it may be objected, From whence proceeds 
that Syziness and Viscosity of the Serum, 
which is observ'd in the Blood of Rheumatic 
Persons, if not from Acids? For we know 
that Milk, which is a sort of Serum of the 
Blood, let it be never so fluid, by the addition 
of any Acid, tho very gentle, a great part of it 
will immediatly coagulat and turn into Curds. 
 
[^p.137^] 
To which I answer, That the foresaid Objection 
is altogether invalid; the Viscousness 
observ'd in the Serum of the Blood, being quite 
different from that of the Curds in Milk: 
tho there are substances contain'd in Milk, fit 
to make both Blood and Serum; but Milk is a 
much more compound Liquor than the Serum 
of the Blood: so the comparison being between 
Subjects vastly different, it is of no weight. 
 
But suppose the comparison good; what agreement 
is there between Curds, and a Substance 
like Gelly? None at all that I know. 
 
But if instead of curdled Milk, they had 
made the comparison between the inviscated 
Serum and Hartshorn Gelly, thay had bin in 
the right; for indeed I know not any two 
Subjects more fit to be compar'd together. 
But then this comparison will not at all prove 
the Inviscation of the Serum to proceed from 
Acid, but from Alkalious Particles; for all 
who know what Hartshorn is, know the reason 
of its making a Gelly, is from its abounding 
with volatil alkalious Salts: and for the 
same reason it is, that Calves Feet, Izing-glass, 
Ivory, &c. make Gellies. 
 
By what I have said, I hope I have freed Acids 
from causing the Viscousness of the Serum 
of the Blood in Rheumatisms; which Viscosity, 
if once taken off, the Distemper immediatly 
vanishes: Yet this is not to be don by 
Alkalies, that ever I could see, tho I have given 
'em in large quantities; but it is expeditiously 
[^p.138^] 
to be don by proper Acids, such as the 
foremention'd Tincture of Antimony, & c. and 
Chalybeats. 
 
But here People will think I am caught in a 
Trap. when I bring in Chalybeats among the 
number of Acids, when generally own'd by 
all to be Alkalies: to confirm the Truth of 
which, they tell you it is manifest, that Filings 
of Iron will make as great an Effervescency 
with all sorts of Acids, as any of the 
Alkalies I have mention'd; therfore I must be 
much in the wrong in reckoning Chalybeats 
among Acids. 
 
From this difficulty I shall endeavor to extricat 
my self, and also to prove, That Iron 
or Steel, till converted into a Vitriol, which all 
will allow to be and Acid, cannot act upon the 
Blood or Serum to cause an alteration in it, 
nor so much as any way to enter into the Veins 
or Arteries. 
 
It is the custom of skilful Practitioners, before 
they give Steel Medicins, to inquire whether 
their Patients are sensible of any Acidity 
in their Stomachs: in which part I allow Acids 
oftentimes to abound, and that exorbitantly. 
If they perceive any Acidity there, 
it is found necessary to give Iron or Steel, 
without any Preparation at all, because by 
means of the Acids in the Stomach it is turn'd 
into a Vitriol, and so made capable of being 
carried into the Blood; wheras in such cases, 
if it has bin before satiared by a precedent 
[^p.139^] 
Preparation, it has little or no effect at all. 
On the other hand, if there be no sensible Acidity 
in the Stomach, Iron or Steel given unprepar'd, 
are carried off by Stool, without 
the least alteration, or any part of it admitted 
into the Blood. 
 
[In Hypocondriacal and Histerical Persons, 
who mostly complain of an Acidity in 
their Stomachs, I have with wonderful success 
given four or five Iron Bullets filed from 
small Rods every day just after Dinner, and 
have ordered the continuance of them somtimes 
for three or four Months; and when all 
other Methods have failed, this has effectually 
taken place.] 
 
All or most of the Preparations of Steel I 
know good for any thing, are perform'd by 
means of Acids, which tend to the dividing 
their parts, and turning them into a Vitriol. 
Now according to the difference of the Acids 
us'd, the result is a different sort of Vitriol, 
which has different operations: But on the 
contrary, Alkalies do so lock up the Body of 
Iron, as to make it unfit to be taken as Medicin, 
because of its extraordinary hardness 
and firmness of Texture. 
 
The Preparations of Steel I generally use 
is that which gos by the name of Dr. Willis, 
and is almost every where to be had; which 
tho grown common, is no despicaple Medicin, 
and is that which follows 
 
[^p.140^] 
Take of filings of Steel, or rather Iron, very 
clean and free from dust, one Pound and half; 
Sal Armoniac two pound: make the Sal Armoniac 
into very fine Pouder; then mix 
them well together in an iron or stone Mortar; 
then put the mixture into a moist 
Cellar, and let it stand a week: Then put 
it into a very large Crucible, which cover 
with a piece of Tile; afterwards put the 
Crucible into a Charcoal Fire, which increase 
by degrees, till the Crucible be almost red hot: 
after it has continued in this state about an hour, 
take away the Fire, and let your calcined matter 
cool by degrees; when cold, take it out of 
the Crucible, and make it into fine Pouder in a 
glass or stone Mortar; then put it into a Bottle 
with a wide mouth, which stop with a glass 
Stopple, and keep in a warm place. 
 
[The Method I use in making that Preparation 
of Steel, known by the name of Dr. Willis, 
is as follows. 
 
Take clean filings of Steel one Pound, Cremor 
Tartar three Pound; mix them well together 
in an Iron Mortar; then put them into an Iron 
or Earthen Pot; pour upon them a Gallon 
of Spring Water, and over a very gentle Fire 
evaporate to the consistence of Hony, stirring 
all the time with an Iron Spatula: afterwards 
add another Gallon of Water, evaporate as before; 
[^p.141^] 
then take it out, and put it upon an Iron 
or Tin Plate: let it stand in a warm place till 
it is perfectly dry; then make it into fine Pouder, 
and keep for use.] 
 
These two Preparations properly given, 
and with convenient Vehicles, I have known 
of great use in som Rheumatisms: and the first, 
when all other Medicins have prov'd ineffectual, 
scarce ever fail'd me in the most inveterat 
Obstructions of the Menses in Women. 
 
Besides the foremention'd Preparations of 
Steel, I have frequently found Cinnaber of Antimony, 
or even common Cinnaber mixt with 
a due proportion of Gum Guaiaci, and given in 
large quantities, to be of great use, not only 
in som confirm'd Rheumatism, but even in 
Sciaticas of long standing, by which alone I 
have known many cured. 
 
I formerly believ'd Cinnaber of Antimony, 
and common Cinnaber to be Alkalies; but 
since I have more nicely inquir'd, I find by a 
peculiar management, a large quantity of an 
acid, sulphureous Spirit may be obtain'd from 
them: [And unless the Mercury, which is a 
main ingredient in the Composition, be accounted 
an Alkaly, there is no such thing to 
be found in it. But for my part, what to make 
of that fugitive Servant of poor Chymists, I 
cannot tell; and must ingenuously own, after 
much Mony and Time spent in inquiring into 
the nature of it, I know no more that what I 
[^p.142^] 
do by its effects, which are somtimes extraordinary, 
if manag'd with discretion.] 
 
Before I conclude this Head, it will not be 
amiss to observe one thing about the Preparation 
of Steel beforemention'd, viz. that while 
it is kept dry, and in a Pouder, it is one of the 
greatest Deoppilatives, or openers of Obstructions 
imaginable: But let it be put in a Cellar, 
and run per deliquium, which it will in a few 
days, 50 or 60 Drops of the said Oil per deliquium, 
given twice a day in a strong Decoction 
of Oak Bark, I have of late found rarely 
to fail in stopping a seminal Flux, which 
all will allow has hitherto bin found as difficult 
as any thing whatever. Som having told me, 
they supposed the Stipticity to proceed from 
the Decoction of Oak Bark only, I purposely 
tried it alone: and tho I own Oak Bark to be a 
noble Stiptic, and to do Wonders, the Decoction 
being taken at the Mouth, and by way of 
Clyster, in common simple Diarrheas, and even 
sometimes in bloody Fluxes; yet in the 
foremention'd case it would do nothing at all: 
but adding som drops of the Oil of Mars to 
the Decoction, it soon had the desir'd effect. 
 
Of late I have bin induc'd to use the following 
Method in the Cure of Rheumatisms, and 
in a great number of Cases it has rarely failed 
me; and where it has failed, I have not had 
the least Temtation to blame the Method or 
Medicins. 
 
[^p.143^] 
+R Tart. Vitriolati Dracm. unam 
Cremor. Tartari Dracm. sex 
Ol. Garrioph. gut. sex 
Sacchari rosati Dracm. tres 
M. f. Pul. in sex Chartulas distribuend. ex quibus 
cap. unam quater in die in Cochlear. Syr. e 
Rubo Idæo, superbibendo haust. Julab. sequentis. 
 
+R Rad. Eringii Unc. duas 
Aq. Font. lb. duas 
Infunde elause~ & calide~ per hor as duas vel tres, & 
coletur; colaturæ adde Vini Rubri Gal. unc. octo 
Syr. de Rubo Idæo unc. tres 
Elix. Vitrioli gut. 40. M. 
 
+R Elix. Vitrioli Dracm. duas 
cap. gut. duodecem in haust. Vini Rub. & 
Aq. Font. ana, p. e. hora~ dimidia~ ante 
prandium. 
 
+R Sp. Vini non Rect. unc. sex, vel octo, vel 
decem. 
Ol. Vitrioli Dul. unc. unam. 
M. f. Mixt. cum qua~ embrocentur Partes affectæ 
mane~ & sero~, superponendo Pannum laneum. 
 
+R Cremor Tart. Dracm. sex 
Cardamomi, Cubebarum, 
Galangæ, ana Drac. duas 
Sacchari Rosati unc. unam semis. 
M. f. Pul. cap. quantum Mucroni Cultri contineri 
potest sæpiu~s in die. 
 
[^p.144^] 
After the Pains are quite gon, I prescribe a 
Steel Course for 3 Weeks or a Month, and during 
that time a continuance of the Elixir of 
Vitriol before dinner, and of the Digestive 
Pouder. 
 
But in this case, as well as in the Gout, the 
quantity of Cremor Tartar and Tartar Vitriolatum 
ought to be such, as to occasion 3 or 4 
Stools in 24 hours, and no more, at least after 
the first day or two; and therfore as peoples 
Strength and Constitutions vary, the quantities 
ought to be lessen'd or increas'd, as occasion 
is. 
 
The Oleum Vitrioli Dul. for the Embrocation 
is as follows; that commonly sold in the Shops, 
which is made by Distillation, being good for 
little or nothing. 
 
+R Ol. Vitrioli opt. rect. 
Sp. Vini Rect. ana p. e. 
Cum cautela~ misceantur, & postea digerantur leni 
Calore arenæ, in Vase vitreo optime~ clauso per dies 
decem, & reservetur ad usum. 
 
[To conclude, and as an addition to this Edition 
of my Essay, I shall make the following 
remarks, being the effects of farther observation. 
 
Rheumatisms, properly so called, may be 
distinguish'd into Acute and Chronic ones. An 
Acute Rheumatism is as much an inflammatory 
[^p.145^] 
Distemper as a Pleurisy or a Peripneumony; but 
by reason the offending Matter is not lodged on 
any of the noble parts, the consequence is not 
so fatal. Now people being ill treated in Acute 
Rheumatisms, their Distemper becoms a 
Chronic habitual one, which perhaps hangs 
upon 'em for many years, with many instances 
of which I have of late met. Now in Acute 
Rheumatisms, I always or mostly use the 
last Method, only omit the Digestive Pouder; 
and somtimes instead of the Embrocation, I 
bathe the Parts with good Elder Vinegar, or 
Vinegar impregnated with other Aromatics; 
and let them drink plentifully of Lemonade, or 
other acidulated Liquors. After the Distemper 
is over, to confirm the Tone of the Parts, 
which can't fail of being debilitated by the 
great pains, I put them into a Steel Course for 
three Weeks or a Month. In Chronic ones, 
where the Blood is sizy, I use the same Method 
with the digestive Pouder; and in neither 
of them scarce ever fail of Success. But 
in Chronic Rheumatisms, where the Blood is 
not sizy, I give the foremention'd Medicins, 
with Gum Guaiaci, & c. where they want Evacuations; 
which, as is elswhere observed, being 
given in due quantities, never fails to prove 
a noble Purge. But where they do not want 
evacuations, I altogether rely on proper Chalybeats, 
suted to the Constitution. This Subject 
alone deserves a particular Treatise; but I 
have already promised so much, that I can't 
[^p.146^] 
think of any such thing, till what I am about 
is finished, which will not be in a short time.] 
 
