[^Tauvry, Daniel: Treatise of medicines^] 
 
[}A 
TREATISE 
OF 
MEDICINES 
CONTAINING 
 
An Account of their Chymical principles, 
the experiments made upon 'em, their 
Various preparations, their Vertues, and 
the modern way of using them. 
 
Together with a short View of the Nature 
and Periods of the Diseases, in which they 
are proper, and some Cautions relating to 
the Disorders they sometimes occasion. 
 
The Medicines are rang'd in their proper Classes 
according to their Vertues, and drawn up in 
Tables for the Readers conveniency, with 
their just Doses annex'd. 
 
Written Originally in French, by M. Tauvry, M. 
D. A Member of the Colledg of Physicians, 
and Fellow of the Royal Society at Paris. 
 
Translated from the last Edition. 
 
LONDON, 
Printed for Richard Wellington, at the Dolphin and 
Crown the West End of St.Paul's-Church-Yard. Arthur 
Bettesworth, at the Red Lyon on London Bridge, 
and Bernard Lintott, at the Cross Keys in St. Martins 
Lane near Long Acre. 1700.}] 
 
[^A preface and a table of contents omitted.^] 
[^Extract 1, pp. 1-30^] 
 
[^p.1^] 
[}A 
TREATISE 
OF 
MEDICINES, 
CONTAINING 
An Explication of their Virtues, and manner 
of Operation.}] 
 
[}CHAP. I. 
Of Medicines in general.}] 
 
MEDICINES are such things as amend 
[/1./] 
the Indisposition of our Bodies. They at 
once preserve and retrieve a healthy State; 
and are not pernicious to Nature: The 
[/2/] 
former Character distinguishes 'em from Food or Victuals, 
as the latter from Poyson. 'Tis true, the agreeable 
Softness of some Medicines, which at once 
remove the offensive Cause, and supply our Bodies with 
Nourishment, do's justly entitle 'em to the Character 
of Nourishing Medicines: And on the other hand, the 
Violence and Coarseness of others, which rifle 
and disorder the parts before they re-instate 'em in 
[^p.2^] 
their natural posture, draws upon them the Imputation 
of Virulent Medicines. However, the distinguishing 
Character of Food or nourishing things is this; 
that they repair our Losses, and furnish us with Parts 
answerable to those that are spent: Whereas that of 
Medicines consists in altering the Dispositions of our 
Bodies to our Advantage. The one supposes an agreeable 
Conformity to our solid and liquid Parts; the 
other displays its Energy in thwarting and opposing 'em. 
The Advantage that accrues by the last, is so far from 
depending on their Conformity to the Parts within us, 
that if they shou'd happen to be melted down into the 
like Form, they would be equally liable to the same 
Disorders. 
 
[/3./] 
Hence we infer, that Mineral Ingredients ought 
not to be branded as pernicious, or excluded from the 
number of Internal Medicines. Tho' their Parts cannot 
be melted down and assimilated to ours, as Food 
is; yet they may serve to alter or expel the Ferments 
that are degenerate from their natural State. Nay, 
Experience will vouch, that some Mineral Preparations, 
especially those of the Evacuating Class, are more 
effectual than any Medicines whatsoever. Thus Mercury, 
Steel, Antimony, and Vitriol, present us with Remedies 
that are not to be match'd in the Vegetable or 
Animal Province. 
 
On the other hand, to do justice to the Vegetable 
[/4./] 
Family, we must needs own, that as the Minerals claim 
a Preference upon the score of Evacuation, so the Plants 
have justly made their Reprisals, by affording more 
powerful Alteratives. Their Principles unite more 
easily with our Blood and Humors, and by consequence 
are admirably fitted for Alterative Designs; as appears 
by the surprising Effects of the Jesuits Bark, Opium, 
&c. without any sensible Evacuation. 
 
But the Alteratives of the Animal Family are yet 
more effectual than those of the Vegetable. Their 
Principles are more of a piece with ours, and easily 
admitted to an intimate Conjunction with our liquid 
Juices. All the Preparations they undergo are not able 
to extinguish their Conformity; to cramp their Alterative 
Capacity; or introduce an evacuating force, to 
which they're generally strangers. Thus the Volatil 
[^p.3^] 
Salts of Animals, Toads, Vipers, Caster, &c. are 
incomparable Remedies for many Diseases. 
 
Medicines are either Simple or Compounded. The 
[/5./] 
former are such as owe their Being to Nature, without 
the assistance of Art. The latter are the Result 
of Artificial Preparations. Some compounded Medicines 
are called simple, upon the comparison with others 
whose Composition is more bulky; as the simple 
Syrup of Succory, the simple Electuary of 
Prunes, &c. 
 
Simples are mightily esteem'd among Physicians; 
[/6./] 
and some are so mis-led by their Merit, as to reject all 
Compositions whatsoever. Their Plea is grounded 
on the friendly Bounty of Nature, which, as they 
pretend, has furnish'd us with simple Specificks for 
every Disease, without entrusting Man's weak Reason 
with the charge of Curing himself. Now, say they, 
'tis is an easier task to discover these Specificks, than to 
invent suitable Preparations. 
 
This Pretext is effectually disprov'd by Experience. 
[/7./] 
We do not find that Nature has provided all things 
necessary for us. On the contrary, it loudly demands 
the assistance of our Reason for prolonging our Lives, 
and rendring 'em more agreeable, by a wise improvement 
of what it affords. Must not Bread, and Wine, 
and a thousand such things be prepar'd and render'd fit 
for use? 'Tis certain, no sensible Person will brand 
these things as useless, unless he have a mind to recall 
the primitive times, when our ancient Grandsires 
drank only Water, and fed on Acorns. 
 
'Tis the Preparation of Bread and Wine that entitles 
[/8./] 
'em to their respective Excellencies. The Corn 
must be converted into Flower, the Flower purg'd 
of its coarse parts, form'd into Paste with hot Water 
and Yest, and then duly fermented and bak'd. If 'tis 
not sufficiently fermented, its Parts being very compact, 
are neither dissolv'd nor digested in the Stomach. 
 
Now as our ordinary Food requires Preparation, 
so Med'cines stand in need of the like Qualification in 
order to facilitate their Passage thro' the Stomach and 
Guts; or at least to promote their Digestion, and prevent 
[^p.4^] 
the Pain and other Inconveniencies they are ap=t= 
to occasion. Of which more Anon. 
 
'Tis sufficient for our present purpose to divide the 
[/9./] 
simple Medicines into Minerals, Vegetables, and Animals. 
The Minerals are properly pieces of Earth 
harden'd or petrify'd by acid Liquors in distinct Lays, 
as appears by their Veins and Joynts. Under this 
Head we comprehend whatever is dug out of the 
Ground, as being near akin to Minerals, and fit for 
medicinal uses. They are rank'd in four Classes; 
the first is allotted to Earths, the second to the oyly 
and sulphureous Juices, whether liquid or congeal'd; 
the third to all the Salts that Seas and Rocks afford; 
and lastly, the fourth to Minerals, properly so call'd; 
which are again subdivided into Stones, Metals, and 
metalline Productions. 
 
The Earths are much diversify'd according as the 
[/10./] 
Air or Water charges 'em with Salts, or as sulphureous 
Particles prevail. Thus some of 'em ferment with 
Acids, as Chalk and Lemnian Earth. Others do not. 
Some will dissolve in Water; others, especially some 
sorts of Clay, and the Earths whose Salts are vitrify'd, 
are uncapable of Solution: Of this last sort are 
Sand, and the like, whose Principles cannot be disengag'd 
or fitted for use. 
 
[/11./] 
Among the liquid oyly Juices there's none more remarkable 
than Petroleum, or Rock-Oyl, which seems 
to be the Basis of all Sulphureous or Bituminous Bodies, 
causing a diversity, according to the measure of its Purity, 
or its Coagulation by different Salts. It 
springs in large quantities from the Rocks of some Islands 
in the Archipelago. When 'tis fix'd by an Acid, 
or mingled with metallick Earths, it becomes Sulphur, 
and is found in the Mines adjacent to the burning 
Mountains. And notwithstanding its being disunited 
from the Marcasite or metalline Veins, by Sublimation 
or Distillation per descensum, yet it will still ferment 
with Aqua fortis; unless its earthy and acid Particles 
be exactly mingled by vertue of a melting Heat, by 
which means 'tis strip'd of the fermenting force, and 
styl'd the common Brimstone. The Bitumens are also 
diversify'd by the Petroleum or Rock-Oyl, according to 
the proportion of its Salts; If it be stinking, black, 
[^p.5^] 
and bitter, 'tis simply call'd Bitumen; if white and 
light, 'tis styl'd Naphtha; its purple Colour christens 
it Asphaltus or Jews Pitch, as being chiefly 
found in a Lake of that name; if it be hard and well 
polish'd, 'tis call'd Jett. Amber it self is nothing else 
but fine Rock Oyl congeal'd by marine Salts; by Distillation 
it yields a clear and stinking Oyl, and a 
volatil Salt that does not ferment with Acids, as being 
(probably) fix'd by the acid of the Sea Salts. If the 
oyly sulphureous and inflammable Bodies be Analytically 
unlock'd to the last degree, they all resemble 
one another, as being equally compos'd of a light 
Earth, Water, and a nitrous volatil Salt. 
 
The third Class presents us with the mineral Salts, 
[/12./] 
which generally consist of an Acid mix'd with earthy 
Particles. Such are common Salt, Sal-Gem, Nitre, 
Allum, Vitriol, the Egyptian Natrum, Sal-Armoniack, 
&c. 
 
Common Salt is at once impregnated with an Alkali 
and an Acid: By vertue of the former it ferments 
with the Spirit of Vitriol; by means of the latter, 
which is more plentiful, its lowermost Crystals ferment 
with the Solution of the fix'd Salt of Tartar. 
 
Sal-Gem seems to possess a larger share of Alkalies, 
by reason that it precipitates the Solution of Sublimat 
Mercury, and Tinctures the Solution of Vitriol with 
a yellow Colour, with which it combines in the 
form of Crystals. 
 
Nitre or Salt-Petre being calcin'd with the Pouder 
of coal becomes a fix'd Alcali; and by Distillation 
yields an acid Spirit. When both these Productions 
are joyn'd together, they revive the Nitre. 'Tis 
drawn by a Lixivium from Earths expos'd for a 
considerable space to the Air; so that it consists of the 
Alkali of Stones, and the volatil Acid of the Air. But 
its fermenting with the Spirit of Vitriol, and agreeable 
mixing with Sal-Armoniac, argue the alliance of 
the volatil Acid to an Alkali. 
 
Rock-Allum is the effect of a strict Union betwixt 
the Alkali of Stones, and a strong Acid like that of 
Sulphur or Vitriol. This account is confirm'd by its 
Chymical Analysis, and the near resemblance of an 
artificial sort, made by pouring the Spirit of Sulphur 
[^p.6^] 
or Vitriol upon Chalk, straining the whole, mixing 
it with Water, and reducing it to Chrystals. 
 
Vitriol is a Composition of metallick Earth, mix'd 
with an acid Spirit like that of Sulphur. The various 
Metals which interchangeably enter into its Composition, 
occasion its Diversity. For the most part it 
partakes of Iron or Copper. There are three sorts of 
it, namely, the white, the green, and the blue. The 
green possesses a large quantity of Iron; the blue has 
more of Copper. 'Tis remark'd that the volatil Spirit 
of Harts-horn do's scarcely disturb the green or 
white, but ferments notably with the Roman Vitriol. 
 
The Egyptian Natrum is a proper Alkali Salt that 
ferments with all sorts of Acids. 'Tis a mixture of Nitre 
and a light Earth; the former being calcin'd by 
the Sun or subterraneous Sulphur. 
 
The natural Sal-Armoniac took its rise from the 
Urines of Animals mix'd with earthy Particles. The 
artificial, now in use, is a composition of Urine, 
Soot, and common Salt. It partakes of an Acid and 
volatil Alkali. Thus any Acid Spirit pour'd upon 
volatil Salts produces a sort of Sal-Armoniac: And the 
acid Spirit of the Air meeting with a fit subject will 
breed the like Composition. Nay, some are induc'd 
by several Experiments to believe, that the principal 
Salt dispers'd through the Air approaches nearer to 
the Nature of Sal-Armoniac, than any other whatsoever. 
 
The difference betwixt fix'd and volatil Salts is occasion'd 
by the variety of their Compositions. Thus 
several volatil things mingled together produce a fix'd 
Body; and on the other hand, volatil Compositions 
spring from fix'd Ingredients. 
 
We proceed to the fourth Class, containing Minerals 
properly so call'd; viz. Stones, Metals, and Marcasites 
or metallick Productions. 
 
Stones are hard unmalleable Bodies, which Water 
[/13./] 
cannot dissolve, nor Fire melt by themselves: so that 
'tis equally difficult to unlock their Frame, or trace 
out their first Principles. However, Reason informs 
us that they are of different Moulds. Some are transparent, 
as Crystal and Diamonds; others present us 
[^p.7^] 
with lively Colours; and the common sort of Stones 
differ from either. Those of a transparent Character 
seem to be form'd of some liquid Matter, for we 
find generally that Transparency cannot be ascrib'd 
to any Bodies, but such as either are or have been liquid: 
Besides, liquid Bodies are only capable of assuming 
regular Forms, as appears by squeezing or 
pinching 'em on any side; and the comparative obscurity 
of some parts of pellucid Stones cannot be otherwise 
accounted for, than by charging it upon the 
foreign Particles that have insinuated themselves during 
their liquid State. 
 
Perhaps 'tis upon this account that Emeralds and 
colour'd Stones are generally found in Silver, Copper, 
or metallick Mines; and Diamonds or Rubies 
oftentimes assume strange Colours. However the 
Rock-Crystal cannot with any likelyhood be said to 
consist of Water thicken'd and frozen up, by the vertue 
of nitrous Salts: For that sort of Crystal is much 
heavier than Water, and is generally bred in hot places. 
And indeed all colour'd Stones are, for the most 
part, heavier than others that are transparent, by reason 
of their mineral Alloy. 
 
However 'tis certain, that Stones afford a great many 
useful Medicines. Lime (which is a Stone calcin'd) furnishes 
us with several effectual Remedies: The Azure 
Stone is an admirable Alkali, which ferments with the 
Spirit of Nitre or Vitriol; and probably upon that account 
was recommended by the Ancients against Hypochondriac 
Distempers. Indeed, I must needs own, that 
some ridiculous effects are attributed to some Stones, 
which are only owing to the Credulity or Disingenuity 
of those that sell 'em. I presume that no one acquainted 
with Physicks, will credit the pretended Efficacy 
of the Eagle Stone, in causing or preventing Abortion 
according as 'tis hung on the Neck or the Thigh; 
or the unaccountable vertue of the Nephritick Stone 
in curing the Gravel. Were these Vertues true, they'd 
be infinitely more wonderful than those of the Loadstone. 
 
A Metal is a sort of malleable Mineral, that melts 
[/14./] 
upon the Fire, but so as to re-assume its former Nature 
and Consistence, after 'tis remov'd from thence. 
[^p.8^] 
Thus 'tis distinguish'd from Antimony, Arsenick, and 
such other Minerals as yield not to the Hammer, and 
when melted lose their primitive Form. We generally 
reckon up seven sorts of Metals, viz. Gold, 
Silver, Copper, Tin, Iron, Lead, and Mercury: 
But Mercury is a Liquor that cannot stand the Test 
of Fire or Anvil; nor is it properly either a Metal or 
Mineral, 'till it be fix'd by Acids, or reduc'd to a natural 
or artificial Cinnabar; in which cases 'tis properly 
styl'd a Mineral. 
 
The Marcasites or mineral Earths, are such Productions 
as partake of some prevailing Metal, interlac'd 
with Stones or Earth. For the most part, their 
Pores are more open than those of Metals. 
 
The various degrees of the wideness of the Pores 
of Metals, occasion a variety in the measure of their 
Fermentation with Acids, tho' at the same time their 
Vertues are not much different. Thus Quicksilver, 
tho' it do's not ferment with the Spirit of Sulphur or 
Vitriol, yet it do's with that of Nitre; not as if it was 
an Acid encountring the nitrous Alkali, that is not 
found in the other Spirits; but because the Spirit of 
Nitre and Sulphur are two different Acids whose Parts 
are unequally dilated, that bear an unequal Proportion 
to its Pores. In like manner, a Vein of Lead 
ferments with the Spirit of Nitre, but not with that 
of Vitriol. And on the other hand Lead it self is 
subject to the Influence of the Spirit of Vitriol, while 
that of Nitre is of no force. The reason of such Accidents 
is this, The Parts of Vein or Mineral are 
more or less dilated than those of the Metal: Perhaps 
the Alloy of foreign Particles, or some peculiar disposition 
in the Parts, occasions their unequal wideness. 
Thus we see there is no necessity of making the one an 
Acid and the other an Alkali, notwithstanding the variety 
of their Fermentations. 
 
The Vegetables, or Plants, are a sort of Substances 
that are fastned in the Earth, rising above its Surface, 
and improving their Growth by the Distillation of a 
Juice within their Fibres. Theophrastus, and almost all 
the Physicians after him, have drawn 'em up into four 
Ranks. The first are Herbs, which shoot forth 
Leaves immediately from the Roots, as Sorrel: The 
[^p.9^] 
second (according to Julius Scaliger) presents us first 
with a Trunk or Stalk, and then with Leaves, as 
Coleworts: The third may be call'd Shrubs, as 
bringing forth hard Branches immediately from the 
Root: The fourth are Trees, or such Plants as first 
send forth from the Root a woody Trunk, and afterwards 
Branches, as an Oak: To these we may add 
a fifth, containing Mushrooms, and coated or round-headed 
Plants. 
 
Although the different Parts of Trees and Herbs 
[/15./] 
are obvious, and universally known; yet by reason 
of their various Uses, we shall not grudge to accommodate 
the Reader with a brief Description of them. 
 
In Plants we observe these Parts; the Root, the 
Stalk or Trunk, the Branches, which before their 
spreading are call'd Buds, and when they grow after 
they're lop'd are styl'd Shoots or young Twigs; besides 
Leaves, Flowers, Fruit, and Seeds; to which 
we may add the Rinds, Wood, Gums, Rosins, Juices, 
Drops, Mistletoes, Mosses, Mushrooms, and Fibres. 
 
Flowers may be distinguish'd from their Foot-stalks, 
Cups, &c. and may be us'd either with or without 
'em; but since variety of Parts has no immediate tendency 
to improve our knowledge of their Vertues, 
we shall take no further notice of their Descriptions, 
nor of the Organs that serve to convey their Nourishment. 
Those who desire to be throughly acquainted 
with these matters, may consult Malphighius, Tourne 
for, and many others. 
 
The Principles and Vertues of all the Parts of a 
Plant, are not always alike. Thus the Roots, Stalks, 
or Trunk of a Plant distill'd thro' a Retort, yield a 
great deal of acid, tho' little or no volatil Salts: 
They likewise afford some volatil Oyl, tho' not near 
so much as the Rinds. The Leaves furnish us with 
volatil Salts and are aromatick Oyls; but the quantity of 
their Acid is much short of that of the Trunk or Roots. 
In like manner, the Juice or soft Parts part with their 
volatil Salts much more readily than the woody Parts, 
which are only the continuation of the Foot-stalks. 
Probably the Principles of the former are more unlock'd 
and dis-united by vertue of the Fermentation, 
[^p.10^] 
and less imbarrass'd by an Acid, than those of the latter. 
 
The Seeds mostly abound with Oyls, and urinous 
and volatil Salts, which sometimes usher in, and sometimes 
follow their acid Spirits. 
 
The watry Fruits are generally charg'd with acid 
Liquors, for the most part void of all volatil or alkaline 
Salts. The Flowers are plentifully stock'd with 
volatil Oyls, and if they're high scented with volatil 
Salts: But at the same time they partake of some acid 
Particles. 
 
The Rosins contain Oyls and acid Particles, as appears 
by Mr. Grew's artificial contrivance of pouring, 
by drops, the Oyl of Vitriol upon the Oyl of Aniseed. 
The Gums seem to consist of Oyly Juices, congeal'd 
by saline or earthy Alkalies. Thus we see, that 'tis 
generally an Alkali that qualifies an Oyl for dissolving 
in Water. 
 
Some Naturalists have thrown some Plants into the 
rank of Animals. The motive they go upon, is the 
Example of the Sensitive Plant, which is an insignificant 
Proof, as also Josephus's fabulous Description of the 
Plant Bara. 
 
Animals are Substances entitled to Motion, either 
[/16./] 
by vertue of the Influence of external Objects, or an 
internal thinking Principle. The Character which 
differences 'em from Plants is this, that they are not 
tedder'd down to one particular place of the Earth; or 
at least, that they enjoy a Liberty of moving some of 
their Parts at pleasure, or as they have occasion. They 
are divided into the rational and irrational kinds. 
The last of the two is drawn up under four Heads; 
namely, the creeping, swimming, four-footed, and 
flying Creatures. 
 
The parts of Animals generally us'd in Physick, are 
the Bones, Flesh, Fat, Marrow, and the principal 
Viscera; the various Excrements, namely, Hair, 
Horns, Claws, Moss, &c. the nourishing Liquors, 
viz. Choler, Blood, Milk, &c. Thus the Lungs of 
a Fox are recommended for the Phthisick, the Guts 
of a Wolf for the Collick, Man's Skull for the Falling-Sickness, 
the Blood of a Goat for the Gravel, the 
[^p.11^] 
Teeth of a wild Boar and the Joints of a Hart for 
the Pleurisie, &c. 
 
Since the various Parts of Animals give different 
Tastes, and require differing measures of Digestion, 
we may reasonably conclude the difference of their 
elementary Principles. Altho' they're all plentifully 
laden with volatil Salts and Oyl, which are embarrass'd 
by very few acid or fix'd Salts, yet they're 
not in all Circumstances equal. The volatil or sulphureous 
Parts, as they're more or less active and disengag'd, 
produce very different Effects; and the 
Phlegm, by its various Capacity for disuniting and 
scattering the Principles, may occasionally highten or 
depress the Sulphur and Salts. 
 
Thus far we have pursu'd the Divisions of Medicines, 
with a greater regard to Curiosity, than to Usefulness. 
Our next Business will be to range 'em according 
to the Qualities and Vertues which render 
'em serviceable. 
 
Galen, and his Votaries, measur'd their Distinctions 
[/17./] 
by the first Qualities, namely, hot, cold, dry and 
moist. These Qualities they threw into a twofold 
State, viz. Actual and Potential: Of the former sort 
is the Heat of Fire, of the latter is that of Pepper. In 
each of these first Qualities they likewise mark'd out 
four Degrees. 
 
The first Degree is allotted to such Medicines as operate 
[/18./] 
but faintly and obscurely. Thus, say they, 
the Flowers of Violets are cold in the first Degree. 
 
In the second Degree their Operation is visible. 
[/19./] 
Thus, in their sense, Lettuce is cold in the second 
Degree. 
 
The third Degree intimates a forcible or violent Operation. 
[/20./] 
Hence Water-Lillies are said to be cold in 
the third Degree. 
 
And lastly, in the fourth Degree their Operation is 
[/21./] 
not only forcible, but in some measure prejudicial. 
As for instance, say they, Opium is cold in the last 
Degree. 
 
To each of these Degrees they assign three Steps 
or Periods; namely, the beginning, the middle, and 
the end. 
 
[^p.12^] 
All the above-mention'd Degrees of Medicines they 
make agree, and correspond with others of the like 
nature in our Temperaments. Thus, according to 
their contrivance, a Remedy cold in the first, will 
heat a Man whose Constitution is cold in the second 
or third Degree. It must be granted, that the contrivance 
of such Ideas is ingenious and entertaining enough; 
but no Man could yet be so happy as to put 
'em in execution. 
 
In order to examin the merits of this Opinion, we 
first make this Remark, namely, that the above-mention'd 
Qualities, viz. cold, hot, dry, and moist, may 
be look'd upon as so many mechanical Dispositions of 
an external Object, fitting it to excite within us the 
sensation of Cold, Heat, Dryness, and Moisture. 
And as they cannot be suppos'd to occasion such Sensations, 
without assigning 'em an influence upon our 
Organs and Liquors; so of course, they must needs 
be useful in Physick. Some of 'em are hot, others 
cold; some dry and solid, others liquid and moist. 
But we ought to remember, that in Physick we only 
mind their intrinsical potential Qualities. Some Medicines, 
tho' they do not directly occasion the Sensation 
of the Qualities they're entitled to, yet they cause such 
Motions in the Liquors of the Body, as are reckon'd 
parallel to those, which the others that are actually 
hot, cold, &c. are wont to present to our Senses. 
Thus we see, that this Opinion is embarrass'd with a 
double Entendre, and in following it we are liable to 
interchangeable mistakes. However, to set it off to 
the best advantage, I grant that the discovery of such 
Medicines as are liable to work up our Humors into 
hot, cold, dry, or moist Dispositions, that is, such as 
promote or retard the motion of the Blood, and assemble 
or disperse its Salts; I say, the discovery of such 
Medicines is a very serviceable Expedient. But, I 
doubt it cannot be compass'd but by Experience. What 
is it that gives me to know that Violets, Lettuce, or Opium 
it self, are cold? Is it not the Experience of their 
Vertue in abating the Heat of Feavers? And upon this 
Supposal is not this consequence, namely, that in Feavers 
such and such Medicines are serviceable to abate 
the Heat of Feavers; I say, is not this Consequence 
[^p.13^] 
more natural and easy than that of Galen's, viz. that 
such and such Medicines are cold? Who can determine, 
that their Efficacy in Feavers is the direct result 
of their cold Quality? Or, how can we range 
all Medicines under these Heads, while we cannot 
single out the cold from the hot, nor the dry from the 
moist? 
 
Upon these accounts, Hippocrates, in his Book de 
[/22./] 
Veteri Medicina, says, That we ought to take our 
Measures from somewhat else, besides the Heat or Cold 
that attend Diseases: For, says he, 'tis neither the 
Heat alone, nor the Cold alone, that makes a Man 
sick; but there are in Man some bitter, some saltish, 
some sweet, some sharp, some tart, and several other 
things which require our particular Consideration. 
Thus the same thing that in one sense is hot, in another 
sense is cooling. 
 
Wherefore we chuse to regulate the divisions of 
[/23./] 
Medicines by their sensible, perceivable, or second 
Qualities: As for instance, some are rough, others 
smooth; some smell very strong, others more agreeably, 
and a third sort give no smell at all; some are bitter, 
some sower, some acid, &c. 
 
The Division may be still carry'd on thus. Some abound 
with spirituous Parts, some with Sulphur, some 
with Salt, some with Phlegm, and some with Earth. 
 
But the most important Divisions are those taken 
from their specifical Qualities; which the Ancients 
styl'd the third and occult Qualities, because they 
fancy'd 'em inexplicable, and found themselves altogether 
oblig'd to Experience or Chance for their Discovery. 
Without their Instruction, says Galen, who 
could have divin'd that Jasper stops Bleeding, and the 
Ashes of Crabs cure Madness? But I shall endeavour 
to make it appear, that tho' the Vertues of some Specificks 
were only discover'd by these means, yet all 
are not subject to the same Fate; and that therefore 
'tis unreasonable to decry the use of Philosophical Reasons 
in Physic, which we find so serviceable in directing 
us to a discreet application of the Medicines already 
known. 
 
[^p.14^] 
[}CHAP. II. 
Of the choice of Medicines, and the way of 
discovering their Vertues.}] 
 
IN treating of Medicines we are to consider the manner 
[/24./] 
of chusing, preparing, and compounding 'em. 
 
The Choice is determin'd by the circumstances of 
the time when they're gather'd, the Country or Place 
they grow in, and their sensible Qualities. 
 
Medicines ought to be gather'd when their Vertue 
is rankest; but the particular Period when that happens, 
is not easily fix'd upon. The Roots seem to be 
equally good at all times, notwithstanding Dioscorides 
his Partiality for the Autumn. The Stalks are best 
when they're come to their full growth, before the 
Plants bring forth Seeds. The Leaves ought to be 
gather'd a short time before their Fall, because then 
their Juice undergoes a sort of Fermentation. The 
Seeds ought to be dry; the Flowers spread; the Fruit 
mellow; and the Juices taken while the Stalk and 
Leaves are breaking forth. Sometimes Medicines are 
alter'd and corrupted by lying too long after they're 
gather'd. In general, Flowers and Leaves cannot last 
above a Year, notwithstanding their being dri'd. The 
Roots, Woods, and Rinds, being of a compact and 
hard Substance, may continue good several Years. In 
the mean while 'tis observable, that the Roots, whose 
Parts are loose and diluted with Moisture, such as Satyrium 
and Asarabacca, will lose their Vertue in a 
Years time: And on the other side, some compact 
Leaves, such as Savin and Cypress Leaves, will hold 
their Strength many Years. 
 
In chusing proper Medicines, we must likewise have 
regard to the Country or Place in which they grow. 
Some Plants are venomous in one Climate, and serviceable 
in another. In Persia an Apricock is Poyson, 
and in Piedmont it self 'tis not wholesome. 'Tis universally 
known and acknowlegd'd, that Herbs growing 
in Fens and marshy Places, or not expos'd to the 
free Air, are not so wholesome as others. 'Twere an 
[^p.15^] 
infinite and useless Labour to recount all the different 
Countries, where the Vertues of Medicines vary. 
For foreign Drugs, we must, in a great measure, refer 
our selves to faithful Druggists. The apparent 
Qualities, namely, the Colour, Taste, Smell, Weight, 
Hardness, and even the Sound of Medicines, are also 
of use to direct us in the Choice: But 'tis impossible 
to comprise 'em within general Rules. We must confide 
in such Authors as have purposely wrote upon that 
Subject. 
 
As for the manner of tracing the Vertues of Medicines, 
[/25./] 
we shall put the case, that a Man, who is altogether 
unacquainted with 'em, would by himself 
try to find out their Qualities. In order to compass 
his end he must have recourse to Reason and Experience, 
seasoning the one with the other. Reason is a 
feeble Instrument, unless supported by Experience. 
And I may safely say, that 'tis impossible to lay open 
the Vertue of any Medicine; without joyning it to other 
things. Our Soul is too narrow and confin'd, to 
reach the knowledge of things by their Causes; since 
'tis only by the Effects that we form any judgment of 
the Causes. 
 
Hence we conclude the necessity of Experience, and 
its happy conjunction with Reason, as being the only 
proper Means for carrying on the Discovery. 'Tis 
chiefly to Experience that we owe the discovery of 
many Purgatives, Narcotics, Febrifuga's, and almost 
all the Specificks. And when we attempt to compass 
that end by Reason, we see our selves frequently disappointed 
in our Expectations. 
 
When we reason upon Experiments we are liable to 
Mistakes; for tho' an approved Remedy may have 
Parts resembling those of another, yet we cannot infer, 
that both of 'em will produce equal effects; for 
so much as their active force is oftentimes lodg'd in the 
distinguishing Particles, and not in the common ones. 
And sometimes a Composition will produce Effects 
quite different from those of its separate Parts. 
 
However, since Experience oftentimes would come 
too late, a Physician is sometimes oblig'd to employ 
his Reason. As for instance, I know that all bitter 
Medicines are proper for killing the Worms; and at 
[^p.16^] 
the same time being in want of the approved Remedies, 
I meet with a bitter Medicine, and conclude that probably 
it may have the same Effects with the known 
Specifics, and therefore give it for the same purpose; 
pecially if I know by other occasions that 'tis innocent 
and safe. 
 
Experience thus join'd to Reason, may display it 
self three ways, 1. By an Analysis. 2. By mingling 
Remedies with the Liquors of our Bodies. 3. By the 
sensible Qualities, styl'd by the Ancients the Second 
Qualities. 
 
The Analysis or Resolution unfolds the Principles of 
the compounded Body. Now Reason and Experience 
teach us, that subtile Parts are apt to put the Blood and 
Humors in motion; that the coarser Parts put a stop 
to their Rapidity; that lixivious Salts hinder the Blood 
to curdle; that acid and essential Salts fix it; and that 
Sulphur tempers and smooths the sharp Particles. Accordingly, 
when the resolution of a Plant gives us to 
understand, that 'tis compounded of such and such 
Particles, we conclude; tho' with no great certainty, 
that it is possess'd of such and such Vertues. 
 
It may be objected; that Fire, in resolving the Body, 
[/26./] 
destroys and transforms most of its Principles; 
that its violence entitles essential Salts to a lixivious 
Character, as it produces 'em in Earths by a violent 
Calcination; and turns Nitre, which is an acid, to a 
fix'd Alkali; it being held upon the Fire a long time, 
and then mix'd with the Powder of Coal. 
 
For answer, I confess 'tis a difficult business to prove 
[/27./] 
that Alkalin Salts are not the effect of Fire, because 
Nature affords none such, excepting Natrum, and all 
the artificial ones are produc'd by a violent Fire. But, 
at the same time, we may reasonably believe that the 
Sea-Salt, Nitre, &c. are certainly Alkalin Salts mingled 
with Acids: because, if we pour the Spirit of 
Salt upon the Salt of Tartar, they present us with a 
true Sea-Salt. Hence we conclude that Alkalin Salts 
are rather the Result of the unfolding of the Body. 
But, granting the Alkalin Salts are the Product of 
the Fire, yet they are still useful Remedies; and besides, 
the same Fire serves to unlock the Acid Salts, 
which cannot be reckon'd its Product. 
 
[^p.17^] 
Nay, supposing the Alkalin Salts were wholly attributed 
to the Fire, there are other Principles behind 
which it claims no right to. Plants are certainly stock'd 
of themselves with Essential Salts; because, if we let 
their Juice stand in a Cold place, we meet with an Essential 
Salt sticking to the Sides of the Vessel in small 
Crystals; and Almonds, Nuts, &c. are visibly possess'd 
of an Oyl that may be extracted without Fire. 
 
Others endeavour to lessen the Credit of the Analysis, 
[/28./] 
by alledging, That the Principles of the Jesuit's 
Bark, Opium, Senna, &c. disunited by Fire, are strip'd 
of the Vertues of their Respective Originals. Those 
of the Bark, say they, are of no use in Fevers, those 
of Opium are not Narcotic, and those of Senna do not 
Purge. 
 
For Answer. I own, the Vertue of several Medicines 
[/29./] 
is owing to the Conjunction of their Principles: 
But there are others, whose Vertues are lodg'd 
only in one Principle. And therefore, having observ'd 
that Odoriferous Plants yield much Sulphur, and that 
some Parts of Animals afford large Quantities of Volatil 
Salts, I would conclude, (upon these single Principles) 
That they promote the Insensible Transpiration. 
But in judging of those Medicines, whose Vertues 
depend on the Mixture of their Principles, our Reason 
must help out our Senses. Thus I would Reason of 
Opium; That is compounded of a Rosinous and 
Spirituous, mix'd with an Earthy and Gummy Part; 
That the latter being buoy'd up by the former, fixes 
and arrests the Spirits, interrupts their Motion, and 
perhaps stops some Branches of the Nerves of the 
Brain. Now the Gummy Particles taken apart cannot 
bear up to the Spirits; and, on the other hand, 
the Spirituous Particles in a Separate State are not capable 
to fix 'em; and, by consequence the Separate 
Parts cannot enjoy the Vertue that attends the Composure. 
'Tis true indeed, we cannot alledge such 
Particular Reasons for the Failure of the Principles 
of Purgatives and Febrifuga's; but tho' the Analysis 
should be lame on that score, it ought not to be 
totally rejected as useless. 
 
[^p.18^] 
The Third Objection against the use of Resolutions 
[/30./] 
is this. Some parts of the Vessel will necessarily mix 
with the Dissolv'd Medicine, and so Adulterate its 
Principles. 
 
I Answer, The number of the Particles flying 
[/31./] 
from an Earthen or Glass Vessel is so small, that it cannot 
alter the Vertue of the Medicine. 'Tis true, that 
a Vessel of Copper, or of any acid Metal, may introduce 
a Foreign and Noxious Tincture; but, if due 
Precaution is us'd, that may be prevented. 
 
[}CHAP. III 
An Enquiry into the other Ways of Discovering 
the Vertues of Med'cines.}] 
 
THE Analysis or Resolution, which is the first way 
of joyning Reason to Experience, does not unfold 
all the Principles of the mix'd Bodies: For there are 
still some behind that neither Taste, Smell, nor Consistence 
can discover. To bring these hidden Principles 
to Light, and render 'em sensible, several Expedients 
have been contriv'd, and frequently put in Execution 
by our Royal Society. 
 
The first Remark to this purpose is this. Acids make 
the Solution of Turnesel grow red: 'Tis an Observation 
that always holds. And if any Liquor gives it a 
light Tincture, while the Taste is faint and obscure; 
'tis observable that afterwards as the Taste improves, 
so the Colour is heighten'd. 
 
The Second is this. Volatil Salts give a white Colour 
to the Solution of the Sublimate Corrosive, whereas 
fix'd Alkali's make it yellowish or reddish. They 
mortifie the Acid by which the Mercury was dissolv'd, 
and cause various Precipitations, and sometimes Coagulations, 
according to the different Force and Spirits 
of the Salts imploy'd for that purpose. 
 
[^p.19^] 
The Third runs thus: Saline Salts, that is, such 
as are near akin to Sea-salt, make the Solution of 
the Sugar of Lead White. There are many Distill'd 
Waters which cannot produce that Effect, tho' at 
the same time they weaken the force of the Vinegar 
as effectually as common Water. And yet common 
Water, by reason of the small quantity of Sea-salt 
contain'd in it, will give the White Colour. And upon 
the same account Well-water whitens more effectually 
than that of a Pool. 
 
To these we joyn a Fourth; namely, That mix'd 
Salts give a reddish Colour to the Solution of German 
Vitriol. 
 
Our next business will be to touch upon such Experiments 
as result from the mixture of Remedies 
with Blood, Lymph, Gall, or Milk. 
 
In the First place, it affords us this Rule; viz. 
[/32./] 
That fix'd Alkalin Salts dissolve and put in motion all 
the Liquors of our Body, and that Acid Salts cramp 
and disturb their motion. The former dis-unite and 
set a float the Sulphurous parts, with which all our 
Humours are richly Stock'd; and perhaps are the 
better qualify'd for that Office, for the Fire lock'd up 
within 'em. On the contrary, the Acid Salts gather 
and unite the Sulphurous Clots, and so Embarrass 
the Passages, and put a stop to the Motion. 
 
The Volatil Salts and Spirituous Particles of Medicines 
[/33./] 
are apt to put the Liquors in Motion; by reason 
of their own propensity to move, and the fermentation 
they raise among the coarse Particles. Coarse 
Sulphureous Medicines clogg the Humours, but subtile 
Sulphurs being easily agitated by the Spirituous parts 
are apt to promote their Motion. 
 
Some disaprove of this Method of mixing Medicines 
[/34./] 
with Liquors of Animals, by objecting, that Liquors 
taken from the Body are not in the same Condition 
as when they were actually part of it. Thus, say they, 
the Spirit of Wine, which is a subtile Sulphur, quickens 
the Motion of the Blood and Humours of Living Persons; 
but after Death it congeals the Blood, Lymph 
and Gall. In like manner, continue they, both it 
[^p.20^] 
and other Medicines will produce different, nay contrary, 
Effects upon the same Liquor, with respect to 
its different State, as being within the Body, or taken 
from it. 
 
For Answer. I Grant that Medicines influence the 
[/35./] 
Humours of Living Persons, at a different rate 
from those of the Dead: But still this their various influence 
may furnish us with useful Experiments. Besides, 
Oyl of Vitriol do's equally fix the Blood and 
Liquors of Living and Dead Animals. And as for 
Spirit of Wine, it fixes the Blood and Bile indirectly, 
by carrying their Motion too high, and so consuming 
their subtile Particles, and giving the Acid 
of the Air an easie admission. Moreover, 'tis probable, 
that Spirit of Wine may contain an Acid. Mr. Tournefor 
shew'd me the Experiment of its making Blew 
Paper Red, while 'twas a drying, that is, while its 
volatil Oyl dispersed it self. 
 
A Second Objection may be form'd thus. The same 
[/36./] 
Juices within our Bodies give different Impressions to 
the Venous and Arterious Blood. 
 
I Answer, The Consequence is naught: Medicines 
[/37./] 
are alter'd in our Mouth and Stomach, and therefore 
their Operation within the Body cannot in every 
respect be a just Precedent for what they produce 
without it. Besides, we have no occasion to 
trouble our selves about their influence upon the Arterious 
Blood; since their first reception is in the 
Veins. 
 
Having thus obviated the Objections that might 
discountenance the Undertaking, I proceed to make 
some Essay. The Influence of the Principles of Medicines 
upon the Blood, Lymph Choler, &c. being 
already hinted at; my business at present shall be 
confin'd to the compounded mix'd Bodies. 
 
Those which abound with Volatil parts, such as 
Sage, Mint, Baum, &c. afford us Juices, that being 
mix'd with Blood or Milk, occasion no change whatsoever, 
but continue their Fluidity. 
 
Plants richly indow'd with Essential and Acid Salts, 
such as Sorrel, Woodsorrel, Juice of Citrons, &c. Fix 
[^p.21^] 
Gall, Lymph, Blood and Milk, and separate the 
Whey from the Curd of the latter two. 
 
Plants furnished with fix'd and Acid Salts loaded 
with gross Sulphur, such as Wolfs-bane, Crowfoot, 
&c. present us with Juices, that sink the Natural Consistence 
and Colour of Blood, and invest it with new 
ones. 
 
Medicines containing Acids hem'd in by Alkali Salts, 
do not fix Blood, Milk, nor Gall. Thus Nitre, Sea-salt, 
&c. serve to preserve their Liquidity, and prevent 
the separation of their Principles. For all these 
Liquors are composed of Phlegm and Oyl, which never 
combine together without the Interposal of Salts. 
Just as Water will not mix with Oyl, without some Salt 
be added to it. No wonder then, that the Salts 
keeping the Principles at due distance, preserve their 
liquid State. Perhaps, some may deny that Nitre, 
Sea-salt, Sal Armoniac, &c. are a mixture of Acid 
and Alkalin Salts; as if the latter were only the product 
of Fire. But the artificial Composition of Salts 
of that Nature makes good the Assertion. Since the 
Acid Spirit of Nitre mix'd with the Alkalin Salt of 
Tartar, becomes a true Nitre; and the Spirit of Salt 
mix'd with the same Alkali yields Sea-salt; now these are 
plainly compounded of Acids and Alkali's. 
 
We are now come up to the second Qualities, which, 
as I intimated before, are serviceable to point out the 
Vertues of Medicines. 'Tis true, the Weight or Lightness, 
Hardness or Softness, are of no great use. But 
the Taste or Smell are very serviceable to this purpose. 
 
The various Tastes, whether Bitter, Soure, Sharp, 
Saltish, Urinous, Sulphurous, Oily, &c. I say these 
various Tastes direct us how to rank Medicines into 
several Classes. Reason informs me at first veiw, 
That insipid and Oily Medicines can only Sweeten 
and Moderate the Acrimony and irregular motions 
of our Humours. Here I conclude Oyl is proper for 
Indispositions where Smoothness and Temper is wanting; 
The Cold Seeds are proper where Humours 
require to be qualify'd and thicken'd. All other 
[^p.22^] 
Tastes are the Product of Salts. The Acid 
springs from Essential Salts, the tart and sharp from 
Alkali's; the saltish Taste partakes of both; and 
the bitter has more of the last. Thus we may reasonably 
account for the several Properties of different 
Tastes. 
 
The Sense of Smelling furnishes us with several useful 
Discoveries relating to the Vertues of Plants. By 
it we discern, if the Medicine be laden with Sulphur, 
whether Volatile, or Earthly. Thus we are taught, 
that all Odoriferous things are good for the Brain and 
Nerves; because they are largely stor'd with a volatil 
Sulphur, capable to overtake and fix the volatil Salts 
that unrip their Texture. 
 
The Superficial Appearance of Plants affords no 
solid Instruction. For several Plants of the same Colour 
have different Vertues. Nay, the Colour of the 
Juices is also fallacious. Thus Scammony and Poppies 
yield White Juices; and yet the former promotes, 
and the latter hinders Purgation. 
 
Those who are in any measure acquainted with 
Physicks will easily perceive, that the External view 
of a Plant is no Rule for its Vertues. 'Tis true, Liverwort, 
Lungwort, and Woodsorrel, bear the Image of 
the Parts that profit by their Vertues; but 'tis well 
known there are others more beneficial to the same 
parts, that carry no External Resemblance of 'em. 
 
[^p.23^] 
[}CHAP.IV. 
Of the Analysis, or Resolution of Medicines.}] 
 
IN Order to the Analysis, or unfolding of the Principles 
of any mix'd Body, we put it into an Earthen 
or Glass Retort, fitted to a Recipient. At first we 
give it a gentle Fire, so that it scarce feels Hot, 
This Fire we continue till it give over running, and 
reserve the Liquor apart. Afterwards we Augment 
the Fire several times, and shift, or empty the Receiver 
upon every Augmentation. When the Fire is 
heighten'd to the last Degree, and the running is over, 
we take the Remainder out of the Retort, Calcine it 
into Ashes, and by a Lixivium and Filtration Extract 
a Salt. 
 
Generally we fetch five Principles from all Bodies; 
some of which are Active, some Passive. 
 
The Active are these three. The Spirit, the Sulphur 
or Oyl, and the Salt. The Passive are two. 
Namely, the Caput mortuum, and Phlegm. 
 
The Spirit, if it be very Volatil, comes first over: 
But if fix'd, it follows the Phlegm. Properly speaking, 
the volatil Spirits are but a Solution of volatil 
Salts in a small quantity of Phlegm. The Acid Spirits 
are a Solution of Acid Salts in the same Liquor. 
The hot burning Spirits are a mixture of Sulphur 
and very volatil Acids in a little Phlegm. 
 
The volatil Sulphur follows the Spirits, and the 
coarser sort comes next to the volatil Salts. By Sulphur 
we mean all the hooking, entangling parts of 
the mix'd Body, especially such as flame upon the 
Fire. They are fix'd and assembled by Acid, and 
rarify'd and dis-united by Lixivious Salts. 
 
Besides this volatil and coarse Sulphur, we meet 
with another sort call'd Ardent Spirits, that are so Incorporated 
[^p.24^] 
with the Salts and Phlegm, that they mix 
easily with watery Liquors. They are call'd Ardent 
Spirits, and consist of a coarse Sulphur exalted by the 
Fermentation which the Juice underwent. 
 
All Sulphurs, whether volatil or fix'd, are reducible 
to a light Earth, Phlegm, and Salt. Thus we see 
'tis only the different ranging of the Principles that 
causes their variety. If we repeat the Distillation of 
common Water upon Fœtid Oyls, the Oyl loses 
much of its stink, and somewhat of the weight; 
and the Water is Tinctur'd with a volatil Alkali, 
as appears by its whitening the Solution of Sublimate 
Corrosive. 
 
We may reasonably Conjecture that the Aromatick, 
or Express'd Oyls are plentifully stor'd with 
Acid Salts. For we find that when they're put into 
Digestion with volatil Salts, and the volatil Salts are 
afterwards sublim'd, they're strip'd of their noysome 
Smell. Besides, they melt difficultly in the Air, and 
so do Oyls mix'd with Acid Spirits. 
 
There are three sorts of Salts. Namely, the Essential, 
Lixivious, and Volatil kinds. 
 
The Essential is taken from the express'd Juice of 
the Plant, Purify'd, and set in a Cellar to run into 
Crystals. 
 
The Lixivious is Extracted by burning the Plant, 
making a Lye with its Ashes, then Filtrating, and 
gradually Evaporating the same. There are Two 
kinds of 'em. The First is simply call'd Lixivious. 
It Tastes like Salt of Tartar, melts in the Air, and 
makes a Yellow, or Red Precipitat of the Solution 
of Mercury. The other sort are call'd Saltish. They 
leave a Mucilage in the Lye while it Evaporates, they 
melt with difficulty in the Air, and have no precipitating 
Influence upon the Solution of Sublimat Corrosive. 
In Taste they resemble Sea-salt. Some of 
'em indeed incline to an Acid Taste. Such is the 
Acid Salt of Swallow-wort. 
 
'Tis a common Observation, that the first Crystals 
of saltish Salts approach to the Nature of Alkali's; 
but the latter are quite Acid, and accordingly 
[^p.25^] 
congeal the Oyl of Tartar. Whereas the first 
Crystals of simple Lixivious Salts partake less of the Alkali, 
and scarce disturb the Solution of Sublimat Corrosive; 
but the latter are remarkable for the contrary 
Effect. 
 
The Volatil Salts are rais'd by Distillation. They 
fasten upon the Neck of the Vessel, especially if it be 
large. We draw large quantities of 'em from the parts 
of Animals. 
 
Volatil Salts are of two sorts. The one are simply 
so call'd, and partake of a Volatil Sulphur. They render 
the Solution of the Sublimat muddy. They ferment 
with Acids; and, in a word, are plain Alkali's. 
 
The other may be styl'd Saltish Volatil Salts. They 
are impregnated with an Acid, and ferment with nothing 
of that Nature. They do not melt in the Air, 
nor is their Taste so unpleasant as that of the sulphureous 
kind. I take the Volatil Salt of Amber to be of 
this sort. 
 
The Phlegm has no Vertue beyond that of common 
Water, and therefore is commonly thrown away as useless. 
It serves only for a Vehicle to the other dissolv'd 
Principles. And when the Salts are dissolv'd in it, 
enforces their Operation. Hence the common Saying; 
Salia non agunt, nisi dissoluta. For Salts are a sort 
of keen Particles, that work most effectually when 
put into Motion by the Phlegm: But at the same time 
their Parts must not be over-diluted and dis-joyn'd in 
the Watry Vehicle, otherwise their Force is impair'd. 
 
The Caput Mortuum is not entitled to any Active 
Force, as being only a Porous Substance dispossess'd of 
the Principles it formerly contain'd. 
 
The above-mention'd Principles are not met with 
in Metals, nor in some Minerals. As for the Salts 
attributed to Lead, Steel, Pearl, and Coral; they're 
only some Foreign Acid Salts that have congeal'd 
some parts of the respective Substance; and these Parts 
may be re-instated in their Natural Condition, by expelling 
the Foreign Intruder that disguis'd 'em. 
 
[^p.26^] 
Seeds and Juices scarce afford any Volatil Salt or Ardent 
Spirit, unless they be fermented. And hence we 
draw a convincing Proof, That Volatil Salts of Plants 
are not the Product of Fire, since the strongest Fire 
imaginable can fetch none from their Seeds or Fruits, 
unless fermented. Nay, Fire cannot Volatilize or Fix 
an Essential Salt, without Fermentation be included 
under that Name, as being a sort of Ignis Mollis, or 
the Natural Fire employ'd by Nature to exalt the Salts 
and Sulphur of our Humours. Besides, there are some 
Volatil Salts drawn from Plants by Vertue of Fermentation 
alone without Fire, such as that of Woad. 
 
As for Alkali Salts, the following Experiment will 
evince that they do not owe their Being to Fire. 'Twas 
communicated to the College of Physicians at Paris, by 
Dr. Vieussens at Montpelier. 
 
Take Fifty Pounds of Man's Blood, Dry and Calcine 
it in a Potter's Oven, during the space of 24 Hours, 
and there will remain about Three Ounces, Seven 
Drams, of an Alkalin Powder that ferments with Acids, 
and gives a green Tincture to the Tincture of Mallows, 
or any other Sulphureous Liquor. By a Lixivium ye 
may extract from it an Ounce of White Fix'd Salt that 
ferments with all Acids, precipitates the Sublimate 
Corrosive, and tinctures the Syrup of Violets with a 
green Colour. The Author says, He took of it Seven 
Drams and Forty Two Grains, and mix'd 'em with 
three Ounces of the Dryest Bole Armoniac. From 
this Mixture on a Reverberatory Fire he drew half an 
Ounce and eighteen Grains of a Spirit, in Colour resembling 
that of Sulphur, and in Taste surpassing the Acidity 
of the Spirit of Vinegar. This Spirit, he says, 
fermented with the Oyl and Fix'd Salt of Tartar, and 
likewise with the Fix'd and Volatil Salts, and with reddish 
Spirit of Blood; it Tinctur'd the Syrup of Violets 
and Turnesel, and the Tincture of Mallows, with a 
red Colour. From hence he concludes the Salt of the 
Blood to be a Saltish Salt partaking both of Sharpness 
and Acidity. He adds, That from what remain'd in 
the Retort, he extracted by a Lixivium two Drams and 
a half of a greyish white Fix'd Salt, which fermented 
[^p.27^] 
with no Acids, except the Oyl of Vitriol; but precipitated 
the Sublimat Corrosive, and gave a green Colour 
to Sulphureous Tinctures. 
 
Now this Experiment is a Convincing Proof, That 
the Fire is so far from turning Acid or Saline Salts into 
Alkali's, that it frequently disingages the Acid from the 
Alkali, or rather produces an Acid, which presents us 
with Effects equal to those of the most violent Acids. 
Thus Mercury, calcin'd by different Sublimations by 
it self in a close Philosophical Vessel, becomes a red 
Powder, in Colour, Taste, and all other Effects, resembling 
the common red Precipitat. Wherefore I 
suspect that these long Calcinations alter the Body of 
the Mercury; that is, That the Fire furnishes the Acid 
that joyns the Calcin'd Matter: And upon that 
Account Mr. Vieussens his Experiment does not prove 
that the Acid was formerly existent in the Blood. Besides, 
the Consequences he fetches from his Experiment 
may likewise be call'd in question upon this score, 
namely, That so large a quantity of Blood as he orders 
to be calcin'd, must needs contain a great deal of 
Sea Salt; which, all the World owns, does not change 
in our Bodies. Now this being a Fix'd Salt might remain 
last in the Calcin'd Blood, and be the Author of 
the Acid he extracted with the Bole Armoniac; much 
after the same manner as Common Salt mix'd with 
Bole Armoniac in a Retort yields a Spirit of Salt. 
 
To conclude. It may be further replied, That during 
the Calcination the Acid of the Air might incorporate 
with the tart Alkali of the Blood; especially 
considering that 'twas calcin'd with an open Fire; just as 
several Plants yield Saltish Salts by Calcination, which 
cannot be obtain'd by Distilling through a Retort. 
However, the Experiment does certainly make it out, 
that the Fire has no better Title to the Production of 
Alcali's, than of Acids. Which, I take it, is a Material 
Point. 
 
[^p.28^] 
[}CHAP. V. 
Of Tastes. Particularly of Insipid, Unctuous, 
Nitrous, and Bitter Medicines.}] 
 
HAving explain'd the Method of discovering the 
Vertue of Med'cines by Resolution, Experiments, 
and the Second Qualities; it remains now to apply it 
to Practice. I begin with Tastes. 
 
Doubtless Tasting is the Sentiment of our Souls, determin'd 
by Objects tickling the Fibres of the Tongue. 
These Objects, by the Variety of the ir Impressions, 
cause different Sensations; and, as the peculiar Configurations 
qualifying every Object to its respective Impressions, 
are not easily distinguish'd; so the difference of our 
Sensations is equally obscure; wherefore we are oblig'd 
to confound several different Tastes under one 
Name. As for Instance, The Sweetness of new Wine, 
Milk, Sugar, Honey, Oranges, Melons, Fruits, and 
Spanish Wine, is not altogether the same: Neither is 
the Bitterness of Beer, Coloquintida, Aloes, Wormwood, 
and Apricock-stones, all of a piece; yet we are 
under a Necessity of Confining all these different Sensations 
to One General Term, in order to avoid the Confusion 
of Equivocal Words, and the Inconvenience of 
departing from Customary Expressions. 
 
On the other side, the Particular Configuration and 
Motion of the Parts of the Objects is also guarded off 
by unsurmountable Difficulties. The Spirit of Nitre, 
which is a Corrosive Acid, after dissolving Silver, gives 
bitter Crystals; and the same Acid Spirit, when it has 
dissolv'd Lead, gives a very sweet Salt. Now Lead 
and Silver are equally insipid; and 'tis a hard matter 
to tell how their Principles produce such different Effects. 
If we take the Crystals of Silver, pour Pickle 
upon 'em, then dry 'em; and when they're cold, melt 
'em on the Fire; they become insipid, tho' formerly 
[^p.29^] 
very bitter and salt, and almost tart. Nitre has scarce 
any Taste, yet by Distillation it yields a very Acid Spirit, 
and by Calcination with the Powder of Coal 
presents us with a tart sharp Salt like Salt of Tartar. 
Sugar and Honey distill'd produce extream Acid Spirits. 
The Spirit of Nitre digested with Spirit of Wine, 
the one being a violent Acid, and the other very hot, 
they become a sweet Aromatical Liquor, known by the 
Name of the Spirit of Nitre dulcify'd. Gold dissolv'd 
in Aqua Regia tastes just like an unripe Sloe. Crabs 
Eyes destroy the Acidity of Vinegar, and become a Saline 
Concrete, &c. However, we must endeavour to 
penetrate as far as possible into the Structure of Bodies, 
in order to discover what we can. The principal Heads 
of such Mixtures as give different Tastes, are these 
following: Insipid, Nitrous, Bitter, Aromatick, Urinous, 
Saline, Lixivious-Tart, Wine-tasted, Sweet, Sour, 
Crabbed, Sulphureous, and Oyly. 
 
Insipid things are such, whose Parts are not Fine 
enough to make any particular Impression, or too pliable 
to effect any Motion upon the Fibres of the Tongue. 
Thus Marble, Stones, Glass, and all other Bodies that 
have compact Parts, not to be dis-joyn'd by the Spittle, 
are uncapable of moving the Tongue to any Sense 
of Taste. Water also is in the same Condition, as having 
movable and incoherent Parts, which are not stiff 
and steady enough to determine the Fibres to a suitable 
Motion. Nay, the Volatil Salts, if they be very fine 
and unmix'd, will give no Taste to Water, provided they 
be mix'd in moderate Quantities. This is made out by 
several Distill'd Waters, which are down-right tastless, 
and yet turn the Solution of Sublimat Corrosive to a 
white Colour. Mr. Clos, a Member of the Royal Society, 
distill'd with a slow Fire, from the Flowers of 
Earth, an insipid Water that makes the Solution of 
the Sublimate white, and precipitates Silver dissolv'd 
in Aqua Fortis. By the Flowers of Earth, we mean the 
greenish Slime that the Earth casts forth in untill'd Places 
after Equinoctial Rains. 
 
Unctuous Bodies are not apt to make lively Impressions 
upon the Tongue, because their keen and piercing 
[^p.30^] 
Particles are embarrass'd by others of a soft yielding 
Nature. However, if they be held long enough upon 
the Tongue, they make a distinct Sensation; their Saline 
Principles being dissolv'd by Heat and Spittle, notwithstanding 
their Confinement, exert a sort of Active 
Force. 'Tis true indeed, they are generally pretty 
fix'd, and unless joyn'd to Aromatick Ingredients, 
are somewhat lazy. Their Energy depends upon the 
Oyl with which they abound, and therefore they are 
us'd for mitigating Pain, unbending the Fibres, and 
qualifying sharp or acid Particles. This Taste is found 
in stale Filberds and sweet Almonds, and Oyls drawn 
from 'em. 
 
A Nitrous Taste stands half way betwixt a perfect 
Tastelesness, and a gentle Bitterness. It leaves a piercing 
Sense of Cold upon the Tongue, and is particularly 
attributed to Nitre, Snow, Well-water, and in some 
measure to Colewort Leaves. Nitre spreads its Taste 
over all the Liquors 'tis mix'd with, by vertue of long 
fine Parts like Needles, consisting of a Mixture of Acids 
and Alkali's. The Points of the Acids are cover'd by 
the Alkali's, and produce blunt Cylinders, that are 
not keen enough to dive deep into the Furrows of the 
Tongue. Bodies indow'd with this Taste, ought to inherit 
the Qualities of Nitre, and the other penetrating 
mixt Salts. However, they seem to partake more of 
the Volatil Acid than the Fix'd Alkali; because they 
provoke Urine, promote Digestion, quench Thirst, and 
quell the Fermentations of the Blood, which they could 
not compass without recalling and keeping under the 
exalted Sulphureous Parts. Upon this Account they 
are very serviceable in continual Fevers, and Inflammations 
of the Internal Parts. 
 
