

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ1_v2_0043^]

|P_43
[}VI. An Enquiry into the natural History and 
medical Uses of several mineral Steel Wa- 
ters; by Dr. Alexr. Thomson Physician at 
Montrose. }]
STeel Spaws are every where so frequent in 
this Part of Scotland where I live, that to 
imagine them impregnated with Iron in Sub- 
stance, were to conceive the whole Country in 
one Mine, for, Excess and Defect computed, 
there may be reckoned at least one for every 
Parish. 

The Soils out of which these mineral Springs 
rise are various: That near to Aberbrothock is 
in the ordinary poorer sort of the Soil of this 
Country, the upper Stratum being a gravelly 
|P_44
Clay, below which there is another of Pebble 
Stories intermixed with Sand; under this there 
is Sand and Gravel mixed. The Well is in 
the lower Part of a Den or hollow Ground, ha- 
ving a Rivulet running by at the Distance of a- 
bout fifty or sixty Paces. The Side of the Ri- 
vulet opposite to the Well is bounded by a gra- 
velly Rock, betwixt the Layers whereof there 
ouzes clear Water dropping over Sleeks [/1./]
suspended thereat; and at the Top of the Rock 
there is a small Well of good Fountain Water. 
I evaporated the Water from these Sleeks by 
the Heat of the Sun, and nothing remained 
but a grey Powder, as of ordinary Clay. A- 
bout three of four hundred Paces above the 
Well, and on the same Side of the Rivulet, 
there is another Spring of common Water; 
but there are no more Rocks near or above the 
Well for a considerable Way. The Soil of 
most other Spaws which I have examined is 
much the same with that of Aberbrothock, and 
generally a Rivulet runs also near them thro' 
common Flintstone and Sand; particularly, 
this is the Case of the Well of Kincardine, which 
is esteemed in this Country next to Aberbro- 
thock: And I am informed by good Hands, 
that the Soil of the Mineral Well at Peterhead, 
at the Mouth of the Murray-Frith, is much 
the same, without any Rocks in its Neighbour- 
hood, except the Sea Rocks, to which it is so 
near, that it is overflowed by high Tides. 

There are only three Spaws that I know here- 
abouts, the Soil whereof varies from what I 
|P_45
have just now described; one of these is in 
Glendy, beyond the fam'd Kairn, on the Top 
of the Grampions: The Soil of this Well is 
Bog, with Moss-ground round it; and no Rock 
is to be seen near it. This Spring bubbles up 
between the Moss and the Gravel at its Bottom, 
playing, as it issues out, like a Pot boiling, and 
appears of the Colour of Oker, with which 
one's Shoes also are coloured when he treads 
on the Moss near the Well. I have seen ano- 
ther situated in a like Soil in Lentretham, near 
to the Mouth of Glenisla; but it does not 
bubble up as the former does. 

The only Spaw of my Acquaintance, that 
hath any thing of Rock uncommon in its 
Neighbourhood, is near to Cortachie, my Lord 
Airly's Seat on the Water of South-Esk: This 
mineral Fountain is situated at the Foot of a 
Hill near to the River, having, at the Distance 
of forty or fifty Paces, a good many rocky 
Stones, which shine or sparkle like Marcasites
when they are broken; and Pearls are fished in 
the neighbouring River. I have sent some of 
these Stones for your Examination; but they 
are not so bright or shining and of such a po- 
lished Surface, as others which I have seen on 
the other Side of that Ridge of the Grampions
in Glenisla. 

After considering the Soils from which these 
Steel Spaws rise, and all in their Neighbour- 
hood, I would think that the most probable 
Account which can be made of their mineral 
Origins may be taken from the Discoveries of 
Mr. Geoffroy, and of Mr. Lemery the Son, com- 
|P_46
pared [/2./]. Geoffroy, after attempting to make 
Iron with the Clay of Brick and Linseed-oil, 
found, by some such Experiments, that there 
was Iron in all Vegetables which he could put 
under Trial; for all of them had Particles, 
which the Loadstone, or Needle touched with 
it, attracted. And Mr. Lemery, by exposing 
Vegetables to the Burning-glass, fused them 
into a metallick Mass in the same manner as 
was done to Filings of Iron; and from hence 
takes Occasion ingeniously to account for this 
Mineral's ascending, its Gravity notwithstand- 
ing, thro' the whole Compages of Vegetables: 
Which he illustrated and confirmed still further, 
by his Experiment 'on Iron dissolved, first by 
Spirit of Nitre, and then by Oil of Tartar, 
when it arbored all over the Surface of the Ves- 
sel in a great Variety of Branches. What I 
aim at may still be more easily conceived from 
what Le Givre, a Man of good Sense and Learn- 
ing of his Time, writes concerning the medi- 
cal Wells of Provence, to wit, That in Trench- 
es digged for discovering the Origins of these 
Wells, and on the Sides of the neighbouring 
Ditches, he found the mineral Fluid drilling 
through its small Conduits, and becoming of the 
Consistence of the Dreg of Oil: And then he 
tells us the various Colours it assumes in Ana- 
logy to Crocus Martis, and describes its diffe- 
rent Degrees of Consistence and Solidity, ac- 
cording to its being more or less exposed to 
the Air. It is probable that the like Discove- 
ries in several other Parts of France induced 
|P_47
Lemery to say, that France abounds in Iron e- 
very where; for I believe we have not other- 
wise heard of Mines of Iron being every where 
in that Country. So that our medical Wells 
may bear a just Analogy to their mineral Pro- 
geny of Vegetables, if such new Phrase of 
Language may be allowed; and I think the 
Volatility of our Spaws, discovered both by 
the Experiments made with them, and by their 
medical Effects, of which hereafter, may hence 
be best accounted for. Nor needs what I have 
here argued for be thought surprising, since 
the best Philosophy hath proved the primoge- 
nial Earth, compared with it as at present, to 
have been of a more liquid Consistence. And 
Mr. Boyle and Mons. Tournefort have discover- 
ed the same of Gems, Marbles and Corals. 

Whatever Truth is in this Doctrine, Mr. 
Geoffroy and Lemery's Experiments lead us to 
understand why Steel Spaws are so frequent; 
and really considering how much the Mineral 
is diffused over all, one would think that all 
Waters should be impregnated with it; and 
possibly they may be so, only the Proportion 
of the Mineral is so small in most Fountains, 
that the common Trials will not discover it. 

I could find no Difference in the specifick 
Gravity of the Steel Waters I tried from that 
of common Fountain Water. 

The fixed mineral Contents of the Steel Wa- 
ters of Aberbrothock and Peterhead may be 
collected much more easily than is done in the 
common Method of evaporating the whole 
Water, if the mineral Water is put in open 
Bottles some Days; for then its Contents pre- 
|P_48
cipitate, and the Water being poured off, will 
let fall any Remains of the Mineral, by affusing 
common Fountain Water: And the Precipi- 
tations may be hastned, by mixing any pro- 
per Adstringent. The mineral Substances thus 
collected, are afterwards to be dried in the 
Shade, Sun, or analogous Heat of Fire. In 
this manner they will be got more intire, than 
when such a strong Heat is employed as is ne- 
cessary in boiling, which may force off the most 
volatile Substances. 

After four Scottish Pints of Aberbrothock Wa- 
ter were evaporated leisurely at the Well, there 
was no Appearance of a Pellicule, and the dried 
Powder that remained, weighed, as near as an 
Accident of losing a little of it would allow me 
to judge, between fifteen and twenty Grains; 
this I threw into a hot Iron Ladle, when it spark- 
led into little Flammules, just as the fine Filings 
of Iron use to do: But the Powder of the Sleeks 
of the Well sparkled but faintly when so tried. 

Mons. du Clo's Experiments satisfy me, as 
they did him, that it is not easy to determine 
what Salts these Waters contain, or whether 
all are impregnated with the same kinds of 
Salts: He could find neither Allum nor Vitriol
in any of the French Wells; only in one he 
found some Resemblance of the latter: All the 
other Wells gave a Salt, answering to a Com- 
position of Nitre and Sea Salt mixed in va- 
rious Proportions; which probably is the na- 
tural Salt of the Earth discovered by Mr. Tour- 
nefort[/3./] resembling in most Trials the Na- 
|P_49trum of the Levant, being neither acid nor al- 
cali, but approaching most to the latter. 

The Gall, Myrobalan and Granat Bark were 
chiefly used by du Clos, to discover the Steel 
Spaws of France, and to determine the greater 
or lesser Degrees of the mineral Contents, by 
the higher or lower Tincture which they made 
when mixed with the mineral Steel Waters: 
Which Trials have also answer'd very well with 
me; only, seeing the Myrobalans give a reddish 
Tincture to ordinary Water, and observing 
the mineral Waters going upon the same Co- 
lour when I used them, I have chose to make 
my Trials with the Gall, and employed either 
the Shell intire, or its Tincture, because the 
Powder or its Infusion generally makes the 
Water muddy. Having therefore affused the 
same Quantity of Peterhead and Aberbrothock
Waters on like Quantities of Gall, the Peter- 
head Water struck a deep purple Colour, and 
the Aberbrothock Water became only dilutely 
red, as a Vin paillè; then I added by Degrees 
double the Quantity of common Fountain Wa- 
ter to the Peterhead Water tinctured with the 
Gall, before it became precisely like to the Co- 
lour of the Aberbrothock Water with the Gall in 
it: Whereby we may see that the Mineral, as 
reached by the Gall, is two Thirds stronger in 
the Peterhead than in the Aberbrothock Water. 
The Water of Glendy came nearest to the Pe- 
terhead Well in its deep Tincture; next to 
this was the Water of Kincardine: Most of the 
other Spaws that I have examined give a Tin- 
cture much like that of Aberbrothock; some, a 
little higher; others, somewhat lower. 

|P_50
The Infusion of the Sleeks gathered from the 
Stones wherewith the Well of Aberbrothock is 
encompassed on the Sides, and covered above, 
made with Water or Vinegar, struck a strong- 
coloured Tincture when Galls were mixed 
with it. 

Rectified Spirit of Wine makes no Change 
on the Steel Waters; but when the Gall is af- 
terwards added, the Tincture is higher than 
when no Spirit is used. The common Spirit 
of Wine mixed with the mineral Water, turns 
it of a fine light Violet Colour; and when the 
Gall is added, the Tincture becomes more 
dusky than by the Gall alone: Whether is it 
not probable, that the rectified Spirit exalts the 
Sulphur, or other active Principles partaking of 
the Nature of Sulphur, without making any 
Tincture, but only augmenting that given by 
the Gall? whereas the common Spirit gives a 
Tincture, which being confounded with that 
of the Gall, forms that dusky Colour. 

Our Steel Spaws which I have tried, appear 
to be so very volatile, that by the least Access 
of Air after they are taken up from the Well, 
all that bears Trial in them goes off, especially 
if they are taken up in a hot Sun; you will 
better comprehend this, when I tell you, that 
lately I caused two Bottles of Aberbrothock Wa- 
ter to be taken up in my Sight, and to be im- 
mediately well cork'd and rosin'd: Next Day, 
he first of them I put under Trial answered 
carce more than ordinary Fountain Water; but 
the other answered in the ordinary Manner. 
The only Reason I could find for this was, the 
cracking of the Rosin, and Roughness of the 
|P_51
Neck of the Bottle, which hindred the Cork to 
apply so close to the Bottle in which the first 
Water was contained: This taught me to be- 
lieve I had not been formerly abused, as I su- 
spected, when I found this and some other Wa- 
ters brought me to have a sensibly vapid Taste, 
and to contain nothing of the Mineral; tho' I 
must tell you, that when I formerly had Aber- 
brothock Water under Examination, and did 
not use so much Precaution as lately, I did not 
meet with such Disappointments; which I can 
attribute to nothing but the Difference of the 
Seasons, the Water being taken up for my late 
Trials in very hot Weather. 

As I found the Liege and Piermont Spaws
giving the same Tincture with Galls, and a- 
greeing every other Way, the vinous Flavour 
peculiar to these foreign Waters only distin- 
guishing them, so I have seen these also faint 
of Taste, and refusing the usual Trials, on oc- 
casion of being ill cork'd or rosin'd. 

I come now to consider the medical Uses of 
these Springs. As they evacuate mostly by U- 
rine, but rarely by Stool, and only in the more 
lax and flabby Texture of the Bowels, I have 
found them, especially that of Aberbrothock, 
good in nephritick Diseases, scouring off Gravel, 
and sometimes pushing a Stone down. They 
are beneficial in scorbutick Foulnesses, especial- 
ly when the Humours are in an acescent Dispo- 
sition; in all Diseases of the Stomach depend- 
ing on an Acid; and in general, they are ser- 
viceable, and may be used more freely in all 
Indispositions, occasioned by what Physicians 
call a morbid Acid in the Body; but where the 
|P_52
alcaline or bilious Disposition prevails, they are 
to be more sparingly, if at all, taken. And 
as Observation hath evicted the Distinction of 
such opposite Causes of Diseases, so the Trial 
by Galls, their turning Syrup of Violets, Tin- 
cture of Roses, &c. green, discover the Alcali 
in them; which might have undeceived Men 
from being so fond of denominating them so 
generally Acidulæ. 

My Experience in the Cure of Diseases by 
these Waters, will not allow me to state uni- 
versally their comparative Virtues on the high- 
er or lower Degree of Tincture from the Mix- 
ture of other Substances with them; for I can- 
not say whether the deeper Colour of Pe- 
terhead Water with Galls, depends on a great- 
er Quantity of the same mineral Sulphur, or on 
a firmer Combination with its Earth; or whe- 
ther they may not contain a grosser Sulphur, 
or a larger Proportion of Earth than is in Aber- 
brothock Waters. All I can hitherto determine 
by Observation is, That in Flaccidness, and 
too great Relaxation of the Solids, especially 
of the Stomach and other chylopoietick Organs, 
the Peterhead Water has by far the Preemi- 
nence: As on the other Hand I have found the 
Use of the Aberbrothock Water of singular Ad- 
vantage, in Lowness of Spirits and other Ma- 
ladies, where the Nerves are said to be affected; 
for which I have also seen the Kincardine Wa- 
ter beneficial. 

One of our Burghers, about thirty Years of 
Age, of a clean and healthy Constitution, ha- 
ving met with stormy Weather at Sea, fed 
on salt Meat, and having bad Success other- 
|P_53
wise in a Voyage, returned scorbutick, ema- 
ciated, enervated in all the digestive Powers, 
low spirited, and so extremely feeble, that he 
could walk or sit on Horseback with Difficulty: 
After drinking Aberbrothock Water at the Foun- 
tain a few Days, he walked about with Ease, 
and with much more Vigour. 

A Gentleman of Honour, aged sixty, of a 
vigorous Body, and who had enjoyed good 
Health, impair'd at Times by good Fellowship, 
from an Inability to walk without Support, re- 
covered Ability to walk with Ease by the same 
Means in a few Days: And he received the 
same Benefit in a greater or lesser Degree for 
several Years, in which he used that mineral 
Water. 

A Lady in a declining Age, having had Un- 
easiness in her Mind, and becoming otherwise 
of infirm Health, every accidental Disorder was 
accompanied with a notable sinking of Spirits. 
After various Medicines that seemed at times 
to gain on the Distemper, which always how- 
ever returned rather worse, and the Lowness 
of Spirits still attacking her less or more, she 
drank the Aberbrothock Water at her own House 
in the Spring: The Water was always taken 
up at Night, and kept fresh two or three Days, 
and then was renewed. She continued the 
Use of it a Month, with some little Intervals, 
and thereby recovered both Health and Spirits. 

A Gentleman having suffered an aguish In- 
disposition several Years, it shifted at last into 
low Spirits to a great Degree; which he reco- 
vered in good Measure, by taking to a low 
Diet. When his Symptoms return, as they 
|P_54
often do, the Liege and Piermont Spaws and 
Aberbrothock Water in its Season are of good 
Use to him; frequently he prefers the last to 
the others, tho' it is brought farther and longer 
kept than in the former Case. 

I have mentioned these two Cases to shew, 
that notwithstanding the Virtue of the Water 
is so liable to fly off, yet it proves of good Ef- 
fect at a Distance from the Fountain; and it 
may prove better this Way, if taken up at a right 
Time, than when it is drank at the Well in a 
hot Season, after the Spring hath been exposed 
several Hours to the Morning Sun. 

The best Season of drinking these Waters is 
doubtless in April and May, after the Spring 
Rains have fallen, and before the Heat of Sum- 
mer comes on; and in the Month of August, to 
the Middle of September, before the Autumn 
Rains begin; at both which Seasons they gene- 
rally taste most of the Mineral: And it is com- 
monly observed, that in the hottest Weather 
these Waters taste most faint, except after a 
moderate Shower of Rain, when the Taste turns 
stronger, but it is weakened after great Rains. 
The Badness of the Quarters, and the Pleasure 
and Convenience of walking about in open Air, 
have however determined the Season of Use to 
the two intermediate Summer Months: But I 
enjoin the People who ask my Advice to drink 
this Water rather at home in the proper Sea- 
son, and to put the cold Air off it at a Fire, if 
it proves cold to the Stomach. 

Great Numbers drink the Waters of Aber- 
brothock, without observing any Regimen, or 
having any Directions from a Physician; nor 
|P_55
do I enjoin any considerable Preparation of Bo- 
dy to my Patients, except in very remarkable 
Foulness of the Juices. Nor do I allow them 
to take Physick for purging, during the Use of 
the Water, if they are not to bath in them. 
The Medicine I ordinarily give is Crystals of 
Tartar, to promote the Evacuation in the most 
ordinary natural Way. With this I sometimes 
give stewed Prunes, or such like, to stir a slug- 
gish Belly a little. 

The vulgar Opinion of all the Benefit of this 
Water being proportioned to the Quantity 
drunk, prevails so much here, without any Re- 
gard to the Constitution, and Strength of the 
Patient, or Nature of the Disease; and so ma- 
ny remarkable Accidents have happened by 
drinking too much, that there is just Reason to 
doubt, whether the Abuse of these Waters does 
not more Harm than the right Use does Good. 
My general Rule is not to exceed three English
Pints drunk leisurely, especially till the Eva- 
cuation by Urine begins, chewing Cinnamon, 
Carvie, or any other easy Aromatick as the Sto- 
mach requires during the Drinking, and walk- 
ing in the Intervals of their Drinking and after 
they have finished their Day's Dose, till they 
begin to be sensible of Fatigue. 

This Rule concerning the Quantity to be 
drunk, and Exercise while drinking, I have 
found to require one Caution, and one Excep- 
tion. The Caution is taken from the Indicati- 
ons in View. When the Springs of the fibrous 
System are to be screwed up by the Force of 
the Mineral, its greater Quantity and stronger 
Consistence with less of the diluent Element 
|P_56
are necessary; and therefore the Waters which 
give the highest Tincture upon Trial, and these 
drunk in smaller Quantities are preferable: And 
this makes me regret that there are no tolerable 
Quarters nor Fields for walking near the Glen- 
dy-well, which is of the highest mineral Tin- 
cture, next to that of Peterhead. I have cau- 
sed it to be brought sometimes to People's 
Houses, where it did Good; but I have never 
seen the Use of it long enough protracted to 
make any Observation of Consequence thereon. 
If our Design principally is to wash the In- 
wards, the weaker Kinds of the mineral Waters 
are most proper. 

The Exception to Exercise is chiefly in the 
Case of great Relaxation of the Stomach and 
digestive Powers, which makes the Patients li- 
able to throw up their Food, as most frequent- 
ly happens to Females. I order such to feed a- 
Bed, and to ly close till the first Digestion is ac- 
complished; and this serves to good Purpose 
preventing the Stomach's casting up its Con- 
tests. A Gentlewoman supposed quite lost in 
this Disease, her inward Powers being altoge- 
ther enervated with a miserable Scene of suc- 
ceeding Symptoms during several Years, was 
at last carried from this Place to Peterhead, 
where she drank all the Water a-Bed, laying 
herself to steep after each Draught; by which 
Means she retained all: And tho' she got into 
drinking the Water to the Excess of a Scottish
Pint a Day, yet she returned perfectly recover- 
ed, and remains so these several Years. 

The Aberbrothock Water has got the Prefe- 
rence to the rest in this Country, most Cures 
|P_57
having been made by it. Whether this is ow- 
ing to its Vogue, having occasioned a greater 
Number of Patients to repair to it; or whether 
it depends on its intrinsick comparative Virtue 
from the Sulphur, which I begin to discover 
more conspicuous in it than in the others, I 
shall not determine; but in all ordinary Cases 
I recommend the nearest Spaw, and have fre- 
quently seen the Effect answer, especially by 
Kincardine Well, and that on our River of Esk, 
in the Skirts of the Grampians; the former 
however comes nearer to Aberbrothock Water 
in the Cure of nervous Diseases. A Girl in bad 
Case of the Nerves, as Nature was framing her 
into the Condition of her Sex; and her Bro- 
ther, a Boy of ten Years of Age, enervated to 
almost a Cripple all over his Body, are now 
recovered by drinking and bathing in these 
Waters two Seasons. 


[^1. 
(a) A smooth shining Clay. 
^]
[^2. 
(b) Memoires de l'Acad. des Sciences, 1704, 1705, 1706. 
^]
[^3. 
(c) Preface to his History of Plants in the Neighbour- 
hood of Paris. 
^]