

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ1_v4_0242^]

|P_242
[}XVIII. A white Swelling of the Knee; by the 
same. }]
MAny Instances are daily seen of that tor- 
menting, dangerous Disease, the white 
Swelling of the Joints; but before one has an 
Opportunity of examining them by Dissection, 
to understand the Nature of the Disease right, 
the Matter has become so sharp that it erodes 
|P_243
the Bones themselves, and then one sees the 
same Thing as he would do in a Spina ventosa. 
I met with one Patient in our Infirmary, whose 
Joint of the Knee was just as far advanced as I 
wished to examine, when it was amputated. It 
gave me a better Idea of that Disease than I had 
before, and possibly may do so to some of your 
Readers, which induces me to send it to you. 

Isabel Blackadder, a young Woman of a de- 
licate tender Constitution, having hurt her left 
Leg by a Fall some Years ago, an Ulcer broke 
out near her Heel, and several Pieces of Bone 
cast out at it; but it recovered so well, that she 
went to Service again. 

In the End of 1734, having hurt the same 
Leg by another Fall, the Knee swelled, be- 
came very painful and stiff, for which she was 
taken into the Infirmary; where, after Blood- 
ing, a few Doses of Aquila alba, and Embro- 
cation with Aq. mindereri, the Swelling and 
Pain both seemed to abate, but soon became as 
bad as formerly, and never afterwards yielded 
to any Medicines. 

The Skin of the swelled Parts was not disco- 
loured, and on the Inside of the Joint a Fluctu- 
ation was felt in one or two Points, but the 
Quantity of Liquor appeared very small, and 
the Fluctuation had a different Feeling to what 
commonly Pus collected in a Cavity has. Her 
Pains were very sharp, especially upon the least 
Motion of the affected Leg; her Flesh and Strength 
decayed daily, and the hectick Symptoms in- 
creased; which at last brought her so low, that 
she could not be raised to a sitting Posture with- 
out fainting, which brought her under the Ne- 
|P_244
cessity of suffering the Member to be amputated. 

In this Condition she was when the Member 
was cut off above the Knee by Mr. Douglas, 
after which she recovered daily, and walks on a 
wooden Leg of the same Form which Alexan- 
der Sheppard used, whose Case I shall soon ex- 
tract also from the Records of the Infirmary to 
send you. (See Art. XXI.) 

When the diseased Joint was dissected, all 
the cellular Membranes, in which Fat is natu- 
rally contained under the Skin, between the 
Muscles and Tendons, and upon the Ligaments, 
were found full of a glairy Matter, which had 
insinuated itself so much every where, and had 
made the other Parts so soft, that we could 
scarce distinguish one from another. In several 
Places of this glairy Substance there were small 
Cavities full of Pus. When the Articulation 
of the Knee was opened, all the mucous Glands 
and fatty Membranes were seen in the same Con- 
dition with the exterior Parts; the semilunar 
Cartilages themselves between the Tibia and Fe- 
mur being quite soft, and with the same cellular 
mucous Appearance that the Glands had. We 
also observed some Pus within the Cavity of the 
Joint, but the Extremities of the Bones were 
scarce begun to be eroded. 

