

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ1_v3_0030^]

|P_30
[}IV. The Effects of the Conessi Bark, by —. }]
Gentlemen, 

NOt having Allowance from my Friend, who 
wrote me the inclosed Letter, to publish his 
Name, I cannot take upon me to communicate 
it; but can assure you, his Integrity, good Sense 
and Knowledge, are such as may give entire 
Credit to his Information; and lately I cured 
an obstinate Dysentery of three Months stand- 
ing, which had yielded nothing to a great Va- 
riety of other Medicines, by giving the Conessi 
Bark in the Form prescribed by him. I am 

Your most humble Servant, 
Alexr. Monro. 

|P_31
THE Tree, of which I gave you some of the 
Bark as a Specifick in Diarrhœas, grows 
on the Cormandel Coast in the East-Indies, 
where it is called Conessi, and is not unlike the 
Cadogapala of the Hortus Malabaricus. The 
Conessi-seca, or Conessi-bark of the small young 
Branches of the Tree which has least Moss, or 
external insipid Scurf on it, is to be chosen, 
and all that Scurf is to be scraped off. 

The clean Bark being pounded into a very 
fine Powder, is made into an Electuary, with 
Syrup of Oranges, and taken to the Quantity 
of half a Drachm, or more, four Times a Day, 
for three or four Days. The first Day it in- 
creases the Number and Quantity of the Stools, 
but without increasing the Gripes. The second 
Day the Bark is taken, the Colour of the Stools 
is mended; and on the third or fourth Day, 
their Consistence generally comes near to a na- 
tural State, when it succeeds at all. 

In recent Diarrhœæ, arising from Irregula- 
rities in Diet, without a Fever, this Medicine 
seldom fails to make a Cure, if a Vomit of I- 
pecacuanna is given immediately before the Pa- 
tient begins the Use of the Bark. The same 
Management also is attended commonly with 
Success in Persons of a lax Habit of Body, who 
are troubled with an habitual Diarrhœa in moist 
rainy Weather, a remarkable Itching in the 
Skin being felt on the third or fourth Day. To 
such Patients especially, the Electuary ought to 
be given Morning and Evening, for some Time 
after they are seemingly cured. Their Drink 
should be Water wherein Rice hath been boil- 
|P_32
ed, and sometimes Emulsions of the cold Seeds, 
with Sal prunell. are necessary. 

If there is a Fever with the Looseness, that 
must be removed by Bloodings and cool Emul- 
sions, or Decoct. alb. with Sal prunell. before 
the Conessi-Bark is given. 

Sometimes when the Cause of a Diarrhœa, 
stopp'd by this Medicine, lies beyond the inte- 
stinal Canal, the Patient, in a few Days after, 
complains of a Pain in the right Hypochonder, 
or in the right Shoulder, or over the Stomach 
towards the left Side, causing often a dull Sense 
of Pain, near or above the left Clavicle, with a 
feverish Pulse. As soon as these Symptoms ap- 
pear, the Patient must be blooded, and his Blood 
will be sizy, or with a tough yellowish Crust on 
the Top, when it has coagulated. The Quan- 
tity of Blood to be taken away, and the repeat- 
ing the Venæsection, must be determined by 
the Patient's Strength, the Degree of Fever, 
and Sharpness of his Pain. In such Cases how- 
ever the Blooding seldom removes the Pain en- 
tirely; but after the Fever is brought sufficient- 
ly down by the Loss of Blood, I have seldom 
missed to complete the Cure, by giving sweet 
Mercury, or rather Calomel, for some Days, 
in small Quantities, as an Alterative. 

I ought to observe, That the Bark should be 
fresh-powdered, and the Electuary new made 
every Day or second Day, otherwise the Bark 
loses its austere, but grateful Bitterness on the 
Palate, and its proper Effects on the Intestines. 

