

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ1_v3_0276^]

|P_276
[}XXV. An Asthma with uncommon Symptoms; 
by the same. }]
MR. James Ure, whose Business as a Writer, 
or Solicitor at Law, engaged him fre- 
quently in Company and good Fellowship, was 
sometimes troubled with a Palpitation at his 
Heart, a trembling in his Hand, and Faintness, 
being always subject to a Cough, and having 
generally very little Appetite for Food, with 
two or three loose Stools a-day. In October
1730, the fifty fifth Year of his Age, having 
catched Cold, a Cough seized him, with which 
he brought up a small Quantity of very thick 
Slime, and complained of a Difficulty of brea- 
thing; he lost all Appetite for Food, and his 
Belly became bound; his Urine was in small 
Quantity, and he could not feel his own Pulse. 

He allowed these Symptoms to continue eight 
Days without asking any Advice; but finding 
them continue, and rather increase, he consult- 
ed Dr. William Porterfield and me, October 20th. 
Besides the above mentioned Symptoms, we 
observed his Difficulty of breathing increase so 
much upon lying down, that he was obliged to 
sleep in a sitting Posture. His Feet and Legs 
were very oedematous. We could feel no Pulse 
in the Arteries of his Wrist, Neck, Temples 
or Ham, but only a sort of trembling under 
our Fingers, which we then attributed to some 
Irregularity in the Distribution of his Arteries, 
|P_277
notwithstanding his affirming, that, when in 
Health, he had a pretty strong Pulse in the ve- 
ry Parts we felt. The Veins of his Arm and 
Neck were very large, and stretched with 
Blood. He could take no sort of Food, but 
had a Thirst, which was not violent, nor was 
his Tongue dry, or his Skin hot. When the 
Cough attacked him, he forced very little Pi- 
tuit up; but his Breathing became exceeding 
laborious, his Face turned very red or Purple, 
and he complained of a violent Headach. When 
he was free of the Cough a little while, he 
walked, spoke, complained of little, and as- 
sured us he was scarce weaker than in Health. 
To prevent the bad Effects of the Cough, twelve 
Ounces of Blood were immediately let; he bled 
freely, and did not turn faint. In the Even- 
ing a Terebinthinat purging Clyster was inject- 
ed, which purged him gently. He was desired 
to take any sort of mild Food which his Sto- 
mach could receive. Rhenish Wine and Wa- 
ter were given for Drink, into which he fre- 
quently dropped forty Gutts of the following 
Mixture, ℞. Elixir, Pectoral. Unc. l. Tinctur. 
Castor. Drach. ii. Sp. Salin. aromat. Drach. 
iii. and every two Hours he swallowed two 
Spoonfuls of the Oxymel Pectoral. of the Edin- 
burgh Dispensatory. At Bed-time he took this 
Bolus. ℞. Sperm. Cet. Scrup. i. Sal. Succin. 
Gr. v. Conserv. Ros. Scrup. i. Syrup. Alth. q. 
s. ut ft. bol.

Next Morning there appeared no Change in 
his Condition; and he took P. Hypecucuan, C. 
xxxv. Oxymel Scillit. Unc. i. This Emetick o- 
perated six Times, without increasing his Head- 
|P_278
ach or Difficulty of Breathing, and brought a 
good deal of Slime with the Water he drank. 
He seemed a little relieved after this Vomit, 
and continued the Use of the Medicines pre- 
scribed the Day before. At Night a blistering 
Plaister was applied to his Neck and Shoulders; 
he took his Bolus, and had a cooling Emulsion 
for Drink. 

The Blister rose well, but the Pain of it 
made him so unable to move next Morning, 
that we could not give the Purgative we had 
determined to order. His Urine was in larger 
Quantity, with a good Sediment; notwith- 
standing which, his Legs were rather more 
swelled, and the other Symptoms continued. 
His Bolus was again given in the Morning; he 
still drank Water with Rhenish Wine; and he 
was desired to take frequently a Spoonful of the 
following Mixture, ℞. Aq. Hyssop. Puleg. a. 
Unc. iii. Cinam. s. v. Raphan. Compt. a. Unc. i.
Gum. Ammoniac. Drach. ii. Sal. Succin. Drach. 
sem. Oxymel. scillit. Unc. ii. Syrup. Alth. Unc. 
i. M.

He continued much in the same Way all the 
22d and 23d, only his Legs and Thighs swel- 
led more; and he began to complain that his 
Clothes were too tight for his Belly. 

In the Morning of the 24th he took this pur- 
gative Bolus, ℞. Pulv. Rhei elect. Scrup. i. A- 
quil. alb. Pulv. Jallap a. gr. v. Syrup de 
Rhamn. q. s. ut. ft. Bol. capt. è Syrup. Violar.
This purged him mildly, and the Quantity of 
his Urine increased considerably, and his Bel- 
ly and Legs became less swelled, which re- 
lieved him somewhat of the Orthopnea. 

|P_279
Next Day he began to use a medicated Wine, 
℞. Rad. Irid. Florent. Scill. Acor. ver. Helen. 
Raphan. rust. a. Unc. sem. Gentian. Drach. ii.
Rub. Tinctor. Unc. sem. Cortic. Sambuc. Ebul. a. 
Unc. sem. Herb. Marub. alb. M. ii. Absinth. 
rom. Centaur. min. a. M. sem. Bacc. Juniper. 
Unc. i. sem. Sal. Tartar. Drach. iii. incis. & 
contus. s. a. M. ut ft. Malia infundend. in Vin. 
Lisbon. lib. vi. Colatur. capt. Unc. ii. mane & 
horâ 5tâ vespertinâ. All this Day and the 
following his Urine passed plentifully, with a 
large Sediment; the Swellings diminished, and 
his Cough and Breathing were easier. In the 
Evening of the 26th, while I sat by him, he 
surprised me with putting his Wrist into my 
Hand to feel his Pulse, which was full, strong, 
slow and equal; but two Hours after, I could 
again feel no more than the very weak trem- 
bling I formerly mentioned. 

The 27th the purgative Bolus was repeated. 
On the 28th, his Pulse returned, and conti- 
nued afterwards firm and strong, till he reco- 
vered his former Health, which he did in a 
little Time, by the Use of the medicated Wine, 
pectoral Mixture, and the Purgative sometimes 
repeted. 

About a Month after, having got the Cold 
again, his Symptoms began to return with the 
same State of his Pulse; but upon taking the 
former Emetick, and the Purgative, they went 
off; and to prevent a second Relapse, he got 
strengthning chalybeat Medicines, with the sti- 
mulating Gums for some Time. 

In the Beginning of January 1732, he was 
again attacked with the Asthma, and want of 
|P_280
Pulse; which were removed with two Doses of 
the Purgative. After a Cough which conti- 
nued some Days in the Beginning of February; 
his Pulse could not be felt during twenty four 
Hours, but it returned after the Operation of a 
purgative Bolus. 

Soon after my Patient retired to the Coun- 
try, where he has continued in very good 
Health; and being lately in Town, revised 
this Account of his Case, and allowed me to 
communicate it to you. 

