

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ1_v5_0351^]

|P_351
[}XXXIV. A considerable Share of the Intesines 
cut off after a Mortification in a Hernia, and 
cured by Mr. William Cookesley Sur- 
geon in Crediton. }]
Sir, 

ABraham Pike of Crediton, in the County of 
Devon, Chimney-sweeper, aged about thir- 
ty, had laboured under an Hernia intestinalis
for several Years, which in the Beginning of 
September 1731 was increased to such a Degree, 
by overheaving himself in carrying Water to 
help to extinguish a Fire that happened in the 
Neighbourhood, that he could not reduce it as 
usual when in Bed. This Misfortune was im- 
mediately aggravated by a total Strangulation 
of the Intestine. The poor Man, through I- 
gnorance and Want, suffered terrible Pains in 
the Part for about a Fortnight, without ac- 
quainting any Body with his late Misfortune 
besides his Wife, till, grown at last intolerable, 
Dr. Bent passing accidentally by, was desired to 
cast an Eye upon him; who finding the Tu- 
mor large, with great Inflammation tending to 
a livid Colour, advised them to get a Surgeon, 
whose Business it was, and in the interim to 
apply a warm emollient Cataplasm to it, which 
was accordingly done. 

I was sent for the next Morning, and upon 
Examination found the Matter had penetrated 
the Coats of the Scrotum, discharging itself in 
|P_352
great Quantity, with putrid Sloughs filling up 
the whole Cavity, the greater Part of which I 
cut off with my Scissars, contenting myself for 
that Time to dress it up with a warm Dige- 
stive, till I could provide myself with a Fomen- 
tation and other Necessaries, as the Case requi- 
red. 

At the next Dressing I found his Excrements, 
which he had not discharged the natural Way 
for above a Fortnight before, came off at the 
Orifice in a large Quantity. 

The whole Cavity of the Wound, which was 
very large, was a Confusion of Matter, Excre- 
ment, rotten Gut, and mortified Membranes. 

I cut off at that Time above six Inches of the 
Intestine, (all of which being fallen down into 
the Scrotum was entirely sphacelated) as also 
above half the right Side of the Scrotum. Ha- 
ving wash'd off the remaining Sordes with some 
of the Fomentation I had hot by me, I dress'd 
it up with Pledgets spread with a Digestive, and 
dipt in the same Liquor. This, nor any of the 
succeeding Dressings, was attended with the 
least Hemorrhage, so that I suppose the sperma- 
tic Vessels and the Testicle were likewise mor- 
tified; for I could find neither of these upon 
cleansing away the stinking Sloughs that cover- 
ed them, and I believe they came off together 
with those Sloughs, but in so rotten a State 
that they could not be distinguished one from 
another. 

I continued on dressing it twice a Day; the 
remaining Sloughs digested off, and the Wound 
began to clean and look well; but still the Ex- 
crement, which should have been discharged 
|P_353
by the Anus, came off at the new Passage: And 
how indeed could we conceive it should do o- 
therwise, when so much of the whole annular 
Substance of the Gut had been cut off? 

Though I had always despaired of the Life of 
my Patient, yet knowing Nature sometimes 
brings about her Ends in a miraculous Manner, 
I was resolved to assist to the utmost of my Pow- 
er. I ordered frequent Clysters to be injected, 
which brought away the indurated Fæces, that 
had lain a long while in the Rectum, and by 
continuing this Method for some time, the Dis- 
charge from the Wound every Day lessened, 
and he had frequent Stools from the natural 
Passage. Thus our Cure went hopefully on, 
and after above a Month's Obstruction from his 
first Confinement, Nature returned again into 
its former Channel. The Discharge at the new 
one gradually lessening, till at last it perfectly 
stopt, the Ulcer was incarned and cicatriced 
with very little Trouble, and the Cure com- 
pletely finished without any further Obstacle. 

As the Man is cured of his Hernia, he is 
now in a much better Condition than he was 
before this Accident happened. He has been 
very healthy since that Time, and follows his 
Labour: He is grown fat, and looks better 
than he did Years before. 

Thus, Sir, I have given you a full Account 
of this extraordinary Case; a Parallel to which 
I had not met with, nor read of, till I lately 
saw something like it in the Medical Essays. I 
hope it will meet with your Approbation, the 
rather because you know the greatest Part of 
the Relation to be true; you having seen it at 
|P_354
first yourself, and had a constant Account of 
the Patient during the whole Procedure from, 

Sir, 

Crediton, 
Dec. 8. 1738. 

Your most obliged 
humble Servant, 
Wm. Cookesley. 

To Dr. Bent at Exeter. 

I lived at Crediton when the Accident hap- 
pened; and, as I remember the Case very well, 
am satisfied it is fairly stated. 

Geo. Bent. 

