

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ1_v1_0069^]

|P_69
[}VIII. Experiments on the medicinal Waters of 
Moffat; by Andrew Plummer, M. D. Fel- 
low of the Royal College of Physicians, and 
Professor of Medicine in the University of E- 
dinburgh. }]
HAVING obtained, by the Favour of Mr. 
Miligen, a considerable Quantity of the 
mineral Water of Moffat, carefully put up at 
the Fountain in the Month of April, and a Par- 
cel of Stones taken from the Bottom of the up- 
per Well, and some dug from the same Vein 
as it crosses the Rivulet below the Precipice up- 
on which the Wells stand, I thought an At- 
tempt to discover the Nature of this celebrated 
mineral Water, by a chemical Analysis and o- 
ther Experiments of that kind, would not be 
|P_70
unacceptable to the Curious, and might in some 
measure be useful to illustrate its Effects in the 
Cure of Diseases. 

Above sixty Years ago Mr. Mackaile publish- 
ed a Topographico-spagyrical Description of Mof- 
fat Wells; in which he concludes, but from 
very precarious Principles, that this Water is 
impregnated with the putid Sulphur of Antimo- 
ny and Nitre; but in another Place he thinks it 
necessary to add to these natural Sal Ammoniac: 
This Gentleman indeed writes in the Dialect of 
an Adept, but most unlike a true Chemist, de- 
clares against Experiments, and asserts, that an 
Analysis of the Water would be to no Purpose, 
and therefore never made the Trial. I shall 
not trouble the Reader with any further Re- 
marks on this Author, but shall impartially re- 
late the Experiments I made on this Water, 
and the Stones taken from the Vein on which 
it runs. 

The mineral Water tried by the hydrostati- 
cal Balance at the Fountain, and compared with 
the Water of a Rivulet near the Well, was 
found somewhat lighter than it; for the speci- 
fick Gravity of the mineral Water was to that 
of the other Water as 838 to 840. 

The mineral Water brought from Moffat to 
Edinburgh, in Bottles well corked and waxed a- 
bout the Neck, had a strong sulphurous Smell, 
but appeared equally limpid and clear as com- 
mon Spring-water, tho' at the Fountain it has 
a milky or bluish Colour: Upon first opening 
the Bottle the Water tasted as strong, to my 
Sense, as when I have drank it at the Well; but 
next day, the Bottle being half empty, the 
|P_71
Water had quite lost its distinguishing Taste 
and Smell. 

I put some Grains of the fresh Powder of Galls 
into a small Quantity of the Water, but it did 
not strike a black or violet Tincture therewith, 
tho' I set the Glass in a Sand-heat for some 
Hours. A strong Infusion of red Roses in com- 
mon Water poured into an equal Quantity of 
the mineral Water, was only diluted and made 
fainter, as if so much simple Water had been 
added to the Infusion, and the same happened 
with Syrup of Violets. This Water then gave 
no Marks of a chalibeat Nature with Galls, nor 
of Acidity with Tincture of Roses, or Syrup of 
Violets; neither did it produce any Effervescence 
with alcaline Liquors, as Ol. Tartar. p. d. or Spir. 
Sal. Ammoniac. only when the first was drop- 
ped into the Water, there appeared a faint blue 
Cloud suspended in it. Acid Liquors, as Sp. & 
Ol. Vitriol. Sp. Nitr. &c. added to these Mix- 
tures with Alcalis, after an Effervescence, pro- 
duced a milky Colour, but no Precipitation. 
The same acid Liquors dropped into the simple 
mineral Water made no sensible Effervescence, 
only the Mixture with Sp. Nitri smoaked a little, 
and some Bubbles of Air rose from the Bottom, 
but all of them turned the Water more or less 
milky. These Phænomena discover the sulphu- 
rous Nature of the Water, but this Sulphur 
must be very subtile, volatile, and in small 
Quantity, seeing the Water exposed to the Air 
soon loses that Smell and Taste which at first 
so remarkably affected the Organs of these Sen- 
ses; and seeing acid Liquors cannot so unite 
the Particles of this Sulphur as to make them 
|P_72
fall to the Bottom, or separate from the Water. 

I made a great many Attempts to fix this Sul- 
phur, and render it conspicuous, but without 
Success, and therefore I shall not trouble the 
Reader with these fruitless Experiments; only 
there is one which had almost led me into a 
Mistake, until by further prosecuting the Ex- 
periment I discovered the Truth: But having 
spoke of this Matter to some Gentlemen before 
I knew my Error, I must take this Opportunity 
to relate the whole Matter. Having put a few 
Grains of Saccharum or Vitriolum Saturni (made 
with Aq. fort. simpl. diluted with a triple Quan- 
tity of common Water and Litharge) into two 
Ounces of Moffat Water, this presently turned 
of a reddish Colour, after standing some Minutes 
the Water grew more pellucid, and the red 
Particles uniting, fell mostly to the Bottom, 
and some small Flakes swam on the Surface: 
This Matter separated from the Water re- 
sembled the Sulphur auratum Antimonii; and 
indeed I imagined that this was the Sulphur 
which impregnates the Water coagulated and 
fixed. That I might therefore procure a suffici- 
ent Quantity of this Matter to discover its Na- 
ture by other Trials, I got a fresh Parcel of 
mineral Water from Moffat, and repeated the 
Experiment: I put 3 Drachms of the Vitriolum 
Saturni by Degrees into 3 Chopins or English
Quarts of the Water, and poured the muddy 
Liquor into a Filter, in which there remained 
a Powder not so red as in the former Experi- 
ment, but of a brownish Colour, which when 
dry weighed 20 Grains. I put 5 Grains of this 
Powder upon an Iron Plate made red hot, it 
|P_73
soon melted and smoaked a little, but did not 
flame; when the Iron was cold, I found upon it 
a thin Scurf of Lead. Upon the rest of this Pow- 
der I poured some Ol. Tartar p. d. and set the 
Glass to digest on a Sand-heat, but the Liquor 
acquired no Tincture as it would have done 
from a sulphurous Substance: So that in this 
Experiment the Acid of the Vitriolum Saturni
mixing with the Water had let fell some of the 
Particles of the Litharge, which by Fire after- 
wards returned to Lead. That I might know 
what remained in the Water which had past 
thro' the Filter, I put about the Half of it into 
an Iron Kettle, to evaporate it in haste, and 
I got a Drachm and 5 Grains of a saline or vi- 
triolic Substance, of a brown Colour, and not 
so sweet and styptick to the Taste as the Vitrio- 
lum Saturni, which was dissolved in the Water. 
The Difference, I presume, was owing partly 
to some of the Litharge being precipitated, part- 
ly to the Iron Kettle in which it was boiled, and 
lastly to some of the proper Salt of the Water, 
being united to this vitriolic Substance. 

Twelve Scots Pints of the mineral Water was 
distilled with a gentle Heat, from Glass Vessels, 
with the Joinings luted; the Water which came 
over was perfectly limpid, and had no Smell 
or Taste, but a little Empyreuma; what remain- 
ed in the Body had no Smell either, but tasted 
somewhat saltish. When ¾ or thereby was 
brought over, there appeared at the Bottom a 
good Quantity of a muddy Sediment, which I 
separated from the Liquor, and carried on the 
Evaporation in a low, wide mouth'd Glass. 
When the Water was reduced to somewhat less 
|P_74
than a Chopin, it seemed well saturated with a 
Salt; for it was thick and bubbled, as when a 
lixivial Salt is boiled near to Dryness. When 
all was cold, I found at the Bottom a dirty Salt, 
mixt with Mud or Earth; the Saline Particles 
were so very small, that I could not observe 
their Shapes; but the Liquor had a very briny 
or muriatick Taste. I proceeded to evaporate 
and crystalize the remaining Liquor, (except 
two Ounces reserved for other Trials) till I ga- 
thered all the Salt which weighed 4 Drachms 
and 2 Scruples. As this Salt was very brown 
and earthy, I dissolved it in some of the distill'd 
Water, filter'd the Solution, and crystaliz'd it 
again; then there appeared very clean and beau- 
tiful Cristals, of an uncommon Figure, of very 
different Sizes, but almost exactly similar; some 
of which are represented of their natural Bigness 
on Plate I. 

Fig. 1. Shews a small Crystal, but very com- 
plete and regular. 
[^This and other plates of illustrations seem to have not been scanned into ECCO. ^]
Fig. 2. Represents one of the largest, some- 
what rugged at the Corners. 
[^^]
Fig. 5. Is the Reverse of the former, shew- 
ing its Stalk. 
[^^]
Fig. 3. Shews two joined by one Side. 
[^^]
Fig. 4. Represents 2 irregularly blended. 
[^^]
Each of these Crystals is made up, as it were, 
of four Triangles joined together, so as to make 
up a little hollow Capsule or Dish, with Brims 
turned outward or horizontally, and stands up- 
on a little Pedestal or Stalk. Besides these Cry- 
stals there were others of a cubical Shape, but 
both Sorts had evidently the Taste of Sea Salt. 

I put two Drachms of the Salt obtained from 
|P_75
Moffat Water into an Iron Ladle, and set it on 
a clear Fire, till the Iron was red hot; the Salt 
smoaked and crackled much as in the Decre- 
pitation of common Salt, but it neither melted 
nor flamed, nor did it much diminish in 
Weight; for after an Hour's toasting, it had 
only lost 18 Grains; which makes it evident that 
this Salt is neither Nitre, nor Sal-ammoniac. 

This decrepitate Salt, with four Scruples of 
the Salt which had not felt the Fire, was put in- 
to a small Glass Retort, and, a Drachm of Oil of 
Vitriol poured upon it, there arose copious 
Fumes, which were immediately confined, by 
applying a Receiver: The Distillation was car- 
ried on with a Fire gradually increased, the Re- 
ceiver was filled with white Fumes, and there 
came over about two Drachms of a volatile 
smoaking Spirit, which answered all the Chara- 
cters of Glauber's Spirit of Sea Salt. 

Having dissolved some Silver in Aqua Fortis, 
I divided the Solution into several Portions; in- 
to one I let fall some Drops of the Spirit above 
described; into another I put some Grains of 
the Salt of Moffat Water, into a third some of 
the Water evaporated to 1/36, and each of these 
made a Precipitation of the Silver. All which 
plainly show that this Water is impregnated 
with common Salt or Sal-gem. Altho' the sa- 
line Cristals obtained from Moffat Water, differ 
very much in Appearance from the Sea Salt 
commonly used, yet having dissolved some com- 
mon Salt in pure Water, after Filtration, and 
a very slow Evaporation, I observed many of 
the saline Particles assume a Shape not unlike 
that described above; but the Cristals of the com- 
|P_76
mon Salt approached nearer to little hollow 
Pyramids, with square Bases. 

I mentioned before, that I had reserved two 
Ounces of the Water, when it was evaporated 
to 1/36 or thereby, and was strongly impregnated 
with Salt. Into a small Quantity of this Brine 
(as I may call it) I let fall some Drops of Ol. 
Tartar. p. d. which caused no Effervescence, 
but presently produced a milky Colour and Co- 
agulation; upon standing a while, the upper 
Part of the Liquor turned clear, and of a Whey 
Colour. The same happened when Spir. Sal. 
Ammon. cum Alcal. fixo was dropt into another 
small Parcel of the same Water; some Drops 
of Spir. Vitriol. put into these Mixtures, after 
Effervescence, dissolved the Coagulation, and 
rendered the Liquor pellucid: But Sp. Vitriol.
or other acid Liquors dropt into the Brine by it- 
self, caused no Effervescence, or other Change in 
Colour or Consistence. The Difference between 
these Phænomena and those formerly observed 
in the fresh Water, upon mixing the same Li- 
quors, is remarkable; for when acid Spirits 
were dropt into the fresh Water, they always 
turned it milky, because then the Water was 
impregnated with its Sulphur, which the acid 
Liquors, in some Measure, coagulated so as to 
change the Colour of the Water: But alcaline 
Liquors added to the fresh Water produced 
little Change, because a small Quantity of Salt 
was dispersed through a great Bulk of Water. 
On the other Hand, when the Sulphur was car- 
ried off by Heat, and the Salt gathered into 
narrower Bounds, then the Acids had no Effect, 
but the Alcalis had a considerable one, by join- 
|P_77
ing themselves to the Particles of Salt, and col- 
lecting them. 

The muddy Sediment which was first sepa- 
rated from the Water, when dry, weighed 25 
Grains; it was of a sandy Colour, and had a 
little Saltness on the Tongue. I put this Pow- 
der into an Iron Spoon, made red hot, and 
kept it on the Fire; it smoaked a little, turned 
black on the Surface, afterwards red, and at last 
perfectly white. When cold it weighed 17 
Grains, and felt like Chalk. 

The Earth which was separated from the So- 
lution of the Salt by Filtration, weighed 15 
Grains. It had no Saltness, but was more grit- 
ty between the Teeth than the former. When 
calcin'd it smoaked little, scarce changed its Co- 
lour, and when cold weighed 10 Grains. 

I poured upon small Parcels of these earthy 
Substances both acid and alcaline Liquors; but 
the Remains were so small, that I could not 
discover whether they contained any metallick 
Particles or not. 

The Stones dug from the Vein, as it passes 
thro' the Bottom of the upper Well at Moffat, 
are made up partly of a crystaline Spar cut, as 
it were, into many polish'd Surfaces like Dia- 
monds, partly of a shining Substance of a gol- 
den Colour, but mostly of a dusky or leadish- 
coloured Ore. 

Tho' these Stones seemed to abound in Sul- 
phur, yet none of it would sublime in close Ves- 
sels, but to obtain it in some Shape, I poured 
upon two Ounces of the Ore in Powder a So- 
lution of Salt of Tartar, by Digestion this ex- 
tracted a very deep-red Tincture, from which
by
|P_78
pouring in Spir. Vitriol. I got a Powder of a Ci- 
tron Colour, weighing 17 Grains, which put 
upon a red-hot Iron, made a faint blue Flame, 
and had a sulphurous Smell. 

Two Ounces of the same Mineral, mixt with 
an equal Quantity of Tartar and Nitre in Pow- 
der, was put into a red hot Crucible in a melt- 
ing Furnace; after half an Hour's Fusion, the 
Matter was thrown into an hollow Cone, or 
antimonial Horn, it did not separate into a me- 
tallick or reguline Part and Scoriæ; but there 
appeared many shining Particles dispersed thro' 
the Mass, like very foul Antimony. The whole 
was again reduced to a Powder, and Water 
poured on it, which acquired a very fetid and 
sulphurous Smell, and a Taste much resembling 
the fresh mineral Water, but much stronger. 
This Water likewise, with Spirit of Vitriol, 
afforded a Sulphur like the former. The me- 
tallick Matter, freed from the Salts by frequent 
washing, was again brought to Fusion with Ni- 
tre and Tartar, and now I found at the Apex 
of the Cone, a Piece of very pure Copper, weigh- 
ing 42 Grains, which answered all the Chara- 
cters of that Metal. 

I acknowledge that I could not discover any 
Marks of Copper in the Water itself, by a- 
ny Trials I could make; but as this Water 
washes a Vein abounding with Copper and Sul- 
phur, and is it self impregnated with Salt, I 
may conclude that the Principles contained in 
this medicinal Water, are a very subtile and vo- 
latile Sulphur, at least some constituent Parts of 
Sulphur, some Particles of Copper and Sal-gem, 
or common Salt. 

