

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ1_v4_0041^]

|P_41
[}IX. The Effects of a very small Quantity of 
Arsenick; by Dr. Alexander Thomson
Physician at Montrose. }]
A Lady finding some Arsenick, which she 
knew not, among other Things, for the 
Use of the Family, put a little of it into her 
Mouth, as People ordinarily do when they 
would discover Things by their Taste. Soon 
after, she came to know what it was; but be- 
ing, as she thought, certain that she had swal- 
lowed none of it, would use no Precaution, 
and felt no Change on herself for twelve Hours. 
Then she became suddenly vertiginous; and be- 
ing carried to Bed, her Body was all over con- 
vulsed, so as by her Motions the Bed and Cham- 
ber were shaken. I saw her four Hours after 
this Attack in this Condition; it was too late 
to give her a Vomit, neither did she complain 
of any Disorder in her Stomach or other Bow- 
els. I gave her as much Ol. Amygd. d. as she 
could bear, and ordered an Injection of Ol. O- 
livarum; whereby hard Fæces of the Shape 
|P_42
and Figure of Sheeps Dung, and as deep-green 
a Colour as Cappers, were brought away. I 
repeated the Injections, till the Clyster came 
away as it was injected, without any of these 
Fæces. 

The Convulsions and Frights in her Sleep, 
procured by liquid Laudanum given in Emulsi- 
ons, still continued; and she awaked often with 
such Startings, that had not one in the Bed 
held her firmly, she would have been thrown 
out of it. In this Condition she remained a 
whole Day and Night. 

The Day following, her Body, but especial- 
ly her Head, Face and Neck, were all covered 
over with red Spots like Measles, with exces- 
sive Glowings and the Aurium Tinnitus. Her 
other Symptoms however began to abate. 

To advance the Eruption, and thereby to 
carry off the internal Disease, I gave Diascor- 
dium and volatile Medicines, whereby she re- 
covered of all the Symptoms from the Poison 
in five or six Days, but remained deprived of a 
fine Constitution several Years after. 

