

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ1_v1_0185^]

|P_185
[}XXI. Stones in the Kidney, with Remarks on 
the Operation of Nephrotomy; by Mr. Jonh
Douglas Surgeon in Edinburgh. }]
— — Aged 53 Years, of a robust Make 
of Body, having large Muscles, and remark- 
ably big Blood-Vessels, the Veins of his Arm at 
the common Blooding-place being to Appear- 
ance an Inch in Diameter, was afflicted, since 
four Years old, with a violent Pain in his right 
Side about the Region of the Kidney, from 
which he never was at any time perfectly free; 
but he often had tolerable Intervals; otherwise 
he was very healthy. 

In his younger Days he was salivated by Dr. 
Pitcairn's Order, and had many different Ad- 
vices from several other Physicians, but seldom 
got Relief from any thing, but the drinking 
large Draughts of warm Water, even to the 
Quantity of three Scots Pints (12 Pounds). He 
more than once suffered such violent Pain for 
some Months, that he was obliged to ly the 
whole Time on a Coverlet laid on the Floor; 
the Pressure of his pain'd Side on the hard Floor 
giving him some Remission from Pain. While 
the Pain continued, all the Urine he passed, 
after it had stood and cool'd a little, became 
like Gleet, or Whites of Eggs. He had often 
|P_186
a Diarrhœa, without any Gripes, and could at 
Pleasure even then refrain going to Stool for a 
whole Day. And in the same Way he could 
retain his Urine, till his Bladder was so sull, as 
to discharge near three Chopins (6 Pounds) at 
once. Several Meats and Drinks, such as Eggs, 
Butter, fry'd Meat, Punch and White Wine 
gave him Pain; small Malt-Liquor rather eased 
him, for which Reason he for ordinary drank 
plentifully of it. 

About the Beginning of February 1731, he 
contracted a violent Cough, which brought on 
a Consumption, of which he died, March 29th 
thereafter; tho' by all Appearance, before that 
Time, his Lungs were in exceeding good Con- 
dition. 

I was allowed to open his Body before Dr. 
Robert Lowis and Mr. John Wallace Surgeon; 
and having always been of Opinion that there 
was a Stone in his Right Kidney, I resolved 
first to imitate the Operation called by Authors 
Nephrotomy, which is said to have been per- 
formed successfully by Dominicus de Marchet- 
tis; but I met with such Difficulties, as give me 
great Reason to wish that either Marchettis had 
given us the Account of it; or that the previous 
Symptoms of Consul Hobson had been set down, 
whereby we might be certain of the Stones 
having been cut out of the Kidney itself; and 
all Suspicion might have been removed of its 
having already made its Way thro' the greatest 
Part perhaps of the containing Organs. The 
Difficulties, I mean, are the Thickness of the 
common Teguments and Muscles which was in 
this Body no less than 3½ Inches. When the 
|P_[^Illustrations of the two kidney stones. ^]
|P_187
Peritoneum was laid bare, I observed the Colon
betwixt it and the convex Surface of the Kid- 
ney; after that Gut was removed, a large 
Nerve presented itself, lying just across the 
Place where the Kidney ought to have been cut. 
And the Depth of my Incision was now so 
great, that I found it impracticable to penetrate 
thro' the Substance of the Kidney into the Pel- 
vis; and therefore I turned the Body into the 
common supine Posture; and opening the Kid- 
ney in the ordinary Way of Dissection, I took 
out the two Stones herewith sent. See Tab.
III. Fig. 5, 6. The largest, Fig. 5. weighing 
half an Ounce, was found in the Pelvis. The 
Figure of it you see is triangular, with its Sur- 
face stuck full of small Granula, as big as Cori- 
ander-Seed, which seem to have been united 
after the Stone has been formed; for they were 
of different Hardness and Colour, being black, 
whereas the Surface of the Stone below them is 
brown and firmer. The lesser Stone, Fig. 6. 
which weighed 16 Grains, and is of an irregu- 
lar square Figure, was lodged in the Substance 
of the Kidney. Besides these two, there were 
a great many other small stony Concretions 
dispersed every where in the Tubuli uriniferi; 
many of these were bigger than the largest 
Grains of Sea-Sand. 

