

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ1_v5_0331^]

|P_331
[}XXX. Artificial Passages for natural Liquors 
made by Alexander Monro, P. A. }]
TO keep the Promise I made in Art. xiii. of 
your second Volume, I send you the three 
following Cases. 

|P_332
A Gentleman had been plagued with a tedi- 
ous Tooth-ach, which occasioned a very hard 
Tumor above the joining of the Cheek and 
Gums of the second dens molaris in the upper 
Jaw on the left Side. The Tumor having sup- 
purated broke outwardly on his Cheek, the Mat- 
ter flowing out of the Ulcer was for some time 
very fetid, and several carious Pieces of Bone 
came out of it. This Ulcer continuing long, 
the Patient came to this Place with Dr. Hugh 
Sutherland now Physician in Orkney. 

There was then in the Ulcer a Tent about 
the Size of a Goose-Quill, an Inch and an half 
long; when the Tent was taken out it was co- 
vered with purulent-like Matter, but upon 
leaning his Head forward and to the left Side, 
a clear Liquor resembling glairy Spittle drop'd 
out. No such Liquor or Pus had ever run out 
of his Nose upon reclining his Head to the 
right Side and downwards. The Sore had no 
fetid offensive Smell. A Probe gently bended 
being put into the Sore, was turned in differ- 
ent Directions in a large Cavity formed of 
Bone lined with a smooth tense Membrane, 
which covered the Bone every where that we 
applied the Point of the Probe. The Roots of 
the rotten Tooth, which began this Trouble, 
and had often been attempted to be drawn by 
different Tooth-drawers, were still fast in their 
Sockets. Dr. Sutherland and the Patient both 
informed me that they had several times obser- 
ved a Thickness, and felt what they thought 
to be a Fluctuation of Liquor in the Palate or 
Roof of the Mouth, which there was not then 
any Appearance of. The Patient was other- 
wise in good Health. 

By cutting the Gum between the Roots of 
the rotten Tooth I made way for a thin Piece 
of Iron, which I pushed forcibly in between 
these Roots, and then thrusting it to a Side, I 
prised the one Root inwards out of its Socket, 
and made the other so loose that it came after- 
wards easily out. A small Gimblet being im- 
mediately put into the farthest back Socket, I 
endeavoured to make it pierce into the antrum 
maxillare, but could not direct it so far back. 
To give a Discharge of the Mucus into the 
Mouth, and to prevent its running out at the 
Orifice in his Cheek, till the swelling of the 
Palate should give an Opportunity of making 
a more effectual Drain, I laid aside the Tent, 
and pushing a Shoemaker's Awl from the join- 
ing of the Gums and Cheek into the sinuous 
Ulcer near the Aperture made into the Antrum
by the former Caries, by the means of a very 
flexible Probe, I introduced a small Cord into 
the Wound made with the Awl, and brought 
an End of it out at the external Orifice of the 
Ulcer, desiring the Mouth to be frequently rinsed 
with Brandy to render the new Wound callous 
soon. 

The Patient's Business obliging him to return 
home, he went away with this Seton, which 
being taken out some time after, this new Pas- 
sage shut up as well as the external Orifice; 
soon after which the Palate swelled, and being 
opened by Dr. Sutherland, some small Pieces 
of Bone came out, and our Patient has been 
well ever since. 

|P_334
Hist. 2. In consequence of a Tooth-ach and 
rotten Root, a Tumor rose in a young Gentle- 
man's Cheek, which had been opened in the 
Inside of his Mouth, and a glairy clear Matter 
was evacuated, but the Incision closing soon, 
the Tumor again appeared, and when I first 
saw him, was as large as a small Golf-ball, fil- 
ling all the Hollow of the Cheek, and being 
considerably prominent. I judged it to be of 
the incysted kind, forced out the Remains of 
the rotten Tooth; but the Tumor not evacua- 
ting at the Sockets, Mr. John Douglas at my 
Desire opened it with a Lancet within his 
Cheek. Clear Mucus being pressed out at the 
Orifice, the Tumor subsided, when we plainly 
felt three Exostoses pointing towards each other, 
between which the Sac had been nitched. One 
of the Exostoses rose from the Root of the na- 
sal Process of the maxillary Bone. The second 
grew out from that same Process, or from the 
anterior orbitar Process of the os malarum near 
to the Orbit. And the third, which was the 
largest, resembling, when felt thro' the Tegu- 
ments, an old Cock's Spur, rose out of the 
Cheek-bone. We could be sensible of no Bone 
being bare or spoilt by a Probe introduced at 
the Wound, nor had we Reason, from the 
Nature of the Matter evacuated, to judge that 
there was any carious Bone. A Tent with a 
Thread hanging to it was put into the Wound, 
which was continued some Weeks, Brandy and 
Melrose being frequently injected into the em- 
pty Cyst, and the Patient rinsing that Side of 
the Mouth often with Brandy. After we thought 
the Passage callous the Tent was no more used, 
|P_335
and the Patient has had no Return of the Tu- 
mor. 

Hist. 3. Upon drawing the Roots of a rot- 
ten Tooth of a young Lady who had a Tumor 
resembling the one described in the former Hi- 
story, a yellowish-coloured thin Liquor flowed 
out of one of the Sockets; this Liquor had a 
great many Particles resembling Oil swimming 
on its Top, but had no fetid Smell. The swel- 
ling immediately subsided, no Exostosis was 
felt; a small Probe introduced into the Hole 
of the Socket could not be made to touch any 
bare Bone in the Circumference of a large Ca- 
vity it was put into; nor could we discover the 
Passage by which the Liquor came from the 
external Cystis into the Socket of the Tooth. 
The Management of this Case was the same as 
of the preceding; the oily Particles appeared 
several Days in the Liquor that flowed when 
the Tent was taken out; at length they could 
not be observed. The Lady has continued 
well and free of swelling. 

