

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ1_v2_0243^]

|P_243
[}XVII. Reflections on the Aneurism occasioned 
by Blood-letting; by the same. }]
THE Figures herewith sent will give a bet- 
ter Idea of the Situation and Course of 
the Arteries of the Arm that are the Subject 
of the following Reflections, than any Words 
can; and therefore I shall not trouble you with 
any verbal Description, but shall proceed to the 
Explication of Table II. 

Fig. 1. represents the most ordinary Distri- 
bution of the humeral Artery. 

1. A Part of the pectoral Muscle. 
|P_244
2. The Biceps flexor cubiti. 
3. The Coraco-brachialis Muscle. 
iv. The Brachiæus internus. 
4. The Brachiæus externus. 
5. The Brevis and Longus Extensor. 
6. The Pronator radii teres. 
7. The Supinator radii longus, and Extensor 
carpi radialis drawn outwards by a Thread. 
8. The Supinator radii brevis. 
9. The Flexor carpi radialis. 
10. The common Origin of the Palmaris 
longus and Flexor carpi ulnaris. 
A The Trunk of the humeral Artery giving 
off Branches in its Course to the neighbouring 
Muscles. 
B The Place below the Joint of the Elbow, 
where it is about to split into its two large 
Branches. 
C The radial Branch. 
D The common Trunk of the ulnar and me- 
dian Arteries. 
E A Branch going off from the humeral Ar- 
tery above the Elbow toward the internal Con- 
dyle, behind which it anastomoses sometimes 
by a large Canal with a Branch sent up from 
the Ulnar, oftner they communicate by a great 
many small Branches, and frequently I could 
not discover any Conjunction of these two Ar- 
teries. 
F The Part of the humeral Artery, where it 
commonly begins to be covered by the Aponeu- 
rosis of the Biceps Muscle. 
G A Branch sent up from the radial Artery 
behind the external Condyle of the Os humeri, 
|P_245
to anastomose with such a Branch of the hume- 
ral Artery as E is. 
[^An illustration of the humeral artery and the adjacent muscles on a separate fold-out page.^]
The same Parts are pointed out in the three 
following Figures, by the Letters and Cyphers 
employed in the first Figure, which makes a 
Repetition of their Explication needless. 

Fig. 2. is borrowed from Mr. Cowper's Scheme 
of Arteries [/1./]. 

α Is a Branch sent off from the humeral Ar- 
tery, to anastomose behind the internal Con- 
dyle of the Humerus, with the Artery β, which 
comes from the Trunk of the ulnar and medi- 
an Arteries. 
H The ulnar Artery. 
I. The median Artery. 
k Branches given to the Muscles of the Hand 
from the humeral Artery, just as it is about to 
split into its Branches. 
[^An illustration showing the different branches of the arteries, on a separate fold-out page.^]
Fig. 3. Shews the humeral Artery dividing 
into two great Branches as it is coming out 
from the Arm-pit. These Branches are repre- 
sented as if they lay at each others Sides, which 
the oblique View I gave of them to the Painter 
obliged him to; but the one γ, which after- 
wards becomes the radial, is placed directly an- 
terior to the other in the Subject, the ulnar δ 
lying pretty close to the Bone. 
[^An illustration otherwise similar to the first figure except that the two branches of the artery are visible.^]
Fig. 4. Represents the humeral Artery split- 
ting near the Middle of the Arm, ε being the 
|P_246
larger anterior more superficial Branch, which 
goes on to divide as the humeral Artery in Fig.
1. does, while the lesser Branch ζ runs close on 
the Bone to open into the common Trunk of 
the ulnar and median Arteries. 

H The ulnar Artery. 
I The median Artery. 
L The Branch marked β in the second Fi- 
gure. 
[^Another illustration showing the two branches of the artery and the adjacent muscles, on a separate fold-out page. ^]
Not. The Muscles 6, 9, 10. are here cut 
through, and hang over the Cubit, while 
those marked 7, are drawn outwards, that 
the Arteries might be distinctly seen. 

I still preserve the Arms represented by Fig.
1, 3, 4,

By the Distribution of the humeral Artery 
in Fig. 1. it would appear that the Artery 
which is in hazard of being hurt by the Lan- 
cet in Blood-letting of the Arm, is for ordina- 
ry the Trunk of the humeral Artery, and that 
the Lancet must pierce the tendinous Aponeu- 
rosis of the biceps Muscle before it touches 
the Artery. To be still more assured of this, 
I pushed Pins into the Arms of several Bodies 
at the ordinary Place where the Basilick Vein 
is opened, and where the Cicatrices of for- 
mer Venæsections were seen; and allowing 
the Pins to remain there, I dissected the Parts 
till I saw what has been above asserted to be 
true. 

Sometimes when the median Vein is open- 
ed lower than ordinary, the radial Artery may 
|P_247
be hurt; but then its Wound must be so near 
its Rise from the Trunk, that it is impossible 
to make any Ligature on the radial Artery a- 
bove the Aperture; and therefore, seeing the 
humeral Artery must be tied, if the Operation 
of the Aneurism is performed, the Consequen- 
ces will be the same as if the humeral Artery 
had been wounded. 

In all Patients then whose Vessels are distri- 
buted in the common Way, without any con- 
siderable Anastomosis between the humeral Ar- 
tery and its large Branches in the Fore-Arm; 
it is in vain to expect that any Pulse should be 
felt at the Wrist, immediately after the Ope- 
ration of the Aneurism is performed; and at 
the same Time, the Want of a Pulse there, 
needs not make the Surgeon go on precipitate- 
ly to the Amputation of the Member, because 
the numerous small Anastomoses may be suffi- 
cient to keep Life in it, and may possibly be 
gradually enlarged so much, as to restore Vi- 
gour and Strength to it, and even to make a 
perceptible Pulse at the Wrist. 

When the Operation of the Aneurism is per- 
formed at the Bending of the Elbow to one 
who has the Anastomosis represented in Fig. 2, 
the humeral Artery must be tied, but the Pulse 
at the interior Side of the Wrist will continue, 
and probably that on the exterior Side will 
soon be restored, because the Blood may have 
the short retrograde Motion from the Inserti- 
on of the anastomosing Tube into the ulnar
Artery, to the Place where the radial Artery 
begins, without any great Diminution of its 
Momentum. 

|P_248
Those who happen to have such a Division 
of the humeral Artery as is represented in Fig.
3. can only have the radial Artery hurt in Ve- 
næsection, and after the Operation of the Aneu- 
rism will have a stronger Pulse than formerly 
in the interior Side of the Wrist, but will pro- 
bably want it in the exterior Side. 

If the Vessels anastomose as in Fig. 4. you'll 
readily see, that the anterior Branch only be- 
ing hurt, the Operation of the Aneurism may 
be performed without interrupting intirely the 
Course of the Blood either in the radial or ul- 
nar Artery; and therefore the Pulse may still 
be felt in the common Place on both Side of 
the Wrist. 

I have very little to add, by way of Re- 
marks on the History related by Mr. Macgill, 
having, in the Account already given of the 
Formation of Aneurisms, prevented any Expli- 
cation of the principal Phænomena. I may 
however observe, that in that History we can 
trace the gradual Formation of the Polypus, 
and from the Mixture of the deeper-coloured 
Parts of the Blood then squeezed out, with 
some of the dissolved cellular Membrane, may 
understand how a Liquor like to Coffee made 
of half-burnt Beans could be collected within 
this Aneurism. 

If the common Notion of the true Aneurism
being a Sac formed by the dilated muscular 
Coat of Arteries, has not had its Rise from 
Theory only, I would suspect that the first 
Assertors of it, seeing the Pleura covering an 
Aneurism in the Thorax, or the tendinous A- 
poneurosis of the Biceps here in the Arm ad- 
|P_249
hering firmly to such a Tumor, mistook them 
for the muscular Coat of the Artery. I have 
an Argument for this Suspicion which seems 
very strong to me, whatever it may do to o- 
thers who are less liable to mistake one Thing 
for another; it is this, that notwithstanding 
my Theory and Dissections had brought me 
to think true Aneurisms to be at least a very 
uncommon Disease, yet when I saw Mr. Mac- 
gill lay the tendinous Aponeurosis bare, I was 
ready to have renounced my Opinion, being 
perswaded it was the muscular Coat of the Ar- 
tery, till he most dexterously prosecuted the A- 
poneurosis to its Rise from the Biceps, and so 
fully convinced me of the Mistake, into which 
I should most readily have been led without dis- 
covering it, if the Operation had been perfor- 
med in the more speedy Way of laying the 
whole Tumor open by one Incision. 


[^1. 
(a) Appendix to the Anatomy of human Bodies, Tab. 
III. 
^]