

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ1_v5_0075^]

|P_75
[}VI. The good Effects of small Doses of Emeticks
and Purgatives frequently repeated; by Dr. 
Alexander Thomson Physician at Mon- 
trose. }]
IN various Indigestions in the Stomach, and 
Fluxions of degenerated Humours to the 
chylopoietick Organs, as also in the Foulnesses 
of the Lungs from a simple Cough or Asthma
thro' their whole Train of morbid Consequen- 
ces, where Emetics and Purgatives given in the 
common full Doses have done no Service, I 
have often found the same Medicines taken fre- 
quently in small Doses, of the greatest Benefit, 
without being attended with any Inconveni- 
ence. 

The two Medicines I have generally made 
Use of in this Way are the Emetic Wine among 
the Emetics, and the Tincture of Hiera picra, 
of the Class of Purgatives. 

The general Rule I observe in ordering these 
Medicines, is to divide into a Number of small 
Doses as much of either of the Medicines as 
would be prescribed to the Patient for a full 
Dose; all which small Doses are to be taken 
with proper Intervals in twenty-four Hours, 
mixed with any proper Vehicle suited to the 
Nature of the Disease. I continue this Method 
daily. If the Medicine occasions Nausea, puk- 
ing or Grips, or if the Patient chuses some In- 
termission, I forbear to give them a Day. 

|P_76
To explain my Meanings, I shall mention 
two or three of the many Cases I have treated 
in this Manner. 

A Girl between nine and ten Years of Age 
used toward Night, and sometimes in the 
Morning, to throw up a viscid, ropy Phlegm 
or Mucus from her Stomach and from her 
Lungs; her Flesh became flabby, and her 
whole Body weak and in Disorder. She got 
sometimes the Emetic and at other Times the 
Purgative in the Manner described above, which 
cured her; and having the same good Effect in 
several Relapses, brought her at last to perfect 
Health, which she has now enjoyed a great ma- 
ny Years. 

A poor Man coughing mixt ulcerous Matter, 
and emaciated to a great Degree with the hectic 
Symptoms, had six Drachms of Emetic Wine
mixed with Lib. 2. Infus. Succ. Liquor. nigr.
given him, which he drank daily, in the 
Nychthemeron. He had at Times a transient 
Nausea, puked and expectorated plentifully. 
After he was accustomed some Days to his Me- 
dicine, the Nausea ceased, and the Expectora- 
tion decreased. I increased his daily Dose of 
Emetic Wine to an Ounce, intermitting a Day 
sometimes. The purulent Expectoration gra- 
dually went off, and he recovered. 

A Lady of a bad Habit of Body and low Spi- 
rits had long laboured under ropy variegated 
Vomitings in the Mornings, with Expectora- 
tive suited thereto. After I had treated her 
with Emetics, Purgatives and other Medicines 
in the ordinary Way to little Purpose, I gave 
her in twenty-four Hours different small Doses 
|P_77
of the Infus. Hieræ picræ, till from a small 
Spoonful I increased the Quantity she took in the 
Day to a Spoonful and a half and two Spoon- 
fuls, always refraining the Use of it when she 
found any Stirrings in her Belly, till they ceased. 
Sometimes likewise I mixed a little Daffie's E- 
lixir. By these Means she recoverd. Lately 
she fell again into the same Way, tried the 
Purgatives in common Doses without Success, 
but recovered again by the Use of the small 
Doses. 

