

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ1_v6_0097^]

|P_97
[}LI. A History of the Rabies canina: by Dr. An- 
drew Plummer Professor of Medicine in 
the University of Edinburgh. }]
A Young Gentleman, about seventeen Years 
of Age, who had been Apprentice to a 
Surgeon in the Country, and had come to Edin- 
burgh for his Improvement, about the Beginning 
of December 1728, was bit by a Dog in the mid- 
dle Finger of the right Hand, about the Middle 
of the Nail. At first he said the Dog belonged 
to a Person of his Acquaintance; which Dog 
had no Symptoms of Madness at the Time: But 
afterwards he affirmed, that he was bit by a 
small Dog, which he observed straggling on the 
Streets, when he was endeavouring to catch him; 
and that he never knew what became of the Dog. 
The Wound gave him very little Trouble at first; 
and he soon cured it in the ordinary way. 

In the Beginning of January 1729, he first 
complained of Pain in that Finger, reaching a- 
long the Back of the Hand to the Elbow, accom- 
|P_98
panied with a Numbness of the Finger. In the 
Night betwixt the 6th and 7th of January, he 
was very hot and restless, the Pain still increasing; 
so that next Morning he went to Dr. Charles Al- 
ston, to ask his Advice. He shewed him his 
Hand; and told him, that he had been bit by a 
Dog some Weeks before; but that the Dog was 
still alive, and well. The Doctor advised him, 
to use an emollient and anodyne Fomentation, 
and a cooling Diet. Accordingly he fomented 
his Hand for some time that Evening; and, 
having taken some light Slap for Supper, went 
to Bed: But the Sharpness of the Pain made him 
toss all Night, and put him in a great Heat and 
Sweat. Being very thirsty, he rose in the Mid- 
dle of the Night, to get some Water or Small 
Beer to quench his Thirst. When he got the 
Liquor, he found that he could not drink so 
much as he inclined, because of some Difficulty 
of swallowing. In the Morning, he attempted 
again to drink; but the Liquor had scarce reach- 
ed his Throat, when he was suddenly convulsed, 
let fall the Cup, and said to his Comrade, that 
he was almost choaked. Some Hours after, 
when he was getting out of Bed, he staggered, 
and complained of Giddiness of his Head and 
Sickness at his Stomach; and intreated his Com- 
rade, to bring Dr. Alston to visit him. The Do- 
ctor having heard his Complaints, and finding 
him still hot and feverish, and his Hand much 
pained, ordered him to be blooded immediate- 
ly, and to have a purgative Ptisan given him as 
soon as possible. After letting ten Ounces of 
Blood, the Pain of his Finger abated, and he 
found himself easier. When the Ptisan was 
|P_99
brought, he made many Excuses to shift the ta- 
king of it; but, at the Intreaty of his Friends, 
he made some Attempts; and declared he could 
not swallow it. In the Evening he was persua- 
ded to try if he could get over a little soft 
Bread soaked in Sack-whey. He took it into 
his Mouth, rolled it about for some time; but, 
when he was about to swallow it, he spit it out 
suddenly, and with a convulsive Motion. How- 
ever, that Night he slept pretty calmly, and had 
a moderate Sweat upon him. Next Morning he 
appeared somewhat disordered, spoke incohe- 
rently, fetched deep Sighs, complained he could 
not breathe, and that something interrupted the 
Motion of his Heart. About eleven in the Fore- 
noon, Dr. Alston came to visit him. He found 
him very uneasy, tossing his Head, and shifting 
Postures. He observed that his Mouth was fre- 
quently distorted, and other Muscles of his Face 
convulsed; his Breathing quick; and his Pulse 
frequent, but feeble. He asked him to take a 
little of a Cordial which was at hand. He said, 
he durst not attempt to swallow; for it would 
choak him: But, being pressed to try it, he put 
the Glass to his Mouth, and poured in the Li- 
quor suddenly; but he as quickly threw it out 
again, with a kind of Horror and Shivering. 
The Doctor perceiving these extraordinary Sym- 
ptoms, and apprehending the Lad to be in the 
greatest Danger, went to the Elaboratory about 
twelve o'Clock, where he expected to meet with 
some of his Colleagues the Professors of Physick, 
and carried Dr. Rutherford, Dr. St. Clair, and 
me, along with him, to his Patient, and, at the 
same time, sent to Mr. Monro, to meet us there. 
|P_100
We found him very much disordered, like one 
in an Agony, tossing his Head and his Arms. His 
Face was red and blotted, his Eyes wild and sta- 
ring, constantly squirting out his Spittle; some- 
times starting up suddenly from his Seat, then 
throwing himself down upon the Bed. Yet he 
answered Questions that were put to him pretty 
composedly: Only he would now and then stop 
short of a sudden, and beg that such a Person, who 
was his most intimate Friend and Comrade, 
might not be admitted into the Room; for he 
could not bear the Sight of him, nor hear his 
Name mentioned; but could give no Reason for 
it. He was desired to sip a little Liquor out of 
a Tea-pot; he attempted it with great Relu- 
ctancy; but spit it out immediately, appearing 
to be in the greatest Disorder; complaining, that 
his Breath was quite stopped. The Physicians 
retired to a Coffee-house, to consult if any thing 
could be attempted with any Probability of Suc- 
cess, and carried along with them the young 
Man who had been the Patient's Bed-fellow and 
most intimate Companion, that they might be 
better informed of all that had happened to him. 
He assured them, that, though he had told Dr. 
Alston that his Finger was bit by a Dog belong- 
ing to a Friend, which was then well, without 
any Symptoms of the Rabies; yet, when he re- 
turned home, immediately after the Bite, he said 
it was given by a Dog straggling in the Streets, 
with a Collar about its Neck; and that he ne- 
ver saw the Dog more. He informed them like- 
wise that the unhappy Lad, at the Time he was 
bitten, had a Gonorrhæa, for which he had been 
taking Medicines privately: That his Method 
|P_101
was, to take a Dose of Mercurius dulcis at Night, 
and early next Morning some Purgative; the 
Operation of which was generally over about 
Mid-day: After which, he used to attend his 
Professors, and go about any other Business. The 
Physicians had not sit long, when another young 
Man, a Comrade of the Patient, came in; tel- 
ling them, That, soon after their Departure, he 
found himself much worse, and believed he was 
a-dying; and therefore intreated him, to call 
back the Physicians: But, as he was going out, 
the Patient run after him, and fell upon him, in 
a most outrageous manner; and would have done 
him a Mischief, if the People of the House had 
not come to his Assistance: That he was carried 
back to his Chamber quite furious: That two 
Men were scarce able to keep him in his Bed; 
and that the Vein which had been opened the 
Day before, had burst open by the Violence of 
his struggling, and was bleeding excessively. As 
he lodged in my Neighbourhood, I went along 
with the young Man, to see in what Condition 
he was then, and if any thing could be done for 
him. It was the most dismal Spectacle I had e- 
ver seen. He was roaring and foaming, gnash- 
ing his Teeth, endeavouring to bite and tear any 
thing he could come at, with his Hands and 
Teeth: He would bounce with such Force, as to 
heave up a Man that was lying across him, and 
make the Bed shake: His Face, Breast, Hands, 
and Linen, were all covered over with Blood 
and Sweat. After he had almost exhausted his 
Strength, and was panting for Breath, I spoke 
to him. He knew me; and answered pretty 
calmly. I told him, it was necessary his Arm 
|P_102
should be bound up, lest he should faint or die 
by Loss of Blood. He agreed. And as no body 
else seemed fond of the Employment, I put a 
Compress and Roller about his Arm, and wiped 
the Sweat and Blood off his Face. As near as I 
could guess, from the clotted Blood, his Linen 
and Bed-cloaths that were wet with it, he had 
lost about twenty Ounces of Blood in this Fit; 
which had lasted near an Hour. In this calm In- 
terval, I asked him, if he would drink? He said, 
he desired nothing more; for he was exceeding 
thirsty. I took up a Jug that was at hand, with 
Milk and Water, and put it to his Mouth. He 
snapt at it greedily, and fixed his Teeth in it: 
He took in a Mouthful of the Liquor; but squirt- 
ed it out again. He was instantly seized with a 
violent Convulsion; which was followed by a 
vomiting of a bilious Phlegm, with some thick 
black Matter, like clotted Blood. Then the fu- 
rious Paroxysm returned; he raved, and strug- 
gled, and attempted to bite. I advised, that he 
should be bound carefully to the Bed; and that 
proper Persons should look after him: Which 
was done. Mr. Monro and I returned in the E- 
vening. He was foaming at the Mouth, making 
a hideous Noise, rolling about his Tongue, and 
making such a Sound as Children wont to do 
when they despise one that talks to them as a 
Babbler. He had a convulsive Motion like the 
Hickup, but stronger; and his Face was frequent- 
ly distorted with Spasms. Even at this Time he 
knew Mr. Monro and me, though he raved in- 
cessantly. He continued in this Condition till 
six at Night; when, his Strength being quite 
|P_103
exhausted, he lay motionless for half an Hour; 
and then expired. 

