

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ1_v4_0236^]

|P_236
[}XV. A Wound with a hot Iron penetrating the 
Pelvis; by Dr. Andrew Willison Physi- 
cian at Dundee. }]
THE Regard Physicians and Surgeons have 
for their own Character and Reputation, 
makes them often shy to undertake the Cure of 
Patients, where they have no Hope of Success, 
and may be blamed by the Ignorant, if the Dis- 
ease is fatal; nay the Despair of doing good is 
sometimes a Reason of proper Remedies being 
neglected as needless. But as every one can 
save himself from Reproach, by making a due 
Prognostick of the Event to the Relations, and 
People have recovered beyond Expectation, 
|P_237
præstat anceps quàm nullum tentare remedium, 
the Sick should have all the Assistance which 
the healing Art can give. 

By this general Reflexion I would introduce 
the History of a Case, which contains indeed no 
new Method of Cure, but where Nature, with 
a little Assistance, made a Cure of a Disease 
which I look'd on as desperate. 

In the Beginning of March 1735, a Smith 
pushed a red-hot Iron with such Force into the 
Buttock, an Inch and a half from the Anus, of 
a young Man of twenty Years of Age, that the 
Point of it came out through the Linea alba, a- 
bout an Inch above the Ossa Pubis, having 
pierced through the Pelvis. After some Hours 
I saw him. His Pulse was low and intermitting. 
He had violent bilous vomiting from time to 
time, great Pains in his Belly, Thirst, Watch- 
ings, cold Sweats and Faintings, with scarce 
any Blood from the Orifices of the Wound. 

I ordered fourteen Ounces of Blood to be let 
from him, and to inject an emollient Clyster 
with Turpentine, which operated well, and he 
was somewhat relieved of the Pain in his Belly. 
He rested ill all Night; and, next Morning, 
his Symptoms continued, and he had passed no 
Urine now twenty Hours after receiving the 
Wound, notwithstanding his having drank 
great Quantities of Liquor. His Pulse was more 
frequent and harder. I caused twelve Ounces 
of Blood to be taken, and after fomenting his 
Belly well with Emollients, rubbed it with Ol. 
Scorpionum. By which the Pain became much 
less. Thirty Hours after receiving the Wound 
he voided a little Urine with much Mucus, such 
|P_238
as People with Stones in their Bladder common- 
ly pass. At Night the Clyster was repeated, 
and brought off a great deal of ropy Slime with 
it. An Emulsion with some Nitre was given 
for ordinary Drink, and a cordial Julep did him 
much Service in moderating the vomiting. 

The third Day he again used the Fomentati- 
on, Clyster and Emulsion. His Urine and Ex- 
crements came now plentifully by the lower 
Wound near the Anus, little being evacuated 
the natural Way, except a little slimy Urine 
which he passed with sharp Pain. I ordered di- 
luted Digestive and Mel-Rose warmed, to be 
injected into the Wound. 

The bad Symptoms continued ten Days, and 
the same Medicines were used. After this Time 
his Urine came the natural Way. In ten Days 
more the Excrements did the same, and in six 
Weeks he was cured, having taken a low ve- 
getable Diet all the Time, with thin weak Li- 
quors for Drink, and Opiats at Night. 

Towards the End of the Cure he was emaci- 
ated, and had a Cough, but recovered of both 
by a Milk Diet. 

