

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ1_v1_0266^]

|P_266
[}XXXV. The Bladder become schirrous, from 
a singular Cause; by Doctor Edward Bar- 
ry, Physician at Cork in Ireland. }]
MR. Moses Dean, a Gentleman of a con- 
siderable Family and Fortune, natural- 
ly of a strong Habit of Body, and of a strictly 
temperate Manner of Living, while a Child 
had often discharged Gravel and small Stones 
with his Urine. The Symptoms attending 
such a Disorder increased as he grew older; 
and about the Age of Twenty four he was cut 
on the Gripe (as the lesser Operation is com- 
monly called) for the Stone, and a very large 
one was taken out of his Bladder. Soon after 
the Wound in the Perinæum was healed, he 
complained of a Pain in that Part; this was 
succeded by a hard Tumor which gradually 
increased in a painful Manner, for the Space 
of twenty one Years, at which Time it was so 
large, that it was equal to the Size of a Turky 
Egg, and prevented him from riding or sitting, 
but with great Uneasiness. One Day being in 
a Chariot, he received a sudden Jolt, which 
gave him such exquisite Pain, that he sent for 
a Surgeon, and told him that he was determi- 
ned to have the Tumor cut out or opened im- 
mediately. The Surgeon tho' ignorant of the 
Nature of the Tumor, applied a Caustick, and 
afterwards cutting on the Eschar, a very hard 
Resistance was perceived, which, by dilating 
the Part, he found to proceed from a large 
Stone about four Inches and a half in Length, 
and two and a half in Breadth, contained be- 
|P_267
tween the Bladder and Perinæum. The Stone 
had a small rising Process which was fixed in 
the Orifice of the Bladder. After the Stone 
was extracted, the Urine constantly flowed out 
of that Orifice, which always obliged him to 
keep a Vessel or Spunge to receive it, till the 
Time of his Death, which was seventeen Years 
after this last Operation. 

During that Time several small Stones passed 
thro' that Orifice, which, with the Acrimony 
of the Urine perpetually running off, not only 
hindred him from sitting or riding, but made 
his whole Life a constant Scene of Misery. 

A Year before de died, purulent Matter fre- 
quently subsided in his Urine; all the Sym- 
ptoms continued to increase, attended with 
bloody Urine, a Pain in the Region of the Kid- 
neys, Colicks and frequent Vomiting. 

On dissecting his Body, at which several were 
present, his Kidneys were found very large, 
with an unequal rough Surface, owing to a 
great Quantity of Gravel collected in them. A 
large Stone which could not pass the Ureter
was lodged in the Pelvis of the right Kidney, 
which was greatly dilated. In the left Kidney 
a large Stone was found in a Bed of Corrup- 
tion. 

When the Pelvis was examined I was at a 
Loss to find the Bladder, nothing that bore the 
least Resemblance to it appearing, and in the 
Place of it a hard solid Substance was discover- 
ed, which I concluded must have been the Blad- 
der, by the Insertion of the Ureters into it, 
which discharged the Urine into the Fistula. 

This indurated schirrous Bladder had no Ca- 
|P_268
vity but what the small Stream of Urine kept 
open; it weighed thirteen Ounces and a quar- 
ter. Cutting thro' it, the Inside was white, 
and it seemed to consist of several distinct schir- 
rous Glands. 

From the Insertion of the Ureters to the ex- 
ternal Orifice was one continued fistulous Ca- 
vity. The external Margin of the Perinæum
was mortified, the Inside of the Fistula was ul- 
cerated, and had large lateral Sinuses, and that 
Part of the indurated Bladder thro' which the 
Urine passed was cancerated. 

It plainly appears that this uncommon Dis- 
order was owing to the external Orifice in the 
Perinæum being healed after the Operation, be- 
fore the internal Orifice in the Bladder was u- 
nited; by which means the sandy Sediment in 
the Urine subsiding and pushing thro' it, form- 
ed a Stone between that and the Perinæum, 
which for the Space of twenty one Years in- 
creased, and dilated the adjacent Parts, till they 
could not admit any further Distension, and 
then the small rising Process filled the Orifice. 

I never visited this Gentleman till about two 
Years before he died, and by a cooling, open- 
ing, Anodyne Regimen, endeavoured to pal- 
liate the Symptoms. This was all the Relief 
his Case would then admit of; but when the 
last Stone was taken out, there were two dif- 
ferent Methods by which this preternatural Al- 
teration in the Bladder might, I believe, have 
been prevented. 

The first was by uniting the Orifice in the 
Neck of the Bladder, by first reducing it to a 
green Wound; but as the Lips of it must have 
|P_269
been very callous, this might have been attend- 
ed with great Difficulty and Danger. 

The next was, by injecting thro' the Ori- 
fice into the Bladder Morning and Evening a- 
bout a Pound of any detergent Injection, which 
by that Means might have kept it pliable and 
free from Obstructions, and given artificial 
Motion, which might have supplied the Defect 
of the natural one, and perhaps in some Cases 
where the Habit of the Body is disposed to 
form calculous Concretions, it might be pre- 
ferable to the former; for it is certain that a 
great Number of Stones did often pass thro' 
this Orifice, which were too large to be dis- 
charged by the Urethra, and which might o- 
therwise have been more quickly fatal to him 
than this Disorder, in which he miserably lan- 
guished so many Years. 

