

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ1_v3_0280^]

|P_280
[}XXVI. A large Steatom passing with the Oeso- 
phagus from the Thorax into the Abdomen; 
by Mr. James Jamieson Surgeon at Kelso. }]
A Carpenter in this Place, thirty six Years of 
Age, of a thin Make of Body, asked my 
Advice about the middle of February 1732; his 
Complaints were, Pains at the Heart, in the 
Pit of the Stomach, both Sides of the Thorax, 
and betwixt his Shoulders; a great Difficulty 
in swallowing, and frequent Inclination to vo- 
mit. He told me it was about six Years, since, 
upon a sudden Grief, he was first seized with 
the Pain, and frequent Palpitations at his Heart, 
and that the other Symptoms came on gradual- 
ly afterwards, but never kept him from his or- 
dinary Work till now. 

At my first Visit I took twelve Ounces of 
Blood from his Arm; the Blood was sizy like 
that in a Rheumatism. Next Day he took 
Pulv. Ipecacuan. Drach. sem. Tartar. Emet. 
Gr. ii. which purged him four or five Times, 
but did not occasion the least Nausea. I gave 
|P_281
him also Doses of the Pillul. Cummos. twice a 
Day, washing them down with Decoct. Amar.
in which a small Quantity of Sal. Absinth. was 
dissolved; caused the pained Parts to be fo- 
mented with a strong Decoction of the Aroma- 
tick Plants, and applied a large Plaister of The- 
riac Andromach. Ol. Mac. per express. and the 
Powder of the carminative Seeds. The Blood- 
ing gave him some Remission of Pain, and was 
repeated twice in the following Weeks, 
with some short Relief each Time. 

Finding however his Complaints rather in- 
crease, I obliged him to call a Physician, which 
his Poverty had made him obstinately refuse 
to do hitherto; and while Dr. Abernethy was 
sent for, he shewed me a hard painful Tumor 
immediately below the Cartilago Xiphoides, 
which he said he had only discovered the pre- 
ceding Night. 

The Doctor suspecting from the Account the 
Patient gave of his Disease, and from the Ap- 
pearance of this Tumour, that an Abscess was 
forming in the Stomach, ordered him a Milk 
Diet, and Lintseed Tea, or a Decoction of He- 
dera Terrest. or Milk and Water for ordinary 
Drink, and caused an emollient Cataplasm to 
be applied to the Tumor. 

He continued to turn gradually worse, till 
about the Middle of March, when he was at- 
tacked with a vomiting, which none of the dif- 
ferent Stomachicks nor Opiats given him could 
restrain, but were thrown back again as soon 
as swallowed. His Thirst became excessive and 
perpetual; but all his Drink, though taken in 
very small Quantities at a Time, was vomited 
|P_282
as quickly as his Medicines, without increasing 
his Pains; and a Singultus soon came on, 
which continued till his Death. 

He passed very little Fæces by the Anus, and 
these were generally procured by gentle Cly- 
sters. 

His Urine was for the most Part limpid, 
when there was any Sediment, it was white. 

During the whole Course of this Disease, the 
Patient's Pulse was never quick or strong, but 
low and languid, and sometimes intermitted. 
His Pains were always most severe in the Night, 
and at last deprived him almost entirely of 
Sleep; and for a whole Month he did not ly 
down, but sat in the Bed, or on a Chair bend- 
ed forwards with his Head on a Pillow. In 
this melancholy Condition he languished till the 
first of April, when he died. 

On laying open the Thorax and Abdomen, 
we observed a prodigious large steatomatous 
Body, which filled a great Part of the Thorax, 
being grown to the Pleura in both Sides, to 
the larger Share of the Mediastinum and Peri- 
cardium; and then accompanying the Oesopha- 
gus, they passed together through the Dia- 
phragm, having enlarged the Passage in this Mu- 
scle considerably, and straitning the Oesopha- 
gus. After entring the Abdomen, it was stretch'd 
along the Dorsum of the Stomach to the Pylo- 
rus, which it also compressed greatly. Both 
the Orifices of the Stomach being so much con- 
tracted, that I could scarce push my Finger 
through either. I was about to have cut out 
this whole Tumor, to measure and weigh it, 
but was opposed by the Relations; and there- 
|P_283
fore behoved to content myself with examining 
its Substance as it lay in the Body. It was so 
hard, my Knife could scarce cut it, but after 
a transverse Incision, several Sinuses formed in 
the firm white Substance discovered themselves; 
some of them contained a Matter like a Meliceris, 
in others, it was a-kin to that of the Atheroma, 
and in a third sort it was purulent and fetid. 

The Fat of the Omentum was all wasted, but 
all the other Visera were sound enough. 

