

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ1_v2_0026^]

|P_26
[}II. An Account of the DISEASES that were 
most frequent last Year in Edinburgh. }]
THE Tertian Agues, which were mention- 
ed in the Close of our preceding Year, 
continued likewise thro' June, and Part of Ju- 
ly 1732. Towards the End of June this Dis- 
ease did not form into regular Paroxysms, and 
perfect Intermissions, but appeared more in the 
Shape of a remitting Fever. During the Re- 
missions, the Pulse was much sunk, but as the 
Sweat came on, the Pulse became fuller and 
stronger. When the Sweat did not break out, 
the Patients became delirious, and some con- 
tinued quite deaf for some Days. The Urine 
was pale, and without Sediment 'till the Dis- 
ease was going off. 

Some were cured of this Disease after two or 
three Paroxysms, by a Vomit or two, but with 
others the Disease lasted much longer. Bleed- 
ing was not found of Use, altho' some Sym- 
ptoms seemed to require it, but Vomiting and 
Blistering succeeded much better, either of 
them bringing out the Sweat when untimely 
stopt or prevented. 

In July some few Tertian Agues remained; 
they were then more regular and gentle than 
before. Towards the End of this Month the 
Cholera began to appear; but it was neither ve- 
ry frequent nor violent. 

In August many among the poorer sort of 
People in the Suburbs and Villages near Edin- 
burgh, were taken with slow Fevers, general- 
ly attended with a violent Head-ach and Ra- 
|P_27
vings; some with a Diarrhæa, others with Pains 
of the Rheumatick kind all over the Body. As 
few of the Sick had Access to timely Assistance, 
several died in this Distemper. 

The same Fever continued among the poor- 
er People thro' September and October, and 
proved mortal the eighth or ninth Day. Be- 
sides the Symptoms before-mentioned, many 
complained of great Weight of their Heads, 
and Drowsiness, Loathing and Vomiting; o- 
thers had Pains of the Breast, and difficult 
Breathing. Children in this Fever, beside the 
Head-ach and Drowsiness, had Pain and tense 
swelling of the Belly. Most of them passed 
Worms, some the Teretes, others the Asca- 
rides, and recovered. 

In November several Children were seized 
with slight aguish Fits returning every other 
Day, but lasting only a few Hours, and going 
off without Sweating. Between the Paroxysms 
the Children were pretty easy, and their Pulses 
calm. These Fits were easily carried off by a 
Vomit or two. 

About the same time several People were ta- 
ken with a Cholera, which did not prove very 
obstinate. 

In this Month likewise the Effects of Cold 
appeared in different Shapes, as Coughs, Quin- 
cys, Rheumatick Pains, Colick Pains, Diar- 
rhæas, &c. 

From the Beginning, till the Middle of De- 
cember, slow Fevers were very rife among 
young People; they continued long, and were 
attended with Pains in the Breast, and a sym- 
ptomatick Diarrhæa, but were not deadly. A- 
|P_28
bout the same time others were seized with Fe- 
vers of the nervous kind, with a very frequent 
but low Pulse. 

On the 17th, December, several People were 
suddenly attacked with Fevers of Cold; the 
Numbers increased but insensibly till the 25th; 
after which these Fevers became greatly epide- 
mick, very few escaping them, and continued 
universal in this City and Neighbourhood till 
the middle of January 1733, when they be- 
gan to decrease, and diminished daily till the 
End of that Month. 

This Fever began with a Coldness, Shiver- 
ing, Swimming of the Head, Pains of the Head, 
Breast and Back; the Pulse was very frequent; 
the Appetite quite lost, and remained pall'd 
sometime after the Disease was removed. With 
a great many it began with a running of Lymph 
at the Eyes and Nose, which continued for a 
Day; then they complained of Pain and Swel- 
ling about their Throats before the Cough be- 
gan, and not a few were suddenly seized with 
the Cough, which, after the third Day, was 
incessant and constant in all, by which they dis- 
charged great Quantities of Mucus, and had 
their Pains greatly increased. Some complain- 
ed of sharp Pains in their Bellies, and had a 
Diarrhæa, sometimes with bloody Stools, e- 
specially if they were not sufficiently blooded 
in the Beginning. Several passed their Urine 
in very small Quantity, of a high Colour, with- 
out Sediment, and continued to do so, some 
time after the Fever was gone off. Among the 
Children, along with the Cough, many had 
|P_29
violent Vomitings, and some a gentle Diar- 
rhæa, which carried off the Disease. 

The Fever commonly left the Sick in two or 
three Days; but after the third Day scarce any 
escaped the constant tickling Cough. General- 
ly all of them inclined to sweat, and were there- 
by considerably relieved. Some had profuse 
Sweats, with copious reddish or brown, but not 
lateritious Sediment in their Urine, without a- 
ny previous Coldness, Shiverings, &c. These 
soon did well, if the Sweating was not discou- 
raged by some other Evacuation. 

Bleeding in the Beginning gave Relief to the 
Pains, and weakned the Fever, and required to 
be plentiful to many who had violent Head- 
aches, and a Feeling in their Eyes as if they 
would have started out, or to those who had an 
universal Oppression of the Thorax, with 
Stitches and Cramps of the Muscles employed 
in Breathing; such in this Condition who de- 
layed Venæsection too long, were seized with 
a Hæmoptoe. Some bled a little at the Nose, 
and were quickly well, without any Medicine 
or other Evacuation. A few were at once sei- 
zed with ugly Faintings; when bled they re- 
covered more slowly; but when supported with 
Cordials, they were soon well. 

Vesicatories were of Service to the Cough, 
and Opiates were of great Use, curing several. 

When the Phlegm began to thicken, Mix- 
tures in which Gum Ammoniac and Oxymel Scil- 
liticum were the principal Ingredients, opened 
the Belly, and did remarkable Service. The 
ordinary Pectorals and Balsamicks were not ob- 
served to do any good. 

|P_30
This Disease was not of itself mortal, but it 
swept away a great Number of poor old and 
consumptive People, and of those who were 
much wasted by other Distempers. As a Proof 
on whom it fell heaviest, we may remark, That 
though the Number of Burials in the Gray- 
friars Charch-yard (where all the Dead of E- 
dinburgh are buried) was double of what it uses 
to be in the Month of January, yet the Num- 
ber of those who were buried at the publick 
Charge was so great, that the Fees of the Bu- 
rials scarce did amount to the Sum commonly 
received in any other Month. 

It was very remarkable, That, notwithstand- 
ing this Disease was so universal here, the Peo- 
ple in our Prison, and the Boys who are nu- 
merous in Heriot's Hospital, which is contigu- 
ous to the West Side of the Grayfriars Church- 
yard, and the Inhabitants of the Houses near 
to that Hospital escaped this Fever and Cough. 

This epidemick Disease which was felt soon- 
er at Edinburgh than any other Part of this 
Island, spread itself gradually over all Scotland. 
It did not reach the most Northern and Western 
Parts till about fifteen Days after the Time a- 
bove mentioned of its attacking this City. The 
Ship Anne and Agnes, David Littlejohn Ma- 
ster, having made a Voyage to Holland, with 
one sick Sailor on Board, returned with the o- 
ther then in perfect good Health, till they made 
Flamborough-head, where on the 15th of Ja- 
nuary six Sailors were taken ill; next Day two 
more were in the same Condition, and the Day 
thereafter one more fell sick; so that when the 
Vessel came to the Road of Leith, none on 
|P_31
Board were in Health except one, who was 
seized the Day after he came on Shore with the 
same Disease which his Comrades had, whose 
Symptoms were the common ones of the ra- 
ging epidemick Distemper. 

We believe it will not be improper here to 
mention the Horses in and about this Place, be- 
ing universally attacked with a running of the 
Nose and Coughs, towards the End of October
and beginning of November, before the Ap- 
pearance of this Fever of Cold among Men. 

This epidemick Distemper above described, 
spread itself over all Europe, and also infested 
the Inhabitants of America; so that it was per- 
haps the most universal Disease upon Record. 
The first Accounts we have of any Thing like 
it this last Year in Europe, was, in the Middle 
of November, from Saxony, Hanover, and o- 
ther neighbouring Countries in Germany. It 
raged at one Time in Edinburgh, and Basil in 
Switzerland. It appeared in London and Flan- 
ders after the first Week in January. Toward 
the Middle of which it reached Paris; and a- 
bout the End of the same Month Ireland began 
to suffer. In the Middle of February, Leghorn
was attacked; and near the End of it, the Peo- 
ple of Naples and Madrid were seized with it. 
In America it began in New-England about the 
Middle of October, and travelled Southward to 
Barbadoes, Jamaica, Peru, and Mexico, much 
at the same Rate as it did in Europe. 

There were also some People in Edinburgh
labouring under Fevers of the Pleuritick Kind, 
and others under slow tedious ones in the Month 
of January. 

|P_32
In FebruaryRheumatick and Pleuritick
Fevers succeeded to the Colds, several who had 
passed through these were seized with those and 
died. The Management of the Sick was no 
other than what is common in Pleurisies. 

About this Time also several People died 
suddenly. 

The Pleuritick or Peripneumonick Fevers 
which began in February, continued thro' all 
March. 

At the same Time slow Fevers were likewise 
frequent without any topical Inflammation. In 
most Patients these Fevers did not appear with 
any violent Symptoms, tho' some had Ravings, 
but they were neither constant nor high. These 
Fevers often lasted till the 30th or 40th Day, 
and in some to the 60th; and at length the Pa- 
tients gradually wrestled out of them, without 
any remarkable Crisis. The common Reme- 
dies in such Cases availed little here; Blister- 
ing was found of much more Service than 
Bleeding. 

Tertian Agues, began to appear in March, 
and continued thro' April and Part of May, 
tho' not very frequent; many of them went 
off easily after four of five Fits, without much 
Assistance from Medicine, others took the com- 
mon Course. 

Some short but sharp Fevers were frequent 
in April, with an Erysipelas for the most Part 
on the Face, and sometimes on the Body or 
Extremities. 

Some few Children had the Small Pox all 
the Spring, and there were rather more in May, 
they were generally of the distinct Kind; and 
|P_33
several had an Eruption like the Bastard or 
Chicken-Pox. It was attended with very little 
Fever, and very slight Symptoms; for after a 
little Heaviness and Loss of Appetite, the Pu- 
stules appeared. They were pretty large and 
red: They did not suppurate, but had a little 
Vesicle of clear Lymph on the Top. Some 
new Pustules appeared for four or five Days 
successively like the first; and about the ninth 
Day all went off. 

