

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ1_v6_0019^]

|P_19
[}XLVII. Unexpected Cures; by Alexander 
Monro, P. A. }]
IF Practisers in Physick and Surgery have 
sometimes uneasy Minds on account of Pa- 
tients, the Nature of whose Diseases they cannot 
judge with Certainty; if they are disappointed 
now and then in the Effects of Medicines; and 
if they have the galling Mortification of the Sick 
dying unexpectedly, they have, on the contra- 
ry, frequently the Comfort and Pleasure of be- 
ing surprised with the great Relief which their 
Patients, in very obscure, or even in Diseases 
which they are ignorant of, receive from Medi- 
cines, which either a very distant Analogy to 
some known Disease, or the Necessity of miti- 
gating some urgent Symptom, have made them 
prescribe; nay, the Event sometimes is prosper- 
ous when the Medicines are differently applied, 
or have other Effects than the Prescriber intend- 
ed. Though People should be very cautious in 
laying down any general Rule in Practice, and 
ought not to found it on one or two Observati- 
ons; yet I must think such unexpected Cures as 
|P_20
I have hinted at, deserve to stand on Record, 
that, if the Medicines employed are not of a ve- 
ry offensive Nature, they may again be tried in 
similar Cases; so that sick People may have some 
more Chance for their Recovery than the com- 
mon Methods give. As a Specimen of such 
Cases, I send you the following Medley of pra- 
ctical Observations. If they are thought useful, 
I can furnish you several more; and dare say, e- 
very one of the Gentlemen of your Society can 
add to the Number. 

I. A middle-aged healthy Man having bruised 
the Extremity of the Penis, the Part of the Pre- 
puce where the Frænum of the Glans is, was rai- 
sed into a large crystaline Tumor. Topical a- 
romatick Fomentations and Suffumigia being ap- 
plied to it, and Catharticks being given, with- 
out its yielding, a small Seton was put through 
it, with the View of allowing some of the wa- 
tery Liquor to ouze out, and of bringing on a 
gentle Suppuration. Instead of this it occasion- 
ed sharp Pain, and a violent Inflammation; 
which made it necessary to take out the Cord, 
and to apply an emollient Poultice of Milk and 
Bread. Next Day after this the Tumor was 
greatly diminished; and the second Day it dis- 
appeared, without a Return. 

II. A young Man had a great many pale-red 
Excrescences, of a very unequal Surface, with 
small Necks on the interior Side of the Prepuce; 
and when the Prepuce was turned back, Cox- 
comb Excrescences were likewise seen on as much 
of the Glans as he could uncover. The Account 
which he gave of his Disease to Dr. James Dun- 
das and me, was, That, having a small Wart on 
|P_21
the Edge of the Prepuce, he cut it away with a 
Razor; soon after which these Excrescences be- 
gan to appear. Mercurial Ointments, Astrin- 
gents, Escharoticks, and several other Medicines, 
had been tried in vain, and he had undergone 
six Weeks Salivation without any Benefit; tho' 
he averred solemnly, that he was sure they were 
not owing to any venereal Cause. 

I tied a Silk Thread very tight round the Neck 
of one of them; he complained of sharp Pain 
while the Noose was drawing, which soon cea- 
sed; and in two Days the Tumor dropt off, 
leaving the Surface of the Part it rose from 
smooth and sound.—I desired a young Surgeon, 
who had seen me make this Ligature, to take 
the other Excrescences away in the same Way. 
When this young Gentleman attempted next 
Day to put a Ligature on one of these Excre- 
scences, he was timorous, and the Patient was 
not obsequious; so that the Ligature was not 
made tight enough to mortify the Tumor. The 
Patient felt very sharp Pain all that Day; and 
by next Morning a very considerable Inflamma- 
tion was raised; for which he was blooded plen- 
tifully, and emollient Fomentations and Poultices 
were applied to the Part. After two Days the 
Inflammation abated, and the Excrescences were 
all considerably diminished; and, as the Inflam- 
mation went off, they shrivelled: So that, after 
eight Days, during which the Emollients were 
continued, it could not be known where the Ex- 
crescences had been. 

Whether was it the Inflammation or the e- 
mollient Applications which made the Cure in 
these two Cases? In my Opinion it was the In- 
|P_22
flammation; and I am confirmed in it by the 
Success which I have seen of stimulating Medi- 
cines in slow cold Swellings. 

III. A Man who had been subject to the Gout, 
was by Accident burnt superficially in the Face 
and Hands. After the Burnings were all skin- 
ned, a spongy Excrescence, the Base of which 
was equal to a Sixpence, rose out from the Point 
of his Nose; and such another, as broad as a 
Shilling at its Base, rose out from the right 
Cheek. They were both of a pale red Colour, 
and of a granulated Surface, throwing out from 
imperceptible Pores a thin Liquor, which fell 
down in Drops so fast, that a considerable Quan- 
tity of it could have been collected in a short 
Time. After different Plaisters, Ointments, A- 
stringents, &c. had been tried to no Purpose, I 
covered the Excrescences with the fine Cotton 
of old Linen, scraped with a Knife, and wet with 
Alcohol. I desired the Cotton might not be ta- 
ken off, but that it should be wet three or four 
Times a Day with the Spirit. After this Appli- 
cation, the ouzing of Liquor decreased, and in 
two Days ceased altogether. The Cotton adhe- 
ring to the Excrescences, they shrivelled, and 
at last became smooth and plain with the other 
Parts of the Skin, leaving only a little Redness 
for some Time. 

IV. A young Man of a weak Constitution, 
and thin Habit, having fallen from a Height, 
was bruised in a great many Parts of his Body, 
and particularly in the hypogastrick Region. He 
complained soon after of a sharp Pain in the Pe- 
nis, and Regions of the Bladder. Those he advi- 
sed with suspecting these Pains might be caused by 
|P_23
some Remains of a virulent Gonorræa which he 
had two Years before, injected some acrid Medi- 
cines into the Urethra, which increased the Pain, 
and occasioned a considerable Inflammation in the 
Penis. When the Inflammation was removed, 
he had great Difficulty in making Water, with 
sharp Pain along the whole Urethra when it did 
pass. He then took several Doses of Sweet Mer- 
cury, drank the Decoction of the Woods; and 
continued some time the Use of gummous Pills, 
with some Grains of Mercury in them. The 
Symptoms becoming however worse, I was con- 
sulted about him four Months after his Fall. 

He complained of a torturing Pain at the Root 
of the Penis, and in the Glans, when he at- 
tempted to make Urine, which let fall a white 
furfuraceous thick Sediment in great Quantity 
when it cooled. I advised mild mucaginous Me- 
dicines, and an emollient healing Injection, with 
Fomentations to the Pained Part. These made 
him a little easier, but did not remove his Dis- 
ease; and he was seized with feverish Paroxysms, 
which had the full Type of Ague, but without 
regular Returns. These wasted his Strength and 
Flesh so fast, that there was a Necessity to stop 
them; with a View to which, and to his origi- 
nal Disease, the following Electuary was order- 
ed: ℞ Pulv. patrum, Drach. ii. Gum. Arabic. 
Drach. i. sem. Sal. Nitr. Drach. i. Pulv. mille- 
ped. unc. sem. Sal. Jov. Londin, scrup. i. Syrup. 
diacod. q. s. Of this he took the Bulk of a Nut- 
meg twice a Day. The aguish Paroxysms went 
off gradually, and the other Symptoms became 
milder, till he was free of all his Complaints in 
|P_24
some Weeks; and he has continued free of them 
ever since. 

V. Alexander Strachan, Gardener to Mr. Er- 
skine of Grange, had a Cholick, which continu- 
ed a Day, in the Beginning of February 1734; 
after which a painful Tumor was observed to- 
wards the left Side of the epigastrick Region, 
which soon increased, and extended itself over 
that whole Region. He took some purgative 
Medicine, after which he had a constant Diar- 
rhæa. 

When he was received into the Infirmary 6th 
March 1734, a Suppuration seemed to be so far 
advanced in the Tumor, that the Surgeons felt 
a Fluctuation of Liquor lodged deep, and the 
left Part of the Tumor pointed outwards. He 
complained of a sharp Pain in the left Shoulder; 
and the Skin of his Face had that leadish Colour 
which is almost peculiar to People whose Livers 
are suppurated. His Pulse was quick and low. 
He had no Desire for Food, and, upon taking it, 
the Pain of the Epigastrium was much increased. 
He had perpetual Thirst; sleeped ill in the Night, 
and sweated much in the Morning, with a Diar- 
rhæa still upon him. 

To promote the Suppuration, a Poultice of 
Oat-meal boiled in Water, with some Basilicon, 
and bruised raw Onions, was applied to the Epi- 
gastrium, and renewed thrice a Day. Some 
Drops of Laudanum were given at Night to stop 
the Diarrhæa, and to procure Rest. Mild Food 
and Drink were ordered. 

The Suppuration seemed to advance outwards 
for four Days; the Dose of the Laudanum be- 
ing gradually increased to check the Diarrhæa, 
|P_25
which frequently returned, but without any Pus
in his Stools. 

On the fifth Day the Tumor was evidently 
diminished, softer and less painful; but he was 
faint, for which he had Sack-whey allowed him 
to drink some times. 

His Poultice and Laudanum were continued, 
the Tumor gradually diminished, and his hectic 
Symptoms went off, without any observable E- 
vacuation of Pus; so that, April 26. he was dis- 
missed heal and strong. 

VI. A Child eight Months old was suddenly 
seized with violent epileptic Fits; after having 
had several, was let five Ounces of Blood at the 
jugular Vein; and soon after, being put into a 
Cradle, covered over with a Cloth, lost a con- 
siderable larger Quantity of Blood, the Cloaths 
about her being all wet, and the Child in a Faint, 
and very pale. She continued weak and pale 
several Days; but never has had any Return of 
the Epilepsy, though she has since that Time un- 
dergone all the common eruptive Diseases. 

VII. A Woman in the Decline of Life, and 
of a broken Constitution, had been several Weeks 
in a rheumatick Fever, out of which she nar- 
rowly escaped, after repeated Blood-lettings and 
other Medicines. Two Years after she was sei- 
zed with the same Symptoms which had appear- 
ed in the Beginning of the former Fever, to wit, 
Anxiety, Thirst, Vomiting, Pains of the whole 
Body, and particularly of the Head, with a high 
quick Pulse. She was taken ill in the Morning, 
and in the Evening fourteen Ounces of Blood 
were let at a Vein of the Arm; which gave her 
little or no Relief. In the Nigth-time the Blood 
|P_26
burst out again at the Orifice of the opened Vein, 
and, besides wetting all the Bed-cloaths, was ly- 
ing in Clots at her Side before it was taken no- 
tice of. A clean Bandage being then applied, 
she fell asleep, and awaked next Morning free 
of all Complaints. 

VIII. In January 1739, a sharp Pain struck 
into my right Eye, then gradually seized all that 
Side of the Face, contracted the Eye-lids, made 
the Tears rush out, and affected all the Teeth of 
the Upper-jaw. It began between Ten and E- 
leven o'Clock in the Morning, increased till a- 
bout Four in the Afternoon, decreased till Six, 
and then went off, without a critical Evacuation 
of any kind, so far as I could observe. In the 
Paroxysm my Pulse had no Disorder in it; and 
in the Intervals I was as well as ever. The 
Inconveniency of Confinement at that Season of 
the Year, and the Hope of each Fit being the 
last, made me suffer these periodical Pains ten 
Days, without trying to remove them by any 
Medicine. 

The Pain increasing daily, and making me at 
last unable to do my Work, I let ten Ounces of 
Blood, and took a Vomit a little Time before I 
expected the Paroxysm would begin. The Vo- 
mit operated severely, but did not prevent the 
Return of the Pain: which continued till the 
Medicine began to go downwards, when I was 
relieved: And, having purged twenty Times 
before Night, I had no more Return of the Dis- 
ease. 

Since that Time I have cured several of this 
Disease, by giving them a Vomit, and a brisk 
Purgative soon after this Operation was over, if 
|P_27
there was no Appearance of the Emetick's acting 
also as a Purgative. 

IX. A Man brought a Quartan Ague and the 
French Pox from England. The Ague was in 
vain attempted to be cured by the common Re- 
medies; and, in the mean time, the Pox advan- 
ced, the nocturnal Pains increased, and the foul 
Ulcers in his Throat spread. His Physician (who 
is one of your Number, and from whom I have 
this Account) gave him five Grains of Sweet 
Mercury at Night, immediately after the Fit of 
the Ague was over; repeated the Dose next 
Morning and Evening, and the Morning of the 
following Day. After taking these four Doses 
of Mercury, he had a Fit of the Ague, which was 
more severe than any he had formerly under- 
gone; the Fever being higher, with Delirium, 
but without any other bad Symptom. After the 
Fit was over, the Mercury was repeated as for- 
merly, till the Salivation rose. He never had 
more Appearance of the Ague; and the vene- 
real Symptoms disappeared by the Use of the 
Mercury. 

I was willing to borrow this Case, because, so 
far as relates to the Ague, it was an unexpected 
uncommon Cure of a Disease little known in this 
Country; the Quartan Agues not having been 
seen here, except produced in other Countries, 
until within the last ten Years; in which they 
have been observed in some Parts of the Coun- 
try, but have not been general. 

