

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ1_v3_0220^]

|P_220
[}XIV. An Account of a Child born with the 
Urinary and Genital Organs preternaturally 
formed; by Mr. James Mowat Surgeon 
at Langholm. }]
IN November 1732, a Child was brought forth, 
whose Funis Umbilicalis was tied to the up- 
per Edge of a deep Hole, at the Place marked 
C, (See Tab. II. Fig. 3. where all the Parts are 
represented of the Size they now are of;) and just 
above the Ossa Pubis this deep Hole penetrated 
the Peritoneum; but now a Lump of spongy 
Flesh D rises out of it. The Edges of the Hole 
were at first and are now sound. From the spon- 
gy Flesh of this Hole arise two Papillæ A, B, 
about the Size of the Point of an ordinary Probe: 
At which the Urine continually ouzes; but 
when the Child cries, the Urine jets out as 
Blood from the Aperture of a small Artery. 
The Papilla on the left Side at A is now clo- 
sed, but the other at B keeps open as at first, 
through which the Urine continually ouzes, 
and scalding all the Parts, keeps them very 
raw. 

The Penis arises immediately at the under 
Side of the Hole, is now of the same Bulk 
|P_221
with the Figure G, but was at first much less; 
it was and still is imperforated, and flat upon 
the upper Side next the Glans, as if it had been 
slit longitudinally: It has two small blue Veins 
marked o:o: and a large Prepuce inverted 
at H. 

The Scrotum and Testes were and continue 
in a good Condition; the Scrotum KK is cor- 
rugated very close to the End of two Promi- 
nencies marked E, E; the Raphe, I, appears in 
its Middle with Wrinkles on each Side; the 
Testes, F, F, ly under the Prominencies, they 
can be moved from the Place they are seated 
in, either higher or lower as we please to put 
them. 

The Distance between the Scrotum and A- 
nus is longer than it should be; and the Ossa 
Pubis are longer and flatter than in other Chil- 
dren. 

There is a large Prominency, E, E, on each 
Inguen, under which the Testes ly. 
[^Illustration missing from the PDF. ^]
The Child is healthy, active and stirring, and 
is very much affected with his Misfortune; for 
he frequently cries upon viewing himself, 
and is very unwilling any other should see these 
Parts. 

The Mother is a very healthy Woman, has 
brought forth another Child every way sound 
and right in all its Members. She tells that in 
May, before she was brought to bed of this her 
first Child, she was struck in the Belly with a 
Cow's Horn; she recovered the Hurt in two 
or three Days, but the Fright remained longer 
with her, and did terrify her sometimes in her 
Sleep. 

|P_222
I have twice or thrice thrust down a small 
Silver Probe at the right Papilla B, about an 
Inch or more, but cannot feel it in the Perine- 
um. I have also closed up the Papilla two 
Hours and three Quarters with a small Tent 
and an astringent Plaister over it, but can dis- 
cover no Swelling in the Perineum, but rather 
in the Belly. Upon withdrawing the Tent, 
the Urine squirted a great way; but by the Un- 
easiness of the Child, and the Anxiety of the 
Mother, I'm obliged to desist at present from 
any further Experiments. 

