

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ1_v4_0029^]

|P_29
[}IV. The good Success of opposite Causticks, and 
of a strong alterative Mercurial Medicine; 
by Dr. Edward Barry Physician at Cork, 
and F. R. S.}]
I Visited with Mr. Osburne and Mr. Wilson, 
two eminent Surgeons in this Place, a 
Gentleman of about forty five Years of Age, of 
a sober Life, and in a married State, who had 
a hard Tumor formed in the Coats of the Te- 
stes, which lightly adhered to the right Testicle, 
and extended to the Epididymis, and was then 
as large as a Turkey-egg. It came on him with- 
out any Cause which he could account for, and 
was equal to the Size of a Walnut when he first 
perceived it. He says it made this Progress in 
the Space of one Night. 

Some Months before he came to Town, E- 
|P_30
molients and Suppuratives were used, a Col- 
lection of Pus was suspected, and a Puncture 
made, a small Discharge of Blood and Ichor 
followed, the Tumor continued large and schir- 
rous, with the Appearance of a cancerous Ul- 
cer. 

Various internal Medicines, and external Ap- 
plications were made use of to no Purpose; but 
the following Method removed this Disorder. 

The common Caustick, which is named by 
some Lapis Septicus, and by others, Lapis in- 
fernalis, was applied; after the Separation of 
the Eschar, about two Inches in Length, the 
Lapis infernalis and Oleum Vitrioli were alter- 
nately used, by rubbing the Part first with the 
Lapis infernalis, and, in less than a Minute 
afterwards, with a Piece of Fir-stick dipped in 
the Oleum Vitrioli, which instantly removed 
the Pain occasioned by the Lapis infernalis. At 
each Dressing this alternate Application of these 
opposite Causticks was repeated, till as much 
was wasted as was then thought convenient; 
the Moisture was absorbed by an armed Probe, 
and a Digestive applied. 

By these Means the Tumor was gradually 
wasted every Day, without any continuing Pain
or succeeding Inflammation; a small Part was 
suffered to remain adhering to the Testicle. 
This was thought more prudent than to run 
the Hazard of injuring the Testicle. This Ap- 
plication answered lately in another very ob- 
stinate schirrous Tumor in the Coats of the 
Testes, and in many Cases seems to be prefer- 
able to common Causticks; the one correcting 
by its opposite Quality the too active Salts of 
|P_31
the other, and by that means instantly remov- 
ing Pain, and by producing a Sal Tertium, 
which has a mild opening Quality, prevents an 
Inflammation and callous Lips, the common 
Consequences of caustick Applications. 

About three Months afterwards a Tumor ap- 
peared in the other Testicle of this Gentleman, 
of about the Size of a Walnut, which was re- 
moved, by giving him going to Bed at Night 
15 Grains of Pil ex duobus, 10 Grains of Tur- 
buth Mineral, and the same Quantity of Cam- 
phire. It was seldom omitted any Night. In 
the Beginning it vomited him some times, and 
purged four or five times; but at last operated 
chiefly as an Alterative, and in three Weeks 
not only carried off this Tumor, but entirely 
removed the small Swelling that was left on 
the other Testicle. This Medicine, which has 
a rough Appearance, acts as a mild, though a 
powerful Alterative. The Evacuation which 
attends it, is generally very gentle. I have 
often known it successful in obstinate venereal 
and scrophulous Disorders. Mr Moore, a Sur- 
geon in the Army, to whom I communicated 
it some Years ago, assures me it never fails him 
in obstinate Gonorrhœas, and in many Cases 
for which he was formerly obliged to direct a 
Salivation. 

