

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ1_v1_0275^]

|P_275
[}XXXVIII. An Account of the most remarkable 
Discoveries and Improvements in Physick 
made or proposed since the Beginning of the 
Year 1731. }]
MR. William Houston Surgeon has accurately 
described the Plant of which the Contray- 
erva is the Root: The Name he gives this 
Plant is Dorstenia, Dentariæ radice, Sphondylii 
Folio, of which there are two Kinds, one Pla- 
centâ ovali, the other Placentâ quadrangulari 
|P_276
& undulatâ. Philosoph. Transact. Numb. 421. 
§ 2.

Mr. de Jussieu, Physician and Member of the 
Academy of Sciences at Paris, assures us from 
his Experience of the successful Effects in Dy- 
senteries of a thick yellow Bark, which has an 
astringent gently bitter Taste, brought first in- 
to Europe from America in 1713, called there 
Simarouba, and resembling what is described 
by the Ancients under the Name of Macer. 
Mr. de Jussieu observed that this Medicine was 
more successfully given in Decoction than in 
Substance. The Dose he usually gave was the 
third Part of a Chopin of Decoction, which had 
two Drachms of the Bark in it. Memoires de 
l'Acad des Sciences, 1729. 

An Accident of two Women dying suddenly 
in Dublin, after drinking some of the common 
distilled Laurel Water, gave Rise to several Ex- 
periments made upon Dogs with the distilled 
Water, and with the Infusion of the Leaves of 
this Lauro-cerasus, communicated by Dr. Mad- 
den Physician at Dublin to the Royal Society in 
England, and afterwards repeated and confirm- 
ed by Dr. Mortimer, R. S. S. by which it ap- 
peared that both the Water and Infusion brought 
on Convulsions, Palsy and Death, when taken 
by the Mouth or Anus. Philos. Transact. Numb. 
418. § 7. and Numb. 420. § 3.

We are informed from Leyden, that Dr. Gau- 
bius, who has succeded Dr. Boerhaave in teach- 
ing Chymy, gave, in the Beginning of 1731, 
a publick College on Milk; in which he shew- 
ed a great Variety of Experiments, and, among 
the rest, prepared its essential Salt, by boiling 
|P_277
Whey (Serum lactis) to one half, then filtra- 
ting it; he continued the boiling and filtrating 
till it became of the Consistence of a Syrup, 
when it was put into a Cellar to crystalize, and 
there the Salt formed into a Cake, which was 
of a saccharous Taste, and resembled Manna. 

Not. This Preparation is somewhat different 
from that which Valentini [/1./] alledges to be 
the famous Saccharum lactis, so much cried up 
by the first Preparer of it Ludovicus Testi [/2./], 
and recommended by others as an infallible 
Cure of the Gout. 

The new Experiments related by Dr. Stahl, 
in his Book of chymical and physical Experi- 
ments, are too numerous for us to enter upon 
an Account of them, and most of them relate 
more to Physicks than Medicine. 

Dr. Christ. Jac. Trew of Norimberg prefers 
the rectified Spirit of Grain for preserving ana- 
tomical Preparations in, to Spirit of Wine, or 
Compositions of Alcohol, Succinum, Camphor, 
&c. because these, he says, soon change into a 
brown Colour, whereas the Spirit from Malt 
preserves its limpid Appearance. When any 
Part is designed to be preserved wet, he re- 
commends the washing of it with Water, till 
the Water is no more tinctured with any Blood; 
the Water is next to be washed away with Spi- 
rits, and then the Preparation is to be put a- 
mong the Spirits in the Glass where it is to be 
kept; the Mouth of which is to be very close 
covered with the Glass Head, over which a wet 
|P_278
Bladder and Leaf-tin are tied. Commerc. literar. 
Norimberg. 1731. Semst. I. Specim. ix.

We learn by private Letters from Leyden, 
that the Vessels of the crystalline Humour of the 
Eye, said in our publick News Papers last Year 
to have been discovered by Dr. Albinus Profes- 
sor of Anatomy there, are all the Branches of 
an Artery, which being sent off from the Ar- 
tery that enters at the central Part of the Retina, 
passes through the vitrous Humour, and when 
it reaches the crystalline, disperses its Branches 
along the Surface of that Lens like Radii till they 
are exceedingly minute, when they pierce into 
its Substance. 

Dr. Albrecht, Professor of Medicine at Er- 
ford, in his anatomical Observations of two 
Men he dissected, is of Opinion that the Blad- 
der of a strong Man may be divided into six 
Coats, among which he thinks the muscular 
ought not to be reckoned, because it consists 
of irregular separated Bundles of Fibres. He 
observed that the Part of a waxy Injection co- 
loured with Cinnabar, which had made its Way 
among the cellular Membranes covering the 
Coats of a Vein, left the colouring Powder be- 
hind it. After injecting Wax into the left pul- 
monary Vein, he remarked a Vein filled with 
the Injection, which ran up on the Outside of 
the Pleura to four or five Inches distance from 
the Vertebræ, and gave off Branches to the 
neighbouring Parts. By accounting for the 
Phænomena of several Diseases from this Fact, 
he seems to think a Communication between 
the pulmonary and thoracick Vessels always to 
obtain. Albrechti Observ. Anat. § 5, 8, 11.

|P_279
Jo. Henr. Schulze, Professor of Medicine at 
Altorff, having observed Wax passing, as he 
thinks, through the Coats of Arteries and Veins 
when these Vessels were injected, of which that 
coloured with red lost its Colour, while the 
green kept it; endeavours thence to account 
for the Secretion of Fat, and the Production of 
an Oedema. Commerc. literar. Norimberg. 1731.
Semest. 1. Specim. v.

Mr. Senac's new Description of the Structure 
of the Diaphragm, and his Remarks on the 
Action of this Muscle are so very particular and 
connected, that they will not bear such an A- 
bridgment as our Design will allow. 

Of the same kind are Mr. Hunauld's Observa- 
tions on the Structure and Actions of some 
Muscles of the Fingers, and Mr. Winslow's Ac- 
count of Rotation, Pronation, Supination, and 
other circular Motions; wherefore we must re- 
fer all these three to the original Papers in the 
Memoires de l'Acad. des Sciences, 1729. 

Mr. Monro, Professor of Anatomy here, has 
made so many Additions to his Osteology, and 
Treatise of the Nerves, which he has tack'd to 
the new Edition lately published that we can- 
not enter into a Detail of them. 

Mr. Winslow, in his Exposition anatomique 
de la Structure du Corps humain, has mended 
every where the common Descriptions, and has 
added innumerable Particulars that were not 
mentioned before him, which make any tole- 
rable Account of such Improvements so much 
longer than our Work can admit, that we can 
do no more than recommend this Author to 
all who wish to have a very particular and ge- 
|P_280
nuine Knowledge of the Structure of the hu- 
man Body. He is indeed very short, and ex- 
tremely reserved in explaining the Functions 
and Uses of the Parts, except in his Treatise on 
the Muscles, where he shews prodigious Varie- 
ties in the Actions of these Organs of Motion, 
that never were so much as hinted before. 

Dr. Bryan Robinson of Dublin, in his Trea- 
tise of the Animal Oeconomy has endeavoured to 
improve on Sir Isaac Newton's Opinions con- 
cerning several Parts of the animal Oeconomy, 
and supports his Reasoning by a Number of 
Experiments and geometrical Calculs. He 
shews first, the Laws that obtain in the Motion 
of Fluids through cylindrical Pipes, which serve 
as an Introduction to his Account of the Motion 
of Blood in the Vessels. 

Next, He argues for Muscular Motion be- 
ing performed by the Vibrations of a very 
elastick Æther, lodged in the Nerves and 
Membranes, investing the minute Fibres of 
the Muscles, excited by the Power of the 
Will, Heat, Wounds, the subtile and active 
Particles of Bodies, and other Causes. 

The third Subject he treats of is Respiration; 
on which he contends, The Life of Animals 
is preserved by acid Parts of the Air mixing 
with the Blood in the Lungs, which Parts 
dissolve or attenuate the Blood and preserve 
its Heat, and by both these keep up the Mo- 
tion of the Heart. 

In the following Section he argues for Di- 
gestion being owing to gentle Heat and Motion. 
By this Heat and Motion the Texture of the 
Nourishment is changed in the Bodies of A- 
|P_281
nimals:  And then, The constituent so- 
lid Parts of Animals, according to their se- 
veral Natures, are endued with peculiar at- 
tractive Powers of certain Magnitudes, by 
which they draw out of the Fluids moving 
through them like Parts in certain Quantities, 
and thereby preserve their Forms and just 
Magnitudes. 

Secretions, according to our Author, are per- 
formed thus: The Glands in the Bodies of 
Animals, according to their several Na- 
tures and Dispositions, are endued with pe- 
culiar attractive Powers, by which they suck 
in various Juices from the Blood. 

In the last place, he shows the Proportion 
of the Discharges of human Bodies, viz. of 
Perspiration, Urine, &c.

Mr. Winslow, Physician and Member of the 
Royal Academy of Sciences at Paris, has pro- 
posed an Improvement on the ordinary Man- 
ner of reducing inguinal or crural Herniæ, 
namely to cause the Patient to rest on his 
Knees and Elbows, while the Surgeon is at- 
tempting to reduce the Bowels. Le Dran Ob- 
servations Chirurgiques, Tom. 2. Obs. 1. and Jour- 
nal de Sçavans, May 1732.

Mr. Cheselden, Surgeon at London, has made 
a considerable Improvement on the lateral Ope- 
ration for the Stone. Instead of pressing his 
Catheter backwards, he causes it to be support- 
ed as close to the Conjunction of the Ossa pubis
as possible; and after having made a large Inci- 
sion into the Teguments, he presses the Gut 
backwards with the Fore-finger of the left 
Hand, and, having felt the Furrow of the Ca- 
|P_282
theter with his Finger, he introduces his Knife 
with the Edge directed forward and down- 
wards upon the Finger into the Furrow, im- 
mediately above the superior Part of the Pro- 
stata; and with the Knife in the same Situation 
he cuts a small Share of the Side of the Bladder, 
its Sphincter, the Side of the Prostata, the Li- 
gament through which the small Beginning of 
the Urethra passes, and the bulbous Part of the 
Urethra. After this Incision the Gorgeret is in- 
troduced upon the Fore-finger, which has been 
kept in the Wound all this Time. The For- 
ceps is quickly introduced, and the Stone is as 
quickly extracted. Douglas's Appendix to the 
History of the lateral Operation. 

Mr. Garengeot, Surgeon at Paris, has much 
enlarged his Treatise of Chirurgical Operations, 
in the second Edition lately published; the most 
considerable Improvements in the practical Way 
that we remarked to be here added are the fol- 
lowing: 

Tom. I. p. 298. Old Age is an Advantage in 
performing the Operations for Herniæ, because 
old Peoples Guts are not so liable to inflame or 
gangrene as those of young Persons. 

Ibid. p. 408. He recommends Exercise to 
hydropic People immediately before they are 
to be tapped, that the grosser Particles in the 
Water of their Belly may be mixed with the 
thinner, and so may run out with them. And 
if there is Reason to suspect any such gross 
Parts remaining after the Operation, he advi- 
ses the Injection of Barley-water to dilute them 
and bring them away. 

Tom. II. p. 354. He describes a new Way of 
|P_283
performing the Operation of the Fistula in Ano; 
it is this, Having thrust a Probe through the 
Gut a little higher than the Bottom of the Si- 
nus, and having drawn out that End by the 
Anus with the Finger introduced into the Gut, 
he makes an Incision parallel to the Probe, at 
an Inch distance from it on each Side, and cuts 
out all between the Incisions. 

Ibid. p. 431. A new Method of tying a 
wounded intercostal Artery, the Invention of 
Mr. Goulard Surgeon at Montpelier, is descri- 
bed; the Instrument employed is a semicircu- 
lar or very curve Needle, that has a Groove a- 
long its convex Part, and two Holes at some 
Distance from each other near the Point, pier- 
cing from the convex to the concave Side; this 
Needle is fixed into a long straight Handle, 
and a Thread is put through the two Holes in 
such a manner, that its Noose is on the con- 
cave Side, and the two Ends are on the Con- 
vex, in the Groove of which they are hid and 
brought down to the Handle. When the 
Needle is thus mounted, and Incision is made 
cross three Ribs, that where the wounded Ar- 
tery is being the middlemost, when these are 
discovered, the Needle is thrust through the in- 
tercostal Muscles contiguous to the upper Edge 
of that middle Rib, and about an Inch farther 
back than where the open Orifice of the Artery 
is, and is pushed within the internal Surface of 
the Ribs downwards, and made to pierce out- 
wards again immediately below the under Edge 
of the Rib; as soon as the Noose of the Thread 
on the concave Side of the Needle appears 
without the Muscles, it is to be raised with a 
|P_284
Pin, and the anterior End of the Thread is to 
be drawn out; then the Needle being drawn 
back again, brings out the other End with it; 
therefore the Thread being now round the Rib, 
is to be tied firmly on it, and the Artery will be 
compressed. 

Tom. III. p. 187. In performing the Trepan, 
he thinks it better for the Surgeon to rest his 
Chin in a Ring made with the Fingers of the 
Hand that holds the Handle of the Instrument, 
than to rest his Forehead on the Back of that 
Hand in the common Way. 

Ibid. p. 369. He thinks it is inconvenient for 
Surgeons to press with the Palm of their Hand 
on the Back of the Amputation-knife in mak- 
ing the circular Incision round a Limb, but ra- 
ther to make Use of Mr. La Peironyer's Crotchet 
or Hook at the Point of the Knife, into which 
a Finger is put for directing the Knife; or, if 
that is wanting, to take hold of the Knife near 
its Point with the Thumb and Fingers of the 
left Hand. 

Ibid. p. 423. He is of Opinion that soft Com- 
pression is much more effectual to stop Hæmor- 
rhagies than hard Substances. 

Ibid. p. 391. He condemns the Use of Vitriol
Buttons, even when Stitches of Arteries give 
way, and would rather trust to soft Compres- 
sion. 

Ibid. p. 414. He advises the Amputation of 
the Fore-part of the Foot when there is Occa- 
sion; in doing which, the Knowledge of the 
Articulations there only can guide the Operator. 

The Chinese seem to have had the Method 
of inoculating the Small-Pox long before it was 
|P_285
introduced into this Western Part of Europe: 
Their Method of Proceding, according to Fa- 
ther d'Entrecolle's Account, is this; they gather 
the Scabs that come off from a healthy Child 
that has had the Small-Pox in a favourable 
Way, and keep them well shut up in a China
Cup till there is Occasion for them; then ta- 
king four small ones or two large ones, and 
putting a Grain of Musk between them, they 
roll them in a little Cotton, and thrust this 
Tent into the Child's Nose, where it remains 
till the Symptoms of Infection begin to appear. 
The Child on whom this Inoculation is to be 
made is to be more than a Year old. If the 
Pustules appear on the first Day of the Fever, 
the Child almost certainly dies: If they come 
out on the second, the Event is uncertain: If 
they do not show themselves till the third Day, 
the Patient probably will recover. Lettres e- 
difiantes & curieuses ecrites des missions etran- 
geres par quelques missionaires de la compagnie 
de Jesu, Tom. 20. Paris 1731.

D. Stevens in his Essay on Aliments, prefix- 
ed to his Translation of Dolæus on the Gout, 
endeavours to prove the gouty Humours to be 
rather of an alcaline than an acid Nature, both 
from the Nature of our Fluids, and from the 
Disease being most effectually mitigated or cu- 
red by an acescent Diet. 

An anonymous Author gives a long Account 
of a Colick, which generally prevails in Amster- 
dam during the Winter, and destroyed many 
of the Inhabitants in 1730. Its Appearance is 
very like to what was formerly called the Colick 
of Poictou, and is here minutely described. 
|P_286
The principal distinguishing Marks of it being 
Its Obstinacy, and bringing on Convulsions, 
Palsies, and other Disorders that are common- 
ly called nervous. The Author redargues all the 
different Opinions concerning the Nature of 
this Disease, and endeavours to prove it to de- 
pend on a gouty Humour. Bibliotheque raisonée 
de l'Europe, Tom. 8. Art. 2.

Dr. Lobb, in his Treatise on the Small-Pox, 
seems to disapprove entirely of Blood-letting in 
the Small-Pox; for the only Case where he 
would allow of it, is in the Beginning of 
the Disease, in a Patient who has a sanguine 
Plethora, which is again confined to so many 
Circumstances, that scarce ever such a Patient 
will be met with. 

He thinks with Dr. Boerhaave, that the Dis- 
ease may be prevented or cured without any E- 
ruption, but differs from the learned Professor's 
Opinion of this being done by the antiphlogistick
Method, and rather thinks a Specifick may be 
found: He proposes the Æthiops Mineral as a 
Medicine that probably would prove such a Spe- 
cifick, and relates some Examples of the Dis- 
ease being in his Judgment prevented by time- 
ly Use of Æthiops: but before he would recom- 
mend it to general Practice, he proposes to 
have sufficient Trials of its Effects made on 
Malefactors, and lays down all the Regimen 
necessary to be observed during the Trials. 

If Dr. Lobb disclaims Blood-letting in the 
Small-Pox, Dr. Loeber Professor of Medicine at 
Jena, in his Sure Rules to a successful Cure of 
the Small-Pox, recommends repeated and plen- 
|P_287
tiful Bleeding, and the greatest Care to follow 
out the antiphlogistick Method. 


[^1. 
(a) Medicina nov. antiqa
^]
[^2. 
(b) In epistol. 
^]