

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ1_v5_0328^]

|P_328
[}XXVIII. A milky Discharge at a small Orifice 
in the Groin, by Mr. John Patch Surgeon 
in Exeter. }]
A Son of Samuel Wroth of Crediton in the 
County of Devon, about Eleven Years of 
Age, and of a strong and healthy Constitution, 
complained to his Mother, on the 8th of Ja- 
nuary 1739-40, that the Linen in his Breeches 
was very wet, and he knew not the Reason of 
it; but she thinking it to be Urine, was about 
to correct him. 

About two Months after, the Boy made the 
same Complaint: When she examined him, 
and soon found a Liquid like unto Milk conti- 
nually issuing from a small, almost imperce- 
ptible Orifice near his Left Groin, which con- 
tinued for three Days; and she verily believed, 
that the whole Discharge at that Time was not 
less than two Quarts or five Pints, which very 
much weakned him. 

A Flux of the fame Kind, and from the ve- 
ry same Part, began again about six Weeks af- 
ter, and wept, but not continually, especially 
towards the latter Part of the Time, for near 
five Weeks; from which, the Boy lost his Ap- 
petite, and was grown so weak that he was 
scarcely able to walk. 

Being informed of so remarkable a Case, a- 
bout the Beginning of September, my Curiosi- 
ty led me to have a Sight of it. There being 
then only a little Redness in the Skin, about 
an Inch above the inguinal Gland, as if there 
had been a small Pustule, without any Pain, 
|P_329
Tumor or Inflammation, made me to suspect 
the Truth of what I have been told concerning 
it: However, I ordered the Boy to acquaint his 
Parents (they being poor) that, if his Disor- 
der should return, I would readily and freely 
give him my utmost Endeavours for his Cure. 

Towards the End of the Month, the Boy 
came under my Care. Seeing it then perfectly 
sound, and of the natural Colour of the Skin, 
I did nothing for him: But in a few Days after 
three or four Spoonfuls of the Discharge was 
brought to me, which appeared like scalded 
Milk; and some of it being heated over a 
Candle, it soon turned to a soft Curd. I im- 
mediately sent for the Boy, and observed it to 
run from the small Orifice down his Thigh 
pretty fast, but it was quite stop'd next Morn- 
ing, when I applied a small Piece of common 
Caustick on the Orifice with proper Bandage. 
After this Application of the Caustick, there 
was never any milky Discharge. When the 
Escar separated, which I did not endeavour to 
hasten, I suffered the Flesh to rise above the 
Skin, that the Cicatrix might be the stronger. 
The Sore was afterwards skinned over with 
the common Desiccatives, and the Boy soon 
recovered his Strength, and has continued ever 
since in perfect Health, without this or any o- 
ther Complaint. 

A Week after the Application of the Cau- 
stick, I drew about eight Ounces of Blood from 
his Arm; and contrary to my Expectation, 
found the Serum as well as the Coagulum to be 
natural both in Colour and Quantity. 

