

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ2_v2_0317^]

|P_317
[}Art. XXI. }]
[}The History of a compleat Luxation of the 
Thigh, in a Letter to Dr. John Ruther- 
foord, President of the Royal College of 
Physicians, and Professor of Medicine in the 
University of Edinburgh; by James Mac- 
kenzie, M. D. late Physician at Wor- 
cester[/1./]. }]
SIR, 
Feb. 10. 1755. 

THE account which I gave you of a 
compleat luxation of the thigh re- 
duced at the Worcester Infirmary, I now 
send in writing, agreeably to your request. 
I send you also Doctor Wall's Letter vouch- 
ing this dislocation; and Mr. Jefferys's 
narrative of the same case. If you think 
any further proof necessary, there are still 
two Physicians and two Surgeons more, 
alive and well, who were present at the 
reduction, and will bear witness (if requi- 
red) to the truth of this accident, as well 
as the two Gentlemen above named, and 
myself, who am, &c. 

|P_318
WIlliam Jones, a tall, robust, heal- 
thy Butcher, fifty six years old, was 
carried to the Worcester Infirmary on the 
seventeenth of August 1747, lame, and in 
grievous pain. His account of himself was, 
That he happened unfortunately, some hours 
before, to ride an unruly horse, which ran 
away with him; and that, making an ef- 
fort to check him, just as he was galloping 
over a stone bridge, the animal reared himself 
upon his hinder feet; and immediately fell 
backward on his rider. The man was stun- 
ned with the fall; but the horse quickly re- 
covered himself, and went off full speed, 
dragging poor Jones after him, by his leg 
which was engaged in the stirrup. The 
horse was soon providentially stopped, and 
the man set at liberty, but unable to move 
his thigh, which he believed was broken. 

The Surgeon in waiting, (for four Physi- 
cians and three Surgeons gave their atten- 
dance in rotation, namely, Doctors Attwood, 
Mackenzie, Cameron, and Wall; and Mess. 
Edwards, Russel, and Jefferys) having tho- 
roughly examined the situation and figure of 
|P_319
the parts disabled and in pain, came to one 
of the Physicians, and told him, that the 
poor man's thigh was dislocated; that the 
head of the bone was struck quite out of 
the acetabulum, and lay fairly in the groin. 
The Physician having, in his younger days, 
attended Boerhaave (who, surely, understood 
physic and surgery as well as any man ever 
did), and knowing that, from the prodigious 
strength of the ligaments, and depth of the 
socket in that articulation, this learned Profes- 
sor was of opinion, that the thigh-bone was 
never dislocated by external violence, but fre- 
quently broken near the head: which was the 
true reason why such accidents were seldom, 
or never, cured: the Physician, I say, persua- 
ded, that his preceptor was in the right, 
observed to the Surgeon, that there must be 
a mistake somewhere, and that there was no 
instance on record, which could be depend- 
ed upon, of such a luxation as he described: 
to which the Surgeon replied, Sir, if you 
will not believe me, you will believe your 
own eyes and fingers presently. 

The novelty of the case brought all the 
Physicians and Surgeons to the Infirmary. 
A Skeleton was fetched, and great care ta- 
|P_320
ken, by a strict inquiry into circumstances, 
to fatisfy all present, that the bone was not 
broken, but really and fairly dislocated. 
There is no reasoning against facts: the 
toes and knee were turned outwards, the 
disabled limb was longer than the sound, 
the hip-joint utterly inflexible, and the round 
large head of the bone lay obvious to the 
sight and touch in the groin. 

The next inquiry was, how this disloca- 
tion should be reduced. All were called to 
consultation; not one of the Physicians or 
Surgeons had ever seen the case before. 
Some of the principal books of modern sur- 
gery were looked into; but one and all de- 
scribed the reduction, and recommended 
extension in such a general, languid, hear- 
say, manner, that it was plain they were as 
unpractised in the case, as the Gentlemen 
present: nor was any better success to be 
expected from Galen's [/2./] method of reducing 
|P_321
a luxation of this joint by hanging the pa- 
tient to a strong beam by the heels with his 
head near the ground. 

After mature deliberation, it was agreed, 
that, in case the usual extension did not suc- 
ceed, the vis percussionis (which is well known 
to increase the force to a surprising degree 
by accelerating the motion) should next be 
tried. In order to both, therefore, we provi- 
ded a large strong table, of a proper length 
and height, which we fastened with screws 
to the floor, and covered with such blankets 
and bolsters as we wanted; a piece of strong 
cloth also was laid upon the blankets, un- 
der the patient's back, of length sufficient 
to turn up between his thighs, and pass over 
his shoulders down to the floor, where both 
ends were securely fixed, with a view to 
resist or counteract the necessary extension. 
We provided also two towels of a conve- 
nient length and thickness; one of which, 
at the middle, was tied with a tight, but 
easy knot above the patient's ankle, and the 
two ends twisted together, were given to three 
|P_322
strong men to hold. The other towel was 
in the same manner fastened above the knee, 
and the double end given to three more; 
while the Surgeons stood ready, one with 
his hand on the ball of the dislocated bone 
to direct it into the socket, one at the knee, 
and another at the foot to turn them inwards. 

When all things were ready, the exten- 
sion was begun, in the common method, 
by the towel-men; but tho' they exerted 
their utmost strength, the head of the bone 
was not moved in the least, and their effort 
served only to increase the poor man's tor- 
ture to an intolerable degree. 

Finding thus the extension of no signi- 
ficancy; and the patient's courage reviving 
after some respite; the vis percussionis was 
was carried into execution after the follow- 
ing manner. The towel-men were directed 
to slacken their towels to a certain point, to 
stand with their feet firm, their arms streight, 
and their bodies bending a little forward; 
and, upon a certain signal agreed on, were 
ordered to pull with a vehement and quick 
jerk, throwing themselves back with all their 
might. 

|P_323
After every thing was in good order, 
and the assistants apprised of the nature and 
necessity of the operation which they were 
about to perform; the signal agreed on was 
at last given. The towel-men pulled in a 
moment with a strong and sudden spring; 
the Surgeons performed their parts dexte- 
rously; and instantly there was a loud crash 
heard, which made one of the Physicians 
call out, Alas! the table is broken. But 
at that very moment the patient, with a 
thundering voice, cried, It's in, it's in, it's 
in. And so it really was; for we imme- 
diately found the limb restored to its natural 
position, length, and flexibility. The pa- 
tient was put to bed; and, by a proper diet 
and care, recovered his former health, and 
could walk perfectly well in three weeks. 
One of the Physicians often met him after- 
wards on foot driving cattle, and always 
asked, How he did? To which his con- 
stant answer was, Very well, thank God and 
the Gentlemen. And he can now, upon oc- 
casion, walk twenty miles in a day, without 
fatigue or pain, tho' the injured limb still re- 
mains near a quarter of an inch longer than 
the other. 


[^1. 
* March 6. 1755. 
^]
[^2. 
* Vid. Gal. in librum Hipp. de artic. commentarior. 
lib. 4. aph. 42. 

And indeed the antients seem to have been acquainted 
with luxations of the hip-joint only in children, or distem- 
pered bodies; unless we shall except Paulus Ægineta, 
|P_321
whose various methods of extension, in this case, whether 
real or supposed, some of the moderns have copied, and 
some have altered. 
^]