

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ2_v3_0466^]

|P_466
[}Art. XX. }]
[}Some Observations on the same Subject, by the 
late Robert Whytt, M. D. F. R. S. 
Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians, 
and Professor of Medicine in the Univer- 
sity of Edinburgh. }]
AS I had occasion, several years since, 
to write some observations on the 
many disorders occasioned by an irregu- 
lar or imperfect gout, in order to illustrate 
another subject with which I thought it 
a good deal connected, I have, since that 
time, been particularly attentive to that 
matter, and have formed so much the same 
opinion with Dr Clerk of the effects of 
the arthritis anomala, that, in one sense, 
at least, I am the most unfit of any in 
|P_467
the society to make remarks on his pa- 
per; because several objections may not 
occur to me, that would present them- 
selves to one of a different way of think- 
ing. 

In confirmation of what the Doctor 
has said of the gout being a more fre- 
quent distemper among young persons 
than commonly is imagined, it may be 
proper to mention, I had for my patient, 
in November last, a girl of seventeen, 
of a delicate make, who, at that time, 
had a regular, and very smart fit of 
the gout in one of her great toes, and in 
one of her knees. In march last, she had 
a return of the same disease, although not 
so highly marked but it might have been 
taken for a rheumatism. Her wrists were 
only swelled; but, before this happened, 
her stomach and breathing had been 
greatly affected. 

Besides the more common symptoms 
occasioned by an irregular gout, I have 
met with the following; viz. a diabetes, 
or an uncommon flux of pale urine conti- 
|P_468
nuing for two or three weeks, a hemi- 
plegia, a mania, palpitation of the heart, 
a troublesome itching of the scrotum, a 
dysuria, a running from the urethra, and 
a pain in the testicles. 

I had a patient who never in his life 
had been affected with any venereal dis- 
ease, who, for several years, had a small 
running from the urethra, which often 
stopped for some weeks or months, and 
then returned. As this person had once 
had a fit of the true gout, and had many 
symptoms which bespoke the arthritis 
anomala, I was of opinion, that the run- 
ning was occasioned by the arthritic hu- 
mour falling particularly on the nerves 
or vessels of the urethra; whence the mo- 
tion of the fluids in them must have been 
increased, and consequently, the secretion 
from the nervous organs must have been 
more copious than usual. 

I have met with three cases of a pain 
in the testicles from an arthritic cause. 
In one of these, the left testicle was much 
swelled; but this swelling went off, upon 
|P_469
a regular fit of the gout coming into 
both the feet and both the hands. 

In page 444. Dr Clerk mentions it as a 
singularity of the arthritic strangury, 
that it is not increased, but removed, by 
blisters applied to the ancles. I have se- 
veral times observed the same thing of a 
slight strangury in continued fevers. 

With regard to the anti-arthritic vir- 
tues of the tansy, I can say nothing from 
my own experience. As to the extract 
of the cicuta; after taking it constantly 
for three months, for a glandular swelling, 
I was obliged to give it up on account of 
a faintness at stomach, flatulence, and o- 
ther complaints attacking me, which, 
from experience, I know to be owing to 
the gout. This seems to shew, that the 
cicuta has no conspicuous anti-arthritic 
powers. Neither can lime-water be look- 
ed on as possessed of this property; for 
I had, some years since, a patient, ex- 
tremely temperate, who, after having, for 
three years running, drunk an English 
quart of lime-water daily, had a very se- 
|P_470
vere and long continued fit of the gout 
in both his feet and both his hands. 
The lime-water seems to have done ser- 
vice to Dr Clerk's patient, chiefly by pur- 
ging him; and this is the more probable, 
as he is one of a very full habit of bo- 
dy. 

