

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ2_v3_0551^]

|P_551
[}Art. XXX. }]
[}Of the Use of Mercury in Convulsive Disor- 
ders, by Dr Donald Monro, Physi- 
cian to St George's Hospital, London. }]
THE convulsive disorders called opis- 
thotanus and tetanus, which come 
after lying in the fields, or being exposed 
to alternate heat, cold, and moisture, and 
other such causes, are very common in 
the West Indies, and other hot climates; 
and are sometimes, though but very rare- 
ly, observed in Great Britain. 

They are mentioned by Hippocrates, 
Celsus, and other antient authors; but 
the best account we have of them is that 
published by Dr Lionel Chalmers of 
Charlestown in South Carolina, in the 
first volume of Medical Observations and 
|P_552
Inquiries, by a Society of Physicians in Lon- 
don, where the Doctor, after giving a ve- 
ry accurate history of the symptoms and 
causes of these diseases, observes, that 
few recover in comparison of the number 
they attack; and that warm baths and 
opiates are principally to be depended 
upon for a cure; which agrees with the 
practice used in the few cases of the lock- 
ed jaw, which have been successfully 
treated in this country. 

Most late practitioners look upon 
these disorders as very fatal. The gen- 
tleman, who was physician to the naval 
hospital at Gibraltar during the late war, 
told me, that he had had above forty peo- 
ple under his care for the tetanus, attend- 
ed with the locked jaw, who all died, ex- 
cept one, notwithstanding he had used e- 
vacuations, baths, and fomentations, and 
had given very freely of opiates, and all 
other medicines that he had ever heard re- 
commended in such cases. The disor- 
der in the one who recovered was occa- 
sioned by a hurt of a finger; and the 
|P_553
amputation of that member on the first 
appearance of the locked jaw proved the 
cure. 

As the remedies hitherto recommended 
for the cure of these convulsive disorders 
have proved so ineffectual, the following 
account of a successful method of cure 
by mercurial unctions, communicated to 
me by a gentleman who was formerly a 
practitioner in physic in the island of 
Jamaica, and who has allowed me to 
transmit it to your society, cannot fail to 
be acceptable. 

While this gentleman practised in Ja- 
maica, he had a great number of cases 
of the tetanus, attended with the locked 
jaw, under his care. At first, he used to 
give very freely of opium, musk, and o- 
ther medicines of this class; to bleed, and 
make other evacuations, while he used 
baths, fomentations, embrocations, and 
other external applications, but all 
without the least success; and, as he had 
lost a great many patients without being 
so lucky as to make one cure, he began 
to believe that this disorder always pro- 
|P_554
ved fatal, and was not to be cured by 
medicine, notwithstanding what some 
practitioners had alledged. However, 
having received an unexpected hint con- 
cerning the good effects of the mercurial 
ointment in such cases, he resolved to 
try it; and ordered the first patient that 
offered, to be put into a warm room, 
and to be rubbed two or three times a- 
day with the ointment, till such time as 
a salivation was raised, when he, with 
pleasure, observed, that as soon as the 
mercury began to affect the mouth, the 
convulsions of the muscles of the jaws, 
as well as all the other spasms and con- 
vulsions, ceased, and the patient was freed 
of all his complaints. 

After this, he treated every case of 
this kind which came under his care in 
the same manner, and cured twelve, 
which were all who applied to him for 
advice so early in the disorder, that there 
was time to bring the mercury to the 
mouth before the fatal period was ex- 
pected. A few died in whom the disease 
was so far advanced before he saw them, 
|P_555
that there was not time to raise a sa- 
livation. None of the cases which were 
under this gentleman's care in the West 
Indies were the consequences of wounds 
or capital operations; nor has he had any 
opportunity of trying it since in cases of 
the locked jaw, which sometimes follow 
capital operations, owing to his having 
given over practice; but he thinks, that, 
from the similarity of the complaint, 
there is no doubt but that the mercurial 
frictions would be equally efficacious in 
such cases, as when the disorder comes 
from catching cold, or other such causes. 

He thinks, that the best method of 
raising a salivation in these disorders is 
to put the patient into a room made as 
hot, by means of a fire, and being sur- 
rounded with blankets as the patient can 
bear; and to rub in a mercurial ointment, 
made with equal parts of quicksilver and 
hogs-lard, as freely and as frequently as 
can be done with safety. That the soon- 
er the cure is begun after the first ap- 
pearance of the locked jaw, the better. 
And that, in cases far advanced, the mer- 
|P_556
cury must be thrown in as fast as possi- 
ble. 

This gentleman used no preparation 
before he begun the use of the ointment, 
but set his patients to work as soon as 
possible. He now and then gave strong 
opiates to procure rest, both before and 
after the spitting came on; but he ob- 
serves, that the quantity of opium, and 
the frequency of the repetition of its 
dose, must be determined by the state of 
the patient, and the symptoms which 
occur. Since his return to England, he 
has had one case of the same kind under 
his care, which was cured by the method 
here recommended. 

Jermyn-street, London, Jan. 29. 
1766. 

