

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v1_0405^]

|P_405
[}XI. }]
[}Mémoire sur des Insectes sur lesquelles on trouve des 
Plantes, par M. Fougeroux de Bondaroy. 
Vid. Histoire de l'Académie Royale des Sciences, 
Année 1769. 4to, Paris. }]
IT has often been observed, that some plants 
grow upon others, and derive their nou- 
rishment from them: But it is by no means so ge- 
nerally known, that vegetables can take root and 
flourish on living animals. Mr Fougeroux has 
had an opportunity of observing some instances 
of this extraordinary fact. These observations, 
together with what other naturalists have said up- 
on the subject, fournish matter for the memoir 
now before us. 

The plants, of which an account is here given 
by Mr Fougeroux, are perfectly the reverse of the 
worm-plant of China, described by Mr Reaumeur 
in the year 1726. For, in that case, a worm fixes 
its snout into the extremity of the plant, and de- 
rives nourishment from it. But the plants, of 
|P_406
which an account is here given, derive their nou- 
rishment from the animals. 

In this memoir, Mr Fougeroux proposes to 
point out different insects upon which plants do 
grow; and to propose what seems to him the most 
probable method of accounting for this conjunc- 
tion. The greatest part of the animal plants, 
which he has seen, grow, he tells us, on the chry- 
salis of a fpecies of cicada. The plant growing 
on these insects has got the generic name of Cla- 
varia, because its stalks and branches, when it has 
any, are terminated by tubercles, which give it 
the appearance of a little club. The root of this 
plant, in general, covers the body of the insect, 
and sometimes is even extended over its head. 
When these productions have for some time been 
preserved in spirits, the plant and animal may be 
separated from each other without hurting either. 
Small grooves, formed by the rings of the animal, 
may be observed running cross the roots of the 
plant: But no vestige can be found of the root's 
having any where penetrated the body of the in- 
sect. These plants produce fibres differing in 
length and number. The fibres are terminated 
by tubercles, which, before the plant arrives at 
maturity, are solid; but, after that period, they 
|P_407
are found punctured, probably by worms which 
have suffered a metamorphosis upon escaping from 
them. 

According to Mr Fougeroux, plants grow, not 
only on the chrysalis of the cicada, but upon the 
cicada itself. He saw one of this kind upon a ci- 
cada brought from Cayenne. The plant, in this 
case, differed from the clavaria already mention- 
ed. It was a species of fucus, composed of long, 
white, silky fibres, covering the body of the insect, 
and extending, from seven to eight lines, above 
and below its belly. 

The author has found the clavaria formerly de- 
scribed growing upon worms. He has found it 
chiefly upon those worms which, suffering a me- 
tamorphosis, become afterwards a small species of 
May-bug. This chrysalis, he observes, is very 
different from that of the cicada, and, even in its 
worm-state, may easily be distinguished from it. 

After describing these different species of ani- 
mal plants, the author next proceeds to offer his 
opinion upon this subject. He first considers 
what had been said by Dr Watson, in the philo- 
sophical transactions, concerning the vegetating fly 
of the Caribbee islands. Dr Watson's account of 
|P_408
these flies is, that they bury themselves about the 
month of May, and begin to be metamorphosed 
in June; and that the little plant which grows up- 
on them resembles a branch of coral, is about 
three inches in height, and carries small protube- 
rances, where worms are generated, which are 
again converted into flies. The author imagines, 
that, in this account, Dr Watson has been decei- 
ved by the worms which he has already mention- 
ed eat into the clavaria, and undergo a change 
in the holes which they have there made. Mr 
Fougeroux is rather inclined to adopt the opinion 
of Dr Hill, founded upon observations made at 
Martinico. There the cicadae are very frequent, 
and, during their chrysalid state, bury themselves 
among dead leaves, to wait their metamorphosis. 
Dr Hill imagines, that the seeds of the clavaria are 
then attached to them, and are afterwards develo- 
ped, much in the same manner as the Fungus ex 
pede equino grows upon the hoofs of dead horses. 

It may appear astonishing, that the clavaria 
should attach itself so constantly to the nymphae 
of the cicadae in America, as it is not observed to 
do so in other countries. For this Mr Fougeroux 
attempts to account, from viewing the clavaria as 
a parasite peculiar to this species of insect; from 
|P_409
the great number of the nymphae of cicadea 
which abound in America; and from the circum- 
stances of the climate and soil, which may render 
this phaenomenon very common there, although 
it be not observed in Europe. 

Many particulars respecting this subject pro- 
bably still remain to be investigated. Mr Fou- 
geroux, therefore, recommends it to those lovers 
of natural history, who have themselves an oppor- 
tunity of examining facts of this kind, to multiply 
observations, by which a full account of this phae- 
nomenon may be obtained. 

