

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v1_0161^]

|P_161
[}V. }]
[}Jacobi Bartholomaei Beccarii Opusculum de 
Lacte. Vid. De Bononiensi Scientiarum et Ar- 
tium Instituto atque Academia Commentarii. 
Tomi Quinti Pars prima, 4to, Bonon.}]
BEccarius had formerly published several ex- 
periments on corns and broths of different 
kinds, which received very general approbation. 
His industrious researches have not stopped there. 
In the paper now before us, we are presented with 
the result of many experiments which he has 
made on milk. Without repeating the experiments 
which had been made by Boerhaave and Macquer 
on this subject, he takes it up where they had left 
it. Boerhaave, from his experiments, had con- 
cluded, that cows milk which was the subject up- 
|P_162
on which he chiefly operated, neither contained 
an acid nor an alkali; that it was hardly in any de- 
gree saline; and that it yielded no spirit upon di- 
stillation. And Macquer was of opinion that it 
contained no salt, which was not to be referred 
to the tribe of acids, and yielded nothing which 
gave even the slightest indication of volatile al- 
kali. The experiments of our author, however, 
led him to form very different conclusions. 

His first experiments were made with that fat- 
ty, sweet-tasted residuum, which is obtained on the 
simple distillation of milk. With this he filled a 
retort to about two thirds, and subjected it to a 
heat, at first gentle, but afterwards encreased to 
a considerable degree. In the beginning, a wa- 
tery, limpid, tasteless liquor arose; after this, it 
appeared of a straw colour, and was somewhat a- 
cid to the taste; it then became more and more 
of a deep colour, and, at the same time, more acid; 
towards the end, it became blackish and empyreu- 
matic; and, at last, upon the heat being greatly 
encreased, white vapours arose and flew about 
the receiver, till some of them were condensed 
into a liquid, and others adhered in a solid state to 
the sides of the vessel, in the form of distinct 
and beautiful ramifications; in the mean time, a 
|P_163
thick foetid oil began to cover the top of the li- 
quor, which put an end to the process. In the 
retort, there remained a thick black coloured sub- 
stance. 

The next experiments made by the author were 
with the serum of the milk. By a very gentle 
heat, he drew off all the watery part of the serum, 
so as to leave nothing but what is commonly cal- 
led the sugar of milk. This he subjected to the 
same process as the mass last mentioned, and with 
precisely the same effect. 

From these experiments, Beccarius was led to 
imagine, that both the milk, taken altogether, and 
the serum, when separated from it, contain no in- 
considerable proportion of a volatile alkaline salt. 
To satisfy himself with regard to this, he next en- 
deavoured to investigate the nature of those pro- 
ducts which he had obtained. From the common 
tests by which acids and alkalines are detected, he 
found that the fluid which he had obtained was 
an acid. Whilst the more solid sublimate which 
came over at last, was evidently of an alkaline 
nature. 

Having, from these experiments, discovered that 
both milk and its serum contain a volatile alkali; 
he observes, that an alkali might naturally be sup- 
|P_164
posed to be present also in cheese. But, as Mr 
Macquer had been of a different opinion, he re- 
solved to determine this also by experiment. For 
this purpose he employed a glue, well known to 
joiners, which is prepared from cheese by boiling 
and pressure. He was led to prefer this glue to the 
cheese itself, as he had formerly found, that even 
the glue from corn was of an animal and alkaline 
nature. Having put some of this glue into a retort, 
he exposed it to a heat at first gentle, but after- 
wards more considerable. There arose, at first, 
a limpid fluid, then a turbid milky one of a uri- 
nous smell. After this, there came over a vapour, 
some of which covered the sides of the receiver, 
and some was converted into an acrid liquor, very 
similar to that which is obtained from animal sub- 
stances. Along with all these products, some oil 
came over, which became thicker and blacker as 
the distillation advanced. The mass remaining 
in the retort was very dry and much burnt. 

Our author concludes this paper, by pointing 
it out as a subject of enquiry, whether these al- 
kaline salts be always present in the milk in a de- 
termined proportion? or, whether the quantity 
produced may be varied by the means used for 
|P_165
obtaining them? This question, from the expe- 
riments now before us, he admits, that he is un- 
able to determine. But, he observes, that, from 
the experiments which he has made on wheat, it 
appeared that the proportion of alkaline salt, con- 
tained in equal quantities of the same matter, ne- 
ver varied. 

