

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v1_0387^]

|P_387
[}VIII. }]
[}A Treatise on the Kinkcough, with an Appendix, 
containing an account of Hemlock, and its Pre- 
parations. By William Butter, M. D. Fellow 
of the Royal College of Physicians Edinburgh. 
8vo, London. }]
THE observations on kinkcough, with which 
we are here presented, are divided into 
seven chapters. In the first of these, the author 
sets out with enumerating the synonimes for this 
disease which have been employed by different 
authors. He then defines it, A quick and nu- 
merous succession of violent short coughs, follow- 
ed by a long, strait, and generally shrill inspira- 
tion, which coughs and inspiration are repeated 
|P_388
without intermission, for many seconds, or even 
some minutes, and often terminate in vomiting of 
phlegm. To this definition he subjoins a full de- 
scription of the disease; and concludes the chapter 
with some remarks upon the prognostics. Ac- 
cording to Dr Butter, a fatal termination of kink- 
cough is owing, either to the length of the disease, 
or the violence of the fits. In infants, he ob- 
serves, it terminates fatally, from producing 
convulsions, suffocation, apoplexy, inflammation 
and suppuration of the brain, ruptures, and in- 
curvation of the spine. In pregnant women, it has 
often produced abortion; and, in adults, it occa- 
sions inflammation of the lungs, and its conse- 
quences, more frequently than in children. From 
long continued kinkcough, patients will become 
asthmatic, consumptive, rickety, or scrophulous. 

The author considers a moist skin, warm limbs, 
open belly, plentiful expectoration, and free vo- 
miting, as good symptoms. On the contrary, he 
draws an unfavourable prognosis, when opposite 
circumstances take place. Frequent haemorrha- 
gies, he observes, protract the disease, and a pul- 
monary one is apt to induce consumption. In 
patients liable to epilepsy, or other disorders of 
the brain; in such as have weak lungs, or who 
|P_389
have been reduced by a preceeding disease; the 
kinkcough is often productive of the worst conse- 
quences. When joined with worms, dysentery, 
measles, small-pox, or peripneumonic symptoms, it 
is always dangerous. Our author concludes this chap- 
ter with observing, that these prognostics, according 
to the common method of cure, are uniformly 
just; but that a more successful treatment will af- 
ford exceptions as to the danger. 

In the second chapter, Dr Butter proceeds to 
consider the nature of kinkcough. It is, our au- 
thor observes, an epidemic contagious disease, of- 
ten complicated with other disorders, forming va- 
rieties worthy of the most attentive consideration. 
It is not essentially attended with fever; as in the 
intervals the patient is entirely free from any 
complaint. It commonly lasts for some months, 
returning in fits for the most part at equal distan- 
ces. Much bleeding and purging are hurtful in 
it. The most famed remedies for it, are gentle 
vomits, stomachic laxative paregorics, and stimu- 
lating antispasmodics. It has often been carried 
off by a fright. And the dissections of those dy- 
ing early in it have discovered nothing praeter- 
natural. From all these circumstances, he con- 
cludes, that it is a nervous spasmodic disease. 

|P_390
He farther remarks, that an uncommon secre- 
tion of mucus takes place in this disease, a free 
discharge of which mitigates the symptoms: And 
that, in proportion as the quantity of slime dimi- 
nishes, the fits become more mild and less fre- 
quent. From this, he concludes, that a morbid 
irritability of the mucous glands is the primary 
affection, and that the spasms are only seconda- 
ry. 

An inquiry concerning the seat of the kink- 
cough is the subject of the third chapter. Va- 
rious have been the opinions entertained with re- 
gard to it. Some have supposed it to be in the 
lungs, some in the stomach, some in both, while 
others have maintained that it is in the head of 
the wind-pipe or gullet. Dr Butter deserts all 
these opinions, and denies that any one of the 
places above mentioned is primarily affected. He 
alledges, that some part of the intestinal canal is 
the principal seat of the disease. To confirm this 
opinion, he offers arguments drawn from four 
sources: 1. From the nature of those habits 
most subject to kinkcough. It chiefly attacks 
childrem; and, in them, it is well known that the 
intestinal canal is more irritable, and consequent- 
ly more easily affected, than any other part of their 
|P_391
bodies. 2. From the nature and cure of kink- 
cough, it is observable, that those children pass 
most easily through this disease, who have an o- 
pen belly; that vomits are most serviceable when 
they promote a gentle looseness at the same time; 
and that patients labouring under kinkcough bear 
the action of vomits much better than they do of 
purgatives. All these circumstances, in the opi- 
nion of our author, seem to point out the inte- 
stines as the seat of the disorder. 3. From the 
diseases consequent upon kinkcough. The chief 
of these are, the king's evil and rickets; both of 
which, in a particular manner, derive their origin 
from an affection of the alimentary canal. 
4. From the periodical returns of the paroxysms. 
Here our author runs a parallel between kink- 
cough and intermittent fever. He thinks it the 
most probable opinion, that the latter of these 
diseases has its proximate cause in the guts; and 
he is even inclined to suppose, that all intermit- 
tent distempers depend upon a primary affection 
of the intestinal canal. In support of this doctrine, 
he adds the history of three intermittent diseases, 
which were principally cured by evacuations from 
the intestines. 

|P_392
The author concludes this chapter with addu- 
cing some objections against the supposition that 
kinkcough is seated either in the stomach or lungs. 
He thinks it improbable that it is seated in the 
lungs, as he alledges that, in this disease, pectorals 
do more harm than good: That a pulmonary 
cough, if not dangerous, terminates sooner than 
kinkcough; and that the rickets and scrophula 
are never produced by a pulmonary cough. He 
thinks it improbable that it is seated in the sto- 
mach, because it is not attended with violent pain, 
sickness, faintishness, and such like symptoms; 
and because intermittent disorders in general can 
never be suspected to have their seat in the sto- 
mach, since vomits render more distinct inter- 
missions which were formerly obscure. 

Having endeavoured to ascertain the seat of 
kinkcough, Dr Butter next endeavours to inve- 
stigate its causes. As the chief predisposing causes, 
he points out the constitutional irritability of chil- 
dren; hereditary predisposition to spasmodic dis- 
orders; the actual existence of such disorders; a 
redundancy of vitiated humours in the stomach 
and guts; worms; dentition; cold; and acute dis- 
eases in general. The occasional cause he sup- 
poses to consist entirely in infectious miasmata, 
|P_393
capable of generating the disease. These mias- 
mata, he thinks, are the growth of Europe, in the 
same manner as those of the plague, measles, and 
small-pox, are of warmer climates. 

Dr Butter next presents us with the history of 
twenty cases of kinkcough, in which he employ- 
ed hemlock, in different forms, with great success. 
Building upon this practice, he proceeds, in the 
sixth chapter, to lay down the cure of kinkcough, 
both simple and complicated. In the simple kink- 
cough, he tells us, there is but one indication, 
and that is, to administer hemlock. He directs 
that is should be diffused in a watery vehicle, be- 
gun in small doses, and gradually increased. For 
a child under six months old, he directs half a 
grain to be consumed in a day; for one from six 
months to two years old, one grain; afterwards 
allowing half a grain for every year of the pati- 
ent's age, till he be twenty: Beyond that pe- 
riod, he directs that ten grains be given for the 
first day's consumption, gradually increasing the 
dose according to its effect. If the patient have 
not two stools a-day, he advises that magnesia or 
polychrest salt be added to the hemlock-mixture. 
In the cure of kinkcough complicated with worms, 
dysentery, dentition, ague, small-pox, and measles, 
|P_394
he recommends, with the employment of hem- 
lock, the exhibition of such medicines as are best 
adapted to the nature of each particular disease. 
When kinkcough is complicated with pregnancy, 
the simple method of cure may, he tells us, be 
followed out with success. 

This treatise on kinkcough is concluded with 
some general corollaries drawn from the preceed- 
ing observations. He alledges, that hemlock is 
seldom contra-indicated by any peculiarity of 
temperament; that it is a safe remedy for kink- 
cough, both in the last months of pregnancy, and 
first months of infancy; that it is a certain anti- 
spasmodic; that it is a good medicine in dentition 
and worms; that it sometimes removes fever, 
stops immoderate excretions, and promotes sweat; 
that it frequently keeps the belly open, and often 
purges; that sometimes it affects no secretion or 
excretion; that it immediately procures better 
nights in kinkcough, abates vomiting, and dimi- 
nishes phlegm; and that, in the space of a week, 
it generally removes the kink and other concomi- 
tant symptoms, except a slight cough. 

To these observations on kinkcough, the author 
subjoins an appendix concerning hemlock and its 
preparations. He here first presents us with the 
|P_395
synonimes and botanical description of the plant; 
and then makes some remarks on its preparati- 
ons, which he divides into internal and external. 
Of the first kind are, the powder, the extract, 
the pills, and the mixture; and, of the last, 
the plaster, the ointment, the poultice, and the 
fomentation. 

The powder of Hemlock, Dr Butter prepares 
from the leaves, foot-stalks, and tender parts of 
the stem, gathered about the time the flowers be- 
gin to open. These he directs to be spread on a 
hearth, before a good fire, with a deep fender 
behind, to hasten the process of drying. When 
they are sufficiently friable, they must be reduced 
to a powder, and preserved in phials well stopped. 
The powder, in this situation, will retain its effi- 
cacy for several months. 

In order to prepare the extract, the plant, he 
tells us, at the same age at which it is cut for the 
powder, must be gathered over night, that all the 
other parts of the process may be finished on the 
following day. After being cut, bruised, and 
put into hair bags, the expression must be con- 
tinued till the drops fall very slowly. The whole 
of the juice, without depuration, must then be 
put into a broad glazed platter, and placed over 
|P_396
a charcoal-fire, in a fire-pan. Before it becomes 
very hot, it runs into clots. You are then to stir 
it frequently with a hemlock stalk, keeping up a 
sufficient degree of heat to make the clots move 
about, without causing any ebulition. Proceed 
in this manner, till the intestine motion ceases, 
and no effort is made by the contiguous mass to 
fill up any vacuities which the stirring may occa- 
sion in the bottom of the platter. You will 
then, says he, have an extract of a proper consi- 
stence. 

For making the pills, he advises, that to any 
quantity of the extract, one fifth of the powder 
should be added. The mass thus formed, is to 
be put up in stone pots, capable of containing a 
pound weight; and in this manner, we are told, 
it will keep perfectly well for the space of two 
years. 

The hemlock mixture is an extemporaneous 
prescription, and is made by dissolving from eight 
to twenty, or more grains, of the mass prepared 
for pills, in eight ounces of spring water, and ad- 
ding to it half an ounce of proof-spirit, and as 
much white sugar. 

For the hemlock-plaster, he gives the follow- 
ing receipt. Take of gum ammoniac eight oun- 
|P_397
ces, common vinegar an English pint; rub them 
together in a marble mortar, till the gum be dis- 
solved; then incorporate the strained solution with 
four ounces of the mass of hemlock-pills; and af- 
terwards evaporate the whole over a very gentle 
heat, to the consistence of a plaster. 

Equal quantities of the mass of hemlock-pills 
and honey, mixed together without heat, consti- 
tute his ointment. And his poultice is made, by 
mixing either the powder of hemlock, or the 
bruised leaves, with oat-meal, and a small pro- 
portion of honey, adding as much spring-water 
as may be sufficient to bring the other ingredients 
to a proper consistence. The hemlock-fomenta- 
tion he directs to be prepared, by boiling eight 
ounces of the fresh herb, well bruised, in an Eng- 
lish gallon of water, straining the liquor when cold, 
and afterwards heating it for use. 

