

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v1_0059^]

|P_59
[}VI. }]
[}Dissertatio Physica Experimentalis, de Calore Ani- 
malium. Auctore J. A. Braunio. Vid. Novi 
Commentarii Academiae Scientarum Imperialis 
Petropolitanae, Tom. XIII. 4to, Petropoli.}]
THE author of this dissertation is already 
well known to the learned world, from ha- 
ving produced so great a degree of artificial cold 
as to congeal quick-silver. In the essay now be- 
fore us, he sets out with observing, that the ex- 
tremes of heat and cold are entirely incapable of 
being measured. He adds, that different bodies 
in nature vary much with regard to the degree of 
heat they possess, but that living bodies, indepen- 
dent of their heat, as particles of matter, have 
an additional heat. This heat, he observes, is 
much varied in different animals; but, for mea- 
suring all the varieties which occur in it, no other 
instrument is necessary, but a common thermo- 
meter. 

Our author, after mentioning that the ther- 
mometer which he employed, was that of De 
L'Isle, but that he has reduced all his observa- 
tions to the correspondent degrees in Fahrenheit's 
scale, as being more generally known, points 
|P_60
out several cautions which are necessary for 
accurate observations; particularly, that the ther- 
mometer be kept applied for a sufficient length 
of time; and that, in examining the heighth to 
which the mercury has arisen, the eye be kept 
horizontal to it. 

With these precautions, he found that the heat 
of the human body is about 97½ or 98 degrees 
of Fahrenheit's thermometer; and that this heat 
is nearly the same in all ages and sexes. Upon 
examining the heat of a calf, both by immersing 
the thermometer into blood newly drawn, and by 
introducing it into an aperture of the abdomen, 
he found it at 104 degrees of Fahrenheit's ther- 
mometer. The heat of a pig he found to be the 
same with the calf, and that of a goat at 101 de- 
grees. A thermometer placed between the 
thighs of a dog, pointed at 100 or 101; to this 
he thinks two should be added, as the difference 
betwixt the heat of surface, and that of the visce- 
ra, which makes the heat of dogs 102 degrees. 
From these experiments it appears, that the heat 
of the human species was less than that of any 
quadruped which he examined; but that even 
the difference between the extremes was not 
very considerable. 

|P_61
Among birds, he found greater excess above 
the heat of the human body. The heat in the 
abdomen of a goose he found to be 107¾. It 
was the same in cocks, hens, ducks, pidgeons, 
peacocks, pheasants, and some others. In smaller 
birds, he found the heat 111 degrees. From 
these experiments it appears, that birds differ 
very little from each other in point of heat; but 
that all of them considerably exceed the human 
body. 

Upon examining a variety of those fishes which 
have gills in place of lungs, Mr Braun found, that 
they had no heat peculiar to themselves, but soon 
assumed the temperature of the medium in which 
they were kept, even when immersed in water, 
of very different degrees of heat. But those fish- 
es which have lungs, he found, possessed nearly 
the same degree of heat as quadrupeds. To the 
animals wanting native heat he also refers, frogs, 
insects, and those animals which sleep during the 
winter, while they remain in a torpid state. 

Having related these observations respecting 
the heat of men and other animals in a state of 
health, our author proceeds to observe, that in 
both it is greatly varied by disease. In fevers, he 
has in general observed the heat to be at 105, 
|P_62
6, 7, or 8 degrees in Fahrenheit's thermometer; 
and, even in the cold fit of fevers, two or three 
degrees above the natural standard. 

The author next proceeds to inquire what de- 
gree of heat and cold men are capable of bear- 
ing. Upon this subject, he concludes, that the 
limits compatible with life are much diversified 
from custom and other circumstances. He tells 
us that Richman in his baths could bear the heat 
at 125 degrees. That the common heat of the 
Russian baths is 106½, and the greatest 116 de- 
grees; that dogs, when inclosed in baths, die at 
different degrees of heat, at 115, 120, and 146; 
that fishes die at 111 degrees, though with that 
heat frogs still survive. A sparrow, he tells us, 
died in seven minutes when kept in a heat of 
146 degrees. Birds of passage, according to our 
author, are able to bear extremes of cold; and 
insects, extremes both of heat and cold. 

Having related these observations, our author 
concludes the present essay with an inquiry con- 
cerning the theory of animal heat. He exa- 
mines particularly the opinions which suppose it 
owing to fermentation, electricity, and friction. 
The two former he rejects as hypothetical and 
unsatisfactory, and thinks it may with justice be 
referred to the last. 

