

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v1_0045^]

|P_45
[}IV. }]
[}Joannis Friderici Meckel, Nova Experimenta et 
Observations de Finibus venarum et vasorum 
Lymphaticorum in ductus visceraque excretoria 
Corporis humani, ejusdemque Structurae utilitate, 
8vo, Lugd. Bat.}]
IN this treatise Dr Meckel sets out with some 
observations on the opportunities which still 
remain of adding to our knowledge of the 
structure of the human body. He observes par- 
ticularly, that the doctrine of secretion still re- 
mains involved in great uncertainty. And he 
concludes his introduction with mentioning the 
intention of the present work, which is, to point 
out the different kinds of absorption, and the pur- 
poses for which they are intended. 

After the preliminary observations, our au- 
thor, in the first section, proceeds to treat of the 
return of the lymph into the blood. Upon in- 
jecting lymphatic vessels with mercury, he has 
often found it pass into the red veins, without a- 
|P_46
ny extravasation; but the nature of the com- 
munication he could not discover, till he hap- 
pened to inject, by a lymphatic coming from the 
pelvis, a gland partly schirrous. He there found 
that mercury entered the sound part of it very 
readily; but, when it came to the schirrus, it was 
obstructed by a weight which supported eighteen 
inches of mercury. By pressure, however, he 
forced the mercury into the smaller ducts of the 
gland; and then saw it pass through a vein from 
the gland into the inferior cava. From this he 
infers, that, when the body is in health, there is a 
natural communication between the lymphatic 
vessels and the veins of conglobate glands; but 
that this passage is much smaller than that into 
the lymphatic above the gland. From this struc- 
ture our author deduces the following physiologi- 
cal observations. He alledges, that, in order to 
prepare every secreted liquor in the body, absorp- 
tion from the secreting organ is absolutely ne- 
cessary; and that, in the preparation of lymph, 
this absorption is performed by the veins. He 
farther observes, that by this structure the lymph 
will be conveyed into the blood, when the lym- 
phatics are either obstructed or ruptured; and, 
by this means, many diseases will be prevented. 

|P_47
Dr Meckel, in the second section, treats of ab- 
sorption taking place by means of the veins from 
the mammae. He here gives an account of his 
having injected with mercury, through the tubes of 
the nipples, the breasts of women, both soon be- 
fore and soon after delivery. Upon injecting the 
mamma of a woman soon after delivery, which still 
adhered to the muscles of the thorax, the mercu- 
ry, after having filled the gland, readily passed into 
the veins of the mamma, and from thence into 
the trunk of the axillary vein. Upon injecting the 
breasts of a woman who had died in labour, this 
communication of the lactiferous tubes with the 
veins was also found. But, by this injection, he 
discovered another singularity, for, upon tying the 
veins and the lactiferous tube at which he injected, 
the mercury burst through another lactiferous tube 
of the nipple, and upon tying this, through a third, 
more remote. From repeated trials in this man- 
ner, he concludes, that the lactiferous tubes have 
a communication with each other. In order to 
prove that this anastomesis takes place in the ex- 
treme branches only of these tubes, our author 
observes, 1st, That the communication seems to 
subsist equally between the nearest and the most 
distant branches. 2dly, That he inserted the tube 
|P_48
into which he injected below the nipple. And, 3dly, 
That, after trying every means in his power, he 
was never able to discover the lactiferous circle de- 
scribed by Nuck. This communication of the 
veins with the lactiferous tubes, our author ima- 
gines, is necessary, both for the preparation of 
the milk, and for its return into the blood in those 
who do not suckle. He observes, that, for the pre- 
paration of milk, the lymphatics serve to carry off 
the superabundant aqueous parts of the blood, and 
the veins the saline and earthy parts; so that no- 
thing but the bland butyraceous part is left to pass 
through the lactiferous tubes. From this com- 
munication also, he infers, that those who have 
ascribed diseases to the return of the milk into the 
blood, have greatly erred. On the contrary, he 
alledges that the absorption of this bland fluid in- 
to the blood, is not only natural, but even useful. 
He farther observes, that, by this structure, the re- 
solution of obstructions of every kind is greatly 
facilitated; and that we should endeavour, in every 
case of the stagnation of milk, to promote its re- 
turn through the veins by applications which tend 
to relax them, and to increase the action of the 
small vessels. 

|P_49
In the third section, the author treats of the ab- 
sorption of semen from the vesiculae seminales. 
Upon injecting the vesiculae seminales of a stout 
man, after tying the ejaculatory tubes, he filled the 
hypogastric vein, and the venous plexus surround- 
ing the vesicles. Upon tracing the veins thus in- 
jected, he found them arising from the cavity of 
the vesicles. In this experiment, no lymphatic was 
injected. Having repeated the experiment seve- 
ral times, he found, for the most part, the same 
appearances; but he acknowledges that he could 
not inject the vein on every trial. 

Dr Meckel alledges that this structure is inten- 
ded for the return of such parts of the semen to 
the blood, as he supposes are too viscid to be 
reabsorbed by the lymphatics. Hence he concludes, 
that we need not be apprehensive of an accumu- 
lation of semen in the vesicles; and that, if this 
complaint should occur, it is to be obviated by 
such remedies as tend to facilitate the circulation, 
and not by corroborants and astringents, which 
might be supposed to promote absorption. 

Dr Meckel, in the fourth section, treats of the 
influence of absorption upon the bile. Having 
frequently injected the lymphatics of the liver 
through the biliary ducts, he adds, that by pressing 
|P_50
fluids still farther, he has also injected the vena ca- 
va. He could not, however, by any force, or by any 
method, push his injection into the vena portarum, 
or hepatic artery. After these injections, upon 
examining the liver with the greatest accuracy, 
both with his naked eye and good glasses, he ne- 
ver could discover any extravasation. He farther 
observes, that, when extravasation took place, the 
passage of the injection into the lymphatics and 
veins was impeded. 

This structure, our author imagines, is intended 
for carrying off the aqueous parts of the fluids, 
that the bile may be prepared and perfected. From 
this also, he accounts for the ready passage which 
the bile finds into the blood, when the ductus cho- 
ledichus is obstructed, as happens in jaundice; and 
for the yellow colour which happens in hydropic 
cases, as the bile is then more watery in its nature 
than usual. 

The subject of the last section is the absorption 
which takes place from the bladder. Having en- 
deavoured to inflate the bladder by the urethra, 
our author found, that all the air passed through 
the vesicular veins, and from thence into the trunk 
of the hypogastrick veins. He also observed the same 
appearances upon the injection of water. 

|P_51
As the bladder was, to all appearances, in a 
sound state, our author concludes, that there is 
always a passage for fluids through its veins. This 
structure, he imagines, is intended for conveying 
the subtile watery lymph from the bladder; and 
for preventing the urine from stagnating long there, 
and thus becoming acrid. He imagines that this 
opinion is confirmed by those cases in which a 
considerable quantity of a fluid, resembling urine 
in colour and smell, has been discharged from the 
arm-pits, upon a suppression of the natural excre- 
tion of urine. 

