

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v2_0072^]

|P_72
[}I. }]
[}The History of a Case in which two Foetuses, that 
had been carried near twenty-one Months, were 
successfully extracted from the Abdomen by In- 
cision. By Thomas Bell, M. D. of the City of 
Dublin, communicated to Dr Thomas Young, 
Professor of Midwifery in the University of E- 
dinburgh. }]
ELenor Noon of Grehan, in the county of 
Mayo, aged twenty-one, after being mar- 
ried fifteen months, had the usual signs of preg- 
nancy. At the expiration of her reckoning, she 
was seized with labour-pains, which, by her own 
account, were very violent for some days, and con- 
tinued near three weeks, gradually becoming more 
|P_73
languid, until they entirely ceased. After this, 
she perceived no motion in the abdomen. But as 
her pains abated, her belly increased in bulk, and 
continued to do so till I saw her, which was in Ja- 
nuary 1757, about five months after she was 
first seized with the labour-pains. At this time, 
the whole abdomen was so much distended, that 
I imagined she and her friends had mistaken the 
case, and that it had been an ascites from the be- 
ginning. But, upon minute inquiry, I had too 
much reason to suspect what afterwards appeared 
to be well founded. 

She was emaciated to the greatest degree, and 
so weak as not to be able to stand, or even to 
bear being raised, without distress: So that, from 
every circumstance, I judged it impossible that she 
could outlive a few weeks, or that any thing could 
be done to serve her. But, upon going to the 
same part of the country, about four months af- 
ter, I found her still living. I was then informed, 
that, about a month after I had last seen her, all 
the water had been evacuated from a small rent 
at the navel; and had come away in such quanti- 
ties, and with such violence, that near four gallons 
were received in a very short time. Mixed with 
this water, there were some fleshy strings; and, as 
|P_74
the oozing continued, some small bones came a- 
way. This made the case evident beyond dis- 
pute; and a situation more distressful cannot be 
conceived; particularly, as the poor woman was 
perfectly sensible of it with all its horrors, her un- 
derstanding not being in the least impaired. She 
was, if possible, more emaciated than formerly; 
she had a constant hectic fever, and was so weak 
as scarcely to have power to speak distinctly. 
Notwithstanding this, she was very desirous to 
live, and, what is extraordinary, she did not total- 
ly despair of it; a circumstance which I really 
believe contributed not a little to save her life. 

I considered that nature had been sometimes 
remarkably favourable in cases nearly similar, and 
resolved to assist its efforts by the application of 
proper cataplasms, in order to promote suppura- 
tion, as the integuments round the aperture were 
red, and sore to the touch. But my expectati- 
ons were disappointed; for, in about seven weeks 
after, she was rather stronger, the charity of the 
neighbouring gentry enabling her to procure pro- 
per diet. Besides this, the opening was so clo- 
sed, that with difficulty it admitted a small probe; 
and the redness and soreness were gone. 

|P_75
From this time, I determined on the extraction 
of the extraneous bodies by incision, as the only 
means left for relieving her. On mentioning it 
to her, she eagerly desired that it should be done, 
from a conviction of there being no other chance 
left of saving her life. However, as her situation 
was so very unpromising as to give little hope of 
success, I resolved to have the concurrence of 
more of the profession. I had her accordingly 
carried to Galway, which was about twenty miles 
from the place of her residence, by two men, in a 
covered litter. The fatigue of this journey she 
bore much better than could have been expected. 

On a consultation with Doctors Joyce, Ryan, 
and Brown, physicians residing in Galway, we 
agreed upon the necessity of an operation; but, 
from many discouraging circumstances, could en- 
tertain little hopes of success. As the poor woman 
was still desirous of having it done, I performed it 
in presence of the above physicians, and of two 
army-surgeons, Dr Scott and Mr Hopkins, the 
latter of whom assisted me. I made an incision 
in the most prominent part of the abdomen, ex- 
tending about two inches above, and as far be- 
low the navel. At this incision I extracted the 
bones of two full grown foetus's, for little besides 
|P_76
the bones now remained. They are since depo- 
sited in the anatomical theatre of our university. 

My patient bore the operation better than 
could have been expected. No haemorrhage 
ensued; and she recovered her health so very 
speedily, as to be able to menstruate in little more 
than three months. In about three months more, 
she was prevailed on to cohabit with her husband. 
She became pregnant in two months after; went 
to her full time; and had an easy natural labour 
and healthful child. Since that, she has had six 
more; and enjoys as great a share of health and 
strength of constitution as most people. 

During the operation, I introduced my hand 
several times into the abdomen, both that I might 
extract all the bones and other extraneous mat- 
ters, and that I might be able to judge whether 
the foetus's were in the uterus, or in any cyst 
formed for them. Some of the other gentlemen 
present did the same. But the weakness of the 
woman prevented us from making such an exa- 
mination as would have been sufficient for deter- 
mining this point with certainty. Most of the 
gentlemen present imagined the former to have 
been the case; and indeed, the thickness and 
firmness of the substance in which the foetus's 
|P_77
were contained, seemed to corroborate that opi- 
nion. But, besides this, the woman still persists 
in asserting, that the waters came from her in 
that labour in the natural way, and in the same 
manner that they have done in several others la- 
bours since. This assertion, if true, must put it 
beyond all doubt that the foetus's were lodged in 
the uterus, and not in any particular cyst. 

