

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v2_0300^]

|P_300
[}III. }]
[} The History of a Case, in which a Tumour in the Ab- 
domen, after Delivery, was imagined to be a se- 
cond Child; but soon after spontaneously disap- 
peared. By Mr John Aikin Surgeon at War- 
rington. }]
MRS P—, of a delicate habit of body, the mo- 
ther of several children, was taken in la- 
bour in the night of October 23. 1773, and de- 
livered of a small child, which appeared to have 
been a short time dead. The midwife, upon dis- 
covering that her belly continued much distended, 
suspecting that there was still another child, sent 
|P_301
for me. I found the placenta lying loose in the 
vagina. I removed it; but, upon introducing 
my singer, I could not feel any other substance 
presenting. I then laid my hand upon the ab- 
domen, and distinctly felt through the thin inte- 
guments, a large solid substance, of an irregular 
form, stretching high up above the navel. I made 
little doubt that this was a second child; and I 
thought I could discover the protuberances of its 
limbs, and the rest of its body. However, as 
there was no flooding, and as the patient was 
weak and fatigued, I did not think proper to at- 
tempt immediate delivery. After waiting, there- 
fore, for some hours,as no labour-pains came on, I 
gave her an opiate; and left her under the care of 
the midwife. 

I found her much in the same state next morn- 
ing; but the tumour was something lower in the 
abdomen. I continued to visit her daily, and 
found no other symptoms but those usually suc- 
ceeding labour. The after-pains were moderate; 
the lochial discharge was at first small, but af- 
terwards very considerable in quantity, and of a 
slimy, foul appearance. The tumour gradually de- 
scended, softened, and diminished; and in less 
|P_302
than a fortnight, it was quite imperceptible. The 
patient was at that time as well recovered as any 
of her weakly constitution could expect, after a 
common delivery. Her stools were regular, but 
the secretion of milk was but small, as had been 
the case with her at her last lying in. 

On inquiry, I learned, that her belly was not 
observed to be enlarged before pregnancy; that 
she bad been in a poor state of health du- 
ring the course of her pregnancy, having conti- 
nual pain in the region where this tumour was 
found, with thirst, hectic heats, and want of ap- 
petite. She had for some years past undergone 
a good deal of hardship and distress, from cir- 
cumstances of misfortune. She was, at the end 
of six weeks after this delivery, in better health 
than she had been for many years before. 

A practitioner of eminent skill and experience 
in this town informs me, that a case, almost ex- 
actly similar to this in its symptoms and termina- 
tion, fell under his care some years ago. 

