

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v2_0031^]

|P_31
[}IV. }]
[}A Letter from Richard Pulteney, M. D. F. R. S. 
to William Watson, M. D. F. R. S. concerning 
the medicinal Effects of a poisonous Plant exhi- 
bited instead of Water-parsnep. Vid. Philoso- 
phical Transactions, vol. 62. 4to, London. }]
IN this letter we are presented with an account 
of very beneficial effects reaped from a plant 
which has hitherto been very little, if at all, used 
in the practice of physic. This plant Dr Pul- 
teney supposes to have been the Oenanthe crocata 
of Linnaeus, which is in general known by the 
English name of Hemlock-dropwort. 

The case in which he had an opportunity of 
becoming acquainted with its use, was that of a 
man, who, from the age of fifteen till he arrived 
at forty, was affected with a most violent cutane- 
ous eruption. With a view to remove it, many 
remedies, prescribed by regular physicians, and 
not a few of the boasted arcana of empyrics, were 
employed without any advantage. At length his 
disorder increased very rapidly. Besides the far- 
|P_32
ther spreading of the eruption, the integuments 
of his legs thickened much, and the limbs swelled 
to such a degree as to render him unable to walk. 
While the quantity of brawny scurf and scales 
thrown off, was so great, that handfuls of it might 
have been taken out of his bed every morning. 

In this unhappy situation, it was recom- 
mended to him to take every morning, when 
fasting, a table-spoonful of the juice of water- 
parsnep, mixed with two spoonfuls of white 
wine: And the person who recommended this 
remedy procured him about half a pint of 
what he said was the juice of water-parsnep. 
The first dose produced such vertigo, sickness, vo- 
miting, cold sweats, and long continued rigour, 
that it had almost proved fatal. So strong, how- 
ever, was his desire of relief, that, with the inter- 
mission of one day, he repeated it in nearly the 
same dose. It was followed by the same sickness 
and vomiting as before, but the succeeding rigour 
was by no means so violent. He was obliged, 
therefore, gradually to reduce his dose to about 
half the quantity he had taken at first. 

Before he had taken this juice a month, he was 
sensible of a very great change for the better; 
and, by persisting in it for some time longer, his 
symptoms were almost entirely removed. It 
|P_33
deserves to be remarked, that this juice never 
purged him, although, even in its reduced dose, 
it never failed to occasion vertigo, nausea, and sick- 
ness, which were soon relieved, if vomiting super- 
veened. After he had thus far recovered, he de- 
sisted from the juice of the plant; but, in its 
stead, he drank every morning for breakfast an 
infusion of the leaves. This infusion neither ex- 
cited nausea nor sickness, but always brought on 
a slight degree of vertigo. The only sensible o- 
peration he could observe from this plant was, 
that it produced an increased flow of urine, in 
which there was a copious sediment. 

Dr Pulteney concluded, that the plant which 
was employed in this case could not be the water- 
parsnep, which is a safe and harmless vegetable. 
He imagined it probable that the oenanthe cro- 
cata, which is very common in that part of the 
country, had been used in its stead. In this sus- 
picion he was confirmed, from getting a specimen 
of the plant which had been used; and, upon 
farther inquiry, he found that it was the juice of 
the root that had been administered, and not of 
the leaves and stalks. 

