

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v2_0289^]

|P_289
[}X. }]
[}An experimental Inquiry into the Figure and Com- 
position of the Red Particles of the Blood, common- 
ly called the Red Globules. Being a Copy of a 
Paper lately read before the Royal Society. By 
William Hewson, F. R. S. and Teacher of Ana- 
tomy. 4to, London. }]
SINCE the time of Leeuwenhoeck, the red par- 
ticles of the human blood have, in general, 
been supposed to be spherical. This figure, how- 
ever, has been doubted by Father de la Torré, 
and some others; and the industrious author of 
the dissertation now before us, whose labours, ex- 
erted with the most happy success for the im- 
provement of others, have unfortunately proved 
fatal to himself, likewise controverts this opinion. 
Having made some new observations on this sub- 
ject, he here presents them to the public. 

He introduces his subject, by observing, that 
these particles in the blood are found very gene- 
rally extended over the whole animal creation. 
|P_290
It is, however, by the assistance of the microscope 
only, that they can be discovered. In all the ex- 
periments mentioned in this paper, one excepted, 
the single microscope was employed, which, tho' 
inferior in magnifying powers to the compound 
microscope, is much superior to it in distinct- 
ness. 

Mr Hewson affirms, that the human blood, or 
blood of other animals, diluted with serum; with 
water having one sixth, or one twelfth of any neu- 
tral salt dissolved in it; or with urine, when strong- 
ly impregnated with salts, shews the particles, im- 
properly called globules, to be flat bodies, having 
a dark spot in the middle. And this figure, he 
observes, they not only shew in extravasated blood, 
but also in that circulating in the vessels of ani- 
mals. The size of these particles, he observes, 
varies, not only in different animals, and in the 
same animal at different times, but even in the 
same animal, and at the same time. They are, 
however, upon the whole, largest in the skate, 
and smallest in the ox, mouse, cat, bat, and ass. 

If blood be examined, when diluted with a 
stronger solution of neutral salt than that men- 
tioned above, the particles appear shrivelled and 
|P_291
contracted. If it be examined without dilution, 
as it flows from a vein, though spread very thin 
upon talk or glass, it appears a confused mass, in 
which the particles cannot be seen separate from 
each other. It is, therefore, to proper dilution, 
that Mr Hewson attributes his success in de- 
tecting the real figure of the red particles of the 
human blood. Leeuwenhoeck himself allowed, 
that, in fishs, and amphibious animals, these bo- 
dies were flat and eliptical; and our author 
imagines it probable, that he concluded them to 
be spherical in quadrupeds and in the human bo- 
dy, rather from theory than observation; for, as 
the blood which he examined was not diluted, he 
could not be qualified to describe them. 

When the particles are diluted with water, they 
appear first spherical, and then dissolve. When 
they have assumed a spherical figure, the black 
spot before seen in their middle, may be observed 
sometimes to turn and roll from one side to the 
other, and sometimes to stick to the side of the 
sphere, like a pea in a bladder. The diameter 
of these spheres is less than their largest diameter 
when in a flat shape; and the blackish bodies ap- 
pear to be less soluble than the vesicle containing 
|P_292
them, as they remain after the dissolution of the 
vesicles. From these observations, Mr Hewson 
concludes, that the particles of the blood are not, 
as Father de la Torré supposed, annular or hollow 
rings, and that the blackish spot, which he ima- 
gined to be a perforation, is a solid body contain- 
ed in a vesicle, the sides of which are filled with 
a subtile fluid. 

Blood, beginning to putrify, when diluted with 
fresh serum, or fresh blood diluted with putres- 
cent serum, exhibits particles like mulberries, or 
rough spheres, the diameters of which are less 
than the largest diameters of the particles in a 
flat shape. In blood begining to putrify, the 
particles sometimes break to pieces, and the black 
spot is fissured through its middle. These phae- 
nomena our author considers to be farther argu- 
ments against the annular structure of the red 
globules. 

Mr Hewson maintains, that there is nothing 
regular in the number of parts into which the 
vesicles break; though Father de la Torré suppo- 
sed each to be composed of seven joints, into 
which they regularly broke down; and Leeuwen- 
hoeck imagined, that each globule consisted of 
six lesser ones. 

|P_293
After these experiments on the blood diluted 
with pure water, and with water impregnated with 
different proportions of neutral salts, Mr Hewson 
concludes, that the use of the serum is to preserve 
the flat shape of the vesicles. And, from obser- 
ving, that both a very strong solution, and a very 
dilute one, alter their shape, he thinks it probable, 
that nature has limited the proportion of water and 
salts in our blood; but that in this proportion there 
is some latitude. He imagines likewise, that the 
mucilage of the lymph has some share in preser- 
ving the flat shape of the red particles. 

