

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v2_0284^]

|P_284
[}IX. }]
[}An Account of the Discovery of the Manner of ma- 
king Isinglass in Russia, with a particular De- 
scription of its Manufacture in England, from 
the Produce of British Fisheries. In a letter from 
Humphry Jackson, Esq; F. R. S. to William 
Watson, M. D. F. R. S. Vide Philosophical 
Transactions, vol. 63. part 1. 4to, London. }]
ISinglass, fish-glue, or ichthyocolla, is a con- 
siderable article of commerce. The fish, 
|P_285
from which it is produced has been mentioned 
by several natural historians: But the proper me- 
thod of manufacturing it has long remained a se- 
cret. 

The author of the letter now before us intro- 
duces his subject, by observing, that Pomet, from 
whom many others seem to have copied their ac- 
counts, has greatly mistaken both the constituent 
matter and preparation of isinglass. From his ac- 
count of the process, we are led to suppose, that 
it may be procured from every species of fish af- 
fording gelatinous principles. Trusting to the 
authority of chemical writers, Mr Jackson's at- 
tempts to discover the constituent parts of isin- 
glass were at first without success. Glue, not i- 
singlass, was the result of every process. A jour- 
ney to Russia, with a view of discovering this se- 
cret, was as unsuccessful as his other attempts. 
But, by a steady perseverance, he, at length, not 
only gained his end, but, in the pursuit, discover- 
ed also a resinous substance, plentifully procura- 
ble in the British fisheries, which experience has 
confirmed to be possessed of the same proper- 
ties. 

|P_286
In considering this subject, Mr Jackson first 
gives the result of some experiments, which shew 
the impracticability of making isinglass by a pre- 
vious solution of animal matters, according to 
the process delivered by most authors. He then 
shews, that it is nothing more than certain mem- 
branous parts of fishes, divested of their natural 
mucosity, rolled and twisted into various forms, 
and then dried in the air. This is proved by the 
following experiment: If long or short stapled 
isinglass be steeped for a few hours in cold water, 
and then untwisted, the membranes of which it 
is composed will expand, and reassume their for- 
mer original hue. By a dexterous address, they 
may even be perfectly unfolded. 

The finer sort of isinglass is prepared from the 
sounds, or air-bladders, of all sorts of fresh-water 
fish. In Muscovy, however, it is chiefly prepared 
from those of the beluga. The book, or ordi- 
nary staple isinglass, seems to be prepared from 
the intestines, and probably also from the perito- 
neum of the same kinds of fish. 

The parts of the fish from which the isinglass 
is formed, particularly the sounds, are taken out 
while fresh and sweet, they are then slit open, 
|P_287
washed from their slimy sordes, divested of every 
thin membrane which envelopes them, and af- 
terwards exposed for a little to the air, that they 
may, in some degree, stiffen. When, in this 
state, they are formed into rolls of different length, 
and thickness, or into what is generally called 
Book and Cake Isinglass, and they are afterwards 
completely dried in the open air. 

Our author imagines, that the peculiar shapes 
in which we at present find isinglass, were given 
it at first, with a view to disguise the real sub- 
stance of which it consists. As this, however, 
in the British fisheries, would be unnecessary, he 
imagines it will answer every purpose in its native 
state, without any such preparation. 

As a species of isinglass, procured from the 
marine fisheries, may be more immediately en- 
couraged, Mr Jackson proposes a method of pre- 
paring it from the sounds of cod, and ling. The 
isinglass prepared from the latter of these fish, 
will admit of any shape; that from the cod of the 
book-shape only. From the cartilaginous nature 
of the sturgeon, it might be imagined that it 
should yield a large proportion of isinglass. Up- 
|P_288
on examination, however, this is found not to be 
the case. 

This paper is concluded with an account of the 
effects of isinglass on compositions of plaster, or 
lime, for ornamenting walls exposed to the vi- 
cissitudes of the weather. If it be dissolved in 
cold water, acidulated with vitriolic acid, and 
then mixed with the above compositions, it forms 
an indissoluble firm concrete of extraordinary 
strength and durability. In this composition, 
the acid quits the jelly, and forms with the lime 
a selenitic mass; while, at the same time, the jel- 
ly being deprived of its moisture, by the forma- 
tion of an indissoluble concrete among its parts, 
soon dries, and hardens into a firm body. 

