

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v2_0395^]

|P_395
[}VI. }]
[}An Extract of a Letter from Dr Nooth to Dr 
Franklin, F. R. S. on some Improvements on 
the Electrical Machine. Vid. Philosophical 
Transactions, Vol. 63. Part. 2. 4to, London. }]
THE author of this paper introduces his ob- 
servations, by remarking, that, while consi- 
derable improvements have been made in the sci- 
ence of electricity in general, the electrical ma- 
chine has hitherto remained in an imperfect state. 

To discover the cause of the uncertainty in the 
action of electrical machines, Dr Nooth's atten- 
tion was first directed to the appearances produ- 
ced by a machine in motion, and to the effects 
which the glass and rubber had on each other. 
He conjectured that part only of the electrical 
fluid, excited by the friction, was carried to the glass 
in motion. This supposition suggested an expe- 
riment, the event of which sufficiently proved 
that the greatest part of the excited fluid was, in 
general, reabsorbed by the fore part of the cushion, 
|P_396
without becoming sensible on the superior part of 
the glass. This fact being ascertained, he next 
attempted to discover some method of preventing 
the return of the electrical fluid, till it made a re- 
volution upon the globe. After many trials, he 
found that this might be effected by the interpo- 
sition of silk, rubbed over with bees wax, between 
the fore part of the cushion and the globe. When 
the silk was ten or twelve times doubled, all com- 
munication between the glass and the cushion 
seemed to be prevented, and the power of the 
machine was greatly increased. 

Having remedied a defect in the anterior part 
of the cushion, attention was next paid to the po- 
sterior part of it. As this is the part alone con- 
cerned in excitation, the object was to render the 
afflux of electric matter as great as possible, by 
the application of the most perfect electrics. This 
end was obtained by confining the amalgam to 
that part where the glass first comes in contact 
with the rubber; and then making a communi- 
cation, by tin-foil, between the amalgam and the 
metallic plate, below the cushion; or, what an- 
swered better than the tin-foil, by fixing a piece 
of leather, covered with amalgam, to the poste- 
rior part of the rubber, in such a manner as to 
|P_397
allow about an inch of it to pass under the cylin- 
der. By either of these means, the electric mat- 
ter found an easy access, and the power of the 
machine was incredibly augmented. 

From these experiments, the author observes, 
that it should be an invariable rule, in the construc- 
tion of all electrical machines, to place non-con- 
ducting substances at the fore part of the cushion, 
and conducting substances at the posterior part 
of it. With this intention, variously constructed 
rubbers may be employed; but the most power- 
ful excitants which Dr Nooth has tried, were 
made of ten or twelve doubles of silk, stuffed with 
hair. The support of the cushion also, our au- 
thor observes, should have its conducting and 
non-conducting side. For this purpose, he ad- 
vises, that it should be made of baked wood, ha- 
ving the posterior part of it covered with tin- 
foil. 

Dr Nooth concludes this paper with some ob- 
servations respecting the disposition of the amal- 
gam. To make it adhere to the posterior part of 
the rubber, he recommends that it should be mix- 
ed with pomatum, and that a little hair-powder 
should be strewed on during the revolutions of 
|P_398
the glass. By attention to these principles, he af- 
firms that the electrician has nothing to fear from 
the humidity of the atmosphere, and that the ma- 
chine will work equally well in all kinds of weather. 

