

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v2_0077^]

|P_77
[}II. }]
[}The Account of an extra-uterine Foetus, voided by 
Stool, twenty-two years after Pregnancy. By 
Thomas Percival, M. D. F. R. S. et S. A.}]
JULY 1751, Mrs T. of R—, near Mottram, 
aged twenty-four years, received a sudden fright 
in the sixth month of her pregnancy, which occa- 
sioned a severe pain in her loins, and was soon 
succeeded by a flooding, but without a miscar- 
riage. These symptoms were relieved by medi- 
cines then directed for her by an experienced and 
judicious surgeon. But her abdomen afterwards 
became much distended, and continued so for 
about half-a-year. At the end of that time, it 
|P_78
subsided all at once, while she lay in a recumbent 
posture. Soon after her menses appeared again, 
and returned at the stated periods in sufficient 
quantity; but they were always attended with 
violent pain. Milk also flowed from her breasts 
during several years. 

In 1757, she was afflicted with great flatulence, 
and often with hysterical fits. Her uterine dis- 
charges were become very putrid, and her health 
and strength seemed to be gradually impairing. 

She consulted me in May 1772, and received 
great benefit from an emetic, an infusion of Pe- 
ruvian bark, and frequent doses of the acid elixir 
of vitriol. At this time she laboured under the 
hemorrhoids; complained of great pain in her 
loins, and about the os sacrum; had frequent 
flushings in her face; and was much troubled 
with sickness and thirst. The apothecary had ta- 
ken eight ounces of blood from the arm, and had 
given her some aperient medicines. I directed 
leeches to the hemorrhoidal veins, an electuary 
composed of the lenitive electuary and flower of 
sulphur, an infusion of columbo root, and the 
following clysters, to be injected every night at 
bed-time. 

|P_79
℞ Ol. e pedib. bov. ℥iv. Tinct. Theb. v. o. 
subact. ʒi. M. f. Enema. 

May 12. She began this course of medicine. 

13. She discharged by the anus two bones 
of a child's head. 

14. She voided in the same way another 
bone of the head. 

17. She discharged the trunk of the body, 
wanting some of the viscera, of a female foetus. 

19. She parted with a thigh-bone. 

She was not afterwards sensible of any dis- 
charge of this nature; and, on the 7th of June, 
when I saw her again, her pains were abated, her 
appetite was improved, and her strength seemed 
to be daily increasing. 

In this state of convalescence she continued 
two months; and then, from some cause, which 
the distance of her place of abode has yet pre- 
vented me from learning, she suddenly relapsed, 
and died in a few days. 

