

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v3_0072^]

|P_72
[}I. }]
[}Observations on the Medical Virtues of Lead, by, 
Mr William White, F. A. S. Surgeon in 
York. }]
CElsus, and Dioscorides of Anazarba, the 
celebrated botanist, who flourished under 
the reign of Vespasian, are, I think, the first who 
make mention of the various preparations of 
lead, as minium, cerussa, &c. and, as physicians, 
greatly extol their virtues; but they used them 
only externally. 

Lead hath been accused, and with great rea- 
son, of being the cause of the colica pictonum, 
when given internally. Its external use has been 
also much suspected; but I think upon too slight 
grounds. I have seen it used so freely as a to- 
|P_73
pic, in ulcers, burns, excoriations, &c. that I can 
never suspect a small plate of lead put over an is- 
sue, or sitting in a new painted room, can ever 
bring on symptoms of the colic of Poictu in even 
the most irritable habits. However, it is now 
come into universal use, and claims the most di- 
stinguished place among the topical remedies. In- 
deed its effect in abating inflammation is won- 
derful; and, with Messrs White, Aiken, &c. I 
cannot but join in esteeming it equally innocent 
as efficacious. 

A brewer to a gentleman near this city, slipt 
with his arm up to the shoulder into a vat of boil- 
ing wort, and was so miserably scalded, that the 
cuticula came entirely off, from the axilla down 
to his finger ends. The pain and inflammation 
was very violent, so that, after a few hours, I was 
sent for. Cloths, wet in Goulard's aqua saturnina, 
were directed to be wrapped about the whole 
arm, and, as they grew dry, moistened a- 
fresh, for the space of an hour, night and morn- 
ing; the arm was then covered with a saturnine 
cerat, spread upon linen, till the time of bathing 
again. The relief was wonderful; the poor man 
really believed it was done by witchcraft; so sud- 
|P_74
den and effectual was the sedative effect of the 
lead experienced. 

This man never found any bad effects from 
the application, though used in large quantities, 
and applied to such a large denudated space, 
where the absorption must too have been very 
considerable. 

A stout young man came to our hospital, a few 
weeks ago, with a gutta serena. He got his living 
by working in the lead mines, his business being 
to detach the ore, having no concern in the clean- 
sing or melting of it. He went to his bed with his 
sight entire; but next morning awoke perfectly 
blind, about twenty weeks ago. He never had 
any colicky symptoms, or any paralytic affection. 
Whether this state of the paralysis of the optic 
nerves might have been caused by lead, I shall 
leave to others to determine; but I never before 
saw the retina in such an absolute state of insensi- 
bility. 

May not the effects of lead be understood from 
the following considerations? 

The living solids of an animal fibre are en- 
dowed with a power of action, which is increased 
by any irritating cause. This aptitude of the ani- 
mal fibres to be acted upon by a stimulus, is term- 
|P_75
ed their irritability. In proportion to the 
weakness of this power, will the effect of any sti- 
mulus to the part be less apparent, and the conse- 
quent contractions more weak and languid. 

Inflammation seems to be only a morbid in- 
crease of this power of action, the effect of an ir- 
ritation more or less permanent and violent. Lead, 
especially when combined with an acid, hath a 
singular effect in diminishing the irritability. It 
exerts this sedative power upon every living part 
to which it is applied, both in its healthful and 
diseased state. Saturnine preparations are of a 
very astringent quality; hence I cannot suspect 
them capable of being absorbed into the system. 
Would they not rather effectually constringe the 
orifices of the absorbent vessels? We know 
that chalybeates are not capable of being thus 
conveyed into the body. It appears to me that 
they cannot exert their effects upon any part of 
the body, but in consequence of an immediate 
application. 

Lead is said to have a peculiar effect of exert- 
ing its noxious qualities upon the primae viae; but 
let us consider, that, when taken into the body, it 
is always applied in contact with those parts. 
May not the obstinate colics, constipations, and 
|P_76
palsies, so often the consequences of its internal 
use, be the effects of its extreme sedative power, 
rendering the intestines incapable of irritation from 
their contents, the consequence of which will be 
the loss of their peristaltic motion, which will be 
followed by every symptom of the colic of Poic- 
tu? 

I am of opinion, that the preparations of lead 
can never be given internally with propriety. The 
numerous and well authenticated instances of 
mischief, resulting from such practice, demands 
our particular attention to guard against every 
means, by which that metal may be brought into 
immediate contact of the bowels. It is a pity 
that we are thus prevented from exhibiting a me- 
dicine so powerfully sedative, and capable of allay- 
ing the inordinate actions of the living fibres in 
general. Perhaps by some now unthought of com- 
bination, its topical action upon the bowels may 
be obviated or prevented. Such a mixture, I 
should imagine, might be found to answer some 
important medical indications. 

Fuller much recommends a gargle with sugar 
of lead; and has, if I remember right, been bla- 
med for it. It must be acknowledged, that some 
caution is necessary to be observed in using it. 
|P_77
But I have frequently used a saturnine gargle in 
an erysipelatous inflammation of the fauces, with 
or without aphthae, and with the greatest success. 
We are, however, confined in its use, from many 
people, children universally, being incapable of 
using either by means of a syringe, or otherwise, 
without suffering part of it to get down into 
the stomach, which might be followed by 
some disagreeble consequences. 

I have always been fearful of giving lead inter- 
nally, and never have yet advised it; but certain 
it is, that some constitutions are much less liable 
to suffer from it than others, proceeding from 
some peculiarity of habit, general or topical. By 
the latter, I mean some peculiar state of the 
nerves of the bowels, by which they are less apt 
to be disturbed or affected by such medicines. 

I have known repeated instances of a continu- 
ed use of the tinct. saturnina, and in considerable 
doses, in cases of a phthisis pulmonalis, without 
being followed by any symptoms of colic: On 
the contrary, it seemed to act as a general seda- 
tive, constantly abating the hectic heat and sweats. 
In one case, to which I attended particularly, it 
evidently diminished the irritability of the heart 
|P_78
and arterial system, seldom failing to render the 
pulse slower, by ten strokes in a minute. 

On the contrary, I have known pain, flatulent 
distensions of the bowels, and obstinate constipa- 
tions, brought on by a single dose of that tincture, 
and believe that a repetition would have been 
followed by the colic of Poictu. 

Saturnine topics have been much blamed, as 
causing many bad symptoms; but probably, in 
many cases, such disagreeable effects have been 
rather the consequences of a retropulsion of some 
irritating acrimony into the system, being gene- 
rally observed in children, and very irritable ha- 
bits. 

Many instances are related in authors, of the 
spasmodic colic being brought on by such exter- 
nal applications, and I doubt not but with suffici- 
ent reason. Dr Baker has given several cases of 
pains in the bowels coming on, subsequent to 
their use; but it is probable, that colica pictonum 
has, at times, been confounded with some of the 
other species of colica. 

It is now a very favourable time for observing, 
whether the colic of Poictu, or many of the other 
bad effects of an internal use of lead, can be ever 
|P_79
produced by it, when used externally, as its pre- 
parations are come into universal use. 

I have used some gallons of the aqua saturnina 
of Goulard; and many other practitioners, with 
whom I have conversed upon the subject, all a- 
gree with me in not knowing a single instance of 
bad consequences induced from such applications. 
Dr Haygarth, in his letter to Dr Percival, from 
a very plentiful use of them in the patients who 
suffered by the accident at Chester, never obser- 
ved the slightest symptom of colic or palsy, tho' 
he was particularly attentive to that very sub- 
ject. 

Being upon the subject of sedatives, among 
which the action of cold holds a distinguished 
rank, an experiment just occurs to my mind, 
which I performed after Dr Franklin. I wet the 
bulb of Fahrenheit's thermometer with aether, 
and quickened the evaporation, by blowing upon 
it with a pair of bellows (done by an assistant); and 
this being continued alternately, for a quarter of 
an hour, the mercury fell from 54 to 28 degrees; 
or 4 degrees below the freezing point, my finger 
being at last quite benumbed with the cold. 

Might not this be a commodious way of ap- 
plying cold topically in some disorders, as in su- 
|P_80
perficial inflammations from an external cause, 
the occasional cause being previously removed, or 
in some kinds of headach? &c. 

The experiment requires a very pure aether. 
I tried it in vain with some that was reckoned ve- 
ry good; but I imagine it had been adulterated 
with some kind of essential oil, which hindered 
the evaporation, and rendered the experiment 
fruitless. By continuing the process, a much 
greater degree of cold may be generated. 

