

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v3_0351^]

|P_351
[}II. }]
[}Observations sur la Structure des Parties de la 
Génération de la Femme; par Mr Portal. 
Vide Histoire de l'Academie Royale des Sciences, 
Année 1770. 4to, Paris.}]
MR PORTAL, after mentioning a va- 
riety of different opinions that had pre- 
vailed among anatomists respecting the parts 
subservient to generation in women, proposes to 
give some observations of his own on this sub- 
ject. In the memoir before us, he confines 
himself to the internal parts of generation in wo- 
men. He remarks, in the first place, that the 
position of the uterus is different at different pe- 
|P_352
riods of life. In the foetus of three or four 
months, the uterus is almost without, and under 
the pelvis; in so much, that a line drawn from 
the os pubis to the os sacrum, falls very near the 
neck of the uterus. In a child newly born, the 
uterus falls without the level of the superior sur- 
face of the os pubis. In a girl, from fifteen to 
thirty-five years of age, the uterus is placed a- 
bove the os pubis, and, in an old woman, it is 
found very far within the pelvis. The axis of 
the uterus is almost perpendicular in the foetus; 
whereas, in old women, it appears almost hori- 
zontal. 

These differences in the position, our author 
attributes to the developement of the pelvis. 

He observes, in the second place, that the figure 
of the uterus is different at different periods of 
life. It resembles, in some measure, a prism in 
the foetus, and in infants. In the adult, it is al- 
most triangular; and it is irregularly rounded in 
old women, even in such as have never had chil- 
dren. The cavity of the uterus varies also in 
proportion to the different periods of life; but, 
in order to observe this, it is necessary to clear it 
from the peritonaeum and ligaments; on its 
|P_353
connection with each of which, he offers a few 
remarks. 

The uterus is covered, through its whole 
length, by a duplicature of the peritonaeum, 
except the exterior face of the neck; and even 
this part is covered by a reduplication of the va- 
gina, more prolonged behind and below, than 
it is before and above. 

The lamina of the peritonaeum, which covers 
the anterior part of the uterus, is folded back 
near to the vagina, in such a manner, as to form 
two kinds of ligaments placed beside the neck of 
the bladder. Above, and upon the sides, it in- 
cludes two bundles of vessels, and forms the 
round ligaments. This anterior lamina stretches 
upon the sides of the uterus, forms the anterior 
lamina of the ligamenta lata, and adheres to the 
iliac muscles; from whence it is reflected for- 
wards, covers the anterior portion of the iliac 
muscle, and joins with the anterior lamina of the 
peritonaeum. The posterior lamina of the ute- 
rus forms, by two reduplications, two kinds of 
circular ligaments, in which Mr Sue thought he 
found two muscles. These two ligaments em- 
brace the rectum. The broad ligaments stretch 
much less in height when the uterus is developed 
|P_354
in women with child; the anterior and posterior 
reduplications of the peritonaeum are almost effa- 
ced: So that, amongst other uses, these liga- 
ments seem to assist the developements of the u- 
terus. The broad ligaments divide the pelvis 
into two anterior apartments; of which, in the 
adult, the one is smaller than the other; whereas, 
in infants, the two are nearly equal. This is ow- 
ing to the different inclination of the os sacrum, 
which takes place at different periods of life. 

The two membranous laminae of the liga- 
ments are easily separated. Between them we 
find a vascular net-work. The uterus also may 
be slipped out of the invelopement of the perito- 
naeum, and removed out of the belly, without 
opening the true lamina of the peritonaeum. It 
is necessary, however, to tear certain cellular pro- 
ductions which run into the fibres, and seem to 
give them common sheaths. Two of these 
sheaths are evidently seen in the lateral and infe- 
rior parts of the uterus, accompanying and inclo- 
sing the uterine vessels, in the same manner as the 
capsule of the liver surrounds the vena portarum, 
 as Walaeus has remarked before Glisson; to 
whom, however, learned anatomists have given 
the honour of the discovery. It is this capsule 
that supports the vessels in their convolutions, and 
|P_355
which fixes them, by means of muscular attach- 
ments, to the proper substance of the uterus. Mr 
Portal remarks, that the cellular sheaths of those 
vessels are sometimes loaded with fat; and, in 
certain dropsies of the uterus, they are filled with 
water. 

In regard to the discovery of the ligaments of 
the uterus, Mr Portal is of opinion, that the an- 
cients were only acquainted with four, and that 
Hermondaville, who professed anatomy in France 
about the middle of the thirteenth century, and 
whose surgery is preserved in manuscript in the 
King's library, and in the library of the Sor- 
bonne, was the first who advanced that the uterus 
was attached by eight ligaments. 

Our author returns now to speak of the cavity, 
which he had already observed to vary at different 
periods of life. In the infant, it is formed of four 
planes; one anterior, which has the figure of a 
parallelogram; two lateral and posterior, which 
join one another; and a bottom, the figure of 
which approaches to a triangle. The posterior 
part, although formed of two planes inclined to 
one another, and which form on the back of the 
uterus a projecting angle, is raised within towards 
the middle. The anterior part, viewed from the 
|P_356
side of the uterus, presents a similar elevation. 
Betwixt the anterior and two posterior planes are 
two kinds of furrows, in which several projecting 
circular lines are observed. At this age, the ute- 
rus is thicker towards the neck than the bottom; 
the reverse of this happens in the adult. This 
observation was made by Mr Sué. Different 
projecting lines are observed in the internal sur- 
face. There is a longitudinal one in the middle 
of the posterior part, which rises from the poste- 
rior ligament of the os uteri, where it is more 
elevated than at the other extremity, which is 
sometimes forked. Sometimes, in place of one, 
there are found two or three projecting and parallel 
lines, about the middle of the posterior part, 
where they separate, inclining towards the sides. 
From the lateral parts of these, several other pro- 
jecting lines rise, which make the tour of the ute- 
rus, or which join to a longitudinal stalk, placed 
sometimes in the middle of the anterior face of 
the uterus. These appear as so many branches 
united to one trunk, forming a kind of tree, 
which Mr Portal thinks may be called arbor vi- 
vificans, to distinguish it from arbor vitae vitae of 
the cerebellum. These lines, in a young person, have 
a resemblance to a branch of the palm-tree. Be- 
|P_357
tween the branches, and chiefly towards the trunk, 
and the os uteri, several holes are observed. 
These are the openings of the excretory ducts of 
certain gangliforme bodies; from which a 
viscous matter runs out, upon squeezing the sides 
of the uterus. There is not a better way of ma- 
king these holes appear, than by broiling a piece 
of the substance of the uterus before a good 
fire. 

The cavity of the uterus is much more contracted 
in the adult than in the foetus or infant. The trunk 
of the tree, with its branches, are either effaced, 
or the intermediate substance is raised. Thro' 
length of time, the sides of the uterus approach 
one another, which diminishes its cavity. Mr 
Portal has always found in the uterus, at all ages, 
the sides thicker than the anterior or posterior 
part. 

There are certain excrescences that rise on the 
internal part of the uterus of old women, even in 
those who had had no children. These have been 
described by authors, but not as happening so 
frequently as they really do. Mr Portal found 
them in thirteen of twenty women, whose bodies 
he had opened on purpose. 

|P_358
Our author concludes his observations upon 
the uterus, by remarking its extreme irritability, 
which he finds to be infinitely greater in the in- 
ternal than the external surface, in the same man- 
ner as Senac and Haller had found with regard 
to the heart. 

