

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v3_0358^]

|P_358
[}III. }]
[}Reflexions sur les Areometres, particulierement sur 
les Principes d'apres lesquels on peut en faire de 
comparables; avec la description d'Areomètres 
d'argent, destinés a determiner les pesanteurs spe- 
cifiques des Esprits-de-vin et des Eaux-de-vie, 
et des moyens d'en faire de pareils, ou de compa- 
rables. Par M. Le Roy. Vid. Histoire de L'Aca- 
dèmie Royale des Sciences, année 1770. 4to, 
Paris. }]
THE Farmers-general, having expressed a 
wish to have a certain rule for determining 
the strength of spirituous liquors, which might be 
used, both by their clerks and by merchants, M. 
Le Roy was induced to turn his thoughts to this 
subject. In order to answer the end in view, he 
|P_359
imagines that the following requisites are necessa- 
ry. 1st, That the instrument employed for the 
above purpose should be simple, convenient, and 
portable. 2d, That it should have as great a de- 
gree of mobility as is consistent with its object, so 
that, when plunged into different liquors in the 
same degree of heat, it may always show nearly 
their respective degrees of specific gravity. 3d, 
That it may be possessed of this mobility, it is 
necessary to confine its range within spirit of 
wine and weak brandy; because the difference 
of specific gravity of pure water and spirit of wine 
is so great, that an areometer could not mark 
these degrees, without either too long or too 
thick a scale. In the first instance, it would not 
be portable, and, in the second, it would not be 
sufficiently sensible. And, 4th, that this instru- 
ment should admit of comparison, that is to say, 
that any number may be made, according to cer- 
tain principles, all marking invariably the same 
degrees. 

M. Le Roy proceeds to explain the principles 
upon which these properties are attainable. In a- 
reometers, he observes, two things are to be con- 
sidered, bulk and weight; they can only be com- 
parable when the bulk, as marked by the de- 
|P_360
grees of their scales, is amongst themselves re- 
spectively as the weight of the areometers. This is 
evident; because fluids being considered as ho- 
mogeneous, the weight of any quantity is always 
as its bulk, and vice versa. Thus, whenever a- 
reometers shall mark, by their correspondent di- 
visions, bulks which shall be to one another as 
the respective weights of the areometers, these 
instruments will be comparable, in all the rigour 
of the word, since these corresponding divisions 
will always show; in the same manner, the rela- 
tion between the weights of the volume of the 
fluid into which they are actually plunged. But 
this principle once established, it is easy from 
thence to deduce the whole theory of the compa- 
rability of areometers; for it is plain, that, in 
order to make them comparable, it is only neces- 
sary to graduate them in such a manner, that 
the space they occupy in fluids, marked by their 
corresponding degrees, should be always as their 
respective weights. From hence any method, 
by which we can determine upon their scales two 
points, at which the volumes marked have the 
same relation as the respective weights of diffe- 
rent areometers, will furnish means of dividing 
these scales into similar parts in such a manner, 
|P_361
that the degrees which they shall mark will per- 
fectly correspond in the same fluids. Thus, for 
example, if we take two areometers, and plunge 
them into two different fluids, in such a manner, 
that in one they sink almost to the top of their 
stalks, and in the other only to the beginning of 
it; and if we then mark upon each ot the stalks 
these points of immersion, we shall have, by di- 
viding into similar parts the interval betwixt these 
points, two areometers that can be compared; 
for, when we have marked the respective points 
of immersion in different fluids, it is certain, that 
the bulks of these fluids displaced, was respec- 
tively as the weight of the areometers, since they 
remained at rest. Farther, in adding to or taking 
away from the bulks occupied at these different 
points, by similar parts of the scale, the propor- 
tion between the weight and these bulks marked 
will be always the same. These instruments are 
therefore comparable in all the degrees of their 
scale. M. Le Roy farther observes, that we may 
obtain the same end, and determine the second 
point in the scale at which the bulk will be in 
proportion to the weight of the areometers, by 
substituting small weights in the room of the 
lightest fluid. 

|P_362
Thus we have two methods of constructing 
areometers that can be compared with one an- 
other: 1st, By employing two fluids, to mark the 
two points necessary for the division of the scale, 
which are of such a nature, as that they may always 
be had identically the same: Or, 2d, by using one 
fluid only for the first term of division, as distilled 
water, for example, and to obtain the second by 
charging the areometer with a known weight, to 
make it sink to the requisite depth. The difficul- 
ty of finding two fluids of a determined specific 
gravity, is a sufficient objection to the first me- 
thod. The most certain means of succeeding is, 
by employing the second, to make use of distilled 
water, the weight of which is supposed constant, 
for the first term of graduation, and then to deter- 
mine the second by means of small weights, 
equal, if the areometers are of the same weight, 
or proportioned to their weight, if they be diffe- 
rent. 

M. Le Roy proceeds then to explain the me- 
thod he used in constructing some areometers 
which he laid before the society for their inspec- 
tion. This consists in precautions to have the 
ball and the stalk as nearly as possible of the same 
size and uniform thickness throughout. For 
these purposes, the ball is turned upon a loom; 
|P_363
the interior surface is made to fit a block of a 
determined size, and the exterior to correspond 
with a mould. The two halves of the ball, thus 
formed, are soldered together; the stalk is made 
of a solid plate of metal of equal thickness 
throughout; and, that its bore may be uniform- 
ly cylindrical, it is drawn as wire through a hole 
of a wire-drawing plate. When thus prepared 
and fitted to the ball, the areometer is compleat- 
ed, by graduating it in the manner already men- 
tioned. 

The experiments made with these areometers 
fully answered the expectations of those who 
proposed the inquiry: And M. Le Roy observes, 
that an artist, accustomed to construct them, can- 
not fail to make them sufficiently exact for e- 
very purpose. 

