

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v3_0424^]

|P_424
[}V. }]
[}Two Cases of Dislocation of the Femur, with an 
Account of the Method of Reduction. By Mr 
Thomas Anderson Surgeon in Leith. }]
[}1. }]
IN September 1772, Mr Bruce surgeon at Mus- 
selburgh sent to me, desiring I would meet 
him at Lord Abercorn's coal-work, one of the 
colliers having dislocated his left thigh-bone. I 
there found Messrs Bruce and Stewart surgeons 
in Musselburgh, and Messrs Simpson and Clarkson 
surgeons in Dalkeith, who were just begun to at- 
|P_425
tempt the reduction by pullies. With these se- 
veral trials were made; but the lacque round the 
knee slipping, it was taken off. By this means 
I had an opportunity of examining it. I found 
the left-knee protruding three or four inches 
further than the right, and the one could 
not be brought within eight or ten inches of the 
other, the foot being turned out. When it 
was moved upwards and downwards, if done 
gently, he found little pain; but I observed, when 
it was nearly, or altogether extended, the head of 
the bone became fixed. And he complained 
more when it was in that situation, if any rota- 
tory motion was attempted with the femur, which 
gave him no uneasiness when the thigh was 
brought up towards the abdomen. From the a- 
bove appearance, it was certain the head of the 
bone was displaced from the acetabulum, and 
lodged downwards and inwards, in the large fora- 
men of the ischium and pubis. I was convinced 
that attempting the reduction, in the common 
method, with the thigh extended, was improper, 
as the muscles were all put upon the stretch, the 
action of which is perhaps sufficient to overba- 
lance any extension we can apply. But, by 
bringing the thigh to near a right angle with the 
|P_426
trunk, by which the muscles would be greatly re- 
laxed, I imagined that the reduction might 
more readily take place, and with much less ex- 
tension. 

When I made this examination, he was lying 
on a table on his back. I raised the thigh to a- 
bout a right angle with the trunk, and, with my 
right-hand at the ham, laid hold of the thigh, 
and made what extension I could. From this 
trial I found I could dislodge the head of the 
bone. At the same time that I did this, with my 
left-hand at the head and inside of the thigh, I 
pressed it towards the acetabulum, while my right 
gave the femur a little circular turn, so as to 
bring the rotula inwards to its natural situation; 
and, upon the second attempt, it went in with a 
snap observable to the gentlemen standing round, 
but more so to the poor man, who instantly cried 
out he was well and free from pain. His knees 
could then be brought together; the legs were 
of the same length, and the foot in its natural 
situation. The knees were kept together for some 
time, with a roller, to confine the motion of the 
thigh; and, in three weeks, he was at his work, 
without the least stiffness in the joint. 

|P_427
[}2. }]
A boy, eight years old, of a strong healthy con- 
stitution, while he happened to be carried on his 
sister's back, lost the hold he had of her neck, 
and fell to the left-side. She, however, held him 
by the legs, which were round her waist, so as to 
occasion considerable stress to the parts. He was 
carried home, and complained of the left thigh 
and haunch, which he said was from a fall 
from his sister's back. The parents being poor, 
and imagining it to be only bruised, were eigh- 
teen days before they called any assistance. At 
this time I found him lying in bed on his back, 
the fore part of the femur turned quite in, the 
knee lying on the right thigh, was fully four 
inches shorter, the leg turned out, and consider- 
able tension and swelling on the hip. From the 
appearance, I suspected a fracture at the neck of 
the bone; but, on examining it, was soon con- 
vinced of the dislocation, and that the head of the 
bone was lodged upwards and backwards from 
the acetabulum, in the concave part of the ilium 
where it joins the ischium. The smallest attempt 
to carry the thigh outwards from the position in 
|P_428
which it lay, gave him the most exquisite pain, 
and he could only allow it to be gently moved 
upwards, if, at the same time, the knee was kept 
over to the right-side. From the motion made 
to discover its situation, he complained so much, 
that the reduction was not attempted at that time. 
The hip was fomented, rubbed with camphorated 
oil, and a poultice applied for that night. Next 
forenoon 1 called on him with two young gentle- 
men; he was placed across the bed, the thigh 
raised so as to form an acute angle with the trunk. 
In this situation the knee lay considerably over to 
the right-side, and the leg was turned much out- 
wards . He was kept down by an assistant, while I 
laid hold, with both my hands, above the knee, at 
the same time standing upon the side of the bed, 
and pulling upwards, I found I could move the 
head of the bone from the place where it was 
lodged; and, upon making considerable exten- 
sion, with my left-hand I laid hold of the middle 
of the leg, which I brought inwards. By this 
the femur made a circular turn, which directed 
its head towards the acetabulum, into which 
it went with a sensible noise. The boy imme- 
diately cried out, that he was well, and could al- 
|P_429
low the thigh to be moved gently in any direc- 
tion. The thighs were kept together for two 
weeks with a bandage, and, in three weeks, he 
could walk; but he complained of stiffness in the 
joint for a week or two afterwards. 

