

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v3_0180^]

|P_180
[}The Case of an Angina Pectoris, which terminated 
fatally with the Dissection; by Thomas Perci- 
val, M. D. F. R. S. and S. A.}]
IN November 1773, I was desired to visit a 
gentleman near Knutsford in Cheshire, aged 
upwards of fifty, who had been, for several years, 
subject to frequent attacks of a most alarming 
and oppressive sensation in his breast, which he 
knew not how to describe. This symptom was 
attended with a pain about the middle of the 
sternum, inclining to the left side; and he was 
generally affected, at the same time, with a pain in 
his left arm where the deltoid muscle is inserted. 
|P_181
As I visited the patient only once, and took no 
notes of his case, I cannot give a minute detail 
of it, and must content myself with saying, that I 
apprehended his disorder to be what Dr Heber- 
den hath so accurately described under the name 
of Angina Pectoris. Various anodyne and anti- 
spasmodic remedies were prescribed; but these 
produced only a temporary alleviation of his 
complaints. And it was observed, that nothing 
afforded such instantaneous ease, during the 
paroxysms of his disorder, as venaesection or 
vomiting. In July 1774, he died; and his body 
was examined by Mr Allen, an ingenious sur- 
geon in Knutsford, who has favoured me with 
the following account of the dissection. 

The left lobe of the liver was considerably en- 
larged, and full of indurated, white, tumors; 
and nearly one half of the right lobe was beginning 
to be affected in a similar manner. The gall- 
bladder was distended with bile; the stomach 
was hard and schirrous, as far as it was in contact 
with the liver; the lungs were pale and livid; 
and the blood-vessels as distinct as if they had 
been injected with Prussian blue. The heart 
and aorta descendens were in a sound state; ve- 
ry little water was found in the pericardium, or 
|P_182
mediastinum; and there was nothing preterna- 
tural in the appearance of the diaphragm. 

This gentleman had lived freely, but was not 
subject to the gout. 

Dr Heberden has favoured me with the fol- 
lowing remarks upon this case. "The dissection 
of this sufferer by the angina pectoris, as well as 
that of a few others, which I have heard of, 
teaches us, that the disease is neither owing to 
inflammation, nor to any mal-conformation of 
the parts. We must not therefore seek for the 
cure amongst the means which lower the vis vitae; 
and we need not despair of finding it elsewhere. 
But we should not expect to find it very soon, 
when we consider how little success has attended 
all our searches after a remedy for the gout, and 
for some other distempers, with whose natures 
we have had, for some thousand years, such a- 
bundant means of being acquainted. "

