

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v3_0015^]

|P_15
[}II. }]
[}Dissertatio Medica de Dulcamara. Auctore Georgio 
Hallenberg. 4to, Upsaliae. }]
AFTER some general observations on the im- 
provement which medicine has lately re- 
ceived, on the defects under which it still labours, 
and on the causes of these imperfections, which 
our author refers to three heads, the subtility of 
physiology, the defects of pathology, and the ne- 
glect of the materia medica, he proceeds to treat 
more particularly of the night-shade. He intro- 
duces his subject, by narrating the various names 
that have been assigned to this plant by different 
authors. To this he subjoins a particular de- 
scription of the dulcamara, which, he observes, is 
the solanum dulcamara caule inermi, frutescente, 
flexuoso, foliis superioribus hastatis, racemis cy- 
mosis, of Linnaeus. 

Mr Hallenberg affirms, that the whole genus 
of solanum, in its natural state, contains some- 
|P_16
thing adverse to nature, although he allows that 
some species of it, when dressed, may be eat with 
safety. The parts of the plant which he propo- 
ses for use are the stalks, throwing aside the root, 
leaves, flowers, and berries. The taste of these 
stalks is a mixture of sweet and bitter. Upon a 
very slight decoction, they yield a sweet tasted li- 
quor; but, if the boiling be continued, it loses 
this sweetness, and acquires a bitter taste. 

The stalks, both in powder and decoction, evi- 
dently possess the qualities of the plant; although 
they have a much slighter degree of virulence 
than the other parts of it. He advises that the 
stalks be gathered either early in the spring, or in 
the end of autumn, when the leaves are void both 
of smell and taste. The form in which he recom- 
mends its being used is that of decoction. He di- 
rects,that, upon two drams of the stalks, dried and 
sliced, a pint of boiling water should be poured, 
which, after standing at rest for half an hour, must 
be put upon the fire, till it boil for the eighth part 
of an hour. By this method of preparation, he 
affirms, that its medical virtues are best extract- 
ed. When a patient first begins the use of 
this medicine, he advises, that a little milk should 
be mixed with it. Two tea-cupfuls of this de- 
|P_17
coction are to be taken morning and evening; 
and, after it has been used for three or four days, 
the stomachs of most patients will bear a stronger 
decoction, without sickness or any other inconve- 
nience, although no milk be added to it. 

After these observations on the method of pre- 
paring and using the night-shade, the author next 
proceeds to treat of its use in medicine. He is of 
opinion, that there are few medicines in the mate- 
ria medica better fitted for purifying the gene- 
ral mass of fluids, by different evacuations, parti- 
cularly by diuresis. He has, himself, frequently 
employed it with success, in violent ischiatic and 
rheumatic pains. In proof of its efficacy in jaun- 
dice, he cites the authority of Tragus, Vierius, 
and Rothonan; and its success in scurvy has been 
confirmed by Linnaeus and Sauvages. Besides 
these diseases, he further recommends it as useful 
against suppressed menstrua, and lochia, contusi- 
ons, itch, and lues venerea. The good effects, 
which may be obtained from it in this last disease, 
he endeavours to confirm, by narrating a case 
which fell under the management of Linnaeus. 
He concludes with observing, that, from the ac- 
tive powers it possesses, it is probable it may be 
used with advantage in many other diseases. 

