

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v4_0391^]

|P_391
[}IV. }]
[}Caroli Josephi Oehme Dissertatio Inauguralis, de 
Morbis recens natorum Chirurgicis. 4to, Lipsiae. }]
INDEPENDENT of the many hereditary dis- 
orders which children receive from their pa- 
rents, such as lues venerea, arthritis, &c. there 
are others to which different parts of the body 
become liable, either from original mal-confor- 
mation, or from necessary violence in such la- 
bours as happen to prove difficult. 

It is to such of the latter as more especially re- 
quire the assistance of surgery, that our author's 
observations are entirely confined. He treats 
successively of tumors and depressions in the head 
from difficult births, of open sutures, hydroce- 
phalus, hernia cerebri, spina bifida, diseases of the 
lips and eye-lids, of the tongue and fauces, of dis- 
|P_392
orders of the breast, such as abscesses in the 
breasts and bronchocele; of diseases of the um- 
bilicus; all the variety of herniae; affections of 
the scrotum, urethra, penis, anus; and, lastly, are 
considered disorders of the extremities and com- 
mon teguments. 

In the cure of the hare-lip, the uniting 
bandage made with threads, which decussate, 
is much recommended. This invention, which 
by many had been attributed to the English, 
our author gives the credit of to a surgeon 
in Leipsic, who, we are told, was the first who e- 
ver had recourse to it. 

In that species of ranula which occurs in new- 
born infants, extirpation by the actual cautery is 
recommended both by Levrete and Delevrye; 
our author, however, points out a different treat- 
ment. If the abscess be only a collection of pus, 
he advises it merely to be opened; but, if con- 
tained in a cyst, the cyst, he says, must be de- 
stroyed, otherwise the tumor is very apt to rege- 
nerate. 

The history of a bronchocele, or rather tra- 
chiocele, which came under our author's inspec- 
tion, is here related. It occurred in a new-born 
|P_393
child; and the tumor was so large, as to extend 
from the ear and cheek of the right side, down 
to the breast and very near the abdomen. It 
appeared evidently to communicate with the as- 
pera arteria, and to depend on an eruption of 
air; for, during inspiration, and when the boy 
cried violently, the tumor increased; and, on the 
contrary, its size was regularly diminished in the 
time of expiration. The patient having been 
under the management of a different practition- 
er, the treatment had recourse to is not men- 
tioned. In a similar case, however, our author 
would recommend astringent spiritous fomenta- 
tions, with a view to get the better of any laxity 
of parts that may prevail. And, if a continu- 
ance of such applications should not effect a cure, 
he would even advise the tumor to be opened, 
so that the diseased fissure may be detected, and 
a coalescence, by proper bandages, be obtain- 
ed. Another instance is mentioned of a conge- 
nital bronchocele, which appeared, however, to 
be of the strumous kind. Swellings of this na- 
ture we are advised to let remain to a more ad- 
vanced age, when either resolution or extirpa- 
tion may, with greater safety, be had recourse 
to. 

|P_394
Such tumors and abscesses as frequently oc- 
cur in the breasts of infants, are commonly at- 
tributed to the milk or serum which collect in 
them not being properly pressed out. This our 
author allows, is sometimes the case, but he is of o- 
pinion, that they more frequently proceed from 
the tight bandages which are commonly, though 
very improperly, applied to new-born children. 

In treating of the different species of exom- 
phalus, our author describes a particular kind 
of tumor in the hypogastric region, to which in- 
fants are liable three or four days after birth. 
It frequently extends from the pubis to the um- 
bilicus, attended with much pain and hardness. 
By dissection after death, tumors of this kind ap- 
pear evidently to be of an inflammatory nature; 
both the abdominal muscles and peritonaeum are 
commonly found affected. They proceed, accord- 
ing to our author, from the blood in the umbilical 
cord not being properly pressed out on the ligature 
being put on immediately after birth. Children, 
we are told, frequently die of this complaint: 
The remedies recommended are, glysters, emol- 
lient fomentations, and plasters of the same 
kind. 

|P_395
A full account is given by our author of the 
congenital hernia, in which the intestines descend 
by the process of the peritonaeum, and lie in im- 
mediate contact with the testes. A similar pro- 
cess, he says, is found in women surrounding the 
round ligament of the womb; and a description 
is here given of what may be termed a conge- 
nital hydrocele, in which the water collected is 
contained in this process of the peritonaeum. 

