

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v4_0075^]

|P_75
[}II. }]
[}Violent Asthmatic Fits, occasioned by the effluvia 
of Ipecacuanha; by William Scott, M. D. of 
Stamfordham, Northumberland. }]
MRS S— of Stamfordham in Northumber- 
land, married a person of the medical 
faculty in the year 1759, being then about 26 
years of age. She had been always remarka- 
bly healthy before that period, and quite free 
from all nervous or other complaints, except a 
trifling headach that used to affect her temples 
and forehead, sometimes for a night or so, about 
the time of her menstruation. 

The first year or two after her marriage, she 
enjoyed her usual good health and spirits in ge- 
neral; but sometimes she was afflicted with a 
very troublesome shortness of breathing, attend- 
ed with a remarkable stricture about her throat 
and breast, and with a particular kind of whee- 
zing noise. These fits came on very suddenly, 
and without any exciting cause that at first 
could be assigned. They were often so violent, 
as to threaten immediate suffocation. They lasted 
|P_76
sometimes for a shorter, and sometimes for a longer 
time, but, in general, went off in two or three 
days, and commonly with a spitting of a tough 
phlegm, wh:ch she said had a disagreeable metal- 
lic taste. When these fits were off, she enjoyed 
her usual good health and spirits. She had chil- 
dren, but suffered as little as any woman could 
do, either in breeding or lying-in; and it was 
not observed that she was more subject to those 
fits when with child, than at other times. She 
was blooded, and took some common pectoral 
medicines for them; but without any benefit. 

About a year and a half, or two years after 
her marriage, she told her husband that she had 
observed these fits had always attacked her when 
any ipecacuanha was powdered in his shop, and 
that she was certain the effluvia of that medicine 
immediately brought them on. This was look- 
ed on at first as a fancy, and little regard paid to 
it for some time. However, frequently after this, 
when any of that medicine was powdering or put- 
ting up, she used immediately to call out, per- 
haps from a different room, that she found the 
ipecacuanha, and that they would see her imme- 
diately affected by it. This I and several others 
saw frequently happen, as she had said; so that 
|P_77
we were at last convinced, to a demonstration, 
that the effluvia of the medicine, some how or 
other, so affected her nerves, as to bring on a 
very great and remarkable degree of spasm, all 
about her throat and breast. 

Having thus had several repeated proofs of the 
effects the medicine had upon her, great precau- 
tion was therefore taken for several years, never 
to pound any of it, but to purchase it powdered; 
and also care was taken, when weighing or put- 
ting any of it up, to send her out of the way, or 
to some distant part of the house. By these 
means, she was kept pretty clear of it for seven 
or eight years together; during which time she 
enjoyed perfect good health. 

Betwixt nine and ten o'clock in the evening 
June 3d 1775, her husband happening to have 
got a quantity of the pulv. ipecacuanha home, 
without considering, opened it out, and put it in- 
to a bottle: His wife was not far off at the time, 
and then in perfect health. Almost before it was 
got quite put into the bottle, she called out that 
she felt the ipecacuanha affect her throat, on 
which she was immediately seized with a stricture 
upon her breast, and a difficulty of breathing. 
She was advised to walk out into the air, to try if 
|P_78
that would put it off, but it had little or no effect; 
she went to bed some little time afterwards, was 
exceedingly ill all night, and betwixt two and 
three o'clock next morning I saw her, when 
she was gasping for breath at a window, was 
as pale as death, her pulse scarce to be felt, 
and, in short, seemed evidently to be in the ut- 
most immediate danger of suffocation. She had 
seven or eight ounces of blood taken from her 
arm; her feet put into warm water; an anodyne 
draught, with seven or eight drops of laudanum, 
given her; and she took frequently a table spoon- 
ful of oil of almonds. None of these seemed to 
have any effect, and she continued much in the 
same way, with few or no intervals of ease, till 
about nine o'clock that morning; when, being in 
a manner almost exhausted, she fell into a kind 
of disturbed sleep, the difficulty of breathing, with 
a wheezing noise, still continuing but little aba- 
ted. She slept some little time, and got out of bed 
again about eleven o'clock that forenoon, her 
breathing being still very difficult, and her eyes 
looked red and a little inflamed. After she got 
up, she became easier towards the afternoon, and 
it was then supposed it would go off. Dr Brown, 
an eminent physician of Newcastle upon Tyne, 
|P_79
happening to be in the neighbourhood, called up- 
on Mrs S.; and being told what had happened, 
said, he had known a case pretty much similar 
from the same cause; and hoped, as she then 
seemed better, it would soon go off. He recom- 
mended to her riding out as soon as she was able, 
and to be kept open. Towards bed-time the 
same evening, the difficulty of breathing return- 
ed, and she was again exceedingly ill all night; 
had flannel cloths wrung out of warm water ap- 
plied to her feet, breast, and throat, with little or 
no advantage; was blooded again about seven 
o'clock next morning, and had also a blister ap- 
plied to the back part of her neck; still conti- 
nuing now and then a spoonful of the oil of al- 
monds. She again fell upon some sleep about nine 
in the morning, and continued in bed till betwixt 
eleven and twelve; she got up, and was again a 
little easier during the day, but at night was as bad 
as ever. The same scene was continued for 
eight days and nights successively; that is, she 
was generally a little easier from about eleven 
o'clock in the forenoon, although still far from 
well, till towards ten or eleven o'clock at night, 
when the shortness of breathing always returned 
very violently. However, after eight days, she 
|P_80
began to get some better rest at night; the 
asthmatic fits were neither so long nor so violent; 
and, about fourteen days from the accident, they 
were almost entirely gone off. Although she is 
now in very good health, she has not yet quite re- 
covered her usual flesh, strength, and colour. Be- 
sides the above mentioned medicines, she took at 
times, during the first eight days, small quantities 
of an emulsion of spermaceti, lac. ammoniacum, 
and succ. liquorit.; had a dose of cooling physic; 
rode and walked out a little sometimes; had a 
few anodyne draughts, with seven or eight drops 
of laudanum; but it could not be observed that 
she got any benefit from any of them, except that 
she sometimes thought the oil of almonds gave 
her a little ease. She had a show of the menses 
four or five days after the accident, although it 
was then only about the middle of the usual pe- 
riod; she coughed up at times some small quanti- 
ties of blood, and had also some mixed with her 
stools and urine. 

The reason why the laudanum, the most effec- 
tual and universal antispalmodic, was used in such 
small quantities, was, that it was known before, 
that she could never bear above eight or nine 
drops of it, as the common dose used to affect 
|P_81
her with violent sickness at stomach, giddiness, 
and pain in her head, to so great a degree, that, 
for some years past, she neither would take, nor 
durst her husband administer, a larger dose to her. 
At the time the above accident happened, she was 
not with child, nor had she had any for some years 
before. 

The above effects of ipecacuanha I believe very 
seldom happen, and, no doubt, arise from some 
peculiarity of constitution. Medical writers, at 
least as far as I can recollect, seem to have taken 
little or no notice of its ever producing such an 
effect. 

Mr Leighton, a very reputable surgeon-apo- 
thecary in Newcastle, told me, that the effluvia 
of ipecacuanha had the very same effect upon his 
wife, as it is above described to have upon Mrs 
S.; and that he had once, in particular, very 
near lost her, from having some of it powdered 
in his shop. 

The ipecacuanha that had the above effects 
upon Mrs S. was the common officinal ash-co- 
loured, or grey kind. 

