

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v4_0326^]

|P_326
[}I. }]
[}The History of a Case of Hieranosos successfully 
treated by the Flowers of Zinc. By Dr Wil- 
liam White, Physician at York. }]
MRS S. a lady of about 42 years of age, 
lusty, and, to appearance, of a very 
healthy habit, sent to desire my assistance, and 
gave me the following account of herself. She 
always had a very weak system of nerves; any 
sudden surprise will render her speechless for an 
hour or two, as I myself have seen. An emetic, 
which she is very often necessitated to take on 
account of violent nauseas and vertigo, which on- 
ly give way after quitting a great quantity of 
|P_327
phlegm from her stomach, always had that ef- 
fect. As she could not live without frequent e- 
metics, and, at the same time, dreaded their 
constant effect, she desired me to try some medi- 
cine of another kind; at length I found that the 
acetum scilliticum had a happy effect. She often 
takes it, and it is never followed by any degree of 
aphonia. Such is the peculiarity of this lady's 
constitution, that the gum guaiacum, in whatever 
form, always is followed by loss of sight for some 
hours, by which effect she unerringly knows 
when it has been given her, however disguised. 

She had good health till the eleventh year of 
her age, and was then taken with the chorea 
sancti viti, which held her a long time. About 
sixteen she was seized with the hieranosos, which, 
notwithstanding the advice of three physicians at 
home, and many elsewhere, continued incessantly 
for three years. She was then reduced to an ex- 
treme degree of weakness, and past any hopes of 
recovery, her disorder being so singular, as to 
terrify her friends, who desired her death, as the 
only release from her sufferings. 

All the class of nervous medicines were 
repeatedly tried, musk, opium, castor, cam- 
phor, valerian, the cortex, chalybeates, cold 
|P_328
and hot bathing, &c. A ptyalism was raised with 
calomel, without any effect. Issues were cut in 
both legs and arms; blisters alone gave her relief, 
and that only for a short time, during the serous 
discharge. After three years the disease gradu- 
ally abated, by taking some pills of Ward's. I 
have seen her several times affected with it in a 
slight degree for a few hours, after any thing 
which hurries her spirits. This she patiently suf- 
fered, as every thing had been done which me- 
dicine could afford her. 

In November she began to be much worse 
than usual; and, from what she could recollect 
of her former sufferings, thought she was going 
quickly to be as bad as in her first attack; send- 
ing for me, I observed as follows. 

Complains of a violent pain in the right side 
of her face, and universal erratic pains and sore- 
ness. A scorching heat all over the skin, except 
her feet up to the ancles, which are as cold as 
marble. Pulse not quickened, but full; mouth 
dry, but no great thirst; body costive, which is 
indeed her natural habit, so as to oblige her to 
the frequent use of magnesia. Regular as to the 
menses, the return of which she expects in five or 
|P_329
six days. Appetite good, rather voracious; but 
her spirits are always low after a full meal, espe- 
cially dinner. Has a violent pain in the loins, 
which often shifts into first one hip, then the o- 
ther; the leg of which side is then affected with 
stupor and numbness, so that she drags it after in 
walking. Faulters in her speech at times, but 
this continues not long. 

All the muscles in her body in strong convulsive 
motions, not all at the same time, but successively; 
e. g. her face is violently affected, nose, eyelids, 
&c. and her whole head, which is thrown violent- 
ly backward, and often twitched from one side 
to the other, with violent pain. From hence it 
removes into the arms, first one, then the other; 
these being deserted, one, or both legs immedi- 
ately become convulsed with violent and incessant 
motions. Thus, all the external parts of her body 
are, by turns, affected. 

She is all the time perfectly sensible, and knows 
what limb is going to be next affected, by a sen- 
sation of something running into it from the 
part already convulsed, which she cannot describe 
in words; but she has frequently told me the part 
going to be affected, which I always found to be 
|P_330
true, though the transition is surprisingly quick. 
A slight pressure upon the part gives ease, per- 
haps by giving tension to the muscles; but, at- 
tempting once to hold her head tight, she told 
me she could not bear it, as it increased her 
pains, which might arise from forcibly prevent- 
ing the free contractions of the convulsed muscles. 
She is easiest in a prone posture. Such has 
been her situation upwards of 48 hours, with 
scarce a moment's remission, by which she com- 
plains of great and universal soreness. No words 
can convey an adequate idea of her odd appear- 
ance; and I do not in the least wonder that, in 
the times of ignorance and superstition, such dis- 
eases were ascribed to supernatural causes and the 
agency of demons. 

As she had formerly, in a similar situation, ta- 
ken so many powerful medicines without success, 
I own, had not the zinc occurred to me, I should 
have despaired of trying them again; but, as she 
was desirous of taking any thing prescribed, I 
ordered a blister ad nucham, et florum zinci, gr. 
i. in a pill, twice a day, washed down with a cor- 
dial julep. This was on the 28th of November. 

29. Blister has discharged greatly; pulse less 
full; no convulsions this morning; complains 
|P_331
of a numbness in the right cheek, where her pain 
was; pain in her loins easier; no numbness in 
either leg; spirits good this morning. She 
doubled the dose of her pills this day. 

30. Had some slight twitchings in the night, 
but of short continuance; none this morning; 
feels not the least sensible effect from the pills; 
scarce any sleep the two last nights; feet quite 
warm; pulse natural; an itching, but no scorch- 
ing heat in the skin; has taken some magnesia, 
sum. pil. ii. ter die. 

December 1. Has had a good night; no con- 
vulsions since I saw her yesterday; no percep- 
tible effects from her pills; in other respects, as 
before. Took nine pills this day. 

2. No complaint since yesterday; blister al- 
most healed. Sum. pil. iv. ter die. 

5. On a journey, did not see my patient. 

4. No return of the spasms since I saw her last; 
complains of sickness and headach, to which she 
is very subject, for which I ordered her to take 
an emetic of acet. scillit. in the evening. 

6. Discharged much phlegm, by the puke, as 
usual; nerves quite firm to-day, and is in all re- 
spects in good health. Medicines discontinued. 

