

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v4_0203^]

|P_203
[}I. }]
[}The History of a case of the Morbus Niger, with 
some Remarks on the effects of Camphor. By 
Dr Henry Marcard, Physician at Hannover. }]
A Woman of a very deformed crooked shape, 
about 48 years of age, had complained, 
many years ago, of very severe pains about her 
stomach, attacking by intervals, and commonly 
accompanied with belching, and a rejection of the 
food, or, if she had taken none, of an insipid 
lymph. The disorder was allowed to be of the 
hysteric kind, and treated as such, there being no 
apparent reason to impute it to any other cause. 

|P_204
On the 16th of February 1773, when I was 
called for, I was told that she was then attacked 
with those pains, to a degree never before expe- 
rienced; that she had vomited up some black 
stuff like coagulated blood. I found no fever; 
she had great nausea; her tongue was not at all 
furred; she had most excrutiating pains in the 
hypogastric region, and was much affected with 
anxiety. 

I should have given her a vomit; but durst not 
venture upon it, from the apprehension that the 
rejection of the black matter might be a sort of 
vomitus cruentus, as it afterwards proved not to 
be; and besides, as it would have been against 
the common rule, Gibbosis nulla sunt exhibenda 
vomitoria; which, by the bye, is a principle, I 
think, far too generally pronounced; and there 
is no doubt this very woman might have taken 
a vomit with great safety, as she brought forth, 
notwithstanding her irregular shape, and even the 
apparent deformity of her pelvis, six healthy chil- 
dren, then all alive. 

Thinking, however, some evacuation proper, 
I ordered something to open the body, and the 
emplastrum de hyosciamo to be laid over her bel- 
|P_205
ly. The following day she was remarkably bet- 
ter, and continued so all the 18th. 

On the 19th, at once, arose a severe fever; the 
pains in the region of the stomach became intole- 
rable; she was constantly vomiting, without bring- 
ing up any thing particular, and had no stools. 

I ordered ten ounces of blood to be taken away; 
frequent clysters, composed of emollient and salt, 
to be given; a bladder with warm water to be laid 
upon her stomach, and a mixture of lemon juice 
and sal absiynthii to be taken several times du- 
ring the effervescence. Towards night I found 
the heat abated; she vomited only by intervals of 
an hour, and the clysters brought away, now and 
then, somewhat more of the coagulated blood, 
as the friends of the patient stiled it, which they 
had omitted to keep for my examination. 

On the 21st, in the afternoon, I was told that 
the patient was in a dying condition, the pains 
being augmented to such a degree, as to produce 
convulsions and a cold sweat. 

I own I was now quite at a loss what to do, 
being entirely ignorant from what cause these 
heavy symptoms could rise. And though I suspect- 
ed the black stuff might be the origin, yet I 
knew so little about its nature, that even that 
|P_206
could give me no directions at all. I resolved at 
last to prescribe three grains of camphor every 
four hours, in an emulsion, with some nitre, and a 
good deal of syrup of white popies, and to order a 
large blister upon the part affected. On the 
same night, about eight o'clock, I was called a- 
gain, and was told that the patient, not long af- 
ter having taken the emulsion, began to vomit in 
a most shocking manner; and that the people a- 
bout her really believed she puked most part 
of her guts away, such strange matters as they 
thought were to be observed in what she threw 
up. Before my arrival, the vomiting had ceased; 
but a large quantity, at least sixteen ounces, of the 
black stuff was collected for my examination. 
Upon inquiry, I found it to be a matter some- 
what like poultice, but less adherent; it was quite 
black, neither inclining to the red nor to the 
yellow, being neither blood nor gall. I put a lit- 
tle of it upon white paper; and, after it was rub- 
bed upon the paper, it went clear off from the sheet 
without colouring it, or leaving any mark behind 
besides moisture. The patient said, that it had no 
particular taste. I have never seen any matter 
more resembling this, than the contents of a tu- 
mor cysticus, an atheroma, which I found once in 
|P_207
the dead body of an old man, just under the 
spleen. 

The patient was much relieved by this evacu- 
tion, though she became extremely weak; she 
recovered very slowly, but did never vomit again. 
As often as she complained of nausea and pains, 
I ordered her purgatives and clysters, and heard 
that they frequently brought off somewhat more 
of the black matter, with apparent relief. She 
fell afterwards into a slight fever, and some other 
little complaints, of which it is unnecessary to 
give any particular account; but, after two 
months from the beginning of her illness, she 
was intirely recovered, and had never again an 
attack of her old complaint, the pains. 

I do not pretend to determine whether this 
stuff came from the spleen, by means of the vasa 
brevia, or whether, perhaps, a tumor cysticus near 
the stomach furnished the matter. This case may
probably fall under that species morbi nigri Hip- 
pocratis, whereof he says: Aeger vigium vomit re- 
luti foecem ; but is not to be determined, as he 
gives no further description of that species. 

I shall forbear mentioning any authors who 
have seen similar cases that proved, I find, com- 
monly fatal. One observation, however, I cannot 
help adding, concerning the effect of camphor 
|P_208
in the present case. All the vires vitae seemed to 
have undergone a very hard struggle by the time 
that I resolved to try the effect of camphor, 
and, soon after it was taken, all was brought a- 
bout. 

Not long ago, I have seen an effect of camphor 
pretty much resembling this one. A woman was 
taken ill of a pleurisy of the bilious kind. 
After about seven days, the pleuritic symptoms 
disappeared, and the remaining disorder was, as 
far as I could guess, merely bilious. Besides a- 
cids, I ordered frequent purgatives, and gave 
them as strong as I durst venture upon. They 
had always the desired effect, causing some stools 
every day; but there was no change to the better; 
she rather became weaker and weaker. I, how- 
ever, continued for some days in the same way. 
On the 15th day of her illness, I found the pa- 
tient very low; she could not well sit in her bed; 
her pulse was hardly to be felt; though she was 
not light headed, she could neither think nor 
speak without great difficulty. 

I thought it now necessary to try another way, 
and gave her four grains of camphor, to be ta- 
ken in four pills, every third hour; and besides, 
|P_209
ordered some wine. Upon my calling again at 
night, the husband of the patient told me that 
these few pills had proved very efficacious; and, 
upon inquiry, I was not a little surprised to find, 
that, after the first dose, the patient had six stools 
of green viscous stinking excrements; and that, 
after the second dose, there followed three more; 
after which she found herself a little better. From 
that time she began to mend; she recovered af- 
terwards, but extremely slowly. 

As camphor has neither faculties to effect vo- 
miting nor purging, it is somewhat difficult to 
discover what cause the effects could be derived 
from, which it exerted in these two cases. Nor 
shall I presume to determine whether it acted 
thus, by adding to the stimulus of the morbid 
matter, or by adding to the irritability of the parts, 
or rather by supporting the vires totius corporis: 
Be that as it may, this conclusion seems very ob- 
vious, that camphor might prove many times an 
excellent remedy when the patient grows weak, 
whilst nature intends a salutary evacuation; 
though certainly the effects can never be so evi- 
dent when the evacuation is to come from other 
excretory organs than the primae viae; when the 
|P_210
morbid matter is to be eliminated by insensible 
perspiration, by urine, sweat, or eruptions. 

