

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v4_0335^]

|P_335
[}IV. }]
[}Observations on Venereal Warts. By Mr William 
Dease, Surgeon, Dublin. }]
AMONG the many obstinate complaints 
that accompany venereal infections, I do 
not know any more hard, sometimes, to remove, 
than venereal warts, so as not to appear again; 
nor do I know any case in which the persisting 
too long in a course of mercurials is attended 
with worse consequences; of which the following 
cases are strong examples. 

I. A young gentleman, sometime in 1772, 
contracted a clap, for which, I believe, he under- 
|P_336
went no regular treatment. Three months af- 
ter, he came to me for advice about an abscess on 
the verge of the anus. He told me, that, before 
it appeared, he had a swelling in the groin, which 
went back. As the abscess was full of matter, I 
opened it, and finding the rectum thin and bare, 
I simply divided it. Every thing went on well; 
after the suppuration was compleatly formed, as 
there was a strong presumption he was poxed, I 
advised him to rub in a dram of mercurial oint- 
ment every second night; but with this he would 
not comply; so I put him on a course of the mer- 
curial pill, with a decoction of sarsaparilla. In 
three weeks he seemed quite well; but then he 
shewed me, for the first time, three or four warts 
he had behind the glans penis. I rubbed them 
down with lunar caustic, and enjoined him to use, 
at least for three weeks more, the pills and decoc- 
tion. The warts disappeared, as he followed my 
advice; and, after that, he went into the country, 
where he soon recovered his former robust habit 
of body. 

Four months after, he came to me, and shewed 
me the warts grown again; but said he never en- 
joyed better health, and would take no medicine, 
but begged I would give him some caustic, which 
|P_337
I did; and thereby he occasionally took them 
down, and continued in perfect health for a year, 
from the time I first had the care of him. But 
then another abscess, on the other side of the anus, 
similar to the first, appeared, which I opened in 
the same manner I had done before. 

Another gentleman of the profession was now 
called in, and, in consultation, was of opinion 
the patient was still poxed, and that it was ab- 
solutely necessary he should be salivated. I urged, 
that, though there was a probability it might be 
so, yet, as I had often seen warts remain after re- 
peated salivations, when it might be presumed 
the virus was subdued, and the complaint but lo- 
cal; and, as our patient had, at present, a dry 
husky cough and hoarseness, it would be better 
to treat him in a more gentle manner, and wait 
the effect. This advice was not received, and 
his friends put him under the care of the other 
gentleman, who removed him to a nursekeeper's, 
where he had him nine weeks in a salivation. 
His sore soon healed, but the warts remained un- 
altered; his strength was much exhausted, and, 
the last week, he began to spit blood. It was now 
found, altho' too late, that mercurials would not 
do; and, as the last resource, he was sent to 
|P_338
Wicklow, it being the beginning of May, to drink 
goats whey; but spitting of pus soon succeeded 
to that of blood, attended with a constant pain 
in the breast, colliquative sweats, purgings at 
times, &c. Three weeks before he died, I saw 
him, and he shewed me the warts still unchanged. 
He died, to the last degree consumptive, in Au- 
gust. 

II. In 1772, A young man, about twenty-one 
or twenty-two, in company with some other 
young men, being all drunk, lay with a common 
prostitute. They were all diseased in conse- 
quence. He had a troublesome heat in making 
urine, but no running, and soon after a number 
of warts appeared on the glans, and behind it. 
He went from one practitioner to another, in the 
country, and took a variety of mercurials, with- 
out any alteration, but when he took them down 
by caustic; which produced but a temporary 
effect, as they soon sprung up afresh. He at last 
came up to Dublin to have my advice: He had 
now been for a year diseased, and never had any 
other venereal appearance; his constitution seem- 
ed only affected by the great quantity of medi- 
cine he had taken. 

|P_339
As there seemed to be no doubt of his being 
poxed, the different treatments he underwent, 
having been by no means regular, I advised him 
to stay under my care for some time, to which 
he consented. I began with bleeding and gentle 
purging; and put him on a soft mild diet, &c. 
and made him take the warm bath. After 
twelve days preparation, during which time he 
bathed twelve times, I began with the mercurial 
frictions, using only a dram of ointment each 
time; and he continued them so as not to let the 
mercury affect his mouth; he left the warts 
without any application, and waited the event. 
In six weeks, not finding them likely to go off, 
I rubbed them with the lunar caustic; but in a 
little time they grew up as big as ever. I then 
had recourse to the lapis infernalis, and made the 
whole interior part of the prepuce, and exterior 
of the glans slough off; but still they grew up 
again; and, after he had been under my care for 
ten weeks, during which time he rubbed in five 
ounces of ointment, the two last of which made 
him spit, to see the effect, I was obliged to send 
him into the country, in danger of a hectic, 
the warts being as large as ever. 

|P_340
With goats whey, and a milk diet, he recover- 
ed in a short time; but the uneasiness of mind he 
suffered, made him apply to practitioners in the 
country, when he took, as he told me, a vast 
quantity of pills, &c. He came up to Dublin 
once more, after being ten months in the coun- 
try; it was in June, and he was much in the same 
situation as when I first saw him, affected with 
no other complaint but the warts. In consulta- 
tion with two gentlemen of the profession, it was 
agreed he should pass, after the necessary prepara- 
tions, through a course of frictions, which was 
continued for eight weeks without having much 
effect on his mouth. What most encouraged us 
was, that the first four weeks, the warts seemed 
to wither and drop off, but, in the latter end, 
grew up a fresh. We tried every kind of es- 
carotic, strong and weak, those mentioned in the 
Medical Observations, mercurial purges, &c. to 
no purpose. At length we left them off, and put 
him on the extract of cicuta, and a light decoction 
of bark. 

He now began, after four months from the 
time he came up to town, to grow weak, sweat 
at night, and spit some blood. He was very 
much emaciated, and lost his appetite, his legs 
swelled, and his pulse was extremely quick. Re- 
|P_341
course was had in vain to asses milk, Seltzer wa- 
ter, Peruvian bark, &c. He went, in October 
1774, to the country, and died in December fol- 
lowing, consumptive, the warts remaining as large 
as ever. The lungs in both these patients seem- 
ed to be the parts chiefly affected. 

III. A coachman, after some claps, not re- 
gularly treated, had warts behind the glans, and 
at the opening of the meatus urinarius. He 
applied to me at St Nicholas's Hospital, in 1770, 
where he was twice salivated that year, and took 
a variety of medicines; he had them often con- 
sumed by caustic; but still they are at present, 
1776, as big as they were when I saw them first. 
He rubs them down, from time to time, with 
lunar caustic, is robust and strong, enjoys excel- 
lent health, has been married these four years, 
and has had three healthy children. The mo- 
ther had never the least complaint, and he has ta- 
ken no kind of medicine since the first year. 

