

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v5_0260^]

|P_260
[}V. }]
[}G. G. Schillingii de Lepra Commentationes. 8vo, 
Lugduni Batavorum.}]
THIS dissertation upon leprosy was wrote by 
Dr Schilling at Surinam in the West In- 
|P_261
dies, where the author had frequent opportuni- 
ties of seeing and treating this disorder. It is 
now published, along with two other papers on 
the same subject, by Dr Hahn of Leyden, to 
whom they had been communicated by the au- 
thor. 

This disorder, our author observes, is very ea- 
sily distinguished when it has arrived at any con- 
siderable height; and, on the contrary, during 
its first stages, it is very difficult to detect. It is 
of great consequence, however, in the treatment, 
to be able to distinguish the disorder soon after 
its commencement; and our author mentions 
two circumstances which he asserts to be con- 
stant and never-failing symptoms, viz. a change 
of colour, together with insensibility in the parts 
affected. The discolouration of the skin which 
occurs here, is of two kinds; sometimes the parts 
are of a pale red complexion, and on other oc- 
casions they are white, with a tendency to a red 
or livid yellow appearance. In the former case, 
the hairs growing upon the parts have somewhat 
of a yellow or red appearance. In the latter, 
they are always white. In both instances, the 
disorder breaks out in spots of a round figure, 
which, in the beginning of the complaint, are al- 
|P_262
ways exceedingly small. Insensibility of the part 
is likewise common to both. 

When, in course of time, the disorder has ob- 
tained a more firm foundation in the system, the 
lobes of the ears begin to swell, turn hard, and 
small tumours appear in different parts of them. 
The sides of the nose, lips, and at length the 
whole face, swell and become red. This redness 
of the skin, in time, turns into a kind of blue, 
which gradually acquires a more livid appearance, 
in proportion to the continuance of the disorder. 
The skin is, by degrees, more and more con- 
tracted, and forms itself into a number of harden- 
ed folds or wrinkles. 

In many instances, by means of proper atten- 
tion to diet and other circumstances, the disor- 
der has continued in this situation, without ma- 
king any farther progress, for ten, or even twen- 
ty years. But when, from neglect of proper 
management, the disease again begins to advance, 
the leprous bloatches spread from the face over 
the whole body, even to the soles of the feet; 
and, rising into nodes and small tumours, occa- 
sion a very disagreeable deformity of the whole 
habit. 

|P_263
It often happens, that the fingers are the parts 
first affected with this disorder. Small vesicles 
rising below the nails, the points of the fingers 
swell, and lose their feeling: By degrees the se- 
cond phalanx become diseased, but they remain 
free from pain, insomuch that the small bones are 
often taken out without giving much uneasiness 
to the patient, and on other occasions they fall 
out of their own accord. 

In the mean time, the perspiration is entirely 
stopped up, by that thickness and hardness of the 
teguments which prevails universally over the 
body. Hence the sick fall into cachexies, leuco- 
phlegmatic swellings, dropsy, melancholy, and at 
last are often seized with a taedium vitae, which 
terminates in their putting a voluntary end to 
their miserable existence. 

The breath in this disorder acquires an into- 
lerably foetid smell; the belly is commonly cos- 
tive, and is with difficulty acted upon by purga- 
tives; the foeces are dry, black, and have a burnt 
appearance; the urine is of a red colour, and ad- 
heres firmly to the vessels in which it is collected; 
and the tongue is always dry and covered with a 
black crust. The blood is commonly very thin; 
that which is taken from the veins has, for the 
|P_264
most part, a very putrid smell; but this circum- 
stance was never observed by our author in blood 
taken immediately from an artery. 

In some instances of this disorder, the feet are 
the parts chiefly affected, and then the complaint 
has been commonly termed elephantiasis, not 
only from the resemblance of the diseased feet 
to those of the elephant, but from the walk of 
such patients resembling exactly the step of that 
animal. 

In this species of the complaint, the skin and 
other soft parts become wonderfully expanded, 
at the same time that the different small bones 
swell considerably. The toes become thick, and 
at last melt down, and run together as if made 
of wax. The slightest affection of the diseased 
parts occasions a discharge of blood, which, 
however, is commonly easily put a stop to. The 
disorder by degrees spreads from the toes over 
the whole foot, and from thence proceeds to the 
femur, rendering the different articulations in its 
course stiff and immoveable; at the same time 
that, in many instances, the muscles and tendons 
concrete so firmly together, that the most skilful 
anatomist can neither separate or distinguish them 
without great difficulty. 

|P_265
It has been tried, whether amputation of the 
member, in cases of this kind, would prove be- 
neficial or not; but, as yet, it has never, we are 
told, been found to succeed. In some, a locked 
jaw occurred about the seventh day from the o- 
peration. This again was commonly succeeded 
by tetanus, which at last ended in death. Others 
died immediately from convulsions; and in such 
as did survive the operation for any length of 
time, the wound occasioned by the operation did 
not heal, and the disorder at last seized upon the 
other foot. A particular description is given by our 
author, of the appearance observed on dissecting 
such limbs after amputation: The internal ap- 
pearance of the bones are nearly the same, he 
observes, as those observed in bones affected with 
spina ventosa. 

Although this disorder is very frequent in 
some of the West India islands, and in some parts 
of the continent of America, yet our author is 
clearly of opinion that it is not originally a dis- 
ease of that climate. It was at first introduced 
by the negroes carried from the coast of Africa, 
and has since been kept up by an annual impor- 
tation of slaves from the same country: For, al- 
though there are many instances of the native A- 
|P_266
mericans labouring under complaints of this na- 
ture, yet there are many entire tribes in which 
it has never been known; and it occurs with 
those only who have frequent intercourse with 
the African slaves. 

It has been asserted by some writers, that le- 
prosy is not communicated by contagion; but 
our author is of a different opinion, and has no 
doubt of its being a contagious disorder. 

In the cure of this disease, we are directed to 
have three principal objects in view. To restore, 
as much as possible, to a natural state, the per- 
spiration of the patient; to dilute the juices suf- 
ficiently with healthy nourishing fluids, so that 
the acrid particles contained in them may be 
more easily expelled; and, lastly, to restore a 
due degree of strength to the whole habit. 

With a view to the first of these indications, 
a frequent use of the warm bath is much recom- 
mended. At first it is necessary to have recourse 
to it with some caution, as it is apt to induce an- 
xiety and palpitations about the heart, and on some 
occasions, convulsions: For this reason, the bath 
should not be repeated above twice a week, at 
first, and the patient should not remain in it a- 
|P_267
bove fifteen minutes at once. He should after- 
wards, we are told, come to use it twice every day, 
viz. on getting out of bed in the morning, and a- 
gain in the evening, on going to rest. Our au- 
thor remarks, that marsh mallows, flowers of el- 
der, and other emollient herbs, make very pro- 
per additions to these baths. 

With a view to promote this free perspiration, 
which is a necessary part of the cure, gentle exercise 
is recommended; and it is the more necessary, 
we are told, the greater the aversion of the patient 
is to attend to it. 

In order to dilute properly the diseased fluids, 
and afterwards to throw them out from the sy- 
stem, we are directed first to exhibit large quan- 
tities of any emollient decoction, and afterwards 
to have recourse to some of the more active sudo- 
rifics. During this part of the course, the great- 
est care is requisite in order to preserve the pa- 
tient from cold; for if, from exposure to cold 
wind, the perspiration should again receive a 
check, it never fails to produce such symptoms 
as always prove very troublesome, and which, 
on some occasions, end even fatally. During this, and 
very other part of the cure, it is necessary to keep 
|P_268
the belly open, by the use of extract of rhubarb, 
of aloetics, or of other gentle laxatives. 

For such putrid ulcers as frequently occur in 
patients infected with leprosy, antiseptic fomen- 
tations are recommended, together with tinctures 
of myrrh, aloes, and succinum. We are directed 
to avoid every oily application, and especially 
such as are conjoined with mercury; for, as long 
as the system remains tainted with the leprous 
miasma, it is always dangerous to have recourse 
to mercury in any form whatever. When the 
general disorder of the system, however, is once 
eradicated, mercury may then, we are told, be 
used with safety; and in that state of the complaint 
it is frequently of service for removing such callo- 
sities of the skin as often remain after every other 
symptom of the disease. 

With a view to strengthen the system, after 
the disease has been entirely carried off, a more 
invigorating diet should be allowed; and the pa- 
tients are directed to rub their whole bodies, daily, 
with spirits of wine, or with rum; and to fumigate 
with the smoke of mastich, olibanum, benzoin, 
lavender, or of any other astringent herb or 
gum. 

