

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v5_0075^]

|P_75
[}VI. }]
[}Thoughts on General Gravitation, and views thence 
arising as to the State of the Universe. 4to, 
London. }]
IN a preface to this short treatise we are in- 
formed, that the thoughts it contains took 
their rise in a philosophical conversation, about 
the beginning of the present year. They are 
therefore presented to the public as the work of 
|P_76
more than one author. And they are intended 
to draw the attention of philosophers to a new 
and curious field of speculation, and to promote 
a spirit for farther researches into the grand 
scheme of nature. 

The authors introduce their conjecture, by ob- 
serving, that the laws of motion, with regard to 
all bodies, are laid down by Sir Isaac Newton in 
four general propositions. The three first he 
lays down as axioms; but the fourth, commonly 
called the law of gravitation, he proves by a 
large and particular induction, founded on the 
phaenomena of our planetary system. And the 
discovery of the law of universal gravitation will 
ever be regarded as one of the noblest exertions 
of the human faculties. 

That gravity, which is indispensable to the con- 
dition of every individual world, does, in reality, 
extend to the greatest assignable distances, is the 
great hinge of the Newtonian philosophy, and is 
therein fully evinced by the most perfect induc- 
tion. The authors of this treatise conclude, 
that such an extension of the power of gravity 
is incompatible with any system of bodies in a 
quiescent state. For, were they in this condition, 
as soon as gravitation began to act, they would 
|P_77
begin mutually to approach, and universal de- 
struction would ensue. 

In consequence of an admirable contrivance, 
introduced by means of projectile forces, com- 
bined with those arising from general gravitation, 
the planets revolve round the sun, and neither 
have a continual approach to it, nor to each o- 
ther. Our authors, therefore, conclude, that as 
gravity is essential to the constitution of all great 
bodies in the universe, periodical motion must be 
necessary to the permanency and order of every 
system of worlds whatsoever. And, as projectile 
force is fitted to counteract the tendency of ge- 
neral gravitation in a small system, so they con- 
jecture, that it will have effect also in the grand 
system of the universe, round whose centre they 
suppose, that this solar system of ours, and an in- 
conceivable number of others like to it, revolve 
according to the law of gravitation. On this idea, 
in place of apprehending disorder and confusion 
from its general influence, it leads us to contem- 
plate an endless number of harmonious motions, 
all of which loudly proclaim the sustaining hand 
of the Deity. 

The conjecture thus attempted to be establish- 
ed by reasoning, is, we are informed, in some 
|P_78
measure proved by facts. For, our authors ob- 
serve, that, agreeably to what has been said, cer- 
tain proper motions of the stars begin actually 
to be discovered by the nicety of modern obser- 
vations. Sirius, Castor, and several others, are 
found to be moving through absolute space, with 
incredible velocity. They add, that the whole 
fixed stars of the firmament are suspected to do 
so by the first astronomers of this age. And 
they conclude, by saying, that posterity must de- 
termine how far the observed laws of these ce- 
lestial motions shall favour these hints of one 
grand universal system. 

