

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v5_0084^]

|P_84
[}III. }]
[}The History of a Convulsive Disorder, treated by the 
Use of the Flowers of Zinc. By Dr Patrick 
Dugud, Physician at Durham. Communicated 
to Dr Duncan. }]
JANE HEDLEY, aged nine years, of a 
relaxed habit of body, and delicate consti- 
tution, was suddenly, about two years ago, 
|P_85
without any previous indisposition, seized with a 
violent convulsive fit; during which, the whole 
muscular system was affected with irregular spas- 
modic contractions. Her countenance became 
pale and contracted; her eyes rolled wildly; the 
muscles of the mouth were thrown into a convul- 
sive grin; her knees were almost brought to 
touch the sternum ; whilst her feet, with the toes 
distorted inwards, seemed to reach the anus. 
Upon undressing her, there was observed, im- 
mediately below the false ribs of the left side, a 
round and circumscribed swelling, soft, and yield- 
ing to the touch; which, in this, and all the sub- 
sequent paroxysms, no sooner began to diminish, 
than all the other symptoms vanished; and she 
was left in an absolute state of stupefaction, which 
generally terminated in a profound sleep. 

After this first attack, which lasted several 
hours, the same series of symptoms continued, for 
six months, to return, at irregular intervals, three 
or four times a week. About this time, she was 
seized with a fever, which had almost proved fa- 
tal. On her recovery from it, she passed three 
large round worms, and had no return of the sit 
till two months after, when they again attacked 
her, with all their former violence ; and increased 
so much in frequency, that, at the time I was de- 
|P_86
sired to visit her, she generally had a fit every 
three hours; which, however, seldom exceeded 
twenty minutes in duration. I had often an op- 
portunity of seeing the girl under the paroxysm, 
and found that it literally answered the descrip- 
tion given me of the first attack. I was informed 
by her friends, that she was naturally a girl of 
great sensibility, quick conception, and a reten- 
tive memory; but that her disorder had so much 
impaired the faculties of her mind, that she had 
forgot every thing she had formerly learned, and 
hardly knew a single letter of the alphabet. 

As the girl formerly had passed worms, and 
continued to have several of the chief symptoms 
which are supposed to indicate their presence in 
the intestinal canal, viz. foetid breath, slimy 
stools, grinding of the teeth, &c. I thought it 
more than probable that all her complaints origi- 
nated from this cause; and therefore judged it 
proper to put her, for some time, upon a course 
of anthelmintics. But, on finding that, instead 
of alleviating the symptoms, they evidently ag- 
gravated the disease, I was naturally led to refer 
the whole phaenomena to a peculiar state of mo- 
bility in the nervous system; and, as the highest 
encomiums had been lately bestowed by Gau- 
|P_87
bius, and others, on the flores zinci, in spasmo- 
dic and convulsive disorders, I resolved to give 
them a trial. And, in order to preclude any 
chance of fallacy with respect to their effects, I 
laid aside all other medicines, and, on the 24th 
of July 1776, prescribed the following simple 
pill: 

℞ Flor. zinc. ʒss. 
Extract. gentian. ʒiss. syr. zingib. q. s. f. 
pilul. No. xxx. quarum duas sumat omni 
m. et v. 

I was sent for in the afternoon, and informed 
that she had scarcely taken the pills half an hour, 
when she was seized with a severe headach, ac- 
companied with reaching, vomiting, and gripes. 
I ordered for her a gentle laxative clyster, and an 
anodyne draught, at bed-time; and was told next 
morning, that the nausea and gripes had ceased 
on taking the opiate, and that she had fewer sits 
in the night than usual. On examining the 
flowers of zinc, I found them very ill prepared, 
and more like a corrosion of the zinc than a true 
calx. I therefore caused some to be procured, 
which I could depend on as genuine, and gave 
them under the form of a powder, as more a- 
|P_88
greeable to the girl, who had a difficulty in swal- 
lowing pills. 

℞ Flor. zinc. gr. xxiv. 
Sacchar. alb. ʒiss. m. s. a. et. divid. in dos. xii. 
Cap. dosin omni m. et v. 

On the 30th, she began to use the powders, 
which sat easily on her stomach; and she had on- 
ly taken them two days, when the return of the 
fits became sensibly less frequent. 

On the 4th of August, I desired that she should 
take three doses of her medicines every day; and, 
from that period, the fits began to diminish so 
fast in the frequency of their return, as well as to 
abate in the violence of their symptoms, that, in 
less than a week, they never recurred in the 
night, and not above thrice through the day. 
The flatulent swelling, (for such I supposed it to 
be,) formerly observed to rise in her side, be- 
came scarcely perceptible; the muscular system 
was now no more thrown into spastic and con- 
vulsive motions; nor was the paroxysm, which 
had assumed the type of a common syncope, 
succeeded by any sensible degree of stupor or 
coma. 

On the 11th, her medicine was increased to 
sour dozes a day; after which the paroxysm 
|P_89
never returned oftener than once in the twenty- 
four hours, and rarely lasted above five minutes. 
She now began to recover the use of her reason 
and memory, to give pertinent answers when spo- 
ken to, and to recollect things which she had 
learned by heart two years before. She was 
now, for the first time, allowed to go abroad 
without an attendant. 

On the 14th, she began to take gr. xii. of the 
zinc, and had not any return of the fits till the 
morning of the 18th, when, on being hurried 
out of bed, she had a slight paroxysm, which 
only lasted about three minutes. She was sen- 
sible of its approach, and, whilst it continued, 
seemed nowise convulsed, As she had experi- 
enced no inconveniency from gr. xii. of the zinc, 
I ventured to prescribe gr. xv. a-day, which was 
attended with so happy an effect, that the fits 
entirely ceased; but she continued to be af- 
fected with a sudden tremor or starting every 
morning, much about the same time that she had 
been formerly wont to have a severe paroxysm. 
Being, however, desired to take every morning a 
a dose of her medicine before she got out of 
bed, this complaint, in a few days, entirely va- 
nished, and, with it, every other symptom of her 
|P_90
disorder, both of mind and body. But, as the 
girl was naturally of a relaxed and delicate habit 
of body, I thought there was still some reason to 
apprehend a relapse, and therefore recommended 
to her the use of sea-bathing, as a safe and pow- 
erful tonic, and well calculated to remove that 
constitutional irritability of system, which seemed 
to be the prima mali labes, and proximate cause 
of the disease. 

In the latter end of August she began to 
bathe, and persevered in it for some weeks; af- 
ter which she was sent into the country, where 
she staid near two months, and returned to town 
perfectly well in every respect. She continued 
in a state of health till the 3d of December, 
when, having walked out, she dropped down in 
a violent convulsion-fit; and was no sooner out 
of one fit, than she was taken with another. I 
did not see her till the 5th, when I found her in 
a situation, that left very little room to doubt of 
the event. Her pulse was extremely quick and 
small, and intermitted every third or fourth pul- 
sation; her looks were wild and ghastly; her 
lower extremities were become paralytic; she 
had subsultus tendinum, singultus, and all the 
|P_91
symptoms of an approaching dissolution; which 
accordingly happened next morning. 

Tho' the above case terminated fatally, it, in 
my opinion, affords the most convincing proof 
of the powerful and salutary effects of the flowers 
of zinc in convulsive and spasmodic diseases. I 
have had an opportunity of using them in three 
other cases of this nature; in two of which they 
were evidently attended with considerable advan- 
tage; but, in the third, they entirely failed. 

