

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v5_0062^]

|P_62
[}IV. }]
[}Pharmacopoea Suecica, cum gratia et privilegio, 
S:œ R:æ Majitis. 8vo, Holmiae.}]
OF all the different branches of the medical 
art, there is, perhaps, no one which has, 
of late years, undergone greater alteration than 
that which respects the preparation and composi- 
tion of medicines. Besides which, the articles 
employed as medicines have also undergone con- 
siderable alterations. Some articles, at one time 
considered as powerful and efficacious medicines, 
are at another exploded as totally useless. And 
daily experience discovers useful properties in 
articles, which were never before employed for 
medical purposes. Of these assertions, the pre- 
sent Pharmacopoeia, as well as several others of 
recent date, affords indubitable evidence. From 
the nature of the work, however, it is impossible 
for us to give such an analysis as can convey any 
|P_63
proper idea of it. Yet, we may observe, that, 
throughout the whole, this publication bears 
evident marks of its being the work of intelligent 
practitioners. And we have little doubt in giving 
it as our opinion, that it is to be considered as, 
perhaps, the best Pharmacopoeia yet extant. 

After a respectful dedication to his Swedish 
Majesty, and a short preface, in which they ex- 
plain their weights and measures, they deliver a 
few general pharmaceutical rules. They advise, 
that herbs, flowers, and the like, should be quick- 
ly dried at a slow fire. With respect to powders, 
they observe, that what is first obtained, is, in 
general, the best. And they direct, that, in ipe- 
cacuanha, the woody part should not be used. Yet, 
they allow, that, in the case of those woody sub- 
stances abounding with gums and resins, as jal- 
lap, Peruvian bark, and the like, the powder first 
obtained is much inferior to what is got afterwards. 
They recommend, that gums and gummi-resi- 
nous substances, should chiefly be pounded du- 
ring frost. And, in the preparation of compound 
powders, they give it as a general direction, that 
the articles should first be pounded, each sepa- 
rately, and then intimately mixed. 

|P_64
To these rules follows the catalogue of the 
materia medica, containing those articles which 
they direct to be kept in the shops, and which 
should not be prepared by the apothecary him- 
self. 

These articles are arranged in alphabetical order, 
and to each is subjoined a character, which, al- 
though short, serves to give a very clear idea of 
the substance employed. A few examples will 
better explain the manner in which they have 
acquitted themselves in this part of their work, 
than any account of it. 

Abrotanum. Herba. 
Artemisia abrotanum. Caroli A Linne. 
Spec. plant. edit. 2. Planta hortensis suffrutico- 
sa. 
Acacia Vera. Succus e fructu. 
Mimosa Senegal. L. Africana arborea. 
Ærugo. Cuprum musto vini corrosum. 
Alcana. Radix. 
Anchusa tinctoria. L. Exotica, Europae austra- 
lis, Perennis. 
Aloe. Cabalina, hepatica, socotrina. 
Aloe perfoliata. L. Exotica Indica. 
Anethum. Herba Seminea. 
Anethum graveolens. L. Hortensis annua. 
|P_65
Arnica. Folia, flores. 
Arnica montana L. Suecica, perennis. 
Assa foetida. Gummi-resina. 
Ferula assa foetida. L. Asiatica, perennis. 
Bdellium. Gummi-resina. 
Obscura. Arabica, palma. 
Castoreum: Et ejus axungia. 
Castor Fiber. L. s. n. Europae septentrionalis. 
Cerussa: In laminis. Plumbum aceti vapore 
corrosum. 
These few examples, selected from the begin- 
ning of the catalogue, will give some idea of the 
method which is followed throughout the whole, 
both with respect to substances from the vege- 
table, fossil, and animal kingdoms. With re- 
gard to this catalogue, we may fartner observe, 
that, although the Stockholm college have re- 
jected many articles which still retain a place in 
other foreign Pharmacopoeias, yet their cata- 
logue is much more numerous than that of the 
Edinburgh College. And it contains above an 
hundred and twenty articles which are not now 
to be found in that work. Some of these which 
have of late been recommended as useful reme- 
dies, on the authority of practitioners of credit, 
have never had a place in the Edinburgh Phar- 
|P_66
macopoeia. Of these, the following seem to be 
the chief. 
Arnica montana, 
Auripigmentum, 
Botrys Chenopodium Botrys L.
Cajeput, 
Camphorata. Camphorosma Monspelica. 
Cicuta virosa. 
Culilavan. Laurus Culilavan L.
Faba Ignatii. 
Inula dysenterica. 
Quassia. 
Salicaria. 
Vanilla. 

After the list of simple medicines, or rather of 
the materia medica, they proceed to the prepared 
and compounded medicines. The order which 
they have here followed, is the arranging the 
whole in an alphabetical list. And, although this 
method be not altogether without disadvantages, 
yet it is, perhaps, preferable to most others. Of 
the various alterations and improvements which 
are proposed through this part of the work, we 
cannot pretend to give an account. 

They propose that an acetum concentratum 
should be prepared by freezing. And they give 
|P_67
it as the standard of strength, that one dram of 
it should saturate a scruple of the salt of tartar. 

They direct the preparation of an ærugo 
crystallizata, by pouring vinegar upon verdi- 
grize, and after maceration and decantation, sub- 
jecting the transparent fluid to evaporation and 
crystallization. This preparation of the verde- 
grize is afterwards employed in the preparation 
of the aqua caerulea, or aqua saphirina, and for 
several other purposes. 

They point out a process for the purification 
of camphor by means of quick lime. 

They give the following formula for the pre- 
paration of a ceratum labiale. 

℞. Butyri recentis, insulsi, libram semis 
Paffalarum exacinatarum, conscissarum, 

Pomorum Borsdorfiensium exacinatorum 
et conscissorum, 

Cerae flavae, singulorum uncias duas 

Radicis alcannae drachmas duas 

Coque leniter in vase figulino donec humiditas 
evaporata sit, seu guttula carboni candenti im- 
miffa crepitum non edat. Massa fervens forti 
expressione coletur in vas aqua rosarum plenum, 
et refrigerata ab aqua hac liberetur. 

|P_68
They direct the preparation of a cremor Sa- 
turni, by uniting equal parts of the acetum 
saturninum and succus citri, from brisk agitation
in a glass mortar. 

For the preparation of an electuarium e manna, 
we are presented with the following formula. 

℞. Mannae electae, 
Sacchari albissimi, singulorum uncias duas, 
Aquae foeniculi, uncias duas cum dimidia, 

Solutionem cola cum expressione, et ei ad-
missae Radices Iridis Florentinae, in subtilissimum 
pulverem tritae, drachmam unam. 

Olei amygdalarum dulcium recenter ex-
pressi unciam unam, fiat electuarium. 

They propose an elixir anthelminticum, consist-
ing of jallap, bastard safron, scammony and gam-
boge; rectified spirit of wine being employed as 
the menstruum. 

Their emplastrum pro cereis rnedicatis, is made 
in the following manner. 

℞. Cerae flavae leni igne liquefactae, libram 
unam. 

Aceti saturnini, unciam semis, mixtis, et 
igne remotis, immerge telas tenues ex quibus 
ant l. a. cerei. 

|P_69
They propose the preparation of a gelatina 
pomorum, by expressing the juice of apples, ad- 
ding to it a fourth part of its weight of white su- 
gar, and then evaporating to the consistence of a 
jelly. 

They obtain an oleum animale by distillation 
from calcined hartshorn, to which is added half 
the weight of the oil of hartshorn. They prepare 
hydragogue pills from compounding gum ammo- 
niac, squills, aloes, gamboge, and elatarium. 

They introduce two preparations of the fixed 
fossil alkali, under the titles of soda depurata, and 
soda tartarizata. They introduce a spiritus for- 
micarum, obtained by the distillation of ants 
with spirit of wine and water. For purifying the 
terra Japonica, they recommend, that it should 
first be dissolved in water, and that then, this 
solution, after straining, should be evaporated to 
dryness. To this they give the title of succus 
Japonicus depuratus; and, unquestionably, the 
name of terra Japonica, which is still retained in 
the Edinburgh Pharmacopoeia, is with great 
impropriety applied to a vegetable extract. 

Besides these, we might take notice of many 
other articles, which are either peculiar to the 
Pharmacopoeia, and are, at the same time, valuable 
|P_70
formulae, or which may justly be considered as 
improvements on similar prescriptions contained 
in those of other colleges. But we shall con- 
clude our remarks on this work, with observing, 
that it terminates with a very useful table, shew- 
ing the proportion of opium, mercury, emetics, 
and purgatives, which enter into different com- 
pounds. 

