

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v5_0407^]

|P_407
[}VII. }]
[}Dissertatio Medica de Methoda Medendi Variolae, 
praecipue auxilio Mercurii. Auctore Thoma 
Fowler, Societ. Med. Edin. Soc. &c.}]
AMONG the numerous inaugural disserta- 
tions which are published at Edinburgh, 
we have oftener than once presented our readers 
with an analysis of such as we thought best me- 
rited the attention of the public. These almost 
solely consisted of such as contained ingenious 
experimental inquiries on subjects, strictly speak- 
ing, rather philosophical than medical: And, 
while they afforded proof of the industry and 
ability of the authors, they, at the same time, ser- 
ved to through new light on intricate and impor- 
tant subjects. They have, however, been, in 
general, the works of young men, who wanted 
experience in the practice of medicine. But, 
while the present treats of a subject purely of a 
practical nature, it is, at the same time, the work 
of one, who, from long and extensive practice, 
has been enabled to deliver the result of judi- 
cious and accurate observation. 

|P_408
Although the practice of inoculation has been 
attended with the most beneficial effects in ren- 
dering the small-pox a much less mortal disease, 
yet this practice is by no means so general, that 
bad cases, from accidental infection, do not fre- 
quently occur. The great object of the present 
dissertation is to deliver proper rules for the treat- 
ment of such, and to establish the power of mer- 
cury as a specific against this contagion. 

In as far as respects the treatment, Doctor 
Fowler thinks that the small-pox may be most 
properly divided into three stages. 

1st, The eruptive stage, extending from the 
first accession of the eruptive fever to the termi- 
nation of the eruption. 

2d, The inflammatory stage, extending from 
the time that the eruption is compleated, till signs 
of debility or putrescency occur. 

3d, The stage of debility or putridity, extend- 
ing from the commencement of the symptoms of 
such conditions, till the final termination of the 
disease. 

After laying down this general division, he 
next proceeds to offer some observations on the 
treatment to be followed during each of these 
stages. 

|P_409
The great object which he thinks ought to be 
aimed at during the eruptive stage, is a diminu- 
tion of the quantity of variolous matter in the 
system. And this, he thinks, is to be effected in 
two ways: By exhibiting mercury as a specific, 
and by moderating the re-action of the system 
by the use of cathartics, gentle diaphoretics, opi- 
ates, blood-letting, antiphlogistic regimen, but 
especially by light clothing, acescent watery li- 
quors, and pure free air. 

From the persuasion that mercury operates as 
a specific, he holds that it ought to be exhibited 
in as great quantities, during the eruptive fever, 
as the intestines and system can bear. And for 
that purpose he recommends the following for- 
mulae: 

℞ Mercurii dulcis sublimati ppt. drachmam dimidiam 
Pilularum ex colocynthide cum aloe drachmam unam 
Contundendo bene misce, ut fiat massa pilularis. 
Dosis pro adultis circiter drachmam dimidiam 
Dosis pro aegris, annos decem natis, circiter scrupu- 
lum unum. 

℞ Mercurii dulcis sublimati, ppt. 
Pulveris radicis jalappi 
Florum sulphuris, singulorum drachmam unam. 
Diligenter misce. 
|P_410
Dosis pro aegris annos quinque habentibus, grana 
quindecim. 
——annos tres habentibus, grana duodecim. 
——infantibus annum unum natis, grana octo. 

With regard to infants, he lays it down as an 
universal rule, that three fourths of the dose are 
to be given at first, and the remainder at the end 
of four hours, if looseness has not come on before 
that. He advises that this mercurial purgative 
should be repeated every second day. And on 
those days on which no purgative is taken, he 
orders for an adult five grains of the common 
mercurial pill of the London college, or ten 
grains of that of Edinburgh, and for younger 
patients in proportion to the age. 

With respect to moderating the reaction of 
the system, the directions which he gives con- 
cerning the use of cathartics, diaphoretics, blood- 
letting, and the like, are very much the same 
with those laid down by other practitioners. But 
we ought, perhaps, to consider it as, in some 
measure, a peculiarity in modern practice, when 
he advises a dose of liquid laudanum to be given 
every night after the operation of the cathartic. 

During the second stage, our author advises, 
that the attention of the practitioner be directed 
|P_411
towards obtaining a laudable suppuration. And 
this, he imagines, is chiefly to be brought about 
by continuing the use of the mercury, and by 
counteracting the effects of irritation resulting 
from cutaneous inflammation. 

During the third and last stage, a laudable sup- 
puration is only to be obtained by counteracting 
the disposition to debility and to putridity. For 
this purpose, the Peruvian bark, acid elixir of 
vitriol, wine, and opiates, are to be considered 
as the principal aids. But, besides these, he fur- 
ther advises, that the patient use for aliment fa- 
rinaceous and acescent food, and for drink, aci- 
dulated and watery fluids. And he considers 
it as further necessary, that care be taken to a- 
void the accumulation of variolous matter on the 
surface of the body, to avoid unusual evacuations, 
and to keep the belly gently open. Besides these 
means, in some instances it is also necessary to 
have recourse to blisters. 

While he imagines that, during the two for- 
mer stages, this disease is to be treated as inflam- 
matory, he considers it during this stage, when 
the small-pox are of the confluent kind, as assu- 
ming the form of a typhus. Hence then a very 
|P_412
different mode of treatment becomes necessary, 
and in place of farther endeavouring to moderate 
reaction, all evacuation must be avoided, and en- 
deavours employed for supporting the vis vitae 
and general tone of the system. With these in- 
tentions the directions which he delivers respec- 
ting the use of Peruvian bark, wine, opiates, 
and other remedies, are little different from 
what are delivered by the greater part of the 
moderns. 

Besides the particulars already mentioned, Dr 
Fowler observes, that much might also be said 
respecting the means to be employed for miti- 
gating anomalous symptoms. But, as his prin- 
cipal object in this dissertation was to establish 
the power of mercury as a specific, without en- 
tering on the consideration of these, he concludes 
this essay by offering some arguments in sup- 
port of this opinion. Of these the following 
are the principal. 

1. He has uniformly observed, that, when pa- 
tients under the process of inoculation had taken 
calomel by way of purgative, to such an extent as 
gently to affect the mouth, the disease was inva- 
riably mild. 

|P_413
2. He has found that, when small doses of 
calomel were given to such an extent as to af- 
fect the mouth without inducing catharsis, the 
disease was equally mild as when it had the ef- 
fect of producing evacuation by stool. 

3. He has remarked, that, although the num- 
ber of pustles from inoculation, where no mer- 
cury was taken, be often but inconsiderable; yet, 
in consequence of the use of mercury, they never 
fail to become more mild, and to terminate soon- 
er than would otherwise be the case. 

4. He has oftener than once had occasion to 
exhibit mercury to children in families where the 
small-pox were particularly severe, with the view 
of their being afterwards inoculated; but, from 
the occurrence of accidental contagion at the 
time, the operation has been prevented. And, 
in these cases, the disease assumed the same mild 
form as if the infection had been given by ino- 
culation. 

5. He has often exhibited to patients, after 
they were affected with the symptoms of small- 
pox without inoculation, calomel, in full doses as 
a cathartic, with remarkable success, the quanti- 
ty of the eruption never being so great as might 
be concluded from the preceding symptoms. 

|P_414
To these arguments, drawn from his own ob- 
servation, he subjoins the sentiments of several 
eminent practitioners, which seem to confirm the 
same doctrine, particularly those of Boerhaave, 
Tennent, Mead, Tomlinson, Blake, and Lett- 
some. And he concludes his observations on 
this subject, by answering some objections which 
may be brought against this doctrine, particular- 
ly those drawn from cases where the disease has 
been very slight from inoculation without the 
use of mercury, and those where patients had 
been attacked with the small-pox during a mer- 
curial course for other diseases, notwithstanding 
which, this affection was very severe. In answer 
to the first, he proposes many circumstances 
which must at least create doubt; and the latter 
he considers as a very rare occurrence. Hence 
he thinks it might, with equal justice, be con- 
tended, that mercury does not cure lues venerea, 
or Peruvian bark intermittent fevers, because 
these also sometimes fail. While, therefore, he 
considers these objections as of no weight, he 
views the doctrine of the specific power of mer- 
cury against the variolous infection, as established 
both by the sentiments of others, and his own 
observation. 

