

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v5_0254^]

|P_254
[}III. }]
[}Account of the Treatment of Bilious Remitting Fe- 
vers in the Military Hospitals at Martinico in 
the year 1761, in a Letter from Dr George 
Monro to Dr Monro Jermyn-street, London. 
V. Letters and Essays on the Small-pox, Inocu- 
lation, Measles, &c. By Different Practition- 
ers. 8vo, London. }]
WHILE Dr Monro remained with the 
military hospitals at Martinico during 
the late war, a great number of the soldiers were 
taken ill of a bilious fever, which appeared to be 
somewhat of the bilious autumnal kind, but of 
a much more malignant nature, we are informed, 
than any to be met with in Europe. The bowels 
were commonly filled with a very putrid bile and 
other liquors; and the preservation of the life of 
the patient depended, in a great measure, on eva- 
cuating speedily and safely these corrupted hu- 
mours with which the primae viae were loaded. 

|P_255
On the first attack of the fever bleeding was 
found necessary; but, if it was delayed till the first 
symptoms were over, it was then found to be 
hurtful, except under particular circumstances; 
and it was therefore commonly omitted. 

When this fever was attended with a burning 
heat, a fulness and beating at the temples, when 
the eyes were turgid and full, as if pressed out of 
the head, when there occurred intolerable sickness, 
nausea, and pain of the stomach, and when it gave 
the patient excruciating torture to press with the 
hand on the stomach, the taking away seven or 
eight ounces of blood was of service. After this, 
it was necessary to keep almost perpetually 
fomenting the stomach, and frequently to re- 
peat emollient clysters till the body was open- 
ed, and then to give once, twice, or thrice, at 
the interval of some hours, a solution of one, 
two, or three grains of tartar emetic, and an 
ounce of manna in water, to puke the patient 
freely, and afterwards to give it in small quan- 
tities, so as to keep the belly loose. 

When the stomach was much oppressed, with- 
out any violent inflammatory symptom, then 
bleeding was omitted. But the fomentations 
were assiduously applied to the stomach, and the 
|P_256
belly was kept open by the help of clysters, and 
then three, four, or five grains of tartar emetic 
were given by way of an emetic, and repeated 
once or oftner, if required. 

After the emetic had operated freely, then 
small doses of a solution of manna and of tartar 
emetic were given, so as to operate freely by 
stool, at the same time that emollient clysters 
were frequently repeated. 

When the bowels were thus well emptied, the 
fever either went off, or an intermission was pro- 
cured; at which period, it was necessary to give 
the bark freely. An ounce in the twenty-four 
hours commonly put an effectual stop to the fe- 
ver, though small doses had no effect whatever. 

When the stomach proved so irritable as not 
to bear the bark in proper doses, opiates were 
given with great advantage, both in procuring 
rest, and in enabling the stomach to retain the 
bark. Small doses of opium, however, had no 
effect. It was necessary, therefore, to give a 
large one, and sometimes to repeat it before the 
end proposed was procured. It must be remark- 
ed, too, that opiates, when given before the sto- 
mach and bowels were thoroughly cleaned, al- 
|P_257
ways made the patient restless and uneasy, and, in 
general, were soon thrown up again. Upon the 
whole, the principal points to be attended to in 
our author's practice in this disease, are, as we have 
already remarked, a thorough cleaning of the 
primae viae, both by vomits and purgatives, to- 
gether with a continued use of warm fomenta- 
tions to the stomach, and afterwards, when an 
intermission appears, a free use of the bark. 

