

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v6_0258^]

|P_258
[}II. }]
[}Advice to Lying-in Women, chiefly respecting the 
Custom of drawing the Breasts. By C. Crutt- 
well, Surgeon at Bath. 12mo. Bath. }]
THE intention of this treatise is to en- 
counter a practice, which, according to 
our author, is founded on prejudice, and is, at 
the same time, unnatural, painful, and even 
dangerous. These conclusions are not pre- 
sented as the result of speculative reasoning, 
but as founded on experience; while, at the 
same time, he assures us, that the practice of 
drawing the breasts, however, powerfully sup- 
ported by custom, may be omitted with safety 
and ease. 

The author introduces his observations on 
the subject, by giving a short description of 
the breasts, and some account of their use. 
The substance of his observations is, that they 
are glandular bodies, appropriated to the pur- 
poses of secretion, and that the liquor secreted 
is by nature intended for the great and good 
purpose of nourishing mankind in their infant 
state. While he accounts for the white colour 
|P_259
of the milk, from its being a secretion which 
takes place almost as soon as the chyle enters 
the blood, he points out also the influence 
which food and drink of different kinds have, 
as affecting this secretion. And from the in- 
fluence of intoxicating liquors on infants, if 
taken by the mother when the breasts are 
empty, he concludes that the most reasonable 
method of encountering the diseases of infants, 
is from giving medicines by the mouth of the 
mother. 

In the case of those mothers who suckle 
their own infants, if the child be put early to 
the breast, obstruction will seldom be met with; 
but if the child be not put to the breast before 
the third day, this organ becomes full, turgid, 
and somewhat painful. In this case the infant 
is often unable to draw forth the milk, and not 
so much from the urgency of present symp- 
toms, as with the view of preventing abscesses, 
schirrhus, cancer, and the like; it has been a 
common practice to hire a woman for the 
purpose of drawing the breasts. By this means 
our author assirms, that endeavours to prevent 
imaginary evils are productive of real disease. 
For if in this state of fullness and hardness, 
the breast were guarded against every external 
|P_260
injury, the swelling would subside, even in 
a few hours, and the child might be put to it 
with safety and with effect. On the other 
hand, external irritation at this time, such as 
that which must arise from drawing the 
breasts, produces inflammation and all its con- 
sequences, fever, abscess, and the like; and 
although the author does not positively assert, 
that these accidents proceed only from this 
cause, yet he affirms, that, in his own practice, 
he never met with any instance of milk-fever 
or abscess in the breast, where that organ had 
not been drawn, or had not received some ex- 
ternal injury. 

Having formed this conclusion respecting 
the cause of these symptoms, Mr. Cruttwell 
next proceeds to lay down those directions, by 
which such accidents may best be prevented. 
First, he considers the measures which are to 
be followed when the child is to be suckled 
by the mother; and afterwards, when it is 
not to be suckled. In the first case, he advises 
that the child should be put to the breast in 
about twelve hours after delivery; and that, 
previous to this, no food should be given it. 
If from neglecting this, the breasts become 
turgid, and affected with a throbbing pain tend- 
|P_261
ing to inflammations, he still advises that 
they should not be meddled with. And he 
assures us, that if the affection be not sup- 
ported by the heat of the room, by cordial 
medicines, hot liquors, or similar causes, the 
throbbing and fullness will cease in six, eight, 
or at farthest in twelve hours. When external 
injuries have been such, that a cure cannot thus 
be effected, our author advises, the applica- 
tion of the saponaceous cerate, from which he 
tells us that the obstruction will be resolved 
and the milk re-absorbed. When this fails 
of effect, and a suppuration ensues, he advises, 
that the matter should be discharged merely 
by a flight puncture, which he affirms, will 
in all cases be perfectly sufficient. And after 
an opening is thus made, he thinks, that the 
saponaceous cerate is much preserable to those 
poultices which are in general recommended. 

The directions which he gives in cases 
where a child is not to be suckled, or where, 
from any supervening disease, it becomes ne- 
cessary that a child should be removed from 
the breast, are nearly the same with those 
which have been mentioned above. He con- 
demns the use of all spirituous applications or 
plasters, applied with the view of repelling. And 
|P_262
on the other hand, when milk is accumulated 
in the breasts, so as to produce a throbbing 
pain, he considers the practice of drawing 
them to be both unnecessary and improper. 
He affirms, that when they are left to nature, 
they will never be attended with any bad con- 
sequences. This practice he recommends as 
the result of long and attentive experience, 
unbiassed by prejudice, and supported by suc- 
cess. 

