

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v6_0217^]

|P_217
[}V. }]
[}The History of a Case of Retroverted Uterus. By 
Dr. Swan, Physician at Dumbarton. }]
I Was called on the 4th April, 1758, in the 
evening, to the wife of James M'Donald, 
in Old Killpatrick parish; she was a tall well 
made woman, between three and four months 
gone with child, and had the preceding day 
got a fall going over a wall near her own 
house. Immediately after this she was taken 
with down-bearing pains and suppression of 
urine. On examination I found the fundus 
uteri fallen down to the lower part of the 
pelvis presenting like a large ball equally at 
the anus, and os externum uteri; a part of the 
vagina next to the perinæum fallen without 
the os externum; and the os tincæ turned for- 
wards to the os pubis and raised above, pressing 
on the neck of the urinary bladder; the 
bladder being at the same time more distended. 
Blood letting, clysters, and fomentations had 
no effect in giving her relief. I drew off by 
|P_218
the aid of a catheter about six pounds of 
urine; but the vagina and neighbouring parts 
were so rigid, dry, and inflamed that I could 
not think of handling them, I therefore re- 
peated the blood letting, emollient clysters, and 
fomentations. That evening the urinary blad- 
der seemed to be near as much distended as 
before, she having passed no urine; the fundus 
uteri was still low in the pelvis. About four 
pints of urine were taken off by the catheter, 
and the parts were not so dry, rigid, and in- 
flamed as formerly, therefore with a finger in 
vagina and another in anus, I raised up the 
fundus uteri till the os tincæ came into its na- 
tural pofition, I directed her to keep in bed 
for some days, and to lie chiefly on either 
side with the nates raised, to make no great ef- 
forts or straining at stool, to keep an open 
belly by clysters, and to take an anodyne occa- 
sionally. By these means she recovered, had 
no relapse, went on in her pregnancy, and 
at the usual time was delivered of a strong, 
healthy child. 

