

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v6_0367^]

|P_367
[}I. }]
[}Dissertatio Medica Inauguralis de Quassia, et Li- 
chene Islandico. Auctore Joh. Theod. Phil. 
Christ. Ebeling. 8vo. Glasguæ. }]
IN the first part of this dissertation, our 
author, before proceeding to the enumera- 
tion of such disorders as quassia is proper for, 
gives first an accurate description of the plant, 
and afterwards proceeds to ascertain experi- 
mentally its several qualities, as will appear from 
the following detail. 

|P_368
[}EXPERIMENT I. }]
 A comparative trial was made with quassia, 
cursuta or gentiana lutea sylvestris, colomba, 
colocynthis, cortex Peruvianus, lichen Islan- 
dicus, and gentiana lutea vulgaris, in order 
to determine the degree of bitterness of each; 
and the following, we are told, is the order in 
which, with respect to this quality, they ought 
stand. 

Cortex Peruvianus, lichen Islandicus, gen- 
tiana, colomba, quassia, colocynthis, cursuta; 
but although cursuta was evidently more bitter 
than quassia, yet the bitterness of the latter 
was of a much more agreeable nature than 
that of cursuta. 

[}EXPER. II. }]
A solution of salt of steel, being added both 
to the decoction and infusion of quassia, no 
change of colour was perceived in either; nor 
was any additional firmness given to a piece of 
flesh immersed in them for the space of several 
days. These, our author observes, are evident 
proofs that quassia possesses little or no astrin- 
gency. 

|P_369
[}EXPER. III. }]
 In this experiment, trials were made for the 
discovery of the best menstruum for quassia. 
A cold infusion in water, especially when as- 
sisted by trituration, was found to possess a 
greater degree of bitterness, than either the 
warm infusion, or even the decoction. It was 
likewise found, that this bitterness of quassia, 
was readily communicated to spirits, both 
proof and rectified; to the different kinds of 
wines, and to vinegar. 

[}EXPER. IV. }]
An infusion of quassia and water being di- 
stilled; the water which came over, was found 
to be somewhat bitter, and was of a yellowish 
colour; but there was not the least appearance 
of any essential oil. 

An ounce of quassia frequently boiled in 
water, afforded only one dram of extract, of 
a brown iron colour. 

[}EXPER. V. }]
In order to determine the antiseptic virtues 
of quassia, a comparative trial was made with 
it and several other articles. A quantity of 
|P_370
blood was added to similar quantities of the 
cold watery infusions of the following articles, 
all contained in separate phials placed in the 
same degree of heat; viz. quassia, lichen 
Islandicus, cursuta, salix, gentiana, and cortex 
Peruvianus. 

As they are here mentioned in order, accord- 
ing to the antiseptic effects they are exhibited, 
quassia it would appear is not possessed of 
much influence in preserving other bodies from 
putrescency. And from this experiment too, 
it is evident, our author remarks, that the an- 
tiseptic powers of plants, neither depends upon 
the degrees of bitterness or of astringency 
possessed by them; for here, the cursuta, and 
willow, were both found less antiseptic than 
Peruvian bark, although the one is much 
more bitter, and the other remarkably more 
astringent than it. 

In another experiment, however, it was found, 
that bile, was preserved longer from putrefac- 
tion both by lichen Islandicus, and cursuta, 
than even by Peruvian bark itself, which 
makes our author conclude, that the antisep- 
tic powers of plants with respect to bile, must 
probably in some measure depend upon their 
degree of biterness. 

|P_371
Our author now proceeds to enumerate the 
opinions of Linnæus and other writers with 
respect to the medical virtues of quassia, in 
fevers and other diseases, but as he does not 
here advance any thing new from his own pro- 
per experience, we must refer our readers, 
for the opinions of the authors to their se- 
veral works. 

[}De Lichene Islandico. }]
As descriptions of the lichen Islandicus are 
to be met with in Ray, Morison, Hudson, 
and Lightfoot, as well as in the works of Lin- 
næus and other foreign writers, we need not 
here trouble our readers with any account of 
its botanical history, and shall proceed im- 
mediately to our author's experiment upon this 
article also. 

[}EXPER. I. }]
This experiment was instituted with a view 
to determine the degree of astringency pos- 
sessed by the lichen Islandicus. 

A drachm of Jesuit's bark in powder, of 
the bark of willow, of the lichen Islandi- 
cus, of the geum rivale, of bohea tea, and of 
the eglantine rose-leaves, were each infused in 
|P_372
three ounces of cold water. In the space of 
twenty-four hours the infusion of geum rivale 
was of a chesnut colour; that of the tea had 
a yellowish hue, as had likewise the infusion 
of rose-leaves. The infusion of bark was 
yellow, that of willow somewhat less so; and 
the water with the lichen Islandicus was of a 
violet colour with somewhat of a yellow tinge. 

To an ounce of each of the infusions, two 
drachms of a solution of salt of steel were added. 
That of geum rivale was converted into a real 
ink; that of roses into a dark red; that of tea into 
a dark green; that of Peruvian bark into a brassy 
colour; the infusion of willow bark became 
of a pale blue colour, and the lichen Islan- 
dicus from a violet was changed into a red. 

To the other two ounces of infusion, of 
each of these articles, a drachm of beef was 
added, and allowed to remain in them for the 
space of forty-eight hours. At the end of 
that time, the beef contained in the infusion 
of lichen Islandicus was found to be firmer 
than any of the rest; next in point of firmness 
was that immersed in the infusion of bark; 
and the piece taken from the infusion of tea, 
was found to be the softest of all. 

|P_373
[}EXPER. II. }]
An ounce of lichen Islandicus being boiled 
for the space of a quarter of an hour in a 
pound of water, and afterwards strained, 
was found to yield seven ounces of a bitter, 
red-coloured mucilage, of nearly the same 
consistence as is obtained by the solution of one 
part of gum arabic in three of water. This 
mucilage was found to answer very effectually 
the purpose of uniting oil with water by means 
of trituration: a scruple of camphor was like- 
wise suspended in six ounces of water by the 
medium of two drachms of the mucilage; but 
mercury could neither be properly extinguish- 
ed by it, nor could wax by means of it be 
united with water. 

[}EXPER. III. }]
This species of lichen is so tough and 
mucilaginous, that a very considerable heat is 
found necessary to dry it sufficiently for pul- 
verisation. 

An infusion of the powder, and likewise 
an infusion of lichen in substance, were at dif- 
ferent times subjected to distillation in a sand 
heat. The water thus obtained was mode- 
|P_374
rately acid; but was not in any degree changed 
in colour by the addition of salt of steel. No 
essential oil could be obtained by distillation. 

[}EXPER. IV. }]
An ounce of lichen being six times strongly 
boiled, and the different decoctions being all 
mixed and evaporated to dryness, five drachms 
and two scruple of an extract was obtained. 
This extract was of a blackish colour; burn- 
ed violently when put into a fire; and when 
dissolved in warm water afforded a very thick 
tough mucilage. 

Lichen infused in rectified spirits of wine, 
afforded, on evaporation, a very small quantity 
of resin. 

From the antiseptic virtues of lichen, our 
author recommends the mucilage prepared from 
it, as more proper than any other, for the 
purpose of combining oils with watery liquids; 
By means of it, such mixtures, he observes, 
are effectually prevented from becoming ran- 
cid; he preserved some of those, with which 
the preceding experiments were made, for the 
space of fourteen weeks without any marks 
of putrescency being observed in them. 

|P_375
In some of the northern kingdoms, li- 
chen, we are told, is used not only as a me- 
dicine, but as an article of diet; and from 
the mild nutritive qualities of which it is evi- 
dently possessed, our author thinks we may 
account for the good effects which have lately 
been said to be derived from it in consump- 
tive disorders, and which have been confirmed 
by the testimony of many of the most accu- 
rate observers. 

As the most agreeable and convenient form 
of using it, he recommends it first to be in- 
fused in boiling water, with a view to its being 
thoroughly cleaned, while by the same means 
it will be deprived of a considerable part of 
its original bitterness. The lichen, thus pre- 
pared, is ordered to be boiled, and the muci- 
lage so obtained from it, to be used either as 
an article of diet or as a medicine; and we 
have it in our power, we are told, to render it 
exceedingly palatable, by the addition of a lit- 
tle white wine, when that can with propriety 
be given; or when wine is not admissible, by 
the addition either of milk, honey, or syrup 
of lemons. 

It is recommended particularly, in all kinds 
of cough; and in cases of emaciation, from 
whatever cause they may have arisen. 

