

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v6_0267^]

|P_267
[}IV. }]
[}A Treatise on the malignant Angina, or putrid and 
ulcerous Sore Throat. To which are added, some 
Remarks on the Angina Trachealis. By J. John- 
stone, M. D. 8vo. Worcester. }]
THE principal part of this dissertation 
was published five years ago, as a thesis, 
at Edinburgh. But the author, having since 
that time had an opportunity of making seve- 
ral valuable additions to it, has now thought 
proper to present it to the public in its present 
form. 

Dr. Johnstone adopts the definition of this 
disorder as given by Dr. Cullen, under the se- 
cond species of cynanche, viz. a red painful 
swelling of the tonsils, and mucous mem- 
brane of the fauces, attended with ulcers, 
which are covered with white, or ash-coloured 
sloughs, with a putrid exanthematous fever, 
and with difficulty of breathing and swallow- 
ing . 

From many passages in the writings of Hip- 
pocrates, Celsus, and other ancients, Dr. 
Johnstone endeavours to prove, that they were 
|P_268
well acquainted with this disease. How far 
he is right in this conjecture, our readers will 
best determine, from comparing their writings 
with the very full and accurate enumeration of 
symptoms, which they will find in this treatise. 

After giving a very distinct history of the 
disease, the author next proceeds to the 
diagnosis, or means of distinction between 
this and some other species of angina. The 
inflammatory angina, is, we are told, of every 
other disease the most liable to be confounded 
with the putrid sore throat. 

Children, women, the relaxed, weak, and 
sickly, are most liable to the malignant angi- 
na; adults, men, the healthy, and robust, are 
most subject to the inflammatory. 

The malignant species is most common in 
autumn, and is highly contagious. The in- 
flammatory usually appears in the spring, and 
is never contagious. Both of them begin 
with shivering; but the malignant is more 
commonly attended with sickness, vomiting, 
purging, and acute pain of the head, than the 
inflammatory. In the former the pulse is 
quick, weak, unequal, and fluttering; some- 
times heavy and undose. In the latter it is 
|P_269
frequent, strong, full, and hard. The malig- 
nant is attended with but little pain; the in- 
flammatory with very acute pain. The ma- 
lignant sort is always attended with prostration 
of strength, dejection of spirits, perpetual an- 
xiety, sighing, and great oppression at the præ- 
cordia, with dull, heavy, watery eyes. But 
whenever sloughs appear, especially if they are 
accompanied with a purple or erysipelatous 
eruption upon the skin, there can then be 
no doubt concerning the true nature of the 
disease, and all suspicion of inflammatory an- 
gina must vanish. 

There is but one other species of angina, 
we are told, from which this disease requires 
any distinction, and that is, the croup, angina 
insantium, or suffocatio stridula. A small de- 
gree of attention to the several divisions of that 
distemper, as made by the best writers, will shew 
that in respect to many of the cases there can 
be no distinction, because in reality there is 
no difference. 

The spasmodic and inflammatory species of 
croup, are distinguished from this disease in 
the same manner as inflammatory angina; but 
with respect to the putrid species of croup, as 
it is attended with the very symptoms of ma- 
|P_270
lignant angina; as dissections after death prove 
the trachea to be in it affected in the same 
manner as in the malignant angina; as the 
writings of Huxham, and the experience of 
other physicians assure us, that the stridulous 
voice is a common attendant on malignant an- 
gina; and, as all authors agree, that the pu- 
trid suffocatio stridula is increased by the same 
circumstances, and cured by the same reme- 
dies, there cannot be stronger reasons, our au- 
thor remarks, for arranging it among the va- 
rieties of malignant angina, and hence he pro- 
poses the following division of malignant 
angina; viz. into angina maligna tonsillaris, 
and angina maligna trachealis. 

The first of these comprehends all cases 
where ulcerations are spread over every part 
of the mouth and throat, when the larynx is 
not affected, which are marked by the ordi- 
nary symptoms, and discovered by inspecting 
the mouth and throat. 

The second takes in all cases where ulcers 
are formed in the larynx and bronchia, which 
are discoverable by sharpness and shrillness of 
the voice, increased difficulty of respiration, 
frequent cough, and expectoration of putrid 
|P_271
mucus, at the same time that the fauces are 
covered over with white sloughs. 

This, we are told, is a distinction of some 
importance, and deserves attention, from its giv- 
ing much assistance in forming a prognosis of 
the event; as when ulcers have found their 
way into the trachea, a cure, our author ob- 
serves, is very seldom to be expected. 

After enumerating the various predisposing, 
occasional, and exciting causes of this disor- 
der, Doctor Johnstone concludes, that, the 
proximate cause consists in a putrid acrimony 
conveyed into the system, and from which, he 
thinks, all the symptoms are easily explained, 
as arising from a debility of the nervous system, 
and a dissolved state of the circulating fluids. 

In the method of cure, our author observes 
one general indication to be kept in view, is, 
to correct the putrescent tendency throughout 
the system in general, and to stop the pro- 
gress of putrefaction in particular parts. 

The different remedies recommended by au- 
thors, are here particularly enumerated, and 
to each, Doctor Johnstone subjoins his own 
Opinion. 

|P_272
Bleeding, our author observes, has been re- 
commended in this disease by some writers; 
but he coincides entirely with Dr. Fothergill, 
in condemning the practice; as instead of mi- 
tigating any of the symptoms, it uniformly 
tends to render them worse. 

Purging, like every other evacuations, which 
diminish much the patient's strength, always, 
we are told, does harm, and ought to be 
strictly guarded against. To obviate costive- 
ness, ripe fruits and occasional glysters of the 
antiseptic kind, are recommended in prefer- 
ence to purgatives. 

When nausea is very urgent in the begin- 
ning of the disease, a gentle emetic is then 
recommended both for emptying the stomach, 
and for exciting a diaphoresis. 

Blisters, notwithstanding the septic nature 
of cantharides, we are told, have been found 
useful in this complaint, by raising the pulse, 
and supporting the vis vita. They are often 
applied with advantage to the throat itself. 

Whenever nitre has been much employed 
in the fever attending the malignant angina, 
it has manifestly increased the heat and all 
|P_273
the putrid symptoms. This might natu- 
rally be expected, our author remarks, in a 
fever attended with great depression of the ner- 
vous and circulating powers, from a remedy 
which diminishes, instead of adding to the 
strength of those powers. 

A dependence upon spiritus Mindereri has 
also, we are told, had bad consequences, 
when the tenuity of the blood was in any 
degree considerable. 

Fixed air, as a corrector of putrescency, is re- 
commended upon the authority of different 
practitioners. 

Although mercury has been proposed by 
some American physicians, in this disorder, 
yet, our author, thinks the practice exceed- 
ingly hazardous, from the known evacuating 
powers of mercury: every evacuation in the 
malignant sore throat, when carried to any ex- 
tent, always, he observes, proves prejudicial. 

The vegetable, mineral, and dulcified acids are 
all recommended in this disorder; particularly 
from their antiseptic powers. But they cannot, 
we are told, be given with freedom to infants 
at the breast, because they coagulate the 
|P_274
milk, and so tend to produce disorders of the 
bowels. 

Pulvis contrayervæ compositus, in some cir- 
cumstances of diarrhœa, we are told, may pos- 
sibly be used with propriety; but, in other 
respects, it is a remedy without any other 
recommendation than that of custom and 
fashion. 

Confectio cardiaca, together with wine and 
other cordials, is recommended, as tending to 
make the pulse fuller and stronger, and for 
removing anxiety and lessening sickness. Wine 
however, is said, to be more effectual than 
any of the others. 

Myrrh and camphor, are both recommended 
as powerful antiseptics; the former, we are told, 
although commonly prescribed only in gar- 
gles, yet may be used with much propriety 
internally. 

The efficacy of Peruvian bark, in this dis- 
ease, has, we are told, surpassed the healing 
powers, experienced from it in every other 
instance. Those who have tried it most in 
this complaint, best knowing how absolutely 
it subdues the disease, which is more certainly 
cured by the early application of this remedy, 
|P_275
than any disease, of equal consequence, by any 
means whatever. It here evidently acts as an an- 
tiseptic and tonic; it corrects putrescency when 
it is begun, and it resists the process of putre- 
faction, by repairing the forces of nature, and 
by giving that vigour to the nervous system 
which enables it to oppose and overcome the 
disease. 

As it has been found inconvenient to admi- 
nister the bark in intermittent and remittent 
fevers, at any time but during the intervals 
of paroxysms; so it has been questioned by 
some, whether we ought not to wait for a re- 
mission in the fever attending the malignant 
sore throat before we give the bark; but our 
author is clearly of opinion, that this cauti- 
ous mode of proceeding is by no means neces- 
sary, no inconvenience having ever, he says, 
been observed to accompany or follow the use 
of Peruvian bark, at the very height of the 
fever attending this sore throat; nay, we ought, 
he thinks, to give it more frequently and in 
larger quantities, in proportion to the height 
of the fever. 

As proper additions to Peruvian bark he re- 
commends, decoctions or extracts of casca- 
|P_276
rilla bark, and of lignum Campechense, espe- 
cially when there appears any propensity to 
diarrhœa. 

By a proper combination and application of 
these various remedies, in the method here 
particularly pointed out by our author, prac- 
titioners will seldom fail, we are told, to re- 
move the disorder, excepting in those in- 
stances where the trachea is affected; which 
not only require some variety in the mode of 
treatment, but are in reality much more dan- 
gerous than where the mouth and tonsils are 
only affected. 

Doctor Johnstone now proceeds to the more 
particular consideration of the angina maligna 
trachealis; after enumerating the opinions of 
all the most eminent authors on this disor- 
der, and having given a diagnosis, between 
the spasmodic, inflammatory, and malignant 
species of it, he then proceeds to the specific 
treatment or method of cure peculiar to the 
latter. 

Whenever the larynx and trachea become 
the seat of malignant angina, the whole me- 
thod of cure directed for its more usual form, 
must then, we are told, be applied with unre- 
|P_277
unremitting assiduity, though we are forbid to 
indulge the same pleasing hopes of success 
from the application of it. 

The air of the patient's chamber should be 
well impregnated with the steams of vinegar, 
myrrh, and honey, which ought to be inces- 
santly rising at his bed-side and he should be 
directed to hold his mouth directly over the 
vessel, or else the steams must be conveyed im- 
mediately into the mouth by means of a funnel. 
Instead of common vinegar, acetum sciliti- 
cum has sometimes been directed to be used 
for steaming, and apparently with effect in pro- 
moting expectoration. 

Expectoration is also to be promoted by all 
other probable means. To vomit the pati- 
ent now and then with oxymel of squills, an- 
swers this purpose, and forwards, we are told, 
the separation of the sloughs; and smaller 
dozes of oxymel of squills with gum ammo- 
niac or assafœtida may afterwards be used to 
keep up the same excretion. 

Assafœtida is here much recommended; and 
after a little use, even children come to take 
it, we are told, easier than gum ammoniac. 
Whilst the patient is taking the Peruvian bark, 
|P_278
the principal remedy to be depended on, a large 
spoonful or two of a strong solution of assafœ- 
tida is directed to be given between doses. 
When the case is alarming, or the patient ob- 
stinately refuses to take it by the mouth, it 
may then be given in a glyster along with the 
bark. 

In such cases, particularly with infants, when 
medicines are rejected, whilst the danger is 
extreme, antiseptic baths are directed; to be 
prepared by boiling Peruvian bark, chamomile 
flowers, or myrrh, in a sufficient quantity of 
water, acidulated with a small proportion of 
vinegar. 

Blisters to the throat, back, or neck, are also 
recommended; and likewise poultices, com- 
posed of garlic, to the feet; which not only 
act as antiseptics, but tend to raise the pulse, 
and to render the breathing easy and regular. 

If, notwithstanding all these attempts, the 
difficulty of breathing should increase, where 
the throat is clear from sloughs, if the pulse 
be good, and the symptoms of debility not re- 
markable, as circumstances are sometimes apt 
to deceive us, inflammation may then be sus- 
pected, and bleeding may very properly be 
|P_279
tried; for in this, as in every other dangerous 
disease, our author concludes, satius est 
anceps remedium experiri quam nullum. 

