

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v6_0346^]

|P_346
[}SECT. III. }]
[}Medical News. }][^An ornamented horizontal line, spanning the whole page. ^]
THe Royal Society of Medicine, lately 
established at Paris, of which we have 
already given some account, have lately distri- 
buted among their members several printed pa- 
pers, respecting the nature and intention of their 
institution. Among these are the following: 

Lettres patentes du Roi, pour l'etablissement 
d'une Société Royale de Medecine, données a 
Versailles au mois d'Août, 1778, registrées en 
parlement le 1er Septembre audit an. 

Travaux proposés aux medecins et physi- 
ciens regnicoles & etrangers, par la Société 
Royale de Medecine dans sa Seance publique 
|P_347
tenüe le Mardi 20 Octobre 1778, au College 
Royal de France. 

Prix proposés par la Société Royale de Me- 
decine dans sa Seance publique, tenüe le Mardi, 
20 Octobre, 1778, au College Royal de 
France. 

To the letters patent is subjoined, an accu- 
rate list of all the members of the society, di- 
vided into the five classes of, Officiers de la so- 
ciété, Associés ordinaires, Associés libres, Asso- 
ciés regnicoles, Associés etrangers. 

It is proposed that the memoirs of the so- 
ciety shall consist of the following subjects. 

1. Les Details des deux Seances publiques de 
chaque Année, les Programmes des prix, l'Eloge 
des associés Morts, les Noms de ceux qui cor- 
respondent & une Notice de leurs Ouvrages. 
2. Les Observations Meteorologiques, faites 
dans les differentes Parties de la France, dont 
le President de la Société a l'Honneur de pre- 
senter chaque semaine les resultats au Roi. 3. 
La Topographie medicale des differentes Villes 
& Cantons. 4°. La Description des Maladies 
Endemiques. 5°. Celle des Maladies Epide- 
miques. 6°. Celle des Epizooties. 7°. Des 
Observations de Medecine-pratique. 8°. Des 
|P_348
Observations Chirurgicales. 9°. Des Obser- 
vations Anatomiques. 10°. Des Observations 
de Chymie-Medicale, & Analyse des differentes 
Eaux minerales. 11mo. Des Observations de 
Botanique. 12mo. Des Observations de Phy- 
sique-generale. 13mo. Les Details des Re- 
cherches & Experiences ordonnées par la So- 
ciété. 14mo. Les Dissertations qui auront 
remporté les Prix. 

After thus pointing out the different parti- 
culars, which are intended to be the subject of 
their publications, they conclude with observ- 
ing, that there is no physician or philosopher 
who may not contribute something to their col- 
lection, by bestowing attention at the place of 
his residence to the objects mentioned above. 

The following questions are proposed as the 
subjects of enquiry for the prize dissertations. 

I. Determiner quel peut être le meilleur Trait- 
ment de la Rage. 

II. D'établir 1° par l'Analyse Chymique, 
quelle est la Nature des Remedes Antiscorbu- 
tiques proprement dits. 2°. Par l'Observation, 
quel doit être leur Usage, & leur combinaison 
dans les différentes especes & complications, 
& dans les differens degres du Scorbut. 

|P_349
III. Existe-t-il veritablement une Fievre 
Miliaire essentielle et distincte des autres Fievres 
Exanthematiques & dans quelle Constitution 
doit-elle être rangée. 

IV. Determiner par un Nombre suffisant 
d'Observations & d'Experiences exactes si les 
Maladies contagieuses, principalement la Pe- 
tite Verole, peuvent se transmettre par l'Inter- 
méde de 1'Air. 

V. D'indiquer la meilleure Methode pour 
guerir promptement & surement la Gale, con- 
tractée par Communication, comme il arrive 
dans les Casernes, dans les Atteliers, dans les 
Hôpitaux & dans les Prisons. 

VI. Fair connoitre le moyen le plus prompt, 
le moins dispendieux et en même-temps le 
plus sûr pour guerir la Gonorrhée virulente 
& pour prevenir les accidens qui en sont ordi- 
nairment les suites. 

Memoirs on these different subjects, accom- 
panied with a sealed billet, containing the name 
of the author, and marked on the back with 
the same motto as the memoir, must be trans- 
mitted to M. Vicq d'Azyr, Secretaire perpe- 
tuel de la Société Royale de Medecine, Rue de 
Sepulcre, a Paris. 

|P_350
***** 

Mr. John Aitken, surgeon in Edinburgh, who 
has for some years past delivered lectures on 
that branch of the medical art, has at present 
in the press a work entitled, Elements of Sys- 
tematic Surgery, which will speedily be pub- 
lished. This work, which is principally intended 
as a text-book for future courses of lectures, is, 
however, written upon such a plan as to be 
adapted for other readers. It consists of three 
parts. 

1. Introduction, or Preliminary Observations 
respecting Medicine; its Division into Physic 
and Surgery; their Limits, &c. 

2. Chirurgical Nosology, or a Methodical 
Arrangement of Chirurgical Diseases, with the 
Synonyma, Definitions, and Remarks on their 
Nature, Seats, Varieties, and Remedies. 

3. Chirurgical Operation, or, an Enume- 
ration and Explication of Manual Surgery, 
correspondent to the Nosology. 

***** 

Dr. John Purcell, one of the professors of 
anatomy in Trinity-College, Dublin, has lately 
transmitted to the Medical Society of Edinburgh, 
|P_351
an Essay, containing many interesting remarks 
on the operation of the section of the symphisis 
pubis, which has lately been so much the subject 
of controversy at Paris. In this paper, among 
other particulars, Dr. Purcell endeavours to 
shew, that this operation, which has hitherto 
been proposed only for the extraction of the 
fœtus in cases for which the Cæsarian section 
was formerly recommended, promises to be 
productive of still greater advantage in cases 
of retroverted uterus, which would otherwise 
prove fatal. How far his reasoning upon this 
subject is sufficient to render the operation ad- 
viseable, our readers will be best able to judge, 
from a candid perusal of the paper itself, which 
will appear in the first volume of the Trans- 
actions of the Medical Society, a work which is 
at present preparing for the press. Mean while, 
the communicating to our readers, this propo- 
sal of Dr. Purcell's, may, perhaps, be of some 
use; if this practice shall seem adviseable to 
those, to whom such unfortunate cases may 
occur. 

***** 

Dr. Odier, of Geneva, in a letter to Dr. 
Duncan, communicates to him the following 
|P_352
observation respecting the use of different re- 
medies in fevers of the intermittent kind. 

"We have here repeated the observations of 
Dr. Lind on the use of opium in intermittents, 
and almost always with the greatest success. 
We give laudanum as he does, to the extent 
of twenty-five drops, half an hour after the be- 
ginning of the hot fit, and we find that it 
shortens it much. It calms the anxiety and 
head-ach, which generally accompany it. It 
brings on sweating much sooner, and renders 
it more profuse. It makes even the return of 
the paroxysms more regular; and has, in some 
instances, been alone sufficient to stop the fever 
altogether. In general, however, a few doses 
of Peruvian bark, with some purgatives, are 
necessary. "

We have given opium even in cases where 
Dr. Lind thinks that it ought not to be given, 
and with equal success; I mean those in which 
there is much delirium, which we have never 
found to be encreased by it, but on the con- 
trary, much oftener to be removed and always 
to be diminished. 

I remember to have seen a case in St. Tho- 
mas's hospital, in London, of a quartan ague, 
|P_353
which had lasted two years, and in which Dr. 
Fordyce gave a dose of Dover's powder, with a 
sweating draught of salt of hartshorn, two 
hours before the fit in order to stop it. This 
succeeded very well. A profuse sweat came 
on just before the hour at which the cold fit 
used to return, and it was altogether prevent- 
ed. Some doses of Peruvian bark were af- 
terwards administered; and this fever, which 
had before resisted many remedies, even the 
bark itself, was then in a few days effectually 
cured. 

"This observation we have had many oppor- 
tunities of repeating here; not only in quar- 
tan, but also in tertian agues; and we find, 
that whenever the patient can be brought to 
sweat, the fit is altogether stopt. If he does 
not sweat, the fit is nevertheless much dimi- 
nished thereby. "

***** 

On Thursday, the 28th of October, Dr. 
Duncan will begin at Edinburgh, his lectures 
on the Theory and Practice of Medicine. 
This course of lectures will be concluded about 
the beginning of May. Five lectures are read 
every week, and the same lecture is repeated 
|P_354
twice every day, viz. between eleven and 
twelve o'clock in the forenoon, and between 
five and six o'clock in the evening. The fee 
for attendance is two guineas; and every stu- 
dent has it in his option to attend at either, or 
at both hours. 

On Saturday, the 30th of October, Dr. 
Duncan will begin a course of lectures on the 
cases of patients subjected to chronical dis- 
eases. This course will also continue till the 
beginning of May. One lecture being deli- 
vered every Saturday. The most important 
cases which occur at the public Dispensary will 
be selected as the subjects of these lectures; 
and, in treating of each case, the observations 
which are offered will be entirely confined to 
such remarks on the history and method of 
treatment, as appear to be of the greatest uti- 
lity in practice. 

About the beginning of May, Dr. Duncan 
and Dr. Webster, will begin their course of 
case lectures for the summer session. This 
course will continue for about three months, 
and besides the lectures on the cases of pa- 
tients, which will be delivered every Monday 
and Thursday, lectures will also be given 
every Tuesday, Wednesday, and Friday, con- 
|P_355
taining remarks on the Pharmacopœias of the 
Colleges of Physicians of London and Edin- 
burgh. 

***** 

The Dutch Society of Sciences, established 
at Harlem, in their Programma for the year 
1779, besides the subjects for prize disserta- 
tions relating to astronomy and some branches 
of general physics, have proposed the follow- 
ing, which are more strictly medical. 

1. Quelle est la veritable nature des Brouil- 
lards ou exhalaisons marines qu'on nomme en 
Hollande Zeevlammen? Quels effets produis- 
sent-ils, & quels sont les moyens d'en preve- 
nir les suites pernicieuses? 

2. La pureté de l'atmosphere a la plus grande 
influence sur la santé des habitans d'une ville. 
Celle de Batavia est dans l'impossibilité d'en 
jouir, par les vapeurs infectés des eaux de la 
riviere, qui sont ou stagnantes ou coulantes 
trop lentement, & qui se remplissent journelle- 
ment de plusieurs milles de livres d'immon- 
dice.—Quels seroient les meilleurs moyens 
d'accelerer le courant, & d'effectuer une de- 
charge plus prompte & plus efficace de ces in- 
|P_356
infections , afin de procurer a la ville de Bata- 
via un atmosphere plus pur & plus salubre? 

3. Quelle est l'influence du dessechiment des 
Marais, Etangs, &c. sur l'état de notre pais? 
Quelles en sont les suites utiles on nuisibles? 
Et dans le dernier cas quelles sont le precau- 
tions a prendre pour prevenir ces suites? 

Those who chuse to employ themselves in 
giving answers to these questions, are desired to 
transmit them before the first of January, 
1780. The answers to the questions proposed, 
as well as the direction on the back of the 
letter which accompanies them, must not be 
of the hand-writing of the author, nor signed 
by his name, or place of abode; but marked 
with a device or motto, and accompanied with 
a sealed letter, having the same device for its 
direction, and containing the name and address 
of the author. The dissertations must be 
written in the Dutch, French, or Latin lan- 
guage, and addressed to Mr. C. C. H. Vander 
Aa, secretary to the society. 

Dr. John Hope, professor of Botany in the 
University of Edinburgh, has lately been 
elected a member of the Harlem Society. 

