

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v6_0079^]

|P_79
[}III. }]
[}The History of a Case of the Pemphigus Major of 
Mr. Sauvages, by Dr. David Stewart, Physi- 
cian in Aberdeen, communicated to Dr. Duncan. }]
A Private soldier of the 73d regiment, 
aged eighteen years, formerly a pedlar, 
and naturally of a healthy constitution, was 
received into the hospital at Aberdeen, on the 
25th of April. About twenty days before 
that he had been seized with the measles, when 
in the country, and in marching to town on 
the second day of their eruption, he was ex- 
posed to cold, upon which they suddenly dis- 
appeared. 

Having arrived in Aberdeen, he was quar- 
tered in a damp, ill-aired, under-ground apart- 
ment. He then complained of sickness at 
stomach, great oppression about the præcordia, 
head-ach, lassitude, and weariness on the least 
exertion, with stiffness and rigidity of his 
|P_80
knees, and other joints; the surgeon of the 
regiment visited him: he was purged, but 
with little benefit. About ten days before, he 
observed on the inside of his thighs, a number 
of very small, distinct, red spots, a little ele- 
vated above the surface of the skin, and much 
resembling the first appearance of small-pox. 
This eruption gradually spread itself over his 
whole body, and the pustules continued every 
day to increase in size. 

Upon being received into the hospital, he 
complained of head-ach, sickness at stomach, 
oppression about the præcordia, thirst, sore- 
throat, with difficulty of swallowing; his tongue 
was foul, his skin felt hot and feverish, pulse 
from 110 to 120, rather depressed; belly cos- 
tive, eyes dull and languid, but without deli- 
rium. The whole surface of his skin was in- 
terspersed with vesicles, or phlyctænæ, of the 
size of an ordinary walnut, many of them were 
larger, especially on the arms and breast. In 
the interstices, between the vesicles, the ap- 
pearance of the skin was natural, nor was there 
any redness round their base; the distance from 
one to another, was from half an inch to a 
hand-breadth, or more. In some places, two 
or three were joined together, like the pustules 
in the confluent small-pox. A few vesicles had 
|P_81
burst of themselves, and formed a whitish 
scab, or crust. These were mostly on the 
neck and face; others shewed a tolerably laud- 
able pus. However, by far the greatest num- 
ber were perfectly entire turgid, and of a 
bluish colour. Upon opening them, it was 
evident, that the cuticle elevated above the 
cutis, and distended with a thin, yellowish, 
semipellucid serum, formed this appearance. 
Nor was the surface of the cutis ulcerated, or 
livid, but of a red florid colour, as when the 
cuticle is separated by a blister, or superficial 
burning. No other person laboured under a 
similar disease, either in the part of the coun- 
try from which he came, or when he resided 
in Aberdeen. 

This case was treated in the following man- 
ner. The largest of the vesicles were snipped, 
and dressed with Uguent. e Lap. Calaminari. In 
the evening he was vomited with a solution of 
tartar emetic, given in small quantities, and at 
intervals. This also procured two loose stools. 
And he was ordered for drink, water-gruel, acidulated 
with lemon-juice. 

April 16. He still complained of sickness, 
some oppression about his breast, and sore 
throat; he had slept little during the night, 
|P_82
his tongue was foul and blackish, his skin, 
however, was not so hot as the preceding day, 
his urine was high-coloured, but had the ap- 
pearance of separation; his pulse 90, and soft; 
most of the sores on the trunk of the body 
looked clean. Others, particularly where the 
vesicles were confluent, seemed beginning to 
ulcerate, and to have a bluish sublivid appear- 
ance. They were dressed afresh with cerate, 
and he was ordered the following medicines: 

℞ Decoct. Cort. Peruvian, ℥vi. Vini Rubr. Lu- 
sitan. ℥iii. M. Hujus mixturæ capiat. ℥ ß. 
tertia quaque hora. 

His acidulated drink was continued; and, on 
account of the very offensive smell on ap- 
proaching near him, some vinegar was placed 
in a bason before the bed, and sprinkled on 
the floor; and the room was kept properly 
aired. 

April 17. His sores looked tolerably clean, 
unless on his arms and thighs; where they were 
livid, a little ulcerated, and discharged a bloody 
ichor. 

His head-ach, sickness, &c. were mostly 
gone; his tongue was rather cleaner; pulse 68, 
and soft. As the decoction of the bark sit easily 
|P_83
on his stomach, the following prescription was 
ordered. 

℞ Pulv. Subtiliss. Cort. Peruv. 3ß. Vini Rubri 
Lusitan. Aquæ fontan. āā ℥ ß. M. ft. Haust. 
tertia quaque hora repetend. 

The acidulated drink was continued, and fresh 
dressings applied to the sores. 

April 18. The little ulcers on his arms and 
thighs still discharged a bloody ichor, and 
looked ill; his other complaints were better; 
pulse 82. The bark had not nauseated him, 
and it was continued as well as his former drink. 

April 19. His sores looked greatly cleaner 
and better; the fever was gone, his pulse na- 
tural, and had no complaint but weakness, and 
a troublesome itching of the skin: the Peru- 
vian bark, &c. were continued. 

April 20. Some of the ulcers still poured 
forth a bloody ichor; most of them, how- 
ever, looked well, and had begun to heal— 
fever gone—medicines continued. 

From the 21st of April, he went on gaining 
strength, and his sores appeared to heal fast; 
he was desired to take only four doses of bark 
every day; and by the 27th, his sores, &c. 
were totally dried up—he had no complaint— 
was dismissed cured. 

|P_84
Although I had never before seen a case si- 
milar to the above, yet I did not hesitate to 
conclude, that the disease belonged to the tribe 
of exanthemata; and had, in a greater or less 
degree, a putrid tendency: having formed this 
idea, it was evident, that if a remission of the 
fever could be procured, the bark, with acids, 
were the remedies most to be trusted to. 

Upon looking into the Nosologia Metho- 
dica of M. de Sauvages, and examining the 
different genera of the order of exanthemata, 
I found that the character of his 93d Genus, 
to which he gives the name of Pemphigus, al- 
most coincided in every particular with the 
history given above; and that of the four spe- 
cies into which he divides this genus, the pre- 
sent case was clearly the first of these, or the 
Pemphigus Major. 

Both Dr. Cullen and Vogel nearly agree 
with Sauvages in their character of this genus 
of the exanthemata. The former also, gives 
it the name of Pemphigus, and the latter that 
Febris Bullosa. Carolus Piso too, in his Con- 
silia Selecta, gives the history of a case nearly 
similar; and the Febris Syneches cum Vesiculis per 
pectus & Collum Sparsis of Dr. Morton, seems also 
to belong to the same genus. 

