

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v7_0062^]

|P_62
[}VI. }]
[}Jo. Ern. Theoph. Guerick Dissertatio de 
Sulphure Antimonii aurato liquido. 8vo. 
Erfurti. }]
THE author of this Dissertation does not 
pretend that he is the discoverer of the 
remedy here treated of; this he candidly at- 
tributes to its real inventor, Dr Christianus 
Jacobus, a celebrated German physician and 
chemist. The intention of the present publi- 
|P_63
cation is merely to make more generally 
known a medicine, which he considers to be 
of very great importance. 

The common sulphur auratum antimonii 
of the shops, and likewise the kermes mi- 
nerale, have long, our author remarks, been 
justly esteemed as the most effectual prepa- 
rations of antimony. But a continued use 
of these remedies being frequently productive 
of troublesome affections of the stomach, a 
medicine destitute of the acrimony of either 
of these, and at the same time possessed of all 
their influence, was therefore much wanted; 
and this, we are informed, is now discovered 
in the remedy under consideration. The 
following is recommended by Dr Jacobus as 
the best way of preparing the medicine. 

Take any quantity of the ordinary sulphur 
of antimony dissolved in the usual alkaline 
lixivium, let one half of it be evaporated to 
such a consistence that an egg may swim in 
it; and an equal quantity of the expressed 
oil of poppies or of almonds being then ad- 
ded to it, the whole is to be well mixed and 
gently boiled till the oil be no longer per- 
ceptible; and the other half of the lixivium 
being then added by degrees, the boiling is 
|P_64
to be continued till the acrimony of the alkali 
is also destroyed. 

The mass being now of nearly the con- 
sistence of a poultice, is to be put into a re- 
ceiver, and being covered with alcohol to the 
depth of five inches, the mixture is then to 
be set to digest for the space of two days. At 
the end of that time, a considerable quantity 
of watery fluid will be found at the bottom 
of the receiver; and the mass swimming in 
it being taken out, is to be dried to the con- 
sistence and firmness of common soap. 

The sulphur auratum antimonii being thus 
converted into a soap, is in this form to be 
kept for use, and part of it may at any time 
be converted into a liquid by being dissolved 
in spirit of wine, which proves for this article 
a very complete menstruum. 

This medicine, independently of its con- 
taining the sulphur of antimony in greater 
quantity than any other liquid hitherto dis- 
covered, is perfectly destitute of that dis- 
agreeable nauseous flavour so universally ob- 
served in every other preparation of this na- 
ture; and the acrimony of the remedy being 
effectually destroyed by the oil with which 
it is combined, it is thereby prevented, as 
|P_65
was already remarked, from producing any 
improper effects upon the stomach, while, at 
the same time, all its influence on the consti- 
tution is preserved, as a preparation of anti- 
mony. 

As a proof of this, various disorders are 
enumerated, in which this remedy has been 
found effectual after every other medicine 
had been tried in vain; and, among others, 
a case of obstinate lepra is mentioned, in 
which a complete cure was obtained by it in 
the space of two months, after mercury, 
æthiops antimonii, and even Plummer's pow- 
der, had been used without any success. In 
this case, five grains of the soap, in the form 
of pills, were given morning and evening; 
at the same time that forty drops of the tinc- 
ture were exhibited twice a-day, in a de- 
coction of juniper-root. In obstinate cases 
of chronic rheumatism, this remedy, we are 
told, is remarkably efficacious; our author 
himself having in several instances seen it 
used with advantage. It is likewise recom- 
mended in every case of lepra, scabies, tinea 
capitis, and in all chronic exanthematous dis- 
orders. 

|P_66
In cases of chronic asthma it is said to be 
particularly serviceable; and likewise in drop- 
sical affections, whether of the whole habit, 
of the breast, or abdomen. Our author men- 
tions several remarkable cures performed by 
it in cases of dropsy. 

In cases of fluor albus, and of gonorrhœa, 
whether from a venereal taint or any other 
cause, this liquid preparation of antimony is 
recommended as being frequently an useful 
remedy. In hemicrania too, we are told, it 
has been used with advantage. 

This remedy, however, should never be 
had recourse to, Dr Guerick remarks, where 
there is reason to suspect vomica, or any in- 
ternal ulceration; nor should it ever be used 
where symptoms of hectic fever are observ- 
able. He gives, as a general caution, direc- 
tions for emptying the blood-vessels in every 
case of plethora, before this medicine be ex- 
hibited: and he desires too, that whenever 
the stomach and bowels are in any degree 
affected, they may be previously cleansed of 
all their improper contents. 

