

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v7_0333^]

|P_333
[}X. }]
[}The History of an obstinate Case of Epilepsy, suc- 
cessfully treated by Blood-letting: Communi- 
cated to Dr Duncan by Dr Robert Hamilton
of the 10th Regiment of Foot. }]
A Labouring man on the banks of the river 
Bush, in the north of Ireland, having 
been long afflicted with the epilepsy; after 
many a long and violent struggle, at length 
|P_334
fell a sacrifice to the superior strength of the 
foe. 

His son, a boy of about 12 years of age, 
healthy and strong of his years, as any in the 
neighbourhood where he lived, and who never 
had before that the least symptoms of such an 
affection, fell into fits. The disease daily ga- 
thered strength, and in a short time he be- 
came a most miserable object. From a fair, 
ruddy, and healthful complexion, he now 
wore a most ghastly look, frightful and wild, 
and became a mere skeleton. 

Thus his disease continued for some years, 
still gathering strength. Sometimes, for a 
whole day together, he could not be said to 
be out of the fit; for as soon as he would open 
his eyes to the light, he would fall immedi- 
ately into another. 

His case now became desperate; and his 
friends, as well as the sympathizing neigh- 
bourhood, wished only for death to relieve 
him from his distress, as they thought him 
out of the reach of medical aid. One day 
as he lay senseless, and convulsed, in which 
condition he had continued from morning till 
evening, while a commiserating crowd were 
gathered around, wishing for his end, it sug- 
|P_335
gested itself to one of the multitude, that per- 
haps bleeding might be of some use; that 
however improbable the success might appear, 
yet it was a duty to attempt something for 
his relief. 

Bleeding is, among the common people, a 
cure for every thing; and what at this time 
probably gave him the idea, was the school- 
master of the parish then joining the crowd. 

The school-master generally lets blood, as 
one part of his parochial duty. As the patient 
was given over long since for lost, the propo- 
sed remedy met with little opposition from his 
friends, having as little hopes of its success. 
Accordingly his arm was tied up, as he lay on 
the ground, and blood let from a large orifice, 
(not being over nice in the operation), and 
the blood was allowed to flow on the ground. 
Scarcely was this performed, when the boy 
began to look up, and recover from the fit. 
Though it was only looked on as a protrac- 
tion, not as a cure of the complaint, yet his 
arm was taken care of and bandaged. How- 
ever, to their great joy, and contrary to their 
expectation, he recovered perfectly, and has 
never since had another fit, though it is now 
above a year. In the space of a few days his 
|P_336
looks altered, and he soon became as fat and 
fair as ever he was in his life. 

This relation I had first from the minister 
of the parish, a very worthy man, who was 
perfectly acquainted with every thing relat- 
ing to the case, and whose veracity is unques- 
tionable; and again from the school-master 
who bled him. 

What I wished most to ascertain, was the 
quantity of blood lost. This I was not able 
satisfactorily to learn, as it was suffered to flow 
on the ground; but according to the several 
questions I put to him, in order to have some 
idea of it, I think it could not be less than 
between two and three pounds. 

As this is a disease that very frequently hap- 
pens, and as yet has kept beyond the reach of 
physic in most instances, when it has once 
been confirmed into a habit in the constitution, 
every thing which has succeeded as a cure in 
any case, whether by accident, as the present, 
or otherwise, should be faithfully communi- 
cated to the public. It is but giving the pa- 
tient a fair trial for his life, when one reme- 
dy fails, to have recourse to another, till we 
have gone through every one which seems to 
have any probability of success, or has ever, 
|P_337
in any instance, succeeded. Neither blisters, 
issues, setons, the actual cautery, powder of 
orange-leaves, the present much boasted 
flowers of zinc, and all the other class of an- 
tispasmodics in daily use, will in every case 
answer; yet no one of them is to be overlook- 
ed as useless. And from the present case, 
which is faithfully related, we ought to turn 
our attention to large bleedings, especially in 
some habits; and perhaps it may be found to 
succeed in more cases than at first view we 
might be led to suspect: Its great antispasmo- 
dic powers are known, and daily acknowledg- 
ed by all the faculty. 

Blood-letting seems the more to be depend- 
ed on, from another case told me by a gentle- 
man, a student of medicine, to whom I had 
related the present. He had read, but did 
not then recollect where, of a case somewhat 
similar: It was of an epileptic patient falling 
down in a fit, and accidentally having his 
temporal artery opened by some sharp sub- 
stance on which he fell; it bled profusely be- 
fore it could be stopped, and the patient was 
radically cured by the hæmorrhagy. 

