

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v7_0349^]

|P_349
[}XII. }]
[}A remarkable Case of Epilepsy and Dysphagia 
Spasmodica, cured by the Use of Cuprum Am- 
moniacum. By Dr John Heysham, Physician, 
Carlisle. }]
JAne Stockbridge became a patient of 
mine on the 9th of January 1780. She is 
an unmarried country woman, in the forty- 
second year of her age, of middle stature, and 
of a lax habit of body. About twelve years 
ago, either from trouble, or a fright, as she 
imagines, she was seized with fits; which, 
during the space of a quarter of a year, return- 
ed once in twenty-four hours, and generally 
in the night. They afterwards became more 
|P_350
frequent, especially in the summer months, 
when she was deprived of her memory, and 
indeed of almost all her mental faculties. 
Within these two years, they have only re- 
turned about twice or thrice a-week. In these 
fits, she becomes insensible, her legs, her arms, 
and many of the muscles of the trunk of her 
body, are so violently convulsed, that three 
men are scarce sufficient to hold her; she 
foams at the mouth, and in this state she often 
continues near an hour; then gradually re- 
covers, but is utterly ignorant of what has pas- 
sed. About seven years ago, without any evi- 
dent cause, she was affected with a new and 
peculiar disorder, viz. a difficulty of swallow- 
ing, with a sensation of stricture and tightness 
in her throat and breast; and was unable to 
swallow either solids or fluids for the space of 
seventeen days. During this time, she had no 
epileptic fits, was entirely supported by nou- 
rishing glysters, and had neither any evacua- 
tion by urine or stool, but had a small dis- 
charge of blood from her ears. Some reme- 
dies were added to the glysters, which, how- 
ever, were attended with no sensible effects. 

On the 17th day, a probang was introduced 
into her stomach; on the immediate removal 
|P_351
of which, she fainted near a quarter of an hour, 
then recovered, was able to swallow both solids 
and fluids with ease, had a stool, and made 
near a gill of urine of a gelatinous consistence. 
This difficulty of swallowing, or dysphagia 
spasmodica, continued to return regularly eve- 
ry month for two years, and was constantly 
removed in the same manner, by the intro- 
duction of the probang, with this difference 
only, that in the second year, upon withdraw- 
ing the instrument, instead of fainting, she was 
seized with strong convulsions. During the 
third year, she was perfectly free from the dys- 
phagia. But the fourth year, it again return- 
ed without any evident cause, and she had 
four or five paroxysms. The paroxysms be- 
came more frequent in the fifth year, viz. about 
once a month, and have continued without 
much variation till the present time. 

On the morning of the 7th of January 1786, 
she was again affected with the dysphagia; and 
on the 8th, I was present, when Mr James, 
a surgeon in this town, with some difficulty, 
on account of the stricture in the gullet, 
introduced the probang into her stomach; 
and on its being withdrawn, a scene truly 
melancholy and alarming presented itself to 
|P_352
our view. She was seized with most violent 
convulsions; her head was bent forcibly back- 
wards, so as to touch her back; and it was 
as much as three strong assistants could do, 
to prevent her from beating herself to 
pieces. These convulsions continued half 
an hour, when she was able to swallow a 
little æther and water, but remained two or 
three hours in a disagreeable situation, which, 
however, she is unable to describe. Since 
the first attack of the dysphagia, she has some- 
times deferred the use of the probang for the 
space of six days, during which time she ne- 
ver has any evacuation by stool or urine, but 
immediately after the operation has frequent- 
ly observed her urine to be gelatinous. When 
free from the dysphagia, she is constantly af- 
fected with the epilepsy, so that she has now 
laboured under the former, seven years, under 
the latter twelve years. When free from fits, 
her appetite is good, belly natural; menses 
have always been, and continue to be regular, 
and in all other respects is in tolerable health, 
and able to perform her ordinary business. 
She is sensible of the approach of the epilep- 
tic fits, but the dysphagia comes on suddenly; 
and during its continuance, she complains of 
|P_353
little or no pain, but has a sensation of stric- 
ture and tightness in her throat. She has 
taken a variety of medicines, but has reaped 
no advantage from any thing but æther, the 
good effects of which were very slight and 
transitory. In this truly distressful case, tak- 
ing into consideration the ascribed cause of her 
disorder, the relief she had received from æ- 
ther, her lax habit of body, and especially the 
absence of all symptoms which indicated any 
local affection of her head or brain, I appre- 
hend, a great degree of irritability, depending 
on a laxity of the nervous system, might, in a 
great measure, be the cause of all her com- 
plaints. Well acquainted with the strength- 
ening and tonic properties of copper, I was 
resolved to give it a fair trial, and am happy 
to find by the event, that it has answered my 
most sanguine expectations. January the 
9th, I accordingly prescribed the following 
pills, ℞. Cupri ammon. gr. xxxii. micæ pa- 
nis. dr. ii. ss. Syrup. simp. q. s. fiat massa, in 
pilulas 64 æquales dividenda. She was or- 
dered to take one of these pills every morning 
and night, and to increase the dose according 
to circumstances. January 26th, soon after 
she takes the pills, they have a very peculiar 
|P_354
effect upon her, which she is unable to de- 
scribe; she, however, continued them for five 
days, when she omitted them for seven days. 
She then began again, and took one, night and 
morning, with nearly the same effects. The 
epileptic fits returned every day for 10 days; 
since that time, she has only had a fit once in 
three or four days. Let her take three pills 
every day, and, if she is able, increase the 
dose to four. February 10, Has taken all the 
pills, and has had but two fits since last report. 
Let her have double the quantity of pills, and 
let her increase the dose, according to the 
effects they produce. February 28th, Began 
with four pills each day, which produce nearly 
the same effects as two did when she first took 
them. She has now increased the dose to se- 
ven or eight every day, without any sensible 
effect. Continues free from fits. Let her 
have some more pills. March 16th, Has con- 
tinued to take eight or nine pills every day. 
They produce no sensible effects. Has had no 
fit. Let her have more pills. April 1st, Has 
taken all the pills, and increased the dose to 
eleven in the day. Continues free from fits, 
and thinks herself perfectly well. 

June 17th. Has continued perfectly well 
since the 3d of this month, at which time she 
|P_355
was seized with a violent looseness, which 
lasted ten days, and then ceased without the 
use of remedies. On the seventh, or four 
days after she had been affected with the 
looseness, she was again seized with the epi- 
leptic fits, and has had one or two every day 
since. They continue about one hour, dur- 
ing which she is insensible and much convul- 
sed. Has had no return of the dysphagia; 
but since the looseness, has been frequently 
affected with hiccup and symptoms threaten- 
ing suffocation, which however go off as soon 
as she gets a free discharge of wind upwards. 
Appetite pretty good, sleeps tolerably, has no 
thirst, and her belly and menses are regular. 
Let the pills of cuprum ammoniacum be re- 
peated; let her begin with one morning and 
night, and increase the dose as before direct- 
ed. 

July 5. On the 18th of June, began to 
take the pills, and took one night and morn- 
ing as ordered. They now produce symp- 
toms very different from what they did be- 
fore. About bout a quarter of an hour after she 
has taken them, she becomes giddy, light- 
headed, and in every respect seems to be in a 
state of intoxication. These symptoms conti- 
|P_356
nue about an hour, when she is affected with 
nausea and sickness at stomach, but never vo- 
mits; afterwards, she breaks out into a sweat, 
in which she continues near an hour, and then 
becomes perfectly well. Since the 22d of 
June, has been entirely free from fits, hiccup, 
and all other symptoms which usually threaten 
or precede them. Her menses did not appear 
the last period. Her appetite is good and her 
belly regular. Let her take a pill and an 
half every morning and night. 

Tuesday July 25. Has continued the pills; 
but, from some mistake in the directions, has 
only taken one pill and a half in the day, in- 
stead of three; this quantity, however, pro- 
duces the usual effects. She has been in good 
health, and free from all her complaints, till 
two o'clock on Sunday morning, viz. 23d, 
when she was seized with the dysphagia, and 
has not been since able to swallow the least 
particle of either solid or fluid food. In other 
respects she is in good health, and complains 
of a sensation both of hunger and thirst, and 
has had no evacuation either by stool or urine 
since she was affected with the spasm. On 
Friday, July 21. she very imprudently assisted 
in removing some hay from the banks of the 
|P_357
river Esk, which were overflowed; in this 
business she was obliged to wade up to the 
knees in water for a considerable length of 
time, during a very heavy and incessant rain. 
To this circumstance, fatigue, &c. she attri- 
butes, I think with reason, the present attack. 

Wednesday 26th. About 11 o'clock A. M. 
the probang was introduced; and, as soon as 
it was withdrawn, she swallowed without any 
difficulty a little æther and water. No con- 
vulsions or alarming symptoms occurred, as 
had been usually the case before; she was on- 
ly affected with some trifling spasmodic con- 
tractions of the stomach and gullet, attended 
with no pain, but with a peculiar kind of 
noise, and eructation of wind; all which 
however soon went off, and she became per- 
fectly well. Her menses appeared almost im- 
mediately after the operation. Let her con- 
tinue one pill and a half night and morning 
for a few days, and then increase the dose to 
two pills twice a-day.—August 12th. Has 
been free from fits, and has had no return of 
the dysphagia, and in every respect is in very 
good health. She has taken four pills a-day 
since the 30th of last month. They still con- 
tinue to produce symptoms resembling intoxi- 
|P_358
cation. Repeat them and let her take two 
night and morning.—September 7th. Has 
finished her pills some time ago, and remains 
free from fits, but has complained of great 
pain in her head for some days; belly costive. 
Let her head be shaved, and apply a large blis- 
tering plaster to it. ℞. Mass. pil. ruf. dr. ii. 
assafœt. dr. i. syrup, rhei. q. s. M. fiat massa 
dividenda in pilulas 40 æquales. She was 
ordered to take two or three of these pills eve- 
ry night at bed-time. Let the copper pills be 
omitted.—October 4th. The blister was ap- 
plied as directed; it remained on the head 
48 hours, discharged a considerable quantity 
of lymph, which removed the complaint of 
her head. She has likewise taken all the 
laxative pills; they procured a stool or two 
every day. While she was taking them, she 
sweeted profusely, and what is somewhat re- 
markable, the sweet tinged her linen of a 
yellow colour. Has had no return of the e- 
pilepsy since the 22d of June, nor of the dys- 
phagia since the 26th of July. At present is 
free from all complaints. Let her have a box 
of the copper pills and be dismissed, with or- 
ders to return should any change occur in 
her situation.—October 28. Having business 
|P_359
in town, she called to acquaint me that she 
has had no return of her fits, although she 
had not got the last box of pills, owing to a 
want of cuprum ammoniacum. On Monday 
last in the night she had a discharge of blood 
from both her ears, which was preceded by 
some little pain in her head, which is now 
gone off. Has had no appearance of menses 
since the 26th of July. Sumat pulv. cort. 
Peruv. dr. ss. bis quotidie. 
[^A long horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
Dr Heysham, in a letter to Dr Duncan in 
January 1781, informs him, that this patient 
then continued in perfect health, without any 
return either of the dysphagia or epilepsy. 


