

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v7_0026^]

|P_26
[}II. }]
[}Cases and Remarks in Surgery; to which is 
subjoined, an Appendix, containing the Method 
of curing the Bronchocele in Coventry.—By 
B. Wilmer, Surgeon. 8vo. London.}]
THE first paper in the collection before 
us, contains observations on strangulated 
herniæ. 

Mr Wilmer having embraced the new doc- 
trine concerning the impropriety of warm ap- 
plications in cases of hernia, the intention of 
this paper is to point out, in all such instances, 
the superior advantages to be obtained from 
the application of cold; and three cases are 
here inserted, in which the application of cold 
vinegar to hernial swellings, seemed to have a 
considerable influence; by effecting the reduc- 
tion of their contents, when in all probability 
the operation for the bubonocele would other- 
wise have been necessary. 

|P_27
The next case of any importance contains the 
history of a patient who died of the hydroce- 
phalus internus; with whom mercury was us- 
ed without producing any good effect. Mr 
Wilmer was called in about the eighth day of 
the disease, and finding the symptoms very 
strongly marked, had immediate recourse to 
mercury.—Calomel being given in frequent 
small doses, while at the same time the mercu- 
rial ointment was applied outwardly, a saliva- 
tion was thereby induced in the course of 
twenty-four hours. The disease, however, 
continued to gain ground; the patient became 
daily weaker, and died on the seventh day 
from the commencement of the mercurial 
course. 

A young woman, in a fit of despondency, ha- 
ving cut her throat, our author was sent for 
to her assistance, when the whole annular sub- 
stance of the trachea was found divided just 
beneath the thyroid cartilage; a great deal of 
blood was lost, and the patient was totally in- 
capable of speaking. 

By two stitches of the interrupted suture, 
assisted by slips of adhesive plaster, the sides of 
the wound of the integuments were brought 
into contact. And notwithstanding the occur- 
|P_28
rence of a troublesome cough, every thing 
went favourably on till the fourth week, when 
the external wound being almost healed, the 
patient was seized with a difficulty of breath- 
ing, attended with a sense of suffocation; and 
after continuance and increase of these symp- 
toms, she died in the space of twenty-four 
hours from their first appearance. 

On dissection after death, the internal 
wound was found so much contracted that 
there was merely room for the introduction of 
a probe, which passed very freely into the tra- 
chea, downwards.—The cicatrix adhered firm- 
ly to the inferior part of the divided trachea; 
but the superior portion had retracted half an 
inch, and its cavity was so much filled by gra- 
nulations of flesh, that there did not appear 
room for a sufficient quantity of air to pass 
through it to dilate the lungs; so that when 
the external wound became so small that the 
lungs could not be supplied with air from that 
source, a difficulty of breathing commenced, 
and at length the patient was suffocated by 
the very efforts attempted by nature for heal- 
ing the divided parts. 

Some time before this case occurred, our au- 
thor was desired by Mr. Harrold, a neighbour- 
|P_29
ing surgeon, to see a patient who he had cut 
into the cavity of the trachea between the cry- 
coid and thyroid cartilages. In this case, as 
in the preceding, the integuments only were 
united by ligature; the patient in every re- 
spect seemed to be doing well till the fifth 
night, when he died suddenly. 

On examining the body, the immediate 
cause of death appeared to have depended on 
the rupture of a small artery, the blood from 
which, not having a ready external passage, 
had found its way into the trachea, and there 
formed a coagulum, which plugged up the ca- 
vity of the windpipe, and suffocated the pa- 
tient, by preventing the access of air into the 
lungs.— From these cases our author states it as 
a query, whether the sewing up the windpipe, 
and leaving the external wound open, in both 
or either of them, would have afforded a bet- 
ter chance of recovery. 

In the case of a woman seized with locked 
jaw and opisthotonos, as nothing could be got 
into the stomach from a convulsive motion in 
the muscles of the thorax being induced by 
every attempt to swallow, it was thought ne- 
cessary to have recourse to glysters, both with 
|P_30
a view to the exhibition of medicines and of 
nourishment. 

Eight ounces of mutton-broth were injected 
three times a-day, and every eight hours a gly- 
ster, consisting of six ounces of water, and two 
drachms of laudanum.—The patient remained 
four days in the same state, during which 
time she did not swallow any thing. The 
quantity of laudanum was increased in the 
glysters, and the rigid muscles of the face were 
well rubbed with camphorated oil. 

On the fifth day, she could speak and open 
her mouth a little; on the seventh, she could 
swallow liquids.—She was then directed to 
take two drachms of laudanum three times a- 
day by the mouth.—She every day became 
better, and in a short time was almost as well 
as usual; but it was six weeks before the mus- 
cles of the neck and back had recovered their 
proper flexibility. 

Sir John Pringle having, in his Treatise on 
Diseases of the Army, recommended the appli- 
cation of blisters to the pained part of the ab- 
domen, in cases of ileus, our author was there- 
by induced to make trial of their effects in 
that disorder. Three cases of this nature are 
here related, in which blisters proved effectual 
|P_31
after all the ordinary remedies had been had 
recourse to in vain. We shall here give a 
more particular account of one of them. 

On the third of February 1774, Mr Wil- 
mer was desired to see a young man who for 
two days had been attended by an apothecary. 
The symptoms were, a constant and acute 
pain below the navel, continual vomiting, hic- 
cough, languid pulse, costiveness, and a cada- 
verous countenance. He had been bled re- 
peatedly; glysters, fomentations, opiates, and 
a variety of solutive medicines, had been ad- 
ministered, but all without any kind of relief. 

A large blistering plaster, with a perforation 
in its centre, was now ordered to be applied 
round the navel, and no medicines were then 
prescribed, that the result might be more cer- 
tainly known. 

Soon after the patient felt any pain from the 
blister, he enquired for the close-stool, and had 
an evacuation, by which he was much relieved. 
The pain of the abdomen gradually abated, 
and in a few days he was restored to health. 
The effects of blisters in the other two cases 
related by our author were equally remark- 
able with the above. After having given some 
remarks upon the treatment of compound 
|P_32
fractures and dislocations, our author concludes 
the publication with an account of the method 
of curing the bronchocele, as practifed at Co- 
ventry. 

The bronchocele, he observes, is a preterna- 
tural enlargement of the thyroid gland; and 
as from different circumstances every attempt 
to extirpate tumours of this nature must be ha- 
zardous, the cure, he thinks, can only be ex- 
pected from the use of internal medicines, no 
topical application being sufficiently active for 
producing resolution. 

The medicine which at Coventry has ac- 
quired so much reputation for the cure of 
this disease, owes its origin, we are here in- 
formed, to Doctor Bate, who, a considerable 
time ago, practised as physician at that place. 
As Mr Wilmer vouches for the effects of the 
remedy, at least in young female patients, we 
shall here give our readers his account of it 
at some length. In men, and in all patients 
past the meridian of life, such effects, he ob- 
serves, are not to be expected from it as when 
young women are the subjects of the disease. 

There are two receipts by which the me- 
dicine is prepared; one of them is for certain 
the original prescription of Doctor Bate. 
|P_33
Which of the two came from him, however, 
our author cannot determine; but they are 
both, he remarks, equally efficacious. The 
following are the contents of each: 

[}Number I. }]
The day after the moon hath been in the 
full, the patient is to take a vomit—on the 
succeeding day, a purge is to be administered 
—on the third night, at going to bed, one of 
the following boluses is to be placed in the 
mouth, under the tongue, and, being suffered 
to dissolve gradually, is to be swallowed. 
This bolus is to be repeated the six succeeding 
nights. 

Take Calcined spunge 
Cork calcined 
Pumice-stone burnt, of each ten 
grains. 

To be separately powdered, and made into 
a bolus with syrup, honey, or mucilage. 

On each of the seven days that the patient 
takes the preceding bole, the following pow- 
der is to be administered in the forenoon in 
any proper vehicle. 

|P_34
℞. Flor. cham. pulv. 
Rad. gentian. pulv. 
Sum. centaur. min. pulv. aa gr. v. m. 

On the eighth day the purge is to be re- 
peated. In the wane of the succeeding moon 
the same process is to be entered into, and re- 
peated a third time, unless the disease be cur- 
ed before.—The vomit is only to be taken 
before the first course of medicines. 

[}Number II. }]
[}℞. Spongiæ calcinatæ dr. ss. 
Mellis q. s. pro bolo. }]
[}The Preparation. }]
Tie the best spunge up hard with wet pack- 
thread, and calcine it in a crucible. These 
boles are to be used as those of the former 
receipt; the bitter powders are to be taken, 
and the same directions with regard to eva- 
cuations observed in every respect as in No. I. 

A very eminent surgeon, who has had ma- 
ny opportunities of seeing the good effects of 
both these preparations, assures our author, 
|P_35
that either of them will succeed with more 
certainty if the patient takes a vomit and 
purge during the increase of the moon. 

The calcined spunge for either of these pre- 
parations ought to be powdered in a glass or 
marble mortar. If a brass one is used, the 
salts of the spunge attract so much of the me- 
tal as to acquire an emetic property. 

