

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v8_0090^]

|P_90
[}III. }]
[}An Observation on opening the Abdomen and Tho- 
rax of a Young Lady, who died after a very 
short illness; communicated to Dr Duncan, by Mr 
Richard Paxton, Surgeon at Maldon in Essex. }]
A LADY, in the 23d year of her age, of a 
delicate frame of body and weakly con- 
stitution, had, for two years past, complained of 
a slight pain on the right side of the thorax, at- 
tended with some restriction in breathing and a 
tickling cough; which symptoms rendered her 
extremely averse to any kind of exercise. A- 
bout the latter end of August 1780, she was 
seized with the symptoms of an autumnal re- 
mittent, then prevailing in the neighbourhood, 
which readily yielded to the usual treatment in 
these cases. 

The first symptoms, however, still attended 
her; the pain in the side, and restriction in brea- 
thing, rather encreasing till the 15th of Decem- 
ber; on the noon of which day, I was again call- 
ed, and found her laid on bed with the follow- 
ing complaints: Debilitated quick pulse, chill- 
ness even to shivering, together with acute pain 
|P_91
on the right side, or, as she expressed, below 
the shoulder, and bilious vomiting. They told 
me, that as she was sitting at her needle-work 
in her chamber, to which she had retired after 
breakfast, she felt, and even heard, something 
give a violent snap within her breast, in that 
part where now she described the pain to be. 
Her mother going into the room soon after, she 
exclaimed to her, she should die. I begged 
she might be undressed, and go to bed; which 
was done, and sent her over a saline julep, 
meaning to visit her again in two or three hours; 
but ere that time was elapsed, her father came 
for me, and I found her stomach rejecting every 
thing she swallowed, and every symptom exaspe- 
rated. I confessed myself totally at a loss for the 
cause of the appearances; but being fully satis- 
fied of her imminent danger, entreated a physi- 
cian might be sent for, which was instantly 
agreed upon; and Dr Steele from Witham, saw 
her about seven o'clock in the evening. By his 
direction she was bled to the amount of 12 
ounces; a blister was applied to the side, &c.

The symptoms then were, in the Doctor's 
own words, Difficult respiration, acute pain in 
the right side, just below the breast, pulse fre- 
|P_92
quent and oppressed, increased heat, frequent 
bilious retchings, countenance uncommonly 
anxious: What was very remarkable, the 
pulse not at all freer from the liberal venesection, 
though the respiration was a little relieved. 
My idea of the case at the time was its being 
a formal pleuritic attack.  She passed a pain- 
ful night without the mitigation of any one symp- 
tom. On the morning of next day, the Doctor 
found her pulse scarcely perceptible, and un- 
commonly quick, continual rigors and vomit- 
ings, cold clammy sweat, &c. complained of 
intolerable sickness, and pain only near the 
pit of the stomach, with a sense of load and 
oppression there.  She died at two o'clock 
that day, or about 28 hours from the time 
of the seizure. 

Next day, having obtained leave to open the 
body, it was performed the fame evening in pre- 
sence of, and with the assistance of three other 
surgeons. 

The abdomen being much distended, appa- 
rently by some fluid, a perforation was made in- 
to it with a trocar, in the usual place of tapping 
for an ascites; by which, however, nothing but 
air was let out. 

|P_93
The abdomen was then opened in the usual 
manner, when the stomach and intestines appear- 
ed greatly distended; which distension ceased, 
upon letting out the air contained in them. The 
stomach, liver, gall-bladder, and intestines, in 
every other respect exhibited a most healthy 
appearance; and no obstruction whatever was 
found in the gall-ducts, or any extravasation in 
the cavity of the abdomen. 

The thorax was then opened, the right cavi- 
ty of which was found to contain more than 
three pints of reddish water, with two cysts de- 
tached and floating therein; one of the cysts 
ruptured but not quite emptied of its fluid. The 
right lobe of the lungs was much compressed, 
so as to occupy but a trifling part of the cavity. 
The left lobe, the heart, and all other parts 
which we examined, were in a perfectly sound 
state; and what is very remarkable, not the least 
adhesion was found in either cavity. 

As Dr Steele had expressed an earnest wish 
for the dissection, I transmitted the account to 
him by the earliest opportunity, and some time 
after received the following: 

Dear Sir, I am much obliged to you for 
communicating so immediately the particulars 
|P_94
of the dissection, which, though it throws some 
light on the immediate cause of our patient's 
death, little enables us to fay what might have 
been done to prevent it. One means only 
suggests itself to me, and that, from the short 
period between the attack and close of the 
scene, a doubtful one. The effusion into the 
right cavity of the thorax ascertained, Would 
an opening between the ribs, into a depending 
part of that cavity, have mitigated the symp- 
toms, or saved life? 

