

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v8_0016^]

|P_16
[}II. }]
[}Specimen Inaugurale Medicum, sistens experimenta 
quædam, quibus constitit, eas partes esse sensu 
præditas, quibus Hallerus cum aliis quibusdam 
omnem sentiendi facultatem cum irritabilitate de- 
negat. Auctore Ignatio Radniczky. 4to. Pragæ. }]
SEveral years ago a doctrine was introduced 
to the world, by the late celebrated Haller 
and his disciples, tending to prove, that the tendons, 
periosteum, dura mater, and some other 
membranous parts, are all destitute of sensation. 
Various answers have been published to this opi- 
nion; but as the Work now before us enters 
more fully upon this investigation than any we 
have met with, and as the Author's ideas are all 
supported by a series of well conducted experi- 
ments, we shall therefore give a particular detail 
|P_17
of such of these as appear to be most conclu- 
sive. 

This Work is divided into four sections: The 
first is entitled, De tendinibus; the second, De 
periosteo & pericranio; the third, De dura & 
pia matre; and the fourth, De pleura & peri- 
tonæo. 

[}Sect I. De Tendinibus. }]
A middle sized dog was the subject of the first 
of these experiments; which was performed, we 
are told, in the presence of Professor McNiven, 
and several other Members of the University. 

The animal being properly secured, the skin 
was cut, in a longitudinal direction, along the 
course of the tendo Achillis. During this inci- 
sion, the dog appeared to be in very great pain; 
it was observed, however, that although he did 
not complain, either upon puncturing or cutting 
off a piece of skin previously separated from the 
parts below, yet that the pain was constantly re- 
newed, on attempting to dissect a portion of skin 
not yet detached from the contiguous parts. 

The tendon with its sheath being now laid 
bare, a very slight degree of irritation with a 
|P_18
needle, was found to produce a great degree of 
pain; but least any fallacy might occur from the 
tendon still remaining covered with its vagina, 
it was at last perfectly denuded, when the same 
degree of irritation was attended with the same 
effect as before. A needle being pushed into 
the substance of the tendon, evidently occasioned 
very severe pain; and the needle being allowed 
to remain there for some time, it was afterwards 
found, in withdrawing it, that the animal com- 
plained severely on its being in the least degree 
moved. Violent signs of pain, too, occurred on 
dividing, even with a cutting instrument, a few 
of the fibres of this tendon. 

In the eighth experiment on this subject, the 
tendon of one of the muscles in the leg of a horse 
was laid entirely bare; and it was uniformly 
observed, that on puncturing the tendon with a 
needle the animal made violent exertions, in 
order to extricate himself from his confinement. 
The same degree of feeling, however, did not 
seem to occur from cutting off a slice entirely 
from any portion of the tendon. 

In experiment ninth, the external oblique 
muscle of the abdomen in a dog was laid bare; 
and, on the application of oil of vitriol to the 
|P_19
aponeurosis of that muscle, only a slight degree 
of uneasiness seemed to ensue; but the animal 
appeared evidently to suffer the most violent 
pain, either from pressing these two parts be- 
tween two sharp bodies, or from puncturing 
them with a lancet. 

In the twelfth and last experiment of this 
section, which we mean to communicate, there 
is related the case of a soldier, whose hand had 
been so severely cut as to induce over the whole 
of it a tedious dangerous suppuration; and on 
the matter being evacuated, some of the tendons 
of the fingers, particularly these of the perforans 
and perforatus muscles, were laid entirely bare. 
In this case, we are told, the sensibility of ten- 
dons appeared to be great indeed; for although 
the patient was of a robust constitution, yet if 
by accident, at any of the dressings, these ten- 
dons happened to be touched by the probe, even 
in the most gentle manner, the most violent pain, 
to such a degree almost as to induce fainting, 
was instantaneously produced. From these, and 
various other experiments on the same subject, 
no doubt, our Author thinks, can remain of ten- 
dons being possessed of a very considerable de- 
gree of sensibility. 

|P_20
[}Sect. II. De Periosteo, atque Pericranio. }]
Experiment I. A middle sized dog 
being properly secured, the teguments of the 
thorax were dissected off, leaving the ribs cover- 
ed with the periosteum only. On beginning to 
separate the periosteum from the bone, the dog 
complained severely: he became again quiet on 
desisting from the operation; but a very violent 
degree of pain seemed always to be induced, 
so soon as the scalpel was again applied to the 
periosteum. 

Experiment II. The same experi- 
ment with the foregoing was put in practice 
with a horse, and the result was exactly similar, 
the horse always exhibiting certain signs of his 
suffering severely, as soon as any attempt was 
made upon the periosteum. 

Experiment III. The pericranium 
of a dog being denuded of the common tegu- 
ments, the animal complained slightly on any 
attempt being made to irritate that membrane 
with a lancet. On touching it with lapis infer- 
nalis, a more severe degree of pain seemed to 
ensue; but the most violent torture was indu- 
ced by the application of a single drop of oil 
|P_21
of vitriol. The pericranium being rubbed with 
a sponge immersed in cold water, likewise cre- 
ated a great degree of pain. 

Experiment IV. The periosteum in 
the leg of a dog being laid perfectly bare, by 
dissecting off the common teguments, muscles, 
and tendons, a very violent degree of pain was 
found to be induced, by endeavouring to sepa- 
rate the periosteum from the bone. This was 
likewise the case by applying butter of antimony 
to the surface of that membrane. 

Experiments V. and VI. being all 
that were made upon this subject, tended to 
shew evidently, that the periosteum is possessed 
of a very considerable degree of sensibility. In- 
dependently of the result of these experiments, 
by which the sensibility of the periosteum ap- 
pears to be considerable, the idea, our Author 
observes, is sufficiently confirmed, merely by the 
common and well known effect which inflam- 
mation always produces on that membrane; no 
part of the body, when in an inflamed state, be- 
ing attended with more exquisite pain than the 
periosteum. 

[}Sect. III. De Dura, atque Pia Matre. }]
Experiment I. The skin and other 
teguments being dissected from the side of a 
dog's head, the trepan was applied, so as to lay 
the dura mater entirely bare. In this state the 
membrane was gently fretted with the point of 
a scalpel, and some degree of pain was thereby 
produced; but a more evident and more violent 
degree of it succeeded to the application of the 
vitriolic acid. 

Experiment II. The same experiment 
with the preceding was repeated upon other two 
dogs; and in both, the most violent degree of 
pain appeared to be produced by the application 
of the vitriolic acid to the dura mater. 

Experiment III. In a girl ten years of 
age, whose skull had been so much fractured as 
to render it necessary to take away different por- 
tions of it, by which a very considerable part of 
the dura mater was laid quite bare, the most 
violent degree of pain was produced at the dif- 
ferent dressings, when, either inadvertently or 
by design, that member happened to be pressed 
upon. 

|P_23
With respect to the pia mater, our Author 
does not adduce any direct experiments in proof 
of its sensibility; but as the external covering of 
the brain, the dura mater, is evidently possessed 
of a considerable degree of sensibility, and, as 
he supposes the pia mater to be equally well fur- 
nished with nerves, he therefore thinks it ex- 
tremely probable, that it must possess no small 
share of sensibility. 

[}Sect. IV. De Pleura & Peritonæo. }]
Experiment I. The pleura of a horse 
being laid bare, and the animal being again suf- 
ficiently quiet after the terror occasioned by 
the dissection of the teguments and intercostal 
muscles, such a degree of pain was produced, 
merely by touching that membrane with the 
point of a finger, that the horse jumped as if 
he had been convulsed. 

Experiment II. On repeating the same 
experiment upon a dog, the distance between the 
ribs was too inconsiderable to admit of the inter- 
costal muscles being properly separated from the 
pleura; in order, therefore, to prevent all manner 
of fallacy from any muscular fibres remaining un- 
|P_24
divided, the point of a scalpel was pushed into the 
cavity of the chest, and afterwards made to press 
back and rub upon the internal surface of the 
pleura; and even in this manner such a degree 
of pain was produced, as made it almost impos- 
sible for four people to retain the dog in his place. 

Experiment III. The same experiment 
being repeated upon other two dogs, the result 
was found to be the same. 

Experiment IV. The teguments and 
muscles of the abdomen in a dog being cut open, 
by an incision along the course of the linea alba, 
the peritonæum was thus laid bare; and as soon 
as the animal had recovered from the fright he 
had been put into, the peritonæum was slightly 
touched with a piece of timber wet with oil of 
vitriol. He instantly thereafter began to breathe 
and moan so strongly, that a rupture was pro- 
duced in the peritonæum, at which all the inte- 
stines were immediately protruded. 

Experiment V. The same experiment 
with the preceding being repeated, not only in a 
dog, but in other animals, was uniformly found 
to be attended with a similar result. 

Our Author however acknowledges, that these 
experiments upon the peritonæum were by no 
|P_25
means so conclusive as those upon the pleura and 
other parts before related; for this membrane 
being so very thin and delicate as to burst very 
soon after the application of the caustic, its effects 
were thereby rendered less obvious than other- 
wise they probably might have been. Upon the 
whole, however, he concludes, that the tendons, 
periosteum, pericranium, dura mater, and pleura, 
appear evidently to possess a very considerable 
degree of sensibility. 

