

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v8_0075^]

|P_75
[}I. }]
[}The History of a case, in which Worms in the Nose, 
productive of alarming Symptoms, were success- 
fully removed by the Use of Tobacco. By Mr 
Thomas Kilgour, Surgeon in Jamaica. }]
AGentleman of Montego-bay in Ja- 
maica, aged twenty-six, of a middle sta- 
ture, and robust make, about the middle of July 
1777, complained for three days, of a slight ob- 
tuse pain in his right upper jaw-bone, root of 
the nose, eye, and forehead of the same side. 
|P_76
On the evening of the fourth day, the pain be- 
came exceedingly violent, extending through the 
third dens molaris, and affecting the right side 
of the face and head, with severe and incessant 
shootings. He applied next morning to an as- 
sistant of Mr Thomas Brown, an expert sur- 
geon in this place, to extract the tooth in which 
he felt the greatest uneasiness, imagining his 
complaints originated from it. The tooth was 
perfectly sound, and its extraction was attended 
with no alleviation of the pain. At night he 
took an opiate, but it afforded no relief. 

I was desired to visit him next day. He then 
felt inexpressible agony and distress. The eye 
and right side of the face were much inflamed, 
but little swelled. From the right nostril there 
distilled, in large drops, a thin dark coloured 
ichor, of a very offensive smell, similar to the dis- 
charge from a carious bone, but more disagree- 
able. I examined the nostril, but could perceive 
no ulceration. I therefore concluded it must be 
a collection of some acrid matter in the maxillary 
cavity, that occasioned these violent symptoms, 
and that the discharge from the nose was the 
matter finding its passage through that way. 

|P_77
The case being alarming, and the fever consi- 
derable, we called for the assistance of Dr Mur- 
ray, who readily agreeing to our opinion of a 
collection of matter being formed in the maxil- 
lary cavity, a perforation was made into it thro' 
the socket from which the tooth was extracted; 
but no discharge of matter followed the perfora- 
tion, nor did the pain in the least abate. On 
the contrary, it continued to increase more and 
more at the root of the nose; and, about an 
hour after the operation, there were voided from 
the right nostril, two insects, in appearance like 
the maggots formed in putrid meat. On placing 
the patient in the light, a vast number were per- 
ceived in motion at the upper part of the nostril. 
I introduced a forceps, and took out three or 
four at a time; and, in the course of that day, 
upwards of thirty. They were in general three- 
fourths of an inch long, and one-eighth thick, 
composed of rings, suddenly tapering towards 
the tail, and had a large brownish head. In ex- 
tracting, they made a strong resistance with what 
served them instead of feet, and gave a sensation 
to my hand like a file drawn across a soft body. 
When taken out, they were very lively, and 
|P_78
crawled about in the open air a long time before 
they died. 

It was supposed these insects were hatched in 
an ulcer of the nose, from a venereal cause, the 
patient being affected with a simple gonorrhœa 
about a twelvemonth before, which was cured 
in the common way, and without any return of 
symptoms. This being the idea formed of the 
disorder, after premising the necessary evacua- 
tions to moderate the febrile symptoms, a mer- 
curial course was entered upon, both with a view 
of correcting the general state of the habit, and 
likewise from its known qualities, in being offen- 
sive to worms, to destroy the insects. Three 
grains of black precipitate were ordered to be 
given at bed-time, along with an opiate; the 
nostril to be frequently fumigated with cinnabar, 
and a solution of calomel and camphor, in oil, 
to be thrown up by injection. 

Having a particular regard for the patient, I 
staid several hours with him, and was much dis- 
appointed in finding neither the fumigation nor 
injection to have the smallest effect in mitigating 
the pain, or destroying the insects. I therefore 
set about some experiments to find out a remedy 
capable of killing them, and happily, in a little 
|P_79
time, discovered one that proved successful; but 
previous to this attempt, that the mercurial solu- 
tion might have the fullest justice done it, I put 
a few of the insects into it, and found them at 
the end of an hour as lively as ever; a clear 
proof they were not of a species to be affected 
by oils or mercury. 

The trials I made upon them were as follow: 
I took five wine-glasses; into each glass I put 
two of the maggots; into one glass, I poured a 
strong decoction of chamomile and wormwood; 
into another, vinous tincture of opium; into the 
third, rum; into the fourth, I blew tobacco- 
smoke; and into the last, I poured a decoction 
of tobacco. 

The bitter decoction gave them no disturbance. 
The tincture of opium, at its first application, 
threw them into violent motion; but in a short 
time they recovered and moved about at their 
ease. The rum killed them in about ten mi- 
nutes. The tobacco-smoke, in a few blowings, 
shrivelled them to death; and the tobacco de- 
coction instantly convulsed and destroyed them. 

Next day, by consent of Dr Murray and Mr 
Brown, the tobacco decoction was injected into 
the nostril, and the fumigation and mercurial in- 
|P_80
jection laid aside. The black precipitate and 
opiate were ordered to be continued at bed- 
time; and, with a view to obviate putrefaction, 
and support the strength, two ounces of infu- 
sion of the bark were administered every hour 
through the day, and the patient indulged in 
a little wine, and such light nourishment as he 
could take. At first the tobacco decoction gave 
a good deal of pain; but in a little time became 
pleasant and agreeable, sensibly correcting the fœ- 
tor, and bringing away the insects in great num- 
bers, and in a very weakly state. After using it 
a few days, seldom more than half-a-dozen a- 
day were voided, and these frequently dead. At 
length, after a course of ten days, numbers being 
extracted by the forceps, and falling out of them- 
selves, sometimes dead, sometimes alive, a white 
transparent substance, near two inches long, and 
a quarter of an inch broad, and flat, with three 
large insects in it, was brought out by the for- 
ceps, upon which the pain greatly abated, and 
from that time the insects disappeared. In a 
few days more the abrasions of the membrana 
Schneideriana were healed up, and before the 
middle of August, the patient was able to go to 
the mountains to recover his flesh. 

|P_81
The above mentioned substance, I presume, 
had served as a nidus for these insects. On the 
surface of it were a great many inequalities and 
furrows. It is to be observed, that this young 
man had been subject to an hæmorrhage from 
the nose, from the time he arrived at puberty, till 
he settled in this island, about five years ago, 
since which time he has had no attack of it. He 
lost the sense of smelling by the right nostril after 
the hæmorrhage appeared, and has it only in an 
imperfect degree by the left; nor has it returned 
since he recovered from this disorder. Might 
not this membranous substance have been form- 
ed of the coagulable part of the blood adhering 
about the ossa spongiosa after the hæmorrhage, 
the red particles of what remained stagnated in 
the nostril being reabsorbed; and might not this 
foreign body, by its stimulus, have brought on 
an ulceration of the memb. Schneid. whence these 
insects have been generated? One circumstance 
in the above case is very astonishing, viz. the 
rapid generation of these insects; as I am confi- 
dent I speak within bounds, when I assert, up- 
wards of 200 were extracted and voided in the 
space of 10 days. 

|P_82
It is surprising, that among all those authors 
who have written on the diseases of warm climates, 
there is no mention of maggots in the nose as a 
disease that sometimes occurs; and yet I imagine 
it is a complaint that has pretty often come with- 
in the knowledge of practitioners; for, since the 
above case, I have been informed of several in- 
stances that have happened in this island. The 
most remarkable is one that occurred some years 
ago, to a married woman of this place. Her 
husband, after every thing had been tried in vain 
by the Faculty, one day when she was in the 
greatest agony, poured a quantity of oil of tur- 
pentine into the nose; and this seeming to abate 
the pain, he continued to apply it for several days 
successively. The event was, the insects were 
killed, and the nose restored to the state of a 
simple ulcer, which soon healed up. But previ- 
ous to the use of the turpentine, the unfortunate 
woman had lost the ossa nasi, and with this de- 
formity she escaped. 

Another case was that of a young man, a few 
miles from this, which happened in 1776; but 
to him it proved fatal. 

Mr Robert Monro of Hanover-parish, a very 
old practitioner, and a man of great experience 
|P_83
and medical sagacity, informed me of a case of 
maggots in the nose he had met with, in which, 
after every thing that was tried had failed, he 
thought of using the tobacco, from knowing its 
powerful effects in killing most kinds of vermin. 
The consequence was, the insects were speedily 
destroyed, and the patient in a little time restor- 
ed to health. And this fact of Mr Monro's, 
who was also called upon to visit our patient, 
was what induced us to persevere in the use of 
the tobacco, which happily proved so efficaci- 
ous. 

