

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v8_0329^]

|P_329
[}IX. }]
[}Histories of two Cases: The Discharge of a large 
calcareous Concretion, and the Extraction of the 
Bones of a Fætus by the Rectum. By  Dr Sa- 
muel Fitzgerald , Physician at Mullingar. }]
ALady of rank in this neighbourhood, 
whose name delicacy forbids to mention, 
hed laboured for eighteen months under the 
most excruciating torture and pains in the hy- 
pogastric region, particularly towards the back 
and os sacrum. For the last three months of 
her illness, she was so reduced for want of food 
and sleep, that she could not leave her bed, ex- 
cept when taken up to the tepid baths, in which 
only she enjoyed any tolerable degree of ease. 
In short, life now had become a burden, and 
death desirable to her and all around her. In 
|P_330
this deplorable situation, upon the discharge of 
an emollient anodyne glyster, she fortunately 
with it passed from the rectum a large hard ball 
of an oval figure, exceeding in size an ordinary 
orange, and so solid that nothing less than the 
stroke of a hammer could break it. It was of 
a dark cinneritious colour, and of a calcareous 
quality in substance, weighing eight ounces and 
three drams. A total liberation from pain imme- 
diately followed its expulsion, and, in a very short 
time the hectic and other alarming symptoms 
vanished, and the lady is now perfectly re-esta- 
blished in health. 

The other case is that of Mary Dardis, a na- 
tive of this town, who, on the first day of June, 
after the usual term of gestation, viz. nine 
months from her second marriage, was taken ill 
of labour-pains; but these being rather tedious, 
and cold, as the midwife termed it, I was sent 
for; and, upon examining the state of the ute- 
rus, I could not possibly find its orifice, though, 
at the same time, I clearly perceived a round 
hard bulk through the teguments, which I con- 
cluded was the head. In this situation, I desi- 
red she might be properly supported and pati- 
|P_331
ently wait the increase of more efficacious pains, 
and then to apprise me of it. For three days I 
heard nothing from her, and then calling at her 
place of residence, I found her engaged at her 
ordinary business, quite well, but uneasy at not 
having been delivered. I told her the right time 
was not yet come; that when it did, all would 
be well, and not to fret herself on that account. 

On the 10th of February next ensuing, being 
nine months and ten days, her husband, at mid- 
night, called upon me, to let me know she was 
in high labour. Curiosity, as well as humanity, 
induced me to visit her; and, to my great sur- 
prise, the first object that presented to the touch 
was the foot and leg of the skeleton hanging 
forth from the rectum. This, by merely hand- 
ling it, readily separated at the articulation of 
the knee; and, as no entrance to the womb 
through the vagina was yet to be found, I was 
reduced to the painful necessity of extracting the 
entire skeleton, bone after bone, through the 
anus. This loathsome manœuvre continued for 
the best part of three successive days; for the 
intolerable stench, and difficult access, were so 
great, that I could not bear it longer than an hour 
at any one time. I suppose the obliquity of the 
|P_332
womb's elevation was the cause of this very pre- 
posterous birth, that its orifice had reached that 
part of the rectum through which the heel of 
the skeleton must have gradually found its pas- 
sage; for she had uninterrupted pains in the 
lower part of her back during the last three 
months, which she called a dry cholic. By clean- 
sing vulnerary injections, and a liberal use of the 
Peruvian bark, the woman is restored to health. 
Though this seems scarce credible, yet it is lite- 
rally true, as may be attested by a surgeon I 
was obliged to call in, to assist now and then in 
the delivery. 

