

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v9_0078^]

|P_78
[}VI. }]
[}Recherches sur la maladie convulsive epidemique 
attribué par quelques observateurs à l'Ergot, et 
confondue avec la gangrene seche de Solognots. 
Par M. Saillant. Vide Histoire de la Société 
Royale de Médecine. Tom. 1. 4to. Paris. }]
IN the memoir before us, the author sets out 
with observing, that the experiments under- 
taken by the Society, to determine whether the 
ergot rye be capable of producing dry gangrene, 
or not, agreed with the observations of Langi- 
us, Perrault, Dodart, and others; but that, on 
the other hand, there are many respectable autho- 
rities which exculpate the ergot or spurred rye, 
and refer to other causes the disease which has 
been attributed to it in Germany and Sweden. 
To clear up this matter, Mr Saillant has compared 
together the authors who have written upon the 
subject. He finds, that they do not agree with 
regard to the cause of the disease; but that its 
progress and symptoms are essentially different 
from those of the dry gangrene. To prove this, 
|P_79
in the paper before us, he gives a detail of the 
symptoms of each of these diseases; and to this he 
subjoins an historical view of the progress of the 
convulsive epidemic of Sweden and Germany,the 
cause of which is not yet entirely determined. 

The dry gangrene is characterized, he ob- 
serves, by the mortification of some one of the 
extremities, sometimes of all of them. Often 
it is preceded by a redness, which, however, is 
not inflammatory, and by some vesications. 
The limb swells, becomes painful, and has a sen- 
sation sometimes of cold, more frequently of un- 
supportable heat. The vessels are obliterated, 
the phlegm becomes black and hard, and the 
patient, at the point of death, is happy, if, from 
a spontaneous separation of the gangrenous part, 
he can survive, with the loss of his extremities. 
The first symptoms of this disease are not alarm- 
ing. The pulse continues for some time nearly 
in the natural state, and is gradually weakened, 
in proportion to the violence of the disease. 
The blood appears black and thick, and the 
urine in a natural condition. The belly is hard 
and tense, but the appetite continues, and dige- 
stion goes on as in health; it is only towards 
the end of the disease, and even on the approach 
|P_80
of death, that diarrhœa usually comes on. Af- 
ter death, on the examination of the body, the 
intestines, and other viscera, are often found 
strewed over with gangrenous spots. 

The cure of this disease is sometimes accom- 
plished in the beginning, by profuse sweats, and 
by a good diet. The medical treatment consists 
in evacuating the primæ viæ, in giving inter- 
nally laxative apozems, diuretics and antiseptics, 
while recourse is had externally to those topical 
applications which are proper for resisting gan- 
grene, for favouring the separation of the dis- 
eased part, without amputation, and for aiding 
suppuration. 

After this description of the dry gangrene, 
he next proceeds to give an account of the con- 
vulsive epidemic affection which has been con- 
founded with it. In that disease, there is not, 
he observes, any gangrene. The violent con- 
vulsions are its essential characteristic. It has 
no regular course, but returns by paroxysms; 
and while it is in reality less dangerous than the 
former disease, it yet makes its attack with much 
more alarming appearances. The patient at 
one time feels as if he were burnt with devour- 
ing fire, and soon after is sensible of cold, simi- 
|P_81
lar to what arises from the application of water. 
These symptoms are accompanied with loss of 
appetite, nausea and vomiting, which are soon 
succeeded by an inexpressible pain. The pa- 
tient, without shedding tears, utters lamentable 
cries, and the affected members are either con- 
tracted with extreme violence, or remain stretch- 
ed out with inflexible rigidity. The pains soon 
abate, when the patient is able to stretch the 
contracted membranes, or to bend those that 
have been stretched; but they return in a fresh 
accession, with the same severity. The patient 
is no sooner out of the fit, than he is tormented 
with a voracious appetite; and he digests with 
sufficient ease, all sorts of aliment. In particu- 
lar years, there succeeds swelling of the feet or 
hands, and the fingers have been covered with 
vesicles full of serosity, the discharge of which, 
however, does not procure any relief. 

The disease, after several accessions, terminates 
itself by sweat or diarrhœa, which is more vio- 
lent when patients eat little, than when they eat 
a great deal. But, for the most part, there re- 
mains, for the space of some weeks, several in- 
conveniencies, such as vertigo, tinnitus aurium, 
deafness, loss or diminution of sight, or the like. 
|P_82
If the affection continues long, it degenerates 
into epilepsy; and if during the affection, there 
shall occur a mental disorder, it in general con- 
tinues for life. If there occurs an obstruction 
of the liver, there in general supervenes a spit- 
ting of blood, sometimes followed by phthisis, 
by epilepsy, palsy, or in fine, by apoplexy. This 
disease attacks most frequently those who are 
plethoric, and in that case the convulsions are 
the most violent. But those of the phlegmatic 
temperament are most subject to comatose af- 
fections after it. 

Some have observed blood issue from the nose 
and mouth after death; but they have not ob- 
served any alteration in the viscera, excepting 
that the lungs were much inflated and distend- 
ed with blood. In other cases, the liver and 
gall-bladder have been much distended with 
bile, and an erysipelatous inflammation has been 
observed over the whole surface of the abdomi- 
nal, and even the thoracic viscera. 

Antispasmodics, he tells us, joined to diapho- 
retics, appear to be the only remedies useful a- 
gainst this disease. Narcotics have seemed only 
to aggravate the affection. But bleeding and 
purgatives have been employed with some ad- 
|P_83
vantage in the beginning of the disease, accord- 
ing to the circumstances and temperament of 
the patient. 

After this account, of the symptoms attending 
each of these diseases, and of the difference in the 
method of treatment, Mr Saillant next proceeds 
to give an historical account of the different peri- 
ods at which the convulsive epidemic has manifest- 
ed itself. He begins with mentioning its occur 
rence in Westphalia in the year 1597, which he 
considers as its first appearance in Europe; and 
concludes with the epidemic in Sweden in 1754, 
of which an account was published by Linnæus, 
in his Amœnitates Academiæ, who treats of it 
under the title of raphania, from the idea, that 
it was occasioned by the raphanistrum or char- 
lock growing among the barley. 

