

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v9_0374^]

|P_374
[}XXX. }]
[}History of a Case of Tetanus successfully treated by 
the Use of large Doses of Opium. By Mr Wil- 
liam Chavasse, Surgeon at Burford, Oxford- 
shire. }]
SEptember 27th 1780. Mr T— B—, 
about ten years of age, by a fall from a 
tree, fractured his leg, a few inches above the 
articulation with the tarsus. By the violence of 
the shock, the tibia was forced through the in- 
teguments. In a short time after the accident, 
the fracture was reduced, the limb laid in a pro- 
per position, the wound dressed superficially, 
and the patient put upon the antiphlogistic plan. 
From the day of the accident to the 16th of Octo- 
|P_375
ber, every thing went on favourably; the wound 
seemed disposed to heal, the fractured limb was 
perfectly at ease, and his general health promi- 
sed a speedy and happy recovery. However, on 
this day, the patient complained of a slight stiff- 
ness of his neck, with a scarce perceptible rigi- 
dity of the muscles subservient to the motion of 
the jaw, but so trivial as to be little noticed by 
him; and as every other circumstance went on 
favourably, I attributed it to a cold which the 
patient had caught by frequently sitting up in 
his bed without proper covering. The rigidity 
and stiffness increasing the two following days, 
made me apprehensive of the attack of a teta- 
nus; which opinion was strengthened by that of 
Mr Bradley, a very ingenious surgeon now 
settled at Hartford, and whose kind assistance 
during the progress of the cure I shall on all oc- 
casions be happy to acknowledge. The conti- 
nuance of these symptoms demanded the use of 
opiates. Therefore, on the 18th, I sent him an 
embrocation, with Liniment. sapon. Tinct. The- 
baic. utriusque par. æq. directing it to be used 
with freedom five or six times a-day. But as 
topical applications alone were not to be trusted 
here, I gave him three camphorated draughts in 
|P_376
twenty-four hours, with twenty drops of the 
Thebaic tincture in each. On the following 
day, the symptoms were somewhat alleviated, 
and the medicines were continued. The wound, 
during this period, was not in the least altered; 
nor was there any other untoward symptom, ex- 
clusive of those already enumerated. On the 
20th, there was a little dyspnœa: a physician 
was called in; who made no other alteration in 
the patient's medicine, than in reducing the The- 
baic tincture to twelve drops to be taken four 
times a-day, leaving, however, discretionary 
power to increase the opiate according to cir- 
cumstances. On the 21st, anodyne cataplasms 
and fomentations were occasionally applied to 
the fauces: the rigidity and difficulty of brea- 
thing increasing, the laudanum was augmented 
to twenty-five drops, to be taken every six 
hours; and as the patient was costive, an ene- 
ma was thrown up, but without effect. The 
succeeding day, the jaw was more fixed, deglu- 
tition nearly impeded, and his respiration more 
distressingly operose; added to these, we had 
frequent and severe subsultus tendinum, and the 
bowels so obstinately costive as to require the 
stimulus of two very active clysters before any 
|P_377
effect was produced. The Thebaic tincture 
was increased five drops to each draught, and 
the anodyne cataplasms and fotus were fre- 
quently applied. The 23d, the jaw remained 
as on the preceding day, but the subsultus ten- 
dinum recurred with additional violence; the 
wound still retained its former healthy appear- 
ance; the laudanum was reduced to twenty-five 
drops every sixth hour, the patient being rather 
comatose; a stimulating clyster was administer- 
ed, which brought away a small but extremely 
fœtid stool. He continued much the same on 
the 24th, when a terebinthinate clyster was gi- 
ven, which not only disposed the bowels to be 
more soluble, but likewise induced a very large 
secretion of urine. As the coma had now left 
the patient, we had again recourse to thirty 
drops of the Thebaic tincture for each dose. 
The 25th, 26th, and 27th, he continued the use 
of his medicine, without any variation of the 
symptoms. On the 28th, the right side (the frac- 
ture being on the left) became paralytic; the 
opiate was increased to thirty-five drops every 
six hours; and though the subject was so young, 
this dose scarcely produced any sensible effect. 
This plan was pursued to the 31st, throwing up 
|P_378
occasionally a purgative clyster. The evening 
of this day, our patient complained of nausea, 
and, after considerable efforts, vomited a large 
quantity of pus. November 1st, he took a sa- 
line purgative draught, to remove any purulent 
colluvies that might be lodged in the primæ 
viæ. This did its duty: the discharge from the 
wound till this period had been favourable, but 
was now converted into a corrosive ichor; in 
consequence of which, I increased the Thebaic 
tincture to forty drops, and to each dose added 
two ounces of a strong decoction of the bark. 
The rigidity of the jaw was much augmented 
on the 2d, and the subsultus tendinum consider- 
ably increased; forty-five drops of the lauda- 
num were now given with the bark, and this 
plan persisted in till the 14th, without any the 
least variation, taking care to keep the body so- 
luble by a free use of clysters. On the 15th, 
the patient complained of a most excruciating 
pain in his thigh; the difficulty of breathing was 
much increased, and the subsultus tendinum so 
violent as to threaten immediate dissolution. 
Under such a complication of dangerous sym- 
ptoms, the opiate in a large dose appeared the 
unicum remedium; sixty drops of the Thebaic 
|P_379
tincture were therefore immediately given. The 
eventual success of the medicine justified the 
practice; for, in less than half an hour, the pain 
and spasms were effectually removed, and the 
patient thrown into a refreshing fleep. At the 
expiration of ten hours, he awoke, without stu- 
por, without fever, and with a visible diminu- 
tion of his late alarming symptoms. The rigi- 
dity of the jaw insensibly abated, respiration be- 
came perfectly easy, and the wound regained 
its former favourable state. The opiate was gra- 
dually diminished to the 30th, when the subsul- 
tus tendinum and every other disagreeable 
symptom had left him. The wound healed in a 
short time, ahd the patient began to walk about 
with very little inconvenience, only finding at 
intervals a pricking sensation near the fractured 
part. This, however, was exceedingly trivial, 
and but of short duration; for, in about eigh- 
teen weeks after the accident, a considerable 
piece of the tibia exfoliated; since which to this 
time, he has been perfectly well, and the defor- 
mity, the consequence of the fracture, so very 
little as not to be discovered but by a very close 
examination. 

