

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v10_0160^]

|P_160
[}XII. }]
[}Description of a Plant yielding Asasœtida, in a 
Letter from John Hope, M. D. F. R. S. to 
Sir Joseph Banks, Bart. P. R. S. Vid. Phi- 
losophical Transactions. Vol. LXXV. Part 1. 
4to. London.}]
IT is near a thousand years, Dr Hope ob- 
serves, since asasœtida was first used in me- 
dicine, but it is not above seventy years since 
we had any satisfactory account of the plant 
which yields it. Kaempfer, who, towards the 
|P_161
end of the last century, travelled over a great 
part of Asia, and was in those parts of Persia 
where the asafœtida is collected, not only 
gives a full account, in his Amoenitates Ex- 
oticæ, of the method of obtaining it, but also 
describes the plant from whence it is obtained, 
but it had never been cultivated in any Euro- 
pean garden, till Dr Pallas was fortunate 
enough to raise it from some seeds which were 
sent from the mountains of Ghilanin in Persia. 

In the year 1777, Dr Guthrie of St Peters- 
burgh, gave to Dr Hope two roots of it which 
he had obtained from Professor Pallas. Both 
these roots were planted in the open ground 
in the botanic garden at Edinburgh. One of 
these died, but the other did well. It has lately 
flowered and produced seed. 

Dr Hope availing himself of this opportuni- 
ty, presented the Royal Society of London with 
a minute and accurate description of this plant, 
which is now published in their transactions, 
and illustrated by two elegant engravings, the 
one exhibiting the flower, the other the leaves 
of the plant. As Dr Hope's description will 
not admit of any abridgment, we must here 
|P_162
content ourselves with observing, that the asa- 
sœtida growing in the botanical garden at Edin- 
burgh, is an umbelliferous plant, of a pale sea- 
green colour, which grows to the height of 
about three feet. That the stem is deciduous, 
but the root perennial. That every part of 
the plant, when wounded, pours forth a rich 
milky juice, resembling asafœtida both in smell 
and taste. At times also, a smell, such as a 
faint impregnation of asafœtida yields, was 
perceivable at the distance of several feet. 

Although, however, from all these circum- 
stances, there is reason to conclude, that this is 
a plant which produces true asafœtida, yet Dr 
Hope has observed, that the description and 
drawing presented by him to the Royal Society, 
differ in many respects from those formerly 
published by Kaempfer. Sir Joseph Banks 
suggests, in a note annexed to this paper, that 
gummi-resinous substance, known by the name 
of asafœtida, may, as well as the sanguis dra- 
conis, and some other gums, be indifferently 
the produce of various species of plants; and 
that while Kaempfer has described one, Dr 
Hope has described another. 

|P_163
With regard to the method of obtaining gum 
asafœtida, Dr Hope observes, on the authority 
of Kaempfer, that, at the proper season, the 
root is cut over once and again: that from the 
incision there flows a thick juice, like cream; 
and that this, farther thickened, is the asafœtida 
of the shops. As the juice which the plant 
growing in the botanical garden at Edinburgh 
yields, seems evidently to be the same with the 
officinal asafœtida; and as the plant bears the 
vicissitudes of our climate, growing in the open 
air without protection, and, even in an unfa- 
vourable season, producing a good deal of seed, 
he expresses his hope, that it may become an 
article of cultivation in this country, of no in- 
considerable importance. 

In addition to the above extract from the 
Transactions of the Royal Society, we may ob- 
serve, that the asafœtida plant, in the botanic 
garden of Edinburgh, has now flowered three 
different times, viz. in the year 1782, in 1784, 
and in 1785. But we are sorry to learn, that 
none of its seeds, though put into the hands 
of very able botanists and gardeners, have ve- 
getated. 

|P_164
With the description of the plant growing 
at Edinburgh, Dr Hope sent to the Royal So- 
ciety several other accurate drawings, particu- 
larly one exhibiting a full view of the entire 
plant in flower, which being too large for the 
size of the Philosophical Transactions, was not 
engraven. We are glad, however, to hear, 
that all these drawings were also sent by Dr 
Hope's direction to Dr Pallas, who wished to 
publish, in the Flora Rossica, a description and 
delineation of this rare plant. It is also pro- 
bable, that, to gratify the curiosity of this coun- 
try, Dr Hope will publish an engraving of the 
entire plant, in its most perfect state. 

