

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v10_0102^]

|P_102
[}VI. }]
[}Mémoire sur la nécessité de faire l'operation Cesa- 
rienne aux femmes qui meurent enceintes, et sur 
les moyens de rapeller leurs enfans d'une mort 
apparente à la vie. Par M. Bordenave. 
Vide Histoire de l'Académie Royale des Sciences, 
année 1777. 4to. Paris. }]
IN the memoir before us, Mr Bordenave sets 
out with observing, that if there be an infi- 
nite number of diseases to which mankind are 
exposed, unavoidably terminating in death, by 
destroying the sources of life, so there are often 
other external causes, which, acting differently 
on the organs, suspend only the vital action, 
but in this manner produce an apparent death, 
which will soon become real, if proper assistance 
be not given. This is exemplified both in the 
case of persons suffocated by the smoke of char- 
coal, and in the case also of many new born in- 
fants. 

These, by proper assistance, are often reco- 
vered; and our author is of opinion, that art 
|P_103
may here extend its influence still farther to 
children, viz. perishing in the womb, who have 
survived the death of the mother. This asser- 
tion, in the memoir before us, he attempts to 
support by a collection of facts, which taken 
singly might not be supposed to have much 
weight. 

The first case he mentions, is that of a wo- 
man who died about an hour after mid-day, 
and was opened about seven in the evening by 
M. Dayries, surgeon to the Hotel-Dieu. She 
was supposed to have been only six months 
gone with child. He, however, took from her 
womb a male child, distinct in all its parts and, 
by the redness of its colour, shewing the ap- 
pearance of life. A palpitation was distinctly 
felt at the region of the heart. Respiration 
soon began, and it continued to live for two 
hours. 

After this, Mr Bordenave takes notice of a 
number of cases mentioned by Mr Cangiamila, 
in his Embryologia Sacra, a work which he re- 
presents as highly valuable, and too little known. 
On that authority, he remarks, that, in the city 
of Montreal and the neighbourhood, in the 
space of twenty-four years, twenty-one living 
|P_104
children had been extracted by the Cæsarian 
operation: that between the year 1704 and 
1748, sixty children had been extracted in the 
same manner at Caltanissecta, of whom only 
five were found dead: that at Victoria, a city 
in the diocese of Syracuse, between the years 
1734 and 1752, the Cæsarian operation had 
been performed twenty times, and in every 
case a living child extracted: and that at Sam- 
buca, a city in the diocese of Girenti, twenty- 
two pregnant women having died, from eigh- 
teen of them children were extracted alive; in 
three of the cases, from the putrefaction which 
had taken place, there was reason to believe 
that the child had been dead some time before 
the death of the mother; but the fourth was 
found stifled among the bed-clothes, probably 
having come into the world among the last mo- 
ments of the life of the mother. Where, there- 
fore, a pregnant woman dies, especially in the 
advanced periods of that state, the Cæsarian 
operation should never, he thinks, be neglected, 
but ought to be regarded as an act of huma- 
nity. 

This operation may, he observes, in many 
cases, particularly where there is sudden death, 
|P_105
be delayed too long, from an apprehension that 
the mother herself may be still in a recoverable 
state. But, exclusive of the other signs of 
death, this, our author thinks, may be certainly 
determined by the inspection of the eyes alone, 
which, in a short time after death, acquire a 
dull and collapsed appearance. But besides 
this, he also proposes, that, in every case, the 
same attention should be paid as would be done 
with a living woman, where the aim was to pre- 
serve both mother and child. 

But the performance of the operation, he ob- 
serves, is not all. It is necessary to distinguish 
whether the child brought into the world with- 
out apparent signs of life, be really in a recover- 
able state or not, that proper measures may, in 
the former case, be taken for its revival. Life, 
he observes, is more easily retained in an infant 
which has never breathed, than after this func- 
tion has been exercised, as circulation can then 
go on without the aid of respiration. Paleness 
of the body, lividity, coldness, the want of re- 
spiration, and even of obvious pulsation, are not 
then certain marks of death. Putrefaction 
alone, he thinks, affords an indubitable sign; 
|P_106
and even this is to be carefully distinguished 
from a gangrenous disposition, which may be 
the effect of compression, contusion, or similar 
accidents. 

For the recovery of infants apparently dead, 
he recommends the blowing warm air into the 
mouth, irritation of the nostrils, bathing in aro- 
matic decoctions, the application of compresses 
dipped in warm wine, suction of the niples, par- 
ticularly the left, which he thinks is peculiarly 
sensible from its numerous nerves, and, finally, 
injection of tobacco-smoke into the intestines. 
These measures are, he thinks, particularly pro- 
per where death is the consequence of weak- 
ness, or a stagnation of the fluids. But when 
it arises from a suffocation of the vital principle, 
occasioned by plethora, or by that obstruction 
which has arisen from compression of the infant, 
then a slight evacuation of blood, by cutting 
the umbilical cord, becomes, he thinks, useful, 
and should precede other practices. These 
measures are not always immediately fol- 
lowed by the desired effect. From experience, 
it appears, that, in some instances, they succeed 
only after being tried for several hours. And 
|P_107
he particularly records one instance published 
in the Gazette de Manheim, for the year 1773, 
where a recovery was effected by long conti- 
nued perseverance, after the most probable mea- 
sures had been used for a considerable time, 
without any prospect of success. To these he 
subjoins two other similar cases, the one by Mr 
Andrieu, surgeon at Gaillac, the other by Mr 
Faissolis, surgeon at Lyons. And he concludes 
with observing, that, from these facts, it ap- 
pears, a laudable attention to infants remaining 
in the womb of those mothers who die in a 
pregnant state cannot be too much encouraged. 
Though the labour should often be in vain, 
yet it will be an ample recompence, if, in 
some instances, the life of a child can be pre- 
served. 

