

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v10_0115^]

|P_115
[}VIII. }]
[}Mémoire sur quelques maladies du Foie qu'on at- 
tribue à d'autres organes, et sur des maladies 
dont on fixe ordinairement le Siége dans le Foie, 
quoiqu'il n'y soit pas. Par M. Portal. Vide 
Mémoires de l'Académie Royale des Sciences, 
année 1777. 4to. Paris. }]
OF all the diseases which afflict mankind, 
none are more dangerous than those of 
which we are ignorant of the seat. Every vis- 
cus has a texture peculiar to itself; it is subject 
to affections from which the others are free; 
and it is freed from these in a manner peculiar 
|P_116
to itself. Since, then, the great art of medicine 
is to assist nature, this can be done only when 
the seat of the disease is perfectly known. This 
consideration has induced our author to endea- 
vour to arrive at the discovery of truth, by the 
examination of dead bodies. And anatomy, it 
must be allowed, is in no respect more useful 
in medicine, than in pointing out to us the 
morbid conditions to which parts are sub- 
jected. 

In the memoir now before us, M. Portal, 
availing himself of the information thus ac- 
quired, endeavours to point out errors respect- 
ing diseases of the liver, which his practice has 
discovered to him. And here he is not asha- 
med to own, that he has often been mistaken; 
a confession which merits much higher praise 
than pretensions to infallability. For, from an 
acknowledgment of error, an author obtains 
the merit of integrity, the advantage of being 
useful, and the honour of having himself disco- 
vered truths which had formerly escaped his 
observation. 

He sets out with observing, that effusions in- 
to the right cavity of the chest, and enlarge- 
ments of these lobes of the lungs which it con- 
|P_117
tains, often cause such a derangement in the 
situation of the liver, that it is suspected to be 
obstructed, although in a perfectly natural 
state. 

In confirmation of this assertion, he relates 
the case of an advocate, whose ordinary physi- 
cian, from the symptoms, concluded that he 
was subjected to a disease of the liver. Mr 
Portal, when called in consultation, discovered 
a large tumour under the false ribs of the right 
side. And as, while the symptoms to which he 
was principally subjected, loss of strength and 
appetite, accompanied with yellowness of the 
skin, and the like, indicated an affection of that 
organ, as there was no cough, pain of heart, 
purulent expectoration, or any other circum- 
stance which pointed out an affection of the 
lungs, his opinion perfectly coincided with that 
of the ordinary physician. On this idea, then, 
they directed their practice; but the disease 
increased daily, and a colliquative diarrhœa 
supervening, the patient was cut off by a ma- 
rasmus. 

Mr Portal was so confident of the disease of 
this patient, that he would not have thought of 
opening the body, had it not been his practice 
|P_118
to open every patient who died under his care. 
But how great, says he, was my surprise, when 
I found the liver in a perfectly natural state. 
It was in the lungs alone that the disease had 
its seat. These were full of obstructions form- 
ed by a scrophulous substance. And in the 
right side there were several abscesses commu- 
nicating together, from whence was discharged 
a considerable quantity of purulent matter. The 
volume of the lungs thus increased, depressed 
the diaphragm, and the liver was consequently 
pushed lower than its natural situation. In this 
manner it formed, below the false ribs of the 
right side, that protuberance which was taken 
for a large obstruction. 

After this, Mr Portal mentions, several simi- 
lar cases, particularly that of the late Duc de 
Chaulnes, treated by him and by M. Bordeu. 
He remarks also, that a similar deception may 
take place on the left side, from the spleen be- 
ing displaced in the same manner. But as its 
size is less, the enlargement is never so great. 

Another kind of mistake often committed, is 
that of believing that there is a disease of the 
liver, wherever yellowness occurs as a symp- 
tom. It is true, he remarks, that this colour 
|P_119
is observable in many affections of the liver. 
But as there are some diseases of that viscus 
which are followed by no yellowness, so, on the 
other hand, yellowness often supervenes, where 
the liver is perfectly sound, and where the se- 
cretion of bile takes place in the most regular 
manner. He tells us, that, in several instances, 
upon opening the bodies of patients, who died 
from obstructions in the intestinal canal, and in 
whom a yellow colour had been observed be- 
fore death, he has found the lacteal vessels filled 
with a yellow fluid, bitter to the taste, and ca- 
pable of inflammation when thrown upon the 
fire. Hence he concludes, that when the bile 
is obstructed in the intestine, it makes its way 
into the lacteals, and is thus insinuated into the 
blood, though the secretion be perfectly natural. 
In the same manner also, he explains the yel- 
low appearance in new born infants. For he 
contends, that he has found a similar fluid, not 
only in their lacteal vessels, but in the thoracic 
duct: that, in these cases, he has found the 
gall-bladder almost empty: that, when the gall- 
bladder, on the other hand, has been much di- 
stended, there has been no jaundice: and, fi- 
nally, that this yellow colour does not take 
|P_120
place where the meconium is freely discharged, 
and where, therefore, no obstruction happens 
in the intestinal canal. 

From these circumstances, he concludes, that 
yellowness, in some cases, takes place without 
any affection of the liver, but from a reflux of 
bile into the blood, through the lacteal vessels. 
And, in further proof of this doctrine, he tells 
us, that, in dogs, he has induced jaundice by 
putting a ligature on the small intestines. 

If, however, on some occasions, diseases 
have been attributed to the liver, where it is not af- 
fected; so, in other cases, diseases have had 
their seat in this viscus, where the affection has 
been attributed to other organs. 

The liver, he observes, is often subjected to 
obstructions, giving rise to vomiting, where the 
cause of the affection is unknown. In proof 
of this assertion, he relates two cases. In the 
first of these the patient, after being long sub- 
jected to violent vomiting, was cut off by hectic 
fever and atrophia. It was imagined, that the 
disease was seated in the stomach; but upon 
opening the body, that viscus was found to be 
perfectly sound, and it was discovered, that the 
affection entirely depended on an enlargement 
|P_121
and obstruction of the liver. The second case 
is that of the Marchioness d'Epagny. In her 
similar symptoms took place, and the vomiting 
was so severe as to render the cure almost de- 
sperate. When M. Portal was called, by ac- 
curate examination, he discovered an enlarge- 
ment of the liver. This led him to have re- 
course to mercurials, and other aperients, by 
which a complete cure was effected. Since 
that time, he tells us, that he has treated se- 
veral other patients in the same manner, with 
equal success. 

Another affection of the liver, which phy- 
sicians often overlook, is violent hæmorrhage, 
happening from this viscus, where the blood 
passes through the ductus communis into the 
intestinal canal, and from thence into the sto- 
mach. He relates several instances of this kind, 
and observes, that by dissection after death, he 
has often detected mistakes, the hæmorrhage, 
during the life of the patient, being suspected 
to proceed from the stomach, and in some in- 
stances even from the lungs, while, in reality, 
it arose from the liver. 

In concluding this memoir, M. Portal ob- 
serves, that he has seen enlargements of the 
|P_122
liver happily terminated by a large hæmorrhage. 
And as an example of this kind, he relates the 
case of Mr Aublet, a celebrated botanist, who 
was, in this manner, entirely freed from a tu- 
mour in the right hypochondrium, productive 
of very alarming symptoms. 

From the different particulars mentioned in 
this memoir, M. Portal infers, that researches 
of this kind, founded on accurate observations, 
cannot fail to be of the highest utility, and that 
they well merit the attention of physicians. 

