

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v11_0176^]

|P_176
[}X. }]
[}An account of the late Dr Hugh Martin's Can- 
cer-powder, with brief observations on Cancers. 
By Benjamin Rush, M. D. &c. Vide Tran- 
sactions of the American Philosophical Society, 
vol. II.Quarto. Philadelphia. }]
THOUGH from the account given in this 
paper it would appear that Dr Martin 
can hardly be considered in any other light 
than that of an empyric, yet the reputation 
which his nostrum acquired was such as justly 
to claim the attention of Dr Rush. And when 
we reflect that the inventions, and even the 
temerity of quacks, has given birth to some 
of the most important improvements in medi- 
cine, such investigations cannot be thought un- 
worthy of the inquiries of the philosophical and 
benevolent physician. 

Dr Martin had been for some time a regi- 
mental surgeon, stationed in the back parts of 
Pensylvania, at Fort Pitt. And his advertise- 
|P_177
ments bore, that he was able to cure cancer, by 
a medicine which he had discovered in the 
woods in the neighbourhood of that garrison. 
After his medicine had gained considerable cre- 
dit in Philadelphia, Dr Rush took the liberty of 
waiting upon him, and of asking him some ques- 
tions respecting his discovery. The answers he 
gave were calculated to make Dr Rush believe 
that his medicine was of a vegetable nature, 
and that it was originally an Indian remedy. 
He shewed some of it, which appeared to be the 
powder of a well-dried root of some kind; and 
he admitted Dr Rush to see him apply it in two 
or three cases. In some instances, Dr Martin 
applied a powder to the parts affected. In o- 
thers, he only touched them with a feather, dip- 
ped in a liquid which had a white sediment, and 
from which Dr Rush inferred that it was a ve- 
getable root diffused in water. 

The effects resulting from these applications 
were very considerable; and Dr Rush witnessed 
their efficacy in several instances. In some 
cancerous ulcers, the cures he performed were 
complete: but where the cancers were much 
connected with the lymphatic system, or ac- 
companied with a scrophulous habit of body, his 
|P_178
medicine always failed, and in some instances 
did evident mischief. 

Dr Rush was anxious to discover a medicine 
which promised relief, even in a few cases of 
cancer. As he observed that the effects of Dr 
Martin's powder shewed it to be of an acrid na- 
ture, and as he supposed all caustic vegetables 
to be nearly the same, he had recourse to dif- 
ferent ones. He tried in a similar manner the 
phytolacca, the stramonium, the arum, and some 
others, in hopes of seeing from them the same 
effects as from Dr Martin's powder. But in 
these he was disappointed. They gave pain, 
but they performed no cures. He was after- 
wards furnished with a powder by a gentleman 
from Fort Pitt, which, from a variety of circum- 
stances, he inferred to be of the same kind with 
that used by Dr Martin. He applied this to a 
fungous ulcer, but it did not produce that de- 
gree of pain, inflammation, and discharge, 
which he had been accustomed to see from the 
application of Dr Martin's powder. After this, 
he should probably, he tells us, have suspected 
that the powder was not formed from a simple 
root, had not Dr Martin, upon all occasions, 
continued to assure him that it was wholly a 
vegetable preparation. 

|P_179
Dr Martin died in the year 1784; and, a few 
weeks after his death, Dr Rush procured from 
one of his administrators a few ounces of the 
powder, with the view of examining it minute- 
ly. Upon throwing the powder, which was of 
a brown colour, upon a piece white paper, he 
could distinctly perceive a number of white 
particles scattered thro' it. He at first suspected 
that these were corrosive sublimate, but the usual 
tests of that metallic salt soon convinced him that 
he was mistaken. Reflecting that arsenic was the 
basis of most of the celebrated cancer-powders 
that have been used in the world, he had next 
recourse to the tests for detecting it. Upon 
sprinkling a small quantity of the powder on live 
coals, it emitted the smell of garlic, a well known 
test of arsenic, so perceptibly, as to be known 
by several persons whom he called into the 
room where he made the experiment, and who 
knew nothing of the object of his inquiries. As 
a second test, he picked out from the powder 
three or four grains of the white particles; these 
he bound between two pieces of copper, which 
he threw into the fire. After the pieces of cop- 
per became red hot, they were taken out; and, 
when they were cooled, it appeared that an evi- 
|P_180
dent whiteness was imparted to both of them. 
To these two he added still a third test. He in- 
fused a small quantity of the powder in a solu- 
tion of vegetable alkali in water, for a few 
hours, and then poured it upon a solution of 
blue vitriol in water. The colour of the vitriol 
was immediately changed to a beautiful green, 
and afterwards precipitated. From all these 
tests then, there could remain no doubt that 
Dr Martin's powder contained a proportion of 
arsenic, which probably was its active basis. 

Dr Rush concludes this paper with a few 
remarks upon this powder, and upon the cure 
of cancers and foul ulcers of all kinds. He 
observes, that the use of caustics, in cancers 
and foul ulcers, is a very ancient and universal 
practice; and he believes arsenic to be the most 
efficacious of any that has ever been used. The 
great art of applying it successfully, is to dilute 
and mix it in such a manner as to mitigate the 
violence of its action; and he thinks Dr Mar- 
tin's composition was happily calculated for this 
purpose. 

He thinks that the arsenic used by Dr Mar- 
tin was the pure white arsenicr; and he conjec- 
tures, that the proportion which it bore to the 
|P_181
vegetable powder, could not be more than one 
fortieth part of the compound. He thinks 
that the vegetable matter, used in the powder 
given to him, was the root and berries of the 
solanum lethale. But he has reason to believe 
that Dr Martin employed different vegetable 
substances at different times. 

He is of opinion, that Dr Martin's want of 
success in many cases arose from his using it 
indiscriminately in all cases. He thinks, that 
in schirrous and cancerous tumours, the knife 
should always be preferred to the caustic. And 
in cancerous ulcers, attended with a scrophulous 
habit of body, such particularly as have their 
seat in the breasts of females, it can only, he 
thinks, protract the patient's misery. Most of 
the cancers which Dr Martin cured by it were 
seated on the nose, or cheeks, or upon the sur- 
face or extremities of the body. 

It is not, he tells us, in cancerous cases only, 
that Dr Martin's powder has been found to do 
service. He has seen this powder used with 
advantage in sores of all kinds, and from a va- 
riety of causes, when they have been attended 
with fungous flesh, and callous edges. 

Every one conversant in practice well knows 
|P_182
that these affections, which this remedy is said 
to combat, are frequently of the most obstinate 
nature. And although, as Dr Rush justly re- 
marks, we are not indiscriminately to expect 
from its use the cure of every cancer, yet if 
it be attended with advantage in the cases which 
he has pointed out, the labour he has bestowed 
in the investigation of it must be an acceptable 
and important service to the public. 

