

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v11_0298^]

|P_298
[}II. }]
[}The History of a case of Hydrocephalus termi- 
nating fatally, after a salivation was ex- 
cited by the use of Mercury. By Dr Wil- 
liam Lee Perkins physician at Kingston 
upon Thames. }]
ON Tuesday (Jan. 10. 1786), I was called 
to see Miss L—, a child two years 
and a half old. This was the sixth day of 
her illness, at least of that which seemed to 
require any attention; though she had been ob- 
served to be drooping, or slightly ailing, at 
times, for near three months before. The 
symptoms were as follow. 

Pulse weak, quick, (140 in a minute); con- 
siderable heat of the skin: Frequent red flush- 
|P_299
ings in the face; sickness of the stomach, 
and retching: Slight stupor; from which, 
whenever she was roused to take either food 
or medicine, she took both with great greedi- 
ness. The pupils of the eyes very much di- 
lated, and continued so in the strongest light: 
She was likewise quite blind, and had been so for 
two days past; the blindness being preceded 
by a strabismus or squinting. Some stools were 
passed this and the preceding day, sometimes 
of a green, sometimes of a dark colour. Three 
teeth were now discovered, just come through 
the gums, and another seemed very near 
through: The tongue and mouth were moist 
and clean. 

From the principal appearances above- 
mentioned, I did not hesitate immediately to 
declare to the parents my opinion, that the 
disease was occasioned by water collected in 
the ventricles of the brain. 

She had been purged several times; and 
had blisters applied about the head and neck, 
some of which now discharged copiously. 

Apprehending the cause of the disease to be 
as before observed, and finding no good ef- 
fect from what had been hitherto applied, I 
|P_300
determined to make trial of the method re- 
commended in the Medical Commentaries by 
Dr Dobson and Dr Percival; regretting the 
want of an opportunity for an earlier and 
more satisfactory trial. I directed, however, 
that one grain of calomel should be given once 
in six hours; and that one scruple of the strongest 
mercurial ointment should be carefully rubbed 
into the legs and thighs morning and evening. 

Jan. 11th, She had taken four grains of ca- 
lomel, and had three scruples of the ointment 
rubbed in. All the symptoms much the 
same. 

12th, She had taken only three grains more 
of calomel, her mouth being fast shut, so that 
nothing could be got down after yesterday 
noon; although she had been once sensible in 
the night, and spoken: The ointment was 
therefore directed to be rubbed in thrice a- 
day, and a nutritive clyster to be injected once 
in four or five hours. The right-eye was this 
day observed to be somewhat inflamed, and 
the flesh of the face felt rigid. 

13th, The pulse very irregular; sometimes 
slower, sometimes quicker, fluctuating be- 
tween 80 and 160, with frequent red flush- 
|P_301
ings of the face: The pupils of the eyes more 
contracted; but still blind. The other eye 
was this day inflamed; a difficulty of breath- 
ing came on; and the symptoms in general 
were more unfavourable, and indeed seemed 
to indicate a gradual tendency to dissolution. 
The ptyalism came on this day. 

14th, The ptyalism copious; respiration 
still laborious. Convulsions had come on last 
night, which lasted two hours; and she moan- 
ed much and loud: She had one stool: No- 
thing could be got down by the mouth. The 
nourishing clysters were continued, and a 
small quantity of the ointment rubbed in. 

15th, The convulsions and moanings came 
on again this morning about six o'clock, and 
continued till between nine and ten: The 
ptyalism copious : The right-arm was of a 
blackish purple colour; and she died the same 
day. 

Throughout the whole of her illness, at 
least that part of it which I saw, she lay in a 
stupor, or state of insensibility, without any 
of those shriekings which are so often observed 
to happen in the last stage of this disorder. 

After death the head was opened, and up- 
|P_302
wards of four ounces of water were found to 
have been collected in the superior ventricles 
of the brain, which gushed out with great 
force on cutting into them. 

