

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v11_0295^]

|P_295
[}I. }]
[}The History of a Case of Universal Latent Can- 
cer. By Dr Richard Kentish physician at 
Huntingdon. }]
IHave lately had a very singular case of 
universal latent cancer. Mrs K—g, a 
maiden lady, aged 64, had long been troubled 
with pains in the hip, thighs, back, and other 
parts of the body. These were treated as ner- 
vous spasms. She took immense quantities of 
bark; used sea-bathing; but found her com- 
plaints aggravated. She was the patient of an 
eminent physician at Cambridge. 

|P_296
Her pains became so violent, and her ema- 
ciation so great, that she was not expected to 
live many days, when I was desired to visit 
her. I found her a perfect skeleton. She had 
a great degree of hectic fever, but no one 
symptom of nervous debility. On inquiry, I 
found that she had suffered amputation of a 
cancerous breast about two years before the 
commencement of her present complaints. She 
had a small tumour on the lower maxilla, 
which, on examination, appeared to me an 
exostosis: She had likewise small tumours of 
the same nature on the os frontis; and she 
complained of a stiffness in the neck, which, 
she said, certainly arose from a sudden turn of 
her head in bed: but I found a small glandu- 
lar tumour in this place. What will appear 
rather extraordinary, is, that my patient care- 
fully concealed several other tumours, which, 
at my future visits, were observed. The in- 
guinal glands were considerably enlarged, and 
the whole occiput filled with exostoses of va- 
rious sizes; the maxillary glands were dis- 
eased, and above the left clavicle were knotty 
swellings as large as small nutmegs. 

No disease appeared near the seat of the ex- 
|P_297
tirpated mamma: but the ribs on that side, 
together with the sternum, were protruded; 
and the glands under the adjoining axilla were 
enlarged. 

I put my patient on a course of cicuta, to 
which I joined merc. calc. to the extent of a 
quarter of a grain daily. 

She appeared to receive benesit: the tu- 
mour on the chin lessened. But one morning, 
as she was turning round, her thigh-bone 
cracked, and was one of the completest frac- 
tures which I ever saw. Mr Mackie (the 
surgeon) said the ends felt gritty, like diseased 
bone. 

From this period, my patient grew daily 
weaker and weaker: She continued her me- 
dicines; and took to the amount of eighteen 
grains or one scruple of the extr. cicutæ every 
night, with an anodyne draught. The merc. 
calc. was occasionally omitted and repeated: 
She had a decoction of Peruvian bark and sar- 
saparilla, which was seldom omitted; but, at 
the end of about three months from the time 
I first visited her, she died. 

On examination, almost every gland appear- 
ed diseased; and I have no doubt that the 
|P_298
bones were all affected with cancer. A callus 
seemed to have been imperfectly formed; but 
she did not live long enough after the frac- 
ture for the formation of a proper union. 

