

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v12_0322^]

|P_322
[}III. }]
[}Two Cases of Ulcer in the Cheek, with which 
the Salivary Duct communicated, cured. By 
Mr Thomas Gill Surgeon, Prescot, Lan- 
cashire. }]
ABOUT the end of August 1778, Mrs 
Cooper of St Helen's, in this county, 
several years married, consulted me concern- 
ing a tumour on the cheek, which she percei- 
ved about two years before. It had gradual- 
ly enlarged, and was now of the bulk of a 
middle-sized walnut; and of late it had be- 
come very painful. The skin appeared a 
little inflamed; but, wishing a more perfect 
suppuration to come on, the part was cover- 
ed with Boerhaave's emp. nigr. 

On the 7th of September she applied again; 
and the suppuration being now sufficiently ad- 
vanced, the tumour was opened with a lan- 
|P_323
cet; and, after having pressed out some pus, 
I discovered a discharge of saliva. 

This immediately called to my mind the 
case related in the 2d Volume of Medical 
Essays of Edinburgh, by the late Dr Monro. 

The cure by seton appearing to me very 
troublesome, both to the patient and surgeon, 
I determined to make trial of caustic. With 
this view, after ascertaining with a probe the 
course and length of the sinus, I introduced 
a proper-sized piece of the trochisci e minio, 
and retained it in the sinus by means of dry 
lint and adhesive plaster, which were occasi- 
nally renewed. 

The eschar was suffered to separate with- 
out the application of any force; and, after 
its separation, I was much pleased to find an 
entire stop put to the salivary discharge. By 
the application of superficial dressings, and ta- 
king care to prevent an uneven cicatrix, the 
cure was completed. 

Some time after, another woman having 
heard of Mrs Cooper's case, applied to me on 
account of an ulcer in the cheek. She had 
been under the care of a surgeon for a consi- 
derable time; but could not get it healed. 
|P_324
On examination, I found that there was a 
discharge of saliva from the ulcer; and treated 
it exactly after the same manner with the 
preceding case. The cure was performed 
with the same ease. 

As the trochisci e minio, had recourse to 
in the above cases, are not noticed in the last 
London and Edinburgh Pharmacopœias, it 
may be proper to specify the formula. 

℞ Minii semunciam. 
Merc. corrosiv. subl. unciam unam. 
Micæ panis—uncias quatuor. 
Aq. rosarum q. s. f. massa formandis 
trochiscis idonea. 

The troches are rolled into sticks of differ- 
ent lengths and thickness, and of a conical 
form. 

