

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v12_0366^]

|P_366
[}VIII. }]
[}A Letter from Dr Graham at Stirling to Dr 
Henry Galloway, giving an account of vio- 
lent Pains from a particular Species of 
Worm under the Skin. Communicated to Dr 
Duncan. }]
IN the month of August last I was consulted 
in the case of John Stewart, a young 
gentleman about twelve years of age, in the 
country of Appin. For some time past he 
had been afflicted with excruciating pains in 
his limbs, and other parts, to such a degree 
as to render his life completely miserable. 
This was ascribed to his having got his 
cloaths drenched with rain in a boat as he 
was fishing in the night-time. Believing his 
case to be entirely rheumatic (which I still 
think it was in some degree), I could do little 
more, at so great a distance from medical 
|P_367
help, than to direct him to be wrapped in 
flannel, and to blister the parts occasionally 
which were most pained. 

In January last I received a letter from his 
father, dated the 17th of that month; of which 
the following is an extract: 

I am now favoured with both your let- 
ters; by which I find you prescribe no 
kind of medicines for my son, who stands 
much in need of relief; this very day be- 
ing one of his worst. But one thing 
has happened to him which I dare say 
will surprise you. About eight days ago 
he discharged two worms; the one from 
his breast, the other from his knee. For 
some hours before, he was like to go di- 
stracted with racking pain in both places. 
Ever since he had some respite till this 
day. We have one of the worms preser- 
ved in spirits. It is near an inch long, all 
in joints in the back, with a hard scale on 
it. I am positive he has more of them, 
from the manner of his complaint now. 
Pray have you any knowledge of these 
creatures? Or is there any assistance can 
be given in getting quit of them? I am 
|P_368
positive he has the rheumatism, with this 
unlucky addition. 

In answer to this I wrote, that the boy had 
probably slept on the grass, or been otherwise 
exposed to some kind of flies, which, piercing 
the skin, had lodged their ova in the punc- 
ture. These being hatched, and the maggots 
come to maturity, and now probably ready 
to become aureliæ, they made their way 
through the skin in search of a proper place 
where they might undergo that change; and 
that, consequently, I hoped he would soon be 
entirely freed from his troublesome guests. 
Meanwhile, I asked the favour of the father 
to send me a few of the worms. 

In another letter, dated 24th January, he 
says, Since I wrote my last, another worm 
came out of Jack's knee, of which I was 
an eye-witness, attended with racking pains. 
The pain got to his head two days ago, 
and so swelled it that he sees but a little in 
one eye. Last night he was blistered be- 
hind his neck; but no relief as yet. In 
short, he is in a miserable situation, and 
has lost his appetite entirely. 

Soon after this he discharged another worm 
|P_369
from above his eye, and others from different 
places; all, so far as I could learn, such as 
are exposed to the air, and to which the flies 
might have had access. 

A few days ago I had another letter, dated 
the 15th April; which says, Jack is still 
tormented with vehement pain in the foot 
and knee alternately; and the cold water 
is the only thing which gives him ease. 
No swelling: and, even in the time of the 
pain, he can suffer it to be rubbed hard; 
which he could not do when discharging 
the worms. And the pain is now quite 
different from what it was at that time. 
I send a small vial with three of the worms. 
These I now send you, together with a dried 
one in another vial, which appears to be of 
the same kind, and which I received on the 
15th of February last. It was discharged 
from another young man in the western parts 
of Perthshire: And I have heard of several 
other boys in the Highlands, who were af- 
flicted with the same disorder this last win- 
ter. 

