

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v12_0370^]

|P_370
[}IX. }]
[}A Letter to Dr Duncan from Mr Thomas Ha- 
milton Student of Medicine at Edinburgh; 
on the benefit of Cyder in the cure of Dropsy, 
and on the induction of artificial Emphy- 
sema. }]
YOUR communicating to the world what- 
ever regards the restoration of health 
to mankind, or whatever may contribute to 
the advancement of any branch of medical 
science, prompts me thus to lay before you a 
fact respecting the cure of dropsy, which a 
few days ago, I had the happiness of hearing 
you speak of, with so much precision and 
judgment. I am induced to mention this 
practice, as you did not take notice of it in 
your lecture: and perhaps (in this country, 
where the article is little made use of, and in 
general but little known unless at some parti- 
|P_371
cular taverns in the summer season) it has 
never had a fair and candid trial by indivi- 
duals or practitioners. The article to which 
I allude is the liberal use of cyder, as practi- 
sed with very great success among the com- 
mon people of Devonshire; a county in Eng- 
land where it very much abounds, and is to 
be had in the greatest perfection, and cheap- 
er than small-beer. I can with confidence 
aver, that I have seen cures performed by it, 
where no other medicine or regimen had 
been used, and that too in the advanced state 
of anasarca or general dropsy: And it sel- 
dom fails in local or partial dropsies, in the 
incipient or advanced states. It is drunk of 
plentifully, perhaps to the amount of two or 
three English quarts a-day. Here is then a 
very large quantity of fluid taken, in one day, 
which must, in some measure, invalidate the 
prevailing opinion, that the profuse use of 
fluids is pernicious in this disease. 

In what particular manner this medicine 
operates, I will not presume to say, as I on- 
ly mean to mention the fact. But, with all 
deference and submission to your superior 
|P_372
judgment, I shall, with the utmost diffidence, 
offer you my opinion. 

In so far only as the disease depends either 
upon a local or general relaxation or debility, 
or a loss of tone and power in the absorbent 
system, or when the exhalant is so redundant 
as to overpower the absorbent functions, 
when there is no suspicion of scirrhus in any 
of the viscera, or when the disease has not 
been ushered in by jaundice, it may, in some 
measure, depend on its cooling astringency, 
having a most peculiarly grateful cordial aci- 
dity, of which those patients are particularly 
greedy. Perhaps it may operate gently in 
the way of diuresis and catharsis; or as sti- 
mulating the absorbent system in general. 
But if conjoined in the way of regimen or 
drink, along with those very powerful reme- 
dies you mentioned, I doubt not of the hap- 
piest success attending it. It allays the im- 
moderate thirst, and prevents the desire for 
liquids; which alone is a great object. Thus 
it may be substituted for other drinks, and be 
a convenient vehicle for other medicines, as 
the bark, &c. 

I here, likewise, take the liberty of offer- 
|P_373
ing you a hint respecting the nature of em- 
physema; which only serves further to cor- 
roborate your opinion of the nature of that 
disease. Though the natural disease has ne- 
ver occurred to me, I have seen the artificial 
one in the highest perfection, and in the living 
human body too. This odd sort of lan- 
guage may perhaps startle you a little. It is 
a practice, though happily not a common one, 
and as happily little known among the vul- 
gar. But there are a few who know it, and 
turn it very much to their advantage; I mean 
among seamen and soldiers. For there is, per- 
haps, no set of men (excepting slaves) who have 
more frequently recourse to imposition, and 
who are more skilled in producing diseases. 
These men make a small puncture or incision 
into the cellular membrane of the scrotum, 
into which they introduce a blow-pipe, and 
inflate the whole scrotum to a most enormous 
size, exactly resembling a rupture; and this 
extends up the inguen to the insertion of the 
chord. This they practise to obtain their 
discharges from the service. And thus the 
skill and judgment of surgeons, in both army 
and navy, are doubly employed, in the de- 
|P_374
tection of imposture, and the cure and disco- 
very of real disease; which every charitable 
man must allow is not always in the power 
of any human being. I had this confession 
from one whom I was employed to examine 
as an object for invaliding; whose answers 
to the questions I put to him, respecting his 
disease, were so evasive and contradictory, as to 
lead me to suspect a falacy, which I at length 
detected. 

