

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v13_0096^]

|P_96
[}VII. }]
[}Remarkable Efsects of Cantharides in paralytic 
Affections. By J. Vaughan, M. D. and 
Physician to the Leicester Infirmary. Vide
Memoirs of the Medical Society of London, 
Vol. I. 8vo, London.}]
DR Vaughan very justly observes, that, 
while paralytic affections are very 
common, they are frequently not to be o- 
vercome by the utmost efforts of art. 
Hence, any remedy, which promises to be 
useful in so dreadful a malady, will be receiv- 
ed both with candour and thankfulness by 
the medical world. The remedy which Dr 
Vaughan here recommends, is cantharides, 
taken in substance. Many cases of this dis- 
ease have, he tells us, occurred to him, in 
which he has employed this remedy internal- 
ly, both with sasety and advantage. And to 
recommend it to the attention of others, he 
|P_97
here presents us with one of the most impor- 
tant of many cases which have come under 
his cognizance. 

A lusty and healthy young man, in the 
twenty-first year of his age, being violently 
heated, threw himself on the ground, and 
fell fast asleep. At the end of some hours, 
he was found utterly incapable of voluntary 
motion, senseless, with great coldness of the 
limbs, and of the surface of the body. He 
was deprived of the power of speech, and 
his water flowed involuntarily. In this state, 
his friends applied to an apothecary for as- 
sistance, who bled him, gave him a purge, 
and applied a blister to his back. After the 
operation of these medicines, Dr Vaughan 
found him with a very considerable degree 
of stupor, a frequent, unequal respiration, 
and a very small and feeble pulse. 

On the 28th of March, as he had not had 
a stool for some days, a warm, stimulating 
clyster, with a proportion of sacred tincture, 
and tincture of jallap, was immediately admi- 
nistered. The whole head was covered with 
a blister, as was also the sacrum: And a vo- 
latile lineament, with more than the usual 
|P_98
quantity of caustic volatile alkali, was applied 
to the pubis, to the spine, and to the lower 
extremities. A bolus, consisting of a scruple 
of volatile salt, and as much of the cardiac 
electuary, with a grain of cantharides in 
powder, was ordered to be taken once every 
six hours, and to be washed down with a 
strong infusion of valerian, horse-radish, 
mustard seed, and canella alba. This plan 
was continued for three successive days, with- 
out producing any visible effect. 

On the 31st of March, the volatile salt, 
and cordial electuary, were each increas- 
ed to the quantity of half a dram, and the 
grain of cantharides was added as before. 
But, instead of being given only once in six 
hours, it was ordered to be repeated every 
three hours, with the infusion as before di- 
rected. 

On the 4th of April, as no material change 
had taken place in his disease, ten grains 
more of the volatile salt, and a second grain 
of cantharides were added to each bolus; 
and this dose was directed to be repeated e- 
very three or four hours, until some manifest 
effect was produced. This plan was pursued 
|P_99
till the 6th of April. But, on the evening 
of that day, he became very restless. He 
was able to toss himself about; and, although 
he could not articulate any words, yet he 
made a great noise, expressive of much pain, 
frequently applying his hand to the region of 
the pubis, as if that were the part more par- 
ticularly aggrieved. The blister was now re- 
moved from his head, and the part washed 
clean. A poultice of bread and milk, with 
some oil, was applied to the blistered part of 
the sacrum, and his medicines were omitted. 
In place of these, he was directed to drink 
freely of barley-water, with gum-arabic. In 
three day after this, all these painful symp- 
toms were entirely removed: He was be- 
come quite sensible: He could retain his 
water: And the day following, he could 
stand, when supported by two people. But 
his countenance betrayed strong marks of 
the injury the brain had sustained, and be- 
spoke a degree of fatuity. 

On the 9th of April, he was directed to 
take once every eight hours, a bolus with a 
scruple of guaiacum, as much volatile salt, and 
and one grain of cantharides, drinking with 
|P_100
it an infusion of valerian. A seton was made 
in his neck, and stimulating plasters were 
applied to the soles of his feet. He conti- 
nued in this course till the 21st of April, 
mending every day. He felt no inconveni- 
ence from the cantharides taken to this quan- 
tity: he slept well; ate his food with appe- 
tite; and his bowels did their office with 
regularity. His intellectual faculties, how- 
ever, were much impaired. He had for- 
gotten how to walk, and he had even his 
letters to learn again. Nothing which had 
passed from the time of his first seizure, had 
left the smallest impression on his mind. 

But, in proportion as he gained strength, 
his mental faculties were restored. He could 
soon walk with the aid of a stick: but his 
limbs were feeble; and he still continued to 
drag them after him: and he had for some 
time little use of his left hand and arm. It 
was however observable, that he gained 
something every day. By the 4th of May, 
he was able to walk tolerably well; but 
the weakness of the left hand and arm still 
continued, though not to so great a degree. 
He was now ordered an aromatic electuary 
|P_101
with steel, and a warm decoction of Peru- 
vian bark, to which was joined the daily 
use of the cold bath. During the use of 
these remedies, his progress to recovery con- 
tinued; and, by the 12th of May, nothing 
remained of his disease, excepting a trifling 
weakness in his left hand. He soon after 
recovered the entire use of this organ also, 
and had no longer occasion for any medical 
assistance. 

Although we must own that we cannot al- 
together adopt Dr Vaughan's opinion, in 
considering this case as a decided example of 
the benefit to be reaped from the canthari- 
des in palsy; yet it at least serves to shew, 
that in certain situations, and with some ha- 
bits, this article may be taken to a very con- 
siderable extent with impunity: And, when 
taken in conjunction with the experience Dr 
Vaughan has had of the benefit of cantharides 
in other cases of paralysis, it should at least 
lead to further trials of their employment in 
that affection, when it obstinately resists other 
modes of cure. Of the practice here recom- 
mended, we have ourselves no experience. 
We have indeed seen cantharides, even in 
|P_102
substance, taken internally, both in diabetic 
cases, and likewise with the view of increas- 
ing the quantity of urine in dropsical affec- 
tions. But in some of these instances, where 
it was taken to a much less quantity than in 
this case, and where it had no influence ei- 
ther as augmenting or diminishing the dis- 
charge of urine, it induced, probably from 
its action on the neck of the bladder, such 
violent strangurious affections, as to give 
very great distress to the patient: And, as 
similar effects may take place in paraly- 
tic cases, without being in any degree ad- 
vantageous to the patient, it should always 
be employed with great caution. When in- 
convenience arises from its stimulating too 
much, Dr Vaughan directs the immediate 
suspension of its use: And he tells us, that 
by this means, and allowing at the same 
time the free use of milk and water as a 
diluent, any troublesome symptoms it occa- 
sions are soon removed. 

Dr Vaughan observes, in a note, that the 
dose of volatile salt which he gave in this case, 
two scruples, viz. every three hours, may seem 
to be rather large: But he mentions another 
|P_103
case, in which he employed it to the extent of 
half an ounce, dissolved in half a pint of 
water-gruel, taken fasting. This dose was, 
he tells us, continued for three weeks, with- 
out producing any effect, either good or bad. 
The patient only observed, that it heated the 
fauces, and warmed the stomach, for a short 
time after it was taken. To determine whe- 
ther it had produced any change in the com- 
mon mass of fluids, he ordered some blood to 
be drawn from the arm. The blood was of 
a more florid colour than usual; but its tex- 
ture was not in the least broken. On the 
contrary, after it had been allowed to stand 
for many hours, he thought that it yielded 
less serum than common, and that the crassa- 
mentum was rather firmer than ordinary. 
This fact may be considered as a strong evi- 
dence, that it has not all those effects upon 
the circulating mass, which some are disposed 
to imagine. 

