

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v13_0086^]

|P_86
[}V. }]
[}An Account of two Persons having a Broncho- 
cele, wherein the use of Burnt Sponge appear- 
ed to have a very considerable Effect. By 
Timothy Lane, F. R. S. }]
THE first case here related, is that of a 
young lady in the seventeenth year of 
her age. She applied to Mr Lane, in Janu- 
ary 1764, for a Bronchocele, which she had 
perceived growing fox about twelve months. 
Mr Lane had, at first, recourse to a powder, 
consisting of millepedes, and the mercurius 
alcalizatus, and to a solution of soluble tartar. 
These medicines were continued for about 
three weeks, without any apparent benefit. 
Mr Lane was then informed, that, in similar 
cases, a lozenge of burnt sponge, placed 
under the tongue at night, when going to 
bed, and remaining there till it gradually dis- 
solved, had been of use. To this remedy 
he resolved to have recourse. To a dram 
|P_87
of burnt sponge, he added as much syrup as 
was necessary to give it the proper consist- 
ence, and divided this quantity into six lozen- 
ges. These had not been continued for a 
month, before the tumour gradually disap- 
peared; and, at the distance of twelve years 
afterwards, when Mr Lane had an opportu- 
nity of seeing her, he found that there never 
had been even the slightest return of her for- 
mer complaint. 

Soon after this, two other patients labour- 
ing under bronchocele, applied to Mr Lane. 
To these, also, he directed the lozenges, 
but without effect: Nor were they more be- 
nefited by any other remedies which he em- 
ployed. But he afterwards recommended 
them to a young lady in the fifteenth year of 
her age, having a bronchocele, where the 
tumour was on the right side of the neck 
only. To her, also, the lozenges of burnt 
sponge were directed. When she first began 
the use of them, she found them trouble- 
some, as it was unusual for her to keep any 
thing in her mouth in that way. But in a 
short time she selt no inconvenience from 
them, and went even to sleep before they 
|P_88
were dissolved. After she had used the lo- 
zenges for about three weeks, she com- 
plained of headach. As Mr Lane supposed 
this to arise from costiveness, he directed 
some infusion of senna, which relieved her. 
In the space of a month, the tumour began 
to decrease; and, by the time she had con- 
tinued the lozenges for four months, it was 
entirely gone, although it had been of two 
years standing before she began the use of 
them. Since their use, she has had no return 
of her complaint. 

In the former case, since different reme- 
dies were employed, Mr Lane observes, 
that it may perhaps be a matter of some 
doubt, whether the cure was to be attribut- 
ed to the sponge. But in this case, as no 
other remedy was taken, he thinks there 
can be little doubt of its esficacy. From 
the facts which are here collected, it appears, 
that the sponge, employed in this manner, is 
not always successful. But in a disease so 
obstinate, it is of no small importance to be 
acquainted with a remedy which will some- 
times succeed. 

|P_89
In a former volume of these Commenta- 
ries, the employment of burnt sponges, in a 
different manner, for the cure of broncho- 
cele, is recommended as used by Dr Bate of 
Coventry; and our readers will sind a full 
account of his mode of giving it, in Mr Wil- 
mer's Cases in Surgery. It is probable, that 
as little of the esficacy of this article depends 
on its being used at night only, and taken in 
a very gradual manner, as is directed in Mr 
Lane's mode of exhibiting it, as on its being 
employed in the wane of the moon, the 
time prescribed for using it in that of Dr Bate. 
But if further experience shall demonstrate, t 
hat a good effect does result from its em- 
ployment, it will probably also ascertain the 
best mode of exhibiting it. And the facts 
here related, should at least induce practi- 
tioners to future trials, by which its esficacy 
will either be confirmed, or the fallacy re- 
futed. 

