

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v13_0313^]

|P_313
[}VI. }]
[}Some Observations on the Endemic Fever of the 
Coast of Guinea; and on the Occurrence of 
Small-pox a few days after birth. By Mr 
William Rait, Surgeon, Dundee. }]
[}1. }]
THE bilious fever, of which I am about 
to speak, is the fatal endemic of the 
Torrid Zone. It may be fitly divided into 
two stages, the inflammatory and the putrid. 
With certain causes co-operating, it attacks 
all ages and constitutions. But it is particu- 
larly the bane of the young, vigorous, and 
plethoric; of those whose blood is in a state 
most liable to favour and produce obstruc- 
tions. 

The causes most obvious in producing bili- 
ous sever are, first, violent exercise in, or ex- 
posure to the sun's heat; drinking of ardent 
|P_314
spirits, or any thing that causes a copious per- 
spiration, provided it gets a sudden check, by 
the application of cold moist air; sudden im- 
mersion in cold water, or sudden exposure to 
the dew of the evening. 

These are the causes chiefly producing it 
in the young and plethoric. But the aged 
and infirm must be acted upon in a different 
way, to produce the same disease. Their 
fibres are naturally lax, and the texture of 
their blood dissolved; consequently, they are 
more liable to be acted on by slighter causes, 
than would produce the same symptoms in 
younger subjects. 

In the first set, viz. the young and pletho- 
ric, it generally attacks with violent symptoms 
of inflammation and determination to the 
head; pains in the region of the loins; nau- 
sea, costiveness, great thirst, and the pulse is 
hard and quick. In the second set, viz. The 
aged and infirm, it attacks with symptoms of 
nervous atonia; great and sudden prostration 
of strength; dejection of spirits ; the pulse 
small, quick and fluttering; palpitations, and 
frequent deliquium animi. 

|P_315
The indications of cure are, first, To lessen 
the momentum of the blood by proper eva- 
cuations: and that is first to be done by bleed- 
ing plentifully from a large orifice, from which 
we may often observe the most instantaneous 
good effects. Yet I would not advise the use 
of the lancet beyond ten hours from the first 
attack; as the violent momentum soon loosens 
the texture of the red globules, and hurries 
them and the whole mass of fluids into a state 
of putrefaction. The use of a warm semicu- 
pium is also sometimes of advantage; but for 
the above reason, it should not be employed 
later than the lancet. 

2dly, To evacuate the primæ viæ of sordes 
lodged there, which is best effected by anti- 
monial preparations; and the best of that 
class, in my opinion, is the tartarus antimo- 
nialis. 

3dly, To evacuate the redundant bile; 
which is best done by small doses of antimo- 
nial tartar and neutral salts, and plentiful di- 
lution with mild teas and gruels. 

4thly, To desend the primæ viæ and in- 
testines from the acrimony of the bile. For 
|P_316
this purpose, 1 have generally used mucilagi- 
nous and oily glysters. 

With this treatment, we may commonly be 
able to procure a slight remission the second 
or third day. Then the practitioner should 
not, even for a moment, delay throwing in the 
Peruvian bark. If the stomach will easily 
bear it, he may throw in the bark at the rate 
of half an ounce, or more, every hour. I would 
also advise the copious use of the vegetable 
acid, and juices of ripe fruits, as oranges, &c. 

Provided the bark binds, and occasions a 
disagreeable weight at the stomach, it will be 
necessary to add to each dose a few grains of 
pulv. rhæi. If, on the contrary, it passes off 
freely by stool, I would by no means check it 
for a little time: The practitioner will al- 
ways have that in his power, as by adding a 
few drops of tinct. Thebaic. he will soon 
conquer the bark's tendency downwards. 

These are the most common indications, 
and the method of cure which I have often 
known to succeed. It generally has a crisis 
by sweat, or diarrhæa, about the ninth or 
eleventh day, but is sometimes protracted till 
the thirteenth, when it leaves the patient in 
|P_317
a state of great debility both of body and 
mind; so great, that I have known patients 
(after the bark and other corroborants have 
been copiously used) incapable of seeing, hear- 
ing, or thinking properly, for a fortnight or 
three weeks; and during that time, their 
imaginations haunted with the most frightful 
ideas and foolish chimeras. Even the terrible 
idea of being hanged, though they endeavour 
to sum up all the little fortitude they were 
then masters of to get rid of, would some- 
times haunt their imaginations, till the gene- 
ral flow of the nervous fluid, and tension of 
the muscular fibres, were restored. 

A very common consequence of bilious 
fever, is swelled ankles, which likewise gene- 
rally subside as the tone of the system is re- 
stored. 

It is impossible to say where the inflamma- 
tory stage ends, and the putrid commences, 
they rush so rapidly into each other. The 
emetic tartar is best calculated for the evacua- 
tion of bilious sordes; for this reason, that it 
acts in a double capacity, by evacuating bile, 
and at the same time determining the cir- 
culating fluids to the surface. 

|P_318
These sew cursory remarks are the result 
of my own practice, particularly on the Coast 
of Guinea, and in the West Indies, when I 
was a very young practitioner. 

[}2. }]
At a time when I was attending a patient 
under inoculation, a lady, whom I also attend- 
ed, was safely delivered of a male child. Two 
or three days after the birth, I was desired 
to look at some spots which appeared on the 
face, neck, and different parts of the body, 
and which alarmed the friends of the infant. 
I immediately pronounced the eruption to be 
that of the small-pox; and in consequence, 
took some pains to watch the progress. 

From some particular circumstances in the 
case of the mother, the child was rather fa- 
tigued than nourished, and the eruption came 
but slowly out. However, it was found at 
last necessary to put the child out to nurse; 
and, providentially, a very healthy one was 
found: in consequence of which, in a few 
days I perceived the eruption (hitherto rather 
|P_319
flat and tardy) put on a very different aspect; 
that of filling up, and maturating kindly. 
The pustules blackened, and went off, in the 
usual manner of the best distinct small-pox. 

I know, that some in the profession are 
prejudiced against the idea of infection taking 
place in utero from the mother. But I con- 
sider this a marked case of that kind, and a 
full proof of the error of such prejudice. 
It is a certain fact, that the small-pox, in the 
natural way, have prevailed in the neighbour- 
hood of the child since it was put to nurse, 
without any new infection or exanthemata mak- 
ing their appearance. 

And I know an old lady (grandmother to 
the said child), who says she was born with 
the small-pox. It is certain, she is now up- 
wards of sixty (in good health), and never 
had any other. 

These facts I humbly mention to you. 
They involve a number of queries, which I 
hope in time will be both put and answered 
by some of your numerous and very ingeni- 
ous correspondents. I only wished to give 
them simply, and without any commentary. 

