

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v14_0302^]

|P_302
[}VII. }]
[}The History of a remarkable Affection of the 
Legs, terminating fatally. Communicated to 
Dr Duncan, in a Letter from Mr B. Wilmer, 
Surgeon in Coventry. }]
IF you should suppose the inclosed case not 
unworthy of a place in the next volume 
of your useful Commentaries, you will do me 
a favour in publishing it there. 

Mr Gaunt, surgeon in Merriden, in the 
county of Warwick, aged fifty-four, about 
twelve years since had a fever of four months 
continuance, which left him deprived of me- 
mory. Notwithstanding this misfortune, he 
continued his business, which was fatiguing, 
and enjoyed an uninterrupted state of good 
health, till the Spring of the year 1787, when 
his appetite for food was become so voracious, 
and he ate and drank to such a degree, that 
|P_303
his friends were apprehensive that some dis- 
agreeable consequences would ensue, and ad- 
vised him, but in vain, to lose blood, to pre- 
vent a fit of apoplexy; of which, from a con- 
stant sleepiness that attended him, they were 
particularly fearful. 

On the 23d of August, in the morning, he 
complained of a great coldness of his feet; 
walked about to visit his patients; and in the 
evening his legs were bathed in warm milk 
and water. He passed the night with in- 
quietude; slept little, although he took seven 
grains of soap-pill at bed-time; and at times 
was slightly delirious. 

On the succeeding day he was sleepy, kept 
his bed, the coldness of his legs continuing; 
and no means that were tried produced any 
warmth in them. 

At this time, the skin was not cold to the 
touch of the person who examined them, and 
he had then neither pain nor numbness in the 
parts. He now took, every six hours, half a 
dram of bark, with twenty grains of snake- 
root. 

Two days from the time he first complained 
of the coldness, he lost the sensation of feel- 
|P_304
ing in both legs; but the skin was not in the 
least discoloured; and he could move his legs 
and feet in all directions. 

Blisters were now applied to the inside of 
each leg: They occasioned a discharge, with- 
out exciting pain. 

On the 2d of September, his brother, a sur- 
geon of Birmingham, was consulted. He or- 
dered the bark to be continued, with the ad- 
dition of confect. cardiaca, and the common 
fomentation to be applied to his legs. A ca- 
taplasm also of oatmeal and beer grounds was 
directed. 

September8th. I was desired to visit him. 
Both his legs at this time were dead, and cold 
as marble. At the parts where the blisters 
had been applied, and the epidermis removed, 
the rete mucosum had assumed a chocolate co- 
lour; but, in other respects, the skin of the 
limbs was not discoloured, but had exactly the 
same pallid appearance as those of a man who 
had been dead three or four days. 

I applied the point of a knife to the skin in 
various parts, without his being sensible of ir. 
About an inch above each knee he felt the 
knife; and the skin was there warm. These 
|P_305
circumstances marked the extent of the morti- 
fication, for the eye could not perceive where 
it terminated. He could move both his legs 
from the bed with ease. His pulse was rather 
quicker than usual, but without hardness or in- 
termission. His urine and stools, in quantity 
and quality, were natural. Upon enquiring 
into the state of his appetite, he informed me, 
that he had, on that day, dined on cold roast- 
ed beef and cucumber. 

September10th. I visited him again. He 
complained then of some pain about his knees. 
Applying my hand to one of them, the skin 
there was warmer than usual; and, for the ex- 
tent of some inches down each leg, the integu- 
ments had the appearance of returning life. 
Below the calf of each leg, the skin was be- 
coming green; and, nearer the feet, had as- 
sumed a complexion of various shades, from a 
light green to a faint yellow. His pulse now 
intermitted, about one stroke in ten. His tongue 
was furred; and he had been, at intervals during 
the night, delirious. On the outside of the 
left thigh, the integuments shewed a disposi- 
tion to gangrene, and were discoloured for a 
considerable extent. He answered all the que- 
|P_306
stions that were asked him rationally; seemed 
persectly sensible of his dangerous situation, 
and begged I would publish his case. 

12th. The gangrene of the left thigh had 
increased much, and covered more than half 
the surface of the vastus externus muscle. He 
was weaker and worse in every respect. 

14th: The disease had spread rapidly. The 
gangrenous disposition had increased in the left 
thigh, and appeared in the right. He was 
very low, and delirious; and, at ten o'clock at 
night, he died. 

I shall forbear to relate to you the various 
remedies, internal and external, which I re- 
commended in this extraordinary case; be- 
cause, as they were ineffectual, it would be em- 
ploying your time to no useful purpose. 

