

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v14_0037^]

|P_37
[}II. }]
[}Æthusæ Cynapii in Corpore Humano Effectus no- 
civus. Auctore Rudolpho Buchhave, M. D. 
Vide Acta Regiæ Societatis Mediæ Hauni- 
ensis. Vol. I. 8vo, Hauniæ.}]
SOON after the publication of Dr Stoërk 
had celebrated the praises of Cicuta, and 
led to its employment over almost all Europe, 
very different opinions came to be entertained 
of its effects; and in particular, it was often 
accused of producing alarming, and even dan- 
gerous consequences. These, Dr Buchhave 
thinks, may not unfrequently proceed from the 
Æthusa Cynapium, the Cicely or Fool's Pars- 
ley, as it is called in English, being mixed with 
the conium maculatum, or common hemlock, 
the article recommended by Dr Stoërk. To 
this opinion our author is led, from some cases 
which fell under his own observation; and these 
he relates in the paper before us. 

|P_38
The first case, is that of a widow, about forty 
 years of age, who had been long afflicted with 
carcinomatous ulcers of her face and neck, pour- 
ing forth a very fœtid ichor, and, although sur- 
rounded by callous edges, yet gradually extend- 
ing to the neighbouring parts. In other re- 
spects she was in good health. Besides laxa- 
tives, Dr Buchhave prescribed for her hemlock 
pills, which she took without any inconvenience 
for the space of two months. But no change 
for the better being produced upon the disease, 
he prescribed the herb of the hemlock, direct- 
ing an ounce of it to be boiled in thirty-two 
ounces of simple water; and of the strained li- 
quor three ounces were ordered to be taken 
daily, in different portions, for the space of 
four or five weeks. But during that time, she 
frequently complained that the draughts of her 
decoction excited tremors, vertigo, headach, 
cholic pains, vomiting, loss of strength, and a- 
version at food. Dr Buchhave, suspecting that 
these might proceed from improper regimen, 
directed strict attention in that particular, and, 
hoping for better effects, admonished her to 
continue the decoction. But being afterwards 
|P_39
informed that consequences still more alarming 
had taken place, particularly violent vomiting 
and severe convulsions, and never having known 
these to proceed from the Conium, he was led 
to examine the plant with which she was fur- 
nished; and he soon found, that a large propor- 
tion of the Æthusa was mixed with the Conium. 
After this she was furnished with genuine and 
unmixed hemlock. Of this she formed a de- 
coction, and took it in the manner before di- 
rected, without any inconvenience. Under the 
use of this, the symptoms above enumerated 
gradually diminished; her strength was daily 
augmented; the malignant ulcers yielded a laud- 
able pus; and, in the space of about eleven 
months, she was completely cured. 

Soon after this, Dr Buchhave was consulted 
about the case of a woman in the country, 
whose whole family had died of consumption. 
She was a little past her twentieth year, and 
had complained for a long time of difficult res- 
piration and dry cough. She had taken a va- 
riety of remedies, without obtaining any relief. 
Suspecting tubercles in the lungs, Dr Buch- 
have had recourse to the Conium, which he di- 
|P_40
rected under the form of decoction, half an 
ounce of the plant being boiled with thirty- 
two ounces of water to two pounds; and she 
was directed to take three ounces of the strain- 
ed liquor every two hours. After it had been 
used with impunity for twenty-four days, she 
became affected with difficult respiration, head- 
ach, cholic pains, nausea, vomiting, lassitude, 
and torpor. Dr Buchhave suspecting a similar 
accident to that formerly mentioned, examined 
the leaves from which the decoction had been 
formed; and here also he could easily distin- 
guish the leaves of the Cicely, mixed with those 
of the Hemlock. To prove beyond doubt that 
the symptoms mentioned above arose from 
the decoction, two other persons took each a 
single ounce of it; and, in the space of a few 
minutes, nausea and cholic pains were excited 
in both. This patient afterwards employed 
the Hemlock, genuine and unmixed, without 
suffering from thence any inconvenience. 

Besides these two, Dr Buchhave relates also 
a third case, that of a young country man, a- 
bout the 20th year of his age. When he ap- 
plied for our author's advice, he was affected 
with venereal ulcers on the palate, nose, and 
|P_41
right cheek. In conjunction with the use of 
some laxative medicines, he was directed to use 
a decoction of Hemlock. He prepared this 
during the Summer from the plant collected in 
his neighbourhood, and used it without any 
inconvenience. But being afterwards obliged 
to purchase it from an apothecary, it induced 
great nausea, vertigo, languor, and a variety 
of other symptoms; and upon examination it 
was found, that here nearly equal parts of the 
Cicely and Hemlock were mixed: but the Hem- 
lock being afterwards procured free from any 
mixture, he took it without any inconvenience; 
and in process of time a complete cure was ob- 
tained. Dr Buckhave is of opinion, that here 
the inconvenience resulting from the Cicely, 
was probably less considerable than would 
otherwise have been the case, from the patient 
having used a milk diet. 

From these cases Dr Buchhave concludes, 
that the bad consequences which some have 
ascribed to Hemlock, are in reality to be attri- 
buted to other plants being mixed with it; and 
he observes, that the different umbellatæ are 
often confounded together, the conium not on- 
ly being mixed with the æthusa, but also with 
|P_42
the cicuta virosa, the chærophyllum, the phæl- 
landrium, and several others. Dr Buchhave 
tells us, that, trusting to extensive experience, 
he can boldly assert, that Hemlock, if it be not 
productive of a good effect, will at least be fol- 
lowed by no bad consequence, even when given 
in large doses. 

