

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v14_0261^]

|P_261
[}I. }]
[}History of a Case of Insanity, cured by the use 
of the Digitalis Purpurea. Communicated 
to Dr Duncan, in a Letter from Dr Joseph 
Mason Cox, at Fishponds, near Bristol. }]
DR WITHERING, in the year 1785, 
having related several cases in which 
the digitalis purpurea succeeded in the cure of 
insanity, and your Commentaries for 1786 
containing two more of the same kind, I was 
induced to try it in one that occurred to me 
lately. 

|P_262
Having observed, from the reports of se- 
veral practitioners who had employed it, that 
the foxglove possessed the peculiar property 
of reducing the pulse, and of occasioning very 
great nausea, I had recourse to it in the case 
I am now to relate, principally as a debili- 
tating power, hoping by its exhibition to bring 
on a remission of a most furious maniacal pa- 
roxysm. I was pleasingly surprised to find 
that the event far exceeded my most sanguine 
expectations; and that by means of this power- 
ful vegetable, I was enabled to restore a very 
valuable member of society to reason, and to 
himself. And as the hint was suggested 
through the channel of your excellent annual 
publication, I have taken the liberty of troub- 
ling you with the particulars of the cafe, 
hoping that you may think it worth commu- 
nicating to the world; as some one of more 
abilities may improve upon the practice, and 
the result may ultimately tend to the benefit 
of mankind. 

Though the medical world cannot but ac- 
knowledge their gratitude to the labour and 
industry of the most skilful anatomists of dif- 
ferent ages, for their dissections and investi- 
|P_263
gations of subjects who have laboured under 
different species of insanity, and for the accu- 
rate and minute histories handed down to us; 
yet it must be sincerely regreted, that the re- 
sult has been by no means adequate to the 
labour. Our knowledge of the human mind, 
and of the connection between it and the 
body, must ever be very limited, while we 
know so little with respect to the destination 
and offices of the several parts of such a com- 
plicated structure as the brain. Haller as- 
serts, that in some cases of insanity no preter- 
natural appearance was observed; and where 
it was discovered, we are so far from being 
able to perceive an uniform connection be- 
tween any one disorder of the mind, and a 
morbid appearance of the contents of the 
scull, that the very fame states are exhibited 
after the most opposite disorders, as phrenzy 
and idiotism. But although, as Dr Arnold 
justly observes, much uncertainty will ever 
attend our researches into the several specific 
states of the brain respectively productive of 
the several sorts of insanity, yet, where we can 
suspect the cause, though we may be ignorant 
of its mode of action in producing the disease 
|P_264
we are authorised, on the most rational prin- 
ciples, to place the greatest hopes of success 
in the administration of those remedies which 
are particularly adapted to obviate its effects. 

It is upon a principle of this kind, that we 
may perhaps account for the influence of the 
digitalis in effecting the several cures imputed 
to it, as well as that I am about to relate. 
Since a superabundance of aqueous or serous 
fluid, extravasated in the different parts of the 
brain, as in the ventricles, between the dura 
and pia mater, &c. have been suspected to be 
the causes of insanity in many instances; 
since we see the effects of water in the brain, 
in cases of hydrocephalus; and since we know 
that the foxglove has a particular power of 
evacuating extravasated fluids, we may from 
thence be led to explain its efficacy in those 
cases, and in that which I am now to relate. 

Mr P. M., aged 40, rather of a corpulent 
habit of body, naturally of a gay and cheerful 
disposition, had for several years enjoyed an 
uninterrupted continuance of health, except- 
ing an occasional pain in the head, which he 
termed a pulsing pain, which however con- 
|P_265
tinued only for a few hours, and left him in 
perfect health. Having by indefatigable in- 
dustry in an active line of business accumu- 
lated an independency, he was induced to re- 
tire, to enjoy the fruits of his labours in ease 
and affluence. But forgetting that the means 
by which he had amassed his fortune, were 
the source from whence he derived health and 
spirits, he quickly became listless and inactive, 
was dejected, peevish, and whimsical, and at 
length his ideas were confused, and his judg- 
ment deluded. He complained of no bodily 
pain, excepting his usual headach, and a stiff- 
ness of his lower extremities, which in the 
evening appeared rather swoln and anasarcous. 
He was habitually costive, and often passed 
several days without a stool. His urine was 
diminished in quantity, and at the same time 
limpid and thin, depositing no sediment. He 
was very subject to acid eructations and bor- 
borygmi; his appetite was impaired, his thirst 
increased, he stept but little. His sleep was 
without refreshment, and accompanied with 
terrifying dreams. 

These were his principal original symptoms; 
and they gradually increased, although the 
|P_266
best medical assistance was procured with 
a view to their removal. At length, from 
a settled melancholy he became most furi- 
ously maniacal; and it was judged proper to 
remove him to some place of confinement. 
He was accordingly committed to my care, on 
the 22d of June last: But, previous to that, 
he had undergone pretty severe medical dis- 
cipline. He had been blistered on the head, 
the back, and the calfs of the legs; he had 
been repeatedly blooded, purged, and vomit- 
ed, and had taken draughts, with gum-ammo- 
niac, sagapenum, tinctura melampodii, steel, &c. 

1 found him very much emaciated, his pulse 
feeble,and beating to eighty and upwards in the 
minute; his countenance sallow, the eyes red, 
sunk, and looking fierce and staring. He had not 
had a stool for a week; and the urine continued 
in small quantity, and pale, notwithstanding 
his debilitated state. His ravings and exer- 
tions required constant confinement and at- 
tendance. Although in general he talked in 
the most incoherent manner, running from 
one subject to another without the least order 
or connection, yet he would reason on some 
topics with the utmost acuteness for a certain 
|P_267
time, but quickly relapse again into his former 
ravings. 

I began my curative attempts by admini- 
stering a laxative emollient clyster: but this 
not succeeding, I had recourse to one more 
stimulating, which brought off several pounds 
of very fœtid fœces. Thinking, from his pre- 
sent debilitated and emaciated state, that the 
antiphlogistic plan had been too rigidly ad- 
hered to, I imagined it would be most pru- 
dent to suspend the use of medicines for a 
few days. But the symptoms suffered no kind 
of remission: he passed day after day in cursing 
and raving, and night after night without 
sleep. I then ordered an emetic solution to 
be prepared, with twelve grains of emetic 
tartar, one grain to be exhibited every half 
hour till it operated. But no obvious effect 
was produced, till ten grains were taken, when 
full vomiting took place. This brought off 
much viscid phlegm, and bile; but no remis- 
sion of symptoms was produced, nor was there 
the least languor after the exertion attending 
the operation of the emetic. His pulse con- 
tinued about eighty, though feeble. As he 
had not enjoyed an hour's sleep during the 
|P_268
whole time he had been under my care, I had 
recourse to repeated doses of opium, under 
the form of paregoric elixir in camphorated 
julep, with the pediluvium continued for an 
hour each night, and a laxative draught every 
morning. Having continued this for a week 
without the least obvious effect, I almost de- 
spaired of relieving him, from his system 
being so exceedingly insensible to the action 
of medicines; which however is no uncom- 
mon case with maniacs. But observing the 
diminished quantity of urine, and a degree of 
tension in the left hypochondrium, I began to 
suspect a serous effusion, and accordingly had 
recourse to the common diuretics, cream of 
tartar, elaterium, squills, mercury, &c.; but 
all of these failed in producing the desired ef- 
fect. The latter, indeed, run off by the bow- 
els, till corrected by opium, which I exhibited 
once to the amount of two drams in six hours, 
but without the least sedative effect. 

At this time, viewing the case as a very 
helpless one, the idea occurred to me of try- 
ing the digitalis, which is represented as pro- 
ducing such remarkable effects in diminishing 
the pulse. I accordingly prepared a decoction, 
|P_269
by boiling an ounce of the dried leaves of the 
digitalis in a pound and a half of water, till it 
was reduced to a pound, and directed three 
spoonfuls to be taken every third hour. It 
produced no seeming effect, till after the third 
dose. An evident nausea was then produced, 
succeeded by full vomiting of viscid phlegm, 
and green crude bile. The flow of urine was 
increased, and the pulse reduced nearly to the 
natural standard. The nausea continued at 
times the two following days, though no more 
of the decoction was given. But I was again 
tempted to repeat the dose, from so favour- 
able a beginning. The effect was nearly the 
same as before, excepting that the flow of 
urine was diminished, and several loose stools 
were produced. I therefore ordered another 
dose of opium, which was succeeded by sive 
hours sleep, the first that had been procured 
during the last fortnight. I found my patient 
in the morning much more composed, though 
he complained much of nausea: he was evi- 
dently, upon the whole, much better. I 
therefore omitted the medicine wholly for 
three days: but on the fourth all the former 
symptoms returning, I had again recourse to 
|P_270
the decoction. It now produced no nausea, 
but the flow of urine was much increased. I 
therefore continued small doses of the decoc- 
tion, with an opiate at night, during nine 
days. At the end of that time, my patient 
seemed much better, both in body and mind. 
He spoke with propriety on a variety of sub- 
jects, and on his late complaints with philoso- 
phic coolness, though he complained that he 
had but an imperfect recollection of them. 
His appetite mended, and the various functions 
became natural. I then left off the medicine 
gradually, each day adding to his strength, ap- 
pearance, and recovery. He is now perfectly 
restored, and has continued for the last six 
weeks as well as ever he was in his life, with- 
out having had any return of his usual head- 
ach. 

