

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v15_0150^]

|P_150
[}XI. }]
[}Reflexions sur les effets de l'éther vitriolique, 
et de l'éther nitreux, dans l'économie ani- 
male. Par M. de Lavoisier. VideHistoire 
de la Société Royale de Médecine, tome IV. 
4to, Paris.}]
IT is, Mr Lavoisier observes, a known fact, 
that all fluids, and probably volatile bodies 
in general, by means of certain degrees of 
heat, pass from the state of liquid to that of 
elasticity; and are transformed into elastic 
aeriform fluids, with all the physical pro- 
perties of air, but without its chemical pro- 
perties. This change happens from a de- 
termined degree of heat applied to each. 
Thus it happens to vitriolic æther at thirty- 
two degrees of Reaumur's thermometer; to 
spirit of wine at sixty-six degrees; and to water 
at eighty. 

|P_151
By means of a pneumato-chemical appara- 
tus, Mr Lavoisier transformed a portion of vi- 
triolic æther into an inflammable air, with 
which he filled several glass vessels. The æ- 
ther thus converted into a vapour, was found 
to possess all the principal properties of the 
inflammable air of marshes, or of that which 
is obtained from metals on their dissolution 
by acids. Like these, it is neither inflammable 
nor combustible, as long as it remains alone, 
and is contained in a close vessel. It burns 
only when in contact with atmospheric air. 
If, with this air, two parts of atmospheric air 
be combined, a permanently elastic fluid is 
formed, which is not condensed by cold, but 
which has the property of detonation when 
it approaches an inflamed body. This per- 
manence is the same, when, in place of atmo- 
spheric air, dephlogisticated air is employed, 
in the proportion of one part to two of the 
inflammable air of æther; but the detonation 
is much stronger. 

Nitrous æther, he observes, presents all the 
same phænomena with an inferior degree of 
the thermometer. But, as it is difficult to 
procure nitrous æther always exactly the same, 
|P_152
the degree of heat is variable, according to 
variations in the æther employed. 

Without entering into a detail of many o- 
ther curious experiments made with æther 
converted into inflammable air, the author 
next proceeds to enquire, how those already 
related throw light upon the manner in which 
æther acts in the animal œconomy. Since it 
is found that this substance is volatilized at a 
degree of heat lower than that of the internal 
parts of the body, it follows, he observes, 
that, when introduced into the stomach, it 
must pass from the state of liquid to that of 
gas, and be transformed into an inflammable 
air. Besides this, as it is difficult to conceive 
that the stomach will not possess some portion 
of atmospheric air, there must result from this 
mixture, a permanently elastic fluid, which 
cannot be more condensed by a degree of heat 
even much below thirty-two of Reaumur. 

By this means, in cases where the stomach, 
either from the fermentation of those fluids 
destined for digestion, or from the use of fer- 
menting drinks, is filled with elastic, gasseous, 
or mephitic fluids, such as fixed air, or any 
other, he considers the vitriolic æther, but 
|P_153
still more the nitrous, as a certain means 
of expelling them. It is, he thinks, unques- 
tionably on this account, that æther is an effi- 
cacious remedy in some species of megrim, 
particularly in those headachs which arise from 
bad digestion. It will, he imagines, also produce 
similar effects in cases of drunkenness, and in 
all those cases in general, where the fermen- 
tation of fluids, either in the stomach, or in o- 
ther neighbouring parts of the intestinal ca- 
nal, has filled those viscera with mephitic ex- 
halations. 

Another property of æther, is that of pro- 
ducing a considerable sense of coldness in all 
surrounding bodies at the instant of its being 
transformed into an elastic aeriform fluid. If, 
therefore, from any cause whatever, there 
should take place a considerable degree of 
heat in the stomach, Mr Lavoisier thinks, that 
æther will necessarily be a very proper remedy 
for cooling and settling it. And he supposes it 
is from this property, that it derives the 
sedative effects which have been attributed 
to it. 

From these reflections, the author is led to 
make some observations on the manner of ad- 
|P_154
ministering æther. He thinks it would be an 
easy matter to make it appear, that it is often 
better to employ it in small doses, frequently re- 
peated, than to take a large quantity at once. 
Supposing, for example, the stomach of a pa- 
tient to be filled with fixed air, as is the case 
in instances of drunkenness, or at least in cer- 
tain instances of it; if the first dose of æther 
which has been administered, has been such, 
that there has not arisen from it a volume of 
inflammable air equal to the capacity of the 
stomach, that viscus cannot, by this means, be 
freed from all the mephitic elastic fluid which 
exists there. It is, on the contrary, evident, 
that there must remain in the stomach, a mix- 
ture of fixed air, and of the inflammable air 
of æther. In such cases, it will only be after 
the third or fourth dose of æther, that we 
can consider the stomach as cleaned. 

Mr Lavoisier observes, that from this rea- 
soning, an objection may naturally be started 
against the use of æther. It may be alleged, 
that in administering æther in the manner men- 
tioned, to a patient whose stomach has been 
loaded with a pernicious elastic fluid, we only 
substitute one elastic fluid to another; and it 
|P_155
remains to be proved, that the inflammable 
air of æther is more salutary than that which 
before existed in the stomach. To this he 
answers, that the inflammable air of æther is 
capable of being absorbed by water and other 
watery fluids; from which it follows, that at 
the end of a longer or shorter interval, all the 
inflammable air of æther will of course disap- 
pear, and be combined with the fluids which 
it meets in the stomach. 

How far our readers will be disposed to a- 
dopt these conjectures of Mr Lavoisier, respect- 
ing the action of æther, we will not pretend 
to say. We must own, that, to us, his reason- 
ing upon this subject appears liable to many 
objections. Æther is well known to produce 
very considerable effects when applied to dif- 
ferent sensible parts of the surface of the 
body; as, for example, to the forehead in in- 
stances of headach. May we not therefore 
conclude, that its effects, when acting upon a 
part so highly sensible as the stomach, will be 
much more considerable, both upon that viscus 
itself, and upon the system in general, indepen- 
dently of the generation of any elastic vapour, 
or of the sense of cold which its evaporation 
|P_156
produces? But, allowing that there are other 
principles upon which æther, taken into the 
stomach, may be supposed to act still more 
powerfully than in the ways which he ima- 
gines; yet still, not only the reputation of the 
author, but the ingenuity of the thought it- 
self, is sufficient to recommend it to serious 
consideration. 

