

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v15_0054^]

|P_54
[}IV. }]
[}Dissertatio Medica de Myristica. Auctore Fre- 
derico Vilhelm Radloff, Præside Car. Pet. 
Thunberg. 4to, Upsaliæ. }]
THIS dissertation, as well as that which 
we have just considered, treats also of 
an article which is in very common use. And 
the author introduces it, by giving the follow- 
ing accurate description of the tree which pro- 
duces the genuine nutmeg. 

Myristica moschata: foliis lanceolatis, 
fructu glabro. 

Arbor, magnitudine pyri vel ultra, cortice 
lævi fusco-cinereo. 

Rami, patentes, ultimi capillares glabri. 

Folia, lanceolata, acuminata, integra, al- 
terna, parum nervosa, glabra, supra viridia, sub- 
tus pallida, digitalia. 

|P_55
Flores, in ultimis ramulis pedunculati, 
sparsi, solitarii, monoici. 

Calyx. Perianthium uniphyllum, trifi- 
dum glabrum. Laciniæ ovatæ, erectæ, breves. 

Corolla, nulla. 

Stamina. Filamentum unicum, siliforme 
calyce brevius. Anthera sub apice filamenti, 
perforata, striata. 

Pistillum. Germen superum. Stylus 
crassus, didymus, brevis. Stigmata duo, acuta, 
brevia. 

Pericarpium. Drupa ovata, umbilicata, 
glabra, unilocularis, lateraliter dehiscens, in 
pedunculis reflexis pendula. Caro pallide vi- 
rescens, tandem pallida, astringens. Nux maci 
reticulata, aurantiaca, cincta rugosa. Nucleus 
rugosus. 

Besides this species of the Myristica, from 
which the genuine nutmeg is produced, ano- 
ther species is, he tells us, also very common 
in India, and sometimes used there, which he 
describes under the title of the Myristica to- 
mentosa, and in the following terms. 

Myristica tomentosa: foliis ovatis, 
sructu tomentoso. 

|P_56
Arbor, minus, ampla et ramosa; ramis ra- 
mulisque magis crassis. 

Folia, lato-oblonga, obtusiuscula, crassa, 
nervosa, supra viridia, subtus pallida, parum 
tomentosa, palmaria usque pedalia. 

Flores ad basin ramulorum, pedunculati, 
solitarii, pedunculis brevibus, crassis, tomen- 
tosis. 

Fructus, drupa oblonga, obtusissima, sub- 
tomentosa. 

Besides these two species, Dr Radloff ob- 
serves, that Rumphius has described and deli- 
neated some other trees nearly resembling 
them. But as their parts of fructification are 
still undetermined, it cannot be positively 
known whether they belong to this genus or 
not. Among the Indians, the Myristica mos- 
chata has the name of Pala, and the Myristica 
tomentosa, of Pala Lacki; although, in dif- 
ferent islands, they have different denomina- 
tions. 

The Myristica grows spontaneously in the 
Molucca islands; but it is chiefly cultivated in 
Banda, and in three small neighbouring islands, 
Neijra, Lontoir, and Pulo Aij. From Neijra 
|P_57
it is alleged that the best nutmegs are 
brought; but in Pulo Aij are the largest and 
most beautiful trees. In all the other Moluc- 
ca islands, the Dutch have now destroyed and 
rooted up the trees bearing nutmeg. Dr 
Radloff, however, tells us, that the industrious 
M. Sonnerat found the Myristica growing in 
New Guinea. The culture of the nutmeg has 
not succeeded in the French African islands; 
but it is found to grow luxuriantly in their 
American settlement of Cayenne. 

This valuable tree delights in mountainous 
situations, but requires, in some degree, the 
shade of other trees, that it may not be scorch- 
ed by the heat of the sun. They require 
likewise to be defended against sea-winds 
with saline impregnations. When the trees 
are five or six years old, they begin to bear 
fruit; but they produce the most abundant 
crop in their eighth or ninth year. They 
are spontaneously propagated by the pigeons, 
who swallow the whole fruit, but digest only 
the mace and pulpy part, and discharge the 
nut. The Dutch, however, sow the whole 
fruit, and transplant the young trees at plea- 
sure. But the whole care of cultivating and 
|P_58
collecting the fruit, is carried on by their 
slaves. 

The Myristica may be considered as pro- 
ducing fruit through the whole year, as it 
flowers and ripens its fruit in a sort of grada- 
tion; but the ripe nuts are chiefly collected at 
three different periods of the year. The 
greatest crop is collected about the end of 
July or August. At that time, however, the 
mace is thin. A second crop is obtained in 
November, and a third in March and April. 
At this last period the thickest mace is ob- 
tained. The sign of ripeness, is, the exterior 
covering obtaining a light red colour. 

The fruit, when collected, is cut up with 
knives, and the external fleshy part left to pu- 
trefy in the woods. The nuts, thus far clear- 
ed, are brought home, and the mace removed 
from them by the aid of a knife. It is expos- 
ed to the sun to be dried; during which pro- 
cess it acquires a yellowish colour. The nut- 
megs also are exposed to the sun for three or 
four days, but are taken into a house every 
night, lest they should be hurt by the dews. 
The nuts thus dried, are divided into three 
parcels. The first, being the largest and best, 
|P_59
are intended for the European market; a se- 
cond sort is used in India; and the third kind 
is, in general, only employed for making oil. 
Before the nutmegs be exported, they are in 
general infused for eight days in lime-water, by 
which it is thought they are defended from 
putrefaction and from insects. 

The mace, after being well dried, is put 
into bags, each containing about one hundred 
and sixty pounds. It is, however, in the first 
place, sprinkled with sea-water, lest it should 
become too brittle, and break into small frag- 
ments. 

From the nutmegs in India, two kinds of 
oil are prepared; an expressed, and a distilled 
oil. Of these, the distilled oil is rarely 
brought to Europe. It is of a pellucid ap- 
pearance, and possesses the full aromatic qua- 
lity of the nut. The expressed oil is obtain- 
ed from an inferior sort of nuts. The nuts, 
roasted and bruised, are subjected to pressure, 
till a thick oil, nearly of the consistence of 
melted butter, is obtained from them; and it 
becomes still thicker after being kept for some 
time in the square vessels into which it is re- 
ceived from the press. 

|P_60
From the mace, when bruised and heated, 
an oil is also obtained, of a redish colour, and 
a fatty and bitterish taste, but without excit- 
ing any great sense of heat in the mouth. 
From about seventeen pounds of mace, half a 
pound of this oil is obtained. 

The Dutch in India sometimes preserve, un- 
der the form of a condiment, with sugar, the 
fruit taken from the tree before it be ripe. 
For this purpose, after being picked from the 
tree, they are boiled in water, then pierced 
with a needle, and afterwards macerated for 
eight or ten days in fresh water frequently 
changed, till the whole bitterness be removed 
from them. After this, they are put into a 
solution of sugar, which, for eight days, is to 
be every day poured off from the nuts, heat- 
ed, and then again added to them. They are 
then boiled in this syrup, and afterwards pre- 
served in glass vessels properly shut. 

When it is considered that the Myristica is a 
tree yielding a bloody juice, and highly aroma- 
tic, it is not wonderful that it is not entirely 
free from all suspicion of a poisonous quality, 
although, when prudently exhibited, it is use- 
fully employed both for dietetical and medi- 
|P_61
cal purposes. It has however been demon- 
strated, by some melancholy examples, that 
the halitus, both of the tree and of the fruit, 
have not only been hurtful to those impru- 
dently exposed to them, but have even indu- 
ced death. Several examples are mentioned 
by Rumphius, of fatal effects, not only from 
eating the nuts, but also from sleeping under 
the tree. From too large a dose of these nuts, 
there is induced oppression at the breast, diffi- 
cult respiration, intense thirst, headach, ver- 
tigo, and fatal apoplexy. 

With regard to the medical use of nutmegs, 
Dr Radloff observes, that they were intro- 
duced by the Arabian physicians, and are first 
mentioned by Avicenna. They have been 
long considered as useful for promoting dige- 
stion in weak stomachs; and, when prudently 
used, are often productive of advantage both 
in bloody and serous discharges. In cases of 
diarrhœa and dysenteria, toasted nutmeg, with 
red wine, or any similar vehicle, is often used 
with advantage. They have also been found 
useful against nausea, vomiting, and cough, 
particularly with pregnant women. 

|P_62
From the external use of the nutmeg, or of 
its oil, the same danger is not to be appre- 
hended as from their internal use. In India, 
the expressed oil is often employed with ad- 
vantage, under the form of friction, to para- 
lytic limbs: and in Europe, it is often applied 
to the umbilical region, to allay violent gripes, 
or evacuations of the primæ viæ; and, when 
rubbed upon the temples, it has been said to 
excite sleep. The essential oil, as well as a 
tincture from the nutmeg, is often serviceable 
in weakness of the stomach; and nutmegs, pre- 
served with sugar, are also used with the same 
intention. The wood of the tree is not un- 
frequently, in India, employed in house-build- 
ing, and for other œconomical purposes. 

The fruit of the Myristica tomentosa, also, 
although of an inferior quality, is often, our 
author observes, employed for the same pur- 
poses as the genuine nutmeg. 

