

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v16_0213^]

|P_213
[}XIV. }]
[}Observations on the Effects of Camphor ap- 
plied externally, in some cases of Retention 
of Urine. By Mr John Latham, F. R. S. 
Surgeon at Dartford. Vide Medical Com- 
munications, Vol. II. 8vo, London.}]
THE paper before us contains different 
cases, in which surprising good effects 
were derived from the external application of 
Camphor. And, if the same benefit shall 
be derived from it in similar cases, its intro- 
duction, in this manner, may justly be consi- 
dered as a discovery of great importance in 
the practice of medicine. 

In the first case which Mr Latham relates, 
the patient was a gentleman upwards of 70 
years of age, thin, and of a delicate constitu- 
tion, but tolerably healthy, temperate in his 
diet, and used moderate exercise. On the 
10th of November, he had been caught in the 
|P_214
rain while on horseback; and, on the follow- 
ing day, had some uneasiness in making wa- 
ter, but not much greater than he had often 
before experienced; as, for some years before, 
he had not been able to retain his urine, for 
any considerable length of time, without in- 
convenience. On the 14th, a total retention 
of urine took place, attended with violent and 
painful efforts to void it, a quick pulse, and 
some degree of thirst. From that time, it 
was always necessary to draw off his water by 
means of a catheter; although, in the mean 
time, several plans of treatment were adopt- 
ed. Bleeding, evacuating the bowels with 
ol. ricini, and the use of the semicupium, were 
changed for bark, and the application of 
cloths dipped in cold water to the pubis. It 
was soon, however, necessary to return to the 
first mode of treatment, on account of the in- 
creased irritation, and marks of inflammation. 
Musk, in large doses, was next employed, but 
without advantage. 

Mr Latham, having read of the good ef- 
fects of the external application of Camphor in 
stranguries, and having observed, that its ap- 
plication produced a more copious flow of u- 
|P_215
rine than usual, and likewise recollecting, that 
it is sometimes employed to counteract the ir- 
ritation of cantharides on the urinary organs, 
thought that it might possibly be of use in 
this case. Accordingly, on the second appli- 
cation of a liniment, prepared of oil of al- 
monds, with as much camphor as could be dis- 
solved in it, which was to be used every four 
hours, the patient voided about half an ounce 
of urine, and continued to void it, in lar- 
ger quantities, from time to time, till the 
22d. 

The use of the catheter (which had been 
introduced sixty-seven times) was now no 
longer necessary; and, by proper remedies, 
and a restorative diet, the patient recovered his 
usual strength; nor had he afterwards any re- 
turn of this complaint. 

Mr Latham relates another case, the sub- 
ject of which was a poor woman, of a delicate 
constitution, who had been seized with a re- 
tention of urine, in consequence of exposure 
to cold. In this case, also, the camphorated 
liniment succeeded, after the failure of se- 
veral other remedies. He concludes this pa- 
|P_216
per with observing, that, in two instances of 
retention of urine, after difficult labours, 
which continued longer than usual, he had 
applied camphor externally, with the desired 
success. 

