

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v16_0342^]

|P_342
[}XIV. }]
[}History of an Obstinate Swelling of the Knee, 
terminating in Recovery. By Dr George Mac- 
farquhar Lawson, of Montego Bay, Jamaica. }]
A MAN, aged 23, of a healthy and ro- 
bust constitution, plethoric habit, and 
dark complexion, had, for a week or two, 
complained of a disagreeable sensation in the 
joint of the right knee, about its centre. 
The knee became rapidly and considerably 
swelled, and the leg gradually wasted. His 
appetite and health declined. He knew no 
cause whatever to which his complaint could 
be attributed. 

A practitioner advised him to keep a cloth 
wet with vegeto-mineral water, constantly ap- 
plied to his knee, and to throw cold water up- 
on it every morning and evening. Finding 
no relief, he applied to me on the first of Fe- 
bruary. I immediately concluded it to be a 
|P_343
rheumatic white swelling. Pain had now ta- 
ken place. It felt as if deep-seated, and was 
very severe, extending along the tendinous 
expansions of the muscles connected with the 
joint. It was much increased by motion, par- 
ticularly by flexion or extension. The skin 
had a shining appearance. A blister was ap- 
plied on each side of the patella, leaving the 
top unblistered, with a view to scarification; 
which, however, he declined. A few cool- 
ing and laxative medicines were given, as he 
was costive; and one of the following pow- 
ders every morning and evening: 

℞ Antimonii crudi drachmam unam. 

Opii purissimi gr. vi. M. & divid. in 
dos. vi. Mercurial friction of the thigh of 
the same side, was carried so far as to affect 
the mouth; and he took daily six drams of 
powdered Sarsaparilla. On the 27th of Fe- 
bruary, the antimonial powders were omitted; 
and next day, I had a consultation with Dr 
Murray, an eminent physician here. We di- 
rected for him the following pills. ℞ Ex- 
tracti foliorum Cicutæ, Calomelanos, utriusque 
grana xiv. Extracti Thebaici gr. vii. Mucil. 
Gum. Arab. q. s. fiat massa divida in pil. xiv. 
|P_344
quarum duæ mane et vespere sumendæ. Mer- 
curial friction was laid aside: he had for common 
drink, a decoction of guaiacum. The blisters 
were kept open, and the sarsaparilla conti- 
nued. A seton was also introduced below 
the knee. 

The extract of cicuta was gradually in- 
creased till the 13th of April, when he be- 
came affected with headach, stupor, and other 
symptoms often arising from cicuta. This 
article was therefore omitted; but calomel 
and opium were continued till the 29th of 
April, when his knee was much reduced in 
size, being hardly larger than the sound one, 
and without pain. 

The blister, which had hitherto been kept 
open, was now healed up; the pills were 
laid aside, and no medicines were taken, 
but two drams of the sarsaparilla daily, and 
a small quantity of the guaiacum decoction. 
The seton was kept open, and affusions of 
cold water to the knee, were used every 
morning and evening. Gentle friction with 
camphorated oil, was also frequently repeat- 
ed, and continued for half an hour each 
|P_345
time. On the 6th of May, he began to 
take five grains of the sal Martis daily; but, 
on the 14th of June, he left off all medicines, 
being then restored to the perfect use and 
strength of his knee. He now goes about 
his usual business, which is a laborious one, 
without the least impediment. 

