

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v16_0190^]

|P_190
[}XII. }]
[}D. Sam. Gottl. Vogelii, Seren. Duc. Regn. 
Megapol. à Consil. Aul. Med. P. P. O. in 
Univer. Lit. Rostoch. Diatribe Medico- 
politica de Causis quare tot Submersi in 
Vitam non revocentur. Præmissa est His- 
toria memorabilis cujusdam fausti exempli. 
12mo, Hamburgi. }]
THE learned author of this essay intro- 
duces his observations, by relating a 
remarkable case of recovery, after apparent 
death had taken place by Drowning. This 
case, however, did not fall under his own ob- 
servation; it occurred at Hamburgh, and was 
communicated to him by Dr Schroeder of 
that city, under whose direction the means of 
recovery were employed. In this case, al- 
though the time for which the boy was under 
water was not exactly ascertained, yet it was 
concluded, that he could not have been less 
|P_191
than half an hour under water. When he 
was found, there was every appearance of 
death. His whole body was not only cold, 
but stiff; his lips livid, the balls of the eyes 
distorted, and the pupils dilated, without even 
the slightest appearance either of circulation 
or respiration. After employing means of re- 
covery for about an hour and a half, some 
convulsive motions at last took place, which 
were gradually succeeded by other signs of 
life; so that, at last, a complete recovery took 
place. Dr Schroeder ascribes the recovery 
chiefly to careful friction over the whole sur- 
face of the body, and to careful inflation of 
the lungs; while, at the same time, venesection 
was avoided. And Dr Vogel is of opinion, 
that this case particularly deserves to be record- 
ed, because the means of cure were so simple. 

While some such cases as that before re- 
lated, demonstrate the possibility of recovery, 
where appearances are very unfavourable, it 
is yet, our author observes, much to be re- 
greted, that recoveries upon the whole are 
but rare. In proof of this, he mentions seve- 
ral large towns, in which, though drowning 
be very frequent, yet not a single recovery has 
|P_192
taken place for several years. An inquiry, 
therefore, into the causes why recoveries are 
so rare, he considers as an object well meriting 
attention. 

He begins by considering those causes which 
preclude all hopes of recovery. The first 
which he points out, is continuance for a cer- 
tain length of time under water. From the 
observations made by the Humane Society of 
London, he infers, that patients will be very 
generally irrecoverable who have been three 
quarters of an hour under water. But it is 
unquestionably safer to extend the term of pos- 
sible recovery, than to limit it, beyond the 
truth. He thinks, however, that no one can 
with justice be accused of neglect, though he 
have not recourse to any means of recovery, 
if the patient has been two hours, or even 
an hour and a half, under water. But in 
many instances, we know nothing of the time 
for which the body has been under water. 
If, however, in these cases there be evident 
marks of putridity, a cadaverous smell, and 
general emphysema; these, he thinks, are in- 
dubitable proofs, that the body has been so 
long in the water as to preclude any possibility 
|P_193
of recovery. All the other marks of death 
which have been commonly pointed out, though 
many of them give a strong presumption, he 
considers as by themselves at least doubtful. 

A second set of irrecoverable cases are 
those, where patients taken out of the water, 
have not in reality been suffocated, but have 
perished from some other cause of death. 
Many conspiring causes, at the time of drown- 
ing, may bring on fatal apoplexy, spasms, or 
convulsions; or death may have been the con- 
sequence of severe injuries to the head, sto- 
mach, or other very sensible parts. From 
these, and similar circumstances, a person who 
has been but a short time under water, may 
yet be in an irrecoverable state. 

A third cause, from which cases are not un- 
frequently rendered irrecoverable, is the too 
slow application of the means of cure. In this 
particular, he observes, that very great im- 
provements have of late been made, from the 
contrivance of proper boxes, containing all the 
necessary apparatus, as prepared by Pia, Gar- 
done, Cogan, and others; and particularly, 
what he considers as an improvement upon all 
the others, that of Mr Kite. But he observes, 
|P_194
that, srom unaccountable negligence, or indo- 
lence, several large towns, where accidents 
from drowning are very frequent, have never 
hitherto made proper provisions of this kind; 
and he points out his native country, Meck- 
lenburg, and the city of his residence, Rostoch, 
as being very deficient in these particulars, 
notwithstanding the danger to which they are 
exposed from the river Warna. He enters 
also, at considerable length, into a detail of the 
plan by which this may be obviated. 

Another cause which he points out, as not 
unfrequently preventing the recovery of the 
drowned, is, that the necessary assistance and 
remedies are applied either injudiciously, or 
without sufficient diligence. These remedies 
he considers as in general employed with one 
of four intentions, either for affording irrita- 
tion, for increasing the heat, for producing 
depletion of the vessels of the brain and lungs, 
or for renewing respiration; and he gives a 
very full enumeration of the particular practices 
referable to each head. He mentions many 
controversies which have subsisted among the 
most eminent practitioners, respecting almost 
every article of this numerous list; and he ob- 
|P_195
serves, that as the mode of cure which is adopt- 
ed, can only be successful when properly accom- 
modated to the nature of the case, want of 
recovery must often arise from necessary ig- 
norance of circumstances. 

Terror, confusion, and perturbation of mind, 
are next pointed out as causes by which a re- 
covery is sometimes prevented. By these, 
much time is often lost. From every mo- 
ment, however, the danger is increased. 

The last cause which he points out, as con- 
tributing not a little to render recoveries less 
frequent than might otherwise be the case, is 
the too early belief of patients being in an ir- 
recoverable state; and, in consequence of this, 
the proper means of recovery not being em- 
ployed for a sufficient length of time. 

From the causes being thus pointed out, 
why so few recover from drowning, Dr Vogel 
imagines, that, on particular occasions at least, 
some of these may be successfully obviated. 
And he subjoins a brief account of the method 
of cure which he thinks ought in general to 
be adopted. 

In taking the body out of the water, all ex- 
ternal injuries, and other rough treatment, are, 
|P_196
he observes, to be avoided as much as possi- 
ble. When it has been conveyed to a proper 
situation, the wet clothes are to be taken off, 
the whole body is to be carefully dried, and 
the mouth and nose freed from any filth that 
may tend to obstruct the passage of air. The 
body must be placed with the head some- 
what raised, in such a situation that there may 
be free access to it on all sides, and that its 
position may be easily changed. A proper co- 
verlet, somewhat warmed, is then to be thrown 
over the whole body, leaving the head free. 
Let assistants, by introducing their hands un- 
der this covering, gently and equably rub the 
whole body with dry flannel cloths, impreg- 
nated with the smoke of juniper, mastich, oli- 
banum, or some similar substance; the cloths 
being carefully dried, and fumigated by other 
assistants. 

During the time of the frictions, an attempt 
must be made to inflate the lungs with air, by 
blowing it in at the nose, or even through the 
glottis, by means of a proper tube. The tongue 
being drawn somewhat forwards, and this tube 
introduced, which is always much preferable 
to bronchotomy, inflation is to be performed, 
|P_197
by a man whose lungs are strong and sound, 
with such force, that the air may penetrate to 
the extreme vessels of the lungs of the drown- 
ed person; and to accomplish this, the mouth 
and nostrils, excepting where the tube is in- 
troduced, must be kept carefully shut. The 
chest and abdomen thus raised, are to be again 
gently depressed; and the alternate introduction 
and expulsion of air regularly continued in this 
manner for a due length of time. 

In conjunction with friction and artificial re- 
spiration, at intervals of from ten to twenty 
minutes, warm stimulant glysters are to be in- 
jected, impregnated with an infusion of tobac- 
co, emetic tartar, oxymel of squills, volatile al- 
kaline spirit, or some similar article. 

If, from the continuance of this simple me- 
thod for the space of an hour or upwards, no 
sign of life can be detected, Dr Vogel thinks, 
there is much reason to fear that the patient 
is in an irrecoverable state. Nay, he is even 
persuaded, that not a few will recover as ef- 
fectually from being laid in a proper situation, 
duly covered, and gently rubbed with the 
hands of assistants alone, as they would do by 
the employment of more numerous practices: 
|P_198
and, whatever be the practices employed, it is 
necessary, he tells us, attentively to watch the 
first returns of life; and when any signs of life 
appear, every mode of cure is, for a little at least, 
to be laid aside; lest, by officious labour, we should 
disturb the more salutary operations of nature. 
And he observes, "Gravis regula contra 
quam peccant optimi medici. Festina lente; 
aliquid naturæ committe, et illi confide si tem- 
pus adjuvet. Non plus mederi oportet, quam 
quantum vides medendum esse. "

Dr Vogel's observations on the method of 
treatment in cases of this kind, are concluded 
with some remarks on blood-letting. Where 
manifest signs of apoplexy, or exuberance of 
blood, can be detected, and where the drown- 
ed person is of a robust and athletic habit, or 
where he has fallen into the water in conse- 
quence of previous inebriation, there can, he 
thinks, be little doubt, that in order to pro- 
mote the return of life, the veins must be re- 
lieved from the load by which they compress 
the brain, and are deprived of their tone. 
But the time of blood-letting, the place from 
which it is to be taken, and the extent to 
which it is to be let, are matters of no small 
|P_199
consequence; for in these particulars, he ob- 
serves, errors are often committed. Where 
the signs of plethora and turgescence are strong, 
it should be performed prior to every other 
attempt to cure; and when the blood freely 
and forcibly flows from the vein when cut, 
with more confidence may we proceed in the 
discharge; but where the signs indicating 
blood-letting are not considerable, it will in 
general, he thinks, be proper to delay it, till, 
by the application of other remedies, there be 
appearances of returning life; and when per- 
formed at this time with those of full habits, 
it has often, he tells us, been observed, that 
the pulse, before small and oppressed, became 
stronger and fuller, and at the same time re- 
spiration more free. Symptoms sometimes oc- 
cur, which indicate even a repetition of blood- 
letting before a perfect recovery; and he con- 
siders a repetition as requisite, where there take 
place violent pain of the head or breast, long 
continued sopor, delirium, difficult respiration, 
violent cough, hæmoptoe, or symptoms of 
peripneumony. 

But if, in some cases, there be symptoms 
thus indicating even the repetition of blood- 
|P_200
letting, so, in other cases, where signs of re- 
turning life take place, it is to be as carefully 
shunned, lest the very primordia of life should, 
as it were, be discharged with the blood; and 
with the weak and infirm, unless from urgent 
symptoms, it is never, he thinks, to be di- 
rected. 

When blood-letting is necessary, Dr Vogel 
thinks, there can be no doubt that the discharge 
should in general be made from the external ju- 
gulars. Where blood cannot be obtained from 
these, he advises it to be let from either tem- 
poral artery; for though the arteries be less 
distended with blood than the veins, they 
are more irritable; and if there be the smal- 
lest remains of lise, a discharge will not 
fail to be obtained from these vessels. In 
such cases, also, he advises cupping, with sca- 
rification, to the head, the neck, and the tem- 
ples, which, besides operating as evacuants, 
are often also useful as stimulants. 

The quantity of blood to be let, cannot, he 
observes, be easily determined, but must be re- 
gulated by the circumstances of age, sex, con- 
stitution, and other particulars, whether ex- 
|P_201
ternal or internal, which indicate the employ- 
ment of it. 

It will often happen, that after a patient is 
almost entirely recovered from the effects of 
submersion, symptoms of a difserent kind will 
supervene. To these, according to their na- 
ture and tendency, the skilful physician must 
direct proper remedies; for without these, he 
who had but just escaped death from drown- 
ing, will, as is not unfrequently the case, in a 
short time fall a victim to another disease. 

Dr Vogel concludes this treatise, by pre- 
senting to his readers a catalogue of the most 
valuable publications which have appeared on 
this important subject; but he contents him- 
self with merely mentioning the names of those 
who wrote on the subject of submersion prior 
to the year 1777. Of the later publications, 
and even of the translations into German of 
the writings of Cullen, Goodwyn, Kite, and 
other eminent British authors who have treat- 
ed of this subject, he gives the titles at full 
length: and he concludes with a list of the 
dates of public edicts, issued by different pro- 
vinces and cities, for making proper provisions 
against accidents from drowning. We cannot 
|P_202
help expressing a regret, that no British sta- 
tute appears in his list; for it is, we think, a 
subject which should not be entirely devolved 
on humane societies, or the voluntary exer- 
tions of benevolent individuals. Where the 
situation of cities, towns, and even villages, is 
such as to render frequent accidents of this 
kind unavoidable, it would be wisdom in the 
Legislature to oblige the community to make 
proper provisions for recovery. And we can- 
not help entertaining a hope, that this too 
long neglected subject may at last attract the 
attention of the British Parliament. 

