

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v17_0490^]

|P_490
[}VI. }]
[}History of a singular Tumour on the Neck. By 
Mr Samuel Lockhart, Surgeon, now in the 
service of the Honourable East India Com- 
pany. }]
ON the 11th of April 1789, I committed 
to writing, the following case of John 
Anderson, a disbanded soldier, in the 60th 
year of his age. 

About 30 years ago, there appeared on 
the right side of the neck, a tumour a- 
bout the size of a walnut, after receiving 
a kick from a horse when in the army. 
For the following ten years after the ac- 
cident, its increase was very impercepti- 
ble; and he found very little inconvenience 
from it. But, after this, it began to grow 
larger; so that, at the end of the next ten 
years, it had got to the size of the fist. It now 
|P_491
became very inconvenient to him, from its 
size; for he never had any very acute pain in 
it. 

Being visibly increasing, he became very 
anxious to have it removed. He therefore 
applied for a consultation of the medical gen- 
tlemen; first at London, then in Ireland, and, 
last of all, at Edinburgh. But, in all of 
these places, he was told it would be a very 
dangerous operation, on account of its situa- 
tion with respect to the large vessels and nerves 
of the neck. 

He was now, from the size of the tumour, 
forced to quit the service. Ever since, it has 
been very sensibly increasing, though slowly. 
But, within these last six years of his life, it 
has grown more rapidly; and, at present, is 
of a most enormous size; extending from the 
clavicle, up to his ear, and stretching a consi- 
derable way over to the left side of the neck, 
both before and behind. 

At first, the skin was stretched equally and 
smoothly throughout the tumour. But, with- 
in the last mentioned period, it has become 
very irregular; and there are several very 
large risings and depressions on its surface. 

|P_492
It has now become so inconvenient and 
troublesome to him, as to render respiration 
and deglutition difficult. And the motion of 
his under-jaw is very obscure. He cannot 
articulate plainly. 

He was naturally a thin man, but very 
active; and enjoyed a very good state of health, 
previous to the accident; but, since which, 
he has been a good deal troubled with dy- 
speptic complaints. His sleep has, some time 
past, been a good deal impaired. He is much 
emaciated; and his voice is very feeble. Said, 
he rather heard with difficulty in the right 
ear. 

Within these eight days, the tumour has ul- 
cerated on the back part, the edges of which 
appear gangrenous; and there are several 
black spots on that side of the tumour. The 
discharge from the ulcer is very fetid, copi- 
ous, and of a dark colour. 

On the 6th of April, a violent hæmorrhagy 
broke out from the ulcer, to the amount of a 
pound or two; but was stopped by the appli- 
cation of cloths dipped in cold water and vine- 
gar. The hæmorrhagy recurred again on the 
7th, to a still greater quantity; and was stop- 
ped, as in the former. 

|P_493
No more hæmorrhagy occurred, until early 
in the morning of the 10th, when every thing 
was tried in vain to stop it. And he died a- 
bout 7 o'clock the same morning. 

He had another tumour, of the size of an 
egg, stretched over the coronal suture, of the 
atheromatous kind. 

He had used a variety of remedies without be- 
nefit, the composition of which he did not know. 

Dissection. On cutting the teguments 
over the tumour, they were found preterna- 
turally thickened in several places. And im- 
mediately beneath, we found the Platisma my- 
oides in the same state. 

On laying open the tumour, we found it 
principally composed of fat; which, in sever- 
al places, was hardened. And, dispersed a- 
mongst the fat, we found several pretty large 
cysts, containing a very fetid matter, of the 
consistence and colour of lintseed-oil. 

On examining the root of the tumour, we 
found it adhering by a cellular substance to the 
trunk of the carotid artery, the whole way; 
the muscles so pressed away, as to turn the 
face towards the left shoulder. 

|P_494
The trachea was pushed over to the left 
side. 

The right side of the under-jaw was so 
twisted, that the flat side of it turned to- 
wards the tumour, and the teeth lay horizon- 
tally in the mouth. Both salivary and lym- 
phatic glands were found perfectly sound. 

Nothing else occurred on dissection. 

We observed, on the surface of the tumour, 
some very beautiful ramifications of veins, in 
a varicose state. 

The tumour weighed thirty pounds. 

