

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v17_0473^]

|P_473
[}III. }]
[}The Hislory of three Cases of Phthisis Pulmo- 
nalis, treated by Cuprum Vitriolatum, and 
Conium Maculatum; two of which terminat- 
ed favourably. By James M. Adair, M. D. 
formerly Physician at Northallerton, now at 
Edinburgh. }]
MR G. D. of Northallerton, aged 19, 
born of scrophulous parents, of whose 
family several had died of Phthisis; tall, of a 
sallow complexion, and black hair, consulted 
me in July 1790. He complained of short, 
frequent cough, with scanty purulent expec- 
toration; pain of the right side, about the 
seventh rib; laborious breathing; and copious 
night sweats. His appetite was bad; and he 
was considerably emaciated, and very weak. 
His pulse was quick and soft; and, towards 
evening, he was evidently affected with hectic 
fever, which remitted on the appearance of 
the sweat, about three o'clock in the morning. 
|P_474
His tongue was preternaturally red; and the 
white of his eyes, and his teeth, had a bluish 
pearly cast. The state of his bowels was va- 
rious; but he was, most frequently, costive. 
In short, he had every symptom of genuine 
scrophulous phthisis. 

These complaints had begun about two years 
before, and had gradually increased till the 
time he consulted me. It was the opinion of 
his friends, and of Mr Dent, a very respect- 
able surgeon, who attended him, that he could 
not live many weeks. 

I began, by directing the use of a diet, con- 
sisting chiefly of milk, with plainly dressed 
fresh meat for dinner; and indulged him in a 
little mild ale, and a glass of wine. The fol- 
lowing medicines were prescribed: 

℞. Vitriol. cærul. gr. x. Solut. ex 
Aq. tepid. unc. v. adde 
Spt. Vitriol. ten. gtt. x. Fiat Julepum 
Emeticum. 

Sign. 

Let the patient drink about a pint of warm 
water, and swallow, immediately afterwards, 
half an ounce of the emetic julap, which will 
almost instantly produce gentle vomiting. 
|P_475
This is to be taken, for the present, every o- 
ther evening, at 8 o'clock; and, aster ten days 
shall have elapsed, every morning. Should 
half an ounce not excite vomiting, an ounce 
may be taken. 

℞. Pulv. folior. cicut. recens siccat. dr. ii. 
Mucilag. Gum-Arab. spiff. q. s. ut fiat 
massa in pilulas xxx. dividenda. 

Let one pill be taken every morning and 
evening; and let the dose be gradually in- 
creased, by the addition of one pill every 
fourth day. If vertigo supervene, let the 
patient lie in bed till it subsides. 

A blister was also applied to the pained 
part, and a laxative mixture directed to be oc- 
casionally used. 

He continued for some weeks to use these 
means, without much apparent benefit; ex- 
cept that his appetite and strength were some- 
what improved, and that the sweating did not 
appear on the night when the vitriolic emetic 
was taken; an effect which, in other cases 
also, I have pretty uniformly observed to take 
place. His cough, and difficulty of breath- 
ing, however, rather increased; and, for some 
days, we were in almost hourly expectation of 
|P_476
his death. The medicines were occasionally 
intermitted, as the symptoms seemed to re- 
quire. 

From about the beginning of September, 
however, he gradually grew better. His cough 
was easier, his expectoration more free, and of a 
healthier appearance. His hectic fever and night 
sweats left him; his strength and flesh return- 
ed; and, before the middle of October, he 
had perfectly regained his former health, which 
he has ever since continued to enjoy, having 
grown considerably robust. 

Mrs M., aged about 26, of a sanguine tem- 
perament, very fair, with thin skin and blue 
eyes, the mother of several children, consult- 
ed me in Spring 1791. She had been for 
some months affected with short cough; with 
scanty expectoration, of a doubtful nature; 
pain of the left side; night sweats; consider- 
able loss of appetite, flesh and strength; a- 
menorrhœa, pulse weak, but not very quick; 
bowels generally costive. She had taken se- 
veral medicines without relief. 

As she seemed to labour under incipient 
phthisis, a milk diet, and the same medicines 
|P_477
which had been ordered for Mr D., were pre- 
scribed for her. She was, by much intreaty, 
prevailed on, to allow a blister to be applied 
to the pained part. 

Under the use of these remedies, her appe- 
tite and strength daily improved; her cough, 
pain, and sweats, left her, and she recovered 
rapidly. 

Some months after, she had a slight relapse, 
from imprudent exposure to cold and moisture, 
which was soon removed, by returning to the 
use of the medicines. 

Elizabeth Sedgwick, a poor woman, aged 
26, mother of three children, consulted me a- 
bout the same time with Mr D. She com- 
plained of severe cough, with copious puru- 
lent expectoration, occasionally streaked with 
blood; considerable pain of the left fide of the 
thorax; hectic fever; and night sweats, alternat- 
ing with diarrhœa. Her pulse was extremely 
quick and weak; her appetite gone; her 
strength diminished; and she was much ema- 
ciated. The tongue was florid; the teeth and 
eyes pearly. She was suckling a poor weakly 
|P_478
child of fifteen months old. She had been af- 
fected in this way for above six months. 

I insisted strenuoufly, that she should wean 
the child, which however, she did not do; 
probably, because she could not afford to feed 
it otherwise. Judging that the poor diet she 
had hitherto used, might have considerable 
share in aggravating her complaints, I or- 
dered her to drink a glass of port wine occa- 
sionally; and to use animal broths, meat, milk, 
and other food of easy digestion, and consider- 
able nutritive powers; with which she was 
supplied, by the charity of families in the town. 

At the same time, I directed the use of the 
hemlock pills, and of the solutio cupri vitrio- 
lati, in the usual way, interposing the opiates 
or acids, as the diarrhœa or night sweats 
seemed to require. She continued to use these 
remedies irregularly during several months, 
with considerable relief. She was evidently 
stronger, and less emaciated. Her cough and 
spitting were better, and the night sweats were 
nearly removed. In short, her health was a- 
mended when I left the place in September 
1791; but I had not sanguine hopes of her 
ultimate recovery, especially as there was no 
|P_479
probability that she would persist in the use of 
the medicines, of which she had been long 
heartily tired. 

As I have, by accident, lost the register of 
cases which contained those of the three pa- 
tients here mentioned, I am under the neces- 
sity of describing their complaints from memo- 
ry; consequently, with less accuracy than I 
could wish. This, however, I can vouch for, 
that no circumstance of importance has been 
added or omitted. 

The most remarkable circumstance attend- 
ing the use of the blue vitriol, is the ease and 
expedition with which it operates, and the nar- 
row limits within which its effects may be con- 
fined. I have frequently given from one to 
four tea-spoonfuls of it in the day, as a tonic 
laxative, in phthisical cases, while I was pre- 
scribing it in larger doses, as an emetic. I pre- 
fer administering it with this view, in the e- 
vening, from its tendency to check the night- 
sweats; but have, not unfrequently, given it 
two or three times in twenty-four hours, when 
the dyspnœa was particularly urgent. 

I have, sometimes, used the extractum, or 
succus spissatus cicutæ, instead of the powder 
|P_480
of the leaves; but I am rather inclined to pre- 
fer the latter. 

I generally prescribe the tinctura opii am- 
moniata, when the patient complains of want 
of sleep; and, frequently use an electuary, com- 
posed of conserva rosarum, nitre, and a small 
proportion of muriatic acid, or sal oxalidis ace- 
tosellæ, so as to render it pleasantly acidulous, 
with a view to relieve the hectic heat and 
sweats. 

I have, sometimes, employed setons instead 
of blisters; and my father's experience has led 
him to give them a preference. I have at 
present under my care, a case of phthisis pul- 
monalis, the history and result of which I shall, 
probably, communicate at some future time; 
in which, the use of a seton has been decided- 
ly beneficial. 

I think it right to mention, what your read- 
ers will doubtless anticipate, that I have been 
consulted in many phthisical cases, in which 
this plan has not proved successful. I think, 
however, I may safely fay, that it has always 
prolonged life, and often rendered it more 
comfortable. 

