

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v18_0382^]

|P_382
[}XV. }]
[}Case of an Ascites, of Six Months continuance, 
cured in a Month, by the exhibition of an 
Infusion of Tobacco. By Mr Robert Bi- 
shopric, Surgeon, York. }]
[/1./]ANN BULMER, of Middle- 
thorpe Grange, near York, 
aged 9 years and a half, about six months ago 
became afflicted with an ascites, in a very 
high degree; for the magnitude, tension, and 
fluctuation of the abdomen were so consider- 
able, that she appeared as fit for the opera- 
tion of the trocar, as any patient I ever saw 
in my life. There was no other dropsical 
swelling. She was emaciated, had a dry 
cough, and bad nights; body costive, and 
appetite impaired. Her urine was very high- 
coloured, and so scanty, that she only made 
about four ounces in twenty-four hours. 

I was also informed by her aunt (under 
whose roof she then was), that she had been 
seized, near nine months ago, with an ague, 
|P_383
which continued near three months, before 
it was removed by the use of medicines: 
That the swelling of the belly began to make 
its appearance soon after the attack of the 
ague, and that it continued increasing for 
four months. Her friends then became so 
much alarmed, that they applied to an ex- 
perienced physician of this city for advice; 
and she continued under his care for two 
months. She took the medicines prescribed, 
in a regular manner, but with no apparent 
abatement of the disease; for the size of the 
abdomen continued nearly the same during 
the period of treatment. But, that the dis- 
ease was checked for the time, was obvious; 
for, on her omitting the use of her medicines 
for about a fortnight before she applied to 
me, the swelling of her body began immedi- 
ately to increase, and continued progressively 
so, until the disease was attended with the 
unpromising appearances already described. 

From an attentive examination of the 
symptoms, I could not forbear considering 
the condition of the patient as a lost case. 
But having just then perused Dr Fowler's 
pamphlet of Medical Reports on the effects 
|P_384
of Tobacco, in the cure of Dropsies, giving 
an account of some extraordinary cases of 
Anasarca and Ascites having been successfully 
treated, I was encouraged to make a trial of 
the medicine. I therefore ordered the patient 
to take from fifteen to twenty drops of the 
infusion of tobacco, prepared according to 
the Doctor's directions in his Reports, 
every forenoon, and every evening, in two 
table spoonfuls of an aqueous vehicle, for a 
week. I also ordered that she should be al- 
lowed as much nourishing food as she could 
take; and that the quantity of liquid drunk 
(drinking as little as possible), and the quan- 
tity of urine passed every 24 hours should be 
carefully noticed. At the same time, I took 
the dimensions of the circumference of the 
abdomen, across the umbilicus, with a tape. 

At the end of the first week, I found (my 
directions being strictly observed), that the 
medicine had agreed with the stomach; 
that the urine began to be increased on the 
second day; that it continued increasing 
from that time; and also, that the size of 
the abdomen had been lessening for several 
days past. 

|P_385
The dose of the infusion was then ordered 
to be increased from 20 to 30 drops twice a 
day, with the same regimen, for a week longer. 

At the end of the second week, I found 
that the effects of the infusion were still more 
conspicous and successful; for the urine 
had gradually increased to four pints, wine 
measure, in 24 hours, although the liquids 
drunk in the same space of time did not ex- 
ceed a pint; and that, on measuring her 
body in the same manner as at the first, it 
was reduced full eleven inches and a half in 
circumference. The medicine had kept the 
body gently open every day, and had ex- 
cited a slight degree of nausea with the 
larger doses. The appetite and sleep were 
become more natural; and the patient be- 
gan to recover strength. The body, how- 
ever, although wonderfully lessened, was not 
yet reduced to its natural size. I therefore 
ordered the medicine and regimen to be 
continued in the same manner as before. 

At the end of two weeks more, or a month 
from the commencement of its use, the swel- 
ling of the abdomen was still farther re- 
duced (perhaps three or four inches, for I 
|P_386
did not happen to apply the measuring tape 
again), and it appeared quite of its natural 
size. The operation of the medicine, the 
dose of which was 30 drops twice a day, 
continued the same on the stomach and 
bowels as before; and also proved equally 
so by the kidnies, in proportion to the re- 
duced collection of water in the abdomen. 
She had also made some progress in the re- 
covery of her flesh and strength. 

In short, this formidable disease, to the 
astonishment of all that saw it, was entirely 
removed by the use of infusion of to- 
bacco alone; for it answered every purpose 
so well, the patient had no other medicine 
given her during its administration. For 
fear, however, of an immediate relapse, I 
thought it prudent to direct both the me- 
dicine and the regimen to be continued for 
another fortnight; which was attended with 
the usual operative effects. And now (which 
is six weeks since she came under my care), 
having had no relapse of her dropsical symp- 
toms, and her flesh and strength being much 
restored, she appears perfectly free from all 
her complaints. 


[^1. June 25. 
1785. ^]