

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v18_0294^]

|P_294
[}III. }]
[}Observations respecting the Guinea Worm. By 
Mr J. Drummond, Surgeon in the Service of 
the Honourable East India Company. Com- 
municated in a Letter to Dr Duncan. }]
I AM disposed to believe, that the Guinea 
Worm sometimes induces symptoms, 
which, as far as I know, have not hitherto 
been described. Personal experience of the 
disorder, first led me to form this opinion. 

About the end of November 1791, I per- 
ceived an unusual stiffness and soreness in 
the inferior part of the gastrocnemii muscles 
of the right leg, at that part where the ten- 
dons of both gastrocnemii unite to form the 
Tendo Achillis. This soreness was never 
acute, consequently did not occasion parti- 
cular inconvenience, or prevent me from 
walking. Several days afterwards, I observed 
a swelling in the part; but this was not at- 
tended by an increase of pain, nor discoloura- 
|P_295
tion. A few days after the occurrence of 
the swelling, a small redish-coloured pus- 
tule, with a black point in the middle, ap- 
peared on the inside of the leg, about an 
inch above the maleolus internus, on the 
fleshy part of the leg, and behind the tibia. 
This pustule appeared to contain a watery 
fluid. At the same time, I felt very distinct- 
ly, under the skin, a round firm substance; 
and was able to trace the animal with my 
finger to a considerable distance, extending 
in convolutions obliquely towards the poste- 
rior and upper part of the leg. Though the 
disease was now evident, yet I did not think 
it necessary to use any remedies, with a view 
to expedite the animal's progress; nor, in- 
deed, was I acquainted with any medicine 
or application which could produce that ef- 
fect. I concluded, that he would work his 
way out, and that it would be most prudent 
to leave him unmolested. But, on the night 
of the 17th December, a few days after the 
appearance of the pustule, though I went to 
bed otherwise in perfect health, I awoke, at 
two in the morning, with a sensation of in- 
tolerable itching over the whole surface of 
|P_296
the body. This sensation was so extremely 
urgent, that I could not refrain from scratch- 
ing violently. Soon afterwards, I felt an 
excessive heat and pricking in my face. On 
looking in a glass, I remarked a redness and 
flushing over my face; and the muscles of 
the face were swelled and convulsed. On 
those parts of my skin where I felt the itch- 
ing, I could discover with my finger a thick- 
ening, as it were, of the skin; it felt as if 
full of hard bumps. While puzzled to ac- 
count for these symptoms, which I had never 
seen, nor read, nor heard of, I was attacked 
with excruciating pain in my belly, accom- 
panied by violent retching, vomiting, and 
loose stools. A little bile and acid matter 
were rejected, by vomiting. But as very 
little bile, notwithstanding the violent retch- 
ing, was brought up, or passed downwards, 
these symptoms could not have been occa- 
sioned by an unusual quantity or acrimony 
of that fluid. The vomiting, as nearly as I 
can guess, continued with very little inter- 
mission above half an hour; during the 
whole of which time, the pain continued 
with unabated severity. These symptoms 
|P_297
were succeeded by violent rigors, which con- 
tinued for some hours, and resembled the 
cold stage of the paroxysm of an intermit- 
tent, unusually severe. When the vomiting 
ceased, I went to bed, and was well covered 
with blankets. The sensation of cold gra- 
dually abated, and I fell asleep. The cold- 
ness and shivering were not followed by any 
preternatural degree of heat of which I was 
sensible; but when I awoke in the morning, 
I felt a moisture on my feet. In the course 
of the night, the pustule had burst, and a 
white firm substance appeared in the spot 
which the pustule had occupied, but so deep 
that it could not be laid hold of. The ani- 
mal had changed his situation during the 
preceding night, and had buried himself very 
deeply among the muscles. He had effected 
this so completely, that though I felt him 
with my finger to a great extent on the 17th, 
yet, on the morning of the 18th, there was 
not the smallest portion perceptible; nor 
could I discover the least trace, on the strict- 
est examination. I felt no inconvenience 
from the attack which I have described on 
the following day, except a little weakness; 
|P_298
nor had I afterwards any return of these di- 
stressing symptoms. On the night of the 
18th, a considerable inflammation appeared, 
surrounding the ankle; and I found it ne- 
cessary, on the 19th, to refrain from walking, 
and to confine myself to a horizontal posi- 
tion. On the 22d, I drew a small thread 
across the surface of the sore, so as to touch 
the extremity of the animal, which felt hard, 
and firmly fixed in the flesh. In consequence 
of this irritation, he threw up a considerable 
quantity of a watery fluid. Some time after 
this, he entirely disappeared, and the inflam- 
mation abated. A troublesome sore remain- 
ed, with a bloody ichorous discharge, which 
continued until the beginning of February 
1792. It then healed, except a small point. 
At this time the animal made his appearance, 
and I was enabled to secure him with a 
thread. He was wrapped round a small bit 
of stick, and pulled twice a day, in the com- 
mon manner. At the expiration of twenty 
days the extraction was completed. 

The animal was upwards of two yards in 
length, and of the thickness of a crow quill. 
After the half was extracted, he gradually 
|P_299
diminished in size. I found that, his pro- 
gress was quickened by the application of 
the aloe leaf, as hot as it could be born, to 
that part of the leg which was hard, swelled, 
and painful. The same effect was produced 
by hard friction. A greasy substance was 
well rubbed on the part, by which means the 
friction could be employed for a greater length 
of time, and induced less pain. The animal 
was coiled up in hard knots, in different 
parts of the leg; and to these the friction 
was chiefly applied. These remedies, parti- 
cularly the friction, seemed to stimulate the 
animal, and induce him to quit his hold 
more expeditiously than he otherwise would 
have done. The application of a great de- 
gree of heat to the part, promoted the form- 
ation of matter around the animal; in con- 
sequence of which he became less fixed, and 
was therefore pulled out more easily. I am 
inclined to believe, that the extraordinary 
symptoms which appeared on the night of 
the 17th December, were occasioned by the 
animal having changed his position; and 
that they might have been prevented, by 
|P_300
making an opening through the sound part 
of the skin, and securing the animal with a 
thread. Had this practice been followed, 
perhaps the greater part, if not the whole, 
might have been extracted immediately, and 
without farther trouble or danger. 

