

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v18_0342^]

|P_342
[}IX. }]
[}History of a Case in which a Recovery took 
place, after a remarkable Injury to the Brain. 
By Mr Thomas Brown, Surgeon in Mussel- 
burgh. }]
CHARLES BURNET, about 12 years 
old, having, on Thursday evening the 9th 
of May, been engaged with some of his com- 
panions in throwing stones, received a blow 
on his head, which made him fall down, and 
he remained insensible for a few minutes. 
He was soon after led home, and appeared so 
immaterially hurt, as to require no immedi- 
ate assistance. 

On the following morning I was sent for, 
and found him out of bed, complaining only 
of some sickness, giddiness, and inclination 
for vomiting; his senses every way perfect; 
his sight and hearing very distinct. His pulse, 
however, was much disordered, not beating 
two strokes alike, in general slow, and some- 
|P_343
times with the intermission of two or three 
seconds. 

Upon examining the place where he re- 
ceived the blow, I could only observe a small 
wound, little larger than a pin head; no tu- 
mour: but, upon pressing with the finger, 
the teguments gave that feel, as if there 
were no bone beneath, with some faint fluc- 
tuation. Upon enlarging the wound with a 
lancet, I was much surprised with the ap- 
pearance of a quantity of brain, mixed with 
blood. Introducing my finger, I felt the 
cranium much broke and beat in, a consi- 
derable way upon the brain. I proceeded 
to enlarge the wound, in the directions that 
appeared most necessary and convenient, so 
as to expose the whole fracture. A space, 
nearly about the size of half a crown, was 
sensibly depressed; and in that place where 
two pieces were beat in, the depression ex- 
ceeded half an inch. The assistance of the 
trepan was not necessary; and I readily ex- 
tracted one piece, about the size of a large 
farthing, shaped like a wedge. The other 
piece seemed to adhere pretty firmly by 
its largest surface. After raising it to a 
|P_344
level, I determined to give it a chance of 
uniting. There was a fissure extended about 
three fourths of an inch, which stopped at the 
junction of the frontal bone. The fracture 
was situated in the left parietal bone, nearly 
in the middle between the sagittal and squa- 
mous sutures, and about an inch from its 
junction with the frontal. Having done 
every thing that appeared immediately ne- 
cessary, I dressed up the wound, put my pa- 
tient to bed, and gave every direction that 
appeared requisite, and left him more reliev- 
ed than before the operation, having seem- 
ingly no complaint. 

I shall not give a particular detail of the 
progress of the case, but content myself with 
observing, that for three or four days the 
symptoms were rather more unfavourable, 
the giddiness severe, the vomiting almost con- 
stant, and attended with frequent hiccough, 
the pulse very much affected, and a consider- 
able languor and want of energy over the 
whole system. He only once made his urine, 
and had one stool insensibly. His mental 
faculties were at no time deranged. During 
these few days, I allowed him nothing but 
|P_345
gruel acidulated with lemon, whey, or water 
with a toast in it; and made him take a spoon- 
ful of a mixture every three hours, with 
tinctura thebaica and vitriolic acid. No 
symptomatic fever appearing, and his pulse 
becoming flat, I allowed him white wine in 
his drinks; and about the fifth day, his vo- 
miting and hiccough entirely left him. After 
this period, he uniformly did well; and a- 
bout three weeks from the accident, he was 
able to go about the house. At this period 
he had no complaint whatever, but his pulse 
was still affected. It however gradually be- 
came more regular for about six weeks, when 
it was not in the least affected; and now he 
undergoes every fatigue, and attends his 
usual diversions, without the smallest incon- 
venience. 

There are a few particulars which occur- 
ed during the operation, and in the after 
state, which deserve to be taken notice of. 
Immediately upon allowing vent to the brain, 
by enlarging the wound, the boy felt him- 
self instantly relieved both from sickness and 
giddiness; and, from being languid and op- 
pressed, became lively and strong. During the 
|P_346
whole operation, he remained sitting erect in a 
chair, without the smallest tendency to faint. 
When the patient cried severely, small quan- 
tities of the brain came out repeatedly; and 
I am confident that this, together with what 
was immediately extravasated, would nearly 
fill a table spoon. The motion of the brain, 
from the pulsation of the arteries, was very 
distinct, and produced small evacuations of 
its substance. This motion continued till 
the wound was quite healed, which required 
nearly two months. Its cure was very much 
retarded by the piece of bone which I allow- 
ed to remain. I was under the necessity of 
extracting it a month after; which was easily 
effected without any bad consequence. I 
was but little troubled with an excrescence, 
which sometimes occurs after the operation 
of the trepan. It, however, exceeded the 
size of a cherry, was remarkably sensible, 
and, upon pressure, I could easily produce 
giddiness or sickness. It put on very much 
the appearance of the brain in a schirrous 
state. Sneezing, coughing, and even speak- 
ing, for a few weeks after the accident, gave 
|P_347
great pain; and the first produced slight stu- 
pidity. 

From the whole history of this case, I 
think we may draw the following conclu- 
sions. 
1. That a sound state of the brain is not 
so essentially necessary to life as has been 
imagined. 
2. That it may be very much injured, 
without producing dangerous, or even a- 
larming consequences. And, 
3. That this case affords a proof, that the 
brain may be more freely treated, provided, 
in every circumstance, the injury is entirely 
unconnected with compression. 

This last conclusion is clearly pointed out, 
by attending to the situation of the patient; 
for notwithstanding the bone was beat in 
upon the brain, the dura mater lacerated, 
and a quantity of brain extravasated between 
the cranium and teguments, no alarming 
symptom ensued. It can only be explained 
from that quantity of brain getting imme- 
diate vent, which was necessary to compen- 
sate for the depression of the bone, and con- 
sequently preventing its power of compression. 

