

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v18_0120^]

|P_120
[}VII. }]
[}Observatio de Diarrhœa, cum Obstructione 
Alvi, haud infrequenti connubio. Auctore H. 
Callisen, M. D. & Prof. Chirurg. Vide
Acta Societatis Regiæ Medicæ Hauniensis. 
Vol. II. 8vo, Hauniæ.}]
DR CALLISEN sets out with observ- 
ing, that both theory teaches, and ex- 
perience confirms, that the stimulus of acrid 
matter contained in the intestines, renders 
the alvine dejections more frequent, and in- 
duces diarrhœa: for no discharge by the belly 
is obtained, but what is produced by the mat- 
ter to be rejected, in consequence of its size, 
weight, acrimony, or some similar circum- 
stance. Where the stimulus to the intestines 
is considerable, unless it be such as to induce 
inflammation, the expelling power of the in- 
testines will be proportionally increased; 
the derivations of fluids to the intestines will 
be more copious, and the dejections of ex- 
|P_121
crementitious matter in a fluid state more 
frequent. Hence, among the remote causes 
of diarrhœa, authors have enumerated fo- 
reign irritations introduced, such as poisons, 
medicines, or the like; acrid matters de- 
posited in the alimentary canal from the sy- 
stem, such as the bile or succus pancreaticus; 
or morbid matter generated in the system, 
as in cases of critical and colliquative diar- 
rhœæ: But no writer, Dr Callisen observes, 
has considered a hardened mass, formed of 
the excrementitious matters themselves, as a 
cause of this affection: nor would such an 
effect, he thinks, appear probable, since a col- 
lection might naturally be supposed to in- 
duce rather mechanical obstruction than 
diarrhœa. But the possibility of such a 
cause of diarrhœa was demonstrated to him 
by the following case: A woman in the 
40th year of her age, of a spare habit of 
body, the mother of several children, and 
menstruating regularly, had, for several 
months, been distressed with anorexia, vo- 
miting, colic pains, particularly in the epi- 
gastric region and diarrhœa, by which black 
coloured fæces were evacuated. When she 
|P_122
applied for Dr Callisen's advice, he prescrib- 
ed various saline, oily, and rhubarbarine 
laxatives; and afterwards, different tonics, 
with suitable regimen; but without deriving 
any benefit from them. A pressing colic 
pain seemed, to the feelings of the patient, 
to be now entirely seated in the left hypo- 
chondrium. Upon examining the abdomen, 
Dr Callisen felt a tumour on the left side, 
near the margin of the false ribs, about the 
size of a goose egg, which gave pain when 
touched. Suspecting this tumour to arise 
from obstruction of the spleen, he ordered 
alterant pills, consisting of soap, bitter ex- 
tract, and gum ammoniac; and at the same 
time he directed external unction with mer- 
cury and camphor. Under these remedies, 
the vomiting ceased, and the pain descended 
to the region of the loins, on the left side; 
the diarrhœa, from which she had five or six 
stools every day, being little changed. 

When Dr Callisen again examined the 
abdomen, at the end of fourteen days after 
his former examination, he found that the 
tumour had descended from the place it then 
occupied, to the region of the loins. The me- 
|P_123
dicines before directed were ordered to be 
continued, as the patient was pretty easy, 
her symptoms being diminished. Some time 
afterwards, she affirmed she was no longer 
sensible of the tumour, nor could Dr Calli- 
sen discover it by the feel: but from that 
period she complained of a peculiar sense of 
pressure in the rectum, and was excruciated 
both night and day with constant tenesmus. 
She was at the same time affected with trouble- 
some hæmorrhoidal tumours, and frequent 
bloody dejections. To counteract these 
symptoms, Dr Callisen directed leeches to be 
applied to the anus, emollient and oily in- 
jections, anodynes, and the gummy extract 
of aloes. But notwithstanding these, the 
tenesmus so far increased, that the patient, 
under the violence of this complaint, fre- 
quently fainted. A slow fever, with great 
prostration of strength, supervened, and she 
seemed to be in the utmost danger. 

While the patient was in this deplorable 
situation, Dr Callisen, upon examining the 
rectum with his finger, was able to touch a 
hard body; and, judging of the size of it by 
means of a probe, he concluded that it was 
|P_124
too large to be discharged by the efforts of 
nature. From reflecting on the symptoms 
resulting from intestinal calculi, he now con- 
jectured that his patient's complaints arose 
entirely from a concretion of that nature, and 
thought that no time was to be lost in extract- 
ing it. Having placed the patient in the situa- 
tion for the operation for fistula in ano, he 
introduced the forceps employed for the ex- 
traction of stone from the bladder, into the 
rectum. From the distance of the handles, 
after he had laid hold of the foreign body, 
he concluded, that its diameter must be a- 
bove four inches, and that it was therefore 
too large to be extracted entire by the na- 
tural orifice of the anus. But before think- 
ing of enlarging the passage, it first seemed 
proper to attempt to break the foreign body. 
This he very easily accomplished; and it 
soon appeared, that it did not consist of 
a calculous matter; for he extracted se- 
veral fragments of highly fœtid excrementi- 
tious matter, of a very firm consistence, 
weighing about two ounces and a half. The 
remainder was easily brought away, by re- 
peated emollient injections. The same day, 
|P_125
many hard scyballa were spontaneously eva- 
cuated by the anus. After this, the natural 
consistence of the excrements returned, the 
cholic pains, anorexia, and hæmorrhoidal 
tumours soon ceased; and in a short time 
she recovered perfect health; care being 
only taken to obviate costiveness, by proper 
diet, and gentle saline and oily laxatives. 

Dr Callisen has no doubt that this excre- 
mentitious mass was accumulated and indur- 
ated in the colon. For the small intestines, 
he observes, on account of their equal 
figure, without cells, and of the greater 
thinness of their contents, scarce admit of 
obstruction, without some other disease. On 
the contrary, the cells of the colon give an 
opportunity for the retention of the more 
firm excrements, for their induration, and 
for their gradual increase. The concreted 
mass, by its size, acrimony, and weight, af- 
fords, he observes, an unusual stimulus to 
the intestines. Hence, in such a case, he thinks 
fluids would be derived to the intestines; 
and from thence, as in the present case, 
diarrhœa, and all the other symptoms here 
occurring, would take place. 

|P_126
Through the whole course of this patient's 
disease, for the space of three months, diar- 
rhœa was present; and he thinks it highly 
probable that this arose from the irritation 
of the excrementitious globe, since that symp- 
tom ceased almost as soon as it was evacuated. 

Dr Callisen concludes this paper with an 
observation, which he thinks of importance 
in practice. In every habit, he remarks, 
where the intestines are weak and irritable, 
a diarrhœa may be present for many days, 
even for weeks, and yet excrementitious 
matter may be accumulated in such quanti- 
ty, as to be prejudicial to the system, from 
its acrimony, putridity, and from the dan- 
ger of absorption, particularly in acute dis- 
eases. In cases of diarrhœa and dysentery, 
we not unfrequently discover, he observes, 
at the end of several weeks, numerous hard 
scyballa evacuated, which could never be 
supposed to be produced, from the small 
quantity of nourishment taken during the 
course of the disease. And we find, that 
after the evacuation of these, the patient 
soon recovers. Hence he thinks, that, in 
many cases at least, strong purgatives are 
|P_127
indicated in the beginning of the disease, for 
those affected with dysentery and diarrhœa. 
He considers them as particularly indicated 
in every case where foulness of the tongue 
and an oppressive fixed pain at any particu- 
lar part of the abdomen, create a suspicion 
of accumulated fæces. And, on the basis 
of extensive experience, he ventures to af- 
firm, that, in putrid diseases, particularly in 
the beginning, although either spontaneous 
diarrhœa, or one excited by gentle laxatives, 
be present, yet that an obstinate disease may 
be much more quickly and safely cured, if 
brisk purgatives be exhibited in due time. 
And, upon the whole, he is disposed to 
think, that in putrid diseases, brisk purga- 
tives are to be preferred to more gentle ones, 
since a state of torpor and insensibility of the 
intestinal canal, and indeed of the whole 
body, often renders the use of the latter al- 
together ineffectual. 

