

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v19_0341^]

|P_341
[}XIII. }]
[}History of a Tetanic Affection, terminating fa- 
vourably. By Mr William Ellis, Surgeon. }]
A New negro wench of Mr John Dunn's, 
who had been washing clothes at the ri- 
ver, came home to all appearance perfectly 
well; she slept in a warm chamber. In the 
morning, she had not risen so early as usual; her 
mistress went to her room; found her with a 
tetanus; her jaws strongly locked; spasms very 
rigid of the cervical muscles. Upon inqui- 
ry I found , that about eighteen days previous 
to that time, she had a ragged piece of pine 
wood run into her foot, which was extracted 
with some difficulty. As I never had one pa- 
tient out of a great number that ever did reco- 
ver, when the locked jaw came on, either from 
lacerated wounds, or puncture in the foot, 
I gave not the least hopes. I examined the 
part; it appeared dry. I cut down the 
|P_342
skin; and the puncture that had been made 
was very perceptible; but no matter, or any 
thing extraneous, could be discovered. I 
ordered her mouth to be tried to get it 
open, to administer something, but with- 
out effect. I immediately applied a caus- 
tic to the puncture; put her into a warm 
bath, keeping out the wounded foot where 
the caustic was; then wrapped her in a 
blanket. We tried to open her mouth, and, 
with great force, got it nearly to take a crown 
piece. I ordered laudanum very freely, but 
she could not swallow, I gave æther and cam- 
phire, which she held in her mouth, and 
gave her some relief; but swallowed not a 
drop. I ordered a clyster with tart. emetic. 
drach. i.; it procured no stools, but was suc- 
ceeded by a profuse sweat. Four hours 
after, she had another clyster with tart. 
emetic. drach. i. Half an hour after, she had 
a stool; and vomited twice. About half an 
hour after this, the spasms of the cervical mus- 
cle were less violent. She began to drink, 
and open her mouth well. I took off the 
caustic. She had three spoonfuls of ol. 
Ricin. given her, which procured plenty of 
stools. In the night, she had a slight re- 
|P_343
turn; but it went off before I saw her. I 
put her upon bark and fetids; she kept 
very well; except the healing of the escar, 
which was deep; and it was some weeks be- 
fore it could be healed. I should observe, 
that I rubbed in mercury; but it could not 
have had the effect the lovers of it suppose. 

