

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v19_0313^]

|P_313
[}VIII. }]
[}Account Of the pernicious Effects from an Im- 
pregnation given to Water by Lead. Com- 
municated to Dr Duncan by A. B. in the 
Service of the Hon. East-India Company. }]
AS an account of the following unfortu- 
nate circumtance, may perhaps in 
some future period hinder a similar accident 
from taking place, I consider it to be my 
duty, as a member of the society, to point out 
an unquestionable instance of the pernicious 
custom of using any kind of drink which 
has for a certain time been in contact with 
lead. I myself, and several others, have 
very nearly lost our lives from this cause; 
and perhaps the singularity of the accident 
may render an account of it not unworthy a 
place in your valuable collection. Of this, 
however, you will be able to judge, from 
perusing the following narrative. 

About ten months ago, a small packet set 
sail for India, and for some time had a very 
|P_134
prosperous passage; but afterwards, in con- 
sequence of contrary winds, all hands were 
obliged to be put upon an allowance of three 
pints of water per day. The seamen kept 
each their allowance separately in bottles; 
while the officers, on the other hand, were 
so unfortunate as to put all their's into a 
leaden cistern, with a stop-cock, which, as 
in many other vessels of the same kind, is 
situated for this very purpose at the door of 
the cabin. The consequence of this was 
dreadful indeed. In about three weeks 
time, there was not one of the offi- 
cers who was not affected with all the 
symptoms of the Colica Pictonum in the 
most violent degree. The colic, regularly, 
morning and evening, became remarkably 
aggravated; the pain all over the abdomen 
was intense; and, along with the usual spas- 
modic affections in this disease, we had some- 
times a tendency to universal convulsions. 
For nearly the space of six weeks, almost no- 
thing would remain even for a moment on 
our stomachs, so that some of us were obli- 
ged to have nourishing glysters occasionally. 
After being about five weeks in this condi- 
|P_135
tion, we arrived at St Helena, where we all 
gradually recovered in the course of a few 
weeks; though some of us have had very 
severe relapses of our complaint during our 
return to England. For some time past, 
too, we have been subject to weakness of 
the back and superior extremities, which has 
now, however, totally disappeared. 

The above symptoms proceeded at several 
times to such an alarming pitch, and at last 
reduced us so much, that, even upon making 
land, two of us with the utmost difficulty 
escaped with our lives. 

Upon considering the matter for a mo- 
ment, there cannot, I apprehend, be the 
smallest doubt with respect to the cause of 
the above symptoms. That they were occa- 
sioned, is proved not only from this circum- 
stance, that every one of the officers who 
lived upon the water contained in it was af- 
fected, while not one of the seamen (who 
all, as we have said, kept their allowance 
seperately) had the smallest complaint; but 
also from the following experiment which I 
made, to put the matter beyond a doubt. 

|P_316
Having filled two tumblers, one with pure 
water, and the other with water from the 
cistern, I poured into each of them a small 
portion of a solution of hepar sulphuris; the 
consequence of which was, that the latter 
was rendered very dark-coloured, while the 
appearance of the other was hardly changed. 

How the water could become so impreg- 
nated with lead, I shall not absolutely pre- 
tend to determine. Perhaps the small quan- 
tity of water might, in consequence of the 
motion of the vessel, mechanically seperate 
a small portion of the metal: Or, not im- 
probably, as it had been kept for several 
weeks, it might take some portion of it up 
by means of a chemical affinity. But in 
whatever manner the above event might 
happen, our unllucky case too clearly prov- 
ed that a portion of lead was contained in our 
allowance of water. 

I shall conclude what I have to say upon 
this subject, with a few words upon the me- 
thod of treatment in the above complaint. 

During the whole course of it, purgatives, 
injections, and the semicupium, were almost 
the only remedies we could depend upon. 
|P_317
Opium, whether administered by the mouth 
or anus, ought never to be exhibited pre- 
vious to some purgative medicine; for in 
the course of our complaint, I had an oppor- 
tunity both of feeling and observing that, by 
following a contrary practice, the pain and 
tension of the abdomen, the gripes, costive- 
ness, and in short all the symptoms, were 
uniformly aggravated. It will, however, in 
some instances be necessary, after the opera- 
tion of the purgative, nay sometimes even 
before it has begun to operate, to give a mo- 
derate dose of opium by the mouth or anus, 
according to circumstances. Opium, how- 
ever, is a remedy which, I can freely say 
from experience, ought to be used in this 
complaint as sparingly as possible, and with 
the utmost precaution; for although it may 
often remove, and even prevent the spasms 
of the intestines for the time, yet I have uni- 
formly found, that it renders them much 
more liable to return, than if no such reme- 
dy had been employed. What I found to 
be of the greatest service in my case, was an 
electuary, in which camphor and flowers of 
sulphur were the principal ingredients; this 
remedy proving both an antispasmodic and 
|P_318
a laxative. Bleeding, too, was a remedy, 
which, though unwillingly, I was under the 
necessity of employing, in consequence of 
the repeated supervention of severe inflam- 
matory symptoms. 

As I know from undoubted authority, that 
there are many vessels which have leaden 
cisterns of the same kind with that which oc- 
casioned the above unfortunate accident; 
and as perhaps at some future period a case 
similar to ours may not improbably again 
take place; it may be worth while to publish 
the foregoing account, by which at least the 
surgeons of such vessels may be put upon 
their guard, and similar catastrophes, if pos- 
sible, prevented. Nay, it may even be at- 
tended with beneficial effects on shore; for as 
I am well informed that there are leaden 
cisterns, and even leaden utensils, in use a- 
mong many families in this kingdom, unfor- 
tunate accidents cannot fail of sometimes 
happening. And I think that it is incumbent 
upon every medical person to do what he 
can in advising the abolition of every leaden 
machine, with which the articles of our diet 
may possibly come in contact. 

