

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v19_0265^]

|P_265
[}III. }]
[}An account of the Effects of an over-dose of the 
Terra Ponderosa Muriata. Communicated 
to Dr Fowler, by Mr A. Mather, Surgeon, 
York. }]
THE Following case affords an instance, 
which may not speedily recur, of the 
pernicious effect of an over-dose of terra 
ponderosa muriata. It is drawn up with so 
much perspicuity and accuracy by the gentle- 
man who was the subject of it, that I can- 
not add any thing to it in these respects. I 
shall only premise, that he was subject to 
frequent attacks of colic, and in the inter- 
val thought his stomach much strengthen- 
ed, and the motion of the bowels duly re- 
gulated by the terra ponderosa muriata, in 
doses of 10 or 12 drops, three times a day. 
These effects I had observed before in similar 
cases, and therefore, recommended the use 
of the medicine to him. As he lived at a 
|P_266
considerable distance from me, I sent him 
an ounce-phial of it at a time, with cau- 
tionary directions respecting its use. These, 
however, in a moment of inattention, he 
had forgot. I conjecture, he must have 
taken at that time about 70 or 80 drops; 
having taken, by his acount, the sixth part 
of an ounce. The consequences which fol- 
lowed are, I think, worthy the notice of 
the Faculty. 

If you will transmit them to Dr Duncan 
for insertion in the Medical Commentaries, 
you will confer an obligation on, Sir, 

Your sincere friend, 
and humble servant, 

York, August 26th. 

A. Mather. 

[}To Dr Fowler, Physcian, York. }]
Dear Sir, 
Freston, 2d March 1792. 

Well acquainted, as I doubt not you are, 
with the use of the stomachic drops you gave 
me, you propably may not have had an op- 
portunity of observing the effects of their 
abuse. As a matter of professional curiosity, 
I perhaps may give you some information on 
the subject. 

|P_267
About a fortnight ago, or somewhat more, 
I had an attack of the colic; and after I 
was relieved, I applied to the drops. I took 
them every day; but only once each day, 
and 10 drops at a time. On Thursday night, 
I took what was meant to be the usual quan- 
tity, but found from the excessively strong 
taste, I must have made a mistake. I hap- 
pened to have looked at the bottle just be- 
fore I dropped them out, to observe how 
much remained. When I looked again after- 
wards, on account of finding the taste so 
strong, I perceived I had disminished them half 
an inch in depth, certainly rather more than 
less. They instantly produced their usual 
effect of making me squeamish. In half an 
hour's time, (about 12 o'clock), I began to 
be violently purged without griping, and, at 
the same time, began to be very much relax- 
ed. This continued till about 2 in the af- 
ternoon, by which time, I could only crawl 
along with the assistance of the furniture 
and walls; my knees, and particularly my 
right, was first seized. When the purging 
stopped, it was succeeded by vomiting, which 
continued till about 8 o'clock. The dis- 
|P_268
charge was not great, but very nauseous, 
both in taste and apperance. I took some 
warm camomile tea; but that came off di- 
rectly, and pure. About 3, I was helped up 
to bed. The use of my limbs was gradually 
taken from me, before the 9 in the evening. I 
could not produce the least possible motion, 
in any joint or limb about me. The last 
part I lost the use of was my left hand. The 
strokes of my pulse, so long as I could feel 
them, and afterwards, when an apothecary 
in this neighbourhood, for whom I sent, felt 
them, were regular, and as in the usual state 
of my health. My feet were deadly cold, 
though continually wrapped in heated slan- 
nels. The apothecary was sent for in the 
evening, and was with me about 8 o'clock. 
I told him what I apprehended to be the 
cause of my complaint, and what I under- 
stood from you the medicine was. He seem- 
ed to doubt whether it could produce the 
effects: he ordered me nothing of medicine 
that night. The people about me were then 
prepairing me a bed down stairs: he directed 
hot bricks to be applied to my feet, as soon 
as I was removed, and that they should give 
|P_269
me some gruel whit brandy in it. After I 
was got to bed, my feet began to burn, and 
my whole body to perspire freely, but not 
profusely; and continued to do so through 
the remainder of my illness. I could not 
sleep any part of the night; and was very 
uneasy in every posture in which I could be 
placed. You may judge of my utter debility, 
when I tell you that, in being served with 
some toast steeped in gruel, a crum passed 
the wrong way, and yet with the utmost 
effort I could not make the least cough to 
throw it back again. The apothecary still, 
however, thought my complaint could scarce- 
ly be caused by the terra ponderosa muriata, 
but seemed disposed to consider me in a rheu- 
matic fever. He told me, he should send 
me a mixture to continue and promote the 
perspiration, which had broken out. 

About 2 o'clock on Friday afternoon, I 
perceived some little strength in a finger, 
and some of my toes. About 5 o'clock, I 
was sensibly amending; and at 10 o'clock, 
when my bed was made, I could put part of 
my own clothes on, and walk without assist- 
ance over the floor, from and to the bed. 
|P_270
On being got to bed again, I took the apo- 
thecary's medicine for the first time; the 
basis of which, if I may be allowed to pry 
into the mysteries of medicine, I conceive to 
be tincture of guaiacum, which directly 
brought on the perspiration, that had been 
rather checked by getting up. That night 
I rested well; and the next day felt no com- 
plaint, exept a sensation of weariness in the 
muscular parts of my body, very like that 
which follows the day after a hard journey. 
I am sensibly thinner than I was, but feel no 
remains of my complaint. My speedy re- 
covery left me no doubt about the cause of 
my complaint. But I shall not be terrified 
by it from using this valuable medicine. I 
brought my bottle very low, and shall there- 
fore beg you to send me two more; one of 
which I intend to give away to a man in the 
neighbourhood, to whom I am clear it must 
be of service, from the similarity of our sto- 
mach complaints. Dear Sir, 

Your obliged friend and servant, 
J— L— 
To Mr Mather. 

