

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ3_v20_0289^]

|P_289
[}VI. }]
[}Histories of Cases of Petechiæ sine febre termi- 
nating fatally. Communicated in a Letter to 
Dr. Duncan, from Dr. William Tattersall, 
Physician, Liverpool. }]
FROM the politeness and attention with 
which you treated me when a student, 
as well as from the general interest you take 
in the pursuit of truth, I am persuaded that 
you will give the following account a candid 
perusal; and that, if you think it worth a 
place in your very useful Commentaries, you 
will not with-hold it. 

Accounts of cases, when faithfully given, 
are often almost equally useful, whether the 
treatment has been successful or not. To 
know what remedies will not succeed, espe- 
cially if they were probable or popular, is the 
road to learn what will succeed; and, from 
these negative accounts, there is frequently 
|P_290
more light thrown upon the nature of dis- 
eases, than from the most flattering testimo- 
ny to the efficacy of medicines. 

The disorder of which I am about to give 
a few cases, having been known only of late, 
and treated by few writers, has not yet ob- 
tained a sixed appellation. It has been called 
by different names, of the respective proprie- 
ty of which the public must judge. Graaf 
has called it Petechiæ sine febre. You, Sir, 
have called it Petechianosis, or Aimarrhœa. 
Dr. Adair, joining both names, has called it 
Hæmorrhœa petechialis. I confess, that at pre- 
sent I am inclined to think, that it ought to 
be called either petechiæ sine febre, or pete- 
chionosis; for I have not found the hæmorr- 
hage either constant or considerable. 

Of this disorder I have seen four cases. 
The first was a woman, of the name of Mary 
Ferris, aged forty-five. She was the mother of 
a number of children; if I recollect right, six 
or seven. She said, that the last labour but 
one had been exceedingly long and painful; 
and that, since this time, she had been much 
troubled both with leucorrhœa and menorr- 
hagia. She seemed to be in poor circum- 
|P_291
stances, and to have lived sparingly. She 
had been delivered about eight weeks before 
I saw her, without any particular circumstan- 
ces occurring; but she had not recovered 
well; and she had laboured under the com- 
plaint above mentioned for six days. She 
had no hæmorrhage; and the discolourations 
of the skin were rather vibices than petechiæ. 
The prostration of strength and appetite were 
considerable, but not great; the pulse was 
sixty-eight; and she had no febrile symp- 
toms. Under the direction of the apotheca- 
ry of the Dispensary, she was taking, every 
second hour, a wine-glass full of a mixture 
which we call Mistura Peruviana Vinosa. This 
is merely equal parts of decoction of Peru- 
vian bark, and domestic or raisin wine. She 
was also taking a grain of opium every night. 
I changed the mixture, and substituted the 
decoction of bark, acidulated in the propor- 
tion of two drachms of the diluted acid of 
vitriol to eight ounces of the decoction, to be 
taken at the same distance of time, and in the 
same quantity; but directed, that in the in- 
tervals there should be taken as much red 
Port. I directed that the opium should be 
|P_292
continued, and ordered mild laxatives occa- 
sionally. The disorder had not yielded to 
the remedies of the apothecary; nor did it 
yield to mine. I next employed the Peruvian 
bark in substance, and in greater quantities. 
I also increased the dose of the other reme- 
dies, but without any benefit. This case oc- 
curred during the first part of summer. The 
patient expressed a desire to have salad, if I 
thought it proper. I neither had given, nor 
was able to give, any remedy that was of 
service; and I did not think it right to refuse 
her. She thought she found considerable be- 
nefit from the salad, of which I understood 
she took a large quantity. It did not, how- 
ever, effect a cure, for she died in three or 
four days after she began to take it. 

The next case was much more singular. A 
family in the Work-house, of the name of 
Clarke, had the itch. The mother of the 
children was extremely clamorous and im- 
pertinent; she was continually asking for 
wine, and other nourishment, merely because 
the children had the itch. I understood that 
she bore a very bad character in the build- 
ings, and accordingly they disregarded her. 
|P_293
In a few weeks after this, she appeared with 
one of the children, a boy of about four years 
old, with a few distinct purple eruptions upon 
his body; he had a good appetite and good 
spirits, and played with other children in the 
court; his pulse was natural. I supposed 
this appearance might be some remainder of 
the itch, or some effect of heat or dirt, and 
took no farther notice of it. In about a week, 
the mother brought him again, and he had 
near four times the number of eruptions; 
and they were of a darker colour. He was 
languid, but he continued to walk out, and 
had a tolerable appetite. I then allowed him 
milk diet, and a little vinum domesticum, 
thinking his mother would be more likely to 
give this than medicine. I directed him to 
be kept as much as possible in fresh air, but 
not to walk much. He remained much the 
same for some weeks. I wished to have or- 
dered medicine, but despaired of the mother 
giving it to him. I, however, ventured to 
order an acidulated decoction of bark, and 
directed it to be made as pleasant as possible 
with syrup, in hopes that he might be indu- 
ced to take it. The mother said that she gave 
|P_294
it, but the clerk found a bottle full in her 
house; and it was generally supposed that she 
did not give any of it. I then desired the 
clerk to see an anodyne draught given at 
night, which I believe he did for several 
nights. The spots afterwards became ex- 
tremely numerous and vivid. The strength 
and appetite were gone, but the pulse was 
not quick; and there was no preternatural 
heat. There was never any hæmorrhage. 
I now ordered bark in substance, and the 
pulvis stypticus; but I believe they were 
never given, unless when the clerk, or some 
neighbour, saw now and then a dose given. 
I mentioned the case to two of our physicians, 
whom I happened to meet, and offered to 
shew it to them. They agreed to go with me 
next morning, which they did. But when 
we came, we found, to our surprise, and to 
some degree of temporary confusion in my- 
self, that fever had supervened. The pulse 
was so quick, that it could not be very accu- 
rately counted; I think it was near 160. The 
child died in the evening. 

Some months after my time of attendance at 
the Work-house had expired, Dr. McCartney 
|P_295
was attending; and he told me that another 
child of the same family was labouring under 
the same disorder, and took me to see him. 
What his treatment was, I do not particular- 
ly remember; but I dare say it was very pro- 
per, according to what is generally supposed 
of this disease; but he told me that the mo- 
ther did not do justice to the child, and that 
he suspected the medicines were not given. 
This child died a few days afterwards. The 
parents were small hardy-looking Welch 
people, and had no appearance of scrophula. 
They would take care that neither they nor 
their children were starved, while they were 
kept by the public. 

The fourth case was Thomas Freeman, aged 
sixty-two. He had lived in part of a house 
as a lodger, and generally dressed his own 
provisions. He appeared to have a dread of 
poverty, and to have lived very sparingly. For 
some days before I saw him, he had laboured 
under considerable weakness, attended with 
epistaxis, and large discolourations of the 
skin, which were a kind of vibices; but a- 
mongst them, there were many small bright 
petechiæ; the pulse was natural; the appe- 
|P_296
tite tolerable. He could walk a little out to 
see his neighbours, and was rather unwilling 
to be confined; but was very tractable. I or- 
dered vitriolic acid, bark, and wine, which 
I believe he took very regularly, but without 
any benefit. I then ordered him to take as 
many oranges as he conveniently could, and 
to continue the wine. The vibices decrea- 
sed, but the petechiæ increased very fast. He 
seemed, however, to be more cheerful, but 
did not gain any strength. In three days 
after, he began to live almost entirely upon 
oranges, to which he added a little gruel. 
He was removed to the house of a daughter, 
in a distant part of the town, and walked to 
and from the hackney-coach. After this he 
was unable to rise from his bed, grew worse 
very rapidly, and died in about two days. 

From this account of an almost total want 
of success, and from the other cases which 
are published, I think it is evident, that we 
do not yet comprehend either the nature or 
the cure of this disease. It has certainly a 
considerable resemblance to scurvy, and ap- 
pears to yield the most to similar remedies; 
but where scurvy affects the patients no more 
|P_297
than this disorder does at first, it yields to the 
remedies with much greater certainty and ra- 
pidity. 

In the next case that occurs, I will try the 
carbonic acid, ripe fruits, and brisk fer- 
mented malt-liquors. 

