

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ4_v1_0^]

|P_371
[}X. }]
[}History of a Case, in which Singular Symptoms 
occurred from the swallowing of an Iron Nail, 
which remained in the Stomach for about fif- 
teen Months. By Dr Philip Robarts Wil- 
son, Physician at Barnet. }]
AGirl in the fourth year of her age, in 
the month of February 1793, by ac- 
cident swallowed an iron nail, nearly two 
inches in length. In its passage, it wound- 
ed the œsophagus, which bled freely; and 
a soreness was felt there for some time. In 
about a fortnight, a trifling cough super- 
vened, with thirst and general fever. This 
fever had remissions and exacerbations; but 
the cough and thirst became incessant, with 
occasional sickness, and pain in the stomach 
and bowels. In the winter, the child began 
to expectorate much phlegm, particularly 
in the morning. This was invariably attend- 
ed with distressing pain in the region of the 
stomach. Her appetite, however, during 
|P_372
the remissions of fever, was somewhat im- 
proved; and she gradually recruited her 
strength a little. But during the fifteen 
months for which the nail was present in 
her stomach, her growth was almost entirely 
suspended. 

On the 5th of May 1794, I was consulted 
respecting the complaints of this child, on 
the supposition that she had worms. Not 
knowing any thing of the former circum- 
tances, I was ready to ascribe the above 
symptoms to the presence of worms; and I 
prescribed medicines with this view of the 
case. The child at this time appeared to be 
in the last stage of a decline, having regular 
night-sweats and hectic-fever. 

On the 7th of May, at noon, the child 
was seized with retching; and after throwing 
up much blood with some violence, the nail 
came up, enveloped in blood and mucus. It 
was covered with a considerable quantity 
of rust, particularly about the point. After 
the expulsion of the nail, every bad symptom 
gradually disappeared; and the child has 
since remained in a state of perfect health. 

