

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ4_v1_0073^]

|P_73
[}VIII. }]
[}On the Use of the Lukewarm Bath in Fevers in 
general, and particularly in those called Low 
Nervous Fevers. By J. D. Brandis, Phy- 
sician at Driburg. }]
[}See Journal der Erfindungen, Theroien und 
Widersprueche in der Natur und Arzneiwis- 
senschaft. Fünftes Stück. 8vo. Gotha, 
1794.}]
DR Brandis, in his Treatise upon the 
Driburg Waters, had recommended, 
in a general way, the use of the warm-bath 
in nervous fevers. It did not occur to him, 
that he had said any thing new, or requiring 
more full elucidation, until he read that part 
of Dr Marcard's Work upon bathing, in 
which he doubts its propriety, and even con- 
demns its use in such cases. This first exited 
our author to pay the subject more particu- 
lar attention, and to expose more fully the 
grouds of his opinion. 

In the winter of 1785, the slow nervous 
|P_74
fever was frequent in Goettingen, often 
complicated with gastric, bilious, and pi- 
tuitous symptoms. In general, however, 
there were no evident or certain remissions, 
and the sensorium was especally affected. 
An obtuse pain in the back of the head, pecu- 
liar weakness and dullness, or preternatural 
sensibility of the organs of sense, a small, ir- 
regular, often little accelerated pulse, deject- 
edness, crude, quite clear, or sometimes na- 
tural urine, watchfulness, or great inclination 
to sleep without refreshment, purging with- 
out relief, were, during the first ten or twelve 
days, in general the chief complaints of the 
patient, who could frequently remain still 
out of bed. The sensorium became gra- 
dually more affected; want of memory, apa- 
thy, and light delirium, succeeded; and the 
disease often terminated in the fifth or sixth 
week, commonly atteded with convulsions. 
A young physician died thus in the sixth 
week; another, who in company with our 
author opened his body, was seized with 
similar symptons. He had been already 
eight days ill when Dr Brandis first saw 
him: his situation was very critical; the 
|P_75
sensorium was remarkably affected, extraor- 
dinary dejection alternated with slight deli- 
rium; the pulse was small, irregular, and 
very quick, no evident remission was to be 
observed, nor any marks of accessions. Bli- 
sters had been applied to his legs, and he 
used internally wine, camphor, and bark. 
These stimulating remedies seemed to affect 
the sensorium still more; the delirium in- 
creased, and all the other symptoms grew 
worse. The lukewarm-bath was now order- 
ed, the other remedies were omitted, and 
sp. mindereri was prescribed, with weak 
warm wine and water, for his drink. The 
effect of the first bath was strikingly benefi- 
cial. After he had remained in it half an 
hour, the deliriun and anxiety diminished, 
and he declared it did him good, and would 
certainly save him. The bath was continued 
eight or ten days. He recovered gradually, 
and was at last completely cured. 

In Hildesheim, in the winter 1789, a simi- 
lar disease was epidemic. Dr Brandis em- 
ployed his remedy, wherever it could be 
used, and with constant success. He attend- 
ed a shop-boy, who was seized with this 
|P_76
slow nervous fever, accompanied by a suc- 
cession of anomalous symptoms, all, how- 
ever, referable to a peculiar affection of the 
sensorium. In the third week, universal 
apathy, stupor, and delirium, came on. Du- 
ring three weeks every remedy was tried; 
wine and ether were given in large doses, 
but in vain; the bath alone, on account of 
the local situation of the patient, could not 
be used, and he died in the middle of the 
eighth week. Immediately thereafter, a 
young woman in the same house was at- 
tacted. The symptoms were in the very 
beginning more violent. Insuperable me- 
lancholy and depression, with violent pain 
in the back of her head, slight remitting fe- 
ver, &c. confined her to bed in eight or 
ten days, and dreadful apathy came on 
as early as the thirteenth day. In this case, 
Dr Brandis overcame all difficulties, and on 
the fifteenth or sixteenth day the patient 
was placed in the warm-bath. The ex- 
pected success followd, the delirium dimi- 
nished, the disease declined without any ob- 
vious crisis, and in four weeks was quite 
removed. The reconvalescence was, how- 
|P_77
ever, extremely slow, and the total loss of 
hair shewed how violent the disease had 
been. 

In February 1798, Dr Brandis was con- 
sulted on account of a young merchant. He 
had been three weeks ill, and treated partly 
with slightly evacuating, partly with stimu- 
lating remedies. Family-distress prevented 
our author from visiting the patient, and he 
only recommended the use of the warm- 
bath in a general way. The attending phy- 
sician had, however, no confidence in it, and 
did not use it. Fourteen days afterwards, 
Dr Brandis was again called in, and found 
the patient given over by the former physi- 
cian. He lay quite insensible, passed his 
stools and urine involuntarily, he was slightly 
delirious, constantly muttering or making va- 
rious gesticulations with his hands; his 
pulse was small and frequent, subsultus tendi- 
num was almost constant, and his tongue 
was quite dry, of a bright red colour, with- 
out any incrustration. He frequently brought 
up, by coughing, thin frothy blood. The 
disease had now continued five weeks; eva- 
cuating and exciting remedies had been freely 
|P_78
used, and recourse had been long had to 
strong doses of wine and musk. Our author, 
even in this situation, did not hesitate to or- 
der the warm-bath; he trusted in it as a 
powerful antispasmodic, and its use was now 
agreed to. The very first bath produced 
evident relief, which encouraged them to 
continue its use steadily. The patient no 
longer brought up blood by coughing, and 
his stools were less frequent, and not without 
his being sensible of them. In eight days he 
was evidently better, and in about three weeks 
perfectly recovered. 

The principal effect of the warm bath in 
fevers is good in general, since it takes off 
the spasm of the skin, and those parts sym- 
pathising with it increases the excretion by 
the skin, promotes the flow of blood through 
its vessels, and moderates the action of the 
nervous system, but without in any way di- 
minishing the vital power or irritability. 
Such, says our author, is the opinion of 
Cullen, Selle, and of Marcard himself, where 
he proves, that the warm bath does not debi- 
litate.According to our author, he seems 
to have been misled merely by the pheno- 
menon which both of them, as well as Mar- 
|P_79
teau, have observed, that in the bath the 
pulse often falls sixteen or twenty beats in a 
minute. Dr Marcard ascribed this to a dimi- 
nution of the vital principle; our author ex- 
plains it otherwise. A freer circulation in 
 the small vessels of the surface, must, says 
he, diminish the flow of blood to the heart; 
now the stimulus, which excites the heart to 
action, being less, its contractions become 
less frequent, though without the smallest 
diminution of the vital principle. Hence 
Dr Brandis thinks the warm bath not ad- 
missible in those fevers where the cause lies 
in the primæ viæ, until that be removed, and 
only in putrid fevers when the crisis takes 
place by the skin, nor in inflammatory 
fevers, when the vital principle must be di- 
minished, which is contrary to the action of 
the warm bath; although he believes, with 
De la Verniere, that it may be useful as an 
assistant remedy, particularly in inflamma- 
tion of the intestines, on account of the sym- 
pathy between these and skin. An ir- 
ritable melancholy man became obstinately 
constipated. His physician, thinking consti- 
|P_80
pation must be removed by purgatives, gave 
at first neutral salts freely, then jalap, and 
at last, one morning, half a scruple of calomel, 
with frequent clysters of vinegar and water, 
and next morning a whole drachm of diagry- 
dium sulphuratum. Constant vomiting, a 
small hard pulse, and violent pain in the 
belly, now came on, and the physician had 
resolved to venture every thing, as he said, 
and to make the patient swallow half a pound 
of pure quicksilver, when Dr Brandis was 
called in. Lukewarm-bathing, bleeding, 
opiates, and the application of a blister to 
the belly, effected a cure. In those fevers in 
which the solids particulary suffer, our au- 
thor thinks the warm-bath must be especially 
useful. For confirmation, he refers to Cul- 
len, Richter, and Selle; and concludes with 
joining Marcard, in recommending it in 
malaria, arising, in warm countries, from 
marsh miasma; and in small-pox, where 
violent fever and spasm of the skin is present. 

