

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ4_v1_0310^]

|P_310
[}III. }]
[}A Case of Obstinate Constipation of the Bowels, 
cured by Calomel. Communicated to Dr Pear- 
son, by Dr David Hosack, New York. }]
AConstipation of the bowels is a dis- 
ease familiar to every physician; but 
when it has been of long continuance, and at 
last removed, it is of importance to become 
acquainted with the means of cure: Every 
case of this kind is instructive and useful, al- 
though it may only serve to confirm us in 
principles already known. 

Samuel Denton, clerk in dry-goods store, 
aged twenty, of a bilious habit of body, sent 
for me on the morning of September 28. 
1795. He complained of great uneasiness 
and griping in his bowels, attended with 
slight chill, a coldness of his extremities, and 
a small but regular pulse. Upon inquiry, 
he told me he had been attacked in the 
night; and ascribed his complaint to some 
honey he had taken in the evening at his 
|P_311
tea; adding, that it had frequently served 
him so before, and that he was subject to 
colic and costiveness upon any irregularity of 
diet, or upon imprudent exposure to cold. 
He informed me, that about five days before, 
he had had a slight attack of the same sort, 
brought on in the same way; and that, 
since that time, his stools had been much 
more watery than usual. From this last cir- 
cumstance, I am disposed to date his disease 
from September 23. the time of the first at- 
tack, seeing that his stools, since that time, 
were not of their proper consistence; but 
lest there be any error in the calculation, I 
shall date it from September 28. 

Early on the morning of the 28th, upon 
which I first visited him, he had taken an 
ounce of castor-oil, which at two o'clock in 
the afternoon had not operated. Imme- 
diately I sent him the following mixture, di- 
recting him to drink freely of thin chicken- 
broth. 
℞. Pulv. rhei, ʒij. 
Magnes. alb. ʒj 
Aq. Menthæ, ℥iij. M. Sumt. dimi- 
diam statim et alteram partem ter- 
tia hora postea, si opus sit. 

|P_312
At four o'clock, his pains increasing, I or- 
dered enemas of warm water, sweet oil, and 
molasses, to be administered every two hours, 
until his bowels should be emptied: they 
were accordingly exhibited, but without 
any good effect. At eight o'clock in the 
evening, I gave him ten grains of calomel. 
In the night, his pain and other symptoms 
became so violent, as to threaten inflamma- 
tion of his bowels; his pulse, as is common 
in inflammations of this sort, was small and 
tense. I immediately opened a vein in the 
arm, and, observing his pulse to rise, I drew 
between sixteen and twenty ounces of blood, 
which in a few minutes became covered 
with a strong sizy coat. I ordered a large 
blister to be applied to his belly; the gly- 
sters to be repeated with an addition of 
Glauber's salts, and to be thrown up in large 
quantities. On the 29th, symptoms of great 
inflammation still continuing, I again bled 
him very largely; gave him a scruple of 
calomel, with one grain of opium: I order- 
ed the injections to be repeated every hour, 
and flannels wrung out of warm water to 
be applied to his belly every quarter of an 
|P_313
hour: All which were done with the most 
scrupulous attention. In the afternoon, the 
calomel was repeated without the opium. 
In the evening, finding no prospect of re- 
lief, I though it necessary to have the ad- 
vice of some other physicians, when Profes- 
sors Bayley and Post were called in. 

It was proposed by those gentlemen to 
employ the warm-bath, and to take away a 
few more ounces of blood; which were ac- 
cordingly done. By these measures, the 
inflammation was subdued, but without ef- 
fecting any discharge from the bowels: the 
injections were continued from time to time, 
but came away as they were exhibited, with- 
out the smallest feculent smell. 

The calomel was repeated in doses of ten 
grains every six hours, which sat well upon 
his stomach. It may be proper here to re- 
mark, that throughout the whole of his 
complaint, his stomach was remarkable re- 
tentive, compared with the usual irritability 
of the organ in diseases of this nature; so 
much so, that the calomel was not rejected 
in any one instance. 30th, The calomel, 
warm-bath, and injections, were continued. 
|P_314
Without a tedious detail of each day's pre- 
scriptions, suffice it to observe, that after 
continuing this plan of treatment for seve- 
ral days without benefit, it was thought ex- 
pedient to administer other purgative me- 
dicines in addition to the calomel, and to 
vary the composition of the injections. Ac- 
cordingly, we had recourse to pills composed 
of jalap and cream of tartar, of each equal 
parts, whitc are much esteemed in obstinate 
costiveness; but in this instance they were 
exhibited for several days without any appa- 
rent advantage. 

Still continuing the use of the calomel as 
before, we next made trial of the castor- 
oil: when he had taken to the quantity of 
about a pound of this medicine, it became 
offensive to his stomach; and we desisted 
from its further use. 

As his bowels appeared to have lost all 
sensibility to the operation of these medi- 
cines, we had recourse to those of a more 
active nature, viz. the pill cocciæ and gam- 
boge, combined with jalap: These were 
given in considerable quantities; but they 
heated his system to such a degree, that we 
|P_315
thought it hazardous to proceed further in 
the use of them. 

Soap being recommended by some of his 
friends as an infallible remedy in conplaints 
of this sort, with the view to their gratifica- 
tion, it also was given in large quantities. 

But none of these medicines appeared to 
produce any good effects with our patient. 
The injections were also varied: instead of 
the warm water, sweet oil, molasses, and 
Glauber's salts, we made use of warm wa- 
ter, castor-oil, and molasses, with Glauber's 
salts, and a few spoonfuls of the infusion of 
tobacco: injections of tobacco-smoke were 
also tried: And, lastly injections of strong 
soap-suds, which in less violent cases fre- 
quently afford relief. 

The tobacco-smoke, and the composition 
containing the infusion of tobacco, occasion- 
ed considerable griping, with narcotic effects, 
and also greatly weakened our patient, but 
without producing any evacuation from his 
bowels. 

There are many instances recorded of 
the good effects of dashing cold water upon 
the extremities in cases of obstinate consti- 
|P_316
pation; but in the present instance, which 
appeared to challenge the whole Materia 
Medica, this also proved unsuccessful. Thus 
foiled, we concluded to rely upon the ca- 
lomel, and to solicit its operation by occa- 
sional mild glysters. 

Such was the plan of treatment from the 
30th of September until the 19th of Octo- 
ber, when he first began to complain of sore- 
ness of his gums, atteded with a rumbling 
of his bowels, and inclination to go to stool: 
at this time he had taken 480 grains of ca- 
lomel, and of the best quality, beside the me- 
dicines already related. 

We now considered the situation of our 
patient to be more favourable; for I believe 
it is a general remark among practitioners, 
that when the calomel affected the mouth, it 
is attended with a corresponding operation 
upon the bowels, and shortly after produces 
a discharge by stool. 

Accordingly, upon the morning of the day 
following, viz. the 20th of October, the 22d 
day of his disease, his injections came away 
covered with fœculent matter; in the even- 
ing, they were followed with moderate dis- 
|P_317
charges of fœces, in small hard lumps, and 
extremely fœtid. On the 21st, his stools be- 
came frequent, but in lumps of hard consist- 
ence; and thus continued for three or four 
days. 

We now desisted from the use of the ca- 
lomel; ordered him the free use of broths 
and gruels, which, throughout his disease, 
had been allowed him but in small quanti- 
ties. In eight or ten days, his bowels ap- 
peared to have recovered their natural state; 
his strength returned; and he paid a visit 
to his friends and relations in the country, 
who were equally rejoiced and astonished at 
his recovery. 

