

[^Sample 1: article - EMJ4_v1_0041^]

|P_41
[}IV. }]
[}Von der Wirkung der Gratiola im Wahnsinn; i. e. }]
[}Of the Effect of Gratiola in Madness, by L. F. 
B. Lentin. }]
See Journal der Praclischen Heilkunde; i. e. 
Journal of Practical Medicine and Surgery, 
published by C. W. Hufeland, Professor of 
Medicine at Jena, Vol. I. Jena, 1795.

DR Lentin observes, that, although we 
have deserted the use of hellebore 
in madness, it is still an axiom among old 
physicians, to treat that disease in most cases 
with emetics and purgatives; and that we 
are only too timorous, or too bold, in our 
choice of them. Our author has been so 
fortunate, as to derive great advantage, in 
three successive cases, from the powder of 
Gratiola. 

Two of the patients were brothers, whose 
father was not actually mad, but only 
crazy. Their uncle was completely de- 
|P_42
ranged, and continued so till his death, in his 
65th year. Both brothers were seized, at 
an early period of life, after unusually hard 
study. Praise and reward sharpened their 
desire of honour; and, redoubling their in- 
dustry, they denied themselves sleep, and 
every invigorating recreation. A mistaken 
enthusiasm prevailed over reason, and would 
not listen to any remonstrance. At first 
every action perfectly resembled Addison's 
description of a dream: The soul, in dreams, 
converses with numberless beings of her 
own creation, and is transported into ten 
thousand scenes of her own raising. She 
is herself the theatre, the actors, and the 
beholder;  and besides, the patient always 
plays the most important and conspicuous 
part. Every thing passed hitherto pretty 
quietly; the nights alone were sleepless, and 
spent in frequent changes of ideas. At last 
the delirium of one of the brothers increa- 
sed so much, that he attacked his mother 
and attendants, and leapt out of his win- 
dow, though without being materially hurt. 
Dr Lentin did not observe in him the symp- 
toms described by Auenbrugger, the retrac- 
|P_43
tion of one or both testicles, which is said 
to take place. 

The patient was at first copiously bled; 
and as none of the usual remedies were 
strong enough to procure the necessary eva- 
cuations, he was made to vomit with from 
three to five grains of white vitriol, after 
he had gotten a stimulating clyster. Dr 
Lentin now prescribed for him half a scruple 
of powdered Gratiola every morning, and 
as much every evening, with a decoction 
of grass-root for his drink. This was con- 
tinued, until the returning irritability of the 
viscera rendered a diminution of the dose 
necessary. After the evacuation of a great 
quantity of bilious matter, he was completely 
restored; as were also the other two, by the 
same method of treatment. They were all 
of a temperament which indicated the use of 
strong stimulating remedies. 

