

[^Sample 1: book - ^]

|P_5
[}Distempers of the solid simple Fibre. }]
21. Those Parts (which being separated from 
the fluid contained in the Vessels, are applied and 
sticking to each other by the strength of the living 
Body, and make the least Fibre) are the least, the 
simplest, earthy and hardly changeable from or by 
vertue of any Cause, which are found in our living 
Bodies. 

22. Hence the reason, why in them, separately 
considered, no one Distemper was ever, observed by 
Physicians, or mentioned as having been cured. 

23. But in the least Fibre, grown from the Con- 
junction of those Parts (21.) the following most 
simple Diseases from 24. to 38. deserve to be taken 
notice of: for they are frequent, and lay the foun- 
dation for understanding of others; notwithstand- 
ing they have hitherto been overlook'd, or not well 
enough understood. [/1./]

[}Distempers of a Laxe and Weak Fibre. }]
24. The weakness of the Fibre is that cohæsion 
of the minutest Parts described (21.) which is so 
|P_6
loosly linked, that it may be pulled asunder even 
by that degree of Motion which is requisite in heal- 
thy Bodies, or not much exceeding it. 

 25. The same is preceeded, 1. By the con- 
version of the Aliments into the Nature of heal- 
thy vital Juices obstructed; which is owing to 
the too great consumption of good Fluids, and to 
the Sluggishness of the powerful strength of the 
Solids over the Fluids; Or to the too great tough- 
ness of the Aliments overcoming the Powers that 
should alter them in the Body. 2. By the too weak 
application of one Part (21.) to the other, which 
proceeds from the too weak motion of the Fluids, 
and this again mostly from a Want or a Defect of 
the Muscular motion. 3. By a too great pulling of 
the Fibre, being near to a Breaking. 

26. The Weakness produceth easily a Stretching 
and a Breaking of the small Vessels made up of 
those weak Fibres (24.) and consequently abates of 
their power over the Fluids therein contained; 
from which distensions arise Tumors; from the 
stopping or extravasated Fluids Putrefactions; and 
farther all such innumerable Ills, as are the Con- 
sequences of them both. 

 27. From what has been said in (24, 25, 26.) 
one may surely know when any Distemper from 
weak Fibres is present, past, or coming on; the 
Effects thereof may be foreseen, and what is ne- 
cessary towards the Cure is surely known. 

 28. The Cure must be obtained; 1. By 
such Aliments as abound in such matter as is de- 
scribed (21.) and which be almost so prepared 
beforehand as it is in a strong and healthy Bo- 
|P_7
dy; Such are Milk, Eggs, Flesh-broaths, Pana- 
does rightly prepared of Bread that was well fer- 
mented; and rough Wines. All which must be 
given in small quantities, but often. 2. By en- 
creasing and invigorating the motion of the Solids 
and Fluids by means of frictions with a Flesh-brush 
or with Flannel; of riding on Horseback, and in 
a Coach, or being carried in a Boat; and lastly, 
of walking, running, and other bodily Exercises. 
3. By a gentle pressure or bandage upon the Ves- 
sels, and a moderate repelling of the Liquids there- 
in contained: 4. By Medicines both acid and au- 
stere, but applied with great caution and gentle- 
ness. 5. By any means as will remove and reme- 
dy the too great pulling of them. 

29. That Fibre is said to be Laxe and Loose
whereof the Parts are in that degree of Cohesion, 
that the same Fibre may with very little pains and 
pulling, be made longer than it was before; from 
whence it appears, that this is that Sort of weak- 
ness as in (24.) and that the aptness to bend doth 
depend from hence; and consequently, that all 
these Effects, as well as the lessen'd Elasticity of 
the Fibre are clearly understood from what has 
been said from (21 to 28.) 

30. And even from thence Answers are ready 
to all the following Difficulties objected, viz. Why 
watry and fat Aliments occasion a weakness in the 
Fibres? Why the same Fibres are weak in People 
of a cold Constitution, in young People, such as 
move little, and such as are still growing? Why 
earthy Aliments, and such as have a moderate 
roughness strengthen the Fibres? Why People of 
|P_8
a hot Constitution, and such as exercise much, 
have strong Fibres? Why the Fibres have an Ela- 
sticity proportioned to their Strength? 

[}Distempers of the Stiff and Elastick Fibre. }]
31. The too great stiffness of the Fibre is that 
sticking together of the minutest Parts (21.) which 
causes them to be link'd so closely together, that 
they will not, or cannot give way to that power 
of the Fluids, which in a state of perfect health 
ought to overcome their resistance. 

32. The same is occasioned by all those Causes, 
which have been mentioned (28.) as necessary to 
cure the weakness of the Fibres, if those means 
are applied or continued too long. 

33. The effects of that stiffness (31.) of the 
Fibres are to cause the Vessels made up of them 
to be less flexible, narrower, shorter, too much 
resisting and hindring the free motion of the Li- 
quids, aud occasion all the Disasters mentioned 
in (50, 51, 52, 53.) by a necessary Consequence. 

34. From which one may know this Distem- 
per (31.) when present, and also foretell the Con- 
sequences; nor is the Method of Curing the 
same less apparent. 

35. The Cure is effected 1. by such Meat and 
Drink as is thin and watry without any rough- 
ness, chiefly the continued use of Milk-whey, of 
the softest Herbs and Sallads, and unfermented 
Liquors. 2. By avoiding of Exercise, and dwel- 
ling in a moist coolish Air, and taking long Sleeps. 
3. by the taking or outwardly applying watry, 
lukewarm, tasteless Medicines, and, such as con- 
tain the lightest and softest Oyls. 

|P_9
36. From hence is understood the too great 
Elasticity of the Fibre, and likewise how to cure 
the same, as being generally the Companion or 
the Effect of the too great stiffness. 

37. And also, why Childrens, Womens, and 
idle Peoples Fibres are generally lax and loose; 
and on the contrary, why the Fibres and gene- 
rally all the solid parts of full-grown People, of 
the Male-sex, of laborious People and such as ex- 
ercise much, are mostly stiff and rigid: And why 
in those, when afflicted with a Palsie, there is a 
strong contraction of the affected Parts. 

[}Distempers of the less and larger Vessels. }]
38. The Diseases of the least Vessels made up 
of the simplest Fibres (21. 22.) (either by an 
Application or a twisting of several together) 
proceed from the same Causes, have the same Na- 
ture and Consequences, and require the same Cure; 
and consequently may be learn'd from (21. to 
30.) 

39. The larger Vessels made up of the small 
ones by the application or twisting of several to- 
gether, are subject to two several kinds of Dis- 
eases. The first of these depends on the Dis- 
eases of the smallest Vessels, which make up this 
large one; so that the Rise, Nature, Effects, and 
the Cure thereof must be taken from thence. (38.) 
But the latter Sort depends, 1. From the strength 
with which the Fluid running through this large 
Vessel doth press upon the sides of that Vessel in 
extending the same: Which Sides, being made 
up of the smaller Vessels, are by this pressure de- 
|P_10
prived of their Fluid; and if continued they grow 
together, and into a solid Fibre, but in a larger 
Sort than that described (21. 23.) Which Effect 
may also be propagated to the next adjoining small 
Vessels. 2. From the nature of the Fluid which 
thickens and sticks to the sides of its proper 
Vessel. 

40. From hence may clearly be understood, 
how Vessels are said to be weak, laxe, strong, 
stiff, and elastic; whereof the Ignorant talk much 
without any true Meaning. And the Subject is 
so noble, that it deserves being treated of more 
at large. 

[}Distempers of weak and laxe Entrails. }]
 41. The weakness of the Vessels and Entrails 
we call that cohesion of the Parts, constituting 
the same, which may be broke with so small a 
Motion as to make them incapable of perform- 
ing, what not only a living but a healthy state of 
Body doth require of them. 

42. Which are different according to the dif- 
ferent Age or Sex. 

 43. This Weakness proceeds, 1. From the 
weakness of the Fibre and the Causes thereof. 
2. From the weakness of the smallest Vessels, 
and its Causes. 3. From the sluggishness of the 
Liquid flowing through the larger Vessels, which 
may proceed from its Quantity being lessened, or 
the increasing of its watry unspirituous Nature; 
or lastly from the muscular Motion being grown 
slower and duller. 

|P_11
44. From the said (41.) Weakness occasioned 
by the Causes just mentioned arise many Diseases; 
which are falsly attributed to a bad Constitution, 
or supposed to be born with the Patient. The 
chief are, 1. An easie Dilatation of the Vessels 
and Tumors: An easie Compression of the same 
and emptiness: A stagnation of the Liquids: A 
more difficult and even resisting Motion of the 
Heart: A crudity of the Liquids, which were to 
acquire a farther degree of Coction there: A Pu- 
trefaction of the same succeeding thereon: An in- 
capacity thereupon of performing the vital, ani- 
mal or natural Functions: And consequently, all 
the Mischiefs that must follow from these; which 
as they are infinite in Number, so be they most 
difficult to cure, and very fruitful in producing 
new and unheard of Distempers; and chiefly 
these two general ones, which are noted by the 
Names of Καηεξια and Καηοχυμία. An easie disso- 
lution or breaking of the Vessels, either from in- 
ward or outward Causes, being either sharp or 
acted violently; from thence an effusion, a stag- 
nation, a corruption and emptying of the Liquid, 
which is necessary to life and health: An inter- 
ception of the Motion of the Fluid, through the 
broken Vessels, and their Putrefaction; which 
were preserved entire by means of those Fluids 
moving through them: These again are many; 
and chiefly Φθίσις, Εμπύημα, ΰδρωψ, and ατροφία. x 
Consumptions, Imposthumes in the Cheast, Dropsies, 
falling away and loss of Flesh.

45. Which if any one accurately considers, he 
shall not only know the Origin, the presence and 
|P_12
the event of this (41.) but also of an infinite 
number of other and very difficult Diseases, and 
he alone can have success in the finding out and 
applying of sufficient and safe Remedies. 

46. And as for the application of those, the ve- 
ry weakness of the Part commands to take Time 
for the Cure; for in no other Case is a sudden 
Change more pernitious. 

47. Therefore Remedies ought to be admini- 
stred slowly, cautiously, and rise by degrees in 
the very efficacie of 'em: And after the Vessels 
shall be strengthen'd by their use, then and no 
sooner let the Muscles be put into a vigorous and 
strong Motion, till it appears from every Particu- 
lar, that now the Vessels and Entrails are be- 
come sufficiently compact, solid and healed with- 
out a fear of breaking there anew. 

48. From hence it appears, that what is re- 
ported of the Power of Aliments is false in one 
Sense and true in another. That the exercise of 
the Muscles doth strengthen the Fibres; That 
the exercise of Riding doth dissolve the thickned 
Humors, strengthen the laxe Parts without dis- 
sipating bodily Strength or the Spirits: That the 
very Blood of the strongest People is very thick, 
soft and kind; that of the weakest and tenderest 
on the contrary, broken, light, and sharp: That 
a number of Diseases, in appearance very diffe- 
rent, may yet be Branches of the same Tree, 
the Root of which being cut they are all cured 
of course. 

49. From the same Principles may be known 
and cured the laxness of the Vessels and En- 
trails. 

|P_13
[}Distempers of the too strong and stiff Entrails. }]
 50. The too great stiffness of the Vessels and 
Entrails is that cohærence of the Parts of which 
they are made up, as will not give way to that 
degree of Motion, which was to change and 
move them, that all such Things might be per- 
formed, as in a living and healthy State did de- 
pend upon, and were occasioned by, that Change. 

51. It proceeds, 1. From all the Causes that 
occasioned too great a stiffness in the Fibres (32.) 
2. but chiefly from the Fibres being strongly pres- 
sed upon each other by the overpowering strength 
of the strongly moving Fluids. 3. From.the grow- 
ing together of the sides of the small Vessels de- 
prived of their Liquid by that strongs pressure, by 
which; the vital Liquid of the Arteries presseth 
the sides of the larger Canals; which Effect is 
most commonly produced and carried to a height 
by any violent exercise of the Muscles. 4. From 
a Vessel which its proper, thickned, dried 
up and coagulated Juice is shut up and grown 
into a Solid. 

52. Where this takes place in Vessels, the 
Effects are, 1. Resembling or the same with those 
that proceeded from too stiff a Fibre. 2. It oc- 
casions a strong Labour; So that the Fibres endea- 
vour to bring themselves, from the circumference 
of the Vessel to its center; to make its hollow 
narrower; to press, to squeeze, to repell and even 
to expell its Fluids; and consequently to hinder 
their protusion from the Heart, and also the acti- 
on of the Heart it self; So that they hardly re- 
|P_14
move again to their proper extent; from hence 
interrupt the even Motion and Circulation of the 
Blood, and consequently the several Secretions; 
they lessen the quantity of Blood which the Heart 
ought to send forth at each beating; they hinder 
the Heart from emptying itself entirely; they pro- 
duce Polypusses from that very remaining Blood, 
which being squeezed and robbed of its Fluid 
Parts, the Polypus grows harder and bigger, 
which at last produceth Choakings and sudden 
Death. 3. In Vessels wounded it occasions great 
Gaps, because of the great strength wherewith the 
several Parts of the Vessels do pull towards their 
fastnings: And when they are cut asunder entire- 
ly, the Cavity is much lessened at both ends, 
or sometimes entirely shut up. 

53. From these set down in 31. to 37. and 
50 to 52. and clearly apprehended, any intelli- 
gent Body may frame to himself Rules, by which 
he must understand the past, present and future 
stiffness, elasticity, and power of the Vessels, their 
present or approaching action, and the proper Cure 
for all. 

54. For this is effected, 1. By all the Re- 
medies which were set down as proper to cure 
the stiffness of the Fibres (35.) 2. And chiefly 
by all such as lessen the quantity, the thickness 
and the pressure of the Blood. 3. By such as su- 
spend the Motion of the Muscles. 4. By all such, 
as moisten, soften, open, dilute, resolve and cleanse. 

55. From all these, viz. 21. to 55. are suffi- 
ciently understood and a Method shewn for curing 
all the Diseases which are peculiarly belonging to 
|P_15
the solid Parts of the Body: And from thence also 
appears what must be answered to the following 
Queries. Which be the difference of the Structure 
of the Solid Parts in the different Ages of Life? 
Why Man grows, continues for some Years of 
the same height; and afterwards in old Age 
grows shorter again, and less? Why he is some- 
times of a loose texture, sometimes of a strong 
and stiff one? Why he is sometimes Moist and 
full, at other times Dry? Why he dies a natural 
Death, and must needs die when he is come to 
a pitch of old Age? And then of what illness he 
most commonly dieth? What Distempers are most 
common to each particular Age? What Diet, 
what sort of Life, what Medicines are the most 
adapted to the several Seasons of Life? How far 
one ought to believe, and of what use it is, what 
has been said about the stiffnefs or laxeness of the 
Solids, &c.

 56. We ought now after the most simple Di- 
seases of the Solids to treat of the Wounds (16.) 
But as they always bring along with them Di- 
seases of the Liquids as from their own Nature, 
we chuse to treat of those things first, which 
ought to be known before a compleat History of 
the Wounds be given. 

57. So that we shall treat first of those Distem- 
pers of the Fluids, which naturally befall them, 
either when they are left to themselves, without 
being any ways affected from their Vessels, or 
when they are put into too violent, or too slug- 
gish a Motion. 

|P_16
[}Of the most simple Defects of the Fluids and 
such as come of their own accord. }]
58. The several Humors which are to be 
found in a living Man, are either yet crude, re- 
taining the Nature of such Aliments as were late- 
ly taken,or have through the Power of the Na- 
tural Functions, and the mixture with the other 
pre-existent humours in Man, acquired a Nature 
very like unto them. 

59. The first mentioned are generally taken 
from Plants, or from the Flesh of other Animals. 

[}Spontaneous Diseases from an acid Humor. }]
60. Our Liquids made up from meally Plants, 
or Garden Fruits, either raw or fermented, if 
they overcome the Power of our innate Juices 
and of Life, acquire in us that nature and dispo- 
sition, as they owe to the Nature of their Produ- 
cers when fomented in a moist and moderate heat. 
From hence chiefly we must derive the acid A- 
crimony, and the more hurtful glutinous Fat. The 
first proceeds chiefly from fermented and not fer- 
mented Juices; The latter from mealy (unfer- 
mented or boyled) Aliments. 

61. This acid Acrimony is igenerally the Pro- 
duct 1. Of mealy Aliments, juicy Acids, as are 
new; crude, actually working, or of such Vege- 
tables as have fermented already. 2. Of a want 
of good Blood in that Body which takes the 
forementioned Food. 3. Of a Weak texture of 
the Fibres in the Vessels and Entrails (24. 29. 
41.) 4. Of a Defect of the Animal Motion. 

|P_17
 62. It first takes its Seat in the first Digesters, 
such as the Stomach and the Duodenum, from 
thence it advances with a slower pace into the 
Blood, and at last taints all the Humors of 
the Body. 

63. It occasions sowre belchings, hunger, a 
gnawing pain in the Stomach, most terrible Co- 
licks, with Wind and even Convulsions in the 
Guts; a sluggishness of the Bilis, and many 
changes and alterations of the same; it renders 
the Chyle sowre, and the very Excrements by 
Stool stink sowrish: These are its Effects in the 
Stomach and in the Guts. 

64. When got into the Blood, it causeth it to 
look pale, and turns the Serum newly come out 
of the Chyle sowre; it makes the very Spittle 
sowre; from hence Itchings, Obstructions, Pim- 
ples, Ulcers, Coagulations of the Blood made 
unable to circulate; afterwards prickings of the 
Brain and the Nerves, from whence Convulsions, 
the whole Circulation of all the Humors inter- 
rupted, and lastly Death it self. 

65. From these described from 60 to 65. one 
may have a certain Knowledge, when this acid 
Acrimony is present, coming, or past; hence al- 
so are seen its Effects; and may the Cure be 
conceived. 

66. Which is effected, 1. With Aliments as 
destroy Sourness whether taken from Animals or 
the vegetable Kind. 2. With Juices like unto 
well-conditioned Blood, which one may find in 
Birds of prey. 9. Strengthners. 4. With a strong 
Motion. 5. With Medicines as do absorb and 
|P_18
soak in the Acids, as dilute them, as blunts the 
Edges of them, and changes 'em. 

67. Whereof the Choice, Preparation, Dose, and 
timely Application are known to the Physician 
from the knowledge of the Disease, its Seat, the 
Patient's person and constitution, and many more 
Circumstances. 

68. From hence it appears, why the Diseases 
of this Kind are so common to Children, to Sloth- 
ful people, to Poor people and certain Tradesmen; 
whereupon consult Ramazzini de Morbis artificum. 

[}Diseases from a spontaneous Glew. }]
69. The Glutinous fat Humors from Vege- 
tables is occasioned, 1. By crude and mealy Ali- 
ments, and by unripe rough Fruits. 2. By a 
want of good Blood. 3. By a Weakness of the 
Vessels, of the Entrails and of the Choler. 4. By 
the lessening of the Animal Motion. 5. By a 
dissipation of the most fluid Parts of the Blood 
through the relaxed secretory Vessels. 6. By the 
Retention of the thicker parts of the Blood and 
Humors from the weakness of those Vessels and 
Instruments as shou'd thrust them out. 

70. It appears first in the first Digesters, from 
hence it flows into the Blood, and afterwards in 
all the other Liquids that are derived from the 
Blood. 

71. In the first Passages it occasions a prostrate 
Appetite, a feeling of Fulness; a Nauseating, Vo- 
mitings, want of Digestion; a sluggishness of the 
Choler, its growing slimy and consuming; it 
breeds nasty Phlegms in the Stomach and Guts; 
|P_19
binds up and swells the Belly; hinders the ma- 
king, the perfecting and the separating of the 
Chyle into the Milk-vessels. 

72. In the Blood it produceth a toughness and 
a paleness, making its Circulation almost impossi- 
ble; in the Vessels Obstructions, Concretions; a 
pale Urine with scarce any Smell; a slow Spit- 
tle; a white Swelling; and almost all the ani- 
mal Secretions obstructed; a defect of the finest 
Juices; and from all these the smallest Vessels 
do shut up and grow together. 

73. From hence are all the Coctions, Circu- 
lations, Secretions, Excretions, all the Vital, Na- 
tural, and Animal Motions disorder'd, from whence 
Choakings and Death. 

74. From these (69. to 73.) appear the Diag- 
nostic, the Prognostic, and the remembrance of 
this Disease; nor can it be difficult to conclude 
what must be necessary towards the Cure. 

75. Which maybe obtained, 1. With using a 
Diet of things that have fermented well, and are 
seasoned with Salt and Spices. 2. With Broath 
made of Volatiles. With whatever may strengthen 
the Vessels and Bowels. 4. With a gradual in- 
crease of Motion and Exercise. 5. With diluting, 
resolving, stimulating Medicines, such as carry 
along with them wherewithal to supply the want 
of Choler, and are of a soapy Nature. 6. With 
Frictions, Heat, Baths, and Blisterings. 

[}Distempers of a Spontaneous Alkali. }]
 76. Some Plants abound in a matter, which, 
if putrefied of its own accord, doth not turn into 
|P_20
an acid Substance, nor run together, but melts 
away into a stinking fat Alcali: Such are most 
all aromatick Plants as have a very sharp taste: 
But it's very seldom that so much is taken of them 
as will from its peculiar nature create an illness: 
But if it shou'd happen, that Disease ought to be 
ranked among those occasioned by a sharp and 
oleous Alcali. 

77. Our Juices formed from the feeding upon 
Meat must vary, 1. According to the Food as the 
Beasts were fed with. 2. According to the diffe- 
rent parts we eat of them. 

78. For those Animals which feed upon Herbs 
and Water make a Chyle either sowrish or easily 
turning so, and consequently give Milk of the 
same nature, which being taken for Food by 
us, must needs preserve the same Nature as if 
we our selves had fed upon those Herbs and 
Waters, and creates commonly in our Stomachs, 
and first Passages, a ropy Matter like unto new 
Cheese. 

79. Those that feed upon Animals of another 
Kind, their Juices turn easily into an Alcali. 

80. When Aliments with the strength of our 
Bodies are so sar attenuated as to be converted 
into Liquors, such as have been found in 
healthy and strong Bodies in four and twenty 
Hours from the taking of Nourishment; If the 
same are left to themselves in a warm place un- 
disturbed, or are violently shook, they'll always 
acquire the Nature of that beginning Putrefaction. 

81. But in Aliments from other Animals this 
disposition to a sudden Putrefaction is there alrea- 
|P_21
dy of its own accord without needing that altera- 
tion which they undergo in our Bodies. 

82. This Corruption indicates that state of the 
Humors, which obligeth the watry Parts to ex- 
hale; the saline Matter being attenuated, deprived 
of its Acid, or even altered, to grow sharp, volatil 
and of an alcali Nature; The oily Part also being 
thinner in one Part, deprived of its Earth, mixed 
with that sharp Salt, groweth harsh, volatile, and 
stinking: But t'other part of the Oyl being most 
firmly united with that Earth, which was depri- 
ved of its Water, Salt and the first mentioned Oyl 
turns into black, thick Dreggs incapable of flow- 
ing. 

83. Insects, Fishes, amphibious Creatures, Birds, 
Beasts of all Kinds, and Reptiles, and even Man 
himself do of their own Nature, when dead, all 
turn into that Corruption just now described. 

84. The Causes which makes this Corruption 
to follow are, 1. Aliments from living Creatures 
(except the Milk of grazing Cattle) chiefly from 
Insects, Fishes, Birds of prey, and such Vegeta- 
bles as are apt to turn into an Alkali. 2. A ful- 
ness either of good Blood, or of such as was al- 
ready tending to Corruption. 3. A great strength 
of the Vessels, of the Bowels and of Choler. 4. A 
standing or stopping of the Fluids, or too great a 
hurry of the same at the animal Motions being ei- 
ther too quick or too slow. 

85. In the first Passage it occasions Thirst, loss 
of Appetite, stinking Belches; it fills the Mouth, 
Tongue, Palate and Throat with bitter stinking 
Filth; it creates nauseousness and vomitings of 
|P_22
corrupt bilious Matter; a stinking Crudity; a 
Looseness with much Choler, inflammatory iliac 
Pains, and a very troublesome Heat. 

86. When carried into the Blood it occasions 
it to be dissolved into a putrid Mass, it creates 
there an Alcali, oleous, volatil Acrimony; it ren- 
ders it unfit for nutrition, it makes it apt to con- 
sume, destroys the least Vessels, and so on; di- 
sturbs, confounds and undoth all the Functions of 
the solid and fluid Parts; so that the circulation, 
secretion, and excretion of Humors keep no lon- 
ger their Course; and there succeeds burning hot 
Fevers, the Urine and all the separated Juices be- 
come fetid and rotten, comes on Inflammations, 
Imposthumes, Gangrenes, Mortifications, and at 
last Death it self. 

87. From what has been said (from 76. to 86.) 
one may again know, prognosticate, and even find 
out the Method to cure this Distemper easily. 

88. The Cure may be obtained by, 1. Aliments 
as will speedily grow sowre, or such as are acid 
already; such are all sorts of mealy Eatables 
boyl'd in Water, or being left to ferment till 
they begin to corrupt; Milk and all that can be 
made from it, carrying along with it the Quality 
of the Herb; all ripe Fruits, the Juices thereof 
whether raw or fermented and sowred; such as 
Cyder and Perry. 2. Acid Medicines from the 
raw Vegetables, or fermented, or from Salts and 
Brimstone converted into Acids by the strength of 
Fire. 3. Such Salts as do devour the Alcali, as 
Sal Gem, Sea-salt and Nitre. 4. Watry Diluters. 
5. Such as gently do blunt, as Emulsions made of 
|P_23
the Seeds of Vegetables, or Decoctions of the 
same. 6. Soapy cleansing Medicines mix'd of A- 
cids and Oyls; Oxymel, and acid Conserves and 
Extracts. 7. Lastly by Rest, Sleep, Steam-bath 
or Fomentations. 

89. From whence it appears, where and why 
sowre Belchings are good succeeding stinking Bel- 
ches. Why and what recovering People do com- 
plain of a troublesome Taste of Salt Ammoniac? 
Why it is a good Sign in accute Diseases when the 
Patients Sweat smells sowre? What sort of Acri- 
mony it is, which ought to be called Acid, which 
are Alcaline, Bilious or Oleous? 

90. Hence lastly may be known, what harm 
doth the too great or the too little Motion of the 
circulating Fluids; and how much its Consequen- 
ces and Effects vary according to the variety of Pla- 
ces, where they stop, and of the Humours upon 
which it operates: What Damages from a stop- 
ping Humour, and what from extravasated and 
lurking. 

91. Having considered all the several Diseases of 
the Solids and the Fluids (as were the Simplest) 
severally; follows now to treat of those, which 
occur together both in the Solids and in the Flu- 
ids, beginning also with the Simplest. 

[}Of Diseases acknowledging no other Cause besides 
the too quick circulatory Motion. }]
92. All the Fluids which are contained in any 
Vessel, that has its rise from the great Artery, are 
separated from that Blood only, which a little 
while before was thoroughly united and mixed in 
|P_24
the right and left Ventricles of the Heart, carry- 
ing no other Face than of one even and homoge- 
neous Liquor. 

93. It has notwithstanding already in those very 
Places some Globules greater than others, of a 
particular Size, of a changeable Figure, of a red 
Colour; and a transparent Water, lighter, thin- 
ner, of smaller Particles, but because of their 
transparency hardly distinguishable from each o- 
ther. The first is called Gore, and the latter Serum. 
Magnifying-glasses have demonstrated both. 

94. The red Gore being settled and separated 
from the Serum in another Vessel, is from its ly- 
ing still only, and the loosness of its Parts resol- 
ved also into Serum, which seems at last to be the 
true first Principle of the whole Mass of Blood. 

95. The Serum being long kept in a moderate 
warm and moist Air, from lying still, and the 
loosness of its Texture is resolved into a thinner, 
lighter, and more transparent Liquid. Which is 
more so, according to the Time it hath been de- 
prived of Motion, &c.

96. The whole Blood by means of a small 
Heat, little more than what is healthful, and of 
little exhalations, runs together into a solid Mass 
separable with a Knife, not resolvable by Water, 
Salt, Oyl nor Spirits. And the same peculiar 
sort of Concretion will befal the Blood by a de- 
gree of Heat just mentioned tho' convey'd into it 
by moist Bodies. 

97. The redness and the running together of 
the Serum In the Blood is owing to the Action of 
the Vessels and to the power of Circulation; as is 
|P_25
shewn from the change of the Chyle, Milk and 
Blood, and is confirmed by the Observations made 
with Microscopes. 

98. The increase of the Motion of the Blood 
through the Vessels, proceeds from the Heart's be- 
ing oftner and stronger contracted. 

99. The Heart is oftner and stronger contract- 
ed. 1. When the Brain and its production the 
little Brain are so strongly pressed as to send forth 
too great a Quantity of the nervous Juice, as it 
hapneth in the passions of the Mind or in Pains. 
2. When the Heart it self is irritated by occasion- 
ing the returning Blood through the Veins to run 
quicker than usual, being push'd on by rubbing 
or the action of the Muscles; or by some sharp- 
ness being present in the Blood, whether aroma- 
tic, saline, acid, alcali, purulent, ichorous, or 
putrefied. 

100. The Motion of the Blood being increased 
in the Vessels, occasions the Blood to run stronger 
upon and towards the Vessels, which are to re- 
ceive the same; a stronger resistance of the Ves- 
sels against the Blood; a strong pressure of the 
Blood upon the sides of the Vessels, a violent rub- 
bing of the Vessels and the Blood against each o- 
ther; a strong rubbing of the several parts of the 
Blood among each other; a greater Heat of the 
whole, a drying up of the Blood from the dissipa- 
ting of the most thin watry Particles; a growing 
Toughness of the same, easily settling and inflam- 
ing; a breaking of the Blood into sharp and vola- 
til Salts and Oyls; The Mouths of the Vessels at 
their beginnings becoming wider, a forcing of the 
|P_26
thickned Juices into the smaller Vessels: The fol- 
lowing Obstructions of the same hereupon, De- 
structions, Inflammations, conversion into Pus, 
Gangrenes, Mortifications, or if in glandular Parts, 
into hardnesses called Schirri, and innumerable 
more Ills, which follow from all these. 

101. The increase of the Circulation therefore 
is known from its Causes (99.) and its Effects 
(100.) but chiefly from a quick Pulse, and a hard 
beating of the Artery; from a swift and laborious 
breathing, and a great Heat. 

102. The Remedies therefore for to restrain 
the too violent Motion of the Humours are the 
same, as are able and must needs lessen the too 
frequent and strong Contraction of the Heart. 

103. Whereof the first regard the Mind, the 
latter the bodily Faculties. 

104. The first are such as will allay and mode- 
rate great Passions by reasoning, by either causing 
contrary Passions or Diversions from the same by a- 
ny Method. 

105. The latter operates by causing the Mus- 
cles to keep quiet, by loosening the Veins in all 
such Manners as have been mentioned (54.) by 
asswaging the sharpness of any kind with proper 
Remedies, either diluting or blunting the edges of 
it (66, 67, 68.) and by removing the Causes of 
Pain. 

[}Of Distempers from the defects of Circulation and 
a Plethora. }]
106. The Diseases proceeding from the defects 
of circulation in the Humours, are very near the 
|P_27
same with such as were occasioned by the sponta- 
neous stopping of the same from (58, to 80.) so 
that one must look back to them for to know them 
and to obtain a Cure. And from all these one 
may easily understand what is meant by a Pletho- 
ra, and know its Causes, Effects, Signs, and Re- 
medies, chiefly if the following Things be well 
minded, 
α. A Plethora is a greater quantity of well con- 
ditioned Blood, than what will undergo those 
Changes, which in Life are unavoidable, unless 
Distempers intervene, and disturbs them. 
β. The same is created by every thing as ma- 
keth a great Quantity of good Chyle and Blood, 
and at the same time hindereth their attenuation, 
consumption and perspiration through the Pores of 
the Skin. 
γ. Hereto refer a great power of the Bowels 
which are employed in the Chylification to strain 
themselves, which is also in the Heart and Arte- 
ries; and at the same time a looser Texture in the 
Veins and other small Vessels: Hereto contribute 
also such soft Aliments as are easily converted into 
Chyle; much Sleep; an easie Mind; a rest of the 
Muscles, a habit of Bleeding, whether naturally 
or with the Launcet. 
δ. The Effects of a Plethora proceed altogether 
from that sort of inward Motion of the Blood and 
Juices, which doth not come up to a Fermentati- 
on, and which we call a Rarefaction, and from 
the Heat occasioned thereby: From hence a Dila- 
tation or a widening of the Blood and lymphatic 
Arteries; the change and interruption of the Se- 
|P_28
cretion; a compression of all the Veins, both 
them as carry back the Lympha, and such as car- 
ry the Blood; a stifling of what shou'd circulate; 
Inflammations; a breaking of the Vessels; Im- 
posthumes; Gangrenes and then Death. 
ε. So that it is easie to know when this Disease 
is present, and to foresee the Effects of it. 
ζ. The Cure is performed, by letting of Blood; 
Exercise and Waking; by a more sharp Dyet af- 
ter due Evacuations; and leaving them off gradu- 
ally. 

[}Diseases the least Compound, Obstructions and 
Wounds. }]
107. An Obstruction is the shutting up of a 
Canal, and denying the Passage to a Liquid which 
should go and flow through the same; whether it 
be vital, found or depraved; proceeding from the 
size of the Matter that should pass, exceeding the 
Cavity of the Canal through which it should be 
let pass. 

108. Which may again proceed from the nar- 
rowness of the Vessel, the bigness of the present- 
ing Body, or both happening together. 

109. The Vessel may become too narrow if out- 
wardly pressed; if it contracts it self, or if the 
sides of the Vessel grow thicker. 

110. The bulk of the small Bodies grows too 
big, either by the slyminess of the Fluid, or by 
having mistaken their Passage. 

111. When these two meet together, the Ob- 
struction is the more obstinate and difficult to re- 
move. 

|P_29
112. The Vessels may be pressed outwardly. 
1. By a neighbouring Tumor from fulness, 
which is inflamed, full of Matter, Schirrous, 
Cancerous, Pituitous, pufft up in the form of a 
Bottle, from a distended Arterie called Aneurisma, 
or a Vein called Varix; by knobs in the Bones or 
Callosities, or some Slyme or Stones. 
2. By some hard and solid Parts, such as Bones 
being broke, disjointed, distorted, or drawn out 
of their natural Position, and so pressing upon the 
neighbouring softer Parts, as must give way. 
 3. By any Cause, which draws the Vessels too 
much and makes 'em longer, whether it be a Tu- 
mour, or the pressure of a part out of its due Po- 
sition, or any external pulling Agent. 
4. By external Causes out of the Body, such 
are too narrow Cloaths, Girdles, the weight of 
the Body resting too much upon one Part, Liga- 
tures, &c. Here also belongs the moving, the 
rubbing, the embracing of other Bodies too eager- 
ly with some particular Part. 

 113. When that Contraction which is peculi- 
ar to each Vessel is increased, chiefly such as have 
winding Fibres, and also such as have them long, 
the cavity of the Vessel is made narrow, and pro- 
ceeds 1. From any cause which doth increase the 
elastick power of the Fibre, of the Vessel and of 
the Bowel, mentioned (31, 36, 40, 50, 51.) 
 2. From a Tumour of them lesser Vessels, out of 
which the sides of the large ones and the Canals 
are form'd, when too much filled. 
3. From the lessening of the Cause, which ex- 
tends the Vessels, whether it be emptiness or 
|P_30
fulness: From whence follows that the Canals be- 
ing cut assunder will soon stop the running out of 
their proper Fluid. 

114. The thickness is encreased in the very 
Membrane of the Vessel, 1. By any Tumour 
(112. No. 1.) in any of those Vessels whose uni- 
on and contexture makes up the Membrane.  2. By 
Callosities grown there; whether cartilagineous, 
membranous or even osseous (51.) 

115. The bulk of the fluid Parts is increased to 
that Degree as to be incapable of flowing, 1. Ei- 
ther by changing their spherical Figure into ano- 
ther, presenting it self in a larger Size to the 
Mouth of the Canal. 2. Or by the joining toge- 
ther into one several, which were single before. 

116. The Figure is chiefly altered, when that 
even pressure of the smallest Particles, now left to 
their own elasticity, which used to work and to 
press from all sides together and equally, is ceas- 
ed; that is when Motion is become languid, or 
the Vessel loosened, or the quantity of the Liquid 
is lessened. 

117. The small Particles run into one, by too 
great a rest, cold, frost, drying, heat, a violent 
circular Motion, and the pressing of a strong Ves- 
sel; by an acid, austere, spirituous or absorbing 
Coagulum, by a Slyme or an Oyl. 

118. The Particles of Fluids having mistaken 
their Passage are stopt, when a small Body of them 
runs into the dilated Mouth of a Canal, the Extre- 
mities whereof they cannot pass. This Dilatati- 
on is chiefly created by a fullness, an increased 
Motion, a rarefaction of the Fluid, a relaxation 
|P_31
of the Vessel; and most of all, if these have pre- 
ceeded, the contraries most commonly follow soon 
after. Which is the most immediate Cause of all 
Colds. 

119. Hence are manifest the causes and nature 
of all Obstructions whatsoever. 

120. Which happening in a living Body hin- 
dreth the Passage of such Matters as shou'd flow 
on; they stop as many as runs in upon 'em; they 
receive their shock; the thinnest Parts are squees'd 
out; the thicker run into one Mass; the Vessel is 
extended, dilated, made thinner, dissolv'd; the 
stagnating Liquor is thickned; the function de- 
pending from the regular flux of the Liquid is de- 
stroy'd; the Vessels which were to be supply'd 
from thence run empty, and dry; the Vessels are 
less and less able to transmit their Liquids: The 
quantity of Liquids in the Vessels free from this 
Obstruction increases, and so doth the quickness 
of the Motion; and consequently produces all the 
Ills which may be occasioned thereby. 

121. Hence according to the difference of the 
Vessel obstructed and of the Matter causing the 
Obstruction do those Effects (120.) appear accom- 
panied by different Symptoms. 

122. In arterious Blood-Vessels are produced 
Inflammations of the first Kind: In the lymphatic 
Arteries dilated Inflammations of the second Kind; 
in the larger Lymphatics pituitous Swellings; in 
the lesser Lymphatics Pains without any apparent 
Tumour; and different are the Effects of Obstru- 
ctions in the producers of Fat, in the Vessels of the 
Bones, of the Marrow, of the Nerves, and of Choler. 

|P_32
123. So that whoever knows what has been 
said from 107, to 723. of the nature, the mat- 
ter, the causes and effects of Obstructions, he 
cannot be ignorant of the Signs of an approaching 
or already present Obstruction and the Effects 
thereof. 

124. And if once he knows the different Sorts 
thereof, it will not be very difficult for him to 
find out the proper Cure and the Means thereof. 

125. For that Obstruction which ariseth from 
an external Pressure (112.) requireth the remo- 
ving of whatever is the cause of that Pressure, 
which, were it possible, must be taken from its 
Description to follow hereafter. 

126. But that, which ariseth from the increas- 
ed contraction of the Fibres, is known from the 
Signs, which shew the contraction of the Bowel, 
of the Vessel and of the Fibre (34, 36, 40, 50, 
53.) And so is that known, where that Contracti- 
on proceeds from the second Cause (113. No. 2.) 
viz. Tumours in the small Vessels which consti- 
tute the Membrane of the Canal; and also the lat- 
ter, which is occasioned by a contracting of the 
Vessel, after a great loss of Blood or Fluid proper 
to the Vessel. 

127. This Obstruction described (113, 126.) 
is cured, 1. By such Remedies as will correct the 
too great contraction of the Fibre, of the Vessel 
and of the Entrail. (35, 36, 38, 54, 55.) 2. 
Chiefly if they can be applied to the very Part af- 
fected, and their Virtue communicated; and chiefly 
by Steams, Fomentations, Bathings, Liniments, 
or Plaisters. 3. By such helps, as will empty the 
|P_33
Vessels of the Membranes, when too much dis- 
tended and fill'd. Whereto belong all Evacua- 
tions in general, but chiefly such as can be 
applied to these same Vessels; Such are the 
loosening, diluting, resolving, attenuating, clean- 
sing, evacuating Medicines. 4. By such as are 
capable to melt and dissolve a Callosity already 
created. 

128. But this latter Sort of Obstruction can 
seldom if ever be cured. Emollient and opening 
Medicines are the Chief: from whence it follows 
that the Animal cannot avoid dying; And that it 
is matter of very great difficulty to procure a long 
Life even with the help of the most proper and 
best applied Medicines. 

129. When the Fluid is become incapable of 
passing through, which proceeds from the loss of 
its Spherical Figure, it is known from looking 
into the Causes thereof (116.) for they are most- 
ly apparent to the Eye, or the helping Glass. 

139. This Obstruction is cured with the help 
of such Remedies as do restore that Figure to the 
Fluid; which are such as increase their Motion 
through the Vessels and Bowels; Such are al- 
so most all stimulating and slrengthning Medi- 
cines; And lastly, an increase of the animal 
Motion. 

131. And whereas the too great thickness of 
the Liquid, and its tenacity proceeds from so 
many and so widely different Causes, (117.) They 
require therefore different Methods of Cure, and 
different Remedies according to their Nature; 
which difference being enquired into in each par- 
|P_34
ticular Disease, will indicate its proper and pecu- 
liar Remedies and Applications. 

132. But the thickness of the Liquids in ge- 
neral is remedied, 1. By inducing an alternative 
Motion in the Vessels. 2. By diluting. 3. By 
an attenuating Liquor being carried into it, mix- 
ed and moved with it. 4. By fetching out or 
evacuating the Cause which did coagulate, and 
thicken. 

133. Those things will bring an alternative 
Motion in the Vessel, 1. Which do temperate 
whatever occasioned the too great distension of 
the Vessel. Such is Bleeding. 2. Which do 
strengthen the Vessels (28, 29. 45, 46, 47. 49.) 
3. Rubbings, and the Motion of the Muscle. 
4. Stimulating Medicines. 

134. Diluting may be performed by warm 
Water chiefly if drank in great Quantity, if in- 
jected by way of Glysters, or the Steams thereof 
be received, if applied outwardly to the Part, and 
as much as possible be drove to the Part where 
the Obstruction is, and wants to be removed. 
Hereto belong such as turn another way, as draw 
on, and push forwards. 

135. The following Things do Attenuate, 1. Water. 2. Common Salt, Sal Gemm, Ar- 
moniac, Nitre, Borax, fix'd or volatil Alcali. 
3. Natural Soaps consisting of an Alcali and an 
Oyl; or compound, sooty, volatil, fix'd, or Cho- 
ler it self. 4. Mercurial Preparations. Which 
may be convey'd to the place affected, by such 
as turn the Humor another way, such as draw 
and push towards it. 

|P_35
136. The Coagulating and Thickning Cause 
is fetch'd out by drawing of another Liquor 
whose drawing power is stronger. Thus the 
Acids work upon the Alcalis, the Oyls upon the 
Alcalis, &c. which are chiefly found out from 
Experiments in Chymie. 

137. But when a Liquid is got into a wrong 
and strange place, and cannot clear its Passage, 
and so forms Obstructions, then are many and 
very malignant Diseases created; so that this Ill 
ought and deserveth to be most carefully minded. 

138. We know this to be the Case. 
1. If we 
are acquainted that its Causes (118.) have pre- 
ceeded, which are generally easily noted. 2. That 
the Contrary Operations have soon after followed. 
3. If we see its Effects very distinctly, as set down 
(120, 121, 122.) 

139. And it is also easie to foretel what will 
be the Consequence of this Ill, if we look back 
to 120. to 123. 

140. The Cure is perform'd, 1. By pushing 
the obstructed Matter backwards by a retrograde 
Motion into the larger Vessels. 2. By resolving 
the same. 3. relaxing the Vessel. 4. or sup- 
purating the Matter it self. 

141. This Matter may be brought back again 
from its Prison, 1. By evacuating the Liquor, 
which is pressing in upon it and driving it in 
closer; viz. a large, and sudden opening of a 
Vein, which will occasion a Straining in the ve- 
ry Vessel obstructed, and so the Matter will be 
push'd back again. 2. By Rubbings from the 
Extremities to the Mouth of the Vessel. 

|P_36
142. It may be resolved by Medicines named 
above from (133. to 137.) 

143. The Vessels may be made looser by means 
mentioned in (35, 36. 54.) 

144. Of the Manner of promoting Suppura- 
tion, or the turning into Pus or Matter, we shall 
speak more at large when we come to treat of 
Inflammations. 

[}Of Wounds in General. }]
145. A Wound is the Separation of the Union 
of soft Parts by hard and sharp Bodies. 

146. The sensible and mechanical Cause there- 
fore is the hardness, the sharpness, and the mo- 
tion of the wounding Instrument. 

147. The Receiver must be a soft Part, conse- 
quentIy a knot or contexture of Blood-vessels, 
Lymphatics, such as are adipous, nervous, mem- 
branous, tendinous, and lastly full of such little 
Bladders as are made of them. 

148. In which Receiver the Instrument causes 
a Separation of what was united, and the shed- 
ing of the contain'd Liquids. 

149. So that it disturbs the Actions, which 
depend from the integrity, wholeness of those 
Parts, and from a determin'd Course of those Li- 
quors through the Vessels. 

150. All Wounds therefore as invade such 
Parts, whereof the wholeness is necessary to make 
Life subsist, are call'd Mortal. 

151. Of these there are such as occasion Death 
unavoidably. 

|P_37
152. Others, if left to themselves, occasion 
Death; But may so far be remedied by the Art 
of Surgery, that the danger of Death ceaseth. 

153. Lastly, some Wounds may become or be 
made mortal, which were not so of their own 
nature when neglected, or when wrong Applica- 
tions are made to 'em. 

154. According to the different Actions, which 
were before performed by the whole and un- 
wounded Parts, do arise the several other Effects 
of Wounds, and acquire from thence their seve- 
ral Names, which are seldom unknown to any 
one acquainted with the Functions of the several 
Parts of the sound Body. 

155. Nor is the difference of Names, Forms, 
and Effects of the several Wounds less, from the 
different Cause or Weapon occasioning or giving 
the Wound, from the difference of its Shape, 
manner of Assault, either by pointing, cutting, 
hewing, or by moving to and fro; from the de- 
gree of Strength in driving in and removing out of 
the Wound, the time of its remaining there, and 
the poisonous quality of the same. 

156. These again vary according to the diffe- 
rence of each Part receiving the Wound, its hard- 
ness, softness, connexion, situation, effect, the 
several Liquids thereto flowing, and the great 
change in its Shape. 

157. Though it is necessary to know exactly 
well all the many and different Beginnings of it, 
yet is there little occasion to dwell here upon a 
nice History of its several Names. 

|P_38
158. If a Wound is made in a healthy and 
strong Body, in a visible place, not containing 
any large Artery; nor very tendinous, the fol- 
lowing Symptoms arise. 
1. The Parts, between which the wounding 
Instrument has been thrust, do part gradually 
more and more asunder, notwithstanding the In- 
strument be removed; unless it be a very small 
puncture. 
2. The Blood runs out at first with Violence, 
and stops afterwards gradually of it self. 
3. Then grows a bloody crust in at the hollow 
of the Wounds. 
4. And a thin Liquor, somewhat reddish and 
faint-colour'd flows out of the separated Fibres. 
5. Now begin the Lips of the Wound to grow 
red, hot, painful, to swell and to turn back. 
6. At the same time the Patient grows sen- 
sible of a little Fever, with heat and thirst. 
7. About the third or fourth Day, sooner or 
later begin to appear in the Wound a sticking Li- 
quor, white, fattish, even, which we call Pus or 
Matter. 
8. At the same time you find the redness, heat, 
pain, swelling, the drawing or turning of the 
Lips, and the Fever either to cease entirely or 
to relent. 
9. And by degrees the hollow of the Wound 
is fill'd with growing Flesh from the bottom 
upwards, and from the circumference to the Cen- 
ter; the Brims getting together by means of a 
white, bluish, soft and even Substance. 
|P_39
10. Lastly, the Wound is dry'd up, and co- 
vered over with a Scar. 

159. If an Artery (not of a very large Dia- 
meter) not too near the Heart, is entirely cut 
asunder, it shrinks back and hides it self among 
its neighbouring Solids, and so stops up its own 
self, and then follow all what has been mention- 
ed (158.) just now. 

160. If the same is wounded a-cross but not 
entirely cut asunder, the Wound is made wider 
through the pulling of the Fibres, from whence 
an incessant Loss of Blood, and after that is stop- 
ped, an Aneurisme from the thinness of the Skin 
growing over the Wound, which for that Reason 
gives way, and is extended into the shape and 
nature of a Bag. 

161. If a large Arterie be entirely cut asunder, 
there follows an incessant bleeding until Swoon- 
ing or Death; the Parts below the Arterie fall 
away, and are at last consumed by an ugly but 
slow Gangrene. 

162. If any Nerves be entirely cut asunder 
they shrink back, hide themselves, draw the 
Branches that are a little above the Wound, 
stretch them, create in the neighbouring Parts 
Obstructions and Pain; and as to the Parts be- 
low the Wound, they become insensible, immove- 
able, and waste away. 

163. Nerves that are prick'd or half cut asun- 
der, creite Pains which at first are sometimes dull 
and sometimes very quick and acute; first in the 
wounded place it self, and then in all the adjoin- 
ing and neighbouring Nerves, from hence Heats, 
|P_40
Tumours, Rednesses widely spreading, Fevers, 
a Delirium, Convulsions, an Inflammation; an 
opening of the inflamed Part with a running 
of a sharp, thin, and often copious Serum; af- 
terwards follow the loss of Feeling, a Stiffness, 
a Drying up, and Unmoveableness of the Part, 
or otherways a Gangrene and Death. 

164. All which (162, 163.) with very little 
difference happen in the wounded Tendons. 

165. And the Membranes are subject to the 
same Disasters, as being mostly Compounds and 
Products of Nerves and Tendons. 

166. What Lymphatic Vessels, such as con- 
tain Fat, and the Veins and small Bladders do 
undergo in Wounds, what they will occasion, is 
easily understood from the Laws of Circulation, 
and by considering the nature of their Neigh- 
bourhood. 

167. If the Wound lyeth open to view, it is 
soon known to be, and its Nature is also soon 
understood. 1. By the Sight it self, having re- 
moved what covered it, and having stop'd the 
running and loss of Blood. 2. By having an Ana- 
tomical Knowledge of the neighbouring Parts. 

168. But the presence of a hidden Wound 
and its Nature are known, 1. From Anatomical 
Knowledge, from the position the Patient was in, 
when he receiv'd the Wound, from the manner 
and strength wherewith it was given. 2. From 
the defect of the Function following the Wound. 
3. From the discharge of the Wound, whether 
within or without the Body. 4. From the conse- 
quent Symptoms, such as Pain, Hiccough, Con- 
vulsion, Tumour, &c.

|P_41
169. From knowing (167, 168.) it is easie 
to foretell the Events. 
1. Whether the wounded Patient will live or 
die. 
2. Whether the Cures be possible or impossi- 
ble, entire or only in part. 
3. Whether the Cure be easie, or difficult, like 
to be long or short. 
4. What effects from the Wound will remain 
after the Cure; whether a wasting, numness, stiff- 
ness and unmoveableness, the Figure spoil'd. 

170. Unavoidable Death from a Wound fol- 
lows from five Effects, and consequently before a 
Jury such must be called mortal Wounds, 
1. As cut off the Influx of the nervous Juice 
from the hind Brain to the Heart, α. The 
Wounds of the little or hind Brain called Cerebel-
lum, and such of the Brain as are deep enough to 
inflict a great Wound in the long marrow Medulla 
oblongata. β. The Blood-Vessels within the Skul 
being broke with an effusion of Blood, which kills 
either by pressing hard or by putrifying there, 
when it cannot be taken out by means of Trepan- 
ning by reason of the Place where that Operation 
cannot be performed; which are chiefly the Fon-
tanelle of the Head in Children; the Sutures, the 
superciliary Sinus, the Temples, the inferior parts 
of the Head, &c.γ. Deep Wounds in the Mar- 
row of the Back-bone near the Neck. δ. And 
lastly, such as cut off the Nerves of the Heart, 
call'd Nervi Cardiaci. 
2. Such as occasion the Blood of the Heart to 
rush forth through the Orifices of its pierc'd Ven- 
|P_42
tricles: So that all Wounds of the Heart deep e- 
nough to penetrate into either of its Ventricles are 
mortal. 
3. Such as turn off the Blood from the Heart, 
from the Brain and little Brain, either into the 
Cavities of the Body or out of the Body it self, 
and cannot be healed because of their Situation. 
Such are the large Wounds in the Lungs, Liver, 
Spleen, Kidneys, Pancreas, Mesentery, Stomach 
and Guts; of the Womb in pregnant Women, of 
the Bladder near its large Arteries; of the Aorta, 
the Carotick and vertebral Arteries, and other Ar- 
teries and Veins of the like Importance and difficult 
Access. 
4. Such as intercept Respiration or Breathing 
intirely, as the cutting of the Larinx when the 
separated Pipe is withdrawn; large Wounds of the 
Bronchia, of both the Cavities of the Chest let- 
ting in the Air, of the Diaphragme penetrating 
through both sides of the Mediastinum of the 
Chest, or cutting its Sinews asunder. 
5. Such as hinder the Motion of the Chyle to- 
wards the Heart; as the cutting through of the 
Gullet, large Wounds in the Stomach, of the thin 
Guts chiefly, if cut through at the Beginnings; a 
Wound in the Thoracick duct or Cystern of the 
Chyle. 

171. Wounds, of their own Nature mortal, but 
curable by Art, are as follows, and may be re- 
ported as such: 
1. Wounds of the Brain that are com'attable by 
trepanning. 
|P_43
2. Wounds of large Arteries or Veins situated so as 
to admit the Hand and Application of the Surgeon. 
3. Wounds of Bowels, where the Hand and 
Medicines may not only be applied but also re- 
tained long enough to heal them. 
4. Such as kill by letting out their Liquids in- 
to such Cavities from whence they may be taken 
out without endangering Life; as the Chest, the 
lower Belly, the Ureters, Bladder and some 
Wounds of the Guts. N. B.A Cure of this 
last mentioned was very lately per- 
formed by a Surgeon [/2./] of St. Anns
Parish, Westminster, on the Body of a Captain 
of his Majesty's Guards. 

172. One may foretell a Wound shall be mor- 
tal, which was not such of its own Nature, from 
these Causes, 
1. From omitting the cleansing and taking out 
of extravasated Pus, from whence a Wasting; or 
the leaving of extravasated Blood in such Cavities, 
where it must needs putrify. 
2. From Errors committed in the Non-naturals; 
of which see our Author's Institutions at large, 
lately made English. 
3. From a neglect or a mistake of the Surgeon. 
4. From the natural or sickly Constitution of 
the Patient. 

173. From these may be fetch'd Depositions of 
Surgeons concerning Wounds, and judge of the 
Time within which they'll prove mortal or kill 
actually. 

174. Hence a Declaration may be made on 
Wounds, and a probable Estimate given of the 
Time of their mortality. 

|P_44
175. But the different Symptoms (159, 159.) 
as to their Causes are easily known to any one, 
who understands how and with what Instrument 
the vital and animal Functions are perform'd. 
Look back to what has been premised of the Dis- 
eases of the Solids and Fluids. 

176. When the outward Coat of an Arterie 
(the inward remaining entire) is either prick'd, 
cut, bruised, drawn asunder, or corroded, the 
Arterie through the force of the Blood is dilated 
and forms a Purse or Bag, which by degrees will 
grow to the bigness of an Egg; acquireth Sides 
or Membranes, which at length grow callous; 
the same beats strong, in proportion to its Size; 
shines with a reddish Colour; if squeezed it 
disappears, the Blood retiring into its natural 
Channel the Arterie, and comes again when pres- 
sing is discontinued; it makes its Arterie wider; 
and the neighbouring Vessels, by pressing upon 
'em, narrower: This is call'd a true Aneurisme
(160.) whereof the Cause, Signs, and Effects are 
plainly discovered. 

177. If an Arterie is wounded by the same 
Causes, and is not well enough consolidated, the 
same Effects will follow as in (176.) 

178. When from the same Causes all the Coats 
of an Arterie are broke at once, and let out its 
Blood into the next extended Parts without void- 
ing the same; there is soon made a Swelling from 
the collection of the extravasated Blood still en- 
creasing without measure, which Swelling is soft, 
hardly beating, the Skin livid, scarce giving way 
when pressed, soon rottening, and soon occasion- 
|P_45
ing a Gangrene of the adjacent Parts. This is the 
Spurious Aneurisme (160.) whereof the Cause, 
Signs and Effects are easily known from this ve- 
ry Description. 

179. Other effects from the cutting of a large 
Artery are soon known out of the Physiology as 
well as the Signs and Effects which appear im- 
mediately upon the cutting of a Nerve asunder, 
(161, 162.) 

180. But that we may have just and clear No- 
tions whence the stupendous Effects proceed of 
the prick'd or half-divided Nerves, as in (163, 
164, 165.) We must consider what follows, 
fetch'd from the knowledge of Anatomy and the 
Alimal Œconomy. 

181. Every Nerve that is visible is a small 
bundle of less Nerves ty'd together by small 
Skins, Arteries, Veins, and interwoven Lym- 
phatics, which afterwards are all covered over 
with one common Membrane. Through all 
these little Vessels as make up the Nerve, there 
flows continually a Liquor proper to each Chan- 
nel, from the Heart, Brain, Cerebellum and the 
Medudulla Spinalis. All these have ever a pretty 
strong power of contracting themselves, 

182. Therefore the Parts of a Nerve entirely 
cut asunder, do shrink back from the place where 
the Wound was given, towards the firm Parts 
to which they are annexed; they hide them- 
selves among the adjacent and surrounding Solids, 
they are kept under by their pressure, their Ori- 
fices shut up together with those of all its Vessels; 
so that no other damage follows than what was 
said in (162.) 


[^1. * Baglivi has publish'd a 
Treatise with the Title, De fibra motrice & mor- 
bosa. ^]
[^2. * Brownhill. ^]