
|P_
[}[^An ornamental horizontal column, spanning the whole page with the text "F Hoffman fecit"^]}]
[}TO THOMAS GUY, Esq; }]SIR, 

[^Decorative frame around the letter "T"^]THOUGH the Subject of this Treatise, consider'd as a Deside- 
ratum in the Healing-Art, should chance to have had no great Share in your Studies, yet have you a 
|P_
Right to a Work of this kind, superior to any such Claim. 

I will not say, had your benificent Dispo- 
sition never appeared in favour of the wretched 
Incurable, that I should never have entertained 
 any Thoughts on this Subject: But this I am 
obliged, in Justice, to acknowledge, that whilst 
I was committing them to Paper, your excellent 
Design was so strongly before me, that I found 
 it absolutely impossible to write regardless of 
it. Upon which Account, it is but Just that 
 I make you a Tender of what was thus 
 written. 

I cannot indeed persuade my self, however 
mean the Performance may appear, that it will 
 prove an unacceptable Present; since it attempts 
 a farther Relief of those deplorable Persons, 
for whom you have already expressed so tender 
 a Regard. 

|P_
And if by due Management, any of these 
shall happily find a Cure, where it might be 
 least expected, in an Hospital set apart for In- 
curables, it will not, I presume, redound more 
 to the Consolation of the Patient, than to 
the Honour and Delight of him who not on- 
ly generously founded, but liberally endowed 
 it. 
I am, 
With the highest Esteem, 
Sir, 
Your most obedient Servant, 
PETER SHAW 

|P_[^A wide ornamented horizontal column, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}A 
TREATISE 
OF 
Incurable Diseases, &c. }][^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}I. Of the proper Means to reduce the Number of Incurables. }]
ALTHO' several cogent Reasons, to demonstrate the 
Feasibility of the present Design, may be drawn from 
the Nature of Distempers, and the known Effects of 
Medicines; the common Occurrences of daily Prac- 
tice, and the great Probability there is of bringing 
many unknown Remedies to Light; yet were it not 
for what so grave and approv'd an Author, as the great 
Lord-Chancellor Bacon, has recorded about incurable Diseases, it would per- 
haps seem daring and presumptuous to maintain the Possibility of lessening 
|P_2
their Number, after so many Ages appear to have been unsuccessfully spent 
in attempting it. 

For, the Cure of Incurables does not only involve a Paradox in the 
Expression, but in an Age so productive of new Discoveries, and so fertile 
in Improvements as the present, it generally passes for a desperate Problem; 
and is apt to be rank'd in the same Class with the Quadrature of the Cir- 
cle, the Perpetual Motion, and the Philosopher's Stone. 

But the most celebrated and judicious Author abovementioned, is clear 
and express, that Physicians [/1./]In inquisitione illorum de Morbis, inve- 
niunt Morbos complures quos Insanabiles decernunt, alios jam inde à 
principio Morborum, alios post talem quampiam periodum. Ita ut L. 
Scyllæ & Trium-virorum Proscriptiones, res nihili fuerint præ Medico- 
rum Proscriptionibus, per quas tot homines iniquissimis edictis morti 
dedunt; quorum tamen plurimi minore cum difficultate evadunt, quam 
illi olim inter Proscriptiones Romanas. Neque igitur dubitabo (continues 
this great Author) inter Desiderata reponere Opus aliquod de Curati- 
onibus Morborum, qui habentur pro Insanabilibus; ut evocentur & exciten- 
tur Medici aliique egregii & magnanimi; qui huic operi, quantum largitur 
Natura rerum, incumbant; quando hoc ipsum, istos Morbos pronunci- 
are Insanabiles, neglectum & incuriam veluti lege sanciat, & ignoran- 
tiam ab infamiâ eximat. de Aug. Scient. L. IV. Cap. II. p. 310. 

After such a Declaration from so great a Man, it will not, I hope, 
appear either assuming or ridiculous to attempt a Discovery of the Cures 
|P_3
of such desperate or inveterate Diseases as may chance unjustly to pass 
for Incurable. Such a Design, at least, ought not to be thought assuming, 
if it be enter'd upon according to his Lordship's Direction, To the end 
that the more able Physicians, and Persons of Eminence and Resolution, 
may be encouraged and excited to a thorough pursuit of this Matter; 
which is the main View in publishing this Treatise. 

And if an Indulgence be granted to any thing that may seem to carry an Air 
of Presumption or Assurance in such an Undertaking, I am persuaded there are 
few will think an attempt of this Nature, Ridiculous or Impracticable, after so 
very grave and discerning an Author has laid it down for just and reasonable. 

Some there are, however, who will be apt to say, granting many Dis- 
eases were an hundred Years agoe, unwarrantably call'd Incurable; and al- 
lowing the Physicians of that time to have, in this Respect, been no 
less unjust than rigid and severe; yet after so many great Improvements, 
and useful Discoveries made in Medicine of late, 'tis impossible the Cen- 
sures of the present Physicians should be equally unjust, or equally severe 
with those at the time when this great Author wrote. Others will go 
still farther and cry, can it be imagin'd, when by a grand Increase of 
Learning, a through Reformation in Philosophy, a prodigious Number of 
useful Experiments, and happy Discoveries in Mechanicks, Anatomy, Chy- 
rurgery, Chymistry, Pharmacy, and Botany, a noble Addition to the  Ma- 
teria Medica, and the Introduction of a Mechanical System of Physic; 
can it be imagined will some say, when by these large Acquisitions the 
Art of Healing seems rais'd to its Achme, its Pinnacle of Perfection, that 
the Censures of Physicians are not extreamly just and utterly Irreversible; 
and the Number of Incurables already shrunk and contracted within the 
narrowest Bounds human Means can reduce them? 

Indeed, it may very well appear Surprizing, if with these accumulated 
Advantages the Art of Healing be not vastly improv'd, and the Number of 
reputed incurable Diseases lessen'd; and yet alas! the thing it self will 
speak and tell us, that Incurables were never more common, and that they 
are so far from diminishing, that they rather seem to grow upon us daily, 
|P_4
insomuch, that 'tis become necessary to provide for the meaner Sort of them 
by a new and an extraordinary Kind of Bounty. 

Besides, as 'twere folly to endeavour to palliate the Matter, the com- 
mon Practice of every Place will, at this Day, afford a sufficient Proof both 
of the great Number of Incurables, and the rash Censures of Physicians. 
For not to mention that we daily see Persons who were given over by 
some Physicians, recover'd by others, what Numbers after having been de- 
clared Incurable by very eminent Men, and such as were well versed in 
physical Practice, have not found a Cure by Accident, the Kindness of 
Nature, the Observation of a Regimen, the Use of slight Medicines, a 
Course of Physic, or by venturing upon some desperate Means? Instances 
of all these are every where so Numerous, that 'tis in vain to go about to 
conceal the Thing, or its pernicious Consequences: Most Persons are now 
appriz'd, that Incurable in Physic has had a like Effect with Occult Qua- 
lity in Philosophy, a Term which manag'd with Address, amus'd the Mul- 
titude, and kept up a Veneration for an Appearance of Learning, but at 
the same time prov'd a very great Obstacle to farther improvement in use- 
ful Knowledge. 

'Tis well known also, that every Age has had its particular Kind of 
Practice, which was always adequate to the Discoveries of the Time, and 
regulated by the prevailing Philosophy of the Place; so that this Practice 
in the Infancy of the Art, must necessarily have been proportion'd to an in- 
fant Knowledge of Diseases and Remedies. 'Tis less to be wonder'd at there- 
fore if the puny Physicians of the earliest Ages shifted the obstinate Cases 
from one to another, and were pleas'd to denounce all the Diseases incurable which 
baffled their slender Skill. This Procedure, however we laugh at in them, 
but are our selves perhaps no less Ridiculous; for we also turn off our des- 
perate Patients, when our Remedies fail us, and term that an incurable 
Disease which obstinately resists the fashionable Practice of our Age and 
Country. 

But is a Distemper therefore really Incurable, because I, a second, or a 
third Person cannot cure it? Or can this Term with any Propriety, be ap- 
|P_5
plied to a Case which has only eluded the prevailing or current Practice of 
our Time, without giving any evident Tokens, that 'tis absolutely, and in 
every respect Incurable? If this be sufficient to denominate a Disease incu- 
rable, then numberless Diseases, which have been cured, were incurable. 

Doubtless this Term ought to be used with great caution, because when 
misapplied, it not only abuses the Patient, but disgraces the Profession, 
and brings a Scandal on its Professors, at the same time that it prevents an 
Improvement of the Art of Healing. But we of this Age ought more 
than those of any precedent one, to demur in the Use of the Word, when 
the Case is not very plain and evident; we who are well acquainted with 
the Structure of the human Body, and several grand Remedies which were 
unknown to former Ages; we who are Masters of all the Experience of 
the Ancients, and have seen their Weakness and Errors, as well as our 
own, in calling some Diseases incurable; we who cannot but own Poste- 
rity may improve in their Knowledge of these Things, and be able to 
cure Diseases reputed by us Incurable, as we have happily cured some that 
were so reputed by Antiquity. Are not we also sensible that Physicians 
generally go in the same beaten Track, and that tho' they differ in Forms, 
yet usually agree to exhibit the same Medicines in like Cases? Thus all 
now prescribe Mercury in the Venereal Lues, and Cortex in Intermittents; 
and if these happen to fail, the modish Practice of our days is suppos'd to 
be exhausted, and without farther trouble, the Case is adjudg'd Incurable. 
But as this Sentence is frequently revers'd either by Nature, Accident, or 
Art, it is, by no means, of it self sufficient to denominate a Person proper- 
ly Incurable, that his Case has been unsuccessfully prescrib'd to by a few 
Physicians. 

How it comes to pass that Incurables are so numerous at this time, and 
that whilst other Arts and Sciences appear in a flourishing Condition, and 
even Medicine it self is greatly improv'd in its Theory, yet the Art of 
Healing, the practical Part, the most valuable Branch of Physic, and ulti- 
mate End which all the other Branches are destin'd to promote and centre 
in, shou'd not be equally advanced, is a Speculation that wou'd carry us 
beyond the Bounds of the present Design. And as it is of far greater Con- 
|P_6
sequence to know how to remedy this Defect in the Art of Healing, and 
thereby diminish, if possible, the Number of Incurables, than to account for 
the slow Progress of the physical Practice; I shall here confine my self to 
the former Consideration, and endeavour to shew what is the most proper 
Method of proceeding in order to discover the Cures of such Distempers 
as obstinately resist the present Form of Practice, at the same Time that 
they give no other Signs of their being absolutely and properly Incurable. 

The Method that I wou'd offer at in this case, is founded on a proper 
Use of our natural Faculties. If we will but open our Eyes, allow a free- 
dom of Reasoning, and not be slow in reducing its Dictates to Action, 
there are good grounds to hope that the Number of reputed Incurables 
will soon be lessen'd, or at least their increase be prevented; and a more 
accurate distinction of Diseases for the future be introduced. 

As by a reputed incurable Disease, I always mean such an one as proves 
too strong for ordinary Treatment, without affording any farther reason 
to persuade us, that the Cure of the same Case is utterly impossible to 
be effected hereafter, to attempt the Cure of a reputed incurable Dis- 
ease, is in no wise Wild or Romantick. But the Way to discover such a Cure, 
is not to stop short where the common Medicines fail, lazily term the 
Case Incurable, and then sit down contented, and applaud our selves for 
having got to the extent of our Tether: On the contrary, if we wou'd in 
earnest endeavour to benefit Mankind, by improving the Art of Healing, 
from an accurate Observation of the Phaenomena of Diseases, we should 
proceed to deduce their immediate Causes, and find out what kind of Re- 
medies are wanting to remove them; and then by the proper Experiments ob- 
tain these Desiderata, or at least in defect of them, contrive to raise the 
known Remedies to their utmost Power, in order to see whether they 
will not then reach the more stubborn Cases. 

It is such a Kind of Geometrical Method, which appears to me the most 
proper to be observ'd in this Pursuit; that way of Reasoning from Data
to Quæsita, which has done Wonders in Philosophy, Astronomy, and 
Mechanicks. But it happens most unfortunately, that instead of encoura- 
ging and pursuing this noble Method in Physic, we seem almost entirely to 
|P_7
discountenance and contemn it; instead of endeavouring by this means to cul- 
tivate the most momentous Art on Earth, we are too often amusing our selves 
with what is Trifling, when set in Competition with it; and instead of 
endeavouring to lessen the Number of Incurables, or ease their Tortures, 
we are either wrapt up in the Clouds, and contemplating the Stars, or 
groveling on the Ground in quest of Pebbles. Not that I would Reflect 
on any part of Knowledge, though ever so little useful; but surely those 
who have attach'd themselves to Physick, and make Profession of its Practice, 
are inexcusable, if this has no share in their Studies. Some excursions out 
of this Province are perhaps allowable, but we should not methinks al- 
ways content ourselves with searching after Things which are utterly 
foreign to Physic. The Theory of Physic, indeed, no one can deny to 
be useful, so far as it brings Advantage to the Practice; but who does not see 
that 'tis Preposterous to spend Time in computing the absolute force of the 
Muscles, the weight of the Air upon the Lungs, the just Momentum 
of the FLuids, and a thousand other Things; whilst there remain so ma- 
ny inquiries of infinitely greater Importance to be made, and which might 
even discover the cure of such Diseases as we now miscall Incurable? 

Is it not shocking to see what Pains and Application are bestow'd in 
promoting other Arts and Sciences, whilst Physick alone is abandon'd, and 
seems to be almost the only Art that is not cultivated among us? Thus in 
Astronomy, a glorious Science indeed, and tho' not unworthy of the Esteem it 
meets with, is yet infinitely less conducive to the Well-being of Mankind 
than the Practice of Physick; what immense Labour and Assiduity are em- 
ploy'd? With what diligent attendance and watching is a new Star added 
to the Catalogue, or another Satellite to the train of a Planet? What Drud- 
gery is not gladly undergone, to determine the Magnitudes, Distances, 
Periods of Revolution, Gravities and Densities of the remote planetary and 
cometary World? But if any profess'd Physicians, leaving their own Art 
to the improvement of others, shall give themselves up to the cultivati- 
on of this, they may please to consider that such procedure will afford 
little Consolation to a Man under the raging torture of the Gout or Stone, 
or to those doom'd to languish under the hard Sentence of Incurable. 
|P_8
What will it avail such as these, to be told the exact Minute of an E- 
clipse, or other Results of numerous Observations, and laborious Calcula- 
tions? And yet these Things which concern us so little are highly priz'd, 
at the Expence of Medicine; and the Knowledge of them obtain'd with 
the most vigorous Resolution and assiduous Application. How we can 
answer the not taking equal Pains to discover new Remedies, improve 
the old ones, and advance the Art of Healing, when the Lives of Man- 
kind are immediately concern'd in it, I am at a loss to know. But to re- 
turn. 

The Method I would recommend to find the Cures of reputed incurable 
Diseases, will be best understood by the Specimen annext; where I aim to pro- 
ceed intirely upon rational Grounds. I must therefore take leave to observe, 
that the free use of our Reason is the best Guide we can make choice of to lead 
us to this Discovery. By the use of Reason I wou'd be understood to mean the 
exercise of that Faculty upon Subjects relating to Diseases, in order to find a de- 
sirable and promising Method of Cure for an inveterate Case, when the 
current Practice has proved unsuccessful; that is, such a Method as shall, be- 
fore it be try'd, appear likely to succeed, when consider'd by a rational 
Physician, and is more eligible to the Patient, than the Distemper 'tis 
intended to rid him of, or at least to palliate. Such a Method of Cure 
as this, is, in my Opinion, unexceptionable, in reputed incurable Cases; and 
ought without scruple to be put in Practice by a reputed incurable Pati- 
ent; because such a Patient can have no hopes of a Recovery, but either 
from meer Chance or Empiricism, or else from the tryal of such a ratio- 
nal Means as is here propos'd: But any rational Person will surely rather 
rely on Reason, than Chance for a Cure. Moreover, true reasoning from 
the requisite Data, brings us to absolute certainty; and is always prefera- 
ble to Belief, Tradition, casual Experience, or any other Assistance rely'd 
on in physical Practice: a general and rational Physician therefore, who 
is never unprovided of Data to Reason from, cannot do better than 
thus to apply this Faculty. And if the result of this Application be the dis- 
covery of a desirable and promising Method of Cure, he cannot do bet- 
ter, in the way of his Profession, than to recommend it. 

|P_9
This method of Procedure will be readily acquiesc'd in by those who 
are unacquainted with the general fate of Physick. Such Persons are apt 
to imagine, that this is the common foot upon which all rational Physici- 
ans proceed in their daily Practice, and that no other tolerable Method can 
be establish'd. But these Persons are not aware how extreamly cautious and 
sparing Physicians have formerly been in the use of their Reason. That Body 
of Men have all along had so tender a Regard to their fellow-Creatures, that 
they thought their utmost care was necessary in the Application of Reme- 
dies; and therefore rarely ventured to trust so dangerous a Thing as Rea- 
son in the use of 'em. And so Experience, safe Experience, came to be 
wisely substituted in its stead: this was the Oracle, this alone was ex- 
toll'd, and Reason, fallacious Reason was decry'd and contemn'd, as ha- 
ving little to do in the Practice of Physick. Hence they proceeded to settle 
Rules, and establish Forms from Experience, chusing always to use the Remedies 
which had been used before, and to prescribe over again what they had already 
experienc'd. To swerve from the establish'd Method, or prevailing Practice of 
the Age, was commonly thought bold and dangerous; and to try a new Re- 
medy, tho' it might promise ever so fair, was look'd upon as hazardous and 
presumptuous. The practice of Physick being thus curb'd in, and re- 
strain'd, has advanced by very slow Paces; and all this for want of a sound 
Philosophy, and a larger stock of Data. For certainly there can be no o- 
ther Pretence, why this best of Faculties should be thrown aside as use- 
less, or disadvantagious in Physick, rather than in Philosophy, or any of 
the Arts and Sciences. But now as the case is otherwise, as our Data
are more numerous, and the way of reasoning from them is improv'd; as 
our present System of Philosophy is solid and extensive, and the Subject of 
Physick, the animal Structure, is vastly better defin'd and understood; 'twould 
be highly absurd to pretend, that this grand Talent ought not to be ap- 
plied to discover the cures of, at least, the reputed incurable Diseases a- 
mong us. For in these Cases, our present stock of Experience is confes- 
sedly of no Service, and new random Trials might be justly deem'd rash 
and Presumptuous: An attempt therefore to form a method of Cure, by argu- 
ing from the nature of the Disease, to the discovery of more powerful 
|P_10
Remedies, is here the only rational and promising means we have 
left. 

It will surely be granted, that the present practice of Physick is im- 
proveable, if it be consider'd, that the several Branches of which this Art 
is compos'd, are daily improving; whilst new discoveries are made in A- 
natomy, and Chirurgery grows more compleat; whilst Chymistry and Phar- 
macy furnish us with new Preparations, and Mechanicks is more success- 
fully applied to the animal Structure; it cannot be doubted but some use 
may be made of these Things to the advantage of Physick, and the cure of 
reputed incurable Diseases. There is no room to question, that many 
powerful Remedies lye now absconded, or enveloped in their first Prin- 
ciples, if it be consider'd, that the whole Set we are at this time ac- 
quainted with, were once in the same state of Darkness and Confusion. 
Let us but reflect, that Agues were reputed incurable till the Cortex was 
found, and its Uses known, as well as the Lues Venerea till Mercury, and 
the Woods were applied; and consider by what means not only these, 
but numberless other useful Medicines were obtain'd; and then there 
will be very great Encouragement to expect, that if diligent search were 
made, and the proper Experiments instituted, many grand Remedies 
might be disclosed, and such as wou'd be of force sufficient to cure 
some Diseases which now lye under the unjust Sentence of Incurable. 

Nor is this the only reason we have to hope for such a Redress in the 
Art of Healing, and a considerable Reduction of the present Incurables: great 
Assistance may in this case be likewise obtain'd from a due management of 
the Remedies we are already possess'd of. For there are so many Requisites 
necessary to advance these to their highest Power, that it may very well be 
questioned, if the utmost force they are capable of affording, was ever 
exerted on the cause of any Disease. 

Chymistry has improv'd the Efficacy of many Medicaments, and shewn 
them to have such Virtues, as were utterly unknown before that Art be- 
came general: And Fire is an Element from which other as great Matters 
may be justly expected. Besides this, an inverted Order, a well propor- 
tion'd Dose, a proper preparation of the Body and Medicine, a right Choice, 
|P_11
a select Combination, with many other Things of the like kind, have an 
immense Power to increase the Virtues of Remedies. Here then is an al- 
most inexhaustible fountain of useful Varieties put into our Hands, which we 
can manage as we please; and if they were properly employ'd, 'tis not to 
be said what Effects they might produce in obstinate or reputed incurable 
Cases. That this may the better be apprehended, let it be consider'd by 
way of Illustration, that when the Cortex has prov'd ineffectual for the 
cure of an Ague, being given before the Body was rightly dispos'd, it 
will succeed when exhibited after due Preparation; that Opiates mixed 
with Purgatives will take effect, which administred single might fail; that 
Solids will purge when Fluids will not; that lenient Purgatives will 
open the Body where strong Catharticks wou'd loose their force; that 
some Medicines succeed when given in small quantities, at long Intervals, 
which administred otherwise would have a contrary effect; and in short, 
that all possible Combinations, Doses, Preparations, &c. have never yet 
been try'd, nor perhaps ever can be exhausted. 

From all which it appears, that the cures of some reputed incurable Dis- 
eases may be justly expected, either from a discovery of new powerful Reme- 
dies, or a more apposite use of the old ones. Our Method therefore ought 
to have regard to both these Desiderata. 

In order to acquire new Remedies, let us suppose the true and immediate 
Cause of a stubborn disorder to be found, which in all bodily Diseases, is com- 
monly material; our Method of proceeding directs us to obtain this material 
Cause, where-ever it can be come at, and to make the proper Experiments up- 
on that very Matter out of the Body, which being included in it was the Parent 
of the Disorder. An Example or two will make all plain. The cretacecus 
Matter, or chalky Stones, which are often thrown out in a Fit of the Gout, ap- 
pear to have been the immediate cause of that Fit. A proper quantity of these 
therefore being obtain'd, and the Nature of them discover'd from the 
Symptoms of the Distemper, &c. we are hence directed to try any Prepa- 
ration that we know has a power to act upon, and dissolve Matter of the 
like kind. But in case such a Dissolvent be unknown to us, then are we 
to contrive some Compositions, after the same manner as if we were pre- 
|P_12
scribing to an inveterate case of a Patient afflicted with the Distemper, 
and try their Virtues upon these Stones, till at length we arrive at a Prepa- 
ration that proves a real Dissolvent, at the same time that it may be safely 
administred, some convenient way, in such a quantity as to be able to ef- 
fect the like dissolution of that cretaceous Matter, whilst it is circulating in 
the Fluids of the Body. Such a Composition, 'tis reasonable to expect, 
wou'd prove a grand Remedy, and perhaps a Specifick, that is, such a Me- 
dicine as will effect a Cure without causing any sensible Evacuation. Un- 
derstand the like Experiments to be made upon the Stones, which are apt 
to lodge in the Bladder or Kidneys, till a proper Dissolvent be found, which, 
if it cannot safely effect the desired dissolution in the Body, may at least 
be so managed, as to prevent the future Generation of a Stone. Again, 
supposing the case of an Hydrophobia occasion'd by the Bite of a mad Dog, 
where we know the Fluids are contaminated by an actual Poyson, which 
being contagious by a Communication of any of those Fluids, a way may very 
easily be contriv'd to obtain a quantity of the infected Saliva, or any other of 
the animal Juices, in order to make the proper Experiments upon it, till 
an Antidote for the Venom were by that means discover'd. This Antidote 
might thus be known to be found. Supposing two equal Portions of the con- 
taminated Fluid to be procured, and the presumed Antidote to be mix'd in 
one of them, let both be communicated by Injection, or otherwise to two 
sound Dogs; and if that wherein the presum'd Antidote was contain'd, 
proves harmless, and the other noxious, and the same Consequence at- 
tends the same Experiment in two or three Repetitions; it would be rea- 
sonably to expect that the Cure of this cruel Disease was discover'd, and 
the Medicine might therefore be try'd occasionally upon Hydrophobous 
Patients, or rather administred soon after the Bite was receiv'd. 

How far this Method of proceeding may be put in Practice, I will not 
presume to determine; but 'tis very probable that it may be advantageously 
pursu'd at least in all those Distempers which yield a grosser kind of Mat- 
ter for their Cause, or else depend upon, a visible alteration in the Con- 
sistence, Texture, &c. of the Fluids. This is certainly a most desirable 
and rational way of procuring Specificks or grand Remedies, since the 
|P_13
Lives of Mankind are not hereby in the least endanger'd; and it otherwise 
remains, that we wait for their Discovery till mere chance shall place them 
before us, open our Eyes, and force us by repeated Importunities and Solli- 
citations, at once to acknowledge their Virtues, and our own Indolence. If 
the whole tribe of reputed incurable Diseases, gave such fair Opportunities as 
these for the discovery of their respective Specificks (and that most of them 
do not, I would have no one be too positive) we might soon see their 
number shrink, upon allowing a proper Patronage and Encouragement to 
this kind of Experiments. 

And here I cannot but take notice, how apt we are to plume our selves 
upon living in an Age when experimental Philosophy flourishes. Experi- 
ments, its true, are daily made, but I wou'd fain know to what grand 
Purposes they serve? Several indeed there are, whose design is highly Com- 
mendable; but are there any now on foot, or that can possibly be con- 
triv'd, of greater Moment, than the sort above mentioned; any more Bene- 
ficial to Mankind, or Ornamental to a Nation; any so well deserving the 
Encouragement of the Wealthy, and the Countenance of the Learned? 
But instead of such useful Essays as these, we generally meet with At- 
tempts so mean and low, so trivial and contemptible, in comparison 
of them, that one wou'd be tempted to think they came from the igno- 
rant Vulgar, and the Herd of Mankind, rather than from the polite and 
philosophical Part of the Species. 'Tis a melancholy Reflection, that those 
Persons from whose open Profession, surprizing Discoveries might be justly 
expected, should generally amuse us with the Minutiæ of Things, put 
us off with the Tith of Mint and Cummin, and leave us to seek the weigh- 
tier Matters, the advancement of Physic, and the Reduction of Incurables 
from another Quarter. 

But what an Improvement of the Art of Healing may we not expect, what 
Alleviation of the Miseries of the Incurable may we not hope for, when a spa- 
cious Building is now purposely crecting for their Reception and Use? This 
seems not only a particular Instance of compassionate Bounty, but a Desire ex- 
press'd for the improvement of Physic, and the universal Benefit of Mankind 
in an illustrious President of a solid and diffusive Good. Physicians then, we 
|P_14
may reasonably presume, will not now be so far wanting to themselves, to 
their Art, and to human Nature, as to neglect this or the like favourable 
Opportunities, of raising the Reputation of their Profession, by discovering 
the Cures for the unjustly suppos'd Incurable, and lessening the Torments 
of the miserable Objects, to whom such Goodness is shewn. 

No longer let us, through Ease and Indolence, give occasion to 
Empiricks to triumph over us, and boast themselves Masters of Speci- 
ficks for the Diseases which we inconsiderately pronounce Incurable: No 
longer let us suffer the People to be deluded with the specious Arcana of 
ignorant Men; Arcana the dear and desperate purchace of hazardous Ex- 
periments, and random trials on the human Kind: No longer let us leave 
to Chance, and the slow workings of Nature, the Discovery and Production 
of those useful Remedies which we are furnish'd with Faculties to search for 
and obtain. Who does not rather repose his Confidence in Reason, and 
the due exercise of his own Abilities, than trust to Accident the manage- 
ment of any Affair? And shall we in the Art of Healing alone, put off 
our inquiries till Chance shall deign to present us with the means of Re- 
covery, when Health is within our own reach? We seem to want no Pre- 
parative in this case, but a Resolution to step beyond the slow-paced Practice 
in vogue, and to be guided by our Reason in the choice of Experiments. We 
are every way fitted to go immediately upon so useful an Undertaking: 
We have seen the Effects of a tolerable number of Trials made upon 
human Blood, and other animal Fluids; which when improv'd and enlar- 
ged, may serve to very useful Purposes: We are furnish'd with a large stock 
of Data, and know how to increase it at Discretion: The Causes of Di- 
seases are generally known, and Materials for Experiments are every where 
at hand; so that if the Work were heartily set about, there is no fear of 
Success. A Set of Axioms also might be laid down to encourage and di- 
rect the Undertaking, and serve as Rules in the Prosecution of it. Such 
as the following for Example. 
1. Mathematical Certainty ought not to be expected in Physic. 
2. A Chronic Disease allows many Opportunities for the Discovery and 
Use of Remedies. 
|P_15
3. The success or failure of a single Experiment, is not sufficient to 
establish or abolish the use of a Remedy. 
4. If any undesirable Method of Cure shall, upon repeated trials, ei- 
ther prove intirely unsuccessful, or suffer more to die than recover, it 
ought not to be acquiesc'd in, before, at least, other more desirable and pro- 
mising Methods shall have been tried. 
5. 'Tis better to try any desirable and promising Method of Cure, than 
run the hazard of languishing out a Life in Pain and Misery. 
6. If any Disease can be transmuted into another, attended with less 
Danger, and less Pain, every such Transmutation is a Degree of Cure. 
7. A Remedy that acts immediately upon the Seat of a Disease, is more 
likely to effect a Cure, than one that acts only Consequentially upon it. 
8. No more causes of a Disease need be inquired after, than will fairly 
and naturally account for its Phænomena. 
9. In every inveterate and dangerous Disease, the most powerful Reme- 
dies ought to be immediately applied. 
10. No Remedy can rationally be directed before it be known what 
Life is, together with its Cause, State and Effects; and what a Disease is, 
together with its Cause, State and Effects. 

These may suffice for a Specimen of what Rules might be given to for- 
ward the discovery of the Cures of reputed incurable Diseases. 

But let this business proceed as it may, and that the Success will be pro- 
portionable to the Application, cannot be denied; we certainly have it 
already in our Power, by the Use of known Remedies to make se- 
veral, whether real or reputed Incurables, pass their Lives with more 
ease and satisfaction than they would enjoy without, them: Nay, by 
well adapted Regimen and Remedies, 'tis possible not only to palliate, 
but to change a stubborn Distemper, so that it may justly pass for a 
degree of Cure, or really become a partial one. But when a Case is per- 
emptorily adjudg'd absolutely Incurable, the Patient is usually dispirited, 
and with difficulty brought to follow those Rules which wou'd produce 
this Effect. For which reason the Sentence of Incurable, be the Case what 
it will, shou'd never be pass'd with Rigour. 

|P_16
There is another thing still behind, and I am glad to find it insisted up- 
on by, no less a Person than that Ornament to our Nation, the great Lord 
Bacon, whom I have already had occasion to mention; not only because 
I know it is necessary for the Author of any Doctrine which car- 
ries the Air of Novelty, to produce his Voucher; but because the Thing 
it self seems somewhat contrary to the general Practice of Physicians, and 
the Sense of some People. 'Tis concerning the proper Means to render 
Death easy, or less irksom, when its approach can no longer be put off or 
delay'd by the Use of Remedies: Concerning which, our great Author 
expresses himself in this manner. [/2./]Etiam plane censeo ad officum 
Medici pertinere, non tantum ut sanitatem restituat, verum etiam ut 
dolores & cruciatus Morborum mitiget: Neque id ipsum solummodo, 
cum illa mitigatio Doloris, veluti Symptomatis periculosi, ad convale- 
scentiam faciat & conducat, imo vero cum abjectâ prorsus omni sanita- 
tis spe, Excessum tantum præbeat è vita magis lenem & placidum. Si- 
quidem non parva est felicitatis pars, (quam sibi tantopere precari sole- 
bat Augustus Cæsar) illa Euthanasia. — At nostris temporibus Medicis 
quasi Religio est, ægrotis postquam deplorati sint assidere, ubi si officio 
suo, atque adeo humanitati ipsi deesse nolint, & artem ediscere, & diligen- 
tiam præstare deberent, quâ animam agentes, facilius & mitius è vita de- 
migrent. Hanc autem partem, inquisitionem de Euthanasia exteriori 
—inter Desiderata reponimus. de Aug. Scient. L. IV. C. 2. p. 311. 
And accordingly his Lordship sets down as a Desideratum, A Method to 
cause a Composure in dying, and does not appear to disapprove even of 
that course which Epicurus took to obtain this end, which was by intoxi- 
cating himself. 
—Hinc Stygias ebrius hausit Aquas. 
|P_17
But tho' the Physicians of our Time are acquainted with better ways than 
this, to cause such a Composure, yet I don't know how it happens 
that few are careful to put them in Practice; unless it be for fear of bringing 
Death the sooner upon the Patient, instead of rendring the passage out of 
Life more easy. For I believe there are not many who apprehend such a Pro- 
cedure to be unnatural, and who would chuse to feel that Pain and Torture 
which some weak Minds may fancy Nature intended they shou'd; and so be 
willing to dye by the regular workings of Providence, rather than be thrown 
out of the ordinary way by human Art. 'Tis therefore methinks a proper en- 
quiry, by what means this composure in Death may be obtain'd, and whether 
it cou'd not be effected by a Remedy which should rather promote than pre- 
vent a Recovery. And since there may be frequent occasions for such an 
Assistant; since it would be inhuman to deny it, when requested; and since 
the Art in it self is doubtless very desirable, and highly beneficial, 'tis pity 
that any opportunity of improving it should be neglected. 
[^A floral ornament in the middle of the page. ^]
|P_18[^An ornamented horizontal column, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}An Attempt to settle a just Notion of Incurable in 
Physic. }]
NO proper meaning being generally convey'd by the word Incurable, 
'tis necessary to appropriate one to so important a Term. 

That the bad tendency of a Distemper, from its first Existence to its la- 
test continuance in the Body, cannot in the least be prevented; or that, 
after a stated Period, the cure of a case can by human Means, be advanced 
no farther, is what this Term in propriety of Speech shou'd constantly sig- 
nify. 

But, a loose and abusive Sense of the Word has so universally obtain'd, 
and is so apt on several occasions to be run into, that 'twill be difficult 
to make it always carry this more restrain'd and correct Signification. Nor 
is it an easy matter in some Cases, to obtain such a distinct and positive 
Idea as ought to be rais'd by this Sound, when we talk of Diseases in a Phi- 
losophical manner; which perhaps is one reason why so many Distempers 
commonly pass under this Denomination; and that when a certain form 
of Remedies has for a determin'd space of Time, been used without the 
desired Effect, the case is merely upon this account pronounc'd Incurable. 
But 'tis apparent that there may happen a wide difference between a real 
and such a reputed incurable Distemper; since to constitute the former, tis
necessary that it will utterly elude the force of what the most perfect Physicians 
can rationally prescribe for its Cure; when to make the latter, 'tis enough 
that it has eluded the Prescriptions of one or two Practitioners. To con- 
firm a Disease really Incurable, the utmost powers of Remedies must prove 
|P_19
ineffectual: To cause it to pass for Incurable, that it has baffled the fashion- 
able Practice will suffice. Some Reason drawn from the Nature of the 
Thing, is requisite to shew a Case to be absolutely Incurable; to denomi- 
nate a Patient so, a groundless Conjecture will serve. 

'Tis likewise evident, that reputed Incurable may chance, at the same 
time, to prove real incurable Diseases; so that to introduce a more accurate 
Distinction, and to shew the true difference betwixt them, is of great Im- 
portance. 

'Tis not necessary however, in an Essay which rather proposes what ought 
to be done, before we make so free with a Term, upon whose use the 
Lives and Health of Mankind depend, than undertakes to do it; 'tis not 
necessary, I say, in such an Essay as this, to descend so far as to inquire what 
Life and Health are, what their Causes and Effects, wherein they consist, 
by what various Means, and how far they may be impair'd or diminish'd 
before Death necessarily ensues; all which it wou'd be absolutely requisite 
to know in the respective Distempers, if we were willing to see whe- 
ther any, and which of the Catalogue of Diseases are in their own Nature 
absolutely, and in every Stage properly Incurable; or if we would fix the Point 
in other Cases, to which when Diseases arrive, they will never admit of 
farther Alleviation. These Things are here suppos'd to be in great measure 
known already, altho' they highly deserve the most exact and careful In- 
quiry. 

But not to let this weighty Matter pass intirely unregarded, it shou'd be 
observed, that if a Distemper be absolutely Incurable, the reason why it is 
so, must arise either from the Nature of the Disorder, or the natural Im- 
perfection of Medicine; and consequently where the Properties and imme- 
diate Cause of a Disease are well known, and yet from them no Reason can 
be deduced to manifest the case Incurable; that it passes for such, ought 
to be attributed to the natural Imperfection of the Art of Healing. But 
the Art of Healing cannot be said to be naturally Imperfect, till its utmost 
extent be known, that is, till the animal Œconomy, and the immediate 
Causes of its Disorders are throughly understood, and the utmost Powers 
of the known Remedies have been fully obtain'd; if not also, till all the dis- 
|P_20
coverable ones have after the best Manner been experienc'd. Now if all 
these Advantages have not been acquir'd in our Days, as no considerate 
Person will say they have, it follows, that no Distemper can properly by 
us be called Incurable, but where some evident Cause of its being so, ap- 
pears from the Nature of the Thing it self. For unless this Cause be ma- 
nifest, to pretend a Disease is not to be alleviated in any of its Stages, or 
that a Cure can be carry'd no farther, when we don't know why, is a bold 
Guess; and to pronounce the Case Incurable, even after we have done our 
utmost, will mean no more than that the Remedies hitherto used in it, 
have fail'd of the desir'd Effect. But wou'd not such a Censure be equally 
Ridiculous, as to say, ten or an hundred unsuccessful Experiments have 
been made to transmute Metals, and therefore their Transmutation is un- 
discoverable? Here then is a Foundation for a just Distinction between real 
and reputed incurable Diseases. 

Thus we see in Chirurgery, those Wounds are properly adjudg'd Mortal 
or Incurable, which happen in such Parts of the Body whose Union was 
of absolute necessity to the continuance of Life; as for Example, a trans- 
verse Section of the Larynx, which intirely stops Respiration; a disunion 
of the Cerebellum, which prevents the Influx of the Fluid there secreted 
into the Heart; &c. These and the like Cases are justly deem'd Incurable, 
from the very Instant when the Wounds were first inflicted; because here 
the vital Functions are evidently destroyed, without any opportunity be- 
ing allow'd for the Use of Remedies. This is the most determin'd and 
genuine Sense of the Word, and therefore the Use of it in other Cases 
ought to be judg'd of, by its Approach to, or Recess from this original 
Meaning. And accordingly where the Fatality of Wounds is less sud- 
den, and less certain, as in Obstructions of the animal Faculties, sup- 
pose by a transverse Section of the Œsophagus, the Term Incurable can- 
not with equal Certainty be apply'd at the Instant the Wound was re- 
ceiv'd, because there may be other Ways contriv'd of conveying Nu- 
triment to the Body, besides by the Mouth; and in the mean Time, Op- 
portunities may be afforded, of applying the proper Remedies. But if 
the Body could be supply'd with Nutriment only by the Mouth, and 
|P_21
there were no Opportunities allow'd for the Use of Means for Reco- 
very, then such a Case might, with equal Certainty, be pronounc'd In- 
curable, or mortal, as one of the former Kind; though the Prediction 
would not be so soon fulfilled. In all such Cases as these, 'tis evident 
when and why the Term incurable is applicable, which is always go- 
verned by the Nature of the Thing, and the Opportunities there are 
for the Use of Remedies, or else by the natural Imperfection of the Art of 
Chirurgery: Whereas on the contrary, in several Diseases, both Acute 
and Chronic, this Term is apply'd, where no such Reasons appear. 
Thus when certain equivocal Symptoms come on in acute Distem- 
pers, without having any Regard to the immediate or material Cause 
of the Disorders of the animal Œconomy; they consist in without 
so much as any positive Idea in our Minds, obtain'd from reflecting 
on the Nature of the Distemper; and without considering the State of 
the Art of Healing, we at present make no Scruple to adjudge them mortal, or 
Incurable, though neither the vital, natural, or animal Faculties are 
wanting. Thus for Instance, we proceed in the Plague, malignant Fe- 
ver, Goal-Distemper, and the confluent Species of the Small-Pox, &c.
when perhaps if the Matter were carefully examin'd into, such Diseases 
ought never to be call'd Incurable, till they arrive at the very Point 
of Death. But if there be any Reason to suspend this final Judg- 
ment in acute Cases, is there not vastly more to be cautious, how we 
pass such a Censure in chronic Diseases, where no Opportunities are 
wanting to make the necessary Inquiries to find out the Cause, and 
to apply the proper Remedies? And what reason can possibly be as- 
signed, that the respective Specificks for the Gout and Stone, shall ne- 
ver be discover'd; or that no means can be contriv'd to alleviate the 
Pain of those Diseases, farther than is effected by the present Practice? 
Who can pretend, that an Antidote for the Bite of a mad Dog is 
undiscoverable, when he considers we are Masters of the Specifick 
for that of the Viper? But to call these, and several other Diseases In- 
curable, is the Way to make them so, as being apt to put a Stop to farther 
Inquiries into the Nature of them, and retard the Discovery of any Thing that 
|P_22
has a Relation to their Cure. At least then, let no one pretend to 
call any Case Incurable, till he is well acquainted with the Subject of 
Diseases; till he knows their true and immediate Cause, and the ut- 
most Virtues of the several Remedies we are at present possess'd of. 

An animated human Body, we are certain, is a pure mechanical 
Structure, wholly compos'd of Solids and Fluids; and consequently the 
immediate Cause of every bodily Disease, can be only Matter and Mo- 
tion. 

The utmost Virtues of Remedies cannot be known, till the Reme- 
dies have been most artificially prepar'd and combin'd, most seasonably 
and properly apply'd, exhibited in the most just Quantity, at the most 
proper Intervals, and lastly, continu'd in exact Proportion to the De- 
mand of the Distemper. All which Requisites, there is little Reason to 
believe, have been hitherto strictly observ'd in their Exhibition. And 
besides the Improvement which may be made in the present Set of 
Remedies, 'tis not to be doubted, as was before observ'd, that many o- 
thers, of equal Virtue, may be discover'd by proper Application; upon 
all which Accounts, it were greatly to be wish'd, that Physicians would 
never apply the Term Incurable to any Cases, but such alone where 
that Matter and Motion are wanting, which Life, even in its lowest 
and weakest State requires, or when all means, by which they used 
to be supply'd, are intirely cut off. For if a Distemper be curable on- 
ly in Part, 'tis improperly call'd incurable, till that partial Cure, can 
by human Means, be carry'd no farther. 

We daily observe so many unexpected and surprizing Turns in the 
Disorders of a human Body; Nature here acts by so many secret 
Springs, and makes so many unforeseen Sallies and Excursions, as if 
she took Delight to mock our Toil, baffle our best concerted Mea- 
sures, and reverse our best form'd Judgments, that it is presumptuous, 
where the Case is not manifest, to pretend to fix and determine the 
Point she shall just come up to, and not exceed; to say, hitherto shalt thou 
come, and no farther; here the Disease is Incurable, and here the Art 
of Healing fails. No one less than an absolute Master of this Art, 
|P_23
will surely ever go so far. If indeed we could always obtain from an 
exact observation of the Properties of Diseases, their true and imme- 
diate Causes, and had a previous Knowledge of the utmost Effects, the 
best adapted Regimen and Remedies would have upon them, then we 
might presume to determine what Cases either were, or were not in- 
curable, by the present known Remedies; and no one, without this 
Qualification, can pass a valid Judgment. Let us then endeavour to 
increase our Knowledge of Distempers and Remedies, by all possible 
Means, and not venture to pronounce the Sentence of incurable upon 
Diseases, at least till we have acquir'd such a Definition of them, as 
will bring us acquainted with their real Causes; and till we are Ma- 
sters of the best Way of managing and improving the Remedies we 
enjoy. 

To discover whether a reputed incurable be also a real incurable 
Distemper, I apprehend the best Course to be taken, is first to set down 
the several Properties of every Case distinctly; next, to draw as many 
Consequences from these Properties, as may give Light into the Na- 
ture of the Case, and assist in discovering its immediate Cause: And 
when this is obtain'd, we are naturally directed to search for the Re- 
medy; so that at length, by this Method of Proceeding, we shall see 
how far our present Stock of Remedies will reach, after they have 
been duly improv'd; and what we are farther directed to seek for, to 
advance the Art of Healing to a greater Perfection. To usher in this 
Method, I will here set down a few short Examples, by way of Spe- 
cimen, of what may be expected from it, upon a proper application. 
The Cases I shall chuse to instance in, are reputed Incurable, either 
from their first appearance, to their ultimate Stage, or after a set Time; 
the Sequel will shew whether they really deserve the Appellation of 
incurable, or ought to be rescu'd, and set free from the tyrannical Im- 
position of a misemploy'd Term. 

|P_24[^An ornamented horizontal column, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}A Specimen of a rational Method, to discover 
the Cures of reputed Incurable Diseases. }]
[}Of MADNESS. }]
1. THERE are two Species of this Distemper, viz. Melancholia 
and Mania. 

2. The Properties of the Melancholia are; to proceed from some 
Disorder in the Mind. 

3. To be preceded by Anxiety, Want of Sleep, intense Thought, fre- 
quent Anger, or any violent Passion; profuse Venery, Pain in the Head, 
Suppression of the natural Evacuations, burning and lasting Fevers, violent 
Exercise long continu'd, hot and dry Weather. 

4. To manifest it self by Fear and Sadness, and the Colour of the Skin, 
which grows pale, yellow, brown, livid; by Spots of the same Colour, a 
slow Pulse, hard Respiration, Secretion and Excretion lessen'd, Loss of Ap- 
petite, Loss of Flesh, Love of Solitude, lasting Passions, Fixedness on some 
Thought, a Pressure, Coarctation or Repletion about the Viscera or Hy- 
pochondria. 

5. When 'tis of long continuance, it causes the Apoplexy, Epilepsy, 
Mania, Convulsions, &c.

|P_25
6. 'Tis sometimes naturally cured by a cuticular Eruption, large Varices, 
great Swelling and consequent Flux of the Hæmorrhoids, and an Excretion 
black Bile by the Mouth or Anus. 

7. The Properties of the Mania are generally the same, but differ in a 
few Particulars; for Instance, 

8. Boldness and Anger here attend instead of Fear and Sadness in the for- 
mer. 

9. Immense muscular Strength. 

10. Very great Watchfulness. 

11.A surprizing Endurance of Cold and Hunger. 

12. Most dreadful and outragious Ideas. 

13. All Secretions in a manner stopt. 

14. Anatomy shews in both Species, that the Brain and its Meninges 
are dry, hard and crisp; its Cortex yellow, and that its Vessels abound 
in Varices, and are distended with a black viscid Gore. 

15. The Mania, after an obstinate resistance of the common Practice, has 
been cured by spontaneous Varices or Hæmorrhoids, by a Dropsy, Dysen- 
tery, a tertian or quartan Ague, and large Hæmorrhages. 

16. Does it not follow, that the immediate Cause of both Species is an 
Evaporation of the more subtile Parts of the Fluids? 1. 2. 3. 7. 10. 13. 14. 

17. That the Mania differs from the Hypochondria only in degree, 4. 
5. 6. 14. 15. Since they both have the same Causes, and exhibit the same 
Appearance upon Dissection? 

18. That this Disease unjustly passes for incurable 6. 15. even altho' a 
Year or two may have been unsuccessfully spent in attempting its Cure? 

19. And lastly, that the Specific wanting in both Species, is such a Reme- 
dy, as will prevent this Evaporation 16. which remains to be discover'd by 
proper Experiments. 

20. In the mean time, perhaps no known Remedy will more forcibly 
contract the Pores, and prevent this Evaporation, than the Cold Bath, when 
used so as to exert its proper force. 

|P_26
21. Now the Cold Bath can only act upon the Body by its Gravity or 
Pressure, the Insinuation of the Parts whereof it is compos'd, and its Cold- 
ness; but its Gravity or Pressure will be proportionably increased by a deep- 
er Immersion, and this will consequently render the Insinuation of the 
Water proportionably greater. Its Coldness also may be immensely in- 
creas'd by the addition of Sal Armoniac, &c. Here therefore is a Remedy 
of an unlimited Force, which seems to be exceedingly well adapted to 
the Cure of this Disease: And accordingly, 'tis found in Fact to answer, 
the best of any known Remedy in this Distemper, tho' made use of un- 
der very great Disadvantages. 
[^A floral ornament in the middle of the page. ^]
|P_27[^An ornamented horizontal column, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}Of the Rabies Canina, or Hydrophobia, conse- 
quent upon the Bite of a mad-Dog. }]
THE Properties of this Disease are as follow. 

1. 'Tis spontaneous in many Animals, especially in Dogs, Foxes, 
and Wolves, which communicate it not only to one another, but to 
Men, by Contagion. 

2. The slightest Bite of an Animal thus infected is often fatal, as it 
is also to touch their Saliva with the Tongue, or to handle such Instru- 
ments much, as have been used about them. 

3. The Contagion in a human Body, manifests itself at various Inter- 
vals in various Subjects; in some it will lurk for several Years. 

4. The Place where the Bite happen'd first becomes painful, the Pain 
spreads to the adjacent Parts, a Weariness and Heaviness is felt in the 
Flesh, the Sleep is broken, discompos'd, frightful, and attended 
with Convulsions. The Patient is uneasy when awake, he sighs, is sad, 
and seeks Solitude. These Symptoms gradually increase, and a Dif- 
ficulty of Respiration comes on, which is now frequently interrupted 
with Sighs; an unusual Dread and Terror upon beholding any Liquid, 
loss of Appetite; to taste any Liquor causes very great Anxiety, Tre- 
mors and Convulsions; vomiting of a viscid bilious or green Matter, 
Heat, Fever, Watching, Priapismus, strange disorderly Ideas. The Tongue 
is dry, and extended out of the Mouth, there is a Hoarseness and very 
great Drought; the Patient at length now becomes outragious upon attemp- 
|P_28
ting to drink; he endeavours to bite whoever he meets with; he foams 
at the Mouth, and gnashes with his Teeth; a cold Sweat comes on; he 
grows most outragiously mad, and, with the utmost Difficulty of Respi- 
ration, dies convulsive. 

5. From Dissection it appears, That the Organs of Deglutition are 
inflam'd, that a viscid bilious matter is lodg'd in the Stomach, that the Gall- 
Bladder is full of black Bile, that the Pericardium is dry, that the Lungs 
are greatly overcharg'd with Blood, that the Arteries are full of a ve- 
ry liquid Blood, but the Veins empty. Tis remarkable, that this Blood 
will scarce coagulate, when extravasated and exposed to the Air. All 
the Muscles, Viscera, Brain, and Spinal Marrow appear too dry. 

6. Is not therefore the immediate Cause of this Disease a subtile 
Poison in the Fluids, whose Specific Antidote is unknown to us? 

7. And till this Antidote can be found, is it not clear, that all man- 
ner of Evacuations, especially Phlebotomy or rather Arteriotomy, are to be u- 
sed in every Stage of the Disease; and all other Measures to be pursu'd, 
which tend to introduce new Fluids, in the Room of the contaminated 
Set; or at least to discharge so much of the Virus, as to lessen its 
pernicious Consequences? 

8. The Effects of this Virus in the Body, being so very dreadful 
and fatal, may justify the Use even of severe and hazardous Means to pre- 
vent 'em, so that at least Phlebotomy ad Animi Deliquium usq; may be occa- 
sionally repeated; not only upon that Account, but also by reason of 
the very great Inflammation that attends it. And because Fear is known 
to have been serviceable in this Case; may it not be very proper to con- 
trive some extraordinary Ways to raise this Passion to a very great De- 
gree, if not before Immersion in the cold Bath, at least by means there- 
of, being us'd in almost its utmost force? 

|P_29[^An ornamented horizontal column, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}Of the Palsy. }]
1. THERE are three Species of this Disease. 1. Where Motion a- 
lone is wanting. 2. Where Sensation alone is wanting. 3. 
Where both Motion and Sensation are wanting. 

2. 'Tis often preceded by the Apoplexy, Epilepsy, or Convulsions, a 
Retention of the natural Evacuations, a Translation of the Matter of 
an acute or chronic Disease; Wounds, Contusions, Luxations, Compres- 
sions, Erosions, &c. intense Cold or Heat, too free an Use of hot 
Water, Exhalations of poisonous Minerals admitted into the Body. 

3. The paralytic Parts grow cold, soft, flaccid and waste gradually. 

4. 'Tis often critically cur'd, or by the Force of Nature, either by 
a spontaneous and lasting Diarrhæa, a Fever, an insensible Dissipati- 
on of the morbific Cause, or lastly, by a convulsive Motion of the 
Part. 

5. From hence it follows, that the immediate Cause of the Palsy 
is a Want of the Influx of the Blood, or nervous Fluid, or both, into 
the Part, 1, 2, 3. 

6. That the Parts lose their natural Elasticity. 2, 3. 

7. That when both the nervous and arterial Fluid is wanting to the 
Part, and the Canals are depriv'd of their natural Elasticity, the Case 
is most inveterate. 

8. That its Cause may be either external or internal. 2. 

9. That the Want of the nervous and arterial Fluid, is either owing 
to a Fault in their respective Canals, or to the Fluids themselves. 2. 

|P_30
10. That it may be cured either by a Specific or an Evacuant, 4. and 
consequently is not justly reputed incurable. 

11. That the Cure depends upon removing the Obstruction to the 
Influx of the Fluids, and deriving them in their natural State, into their 
respective Canals. 

12. That the Cure must be adapted to the Cause. 

13. Supposing then, both Canals and Fluids to be affected; the 
Canals to have become cold and flaccid, and the Fluids gross and te- 
nacious; 'tis plain, that a powerful Dissolvent, which at the same time 
that it liquifies and purifies the Blood, promotes a free Circulation in 
the disorder'd Parts, and restores the Elasticity to the Canals, will prove 
a Specific in this Case: And why the Cortex Peruvianus, when rais'd to 
its utmost or proportionable Power, may not prove this Specific, per- 
haps nothing but the proper Experiments will shew. 

14. The very great Effects of a due Use of the Cortex, not only 
in intermitting Fevers, but in many other Disorders, both of the Solids 
and Fluids, are too well known to stand in need of a particular Enu- 
meration; and this Medicament is now so universally allow'd to be safe 
as well as efficacious, when properly apply'd, that I know of no Ob- 
jection that can lie against the Use of it in the Palsy. Those who 
think it not of Force sufficient in such an obstinate Distemper as this, 
when, after some Months have to no Purpose been spent upon it, 'tis 
reputed Incurable, will please to consider its surprizing Effects on the Solids 
and Fluids in a rebellious Quartan Ague, in what very large Doses 'tis 
capable of being exhibited, and how much a prudent Mixture of Sal 
Absinth: &c. will add to its Virtue; especially if so grand a Remedy 
as the cold Bath, when duly improv'd, may be call'd in to its Assist- 
ance, as in the Distemper we are speaking of, it frequently may. 
