
|P_1[^A horizontal ornamental column, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}AN 
ESSAY 
ON 
PHYSICK. }]
IShall not trouble the Reader with the 
Occasion of the following Essay, or 
make any Apology for publishing it; 
the Subject of it is too Important to need 
the latter, and the former is a matter of no 
Consequence to the Publick: and as I am 
not in humour, at present, to compliment 
either my Self or Others, and have neither 
leisure nor inclination to be Impertinent, I 
shall directly fall on my Subject, without 
farther Preface or Dedication. 

|P_2
'Tis a matter of Fact beyond dispute in 
the History of Physick, as far as we have 
any remaining Records of it, from its first 
Rise to this Day, that the Materia Medica
has still grown more and more Bulky in 
every Age. From what Causes this arose, 
and what Effects it has produced, will be 
farther seen in the Course of this Essay. 

The most antient Physicians, as far as we 
can find, made use of but very few Reme- 
dies, and those few were entirely directed 
to the natural Evacuations; either to pro- 
mote such as were Obstructed and Defec- 
tive, or to check and restrain such as were 
Excessive and Redundant. And herein they 
exactly followed the Direction and Indica- 
tions of Nature, by observing what Aug- 
mentation or Diminution of these Evacua- 
tions, brought on such and such morbid 
Symptoms, and by what ways and means 
they were removed and carried off, when 
the whole Process was left to Nature only, 
without any assistance or interposition of 
Art. And as this was the only proper 
foundation to erect a laudable Praxis upon; 
so in fact we find that the Medical Pro- 
|P_3
cesses of the Antients, were always more 
or less successful, as they had a nearer or 
more remote relation, in their intention of 
Cure, to the Operations of unassisted Na- 
ture, and were directed, governed and con- 
ducted by this Principle. 

While Men thus contented themselves 
with knowing only what they could dis- 
cover in Fact, confined their Reasonings to 
such Phænomena as occurr'd by Observa- 
tion and Experience, and were not ashamed 
to confess their Ignorance where they had 
no true Knowledge; they studyed Nature 
more successfully, and applyed their Know- 
ledge to much better purpose: and Phy- 
sick, as well as other Arts and Sciences, 
was considerably advanced and improved. 
But such was the Vanity of the Philoso- 
phers in pretending to search into the real 
Essences, intrinsick Constitutions and formal 
Causes of things, that, in this whimsical 
pursuit, they had not only set aside the 
true method of improving Knowledge by 
careful observation and just experiments, 
but introduced into its room a chimerical 
Succedaneum, which had no foundation in 
|P_4
Reason and Nature, but was merely Fictiti- 
ous, Imaginary and Hypothetical. And 
thus while they thought to ransack the 
Bowels, and penetrate to the very Centre 
of Nature, they lost sight of the Surface, 
and could not perceive or judge of what 
was before their Eyes. 

If these dark and profound Inquisitors 
had confin'd their Enquirys and Lucubra- 
tions to matters of Speculation and Enter- 
tainment, and had not attempted to intrude 
their Whimsys and Reveries into common 
Life, and the useful Arts and Sciences; tho' 
no good had come of it, yet, on the other 
hand, no great harm would have been done: 
but the mischief lay here, that in every Age 
the Philosophy most in vogue, like a Tor- 
rent carry'd all before it, broke in upon 
Soul and Body at once, and settled not on- 
ly the Faith of Christians, but the Practice of 
Physicians too: and hence we meet with 
in their turns Platonists, Aristotelians,  Car- 
tesians, Corpuscularians, Specificians, and 
Rosicrucians in Physick, as well as in Divi- 
nity. These all claimed the same implicit 
Faith and Obedience to their respective 
|P_5
Creeds, Canons and Constitutions, equally 
denyed the Right of private Judgment to 
all their Disciples, and, as far as lay in their 
power, discouraged and opposed all rational 
Freedom of Inquiry whatsoever. Thus a 
Physical as well as Theological Orthodoxy 
was ever insisted on, and a Man, in either 
case, was always reputed to die a Heretick, 
if he did not die in Form. 

The State of Physick thus stood for ma- 
ny Ages, on the authority of the Schools 
and whimsies of the Theorists. The study 
of Nature was almost wholly laid aside, and 
the good old way to Knowledge by Obser- 
vations and Experiments, was superseded 
by Canons and Aphorisms founded on a 
meer verbal and unintelligible Philosophy; 
which from authority, only, obtain'd the 
name of first Principles, and of consequence 
were not to be disputed. And hence we 
find that the Practice of Physick in every 
succeeding Age became more and more 
uncertain and precarious, till it ran quite 
out of Character, and fell into the hands 
of Visionaries and Chemical Enthusiasts, 
who being for the most part Men of strong 
|P_6
Imaginations and weak Judgments, em- 
ploy'd all their thoughts, and spent all their 
time, in search after the Alkahest or  Uni- 
versal Medicine; and so eager were they 
in the pursuit of this Chimæra, that they 
not only neglected, but almost quite lost, the 
little knowledge they had of particular Re- 
medies. 

And that a proper Theory might not be 
wanting exactly suited to this whimsical 
and ridiculous Enterprize; and finding it 
impracticable to adapt any one then in be- 
ing, or to contrive a new one in the way 
of Reason and Nature; they wisely took it 
into their heads to introduce Machinery 
into Medicine, and to bring in Demons and 
supernatural Agents to their assistance. Thus 
the Archæus came into play and was con- 
stituted Superintendant over the whole A- 
nimal Oeconomy. This Major-Domo, as 
long as he was in good humour, executed 
his Commission very faithfully, and guarded 
the Health and Safety of the whole Body; 
so that all Danger was prevented, and every 
thing went on well. But no sooner was he 
displeased and disobliged, but he neglected 
|P_7
his guard, Disease broke in upon the Con- 
stitution, and all was out of order; and no- 
thing in Nature could restore it again to its 
former Health and Rectitude, till the  Ar- 
chaeus was pacifyed and appeased with the 
grand Secret or universal Medicine. Now 
this grand Secret, you must know, was a 
certain Chemical Preparation so exactly suit- 
ed to his Taste, that it never fail'd, when 
timely administred by the Physician, to an- 
swer this intention: but when this peevish 
testy Phantom happened to be neglected too 
long, he then fell into a passion, became 
implacable, and in his rage and fury always 
destroyed the Patient. 

This Scheme, as whimsical and visiona- 
ry as it appears to be, has had for its Patrons 
and Defenders Gentlemen of the greatest 
name; and I make no doubt but long e'er 
this time, some happy Genius or other in 
the Enthusiastick way would have carried 
this matter, if possible, into farther Fanati- 
cism, had not Mathematical and Mechani- 
cal Learning, which began to be in fashion 
in the last Age, put People on a better me- 
thod of enquiry and a juster way of reason- 
|P_8
ing. And yet notwithstanding, such is the 
prodigious and almost insuperable force of 
Prejudice and Education, that a great part 
of this Scheme is still retained, by Gentle- 
men who would think themselves ill used 
if their Mathematical or Mechanical Know- 
ledge should be called in question, under 
the Animal Spirits, notion of to whom they 
have assigned much the same Province and 
Powers, as was done to the Archæus before; 
with this additional absurdity, that these  A- 
nimal Spirits have been treated as mecha- 
nical and intelligent Agents at the same 
time: of which any one may be convinced, 
who shall think it worth his while to look 
into and examine the several Hypotheses on 
this Subject. 

And tho' it must be owned, that great 
advances and improvements have been since 
made, by the Moderns, in natural Know- 
ledge, yet 'tis much to be wish'd that a bet- 
ter method had been taken in the applica- 
tion of this to the Animal Oeconomy, the 
Practice of Physick, and the Cure of Diseases. 
But such has been the hard fate of this Pro- 
fession, that amidst all other advances Phy- 
|P_9
sick has been so very little improved, that 
we have but one Book in the World, as far 
as I know, wherein any general Attempt has 
been made to apply the true Philosophy 
of Nature to the Animal Oeconomy and 
the Materia Medica; and this in my opi- 
nion has been executed with such success 
by the Ingenious Author of the Philo- 
sophical Principles of Medicine, that the 
Intelligent unprejudiced Reader may pro- 
mise himself to meet, therein, with almost 
every thing that is valuable in the Theory
and Practice of Physick; erected into one 
consistent System, founded on indisputable 
Principles, and judiciously drawn out into 
all its useful Corollaries and Consequences. 
Nay, 'tis a Truth but too plain in fact, that 
in general we are much declined from the 
more simple and natural methods of cure 
made use of by the Antients; and as this 
has been chiefly owing to our neglecting 
the true rational Indications and Intentions 
of Cure, so instead of applying to this as 
Nature would direct us, we have been, and 
still are, continually amused with an infinite 
jumble of Medicines under the notion of 
Specifick Alteratives; as if, by a most unac- 
countable and unintelligible Transmutation, 
|P_10
the morbid Matter could be converted into 
good Blood and Humours, and retain'd in 
the Body without injury to the Constitu- 
tion; and there were no need at all of 
throwing it off by any of the natural Eva- 
cuations. Which idle Conceit is without 
doubt the Bane of all rational Practice, and 
the common Cheat by which Quacks, 
Empyricks and Ignorant Pretenders, chowse 
and dupe People out of their Money and 
Lives. 

Now in order to shew the Folly and Ab- 
surdity of this Notion, and to contribute 
what lies in my power towards reviving 
the more natural and rational Practice of 
the Antients, I shall in this Essay, under 
distinct Sections, consider the principal Ope- 
rations of Medicines, and the manner in 
which they Act; end herein I shall confine 
my self to such Simples as are most useful 
and necessary in Practice, with due allow- 
ance for some choice of things, in the same 
general Intention, for the better accommo- 
dation of them to the Stomach and parti- 
cular liking of the Patient: avoiding as 
much as possible all such philosophical Spe- 
culations, as have the least tendency to lead 
|P_11
me beside my Design, or to draw me into 
any Considerations or Enquiries, concerning 
them, beyond their obvious sensible Quali- 
ties and Effects; which, in my opinion, is 
the true Boundary of all medicinal Know- 
ledge, and the Ne plus ultra of the Physi- 
cians Empire. 

[}SECT. I. }]
[}Of Animal Mechanism. }]
IT would be impossible to give any ra- 
tional Account of Diseases and their 
Cure, without a general knowledge of the 
Animal Oeconomy and the Method of 
Nature in preparing, digesting and secre- 
ting the several Liquors of the Glands, and 
the principal ends and uses for which they 
are intended. And as this can only be 
known by a careful observation of Facts 
and the method of Nature either in pre- 
serving Health, or in the Formation and 
Cure of Diseases, where there has been no 
Interposition of Art, and no Reasonings à 
priori or antecedent to the Facts them- 
selves: so it is no wonder that the Theo- 
|P_12
rists in all Ages, who deviated from this 
good old way of the Antients, and set out 
with other Views and on other Principles, 
bewildered themselves and their Followers, 
and never arrived at any one point of real 
and useful Knowledge, or made the least 
Advance or Improvement in the Art of 
Healing. 

The most antient Physicians, who were 
always the best Philosophers of their time, 
grounded their Curative Intentions, upon 
the most obvious and sensible Effects of 
Medicines, as they either promoted or re- 
strained this or the other natural Evacua- 
tion, and thereby corrected any such Error 
either in Excess or Defect. And this most 
obvious and sensible Effect, visible to all 
By-standers or Observers, they called the 
Virtue, Power or Property of the Medi- 
cine; and herein they never expected or 
promised any sensible Effect in the Cure of 
Diseases, from insensible or unknown Cau- 
ses; or, which is the same thing, they were 
not let into the Mystery of our Modern 
Specifick or Corpusculariau Philosophy; 
they did not understand the Magick of 
|P_13
Curing Diseases, by Occult Qualities in 
Medicines, or of producing sensible Effects 
without sensible Causes. 

But our Modern Writers upon Physick 
and the Cure of Diseases, have for the 
most part inverted this Order of Nature, 
by a most ungeometrical and immechani- 
cal Application of Geometry and Mecha- 
nism, to the Animal Structure and Oeco- 
nomy: And not a few of the great Masters 
and Leaders of the Faculty, have either 
made their own Data, assumed false Prin- 
ciples without Proofs, or reasoned Illogi- 
cally, by drawing false Consequences from 
real Facts and just Principles. Of this I 
shall give some very pregnant and convinc- 
ing Instances, that I may not be thought 
to talk at random, or to lay in a Charge 
against our Modern Medico-Philosophers 
without Ground or Reason: for tho' I love 
Truth, yet I hate any thing that looks like 
Malice and Defamation, and had much ra- 
ther be convicted of Ignorance than Disho- 
nesty. 

1. Then the Antients had observ'd, 
that the small parts of some sorts of mat- 
|P_14
ter, would attract and intimately unite or 
Incorporate with each other; while the 
Particles of other sort of matter, would 
naturally separate and disunite, and could 
not easily be Incorporated at all. Thus they 
observ'd that the Particles of Salts would 
readily dissolve in, and intimately mix and 
incorporate with Water, tho' they are Spe- 
cifically heavier; and that Oils and  Sul- 
phurs would not do so, but, on the con- 
trary, disunite, separate and repel each o- 
ther, whatever their different Specifick Gra- 
vities might be. 

They observ'd likewise in the Animal 
Body, that the several parts to be supply'd 
and nourish'd, would attract, imbibe and 
retain their proper Nutritive Matter, and 
repel or drive on any other sort of Mat- 
ter, not fit for such a purpose; and these 
different Powers or Properties, in the se- 
veral sorts of Matter which they observ'd 
to be so obvious and visible to the Senses, 
they call'd Sympathy and Antipathy, with- 
out knowing the Causes of it, or so much 
as pretending to reason from it à priori. 
And here therefore they could mean no 
|P_15
more by it, than we do by Centripetal and 
Centrifugal Forces, or the mutual  Attracti- 
on and Repulsion of the several parts of 
Matter. The most antient Philosophers 
and Physicians therefore had as clear and 
distinct Ideas of their Sympathy and  Anti- 
pathy, and understood what they meant by 
it, as well as we do the Gravity and Vis 
Inertiæ of Bodies in general, the  Elastici- 
ty of the Air, or the Pressure of Fluids, and 
the different degrees of Attraction in Bo- 
dies. And, 'tis more than probable, were 
these Gentlemen now living, and ask'd to 
explain themselves on this Subject, that they 
might tell us they would assign the Causes 
of what they called Sympathy and  Antipa- 
thy, as soon as we had explained and as- 
signed the Causes of any of the other Facts 
and sensible Appearances before mentioned; 
and that till we could do this, we should 
in reality be no wiser than they. 

It must be own'd that this Doctrine 
was afterwards very much corrupted and 
abused, and apply'd to a thousand Cases, 
where it could have no place, as the  Peri- 
patetick Philosophy grew into Vogue, and 
|P_16
came to be more and more celebrated in 
the Schools. For in this Philosophy, Words
were never intended to signify any real 
Facts, Appearances or Phænomena in Na- 
ture, but only the unknown Causes, or 
internal Constitutions of Things. This in- 
deed was a short way of talking, about 
every thing known or unknown, but a 
round-about way to Knowledge, as it ne- 
ver produced any. But as this cannot affect 
the more antient Physicians and Philoso- 
phers, or those who lived after Aristotle's 
time who still built their Knowledge of 
Nature upon Observation, Experiment and 
Fact, as much as if no such Philosopher 
had ever been born; so it is certain that no 
other real Improvement of natural Know- 
ledge has ever been made, or ever can be 
made, on any other Plan whatsoever. 

When the Antients were mistaken, it 
was generally owing to want of clearer 
Facts or Data to reason upon; but the 
Moderns, by wrong Reasoning upon Facts, 
and drawing false Consequences from 
Things given, have run into more and 
grosser Errors, than had ever been known 
before. In short, the most Antient Phy- 
|P_17
sicians were very good Modern Philoso- 
phers, in every thing relating to their  Pro- 
fession, whatever they might be as to other 
parts of Nature; while the Generality of 
the Moderns, tho' very good Philosophers 
in other Respects, are yet, with regard to 
the Medical Art, in spite of all the  New- 
tonian Principles and Discoveries, down- 
right Atomists or Aristotelians. 

The Antients knew nothing of the Cir- 
culation of the Blood, from the Heart thro' 
the Arteries and back again by the return- 
ing Veins; nor of the particular Ducts 
thro' which part of the Chyle is conveyed 
from the Stomach to the Subclavian Veins. 
But the Moderns having made these Disco- 
veries, let us consider some of the Fruits of 
it, and the Consequences they have drawn 
from it. 

From the Circulation of the Blood, as 
a Fact given, it has been commonly con- 
cluded, that the Action of the Heart, in its 
alternate Systole and Diastole, is the whole 
Force and adequate Power, by which the 
Blood is moved in the course of its Circu- 
|P_18
lation. Knowing therefore that the Blood 
Circulates, and presuming that the Heart is 
the moving Force or Power, this Power 
has been exactly computed, at a great ex- 
pence of Geometry and Mechanism. And 
herein the Gentlemen, who have applyed 
themselves to this, have succeeded so well 
and come so near together, that they have 
differed only about the Force of the Heart, 
in the proportion of 500000 to 1; for this, 
upon a just Computation, will be found to 
be nearly the Difference, between Dr. James 
Keil, and the famous Borelli in his Book 
de Motu Animalium. But in the mean 
while, might it not be as well to be quite 
ignorant of the Circulation of the Blood, 
as not to be able to apply it to better Pur- 
pose? Did not the Antients Bleed, when 
occasion required, before they knew any 
thing at all of the Circulation of the Blood? 
Nay, did they not use Phlebotomy with 
more Judgment and Success, by opening a 
Vein as near as possible to the Part affected; 
while the Moderns have absurdly run into 
the contrary Practice, against Fact and Ex- 
perience, as well as the Reason and Nature 
of Things; by falsly concluding that 'twould 
|P_19
be indifferent from what part of the Body 
Blood should be drawn, since, in conse- 
quence of the Circulation, the  Æquilibri- 
um of the Vital Fluid would necessarily be 
soon restored again. Or has the Knowledge 
of the Circulation, by any Use or Applica- 
tion whatever that has yet been made of 
it, at all improved the Art of Healing? 

But farther, from the Discovery of the 
Chyliferous Ducts, which terminate chiefly 
in the left Subclavian Vein, tho' they are 
often found in the Right too, it has been 
concluded that the whole quantity of Chyle, 
and every thing that can be conveyed from 
the Stomach thro' the Lacteals, must pass 
this way into the Blood-Vessels; and that 
this Matter must afterwards be derived a- 
gain from the Blood in the Arteries, by the 
Glandular Secretory Ducts, before there can 
be any such thing as Animal Nutrition or 
Evacuation. But as this is contrary to all 
the Phænomena of Animal Nature, and 
demonstratively false in Fact, it could not 
possibly have ever entered into the Heads 
of Men, who had not had the vast advan- 
tage of Modern Discoverys in Physick. 

|P_20
Any Man, I think, who has made the 
least reflection upon this Matter, if not too 
strongly prejudiced, or accustomed to ano- 
ther way of thinking, must be convinced 
that the Natural Evacuations, in their in- 
creased or diminished Quantities, do not at 
all follow the Laws and Conditions of the 
Sanguineous Circulation, or the increased 
or diminish'd Velocity and Momentum of 
the Blood; but that one may be increased 
while the other is diminished, and pro- 
duce their Effects reciprocally. In Inflam- 
matory and Effluent Fevers, where the Ve- 
locity and Impetus of the Blood is greatest, 
the natural Secretions and Evacuations are 
generally greatly diminish'd. And, on the 
contrary, in the Paroxisms of Diabetical, 
Hypochondriacal and Hysterick Disorders, 
we often find a very great and extraordi- 
nary Profluvium of Urine, where the Cir- 
culation of the Blood is very low and lan- 
guid, or almost quite suspended; which 
could not possibly happen, I think, if these 
Evacuations were made from the Arterial 
Blood, and depended on the Velocity and 
Impetus of that Fluid. 

|P_21
InAtrophys we frequently see People, 
running off all their Flesh, till they are 
reduced to mere Skin and Bones, and yet 
the Blood-Vessels remain still full and turgid, 
and the Blood, upon opening a Vein, comes 
off with sufficient Force and Freedom, and 
there are no Symptoms, or Indications at 
all, of any Diminution or Defect of that 
Fluid. 

In a Dropsy every thing that is drank, 
or taken in of a fluid Nature, fills up 
and distends the Ventricles of the Glands, 
the Lymphatick Ducts, and Membranous 
Cells throughout the Body still more and 
more; while the quantity of Blood, upon 
the whole, is not at all increased, but ra- 
ther much lessened and diminished: And 
Bleeding, in this Case, is so far from lessen- 
ing or abating any such Glandular, Lympha- 
tick or Membranous Plethora, that, on the 
contrary, it rather increases, strengthens and 
confirms it: And farther, in this Case such 
a Plethora, or Redundancy of Water, may 
be all drawn off, and discharg'd by Urine, 
Stools, Sweating, &c. without affecting 
|P_22
or altering the State of the Blood, so far as 
can be discovered, either as to its Quantity 
or Quality. 

These Facts; and Observations, to men- 
tion no more, are I think sufficient to de- 
monstrate, that there is no such Intercourse 
and Communication between the Glands 
and Membranous Cells and the Blood, as 
is commonly Imagined; and that a Defect, 
or Redundancy, may happen in either inde- 
pendent of each other, and consequently 
that those Lacteals, which convey a certain 
portion of the Chyle from the Stomach, 
to be emptyed into the Blood-Vessels, may 
receive either more or less than their share, 
as well as those which are to carry off and 
convey the same to the Breasts, Kidneys, 
Cutaneous Ducts, &c. and this indepen- 
dent on each other, as the Recipients, lead- 
ing to one part or the other, may either 
be too Lax and Open, or too much  Con- 
stringed and Obstructed. And from hence 
it is, that we find some Persons and Con- 
stitutions very much inclined and disposed to 
collect and accumulate Blood, while they are 
still Thin and Lean in Flesh; and others to 
|P_23
grow Fat and Fleshy, with a Scarcity and 
Defect of Blood at the same time. Which 
yet, as plain and evident as it is in Fact, I 
think, could not possibly happen upon the 
Modern Hypothesis of Secretion, or if the 
whole quantity of Chyle or Nutriment
from the Stomach, were to be conveyed 
and thrown into the Blood, before any o- 
ther part could be supplyed with the Same. 

Another modern Discovery in Phy- 
sick, as a Consequence of the former, is 
this, That there is no such thing as different 
Fermentations, Digestions, and Separations
of Liquors in the Ventricles of the Glands, 
from different Degrees of Heat and  Mo- 
tion; but that all the variety of the different 
Secretions, is effected by a simple Colature
from the Arterial Blood, thro' small Pipes 
of different Diameters, and which will ad- 
mit of Fluid Particles of one Size, but not 
of another, without any Glandular Con- 
coction whatsoever. Now if any body 
had a mind to look like a Mechanician
and Chemist, without being one the  Bel- 
linian Doctrine, would soon furnish him 
with Words that might sound very well; 
|P_24
and a Man who is well versed in that  Hy- 
pothesis, may possibly be thought a consi- 
derable Philosopher, while he is talking the 
greatest and most egregious Nonsense in the 
World. For tho' we see every Day, and 
in the whole Oeconomy and Process of Na- 
ture, very great Changes and Transmuta- 
tions made upon Fluids by Fermentation
and Digestion, under different Degrees of 
Heat, Rarefaction and Intestine Motion, 
yet no Man could ever observe any such 
Thing effected by any sort of Colature or 
Straining whatsoever. And when these 
Gentlemen will be pleased to give us any 
Instances of turning Must into Wine, Wort
into Beer, or Chyle into Milk, Urine, Bile, 
&c. by Straining, it will then be time e- 
nough to consider this Matter farther; but, 
in the mean while, if they will not be con- 
vinced to the contrary themselves, I hope 
they will give me and some others leave to 
laugh at such an Hypothesis, at least, till 
they are better able to support it. 

The Antients, tho' they had not the use 
of Microscopes, the Method of Injecting
the Vessels, and several other Helps with 
|P_25
which Providence has favour'd us, yet they 
were very careful and diligent Observers 
of all the obvious sensible Appearances, or 
Phænomena of Nature, in the Animal 
Structure and Oeconomy. And from hence 
they form'd Judgments and Conclusions 
more certain and successful, concerning the 
Formation and Cure of Diseases, than ever 
the Moderns have done from a great num- 
ber of most precarious and false Hypotheses, 
under the pretence of a better Application 
of Geometry, Mechanism and Philosophy, 
to Physick and the Animal Oeconomy. 
The pretended Fermentations of Acids and 
Alkalys in the Blood; the various Combi- 
nations of the Chemical Principles of Salt, 
Sulphur and Mercury, in the Body, and the 
Effects from thence arising; the motive 
Power of the Animal Spirits, together with 
their several Suffocations and Explosions, 
Concentrations and Dissipations; the  Spe- 
cifick Transmutations of morbid Matter, 
and the Miraculous Power of Medicinal 
Corpuscles upon the Blood; the mysterious 
Effects of Straining, or the Preparation of 
all the different Liquors of the Glands, by 
a Simple Colature from the Blood in the 
|P_26
Arteries, These are some of the most pre- 
vailing Hypotheses which the Moderns 
have assumed and argued upon, as Facts, 
without the least Ground or Reason from 
any of the real Appearances or Phænomena
of Nature: And, to which I shall here only 
add one more, as the Crown and Glory of 
all the rest, namely, that the Blood, in its 
Circulation, moves it self by means of the 
Animal Spirits, which are, at the same 
time, moved by the Blood. For, in this  Hy- 
pothesis, the Blood cannot move till the 
Heart contracts, by the Influx of the Animal 
Spirits from the Nerves; and, on the other 
hand, the Animal Spirits cannot flow thro' 
the Nerves into the Heart, till they have 
been separated in the Brain, by the prior 
Motion or Circulation of the Blood. So 
that herein 'tis evident, that they are both 
supposed as the Antecedent Causes and 
Consequent Effects of each other; and the 
Blood, in this way of accounting for its 
Circulation, can have no Motion but what 
it communicates to, and returns upon it 
Self; and this against a constant Resistance, 
without any prior independent Moving 
Force at all. Which is just as good Sense 
|P_27
as if any one should assign the Weight, 
Spring, or Moving Force, applyed to the 
Wheels, or Pullies, as the Cause of the Mo- 
tion of a Clock, Watch, Crane, or other 
Machine, and at the same time suppose the 
Motion of the Engine, to be the Cause of 
the Weight, Spring, or Moving Force. But 
this, notwithstanding all the expence of 
Geometry and Mechanism that has been 
laid out upon it, by its great Patrons and 
Defenders, and its being so generally re- 
ceiv'd on their Authority, as a first Princi- 
ple in Physick, is an evident Impossibility. 

The first and best Philosophers and Phy- 
sicians, who apply'd themselves to the Stu- 
dy of the Animal Oeconomy, by observing 
the great Alteration made upon our com- 
mon Food, by Fermentation and Digestion
in the Stomach, whereby a Liquor was 
prepared to be afterwards farther conveyed 
to the several Parts of the Body, while the 
Excrementitious Indigestible Parts of the 
Aliment were separated, forced forward, 
and thrown out of the Body, carryed this 
Reasoning, by Analogy of Nature, to the 
other Glands and Ventricles of the Body, 
where they supposed a farther Concoction
|P_28
might, in like manner, be made and diffe- 
rent Liquors prepared and separated, under 
different Degrees of Digestive Heat and 
Motion, so as to answer the several Ends 
and Purposes of the Animal Constitution. 
And herein they argued right, and grounded 
their Principles upon the true Method and 
Oeconomy of Nature in all other like 
Cases. But how far the Moderns have 
mended this Theory, or any other practical 
Principle of the Antients, by any of the 
foregoing Hypotheses, or by their clearer 
Knowledge of Anatomy, I may leave any 
one to judge. 

But, besides the Virtues, Properties or 
sensible Effects of Medicines, as they visibly 
promoted or restrained this or the other 
natural Evacuation, the first and most suc- 
cessful Students of this part of Nature, had 
another Class of Powers and Properties
in things given, as they visibly and sensibly 
affected the Animal Constitution, with re- 
gard to the Primary or Elementary Quali- 
ties, as they chose to call them, of Heat
Cold, Moisture and Dryness. Or which 
is the same thing, as Things given, whether 
|P_29
a Medicine or Diet, were found to Heat
or Cool, Moisten or Dry the Solids in ge- 
neral. And upon this they founded their 
Notion of the four Principal Primary or 
Elementary Constitutions of Hot and Dry, 
Hot and Moist, Cold and Dry, and Cold
and Moist. Where these primary Elemen- 
tary Qualities were found to be so equally 
mix'd and contemperated, as that any one 
of them did not abound or prevail against 
the rest, this was called the Natural Tem- 
perature or State of Health; For while 
these Elementary Qualities were duly 
tempered and equally blended together, 
the Body remain'd Sound and Well, and 
performed all its Functions regularly and 
in good Order; and no Disease or Distem- 
perature could ever be observ'd, but upon 
the Prevalency of some one, or more, of 
these Qualities above the others: And from 
hence in every Disease the prevailing 
Humours were distinguished into Blood, 
Phlegm, Choler or Bile, and Melancholy
or Black Bile: and the general Constitu- 
tions were from thence denominated, either 
Sanguine, Phlegmatick, Cholerick, or  Me- 
lancholy, as this or that Humour prevail'd 
|P_30
or had the Ascendency in particular Per- 
sons. 

Now this, I think, is plain Sense and 
talking very Intelligibly; and the Moderns, 
who have found out other Hypotheses, 
better Methods of Reasoning in Physick, 
and nearer Ways to Health, as the Event
has plainly prov'd, cannot pretend to be 
Ignorant of what the Antients meant by 
Blood, Phlegm, Choler or Bile, tho' they 
have been mightily puzzled to know what 
was understood and intended by their Me- 
lancholick Humour or Black Bile. And 
yet he who does not understand this, must 
either never have practised Physick, or else 
never have made any Observations and Re- 
flections on what he has seen and met 
with in Practice. For, in my Opinion, 'tis 
extreamly clear that the antient Physicians 
neither did, nor could, understand any thing 
else, by their Melancholia or Bilis Atra, 
but the Bile corrupted, vitiated, and dege- 
nerated from its natural State and Use; in 
which case it always turns Black, and be- 
comes a peccant distempered Humour. It 
is true, indeed, that all the Humours by 
|P_31
Stagnation, Corruption and Fermentation, 
may change their Original Colours and 
Qualities, as well as the Bile, which was as 
well known to the Antients as to the Mo- 
derns, and taken notice of by them accord- 
ingly; but yet this Corrupt Bile, when it 
prevails, is so very extensive in its Conse- 
quences, and productive of so many and 
great Diseases, even where no Jaundice
ensues, that it was justly taken notice of 
and distinguished, by them, as one of the 
Principal General Morbid Constitutions: 
And especially, as this Distemperature of the 
Bile naturally, and almost constantly, at- 
tends a Cold and Dry State and Habit of 
Body, or a prevalency of Cold and Dryness, 
above Heat and Moisture, in the General 
Constitution. 

I am aware some trifling Objections may 
be made to what I have advanced here; 
but as they would all terminate in this, 
that the Antients could not always express 
themselves accurately enough to be under- 
stood by the Moderns; so in answer to 
them, without mentioning the particular 
Objections, it may be only said in general, 
|P_32
that the Moderns, in this Case, have been 
equally culpable, in that they have not 
been always able to express themselves, 
with sufficient Clearness, to be understood 
by one another. But for any one gross 
Absurdity, or Falshood in Fact, which any 
Man shall produce from the Antients, a- 
bout the Cause, Formation and Cure of 
Diseases; I will undertake, in defence of the 
Moderns upon this Article, to give him 
five. 

TheAntients had, indeed, a particular 
Notion that the Blood is made in the  Li- 
ver, to which Viscus they ascribed the Act 
of Sanguification. This Opinion has been 
perhaps justly rejected by the Moderns, tho' 
they have not been able yet to settle any 
thing in the room of it; and therefore have 
had no ground for the Laugh. The An- 
tients, it seems, fell into this Mistake for 
want of a clearer Knowledge of Anatomy. 
Well, be it so; but how have the Moderns 
rectified this Error, by their farther Disco- 
veries, and better Acquaintance with the A- 
nimal Structure and Oeconomy; or to 
what particular Organ do they ascribe this 
|P_33
Act of Sanguification? Perhaps it may be 
answered, with some Triumph here, that 
the Case is now very plain, and that since 
the Discovery of the Elasticity of the Air, 
'tis evident enough that the Lungs are the 
only proper Sanguifying Organs; where, 
by the Intromission of a fine Elastick Au- 
ra, these Globules are form'd and blown 
up. But this is a very strange Account of 
the Matter, indeed, since 'tis certain, in Fact, 
that these Globules are specifically heavier, 
instead of being lighter than the Serum. And 
consequently, that they cannot be Vesicles 
or Bubbles fill'd and blown up with Air. 
And had one therefore a mind to maintain 
the Argument, for the sake of the Jest, it 
would be no great difficulty, in my Opini- 
on, to defend the Liver against the Lungs, 
in spite of all such Reasonings as this. 

But he who would follow the Gui- 
dance of Nature, and build his Opinion 
herein on plain Facts and Observations, 
may perhaps see Reason to conclude, that 
the Act of Sanguification is not appro- 
priated to any particular Viscus or Bowel, 
|P_34
that the Lungs contribute only their share 
in the Operation, and that the Blood re- 
ceives its peculiar Type and Form in the 
Arteries, where it undergoes the highest 
Degrees of Heat, Impetus and Motion. 

For we may observe, in Old People, 
where the natural Heat, and Elastick Tone 
of the Solids are much impaired, that the 
Blood grows paler, fainter, and runs more 
into Water, and that the Globular Part or 
Cremor sensibly lessens in proportion to 
the Serum. And this likewise is remarka- 
bly the Case in a Chlorosis, or, indeed, any 
Obstruction of the Menstrual Secretion at- 
tended with Chilliness, Lowness, Pallor
and Languor: In which Cases we often 
see the Globules almost lost, and the Blood 
is little else but Serum. But, by restoring 
the natural Heat, and strengthning the Elas- 
tick Tone of the Arteries, these Globules 
soon rise again, and the Crassamentum or 
Cremor is reduced to its natural and due 
State, whether this be done by any Inter- 
nal Means or External only. 

|P_35
Thus it may likewise be observed, that 
People of Hot, Biliose, and Sanguine Con- 
stitutions, whose Fibres are more firm and 
tense, and where consequently the mus- 
cular Force and Action of the Solids is 
stronger and more vigorous, than in other 
Temperaments, have proportionally more 
Cremor in the Blood than others; and, in 
some high Inflammatory Fevers, where the 
Elastick Force of the Solids is still greater 
and more exalted, the Blood becomes almost 
all Cremor, and affords but very little  Se- 
rum after it has stood many Hours in a 
cold Place. Now, from these Observations, 
to mention no more at present, it may 
perhaps be justly concluded, that the Blood 
receives this Form from the Heat and Ela- 
boration it undergoes in the Arteries. 

But to resume and consider a little far- 
ther the natural Constitutions, as depend- 
ing on the Primary or Elementary Quali- 
ties above mentioned, it may be proper to 
take notice, that the true alterative Method 
of the Antients, consisted in regulating and 
moderating these natural Constitutions and 
primary Qualities. And this they did not 
|P_36
pretend to do by Specifick Alteratives, in 
the Modern Quack Sense, or by any  Oc- 
cult Qualities, or Magical Effect, of Me- 
dicines on the Blood, where People were 
not to know what they took, or after 
what manner they were to expect Relief, 
but by a skilful Direction and Regimen in 
the Use of those Things, which have, I 
know not for what Reason, been common- 
ly called the Non-Naturals, such as Diet, 
Air, Exercise, &c. But I should rather 
chuse to call these the Universals or  Con- 
stitutionals, because the Original Natural 
Constitutions and Primary Qualities do al- 
most entirely, absolutely and universally de- 
pend upon them, so far as Moderating and 
Tempering them can fall under the Consi- 
deration of a Physician. 

A Flesh and Ale Diet increases the Cras- 
sament of the Blood, and accumulates Fat
more than any thing else; it oilifies and 
enriches the Blood, and promotes the Heat 
and Humidity of the Constitution, which 
is the Characteristick of that Temperament 
which by the Antients was call'd Sanguine. 
But when this Constitution becomes In- 
|P_37
temperate and Morbid, it is the Foundation 
of all those Diseases which are owing to 
an overgrowth of Fat, and a too thick and 
rich Blood. 

A Milk and Vegetable Diet, join'd with 
Water-Drinking, encreases the Serum of 
the Blood more than the Crassament. It 
cools, refrigerates and moistens the Habit 
or Constitution, moderately contracts the 
Solids, and promotes the Alvine and Uri- 
nary Discharges. But it has not the same 
Effect on the Cutaneous Evacuations by 
Sweat and Perspiration, which it rather 
lessens and restrains. And yet, by joining 
this Regimen in Diet to a moderate use of 
warm Liquors, or such as contain a Vinous 
Spirit, any immoderate Check or Restraint 
of Perspiration may easily be prevented: 
As, on the other hand, Vegetables and  Wa- 
ter-drinking are, in a good measure, Pre- 
ventatives of the ill Consequences, which 
might otherwise follow, from the too free 
Use of a Flesh and Ale Diet. 

The Choice of Air is undoubtedly of 
the utmost Consequence to moderate and 
|P_38
reduce a Constitution, when it grows into 
any Intemperature; and here the Constitu- 
tion of the Air, with regard to the Prima- 
ry Qualities above mentioned, compared 
with the Constitution of the Patient, will 
afford any Man a sure and unerring Rule 
in the choice of Air. For 'tis certain that 
any Error of Constitution ought to be 
rectifyed and reduced by the contrary Tem- 
per and Quality of the Air, and no body 
would chuse a Hot Air for a too Hot 
Constitution, or a Cold Air for a Cold One, 
and so of the Rest. 

In a Phthisis, or natural Weakness of 
the Lungs, the softest and warmest Air is to 
be chosen, provided it be not too Thick, 
Moist and Boggy. But in an Asthma,  Jaun- 
dice, Weakness and Relaxation of the 
Nerves, and almost in all thin declining 
Habits where the Lungs are sound, a thin, 
cool, dry and Elastick Air, is always best 
and most eligible. But Gross, Fat and Cor- 
pulent People can never be much mended 
by any Air, without a cooling attenuating 
Vegetable Diet and proper Exercise. 

|P_39
Of all Exercises for Health, as well as 
Pleasure, nothing can stand in Competition 
with Riding and Swimming; which won- 
derfully brace the Nerves and Solids in ge- 
neral, restore their Elastick Tone, open 
Obstructions, and promote the several na- 
tural Secretions and Evacuations, beyond 
any other Gymnastick Regimen whatsoever. 

ModerateSleep is the great Solamen
and Restorative of Nature, by which the 
Organs are warm'd, moistned and lubrica- 
ted, and the several Springs of Motion 
wound up, and prepared for farther Action 
in the waking Hours. But in this Case ex- 
cessive Indulgence of Sleep, or Overwatch- 
ing and Want of Sleep, are equally injuri- 
ous to, and produce different and contrary 
Effects upon, the Constitution. For  Ex- 
cessive Sleeping checks and restrains all the 
natural Secretions and Evacuations, weakens 
and relaxes the whole Animal Frame, de- 
stroys the Tone of the Muscles, and induces 
such a weak, cold, humid and flabby State 
of the Nerves, as threatens a Palsy, and 
frequently terminates in one; which I have 
more than once known to be the Conse- 
quence of it. 

|P_40
On the other hand, Overwatching and 
the Want of natural Sleep, wears and wastes 
the whole Animal Constitution, heats the 
Blood, drys and contracts the Nerves, and, 
in fine, either kills with a Fever attended 
with a Phrensy, or induces a Mania,  Lu- 
nacy, or Distraction of some sort or other, 
as is but too commonly seen and experi- 
enced. 

ThePassions have so great a share in 
the Constitutions and Diseases of the Body, 
that, in my Opinion, this ought to be rec- 
koned one of the principal Provinces of 
Physick; and indeed, with a Saving to the 
Divines, I think Physicians are the fittest 
Persons to apply a proper Relief, under 
those great Emotions and Perturbations of 
Mind; which either arise from the Body at 
first, or are soon materializ'd by a commu- 
nication with it. For these Passions are all 
either pleasing or painful Images, and have 
just the same Effect upon the Constitution, 
whether they arise from things without us, 
or have their Original from the Mind with- 
in. 

|P_41
'Tis evident that the pleasurable and 
painful Passions, have very different and even 
quite contrary Effects upon the Blood, Hu- 
mours, and respective Organs of the Body, 
of which a Mechanical Account and Expla- 
nation, may be seen in the Ingenious Dr. 
Morgan's Philosophical Principles of Me- 
dicine; a Book that can never be too much 
studyed by the young Physician, who in- 
tends to make a Figure in his Profession, 
and would build his Practice on plain Facts 
and indisputable Principles. To that Trea- 
tise, therefore, I shall refer the curious 
Reader; where, I can assure him, he will 
find this Subject touch'd with uncommon 
Delicacy, and see the Origin, and different 
Modifications, of the Passions beautifully 
described, and their Effects on the Animal 
Organism, in a strong and masterly manner, 
Anatomically delineated and Mechanically 
accounted for: Which makes it the less 
necessary for me to enter farther into the 
Theory of the Matter here. 

'Tis evident in Fact that Hope and Joy
warm the Blood, diffuse the natural Heat, 
raise the Pulse, and take off any Irritation 
|P_42
or painful Stimulus upon the Organs; and 
that Fear and Grief produce the quite con- 
trary Effects to all these. But 'tis observa- 
ble, that Grief is the most sinking, wast- 
ing, disanimating Passion of all; for Fear
very often inspires the Person Affected, 
with a Resolution and Courage proportio- 
nal to the apparent or apprehended Danger, 
and thereby arms him, with suitable Strength 
and Firmness, to encounter with the Diffi- 
culties before him. 

Hope and Joy affect the Blood and Hu- 
mours much after the same manner with 
Vinous Spirits, Opiates, and other such 
Exhilerating Volatiles; but Grief and Fear
when they are strong and overbearing, with 
Acids and Salts upon the Stomach; i. e.
they affect the Organs with Pain, lower 
the Pulse, repel the natural Heat, and dis- 
arm a Man of Spirit, Strength and Resolu- 
tion, or, perhaps, keep him constantly a- 
wake and attentive to the painful disagree- 
able Scene, till he has quite lost his Senses. 
From this short Account of the Mechanical 
and most obvious Effects of the Passions, 
the Methods of relieving them when they 
|P_43
grow Exorbitant, may be easily drawn; and 
there is no need that I should farther insist on 
it here. I had some thought indeed of being 
larger on the consideration of these  Consti- 
tutionals, which we so improperly call 
Non-Naturals; but the Bounds to which 
I must confine my Self, in this Essay, will 
not permit of a longer Detail at present; 
and I must, therefore, refer a more particu- 
lar and distinct Account of these Matters, 
to some fitter Opportunity. 

[}SECT. II. }]
[}Of the Materia Medica in general. }]
NOTWITHSTANDING the vastness 
of this Subject, I have no design to 
write a Volume upon it, nor do I think it 
necessary. But considering the Bulk to which 
the Materia Medica is grown, 'tis certain- 
ly, I think, high time to come to some pro- 
per Limitations and Restrictions concerning 
it, before it is quite run out into Infinity. 
For, to such an excessive Degree is this Mat- 
ter grown already, that a Man had almost 
as good read over all the Acts of Parlia- 
|P_44
ment and Laws of England, as the Books 
of Physick, and the infinite Jumble and 
Confusion of Remedys of one sort or an- 
other. I am sensible, indeed, that the 
best and ablest Physicians among us, have 
very much reduced the Materia Medica, 
and brought it into a narrow Compass with 
respect to their own Practice; but this is 
no advantage to those who have not bought 
their Experience at so dear a rate, or who 
have not had opportunitys of making tryals 
themselves, but must still go on, in their Prac- 
tice, upon the Judgments of such as have 
pretended to vast Experience before them, 
and who have, hereupon, cryed up a prodi- 
gious number of Simple and Compound Re- 
medies as infallible, and fill'd large Volumes 
with them, when, perhaps, few or none of 
them, upon tryal, will be found to answer 
their Character. So that, amidst this huge 
Lumber, a young Practitioner must still be 
continually sifting out a Medicine, for his 
purpose, in most Cases, like a Pearl in the 
common Rubbish, or a Needle in a Heap of 
Sand. 

|P_45
This Uncertainty and Confusion in Phy- 
sick, have not arisen from any of the obvi- 
ous Sensible Properties or Effects of Me- 
dicines, as they affect the Natural Evacua- 
tions or the Primary Constitutional Quali- 
ties; for here the Practice stands upon a 
pretty good certainty: but only from the 
vain and fruitless search after Specificks, in 
the modern absurd Sense, or rather  Non- 
sense, of the Word. This, as the Matter 
appears to me, has been the true Cause of 
all such Darkness and Obscurity, as we 
find the Materia Medica under to this ve- 
ry Day. I shall therefore, under this Sec- 
tion, lay down some Principles, well esta- 
blished in Fact, which may serve as so ma- 
ny certain Rules of Judgment, whereby 
the young Physician may govern himself 
in the choice Medicines, so as to render 
his Practice less precarious and uncertain, 
than it otherwise might be, upon his first 
setting out in the World. And herein, I 
shall proceed in this plain and natural Me- 
thod, by considering how far the several 
Parts of the Materia Medica, as it now 
stands, are Digestible or Indigestible; in 
what Cases and under what Circumstances, 
|P_46
they are capable of passing the Lacteals
and mixing with the Blood; and what  Ef- 
fects may be expected from them, when 
they get there, which will take in all I 
intend to say on this Subject. 

1. Then it is certain, that nothing can 
pass the Lacteals, but what has been pre- 
viously liquified, and reduced to an  Efflu- 
vium, or an exceeding fine, thin and rarefy- 
ed Vapour. Not only the Fibrous Solid
Parts of our common Food, but likewise 
the more fix'd Oils and Salts, with which 
it abounds, are incapable of being dissolved, 
liquifyed and volatiliz'd, by the Digestive 
Heat and Action of the Stomach, and the 
Attractive Power of the Lacteals; and 
therefore the Residue of the Aliment, which 
cannot be resolved, attenuated and fluxili- 
zed, by such a degree of Heat and Motion 
during the time of Concoction, are by Na- 
ture precipitated, thrust forward and eject- 
ed out of the Body, thro' the common Al- 
vine Excretory Ducts and Passages. Now, 
if so considerable a Part of our common 
Aliment, which has no stronger or closer 
Texture than that of the Vegetable and 
|P_47
Animal Solids, cannot be so far dissolved 
and attenuated in the Stomach, as to be 
strain'd off thro' the Lacteals; what shall we 
say to those vastly more solid and compact 
Substances which are often given as  Speci- 
fick Alteratives? or by what Chemistry, or 
Mechanism, can our Specificians pretend 
to convey such Substances as these into 
the Blood, without first rendering them, by 
some previous Operation, Soluble and  Flux- 
ilizable in Water? 

Sulphur, Æthiops, Cinnabar, Antimony, 
Mineral Bezoar, and universally all  Mi- 
neral Glebes and Metalline Calces, com- 
municate nothing to Boiling Water, but 
their Parts remain fix'd, inseparable and 
unalterable, against all the Power of such a 
degree of Heat and Motion; which is yet 
vastly greater than can be produced, by the 
natural digestive Heat and Action of the 
Stomach, during the time of Concoction. 
Nay, if the Parts of any such solid cohering 
Substances be first of all broken and di- 
vided, as far as possible, by any Grinding 
or Trituration whatever, yet still, when 
they are afterwards committed to boiling 
|P_48
Water, such a degree of Heat and Motion 
makes no Alteration, and cannot break or 
divide them farther: but, after all, their 
smallest Parts, when examined by a Micro- 
scope, will appear to be many thousand 
times larger than any of the Orifices of 
the Lacteals, of which any Person may ea- 
sily be convinc'd upon tryal. And conse- 
quently, he who expects to pass such Parti- 
cles thro' the Lacteals into the Blood, even 
after their utmost Trituration, and conse- 
quent Maceration, in any Liquor which 
the Stomach can bear, will find himself 
deceived, and may as well attempt to thread 
a Needle with a Cable, or, to speak accord- 
ing to our English Translation, It is as im- 
possible as for a Camel to go thro' the Eye 
of a Needle . 

2. SuchMetalline Substances, as above 
mentioned, may indeed be converted into 
the form of a Salt, by the Power of strong 
Acids, such as Oil of Vitriol, Spirit of 
Nitre, &c. as is well known to the Che- 
mists; and in this Case they become Soluble 
in Water, and may be volatiliz'd in it, to 
any assignable degree of Tenuity. But then 
|P_49
they are converted into Poysons, and can- 
not be thought fit Alteratives, unless the 
intended Alteration be Death. 

I know that some of these Metalline A- 
cid Salts, may be given in some Cases, as 
Emeticks and Catharticks: bu tthen, as they 
are not intended to pass into the Blood, 
but to be presently thrown out of the Bo- 
dy together with such other morbid Matter 
as they derive from the remote Parts; so, in 
no case whatever, should they be exhibited 
as Alteratives in a long continued Course 
of Medicine, nor indeed us'd for any other 
purpose, but with the greatest Caution, 
and upon the utmost Necessity. They are 
edged Tools, and never to be meddled with 
without some Danger. 

It is true indeed, that some Physicians 
have recommended even the alterative 
Power of Poysons, when the first Passages 
are guarded against them, and they are safe- 
ly conveyed into the Blood and remote 
Recesses of the Body; but, upon what Prin- 
ciples this Practice is founded, I own, is be- 
yond my Comprehension. Would any but 
|P_50
a Madman, trust an Enemy in his House, 
or Closet, that he knows would murder 
him in the open Street? or is it conceiva- 
ble that the much thinner, finer and ten- 
derer Coats and Membranes of the remote 
Glands and smallest Vessels, under such 
Recluses, should be able to bear the Power 
of so vast a Stimulus, better than the Sto- 
mach it self where there is so free and o- 
pen a Discharge? 

It is well known that Poysoning has 
been made an Art of, and reckoned a prin- 
cipal Part of Magick; and it has been re- 
ported of the Indians and some Italians, 
that they can give Poysons to operate in a 
certain assignable time, either longer or 
shorter, without producing any present ill 
Consequences when first exhibited. This 
method of Poysoning indeed, might, per- 
haps, receive vast Improvement from such 
a Notion of Alteratives; but, as this does 
not belong to Physick, I shall leave the 
consideration of it to others. And, since 
no Method has yet been discovered, of go- 
verning and directing the Venenous Parti- 
cles, when got into the Habit, to the mor- 
|P_51
bid Matter only, or of preventing their 
baneful Impression, and deleterious Effects, 
on every part of the Animal Frame and 
Constitution; I shall not only absolutely 
reject the internal Use of any such sort of 
Medicines, but draw one practical Conclu- 
sion from the whole which I take to be of 
great Importance; sc. That any Medicine, 
endued with a strong Emetick or Cathartick 
Stimulus, should never be suffered to lie 
long in the Body, or to pass the Lacteals 
where it is capable of it, but ought to be 
thrown off, as soon as possible, by the near- 
est Outlets and properest Excretorys; toge- 
ther with such other Matter as it has de- 
rived and prepared for Evacuation. 

But, besides those things that are abso- 
lutely Indissoluble, and cannot be convey- 
ed into the Blood at all, and such as, by 
reason of their violent Stimulus and Cor- 
rosive Qualities, ought not to be trusted 
there, there is another sort of Medicines 
which might justly be expell'd the Province 
of Physick, under this notion of Specifick 
Alteratives, tho' they are not absolutely 
Indigestible, nor endued with any hurtful 
|P_52
Stimulus: What I here aim at, is the  Testa- 
cea, Resins, Boles, and Earths, which will 
not impart a Tincture so as to be liquifyed 
and volatiliz'd with Water, or any other 
common potable Liquor. 

Any of these, when retain'd in the 
Body, must necessarily clog and obstruct 
the primary concoctive Organs, and do 
more Mischief, in a little time, than all the 
Advantages that can be expected from them. 
For, as they cannot be sufficiently resolv'd, 
liquifyed and sublimated, by the natural di- 
gestive Heat of the Stomach, so as to pass 
the Lacteals, they must needs foul and ob- 
struct the first Passages, impair the Appetite, 
suppress the natural Heat, weaken the Force 
of the Muscles and Elastick Fibres in ge- 
neral, and, by continuance, induce an  Atro- 
phy of the worst sort, which arises from an 
Obstruction of the Lacteals, and a conse- 
quent depravation of Digestion and loss of 
Appetite. 

But while I am exploding, and setting 
aside these things as Alteratives, or with 
regard to any good Effects they can have 
|P_53
upon the remote Glands and Membranous 
Vesicles, I would not be thought to main- 
tain, or suppose, that they may not, at least 
some of them, be of use, in particular Cases, 
by their present Effects on the first Passages; 
provided they are extruded and thrown out 
of the Body, by Emeticks or Catharticks, 
as soon as they have answered their proper 
Intention. But this will be farther explain- 
ed in some of the following Sections. 

Another principal thing, to be regard- 
ed in the Practice of Physick, is the Doses
of Medicines, and the Manner of Exhibit- 
ing them. For 'tis certain, that where a 
Medicine is never so good and efficacious, 
and capable of answering the Intention of 
the Physician of it self; yet still this Effect 
may be eluded, and Nature deprived of the 
expected and intended Relief, by a wrong 
method of Exhibition, or by an Error com- 
mitted, either in the Quantitys or Forms
of such Simple or Simples, on which the 
whole Intention of Cure depends. 

And nothing, in my Opinion, has prov'd 
more prejudicial in the Practice of Physick, 
|P_54
than the Stated Canonical Doses of Me- 
dicines, whether Simple or Compound. 
When once a Man imagines himself to be 
pinn'd down, in the giving of Medicines, 
to any stated Authoriz'd Doses, he must 
not go beyond it, tho' he should miss of his 
Intention and lose his Patient. And from 
hence one may venture to say, that more 
hurt has been done by trifling with Effica- 
cious Medicines, and thereby losing Time, 
than by mistaking the Case, and directing 
things contrary to the Intention of Cure. 

But this Error is oftnest committed in 
the Case of Compounds, which are com- 
monly look'd upon and regarded as so ma- 
ny Canons in Physick; and consequently 
entitled to an absolute and implicit Obedi- 
ence and Conformity. But, as this is cer- 
tainly the prudential Orthodox Method of 
Trifling, and of doing a great deal of Mis- 
chief by doing no Good, so I dare be bold 
to say, that he who shall govern himself 
by these Rules, without using his own 
Judgment in varying the Doses and Forms, 
as occasion requires, will not only often- 
times lose his Patient, but his Reputation 
into the Bargain. 

|P_55
It is certain that the Art of  Composi- 
tion in Medicine, upon which all our com- 
mon Dispensatorys are founded, arose with 
the Specifick or Corpuscularian Philosophy, 
and with that it must sink again; for, while 
the Practice stood upon this Chimærical 
Foundation, the Physician, for want of be- 
ing acquainted with the Obvious Sensible 
Qualities and Effects of Medicines, and the 
Method that unassisted Nature took to re- 
lieve her self, under any particular Disor- 
der, could have no other Intention in his 
Medical Processes, than to cure by Magick
or Occult Qualities; and consequently must 
conclude that his chance of Success, always 
rose in proportion to the number of Ingre- 
dients in the Compound Remedy. But an 
Extemporaneous Practice is, certainly, the 
only true and rational Method of practising 
Physick; as this may, by the Physician who 
knows what he is about, be always accom- 
modated to the great Variety and Compli- 
cation of Symptoms in particular Cases: 
and nothing surely can be more Absurd and 
Irrational, than Extemporaneous General 
Prescriptions, or Stated Canonical Com- 
pound Remedys. 

|P_56
Whoever considers the most com- 
mon prevailing Compounds, will find them 
to be a general confused Jumble of Sim- 
ples of very different Virtues and Proper- 
ties; and, consequently, not containing, up- 
on the whole, the real Power or Efficacy of 
any one Ingredient in the whole Composi- 
tion. And if any such General Artificial 
Composition should happen to answer the 
Intention, in some particular Cases, it is 
more by chance than any thing else. And, 
in these Canonical Compounds, it may be 
pretty generally observed, that the Simple
that gives it the Name, or from which the 
Denomination is taken, has the least share 
in the Composition, and might do much 
better alone, or with any easy extempora- 
neous Management. 

But besides this Art of Composition, 
or confounding all Virtues and Properties 
together, there is another artificial Method 
of spoiling, or rendering Useless and In- 
significant, the best and most Efficacious 
Simples, by pretending to preserve and se- 
cure their original native Effects and Vir- 
|P_57
tues, in their Distill'd Waters, Syrups,  Con- 
fections and Conserves. 

Simple and Compound Waters drawn 
from Vegetables, are, for the most part, sim- 
ply ineffectual as to any Intention for 
which they are given; and he, who makes 
use of them for any other purpose than as 
Vehicles, for Medicines of greater Efficacy, 
will always find himself disappointed; and, 
even for this purpose, the Simple or low 
Distilled Waters, not having Strength e- 
nough generally to keep from Mothering 
and Spoiling upon hand, are not half so 
good as Common Water or fresh Small 
Beer. But the Compound Waters, which 
are raised to a proof Spirit, may, some of 
them at least, do very well and be thought 
pleasant enough as a Dram, tho', I think, 
most of 'em are fitter to be sold at Inns and 
Coffee-houses than the Apothecarys Shops. 

TheMedicated Syrups are, if possible, 
still more Insignificant; for, excepting a few 
of them which are intended as Purgatives, 
there is not one of them capable of answer- 
ing any other Intention in Physick: and 
|P_58
since they are chiefly used in Juleps, as 
Specifick Sweetners by the Physician, and 
as Sugar it self would do much better and 
render the Medicine more agreeable and 
less nauseous, I think they may be very 
well left, to the Apothecary, for the pur- 
pose of particular Forms and to make up 
dry Substances into Boles, Pills and  E- 
lectuaries.

Confections and Conserves may likewise 
answer some such use as to give an agree- 
able Relish, or to bring Electuaries to a 
due Consistence; but otherwise, their Medi- 
cinal Virtues may very well be spared. 

But, by Decoctions, Infusions and  Tinc- 
tures, the Native Essential Oils and Salts
of Simples may be extracted, so far as the 
natural Heat of the Stomach is capable of 
doing it. And, since all the proper Medi- 
cinal Virtues and Powers of the Simples 
themselves consists and resides in these Salts
and Oils, by such a Preparation and Ma- 
nagement, they may certainly be given to 
vastly greater Advantage than in their com- 
mon Gross Substances. For by this all the 
|P_59
Efficacy of the Simples may be obtain'd 
fresh and pure, and to any given degree as 
the Case requires, so as to come up fully 
to the Intention. And hereby also the 
Stomach may be saved the Difficulty and 
Inconvenience of Solution, Digestion and 
Separation of the Parts; which is done be- 
fore-hand in this way of Preparation, to 
the great assistance of Nature. For it can- 
not certainly be a rational Method, or good 
Contrivance, to commit Gross, Solid and 
Strongly-Cohering Substances, to a sick, 
weak and distemper'd Stomach, which can- 
not perhaps retain and digest any ordinary 
solid Food. 

And, from the same Mechanism and 
Chemistry of Nature, it must likewise fol- 
low, that all nauseous, sickening and loath- 
some Medicines, ought as much as possible 
to be avoided; that is, they ought absolute- 
ly to be avoided and never given or urg'd 
at all. For 'tis a hard Case, indeed, when 
a weak languid Patient must be forced, 
with Things which he could never have 
taken, in his best Health, without loathing 
Reluctancy and sensible Disorder. 

|P_60
The Notion of Specificks, and the vain 
pretence of curing Diseases by the Occult
Operation of Medicines upon the Blood, 
has been the true ground of all such Vio- 
lence offered to Nature. For, if the Dis- 
ease is to be cured by Things which are to 
affect the Blood, after a secret and inexpli- 
cable Manner, the Patient must believe and 
suffer for the sake of Health, against all 
sensible Appearances to the contrary: for, 
no doubt, the Specifick Remedys will do 
their Work, and faithfully execute their 
Commission, when they get into the Blood 
and arrive at the Seat of the Disorder, what- 
ever Mischief or Injury they may occasion, 
to the Constitution, before they get there. 

I have made these Observations, which 
appear to me plainly necessary, with regard 
to the general Use and Application of the 
Materia Medica, for the sake of such Gen- 
tlemen, only, as shall think it worth their 
while to form their Conduct upon the 
Reason and Nature of Things, and build 
their Practice on Facts and Experiments. 
And, if such Regulations should happen to 
|P_61
throw out a great part of its many Particu- 
lars, I hope, however, it may serve to im- 
prove the Art of Healing, which is all I 
aim at. 
