
|P_
TO THE 
ANTACADEMIC PHILOSOPHERS, 
TO THE Generous DESPISERS of the Schools, 
TO THE Deservedly-Celebrated J—W—d, 
J—M—r, and the rest of the 
numerous Sect of Inspired PHYSICIANS; 
This little Work is humbly inscribed, by

Their most Devoted Servant, 
and Zealous Admirer. 

|P_9
[}AN 
E S S A Y 
For Abridging the 
STUDY of PHYSICK. }]
Sic ubi visceribus gravidae telluris imago 
Effecta est hominis, foeto consurgit in arvo; 
Quodq magis mirum simul edita concutit arma. 
OVID. METAMORPH. 
[^Decorative frame around the letter "O".^]OUR University Method of study-
ingPhysick is attended with so 
many Discouragements, it is such 
an expensive, tedious, difficult 
way to Science, that one who has any 
talent at Projecting cannot, I think, em-
ploy it more humanely than in putting the 
distressed Youth upon a shorter and easier 
|P_10
road. The Pride and Ill-nature, perhaps the 
Avarice too, of the Learned in every Science, 
would gladly make a mystery of the art they 
profess, and render it inaccessible but to a few. 
Ask a Gentleman of the Aesculapian tribe, 
what course of Education is requisite to the 
making of a Physician? He will presently 
tell you, that a young Man who would suc-
cessfully apply himself to the Study of Me-
dicine, must first of all have an Understand-
ing capable of Instruction; and that after he 
is pretty far advanced in the Languages and 
such other pieces of Learning as he imagines 
to be necessarily previous and introductory 
to Physick, he must study every particular 
Branch of that Science under able Teachers, 
and labour night and day for God knows 
how many years, before he can be supposed 
fit to Practise. Very modest Demands truly! 
This is either the most malicious fetch 
or the simplest mistake in the world: for in 
reality, Learning is no more necessary to a 
Physician than to a Fidler. And for all this 
pother, I am mistaken too if I cannot lay 
down a Method, by the religious and strict 
observance of which, a young man (what-
ever his natural Sense be) may, in two 
|P_11
or three years time, without any expence 
either of Money or Animal Spirits worth 
calculating, drop into the world not only a 
ripe Surgeon or Physician, but Physician, 
Surgeon and Apothecary all in one. But be-
fore I proceed to communicate my Scheme,
I here solemnly declare that I have not the 
least pique at the present Faculty of Phy-
sicians, nay, that I honour that learned So-
ciety; but Amicus Plato, amicus Socrates, 
magis amica veritas. It were a piece of 
complaisance, unworthy a truly generous and 
extensively-benevolent disposition, to con-
ceal such means as must evidently make the 
acquisition of an useful Art much easier, 
merely for the sake of indulging the narrow 
humour of it's present Professors, who grudge 
that any should rise to the Dignities and Pri-
vileges of their Profession with less Pain 
and Charge than themselves have done. 

Well then, to begin with the previous
Qualifications of our Student. He must be 
provided by bountiful Nature, with an in-
exhaustible fund of Assurance, that cardinal 
Virtue, which without the assistance of any 
other is sufficient to make a great man. A 
|P_12
little Sense would not be amiss; but as this 
is seldom an Ingredient in a Constitution 
where the other predominates, and as it is 
not absolutely necessary, we shall not reckon 
upon it. Impudence alone will do, for it 
gives such a force to the otherways lightest
Merit, that the Address, or rather the Assault, 
of a man who possesses it to any eminent de-
gree, is not to be resisted. If besides he can 
make a shift to read Corderius with the help 
of a Dictionary, that is to say, if he has a 
Quantum sufficit of Latin to enable him to 
understand a Recipe and to accent a hard word
gracefully, he is now fitted to attempt the 
most arduous parts of the Study.

As soon therefore as our young man is 
thus hopefully qualified, let him forthwith 
be bound Apprentice for two or three years 
to an Apothecary, who presides like a whole-
some Planet over some Country-Town, shed-
ding kindly Influence for several miles round 
him. His main business during the time of 
his Apprenticeship will be, to spread now 
and then a Plaister, sometimes to make up 
an Electuary or a Mass of Pills, to administer 
Clysters in great abundance, and to manage 
|P_13
the Non-naturals of the gaunt hide-bound 
Steed upon whose back his Master ranges 
the Country, like the King of Terrours on his 
pale Horse. Tho' this last may not appear 
to be a very liberal Office, yet as far as it 
will give him an occasion to become acquain-
ted with the Constitution of that generous 
Animal, and with the general Regimen that 
suits it best, he will find it of mighty ad-
vantage to him afterwards, when he comes 
to exercise the Hippohiatrical Function, the 
cultivation of which makes a very considera-
ble Article in the Practice of Medicine, in 
some parts of the Country. When he is at 
leisure from these more important Duties, he 
may, if he pleases, glance over some short 
general System of Anatomy. I must own in-
deed this is almost a needless trouble, yet I 
would have him able to tell upon occasion 
whether the Stomach lies in the Abdomen
or in the Thorax, and the like, if it were only for 
ornament's sake, and to keep him in coun-
tenance among those people who have got a 
notion that some acquaintance with the struc-
ture of the Human Body is necessary to a 
Physician; for we must not hope to reform 
the world all at once. When he has thus 
|P_14
laid a good Foundation in Anatomy, to which 
I allow him a month, or, if his Master rides 
much and the roads are dirty, six weeks, let 
him proceed to the Practice of Physick and 
Surgery: A short System for each will be 
sufficient. He will frequently have occasion 
to practise Chemie under his Master's eye, and 
thus may gain a competent skill in this Branch 
of the Study without the fatigue of Reading. 
A Botanist he must grow, whether he will 
or not. And as for the Materia Medica and 
Methodus praescribendi, he may make himself 
Master of these in this manner. As often as 
a Physician's Bill comes to his Master's Shop, 
let him out with his Pocket-book, slap it down 
and make it his own, according to Mr. Bayes's 
Rule of Records. As he must have frequent 
access to know, against what Disease this or 
that Prescription was design'd, let him there-
fore devote a page or so in his Pocket-com-
panion to every Disease, and under each of 
these let him range the Prescriptions adapted 
thereto. Thus when he engages in the 
Practice himself, whatever Disease shall fall 
in his way, he has no more to do but turn 
over his Vade mecum, where he will probably 
find something proper for it. With regard 
|P_15
to the different Stages of Diseases, the various 
Combinations of Symptoms, and the like, 
these are subtile trifles that none but your 
whimsical people give themselves any trou-
ble about. In the mean time, suReceipts
as he has not got sufficient intelligence to 
warrant his reducing under the Article of any 
Disease, will serve him in good stead A-
nomalous Cases, which in all probability will 
frequently occur to him. If by sollowing 
this course, he is not furnished with a com-
pleat System of Recipes by the time that his 
Apprenticeship is expired, let him consult 
Markham's English Housewife's skill in Phy-
sick, to be found in the Quarto Edition of his 
Works, where he will meet with Receipts
that will either help or prove a sovereign Cure
in every Disease. I have known very valu-
able Collections of this kind in the hands 
of some Ladies. 

Behold! what a bare simple thing is Phy-
sick! when it's showy Luxuriances, it's fruit-
less Branches, are lopped off. Vain swelling 
Science, how much art thou shrunk! How 
is the Learning of the Eastern and the Western 
Schools, how are the toils of the ancient Sages and 
|P_16
Those of modern days, swallowed up almost 
at once by a Boy! and a Boy of no great depth
neither! For now is the grand Affair finished, 
and our Scholar is perfectly well instructed 
in every part of his Study. I shall appeal to 
himself if he is not. If a young man, blessed 
with these natural Gifts I have demanded, 
after such a happy Education, is not consci-
ous of greater Abilities than almost any of 
those you call regular Physicians, I am much 
mistaken. This very Shew of Merit, tho' 
he possessed nothing at all of the Substance, 
will recommend him prodigiously to the Vul-
gar, Great and Small, (that is to say, to nine-
teen at least of twenty parts of Mankind) 
who are such humane Judges of a man's qua-
lifications, that they never seek further than 
his own word for them, but always measure 
his Abilities by his Pretensions. Now I say 
our young Doctor may go where he pleases. 
He cannot fail to be by this time a skilful 
Apothecary, and for Physick and Surgery, it 
is strange if he is not equally qualified for 
Practising either ubi{que} gentium. Or if he finds 
his Genius more particularly turned to one 
Disease than to the rest, he may with con-
siderable emolument both to himself and the 
|P_17
Public, confine his Practice to that, and may 
make a good figure as an Antidysenteric or 
Antimaniac Physician, as a Vermicide, a 
Tooth-drawer, or a Corn-cutter. And if he 
applies himself to the Obstetrical Art, let him 
turn over Culpepper's Midwife enlarg'd night 
and day. That little Book is worth a whole 
Library. All that is possible to be known 
in that Art is there treasur'd up in a small 
Duodecimo. Blessed, yea for ever blessed, be 
the memory of the inimitable Authour, who, 
and who alone, had the curious happiness to 
mix the profound Learning of Aristotle with 
the facetious Humour of Plautus!

And now, that I may not omit any thing 
that lies in my power towards the preparing 
of our Doctor for business, I shall offer him 
a few Advices for the regulation of his Con-
duct, when he comes abroad into the World. 
As soon therefore as he is thus exquisitely 
accomplished, he must think of Transplant-
ing himself to some Place where he is little 
known. And whether he commence iti-
nerant or fixed Physician (tho' I would ra-
ther he chused the latter Situation, as more 
agreeable to the Dignity of his Profession) 
|P_18
I advise him first to make himself a little ac-
quainted with Geography, that he may not 
be at a loss to relate what Wonders he has 
seen in foreign Countries. This will have 
a mighty Charm with the Vulgar, who have 
a shrewd notion of things which one would 
think above their reach, and know perfectly 
well what an amazing Influence the foreign 
Air has upon a man's Intellectuals. How
 this foreign Air operates, is not to the present 
purpose to enquire; only it is undeniable 
that it has a prodigious effect. It is not only 
the most effectual, but the easiest way to Im-
provement; since in this case a man has no 
need to exert himself any further, than just 
to condescend in his own mind upon any 
Art or Science that he would desire to be mas-
ter of, and he must imbibe it or cease to 
Breathe. He is a Spunge thrown into water. 
For take me a man that has scarce sense e-
nough to spell his own name, and Steep him 
for two or three years in a foreignAtmo-
sphere, you will bring him out again Wring-
ing-full of Knowledge, tho' he had done 
nothing considerable all the time but drank 
pure quintessential Rum or a little sprinkled
with water by way of Punch in a Guinea-
|P_19
ship, or strolled about arrayed in Sheep's guts 
with the ingenious Inhabitants of the Cape 
of Good Hope. Nay, suppose he had passed all 
the time of his foreign Sojourn in a profound 
Sleep, he should find himself strongly Im-
pregnated with Science when he awaked. 
The meanest and most ignorant of the vul-
gar know this; And it is convenient to hu-
mour them. For it is really no cheat at 
bottom, if one who has received all the Eru-
dition which far-distant Regions can com-
municate, without stirring a foot from home, 
if such a one, I say, should take the benefit 
of being reputed a travelled Gentleman.

But I had almost forgot to enjoin a very 
necessary Branch of Education. Necessary 
in some cases, tho' indeed to an ordinary Judge 
it may appear somewhat trifling. What I 
have in view at present is the art of Fumisuc-
tion and of Drinking strong Liquor valiantly. 
I would have him apply indefatigably to these 
in the time of his Apprenticeship, his more 
important Studies need not cool for it 
neither: And he must have a very slow ca-
pacity, if after two or three years diligent 
application, he is not as able a Practitioner 
|P_20
both ways as the most Phlegmatic Justice in a 
whole County. He will find the Advantage 
of these Qualifications, if his Lot is ordered 
him in any part of the Country where the 
exercise of such elegant Arts is the reigning 
Diversion or Business. For they will almost 
infallibly recommend him to the Patronage 
of some jocular Squire, who every Evening, 
assisted by his never-flinching friend, the spi-
ritual Doctor, wraps himself up in a thick 
night of Tobacco-smoak, and murders an 
artificial Thirst with repeated Draughts of 
strong-Beer. If, added to this, he be a good 
Shot, and can roar at a Fox-chase, his For-
tune is made in spight of hazard. 

Now as soon as our Physician begins to lay 
himself out for Business, let him assault the 
general Ear with long and loud Relations 
of the mighty Exploits he has performed. 
Exempli gratia: Every Brook will furnish 
him with Pebbles, rugged, brown, and large 
enough, which, after his Brethren the other 
Physicians had condemned his Patient to un-
dergo the operation of Lithotomy, he made 
him discharge by the sole virtue of Diureticks.
In this case, the larger that he picks his 
|P_21
stones the better, only he must take care 
that they are no larger than the human Blad-
der may be supposed able to contain; if he 
keeps himself within these bounds he cannot 
overdo things, for the greater the wonder 
be, it is so much the more taking. Let him 
talk confidently of such feats, no matter 
whether they are possible or not; for tho' 
Miracles, they say, are ceased, the Beast with 
many heads can swallow them with as much 
alacrity as ever. It likes hugely too to be re-
galed with hard words; these work like a Spell 
upon the ignorant Hearers, and are the sure 
sign of a great Scholard. Therefore for the 
inrichment of his Phraseology and the edifi-
cation of the gaping Herd, I counsel him, 
instead of turning over a Dictionary, which 
is but an awkard, troublesome, way of learn-
ing the Terms of Art, to get by heart the La-
tine Index to any System of Botany, where 
he may have as many odd-sounding words 
at one view, as may, when judiciously mix'd, 
sufficiently darken his Expression, and give 
his discourse the air of an Oracle.

Now must he, like the Carrion-crow, smell out his Prey, and wherever the Dis-

|P_22

eased are, there let him be. When a Phy-
sician's Prescription comes to his shop, I ad-
vise him without delay to make a visit to the 
Patient, and to let him know that he did 
not think it proper to make up the Medi-
cines which were ordered till he knew his 
Condition himself. Then after he has felt 
his Pulse, viewed his Water, and asked him 
a few Questions, he may proceed in this 
manner—"It is very lucky for you, Sir,
that I happened to use this Caution, for 
the Recipe that came to my hand is quite 
wide of the purpose; so we shall, if you 
please, let it alone, and I'll send you some-
thing that will in a little time do you ser-
vice."—This cannot fail to succeed to 
his wish among the Million. But where the 
Patient is so obstinate and intractable, that all 
he can utter to his own praise or the disad-
vantage of the Physician is not sufficient to 
shake him, he may have his full Revenge 
both upon the Physician and Patient through 
the grace of Pharmacy.—Thus I have de-
livered the principal Rules by which our 
Doctor must direct his Conduct; the rest I 
leave to his own Discretion. 

|P_23
Since I wrote this, I am informed by se-
veral hands, that the Method I have laid 
down is generally in every point, and has 
been for some ages, practised thro' Great 
Britain, and that the Physicians of this kind 
are distinguished by the name of Quacks.
However, I conceive it may not be unaccep-
table to these Gentlemen to present them 
with a regular Draught of their own Scheme, 
and it may at the same time be of service to 
Beginners to give them a view of their Agenda
at once. In the mean time I am glad, that 
tho' I am disappointed of the honour of be-
ing the first Discoverer of this way, I am 
for that very reason safe from engaging in a 
Quarrel with the Physicians, which I had 
almost laid my account with. And more-
over, one of my Friends tells me, that the 
more Quacks, as he calls them, the better 
for the Physicians. "For, says he, 
the Wrath of Heaven and the proper Vices of 
Mankind, are scarce so productive of Dis-
eases as are these Quacks; who in places 
where they abound, and where the Inha-
bitants for every aching head or scratch 
of a pin, have recourse to their skill, keep 
|P_24
up a perpetual Spring and Fall the whole 
year round." But this I take to be meer 
Raillery. 

Another Friend of mine, who is also 
a Projector, and confiders things seriously, has 
a Scheme by him for the more advantageous 
regulation of the Civil Punishments. Among 
other things he proposes, that all Doc-
tors of this kind, whether Officinal or Er-
rant, should be taken up and distributed 
among the publick Goals, to superintend the 
Health of Capital Offenders: (for he disap-
proves of publick Executions.) And that such 
of these Delinquents as escape with life and 
limb after a year's Discipline under their re-
spective Physicians, should be taken into the 
Army; "for, says he, they'll probably make 
hardy Soldiers." He thinks further, that 
for the support of these private Officers,be-
sides the discarded Hangman's Fees, the 
Country should not grudge a small Tax up-
on every Life, (at least upon the Lives of 
those who used to employ them before the 
commencement of their new Dignity) espe-
cially since by this means they are secured 
|P_25
from the most mortal dangers they were exposed to. 

But for all this, I shall not lose conceit 
of my Scheme till I have better reason. 
For I have some cause to suspect that the 
Gentlemen who talk so unfavourably of 
these Sons of Poean, are not altogether free 
of Prejudice. 

|P_26
[}A 
DIALOGUE, 
Relating to the 
PRACTICE of PHYSICK, 
As it is managed by a certain 
Illustrious Society.}]
Di, quibus imperium est animarum, umbrae{que} silentes, 
Et Chaos, et Phlegethon, loca nocte tacentia latè; 
Sit mihi fas audita loqui, sit numine vestro 
Pandere res alta terra & caligine mersas. VIRG. 
[}* Hygeia. Mercury. Pluto. }][/1./]
Hygeia. [^Decorative frame around the letter "W".^]WEll Mercury, now that we 
are arrived at Pluto's Pa-
lace, pray tell me what's 
my Business here? You 
came to me with a distracted hurry in your 
looks, and desired me to follow you with 
all speed, which I did implicitly enough, 
expecting to learn from you on the road 
upon what strange emergency my presence 
|P_27
was necessary in Hell. But you plied 
your wings so eagerly, that tho' I don't use to 
saunter in my motions, I could not come 
within hearing of you all the way. But 
now that you have recovered Breath, and 
since Pluto, with whom it seems I am to 
have affairs, is taking a Nap, pray tell me 
what are his demands upon me? 

Mercury.A Nap quotha! would he were 
well out on't. The fatigue of this Bout has 
it seems done more for him than all the vir-
tues of my Rod. But if he had one grain of 
Mortality in him, he had slept his last before this. 

Hyg. You amaze me! Nay then, some 
strange Revolution must be near when the 
Gods themselves grow sick. I should not 
have thought it so prodigious neither, to 
have heard that Venus was under a Saliva-
tion, or that Bacchus was sitting Cushioned 
up with the Gout, or Raving in a Fever.
But Pluto, that regular, temperate, sober-
living God, and of a good firm Constitution 
too; Pluto sick! 'tis impossible. Mercury
you're arch sure, this must be one of your 
|P_28
Bites; but I am not so credulous as you 
imagine. 

Merc. Well, you'll know by and by whe-
ther I jest or not. 'Tis not long since I 
thought as little of Sickness as you do, and 
Pluto as little as either of us. And let me tell 
you, if you had the same cause to be sick 
that He has, I question much if that clean alert 
Constitution of yours, and all the firmness of 
your Animal Oeconomy, could preserve you 
from these Disorders which we have hitherto 
imagined were only incident to Mortals. 

Hyg. But prethee Mercury, if I may be-
lieve you're in earnest, tell me how came 
the Infernal Jupiter by this Indisposition? 

Merc. Why you shall hear.—Did you 
observe what a pickle he was in two or three 
nights ago, at our last Merry-making? 

Hyg. I left the Company just as they 
seemed to have reached a reasonable degree 
of Mirth. For you know I seldom sit longer 
upon these Occasions, than the first Bottle 
is emptied. 

|P_29
Merc. True. But Pluto does not always 
confine himself to such Rules. The Nectar,
you remember was of the right generous 
kind, which he ply'd as long as Drinking 
was good. And when all the rest were for 
going, He and Silenus, who had got into a 
Corner by themselves, and were grown 
vastly Loving and Facetious, laid their heads 
together for another Bottle, tho' he had e-
nough in all conscience before. Well, he 
was at last prevailed upon to rise, and he 
stagger'd home as drunk as twenty Beggars, 
roaring, and singing Sonnets to Proserpine,
like a Bacchanal, all the way as he went. 
While the Inhabitants of the Infernal Re-
gions, were so tickled in their Spleens to see 
their King on such a merry pin, that they 
fell all a capering and dancing round him; 
and he reel'd and gambol'd as fast as the 
best of 'em. In short, you would have split 
your Sides, had you seen this odd Scene of 
Pleasantry. I saw all that pass'd by the light 
of the Torches. For tho' he was affronted 
at my offering to conduct him home, as if 
he were Drunk forsooth; yet I thought it 
was proper to follow him at a distance, and 
|P_30
accordingly did not lose sight of him the 
whole way. 

Hyg. Your Description diverts me ex-
treamly. Pluto is not often in such a fro-
licksome vein. But pray how did his Nec-
tar digest with him? I hope that did not 
grumble in his Guts? 

Merc. No, hang it! that would not have 
touch'd him neither. This was only the 
Prelude to the Tragedy. No sooner was 
he got home than he calls for a fresh Bottle, 
and would needs make every body drink that 
was near him; laughing, and talking, and 
singing, with all the gaiety imaginable, and 
smacking, and kissing all about him. As 
he was playing a thousand Anticks that 
shook the whole Palace with Laughter, up 
comes there a brazen-fac'd Son of a Wh— 
of a Pill-giving Quack, and— 

Hyg. Begging your pardon, these are 
they that my sick Votaries every day curse 
so heartily in their Prayers to me; but I 
could never yet perfectly learn what they are. 

|P_31
Merc. Rot 'em! I don't want to know any 
more about them than I do already—But 
to my Tale. This precious Rascal finding 
Pluto in a very affable tune, comes up to 
him, and with a deal of affected Concern 
in his Countenance, accosts him in this man-
ner—"Dread Sir, I take it to be indispen-
sably incumbent upon all Subjects to ex-
ert their several Capacities in the Service 
of their lawful Sovereigns. My Profession 
is Physick, and" (after he had told a 
thousand Lyes concerning his Education, and 
what Cures he had performed) "my Con-
cern, says he, for your Majesty's Welfare 
obliges me to take the liberty to tell you, 
that I'm afraid you have drunk more to-
night than is consistent with your Health. 
Your Eyes look red, your Pulse (here he 
fumbled about Pluto's Wrist) strikes much 
too fast, and from the present Pleni-
tude of your Vascular System, I can easily 
prognosticate, by the Rules of my Art,
that if you don't purge off your Crapula,
your Majesty must unavoidably, within 
the space of a few hours, be seized with 
an Ephemerous Fever, or a Febris ardens, or 
|P_32perhaps drop headlong into an Apoplexy.
But these Misfortunes may easily be pre-
vented, by taking two or three of my Pilu-
lae Catholicae, which I invented, and al-
ways prepare my self, and which scarce 
ever fail to succeed in this, or any other 
Intention.—There they are."With 
that he pulled out a Box as full of Plagues 
as Pandora's, and presenting Pluto with two 
of his Pills,—"Your Majesty will please 
to swallow these, (says he,) and I shall in-
sure you from all the bad Consequences 
of this night's work. I am confident, 
if your Majesty once knew the inestima-
ble Virtues of these my Pills, your Ma-
jesty would never go without some of them 
about you afterwards." Good Gods! what 
Simpletons does Drink make of us! Pluto,
without reflecting upon the Absurdity of 
this Speech, or once dreaming of what he 
was a doing, takes the confounded Pills, and 
tosses them over with great Alacrity. And 
indeed they soon cured him of his Drunken-
ness, or at least of his Mirth. For they had 
not been an hour in his Stomach, till he 
grew monstrous sick, and fell a vomiting 
and scouring most enormously. He did so 
|P_33
roar and curse, and toss and tumble, and 
run hobbling and crouching up and down 
with his Guts in his Arms, screwing his Face, 
sweating like a Horse, and looking as pale 
as Ashes, that but for his Immortality one 
would not imagine he could have lived in 
that Condition two hours. The Villain of 
an Empirick was sent to, who, when he 
heard how Matters went with his Majesty; 
had the impudence to say, He liked him so 
much the better that the Medicine operated 
well, and that he would but just stay till he 
made up something to alleviate the Stimulus;
if there was occasion for it, and give him e
ase, and then would follow. But the sor-
ry Scoundrel thought fit to sneak off, and he 
has not been heard of since. I suppose he 
sculks in some blind Corner or other, but 
he can't long lie hid from the Punishment 
he deserves so richly. In the mean time, 
Pluto has continued for these two days in as 
bad a way as when his Physick first began 
to work. And yet, sick as he was, he 
would not for a long time consent to the 
taking of any Measures, which might di-
vulge an Affair that was so little to his Ho-
nour; but he was forced to yield to Ne-
|P_34

cessity at last, and dispatched me in great 
haste to find you out. And tho' he is just 
now asleep it seems, I'm afraid there is still 
work enough left for you. For considering 
what he has suffered, and how miserably 
ill he was but lately when I left him, I am 
apt to suspect that his present Rest is meerly 
owing to his Weakness, and you know much 
better than I, how deceitful these Truces 
sometimes prove. 

Hyg. Well, I shall do what lies in my 
power for him; tho' I must own I am not 
very sorry that he smarts for his Folly nei-
ther.—But pray Mercury, can you tell me 
what sort of People these Quacks are? For 
tho' they practise Physick it seems, and pre-
tend to have some Interest with me, I have 
no Correspondence with them. 

Merc. No, I don't imagine you have. I 
shall tell you in as few words as possible all 
that I know about them. You remember 
that in former times, none were allowed to 
practise Physick but those that were found 
duly qualified, and had prepared themselves 
by a long Course of Study for that important 
|P_35
Imployment. But now there is not a poor 
Peasant or Mechanick, but if he has two 
Sons, one of them must be a Doctor, as they 
call them, with a vengeance, tho' it were 
in spight of both Nature and Education. 
And what wise Method do you think they 
fall upon to accomplish this great work? A 
very short one you'll say. They have no 
Notion of Education themselves, and they 
are not able to bear the Expences of intro-
ducing their Sons regularly to the knowledge 
of the Art. But instead of this, they place 
a raw unletter'd Lad for two or three years 
under the Care of some Apothecary, who 
perhaps does not know a great deal more 
than his Apprentice. Here he fancies he 
learns not only to prepare and compound 
Medicines, but, by perusing and Common-
placing the Physicians Bills, how to apply 
them too forsooth. And so at last, by a 
happy Delusion, he thinks himself not only 
an Apothecary, but a Physician. Thus, 
what by his own proper Fund of Ignorance, 
what by his Master's, improving it, he comes 
out at last a doubly greater Fool than he en-
ter'd. But in the mean time, as Ignorance 
and want of Sense give him Assurance, and 
|P_36
the Lowness of his Education preserves him 
at liberty from the combersome Shackles of 
Honour and Honesty, if he has but sleight 
enough to save himself from Transportation 
or the Gibbet, he is sure to make a Lively-
hood, tho' never so many should suffer for it. 
Others have fallen upon a yet easier way of 
scaling the Heights of Physick, by setting up 
upon something that they call a Nostrum, left 
them in a Legacy by their Grand-mother, by 
which they pretend infallibly to cure some one, 
or perhaps all Diseases. And this, whe-
ther it is insignificant or dangerous, they ad-
minister the same way in all Circumstances, 
and in the same Dose to Persons of all Ages, 
Sexes, and Constitutions. 

Hyg. A hopeful Education I'll swear! 
Well, I don't wonder that those Fools who 
venture their Lives in the hands of such 
Bunglers, load them with such Impreca-
tions at last. 

Merc. These Wretches however have for 
some time been in great favour with Pluto.
And in return for their contributing so con-
siderably to the peopling of his Dominions, 
|P_37
they have had the Honour to lodge in the 
same Quarter with Alexander, Caesar, and 
the rest of the noble Tribe of Man-butchers. 
But of late years they have sent down such 
numerous Colonies, that it would have puz-
ledPluto to account for so many swarms (at 
a time when he heard nothing, by any Ad-
vices from the upper World, either of Fa-
mine or Pestilence, or very hot Wars) if it 
were not that, of all the Myriads that daily 
descend to Hell, there is scarce One of Six, 
but what lays the Blame of his untimely 
Fate upon the Quacks. So that at last, he 
begun to consider them with another eye, and 
to remit of his Indulgence towards them, as 
dreading they would at this rate in a short 
time quite destroy the Brood of Mankind, 
and so cut off all future Supplies to his 
Realms. But now this Affair I presume 
will compleat their Disgrace, and entirely 
ruin them with Pluto. They have for a 
long time played their Pills, Drops, and Po-
tions here upon the poor Wretches that are 
miserable enough besides. But there was ne-
ver any ear given to their Complaints, for it 
was suspected to be all meer Fetch and Kna-
very, and that they were only sick to get 
|P_38
the Rigour and wholesome Discipline of our 
Infernal Regions a little abated. And but 
the other day, one of these Miscreants, as 
he was passing by Tantalus, who was crying 
out of Thirst after his old rate, stop'd and 
told him, that Symptom was entirely owing 
to the redundant Choler in his Blood, and 
that he could give him a Potion that would 
purge it off to his great Relief. Poor Tan-
talus, who was glad to drink any thing, 
made but one Draught of his Potion, and 
poured a thousand Blessings upon his pre-
tended Benefactor. But it proved a bitter 
Draught to him. For it handled him so 
unmercifully, and, instead of having his 
Thirst quenched by it, he called out at last 
so pitifully for Drink, and swooned away 
so often, that he was obliged to be taken 
out of his Tub: And now that his great 
rage of Sickness is abated, they are e'en fain 
to cocker him up with Broths and Jellies 
to fill his empty Vessels again. Such things 
as these passed without being much taken 
notice of, and for the most part without 
being credited; but I shall wonder if these 
Varlets are not called to a severe Account, 
now that the Gods themselves can't live for 
|P_39
them. For you must know that, just about 
the time that Pluto took his Physick, honest 
old Charon got his Dose too. 

Hyg. No sure! How in the name of won-
der came Charon so tractable and complai-
sant? I hope his Austerity was not mellow-
ed by a Bottle too? 

Merc. No faith; He was as sober as I 
am just now: but you shall hear how it hap-
pened. One of these Poison-mongers, who 
wanted a Cast over, but had not a Farthing 
to pay his Fare, bethought himself of a sly 
Expedient. He takes his Seat just by the 
old Waterman, and begins to make his 
Court by complimenting him upon his vi-
gorous Constitution and the Greenness of his 
old Age; but at the same time could not 
help observing that his Skin disgraced them, 
(for you know he is not very nice about 
his Linnens, and does not go into a Bath 
perhaps once in a Century) and that he had 
contracted something of a Scorbutick Taint,
by having lived so long upon the Water. 
But if he would accept of some Doses of his 
Pulvis Scelotyrbicus, and now and then 
|P_40
make use of the warm Bath, he might soon 
become as sleek and pure as a Snake that 
has just cast his Slough. Charon at first 
made him surly enough Answers, and was 
like to have grown very rough, but the in-
sinuating Rascal plied him so with positive 
Remonstrances, that the simple old Dotard 
began at last to imagine that his Skin really 
itched. He told him, that what he said 
might be true enough, but that he had not 
Leisure to take Physick. The unconscio-
nable Knave replied, that the Medicine 
which he had to offer him was an Alterative
and acted insensibly, so that he needed not 
lose a Moment's Business, nor so much as 
change his Diet for it. Well, not to tire you 
with a long Tale, Charon takes the Powders
in lieu of Fare, which was all that the Ras-
cal wanted. And one Dose has wrought 
him so heartily, that if they were to cure 
him of a Leprosy, I suppose Cerberus may 
take the rest for him. He was obliged to 
crawl out of his Boat into a Hut by the Ri-
ver's side, where he lies cursing and blas-
pheming at a hideous rate, and is so peevish 
and in such a nasty pickle, that no body
cares to go near him. Since this Misfor-
|P_41
tune happened to him, I have been obliged 
to perform his Office: but to secure my self 
from having a Pill or Powder cramm'd down 
my Throat too, not a Rag of a Quack comes 
into the Boat as long as I'm Master. They 
make a deal of pother for Admittance, 
but I e'en let them strole about the wrong side 
of the Lake till Charon is ready to take care 
of them himself; and if he does not take care 
of them with a vengeance, as soon as he gets 
upon his Stumps again, I shall say his Cho-
ler is purged off effectually. There is as good 
as Ten or a Dozen of them already, and they 
are become so bold, that if I did not keep 
them at a distance by brushing their Jackets 
for them when they advance too near, I be-
lieve they would think of storming the Boat. 
But I expect good Sport when they come 
under Charon's Discipline. It will delight 
one to see how he'll tear and lay about him, 
and how the poor Scoundrels will scamper 
up and down, as if they walk'd upon hot 
Iron. 

Hyg. Yes, I presume they'll stand in need 
of more Skill than their own to heal them-
|P_42
selves.—But I wish Pluto would make 
and end of his Nap, for I shall be obliged to be going presently. 

Merc. So shall I. I'll step into his Cham-
ber, and see if he is yet awake.—O! I hear 
him groaning and stretching himself upon 
the Bed. You may come in, Hygeia.

Hyg. How is it with you now, Pluto?
Mercy on me, you look pitifully! 

Pluto O Hygeia! what have I suffered 
since I saw you! 

Hyg. Well, I hope you shall not suffer 
much longer; and if you were once set to 
rights again, I presume you won't tamper 
any more with these unlucky Ministers of 
the Fatal Sisters. 

Pluto A Pestilence on them! But what 
must I do? for I find I shall soon be as bad 
as ever. 

Hyg. Why, you must send for some skil-
ful Physician. You have Hippocrates, Cel-
|P_43
sus, Sydenham, and I don't know how many 
here, that are an Honour to their great Fa-
therAesculapius, and, for the good Offices 
they have done Mankind, deserve the im-
mortal Fame and compleat Happiness they 
now enjoy. You must have recourse to their 
Help, for without Nature's Means and theirs, 
I never do any thing. 

Pluto. Their Help! I never could endure 
them: for my Empire might still have re-
mained an unpeopled Desart for them. And 
I have often been angry with Minos and Rha-
damanth, for allotting them the same habi-
tations with Solon, Lycurgus, Socrates, Ci-
cero, Brutus, and the other public Benefac-
tors of Mankind. I little thought ever to 
have Dealings of this kind with them; but 
I have reason to lay aside my old Grudges 
now. 

Merc. Well, I expect you'll judge more 
favourably of them hereafter.—But in the 
mean time, Pluto, as there is nothing so 
curst but what brings some good along with 
it, I humbly think this Accident might be 
|P_44
improved to a profitable use. You know 
Ixion's Wheel is falling to pieces, the Furies' 
Scourges are worn so light and limber, that 
they are become meer Children's Play: In 
short, all the Instruments of Hell are going 
to wrack. Now to save the Expence of re-
pairing them, which will make a great Gap 
in your Fund, what if all that pompous 
Apparatus, and this Variety of Tortures, 
were laid aside, and the Medicines of these 
Quacks (which come cheap enough, for all 
their exorbitant Bills) made use of in their 
stead, and administred once, twice, or thrice 
a Week, in proportion to the Offence, Ha-
bit, and Constitution of the Criminals, and 
pro ratione Virium & Operationis.

Tantalus. Blast me, all the Gods! if I take 
Potion more.—I'll drink Phlegethon first.—
Let me into my Tub again—Oh!—

Hyg. So Tantalus, you have got a quick 
Ear. Pluto will perhaps excuse you if you 
speak him fair. But pray, Mercury, let us 
hear the rest of your Scheme, with Pluto's 
leave, it may perhaps divert him. 

|P_45
Merc. Well, in the mean time that the 
Furies may not lie out of Business, nor want 
an Imployment suitable to their Dispositions; 
I would propose that they should have the 
pleasure to administer these Pills, Potions,
&c. and in short to perform the Office of 
the Quacks. 

Hyg. And pray what will you make of 
the Quacks themselves? What uncommon 
Torments are you preparing for them? 

Merc. As for them, that they may still 
be occupied in something Analogous to their 
former Trade, let it be their Business to 
take care of the Kennels, Sewers, and Com-
mon-shores; nor think it below them to be 
the Scavengers of Hell. 

Hyg. By Jupiter, a good Contrivance! 
Pluto, what do you say to this? 

Merc. —Ye Gods! Pluto is as bad as 
ever! How he heaves! how he sweats! 
how he's convulsed! as if his whole Frame 
|P_46
were disjointed! I must make Dispatch, and 
send hither Hippocrates and some of the rest 
of the Physicians, and then to the Oar again. 
Do you, Hygeia, stay here in the mean time. 

Hyg. I shall. Fare you well, Mercury,
and make haste. 
