
|P_
[}TO 
STUDENTS in Physic.}]GENTLEMEN, 
[^Decorative frame around the letter "I".^]IT is universally agreed, that 
among the several other 
Branches of Learning, ne-
cessary to the Accomplish-
ment of those, who are 
Candidates in the Art of 
Healing; the judicious Instructions of an 
able, practical Physician, is a Qualifica-
tion of the first Moment. The Reason of 
the present Concession is very evident: Be-
|P_ij
causethe Pupil, as the Result of such an 
happy Institution, according to the Stand-
ing of his Professor, may, in a few Years,
enter upon Business, with greater Advan-
tage, than he could possibly do, in many,
without such Assistance. For myself, I 
own, I am too vain, not to account it 
a singular Felicity in my Life, that I have 
been bless'd with an Opportunity of at-
tendingSir Richard Manningham's
Lectures in Midwifery and Physic.

I pay a greater Deference to that Gen-
tleman'sgood Sense and distinguish'd 
Modesty, than either to affront the one, or 
insult the other, by attempting any thing, 
that might carry the Appearance of an En-
comium, tho' religiously confined to his 
just Praise: Nevertheless, as every gene-
rous and honest Mind would be equally 
careful, neither to offend against the Laws 
of Gratitude to an ingenious Tutor, for 
the most instructive Dictates; nor those 
of Justice and Zeal due to the Public, for 
whose Service, Gentlemen, you are pre-
|P_iij
paring:I expect it be allowed me, on the present Occasion, as a necessary Instance of Duty to Both; that I am at Liberty to de-
clare, I want no Veneration for Sir Ri-
chard'sWhole Course.—It is composed, 
indeed, of Two grand Branches, which are 
those of Midwifery and Physic. The for-
mer of these is by no means destitute of its 
Beauties: Such as the Improvements in the 
Apparatus itself; the Chastity of the Insti-
tution; and the Exclusion of all Instru-
ments.—For the first: The greater Ma-
chine is the most finish'd, in its way, that 
has, as yet, ever appeared, for conduct-
ing the different Kinds of Deliveries;
while the Glass Machine gives ocular Proof 
of the Reason and Justness of the Rules to 
be observed in Operations on the Other; 
and, consequently, in Genuine Labours.—
For the next: It is not possible, by this 
Manner of Instruction, to give the least 
Offence to the chastest Mind, the most 
scrupulous Modesty. — And with respect 
to the Affair of Instruments: It is evident 
|P_iv
to a Demonstration, from this Method of 
Practice, that there is so little Occasion 
for the present frequent Use of them, that 
excepting in a Case or two, which but 
rarely happen; the judicious Management
of the Hand, is all that is required in the 
Art of Midwifery.

Gentlemen, I abhor Flattery and 
Ostentation: And I cannot but persuade 
myself, you will acquit me of Both, when 
I assure you, I should, at no rate, have 
taken upon me to have been either so par-
ticular, or positive in the Articles above, if 
I were not very well acquainted, with the 
utmost, that has been done Abroad on the 
Subject of Midwifery. I studied under 
Two Masters, the late Messieurs Gre-
goire and Dussé, at Paris; and came 
from thence with no small Freight of Self-
sufficiency and Confidence: Nor is it proba-
ble to me, I should ever have been dispos-
sess'd of my personal Prejudices and dan-
gerous Mistakes (especially in the Use of 
Instruments) had I not fell under Sir Ri-
|P_v
chard's Institution, and formed myself 
on His Practice.

These things notwithstanding: As I 
always thought the matter of Deliveries
the least Branch of the Man-Midwife's
Character; and was assured, that He would 
ever have most Success in Operations, who 
was best acquainted with the Structure of 
the Human Body: So I could not help be-
ing especially charmed with those Lectures 
in Sir Richard's Course, which proper-
ly belong to the latter Branch, the Head 
of Physic. The superior Utility of the 
Subject will excuse my passionate Regard 
on this Part: Since it is plain, that the 
Science, which leads to a general View of 
the animal Machine, and to a perfect Know-
ledge of all the Diseases to which the whole 
Nature, in common, is incident; must be 
vastly preferable to all that is partial
and confined, however exalted and worthy in it-
self. 

What was last observed, Gentlemen, 
you will please to remember, is designed, 
|P_vj
not only to account for the extraordinary 
Pains I was at in securing this Lecture; 
but is also offered as a Reason, why you 
are to believe it tolerably correct. For the 
latter indeed, you have this additional As-
surance, that I had not only several Op-
portunities of attending the Repetition of 
it; but was, moreover, allow'd the pecu-
liar Indulgence of taking it in short-hand,
 as delivered. 

I confess, it would give me no small 
Pain, were I the least apprehensive, I was 
taking any Freedom, that might justlyex-
pose me to the Resentment of Sir Ri-
chard Manningham: But, I flatter 
myself with less Danger in this Point, so 
far as concerns the present Publication,
however; since, I am only indulging the 
English Reader with his excellent Method 
of Investigating Diseases, in the manner 
he explain'd it to Us, in his first Evening's 
Lecture in Physic; at the same time, that 
it is to be observed, he has already com-
municatedthe Method itself to the learned 
|P_vij
World in his Latin Compendium: Tho' 
some of the best Judges have acknowledg-
ed it's Claim to an higher Title.

There is one Circumstance, Gentle-
men, of great Importance in the present 
Lecture, I mean: That the whole Argu-
ment is built on the most venerable Anti-
quity, and not on any precarious, modern 
Theories. I take the Liberty of inserting 
this previous Hint; not but your own At-
tention in Reading would have excused 
me the Trouble; because you will from 
hence immediately argue its intrinsic Va-
lue, and give more boldly into its Use.—
The Histories of Diseases, originally put 
together by the most accurate Observations
of Hippocrates, and established on 
the Authority of his Successors, the most 
celebrated ancient Physicians, is here your 
Standard. Nature, since her various 
morbid Phaenomena were, in their manner, 
first reduced to any regular System,ap-
pears to have suffered no Deviation for 
some thousand Years past; nor can, in-
|P_viij
deed,be capable of any, for the future, 
while the animal Oeconomy, and the Laws,
under which the human Species continues 
to act, remain invariable.

I wish nothing more ardently, than 
that, as the Subject, on which the Lecture 
before you is rais'd, is of general Use
in itself; and it is hardly possible, every Stu-
dent'sSituation should allow him an Op-
portunity of attending on the Spot: Those, 
into whose Hands it may now fall, may 
find as much Pleasure and Advantage in 
receiving it from the Press, as the Pub-
lisher has perpetually retained, since he 
first took it from Sir Richard's own 
Mouth. I am, 
LONDON: Bow-lane, Feb. 4. 1741-2. 
GENTLEMEN, 
Your most Obedient, 
Humble Servant,
SAYER RUDD, M.D. 
and Man-Midwife. 

|P_
[}The Certain Method to 
Know the DISEASE.}][^Decorative frame around the letter "I".^]IN the Course of our Lectures in 
Physic, we propose, chiefly to confine 
ourselves to the Diseases of Children,
from Infancy up to ripe Age; and to 
the Diseases, peculiar to the Female Sex; those 
especially, belonging to Pregnancy and Childbed:
Nevertheless, as Women are liable to all the Di-
stempers incident to Men, besides the many pecu-
liar to their own Sex, as they are, by Nature, or-
dained for the Preservation of Mankind; it will 
be necessary, in a great measure, to treat of Dis-
eases at large; and more particularly of Fevers,
which, indeed, make up a very great Part of the 
Disorders that afflict us, and do also associate 
themselves, with every other Disease: Febris, 
maxime communis Morbus, omnium aliorum 
Morborum, praecipue Inflammationis, comes est.
Hippocrates. The Truth of which we daily 
experience; and, moreover, often observe that, a 
|P_2
Fever shall even elude that Method of curing a 
Disease, which, without a Fever, has been gene-
rally found successful; an Observation well wor-
thy our particular Notice. 

Women with Child, and in Childbed, are 
often afflicted with Distempers, no ways cognate
to Pregnancy or Childbed; especially Fevers of all 
Kinds, whose Essence and Nature, indeed, differ 
nothing from other Fevers, and require a like Me-
thod of Cure; yet, by reason of their happening 
at the Times above-mentioned, are attended with 
greater Difficulties in Curing, and demand our 
greatest Caution and Prudence, in the Administra-
tion of the proper Remedies for the Fever; the 
Physician at this time, not being at Liberty, so 
freely to make use of Bleeding, Vomiting, Blistring, 
Sweating, Purging, and Method of Diet: And 
during Pregnancy, our chief View must always be 
to prevent a Miscarriage, or even the bringing on 
of Labour, whenever the Disease has no Affinity
to Pregnancy. For tho' Diseases, which are ow-
ing to Pregnancy, either decrease, or go off upon 
Delivery; yet, those which are no ways cognate,
are for the most part found to increase after the 
Delivery; and as Hippocrates observes: Si 
mulier, Utero gestans, morbum habuerit non cogna-
tum, in Puerperii purgatione, perit.

Wherefore, as in all Diseases not cognate to 
Pregnancy, our chief View, as I observed above, 
must be, to prevent Abortion and untimely La-
bour; so in all Diseases happening in Childbed, 
|P_3
our principal Aim, must then be directed, to the 
due Regulation of the Lochia. Many, and great Dif-
ficulties surround us, in this dangerous and com-
plicated Situation, which exact our most diligent 
Care and Attention: And, as it is oftentimes no 
easy Matter to distinguish between the cognate Di-
stemper, and that which has no relation to Preg-
nancy or Childbed; and at all times, very difficult 
rightly and safely to conduct Affairs, in this nice 
and critical Situation; I shall therefore, in my 
subsequent Lectures, endeavour, to the best of my 
Judgment and Knowledge, to inform and direct 
you in each Particular, from the repeated Obser-
vations of the most approved Authors in Physic, 
both ancient and modern; and also from Experi-
ences and Successes, collected from my own Ad-
versaria, confirming their Doctrine; besides which, 
I shall illustrate each Case, by the particular Ap-
plication of the Method of Investigating the Na-
ture of all Diseases. 

It is a Maxim universally received among Phy-
sicians: That Medicine should begin, where Philoso-
phy ends. And as it is, undoubtedly, a necessary 
Qualification in a Physician to be knowing in Phi-
losophy; and the Animal Oeconomy is that Part of 
Philosophy, which is more especially conducive to 
the Knowledge of the Practice of Physic: I make 
no doubt, but you, Gentlemen, who have in this 
City the best Opportunities of being instructed in 
this Branch of Science; especially by that most 
accurate, and excellent Anatomist and Physician, Dr.
Nicholls; who, it must be confessed, is an Ornament 
|P_4
of our Profession, and worthy of singular Praise: I 
say, I make no doubt, but with such Advantages, 
you have already obtained a competent Knowledge 
in the Animal Oeconomy; and will, therefore, be 
enabled to make the best Use of our Lectures, 
and Method of Investigating the Nature of Dis-
eases. 

Now, the human Body, we all know, may 
be properly considered, as a most perfect Machine;
whose Parts are extremely well configurated and 
joined together; whose Symmetry is most beauti-
ful; and whose Actions, resulting from this admi-
rable Compages, are reciprocally carried on by So-
lids and Fluids, of which it is made up. And as 
many of its Actions and Motions, are easily demon-
strated to be the necessary Consequences of it's Stru-
cture; so its Diseases, and all their Symptoms, are 
only the irregular Motions, or Disorders of this 
very complicated Machine: Nor is the Case the 
least altered, that we have a Principle within us, 
not subject, in itself, to the Laws of Motion. 

It is, therefore, highly incumbent on every 
one, who would attain to the due Knowledge of the 
Art of Healing, that he make himself very well 
acquainted with this curious Machine: that know-
ing well the Parts, and the natural Actions, and 
Secretions of the human Body; he may be enabled 
to judge, when, and how, these natural Actions are 
perverted: all the Symptoms of Diseases, being 
the necessary Consequences of the Alteration of the 
Animal Oeconomy. It's Actions therefore being per-
|P_5
formedby Fluids secerned from the Blood; without 
the Knowledge of Secretions, we cannot under-
stand the Nature of Diseases: Secretion being the 
Spring of all animal Functions. Wherefore, the 
greater our Knowledge is of the Animal Oecono-
my, the more likely we shall be, to discover the 
Seat and Nature of its Diseases; and of course be 
better enabled to rectify all its Disorders. 

Experience is, no doubt, of great and 
necessary Use, in promoting the Art of curing 
Diseases, if directed by a Knowledge in the Animal 
Oeconomy; forasmuch as it is only by a just reason-
ing on our Experiences, that we can come at the 
Knowledge of any Phaenomenon of Nature. So 
that Experience, or the Knowledge of the Histories 
of Diseases, added to that of the Animal Oeconomy,
is what can only make a Physician; and, where-
ever the History of a Disease is exactly known, if 
the right Method of curing it cannot be deduced, it 
must be, because the Animal Oeconomy is not suffi-
ciently understood: For our Skill in curing Diseases, 
whose Histories are exactly known, is, for the most 
part, proportional to our Knowledge of the Ani-
mal Oeconomy. For in order to find out the Seat
and Nature of a Distemper, and from them to de-
duce a right Method of Cure, it will be absolutely 
necessary to reason on those Histories; which we 
cannot do, as we ought, if we are ignorant of the 
Structure of the Machine, we are about to rectify.

Descriptions and Diagnostic Signs of 
Diseases, are the proper Business of Observation
|P_6
and Experience; but, Indications of Cure arise 
from our reasoning upon those Observations. Di-
agnostics are properly a Collection of particular 
Symptoms only; but Indications are those Conclusi-
ons, which our Knowledge of the Animal Oecono-
my enables us to make on these Observations, and 
Descriptions: So that the Histories of Diseases, and 
the Knowledge of the Animal Oeconomy, must al-
ways go hand in hand, in order to the obtaining 
the due Knowledge of the Practice of Physic. He 
therefore, who is sufficiently knowing in Philoso-
phy and the Animal Oeconomy, and makes a proper 
Use of this Knowledge, by reasoning on real Facts,
grounded on repeated Experience and Observation,
may justly be said to use his Philosophy aright; and 
may then reasonably hope for Success, in finding 
out the genuine Indications of Cure, in which, the 
Practice of Physic chiefly consists: And without 
this Caution our Reasonings will certainly be to ve-
ry little purpose. 

The great Hippocrates has this Assertion: 
That Nature cures Diseases. The Truth of it we, 
of this Day, may experience, if we will carefully 
keep up to his excellent Directions, and Method:
It being his only Aim to relieve Nature when op-
pressed, in the very Way, and Manner he observed 
her endeavouring to expel Diseases. And it was by 
a constant Diligence of this Kind, joined with his 
wonderful Sagacity, that he arrived to that great 
Degree of Perfection in the Knowledge of Physic: 
Hence he perceived that, Nature herself judges 
Diseases; and, indeed, does all, being properly as-
sisted;
|P_7
nay, and, sometimes, without any Assist-
ance.

Hippocrates also informs us, and our own 
Experience cannot but confirm it: That those People 
who have Fevers, and are left to themselves, and 
take no Medicines; if they do recover, get rid of 
their Fevers by Sweating, a Looseness, an Haemor-
rhage, Diabetes, or the like: From whence Hip-
pocrates, and the ancient Practitioners in Phy-
sic, took their first Intimation to provoke Sweat
and the other Evacuations. And from their re-
peated Observations and Successes, they have form-
ed for us, a most rational Method of Cure. And 
if we duly consider, and attend to the different 
Ways by which Nature extricates herself from Dis-
eases, when left to herself; we shall soon be con-
vinced, that they are not the confused and disordered
 Effects of Nature, ill defending herself; but, in 
fact, the gradual, steady, and measured Operati-
ons of that exquisite Mechanism, and innate, inces-
sant Principle of Self-preservation, with which Pro-
vidence has been pleased to endow our Bodies: A 
very strong Confirmation of the Necessity of a care-
ful and diligent Observance of the Tendencies of Na-
ture, in all her Disorders; and the Method she 
takes to get rid of Diseases, when left to herself: 
And also, a very good Caution to us all, not to be 
over hasty, or too busy in the Administration of our
 Remedies; lest we should be found to ruffle and 
disturb, rather than assist Nature, with the untime-
ly Use, or Multitude of our Medicines. And re-
ally, the Ne quid nimis, in the Practice of Physic, 
|P_8
is a Matter of no small Consequence. He there-
fore, in my Opinion, is most likely to prove the 
best, most prudent, and rational Physician, who 
most diligently observes, and constantly follows, the 
Motions, and Dictates of Nature herself.

If an altogether new Distemper should at any 
time arise among us, the only Way of getting into 
the Nature of such new Disease, would be to copy
Hippocrates's Example; I mean, his Me-
thod of observing, joined to the Rule of finding out 
the Nature of Diseases: For we must, first, be 
led by Symptoms to find a Disease; after that it's 
Nature, and from thence the Method of Cure. 
And here it may be proper to observe, that there 
are several Seasons, which have Diseases peculiar to
themselves; and may, in some measure, indeed, be 
called new Diseases: It will therefore be necessary t
o know, and carefully observe the Seasons, as
Hippocrates, and, our renowned Countryman, 
Sydenham advise; wherein such Diseases are 
wont to appear; otherwise we shall be unsuccessful 
in curing the Diseases peculiar to those different 
Seasons. It must also be observed, that these Dis-
eases are generally stated, and regular in each Con-
stitution, and have an Affinity to each other: He 
therefore, who is able to come at the Nature and 
Cure of one Epidemical Distemper, in any Constitu-
tion, hath an Advantage in the Cure of all the other.
For tho' they may differ in several respects, yet 
they require something common in their Cure, as 
proceeding from a common Cause. And a few 
Cases diligently enquired into, by recollecting and 
|P_9
carefully examining their Symptoms, as directed by 
our Method of discovering the Nature of Diseases; 
will be sufficient to give us the Nature, Causes, and 
Method of Cure, of the Disease of every Constitu-
tion whatever. Here we can by no means omit a 
pertinent Observation of Celsus: Quod si jam 
incidat Mali genus aliquod ignotum, non ideo ta-
men fore Medico de rebus cogitandum obscuris; sed
 eum protinus visurum, cui morbo id proximum sit;
 tentaturum{que} remedia fimilia illis, quae vicino malo 
saepe succurrerint, & per ejus similitudinem opem
 reperturum.

The many accurate and charming Descriptions
of Distempers, delivered down to us by Hippo-
crates in his Histories of Diseases; wherein the 
Phaenomena of each Distemper, even in its minu-
test Circumstances, are observed; present us with 
a most exquisite Delineation of Nature: and if 
duly attended, will always be found, of the great-
est Service for advancing our Progress in the Art of 
Healing. Because, from his Diagnostics in particu-
lar, and others of the Antients, and such among 
the Moderns, who have closely copied after His 
manner; we readily discover the Nature of the 
Disease. And as, whenever we arrive at the true
and exact History of any Distemper, whether from 
Books, or our own careful Observations; we may, 
at all times, by the right and diligent Application 
of the Method of Investigation, most assuredly dis-
cover the immediate and conjunct Cause; so may 
we likewise, on those Principles, easily come at 
the Nature of the Disease; when, having that 
|P_10
given, it will be no difficult matter to find out Re-
medies to Cure, in all curable Cases; and to admi-
nisterRelief, even in those, which are incurable.

Thisunwearied Diligence in Observation, and 
close Attendance on Nature in that sagacious, great 
Man Hippocartes, and others of the Antients;
might probably be heightened in them, from the 
Scantiness of their Materia Medica, and the ex-
ceedingHarshness of the then known Remedies;
 however, much to our Benefit: since the excellent 
Descriptions of Diseases they have given us, can 
not only never be exceeded, but will always remain
 invariably true, while Human Nature continues 
the same. And had those of later Ages, who have 
been so happily provided with a more copious and 
salutary Materia Medica; and who, it must be 
allowed, have been greatly improved in the Know-
ledge of the Animal Oeconomy: had these, I say, 
constantly persevered in the Use of Hippocra-
tes'sgreat Diligence and Manner of observing;
they might, doubtless, long ago, have brought the 
Practice of Physic to a considerable Degree of Per-
fection; tho' they had not been bless'd with his 
extraordinary Sagacity: For that, indeed, is a pe-
culiar Happiness, and the Lot of a very few; in 
which Particular, I believe, we may say of the 
Physician, as is commonly done of the Poet: Na-
scitur, non fit.

Now, should we of this Age, flushed with our 
superior Knowledge in the Animal Oeconomy, and 
the Variety of our Materia Medica; neglect to 
|P_11
make use of that Prudence and Diligence, which is
necessary in attending the Motions and Intentions of
 Nature; and, instead of endeavouring to assist her
on these Principles, when oppress'd, become too 
precipitate and officious, in the Administration of 
our Medicines; the Consequence will inevitably 
be, that we shall only obscure the Disease, by mul-
tiplying, rather than taking off the Symptoms; and 
this to our own personal Confusion, the manifest 
Injury of our Patients, and the great Disrepute of 
our Profession. Whereas, would we consult the 
true and proper Use of the many happy Improve-
ments of our own Age, I think, it cannot be done 
more effectually, than by keeping close to our most 
skilful Leader, Hippocrates; together 
with the ancient Practitioners in Physick, in their 
Manner of observing, and in their Method of heal-
ing; founded upon the Knowledge of the conjunct 
Causes of Distempers, from whence alone, the cu-
rative Indications are to be taken: agreeable to the 
Method here mentioned, and Hippocrates's 
Manner of observing. And by a careful Perseve-
rance in these Methods, I imagine, we may rea-
sonably hope for the greatest Success; and may, 
perhaps, in a few Ages, arrive at the highest Per-
fection in the Practice of Physic, that human Na-
ture is capable of attaining. 

From what I have already advanced, 
you will naturally conclude, that it is no easy Matter to be-
comea prudent and skilful Physician: Much Read-
ing, much Thought and Pains will really be re-
quired; many Things are necessary to be learnt
|P_12
much Diligence in Inquiry, much Assiduity in 
Observation is to be used, before we can be duly
qualified, either with Peace of Mind to ourselves, 
or Relief to our Patients, to undertake a Trust, 
in which the Lives of our Fellow-creatures are so 
nearly concerned. 

If this be a just State of the Case, what shall 
we say of those Persons, who boldly take upon 
them the Practice of Physic, without the least pre-
vious Knowledge of the Requisites absolutely neces-
sary for the regular Discharge of this important 
Office? Certainly it can be no other than the great-
est Folly, and the highest Presumption, for Those to 
expect Success, or hope for a Blessing on their En-
deavours; who are altogether ignorant of the Pro-
vince in which they engage: And would such 
Persons but give themselves Time to reflect, and 
seriously consider, the great Consequence of Physic, 
in the practical Part of it; where Life itself is so 
immediately at stake: I am persuaded, they 
would not thus rashly venture to administer Medi-
cines, before they had acquired the proper and ne-
cessary Qualifications.

It is a mighty Mistake, that has seized some of 
our young Candidates in Physic, who are not 
much addicted to Study or Pains-taking, to ima-
gine: That, if they are but well furnished with 
Books of Recipes, they have every Qualificationsuf-
ficient to commence Doctor upon; because in 
those Books, as they think, agreeable to the com-
mon Saying, they are sure to find a Salve for every
|P_13
Sore. But, alas! these base, empirical Books, the 
Pest of the present Age, will greatly deceive them.
They are by no means to be confided in; but, on 
the contrary, are rather to be looked upon as very 
injurious: Forasmuch as they only furnish all 
Sorts of People, with great Opportunities of destroy-
ing each other's Health. And should any Person 
pretend to set up to practise Physic on this deceitful
 Foundation, He would soon find himself miserably 
misled; to the great and manifest Injury of Him-
self, as well as his Patients. For it is most cer-
tain, that every Medicine, be it never so good,
 must always be administer'd in the most proper 
Dose, and at the most proper Times of the Disease, 
to make it of any Advantage to the Patient; but 
the Chance of the Mischief arising from the con-
trary Practice, no one, I think, would covet: 
Yet this Knowledge can no otherwise be come at, 
than in the arduous and diligent Manner of study-
ing above-mention'd; join'd with the Method of In-
vestigating the Nature of Diseases. Not that this 
is the only Advantage, which follows on our Do-
ctrine of Investigation; fince it not only leads us 
into the true Nature of the Disease, and the cer-
tain Method of Cure; but also, at the same time, 
into the very Nature and Power of Medicines them-
selves, if rightly attended to and applied. And 
were it possible, even to find out an Universal Re-
medy for all Distempers; it must still be subject to 
the due Timeing and Dosing; the accurate Know-
ledge of which, can no otherwise be obtained, than 
by the Manner and Method already laid down. 
And this, indeed, is the only real and true Arca-
|P_14
num,in the Practice of Physic. All your Pana-
ceas, Nostrums, Specifics, and the like; without 
this perfect Knowledge of administring them, in the 
most proper Dose, and at the most proper Times of 
the Disease, will, for the most part, prove very 
mischievous. And here the Opinion of the late 
learned Professor Boerhaave concurs with us: 
Nec speciosos Medicamentorum titulos Morbis addidi. 
Cur? Nihil Arti exitiale magis novi; neque verò 
ipse ullum cognosco, quin solo tempestivo Usu tale 
fiat. [/1./] And these Remedies can only, by the 
greatest Hazard and Chance imaginable, ever prove 
of good Effect, in any Disease of Consequence: Tho' 
we all know, indeed, that, in many Cases, let 
the Medicine given be ever so improper in itself, or 
ever so unseasonably administer'd; the Strength of
Nature may sometimes get the better of both. 
But this is by no means Curing; nor can it be 
any Excuse for our Ignorance.

Having thus prepared you for the Method to 
be observed in finding out the Distemper; I shall 
now proceed to give it you, in the plainest, and 
most methodical Manner, I am able. 

I cannot introduce, what I have to offer on 
this Head, with greater Advantage, than by laying 
before you, the following practical Observation of
Scheffler: Ut Rationalis Medicus curativis Sco-
pis satisfacere, Materias Medicas invenire, inventis rectè uti valeat: non satis erit, Vires custodire, & morbificas Causas amovere; sed & Morbi Speciem, 
|P_15
& Locum affectum exquisitè cognitum habeat, necessè est.

Agreeable with this, you will observe that, 
in order to Cure any Disease, it is necessary to have 
a thorough Knowledge of the Disease itself, and of 
the Remedy peculiarly adapted to it; it being im-
possible to cure a Disease according to Art, if the 
Nature of the Disease be hid from the Artist: And 
for want of this Knowledge, the Care and Pains
of many Physicians have proved ineffectual. For 
these Physicians, for the most part, making little 
other Use of the Diagnostic Symptoms, than the 
mere naming the Distemper only; have, very inju-
diciously, taken their Indications of Cure, from se-
condary and casual Symptoms: Whereas the true 
Nature of a Disease is ever best found out, from the 
Diagnostic Signs or Marks alone; and from thence
 also, the true Indications of Cure, must always be
 drawn, in order to the best and most effectual Me-
thod of curing the Disease. And as these Indicati-
ons wholly arise from our Reasoning upon the Ob-
servations of the Phaenomena of Nature; therefore, 
the greater our Knowledge of the Animal Oecono-
my is, the better we shall be enabled to find out 
the Nature of the Disease. For 'tis the Animal 
Oeconomy alone, which must enable us, by reason-
ing upon the Causes, Signs, and Symptoms of Dis-
eases, to find out their Natures, and to deduce true
and just Indications of Cure. 

This, however, in general; more expressly: 
To come at the true Method of investigating all Dis-
|P_16
eases,incident to the Human Body; and from 
thence proceed to the most effectual Methods of 
treating and curing them; the solid Knowledge of 
the following Particulars is absolutely required, 
viz.

1. The next, and ever-concomitant Cause of the 
Disease. 
2. The Seat and Part affected.
3. The Ways and Passages, thro' which the Evil 
takes its Course. 
4. The inseparable Signs of the Distemper. 
5. The Symptoms, which commonly accompany
the Disease; and 
6. That we be careful the Symptoms of the Dis-
ease are rightly distinguished.
If we err not in these main Points, we are in the 
right Way of arriving to an happy Cure of the Dis-
ease. 

It is very necessary at all times, carefully to 
distinguish between the Disease itself, and the Sym-
ptom; the want of which has been the Stumbling
-stone of some, even very learned Men, in all Ages: 
Since it is to be imputed to the want of this Distin-
ction, as a principal, if not the only Obstacle; that 
Physicians have been so much at a Loss, for the 
true Cause of the Disease, and have therefore so 
often taken the Symptom for the Disease itself; not 
rightly distinguishing the next, and immediate con-
junct Cause, from its Symptoms or Accidents;
which 
|P_17
may not be occasion'd by the next, and always ac-
companying Cause of the Disease, but by some other 
Symptom; and what is so far from being the Mark 
of the Disease, that it is a Symptom of a Symptom
only. 

In the Tooth-ach, for Example, when it does 
not proceed from a Caries; the genuine Essence of 
this Disease, is the violent Distension or Stretching
of the Periostium, by some sort of Humour; by 
which means this Membrane, being forc'd out of 
its natural Form and Situation, excites a most ex-
quisite Pain; which Pain is not the Disease, but 
the true Mark of the Disease; and the Humour
occasioning this Pain, the Cause of the Disease.
The Inflammation, Fever, swelled Face, &c. which 
may succeed, are neither of them the true Mark;
but proceed from the Pain, which is the true Di-
agnostic Sign or Mark of the Disease; each of the
above-mentioned being the Symptom of a Symptom
only. 

[}Of theDiagnostics orSignsof a
Disease. }]
The true Marks or Signs of a Disease are such, 
which are present from the Beginning, and, as it 
were, born with the Disease; they grow up with 
the Distemper to it's height; abate also, and va-
nish with the Disease. These are the only sure Marks
or Signs: other Signs or Symptoms, which do not 
immediately follow the Disease, nor any proper Ef-
|P_18
fectsof it; and which do not always appear in the 
Disease, are therefore deceitful Signs, and not to be 
trusted to; tho' such as have, inadvertently, mis-
led some, even sagacious Men. 

Now, these deceitful Signs are not to be reckon-
ed among the proper Symptoms of the Disease; be-
ingonly such as proceed from some proper Sym-
ptom of the Disease; and are, indeed, Symptoms of 
Symptoms only. For the true, and proper Diag-
nostic Marks or Signs of the Disease, must always 
begin, grow up, decline and vanish with the Disease 
itself; and, from such Marks only, we must ever 
draw our Indications of Cure.

[}Of theSymptomsof a Disease. }]
As to the Symptoms of any Disease, the first Bu-
siness is to distinguish the Symptoms in general, from 
the Disease itself; and then to make a Distinction 
between the Symptoms themselves: That is, the Sym-
ptoms which arise and vanish with the Disease, are 
to be distinguish'd from those, which are bred, not 
from the Disease itself, but from the Symptoms of the 
Disease: And the Symptoms, as we before obser-
ved, which immediately accompany the Disease, and 
are born and die with it; are the only sure Marks
or Signs of the Disease. 

To  illustrate this by our former familiar Instance 
of the Tooth-ach: Here the Pain is the chief and 
most grievous Symptom, but is neither the Disease it-
|P_19
self, nor the Cause of the Disease; nor, yet, is it a 
simple Symptom only, forasmuch as it is the Cause of 
other Symptoms, which succeed; as the Fever, In-
flammation, swelled Face, &c. especially when the 
Pain is violent. Those several Accidents, now 
mentioned, are caused only by the raging Pain of 
the Tooth-ach (the true Mark of the Disease) and 
are Symptoms of a Symptom only. And farther, 
these Accidents of Fever, Inflammation, swelled 
Face, &c. are neither in whole, nor in part, the 
Cause of the Tooth-ach; neither are they insepara-
ble Companions of the Tooth-ach; for the Tooth-
ach may be, and often is, without them. And the 
swelled Face, in particular, does not begin, nor end
with the Disease; nor does it always accompany it; 
nor is it of the same Nature with the Humour,oc-
casioning that violent Pain, but is a Symptom only 
of the Tooth-ach; being raised by the Pain, and 
bred by Consent of Parts from an Afflux of Hu-
mours. 

Thus you see plainly the Method of investiga-
ting the Nature and Causes of a Disease; it's Seat
and Part affected; it's Diagnostic Symptoms; and 
the Necessity of distinguishing these latter, not only 
from the Disease itself, but also from one another:
All which will make way to judge the better of a 
fit Remedy to cure the Disease; for we cannot rea-
sonably hope for a Cure, before the Disease be tho-
roughly understood. And in this manner we must 
come at the Nature, Cause, and Cure of all Dis-
eases whatever. — And, indeed, Diseases have 
that surprizing Analogy to one another, that we 
|P_20
cannot find the Nature of any one Disease; but the 
Nature of several other will, by the same means, 
become manifest to us. So that a general Know-
ledge arises from a particular Inquiry; and we are 
instructed from the Discovery of any one, into the 
Nature of many other Diseases, and the most perfect 
Practice in Curing them. 

From this Method also of finding out the Di-
stemper, is discovered, at the same time, the only 
Way of making a right and true Prognostic; which 
is only a Declaration of a Physician's Expectation 
in curing a sick Person. And this Expectation can 
no otherwise be truly framed, than from the Na-
ture of the Disease; the Quantity and Intenseness
of it; the natural Strength of the Sick; and the 
Power of Medicines conjunctly. The Knowledge 
therefore of Prognostics is not otherwise to be acqui-
red, than by rightly investigating the Diagnostic 
Marks of a Disease, whereby it's Nature is disco-
vered; with that the Quantity of the Disease, and the 
Strength of the Sick, at the same time. And as by 
this Method, we are also led into the Nature, and 
Power of Medicines themselves; so here again, the 
very Medicine reflects Light, and, in some measure, 
confirms the Knowledge of the Disease; as Hippo-
crateswell observes: The Medicine declares the 
Disease.

This then is the Method, by which the Nature 
of all Diseases, to which human Bodies are, or may 
be liable, is discovered. And should ever any alto-
gether new, and unheard of Disease, at any time, 
|P_21
appear amongst us; this will be found the sure way 
of coming at it's Nature: by only thus carefully re-
collecting, and examining its Symptoms. Again, 
this will of Consequence direct to the most proper 
Method of Curing; the Knowledge of a Disease be-
ing the first Step towards its Cure. 

"Allthe Difficulty of Philosophy," says the 
great Sir Isaac Newton, seems to consist in 
this: From the Phaenomena of Motions to investi-
gate the Forces of Nature; and then, from these 
Forces, to demonstrate the other Phaenomena. 

Agreeable to which, we observe: That 
the Symptoms of any Disease being given, it's Nature 
may readily be discovered.

Now the Method of curing Diseases, by draw-
ingIndications from the evident and conjunct Cau-
ses, has been most approved of by the best and 
Generality of Physicians. To this purpose Cel-
sus: Rationalem quidem puto Medicinam esse de-
bere: instrui vero ab evidentibus Causis; obscuris 
omnibus, non à Cogitatione Artificis, sed ab ipsa Ar-
te rejectis. As to the Knowledge of these Causes, it 
is allowed, they can only be attained by a close and 
assiduous Observation of all the Appearances in the se-
veral Stages of the Distemper: Whoever therefore 
is Master of an exact Knowledge in the Histories
of Diseases, having also due Regard to the Diag-
nostics, as by our Method directed; may readily 
investigate their Nature. Natural Philosophy and 
the History of Diseases, as we observed before, must 
|P_22
ever go hand in hand in improving the Art of 
Healing; it not being possible to make any great 
Use of the latter, without some Degree of Know-
ledge in the former: and the greater our Knowledge
is in the Animal Oeconomy, the better the Nature of
 Diseases will be known. 

I have always found, the keeping close to this 
Method of investigating the Nature of Diseases, of 
the greatest Use to me in the Course of my Pra-
ctice. For having long since drawn up our Method
from the most approved Authors in Physic, Anci-
ent and Modern; I have constantly apply'd it, not 
only to all those Histories of Diseases, which I read 
in Authors, whose Descriptions of evident Causes, 
Signs, and Symptoms are just; where the several 
Species of the same Disease are judiciously distinguish-
ed; but also to all those Diseases, together with 
their several Appearances, I have at any time met with 
among my Patients. And I am verily persuaded, 
that you, Gentlemen, will likewise reap the same 
Advantage, by the Use and Application of our 
Method, if duly attended, in your future Practice;
as well to the great Relief of your Patients, as the 
abundant Satisfaction of your own Minds.

Now, in order the more strongly to inculcate 
on your Minds this most necessary and useful Method 
of investigating, we will here again give it you in 
a closer Manner, and in a somewhat different Light;
setting out with an Observation of Lommius: 
Noscere Morbum proximus est ad SanitatemGra-
dus: Nemo sane hanc aut praesagire, aut reddere 
|P_23
affectis rectè potest, qui non animadvertere Genus 
Aegritudinis, quod sit; non ejus Eventum omnem
 praenunciare, certis Indiciis norit.

We said before, that the Symptoms of any Dis-
ease being given, it's Nature may be discovered. 

Now, the Symptoms of every Disease are no 
other than the Effects of some Cause, or some 
Number of Causes, which pervert and overturn
the natural Actions of one or more Parts; for which
reason by explaining these Symptoms, we become 
apprised of the perverted Action, or discover the Dis-
ease: for nothing can be the Cause of a Disease, 
that does not produce the Symptoms, in which the 
Nature of the Disease consists. 

Wherefore, the Symptoms of any Disease be-
ing given, it's Nature may thence be discovered: 
And the Nature of a Disease being assigned, we 
have also the Methods of curing it. Farther, having 
the Nature and Causes of any Disease, we shall be 
able to determine how far the Disease is curable or 
incurable; the Probabilities of curing any Distem-
per; and the most proper Methods of attempting 
it. 

Now the Ancients, as we have already obser-
ved, having accurately describ'd the Diagnostic 
Signs or Marks of Diseases, together with their 
most natural and simple Appearances; whoever is
thoroughly acquainted with the Histories, as deli-
vered down to us by them, and is accurate, or well 
|P_24
versed in the Structure and Nature of the Fluids
and Solids of the Human Body; may, from their 
Diagnostic Signs, in particular, be able to discover 
the Nature and Seat of the Disease, and the Way
it is produced. By the same means also, he will 
have it in his Power to shew in what manner, the 
Symptoms attending the Disease do flow from it's 
Nature, thus found out from it's Symptoms; and 
likewise be capable of perceiving how those Sym-
ptoms give way, or are cured, by changing the di-
stempered Condition of the Parts affected.

In this Examination of the Nature of the Dis-
ease from it's Symptoms, we must be most careful, 
that every casual and foreign Symptom be separated 
from the constant and permanent, in the manner 
the Method, more at large, directs; it being easy 
by observing the Rule there laid down, to distin-
guish the constant and inseparable Symptoms from 
those, which are merely casual and secondary.

Theprincipal Symptoms are, for the most part, 
casy to be explained; the false Symptoms are most 
commonly found among the secondary Sort, and 
are the Symptoms of Symptoms only; for which rea-
son they ought to be rejected from the Number of 
Symptoms properly belonging to the Disease.

Indications of Cure must be drawn from 
the Nature of the Disease, and not from their pre-
carious and supposed Causes; nor from their adven-
titious and casual Symptoms: And there must run 
an uninterrupted Chain, from the Diagnostic Signs
|P_25
of the Disease, through it's Nature and Causes,
'till it ends in a rational and evident Method of 
Cure.

Thus we see that, in order to cure any Disease,
the most natural, easy, and practical Way, is first, 
to collect the most constant Symptoms and Effects of 
the Disease. But in doing this, we must always 
remember; that our utmost Diligence will be abso-
lutely necessary, rightly to distinguish the Symptoms:
That in our collecting the genuine Diagnostic Signs
of any Disease, we never suffer the secondary Signs,
or Symptoms of Symptoms, to creep into the Num-
ber of the genuine Diagnostic Signs. For, if we do, 
we shall certainly render our Inquiries into the true 
Nature of the Disease, almost fruitless and impra-
cticable. But, by strictly observing this Caution,
we shall readily discover the Disease, and it's Sym-
ptoms; together with the Causes of Both. And if 
we can come at the Nature of the Disease, we are 
about to Cure; there remains no Difficulty as to the 
Way of curing, be the Appearances of the Symptoms
ever so various or complicated.

Thedirect Method of Cure being thus obvious,
the Probabilities of Success must be, as the Nature
of the Distemper we come to Cure, and the Force
and Efficacy of the Medicines we administer, respe-
ctively: And if we already know, or can discover 
by Practice, the peculiar Ways, in which the Me-
dicines, we make use of, will act; we shall be 
thereby instructed, when one Method, or any one 
|P_26
Medicine,  is most properly administered; and why
it must be continued, or laid aside: which is the 
Sum and Substance of Physic. 

The Materials, which compose the Me-
thod of Investigating, and finding out the Nature of
 Diseases, having been only dispersed in several Parts 
of the Works of Hippocrates, Celsus, 
and other most approved Authors in Physic, both 
ancient and modern; and having never yet, as I 
know of, been thoroughly collected and digested into 
a regular Form: As it may, to this Day, be justly 
supposed one great Reason, why those excellent Hints
and Admonitions have not, always, been so duly re-
garded and attended to, as they certainly deserve;
so was it, long ago, an Incentive to me to throw 
them together, with some Care and Pains, in the 
Method, in which I have now delivered them. 
And I have, for many Years, with much Satis-
faction and Success, experienced the great Benefit
and Usefulness of so good a Monitor in my own Pra-
ctice; and I flatter myself, it may become equally
serviceable to others of my Profession, if rightly
made use of: It being the whole Business of the Phy-
sician to find out the Distemper, and from that to 
draw the Method of Cure; and to know the Power
and Efficacy of his Medicines, together with the true
and exact Manner of Timeing and Dosing them, in 
each particular Disease, and its Variations.

This Method, therefore, of investigating 
the Nature of all Diseases, being the most natural, 
most rational, and certain Way of attaining that 
|P_27
compleat Knowledge; I think, it may not improper-
ly be esteemed the very Master-Key to the Know-
ledge of the Practice of Physic: And I imagine, 
if thoroughly understood, and then properly apply'd,
it will most safely conduct us, from the very 
Threshold of Physic even to its Consummation; and 
that, with much greater Expedition and Success,
than any other, hitherto known, Method. And, 
as it will be of very great Service to the Beginner;
so likewise, will it continue to be the most useful
and necessary Companion, we can associate withal, 
through the whole Course of our Practice.Where-
fore, that I might make this Method familiar to 
you, I have gradually opened it in the Beginning of 
this Lecture, and have through the whole variously 
represented it: More particularly, I have given it 
you in two different Views; that I might the more 
strongly inculcate, and impress it on your Minds.
And, that nothing may be wanting to it's compleat 
Use; I shall endeavour, in my subsequent Lectures,
not only to make it still more familiar, but also as 
serviceable as possibly may be, both to yourselves
and Patients; by illustrating it with frequent Ex-
amples, and the constant Application of it to the se-
veral Disorders, we shall hereafter be obliged to 
treat of. By this means, Gentlemen, I hope, you 
will be altogether Masters of the right Use of our 
Method of Investigation, and the Application of it 
in all the Diseases, and the Varieties of them, 
you may either meet with in Authors, or observe in 
your own future Practice.

|P_28
For the rest: I shall take care to direct you, 
how to judge of the Efficacy and Powers of Medi-
cines, with their peculiar Way of acting: How to 
administer each Medicine in the most proper Dose,
and most proper Time of the Disease: When it may 
be necessary to alter, entirely change, or continue 
the Methods and Medicines: When, and how, pro-
perly to Bleed, and apply Blisters, in the several 
Stages and Complications of a Distemper. I shall, 
besides, furnish you with a select Materia Medica,
and Methodus Praescribendi, suitable to each Dis-
ease. This introductory Knowledge, joined to your 
own necessary Diligence and constant Attention; will,
 I apprehend, most effectually qualify you, to pra-
ctise with Success, in every Disorder, we shall have 
occasion to lay before you in this Part of our Course. 

FINIS. 
