
|P_
[}PREFACE. }]
THE medical reader will readily dis-
cover part of the following Essay, to
be extracted from the works of the celebrated 
Hoffman, a name well known to the learned 
world.

The observations 'tis apprehended will be 
supported by the authorities[/1./]produced, the 
universal assent of all the rationalists in 
physic, and indeed we hope of every rational 
man. 

A plain and perspicuous style is what we 
have chiefly aimed at, in order to adapt the 
subject, to the comprehension of every reader; 
and we can't help wishing this method more 
frequently pursued by physical writers, that 
the medical study might be rendered more en-
tertaining and general: for we are thorough-
ly satisfyed, the art would be no sufferer 
thereby, but the imputations it is charged with, 
|P_
as an obsure, perplexing study, by this means 
banished, and itself receive new lustre, in 
proportion to its being more diffused.

The many errors so frequently committed in 
the administring of Nostrums, Universal Me-
dicines, and particularly for some time past, 
of James's powder, induced us to point out to 
the favourers of such medicines, the inconve-
niences and danger, they sometimes expose 
themselves too, by their imprudence, and cre-
dulity; in attaching themselves to this, or any 
other medicine, without proper restrictions. 

To guard therefore against such delusions, 
and to render the unphysical reader better 
qualified to decide, in an affair of so much 
importance, as his own health, and life, is 
the purport of this Essay; where by demon-
strating the influence Nature has over many 
diseases, he may the readier judge of medi-
cal assistance in general, and on what plan, 
it can best be conducted. 

Should we have set this affair in a clearer 
light, than it has yet appeared in, to the gene-
rality, our design will be sufficiently answered, 
and as truth and impartiality were our cheif 
motives, we shall as little regard censure, as 
we court applause; 

[/2./]. 

|P_
[}AN 
ESSAY
ON THE 
Power of NATURE and ART,
IN 
Curing DISEASES, &c.}]
[^Decorative frame around the letter "N".^]NOTwithstanding the indefa-
tigable labours of so many 
able men, for more than two 
thousand years past, to bring 
the art of physick to a de-
gree of perfection the other sciences have 
attained; notwithstanding the great pro-
|P_2
gress,that has been made in many branches 
of this art; and how enlightened soever we 
may have been by the improvements and 
discoveries of the last century; yet it must 
be confessed, that the cure of many dis-
eases, is not yet arrived to a degree of 
perfection; or is infallibility ever like to be 
an attribute of physick. To free a man 
from pain, and to save him from destruc-
tion, is in itself noble and god-like, nor is 
it to be wondered, that the first physi-
cians were deified, or that those, who 
have excelled in this art since, have been 
highly esteemed and honoured; for as in 
natural things, the sun is the author and 
fountain of life, so the physician who pre-
serves life, seems a second origin there-
of.[/3./] Yet happy would it be for mankind, 
if a more expeditious method of curing 
some fevers could be discovered, consi-
stent with the patients safety? What emo-
luments and applauses would that man 
deserve of his country, whose studies had 
|P_3
been so fortunate to discover a medicine, 
which had the power of checking the 
exorbitance of a fever, eluding its force, 
and entirely eradicating the latent cause? 
How happy, I say, if this could be effect-
ed without waiting the tedious course, 
nature is sometimes observed to take, in 
fitting and preparing the febrile matter for 
a separation, and expulsion from the blood, 
in order to a salutary crisis; or if even 
those assistances art has hitherto employed, 
in accelerating these crises, or rendering 
them unnecessary, could be effected 
with less danger. 

Such a pursuit and study is undoubt-
edly laudable and beneficent, and tho' 
the whole science may be too abstruse, 
and extensive, for the human mind to 
comprehend;
[/4./] though, like the philoso-
|P_4
pher's stone, and longitude, it seems at-
tended with insuperable difficulties; yet, 
when discoveries, in particular branches, 
are offered to us with modesty, candour, 
and impartiality, abstracted from merce-
nary views, or the arts of designing men;
they certainly merit our notice, and strong-
ly demand our attention: but should we 
find they want these intrinsic characters, 
these genuine marks of truth; that they 
are supported by the sophistry of the 
artful and designing, or protected by the 
bigottry of credulous and improper judges;
sure it becomes high time to unmask the 
impostors, and detect the chicanerie; espe-
cially in so important a cause as that, 
wherein our healths and lives are so prin-
cipally concerned: for as all ages have 
abounded with false pretenders, who have 
deluded the unwary, under the specious 
appearance of serving the publick, so me-
dical impositions have been more noto-
rious, and successful: nor indeed is it to 
be wondered at, that this tribe should be so 
numerous and prevalent, when such en-
couragements are given them; and when 
|P_5
we consider how few are qualified to judge 
properly, either of diseases, or remedies;
or to distinguish between the powers of 
art, and the influence of nature.

These are the chief points we shall 
endeavour to render more obvious and 
familiar, for it is neither our design, or 
intention, to enquire into the causes, which 
have retarded this wished for perfection; 
or to point out the obstacles, which by 
some are thought to have impeded the 
completion of so noble a fabrick, after so 
fair a foundation laid by our predecessors
of old: we shall therefore first observe, 
that possibly an invariable method of 
curing diseases, can never be laid down, so 
long as different temperaments of the air, 
climates, seasons, and constitutions, are so 
frequently introducing new and various 
diseases; which, tho' often in many res-
pects similar to others, which have pre-
ceeded them, yet do they differ from them 
very essentially, and of course require very 
different treatment. Without having re-
course to the authorities of such sagacious 
|P_6
writers, as Hippocrates, Sydenham, Boer-
haave, Hoffman, &c. whose accurate and 
faithful observations would be indisputa-
ble in such a point; Who is there capa-
ble of making proper remarks in practice, 
to whom this truth has not occurred? 
And who but from hence must have been 
convinced, that in the direction of medicine,
due attention must be paid to particular 
symptoms, without being slavishly attached 
to particular forms?

But as the diligent observers
[/5./] of nature's 
laws, ingenuously confess, that in many 
cases she is her own, and best physician; 
and that we often attribute effects to 
wrong causes, by charging that to the re-
medy, which is due only to her own efforts;
it may be necessary to consider how far 
nature may be said to cure diseases,un-
|P_7
assisted by art; to point out when it is in 
her power to relieve herself, and when 
without the help of art, she would destroy 
herself; and this will naturally lead us to 
the true study of the medical art.

As the word nature is variously defined, 
we desire to be understood by it, the laws 
of motion, originally implanted in the 
machine, in order to set it in action, and 
preserve it so; by this natural mechanism 
of our bodies, whatever prove injurious to 
us is often thrown off some way, or other, 
provided the course of nature be not in-
terrupted. This power of nature is so 
extraordinary in some constitutions, that 
in spite of all the blunders that are fre-
quently committed, men recover even from 
the most dangerous fevers. 

That we may the better judge of the 
nature of a disease, or fever, it may by 
some perhaps be thought no useless digressi-
on, to enquire wherein health consists, that 
by a proper definition of the term, we may 
the better understand, when it is perverted, 
|P_8
and by what means, either of nature, or 
art, it is again restored. 

The health then of every animal body 
depends on a regular, moderate, and equa-
ble circulation, of a proper condition'd 
blood, a due secretion, and execretion,
 of the juices or humours from it, and a proper 
degree of elasticity in the solids. This cir-
culation once disturbed, and these secreti-
ons once perverted, are the cause of almost 
all diseases. Thus from obstructed per-
spiration, or sweats suddenly suppressed, the 
fluids that should freely flow off through 
the pores and glands of the skin, recoil on 
the blood, increase its quantity, and pervert 
its quality: a redundancy of bile, or an 
undue secretion of it in the liver, becomes 
productive of many and various diseases, 
such as bilious cholics, jaundices, inflam-
mations of the liver, St. Anthony's fire, 
fevers, and many other disorders arising 
from its acrimony and stimulus. From 
this specimen, we may judge of the ill 
effects, which are the consequence of the 
rest; for whenever these secretions are not 
|P_9
regularly carried on, the constitution is sure 
to be injured; and these humours or juices
so amicable before, by being now de-
praved, are made capable of producing 
an infinity of disorders. 

We come now to explain, what we 
mean by nature curing diseases, and how 
or by what ways she effects this purpose 
and here among many others she takes, 
to remove an offending enemy, brought 
on frequently by a suppression of one, 
or other, of the above secretions; if the 
cause be slight, she frequently throws off 
the load of impure serum, by the glands 
of the nose and fauces, by coughs, a loose-
ness, urine, and sweats; which if untimely 
suppressed by art, are sure to bring life 
in danger, or at least foretell a future dis-
ease. But her most general method, when 
the disease is more important, is by raising 
a fever for her relief, and increasing the 
motion of the circulating fluids;
[/6./] by this 
means she removes obstructions, which 
|P_10
threaten life; by this the superfluous, 
impure, and viscid fluids, which choak up 
the vessels, are attenuated, dispersed, and 
thrown off by urine, stool, or perspiration: 
in other cases, when the vessels are too 
turgid, she often relieves their distending 
fullness, by bursting open their mouths, 
and bringing on a salutary bleeding, by 
those of the nase, uterus, and anus; and 
thus delivers berself from the oppressive 
load. 

These are some of the ways she takes to 
relieve herself in acute disorders, as fevers: 
nor is she sometimes less successful, in the 
cure of old, stubborn, and chronical dis-
eases; Asthma's of long standing have been 
cured by a St. Anthony's fire thrown out 
on the surface; epilepsies by scorbutic 
eruptions; and even melancholy and mad-
ness by the piles. However it must be 
confessed that the power of nature is not so 
often manifest in the cure of chronic, as 
acute disorders, which latter are often 
effected solely by her own means, as the 
former generally are by art.

|P_11
After having taken notice of the vari-
ous ways nature takes to relieve herself, 
and observed, that the most greivous 
diseases are sometimes happily terminated 
and cured, without medical assistance; few 
arguments can be thought necessary to 
inforce this study of nature and her laws, 
as preferable to any other; for if it is 
most certain, that nature often prevails 
over art, which should always be her 
assistant and imitator, we may justly con-
clude, that the method by which nature 
alone cures diseases should be studied, as 
worthy our imitation, and more particular 
regard. 

For whoever doth not attend to natures 
motions in relieving her, will most cer-
tainly do her great injury; which is fre-
quently the case with those, who before 
the febrile matter is moveable and dissolved, 
or prepared for separation, endeavour to ex-
pel it untimely, and by ways neither adapt-
ed to that purpose, or to which she has 
any tendency herself. Thus as Hoffman ob-
|P_12
serves * it is to be lamented, that we every 
day see unskillful physicians, trusting too 
much to their Nostrums, without having 
any regard to indications, method, or time, 
with respect to the disease, and thereby 
often bring the patient into extreme dan-
ger; but if nature be powerful enough 
to elude the force of the medicine, and 
triumph over the disease, they then ar-
rogantly boast of the importance of the 
cure, and gain both fame and rewards 
by their rashness; but such imprudent 
men are not to be trusted, for sure it is 
not the least part of the physicians art, to 
know the course, genius, and salutary 
ways of nature, that he may not disturb 
her operations, or assist her improperly. 

But notwithstanding this power of na-
ture in curing diseases, 'tis evident there 
are many, where she wants assistance, and 
would often destroy herself without timely 
relief, by the very means she endeavours 
for her preservation; the symptoms brought
[/7./]
|P_13
on by her own efforts, being often more 
dangerous than the disease itself; so that in 
many diseases, a great part of the physicians 
work, is to appease her fury, and correct 
her errors; for being sometimes transported 
as it were, with a blind and impetuous 
passion, she unseasonable produces those 
dangerous, disorders in the body, that 
demand the succour of art. Thus to what 
salutary purpose are those violent spasms 
which arise from some poisons taken inter-
nally, but to retain the enemy, she wants 
to expell? Of what use to her, are those 
various convulsions, which arise from fla-
tulencies and worms in the bowels? To 
what purpose those direful pains, those 
vehement, and acute fevers, which arise 
from the slightest injury, or puncture of 
nerve, or tendon? Certainly these enor-
mous commotions are worse than the 
cause, for whose sake according the Hel-
montians, they were by provident nature 
appointed for her relief; for unless art 
soon runs to her assistance, they will most 
inevitably bring her into great danger, if 
not destroy her. What succour can nature 
|P_14
bring to fixed inflammations of the head, 
lungs, uterus, &c. without the help of art. 
The venereal lues was never cured by 
nature. The dry and bilious cholic, with 
some others, require the immediate assist-
ance of art: inveterate schrophulous, scor-
butic, and leprous disorders, nature never 
removed. The gout, epilepsy, madness, 
dropsies, gravel and stone, worms, and 
many other disorders that might be enu-
merated, tho' all of them are strong proofs 
of the little power nature has over them, 
yet many of them are known to be cured by 
the efficacy of medicine, and all of them 
have been alleviated thereby. In short with 
Mr. Boyle,[/8./] we may look on a good phy-
sician, not properly as a servant to nature, 
but a counsellor, and a friendly assistant; 
who in his patients body furthers those 
motions, and other things, that he judges 
conducive to the welfare and recovery of 
it; but as to those he perceives likely to 
be hurtful, either by encreasing the disease, 
|P_15
or otherwise endangering the patient, he 
thinks it is his part to oppose or hinder, 
tho' nature manifestly seems to endeavour 
to increase, or carry on those hurtful mo-
tions. Thus many of the miseries, to 
which human nature is subject, may be 
relieved by proper assistances, and with 
Asclepiades we may say, naturam et prodesse 
& nocere.

It may be necessary to observe here, 
that tho' art is chiefly instrumental in 
the cure of chronical diseases, yet it is 
under the auspices of nature, and effected 
by a proper imitation of her ways. What 
else is meant by giving warm, stimulating, 
pungent, and volatile medicines, with steel 
and mineral waters, but to encrease the 
motion of the circulating fluids, and pro-
mote a certain degree of fever. Are not 
the cures of some rheumatisms, palsys, and 
many other disorders, accomplished by 
these means; by attenuating and melting 
down the viscid fluids, and opening their 
obstructed channels by this accelerated 
motion. Thus as a certain degree of fever
|P_16
is necessary to remove acute, so also chroni-
cal disorders; and as a late writer has ob-
served, could a physician certainly raise a 
fever, and keep it to what height he pleased, 
many chronic disorders might be thus 
cured; but tho' this cannot be effected by 
art, yet nature may be imitated by direct-
ing the above medicines, which by ex-
perience have been found successful for 
this purpose, so that in many cases, it may 
be said, the fever is not the disease, but 
the remedy, et dolor, est medicina doloris.

From hence then we learn, that though 
nature often cures diseases, yet she often 
stands in need of medical help; tho' it is 
more evidently observed in chronic, than 
acute cases; for we speak not of those 
which come under the surgeon's cognisance, 
where she must often be destroyed, with-
out immediate manual assistance. 

Nor is it the least part of the physicians 
skill to know when to give it, and to di-
stingush between the force of nature and 
art, between the effects and bounds of me-
|P_17
dicine. Happy is he then, who has made 
nature his study, who knows when to re-
strain her exorbitant, and when to rouse 
her languid motions; who foresees when 
to give her timely succour, and can di-
stinguish when he does her most service, by 
attempting to do least for her; for 'tis a 
grand mistake to conclude that natureal-
ways wants the assistance of art, it being 
the best remedy sometimes to use none at all
But according to Lord Bacon, men com-
monly take a view of nature, as from a 
remote eminence; and are too much a-
mused with generalities: whereas if they 
would descend and approach nearer to par-
ticulars, and more exactly and considerate-
ly examines into things themselves, they 
might make more solid and useful disco-
veries. No doubt therefore, if physicians, 
leaving generalities for a while, would 
advance towards nature; they might be 
able to vary their art as distempers vary.
[/9./]

|P_18
This knowledge however can only be 
attained by experience, and sedulous obser-
vation, and a perfect acquaintance with 
those indefatigable guides, who studied 
nature carefully, and have left us the fruits 
of those studies on record: to this end 
also a man should be well acquainted with 
natural philosophy, the materia medica, 
and the animal oeconomy; have a genius, 
and penetrating sagacity, to be able to di-
stinguish the true causes of disease, from 
effects; the certain powers of medicine, 
with the bounds of nature and art;for 
there are in physick, as in the natural and 
moral world, general laws, universal pro-
positions, and a perpetual analogy, between 
art and nature, that runs through the 
whole science for that purpose. 

Let us therefore, says the great Pitcairn,
[/10./]
if we are inclined to deserve well of the re-
publick of physick, that is, of all mankind, 
follow this excellent rule; for it is our duty 
to compare the observations that have been 
made by others, and continue to be made 
|P_19
every where, upon diseases and their re-
medies, without any regard to opinions: 
which are nothing in comparison to the 
certain conviction of our senses. 

But how few, as Dr. Friend, has taken 
notice, are qualified to make judicious 
observations on their experience?[/11./] For the 
word is often made use of, when the effects 
do not plainly appear. He farther observes, 
that a man may practice and practice all the 
days of his life, and yet be never the wiser 
for his experience, if he neglects to make 
the proper observations, which that expe-
rience might suggest to him; and it is not 
very likely, he should be over nice in his 
observations, who constantly goes on in his 
first tract, and has no other scheme, but 
his own narrow notions in his view: 
whereas the searcher of authors, has the 
benefit of other men's experience, together 
with his own, and it is from the joint con-
currence, that we can hope for any con-
siderable advancements of knowledge. 
|P_20
Were it not for this, the oldest physician 
would always be the best physician; and 
there would be little or no difference, even 
as to the scientific part, between an old 
nurse, and the most regular professor. 

Thus is it plain that practice alone will 
not teach a man the art;[/12./] for there are not 
wanting instances of practitioners, who are 
grown old in business, but for want of being 
early instructed in the principles of the art, 
are almost as absolute strangers to it, as 
they were at first setting out. The practice 
of these men has always been, empirical 
and by receipts, and as their minds have 
never been sufficiently enlightened with 
true science, to pursue it properly; so they 
catch at every new medicine, like drown-
ing men at every twig, in hopes of sup-
porting a little longer a sinking reputation. 
Such is the fluctuating state of the mind, 
unless a man is thoroughly grounded in the 
rudiments of his art; for like one perplexed 
in a labyrinth, unless the right path is 
|P_21
pursued, he is continually erring and mis-
taking his way; treading again and again 
in the same tract, till he is tired; yet is he 
often deceived in the mazey round, and 
frequently flatters himself, with the pursuit 
of the true path. 

This naturally leads us to enquire into 
the force, and power, of some favourite 
medicines, which are given in acute fevers;
and are supposed now and then, to work 
such speedy recoveries; when the cure in 
general, rather depends upon a dueregula-
tion in diet, and proper regimen in other 
respects, than any peculiar medicine: but 
our fondness to such remedies, generally 
rises in proportion to our credulity, igno-
rance, or prejudices; for rather than attri-
bute any good change in the distemper, to 
the power of such regimen; it flatters the 
vanity of some, to ascribe it to a medicine 
of his own prescribing, tho' ever so insig-
nificant. How often have the most simple 
things, luckily timed at the crisis of a 
fever, been applauded for effects, they had 
no pretensions to; for nature who often 
|P_22
triumphs over slight obstacles, little cares 
to whom the honour is attributed, so that 
she herself comes off victorious. This 
might be abundantly exemplified in a great 
variety of instances, to the conviction of 
the most sanguine bigot: and indeed im-
partial, and competent judges, will readily 
confess, that nothing is more difficult to 
ascertain, than the true virtue of medicines: 
for their effects in general rather take their 
force, from the judgment of the physician, 
in their just application, than from any 
constant and inherent virtue of their own. 
The learned Dr. Friend[/13./] hath curiously 
observed, and shewn, that the different 
operation of remedies, arises not from any 
change of virtue in the medicament, which 
continues always the same; but from the 
different state of the body, wherein it is 
applied. 

Thus the bark taken in the fever fit, 
shall often purge, between it, bind; Opium
instead of controuling watchings, shall fre-
|P_23
quently increase them; Aloes whose pro-
perty is to purge, shall in some cases, tho' 
given for that purpose, not operate at all; 
while restringents, shall in other con-
stitutions occasion purging. Steel, Antimony, 
Mercury, &c. might be brought to eluci-
date this truth; and prove their different 
effects on different constitutions; as well as 
when they are injudiciously directed. 

But as it may be necessary, to set this 
affair in a clearer light, to prevent being 
misunderstood; and to shew, when nature
can do without art, and where the latter 
is requisite; I must beg leave to explain 
myself a little farther, on both these 
heads. Who then, ever so slightly acquaint-
ed with acute disorders, but must have ob-
served, that fevers in their infancy, are 
frequently and easily removed, by very 
simple means; or rather that the Fever, 
which is nature's instrument, assisted by di-
lution with small liquors, and abstinence 
from animal diet, seldom wants any other 
helps; but where bleeding and gentle eva-
cuations are joined to these, the end is gene-
rally accomplished in a few days; for by 
|P_24
this; method, the fluids are diluted, the se-
cretions renewed, and the fullness of the 
vessels abated: and to speak ingenuously, 
'tis extremely probable, that fasting, and 
abstemiousness, would cure many, and 
prevent most distempers; had men resolu-
tion enough to pursue it for a sufficient 
length of time, under proper regulations. 

But when this method has been neglect-
ed, and repeated colds, or acts of intempe-
rance, are urged on one another; aggrava-
ted by a heating regimen, or hottermedi-
cines; we must not wonder at the difficul-
ties that often attend the removal of such a 
fever; for the blood and other juices, are 
now become too viscid or sizey, to circu-
late in the finer vessels; hence frequently 
from such obstructions, arise inflammati-
ons in particular parts; which if not soon 
removed by art, terminate in matter, or 
fatal gangrenes. In other fevers, the blood 
is in the reverse state, being too rare, thin, 
and acrimonious; tending to dissolution, 
and putrefaction; which by the rapidity of 
the circulation, is frequently forced thro' 
|P_25
the extremities of the small arteries, and 
are the cause of malignant eruptions, and 
violent bleedings. Here indeed it is high 
time for art to interpose, for nature is no 
longer her own assistant, but will soon de-
stroy herself, without timely succour: 
under these different circumstances, the 
skillful physician has sufficient opportuni-
ties, of distinguishing his prudence, and 
abilities, for the storm is now raised, the 
pungent pains are become insupportable; 
the disturbed functions of the mind, call 
aloud to be be-calm'd, that reason may re-
assume her throne; now is the time to 
assist her effectually, either by curbing her 
inordinate transports, or succouring her 
languishing struggles: Here the cautious 
prescriber, will guard well against either 
extream, least by an injudi cious applica-
tion, he may aggravate the cause, by adding 
fuel to a fire which burns but too intensily 
already, or check that vital flame, that is 
but too nigh extinguished. Here he who 
has carefully studied the laws of nature
and observed the ways she sometimes takes 
to relieve herself, will be best able, to give 
|P_26
her that assistance, she now so much wants; 
while he, who is only acquainted with her 
in speculation, will stand amazed, and 
affrighted at symptoms he never suspected, 
and impotently attack the disease, on the 
strength of some favourite hypothesis, or 
some darling Nostrum. 

From this portrait, or description of two 
different kinds of fevers only, one may rea-
sonable inquire how far any one method, 
or medicine, is like to answer both inten-
tions; but before we venture to mention 
our own thoughts on this head, let us take 
the opinion of the immortal Sydenham,
that candid, and judicious observer; who 
says,[/14./] there are various kinds of fevers, 
most of which require their peculiar method
of cure, different from the rest; and that 
the same individual fever, of whatever kind 
it be, requires one treatment at the first, 
and another somewhat different, through 
all its stages, as long as it continues. Many 
other similar passages might be extracted 
|P_27
from this great man's works. Let us hear 
also the experienced Baglivi, who says,[/15./] a 
great many have such an affection to some 
one remedy, that they think it alone in-
titled to a sovereign virtue, and power, of 
curing almost all diseases; either by reason 
of a lucky event, observed now and then 
to ensue the use of it, or rather by a 
certain innate propensity that they have, 
not only of crying up some medicines, but 
ascribing to them fictitious virtues: but I 
must observe by the bye, says he, that no 
physician can cure a fever happily, with-
out he informs himself of the febrile state 
of the blood; whether it is too rapid, 
thin, or inflammable, &c. or on the other 
hand, apt to congeal, thick, malignant, 
&c. For in such different states of the 
blood, the indications of cure must be 
diversifyed accordingly. The honourable 
Mr. Boyle in his treatise on the usefull-
ness of philosophy, observes, that it is 
much more difficult, than men can imagine, 
to make an accurate experiment in physic, 
|P_28
for often the same disease proceeding, in 
several persons, from quite different causes, 
will be increased in one, by the same re-
medy, which has cured it in an other 
and not only the constitutions of patients, 
may as much alter the effects as the causes of 
diseases; but even in the same patient, and 
in the same disease, the single circum-
stance of time, may have almost as great 
an operation upon the success of the medi-
cine, as either of the two former particu-
lars. The learned Friend[/16./] on this occa-
sion also observes, that a man who has the 
least acquaintance with physic, must be 
sensible, that a universal medicine must 
be a cheat; and though it be ever so good 
and valuable a medicine itself, yet it is 
utterly impossible it can be equally appli-
cable to all persons, in all cases, and at 
all junctures; and therefore it must be de-
termined by the skill of some discerning 
physician, who is well apprised of the na-
ture and symptoms of the disease, where
[/17./]
|P_29
to give it, and where to forbear. We 
need not go far for a proof of this: we 
have a convincing one in that great, and 
perhaps the only specifick, the bark: which 
if used indifferently, and without judge-
ment, even in intermitting cases, has a 
chance to do as much hurt as good. But 
I forbear making further quotations, from 
other writers of equal eminence, that the 
reader, may not be tired. 

If these things be true, if such autho-
rities are to be relied on, how absurd is it, 
to suppose any medicine can be possess'd of 
the unerring faculty, of removing all 
fevers; and yet this opinion, however 
dissonant to reason, and common sense it 
may be, appears to have it's abettors; and 
I am sorry to say it, among some few too, 
who call themselves physician; contrary 
indeed to the ingenuous declaration of the 
learned publisher of this remedy, who in 
the following passages in his dissertation on 
fevers, as well as in his daily practice,
manifestly disavows such a general power 
in his preparation. I am obliged says 
|P_30
he,[/18./] to own, that as I esteemed life too 
sacred to be hazarded, for the sake of an 
experiment, I have never neglected to call 
in all other medicinal aids, to my assistance, 
when I thought the case required them, 
and believed that they would be of service. 
Again[/19./] as I would be extreamly cautious 
of leading any one into error, in an affair 
of so much importance, as is that of life, 
I must remark, that when violent inflam-
mations of the vital parts threaten imme-
diate destruction, I should think it impru-
dent to neglect repeated bleedings, purges, 
clysters, and all other assistances, which the 
art of medicine can afford. 

After such plain and candid concessions, 
one would think it was impossible, that 
any but stupid bigots, or superstitious old 
women, unacquainted with such auxilia-
ries, would solely depend upon this reme-
dy, and in the most desperate cases. Does 
it not hence evidently appear that Dr. 
|P_31
James himself does not? Do not some of 
his cases prove it, where we find Bleeding, 
Nitre, Musk, stimulating Cataplasms, 
Blisters, and Purges, directed as associates 
with the medicine.[/20./]

And who, among such a group of auxi-
laries, can pretend to say, what share of 
merit, becomes due to the powder? The 
Dr. himself ingenuously confesses, he some-
times could not determine how far it was 
instrumental in the cure;[/21./] nor indeed how 
should he. 

How absurd then must it appear to 
every impartial man, who reflects cooly, 
that a medicine, which it is acknowledged 
may demand all these occasional assistances,
should without restrictions, be thus rashly
and universally recommended by some in all 
fevers; for whatever limitations may be 
hinted at in the treatise, can it be sup-
posed, that those unacquainted with the 
|P_32
science of physic, can distinguish, from 
the rules there laid down, when to employ 
these auxilaries? Neither can Dr. James,
always be at hand to, direct them, and who 
less acquainted with that medicine, would 
risk their reputations, by being concerned 
with it, on such important occasions, 
where lives are at stake; much less can it 
be possible, that the promiscuous admini-
stration of this remedy, to diseases of such 
general Names, as are mentioned in the 
advertisement, can be successful; when the 
conditions of these diseases, do so perpetu-
ally vary. 

But if the operation, and effects of this 
medicine are to be rationally, and not empi-
rically accounted for; if it is to be ex-
amined by the same tests, that all others 
are; we shall find, that like them, it must 
be directed, and given with prudence, and 
skill, to render it efficacious, and prevent 
it's being injurious. For example if it has 
been found successful in thinning and at-
tenuating the viscid, sizy blood and fluids, 
is it not likely to be prejudicial in cases, 
|P_33
where the fluids are already too thin
and rare? If it has been found useful, in in-
creasing the secretions of the glands of 
the skin, intestines, and kidneys, by pro-
moting stools, urine, and sweats, may it 
not be injurious, in those cases, where these 
secretions are but too liberal already? That 
this is evidently the case in some colli-
quative fevers, appears by the broken tex-
ture of the blood; where the particles 
being too much dissolved, are daily ex-
hausting the patient, by running off too 
fast, through the pores, by melting sweats, 
or the bowels by watery stools. 

How preposterous, how inconsistent then 
must be the practice of those, who give it 
thus indiscriminately; and who thus wan-
tonly trifle with lives, they are intrusted 
with? But surely the folly of such pro-
ceedure can want no illustration. Could a 
man also without horror reflect, on being 
accessory to the untimely death of a friend, 
or neighbour, by the vomiting power of 
an antimonial medicine, given without 
previous, or proper bleedings, in inflamma-
|P_34
tionsof the lungs, or brain, trusting to 
this medicine solely, in such important
diseases, contrary to the express rules of 
Dr. James? This though a real prostitu-
tion of it, yet has been done, and by 
the direction of some, who ought to 
know better; for can the most sanguine 
abettors of this medicine, pretend to pre-
vent this operation, as it is one of its gene-
ral effects,[/22./] the continuance of which may 
depend on the juices it accidentally meets 
with in the stomach? Under such threat-
ning cicumstances, with violent pains in 
the head, or sides, attended with the ut-
most difficulty in breathing; what a truly 
piteous situation, must be that of the un-
fortunate patient, under the vomiting 
power of this medicine? How must the 
acute, pungent pangs, be thereby aggra-
vated? The turgid and distended vessels 
stretched, even to bursting? Or at least such 
a quantity of fluids may thereby be derived 
|P_35
on parts, already but too much loaded, 
so as to fix immoveable obstructions, and 
occasion fatal gangrenes. These are warn-
ings that should be given by somebody, as 
they are not the result of imaginary specula-
tions, but are real facts, which have occurred; 
and though the farmers loss may not be 
greatly increased, by the additional expence, 
attending the purchase of[/23./] the medicine, 
for his cows and oxen; yet his family may 
sustain an irreparable one, by an untimely 
and injudicious taking of it himself. 

But if such be the barrenness of the ma-
teria medica. or the incapacity of the phy-
sician, in drawing his indications of cure, 
that this must be the popular, and fashion-
able remedy; let us at least have the wisdom
and honesty, to treat it, as we do other 
medicines; for by these means only, can 
it obtain a just reputation: let us then con-
fine it within its proper sphere of action 
and give it in such cases only, as it appears, 
calculated for; which from our observa-
tions, seems chiefly to be in the beginning of 
|P_36
slight fevers, which arise from indigestions, 
or taking cold; for by its stimulus on the 
stomach and bowels, those organs may be 
thus cleansed of their indigested particles, 
their, feculencys thereby removed, and the 
sweats it generally procures, assisted by 
plentiful dilution, may set open the secre-
tions; and thus by removing the surcharge 
early, nature is left at more liberty to re-
cover cover herself. Should it on fair trials be 
found to suit other indications, let it be 
given with discretion; but if our views are 
not answered soon, let us not, Sangrado
like, obstinately persevere as some do, to 
the patients destruction; that we may a-
void the just reproaches of an injured family, 
who may be made sufferers by our wanton-
ness, and imprudence; and prevent those 
bitter reflections, that will recoil onour own 
minds, by being thus accessory to them. 

Medicines of this kind, as generally gi-
ven, tis true may save some the trouble 
of thinking, and searching for indications; 
which every prudent man thinks absolutely 
necessary, before, he prescribes; but this 
compendious method cancels all tyes, or 
|P_37
duty of this kind; abjures this slavish at-
tachment to the study of nature, and her 
laws, as delusive, and desultory; reduces 
the science of physic to a narrower com-
pass, and instead of leading, or kindly 
assisting nature, forces her to be obedient, 
and follow the ways they choose to pre-
scribe her. Such implements however in 
physic, are like edge tools in the hands 
of children, or weapons of destruction 
in those of madmen; the simplicity of the one, 
converting them to their own prejudice, 
and the insanity of the other, to the de-
struction of those about them: and this 
observation we apprehend will always hold 
true, that this or any other valuable medi-
cine, can only be of real service, when di-
rected with judgment; and that it is the 
judicious timeing, and adapting the medicine,
to the disease, that makes it either a bene-
ficialremedy, or a destructive poison.

We desire it may particularly be re-
marked, that the violent sweats extorted 
by sudorisic medicines in fevers, but too 
often aggravate the disorder, though they 
|P_38
seemingly give present relief;[/24./] for unless 
this evacuation be critical, i. e. by carrying 
off the cause of the fever, the blood is there-
by defrauded of its thinner, and finer parts, 
and the remainder left so thickened, that 
'tis rendered unfit for circulation in 
the finer vessels, and often occasions ob-
structions, that terminate fatally. This 
has remarkably been observed to be the case 
with this medicine, where after having 
caused profuse sweats, for several days, the 
blood on examination for that purpose, so 
far from being attenuated by the medicine, 
(as is the property generally ascribed to it) 
hath on the contrary, been found more 
tenacious, and sizey; and so unfit for circu-
lation, as to occasion constant watchings, 
delirium, &c. which in some cases subsisted 
till blisters, and more powerful attenuants 
removed those symptoms; in others till 
death put an end to them. 

|P_39
Nor is it less necessary, to guard against 
the promiscuous use of this powder, in 
eruptive fevers, particularly those called 
miliary; as it is evident to the observing
practitioner, that the eruptions once re-
pelled, the patient is thereby often brought 
into the most eminent danger of his life: 
and if this has often been found to be the 
case, by a few slight stools, what conse-
quences may we not apprehend from 
a medicine, whose known effect is acknowledg-
ed, sometimes to purge pretty briskly.[/25./]

As Dr. James seems so sinngular in his no-
tions concerning miliary fevers, and suspects 
them to be entirely the children of art[/26./]
as he has so ludicrously treated this im-
portant subject, which has been so accurate-
ly described by Sir David Hamilton, 
Hoffman, Mead, &c. and probably too so 
far, as to lead some of his pupils into 
fatal errors; I thought it the more incum-
|P_40
bent on me, to give this caution; and the 
more particularly, as in his paper instruc-
tions, he recommends this powder 
for miliary fevers, and all others of the erup-
tive kind; and says that there is no reason 
to fear a moderate number of stools, at the 
latter end of a fever, or at any other 
time.[/27./] The latter part of this paragraph, 
is surely too bold an assertion, especially if 
relative to this fever; where a very mode-
rate number of stools, has frequently pre-
cipitated the patients fate, by the sudden 
repulsion of the eruptions. 

From what then has been advanced in 
relation to the powers of nature and art;
in regard to the use of medicine in general,
and this powder in particular; we may ob-
serve that in many acute disorders, or 
fevers, nature is often her own, and best 
physician; that the assistances from art 
should in general be cautiously directed; al-
ways drawn, from such indications, as the 
symptoms point out, and must be varied 
|P_41
in proportion to the nature of the disease: 
That no one medicine, can ever answer 
so many different purposes; more especi-
ally one whose operations are so precarious;
and which we are convinced from the pro-
cess of, (which is no secret to the world) 
that tho' it may be useful in some cases, 
it must be prejudicial in others; that a pro-
miscuous, unlimited power of giving it, 
according to some, has to our knowledge, 
been productive of many, and great mis-
carriages: How often has nature been di-
sturbed, and a favourable crisis prevented 
by this, and other ill-timed medicines? 
And how easily distempers slight in them-
selves, are often converted into important 
ones, by untimely and injudiciousapplica-
tions, is well known to the careful observer. 
Cases of this kind have occured where 
nature tho' feeble, and oppressed, yet labour-
ing hard to relieve herself, and depurate 
the blood by critical swellings, has been 
most preposterously teized and thwarted 
with the stools, and sweats, incited by this 
medicine, till she had nigh sunk under the 
|P_42
oppression; yet has she at last happily e-
merged, and accomplished her designs, 
after having obtained a truce with it for a 
few days. So true is that observation of 
Dr. James*[/28./] that some few are so happy in 
an unextinguishable strength of constituti-
on, that they even at last miraculously re-
cover, notwithstanding the most absurd 
treatment. In colliquative cases, where 
the secretions were too liberal, it has sunk 
many untimely; and in fevers of several 
days standing, where the vessels are too tur-
gid, the pulse vehement, the blood so gluey 
and viscid, that it cannot freely pass the 
finer vessels, or so fused, and broken, that it 
threatens to escape them; when inflam-
mations are also fixed on the nobler parts, 
foreboding inevitable destruction without 
speedy relief; surely on such emergencies, 
it would be madness indeed to trust to this, 
or any one medicine, without calling in 
every other help, that reason, and expe-
rience dictate on such occasions; and this 
we are justified in asserting, not from the 
|P_43
reason of the thing only, but from the 
authority likewise of Dr. James himself, in 
the places above cited. 

I cannot conclude without taking notice, 
of a ridiculous insinuation, advanced by 
some, as a reason, why the gentlemen of 
the faculty do not patronize this medicine; 
which is, that it would be destructive of 
their private interests, by making such 
speedy cures. But this objection, the trite, 
and stale artifice of every empirick to re-
commend his Nostrum, is as mean, and 
contemptible, as it is false; 'tis an artful 
lure, thrown out only as a decoy for the 
publick, that they may the more readily 
become their dupes. 

For are not the physicians of this nation 
in general, and of London in particular, 
men of liberal educations, whose learning, 
and abilities are equal to any in Europe?
Are not many of them, as conspicuous for 
their humanity, benevolence, and tender-
ness, as they are for their independant 
fortunes? What could induce such men, 
|P_44
to procrastinate the cures of those commit-
ed to their charge, but a certain conviction 
of the inefficacy, and incertitude, of general 
medicines? Is it not then base, and infamous, 
to insinuate, that these men would sacri-
fice all considerations of honour, justice,
and compassion, merely to oppose such a 
universal medicine? Is it not notorious, 
that many of them in their private practice, 
as well as by repeated trials in our hospi-
tals, have found it was by no means to 
be relied on? or can it deserve credit from 
any sensible, and unprejudiced minds, that 
those few practitioners who do espouse 
this medicine, have alone monopolized the 
amiable qualities of truth, disinterestedness, 
and common honesty? Surely it would be 
more ingenuous, and candid, to conclude, 
that nothing but this certain conviction of 
the incertitude, and inefficacy, of general me-
dicines, and of this in particular, (whose 
virtues like all others, can only arise, by 
being rationally adapted to particular cir-
cumstances, and states of diseases) could be 
the true and only cause of leading physici-
ans, to forbear its general use; whatever 
|P_45
bold assertions, ignorant, and designing men may advance to the contrary. 

These are some of the observations, that 
have occured, and 'tis to be apprehended 
will have some weight with the impartial: 
for if neither honour, conscience, humanity,
and independance, can be thought to have 
any influence over the conduct, of such pro-
fessors of physic; we must be under a ne-
cessity of condemning, a body of men, as 
monsters in nature, who have hitherto 
been esteemed real ornaments to their 
country, and respectable, as well as useful
members of society. 

|P_
[}POSTCRIPT. }]
IN order to form a more general, and 
comprehensive idea of this Powder, we
have thought proper to insert here, its 
various, and common operations, in those 
cases Dr. James himself has published, in 
his dissertation on fevers. In his paper 
instructions, he remarks, that it is found 
sometimes to operate pretty briskly, by way 
of vomiting and purging, as indeed several 
of his cases prove; so that the judicious 
reader may hence observe, as well as from 
the uncertainty of its operation; that it 
ought to be given with great caution, and 
circumspection: for though some few 
constitutions, may be able to support these
operations without injury, while the body 
is strong, and vigorous; yet under many 
circumstances, which we have pointed 
out, as well as when the patient is reduced
|P_47
by the disease; how far profuse sweats
continued for four and twenty hours, and 
renewed; with brisk, and frequent vomit-
ing, and purging, may suit such, and 
every other indication, is submitted to the 
decision of competent and impartial judges. 

[}The various EFFECTS of the POWDER 
according to Dr. JAMES. }]
Page 9. Dissertation on fevers. Mrs. M.
on taking one paper, sweated profusely
six hours; on repeating the same, the 
two subsequent nights, it operated in 
the same manner. 

10. Mr. W. had a nausea, and inclination 
to vomit, with some gentle pukes, and 
several purging stools, and beside this, a 
pretty plentiful sweat. 

12. Mr. H. sweat very moderately, and 
had three purging stools. 

13. Mr. C. had a gentle sweat and no 
stools. 

14. Mr. J. B. had profuse sweats for four 
hours, purged considerably.

|P_48
14. Mr. W. B. sweat pretty much, and 
purged three times. 

15. Mrs: B. sweat a good deal, and purged 
three or four times. 

17. Miss S. vomited once, purged five 
times, sweat a little, the next day another 
dose vomited three or four time,purg-
edfour, or five, and sweat a little. 

18. Mr. D. had several pukes, a profuse
sweat of many hours continuance. 

19. Mr. E. puked gently twice, and had 
three stools. 

20. Mrs. E. a copious sweat. 

21. Mrs. F. vomited several times, purged 
frequently and sweated profusely.

21. Mrs. E. F. operated nearly in the 
same manner. 

22. Mrs. S. took six doses, and had no per-
ceiveable operation.

23. Mrs D. had at first no visible opera-
tion, afterwards purged gently. 

24. Mr. J. D. brought on a great sweat, 
purged twice. 

25. Mr. P. vomited three or four times, 
and sweated pretty much, for four, or 
five hours. 

|P_49
26 Mr. H. vomited several times, purged 
very often, and sweat plentifully. 

26. Mr. N. had three stools, sweat plen-
tifully about three hours. 

27. Mr. H. vomited three or four times, 
purged several times, and sweat plenti-
fully for about twenty-four hours. 

28. Mr. L. vomited two or three times, 
and purged often.

29. Mrs. B. made very sick, vomited pretty 
much, purged three or four times, sweat 
all night. 

30. Mr. J. B. puked once, sweat profusely. 

31. Mr. S. vomited gently four or five
times, purged several times.

33. Miss. E. had no sensible operation with 
three doses; was bled, had a blister put 
on her head, cataplasms to her feet, 
a clyster, and Glauber salts, which purged 
twice. 

38. Mr. D. had a copious sweat, for four-
teen hours; and three stools. 

Thus we may observe, that in eight 
cases, the powder both vomited, purged, and 
sweat; and these generally profuse sweats; 
|P_50
pretty smart, considerable, and frequentpurg-
ings, and vomiting several times.

In seven cases, it operated by sweats,
and purging; sometimes moderately, but in 
general profusely, and considerably both ways. 

In three, it vomited and sweated; and in 
three more, it sweat only. Three also it 
vomited and purged, in one moderately, in 
the others, it vomited three or four times, 
and purged several; in one case it purged 
only, and in two had no operation at all. 

So that out of twenty seven cases, it 
operated by stool in nineteen, and in ten 
of them smartly, and considerably.

These are the general effects and opera-
tions which followed the taking this medi-
cine, with sometimes a copious sediment 
in the urine; and may we not from hence 
fairly conclude, that in those cases, where 
vomiting, purging, and sweating are per-
nicious, (and many such there are) that the 
use of this powder should be suspended? 
When the constitution also is lowered, or 
|P_51
greatly reduced by the disease, may not the 
evacuations above mentioned, especially 
when profuse, smart, and frequent, in many 
cases, precipitate the patient's fate? But if 
the indication be to sweat, purge, or vomit
singly, can we ever be sure of answering any 
one of these intentions alone, without pro-
moting others, we do not want, and which 
may prove of dangerous consequence? Such 
seems to be the uncertainty of this medicine. 

When given in small quantities, it possibly 
may be less hazardous, though perhaps less 
efficacious, as some operation seems always 
expected from it. But as Dr. James has 
not yet thought proper, to furnish us with 
cases of this sort, we shall for the present 
decline any further animadversions: nor in-
deed should we have troubled the public 
with these, had we not thought they were 
become absolutely necessary, both for the 
reputation of the medicine, as well as for 
the patient's safety. 

FINIS. 

|P_
[}ERRATA. }]
PAGE 18. L. 17. for runs, read run.

P. 25. l. 2. for are, read is.

P. 32. l. 5. for that, read the.

P. 8. l. 6. for execretions read excretions.

P. 13. l. 20. read according to the

P. 29. l. 17. after abettors, add, in regard to James's powder.
