

[^Sample 1: book - ^]

|P_31
[}CHAPTER I. }]
[}Of the most usual Causes of popular Maladies. }]
[}SECT. I. }]
THE most frequent Causes of Diseases 
commonly incident to Country 
People are, 1. Excessive Labour, 
continued for a very considerable 
Time. Sometimes they sink down 
at once in a State of Exhaustion and Faintness, 
from which they seldom recover: but they are 
oftener attacked with some inflammatory Disease, 
as a Quinsey, a Pleurisy, or an Inflammation of 
the Breast. 

There are two Methods of preventing these 
Evils: one is, to avoid the Cause which pro- 
|P_32
duces them; but this is frequently impossible. 
Another is, when such excessive Labour has been 
unavoidable, to allay their Fatigue, by a free 
Use of some temperate refreshing Drink; espe- 
cially by sweet Whey, by Butter-milk, or by 
[/1./]
Water, to a Quart of which a Wine-glass of 
Vinegar may be added; or, instead of that, the 
expressed Juice of Grapes not fully ripe, or even 
of Goosberries or Cherries: which wholesome 
and agreeable Liquors are refreshing and cordial. 
I shall treat, a little lower, of inflammatory Dis- 
orders. The Inanition or Emptiness, though ac- 
companied with Symptoms different from the 
former, have yet some Affinity to them with 
Respect to their Cause, which is a kind of gene- 
ral Exsiccation or Dryness. I have known some 
cured from this Cause by Whey, succeeded by 
tepid Baths, and afterwards by Cow's Milk: for 
in such Cases hot Medicines and high Nourish- 
ment are fatal. 

[}§ 2. }]
There is another Kind of Exhaustion or 
Emptiness, which may be termed real Empti- 
|P_33
ness, and is the Consequence of great Poverty, 
the Want of sufficient Nourishment, bad Food, 
unwholesome Drink, and excessive Labour. In 
Cases thus circumstanced, good Soups and a little 
Wine are very proper. Such happen however 
very seldom in this Country: I believe they are 
frequent in some others, especially in many Pro- 
vinces of France. 

[}§ 3. }]
A second and very common Source of 
Disorders arises, from Peoples' lying down and 
reposing, when very hot, in a cold Place. This 
at once stops Perspiration, the Matter of which 
being thrown upon some internal Part, proves 
the Cause of many violent Diseases, particularly 
of Quinseys, Inflammations of the Breast, Pleu- 
risies, and inflammatory Cholics. These Evils, 
from this Cause, may always be avoided by avoid- 
ing the Cause, which is one of those that destroy 
a great Number of People. However, when it 
has occurred, as soon as the first Symptoms of 
the Malady are perceiveable, which sometimes 
does not happen till several Days after, the Pati- 
ent should immediately be bled; his Legs should 
be put into Water moderately hot, and he should 
drink plentifully of the tepid Infusion marked 
No. 1. Such Assistances frequently prevent the 
Increase of these Disorders; which, on the con- 
trary, are greatly aggravated, if hot Medicines are 
given to sweat the Patient. 

[}§ 4. }]A third Cause is drinking cold Water, 
when a Person is extremely hot. This acts in 
the same Manner with the second; but its Con- 
|P_34
sequences are commonly more sudden and vio- 
lent. I have seen most terrible Examples of it, 
in Quinseys, Inflammations of the Breast, Cholics, 
Inflammations of the Liver, and all the Parts of 
the Belly, with prodigious Swellings, Vomitings, 
Suppressions of Urine, and inexpressible Anguish. 
The most available Remedies in such Cases, from 
this Cause, are, a plentiful Bleeding at the Onset, 
a very copious Drinking of warm Water, to 
which one fifth Part of Whey should be added; 
or of the Ptisan No. 2, or of an Emulsion of 
Almonds, all taken warm. Fomentations of 
warm Water should also be applied to the Throat, 
the Breast and Belly, with Glysters of the same, 
and a little Milk. In this Case, as well as in the 
preceding one, (§ 3.) a Semicupium, or Half- 
bath of warm Water has sometimes been attend- 
ed with immediate Relief. It seems really asto- 
nishing, that labouring People should so often 
habituate themselves to this pernicious Custom, 
which they know to be so very dangerous to 
their very Beasts. There are none of them, who 
will not prevent their Horses from drinking 
while they are hot, especially if they are just go- 
ing to put them up. Each of them knows, that 
if he lets them drink in that State, they might 
possibly burst with it; nevertheless he is not 
afraid of incurring the like Danger himself. How- 
ever, this is not the only Case, in which the 
Peasant seems to have more Attention to the 
Health of his Cattle, than to his own. 

|P_35
[}§ 5. }]
The fourth Cause, which indeed affects 
every Body, but more particularly the Labour- 
er, is, the Inconstancy of the Weather. We 
shift all at once, many times a Day, from Hot 
to Cold, and from Cold to Hot, in a more re- 
markable Manner, and more suddenly, than in 
most other Countries. This makes Distempers 
from Defluxion and Cold so common with us: 
and it should make us careful to go rather a 
little more warmly cloathed, than the Season may 
seem to require; to have Recourse to our Winter- 
cloathing early in Autumn, and not to part with 
it too early in the Spring. Prudent Labour- 
ers, who strip while they are at Work, take care 
to put on their Cloaths in the Evening when 
they return home. [/2./]
Those, who from Negli- 
gence, are satisfied with hanging them upon their 
Country Tools, frequently experience, on their 
Return, the very unhappy Effects of it. There 
are some, tho' not many Places, where the Air 
itself is unwholsome, more from its particular 
Quality, than from its Changes of Temperature, 
as at Villeneuve, and still more at Noville, and 
in some other Villages situated among the Marsh- 
es which border on the Rhone. These Countries 
|P_36
are particularly subject to intermitting Fevers, of 
which I shall treat briefly hereafter. 

[}§ 6. }]
Such sudden Changes are often attend- 
ed with great Showers of Rain, and even cold 
Rain, in the Middle of a very hot Day; when 
the Labourer who was bathed, as it were, in a 
hot Sweat, is at once moistened in cold Water; 
which occasions the same Distempers, as the sud- 
den Transition from Heat to Cold, and requires 
the same Remedies. If the Sun or a hot Air 
succeed immediately to such a Shower, the Evil 
is considerably lighter: but if the Cold continues, 
many are often greatly incommoded by it. 

A Traveller is sometimes thoroughly and un- 
avoidably wet with Mud; the ill Consequence 
of which is often inconsiderable, provided he 
changes his Cloaths immediately, when he sets 
up. I have known fatal Pleurisies ensue from 
omitting this Caution. Whenever the Body or 
the Limbs are wet, nothing can be more useful 
than bathing them in warm Water. If the Legs 
only have been wet, it may be sufficient to bath 
them. I have radically, thoroughly, cured Per- 
sons subject to violent Cholics, as often as their 
Feet were wet, by persuading them to pursue this 
Advice. The Bath proves still more effectual, 
if a little Soap be dissolved in it. 

[}§ 7. }]A fifth Cause, which is seldom attended 
to, probably indeed because it produces less vio- 
lent Consequences, and yet is certainly hurtful, 
is the common Custom in all Villages, of having 
their Ditches or Dunghills directly under their 
|P_37
Windows. Corrupted Vapours are continually 
exhaling from them, which in Time cannot fail 
of being prejudicial, and must contribute to pro- 
duce putrid Diseases. Those who are accustom- 
ed to the Smell, become insensible of it: but the 
Cause, nevertheless, does not cease to be un- 
wholesomly active; and such as are unused to it 
perceive the Impression in all its Force. 

[}§ 8. }]
There are some Villages, in which, after 
the Curtain Lines are erased, watery marshy Places 
remain in the Room of them. The Effect of this 
is still more dangerous, because that putrify'd 
Water, which stagnates during the hot Season, 
suffers its Vapours to exhale more easily, and more 
abundantly, than that in the Curtain Lines did. 
Having set out for Pully le Grand, in 1759, on 
Account of an epidemical putrid Fever which 
raged there, I was sensible, on traversing the 
Village, of the Infection from those Marshes; nor 
could I doubt of their being the Cause of this 
Disease, as well as of another like it, which had 
prevailed there five Years before. In other Re- 
spects the Village is wholesomly situated. It 
were to be wished such Accidents were obviated 
by avoiding these stagnated Places; or, at least, 
by removing them and the Dunghils, as far as 
possible from the Spot, where we live and lodge. 

[}§ 9. }]
To this Cause may also be added the 
Neglect of the Peasants to air their Lodgings. It 
is well known that too close an Air occasions the 
most perplexing malignant Fevers; and the poor 
Country People respire no other in their own 
|P_38
Houses. Their Lodgings, which are very small, 
and which notwithstanding inclose, (both Day and 
Night) the Father, Mother, and seven or eight 
Children, besides some Animals, are never kept 
open during six Months in the Year, and very 
seldom during the other six. I have found the 
Air so bad in many of these Houses, that I am 
persuaded, if their Inhabitants did not often go 
out into the free open Air, they must all perish 
in a little Time. It is easy, however, to prevent 
all the Evils arising from this Source, by opening 
the Windows daily: so very practicable a Precau- 
tion must be followed with the happiest Conse- 
quences. 

[}§ 10. }]
I consider Drunkenness as a sixth Cause, 
not indeed as producing epidemical Diseases, but 
which destroys, as it were, by Retail, at all 
times, and every where. The poor Wretches, 
who abandon themselves to it, are subject to 
frequent Inflammations of the Breast, and to 
Pleurisies, which often carry them off in the 
Flower of their Age. If they sometimes escape 
through these violent Maladies, they sink, a long 
Time before the ordinary Approach of old Age, 
into all its Infirmities, and especially into an 
Asthma, which terminates in a Dropsy of the 
Breast. Their Bodies, worn out by Excess, do 
not comply and concur, as they ought, with the 
Force or Operation of Remedies; and Diseases 
of Weakness, resulting from this Cause, are al- 
most always incurable. It seems happy enough, 
that Society loses nothing in parting with these 
|P_39
Subjects, who are a Dishonour to it; and whose 
brutal Souls are, in some Measure, dead, long 
before their Carcases. 

[}§ 11. }]The Provisions of the common People 
are also frequently one Cause of popular Mala- 
dies. This happens 1st, whenever the Corn, 
not well ripened, or not well got in, in bad [/3./]
Harvests, has contracted an unwholesome Qua- 
lity. Fortunately however this is seldom the 
Case; and the Danger attending the Use of it, 
may be lessened by some Precautions, such as 
those of washing and drying the Grain compleat- 
ly; of mixing a little Wine with the Dough, in 
kneading it; by allowing it a little more Time to 
swell or rise, and by baking it a little more. 2dly, 
The fairer and better saved Part of the Wheat is 
sometimes damaged in the Farmers House; ei- 
ther because he does not take due Care of it, or 
because he has no convenient Place to preserve it, 
only from one Summer to the next. It has often 
happened to me, on entering one of these bad 
Houses, to be struck with the Smell of Wheat 
that has been spoiled. Nevertheless, there are 
known and easy Methods to provide against this 
by a little Care; though I shall not enter into a 
Detail of them. It is sufficient to make the Peo- 
ple sensible, that since their chief Sustenance con- 
sists of Corn, their Health must necessarily be 
|P_40
impaired by what is bad. 3dly, That Wheat, 
which is good, is often made into bad Bread, by 
not letting it rise sufficiently; by baking it too 
little, and by keeping it too long. All these Er- 
rors have their troublesome Consequences on those 
who eat it; but in a greater Degree on Children 
and Valetudinarians, or weakly People. 

Tarts or Cakes may be considered as an Abuse 
of Bread, and this in some Villages is increased 
to a very pernicious Height. The Dough is al- 
most constantly bad, and often unleavened, ill 
baked, greasy, and stuffed with either fat or sour 
Ingredients, which compound one of the most in- 
digestible Aliments imaginable. Women and 
Children consume the most of this Food, and 
are the very Subjects for whom it is the most 
improper: little Children especially, who live 
sometimes for many successive Days on these 
Tarts, are, for the greater Part, unable to digest 
them perfectly. Hence they receive a [/4./] Source 
|P_41
of Obstructions in the Bowels of the Belly, and 
of a slimy Viscidity or Thickishness, throughout 
the Mass of Humours, which throws them into 
various Diseases from Weakness; slow Fevers, a 
Hectic, the Rickets, the King's Evil, and Feeble- 
ness; for the miserable Remainder of their Days. 
Probably indeed there is nothing more unwhole- 
some than Dough not sufficiently leavened, ill- 
baked, greasy, and soured by the Addition of 
Fruits. Besides, if we consider these Tarts in an 
oeconomical View, they must be found incon- 
venient also for the Peasant on that Account. 

Some other Causes of Maladies may also be 
referred to the Article of Food, tho' less grievous 
and less frequent, into a full Detail of which it is 
very difficult to enter: I shall therefore conclude 
that Article with this general Remark; that it 
is the Care which Peasants usually take in eating 
slowly, and in chewing very well, that very 
greatly lessens the Dangers from a bad Regimen: 
and I am convinced they constitute one of the 
greatest Causes of that Health they enjoy. We 
may further add indeed the Exercise which 
the Peasant uses, his long abiding in the open Air, 
where he passes three fourths of his Life; besides 
|P_42
(which are also considerable Advantages) his 
happy Custom of going soon to Bed, and of rising 
very early. It were to be wished, that in these 
Respects, and perhaps on many other Accounts, 
the Inhabitants of the Country were effectually 
proposed as Models for reforming the Citizens. 

[}§ 12. }]
We should not omit, in enumerating 
the Causes of Maladies among Country People, 
the Construction of their Houses, a great many 
of which either lean, as it were, close to a 
higher Ground, or are sunk a little in the Earth. 
Each of these Situations subjects them to consi- 
derable Humidity; which is certain greatly to 
incommode the Inhabitants, and to spoil their 
Provisions, if they have any Quantity in Store; 
which, as we have observed, is another, and 
not the least important, Source of their Diseases. 
A hardy Labourer is not immediately sensible of 
the bad Influence of this moist and marshy Ha- 
bitation; but they operate at the long Run, and 
I have abundantly observed their most evident 
bad Effects, especially on Women in Child-bed, 
on Children, and in Persons recovering of a pre- 
ceding Disease. It would be easy to prevent 
this Inconvenience, by raising the Ground on 
which the House stood, some, or several, In- 
ches above the Level of the adjacent Soil, by a 
Bed of Gravel, of small Flints, pounded Bricks, 
Coals, or such other Materials; and by avoiding 
to build immediately close to, or, as it were, 
under a much higher Soil. This Object, per- 
|P_43
haps, may well deserve the Attention of the 
Publick; and I earnestly advise as many as do 
build, to observe the necessary Precautions on 
this Head. Another, which would cost still 
less Trouble, is to give the Front of their 
Houses an Exposure to the South-East. This 
Exposure, supposing all other Circumstances of 
the Building and its Situation to be alike, is 
both the most wholesome and advantageous. I 
have seen it, notwithstanding, very often neg- 
lected, without the least Reason being assigned 
for not preferring it. 

These Admonitions may possibly be thought 
of little Consequence by three fourths of the Peo- 
ple. I take the Liberty of reminding them, 
however, that they are more important than they 
may be supposed; and so many Causes concur to 
the Destruction of Men, that none of the Means 
should be neglected, which may contribute to 
their Preservation. 

[}§ 13. }]
The Country People in Swisserland
drink, either 1, pure Water, 2, some Wine, 3, 
Perry, made from wild Pears, or sometimes Cy- 
der from Apples, and, 4, a small Liquor which 
they call Piquette, that is Water, which has 
fermented with the Cake or Husks of the 
Grapes, after their Juice has been expressed. 
Water however is their most general Drink; 
Wine rarely falling in their Way, but when 
they are employed by rich Folks; or when they 
can spare Money enough for a Debauch. Fruit- 
|P_44
Wines and the [/5./]Piquettes are not used in all 
Parts of the Country; they are not made in all 
Years; and keep but for some Months. 

Our Waters in general, are pretty good; so 
that we have little Occasion to trouble ourselves 
about purifying them; and they are well known 
in those Provinces where they are chiefly and 
necessarily used. [/6./]
The pernicious Methods 
|P_45
taken to improve or meliorate, as it is falsely 
called, bad Wines, are not as yet sufficiently 
practiced among us, for me to treat of them here: 
and as our Wines are not hurtful, of themselves, 
they become hurtful only from their Quantity. 
The Consumption of made Wines and Piquettes
is but inconsiderable, and I have not hitherto 
|P_46
known of any ill Effects from them, so that our 
Liquors cannot be considered as Causes of Dis- 
tempers in our Country; but in Proportion to 
our Abuse of them by Excess. The Case is dif- 
ferently circumstanced in some [/7./]
other Coun- 
tries; and it is the Province of Physicians who 
reside in them, to point out to their Country- 
Men the Methods of preserving their Health; as 
well as the proper and necessary Remedies in 
their Sickness. 
[^Triangular ornament in the middle of the page. ^]
|P_47[^An ornamented horizontal line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}CHAPTER II. }]
[}Of the Causes which aggravate the Diseases of the 
People. General Considerations. }]
[}SECT. 14. }]
THE Causes already enumerated in 
the first Chapter occasion Diseases; 
and the bad Regimen, or Conduct of 
the People, on the Invasion of them, 
render them still more perplexing, and very often 
mortal. 

There is a prevailing Prejudice among them, 
which is every Year attended with the Death of 
some Hundreds in this Country, and it is this— 
That all Distempers are cured by Sweat; and 
that to procure Sweat, they must take Abundance 
of hot and heating things, and keep themselves 
very hot. This is a Mistake in both Respects, 
very fatal to the Population of the State; and it 
cannot be too much inculcated into Country 
People; that by thus endeavouring to force Sweat- 
ing, at the very Beginning of a Disease, they are 
with great Probability, taking Pains to kill them- 
selves. I have seen some Cases, in which the 
continual Care to provoke this Sweating, has as 
manifestly killed the Patient, as if a Ball had 
been shot through his Brains; as such a precipitate 
|P_48
and untimely Discharge carries off the thinner Part 
of the Blood, leaving the Mass more dry, more viscid 
and inflamed. Now as in all acute Diseases (if we 
except a very few, and those too much less fre- 
quent) the Blood is already too thick; such a 
Discharge must evidently increase the Disorder, 
by co-operating with its Cause. Instead of for- 
cing out the watery, the thinner Part of the 
Blood, we should rather endeavour to increase it. 
There is not a single Peasant perhaps, who does 
not say, when he has a Pleurisy, or an Inflamma- 
tion of his Breast, that his Blood is too thick, and 
that it cannot circulate. On seeing it in the 
Bason after Bleeding, he finds it black, dry, burnt; 
these are his very Words. How strange is it 
then, that common Sense should not assure him, 
that, far from forcing out the Serum, the watery 
Part, of such a Blood by sweating, there is a Ne- 
cessity to increase it? 

[}§ 15. }]
But supposing it were as certain, as it is 
erroneous, that Sweating was beneficial at the 
Beginning of Diseases, the Means which they 
use to excite it would not prove the less fatal. 
The first Endeavour is, to stifle the Patient with 
the Heat of a close Apartment, and a Load of 
Covering. Extraordinary Care is taken to prevent 
a Breath of fresh Air's squeezing into the Room; 
from which Circumstance, the Air already in it 
is speedily and extremely corrupted: and such a 
Degree of Heat is procured by the Weight of the 
Patient's Bed-cloaths, that these two Causes alone 
are sufficient to excite a most ardent Fever, and 
|P_49
an Inflammation of the Breast, even in a healthy 
Man. More than once have I found myself 
seized with a Difficulty of breathing, on entering 
such Chambers, from which I have been imme- 
diately relieved, on obliging them to open all 
the Windows. Persons of Education must find 
a Pleasure, I conceive, in making People un- 
derstand, on these Occasions, which are so fre- 
quent, that the Air being more indispensably ne- 
cessary to us, if possible, than Water is to a Fish, 
our Health must immediately suffer, whenever 
that ceases to be pure; and in assuring them 
also, that nothing corrupts it sooner than those 
Vapours, which continually steam from the Bo- 
dies of many Persons inclosed within a little 
Chamber, from which the Air is excluded. 
The Absurdity of such Conduct is a self-evident 
Certainty. Let in a little fresh Air on these 
miserable Patients, and lessen the oppressing Bur- 
then of their Coverings, and you generally see 
upon the Spot, their Fever and Oppression, their 
Anguish and Raving, to abate. 

[}§ 16. }]
The second Method taken to raise a 
Sweat in these Patients is, to give them nothing 
but hot things, especially Venice Treacle, Wine, 
or some [/8./]Faltranc, the greater Part of the Ingredi- 
|P_50
ents of which are dangerous, whenever there is 
an evident Fever; besides Saffron, which is still 
more pernicious. In all feverish Disorders we 
should gently cool, and keep the Belly mode- 
rately open; while the Medicines just mentioned 
both heat and bind; and hence we may easily 
judge of their inevitable ill Consequences. A 
healthy Person would certainly be seized with an 
inflammatory Fever, on taking the same Quan- 
tity of Wine, of Venice Treacle, or of Faltranc, 
which the Peasant takes now and then, when he 
is attacked by one of these Disorders. How 
then should a sick Person escape dying by them? 
Die indeed he generally does, and sometimes with 
astonishing Speed. I have published some dread- 
ful Instances of such Fatality some Years since, 
in another Treatise. In fact they still daily oc- 
cur, and unhappily every Person may observe 
some of them in his own Neighbourhood. 

[}§ 17. }]
But I shall be told perhaps, that Diseases 
are often carried off by Sweat, and that we ought 
to be guided by Experience. To this I answer, 
it is very true, that Sweating cures some particu- 
lar Disorders, as it were, at their very Onset, for 
Instance, those Stitches that are called spurious 
or false Pleurisies, some rheumatic Pains, and 
some Colds or Defluxions. But this only hap- 
pens when the Disorders depend solely and sim- 
|P_51
ply on stopt or abated Perspiration, to which such 
Pain instantly succeeds; and where immediately, 
before the Fever has thickened the Blood, and 
inflamed the Humours; and where before any 
internal Infarction, any Load, is formed, some 
warm Drinks are given, such as Faltranc and 
Honey; and which, by restoring Transpiration, 
remove the very Cause of the Disorder. Never- 
theless, even in such a Case, great Care should 
be had not to raise too violent a Commotion in 
the Blood, which would rather restrain, than pro- 
mote, Sweat, to effect which Elder-flowers are 
in my Opinion preferable to Faltranc. Sweating 
is also of Service in Diseases, when their Causes 
are extinguished, as it were, by plentiful Dilu- 
tion: then indeed it relieves, by drawing off, 
with itself, some Part of the distempered Hu- 
mours; after which their grosser Parts have passed 
off by Stool and by Urine: besides which, the 
Sweat has also served to carry off that extraor- 
dinary Quantity of Water, we were obliged to 
convey into the Blood, and which was become 
superfluous there. Under such Circumstances, 
and at such a Juncture, it is of the utmost Im- 
portance indeed, not to check the Sweat, whether 
by Choice, or for Want of Care. There might 
often be as much Danger in doing this, as there 
would have been in endeavouring to force a 
Sweat, immediately upon the Invasion of the 
Disorder; since the arresting of this Discharge, 
under the preceding Circumstances, might fre- 
quently occasion a more dangerous Distemper, by 
|P_52
repelling the Humour on some inward vital 
Part. As much Care therefore should be taken 
not to check, imprudently, that Evacuation by 
the Skin, which naturally occurs towards the 
Conclusion of Diseases, as not to force it at their 
Beginning; the former being almost constantly 
beneficial, the latter as constantly pernicious. 
Besides, were it even necessary, it might be very 
dangerous to force it violently; since by heating 
the Patients greatly, a vehement Fever is excited; 
they become scorched up in a Manner, and the 
Skin proves extremely dry. Warm Water, in 
short, is the best of Sudorifics. 

If the Sick are sweated very plentifully for a 
Day or two, which may make them easier for 
some Hours; these Sweats soon terminate, and 
cannot be excited again by the same Medicines. 
The Dose thence is doubled, the Inflammation is 
increased, and the Patient expires in terrible An- 
guish, with all the Marks of a general Inflamma- 
tion. His Death is ascribed to his Want of 
Sweating; when it really was the Consequence 
of his Sweating too much at first; and of his 
taking Wine and hot Sudorifics. An able Swiss 
Physician had long since assured his Country- 
men, that Wine was fatal to them in Fevers; I 
take leave to repeat it again and again, and wish it 
may not be with as little Success. 

Our Country Folks, who in Health, natu- 
rally dislike red Wine, prefer it when Sick; 
which is wrong, as it binds them up more than 
white Wine. It does not promote Urine as well; 
|P_53
but increases the Force of the circulating Arte- 
ries, and the Thickness of the Blood, which 
were already too considerable. 

[}§ 18. }]
Their Diseases are also further aggrava- 
ted by the Food that is generally given them. 
They must undoubtedly prove weak, in Conse- 
quence of their being sick; and the ridiculous Fear 
of the Patients' dying of Weakness, disposes their 
Friends to force them to eat; which, increasing 
their Disorder, renders the Fever mortal. This 
Fear is absolutely chimerical; never yet did a 
Person in a Fever die merely from Weakness. 
They may be supported, even for some Weeks, 
by Water only; and are stronger at the End of 
that Time, than if they had taken more solid 
Nourishment; since, far from strengthening 
them, their Food increases their Disease, and 
thence increases their Weakness. 

[}§ 19. }]
From the first Invasion of a Fever, Di- 
gestion ceases. Whatever solid Food is taken 
corrupts, and proves a Source of Putridity, which 
adds nothing to the Strength of the Sick, but 
greatly to that of the Distemper. There are in 
fact a thousand Examples to prove, that it be- 
comes a real Poison: and we may sensibly per- 
ceive these poor Creatures, who are thus com- 
pelled to eat, lose their Strength, and fall into 
Anxiety and Ravings, in Proportion as they swal- 
low. 

[}§ 20. }]
They are also further injured by the 
Quality, as well as the Quantity, of their Food. 
They are forced to sup strong Gravey Soups, 
|P_54
Eggs, Biscuits, and even Flesh, if they have but 
just Strength and Resolution to chew it. It seems 
absolutely impossible for them to survive all this 
Trash. Should a Man in perfect Health be 
compelled to eat stinking Meat, rotten Eggs, 
stale sour Broth, he is attacked with as violent 
Symptoms, as if he had taken real Poison, which, 
in Effect, he has. He is seized with Vomiting, 
Anguish, a violent Purging, and a Fever, with 
Raving, and eruptive Spots, which we call the 
Purple Fever. Now when the very same Arti- 
cles of Food, in their soundest State, are given 
to a Person in a Fever, the Heat, and the mor- 
bid Matter already in his Stomach, quickly pu- 
trify them; and after a few Hours produce all 
the abovementioned Effects. Let any Man judge 
then, if the least Service can be expected from 
them. 

[}§ 21. }]
It is a Truth established by the first of 
Physicians, above two thousand Years past, and 
still further ratified by his Successors, that as long 
as a sick Person has a bad Humour or Ferment 
in his Stomach, his Weakness increases, in Pro- 
portion to the Food he receives. For this being 
corrupted by the infected Matter it meets there, 
proves incapable of nourishing, and becomes a 
conjunct or additional Cause of the Distemper. 

The most observing Persons constantly remark, 
that whenever a feverish Patient sups, what is 
commonly called some good Broth, the Fever ga- 
thers Strength and the Patient Weakness. The giv- 
ing such a Soup or Broth, though of the freshest 
|P_55
soundest Meat, to a Man who has a high Fever, 
or putrid Humours in his Stomach, is to do him 
exactly the same Service, as if you had given him, 
two or three Hours later, stale putrid Soup. 

[}§ 22. }]
I must also affirm, that this fatal Pre- 
judice, of keeping up the Patients' Strength by 
Food, is still too much propagated, even among 
those very Persons, whose Talents and whose 
Education might be expected to exempt them 
from any such gross Error. It were happy for 
Mankind, and the Duration of their Lives would 
generally be more extended, if they could be 
thoroughly persuaded of this medical, and so 
very demonstrable, Truth; — That the only 
things which can strengthen sick Persons are 
those, which are able to weaken their Disease; 
but their Obstinacy in this Respect is inconceiv- 
able: it is another Evil superadded to that of the 
Disease, and sometimes the more grievous one. 
Out of twenty sick Persons, who are lost in the 
Country, more than two Thirds might often have 
been cured, if being only lodged in a Place de- 
fended from the Injuries of the Air, they were 
supplied with Abundance of good Water. But 
that most mistaken Care and Regimen I have 
been treating of, scarcely suffers one of the twenty 
to survive them. 

[}§ 23. }]
What further increases our Horror at 
this enormous Propensity to heat, dry up, and 
cram the sick is, that it is totally opposite to what 
Nature herself indicates in such Circumstances. 
The burning Heat of which they complain; the 
|P_56
Dryness of the Lips, Tongue and Throat; the 
flaming high Colour of their Urine; the great 
Longing they have for cooling things; the Plea- 
sure and sensible Benefit they enjoy from fresh 
Air, are so many Signs, or rather Proofs, which 
cry out with a loud Voice, that we ought to at- 
temperate and cool them moderately, by all 
means. Their foul Tongues, which shew the 
Stomach to be in the like Condition; their Loath- 
ing, their Propensity to vomit, their utter Aver- 
sion to all solid Food, and especially to Flesh; the 
disagreeable Stench of their Breath; their Dis- 
charge of fetid Wind upwards and downwards, 
and frequently the extraordinary Offensiveness of 
their Excrements, demonstrate, that their Bowels 
are full of putrid Contents, which must corrupt 
all the Aliments superadded to them; and that 
the only thing, which can prudently be done, is 
to dilute and attemper them by plentiful Draughts 
of refreshing cooling Drinks, which may pro- 
mote an easy Discharge of them. I affirm it 
again, and I heartily wish it may be thoroughly 
attended to, that as long as there is any Taste of 
Bitterness, or of Putrescence; as long as there is 
a Nausea or Loathing, a bad Breath, Heat and 
Feverishness with fetid Stools, and little and high- 
coloured Urine; so long all Flesh, and Flesh-Soup, 
Eggs, and all kind of Food composed of them, 
or of any of them, and all Venice Treacle, Wine, 
and all heating things are so many absolute Poi- 
sons. 

[}§ 24. }]
I may possibly be censured as extrava- 
gant and excessive on these Heads by the Pub 
|P_57
lick, and even by some Physicians: but the true 
and enlightened Physicians, those who attend to 
the Effects of every Particular, will find on the 
contrary, that far from exceeding in this Respect, 
I have rather feebly expressed their own Judg- 
ment, in which they agree with that of all the 
good ones, who have existed within more than 
two thousand Years; that very Judgment which 
Reason approves, and continual Experience con- 
firms. The Prejudices I have been contending 
against have cost Europe some Millions of Lives. 

[}§ 25. }]
Neither should it be omitted, that even 
when a Patient has very fortunately escaped 
Death, notwithstanding all this Care to obtain it, 
the Mischief is not ended; the Consequences of 
the high Aliments and heating Medicines being, 
to leave behind the Seed, the Principle, of some 
low and chronical Disease; which increasing in- 
sensibly, bursts out at length, and finally procures 
him the Death he has even wished for, to put an 
End to his tedious Sufferings. 

[}§ 26. }]
I must also take Notice of another dange- 
rous common Practice; which is that of purging, 
or vomiting a Patient, at the very Beginning of a 
Distemper. Infinite Mischiefs are occasioned by 
it. There are some Cases indeed, in which eva- 
cuating Medicines, at the Beginning of a Disease, 
are convenient and even necessary. Such Cases 
shall be particularly mentioned in some other 
Chapters: but as long as we are unacquainted 
with them, it should be considered as a general 
Rule, that they are hurtsul at the Beginning; this 
|P_58
being true very often; and always, when the Dis- 
eases are strictly inflammatory. 

[}§ 27. }]It is hoped by their Assistance, at that 
Time, to remove the Load and Oppression of the 
Stomach, the Cause of a Disposition to vomit, of 
a dry Mouth, of Thirst, and of much Uneasiness; 
and to lessen the Leaven or Ferment of the Fever. 
But in this Hope they are very often deceived; 
since the Causes of these Symptoms are seldom 
of a Nature to yield to these Evacuations. By the 
extraordinary Viscidity or Thickness of the Hu- 
mours, that foul the Tongue, we should form our 
Notions of those, which line the Stomach and 
the Bowels. It may be washed, gargled and 
even scraped to very little good Purpose. It does 
not happen, until the Patient has drank for many 
Days, and the Heat, the Fever and the great Si- 
ziness of the Humours are abated, that this Filth 
can he thoroughly removed, which by Degrees 
separates of itself. The State of the Stomach 
being conformable to that of the Tongue, no 
Method can effectually scour and clean it at the 
Beginning: but by giving refreshing and diluting 
Remedies plentifully, it gradually frees itself; and 
the Propensity to vomit, with its other Effects and 
Uneasinesses, go off naturally, and without Pur- 
ges. 

[}§ 28. }]
Neither are these Evacuations only ne- 
gatively wrong, merely from doing no Good; 
for considerable Evil positively ensues from the 
Application of those acrid irritating Medicines, 
which increase the Pain and Inflammation; draw- 
|P_59
ing the Humours upon those Parts that were al- 
ready overloaded with them; which by no means 
expel the Cause of the Disease, that not being at this 
time fitted for Expulsion, as not sufficiently con- 
cocted or ripe: and yet which, at the same Time, 
discharge the thinnest Part of the Blood, whence 
the Remainder becomes more thick; in short 
which carry off the useful, and leave the hurtful 
Humours behind. 

[}§ 29. }]
The Vomit especially, being given in 
an inflammatory Disease, and even without any 
Distinction in all acute ones, before the Humours 
have been diminished by Bleeding, and diluted by 
plentiful small Drinks, is productive of the great- 
est Evils; of Inflammations of the Stomach, of 
the Lungs and Liver, of Suffocations and Fren- 
zies. Purges sometimes occasion a general In- 
flammation of the Guts, which [/9./] terminates in 
Death. Some Instances of each of these terrible 
|P_60
Consequences have I seen, from blundering Te- 
merity, Imprudence and Ignorance. The Effect 
of such Medicines, in these Circumstances, are 
much the same with those we might reasonably 
expect, from the Application of Salt and Pepper 
to a dry, inflamed and foul Tongue, in Order to 
moisten and clean it. 

[}§ 30. }]
Every Person of sound plain Sense is 
capable of perceiving the Truth of whatever I 
have advanced in this Chapter: and there would 
be some Degree of Prudence, even in those who 
do not perceive the real good Tendency of my 
Advice, not to defy nor oppose it too hardily. 
The Question relates to a very important Ob- 
ject; and in a Matter quite foreign to themselves, 
they undoubtedly owe some Deference to the 
Judgment of Persons, who have made it the 
Study and Business of their whole Lives. It is 
not to myself that I hope for their Attention, but 
to the greatest Physicians, whose feeble Instru- 
ment and Eccho I am. What Interest have any 
of us in forbidding sick People to eat, to be stifled, 
or to drink such heating things as heighten their 
Fever? What Advantage can accrue to us from 
opposing the fatal Torrent, which sweeps them 
off? What Arguments can persuade People, that 
some thousand Men of Genius, of Knowledge, 
and of Experience, who pass their Lives among 
a Croud and Succession of Patients; who are en- 
tirely employed to take Care of them, and to ob- 
serve all that passes, have been only amusing and 
deceiving themselves, on the Effects of Food, of 
|P_61
Regimen and of Remedies? Can it enter into 
any sensible Head, that a Nurse, who advises 
Soup, an Egg, or a Biscuit, deserves a Patients 
Confidence, better than a Physician who forbids 
them? Nothing can be more disagreeable to the 
latter, than his being obliged to dispute continu- 
ally in Behalf of the poor Patients; and to be in 
constant Terror, lest this mortally officious At- 
tendance, by giving such Food as augments all 
the Causes of the Disease, should defeat the Effi- 
cacy of all the Remedies he administers to remove 
it; and should fester and aggravate the Wound, 
in Proportion to the Pains he takes to dress it. 
The more such absurd People love a Patient, the 
more they urge him to eat, which, in Effect, ve- 
rifies the Proverb of killing one with Kindness. 

|P_579
[}CHAPTER XXXIV. }]
[}Containing Questions absolutely necessary to be an- 
swered exactly by the Patient, who consults a 
Physician. }]
[}SECT. 588. }]
GREAT Consideration and Experience 
are necessary to form a right Judg- 
ment of the State of a Patient, whom 
the Physician has not personally seen; 
even though he should receive the best Infor- 
mation it is possible to give him, at a Distance 
from the Patient. But this Difficulty is greatly 
augmented, or rather changed into an Impossi- 
bility, when his Information is not exact and 
sufficient. It has frequently happened to myself, 
that after having examined Peasants who came 
to get Advice for others, I did not venture to 
prescribe, because they were not able to give me 
a sufficient Information, in order to my being 
|P_580
certain of the Distemper. To prevent this great 
Inconvenience, I subjoin a List of such Questions, 
as indispensably require clear and direct An- 
swers. 

[}General Questions. }]
What is the Patient's Age? 

Is he generally a healthy Person? 

What is his general Course of Life? 

How long has he been sick? 

In what Manner did his present Sickness be- 
gin, or appear? 

Has he any Fever? 

Is his Pulse hard or soft? 

Has he still tolerable Strength, or is he weak? 

Does he keep his Bed in the Day Time, or 
quit it? 

Is he in the same Condition throughout the 
whole Day? 

Is he still, or restless? 

Is he hot, or cold? 

Has he Pains in the Head, the Throat, the 
Breast, the Stomach, the Belly, the Loins, or in 
the Limbs, the Extremities of the Body? 

Is his Tongue dry? does he complain of 
Thirst? of an ill Tast in his Mouth? of Reach- 
ings to vomit, or of an Aversion to Food? 

Does he go to stool often or seldom? 

What Appearance have his Stools, and what 
is their usual Quantity? 

|P_581
Does he make much Urine? What Appear- 
ance has his Urine, as to Colour and Contents? 
Are they generally much alike, or do they 
change often? 

Does he sweat? 

Does he expectorate, or cough up? 

Does he get Sleep? 

Does he draw his Breath easily? 

What Regimen does he observe in his Sick- 
ness? 

What Medicines has he taken? 

What Effects have they produced? 

Has he never had the same Distemper before? 

[}§ 589. }]
The Diseases of Women and Children 
are attended with peculiar Circumstances; so 
that when Advice is asked for them, Answers 
must be given, not only to the preceding Ques- 
tions, which relate to sick Persons in general; 
but also to the following, which regard these 
particularly. 

[}Questions with Respect to Women. }]
Have they arrived at their monthly Discharges, 
and are these regular? 

Are they pregnant? If so, how long since? 

Are they in Child-bed? 

Has their Delivery been happily accomplished? 

Has the Mother cleansed sufficiently? 

Has her Milk come in due Time and Quan- 
tity? 

|P_582
Does she suckle the Infant herself? 

Is she subject to the Whites? 

[}Questions relating to Children. }]
What is the Child's exact Age? 

How many Teeth has he cut? 

Does he cut them painfully? 

Is he any-wise ricketty, or subject to Knots or 
Kernels? 

Has he had the Small Pocks? 

Does the Child void Worms, upwards or 
downwards? 

Is his Belly large, swelled, or hard? 

Is his Sleep quiet, or otherwise? 

[}§ 590. }]
Besides these general Questions, com- 
mon in all the Diseases of the different Sexes and 
Ages, the Person consulting must also answer to 
those, which have a close and direct Relation to 
the Disease, at that very Time affecting the 
Sick. 

For Example, in the Quinsey, the Condition 
of the Throat must be exactly inquired into. In 
Diseases of the Breast, an Account must be given 
of the Patient's Pains; of his Cough; of the Op- 
pression, and of his Breathing, and Expectora- 
tion. I shall not enter upon a more particular 
Detail; common Sense will sufficiently extend 
this Plan or Specimen to other Diseases; and 
though these Questions may seem numerous, it 
will always be easy to write down their Answers 
|P_583
in as little Room, as the Questions take up here. 
It were even to be wished that Persons of every 
Rank, who occasionally write for medical Ad- 
vice and Directions, would observe such a Plan 
or Succession, in the Body of their Letters. By 
this Means they would frequently procure the 
most satisfactory Answers; and save themselves 
the Trouble of writing second Letters, to give a 
necessary Explanation of the first. 

The Success of Remedies depends, in a very 
great Measure, on a very exact Knowledge of 
the Disease; and that Knowledge on the pre- 
cise Information of it, which is laid before the 
Physician. 

FINIS. 


[^1. 
* This supposes they are not greatly heated, as well as fa- 
tigued, by their Labour or Exercise, in which Circumstance 
free and sudden Draughts of cooling Liquors might be very 
pernicious: and it evidently also supposes these Drinks to be 
thus given, rather in Summer, than in very cold Weather, as 
the Juice of the unripe Grapes, and the other fresh Fruits suf- 
ficiently ascertain the Season of the Year. We think the Ad- 
dition of Vinegar to their Water will scarcely ever be necessary 
in this or the adjoining Island, on such Occasions. The Cau- 
tion recommended in this Note is abundantly enforced by Dr. 
Tissot, § 4: but considering the Persons, to whom this Work 
is more particularly addressed, we were willing to prevent 
every Possibility of a Mistake, in so necessary, and sometimes 
so vital a Point. K.
^]
[^2. 
* This good Advice is enforced in a Note, by the Editor of 
Lyons, who observes, it should be still more closely attended to, 
in Places, where Rivers, Woods or Mountains retain, as it 
were, a considerable Humidity; and where the Evenings are, 
in every Season, cold and moist.—It is a very proper Caution 
too in our own variable Climate, and in many of our Colonies 
in North America. K.
^]
[^3. 
* Thus I have ventured to translate Etés (Summers) to ap- 
ply it to this and the neighbouring Islands. Their Harvests 
in Swisserland perhaps are earlier, and may occur in August, and 
that of some particular Grain, probably still earlier. K.
^]
[^4. 
*The Abuse just mentioned can scarcely be intended to for- 
bid the moderate Use of good Pastry, the Dough of which is 
well raised and well baked, the Flower and other Ingredients 
sound, and the Paste not overcharged with Butter, even though 
it were sweet and fresh. But the Abuse of Alum and other 
pernicious Materials introduced by our Bakers, may too justly 
be considered as one horrible Source of those Diseases of Chil- 
dren, &c. which our humane and judicious Author mentions 
here. What he adds, concerning the Pastries being rendered 
still more unwholesome by the sour Fruits sometimes baked in 
it, is true with Respect to those Children and others, who are 
liable to Complaints from Acidities abounding in the Bowels; 
and for all those who are ricketty or scrophulous, from a cold 
and viscid State of their Humours. But as to healthy sanguine 
|P_41
Children, who are advanced and lively, and others of a sanguine 
or bilious Temperament, we are not to suppose a moderate Va- 
riety of this Food injurious to them; when we consider, that 
the Sharpness and Crudity of the Fruit is considerably correct- 
ed by the long Application of Fire; and that they are the Pro- 
duce of Summer, when bilious Diseases are most frequent. 
This suggests however no bad Hint against making them im- 
moderately sweet. K.
^]
[^5. 
* This Word's occurring in the plural Number will proba- 
bly imply, the Swiss make more than one Species of this small 
Drink, by pouring Water on the Cake or Remainder of their 
other Fruits, after they have been expressed; as our People in 
the Cyder, and perhaps in the Perry, Counties, make what 
they call Cyderkin, Perkin, &c. It should seem too from this 
Section, that the laborious Countrymen in Swisserland drink no 
Malt Liquor, though the Ingredients may be supposed to grow 
in their Climate. Now Beer, of different Strength, making 
the greater Part of our most common Drink, it may be proper 
to observe here, that when it is not strong and heady, but a 
middling well-brewed Small-beer, neither too new, nor hard 
or sour, it is full as wholesome a Drink for laborious People in 
Health as any other, and perhaps generally preferable to Wa- 
ter for such; which may be too thin and light for those who are 
unaccustomed to it; and more dangerous too, when the la- 
bouring Man is very hot, as well as thirsty. The holding a 
Mouthful of any weak cold Liquor in the Mouth without 
swallowing 'till it becomes warm there, and spurting it out 
before a Draught is taken down would be prudent; and in 
Case of great Heat, to take the requisite Quantity rather at 
two Draughts, with a little Interval between them, than to 
swallow the Whole precipitately at one, would be more safe, 
and equally refreshing, though perhaps less grateful. K.
^]
[^6. 
(I) The bad Quality of Water is another common Cause of 
Country Diseases; either where the Waters are unwholesome, 
from the Soils in which they are found, as when they flow 
through, or settle, on Banks of Shells; or where they become 
such, from the Neighbourhood of, or Drainings from Dung- 
hills and Marshes. 

When Water is unclear and turbid, it is generally sufficient 
to let it settle in order to clear itself, by dropping its Sedi- 
|P_45
ment. But if that is not effected, or if it be slimy or muddy, 
it need only be poured into a large Vessel, half filled with fine 
Sand, or, for want of that, with Chalk; and then to shake 
and stir it about heartily for some Minutes. When this Agita- 
tion is over, the Sand, in falling to the Bottom of the Vessel, 
will attract some of the Foulness suspended in the Water. 
Or, which is still better, and very easy to do, two large Ves- 
sels may be set near together, one of which should be placed 
considerably higher than the other. The highest should be half 
filled with Sand. Into this the turbid, or slimy muddy Water 
is to be poured; whence it will filter itself through the Body of 
Sand, and pass off clear by an Opening or Orifice made at the 
Bottom of the Vessel; and fall from thence into the lower one, 
which serves as a Reservoir. When the Water is impregnated 
with Particles from the Beds of Selenites, or of any Spar (which 
Water we call hard, because Soap will not easily dissolve in it, 
and Puls and other farinaceous Substances grow hard instead of 
soft, after boiling in it) such Water should be exposed to the 
Sun, or boiled with the Addition of some Puls, or leguminous 
Vegetables, or Bread toasted, or untoasted. When Water is 
in its putrid State, it may be kept till it recovers its natural 
sweet one: but if this cannot be waited for, a little Sea Salt 
should be dissolved in it, or some Vinegar may be added, in 
which some grateful aromatic Plant has been infused. It fre- 
quently happens, that the publick Wells are corrupted by foul 
Mud at the Bottom, and by different Animals which tumble in 
and putrify there. Drinking Snow-water should be avoided, 
when the Snow is but lately fallen, as it seems to be the Cause 
of those swelling wenny Throats in the Inhabitants of some 
Mountains; and of endemic Cholics in many Persons. As 
Water is so continually used, great Care should be taken to 
have what is good. Bad Water, like bad Air, is one of the 
most general Causes of Diseases; that which produces the 
greater Number of them, the most grieveous ones; and often 
introduces such as are epidemical. E. L.i.e. the Editor of Lyons. 
^]
[^7. 
(I) Many Persons, With a Design to preserve their Wines, 
add Shot to them, or Preparations of Lead, Alum, &c. The 
Government should forbid, under the most severe Penalties, all 
such Adulterations, as tend to introduce the most painful Cho- 
lics, Obstruction, and a long Train of Evils, which it some- 
times proves difficult to trace to this peculiar Cause; while 
they shorten the Lives of, or cruelly torment, such over credu- 
lous Purchasers, as lay in a Stock of bad Wines, or drink of 
them, without distinction, from every Wine Merchant or 
Tavern. E. L.

This Note, from the Editor at Lyons, we have sufficient Reason 
for retaining here. K. 
^]
[^8. 
* This Word, which must be of German, not of French Ex- 
traction, strictly signifies, Drink for a Fall, as we say Pulvis ad 
Casum, &c. Powder for a Fall, or a supposed inward Bruise. 
Dr. Tissot informs me, it is otherwise called the vulnerary Herbs, 
or the Swiss Tea; and that it is an injudicious Farrago or Med- 
|P_50
ley of Herbs and Flowers, blended with Bitters, with stimula- 
ting, harsh and astringent Ingredients, being employed indis- 
criminately in all their Distempers by the Country People in 
Swisserland. K.
^]
[^9. 
* It is pretty common to hear of Persons recovering from 
Inflammations of the Bowels, or Guts, which our Author more 
justly and ingenuously considers as general Passports to Death: 
for it is difficult to conceive, that a real and considerable In- 
flammation of such thin, membranous, irritable Parts, lined 
with such putrescent Humours and Contents, and in so hot and 
close a Situation, could be restored to a sound and healthy State 
so often as Rumour affirms it. This makes it so important a 
Point, to avert every Tendency to an Inflammation of these 
feculent Parts, as to justify a Bleeding directed, solely, from 
this Precaution, and which might have been no otherwise indi- 
cated by a Disease, attended with any Symptom, that threatened 
such an Inflammation. But when a Person recovers, there can 
be no anatomical Search for such Inflammations, or its Effects, 
the real or imaginary Cure of which may well amaze the Pa- 
tient, and must greatly redound to the Honour of his Prescri- 
ber; so that there may be Policy sometimes in giving a mode- 
rate Disease a very bad Name. K.
^]