
|P_
THIS ESSAY 
ON THE ART OF HEALING, 
IN TESTIMONY OF THE AUTHOR'S 
GRATITUDE, IS WITH THE GREATEST RESPECT, 
INSCRIBED 
TO HIS GRACE 
 HUGH DUKE OF NORTHUMBERLAND, 
A LOVER AND A PROMOTER 
OF USEFUL ARTS, BY HIS GRACE'S 
MOST OBEDIENT SERVANT, 
GEORGE FORDYCE. 

|P_
[}THE 
NATURAL HISTORY 
of the 
HUMAN BODY. }]
A Disease is such an alteration of the chemical 
properties of the fluids or solids, or of their 
organization; or of the action of the moving power; 
as produces an inability or difficulty of performing 
the functions of the whole, or any part of the system, 
or pain, or a preternatural evacuation. 

[}The Chemical Properties of the 
FLUIDS. }]
THE fluids may be divided into 
1st, The blood. 
2dly, Those formed during digestion, before the 
food is converted into blood. 
3dly, The secreted fluids. 

The blood consists of 
1st, The serum. 
2dly, The coagulable lymph. 
3dly, The red part. 
4thly, The superfluous water. 
5thly, Extraneous substances introduced. 

|P_2
The serum, coagulable lymph, and superfluous wa- 
ter, are diffused through one another; and the red 
part is mechanically mixed with them. Some of the 
extraneous substances are also mechanically mixed 
with them, and some diffused through them. 

[}Properties of the Serum. }]
IT is fluid in any degree of heat between 30 and 
160 of Fahrenheit's thermometer. 

In a lesser heat it freezes, in a greater it coagu- 
lates. 

Coagulation is a separation of an animal or vege- 
table matter from the water in which it was dissolved; 
and is at the same time a change of the properties of 
that matter, rendering it insoluble in water again by 
commixture alone. 

The serum consists chemically of a coagulable mat- 
ter, and water in which common sal ammoniac and 
phosphoric ammoniac, and generally common salt, 
and frequently selenites, and fixed ammoniac, are dis- 
solved; but it is a question, whether the water che- 
mically combined in the serum is also united with 
those neutral salts, or whether the serum, and the 
solution of these, are only diffused through one 
another. 

It is probably in itself colourless, and inodorous; 
but it receives a yellowish or brownish hue from the 
putrescent part of the blood, and acquires a smell 
from the essential oil. 

If it contained no neutral salts, it would be insipid, 
and incapable of stimulating. 

|P_3
The superfluous water may be separated from it 
by filtration in the body, but that which is chemi- 
cally combined with the other parts cannot. 

All the water may be evaporated from it by a lesser 
heat than 140 degrees of Fahrenheit's thermometer, 
if it be exposed to the air. The other parts remain 
after this operation solid, and soluble again in water 
by commixture alone. 

The separation or addition of superfluous water 
does not affect its viscidity, so far as that is of any 
consequence in the circulation; but the separation of 
that water which is in chemical combination, may 
render it more viscid. 

The water in chemical combination is never se- 
parated, while the serum is contained in the blood- 
vessels; and of consequence this part of the blood 
is always equally viscid, so far as its viscidity can 
affect the circulation or secretions. 

It may be coagulated by acids, oils, alcohol, &c. 
but no substance can get into the blood-vessels in a 
sufficient degree of concentration to coagulate it, ex- 
cepting by injection. 

It may be coagulated by a juice secreted in the 
stomach. 

It has seldom, if ever, been found coagulated in 
the body. 

The only perceptible difference which has ap- 
peared in the coagulable part of the serum, from any 
observation hitherto made public, is, that sometimes 
in coagulating its parts adhere more or less firmly, 
and that sometimes it is of a deeper or lighter brown 
colour. 

|P_4
[}Properties of the Coagulable 
Lymph. }]
IT is a compound of water and a coagulable 
matter. 

As long as it continues in the course of circulation, 
it is fluid in any degree of heat between 30 and 120 
degrees of Fahrenheit's thermometer. 

When it is taken out of the blood-vessels, it coagu- 
lates; whether it be in motion or at rest, exposed to 
the air or not, or in the heat of the human body, or 
in any other degree of heat. 

If it be retained in a blood-vessel, it continues fluid 
for more than three hours in any degree of heat be- 
tween 30 and 120 of Fahrenheit's thermometer, and 
that whether it be in motion or at rest. The smaller 
the blood-vessel, the longer it continues fluid. 

It has hardly ever been found coagulated in the 
blood-vessels of a living animal, unless they have 
been enlarged into aneurisms or varices. 

It has generally been found coagulated in the large 
vessels of the human body on dissection, and some- 
times separated from the other parts; but to all ap- 
pearance these coagulations have almost always taken 
place after death. 

When it is taken out of the blood-vessels, it may 
be prevented from coagulating, by saturating the 
whole blood with common, sea-salt, and perhaps by 
some of the other neutral salts. 

Although the coagulable part of the serum and 
coagulable lymph have different properties, the co- 
agulum formed from both is pretty nearly the same. 
|P_5
The coagulum may be dissolved in water by boiling 
or putrefaction; and may be united with concen- 
trated acids, with caustic alkalis, and calcarious earth, 
and with some metallic salts, into a substance soluble 
in water: but none of these can get into the system 
by absorption, so as to produce this effect. 

Both the superfluous water and serum are capable 
of being separated from the coagulable lymph, by fil- 
tration in the body. 

When the blood is received into a proper vessel, 
the coagulation of this part gives an appearance of 
solidity to the whole: but soon after the whole be- 
comes thus apparently solid, part of the serum, of the 
superfluous water, and of the water which was com- 
bined with the coagulable lymph, ouzes out from the 
whole mass, and brings along with it part of any 
extraneous fluid that may be contained in the blood- 
vessels; leaving behind what is commonly called the 
red globules, the coagulum of the coagulable lymph, 
and any solid particles that may have been in the 
blood. This is called the spontaneous separation. 

When the arteries are acting strongly, whether 
the whole habit be strong or not, the coagulable 
lymph is more fluid, and longer in coagulating. Of 
consequence it lets the red particles, which are the 
heaviest part of the blood, fall down towards the bot- 
tom, before it coagulates: and upon the spontaneous 
separation, the coagulum is divided into two parts; 
the upper, consisting of the coagulum of the co- 
agulable lymph alone (which has in this case been 
called the buff); the under, consisting partly of this, 
and partly of the red particles. 

Although part of the coagulable lymph would 
separate from the red particles, may be prevented by 
taking the blood from a small vessel, or from a small 
|P_6
orifice, or by letting it run along the skin before it falls 
into the vessel into which it is received, or by re- 
ceiving it into a vessel whose surface is large in pro- 
portion to its contents; as in all these cases the co- 
agulation is forwarded. On the other hand, if it 
stagnate in the blood-vessel for some time before it is 
taken out, there will be a separation, when none 
would otherwise have happened. 

Whether the coagulable lymph separates in part 
from the red particles, or not, it coagulates sometimes 
into a firmer, sometimes into a looser mass, generally 
in proportion to the strength of the system. 

All the substances which coagulate the serum, have 
the same effect on the coagulable lymph; but none 
can be applied to it in the blood-vessels, excepting by 
injection in a sufficient degree of concentration to 
coagulate it. 

The coagulable lymph is probably in itself colour- 
less, insipid, inodorous, and incapable of stimulating. 

Whilst it remains in the blood-vessels, it is che- 
mically combined with a certain proportion of water, 
from which it cannot be separated but by coagulation; 
neither will it combine with a larger proportion. 

Water mechanically mixed with it has no effect on 
its viscidity, so far as that affects the circulation 
or secretions. 

No other differences besides those already taken 
notice of are observable in its properties. 

The coagulable lymph and serum are both capable 
of putrefaction, and are converted by it into a muci- 
laginous matter, not coagulable by any of the methods 
recited above. 

If this mucilaginous matter should undergo a fur- 
ther putrefaction, it emits a fœtid vapour, and is con- 
verted into saline substances and calcarious earth. 

|P_7
[}Properties of the Red Part. }]
UPON viewing this part of the blood with a deep 
magnifier in the solar microscope, as it circulates 
in the blood-vessels of a living animal, it appears to 
be divided into a number of small particles, which are 
apparently annular, and exceedingly flexible. 

While the animal is respiring, and the blood cir- 
culating, it is of a scarlet colour in the arteries, and 
of a Modena red in the veins; but if the respiration 
be stopped, that blood which circulates afterwards 
through the lungs continues of a Modena red. If it 
be taken out of the veins, kept moist, and exposed to 
respirable air, it becomes of a scarlet colour; if it be 
taken out of the arteries, and covered from the air, 
or if it stagnate in them, its colour is changed to a 
Modena red. A light shade of Modena red is not 
scarlet, neither is a deep scarlet a Modena red. Va- 
rious other substances alter the colour of this part. 

It seems to have a sweetish tasle, to be inodorous, 
and void of stimulus. 

Its specific gravity is but a very little more than 
the serum or coagulable lymph. 

It is more inflammable than the other parts; and, 
on performing its chemical analysis, it yields a large 
proportion of empyreumatic oil. 

It is readily soluble in water, but not in the 
serum. 

It is not soluble in a saturated solution of neutral 
salts. 

|P_8
It is capable of undergoing the putrefactive fer- 
mentation, the first stage of which breaks it down 
into smaller particles, and renders it of a dark colour. 
It afterwards is converted into a mucilage, and be- 
comes soluble in the serum. 

[}The Superfluous Water. }]
IT is diffused through the serum and coagulable 
lymph. 

It contains a part, perhaps the whole, of the salts. 

These salts are chemically combined with a part 
of it only, and this solution is diffused through the 
remaining part. 

The water diffused may be separated from the so- 
lution by filtration in the body. 

The solid part of the blood, left after evaporation 
of the water by a heat less than that of boiling water, 
amounts to from one fourth to one fifth of the whole. 

[}Extraneous Substances. }]
A Great variety of extraneous substances, both fluid 
and solid, may be introduced into the blood- 
vessels by absorption; but none of them in such pro- 
portion as to produce any alteration in the blood, ex- 
cept by fermentation. 

When any ferment is introduced into the blood- 
vessels, it acts upon a part of the blood only; the 
greatest part remaining to all experiment exactly the 
same as before. 

|P_9
[}Of the Putrefaction of the 
Blood. }]
FErmentation is the conversion of one compound 
into another, by a new arrangement or manner 
of combination of its elements. 

What is commonly called putrefaction consists of 
two fermentations, which we shall call by the names 
of the first and second stage. 

All animal solid and fluids may be reduced by the 
first into a mucilaginous mass, soluble in water, and 
diffusible through any quantity of it. 

The red part of the blood first breaks down into 
smaller particles, before it is formed into a perfect 
mucilage. 

The first stage takes place without any effer- 
vescence. 

The second stage converts this mucilage into earths, 
and salts, a fœtid vapour, and fixable air. 

The first and second stage of putrefaction take 
place in a small part of the blood, or it is destroyed 
by some other operation; for 

After having coagulated the serum, if we squeeze 
out the water, and evaporate it, there is left a mu- 
cilaginous matter similar to that formed by putre- 
faction. 

The salts formed in the blood-vessels, excepting 
phosphoric ammoniac, may be formed by the last 
stage of putrefaction; and those formed by the last 
stage are found in the blood-vessels, excepting nitrous 
selenites, and nitrous ammoniac. 

|P_10
This mucilage, and these salts, are always carrying 
off by urine; the present blood is always diminishing, 
and the vessels require a fresh supply from the food. 

The blood is always in the most powerful cir- 
cumstances of putrefaction; which are, a heat of 98 
degrees of Fahrenheit's thermometer, fluidity, a mo- 
derate exposure to air, and motion: but it is pre- 
vented from putrifying by the action of the vessels; 
nor can any ferment or other circumstance induce the 
fermentation, till this action is altered, except per- 
haps the introduction of chyle intermixed with putrid 
matter. 

In diseases, the first stage often takes place in part 
of the blood; the second stage sometimes, although 
seldom. 

|P_11
[}Of Digestion. }]
DIGESTION is the conversion of the food into 
chyle, and afterwards into blood. 

The food may consist of farinaceous or muci- 
laginous vegetable substances, or native vegetable acid, 
or sugar, or expressed oil, or animal solids, or animal 
fluids containing a mucilaginous matter. 

These substances may be digested, if they be taken 
singly, or if they be mixed together. 

The blood formed does not differ sensibly in its 
properties, whether the one or the other of them be 
used singly, or several of them together; provided 
the organs of digestion be sufficiently powerful 
convert them into blood. 

If the food be solid, it is generally broke down by 
the teeth, or by some other apparatus. 

But mashing it down with water is not sufficient 
to alter its chemical properties, and convert it into 
chyle and blood. 

It is mixed in the stomach with the watery fluids 
we drink, and with the mucilaginous watery fluids 
secreted by the salivary and other glands. 

It is sometimes dissolved in water before it is used: 
but it is often rendered solid by a previous prepa- 
ration, or coagulated by a substance secreted in the 
stomach. 

Simple solution in water does not convert it into 
chyle or blood. 

If it be previously dissolved in water, it affords less 
nourishment than if exhibited solid. 

|P_12
It is necessary that it remain in the stomach for 
some time, in order to its digestion. 

The only process it can go through in the organs 
of digestion, that is capable of altering its chemical 
properties, is fermentation. 

Its fermentation is not attended with effervescence 
in a healthy stomach. 

If vegetable food be used, an acid is produced. 
This acid is destroyed in the duodenum by the bile. 

If animal food be used alone, no acid is produced. 

The stronger the stomach, and the more perfect the 
digestion, the less acid is formed from vegetable food. 

No stage of the putrefactive fermentation takes 
place, during the conversion of it into chyle and 
blood, if the digestion be perfect. 

The fermentation which takes place is peculiar to 
the organs of digestion, and has never been produced 
by any artificial means yet attempted. 

The fermentation which takes place in the stomach, 
forwards the solution of solid food in the watery 
menstruums. 

Solid foods dissolve sooner in the stomach than they 
can be dissolved in water in the same heat, by any 
means hitherto found out. 

If the stomach does not act properly, solid food 
remains undissolved; vegetable, and mixtures of ve- 
getable, and animal substances become more acid; 
animal substances putrify; a quantity of air is sepa- 
rated; and the food is not digested and converted 
into chyle. 

Only that part of the food which is digested affords 
nourishment; the nourishment therefore is in pro- 
portion to the food and the digestion. 

When food, either from its quantity or quality, 
cannot be digested, it is apt to occasion great dis- 
|P_13
turbances in the system, while it is contained in the 
stomach and intestines. 

The only sensible alterations produced in the blood 
by different foods, are in its quantity; or in the pro- 
portion of superfluous water; or that sometimes a 
long use of animal food brings on a degree of pu- 
trefaction. 

[}Of the Chyle. }]
THE chyle is formed from the food in the in- 
testines, and absorbed by the lacteals. 

The whole fluid absorbed is not chyle, but a mix- 
ture of chyle, and the solution of those substances, 
which were simply dissolved in water without being 
digested. 

Quere, Whether a simple solution of mucilaginous, 
animal, or vegetable substances, can be converted 
into blood, without being formed into chyle in the 
stomach and intestines? 

Chyle is fluid, while in the lacteals; when exposed 
to the air, it coagulates; it is rendered white, from 
a mixture of expressed oil. 

When coagulated, a fluid may be squeezed out, 
which probably contains a coagulable matter, and 
sugar. 

|P_14
[}The Secreted Fluids. }]
THEY either 

Exist in the blood-vessels, being mechanically 
mixed with the other fluids, and require only a me- 
chanical separation; 

Or they do not exist in the blood-vessels, their 
elements only being contained there: but these ele- 
ments are not combined, so as actually to form the 
secreted fluid. It is therefore requisite, that some 
chemical operation should take place in the secretory 
organ, by which the elements shall be combined so as 
to form the matter secreted. 

The chemical operation by which they are formed, 
is fermentation. 

The fluids separated mechanically, are 
The matter of the insensible perspiration. 
The urine. 
The sweat. 
The milk. 

The fluids formed in the secretory organ by a che- 
mical operation, are 
The mucus. 
The saliva. 
The pancreatic juice. 
The semen. 
The bile. 
The wax in the ear. 
The sebaceous matter. 
The coagulating matter of the stomach, &c.

|P_15
[}The Matter of the Insensible Perspiration. }]
IT is separated from the surface of the lungs, and 
from the skin, by evaporation. 

The quantity evaporated depends upon the quan- 
tity of superfluous water in the blood-vessels, the heat 
of the air, the quantity of air applied, and the con- 
traction or relaxation of the vessels from whence the 
evaporation takes place. 

When the body is in its natural state, that part of 
the insensible perspiration, which is capable of con- 
densation, consists of water, with a very small pro- 
portion of a mucilaginous matter and essential oil, 
and sometimes perhaps volatile alkali. 

There is no reason to suppose, that any matter flies 
off that cannot be condensed, from any experiment 
hitherto made; but it is rather probable that there 
is not. 

Should any other substance, capable of emitting 
vapour in the heat of the human body, get into the 
blood-vessels, or be formed on the surface of the skin, 
lungs, or in any of the passages of the air in breathing, 
it may be mixed with the insensible perspiration. 

Some of these substances may be putrid vapour, va- 
riolous, morbillous, and other infectious matters, alco- 
hol, and other extraneous volatile substances, &c. 

The matters thrown off by insensible perspiration, 
may be evacuated by the other excretions. 

The health is not in proportion to the quantity of 
insensible perspiration. 

|P_16
[}The Urine. }]
THE urine, in the common state of the body, is 
a transparent brownish fluid, which upon cool- 
ing has a mucilaginous matter separated, capable of 
being redissolved in heat. 

In health, the separating mucilage is generally in 
such quantity as to remain suspended in the urine 
after its separation, forming what has been called 
the cloud. 

It is sometimes totally absent in health, but much 
more frequently in diseases; sometimes it is in quan- 
tity sufficiently to carry the cloud to the bottom, and 
form a mucous sediment; and sometimes it falls down 
in a flaky powder, and forms what has been called 
a lateritious sediment, which is commonly of a brick 
colour, and now and then white. 

This last appearance often takes place on the going 
off of acute diseases; but it also happens in health, 
and while diseases subsist in their full force, parti- 
cularly when they affect the urinary passages, or parts 
near them. 

Sometimes the separating mucilage is separated in 
a powder, remains suspended in the urine, and renders 
it turbid. 

After the separating mucilage is separated, if the 
urine be filtrated from it, it is transparent, consisting 
of water which contains a mucilage, and salts. 

1st, A mucilage, similar to that formed by the first 
stage of putrefaction. 

This mucilage is of a brownish colour, and gives 
the greatest part of the colour to the urine. 

|P_17
Its quantity varies considerably; but the proportion 
of it in the urine is always small. 

If the water be evaporated from it, it will redissolve, 
and it may be diffused through any quantity of water 
in any heat. 

It is not coagulable. 

2dly, The salts are common salt, common sal am- 
moniac, phosphoric ammoniac, vitriolic selenites, and 
muriatic selenites. 

Common salt is contained in the urine, in conse- 
quence of its being used in the food, or drink; and 
it is in proportion to the quantity used. 

The other salts are contained in the urine indepen- 
dent of any saline substance taken into the body, 
except perhaps the vitriolic selenites. 

The quantity of selenitic salts is commonly very 
small; but sometimes the urine is saturated with vi- 
triolic selenites, which separates, and chrystalizes, 
upon the urine's standing to cool. 

The proportion of the salts varies considerably, 
but is always so small as to form a diluted solution. 

The solution is generally sufficiently concentrated, 
to stimulate a very irritable part, but not always. 

The dilution depends on the quantity of super- 
fluous water in the blood-vessels, and on the quantity 
of that superfluous water evacuated by the kidneys: 
so that, when the quantity secreted is large, the so- 
lution is generally diluted; when small, more con- 
centrated. 

Watery fluids may pass through the blood-vessels, 
and by the kidneys, hardly carrying off any thing 
with them, especially if large quantities be drank at 
a time, and the external vessels be contracted. 

|P_18
Sometimes a quantity of calcareous earth is found 
in the urine, suspended by mechanical mixture, or at 
least not combined with an acid. 

Any extraneous substance, soluble in water, that 
may get into the blood-vessels, may be evacuated 
along with the urine; such as acids, alkalies, neutral 
and other saline substances; infusion of rhubarb, and 
other mucilaginous vegetable juices; bile, pus, and 
other fluids formed in the body. 

If the kidneys are relaxed, or stimulated; chyle, 
serum, coagulable lymph, and even the red part of 
the blood may be thrown out. 

The red part may also be broke down by putre- 
faction, and pass off by the kidneys, of a very dark 
colour, disturbing the transparency, and sometimes 
forming a sediment. 

If the heart and arteries act more strongly, or fre- 
quently, than they do in their natural state, a quan- 
tity of expressed oil comes away with the urine, and 
forms a film on the surface, or a ring round the vessel 
into which it is received. 

The urine always contains a portion of the essential 
oil of the urinary passages, and sometimes a portion 
of their mucus. 

|P_19
[}The Sweat. }]
AS far as we are capable of judging from the small 
quantity that can be collected, it contains nearly 
the same substances as the urine; only that instead of 
the essential oil of the urinary passages, it is mixed 
with the sebacious matter of the skin, which gives it 
a degree of whiteness, and a smell different from that 
of the urine. 

[}The Milk. }]
IT is secreted naturally in the breasts of women 
for the nourishment of their young, sometimes 
during pregnancy, and always after child-birth. 
There are said to have been instances of its being 
secreted at other times, and from other parts of the 
body. 

It is a whitish fluid, which separates into two parts 
upon being left at rest in a moderate degree of heat: 
The upper part consists principally of expressed oil, 
with a mixture of the other part, and is whiter and 
more opaque. 

The under part consists of a solution of coagulable 
matter and sugar, in water; with a small mixture 
of expressed oil, and is called the skim-milk. 

The expressed oil is fluid in the heat of the human 
body, but solid in the heat of the atmosphere. 

|P_20
It is only mechanically mixed with the other part. 

It is tinged with, and receives a flavour from, the 
essential oil of the food and of the body. 

It is found not only in different proportions in the 
milk of different women, but also in the milk of the 
same woman at different times, and even in that 
which issues from the different excretory ducts of the 
glands of the same breast. 

The coagulable matter only differs from the coagu- 
lable matter of the serum, in its coagulability, and 
its proportion to the water. 

It is not coagulable by a less heat than that of 
boiling water, and by that only, if the water be eva- 
porated from it. 

It may be coagulated by acids, alcohol, several 
metallic and aluminous salts, and vegetable juices; 
but it requires that they should be applied to it in a 
greater degree of concentration than the serum does, 
in order to its coagulation. 

Heat assists the coagulating power of these sub- 
stances. 

It is readily coagulable by the coagulating juices 
of the stomach, and coagulates in the stomach of a 
living animal, whether any acid be contained in it or 
not. 

The sugar contained in the milk does not differ in 
its properties from that of the sugar-cane. 

Its proportion is always small. 

When a woman makes use of vegetable food, it 
seems to be in greater proportion than when she uses 
animal. 

The milk of a bitch, using animal food alone, con- 
tains sugar. 

|P_21
If milk be kept for some time exposed to the air, 
and in the heat of the atmosphere, or of the human 
body, the sugar ferments, and is converted into vine- 
gar, which coagulates the coagulable matter. 

The same change may take place in the breast, if 
it stagnate there for some time, or if the woman be 
suddenly affected with any of the passions of the 
mind that are attended with anxiety. 

If blood be taken from the arm after a full meal, 
the serum is often mixed with a substance which gives 
it a degree of whiteness and opacity. 

The milk is secreted after a full meal in larger pro- 
portion, than after a woman has fasted for some time. 

In the latter case, the proportion of the expressed 
oil, coagulable matter, and sugar, likewise dimi- 
nishes, and the milk contains besides these the neutral 
salts of the blood, and acquires a bitterness from the 
sebacious matter of the glands of the nipples. 

In some women the milk always contains the salts 
of the blood, or the sebacious matter of the nipples. 

The sebacious matter not only gives it a bitter 
taste, but also, sometimes, a yellowish colour and a 
thicker appearance. 

The milk may contain any substance which is 
thrown into the stomach, and simply dissolved in 
water, without going through the digestive fermenta- 
tions, and being converted into chyle. 

[}The Mucus. }]
IT covers the surfaces of the membranes that are ex- 
posed to any extraneous matter, such as the skin 
and internal membrane of the mouth, nose, lungs, 
æsophagus, stomach, intestines, urinary passages, &c. 

|P_22
It is a fluid of an adhesive viscidity approaching to 
a solid, and of greater viscidity in one part than in 
another. 

It is a compound of a coagulable matter and 
water. 

It is more or less viscid, according to the quantity 
of water with which it is combined. 

It is of different degrees of viscidity in different 
parts of the body. 

It will not combine with more water than what is 
already contained in it; neither can its viscidity be 
altered by digesting it with water, unless it begin to 
putrify; nor can the more viscid mucus of one part 
be converted into the less viscid of another. 

If the water be evaporated from it by a gentle heat, 
the coagulable matter remains solid: if this be im- 
mersed in water, it will absorb that quantity which 
evaporated from it, but no more, and it will regain 
its former fluidity and viscidity. 

It, for the most part, contains either no neutral 
salts, or so small a proportion as cannot easily be ren- 
dered sensible to experiment. It is colourless, insipid, 
inodorous, and incapable of stimulating. 

It combines with concentrated vitriolic, nitrous, 
and muriatic acids, with concentrated solutions of 
some metallic salts, and also with concentrated or 
diluted solutions of caustic alkalies and caustic calca- 
rious earth, into compounds soluble in, and diffu- 
sible through water. 

Acids and some metallic salts dissolved in water, 
and concentrated, but not to that degree as to dissolve 
it, alcohol and aluminous salts coagulate it. It is 
also coagulable by the heat of boiling water, but not 
by a less degree of heat. 

|P_23
The mucus defends the membranes from being so 
much stimulated by any application as they would be, 
if they were not covered with it. 

If the secretion be suddenly increased, the matter 
secreted is often a thin watery fluid containing the 
salts of the blood, and in consequence of them capa- 
ble of stimulating; and the membranes are not de- 
fended from external applications. 

If a greater secretion should continue than what 
naturally takes place, the mucus retains the salts, but 
often acquires a viscidity, and becomes incapable of 
being diffused through water: its colour also often 
grows white, greenish, or yellow; and now and then 
it acquires a smell. 

[}The Saliva. }]
IT is secreted by several glands in the mouth; and 
the principal part of it is thrown down into the 
stomach, to answer some purpose in the digestion of 
the food. 

It is a fluid of an adhesive viscidity, with difficulty 
diffusible through water. 

It consists of water, a coagulable matter similar to 
that of the mucus, and the salts of the blood, but 
not in so large a proportion as they are contained in 
the serum. 

It contains a larger proportion of water than the 
mucus. 

In its other properties it is similar to the mucus. 

|P_24
[}The Pancreatic Juice. }]
IT appears to be similar to the saliva, except that 
it is less viscid, and contains a larger proportion of 
the salts of the blood. 

The saliva and pancreatic juice are probably wa- 
tery menstrua for the solution of the food in the 
stomach and intestines, their viscidity preventing them 
from being absorbed before they produce that effect. 

They have been said to act as ferments during the 
digestion; but as the fermentations of the stomach 
have never been made to take place out of it, we 
cannot judge of this by any experiment hitherto com- 
municated to the public. 

[}The Bile. }]
THE blood from which the bile is formed has 
probably gone through one circulation, without 
being exposed to the air in the lungs, or mixed with 
the fluids brought by the lymphatics from the diffe- 
rent parts of the body. 

The blood, from which the bile is formed, passes 
through the vessels of the abdominal viscera, before it 
arrives at the liver; but it does not take up any sub- 
stance from them, or at least not in such a quantity 
as to be sensible to any experiment yet made; but, 
on the contrary, it appears perfectly similar in all sen- 
|P_25
sible qualities to the blood returning by the veins from 
the other parts of the body. 

There is no appearance of bile in the vena porta- 
rum of a living animal. 

When bile in the jaundice is contained in the 
blood-vessels, it is secreted by all the secretory or- 
gans, and it is evidently contained in all the secre- 
tions. 

The bile is formed from the blood in the secretory 
vessels of the liver. 

It runs along the hepatic ducts into the ductus com- 
munis cholidochus, and from thence partly into the 
duodenum, and partly into the gall-bladder. 

It continues for some time in the gall-bladder, and 
becomes more perfect in its properties there; from 
thence it returns into the ductus communis cholido- 
chus, and passes into the duodenum. 

The bile is a fluid of an oleaginous viscidity, con- 
sisting of a solution of a solid matter in water. 

If the water be not evaporated from it, no altera- 
tion is produced on it by any heat between 32 and 
112 degrees of Fahrenheit's thermometer. 

The bile is diffusible in any proportion of water. 

If the water be evaporated from the solid part by 
a heat not exceeding 112 degrees of Fahrenheit's ther- 
mometer, it is soluble in, and diffusible through, any 
quantity of water. 

The solid matter of the bile melts if it be heated, 
and is decomposed if the heat be encreased. 

If it is distilled by itself, it yields a larger propor- 
tion of empyreumatic oil than any of the other fluids, 
except the expressed oil and red part of the blood. 

It is of a yellow colour, and a sweetish bitter taste. 

When it is not combined with more water than it 
generally is in the gall-bladder, it does not putrify 
|P_26
more readily than the blood; but if it be diluted with 
water or watery fluids, it putrifies more readily. 

Acids and some of their compounds decompose it, 
and precipitate from it a resinous matter. 

The acidity of the acid is lost by its combination 
with the other part; but if more acid be employed 
than what is necessary for the decomposition, the aci- 
dity of the superfluous quantity remains. 

The matter precipitated has the peculiar smell of 
the animal. 

It is solid in the heat of the atmosphere, melts in 
a moderate degree of heat, and burns very readily. 

It is not soluble in water. 

It is partly soluble in alcohol. 

If the passage of the bile into the duodenum be 
stopt, acidities are apt to take place in the intestinal 
canal, the peristaltic motion does not go on properly, 
the fæces lose their peculiar colour and smell, and 
often acquire a more putrid fœtor, and the digestion 
is hurt, but not entirely prevented. 

The properties of the other secreted fluids have not 
been sufficiently investigated by experiments for us to 
be able to give any satisfactory account of them. 

|P_27
[}The Chemical Properties of the 
Animal Solids. }]
THEY are a compound of coagulable matter 
and water. 

They are naturally flexible; but, if the water be 
evaporated from them by a gentle heat, they become 
friable. 

The water chemically combined, cannot be sepa- 
rated from them by expression. Exposed to about a 
red heat, they are decomposed; and if they be distill- 
ed by themselves, volatile alcali, empyreumatic oil, 
water, and calcareous earth, are formed. 

When free from essential oil, blood, and the salts 
of the fluids, they are colourless, insipid, and ino- 
dorous. 

They differ in their flexibility and elasticity. 

Fibres and membranes are readily flexible, not ca- 
pable of being broke by bending, and have a less de- 
gree of elasticity. 

Cartilage is less flexible, capable in general of 
being broke by bending, and more elastic. 

Cartilage often supplies the place of bone in young 
animals. 

Heat, dilute acids, neutral salts, alcohol, metalic, 
and aluminous salts, astringent juices of vegetables, 
and several other substances, coagulate them, i. e. se- 
parate part of the water chemically combined, and of 
consequence contract them, diminish their flexibility, 
and harden them. Substances coagulating the animal 
solids, are called Astringents. 

|P_28
If they be exposed to a freezing cold, the water 
freezes; and upon thawing their texture is found to 
be altered. 

Concentrated vitriolic, nitrous, and muriatic acids, 
caustic alkali's, even in a diluted solution, quick lime, 
and several of the metallic salts, combine with them 
into a substance diffusible through, or soluble in, wa- 
ter, and destroy their texture. 

They are capable of putrefaction in the same man- 
ner as the animal fluids. 

|P_29
[}The General Structure of 
the Body. }]
[}The Blood-Vessels. }]
THERE are cavities in the body, called blood- 
vessels, in which the red part of the blood, the 
coagulable lymph, and part of the serum and super- 
fluous water, are usually contained. 

They consist of the heart, arteries, capillaries, and 
veins. 

The heart consists essentially of two cavities, there 
being two hearts, properly speaking, joined together 
in the human body, serving for two circulations of 
the blood; one through every part of the body, and 
one through the lungs. 

The left side of the heart serves for the general cir- 
culation, and consists of two cavities, the auricle 
and the ventricle. 

The auricle is a cavity which opens into the pul- 
monary veins at one end, and into the ventricle at the 
other. There is a valve placed at the opening into 
the ventricle, which prevents any fluid from passing 
from the ventricle into the auricle. 

The auricle is in part covered with muscular fibres. 

The ventricle is a cavity surrounded with muscular 
fibres, having one opening into the auricle, and an- 
other into a pipe, called the aorta or great artery. 

At the opening into the aorta, there are valves, 
which prevent any fluid from passing from the aorta 
into the ventricle. 

|P_30
The aorta is a tube which begins at the heart, 
and dividing into several branches, goes to every part 
of the body. 

It does not divide at once, but branches out as it 
passes along. 

When it has arrived at any part, and divided into 
very small branches, these open into one another, so 
as to have a free and perfect communication every 
way: from these arise a smaller set of tubes, which 
also communicate in the same manner; and from 
them again arise a larger set, which have likewise a 
free communication. 

The first set have been called capillary, or anasto- 
mosing arteries: the second have not got a name: 
the third have been called capillary veins; but I 
would term all of them capillary vessels. 

From the third set arise tubes which terminate in 
the heart, joining together as they go on towards it, 
and forming principally two large tubes, which open 
into the right auricle. 

These are called veins. 

The veins which are subject to frequent compres- 
sion, from the action of the muscles, have valves 
which open towards the heart. 

Each artery, capillary, and vein, is nearly cylin- 
drical, but somewhat irregular in its diameter. 

No muscular fibres appear on the arteries, capilla- 
ries, or veins in the human body. 

These vessels are all of them elastic, and capable 
of being distended, so as to contain a larger quantity 
of fluid than what is necessary to render them cylin- 
drical. 

Their elasticity is not sufficient to overcome the 
weight of their sides and keep them cylindrical, if 
|P_31
they are not filled with a fluid, excepting in that part 
of the aorta nearest the heart. 

When an animal is dead, and no chemical or me- 
chanical change has taken place in the vessels, the 
elasticity is the same as when the animal was alive. 

When an animal is dead, and the vessels act by 
their elasticity alone, they are incapable of contract- 
ing to half the size they are of at their utmost disten- 
tion, supposing them to continue cylindrical. 

When an animal is alive, the blood-vessels are al- 
ways cylindrical, excepting when they are compressed 
by a considerable external force. 

They are always full of blood. 

When an animal is alive, the veins, capillaries, 
and small arteries, are sometimes contracted to less 
than half the size they are of at other times; there- 
fore the veins, capillaries, and small arteries, in a 
living animal, have a contractile power independent 
of their elasticity, by which they adapt themselves to 
the blood, and continue cylindrical. 

This power is similar to the muscular power. 

When the vessels contain more blood they become 
longer, or their diameter is enlarged, or both; and, 
e contra, 

When they contain less blood, they become short- 
er, or their diameter diminishes, or both. 

The contractile power of the vessels is capable of 
diminishing either their length or diameter. 

When an animal dies, the arteries and veins lose 
their cylindrical form, and are flattened, and the ca- 
pillaries contain less blood in them. 

The arteries, veins, and capillaries of a living ani- 
mal, are commonly contracted to a greater degree 
than they can be by their elasticity. 

|P_32
The elasticity is commonly endeavouring to distend 
them. 

If the vessels are emptied to such a degree that they 
cannot adapt themselves to the blood, and continue 
cylindrical, the animal dies. 

The most essential effort of the living power, is, to 
adapt the vessels to the blood. 

[}The Course of the Circulation of 
the Blood. }]
THE blood passes from the left auricle of the heart 
into the left ventricle, from the left ventricle 
into the aorta, and from thence by the smaller arte- 
ries to the capillaries in every part of the body; from 
these it returns by the veins to the right auricle of the 
heart. The blood, for the most part, moves in one 
uniform direction in each artery, viz. from the heart 
towards the capillaries: it also moves in one uniform 
direction in each vein, viz. from the capillaries to- 
wards the heart; but although it moves in general 
from the arteries through the capillaries into the 
veins, yet its direction in any one capillary may be, 
and often is, altered and reversed. 

Both the general velocity with which the blood 
moves through the whole system, and the proporti- 
onal velocity of its motion in particular vessels, are 
constantly varying. 

|P_33
[}The Powers producing the  Circu- 
lation of the Blood. }]
THE force with which the blood moves in the 
veins, and the muscular contraction of the au- 
ricle, which takes place during the relaxation of the 
ventricle, propels the blood into the ventricle. 

When a certain quantity of blood is propelled into 
the ventricle, its muscular fibres contract, being pro- 
bably stimulated thereto by the blood. 

This contraction of the muscular fibres of the right 
ventricle diminishes or obliterates it, and propels the 
whole, or part of the blood contained in it, into the 
aorta; the valve placed at the opening of the auricle 
into the ventricle, preventing its return into the au- 
ricle. 

When the ventricle has emptied itself into the 
aorta, it relaxes and receives a fresh quantity of blood 
from the auricle; the blood being prevented from re- 
turning from the aorta by the valves placed at its 
opening into the heart. 

The action of the heart tends to produce an equal 
and uniform circulation in every part of the body. 

[}The Circulation doth not depend on the Action
 of the Heart alone. }]
The circulation is not equal and uniform through 
the whole body, but the same quantity of blood flow- 
ing from the heart, a greater proportion of it some- 
times circulates through one part, sometimes through 
another. 

|P_34
If the heart be the sole power propelling the blood 
forward, the circulation can only be increased in any 
one part by an increase in the size of the vessels, or 
removal of some obstruction to the circulation there, 
or a diminution of the size of the vessels, or obstruct- 
tion to the circulation in the rest of the body; and 
e contra the circulation can only be diminished in one 
part by a diminution of the size of the vessels, or ob- 
struction to the circulation there, or an increase of 
the size of the vessels, or a removal of some obstruct- 
tion to the circulation in the other parts of the body. 

The principal causes producing an alteration of the 
size of the vessels, or an obstruction to the circulation, 
are, 
1st, An increase or diminution in the disposition 
to contraction in the capillary vessels, or in the ex- 
ternal pressure. 
2dly, The meeting of the streams of blood in the 
anastomosing vessels. 
3dly, The attraction of the blood to the sides of the 
vessels. 

The disposition to contraction in the capillaries of 
a particular part, or the external pressure, may be in- 
creased, so as actually to produce a diminution of the 
size of the vessels of that part, (notwithstanding the 
action of the heart,) and by consequence a diminution 
of the circulation of the blood in that part. 

As the obstruction arising from the meeting of 
the streams of blood in the anastomosing vessels de- 
pends on the velocity with which it moves, it tends 
to render the circulation in a part equal, by pre- 
venting an increase or diminution of it. 

As the blood is thoroughly mixed in the right ven- 
tricle of the heart, and is distributed from thence to 
the different parts, no alteration in its attraction to 
|P_35
the sides of the vessels can produce an increase or 
diminution of the circulation in a particular part. 

It has been supposed, that a viscidity in the fluids, 
or an increase of the size of their particles, often 
produced an obstruction to the circulation; but this 
opinion has not been proved, or rendered probable, 
by any experiment hitherto made public: on the con- 
trary, the red globules appear to be always nearly of 
the same size, except when they are broke down by 
putrefaction: the serum and coagulable lymph seldom 
or ever appear more viscid than when in their common 
state; and, if they were, their viscidity would affect 
the system equally. 

The disposition to contraction in the capillary ves- 
sels, or the external pressure, may be so much dimi- 
nished, as that the action of the heart continuing the 
same, the size of the vessels of a part may be in- 
creased, so as actually to occasion a greater circula- 
tion of blood in that part. 

If the heart be the sole cause of the circulation, the 
only material alteration that could take place in the 
proportion of the circulation in the different parts, 
must depend on an increase or diminution of the dis- 
position to contraction in the vessels, or on an altera- 
tion in the external pressure. 

But the circulation may be increased in a particu- 
lar part, the motion of the heart continuing the same, 
by causes which do not diminish the disposition to 
contraction of the vessels of that part, nor increase 
the disposition to contraction in the vessels in the 
other parts of the body, nor produce any effect on 
the external pressure. 

Therefore the heart is not the sole power which 
propels the fluids through the part in which the circu- 
lation is thus increased. 

|P_36
The causes capable of increasing the circulation in 
a part, are generally such as tend to excite muscular 
motion, and are called stimuli. 

Some part of the body, brought into action by 
these stimuli, is capable of increasing the circulation 
independent of the action of the heart. 

The arteries are endowed with a muscular motion, 
by which they may increase the circulation in a par- 
ticular part, or assist the heart in the general circula- 
tion of the blood. 

The arteries at each contraction of the heart are 
distended; at each relaxation they contract. 

This alternate contraction and dilatation might 
depend on their elasticity. 

If their contractions and dilatations depended on 
their elasticity, their size at their utmost contraction 
in the living body should be equal to that produced 
by a fluid injected into them, with a force capable of 
overcoming the resistance the blood meets with in the 
capillary vessels, which, in the human body, is pro- 
bably equal to eight feet perpendicular height of 
water. 

But their size, even at their utmost state of dila- 
tation, is less than that produced by a fluid injected 
into them, with a force equal to one foot perpendi- 
cular height of water, when the animal is dead. 

Therefore their contractions and dilatations do not 
depend on their elasticity. 

The additional force which occasions an increase 
of the circulation, in a particular part, must depend 
on the action of the arteries or capillaries. 

As the capillaries do not contract and dilate alter- 
nately, and as the direction of the blood in any one 
|P_37
of them is quite undetermined, this additional force 
cannot depend on the action of the capillaries. 

If the arteries contracted and dilated by their elasti- 
city, no additional force could be applied from their 
contraction and dilatation; since the heart would lose 
more force, in distending the arteries, than they 
would re-apply to the blood in contracting. 

If the arteries, upon being distended by the blood 
thrown into them by the heart, are excited to a mus- 
cular contraction, and when they have performed 
this contraction relax, and like the ventricle of the 
heart, receive the blood easily into them, and when 
they are again distended, are excited to a second con- 
traction, they may apply an additional force to that 
of the heart, so as to promote the circulation through 
the whole body. 

If such contractions and dilatations be greater in 
any particular part, they will promote the circulation 
in that part; in as much as, when they are relaxed 
to a greater degree, they will suffer the blood to pass 
through them more readily into the capillaries; and, 
when they contract, they will empty themselves more 
thoroughly into the capillaries. 

The arteries have a muscular contraction and dila- 
tation, similar to that of the ventricles of the heart, 
by which they apply an additional power to that of 
the heart, so as to promote the general circulation 
through the whole body, and often to increase the 
proportional circulation in a particular part. 

The motion of the blood is regulated by the action 
of the heart and arteries, and the contraction of the 
capillary vessels; and these are measured by the pulse. 

|P_38
[}The Pulse. }]Indicates by It is called 1st, THE strength of 
the contraction 
of the heart, Strength, 
Weakness, Strong. 
Weak. 2dly, The quantity of 
blood thrown out at 
each contraction, Fulness, 
Smallness, Full. 
Small. 3dly, The number of 
contractions, Frequency, 
Slowness, Frequent. 
Slow. 
4thly, The regularity 
of its action, as to 
strength, quantity or 
frequency, Regularity, 
Irregularity, 
Intermission, Regular. 
Irregular. 
Intermittent. 5thly, The strength of 
the action of the arte- 
ries, Hardness, 
Softness, 
Redoubling, 
Trembling, Hard. 
Soft. 
Redoubling. 
Trembling. 6thly, The irritability 
of the vessels, Quickness, 
Regularity, 
Slowness, Quick. 
Regular. 
Slow. 7thly, The medium 
diameter of the arteries, Dilatation, 
Contraction, Great. 
Small. 8thly, The quantity 
of blood in the vessels, Oppression, 
Smallness, Oppressed. 
Empty. 9thly, The contracti- 
on of the capillaries, Obstruction, 
Freedom, Obstructed. 
Free. 
|P_39
[}The Structure of the Lungs. }]
THERE is a set of vessels in the lungs which con- 
tain air, and another which contain blood. 

[}The Air Vessels. }]
The air vessels consist of a pipe, called the trachea; 
one end of which opens into the throat, and commu- 
nicates with the amtosphere by the nostrils and mouth; 
the other divides into branches which go to every part 
of the lungs, and whose ends open into small cavities, 
or cells. 

The air in the lungs is generally in motion; for ei- 
ther that which is at present contained in the cells, is 
passing through the trachea into the atmosphere, or a 
fresh parcel is passing from the external atmosphere 
through the trachea into the cells. 

The whole of this motion is called respiration: 
when the air is passing in, it is called inspiration; 
when it is thrown out, expiration. 

When the thorax is enlarged by the action of one 
set of its muscles, the pressure of the external atmo- 
sphere forces the air into the lungs; the other set of 
muscles which contract the thorax when put in action, 
force the air out of the lungs into the atmosphere. 
But the pressure of the atmosphere on the surface of 
the body counterbalancing its pressure on the surface 
of the lungs, neither the muscles of inspiration nor 
those of expiration are assisted or counteracted by it. 

If the air continues at rest in the lungs for many 
minutes, or if a man continues to respire the same 
|P_40
air, or if he breathes air that hath served for the in- 
flammation of fuel or pure fixable air, he dies. 

It is not determined whether pure inflammable air 
will serve for respiration. 

Some vapours kill immediately if taken into the 
lungs, independent of their being unfit for respira- 
tion. 

[}The Blood-Vessels. }]
The air vessels of the lungs consist of two sets, viz. 
1st, The Pulmonary. 
2dly, The Bronchial. 

[}The Pulmonary Vessels. }]
The right side of the heart is similar to the left, ex- 
cepting that both the auricle and ventricle have fewer 
muscular fibres, and that the auricle receives blood 
from the venæ cavæ, and the ventricle throws it into 
the pulmonary artery. 

The pulmonary artery begins at the right ventricle 
of the heart, and goes from thence to every part of the 
lungs in the same manner that the aorta goes to every 
part of the body. 

When the pulmonary artery hath divided into very 
small branches, these do not open into one another 
and form anastomosing vessels like the small branches 
of the aorta; but they join again, and form veins, 
which uniting together, go to the left auricle of the 
heart commonly in five trunks. 

|P_41
[}The Circulation of the Blood through the 
Pulmonary Vessels. }]
The blood passes from the right auricle into the 
right ventricle, from the right ventricle into the pul- 
monary artery, from the pulmonary artery into the 
pulmonary veins, and from the pulmonary veins into 
the left auricle. 

[}The Powers propelling the Blood through the 
Lungs. }]
The muscular fibres of the right auricle contract- 
ing, propel part of the blood contained in it into 
the right ventricle, and they are assisted by the force 
with which the blood moves in the veins. 

The muscular fibres of the right ventricle being sti- 
mulated to contract when it is full, propel part or the 
whole of the blood contained in it into the pulmonary 
artery, the blood being prevented from returning into 
the auricle by the valve placed at the opening of the 
auricle into the ventricle. 

After the ventricle has contracted, it relaxes and 
receives the blood from the auricle, it being prevented 
from returning from the pulmonary artery by the 
valves placed at the opening of the pulmonary artery 
into the ventricle. 

The blood is thrown by the right ventricle through 
the pulmonary artery and veins into the left au- 
ricle. 

Perhaps the pulmonary artery hath a muscular 
power, similar to the muscular power of the other ar- 
teries, by which it promotes the circulation of the 
blood through the lungs. 

|P_42
The blood meets with the same obstructions in its 
passage through the lungs that it does in its passage 
through the other parts of the body, excepting that 
there being no anastomosing vessels, there is no ob- 
struction from the streams of the blood meeting in 
them, and opposing each others motion. 

The blood meets with some additional obstructions 
in its passage through the pulmonary vessels, besides 
those it meets with in the other parts of the body, 
viz. 
1st, The motion of the lungs in respiration, as 
there are no valves in the vessels, tends to retard the 
circulation, although the reverse hath been asserted. 
2dly, If a sufficient quantity of respirable air be not 
received into, and thrown out of the lungs, the mo- 
tion of the blood in the pulmonary vessels is con- 
siderably retarded. 

[}The Bronchial Vessels. }]
An artery arises from the aorta, and spreads itself 
through the lungs, terminating in anastomosing capil- 
lary vessels, which open into veins in the same man- 
ner as the other branches of the aorta in other parts 
of the body. 

The blood circulates in these vessels in the same 
manner as in the other vessels, arising from the aorta 
in other parts of the body. 

|P_43
[}The Extravasation and Absorption
of the Lymph. }]
PART of the superfluous water and serum is con- 
tinually passing through the sides of the vessels, 
particularly the capillaries, into the cellular mem- 
brane, and all the cavities of the body, so as to keep 
their surfaces moist. 

It has been supposed that they passed through tubes 
appended to the sides of the blood-vessels; but such 
vessels have never been demonstrated, nor is there any 
reason for supposing that they exist, excepting in the 
glands. 

The fluids, commonly extravasated, have been 
called the lymph. 

It is uncertain whether it passes through the acci- 
dental pores in the sides of the vessels, or by cy- 
lindrical organised holes; but it is most probable that 
it passes through organised holes, as the secretion is 
regular and constant. 

The pores or vessels it passes through, are called 
exhalants. 

It is absorbed by the lymphatics. 

A lymphatic is a tube nearly cylindrical, divided by 
valves, so as to have the resemblance of joints. 

They arise from the cellular membrane, and cavi- 
ties, and the greatest part of them go to the thoracic 
duct. 

The valves allow the lymph to pass from the cavi- 
ties to the thoracic duct, but prevent its passing from 
the thoracic duct to the cavities. 

|P_44
The lymphatics in passing from the cavities to the 
thoracic duct, go through the lymphatic glands. 

The structure and use of these glands are not as yet 
ascertained. 

The thoracic duct is a tube which begins near the 
diaphragm, and commonly terminates in the left sub- 
clavian vein. 

At its opening into the left subclavian vein, there is 
a valve which allows the lymph to pass from it into 
the vein, but prevents the running of the blood from 
the vein into the thoracic duct. 

Some of the lymphatics terminate in veins. These 
are similar in structure to those which terminate in the 
thoracic duct. 

[}The Powers producing the Extravasation and 
Absorption of the Lymph. }]
The contractile power of the blood-vessels squeezes 
the lymph into the cellular membrane and cavities. 

The quantity thrown out is in proportion to the 
force of the circulation, the fluidity of the substances 
contained in the blood-vessels, or the quantity of the 
more fluid substances, and the degree of contraction 
of the capillaries and exhalants. 

The joint of a lymphatic opening into a cavity, en- 
deavours to fill itself from that cavity by its action as 
a capillary tube, the valves preventing the return of 
the lymph from the other part of the lymphatic. 
In like manner a lymphatic may fill itself entirely 
from the cavity in which it terminates, but its action 
as a capillary tube will not tend in the smallest degree 
to propel the lymph into the veins. 

It is most probable that the joint of the lymphatic, 
next to the cavity, having absorbed a sufficient quan- 
|P_45
tity of lymph to fill it, is stimulated to contract and 
propel the fluid into the next joint, and so on to the 
thoracic duct, or vein, in which it terminates; and 
having emptied itself, and being relaxed, it fills itself 
again from the cavity, and so continues to act: for 
there is apparently no other power in the body capable 
of producing a regular flow of the lymph through the 
lymphatics into the blood-vessels. 

For in a living animal where the veins are con- 
tracting, and pressing the blood, if one end of a ca- 
pillary tube terminate in a vein, and the other in a 
cavity; and if there be no action in that tube, ex- 
cepting that which arises from its being a capillary 
one, or from the motion of the blood in the vein; if 
there be any motion in that tube after it is full, it will 
always be from the vein into the cavity, and never 
from the cavity into the vein, let the tube be of any 
size or shape whatever. 

Further; the alternate pressure of the lymphatics 
arising from the alternate contractions and relaxations 
of the blood-vessels, or muscles, is not sufficiently 
powerful, universal, or equal, to produce a regular 
flow of the lymph through the lymphatics into the 
blood-vessels. 

Neither does the cellular membrane and cavities 
force the lymph into the lymphatics, and through 
them into the veins. 

The extravasation of fluids from the blood-vessels 
in to the cellular membrane and cavities, and their re- 
absorption, generally take place in the above man- 
ner. 

Sometimes the coagulable lymph is thrown out by 
the exhalants. 

When the coagulable lymph is thrown out, it most 
commonly coagulates. 

|P_46
If it coagulate, it cannot be taken up by the lymha-
tics, till it be redissolved. 

In many cases it redissolves, and is absorbed much 
sooner than it can be rendered soluble in water, by 
putrefaction when out of the body. At other times 
it continues in the cavity for many years. 

The red part of the blood is also sometimes thrown 
out by the exhalants. In this case, its particles are 
broke down probably by the first stage of putrefaction, 
and it is afterwards reabsorbed. 

The same things may happen, if the red particles 
and coagulable lymph are extravasated in consequence 
of the rupture of a blood-vessel. 

In particular parts, as in the corpora cavernosa 
penis, the extravasation and absorption is probably 
performed in a different manner, and by different 
vessels. 

All absorbent vessels must have a power of propel- 
ling the fluids into the blood-vessels, sufficient to 
overcome the force of their contraction, by which 
they endeavour to propel the blood out of any 
opening. 
