

[^Sample 1: book - ^]

|P_1
[}PART I. 
OF THE 
GENERAL CAUSES OF DISEASES. }]
[}CHAP. I. 
OF CHILDREN. }]
THE better to trace diseases from their ori- 
ginal causes, we shall take a view of the 
common treatment of mankind in the 
state of infancy. In this period of our lives, the 
foundations of a good or bad constitution are ge- 
nerally laid; it is therefore of importance, that 
parents be well acquainted with the various causes 
which may produce diseases in their offspring. 

It appears from the annual registers of the dead, 
that about one half of the children born in Great 
Britain die under twelve years of age. To many, 
indeed, this may appear a natural evil; but, on due 
examination, it will be found to be one of our own 
creating. Were the death of infants a natural evil, 
other animals would be as liable to die young as 
man; but this we find is by no means the case. 

|P_2
It may seem strange that man, notwithstanding 
his superior reason, should fall so far short of other 
animals in the management of his young: But our 
surprise will soon cease, if we consider that brutes, 
guided by instinct, never err in this respect; while 
man, trusting solely to art, is seldom right. Were 
a catalogue of those children who perish annually 
by art alone exhibited to public view, it would 
astonish most people. 

If parents are above taking care of their child- 
ren, others must be employed for that purpose: 
These will always endeavour to recommend them- 
selves by the appearance of extraordinary skill and 
address. By this means such a number of unneces- 
sary and destructive articles have been introduced 
into the diet, clothing, &c. of infants, that it is 
no wonder so many of them perish. 

Nothing can be more preposterous than for a 
mother to think it below her to take care of her 
own child, or to be so ignorant as not to know 
what is proper to be done for it. If we search na- 
ture throughout, we cannot find a parallel to this. 
Every other creature is the nurse of its own young, 
and they thrive accordingly. Were the brutes to 
bring up their young by proxy, they would share 
the same fate with those of the human species. 

We mean not, however, to impose it as a task upon 
every mother to suckle her own child. This, what- 
ever speculative writers may alledge, is in many 
cases impracticable, and would inevitably prove de- 
structive both to the mother and child. Women of 
|P_3
delicate constitutions, subject to low spirits, hyste- 
ric fits, or other nervous disorders, make very bad 
nurses: And these complaints are now so common, 
that it is rare to find a woman of fashion free from 
them: such women, therefore, supposing them 
willing, are really unable to suckle their own 
children. 

Almost every mother would be in a condition 
to give suck, did mankind live agreeably to Nature: 
But, whoever considers how far we have deviated 
from her dictates, will not be surprised to find 
many of them unable to perform that necessary 
office. Mothers who do not eat a sufficient quan- 
tity of solid food, nor enjoy the benefit of free 
air and exercise, can neither have wholesome hu- 
mours themselves, nor afford proper nourishment 
to an infant. Hence children who are suckled by 
delicate women, either die young, or are weak and 
sickly all their lives. 

When we say that mothers are not always in a 
condition to suckle their own children, we would not 
be understood as discouraging that practice. Every 
mother who can, ought certainly to perform so ten- 
der and agreeable an office. But, suppose it to be 
out of her power, she may, nevertheless, be of great 
service to her child. The business of nursing is by 
no means confined to giving suck. To a woman 
who abounds with milk, this is the easiest part of 
it. Numberless other offices are necessary for a 
child, which the mother ought at least to see 
done. 

|P_4
A mother who abandons the fruit of her womb, 
as soon as it is born, to the sole care of an hireling, 
hardly deserves the name of a parent. A child, by being 
brought up under the mother's eye, not only secures 
her affection, but may reap all the advantages of a 
mother's care though it be suckled by another. How 
can a mother be better employed than in superin- 
tending the nursery? This is at once the most de- 
lightful and important office! yet the most trivial 
business or insipid amusements are often preferred 
to it. A strong proof both of the bad taste and 
wrong education of modern females. 

It is indeed to be regretted, that more care is not 
bestowed in teaching the proper management of 
children to those whom nature has designed for mo- 
thers. This, instead of being made a principal, is 
seldom considered as any part of female education. 
Is it any wonder, when females, so educated, come 
to be mothers, that they should be quite ignorant 
of the duties belonging to that character? However 
strange it may appear, it is certainly true, that many 
mothers, and those of fashion too, are as ignorant, 
when they have brought a child into the world, 
what to do for it, as the infant itself. Indeed, the 
most ignorant of the sex are generally reckoned 
most knowing in the business of nursing. Hence, 
sensible people become the dupes of ignorance and 
superstition; and the nursing of children, instead 
of being conducted by reason, is the result of whim 
and caprice [/1./]. 

|P_5
Were the time that is generally spent by females 
in the acquisition of trifling accomplishments, em- 
ployed in learning how to bring up their children; 
how to dress them so as not to hurt, cramp, or con- 
fine their motions; how to feed them with whole- 
some and nourishing food; how to exercise their 
tender bodies, so as best to promote their growth 
and strength: Were these made the object of fe- 
male instruction, mankind would derive the great- 
est advantages from it. But, while the education of 
females implies little more than what relates to dress 
and public shew, we have nothing to expect from 
them but ignorance, even in the most important 
concerns. 

Did mothers reflect on their own importance, 
and lay it to heart, they would embrace every op- 
portunity of informing themselves of the duties 
which they owe to their infant-offspring. It is their 
province, not only to form the body, but also to give 
the mind its most early bias. They have it very 
much in their power to make men healthy or vale- 
tudinary, ufeful in life, or the pests of society. 

But the mother is not the only person concern- 
ed in the management of children. The father has 
|P_6
an equal interest in their welfare, and ought to assist 
in every thing that respects either the improvement 
of the body or mind. 

It is pity that the men should pay so little regard 
to this matter. Their negligence is one reason why 
females know so little of it. Women will ever be 
desirous to excel in such accomplishments as re- 
commend them to the other sex. But men gene- 
rally keep at such a distance from even the smallest 
acquaintance with the affairs of the nursery, that 
many would esteem it an affront, were they suppo- 
sed to know any thing of them. Not so, however, 
with the kennel or the stables: A gentleman of the 
first rank is not ashamed to give directions concern- 
ing the management of his dogs or horses, yet 
would blush were he surprised in performing the 
same office for that being who derived its existence 
from himself, who is the heir of his fortunes, and 
the future hope of his country. 

Even physicians themselves have not been suffi- 
ciently attentive to the management of children: 
That has been generally considered as the sole pro- 
vince of old women, while men of the first charac- 
ter in physic have refused to visit infants even when 
sick. Such conduct in the faculty has not only 
caused this branch of medicine to be neglected, but 
has also encouraged the other sex to assume an ab- 
solute title to prescribe for children in the most 
dangerous diseases. The consequence is, that a 
physician is seldom called till the good women have 
exhausted all their skill; when his attendance can 
|P_7
only serve to divide the blame and appease the dis- 
consolate parents. 

Nurses should do all in their power to prevent 
diseases; but, when a child is taken ill, some per- 
son of skill ought immediately to be consulted. 
The diseases of children are generally acute, and 
the least delay is dangerous. 

Were physicians more attentive to the diseases 
of infants, they would not only be better qualified 
to treat them properly when sick, but likewise to 
give useful directions for their management when 
well. The diseases of children are by no means 
so difficult to be understood as many imagine. It 
is true, they cannot tell their complaints; but the 
causes of them may be pretty certainly discovered, 
by putting proper questions to the nurses and such 
as are about them. Besides, the diseases of infants, 
being less complicated, are easier cured than those 
of adults [/2./]. 

It is really astonishing, that so little attention 
should in general be paid to the preservation of in- 
fants. What labour and expence are daily be- 
|P_8
stowed to prop an old tottering carcase for a few 
years, while thousands of those, who might be 
useful in life, perish without being regarded! 
Mankind are too apt to value things according to 
their present, not their future, usefulness. Tho' 
this be of all others the most erroneous method 
of estimation; yet, upon no other principle is it 
possible to account for the general indifference 
with respect to the death of infants. 

[/3./]One great source of the diseases of children is, 
the unhealthiness of parents. It would be as 
reasonable to expect a rich crop from a barren soil, as 
that strong and healthy children should be born of 
parents whose constitutions have been worn out with 
intemperance or disease. 

An ingenious writer observes [/4./], that on the con- 
stitution of mothers depends originally that of their 
offspring. No one who believes this will be sur- 
prised, on a view of the female world, to find dis- 
eases and death so frequent among children. A 
delicate female, brought up within doors, an utter 
stranger to exercise and open air, who lives on tea 
and other slops, may bring a child into the world, 
but it will hardly be fit to live. The first blast of 
disease will nip the tender plant in the bud: Or, 
should it struggle through a few years existence, 
its feeble frame, shaken with convulsions from 
every trivial cause, will be unable to perform the 
common functions of life, and prove a burden to 
society. 

|P_9
If, to the delicacy of mothers, we add the irre- 
gular lives of fathers, we shall see further cause to 
believe that children are often hurt by the consti- 
tution of their parents. A sickly frame may be 
originally induced by hardships or intemperance, 
but chiefly by the latter. It is impossible that a 
course of vice should not spoil the best constitu- 
tion: And, did the evil terminate here, it would 
be a just punishment for the folly of the sufferer; 
but, when once a disease is contracted and rivetted 
in the habit, it is entailed on posterity. What 
a dreadful inheritance is the gout, the scurvy, 
or the kings-evil, to transmit to our offspring! 
How happy had it been for the heir of many a 
great estate, had he been born a beggar, rather 
than to inherit his father's fortunes at the expence 
of inheriting his diseases! 

No person who labours under any incurable 
malady ought to marry. He thereby not only 
shortens his own life, but transmits misery to 
others: But, when both parties are deeply tainted 
with the scrophula, the scurvy, or the like, the 
effects must be still worse. Such will either have 
no issue at all, or those whom they have must be 
miserable indeed. Want of attention to these 
things, in forming connections for life, has rooted 
out more families than plague, famine, or the 
sword; and, so long as these connections are formed 
from mercenary views, the evil will be continued. 

In our matrimonial contracts, it is amazing so 
little regard is had to the health and form of the 
|P_10
object. Our sportsmen know, that the generous 
courser cannot be bred out of the foundered jade, 
nor the sagacious spaniel out of the snarling cur. 
This is settled upon immutable laws. The man 
who marries a woman of a sickly constitution, and 
descended of unhealthy parents, whatever his views 
may be, cannot be said to act a prudent part. A 
puny scrophulous woman may prove fertile; 
should this be the case, the family must become 
an infirmary: What prospect of happiness the 
father of such a family has, we shall leave any 
one to judge. 

The Jews, by their laws, were, in certain cases, 
forbid to have any manner of commerce with the 
diseased; and indeed to this all wise legislators 
ought to have a special regard. In some countries, 
diseased persons have actually been forbid to marry. 
This is an evil of a complicated kind, a natural de- 
formity, and political mischief; and therefore re- 
quires a public consideration. 

Such children as have the misfortune to be born 
of diseased parents, will require to be nursed with 
greater care than others. This is the only way to 
make amends for the defects of constitution; and 
it will often go a great length. A healthy nurse, 
wholesome air, and sufficient exercise, will do 
wonders. But, when these are neglected, little 
is to be expected from any other quarter. The 
defects of constitution cannot be supplied by me- 
dicine. 

|P_11
Those who inherit any family-disease ought 
to be very circumspect in their manner of living. 
They should consider well the nature of such dis- 
ease, and guard against it by a proper regimen. It 
is certain, that family-diseases have often, by pro- 
per care, been kept off for one generation; and 
there is reason to believe, that, by persisting in the 
same course, such diseases might at length be 
wholely eradicated. This is a subject very little 
regarded, though of the greatest importance. Fa- 
mily-constitutions are as capable of improvement 
as family-estates; and the libertine, who impairs 
the one, does greater injury to his posterity, than 
the prodigal who squanders away the other. 

The clothing of an infant is so simple a mat- [/5./]
ter, that it is surprising how any person should err 
with regard to it; yet many children lose their 
lives, and others are deformed, by inattention to 
this article. 

Nature knows no other use of clothes to an 
infant, but to keep it warm. All that is necessary 
for this purpose, is to wrap it in a soft loose cover- 
ing. Were a mother left to the dictates of nature 
alone, she would certainly follow this method. 
But the business of dressing an infant has long 
been out of the hands of mothers, and has at last 
become a secret which none but adepts pretend 
to understand. 

From the most early ages it has been thought 
necessary, that a woman in labour should have 
|P_12
some person to attend her. This in time became 
a business; and, as in all others, those who were 
employed in it strove to outdo one another in the 
different branches of their profession. The dres- 
sing of a child came of course to be considered as 
the midwife's province, who no doubt imagined, 
that the more dexterity she could shew in this ar- 
ticle, the more her skill would be admired. Her 
attempts were seconded by the vanity of parents, 
who, too often desirous of making a shew of the 
infant as soon as it was born, were ambitious to 
have as much finery heaped upon it as possible. 
Thus it came to be thought as necessary for a 
midwife to excel in bracing and dressing an infant, 
as for a surgeon to be expert in applying bandages 
to a broken limb; and the poor child, as soon as 
it came into the world, had as many rollers and 
wrappers applied to its body, as if every bone 
had been fractured in the birth; while these were 
often so tight, as not only to gall and wound its 
tender frame, but even to obstruct the motion of 
the heart, lungs, and other organs necessary for 
life. 

In several parts of Britain, the practice of rol- 
ling children with so many bandages is now, in 
some measure, laid aside; but it would still be a 
difficult task to persuade the generality of women, 
that the shape of a child does not intirely depend 
on the care of the midwife. So far, however, are 
all their endeavours to mend the shape of chil- 
dren from being successful, that they constantly 
|P_13
operate the contrary way, and mankind become 
deformed just in proportion to the means used to 
prevent it. How little deformity of body is to be 
found among uncivilized nations? So little indeed, 
that it is vulgarly believed they put all their de- 
formed children to death. The truth is, they 
hardly know such a thing as a deformed child. 
Neither should we, if we followed their example. 
Savage nations never think of manacling their 
children. They allow them the full use of every 
organ, carry them abroad in the open air, wash 
their bodies daily in cold water, &c. By this 
management, their children become so strong 
and hardy, that, by the time our puny infants get 
out of the nurse's arms, theirs are able to shift for 
themselves. 

Among brute animals, no art is necessary to 
procure a fine shape. Though many of them are 
extremely delicate when they come into the world, 
yet we never find them grow crooked for want of 
swaddling-bands. Is nature less generous to the 
human kind? No; But we take the business out 
of her hands. 

Not only the analogy of other animals, but the 
very feelings of infants tell us, that they ought to 
be kept easy and free from all pressure. They 
cannot indeed tell their complaints; but they can 
shew signs of pain; and this they never fail to do, 
by crying, when pinched by their clothes. No 
sooner are they freed from their bracings, than 
|P_14
they seem pleased and happy; yet, strange infa- 
tuation! the moment they hold their peace, they 
are again committed to their chains. 

If we consider the body of an infant as a bundle 
of soft pipes, replenished with fluids in continual 
motion, the danger of pressure will appear in the 
strongest light. Nature, in order to make way 
for the growth of children, has formed their bo- 
dies soft and flexible; and, lest they should re- 
ceive any injury from pressure in the womb, has 
surrounded the fœtus every where with fluids. This 
shews the care which nature takes to prevent all 
unequal pressure on the bodies of infants, and to 
defend them against every thing that might in the 
least cramp or confine their motions. 

Even the bones of an infant are so soft and car- 
tilaginous, that they readily yield to the slightest 
pressure, and easily assume a bad shape, which 
can never after be remedied. Hence it is, that 
so many people appear with high shoulders, 
crooked spines, and flat breasts, who were as well 
proportioned at their birth as others, but had the 
misfortune to be squeezed out of shape by the 
application of stays and bandages. 

Pressure, by obstructing the circulation, like- 
wise prevents the equal distribution of nourishment 
to the different parts of the body, by which means 
the growth becomes unequal. One part of the 
body grows too large, while another remains too 
small; and thus in time the whole frame becomes 
disproportioned and mishapen. To this we must 
|P_15
add, that when a child is cramped in its clothes, 
it naturally shrinks from the part that is hurt; 
and, by putting its body into unnatural postures, 
it becomes deformed by habit. 

Deformity of body may indeed proceed from 
weakness or diseases; but, in general, it is the 
effect of improper clothing. Nine tenths, at 
least, of the deformity amongst mankind, must be 
imputed to this cause. A deformed body is not 
only disagreeable to the eye, but by a bad figure 
both the animal and vital functions must be im- 
peded, and of course health impaired. Hence 
few people, remarkably mishapen, are strong or 
healthy. 

The new motions which commence at the birth, 
as the circulation of the whole mass of blood 
through the lungs, respiration, the peristaltic mo- 
tion, &c. afford another strong argument for 
keeping the body of an infant free from all pressure. 
These organs not having been accustomed to 
move, are easily stopped; but, when this happens, 
death must ensue. Hardly any method could be 
devised more effectually to stop these motions 
than bracing the body too tight with rollers, [/6./]ban- 
dages, &c. Were these to be applied in the same 
manner to the body of an adult, for an equal 
|P_16
length of time, they could hardly fail to hurt the 
digestion and make him sick. How much more 
hurtful they must prove to the tender bodies of 
infants, we shall leave any one to judge. 

Whoever considers these things will not be sur- 
prised, that so many children die of convulsions 
soon after the birth. These fits are generally at- 
tributed to some inward cause; but, in fact, they 
oftner proceed from our own imprudent conduct. 
I have known a child seized with convulsion-fits, 
soon after the midwife had done swaddling it, who, 
upon taking off the rollers and bandages, was im- 
mediately relieved, and never had any convulsion- 
fits afterwards. Numerous examples of this might 
be given, were they necessary. 

It would be safer to fix on the clothes of an 
infant with strings than pins, as these often gall 
and irritate their tender skins, and occasion con- 
vulsions. Pins have been found sticking above 
half an inch into the body of a child after it had 
died of convulsion-fits, which, in all probability, 
proceeded from that cause. 

Children are not only hurt by the tightness of 
their clothes, but also by the quantity. Every 
child has some degree of fever after the birth; 
and, if it be loaded with too many clothes, the 
fever must be increased. But that is not all; the 
child is generally laid in bed with the mother, who 
is often likewise feverish; to which we may add 
the heat of the bed-chamber, the wines, and other 
|P_17
heating things, too frequently given to children 
immediately after the birth. When all these are 
combined, which does not seldom happen, they 
must increase the fever to such a degree as will 
endanger the life of the infant. 

The danger of keeping too hot, will 
further appear, if we consider, that, after they 
have been for some time in the situation men- 
tioned above, they are often sent into the country 
to be nursed in a cold house. Is it any wonder, 
if a child, from such a transition, catches a mortal 
cold, or contracts some other fatal disease? When 
an infant is kept too hot, its lungs, not being suf- 
ficiently expanded, are apt to remain weak and 
flaccid for life; from hence proceed coughs, 
consumptions, and other diseases of the breast. 

It would answer little purpose to specify the 
particular pieces of dress proper for an infant. 
These will always vary in different places, accord- 
ing to custom and the humour of parents. The 
great rule to be observed is, That a child have 
no more clothes than are necessary to keep it warm, 
and that they be quite easy for its body. 

Stays are the very bane of infants. A volume 
would not suffice to point out all the bad effects 
of this ridiculous piece of dress. The madness in 
favour of stays seems, however, to be somewhat 
abated; and it is to be hoped the world will, in 
time, become, wise enough to know, that the hu- 
|P_18
man shape does not solely depend upon whale-bone 
and bend-leather [/7./]. 

We shall only add, with respect to the clothes 
of children, that they ought to be kept very clean. 
Children perspire more than adults; and, if their 
clothes be not frequently changed, they become 
very hurtful. Dirty clothes not only gall and fret 
the tender skins of infants, but likewise occasion 
ill smells; and, what is worse, tend to produce 
vermin and cutaneous diseases. 

Cleanliness is not only agreeable to the eye, 
but tends greatly to preserve the health of children. 
It promotes the perspiration, and, by that means, 
frees the body from superfluous humours, which, 
if retained, could not fail to occasion diseases. No 
mother or nurse can have any excuse for allowing 
a child to be dirty. Poverty may oblige her to 
give it coarse clothes; but, if she does not keep 
them clean, it must be her own fault. 

|P_647
[}CHAP. XLVIII. 
DISEASES OF WOMEN. }]
WOMEN, in all civilized nations, have the 
management of domestic affairs; and it is 
very proper they should, as nature has made them 
less fit for the more active and laborious employ- 
ments. This indulgence, however, is generally 
carried too far; and females, instead of being 
benefited by it, are greatly injured, from the 
want of exercise and free air. To be satisfied of 
this, one need only compare the fresh and ruddy 
looks of a milk-maid with the pale complexion 
of those females whose whole business lies within 
doors. Though Nature has made an evident 
distinction between the male and female with re- 
gard to bodily strength and vigour, yet she cer- 
tainly never meant, either that the one should be 
always without, or the other always within doors. 

The confinement of females, besides hurting 
their figure and complexion, relaxes their solids, 
weakens their minds, and disorders all the func- 
tions of the body. Hence proceed obstructions, 
indigestion, flatulence, abortions, and the whole 
train of nervous disorders. These not only unfit 
women for being mothers and nurses, but often 
render them whimsical and ridiculous. A sound 
mind depends so much upon a healthy body, that 
|P_648
where the latter is wanting, the former is rarely to 
be found. 

I have always observed, that women who were 
chiefly employed without doors, in the different 
branches of husbandry, gardening, and the like, 
were almost as hardy as their husbands, and that 
their children were likewise strong and healthy. But 
as the bad effects of confinement and inactivity upon 
both sexes have been already shown, we shall proceed 
to point out these circumstances in the structure 
and design of females, which subject them to pe- 
culiar diseases; the chief of which are, their 
monthly evacuations, pregnancy, and child-bearing. 
These indeed cannot properly be called diseases 
themselves, but from the delicacy of the sex, 
and their being often improperly managed in 
such situations, they become the source of nu- 
merous calamities. 

[}OF THE MENSTRUAL DISCHARGE. }]
Females generally begin to menstruate about 
the age of fifteen, and leave it off about fifty, 
which renders these two periods the most critical 
of their lives. About the first appearance of this 
discharge, the constitution undergoes a very con- 
siderable change, generally indeed for the better, 
though sometimes for the worse. The greatest 
care is now necessary, as the future health and hap- 
piness of the female depends, in a great measure, 
upon her conduct at this period. 

|P_649
If a girl about this time of life be confined to 
the house, kept constantly sitting, and neither al- 
lowed to romp about, nor employed in any ac- 
tive business, which gives exercise to the whole 
body, she becomes weak, relaxed, and puny;
her blood not being duly prepared, she looks 
pale and wan; her health, spirits, and vigour de- 
cline, and she sinks into a valetudinary for life. 
Such is the fate of numbers of those unhappy fe- 
males, who, either from too much indulgence, or 
their own narrow circumstances, are, at this cri- 
tical period of life, denied the benefit of exercise 
and free air. 

A lazy indolent disposition proves likewise very 
hurtful to girls at this period. One seldom meets 
with complaints from obstructions amongst the more 
active and industrious part of the sex; whereas the 
indolent and lazy are seldom free from them. These 
are, in a manner, eat up by the chlorosis, or green- 
sickness, and other diseases of this nature. We would 
therefore recommend it to all who wish to escape 
these calamities, to avoid indolence and inactivity, 
as their greatest enemies, and to be as much 
abroad in the open air as possible. 

Another thing that proves very hurtful to 
girls about this period of life, is unwholesome food. 
Fond of all manner of trash, they often indulge 
in it, till their whole humours are quite vitiat- 
ed. Hence ensue indigestions, want of appetite, 
and a numerous train of evils. If the fluids be not 
duly prepared, it is utterly impossible that the se- 
|P_650
cretions should be properly performed: Accord- 
ingly we find, that such girls as lead an indolent 
life, and eat great quantities of trash, are not only 
subject to obstructions of the menses, but likewise 
to glandular obstructions; as the scrophula or 
king's evil, &c.

A dull disposition is likewise very hurtful to 
girls at this period. It is a rare thing to see a 
sprightly girl who does not enjoy good health, 
while the grave, moping, melancholy creature 
proves the very prey of vapours and hysterics. 
Youth is the season for mirth and cheerfulness. Let 
it therefore be indulged. It is an absolute duty. 
To lay in a stock of health in time of youth, is as 
necessary a piece of prudence as to make provision 
against the decays of old age. While therefore 
wise Nature prompts the happy youth to join in 
sprightly amusements, let not the severe dictates 
of hoary age forbid the useful impulse, nor damp 
with serious gloom the season destined to mirth 
and innocent festivity. 

Another thing very hurtful to females about 
this period of life is strait clothes. They are fond 
of a fine shape, and foolishly imagine, that this 
can be acquired by lacing themselves tight. 
Hence, by squeezing the stomach and bowels, 
they hurt the digestion, and occasion many incu- 
rable maladies. This error is not indeed so com- 
com as it has been; but, as fashions change, it 
may come about again: we therefore think it not 
improper to mention it. I know many females 
|P_651
who, to this day, feel the direful effects of that 
wretched custom which prevailed some time ago, of 
squeezing every girl into as small a size in the middle 
as possible. Human invention could not possibly 
have devised a practice more destructive to health. 

After a female has arrived at that period of 
life when the menses usually begin to flow, and 
they do not appear, but, on the contrary, her 
health and spirits begin to decline, we would ad- 
vise, instead of shutting the poor girl up in the 
house, and dosing her with steel, assafœtida, and 
other nauseous drugs, to place her in a situation 
where she can enjoy the benefit of free air and 
agreeable company. There let her eat whole- 
some food, take sufficient exercise, and amuse 
herself in the most agreeable manner; and we 
have little reason to fear, but Nature, thus assist- 
ed, will do her proper work. Indeed she seldom 
fails, unless where the fault is on our side. 

When the menses have once begun to flow, the 
greatest care should be taken to avoid every thing 
that may tend to obstruct them. Females ought 
to be exceeding cautious of what they eat or drink 
at the time they are out of order. Every thing 
that is cold, or apt to sour on the stomach, ought 
to be avoided; as fruit, butter-milk, and such 
like. Fish, and all kinds of food that are hard of 
digestion, are also to be avoided. As it is impos- 
sible to mention every thing that may disagree 
with individuals at this time, we would recom- 
mend it to every female to be very attentive to 
|P_652
what disagrees with herself, and carefully to 
avoid it. 

Cold is extremely hurtful to females at this 
particular period. More of the sex date their dis- 
orders from colds, caught while they were out of 
order, than from all other causes. This ought 
surely to put them upon their guard, and to make 
them very circumspect in their conduct at such 
times. A degree of cold that will not in the least 
hurt them at another time, will, at this period, 
be sufficient entirely to ruin their health and con- 
stitution. 

The greatest attention ought likewise to be 
paid to the mind, which should be kept as easy 
and cheerful as possible. Every part of the 
animal œconomy is influenced by the passions, but 
none more so than this. Anger, fear, grief, and 
other affections of the mind, often occasion ob- 
structions of the menstrual flux, which prove ab- 
solutely incurable. 

From whatever cause this flux is obstructed, 
except in the state of pregnancy, proper means 
should be used to restore it. For this purpose we 
would recommend sufficient exercise, in a dry, 
open, and rather cool air; wholesome diet, and, 
if the body be weak and languid, generous li- 
quors; also cheerful company, and all manner of 
amusements. If these fail, the following medi- 
cines may be tried. 

When the obstructions proceed from a weak 
relaxed state of the solids, such medicines as tend 
|P_653
to promote digestion, to brace the solids, and as- 
sist the body in preparing good blood, ought to 
be used. The principal of these are iron, the 
Peruvian bark, with other bitter and astringent 
medicines. Filings of iron may be infused in wine 
or ale, two ounces to an English quart, and after 
it has stood in a warm place twenty-four hours, it 
may be strained, and a small cupful drank three 
or four times a-day; or they may be reduced to 
a fine powder, and taken in a dose of half a dram, 
mixed with a little honey or treacle, three or four 
times a-day. The bark and other bitters may 
either be taken in substance or infusion, as is most 
agreeable to the patient. 

When obstructions proceed from a viscid state 
of the blood, and the patient is of a gross or full 
habit, evacuations, and such medicines as atte- 
nuate the humours, are necessary. The woman 
in this case ought to be bled, to bathe her feet 
frequently in warm water, to take frequently a 
cooling purge, and to live upon a spare thin diet. 
Her drink should be whey, water, or small beer, 
and she ought to take sufficient exercise. 

When obstructions proceed from affections of 
the mind, as grief, fear, anger, &c. every me- 
thod should be taken to amuse and divert the 
patient. And that she may the more readily 
forget the cause of her affliction, she ought, 
if possible, to be removed from the place where 
it happened. A change of place, by presenting 
|P_654
the mind with a variety of new objects, has often 
a very happy influence in relieving it from the 
deepest distress. A soothing, kind, and affable 
behaviour to females in this situation is also of the 
last importance. 

An obstruction of the menses is often the effect 
of other maladies. When this is the case, instead 
of giving medicines to force down that discharge, 
which might be dangerous, we ought, by all 
means, to endeavour to restore the patient's health 
and strength. When that is effected, the other 
will return of course. 

But the menstrual flux may be too great as well 
as too small. When this happens, the patient be- 
comes weak, the colour pale, the appetite and di- 
gestion are bad, and œdematous swellings of the 
feet, dropsies and consumptions often ensue. 
This frequently happens to women about the age 
of forty-five or fifty, and is very difficult to cure. 
It may proceed from a sedentary life; a full diet, 
consisting chiefly of salted, high-seasoned, or acrid 
food; the use of spirituous liquors; excessive fa- 
tigue; violent passions of the mind, &c.

To restrain this flux, the patient should be kept 
quiet and easy both in body and mind. If it be 
very violent, she ought to lie in bed with her head 
low; to live upon a cool and slender diet, as veal 
or chicken broths with bread; and to drink de- 
coctions of nettle-roots, or the greater comfrey. 
If these be not sufficient to stop the flux, stronger 
|P_655
astringents may be used, as allum, the Peruvian 
bark, &c.[/8./]

But the uterine flux may offend in quality as 
well as in quantity. What is usually called the 
fluor albus, or whites, is a very common disease, 
and proves extremely hurtful to delicate women. 
This discharge, however, is not always white, but 
sometimes pale, yellow, green, or of a blackish 
colour; sometimes it is sharp and corrosive, some- 
times foul and fœtid, &c. It is attended with a 
pale complexion, pain in the spine of the back, 
loss of appetite, swelling of the feet, &c. It ge- 
nerally proceeds from a relaxed and debilitated 
state of the body, arising from indolence, the ex- 
cessive use of tea, coffee, or other weak and wa- 
tery diet. 

To remove this disease, the patient must take 
as much exercise as she can bear without fatigue. 
Her food must be solid and nourishing, but of 
easy digestion; and her drink pretty generous, as 
red port or claret. These may be drank pure, or 
mixed with water, as the patient inclines. Tea 
and coffee are to be avoided. I have often known 
|P_656
strong broths have an exceeding good effect in this 
case. The patient ought not to lie too long a-bed. 
When medicine is necessary, we know none pre- 
ferable to the Peruvian bark, which, in this case, 
ought always to be taken in substance. In warm 
weather, the cold bath will be of considerable 
service. 

That period of life at which the menses cease 
to flow, is likewise very critical to the sex. The 
stoppage of any customary evacuation, however 
small, is sufficient to disorder the whole frame, 
and often to destroy life itself. Hence it comes 
to pass, that so many women either fall into chro- 
nic disorders, or die about this time: Such of 
them however as survive it, without contracting 
any chronic disease, often become more healthy 
and hardy than they were before, and enjoy 
strength and vigour to a very great age. 

If the menses cease all of a sudden, in women 
of a full habit, they ought to abate somewhat of 
their usual quantity of food, especially of the 
more nourishing kind, as flesh, eggs, &c. They 
ought likewise to take sufficient exercise, and to 
keep the body open. This may be done by tak- 
ing, once or twice a-week, a little rhubarb, or an 
infusion of hiera picra in wine or brandy. 

It often happens that women of a gross habit, 
at this period of life, have ulcerous sores break 
out about their ancles, or in other parts of the 
body. Such ulcers ought to be considered as 
critical, and should either be suffered to continue 
|P_657
open, or artifical drains should be substituted in 
their stead. Women who will needs have such sores 
dried up, are often soon after seized with acute or 
chronic diseases, of which they die. 

[}OF PREGNANCY. }]
Pregnant women are often afflicted with the 
heart-burn. The method of treating this com- 
plaint has already been pointed out. They are 
likewise, in the more early periods of pregnancy, 
often harassed with sickness and vomitings, espe- 
cially in the morning. The method of relieving 
these complaints has also been already shewn. 
Both the head-ach and tooth-ach are very trouble- 
some symptoms of pregnancy. The former may 
generally be removed by keeping the body gently 
open, by the use of prunes, figs, roasted apples, 
and such like. When the pain is very violent, 
bleeding may be necessary. For the treatment of 
the latter, we must refer the reader to that article. 
Several other complaints incident to pregnant wo- 
men might be mentioned, as a cough and diffi- 
culty of breathing, suppression and incontinency 
of urine, &c.; but as all of these have been taken 
notice of before, we shall not repeat them. 

Every pregnant woman is more or less in dan- 
ger of abortion. This should be guarded against 
with the greatest care, as it not only weakens the 
constitution, but renders the woman liable to the 
same misfortune afterwards. Abortion may hap- 
|P_658
pen at any period of pregnancy, but it is most 
common in the second or third month. Some- 
times, however, it happens in the fourth or fifth. 
If it happens within the first month, it is usually 
called a false conception; if after the seventh 
month, the child may often be kept alive by pro- 
per care. 

The common causes of abortion are, the death 
of the child; weakness or relaxation of the mo- 
ther; great evacuations; violent exercise; raising 
great weights; reaching too high; vomiting; 
coughing; convulsion-fits; strokes on the belly; 
falls; fevers; disagreeable smells; excess of 
blood; indolence; high living; or the con- 
trary; violent passions or affections of the mind, 
as fear, grief, &c.

The signs of approaching abortion are, pain 
in the loins, or about the bottom of the belly; 
a dull heavy pain in the inside of the thighs; a 
slight degree of coldness or shivering; sickness; 
palpitation of the heart; the breasts become flat 
and soft; the belly falls; and there is a discharge 
of blood or watery humours from the womb. 

To prevent abortion, we would advise women 
of a weak or relaxed habit to use solid food, 
avoiding great quantities of tea, and other weak 
and watery liquors; to rise early, and go soon to 
bed; to shun damp houses; to take frequent ex- 
ercise in the open air, but to avoid fatigue; and 
never to go abroad in damp foggy weather, if they 
can shun it. 

|P_659
Women of a full habit ought to use a spare 
diet, avoiding strong liquors, and every thing that 
may tend to heat the body, or increase the quan- 
tity of blood. Their diet should be of an open- 
ing nature, consisting principally of vegetable 
substances. Every woman with child ought to be 
kept cheerful and easy in her mind. All violent 
passions endanger the life of the fœtus, and may 
cause an abortion. 

When any signs of abortion appear, the wo- 
man ought to be laid in bed on a mattress, with 
her head low. She should be kept quiet, and her 
mind soothed and comforted. She ought not to 
be too warm, nor to take any thing of a heat- 
ing nature. Her food should consist of broths, 
rice and milk, jellies, gruels made of oat-meal, 
and the like. 

If she be able to bear it, she should lose, at 
least, half a pound of blood from the arm. Her 
drink ought to be barley-water sharpened with juice 
of lemon; or she may take half a dram of pow- 
dered nitre, in a cup of water-gruel, every five or 
six hours. If the woman be seized with a violent 
looseness, she ought to drink the decoction of 
calcined hartshorn prepared. If she be affected 
with vomiting, let her take frequently two table- 
spoonfuls of the saline mixture. 

Sanguine robust women, who are liable to 
miscarry at a certain time of pregnancy, ought al- 
ways to be bled a few days before that period ar- 
rives. By this means, and observing the regimen 
|P_660
above prescribed, they might often escape that mis- 
fortune. 

Though we recommend due care for prevent- 
ing abortion, we would not be understood as re- 
straining pregnant women from their usual exer- 
cises. This would operate the quite contrary 
way. Want of exercise not only relaxes the body, 
but induces a plethora, or too great a fulness of 
the vessels, which are the two principal causes of 
abortion. 

[}OF CHILD-BIRTH. }]
Many diseases proceed from the want of due 
care in child-bed; and the more hardy part of the 
sex are most apt to despise the necessary precau- 
tions in this state. This is peculiarly the case with 
young wives. They think, when the labour-pains 
are ended, the danger is over; but in truth it may 
only then be said to be begun. Nature, if left to 
herself, will seldom fail to expel the fœtus; but proper 
care and management are certainly necessary for 
the recovery of the mother. No doubt, mischief 
may be done by too much as well as by too little 
care. Hence females who have the greatest num- 
ber of attendants in child-bed generally recover 
worst. But this is not peculiar to the state of 
child-bed. Excessive care always defeats its own 
intention, and is generally more dangerous than 
none at all. 

|P_661
During actual labour, nothing of a heating 
nature must be given. The woman may, now 
and then, take a little panado, and her drink 
ought to be toast and water, or thin groat-gruel. 
Spirits, wines, cordial-waters, and other things 
which are given with a view to strengthen the mo- 
ther, and promote the birth, for the most part 
tend only to increase the fever, inflame the womb, 
and retard the labour. Besides, they endanger 
the woman afterwards, as they often occasion vio- 
lent and mortal hæmorrhages, or dispose her to 
eruptive and other fevers. 

When the labour proves tedious and difficult, 
to prevent inflammations, it will be proper to 
bleed. An emollient clyster ought likewise fre- 
quently to be administered; and the patient 
should sit over the steams of warm water. The 
passage ought to be gently rubbed with a little 
soft pomatum or fresh butter, and cloths wrung 
out of warm water applied over the belly. If 
Nature seems to sink, and the woman is greatly 
exhausted with fatigue, a draught of generous 
wine, or some other cordial may be given, but 
not otherwise. These directions are sufficient in 
natural labours; and in all preternatural cases, a 
skilful surgeon, or man-midwife, ought to be call- 
ed as soon as possible. 

We cannot help taking notice of that ridiculous 
custom which still prevails in some parts of the 
country, of collecting a number of women toge- 
ther upon such occasions. These, instead of being 
|P_662
useful, serve only to crowd the house, and ob- 
struct the necessary attendants. Besides, they 
hurt the patient with their noise; and often, by 
their untimely and impertinent advice, do much 
mischief. 

After delivery, the woman ought to be kept 
as quiet and easy as possible. Her food should be 
light and thin, as gruel, panado, &c.; and her 
drink weak and diluting. To this rule, however, 
there are some exceptions. I have known several 
hysteric women, whose spirits could not be sup- 
ported in child-bed without solid food and gene- 
rous liquors; to such a glass of wine and a bit of 
chicken must be allowed. 

Sometimes an excessive hæmorrhage or flood- 
ing happens after delivery. In this case, the pa- 
tient should be laid with her head low, kept cool, 
and be in all respects treated as for an excessive 
flux of the menses. If the flooding proves violent, 
linen cloths, which have been wrung out of a 
mixture of equal parts of vinegar and water, 
or red wine, should be applied to the belly, the 
loins, and the thighs: These must be changed as 
they grow dry; and may be discontinued as soon 
as the flooding abates [/9./]

|P_663
If there be violent pains after delivery, the pa- 
tient ought to drink plentifully of warm diluting 
liquors, as tea with a little saffron; or an infusion 
of camomile flowers; and to take small broths, 
with carroway seeds, or a bit of orange-peel in 
them; an ounce of the oil of sweet almonds may 
likewise be frequently taken in a cup of any of the 
above liquors; and if the patient be restless, a 
spoonful of the syrup of poppies may now and 
then be mixed with a cup of her drink. If she be 
hot or feverish, one of the following powders may 
be taken in a cup of her usual drink, every five or 
six hours [/10./]. 

An inflammation of the womb is a dangerous 
and not unfrequent disease after delivery. It is 
known by pains in the lower part of the belly, 
which are greatly increased upon touching; by 
the tension or tightness of the parts; great weak- 
ness; change of countenance; a constant fever, 
with a weak and hard pulse; a slight delirium or 
raving; sometimes incessant vomiting; a hiccup; 
a discharge of redish, stinking, sharp water from 
the womb; an inclination to go frequently to 
|P_664
stool; a heat, and sometimes total suppression of 
urine. 

This must be treated like other inflammatory 
disorders, by bleeding and plentiful dilution. 
The drink may be thin gruel or barley water; in 
a cup of which half a dram of nitre may be dissol- 
ved, and taken three or four times a day. Clys- 
ters of warm water must be frequently admini- 
stered; and the belly should be fomented by 
cloths wrung out of warm water, or by applying 
bladders filled with warm milk and water to it. 

A suppression of the lochia, or usual discharges 
after delivery, and the milk-fever, must be treat- 
ed nearly in the same manner as an inflammation 
of the womb. In all these cases, the safest course 
is plentiful dilution, gentle evacuations, and fo- 
mentations of the parts affected. In the milk- 
fever, the breasts may be embrocated with a little 
warm linseed oil, or the leaves of red cabbage 
may be applied to them. The child should be 
often put to the breast, or it should be drawn by 
some other person. 

Nothing would tend more to prevent the 
milk-fever, than putting the child early to the 
breast. The custom of not allowing children to 
suck for the first two or three days, is contrary to 
Nature and common sense, and is very hurtful 
both to the mother and child. 

Every mother who has milk in her breasts, 
ought either to suckle her own child, or to have 
|P_665
her breasts frequently drawn, at least for the first 
month. This would prevent many of the dis- 
eases which prove fatal to women in child-bed. 

When an inflammation happens in the breast, 
attended with redness, hardness, and other symp- 
toms of suppuration, the safest application is a 
poultice of bread and milk, softened with oil or fresh 
butter. This may be renewed twice a-day, till the 
tumour be either discussed or brought to suppura- 
tion. The use of repellants, in this case, is very dan- 
gerous; they often occasion fevers, and sometimes 
cancers: Whereas a suppuration is seldom attend- 
ed with any danger, and has often the most salu- 
tary effects. 

When the nipples are fretted or chapt, they 
may be anointed with a mixture of oil and bees- 
wax, or a little gum-arabic may be sprinkled on 
them. I have seen Hungary-water applied to the 
nipples have a very good effect. Should the com- 
plaint prove obstinate, a cooling purge may be 
given, which generally removes it. 

The miliary fever is a disease very incident to 
women in child-bed. But as it has been treated 
of already, we shall take no further notice of it 
here. The celebrated Hoffman observes, That 
this fever of child-bed women might generally be 
prevented, if they, during their pregnancy, were 
regular in their diet, used moderate exercise, took 
now and then a gentle laxative of manna, rhu- 
barb, or cream of tartar; not forgetting to bleed 
|P_666
in the first months, and avoid all sharp air. When 
the labour is coming on, it is not to be hastened 
with forcing medicines, which inflame the blood 
and humours, or put them into unnatural com- 
motions. Care should be taken, after the birth, 
that the natural excretions proceed regularly; and 
if the pulse be quick, a little nitrous powder 
should be givem, &c.

We shall conclude our observations on child- 
bed women by recommending it to them, above 
all things, to beware of cold. Poor women, 
whose circumstances oblige them to quit their bed 
too soon, often contract diseases from cold, of 
which they never recover. It is pity the poor are 
not better taken care of in this situation. 

But the better sort of women run the greatest 
hazard from too much heat. They are generally 
kept in a sort of bagnio for the first eight or ten 
days, and then dressed out to see company. The 
danger of this conduct must be obvious to every 
one. 

The superstitious custom of obliging women to 
keep the house till they go to church, is likewise 
a very common cause of catching cold. All 
churches are damp, and most of them cold; 
consequently they are the very worst places to 
which a woman can go to make her first visit, 
after having been confined in a warm room for a 
month. 

|P_667
[}OF BARRENNESS. }]
Barrenness may be very properly reckoned 
among the diseases of females, as few married 
women who have not children enjoy a good state 
of health. It may proceed from various causes; 
but we shall only take notice of three, viz. high 
living, relaxation, and grief. 

It is very certain that high living vitiates the 
humours, and prevents fecundity. We seldom 
find a barren woman among the labouring poor, 
while nothing is more common amongst the rich 
and affluent. The inhabitants of every country 
are prolific in proportion to their poverty, and it 
would be an easy matter to adduce many instances 
of women who, by being reduced to live entirely 
upon a milk and vegetable diet, have conceived and 
brought forth children, though they never had any 
before. Would the rich use the same sort of food 
and exercise as the better sort of peasants, they 
would seldom have cause to envy their poor vas- 
sals and dependents the blessing of a numerous 
and healthy offspring, while they pine in sorrow 
for the want of even a single heir to their extensive 
dominions. 

Affluence begets indolence, which not only 
vitiates the humours, but induces a general re- 
laxation of the solids; a state highly unfavourable 
to procreation. To remove this we would re- 
|P_668
commend the following course. First, sufficient 
exercise in the open air; secondly, a diet con- 
sisting chiefly of milk and vegetables [/11./]; thirdly, 
the use of astringent medicines, as allum, dragon's 
blood, elixir of vitriol, the Peruvian bark, &c.; 
and lastly, the cold bath. 

Whatever obstructs the menstrual flux may 
be considered as a cause of barrenness. Hence it 
is often the consequence of grief, sudden fear, 
anxiety, or any of the depressing passions. When 
barrenness is suspected to proceed from delusions 
of the mind, the person ought to be kept as easy 
and cheerful as possible; all disagreeable objects 
are to be avoided, and every method taken to 
amuse and entertain the fancy. 


[^1. 
* Tacitus, the celebrated Roman historian, complains 
greatly of the degeneracy of the Roman ladies in his time, 
|P_5
with regard to the care of their offspring. He says that, in 
former times, the greatest women in Rome used to account it 
their chief glory to keep the house and attend their children; 
but that now the young infant was committed to the sole care 
of some poor Grecian wench or other menial servant.—We 
are afraid, wherever luxury and effeminacy prevail, there will 
be too much ground for this complaint. 
^]
[^2. 
* The common opinion, that the diseases of infants are 
hard to discover and difficult to cure, has deterred many phy- 
sicians from paying that attention to them which they deserve. 
I can however, from experience, declare that this opinion is 
without foundation, and that the diseases of infants are nei- 
ther so difficult to discover nor so ill to cure as those of adults. 
This we hope will induce practitioners to pay more regard to 
the complaints of their young patients, and not to leave them 
intirely in the hands of old women. 
^]
[^3. Of diseased 
parents. ^]
[^4. 
* Rousseau. 
^]
[^5. Of the 
clothing of 
children. ^]
[^6. 
* This is by no means inveighing against a thing that does 
not happen. In many parts of Britain at this day, a roller, 
five or six feet in length, is applied tightly round the child's 
body as soon as it is born. 
^]
[^7. 
* Stays made of bend-leather are worn by all the women 
of lower station in many parts of England. 
^]
[^8. 
* Two drams of allum and one of Japan earth may be 
pounded together, and divided into eight or nine doses, one 
of which may be taken three times a-day. Persons whose 
stomachs cannot bear the allum, may take two table-spoonfuls 
of the tincture of roses three or four times a-day, to each dose 
of which, ten drops of laudanum may be added. 

If these should fail, half a dram of the Peruvian bark, in 
powder, with ten drops of the elixir of vitriol, may be taken, 
in a glass of red wine, four times a-day. 
^]
[^9. 
* In a violent flooding after delivery, I have seen very good 
effects from the following mixture. Take of penny-royal 
water, simple cinnamon water, and syrup of poppies, each 
two ounces, acid elixir of vitriol a dram. Mix, and take 
two table-spoonfuls every two hours, or oftener if necessary. 
^]
[^10. 
* Take of crabs claws prepared half an ounce, purified 
nitre two drams, saffron powdered half a dram; rub them to- 
gether in a mortar, and divide the whole into eight or nine 
doses. When the patient is low-spirited, or troubled with 
hysterical complaints, she ought to take frequently twelve or 
fifteen drops of the tincture of asafœtida in a cup of penny- 
royal tea. 
^]
[^11. 
* Dr. Chyne avers, that want of children is oftener the fault 
of the male than of the female, and strongly recommends a 
milk and vegetable diet to the former as well as the latter; 
adding, that his friend Dr. Taylor, whom he calls the Milk- 
doctor of Croydon, had brought sundry opulent families in his 
neighbourhood, who had continued some years after marriage 
without progeny, to have several fine children, by keeping 
both parents, for a considerable time, to a milk and vege- 
table diet. 
^]