
|P_
THE FOLLOWING PAGES 
ARE MOST RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED 
TO THE 
PRESIDENTS AND OTHER MEMBERS
OF THE 
MEDICAL SOCIETY. 

|P_
|P_
[}AN 
ADDRESS, &c.}]GENTLEMEN, 

IT is with much diffidence that I offi-
cially presume to deliver a few de-
tach'd thoughts, chiefly respecting Medi-
cal Improvement; as an address in-
troductory to the commencement of our 
literary business in this place. Your in-
dulgent candour which I have so often 
experienced, I flatter myself, will, on this 
occasion, impute the faults which you 
will doubtless discover, not to intention, 
but inability or misconception. 

I chearfully embrace this opportunity 
to express the most grateful impressions I 
|P_8
entertain of the great and unsollicited 
honour you have been pleased to confer 
upon me, by twice calling me to the of-
fice of President. Had my powers been 
equal to my wishes, no part of my con-
duct in that elevated character, had been 
unworthy of you, or of this chair. Al-
tho' indispensible avocation permits me 
no longer to hold any office among you; 
yet will I lose no opportunity of being 
present, and, as far as I may be able, of 
assisting in your instructive speculations; 
and of promoting to the utmost of my 
power, the general prosperity of a Society 
to which I ever have been so much at-
tached. 

In the commercial world, it is allowed 
by all, that the comparative rate of ex-
change, is a just index of the prosperous 
or adverse state of trade in different 
countries individually, or relatively con-
|P_9
sidered. With no less truth, in my 
opnion, the comparative degree of 
cultivation to which Belles Lettres and 
philosophy, or the fine and useful arts, 
arrive in different kingdoms may be re-
garded as demonstrative of their re-
lative civilization. 

Judging by this criterion, altho' in 
this respect Caledonia may not justly 
boast of being the first, she is by no 
means the last of the European nations: 
Her progress in the walk of general 
science and liberality is rapid, and I 
hope will long continue so. Justice, 
however, constrains me to confess, that 
long, too long, in a great degree, she had 
neglected the Medical Philosophy. 
In an Aera not beyond the recollection 
of some present, the immortal honour of 
planting a medical school in this Metropo-
lis; now indeed second in fame and 
erudition to none in Europe, was reserv-
|P_10
ed to a distinguished, a fortunate Mon-
ro. To his memory consenting nations 
pay that just tribute of applause, which 
his country in general, but this City and 
its University in particular, ought to 
perpetuate by a statue. 

By a Worthy Select Bandof the 
numerous students, who flocked from all 
quarters, allured by the rising fame of 
the Edinburgh University; this Medical 
Society in 1737, was happily institu-
ted. Of its various progress and present 
flourishing independent state, I presume 
you to be well informed; and there-
fore avoid attempting any particular his-
torical narration of these circumstances at 
present. 

The Building[/1./] in which we are now 
|P_11
assembled is a grand phenomenon of medi-
cal ardor, unparallelled in any country; 
and may justly be regarded as a temple 
sacred to Æsculapius, reared by the 
virtuous zeal of his youthful votaries, 
for purposes the most liberal and praise-
worthy. The Friends of Science, not 
of your number,[/2./] who have generously 
contributed towards its structure; are 
entitled to our most grateful thanks. 

Contemplating this Fabric, and the 
many other aids which the present ad-
vantageous state of our society affords 
to facilitate study; you must have anti-
cipated me in this reflection, that, while 
our minds are gratefully affected to 
our Meritorious Predecessors, our 
|P_12
every power ought to be exerted, if not 
to advance, at least, to maintain our ex-
tended reputation: that, the verdant lau-
rels they have transmitted may not wi-
ther in our hands, overwhelming us with 
indelible ignominy and disgrace. 

'Tis with the highest pleasure, I per-
ceive, without being chargeable with 
adulation, I can fairly aver, that this So-
ciety at no period of its existence has 
been more secure of progress than at 
present: the learning, genius and manly 
liberality of sentiment, which I know you 
possess, and which, with much satisfac-
tion and instruction, I have so often ob-
served animating your debates; constitute 
the foundation on which this assertion rests. 

You are not to be informed that the com-
bined powers of Genius and Industry
must perseveringly operate thro' the 
course of several years, that a tolerably 
|P_13
complete knowledge of even the elemen-
tary parts of the science of medicine, as 
already ascertained and taught, may be 
acquired. To have proceeded so far in 
medical study, is indeed to have made no 
despicable progress: But I trust your 
ardent ambition is more aspiring than to 
remain satisfied with the acquisition of a 
bare acquaintance of the dogmata of this, 
or the other Medical Sect or professor, 
i. e. of the present state of the healing art. 
It would be offering an undeserved insult to 
your sagacity, were I but once to 
imagine, that you could entertain a be-
lief, that the Medical Philosophy had al-
ready attained the utmost perfection of 
which it is susceptible. You well know, 
that the unexplored regions of the terra 
incognita Medicinalis, so to speak, still af-
ford abundant scope for your most pro-
tracted labours; so just is the observa-
tion, ars longa, vita brevis.

|P_14
Anatomy, as being the grand basis
of the Medical Fabric, from the earliest 
periods of society, in every civilized coun-
try, has been cultivated with the most 
unrelenting ardor of investigation, which 
many most material improvements have 
from time to time rewarded. Are there 
not still, however, many very interesting 
parts and circumstances of the structure 
of the Animal Automaton which we 
but little know? and many others of 
great importance, of which we are total-
ly ignorant? What anatomist has hither-
to been able successfully to evolve the 
texture of the Spleen; an organ of 
considerable size, and probably of pro-
portional importance in the animal œco-
nomy? Very lately it has been supposed 
the sole fabricator of the globular part of 
the blood[/3./]. The same question may be 
put with respect to the structure of the 
Muscular Fibre, or Living Solid; 
|P_15
and that Specific Configuration of 
the several orders of the Secretory 
Organs, upon which such a wonderful 
variety and opposition of secreted liquors 
probably depends. But, above all, it 
may be put with respect to the Brain, 
and Its Appendages; parts essential to 
life, often the seat of disease, evidently 
variously organized, of great volume and 
surprizingly diversified in their external form. 

I will be pardoned for expressing my 
fears, that few anatomical improvements 
are to be expected from you while resi-
ding in this country; at least, while its 
present TONE continues, however great 
your ability and ardor: because an insu-
perable barrier is opposed to your pro-
gress; I mean the want of private 
Dissection. In the end of the eight-
teenth century, when philosophical libera-
lity is diffused from Pole to Pole, what a 
|P_16
pity, or rather what a shame, that, even 
in the Metropolis of a kingdom, not un-
civilized, and in its principal Universi-
ty too, where the circle of education 
is otherwise tolerably complete; this 
Grand and almost only Avenue to 
the Æsculapian Temple, should re-
main most barbarously blocked up! 

A public course of anatomical demon-
stration, exceeded by none, and equalled 
by few, is, I confess, annually made here; 
by a learned, discerning, accurate, inde-
fatigable Professor: whom none of you 
can more respect than I do. I, notwith-
standing, hesitate not to declare it as my 
positive opinion, and I will venture to say 
it is not solitary, that, no public anatomi-
cal exhibitions, where the student is mere-
ly a passive Spectator, are sufficient 
to convey and impress those precise and 
multifarious ideas of this important 
branch of natural knowledge, absolute-
ly requisite to complete the medical 
|P_17
character; throwing discovery altogether 
out of the question. 

To acquire a tolerable knowledge of 
even the great outlines of anatomy, it is 
indispensibly necessary to take the knife 
in hand, and, with the most unremitting 
attention, dissect a variety of bodies of 
different sizes, ages, and sexes, properly 
chosen, and prepared for the purpose: 
Much more must this plan be followed, 
if it be proposed to soar in the regions of 
discovery and improvement. I can ex-
perimentally assert, that more anatomical 
information will be reaped from the well 
conducted dissection of one body, than 
from repeated public courses. 

If this opinion be well founded, it is 
a self-evident consequence, that attending 
one or two public courses of anatomy, 
must be much inadequate to accomplish 
the medical philosopher; especially, if 
the practice of surgery, the most evident-
ly useful part of the healing art, be his 
|P_18
destination. Humanity revolts at the 
idea of the many unavoidable, and, I 
fear, too often fatal blunders that must 
result from this capital defect of the me-
dical education to be obtained in this 
country. It is abundantly mortifying 
indeed, to observe those who wish to at-
tain a proper degree of anatomical know-
ledge, after spending several years at our 
Universities, and probably attaining their 
highest honours, reduced to the alterna-
tive of either undertaking expensive ex-
peditions into foreign countries, in this 
respect more civilized than ours; or of 
remaining dangerously uninformed. 

If one should attempt to adjust the 
wheels and springs of a nice and delicate 
mechanism, he, perhaps, had never be-
fore seen, or, at least, never minutely 
considered; with what indignant contempt 
would we treat the rude audacious pre-
tender? Thousands, alas! are daily sub-
|P_19
jected to the unpractised knife of opera-
tors of necessity aukward, I had almost 
said unskilled; because they never could 
enjoy the requisite opportunity, of either 
acquiring proper dexterity to perform 
any proposed operation with due address; 
or full knowledge of the parts concern-
ed: from the want of access to the dead 
human body. 

This alarming consideration is surely of 
sufficient force to conquer the vulgar 
prejudices against private dissection, whe-
ther the offspring of superstition or igno-
rance. The violation of the sepulchre or 
the clandestine robbery of the tomb, 
is most justly regarded as a crime of a 
deep dye; but certainly private dissecti-
on, under proper regulations, is compa-
tible with the most absolute security in 
this respect. Of this the practice of 
most of the European countries is an ir-
refragable proof; viz. of these countries 
to which our students are compelled to 
|P_20
resort, to obtain opportunities of diffec-
ting which might so easily be afforded at 
home. Were a proportional number of 
dead human bodies annually furnished 
by authority, to the medical Students in 
the different towns of Scotland in gene-
ral, and to those attending our Universi-
ties, in particular, for private dissection: 
the salutary consequences would soon 
surpass conception. It is truly astonish-
ing, that a matter of such endless impor-
tance had not, long e'er now, challenged 
the notice, and roused the attention of 
the Honourable Superintendants
of our Police, or even of the Legisla-
ture itself. 

The Criminal and Flagitious, whether 
they expire under the hands of the exe-
cutioner, or by disease; ought always to 
be consigned to the anatomical knife: 
that thus, in some degree, when dead, 
they may attone to society for their de-
|P_21
predation and turbulence when alive. 
Public utility seems likewise to have a 
good title to the use of the dead bo-
dies of those who by idleness and dissipa-
tion, have rendered themselves objects of 
public charity; and consequently, per-
haps for many years, have been cloathed 
and fed at the public expence. 

Humanity, Patriotism, and even self-
interest conspire, to stimulate every in-
dividual to promote, at least, not to op-
pose the establishment of a measure so 
pregnant with the most solid advantages 
to mankind. The advancing liberality 
of this country, affords the strongest rea-
sons to hope that the auspicious Æra is 
not very distant, when medical improve-
ment shall be no more retarded by the 
impossibility of acquiring anatomical in-
formation in the only way that it can 
be acquired; a mischief hitherto so op-
probrious, fatal, and gigantic. 

|P_22
If Anatomy be defective, Phisiology
which teaches the functions of the va-
rious organs and parts detected by ana-
tomy, must necessarily be proportionally 
defective. Not only is this the fact, but 
the uses even of many parts which the 
anatomist has described with tolerable ac-
curacy, are far, very far, from being suf-
ficiently explained by the phisiologist; 
e. g. Of several of the generative 
 Organs, of the differentSub-
stances and Protuberances of the 
Brain, of the Ganglions, &c. 

In like manner, many of the gene-
ral laws and principles of the living sys-
tem are not illustrated with satisfactory 
precision; while one physiologist affirms 
that Menstruation depends on to-
pical, another refers it to general 
Plethora. Some contend that Nutri-
tion is effected by the Nerves, others 
by the Vessels: and a variety of facts 
|P_23
are artfully adduced, to establish these 
opposite doctrines. With respect to 
many other physiological disquisitions the 
same contrariety of opinion exists. 

If the question be put, "What shall be 
said when Doctors disagree?" I reply, 
recur to nature, collect useful facts, from 
them draw manly, liberal, chaste con-
clusions; disregard ideal, cobweb, flimsy 
theories, the baseless fabric of a vision. 
General Principles, rationally de-
duced as corrollaries from established 
facts, only, in my opinion, can justly 
claim the dignified appellation of Theo-
ry. 

Pathology, you know, treats of the 
morbid States of animal nature, with 
a view to effect their Prevention, Al-
leviation or Cure. Many anatomical 
and physiological speculations are more 
curious than useful, and may, therefore, 
altho' not strictly just, have the merit 
|P_24
of being innocent. Pathological disqui-
sitions, on the contrary, must always pro-
duce the most serious consequences; be-
cause they influence the medical conduct 
of disease. Our small knowledge, or 
rather our great ignorance, of this depart-
ment, affords but a melancholy theme to 
the anxious philosophic inquirer. The va-
riety and opposition, the absurdity and 
confusion of numberless futile conceits, 
wild imaginations, fanciful opinions, dig-
nified forsooth with the name of Doct-
rines, are the opprobrium of the medi-
cal profession: and present to the con-
templative mind, the idea of primæval 
Chaos, when darkness brooded over the 
great abyss. 

Altho' I possessed ability, neither your 
time nor patience permit me to attempt 
a particular enumeration of the striking 
absurdities, which have, in a great de-
gree, hitherto overwhelmed pathology, 
|P_25
depressing medicine far beneath the 
rank of her sister arts; because these 
arts are established in the evolved un-
alterable laws of nature. 

One class of pathologists have recourse 
to the sensible qualities of the At-
mosphere, as chiefly contributing to 
create the numerous and important tribe 
of febrile disorders; and endeavour to 
support their reasonings by meteorologi-
cal registers and observations without 
end. With equal confidence, another 
tribe, disregarding in a great measure, this 
opinion, muster up invisible mias-
mata and floating Poisons, to untie 
every gordian knot; either as principal 
agents, or complete efficients. In like 
manner, while the favourite system of one 
period, refers us, with much plausibility, 
to the Fluids, and morbific matter
there existing, for the Seat and Causes
of many diseases; that of another, with 
|P_26
at least equal probability, directs our at-
tention almost solely to spasm and other 
affections of the Solids. 

I cannot avoid here to remark, that 
were the science of medicine like fluxi-
ons, infinitesimals, the quadrature of the 
circle, &c. i. e. purely a matter of 
curious uninteresting speculation; we 
might view the fluctuating insta-
bility of its Dogmata or Doctrines, 
as they are called; with the same Tone of 
mind with which we contemplate the 
fantastic shiftings of the aurora borealis,
or visions of the night. But how diame-
trically opposite must be the feelings of 
humanity, reflecting that these successive 
doctrines have respectively, during their 
fashionable periods of domination, greatly 
influenced the medical management of 
disease; compelling the passive entramel-
led, bewildered practitioner, to employ 
the most opposite curative means, in the 
|P_27
same morbid states: the consequent ha-
vock, devastation, and massacre of man-
kind is more easily imagined than descri-
bed. 

The ancient maxim in medio tutissi-
mus ibis,  should perhaps never be en-
tirely neglected. It seems exceedingly 
probable a priori, that, the fluids being 
made or elaborated by the solids; and 
these, on the other hand, supported by 
the fluids; their affections will not long 
remain distinct, but rather always be re-
ciprocal: However, 
"Non nostrum tantas componere lites."

Moreover, how little we do know with 
tolerable certainty, respecting the im-
pressions made on the sentient parts
of our bodies, by what are named the 
potentiae nocentes; or of the derange-
mentof Organization; or of the 
Number and Nature of the morbid 
alterations thence consequent! yet 
|P_28
it seems absolutely necessary that these 
particulars be marked with the utmost 
possible precision. For instance, we are 
told, that there are two species of fe-
brile delirium, requiring the most opposite 
treatment; but who has hither-
to pointed out, with sufficient accuracy, 
the symptoms ascertaining their important 
discrimination? If, therefore, in such 
a perilous predicament the Genius of 
blunder should but for a moment over-
cloud the practitioner's discernment, 
which is a very supposable, but I hope, 
a rare occurence; conclamatum est.

'Till pathology, therefore, is more de-
termined and complete, don't cases beset 
with dubiety and peril, seem justly to de-
mand a suspension of hostilities (so to 
speak) or of our therapeutic efforts; 
which, permit me to say, may often with 
justice be termed the impertinence of 
art? These daring practitioners, who in 
|P_29
the advanced critical febrile states, which 
they by no means understand, exhibit 
febrifuge nostrums,[/4./] with a teme-
rity that equally shocks our feelings, and 
alarms our fears; may not ineptly be 
compared to the nonplus'd statesman; 
who, to smother dissention and broil, of 
which his mal-administration is probably 
the cause, risks the very existence of the 
state itself, by plunging it headlong into 
general combustion, and foreign war. 

It is with much pleasure I acknow-
ledge, that, in this most essential depart-
ment of the medical philosophy, light 
and order happily begin to diffuse their 
genial influence over darkness and con-
fusion. The genius and labours
of some whom this Society can reckon 
among her honorary sons, have al-
ready contributed, in no small degree, 
|P_30
to this most desirable purpose. I am 
confident I speak your sentiments, and 
most assuredly my own, when I mention 
with the most particular gratitude, the 
great advantages we have so often and 
so happily reaped in our inquiries, from 
the Cullenian Nosology: a work per-
spicuous tho' concise, elaborate yet not 
voluminous, in every part demonstrative 
of the liberal views, and extensive medi-
cal erudition of its very respectable and 
accomplished author, who with truth 
may say, 
"Exegi monumentum aere perennius."

Supposing just indications of cure to 
be formed, in consequence of an advan-
ced and chaste pathology, to be then 
provided with proper and active Agents
or Remedies to fulfil these indications; 
becomes a matter of most important con-
cern. The jarring opinions of authors 
|P_31
respecting the nature, activity, dose and 
mode of exhibition, of almost every ar-
ticle of the Materia Medica; present 
a most extensive field for useful experi-
ment and investigation. 

With respect to medical improvement, 
I shall only in general add, that, your ex-
pectations, in my opinion, are less likely 
to be frustrated, if you look for it to re-
sult more from anatomical physiological 
and pathological progress, than from the 
discovery of any addition to the Materia 
Medica. This part of the medical sci-
ence is by no means to be neglected, altho' 
it be probable, that advancing but a single 
step in any of the other walks, may be 
productive of more real and solid im-
provement and utility, than the acquisi-
tion of a thousand simples; if it be true, 
that it is an easier business to fulfil, than 
institute proper curative indications. 

|P_32
Be assured that the Physician towers 
above the Empiric, the nurse and old wo-
man almost only in proportion to his su-
perior information respecting the parts, 
the laws, and morbid states of ani-
mal nature; the more perfect his acquire-
ments in these particulars, the higher his 
pre-eminence among the sons of Aescu-
lapius. No mode of inauguration how-
ever solemn, no academic rites or autho-
rity however great or antient, can elevate 
to the honourable rank of Physician, a 
person of an opposite description. Such a 
one could only be regarded as an empty 
dignified form, around whose blighting 
temples, the venal, the surreptitious, 
the prostituted laurels of Apol-
lo must basely fade to the utter discredit 
of all concerned; a more melancholy 
consequence still would be, that his prac-
tice could not fail to prove the bane of so-
ciety, operating the destruction of such in-
dividuals
|P_33
as might become the unfortu-
nate subjects of his temerity. 

If therefore to become a Physician, 
(i. e. to be qualified to mark with preci-
sion, the almost infinitely various affec-
tions of animated matter, so as to direct, 
as far as may be, its movements to the 
blissful abode of longaevity and health,) 
be a task only terminating with life, 
to be exhausted by no labour, and to 
which the most discriminating mental 
powers are not superior; the folly, not 
to say criminality of attempts[/5./] to incite 
vulgar vanity to tamper with the most 
precious interests of mankind, needs 
no illustration. 

In every species of philosophical inves-
tigation, particularly those of a medical 
nature, where certainty is so difficultly 
attained; to guard against credulity, 
is a counsel, I deem of such infinite im-
portance, that, before I put an end to this 
|P_34
address, I cannot help tendering it in the 
most earnest manner to the particular no-
tice of my younger Socii. In all 
cases, where there is not absolute de-
monstration, or at least as high a degree 
of evidence, as the nature of the argu-
ment admits; to suspend belief or to ex-
ercise a proper degree of scepticism, till 
mature examination and reflection shall 
compel assent: I regard as a measure pru-
dent, rational and philosophic. The un-
supportedipse dixit of any man, however 
great his name in science, I always con-
sider as a very weak argument: Recan-
tation at best is exceedingly disagreeable. 

The constitution of our Society, or its 
present system of laws, I am far from 
reckoning perfect; many meliorations, I 
doubt not will be made from time to 
time. No good reason can be assigned 
why our meetings should be suspend-
ed during half the year: In summer in-
|P_35
deedthey might probably be thin; but it 
does not follow, that your speculations on 
that account would be less instructive, or 
your essays more imperfect. 

I conclude by congratulating you up-
on your affairs being now happily in 
such a prosperous train, as to afford the 
most flattering prospects. I contemplate 
the rising glory, and future greatness of 
the Medical Society, with no small degree 
of pleasurable ecstasy and expectation: 
Methinks, I hear its towering genius
with the most complacent exultation ex-
claim"sublimi feriam sidera vertice. "

FINIS. 
