
|P_
PHILOSOPHY OF PHYSIC. 

(PRICE ONE SHILLING AND SIX-PENCE.) 

|P_
[}INTRODUCTORY PREFACE.}]
[}To those Gentlemen in particular who honoured 
DR. SMITH by their obliging Condescension 
in attending his Lectures on the Philosophy 
of Physic—and to the Public in general. }]
I SHOULD be much wanting in respect, much more so 
 in gratitude, did I not in this address acknowledge the 
pleasing remembrance of that very candid reception, 
with which my noble and truly liberal auditors have been 
pleased to honour some very imperfect endeavours to esta- 
blish the first elements of Physic. 

CONSCIOUS of the many inaccuracies to be discovered throughout the Course of my Lectures, I have not presumed 
to stile them more than rude preparatory outlines; con- 
cluding there was little more to be expected than perhaps an approbation of the design; and for this I trusted to the 
known indulgence of liberal minds. In these expectations 
|P_6
I have been agreeably deceived: — I have been most 
kindly supported by the favour and countenance of men dis- 
tinguished for abilities and learning: which emboldens me 
to hope the present enlargement of my Syllabus may likewise escape the censure of the Public.—In my Introductory Lec- 
ture I mentioned that the design had been many years in contemplation; but, fearful of my own want of importance, 
awed by the formidable appearance of the task, and the al- 
most infurmountable difficulties attending the promulging 
a new doctrine, with such a degree of success as might in- 
title it to a fair and candid disquisition,—I could not before summon the fortitude necessary to appeal to the Public. 

When the Lectures were compiled, many doubts remained 
concerning the propriety of delivering the Conjectures on 
Animal Life; and had it not been for the persuasion of 
some friends, whose judgments I have ever respected, the 
Conjectures had been suppressed: they observed, and with 
propriety, my Lectures would be imperfect, unless the Prin- 
ciples were communicated on which my own maxims were 
founded. 

To their determination I submitted, not without reluc- 
tance, being fearful of the event; lest I should either have 
been deceived in my reasonings, or might not be able to 
express myself, so as to be clearly understood. 

IT is even now my most earnest desire, the Principles on 
which the Conjectures are founded should be coolly and deli- 
berately enquired into. Many of the opinions are undoubt- 
edly 
|P_7
new and singular: Truth being the great object of my 
pursuit, I should have reason to lament the partiality of my 
 friends, if I suffered myself to be prevailed on to propagate 
errors, however plausible they might appear: For these rea- 
sons I have withstood many respectable applications to deliver 
another Course of Lectures; and am determined not to 
repeat them, till the Public have had a fair opportunity of 
examining the truth of the Principles, on which those Con- 
jectures are founded, that support the practical observations delivered in the Lectures. 

IT is well known, that all learned and wise men ever re- 
gard new systems with a jealous eye; and their so doing is 
to be accounted a mark of wisdom. I wish my principles 
to be received with a manly distrust; suffer them, however, 
to undergo a full and candid examination. I am sensible it will require some degree of attention for gentlemen to 
comprehend the whole of them; especially those who have 
not seen the experiments, and who are unacquainted with the 
reasonings by which the principles have been supported. 

THESE difficulties may perhaps occasion doubts in the 
minds of some medical, and other learned men; so far it 
must be acknowledged they will operate against me. I am 
content it should be so. Possibly those doubts may excite 
some more able persons to search after the truth; and, as I 
am not wedded to my own opinions, I shall most readily 
join in their condemnation, whenever they are proved to be 
erroneous. 

|P_8
The enlargement of my Syllabus will, I apprehend, 
prove acceptable to many of those Gentlemen who honoured 
 my Lectures by their presence; some of them indeeed have 
applied to me on this subject. The Public at large, per- 
haps, may be pleased with having an opportunity of know- 
ing the principles; and generous minds ever shew favour to 
an attempt, however poorly executed, that has for its ob- 
jects the information and happiness of mankind. 

I Shall beg leave to repeat what was delivered in one of 
my Lectures— 

"I Love the profession of physic. I honour able medical 
practitioners. I wish to convince mankind of the benefits 
that may be derived from a practice of physic founded on 
liberal and rational principles. I have used my best en- 
deavours to convey clear and adequate ideas concerning 
animal life, and the laws of the animal oeconomy; with 
a full hope and firm persuasion, that thereby the practice 
of physic may be rendered more universally beneficial; 
and with a sincere desire that farther dignity may be 
added to the profession. "

Whether my maxims be true or false, permit me to add, 
if I cannot, by a generous and candid behaviour on my own 
 part, suppress the envy and jealousy of illiberal minds,—I 
can pity and forgive such men. 

It is my earnest desire to promote medical knowledge; 
to render the philosophy of physic, an easy, pleasing, and 
|P_9
rational study; and to point out to gentlemen of fortune 
the propriety of their becoming acquainted with the first 
elements of a science—founded in the knowledge of the 
Laws of Nature, respecting animal life. 

I most sincerely wish my fellow labourers, in the healing 
art, may with unanimity join me in this undertaking—let us 
endeavour to convince mankind it is their interest, on all 
occasions, to apply to able medical practitioners—more espe- 
cially in that class of complaints termed Chronic, which is at 
present the great field of quackery. 
Hatton-street,May 16, 1778. 

HUGH SMITH. 

|P_11
[}TO THE

R E A D E R. }]
The following is the Syllabus first published, 
in which no mention is made of the Conjectures to 
be delivered after the Lectures, concerning the first 
material cause of animal life, and the laws of the animal 
oeconomy. 

If it be asked, why this part of the design was not taken 
notice of?—I refer my reader to the doubts already ex- 
pressed in the Introductory Preface.—I was likewise fearful 
this attempt might be treated as altogether chimerical—and 
|P_12
did not care to run the risk of premature ridicule; well 
knowing that, sometimes, where solid objections are not ad- 
vanced, private whispers, and ironical buffoonery, may 
create insuperable prejudices against a man who dares to 
venture out of the beaten paths of Science. 

|P_13[^A horizontal double-line, spanning the whole page. ^][^A horizontal double-line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}PHILOSOPHICAL LECTURES 
on the 
PRACTICE of PHYSIC: 
By HUGH SMITH, M. D. 
Of Hatton-Street, London. }]
THESE Lectures are intended to render the Practice 
of Physic a liberal science; as derived from the 
known and established laws of Natural Philosophy— 
to open a new theory, adapted to practice, and correspon- 
dent to those laws. 

No person, it is believed, on this plan, has ever yet at- 
tempted to bring the rudiments of the science of Medicine, 
into one general and compendious point of view. 

|P_14
In the execution of the plan, possibly some practical rules 
may arise, supported on established principles, tending to 
the improvement of the science [/1./]. By a chain of rational 
and philosophical reasoning it is designed to call forth that 
knowledge obtained by detached studies; and to apply it to 
the great end and purpose for which those studies were insti- 
tuted. 

Men are often possessed of powers and talents, to which 
they themselves, in some degree, are strangers—and great 
abilities are often buried in oblivion, for want of right rules 
in practice. The truth of this observation many medical 
men have the mortification to experience; and on this ac- 
count only perhaps they pass their lives in obscurity; and 
their knowledge is lost to the world. The present Lectures, 
therefore, are particularly recommended to medical students.

To men of letters human nature is acknowledged to be an 
agreeable object of contemplation. Can it be less entertaining 
to any man of good natural understanding? The knowledge 
of nature is not surely above the reach of common sense — 
Considered liberally, and freed from all unnecessary terms of 
art, it will be found a pleasing science. These Lectures, 
probably, may throw a new light on the subject; by open- 
ing to familiar view the first springs of life; [/2./] the causes of 
|P_15
man's gradual rise; necessary decay; and the causes likewise 
of the diseases to which he is liable. Is not every human 
being interested in this inquiry? How many men 
have been rendered miserable by dipping into medical 
authors, for want of a consistent view of the leading prin- 
ciples of the science? In these Lectures, though on medical 
subjects, every thing mysterious being removed, man properly 
becomes the object of rational, or philosophical contempla- 
tion.—It is to be hoped, likewise, the practice of physic may 
be rendered more universally beneficial, and possibly fresh 
dignity may be added to the profession. 

[}SYLLABUS. }]
First Lecture—Introductory.—The Importance of the 
Design—not confined to men of the profession—but of 
utility to all gentlemen of liberal education—the propriety of 
their becoming acquainted with the elements of the science 
of Medicine enforced. 

Second Lecture—Historical,—but principally in regard 
to the Practice of Physic.—It is not only usual, but useful 
and entertaining, to trace the origin of whatever engages our 
inquiry. 

Third Lecture—On Animal Life.—It is impossible to 
establish the Practice of Physic, on liberal and rational prin- 
|P_16
ciples, without clear and fixed ideas concerning Animal Life 
—the great design of the art being to assist Nature, in order 
to preserve the lives of Animals. 

Fourth Lecture—On Nutrition.—The design of this 
Lecture is to inquire into the mode of Nutrition, as it is 
performed in animal bodies—to point out certain facts, as 
data, to prove that Nutrition is universally carried on, in 
animal bodies, by the glandular system. [/3./]

Fifth Lecture—The subject of Nutrition continued.— 
This doctrine, though perhaps allowed, in part, by many 
able practitioners, has never yet been proved in the whole— 
its novelty therefore might induce some to dispute the truth of 
it, if the matter of fact rested only on a single person's prac- 
tical discoveries; or on a few simple facts, however evident to 
the senses.—We shall therefore confirm this doctrine by phy- 
siological researches, and mathematical reasonings founded on 
the established data contained in the Fourth Lecture. [/4./]

Sixth Lecture—A continuation of the same subject.— 
No proof ought to be withheld, that can rationally be ad- 
vanced, in support of principles in themselves important, but 
not generally established.—We shall therefore, by mechanical 
|P_17
reasoning, farther confirm this doctrine of Nutrition being 
universally carried on by the glandular system. 

Seventh Lecture—On Diseases.—Here we mean to 
prove, agreeable to the principles before-mentioned, from 
practical experience, that the primary errors in animal 
bodies, which may justly be styled the internal, incipient, 
causes of diseases, are, universally, seated in the glandular 
system.—This, if well supported, must necessarily establish 
our doctrine concerning Nutrition beyond the possibility of 
doubt.—It must likewise be productive of new theories in 
many cases; and alter the present mode of practice, with 
regard to the curative intentions, in various diseases. 

Eighth Lecture—How a Physician differs from a 
Quack.—Having in the former Lecture established fixed 
principles, as a solid foundation for a liberal and rational 
practice of Physic, the present philosophic inquiry seems 
properly to take place. 

Ninth Lecture—Will set forth the superiority of a ra- 
tional Practice of Physic over empiricism and quackery. 

Tenth Lecture—Acute and Chronic Diseases distin- 
guished.—In this Lecture we shall take the liberty of drawing 
the line of distinction, in some measure different from that 
already given by medical writers; but perhaps necessary to 
establish the Practice of Physic, on liberal and rational 
principles—which regularly leads to— 

|P_18
Eleventh Lecture—An inquiry into the causes of 
Quackery. 

Twelfth and last Lecture—Contains some rules, that 
we humbly conceive will be found useful; especially, to 
younger practitioners, in their conduct towards patients, 
both in acute and chronic diseases; in order to obtain their 
rational confidence, and to convince them of the benefits 
that may be derived from a Practice of Physic, founded on 
liberal and rational principles. 

|P_19
[}DESCRIPTION 
of a 
GLAND. }]
THAT no confusion may arise in our ideas, and with a 
view to be clearly understood by every one into 
whose hands this Syllabus may fall, it will not be improper 
to subjoin an explanation of the word Gland, as it is applied 
in the Lectures. 

All medical writers agree in this point, that a Gland
serves to separate a particular humour from the blood. Glands
are distinguished, by anatomists, into simple and compound; 
accurate descriptions have been given of many that are 
visible, and new Glands are continually discovered. It 
concerns not our present purpose to inquire into their 
structures: Different Glands are evidently appointed for 
different uses—Whether, therefore, they be simple or com- 
pound; or whether they be any thing more than the ulti- 
mate terminations of single arteries, convoluted, or not; 
|P_20
every part of the animal œconomy must be allowed to be a 
Gland, whose office it is to separate, percolate, or drain a 
particular humour from the blood; which humour, when 
thus separated, is no longer blood. 

In strict conformity to Physiology, this Description establishes 
a clear and adequate idea to be conveyed by the word Gland. 

|P_21
[}SOME ACCOUNT 
of the 
CONJECTURES 
on 
ANIMAL LIFE, &c.}]
THROUGHOUT the course of our Lectures, we 
endeavoured from effects to lead to causes—and 
thereby to account for Nutrition—and the primary causes of 
Diseases. 

Our Conjectures concerning the first active material cause 
of Animal Life, and the laws of the Animal Oeconomy, 
for obvious reasons, were totally detached from the Lec- 
tures—on these points, we endeavoured to trace effects from 
causes; and, by arguments founded on experimental proofs, 
we hope at least to have strengthened some of the opinions 
delivered in our Lectures; though perhaps we have not 
been able fully to establish any point contended for. 

|P_22
It is necessary, however, to be remarked, that nothing 
new is meant to be advanced concerning the properties of 
air, nor is it intended to enter into its properties at large— 
the application of its properties to Animal Life, is all we 
aim at: Some Conjectures are offered, that seem to shew the 
probability of air, put into motion by heat, being not only 
the first active material cause of new life, but the actual 
support of life, throughout every different stage of our 
animated existence. 

These Conjectures, if admitted, shew the Mosaic account 
of the creation of man to be philosophically true— that 
the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, and 
breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and man became 
a living soul,  (Gen. ch. ii. v. 7.)—and that the laws of 
generation are the means appointed by our Creator to pre- 
serve this active operative cause of life, so given: For the 
Conjectures seem to evince what we term vital air, to be 
the first cause of motion, not only in man, but throughout 
the whole animated creation. 

Our leading aphorism runs thus— 

In all Animals, Life, Heat, and Motion, are 
Inseparable. 

We maintained the truth of this aphorism, not only by 
death and its consequences, but likewise by life and its 
effects: It seems also to be farther illustrated by the follow- 
ing Principles—from which many other important con- 
clusions have been drawn. 

|P_23
[}PRINCIPLES 
on which the 
CONJECTURES 
ARE FOUNDED. }]
Each Night, before the Lecture, a variety of Experiments 
were exhibited, to demonstrate the Truth of the following 
Principles: many of which will not be denied by scientific 
Men; and where it seems necessary, the others are attempted 
to be explained. 

I. 
AIR is matter. 

II. 
Matter is of itself inactive, but capable of being put 
into motion. 

|P_24
III. 
Air, as matter, is capable of different arrangements, 
modifications, and combinations, in obedience to the ge- 
neral laws of matter. 

IV. 
Air is a fluid—but has properties peculiar to itself, and 
different from other fluids;—for, 

V. 
Air is an elastic fluid, and the force of its spring is pro- 
portionable to its weight. 

VI. 
Air possesses the property of rarefaction, or expansion. 

VII. 
Heat—by which we mean a similar effect to that pro- 
duced by fire, will rarefy or expand air. 

|P_25
VIII. 
Air possesses the property of compression, or condensation. 

IX. 
External pressure will condense, or compress air. 

X. 
Cold will condense, or compress air. 

XI. 
Airthen is rarefied by heat, and compressed by cold. 

XII. 
Air exists in all bodies, fluid and solid. 

This, perhaps, will not be doubted by such as are acquainted 
with experiments on air—for the satisfaction of others, the 
truth of the Principle was proved by experiments on gold, 
silver, copper, brass, lead, marble, various other stones, wood, 
&c. Air visibly issued from them all; more from some, than 
from others, in proportion to their porosity—the porosity of 
|P_26
wood, stone and metals, by help of a microscope, may be curi- 
ously displayed to the eye. 

XIII. 
When bodies are deprived of internal heat and motion, 
the air contained within them may be said to be at a state of 
rest; it being then only subject to the variations of the 
atmosphere. 

This may be proved by the Thermometer. The following curious 
experiment farther illustrates the matter of fact, and may 
lead to other discoveries: Let the bulb of a Thermometer be 
put into two ounces of cold water; the air, apparently at rest 
in the quicksilver, by the effect of cold being more compressed, 
the mercury will quickly descend several degrees; when the 
quicksilver is again apparently at rest, let thirty drops of oil 
of vitriol be put into the water; this produces heat, and the 
air contained in the quicksilver will as quickly be expanded; by 
the effect of this internal heat communicated to the fluid, the 
quicksilver will rise two or three degrees: Let a little chalk be 
now added to the fluid, the internal heat will be farther in- 
creased, and the quicksilver will ascend two or three degrees 
more. — Does not this experiment likewise shew that heat accompanies internal motion in fluids? — This observation, 
perhaps, may not prove unworthy the attention of such Gentle- 
men as entertain themselves with experiments on what is termed 
fixed air. 

|P_27
XIV. 
On the application of heat to a fluid, the first evident 
sign of internal motion is an air-bubble. 

This is experimentally shewn, by putting any transparent liquor 
into a spoon, and placing it over a candle, or a lamp; in dif- 
ferent fluids, different appearances may be observed, not un- 
worthy the attention of the curious. 

XV. 
In this state of the fluid the air contained in it is more 
rarefied, and expanded, than in the cold state of the fluid. 

XVI. 
The air contained in most fluids becomes so far rarefied as 
to be put into motion by a degree of heat below that of the 
blood; we may then fairly conclude, from the degree of 
heat accompanying animal life, that the air contained in the 
fluids of an animal body is continually in motion. 

This was confirmed by a variety of experiments (oleaginous 
fluids excepted) by placing the fluids over a lamp, and regu- 
lating the heat by a Thermometer. 

|P_28
XVII. 
The tunic, or coat of every distinct air-bubble, is evi- 
dently formed of the surrounding fluid. 

XVIII. 
Each distinct bubble of air has a distinct and separate 
motion. 

XIX. 
In different fluids, different degrees of heat are required 
to render these air-bubbles visibly active. 

XX. 
In the more thin and transparent fluids, air-bubbles are 
sooner visible; and the air becomes fugitive below the de- 
gree of blood heat. 

Water acidulated with spirit of vitriol, or distilled vinegar, 
becomes more transparent, and will prove the truth of this 
Principle; it may likewise be shewn by many of the white 
wines, and other fluids. 

|P_29
XXI. 
These bubbles of air, being specifically lighter than the 
surrounding fluid, naturally tend to the surface; and there, 
soon bursting, this rarefied air escapes, and mixes with the 
common atmosphere, unless it be prevented by proper reci- 
pients. 

Since the pressure of the atmosphere is the same on all fluids, 
how happens it that in some the air-bubbles are longer detained 
than in others? 

XXII. 
Different fluids possess different degrees of tenacity or 
cohesion: this tenacity is weaker in thin transparent fluids. 
—Air-bubbles, therefore, become sooner fugitive in such fluids. 

XXIII. 
Glue, gum, or sugar, suspended in fluids, render them 
more tenacious, or cohesive.—Air-bubbles therefore are longer restrained from becoming fugitive in such 
fluids. 

If our conjectures prove right, this observation may afford 
a clew to examine into the laws of life in the vegetable king- 
dom.—This idea is thrown out for the consideration of ingenious 
men; the subject itself, at present, not being within our sphere. 

|P_30
XXIV. 
External heat being removed from a fluid, although the 
pressure of the cold atmosphere be freely admitted; it is, 
nevertheless, a considerable time before the air, rarefied by 
heat, returns to a state of rest. 

The truth of this principle may be illustrated by a spoon, in 
the manner before mentioned; (Principle XIV.) and it is worthy 
attention. 

XXV. 
Earthy particles may be suspended in a transparent fluid. 

The process for making magnesia alba proves this—it is no 
contemptible experiment, though in familiar practice. 

Two transparent liquors being mixed, they instantly lose both 
their transparency and fluidity, and become one intire white in- 
spissated substance—this being repeatedly washed with water, 
the white earth, when dried, is the common magnesia alba of the 
shops. 

It is well known this white earth was originally suspended in 
an aqueous menstruum, by means of the vitriolic acid; and in 
this process, it is precipitated by the fixed alkaline. 

|P_31
XXVI. 
Earthy particles may float in air. 

If any one doubts the truth of this, let him admit a ray of 
light into a darkened room, and he will be convinced of the 
matter of fact. 

XXVII. 
Air does exist in the circulating fluids of an animal. 

This was proved by the blood-vessel of a bullock, being 
secured by ligatures, before it was separated from the body of 
the living animal—it was farther confirmed by live cray- 
fish, tench, &c. 

XXVIII. 
Air does exist in the medullary substance of the brain. 

This is one of the most beautiful experiments that can be 
exhibited by the air-pump—if it be well shewn, the resistance 
of the medullary and cortical substance of the brain is so 
great, as to produce a kind of perpetual motion. 

XXIX. 
Air-bubbles, though specifically lighter than the sur- 
rounding fluid, cannot escape till the resistance arising from 
the cohesion of the parts of the surrounding fluid itself be 
overcome. 

|P_32
XXX. 
This resistance, arising from the cohesion of the parts of 
the fluid, is proportioned to the different degrees of tenacity 
proper to different fluids; as before shewn. 

XXXI. 
This cohesive property in fluids, then, is the bond that 
restrains the air from becoming fugitive; or, in other words, 
it is the bond of union. 

XXXII. 
animal jelly, or gluten, exposed to the common atmo- 
sphere, and surrounding a globule of air, is sufficiently co- 
hesive to prevent this moving air escaping in a degree of 
heat somewhat superior to that of blood heat. 

XXXIII. 
It being highly necessary to fix some standard to regulate 
our inquiries—Air rarefied, in motion, detained in animal 
bodies by glandular secretions, or circulating with the fluids 
in the vascular system, permit us to call Vital Air. 

XXXIV. 
Vital Air, Heat, and Motion, then, appear to be inse- 
parable, in animal life. 

|P_33
On these principles our arguments are founded, concern- 
ing the first active material cause of animal life; and from 
these principles our conjectures are drawn, concerning the 
laws of generation, and those of the animal œconomy. For 
the satisfaction of the learned, and curious, it will not be 
improper to add a few words concerning Vital Air, which we 
presume to be the first material cause of motion in animal life. 

This conjecture we have endeavoured to support by argu- 
ments drawn from experiments; all tending to shew the ra- 
tional probability of air existing in an active and circulating 
state in animal bodies. 

It will be remembered, we proved air did actually exist in 
the blood of a living animal; and likewise in the medullary 
substance of the brain. We also proved, that in the degree 
of heat proper to animal life, this air must be in a rarefied 
and active state; and we farther endeavoured to shew, by 
arguments drawn from an incubated egg, and other points, 
the rational probability, that the propelling force of air, thus 
rarefied, and confined in a vascular system, was the first ma- 
terial cause of the circulation of the blood, and other fluids, 
in an animal body. 

The reaction of the vascular system we presume to be the 
secondary cause, in conjunction with the former, producing 
what is termed involuntary muscular motion—this motion, in 
the beginning of new life, is first discoverable at the punctum 
saliens, or leaping point; which afterwards becomes the 
heart of the fœtus. The heart we have presumed to stile 
|P_34
the centre of motion; by which the circulation of the blood is 
regulated and maintained. The blood we consider to be a 
passive fluid, the common menstruum from whence nutrition 
is derived, by means of the glands.—We presume that some 
one order or more of the glands must be injured, debilitated, 
or totally obstructed, before the blood of an animal becomes 
impure. 

By the propelling force of Vital Air we presume all 
glandular secretions to be performed, and the lymphatic cir- 
culations to be supported by the same power—and by means 
of the glands we presume the laws of generation to be main- 
tained. 

In the beginning of new life, the motion of Vital Air 
seems to be supported by the natural heat of the parent, or by 
some adequate external means—this appears to be a general 
law, throughout nature, till involuntary muscular motion be- 
comes sufficiently powerful to communicate that degree of 
internal heat, peculiarly proper to Vital Air: When this 
period arrives, the act of incubation ceases, with all oviparous 
animals; the fœtus opening to itself a passage in order to breathe 
the common atmosphere; and, in viviparous animals, the 
natural birth takes place, by the united efforts of the parent 
and fœtus. 

It may perhaps be expected that something should be said 
concerning the brain and nervous system.—In this summary 
way I cannot hope to persuade scientific men to think with 
me—however, by mentioning the points contended for, 
|P_35
possibly objections will be started, that eventually may lead 
to the discovery of truth. 

We took notice in some of our conjectures, that man 
having a material body, it was but reasonable to conclude it 
should answer the various purposes for which it was so cu- 
riously formed; and that every distinct member should 
have its destined office. We endeavoured to prove that, in 
the business of motion and sensation, the nerves, proceeding 
from the brain and spinal marrow, though the chief, were 
not the only instruments; and from numerous experimental 
proofs, we concluded that the reaction of the vascular 
system, voluntary motion, and the exercise of the external 
senses, could not be supported without the aid of the ner- 
vous system. 

It will be recollected we used many arguments to shew 
the proper sense of feeling seemed to arise from the due re- 
sistance of the medullary substance of the brain, or nervous 
matter, opposed to the propelling force of Vital Air. 

We took occasion to observe, that all the other senses 
were obedient to the proper sense of feeling; and endeavoured 
to shew that hearing, seeing, smelling, and tasting, were 
nothing more than the effects arising from feeling, which 
we considered as their primary cause. 

As we have, under certain limitations, acknowledged the 
nervous system to be the seat of feeling, we inquired into 
the effects produced by any considerable variation in the 
|P_36
Vital Air, peculiarly existing in the nervous matter—and 
having before shewn the rational probability of pain arising 
from the propelling force of too highly rarefied air, we 
seemed to be warranted in drawing the following conclu- 
sions:—The sense of feeling is seated in the nervous system— 
the sense of feeling becoming too exquisite produces pain 
—the nervous system is then the seat of pain.—Gouty 
symptoms, therefore, whether fixed or wandering, being 
ever accompanied with that too exquisite degree of sensibi- 
lity, that either produces unhappy sensations, or acute 
pain, we presume the nervous system to be principally 
affected in gouty patients. 

We endeavoured to strengthen, and support our conjectures 
concerning gouty, and what are termed nervous complaints, 
not only from practical experience; but likewise by shewing 
that a partial, or total loss of motion and feeling, in para- 
lytic complaints and nervous apoplexies, probably arises 
from an opposite cause—namely, from the propelling force 
of Vital Air existing in the nervous matter, or in the me- 
dullary substance of the brain, being too much abated; or 
from its becoming a body at rest. 

These are some of the practical inferences, arising from 
our conjectures, concerning the brain and nervous system: 
happy shall I think myself if they prove any way instru- 
mental towards alleviating the distresses of mankind. 

With regard to the sentient principle, or spirit of man, 
we observed, that although simple ideas might be stirred up 
|P_37
in the mind by the mediation of the nervous system; yet, 
our ideas are not matter: something more than a material 
system, therefore, seems necessary and requisite to thinking. 
And if Vital Air be the first material cause of motion, the 
vascular system can be considered only as the secondary 
cause:—Is it not highly improbable, then, that the sentient 
principle should depend on this secondary cause, namely, on 
a system of organized matter?—Be this as it may, it is out 
of my province to enter into metaphysical controversies; and, 
as observed in my Lectures, I am unequal to the task: How- 
ever, that the sentient principle is not material, we verily 
believe, and endeavoured to confirm by many other argu- 
ments;—and if the mind be not material, experimental 
researches after this immaterial principle must ever prove 
in vain. 

We ventured to add, that if there be a connection be- 
tween gross material, and immaterial substances, it is pro- 
bably effected by some rare medium; and therefore, that 
this union was not unlikely to be formed by means of Vital 
Air. Whether our general arguments on this point were 
forcible or not, must be left to the determination of others; 
we however concluded this subject in the following manner. 

We have endeavoured to shew that life depends on Vital 
Air; and that not only motion, but all the external senses 
depend on it likewise—and if so, it seems a fair conclusion, 
that the nervous fluid, or animal spirits, is nothing more 
than Vital Air. 

|P_38
I am compelled, from my practical experience in the 
gout, in paralytic complaints, and other errors in the ner- 
vous system, to believe this—and from what has been ad- 
vanced, am I not authorised to conclude, the Mosaic accounts 
of the creation of man, and of the laws of generation, are 
philosophically true? 

Having thus set forth what may probably be deemed 
sufficient to enable medical and other scientific men to 
judge of the rationality of our system—I leave it to their 
consideration, whether we mean to captivate the credulous, 
or to appeal to men of sense in pursuit of truth. 

Such gentlemen as have honoured me by their attention, 
will be enabled, from these outlines, to recall many of our 
conjectures concerning animal life, and the laws of the ani- 
mal œconomy; which, I flatter myself, will afford them 
some degree of satisfaction. 

I do not expect this system, even if it should prove to be 
true, to be established without opposition; I am prepared to 
receive all objections that may be advanced, whether it be 
in my power to answer them or not—I am prepared to re- 
ceive them, let me repeat, because I wish the principles to 
pass through the strictest scrutiny. 

If the principles be admitted, it is presumed the rationa- 
lity of the conjectures, on animal life, will add no little degree 
of weight to the doctrines contended for in the course of our 
Lectures; namely, that nutrition is carried on by means of 
|P_39
the glandular system; and that the internal, incipient causes 
of diseases are universally seated in the glands. 

It is proper, however, to observe, whether the principles 
be admitted, and our conjectures allowed, or not; it does 
not follow, that our practical inferences, respecting diseases, 
originally drawn from matters of fact evident to the senses, 
are to be considered as altogether erroneous.—All that I ask, 
is, to be judged with candour; and most chearfully submit 
to the determination of intelligent men. 

I am fully persuaded, those gentlemen who did me the 
honour of attending my Lectures, will not hesitate to say, 
that my opinions were delivered with diffidence; it was my 
earnest desire to persuade; but well knowing the scanty 
limits of human understanding, I believe no man can chal- 
lenge me with having advanced any one conjecture as a po- 
sitive assertion: Yet, this I did say, at the conclusion of 
my Lectures— 

As a duty incumbent on me, I have, in this public 
manner, communicated my thoughts to liberal and learned 
men; that the world at large, however they may differ 
in opinion, might not charge me with having reserved my 
principles as secrets: But having entered into so very 
wide a field, I am certain, you, gentlemen, would not 
wish me too hastily to commit to the press, the present 
crude and imperfect ideas, on subjects of such import- 
ance.—If the principles on which our opinions are founded, can be fairly overturned, by arguments drawn from expe- 
|P_40
riments—let them fall.—If not, I trust more able advo- 
cates than myself will not be wanting, to support the 
truth of our doctrines; and to enlarge the bounds of our 
knowledge, with regard to the theory, and cure of 
diseases. 

FINIS. 
