
|P_
|P_MY TRUST IS IN GOD [^an angel standing atop the upper half of a globe beneath a banner ^]
A Dissertation upon the Nervous 
System to show its Influence u- 
pon the Soul. 

Man can know little, and yet he 
wants to know all things, He is con- 
fined to a point of time in this life, 
yet extends his Views backwards 
& forwards, through Millions of 
Ages, till he is lost in eternity. He is 
confined to some minute part of this 
Globe; yet while his feet stand on it, his 
Soul is travelling through the whole 
planetary System, traversing the 
immensity of Space, till he is at last lost in Infinity. 
Published September 1780. 

|P_[^An ornamented horizontal line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}DISSERTATION 
on the 
NERVOUS SYSTEM, &c. }][^A long horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
[}SECTION I. }]
BEFORE we proceed, it will be necessary 
to explain, in a simple manner, the Na- 
ture of those bodily powers, which Constitute 
the very Principles of Life. 

The Human Body is sustained and kept a- 
live, by three principal powers, which like the 
movements of a Clock or Watch, co-operate 
and assist each other: The first is the brain 
and Nervous System proceeding from it, the 
grand Source of all Sensation; The Second, 
is the Heart and Arteries, or blood Vessels, 
which give motion and circulation to the 
Blood; And the Third is the Stomach and 
Bowels, which prepare the Aliment and sup- 
ply Nourishment for those, as well as all parts 
of the Body. 

|P_2
In speaking of Digestion it will be remark- 
ed, that the Stomach loses its power when de- 
prived of Nervous Influence; and we should 
here take notice, that the Regularity and Vi- 
gour of the Heart's motion, chiefly depend 
on the same cause. 

As therefore the Brain and Nerves, the 
Heart and Arteries, and the Stomach and 
Bowels, are the principal instruments of all 
Sensation, Circulation, Nutrition, Life and 
Motion, and the very Agents which govern 
and direct the whole Animal Machine; It 
will be necessarily consequent, that when any 
of them becomes disconcerted, and put out of 
order, the vital functions of the Body depen- 
ding upon them, must then be unduly per- 
formed. "where one Link's broken, the 
whole chain's destroyed. "

Such is the extraordinary Sympathy and in- 
tercourse between those several organs, that 
like so many little provinces, allied by mutual 
Interest, not one of them can exercise its full 
power without the assistance and concurrence 
of the rest; for as the Heart and Stomach 
cannot act without the assistance of the Brain, 
or the Stomach Digest without receiving a 
due Quantity of blood from the Heart; so 
neither can the Heart have sufficient force to 
keep up the circulation, without a continual 
supply of nourishment from the Stomach; 
|P_3
or even the Brain itself exert its Influence 
over those organs without being duly nou- 
rished by Both. Although it will evidently 
appear, that the Nerves are the Immediate or- 
gans of all vital motion and Sensation, and 
the medium by which impressions made on 
the Body are instantly conveyed to the mind; 
yet the precise manner by which this misteri- 
ous intercourse is carried on, remains a sec- 
ret in nature with which, perhaps, we shall 
never be acquainted

So intimately connected are the Body and 
Soul, and such their Correspondence, that 
Impressions made on the one naturally influ- 
ence the other with the like feelings: Thus, 
by immoderate grief the digestive faculty of 
the Stomach is impaired and taken away, and 
by a blow on the head which injures the 
Brain, the Soul is as it were dethroned, and 
losing its empire over the Body, all sense and 
motion are instantly destroyed. The Soul, 
or Intellect, whilst confined to the Body, 
"That muddy Vesture of decay, " is obliged 
to stoop to the state and condition of the 
Nerves, whose feelings are liable to alteration 
from a thousand accidental or unavoidable 
causes, so as to occasion diseases, or being to- 
tally abolished, to produce instant death. 
Those, as well as many other circumstances, 
concur to prove that the faculties and dispo- 
|P_4
sition of the mind, in a great measure, depend 
on the bodily organs with which they co-ope- 
rate, and where those are changed from their 
natural State, so are its appetites and oper- 
ations. 

How different is the State of the Body and 
Soul when the vessels are empty or full, viz. 
after long fasting, or a plentiful meal, in the 
first the pulse is weak and unequal, the Com- 
plexion pale, the Body languid, and the Spi- 
rits desponding: But after eating and the mo- 
derate use of wine, the Springs of Life are 
wound up, and the Body and Soul are restor- 
ed to their native vigour. 

The consent between the Brain and Heart is 
remarkable, for, intense Study or thinking 
quickens the Pulse, and a sudden fright will 
occasion palpetations or a convulsive Struggle 
of the heart, even sometimes to a mortal suf- 
focation: in both these cases, the first impres- 
sion is made on the Brain, and the Heart, 
like a faithfull companion, suffers by sympa- 
thy; but whether the Nerves act as Tubes, 
or Vibrating Cords, like the Strings of a mu- 
sical Instrument, or whether they serve as 
conductors to some subtle fluid similar to that 
of Electric Fire, we are wholly ignorant The 
Brain seems therefore to the Nerves, what 
the Heart is to the Blood Vessels or Arteries; 
for too violent a degree of Action in the last, 
|P_5
will produce heat and increase circulation, as 
may be observed after violent exercise, or in 
the time of a Fever: in like manner, when 
the power of the Brain and Nerves is too vio- 
lently impressed on the Body or Soul, their 
Sensations will be rendered too quick and 
exquisite; like the motion of a watch, which 
becomes rapid and irregular when the main 
spring acts too strongly on the several wheels 
and subordinate movements. 

Impressions made on the Soul will often 
totally subdue those of the Body: and on 
the contrary, such as are made on the Body, 
will remove those of the Soul; all which 
may supply an Intelligent observer with use- 
ful hints in the cure of such diseases as have 
been unsuccessfully treated by medicines. 

Religious doubts which perplex the Soul 
with alternate Hopes and fears, a Sedentary 
life, or warm, damp air, all dispose the con- 
stitution to Melancholy, by weakning the 
Nervous power. Those are the general causes 
of low Spirits, and acquired melancholy, 
which always operate most powerfully on 
People of nice Sensations, whose Pleasures 
and Pains from over-delicacy of the Nervous 
System, are too exquisite for sense; but the 
precise manner in which they produce their 
effects, or why such causes do not always oc- 
casion similar consequences, in such a parti- 
cular State of the Nerves, is utterly unknown. 
|P_6
Where Joy most revels, Grief doth most lament; 
Grief Joys. Joy grieves, on slender accident.
Those, on the contrary, of more clumsy or- 
gans, who are possessed of little more than 
Vegetable-feeling, never experience the mise- 
ry of Nervous Disorders; but if they have 
less pleasure, the account is balanced by their 
enduring less pain. 

We have already observed, that the Body 
and Soul, receive all their information by 
means of the Brain and Nerves, and that by 
Those they mutually converse and sympathize 
with each other; hence it will follow, that 
whenever those Organs are Injured, and like 
unfaithful Messengers, do not truly execute 
their Office, and represent things as they are, 
the Patient will then be imposed upon, by 
Delusive Perception, and figure to herself 
things which have no existence, but in her 
own distempered Brain. 

They suppose that every one looks upon 
them with a malignant eye, and puts the worst 
construction on what they say and do; In 
short, though they are industrious to torment 
themselves, by means which appear ludicrous, 
they experience substantial misery, and are 
sometimes driven to desperation, and Suicide; 
so that in the whole catalogue of earthly evils, 
human Nature cannot present an object more 
truly pitiable! 

|P_7
What then shall be said of those who either 
from Ambition or the view of gain, stifle the 
feelings of honour and humanity, and sordid- 
ly submit to form alliances which Entail he- 
reditary miseries on their posterity, more grie- 
vous than death itself! and who, therefore, 
instead of remembering the Authors of their 
being with filial affection, must behold them 
with indignation and sorrow! 

Retirement and bodily ease are not de- 
structive to the melancholy, for whilst they 
sit still unemployed, they become a prey to 
their own thoughts. On the contrary, exer- 
cise and severity of Diet, are beneficial; for 
no one can think or study with the same at- 
tention, when impressed with the disagreeable 
sensation of Hunger, or tormented with a ra- 
ging tooth, as when he is perfectly at ease. 

Since we find that painful sensations ap- 
plied to the Body or Mind, often destroy 
health and occasion Melancholy; by parity of 
reasoning it may be concluded, that pleasur- 
able feelings of a contrary nature will bid 
fairest to restore it: The chiefest of those 
are, Chearful Company, Poetry, Music, and 
Dramatic entertainments of the Comic kind, 
Frequent exercise in the open Fields, or 
flower Gardens, the waters of Tunbridge 
or Spa, assisted by that sovereign remedy the 
|P_8
Peruvian Bark, and the use of the cold Bath, 
will also be found powerfully Salutary. 

The Study of Natural History, and em- 
ployment of delineating some of its most beau- 
tiful and minute objects arranged under their 
proper classes, as those of Birds, Insects and 
Flowers, will afford very pleasing and rational 
entertainment and assist in diverting the mind 
from things of a more serious nature. Parti- 
cular thoughts and reflections of the mind 
are joined with certain conditions of the Bo- 
dy; and therefore, our manner of living, in 
a considerable Degree, changes our manner of 
thinking. Hence by Travelling, the univer- 
sal benefits of Air, Exercise and Diet, will at 
once be most agreeably obtain'd; all which 
tend to strengthen the Constitution, and to 
wear out disagreeable impressions made on the 
Body or mind by introducing others of a dif- 
ferent nature. 

The next Sovereign remedy in diseases of 
the mind is Music. Cicero asserts it's amaz- 
ing power, and Plato Supposes the effect of 
harmony on the mind is equal to that of air 
on the Body: Its Divine influence is exempli- 
fied by David in the Cure of Saul; and the 
Eastern Monarch who had conquered the 
world, was himself Subdued by the Seraphic 
Strains of Timotheus's Harp, which so capti- 
vated his ear, that he was roused into mad- 
|P_9
ness, or soothed into melancholy as the sounds 
became sprightly and animated, or Solemn 
and Slow. 

So wonderful is the empire of Music over 
the mind, as recorded by the antients, that 
it leads the soldier undaunted to the Immi- 
nent deadly breach.  and alternately stops 
the rage of conquest by its varied power: It 
mitigates bodily pain, suspends the malignant 
force of madness and despair, and lulls the 
Soul into traquility and peace. 

The effect of music however will be differ- 
ent according to the stile, and manner of its 
composition, and therefore should be adapted 
to the particular state and disposition of the 
mind. The plaintive Tone of soft Flutes will 
induce a pleasing languor, and compose it when 
tortured with rage or irritated by the more 
violent passions; and on the Contrary, the 
merry pipe and Tabor will exhilerate, and 
raise the moping head of melancholy, depres- 
sed by Religious Despair, Disapointed Ambi- 
tion, or hopeless Love. 

Let us appeal to the refined feelings of 
those most susceptible of the Divine power 
of harmony, to prove its sovereign influence 
over the mind; that it is the true oblivious 
Antidote, the Nepenthe of the Gods, to heal 
a wounded Spirit, to exalt the Soul above 
low-thoughted care, and lap it in Elysium. 

|P_10
This great sensibility occasions people of 
Rank to be Victims of their most favourite 
feelings; all that afflicts or threatens others, 
all the evil incident to mankind in general, 
are to them real grievances, affecting them, 
very frequently, more than their own private 
complaints, and essentially destroy their health; 
in a word, infinitely more sensible of tender 
impressions, and exposed to a much greater 
number than the Peasant, of necessity they 
must suffer much more. 

Nerves continually agitated by humours 
which are always irritative, by disordering the 
harmony of the Organs, and enfeebling the 
Body, murder the mental faculties; which 
are so much dependant on the Situation of its 
surrounding body, that whatever disorders 
the œconomy of the one, absolutely preju- 
dices the mode of thinking in the other. 
That bright'ning ray, by God himself bestow'd, 
Blends with our Senses, and like them grows weak.

Nervous disorders, that disposition to be 
too easily affected and susceptible of irregular 
and painful emotions, is one of the most cruel 
scourges to people of rank that has been ad- 
vanced. It most commonly occurs, and till 
now, has been particularly unhappy in a mis- 
taken treatment, because its origin had not 
|P_11
been sufficiently investigated: it's different 
Species, which required very different reme- 
dies, was left unexamined. This Branch of 
Physic is at present too much confined to 
hypothesis, the Subject of party disputes, or 
at least influenced by Fashion. 

Many Eminent Physicians, regarding all 
disorders of the Nerves as the Consequences 
of relaxed fibres, and weak digestions, would 
effect a cure by means of remedies which are 
hot, and strengthening, by Gums, Steel, Bit- 
ters, Camphire, Castor, Musk, Spirituous 
Tinctures, Opium, &c. which is an error si- 
milar to the following, in speaking of indi- 
gestion and Stomachic remedies. In attri- 
buting all Nervous complaints to one cause, 
they have proposed but one kind of remedy, 
which unhappily has no better success than in 
complaints of the Stomach. Nerves inflamed 
by the immoderate use of Aromatics, are not 
relieved by using Assafœtida; a sharper Me- 
dicine than the most piquant Aromatic: those 
who are dried up by the abuse of Barbadoes 
Water and Marasquin, will not find assistance 
by drinking great quantities of the Tincture of 
Gentian, of Valerian, or of Castor; but those 
remedies so hurtful, in these cases, are very 
beneficial in cases where a weak fibre, or poor 
and watery Blood are the true causes of the 
complaint, and such cases often do occur. 

|P_12
That Tea affects the Nerves of the Stomach 
is evident, by its communicating disagreeable 
Sensations upon the Soul. That the Soul 
becomes affected when the digestion of the 
Stomach is impaired, is also evident, so that 
the Soul cannot be answerable in that case, 
for Actions of the Body; for without the 
Nerves are braced up to the Standard of the 
Soul, it's ideas are imperfectly connected: 
so that it is clear, the Nerves operate upon the 
Soul, as the Works of a Clock regulate the 
Movement in keeping Time. 

That extreme sensibility to all Impressions, 
which render many so unhappy, should be 
treated like disorders of the Nerves, on which 
it depends, and often requires cold Baths, 
Milk diet, much exercise, and the courage to 
brave the open Air, and those things which 
we most dread. 

Sometimes the Disorder only exists in the 
Imagination. The vapourish persuade them- 
selves they are not able to do any thing, when 
they are very strong; they fancy every thing 
incommodious which they are very well able 
to bear; they deprive themselves of, and re- 
nounce, all enjoyments, frighten themselves 
with an unexisting Bugbear, and court a real 
one. Such Cases require the Physicians ut- 
most penetration: If he is deluded, the Patient 
is lost; but if he deceives the Patient, and gains 
|P_13
his confidence, a Cure is the work of a mi- 
nute. I have seen five such Persons, who 
fancied they could neither bear light, noise, 
air, or food, keep their Beds in a dark and 
matted Chamber, where none were suffer'd 
to walk, move, or speak out, but with the ut- 
most precaution; lived only on Broth and 
Jellies; thought themselves dangerously ill, 
settled their Affairs, and all this while they 
were perfectly well: I compelled them to see, 
hear, speak quit their Beds, and even their 
House, to eat and act like other People, to 
feel themselves well, and pass in one quarter 
of an Hour from the greatest Misery to the 
greatest Happiness. 

We must be persuaded the Nerves are im- 
mediately affected by the Labours of the Soul: 
inactivity is also sufficient to destroy them, and 
often produces this effect, even in Persons 
whose mind is as indolent as their Body The 
Nerves are the principal parts of the Machine, 
whenever any of the Animal Functions are 
disturbed, they must undoubtedly be injured. 

When the Nerves are affected without any 
sensible cause, one would be led to suppose, 
that some disease would soon appear, the 
source of which might possibly be discovered 
by attentive observation and be the more easi- 
ly destroyed before the disease had come to 
any height. Some disorders, (of the Stomach 
|P_14
especially) shew themselves more readily by 
the effects they have on the Nerves; for they 
being a kind of Medium between the Soul 
and the Body, are exposed to suffer from the 
irregularities of each, and communicate to the 
one, the injuries they receive from the other: 
thus it is that the Soul becomes prejudicial to 
the Body, and the Body hurtful to the Soul, 
and that they are both combined in destroy- 
ing the Nervous System. 
[^A long horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
[}SECTION II. }]
LET us now consider what is to be done 
to obtain a cure in Nervous Diseases. 

First then, we are exactly to regulate the 
use of non-naturals; For in vain is a pre- 
scription of medicines, if the Patient is not 
directed and willing to observe certain regu- 
lations, in relation to Air, diet and Exercise. 
Chuse a free open Air, not incumber'd with 
Hills or Woods A dry cool Air, braces 
and Invigorates the whole Body; while a Hot, 
confined, and damp Air, weakens and relaxes 
the Habit. When the Stomach and Bowels 
are weak, they should be well guarded against 
cold and Damps especially in Winter; and 
there is no dress better and more necessary to 
|P_15
keep up a due perspiration, than Flannels 
worn next the Skin. 

Constant exercise, every day that allows of 
it, either in walking, on horse-back, or in an 
open Chaise, is of vast service; it should be 
as much as the strength will admit, without 
weakness, fatigue or hurry; never weary 
yourself, nor raise a Sweat, go no further, 
than you can return with as much spirit as 
you went out. Exercise strengthens the whole 
Nervous System, assists digestion, (but retards 
it after a full meal; therefore after dinner sit 
a while) Sanguification, and the distribution 
and secretion of all the Animal Fluids. By 
muscular motion, the blood and Juices are 
kept in a due state of Fluidity; their Viscidi- 
dity is broken and dissolved, and all obstruc- 
tions either prevented or removed. The flesh 
Brush is an excellent thing for strengthening 
the Solids; as friction, either with the flesh 
brush, flannel or coarse Linnen Cloth, 
strengthens the Body, promotes the circula- 
tion, and is particularly useful in weak Bow- 
els. 

People of weak Nerves are generally quick 
thinkers, from the delicacy of their sensitive 
organs, which we therefore more liable to be 
fatigued and relaxed with exercise, than those 
of a Coarser make; whence we see the ne- 
cessity of keeping the mind easy, quiet and 
|P_16
chearful, since nothing hurts Nervous People 
more, than fear, grief, and anxiety. Use 
therefore agreeable amusements, and a little 
slight, entertaining and diverting reading, 
that requires no thought, for all Study is 
pernicious and hurtful. Conversation should 
be agreeable trifling and easy, without dispute 
or contradiction; amusements be Innocent, 
various, and not expensive: otherways, upon 
reflection, the money laid out would do more 
hurt, than the amusements could recompence. 
In a word, all thought and care must be laid 
aside; and rationality must give place for a 
while, to a way of life, which Bath gives a 
pattern of. I cannot but highly approve of 
a practice there, of having music, while the 
Patients drink the Water; which has a very 
great and good effect upon the motion of the 
finer animal Fibres. Music has been allow'd, 
in all ages of the world, to have a Noble pow- 
er in raising the dejected ideas of the Soul. 
Those that have the most delicate constituti- 
ons, are most sensible of its good effects; it 
opens the obstructions of the finest Vessels; 
assuages the passions, and at the same time 
communicates a pleasure to the Soul, and 
makes its ideas chearful, gay and lively; by 
the oscillatory motion of the Air, vibrating a- 
gainst the tempanum of the ear, there is such 
an impulsive motion given to the finest fibres 
|P_17
of the Brain, (upon which the Soul more 
immediately displays its Faculties) as to enable 
them to bring regular impulses to the senso- 
rium. 

But music, though it restores the Tone of 
the finest Fibres of the Brain; yet the inferi- 
or organs demand coarser treatment, to re- 
store them to the Standard of health

We must abridge the Quantity and Quality 
of our food, which ought to be nourishing, 
easy of Digestion, and suited to the Stomach 
of the Patient. Fat meats, and heavy sauces 
are hurtful; and all excess is to be avoided. 
The Patient ought never to eat more than 
the Stomach can easily digest: eat therefore 
little at a time, but often, of innocent, plain 
and simple meat; for every time the stomach 
is overloaded, the strength is impaired, and 
its Nerves are disordered. 

Above all things, heavy suppers ought to 
be avoided; since the stomach is much more 
apt to be oppressed with the same quantity of 
food, in an horizontal position, than in any 
erect posture; and since the Digeston goes on 
Slower in time of sleep than when awake, as 
the vessels are then much relaxed. 

It is a great blessing, that loathing, and 
want of appetite in some degree, attend all 
disorders, which prevent many people from 
in fallibly and quickly ruining themselves with- 
|P_18
out resource. Those who have only a few 
transient symptoms, and are but in the first 
stage of Nervous Diseases, should live with a 
due degree of temperance suited to their con- 
stitution; and abate a little of the quantity of 
their food, while they are more immediately 
under the symptoms. Indeed, if the disorder 
is deep, and hath continued so long as to pro- 
duce more violent symptoms, there is a ne- 
cessity to be still more careful. Drink small 
Beer, soft fine ale, or Wine and water; but 
never use water alone. Wine in excess en- 
feebles the Body, and impairs the faculties of 
the Soul; but a few glasses of wine, in time 
of eating, assist digestion. A Glass of wine 
before Dinner, on an empty Stomach, and 
when one is Languid, feeble or faint, is of 
great service. Wine in general, is preferable 
to Malt Liquor; the best Wine is Rhenish, 
Mountain, or small French Wine. When 
the stomach and Bowels are troubled with a- 
cidity, water mixed with Rum or Brandy, is 
preferable to Wine, or Malt Liquor. That 
too common drink Tea, is very hurtful to 
both the stomach and Nerves, especially if 
drank hot, with little Bread: I would there- 
fore recommend, not the disuse, but the 
more moderate use of Tea: it were, well, if 
something else was Joined with it in the morn- 
ing; Or instead of Tea, which is almost con- 
|P_19
stantly hurtful to the Neves, a Tea made of 
Balm and mint, in every dish of which should 
be put a Tea spoonful of the Balsamic mix- 
ture of Cream and Yolks of Eggs, with two 
or three drops of Oil of Cinnamon; which 
makes an agreeable Beverage, and is highly 
grateful to the stomach, as I have myself had 
occasion to observe. 

But of all things, the cold Bath is the 
greatest strengthener of the Nerves; it re- 
moves glandular obstructions, raises the Spi- 
rits, and vivifies and strengthens the whole 
Man; for Children, delicate constitutions, 
and Women liable to miscarriages, or trou- 
blesome floodings, nothing can be better. 
Cold Bathing, I am persuaded, is analagous 
to the Bark, which is also a very proper Me- 
dicine, for it strengthens the Stomach, Mus- 
cles, Nerves, and even the Soul itself, and 
enables them to support fresh fatigues. I 
have known several young Persons throw 
themselves into the Cold Bath, after being 
wearied and depressed with Study, who al- 
ways found upon coming out, a peculiar 
strength of mind, and a fresh disposition to 
Study. But I shall here observe, that where 
the Stomach, Liver, or other Viscera are un- 
sound, the Cold Bath is improper. 

That eminent Physician Mr Lewis, says, 
That of all Remedies, whether external or 
|P_20
internal, there is none can equal the virtue 
of the Cold Bath:—it cools the Body more, 
strengthens the Nerves better, and promotes 
perspiration more effectually than any me- 
dicine taken down the throat can do. 

The use of Bark and the Cold Bath toge- 
ther is pointed out by the Nature of their 
Virtues; they produce the same Effects; and 
being combined will cure disorders, which 
every other Remedy would only have en- 
creased. Being strengthening, sedative, and 
febrifugal, they reinvigorate, diminish the fe- 
verous and Nervous heat, and calm the irre- 
gular motions produced by the Spasmodic 
disposition of the Nervous System; they for- 
tify a weak Stomach, and quickly dissipate 
its attendant pains. They restore Appetite, 
they facilitate digestion and nutrition: they 
promote all the functions, and particularly 
perspiration, which render them so efficaci- 
ous in all catarrhous and cutaneous disor- 
ders, in a word, they remove all disorders 
occasioned by weakness provided the Patient 
is not afflicted with indissoluble obstructions, 
inflammations, or internal Ulcerous obscesses, 
which conditions almost necessarily exclude 
the Cold Bath, but which frequently al- 
low of the Quinquina From my own 
experience, I can assure the Reader, that I 
have my self plunged into the Cold Bath, 
|P_21
when I have found my Spirits so depressed, 
that without the utmost exertion of a power- 
ful Resolution, and being as it were superna- 
turaly assisted. I could never have attempt- 
ed it. Yet on coming out I have found my 
Nerves so Braced, and my spirits so strength- 
ened, that in a manner I viewed an other 
and a Spiritual State, with such extacy as 
made me ready and desirous to enter into it. 
I shall here too further recite what I once 
met with at Margate in Kent, where the late 
King of Britain arrived from Germany, and 
used the Cold Bath, and drank the Waters 
with great Advantage which is expressed, by 
an inscription on a statue erected on purpose, 
in this manner. 
Thy Baths give Vigour, and thy Waters Health. 
For altho' the Water only acts immediately 
on the Cutaneous Nerves and Vessels, yet it's 
strengthening power is, by sympathy, com- 
municated to the inmost parts of the Body, 
and mixes radically with the Fluids. 

Daily experience convinces us of the power 
of the Soul upon the Stomach. Those most 
addicted to reflection, perform their Digesti- 
on with greater difficulty; on the contrary, 
those who think little, generally digest well. 
We frequently see Persons of weak under- 
standings eat and drink very freely, without 
|P_22
suffering any inconvenience, although they 
lead sedentary lives, and have not remarkably 
strong constitutions. On the contrary, how 
many sensible Men do we see, whose Digestion 
is performed with much pain and difficulty, 
although they are of a good habit of Body, 
and use some exercise. 

The connection of the Soul with the Body 
is in fact so strong, that it's even difficult to 
conceive how one of them should act, and the 
other not be sensible, in a greater or a less 
degree, of that action. The Organs of Sense 
being put in motion, convey the Subject of 
thought to the Mind, by acting on the Fibres 
of the Brain; and while the Soul is employ- 
ed in thinking, the parts of the Brain are in 
a greater or less forcible motion, and in a less 
or greater degree of tension. These Motions 
fatigue the medullary or Nervous portion of 
the Brain; and this delicate substance, after 
a long course of Meditation, becomes as much 
exhausted, as a strong Man is after exercise. 
Whoever has thought intensely, even once in 
his Life, must have experienced this in him- 
self: and there is certainly no very Studious 
 Man, who has not often felt, on coming out 
of his Closet, violent pains in his head, at- 
tended with a great degree of heat in this part. 
This heat will depend on the proportion of 
weariness and inflammatory tension, which 
|P_23
the medullary substance has undergone: the 
eyes soon become sensible of this fatigue; and 
if we consider a Man who is deeply engaged 
in thought, we shall see that the Muscles of 
his Face are all upon the stretch, and some- 
times appear even convulsed. 

A great Author has taken notice of the 
Danger of fixing the Attention too strongly. 
When the Action of the Soul is too pow- 
erful,  says he, it attacks the Body so 
violently, that it throws it into a consuming 
State: if the Soul exerts itself in a peculiar 
manner, on certain occasions, the Body is 
made sensible of it, and becomes heated 
and debilitated. 

Another Author of note has observed the 
same, and says; The union of the Soul 
with the Body is so intimate that they, re- 
ciprocally share the good or evil which hap- 
pen to either of them. The Mind or Soul 
cannot put forth its powers, when the body 
is tired with immoderate exercise: and too 
close an application to study destroys the 
Body, by dissipating the Animal spirits, 
which are necessary to recruit it. 

The brain, which is the immediate seat of 
these emotions, the nerves which arise from 
it, and the Stomach, which is furnished with 
many nerves of an exquisite sensation, are the 
parts first attacked, and commonly most in- 
|P_24
jured by the immoderate labour of the mind; 
but if it should continue for any length of 
time almost all the parts of the body become 
partakers of the injury. 

The first symptoms which indicate a weak- 
ness of the Nervous System, are a kind of 
pusillanimity we were before strangers to; 
Diffidence, fear, grief, dejection and Dispirit- 
edness: he who was the most intrepid man 
now becomes the most timorous; the slightest 
undertaking frightens him, the most trifling 
unforseen incident makes him tremble; the 
slightest indisposition appears to him a fatal 
disease; and the idea of Death fills him with 
intolerable horrors. Some Tyrants have con- 
demned certain Philosophers, whom they ha- 
ted, to death, but have never been able to 
make them fear it; how much more effectu- 
ally would their cruelty have been exercised 
if by suffering them still to Live, they could 
have inspired them with those fears of Death 
hypochondriacs are tormented with? We see 
instances every day of men of Learning, who 
perceiving the first signs of this distemper, 
have been obliged to forsake their favourite 
studies; whose Nerves being weakened, they 
become incapable of attention; their memory 
fails: their Ideas are confused; a Sensation of 
heat in the Head, palpitations, a total dejec- 
|P_25
tion, and the apprehension of death makes 
the pen fall from their hands. 

The injury the mind has done the Body 
soon recoils upon itself; for it has been the 
will of the supreme Being, that as long as 
these two Substances continued together, the 
labours of the mind should in a certain de- 
gree depend upon the health of the Body: 
this truth has been ever acknowledged. An 
Author has emphatically declared, that the 
props of the Body supported the Soul, 
And that, Health increases the powers of 
the mind; when the body is diseased, the 
mind is not capable of reflection . It is 
not therefore surprising that the mind should 
be weakened, after it has exhausted the Brain 
and Debilitated the Nerves. 

An Eminent Physician who lived long in a 
City where learning is much cultivated, says, 
That study begins by impairing the Stomach 
and that if the complaint is not relieved, it 
may degenerate into a melancholy. And that 
a vitiated Stomach attends Learned People, 
as surely as the shadow follows the Body. 
That he has seen Patients who suffered for 
this immoderate thirst of Learning, first by a 
loss of appetite, an entire inability of the Di- 
gesting Powers, and a total debility which 
ensued; afterwards they have been tormented 
|P_26
with spasms, convulsions and at length with 
a total privation of all their senses. 

When the Digestion is imperfect, the hu- 
mours imbibe a crude quality, which renders 
them unfit for their various destinations; and 
which particularly prevents Nutrition, upon 
which the reparation of all the Powers de- 
pends. To be convinced of the general in- 
fluence of the Stomach, it is only necessary to 
observe the State of a Person who labours 
under a difficult Digestion; the Powers are 
lost in a few minutes, a general uneasiness 
makes the weakness more insupportable, the 
Organs of Sense are benumbed, the faculties 
of the Soul are exercised very imperfectly, the 
Memory, and particularly the Imagination, 
seems to be annihilated; in a word, nothing 
makes a sensible Man so much resemble an 
Idiot, as the difficulty of Digestion. This 
Observation equally points out to us, that of 
all Disorders, there are none which more 
quickly affect the Soul, than those of the 
Nervous System. 

There is one general precaution, which is, 
to refrain from all Liquors in great quanti- 
ties; they weaken Digestion, by relaxing the 
Stomach, drowning the degestive Juices, and 
by precipitating the Aliments before they are 
digested: they relax all the parts, dissolve the 
humours, excite making Water, or draining 
|P_27
Sweats. I have seen disorders occasioned by 
Weakness considerably diminished without 
any remedy, but the mere retrenching of the 
quantity of Liquor the Patient usually Drunk. 

We know, that an unnatural State of the 
Nerves of the Stomach may either produc a 
craving or an aversion to food; that low 
Spirits and Melancholy often proceed from 
that cause: nor is it to be doubted, that 
when the Nerves of the Stomach are, for cer- 
tain causes, affected in a manner somewhat 
different, an indifference for food, a weak 
Digestion, a languor and coldness, a slow 
Pulse, and wasting, may be the consequences. 
By proper food, the Nerves of the Stomach are 
gratefully stimulated, and the whole Body is 
thence enlivened and strengthened; so that, 
besides its use for nutrition, food in the sto- 
mach becomes, altogether necessary in some 
delicate Nervous People, for keeping up the 
strength of the Body, and the due exercise 
of all its suctions. The morbid affection of 
the Nerves of the Stomach, by sympathy, 
impairs the Vigour and energy of the whole 
system. 

It is said in Holy Write, That where much 
is given, much will be required  May I 
presume then to put a Question, which I wish 
to do without giving offence to God or the 
world. How it has happened in all ages, 
|P_28
That men of the greatest sensibility of Soul, 
should be endued with such delicate Nerves, 
as pervert the mental Faculties and prevent 
the Soul from exerting its noblest Powers, to 
shine and illuminate in contemplation of the 
Works of God? 

I shall conclude this Section with Dr Chene's 
observation, in his English Malady, the reading 
of which, strikes the Human Mind with asto- 
nishment: But of all the miseries that af- 
flicts human Life, (says that Eminent Phy- 
sician) and which principally relate to the 
Body, in this Valley of Tears, I think Ner- 
vous disorders, in their extreme and last 
Degree, beyond all comparison the worst. 
It was the observation of a Great Man, that 
he had seen persons labouring under the 
Gout, Stone, Cancer and every other dis- 
order, which could tear the Human Ma- 
chine. But had he compared them all (and 
indeed scarce any, willing to lay down cheer- 
fully the Load of Clay, we will except those, 
who were supported by divine power) but 
such as laboured under an Internal Anxiety, 
meaning those most Cruel, Sinking, Suffo- 
cating and Strangling, Nervous Disorders, 
they greatly exceeded. It is almost the only 
misery to be dreaded and avoided in Life, if 
possible it can be by any means. For when 
|P_29
once the supporters are gone, the Dissolution 
is perfect. 
[^A long horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
[}SECTION III. }]
THE Human Body is made up of such frail 
Materials, that they must necessarily de- 
cay, and often be put out of order. 

We are not only subject to pain, and dis- 
eases; but also to Irregularities of the Passions, 
and Influence of the Weather; all which af- 
fect the Spirits, Intellects and Memory, so as 
to render the same Person very different, at 
different times, in thinking, speaking, and 
acting; as any one, who is not robustly in- 
sensible must naturally discover from his own 
feelings, at one time or other. Considering 
its admirable Structure, the Number and ex- 
quisite fineness of its movements, that in a 
healthy State, all its parts must conspire to 
perform their proper office, and that the least 
failure generally occasions some disease; it 
appears matter of astonishment that we are 
more than the transitory Beings of a Day. 

In this frail and uncertain state, the human 
System is subject to an Inclement Atmo- 
sphere without, and the violent Passions with- 
|P_30
in, it may suffer from Intemperance in Diet, 
the advances of Age and the prevalence of 
Injurious Habits, so as to render it more un- 
stable than the Weather-Glass, and in a per- 
petual state of change, from the Cradle to the 
Grave. 

Well may human Life, thus surrounded by 
a train of unavoidable dangers, and calamities 
be compared to a fleeting shadow which ne- 
ver contiues in one stay. Like an unballasted 
bark in a troubled Ocean, it becomes the 
sport of Winds and tides; and without the 
aid of Religion, Reason, and Philosophy, is 
in continual danger of being swallowed up 
and lost. 

Perhaps, however, very few can properly 
be said to die of old age merely; for even 
the Life of Old Parr might probably have 
been still prolonged, had he not changed his 
Air and manner of Living. 

Here we may observe, that by a kind of 
Fatal Necessity, Animal Bodies are worn out 
and destroyed by that very cause which con- 
stitutes the principles of Life, namely, the 
circulating power of the Blood; and con- 
sequently, that the number of years to which 
man may attain, will probably be in propor- 
tion to the Velocity of the Pulse: If so, it will 
then follow, that such a particular state of 
the Constitution as produces the greatest de- 
|P_31
gree of strength and vigour in youth, is not 
most likely to prolong Life, that those of 
weak solids, and delicate habits in their early 
state, grow old more slowly than others; and 
if the Viscera is sound, become for a time, 
more strong and Healthy from the effect of 
Age

The disorders produced by the efforts of 
the mind fall soonest upon such as are inces- 
santly engaged in the contemplation of one 
object:Study (says Mr Rousseau) makes 
men tender, weakens their Constitution, 
and when once the Body has lost its pow- 
ers, those of the soul are not easily preser- 
ved. Application wears out the Machine, 
exhausts the spirits, destroys the strength, 
enervates the mind, makes us pusillani- 
mous, unable either to bear fatigue, or to 
keep our passions under. 

The whole Body becomes hard in process 
of time, and old age itself is a general indu- 
ration. In labouring Men, those parts most 
used in their respective employments grow 
callous; in men of Letters, the Brain itself 
is attacked in this manner. They become in- 
capable of connecting ideas, and grow old 
much before their time. 

In Children the Brain is too soft, in old 
Persons too hard, and in the two extremes it 
is equally unfit to communicate the Oscillati- 
|P_32
ons exerted by thinking. Galen has rightly 
observed, that our memory fails first, and 
forebodes the weakening of our reason
The Nerves are not the only parts affected by deep 
thinking, for, as Gunzius has observed, the 
weariness of the eyes is alone sufficient to 
produce Nervous diseases, There is no one 
but must have experienced, as I have often 
done, how much the head is weakened by 
long attention of the sight. If after a Fever 
or other Indisposition, it should happen to 
me, before my strength is well recruited, to 
fix my eyes for a long time on any Object, I 
am immediately seized with Giddiness, sick- 
ness at stomach, and my whole Body suffers 
a painful Sensation of being fatigued and ex- 
hausted

If such are the Injuries brought on the 
Constitution by irregularity and excess of the 
Passions, it ought to be the care of every 
Rational Being, to guard against their insults, 
and to oppose their Effects with becoming 
resolution, and a Virtuous Resignation to the 
Will of Providence. 

Happiness and Misery are the Lights and 
Shades which fill up the out-lines in the Por- 
trait of Human Life. Every Man naturally 
endeavours to attain the one, and avoid the 
other; but by very different means, which 
are often disproportioned to that end. 

|P_33
We frequently deceive ourselves, both in 
the pursuit and enjoyment of our wishes. 
Extravagance of Hope often ends in disap- 
pointment; and even a constant Series of 
pleasurable Events will at last lose their power. 
To give them true relish, and make them 
lasting, the mind must refer to some former 
painful sensations. 

Thus a Person who always possessed Health, 
is scarce sensible of its value; but when lost, 
let it again return, and he will bless the means 
which restored it. None enjoy Riches so 
much as those who have been at great pains 
to attain them: He who always was affluent, 
has no competent idea of Indigence, to con- 
trast such a State, or exalt his enjoyment. 
Were our exquisite pleasures too lasting, they 
would lay so much stress on the vital powers 
of the Body, as would soon wear it out. 
Every extreme, therefore, corrects itself; and 
every Evil works its own cure. 

If the violent Passions harrow up the Soul, 
and disturb its union with the Body, a Con- 
science pure and uncorrupted, the inestima- 
ble reward of Virtue, will best reconcile them 
to each other, and cause them to dwell in 
harmony: That will always speak peace to 
the Mind, whatever the World may say, and 
shield it from the impotent attacks of slander 
and abuse. Whoever is oversolicitous about 
|P_34
Censure, Fame, or the possession of temporal 
Enjoyments, will seldom find repose: an un- 
gratious look from his superiors, or unmerit- 
ed insolence from those below him, will vex 
and discompose him. If he is anxious for 
long life; a Coffin or shroud, the apparatus 
of Death, will alarm and appal his senses; 
whilst he who dispenses with unavoidable ills 
with a Philosphic indifference, who is neither 
weary of living or affraid to die, will find 
within himself an inexpressible, and perpetual 
calm. 

By giving way to sorrow, or anger, they 
at last become habitual and reign triumphant: 
In a word, the government of the passions is 
as essential towards preventing diseases of the 
mind, as Temperance contributes to hinder 
them attacking the Body. 

That man ought to be deemed richest, 
who is the happiest; and he is the most like- 
ly to become so, who, with a virtuous resig- 
nation is prepared for the unavoidable evils 
which flesh is heir to; who expostulates with 
the folly and extravagance of his own desires, 
and though a hard task, at last convinces him- 
self that what he likes best, is not always best 
for him; who preserves at all times, a decent 
equality of mind, is not arrogantly elated 
with the delusive smiles of Prosperity, nor 
servily cast down by the surly visage of Mis- 
fortune. 

|P_35
The Organs of the Body may be entirely 
unfit to be acted upon by the Soul, when it 
remains wrapped up in itself, like a criminal 
in a Dungeon. Some people are born with 
imperfect nerves, which are stopt up, and 
never all their lives, unfold themselves, and 
shake off the Clog of Matter which obstruct 
them. 

Though the Soul has a power over the in- 
voluntary motions of the Body, in a healthy 
state; yet when the Body is diseased or im- 
perfectly formed, the operation of the Soul 
then is irregular. 

Even the strength of the Constitution is 
itself dangerous. Young people of excel- 
lent Constitutions, apply themselves to study 
with indefatigable industry; the powerful 
action of the Soul increases that of the 
Organs, and they are attacked with inflam- 
matory diseases, the consequence of irri- 
tation long kept up in vigorous habits. 
Sometimes they expire in the first attack; 
more commonly they get the better of that; 
and if they find themselves perfectly re- 
covered, their constitution recovering its 
vigour, they give themselves up again to the 
same labours, and relapse into the same dis- 
orders. There are frequent instances of ro- 
bust young men close applying to study, who 
are attacked with inflammatory fevers every 
|P_36
year; at last, in process of time, being worn 
out by these attacks and by their labours, they 
lose their strength, and are seized with con- 
sumptive diseases, against which they are no 
longer able to resist. 

Health is frequently destroyed by excessive 
devotion. An Author has collected several 
interesting observations on this head, in which 
devout Melancholy is well delineated; its 
symptoms are very unaccountable, alarming, 
and grievous; and there are few practitioners 
who have not had opportunities of seeing 
some shocking instances of this disease. The 
greatness and excellence of the object, and 
the satisfaction the Soul experiences in giv- 
ing itself up to the contemplation of the Al- 
mighty, excites too lively a Sensation, and 
produces in the Brain, attention too violent 
and too continual, to be supported for a long 
time together without Injury; it soon throws 
the soul into fanatical madness, and exhausts 
the Body. Some most amiable yung Per- 
sons, led away by an erronious System, 
fade and fall into decay, neglecting the duties 
of their calling, in order to give their thoughts 
up wholly to the supreme Author of their 
Being, who could not have been more pro- 
perly glorified than by a strict Attention to 
those duties. A Student is still regrated, 
One of the greatest abilities, born with strong 
|P_37
powers of the mind, whose candour and o- 
ther Virtues would have been an acquisition 
to the Church; But who unfortunately de- 
voted himself to a sect, of which he soon was 
the victim, the powers of his Body decaying 
as fast as his mind became more zealously in- 
flamed. 

Sometimes even the most lucky thoughts 
arise in the midst of recreation. One of the 
greatest Geniuses of our age computed his 
immortal works walking about in the Coun- 
try. The Soul unfolds itself in open Air, 
but is imprisoned within the confined walls of 
a Study; it is elevated by the fragrance of 
Flowers, depressed by the smell of a Lamp. 
Plutarch's comparison on this subject is 
very just and excellent: "A little water, "
(says he,) nourishes and strengthens 
Plants; and a greater quantity stifles them. 
Thus it is with the mind; moderate labour is 
its food; excessive labour destroys it. When 
activity was mentioned as the second cause of 
the disorders here treated of, exercise was 
certainly represented at the same time, as one 
of the most powerful preservatives and re- 
storers of the health of the Learned. 

In the foregoing article, the advantages of 
open air have been considered, these are 
greatly enhanced, if accompanied with some 
degree of motion. The Learned in general, 
|P_38
are not sufficiently convinced of the influence 
the Body has on the Soul, although it was 
well known to our greatest men, who have 
been sensible that the Mind was subject to the 
powers of Physic as well as the Body, The 
Soul, says Des Cartes, is so much influenc- 
ed by the Constitution, and the State of 
the Bodily Organs, that if it were possible 
to find out a method of encreasing our pe- 
netration, it should certainly be sought for 
in Medicine.  Walking alone is very be- 
neficial, but not quite sufficient; and it can- 
not be too much recommended to them to 
ride out frequently on Horse-back; this kind 
of exercise is of use to the Head, the Breast, 
and the Viscera of the lower Belly, especially 
by preventing or dispelling their obstructions. 

The hypocondriac disease may also be 
reckoned among the Evils learned Men are 
exposed to, from that kind of inactive life, 
which disturbing the circulation in the abdo- 
dominal Viscera, produces obstructions in 
them. This disease generally attacks the In- 
dolent, the Luxurious, the Unfortunate, and 
the Studious. Men of a Melancholy tem- 
perament, whose minds are capable of great 
Attention, and whose passions are not easily 
moved, are in the advanced periods of Life, 
most liable to this disease. It may rather be 
called a complication of Maladies, than a 
|P_39
single one. To what a wretched condition 
are the best of Men often reduced by it! 
Their strength and appetite fail; a perpetual 
gloom hangs over their minds; they live in 
the constant dread of death, and are continu- 
ally in search of relief from Medicine, where, 
alas! it is not to be found. 

Those most liable to this Disease, are the 
Virtuous, the Valiant, the Brave, and those 
of an enlarged understanding, whom it would 
be the interest of the world to wish, they were 
free from that and every other illness; and 
except for that alloy, they would have too 
large a share of human happiness. To this 
we owe the irrepareable loss of Doctor Young, 
and the best and most approved Men that 
have appeared among us. 

Hypochandriac persons ought never to 
fast long, and their food should be solid and 
nourishing, all acescent and windy vegetables 
are to be avoided. Flesh meats agree best 
with them, and their drink should be old Cla- 
ret or generous Madeira. 

In all persons afflicted with Nervous disor- 
ders, there is a great, delicacy and sensibility 
of the whole Nervous System, and an un- 
common degree of weakness of the Organs 
of digestion. These may be either natural 
or acquired. When owing to a defect in the 
|P_40
Constitution, they are hardly to be removed; 
but may be mitigated by proper care. 

But Nervous Affections arise more fre- 
quently from causes which it is, in a great 
measure, in our power to avoid, than from 
Diseases, or any Original fault in the Consti- 
tution. Excessive grief, intense Study, im- 
proper diet, and neglect of Exercise, are the 
great Sources of this extensive Class of dis- 
eases. 

Grief indulged destroys the appetite and 
digestion depresses the spirits, and induces an 
universal relaxation and debility of the whole 
System. Instances of this are daily to be seen. 
The loss of a relation, or any other misfor- 
tune in Life, is often sufficient to occasion 
the most complicated series of Nervous symp- 
toms Such misfortunes indeed are not to 
be avoided, but surely their effects, by a vigor- 
ous and proper exertion of the mind, might 
be renderd less hurtful. The effects of in- 
tense Study are pretty similar to those occasi- 
oned by Grief. It preys upon the Animal 
Spirits, and destroys the appetite and digesti- 
on To prevent these effects, studious Persons 
ought, according to the Poet, To Toy with their 
Books. They should never Study too long 
at a time; nor attend long to one particular 
Subject, especially if it be of a serious nature. 
They ought likewise to be attentive to their 
|P_41
posture, and should take care frequently to 
unbend their minds by music, diversions, or 
agreeable Company. 

With regard to Diet, I shall only observe 
that Nervous diseases may be occasioned 
either by excess or inanition, both these extre- 
mes hurt digestion, and vitiate the humours. 

But the most general cause of Nervous dis- 
orders is Indolence. The active and laborious 
are seldom troubled with them They are 
reserved for the Children of ease and afflu- 
ence, who generally feel their keenest force. 
All I shall say to such Persons is, that the 
means of prevention and cure are both in 
their own power. If the Constitution of hu- 
man nature be such, that man must either 
labour or suffer diseases, surely, no individual 
has any right to expect an exemption from 
the general rule. 

If the stomach is bad, either naturally or 
from errors in diet, this Organ will be affected 
by the exercise of the mind, while the Nerves 
shall remain in a sound state; on the contrary, 
if the Nervous System is weak, and the Sto- 
mach strong, Nervous diseases of great im- 
portance, will be brought on before the Sto- 
mach is Injured. 

A fit of Illness, undigested food, or any 
similar cause often occasions broken uncon- 
nected dreams, and prevents our receiving the 
|P_42
arising from sound sleep; the reason of which 
probably is, the fermentation and discordance 
of the nutritive juices, incapacitating our senses 
or organs (thro' which the soul is empowred 
to act) from being in a perfect state of rest, 
the soul must consequently partake of that 
irregular and unconnected quality, by which 
the bodily organs are at that juncture 
actuated: But in Death the case is quite re- 
versed; the Soul, instead of being Clogg'd up 
and embarrassed by Bodily impediments is 
absolutely and entirely freed from them; for 
we cannot suppose it is longer confined to 
Nerves and Arteries, which there is no possi- 
bility of its ever making any further use 
of, such a supposition must be ridiculous: So 
that in sleep the Soul's situation is directly 
contrary to what it must be in death; in 
the first case it is by material influence pre- 
vented from exerting its powers, whereas 
in Death, that is, on its enlargement from 
its Material body it finds itself for the first 
time at full Liberty, and in full power of 
expanding and exerting them to the ut- 
most. 

It is evident that Virtue and Vice are not 
Constitutional, and dependent on any parti- 
cular habit of Body, and tho' our material 
part, has an influence over the soul, in regard 
to the exertion of its Faculties, yet that influ- 
|P_43
ence extends only to the enlarging or con- 
tracting our intellectual faculties, and not to 
our making a good or ill use of those facul- 
ties, that rest solely in Ourselves, and if we 
make a wrong use of that power; if we un- 
naturalize ourselves, as I may say, by deviat- 
ing from the Paths of Virtue, whom are we 
to blame? The Deity who has formed us as 
we should be, or ourselves, who with an un- 
grateful hand, rejected the opportunity he has 
given us of attaining virtue, and in conse- 
quence, eternal felicity? 

Are we not assured too, by the Deity, that 
according to our different abilities, situation, 
various contingencies &c we shall hereafter 
be judged? Our actions will be scrutaniz'd in 
proportion to the talents entrusted to us, and 
according to the opportunities and incitements 
we have had, to make use of them and 
not taken in that superficial light, mor- 
tals look on them: It is not those who have 
the greatest share of, but those who make the 
best use of their moral and intellectual powers, 
who will be regarded hereafter; justice and 
goodness are the Deity's Attributes, and by 
them we are hereafter to be judged: As to 
Idiots, &c who (like the Brute Creation) are 
under the dominion of matter, at least, 
have as little power of exerting their facul- 
ties, the Deity's Justice will hardly expect 
|P_44
from them duties, which it is impossible they 
should perform. What use they and many 
more beings are of in the Creation we know 
not; but let us not, short sighted as we are, 
for that reason arraign Divine wisdom: We 
are sure every part of the Creation was or- 
dain'd for some wise purpose, tho' to what 
end we are perhaps ignorant; And in regard 
to the diversity of power, talents, &c. which 
we observe among men, so far from being a 
blemish, they are a great prof of the Deity's 
Wisdom: Instead of their being the cause of 
confusion it is on that, the link which sup- 
ports all, chiefly depends: was it otherways, 
half the omnipotent's Power and goodness on 
earth, would have been in vain. 

We may assure ourselves, That Death, 
(which is indeed but the Souls Birth) instead 
of being a gloomy Messenger, is in reality 
our best Friend, since by his means we shall 
be freed from the fetters of the flesh, and in- 
troduced into a state of freedom, Knowledge, 
and (I hope) Happiness, where our intellect- 
ual Powers will have full scope: where we 
shall be all Ethereal Sense, and capable of in- 
numerable Joys which in our present state we 
can have no conception of: as Swans are said 
to sing melodiously before Death, from an in- 
stinct of some extraordinary Good approach- 
ing, so should good men rejoice on their 
|P_45
elinquishing this mortal State: let us consider 
what happiness even in this life the contemp- 
lation of an eternity produces! To indulge in 
the hopes of meeting again with our long-lost 
best beloved Friends; of living in intimacy 
and conversing with, not only the Heroes 
and Philosophers of all ages, but with Angels 
and other superior Beings; of indulging the 
amiable curiosity of searching into and ad- 
miring the works of the Deity, thro' the im- 
mensity of the creation, where infinite variety 
must prove an infinite fund of unspeakable, 
insatiable, and ever encreasing happiness; must 
not reflections like these animate our Spirits 
and stimulate us to virtue? I own I often in- 
dulge the thought, and am never so happy as 
when I am thus, as it were, anticipating eter- 
nity; besides, nothing contributes so much 
to cheerfulness, Religion, Humanity and all 
the social virtues, as the contemplation and 
hopes of a futurity; whereas to the contrary 
opinion, is ever united a melancholy which 
rankles within us, which preys upon our Spi- 
rits, and which by divesting us of all fears of 
a future Judgment, encourages Vice; and too 
often induces us to give such a loose to our 
passions as makes us incapable of Happiness 
either in this world, or the world to come. 

And for the Good and Virtuous, the 
cause of their Immortality is continually 
|P_46
creasing even in this world: The longer they 
exist, the more they improve in Knowledge 
and virtue and consequently, the more 
they merit an Eternity. We might as 
well suppose, the Deity should annihilate 
Angels, and other superior Beings, as the 
Souls of Virtuous Men. When we most 
please him, to imagine we shall be most se- 
verely punished by him, were absurd; and 
surely to the virtuous and happy, Annihilation 
must be the most dreadful of Punishments. 
The Immateriality of the Soul implies too, 
that it is a Substance incorruptible and inva- 
riable and consequently eternal, unless it shall 
please the Deity to annihilate it; and can we 
suppose, that Truth and Goodness, which 
are emanations from the Divine Creator, will 
not eternally exist? 

Every part of the Creation evinces, in the 
most striking characters, the Existence of a 
Deity; and because we are not acquainted 
with the Nature and Essence of the Deity, 
shall we for that reason alone, doubt there 
is a Deity? 

The Case is the same in all immaterial sub- 
stances; nor is it possible for us to be admit- 
ted to a nearer intimacy with them, while we 
are confined to this bodily prison, where, as 
I before observed, we can have no distinct idea 
|P_47
of any thing but what is material, since all our 
perceptions are the effects of material impuls- 
es, and conveyed through material Organs 
to the Soul. The human understanding 
is limited to every human boundaries How 
many things are there, even in the ma- 
terial Creation, which seem mysterious, and 
are kept from us? Yet this should not 
give us the least uneasiness, since what- 
ever is available to our happiness here, or 
hereafter, is laid open to us. The knowledge 
of a Deity, and the Soul's existence, are 
truths absolutely necessary to make us happy 
and virtuous. 

It is worth observing, That we are assured 
in Scripture,— Angels and other spiritual 
Beings, neither Marry, nor are given in 
Marriage:  They all have one common 
Parent, The Almighty. 

Our Bodies, like all other material systems 
are not designed for eternal duration, are 
ever variable, and so ordered, as to stand in 
need of daily recruits of Food, Sleep, &c.: 
During our sleep, a swoon, or any similar 
cause, the Soul being embarrassed and 
clogged up, as it were, is in a state of Deliquium 
at least, if it does think, its actions are so incon- 
gruous, as not to be traced in our waking hours 
notwithstanding which, we are not to suppose 
that the Soul is in reality more defective then, 
|P_48
than at another time; but the Organs, thro' 
which it is obliged to act, being obstructed, 
its faculties are consequently impeded. If 
we lose our Eye-sight or hearing, the Soul is 
not in the least maimed thereby, it has but lost 
its Instrument or Bodily Organ, its original 
power is still the same; and were our optical 
or auditory Organs reduced to order, the 
Soul would again re-exert its usual Faculties. 
