
|P_
[}FRONTISPIECE. }][^man seated in a room with his feet resting on a skeleton^]J. L#d##. sculp 

The Sick me with the Best Advice supply
Who Seen may thro## their useless ##utches by. 
Trample on Death assisted by our Ar#. 
His Glass Demolish, and destroy his #####. 
|P_iii
[}PREFACE. }]
AS Health is the noblest blessing of 
this life, the method of pro- 
curing it should be our principal en- 
quiry. While possessed of it, we seldom 
pay a proper attention to its importance; 
when lost, we become sensible of its 
value, but are frequently careless con- 
cerning its recovery. The reasons are 
plain; while we have it we trifle with it 
till it flies us; when fled, we trifle with 
our misfortune, because we suppose the 
 recovery to be either impossible or im- 
probable. 

|P_iv
For the benefit of mankind, we here 
furnish the public with some of the best 
and easiest methods of recovering and 
securing health, and of preserving life, 
which comprehend the greatest disco- 
veries in the Medical Art. These will 
equally suit all ranks of people; the 
Poor, because the Remedies may be 
cheaply obtained; and the Rich, because 
they may be easily put in practice. Hence 
Health may be recovered with Facility,
and a Knowledge of the powers of me- 
dicine obtained without Difficulty. So 
that our readers may at once cease to 
be Patients themselves, or, if they please, 
become Practical Physicians to others. 

|P_5[^A horizontal double-line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}Every Patient his own Doctor. }][^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}PART I. 
INTERNAL DISORDERS. }][^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}SCURVY. }]
THE Scurvy being the principal disease inci- 
dent to the inhabitants of Great Britain, and 
the source from whence many of their other 
disorders flow, we thought it necessary to commence 
this salutary Work, with an account of the nature of, 
and the remedies against, this fatal foe to ENGLISH 
CONSTITUTIONS. 

[}Symptoms. }]
THE symptoms or signs of this dangerous disease 
are a frequent laziness and lowness of spirits, pains in 
various parts of the body, sometimes livid spots, often 
a sallow complexion, a continual itching of the blood, 
difficulty of breathing, swelling of the legs, bleeding 
|P_6
at the nose, and spongy gums, subject to pains and 
bleedings. But it is to be observed, that as consti- 
tutions differ, the signs or symptoms of the disease 
vary; and people, according to their years, situations 
in life, and manner of living, are attacked by this 
disease, under several appearances; but some of the 
above symptoms always attend it according to the 
constitution of those afflicted; for whose benefit we 
shall point out the most approved and certain me- 
thods of cure hitherto discovered. 

[}Remedies. }]
A Milk diet, with weak whey, greens of all kinds, 
fresh vegetables, fruits, acids, scurvy-grass ale, fresh 
beer and cyder, tar water taken twice a day, with 
camphire, one scruple, æthiops mineral, half an 
ounce, powder of gum-guaiacum, two drachms, ho- 
ney, one ounce, mix and make an electuary, and take 
the bigness of a nutmeg every night going to rest. 
The patient may likewise drink the decoction of the 
woods. Drinking sea-water will be found extremely 
beneficial, as will bathing in the sea. 

But for the easiest and most efficacious remedy for 
this dreadful disease, we may thank Capt. Cook, who 
in his late voyage round the world, by the command 
of his present Majesty in the ship Resolution, pre- 
served himself and all his men from the Scurvy, by 
the use of a very simple medicine; though he passed 
through the temperature, the frigid and the torrid 
zones, was absent from England three years and eigh- 
teen days, and went through such a variety of cli- 
mates, as were sufficient to make the severest attacks 
on the most robust constitution. But as his methods 
of proceeding will appear with most propriety in his 
own words, we shall present our readers with his 
Letter to Sir John Pringle, Bart, President of the 
Royal Society, which letter is dated March 5, 1776; 
|P_7
and for which Captain Cook received a Premium 
Medal. 

SIR, 

AS many gentlemen have expressed some surprize 
at the uncommon good state of health which the 
crew of the Resolution, under my command, ex- 
perienced during her late voyage; I take the liberty 
to communicate to you the methods that were taken 
to obtain that end. Much was owing to the ex- 
traordinary attention given by the Admiralty, in 
causing such articles to be put on board, as either 
by experience or conjecture were judged to tend most 
to preserve the health of seamen. I shall not trespass 
upon your time in mentioning all those articles, 
but confine myself to such as were found the most 
useful. 

We had on board a large quantity of malt, 
of which was made sweet-wort, and given (not only 
to those men who had manifest symptoms of the 
scurvy, but to such also as were, from circumstances, 
judged to be most liable to that disorder) from 
one to two or three pints in the day to each man, 
or in such proportion as the surgeon thought necessary; 
which sometimes amounted to three quarts in the 
twenty-four hours. This is without doubt one of 
the best antiscorbutic sea-medicines yet found out; 
and if given in time will, with proper attention to 
other things, I am persuaded, prevent the scurvy 
from making any great progress for a considerable 
time: but I am not altogether of opinion, that it 
will cure it in an advanced state at sea. 

"Sour-krout, of which we had also a large pro- 
vision, is not only a wholesome vegetable food, but, 
in my judgment, highly antiscorbutic, and spoils 
not by keeping. A pound of it was served to each 
|P_8
man, when at sea, twice a week, or oftener when it 
was thought necessary. 

Portable soup, or broth, was another essential 
article, of which we had likewise a liberal supply. 
An ounce of this to each man, or such other pro- 
portion as was thought necessary, was boiled with 
their peas three days in the week; and when we 
were in places where fresh vegetables could be pro- 
cured, it was boiled, with them and with wheat 
or oatmeal, every morning for breakfast, and also with 
dried peas and fresh vegetables for dinner. It 
enabled us to make several nourishing and whole- 
some messes, and was the means of making the peo- 
ple eat a greater quantity of greens than they would 
have done otherwise. 

Further, we were provided with rob of lemons 
and oranges; which the surgeon found useful in se- 
veral cases. 

Amongst other articles of victualling, we were 
furnished with sugar in the room of oil, and with 
wheat instead of much oatmeal, and were certainly 
gainers by the exchange. Sugar, I imagine, is a 
very good antiscorbutic; whereas oil, such at least 
as is usually given to the navy, I apprehend has the 
contrary effect. But the introduction of the most 
salutary articles, either as provision or medicines will 
generally prove unsuccessful, unless supported by 
certain rules of living. 

"On this principle, many years experience, to- 
gether with some hints I had from Sir Hugh Palliser, 
the Captains Campbell, Wallis, and other intelligent 
officers, enabled me to lay down a plan whereby all 
was to be conducted. The crew were at three watches, 
except upon some extraordinary occasions. By this 
means they were not so much exposed to the weather 
as if they had been at watch and watch; and they 
had generally dry cloaths to shift themselves when 
|P_9
they happened to get wet. Care was also taken to 
expose them as little as possible. Proper methods 
were employed to keep their persons, hammocks, 
bedding, cloaths, &c. constantly clean and dry. 
Equal pains were taken to keep the ship clean and 
dry between decks. Once or twice a week she was 
aired with fires; and when this could not be done, 
she was smoaked with gunpowder moistened with 
vinegar or water. I had also frequently a fire made 
in an iron pot at the bottom of the well, which 
greatly purified the air in the lower parts of the ship. 
To this and cleanliness, as well in the ship as amongst 
the people, too great attention cannot be paid; the 
least neglect occasions a putrid offensive smell below, 
which nothing but fires will remove; and if these 
be not used in time, those smells will be attended 
with bad consequences. Proper care was taken of 
the ship's coppers, so that they were kept constantly 
clean. The fat, which boiled out of the salt beef 
and pork, I never suffered to be given to the people, 
as is customary; being of opinion that it promotes 
the scurvy. I never failed to take in water wherever 
it was to be procured, even when we did not seem 
to want it; because I look upon fresh water from 
the shore to be much more wholesome than that which 
has been kept for some time on board. Of this essen- 
tial article we were never at an allowance, but had 
always abundance for every necessary purpose. I am 
convinced that with plenty of fresh water, and a close 
attention to cleanliness, a ship's company will seldom 
be much afflicted with the scurvy, though they should 
not be provided with any of the antiscorbutics before- 
mentioned. We came to few places where either 
the art of man or nature did not afford some sort of 
refreshment or other, either of the animal or vege- 
table kind. It was my first care to procure what 
could be met with of either, by every means in my 
|P_10
power, and to oblige our people to make use thereof, 
both by my example and authority; but the benefits 
arising from such refreshments soon became so obvious, 
that I had little occasion to employ either the one or 
the other. 

These, Sir, were the methods, under the care of 
Providence, by which the Resolution performed a voy- 
age of three years and eighteen days, through all the 
climates from 52 degrees north to 71 degrees south, 
with the loss of one man only by disease, and who 
died of a complicated and lingering illness, without 
any mixture of scurvy. Two others were unfortu- 
nately drowned, and one killed by a fall; so that of 
the whole number with which I set out from England, 
I lost only four. 

"I have the honour to be, Sir, &c. "

[}Extract of a Letter from Captain Cook to Sir John 
Pringle, Bart. dated Plymouth Sound, July 7, 1776.}]
"I entirely agree with you, that the dearness of the 
rob of lemons and oranges will hinder them from 
being furnished in large quantities, but I do not think 
this so necessary; for though they may assist other 
things, I have no great opinion of them alone. Nor 
have I an higher opinion of vinegar: my people had 
it very sparingly during the late voyage; and towards 
the latter part, none at all; and yet we experienced no 
ill effects from the want of it. The custom of washing 
the inside of the ship with vinegar I seldom observed, 
thinking, that fire and smoak answered the purpose 
much better. "

To the above we shall subjoin the following re- 
marks on Captain Cook's judicious procedure; with 
some other interesting particulars; being a summary 
of the discovery of the great antiscorbutic virtues of 
sweet-wort by Dr. Macbride, &c. 

"CAPTAIN COOK begins his lift of stores with 
|P_11
malt: "Of this, " he says, was made sweet-wort, 
and given not only to those men who had manifest 
symptoms of the scurvy, but to such also as were 
judged to be the most liable to it.  Dr. Macbride, 
who first suggested this preparation, was led, as he says, 
to the discovery by some experiments that had been 
laid before the Royal Society; by which it appeared, 
that the air produced by alimentary fermentation was 
endowed with a power of correcting putrefaction. 
The fact he confirmed by numerous trials, and finding 
this fluid to be fixed air, he justly concluded, that 
whatever substance proper for food abounded with it, 
and which could be conveniently carried to sea, would 
make one of the best provisions against the scurvy; which 
he then considered as a putrid disease, and as such to be 
prevented or cured by that powerful kind of antiseptic. 
Beer, for instance, hath always been esteemed one 
of the best antiscorbutics; but as that derived all 
its fixed air from the malt of which it is made, he 
inferred, that malt itself was preferable in long 
voyages, as it took up less room than the brewed li- 
quor, and would keep longer sound. Experience 
hath since verified this ingenious theory, and the malt 
hath now gained to much credit in the navy, that 
there only wanted so long, so healthful, and so cele- 
brated a voyage as this, to rank it among the most 
indispensable articles of provision. For though Cap- 
tain Cook remarks, that a proper attention to other 
things must be joined, and that he is not altogether 
of opinion, that the wort will be able to cure the 
scurvy in an advanced state at sea; yet he is per- 
suaded, that it is sufficient to prevent that distem- 
per from making any great progress, for a con- 
siderable time;  and therefore he doth not hesi- 
tate to pronounce it, one of the best antiscorbutic 
medicines yet found out. 

This salutary gas, or fixed air, is contained more 
|P_12
or less in all fermentable liquors, and begins to op- 
pose putrefaction as soon as the working or intestine 
motion commences. 

In wine it abounds, and perhaps no vegetable sub- 
stance is more replete with it than the fruit of the 
vine. If we join the grateful taste of wine, we 
must rank it first in the list of antiscorbutic liquors. 
Cyder is likewise good, with other vinous produc- 
tions from fruit, as also the various kinds of beer. 
It hath been a constant observation, that in long 
cruizes or distant voyages, the scurvy is never seen 
whilst the small-beer holds out at a full allowance; 
but that when it is all expended, the disorder soon ap- 
pears. It were therefore to be wished, that this most 
wholesome beverage could be renewed at sea; but 
our ships afford not sufficient convenience. The 
Russians however make a shift to prepare at sea, as 
well as at land, a liquor of a middle quality between 
wort and small-beer, in the following manner. They 
take ground malt and rye meal in a certain proportion, 
which they knead into small loaves, and bake in the 
oven. These they occasionally infuse in a proper 
quantity of warm water, which begins so soon to fer- 
ment, that in the space of twenty-four hours their 
brewage is compleated, in the production of a small, 
brisk, and acidulous liquor, which they call quas, 
palatable to themselves, and not disagreeable to the 
taste of strangers. The late Dr. Mounsey, member of 
the Royal Society, who had lived long in Russia, and 
had been Archiater under two successive sovereigns, 
says, that the quas was the common and whole- 
some drink both of the fleets and armies of that em- 
pire, and that it was particularly good against the 
scurvy. He added, that happening to be at Moscow 
when he perused the "Observations on the Jail- 
Fever, " published here, he had been induced to 
compare what he read in that treatise with what he 
|P_13
should see in the several prisons of that large city: 
but to his surprize, after visiting them all, and find- 
ing them full of malefactors, for the late empress 
then suffered none of those who were convicted of 
capital crimes to be put to death, yet he could dis- 
cover no fever among them, nor learn that any acute 
distemper peculiar to jails had ever been known there. 
He observed that some of those places of confine- 
ment had a yard, into which the prisoners were al- 
lowed to come for the air; but that there were 
others without this advantage, yet not sickly: so 
that he could assign no other reason for the health- 
ful condition of those men than the kind of diet they 
used; which was the same with that of the common 
people of the country, who not being able to pur- 
chase flesh-meat live mostly on rye-bread, (the most 
acescent of any bread) and drink quas. He con- 
cluded with saying, that upon his return to Peters- 
burg, he had made the same enquiry there, and 
with the same result. 

Thus far my informer: from whose account it 
would appear, that the rye-meal assisted both in 
quickening the fermentation, and adding more fixed 
air; since the malt alone could not so readily pro- 
duce so acidulous and brisk a liquor. And there is 
little doubt, but that whenever the other grains can 
be brought to a proper degree of fermentation, they 
will more or less in the same way become useful. 
That oats will, I am satisfied, from what I have 
been told by one of the intelligent friends of Captain 
Cook. This gentleman being on a cruize in a large 
ship, in the beginning of the late war, and the scurvy 
breaking out among his crew, he bethought himself 
of a kind of food, he had seen used in some parts 
of the country, as the most proper on this occasion. 
Some oatmeal is put into a wooden vessel, hot water 
is poured upon it, and the infusion continues until 
|P_14
the liquor begins to taste sourish; that is, till a fer- 
mentation comes on, which in a place moderately 
warm may be in the space of two days. The water 
is then poured off from the grounds, and boiled 
down to the consistence of a jelly. This he ordered 
to be made, and dealt out in messes, being first sweet- 
ened with sugar, and seasoned with some prize-wine 
he had taken, which, though turned sour, yet improved 
the taste, and made this aliment no less palatable than 
medicinal. 

[}GOUT. }]
[}Symptoms. }]
THE urine of the person afflicted is high co- 
loured, and has a sandy sediment of a reddish cast; 
the part affected looks red and is swelled. The pain 
is exceedingly acute, as if the bone was broken and, 
is succeeded by a slight fever, and a chilness or shiver- 
ing, which seizes the great toe, ancle, heel, calf of the 
leg, &c. 

[}Remedy. }]
BEFORE the afflicted go to bed at night, they 
should take a tea spoonful of volatile tincture of 
guaiacum in a glass of water: keep themselves warm, 
and drink sack whey. Exercise is very requisite for 
those afflicted with this disorder. 

As the duke of Portland's Gout Powder is re- 
markably efficacious in the cure of this disorder, we 
shall here transcribe the receipt for making it. 

TAKE of round birthwort root and gentian root, 
of the tops and leaves of germander, ground pine, and 
centaury: take of all these, well dried, powdered and 
sifted as fine as possible, an equal quantity; mix them 
well together, and take one drachm of this mixed 
powder every morning fasting in a cup of wine and 
water, broth, tea, or any other vehicle you like best; 
|P_15
keep fasting an hour and an half after it. Continue 
this medicine for three months without interruption, 
then diminish the dose to three quarters of a drachm 
for three months longer, then to half a drachm for 
six months more, taking it regularly every morning if 
possible. After the first year, it will be sufficient to 
take half a drachm every other day. As this medicine 
operates insensibly, it will take, perhaps, two years 
before you receive any great benefit; so you must 
not be discouraged, though you do not perceive at 
first any great amendment; it works slow but sure: 
it doth not confine the patient to any particular diet, 
if he lives soberly, and abstains from those meats 
and liquors that have always been accounted pernicious 
in the gout; as champaign, drams, high sauces, &c. 

[}RHEUMATISM. }]
[}Symptoms. }]
FEVERISH and costive body, loss of appetite, 
coldness of the extreme parts, heaviness of the joints, 
chilness, shivering, and racking pains in the 
limbs. 

[}Remedies. }]
BE covered warm when you go to bed, and take a 
drachm of powder of gum-guaiacum. The duke of 
Portland's Gout Powder is likewise used in this disorder; 
but it is to be observed, that in the rheumatism, 
which is only accidental and not habitual, a few of the 
drachm doses may do; but if habitual, or has been of 
long duration, then you may take it as for the 
gout. The remedy requires patience, as it operates 
but slow in both distempers. 

|P_16
[}PLEURISY. }]
[}Symptoms. }]
HEAT, thirst, a troublesome cough, and a violent 
pain of the side. If the patient is bled, the blood has 
a resemblance of tallow when melted. 

[}Remedies. }]
FREQUENT bleedings, a blister on the side, 
and half a pint of the following infusion taken twice 
a-day: a quart of boiling penny royal water, poured 
on six ounces of fresh horse dung, strain it when 
cold, and sweeten it with a quarter of an ounce 
of Venice treacle. 

[}FEVERS. }]
[}Symptoms.}]
THERE are two principal sources of fevers, one 
comprehends the causes which render the blood and 
other fluids of the body too thick; the other includes 
those which make them too thin. Let us now exa- 
mine how one sort may be distinguished from the 
other. 

It should be observed, that in all fevers of every 
kind, there is a morbid or malignant quality intro- 
duced and subsisting in the blood as the productive 
cause; and the proper means for curing them are 
such methods and medicines as by experience have 
been found effectual for removing their morbid qua- 
lity, and recovering the sick in the shortest time. 

In some persons, when there is too much blood, 
such bleeding may be advised as will draw off the 
excess, except in pestilential distempers, in which 
blood-letting has proved almost always mortal, even 
in the bodies fullest of blood; this evacuation must 
|P_17
be moderately used in pleurisies, as the extremity of 
pain and difficulty of breathing shall acquire it. 

That the common people (who generally know 
when persons have fevers) may have a little more 
knowledge of these acute diseases, and how to dis- 
tinguish one kind of them from the other; the per- 
son who is to direct for the sick, should carefully 
enquire into the state of his body; he should exa- 
mine his pulse. Let him feel the pulse of two or 
three that are in health, and his own pulse; and then 
compare them with the pulse of the patient, and 
thereby he will come nearly to know how much it 
differs from the healthful standard, as to quickness 
or slowness, and as to its strength and weakness, and 
be able to deduce some conclusions which may guide 
his conduct; then let him learn the degree of febrile 
heat; and one way to do this may be by feeling the 
side of the neck below the ears (through which the 
large blood vessels pass to and from the brain) and 
thus the degree of the heat of the blood may be 
known; and the other symptoms of the patient should 
be particularly enquired into. 

If the heat of the body be excessive, the pulse 
quick and strong, the flesh very dry, the pores of 
the skin very close, and the thirst very great, it 
may be concluded that the cause which produced that 
fever has rendered the blood too thick. 

If the pulse is too quick, and not strong, and the 
heat of the body not great; if the tongue is very 
black or dry, and the thirst is great, or it the patient 
voids blood by urine, or spitting, or at his nose, or 
by stool; or if he has flat spots on his skin, black 
or reddish in colour, or if he has a great looseness, with 
watery or thin stools; or if he has profuse sweats, 
with a sensible sinking of his spirits, and decrease of 
strength, it may be inserted, that the fever is of a 
putrid kind. 

|P_18
[}Remedies.}]
THE following general rules should be observed: 
to drink as plentifully as possible some diluting liquor 
whenever thirsty, such as barley-water, mint and balm 
and sage tea, thin water-gruel, or beef tea made as 
follows: 

Take a pound of lean beef, cut it small, pour upon 
it two quarts of water, boil it for the space of five 
minutes, then keep for use. 

To use such nutritious food, as most freely may 
be taken, because it abates the acrimony of the blood, 
repairs the waste of the body, and is one of the best 
cordials; small whey made with Canary or Mountain 
wine may be frequently used. 

It may be necessary, before we proceed farther, to 
premise that in liquid, by four table spoonfuls, is 
meant half a gill, or two ounces; two spoonfuls 
one ounce, one spoonful half an ounce, or four 
drachms. 

If seized with any feverish complaint, take the fol- 
lowing mixture. 

Salt of wormwood, two drachms, lemon juice, or 
any acid, a sufficient quantity to make a neutral me- 
dicine, sugar about two drachms, common water 
about half a pint, and about two ounces of nutmeg 
water, or any spirit; mix together, and take two 
spoonfuls every three hours. 

At night take a little sweat going to rest, and the 
next morning continue the mixture. Or if incon- 
venient to make up the above medicine, or too poor 
to get it, we recommend Salt Petre as an efficacious 
as well as cheap remedy. 

We shall mention one instance of its utility. A 
poor woman asked advice for her husband (a man 
about forty years of age) who had a fever, with a 
violent pain in his side, and was light-headed at 
times. 

|P_19
We advised her to get an ounce of salt-petre, and 
powder it; then to divide it into four equal parts, and 
each of them into four others for so many doses, 
each of which will contain about half a drachm, 
directing that she should give one of them, dissolved 
in a coffee dish of sage tea, sweetened with sugar to 
his palate every three or four hours; and when he 
had taken this salt, she came and said, that his fever 
was gone; but that his cough remained. We then 
advised her to give him about twenty drops of balsam 
capivi, with powder sugar, night and morning; and 
he happily recovered. 

But if troubled with a cough, add, of sperma-ceti 
in powder two drachms; dissolved with the yolk of 
an egg, to be taken in the same manner. 

Or, if that cannot be had, the following powder. 

Take sperma-ceti in powder, half an ounce; sugar 
and salt-petre each two drachms; mixt together, and 
take as much as will lay on a shilling every three or 
four hours in any liquid. 

If bound, take the following opening mixture. 

Take two drachms of senna leaves, boil in ten 
ounces of common water to eight ounces; strain off, 
and add manna half an ounce, tincture of senna one 
ounce; mix, and take two table spoonfuls every three 
hours, till it operates. 

This medicine is easily prepared, and very handy 
on many occasions, especially when the body calls for 
a remedy of this nature; it is cooling as well as lax- 
ative; washes its passage through the bowels, without 
any griping or disorder, and stands in need at the 
same time of no over strict regimen. 

Thus far fevers in general; proceed we therefore 
to those more particular. 

[}Of an Acute Inflammatory Fever. }]
THE young, robust plethoric habit, will ever be 
most liable to inflammations; whilst, on, the contrary, 
|P_20
in the weakly and infirm, the circulation cannot 
readily be worked up to such a pitch as is requisite to 
constitute a disease of an inflammatory kind; in both, 
cold or obstructed perspiration is almost the only 
occasional cause. This fever may be easily known 
from the constitution of the sick person; a quick, 
full and tense pulse, hard beyond its natural state; 
florid countenance, with great heat and thirst, acute 
pains in the head, back and loins, &c. 

To the cure of an inflammatory fever therefore it 
is necessary, first, to take away about six or eight 
ounces of blood, then give about fifteen grains of 
Ipecacuanha in a cup of any liquid, and work it off 
with camomile flower tea, having nothing after it 
that night, but a little mulled wine to settle the 
stomach. 

Tartar emetic two grains, diaphoretic antimony, 
ten grains, barley water, eight ounces; mix and take 
two spoonfuls every four hours; and every now and 
then about as much salt-petre as will lay on a shilling 
dissolved in the drink. 

If all this should not open the body, it will be ne- 
cessary to add an emollient clyster. 

If at the end of the disease the pulse should flag, 
discontinue the medicines, and use cordials. 

If an intermission should happen, with gentle sweats, 
and turbid urine; the bark in small doses or rather 
a decoction of it, may be thrown in. 

[}Of a nervous Fever. }]
THIS low nervous fever is directly opposite to 
the acute inflammatory, and therefore must be dif- 
ferently treated. 

It mostly happens from profuse evacuations, and 
to those of relaxed solids, and dissolved watery fluids; 
the pulse, though quick, is here weak and low, the 
heat of body but little beyond the natural, and the 
|P_21
symptoms in general of the spasmodic kind, and in- 
dependent of inflammation. 

In the one it becomes necessary to lower the im- 
petus of the circulation, by evacuations and coolers; 
in the other, the warm cordial, the stimulating me- 
dicines are by all means adviseable to excite the vis 
vitæ, and promote such a degree of fever as may 
suffice for its expulsion. 

Evacuations of blood, and by stool, can then be, 
of no service in the cure of a low fever, but a great 
detriment. A gentle vomit in the beginning, and a 
breathing sweat throughout its continuance will be 
useful. 

A warm, light, nourishing diet, and plenty of 
generous wine will be expedient, with blisters and si- 
napisms, or mustard plaisters and other drawers of 
the feet, for the relief of the symptoms. 

First then give the ipecacuanha vomit, with the 
mulled wine as before described; and going to bed, 
half a drachm of mithridate. The next day the fol- 
lowing mixture. 

Take Venice treatle, two drachms, syrup of saffron, 
half an ounce, simple mint water, eight ounces, 
strong cinnamon water, two ounces, volatile tincture 
of valerian, two drachms, mix, and take two spoon- 
fuls every three or four hours. 

To these may be added, as occasion requires, a 
little opiate camphire, contrayerva, valerian, cochi- 
neal, warm aromatics, and some volatile salts; and 
when better, the gum pills; but if towards the latter 
end of the disease, when gentle sweats break out, 
and the urine becomes turbid or thick, the bark will 
be attended with great advantage, though there should 
appear no intermission. 

|P_22
[}INTERMITTING FEVER, or AGUE. }]
[}Symptoms. }]
ACCORDING to the air, constitution and strength 
of the patient, intermittents frequently vary, some 
will have a tendency to the inflammatory, or degene- 
rate into an acute continual fever, especially if too 
hot a regimen has been used; which if it should have 
been the case, gentle cooling purges will reduce it, 
and then give the bark with nitre joined with it. On 
the contrary, intermittents will urge on the nervous 
fever; in which case join the cordial aromatics, such 
as snake root, contrayerva, myrrh, camphire, and 
the like, with the bark. 

[}Remedies. }]
TO cure an intermission, the following is ad- 
viseable.—Best bark, one ounce, finely bruised; snake 
root, two drachms, finely bruised; boil in common 
water from a pint and a half to one pint, strain it off, 
and take four spoonfuls every three or four hours. 
If it should purge, add to each dose five or six drops 
of liquid laudanum; if it should bind, about five or 
six grains of powdered rhubarb; if want of appetite, 
about five or six drops of elixir of vitriol. 

A variety of different medicines have been found 
to succeed, but the preference has ever been given to 
the bark; twelve drachms of which generally puts 
by the fit, though it is necessary to continue a few 
doses more to prevent a return. 

One or two grains of Roman vitriol given, during 
the intermission, two, three, or four times in the 
twenty-four hours; or about a drachm of allum, 
with thirty grains of nutmeg, or snake-root, in 
half a pint of warm ale or barley water has suc- 
ceeded well. 

|P_23
Intermitting Fevers, those especially whose fits re- 
turn every other day, have been often cured with a 
few doses of cochineal, by taking about half a drachm 
of it in powder, some time before the accession of 
each fit; and others have been recovered, by taking 
five, six, or seven grains of the Virginian snake root, 
three times on the days of intermission, at about four 
or five hours distance; and I have with success ad- 
vised some of the poor to drink a quarter of a pint 
of tea, made with the root of burdock, every third 
or fourth hour, during the intermissions, sweetened 
with sugar, or not sweetened, as the patient chuses. 

These sort of intermittents allow a good opportu- 
nity for taking the Peruvian bark, and that the poor, 
those great objects of our compassion and charity, 
may have the benefit of that excellent remedy, at 
the least expence, advise the following method, viz. 

To buy an ounce of the best bark in powder, then 
divide it into eight or twelve equal parts, and take a 
dose of it every third hour, during the intermissions, 
beginning as soon as they are quite free from a fit, 
in the following manner, viz. 

Mix a dose of the bark, with a tea cup of hot wa- 
ter, with which it will mix easily; and when it is 
cool enough, then let the patient drink it, and take 
after it a glass of punch, made in the common way, 
and take his meals at his usual times. Suppose the 
time for taking the bark happens at the time of din- 
ing, let him first take the bark, and then eat his din- 
ner. I have done so myself. 

We advise the patient to take the bark in the 
night, as well as in the day, which I have done my- 
self several times, having a person to sit up and wake 
me, when the time for taking the bark comes. 

If the patient can take a drachm of the bark for 
a dose, without finding his stomach loaded, let that 
quantity be the dose; and when he has taken one 
|P_24
ounce, though he misses the fit, yet let the bark be 
prepared, and the doses taken at four hours dis- 
tance. 

[}HECTIC FEVERS, attended with Coughs or 
Consumptions. }]
[}Symptoms. }]
HECTIC Fevers with coughs, are commonly 
called Consumptions, on account of the great waste, 
or decrease of the bodies afflicted with them. 

The symptoms, which are obvious, and necessary 
consequences of an ulcerated state of the lungs, are 
a cough, a copious spitting of a purulent-like mat- 
ter, which is thrown up night and morning, and if 
tried, sinks in water. 

Oppression of the breast, bad appetite, thirst great, 
hectic fever, colliquative sweats, which succeed night 
and morning alternately, a lowness, and great dis- 
charge of urine, the pulse becomes quick and sharp, 
the body pines, and is emaciated, and its several 
functions totally impaired and decayed. 

[}Remedies.}]
THE air where the patient lies ought to be free 
and pure, the constitution must be kept in action, and 
take as much exercise every day as it can bear. 

Horse-riding, giving the body motion with little 
fatigue, if convenient, is preferable to any carriage, 
which should be before dinner, else it proves hurtful. 
Great care must be taken to prevent catching cold by 
damp things or otherwise. 

A southern voyage by sea frequently cures, when 
all things else fail, provided the provisions are fresh; 
and as milk cannot there be easily obtained, fruits, 
broths and balsamics must supply the place. 

A proper regimen, with the patient's own endea- 
|P_25
vours, act mostly towards the cure; a mind kept 
easy, with varying objects to divert the attention; 
yet it may be necessary to subjoin some serviceable 
medicines. 

First, I would recommend for diet, light, but re- 
storative, and diluting drink. Milk, asses milk, (if 
obtainable) water-gruel made of meal, or fine white 
flour, with a little butter or sugar, or cyder whey, 
or barley water, or ground-ivy tea sweetened with 
sugar or honey, acidulated with the juice of lemon, or 
an apple boiled in a pint of water, with one large spoon- 
ful of brandy, and sweetened as before directed, as 
necessary to promote the spitting up the phlegm. 

Secondly, to remove the fever, give the following 
medicine: 

Salt-petre, two drachms; cochineal, half a drachm; 
pure water, half a pint; syrup of balsam, or sugar, 
or honey, sufficient to pallate; brandy, or rather 
rum, two ounces; mix these and take two spoonfuls 
every third or fourth hour. 

If there should be a flux, then the following: 

Tincture of roses, one pint; liquid laudanum, 
twenty grains; drink a cupful often. 

If restless at night, take storax pill, four grains. 
When there is great difficulty of breathing, the am- 
noniac medicine, with the oxymel of squills, give 
the most relief. 

[}ULCERATED LUNGS. }]
THE SYMPTOMS are described in the last article. 

[}Remedies. }]
COMPOUND powder of gum-tragacanth, one 
scruple; salt-petre, ten grains; make a powder to 
be taken in any soft liquid, four times a day. 

|P_26
If the chest or stomach should be sore, emultions of 
sperma-ceti, or oil of almonds will be useful, as 
well as twenty drops of the balsam capivi, night and 
morning, and continued for some weeks, even after 
well; and to strengthen all the muscular fibres and 
vessels of the body, close with the preparation of 
the bark, and elixir of vitriol. 

[}PESTILENTIAL DISORDERS. }]
[}Symptoms. }]
THESE disorders, which go under the different 
names of morbid, malignant, putrid, pestilential, 
petechial, hospital, and goal fevers, differ only in a 
degree from each other. They arise from many 
causes, such as foul air, or putrid animal and vege- 
table effluvia, or from confined places, not properly 
ventilated or kept clean, or frequently communi- 
cated by contagion. 

The symptoms in general are lassitude and weak- 
ness, or loss of strength, an oppression or pain in the 
stomach, pulse low or weak, bitter taste in the mouth, 
drowth, fœtid breath, a dejected mind, frequently 
sighing, wanting to vomit, great pain in the head, 
back, and loins, tongue black, chaped, though at 
first white, and small spots about the skin, resembling 
the measles, but of a purple or livid colour. Eyes 
heavy, yellowish and inflamed, and frequently pro- 
fuse sweating. 

[}Remedies. }]
BLEEDING here is to be avoided as most dan- 
gerous: and the first thing, clear the stomach by Ipe- 
cacuanha wine, about one ounce, worked off with 
camomile flower tea, and mulled wine at night. 

Then begin and take the recipe prescribed for in- 
termitting fevers, and drink weak mountain whey, 
|P_27
with tincture of roses plentifully acidulated, with the 
elixir of vitriol. Likewise the following bolus, three 
times a day, in some tormentile root tea, and sweetened 
with the finest sugar. 

Powder of valerian, ten grains; powder of snake 
root, ten grains, cochineal, four grains, gum cam- 
phire, five grains; syrup of saffron, a sufficient quan- 
tity to bind it. 

If bound, the bowels should be gently opened by 
powdered rhubarb, in small doles; and, if occasion, 
emolient clysters; if a diarrhœ, or purging, cordial 
restringents, and gentle opiates occasionally; omit all 
volatiles as prejudicial. 

If any morbid quality of the blood discovers itself 
by any symptom on the skin, it is an argument against 
every evacuating remedy, which makes a revulsion 
from the surface of the body; therefore never use 
them for the cure of any cutaneous disease. 

[}St. ANTHONY's FIRE. }]
[}Symptoms.}]
CHILLNESS, and shivering, great thirst, rest- 
lessness, the face suddenly swelled, becomes painful 
and appears red and pimply, and the eyes are closed 
with the swelling. 

[}Remedies. }]
THE patient must lose eight or ten ounces of 
blood, which must be repeated if the symptoms con- 
tinue strong. Apply to the part a pultice of white 
bread and milk, and a little hog's lard in it; let the 
pultice be changed twice in a day; but flannels 
wrung out of a strong decoction of elder flowers ap- 
plied warm afford the speediest ease and relief; and 
every other morning take the following purge, till 
the disorder is cured, viz. 

|P_28
Glaubers salt one ounce, manna, half an ounce, 
mix and dissolve it in warm water for one dose. 

The diet in this disease must be very low, chiefly 
water-gruel, or at most weak broth; all strong liquors 
and flesh meat must be avoided as poison. 

[}APOPLEXY. }]
[}Symptoms.}]
SHORT breathings, imaginary noises in the ears, 
drowsiness, loss of memory, tremblings, staggerings, 
a giddiness in the head, and dimness of sight. 

The disease at its height is a total deprivation of 
all sense and motion, respiration excepted, and even 
that is performed with great difficulty. It greatly 
injures the faculty both of the mind and body, and 
is seldom perfectly curable. 

[}Remedies.}]
CUPPING in the nape and sides of the neck 
is always useful, provided the scarifications are deep 
enough to give a free passage to the blood; stimu- 
lating clysters and warm purges are also of service, 
as is the following electuary. Take half an ounce of 
powdered heath valerian, and one ounce and an half 
of conserve of orange peel, and mix them together; 
the dose is the quantity of a nutmeg every four hours, 
dissolved in a cup-ful of rosemary tea. Apply a 
strong blister to the back and the legs. The diet 
must be very sparing. 

[}ASTHMA. }]
[}Symptoms.}]
A laborious breathing, or obstruction of the lungs 
attended with great anxiety, and a straitness about 
the breast. 

|P_29
[}Remedies. }]
BLEEDING, gentle vomits, a large blister applied 
to the back or legs, slender diet and malt liquors to 
be particularly avoided. Likewise frequently take 
three large spoonfuls of the following mixture; two 
drachms of gum ammoniacum in half a pint of 
pennyroyal water, intermixed with an ounce of oxy- 
mel of squills. 

[}BLOODY FLUX. }]
[}Symptoms. }]
SHIVERING, coldness, gripings, quick pulse, in- 
tense thirst, greasy stools frequently mixed with 
blood and filaments which appear like melted suet. 

[}Remedies. }]
FIRST lose blood, then take the following vomit: 
Half a drachm of powder of ipecacuanha worked off 
with camomile tea: daily repeat this vomit three or 
four times. Malt and spirituous liquors must be 
carefully avoided, and between the vomitings the 
patient should every hour take a large spoonful warm 
of a drink made thus: Dissolve half an ounce of 
gum arabic, and half an ounce of gum tragacanth 
in a pint of barley water, over a gentle fire. Cly- 
sters made of fat mutton broth are of great ser- 
vice. 

[}STONE and GRAVEL. }]
[}Symptoms. }]
A suppression, or stoppage of urine, may proceed 
from various causes, such as the kidneys, or the neck 
of the bladder being inflamed, small stones lodging 
in the urinary passages, spasms or contraction of the 
neck of the bladder, &c. 

|P_30
In all obstructions, if the patient's strength will 
admit of it, draw off about eight ounces of blood, 
give some cooling, gentle, opening medicines, with 
a little sweet oil, and foment the part with a decoction 
of mallows, or camomile flowers; let there be drank 
often some diluting liquor, with about forty nitre 
drops in it, and every six hours, about one drachm 
of Castile soap, dissolved in any liquid, especially if 
small gravel comes away with the urine, or it should 
be bloody; for when small stones are lodged in the 
kidneys, which comes away with the urine, it is 
called gravel; but when they lodge some time in 
the bladder, they collect together, form a body, 
and accumulate fresh matter, begin to be too large 
to pass off with the urine, and then is called a stone. 

When afflicted with the stone, avoid all aliments 
of a windy or heating nature, all salt meats, sour 
fruits, acids of all kinds, use every thing that pro- 
motes the secretion of urine, and keeps the belly 
open, artichoaks, asparagus, lettuces, &c. are pro- 
per; and to drink milk and water, barley water, 
decoctions of marshmallows, parsley, liquorice, lin- 
seed, or gin and warm water mixt, not too strong; 
use gentle exercise, and take soap lees, beginning 
with thirty or forty drops, in a cup of lime water, 
every night and morning, and increase the dose re- 
gularly to sixty drops, as the stomach will bear. 
Likewise nitre drops in marshmallow tea, with gum 
arabic; or take broom seed, finely ground, as much 
in quantity as will lay on a shilling, in a gill of the 
best white port, morning and evening. 

[}Remedies. }]
TAKE two scruples or calcined egg shells three 
times a day, in a glass of any convenient liquor, drink- 
ing after each dose, a third part of the following de- 
coction: 

|P_31
Take two ounces of Castile soap, dissolve it in a 
quart of soft water, and sweeten it according to your 
taste with honey, or loaf sugar, If this decoction 
is made in a copper vessel, care must be taken that 
it is well tinned. 

The taking of these medicines must be continued 
for some time after the complaint is removed, lest any 
part of the stone should remain, which being rough 
and unequal, might occasion exquisite pain. 

It is common, after a few days use of these medi- 
cines, to have an increase of pain in making water, 
at which time a soft diet, emollient drinks and rest 
are proper. For common drink milk and water, or 
a decoction of marshmallow roots, parsley and li- 
quorice may be used; but if the person has been used 
to strong liquors, small punch, made without acid, 
may be drank sparingly. Artichoaks, asparagus, 
spinage, lettuces, succory, parsley, turnips, potatoes, 
radishes, peas, &c. may be safely used; but onions, 
leeks, and celery, are to be preferred to all other 
vegetables. 

The patient ought to drink no more of any liquor 
than is sufficient to quench his thirst, and he should 
hold his water as long as he can without great un- 
easiness, that it may have the longer time to act in 
the stone. 

If these medicines occasion costiveness, it will be 
necessary, now and then, to take a dose of Glauber'
salt and manna. 

[}DROPSY. }]
[}Symptoms. }]
THE dropsy is caused by many irregularities, 
from drinking strong liquors, from want of exercise, 
from excessive evacuations, from too much loss of 
|P_32
blood, from fluxes, &c. It is so called from a pre- 
ternatural swelling of the whole body, occasioned by 
a collection of water therein. 

[}Remedies. }]
THE Patient must take a vomit, working it off 
with a little camomile flower tea, and once a week 
after, take jalop in powder, and cream of tartar 
each half a drachm, in a cup of tea, working it off 
with a little broth. In the intermediate days, take 
salt of nitre, twenty grains, powder of squills ten 
grains, mix together, take at night going to bed, 
and the first thing in the morning, in a small glass 
of brandy, and let the belly be anointed with a little 
warm oil twice every day, wearing a flannel next the 
skin, abstaining as much as possible from drink, es- 
pecially weak and watery liquors, and quench the 
thirst with acids, such as juice of lemons, oranges, 
&c. Let the food be dry, and of a healing quality; 
toasted bread, wild animals roasted with garlick, 
mustard, onions, cresses, horse radish, and such like; 
tea biscuit dipt in wine, or a little brandy, now and 
then, will not only quench the thirst, but prove very 
nourishing; all diuretic medicines infused into 
Rhenish wine, are very serviceable. Or take the 
large leaves that grow upon the stem of the artichoak, 
wipe (not wash) them; bruise them in a mortar, and 
strain out the juice through a linen cloth, forcing it 
out; then put a pint of the juice into a quart bottle, 
with a pint of Madeira wine, or Mountain, if you 
cannot get good Madeira. Take three spoonfuls 
every morning fasting, and three spoonfuls likewise 
at going to bed; the dose may be increased to four 
or five, if the case requires, and the stomach will 
bear it. Mind to shake the bottle well, when you 
take it. 

|P_33
[}CONVULSIONS. }]
[}Symptoms. }]
CONVULSIONS in children are thus to be dis- 
tinguished. The face turns blackish, the eyes are 
distorted, and the balls seem immoveable, the mouth 
is drawn awry, and the fist is clenched. It is to be 
observed that a drowsiness usually intervenes between 
the fits. 

[}Remedies. }]
A BLISTER applied to the nape of the neck 
is sometimes serviceable. Or give a few hartshorn 
drops in a tea-spoonful of water frequently, or give 
three or four drops of the tincture of wood soot in 
the same manner. 

[}DIABETES. }]
[}Symptoms. }]
A great discharge of urine, of the smell, colour, 
and taste of honey, a decay of the whole frame, and 
an intense thirst. 

[}Remedies. }]
INFUSE for three days in one gallon of lime 
water, three ounces of liquorice root, two ditto of 
the shavings of sassafras, and one of guaiacum. The 
dose is half a pint, three times a day. Lime water 
is made by pouring twelve pints of boiling water on 
one pound of unslacked lime, which is fit for use as 
soon as cold. 

Or make allum whey, by boiling four pints of 
milk over a slow fire, with three drachms of allum, 
till it is turned into whey. When as much as will 
fill a four ounce phial may be taken three times a 
day. 

|P_34
[}EAR-ACH. }]
[}Symptoms. }]
A pain in the ear, arising from a cold, or a 
disorder of the nerves of the head. 

[}Remedies. }]
THE smoak of tobacco blown into the ear, or 
a roasted onion or salt put into the ear, will take 
away the pain, but the head must be kept warm. 

[}DRY BELLY ACH. }]
[}Symptoms. }]
THE Symptoms of the dry belly ach, or in other 
words, the nervous cholic, are, costiveness, violent 
pains in the bowels, coldness of the hands and feet, 
faintings, a kind of paralytic disorder, great anxiety 
of mind, and tremblings. 

[}Remedies. }]
THE warm bath is an admirable remedy, as is 
balsam of Peru, given inwardly from twenty to forty 
drops in a spoonful of powdered loaf sugar, three or 
four times a day; besides which you may give the 
following clyster. Boil in a pint of water an ounce 
of dried mallow leaves, half an ounce of camomile 
flowers, and half an ounce of sweet fennel seeds. Half 
a pint of this decoction, with half an ounce of Epsom 
salts, and two spoonfuls of sweet oil must be used for 
a clyster, and repeated as often as necessary. 

[}YELLOW JAUNDICE. }]
[}Symptoms. }]
A yellowness of the whole body, and more par- 
ticularly about the eyes, urine of a saffron colour, 
stools almost white, bitterness of the tongue, vomit- 
ing of galls, heaviness and lassitude of the limbs. 

|P_35
[}Remedies. }]
TAKE the white of an egg, and two glasses of 
spring water; beat them well together, and drink the 
quantity off at a draught. 

It cools the lungs, which in this distemper are 
always inflamed; expels the asthmatic disorder, which 
also always, in some degree, afflicts the party diseased; 
it speedily procures perspiration, invigorates the animal 
spirits, causes digestion, and creates an appetite. 

By these means the late lord Blakeney cured great 
numbers in Ireland, Minorca, and in this kingdom; 
and said that he never knew it to fail. 

[}INDIGESTION. }]
[}Symptoms. }]
FREQUENT belchings, heart-burn, and an op- 
pression or weight at the stomach. 

[}Remedies. }]
PYRMONT and Spa waters. Or from ten to 
twenty drops of acid elixir of vitriol in a glass of 
water, two or three times a day, or a large spoonful 
of tincture of hiera picra, every day an hour before 
dinner. 

[}INFLAMMATION of the BOWELS. }]
[}Symptoms. }]
A feverish complaint, a vomiting, a great costive- 
ness, and a burning pain in the belly. 

[}Remedies. }]
SPARE diets and weak broths should be used. 
Juice of lemons taken inwardly affords surprizing 
relief; or let the patient lose ten ounces of blood, and 
have the bleeding repeated according to the urgency of 
|P_36
the complaint. Then, till the patient has had two 
or three stools, give twice every day the following 
clyster: 

Take of dried mallow-leaves an ounce; camomile 
flowers, and fennel seeds, of each half an ounce; boil 
them in a sufficient quantity of water to strain off 
about half a pint; then add two ounces of sweet oil, 
and it is fit for use. 

To ease the pain, and stop the vomiting, give ten 
drops of liquid laudanum, in a little broth, every six 
hours. 

[}MEASLES. }]
[}Symptoms. }]
THIRST, drowsiness, slight cough, chillness, 
shivering, accompanied by a fever, great sickness, 
and an effusion of tears. The little red spots, which 
do not rise above the surface of the skin, appear the 
fourth day. 

[}Remedies.}]
THE diet and management to be the same as in 
the small pox; then bleeding and frequent purging; 
and let the patient drink plentifully of the following 
decoction.—Take pearl barley, raisins and figs, of 
each two ounces, stick liquorice bruised, half an 
ounce: boil them in four quarts of water, till the 
water is reduced to two quarts; strain it for use, and 
tincture it with a quarter of an ounce of salt pru- 
nella. 

|P_37[^A horizontal double-line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}Every Patient his own Doctor. }][^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}PART II. 
EXTERNAL DISORDERS. }][^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}PILES. }]
[}Symptoms. }]
THE piles are of a two-fold nature, the bleeding 
piles, and the blind piles; the former, when 
there is any discharge, the latter, when there is not. 

Persons of a bulky size, who lead an inactive life, 
and live high, are most subject to this disease, though 
it is sometimes hereditary, and then it attacks more 
early in life than when it is accidental. They may 
be occasioned by an excess of bloody by strong aloetic 
purges, high seasoned foods, by drinking great quan- 
tities of wines, the neglect of any customary eva- 
cuations, much riding, great costiveness, or any thing 
that occasions hard or difficult stools. Pregnant wo- 
men are sometimes afflicted with them. 

|P_38
[}Remedies. }]
IF only little swellings within and without the 
fundament, touch them with a little oil of amber. 
Or, take lime water, four ounces, liquid laudanum, 
half an ounce, mix together, and make a linament 
to bathe the parts with it very often. 

If they are bleeding piles, care must be taken 
not to stop them too soon, especially if they are pe- 
riodical, and return frequently, as they prove salutary; 
but if they continue in such quantity as to waste the 
patient's strength, hurt his digestion, or impair any 
functions, then a proper regimen and astringent me- 
dicines must check the discharge. 

A linen cloth dipped in camphorated spirits of 
wine, may be applied to the parts, and a bread and 
milk poultice, if excessively painful, or a little cool- 
ing ointment of elder, equal parts of each mixed 
together; a dose of manna and salts, or sena tea, or 
some cooling physic given in the morning, and an 
electuary made of one ounce of lenitive electuary, 
flower of brimstone, half an ounce, of cream of tar- 
tar, two drachms, syrup of roses, a sufficient quan- 
tity to mix together; then take the bigness of a nut- 
meg twice a day, occasionally. Leeches applied to 
the part, or on the pile itself, gives great relief. 

[}GREEN WOUNDS. }]
[}Symptoms. }]
THE appearance and nature of green wounds 
must be various from the nature of the accident by 
which they were occasioned, or the weapons from 
which they were received. 

[}Remedies. }]
DRESS them daily with yellow basilicon spread 
|P_39
on fine lint, after fomenting them with a fomentation 
made of southernwood and wormwood, camomile 
flowers, of each an ounce; bay leaves dried, half an 
ounce. Boil them gently in six pints of water, and 
strain it off for use. Foment all green wounds as well 
as old sores with this before they are dressed every day. 

[}BITE of a MAD DOG. }]
[}Symptoms. }]
IT is necessary to mention the signs by which a 
dog that is mad may be known. 

A mad dog is seemingly rapacious and thirsty, 
yet eats and drinks nothing; his eyes are fierce and 
flaming; he hangs down his ears, and thrusts out 
his tongue; froths much at the mouth, and barks at 
his shadow; oftentimes runs along sad and anxious 
without barking at all; frequently pants for breath, 
as if tired with running; carries his tail bent inwards; 
runs without distinction against all he meets, with 
great fury, and bites; hurrying on in an hasty and un- 
certain course. Dogs that are well are afraid and 
fly, both at the sight and barking of one that is 
mad. The first mad symptom in a dog, is an un- 
usual trembling. 

With respect to the symptoms in persons bit, they 
are, principally, confused and mischievous looks, and 
an utter abhorrence of water. 

[}Remedies.}]
MIX one pound of common salt in a quart of water, 
and then squeeze, bathe, and wash the wound with the 
same for an hour, and not drink any of it; then bind 
a little salt to the part affected for twelve hours. But 
be very careful to apply it instantly after the bite of 
the animal. 

|P_40
Take the leaves of rue, picked from the stalks and 
bruised, six ounces; garlic picked from the stalks and 
bruised, Venice treacle and mithridate, and the scrap- 
ings of pewter, of each four ounces; boil all these 
over a slow fire, in two quarts of strong ale till one 
pint be consumed; then keep it in a bottle close stop- 
ped, and give nine spoonfuls to a man or woman, warm, 
seven mornings following, fasting, and six spoonfuls 
to a dog. 

This will not fail, if it be given within a few days 
after the biting of the dog. Apply some of the 
ingredients from which the liquor was strained to the 
bitten place. 

Bathing in the sea, where the patient can be accom- 
modated with conveniences, is likewise deemed an ad- 
mirable remedy. 

To this we may add, that, to cure the bite of a 
viper or adder, if you will rub the part bitten with 
some of the fat of the animal, it will prevent any bad 
effects from arising; but if the fat of the animal can- 
not be procured, warm sallad oil will be attended with 
the same good consequences. 

[}CANCER. }]
[}Symptoms. }]
THIS dreadful disorder originates from a small 
tumour, which often remains for years without en- 
creasing, and does not change the colour of the skin. 
However, when the humour becomes more active, 
the swelling suddenly grows large, livid, round, un- 
equal, painful, then breaks, and sharp stinking sores 
succeed, which eat away the sound parts, when the 
lips of the wound become exceeding disgustful to 
the sight. This disorder generally affecs the breasts, 
but sometimes attacks the privities, ears, nose, and 
arm-pits. 

|P_41
[}Remedies. }]
A quarter of a pound of guaiacum shavings must 
be boiled in six pints of water, till the quantity is 
reduced to four pints, a pint of which, milk warm, 
must be drank daily. Fomentations of milk and 
water, and poultices of white bread and milk must 
be used externally, and the wounds should be de- 
fended from the cold air by a piece of fine linen, 
spread with spermaceti ointment, which should be 
renewed twice or thrice a day. This ointment is 
made thus. Take a quarter of a pint of the best 
sallad oil, a quarter of a pound of white wax, and 
half an ounce of spermaceti. Melt them together 
over a gentle fire, and afterwards keep them stir- 
ring till the whole is cold. 

[}CHILBLAINS. }]
[}Symptoms. }]
CHILBLAINS are swellings on the hands and 
feet, from excessive cold, accompanied with into- 
lerable pains, prickings, itchings, heat, and redness. 

[}Remedies. }]
ON their first appearance bathe them with snow 
water, if that can be procured, or hold them over 
the steam of boiling vinegar. 

If they grow sore and break, use the fomentation 
mentioned, in the article of green wounds, and then 
apply a dressing of yellow basilicon, mixed with a few 
drops of spirits of turpentine, and spread on fine lint. 
A sparing diet should be used, and the parts affected 
kept warm. 

|P_42
[}ITCH. }]
[}Symptoms. }]
THE itch is mostly communicated by infection, 
and generally appears in small watery pustules about 
the wrists, and between the fingers, and affects the 
arms, legs, thighs, &c. is attended with intolerable 
itching, when sitting by the fire, but more particu- 
larly when in bed; is never dangerous, unless ren- 
dered so by neglect or improper treatment. It must 
not be suddenly drove in; after cure, have proper 
evacuations. 

[}Remedies. }]
THE best medicine is sulphur of brimstone used 
externally; or internally, take flower of brimstone 
in treacle or milk, every night and morning, and rub 
the parts every night, going to bed, with an ointment 
made of flower of brimstone, two ounces, crude salt 
ammoniac in fine powder, half an ounce, hog's lard, 
a quarter of a pound, mixed together; the smell, if 
disagreeable, may be taken off by adding a few drops 
of essence of lemons: if necessary, rub the whole 
body; let it be done at different times; the linen 
should not be changed, and should afterwards be well 
dried and fumigated with brimstone, to prevent a 
fresh infection when cured, and three or four brisk 
purges, at different times, taken; it will not be 
amiss to drink a glass of cream of tartar whey every 
morning for a week or more, using wholesome food 
and observing cleanliness. 

[}SORE EYES. }]
[}Symptoms.}]
THE symptoms of sore eyes are easily known, 
being redness, a stiff gumminess, a salt rheum or 
|P_43
water flowing from them, weakness of sight, dim- 
ness, a painful heat in the eye-lids, and many others 
unnecessary to relate, as those who feel them must 
be well acquainted with their nature; proceed we 
therefore to the 

[}Remedies. }]
WE shall here present our reader with the great 
Sir Hans Sloan's celebrated remedies. 

Take of prepared tutty, one ounce; of lapis hæ- 
matitis prepared, two scruples; of the best aloes 
prepared, twelve grains; of prepared pearl, four 
grains; put them, into a prophyry, or marble mor- 
tar, and rub them with a pestle of the same stone 
very carefully, with a sufficient quantity of viper's 
grease, or fat, to make a liniment; to be used daily, 
morning or evening; or both, according to the con- 
veniency of the patient. 

The doctor prescribes bleeding and blistering in 
the neck, and behind the ears, in order to draw off 
the humours from the eyes; and afterwards, accord- 
ing to the degree of inflammation, or acrimony of 
the juices, to make a drain by issues between the 
shoulders, or perpetual blister. And for washing the 
eyes, recommends cold spring water. And the best 
inward medicines, which he has experienced, to be 
conserve of rosemary flowers; anti-epileptic powders, 
such as Pulvis ad Guttetam, betony, sage, rosemary, 
eye-bright, wild valerian root, castor, &c. washed 
down with a tea made of the same ingredients; as 
also drops of spirit Lavandulæ Composit, and sal. 
vol. oleos. 

If the inflammation returns, the Doctor says, 
drawing about six ounces of blood from the temples, 
by leeches, or cupping on the shoulders, is very 
proper. 

|P_44
The liniment is to be applied with a small hair 
pencil, the eye winking, or a little opened. 

[}FISTULA. }]
[}Symptoms. }]
A deep, winding, callous ulcer, with a narrow en- 
trance into a spacious bottom, and yielding a sharp 
virulent matter. 

[}Remedies. }]
A quarter of a pound of elecampane root, three 
quarters of a pound of fennel seeds, and a quarter 
of a pound of black pepper; pound these separately, 
and sift them through a fine sieve; take half a pound 
of honey and half a pound of powder sugar, melt, the 
honey and the sugar together over the fire, scumming 
them continually, till they become bright as amber, 
when they are cool, mix and knead them into your 
powder, in the form of a small paste. 

The dose is the size of a nutmeg, morning, noon, 
and night; drinking a glass of wine or water after it. 

If the above should not succeed, immediate recourse 
must be had to a skilful surgeon. 

[}MORTIFICATION. }]
[}Symptoms. }]
THE juices lose their proper motion and ferment, 
and thereby destroy the texture of the parts, and cor- 
rupt. 

[}Remedies. }]
The part must be fomented every night and morn- 
ing with hot flannels, wrung out, with the following 
fomentation: 

|P_45
Take lime water a pint, and dissolve in it half an 
ounce of crude sal armoniac; then add three ounces 
of camphorated spirits of wine. Afterwards apply 
a poultice of stale beer grounds and oatmeal, moist- 
ened with a little hog's lard: when the part begins 
to suppurate, apply under the poultice a dressing of 
black basilicon inwardly. 

Take a dram of the best Peruvian bark in fine pow- 
der, every four hours in a gill of mountain wine. 

[}OLD ULCERS. }]
[}Symptoms.}]
ULCERS are wounds or sores of long continu- 
ance, and their symptoms virulent matter issuing from 
them. 

When any ulcer is of long standing, it is dangerous 
to dry it up, without substituting in the place of a 
discharge, (which is become almost natural,) some 
others; such as purging from time to time, or cut- 
ting an issue near the diseased part. 

To forward the cure, salt meat, spices, and strong 
liquors must be most avoided: the usual quantity of 
flesh meat should be lessened, and the body be kept 
moderately open, by a vegetable, or milk diet; and 
if the ulcers are in the legs, it is of great importance 
to keep in a lying posture; for negligence in this 
material point changes the slightest wounds into 
ulcers, and the most trifling ulcers into obstinate 
and incurable ones. To cure which, 

Take a quarter of a pound of basilicon, and an 
ounce and an half of oil of olives, and mix therewith 
half an ounce of verdigrease; dress the sore with this 
ointment, spread open a little tow, after fomenting it 
well with a decoction made of camomile flowers, and 
mallow leaves. Take frequently a dose of cooling 
physic, and live regularly. 
