
|P_
AS there is no medical theory, formed from in- 
duction, to enable us to detect what is erroneous 
or false in the accounts of facts, or to direct us in the 
treatment of new cases; the following attempt to 
connect with an important organ many otherwise 
loose facts, may tend to facilitate the recollection and 
application of them, and thus abridge the range of 
inquiry. The number suggested by this view is so 
great, that there is less difficulty in the collection 
than in the choice; their relation and order, familiar 
only to one's own habit of association, may to others 
at first be obscure; and some of them may be disputed; 
but the leading ones seem to show that the stomach 
is the seat of life, disease, and recovery, and the main 
organ of a complicated system. Many authors, 
as Vanhelmont, Rega, Bordeu, Lacaze, Barthez, 
Fouquet, and particularly Mr. Hunter, lean, in their 
useful writings, to the opinion held in this summary, 
which was meant as part of heads of lectures on 
Materia Medica, read in Edinburgh several years 
ago. The farther application of the doctrine to prac- 
tice, will probably appear soon. 

CHARLES WEBSTER. 

|P_
[}By the same Author, }]
Medicinæ Praxeos Systema, 3 tom. 
An Account of the Life and Writings 
of Dr. A. Pitcairn. 

|P_
[}Facts tending to show the Connexion of the Sto- 
mach with Life, Disease, and Remedy. }]
SUCH simply organized animals as have 
no visible brain, nerves, lungs, heart, 
or blood-vessels, and even vegetables, con- 
tract and re-act on impressions being made 
on any part of them; and being cut in 
pieces, each becomes a living individual. 
They separate the elements of dead matter 
which re-unite within them in various and 
specific proportions, and extend their fibres; 
they propagate their kinds whose particles 
and fibres are arranged into specific forms, 
as all consolidated fluids are; they have a 
preserving and resisting power called vis con- 
servatrix and medicatrix naturæ; become de- 
ranged in their functions and structure by 
|P_2
excess, defect, or peculiarity of impression; 
recover from various morbid states; rege- 
nerate lost substance; cease at length to an- 
swer impressions, and spontaneously sepa- 
rate into their elements, which form new 
combinations in nature. 

In an animal, which, besides a sto- 
mach, the seat of the first assimilation and 
simple life, has nerves and brain, the me- 
dium of sensation and thought, the energy 
of which is encreased by a heart and lungs; 
the assimilating, moving, sentient, and 
thinking powers become parts of one whole, 
necessary to the action and effect of one ano- 
ther, acting as it were in a circle, modify- 
ing and improving the system, in which the 
smallest puncture producing contractility, 
pain, and hæmorrage, seems to shew that 
life, mind, and heart exist in every point. 

Cold-blooded animals, whose circulation 
is languid, and respiration occasional, live 
and move for several hours without brain, 
|P_3
heart, or lungs: the heart of a young hot- 
blooded animal continues its motions for 
some time after its connexion with the 
brain is cut off [/1./]; in phthisis pulmonalis 
there is sometimes scarcely a vestige of 
lungs left; some persons have the power of 
suspending the action of the heart [/2./], and it 
is sometimes suspended without the will, 
while the other functions continue entire [/3./]. 

After decollation, it is said, a viper tra- 
versed several walks in a garden; an ostrich 
continued running in a circular course 
leading to an accustomed place of refuge; 
and a cock impulsively continued its motion 
towards some grain that had been just pre- 
sented to it; a turtle, whose strength, con- 
sidering its massy shell, must be very great, 
lives for months without the head [/4./]: fœtuses 
have been born alive without brain, cere- 
bellum, or spinal marrow. In dropsy of the 
|P_4
head, nothing has been found but the 
membranes; some have lost a considerable 
part of the brain and recovered; all the in- 
voluntary motions, and even the use of the 
limbs, have continued a day or two after 
the spinal marrow has been divided [/5./]; the 
involuntary ones continue when the senses 
and brain are locked up in sleep, lethargy, 
and apoplexy, and in the suspended action 
of the heart and lungs in syncope. In 
mania the vigour is often increased and the 
sensibility diminished, while the contrary is 
generally observed in indigestion, gout, and 
nervous diseases, in which the intellect is 
 often unimpaired. The contractility lasts 
much longer if an animal be killed by de- 
stroying its brain than otherwise [/6./]; death, 
occasioned by over-exertion of the muscles, 
by the electric, carbonic, or azotic fluids, or 
by the poison of a viper, prevents the muscles 
|P_5
from becoming rigid, and disposes to a much 
quicker putrefaction; and the life in vege- 
tables, particularly in their seeds, in a chick 
before incubation, and in the hibernating 
animals, as in the swallow, mountain-rat, 
and dormouse, resists the tendency to putre- 
faction, and freezing. The brain of a man, 
in proportion to the weight of his body, is 
above thirty times heavier than that of a 
large quadruped, and still more so than that 
of an amphibious one, as the crocodile, with 
proportionably less strength. The brain 
has a small proportion likewise, in long- 
necked birds, fishes, and insects; and is sin- 
gularly large in some small animals, as small 
birds and rats. In the lower animals it is 
in general spent in nerves on the senses, 
face, and jaws, as the spinal marrow is in 
those on the trunk which are large in pro- 
portion; and in all animals the axillary and 
sciatic nerves and blood-vessels, as necessary 
to strong voluntary motion, are the largest. 

|P_6
The pulp of the brain and nerves has 
very little contractility. Parts of animals 
live and grow without nerves; a limb, 
after its nerve is cut, though it loses 
its power of voluntary motion and sensa- 
tion, and, after some time, begins to waste, 
yet does not putrefy, but retains its con- 
tractility, temperature, and circulation; and 
a wound or fracture in this case heals, though 
the nerve be not regenerated [/7./]. A muscle, as 
the heart, whose nerves bear no proportion 
to its bulk and action, cut off, retains its 
contractility. Palsied limbs void of sense 
or motion, or of both, are sometimes ex- 
tremely contractile, inflame, suppurate, and 
heal, as in the case of a blister, which does 
not so readily happen in a moribund patient; 
and an obstinate ulcer in the affected side has 
been known to heal quickly on the attack of 
hemiplegia. 

No animal can exist without a stomach; 
life has remained even in the perfect ani- 
|P_7
mals independently of almost every other 
organ; the stomach is the only organ which, 
as in the zoophytes, the hydatid, the 
oyster, the polypus, and some other vermes, 
can be said to exist as an animal by itself; 
these animals are capable of every muscular 
motion, and of every living power suited 
to their mode of existence and the conti- 
nuance of their kind. Placed in the mid- 
dle, the stomach is felt to be the centre of 
every impression on any part of the body or 
the mind, and the seat of muscular exertion 
and fatigue. A blow, or the wind of a 
cannon-ball over the stomach, kills with- 
out leaving any mark [/8./]; if any of its nerves 
be cut or itself wounded, the aliment re- 
mains unchanged; when healthy it resists, 
arrests, and reverses the stages of fermen- 
tation, sweetens putrid meat, does not suffer 
from the syphilitic, variolous, viperine or 
|P_8
carbonic poisons, which injure only the bare 
surface or passages to the nose and lungs. It 
is the receptacle of food, poison, and medi- 
cine, the effects of which on itself are pro- 
pagated to every other part; it is most sub- 
ject to disorder, most accessible to remedy, 
regulating, and regulated by, the motions 
and sensations of the whole system, and so 
accommodating itself as to keep all the parts 
in balance. Languido ventriculo omnia lan- 
guent, vegeto vigent. In most cases it is the 
first organ that feels, and the last that fails [/9./]
Even the state of the mind or character seems 
connected with it, vigorous and ferocious 
animals being generally carnivorous, with 
muscular vigour in proportion to their 
voracity. It seems to be the centre of 
power and motion from which the vital 
principle, whatever it be, is determined 
into the different parts, supporting the in- 
|P_9
herent power in the moving fibres, 
the thinking power in the brain, sensation in 
the sentient extremities, assimilation in the 
lymphatic [/10./], sanguiferous, and glandular 
vessels, and the fulness in every part of the 
system. 

When the gastric energy is diminished, 
parts seem to lose their motion and sense as 
they are distant from the stomach; as 
the tips of the nose and ears, the fingers 
and toes, and the vascular extremities. Like 
the senses, it has specific sensations, as of 
hunger, thirst, satiety, longing, loathing, 
|P_10
sickness, peculiar pain, with a great variety 
of nameless states without sensation, ac- 
companied with corresponding changes, ac- 
cording to predisposition in different parts 
of the system. A grain of a tasteless sub- 
stance will affect the stomach, and, through 
it, the other parts, or these only, while 
various acrids, pungent aromatics, and spi- 
rits, can often be taken in large quantity, 
without producing any remarkable effect 
whatever. Stones of considerable size have 
been swallowed, and the stomach itself, 
though, from its organic contractility, it is 
always full, can be in very different states 
of distension and contraction, with even 
morbid tumor, without much inconveni- 
ence. Leidenfrost mentions a case, in which 
the application of warm wine to the villous 
coat of a wounded intestine excited great 
motion without any pain, even on rubbing 
off the mucus so as to bring blood. There 
is often little or no pain felt in the action of 
|P_11
violent vomiting or purging, so that living 
motion does not, even in the perfect ani- 
mals, imply sensibility. 

The alimentary canal, which, on open- 
ing a living animal, hardly seems to move, 
shows, as soon as the other parts die, 
strongly increased motions, which, like the 
contractility mentioned above, continue 
for hours [/12./]. In the case of violent death, 
as that of beheading, the same increased 
motions, after some short space, with an 
impetuous spring of blood from the vessels, 
are remarkable; which motions may, per- 
haps, independently of the gastric liquor, 
sometimes occasion those perforations in the 
stomach observed in such cases, particularly 
in infants even after natural death; and to 
some similar state of bowel may be referred 
the [/13./] esuries and priapismus moribundorum. 
This resisting or reacting power or vis con- 
servatrix and medicatrix, in which the 
|P_12
power of recovery seems to reside, is evident 
in the case of other impressions on the 
stomach, the surface, and the mind, as in 
the action of an emetic, the glow from the 
cold bath, and the red suffusion produced 
by passion; and it is this which seems chiefly 
to enable a healthy animal to bear changes 
and extremes of the ordinary ones, as those 
of temperature, air, food and drink, motion, 
sensation, and thought, in a remarkable de- 
gree. The powers acting on the system, as 
heat, air, exercise of body and mind, diet, 
poison, medicine, and the fluids, tend to in- 
crease the power of the stomach, but ulti- 
mately, or in excess, to destroy it; and are 
called stimulants. When defective they 
tend to diminish it, and are called sedative, 
which effect, if of a certain degree, is fol- 
lowed by the reaction or resistance; and they 
are then called indirect stimulants. Hence 
the same natural morbid and salutary im- 
pressions may, according to their degree, be 
|P_13
sedative or stimulant. Some impressions, 
both internal and external, affect it pecu- 
liarly, and, through it, different parts of 
the system. In general, strong impressions 
excite the resisting power, weak ones seem 
occasionally to sooth, diminish, or tease it, 
specific ones produce specific states in it and 
in different parts of the system, and on these 
fits of resistance, seem to depend the states 
of periodical disease. 

The stomach is the seat of the first assi- 
milating power, in which the elements of 
food and drink, of whatever kind and va- 
riety, separate, and then unite into the only 
one combination fit for undergoing the 
other specific changes, for making the spe- 
cific impressions, for giving the due disten- 
sion, and repairing the continual waste; and 
its spontaneous effort or struggle with local 
injury, seems to excite that symptomatic 
fever, or state of vessel which renders the 
parts of the blood more separable, forming 
|P_14
the buffy-coat, the inflammatory exudation, 
the suppuration, and the callus or ossifying 
arteries, so as to regenerate destroyed parts, 
fill cavities, and form skin. On its state 
seems to depend that of the chyle, blood, 
secretions, every soft and hard fibre, every 
organ and function of the system, and such is 
its importance, that it has been emphati- 
cally called the animal, the conscience of 
the body, and even supposed the seat of the 
soul [/14./]

During ordinary hunger, its power over 
the muscles is diminished, which state is 
called weakness; there is a diminished 
action of the heart and arteries, particularly 
at their extremities, as appears from the 
weak and frequent pulse, dryness, paleness, 
shrinking, and lankness of the surface and 
features; diminished secretion, as appears 
from the dry mouth and from the flaccid 
|P_15
breasts of nurses, a less free respiration, yawn- 
ing, hiccup, weak voice, sensibility to cold, 
feebleness of mind and peevishness, with 
various other symptoms in different indi- 
viduals. This esurient state, like that of 
other appetites and temporary states of di- 
sease, goes off, is apt to change into the 
loathing or sick state, then returns, becom- 
ing irresistible, enabling the stomach to dis- 
solve leather and other indigestible matters; 
and producing excessive thirst, delirium, 
and other symptoms. 

On the sight of food, the mouth fills with 
water; and on taking some, the esurient 
state with its symptoms is removed, the 
stomach feels comfortable, the muscles and 
organs, particularly those most fatigued, re- 
cover their strength, the circulation is pro- 
moted, the secretions flow, the respiration 
becomes free, the countenance brightens up, 
serenity and vigour are imparted to body and 
mind, and the heart opens in benevolence. 
|P_16
During this sated state the new impression, as 
if engrossing the power of the stomach, is 
apt to induce a chilliness, drowsiness, heat, 
full pulse and perspiration, the phœnomena 
of slight fever, and in some, formidable 
symptoms. 

The effects of food, as of every thing 
else, being relative to the state of the 
stomach, what is light to one is heavy to 
another; and a cordial in some states occa- 
sions vomiting. A heavy meal oppresses 
the stomach, and depresses its power over 
the other parts of the system, often induc- 
ing alarming symptoms, which are fre- 
quently relieved by a puke, or by spirits 
or aromatics, increasing the power of the 
stomach. Alcohol, opium, or carbonic acid 
tends like a meal, to induce serenity and 
vigour of body and mind, but if in excess, 
brings on the ebrious state of stomach, 
which deranges the functions of both. A 
trespass in eating or drinking, or any thing 
|P_17
which from temperament, taste, or associa- 
tion of ideas, happens to disagree with the 
stomach, is apt instantly to occasion various 
symptoms [/15./]

What weakness, spasms, pains and 
aches, stitches, depravations and depriva- 
tions of sense and motion, and uneasy 
feelings of body and mind, does not a 
little air pent up occasion, and its expul- 
sion instantly relieve? What symptom has 
not been occasionally referred to indigestion, 
and what remedy does not fall under the 
|P_18
treatment of it and its effects? What 
disease is free from some affection of the 
stomach or canal, and what fever does it 
not mark in its beginning, its progress, re- 
mission, crisis, and cure? The diseases of 
children are acknowledged to be mostly 
from the stomach and bowels, and they are 
known to be cured of alarming symptoms by 
a puke, a glyster, or a purge. A person feels 
weak, loses colour and spirits, has head- 
ach, giddiness, and shivering, and the pre- 
disposed suffer fits of their diseases, without 
suspecting, as there is no sickness, want of 
appetite, costiveness, or affection of the 
stomach, that they proceed from it, till a 
natural vomiting or looseness, an emetic or 
cathartic relieve the complaints. Fits, as 
of asthma, chin-cough, hysteria, and gout, 
are generally preceded by some affection of 
the canal, and diminish or go off by the ex- 
pulsion of air or other matter. 

There does not seem to be one symptom 
or combination of symptoms, but may be 
|P_19
produced by something taken into the sto- 
mach, and, in the case of poisons, its orifices 
have been found, on dissection, so constricted 
as to have prevented the escape of any of 
the matter. 

The effect of poison, like that of food and 
medicine, is relative to the kind and state of 
stomach. Cows and hares eat hemlock, 
hares eat milk-thistle, hogs fatten on hen- 
bane, quails on hellebore, and goats on eu- 
phorbium: a horse can take more glass of 
antimony than would kill an hundred men, 
a dog more opium than would kill an un- 
accustomed man, while an ordinary dose of 
jalap, of nux-vomica, or a few bitter almonds, 
would convulse and kill him. Bitter al- 
monds kill different kinds of birds likewise, 
and parsley is poison to parrots. Indeed 
every animal and vegetable poison is the 
food of some animal, and notwithstanding this 
difference of effect, little or no difference of 
structure in brain, muscle, membrane, and 
|P_20
bone, which form the animal solids, can be 
perceived. 

That the stomach may be in a great va- 
riety of states, appears from the organs of 
sense being capable of such variety in re- 
gard to sensation, from causes external or 
internal. Each taste implies a specific state 
of organ. Alkaline, acid, sweet, bitter, 
astringent, acrid, aromatic, and fetid matter 
excite their respective tastes, which imply 
states of organ as numerous as the indivi- 
duals of these classes, with their various 
combinations. 

Some kinds of matter affect different 
parts of the same organ, and the sensation 
is propagated to a greater or less distance 
without any probability of absorption. So 
an irritation in the lungs is often felt at the 
epiglottis; in the liver, at the shoulder; 
in the kidney, at the testicle and thigh; 
in the bladder, at the end of the glans 
penis; in the colon, at the navel; in every 
|P_21
part of the system at the stomach; and 
in the stomach, at every part of the system. 

An astringent, at the tip of the tongue, 
corrugates the whole mouth, and stops some- 
times a remote hæmorrhage: a bit of alum 
dissolving in the mouth, occasions a thrill 
over the body; sea-salt is felt chiefly at the 
point of the tongue, bitter apple at its 
middle, elaterium and mezereon at its root, 
and jalap in the gullet. A disagreeable taste, 
smell, sight, sound, or touch, the tickling of 
the throat, or coughing, are apt to occasion 
sickness and vomiting. The mere chewing 
of tobacco or rhubarb, has occasioned vo- 
miting and purging. Tasteless warm water, 
an antimonial, or the berries of coriaria 
myrtifolia, throw the stomach into convul- 
sions. 

Belladonna gives a dryness and stricture 
in the fauces; mercury or muriated barytes 
produces salivation; arsenic sets the teeth 
on edge, produces gastritis, thirst, black 
|P_22
tongue, subsultus tendinum, and delirium, 
as in the last stage of typhus, in which 
fever the stomach, on dissection, is gene- 
rally found morbidly red. A pin, a bit of 
cork, nutmeg, or other indigestible matter 
in the stomach, as if in the lungs, has, till 
evacuated, occasioned a continual cough- 
ing [/16./]; and an habitual cough is often sus- 
pended during a meal or any sapid im- 
pression. Cicuta produces giddiness; alco- 
hol, opium, fixed air, lead, and, when the 
stomach is in a particular state, other things 
produce intoxication. 

Lead produces gastrodynia, peculiar colic, 
with constipation, yellow countenance, 
palsy, chiefly of the supinators and extensors 
of the fingers, and extensors of the legs, 
with heat and pain in the palms and soles. 
Copper occasions delirium with leprous-like 
spots on the surface. Digitalis, after remark- 
|P_23
ably diminishing the action of the heart and 
arteries, and promoting absorption and a 
flow of urine, has been thrown up seem- 
ingly intire during the deathful sickness it 
is apt to occasion. Cantharides occasion 
strangury and priapism, and sometimes re- 
lieve nervous cases of the former; [/17./] rho- 
dodendron chrysanthemum occasions deliri- 
um; stramonium occasions itching, inflam- 
mation, eruptions, swellings, tremors, fever, 
and delirium; secale cornutum diseased 
(ergot) produces rhaphania; laurel-water 
kills every species of animal, and in the 
quantity of six ounces generally without 
any previous symptom; an ounce or so al- 
lows a reaction, which occasions inflam- 
mation, hæmorrhage, and convulsions. 

Wepfer mentions a number of patients 
poisoned with water-hemlock, and affected 
with pain at the stomach and in the bowels, 
|P_24
grinding of the teeth, hiccup, locked- 
jaw, difficult respiration, an aspect of 
horror, convulsions, with the abolition 
of all the senses, hæmorrhage from the 
ears, efforts to vomit, body bent back 
like a bow, and death; after which 
the belly and head swelled, there was a 
green foam at the mouth, the orifices of 
the stomach were found quite closed, and 
the blood coagulated, as in every violent 
death, from an internal cause, whereas, 
from an external one, it remains liquid. 
In some the symptoms indicated ludicrous, 
and in others serious turns of mind. In 
general, the appearance on dissection of 
animals killed by these or other poisons, 
or even by external ones, is redness of the 
stomach, with livid or black spots in it, in 
the intestines, particularly at the insertion 
of the ductus choledochus into the duo- 
denum, and in the mesentery. So much 
do impressions on the surface affect the 
|P_25
stomach, that Bonnet and others have found 
these appearances in animals killed by the 
bite of the viper; and Fontana mentions 
dogs and cats recovering from the bite, in 
proportion to the struggle and violence of 
vomiting. Tobacco oil applied externally 
occasions vomiting; and if the surface be 
bare, it kills. The stomach is found red 
in hydrophobia, and in other cases connected 
with affections of that organ. Morgagni and 
Sprœgel could find no redness in rats poi- 
soned by arsenic, or in rabbits that died on 
taking corrosive sublimate; nor could the 
Florentine academicians find any change in 
the solids or fluids of a bull killed by the 
bite of a viper. Hence poisons may destroy 
life by diminishing the energy of the sto- 
mach beyond the power of reaction. 

|P_26
[}Emetics. }]
An emetic induces, even in the strongest, 
affections of the natural, vital, and animal 
functions, as a sense of languor, lassitude, 
weakness, tremors of the limbs and lips; 
diminished action of the heart and its re- 
motest vessels, as appears from the small, 
weak, frequent, irregular pulse, paleness 
and shrinking of the surface, the cutis an- 
serina, and from their effect on hæmor- 
rhages and other discharges; difficult re- 
spiration, vertigo, rigors, a sense of weari- 
ness, weakness, or pain in the muscles of 
the back, partial sweating, anxiety at 
stomach, constriction of the mouth and 
fauces, salivation, expectoration, flowing of 
the bile, sickness, colic, vomiting; during 
which exertion the face and eyes become 
red, the veins turgid, the pulse strong, the 
sweat general, and the symptoms, which are 
|P_27
those of intermittents and of all other sto- 
machic, or what are called constitutional 
diseases, are relieved. The effects of eme- 
tics in incipient fever, phthisis, gout, in- 
flamed testicle, certain dropsies, manias, and 
other diseases shew the influence of the sto- 
mach over every part of the system. 

[}Cathartics. }]
In the continued identical structure from 
the gullet to the rectum, the state of 
one part is apt to affect that of another; so 
indigestion occasions flatulence, spasms and 
pains in the intestines, which are often re- 
lieved by a medicine on its reaching the 
stomach; a looseness occasionally relieves 
a vomiting, and a vomiting relieves a loose- 
ness; chewing or smoking tobacco will 
purge, and a tobacco-injection or glyster 
will produce all the symptoms of an eme- 
tic. A cathartic, though returned by vo- 
|P_28
miting, often purges, and a drastic has 
been known to purge severely, and to prove 
fatal, when, on dissection, the stomach 
only was found to he inflamed. Hoffmann 
mentions a woman in a tertian, who, having 
taken eight grains of glass of antimony, 
had violent vomiting and purging during 
three successive fits, but not in the inter- 
vals, that she died in the third fit, that, on 
dissection, the stomach and upper intestines 
were found inflamed and covered with gan- 
grenous spots, and that the antimony was 
retained in the villous coat of the stomach. 

Most cathartics, like other matters, are 
decomposed before they pass the pylorus; 
those which pass seemingly unchanged, as 
sulphur, oxyd of mercury, cassia, and rhu- 
barb, are in general gentle in their opera- 
tion. Scammony and gamboge are apt to 
disorder the stomach peculiarly; hellebore 
occasions great anxiety, with a sense of suf- 
focation; colocynth and resinous pur- 
|P_29
gatives, as jalap, are apt to produce colic; 
aloes affects the rectum, and the effects of 
elaterium and iris palustris are felt at the 
extremities of the arterial system. 

[}Diuretics, Refrigerants, and Sudorifics. }]
Diuretics, and mere liquids, sometimes 
excite urine so suddenly, that the ancients 
imagined a direct communication between 
the stomach and bladder. A retrograde mo- 
tion in the lymphatics has been supposed, 
and ingenioussly supported [/18./]; but the flow 
appears to be often analogous to the sudden 
one of milk from the breasts of nurses, and 
other sudden secretions. Strangury is a 
constant symptom of gastritis; and affections 
of the urinary organs constantly affect the 
stomach. Digitalis, squill, tobacco, and 
|P_30
most other diuretics are apt, like other 
nauseants, to be expectorant or sudorific, 
and if they be so in a considerable degree, 
or if they produce vomiting or purging 
early, they fail to induce that state of 
stomach which seems necessary to their 
diuretic operation. Two ounces of any 
neutral salt is apt to be emetic; an ounce 
or so, even of alum, to be cathartic; two 
or three drams to be diuretic; a dram to be 
refrigerant, and, in a warm temperature, 
sudorific. 

Though our ideas of quantity be 
gross, yet it cannot be supposed that such 
minute doses of refrigerants, sudorifics, or 
antispasmodics, of nitre, an antimonial, 
ammonia, opium, [/19./] or æther, can operate 
|P_31
by going to every point and pore of the 
body. Alcohol [/20./] and aromatics, as curry, 
heat in a cold temperature, and cool in a 
hot one. Cold water is apt to produce heat 
and sweating, warm water to produce cold 
and shivering. Ammonia, opium, aro- 
matics, or alcohol induce heat in the cold 
fit, and diminish it in the hot fit of fever; 
an emetic or bark prevents both, and what 
are called refrigerants are apt to increase 
both. 

[}Tonics. }]
Any nauseous matter, acid, or air in the 
stomach, or any disagreeable impression, or 
the absence of an accustomed one, is apt to 
induce that state of stomach in which its 
power over the muscles is diminished, and 
on which the sense of weakness depends. 
Such impressions and states being removed, 
the balance between the stomach and mus- 
|P_32
cles is restored; which removal has been 
called a tonic effect. Acids, astringents, 
bitters, aromatics, fetids, iron, zinc, cop- 
per, or arsenic may remove this state, and 
consequently its symptoms, as weakness, 
palsy, tremors, spasm, fever, inflammation, 
ulcer, gangrene, hæmorrhage and serous 
discharge, and have been called tonic. 

The faulty state of stomach is not always 
attended with impaired appetite, which 
may be prurient, irregular, and even ex- 
cessive; but that, in such cases, the stomach 
is not in a natural state is evident from the 
deficient assimilation in phthisis, bulimia, and 
some moribund cases; and from the morbid 
one, in chlorosis, worms, and sea-scurvy, 
in which last the citric-acid taken into the 
stomach, where it must be changed, seems 
to counteract the effect of salt meat, cold 
and moisture on the surface, excess or de- 
fect of exercise, and despondence, the usual 
|P_33
causes of the disease. The sudden effects 
of small doses of aromatics, fetids, ammo- 
nia, doses of aromatics, fetids, ammo- 
nia, alcohol, æther, or opium, in allaying 
the sense of weakness, heat, cold sweating, 
spasm, pain, and other symptoms all over 
the body, with depressions of mind; and of 
the same medicines, and the bark in pre- 
venting and arresting ague-fits, show that 
such symptoms depend on states of stomach, 
and that these medicines act on the stomach, 
inducing changes in it, the effects of which 
are propagated over the system. [/21./]

If fever, inflammatory and hæmorrhagic 
diseases, were affections merely of the 
|P_34
heart and blood-vessels; nervous diseases 
of the brain and nerves; dropsy, and 
scrophula of the lymphatics; scirrhus of 
the other glands; ulcers of the skin; 
dyspnæa and cough of the lungs; rheu- 
matism of the large joints, and gout of the 
small; jaundice of the ducts of the liver, and 
diabetes of the kidneys, these would oftener 
exist together; but being symptoms of states 
of stomach, and as different states of the 
same organ cannot exist at the same time, 
the system is thus not readily overpowered 
by a confluence of diseases; the same 
causes induce different symptoms according 
to predisposition,; the same remedy an- 
swers in various morbid states, and it seems 
thus that the balance of secretions is esta- 
blished. How often, after death, are 
morbid states of brain, lungs, and heart, 
in vain looked for, while the cause of all 
the symptoms is either invisible or found 
|P_35
in the stomach, which had not seemed 
previously to suffer. 

[}Narcotics. }]
Narcotics seem to induce a state of 
stomach, which tends to supply the want 
of necessary impressions, or resist such as are 
apt to occasion pain or prevent sleep, the 
natural relief and restorer of the sentient 
part. If a morbid impression exist, as from 
acid in the stomach, sordes in the bowels, 
of fulness in the vessels; or if it be of a me- 
chanical or chemical nature in any other 
part, it must be removed; or if it be from 
a lacerated nerve, this must be divided, 
otherwise narcotics may not operate, or 
may even aggravate the symptoms. It is 
the state produced by the impression, as the 
painful state of nerve; muscular spasm; 
or local inflammation, as from bruises or 
wounds; ulcer; or disposition to gangrene, 
|P_36
as in the toes [/22./], that narcotics and medicines 
used in such cases affect, and that only by 
keeping the assimilating and resisting powers, 
and thereby the other functions in a proper 
state, till the morbid impression lose its 
power, and the morbid state, disposition, and 
habit cease. 

While every part continues under the 
dominion of the stomach, no mechanical or 
chemical change of a morbid nature can 
take place in the solids or fluids of the 
system; and from the natural accommo- 
dation between the stomach and other parts 
constantly tending to a level, and forming 
an equally, though sometimes slenderly, 
balanced constitution, morbid impressions 
are often resisted, local complaints arising 
in the course of disease become tolerable, 
and changes and extremes of the ordinary 
impressions, which are all first felt at the 
|P_37
stomach, can be borne in a remarkable de- 
gree; but when the balance between the 
stomach and other parts, by means of in- 
ternal or external impressions, or evacua- 
tions, is diminished or lost, as in an ill or 
broken constitution, a slight change in ordi- 
nary, morbid, or salutary impressions, is felt. 

The stomach may be put into a state 
more or less susceptible of a particular im- 
pression. Mercury, whether administered 
internally or externally, seems to render it 
more sensible to that of the bark in ague, of 
squill in dropsy, of opium in syphilis, and 
of electricity in various diseases. In mania 
the stomach and system are generally very 
insensible to impressions; but opium given an 
hour or two before even an ordinary dose of 
an emetic, promotes its operation, though 
in a combined specific effects are usually diminished. 
In mania, reason is generally observed to re- 
|P_38
turn in proportion to this sensibility of the 
stomach. 

Impressions differ not only in kind, but in 
degree, and are powerful, being less resisted, 
as they are sudden. Strong ones, as eme- 
tics, warm water, &c. act chiefly on the 
stomach, while weak ones, such as do not 
even nauseate, and have little sensible qua- 
lity, as small doses of emetics, warm 
water, absorbents, sarsaparilla, entire mustard-seed, 
and oxyds, affect the remotest parts, and 
are much used in indigestion, nervous dis- 
eases, passive discharges, and ulcers. A 
remedy or dose to the unaccustomed, ope- 
rates like an unexpected blow or event, 
with proportional forece; a strong impression 
on the surface affects the part chiefly, 
while tickling, a scratch, dentition, a trans- 
polanted tooth, and other seemingly weak 
but peculiar impressions, affect the stomach 
and system considerably. 

|P_39
[}External Impressions. }]
Impressions on the senses affect the sto- 
mach. A disagreeable taste, smell, sound, 
or touch, is apt to occasion sickness and 
shivering, to set the teeth on edge, or to 
make the mouth water. The smell of spi- 
rits sickens and intoxicates [/23./]; smells agree- 
able to some, make others sick, faint, and 
suffer abortion; while fetid ones sometimes 
recover people from sickness, syncope, or 
hysteria. Certain motions, as that of a 
swing, ship, or carriage; going backwards, 
turning round, and, in cases of ill-health, 
the posture of standing, or even sitting, oc- 
casions sickness, while that of lying prevents 
it and syncope. Agreeable sensations often 
relieve sickness and promote digestion; but 
in excess, injure the stomach exceedingly. 

|P_40
Emotions are felt at the stomach. The 
modifications of aversion, as fear, anger, 
shame, and grief, instantly impair the keen- 
est appetite, and are apt to occasion sick- 
ness, tremors, paleness, flushings, weeping, 
various nervous affections, looseness, and 
jaundice. One is sick at the thought of 
anything disagreeable; and an injury is pro- 
perly enough said to stick in the stomach; 
which word itself in many languages im- 
plies anger and other states of mind. The 
modifications of desire, as hope, compla- 
cence, and joy, improve the appetite and 
promote digestion and strength. The 
thought of any thing agreeable does one's 
heart good; which common phrase, like 
that of sick at heart, refers to the stomach, 
as the word bowels does to the kindly af- 
fections. Agreeable emotions in excess are 
apt to produce mania and other disorders, 
and have been suddenly fatal. While the 
mind is much struck, or fixed, as in thought, 
|P_41
passion, affection, or mania, the sensibility is 
diminished to other impressions, as that of 
spirits, medicines, contagion, and tempera- 
ture; and fits of various diseases are thus 
suspended. 

There is a great analogy between the in- 
ternal surface, from the mouth to the anus, 
and the external one [/24./], both being continu- 
ous, pervious to fluids by vessels, quickly 
regenerating lost substance, covered with 
mucous or sebaceous matter defending 
the tender surfaces, liable to abrasion, 
inflammation, thickening, and probably 
the same eruptive and other diseases, the 
state of the one affecting or alternating 
with that of the other. Perhaps the 
growth of hair after death, shews some 
continuance of life in the skin. 

As a strong dose, it was observed, 
chiefly affects the stomach, so a strong 
|P_42
impression, as pinching, affects chiefly 
the part; tickling affects the whole sys- 
tem, occasioning itching and laughter, and 
if continued, weakness, sickness, vomit- 
ing, and convulsions. Gentle pinching 
and friction are prevailing eastern customs, 
and exercise is universally so, for promoting 
digestion. A large bleeding sickens, and 
small ones are commended in many cases; 
compression allays vomiting and colic; a 
plaster, by giving support to the muscles of 
the back, seems sometimes to steady the sto- 
mach and system; and the want of usual com- 
pression, as that of a neck-cloth, stays, or 
garters, is apt to produce sickness and other 
uneasy feelings. 

Scrophulous-like tumors in the neck 
have been attributed to compression of the 
inguinal glands by a truss; and various dis- 
eases to that of the feet and other parts. 
Peculiar impressions, or slight impressions 
in peculiar states, produce peculiar symp- 
|P_43
toms. A scratch produces in some, swelled 
glands; in others tetanus [/25./], with a state of 
stomach attended with pain, and which 
has borne fifteen hundred grains of good 
opium in six days, without sleep, or any 
affection of the head or mind. An old 
and obstinate epilepsy, it is said, has ceased 
to return after the extirpation of a wart from 
the surface. Dentition produces vomiting, 
purging, eruptions, fever, and convulsions. 
A transplanted tooth has produced appear- 
ances of syphilis or scrophula, cured both 
with and without mercury. A wound 
|P_44
gradually, according to its seat or extent, 
affects the stomach, as appears from the 
indigestion, foul tongue, and fever, in- 
ducing, as in pregnancy for the fœtus, 
that state of vessel necessary to form the buffy- 
coat, and instead of blood, that suppu- 
ration, so remarkably under the influ- 
ence of diet; and during which the 
state of stomach is sometimes such, that 
solid meat has suddenly produced great 
weakness, with dyspnæa, delirium, and con- 
vulsions, ending in death; and the suppura- 
tory or hectic state, if it does not heal, 
teases, wastes, and destroys. In pregnancy 
the state of stomach is peculiar, seemingly 
necessary to the retention of the fœtus; and 
may be the cause of its resisting contagion, 
and arresting the symptoms of phthisis. A 
state of vessel that teases the stomach and 
system, is often taken off by a spontaneous 
hæmorrhage or inflammation effected by an 
|P_45
effort of the stomach, which a bleeding or 
a blister could not allay. 

The elements of food and drink in form- 
ing chyle, blood, secretions, and solid parts; 
and the base of vital air uniting with these by 
the lungs, and perhaps by the surface, may 
give the blood its colour, its temperature, 
its mobility, its coagulability, its power 
of acting on the left ventricle with those 
appearances of vitality ascribed to it by 
Mr. Hunter; and these condensations 
going on less in a warm temperature, 
and more in a cold one, may by the ac- 
commodating nature of the stomach with 
the other parts, preserve the equilibrium 
of heat in the system. 

That temperature on the surface affects 
the stomach, is evident from certain appli- 
cations of cold exciting vomiting and purg- 
ing; from hot applications, or a hot fit re- 
lieving those vomitings which occur in 
fever and the plague; and from changes of 
|P_46
temperature inducing or relieving various 
diseases, and fits of disease of which the 
stomach is the feat [/26./]. A warm fomenta- 
tion relieves the sense of heat, handling snow 
occasions it, an irritation as from a thorn 
produces it, and an irritation in the stomach 
occasions alternations of heat and cold. 
Human heat is between 32° and 156°, the 
two coagulating points; and the agreeable 
is, exclusively of habit, between 32° and 
the human heat. In tropical and polar 
climates the appetite is keen, and the sto- 
mach resists the power of intoxicating 
liquors and of contagion. Seeds, eggs, im- 
perfect and young animals and maniacs, 
being, as it were, all stomach, bear the ef- 
fects of heat and cold remarkably. 

Certain degrees of heat and cold dispose 
|P_47
to sleep; which, in the case of cold, or of 
external and internal poison, subduing the 
power of the stomach, is apt to prove fatal. 
From the long fasting that is borne in 
sleep, the slow operation of a medicine, and 
the suspension of stools, the stomach seems 
less sensible in that state; the temperature 
is two degrees less; and cold is easily caught 
in sleep. If appetite or sleep pass its pe- 
riods, the disposition ceases, and its re- 
turn is the first symptom of crisis in fever. 
Dyspeptics are apt to start from sleep or the 
article of sleep, and then other nervous af- 
fections, as asthma, palpitation, epilepsy, 
and gout, are apt to happen, probably from 
the change in the state of the stomach. It 
seems to be only in occasional states of 
stomach that fits from fixed causes, and 
other periodical diseases, occur. 

Friction, fomentations, aromatics, fe- 
tids, acrids, spirits, ammonia, æther, and 
opium allay vomiting and internal spasms, 
|P_48
prove cathartic, or favour the operation of 
one. In people with whose stomachs ho- 
ney, unctuous matter, or eggs disagree, 
any application of these or of wax to a 
sore, has been observed likewise to dis- 
agree. Tartite or muriate of antimony ap- 
plied externally, as if taken into the sto- 
mach, excite vomiting, purging, and sweat- 
ing. Lead, copper, mercury, and other im- 
pressions, produce vomiting and purging. It 
is said that bitters expel worms, that opium 
and tobacco produce ebriety, that bark 
cures ague, and that opium applied to the 
bare surface has destroyed life without be- 
ing absorbed. Ammonia weakened with 
oil, so as to be applied to the surface, fre- 
quently produces nausea and an universal 
sweat. Some sapids so applied, seem to 
affect the sense of taste without reaching it. 
Arsenic, the bite of a viper, or of a mad- 
dog, has produced death; and, on dissec- 
|P_49
tion, the stomach only has been found in- 
flamed. 

The state of the tongue and mouth 
is always attended to as a mark of the 
state of stomach, according to which the 
sensations of taste are various, and the 
saliva and mucus vary in quantity, con- 
sistence, taste, smell, and colour. Hence 
wateriness, ptyalism, salivation, or foam- 
ing, is apt to occur on the sight of grateful 
food in indigestion, pyrosis, pregnancy, hy- 
drophobia, epilepsy, scurvy, fever, and 
small-pox; the first symptom of which 
last is pain at stomach, and the chief re- 
medy cold to the surface. Lead, anti- 
mony, barytes [/27./], fox-glove, opium, or the 
guatimala serpent, as well as mercury, ex- 
cite salivation, which is promoted by a 
nauseant or emetic, or by different degrees 
of temperature. A grain or two of a mer- 
|P_50
curialin the stomach, or on the bare skin, 
has had the effect; the salivation, like a 
gleet or mercurial sore, will sometimes 
continue for months; and when suddenly 
stopt, is apt to be followed by a violent 
affection of stomach, with vomiting, only 
to be allayed by mercury [/28./]. 

If infection be removed before the specific 
state of stomach and vessel be induced, di- 
sease does not take place; and the morbid 
state itself may, in the case of syphilis, be 
removed, for a time at least, by copper, or 
by a course of corrosive sublimate, or by 
fever, while the disposition may remain, and 
break out with or without virulence. 

Such is the sensibility of the skin as well 
as stomach, that a cold or hot body, or an 
astringent applied to either, is apt to pro- 
duce a contraction over all, and stop some 
hæmorrhages. Fantonus mentions a man 
|P_51
in a fever, in whom blister-issues that had 
dried up, opened and discharged anew, 
after the application of other blisters to 
distant parts. A plaster on some skins ex- 
cites an eruption in other parts. After a 
suppuration in the fore-arm, a swelling has 
taken place successively in the arm-pit, the 
parotid, the leg, the knee, and the groin. 
A swelled testicle is allowed to be merely 
from irritation. A succession of tumors 
takes place in the conglobate glands 
from the mesentery to the neck, and 
likewise from a compression of the in- 
guinal glands; in the inguinal and axillary 
from irritation at the toes and fingers, 
with or without infection; and in the neck 
and behind the ears from a scratch, a 
blister, or tinea capitis in the neighbour- 
hood. The pain of a wound, burn, or 
bruise, is sometimes alleviated as pain be- 
gins in another part. Pain, spasm, inflam- 
|P_52
mation, and other states are apt to shift, 
as are ulcers, that is peculiar states of vessel 
with peculiar assimilation as the ichor of 
cancer, the cheesy-like matter of scrofula, 
and the stony matter of gout. 

Noxious matter seems either rejected by 
the absorbents at the surface, or assimilated 
before it meet the chyle in the thoracic duct. 
A mild substance like milk or mucilage in- 
jected into a vein, is apt to throw the 
system into convulsions. The flesh of an 
animal killed by a poisonous bite or arrow, 
affords wholesome food; during a course 
of chalybeates no superfluous iron is de- 
tected in the chyle or blood; bile circulat- 
ing in jaundice does not produce giddiness, 
dimness of sight, &c. as when in the sto- 
mach; colouring and odorous particles, as 
of madder, logwood, turpentine, garlic, or 
asparagus, circulate without producing any 
effect; in syphilis the fluids, and even se- 
condary ulcers do not generally infect; and 
|P_53
though a mercurial may lose, and sulphur 
acquire oxygen in the system, yet it is not 
alleged that either is found there but in its 
mild state. 

A morbid state or a fever, attended 
with inflammation, eruption or ulcer, often 
takes place suddenly, and runs its course 
without any infection, applied or generated, 
or any cause or remedy which acts on the 
fluids; in the case of infection the symp- 
toms, as the variolous eruption, sometimes 
do not appear, and sometimes continue to 
appear when the state or the fever is gone; 
and are affected by external temperature, 
while the internal one continues the same; 
some very infectious diseases, as the yaws, 
admit of cure from mere attention to the 
general health; an infectious irritation, 
like others, takes time before it affects the 
resisting and assimilating power, so as to 
produce the specific state of vessel and spe- 
cific matter; during the variolous and sy- 
|P_54
philitic state, though there is nothing to 
prevent absorption, any new infection seems 
to have no constitutional effect; in the case 
of small-pox, yaws, and some other infec- 
tions, the system becomes afterwards in- 
susceptible of their action, as it, in some 
measure, does of that of accustomed ones, 
as spirits, opium, tobacco, and even febrile 
contagion; and no satisfying account is 
given why the absorption, multiplication, 
or assimilation, with the other effects of an 
infectious particle are not more immediate, 
and in proportion to its quantity, and why 
after absorption, it should in any case fail 
to assimilate. 

Morbific matter does not seem to be a cause 
of gout or of other diseases, called hereditary, 
as mania, epilepsy, or scrofula, which are 
not infectious, and in which, as in all other 
cases, the state of the fluids must depend on 
that of the solids. Gout often attacks per- 
sons in seemingly good health preceded 
|P_55
perhaps only by slight symptoms of some 
affection of the alimentary canal, is subject 
to frequent, sudden, and distant translations, 
affecting the joints with inflammation, but 
the stomach with a state so opposite, that 
highly stimulating cordials are taken with 
relief; and no antidote to gouty matter 
there, whether supposed acid or otherwise 
acrimonious, was ever thought of. 

The remedies in syphilis tend to bring 
the stomach and consequently the vessels 
from their syphilitic state, and to keep the 
functions in a proper condition till the im- 
pression cease to operate, the morbid state 
be changed, and the habit overcome. The 
remedies affect the assimilating organs, and 
except perhaps the corrosive sublimate, im- 
prove them, as appears from the corpulence 
to which they dispose. Infants have re- 
markably assimilating and resisting powers, 
slaver a great deal, are not easily affected by 
syphilis, or easily salivated by mercury, and 
|P_56
are easily cured. Mercury, and opium when 
it succeeds, seem to put the stomach in a pe- 
culiar state, somewhat, perhaps, like that 
of infancy, and the salivation does not ap- 
pear to be from absorption any more than 
when it occurs from an emetic, pregnancy, 
or worms; or than giddiness is when it 
arises from the use of hemlock. 

Inflammation by mustard, &c. does not 
excite strangury, as cantharides are apt to 
do. It often ceases the moment the blister 
is removed, the effect of the impression is 
allayed by a poultice, or the stomach is 
soothed by a diluent, or by camphorated 
oil applied to the surface. Cantharides in- 
ternally relieve paralytic strangury, and in- 
continence of urine; strangury frequently 
occurs from affections of the stomach, as 
gastritis; and the uva ursi, alkali, or super- 
carbonated alkali, whose effects seem chiefly 
confined to the stomach, occasionally re- 
lieve even fits of the stone. 

|P_57
Contagions, whether marshy, human, or 
specific, are sometimes traced to smells, as 
a cadaverous one, a heavy earthy one, that 
of the confluent small-pox, dysenteric stools; 
or they may induce the febrile state, the 
only steady character of which is weakness, 
though the impression do not just excite the 
state of sensation. It may be in a way s 
imilar to what happens in idiosyncrasies in 
regard to cheese, a cat, &c. or that of the 
insensible action of various irritations, as of 
worms. A gentleman who cannot bear 
being in a room where there is any cheese, 
though he does not see or smell it in 
the least, instantly feels a sense of weak- 
ness, after some time, sickness with a cold 
sweat, and faints if he endeavour to brave 
it. In this way contagion may, through 
the organ of smell, affect the stomach 
and system. Inoculated, it produces 
the specific state, inflammation and sup- 
puration, and in the case of small-pox 
|P_58
without predisposition, the stomach does 
not yield too much, and its energy is kept 
up by cold on the surface, so that a slight 
eruption happens sometimes without fever. 
Heat on a part seems to increase the vario- 
lous state of vessel. Cool air on the surface 
recovers persons from the state induced by 
carbonic, azotic, and other noxious airs, the 
first symptom of which is vomiting; from 
syncope, and from the still-born state, the 
first exertion from which is seen to be about 
the region of the stomach; and the cold 
seems to operate, as in discharges of blood, 
by exciting the stomach from its passive 
state. Affections of the stomach, as ob- 
served, mark fever in its attack, progress, 
remission, crisis, and cure; all its causes af- 
fect the stomach; it has no symptom but 
what an immediate application to the sto- 
mach may produce and its evacuation re- 
move; and it is often prevented and cured 
by remedies affecting only that organ. 
|P_59
Its forms of intermittent, remittent, conti- 
nual, yellow, bilious, and dysenteric, seem 
all related, prevailing at the same time, 
changing their types, and running into one 
another; and the late observations, made in 
different climates, tend to show that the 
same treatment, properly timed, answers 
equally with them all. 

THE END. 
