[^Lodge, Thomas: Treatise of the plague^] 
 
[}A 
TREATISE 
of the Plague: 
Containing the nature, signes, and accidents 
of the same, with the certaine and absolute cure of 
the Feuers, Botches and Carbuncles that raigne in these 
times: And aboue all things most singular Experiments 
and preseruatiues in the same, gathered by the obseruation 
of diuers worthy Trauailers, and selected 
out of the writings of the best learned 
Phisitians in this age. 
 
By Thomas Lodge, Doctor in Phisicke. 
 
LONDON 
Printed for Edward White and N.L. 
1603.}] 
 
[^Omitted a dedication to the mayor, aldermen and sheriffs of London and a preface to the reader.^] 
 
[^Extract 1, ff. B1r-E4v^] 
 
[^f.B1r^] 
[}The causes and cures of 
the Plague.}] 
 
[}CHAP. I. 
Of the nature and essence of the Plague.}] 
 
THe Diuine Philosopher Plato (declaring 
vnto vs in diuers of his Dialogues, the 
perfect way and path, whereby we may 
rightly intreat, and skilfully proceede, in 
the discouery of any thing) saith, That it 
behoueth euery man, that indeuoureth 
by Art and methode to attaine the perfect 
knowledge of that whereof he standeth in 
doubt, or is desirous to instruct an other in any Science whatsoeuer, 
to begin with the definition of the same, without the 
perfect grounds and vnderstanding whereof, nothing may be 
either worthily knowne, or truly explicated: (which lesson of 
his, both Tully in his Offices, and Gallen in his Booke of the 
differences of sicknesses haue very carefully obserued:) Since 
therefore in this Treatise of mine, I am purposed (by the grace 
and assistance of Almightie God) to manifest vnto you the nature, 
malignitie, and accidents of the Plague, to the intent and 
purpose that I may instruct you after what manner you may 
withstand a sicknesse so greeuous, and accompanied with so 
diuers and dangerous accidents, by those meanes and medicines, 
which God of his mercy hath left vs, by the noble Art of 
Phisicke, it shall not be amisse, if for your better vnderstanding 
what the plague is, I take my beginning from the definition 
[^f.B1v^] 
of the same. But before I prosecute this my intended purpose, 
let vs inuocate and call vpon that diuine bountie, from 
whose fountaine-head of mercy euery good and gracious benefit 
is deriued, that it will please him to assist this my labor, 
and charitable intent, and so to order the scope of my indeuour, 
that it may redound to his eternall glory, our neighbours 
comfort, and the speciall benefite of our whole Countrey: 
which being now vnder the fatherly correction of Almightie 
God, and punished for our misdeeds by his heauy 
hand, may thorow the admirable effects and fruites of the 
sacred Art of Phisicke, receiue preuention of their daunger, 
and comfort in this desperate time of visitation: To him therfore 
king of kings, inuisible, and onely wise, be all honor, maiestie 
and dominion, now and for euer, Amen. 
 
The Plague then (as Galen witnesseth, is a pernicious 
and daungerous Epidemie, (that is to say, a generall, or popular 
sicknesse) which violently rauisheth all men for the most 
part to death, without respect or exception of age, sexe, complexion, 
gouernment in life, or particular condition whatsoeuer: 
And therefore is it worthily called pernicious, because 
there can be nothing more daungerous then the same, which 
by the malignitie and violence therof, inforceth sodaine death, 
and by the proper nature, proprietie and contraritie it hath 
with our bodies, killeth mankind no lesse readily, then violently. 
But that you may more exactly vnderstand what y=e= plague 
is, you ought to note that there are diuers sorts of sicknesses; 
that is to say Epidemick, Endemick plague, and priuate disease, 
(as Galen witnesseth in diuers places:) An Epidemick 
plague, is a common and popular sicknesse, hapning in some 
region, or countrey, at a certaine time, caused by a certaine indisposition 
of the aire, or waters of the same region, producing 
in all sorts of people, one and the same kind of sicknesse; as 
namely burning Feuers, Tertian Agues, Opthalimes, or inflammation 
of the tunicle of the eies, Carbuncles, or Collicks, 
or general and greeuous coughes, accompanied with shortnes 
of breath, or disenteries, or fluxes of blood, which uniuersally 
and very often times raigne in some countries about the end 
[^f.B2r^] 
of sommer: All which sicknesses when as they are common in 
any particular place or region, are called Endemick, which is 
as much to say, as sicknesses happening publikely & popularly 
in the same region or country, by a certaine euil qualitie of the 
aire that raigneth therein, and produceth such like infirmities 
in mens bodies. For as both Galen and the diuine olde man 
Hypocrates do testifie, euery sicknesse that proceedeth from 
the aire infected with a venemous qualitie, that is the cause 
which produceth and begetteth the same, is in his essence Epidemick, 
popular and pestilentiall. Thus farre according to the 
fathers of Phisicke haue I truly discouered what Epidemick 
is. Endemick is a common sicknesse, and yet for all that proper 
to some one country or region: which is as much to say, 
as a regional, or prouincial sicknesse: For there are certain regions 
and places which by a peculiar propertie in themselues 
engender certaine kindes of infirmities, which are particular 
only to the inhabitants of that region, either by occasion of the 
aire, or the waters in that country. As in the new found land 
(discouered by the Portugalls and Spaniards) in that Iland 
which is called Hispaniola, and other places of India, there 
raigne certaine pustules or broad scabs, (not much vnlike the 
French poxes) wherewith almost all the inhabitants of the 
country are infected, the remedy whereof they haue gathered 
from the infusion of the wood of Guaiacum, whence the vse 
thereof with very fruitfull successe hath bene discouered and 
proued forcible here in Europe. In Sauoy and the valley of 
Lucernes, the most part of the inhabitants haue a swelling in 
the throate. In Pouille and Calabria, for the most part all the 
inhabitants haue y=e= Iaundis. And such sicknesses as are these, 
are called Endemiques, prouintiall or regionall infirmities, yet 
for all that they are not to be accounted pestilentiall or contagious: 
The Plague as I haue said, is a pernicious Epidemie, 
that is to say, a common and popular sicknesse, which is both 
contagious & mortall. A priuate sicknesse is that which is particular 
& proper to any one in priuate, proceeding from particular 
indisposition of the body of him that is attainted, or by reason 
of some disorderly dyet by him obserued, or rather by some 
[^f.B2v^] 
excesse committed by him, or through the corruption of the humours 
in his bodie, yet not contagious; but such an infirmitie 
as neither is free from daunger, nor exempted from mortalitie. 
These are the differences of such sicknesses as serue for our 
purposes to declare the nature of the Plague, which in her 
proper signification is a popular and contagious sicknesse, for 
the most part mortall, wherein vsually there appeare certaine 
Tumors, Carbuncles, or spottes, which the common people 
call Gods tokens: which Plague proceedeth from the venemous 
corruption of the humors and spirits of the body, infected 
by the attraction of corrupted aire, or infection of euil vapours, 
which haue the propertie to alter mans bodie, and poyson his 
spirits after a straunge and daungerous qualitie, contrary and 
mortall enemy to the vitall spirits, which haue their residence 
in the heart: by reason whereof it suddainly rauisheth & shortly 
cutteth off mans life, who for the most part is attainted with 
such a venemous contagion: And for that we haue saide that 
the plague is a popular and contagious sicknesse, it shall not 
be amisse to declare and plainly discouer, what these wordes 
Popular, and Contagious, do signifie. Popular and Epidemich 
haue one and the same signification; that is to say, a sicknesse 
common vnto all people, or to the moste part of them. 
Contagion, is an euil qualitie in a bodie, communicated vnto 
an other by touch, engendring one and the disposition in 
him to whom it is communicated. So as he that is first of all 
attainted or rauished with such a qualitie, is called contagious 
and infected. For very properly is he reputed infectious, that 
hath in himselfe an euil, malignant, venemous, or vitious disposition, 
which may be imparted and bestowed on an other 
by touch, producing the same and as daungerous effect in him 
to whom it is communicated, as in him that first communicateth 
and spreddeth the infection. This sicknesse of the Plague 
is commonly engendred of an infection of the Aire, altered 
with a venemous vapour, dispearsed and sowed in the same, 
by the attraction and participation whereof, this dangerous 
and deadly infirmitie is produced and planted in vs, which 
[^f.B3r^] 
Almightie God as the rodde of his rigor and iustice, and for the 
amendment of our sinnes sendeth downe vppon vs, as it is 
written in Leuiticus, the 26. Chapter, and in Deuteronomy 
the 28. If you obserue not my Commaundements saith 
our Lord, I will extinguish you by the Plague which shall 
consume you. To the like effect is that of Celsus (a man of famous 
memorie amongst our Phisitions) who very learnedly 
saith, that all straunge sicknesses befall mortall men, by reason 
of the wrath and displeasure of the Goddes, and that the 
necessary meanes to finde recouery and remedie for the same, 
is to haue recourse vnto them by intercession and prayers. 
The same also testifieth Homer (the soueraigne of all diuine 
Science & Poeticall perfection) in the first booke of his Iliades. 
Since therefore it is euident by the testimonies abouesaid, that 
the Plague is a manifest signe of the wrath of God conceiued 
against vs, the first and most wholesome remedie is to haue 
recourse vnto him, who is the Father of mercy, and soueraign 
Phisition of all infirmities, imploring his grace and mercy, by 
fastings, praiers, and supplications, by almesdeeds, good works, 
and amendment of life, to the ende we may appease and pacifie 
his wrath, and reconcile our selues vnto him, and obtaine 
his grace and mercy, according to the example of penitent 
Dauid, and the contrite Niniuites. In imitation of 
whome, if we shall haue our recourse vnto his mercy seat, 
we may rest assured that he will beholde vs with his eye of 
pittie, and graunt vs both health of soule and bodie, according 
vnto his promises made vnto those who call 
vpon him in humilitie and sinceritie of hart 
and conscience. See here the first 
rule. 
 
[^f.B3v^] 
[}CHAP. II. 
Of the causes of the Plague.}] 
 
THose sicknesses which are contagious 
and pestilent (euen as al other kinds of infirmities) 
haue their causes. For nothing 
may produce without an efficient cause 
that bringeth the same effect: The 
Plague then hath his originall & producing 
causes, from whence shee taketh originall 
beginning: and is engendred by a certaine and more 
secret meanes then all other sicknesses. For, for the most 
part the causes of priuate sicknesses which are not infectious, 
are either to great repletion, or a generall deprauation 
of the humours which are in the body, or obstruction, or 
binding, or putrifaction, as Galen in his Booke, (Of the 
Causes of sicknesses) hath very learnedly written. But the 
Plague hath none of these aboue mentioned causes, but only 
contagious and pestilent: yet notwithstanding together with 
these causes of repletion, Cachochimie, obstruction, & putrifaction, 
the Plague may bee annexed and vnited; but yet in such 
sort, as they be not the proper reputed causes which ingender 
the Plague, for then if y=t= should follow, all sicknesses accompanied 
with such like causes might be reputed pestilentiall, which 
were both vntrue and absurde: It behooueth vs therefore, to 
finde out a proper and continent cause of the Plague, and such 
like contagious infirmities. Let vs then conclude with Galen, 
in his Booke Of Treacle, to Piso, and Pamphilianus, 
that all pestilentiall sicknesses, as from the proper cause, are 
ingendred from the ayre, depraued and altered in his substance, 
by a certaine vicious mixture of corrupted and strange 
vapours, contrary to the life of man, and corrupting the vitall 
spirit: which vnkindly excretion sowed in the ayre, and 
infecting the same, communicateth vnto vs by our continuall 
alteration of the same, the venome which poysoneth vs. 
[^f.B4r^] 
The ready and speedy chaunges, saith Galen, which happen 
in the ayre, through the euill corruption of the same, produce 
the Plague; which like a rauishing beast depopulateth and destroyeth 
diuers men by death, yea whole cities, because men 
hauing a necessitie to sucke in the ayre, together with the same 
sucke in the infection and venome: By this it appeareth that 
the proper and immediat cause which ingendreth the Plague, 
is the attraction and in breathing of the ayre, infected and poisoned 
with a certaine venemous vapour, contrary to the nature 
of man. To his effect before his time, the great M. 
of Physique, Hipocrates writeth thus, in his Booke Of 
Humane Nature: The cause (saith he) of the generall pestilence 
which indifferently attainteth all sortes of men, is 
the ayre which we sucke, that hath in it selfe a corrupt and 
venemous seede, which we draw with our in-breathing. 
Now the causes which engender such vapours in the aire, are 
diuers and of different kindes, for sometimes such a vapour 
is lifted vp into the ayre, by reason of the corruption & stench of 
dead and vnburied bodyes; (as in places where any great 
battell haue beene fought, it often falleth out, according 
as diuers Histories testifie.) It is ingendred also through 
euill vapours that issue from the earth, or certaine Caues 
thereof, which yeelde foorth exhalations full of corruptions 
that infect the ayre, where it contracteth by an euill qualitie. 
It happeneth likewise by a loathsome steame, of certain Marsh 
in plashie Fennes full of mudde and durt, as also from diuers 
sorts of Plantes, and venemous beastes, whose euill 
qualitie may produce such an effect in the ayre. But the ancient 
Physitians and Astrologers, (as namely Auicen, with 
diuers others) report: that the Plague hath two originals 
and sources, from whence (as from a Fountaine) shee taketh 
her beginning. 
 
The first is, in the indisposition of the earth ouerflowed 
with too much moysture, and filled with grosse and 
euill vapours, which by vertue of the Sunne beeing lifted 
vppe into the ayre, and mixed with the same, corrupteth 
[^f.B4v^] 
the nature and complexion thereof, and engendreth a certaine 
indisposition in the same contrary to our substaunce, from 
whence it commeth to passe, that they who sucke this infected 
aire are in daunger to be attainted with this contagion 
and sicknesse of the Pestilence. Especially, if they be of an 
euil constitution of body, repleate with euil humours, men of 
vnbrideled dyet, sanguine, and such as haue large and portuall 
poses: They likewise who are weake and delicate, are men 
ready to be surprised and infected. 
 
An other cause of the Plague saith Auicen, proceedeth from 
the celestiall formes, that is to say, the starres and their configurations 
and malignant aspects, which by their influences 
cause such sicknesses full of contagion and Pestilence, as in 
generall all other Astrologians testifie: But in truth as touching 
mine owne opinion which is grounded vpon the diuine 
determination of Plato in his Epinomides, and his Timæus, 
of Plotinus his chiefe follower, of Iamblichus, Proclus, 
Mercurius, Trismegistus, Aristotle, and Auerrhois, I finde 
that this opinion, is both false and erronious; as namely, to 
thinke that any contagion or misfortune, incommoditie or sicknesse 
whatsoeuer may by reason of the starres befall man. 
Because as Plato witnesseth in his Dialogue intituled Epinomis, 
The nature of the starres is most goodly to behold, wel 
gouerned in their motions, and beneficiall to all liuing creatures, 
bestowing on them all commodities of generation and 
conseruation: If then the nature of the starres be so good that 
it meriteth to be called diuine (as in the same place Plato intituleth 
it) and yeeldeth so many benefites to these inferiour 
bodies: how can it be that the starres infuse such infection and 
contagion vpon the earth and earthly creatures, whereas it 
is manifest that no cause can produce such effects as are contrary 
to it selfe? If then the good of inferior bodies proceedeth 
from celestiall bodies, as namely the generation, 
production of fruites, and riping of the same: yea and the 
conseruation of euery ones vertue (as in truth it doth): It shall 
neuer be truly and possibly concluded that the corruption and 
[^f.C1r^] 
extermination of bodies proceedeth from the starres. And therfore 
Aristotle very aduisedly saith; That this inferiour world 
is very necessarily coupled and ioyned with the superiour, to 
the ende that all the vertue therof might be conducted and guided 
by the same. If the starres by their vertue conserue all the 
creatures in this world, how can they by corruption, veneme 
and contagion, dissipate and destroy them? The saide Plato 
also calleth all the Planets and starres filters, for their accord 
in good doing; and saith that it is a great folly in men to thinke 
that some Planets are euil and malignant, and the rest good, 
whereas all are good. For as Calcidius the great Platonist 
saith in his Commentaries vpon Platoes Timæus, No euil 
may either proceed or take beginning from the heauens, because 
in that holy place all thinges are good, and such as resemble 
the diuinitie, and nothing that sauoureth of malice 
may abide and haue place: neither saith he, can the starres 
chaunge their nature, because it is simple and pure, neither 
can they degenerate from the simplicitie and puritie which by 
the Almightie power hath bene bestowed vpon them. Why 
then shall we attribute vnto them a malignant, pestilent, and 
contagious qualitie, and such as rauisheth and spoyleth all liuing 
creatures by a venemous and pestilent influence? For if 
contagion be as badde a thing as may be (as in truth it is) the 
most disordinate and contrary to nature, or rather enemy to 
life) the source and originall of which contagion, is nothing 
but very infirmitie, putrifaction and corruption in matter, 
how dare we attribute to the starres & heauen (which is the beginning 
of all generation) such an erroneous and vnnaturall 
accident? Whereas the Planets are Celestiall bodies, well disposed, 
powerfull, without vice, corruption, or matter, subiect 
or inclining to any contagion: And therefore Auerrois the 
chiefe Commenter vpon Aristotle saith; That whosoeuer 
beleeueth that Mars or any other Planet disposed in any sort 
whatsoeuer, doth hurt to any inferiour bodies; the same man 
in sooth beleeueth such things as are estraunged from all Philosophie. 
And the same Author vpon the ninth of Aristotles 
[^f.C1v^] 
Metaphisiques, saith: that the Celestiall bodies which are 
the beginning of all things are eternall, and haue neither euil 
error or corruption in them; for corruption is of the order of 
such things as are euil. And therefore saith he, it is impossible 
to know that which the Astronomers say, that there are some 
fortunate, and some vnfortunate starres, but this only may be 
knowne, that whereas all of them are good, that some of them 
are better then other some. Behold here the worthy and true 
opinion of this excellent Philosopher, which before him (in as 
much as concerneth the first part of this sentence) Aristotle in 
the ninth of his Phisiques, Chapter 10. had testified. The 
wise Philosopher Mercury Trimisgistus in his Dialogue intituled 
Asclepius, saith; that all that which descendeth from 
heauen is generatiue; if then in respect of vs the influence of 
heauen be generatiue (as in truth it is): for as Aristotle saith, 
Sol & homo generant homine~) it cannot any waies be possible 
that it can corrupt or cause the confusion of mankinde. The 
like also is confirmed by Proclus, (who interpreteth vpon 
Platoes booke de Anima & Demone,) The Celestiall bodies 
(saith he) by a soueraigne harmony containe all thinges in 
themselues, and perfect them, and conforme them among 
themselues: and to the vniuers, If then it appeareth that the 
Celectiall bodies perfect all things, and both confirme & conserue 
them, (as in truth they doo, and this Author witnesseth) 
how can these engender contagion and infection in vs, which 
abolishe our perfection and integritie, and destroy vs by 
rauishing our liues? To speake truth, as me seemeth it were 
a thing impossible. For it is contrary to the nature of contagion, 
that it should descend from heauen, because contagion is 
no other thing but an infection proceeding from one vnto an 
other by communication of a pestilent and infected vapour, 
and by this meanes if the Plague and contagion proceeded 
from the starres, it should necessarily follow by the definition 
of contagion, that the starres were primarily or formerly infected, 
if by their influence they should send a pernicious contagion 
among vs. But this in no sort may be graunted, because 
[^f.C2r^] 
the starres by being Celestiall bodies, pure, diuine, and 
estranged from all corruption, receiuing and containing no 
infection in them, being no materiall bodies apt to transmutation 
or chaunge, (as Aristotle and Auerrois in his Booke de 
Cælo est mundo, doo learnedly alledge) cannot be capable of infection 
or contagion, neyther communicate it to the inferior 
bodies. Let vs therefore cast off this vaine and sottish opinion 
whereby we are induced to beleeue that the Plague proceedeth 
from the heauens: that is to say, from the influence of 
the starres, (as by the vanitie of time we haue had inducements.) 
But let vs confesse that it proceedeth from the secret 
iudgements of God, who intendeth by this scourge to whip 
vs for our sinnes, as it appeareth in Leuiticus, and Deuteronomy 
To conclude, we say that the cause of the Plague 
is a malignant alteration and corruption of the ayre infecting 
our bodies, as it hath bene declared in 
the beginning of this Chapter. 
 
[^f.C2v^] 
[}CHAP. III. 
Of the signes of the Plague, both impendent and present, 
with the good and euil signes appearing in pestiferous 
sicknesses.}] 
 
THe signes whereby a man may know the infection 
of the aire which threatneth vs with 
Pestilent sicknesses, are, when as we see the 
same continuall and accustomably troubled 
with thicke, cloudy, moyst, and ill smelling 
vapours, the Skie vnaccustomed to Northren 
windes, but sollicited with Southerly blastes; The 
aire full of fogges and vapours, making a showe of raine 
without any showers: For such signes as are of that nature 
engender corrupt Feuours, as Aristotle saith in his Probleames. 
If the winter be hote and moyst, and obserue not 
his naturall temperature, and when the Spring time is very 
dry without raine, and notwithstanding colde, and after 
for many dayes charged with Southerly windes, troubled 
aire, and then cleare, and afterwards suddainly ouercast, 
the nights colde, and the day very hotte and soultry, 
It signifieth that we shall haue an euil Plague the Sommer 
after. Moreouer, if at that time there appeare any increase 
of such creatures as are engendred of putrifaction, as wormes 
of the earth, flies, gnattes, eales, serpents, toades, frogs, and 
such like foretokening corruptio~ and putrifaction in the earth 
and waters, and when the aire the same day chaungeth from 
faire to foule, and from cleare to cloudy, when the Sunne shineth 
and afterwards hideth his head in cloudes, in one and 
the same day, it is a signe that the temperature of the aire is 
altered. And when as Rats, Moules, and other creatures, (accustomed 
to liue vnder ground) forsake their holes and habitations, 
it is a token of corruption in the same, by reason that 
such sorts of creatures forsake their wonted places of aboade. 
And when as the Birds of the aire fall downe dead, or forsake 
[^f.C3r^] 
their nests, it is a signe of great corruption and contagion in 
the same. Long and continuall raines, accompanied with 
Southerly windes, dispose the ayre to sicknesses and putrifaction, 
as Hipocrates, and Galen testifie in their Epidemies. 
When as Feuers are accompanied with small Poxe, or Mesels, 
with spots, or red markes like to the biting of Fleas, it is 
a signe of a pestilent Feuer. When the sicke is very much 
tormented with the passion of the heart, vomitings, soundings, 
or weaknes, or faintnes of the hart, without great outward but 
vehement inward both heate and drought, with appearance of 
swellings, botches, carbuncles, and Mesels, without all question 
he is seized with a pestilential Feuer, especially if diuers 
at the same time and in the same place are attainted with the 
same griefe: and if so be the partie which is infected hath frequented 
places both contagious and infected. See heere the 
the principall signes of the Plague and pestilentiall Feuer. 
The euill, dangerous, and mortall signes in such as are diseased, 
are feeblenes and weaknes of the regitiue vertue of the body 
(which may be discouered by the pulse when it is weake, vnequall, 
disorderly, languishing and intermittent, by often Sincopes 
or soundings, alienation, and frenzie, blewnesse and 
blacknesse appearing about the sores and carbuncles, and 
after their appearances the sodaine vanishings of the same, 
cold in the extreame partes, and intollerable heate in the inward. 
vnquenchable thirst, co~tinually soundings, vrines white 
and crude, or red, troubled and blacke: Colde swet about the 
forehead and face; crampes, blacknesse in the excrements of 
the body, stench, and blewnes, the flux of the belly, with weaknesse 
of the heart, shortnes of breath, and great stench of the 
same, lacke of sleepe, and appetite to eate, profound sleepe, 
chaunging of colour in the face, exchaunged to palenesse, blacknesse, 
or blewnesse, cogitation or great vnquietnes. All these 
signes betoken either certaine death or daunger thereof in the 
Plague; euen as contrariwise the contrary foretoken recouery 
of the sicknesse, by reason they testifie vpon the regitiue 
power and vertue of the bodie, goodnesse of the complexion, 
[^f.C3v^] 
and vertue of the same, with strength of y=e= hart. For as Auicen 
sayth: They that are manly, and confidently beare out their 
sicknesse without any showe of feare, they are those which 
for the most part escape. Likewise to haue a good appetite 
to sleepe in repose, without disturbance of the body, it is a good 
signe. The Botches, and Carbuncles to retaine a good colour, 
and without great paine to be brought to ripenesse and supponation, 
to haue a moderate heate mayntained through all the 
body: The vrines, in disgestion, colour, substance, & contents, 
to be good: To haue easie breathing, swet warme, & vniuersall 
through all the body, appearing on a decretory or criticall day. 
All these signes appearing in the infected person, giue great 
hope of his recouery. These bee the signes and tokens by 
which you may gather a sure and vnfained iudgement of that 
which shall befall him that is attainted with the Plague. 
 
[}CHAP. IIII. 
A Rule and instruction to preserue such as be in health, 
from the infection.}] 
 
WHen as (by the will of GOD) the contagion of the 
Plague is gotten into any place, Citie, or Countrey; 
we ought to haue an especiall regard of the generall 
good, and by all meanes to study for their preseruation who 
are in health, least they fall into such inconueniencie. First 
of all, therefore it behooueth euery man to haue speciall care 
that he frequent not any places or persons infected, neither 
that hee suffer such to breath vpon him: but as Galen hath 
learnedly aduised, in his Booke De Differentiis Erebrium, 
Chap. 2. Estrange himselfe as farre as him lyeth, from their 
societie. The first and chiefest remedie then, is to chaunge 
the place, flie farre and returne late: Hipocrates, likewise in 
his Booke De Natura humana, saith: that wee ought to forsake 
the place whereas a generall sicknesse rangeth, according 
to the common Prouerbe, Cito, longe, tarde. And if necessitie 
constraineth vs to frequent the infected, (either to be assistant 
to our friends, or otherwise:) euery man ought to demeane 
[^f.C4r^] 
himself in such sort that the sick mans breath doo not attaint 
him: which may very easily be done, if a man haue y=e= skill 
to choose & take the winde that properly bloweth towards the 
sicke & infected, and not from the infected to the healthfull: And 
therefore in that case the healthfull ought to keepe themselues 
vnder, not ouer the winde. The first part of preseruation, is 
to purifie and purge the ayre from all euill vapours, sentes, 
stench, corruption, putrifaction, and euill qualitie. For which 
cause, it is necessary to make good fumes in our houses, of sweet 
and wholesome wood, as Rosemarie, Iuniper, and Lawrell, 
or Bayes, and to perfume the whole house and chambers with 
the fume of Rosemary, Iuniper, the parings of Apples, Storax, 
Beniamin, Incence, dried Roses, Lauender, and such like, 
both Euening and Morning. It is not amisse likewise at euery 
corner of the street, (at least twise in the week) to make cleare 
and quicke Bonefires to consume the malignant vapours of 
the ayre, according as Acron the great Phisitian, commaunded 
to be done during the mortall plague in Greece: As Paulus 
Ægineta testifieth in his second Booke, Chap. 35. It is 
good also to weare sweet sauors and perfumes about vs, such 
as in Winter time, are Marcorame, Rosemarie, Storax, 
Beniamin, or to make a Pomander after this sort that ensueth, 
and to weare it about vs to smell too vpon all opertunities. 
Take of the flowers of red Roses, of Violets, of Buglos, 
of each halfe a little handfull, of the three Sanders, 
of each a Dramme; of the rootes of Angelica, Gentian, 
and Zedoary, of each foure scruples; of white Encens, 
Cloues, Nutmegs, Calamus, Aromaticus, of each a dram, 
of Storax, Calumit, and red Beniamin, of each a dramme and 
a halfe, of orientall Muske a scruple, of Amber-greece halfe 
a scruple, of Ladaum infused in Rose-water one ounce, 
mixe all these together in Rose-water where in the Gum 
Dragacanth hath beene infused, and with a little of Rose-vinegar 
make a paste, of which you may forme certaine 
rounde Pomanders, to weare about your necke, and 
smell vnto continually. Or take of Rose-water three ounces, 
[^f.C4v^] 
of white Vinegar, of Roses .ii. ounces, of white Wine, or pure 
Malmosie two spoonfuls, of the powder of Cloues, of the roots 
of Angelica and Storax of each halfe a dramme, mixe them 
all together, and with this liquor it shall not be amisse to wash 
your hands, bedeaw your forehead & nostrils, and the pulces of 
your armes, for such an odour and of so wholesome a qualitie, 
vehemently repulceth the venome that assaileth the heart, and 
altereth the pestilence of the ayre. It shall not be amisse likewise 
to carrie an Angelica roote in your mouth, or a Gentian 
or Zedoary roote, or else the rine of an Orange, Lemon, or 
Pomecitron, which as Auicen testifieth haue soueraine effects 
in this case. The continual vses of these good odors comforteth 
the heart and vitall spirites, driueth away all venemous 
vapours, and rectifieth the ayre that whirleth about 
vs, as Auicen testifieth in his Booke, Of the Forces of the 
Heart. For which cause, they which desire the continuance 
of their health, ought neuer to be vnprouided of these things. 
Amongst all other medicines that haue the propertie to comfort 
and reioyce the heart, the Easterne Hyacinth, beeing 
worne about the brest, and next vnto the naked skin, or else 
held in the mouth is very effectuall, as Auicen testifieth, in 
his Booke, Of the Forces of the Heart, (in that Chapter 
wherein hee entreateth of the Hyacinth,) where hee saith: 
that the sayd Stone hath not only a propertie to fortifie the 
heart, and quicken the vitall spirites, but also to resist all venomes. 
For which I aduise all such as haue both meanes and 
maintenance to get such a iewel, to carrie the same either in 
their mouthes, or continually about their neckes, neare 
vnto the region of their hearts, by reason of that excellent 
propertie which all Authors by 
vniforme consent attribute vnto 
the same. 
 
[^f.D1r^] 
[}CHAP. V. 
The meanes and preseruatiues which are to be ministred 
inwardly against the Plague.}] 
 
GAlen in his first booke of the differences 
of Feuers, and in that Chapter wherein 
he intreateth of the pestilent Feuer, 
saith: That to preserue the body from 
infection, it shall be very necessarie to 
clense and purifie the same from al corruptions 
and superfluities, by fit purgations, 
and to take away these oppilations, and stoppings, 
which are the meanes that naturall heat cannot bee 
dispersed, & to dry the body from humidities, and to maintaine 
such bodyes as are drie in their Estates. In imitation 
of whose opinion and direction, it shall be good to euacuat and 
expell those superfluities of humours, which abound according 
to there natures, age, complexion, vertue, quantitie and 
qualitie, who are forced with the same superfluous humours. 
It is therefore note worthy, in suspected and dangerous times 
that no accustomed euacuations either by fluxe of Hemeroides, 
or of the belly, old vlcers, menstruall blood, itches, or such 
like should be restrained. For those purgations which are of 
this kinde doo clense the vnnecessary humours, and by this 
meanes maketh the body healthfull, whereas such humours 
being either repressed by astringent medicines or such like 
ointments, might greatly hurt the principall members, and 
produce strange sicknesses in the same. And for this cause, Galen, 
and Hipocrates write: That it is a good signe when as 
any defluxion is expelled, from the inward and principall 
parts of the body: where contrariwise, if the same be transported 
from the outward to the inward parts, if is a most 
euil and sinister signe. For which cause in the Plague time 
it is the surest way, rather to suffer those superfluities to haue 
their course, then to stop or stay them by any medecine: because 
by the voydance thereof, the body is purged from the same 
[^f.D1v^] 
superfluities which being retained might wonderful annoy it. 
Which counsaile of theirs, may serue for an aduertisement to 
all those that shall be so disposed and affected in the time of the 
Plague. It behooueth therefore such as be Sanguine, full in 
loue, and youthfull in yeares, to be let blood after a competent 
manner, thereby to diminish their replexion and aboundance 
of blood. Those that are chollerique, ought to be purged with 
an infusion of Rubarb; if they be wealthy: and if poore, with 
the Electuary of the iuice of Roses, by taking three Drammes, 
or halfe an ounce thereof in Sorrell, Endiue, or Purslane water, 
or else by Diacatholium, Diaprunis, Laxatiue, the sirope 
of Roses, Cassia, or the pilles of Rubarb, Fometorie, or those 
that for their gentle working are called (by the Phisitians) Aureæ. 
The Flegmatique, ought to be purged with Agaric, 
Diaphenicon, Diacarthami, the pils Aggregatine, Cochiæ, 
according to the strength of their bodyes, the qualitie of the humor 
which are offensiue, at the discreton of the learned & experienced 
Phisitians, by whose directions and prescriptions such 
medecines are to be ministred, & not according to the custome 
of this time, by foolish Idiotes and ignorant Emperiques. 
Such as are melancholy should be purged with the infusion of 
Sena and Epithemum with a little Anice seede, and Diacathelicon, 
with the Confection, Hamech, Diasene, Solutiue, 
the pilles of Femitory, and Aureæ. I forbeare to call the pils, 
De cape Armeno, and Lasuli into vse, because they are too violent, 
and scarcely well prepared. Such as are weake and 
delicate persons (As woman with childe, children, and aged 
people,) it shall suffice to purge them with an ounce of Cassia, 
extracted with halfe or a whole dramme of Rubarb, or two 
ounces of Manna, or three ounces of sirope of Roses, or with 
the sirope of Sucery with Rubarb, but with this Prouiso alwayes, 
that the direction be taken from a learned and diligent 
Phisitian, and not according to the fancie of foolish chare-women, 
and ignorant practizers. To those litle children that are 
subiect to the wormes, you shal giue this pouder in the Plague 
time, which is both fit to correct the one, and expell the other, 
the vse thereof is in Purslane or Sorrel water, with one ounce 
[^f.D2r^] 
of sirope of Limons. Take Worme-seed, Citron, or Pomecitron-seed, 
of the seeds of Sorrell and Purslane, of each halfe 
a dram, of the hearbe called Scordion one scruple, of Rubarb 
a dram, of bole Armenus one scruple, make a small powder of 
all these, whereof in the aforesaid waters giue halfe a dram or 
a scruple to the child, acording to former direction. 
 
[}CHAP. VI. 
A Rule and direction, whereby, by Potions, Pils, Powders, 
Opiates, and Losenges (which are most fit, apt, and 
conuenient to preserue the body from Contagion,) the 
Plague may be preuented.}] 
 
THe Diuine prouidence of God, being carefull 
for his creatures, and the preseruation of 
mankind, hath produced many remedies to 
represse and preuent the daungerous insultes 
and assaults of y=e= Plague, or any other venemous 
contagion whatsoeuer: (which remedies 
our ancient Phisitians haue called Antidotes, that is to 
say, certaine medecines which in their nature and hidden property 
inclosed in them, are contrary vnto them, as Galen in 
ii. books of Antidotes hath learnedly declared.) Of these remedies 
I wil set down some, and those the most effectuall in this 
Chapter, as well for the rich as for the poore, whose miserie 
and distresse we ought more inwardly to releiue then the rest: 
partly because God hath especially enioyned vs no lesse, partly 
because they of the~selues haue no meanes to succour themselues, 
for which cause we are in charitie bound to relieue the~, 
as herafter shalbe proued. And of these remedies we ought to 
vse some change, to the ende, that nature making vse of one of 
them do dot dispise the vertue thereof, as Galen writeth in his 
fift booke, de Sanitate Tuenda. The body therefore being first 
of all well purged, it is good to make vse of Guidos Electuarie 
Theriacal, especiall in Winter or Autumne, namely in those 
who are of a colde and moyst complection, especially where it 
may euery waies be commodiously applyed. The Apothecaries 
either haue or may conueniently haue the Species therof 
ready prepared, of which a man may take a dra~ at once in Buglos, 
[^f.D2v^] 
or Sorrel-water, or in good White wine, or in the winter 
time with Claret wine. This powder is very effectuall 
in this case, if it be wel and faithfully dispensed, neither is the 
price ouer valued for the poore: of this powder may you make 
vse two or three dayes, either with some fit water, or else in the 
forme of Losings. This powder also which ensueth is a very 
singular remedie, which in stead of the former, and in way of 
chaunge, you may vse for two or three dayes space. Take the 
rootes of Tormentill, the rootes of Zedoary, and Angelica, 
of each a Dramme; Fine Cinamon, yellow Sanders, of the 
seedes of Citrons and Sorrell, of each a Dramme and a halfe, 
of the shauings of Iuorie, of Cardus benedictus, & the rindes 
of Citron, of each foure scruples, of bole Armenus prepared 
two Drammes, of fine Sugar as much as shall suffice: make 
thereof a very fine powder, of which those that are strong 
and in yeares may take a dram, & the yonger sort, half a dram 
in Scabious water, and Sorrell water, or in three good spoonefuls 
of good White wine. Galen, (in his second booke of Antidotes) 
setteth downe this singular remedie for the poore, 
which was made and composed by Apollonius. Take twentie 
leaues of Rew, two common Nuttes, two dried and fatte 
Figges, a little Salt, mixe all together and take euery Morning 
a morsell, and drinke a little pure White wine after: If 
any one fasting taketh this medecine, no venome may hurt 
him that day, as Galen (according to Appolonius opinion) 
testifieth, in the place afore alleaged. There is an other easie 
and excellent medecine which followeth, the which King Nicomedes 
vsed against all venome and poyson. Take of Iuniper 
berryes two Drams, of Terra Sigillata as much, make 
hereof a powder, & incorporate the same with good Honie, and 
reduce it to the forme of an Opiate, of which a man may take 
a bole or bit to the valew of ii. drams for the rich, & for the poore, 
in stead of Terra Sigillata, you may vse as much bole Armenus 
prepared. This remedy is set down by Galen, in the foresaid 
place, & is of great efficacy. The Electuary de bolo Armeno, 
also is commonly vsed, & hath no vnpleasant taste therwith. 
[^f.D3r^] 
The Pilles of Rufus also are an excellent preseruatiue against 
the Plague, which are made after this manner following: 
Take Aloes and Armoniack of each two drammes, and make 
a composition thereof with white Wine and vse the same, for 
they are of Paulus Æginetas description: but if you wil more 
properly dispence the same, leaue out the Armoniac, and in 
stead thereof, put therto a litle Saffron, according to the forme 
which ensueth, and you shall make a most excellent medicine 
to this effect. Take of Aloes washed in Rose water, one ounce 
of Mirrh and Saffron, of each two drammes, of Bole Armenus 
two drammes, make Pilles thereof with white Wine, or 
the iuice of Limons in Sommer. Of this composition you 
may forme fiue Pilles for a dramme, and take them euery 
morning. An other preseruatiue, and very profitable for the 
poore, is this that followeth. Take one or two handfuls of Sorrell, 
steepe them in a Uioll in good Rose-Wine Uineger, 
and keepe it close stopped, and in the morning when you rise, 
take three of foure leaues of the Sorrell thus steeped, and eate 
the same, for it is a profitable medicine: the reason is, because 
Sorrell by his vertue represseth the heate of the blood, and 
resisteth against all putrifaction. And if you drinke a spoonefull 
or two of the saide Uineger in the morning: Or steepe a toste 
of white bread in the same, and ouerspread it with Sugar, it 
is both comfortable and wholesome at all times: Some there 
are that vse the leaues of Rew after the same sort, but this medicine 
is not allowable but in the cold time of the yeare, and 
in such bodies as are cold and phlegmatique by reason of the 
heate thereof, Iuniper berries also being steeped in Rose Uineger 
and taken in the morning, as wonderfully profitable to 
that effect. 
 
[}These remedies which ensue are very excellent and 
appropriate for the Plague.}] 
 
[}A Pomander of excellent sent and sauour good against 
Pestilent aires.}] 
 
[^f.D3v^] 
TAke pure and sweete Ladanum, Beniamin, Storax Calamite, 
of the Trocisques of Gallia Moscata, of Cloues, 
Mace, Spikenard, the wood of Aloes, the three Saunders, 
the rootes of Orace, of eache halfe an ounce, let all these 
be beaten to a fine powder and searsed, and then incorporate 
the whole with liquide Storax, adding therevnto of Muske 
and Amber, of each a dramme, of Ciuet two drammes; make 
a paste hereof with the infection of Gumme Tragacents in 
Rose water. 
 
[}A prettie preseruatiue to be carried in a mans mouth during 
the time of infection, which procureth a sauoury 
and sweete breath.}] 
 
TAke of fine Sugar one ounce, of Orace halfe an ounce, of 
the shell of an Egge the inward skin being taken away 
halfe an ounce, put the shell of the Egge into Muske 
Rose water till it be mollified for the space of eight dayes, beat 
all these to a fine powder, and with Rose water wherin Gum 
Tracagant hath bene infused, make prettie Pellets according 
to what bignesse you please. These are very wholesome, and 
make the breath sweete, and comfort the heart inwardly, and 
are of a temperat qualitie, which you may keep in your mouth 
some three houres. 
 
[}An admirable and excellent defensatiue in forme of an 
oyntment to defend the heart in time of infection, profitable 
both for the healthy and diseased, and of admirable 
effects.}] 
 
TAke of the best Treacle you can get, or in stead thereof 
Methridate (but Treacle is the better) take I say two 
ounces. The iuice of sixe Limons mixed together, and 
put them into a litle glassed pipkin, and let them boyle therein 
till halfe the iuice be consumed. Then suffer it to coole, and afterwards 
take two drams of beaten Saffron, of Caroline and 
white Diptamy, of each two drammes, incorporate all these 
things together after they are well pounded, and bring them 
to the forme of an ointment, wherwith euery day annoint the 
[^f.D4r^] 
region of the heart vnder the left pappe, making a circle with 
the same round about the pap. Afterward take an ounce of 
Christaline & pure Arsenick, and wrap it in Gossapine Cotton 
and red Taffata, after the forme of a litle bag, carry the same 
about you, being bounde vnderneath or hard vpon your left 
pap: by this meanes each man may be assured that he shall 
not be infected, if so be he vse those inferioir remedies which I 
shal set downe and haue heretofore declared for the good of my 
Country. 
 
[}An other excellent preseruatiue against the Plague.}] 
 
TAke of the leaues of Mary-golds, which the Latines call 
Calendula, of Uerveine, Scabious and Sorrell, of each a 
handfull: of the rootes of Gentian, Zedoary, and white 
Diptamy, of each two drams, boyle them all together for two 
houres space in good and pure fountaine water, from the value 
of a quart to a pinte, adde thervnto the iuice of sixe Limons 
and as much Sugar as shal be sufficient, make a sirope hereof, 
and aromatise it with Cinamom, and take thereof euery 
morning foure or fiue spoonefulls. 
 
[}A singular water both for the healthy and diseased in the 
time of the sicknesse, whereof they may take an ounce 
euery morning with much comfort.}] 
 
TAke Ualerian, Carline, Zedoary, good Mirrhe, Bole 
Armenus, Gentian, of round Birtwoort of Aristolochia, 
of Calamus Aromaticus, of white Diptamy, Imperatoria, 
of each one ounce and a halfe: of fine Aloes two drams, 
of Saffron a scruple, beate all these to a fine powder, and afterwards 
steepe them in fiue pintes of excellently wel rectified 
spirit of Wine, and let them infuse therein sixe houres, and see 
the body wherein you put them be well luted. After the sixe 
houres be past, adde thervnto fiue pintes of good Malmessie, 
and straine the same, or rather you may leaue the simples in 
[^f.D4v^] 
the bottome and dreine it clearly and gently: Of this water 
euery morning fasting, take two or three spoonefulls, for it is 
an excellent and well approued remedy. 
 
[}Excellent Pilles against the Plague.}] 
 
Take of Aloes one ounce, of Mirrh and Saffron, of each 
three drammes, of Bole Armenus, Terra Sigillata, 
Zodoarie, white Diptamus, the rootes of Tormentil, of 
each a dramme, make Pilles of these, being all of them well 
poudered and mixed with the iuice of Mary goldes or redde 
Coleworts, or which, euery day take one, and once euery moneth 
a dramme. 
 
[}An excellent and approued remedie allowed by diuers 
learned mens experience.}] 
 
TAke the rootes of Tormentil, and of white Diptamus, 
the rootes of Ualerian, and white Daises (and if it be possible 
to get them greene it shal be the better:) Take these 
aboue named rootes, as much of the one as of the other, pound 
them and make a fine pouder of them: Then take the decoction 
of Sorrel, and let the aboue named pouder be infused in 
the same, then let it be taken out and dried in the Sunne; Afterwards 
beate it to pouder againe, and infuse it anew, and 
afterwards dry it in the Sunne as before: which when you 
haue done three or foure times, reserue the same pouder clearly 
in some conuenient vessell, and when as any one feeleth 
himselfe strooken with the Plague, giue him presently halfe 
an ounce of this pouder in Rose water, or Scabious water, 
or in nine houres after he shall feele himselfe infected. This 
remedy in diuers persons and very oftentimes hath bene experimented, 
and hath wrought wonderfull effects, if it were 
giuen within the time prescribed. 
 
[^f.E1r^] 
[}A singular and secret Remedie the which I receiued from 
a worthy man of Venice, admirable for his learning in 
all Sciences, who of curtesie imparted the same vnto 
me, with protestation that he had seene wonderfull effects 
of the same.}] 
 
Take of the Rootes of Tormentil and white Diptamy, as 
much of the one as of the other, of Bole Armenus washt 
in Rose water, the quantitie of a great Chestnut, of orientall 
Pearles one dramme: of the sharings of Iuory one 
dramme and a halfe, beate all these into a fine powder, and 
incorporate them with conserue of Roses in a marble Morter, 
reserue this confection in a vessell of glasse well couered. Take 
hereof the quantitie of a great Nut in the morning, and 
drinke a spoonefull of the Iuice of Mary-golds or Lemons 
with Sugar after it. The Gentleman that gaue me this, 
assured mee that hee had giuen it to many in the time of 
the great Plague in Venice, who though continually conuersant 
in the houses of those that were infected, receiued no 
infection or preiudice by them. A Remedie worthy the vse 
and noting. 
 
[}An Opiate against the Plague, extracted partly out of 
Galen, partly out of Discorides, and others of excellent 
effect.}] 
 
TAke twentie common Nuttes, of dried Figges, to the 
number of 15. and of Rue and Scabious, of each twentie 
leaues: Of the rootes of both sorts of Aristolochia, the 
round and long, of each halfe an ounce, of Tormentil, white 
Diptamy, Pimpernell, Bay Berries, Borage flowers, the 
Rinde of the roote of Capres, of each two drammes & a halfe: 
of Galingale, Harts horne, Mace and Mirrhe, of each two 
drammes: of Bole Armenus, Terra Sigillata, common Salt, 
of each two scruples, beat all these to fine pouder, and incorporate 
them with two pound of pure clarified Hony, and make 
an Opiate therof: wherof in the morning take the quantitie of 
a Nut, and drinke thereafter a litle white Rose Uinegre and 
Rose water, and you shall find this medicine very effectuall. 
 
[^f.E1v^] 
[}A perfume for to aire the Chamber of him that is infected, 
correcting the venemous aire.}] 
 
TAke blacke Pitch, Rosin, white Frankincence, of each 
sixe ounces, of Mirrhe foure ounces, of the wood of Aloes 
halfe a dramme, of Storax and Beniamin, of eache a 
dramme, of Iuniper berries, and the leaues of Rosemary, of 
each two drammes, make a grosse powder of these, and in a 
Chafingdish and coates cast of the same & perfume the Chamber. 
 
[}A powder of great vertue against the Plague, which 
was sent by Philip King of Spaine, to Charles the 
ninth King of France, in the yeare 1564. when as 
almost the whole kingdome of France was infected 
with the Plague.}] 
 
Take chosen and perfect Mirrhe, the wood of Aloes, Terra 
Sigillata, of Bole of Armenia prepared, of Mace, 
Cloues, and Saffron, of each an ounce, beat them to a 
fine powder, of which you may take a dramme in Rose water, 
or the iuice of Limons in sommer, and in winter with good 
wine. This powder was sent to the King and Queenes Maiestie 
for a soueraine remedy. Valleriola in his third booke of 
his Phisicall obseruations the first Enarration, setteth downe 
a composition to this effect, taken out of the best Authors in 
Phisicke, especially out of Galen, Paulus, Ægineta, Diascorides, 
and Auicen, according to this forme following. 
 
Take of the best Bole of Armenia one ounce, or perfect Cinamom 
halfe an ounce, of the rootes of the hearbe called in Latin 
and Greeke Pentaphillon, or else Tormentil, of each halfe 
an ounce, of the roote of Gentian three drammes, of the rootes 
of both the sorts of Aristolochia the round and long, of the 
rootes of Florentine Lillies, of each two drammes, of the rootes 
of Enula, Campana, three drammes, of the dried rinde of Oranges 
or Pomecytrons (which is farre better and more effectual) 
[^f.E2r^] 
three drammes, of Pomecyfron seeds, or in stead therof 
Orange or Limon, of Tornep seede, and Sorrel seede, of each 
two drammes. Of Iuniper berries, Cloues, Mace, Nutmegs, 
Zeboary and Angelica, of each two drammes, of the leaues of 
Rosemary, Sage, Rew, Bittony, and Chama Pilis, of each a 
dramme, of Bay-berries, Saffron, Masticke, Frankinsence, 
the shauings of Iuory, orient Pearles, white, red, and yealow, 
Saunders, of each a dramme, of the flowers of red Roses, of 
Uiolets, of water Lillies and Buglosse, of each two drammes: 
let all these be beaten to a fine powder and with clarified Hony, 
or the iuice of Limons, make an Opiate thereof. The dose 
of the powder to those that are in health is a dramme for preseruation: 
and in those that are sick two drammes, with Scabious 
or Rose water in sommer, and with good wine in winter, 
and if a man desire to have it in an Opiate, he may well 
take halfe an ounce. 
 
[}A soueraine and excellent Remedie taken 
out of Alexis.}] 
 
TAke Iuie berries of the oake in their full maturitie, (gathered 
if it be possible in such places as are Northward) 
dry them in the shadow, and afterwards keepe them in a 
boxe or leather Sachell, and reserue them for an especiall Remedy, 
and when you would make vse thereof, you shall giue 
of this pouder to those that are infected to the value of a dram, 
as much as will couer a French Crowne, mixe this powder 
with good white wine, and let the Patient drinke thereof, and 
couer him wel in his bed, that he may sweat so long as he may 
endure, and afterwards cause him to change his shirt, sheetes, 
and bed, if it be possible. And by experience it will profite, for 
proofe wherof the Author produceth maruellous effects of this 
medicine, especially of a Millanors being at Allep in Siria, 
who witnesseth that he tooke this medicine, and that sodainly 
the Carbuncle or Botch brake. And this was in the yeare 
1523. 
 
[^f.E2v^] 
[}The Almaines and Flemmings in the time of the Plague, 
vse this Remedie that ensueth.}] 
 
TAke one part of Aqua Uita of the best, three partes of 
Malmesie, or other pure wine, of Iuniper Berries halfe 
a handfull, or of common Nuttes three or foure, these [^ORIG. BLURRED^] 
they steepe in the abouesaid Liquour three houres, and afterwards 
eate them morning and euening. This Remedie in 
old folkes & in the winter time is not to be misliked: Treacle 
and Methridate, are excellent remedies in the Plague time, 
if you take a dramme in sommer time in Rose water, or Sorrell 
water, and in winter two with good Wine. But those that take 
the same ought to abstaine from meate for the space of sixe 
houres after: and to suppe little or nothing at all the day before: 
for otherwise the saide medicines takes no effect. 
 
See here the most soueraigne and exquisite remedies that 
may be found to preserue those that are in health, as well the 
rich as the poore in this contagious time, which interchangeably 
upon all opportunities a man may vse. But aboue all 
things it is behoueful to keepe a good diet & order euery waies, 
and to see the body soluble, for that it is one of the most principall 
points to preserue & continue the body in health. But amo~gst 
those things that are most necessary & requisit towards 
the continuance and preseruation of heath, and auoydance of 
contagion, nothing is more to be respected then sobrietie and 
an orderly course of life: for continence is the mother & fostresse 
of all good disposition in mans body, by reason that by sobrietie 
the health is confirmed and continued in his estate; the humors 
are well tempered, and naturall heate fortified, the naturall 
passages of the body entertained in their due harmony, 
the operations of nature euery one in themselues well and 
duly accomplished: and by these reasons sobrietie is the foundation 
to warrantise the body from all euils: as contrariwise, 
intemperance is the source and and originall of all mishap and 
fatall infirmitie. All which is confirmed by Hypocrates and 
[^f.E3r^] 
Galen, in the second booke Of the Aphorismes: Aphorisme, 
17. and Hipocrates himselfe in the sixt of his Epidemies, 
where he saith, That the chiefest care that is to be had for to 
continue health, consisteth principally in this: to liue soberly, 
to vse conuenient exercise, and not to gorge a mans self 
with surfets. The like also is confirmed by Galen and Plutarch, 
in their writings and Bookes, De Sanitate Tuenda, 
wherein the error & folly of the common sort appeareth most 
manifestly, who dare in the time of infection and pestilence, 
to ouercharge themselues with wine, and fill their stomackes 
in the morning before they goe out of doores, thinking by this 
time to coniure the time, (according to their lewd discourse) 
and abate the euill vapour of the ayre, whereas in effect, they 
effect nothing but the contrarie. For wine being taken fasting, 
maketh the body more apt to conceiue iufection through 
the heate thereof, and the piercing qualitie and opening it, causeth 
in the parts & vessels of the body, namely the vaines and 
arteries, making the~ by these meanes more capable to receiue 
the euill influence of the ayre, if any raigne at that time. Let 
therefore all men be curious to obserue this commendable sobriety, 
if they be desirous to auoyd the dangers of the Plague, 
by forbearing al diuersities of meats, and surceasing to fil their 
stomackes with vnmeasurable repastes, and let them feede soberly, 
and no more then is needfull to sustaine life, obseruing 
a temperate exercise in pleasant and delightfull places. Let 
them leade their life in peace, and quiet in minde, in ioy, disport 
and honest pleasure, auoyding all perturbations of the 
spirit, and especially sadnesse, melancholy, wrath, feare, and 
suspect; which are the most daungerous accedents that may 
encounter a man in such like times: as Galen in his Booke, 
(Of the Art of Medecine) hath written, and of this kinde of 
temperate life, I wil make a particular discourse in the Chapter 
ensewing, to the ende that euery one may vnderstand 
what meanes he ought to obserue, in the maintenance of his 
health by good diet and order. 
 
[^f.E3v^] 
[}Chap. VII 
A briefe Methode and rule of life, how to perserue the 
healthfull in time of sicknesse.}] 
 
THE Principall meanes to continue a 
man in health, consisteth in an orderly 
obseruation of diet, elections of meate, 
measure and opportunitie in receiuing 
the same, and in the quantitie and qualitie 
thereof, (which shall be the argument 
of this present Chapter.) It is therefore 
especially to be considered and prouided, 
in this cause, that the body abound not in superfluities and excrements, 
which may yeelde matter and foode to putrifaction 
and contagion in humours, which may no better wayes bee 
performed, but by a good regiment in life. Men that are curious 
of their healt, will take heede of all immoderate repletion 
of meates, and in suspected times diuersitie of meates is to 
be eschewed, leaste the stomacke should bee ouercharged 
thereby, by which meanes diuersities of humours 
may be ingendred; but it behooueth a man to feede of one only 
dishe or two, that in qualitie and nourishment may be conformable 
to his nature. He ought likewise to be ware in these 
times of such meats as may easily putrifie in the stomack, such 
as ye_[^ORIG. BLURRED^]ld but grosse nourishment, and breed oppilation and ocstruction 
that heate the blood and humours, and make them 
vicious and sharpe. Of this sort are salt meates, Porke, Beefe, 
Scalions, Colewortes, Garlike, Onions, Spice, Mustard, 
old Cheese, such Fish as are caught in standing Pooles and 
Marshes: strong, hote, hie and troubled wines. Such meates 
as are conuenient, are of delicate flesh and easily digested, as 
Capon, Chickens, yong Pullets, the broth whereof doth rectifie 
and temper the humours of the body, as Mesue testifieth. 
Also the flesh of Ueale, Kid, or yong Mutton are allewed, and 
the birds of the field, such as are Partridges, yong Pigeons, 
Turtells and such like are to be admitted. And in the broth of 
such like things, you ought to seeth Sorrel, Purslane, Borage, 
and Marigoldes, which according to Alexander Benedictus 
[^f.E4r^] 
in his Treatise of the Plague, is an excellent medecine. The 
iuice of Sorrell likewise and sowre Grapes are allowed, and 
Oranges, and Limons with Sugar are not amisse, in the iuice 
whereof you may dip your meat or bread at your meales, and 
such like. Rose vineger in this time is commended. As for all 
bakt meats (as Pasries or such like are forbidden,) both for the 
gluttonous substance that is in them, as for that they engender 
obstructions. Fresh and reare Eegges sod in water are of 
good nourishment. Sea fish, as the Soale, the Mullet, Gurnard 
and such like may be admitted, yet ought they not too oftentimes 
bee vsed by reason they breed humidite and waterish 
blood. Amidst the sowrer fruite, the Proyne, Straberries, and 
muscadine Peare are to be eaten, so they be taken in a little 
quantitie, as for al other fruit they may wel be omitted, because 
they fill the vaines with watrish blood, and such as easily corrupteth, 
except the Raison which is very good. In vse of wine, 
Claret and white (not fuming nor ouer hye coloured, but tempered 
with good water) are very fit to be drunke at meales and 
no otherwise. For exercise, it ought to be co~uenient and temperate 
accustomed in the morning in places delightfull and pleasant, 
in the shade in Summer-time: in Winter-time in the 
Sunne. Touching apparell, each one ought to vse decencie 
and comelinesse therein, and oftentimes to shift both woollen 
and linnen, especially in Summer, in which time if those that 
are of ability shift once a day it is not amisse. Care likewise is 
to be had, that men heat not their blood by violent trauell, but 
to vse a co~uenient rest after their repasts. It is behooueful likewise 
(as hath been said) to keepe the body soluble, so as once a 
day or twise in 21. houres, either by the benefine of nature or 
the vse of the pilles aboue mentioned the belly may be loosned, 
& the body no wayes suffered to be bound. Especially in those 
times al vse of women is forbidden. For there is not any thing 
during this contagious season more forcible to enfeeble nature, 
then such vnbridled desires which stirre and distemper the humors 
and dispose the body to receiue infection. Briefly, to liue in 
repose of spirit, in al ioy, pleasure, sport & contentation amongst 
[^f.E4v^] 
a mans friendes, comforteth heart and vitall spirits, and is in 
this time more requisite then any other things. 
 
This is the order and maner which euery one ought to obserue, 
in his manner of life in these suspected times, with this 
finall Prouiso, that the houses be kept cleane and well ayred, 
and be perfumed with water and vinegar in Summer time, 
and in winter time with perfumes, of Iuniper, Rosemarie, 
Storar, Beniamin, and such like. That the windowes thereof 
be kept open to the East, towards the shining Sunne 
and the Northren winde, shutting out all 
Southerly windes, and such as blow 
from contagious places. 
 
