[^Royal college of physicians: Certain necessary directions^] 
 
[}CERTAIN 
necessary Directions, aswell 
for the Cure of the 
Plague, as for preuenting 
the Infection; 
 
With many easie Medicines of small charge, very profitable 
to his Maiesties Subiects; 
Set downe by the Colledge of Physicians by the 
Kings MAIESTIES speciall command. 
With sundry Orders thought meet by his Maiestie, and his 
Priuie Councell, to be carefully executed for preuention 
of the Plague. 
Also certaine select Statutes commanded 
by His Maiestie to be put in execution by all 
Iustices, and other officers of the Peace 
throughout the Realme; 
Together with His Maiesties Proclamation for further 
direction therein: and a Decree in Starre-Chamber, concerning 
buildings and In-mates. 
 
Imprinted at London by ROBERT 
BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent 
MAIESTIE: And by the Assignes of 
IOHN BILL. 1636.}] 
 
[^Omitted a dedication to the justices of peace, a table of contents, a royal order for combating the plague and a dedication to the king^] 
 
[^Extract 1, ff. B3r-E4v^] 
 
[^f.B3r^] 
[}An aduice set downe by the Colledge 
of Physicians, by his MAIESTIES 
speciall Command, containing certaine necessary 
Directions, as well for the cure of the 
Plague, as for preuenting the Infection; with 
many easie Medicines of small charge, the vse 
wherof may be very profitable to his 
MAIESTIES Subiects.}] 
 
[}Doctors, Apothecaries and Chirurgions.}] 
 
THe Church Orders for prayers 
being first obserued as in 
former times, it is thought 
necessary that by the gouernment 
of the Citie there be appointed 
sixe or foure Doctors at the least, 
who may apply themselues to the cure of 
the Infected: and that these Doctors bee 
stipendiaries to the Citie for their liues: 
and that to each Doctor there be assigned 
[^f.B3v^] 
two Apothecaries and three Chirurgions, 
who are also to be stipended by the Citie, 
that so due and true care may be taken in all 
things, that the people perish not without 
help, and that the Infection spread not, 
while none take particular care to resist it, 
as in Paris, Venice, and Padua, and many other 
Cities. 
 
And if any Doctor, Apothecary or Chirurgion 
stipended by the City, shall happen to 
die in the seruice of the attendance of the 
Plague, then their widowes suruiuing 
shall haue their pensions during their 
liues. 
 
[}Men or goods from forreigne infected 
places.}] 
 
IT is likewise necessary that there bee 
care taken, that neither men nor goods 
may come from any suspected places beyond 
the seas, or in the land, without certificate 
of health, or else either to bee sent 
suddenly away, or to be put to the Pesthouse 
or some such like place for fourty daies 
(according to the custome of Italy) till the 
certainty of their soundnesse may be discouered. 
 
Two places for entertainment are to be 
prouided; one for the sound and another for 
those who are infected. 
 
[^f.B4r^] 
[}That all established good orders 
be reuiued.}] 
 
THat the Statutes and good Orders 
made and formerly published against 
common Beggers, against all manner of 
Playes, Bowling-alleys, In-mates, Tippling-houses, 
Laystalls, against the sale of 
corrupt flesh or fish may be reuiued and 
strictly executed, and that the Scauengers 
in generall, and euery particular housholder 
take care for the due and orderly 
cleansing of the streets and priuate houses, 
which will auaile much in this case. 
 
That Doggs, Catts, Conies and tame 
Pidgeons be destroyed about the Towne, 
or to be kept so sparingly that no offence 
may come by them, and that no Swine be 
permitted to range vp & down the Streets, 
as they frequently do, or rather not to keep 
any at all. 
 
It were also to bee wished that the 
Slaughter-houses were vtterly put from 
out the liberties of the City, being in themselues 
very offensiue: and that funnels in 
Church-vaults be considered of, and the 
depth of graues. 
 
[^f.B4v^] 
[}To be cautelous upon any suspition.}] 
 
IT is to be feared, because euery one desireth 
his own liberty, that none will giue 
notice of any suspition of the Plague against 
themselues; wherefore that must be 
the Ouerseers care, vpon any notice or suspition 
of Infection, by the helpe of the 
Doctors, Chirurgions, Keepers or Searchers, 
to finde out the trueth thereof, and 
so to proceed accordingly, but not to depend 
vpon the Testimony of women Searchers 
alone. 
 
[}The care to be taken when a house 
is visited.}] 
 
THat vpon the discovery of the Infection 
in any house, there bee presently 
meanes vsed to preserue the whole, aswell 
as to cure the infected. And that no sick 
person be remoued out of any house, though 
to another of his own, without notice 
thereof to be giuen to the Ouerseers, and to 
be by them approued: or if the whole be to 
be remoued, that notice be giuen to the Ouerseers 
of their remoue, and that caution 
be giuen, that they shall not wander about 
till they be found. 
 
The house that is known to be infected, 
though none be dead therein, to be shut vp, 
[^f.C1r^] 
and carefully kept watched by more trusty 
men then ordinary warders, till a time after 
the partie be well recouered, and that 
time to be fourty dayes at the least. 
 
[}Caution concerning flying into 
the Countrey.}] 
 
BEcause many masters of families, presently 
vpon the visiting of their houses 
before any be dead, flie into the Countrey to 
their friends, by which meanes the Plague 
is often carried into the countrey: That 
no man shall depart his house except it be 
to an house not inhabited, and that it be to 
an house of such distance as that he may 
conueniently trauell thither without lying 
by the way, much lesse that hee send his 
children or seruants, and this to bee done 
by the approbation of the Ouerseers vnder 
their hands. 
 
That such also as remooue into the 
Countrey before their houses bee visited, 
haue a Certificate from the Ouerseers of 
their parish, vnder their hands and seales, 
testifying that such persons were not 
visited before their remooue, that by vertue 
thereof they may the freelier trauell 
in the countrey, and be more readily entertained. 
 
That no infected person be secretly conueied 
out of any house: and in any such misdemeanour 
[^f.C1v^] 
the master of the house, both 
from which the sicke party is sent, as also 
the master of the house into which the partie 
shall be receiued without the licence of 
the Ouerseers of both parishes respectiuely, 
shall be seuerally punished at the discretion 
of the Ouerseers. 
 
Because it is likely that the better sort 
will not call to them such Doctors as are 
deputed to the Cure of the plague, vpon the 
first falling sicke of any in their houses, lest 
thereby they might draw greater infection 
vpon themselues: if therefore any house so 
vsing other Doctors shall happen to be visited, 
that then the Doctor, who shall ordinarily 
take the care of that house, shall presently 
cause notice of the said infection to be 
giuen to the Ouerseers, that care may be 
had thereof by the Physicians deputed. 
 
[}Buriall of the dead.}] 
 
THat one being dead in any house of the 
Plague, notice be giuen to the Ouerseers, 
and that the dead party be buried by 
night in priuate manner; yet not without 
the priuity of the Minister, Clerk, Bearers, 
and Constable or Ouerseers, and 
that none enter the visited house but permitted 
persons, vpon danger to be presently 
shut vp themselues, and that there be a 
visible marke set vpon the outside of the 
[^f.C2r^] 
doore, and to stand shut vp fourty dayes, 
and that there be no tolling or ringing of 
Bells at such priuate burials. 
 
[}Caution about apparell and 
housholdstuffe.}] 
 
THat no apparell nor housholdstuffe bee 
remoued or sold out of the infected 
house, for six moneths after the infection is 
ceased in the house, and that all the Brokers 
and inferiour Criers for apparell be 
restrained in that behalfe. 
 
[}Preseruatiues.}] 
 
[}Correction of the aire.}] 
 
FOr the correcting of the infectious aire, 
it were good that often Bonfires were 
made in the streets, and that sometime the 
Tower Ordnance might be shot off, as also 
that there be good fires kept in and about 
the visited houses and their neighbours. 
 
Take Rosemary dried, or Iuniper, Bayleaues 
or Frankincense: cast the same vpon 
a Chafingdish, and receiue the fume or 
smoake thereof. 
 
Also to make fires rather in pans to remoue 
about the chamber, then in chimneys, 
shall better correct the aire of the 
houses, adding a piece of old iron to the fire. 
 
[^f.C2v^] 
Take a quantity of Uineger very strong, 
and put to it some small quantity of Rosewater, 
ten branches of Rosemary, put 
them all into a bason, then take fiue or sixe 
flint stones, heated in the fire till they bee 
burning hot, cast them into the same Uineger, 
and so let the fumes be receiued from 
place to place of your house. 
 
That the house be often perfumed with 
Rue, Angelica, Gentian, Zedoary, Setwall, 
Iuniper wood or Berries burnt vpon 
embers, either simply, or they may bee 
steeped in wine vineger, and so burnt. 
 
Perfume the house and all therein with 
this: Slake Lime in Uineger, and aire the 
house therewith, burne much Tar, Rosen, 
Frankincence or Turpentine, both in the 
priuate houses, and in the Churches before 
prayers. 
 
[}By perfuming of Apparell.}] 
 
Such apparell as you shall commonly 
weare, let it be very cleane, and perfume 
it often, either with some Uirginia Cedar 
burned, or with Iuniper and if any shall 
happen to be with them that are visited, 
let such persons, as soone as they shall 
come home, shift themselues, and aire their 
clothes in open aire for a time. 
 
[}By carrying about of perfumes.}] 
 
SUch as are to go abroad, shall doe well to 
carry Rue, Angelica, or Zedoarie in 
[^f.C3r^] 
their hands to smell to; and of those they 
may chew a little in their mouthes as 
they go in the street, especially if they be 
afraid of any place. It is not good to be 
ouer-fearefull, but it cannot be but bad to 
be ouer-presumptuous and bold. 
 
Take Rue one handfull, stamp it in a 
morter, put thereto wine vineger enough 
to moisten it, mixe them well, then straine 
out the iuice, wet a piece of spunge, a toast 
of browne bread therein, tie it in a thin 
cloth, beare it about to smell to. 
 
Take the root of Angelica, beaten grosly 
the weight of six pence, of Rue and 
Wormewood, of each the weight of foure 
pence, Setwall the weight of three pence, 
bruise these, then steepe them in a little 
Wine vineger, tie them in a linnen cloth; 
which they may carry in their hands, or 
put it into a Iuniper box full of holes to 
smell to. 
 
[}Or they may vse this Pomander.}] 
 
TAke Angelica, Rue, Zedoarie, of each 
halfe a dram, Myrrhe two drams, 
Camphire sixe graines, Wax and Labdanum, 
of each two drams, more or lesse as 
shall be thought fit to mixe with the other 
things, make hereof a ball to carry about 
you: you may easily make a hole in it, and 
so weare it about your necke with a string. 
 
[}The richer sort may make vse of this 
Pomander.}] 
 
[^f.C3v^] 
TAke Citron pills, Angelica seeds, 
Zedoary, red Rose leaues, of each halfe 
a dram, yellow Sanders, Lignum Aloes, 
of each one scruple, Galliæ Moschatæ foure 
scruples, Storax, Calamit, Beuzoni, of each 
one dram, Camphire sixe graines, Labdanum 
three drams, Gum Tragaranth dissolued in 
Rose water enough to make it up into a 
Pomander, put thereto sixe drops of spirit 
of Roses, inclose it in an Iuory boxe, or 
weare it about your necke. 
 
[}By inward medicines.}] 
 
LEt none go fasting forth, euery one according 
to their fortunes, let them eat 
some such things as may resist putrefaction. 
 
Some may eat Garlick with Butter, a 
Cloue two or three, according to the ability 
of their bodies: some may eat fasting, 
some of the electuary with Figs and Rue 
hereafter expressed: some may vse London 
Treacle, the weight of eight pence in a 
morning, taking more or lesse, according 
to the age of the party; after one houre let 
them eat some other breakfast, as bread 
and Butter with some leaues of Rue or 
Sage, and in the heat of the Summer of Sorrell, 
or Wood-sorrell. 
 
[^f.C4r^] 
To steep Rue, Wormwood or Sage all 
night in their drinke, and to drinke a good 
draught in the morning fasting, is very 
wholsome, or to drinke a draught of such 
drinke after the taking of any of the preseruatiues 
will be very good. 
 
In all summer Plagues it shall be good to 
vse Sorrell sawce to be eaten in the morning 
with bread, and in the fall of the leafe 
to vse the iuyce of Barberies with bread 
also. 
 
[}By Cordialls.}] 
 
[}Mithridates medicine of Figs.}] 
 
TAke of good Figs and Walnut kirnels 
of each twenty foure, Rue picked two 
good handfulls, of Salt halfe an ounce or 
somewhat better: first stamp your Figs 
and Walnuts well together in a stone 
morter, then adde your Rue, and last of all 
your Salt, mixe them exceedingly well: 
take of this mixture euery morning fasting 
the weight of sixteene pence, to children 
and weake bodies lesse. 
 
[}Or this will be effectuall also.}] 
 
TAke twenty Walnuts, pill them, Figs 
fifteen, Rue a good handfull, Tormentill 
roots three drams, Iuniper berries 
two drams, Bole Armoniack a dram and 
a halfe. First stamp your roots, then your 
Figs and Seeds, then adde your Walnuts, 
[^f.C4v^] 
then put to your Rue and Bole; and 
with them put thereto sixe drams of London 
Treacle, and two or three spoonfuls of 
wine vineger, mixe them well in a stone 
morter, and take of this euery morning the 
quantitie of a good nutmegg fasting; they 
that haue cause to goe much abroad, may 
take as mcuh more in the euening two 
houres before supper. 
 
[}For women with childe, children, and such as 
cannot take bitter things, vse this.}] 
 
TAke conserue of red Roses, conserue of 
Wood-sorrell, of each two ounces, conserues 
of Borage, of Sage flowers, of each 
sixe drams, Bole Armoniack, shauings of 
Harts horne, Sorrell seeds, of each two 
drams, yellow or white Sanders halfe a 
dram, Saffron one scruple, Sirrupe 
of wood-sorrell, enough to make it a 
moist Electuary: mixe them well, take so 
much as a Chestnut at a time, once or twice 
a day, as you shall finde cause. 
 
[}For the richer sort.}] 
 
TAke the shauings of Harts horne, of 
Pearle, of Corall, Tormentill rootes, 
Zedoarie, true Terra Sigillata, of each one 
dram, Citron pills, yellow, white and red 
Sanders, of each halfe a dram, white Amber, 
[^f.D1r^] 
Hyacinth-stone prepared, of each two 
scruples, Bezoar stone, of the East Unicornes 
horne, of each 24. graines, Citron 
and Orange pilles canded, of each three 
drams, Lignum Aloes one scruple, white 
Sugar Candie, twice the waight of all the 
rest, mixe them well being made into a 
Dredge powder. Take the weight of 12. d. 
at a time euery morning fasting, and also 
in the euening about fiue a clocke or an 
houre before supper. 
 
With these powders and Sugar there 
may be made Lozenges, or Manus Christies, 
and with conuenient conserues they may 
be made into Electuaries. All which and 
many more for their health they may haue 
by the aduice and directions of their owne 
Physicians: or at lest Physicians will not 
bee wanting to direct them as they may 
haue need to the poore for charities sake. 
 
They may also vse Bezoar water, or 
Treacle water distilled, compounded by the 
Physicians of London, and knowne by the 
name of Aqua Theriacalis stillatitia, which 
they may vse simply; or they may mixe 
them also with all their Antidotes, as occasion 
shall require. 
 
The vse of London Treacle is good 
both to preserue from the sickenesse, as also 
to cure the sicke, being taken vpon the first 
apprehension in a greater quantitie, as to a 
man two drams, but lesse to a weake body, 
[^f.D1v^] 
or a childe, in Carduus, or Dragon water. 
 
Take of the finest cleare Aloes you can 
buy, in colour like to a liuer, and therefore 
called Hepatica, of Cinamom, of Myrrhe, 
of each of these the weight of three French 
Crownes, or of two and twentie pence of 
our money, of Cloues, Maces, Lignum 
Aloes, of Mastick, of Bole Orientall, of 
each of these halfe an ounce, mingle them 
together, and beat them into a very fine 
powder: of the which take euery morning 
fasting the weight of a groat in white wine 
delayed with water. 
 
Take a dry figge and open it, and put 
the kernell of Walnut into the same, being 
cut very small, three or foure leaues of Rue 
commonly called Herbg-race, a corne of 
Salt, then rost the Figg and eat it warme, 
fast three or foure houres after it, and vse 
this twice in the weeke. 
 
Take the powder of Tormentill, the 
weight of six pence, with Sorrell or Scabious 
water in Summer, & in the Winter 
with the water of Ualerian, or common 
drinke wherein hath beene infused the forenamed 
herbes. 
 
Or else, in one day they may take a little 
Wormewood and Ualerian with a graine 
of Salt, in an other day they may take seuen 
or eight berries of Iuniper, dried and 
put in powder, and taking the same with 
common drinke, or with drinke in which 
[^f.D2r^] 
Wormewood and Rue hath beene steeped 
all night. 
 
Also the Treacle called Diatessaroum, 
which is made but of foure things, of light 
price, easie to be had. 
 
Also the roote of Enula Campana taken in 
powder with drinke. 
 
Like wise a piece of Arras roote kept in the 
mouth as men passe in the streets. 
 
Take six leaues of Sorrell, wash them 
with water and vineger, let them lie in the 
said water and vineger a while: Then eate 
them fasting, and keepe in your mouth and 
chew now and then either Setwall or the 
roote of Angelica, or a little Cinamom, or 
foure graines of Myrrhe, or so much of rattle 
Snake roote. 
 
[}By Medicines Purgatiue.}] 
 
IT is good for preuention to keepe the bodie 
reasonable open, especially with such 
things as are easie of operation and good to 
resist putrefaction, such are these Pills 
which are vsually to be had at good Apothecaries, 
and are called Pestilentiall 
Pills. 
 
Take Aloes two ounces, Myrrhe and 
Saffron, of each an ounce, Ammoniacum 
halfe an ounce; make them up into a masse 
with the Iuice of Limons, or white wine 
vineger, to keep the body open, a small Pill 
[^f.D2v^] 
or two will be enough taken a little before 
supper, or before dinner; but to purge the 
body take the weight of a dram made into 
fiue or sixe or more Pilles in the morning 
fasting, and that day keepe your Chamber. 
 
If the Patient bee costiue and bound in 
his bodie, let him take a suppositarie made 
with a little boiled honey, and take a little fine 
powder of salt, and so taken in at the 
fundament, and kept till it mooue a 
stoole. 
 
For the poore, take Aloes the waight of 
sixe pence put in the pap of an Apple: and 
for the richer, pilles of Ruffus to be had in 
euery Apothecaries shop. 
 
Such as are tied to necessary attendance 
on the infected, as also such as liue in visited 
houses shall do well to cause issues to be 
made in their left armes or right legs, or 
both, as the doctor shall thinke fit. 
 
[}Blood letting.}] 
 
If the Patient be full of bloud and strong, 
let him be let blood vpon the Liuer veine 
in the right arme, or in the Median veine of 
the same arme (if no sore appeare.) 
 
For blood leting and strong purging 
there must bee particular directions had 
[^f.D3r^] 
from the Doctors deputed according to the 
constitution of the parties. 
 
These two last remedies of blood letting, 
and strong purgings, are to be vsed the first 
day that the Patient shall fall sick, as cause 
shall be to vse the one or the other, (no sore 
appearing) In which case, if any sore 
or spots shall appeare, they are both to bee 
forborne. 
 
[}Vomits.}] 
 
To prouoke vomit, with two ounces of 
Ranck oyle, or Walnut oyle, a spoonefull 
of the iuice of Celendine, and halfe a spoonfull 
of the iuice of Radish root or two spoonfuls 
of Oxymel of Squils, with posset drink 
and oile. 
 
[}Medicines expulsiue.}] 
 
THe poison is expelled best by sweating 
prouoked by posset ale made with Fennel 
and Marigolds in winter, and with Sorrell, 
Buglosse, and Borage in summer, with 
the which in both times they must mingle 
London treacle, the waight of two drams: 
and so to lay themselues with all quietnesse 
to sweat one halfe houre, or an houre if they 
be strong. 
 
For the cure of the Infected vpon the 
[^f.D3v^] 
first apprehension, Burre seeds, Cucheneely, 
powder of Harts horne, Citron seeds one, 
or more of them, with a few graines of 
Camphire, are good to bee giuen in Carduus 
or Dragon water, or with some 
Treacle water. 
 
Take Burre seeds and Cucheneely, of 
each halfe a dramme, or to a weak body of 
eace one scruple, Camphire fiue graines, 
mix these with two ounces of Carduus or 
Dragon water, halfe an ounce of Treacle 
water, sirrupe of Woodsorrell a spoonfull, 
mixe these, giue it the Patient warme, couer 
him to sweat, you may giue him a second 
draught after twelue houres, let him 
drinke no cold drinke, this posset drinke or 
the like will be good to giue the visited liberally. 
 
Take Wood-sorrell halfe a handfull, 
Marigold flowers halfe so much, shauings 
of Harts-horne three drams, a figge 
or two sliced, boile them well in cleare posset 
drinke, let them drinke thereof freely, you 
may put thereto a little suger. 
 
Take Citron seeds six or eight, shauings 
of Harts-horne halfe a dramme, London 
Treacke one dramme, mix them with two 
ounces of Carduus water, or with three 
ounces of the prescribed posset drinke. 
Drink it warme, and so lie to sweat. 
 
[^f.D4r^] 
Take Sorrell-water fiue or sixe spoonfuls, 
Treacle-water one spoonefull, London-Treacle 
one dramme and a halfe, mix 
them well, giue it warme, and so lay the 
Patient to sweat. 
 
Take Tormentill and Celandine rootes 
of each foure ounces, Scabious and Rue, 
of each one handfull and a halfe, Whitewine 
vineger three pints, boile these till 
one pint be wasted, straine out the liquor, 
which reserue for the vse of the Infected: 
let it be taken thus. 
 
Take of this liquor and of Carduus water, 
of each one ounce and an halfe, London 
Treacle one dramme and a halfe, Bole 
Armoniak halfe a scruple, put thereto a little 
sugar, mix them well, let the party drink 
it warme, and couer him to sweat. 
 
[}In Summer this is good.}] 
 
TAke the Iuice of wood-sorrell two ounces, 
the Iuice of Lymons one ounce, 
Diascordium one dramme, Cinamom sixe 
graines, Uineger halfe an ounce, giue it 
warme, and lay the sicke party to sweat. 
Use this in case of Fluxes of the belly, or 
want of rest. 
 
Take an Egge and make a hole in the 
top of it, Take out the white and yolke, 
[^f.D4v^] 
fill the shell with the weight of two French 
crownes of Saffron, rost the said Egge 
thus filled with Saffron vnder the Embers, 
vntill the shell begin to wax yellow. 
Then take it from the fire, and beat the 
shell and Saffron in a morter together 
with halfe a spoonefull of mustard seed. 
Take of this powder a French crowne 
waight, and as soone as you suspect your 
selfe infected, dissolue it into ten spoonefuls 
of posset Ale, and drinke it luke-warme, 
Then go to bed, and prouoke your selfe to 
sweating. 
 
[}Or, 
Take one dram of the Electuarium de Ouo.}] 
 
Take fiue or six handfuls of Sorrell that 
groweth in the field, or a greater quantitie 
according as you will distil more or lesse 
of the water thereof, and let it lie infused or 
steeped in good vineger the space of twentie 
foure houres, Then take it off, and drie it 
with a linen cloth, and put it into a limbeck, 
and distill the water thereof, and as 
soone as you finde your selfe touched with 
the sicknesse, drinke foure spoonefuls of the 
said water with a little sugar, and if you be 
able, walke vpon it untill you sweat, if not, 
keepe your bed, and being well couered prouoke 
your selfe to sweating. 
 
[^f.E1r^] 
Take of the root Butter-burre, otherwise 
called Pestilent-wort one ounce, of the 
root of great Ualerian a quarter of an 
ounce, of Sorrell an handfull, boile all 
these in a quart of water to a pinte, then 
straine it, and put thereto two spoonfulls of 
Uineger, two ounces of good Sugar, boile 
all these together vntill they be well mingled: 
let the infected drinke of this so hot as 
he may suffer it, a good draught, and if hee 
chance to cast it vp againe, let him take the 
same quantitie straightway vpon it, and 
prouoke himselfe to sweat. 
 
Or the infected may take one dram of this 
powder following. Take Sugar of Roses 
foure ounces, Ginger two ounces, Camphire 
one ounce, make these into fine powder, 
keep it made up into bals with Wine. 
 
Take of the powder of good Bay-berry, 
the huske taken away from them, before 
they be dryed, a spoonfull; let the Patient 
drinke this well mingled in a draught of 
good stale Ale or Beere, or with a draught 
of white Wine, and go to bed, and cast himselfe 
into a sweat, and forbearee sleepe. 
 
Take the inward Bark of the Ash tree 
one pound, of Walnuts with the greene 
outward shels to the number of fiftie, cut 
these small; of Scabious, of Ueruin, of 
[^f.E1v^] 
euery one a handfull of Saffron two 
drammes, powre vpon these the strongest 
vineger you can get foure pintes, let them 
a little boyle together vpon a very soft fire, 
and then stand in a very close pot well stopt 
all a night vpon the embers, after distill 
them with a soft fire, and receiue the water 
close kept. Giue vnto the Patient 
laid in bed and well couered with clothes, 
two ounces of this water to drinke, and 
let him be prouoked to sweat, and euery 
eight houres during the space of twentie 
foure houres giue him the same quantitie 
to drink. 
 
Care must bee taken in the vse of these 
sweating Cordialls, that the party infected 
sweat two or three houres, if hee haue 
strength, and sleepe not till the sweat bee 
ouer, and that he haue beene well wiped 
with warme linen, and when he hath beene 
dryed let him wash his mouth with water 
and vineger warme, and let his face and 
hands bee washed with the same: when 
these things are done, giue him a good 
draught of broath made with chicken or 
mutton with Rosemarie, Thyme, Sorrell, 
Succorie and Marigolds; or else water 
grewell, with Rosemarie and Winter-Sauorie, 
or Thyme Panado seasoned 
with veriuyce or iuice of wood-sorrell. For 
their drinke let it be small beere warmed 
[^f.E2r^] 
with a toste, or water boiled with Carraway 
seed, Carduus seed, and a crust of bread, 
or such posset drinke as is mentioned before 
in the second medicine; after some nutriment 
let them sleepe or rest often washing 
their mouth with water and vineger. 
 
These Cordials must be repeated once in 
eight, tenne or twelue houres at the furthest. 
 
If the partie infected vomit vp his medicine, 
then repeat it presently, or else giue 
him two or three spoonefuls of Uineger of 
Squils, or Oxymel of Squils with posset 
drink, and then after proceed. 
 
[}Medicines externall.}] 
 
VEsicatories applied to the armes, inside 
of the thighes, or about the bottome of 
the calfe of the leg, will draw forth the venome: 
but the vse of these requires the direction 
of the Doctors deputed. 
 
For the swelling vnder the eares, armepits, 
or in the groines, they must be alwayes 
drawen forth and ripened, and broke with 
all speed. 
 
These Tumors, and much more the Carbuncles 
and Blaines doe require the care 
and skill of the expert Chirurgion: but not 
to leaue the poorer sort destitute of good remedies, 
these following are very good. 
 
Pull off the feathers from the tailes of 
[^f.E2v^] 
liuing Cocks, Hennes, Pigeons, or Chickens, 
and holding their bills, hold them 
hard to the Botch or swelling, and so keepe 
them at that part vntill the die, and by 
this meanes draw out the poison. It is 
good to apply a cupping glasse or embers 
in a dish, with a handfull of Sorrell vpon 
the embers. 
 
[}To breake the Tumor.}] 
 
TAke a great Onion, hollow it, put into 
it a Figge, Rue cut small, and a dram 
of Uenice Treacle, put it close stopped 
in a wet paper, and roste it in the embers. 
Apply it hot vnto the Tumor, lay three or 
foure one after another, let one lie three 
houres. 
 
Scabious and Sorrell rosted in the 
embers mixt with a little strong leaven, 
and some Barrowes grease, and a little 
salt, will draw it and breake it. 
 
Take two or three rosted onions, a Lillie 
root or two rosted, a handfull of Scabious 
rosted, foure or fiue figs, a piece of 
leauen and a little Rue, stampe all these together, 
if it be too dry, put to it two ounces 
of oile of Lillies, or so much salt butter, 
make a pultesse, applie it hot, after it hath 
lien three or foure houres, take it off and 
burne it, and apply a fresh pultesse of the 
same, if it proue hard to breake, adde a little 
burnt copperasse to the pultesse. 
 
[^f.E3r^] 
[}Or this.}] 
 
TAke the flowers of Elders two handfuls, 
Rocket seed bruised one ounce, 
Pigeons dung three drams: stampe these 
together, put to them a little oile of Lillies, 
make thereof a pultesse, apply it and change 
it as you did the former. 
 
[}To draw.}] 
 
WHen it is broken, to draw it & heale 
it take the yolke of an Egge, one 
ounce of honey of Roses, Turpentine halfe 
an ounce, wheat flowre a little, London 
Treacle a dram and a halfe, mixe these wel, 
spread it vpon leather, change it twice a 
day, or take Diachylon cum Gummis. 
 
[}For the Carbuncle.}] 
 
APplie an actuall or potentiall Cautery, 
laying a defentatiue of Bole Armoniack, 
or Terra Sigillata, mixed with Uineger 
and the white of an Egge, round about the 
tumour, but not vpon it. 
 
Take three or foure Cloues of Garlick, 
Rue halfe a handfull, foure Figges, strong 
Leauen, and the Soote of a Chymney in 
which wood hath beene burnt, of each, 
[^f.E3v^] 
halfe an ounce, Mustard seed two drams, 
Salt a dram and a halfe, stampe these well 
together, and apply it hot to the sore: You 
may put thereto a little salt butter if it be 
too drie. 
 
[}Or this.}] 
 
Take leauen halfe an ounce, Radish 
rootes, the bigger the better, an ounce 
and an halfe, Mustard seed two drams, 
Onions and Garlicke rosted, of each two 
drammes and a halfe, Uenice Treacle, or 
Mithridatum, three drammes, mixe these 
in a morter, apply it hot thrice a day to the 
Sore. 
 
But these Sores cannot be well ordered 
and cured, without the personall care of a 
discreet Surgeon. 
 
Take of Scabious two handfuls, stampe 
it in a stone morter, with a pestle of stone if 
you can get any such, then put into it of 
old Swines grease salted two ounces, 
and the yolke of an egge, stampe them well 
together, and lay part of this warme to the 
Sore. 
 
Take of the leaues of Mallowes, of 
Camomyll Flowers, or either of them a 
handfull, of Linseed beaten into powder 
two ounces, boile the Mallow leaues first 
cut, and the flowers of Camomyll in faire 
water, standing about a fingers breadth: 
[^f.E4r^] 
boyle all them together, vntill all the water 
be almost spent, then put thereunto the 
Linseed, of wheat flowre halfe a handfull, 
of Swines grease, the skins taken away, 
three ounces, of oile of Lillies two ounces, 
stir them still with a sticke, and let them all 
boyle together on a soft fire without smoak, 
vntill the water be vtterly spent: beat them 
altogether in a morter vntill they bee well 
incorporated, and in feeling, smooth and 
not rough. Then take part thereof hot in a 
dish, set vpon a linen cloth, applying it to 
the sore. 
 
Take a white Onion cut in pieces, of 
fresh butter three ounces, of leauen the 
weight of twelue pence, of Mallowes one 
handfull, of Scabious, if it may be had, one 
handfull, of cloues of Garlick the weight of 
twentie pence: boyle them on the fire in sufficient 
water, and make a pultesse of it, and 
lay it warme to the sore. 
 
[}Another.}] 
 
Take two handfuls of Ualerian, three 
rootes of Danewort, an handfull of Smallage 
or Lobage. Seeth them all in Butter 
and water, and a few crums of bread, and 
make a pultesse thereof, and lay it warme to 
the sore till it breake. 
 
[^f.E4v^] 
[}Another.}] 
 
If you cannot haue these hearbes, it is 
good to lay a loafe of bread to it hot, as it 
commeth out of the Ouen (which afterward 
shall be burnt or buried in the earth) 
or the leaues of Scabious or Sorrell rosted, 
or two or three Lilly rootes, rosted vnder 
Embers, beated and applied. 
 
