

[^Sample 1: book - ^]

|P_3[^A horizontal double-line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}A 
LETTER 
OF AN 
Eminent Divine, 
TO THE 
Dispensary Physicians. }]
I Had in my Sermon discours'd, That the Creator of 
the World had given Reason to Mankind, to adapt 
the Governments and Laws to their various Circum- 
stances; as the Foods and Medicines, which are bestow'd 
on us in the greatest abundance, have been prepar'd from 
Observation and Experience, in the different Climates, for 
the Preservation of Life. All the Governments have been 
and must be prosperous, when (as all the parts of our 
Body are design'd for the common Life of the whole) the 
People shall with Courage defend the Prince, and cheer- 
fully observe the Laws; and when the Supreme and In- 
feriour Magistrates shall vigilantly preserve the Properties 
of the Subjects. The first and the greatest Property is 
Life, which demands the Preservation, by the Laws, of 
the Plenty of all things necessary to maintain it. As all 
the Parts of our Body assist the other, every Subject is 
|P_4
oblig'd to defend one the other, must repell all Assaults, 
must demand of the inferiour Magistrates their Care of the 
Publick Welfare. The happiness of Mankind is insur'd 
to us on these Conditions only, and are not lost and be- 
tray'd but by our own Follies; as our Health, by Luxu- 
ry and Excess, and our Life in Diseases by the neglect or 
unhappy application of Medicines. It is Impious to ex- 
pect Miracles to supply our Negligence of our own Pre- 
servation. The Clergy are appointed to act, as the De- 
puties of the Supreme Power, to admonish the Prince and 
the People, to exact the great mutual Duties of Justice, 
Obedience, and the Care of the Publick Prosperity. 

You will be surpriz'd, Gentlemen, how much this Dis- 
course inflam'd my Parishioners, to debate and discover 
if any Care is taken of the People in Sickness, it has from 
them recoyl'd on me, and sav'd me, as those that heard 
it. I could not visit any one Family, but I was most sen- 
sibly affected. We are the most neglected, tho' most op- 
prest People in the World. The Poor, the Servants, the 
meaner Tradesmen are undone in every Sickness. We are 
cheated for one Dram and for one Spoonful of the Reme- 
dies in a greater degree of Expence, than the Govern- 
ment formerly did, and now can and must secure to us a 
Pound and a Gallon of the best Medicines in the Uni- 
verse; and then to multiply these Frauds, we must in e- 
very Disease take the oppressive, pernicious Multitude of 
the little shamming Doses. In other Houses, Lord have 
Mercy on us! VVhat do the Magistrates think, to suffer 
every Boy setting up the Trade of an Apothecary (whose 
Skill has never been examin'd) and every Vagabond from 
Foreign Countries to impose on our Weakness by a Thou- 
sand Lyes, to undertake all the dangerous Diseases? Do 
they see and hear, that many near them are daily kill'd by 
their Ignorance of the Disease, by the Numbers of Medi- 
cines, by which only they pay themselves for their deadly 
Care and Advice? Are they insensible of all Humanity, of the 
Guilt they contract, as Accomplices? The Eternal Uni- 
|P_5
on of the Inhabitants of the Island is gloriously accom- 
plish'd, shall we be wretchedly heedless of securing the 
Union of the Soul and Body of every Inhabitant? VVe 
must imitate the excellent Discipline of the Britains of the 
Northern Part, encourage Virtue and the Publick Spirit, 
and repel the raging Libertinage and Contempt of all 
Order and the Laws destructive to all Societies. Are the 
furious Inroads and Devastations and Butcheries of the 
Borders abolish'd, and all the Professions of Religion, the 
Law and Physick without defence, laid open to the Inva- 
sions of every impudent Pretender, with the Arts only 
and Abilities to cheat and delude the People, destitute of the 
Advice and Defence of the Magistrates? The VVicked 
Physicians and Surgeons are the first and Principal Cause 
of our Miseries, they basely justify to us their wretched 
Quackery, when call'd in at the Extremity; they vainly 
labour to mend the Mistakes by contrary Methods, and 
they improve the Robbery by appointing the same endless 
quantities of the little Doses, many superfluous and neg- 
lected, many more than they use in their own Houses. 
These two Enormous Crimes (the Physicians and Surge- 
ons have almost cngross'd to themselves) deserve Death. 
The College and the Company supported by the Govern- 
ment can only save us. But there are Physicians and Sur- 
geons more Honest and Learned than our Enemies, who 
would secure us from this Robbery and Destruction, and 
preserve the College and Company to improve all the 
Members in the respective Arts and Sincerity to the Pati- 
ents, they are both assaulted by the perjur'd Perfidiousness 
of many of both the Societies. Dr. R. swears every day 
he will damn and destroy it; that there is, and shall be no 
other Physician in the Nation but himself. The largest 
part of the Physicians delude us fatally, commending the 
vile VVork the Apothecary has made, design nothing 
more in the Prescription than his Profit, ruin their own 
Profession to gain the prevalent Recommendation, the Pre- 
ference in the Apothecaries favour. There is a Surgeon 
|P_6
of the same Principles and Morals with the Bravo Doctor, 
who breaks his Company, and the Improvements and Sub- 
sistence of his Prentices, that he may be nois'd as the on- 
ly Judge and Operator. The others, by a deadly piece of 
Work they are now and then prefer'd to. What will be 
the Fate of the miserable English, when the Apothecaries 
are increas'd by two or three Prentices in all the Shops, 
when the College and Company shall be deserted, and 
our Life, and the two Professions shall be destitute of the 
Care of the Magistrate? 

You know, Gentlemen, I came lately to my Prefer- 
ment here from the University; we have the same Usage 
in Oxford and Cambridge. The Professors are insensible, 
that the Faculty is invaded, almost ruin'd. Do they in- 
struct the Students in the faithful and learned Practice, to 
preserve the Patients and the Profession together? I ob- 
serve the Outlyers affront the College, refuse to unite 
with it, betray it and themselves, and the Sick, to the 
Apothecaries Encroachments. Alarm'd with these Out- 
rages, I demanded of many of the Apothecaries Physici- 
ans, how long they intended to cultivate and increase the 
fraudulent and pernicious Practice? They reply'd with 
great Impudence, as long as the People cannot discover it, 
as long as we must live by it. We own, that the Gen- 
try and People are us'd by us in the most filthy man- 
ners. We shall be call'd Scavengers and Reformers, if we 
use them otherwise. We have no other ways to come 
into Business, but yielding all the Diseases to the Apothe- 
caries, 'till Danger or Death appear; we must complement 
the Choice of us to mend the matter, by extolling their 
great Skill and Care, and by writing two or three Guineas 
a Day of the small Doses, let the Case be what it will. We 
will not risque those our only Fees and Reputation, to 
save the Kingdom. Many Surgeons assur'd me, their 
Case was the same, and oblig'd me with the Information 
of the Remonstrances of your College, which they said, 
assert Surgery as well as Physick, sold at the Crane in St. 
|P_7
Paul's Church-yard, to which no Physician or Surgeon had 
dar'd to reply, which will amply instruct you, how great, 
how many are the Calamities of the Sick, from our Trea- 
cheries to them. The most infamous of both heartily 
wish, the Government would chastise and reform us; 
but who will call on the Magistrate, who do not know 
their own Losses, and Pains, and Danger, and are stupi- 
fied by the numberless Forgeries of the Apostate Physici- 
ans and Surgeons, united with the innumerable Apotheca- 
ries their Masters, and the Governours of the Families? 

Your College Discourses have no other Design, but 
the Preservation of the Royal Family, the Nobility, Gen- 
try and People, by the sincere and learn'd Practice. The 
Dispensary Poem, writ at the Request, and by the Instru- 
ctions of the President, and the Majority of the Society, 
avows the detestable Knavery, and the most certain great- 
est Ignorance of the Physicians, as well of the Medicines, 
as Diseases. The Surgeons must be in the same Circum- 
stances with you. 

On Saturday Morning, a great part of my Parish, of 
the Church and Dissenters, fill'd my Parlour. I observ'd a 
Paleness, but a resolv'd Air in all their Faces, as in the Al- 
lies pushing the French at Ramillies. Their Onset on the 
English, who neglect the Laws, their Property and Life, 
and the perfidious Physicians and Surgeons, more cruel 
Enemies than the most raging Tyrant, was as brave, and 
will gain the Victory. Their Language, I perceive, was 
taken from your Treatises, which they had read, and of- 
ten seriously debated: The Proofs of every Article are 
publish'd in them. 

We cry out to you for Justice, and our natural and le- 
gal Right, the Punishment and Reformation of the most 
impious Practisers, who betray the only possible Improve- 
ment of the young Physicians and Surgeons, who com- 
bine with the Apothecaries to have us forc'd to take their 
illegal, unexamin'd, unlicens'd Advice, by the insuffera- 
ble Payments for the Medicines; we are compell'd to 
|P_8
hazard and lose our Life, imploying them from the intole- 
rable Expence, and kill the Growth of the Knowledge of 
the two Professions. You inform'd us from the Pulpit, 
that Providence is not, and cannot be deficient in the Pro- 
vision of the greatest Plenty of all the Necessaries to pre- 
serve Mankind. The Magistrate is the Steward, and 
must keep open those Magazines of Bread, the Foods, and 
all the other necessary Supports, and invite us to enjoy our 
Shares of the vast Abundance. Our Government has for- 
merly appointed the general Medicines of common and 
most frequent Use, to be sold for our Relief, which are 
all of the cheapest Values: In the last Age, every Fami- 
ly knew all those Medicines, how to divide or mix them; 
what were the low Prices of each. This Privilege is now 
sacredly preserv'd in the other Parts of Europe. We now 
are undone, we are plunder'd by the scandalous Exacti- 
ons of one Hundred Parts more than the just common 
Rates. We have together warily examin'd all the Parti- 
culars; we avow, the Remedies are in the small Portions 
of their Doses cheaper than Bread, and the common Nou- 
rishments. Our vile Physicians and Surgeons are the 
Contrivers or Abettors of the Cheats of the little Doses, in- 
stead of the larger Quantities, which they formerly or- 
der'd the Houses to buy, and to divide and mix, and use 
in the more easie Cases: we are now pillag'd by them in 
the Proportions of 40, 50, 100 to one. VVe are forc'd 
to explain it to you, by a vulgar, but most instructive 
Example. If my Physician or Surgeon advise me to take 
Old Malaga VVine, shall they permit me to send for it 
to the Vintner's, at 2 s. and 6 d. the Quart, or shall 
they add a fulsome Syrup to deceive me, to alter the 
Colour, to make it more nauseous and unwholsome? 
Contrive with the Vintner to send it in by his Boys in di- 
minutive Parcels, that the one Quart shall draw five 
Pounds out of me? Do not the Fools engage me to stick 
close to the Vintner and his Boys, and to command them 
to advise us? Since we must pay five Guineas for every 
|P_9
Quart of Malaga, we will make them save us all their 
Fees. 

They saw me trembling, I was assur'd of their Affe- 
ction, but they rush'd on me with a Rage not to be ex- 
press'd to you. I paid six Guineas for the Vulgar Bitter 
Decoction, sent in the small Glasses, and the Ingredients 
were heretofore, and may now be had for one Shilling. 
The 2d. I paid 30l. for Perle Juleps in 14 Days, when one 
of them is worth but 8 d. Then the 3d. Venice Treacle, 
Diascordium Mithridate, are very cheap in the Pound. I 
paid two Guineas every day, in a long Sickness, for the 
Dram Boles of them and the small Draught to wash them 
down. Then a 4th. the common Cordial Powders are not 
worth a Farthing a piece. I knew a poor Woman reduc'd 
to Beggary, by a Crown for every one of many of them 
every day she was sick, 'till a Charitable Physician made 
the Cure in a Week, with the Charge of one of them. 
They all join'd in one Voice and Shout, We are Mer- 
chants, we are Distillers, Druggists, we have in our long 
Services for our Masters abroad, in all the Parts of Eu- 
rope, seen the more honest, and the vastly greater Suc- 
cesses of the Physicians and Surgeons, and we know the 
low Rates of many domestick Remedies lately communi- 
cated to us by our faithful Physicians of the Dispensary 
As God is the Preserver of Men, the most Soverign Me- 
dicines must be most plentiful, growing in our own Cli- 
mates, or imported in large Quantities. Our Reason, as 
well as the College, supported by all Antiquity, and all 
the most eminent Physicians of the two last Centuries, as- 
sure us, that the Preparations must be most facil and ready, 
rational and simple, not confounded and debas'd by Con- 
fusions of Ingredients, or corrupted by long pretended 
Artifices, only to delude and rob us. But our Physicians 
and Surgeons, during the Contrivance to take away our 
Money, hazard, or take away our Life. They are not 
able to plead and defend themselves. Bezoar, the vilely 
cheap precious Stones, as they call them, the Leaf Gold, 
|P_10
are good for nothing, but being indissolvable in us, they 
do all they can to destroy us: they lie unalter'd in us, in 
the room of the most useful Medicines, we should have 
in their stead. Beside the Demonstrations of the College, 
we know, they are not Medicines, they are not us'd a- 
broad. How many Millions recover without them! VVe 
import into England but a small Parcel of Bezoar. You shall 
hear the greatest Imposture ever wounded your Ears. 
They pretend it must be in all the Boles and Juleps; all 
the Remedies are in the Bills styl'd Bezoartick. Our Ima- 
gination must be tickled by the Bill, to distinguish the 
Assault on our Money and Life. 

I could not support my Abhorrence of a Crime in all 
its Circumstances, more abominable than the Plunders on 
the Road. A Remedy must, and shall be found out.— 

They stopt me with the Acclamations of Victory, when 
the Enemy runs. We have the wicked Physicians and 
Surgeons under our Feet. Our Impeachment of them 
will require and deserve your Attention and Patience. 
Our Government, as in all Parts of Europe, commanded 
the College to appoint Medicines for the general Use. By 
this Book, the Apothecaries must prepare all the Remedies 
of their Shops. They are, as they must be, perfect Me- 
dicines, every one fully design'd to answer the several 
Purposes, without the Delay and Trouble of Mixture, 
as far as it is possible to contrive them. The Compound 
are, and must be, every one compleat in the Kind, as the 
compound Waters, Elixirs, Confections, Powders, Pills, 
Oils, Ointments, Plaisters. The Physicians and Surgeons 
have their Reward for their Advice and Fidelity to us, 
as in the Instance of the old Malaga, and are oblig'd to 
preserve to us our Right, not to impose or suffer any Fraud 
to be impos'd on us. They must report to us the Quan- 
tities of each of these publick, and our Remedies to be 
us'd. We can mix (as well as in old England, and all o- 
ther Nations) the simple, and the compound Waters, the 
Spirits, and Tinctures. We can divide their Doses, and of 
|P_11
the Confections, Pills, and Powders, &c. with the surest 
Exactness. How many Remedies are every day and 
hour now divided in our Houses, the volatile Spirits, the 
Laudanums, the Elixirs, the Rhubarb, Manna, and the 
purging Salts? Our Abilities are equal to the Boys in the 
Shop, and our Cautions to prevent any possible Errour 
more powerful than of the playful Lads. They are now 
prescrib'd by the knavish Physicians and Surgeons, in 
Mixtures of very many of them together, only to dis- 
guise them from our Knowledge, and the Price of the 
whole. They are parcel'd by their Order into many 
little shamming Doses, to extort 3 or 4 Guineas a day, 
when often we have all of them ready in the Closet, and 
the greatest Expence of them cannot be 3 or 4 Shillings. 
The Government demands, that we shall know the Mix- 
tures of the 4 or 5 Cordial Juleps, now only us'd, and the 
Uses and Doses of the publick Spirits, Tinctures, Confe- 
ctions, Pills, &c. for the common incidental Disorders of 
our Children, and Servants. All the Mystery was in- 
vented only to cheat us; we are basely told, that the 
excellent publick Remedies are good for nothing, unless 
they play the Changes on them, by mixing them every 
hour at all Hazards to blind us, that a Grain or two 
more or less of Disacordium, Crabs-Eyes, and Coral, 
would certainly kill or delay the Recovery. You must not 
now (the most God-like and ravishing Charity, and of the least 
Expence) bestow a Julep, a Confection, or a Pill, or Powder, 
on our Servants or poor Neighbours. They must be left for 
the Apothecaries to devour by the Rapine of one Hun- 
dred to one, more than we could purchase the Quantities. 
Our Poor, have by Tradition, secur'd a small part of their 
Property; they run to the Shop for a Penyworth of Sa- 
fron, of Cordial-water, of a Powder, of Mithridate. But 
their Hearts are broken, they are told they are little worth, 
if they are not shuffled with Bezoar, and the other Impo- 
stures. I was then permitted to declare my Resentment, 
that we must abjure our Religion, and throw up our Commis- 
sion, if we do not command, that the Divine Benefactions 
|P_12
of the Necessaries of Life shall be equally distributed, by de- 
nouncing from the Pulpits, and by our Admonitions of the 
Magistrates of their Guilt, the Ravages of the People, by the 
Violation of the Trust we repose in our Physicians and Sur- 
geons, and their Neglect in supporting the legal Powers of 
the College and Company, to expose and punish these Cri- 
minals. They shall be compelled to order the excellent 
Medicines without Mixture or Division, and to note the 
Prices. All the Families will gratefully receive, and soon 
be Masters of the most gainful Instructions. We are oblig'd 
by the Laws to make good all the Robberies in our Coun- 
tries, unless we can apprehend the Robber, and convict 
him. I and you are guilty of all these Devastations, if 
we do not inform our Neighbours, rouze them to join 
with the Magistrate to seize the Thieves. While I was 
speaking, my Friends, I perceiv'd, had their Breast full: 
It is nothing, they said, that we are cheated, and the Poor 
reduc'd to Misery; we are hazarded or destroy'd in every 
Sickness. These Collusive knavish Mixtures are oppres- 
sive to our Stomachs and Blood, often have no Opera- 
tion for our Relief, because the 8 or 10 perfect Medi- 
cines (which are themselves compositions) do violate and 
obstruct the just and necessary Operations of every Ingre- 
dient. You will with Difficulty support your self, when 
you hear the Injuries we receive from the perfidious Phy- 
sicians and Surgeons. A sower, fermenting, roapy, stink- 
ing, or at best, sugary and loathsome Syrup is cast into the 
Juleps, made by it most ungrateful to the Stomach, most 
corruptive of the Blood. The temperate Powders are 
heated by the Acrid, these are debas'd in their turns by 
the absorbing. The Gentle, and hot, and active Pills are 
mix'd to make a Dose, when one of the sorts was intended 
sor the occasion of the Disease or Constitution. All the 
Admirable Confections, Powders, Extracts, are jumbled 
with the corrupted, stinking, sticky Conserves, and the ab- 
hor'd Syrups, to make a fulsom, nauseated Bole, which re- 
quires the other condemn'd Mixture to wash it down; 
two Collusive Medicines sorc'd at once to oppress the mi- 
|P_13
serable Patient. Our Nature feels and judges, and in 
most Cases abhors the base Medicines. They are reje- 
cted with Abhorrence, and thrown away, and in a 
Million of Instances, Nature then soon triumphs over the 
Disease, assisted by the excellent natural Cordials, and o- 
ther Remedies of the Family, or those preserv'd from the 
Corruptions of the Mixture. Our eminent Physicians and 
Surgeons, who dare not write any one thing but for the 
Apothecary's Profit, are by Custom, train'd in directing 
only these; they cannot appoint any other, they do not 
know the Virtues and Uses of the excellent Medicines to 
be taken by themselves, as the Government, from the Col- 
lege, appoints. 

I imagin'd, the Discourse was drawing to its Conclu- 
sion. But will you, they went on, receive and believe 
the greatest Truth in the World, that the Ignorance of 
these Physicians and Surgeons, must certainly expose to De- 
struction, the Life of the Royal Family, the Nobility, Gentry 
and People? VVhen they were faithful to us, and dire- 
cted us to mix and divide the perfect publick Medicines, 
or to infuse or decoct many admirable Simples, (as the Di- 
sease or Constitution requir'd, one or two of them toge- 
ther,) they knew, with the greatest Exactness, if the Wa- 
ter, the Spirit, the Tinctures, the Powder, Pill, or Confe- 
ction, were good, or the worst in the VVorld. They 
would extol this, and fling away the other, and make us 
send to such an Apothecary for the best of his they had 
lately tasted in another House. But our vain presuming 
ignorant Physicians and Surgeons, when they now see or 
tast their foolish Mixtures (which they therefore never do) 
cannot make any Judgment, if any one of the Ingredients is 
good. As in the Tumults of the Rabble, their Numbers 
secure them from Execution. They do not know one Sim- 
ple, cannot inform us that the Rhubarb is rotten, and the 
Child will die, if he has not better; that these Flowers, and 
Seeds, and Roots, are not fit for use. All my House was 
fill'd with the Exclamations. They know nothing of any 
|P_14
one Medicine. Dr. R. has been caught a thousand times 
in his Blunders, has lost the VVagers he wanted Sence to 
avoid. The other Apostate Physicians and Surgeons, are 
upon the level with him. They are not made to learn 
them at the Universities. VVe know they are here now 
engag'd in worse Company and Entertainments. The 
Merchants, Druggists, Distillers, many other Traders, cry'd 
aloud, VVe will maintain it before the Parliament, before 
all Mankind, that without frequently applying each singly 
to their Senses, by carefully comparing and detecting the 
Differences, they shall never know a Medicine. VVe 
cannot arrive to any Skill in our Goods, but by many, and 
continual Examinations and Tryals. 

VVhen the Managers of this Part drew to the Con- 
clusion, many Merchants advanc'd to me with a Confu- 
sion and Trouble not to be describ'd. It is from this Igno- 
rance of our Physicians and Surgeons, that the Apothecaries 
dare make the most abhor'd sophisticated Medicines. Can you 
conceive, that it is commonly said, Mine has good things, 
and I pity the rest of the City. This I believe makes very 
good, and not one besides. They sell several sorts of the 
higher and lowest Prices: The VVholesale to a Retaler: 
The sweepings of the Druggist's Shop furnish the Materi- 
als. Can you conceive, that six of our chief Apothecaries were 
accus'd before the College, for making and vending the most 
frequently us'd Medicines in the safest manners; the prin- 
cipal Ingredients of many of them inhumanly detain'd from 
the Sick? The Officers of the Company had injur'd an 
Apothecary in the City; he order'd his Friends to buy 
the Remedies most usually administred. They were con- 
demn'd at the Hall by the unanimous Voice of the Venders of 
many of them. The Names of the Men and the Medicines 
are printed by the College. The Apothecary was the 
Evidence against them; the Physicians (which is the in- 
tolerable Grievance we now deplore) were not able to say 
any thing to the matter. They would, they must have 
past on any one of their Patients of the best Quality: Are 
|P_15
they not rare Cures of Dr. R's working with such Tools on 
Diseases, which are not able to destroy the Sick, when his 
Apothecary in Covent-Garden, is one of them, and his 
Apothecary in the City, has been discover'd, and there 
was a large Collection of their Poisonous VVares, which 
were not brought to that Tryal? Are not these super- 
excellent Physicians and Surgeons, who know not, who 
care not what they order unto us? As the Trade and its 
Poverty increases; as the Emulation and Necessity of 
gaining the most they can from the Badness of the Medi- 
cines, who shall ensure us, when the Advisers cannot, 
that they are not current in the Royal Chamber and the 
Nobility, as well as ours? The Rhubarb Apothecary and his 
Partners, were by the Druggist accus'd before the Commis- 
sioners of the publick Accounts, for robbing the late King, by 
the excessive Prices for the Medicines sold to him for no- 
thing, and good for nothing, and for the Murthers of 
many Thousands of the Army in the first Descent in Ire- 
land. It is printed, that they took the Oaths of the Cri- 
minals themselves, were just neither to the King, nor the 
vast Numbers barbarously destroy'd. 

I had not the Power on my Mind, my Passion made 
the Reply, The Government shall not take care of such Mon- 
strous Fools as you. You contrive your own Destruction, 
and are angry, if any one endeavours to save you. You 
will have the Apothecary come to your House, enter the 
Chamber of the Sick, when you should command him to 
the Still, the Mortar, the Scales and the Measures to deli- 
ver carefully all the quantities you want, to prevent your 
being often expos'd, often kill'd (as the College proves in 
many Particulars) by the obvious Errors of the wanton idle 
Boys. Was ever Madness thus violent and fatal as Yours? 
How long a List of the Squires can you make, who send 
for the Vintner to the Parlour, make him fill and measure 
each Glass, order the Numbers they shall take off, and 
make the Reckoning of so many Draughts at his own 
Pleasure and Occasions? Are you acquainted with the 
|P_16
Changelings, who desire the Baker and the Poulterer to 
carve and send in the Parcels they have design'd for every 
Member of the House? There are Nurses not blind and 
decrepit, who can give the Glysters, and dress the Blisters, 
and apply the Melilote, your Friends and Servants to at- 
tend. You have a Physician not far from you, examin'd 
and allow'd by the Government, as the Judge on the Cir- 
cuit, or your Minister, who makes all the necessary Ob- 
servations, attends in all the necessary Cases, and appoints 
the Divisions and Mixtures, and the just Seasons of admi- 
nistring the Medicines. Will the Apothecary discourse 
more copiously, of the most abstruse Causes and diffe- 
rences of Diseases, of the Reasons and Progress of all the 
Symptoms, on all the Energies of every Remedy, and if 
he is busy in another Place, fend his Journeyman or any 
one of his Prentices to discourse on the Affairs, nor you 
nor they can understand? A notable Writer on their side
asserts his own great Skill, and not of many more, but 
protests, That the Master and Wardens of the Company are 
not able, and are not to be trusted with the Examination 
of such Abilities as these. The Man and his Lads furnish 
the Prattle, do all the Drudgeries for the Nurses and Foot- 
men, bring the Doses, and run on the Errands, and pre- 
sent them with Cordials and Gratuities, when in Health, 
and abundance of them, when they complain. The Go- 
vernour of the House must be thrust from the Chamber, and 
the Concerns of the Life and Expence, is allow'd no freedom of 
Speech, or Vote in the Choice of the Physician or Consultation. 
When the Rout is begun, and the Ship is sinking, we will 
have the best General and Pilot of his Appointment. Tho' 
that Life is best, he shall inform the Apothecary the Methods 
and Medicines to save the next in course. I assert, that he 
must not, will not, is not able to instruct the Invader of 
his Profession. Do you know any Art or Trade which is 
Felo de se? And the General imploy'd only in Rallying 
the runaway Troops, can never project or make a glori- 
ous Campaign: Your Physician is a Stranger to the great 
|P_17
Design of repelling the Diseases at the Beginning, and of 
assisting Nature then in its greatest vigour; does he know 
the Remedies then Necessary? No; he rarely or never 
uses them. But he will communicate what he knows. 
No; he must raise so much out of the Disease for the 
Ruler of the Affair, who will not prepare with the ex- 
traordinary trouble the appropriate Remedy, when the 
Waters, &c. lie always ready in the Shop to be mixt up, 
and divided in an instant; and if our Specifick Medicine de- 
monstrates the just Application and its Efficacy, the Dis- 
ease shall vanish, before the tenth part of the Sum is rais'd. 
This is the Duty and Employment of the Physician and 
Surgeon prefer'd, as now in all your Houses, to the Ser- 
vice. And when the Apothecaries shall by their two or 
three Prentices have Eight or Ten Habitations only from 
one Shop to another, they must then, as usually at this 
time, finish as well as begin, and to advance their Repu- 
tation, and the Peoples surest Confidence in them, bring 
in to commend, extoll, and set them off, the most pre- 
par'd Knaves and Blockheads of them both. What will 
you think of that sort of Physicians and Surgeons, the 
Men of no Religion or Manners, who ply the Gentlemen 
of perpetual Surfeits and their other usual Disorders, who 
by their Banter and Atheistical Impudence extinguish in 
them all Sence of Honour and Concern sor the Publick 
Welfare, use them as their Engines of Noise and Violence 
to destroy the College and the Company, which can only 
(as Merchants in Consort, as Councils of Courts and Armies) 
raise the Improvements and Fidelity of the two Professions, 
and prompt the Madmen to cry them up, the only great 
and all-sufficient Physicians and Surgeons, against the 
strongest Evidences of their Reason and Sense. 

I saw Floods of Tears gush from the Eyes of many of 
my Friends, which oblig'd me to relieve their Trouble 
and mollify their Pain. You may be happy, as soon as you 
please . I will present you with the greatest Wisdom Mor- 
tal Man can aspire to, the most profitable Invention, its 
|P_18
Produce is equal to the Silver Mines; all our Forefathers 
were Masters of it, we have lost it by the Foolish Pursuits 
of Luxury and Pleasure, and suffered our Inheritance of 
Understanding to lie neglected and wast. Entertain your 
Physicians and Surgeons, as the Kings do, in your respe- 
ctive Proportions. You will then engage and subdue 
them by the irresistible Powers of their own Interest to ren- 
der you ten Thousand Services more than I can enume- 
rate. Suppose your only Son is seiz'd with a Fever, your 
Physician then must by all the Visits, to apprehend all the 
most Minute and most Important Observations, by his 
vigilancy to lay hold on all the occasions, by his incessant 
Perusal of his Authors and his Practice, by his Judgment 
more elaborated from the private Councils of the most 
Eminent Physicians he will address to, conclude the Cure, 
if possible, in 3, 4, or 5 days, which Millions of Events 
attest, and not permit the Disease to escape him, and run 
off to 15, 20 days, and acquire daily more violence and 
danger. Will not your Surgeon's Interest oblige him to 
the same faithful Treatment of all the Tumours and 
Wounds? They will both instruct you in the Rates and 
Divisions of all the Juleps, Powders, Confections, and in 
every Case save you a Summ more bulky and affrighting than 
the Salary. But I crave your sharpest Attention, they will 
by their Interest be necessitated to teach and inform you 
in the Uses and Applications of all the Medicines, that 
you may wisely and safely tamper with all the vulgar 
Disorders of the Family, and the most Divine Charity the 
Relief of your poor Neighbours with your Council, and the 
Medicines at no cost, which now destroy and undo them. 
VVhen the Case is more difficult, it is your Interest to re- 
commend your Physician and Surgeon to all the opportu- 
nities which shall increase their Knowledge and Experience. 
How secure will you make your selves, fortify your Minds 
with the strongest Confidence of Success, when you know 
he has cur'd 500 of the Disease, which has surpriz'd you? 
You must not object, that you must have a burnisht Phy- 
|P_19
sician, as Dr. R. or an impudent all-assuming Surgeon, as 
C. B. Your Physicians Learning shall not be glistring Tin- 
sel, as Dr. R. but have all the weight and richness of the 
Metal. If all our Knowledge is seeing the differences of 
Diseases, of their Symptoms and the Event after the use of 
the Remedies, the vain Pretenders may have more Wit 
and artful Negligence: But yours will have more Art and 
Success in proportion to the Numbers of his Patients near 
him, and the caresul Journals he has enter'd of the Course 
of their Voyage. This copious and assiduous Practice 
will make your Physician warranted to you from the 
strictest Education and Examination at the College, an 
Hippocrates, Galen, and Sydenham, furnish'd with the 
two necessary Parts of the Mixture, Integrity and Science. As 
the Princes and People fearfully depend in a dubious War, 
on the Art and Courage of the Generals and Admirals, all 
the Crown'd Heads, and the Knees of the Subjects pro- 
strate themselves, do and must bow down and bend to the 
two Professions, when under the Terrour of insulting Di- 
seases. The greatest Honours and Regards engage the 
proportion'd Zeal and Affection. They are assaulted and 
worried in no part of the Universe, as by the deluded, 
unthinking English. The Rabble only judge the Merits 
of the Victory; the Aged, the Wise and observing Gentry 
are lost, or dare not appear, and humbly offer their Judg- 
ment. The Apothecary, as the Midwife, is call'd to all 
the innumerable safe and natural Labours of the Distem- 
pers, he only saves all the Mothers and Children; but the 
Artist sent for in the insuperable Difficulties is condemn'd, 
they ply their Engines and Waters at all the Outcries 
of Fires breaking forth, the other has nothing left to at- 
tempt, but blowing up, and laying the Houses in an 
Heap of Ruines. The Rabble are accustom'd to the Numb- 
ers of Doses and irrational casting them into, and against the 
Disease. The Physician is accus'd of the Death of the Pa- 
tient, if he pretends, by Reason, and the Cautions of ruf- 
fling the natural Motions by the numberless Remedies, 
|P_20
to seize the just Informations, and prevent the fatal Effect 
of any one violently opposing the natural Designs of the 
Recovery. But, as the Mob are for fighting instantly, 
and are well contented, tho' they are beaten, if a great 
many are killed, our wretched People judge only by the 
boisterous Management, with the vast Excess of the Ran- 
dom Shots of the Medicines. If one presumes to give the 
first and the richest Cordial, the Prospect of certain Re- 
coveries, will you dare go on as you begin, let Nature 
recover it self. Dr. R. and the blustering Surgeon, take 
away all the hope of Recovery at first sight. They swear 
and damn they shall die, and some do so; but when one 
does well, we magnifie the Cure, and are infinitely pleas'd 
with the most hazardous Escape. Thus every Fever and 
Small Pox, tho' the Kind, reigning then, may be safe, must 
have every two Hours, such a Quantity of Boles and 
Draughts, &c. as the Apothecaries will have made the 
Fashion, tho' we see in a thousand Instances, many have 
their Healths restor'd by ten times fewer. The People 
will not see the Dangers they were preserv'd from, when 
an equal Proportion remains on the Table. You shall 
hear them lament, that tho' seven of the House got over 
the Small-Pox by the honest Treatment, they lost one dear 
Child, they fear had not all the Remedies could be taken. 
The judicious Physician must grievously suffer, and the 
poor Patients with him, when profuse and frequent Bleedings, 
the rudest Vomits, Cupping and Scarifying, and much Bliste- 
ring, and bloody Water and Pain shall give the grand Reputa- 
tion, as the Vulgar cry up Surgeons from cutting off a Limb, 
gashing, and letting out of a deal of Matter, and trepanning 
the Skull. I have lately been assur'd by several Physicians, 
that no Credit can be acquir'd by saving the Life of a Pa- 
tient, by preventing the deadly Symptoms, by conducting 
and supporting the natural Powers. The healthy Enter- 
tainment and Feast is rejected, and the Luxury and De- 
bauchery are the Demonstration of much Respect and Af- 
fection: tho' the Stomach and the Head terribly suffer, 
|P_21
and a dreadful Fever follows the Surfeit. The Physicians 
have compell'd me to believe them, that their Fame was 
usually advanc'd after the Patients had fall'n by the Load 
of ungrateful oppressive Doses, the World never knew be- 
fore: That they lamented from their Souls, the Calami- 
ties of the Sick, when the Dr. is every day driven on by 
the Apothecary, add vehemently drag'd forward by the 
Attendants to oppose the Life, by the half Sheet of Pre- 
scriptions in every Visit of many Doses, and to be pleas'd 
when the next Day they remain from the Sleep interve- 
ning, or the fortunate Aversion of the Patient. When we 
do not comply with the Importunities for the superfluous 
Remedies, we must trick the foolish People, with the odd 
silly Advices of an Issue on the top of the Head, or a Seton, or 
going to Bath or Turnbridge, what ever the Disease is, when 
there are very many may be used to better purpose than 
two Waters only. Shou'd you at any time discover one 
of the many Deaths, that you lost your Son by the exces- 
sive Dosing, or a little impertinent Whimsey of distin- 
guishing Advice, and cry out for Justice on the Murthe- 
rers; you must be reprimanded, that you do not consult 
the ancient Gentlemen of the oldest and wisest Observa- 
tions, that you cannot see with your own Eyes, that 
Millions of Children have saved themselves by the fierce 
Cries, and beating off, and spattering out the Boles; that 
thousands of old Men and Women had protected their 
Life to the longest Periods, by the Chamber, and Absti- 
nence, and the Dread of too many Medicines. But you 
must, with all your Power, maintain the Honour and 
Discipline of the College, which can only, by the mutual 
Improvements of the learned and faithful Practice, give 
you the great Standards to judge by. You must use your 
Reason, the Methods the Government has given you, and 
not cry out to be help'd, like the careless Child, who 
will be taken up, when he might have kept his Legs, if 
he pleas'd. If the Mirmils, Querpoes, Bards, and the Up- 
starts, have carried the Patrons daily Earnings of two or 
|P_22
three Guineas a Day, too far in most of the Diseases, and 
you can prove the Sick were grievously injur'd, or dy'd by 
the modern and growing Practice, you must appeal to the 
Censors of the College, who have publish'd them as Homicides 
and Villans. 

All the Company call'd aloud, we will oppose the Apo- 
thecaries, the Origine of all our Sufferings, and not pay 
the Bill of two or three Guineas a day, which we can 
have in the Quantities for two or three Shillings. 

I answer'd them, you will expose your Folly, and the 
Apothecary shall come off victorious in the Tryal; he 
shall have his Bill justified, tho' he sets down many Pow- 
ders daily not worth two Farthings, at 4 s. and 6 d. and 
shall have the Cost of the Suit. The Court and the Jury 
shall denounce your Sentence; we will never examine 
the Merit, the Value of any Dose. You shall be cheated 
and undone. Is the Bill 30 l. in one Fever? It shall 
pass, were it 300 l. Is it 200 l. for a Clap? You should 
pay it, were it 2000l. If most of the Boles and Draughts 
after them, we know are all worth but 2 d. rated now to 
you at 5 s. were set down at 5 l. at 50 l. you shou'd be 
forc'd to pay it; which, as their Numbers and their 
Wants improve, they will swear is the common Reck- 
oning for them. Do you trouble the Court in a revenge- 
ful Prosecution, that all the Money you can spare for 
your Health and Life, is wrested and taken from you by 
the Apothecary? The Government has appointed, that 
all these Medicines, prepar'd in the Shop, shall be bought 
in Quantities at the smallest Values, to be easily mix'd and 
divided by you. Why do you use any Physicians, that 
are not honest and just to you, do not inform you of the 
Provision of all the Necessaries of Life, your Property, 
and the obvious Skill of adapting them to the frequent 
Occasions? Are you Fools to be govern'd by the Apo- 
thecary? Are you Fools to suffer him to defraud your 
Physician? You shall be whipt with the Rods you 
prepare. Begone from the Court, and report to all you 
|P_23
know the Decree we make, that we will not be the Col- 
lege Beadles. The Law has impower'd them to restrain the 
Apothecaries from Quacking our of their Shops, and can, 
if you please to support it, deter and punish their Mem- 
bers, and prevent the Exactions and Destruction of a 
wanton Nation, proud of their Laws and Liberties they 
are always breaking. I suppose they had the dismal Re- 
membrance of the vast Yearly Payments, of the Death of 
their Children, of the Defeats in the Tryals with the Apo- 
thecaries; I heard the Shrieks, and Groans, and Gnash- 
ing of Teeth, as in the Old Baily, when the Sentence is 
pronounc'd to the Barr full of Criminals. 

I must confess to you, I sympathiz'd with them. But 
all was calm and serene in a Moment, after I had assur'd 
them, that the miserable English should not fall, as in the 
sacred History, into the Hands of Thieves, be stript and 
wounded to death by them. The Priest and the Magi- 
strate shall not pass by on the other side, regardless of 
their Calamities. You shall be restor'd to your Proper- 
ty, the Knowledge of the Prices and Uses of all the pub- 
lick Remedies the Government has presented to you. 
The Physicians and Surgeons shall not be ignorant, as 
now, if they are honestly or treacherously prepar'd, and 
pass, as it may happen, the vilest Medicine on the Sick, 
when the Life depends, in the Juncture of many Circum- 
stances, on the Dose. They shall be compell'd to learn 
the great Variety of the Simples, and not, as now, delude 
and destroy, with 30 or 40 of the general Remedies only. 
They shall not dare to confound these together in an use- 
less Mass, then to be broken into little Doses, to blind 
our Knowledge of the Values, and expose our Life. They 
shall not, with the most abhor'd Perjury, assault their 
own Societies, and deliver to the Apothecary's Ignorance, 
all the Cases which can only nourish and increase their 
Knowledge, and by the Communications, the Stock of 
Sience of the two Professions. The Sick formerly were 
expos'd in the Temples, and the Porches of their Houses, 
|P_24
to the Views and Advice of all the Spectators, we are en- 
compass'd only with the Impostures of the Apothecaries, 
the most wicked Physicians and Surgeons, without the 
Knowledge of the Goodness and Virtues of the Medicines, 
or the different Circumstances of our Diseases. We will 
implore the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, to address to the 
Fountain of Justice for the Visitation of them, and the most 
severe Inspection into the State of the Nation, the Health 
and Life of the Subjects. 

I was almost deter'd from the Pursuit of my Design, 
fearing the Nobility and Gentry would not receive the In- 
formation, and the common People boysterously rage, 
when assur'd, that their eminent Physicians and Surgeons, 
are only the Setters and Sweetners for the Apothecaries to 
pilfer them, that they have not the Learning and Abili- 
ties which will preserve them in any one very dangerous 
Disease. But then, the College asserts both in many parts 
of their Remonstrances, and our most Religious and 
most Learned K. Charles I. and the Lords of this Council, 
and all the Judges of England, did most solemnly avow, 
that, without the one Soverein Remedy, the Profession 
must be more and more corrupted to the Consumption of 
all its Virtue and Knowledge. You have try'd many Me- 
dicines without Success. Your College, and the Surge- 
ons Company, must humbly address to her Majesty, who 
derives all the Royal Virtues from your great Patron, 
K. Charles I. You will excuse me, when I urge the Ne- 
cessity of saving your Societies, and the Life of the Pub- 
lick, by the Address to her Majesty in Council, from the 
most weighty and irrefragable Reasons the College Dis- 
courses have abundantly furnish'd me with. All the Eng- 
lish Gentlemen will excuse my Confidence, my Pre- 
sumption, when I aslert, that you cannot be refus'd, that 
the College and Company shall be restor'd to their 
Dignity and Power of relieving the most opprest Peo- 
ple. That the Decree must be the same, which was made 
by that most Religious, and most Learned Prince. I 
|P_25
scorn, and defie all the Objections the deluded English
Gentlemen can invent. Are they more wise than the 
King? Have they more Honour than the Lords of the 
Council in that Reign? Is not the most profound Learn- 
ing of the Judges, at that time, admir'd in this? To come 
close to my Adversaries, your College demonstrated, that 
the Profession of Physick must be destroy'd, when the 
Apothecaries are suffer'd to intrude into the Chambers of 
the Sick, leaving their Station and Duties of preparing, 
and carefully delivering the Medicines in the Shop, hav- 
ing no Reward, but what they contrive out of the Multi- 
tude and Dearness of the Doses. Their Numbers force them 
to suggest all the Forgeries imaginable, to cry up that 
sort of Physicians, who shall fatally deceive the People, 
support their most absurd and pernicious Advices, and 
justifie and improve the Prosit from the many and dear 
Medicines. They must cry down the other sort, who shall 
caution them for the future, against the unexamin'd, il- 
literate Pretenders, and maintain the Property of the Use 
of the publick Remedies, and preserve their Knowledge of 
the small Prices of the most generous Medicines. 

His Majesty and the Council, allow'd the clearest and 
the greatest Truth. 

You then proceed to avow, that it is the greatest Folly, 
that God has not afflicted Mankind with the Permission of 
any more deadly Infatuation,. than to take an Apotheca- 
ries Judgment, in the tender or furious Begining of Di- 
seases, whose Capacity was never examin'd, to force 
him to pay himself what he pleases, 1, 2, 3 l. a Day, by 
the Number of the Doses, and the fraudulent Prices, when 
all the Parts of the Universe have observ'd, that many se- 
vere Diseases pass off by the Strength of Nature, assisted 
or not disorder'd, and that the largest Part of the Medi- 
cines of our own Growth, are, and must be of the lowest 
Rates. But that the unhappy People will easily be im- 
pos'd on by the Impostures of no Efficacies in the most 
plentiful, of the few pretended to be dear, being mix'd 
|P_26
in every thing they shall take, especially when the per- 
jur'd Physicians are ready to vouch all the Articles of the 
Forgery. 

Your College then, with a Generosity never to be pa- 
rallel'd, confess'd, that the Physicians Knowledge of Di- 
seases was almost lost; that by treacherously commending 
every Practice of the Apothecaries, they were by degrees, 
more and more neglected; that the Disease is broken from 
the natural Types every day, by the improper and hourly 
intruded Remedies, that prescribing in that Confusion of 
the genuine and unnatural Symptoms, they can never 
judge of the Disease: That their Violations of the Laws of 
Physick must destroy all the Patients, unless the natural 
Vigour is able to oppose them, and perform the Cure. 

The Physicians must lose all the Knowledge of Me- 
dicines, not able to discern the best from the most So- 
phisticate, not commend or reject the Use of them in 
the most hazardous Cases, and not distinguish the true 
Qualites and Virtues, or judge of the Operations, when 
they conspire with the Apothecaries to blend together, 
with the most fatal Inhumanity to the Sick, the perfect, 
complete Remedies, design'd to be us'd in their full 
Power, unmix'd. The Confusion of them confounds and 
breaks the Efficacy to be rely'd on. This must be 
the great Art and Mystery of the Practice to kill and ob- 
literate the Peoples Discernment of their Prices, and their 
Application of them in the more easie and frequent Di- 
stempers. The Apothecaries will insult the Physician's 
Ignorance, will affront them, if they pry into the Secrets 
of the Shop, and observe the single unmix'd Medicines 
there, will reject the Prescription, which shall give the 
unusual Trouble of Preparation, in the place of the Vul- 
gar, always ready to be clapt together, will command the 
Physicians, fearing their Displeasure, never to examine a- 
ny Qualities or Virtues of any Simple, or contrive any 
more rational Preparation, or bring to the Test, any for- 
merly or lately publish'd. They will demand in all the 
|P_27
Houses they govern, their faithful Assurance, that they 
will decry all the Improvements of the Learning in Me- 
dicines in the publick Laboratory of the College or their 
own, and report it Scandalous to reflect, what Medicines 
their Patients shall take. 

When the Physicians of more cultivated Learning and 
Experience, shall with Reluctance betray their Patients, 
the Apothecaries will select the poor and necessitous, and 
daring Impudence of the Novices, who have not had 
the Observations of Diseases or Remedies to compare and 
form a jast Judgment of. These must unite and blast 
the Physicians of long Practice and Discernment of 
the Successes of the various Methods of Cure, whose In- 
structions and Cautions can only educate and raise to 
Perfection the Crude Attempts of the Practice lately 
begun. They shall never or after the Destruction of 
many of the Sick begin to correct their Errors, and fear 
there may be more rational ways of treating the Dis- 
eases and better Medicines to be employ'd. 

His Majesty, and the Lords of the Council, and the 
Judges were pleas'd to allow the most necessary Conse- 
quences in the Art of Physick, and in all other Professions, 
and therefore determin'd to dissolve the Apothecaries 
Company, to appoint the competent Number in the 
City. The Application was prevented by the Rebellion 
breaking forth soon after. 

Your College generously imitates your Learned and pub- 
lick Spirited Predecessors: You have presented to the No- 
bility and Gentry the boldest Discovery of the Ignorance 
of the Physicians in all the Diseases and Medicines. You 
assert that the great Enquiries are no more, and by a large 
variety in the first and last Pages you endeavour to 
convince them, that the Profession (and the Surgeons cannot 
be secluded,) has no Honour or Conscience, no Design or In- 
dustry, or Ability to procure Health and Life. It will be 
unpresidented to admit Dr. R.&c. to enter their Protesta- 
|P_28
tion, when the Majority of the Society has included them,
and they can plead no Cause of Exception. 

I know our Gentlemen are proud of their Wit and Im- 
provements from Conversation, and fancy that Divinity, 
Law and Physick are learned by Rote and by the Ear, and 
in good Company. Because some useful, many very ri- 
diculous Inventions have entertain'd the Age, they ima- 
gine, that it excells all the preceding times. All before 
us were nothing to us. The French, they say, conquer'd 
the Island in the Reign of our King Henry, V. the Spani- 
ards subdued us in 88, that the Reformers of our Reli- 
on had no Learning, that the Judges and the Lawyers 
were not regarded, that they had then no Physick: That 
we are wiser than all the World beside, and have more 
Courage and Bravery, that they would conquer the French
sooner, without any Allies. Tho' our present Physici- 
ans are not instructed by the Professors in the University, 
nor by any one ever after at all wiser than themselves, tho' 
they pretend to little Study and Diligence, value them- 
selves on the general Learning, preliminary only to, and ne- 
cessary to enter all the Professions, or are very elaborate 
in Trifles nothing to their Purpose, they assume a Cha- 
racter they have no Pretence to, a Grandeur and Lustre 
to cover the Crimes, of which you accuse them. I am 
therefore oblig'd to deduce the History of Physick from 
its Original, out of your Books, and the Comments on 
them to the almost total Corruption and Death of it in 
our Age. The Records are authentick, your Observati- 
ons most just, that the noisy Admirers of the Modern Ac- 
complishments shall be forc'd to confess their Folly and 
repair the Weakness of their Understanding. 

The first Labours and Industry of Mankind were ex- 
ercis'd in discovering the Fruits, and Grains, and Fountains, 
the grateful and present Remedies of Hunger and Thirst, 
then in discovering the Caverns of Rocks, and building, 
in imitation of them, their Securities and Defences from the 
Cold and the Ravages of the Beasts of Prey, till they 
|P_29
had learnt from them to assault and destroy their own kind. 
The first Surfeits and Pains, and Fevers, Bruises and 
wounds, rais'd their most eager Affections to relieve, and 
the most unwearied Solicitudes to find the Medicines, which 
should be able in the parallel Dangers to preserve them- 
selves. The Plants they had tasted in their searches after 
Food, and had rejected from their Qualities and Vertues 
more powerfully affecting the Palate and the Stomach, 
were instantly demanded and apply'd. The natural Cra- 
vings and Instincts of the Patients were heard and regar- 
ded, the Aversions and Antipathies were most warily ob- 
serv'd and recorded. The observations of the various Suc- 
cesses were made in the view and Inquest of all the little 
Communities, and preserved for the use of Posterity. 
When the small Governments increast and multiply'd to 
Kingdoms and Empires, the Medical Knowledge of pre- 
venting and curing Diseases was proportionably extended. 
The first most populous Countries were therefore most 
famous from the Improvements of Physick, before all the o- 
ther Arts. Apollo therefore and Æsculapius were immor- 
taliz'd as the greatest Benefactors, from the great Improve- 
ments of the Science, which preserves Life: they were a- 
dor'd in their Temples, where all the Healthy and Diseas'd 
made their daily Sacrifices for their Protection and Preser- 
vation. Many of the other Deities were neglected, there 
was no City, where Æsculapius was not addrest to for his 
Inspirations and Communications of the most Sovereign 
Medicines. This alone was the Profession, which engag'd 
the most indefatigable Industry of all the Princes of both 
Sexes, of all the Nobility, of the most sagacious Popula- 
cy, till after many Ages, a great Magazine of Observati- 
ons of all Diseases, and their most prevalent Remedies had 
been collected, and the Application committed to the as- 
siduous Practisers of the Science. Can it be doubted, 
that it was in many Centuries advanc'd to the greatest 
Height and Honours, when the Patients and Observations 
innumerable had made infinite Records of all things inju- 
|P_30
rious to Health, of the unhappy and most prosperous E- 
vents of Millions of Attempts in all the different Disea- 
ses and their Symptomes. They then had from the Di- 
ctates of Nature, the good Sence the English have now lost 
and cannot recover, to desire in the first Invasions of the 
most deadly Enemies, the most celebrated and most pre- 
par'd Adviser? Navigation and Commerce communicated 
from the East and from Egypt to the Greeks, the Know- 
ledge of the differences of Diseases, the various Methods 
to attempt the Recoveries. Hippocrates is not the first Writer 
of Antiquity, he records many before him. There were 
many thousand of Discourses of Diseases, and Medicines 
to furnish his admirable Collection, and the most sublime 
Philosophy, of the Motions of our Nature, to relieve it 
self from the Violences of Diseases, and in the Progress of 
them, and of the most powerful Succours of its Allies, 
the Operations of the Medicines, as many thousand Poets 
flourish'd before Homer, who inflam'd his Emulation to 
surpass them in his Poems, which have never been imi- 
tated or equall'd. The most necessary Art was pursu'd 
with the greatest Ardour through many Ages, till Galen
in the most eloquent and learned Volumes, collected the 
Histories of all the Diseases, which can afflict us, and 
almost all the Remedies, which are able to repell them. 
Our Gentlemen will rave at my Assertion, but I assert, 
that the Genius of Antiquity (when Human Nature was 
rais'd to its greatest Elevation, when the Governments 
were secur'd by the most equal and wisest Laws, when 
the Courage and Arts of Invasion and Defence, when 
the Buildings of Magnificence and Use, the Histories, 
Poetry, Oratory, Painting, Statuary and Musick, and all 
the other Entertainments of Life surpass our just Compre- 
hension, as they explode our pretences to imitations) could 
not be wanting or defective in advancing the Profession of 
conquering the most deadly and stubborn Diseases to its 
greatest Perfection. The Gentlemen, who do not under- 
stand me, will pelt me with most terrible Objections: I 
|P_31
must in the first place request them to consider most se- 
dately and maturely the most important Affair they have 
ever examin'd and refer them to the most instructive Com- 
ments on your College Publications. There are not many 
Distempers, which are not largely treated of in the Writings 
of the Antients. But they give the most necessary, the 
infallible Rudiments, the only firm and solid Foundations, 
on which alone the Superstructure can be rais'd; all the 
different Symptomes of Diseases our Nature can be affli- 
cted with, all their necessary Consequences and Events, 
which will pass off by the Natural Efforts alone, and 
which of them require the most tender Treatments or the 
most vigorous Oppositions. As the General does not learn 
to conquer one Enemy and one Army, to besiege one 
Fortification only: Nor the Master to conduct the Ship 
into one Port, and govern it in the Storms of one Season 
of the Year. Had they great Plenty of the Medicines? 
They were Masters of the Knowledge of the Qualities 
and Preparations of all the Plants the Universe produces. 
Is a small Pittance pretended to be lately discover'd ? How 
vast a Number of theirs are known only by their Names? 
their Properties and Uses are now neglected, banish'd from 
the English Enquiries and Practice? Our People foolishly 
fond of the sufficiency of the Moderns, will be angry 
our Physicians shall be commanded to consult Hippocra- 
tes, Diascorides, Galen. They have possess'd, engrosst all the 
immense Wealth of Knowledge in their Treasury. They 
are the Originals and Master-pieces, which we must copy 
after and labour to imitate.We must obey the immutable 
Laws of Nature they have publish'd, and every Devia- 
tion from the most perfect is erroneous and absurd, and 
in the present Case fatal to Life. They were examin'd, 
approv'd, authoriz'd by all the Nations in many succee- 
ding Ages; the Diseas'd must dye, if they cannot be pro- 
tected and preserv'd by them. Shall any one conceit, that 
the Preparations of their Medicines were not then the most 
exquisite? Did they take care of their Bread and Wine 
|P_32
only? Did they exceed us in all the Incentives of Luxury 
and Debauchery, and neglect the most potent Preservers 
and Restorers of Life? Their Medicines were prepar'd in 
the greatest degrees of Perfection, not enervated or de- 
bast by the impudent Fallacy to amuse and defraud the 
Sick, not the collusive Prescripts, void of all Virtue and 
Efficacy to delude, not the raging and violent, wasting 
and consuming the Blood and Spirits they pretend to sup- 
port. The Patients had all the natural mixture of their 
Powers and Operations in the Substance, or in the Extracts, 
or the admir'd innumerable Infusions in their Wines or 
other Liquors. But the Art, as the Life it defends, after 
Maturity declines from its Beauty and Vigour. The Am- 
bition, Emulation, and rapacious Avarice of Physicians 
corrupted it. The Diseases, the most terrible, had been 
frequently cur'd, and Life extended to the longest Pe- 
riods, but in Pain, in the dreaded Dangers, the solicitude 
for a greater, for a new Medicine, more vigorous they 
fancy in the first Invention, gave the Honours to all the 
Innovations, the giddy Desertions from, and the impu- 
dent Affronts to all the established and constant Successes 
of the general Use. The Grecians and Romans were as- 
saulted by barbarous Nations, they were prevented by 
their Calamities, from debasing their Physick by the im- 
portunate Demands, and therefore indefatigable Pursuits 
of their Physicians, after the endless Novelties of Prepara- 
tions. The Prosperity of the Arabians unhappily destroy'd 
the natural sincere Practice, the Contagion from them 
spread into Europe. Our Age suspects, because the Load- 
stone was lately apply'd to direct our Navigation, that 
the Ancients had no Ships, or Commerce: because 
Printing was not long since invented, that they knew 
not the Art of Writing; that they made War with 
Clubs and Stones, for want of our Powder and Artil- 
lery. It must be repeated, as the first and greatest Point 
in the Controversie, that the Eastern Nations, the Greci- 
ans and the Romans, who excell'd the Moderns in all things 
|P_33
of Necessity and Grandeur, has all the most rational Prepara- 
tions of the Infusions and Decoctions, all the Extracts, the 
Artifices of all the Balsams and Ointments, especially the 
Externals for all the various Purposes; that they were able 
to comprehend the two first and greatest Laws of Medi- 
cine, that the Remedy, whose Qualities and Virtues have 
been examin'd, and confim'd by the Experience of repeated 
Success, must be given to the Patient without the Load 
and Incumbrance of many Ingredients of uncertain, of 
suspected, of contrary Qualities, but only to convey the 
great Specifick more pleasantly to the Palate and Stomach, 
to bribe the one, and fortifie the other, to receive the Re- 
medies for the whole Body. The other Instance of their 
Wisdom and Fidelity, demands our Gratitude and Imita- 
tion. As the Fruits must be eaten before they are dead 
and rotten; Bread, before it is dry and mouldy; Flesh, 
without Salt, and dry'd in the Smoak; when the newly 
prepar'd is most agreeable to the Taste, and Appetite, and 
Digestion. In this manner, were the Remedies then ad- 
ministred: the great Specifick, which governs the Cure, 
(by altering and reducing the observ'd vicious Intempera- 
tures of the Blood and Spirits) or instantly powder'd, late- 
ly extracted, infus'd, or decocted, the entire unevapora- 
ted Powers were presented to the Sick. But the hot and 
restless Arabians, with the parallel Folly of rejecting the 
noble Models of the Grecian Architecture, 'till they know 
the Elements of Marble; the Nature of the Cement, all 
the Qualities of the Iron Tools; with the Madness of re- 
fusing to sail, to acquire the Wisdom and Wealth of re- 
mote Nations; 'till they have disputed on, and resolv'd 
the Causes of the Winds, and of the Ebbing and Flow- 
ing of the Sea, lost the Substance for the Shadow, heated 
one another with the never-ceasing Disputes concerning 
the Causes and Modes of all the Operations of, and on the 
Humours of the Body, when the first are felt and discove- 
red by a thousand Signs, and the other are obvious to all 
our Senses. The Churchmen were more early corrupting 
|P_34
in the same manner, Religion and Morality, by their end- 
less Controversies, to adjust the plainest Truths to the 
Notions of Plato and Aristotle. But to return to the Me- 
dicines; the Arabians insulted, and affronted all the most 
faithful Observations of the great Effects of the most natu- 
ral and rational Preparations, and impos'd on their Prin- 
ces, Nobility and People, the most absurd and sophistica- 
ted, desir'd for their Novelty by the Imagination debauch'd 
by the assum'd grater Industry and Penetration of the 
Impostors. These could not be stop'd in their Career of 
Riches and Glory, to be acquir'd by the new Fashions of 
Medicines: They strove to outdo one another, vitiating 
and destroying the genuine Preparations and Mixtures of 
the Sovereign Simples, by their newly discovered simple
and compound Waters, and Conserves, and Syrups. The 
obvious Frauds of the Craft, prompted and incited their 
Dillgence, to invent many Thousand new Waters, and Con- 
serves, and Syrups. To prepare these, there must be a Le- 
gion of Apothecaries, they and the Physicians unite, in Con- 
federacy, all their Forces, to damn and decry all the ap- 
plauded Remedies: The new, tho' infinite, will not subsist 
them without Deceit, and the Artifices of mending the 
Trade. An Arabian Prince and Physician had his Army 
pester'd with another Army of Apothecaries, as numerous. 
He resolv'd to lessen their Numbers, by separating the 
Honest from the Knaves. He appointed an unintelligible 
Jargon of insignificant Words, to be publish'd as a Receit 
of a general Remedy; many Thousands undertook to 
prepare it, were detected busie in the compounding it, 
and were discarded. 'Tis now time to return to Europe, 
and England, to observe how we have been, and how we 
are treated at this time. 

