

[^Sample 1: book - ^]

|P_1[^An ornamental horizontal column. ^]
[}AN 
ESSAY 
UPON THE 
DUTIES 
OF 
Physicians and Patients, &c. }][^An ornamented horizontal line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}Olympia. Jasilla. }]
Ol.MADAM, your Servant. I 
give you Joy of your Re- 
covery, but am sorry to see 
the Enemy Master of your 
Face still. 

Ja. I thank you, Madam. I am sensible 
I owe the slow Return of my Health and my 
Complexion to Mismanagement. Had I 
took no Advice or Physick but my own, or 
my Aunt's, I had been better than ever I 
was in my Life, two Months ago: But my 
superstitious Brother could not be satisfy'd 
'till Doctors and Apothecaries were sent for. 
|P_2
The Family Receipt-Book was not worthy 
to be consulted, but every thing must be 
prescrib'd and order'd in Latin; as if the 
Vulgar Tongue were as dangerous in Phy- 
sick, as the Papists make it in Divinity. 
There was the usual Posse of Strokes crook- 
ed and streight, of Dashes, and Dots, those 
costly Characters, which, for my part, I be- 
lieve are only Show, and have no more 
Meaning or Vertue in them, than the 
Cant of a High-German Artist over the Ex- 
ercise of his Fingers. However, the Phy- 
sician and his Confectioner had their Doses 
too in their Turn out of the Scrutore; and 
so, you may be sure, I was cur'd with all the 
Deliberation and Art imaginable. If your 
Mouth waters for the Philosopher's Stone, 
you may easily find it, Madam, in a Physi- 
cian's Books, or an Apothecary's Gallipots. 

Ol. Gently, good Lady: One would 
think, by these peevish Reflections, your 
Physician had been more unfriendly than you 
represent him, and handed you out of a Fe- 
ver into a Consumption. "Such alas! is the 
Pride of human Nature, " says [/1./] a certain 
Doctor, who seems to have been well ac- 
quainted with it, that we had rather 
make forty false Steps, by following our 
|P_3
own Advice, than one true one by taking 
other People's.  Under Favour, you treat 
the Faculty ill. Their Profession is Signifi- 
cant and Honourable. The Knowledge and 
Learning it requires, are such as answer up 
to the Dignity of the Mind, and deserve an 
earnest Application. Its Object is wide 
and valuable. 'Tis the great Blessing of 
Health, of which Orpheus, in his Hymn to't, 
says, The World's an useless Mass when thou'rt 
away . And its Importance reaches farther 
still. The Business of it is not only to ma- 
nage the Mechanism, and keep Dissolution 
at Bay; but Action, Employment, and Du- 
ty, depend in a great Measure upon the 
Physician. Without him, great Part of the 
World would be lost upon us; and the 
Bounties of Providence imperfectly under- 
stood. Human Nature would not know 
the Estate she is born to. Our Bodies would 
be never the better for half the Provision God 
has made for them; and the Mind, when in- 
commoded by the Body, would often find 
herself at a Loss for a Remedy. Let me 
add, That the Considerableness of the 
Profession (as [/2./] One, that had well weigh'd 
it, observes) appears too in the Extent 
of its Jurisdiction, which takes in the 
greatest Monarchs, as well as the meanest 
|P_4
Mortals. This holds the most absolute 
Princes in Coercion. Health itself does 
not exempt them from Subjection to their 
Physicians. And indeed 'tis a Homage 
they do with Satisfaction; for they know 
if they mutiny or murmur, they shall 
smart for't.  And since, Madam, I have 
now stept into Quotation, give me leave to 
make farther Use of the Learned, and to 
communicate what my little Reading affords 
upon the Topick before us. 

Ja. Pray make the most of your Cause. 

Ol. In general; To be qualify'd (says 
[/3./]Tully) to conferr a good State of Health 
 and Habit of Body, implies a Sort of Affi- 
nity to the Divine Attributes. And [/4./] o- 
thers observe to the same Effect, that, The 
next Thing to giving Life, which is sole- 
ly in the Creator's Gift, is keeping it up 
entire, and detaining it long. I go on 
with the same [/5./] Authors; He that recovers 
a Madman, almost makes a Man of him in 
the literal Meaning. He sets a reasonable 
Being, as it were, together again. The 
Divine may thank the Physician for many 
a Penitent; If the Latter had not preser- 
|P_5
ved his Patient, the Former had miss'd of 
his Convert. A Lethargy makes a Man 
deaf to the most Pathetick Addresses; and 
the Confessor is like to do but little good 
upon one that's held in his Bed. 'Till the 
Brain and the Blood stand corrected in some 
measure, there's no room for ghostly Ad- 
vice. [/6./] Every Man owes his Parents but 
one Life, (says Erasmus) and we think it a 
great Debt; What Returns then may a 
Physician challenge at that Man's Hands, 
who stands indebted to him for seve- 
ral? He that has interposed between 
Us and Death in a Battle, and cut us out 
a Retreat, when a strong Body had shut us 
in, is such a Deliverer, as 'tis confess'd, has 
a Title to very solemn Expressions of our 
Gratitude. What does the Physician de- 
serve then, that does as much for us every 
Day? Agen; 'Till Physicians were in Busi- 
ness; 'till Distempers came to be rightly 
distinguish'd; and the Materia Medica was 
sufficiently discover'd; how many People 
dropt before their Time? And how many 
that are now living and well, had never 
been born, if the Art of bringing them 
into the World had been less understood? 
|P_6
— But I'm unwilling to try your Patience 
to the Length of my Collections. 

Ja. Let me see; have not I Authorities 
against Authorities? — My Memory is a 
short one, but I think 'tis long enough for 
my Learning..... I have a little Acquaintance 
with French Authors, and among the rest 
with Monsieur Montaigne, who, as I re- 
member, makes an Argument against you 
of his Family's Longevity. My Father (says 
he) liv'd seventy two Years, my Grandfa- 
ther sixty nine, my Great-Grandfather a- 
bout fourscore; and ne'r a one of them 
ever swallow'd a Grain of Physick. 

Ol.It may be so,  (says a [/7./] Physician 
that answers him.) Exceptions are no Rule. 
These Gentlemen, 'tis to be suppos'd, 
were Men of exemplary Temperance and 
Sobriety, true to the Interest of their Con- 
stitutions, and manag'd themselves Medi- 
cally, tho' perhaps they did not know 
so much. There are indeed Instances eve- 
ry Day, of People dying young, that have 
liv'd fast: But on the other hand, do not 
we see Valetudinarians, that observe Rules, 
and take care of themselves, reach a good 
old Age very commonly? Galen, as he 
tells us himself, brought a weak Constitu- 
tion into the World; and yet he cultiva- 
|P_7
ted and confirm'd it so effectually, that he 
was scarce ever indispos'd; and lived to 
a Hundred and forty: Tho' Suidas says 
he dy'd in his Seventieth Year; and Alber- 
tus ab Eybe, (upon whose Authority, I know 
not) in his Eighty seventh. Plato and Ari- 
stotle mention one Herodicus, that was natu- 
rally the most infirm and tender Man of his 
Time; and yet by the Benefit of Art, and 
a right Government of himself, held it out 
to a Hundred. 

Ja. The Frenchman objects, That the 
Romans had no Physicians for Six hundred 
Years; and that Cato, their celebrated 
Patriot, advis'd them to live as long as 
they could without them. 

Ol.And so they did,  (answers the Dutch- 
man) but not without Physick. There are 
scarce any Physicians in Turky, but then 
they have their Druggs and Receits, and 
certain establish'd Maxims and Measures to 
go by, both in Doctoring and Dieting 
themselves. And what, at last, was the 
Reason why the Romans and Cato were so 
averse to Physicians? Cato himself tells 
you in Pliny. It seems they had none 
among themselves, and they durst not trust 
the Greeks, because they had enter'd into a 
solemn Combination to give no Barbarian
Quarter, that fell into their Hands. Now, 
with Submission, this was not keeping out 
Physicians, but Ruffians. The Quarrel 
|P_8
was not to the Profession, but to the Men. 
They did not desire to stake Recovery a- 
gainst Ratsbane; and they were in the right 
of it. Agen; Medicine was not the only 
Thing they were uncivilized in for several 
Ages. Tully complains their Common- 
wealth had lain bare too long of other 
Parts of Knowledge and Improvements of 
the Mind, and particularly that no Philo- 
sophy had appear'd in the Roman Dress 
or Language. But now will any one in- 
ferr from hence, that Cato declar'd against 
a Profession of such Importance? If he 
will, let him consult Cato himself in Pliny, 
and there he will find, it was by Rule of 
Art he lengthened out his own and his La- 
dy's Life to such a remarkable Period. 
[/8./] Another Reason of Cato's Antipathy (says 
Erasmus) was the Austerity of his Tem- 
per, and his Partiality to his Romans. 
The Greek Physicians made too great a Fi- 
gure for him, and seem'd to reproach his 
Countrymen's unpolish'd Circumstances. 
This made him banish all Philosophy, not 
because it was not good, but because it 
was Greek. 'Tis Experience(says he) that 
consummates a Genius. All your Specu- 
lations and Hypotheses are Trifles. Phy- 
sicians and Apothecaries would soon be 
|P_9
broke, if Carduus and [/9./]Coleworts were 
more commonly used when we find a 
Foulness in the Stomach or Bowels.  You 
may perceive the Statesman was a little 
smitten with Quackery himself. Besides, 
'tis worth notice here, that we have Tully
against Cato; and perhaps, all Things consi- 
der'd, the Former's Authority may be the 
better of the Two. But not to tire you; 
I must tell you in a word, both God and 
Man, Scripture and Law, past Ages and 
present, are all in the Physician's Interest, 
and support his Pretensions. 

Ja. Don't mistake me, Madam; I am for 
Physick, Knowledge and Practice too, as 
much as any one. But I don't understand, 
why it must be the Privilege and Property 
of a few Undertakers of the other Sex. You 
are a Learned Woman, and have read a great 
deal, Madam; Pray inform me how Princes 
and Universities came by a Power of Farming 
out Philosophy. 'Tis hard, methinks, the 
Women should be made a Province thus to 
the Men in every Thing. Why must we be 
their Patients when we are sick; and only 
their Nurses when they are so? Why should 
not we, who are at so much Pains to bring 
Mankind into the World, have as good a 
Title as the best of them, to the Liberty of 
|P_10
sending some People out of it? In short, 
they are downright Pharaohs: They let us 
practise our Midwifery upon one another, 
but as soon as the Children are born, they 
take them out of our Hands. 

Ol. And give me leave to say, they would 
do us a Kindness, if they did not gratify us 
thus far. Our Privilege in this Preliminary 
has destroy'd not a few of us. I know Mo- 
desty is generally insisted on in the Case; 
especially by some Women, that are, perhaps, 
as Vain as they are Vertuous. But in my o- 
pinion, 'tis a Misapplication of the Text; 
For Modesty consists in an Abstinence from 
unlawful or indecent Pleasures, and not in 
an Affectation of unnecessary Danger or 
Pain. But not to lose Sight of our Subject; 
I perceive you are angry the Women are not 
Licentiates. You don't envy the Physician 
his Fee so much as his Figure. Your Con- 
cern is not to be, but to be thought, as 
Knowing as he is. You would have your 
Degrees without doing Exercise, and make 
a Diversion of what others find a Fatigue. 
You would leave no Distinction between 
Practice and Tampering. Briefly, the Thing 
you grasp at is the sweet Prerogative of 
Judging and Directing, without any of the 
Study and Care that qualifies the Doctor 
for his Duty, and follows him close in the 
Discharge of it. Now believe me, this is a 
very ravenous Ambition. And, by the way, 
|P_11
tho' it may begin, it seldom stops at any 
Branch of Learning, or Instance of Improve- 
ment. Quackery is an Eddy that sucks in 
every Thing. When it has swallow'd Phy- 
sick, it quickly fetches down Philosophy, 
Divinity, Law, Mathematicks, and the whole 
Flota of Arts and Professions, after it. Con- 
fess ingenuously, Madam; could you with 
any Comfort confine yourself to so narrow a 
Business as the Care and Custody of Life and 
Health? Would not the Minister's Preach- 
ing, or the Lawyer's Pleading, soon set 
your Mouth a watering agen? Could you 
bear to live, and die at last, no more than 
the Third Part of a great Scholar? 

Ja. In my Conscience, I believe not, 
now you put me in mind of it. I hate Dis- 
sembling; and therefore I tell you plainly, 
both Gospel and Law are as open to me, as 
to any of my Neighbours. It could never 
enter into my Head, that Porters of Colle- 
ges and Inns of Court lock up the whole 
Commonwealth of Letters every Night. 
No, no; Knowledge does not grow, like 
Moss, upon old Walls. I am persuaded, if 
some Women were to enter of the Univer- 
sity Incognito, they would acquit themselves 
as remarkably, in Study and Dispute, as o- 
thers have done in the Camp. 'Tis nothing 
but Prejudice and Superstition, Woman, 
that keeps us out of Play. 

|P_12
Ol. A little Logick, I confess, might do 
you no harm. You are beside the Question 
already. What we might do, if we were 
to keep up with the other Sex in Education; 
if we did not part Company at the School- 
Dame's Door; if we travel'd as many Sta- 
ges as they do, from Reading and Writing 
to Languages, from Languages to Books, 
and a Taste of Authors, from thence to an 
Imitation of them, then forward, to the 
more Olympick Exercises of Distinguishing, 
Comparing, Judging, Reasoning, and all 
these, secundum artem, as they say; and 
farther agen, to the Application of these 
to Theory, and the Accommodating of Spe- 
culation to Practice, and the Ripening of 
Practice into Experience: What we might 
do afterwards, if we went thro' all this first, 
I will not dispute. But for us to spread our 
Sails, and venture to Sea without Chart or 
Pilot, before we know how to turn a Rud- 
der, or draw a Rope; What is this, but ca- 
sting ourselves away, and all that trust us? 
Soul, Life, and Estate are too valuable Con- 
cerns to be put into the Hands of Empyricks. 
'Tis somewhat strange, that we should be 
born Graduates in all Faculties, and yet 
go to School to learn Plain-Work and Pa- 
stry. But it seems, our Heads and our 
Tongues can set themselves at Work better 
than our Fingers. 

|P_13
Ja. Supposing your Distinction to the 
purpose, (for I hate to be Positive) yet it 
will not come up to the Point. For why 
are only the Women deny'd their Birthright? 
If Nature has qualify'd us, as well as the Men, 
for the nobler Scenes and Offices of Life; 
why are we excluded? 'Tis very hard the 
Silver in our Ore should be thrown away, on- 
ly for want of Sifting. To urge Universal 
Custom and Prescription against us, is only 
to tell us the Thing is Fact, which we know 
too well already; but by no means clears 
the Merits of the Cause. 

Ol. I can tell you then, the Defendant has 
other Pleas to fill up his Answer. Remember, 
Madam,we were born Subjects as well as Wo- 
men, and the Constitution has prejudg'd us. 

Ja. What, in the free Use of our Under- 
standings? I'm for no such Arbitrary Doings. 
Belike, if there was an Act of Parliament, 
streightly charging and requiring us to go 
Blindfold, and never open our Mouths, but 
at Church or Meals; you are such a dutiful 
Daughter of the Commonwealth, that you 
would be content we should stand all the 
Days of our Lives like Statues of Fortune, 
with Mufflers upon our Eyes, and no 
Tongues in our Mouths. Now I, that 
have as great a Respect for the Legislature as 
any one, must confess, I can't be so re- 
sign'd. I shall never submit to a Salique
Law for Ignorance and Insignificancy. 

|P_14
Ol. And yet I am confident, there is not 
one Woman in five hundred, that would ex- 
change Education and Business with the 
Men. If Dressing, Dancing, Visiting, were 
put in the Balance, against Confinement, 
hard Study, and close Attendance, the 
lighter Scale would easily raise the heavier. 
If we can buy good Bargains, let other 
People stand behind the Counter. We 
can't complain of hard Usage. It costs 
the Men dear, what we purchase cheap. 
Besides, by your Argument, Madam, Com- 
munity of Callings should be a Branch of 
the Law of Nature; Mankind must never 
break Bulk; and the Grocery of the World 
would lie unretail'd. We should all be our 
own Watchmakers, Upholsterers, and Sil- 
ver-Smiths, too; and every House a Cheap- 
side, as well as an University. Your Model 
has more Absurdities yet, Madam, if you 
are inclin'd to know them. 

Ja. 'Tis pity you were not a Man, Olym- 
pia, tho' you will not allow me to be a Do- 
ctor. I own you would have made an ex- 
cellent Mountebank. You have a Volubili- 
ty, which many a Barrister and Recorder 
would be glad of. You have said luch fine 
Things in Favour of our Masters, that if 
I did not know you to be a married Lady, 
I should believe you were a waining Virgin. 

Ol. Before we part, it may be my Turn 
to rally. But 'tis a Maxim of the Schools 
|P_15
with me, never to Play till I have said my 
Lesson. If you please to give me leave, I 
will take this Opportunity to enter a little 
deeper into the Subject before us. 

Ja. Controversie carries lnfection. You 
seem dispos'd to give your Fancy a Breath- 
ing, and so am I. Begin as you please. 

Ol. With your leave, we'll return to 
what I touch'd upon before, the Nobleness 
and Importance of the Profession. And from 
this, with a little Help of that same Volu- 
bility, we shall easily slide into a short Con- 
versation about the Duties of Physicians and 
Patients. Now, as to the First, I have some- 
times made it a Question to myself, whether 
Medicine should not take place of Law. 
'Tis true, Justice and Government are Mat- 
ters of much greater Consequence than 
Health and Life; and the Last are very pre- 
carious and defenceless without the First. 
Anarchy, Rapine, and Violence, 'tis certain, 
do more Execution than the Plague. A 
Child born with Fire and Sword in the 
Room, is, in effect, an Abortion. And when 
Laws lie dead, and Riot rules, a Man has 
not so good a Chance for his Life, as Romulus, 
when he suck'd a Wolf. All this is true. But 
then we must remember, Right and Order are 
not Law itself, but the Foundation and End 
of Law. For Law, as such, is only a Hu- 
man lnstitution, Arbitrary and Reversible. 
And the Professors of it are truly call'd Ser- 
|P_16
vientes ad Legem, Servants at Law, be- 
cause they are oblig'd to follow the Directions 
of their Superiors implicitly; and in this 
respect they may be call'd State Apothecaries
too. [/10./] Then there's this farther Difference 
between the two Professions. The Law 
must light hard upon half the People, at 
least, it has to do with. Whereas Physick 
is an universal Benefactor. One Man's 
Health is not another Man's Loss. All the 
Chancery that can happen in Physick, is the 
Length of the Process. If a good Habit 
of Body were Holding, and a Man could 
be well by Acres; then, I confess, the 
Physician would be more embarrass'd and 
confin'd in his Services. But there's no 
Litigiousness in a Cure, no Suing for 
good Blood and Animal Spirits. If I ga- 
ther Flesh and Strength, 'tis not out of o- 
ther People's Muscles.  Agen; the Conse- 
quence we drive at, comes double arm'd, 
if we consider, that Redress of Wrong, and 
Suppression of Disorder, are the Business of 
the Military Men too, tho' in another Way: 
And why should not the End of their Pro- 
fession set Them as well as the Lawyers a- 
bove the Physicians? 

|P_17
Ja. Especially, considering the Odds be- 
tween a Hero's Veins, and a Clerk's lnk- 
bottle. 

Ol. And withall, what continual Fatigues 
and Hardships follow the Camp: How 
stern and rugged the Discipline, and how 
short the Pay, as well as the Service. But 
to return; the Physician's Code and Statute- 
Book is Nature. He collects his Skill, and 
compounds his Materials, on the foot of his 
own Industry, Observation, and Sagacity. 
Philosophy is no Parliamentary Establish- 
ment: And there's no such Thing as En- 
acting a Man into a Machaon. To trace the 
Nile of Life and Vigour up to the Fountain- 
Head; to unlock the Mysteries, and correct the 
Obliquities of Mechanism; to adjust the Mix- 
tures, and conduct the Motions of the Ele- 
ments; to moderate between Solids and Flu- 
ids, and keep the Parties Under; in a word, 
to preserve Harmony amongst the mutinous 
Ingredients of the Animal Frame, and re- 
duce them to an orderly Tone and Tem- 
per; especially when they've skirmish'd and 
handled one another ill: What is this, but the 
Province of Angelick Intelligences? And what 
shall we call an Order of Men, thus quali- 
fy'd and employ'd, but God's special Ope- 
rators, and the Subsitutes of Omnipotence? 
Briefly, Madam, whoever would make an 
Estimate of the Intrinsick of both Professions, 
should ask himself which is the nobler Sub- 
|P_18
ject of the two to practice upon, the Bodies 
of Men, or the Skins of Beasts. 

Ja. This Rhetorick of yours, I must 
tell you, may transport you into Inconveni- 
ences. Let me dissuade you from pursuing 
the Comparison. Sign your Will before 
you say any more of it; and reserve it for 
the last Compliment to your Doctor. 

Ol. I shall follow your Advice, and turn 
off into smoother Way. I come now to 
what I may call The Divine Right of the 
Physician. If you please, we'll consult our 
Bibles upon the Question. 

Ja. I don't apprehend you will find 
much there to your purpose, but what is 
Apochryphal. 

Ol. More, perhaps, than you imagin. The 
Author of Nature tells you out of his own 
Mouth, That they that are sick need a Physician . 
For that is plainly imply'd in the Antithe- 
sis of those Words; They that be whole, need 
not a Physician, but they that are sick . And the 
Prophet Jeremy speaks of Health, as a natural 
Consequence of the Physician's Attendance 
and Direction; Is there no Balm in Gilead? 
Is there no Physician there? Why then is not the 
Health of the Daughter of my People recover'd? 
And I'll venture to say, 'twas an Honour de- 
sign'd the Mechanical and Ordinary Means 
which God has provided, of repairing 
Strength, restoring Health, and preserving 
Life, that material Applications were some- 
|P_19
times us'd in miraculous Cures. The Prophet's 
Plaister of Figs, and our Saviour's Mixture of 
Clay and Spittle, seem to carry this Meaning. 
Just as the distinguishing Ensigns or Symbols 
of a Nation's Eminence and Honour, for in- 
stance, the Red and the White Cross, are en- 
courag'd and aggrandiz'd by the Prince's 
Wearing them. In the next place, if 
you call for the Sense of Lawgivers and 
Senates upon this Matter, you'll find 
they have conferred Reputation and Privi- 
lege very liberally upon the Faculty, subscri- 
bed to their Merit, and enscons'd them with 
Sanction. But before I bring the Cause in- 
to Court, let's enquire what Credit and E- 
steem the Profession has stood in with Pub- 
lick Bodies or Considerable Persons. 

Ja. You begin to talk formidably. 

Ol. Perhaps you'll have reason to say so 
presently. Come on then. The Egyptians
assign'd their Physicians large Salaries out 
of the Publick Stock. Herodotus tells us, 
the Doctors in this Country were distribu- 
ted into as many Classes as there were known 
Distempers; and Plutarch, that Med'cine 
was so much in Vogue among them, that 
they were one and all Physicians. 

Ja. That's what I would have else- 
where. 

Ol. Let us be as well qualify'd first. I 
proceed. The Athenians had such a Re- 
spect for this Profession, that they suffer'd 
|P_20
no Man to meddle with it, that had not his 
Freedom. The same Republick set up Hip- 
pocrates a noble Statue in his Life-time. 
Julius Cæsar Enfranchis'd all Students in 
Physick, to keep those that were already at 
Rome, from leaving it, and encourage more 
to come. Augustus, upon Antonius Musa's 
recovering him from a dangerous Fitt of 
Sickness, gave the Physicians the Privilege of 
wearing Gold Rings, which before only Se- 
nators and Knights might do. And the Ro- 
mans honour'd him with a Statue, at the 
Side of another of Esculapius, in conside- 
ration of so great a piece of Service. Darius
gave Democedes, a Captive, several noble 
Mannors for curing him, and the Honour 
too of a Place at his Table. The Faculty 
had Pensions conferr'd upon them by the 
Emperor Alexander Severus. Ptolemy made 
a Present of a Hundred Talents to Erasistra- 
tus, Aristotle's Grandson, for curing his 
Father Antiochus; and Antigonus gave him 
Sixty thousand [/11./]Philippean Guineas for cu- 
ring his Son. 

Ja. I find getting Estates has been an old 
Affair with the Physicians. 

Ol. It has so; and why not, if they got 
them honestly? The Cassii, Carpitani, Arun- 
cii, Albucii, made their Fortunes this way, and 
|P_21
very great ones too, without maiming their 
Characters. Cardan, in his Panegyrick upon 
Medicine, has more Instances to mortify 
you. He tells you of Artaxerxes's Gene- 
rosity to Hippocrates, Phalaris's to Polycletus 
Missenius, and Polycrates's to Democedes. 
Alexander the Great almost Buried Critobulus
in Gold, for keeping him above Ground. 
What think you of one Crinas, that new 
built all the Fortifications of a City in his 
Life-time, and yet left a vast Estate at his 
Death? 

Ja. 'Tis well if he did not build with 
the Burghers Bones. 

Ol. Misrepresentations and Aspersions 
would not stick upon the Profession in those 
Days. Princes and People of the first Rank 
were proud to be of the Faculty; insomuch 
that it was a Sort of Misprision and Scanda- 
lum Magnatum, to treat the Doctors con- 
temptuously. Solomon was certainly a very 
Learned Physician. And so probably were 
several other Eastern Monarchs; Sabor and 
Ginges, Kings of Media; Sabiel of Arabia; 
Mithridates of Persia; and Hermes of Egypt. 
Mesues, Grandson of a King of Damascus; 
and Avicenna, suppos'd to be Prince of 
Corduba, were very eminent this way too. 

Ja. Have you no Queens in your Cata- 
logue? 

Ol. I don't find any. The Sex were 
then afraid of Pretendingness. But I 
|P_22
come forward to the Recommendations and 
Favours of the Law. Several of the Empe- 
rors granted the Faculty many Legal Privile- 
ges. Vespasian, Adrian, and Antonine con- 
firm'd the Immunity and Eminence Julius 
Cæsar and Augustus had given them. Com- 
modus, Severus, Constantine, Valentinian and 
Valens, Honorius and Theodosius, and Julian, 
enacted in their Favour. These Edicts freed 
them from all publick Imposts and Offices of 
Trouble, and not only their Persons, but their 
Wives, Children, and Estates too. Agen, 
the Law cover'd them with such an effectual 
Protection, that whoever molested or injur'd 
them, was to be punish'd at the Judge's Dis- 
cretion. Nor had they only Privileges and 
Protection, but likewise large Salaries 
and Pensions assign'd them. 'Tis true in- 
deed, only a certain select Number, and 
those to be preferr'd, principally for their 
Morals, and in the second regard for their 
Learning, call'd Numeraries, as the rest were 
call'd Supernumeraries, had a title to, or 
enjoy'd these Rights. But then we know 
these Honours and Encouragements were 
design'd the Profession more than the Persons. 
As for Statute-Law, the 5th of the 14th and 
15th of Henry VIII. discharges Physicians 
from being summon'd upon Juries in London; 
and requires an Examination and Licence 
from the College to qualify for Practice. 
And the Powers deriv'd to them by Aca- 
|P_23
demical Promotion are too well known to 
be mention'd. 

Ja. You seem to have weigh'd the 
Strength of the Cause with uncommon Ap- 
plication and Curiosity. But perhaps you 
have never, or very rarely, been under the 
Discipline of Anatomical Hands. I fancy, 
if you were to feel the Smart of a few Ex- 
periments, you'd abate of your Zeal. 

Ol. And that brings me directly to the o- 
ther Head of Discourse; the Physician's and 
the Patient's Duty; which I have had Occasion 
more than enough to consider, before you 
and I came acquainted. I never was a Bi- 
got to Pain. And I shall not excuse a Phy- 
sician's Abuse of his Power. To be forc'd 
(says [/12./] one of them) to come to a hard Bar- 
gain for Life or Relief; to be kept long in 
Misery and Suspence, and perhaps but half 
cured at last; is enough to make a Man 
think himself under the Hands of an Exe- 
cutioner, rather than a Doctor.  But, not- 
withstanding this, I always thought my Phy- 
sician and my Surgeon best able to judge, 
When Rigorous Methods were necessary, and 
then I submitted to them. To consult a 
Man's Ease, and indulge his Aversions, in 
some Circumstances, is but a kind Way of 
cutting his Throat. Incision-Knives were 
|P_24
not made for Ceremonie. When the Rule 
requires it, the Physician is as much bound 
to torture a Man into Health, as a Judge to 
give Sentence. For Cancers and Gangreens 
are as Incorrigible, as Harden'd Malefactors. 
Besides, this Pretence of Quarrel concerns 
the Surgeons more than the Physicians. The 
Severities of the latter are few, and not fre- 
quent; and are generally the Effect, either 
of the Patient's Vices, or his Negligence. 
Carduus Cantharides and Mercury seem 
design'd by Providence for Punishments as 
well as Preservatives. And before you en- 
ter upon a Misunderstanding with the Sur- 
geons, consider, Madam, they stand clear 
of your Imputation too. They are not Ag- 
gressors. The sharpest of their Operations 
are extorted, either by the Patient's Rash- 
ness, or Misfortune. The Part is made Use- 
less to Itself, and Dangerous to the Whole, 
before they come to cutting off.—I could 
enlarge upon this Head, but I suppose you 
see how the Matter stands already. 

Ja. I confess my Objection was started 
a little hastily. Let it be withdrawn, if you 
please, and go on as you propos'd. 

Ol. I begin with the Patient's Part; whom 
it concerns, as nearly in Duty as Interest, 
to chuse, where there is more than one 
Physician, the Man of most Skill, Experi- 
ence, and Success. 

|P_25
Ja. I thought you would soon run a- 
ground. I have you now at Mercy, Ma- 
dam. 

Ol. As how? 

Ja. With your favour, let me understand 
how a Physician's Qualifications and Abilities 
can come under my Cognizance, unless I am 
compleat Judge of his Principles and Me- 
thods? If you'll allow me to know when he 
prescribes and manages right, this is Con- 
fessing, I understand before-hand, what 
Measures and Medicines are to be taken, and 
then why should I trouble the Doctor? 

Ol. A good Judge of Painting may be no 
Performer. You may make an Estimate, 
in some measure, of a Physician's Qualifica- 
tions and Conduct, when you know what 
Course he designs, and for what Reasons, 
tho' your own Capacity could never have 
reach'd either. Second Causes, when they're 
once discover'd, are the most Obvious things 
in the World. The Cypher's over, after you 
have found the Alphabet. Not that any 
further Condescension of this kind should be 
expected from a Physician, than explaining 
himself in general. And 'tis likely his No- 
tions may be so Satisfactory, or so Discou- 
raging, as to determine the Patient. Be- 
sides; I don't suppose you cast upon a De- 
sart Island, with Two or Three of the 
Faculty in't, and no Body to practice upon but 
themselves. A Physician seldom settles in an 
|P_26
Unpopulous Place; and tho' you should 
happen to be his Handsel, you may conclude 
yourself safe, if he comes well enough re- 
commended to expect Welcome and Busi- 
ness; which 'tis certainly his Interest to 
take care of, as well as yours to take care of 
yourself. But then, if he has resided some 
time in the Town or the Neighbourhood, 
you may easily get Information of his Abi- 
lities and Success, from People either of 
Sound and Superiour Understandings, or at 
least of Tender Constitutions. Further, if 
he carrys Academical Honour, or other Le- 
gal Testimonials about him, his Pretensions 
are Valid, and you may depend upon his 
Sufficiency. You see, Madam, I have rid 
myself of your Difficulty. 

Ja. You are lucky at Solutions. You 
have always a Muse facing your Form. But 
for all your Cunning, you may be snared by 
and by. 

Ol. Are you sure I shan't lose your La- 
dyship in a Wood first?—You are ever 
and anon going off the Scent.—The First 
thing, I say, a Patient or his Friends should 
concern themselves about, is the Choice of 
the Physician. As to this, Experience chal- 
lenges a Precedency in the Exercise and Use 
all acquired Accomplishments are to be put 
to; but most of all in the Practice of Phy- 
sick. The Knowledge of the Parts of the 
Body, of the Virtues of Druggs, and the 
Strength of their Operations, together with the 
|P_27
Distinguishing of Symptons and Cases are 
so necessary, that 'tis Presumption so much 
as to feel a Pulse without them. And yet 
how faint is the Action of all these Rays at 
large, in Comparison of their Force collected, 
if I may say so, in a Focus of Experience? 
This is that which Warms Opinion and Spe- 
culation into Life, Braces the Understand- 
ing, and teaches the Mind to walk alone. 
'Tis this that finishes a Mead or a Radcliffe. 
'Tis this that puts the last Hand to the No- 
blest Productions of Nature and Art. But 
of the Physician's Qualifications I shall have 
occasion to say more, when I come to speak 
upon his Duty. Further, the Sick Man is in 
fault, if he does not look out for Help be- 
times. Not that we should imagin every 
little Pain, Qualm, or Stitch, an Admonition 
from Providence to summon the Doctor. 
The Penances either of our Intemperance 
in the Quantity, or our Presumption in the 
Choice of our Meat and Drink, are no sur- 
prizing or mysterious Disorders. We need 
not be taught, that in such usual inconveni- 
ent Consequences as these, either of lntempe- 
rance, Laziness, or a Sedentary Neglect of 
ourselves, Abstinence, Exercise, and Regu- 
lar Evacuations will pacifie injur'd Nature, 
and reconcile our Constitutions to us agen. 
Sometimes such an Instinct comes along with 
an Indisposition, that we know as well what 
Physick we want, as what Dish of Meat we 
|P_28
like at another time. And such Suggestions as 
these, I'll allow to be as safe a Direction as 
a Doctor's Bill; provided some notorious 
Symptom does not bespeak our Caution, and 
make us turn our Backs upon our Inclinati- 
ons. Thus, if a Fancy comes upon a Man 
unaccountably, that Smelling to Thyme or 
Sweet-Brier would relieve him in the Head- 
Ach, I think he should listen to the Hint, 
and try whether his Imagination dictated 
at Random. But if he desired Small-Beer, 
when his Hands were hot, and his Pulse in 
a Hurry, I should persuade him not to be 
advis'd altogether by his Fancy. But when 
either an Indisposition attacks us, whose Ori- 
gin we can't account for; or one which we 
can easily guess at the Cause of, keeps its 
hold longer than we had Reason to expect; 
When either the Distemper's Violent in the 
Seizure, or Obstinate in the Continuance; 
Then there must be no Time lost; no Con- 
sulting of Smatterers; no Anxiousness or 
Debating about the Expensiveness of Fees and 
Physick. When the Enemy's thus far ad- 
vanc'd, Irresolution's Dangerous, and Secu- 
rity Fatal. 'Tis time to think of retiring un- 
der the Canon of the College, and confe- 
derating with Art and Science. Then the Son 
of Sirach's Advice is seasonable; Give place 
to the Physician, for the Lord hath created him: 
Let him not go from thee, for thou hast need 
of him.  c. 38. When any thing ails the 
|P_29
Cattle, says [/13./]Botallus, we send them to 
the Farriers. The Goldsmith has the 
mending of a Lord's Chain, or a Lady's 
Bracelet. Diamonds and Precious Stones 
are the ]eweller's Province. And when our 
Cloaths want Furbishing, we put them 
into the Botcher's Hands. But for Life and 
Health, either we don't trouble ourselves 
about them, or we trust any One with them, 
any confident Jackanapes, sooner than a 
Physician; and it fares with us accord- 
ingly.  Agen says the same Author, When 
a Man finds himself out of order, he may 
prescribe himself a Dram or a Cordial, if 
he pleases; but for the rest, he must have 
Recourse to the Physician. And let him 
consult not Books, but Men. Med'cine is 
always better in Manuscript, than in Print. 
Benedictus has a valuable Admonition to the 
same Effect. [/14./]Pain , says he,  and Sickness 
are strangely Credulous and Curious, and 
therefore we should take particular care 
not to be prevail'd upon by their Importu- 
nities to lay hold of every one's Help and 
Advice that offers it, and call in the Phy- 
|P_30
sician only at last, like a Sheriff to an Exe- 
cution.  Further; if you think there's 
Frugality in staying beyond the Crisis— 

Ja. You'll say, I shall find myself Mista- 
ken; which I can't deny. Some time 
since, you know, I was sadly afflicted with 
the Colick. I stay'd 'till all the Women 
of Fashion and Pretence in the Country had 
spent the Flower of their Closets upon me, 
and given me over. At last, when the Pain 
had foil'd my own Patience and their Medi- 
caments, I made my Complaint to Doctor 
— who order'd me two or three Bottles 
of something, that gave me present Ease, 
and restor'd me to perfect Health in a 
Week. Now when I had cast up the Charge 
of the Presents I had sent to my Doctresses, 
and the Visits I receiv'd from them, I found it 
rise to ten Pound more than the Physician's 
Fee, and the Apothecary's Bill. 

Ol. Methinks, that might have made a 
Convert of you. But to pursue my Advan- 
tage. There's yet another Consideration 
that should prevail with Sick People to make 
use of a Physician early; because if they stay 
so long that there's little or nothing to be 
done, 'tis odds whether the Physician will 
venture to be concern'd. One of the Facul- 
tie tells us, [/15./]'Tis an lnstance of a Physici- 
|P_31
an's Wisdom, not to have any thing to do 
with Incurable Distempers, and burn his 
Fingers with Impossibilities: For let Reco- 
very be never so Impracticable, the Physi- 
cian must expect to be charg'd with taking 
away every Life he does not save. If he is 
not a Deliverer, he must be a Murderer. 
And a Man has yet more Reason to be Cau- 
tious and Angry, where a Patient has 
been pleas'd to compliment Unqualified 
Undertakers with the best Opportunities of 
recovering him; for as another Physician, 
Botallus, observes, [/16./]There are few Peo- 
ple, if any, to be found, but what are 
ready with Receipts for the Sick at first 
Sight, and throw them into a Course with- 
out more ado. But when their Skill has 
had its usual Effect, and they know not 
how to manage the Mischiess of their own 
making, they'll meddle no further, and 
are as humble and unpretending for a lit- 
tle time, as one would wish. However, 
says the [/17./] former Author, let the Physician 
venture where he has any Sparks of Hope 
to encourage and direct him. Only the 
Family ought to know what the Odds are 
against him: Else the Blame of a Miscarri- 
age will light upon the Profession, or at 
|P_32
least upon the Man. You'll be believ'd be- 
fore the Defeat, but not easily after it. 
I know (continues my Author) there are 
many Advocates for the contrary Opinion, 
that let the Complexion of Affairs be ne- 
ver so bad, something must be try'd; and 
that the best Means that can be thought 
of, however unpromising, are never thrown 
away.  Whichever of these Rules is right, 
you see what lamentable Difficulties and Di- 
lemmas are the Consequence of losing Time, 
and leaving the Country Open and Expos'd 
to the Invader. 

Ja. Methinks the Doctor might be so kind 
as to come of his own accord, and offer his 
Services. This would make him famous 
for his Humanity. 

Ol. But not for his Discretion. Such For- 
wardness is forbid by Maxim. [/18./]Come 
to a Patient when you are call'd, says a 
Physician; Make as much haste as you 
please then, but not before. When the 
Price of your Wares is stated and known, 
your Customers will have the meaner o- 
pinion of them, for your bringing them to 
their Doors.  And another of them to the 
same Purpose; [/19./]He that would not make 
|P_33
self cheap, must avoid an Excess of Con- 
descension, and keep somewhat upon the 
Distance and the Reserve. Intrusion and 
Fondness for Company is a Lessening 
Infirmity. The way to be respected is 
not to be too Forward and Familiar. 
And for this Reason 'twill be adviseable 
for a Physician not to proffer his Service, 
but to stay till he has a Summons. 'Tis 
true, it discovers a noble Benevolence of 
Temper, to lay hold of all Opportunities 
of doing Good. But yet good Offices, if 
a Man's Prodigal of them, go a Begging 
at last; and an Art may be so Liberal as to 
make itself Contemptible.  But to mend 
my pace, and keep up with the Argument; 
When the Physician's come, 'tis the Patient's 
Duty, in the next place, to represent his Con- 
dition as distinctly and fully to him as he can. 
He's neither to let Modesty, in some Cases, 
nor Shame, in others, prevail with him to 
conceal any Circumstances, or dress up the 
Distemper in false and flattering Colours. 
If we fall into noisome Circumstances by 
Misfortune, or if such is the Nature or Seat 
of the Disease, that a Bashful Man must put 
a Force upon himself to mention it; then 
Hiding or Disguising is Modesty no longer, 
but Infirmity. If our own Sin and Folly 
have distress'd us, the Consciousness of it 
should dispose us indeed to Repentance and 
Resolutions of Reformation, but by no means 
|P_34
to Shyness and Neglect of a Cure. [/20./]One 
Man endeavours to smother a Passion of 
Love or Lust, that's flaming in his Heart; 
Another suppresses his Anger, tho' his 
Eyes glow with it. One Man's Vitals are 
secretly Chill'd with Fear; Another's Wa- 
sted with Care. Now these Discomposures 
are either Principals or Seconds in the 
Quarrel; and yet that's more perhaps than 
the Doctor knows. But if the Gentle- 
man's Case must not be distinctly under- 
stood, the Doctor ought to be told at least 
in general, what share his Mind has in his 
Malady. For this is more than a Circum- 
stance; and may make it necessary to alter 
his Plan, and change his Batteries.  The 
same Author (for I am now borrowing) 
has a remarkable Story to this Purpose. 
[/21./] I had a Patient , says he,  at Paris t'other 
Day, that thought himself in a Feaver, and 
complain'd of a great Pain and Op- 
pression in his Breast. I could find no Fea- 
verish Symptoms; and I was to take his 
word for t'other. He express'd an Un- 
common Impatience, sigh'd much, and 
rested little. I purg'd him; I chaff'd his 
Breast, and stroak'd it with comfortable 
|P_35
Liniments; and did what else I thought 
most likely to relieve him. I forbore 
Bleeding, because he did not complain of 
any fixt or constant Pain, and he breath'd 
freely. Besides, he was threescore Years 
old; and 'twas Winter. This pass'd on 
for four Days. Upon the Fourth Day 
about two a Clock in the Afternoon, this 
Unintelligible Disorder unmask'd, and 
vanish'd on a sudden, while I was in the 
Room. The Gentleman's Servant came 
up, and brought him word he had carried 
his Cause at Lions. It seems 'twas the 
Issue of a Law-Suit that had made his Heart 
ake, and given him such a racking Pain 
thereabouts. The News was scarce told, 
when my Patient, who lay the Minute 
before, as if he was expiring, mounts up 
in his Bed; Well, now, says he, the Pain's 
quite gone, and I'm as well this moment 
as ever I was in my Life. I find I was 
Sick of Sollicitude; and if I had not been 
Defendant at Lions, I had not been Plan- 
tiff here.  To return; This Covering and 
Disguising is not only Dangerous, but very 
often Impracticable. A Cheat will not ea- 
sily pass upon Science. The Heart is the 
only Part of the Body a good Physician can't 
see into. Some Features and Indications of 
Imposture will be peeping out, and 'scape 
Prevention. A Dissembled Case lies as o- 
pen to a Professor, as a Counterfeit Coin to 
|P_36
an Antiquarie. And then a Man, besides 
the Disgrace of the Disease, has that of the 
Detection too, to discompose him; which 
is to some People the greater Mortification 
of the two. And withall he may have Rea- 
son to fear the Physician will revenge Di- 
strust with Discovery; whereas if he had 
been confided in, he would not have been 
provok'd to betray. [/22./]In Infamous or 
Disreputable Cases, a Man of Honour , 
says Benedictus very rightly,  will keep 
the Secret as carefully as he'll attend the 
Cure. For 'tis barbarous, to put a Man 
to Pain in his Character, that has already 
so much of it in his Bones. 

Ja. Thus far I agree with you. 

Ol. I don't doubt but we shall understand 
one another by and by. — I have two or 
three short Precepts more for the Patient, 
and then I come to the Doctor's Duty; which, 
I suppose, you long to hear. 

Ja. I expect Impartiality. You have 
brought the Physician to the Bedside; One 
would think you might leave him there. 

Ol. If the Patient be perfectly right in his 
Senses. But the truth is, many Sick People 
are more Lightheaded at the begining of a 
Fit of Sickness, than afterwards. And this 
is the best Defence I can make for those, that 
|P_37
when they have consulted a Doctor, and had 
his Advice, over rule his Directions, and 
throw away his Physick. You shall have a 
Learned Physician's Reflections upon this 
matter, if you please. [/23./]The Patient , says 
he, must be governable, and resign to those 
that have the care of him, especially to 
the Physician: And neither the Sick Man, 
nor they that are about him, may pre- 
sume to impose upon the Physician, or elude 
his Directions. The Patient's Irregulari- 
tie and Impatience light hardest upon him- 
self. This sort of Sedition, tho' never so 
industriously conceal'd, always breaks out 
in the Consequences.  Another tells us, 
[/24./] 'tis Fact, and that daily Observation 
proves it so, that more Men lose their 
Lives by their own Obstinacy, than by all 
the Distempers in a Bill of Mortality put 
together.  So says Botallus too; [/25./]A 
Physician, 'tis true, mistakes his way some- 
times; but where one Man dies of the 
Doctor, a hundred miscarry by their own 
Folly. 'Tis no wonder that Ignorant, Neg- 
ligent, Ungovernable, Enterprizing Peo- 
ple should not easily get over at Fit of Sick- 
|P_38
ness.  And elsewhere he affirms, [/26./]That 
one Physician, or even the Unassisted 
Strength of Nature, may recover a much 
greater Number of Complying and Order- 
ly Patients, than a whole College can of 
perverse ones, that suppress their Com- 
plaints, and refuse their Submission.  Fur- 
ther, theres Ill Manners as well as Absurdity 
in this Instance of Misbehaviour. Not to 
make use of a Physician is a Presumptuous 
Neglect of ourselves; But 'tis over and above, 
an Incivility, and a Contempt of his Cha- 
racter, to defeat his Care, and protest his 
Bills. Besides, this Conduct implys a strange 
Inconsistency and Levity. For at last, if we 
understand the matter right, the Doctor's 
Prescription, in this Case, is our own at Se- 
cond Hand. If we can't confide in him, 
why do we consult him? And if we can, 
why don't we? 

Ja. Excuse me, Madam; That Conse- 
quence has its Exceptions. For the purpose, 
if I have made Tryal before of the Druggs 
he orders me, and found them Abhorrent to 
my Nature; or if I know there's Poison in 
the Potion; must I join my Lips to Death, 
and drench myself as meekly as a Discarded 
Vizier would receive the fatal Bowl from 
|P_39
the Hand of an Eunuch? I never thought 
the Physician so absolute. 

Ol. The last of your Objections, if you 
apply it in Earnest, is not to be imagin'd. 
'Tis out of the Confines of the Question too; 
and carrys you to the World in the Moon. 
It affects your Cook, Butler, Dairymaid, 
all your Domesticks, Relations, Neighbours, 
and Acquaintance, as much as your Doctor. 
And as for t'other, 'tis plainly a studied one. 
For tho' a Physician may be a Humorist as 
well as another Man; yet is it probable he 
should be so little concern'd for his own Re- 
putation and Interest, as to ask no previous 
Questions about his Patient's Constitution, 
Antipathies, and Management of himself? 
At least, if a Caution's given him, it can't 
be conceiv'd he should lie under any Temp- 
tation to impose unnecessary Severities upon 
his Patient, and join the Enemy Himself 
with his Auxiliaries. 

Ja. What if I follow his Directions, and 
grow worse? 

Ol. If you have no other Reason to suspect 
his Judgment or Integrity, but a longer Con- 
tinuance of the Distemper than you expect- 
ed, let not That determine you too soon to 
his Disadvantage. For 'tis one Physician's 
Advice to another, [/27./]to abide obstinate- 
|P_40
ly by those Means and Measures that he's 
sure are Rational and Well-grounded, tho' 
he waits long the good Effects of them; 
and never to pursue a Hazardous and 
Uncertain Method, because it has not been 
follow'd long enough to do any visible 
Mischief; For that Casualties are so sar 
from being general Rules, that they are 
only Exceptions.  However 'tis not safe 
to be too Implicit neither. If you find your 
Champion foil'd; if you don't mend with- 
in any reasonable Time; much more, if you 
grow worse; you are certainly at Liberty 
to take Notice of it to him. And if the Symp- 
toms look formidable, and Danger hastens 
its Approaches, to desire him to think of 
conferring with a Brother of the Facultie, 
and if he refuses, (which very rarely hap- 
pens) to dismiss him, and seek elsewhere for 
Help. 

Ja No doubt on't. In good Time, if 
the Distemper's Chronical enough, the House 
may be full of Physicians. Those same Con- 
sults, I confess, are a Masterpiece! For ei- 
ther the Assistants will agree with the first 
Doctor, or differ from him. If they agree, 
then One would have done as well as Both. 
If they disagree, what better Issue's to be 
expected from the Clashing Opinions of 
Two or more, than from the Uniform Pro- 
ceedings of One? When they have made 
the most of their Maxims, the only new 
|P_41
Resolution you can come to is to trust your- 
self with a new Doctor, or with none. And 
what's a new one to do? Why truly he 
has double work upon his Hands; He has 
his Predecessor's Errors, as well as his Pati- 
ent's Constitution, to correct. And at last you 
have only the same Chance as before, whe- 
ther you sha'nt be left in a Condition a third 
part worse than he found you in, for others 
of the Faculty to take their turn, and carry 
off their Shares of the Wreck too. 

Ol. Soft and fair. Your Speed, I'm sure, 
has carry'd your Ladyship on the wrong 
side o' th' Post. Let's apprehend one another 
right. I would not have it quoted for my 
Opinion, that Physicians ought to assemble 
in as Numerous Bodys as General Coun- 
cils. The Circumstances of Persons, and 
the Turn of Things, are the best Rule in 
these Difficulties. If the Patient's Life and 
Health are of great Importance, either to 
the Family or the Publick, nothing should 
be omitted that any Good can be hoped from. 
The whole Posse of Nature and Art should be 
muster'd. Agen; If there's a Life of less Con- 
sequence at stake, and if none of the known 
and usual Expedients have been neglect- 
ed; If the Skill of two or three Authoriz'd 
and Careful Physicians gives way, and the 
Disease forces all their Intrenchments; I 
will not say but the Patient's free to gratify 
a Departing Curiosity with the Med'cines 
|P_42
of all the Matrons in the Country. After 
Sentence of Death pronounc'd, he may 
make a Bargain of his Body if he pleases. 
And, for your Comfort, Madam, you 
know such lurking Embers of Life have 
sometimes surviv'd an Execution as have 
kindled it up agen. I'll allow you to please 
yourself with just such a Possibility as this, 
when a Consult of Learned Physicians have 
done what they can for you, and give you 
over. To do you further Justice; It seems 
you think it absurd, when one Physician has 
done you no Service, to consult another; 
and your Reason for it is, because if the last 
Comer strikes into the Measures of the first, 
your Purse may be somewhar lighter, but 
you are still where you were; and if he does 
not, you are ne'r the nearer a Cure, and 
may be practic'd upon to Death. I think 
that's your Argument. 

Ja. And what's your Answer? 

Ol. 'Tis this; if they agree, you may be- 
gin to suppose your Condition desperare, 
or conclude you have not try'd the Course 
you are in long enough; which last will be 
a Cordial however, if it does not end in a 
Cure. And if the last Physician sees the Mi- 
stake of the First, or believes he does, you 
may demand his Reasons without Presump- 
tion, and 'tis like he may be furnish'd with 
them by an Insight into the Error of his Bro- 
ther's Method. We have all a better Hand 
|P_43
at finding out other People's Mistakes than 
our own. Those Subtilties of Nature, which a 
Single Microscope will not reach, a Double 
one discovers in a trice to advantage. Ob- 
serve agen, how Partial you are pleas'd to 
be in your Supposals. You Visit the Sick, 
more like an Ill-boding Bird than a Friend. 
Your Message is all to the Purpose of Disap- 
pointment and Death. What , say you, 
if every new Undertaker should make 
things worse than he found them? Sup- 
pose their Practices run foul upon one an- 
other, and each of them luggs off a Limb 
of you?  What's all this but Phantom and 
Chimera? Does such a thing happen once 
in a thousand Instances? And then agen, 
say I in my turn, What if a Second or 
a Third prevents or stops the Ill Conse- 
quences of a former Mismanagement, fa- 
stens upon the True Cause, and reinstates 
you in Health and Vigour?  Does this so 
rarely happen, Madam, that it could not 
enter into your Thoughts? Fallibility will 
always be a Weak Argument against the use 
of Reason. And, as one of the Faculty ob- 
serves very well, [/28./]the Reproaches that 
are thrown upon a Knowing and a Wise 
Man for the Misfortune of a Mistake, are 
an Indignity offer'd to the Honour of Man- 
|P_44
kind, and ought to be Resented Universal- 
ly.  If lmperfection would justifie Use- 
lessness, we might all be Idle upon Principle. 
And he that's afraid to use his Legs, because 
he may stumble, may e'en lie a bed till 
they mortifie. 

Ja. In earnest, Olympia, I'm afraid you'll 
never be wean'd from this Weakness. I 
suppose you us'd to have more Physicians 
about you in your Sickness, than other Wo- 
men have Gossips at their Labour. 

Ol. You'll be less Severe by and by. 

Ja. In the mean time, since the Clue of 
the Argument has brought us to the Busi- 
ness of Consults, let's know, if you please, 
how they're to be govern'd. This is a Point, 
I suppose, the Doctors have refin'd upon. 
It goes deep in their Affairs, and brings a 
great deal of good Lining into their Poc- 
kets. 

Ol. And yet it lies under some Restricti- 
ons that keep a Man upon his Guard, and 
Fetter him with Maxims. You may have a 
Specimen of them from the Physicians them- 
selves, who should best understand them. 
To begin then; 'Tis Botallus's Opinion, 
[/29./]That no Consults ought to be held in 
the Patient's Presence, because 'tis not fit 
he should know all the Circumstances of 
|P_45
his Case that are necessary to be canvass'd, 
the bad as well as the good. Damps and De- 
spair Sett their Teeth where they seize; and 
'tis much easier to keep them off at first, than 
to make them quit their hold afterwards.  As 
to the Time when recourse should be had to 
them; [/30./]There is a necessity , says Fonseca,  for 
Consults, when a Physician finds himself 
overmatch'd. Where much depends up- 
on't, all Parties will strain their Faculties 
for Discoveries, and one Man observe 
what 'scapes another. Numbers are best 
at Invention. A Cabinet of the Facultie 
sees, like Argus, every way at once. Be- 
sides, as Solomon says, Without counsel, 
purposes are disappointed: but in the mul- 
titude of counsellers they are established . 
And then too, as Fonseca further suggests, 
a Physician's calling-in more Assistance is 
finding Security for his own Reputation. 
It covers him from Censure and Misreport. 
If his Management should be question'd, 
his Brethren can do him Justice, and so the 
Catastrophe of a Violent Distemper won't 
be charg'd upon the Doctor's Ignorance or 
Indiscretion.  As to the Number of Per- 
sons that are to be at it, Botallus is for a few; 
[/31./]A Numerous Consult's more likely to 
|P_46
perplex things than to clear them. Two 
or Three good Physicians, Honest and 
Knowing, are enow; and seldom leave a 
Fourth matter to work upon.  As to the 
Quality of them; [/32./]Admit none (says the 
same Author) but Physicians to your Con- 
ferences, or at most but one or two Per- 
sons more, a Nurse, or an Attendant, or 
so. Intruders and Interlopers always cross 
upon Men of Knowledge. Either there 
are more or fewer Ingredients in the Bill 
than there shou'd be! Or if you preferr 
the Wisdom of the College to their tedi- 
ous Impertinence, the whole Regimen's
absolutely condemn'd, and your Reputa- 
tion murder'd, if your Med'cine does not 
work as quick as a Miracle. Another In- 
convenience is, that if any Party in the 
Consult happens to be Positive and Con- 
ceited, the Weakness and Ignorance of the 
By-standers encourage his Confidence, 
and make him insufferably troublesome. 
He'll be the Foreman. He knows Those 
that know least are always Friends to 
those that talk most; and so he pushes his 
Advantage, hears no Body, and makes e- 
very Body hear him; cancels a well-con- 
certed Scheme, flourishes upon his own, 
and perhaps plagues his Brethren at last 
|P_47
into a Compliance too.  To the same effect 
Fonseca; [/33./]The Debates of Physicians 
ought to be as private as possible. How 
often have they and their Patients far'd 
the worse, for letting People into the Place 
of Consultation, that had no Business 
there? They that envy Men their Know- 
ledge, as the Ignorant always do, make 
the same ill use of the Disputes of Physi- 
cians, as of those of Divines; turn them to 
the Disparagement, not only of the Dis- 
putants, but the Profession itself An- 
other Inconvenience,  continues my Au- 
thor,  is this; that Physicians, who have 
their Failings in Common with other Men, 
may be Positive and Dogmatical. Not 
unlikely, their Hypotheses may clash, and 
and yet every One must maintain his own 
vigorously, as he values his Reputation. 
Tho' he should be made secretly sensible 
that he's out in his Measures, yet his Con- 
cern for his Character sollicits strongly to 
give up his Patient rather than his Position. 
Whereas if only the Facultie are upon the 
Spot, he may acquiesce without Danger 
of any Blemish upon his Honour. In short, 
a Consult of Opiniaters ought to be lock'd 
up as close as a Jury. They'd certainly come 

|P_48 the sooner to a right Understanding and 
Unanimity. 


[^1. 
* Pleriq: sunt qut malunt in sua ignorantia peccare, quàm 
alieno duce rectè facere. Leon. Botallus, de Medic. & Æ- 
grot. Munere. 
^]
[^2. 
* Mirandum non est, si ob negotii pondus, non solum vul- 
gares homines, &c.Gabriel a Fonseca, Medic. OEconom.
^]
[^3. 
* Nulla re ad Deum homines propius accedunt, &c.Cic. 
pro Ligario. 
^]
[^4. 
†Si dare vitam proprium Dei munus est, &c.Erasmus. 
Crocius. 
^]
[^5. 
‖ Qui lymphatum, phreneticum, furiosum, restituit, &c.
Erasmus. Crocius, to the same Effect. 
^]
[^6. 
* Parentibus nihil non debemus, quod per hos vitæ mu- 
nus accepisse quodammodo videmur, &c.Declam. in laud. 
Art. Med.
^]
[^7. 
* Rara non sunt Artis, &c.Joan. Beverovicius contra 
Montanum. 
^]
[^8. 
* Catoni non placuit, &c.Declam. in laud. Art. 
Med.
^]
[^9. 
* Brassica. Homo durus, ad purgandum hominis corpus 
sufficere Brassicam & erebros vomitus existimabat. 
^]
[^10. 
* Cum illa (scil. Jurisprudentia) nunquam sine aliorum of- 
fe , &c.Grynæi Medicinæ Encom.
^]
[^11. 
* Aureos Philippeos, each being, according to Dr. Ber- 
nard, in Value 18 s. 4 d. of English Money. 
^]
[^12. 
* Carnificis est, pendentibus fatis, &c.Alex. Benedi- 
ctus. De Med. atq; Ægri officio Aphorism. c. 1. 
^]
[^13. 
* Merito hi pœnas delicti dant, cùm statim ad vete- 
rinarios transmittant jumenta, &c. De Med. & Ægroti 
Munere. 
^]
[^14. 
† Nec cuivis præsidium profitenti, valetudinis desiderio 
statim credatur, solis medicis occidendi impunitate reli- 
ctà. De Med. atq; Æg. Officio Aphorism. c. 1.
^]
[^15. 
* Prudentis Medici est insanabiles ac desperatos mor- 
bos non curare, &c. De Med. atq; Ægri. Offic. Aphor. c. 1.
^]
[^16. 
* Intelligite vos Patientes multos, ne dicam forte om- 
nes homines esse paratos ac liberales in medicis confinis 
promendis, &c. De Med. & Ægr. Munere. 
^]
[^17. 
† Ubi supra. 
^]
[^18. 
* Accersitus adeas, non alias: &c. Botallus, de Med. & 
Ægr. Munere. 
^]
[^19. 
† Vitato assiduæ consuetudinis fastidio, &c. Gabr. à 
Fonseca, Med. OEcon.
^]
[^20. 
* Sunt etiam qui aliqua clandestina libidine flagrant: 
&c. Botallus de Med. & Æg. M.
^]
[^21. 
† His proximis diebus patientem tractabam, &c. 
Ibid.
^]
[^22. 
* Alienam miseriam pudoris sociam indicare nefas est, 
Alex. Benedictus De Med. atq; Ægri Offic. Aphorism. c. 1.
^]
[^23. 
* Æger obsequens esse debet: &c. Alex. Benedictus, 
Ibid.
^]
[^24. 
† Certissimum experimentum quotidie commonstrat, 
&c. Gabr. à Fonseca, Med. OEcon.
^]
[^25. 
‖ Etsi in multis peccare in suo officio possit Medicus: 
&c. De Med. & Æg. Offic.
^]
[^26. 
* Oportet pro rato habendum facilius posse multos æ- 
gros morigeros: &c. Ibid.
^]
[^27. 
* A recta ratione nonquam drscedendem est, &c. Be- 
nedictus, De Med. atq; Ægri. Offic.
^]
[^28. 
* Errorem in homine quamvis sapientissimo calum- 
niari, &c. Gab. à Fonseca, Med. OEcon.
^]
[^29. 
* Medicorum consilia seorsum ab ægris ineunda sunt, 
&c. Ubi supra.
^]
[^30. 
* Consultoribus tunc... opus est; tum quia &c. Ubi 
supra.
^]
[^31. 
† Confundit potius multitudo medicorum quim ju- 
vet; &c. Ubi supra.
^]
[^32. 
* .. seorsumq; à populo uno auditore, &c. Ubi 
supra.
^]
[^33. 
* Consultationi velut rei gravissimæ nunquam astantes 
affinesve &c. Ubi supra.
^]