

[^Sample 1: book - ^]

|P_[^An ornamental horizontal column, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}A FRIENDLY 
Admonition, &c.}]
MAN, not contented with 
what his bountiful and muni- 
ficent Creator intending for 
his Comfort, has wisely tem- 
pered with such a due Pro- 
portion of Strength, as that, taken in 
Moderation, would make his Heart grad, 
has unhappily found Means to extract, 
from what God intended for his Refresh- 
ment, a most pernicious and intoxicating 
Liquor, to which, in a great measure, is 
owing, the remarkable Increase of Drun- 
kenness of late Years; which Vice reigns 
to a most enormous Degree, among the 
habitual Drinkers of Brandy, and other 
Distill'd Liquors; which are found to be 
most pernicious and destructive: For at 
the same time that they coagulate and 
thicken the Blood, they also contract 
|P_4
and narrow the Blood-Vessels; which 
has, in Fact, been found to be true; by 
Experiments purposely made, with Bran- 
dy, on the Blood and Blood-vessels of 
Animals. 

Whence we may evidently see the 
Reason why those Liquors do so fre- 
quently cause Obstructions in the Liver; 
whence the Jaundice, Dropsy, and many 
other fatal Diseases: It is in like man- 
ner also that they destroy and burn up 
the Lungs too: Hence also it is, that 
by frequently contracting, and then soon 
after relaxing, they weaken and wear 
out the Fibres and Coates of the Sto- 
mach, on which they more immediately 
prey, every Time they are drunk: 
Hence, I say, it is, that these spirituous 
Liquors rarely fail to destroy the Appe- 
tite and Digestion of those, who habi- 
tuate themselves to them; for, by dry- 
ing up, and spoiling the Nerves, they 
make them insensible; they destroy also 
many of the very fine Vessels, especially 
where the Fibres are most tender, as in 
the Brain; whereby they spoil the Me- 
mory and intellectual Faculties: And by 
thus inflaming the Blood, and disorder- 
ing the Blood-Vessels and Nerves, they 
vitiate and deprave the natural Tem- 
per. 

|P_5
When first drank, they seem to comfort 
the Stomach, by contracting its too relaxed 
Fibres, and also to warm the Blood; 
but as the Warmth which they give, on 
mixing with the Blood, soon goes off, 
as it is in Fact found to do, when we 
mix Brandy with Blood; so also the 
spirituous Part of the Brandy being soon 
diluted, and imbibed by the watery Hu- 
mours of the Body, it can no longer 
contract the Fibres of the Stomach, and 
other Parts; which therefore as soon re- 
laxing, the unhappy Persons are thereby, 
in a little Time, reduced to a cold, re- 
laxed, languid, and dispirited State, 
which gives them so much Uneasiness, 
they are impatient to get out of it, by 
fresh Supplies of the same deadly Li- 
quor; which, instead of curing, daily 
increases their Disease more and more. 
Hence it is, that their Soul fainting 
within them, these unhappy Wretches 
are ever thirsting after it, and, with the 
Horse-Leech, cry, give, give; but alas! 
never are, nor can be satisfied. For 
these strong Liquors, tho' called spiri- 
tuous, are so far from refreshing and re- 
cruiting the Spirits, that, on the con- 
trary, they do, in reality, depress them; 
and extinguish the natural, vital Warmth 
of the Blood to such a Degree, that, as 
Physicians have observed, their Prescrip- 
|P_6
tions, or Medicines, are found to have 
little or no Effect, towards restoring these 
unhappy Persons, when sick, to their 
Health. 

The spirituous Liquors soon intoxi- 
cate, which Intoxication soon goes off 
again, and leaves them faint and lan- 
guid: And as when immediately injected 
into the Veins of an Animal, they cause 
sudden Death; so when drank in a large 
Quantity at once, they coagulate and 
thicken the Blood to such a Degree, as 
to kill instantly; many Instances of which 
we frequently hear of: And when they 
are not drank in such Quantities as to 
kill immediately, but are daily used, 
then, besides many other Diseases, they 
are apt to breed Polypuses in the Heart, 
by thickening the Blood there; which 
Polypuses, as they grow larger and larg- 
er, do, by hindering and retarding the 
Motion of the Blood through the Heart, 
thereby farther contribute to the Faint- 
ness and Dispiritedness of those unhappy 
Persons, and at length, by totally stop- 
ping the Course of the Blood, do as ef- 
fectually kill, as if a Dart had been 
struck through their Liver. 

These Distill'd Liquors, which, by 
reason of their great Strength, are found 
to be so destructive to our Bodies, are 
observed by Chymists, to be all of them 
|P_7
composed, and to consist, of Water, a 
Spirit, and an acid Oil. They find 
also upon the nicest Scrutiny, that 
all Distilled fermented Spirits are the 
same, whether Distilled from the fer- 
mented Juice of Grapes, as is done in 
France, and some other Countries, or 
from Corn, Grain, or other fermented 
Fruits. And accordingly their pernici- 
ous Effects upon human Bodies, are found 
to be the same. For it is well known, 
that many are in and near Sea-Port 
Towns, as effectually destroyed, by the 
habitual drinking of French Brandies, as 
are those who habituate themselves to 
drink other Distilled spirituous Liquors; 
And the same holds true of Rum, which, 
it is well known, destroys such Multi- 
tudes in America, as even in a manner 
to depopulate whole Countries: Some 
of these Liquors may indeed be more 
palatable than others, but they are all 
in a manner equally pernicious, that are 
of an equal Strength, and those most de- 
structive and deadly, which are the 
strongest. 

But notwithstanding Men find, by 
daily Experience, both in themselves and 
others, the destructive Effects of these 
Liquors; tho' they Yearly see a thousand 
fall at their Side, and ten thousand at 
their right Hand, yet will they not be 
|P_8
warned so as to avoid them. There is 
that predominant bewitching of Naughti- 
ness in these fiery Liquors, as impetu- 
ously carries Men on to their certain 
Destruction, in spight of the contrary 
natural strong Desire they have to live 
long, and see good Days; so effectually 
does this insatiable wandering of Concu- 
piscence after them, undermine the Simple; 
as the Wise Man observes, Wisdom iv. 
12. 'Tis the peculiar Misfortune of these 
unhappy Wretches, that they seldom 
have so much as a Heart to be set free: 
New when a Man's Will and Affec- 
tions are thus depraved, and he is de- 
lighted with this worst of Slavery, there 
is little Hopes of him. To recover him 
from this Condition, he must be, as it 
were, forced into his Liberty, and res- 
cued, in some measure, from his own 
depraved Desires; he must be dealt with 
like a Madman, and be bound down, 
to keep him from destroying himself. 

We find the strong, and almost invin- 
cible Propensity of habitual Sinners to 
continue on in their evil Courses, most 
emphatically expressed in Scripture; Can 
the Ethiopian change his Skin , says God, 
to the rebellious Israelites,  or the Leo- 
pard his Spots, then may ye also do Good, 
that are accustomed to do Evil : Jerem. 
xiii. 23. Which melancholy Truth may, 
|P_9
with greater Certainty, be said of the 
unhappy habitual Drinkers of Brandy, 
and the like Distill'd spirituous Li- 
quors, than of those who labour under 
any other Vices whatsoever; for how 
rarely, how very rarely do we see any 
of those unhappy Persons reclaimed; they 
are absolutely deaf to all Admonition, 
neither will they hear the Voice of the 
Charmer, charm he never so wisely. No 
Considerations whatsoever, neither of this 
World, nor the next, have any Weight 
with them; they will forego all that 
is most desirable here, and endure the 
utmost Miseries in Life, for the Sake of 
it. How many does it reduce to suffer 
the Hardships of the extreamest Poverty, 
not only by wasting their Substance by 
a continual Drain to satisfy a false, vi- 
tiated Appetite, but also by so enfee- 
bling and disabling them, that they have 
neither Will nor Power to labour for 
an honest Livelihood; which is a prin- 
cipal Reason of the great Increase of the 
Poor in this Nation, as also of the much 
greater Number of Robberies, that are 
committed of late Years, than were in 
former Ages. And as to the Health of 
these miserable People, the most desira- 
ble, because the Foundation of all o- 
ther Enjoyments, that is greatly deprav'd 
and sottishly given in Exchange, for a 
|P_10
false, unnatural Sensation of it, which 
each fresh Dram seems to give for the 
present; while it is, at the same Time, 
really undermining and destroying their 
Healths. Nay, so bewitching is this In- 
fatuation, that tho' they cannot, most of 
them, but be sensible, that they are 
manifestly shortening their Days, and just 
plunging themselves into their Graves, 
yet will they not refrain. Hence we see 
what little Hopes there is of reclaiming, 
by any Arguments whatever, these mi- 
serable Wretches, who are thus inslaved. 

Would God! that at least those who 
have not as yet engaged in these un- 
happy Courses, might thereby be effec- 
tually deterred from such destructive 
Ways, which it is most easy at first to 
avoid, but very difficult to refrain from, 
to those who are once habituated to such 
Liquors. 

But alas! the Infection is spread so 
far and wide, that if it continues its 
destructive Conquests, in the same man- 
ner, and to the same degree, that we 
have unhappily lived to see it advance, 
within these thirty or forty Years, it 
must needs, in a few Generations, in- 
fect all Mankind with its baneful Influ- 
ence. For it makes its Way into the 
World as a Friend to Mankind, and in- 
sinuates itself under the Disguise of grate- 
|P_11
ful Flavours; and under the Notion of 
helping Digestion, comforting the Spirits, 
and chearing the Heart, it produces 
the direct contrary Effects. And tho' 
these deceitful Hydra's are found, by 
daily Experience, to destroy Multitudes 
of Mankind, yet are they received and 
entertained with so general Applause, 
that they boldly lift up their invenom'd 
Heads in every Street, to such a de- 
gree, as looks as if it were the Business 
of a considerable Part of Mankind to 
destroy the other. And tho' thousands, 
and ten thousands, nay, Millions, over 
the whole Earth, perish Yearly thereby, 
yet no Man layeth it to Heart, excepting 
the Heads of the poor wild Indians in 
New England, Carolina, and other Parts 
of North America, who being sensible of 
the great Destruction, Distill'd spirituous 
Liquors have made among them, have 
frequently and earnestly desired, that no 
such Liquors might be sold to their 
People; which, as they have made 
great Havock among them, so it is ob- 
served to do the same among those Chris- 
tians, who both taught them that beastly 
and destructive Vice, and are continu- 
ally furnishing them with Materials to 
continue in it. And what more just 
and reasonable, than that those, who 
reach forth the invenom'd Cup to o- 
|P_12
thers, should themselves also perish by 
it. 

Of all the Miseries and Plagues that 
unhappy Man, has been incident to, none 
was ever so effectually destructive as this, 
not even those three sore Judgments of 
War, Pestilence, or Famine; all which, 
after having raged for some Time, cease: 
But this evil Spirit is an unrelenting, 
merciless Destroyer, that threatens end- 
less Destruction from Generation to Ge- 
neration: This is indeed a Master-piece 
of the Devil's, whereby he makes Men 
their own Executioners, which consigns 
them over, not only to present, but eter- 
nal Death also. 

Yet notwithstanding these, its most 
pernicious and destructive Effects, where 
is that Christian Country that desires, 
with the abovementionecl poor ignorant 
Indians, their People to be restrained 
from it; so far from that, that they 
seem rather to establish it by Law; in- 
somuch that there is little Hopes of any 
Attempts being made towards suppres- 
sing it, till the spreading Evil is grown 
more and more flagrant, as to be- 
come at last so enormously destructive, 
that it will be, in a manner, impossible 
for human Species to subsist under it. 

And this Time seems to be coming 
on a-pace, for the Infection, as it has 
|P_13
for these thirty or forty Years made a 
surprizing Advance, so it continues to 
spread far and wide. Nay, the unhappy 
Influence of these Liquors, reaches much 
farther than to the Destruction of those, 
who indulge in the Use of them, even 
to their Posterity, to the Children that 
are yet unborn. Of this we have too 
frequent Instances, where the unhappy 
Mothers habituate themselves to these 
Distill'd Liquors, whose Children, when 
first born, are often either of a diminu- 
tive Pigmy Size, or look withered and 
old, as if they had numbered many 
Years, when they have not, as yet, alas! 
attained to the Evening of the first Day. 
And how many more Instances are there 
of Children, who, tho' born with good 
Constitutions, have unhappily sucked in 
the deadly spirituous Poison With their 
Nurse's Milk. 

For Nature is then under a Necessity 
of drawing out very slender Threads of 
Life, when the Nourishment of either 
unborn, or born Children, is hardened 
and spoiled by such pernicious Liquors: 
Whence it is evident, that in Propor- 
tion, as the Contagion spreads farther 
and farther among Mankind, so must 
the Breed of human Species be propor- 
tionably more and more depraved, and 
will accordingly degenerate more and 
|P_14
more, from the more manly and robust 
Constitution of preceeding Generations. 

As Sobriety and Temperance is the 
best Means we can possibly make use of, 
in order to preserve our Health and 
Strength; so Drunkenness and Excess are 
the ready Means to destroy them, and 
the surest Way to make a Man's Days 
few and evil upon Earth. By Intempe- 
rance, the Body is surcharged with re- 
dundant Humours, whereby the natural 
Heat is extinguished, and the Constitution 
destroyed by grievous Diseases, as Dropsy, 
Jaundice, Palsy, Apoplexy, and the like. 

Physicians observe that these Di- 
still'd spirituous Liquors, which are in- 
flamed by repeated Distillations, are, in 
a manner, direct Poison to human Bodies, 
which are, most of them, of too delicate a 
Make, long to bear the being corroded by 
such burning actual Cauteries. For they 
observe, that not only the Constitution of 
the Blood is thereby spoiled, its red Part 
being consumed and burnt, whereby the 
Blood is impoverished to such a De- 
gree, as to have ten times more Serum
in it than red Parts; but also that the 
fine tender Blood-vessels of the Liver, or 
Lungs, or some other important Bowel, 
are thereby destroyed. Whence Hectick 
Fevers, Consumptions, and the like Dis- 
eases. Whence also sometimes great 
|P_15
Profusions of Blood, by the Vessels being 
corroded; or else by being too much 
weakened, relaxed, and broken, the 
thin sharp Serum, easily ouzing through 
their Substances, throws those unhappy 
Persons into fatal Dropsies. How many 
have drank to that Excess, as to die 
instantly, with the destructive Weapon, 
as it were, in their Body; whose Deaths 
Charity itself must needs judge most mi- 
serable, since they die in their Sins, and 
are taken away in God's just Wrath, even 
whilst they are sacrificing their Souls to 
the Devil. But though the Number of 
this Sort be many, yet it is but small, 
in Comparison of those Multitudes, whom 
it sweeps away by a gentle and unper- 
ceived Decay: For it does, by little and 
little, quench the natural Heat, and ex- 
tinguish the Lamp of Life, and so lead 
Men, though not by so direct a Passage, 
yet but a little about, to their Graves, 
as certainly, though not so speedily. If 
then we think it a fearful Sin for a Man 
to murder himself, and by laying vio- 
lent Hands on his own Person, to shorten 
his Life; then let us not esteem Drun- 
kenness as a small Sin, since its produces 
the same Effects, though by other Means, 
and brings us to an untimely Death, 
though it be by a different Method. 
The plain Reason why so vastly great- 
|P_16
er Numbers are taken off by untimely 
Deaths in this, than in former Ages, is 
evidently this, that Drunkenness and In- 
temperance are in an extraordinary Man- 
ner increased among us; and that espe- 
cially by the detestable Use of Brandy, 
and other Distill'd 'spirituous Liquors, 
which are most pernicious to our Con- 
stitutions. There are, indeed, some few 
of so strong a Constitution, that they can 
lead an intemperate Life for a good 
Number of Years, without feeling any 
sensible Decay in themselves, yet at 
length they usually pay dear for their 
former Excesses, when the Effects of their 
strong Liquors vent themselves in Sick- 
ness and Diseases, and make the unhappy 
Wretches, a miserable Monument of the 
sad Effects of the beastly Sin of Drunk- 
enness: Thus we see that this Sin, by 
an almost necessary and fatal Conse- 
quence, brings Death along with it. 

But let us consider the spiritual, as 
well as temporal Evils, that Men bring 
upon themselves by the Sin of Drunken- 
ness; They who live in a constant ha- 
bitual Course of Debauchery, are dead 
in their Sins; it commonly brings them 
to a State of final Impenitence. All 
Sense of Religion is apt to wear off 
from those, who give themselves up to 
this Vice; they in Effect say unto God, 
|P_17
Depart from us, for we will have no 
Knowledge of thy Laws. And though 
they may sometimes have good Dispo- 
sitions, yet they very rarely put them in 
Execution; because their Heads are so 
shattered and discomposed, that they can- 
not have any settled serious Thoughts. 
But God knows 'tis very seldom that the 
Drunkard entertains the least Thoughts 
of Repentance, for he is rather for en- 
couraging himself and others, to go on 
in sinning, than to break them off by Re- 
pentance; Isa. lvi. 12. Come ye, say they, 
I will fetch Wine, and we will fill our 
selves with strong Drink, and to Morrow 
shall be as this Day, and much more a- 
bundant . Daily Experience convinces us 
how hard it is to reclaim Drunkenness; 
which should, in Reason, make Men 
dread, abhor, and detest this Vice, which 
leads them to a State of Impenitence, 
the greatest Evil that is incident to us 
in this Life, since it is the sure Fore- 
runner of eternal Misery in the next. 

In order therefore to have a just Ha- 
tred and Detestation of this Sin, it be- 
hoves Men seriously to consider the Hei- 
nousness of it, and the manifold Evils and 
Mischiefs that accompany it. It being 
a Vice that is condemned both by God 
and Man, by Infidels, as well as Chris- 
tians, and is withal most injurious to 
|P_18
our selves, by weakening and destroying 
our Bodies, and thereby shortening our 
Lives: How oft is the Candle of the Wic- 
ked put out, and how frequently cometh 
their Destruction upon them, God distri- 
buteth Sorrows in his Anger , Job xxi. 17. 
Job calls it, their Destruction, for them- 
selves are the Authors of it. 

The Prophet Jeremiah, xxxv. 14. tells 
us, that the Words of Jonadab, the Son 
of Rechab, that he commanded his Sons 
not to drink Wine, are observed : but our 
bountiful God has permitted the Use 
thereof, only with this Charge, Be ye 
not drunk with Wine, wherein is Excess , 
Ephes. v. 18. yet Men do not obey his 
Voice, therefore the Rechabites will be 
their Judges; and it will be more to- 
lerable in the Day Of Judgment, for Ma- 
hometans and Idolaters, than for sottish 
Christians. 

The habitual Drinkers of Brandy, and 
other Distill'd spirituous Liquors especi- 
ally, are grown to that Height of Im- 
piety, that they even glory in their 
Shame; they that are now drunk, are 
not drunk in the Night only; they do 
not desire that the Darkness should cover 
their shameful Wickedness, for they com- 
mit this Sin openly and at Noon-day, in 
the Face of the Sun: They add Drunk- 
kenness to Thirst : Deut. xxix. 19. 

|P_19
When we reflect upon the unhappy 
Course and Life of these miserable, infa- 
tuated Wretches, how ought it to af- 
fect us with Concern, to consider that it 
is destructive of their Happiness both here 
and hereafter. Could we peep into the 
Chambers of Death, and see those un- 
happy Souls, who were once indulging in 
excessive Drinking here on Earth, on 
whom the Pit has shut her Mouth; who 
are full of Anguish and Indignation for 
their former Folly, when it is too late. 
It much imports us therefore to remem- 
ber that there remains still the same 
Threatning to the Drunkards of this 
Generation, which was formerly denoun- 
ced by the Prophet against the Drun- 
kards of Ephraim; They shall be trod- 
den under Feet, Isa. xxviii. 3. 

It is commonly pleaded by those who 
are under a Habit of Drunkenness, that 
they cannot forsake it; so they flatter 
and deceive their own Souls, that either 
God will not require them to do an im- 
possible Thing, and therefore they shall 
be excused; or they say he is a hard 
Master, to shut a Man out of Heaven, 
and cast him into Hell, for doing a Thing 
which he could not help. But, O wic- 
ked Servant! Wherefore dost thou, to 
keep thy own Wickedness, accuse God 
foolishly and falsely? for he will not lay 
|P_20
upon Man more than right, that he should 
enter into Judgment with God , Job xxxiv. 
23. The Son of Sirach justly observes, 
that God hath commanded no Man to do 
wickedly, nor has he given any Man a 
License to Sin: Eccles. xv. 20. If those 
who are diseased with a Dropsy, will, 
when they are advised by a Physician, 
restrain their Appetite, and refrain from 
much Drink; though, by reason of their 
Distemper, they are continually tor- 
mented with an insatiable Thirst, and 
this for the Sake of recovering their 
Health, and to preserve, for a while, 
their temporal Life: Then how much 
more should those who have been 
addicted to Drunkenness, bridle their 
Appetite, and abstain from Intemper- 
ance, notwithstanding they have thereby 
brought upon themselves, such an un- 
natural depraved Thirst, as gives them 
great Uneasiness to forbear drinking; so 
many and great are the Evils that do 
necessarily accompany this Vice, both in 
this Life, and in the Life to come, that 
are much more earnestly to be avoided 
than many Deaths. 

No Habit, however long in contract- 
ing, his impossible to be removed; it may 
be done, though with some Difficulty. 
There is no one so far gone in the Dis- 
ease of Drunkenness, or any other Sin 
|P_21
whatever, but there is room for a Cure, 
which would certainly be obtained, if 
seriously, and in Earnest, sought after; 
for God affords his Grace to al1 that 
ask it; 'tis only to the Obstinate and 
Impenitent, that he shuts up his Bowels 
of Mercy and Compassion. It a greatly 
behoves Men therefore not to forfeit 
the Divine Grace and Assistance, by their 
obstinate Perseverance in this beastly Sin, 
but to repent, and reform, that this and 
all their other Sins should be forgiven 
them. 

They who would not be led away, 
nor enslaved by this vile Vice of exces- 
sive Drinking, must carefully avoid the 
Company of Drunkards, pursuant to the 
Advice of the Wise Man, Prov. xxiii. 20. 
Keep not Company with Drunkards . It 
much imports us therefore to avoid 
drunken Company, and to shun their 
Conversation; for if once we give 
Ground and comply, we are lost, the Sin 
will, by little and little, prevail upon us. 
Thus many who have purposed to lead 
temperate Lives, by venturing into the 
Company of Tiplers, where they have 
been gradually drawn in, to be Parta- 
kers of their Bestiality, have at length 
arrived to that Pitch of Excess, as to 
drown all their serious and pious Reso- 
|P_22
lutions in a continual Flow of Drunk- 
kenness. 

If Men did, in the Sincerity of their 
Heart, use such proper Means, there is 
no doubt, but they would be able to 
overcome this Vice, how long soever 
they may have been accustomed to it. 
They therefore who continue under the 
Power of it, can never excuse them- 
selves, by the Impossibility of Amend- 
ment; but should rather accuse the 
Falseness of their own Hearts, that have 
still such a Love for this Sin, that they 
will not, in good Earnest, make use of 
the proper Means to avoid it. 

In a Word, If all these Considerations 
will not deter Men from this odious 
Vice; they must still wallow in their 
Vomit, and continue in this sottish, 
senseless Condition, till the Flames of 
Hell rouse them, when they will, by 
sad Experience find, what they will not 
now believe, that the End of these Things , 
as the Apostle says, (Rom. vi. 21.) is 
Death . 

I shall conclude with the Words 
of St. Paul, and St. Peter, 1 Thess. v. 5, 
6. 1 Pet. v. 8. 1 Pet. i. 13. Ye are all 
the Children of Light, and the Children 
of the Day; we are not of the Night, nor 
of Darkness: therefore let us not sleep, as 
|P_23
do others, but let us watch and be sober. 
For they that sleep, sleep in the Night; 
and they that are drunken, are drunken 
in the Night; but let us who are of the 
Day be sober. Be sober, be vigilant, be- 
cause your Adversary the Devil, as a roar- 
ing Lion, walketh about, seeking whom he 
may devour. 

FINIS. 
[^An ornament in the middle of the page. ^]
