

[^Sample 1: book - ^]

|P_3[^An illustration ... ^]
[}PHARMACOMASTIX: 
OR, THE 
OFFICE, USE, and ABUSE 
of APOTHECARIES explained, &c.}]
SIR, 

SINCE Physic alone among all the use- 
ful sciences, has at this time the misfortune 
to be unrepresented in Parliament, and as the 
Statutefor preventing Frauds and Abuses 
in the making and vending unsound, adulterate, and bad 
Drugs and Medicines, is now near expiring, I hope 
it may not be improper to shew the necessity of 
continuing that Act, and to offer some Amendments 
thereto, which the artful evasions and corruptions of 
mercenary artificers have rendered absolutely neces- 
sary. 

Your early acquaintance with the nature and 
constitution of Parliaments, your weight in our 
national Assembly, and your extensive benevolence, 
have pointed you out the fittest patron and advocate 
for a Scheme wholely calculated for the public Be- 
nefit, to correct the many enormous Abuses in 
Pharmacy, and consequently to promote the 
|P_4
health and temporal happiness of a considerable part 
of mankind. Therefore I shall venture, without 
any farther apology, to submit the following lines to 
your serious consideration. 

There is no well regulated country where the 
Legislature has not made some provision for 
the preservation of the health of the Body natural, 
as well as for that of the Body politic; yet pity it is, 
that in most, for want of due Information, all the 
Laws hitherto enacted in regard to Medicine, have 
fallen far short of it's good intentions. For as an 
Evil whose source or cause is unknown must be 
remediless; so is it scarce possible, that the Frauds 
or Abuses in any art or trade, tho' ever so pernicious 
to society, can be prevented or punished by law, 
until they are first discovered and made apparent to 
the law-givers. — If some of the honest artists or 
tradesmen of every occupation, would ingenuously 
disclose the secret corruptions of their respective 
callings (without which they may for ever escape 
the cognizance and censure of the Legislature) 
we might then hope for a general reformation. 
But alas! we are too like the Ephesian smith in 
scripture, ready upon every attempt to purge us 
from iniquity, to cry out with him, The craft is in 
danger. 

The natural, fragile structure of the human 
Frame, which has rendered it subject to sundry 
inevitable vicissitudes, from the force of external 
bodies, from the alterations of the air, the nature 
of the aliments, and from the very vital actions, 
has made the healing art in general, of all others the 
most useful and necessary for the support and well- 
being of mankind, and nearly coœval with the 
Creation [/1./]. So sensible were men in all ages of the 
usefulness and dignity of Physic, that it has ever 
been held in the utmost reverence and esteem. 
|P_5
The inventors or improvers of this noble art were 
by the antients ranked among the Gods, and stiled 
sons of Gods, and the hands of Gods. It was a long 
time practised by heroes only, or the sons of Gods, 
[/2./]
being deemed too sacred for prophane hands. 
The Heathen, Jews and primitive Christians agreed in 
paying the utmost respect to the healing art, be- 
lieving it of divine and heavenly origine [/3./]. Hence 
we find the greatest honors possible were conferred 
on the antient physicians in the most wise, polite, and 
politic states. They were generally caressed or en- 
vied by kings and princes who designed to study, 
and endeavoured to acquire and practice their in- 
estimable art. Many natural productions as well as 
artificial preparations to this day retain the Name of 
a royal discoverer or inventor. And two [/4./] of the 
most considerable antient physical writers whose 
works are extant at this time, were, one the son of 
a king, the other a sovereign prince. The Athenians
so justly prized the worth and excellency of the 
divine Hippocrates, that they initiated him into their 
grand mysteries; they presented him with the free- 
dom of Athens in a crown, (a royal diadem) to 
the value of a thousand pieces of Gold, and set- 
tled a considerable stipend for his maintenance during 
life, at the public expence. — They likewise made 
a law prohibiting all women, bondsmen, or slaves 
meddling with Physic: as they did likewise in Locris, 
which decreed, that disobedience to the directions or 
prescriptions of Physicians should be punished with 
death. Julius Cæsar made all Physicians that should 
settle in Rome, freemen and denizens [/5./]; and when, 
for some reasons of state, a succeeding emperor 
banished the Greeks that city, yet the Physicians, 
tho' all Greeks, were exempted. It is also observable 
|P_6
that the first alien known to obtain his freedom of 
that once glorious city was a Physician [/6./]. The 
Physicians of the college of Milan are dignified 
with an order of knighthood, and wear to this day 
golden Collars [/7./]. Innumerable other instances 
might be produced, if necessary, to shew, that 
medicine and the medical sages were ever respected 
and esteemed, admired and encouraged, all 
the World over. See Celsus, Senert. Inst.Med.
Moæbii Synops. epitom.Inst. Med. Le Clerc Hist.
de la Medecine. Friend's History of Physic. Harris's 
Pharmac-anti-empyr. and Prof. to Fuller's Pharmacop. 
extempor. 

If the healing art was thus honored in the ruder, 
early ages, how much does it deserve our regard 
and attention with the many considerable improve- 
ment of the moderns, which were to the antients 
utterly unknown? 

There can hardly be any one insensible of the 
value of Health and Life, since the very first 
impulse of nature prompts every creature to use all 
ways and means to preserve them: And nothing 
but an uninterrupted enjoyment of health can render 
any man regardless of so invaluable a blessing. It 
was the dreadful contagion which raged in Rome
about the 301st year after the building that city, 
'where there were not then found Physicians enough 
to attend the sick [/8./], that first made the robust Ro- 
mans sensible of the Use and Excellency of Physic, 
which they afterwards so generously incouraged, and 
so amply rewarded. Salus populi suprema lex esto, is 
a precept which was once religiously observed, in 
its fullest extent, by every worthy Roman senator. 
And tho' it might not have been originally pro- 
nounced or received in this sense literally, yet I ap- 
prehend the application of it merely to the bodily 
|P_7
health of the people, can be no wide deviation from 
the sense of the wise author; since the general well- 
fare of the community depends upon the health of 
it's Members. 

Physic or Medicine is the art by which our 
lives and health are preserved and restored. And 
abuses or mal-administration in any branch thereof 
must necessarily prejudice or subvert the whole. 
This cannot be charged upon Physic or Chirurgery, 
for it may in truth be affirmed, that this Kingdom 
was never so happily provided in that way, as at 
present, with men of both professions inferior to 
none in Europe, in erudition, judgement, and probity. 
But Pharmacy, or the apothecary's art in parti- 
cular, which ministers in an especial manner to the 
two former branches, namely Physic and Chirurgery; 
tho' the good success of both most considerably 
depends thereupon, is left neglected and un- 
cultivated, over-run with errors, abuses and frauds. 
And tho' there are no corruptions in any art so per- 
nicious and destructive to the public, as those of 
Apothecaries, yet (melancholly consideration!) none 
are so little liable to discovery or punishment. 
Deceits in most trades are perceptible to the gene- 
rality, and are not only in some sense cognizable 
by law, but as they must sooner or later be discover- 
ed by the customers, common policy will direct 
most tradesmen to some integrity in their callings. 
But as the most baneful frauds in Pharmacy, being 
never suspected, are seldom or never perceptible to 
the public, tho' often felt, (few or none besides 
Physicians,Chirurgeons, or Apothecaries, being sensible 
of the evils in this way,) so none transgresses with 
more ease and security, than the dishonest apothe- 
cary. He may destroy the reputation of the most 
careful and judicious physicians and chirurgeons, and 
murder thousands of their patients, his bill is never- 
theless paid, and he is still unsuspectedly entertain- 
ed, caressed and employed by the surviving Fami- 
|P_8
lies. A little artifice can tinsel or varnish over the 
most vile frauds or perfidious neglects of the unjust 
apothecary. If he can command a brazen front, 
with an hardened, servile conscience, it is enough, 
all is safe. For his vassal apprentices, who only can 
be privy to his villainy, are hushed, they are obliged to 
keep his secrets without distinction. 

As Pharmacy is a most useful and necessary 
art, nay, according to one of the fathers of physic [/9./], 
the most useful branch of medicine, when in a state 
of purity and perfection, so it is the most pernicious
and destructive, when it is not exercised with the 
utmost integrity, care, fidelity and good under- 
standing. No knave so vile, so dangerous to society 
as a bad apothecary. The rapacious highwayman, 
a professed enemy to mankind, bids the unwary tra- 
veller stand and at the peril of his life part with his 
money: But the dishonest apothecary, a more subtil 
kind of robber, pretends a friendship for his Custo- 
mer, yet takes the same opportunity with the former 
(which the love of life and health, and dread of 
death that human Nature is possessed with, amply 
affords him,) and so robs thousands of their fortunes, 
giving them only some vile, useless drug in ex- 
change; by which their lives are always endan- 
gered and often destroyed. And yet notwithstand- 
ing the apothecary is never in the least suspected; so 
that the orphan may oft pay him for the death of 
his parents, parents for that of their children, wi- 
dows for their husbands, and so forth: and perhaps 
gratefully acknowledge the great care and tenderness 
of their worthy apothecary, tho' he might have been 
more instrumental to their death than the disease. 

For these reasons,, the apothecaries have no tem- 
poral advantages in, nor any incitements to honesty 
or integrity in their calling. For while men can 
buy the most base and worst commodities, and may 
|P_9
without detection, substitute them for, or sell them 
at the same rate with the best and most genuine, we 
shall probably be infested with such mercenary 
wretches as will prefer their own ill-gotten gain, to 
a clear conscience and the safety and welfare of 
their neighbours; the far greater profit arising from 
illegal trade. 

I would not be hereby thought to charge all the 
worthy apothecaries of this kingdom, with igno- 
rance, disingenuity, or disintegrity; far be it from 
me! I am well assured that we have some, as ju- 
dicious, as skilful, and as honest in their way, as 
any in Europe. But as it may not be allowable 
to point at the indentical guilty persons, either by 
naming the one, or exempting the other, so I am 
obliged to make the charge in general against the 
whole fraternity, my self not excepted. So let him 
whom the cap fits wear it — [/10./] let the galled jade 
wince. — It is thro' a real concern for the just, 
good men, that are indiscriminately blended with 
the unjust, and for the scandalous disrepute which 
the excellent art of Pharmacy is fallen into, toge- 
ther with the long train of evils which attend the 
public in general, from the base craft and corrupti- 
on of avaricious falsifiers of medicines, that I am 
urged to this work. 

I have a long time had a conflict with myself 
about this important undertaking. I must confess I 
some time feared the united powers of the wicked a- 
gainst me, having on the like occasion heretofore, 
fatally experienced the strength of the confederate 
Opponents of reformation: And above all, I avoided 
taking upon me a task, to which I am conscious of, 
and confess my inequality. But at length laying a- 
side all selfish fear, and finding none of the many 
more capable inclined to engage in such a just and 
necessary warfare, I have at all hazards presumed 
|P_10
to give you the following informations, and to sub- 
mit these just (tho' indigested) Observations to the 
wisdom of the Legislature; from whose pater- 
nal care and benevolence alone, we may expect the 
due encouragement of Virtue, and the suppression 
of Vice of every kind. If my weak endeavours 
answer any useful purposes, I have my full recom- 
pence in being but ever so mean an Instrument of 
effecting a public good. I hope the merits of the 
Cause, for which I am but a slender advocate, and 
the simplicity and honesty of mine intentions, will 
gain your attention, plead for the weakness of my 
performance, and supply the want of Rhetoric and 
Oratory. 

In order to lay this matter properly before you, I 
judge it expedient, 

I. To consider the rise and primitive state of 
Pharmacy, and from the best authority to point out 
the proper Office and Duty of, and the requisite 
Qualifications for an Apothecary. In which I shall 
cursorily endeavour to explain the difference between 
Apothecaries and Druggists. 

II. To shew the present state of Pharmacy, and 
how far the modern deviate from the proper Office
and Duty, and fall short of the qualifications of the 
antient true Apothecaries; in which fatal degeneracy 
it will appear, that it is scarcely possible for a man 
to learn that Art fully, and then to get an honest
livelihood by that profession solely, let his know- 
ledge and understanding in it be ever so consider- 
able, unless he had the good fortune of an extraordi- 
nary genius, which may lead him to study it properly, 
and of gaining a set of customers who pay un- 
common deference to his judgement and integrity. 

III. To lay open some of the most inconsidera- 
ble and obvious Frauds and Abuses in this way, whe- 
ther thro' ignorance or design of Apothecaries or 
Druggists; and to point out some of the most per- 
|P_11
nicious sophistications of Medicines, with the evil 
consequences thereof. And 

IV. and lastly, To offer some means to prevent 
such horrid mal-practices for the future; whereby 
the King is not only basely defrauded in his just 
Revenue, by which every Subject must suffer; but 
also the Public is robbed of the chief blessing 
of this life, Health, and the means of restoring it; 
and the fair and honest Apothecary is crampt and 
restrained in the lawful discharge of his function; 
being undersold by the fraudulent and dishonest. 

I. In the pure, primitive ages of the healing Art, 
the physician not only prescribed, but collected, pre- 
pared, dispensed, and administred medicaments, as well 
as performed chirurgical operations. For the now
three distinct branches of Medicine, called Phyfic, 
Pharmacy, and Chirurgery, were (till about the time 
of Herophilus and Erasistratus) managed by one and 
the same hand [/11./]. But finding it too laborious and 
burdensome, and according to a trite aphorism of 
the father of Physic, [/12./] that the life of man was 
too short to comprehend fully, or to compleat the know- 
ledge of that sublime Art, it was judged expedient 
to divide it into these three different parts, that 
having less to study in each, it might become less 
tedious and prolix, insomuch that every student 
may hope to arrive at a competent degree of know- 
ledge in that branch which he chose for his peculiar stu- 
dy: Whereupon the three distinct offices of Physician, 
Apothecary, and Chirurgeon, were instituted. 

The Physicians, on account of seniority and super- 
lative erudition, are justly allowed the pre-eminence
of the two other brethren, which, indeed, I think 
that profession merits of all others, divinity only 
excepted. A Physician must have a most liberal edu- 
cation: He must be well versed in all the learned 
|P_12
languages, in natural history, in all parts of Phi- 
losophy, in Anatomy, the animal Œconomy, the histo- 
ries of distempers, their natures, signs, Symptoms, 
causes, diagnostics, prognostics, indications of Cure, 
&c. He must likewise be well grounded in 
the theories of the Chemic and Galenic pharmacies
and of chirurgery. For according to the wise author
of medicine, [/13./]natural endowments, learning, a proper
place for study, education from infancy, industry and 
time, are requisite to constitute a physician; in conse- 
quence of which we find, the education of such is 
in schools and universities, seminaries of polite lite- 
rature, where all things are learned to compleat the 
physician and the gentleman. Thus must a physician
be qualified before he can undertake the care of the 
sick in any, the slightest disorder: And he who 
made the greatest progress in that admirable art, 
even the divine sage, [/14./] is not ashamed to confess, 
that tho' he was now advanced in old age, and got to the 
extremity of life, he had not yet arrived at the end of 
physic. Whence it follows that physic is the deep- 
est and most extensive study, and it's practice the 
weightiest and most important charge, that human 
nature can possibly undertake. 

Chirurgery now usurps the second rank; and 
tho' it has had a worse fate than physic, in falling 
some time into the hands of ignorant and illiterate 
men, yet it's knowledge is again happily revived a- 
mong us, and all those who make a figure in that 
profession, are not only men of learning and erudi- 
tion, but inferior to none in Europe in judgement and 
understanding in that excellent art. 

For some centuries Chirurgery 1 as well as 
Pharmacy, 2 was subservient and ministerial to Phy- 
sic. The first Chirurgeons[/15./] and Apothecaries after 
|P_13
the division of Medicine into these three branches, 
being taught by the Physicians, [/16./] were by them 
solely directed and conducted in the exercise and 
discharge of their respective functions. So that the 
then Chirurgeons never bled, opened tumours, 
amputated limbs, nor performed any other opera- 
tion in their profession; nor did the Apothecaries
apply, or administer any medicine, but in con- 
sultation with or by the advice or approbation 
of the Physicians. Yet as it is now essentially ne- 
cessary to compleat a Chirurgeon, that he be a man 
of learning, a perfect master of anatomy and of 
course well acquainted with the animal œconomy, and 
his object being one, and his practice being grounded 
on the same principles and rationale with Physic, 
(with this only distinction, that one treats the ex- 
ternal, the other the internal disorders of the human 
Body,) it does not seem unreasonable, that such 
Chirurgeons should bleed and perform other opera- 
tions in that way, and even prescribe, especially ex- 
ternal applications, upon their own Judgement 
solely. 

But the case is quite otherwise with Apothecaries: 
For altho' they should be good scholars, and ne- 
cessarily conversant with the writings of the learn- 
ed who treated on their profession, yet does their 
requisite Readings no where instruct them in anato- 
my, or the animal œconomy, nor in any of the 
many other necessary qualifications of physicians, or 
chirurgeons, the knowledge of the Materia medica
only excepted, the apothecary's office, his very 
appellation in all the known languages denotes. 
Thus among the antients, Medicus sellularis
implied an apothecary or one who prepared and 
dispensed medicines. As did likewise Pharmaceuta
and Medicamentarius. In like manner Apothecarius
an apothecary from Apotheca, a shop, ware-house or 
|P_14
repository, or (in the more common acceptation,) 
a place where drugs or medicines are kept or sold; 
and he may be aptly called a Physic-Shop-keeper: 
also Pharmacopæus, a maker, preparer or compound- 
er of medicines. And likewise Seplasiarius, from 
Seplasia, a market-place in Capua, once a famed 
mart for drugs and perfumed ointments. And 
the sole proper business and office of an Apothecary, 
is, to collect or procure at due times and seasons, from 
the proper places, the several, usual medicinal pro- 
ductions of Nature, the simples of the Mineral, ve- 
getable and animal Kingdoms; to select and prepare, 
to decompound or compound them according to Art, by 
the directions of Physicians, and by their prescripti- 
ons only, to dispense, administer, or apply them. [/17./] To 
qualify him for which undertaking he should be well 
versed in natural history, as far as it regards Mine- 
ralogy, Botonalogy, or Zoology, and rationally as well as 
experimentally grounded in the knowledge of the 
Galenic and Chemic Pharmacies; which is a large Field 
for a man to exercise his talents in learnings and it 
must well employ his time every season or the year 
after, if he intends discharging the duty of his office 
strictly and faithfully. Pharmacopola is an injurious 
name, improperly given to an Apothecary. The 
Pharmacopolæ of the antients seem to have been such 
as were employed by artists in collecting or procuring 
the simples; they were mere venders of drugs, and 
pretended to no art or knowledge beyond that; but 
as these men in time degenerated into knaves or 
quacks, they became hateful to society, and the name 
of Pharmacopola, with most writers since implies, a 
canting hawker, a false quack, or a deceitful mounte- 
bank. How applicable this appellation, in the worst 
sense, may be to some dealers in medicine, who call 
themselves Druggists, I shall not here determine; but 
|P_15
we have the satisfaction to observe, that that trade is a- 
gain revived; for in London, Marseilles, Amsterdam, Rot- 
terdam, Leghorn, Hamburgh, and most other regular 
trading cities in Europe, the Druggist is none other than 
a mere Merchant of Drugs, and in the best fense of the 
word, Pharmacopola. 

So different a profession from Physic was Pharmacy
deemed, that not above a century passed, since the 
Grocers Company in London dispensed medicines. 
But it was at length found expedient, that some 
should separate from that body, who should take 
upon them the entire management of the medicinal 
part of that trade, that by applying themselves sole- 
ly to an affair of so great importance to the public, 
they might cultivate and attain to a competent know- 
ledge in so useful and necessary an art. Whereupon 
Pharmacy was revived, and the Apothecaries throw- 
ing off all incumbrances, betook them to their pro- 
per profession, in which they soon became eminent, 
were taken notice of, and encouraged by the learned, 
and grew into such favour with King James the 
First, that he incorporated them by Royal Charter, 
and used to call them his own company. Thus they 
became a distinct society from the grocers. 

The illustrious college of physicians of Augsburgh, 
which was the first, that I find, who took the pains of 
compiling, and published the celebrated Auguftane 
Dispensatory, has most minutely and justly laid down 
the qualifications for and the office and duty of an Apo- 
thecary, from whom, with some few amendments 
from other authentic writers, I make the following 
abstract. 

As Pharmacy is a most considerable branch of the 
Healing Art, being the physician's chief agent, so 
the apothecary should be a just good man, and principally 
grounded in the knowledge of his profession. 

He should in general be untainted in his morals, and of 
a perfect sound understanding, endowed with a just reve- 
rence for the Supreme Being, and the true principles 
|P_16
of the Christian Religion; pious and faithful, 
just and equitable; humane, benign, affable, placable, 
merciful and ready; mild and bountiful to the poor and indi- 
gent; ever preferring publick to private gains; vigilant 
and regardful of the dangers and necessities of the sick; in 
acts of mercy and charity, diligent and unwearied; not 
covetous, penurious, or mercenary; for in buying of drugs, he 
is to prefer the testimony of a clear conscience, the good 
of his neighbour, and his own credit and reputation, to ill 
gotten riches or lucre. Wherefore, he is to procure ge- 
nuine good drugs and medicines at any rate, rather than by 
buying at the vilest, dispense adulterate or bad medicines, 
and deceive his unwary customer to the peril or prejudice 
of his life or health. He should be fober and regular in 
all his conduct; no gamester, sot, or drunkard; nor prone 
to libidinous concupifcence or venery. 

Thefe premised, his capacity is next to' be consi- 
dered. He must not only have a strong natural genius to 
lead him to this art, but he must be a good scholar, to ina- 
ble him to read the ordinary prescripts of physicians and 
chirurgeons, which (from the difficulty of translating 
them with any certainty into the vulgar tongues, 
and for other obvious reasons,) are all over Europe 
wrote in Latin, and especially, that he may acquire a 
thorough knowledge of his profession, by consulting the 
works of the learned, who treat upon the several 
branches thereof. 

The Authors recommended, are Dioscorides, Galen, 
Ægineta, Ætius, Mesue, Nich. Prœpositus and Myrep- 
sius, Pliny, Corn. Celsus, A. M. Brasavolus, Valer. Cor- 
dus, Anut. Fæsius, Fuchsius, Garcias ab Horto, Nich. 
Monardes, J. B. Sylvaticus, Fernelius, Joubertus, Re- 
nodœus, Melichius, Coudenbergius; also, Mathiolus, Lo- 
nicerus, Tragus, Lobelius, Pæna, Dodonœus, Taberna- 
 montanus, Quercetanus, Joh. Jac. Weckerus, Heurnius, 
Oswald. Crollius, &c. To which must now be added 
G. Agricola, Fer. Imperatus, B. Cæsius, Worm, 
Casp. & Joh. Bauhin, Salmasius, Schroeder, Zwelser, 
Morrison, Ray, Tournefort, Ang. Sala, J. Hartman, 
|P_17
Mynsicht, the Hoffmans, Clusius, Piso, Bontius, 
Marcgravius, Wedelius, Le Mort, Dale, Stahl, 
Boerhaave, and many others; besides the several col- 
legiate dispensatories of Augsburgh, London, Brux- 
els, Edinburgh, Paris, Leyden, Hague, Ghaunt, &c.
from these the apothecary can best learn the medicinal parts 
of the mineral, vegetable, and animal kingdoms, with their 
proper names and synonyma in the Arabic, Greek, Latin, 
and vulgar tongues: These will teach him to discern the 
good from the bad, and to select the true and genuine, 
from the false and sophisticated: and in short, from them 
he can collect the generic marks and characteristics of 
the simple, with proper instructions for preparing, and 
necessary animadversions on, the compound medicaments. 

 Having laid these solid foundations for his future 
practice, his Œconomy comes next under conside- 
ration. 

His shop should be situate in a convenient, open, 
temperate place, not exposed to damps, winds, dust, 
smoke, or stench. And as it contains sundry distilled 
liquors, wines or vinous infusions, tinctures and si- 
rups, electuaries, confections and conserves, which 
too much heat will render vapid or mothery, fer- 
ment, sour, or otherwise spoil; and which excessive 
cold will chill add freeze, congeal, crystallize, or o- 
therwise prejudice: A vintner need hardly observe 
a greater exactness or regularity in adjusting the 
temperature of his cellar or vault, than an Apo- 
thecary should in that of his shop or store-room. 
Wherefore he should avoid the extreme heat of the 
sun, which on one hand he is exposed to, all the 
summer months, and on the other, the extraordi- 
nary cold of the winter: For which reasons, that 
aspect is most eligible which affords the greatest 
mediocrity. Nor should it be exposed in any, to 
the many inconveniences and evils of open un- 
glassed windows and doors, nor made more intem- 
perate by fires made on particular occasions only, 
either in summer or winter. 

|P_18
And that the medicines may he handled cleanly and 
neatly, (those for internal use more especially, which 
are taken with the greater reluctance and disdain, the 
more sordidly they are observed to be treated) the Apo- 
thecary is to keep his shop and utensils sweet, pure, and 
clean; and with indefatigable diligence, furnish it with 
the usual commodities at due seasons, and preserve them 
for future use in fit receptacles and convenient places. 

He is not to sell or administer, nor suffer, or cause 
to be administered to any, (without the immediate li- 
cence of a Magistrate, or the prescription of a judicious 
Physician) any sort of poyson or poysonous drugg, 
philtres, provocatives of terms or abortion, opium or 
laudanum, strong vomitives or purgatives, nor other 
such like powerful medicines, especially the Chemical 
preparations of Mercury and Antimony. 

He should be strictly just and faithful, cautious and 
circumspect, in the dispensing and preparing the ordina- 
ry prescriptions of Physicians, as well as the officinal 
compositions. Nor should he rashly or conceitedly, sub- 
stitute any one thing for another in a medicine, trust- 
ing to his own judgement or knowledge, nor omit the 
least or meanest ingredient in any composition whatsoever, 
without the advice, consent, or approbation of the pre- 
scriber, or some other skilful, prudent physician. But 
with religious fidelity, care and integrity, dispense all 
prescripts in quality and quantity, truly and exactly, 
according to the literal fense of such prescript or recipe. 
He is to keep an exact registry of all such recipe's, and the 
originals, carefully filed. He is to keep such as are for se- 
cret complaints from being exposed. He is to repeat 
no medicine without the direction of the prescriber. 
See prolegom. Isagog. in pharmac. August. Cap. 
i. I. D. Horstij Inst. pharmaceut. Part. i. Cap. ii. 
Hoffman. Clav. pharm. Schroed. p. 29. 

So sensible were the wise senate of Augsbourg of 
the use and necessity of these rules, that they made 
some excellent laws, as well to inforce the observati- 
on, thereof, as to regulate the practices of physic, 
|P_19
pharmacy and chirurgery in every other instance: 
And the senate of Ghaunt also took much the like 
method. 

Among other statutes it is enacted, "That no 
apothecary, shall so far swerve from his duty, 
as to interfere with the proper office of a physi- 
cian or chirurgeon; and that none presumes to 
sell or administer medicines (strong purgatives 
and provocatives especially) without the prescripti- 
on of a physician; lest by the rash, ill-judged, or un- 
timely use of the most efficacious remedies, the 
health of the public may suffer, and the best 
medicines fall into contempt and disrepute; phy- 
sicians only being the proper judges of the fit 
subjects and just times of administering such 
remedies." — "The apothecaries are obliged to 
prepare and compound all their medicines by 
the college dispensatory, [/18./] and to sell them at 
the rates fixed by the senate.""All quacks, em- 
pirics, mountebanks, and such like impostors and 
 pretenders to medicine whatsoever, not found le- 
gally qualified, are expelled the state." See the 
decrees and statutes of the senates of Augsbourg and 
Ghaunt, annexed to their several dispensatories. 

The apothecaries of Paris are obliged, not only 
to conform to the dispensatory, strictly and literally, 
but are likewise prohibited to vend or administer a- 
ny medicines whatsoever, without the prescription of 
one of the faculty of medicine or one of the King's 
physicians. See an arret of parliament prefixed to 
the Parisian dispensatory. 

Nothing assuredly can contribute more to the im- 
provement and benefit of the healing art, than the 
professors of the different branches thereof, applying 
themselves entirely to the study and practice of their 
respective callings. And this was certainly the wise 
design of our predecessors in dividing it into those 
|P_20
three several parts; and were it yet further subdivided, 
it is probable it might be brought to greater certain- 
ty and rendered more generally beneficial to man- 
kind, than it can be in an aggregate state; since the 
meanest branch can sufficiently employ the whole 
attention and understanding of a man. We find 
that many of the antients were of this opinion [/19./], and 
that it was approved by the late celebrated doctor 
Harris of London[/20./]. What considerable discoveries 
and improvements have already been made in phy- 
sic in general by these divisions, are very obvious to 
all that are conversant with the history of medicine. 
Physicians by appointing proper agents for the more 
operose and mechanic parts of their profession, threw 
off all incumbrance and obtained more time and 
leisure for study. Chirurgery was cultivated un- 
der the same management and both have arrived 
at the extraordinary pitch of eminence we now see 
them in, under these wise Regulations. Pharmacy
too, while it kept within the proper bounds, shone 
and flourished; for it is observable, that no set of men 
made a better figure in their way than the apothe- 
caries that retained their integrity and kept within 
the just limits of their Occupation; which the 
works of many of them amply testify. Of these 
are Ferrantes Imperatus a Neapolitan, who wrote a 
most excellent natural history, 28 books in folio; 
John Parkinson of London, who wrote the Theatrum 
Botanicum and Paradisus Terrestris; Thomas Johnson
of the same, who emaculated and augmented 
Gerard's Herbal, all in large folio; Moses Charas of 
Paris, who wrote a very useful dispensatory, in large 
quarto; Peter Pomet of the same, a mere druggist, 
who wrote a history of drugs in folio; M. Lemery, 
who wrote a course of Chemy in octavo, an universal 
dispensatory, and a dictionary of drugs in large 
|P_21quarto; and M. Homberg, who made many improve- 
ments and discoveries in the Pharmacies [/21./], who were 
both honoured for their eminence with the degree of 
doctor of medicine. At present Mr. Joseph Miller
and Mr. Isaac Rand of London, deserve honourable 
mention; as do Messieurs Bolduc and Geoffrey of 
Paris, whose worth and merit none can be a 
stranger to, who reads the memoirs of the Aca- 
demy Royal of Sciences. I have reserved to bring up 
the rear, the brightest ornament of his profession, 
the late learned and ingenious Mr. Samuel Dale, 
whose excellent Pharmacologia has rendered him 
well known to all the physical world. For tho' he 
lived in Brantry in Essex, yet was his merit so well 
known to the illustrious college of physicians of 
London, that before he published the last edition of 
his works, which he greatly augmented and im- 
proved, he was honored with a licence to practise 
physic. With him let me remember that great and 
laborious artist and curious naturalist, Seba of 
Amsterdam; whose prodigious Musœum with the 
history thereof, five large volumes in folio, must 
render his memory famous to latest posterity. 

II. While Pharmacy was practised by such able 
hands as those, Physic which has so great a depen- 
dence upon it, must have flourished. But such be- 
came the insatiable avarice of most of the apotheca- 
ries, that they could not long content themselves 
with the ample profit that arose upon the sale of 
their proper commodities and manufactures; but 
envious of their elder brethren of the faculty of 
physic, they now endeavoured to imitate them, as 
the frogs in the fable did the oxen, (and indeed 
with much the fame success) and sought after new 
methods of increasing their sordid gains. This they 
effected by treacherously and surreptitiously invading 
the provinces of physicians and chirurgeons, and 
|P_22
alluring the populace under the specious pretence of 
giving advice in physic and chirurgery gratis. 
Which fatal delusion readily insnared the ignorant 
vulgar, who could not be sensible of their gross ig- 
norance and manifest incapacity for such an under- 
taking, nor apprehend that these very bountiful 
gentry, took care to tax their medicines with their 
invaluable advice; so that their prescriptions (of 
which it must be confessed they are always most li- 
beral) are now charged infinitely more than their 
real value, or what those of physicians and chirur- 
geons, (tho' of more intrinsic worth, being certainly 
better adapted to particular exigencies, to the con- 
stitution and the indications of cure,) might be made 
up and sold for. And thus by iniquitously enhancing 
the prices of remedies and giving them in unneces- 
sary abundance, they clandestinely acquired unme- 
rited fees, equal to those justly due to the most 
regularly educated and most experienced physicians 
or chirurgeons. 

That this is the present cafe, every intelligent, 
candid apothecary must confess. And these fallacies 
might be further evinced beyond dispute, were the 
generality to be made sensible of the just rates of 
medicines and the most monstrous, extravagant 
bills they are frequently charged. To see two 
drachms of Sal prunel not worth a penny, disguised 
with some insignificant color, and an unintelligible, 
pompous title, and sold for sixteen pence, must surely 
move your contempt and indignation! Who with- 
out abhorrence and surprize, could see sham Gasgoin's 
powder, without a grain of bezoar, sold at five 
shilling the drachm, when (by omitting that only 
dear ingredient) it could not have cost the maker 
one penny? Yet these and many such like imposi- 
tions are daily practised by mercenary quacks, and 
by them judged necessary and their undoubted 
right, on accompt of their extraordinary skill, great 
care, frequent visits, and trouble in attending and pre-
|P_23
scribing. I have known a gentleman's bill, who 
sickened on Monday and died the Wednesday follow- 
ing, amount to above five pounds, tho' his careful 
apothecary had but a street's breadth to cross be- 
tween his shop and the patient's lodging. It is 
more than probable, that if the unhappy sufferer took 
to the value of his bill in medicines, it was the 
cause of his death, and would, tho' he had the most 
athletic constitution; but to acquit his apothecary of 
this murder, every one of the profession must con- 
fess, that no man could well require or consume 
medicines to that value in the time. Then what 
physician could expect so much for his attendance in 
the ordinary manner for so long? 

It must be allowed that all artists have a just 
right to charge upon their wares, the necessary ex- 
pences and trouble that attend the preparing and 
vending them; but those of apothecaries in the sale 
of their commodities without doors, they have 
unnecessarily and unjustly brought upon themselves, 
for the most part; so let the world judge their me- 
rit, in imposing such an iniquitous tax upon the 
public. 

Some perhaps will in good-nature, urge in favour 
of their worthy apothecary, that for a bill of ten 
pounds he is often put off with five or fix. A modest, 
humble creature! His merit as well as demerit, is 
best known to himself. — It is true some apothe- 
caries may think themselves well paid with half their 
bill, and it is not improbable they often are too 
well. For while they can swell their accounts to 
what size they please, by the quantities of medicines 
they prescribe, and charging what they will, it is 
likely care will be taken to suit the bill to the humor 
of the customer, so that if he should pay but a 
fourth part, they are sure to be no losers. But 
which of them will remit one penny of their bill on 
their own accord, be it ever so highly rated, to 
such as do not wrangle for it? And is not whatso- 
|P_24
ever they receive over and above the real value of the 
medicines justly disposed of, the most base and wicked 
extortion? — Such apothecaries would probably 
join in the impious breathings of Garth's Diasenna, 
if they thought their goods were too low rated. 

Thrice happy were those golden days of old, 
When dear as Burgundy ptisans were sold; 
When patients chose to die with better will, 
Than live to pay th' apothecary's bill. 
And cheaper than for our assistance call, 
Might go to Aix or Bourbon spring and fall. 
Dispensatory, Cant. iii. 


The extraordinary, unlimited gain' arising from 
these horrid usurpations, has now tempted the apo- 
thecaries utterly to forsake their proper and imme- 
diate office and duty. For instead of pursuing the 
true means of learning pharmacy, (reading the 
Works of the celebrated writers upon that subject, 
such being generally in Greek or Latin, languages to 
which most dealers in drugs are entire strangers,) 
they have totally neglected and forsaken it, and in 
the room of such authors furnished themselves with 
only some vile English dispensatory, the despicable 
cob-webs of some poor illiterate wretch, who quacked 
for a livelihood and spun these paultry traps for ig- 
norant, unwary Flies. Such were the memorable 
star-mongers and voluminous quacks, Culpeper and 
Salmon, and the erroneous, conceited scriblers, 
Quincy and Alleyne; whose dispensatories, practices 
of physic, and other such like fallacious quack-books, 
(which will not bear reading by any that have read 
the originals, being calculated only for such mean, 
illiterate reptiles, as addict themselves to that vile, 
pernicious Trade of quacking,) can but prompt a 
man to think he understands physic, and practise it, 
when a better education must convince him of the 
|P_25
contrary, and make him tremble at the thoughts of 
the stupendous task. 

Thus has Pharmacy been perverted and debased. 
For tho' held by the antients in the second rank, yet 
is it now deemed the last and meanest of the three 
branches; and indeed under the present mismanage- 
ment and depravity, it may of all trades be reckoned 
the vilest and most despicable; and instead of being 
useful, it is become apparently destructive to society. 
A footman or porter may now a-days pass for an 
apothecary, we fee shops daily served and attended 
by such, or ignorant women. I have known an 
apothecary's shop served by a journey-man of a cer- 
tain mean mechanic trade, who knew not a letter 
in the alphabet. Nay, a wretch who conversed 
more with brutes than men; the stable-tender or 
groom of a certain eminent apothecary, has been 
exalted from rubbing of horses heels, to attending 
his master's table, and thence to wiping of compters 
and pounding mortars; and being translated from 
his master's to a shop of his own, acquired so much 
craft as to pass for an apothecary, lived in repute 
among his neighbours for many years, and died not 
long since in very considerable circumstances. 
Hence the calling is become so vile and scandalous, 
that few, besides the meaner sort, put their children 
to learn it, and so contemptible are those after 
a most servile and tedious apprenticeship, that a 
journeyman taylor, or shoemaker, or any of the 
meanest handy-craft trades, shall get better wages 
than a journeyman apothecary, of ever so good un- 
derstanding in his profession, the most ignorant 
being capable of serving most of our common shops, 
which consists chiefly in retailing medicines made up 
by a nominal druggist, as incapable of preparing, as an 
apothecary of prescribing them justly, or bought 
from a poor, ignorant herb-gatherer, who both 
frequently sell one thing for another of ever so dif- 
ferent qualities, which impositions are implicitly 
|P_26
over-looked by master and man; neither thinking 
the knowledge of simple or compound medicines 
material, or necessary, nor their preparation or 
composition his proper occupation, they lay them- 
selves out for practising physic and chirurgery; for 
which as well as their own profession, the reading a 
false English dispensatory is reckoned a sufficient qua- 
lification. So, quacking being the principal business 
of a modern apothecary, he generally goes thro' that 
himself, therefore needs no judicious emanuensis, any 
raw-boy being soon made capable of the ordinary 
business of his shop; for which reason, rather than 
pay journeyman's wages, apprentices are multiplied 
at any rate, and at all hazards. Whence we come 
to have more apothecaries' shops than any city in 
Europe in proportion: We are within eight or ten 
equal in number with those of Paris, which I think 
is allowed to be six times as populous as Dublin. 

But this fatal degeneracy has now made such a 
progress, that we really forget or know not what 
we should be. For regardless of the worth and 
dignity of our art and of the public benefit, the 
apothecaries have neglected and abandoned it, and 
in the vain pursuit of another, (like Æsop's dog) 
quitted the real substance for an empty shadow; so, 
losing their art, have dwindled into vile, fallacious 
quacks, vain and audacious pretenders to physic and 
chirurgery, and destructive hawkers of medicine. 
The very method of educating youth in this calling, 
is either quite forgotten, or, so far perverted and 
changed from what it must have been heretofore, 
that it is by great accident if ever we happen to fee any 
one of common understanding in that profession; 
few having more than the undeserved name of apo- 
thecary, and that only because he lived in some 
mean, servile station for a time, with one of that 
appellation. These pretenders are above the ordinary 
business and attendance of a shop; that with them 
is quite out of the question; they fly at higher game. 
|P_27
You may see some of these would-be doctors in all 
parts of the town in quest of prey. One dressed 
with all the formality of a prig, another affecting 
a dirty slovenly mien, and an unnatural, sullen grim- 
mace, instead of the natural gravity which must 
necessarily possess men of understanding in the 
important practice of physic. The first shall assume a 
most pedantic, dogmatic air; the second, an ill- 
feigned, awkward, hippocratic leer: and either shall 
smell, taste, or inspect excrements, examine the 
visage and tongue, and feel the pulse with great 
solemnity; then, in a long spun, uncouth jargon of 
ill-chosen, unintelligible, technical words, enough to 
raise the admiration and puzzle all the nurse-keepers 
in Christendom, shall ask a poor languishing patient, 
a set of tedious, impertinent, common-place ques- 
tions, which he cannot possibly understand, and con- 
sequently cannot answer. But the wily quack, with 
a self-sufficient look, and a weighty, revolving 
humh! — cries, so, — ay, — very well, — hemh, 
— I thought so, — I apprehend you, and so forth. 
Then armed with fatal pen, ink, and paper, he pre- 
scribes largely, some stinking, mothered waters, 
fermented sirrups, pernicious burning spirits, in- 
grateful, medicated brandy-juleps[/22./], or at best, unwhol- 
fome and unsavory punch, which the prescriber (to 
whom indeed their worth is solely known) calls 
specific or alexipharmic, and takes care often to 
repeat, because he would not have his patient die 
for want of a cordial, (as it is termed) or rather, 
that he may sell his wares and have an opportunity 
of charging for his visits; tho' he does not know, 
but he hereby in effect signs the poor sufferer's
death-warrant, tho' he meant only to draw a small bill
in his own favour. Yet ask this mighty sham-doctor, 
how the meanest compositions in his shop are made? 
whence this or the other simple ingredient? what 
|P_28
it's distinguishing marks and characteristics ? or the 
like; I will venture to answer for him rather than 
betray his ignorance, he will confess he bought them 
from some honest druggist. No, no; he does not 
stoop to such mean things, he practises physic; like 
Garth's Colon, 

In trifling shew his tinsel talent lies, 
And form the want of intellects supplies. 
In aspect grand and goodly he appears, 
Revered as patriarchs in primæval years. 
Hourly his learned impertinence affords, 
A barren superfluity of words. 
The patients ears remorseless he assails, 
Murders with jargon where his medicine fails. 
Dispens. Cant. ii. 


Let us now take a further view of such an apo- 
thecary and see how he can teach pharmacy. 

The apprentice of such a master, begins with a 
small smattering of grammar rules, and sometimes 
none; which he (least Tyro should soon discover 
his ignorance and illiterature, or in time out do him) 
judges sufficient. His fund of sense, genius, or o- 
ther abilities, are never considered, being indeed but 
trifling to a modern Apothecary, for a little acquired 
craft may make a mere block-head, or even an I- 
deot, pass for an Apothecary. His apprenticeship com- 
mences, with the servile drudgery of the most abject 
slave; as for instruction of any kind he must not 
expect it, his master, who shines among his nurse- 
keepers and co-equals, had none: So that to learn 
his trade, the only prospectle ft, is to follow the good 
example of master, which in this instance is not at- 
tended with much difficulty, and therefore requires 
but few documents. For altho' he deigns to suffer his 
vassal to make up some few physicians prescrip- 
tions, (out of pure complaisance to the elder bro- 
thers of the faculty of physic, or insuperable love of 
|P_29
pels,) yet he never sullies his own delicate hands 
with any preparation; his fingers are made for no- 
bler purposes, feeling of pulses, (in other words) pick- 
ing of pockets. Nor does he think it needful he 
should, when from certain half bred or mungrel apo- 
thecaries, falsely called druggists, he can buy almost 
every preparation or composition, or rather substitutes 
for any, cent. per cent. cheaper than any honest man can 
make them; nothing need be wanting while there is 
any thing of the same or like appearance in the shop. 
The poor deluded boy is told, that master by 
experience knows this or the other base and foreign 
substitute to be equal, if not the same, with whatever 
he is pleased to vend it for. Thus is he to learn his 
future occupation! 

At length the slavish apprenticeship ended, the mi- 
serable, unedified drudge of a vile quack is now be- 
come a master. — Of what? — Why of a shop only 
forsooth. — See him already by example, if not by 
precept, thorough paced, not only in the little mean 
insinuating artifices and tricks of quacks and ordinary 
haberdashers of drugs; but likewise imbued with the 
base penury and sordid craft of pinching on the one 
hand the industrious wretch, who for want of better 
employment seeks a miserable livelihood, by gather- 
ing the herbs or reptiles of the earth, and extorting 
on the other, an exorbitant profit from the pitiful 
farthing of the most necessitous. Having observed 
it needful while an apprentice, he chiefly studied the 
astucia medica, the querks and artifices of physic- 
jobbers, rather than the necessary qualifications of a 
good apothecary, to which he is yet a stranger. He 
therefore apes something of the dress and mien of a 
physician, well knowing, that esteem is oftener gained 
by artifice and outward appearance, than by real worth 
or merit; and then by fawning, cringing, dissimulati- 
on, and the like, gains a set of acquaintance and 
customers in low life, by whom he is extolled, till, 
by degrees or accident, he rises a step higher, and so 
|P_30
is soon (like Moliere's faggot-maker, tho' not al- 
ways by stripes) persuaded to think himself a Doctor. His 
customers he now calls patients, in imitation of his 
superiors, and had he called them sufferers, the appel- 
lation would be still more expressive and significant. 

His sole care is now to vend the destructive maga- 
zine of perishable shop-trumpery, which is not very 
difficult to effect, when the quack has pushed him- 
self into some repute with the vulgar, among whom 
he must have many Jack-calls, by whom the skilful 
physicians and chirurgeons are artfully decried and 
falsely vilified, who might by abstinence, diet, air, 
or exercise, or by dexterity of hand or bandage, 
perhaps without the use of a shop-medicine, cure 
sundry maladies, for which the physic-shopkeeper bears 
them mortal enmity, as they do not promote his 
trade unnecessarily, with the usual fallacious insinua- 
tion of his unparallelled skill and judgement in physic and 
chirurgery, and his thorough acquaintance with the prac- 
tice of both, from the number of recipes, which come in- 
to his hands: but above all, the cheapness of his advice 
and attendance; being said to charge no more than 
the bare prices of a few necessary, cheap Remedies; which 
is the principal recommendation. His character thus 
established, he has frequent opportunities of putting 
off his commodities at any rate, and this he takes 
care to improve by raising so many dangers and dif- 
ficulties, that he keeps his poor sufferers in as wretched 
a state of dread and dependence, as the wicked and 
ignorant quack Coctier did the timorous king of 
France[/23./]. These abject vassals of an usurping apo- 
thecary, (to palliate, cure, or prevent some imaginary 
or fictitious distemper,) are never to cease taking 
medicines, being persuaded they cannot live an hour 
longer than they are crammed with some unnecessary 
nauseous part or other of his decaying shop-lumber, till 
after many filthy, expensive drenches, harrassed nature 
|P_31
sinks under the oppressive weight, or by her own 
strength breaks the bonds, and he is pleated to take 
the honor of the cure, and to pronounce them in 
statu sano. If a bleeding or any chirurgical operati- 
on should be wanting, provided it be such as his ig- 
norance and incapacity may not too plainly appear 
in, and wherewith he may consume plenty of Styptics, 
Litus's, Balsams, Liniments, Ointments and Plasters, 
it is done by the apothecary, citó, tutó, & jucundé, and 
that too without the least help of a chirurgeon; which 
the sick are told to be quite unnecessary, as physicians 
in other cafes; the fees of both being pretended to be 
saved by the quack. As a thrifty ale wife, to avoid 
excise, gave her customers ale gratis, paying two 
pence for the toast and nutmeg put into each quart. 

Moreover to confirm the populace in their vain 
notions of their apothecary's judgement in physic, he 
has generally the artifice to become the basest pla- 
giary. For among the customers, he uses on every 
occasion, or rather abuses, the prescriptions, and even 
borrows the very words of the family-physician. 
Thus he steals the doctor from himself! (if I may 
be allowed the phrase) insomuch, that when by force 
he is called in and consulted, it is ten to one the pre- 
judiced patients will fay, that the doctor said and di- 
rected the very same things which the worthy apothe- 
cary did before, in this or some other cafe, which they 
think, or perhaps are told, was the fame. 

I cannot here overlook that most abominable prac- 
tice of some apothecaries and druggists, who not only 
personate one another, by assuming the name of 
their neighbouring brethren, in order to steal their 
customers, but a certain audacious quack has been 
known to personate a late physician of his name, and 
to recommend himself after as an apothecary. These 
base artifices lead them to make repetitions of 
prescriptions which they never saw, being on ano- 
ther's file. How fatal such horrid guess-work must 
often prove, to the patient and prescriber, is easily 
|P_32
judged; and how late a gentleman of figure suffer- 
ed by this sort of chicane, as well as his physician, I 
shall not say, lest it should too far injure a certain 
pert, young quack apothecary, whose rashness in this 
instance, will, I hope, prove a warning to him for 
the future. 

Thus admirably equipped with craft and artifice, 
and with impudence and assurance, (the inseparable 
attendants of ignorance) this monstrous, amphibious 
animal, this wretched cobler in medicine, who has not 
in reality a single qualification for a physician or 
chirurgeon, nor perhaps even for an apothecary, vainly 
pretends to the knowledge of the three, and so 
takes upon him the sole care and management of 
the sick in all distempers and disorders; acute or 
chronic, physical or chirurgical cafes are all alike to 
him, well knowing that his incapacity is not obvious 
to the unhappy parties concerned! he hardily persists in 
his malpractices, being blinded with ignorance, 
prompted by avarice, and having his conscience 
hardened by an early contracted habit of iniquity, 
till he has rendered the unhappy sufferers immedica- 
ble; and then (seldom or never before) permits a 
physician or chirurgeon to be called in; or rather, 
if he can, brings in some poor pretender to, or mercena- 
ry tool of, either profession, to justify his apparent 
misconduct, or to take the honor of giving the tor- 
tured sufferer the Coup de Grace. 

I shall beg leave to give one melancholy instance 
of this kind out of many. A certain unfortunate 
man, who too much confided in the boasted skill 
of a bold presumptuous quack, committed himself 
to his care for a certain, slight, secret disorder: The 
apothecary judging it the only way to make a penny 
of the patient, proceeded to administer medicines 
by wholesale. For within the compass of three 
months he gave him above forty doses of mercurial 
physic, with sundry other costly drenches, which 
brought a considerable flux of humors upon the af- 
fected part: to which he then made divers unctuous 
|P_33
applications, till at length it became cancerous. 
Lastly he had recourse to salivation, but with no 
better success, the patient grew sensibly worse: Yet 
the Quack to dispel the growing doubts and suspici- 
ons of the poor abused man, called in a reputed phy- 
sician, to justify his mal-practice, and assist him in 
the cure. The doctor being unable to satisfy the 
unhappy sufferer in his distrust of the quack, he call- 
ed in better assistance, and had his life with great 
difficulty saved, by the amputation of the distem- 
pered member. Notwithstanding all this gross 
abuse of the miserable patient, this unworthy apo- 
thecary, who may be presumed to be the principal 
cause of the greatest evil attending this cafe, makes 
a most extravagant large bill, with a charge of 
twenty shillings to his coadjutor the doctor, annexed. 

By these and such like unnatural transgressions, is 
the apothecary led out of the way of his duty, and 
bred an utter stranger to all parts of his proper 
calling. By this vile craft he gets his bread, no 
wonder then he should be firmly attached to it. 
This is all he learns, all he knows, all he practises, 
all he teaches: And this he finds sufficient to re- 
commend him : He indeed generally takes care to 
secure an interest in some party or club, whether 
religious or politic, no matter with how little reason, 
provided he espouses and defends their principles 
with a good stock of blind zeal and violence, he is sure 
of the Society's favour, so he may securely neglect 
his true profession. He therefore employs his whole 
time in quacking or stroling over the town in quest 
of prey. For to avoid the dangerous imputation of 
having nothing to do, no practice, (as the phrase is,) 
he must never be found at home ; not to be seen 
in his noisome shop except by accident to prescribe 
for some sudden emergency, or perhaps sometimes 
to edify by reading over his own ill-chosen, stolen re- 
cipe's, there carefully filed more for shew than use: 
That done, he must hurry forth, and rush thro' 
|P_34
the streets as if he had so many calls, that he cannot 
tell which first to answer: While the principal part 
of his business, furnishing the shop and serving the 
wretched customers, is left to some mercenary sham- 
druggist, a miserable herb-gatherer, and a raw appren- 
tice. The very Druggist, who in all other nations 
in Europe is but Pharmacopola, a mere drug-mer- 
chant, is with us, not only a physician and chirurgeon, 
but also a Galenic and Chemic apothecary; a seller 
of druggs, medicines, vernices, oils, paints or colours, 
poysons, &c. a Jack of all trades, and in truth, ma- 
ster of none — For bad as the usual education of an 
apothecary may be, if it could be yet worse, he 
may make a good modern druggist enough. And 
it is demonstrable, that, among the many who 
assume that name, there are not above two in Dub- 
lin that have any right to it. These who are, if 
possible, worse quacks than the apothecaries, and 
generally worse qualified in every respect, were the 
first who introduced that blackest villainy of sophi- 
sticating, and debasing of medicines to gain fame and 
applause by underselling their honest brethren; 
and you shall now find most of them ready to make 
up the prescriptions of physicians and chirurgeons, 
brought to them by the ignorant vulgar, (who alone 
indeed intrust them with such,) at any rate they are 
offered, even tho' they cannot read them, and tho' 
they may be composed of sundry medicaments to 
them utterly unknown. How must the unhappy 
patient and prescriber suffer, whose prescriptions 
fall into such unworthy hands? 

Thus wretchedly is pharmacy taught and practised 
now a-days. How foreign to the manner of the 
antient, true apothecaries, is, I hope, evident from the 
foregoing ; and how contradictory to reason, justice, 
and common sense, is, I believe, to every rational 
unprejudiced man, obvious. Yet, that under the pre- 
sent fatal mismanagement, it is, and must continue so, 
is, I think, most demonstrable. Foe a man who 
|P_35
takes the greatest pains to learn that art, and 
acquires the most extraordinary knowledge, and all 
the requisite qualifications therein, and ever so strict- 
ly, and diligently attends to the regular calls of his 
profession, and discharges the duty, and proper office
of an apothecary, if he does not most audaciously 
and adventurously, quack in all cases without dis- 
tinction, he is surely deemed but a blockhead, and 
may remain to the generality unknown, and starve; 
or perhaps have the comfort of being reputed, in 
his narrow circle of acquaintance, a good, honest 
fellow, but no apothecary; that is to fay, no quack; 
and is therefore despised, because, he has the candor 
and integrity, not to intermeddle with any business, 
but his own, nor to attempt things beyond his 
sphere. In short it is not such a man that is with 
us deemed an apothecary, no, it is the most despica- 
ble of all human beings, a wretch ignorant of all 
arts, yet pretending to the greatest; a false, dis- 
sembling sycophant, that poor, shallow mimick, or 
untowardly ape of a physician, chirurgeon and apo- 
thecary, the vile, deluding quack! Where then is 
the encouragement to excel in this art, when the 
most ignorant of it, are, by the generality, preferred, 
and most esteemed? 


[^1. 
† Boerh. Instit. Medic. Prolegom. 
^]
[^2. 
† Ælian de. animal. lib. ii. cap. 18. 
^]
[^3. 
‡ Cicer. Tusculao. Quæst. lib. 3. Hippoc. de pris. medicina 
S. Aug. de Civit. Dei. 
^]
[^4. 
§ Mesue & Avicen. 
^]
[^5. 
‖ Sueton. 
^]
[^6. 
* Arcagathus. 
^]
[^7. 
† John. Bapt. Sylvatic. 
^]
[^8. 
‡ Dion. Halicarnas. 
^]
[^9. 
† Celsus. See J.D. Horst. Inst. pharmac. L. ii. C. i. 
^]
[^10. 
* Shakespear's Hamlet. 
^]
[^11. 
* Cels. Pref. l. i. Le. Clerc. hist. de la Med. p. ii. l. t. c. ix. 
^]
[^12. 
† Hippoc. Lib. i. Aph. i. 
^]
[^13. 
* Hippoc. lex. 
^]
[^14. 
† Hippoc. Epist. ad Democrit. 
^]
[^15. 
† GREEK Arist. Polit. L. iii. C. ii. Medicins mainæuvre & 
medicins pharmaceatique. Le Clerc. Hist. de la Medicine, p. ii. p. 47. 
^]
[^16. 
‡ GREEK ou Medicins Architect. ibid. 
^]
[^17. 
* Renod. Inst. pharmac. c. 2. Geo. Wolf. Wedel Pharmac. 
Proæm. 
^]
[^18. 
* See the King's proclamat. prefixed to the London dispnsat. 
^]
[^19. 
* Herodot. L. ii. S. 84. 
^]
[^20. 
† Pharmac. Anti-Empiric. p. 217. 
^]
[^21. 
* See Memoires de l'Acad. Roy. de Sciences. 
^]
[^22. 
* G. Harvey. 
^]
[^23. 
* Lewis xi. Mezeray. 
^]