
|P_3
[}MR. WARD's 
Practice of Physick 
Impartially Considered.}]
SIR, 
Minehead, Dec. 14. 1740. 

THE truly generous, noble, and 
indefatigable Spirit you have 
exerted on the Behalf of the Com-
monwealth, during your sitting in 
Parliament, has drawn upon you the 
Trouble of this Application. You 
have shewn, not only Inclination, 
but Ability to do real Service to 
your Country, by promoting and car-
rying on several Bills, which will 
greatly contribute to the publick Good, 
|P_4
and transmit your Name with Ho-
nour to Posterity. You are a true 
Patriot, in the purest Sense of the 
Word; and, as such, I don't doubt, 
but you will think the following Pages 
highly worthy of your serious Con-
sideration; and if you find any Hint 
in them fair, reasonable, and cal-
culated for the Interest of your Fel-
low-subjects, you will gladly improve 
it, and readily concur in building 
upon it such an wholsome Law as 
may redress the Grievance complained 
of. I think it will be easily granted, 
that the Health of the Body is full as 
valuable as the Property of Estates. 
How difficult would it be for any Per-
son to believe, that our Legislature is 
of that Opinion, who should observe, 
that there are so many good Laws en-
acted by every Parliament for the De-
|P_5
fence of the one, and scarce ever any 
Care taken of the Preservation of the 
other? Indeed, within a long Series 
of Years, the Parliament has been 
most graciously pleased to cast an Eye 
towards the Health of the People, by 
an Act impowering Physicians to in-
spect Apothecaries Shops; by an Act 
for preventing the Retailing spirituous 
Liquors; and by an Act for the 
Encouragement of the Publication of 
Mrs. Stephens's Remedies. However, 
these Instances, few as they are, prove, 
that the Honourable House does 
not think the Health of the Nation 
intirely below their Care and Consi-
deration; and therefore we ought to 
suppose, that the Reason why Acts of 
Parliament for the like good Purposes 
are not more frequent, is, that the 
House is not applied to on such Sub-
|P_6
jects in a proper manner; that the 
Grievances the People labour under 
are not fairly and plainly laid before 
the Members, or practical Methods of 
Redress are not pointed out. 

The Health of a People can only 
be preserved by all the wholsome 
Laws the Wisdom of a Legislature can 
contrive, to prevent Luxury, De-
bauchery, and every kind of Immora-
lity, which infallibly produce Diseases, 
or by frequent Inspections into the 
State of Physick in their Country, be-
cause Abuses will daily creep into 
every Society, or Set of Men, who find 
themselves under no Restraint, from 
any Apprehensions of being called to 
an Account for their Method of treat-
ing Mankind, in their most moment-
ous Concernments. Tho' the first 
|P_7
Part of this general Plan is highly 
worth your Consideration, yet I shall 
beg Leave to say a few Words to you 
in regard to the latter only. 

The Reformation of the State of 
Physick in general is greatly wanting 
in this Nation, and, I believe, most 
warmly wished by every honest Man, 
even of the Faculty itself. But tho' 
general Reformations may be as dif-
ficult as they are desireable, yet some 
crying Enormities may themselves 
point out the Method of their own 
Redress. 

If we consider the publick Hu-
mour of the good People of England
for these last Twenty Years, one should 
be apt to conclude, that certain odd 
Conjunctions of the heavenly Bodies 
|P_8
brought on epidemical Follies, as well 
as Diseases. How have Shakespeare, 
Johnson, Otway, and all the Plays 
capable of delighting the Mind, in-
structing the Head, or mending the 
Heart, been totally neglected, or cold-
ly received, while dear Harlequin!
charming Devil! has filled all our 
Affections, triumphed over our Judg-
ments, and emptied our Pockets! 
During an Aera like this, when such 
crowded Audiences, composed of the 
great Vulgar and the small, gave 
such plain Demonstrations of their 
polite Taste, and profound Wisdom, 
is it to be wonder'd, that there should 
appear, from the malign Influences 
of the same Stars, Marks of an epi-
demical Madness in other Parts of the 
Town, as well as in the Theatre? 
No; Dr. Faustus will have the Ho-
|P_9
nour to be handed down to Posterity 
as the illustrious Contemporary of a 
Mapp, a Taylor, and a Ward. The 
Historian of our Days will be able to 
inform his Readers, that the Infatu-
ation was so general, that Freind, Mead,
and Pellet, were as much eclipsed by 
this bright Constellation, as Shake-
speare then was by a more happy 
Genius; a Gentleman, who, with 
surprizing Activity, could turn him-
self into all Shapes, and appear to be 
any Animal but what he really was. 
Such are the irresistible Charms of 
Delusion! Such the Happiness of be-
ing deceived, that all our Applauses 
rise in Proportion to the Artfulness 
of the Imposition, and the Difficulty 
of discovering the Cheat! 

|P_10
Let Mrs. Mapp's Bones rest in 
Peace, tho' she tortur'd so many in 
the Days of her Fame. 

Let the dexterous Dr. Taylor be 
able to purge the visual Ray of our 
neighbour Nations, that they may see 
their true Interest to consist in treat-
ingGreat-Britain with Honour and 
Respect. 

Mr. Ward is the only medicinal 
Meteor which yet continues to shine 
amongst us, whose Fame has raised 
him to the highest Degree of Esteem 
and Admiration with the Gay and 
the Polite, on whose Authority and 
Judgment Thousands, and Tens of 
Thousands, of the lower Part of Man-
kind, swallow his Medicines with im-
plicit Faith, and are said thereby to 
|P_11
receive most wonderful Cures, in al-
most incurable Distempers. The In-
fluence of this Gentleman's Reputa-
tion being now become so very exten-
sive, his Manner of practising Physick 
cannot be thought a Subject unwor-
thy the Notice and Consideration of 
the Legislature. I am sure, Sir, you 
will afford it your Attention, for a 
few Minutes, as it is of Importance 
to the Service of the Publick, to which 
I well know how much every Mo-
ment of your Time is dedicated. 

I shall by no means take upon me 
to determine, whether the numberless 
Deaths laid to this Gentleman's Charge 
by his Opposers, or the unparallel'd 
Cures he is said to have performed by 
his Admirers, come nearest the Truth. 
What he owns himself, and what all 
|P_12
his Friends allow, may, I hope, be 
taken for granted. He confesses, with 
great Candour, that he is wholly ig-
norant of the History and Nature of 
Diseases; that he understands nothing 
of Anatomy, or the animal Oecono-
my; and that he only pretends to 
some Knowledge in Chymistry, by 
which Art he has discovered a few 
Medicines, of greater Efficacy in parti-
cular Cases, than those in common Use 
among regular Physicians. Suppose 
then, that what this Gentleman asserts 
is true, and that he has such powerful 
chymical Secrets in his Possession; 
must they not be capable of doing 
as much Harm, when ignorantly and 
promiscuously administered, as they 
would be of doing Good in the Hands 
of a Person duly qualified to know in 
what Cases, how, and when, properly 
|P_13
to apply them? Will that noble chri-
stian Charity, which from this Gentle-
man'sknown moral Character cannot 
but be believed to be the sole Motive 
of his great Bounty to the Crowds of 
poor People who daily attend him, 
make amends for his dealing out these 
powerful Medicines so indiscriminate-
ly to all who shall pay him the Com-
pliment of being willing to swallow 
them? Do the Multitude of Patients 
whom he never saw before, or will 
see afterwards, want no Attendance 
during the violent Operation of their 
Physick? No Person acquainted with 
the Nature of their Medicines, to re-
lieve or correct any Accidents, which 
so often attend the most common and 
gentle Remedies? Surely it must ap-
pear, to every unprejudiced Person, 
that the most useful Drugs, under 
|P_14
such Management, must be a sore 
Evil, and therefore that nothing can 
be more uncharitable, than thus to de-
ceive and hurt a Multitude under the 
specious Pretence of Charity? But 
however faulty this Gentleman's Me-
thod of Practice may be, yet his Me-
dicines may in themselves, and under 
proper Direction, be extremely valuable. 
Let us grant, that they are so; Is it 
not then incumbent on those who 
have the Good of the People at Heart, 
to endeavour to render these valuable 
Secrets a publick Benefit, which, un-
der their present Circumstances, are 
so great a Calamity? Every Man 
ought to be rewarded for his Discovery 
of any thing that may be beneficial 
to Society. Mr. Ward should not 
be desired to part with his Property 
(and his Nostrums are undoubtedly 
|P_15
such) without a reasonable Equivalent. 
The Parliament of Great-Britain is 
able to grant him this Equivalent, and 
they have a Right to demand the 
Knowledge of his Secrets on just and 
equitable Terms. An Englishman,
who possesses a Piece of Ground which 
interrupts the making a River navi-
gable, is obliged to part with his Pro-
perty for the Good of the Commu-
nity: Surely Mr. Ward's Property in 
his Secrets is not more inviolable, than 
what every Man has in his own Land; 
and therefore it cannot be looked 
upon as any Hardship, if he should 
be forced to part with them on like 
Conditions. Should such a Demand 
be made upon him by Parliament; 
should the Reward appointed be ob-
tainable only by the Proof, before 
competent Judges, of his Medicines, 
|P_16
when divulged, performing the same 
Cures on fair Subjects, which they 
are now said to do on his private Pa-
tients; and should he refuse to stand 
that only Test, what could be con-
cluded from such a Refusal, but that 
he did not believe in his own Con-
science, that they would perform 
what he and his Friends do now per-
suade the World to believe that they 
will do? Would not such a Refusal 
be a just and equitable Ground for 
the Parliament to forbid his farther 
dealing out these Medicines, (of which 
they would have Reason to believe 
that he had himself no Opinion) and 
by a wholsome Law, to prevent his 
Majesty's Subjects from being any 
longer cheated of their Money, if not 
robb'd of their Lives. But as this 
Gentleman's great Cures are so well
|P_17
attested by many Persons of Fashion, 
whose Knowledge in such Matters 
cannot be disputed, I have no Reason 
to fear, that he would at all suspect 
the Efficacy of his Medicines, in all 
the desperate Cases, which he now so 
confidently undertakes. He will there-
fore undoubtedly submit them to an 
impartial Trial with the greatest 
Chearfulness, especially as he will, 
over and above the Reward appointed 
by Parliament, be sure of gratifying 
his most charitable Disposition in the 
Satisfaction of knowing, that, whereas 
before only some Thousands of his 
Countrymen enjoyed the Fruits of his 
Labours, then he will become a ge-
neral Good to Mankind. The ho-
nourable Gentlemen who now talk of 
his Medicines as divine, and of his 
Cures as little less than miraculous, 
|P_18
will all most heartily join in promoting 
this Publication; they will congratu-
late their Country on the inestimable 
Possession of these Secrets, which, but 
for the Care of our Legislature, might 
have slept in the single Breast of their 
Author, and have been buried with 
him in Oblivion, to the irreparable 
Loss of all future Ages! 

As the Number of Inhabitants is 
the Riches of a Nation, while so 
many brave Men are losing their Lives 
abroad in the Service of their Coun-
try, let us not suffer those who remain 
at home to be daily thinned, either 
by the improper Application of Mr. 
Ward's Medicines, under his present 
Administration of them, or for want 
of their being made more universally 
useful by a speedy Publication. 

|P_19
The Gin Act is a glorious Instance 
of the tender Care of our Parliament 
for the Lives and Healths of our Peo-
ple, to whom that pernicious Liquor
 was promiscuously, and sometimes 
charitably, retailed, by such who pre-
ferred their own wicked Gains to the 
Welfare of all human Creatures. 

Mrs. Stephens's Act is a plain Proof 
of the true Sense your honourable 
House has of the great Benefit of 
making any useful Discoveries in Phy-
sick; and it is likewise a proper Pre-
cedent of the Manner in which such 
Publications should be made, and of 
the Tests and Trials such discovered 
Medicines must undergo in order to 
entitle their Authors to their due Re-
ward. What may be a reasonable Sa-
tisfaction for Mr. Ward's doing this 
|P_20
signal Service to his Country, I cannot 
guess at. If his Medicines will per-
form the Cures openly and fairly, which 
are now attributed to them, I think the 
Parliament cannot pay too much for 
the Knowledge of them, or Mr. Ward
receive too great Honours from a 
grateful People. But should this Gen-
tleman be so blind to his own Interest 
as to refuse to become this publick 
Blessing, on any Terms, can he expect 
to enjoy the warm Affections of his 
Countrymen, to whom he will appear 
so charitable, and so hard-hearted, at 
the same time? Should he refuse to 
comply with the generous Desire of 
the Parliament, could he complain that 
they should exert their just Authority? 
If he refuses to save Millions, he can-
not surely think himself ill-treated by 
the Guardians of the Publick, if it 
|P_21
should be forbid to destroy even his 
Thousands! 

But to You, Sir, I humbly submit 
the Consideration of this important
Point; I call it important; and what 
concerns the Lives of so many of the 
Innocent, and the Ignorant, deserves to
 be so called. I speak as a Friend to 
Mr. Ward, as well as to my Country. 
I propose a Method, by which, instead 
of being the Idol of a Few, he shall 
become the Darling of a whole People! 
by which he shall remove that huge 
Load of Scandal, which now lies upon 
him, to the great Chagrin of his 
Enemies, who shall pine with Envy 
at the Brightness of his Glory. The 
black List of his private Murders, 
which is now maliciously handed about 
by Physicians, and their Emissaries, 
|P_22
shall whiten into a pompous Register 
of publick Cures, performed by his 
Medicines, on the miserable Objects, 
who had been delivered over to the 
iron Jaws of Death, by the Ignorance 
or Indolence of those Doctors, falsely 
so called, who have had no Oppor-
tunity of understanding Physick, but 
their having been bred to the Profes-
sion. By this means this worthy Gen-
tleman shall be freed from that La-
bour and Toil with which he now 
serves his Country in his private Ca-
pacity. He shall do even more Good, 
and yet, as is most meet and fit, he 
shall be able to retire from the World, 
full of Days and Honours; he shall 
spend the few last Years he has to come 
in Dignity and Ease, enjoying the calm 
Evening of a well-spent Life, conversing 
with Nature in the most endearing Inti-
|P_23
macy, to which he has arrived by tor-
turing her ten thousand Ways, till he 
made her confess those very Secrets, 
which he has now communicated for 
the publick Good, and which shall 
draw down Blessings on him, and his 
Posterity, through all future Ages. 

I beg therefore, Sir, for my Sake, 
as your Fellow-Citizen; for Mr. 
Ward's Sake, who can do us all so 
much Service; and for your Country's 
Sake, whose Interest you have so sin-
cerely and warmly at Heart, that you 
will think seriously on this Matter. 
What you see to be right, I know you 
will vigorously pursue; and to your 
good Conduct the Whole is submitted, 
by, Sir, 

Your most obedient 
humble Servant,
Philanthropos. 
