

[^Sample 1: book - ^]

|P_1[^A horizontal double-line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}OBSERVATIONS 
On the Diseases of the Army in 
CAMP and GARRISON. }][^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}PART I. }][^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}CHAP. I. }]
[}Of the Air and Endemic Diseases of the 
Low Countries. }]
THE river Lis, rising in Artois, and 
joining the Scheld, at Ghent, divides 
the high and dry part of Flanders 
from the low and wet. Between 
this line and the sea the country is flat, mar- 
shy and unhealthful, including Dutch Flan- 
ders, with some barrier towns belonging to 
the States, the French, and Austrians: of all 
which, Furnes and Sluys are the most sickly. 
But the remaining part of Flanders is higher, 
|P_2
and, with the rest of the Austrian Netherlands, 
is altogether a dry and healthful country. 

Great part of the United Provinces is like- 
wise low and wet, and subject to the same 
distempers with Flanders: and Dutch Bra- 
bant being also marshy, from Graaf down- 
wards along the Maes, and every where in- 
commoded with water near the surface, is 
subject to the same aquatic diseases. But above 
all, Zealand shares the worst air; as being 
not only low and watery, but surrounded with 
the oozy and slimy beaches of the eastern and 
western Scheld, and the most marshy parts of 
the country: so that almost every wind, ex- 
cept from the ocean, must add to its native 
moist and unwholesome exhalations. 

All this tract of the Netherlands being 
little higher than the level of the sea, or the 
rivers that pass through it, was once so much 
exposed to inundations from floods and high 
tides, that till dykes and drains were made, 
it was no better than a large morass; and even 
now, after incredible labour, the country is 
still subject to be overflowed by extraordinary 
floods, and other casual inlets of water. By 
|P_3
the evaporation of this, as likewise of the ca- 
nals and ditches, in all which innumerable 
plants and insects lie and rot, the atmosphere 
is filled, during the latter part of summer and 
autumn, with moist, putrid and insalutary 
vapours. 

A second, but less obvious source of hu- 
midity, is from the water under ground; 
which is every where so near the surface, that a 
constantly dry ditch, the sure mark of a health- 
ful situation, is never seen, except in the higher 
lands. Now, as the soil is light, the moisture 
easily transpires, and in summer loads the air 
with vapour, even where no water is visible. 
This is the condition of most of Dutch 
Brabant; the inhabitants of which are less 
liable to intermittents, in proportion to the 
depth of this subterraneous water; so that 
by looking into their wells, it is easy to de- 
termine the comparative health of each 
village. These wells being fed by the 
under-ground water, and sinking proportion- 
ally to the droughts of summer, are at once 
a proof and measure of the constant exhala- 
tion of this water by the sun. 

|P_4
In Zealand, and upon the opposite coast of 
Flanders and Brabant, is observed a peculiar 
kind of putrid damp, which rises at low wa- 
ter from a beach covered with slime and mud, 
more liable to corruption on account of the 
mixture of fresh and salt-water [/1./]. But upon 
an open and sandy coast, as at Ostend, the 
country is refreshed with wholesome winds 
from the sea; while at the same time there is 
reason to believe the exhalations from thence 
are considerably less than those of marshy 
grounds [/2./], and never putrid. 

But another, and more general cause of the 
humidity and corruption of the atmosphere, 
is from an imperfect ventilation. There are 
no hills to receive the winds, or to direct them 
in streams upon the lower grounds; hence the 
air is so apt to stagnate; and the more by reason of 
large plantations made for pleasure, inclosures, 
or fuel. The farms and smaller villages are 
crowded with trees, which not only confine 
but moisten the air, by transpiration. But in 
towns, where there is less of this kind of moi- 
|P_5
sture, where the houses and pavements of the 
streets in a great measure prevent the rising 
of the damps, and where there are continual 
fires, the aquatic diseases are both fewer and 
milder. 

To these causes of endemics, in flat and 
marshy countries must be added, the impurity 
of the common water, which being here 
either collected from rains, and preserved 
in cisterns, or drawn from wells extremely 
shallow, is, in hot and dry seasons, soon 
corrupted. This being the case, the gene- 
ral tendency to putrefaction is aggravated by 
the use of such water; as well as by meats, 
which in a close, hot, and moist air, are 
quickly tainted. Everything, therefore, con- 
spires in summer, not only to relax the solids, 
but to dispose the humours to putrefaction: 
and as the combination of heat and moisture 
is the universal cause of a speedy corruption 
of all animal substances, so it is observed, in 
every country, to produce fevers, and other 
distempers of a putrid kind; exactly the same, 
or similar to what occur in the low and mar- 
shy parts of the Netherlands. 

|P_6
This is the nature of the climate: but 
according to the various degrees of heat, and 
moisture of the season, the epidemics will be- 
gin earlier or later, be of longer or shorter 
duration, and will be attended with milder 
or more alarming symptoms. If the heats 
begin soon, and continue throughout autumn, 
not moderated with winds and rains, the sea- 
son proves extremely sickly, the distempers 
appear soon, and are dangerous: but if the 
summer heats begin late, or are tempered with 
frequent showers and winds, or if the autum- 
nal colds begin early, then are the diseases 
both late and few, the symptoms gentle, and 
the cure easy [/3./]. 

And here it will be proper to observe, that 
moist and rainy seasons differ greatly; since in 
marshy countries, intense and continued heats 
occasion a moisture in the atmosphere, by the 
immense exhalation they raise; whereas fre- 
quent showers during the hot season, cool 
the air, check the excess of vapour, dilute and 
refresh the corrupted stagnating water, and 
precipitate all putrid and noxious Effluvia. 
|P_7
But if heavy rains in the beginning of sum- 
mer are succeeded by great and uninterrupted 
heats, these rains, by overflowing the mea- 
dows, serve only for matter of more exhala- 
tion, make the season more sickly, and the 
distempers more fatal. 

Again, it is to be remarked, that the sick- 
ness never begins till the heats have continued 
so long as to give time for the putrefaction 
and evaporation of the water. The com- 
mencement, therefore, of the epidemics may 
be dated from some time in July, or the be- 
ginning of August, under the canicular heats; 
their sensible decline about the first falling of 
the leaf, and end when the frosts begin. For 
the rest of the year, it is safe, and not pecu- 
liarly less disposed to produce any distemper. 

It is farther to be observed, that tho' in 
the month of September the greatest ardour 
of the season is gone, yet the epidemics con- 
tinue, by reason of the difference of the de- 
gree of heat between the days and nights. 
The days are still warm, but the nights 
are cold and often foggy; and it is by 
these sudden transitions that the perspira- 
tion is stopped, and the more putrescent 
|P_8
parts of the blood retained, or thrown in the 
form of a putrid and acrid bile upon the 
bowels. It must also be remarked, that the 
summers are hotter, and the weather more 
constant, on the continent, than in the same 
latitude in Britain: and lastly, that in the 
Netherlands the heats are more close and 
stifling, than they are usually felt in hilly 
countries. 

The epidemic of the hot season, and great 
endemic of this and other marshy countries, 
is a fever of an intermitting nature, commonly 
of a tertian shape, but of a bad kind; which, 
in the damper places and worst seasons, appears 
in the form of a double tertian, remittent, con- 
tinued putrid, or even an ardent fever [/4./]. All 
which, however varying in type in different 
constitutions and other circumstances, are ne- 
vertheless of the same nature, and proceed from 
like causes: as a proof, both the continued and 
ardent fever of that season, usually terminate 
in regular intermittents. 

In Zealand, where the air is worst, it is 
called the gall-sickness; and, indeed, both the 
surcharge and depravation of the bile is so re- 
|P_9
markable, wherever these fevers prevail, that 
the immediate cause has been usually referred to 
the corruption of that humour. But however 
that be, it is certain, that the continuance and 
malignity of the disease is owing in a great mea- 
sure to an increased secretion and putrefaction 
of the bile, occasioned by the fever. 

In proportion to the coolness of the season, 
to the height and driness of the grounds, the 
epidemic appears milder, remits or inter- 
mits more freely, and recedes farther from 
the nature of a double tertian, a continued 
putrid, or an ardent fever. In its worst state, 
the effects plainly ascertain the cause; as these 
fevers are attended with intense thirst and 
heat, foulness of the tongue, bitterness of taste, 
desire of acids, nausea and aversion to all ani- 
mal food, putrid vomiting, extreme sense of 
oppression about the stomach, livid spots, 
and the like strong indications of a putrid 
bile; if not a corruption of all the hu- 
mours. And whereas, with such symp- 
toms, the disease assumes an intermitting 
or remitting form, it should seem, that 
even the more benign intermittents of this sea- 
|P_10
son were owing to a lesser degree of the same 
cause. 

The Cholera Morbus, and dysentery, tho' 
rarely to be called epidemic, are nevertheless 
frequent diseases of these moist countries. 
They appear in the same season with the fe- 
vers, and seem to be only particular determi- 
nations of the same corrupted humours; to 
which, if the first passages give free vent, a 
Cholera or flux ensues; but if the vitiated hu- 
mours are retained and assumed into the blood, 
they may occasion an intermitting, remitting 
or continued fever. 

Both fevers and fluxes are often accompa- 
nied with worms, which are not to be deemed 
the cause of either; but only a sign of a 
preceding bad state of the bowels, brought 
on by a decay of the natural secretions, a stag- 
nation and corruption of the aliment, and a wea- 
kened tone of the intestines; all owing to the 
heats and moisture of the season. 

These are the acute endemics of the mar- 
shy parts of the Netherlands. The chief 
chronical distemper is a species of a scurvy pe- 
culiar to a moist and corrupted air; the symp- 
toms of which agreeing so much with the sea- 
|P_11
scurvy, they may be accounted the same disease. 
The exhalation of the canals and marshes in 
hot weather, acts like the vapour which rises 
from the bildge-water of a ship; both are 
moist and putrid; and in both the effects of 
putrefaction are plainly seen. Here the sea 
air is least to be blamed; for ventilation on 
board a ship is no greater preservative from the 
marine scurvy, than removing from the mar- 
shes to a dry sea coast, or to any other dry and 
sound air, is a cure for the other. 

In general, it is the richer sort, or those who 
can afford to live above the common rate, 
who keep freest from the diseases of the mar- 
shes. For such climates require dry houses, the 
apartments raised from the ground, proper 
exercise, without labour in the sun or in the 
evening damps, a just quantity of vinous 
liquors, and victuals of good nourishment: 
without such helps, not only strangers, but 
the natives themselves, are extremely sub- 
ject to diseases, after hot and close sum- 
mers. The hardiest constitutions are not 
more exempted than others, and less in 
proportion to the driness of the parts 
from whence they come. And this is the 
|P_12
reason British soldiers are so liable to bilious 
fevers and fluxes, in the wetter parts of the 
Netherlands. 

Now tho' in the lower parts of Flanders 
and Holland, the summer and autumnal dis- 
tempers appear in the extreme, yet in no 
country, however dry, is there a total exemp- 
tion. For the summer heats, if great, always 
relax the solids, and tend to corrupt the juices: 
under which circumstances, if the body is ex- 
posed to fogs and nocturnal damps, or receives 
improper food, the same kind of distempers, 
tho' less characterized and in smaller num- 
bers, will be incident to dry, as well as to mar- 
shy countries. Hence in the driest camps, 
after great and continued heats, these sum- 
mer and autumnal fevers and fluxes are 
constant; because in that situation, besides the 
natural moisture of a tent, men must either 
by duty or misconduct be frequently exposed 
to wet ground, wet cloaths, nocturnal damps 
and colds. And the subjection to these ma- 
ladies is the more inevitable, in proportion to 
the more sensible and frequent interchanges 
of heat and cold in the field, than in quarters. 

|P_13
But a sudden stoppage of perspiration com- 
ing upon relaxed fibres, and a putrescent 
state of blood if not timely remedied, is sure 
to produce a remitting fever, dysentery, or 
 the like disorder: so that these distempers 
may be called as properly the endemics of a 
camp, as of a low and marshy country. 

[}CHAP. II. }]
[}A general account of the Garrison Diseases
of the British troops in Flanders, and the 
cantonments in Germany. }]
IN the beginning of June ( [/5./]N.S.) 1742, the 
British troops began to embark for Flan- 
ders. There were in all, of foot and cavalry, about 
16,000; the winds were favourable, the se- 
veral embarkations short, the men landed in 
good health, and went into their several gar- 
risons. 

The head-quarters were at Ghent, with 
most of the cavalry, three battalions of guards, 
|P_14
[/6./]one marching regiment, and the train; eight 
battalions were quartered at Bruges, two at 
Courtray; a regiment of dragoons lay at Ou- 
denarde and another was divided between 
Alost and Grammond. At Ghent there was 
a general hospital; but in the other garrisons 
the care of the sick was committed to the 
surgeons of their respective regiments. 

During the summer and autumn, the wea- 
ther was good, the heats moderate, and the 
country, for the season and climate, enjoyed 
good health. The British officers shared in 
it, but the common men were generally un- 
healthy; and this seemed to be the reason: 

Ghent is situated between the high and 
low part of Flanders; one quarter of it, call- 
ed St. Peters-hill, stands high above the rest 
of the country, and in this the barracks, hav- 
ing drains and free air, were quite dry; so 
that the men who lay there enjoyed perfect 
health: but the rest, who were quartered in 
the low part of the town, whose barracks be- 
ing mostly the ground-floors of waste houses, 
without drains, and, of course, very damp, 
were all sickly. The battalion of the first 
regiment of guards was a remarkable instance 
|P_15
of the difference of quarters: two of its com- [/7./]
panies lay on St. Peter's hill, the remaining 
eight in the lowest part of the town, in rooms 
so very damp, that the men could scarce keep 
their shoes and belts from moulding. In the 
month of July, the sick of this one batta- 
lion amounted to about 140 [/8./]; of which 
number only two men belonged to the companies 
on the hill, and all the rest to those in the 
lower town. But in the middle of Au- 
gust, upon changing the barracks, the sick- 
ness suddenly abated. The rest of the garri- 
son suffered much less in proportion; the 
highest Returns of the foot at no time exceed- 
ing 70 in a battalion and 40 in a regiment 
of dragoons [/9./]. Now as the Returns include 
all accidents unfitting a soldier for duty, and 
as these numbers are more than triple to 
what such corps commonly have at 
home, the sickness in this garrison was ac- 
counted moderate. The highest Returns were 
in the month of August; when the distem- 
|P_16
[/10./]pers were chiefly intermitting and remitting 
fevers, diarrhœas, and a few dysenteries. 

But the sickness was more considerable at 
Bruges, a city of the lower division of 
Flanders, and moister than Ghent. The 
soldiers had moreover damper barracks, and 
suffered accordingly. The remitting and inter- 
mitting fevers began in July; but in August the in- 
termittents were most numerous, which conti- 
nuing throughout September, diminished in 
October, and ceased with the frosts in 
November. These fevers were not only of 
a worse kind than those at Ghent, but the 
Returns of the sick was three times greater, 
and more in proportion died. Next to the 
fever, fluxes were most frequent; and tho' 
not always with blood, were generally of 
the dysenteric kind. It was then observ- 
able, that such as lay in the upper stories, 
kept their health incomparably better than 
those who were below on the ground-floors. 

The two battalions at Courtray happened 
to be differently lodged; one had dry barracks, 
the other wet, and this last had double the 
number of sick throughout the autumn: but 
the highest Return did not exceed 70. 

|P_17
Oudenarde is in the higher division of [/11./]
Flanders; but the barracks being without 
drains, and damp, and the situation low, the 
Welch Fuzileers, who lay there, suffered as 
much in proportion as the garrison of Bruges. 

But at Alost and Grammont, towns in the 
same division (where the dragoons were bil- 
letted in private houses) there was scarce any 
distemper at all; and that corps was in such 
health, when the army marched into Ger- 
many, that it left not a man behind. 

The great number of sick, and the little 
experience in the cure of diseases incident to 
a moist climate, were the reasons that, at this 
time, the fevers were perhaps less successfully 
treated than afterwards. Many of the re- 
mittents degenerated into continued fevers, 
often mortal; and the intermittents, or 
agues, by being prematurely stopped, or not 
secured against relapses, changed likewise 
into continued fevers, or ended in dangerous 
obstructions of the viscera. 

After the frosts in November, the inter- 
mittents never appeared, unless upon catch- 
ing cold; when such as had been ill in au- 
tumn were subject to relapse. 

|P_18
[/12./]Here the autumnal epidemic ceased, and 
the winter diseases began; which were colds 
in various shapes. The most common were 
hard coughs, stitches, rheumatic pains, 
pleurisies, inflammations of the lungs, &c. 
to all which the soldiers, unused to duty and 
cold quarters; and unprovided with cloaths 
suited to the climate, and to the season (at this 
time particularly sharp) were extremely liable. 

Besides these, there was no general ailment, 
except the itch; which indeed was so uni- 
versal, soon after landing, that many believ- 
ed, that either the salt-provisions at sea, or 
the change of air, must have been the cause 
of so sudden and extensive a complaint. But, 
it was solely owing to the contagion of a few, 
who being infected before the embarkation, 
communicated the distemper to their com- 
panions on board, or soon afterwards in the 
barracks. 

Such were the diseases most incident to the 
troops, before they marched. The less fre- 
quent, were dropsies and consumptions; 
whereof the former were the consequence 
of the autumnal fevers ill cured; and the 
latter, the termination of neglected colds. 

|P_19
But of all, the most alarming was a fever [/13./]
of a malignant nature, very slow, and attend- 
ed with a sunk pulse and a constant Stupor: 
yet it was more the newness and danger, than 
the number seized, that made it considera- 
ble. The cause was at first mistaken; but 
afterwards, it appeared to arise from the 
foul air of some of the wards crouded with 
sick; and especially of one room, in which 
a man lay with a mortified limb. This 
fever was confined to the hospital; and as it 
has generally taken its rise from thence, it 
shall hereafter be distinguished by the name 
of the malignant or hospital fever. 

In the beginning of February, the troops [/14./]
moved from winter quarters, and marching 
into Germany, were cantoned in the country 
of Juliers and Aix-la-Chapelle. Part of the 
cavalry, only, was left at Brussels; and the 
sick and weak, to the amount of 600, be- 
ing collected from all the garrisons, were put 
into the general hospital at Ghent. The wea- 
ther was, for the season, favourable, and the 
troops entered Germany in good condition. 
Soon after the Influenza passed through the 
greatest part of Europe, and was sensibly felt 
|P_20
[/15./]at Brussels; tho' but little in the cantonements; 
otherwise, than that many, who, in the pre- 
ceding autumn had been seized with agues, 
then relapsed. For other diseases, they were 
the same as in garrison; such as coughs, 
pleurisies and the like, from taking cold in 
a rigorous season. 

From the arrival of the troops at their can- 
tonements, till the beginning of May, the 
weather was extremely cold, with extraordi- 
nary snows, which fell towards the end of 
March, and continued for seventeen days: in 
the midst of which the troops left their quar- 
ters, and crossed the Rhine. The march was 
long, and the roads deep; but as the men came 
every night into warm houses, and had good 
provisions, so few fell ill by the way, that in 
both marches, from Ghent to the cantone- 
ments, and from thence to the place of en- 
campment, in winter, or in the worst weather, 
we did not, in all, lose twenty. In the begin- 
ning of May, the weather suddenly changed, 
and the troops encamped on the 17th, at 
Hoechst, on the banks of the Maine, in a 
dry, open and healthful country. 

|P_21
[}CHAP. III. }]
[}A general account of the Diseases of the Bri- 
tish troops, during the campaign in Germany, 
and the ensuing winter in Flanders. }]
THE ground, tho' naturally good, had 
not had time to dry thoroughly since 
the late snows and rains; and tho' the days 
were now warm, the nights were still cold, 
and condensed the vapours. These sudden 
interchanges of heat and cold, joined to the 
moisture inseparable from tents, could not but 
affect the health of troops unused to the field. 
Many were thereupon seized with inflam- 
matory disorders, of sundry forms. 

The flying hospital was opened at Nied, a 
village in the neighbourhood of the camp, 
which, in three weeks, admitted about 250 
sick. When the number was thirty less, the 
distempers were classed, and stood thus: of 
pleurises and peripneumonies, 71; rheuma- 
tic pains, with more or less of fever, 51; in- 
flammatory fevers, without either rheumatic, 
or pleuritic pains, 25; intermittents, 30; 
|P_22
[/16./]hard coughs without fever, 9; old coughs 
and consumptions, 7. The rest had either 
fluxes, or some inflammatory symptom dif- 
ferent from these mentioned; and several 
slighter cases remained in the camp. The 
intermittents and fluxes were also accompa- 
nied with a considerable degree of inflam- 
mation. 

This, with a little variation, is the course 
of the first camp-diseases; for the nights be- 
ing yet cold, and the ground wet, it is easily 
conceived in what manner men must suffer, 
who lie in tents, without any covering. Be- 
sides, soldiers are frequently exposed to rain, 
and have not means of drying their cloaths; 
at other times, for want of occupation, they 
are apt to lie down on the grass, and fall 
asleep in the sun. 

Hence, the diseases from the first en- 
campment till past the summer solstice, are 
all highly inflammatory. Fluxes, remit- 
ting and intermitting fevers are, during this 
period, never general; and such as occur, 
are never without inflammation. 

The cavalry had not near their proportion 
of sick, and never have in camps; for the care 
|P_23
of the horses gives the men an easy but con- 
stant employment, their cloaks keep them 
dry in rains, and serve for bed-cloaths at 
night. For the officers, they enjoyed then 
perfect health, as they always do in the first 
part of a campaign. 

On the 22d of June, the army marched to 
Aschaffenburg, where it encamped on a dry 
and airy field. In the hospital were left 500; 
so that in five weeks the proportion of the sick 
to the whole, was about 1 to 29. Before 
this motion of the troops, the sickness had 
sensibly decreased; and it continued still to 
decline in the new camp: for, the weakest 
were already in the hospital, and the rest of 
the men were inured to the field. Add to 
this, that the nights were now warm, and 
there had been no rain to wet the men's 
cloaths, or the ground on which they lay. 

On the 26th, in the evening, the tents were 
struck; the army marched all night, and next 
morning fought at Dettingen. On the night 
following, the men lay on the field of battle, 
without tents, exposed to a heavy rain; and 
next day they marched to Hanau, where they 
encamped in an open field, and on good 
|P_24
[/17./]ground, but then wet, and they had no straw 
for the first night. By these accidents, a sud- 
den change was made in the health of the ar- 
my. For, the summer had begun early, and 
the heats hitherto had been great and con- 
stant; but, the free and uninterrupted perspi- 
ration, attending those very heats, had as yet 
prevented them from producing any general 
sickness. Now the pores were suddenly stop- 
ped, the humours became putrid, and in that 
condition were turned upon the bowels, oc- 
casioning an epidemic dysentery; which be- 
gan at this time, and continued for a great part 
of the season. In the space of eight days af- 
ter the battle, about 500 were seized with it; 
and in a few weeks more, near half of the 
troops were either ill, or had recovered of that 
distemper. It was common, tho' not nearly so 
frequent, among the officers; of whom those 
were first seized, who happened to lie wet 
at Dettingen: the rest suffered by contagion. 

The dysentery, the constant and fatal epi- 
demic of camps, appeared sooner this sea- 
son than it did in any succeeding cam- 
paign. Now, as its usual time is not before 
the latter end of summer, or beginning of 
|P_25
autumn, its cause has been unjustly imputed [/18./]
to eating fruit in excess. But, the circum- 
stances here contradict that opinion; for 
the sickness began and raged before any fruit 
was in season, except strawberries, (which, 
from the high price, the men never tasted) 
and ended about the the time the grapes were 
ripe; which growing in open vineyards were 
eat by every body. 

To this add the following inci- 
dent. Three companies of Howard's regi- 
ment, which had not joined the army, 
marched with the King's baggage from 
Ostend to Hanau; where arriving a night 
or two before the battle, and having orders 
to stop, encamped for the first time, at a 
small distance from the ground, that was 
afterwards occupied by the army. These 
men had never been exposed to rain, or lain 
wet; by this separation from the line, they 
were also removed from the contagion of 
the privies; and having pitched close upon 
the river, they had the benefit of a constant 
stream of air. By means of such favour- 
able circumstances, it was remarkable, that 
while the army suffered most, this little 
camp entirely escaped the distemper; tho' 
|P_26
[/19./]tho' the men breathed the same air, the 
contagious part excepted, eat of the same 
victuals, and drank of the same water. This 
immunity continued for six weeks, until the 
army removed from Hanau; when these 
companies joining the main body, and en- 
camping in the line, were at last infected; 
but suffered little, as the flux was then so 
much upon the decline. 

The dysentery raged all the month of July 
and part of August, to which the weather con- 
tributed. For, soon after the above mentioned 
rains, which had cooled the air, the heats 
returned, and continued for some weeks so 
great, that the humours, already too much 
disposed, were farther prepared to receive 
the infection. Of this the chief fomes seemed 
to be the foul straw and the privies: for, as 
soon as we left that ground, the sickness 
visibly abated. 

The numbers aggravated the symptoms, 
as in the case of the small pox, plague, and 
every other putrid and infectious disease. 
But, the flux is particularly destructive in full 
hospitals, where the corrupted steams being 
confined and accumulated, are raised to a 
|P_27
high degree of virulence: of which fact the [/20./]
present sickness afforded a fatal instance. 

The village of Feckenheim, about a league 
from the camp, was taken up for an hospital; 
into which, during the stay the army made at 
Hanau (besides the wounded from the field 
of battle) about 1500 sick were sent from 
the camp; and of that number, the greatest 
part, ill of the dysentery. By which means 
the air became vitiated to such a degree, that 
not only the rest of the patients were seized 
with the flux, but the apothecaries, nurses, 
and other attendants, with most of the inha- 
bitants of the village, were also infected. To 
this acceded a still more formidable disease, 
namely, the hospital or jail-fever, an inse- 
parable attendant of foul air from crowds 
and animal corruption. These two com- 
bined occasioned a great mortality: while 
on the other hand, such as were seized 
with the dysentery, and not removed from 
the camp, tho' wanting many convenien- 
cies, others had in hospitals, kept free of 
this malignant fever, and commonly did 
well. 

On the 10th of August, the army decamp- 
ed from Hanau, and came to Wisbaden; where 
|P_28
[/21./]we lay some days, and were joined by four 
battalions from England. On the 23d, we 
crossed the Rhine, and on the 30th of the 
same month, encamped at Worms, along 
the river; where we continued until the 
25th of September. All the encampments 
were on dry ground, and in an open coun- 
try. 

The month of August was still warm and 
dry, without fogs; and the rest of the autumn 
was of a piece, allowing for the abatement of 
heat, and the constant dews of this season. In 
the end of August, tho' the days were still 
hot, the nights grew cool; and in the begin- 
ning of October the cold was so far advanced, 
that the fields were sometimes covered with 
a hoar-frost. 

From the time of removing from Hanau, 
there was so remarkable a decline of the dy- 
sentery, that the change could be only im- 
puted to the leaving behind the infectious 
privies, the foul straw, and filth of a long en- 
campment. When the army crossed the 
Rhine, this distemper made but a third of 
all the sickness, from having been lately al- 
most the only complaint. In a month af- 
ter it was scarce seen, unless in a few; who 
|P_29
by reason of imperfect cures, colds, or errors [/22./]
of diet, chanced to relapse. 

About the middle of August, when the 
dysentery was on the decline, a new disease 
appeared, and which daily increased, as 
long as the troops kept the field. This was 
a remitting fever; the paroxysms of which 
came on the in the evenings, with great heat, 
drought, a violent head-ach, and often a deli- 
rium; all which symptoms lasted most of 
the night, but abated in the morning with 
an imperfect sweat; and sometimes with an 
hæmorrhage of the nose, or a looseness. The 
stomach was, from the beginning, much dis- 
ordered with a nausea and sense of oppres- 
sion, frequently with a bilious and putrid 
vomiting. If evacuations were either ne- 
glected, or too sparingly used, the patient 
fell into a continued fever; and sometimes 
grew yellow, as in a jaundice. When the 
season was far advanced, so that colds be- 
came frequent, the fever was attended with 
a cough, rheumatic pains, and sizy blood. 
The officers were not so subject to it as the 
common men, being less exposed; and for 
the like reason the cavalry, who had cloaks 
to keep them warm a-nights, were less liable 
|P_30
[/23./]to fall ill. Others, who belonged to the ar- 
my, but lay in quarters, were yet sel- 
domer seized; and the less in proportion 
to their being little exposed to heats, night- 
damps, and bad lodgings. This distemper, 
another constant epidemic of an army, shall 
hereafter be distinguished by the name of 
the bilious, or autumnal remitting fever. 

In the course of the dysentery, and even of 
this fever, several voided round worms; and 
the same symptom has occurred in both, 
in every campaign. But we are not, there- 
fore, to imagine, that these worms are the 
cause of the fever or flux; but only, that 
when joined to either, they make them 
worse. 

On the 25th of September, the army, free 
of the dysentery, but with a daily increase of 
the remitting fever, marched to Spiers; but 
returned on the 13th of October. The 
weather had changed, and it rained much 
during the march; which, with the cold- 
ness of the season, caused, in that little time, 
so much sickness, that when the troops 
came back, above 800 more were sent into 
the hospital, and almost all of them ill of 
this fever. Three days after, the army moved 
|P_31
to Biberic, and breaking up camp, on the 25th [/24./]
of October, the British, in different divisions, 
returned to the Netherlands. The weather 
being extremely favourable to the march 
(which continued a month), and the men 
coming into warm quarters every night, so 
few fell ill, that they arrived at their several 
garrisons with scarce the loss of a man. 

But 3000 sick were left in Germany; part 
at Feckenheim, near Hanau, and the rest at 
Osthoven and Bechtheim, two villages in 
the neighbourhood of Worms. The state 
of the sick at Feckenheim has been men- 
tioned: where the malignant fever and dysen- 
tery grew daily worse. Few escaped; for, 
how mild or bad soever the flux was, (for 
which the person was sent to the hospital) 
this fever almost surely supervened. The 
petechial spots, blotches, parotids, frequent 
mortifications, contagiousness, and the great 
mortality set forth its pestilential nature. In 
this respect it was worse than the true plague, 
that there was no security against a relapse; 
but, on the contrary, almost a certainty of it, 
if the person continued in the infectious air. 
Of fourteen mates employed about the sick, 
five died; and, excepting one or two, all 
|P_32
[/25./]the rest had been ill, and in danger. The 
hospital lost near half of the patients; but 
the inhabitants of the village having first re- 
ceived the flux, and afterwards the fever by 
contagion, between the two were almost ut- 
terly destroyed. 

The condition of the two hospitals near 
Worms was better; where the sick had more 
space, they had been admitted in a cooler 
season, and the distempers were less putrid. 
But, one general hospital being to be made 
at Newied, the sick were removed from 
their several quarters, and carried down the 
Rhine to that place: where, by the change 
of air, those from Feckenheim were at first 
relieved, but the rest, who were mixed with 
them, caught the infection; which the fol- 
lowing circumstance rendered still more ge- 
neral and fatal. For, orders coming soon 
after to remove the hospital from Germany 
to Flanders, all the sick were embarked in 
bilanders, and conveyed by water to Ghent; 
but where they did not arrive till about the 
middle of December. So that, in this tedious 
voyage, the fever having acquired new force by 
the confinement of the air, mortifications, and 
|P_33
other putrid Effluvia, it was raised to such an [/26./]
extraordinary pitch of virulence, that above 
half the number died by the way, and several 
more soon after their arrival. The resem- 
blance of this fever to a true pestilence, was 
farther evinced by this remarkable incident. 
A parcel of tents were put on board the same 
bilanders with the sick, and which being to be 
refitted at Ghent, were put into the hands 
of a tradesman, who employed twenty-three 
journeymen about the work; but those un- 
happy men were quickly seized with a malig- 
nant fever, and seventeen of them died. 

The proportion of men left in the hospitals 
at the end of the campaign, to those who came 
safe into winter quarters, was about 3 to 13. 

The winter quarters assigned the troops, 
were Brussels, Ghent, Bruges and Ostend: 
of all which, Brussels is the highest and 
best aired. But in winter, as there is little exha- 
lation, and consequently no dangerous moisture 
in the air, the situation of the place is a matter 
of less consequence; so that the only con- 
cern is only to provide the men in warm and dry 
barracks, with a sufficient allowance for fuel. 
The best quarters were at Brussels, and accord- 
|P_34
[/27./]ingly the sickness was nothing there, in com- 
parison of what it was at Ghent and Bruges; 
where the dampness of the barracks, conspi- 
ring with some remains of the diseases of the 
field, occasioned frequent distempers in the 
beginning of winter. 

For, notwithstanding the troops returned to 
Flanders in apparent good health, yet, soon af- 
ter their arrival, several were taken ill with re- 
mitting fevers, attended with inflammatory 
symptoms; whereby it appeared, that the 
seeds of this fever might lie some while la- 
tent in the body, and break out upon colds 
caught at any time before the frosts have re- 
covered the tone of the bowels, braced the 
fibres, and purified the blood. 

In the beginning, therefore, of winter, these 
remittents were the prevailing distemper of the 
garrisons; and there were besides several jaun- 
dices without any fever. At Brussels, where, 
as we observed, the barracks were dry and 
warm, the fevers were few, and the jaundice 
rare: but at Ghent and Bruges, both were 
numerous. Yet the continuance of this 
fever was short, for it disappeared in De- 
cember; nor was succeeded by any other 
|P_35
distemper, but coughs and inflammations from [/28./]
colds; exactly as in the preceding winter. 

No epidemic appeared in the spring. The 
only disease, besides colds, was the malignant 
fever, which came from Germany, and was 
still fatal in the hospital at Ghent. And some 
degree of the same distemper was also felt at 
Bruges, in the regimental infirmaries 
were at first crouded. 

[}CHAP. IV. }]
[}A general account of the Diseases of the cam- 
paign in Flanders, in the year 1744. }]
THE arms first encamped at Anderlecht, 
within a league of Brussels, on the 13th 
of May. On the 1st of June they moved to Ber- 
leghem, and lay there till the 31st of July; 
when they crossed the Scheld, encamped at 
Anstain, in the territory of Lisle, where they 
remained almost all the rest of the campaign. 

The British took the field with five new 
battalions, and at Berleghem there was a re- 
inforcement of five more from England; 
which, with the additionals to the dragoons, 
and recruits, made the national troops exceed 
|P_36
[/29./]in number those of the former campaign, by 
upwards of 10000. 

The first three days of the encampment 
were warm for the season, the succeeding ten 
were cold; but afterwards the weather turn- 
ed very mild, and keeping dry without exces- 
sive heat, the summer proved in general very 
favourable for the field. Before the army pas- 
sed the Scheld, there having been no hard duty, 
and the forrage being at hand, the men suffered 
little by wet cloaths or fatigue; hence the sick- 
ness was so moderate, that during ten weeks 
encampment, our troops had sent little more 
than 600 into the hospitals of Ghent and Brus- 
sels: which was not above 1/43 part of the whole. 

Two thirds of these cases were merely in- 
flammatory, being either pleurisies, peripneu- 
monies, quinseys, rheumatisms with fevers, or 
the like. For the rest, they were mostly ver- 
nal agues, with a few fluxes, and other casual 
distempers: and these likewise with some in- 
flammation, as in the beginning of the last 
campaign. 

Now as to the inflammatory disorders of a 
camp, it may be proper once for all to observe, 
that upon first taking the field, coughs and 
|P_37
stitches, with inflammations of the lungs [/30./]
and pleura, are the common effects of taking 
cold; but towards the summer solstice, as the 
weather grows warmer, the breast is less liable 
to be affected, and the colds are rather produc- 
tive of a continued fever, with sizy blood, than 
of any of the above mentioned inflammations. 
Moreover, that this fever, with proper ma- 
nagement, may generally be removed in a 
few days; but when neglected in the begin- 
ning, by the omitting bleeding, by continuing in 
camp, or being carried in waggons to distant 
hospitals, it becomes at last very dangerous. 

After the army came into the territory of 
Lisle, an hospital was opened at Tournay, on 
the 23d of August; into which were at first 
sent but 50 sick: and these being all that were 
taken ill since the army crossed the Scheld, 
were a proof how healthful the troups then 
were. But in this small number there appear- 
ed a change in the distempers, from in- 
flammatory to bilious: most of the cases 
were either remitting fevers, or dysenteries. 
So that now there seemed only wanting some 
alteration of weather, to make the bilious dis- 
eases as epidemic as the foregoing cool and 
|P_38
[/31./]moderate summer would allow. Accordingly 
a change came; for, from the end of August 
to the middle of September, there fell a great 
deal of rain; and the men who were out on 
forraging parties, were not only often wet, but 
the ground whereon the foot encamped, be- 
ing low, retained the rain water. Hence, by 
the first of October, there were in the hospi- 
tal above 450 ill of the dysentery; besides 
slighter cases, that remained in the camp. 

This, however, was the height of the dis- 
temper; which, considering the number of 
our troops, was as nothing, compared to its 
frequency in the former campaign. The 
reason was plain; the last summer had been 
so hot, that by the end of June the hu- 
mours had already acquired a high degree of 
acrimony; in which state, the rains at Det- 
tingen giving a sudden and general check to 
perspiration, many were then seized at once; 
and from thence sprung the infection, 
which was kept up by hot weather, and 
the privies of a long encampment. Where- 
as, by the temperature of this summer, the 
dysentery did not appear till very late, and 
then could make no progress for want of heat. 

|P_39
The remitting fever of the camp being more [/32./]
regular in its appearance than the flux, began 
but a little later than it did the year before, 
was frequent in the end of September, but was 
at no time so general. The symptoms were 
also more moderate, tho' similar: there was 
rarely any yellowness, as in the former cam- 
paign; but when the weather grew cold, it 
was often joined with a cough, infarction of 
the lungs, or rheumatic pains: which symp- 
toms, as was said above, did not properly be- 
long to the fever, but were only accessions to 
it, from extraordinary colds. 

The rains were succeeded by a tract of fine 
weather, which continued till the beginning 
of October; but this again being followed 
with heavy and cold rains, the sickness must 
have increased, had not the campaign ended 
soon after. For on the 16th of that month, 
some of the troops were sent into winter quar- 
ters; and in a few days more, they were fol- 
lowed by all the rest. 

On breaking up, there were about 1500 
sick in the hospitals at Tournay, Ghent, and 
Brussels: which was only the 17th part of all 
that took the field. The amount of the deaths 
|P_40
[/33./]during the campaign, and of those who were left 
in hospitals at the end thereof, did not exceed 
300. The mildness of the season, the dry en- 
campments, the frequent exercise given to the 
troops by forraging parties, when the camp 
was fixed at Anstain, and the early retreat 
into winter quarters, all concurred in preserv- 
ing the health of the army. 

The troops returning so soon and well into 
garrison, carried with them few seeds of dis- 
tempers. The dysentery had been for some 
time on the decline; and was but a little re- 
vived by the wet weather. And as half the 
army had been hardened by two campaigns, 
the remitting fever was confined in quarters 
chiefly to the recruits and new regiments, who 
had encamped this summer for the first time. 

The British returned to the same garrisons 
they left. At Brussels the general hospital was 
kept up; but at Bruges and Ghent, none were 
appointed: the regimental surgeons getting 
barracks for their sick, with an allowance of 
medicines, and all other necessaries, at the 
public expence. In each of these garrisons 
was stationed an hospital physician, to whom 
the surgeons were to apply occasionally for as- 
|P_41
sistance. Which scheme of separate regimen- [/34./]
tal infirmaries, tho' only intended to save the 
expence of one common and great one, an- 
swered another purpose; which was, that of 
dividing the infection, and thereby guarding 
against a malignant fever, the common and 
fatal consequence of a large and crouded 
hospital. 

At Ostend remained two battalions, which 
having garrisoned the town during the cam- 
paign, had enjoyed good health; with the ex- 
ception of a few autumnal agues. The re- 
mitting fever was not known among them; 
and the intermittents, with a few gentle fluxes, 
were confined to those soldiers only, who by 
reason of out-guards and night-duty, were 
most exposed to colds and wet. But as a 
proof of the healthfulness of the place and 
season, neither our officers nor the inhabitants 
had any distemper among them. 

|P_42
[}CHAP. V. }]
[}A general account of the Diseases of the cam- 
paign in Flanders, in the year 1745. }]
On the 25th of April, the British troops 
[/35./]took the field, encamping again at An- 
derlecht; and on the 9th of May the army 
came up to Briffoel. 

The weather being mild, the sickness was 
moderate; but altogether like that of former 
campaigns. Inflammatory disorders were com- 
mon, and, as before, mostly in the shape of 
a pleurisy, or peripneumony: seldomer in 
the form of an acute rheumatism, as the wea- 
ther was yet too cold for tempting the men to 
sleep on the grass, the common cause of the 
distemper. The vernal intermittents were also 
of an inflammatory kind; as were likewise 
the few fluxes that appeared: the only new 
disease was the small pox, which came 
from England with the recruits; but did not 
spread: and at no time have we known 
it of any consequence in a camp. 

|P_43
The battle of Fontenoy was on the 11th, [/36./]
on which day the weather was fair, and the 
following night so dry and mild, that tho' most 
of the men lay without cover, and all had 
been extremely fatigued, yet no sickness 
ensued. Next day an hospital was made at 
Ath, in the cazernes of St. Roc, which took in 
about 600 wounded. 

On the 16th of the same month the army 
removed from Ath, and encamped at Lessines; 
where it continued till the 30th of June. The 
greatest part of May being dry, and moderate- 
ly warm, was favourable, both to the wound- 
ed, and to the men in camp. But June being 
cold and wet, the vernal agues and fluxes re- 
turned; and, tho' little affecting the old and 
hardened troops, were severe on Price's and 
Mordaunt's regiments; which, with the 
draughts, were all new, and had for the 
first time encamped at Lessines. 

From this place the army moved to Gram- 
mont, where it staid ten days: and from 
thence marching to Brussels, encamped on 
the plain of Dieghem; which being a dry, 
open, and elevated field, is reputed the most 
|P_44
[/37./]healthful ground for a camp in the Nether- 
lands. From hence, after a month's stay, the 
army moved to Vilvorde; where the soil be- 
ing still dry, the country airy, and the heats 
temperate, the men continued to enjoy extraor- 
dinary health. For in the middle of Sep- 
tember, few battalions returned above 12 
sick altogether; which was as low a number 
as could be expected in the best quarters. 

The temperature of the weather, the dri- 
ness of the ground, and the little fatigue the 
troops underwent, conspired to make the au- 
tumn, naturally a sickly season, extremely 
healthful. The dysentery had been only fre- 
quent in the new regiments, and was easily 
cured: neither could the remitting fever 
ever be called epidemic. For, tho' it began 
about the end of August, and was the most 
frequent disease through the rest of the cam- 
paign, yet it was so inconsiderable, that no bat- 
talion at any time returned above seven or 
eight ill of that distemper; and those with 
milder symptoms than had been seen in for- 
mer campaigns. 

It was observable, when the troops made 
another small remove, to form a line along 
|P_45
the great canal, the ground being low and [/38./]
close planted, the effects of moisture began 
presently to appear: but upon returning to 
the former camp, they were no longer seen. 

On the 24th of October, the weather still 
continuing fair and temperate, the camp broke 
up, and the troops went into winter quarters. 
Some time before this, ten battalions had been 
sent home; and in the beginning of Novem- 
ber, the whole British infantry, with part of 
the cavalry, being recalled to suppress the re- 
bellion, marched to Willemstad, and em- 
barked for England. 

Thus far an account of the health of the 
main body of our troops: the state of the se- 
parate corps was as follows. In the end 
of Auguft, Ostend having surrendered, the 
garrison, consisting of five British battalions, 
was conducted to Mons; where they staid 
about three weeks. These men had been so 
healthy, that when they retired upon the ca- 
pitulation, notwithstanding the fatigues of a 
siege, they left only ten sick: but the same 
corps being put into damp barracks at Mons, 
whilst the town itself was surrounded with an 
inundation, the autumnal diseases prevailed so 
|P_46
[/39./]much, that in that short time, 250 were ta- 
ken ill and left behind, when the rest march- 
ed to Brussels. The cases were dysenteries, 
remittents, and intermittents; and to these 
fevers, as is usual towards the end of autumn, 
coughs, rheumatic pains, and other symptoms 
of cold were joined: not without some mix- 
ture, as it appeared, of the hospital fever, ac- 
quired by the close and bad accommodation 
they had at Mons. 

Handyside's regiment, another detached 
corps which had come over this summer, 
was, about the middle of July, sent into the 
citadel of Antwerp. The air of that city is 
moist, and the fort is particularly exposed to 
the damps of the neighbouring marshes. 
The barracks were, moreover, on ground 
floors, and extremely damp; in consequence 
whereof the dysentery, together with remit- 
tents and intermittents, of a bad kind, became 
general. In the beginning of October, 163 
were returned sick from that battalion only; 
which was five or six times more than any 
other regiment had in the line. This extraor- 
dinary disproportion may, in part, be imputed 
to the newness of the men, but much more 
|P_47
to the damps; since the other new regiments [/40./]
that were then in camp, suffered very little: 
and in the town itself, fluxes, remittents, and 
intermittents, were also frequent among the 
inhabitants, whilst the people of Brussels en- 
joyed perfect health. When Ghent was ta- 
ken, part of Rich's dragoons having escaped 
from thence, retired to Antwerp, and were 
seized with the epidemics of the place; whilst 
the remainder of that regiment, which lay in 
camp, continued entirely free of both fever 
and flux. 

Upon the whole, when the campaign end- 
ed, there were left in the several hospitals of 
Antwerp, Brussels, and Mons, about 1000 
sick, including all cases: a very small number, 
considering that during this campaign, there 
had been at one time in Flanders, besides the 
cavalry, 29 battalions; whereof some had ne- 
ver before taken the field. The deaths from 
the beginning to the end of the campaign, 
exclusive of those who were killed in battle, 
or died of their wounds, did not exceed 200. 
In both this and the last summer, the heats 
were moderate, the troops were little harras- 
sed by fatigues, and, in general, little exposed to 
|P_48
[/41./]wet cloaths or damps; and the return to win- 
ter quarters being early, were so many con- 
curring circumstances to make this, of all, 
the most healthful campaign. 

[}CHAP. VI. }]
[}A general account of the Diseases of the cam- 
paign in Great Britain, 1745, and 1746. }]
A Little before the end of the campaign 
1745, the three battalions of foot 
guards, and seven others, embarked in Hol- 
land, and landed in the south of England: 
the passage was short, and the troops leaving 
the field before the nights turned cold, arriv- 
ed in perfect health. The rest of the in- 
fantry having lain longer in camp, embarked 
later in the season; and being detained long on 
board by contrary winds, arrived sickly at 
Newcastle, Holy-island and Berwick. For, 
some of the men, during the voyage, fell ill 
of remitting fevers; which, by the crouds and 
the foul confined air of the hold, were soon 
converted into a malignant fever of the 
hospital. 

|P_49
 An hospital was made at Newcastle, in [/42./]
which the sick, as they landed, were lodged; 
and this house also taking in those that fell ill 
in the army under the command of Marshal 
Wade, the air became soon corrupted and 
infectious. Not only the nurses, and those 
who were constantly in the wards, were there- 
by sufferers, but also the medical attendants, 
tho' less confined to the putrid air: insomuch 
that three of the town apothecaries, with four 
of their apprentices, and two journeymen, 
were seized with the contagion, and died. 

Ligoniers and Price's regiments landed at 
Holy-island. These had embarked in perfect 
health, leaving all their sick behind at Ant- 
werp; but before they arrived, were in the 
same condition with those that came to New- 
castle. The disaster was unforeseen, and un- 
provided for. Ninety-seven were taken out 
of the ships ill of the malignant fever, where- 
of 40 died; and the people of the place re- 
ceiving the infection, in a sew weeks buried 
50; which was a sixth part of the inha- 
bitants of that island. The same fever was 
carried into Berwick, by the troops that land- 
|P_50
[/43./]ed there; but there being fewer sick, the 
distemper did not spread. 

In the beginning of December, a body of 
troops, consisting of 12 battalions, and 3 regi- 
ments of cavalry, under the command of his 
Royal Highness the Duke, assembled at Litch- 
field. The quakers had made a present of 
flannel under-waistcoats to the men; which 
was a seasonable provision for a winter cam- 
paign. The march was dry; the army en- 
camped at Packington for three days only; at 
Stone, the men lay for one night upon their 
arms: but at all other times, being every night 
in quarters, having plenty of straw, fuel and 
provisions, they kept their health as well as 
could be expected in that season of the year. 

Towards the end of December, most of the 
infantry were sent into quarters, whilst the 
cavalry and 1000 foot, advanced to Carlisle. 
The sick, as they fell ill, were left in the towns 
on the road, to the care of the surgeons and 
apothecaries of the several places, and were 
well treated. 

The troops having staid some days at Litch- 
field, a greater number of sick was left in that 
place than in any other; on which account 
|P_51
the work-house was fitted up for an hospital: [/44./]
but there being too many admitted, the com- 
mon fevers became malignant, and several died. 
But in the other towns where the men were 
taken ill, and where there was no common 
hospital, that fever was unknown: so that 
the distempers, without any malignity, run 
their natural course, and generally came to a 
happy issue. 

The autumnal remitting fever, disguised 
with many symptoms of cold, could be traced 
in the troops which came over from Flan- 
ders, until the frosts in December put an end 
to it. But the prevailing distempers were 
hard coughs, stitches, pleuritic and rheumatic 
pains, with a few fluxes, the natural conse- 
quences of exposition to colds and rains on 
duty, or of wet feet on the march. There 
were also some intermittents; but all with 
such a mixture of coughs and infarctions of 
the lungs, as made bleeding the most neces- 
sary remedy. In general, large and repeat- 
ed bleedings were so requisite, that in every 
town through which the troops past, and 
where sick were left behind, the physician 
of the army believed the surgeons and apo- 
|P_52
[/45./]thecaries of the place more than half instruct- 
ed about the cure of the patients committed 
to them, when he had inculcated the neces- 
sity of large and repeated bleedings: for the 
men were at this time well fed, and by the 
colds their blood had become extremely sizy. 

Carlisle was invested in the beginning of Ja- 
nuary, and taken in a few days. The short- 
ness of the time, the mildness of the weather 
for the season, and the good cover which the 
troops found near the works, made the sick- 
ness so inconsiderable, that only one died there. 
And during the whole expedition, this body 
did not lose above 40 men; tho' there had 
been in all between 600 and 700 sick. 

On the 10th of February the Duke's army 
marched from Edinburgh towards Perth. It 
consisted of 14 battalions, and three regiments 
of cavalry; which being too large a number to 
be all billetted in so small a place, two battalions 
were quartered in churches. Provisions were in 
plenty, but the quarters were generally cold; so 
that a great many fell ill of the common in- 
flammatory distempers of the winter, and in a 
greater degree than before. The hard coughs 
|P_53
in particular, with inflammations of the pleura [/46./]
and lungs were most frequent. 

In the beginning of March the troops re- 
moved from Perth to Montrose, and from 
thence to Aberdeen, leaving 300 sick behind 
them; who were all well accommodated in 
the corporation halls and private houses of 
these towns. 

Till the end of March, the whole infantry 
was quartered in Aberdeen; but afterwards 
nine battalions were cantoned at Inverurie and 
Strathbogie: and at this time, one battalion 
more landed and joined the army. 

The weather being all this time extremely 
sharp, with frost and snow and easterly winds, 
the distempers continued to be highly in- 
flammatory, tho' of the same kind with what 
usually occur in winterquarters. Whilst the 
men suffered by cold beds, guards and out- 
duties, or by their own mismanagement, 
neither the season nor climate gave inflam- 
matory disorders to the officers, who had warm 
quarters, and were less exposed to cold: but 
in the beginning of March, when the wea- 
ther was very sharp, some of them were seiz- 
ed with the gout. 

|P_54
[/47./]The sick were well lodged in the hospital 
belonging to the town, and in other large 
houses; where having a free air, they were 
preserved from the hospital fever. Including 
those at Inverurie and Strathbogie, about 400 
sick were left behind, when the army moved; 
but of this number a small proportion died. 

On the 23d of April the army first 
encamped at Cullen; the next day it passed 
the Spey: on the 27th [/48./] after the battle of 
Culloden, the troops advanced to Inverness, 
and encamped on the south side of the town. 

At Strathbogie and Inverurie the duty had 
been constant, to guard against a surprize; one 
day's march had been long and rainy, the en- 
campment early, and many colds caught from 
wading the rivers: all these circumstances con- 
curred to make the sickness considerable. Be- 
fore the army reached Inverness, about 60 or 
70 men were taken ill, were left in towns 
by the way; and after the encampment 
the inflammatory distempers daily increased. 
These were the more severe, as the season 
was early, the climate cold, and the camp ex- 
posed in an open country to piercing winds. 
|P_55
The pleurisies and inflammations of the lungs, [/49./]
in particular, were violent, and tended quickly 
to suppuration; if large and repeated bleed- 
ings, and other parts of cure, were not 
speedily used. 


[^1. 
* Vid. LANCIS. de Nox. Palud. Effluv. lib. i. p. i. c. v. 
^]
[^2. 
† Hist. de l'Acad. R. des Sc. A. 1741. p. 27. 
^]
[^3. 
* All this is agreeable to a register of the weather and dis- 
eases kept for several years, by Dr. Stocke, physician at 
Middelburg. 
^]
[^4. 
* An ardent fever is defined Part III. Ch. iv. § 2. 
^]
[^5. 
* N.B. The new stile is used throughout. 
^]
[^6. 1742. ^]
[^7. 1742. ^]
[^8. 
* A compleat battalion consisted of 813; but as commis- 
sioned officers are not put in the Returns of the sick, we are only 
to reckon the full corps at 780. 
^]
[^9. 
† This consisted of three squadrons, and each squadron of 
158 men, not including officers. 
^]
[^10. 1742. ^]
[^11. 1742. ^]
[^12. 1742. ^]
[^13. 1742. ^]
[^14. 1743. ^]
[^15. 1743. ^]
[^16. 1743. ^]
[^17. 1743. ^]
[^18. 1743. ^]
[^19. 1743. ^]
[^20. 1743. ^]
[^21. 1743. ^]
[^22. 1743. ^]
[^23. 1743. ^]
[^24. 1743. ^]
[^25. 1743. ^]
[^26. 1743. ^]
[^27. 1743. ^]
[^28. 1744. ^]
[^29. 1744. ^]
[^30. 1744. ^]
[^31. 1744. ^]
[^32. 1744. ^]
[^33. 1744. ^]
[^34. 1744. ^]
[^35. 1745. ^]
[^36. 1745. ^]
[^37. 1745. ^]
[^38. 1745. ^]
[^39. 1745. ^]
[^40. 1745. ^]
[^41. 1745. ^]
[^42. 1745. ^]
[^43. 1745. ^]
[^44. 1745. ^]
[^45. 1745. ^]
[^46. 1746. ^]
[^47. 1746. ^]
[^48. 
* N. B. The new style is continued. 
^]
[^49. 1746. ^]