

[^Sample 1: book - ^]

|P_[^An ornamental horizontal column, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}A 
LETTER, &c.}]
SIR, 

HAVING lately wrote you my sen- 
timents fully, on a project of 
giving the Foundling Hospital a 
National Establishment, with a 
fix'd Revenue by Act of Parliament, I was 
somewhat surprised at your insisting, in 
consequence of it, on my making them 
publick; for no man is better acquainted 
than yourself with my backwardness to 
commence Author, even of a Pamphlet. 
However, this aversion must, at present, give 
way to what you are pleased to urge; that 
it may, in your opinion, be of service to 
my Country, as a Bill is daily expected to be 
|P_4
brought into Parliament for that Purpose, 
which was attempted last Sessions, intitled, 
A Bill for obliging all Parishes in this King- 
dom to keep proper Registers of Births, Deaths, 
and Marriages; and for raising therefrom a 
Fund towards the Support of the Hospital, 
for the Maintenance and Education of exposed 
and deserted young Children. I shall therefore, 
without any hesitation, prepare to obey your 
commands, and to do my duty, as an 
Englishman, by laying the substance of what 
I wrote you before the Publick, with the 
same freedom and sincerity which I used 
in corresponding with a Friend. 

But here I must beg leave to premise, 
that it is impossible for me not to be sensible, 
that I shall find many persons, of good and 
benevolent dispositions, prejudiced against this 
attempt, as far as it may affect the Hospital, 
on account of the reverence which they 
implicitly pay to every thing that wears the 
name of a Charity. The Virtue of Charity, 
I readily agree with them, is most noble and 
divine; and the abuse of it has, perhaps, 
|P_5
added to the proof of its Excellency. Cor- 
ruptio Optimi fit Pessima, is an Observation of 
long experience, and great authority; and, 
as England is a soil most natural to the ge- 
nuine Plant, the hurtful imitation of it, to 
a very pernicious degree, has, from time to 
time, been here most industriously planted. 
Our ancestors, many years ago, sold their 
estates, and forsook their wives and children, 
all for the fashionable Charity of those times, 
that of rescuing the Holy-Land from the 
Saracens. We know the event of the Cru- 
sado; in most Parts of Europe the evil of it 
was severely felt, but, in England, where it 
found fuel, in the valour and generosity of 
the People, it became a plague, that threat- 
en'd with destruction the whole realm, 
from the King to the Freeholder. 

To this Charity succeeded an universal 
and unbounded Zeal, for the establishment 
of Religious Houses, under various titles, 
Monasteries, Nunneries, Abbeys, Priories, Chaun- 
tries, &c. &c. &c. Upon which last men- 
tioned kind of Charity, I shall only remark, 
|P_6
that with it reign'd Tyranny, Poverty, and 
Ignorance, and from its suppression arose 
Liberty, Trade, and Learning. 

These examples of the effects of ill- 
directed Charity sufficiently prove, that the 
Spirit of it may be fatally exerted; but if 
the general Plan of a Foundling-Hospital, of 
the prodigious extent now seeming to be 
aimed at, were a proper one, it should have 
been adopted, at the time when the sup- 
pressed Religious Houses might well have 
been converted into Foundling-Hospitals, to 
which some say, they had a propensity. 
They were certainly sufficient in number, 
and their revenues a fund already established, 
which, at present, will be very difficult to be 
found, unless the present possessors of them 
should charitably apply to Parliament for a 
power to surrender those estates to this our 
present fashionable Institution: However, it 
may be but justice here to confess, that the 
foundation of a few houses to serve for a 
retirement to venerable men, grown old and 
infirm, who had spent their youth in the 
|P_7
cultivation of Piety and Learning; or, as an 
asylum for virtuous and devout women, re- 
duced by the various accidents of life, does 
not convey a displeasing or ridiculous idea; but 
it was the excess and abuse, which occasioned 
the total suppression of all Religious Houses 
whatever; and the same causes may produce 
the like effects, in regard to these Hospitals, 
should this Bill pass into a Law. 

When this Hospital was first erected, by 
Charter granted by his Majesty, under the 
Great Seal, bearing date the 17th day of 
October, 1739, it was on the suggestion, To 
prevent the frequent Murders committed on 
poor miserable Infants, by their Parents, to hide 
their Shame, and the inhumane Custom of exposing 
new-born young Children to perish in the 
Streets, or training them up in Idleness, Beg- 
gary, and Theft. 

So laudable a Design soon found in this 
opulent city and kingdom, generous and 
compassionate Minds, who contributed largely 
to an Establishment, which they judged capa- 
ble of producing such salutary and desirable 
effects; and the Lists of Benefactions, with 
|P_8
the Names of the several Benefactors of both 
Sexes, hung up in the Foundling-Hospital, will 
do lasting honour to the memory of the No- 
bility and Gentry of this age and kingdom, 
for their generous Contributions to so pro- 
mising an Undertaking. 

It was then expected by many, especially 
by Gentlemen who had travelled into foreign 
countries, and observed the method and 
regulation of the best ordered Hospitals of 
this kind abroad, that the same method 
would have been adopted and observed in 
this Hospital, by admitting children by a 
wheel of a proper size, which, on the ring- 
ing of a bell by the person who should bring 
the child to the Hospital, might be turned 
round by the porter or servant attending on 
behalf of the Hospital, and the child brought 
in be taken care of, without asking any 
question whatsoever of the person who brought 
it, or making any inquiry after them. 

Had this method been strictly pursued, it 
would not only have effectually answered the 
good ends proposed, of covering the mother's 
|P_9
shame, and preventing the murder of an in- 
fant, which might, in time, have been of 
use to the publick; but it is highly probable, 
that the children, brought in this manner to 
the Hospital, would not have proved very 
numerous; and, consequently, the liberal 
contributions of the Nobility and Gentry, 
made soon after the establishment, would have 
been fully sufficient to have provided for 
all the objects of Charity thus brought. 

From what motives a method so rea- 
sonable, so obvious, and so conformable to 
the tenor of the Charter, was laid aside, I 
shall not inquire. It is enough to observe, 
that the quitting this plain and easy method, 
and taking in children, at first by way of 
advertisement and balloting, in numbers 
of thirty or forty at a time (when usually 
many more appeared than could be taken 
in) at first to two months old, and after- 
wards proceeding to a twelvemonth old; 
and from taking in thirty or forty at 
a time, to taking in as many as should 
be offered from time to time, has swelled 
|P_10
the expences of this undertaking to such 
an enormous degree, that it now requires, 
over and above their private Revenues, an 
additional aid from Parliament of fifty 
thousand pounds a year to maintain it, 
which must continually increase every year, 
so long as this extensive Scheme is pursued, 
though it is already not much short of the 
interest of a million and half of mo- 
ney raised for the service of the pub- 
lick; and this, at a time when we are 
obliged, for our necessary defence in a just 
war, against our ancient and perfidious 
enemy, to raise for the current service of 
the year more money, by several millions 
than was ever raised in one year in any former 
war. 

Hitherto, indeed, the Governors of this 
Hospital have been contented to apply to 
Parliament for annual supplies, to provide 
for the great expences they are at. They 
now apply to Parliament for a fixed and 
perpetual revenue to be settled for the use 
of this Hospital: What it may amount to, 
|P_11
if this Bill should pass into a law, is at 
present very uncertain. The highest estima- 
tion which I have heard of it, has not 
amounted to above 10,000l. a year, which 
can, by no means, be supposed a revenue 
equivalent to the expences, which they must 
needs be at, in the prosecution of this ex- 
tensive Plan. It would seem therefore, that 
the chief view of the promoters of this 
Bill is to get their plan approved, and adopted 
at any rate; and, when they have obtained 
such a Parliamentary Sanction, they will 
think themselves secure of not being aban- 
doned, and, in the end, gain the point 
which they propose, to wit, to lay the 
enormous charge of this Hospital on the 
publick, and to engage the Parliament to 
provide for it, how immense soever the 
expence may prove; which, in time, may 
probably swell what was at first proposed as 
a voluntary Charity, into a Corporation of the 
greatest revenue of any in the kingdom. 

By the accounts delivered into Parliament 
last Session, it appears, that the Receipts 
|P_12
for accompt of the Hospital, from its Com- 
mencement to December the 31st, 1757, have 
amounted to upwards of the Sum of 166,000l.
and that, in all that time, no more than 105 
children have been put out, viz. 62 boys, 
and 43 girls, which is an expence, for all 
the children put out to that time, which 
amounts to upwards of 1500l. for every 
child so put out, to that time. 

Whoever peruses the Bill, as last printed, 
by order of the House of Commons, will find 
Objections, which may be made almost to 
every Clause, as it now stands, which, it is 
hoped, will either be clear'd up, or altered, 
as it may pass through the Committee. In 
the mean time, I shall beg leave to make 
such Observations as have occurred to me, 
which I submit to your better judgment. 

As to the first and second Clauses, it does 
not appear that any complaints have ever 
been made, that the present method of regi- 
stering Births, Deaths, and Marriages, has 
been found liable to great inconveniences, 
though, perhaps, in some particulars, there 
|P_13
might be alterations and amendments made 
by which those of Births and Burials might 
be rendered more exact and useful; but, 
surely, by the late Marriage Act, sufficient 
care was taken, not only for the duly solem- 
nizing, but the punctual registering of all 
marriages whatsoever so solemnized; but, why 
may not this be done, by an Act prescribing 
those amendments to the ministers and clerks 
of every Parish, full as effectually, and at a much 
cheaper rate, than by erecting this General 
Register Office, in so very expensive and 
extraordinary a manner, which, at best, can 
only contain the Duplicates of what is con- 
tained in the original Parish Register Book, 
which must always be of greater authority, 
than any Duplicate or Copy taken from them? 

And, as for the application of the produce 
of this tax, for the benefit of the Foundling- 
Hospital, by the third Clause, there seems to 
be no more reason for giving this extraordinary 
assistance to that Charity in particular, than 
to any other Charity established in the 
kingdom. 

|P_14
By the fourth Clause, a Register General 
is to be appointed by the Governors and 
Guardians of the Hospital, who, together 
with a competent number of clerks, are to 
have sufficient salaries appointed to them, 
and the Register General is to provide a suffi- 
cient quantity of books and paper, properly 
ruled and titled, to be divided into several 
columns, for which he is to be paid at the 
rate of one penny for each folio, or two 
pence for every sheet of paper so ruled and 
titled, by the Churchwardens of every Parish 
in the kingdom; and to supply all the said 
several Parishes with the like books and paper 
at the same rate, from time to time, as often 
as there shall be occasion; which seems to 
be a prodigious perquisite designed to the 
Register General, for providing such books 
and paper to a perpetuity. And, whereas, 
by the late Marriage Act, the new books for 
the register of Marriages, ordered to be 
provided by each Parish, were allowed to 
be provided by the Churchwardens of each 
Parish, wherever they thought fit, this 
|P_15
Bill makes the providing such books and 
paper a perpetual monopoly, in favour of the 
Register General. 

In the fifth Clause, prescribing the manner 
of registering Deaths; the second column, 
directed to contain the names, professions, or 
additions of the parents deceased, will be, in 
a number of case of the deaths of old people, 
impossible to be complied with: And, though, 
in the eleventh Clause, the occupier of the 
house, in which any person shall die, is 
obliged to give notice in writing of those 
several particulars only, so far as the same 
can be known, or conveniently obtained, 
yet this fifth Clause positively enjoins the 
officiating minister to enter the register of 
the Death, in the manner above-mentioned. 

The sixth Clause, relating to the register- 
ing of Marriages, which were so thoroughly 
well provided for by the late Marriage Act, 
seems wholly needless. 

The seventh and eighth Clauses seem 
designed to secure this good job, for the 
Register General, by providing the books and 
|P_16
paper for Duplicates, as has been before 
observed. 

By the ninth Clause it appears very difficult 
to oblige such persons to pay, who either 
do not chuse to christen their children, or 
Anabaptists, who do not baptize children, 
till grown up to maturity, or Quakers, who 
do not baptize at all; nor is any method 
prescribed how to deal with either Ana- 
baptists, or Quakers, who do not give due 
notice of their child being named, so as to 
enforce them to pay according to this Act. 

By the 10th Clause, a very extraordinary 
favour is done to the parents of illegitimate 
children, who are exempted from giving any 
notice of the birth of the child, but may 
have the child publickly baptized, named, 
and registered, as illegitimate, at the charge 
of the parish; and whereas, hitherto, the 
bringing a bastard into the world has always 
been deemed an action deserving some punish- 
ment, or discouragement, at least, it is now 
rewarded. 

|P_17
The twelfth, thirteenth, fourteenth, and 
fifteenth Clauses, oblige the married couple 
to give notice of their Marriage in writing 
to the Parish-Clerk, though he is present at 
the wedding, and the Clerk to give the said 
notice to the officiating Minister, who is 
obliged, immediately after the same is delivered 
to him, to enter the same three times over, 
to wit, once by virtue of the Marriage Act, 
and twice by virtue of this Act, as well as 
to file the notices in order; the Parish-Clerk 
is likewise obliged to give immediate notice 
to the Churchwardens, or one of them, that 
they may forthwith demand and receive the 
rates herein assessed, which will oblige one 
of the Churchwardens to be present at every 
wedding. 

By the sixteenth Clause, the rate for a 
Baptism and Burial is assessed at eight-pence 
each, and is the same for the greatest peer 
or the meanest commoner. 

By the seventeenth Clause, the rates on 
Marriages are somewhat varied, viz. 10s. on 
Marriages by prerogative licence, 2s. for Mar- 
|P_18
riages by common licence, and 6d. on Mar- 
riages by banns. 

By the eighteenth Clause, the Poor's 
Rate is made chargeable only for these seve- 
ral rates for such poor as stand on the Poor's 
Books already; and by the tenth Clause, for 
illegitimate children, brought to be baptized 
and registered. 

By the nineteenth Clause, in the begin- 
ning, it is only said, that the Churchwarden 
or Churchwardens, Chapelwarden or Chapel- 
wardens, Overseer or Overseers, of the Poor, 
shall meet to compare the registers and 
duplicates, with the several notices required 
to be given; but the latter part of the said 
Clause directs, that the said Minister, as well 
as the Churchwarden or Churchwardens, 
Chapelwarden or Chapelwardens, Overseer or 
Overseers, shall sign the register and dupli- 
cate, or duplicates, and enter thereon the 
time when the same were so signed. 

Byt the 20th Clause, it is made felony, 
(supposed, without benefit of the clergy) 
wilfully to deface any such register or 
|P_19
duplicate, which is adding to the mischief 
of making capital offences too numerous. 

By the twenty-first and twenty-second 
Clauses, the method is prescribed of recover- 
ing the penalties from offenders against this 
Act, in a summary way, before a Justice of 
peace, of the district wherein such person 
shall reside; the one half of which is to go 
to the informer, and the other to the Found- 
ling-Hospital, which is something very ex- 
traordinary, that the penalty for breach of 
a law should be made payable to a particular 
Corporation, as well as the method of en- 
forcing it in so summary a manner, by one 
Justice of peace, especially, when it is con- 
sidered, that any such supposed offender is 
to contend with a Corporation, that has an 
income of 50,000l. a Year. 

The twenty-third Clause only obliges the 
Churchwardens, Chapelwardens, or Overseers 
of the Poor, to deliver to the Collectors of 
the Land-tax the said duplicates, and to 
pay to them the money which shall appear 
to be due for the same. 

|P_20
By the twenty-fourth, twenty-fifth, twen- 
ty-sixth, twenty-eighth, and twenty-ninth 
Clauses there is an allowance of 5s. in the 
pound to be paid to the officiating Minister, 
for his trouble in making the said entries in 
the said registers, and duplicates, and com- 
paring, correcting and signing the same; 1s.6d.
in the pound to the Parish-Clerk, for his 
receiving the said notices; 3d. in the pound 
to the Collector of the Land-tax, for recei- 
ving the money, and paying it to the Re- 
ceiver-General; and 3d. in the pound to the 
Receiver-General, for paying the same to 
the Treasurer of the Foundling-Hospital for 
the time being: All which is exclusive of 
the charge of purchasing, or erecting the 
General Register Office in London, and the 
payment of the salaries to the Register Ge- 
neral, and the Clerks employed by him, for 
their attendance in the said Office; where- 
upon I beg leave to observe, 

I. That there is no instance of any other 
Act of Parliament, where poundage out of a 
tax raised is given to a Minister, in consider- 
ation of his doing his duty. 

|P_21
II. It is very doubtful whether any offici- 
ating Minister will think himself sufficiently 
paid by this, for his extraordinary trouble 
in entering so many registers, for most of 
which he will have but two-pence, and for 
many, no more than three half-pence apiece. 

III. Supposing divers officiating Ministers 
to have been employed in the course of a 
year, in performing the offices of Christen- 
ings, Burials or Marriages, and making the 
entries directed, which of them is to receive 
the gratuity or allowance of 5s. in the pound, 
on the money collected by virtue of this Act? 

IV. That the payment of the produce of 
any tax whatsoever, to any Corporation, by 
the Receiver General of any county, without 
first passing thro' the Exchequer, is unconsti- 
tutional. 

V. That the charge of erecting or pur- 
chasing an office for the Register General, 
together with the payment of salaries to him, 
and Clerks employed by him, and other in- 
cident charges, may be reasonably supposed 
to amount to 3s. in the pound more, on all 
|P_22
the money raised by this Act, which added 
to the other 7s. will make 10s. in the pound, 
or one half of the money raised, which is 
supposed to be much more chargeable than 
the raising any other tax whatsoever, and 
ought the less to be allowed, as this Office 
will interfere both with the Register Office 
of each Diocese, as also with the Heralds 
Office, who have both of them a prior right 
to an Office of this sort, to the Foundling- 
Hospital. 

The embarrassment of Burials, by the Pro- 
hibition in the 27th Clause to remove a dead 
corpse into another parish, before a certificate 
is obtained from the Clerk of the Parish where 
the death happens, of the delivery of due 
notice, of the registry being made, and the 
money being paid, to with the sum of 8d.
may be attended with exceeding bad conse- 
quences, when any death happens by an in- 
fectious disease, if either the Occupier of the 
house, or the Minister, or the Clerk of the 
Parish, or the Churchwarden, be out of the 
way; for the notice must first be given by 
|P_23
the Occupier of the house to the Clerk, who 
must deliver it to the officiating Minister, and 
likewise acquaint the Churchwardens; the 
Minister must enter it twice over, and file the 
Notice, and the money must be paid to the 
Churchwarden, and a Certificate of its being 
paid must be given; and all this must be 
done before the Body can be removed, for 
the security of 8d. And it being so common 
a practice in London, and other great towns, 
to remove Bodies to some Hall, or other 
publick place, assoon as conveniently may be 
done, for the ease of all the Living in the 
house, where the Death has happened, this 
strict prohibition to remove the dead Body, 
before such Certificate obtained, cannot but 
frequently occasion great delays and inconve- 
niences, and may possibly sometimes commu- 
nicate infection. 

By the 30th Clause it is enacted, that the 
Copies of any such Entry in any Duplicates 
being examined, and attested by the said 
Register General or his Deputy, shall be re- 
ceived as evidence, in any Court of Record 
|P_24
or Nisi-prius, or any other place whatsoever; 
which gives greater authority to a Copy of 
a Duplicate (which Duplicate is but a Copy 
of the original Register) than has hitherto 
been given by the Law to a Certificate of the 
Clerk of a Parish, from an original Entry 
faithfully kept in the Parish Register. 

By the 31st and 32d Clauses, Abstracts 
from these Duplicates are to be made, and 
annually laid before the Parliament by the 
said Register, and Copies thereof annually 
delivered to the Lords of Trade and Planta- 
tions, to the end that the Sum collected and 
raised by this Act may be known, as also 
the number of Births, Deaths, and Marri- 
ages, which are registered therein; but it 
does not appear to what purpose these Lists 
are to be prepared, and laid, with so much 
parade and expence, before the Parliament, 
and the Lords of Trade and Plantations, 
when, by a very short Act to oblige all 
Ministers and Parish-Clerks to be exact in 
their registers of Births and Deaths, such 
a List could be easily procured, as it has 
|P_25
been hitherto, from the Parish-Clerks, within 
the Bills of mortality; and it will hardly be 
pretended, but that effectual care has been 
taken by the late Marriage Act, to have all 
Marriages exactly registered; and an ac- 
count of all Births, Deaths, and Marriages, 
might easily be transmitted from every Parish 
to the Register Office of the Bishop of each 
diocese, without occasioning such an immense 
expence and trouble, and subjecting the 
people to the many inconveniencies and 
penalties, which may be occasioned by this 
Bill, if it should pass into an Act. 

The 33d and 34th Clauses oblige the 
Parish-Clerks, as well in their individual 
capacity, as in that of a company, to lay 
weekly, and yearly, several accounts, as 
mentioned, before his Majesty, and the Lord- 
Mayor of London; and, by the 35th, it is 
provided, that nothing in this Act shall take 
away or alter Ministers fees, or hinder a 
Register being kept of Births, Burials, or 
Marriages, within this kingdom, by the Mi- 
nister of any Parish in England, Wales, or 
|P_26
Town of Berwick upon Tweed, or a Tran- 
script thereof being sent to the Registry of 
the diocese, wherein such Parish is situated, 
according to any Provisions, subsisting for 
that purpose; so that, notwithstanding the 
great additional trouble, laid by this Bill, on 
the officiating Ministers, and Clerks of Pa- 
rishes, nothing is abated to them of their 
former duty. 

By the 36th Clause, a Copy of this Act, 
as soon as it shall be printed, is to be sent 
by the Clerk of the peace, in every County, 
City, Riding, or Division, in England, 
Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, 
to the Parish Officers of each Parish, for 
which is to be paid to the said Clerk of the 
peace, by each Parish, 3s. which will make 
a pretty perquisite to the Clerks of the peace, 
when the Churchwardens of each Parish 
might provide a Copy of the Act for 6d.

The last Clause, being the 37th, enacts 
a Penalty of 5l. on such Churchwardens as 
shall refuse or neglect to buy such books and 
paper, at the times directed, and is a suffi- 
|P_27
cient penalty to enforce an obedience to that 
part of the Act. 

Upon the whole, there is no special ap- 
propriation of this money, so to be raised, 
to what uses it is to be applied by the Go- 
vernors and Guardians of the Foundling- 
Hospital, or how they are to account for it 
to Parliament, or elsewhere. 

Lastly, The Bill, being a money Bill, is 
capable of no amendment by the Lords, but 
must be absolutely passed, or rejected, tho' 
containing regulations, which affect every 
Parish in England, and interfering very much 
with the management of ecclesiastical duties 
and persons. 

Having gone through the several Clauses, 
I leave it to every unprejudiced man, who 
considers the whole tenor of the Bill, whether 
it does not appear, that thereby a fresh train 
of embarrassments, difficulties and discou- 
ragements, will be heaped on the facerdotal
Order; that a tax is, in effect, to be laid on 
Baptism, which, as a Sacrament, ought cer- 
tainly to be liable to none; and by that on 
|P_28
Funerals, the grief of persons in low life, 
on the loss of their chief support, by the 
death of a parent, is, at least, very unseasona- 
bly aggravated; and the difficulties on Mar- 
riages greatly increased. 

Mankind, as much as they are raised by 
the dignity of their nature above other 
animals, are likewise distinguished from them 
by Providence, in its particular care of their 
Propagation and Increase, which is not left 
to a fortuitous congress, nor to a short so- 
ciety of a year or a few months; but in 
the beginning GOD made them male and 
female, and ordained marriage as a perpe- 
tual society between them for life, which 
(as Milton finely expresses it) 
— — — — — — — requires 
Collateral Love and dearest Amity , 
for the mutual comfort of each other, and 
for rearing an offspring to the state of man- 
hood, which demands the joint care of both 
parents for many years, and is a perpetual 
source of the most amiable and the most 
useful connections in life. 

|P_29
Nor does the obligation then cease, for, as 
the parents grow old, if they have done their 
duty by their children, the children have a 
reciprocal duty to perform to them to the day 
of their death, and are equally obliged, by 
the ties of nature to support the parents in 
age, if they come to want it, as the parents 
were to take care of their offspring, when 
young, which requires a mutual society, not 
only between the man and his wife, but 
between the parents and their children, 
during their whole life. How convenient, 
how beautiful, and how fitly adapted to the 
welfare of society is this Order of Providence! 
and how justly has it been always esteemed 
and admired among the wisest nations! 

Accordingly, we find that they have al- 
ways given the greasest encouragement to 
Marriage, and the Romans passed a law, giving 
special privileges to the Fathers of three 
Children, called the Jus trium liberorum, 
which law continued in force in great part 
of Europe, for many centuries, and is still, 
tho' with some alterations, in force, in divers 
|P_30
parts of Italy: And the welfare of the child 
has been always deemed the best pledge, and 
strongest security, for the fidelity and loyalty 
of the parent. 

And in how great esteem and veneration 
the parental authority has always been held 
amongst the best and wisest of nations, 
History will shew. Holy writ informs us, 
that for many ages it was the foundation of 
all government among the Jews, from Abra- 
ham to Moses; and that it was afterwards, of 
the very essence of the Jewish polity. The 
honour therefore to be paid to their parents 
was made the first commandment of the 
second Table of the Decalogue, which com- 
prehends the whole duty to society. The 
Egyptians claim the next place, on all ac- 
counts; of their veneration to their parents, 
we have the most ample proofs, and they 
even preserved, for ages, this piety to their 
remains. I must not omit, that they en- 
joined the son to be instructed in the trade 
of his father. How far this was necessary, 
I shall not pretend to say, but they appear 
|P_31
to be the first people who carried on commerce 
with glory and advantage; and of their great 
proficiency in mechanicks, we have stupen- 
dous monuments to this day. Not to expatiate 
on this subject too widely in the vast field 
of history, it may be observ'd, that the Gre- 
cian Legislators took their maxims of govern- 
ment and morality from the Egyptians, and 
the Romans deduced theirs from the Greeks; 
that famous republick, in every respect the 
best regulated state, and the nicest censor of 
manners, was so jealous of infringing on the 
parental jurisdiction, that they, at no age, 
and in no circumstance of life, intirely 
emancipated a son from the authority of his 
father. 

The next, who make a figure in history, 
are those great Northern conquerors, the Suevi, 
Goths, Alans, Vandals, &c. all of whom, tho' 
tenacious of liberty, to the utmost extent of 
the idea, in regard to their princes, rigorously 
preserved, in their private families, the sub- 
mission of children to their parents, wisely 
judging, that the preservation of their publick 
|P_32
freedom depended on that œconomy: For, 
in all human societies, there must be an 
authority lodged somewhere; they are happiest 
where it resides in the parent, to direct and 
instruct their youth, and in laws made and 
executed by themselves to regulate their 
manhood. This plan of our constitution 
was first derived from these Northern Heroes, 
from whom we boast of our origin. From 
them we inherit a well regulated spirit of 
liberty, and a reverence and submission to 
parents. These are, to this day, the univer- 
sally acknowledged characteristicks of English- 
men, the best and happiest people upon earth; 
long may they continue so: but that con- 
tinuance must depend, in great measure, on 
our adherence to those principles, which 
have hitherto made us great, and preserved 
us free. 

I cannot quit this part of my subject 
without mentioning the instance of the brave 
black Prince, as he was called, Son of Ed- 
ward III. who, as Rapin relates, after the 
battle of Cressy was over, closed the atchieve- 
|P_33
ments of that glorious day, by modestly and 
dutifully kneeling down, at the approach of 
his father, to ask him blessing: Selon la Coutume 
d'Angleterre. This picture excites no idea 
in our minds, that can make us ashamed of 
the Coutume d'Angleterre; nor shall we look on 
our renowned Ancestors with such Ingrati- 
tude, as tot be any ways the occasion, that, 
instead of an honourable Progeny lawfully 
descending from them, a debauched, spurious, 
perhaps an incestuous Race, may become the 
future Lords of this Island. 

This consequence is what may, well, be 
apprehended in time, if this Bill should pass 
into a law, and the prodigious extension of 
the Foundling-Hospital, now aimed at, be car- 
ried into execution; which does not admit, 
only, children in danger of being murdered, 
to hide the shame of their parents; but is, 
in a manner, a publick encouragement to all 
parents, who do not chuse to maintain their 
own children, to abandon them before they 
are a twelve-month old; whereby, not- 
withstanding experience hitherto has shewn, 
|P_34
that the children have died in very great 
numbers, yet as there are like to be more 
and more brought every year into the Hos- 
pital, this method must, in time, bring an 
immense number, of which no judgment 
can strictly be formed; although the ingeni- 
ous Mr. Massie, in some shrewd Observations, 
which he has made of the consequences of 
the extension of this Hospital, supposes, that, 
in fifty years time, there will not be less than 
50,000 of them, [/1./] all of which will be 
deemed Illegitimate and Foundlings, though, 
perhaps, five-sixths, or nine-tenths of them 
be children born in lawful matrimony, but 
abandoned by their own parents. 

Illegitimate children, who happen to be 
born of parents that take the best care of 
them, seldom escape contempt and disregard 
from their equals; but much worse is the case 
of these Foundlings, who have no parent to 
foster them in their childhood, or to advise 
|P_35
them in their youth; no brothers or sisters 
to grow up as friends, to assist them in going 
thro' life, nor any connection with any re- 
lation whatever. Is this condition to be com- 
pared to that of legitimate children in a fa- 
mily? No surely. Why then is it endea- 
vour'd to be extended to so enormous a de- 
gree? Are these Foundlings, when they grow 
up to manhood, to be the men to fight in 
defence of their country? Alas! what coun- 
try have they, who have no relations? who 
have been abandon'd in their infancy by their 
own parents, and have known nothing of the 
effect of natural affection exercised towards 
themselves. How shall they love their coun- 
try, who have never had any love shewed 
them by parents or relations? 
Non his Juventus orta Parentibus 
Infecit æquor sanguine.— 
'Twas not by such a motley Brood, 
The Seas were dyed with hostile Blood, 
either at the time of the Destruction of the 
Spanish Armada, or in the Dutch and French
Wars which have happen'd since. 

|P_36
And, as their connections are not likely to 
excite them to fight for their country, so 
neither will their Education qualify them for 
a Life of hardship and fatigue, like the 
Rusticorum mascula militum Proles of Horace, 
or the hardy Offsping of our English La- 
bourers, who, being early inured to bear hun- 
ger and cold, and bred to hard labour, have 
so often and so successfully, under the con- 
duct of expert and valiant Leaders, made the 
power of France tremble; whereas the chil- 
dren educated in this Hospital, being well 
supplied with all necessaries, will feel none of 
these hardships, and, till they are put out ap- 
prentices, will have no employment but to 
make purses, or spin twine, to pray, and to 
play. Nor, indeed, would it be possible for 
the Governors of any Hospital, without the 
imputation of barbarity, to use children to 
the hardships, which many of those, of the 
poorer sort, patiently submit to, and even 
thrive under, when bred with their parents, 
who, they are very sensible, can do no better 
for them. 

|P_37
They may indeed, when grown up to 
manhood, be qualified to serve in any arbi- 
trary designs; as we find, in countries, where 
despotism is carried to the highest pitch, 
every thing begins and ends in the absolute 
Will of a Tyrant, inforced by mercenary 
homicides, who have no connection with 
the other Inhabitants. Thus, in Turkey, it 
is supported by the Janizaries, who are Found- 
lings, brought up in Colleges, or Hospitals, 
and tho' no wise intitled, by birth, to one 
foot of ground, yet, at their Master's com- 
mand, annul all private succession, and butcher, 
without mercy, whomsoever he is pleased 
to mark out for destruction, and at last, for 
want of other game, often destroy the royal 
Hunter himself. The Mamalukes, next to the 
Janizaries, were the most illustrious body of 
Foundlings in history, if in one instance they 
did not exceed them; I mean, their bold stroke 
of placing one of their number on the throne, 
and then by a Law rendering all but Found- 
lings incapable of it. 

|P_38
Upon the whole, Sir, I must now sub- 
mit it to your consideration, whether it does 
not appear, that the prodigious extension of 
this Charity, by taking in all children what- 
soever that shall be offered, under a twelve- 
month old, is a real and extraordinary devi- 
ation from the original design of the Char- 
ter; that the method of raising this tax will 
be very prejudicial, and tend to the dispa- 
ragement and neglect of the sacred ordi- 
nance of Baptism, will unreasonably afflict 
the relations of all dying persons, and will 
greatly discourage Matrimony, and tend to 
corrupt the morals of the people; that, in 
stead of being a provision for exposed and 
deserted young children, it will prove a 
strong temptation and encouragement to 
many parents to abandon their own legiti- 
mate children, for whom they are well able 
to provide; and that so great a number of 
persons, brought up without any connections 
or relations, will grow into a body quite 
different and distinct from all others in this 
kingdom, but who will neither by their 
|P_39
education or constitutions serve so well 
either for soldiers, day-labourers, or manu- 
facturers, or for any other office of life, as 
the children of ploughmen and day- 
labourers, bred under the eye of their 
own parents, and early inured to that kind 
of life, the number of which useful peo- 
ple will be greatly decreased by the increase 
and extension of this design; the Overseers 
of the Poor in country parishes having already 
fallen into the practice of sending children 
up to the Hospitals, in waggons, to the no 
small risque of their lives; and therefore 
that it will be far more eligible to reduce 
this Hospital again, in time, within its 
original bounds of a voluntary Charity, than 
to extend it to that enormous degree, which 
would be the consequence of this Bill. 

Est Modus in Rebus, sunt certi denique fines, 
Quos ultra, citraque nequit consistere Rectum. 
I am, with the greatest Esteem, 

SIR, 

Feb. 5. 
1759. 

Your most affectionate Friend, 
and humble Servant. 


[^1. 
* See Mr. Massie's Observations on the Foundling-Hospital, 
in his Pamphlet lately published, about Parish Poor, Page 45 
to 48, and 145 to 146. 
^]