

[^Sample 1: book - ^]

|P_[^A horizontal double-line, spanning the whole page. ^][^A horizontal double-line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}ANIMADVERSIONS, &c. }]
A House divided against itself, says the scripture, cannot 
stand. Whether this be applicable to the present state 
of the College of Physicians, time will determine. 
But we know, that, from a fortuitous concurrence of cir- 
cumstances, great revolutions have often been the ultimate 
effect of a very trivial first cause: yet, be that first, that re- 
mote-cause, whatsoever it may, the constitution of the times 
is the principal cause of most revolutions. Our forefathers 
were, doubtless, wise enough in their generation; never- 
theless, the natural result of experience, or the different com- 
plexion of the age, frequently oblige us to disregard their 
precepts, reverse their decrees, and repeal their laws. But 
mankind are naturally so attached to custom, that they sel- 
dom attempt reformation, till the absurdity or burthen of 
their yoke becomes flagrant or intolerable. 

|P_2
Be not alarmed, my good reader, I have no treasonable 
intention. I have nothing to do with the revolutions of 
kingdoms. They are below my notice; for, though they be 
sometimes of importance to individuals, to nations their 
consequence is generally trivial. If life and health be our 
prime blessings, and pain and dissblution our greateit evils, 
the date, whose constitution I am about to consider, con- 
cerns us much more than that by which we are governed, 
taxed, and protected. 

Anno 1511, previous to the charter of our eighth Harry, of 
pious memory, by which the physicians of London were made 
a body corporate, there passed an act of parliament ordain- 
ing, that no person should practise physick, but such as had 
been examined by the Bishop of London or the Dean of St. 
Paul's: and the reafons assigned for passing this act were 
these: "Forasmuch as the science and cunning of physic is 
daily within this realm exercised by a great number of igno- 
rant persons, of whom the greater part have no manner of 
insight in the same, nor in any other kind of learning; some 
also can read no letters on the book, so far forth, that com- 
mon artificers, as smiths, weavers, and women boldly and 
accustomably take upon them great cures, and things of great 
difficulty, in which they partly use sorcery and witchcraft, 
partly apply such medicines as be very noious, and nothing 
meet therefore, to the high displeasure of God, &c." This 
preamble is a striking picture of the ignorance and barbarism 
of the people of those times; legislators not excepted. 

|P_3
In the 10th year of the same reign, the College of Physi- 
cians obtained their charter, the principal articles of which I 
shall beg leave to consider. 

Art. 6. Doctoribus Joan. Chambre, Thomæ Linacre, Fer- 
dinando de Victoria, medicis nostris, Nicholao Halsewell, Jo- 
anni Francisco, & Rob. Yaxley, medicis, concessimus, quod ipsi, 
omnesque homines ejusdem facultatis, de et in civitate predicta, 
sint in re & nomine unum corpus & communitas perpetua sive 
collegium perpetuum.

From this article it appears, that, not only those whose 
names are expressed, but all the physicians then in London, 
were, by this act, constituted members of the College, 
which College was thus rendered perpetual. 

In Art. 7. they are impowered to elect annually a President, 
ad supervidend', recognoscend', & gubernand', their community. 

Art. 8. grants the College a common seal. 

By Art. 12. they and their successors are authorized to hold 
lawsul meetings, and to make statutes for the government 
and correction, not only of their own community, but of 
every person exercising the same faculty in the city of Lon- 
don, and within seven miles distance. 

In Art. 13. all persons are prohibited from exercising the 
said faculty in London, or within seven miles thereof, with- 
out a licence, under the seal of the College, on a penalty of 
five pounds for every month; half to the King, and the other 
half to the College. 

|P_4
Art. 14. impowers them to elect annually four Censors, 
who are invested with very extensive authority to fine or im- 
prison those who offend against the above laws. 

In a subsequent act of parliament, in the same reign, their 
charter is confirmed, and it is farther ordained that no person 
be suffered to exercise or practise physic in any part of Eng- 
land, until such time as he be examined, at London, by the 
President of the College, and three Elects, and shall have 
obtained letters testimonial of their approbation, except he 
be a graduate of Oxford or Cambridge. By this act also, 
eight Elects are established, who have the sole power of 
chusing one of their own number annually for a President, 
and of chusing fresh Elects as often as a vacancy shall happen. 

These then are the pillars which support the College of 
Physicians; and certainly very strong pillars they are. Their 
power, in general, is great, but not absolute. We have seen, 
in Article 12. that they are authorized to make private sta- 
tutes, & ordonationes pro salubri gubernatione, supervisu, & 
correctione collegii seu communitatis præd', & omnium homi- 
num eandem facultatem indicta civitate, seu per septem milli- 
aria in circuitu ejusdem civitatis exercend' secundum necessi- 
tatis exigentiam quoties, & quando opus fuerit, &c.

Considering this article, a question naturally arises, name- 
ly, To what degree this privilege of making by-laws may be 
legally extended? Was it intended, by this clause, to give 
the College a power of making whatfoever laws they pleased, 
|P_5
in favour of whatsoever universities they should think proper, 
though ever so apparently injurious to the practice of physic 
and discouraging to men of real abilities? The clause ex- 
pressly says, pro salubri gubernatione. This salubriis a strong 
word, as it clearly explains the intention of the legislature. 

If upon an impartial enquiry into the matter, it should ap- 
pear, that those members of the College, who have con- 
stantly had the power of making the exclusive statutes, have 
been invariably partial to the universities where they received 
their education; and if it should farther appear, that these 
universities, from a defect in their constitution, are incapable 
of bestowing a medical education; if, I say, this should 
really be the case, will it not naturally follow, that it is high 
time for the legislative power to interpose? 

With regard to the universities of Oxford, Cambridge, 
and Dublin, nothing can be more certain than that they are, 
at present, by no means schools of physic. This is a fact, 
which those, who are at all acquainted with the matter, 
must necessarily acknowledge. I do not deny that a studious 
young man may in any university, or in any village in the 
kingdom, by assiduous application, make himself acquainted 
with the general theory of any science; but in the study of 
physic this is by no means sufficient. In the abovementioned 
universities the necessary means of acquiring medical know- 
ledge are wanting. The lectures in every branch of medi- 
cine are infinitely too short and superficial, and delivered by 
men, though perhaps of sufficient erudition, yet utterly in- 
|P_6
capable of illustrating their theory by practical observation. 
Besides, many of the essentials are not taught at tall. No 
patients, no clinical lectures, which are the sine qua non of 
a medical education. 

Probably it will be urged, that, on patriotic considera- 
tions, our English universities should be favoured. Cæteris 
paribus, this may he right; but patriotism, where the ad- 
vancement of knowledge and the consequent welfare of the 
people are concerned, is only a secondary consideration. In 
matters of this importance, we ought to act as citizens of the 
world, and, so far from confining our medical students to 
any particular mode of education in our own country, it 
were insinitely more rational to encourage their residence in 
those universities where medical erudition is most effectually 
to be acquired. 

The rectitude of this reasoning will appear incontro- 
vertible, if the opinion of every individual be allowed to be 
that of the whole community; for, suppose we ask any sick 
person, at what university he chuses his physician should have 
taken his degree, will he not answer, That it is a matter of 
indifference, provided he be a man of skill in his profession? 
The most desirable university, therefore, is that where most 
knowledge may be acquired. 

But, lest I should be misapprehended, I repeat, that where 
two universities are upon an equal footing, as schools of me- 
dicine, those of our own country, that is, those of England, 
Scotland and Ireland, ought certainly to be preferred; but 
|P_7
if medical knowledge were known to flourish eminently in 
any other part of the world, a British subject educated in 
such a university, were it even in China, ought to meet with 
every possible ennouragement on his return to England. 

Such, I presume; are the principles, by which men of sci- 
ence should be influenced. Patriotism is undoubtedly a 
virtue; but true patriotism will consider the end rather than 
the means. The first object of a real patriot is the well- 
being of the people, and the first part of that object is 
their health. 

Let us now ask whether the Statutes of the College of 
Physicians were dictated by those liberal principles, and that 
true regard to science, by which, we are of opinion, they ought 
to have been influenced? An impartial retrospection will, I 
presume, convince us, that they rather breathe that selfish 
spirit of commerce, which is no friend to science. 

But, before we lose sight of Oxford and Cambridge, it 
may not be amiss to satisfy those who ask, how it happens 
that these serminaries of learning are incapable of affording a 
sufficient medical education? for though, in the present dis- 
pute, it were enough to have proved the fact, yet it is not 
entirely foreign to our purpose to assign the cause. First, 
then, let it be remembered, that the means instituted for that 
purpose, had their foundation at a time when all knowledge 
was at a low ebb; it is no wonder therefore that, in: the pre- 
sent state of things, they should be insussicient to the end for 
which they were designed. But the fixed stipends of the 
|P_8
professors is the chief obstacle. The present flourishing 
state of those universities where the emolument of the pro- 
fessors depends solely on the number of their pupils, is a suf- 
ficient proof of the truth of this observation. In short, the 
entire constitution of our English universities is so ill adapted 
to the present times, that nothing but a total reformation 
can save them from universal neglect and ruin. I confess 
that such a reformation would be a most arduous undertaking, 
yet, I am convinced, that it will not be long before the uni- 
versities themselves will solicit the attempt. 

Before we proceed, I must request the reader to cast his 
eye once more on the above-recited articles of the charter. 
He will there find no other degrees or distinction of persons, 
than those of President, Censors, and Elects; those there- 
fore of Fellows, Candidates, and Licentiates, are distinctions 
founded solely on the authority of the College itself. By 
the charter it evidently appears, that no distinctions 
were intended but those therein specified; and that the 
founders of the College were of this opinion, is plainly seen 
from their not daring even to increase the number of their 
Elects, without the authority of a subsequent act of par- 
liament. 

After mature consideration of this matter, it seems pretty 
evident, that in their exclusive statutes, the College have 
acted not only with unjustifiable partiality, but illegally: if 
so, the Licentiates will probably be redressed; especially if 
it should appear, that many of our molt eminent perso- 
|P_9
nages in the practice of medicine, are thus excluded from 
the honours which were certainly intended for men of shining 
abilities, of whatsoever school. 

The Royal Society in England, the Academy of Sciences 
at Paris, and every institution of the like nature in other parts 
of Europe, know no such distinctions as those of school or 
country. Their founders were actuated by more enlarged, 
more liberal principles. They considered science as a native 
of the universe, and have made no private statutes that 
would exclude even an inhabitant of Mercury or Saturn, if 
he were a man of distinguished abilities. 

Let us now suppose, that an inhabitant of either of these, 
or any other planet, were to pay us a visit. Let us farther 
imagine him infinitely more learned, and in every respect 
more enlightened, particularly in the science of medicine, 
than any inhabitant of Earth. He determines to spend some 
time with us, and to visit patients in the city of London. 
The College of Physicians, being informed of his proceed- 
ings, order him to appear before them, and, with their usual 
solemnity and sagacity, proceed to examine him in what they 
have learned at Oxford or Cambridge to call the fundamentals 
of the art of healing. Can any scene be imagined more ridi- 
culous? After all, they grant him a licence to practise, but 
it is impossible to admit him fellow of the College, because 
he is not a graduate of an English or Irish university. Let 
not this be condemned as a ludicrous representation of the 
case. The colouring, though somewhat strong, is yet real, 
|P_10
and is, I think, a pertinent illustration of the arguments I 
have advanced to prove, that the London College is built up- 
on a narrow basis. 

We will now proceed to consider that Statute of the 
College which regards the admission of Licentiates; and, 
that our reasoning, on this subject, may be sully under- 
stood, we shall transcribe the preamble of the Statute it- 
self. 

Quoniam complures, in hac Civitate Medicinam faciunt, 
quos inidoneos omino censemus, ut in numerum Sociorum aut 
Candidatorum adoptentur, vel quod natione non sint Britanni, 
vel Doctoratus gradum non adepti fuerint, vel non satis docti, 
aut ætate & gravitate provecti sint, vel alias consimiles ob cau- 
sas, & tamen Reipublicæ inservire saluti hominum prodesse 
possint, saltem in nonnullis curationibus. De his ordinamus & 
statuimus, ut post debitas examinationes, & approbationem Præ- 
sidis & Censorum permittantur ad praxin, quandiu se bene ges- 
serint. 

As some may think themselves interested in this subject, 
who are not acquainted with the Latin language, I shall trans- 
late the above paragraph. 

"Because many in this city practise physic, whom we 
deem quite improper to be adopted Fellows or Candidates, 
either because they are not Britons, not admitted Doctors, 
are not sufficiently learned, are too young, or for some such 
like causes, and nevertheless may be of service to the public, 
and the health of mankind, at least in some cases. Con- 
|P_11
cerning these we ordain and appoint, that after proper exa- 
minations, and the approbation of the President and Cen- 
sors, they be permitted to practife, so long as they behave 
well." 

Who can read this declaration without being struck with 
its extreme arrogance and ignorance? What are the particular 
cases in which an unlearned man may be of service? Why are 
not nurses and old women licensed to practise for the same rea- 
sons? Could any thing have been contrived more humiliating, 
more shocking to the Licentiates, among whom the greatest 
number are Britons, of age sufficient, and Doctors of Physic, 
who therefore are thus stigmatized with the want of that learn- 
ing which many of them possess in a more eminent degree 
than any of those by whom they are examined? Can it there- 
fore seem wondersul that the Licentiates should be offended at 
such irrational partiality, such monopolizing principles? Is it 
not rather surprising, that any Physician, who had already un- 
dergone a severe examination by the heads of the university 
where he took his degree, should ever have submitted to ac- 
cept a licence upon such wretched considerations? 

But, since we are obliged to acknowledge that the College 
of Physicians have some sanction from the legislature, let us 
enquire a little into the manner in which they have exerted 
their power. 

The reasons assigned for granting them this power were, 
to prevent illiterate and ignorant people from practising phy- 
sic. Have they acted accordingly? Have they impartially 
|P_12
persecuted those whom they knew to be illiterate and igno- 
rant? Have they not, on the contrary, constantly suffered a 
number of professed Quacks to practise physic without the 
least molestation? Have they not permitted hundreds of Phy- 
sicians, all over the kingdom, to practise without a licence, 
though their power extends equally to every part of the 
kingdom? Have they not exerted their authority entirely 
against those who might interfere with their own practice in 
the metropolis? And do they not constantly disregard those, 
who, from a different mode of practice, take no fees, and 
consequently do not immediately injure them, I mean the 
Apothecaries? 

Such hath been of late years the conduct of the College of 
Physicians. Totally forgetful of the reasons assigned for their 
institution, they have suffered consummate ignorance and 
quackery to ride in state-coaches triumphant through the 
streets, to the eternal reproach of that body corporate, which 
obtained its charter on purpose to suppress those pests of so- 
ciety. I say on purpose, for that was the sole motive for 
granting such power to any set of Physicians. But Quacks, 
it seems, are a harmless, or rather beneficial tribe of people, 
in regard to the interest of Physicians; therefore they are not 
molested. 

As to that consequential body of literati, called Apothe- 
caries, let us see in what light they were considered by the 
College of Physicians in the last century. 

|P_13
Having in a former statute forbid all its members to use 
those Apothecaries who themselves practised physic, the Col- 
lege in the year 1687 farther ordained, that 

Quoniam experientia compertum est, Pharmacopolas ex Me- 
dicorum præscriptis, speciem quandam, & umbram falsæ sci- 
entiæ consectari, quâ se passim venditantes, non sine ali- 
orum periculo ad suum compendium abutuntur; statuimus, & 
ordinamus, ne quis in posterum Collega, sive Socius, sive Can- 
didatus, sive permissus, præscriptis suis, seu schedulis medi- 
cinalibus, directiones (quas vocant) adjiciant (præterquam in 
nosocomiis) sed eas apud ægrum ipse relinquet, aut saltem pri- 
us obsignatas ad ejus domum transferendas curabit; medica- 
menta interim in schedulis præscripta, jubeat solummodoò ut ti- 
tulis quibusdam congruentibus, aut notis ad eorum distinctionem 
aptis signentur, nempè ut quantum in nobis est, nihil quisquam 
hujusmodi Medicastris suboleat quo consilio, quà ve intentione, 
aut in quos usus remedia præscribantur: mulctentur autem sin- 
guli viginti solidis in usum Collegii quoties in hac parte deli- 
querit. 

That is, 

"It being found by experience, that Apothecaries, from 
the prescriptions of Physicians, acquire some shadow of false 
knowledge, of which they every where boast to sick people, 
and misuse, for their own advantage, and not without danger 
to others; we will and ordain that, for the future, no mem- 
ber of the College, whether Fellow, Candidate or Licen- 
tiate, do add directions to their prescriptions (except in hos- 
|P_14
pitals) but that they leave such directions with the sick, or 
send them signed to their houses, ordering the medicines only 
to be distinguished with proper titles, to the intent that, as 
much as in us lies, these Medicasters may be prevented from 
discovering with what intention the medicines are prescribed. 
As often as any one shall offend in this particular, let him be 
fined twenty shillings for the use of the College." 

Nullus Socius, Candidatus aut Permissus, Pharmacopolæ 
opera utatur, quem in comitiis majoribus (quibus ut intersint 
omnes omnium ordinum Collegæ præmoniti sunt) Præses renun- 
ciaverit, aut medicine praxin exercere, aut ea de causa bis 
citatum, ut se sisteret coram Præside, & Censoribus nondum 
comparuisse, sub pœna quadraginta solidorum prima vice, se- 
cunda quinque librarum, & tertia expulsionis è Collegio. Præ- 
sidis autem & Censorum esto hujusmodi causas cognoscere, mo- 
menta expendere, & definire, quis praxeos teneatur, & quem 
illi, aut major pars eorum judicaverit, eum nos Pharmacopo- 
lam practicantem esse, statuimus & appellari volumus. De- 
nique Sociis, cæterisque Collegis omnibus, precipimus & manda- 
mus, ut seposito omni affectu & respectu personarum, ejusmodi 
Pharmacopæos quoscunque praxin exercuisse deprehenderint, 
eorum nomina Præsidi, & Censoribus deferant, idque sub pæ- 
na violate sidei Collegio præstitæ. 

That is, 

"No Fellow, Candidate or Licentiate, shall make use of 
an Apothecary, whom in the greater meetings (at which all 
the members are required to attend) the President hath re- 
|P_15
nounced, or declared to practise physic, or hath on that ac- 
count been twice summoned to appear before the President 
and Censors, yet hath not appeared, under the penalty of 
forty shillings for the first offence; for the second five 
pounds; and for the third, expulsion. Let it be the busi- 
ness of the President and Censors to take cognisance of these 
matters, to weigh and determine who are guilty of practising 
physic, and whomsoever they shall condemn, we do pro- 
nounce to be practising Apothecaries. Lastly, we command 
the Fellows, and every other Member of the College, that 
without partiality or respect of persons, as often as they de- 
tect any of these Apothecaries practising physic, they bring 
their names to the President or Censors, under pain of be- 
ing censured for breach of faith to the College." 

So that in the year 1687 the Co1lege were of opinion, that 
these Medicasters of Apothecaries, deriving their knowledge 
solely from the prescriptions of Physicians, were too ignorant 
and illiterate to be suffered to practice Physic. They consi- 
dered, that from the mere perusal of prescriptions, nothing 
could possibly be acquired, but, as they themselves express 
it, a shadow of false knowledge, ever dangerous to the pa- 
tient. They considered the art of mixing a bolus as having 
not the least connection with the art of healing; and that a 
man might beat in a mortar to eternity, without acquiring 
thence the least knowledge of diseases. They considered 
that an Apothecary could have no more pretensions to skill in 
physic, than any other mechanic; for that, if such pre- 
|P_16
tensions were founded on their dealing in drugs, it might 
with equal justice be extended to the druggist and the herb- 
woman. They considered medicines as the instruments of 
their art, and that it was as absurd to expect medical know- 
ledge in the makers of such instruments, as that the maker 
of a fiddle should be an expert musician. But they consi- 
dered these instruments, like those used by surgeons, as sharp- 
edged instruments, which could never be intrusted in the 
hands of ignorant men, without great danger to the patient. 
And, lastly, they considered, that even supposing the Worship- 
sul Company of Apothecaries, as the peculiar favourites of 
heaven, to be inspired with medical knowledge and sagacity, 
yet that they were of all men the most improper to be in- 
trusted with the power of visiting the sick and dispensing 
their own medicines, because their judgment, if they had 
any, would be constantly biassed by their interest. It re- 
quires very little medical knowledge to comprehend, that effi- 
cacious medicines can never be matters of indifference; that 
there can be very few cases in which such medicines will not 
either do good or harm. Be the case however what it will, 
the patient must take physic, because the Apothecary has 
no other method of paying himself for his attendance. So 
that the patient not only runs the risque of the misappli- 
cation of medicines, but of being obliged to swallow a quan- 
tity of stuff, in cases where all medicine whatsoever must be 
hurtful. 

|P_17
From these considerations then the College of Physicians 
of the last century thought themselves obliged to endeavour 
to suppress an abuse so highly and peculiarly injurious to the 
inhabitants of this kingdom. I say peculiarly, because it is 
an abuse which never gained footing in any other part of 
the world; the Apothecaries of no other kingdom having 
ever attempted to interfere with Physicians in the practice 
of physic. 

What now shall we say to the supine negligence of the 
present College in this matter? Is it because they think more 
favourably of Apothecaries? Certainly not. It is because, 
from a very unjustifiable neglect of their own statutes, they 
have suffered this numerous body of men to establish them- 
selves in the opinion of the unreasoning multitude, and by that 
means to render themselves in some degree formidable. That 
being the case, no one has resolution enough to hang the bell 
about the cat's neck. By neglecting to suppress the evil in 
its infancy, they have rendered themselves in some measure 
dependent on Apothecaries. In the present constitution of 
things, it is generally in the power of an Apothecary to in- 
troduce his favoured Physician into the families he attends, 
and if a Physician be intruded upon him against his inclina- 
tion, it is always in his power to disappoint his expectations, 
by omitting, or substituting one ingredient for another in the 
composition of his medicines. This were indeed consum- 
mate villainy; but there are rascals in all professions. 

|P_18
Let not the Apothecaries imagine themselves hardly dealt 
with upon this occasion, or that I mean the least reflection 
upon them as men, or to accuse them of any peculiar want of 
understanding. I have really no such intention; but unless 
I were to allow, that they are born with abilities superior to 
the rest of mankind, I must insist on their total ignorance of 
a science which, from the nature of their education, they 
have had no opportunities to learn. The Apothecaries, I 
know, will be very unwilling to allow the impossibility of 
their being skilful practitioners; but to convince them that 
I do not mean to insinuate that their natural talents are less 
than those of other men, I declare it to be my opinion, that 
if the greatest Physician in Europe had had no other educa- 
tion than that of an apothecary's fhop, he would have known 
no more of physic than any other mechanic. 

But, say the Apothecaries, if we are really as ignorant as 
you are pleased to represent us, how comes it that the 
people of this kingdom so generally employ us, not as Apo- 
thecaries, but as Physicians? Do they not suffer us to judge 
of their disorders, and to send them what physic we think 
proper? Is there, in short, any difference between our em- 
ployment and that of the most learned Physician of you all? 
I confess there is none. But the conduct of the good people 
of England is no argument in favour of your medical know- 
ledge; because it is impossible for them to judge of your 
skill, unless they themselves were Physicians. 

|P_19
But whilst I assert, that Apothecaries have, from their 
trade, no more reason to suppose themlelves Physicians, than 
a weaver or any other person, I am not forgetful that there 
may have been some few examples of Apothecaries changing 
their profession, and becoming very eminent physicians. We 
are told also of a blacksmith becoming a great painter. Such 
instances however are so very extraordinary, that nothing in 
favour of Apothecaries can be thence concluded. Men of 
uncommon genius and application will distinguish themselves 
in whatever art or science they happen to pursue, in spite of 
every disadvantage of their early education. 

But the strongest argument in favour of what I have en- 
deavoured to prove, is, that the contrary would lead us into 
a manifest absurdity; namely, that the most difficult of all 
sciences may be acquired without instruction, method, study 
or application, and consequently, that a regular medical edu- 
cation is entirely unnecessary; and we may then proceed far- 
ther and say, that every attorney is a lawyer, every cobler a 
shoemaker, every botcher a taylor, &c. But this, though a 
natural conclusion, mankind will hardly allow, because rai- 
ment and property are of more importance than health 
and life. 

Before I quit this subject, I cannot avoid taking notice of 
the frequent fatal consequence to the patient of the custom 
of employing Apothecaries out of their profession. Those 
who are well acquainted with the nature and progress of dis- 
eases, will inform you, that most of those which are called 
|P_20
acute, generally become fatal, if improperly treated in the 
beginning; that the first symptoms of some disorders are so 
equivocal, as to require much sagacity, penetration, expe- 
rience, and mature recollection of the observations of an- 
cient writers, to distinguish them from each other; and that 
these maladies, so very similar in appearance, require a treat- 
ment as different as can possibly be imagined. But this treat- 
ment consists not only in the medicines to be taken, but in 
regimen, temperature of the room, bleeding or not bleeding, 
together with many other circumstances of infinite importance 
to the safety of the patient, and which only can be deter- 
mined by a proper idea of the disease. 

Nevertheless, by the custom of England, at this important 
period of all disorders, the first person applied to is a shop- 
keeper, a medicine-monger, who differs in no respect from 
his neighbour the fishmonger, or ironmonger, except in the 
circumference of his perriwig. strange infatuation l Thus the 
malady is either suffered to gather strength from neglect, or, 
by injudicious treatment, rendered incurable. The Physician 
is called in, and the Patient dies. 

Let those who doubt the truth of what I say, consult any 
experienced Physician, whose judgment and integrity they 
have no reason to question; let them desire him to lay his 
hand upon his heart, and declare upon his honour, whether 
what I have said be not a true representation of the matter? 
whether he has not lost many a patient by the ignorance and 
self-sufficient trifling of an Apothecary? 

If this then be the real opinion of all Physicians; if it be 
the unanimous opinion of the College themselves, what shall 
we think of their unaccountable neglect to exert that power 
with which they are so amply invested. 

As to those who employ Apothecaries in the room of Phy- 
sicians, they urge, in excuse for their conduct, that it is 
owing to the exorbitant fees of the latter; and particularly 
that those of the middle, or lower rank, cannot possibly af- 
ford so great an expence. There seems indeed some weight 
in this argument; but a very little reflection will be suffi- 
cient to convince us of its fallacy. Apothecaries in general 
are as well paid for their trouble of attendance as Physicians; 
they differ only in the manner of receiving their money: the 
one takes it immediately; the other at the end of the year. 
But I will venture to affirm, that in slight diseases, according 
to the present fashion of being doctored by a shopkeeper, 
the patient is generally at more expence than if a Physician 
had been first sent for; and that, in all diseases, if Physicians 
were rendered independent of Apothecaries, and intrusted 
with the sole care of the patient from the beginning, the ex- 
pence to the patient would be much less than it now is. 
This, therefore, is an argument on the other side of the 
question. Besides, if we have reasoned justly on this subject, 
depending on an Apothecary is a dangerous dependance, and 
consequently worse than no dependance at all. If a sick per- 
son cannot afford to send for a Physician, he had much better 
commit himself to the care of an old woman, who, with equal 
|P_22
skill, will be under no temptation to send him physic, in or- 
der to pay herself for her trouble. 

It is easy to foresee, that this consequential body of men 
will be highly offended with my having expressed myself so 
unreservedly concerning their medical abilities. But though 
I may be singular in thus declaring my sentiments, they may 
be well assured, that I have done nothing more than express 
the sentiments of every Physician who deserves that name; 
for, however some may, on lucrative considerations, demean 
themselves so far as to flatter Apothecaries into a belief of their 
being really possessed of some medical knowledge, they may 
be well assured, that, whenever they open their lips concern- 
ing their patients, they are heard, by the Physician, with 
contempt. 

Those who, by long study and laborious application, have 
become well acquainted with the science of physic, know it 
to be in its nature so very extensive, and inveloped in such 
a cloud of difficulties, that all the advantages of a regular 
and learned education are scarce sufficient to conduct them 
through the labyrinth. The diseases of the human body are 
lo wonderfully numerous, and their species distinguished by 
such variety of minute circumstances, that the ablest Phy- 
sician with all his experience, assisted by that of all those 
who have gone before him, from the great Hippocrates to 
the present time, finds himself frequently in doubt, and 
obliged to deliberate maturely before he proceeds. To this 
difficulty of judging properly of diseases, let us add that of 
|P_23
the false properties commonly ascribed to many of the medi- 
cines in general use. The medical properties of bodies are 
discovered only by a perfect knowledge of their chemical pro- 
perties; by frequent experiments on animal bodies, and dili- 
gent observation of their effects, not only on healthy sub- 
jects, but in every stage of every disease, in every constitution. 

The ancient Greeks were so perfectly sensible of the great 
difficulty of attaining a competent knowledge in medicine, 
that a Physician was obliged to spend the greatest part of his 
life in study and experiment, before he was allowed to prac- 
tise. But if any one be desirous of forming a juft idea of the 
many requisites to a thorough knowledge of the medical art, 
let him consult the celebrated Boerhaave's Methodus Studii 
Medici, where he will find, besides the books commonly sup- 
posed necessary to be studied, that almost every branch of 
learning was thought, by that great man, to constitute a 
part of a Physician's erudition. 

Can it then be matter of surprize, that a Physician who 
views the art of medicine in its full extent, and who recol- 
lects the labour and difficulty with which his knowledge hath 
been acquired; is it, I say, at all wondersul, that such a 
Physician should behold with indignation, a most ignorant, 
illiterate set of people, audaciously visiting the sick, pretend- 
ing to judge of their diseases, and administering medicines, 
witht the same confidence as if they were possessed of all the 
advantages that a learned and regular education could supply? 
Can he, without compassion, contemplate the inconceivable folly 
|P_24
of mankind in trusting their lives to the care of such men? 
Can he, without amazement, consider the negligence of his 
brethren at the College who suffer this abuse, to the great 
scandal of physic, and the destruction of mankind? 

This neglect to confine these practising Apothecaries with- 
in their proper sphere, is the more unpardonable in the Col- 
lege of Physicians, because the means are so obvious and easy. 
They might, indeed, with great justice, be prosecuted for 
practising without a licence, and fined according to the sta- 
tute; for there is hardly a man in England so ignorant as not 
to know, that there is no difference between the general em- 
ployment of an Apothecary and that of a Physician. But 
this mode of proceeding were too troublesome and tedious. 
The most easy and effectual method would be, for the Col- 
lege to require a promise, from all their members, upon their 
honour, not to suffer any of their prescriptions to be made 
up by a practising, or visiting Apothecary. This determina- 
tion firmly adhered to, would in a very short time put an end 
to so destructive an innovation. I say destructive, for I do 
positively afirm from long experience, and very accurate ob- 
servation, that the present fashion of consulting Apothe- 
caries, is the most fatal evil with which this nation is afflicted. 

But it is urged, in favour of Apothecaries, that many of 
them, from their extensive practice, must necessarily have 
gained great experience, which is allowed to be of vast im- 
portance in the medical art. To this I answer, that expe- 
rience without theory, and not founded on the experience of 
|P_25
former ages, will produce no better qualification than that 
of an old nurse. Besides, though this experience may be 
urged in favour of Apothecaries, it is evident that mankind 
are, in fact, of another opinion; else why do they call in a 
Physician, when they imagine themselves in real danger? If 
they are sincere in their opinion of the skill of their Apothe- 
cary, why do they not trust to it entirely? No; for, say 
they, though we thought him sufficient at the beginning of 
the disease, we look for better advice when the case becomes 
dangerous. But I have told you, that in the beginning of dis- 
eases the symptoms are most equivocal, and consequently that 
an Apothecary might be trusted with more safety when the 
disorder is confirmed, and the symptoms less doubtsul, and 
that, in many cases, the fate of the patient is determined ir- 
recoverably by the conduct of the Apothecary in the first 
twenty-four hours. 

In short, the more we contemplate this matter, the less we 
are inclined to excuse the conduct of the College; for there 
is not a man of them all who is not, in his heart, convinced 
of the truth of all I have said. Their neglect therefore can- 
not be attributed to ignorance; nor can it justly be ascribed 
to indolence, for we have seen them, of late, particularly 
attentive to young Physicians, from whom, in consequence 
of their private statutes, they could exact considerable sums 
of money. By persecuting lthe Apothecaries, that is, by re- 
solving not to have their prescriptions made up by those that 
visit patients, the College would add nothing to its wealth; 
|P_26
but by obliging a young Physician to buy a licence, the Col- 
lege receives fifty pounds. 

I wish it were in my power to vindicate the College in this 
particular; but it is impossible. Their partiality is too fla- 
grant to admit of any excuse. They persecute a man whom 
they know to have had a regular and expensive education, 
and to whom fifty pounds, at his first setting out in life, 
may be no inconsiderable sum, whilst they suffer a set of ig- 
norant men, who have had no education at all, to practise 
with impunity; and all this under a pretence of preserving 
the people from the danger of employing ignorant medicasters. 

Can it be supposed, that the Legislature, in giving a char- 
ter to the College of Physicians, ever intended to give them 
a power to oblige regular Doctors of Physic to purchase a li- 
cence to practise, at a considerable expence? Certainly not. 
The sole design of that charter was to prevent the people from 
being imposed upon by ignorant pretenders to medical know- 
ledge. How much the College hath regarded this sole end 
of their institution, by persecuting Quacks and practising 
Apothecaries, is well known. 

So long therefore as the College continue to neglect Quacks 
and Apothecaries, their calling upon regular Physicians can- 
not, by any means, be attributed to their regard for the public 
welfare; but, on the contrary, to a motive, of which, as gen- 
tlemen, they ought to be ashamed. 

When I speak of regular Physicians, I do not mean Gra- 
duates of Oxford or Cambridge only; nor do I mean to in- 
|P_27
clude those Doctors of Physic who are possessed of a diploma
from any university which confers degrees without examina- 
tion, medical exercise, or residence. Such degrees are in 
their nature scandalous, because they can be no testimony of 
the graduate's abilities, and because they are never accepted 
by those who can obtain one that is more honourable. Such 
Doctors, I confess, cannot be too strictly examined by the Col- 
lege; or rather, they ought to be absolutely interdicted, ex- 
cept in some very few instances, where a man's abilities are 
universally known and acknowledged. If indeed the Legisla- 
ture were properly attentive to the well-being of the people, 
the Scottish universities, which thus confer degrees on persons 
whom they have never seen, ought to be deprived of a power 
so dangerous to mankind; or, as I have laid before, the 
College of Physicians ought not to suffer any such Doctors to 
practise within their jurisdiction. 

With regard to those who have had a regular education, 
who, in consequence of sufficient residence at a creditable 
university, proper exercises, and severe examination, have 
obtained a diploma, authorizing them to practise physic in any 
part of the world; with regard to such, I say, a re-exarni- 
nation by any College of Physicians must be deemed not only 
superfluous, but highly insulting, both to the Physician ex- 
amined, and to the University under whose great seal he is 
declared Doctor, and worthy to be intrusted with the cure of 
diseases. 

|P_28
I have often wondered, how the President and Censors of 
a private College of Physicians could possibly arrogate to 
themselves the unjustifiable power of calling to examination, 
like school-boys, persons whose medical education they knew 
to be superior, and whose rank in physic was equal to their 
own. It is indeed wonderful they should not recollect, that 
when a man has once obtained the degree of Doctor, in the 
regular manner above mentioned, he has passed the time of 
examination, and that a second examination, even by a 
whole University, could not be proposed to him without in- 
dignity. Strange! that these Fellows should be unmindful 
of the rank to which they were raised when they were cre- 
ated Doctors: a degree which, in civil society, lifts them 
very high, and without which, as Fellows, they have no 
rank at all. 

By what infatuation then have these Fellows been led to 
insult their equals, by commanding them servilely to appear 
before them, and, like children, repeat their medical cate- 
chism. I confess, and am heartily sorry for it, that I myself 
did submit to be thus catechised by this high court of inqui- 
sition; though, in the Republic of Medicine, I was equal in 
rank to the highest of my inquisitors. They were pleased 
to be satisfied with my answers to their important questions, 
and I was accordingly dignified with the title of Licentiate: 
that is, they did me the honour to write my name in the list 
of those blockheads, whom they deem omnino inidoneos ut in
|P_29
numerum Sociorum aut Candidatorum adoptentur, quod non sa- 
tis docti sunt, "but who nevertheless may possibly be of some 
service to the public, at least in some few cases." 

Is it possible that any Licentiate can read this without blush- 
ing?' For my own part, I wish had gone to practise physic 
at the Cape of Good-Hope, rather than have submitted to 
stoop so far beneath the dignity of my rank, as to answer 
their impertinent questions, and accept their licence on such 
wretched, such contemptible considerations. As to the mo- 
ney I paid them, they are welcome to it; but I shall always 
consider it as a sum to which they had no more equitable 
right, than they have to my whole fortune, which, though 
I am no Fellow, but a licensed blockhead, the public hath been 
pleased to render considerable. But as often as I recollect 
my tame submission to be interrogated by a set of men who 
possessed no shadow of claim to a superiority over me in point 
of medical rank, I own that I am dissatisfied with that want 
of spirit, which I ought to have exerted. 

Possibly I should have had some difficulties to encounter; 
but these difficulties, I am of opinion, would have been less 
formidable than is generally imagined. Happily, we live in 
an age, and nation, in which remonstrances against flagrant 
abuses are graciously received and attended to. If it should 
evidently appear that a body of men, to whom the govern- 
ment granted certain powers, had uniformly mistaken and 
misapplied those powers, so as to countenance those whom 
they ought to persecute, and oppress those whom they ought 
|P_30
to protect; if, in short, it should appear that the College 
of Physicians had so intirely forgotten the reasons assigned 
for their institution, as to suffer an innumerable swarm of 
most illiterate, ignorant Quacks and Apothecaries to practise 
physic all over the kingdom, and particularly in the metro- 
polis, under their own eyes. If it should farther appear, 
that the College made a practice of selling licences at an ex- 
orbitant price, and of obliging regular Doctors of Physic to 
submit to an ignominious examination. If these be facts, 
and these facts be deemed acts of partiality and oppression, 
can it be doubted that, on a proper representation, the com- 
plainants would not be redressed? 

Suppose a Doctor of Physic, appearing before the Presi- 
dent and Censors in order to be examined, were to address 
them in the following words. "Gentlemen, I have obeyed 
your summons, because, notwithstanding the ungenteel man- 
ner in which it was expressed, I was willing to consider it as 
an invitation to meet my equals upon business of importance. 
If with an intention to be informed of the present improved 
state of medicine in the university where I took my degree, 
you chuse, as matter of conversation, to ask me any parti- 
cular questions, I shall give you the best account I am able; 
but you will please to remember that, consistent with the 
honour of that University, and my own dignity as Doctor of 
Physic, I cannot possible submit to answer any questions cal- 
culated only to satisfy you of my medical abilities, of which 
this Diploma in my hand, together with this Thesis, which I 
|P_31
have Written and publickly defended, are undoubted testi- 
monies. Surely I need not inform you, that having obtained 
the degree of Doctor, by such means, at such an university, 
I am already in possession of the highest honour that physic 
can confer. As therefore it is not in your power to raise me 
higher, there can be no reason for obliging me to submit to 
any examination; it being a known maxim, that all exami- 
nations are made with an intention to advance the person exa- 
mined. If you urge in excuse for your method of proceed- 
ing, that your motive is to prevent ignorant people from 
practising, I must tell you, that Doctors of Physic, who 
have obtained their degree in a regular and reputable man- 
ner, are the last persons you ought to suspect, and whom 
therefore you have no right to summon, till you have entirely 
suppressed all those whom you know to be most ignorant. 
Who these are, I need not inform you: Quacks and Apotheca- 
ries stare you every where in the face, and convince the world, 
that your pretence of consulting only the safety and welfare of 
your fellow-subjects is a mere farce. I am indeed forry, Gen- 
tlemen, to be thus explicit with you; but I consider myself 
as speaking to my brethren, and not to my superiors in any 
respect; besides, you have continually offered such flagrant 
indignities to Doctors of Physic, that I am not sorry for the 
opportunity of vindicating the honour of so respectable a body 
of men, against the outrages of an improper authority. I 
have read your charter, and considered it with much attention, 
and I am perfectly convinced, that you are thereby impow- 
|P_32
ered to suppress malpractice, and not to be oppressive to 
men of approved abilities." 

What would the College of Physicians reply to such a 
speech? They would call him an impertinent fellow, deem 
him refractory, and would proceed against him according to 
law. But are such oppressive proceedings consistent with the 
liberal sentiments which ought to distinguish men of science? 

A College of Physicians, on a proper foundation, might 
certainly be rendered a salutary institution; but I humbly 
conceive, that it ought to be established on a foundation to- 
tally different from any that could possibly be erected in the 
reign of Harry the Eighth. I have mentioned before, that 
the statutes of all other learned societies, as well in England, 
as in other parts of Europe, have been conceived by men of 
liberal ideas, regardless of the narrow limits of country or 
school; men who wisely considered, that to admit none but 
members of their own universities, would be the most ef- 
fectual method to impede the progress of science, as by that 
means they would deprive themselves of every improvement 
made by foreigners. 

If such unrestrictive principles were thought necessary to- 
wards the improvement of less essential arts and sciences, how 
much more indispensible are they not to the improvement of 
medical knowledge? A College of Physicians, so far from 
endeavouring to confine the students of medicine to the uni- 
versities of their own country, ought, on the contrary, to do 
all in their power to encourage them to study in foreign coun- 
|P_33
tries, wheresoever the most eminent Professors of medicine are 
to be found. As to any arguments against this liberal plan, 
from political considerations, they are too foolish to deserve 
an answer. A few pounds sterling that might be thus car- 
ried out of the kingdom, is an object too inconsiderable to 
merit a moment's attention; especially when compared to 
the advantage of importing medical knowledge in exchange. 
Besides, men thus instructed would, in time, become emi- 
nent Professors in our own country, and the necessity of tra- 
velling grow every day less and less, which, with the assist- 
ance of new regulations at Oxford and Cambridge, would be 
a means of retrieving their character as schools of physic: for 
if I have reasoned justly, the very means which were intended 
by the College of Physicians to support those univerlities, hath 
been one great cause of their decline; a natural effect of il- 
liberal notions. 

As to the terms of admission, they ought to be such as a 
Gentleman, and Doctor of Physic, might accept with honour. 
Examinations are ignominious for the reasons above recited; 
they are ineffectual, because the questions proposed are such 
as any young student of medicine may easily answer; and 
they are superfluous, because those who have obtained an ho- 
nourable degree, have already given sufficient testimony of their 
knowledge, and the rest ought not to be admitted on any 
terms whatsoever. 

Let it be the business of the College to enquire into the 
present state of medicine in every university in Europe. Let 
|P_34
them particularly inform themselves in what manner such uni- 
versities are wont to confer degrees in physic. Let them, in 
consequence of such enquiry, make a list of those univer- 
sities whose degrees are truly respectable. Let them form a 
statute impowering them to admit every Doctor of Physic of 
such universities, a member of the College, under the deno- 
mination of Licentiate, on producing his Thesis and Diploma, 
and paying certain small fees towards defraying the necessary 
expences, which from their nature must be very inconsidera- 
ble. Let him continue a Licentiate for the space of four 
years; during which term let his fee be fixed at half the usual 
sum, or whatever moderate sum the College may think pro- 
per; but be that sum what it may, let him be engaged, upon 
his honour, never to refuse attending the sick on such mode- 
rate terms, within a certain distance. Such a regulation would 
not only enable the lower class of people to send for proper 
assistance, but would give great opportunities of practice to 
young Physicians. 

The four years being expired, let him then be admitted 
Fellow of the College, and be thence entitled to receive the 
usual fees. Thus we might expect to see Fellows of the Col- 
lege men of learning and experience, and the diseased might 
rationally expect the best assistance that physic can administer. 

These hints are to be considered merely as the outlines of 
a plan which might easily be formed for the purposes above 
mentioned. Pride, self-interest, and an obstinate adherence 
to old customs, will, I make no doubt, be considerable ob- 
|P_35
stacles in the way; but they are obstacles which, I think, 
may be removed without difficulty, if the great and powerful 
can, by any means, be persuaded to think the subject of suffi- 
cient importance for their consideration. It is indeed a sub- 
ject which people in general suppose to concern the Faculty 
only; but they are much mistaken. It is a matter which 
ought not, on any account, to be entrusted entirely with the 
Faculty. The health of the people is so far from being an 
object beneath the attention of the Legislature, that it would 
not be very difficult to prove it deserving their first and most 
mature consideration. Certain it is, that the practice of phy- 
sic is, at present, upon a most wretched footing; and that if 
the people had a proper regard for their own welfare, every 
individual would exert himself to the utmost of his abilities 
to redress the evil. 

If I were to be asked, what would be the most effectual 
means to procure redress, I should advise an address to Par- 
liament, in order to procure a proper enquiry into the state 
of physic in this kingdom, praying that a committee might 
be appointed for that purpose. Such a committee, without 
any skill in medicine, might easily be made to understand the 
nature and foundation of the grievances complained of, and 
the means of redress, by a new establishment, would evidently 
appear. 

I declare solemnly, that I am not actuated by the least spark 
of rancor or resentment to any particular Fellow of the Col- 
lege: on the contrary, I respect many of them for their 
|P_36
learning and medical abilities; but I condemn their institu- 
tion as illiberal, obsolete, and oppressive; and I blame their 
flagrant partiality and neglect of the most salutary of their 
own statutes. 

Patriotism, I confess, is a word which hath heen so often 
prostituted, that a man who pretends to have no other mo- 
tive in what he says or does, than the good of his country, 
is, not unjustly, suspected of hypocrify. Nevertheless, if it 
be evident, from my age and situation, that I cannot possibly 
have any other end in view, those who know me will acquit 
me of any sinister intention. I expect not, however, to com- 
mand attention on this account. All I desire is, that those 
who deem these sheets worth their perusal, will consider what 
I have written with impartiality, and determine according to 
the weight or fallacy of my arguments. 

For the farther information of those who have no oppor- 
tunity of consulting the Archives of the College of Physicians, 
I shall here subjoin an abridgment of their Statutes or By- 
laws, to which I shall prefix their Charter of Incorpo- 
ration. 

