

[^Sample 1: book - ^]

|P_5
[}THOUGHTS 
ON 
HOSPITALS. }]
TO counterbalance the various 
evils and miseries of life, Provi- 
dence has planted in our na- 
tures a benevolent principle, which, 
without waiting for duty to incite, or 
reason to approve, inclines us by an in- 
voluntary emotion to relieve the distresses 
of our fellow-creatures, and gives us the 
purest and most sensible pleasure for our 
reward. 

Never were the rights of humanity 
better understood, nor the feelings of 
|P_6
compassion more indulged than in our 
age and country. Of this we have a 
pleasing proof in the rapid success at- 
tending every charitable institution. We 
have seen, within less than half a cen- 
tury, numerous edifices arise throughout 
the kingdom, dedicated to the support of 
the poor under the severe afflictions of 
disease and want—we have seen these 
amply maintained, carefully inspected, 
and diligently attended; and all this 
without any interference of the civil 
powers, merely by the generous and dis- 
interested zeal of individuals. In the 
Metropolis many new designs have been 
set on foot for the relief of particular 
diseases and calamities; in the country 
general Infirmaries have been establish- 
ed at almost every considerable town, 
upon the most liberal and extensive prin- 
ciples. 

Amidst the universal diffusion of this 
amiable spirit, one thing alone appears 
wanting to compleat the wishes of hu- 
manity; and this is, that a proper di- 
|P_7
rection of the means, should accompany 
the well-meant intentions of doing good. 
Without a due regard to this object the 
most benevolent designs may be frus- 
trated, and instead of a blessing, prove an 
additional misfortune to the afflicted. 

Having turned my thoughts some- 
what particularly to this subject, several 
reflections occurred to me which appear- 
ed of importance enough to be commu- 
nicated to the public; and in any at- 
tempts to rectify errors or suggest im- 
provements, I have no doubt of being 
favourably heard, by all who can dis- 
cern a good intention even where they 
cannot agree with the opinion. And if 
in this little piece they shall meet with 
a freedom of censure in points which 
they may have regarded rather as objects 
of applause, they will not I hope, con- 
sider the Author's profession as having 
influenced him to inculcate opinions 
with an interested view. It is well 
known to the world, and with a consci- 
ous pride I repeat it, that no profession 
|P_8
or set of men have shown themselves so 
ready to offer their assistance to the poor, 
or so disinterested in promoting improve- 
ments in their art for the benefit of man- 
kind, as the medical faculty. Their vo- 
luntary unpaid attendance on the nume- 
rous sick at Hospitals, their readiness to 
give advice to the poor at home, amply 
prove the former; their spirited patro- 
nage of inoculation, with every other 
means of prevention against diseases, their 
union into societies for the free commu- 
nication of knowledge and improvement, 
sufficiently declare the latter. 

Whoever has frequented the misera- 
ble habitations of the lowest class of poor, 
and has seen disease aggravated by a total 
want of every comfort arising from suit- 
able diet, cleanliness and medicine, must 
be struck with pleasure at the change on 
their admission into a Hospital where 
these wants are abundantly supplied, and 
where a number of skilful persons are co- 
operating for their relief. On the other 
hand, when he walks through the long 
|P_9
wards of a crowded Hospital, and sur- 
veys the languid countenances of the pa- 
tients, when he feels the peculiarly noi- 
some effluvia so unfriendly to every vi- 
gorous principle of life, and compares 
their transient effect upon him, with that 
to be expected by those who are con- 
stantly breathing them and imbibing 
them at every pore, he will be apt to 
look upon a Hospital as a dismal prison, 
where the sick are shut up from the rest 
of mankind to perish by mutual conta- 
gion. 

These obvious and simple ideas an- 
swer in fact to the real state of advan- 
tages and disadvantages in hospitals. As 
far as diet, nursing, and medical assist- 
ance are concerned, they are of eminent 
use and comfort to the poor; but the 
grand necessary of life, air, is never to 
be had in a salutary degree of purity, 
frequently is vitiated so as to become a 
poison. Every hospital, I fear, with- 
out exception, may in some measure be 
considered as a Lazaretto, having its own 
|P_10
peculiar disease within it. That dread- 
ful distemper, little less malignant than 
the plague itself, distinguished by the 
title of the jail or hospital fever, has long 
been known as the inbred pestilence of 
crowded receptacles for the sick, and 
has thinned our fleets and armies more 
than the sword of the enemy. Sir John 
Pringle, the great observator of military 
diseases, expresses in the strongest terms 
his dread of this fatal distemper, and his 
disapprobation of such a disposition of the 
sick in large general hospitals as is almost 
certain to produce it. When the same 
causes act in so inferior a degree, as not 
to occasion such alarming consequences, 
they are still far from being innocent. 
I am intimately acquainted with a coun- 
try Infirmary remarkable for neatness, 
and excellence of construction, and I 
have even there very frequently seen a 
slow depressing fever, the offspring of 
putridity, creep over the patients other 
complaint, become the principal disor- 
der, and resist every remedy that could 
|P_11
be thought of, till dismission from the 
house produced a spontaneous cure. 

My design in offering to view facts of 
this kind, is not to inculcate a general 
and undistinguishing prepossession against 
these charitable institutions, but merely 
to show that there is a real necessity for 
extraordinary caution in their manage- 
ment; and that the present fashion of 
indiscriminately hurrying the poor sick 
into hospitals, and being busied with a 
benevolent zeal to fill them as full as pos- 
sible, may be productive of consequences 
which are quite opposite to the kind in- 
tentions of humanity. I have no manner 
of doubt that they may be rendered emi- 
nently useful, and that the greatest part 
of their inconveniences may be avoided; 
and it is upon this conviction that I ven- 
ture to offer to the public the result of 
some study and observation concerning 
them. 

I Shall begin with some general re- 
marks on some circumstances with re- 
gard to the usual construction of hospitals 
|P_12
which have a considerable influence over 
the salubrity of the air; and shall then 
proceed to the consideration of several 
particular diseases with respect to the pro- 
priety of their admission into a hospital. 

The various causes of vitiation of the 
air have been pointed out with great 
precision, and means of prevention sug- 
gested in particular cases by many of the 
improvers of modern practice. The 
great character several of their works 
have deservedly acquired gives reason to 
presume, that every medical reader must 
be acquainted with them; a recapulati- 
on therefore of their general doctrine 
would be useless, especially as many 
parts of it are not applicable to our sub- 
ject. It is not to be supposed that any 
important mistakes can be committed, in 
a thing so well known and so much in 
our power, as the choice of a proper situ- 
ation and exposure of a hospital with re- 
gard to the state of the air, as depending 
upon heat and cold, dryness and mois- 
|P_13
ture, and the like external circumstances. 
It is in the laying out of the building, 
and the internal conduct of the house 
that we are to look for the source of those 
errors which may prove so fatal. In 
planning the building, two quite opposite 
and incompatible views are found to in- 
terfere. The architect considers it as 
his business to manage his room and 
materials in such a manner, as to accom- 
modate the greatest number of people in 
the least possible space. The physician 
on the contrary would leave as much 
vacant space, occupied by the fresh air 
alone circulating freely, as was in any 
degree compatible with use and conve- 
nience. It is to the prevalence of the 
former above the latter that all our com- 
plaints are owing. 

The most common plan of a hospital 
is a quadrangle, the ground floor of 
which is appropriated to offices, and the 
stores above to lodging the sick, which 
are for that purpose disposed into long 
rooms running the whole length of the 
|P_14
sides, and containing, according to the 
size of the building, perhaps from twenty 
to fifty beds ranging along the opposite 
walls. There are usually two common 
stories, and an attic story divided in this 
manner. The long wards seldom run 
along the four sides of the quadrangle, 
but only two or three of them. The 
rest is taken up with stair-cases and small- 
er rooms for particular occasions. 

The first fault to be observed in this 
plan, is the quadrangular form of the 
whole building, which prevents an ef- 
fectual thorough ventilation, and causes 
a collection of stagnating air, tainted by 
a variety of noxious effluvia, in the cen- 
tral space, which continually returns 
upon the rooms through the windows 
looking that way. 

The disposition of the lodging rooms 
into long wards, is another, and a much 
more pernicious fault, insomuch that I 
would assign it as the principal cause of 
bad air in hospitals; and it is evident 
that this must be the case, from the very 
reason which led to the contrivance, viz. 
|P_15
that a large number might be lodged in 
a small space. Every person, even in 
health, by his breath and the effluvia 
arising from his body vitiates a quantity 
of air around him; and the only reason 
why we do not in general perceive any 
bad effects from the poison generated by 
this vitiation, is, that it is usually diluted 
with a large quantity of fresh air, and 
carried off by a free circulation. If the 
quantity of air be lessened, or its circu- 
lation impeded, noxious effects will be 
proportionally shown. The degree to 
which this may be done without pro- 
ducing any injury of consequence cannot 
be exactly ascertained; but there is no 
doubt that it must become hurtful, when 
such a number as from twenty to fifty 
persons, many of them afflicted with 
ulcers and other diseases which tend to 
aggravate the putresency of the fluids, 
are constantly confined together in a room 
just large enough to hold their beds. The 
circumstance of continuing through the 
day in the room where they slept, is a 
|P_16
considerable aggravation of the evil. 
The bed-cloaths acquire a strong im- 
pregnation from the perspired vapours 
of the night, as is evident on first enter- 
ing the bed-chamber of a single person 
in health, and their soft porous texture 
renders them extremely tenacious of 
every kind of effluvia. It would there- 
fore be a good regulation in every hospi- 
tal, especially such as are in any degree 
crowded, that all the patients who are 
capable of sitting up, should remain 
through the day in large airy halls, and 
that their wards and bedding should in 
the mean time be as much as possible 
exposed to ventilation. 

Still however I am persuaded, that 
every precaution and contrivance to sweet- 
een the air will be only palliative while 
the great sources of contagion, large 
crowded wards, remain in use. Sir John 
Pringle, indeed, recommends large 
wards for the military hospitals, but it 
is evident that he does it upon the sup- 
position, that more proportionable void 
|P_17
space will be left in them than in small 
ones; for he lays it down as a rule, that 
so few patients should be admitted into 
each ward, that one unacquainted with 
the danger of bad air might imagine 
there was room for double or triple the 
number: a precaution I will venture 
to say, observed in none of our hospi- 
tals, since it would totally overthrow 
the oeconomical plan upon which they are 
built. It is true the first appearance of 
a large ward strikes us with an idea of 
somewhat very spacious and airy; but if 
we conceive for a moment in imaginati- 
on, that it was partitioned into as many 
separate divisions as there are patients, 
we shall be sensible how narrow a space 
is allotted to each. It is a farther objec- 
tion to large wards, that if a particular 
cause of contagion prevails, it is by their 
means communicated to greater num- 
bers than it otherwise would be. The 
illustrious author above-mentioned re- 
lates an instance of the malignant hos- 
pital fever beginning in a ward, from no 
|P_18
other cause than a mortified limb of one 
of the patients. The contagion thus 
raised would probably go no farther than 
that particular ward—by its being small 
therefore the number infected would have 
been less. Various other circumstances, 
such as the mutual disturbance and terror 
arising among the sick from the shocking 
view of each other's sufferings, their ago- 
nies, raving and dying groans, all plead 
strongly with humanity against these dis- 
mal lodging places. I am at a loss for 
terms strong enough to censure a practice 
which, I verily believe, when followed 
to its full extent in a large and crowded 
hospital, is the source of more fatal con- 
sequences than the original diseases of 
the patients. 

A want of due height in the wards 
is an additional cause of vitiated air, and 
is occasioned by the same plan of mak- 
ing the most of the room and materials. 
The attic story is built for this purpose, 
which by its disproportionate lowness is 
totally useless in itself and cramps the 
|P_19
subjacent stories of their proper height. 
I could point out several expensive hos- 
pitals much injured by this circumstance, 
and, if ever they happen to be thorough- 
ly filled, the mischievous consequences 
will probably be severely felt. 

I am aware that a different plan of 
constructing hospitals, especially in large 
cities, would be attended with a great 
increase of expence and loss of room; 
but this ought not to be an object when 
a point is under consideration, which is 
to determine whether or no these insti- 
tutions be of any real public utility. 
There cannot surely be a greater contra- 
diction in the nature of things than a 
disease produced by a hospital; and that 
such a disease is really known, that it 
has proved fatal to thousands, and in 
some measure prevails in every hospital, 
is a too certain and deplorable proof of 
important mistakes in their construction 
and management. If the utility of them 
in their present state upon the whole 
really preponderate, it is still placing 
|P_20
them in the rank of necessary evils, when 
one would hope they might be rendered 
unmixed and undoubted benefits. 

It does not belong to my profession 
to lay down an architectural plan for one 
of these buildings, nor do I conceive it 
necessary. By pointing out what to a- 
void, we in effect give rules what to 
aim at. The danger of corrupted air in 
crowded close apartments will suggest 
the necessity of having them lofty, well 
ventilated, and thinly peopled. In ge- 
neral, the best plan would seem to be, 
a range of cells or small rooms opening 
into a wide airy gallery, having a brisk 
circulation of air through it. Greenwich 
Hospital will give a good idea of this 
disposition, though in respect to loftiness 
and spaciousness of the apartments it is 
unequal to what would be requisite for 
sick people. 

I now proceed to offer some remarks 
concerning those means of advancing the 
utility of Hospitals, and avoiding their 
|P_21
usual inconveniences which depend up- 
on the selection of such patients as from 
the nature of their cases are the most 
proper objects for admission. 

In judging of diseases with regard to 
the propriety of their reception into hos- 
pitals, the following general circum- 
stances are to be considered. 

1. Whether they be capable of 
speedy relief; because as it is the inten- 
tion of charity to relieve as great a num- 
ber as possible, a quick change of objects 
is to be wished; and also because the 
inbred disease of hospitals will almost 
inevitably creep in some degree upon 
one who continues a long time in them, 
but will rarely attack one whose stay is 
short. 

2. Whether they require in a par- 
ticular manner the superintendance of 
skilful persons, either on account of their 
acute and dangerous nature, or any sin- 
gularity or intricacy attending them, or 
|P_22
erroneous opinions prevailing among the 
common people concerning their treat- 
ment—It is evident that in general the 
most important good effects will arise 
from admitting these. 

3. Whether they be contagious, or 
subject in a peculiar degree to corrupt 
the air and generate pestilential diseases— 
the danger of their admission to the other 
patients is obvious. 

4. Whether a fresh and pure air be 
peculiarly requisite for their cure, and 
they be remarkably injured by any viti- 
ation of it—I fear it will be impossible 
with every improvement to render a 
hospital a fit residence for persons affect- 
ed with such diseases. 

We shall apply these considerations to 
various particular cases, and from weigh- 
ing the comparative importance of each, 
shall endeavour to deduce some firm 
practical conclusions. 

|P_23
There are no disorders in which the 
benefit of hospitals seems more clearly 
apparent, than those which arise from 
external injury in a sound body. They 
strongly concur in the important circum- 
stances of requiring, and at the same 
time being capable of speedy assistance. 
From their violence and the suddenness 
of their attack they are peculiarly dis- 
tressing and terrifying, and a poor man's 
habitation is usually very ill provided 
with the conveniences necessary for their 
treatment. Unassisted nature will fre- 
quently get the better of other diseases, 
and they may become less formidable by 
bearing up boldly against them; but a 
wound, a fractured or dislocated bone, 
are disorders immediately felt in their 
utmost severity, and compel the most 
reluctant to seek the assistance of art. It 
is therefore a very humane and proper 
regulation in every hospital that all such 
cases should be admitted upon sight 
without the formality of a recommend- 
ation. 

|P_24
Of accidental injuries, some answer 
perfectly well the other circumstances 
favourable to admission, of being little 
subject either to cause corrupted air or 
to be affected by it; others on the con- 
trary are liable to great objection on 
these articles. This difference in gene- 
ral turns upon the degree of inflamma- 
tion, and consequently of fever, and 
succeeding suppuration, and mortifica- 
tion, excited; and upon the sensibility 
and irritability of the parts injured and 
exposed to the air. Thus, flesh wounds, 
simple fractures and dislocations, may be 
cured with almost equal ease in any situ- 
ation, while violent contusions and burns, 
wounds of nervous and membraneous 
parts, compound fractures, and the like, 
are rendered peculiarly dangerous and 
difficult of cure by the contaminated air 
of a hospital. The military and naval 
Surgeons know from unhappy experi- 
ence, the fatal effects of bad gun shot 
wounds in their hospitals. They see the 
inefficacy of every attempt to save a shat- 
|P_25
tered limb, and are driven with reluct- 
ance to the frequent use of that disagree- 
able, and in these cases, hazardous re- 
medy, amputation. Nor do these mor- 
tifications fall to their share alone. Every 
Surgeon attending a large and crowded 
hospital, knows the very great difficulty 
of curing a compound fracture in them. 
This is so universally acknowledged, that 
the most humane and judicious of them 
have been obliged to comply with that 
dreadful rule of practice, immediate am- 
putation in every compound fracture. 
Mr. Pott, than whom there is not in 
the whole profession a more unprejudiced 
patron of improvement, or a warmer ad- 
vocate for humanity, has recommended 
this general rule upon the grounds of ac- 
curate and impartial observation. Yet, 
that it is not founded upon the nature of 
the case, but upon the added malignancy 
of hospital air, is evident from the dif- 
ferent success in private practice and the 
country infirmaries. The reader may 
see this point set in a very striking light 
|P_26
by Mr. Kirkland, in his Letters on 
Fractures and Dislocations, occasioned by 
Mr. Pott's Remarks on the same subject. 

The danger of bad air in fractures of 
the skull, is a particular observation of 
antient date. These have not only the 
general unfavourable circumstances of 
compound fractures, but the aggravated 
evil of a disordered brain and nerves. 
The fatality of this accident in private 
practice is melancholy, but to a much 
greater degree in hospitals. 

All injuries producing in the first in- 
stance a great destruction and mortifica- 
tion of substance, and in consequence 
an abundant suppuration, are extremely 
liable both to occasion and to be affected 
by corrupted air. The separation of 
sphacelated parts when the powers of 
nature are vigorous and the surrounding 
air is fresh and reviving, will generally 
be affected without communicating a 
contagion to the subjacent sound parts; 
but when the solids are relaxed, and the 
fluids vitiated by steeping in a morbid 
|P_27
atmosphere, the whole body will be- 
come in some measure assimilated to the 
putrefactive ferment in the mortified 
parts, and will readily imbibe and spread 
its contagion. The prevalence of laxity 
and a putrid tendency will also render 
the suppuration from wounds and ulcers 
superabundant and ill conditioned; the 
reabsorption of the matter and its recep- 
tion into the lungs by effluvia will keep 
up this disposition, till at length the pa- 
tient is worn away by a consuming 
hectic. 

All these considerations will exactly 
apply to the wounds made by the sur- 
geon in his operations. How apt the 
patient is to sink under the symptoma- 
tic fever, and abundant suppuration con- 
sequent upon them, when breathing the 
corrupt air of a crowded hospital, I re- 
fer to universal experience to testify. 
This fatal event has been so frequent in 
military practice, as to furnish a plausi- 
ble argument for the total abolition of 
the amputation of limbs. When on the 
|P_28
other hand, the rule before mentioned 
relative to compound fractures is con- 
sidered, the poor sufferers under this un- 
happy accident seem to be given up to 
inevitable destruction. Preserve the 
limb—they die of the inflammation and 
gangrene; take it off—they are wasted 
by the suppuration and a putrid hectic. 
A terrible dilemma, if it were unavoida- 
ble from the nature of the case. It is 
certain, that the number sacrificed after 
surgical operations to hospital pestilence 
is an evil of important magnitude. This 
is out of all proportion so much greater 
in the crowded London Hospitals than 
in private practice, and country infirma- 
ries, as plainly to show that the single 
circumstance of purity of the air is of 
greater consequence than any other to 
the success of an operation; and that 
even increased skill and knowledge in 
the profession will not counterbalance 
the want of it. This is still more con- 
spicuous in French practice than our own. 
Every surgeon in France aims at striking 
|P_29
out some petty mechanical improvement 
in the operative part of the art; at the 
same time it may be safely asserted, that 
they are usually too inattentive in matters 
of more fundamental importance to the 
general utility of the profession. With 
a mixture of shame and indignation, I 
have read such passages as the following, 
in their authors. After proposing some 
new improvement in a common opera- 
tion, they relate a case in which it was 
adopted; and pursuing it in the way of 
a journal, coolly tell you that on such a 
day the patient died; but as his death 
was only caused by the usual consequen- 
ces of the operation, the credit of their 
particular method is not at all affected 
by it. Miserable supineness and delusi- 
on! To go on in the daily practice of a 
fatal operation, satisfied with the self- 
flattery of having invented an ingenious 
method of performing it—as if the ob- 
ject of a noble and most useful profession 
was to please and surprise by a shew of 
|P_30
dexterity, rather than to advance the 
welfare of mankind. 

It is certainly from bad success in 
hospital practice, that Mr. Sharp and 
others have given a dreadful idea of so 
simple an operation as that for the Hy- 
drocele. In private practice and a coun- 
try infirmary, I have frequently seen it 
performed without a single dangerous 
symptom. 

What conclusion with regard to the 
admission of patients into hospitals, are 
we to deduce from the state of facts thus 
laid down? plainly this, that since ex- 
ternal injuries and the diseases requiring 
surgical operations in a very particular 
manner need the relief of hospitals, we 
are to endeavour by every possible pre- 
caution to render these suitable recepta- 
cles for them, rather than deny assistance 
to such afflictions as most forcibly de- 
mand it, and are most capable of receiv- 
ing it. 

If the plan for constructing hospitals 
which has here been briefly pointed out, 
|P_31
were followed, in all probability the fa- 
tal consequences of these cases would 
not take place, unless the number of 
patients were inordinately large; a cir- 
cumstance that, I imagine, will render 
it impossible with every contrivance to 
preserve the air quite pure and untaint- 
ed. To obviate this inconvenience, it 
might be proper in a very large city to 
have several small hospitals interspersed 
through it, solely appropriated to the 
reception of accidental injuries; which 
would also have this farther good effect; 
that assistance would be nearer at hand, 
and the pain and danger of conveying 
such patients to a distance would be a- 
voided. This last consideration has, we 
see, been thought of so much impor- 
tance in London, that some of the hospi- 
tals have on that account been placed in 
the very heart of the city. It unfor- 
tunately happens that these are also some 
of the largest, and thereby a double cause 
of bad air is allowed to operate. By 
much the most hurtful of these is how- 
|P_32
ever the largeness and bad construction 
of the building; for although the air 
in the middle of a populous city must 
doubtless be rendered very impure from 
the vast variety of impregnations it un- 
dergoes, yet these impurities are not in 
general of the putrefactive kind, nay 
upon the whole may perhaps have the 
effect of antiseptics, as in some instances 
has appeared to be the case. 

Many hospitals, however faulty in 
general construction, are provided with 
small rooms for the reception of those 
who have undergone operations; and 
where the number of patients is small 
these are usually sufficient to contain all 
cases of this kind; which is an addi- 
tional reason why the country hospitals do 
not feel in so alarming a degree the bad 
effects of hospital air upon such patients. 

The second and more numerous class 
of diseases which come under the sur- 
geon's province, is of such as arise from 
some peculiar virus or cachexy infect- 
ing the whole habit of body, and ap- 
|P_33
pearing in a variety of external morbid 
affections. If we examine these by the 
general considerations before laid down 
concerning the admission of patients, we 
shall find, for the most part, that they 
possess in an inferior degree the favoura- 
ble circumstances of being capable of 
speedy relief and requiring particular at- 
tention; and that they are liable in a 
greater degree to the disadvantage of 
causing and being injured by vitiated air. 

No disease fills our hospitals, especi- 
ally in some parts of the kingdom, with 
so many surgical cases as the scrophula, 
and none is in general more improper 
for admission. When this virus has once 
infected the constitution it is continually 
showing itself in numberless different 
appearances from the slightest glandular 
tumour to the most inveterate pulmonary 
consumption and white swelling of the 
joints. In all it is constantly manifested 
by the same sluggish obstinate dispositi- 
on, resisting almost every attempt of art, 
|P_34
either from medicine or the hand of the 
Surgeon. 

Nothing can be more deplorable 
than the condition of a poor sufferer 
under this disease in its worst state. I 
have seen numbers of these miserable 
creatures, covered over with ulcers, dis- 
abled in their limbs, and emaciated by 
suppurations and pulmonary obstructi- 
ons, applying for addmittance into a 
hospital, and received merely from the 
forcible commiseration which their 
wretchedness excited. The consequence 
was always uniformly the same. Pent 
up amidst the morbid effluvia from their 
own bodies and those of other patients 
in the same condition, their cough and 
hectic increased, the discharge from their 
ulcers became more abundant and ill- 
conditioned, and they either sunk under 
their complaints in the hospital, or ob- 
tained a short reprieve by returning home 
to the country air. When the effects of 
this disease are less terrible, nature will 
often relieve herself; especially when 
|P_35
the fibres acquire vigour and firmness by 
the progress from infancy to puberty. 
Medical assistance directed to this inten- 
tion may usefully second the efforts of 
nature; but the manual and operative 
part of surgery is in general very little 
required, and every thing relating to in- 
ternal medicine or external application 
may be as well administered out of a 
hospital as in it. In this disease there 
seem to be no reasons for admission into 
a hospital sufficient to counterbalance 
those against it, except where amputa- 
tion is necessary on account of a joint 
swelling, or in a few cases which render 
some other operation adviseable. Even 
in these I have frequently seen instances, 
where the complete cure of a stump or 
the wound made by opening an abcess, 
could not be accomplished without dis- 
mission from the house to a purer at- 
mosphere. 

It is more difficult to determine on 
the propriety of admitting persons in- 
fected with the venereal virus. Very 
|P_36
few, I imagine, in this age are of that 
rigid severity in principle, as to with-hold 
relief from real afflictions because they 
are occasioned by the folly and vice of 
the sufferers. Charity would be solely 
employed in mitigating the distresses of 
mankind, without attempting to distin- 
guish the chastising hand of heaven from 
the ordinary operation of natural laws. 
I therefore wave all considerations of this 
sort, and suppose these patients to claim 
an equal right of admission for relief 
with any others, under the rules form- 
erly laid down. 

There is no instance in which the 
power of the healing art is more distinct- 
ly shown than in the treatment of the 
venereal disease, which, alarming and 
dreadful as its effects are when left to 
unassisted nature, will in its most inve- 
terate state admit of a complete cure. It 
is one of those very few disorders for 
which medicine affords a specific that is 
able with certainty to overcome it, by 
an action not referable to general laws, 
|P_37
but peculiar to itself. This circumstance 
in favour of receiving venereal patients 
into hospitals is reinforced by the great 
advantage, and in many cases the neces- 
sity, of a particular superintendence du- 
ring the treatment. The administering 
of mercurials to a considerable quantity 
requires a close attention and numerous 
precautions; and when it is considered 
that the persons most liable to receive 
this disease are such as are least accus- 
tomed to regulate themselves with pru- 
dence, it will appear that the confine- 
ment and rules of a hospital cannot be 
more usefully employed than upon them. 
On the other hand it must be confessed 
that the nature of the disease itself in 
many cases, and the operation of mer- 
cury, dispose the body to emit putrefac- 
tive effluvia which strongly tend to cor- 
rupt the surrounding air. This circum- 
stance has occasioned the total rejection 
of these patients from some hospitals; 
and where they are admitted, it is a ge- 
neral rule to keep them together in a 
|P_38
part of the house remote from the rest. 
Where this is exactly followed, and they 
can be lodged in such a manner that no 
vitiated air can escape from them to the 
other patients, no objection can, I think, 
be made to their admission, and it would 
be difficult to supply their places with 
those who would receive more benefit 
from such institutions. This, however, 
in a large and crowded hospital is almost 
impracticable; and in some of the Lon- 
don hospitals the communication of bad 
air from the venereal wards is very per- 
ceptible; so that in a great city where 
the number of these patients is conside- 
rable, it will always be best to appro- 
priate buildings for the reception of them 
solely. In these, although the contact 
of fresh external air, so salutary in most 
diseases, is hurtful to patients undergo- 
ing a high mercurial process, yet every 
contrivance to prevent a putrid atmos- 
phere, consistent with necessary warmth, 
should be adopted. 

|P_39
It is a rule in some hospitals to com- 
promise this matter by admitting vene- 
real patients as out-patients only. Where 
this has been done, I have never known 
any but the slightest cases treated with 
advantage; and it were to be wished that 
no others were undertaken, since the o- 
peration of mercury is by much too de- 
licate a thing to be trusted far out of the 
prescriber's sight, and it may be highly 
improper for patients under this process 
to attend at the stated times for advice 
and medicine. It may be farther added 
that palliation in this disease is worse to 
the community than absolute neglect, 
since the imprudent sufferers deluded by 
a supposed cure go on to spread the con- 
tagion, and entail it in its most dreadful 
consequences upon a future generation. 
On this account every empirical nostrum 
vended for this disease is highly perni- 
cious: for allowing that, properly ad- 
ministered, it be capable of producing a 
cure, (as in fact is the case with almost 
every mercurial preparation) yet it is 
|P_40
absolutely impossible by any general di- 
rections to render a person, who is un- 
acquainted with the nature of these me- 
dicines, a proper judge of their exhibi- 
tion; and it will always happen either 
that they injure their constitutions by 
over-dosing, or that they remain short 
of a cure; or very probably both these 
circumstances may take place. 

Little needs be said concerning that 
terrible disease, the cancer. There is so 
small a probability of curing it by any 
means hitherto discovered, and it is so 
loathsome an object to the senses, that 
unless the removal of the part affected by 
an operation be practicable and adviseable, 
it can with no degree of propriety be re- 
ceived into a hospital. If the attention 
of art be directed to palliate some of the 
most grievous symptoms, any means for 
this purpose may be employed with equal 
advantage by the patient at home. 

Those habitual ulcers proceeding from 
that constitutional indisposition called the 
scorbutic, are usually more dependent 
|P_41
upon internal medicine and diet for their 
effectual cure, than upon topical appli- 
cation and the surgeon's hand. Ulcers 
of the legs have been thought so far an 
exception, that a strict observance of rest 
and a reclined posture, which can scarcely 
be trusted to without hospital confine- 
ment, was imagined the most necessary 
circumstance in their treatment. Some 
late observations would seem to over- 
throw this surgical maxim; and certain- 
ly if the cure can as well be accomplish- 
ed in a different method, it will on se- 
veral accounts be preferable. It must be 
confessed that although the ulcers are 
brought to heal by the common hospital 
treatment, the cure generally only stands 
good while the confinement lasts. Then 
every symptom by which this habit of 
body is discovered, and every indication 
of cure, strongly points out the tenden- 
cy of putrid air to aggravate the origi- 
nal cause of the complaint; and where 
this prevails in a great degree in a 
crowded hospital, it is no unusual thing 
|P_42
to find these ulcers rebellious against e- 
very means of art, and gradually putting 
on a more alarming appearance, till it 
has been necessary to send them away in 
a worse condition than they entered. If 
therefore these cases can be treated with 
tolerable success out of a hospital, it 
will certainly be better to favour the ge- 
neral health by pure air and suitable 
diet and medicines, than to incur the 
danger of such a depravation of the 
fluids as may injure the constitution, and 
perhaps aggravate the topical disease. 
However as this matter may be consider- 
ed still sub judice, and from my own ob- 
servation I am by no means convinced 
that absolute rest and a reclined posture 
are not in many cases necessary, I would 
not choose to speak positively concern- 
ing it. 

I proceed to consider internal diseases
with regard to the propriety of their re- 
ception into hospitals, which I shall 
only attempt to do in such a brief and 
general manner as may serve to direct 
|P_43
the judgment of persons, not belonging 
to the medical faculty, in the benevolent 
employment of selecting proper objects 
for these charities. 

The division of diseases into acute and 
chronic, though not sufficiently accurate 
and comprehensive for the purposes of 
science, is the most useful in our view 
of the subject, since it turns in general 
upon those properties of diseases, which 
determine the circumstances formerly 
pointed out as the great objects of consi- 
deration in admitting or rejecting them. 
Though it is difficult precisely to distin- 
guish these classes, on account of the 
gradation by which they fall into each 
others limits, yet it is easily understood 
that the acute are those which are violent 
in their attack and rapid in their course, 
soon terminating in death or recovery, 
and which proceed rather from occasio- 
nal and accidental causes than a regular 
determination of the constitution—that 
the chronic are the contrary of all this; 
slow in their progress, incomplete in 
|P_44
their terminations, and frequent in their 
returns, as proceeding from causes con- 
stantly existing in the system. This 
slight sketch of their character will at 
once show, that the acute have many ad- 
vantages over the chronic in their plea 
for admission into hospitals. The causes 
from which they proceed being acci- 
dental, and their progress hazardous and 
rapid, they at the same time are likely 
to receive speedy relief from the skill 
and attention of the physician, and 
particularly stand in need of his super- 
intendance. The chronic, on the other 
hand, give little hopes of a radical cure, 
and must usually be treated by such re- 
medies as do not produce a sudden 
change, and consequently do not re- 
quire a frequent attention to their ef- 
fects. 

Fever either as a symptom or an ori- 
ginal complaint, is the principal object 
in acute diseases. There are almost in- 
finite diversities in the state of this dis- 
order; in all its varieties the reasons for 
|P_45
admitting it to the relief of a hospital 
are very strong; the reasons against its 
admission vary in degree greatly. 

Every fever, it is true, is liable to 
contract a malignancy from the bad air of 
a hospital, which also becomes commu- 
nicable; but in many of them, such as 
the intermitting fever or ague, the in- 
flammatory continued fever, the pleuri- 
tic, nephritic, rheumatic, and all of the 
like nature, this disposition is in so in- 
ferior a degree, that, unless the hospi- 
tal be in so wretched a state as to deserve 
the name of a Pest-house rather than an 
Infirmary, there need be no scruple in 
admitting them. As was before observ- 
ed concerning compound fractures and 
other accidental injuries, the necessity 
of affording relief to such disorders is so 
striking, that these institutions do not at 
all answer their end unless they are ren- 
dered suitable for them; and this may 
be considered as the test of their utility. 
Many more doubts may be raised re- 
|P_46
specting those fevers which are peculi- 
arly termed contagious. 

Contagion is distinguishable into 
two kinds, and it is of importance to 
our subject to make this distinction. 
The contagion of some diseases, such as 
the small-pox and measles, is of a spe- 
cific nature, always producing its own 
disease, infecting by the smallest con- 
ceivable particles of its matter, and 
giving no indication of itself by a sensi- 
ble vitiation of the surrounding air, ex- 
cept when accumulated in large quantity. 
The contagion from putrid and malig- 
nant diseases, on the other hand, is very 
similar in all cases; is communicated in 
proportion to its quantity, which is per- 
ceptible by sensible effects on the air; 
and is nearly, if not entirely of the same 
nature with that corruption of the air 
always proceeding from the putrid efflu- 
via of a number of persons crowded into 
a small space. This may therefore be 
so diluted and counteracted by various 
precautions, as, in great measure, to lose 
|P_47
its infectious quality; the former never 
can; hence a necessary and invariable 
rule of excluding it from a general hos- 
pital. But it so happens that of all the 
diseases which prevail in this country, 
and indeed in the greatest part of Europe, 
a specifically contagious one, the small- 
pox, is the most frequent, and carries 
off the greatest number of people. It 
would therefore be a great check upon 
the utility of hospitals, if so fatal and 
common a distemper could meet with 
no relief from them; especially as in its 
dangerous state it requires in a very par- 
ticular manner the close attention of me- 
dical skill; and from some late improve- 
ments in practice, there is reason to be- 
lieve that many lives might be saved 
which are daily sacrificed to ancient er- 
rors in the method of treatment. 

A very happy peculiarity also attends 
this disease, that by a certain method of 
communicating it, its violence is lessen- 
ed in so great a degree as to render it al- 
most a different distemper, in which a 
|P_48
fatal event is absolutely rare and uncom- 
mon. There is not in the whole annals 
of the healing art any discovery nearly 
so beneficial to mankind (excepting per- 
haps the use of mercury for the venereal 
disease) as this practice of inoculation; 
it is therefore highly interesting to the 
wishes of humanity that it should prevail 
as generally as possible. On these ac- 
counts particular hospitals have been for 
some time past erected in the Metropolis 
for the small-pox, both in the natural 
and artificial way of receiving it, and 
their public utility has been so great, 
that it is pity they are hitherto confined 
to London. The frequency of this dis- 
ease would always give a supply of pa- 
tients in most of our large towns, in the 
natural way; and if, what is a most de- 
sirable object, the practice of inoculation 
was to become general, and all children 
at a certain age were to undergo it, there 
never could be wanting a constant and 
regular succession of subjects. So flat- 
tering a prospect of public good, moves 
|P_49
me most warmly and heartily to propose 
this addition to the charitable instituti- 
ons in all the cities and towns where a 
general hospital is already, or may in fu- 
ture, be founded. A moderate sized 
building, either distinct, or forming a 
wing to the general infirmary, would 
serve this purpose. It should be con- 
structed with every possible contrivance 
for pure air, which is so remarkably 
salutary in this disease; and might serve 
indifferently for the reception of the 
natural or inoculated small pox, though 
it would be proper to separate them 
into different rooms. 

I would wish the benevolent patrons 
of these charities to reflect, that, till 
this scheme is executed, a large propor- 
tion of the diseased poor must be un- 
provided with suitable relief, and a most 
dangerous distemper will be continually 
making its ravages unchecked by those 
improvements in practice which have 
been made so much to the benefit of 
mankind. 

|P_50
With respect to those diseases which 
are contagious on account of the degree 
of putrefactive malignance attending 
them, the danger from them is to be 
estimated in the same manner as that 
from the usual causes of putrid air. If 
the construction of the hospital be such 
as fully to guard against the generation 
and communication of corrupted air, it 
may be safe and proper to admit patients 
in these distempers, which universally 
demand great medical care and attenti- 
on; but it will certainly be wrong for 
their sakes to expose a number of other 
patients to any considerable hazard of a 
dreadful disease. Besides, since one of 
the very worst of these diseases takes its 
rise from crowded hospitals, it cannot 
be imagined that a place where even the 
least degree of the same cause prevails 
can be a proper receptacle for them; 
for this reason, as most of our hospitals 
are at present circumstanced, they ought 
as much as possible to avoid admitting 
them. The fatal necessity of receiving 
|P_51
malignant fevers, into the military hos- 
pitals has been too often experienced, 
but no such necessity takes place in com- 
mon practice. It must be left to the 
judgment of the hospital physician, to 
balance the positive and negative reasons, 
and to determine as he thinks will con- 
duce most to the public good. 

All diseases affecting the lungs, are, 
I fear, of that kind which can never 
receive benefit from even the sweetest 
and best contrived hospital. The direct 
application of the air to the affected part 
renders its purity a matter of the highest 
consequence; and indeed it is not enough 
that it be merely innoxious, it ought to 
be medicinally soft and pure, since it is 
frequently the only remedy in which we 
can put any confidence. Exclusive of 
any peculiar contamination of hospital 
air, the circumstance of their being situ- 
ated in large towns is a sufficient objec- 
tion to their receiving these diseases. 

With respect to chronic disorders, 
it will be needless to go through an 
|P_52
enumeration of them for the purpose of 
determining the propriety of their ad- 
mission into hospitals. The general con- 
siderations formerly laid down must de- 
termine in each particular case, always 
remembring that admitting a patient 
cannot be a thing indifferent, but both 
on his own account and that of the other 
patients, if no peculiar advantage is ex- 
pected from his being taken into the 
house, he should remain out. Instead 
of studying to fill a hospital, we ought 
to consider how it may be emptied, since 
every improper object admitted is a 
burthen upon the whole house; and 
every vacancy, a general relief. I would 
wish to enforce as much as possible the 
idea of a hospital being a place designed 
for the cure of the sick, and not an alms 
house for the support of the indigent and 
decrepid. I have very frequently known 
this matter become the subject of dis- 
pute, and humane persons swayed by 
the latter consideration to recommend 
improper objects for hospital relief. Yet 
|P_53
nothing is more evident than that the 
same institution cannot be calculated 
for both intentions, and that it is an 
injury to burthen an infirmary, which 
is supported by the private charity of 
individuals, with such objects of relief 
as are provided for by the public. It is 
not poverty, but sickness, that demands 
the assistance of a hospital, and when 
diet and lodging are joined to medical 
relief, it is only that the end of curing 
a disease may be better accomplished. 
On this account, though the number of 
in-patients should be restricted within 
confined limits, the out-patient list should 
be upon the most comprehensive plan 
possible; and I would wish it to be un- 
derstood that wherever I have spoken 
of the impropriety of admitting patients 
into a hospital, I meant to leave it en- 
tirely free and open to them for relief as 
out-patients. I believe this object is in 
general too much neglected. Where it 
is kept up with proper spirit and atten- 
tion, and a habit of regularity in attend- 
|P_54
ance and obedience to orders is formed 
among the patients, very great and ex- 
tensive good may be done by dispensing 
advice and medicines to the poor in such 
cases as do not require admission into a 
hospital. There is usually great neglect 
and mismanagement in the treatment of 
those poor sick who are paid for by a 
parish. The Apothecary who contracts 
for them at a fixed annual stipend, will 
be tempted to consider it as a job which 
he is to do in the cheapest manner possi- 
ble; and to afford them only such at- 
tendance and medicine as is just necessa- 
ry to preserve himself in office. Indeed 
the shamefully scanty pittance by which 
he is recompensed may generally be plead- 
ed in his excuse. There is no temptation 
to use the out-patients of a hospital in 
this manner; and the expence of medi- 
cines is so trifling in proportion to that 
of the various incidents in house-keep- 
ing, that there need be very little ap- 
prehension of wanting a fund to extend 
this branch of charity to all who offer. 

|P_55
I have taken occasion in several in- 
stances to censure that spirit of penuri- 
ous œconomy which makes charity to 
appear so unlike itself, and often defeats 
its benevolent intentions. A reflection 
of this kind occurs to me, which I can- 
not more properly introduce than in this 
place. It is the custom in many hospi- 
tals to require a cautionary sum to be 
deposited on admission, with the design 
of securing the charity from any expence 
for the patient's funeral, in case of death. 
In the latest book of hospital rules which 
I have seen, that compiled for the Lei- 
cester Infirmary, it is calculated that the 
sum of twelve shillings is sufficient for 
this purpose, which is accordingly de- 
manded on the admission of each pa- 
tient. Now this sum, though apparent- 
ly so trifling, is such as would distress 
many poor families to raise; and this 
difficulty would, in a much greater de- 
gree than can readily be imagined, check 
the utility of hospitals to that class of 
persons who most stand in need of them. 
|P_56
The natural propensity that mankind in 
general has to pay the last duties to a 
relation, and the horror of such violati- 
ons of the dead as are always suspected 
in hospitals, will incite all but the most 
wretched to take this charge upon them- 
selves. Such a rule is therefore calcu- 
lated to guard against those only whose 
misery most strongly solicits relief; and 
in proportion as the fatality of a disease 
rendered medical assistance necessary, they 
would find a greater difficulty in procu- 
ring a friend to deposite the sum requi- 
red. In the Manchester Infirmary, where 
no such demand is made, the expences 
for funerals, which is calculated at thir- 
teen or fourteen shillings each, has for 
ten years past amounted to no more than 
eight shillings per ann. Had it been 
ten times greater it would have been a 
pitiful object to stand in competition 
with the rights of humanity. 

Having already treated of appropri- 
ating hospitals to some particular diseases, 
|P_57
I shall now pursue this subject with re- 
gard to another case or two. 

There are no instances in which hu- 
manity appears so amiable as in its relief 
of the distresses to which the weaker and 
softer sex are peculiarly liable. Nature 
has given them a particular claim to our 
tender protection, and it is a distinguish- 
ing mark of civilized manners that they 
add force to this natural principle: thus, 
nothing more strongly stamps the cha- 
racter of Gentleman than a quick sensibi- 
lity and delicate attention to this point. 

The state of pregnancy and parturiti- 
on most especially calls forth this regard 
to the sex, and no age or nation has ever 
been so barbarous as to be entirely in- 
sensible of it. It was therefore an ex- 
tremely natural and amiable turn of the 
charitable spirit so prevalent in this age, 
to institute hospitals for the reception of 
poor lying-in women; and the scheme 
has been accordingly honoured by the 
patronage of persons of the highest rank 
and character. I should on every ac- 
|P_58
count be unwilling to express any disap- 
probation of a species of charity appa- 
rently so very laudable, did not a real 
concern for the welfare of its objects 
overbalance other considerations. In- 
fluenced by this motive I know no fear 
of public disfavour, and shall with free- 
dom give my sentiments on the subject. 

The chief source of error in the treat- 
ment of puerperal women has been con- 
sidering the state of parturition too much 
a disease, rather than a regular operati- 
on of nature. From hence has proceed- 
ed that numerous train of arbitrary rules 
and customs relating to diet, confine- 
ment, and nursing, which are applied 
indiscriminately to all persons without 
regard to their particular state or consti- 
tution. It is a fact for which I refer to 
all intelligent practitioners in midwifery, 
that fatal consequences after delivery, 
happen much more frequently in that 
class of women who are enabled to com- 
ply with all the forms and precautions 
of the most delicate practice, than among 
|P_59
those who are in want of every conveni- 
ency, and many things usually thought 
necessary in their condition; and are 
forced from every indulgence of rest and 
retirement. Hence arises a convincing 
argument that there is something fun- 
damentally wrong in the common me- 
thod of treatment, and that the so much 
dreaded diseases of child-bed are rather 
artificial than natural. On this subject 
a great deal remains to be said, and it 
is with pleasure that I can refer to a 
treatise concerning puerperal fevers, and 
the management of women during this 
period, which will speedily be published 
by a gentleman fully qualified from ex- 
tensive experience and an enlarged free- 
dom of thinking, to make the most 
useful improvements in this part of 
practice. My intimacy with him al- 
lows me to borrow a few observations 
which are applicable to the present pur- 
pose. 

The state of parturition not being a 
disease, but a regular process of nature, 
|P_60
appears at first sight not to be a fit sub- 
ject for a hospital, which is properly 
a receptacle for the sick. Manual assist- 
ance in delivery is very rarely requisite; 
and when it is, may easily be had by the 
poorest person from the very numerous 
practitioners in this branch. Medicines 
and medical superintendence are also in 
common cases totally unnecessary. Nurs- 
ing, confinement, and unaccustomed di- 
et, are much oftener carried to a perni- 
cious excess, than deficient in a hurtful 
degree to the very lowest class of women. 
Nature rather chooses to be confined 
within mere necessaries, than burthened 
with superfluities, and though these may 
seem to contribute to the ease and com- 
fort of patients, they scarcely will to 
their safety. These remarks may serve 
to show that the puerperal state does not 
strongly require the assistance of hospi- 
tals; let us next examine whether these 
receptacles are not peculiarly improper 
and dangerous to women in this condi- 
tion. 

|P_61
Though, this state is not, as I before 
observed, of itself a disease, yet it is a vio- 
lent effort of the system, which renders 
it particularly liable to disarrangement 
from accidental causes. The puerperal 
fever is well known, and justly dreaded; 
and various are the causes to which it has 
been attributed. I think myself suffici- 
ently warranted by the authority before 
cited to consider it in general as the ar- 
tificial product of close vitiated air, too 
great warmth, and heating medicines 
and diet. As it is manifestly a fever of 
the putrid tendency, there can be no 
doubt that every thing disposing to pu- 
trefaction must first act as an occasional 
cause, and during its progress as an ag- 
gravating circumstance conducing to a 
fatal termination. Hospital pestilence in 
the slightest degree must therefore be 
peculiarly dangerous to lying-in wo- 
men; and I wish it did not appear too 
plainly from fact, that these institutions 
as they are at present conducted, do not 
answer the benevolent designs with which 
|P_62
they were erected, but rather give di- 
seases where there were none before, than 
prevent or cure them. Within these two 
or three years puerperal fevers have been 
uncommonly frequent and fatal in Lon- 
don, and have proved extremely distress- 
ing to practitioners, who have been as 
much at a loss for the general cause, as 
the remedy. Whatever this was, I have 
been assured from the best authority that 
they have proportionally raged much 
more in the lying-in hospitals, than in 
private practice; which is a strong argu- 
ment both of their putrescent nature, 
and of the tendency of these hospitals to 
produce them. [/1./]

|P_63
On making a calculation from the 
printed account in the year 1769, of the 
British lying-in hospital (which is con- 
ducted by persons eminent for their skill, 
and extremely attentive to every circum- 
stance that can influence the health of 
their patients) I find the average propor- 
tion of deaths from the first institution 
has been very nearly one in fifty one. 
This mortality can never be supposed the 
natural consequence of child bearing; 
and from many observations in my own 
practice, and that of others, I am certain 
that private practice is usually much 
more successful. The publishers of that 
account seem aware that the number of 
deaths is alarming, and in some measure 
endeavour to apologize for it, by saying, 
that most of those who died were afflict- 
ed with dangerous distempers at their 
admission; but I do not see that a larger 
allowance of such cases ought to be made 
for hospital patients than for an equal 
number of other poor; and it is to be 
|P_64
considered that the private practitioner 
who is never called to the poor but in 
cases of difficulty and danger, has a great 
disadvantage in this respect, which hos- 
pitals that receive patients indiscrimi- 
nately, are exempt from. 

I should be extremely unwilling to 
check the progress of any charitable in- 
stitution, which in the main appears 
calculated to promote the public good; 
I therefore beg it may be understood, 
that my remarks on lying-in hospitals 
are chiefly calculated for those now in 
being, not such as may hereafter be e- 
rected upon an improved plan. These 
I doubt not might be rendered a great 
comfort to the poor, without giving rise 
to any peculiar danger as hospitals; and 
if nature has in general so amply provi- 
ded for the safety of women in this con- 
dition, as to render hospitals unnecessary 
with regard to their usual purpose of 
curing a disease, still they may be very 
|P_65
useful and laudable institutions, consi- 
dered in the light of common charity. 

There is another benevolent design 
now carried on in London for the de- 
livery of poor women at their own hou- 
ses; in which the attendance of a skilful 
practitioner, intrusted with a power of 
distributing supplies as he finds requisite, 
must be productive of the kindest and 
happiest effects, and cannot be liable to 
a single objection, if faithfully and ju- 
diciously managed. Such a design merits 
the warmest encouragement, and I 
heartily wish it success. 

The last disease to which particular 
hospitals have been appropriated, that I 
shall mention, is Lunacy. 

The case of the unhappy objects af- 
flicted with this disorder is in a peculiar 
manner distressful, since besides their 
own sufferings, they are rendered a nu- 
sance and terror to others; and are not 
only themselves lost to society, but take 
up the whole time and attention of 
|P_66
others. By placing a number of them 
in a common receptacle, they may be 
taken care of by a much smaller number 
of attendants; at the same time they are 
removed from the public eye to which 
they were multiplied objects of alarm, 
and the mischiefs they are liable to do 
to themselves and others, are with much 
greater certainty prevented. It is a me- 
lancholy circumstance of this disease that 
it very seldom admits of a perfect cure; 
so that there is a probability of its re- 
quiring almost during life the care and 
superintendence of skilful persons. As 
its seat appears to be rather in the mind 
than the body, the attention of art must 
be chiefly directed to acquire a proper 
government over the temper and passi- 
ons, by means of contrary affections of 
the mind; a task which necessarily sup- 
poses constant observation and great ex- 
perience in these particular cases, to- 
gether with that firmness and total 
|P_67
absence of terror which can only be 
gained by habit. 

From all these considerations it has 
long been the custom to confine these 
patients in houses appropriated for their 
reception, and provided with persons 
experienced in their management. In- 
stitutions of this kind, undertaken by 
private persons for their own emolu- 
ment, are sufficiently numerous; but the 
poor in this kingdom have hitherto been 
but indifferently provided with public 
hospitals for the relief of Lunatics. Be- 
sides the two in London, there is not 
throughout the kingdom one that de- 
serves the name of a Lunatic hospital, 
except a lately erected one at Manches- 
ter. From an account of this last lately 
published, I shall quote some considera- 
tions which induced the promoters of 
charity in that place to set on foot so 
benevolent a design. 


[^1. 
(a)A remarkable fact of this kind appears in the 
account of an epidemic disease among the lying-in wo- 
men at Paris, in the year 1746, given in the Memoirs 
of the Academy of Sciences; where, after observing in 
general that the disease was more fatal to the women de- 
livered at the Hotel Dieu, than to those delivered at 
their own houses, it is remarked that out of twenty of 
these patients at the Hotel Dieu, scarcely one recovered. 
A fatality equal to that of the most malignant fever ever 
known! 
^]