
|P_
[}ADVERTISEMENT. }]
THE following little Piece was hastily drawn 
up in the Year 1769, when the Heads of the 
University announced their Intention of open-
ing the Radcliffe Infirmary with an Encœnia. 
They afterwards dropped this Design. But 
the Author having lately employed a leisure 
Hour in correcting and somewhat enlarging his 
Oration, now begs Leave to lay it before the 
Public. 

|P_
[}AN 
ORATION
ON THE UTILITY OF 
PUBLIC INFIRMARIES. }]
IF we closely examine the moral Qualities, which are 
denominated Virtues, and which Mankind have agreed 
to honour with Applause, we shall find that almost all 
regard Man, as he is a social Being, born to do good 
Offices to others. Upon this Principle it is found likewise, 
that our Approbation of virtuous Actions, is usually pro-
portioned to the Extent of their Influence and Utility. 
Thus a Legislator and a Patriot must ever be more admired 
than a Man of Prudence, Wisdom, and Integrity, exerted 
only in the contracted Sphere of private Life. 

But of all the social Qualities, Benevolence is the most 
immediately useful. It is indeed the Source of all the rest, 
|P_6
and naturally induces that great End and Cement of Society, 
mutual Beneficence. This Virtue too, like all others, 
becomes more illustrious in Proportion as its Consequences 
are more extended. 

To the strong and universal Prevalence of this amiable 
Quality it is owing, that the Magistrates and Legislators, 
in most Countries, have instituted some Provision to alle-
viate the Miseries of the Indigent and Helpless. This also, 
in the opulent, the liberal, and the ingenuous, has pro-
duced the undertaking of Works of the present Kind, of 
Hospitals, Infirmaries, and Receptacles for the Relief of 
various Distresses. 

Indeed the Goods of Fortune, the Means of Health and 
Felicity, which come to the Rich by Inheritance or Acquisi-
tion, are not their sole exclusive Property. The Poor have 
a Claim of Right for their Share. And the Relation that 
subsists between them and the Rich, certainly obliges the 
latter to assist them under Diseases, Casualties, and heavy 
Calamities. 

|P_7
It perhaps may not be unnecessary to remind the Sons of 
Ease and Affluence, that the laborious Poor not only form 
the Bulk of the Nation, but are likewise the Part on which 
the Strength, the Prosperity, and even the Existence of the
Whole depends. To them, as distributed through the 
humbler and more toilsome Offices of Society, we owe all 
the Necessaries of Life, and all its Conveniencies. The 
Labour of the Husbandman, the Manufacturer, and Me-
chanic, is confessedly essential to the Welfare of the 
Community; and yet a present Subsistence for themselves 
and their Families is their only Recompence. Every Sun 
rises to light them to their fatiguing Labour, which often 
ends not with the closing Day. They contentedly toil on 
from Youth to Age, and while they perhaps repose their 
weary Limbs in the Hut of Poverty, see their Sons entering 
upon the same Course of unnoticed Hardships and unre-
warded Industry. Surely then their Lot at the best is not to 
be envied. But what a deplorable Change must they feel, 
should they be attacked by any one of that Host of Diseases 
which make such Havock amongst the human Race? That 
Strength which supported them in their daily Toil, now 
|P_8
fails them; that Health of Body and Ease of Mind which 
lightened the Burthen of Poverty, are now no more. 
Sickness, by disabling them from earning a Subsistence, occasions Want, and Want excludes the Means of Reco-
very from Sickness. The two greatest of natural Evils 
united, double each other's Weight, and accumulate 
Distress. Thus, in more sultry Climes, the scorching Sun 
every where oppresses the fainting Traveller with his 
Beams, but should they be reflected from the Declivity of 
some barren Mountain, the Heat becomes intolerable, the 
very Air is tainted, and all Nature sickens. 

Without Health, without the Means of recovering 
it, or even of subsisting, whither then must these abandoned 
Sons of Affliction look for Relief? To the casual Munifi-
cence of private Benefactors? Uncertain, hopeless Prospect! 
To their own Friends or Kindred? Alas! their Pity is all 
they have to bestow. To their Children (since some of them 
no doubt are Fathers of Families)?—But here the Scene is 
truly calamitous. The little Mourners stand round the sick 
Bed of their Parent, and while they feel, deeply feel for his 
|P_9
Sufferings, cannot be insensible to their own. He turns 
an hopeless Eye towards them, perceives them in Want of 
that Bread which he had hitherto provided for them by his 
Labour, perceives them foretasting those Distresses which, 
at his Death, are to be their sad Inheritance. 

But waving these peculiar Circumstances of Misery, let 
us only reflect on that Variety of Distempers to which 
Poverty is exposed, without the Means of Relief. And in 
this View, what Objects of Compassion present themselves 
before us? Objects which must awe the Pride of Man, and 
awaken his Tenderness. 

Numbers of all diseas'd, all Maladies, 
Of ghastly Spasm, or racking Torture, Qualms 
Of heart-sick Agony, all feverous Kinds, 
Convulsions, Epilepsies, fierce Catarrhs, 
Intestine Stone and Ulcer, Colic Pangs, 
Demoniac Phrenzy, moping Melancholy, 
And Moon-struck Madness, pining Atrophy, 
Marasmus, and wide-wasting Pestilence, 
Dropsies and Asthmas, and joint-racking Rheums. 
|P_10
What a Group of human Miseries! All various, yet all 
languid, deformed, and loathsome. A benevolent Mind 
shudders at their very Names. But could you have the 
wretched Sufferers before your Sight, could you mark the 
dire tossing of restless Anguish, and listen to the deep 
Groans of Despair, surely every Eye would drop a sympa-
thizing Tear, and every gentle Heart would bleed. 

It may justly be a Matter of Wonder that our civil 
Police has made none, or at least no adequate Provision 
for the Poor when labouring under these Calamities. They 
are the Servants of the Public, and therefore entitled to its 
Protection. Besides, a stronger Tye subsists. They 
whose Distresses thus loudly implore our Compassion, what 
are they? Want, indeed, and Misfortunes have much dis-
guised them, and Misery hath worn them to the Bone. 
Yet they have the same Nature, and except a few accidental 
variable Distinctions, are the same with us. They have an 
Original alike divine, a Mind alike intelligent. To be a 
Man, and to be miserable, is a sufficient Claim on the 
generous and humane. Shall we then leave those to perish, 
whom it is the Interest of their Country, and the Duty of 
|P_11
all Mankind to assist and preserve? Medicine, and every 
other Relief in the Calamity of bodily Diseases, are natural 
Provisions for the present indigent and infirm State of the 
Sons of Men. In Spite, indeed, of all these Assistances, 
Sickness will still slay its Thousands, and thin the World b
y its destroying Sword. But nothing surely can more 
contradict the Order of Nature and the Will of Providence, 
than that Numbers should fall Victims, not so much to the 
Fury of Disease, as to the Neglect and Cruelty of those 
who ought to supply them with the Means of Recovery. 
Yet how many of our sick and disabled Poor must be left to 
this unhappy Lot, if no public Infirmaries are established 
to receive them? 

These, indeed, open their friendly Doors for such poor 
deserted Wretches, these bind up their Wounds, and exert 
all the Power of Medicine to heal their Diseases. 

Where no charitable Asylums of this Kind are erected, 
it is a common Resource with our sick Poor, though a fatal 
one, to apply to mercenary and pernicious Empirics, 
whose Ignorance either immediately deprives them of their 
|P_12
Lives, or injures their Healths beyond Reparation. But 
in these Houses of Charity they are sure to find able Physi-
cians, and every Thing provided for their Conveniency 
and Cure that Art can suggest or Munificence supply. 

Public Infirmaries are not only the best, but the only 
Means by which the necessitous can procure the several 
Kinds of Assistance which their various bodily Diseases 
require. In large commercial Towns, what other Provision 
can be made against those Casualties which so frequently 
happen to the poor labouring Part of the Inhabitants, or 
to the still more unfortunate Stranger? 

Here give me leave to add to these general Advan-
tages, one peculiar to this Place. A Fashion has of late 
prevailed, to send such of our Youth as are designed for the 
Profession of Physic, to foreign Academies, which, though 
far inferior to our own in every other Respect, have been 
thought superior in this. The Reason of a Custom so 
injurious to the Interest of our Country, and the Honour of 
our Seats of Learning, is far from being satisfactory; how-
ever, by the present Institution, the very Shadow of it is 
|P_13
removed. Important as every public Infirmary must be, 
the Importance of this is still more extensive. It affords 
not only the best Assistance to the sick and disabled, but 
likewise the best Opportunities of Observation and Improve-
ment to young Students in the medical Science, on whose 
future Skill so much depends. It has the happy, the sin-
gular Excellence of at once relieving the Misery of Indivi-
duals, and making that Misery beneficial to the Community. 
We now, at length, may justly boast that ours is the most 
compleat Seminary in Europe for so important a Study, 
whether we regard Botany, Anatomy, the Theory or 
Practice of Medicine. To no Profession is Learning more 
necessary: and here Students can best consult the rich 
Treasures of Antiquity, and the Parents of the healing 
Art: here they may add every liberal Accomplishment, and 
acquire that general and extensive Knowledge for which 
the English Physicians are deservedly distinguished. When 
we consider the general and local Advantages of the Infir-
mary here erected, what public Honours and Benefits may 
we not date from this auspicious Æra? May we not foretell, 
that as our Alma Mater already reckons in the list of her 
|P_14
Sons, the greatest Names in Medicine, she will now add to 
the glorious Catalogue, and see in her Train future 
Linacres, Willis's, Radcliffes, and Friends, who shall emulate 
the Science and Reputation of those who have gone before 
them? 

But enough perhaps has been said to prove how much 
these Institutions concern the public Interest and Honour: 
Indeed one would think it impossible that any Persons 
should object to, or refuse supporting these excellent Under-
takings, which are so beneficial in all their Views: one 
would think it, I say, impossible. But if any such should 
be, with such we will not contend. Let Avarice refuse its 
Assistance, and, if possible, its Applause. 

Though publick Infirmaries have political Advantages 
so undeniable and self-evident, yet we may safely affirm 
that they stand on a firmer Basis, that they are supported 
by Arguments stronger than the Deductions of Reason; 
Arguments which every generous Breast must feel. When 
we reflect on the Malignity of the Diseases, the Weight 
|P_15
of the complicated Afflictions which they are intended to 
relieve, we are, we cannot but be interested and disposed 
to compassionate the Sufferers, partly from the Conscious-
ness of being liable to the same Evils, and partly from 
thy nobler Impulses, O Benevolence! Here the truly 
humane Mind, like a well-tuned Instrument of Musick, 
obeys the sudden Touches of Pity, and the sweet Harmony 
of its social Affections, wholly passive in the Sympathy 
of its own Goodness. While the Rich and Powerful 
indulge the tender Sensations of Humanity, and promote 
such well-plann'd Works of Beneficence as the present 
Institution, they at once communicate Happiness to 
others, and inexpressibly augment their own. They feel, 
that they are obeying the Dictates of purest Nature, and 
wisest Reason; that they are fulfilling the Ends of So-
ciety, and the Will of its great Author, whose darling 
Attribute is Mercy, whose very Essence is Love. Most 
wisely did he distribute Men into these subordinate Ranks, 
and implant these generous Principles. 

—"He form'd a Whole, the Whole to bless, 
On mutual Wants built mutual Happiness." 
|P_16
Whatever may be the Vices of the present Age, the 
most censorious Cynick must allow that it has its Share 
of that Philanthropy and Tenderness which we would 
here recommend. History informs us that it was the 
barbarous Policy of some ancient States to expose Infants 
if infirm, to abandon diseased Persons, and even to destroy 
those who were rendered useless to the Community by 
Age and Decrepitude. But polished Times and Nations 
are Strangers to such unfeeling Sentiments. A Disposition 
to Compassion and to Offices of Kindness will ever gain 
Ground in Proportion to Civilization, and improved Ele-
gance of Manners. Perhaps this Virtue expands itself 
most, when the Powers of the Mind are softened by 
Luxury, and all other Virtues are in the Wane. It is 
certain that the earliest Societies had less of it; Warriors 
and Heroes were their greatest Characters. 

However this may be, I need not hesitate to congra-
tulate my Country, since a bountiful and beneficent 
Spirit is, and has ever been its national Characteristick. 
For this, I may appeal even to the ruder Ages of Ignorance 
|P_17
and Superstition, to those hospitable and intentionally 
Religious, to those venerable and princely Foundations, 
over whose general undistinguished Ruins, Humanity and 
Piety must for ever mourn. Through the mistaken Zeal 
of our Ancestors, these abounded more in our Isle than 
in any other Christian Country. And if at their Disso-
lution, these noble Edifices and Endowments had been 
applied to the Uses which the publick Interest required; 
Poverty, Sickness, and decrepit Age had never wanted an 
Asylum, nor had the sacred Will of the Dead been so 
flagrantly violated, or their Ashes so impiously disturbed. 
Some of them it must be owned in the Capital, by the 
Care and Earnestness of an excellent Prelate, were saved 
from the sacrilegious Talons of Court-Harpies, and con-
secrated to the Relief of Misery and Disease. But so small 
was the Number, that it seemed only to point out how 
much might and ought to have been done, had the least 
Degree of publick Spirit, Justice, or Honour influenced 
those infamous Plunderers. Here then was lost the grand 
Opportunity of establishing Receptacles for Distress in 
every Part of the Kingdom; and with equal Indignation 
|P_18
and Sorrow must we look back on this deep, this indelible 
Stain of the Annals of our Reformation. 

But now indeed we see fairer and brighter Prospects 
around us. A Spirit of Charity has diffused itself amongst 
all Ranks of People, amongst our Merchants, our Law-
givers, and Nobles. The Liberality of our Forefathers 
is at least equalled, and their Wisdom in choosing Objects 
of that Liberality much surpassed. In our Metropolis, 
almost every Species of Distress has been considered, 
pitied, and relieved. 

The deserted Infant, whose Misfortunes begin with its 
Existence, meets that Redress for which it cannot petition. 

The unhappy Prostitute, though she has survived Inno-
cence, finds she has not survived Compassion, she sees an 
hospitable Retreat open for her Misery and Shame, sees a 
friendly Hand reached out to recover her stumbling Feet 
to the Paths of Virtue and Peace. 

|P_19
I might lead your Attention to that Mansion within 
whose Walls we behold the noble Fabrick of the Human 
Mind in its melancholy Ruins.—But this is a Sight of 
all others, the most humiliating and painful. For Persons 
in a State so consummately calamitous, the bleeding Pity 
of their Fellow-Citizens has made a munificent Provision; 
—like the wounded Tree of Arabia, it weeps healing 
Balm. 

Worthy the Kings of a martial and generous People 
are those royal Foundations, which receive the maimed 
Veteran, who has fought the Battles of his Country. 
There after all his Toils and Dangers he sits down to 
recite in the honest Loquacity of Age his hardy Deeds, 
and count his glorious Scars.—Brave Man! Peaceful shall 
be the Evening of a Life exposed in the Service of Britain;
—thy hoary Head is covered with well-earned Laurels! 

I need not mention the various Infirmaries and Hos-
pitals for the Sick. Enough has already been said on the 
Excellence of these Houses of Mercy; and this is a Species 
|P_20
of patriotick Charity which has not been confined to our 
chief City. In other Parts of the Kingdom, Receptacles 
have been established for those who groan under the com-
plicated Wretchedness of Poverty and Disease. And every 
one of this illustrious Audience, every one (I doubt it not) 
will join me in wishing that the Streams of Beneficence 
may still flow in so useful a Channel, and that each of 
our provincial Towns may be blest with such an Institution 
as that which Oxford at length enjoys. 

Whilst the benevolent Speculatist, the sincere Lover 
of his Country contemplates all these Establishments as 
the Monuments of national Virtue, and the Sources of 
innumerable Advantages to the State; the Lover of the 
Arts will consider them in an additional Point of View, 
will regard the Structures which are destined to the Pur-
poses of public Munificence as exhibiting to foreign 
Nations and to Posterity, the most striking Proofs of the 
Taste and Magnificence of his Countrymen and Contem-
poraries. The Houses of private Citizens (however 
opulent) are seldom equal in the Beauty of their Structure 
|P_21
to Edifices of publick Use and Contrivance. Where the 
Purposes of private and domestick Utility are only to be answered, the Genius of the Artist is necessarily circum-
scribed: He may indeed in these give Proofs of the 
Elegance of his Taste, and the Correctness of his Ideas; 
but from the Grand and Magnificent he is unavoidably 
precluded. But public Edifices of every Kind, have most 
of all, contributed to display the Arts of Design in their 
full Lustre, in every Age and Country where those Arts 
have been cultivated. To them we owe the Memory 
both of laudable Actions and of illustrious Artists; and 
by them the flourishing Nations of Antiquity have trans-
mitted to us the most durable Records of their former 
Splendor and Greatness. To them the first, and most 
celebrated Cities of the World at this Day owe their chief 
Ornament. 

The Number of magnificent Churches, Colleges, and 
other publick Buildings throughout the Christian Boun-
daries, and especially in Italy, have afforded an ample Field 
to the Genius of the Architect, the Statuary, and the 
|P_22
Painter. In one City only, the immense Fabrick of St. 
Peter's, the Church of St. John Lateran, the Vatican
Library, the Hospital of the Holy Ghost, and almost 
innumerable other Edifices of public Use, will always 
present Rome, though fallen from her ancient Glories, 
as highly deserving the Attention of the curious Traveller, 
and will immortalize the Names as well of those Artists 
who contributed their Talents to their Erection and Embel-
lishment, as of the Popes their Patrons. 

InSpain, in France, in our own Country, and in every 
Nation where the Arts have fixed their Residence, their 
Influence is most conspicuous in the Beauty and Gran-
deur of publick Structures. 

No City or People can be more indebted for Decora-
tions of this Kind to the Munificence of a private Citizen, 
than we are to that admirable Person, from whose exten-
sive Benefactions to this Seminary hath arisen the Design 
and Establishment of an Infirmary in this Place. It would 
therefore be unjust to close these Reflections without some 
Tribute to his Memory. 

|P_23
Superior to the common Views of a lucrative Profession, 
he esteemed Wealth only valuable, as it enabled him to 
extend his good Offices to Mankind. Hence the vast 
Fortune which he acquired by his singular Talents in the 
important Science of Physick, was while he lived, a Fund 
of Charity and Beneficence; and the noble Bequests made 
by him at his Death to this Place of his Education, will 
continue the good Effects of his Liberality and his Grati-
tude to the remotest Times. 

He was a Man undoubtedly born for the Benefit and 
Ornament of his Country. His Virtues were of that 
Kind whose Lustre will appear more amiable to the 
undazzled Eye of Wisdom than the Trophies of Con-
querors, and the splendid Qualities of those whom the 
ill-judging Multitude calls Great. Amongst the military 
Honours of ancient Rome, the only one perhaps, with 
which a benevolent Man would wish to intwine his Brow, 
is the Civic Crown. And if he who preserved the Life 
of a single Citizen deserved to be so distinguished, what 
Crowns must we weave for Radcliffe?—Such was 
|P_24
the Wisdom which guided his beneficent Soul, such was 
the Propriety which regulated the Disposition of his Wealth, 
that though dead he still remedies the Distresses and Dis-
eases of Men, and claims from them a daily-increasing 
Tribute of grateful Applause. The helpless Objects, who 
are relieved from Misery, or rescued from Death by his 
Bounty, shall hang around his Monument, the useless 
Crutch, and the votive Tablet.—Even those on whom 
Providence has bestowed Affluence, though they are not 
affected by his Munificence, may be animated by his 
Example. 

But it is unnecessary to expatiate on Merit so transcen-
dent, and I will not obscure his Praises by my feeble 
Attempts to display them. As the Benefits resulting 
from his well-directed and boundless Liberality, will 
assuredly extend to future Ages, we may safely trust his 
Fame to Posterity. 

FINIS. 
