

[^Sample 1: book - ^]

|P_1
[}AN 
HISTORICAL ACCOUNT 
OF THE 
Origin, Progress, and Present State 
OF 
BETHLEM HOSPITAL. }][^A long horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
THOSE ancient foundations, which have been established 
in the city of London by the munificence of our monarchs, 
for the relief and maintenance of the diseased poor, have always 
been considered as objects worthy of public support. The care of indi- 
gent lunatics is attended with peculiar difficulties, and, as much im- 
mediate evil must arise from the neglect of them, the community cannot 
but be nearly interested in the welfare and prosperity of those places 
which are provided for their reception. It may not therefore be 
thought improper to give some account of the origin, progress, and 
present state of Bethlem Hospital. 

|P_2
The Hospital of Bethlem owes it's name and original esta- 
blishment to the piety of a citizen of London. In the year 
1247, in the 39th of Henry the third, Simon Fitz Mary, who had 
been sheriff, influenced by the prevailing superstition of the age, was 
desirous to found a religious house. Accordingly, he appropriated by 
a deed of gift, which is still extant, all his lands in the parish of 
St. Botolph without Bishopsgate, being the spot now known by 
the name of Old Bethlem, to the foundation of a priory. The 
prior, canons, brethren and sisters, for whose maintenance he pro- 
vided, were distinguished by a star upon their mantles, and were es- 
pecially directed to receive and entertain the Bishop of St. Mary 
of Bethlehem, and the canons, brothers, and messengers of that 
their mother church, as often as they might come to England. Such 
was the original design of this foundation, a design as far short of 
the uses to which it has been since converted, as the contracted views 
of monkish hospitality are exceeded by the more enlarged spirit of 
protestant benevolence. 

We hear but little more of this house for the space of two hun- 
dred years. When the vast fabric of papal superstition in England 
began to totter, and the votaries of Rome were expelled from their 
ancient retirements, it was seized by Henry the eighth, who, in 
the year 1547, granted the hospital of Bethlem, with all it's revenues, 
to the mayor, commonalty, and citizens of London, from which time 
it became an hospital for the cure of lunatics. 

|P_3
It is most probable that the city of London had felt great in- 
convenience from the want of a proper receptacle for those unhappy 
objects, who were afflicted by the most deplorable malady incident 
to the human frame. The retired situation of the hospital of Bethlem, 
and it's contiguity to the city pointed it out as a fit place for the 
desired purpose. Accordingly, we find from authentic documents, 
that, in the year 1523, Stephen Gennings, merchant-taylor, gave forty 
pounds by will towards the purchase of this hospital, and, that the 
mayor and commonalty had taken some steps to procure it, a very 
short time before they derived their right to it from royal munifi- 
cence. What were the revenues which it then enjoyed does not now 
appear: it is certain, they were inadequate to the necessities which 
they were intended to remedy; for, five years after the royal grant 
had passed, letters patent were issued to John Whitehead, proctor 
to the hospital of Bethlem, to solicit donations within the counties of 
Lincoln and Cambridge, the city of London, and the isle of Ely. 

In the infant state of this charity, no other provision was made 
for the unfortunate patient, besides confinement and medical relief. 
His friends, if they had ability, or the parish, of which the wretched 
lunatic was an inhabitant, were obliged to contribute to his support. 
It remained for the judicious benevolence of succeeding times to 
improve the good work, and to supply that comfortable subsistence, 
and tender care, which, through the blessing of the divine providence, 
have restored so many distracted objects to their families, and to society. 

|P_4
There is no account of donations received before the year 1632. 
They were not, for some time, considerable, but the manifest utility of 
the institution, and perhaps the detriment which the public suffered, soon 
induced them to attend to the security of those members, who, 
through the visitation of God, were become dangerous to the commu- 
nity. Accordingly, the growing charity was cherished not only by ci- 
tizens, upon whose notice it more immediately pressed, but by others 
who had judgment to select proper objects of their attention, and 
ability to assist them. And here the mind, which rejoices to indulge 
the pleasing sensations of benevolence, cannot but feel the warmest 
glow, when it perceives how much the hospital of Bethlem has been 
indebted to secret, unknown benefactors. Private charity may not 
perhaps excite and animate others so much as public benefactions, 
but it affords the strongest recommendation of the institution which it 
favors. He who conceals his good deeds cannot possibly be influ- 
enced by any other than the purest motives: it is the merits of 
the objects only that he regards; these he weighs well before he 
gives his alms, and he is seldom mistaken in their application. 

About the year 1644, it was under consideration to enlarge the 
old hospital; but the situation was too close and confined to 
allow of its being rendered a commodious asylum for the numerous 
distracted persons of both sexes that claimed it's protection, and pro- 
bably the dreadful commotions of that period checked the idea of 
improvement. When peace and legal government were restored, and 
England had rest from the violence with which it had been con- 
vulsed, the concerns of civil society were again attended to, and it 
became a matter of serious deliberation to build a new hospital. 
|P_5
In April 1675 this great work was begun. The lord-mayor, alder- 
men, and common-council of the city of London, allotted to the 
governors a large piece of ground near London-Wall, on the south 
side of the lower quarter of Moorfields, where the hospital of Bethlem 
now stands. The expedition, with which this stately fabric was com- 
pleted, challenges our admiration. For, from an inscription over the 
arch facing the entrance into the hospital, it appears that it was 
finished in July, in the following year. So active was the zeal that 
quickened the growth of this noble structure! The generosity of the 
contributors must have been equal to their attention, for the charge 
of the building amounted to no less a sum than £17,000. And 
never, it may be truly asserted, were expence and trouble better be- 
stowed: the hospital of Bethlem stands an illustrious monument of 
British charity; and, whether we consider the becoming magnifi- 
cence of the building, the commodious arrangement of the interior 
apartments, or the effectual relief which it reaches out to the poor 
objects whom it shelters, we may safely pronounce, that it is not to 
be parallelled in the whole world. [/1./]

|P_6
In the close limits within which the old hospital was confined, it 
was impracticable to reserve room for those forlorn beings, of whose 
return to the comforts of a sound mind there were no hopes. The 
increasing multitude of curable objects justly demanded admittance; 
nor did it seem reasonable that they should be excluded from the 
prospect of enjoying a blessing which the former could not attain. 
When the new house was erected, it was hoped that some provi- 
sion might be made for such as were deemed incurable, and at the 
same time dangerous to the public. But the great influx of insane 
persons, from all parts of the kingdom, into the hospital, frustrated 
these expectations, and gave reason to suppose, that few, if any, of 
its numerous apartments, would, at any, time be vacant. It was 
therefore found necessary to enlarge the building; a particular sub- 
scription was set on foot for the purpose, and, in the year 1734, two 
wings were added to the hospital. This addition of room has enabled 
the governors, in some degree, to answer the wishes of the public; 
and there are now maintained one hundred incurable patients, 
fifty of each sex, who enjoy every advantage which their deplora- 
ble state can admit. The number of patients in the house, who are 
supposed capable of being relieved, commonly amounts to about one 
hundred and seventy, and of these, it has been found upon an 
average, that nearly two out of three are restored to their understanding. 
To such a degree of perfection have the liberal benefactions of the well- 
disposed (for it is by benefactions that the deficient revenues of this 
hospital have been, and must be supplied) advanced this noble insti- 
tution! And such is the solid and substantial good, which it derives 
to individuals and to the community! 

|P_7
But while the benevolent heart feels a sensible joy in reflecting 
upon the load of human wretchedness that is lightened by the ac- 
commodations of this friendly mansion, it cannot but express a wish, 
that the benefits of the hospital might be rendered more extensive. 
It is an object much to be desired, that the many distracted persons, 
whose disorder no medicine can reach, might continue to find pro- 
tection within these walls, and not be returned to their friends, a 
burthen, very often too heavy for them to bear. The number of 
incurables, which the hospital can at present contain, is small, when 
compared with those who wait their turn of admission. Perhaps it 
would not be supposed that there are generally more than two 
hundred upon what is called the incurable list; [/2./] and, as instances 
of longevity are frequent in insane persons, it commonly happens 
that the expectants are obliged to wait six or seven years, after 
their dismission from the hospital, before they can be again received. 
During this long interval, they must be supported either by their 
respective friends, or parishes. The expence of maintaining and pro- 
perly securing them far exceeds the allowance that is usually made 
for paupers; and in middling life, where the feelings of a worthy son 
or husband revolt at the idea of a near relation becoming an object 
of parochial alms, the distress and difficulties of the lunatic's unhappy 
friends must be greatly aggravated. Besides, for want of due care 
|P_8
and security, accidents, far too shocking to be related, have some- 
times happened. [/3./]

These manifest evils, that arise from the want of a proper pro- 
vision for so great a number of incurable patients, have induced many 
benevolent persons to wish, that, the hospital might be enlarged. 
Indeed, many have appropriated their benefactions solely to the 
incurables; and it is hoped that others will forward and complete 
their good intentions. True policy must join with humanity in the 
wish, that, this may not any longer be, what at present it is, almost 
the only branch of charity in this great city that wants a sufficient 
establishment. Besides, there seems a peculiar degree of generosity 
in assisting those who must burthen, but can never benefit society, 
and who, so far from recompensing, cannot even feel the least gra- 
titude to their benefactors. [/4./]

|P_9
The conduct and management of this hospital is more im- 
mediately intrusted to a committee of forty-two governors, seven 
of whom, together with the treasurer, physician, and other officers, 
attend every Saturday, in monthly rotation, for the admission of pati- 
ents, and for the regulation of such other matters, as may concern 
the ease, welfare, and convenience, of so large a family. And, as 
the committee is open to every governor, it receives all the benefit 
which it can derive from the prudence and information of persons 
of different habits of life, respectable citizens who are engaged in, 
or have retired from business, gentlemen of the medical profession, 
and others of independent fortune, whose leisure or benevolence may 
lead them to attend. 

As soon as the lunatic is judged a fit object for this charity, he 
is delivered to the steward, who, under the direction of the physician, 
assigns him such a degree of care and confinement as his case may 
require. The wards are spacious and airy, [/5./] and the convenience of 
the apartments allotted to each unhappy individual, together with the 
order, decency, and cleanliness that are conspicuous through the whole 
house, cannot but strike the curious and charitable visitant: and, though 
the various spectacles of wretchedness, which there present themselves, 
must agitate the mind that feels for the woes of humanity, the pain, 
which they occasion, will rarely fail of being mitigated by the view 
of that relief which is administered to the wretched. 

|P_10
It is scarce necessary to assert, that the unhappy patients enjoy 
the ablest medical assistance administered with the greatest humanity. [/6./]
The provisions of the hospital, the vegetables, milk, beer, &c. are all 
excellent in their kind: [/7./] they are carefully inspected by the steward, [/8./]
who is resident, and frequently viewed by gentlemen of the committee. 

But perhaps an explanation of the regular plan of diet, established 
in this numerous houshold, may not prove unacceptable to those who 
deem no particulars trivial or uninteresting, that tend to alleviate human 
distress. The constant breakfast allotted the patients throughout the 
year, is water-gruel, with bread, butter and salt. They have meat 
for dinner three days in a week. Beef is the Sunday's fare; mut- 
ton is their Tuesday's dinner, and they have veal on Thursdays, 
but the last only from Lady-day to Michaelmas; during the win- 
ter months, mutton or pork is substituted in it's place. They have 
also a sufficient quantity of broth; and that every indulgence, which 
œconomy permits, may be given to the poor patients, on the meat 
days one gallery [/9./] is always gratified with roast meat. The quan- 
tity of solid meat, besides vegetables and a pint of small beer, 
allowed each individual, is eight ounces. On the days in which they 
have no meat, and which are called banyan days, they have milk- 
|P_11
pottage, or rice-milk, with bread and cheese. Their constant sup- 
per is bread and cheese, with a pint of small beer; and twelve out 
of each gallery, in their turn, have butter if they prefer it. 

The cells are visited early every morning by the servants of the 
house: these make their report to the apothecary, [/10./] who goes round 
about eight o'clock to inspect them himself, and to give such orders 
and directions as may be necessary. The physician visits the hospi- 
tal three days in a week. There are certain days fixed for the proper 
medical operations; and the cold, or hot bath is used in those cases 
where it is judged to be salutary. Every patient is indulged with 
that degree of liberty which is found consistent with his own, and 
the general safety. In the winter there are certain rooms with com- 
fortable fires, [/11./] where those, who are in a convalescent state, meet 
and associate; and in the summer, they walk in the large adjoining 
court-yards, and sometimes amuse themselves with such diversions as 
are deemed not improper to quiet their spirits, and compose the agi- 
tation of their minds. The hospital used formerly to derive a revenue, 
of at least £400 a year, from the indiscriminate admission of visitants, 
whom, very often, an idle and wanton curiosity drew to these regi- 
ons of distress. But this liberty, though beneficial to the funds of the 
charity, was thought to counteract it's grand design, as it tended to 
disturb the tranquillity of the patients. It was therefore judged pro- 
per, in the year 1770, no longer to expose the house to public view; 
and now, it is scarce ever open to strangers, unless they are intro- 
|P_12
duced by a particular order. The friends of the poor objects have 
a limited access to them. At the admission of a patient, a ticket is 
delivered, which authorizes the bearer of it to come to the hospital, 
on Mondays and Wednesdays, between the hours of ten and twelve. 
And here, it may not be amiss to contradict a most injurious notion, 
that has been adopted, chiefly indeed by that class of people, who 
are most prone to form prejudices against eleemosynary institutions, 
which is, that the patients in Bethlem hospital are beaten, and in other re- 
spects ill treated, in order to compel them to submit to the necessary ope- 
rations. This idea is absolutely erroneous. No servant is allowed so 
wanton an abuse of the authority that is given him; and it is strictly en- 
joined, that, a patient shall never be struck, except in cases of self-de- 
fence. Indeed it is notorious, that, the members of this family are ma- 
naged with that lenity which their situation claims. If the known hu- 
manity and attention of the officers of the house were not itself a suffici- 
ent security for their being well treated, the frequent inspection which 
the hospital undergoes from a large proportion of the governors, who, 
at different times, serve upon the Bethlem committee, would at once 
invalidate the suspicion that has been mentioned. In short, such is the 
comfortable subsistence, kind treatment, and able medical aid, which 
the patients here meet with, that many, who are intimately acquainted 
with the conduct of the house, have declared, that if ever God should 
be pleased to visit them with insanity, Bethlem hospital is the place, 
into which they would wish to be admitted. [/12./]

|P_13
The admission of patients into Bethlem hospital is attend- 
ed with very little difficulty. It is first necessary to consider, whether 
the case of the supposed lunatic includes any of those circumstances 
which the prudence of the hospital regards as objections to admissi- 
on. These are few in number; and the wisdom and propriety of 
them will be easily allowed. Mopes, persons afflicted with the palsy, 
or subject to convulsive or epileptic fits, and such as are become 
weak through age, or long illness, are excluded. Objects of this descrip- 
tion, it is presumed, may be sufficiently protected and secured by their 
friends, or in a parish workhouse. It is peculiarly deserving notice 
that no person is considered as disqualified for admission here, who 
may have been discharged uncured from any other lunatic hospital. 
When the friends of a lunatic are satisfied that he is a proper object 
of the charity, and the petition and certificates of the patient's legal 
parish settlement are prepared, [/13./] it then becomes necessary to procure 
a governor's recommendation. The hospital also requires, that, upon 
admission, two house-keepers residing in or near London, shall enter 
into a bond to take the patient away when discharged by the com- 
mittee, and pay the expence of clothes, and of burial in case of 
death. If the lunatic is sent by a parish, or any other public body, 
the sum of three pounds four shillings is paid for bedding, but if he 
is placed there by friends, the hospital, anxious to lighten their 
burthen, reduces the sum to two pounds five shillings and six- 
|P_14
pence. [/14./] It is expected that the patient should be supplied with 
clothing; in failure of such supply, the hospital provides proper gar- 
ments at the lowest rate, and the bondsmen repay the expence. [/15./]

There is no particular time limited for the continuance of a pa- 
tient in the hospital, who is under cure. It is generally seen in a 
twelvemonth, whether the case will admit relief; and sometimes in 
a few months health and reason are restored. Nor does the care of 
the governors cease when the recovered lunatic is dismissed from the 
hospital. At the time of discharge, he is interrogated as to the treat- 
ment which he has received, and, if he has had cause of complaint, 
required to declare it. He is encouraged to apply occasionally to the 
medical officer, who gives him such advice and medicines as are 
proper to prevent a relapse, and, if it should appear that his circum- 
stances are particularly distressing, the treasurer and physician possess 
a discretionary power to relieve him with a small sum of money at 
his departure. 

|P_15
Happy is it for the individual, for his friends, and for society, 
when thus the divine blessing gives efficacy to the means used for 
his restoration! The wishes of the benevolent are gratified, and the 
success of the institution is so far complete! How then must we la- 
ment the case of the incurable lunatic, dismissed from the protection 
to which he had been accustomed, and thrown upon his distressed un- 
fortunate friends! [/16./] The hopes indeed of his return to his asylum are 
not entirely cut off, but the prospect of it is too remote to alleviate, 
in any degree, present suffering. A long period must elapse be- 
fore he can be re-admitted. In the mean time the frantic maniac, and 
the desponding lunatic must be secured from doing violence to them- 
selves, and others. The lowest annual expence, in those houses where 
parish objects are maintained, exceeds twenty pounds: where the for- 
lorn being is supported by his friends, the expenditure scarce ever 
falls short of thirty. The feeling and considerate mind, that can judge 
of the œconomy which is requisite in humble life, and knows how to 
estimate its wants and necessities, will easily calculate the weight and 
effect of so heavy an expence;—will imagine how severe a struggle 
it must often occasion between necessity and pity, between natural 
affection and the pride of honest industry, which is sometimes reduced, 
by exertions too great for its ability, to accept itself that relief, which 
it had blushed to ask for the dearest relatives. 

How glorious then would be the work! how comprehensive the 
charity, that should contribute to increase the establishment for incu- 
|P_16
rable lunatics! The good, that would arise from the improvement of 
so excellent an institution, is certain and undoubted, and from that 
active spirit of humanity, and rational benevolence which peculiarly 
adorns the British name, we may hope, that, this great work will not 
be left defective and incomplete. The government of the royal hos- 
pitals, as lately established by parliament, affords ample security to the 
charitable benefactor, that his good intentions will receive their accom- 
plishment. [/17./] The wealthy and munificent city of London, associ- 
ated with the guardians of each charity, cherishes in her bosom, and 
fosters with her care those endowments, which the liberality of Henry, 
and the piety of Edward committed to her administration.— 
That this happy union will operate to the relief of the distressed 
poor, there can be little doubt. The friends of the hospital of Beth- 
lem form the most sanguine expectations, that their ability to alleviate 
the greatest of all human calamities will be enlarged and extended; 
they hope to effect the purposes they have in view, and entertain full 
confidence, that, the generous assistance of the opulent and the good, 
will enable them, in an eminent degree, to lessen the evils of 
humanity. 

FINIS. 


[^1. 
* The design of the building was taken from the Chateau de Tuilleries, in Versailles. Louis 
XIV. it is said, was so much offended that his palace should be made a model for an hospital, 
that, in revenge, he ordered a plan of St. James's to be taken for offices of a very inferior 
nature. The figures of the two lunatics over the gates of the hospital, an engraving of which is pre- 
fixed to this account, were the work of Cibber, the father of the comedian. My father 
Caius Gabriel Cibber was a native of Holstein, who came into England, some time before 
the restoration of king Charles II. to follow his profession, which was that of a statuary. The 
basso relievo on the pedestal of the great column in the city, and the two figures of the 
lunatics, the Raving, and the Melancholy, over the gates of Bethlem hospital, are no ill 
monuments of his fame as an artist. Cibber's Apology for his own Life. 

There is a tradition that the person represented by the figure of the melancholy lunatic, was 
porter to Oliver Cromwell. 
^]
[^2. 
* When a patient, after sufficient trial, is judged incurable, he is dismissed from the hos- 
pital, and if he is pronounced dangerous either to himself or others, his name is entered into 
a book, that he may be received in turn among the incurables maintained in the house, 
whenever a vacancy shall happen. 
^]
[^3. 
* There are now in Bethlem hospital two patients who have committed deeds of the most 
horrid kind. 
^]
[^4. 
† It may not be improper here to rectify a mistaken notion that has gone forth into the 
world. It has been presumed by many, that the hospitals of Bethlem, and St. Luke are 
connected: the latter, it has been thought, is appointed for the reception of incurables discharged 
by the former; and so prevalent has been this opinion, that the steward of Bethlem hospital has 
often received letters from persons of education and credit, who were interested for patients 
discharged incurable, desiring to know, when they would be sent to St. Luke's. How such an idea 
could have obtained, except from the nearness of their situation to each other, it is not easy to 
say; certain it is, that it has not the least foundation in truth. Both hospitals are engaged in the 
same good work, have the same object in view, the restoration of reason to the distracted; and 
both admit a limited number of incurables; but the governors, officers, and funds of 
each charity are totally separate and distinct. 
^]
[^5. 
* The length of each ward or gallery is 321 feet, the width 16 feet 2 inches, and the heigth 
13 feet. There are 275 cells, each of which measures 12 feet 6 inches by 8 feet. 
^]
[^6. 
* The physician to the hospital is Dr. Monro, and the surgeon, Mr. Richard Crowther. 
^]
[^7. 
† The committee have lately allowed vegetables and a better sort of small beer. This libera- 
lity has produced the most salutary effects upon the general health of the patients, as the medical 
officers have observed, that the patients have not been since so much afflicted with scurvy, or 
fluxes as formerly. 
^]
[^8. 
‡ Mr. Henry White. 
^]
[^9. 
§ The house is divided into five. 
^]
[^10. 
* Mr. John Gozna: he has apartments in the hospital, and is constantly resident. 
^]
[^11. 
† These to prevent mischief, are defended by large guard-irons. 
^]
[^12. 
* It is worthy of remark, that the patients themselves are often known to prefer Bethlem to 
private mad-houses. 
^]
[^13. 
* The forms of these are readily obtained by an application at Bethlem, or at the clerk's 
office in Bridewell hospital; and a governor's recommendation is never refused to the friends of 
any proper object. 
^]
[^14. 
* When an incurable patient is finally settled in the house, the sum of half a crown per week 
is paid to the hospital by his friends, or the parish to which he belongs. 
^]
[^15. 
† BETHLEM HOSPITAL. Ordered, That the apparel wanting for the patients, may be pro- 
vided by their friends; but, if not done, the steward shall furnish what the weekly committee 
shall order, at the following prices: 

[}For Men. }]A coat £0 16 6 A waistcoat 0 6 4 A pair of breeches 0 9 4 A shirt 0 3 11 A pair of shoes 0 4 6 A pair of stockings 0 2 3 A cap 0 1 0 A blanket gown 0 10 6 A strait waistcoat 0 13 6 Buckles0 0 8 
[}For Women. }]A blanket gown £0 10 6 A gown and petticoat 0 19 0 An under petticoat 0 3 3 A shift 0 3 4 A pair of shoes 0 3 1 A pair of stockings 0 1 10 A cap 0 1 0 A handkerchief 0 1 3 An apron 0 2 2 Buckles 0 0 8 ^]
[^16. 
* The case is particularly hard when the patient, as it often happens, is sent to London from 
a remote county. 
^]
[^17. 
* A contest had long subsisted between the common-council of the city of London and the 
acting governors of all the royal hospitals; the former claiming a right to be admitted govern- 
ors in virtue of the several royal charters. This dispute has been happily settled by a compro- 
mise which allows the admission of twelve of the common-council to each hospital. Application 
was made to parliament in 1782, and a bill passed, which fully establishes this agreement, and 
the friends of these noble charities have now the satisfaction to be assured that the government of 
them is settled in a mode best calculated to promote their prosperity. 
^]