

[^Sample 1: book - ^]

|P_
[}A 
LETTER, &c.}][^A horizontal double-line, spanning the whole page. ^]
HAVING for some year past paid a particular at- 
tention to the Government of the York Lunatic Asylum, 
I flatter myself that, in the detail of this Letter, I shall 
be able to lay before you some particulars worthy of 
your notice: and I the more readily embrace this op- 
portunity, as I find that the Reverend Mr. Mason has 
lately published some "Animadversions " on the Cha- 
rity, which appear to me deficient in information, and 
fallacious in argument. 

From the time that the Asylum was opened in 1777, 
to the middle of the year 1788, the house has received, 
as I am well informed, all the patients that have offered, 
without rejecting one application for want of room. 
But for some months past the applications have been so 
numerous, that the apothecary has been under the 
necessity of putting up two beds in many of the rooms, 
contrary to the usage of the house, and the convenience 
of the patients. This inconvenience, however, will 
soon be removed, as the new building, containing 
twenty-four rooms, will be ready for the reception of 
patients before the expiration of the present year. 

|P_8
At this time the Asylum contains sixty-six patients, 
and these are formed into three divisions. The first 
division (in number twenty, and never to exceed 
twenty-five), consists of such patients as are of better 
condition, who pay a considerable weekly sum for their 
board and medicines, the surplus of which is employed 
in lessening the payments of those patients who are in 
low circumstances, and have no parish relief. The se- 
cond division (in number twenty-six, of which upwards 
of one fourth are parish-paupers), consists of those who 
pay eight shillings per week for their board and medicines; 
a sum which from experience is found equal to the ex- 
pence incurred by patients in general. In this division 
the Governors have included the parish-paupers, judge- 
ing it unreasonable that parishes should share with the 
necessitous objects of the third division all the advanta- 
ges arising from the surplus of the payments made by 
the patients in affluent circumstances. It surely is suf- 
ficient that parish-paupers are taken in at a price equal 
to what they cost in diet and medicines. This was the 
relief originally intended, and with which the parishes, 
for the space of four years, were well contented; but 
as soon as the Governors reduced the weekly payments 
of those who were in low circumstances, then the parishes, 
most unjustly and ungenerously, put in their plea for a 
reduction also, not considering that there was a wide 
difference between a body of affluent people and a poor 
individual. To say that parishes will refuse to send 
their insane poor to a place where they have a chance 
to be cured, or relieved, because they must there pay 
the equitable expence of their board, is a childish idea, 
and contrary to experience. 

The third division (in number twenty) consists of 
patients in low circumstances who pay for their own 
board, and have no assistance from their parishes. Those, 
as I am well informed, are all objects of pitiable di- 
stress. They stand thus: Ten at six shillings; Six at 
five shillings; and Four at four shillings per week. Of 
|P_9
these last, one is the son of an aged widow, whose in- 
come is barely sufficient for herself; another is the hus- 
band of an industrious woman, who supports herself and 
one child by the profits of a small shop; the third is the 
son of a day-labourer, who rents a small cottage and two 
acres of land; and the fourth is the wife of a poor curate, 
who has six children: And is the pecuniary distress of 
a whole parish to be put in competition with that of one 
such poor person! On this division of distressed individuals 
the Governors have bestowed the interest of L. 650, given 
by Lady Gower, Mrs. Bourchier, and Mrs. Bouverie, ex- 
pressly for "the relief of the most necessitous objects; "
and they have also applied to their use part of the over- 
flowings of the first division, as before observed. With- 
out these aids, the poor objects of this division could not 
have subsisted in the Asylum, it being well known that no 
part of the general subscription can be applied to the 
maintenance of the patients, until the stock is found to ex- 
ceed the expence of the buildings, repairs, and furniture. 
To this the Governors have scrupulously adhered, inso- 
much, that from the commencement of the Charity in 1777. 
to the present hour, no part of the subscribed money has 
been appropriated to the maintenance of the patients. 
On the contrary, the patients by weekly payments, pro- 
portioned to their abilities, have defrayed the whole ex- 
pence of the household, and at the same time discharged 
the wages of the servants and the salary of the apothe- 
cary, amounting in the last year to the sum of L. 1200. 
Some persons have said that they subscribed their 
money for the maintenance of the parish-poor, as well 
as for the erection and furnishing of the building; but 
these persons seem to have misconceived the design of 
the original founders. All the acts of the committee 
shew, that the maintenance of the patients from a pub- 
lic fund, was not a primary, but an eventual object. 
The following address of the committee, in April 1774, 
speaks clearly to this point: Agreeable to the plan 
of the Medical Committee, a weekly payment of six 
shillings from the respective parishes, or friends of 
|P_10
the patients, [/1./] will be sufficient to defray all the ex- 
pences of the household, without the assistance of any 
fund: So that little more will be required besides a 
sum adequate to the expence of finishing and furnishing 
the present building, together with a sum for carrying 
out the wings, in case the number of patients should 
increase beyond what can be accommodated and 
lodged in the body of the house ; and of this there is 
a great probability, if we may judge by the nume- 
rous applications that have been made from very re- 
mote distances. But should the subscriptions, for- 
tunately exceed the charge of the necessary buildings 
and furniture, in that case the overplus money will be 
converted into a fund for lessening the weekly pay- 
ments of the patients.  But which of the patients 
were to be deemed the proper objects of this bounty, 
was left to the judgment of the Governors themselves. 

At the first opening of the Asylum there was no distinc- 
tion of patients, and all paid eight shillings per week for 
their board and medicines; but after a few years it was 
found that this sum was not well-proportioned, as un- 
der this regulation those who were in easy circumstan- 
ces paid too little, and those who were poor, and had no 
parish relief, paid too much. It was therefore ordered, 
for the more extensive service of the public,That persons 
of better condition should be admitted, on their paying 
a weekly sum, proportioned to their circumstances: At 
the same time it was ordered, That the overflowings of 
their weekly payments should be applied in aid of those 
persons who were poor and paid for themselves. Under 
this charitable regulation the Asylum continued for the 
space of one year, and the success proved the wisdom of 
|P_11
the measure. But it being observed by the physician, 
that he was likely to be materially injured by this re- 
gulation, however advantageous to the Asylum, as it 
obliged him to attend, gratis, those very persons who 
would otherwise have been his owni private patients, it 
was ordered, That he should be allowed to take reason- 
able fees from such affluent patients: And during the 
time that he has acted under this regulation, I am 
satisfied that no part of his conduct will be found re- 
prehensible. Some persons have observed, that the 
Governors should not have made any alteration in their 
original plan, but have kept all the patients at eight 
shillings per week. In answer to such suggestions I 
shall only observe, that whoever considers the powers 
and circumstances of men, will hold those to be the 
wisest, and really the most faithful to the duty which they 
owe to the public, who make the best use of their experi- 
ence during their attendance on the public service. 

Progressive improvements have been made in all 
charities; and the governors of Bethlem and St. Luke, 
have, in a particular manner, borne their testimony to 
the rectitude of such measures. 

When Bethlem Hospital was erected in 1676, no
incurables, and only 67 curables were admitted. But 
in 1696, the number of the latter was increased to 120, 
and in 1728 to 138, when, for the first time, three in- 
curables were admitted, which in the following year 
were increased to 20. At this present time there are 
160 curables and 100 incurables. 

In the excellent institution of St. Luke's, established 
in 1751, for incurables, there are at present 120 cu- 
rables, and only 40 incurables, which last pay five shil- 
lings per week for their maintenance. Of this num- 
ber there are six patients who are paid for by their re- 
spective parishes; but by a late regulation, parishes in 
future are not to receive the benefit of the incurable 
|P_12
fund, it being the intention of the Governors to give 
the greatest relief to those who are in low circumstances 
and pay for themselves. And here I beg leave to re- 
mark, that this small payment of five shillings is not 
fully adequate to the expence of one patient, but the de- 
ficiency is made up out of the general fund, which at the 
last audit in 1787, amounted to upwards of L. 100,000. 
This excellent charity, consisting of poor only, is at- 
tended, gratis, by Dr. Simmons, who visits several 
houses of private confinement in the neighbourhood of 
London, one of which is under his own special direc- 
tion, where the patients are treated with the utmost 
tenderness and propriety. In this house the patients 
pay from one guinea to three guineas and a half per 
week, exclusive of medicines and physician's fees. 

St. Patrick's Hospital in Dublin has a great resem- 
blance to the York Lunatic Asylum. It was originally 
founded by Dean Swift for the reception and mainte- 
nance of poor lunatics and idiots, but now receives a few 
patients of good condition. In this Hospital 100 insane 
persons are lodged and boarded, of which number 18 
are persons of good condition, who pay from thirty to 
sixty guineas a-year for board and lodging, together with 
two guineas on admission, and eight guineas annually 
(each person) to the attending physician. The re- 
maining 80 patients are paupers, and are maintained 
at the expence of the public fund, which is about 
L. 1200 a-year. That sum, together with the savings 
from the patients of better condition, discharges the 
apothecary's salary, servants' wages, and all the expen- 
ces of the household. 

In the Lunatic Asylum at Manchester, which contains 
about 70 patients, the payments are from six shillings to 
one guinea per week for board and medicines, and all 
above six shillings pay to the physician one guinea on 
admission, and the like sum when discharged: the rest 
is left to the generosity of the patient's friends. This 
is a well-regulated Establishment. 

|P_13
After this cursory review of some of the principal 
hospitals for the reception of lunatics, I shall now descend 
to a most material part of our own Institution, and 
that is the increase of its income from the board of the 
patients of the first class. It gives me sincere pleasure 
to inform you, that upon the audit of the third quarter, 
on the 14th of July last, the Asylum had gained the 
sum of L. 348, after the apothecary's salary, the servants' 
wages, and all the expences of the household had been 
paid. And as the current quarter is likely to equal the 
last, I dare venture to say, that at the expiration of 
the four quarters in October next, the saving will be 
upwards of L. 450. From this sum, L. 200 is, by the 
order of the last General Court, to be paid to the phy- 
sician, for this year only, in compensation for his con- 
sent that the treasurer should take into the common stock 
all the fees which he was entitled to receive from the 
patients in affluent circumstances. The balance then, in 
favour of the Asylum, will be L. 250; and, it is pro- 
bable, that a sum equal to this balance will be annually 
left in the hands of the treasurer, to be applied as the 
Governors may think proper [/2./]. 

The Reverend Mr. Mason, in the "Animadversions "
alluded to, has taken much pains to prove that the 
insane parish-poor were originally intended to be re- 
lieved by the Lunatic Asylum. No person that I 
know of ever denied the position. All the public 
advertisements declare it. But the relief intended, and 
publickly given out, was, That they, and such insane 
persons as were in low circumstances, should be lodged 
in the Asylum, and supplied with board and medicines 
at the rate of eight shillings per week, each person. That 
|P_14
relief they have had, and continue to have [/3./]. I know 
of no title that parishes can have to any further re- 
lief from this Charity. Upon the reduction-fund 
they can have no possible claim, as no part of it be- 
longs to the original subscription. It is independent 
of the subscription, being the bounty of Lady Gower, 
Mrs. Bourchier, and Mrs. Bouverie, for the express 
purpose of granting relief, at the discretion of the Go- 
vernors, to such insane persons as are in low circum- 
stances, but on no account to be employed in the build- 
ing. To this fund, which produces L. 35 annually, is 
added about L. 200 more, being the annual surplus of 
the payments of those patients who are in affluent cir- 
cumstances, after discharging their board, medicines, 
and medical attendance. Mr. Mason has totally mi- 
staken the nature of the government of the Lunatic 
Asylum. As, on the reduction-fund, parishes have not 
the shadow of a claim, neither are they entitled to any 
thing from the general subscription, as the treasurer has 
only in bank about L. 1200, which is set apart for de- 
fraying the expence of the present additional building, 
together with L. 1300, the interest of which is under a 
perpetual appropriation to the repairs of the house and 
furniture. Every expence of the household is de- 
frayed by the patients themselves, agreeably to the ori- 
ginal constitution, by payments proportioned to their 
abilities; and I beg leave to repeat, that from the be- 
ginning of the Institution to the present hour, there ne- 
ver has been one farthing of the subscription-money ap- 
propriated by the Governors either to the maintenance 
of the patients, the attendance of the physician, the salary 
of the apothecary, or the wages of the servants. The 
whole public money, consequently, remains with the Ho- 
spital estate. If Mr. Mason could make it appear that 
the insane parish-poor can be maintained in the Asylum 
for less than eight shillings weekly, he would in that 
case have a reasonable plea for a reduction of their pay- 
|P_15
ments; but till then, his pamphlet will be considered 
as the indication of something not perfectly right in 
the temper of its author, and will add but little to his 
honourable reputation. 

Had Mr. Mason informed himself of the real state of 
the Asylum, I am satisfied that he would not have pub- 
lished "Animadversions " against, but in favour of that 
Charity. Independent of the relief given to the parish- 
poor and persons in low circumstances, the benefits are 
great to those few who are in easy circumstances. The 
payments made by them are moderate, and always 
suited to the circumstances of their families. The ex- 
pences of no patient exceed L. 1:4s per week; for 
which moderate sum they have hitherto been provided 
with meat, drink, washing, lodging, medicines, and 
medical attendance. Parishes pay eight shillings for 
their insane poor, and persons in low circumstances, 
who pay for themselves, are received as low as four
shillings per week. Here is a benevolent and rising 
charity which Mr. Mason has greatly injured! 

It would be abusing the patience of my readers was 
I to record all the misrepresentations and unfair rea- 
soning inserted in Mr. Mason's "Animadversions ". 
One, however, I cannot let pass, as it has materially 
operated to the disadvantage of the Asylum, and con- 
sequently has answered the end of its author. He says, 
And yet, when to discourage the lower kind of pri- 
vate madhouses was here declared to be the purpose 
of this Institution, it may not be amiss to note, that 
only two years after, about the end of 1784, a cer- 
tain person, by name Matthew Wilcoxon, was dis- 
charged the house, in which he had for about eight 
years been a most useful servant. This respectable 
old man had, for many years before, been in that way 
of business; he had seen much of the practice of 
Bethlem-Hospital, had acted under Dr. Monro, and 
was possest of many of his prescriptions, and for his 
competent skill, at least in common cases, and still 
|P_16
more for his great care and humanity, was patronized 
by Dr. Dealtry himself, who constantly recommended 
him, when lunatic cases came before him, even to 
persons of condition. When the Asylum was nearly 
finished, this man was consulted concerning it, and, 
after rectifying many mistakes in the building, 
brought his own patients into it, and, relinquishing 
his own private house, became principal manager, 
keeper, nay, and apothecary too (at least occasionally), 
for the small annual salary of L. 40. Yet, at or about 
this very time, he was dismissed; and how dismissed? 
With a pension of L. 20 per annum for life, and with 
leave to take with him such of his own patients as 
then remained in the house. He is now in his 77th 
year, but in the full vigour of all his faculties, and ex- 
cept a natural diminution of bodily strength, as com- 
petent to superintend such an hospital as ever. He 
still, in the suburbs of York, keeps a few patients, as 
many as his neat but small cottage will permit him to 
keep, and in the greatest order and decency. Many 
remarks might be made on this anecdote, but I only 
propose this single question: Was his dismission the 
best way of discouraging private madhouses? 

That Mr. Wilcoxon acted in Bethlem-Hospital as a 
servant I allow; but that his being in possession of some 
of Dr. Monro's prescriptions would make him a physi- 
cian, is what no man in his senses will admit. Mr. 
Mason asserts, that Mr. Wilcoxon brought his patients
into the Asylum when he first engaged as a servant there; 
but he has artfully concealed the numbers. This is 
a story that has "magic in the web of it! "One patient 
Mr. Wilcoxon certainly brought in; and one patient 
he as certainly took out; and it is as certain, that Mr. 
Wilcoxon told Mr. Mason so in March last. 

In the pamphlet alluded to, Mr. Mason has feelingly 
described the case of one Henry Shaw, at present a pa- 
tient in the Asylum, at the reduced price of six shil- 
lings per week. This young man, he tells us, has al- 
|P_17
ready cost him L. 120;—a considerable sum indeed! 
but sufficiently repaid by the pleasure of telling the 
story. Should Mr. Mason continue to complain of this 
great burthen, he must expect to be told, that the Asy- 
lum bears its proportionable part; for the Society loses 
five pounds annually by every person kept by them 
at six shillings per week. When this loss is fairly calcu- 
lated, Mr. Mason will find himself in honour, not to say 
in justice, indebted to the Asylum in a sum something 
above his original subscription of L. 21. Probably Mr. 
Mason, in the next edition of his "Animadversions, "
may say something in favour of another of his Eleves, 
who is also a patient in the Asylum; but such a recom- 
mendation will be needless, as the relations of the young 
man do not object to the moderate price of eight shil- 
lings per week for his board and medicines. 

Mr. Mason, in the 22d page of his "Animadversions, "
charges the Governors with the "inordinate waste " of 
the public money in the purchase of the land on which 
the Asylum now stands; asserting, in a note, that land 
which lay conveniently near the County Infirmary, 
might have been purchased at a much cheaper rate. 
These are heavy charges indeed, as they go to im- 
peach the integrity of many respectable characters. 
Now, in direct opposition to Mr. Mason's charges, 
I pledge myself to prove, that the committee used 
their most strenuous endeavours to purchase land in 
the neighbourhood of the County Infirmary; and 
also, that they never had the slightest intimation or 
knowledge of any land in the neighbourhood of the 
Infirmary, that might have been purchased for less mo- 
ney, by the acre, than what they gave for the land on 
which the Asylum now stands. What comes within my 
knowledge is, That soon after the first general meeting 
of the subscribers to the Asylum, the committee did ap- 
ply to the acting managers of the County Infirmary, 
for the purchase of all, or part, of a field, lying imme- 
diately behind the Infirmary; but their application re- 
|P_18
ceived a direct negative. Still anxious to have ground in 
the neighbourhood of the County Infirmary, they ap- 
plied to the late Mr. Yoward for two acres of land, which 
lay directly opposite the Infirmary, and for which the 
unreasonable sum of L. 600 was demanded. 

About this time Dr. Hunter (as I am well informed) 
had some conversation with the late Mr. Jubb, about a 
small field, situated near the Groves, and not at an in- 
convenient distance from the Infirmary; but was told by 
him, That, however well-disposed to serve the Asylum 
(and a warm friend to it he was), he could not at that 
time part with this field, as its conveniences were ab- 
solutely necessary to him. 

Now, I call upon Mr. Mason to declare, whether, 
when he wrote his "Animadversions, " he knew of any 
of these transactions.—If he did, his note in the 22d page 
of his pamphlet, does him no credit [/4./]. If he declare 
his ignorance, I will take upon me to prove, That he 
himself was upon the Committee when an order was 
made to enquire after two acres of land opposite the 
County Infirmary; which order was carried into exe- 
cution on the following day. 

I shall pass over in silence the many low and illi- 
beral attacks made by Mr. Mason upon the constitu- 
tion of the Asylum, the honour of its Governors, and, 
in particular, upon the attending physician. The pro- 
sperity of the Asylum falsifies his assertions, and the 
well-known character of its Governors defends them 
sufficiently against the petulant attacks of a man so little 
qualified to direct public business. 

August 22, 1788. 

|P_
[}at a 
GENERAL COURT of GOVERNORS, }]Held at the Asylum, August 23, 1788, 

[}His Grace the ARCHBISHOP of YORK in the Chair. }]
Resolved, THAT whereas L. 35 a-year, arising from 
the interest upon three separate sums, given by the late 
Countess Dowager Gower, Mrs. Bourchier, and Mrs. 
Bouverie, is, as yet, the only fund appropriated to the 
relief and maintenance of the patients in this Asy- 
lum, a weekly payment, which was of necessity exacted 
of every patient at the period of its first institution, 
continues to be necessary still: And whereas persons 
of every condition, as well those in easy circumstances 
as those in the most necessitous, are admitted into this 
Asylum, to partake the benefits of commodious habita- 
tion, and of the great ease, good order, and excellent 
medical assistance given here; it was resolved that the 
patients should be formed into classes, according to their 
respective fortunes, and that those of the superior or 
opulent class should pay, according to their abilities, 
certain weekly rates, exceeding the expence of their 
maintenance, thereby creating the means of relieving 
the class of the necessitous, by lowering their weekly 
payments, to a rate more suitable to their circumstances, 
though not adequate to the expence of their mainte- 
nance. 

|P_20
This court, upon a full and serious reconsideration 
of the principle of that resolution, and upon the ex- 
perience of the effect produced by the regulation, does 
now confirm it, and does also confirm the rule whereby 
patients sent into this Asylum by parish-officers, and, 
according to the strict injunction of the law, maintained 
at the charge of their respective parishes, are rated at 
8 s. per week each, this being the computed average 
expence of maintaining each patient; the court being 
clearly of opinion that whenever the means arise, it is 
more in the true spirit of charity, that those means 
should be applied to the relief of necessitous individuals, 
than to the ease and accommodation of the opulent 
proprietors and inhabitants of a parish, under what- 
ever specious description it may be thought proper to 
mask their case. 

And whereas the court having considered, that it 
was unfit and unjust, that patients in easy and affluent 
circumstances should, equally with the necessitous and 
indigent, enjoy the gratuitous assistance of the attend- 
ing physician, did resolve, August 26, 1785, to request 
the physician to accept, from patients of the former 
description, the reasonable emoluments of his profession: 
And whereas by a subsequent resolution of August 24, 
1787, the court did request the physician, to accept a 
salary of L. 200 for the ensuing year, in lieu of fees 
from patients of the superior class; this court, upon a 
serious and deliberate review of this last-mentioned re- 
solution, determines not to renew it at this period, but 
requests the physician henceforth to receive such mode- 
rate and reasonable fees from the class of affluent pa- 
tients as he was accustomed to receive heretofore. 

Resolved, That the thanks of this court be given 
to Dr. Hunter, the physician, for his great attention to 
all the interests of this Institution, especially for his 
assiduous care and successful treatment of the patients, 
and particularly, at this time, for the disinterestedness 
|P_21
of his whole conduct from the first establishment of the 
Asylum to the present day. 

Resolved, That the Governors present rely upon 
the candour of all the subscribers, to give credit to 
their assurances, that no sinister motives ever have in- 
fluenced, or ever can influence their conduct. They 
trust that all the regulations they have established, and 
the whole œconomy of the Institution, have merited 
the approbation of every subscriber; and they hope 
that all will agree with them in opinion, that such Go- 
vernors as profess themselves friends to the Asylum 
would express their good-will to it much better by at- 
tending in their places at the times of meeting, and 
there giving their advice for the regulation and im- 
provement of the Institution, than by prejudicing the 
minds of the public by their misrepresentations. 

MICHAEL EASTBURN, Secretary. 

|P_
[}STATE of the ASYLUM. }]
ON the 1st day of January, 1777, the house was 
opened for the reception of patients, since which time 
to the 17th day of August, 1788, 514 insane persons 
have been admitted. 
Admitted since the beginning 514 Cured 239 Relieved 126 Incurable, and removed by desire of their friends 45 Died 36 Remain in the house, 34 men and 34 women 68 — 514 
William Preston, Treasurer. 
A. Hunter, Physician. 
Michael Eastburn, Apothecary. 
[^A long horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
[}RESOLUTIONS and ORDERS. }]
Resolved, That this Charity shall receive all per- 
sons labouring under an unsound mind, whether cura- 
ble or not. 

Ordered, That all the patients in the house, and 
such as may hereafter be received, shall be classed by 
the Visitors according to their respective circumstan- 
ces; 
Class 1. Six shillings per week. 
— 2. Eight shillings. 
— 3. Ten shillings. 
— 4. Twelve shillings. 
Class 5. Fourteen shillings per week. 
— 6. Sixteen shillings. 
— 7. Eighteen shillings. 
— 8. Twenty shillings & upwards. 

N. B. The above payments discharge board, lodging, tea, washing, 
and medicines. 

|P_23
Ordered, That a separate table be kept for such pa- 
tients as are rated above eight shillings per week; with 
the privilege of being admitted without certificates. 

Resolved, That patients of the higher classes may 
be waited on by their own servants, paying six shillings 
per week for their board and washing. 

Resolved, That women with child, labouring under 
an unsound mind, shall be received, upon security being 
given that the child shall not become burthensome to 
the parish in which the Asylum stands. 

Ordered, That, in cases of sudden lunacy, patients 
will be received into the house without previous notice, 
if presented before sun-set: But, in all other cases, it is 
expected, that notice be sent to the Apothecary at the 
Asylum a few days before the arrival of the patient, 
that every thing may be properly prepared for his, or 
her, reception. 

Resolved, That lunatics, coming recommended as 
parish-poor, shall be placed in the second class, except 
upon extraordinary occasions; it being the intention of 
this institution to give the greatest relief to such persons 
as are in low and distressed circumstances, and who do 
not receive relief from their respective parishes. 

Resolved, That it would be convenient to the Pub- 
lic, as well as advantageous to the Asylum, if patients 
in affluent circumstances were admitted. 

Ordered, That twenty-five patients of the above 
description shall in future be admitted, on their paying 
a suitable pension to the Asylum; but it is understood 
that such patients shall pay reasonable fees to the phy- 
sician for his attendance. 

Ordered, That the physician do attend, gratis, all 
|P_24
patients whose payments do not exceed eight shillings 
per week. 

Resolved, That a donation of twenty pounds, or 
upwards, shall constitute a Governor, with the privi- 
lege of recommending as many patients as he may 
think proper. 

Ordered, That the weekly payments of the first 
class of patients be lowered one shilling, or more, at 
the discretion of the Visitors. 

MICHAEL EASTBURN, Secretary. 

⁂  The Governors wish to have it understood, that 
this Charity is intended to lessen the number of pri- 
vate mad-houses, by affording a comfortable retreat to 
a numerous body of unhappy sufferers, at a price pro- 
portioned to their abilities; and as twenty additional 
rooms, with suitable offices, are nearly finished, dona- 
tions for the purpose of defraying that expence will be 
received by Messrs Garforth and Co. Messrs Cromp- 
ton and Co. bankers in York; and by Messrs Martin 
and Co. Messrs Boldero, Kendal, and Co. bankers in 
London. 



[^1. 
*This, at a subsequent meeting, was made eight shillings; which, upon 
the supposition that there would be fifty-four patients in the house, made 
an annual income of L. 1123; a sum fully sufficient for all the expences 
of the household, as publickly declared and well understood at the time. 
The public subscription was therefore clearly intended for the building 
and furnishing a house for the reception, and not for the maintenance, of in- 
sane persons.  The contrary is asserted, very absurdly, by Mr. Mason. 
^]
[^2. 
* By way of experience the physician's fees (for this year only) were 
converted into a salary of L. 200, in order that the Governors might know 
exactly the profits that arise from the patients of better condition. They 
are now in possession of that knowledge; so that at a future day they may, 
if they see occasion, six a salary upon the attending physician, in the room 
of optional fees. For what regards the salary, see the Appendix, 
No I. 
^]
[^3. 
* When the Asylum was first established, parishes paid for their insane 
paupers confined at Bramham, the sum of ten guineas for the first quar- 
ter, and half a guinea per week ever after. 
^]
[^4. 
*Mr. Mason fays, The situation chosen was still more objectionable 
than any other of those original errors: Ground, I am well informed, 
might have been purchased, which lay conveniently near the County 
Infirmary, at a much cheaper rate than was given for that on which 
the Asylum now stands. Proximity of place was surely devoutly to 
be wished with regard to the two buildings. " Page 22. 
^]