

[^Sample 1: book - ^]

|P_[^A horizontal double-line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}an 
ANALYSIS 
of 
DISEASES and MORTALITY. }][^A long horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
[}CHAP. I. }]
FROM the compound motions of the earth, 
and of the moon; from the external ele- 
ments with which the earth and the hu- 
man species are invested; from their different 
habitations on the earth; from their different 
ages; from their different original tempera- 
ments, class, or genus; from their different 
ranks and habits of life; from their habitations 
in city or in country; from the difference of 
the sexes, and their separation or intercourse, 
|P_2
myriads of diseases and deaths ensue, and are 
peculiarly attached to these various modifica- 
tions of mankind. Of each of these we are to 
take a transient glance in the present chapter, as 
also of the aggregate number of the human 
species. They are bungling empiricks or auda- 
cious prostitutes in medical criticism, who mis- 
represent the above as speculative and useless 
propositions in medicine, and who cannot discern 
the practical tendency of this Introductory Ana- 
lysis of the Human Species. 

A morbid history of the inhabitants of the 
earth is interwoven with the rudiments of astro- 
nomy, geography, and natural philosophy. Our 
planet is a small link, member, or key of one 
universal and harmonious system. The vault of 
Heaven is studded with a profusion of those bril- 
liant orbs; of the sun, and its seven planets, 
with ten or more of the latter's subordinate 
satellites, or moons; and of 21 comets. Our 
ultimate views are lost in the remote and bound- 
less distances of the fixed stars, amounting to 
some thousands, or perhaps, with their revolv- 
ing planets, to some millions. 

One of the seven planets in our solar system, 
the earth, this small domain of restless mortals, is 
distant from the sun 95,000,000 miles. It has several 
incessant and compound motions. In the space 
of 3651/4 days it completes its annual circle round 
the sun, which is the length of our year; and 
throughout that orbit is whirled with the amaz- 
ing rapidity of 68,000 miles hourly; whereas the 
swiftness of a cannon ball, in the same interval, 
is only 480 miles. Its diurnal rotation every 
24 hours, like a suspended wheel upon its axis, 
|P_3
is, at the equator, at the rate of 1035 miles 
hourly. Its two remaining motions are the al- 
ternate spiral inclination and declination of its 
north and south poles, to and from the sun at 
different periods of the year; and the small 
monthly circle round the common centre of 
gravity with the moon. From these combined 
terrestrial motions ensue day and night, sum- 
mer and winter, the equinoxes and solstices. 
The earth is attended by an inferior, and not 
very distant satellite, the moon, its reflecting 
lamp of night, whose influence on the ocean 
and tides, and in some diseases, are universally 
conspicuous. The ancient astrological systems 
seem to be derived from influences too remote 
and faint. 

Our planet and its inhabitants are invested 
with a few elements, the great and very uni- 
versal agents both of natural good and evil. 
Heat and light are derived from one common 
parent, the sun: their negative qualities, dimi- 
nution or privation are cold and darkness. From 
the equator to the poles are all the gradations 
of heat and cold, the extremes of which are 
sometimes considerably above the human tem- 
perature, or 97 of Fahrenheit's thermometer, 
and sometimes sunk considerably below 1 or 0 
of the same scale. In both these instances, as 
also in duration, recurrence and changes, and 
independent of latitudes, prodigious variations 
will result from the perpendicular or the oblique 
direction of the solar rays, their duration, ab- 
sorption, or retention, from elevations, soils, 
situations, seasons, days, and nights. But with- 
in the equatorial limits the variations in the 
|P_4
thermometer and seasons are much less considen- 
able than without the tropicks. 

The earth floats in a subtile, elastick, and so- 
norous fluid, the atmosphere, or air, with which 
it is circumfused on all sides to the distance of 
more than 45 miles; from whose agitations and 
currents ensue all the diversity of winds; and 
whose gravity upon the human body, except 
in elevated situations, and in certain changes of 
weather, amounts to thirty-two thousand pounds, 
as is proved by the air-pump and barometer. 
Its noxious effects may be traced to many 
sources, to pollution, stagnation, unelasticity, 
levity, nocturnal chill; the points from whence 
winds blow, their constancy, irregularity, re- 
currence, velocity. — Another subtile, and active 
agent in the machinery of nature is the electri- 
cal emanation; the fabulous artillery and thun- 
der-bolts of Omnipotence. 

From the sun's heat, and the successive 
streams of air and winds, a prodigious evapora- 
tion is carried on from the surface of the earth, 
the ocean, and vegetables. This accumulated 
vapour, to which, according to some, the air 
also contributes, is collected into mists and 
clouds, and suspended in the atmosphere, at no 
great distance from the earth, is again dis- 
charged into the terrestrial cistern in moisture, 
fluid or condensed, as rain, snow, hail, but in 
quantity, duration, recurrence, extent, and con- 
tamination, diversified by a number of collateral 
causes. 

Without the concurrent support of these dif- 
ferent elements, animal and vegetable life would 
soon be annihilated. From each of their simple 
|P_5
depravities, morbid modifications, defect, or 
excess, but infinitely more from their complex 
combinations, intermixtures, and undue assimi- 
lations are engendered, and inflict a multitude 
of human diseases. 

In shape the earth has more resemblance to a 
turnip than to a globe. Its circumference is 
24,840 English miles. Its surface is composed 
of dry land and of water, of which the ocean, 
without including lakes and rivers, occupies 
more than double the extent of the land. The 
dry land is diversified by plains and elevations, 
none of which ascend to five perpendicular miles. 

The Creator has bountifully stored the earth 
and the ocean with animals and vegetables. 
Our attention is here circumscribed to the most 
exalted class, the Human Species; leaving to 
the naturalist a description of quadrupeds, birds, 
fishes, insects, and vegetables. By far the 
largest proportion of the human species are sta- 
tioned to the north side of the equator, and 
even to the north of the tropick of cancer. 
The populous continents, or rather the one vast 
united continent, of Europe and Asia, and the 
adjacent islands, comprehending most of the 
powerful kingdoms in our planet, are in the 
northern hemisphere. Within the tropical cir- 
cles and furnace of the earth, are stationed the 
next considerable hive of mankind. To the 
south of Capricorn there are few inhabitants. 
An immense orbicular segment of this hemi- 
sphere furnishes habitation for fishes only. But, 
in the opposite hemisphere, some wretched hu- 
man beings are scattered through dreary waftes 
|P_6
of ice and snow within the northern polar 
circles. 

Calculators differ enormously respecting the 
number of the Human Species. Some sink the 
collected herd so low as three hundred million, 
whilst others exaggerate them to treble and 
quadruple that amount. It forms no part of 
my scheme to investigate the comparative po- 
pulation of the earth, one, two, and three thou- 
sand years ago. Europe, in all probability, 
since the era of Roman grandeur, has, toge- 
ther with advancement in civilization, likewise 
added to the number of its inhabitants. 
Those parental nurseries of the arts and sciences 
in Asia and Africa, have no doubt undergone 
various revolutions in population. If we were 
to draw any inferences from the numerous 
Asiatic armies, during the successive despotism 
of Assyrian, Babylonian, Medean, and Persian 
monarchies, we should conclude that, in remote 
ages, the south of Asia abounded in men. The 
extensive empire of China, at this day, resem- 
bles an industrious bee-hive, and is gorged with 
mankind. We have still more aversion to 
plunge into the mysterious archives of Africa, 
and with critical affectation to pronounce upon 
the population of that quarter before the decay 
of its political, commercial, and literary fame 
with Thebes, Carthage, and Alexandria. That 
modern-discovered transatlantic continent, from 
the cruelties and desolation of its first conquer- 
ors, and of a loathsome, infectious disease 
exchanged for another, has probably suffered 
considerable diminution of its original feeble 
hive, notwithstanding the recruit from Europe; 
|P_7
and in the scale of population America as yet 
ascends to a very subordinate rank amongst the 
other continents. 

The most probable calculations estimate the 
whole human race at eight hundred million; of 
which number Europe, the most diminutive in 
size, can boast of a hundred and thirty mil- 
lion. The great swarm is in Asia, amounting 
to between four and five hundred million. Africa 
is supposed to contain one third or fourth of 
the latter number. Over the fertile wilderness 
of America, which stands dignified in superior 
magnitude, are scattered not altogether twenty 
million. On the other hand, in vegetable pro- 
duction Europe is the least prolifick. 

But if in London alone, where registers of 
various kinds may be consulted, calculators are, 
notwithstanding, at variance respecting its po- 
pulation upwards of one hundred thousand, and 
in the whole island more than a million; it may 
be reasonably suspected, that in forming a gross 
estimate of the aggregate terrestrial inhabitants, 
we may err perhaps one, two, or even three 
hundred million. As well might we expect a 
correct list of the lions, crocodiles, and mon- 
kies of Africa, as of the outcast human race in 
those burning and illiterate regions. 

To determine the amount of inhabitants in 
any city, town, or kingdom, calculators from 
choice, and oftener from necessity, have adopted 
several methods. The first, and most uner- 
ring, by a numerical survey through every 
house. The second, by the number of houses, 
and by allotting 5 or 41/2 inhabitants to each 
house, which, at a general average, including 
|P_8
town and country, was found to be the standard 
in many parts of Europe. But unfortunately 
in ours, and in many other national registers of 
houses and separate dwellings, there is great in- 
accuracy; and in some European cities the in- 
habitants are double and treble beyond this pro- 
portion: The third and far the most fallacious 
method, both on account of the necessary data, 
and process, is by multiplying the usual decre- 
ment of life, or expectation of an infant at 
birth in that city or country, whose population 
we wish to ascertain, by the general medium of 
christenings. 

The assemblages of the human race are 
greatly diversified by their ages. Dr. Price 
supposes nearly an equal proportion are living 
under 16, and above that age; but however, 
that the latter are most numerous. Davenant 
states 20 as the partianal number. Dr. Halley 
supposed the number living under 16 to com- 
prise about one third; and those between 20 and 
42 another third of the community. The fol- 
lowing table is founded upon a numerical ana- 
lysis of the inhabitants merely of England, by 
Davenant. Our table embraces the whole in- 
habitants of Europe, stating them here at 
132,000,000. Each division or group is in the 
proportion of 13 to 1 more than the inhabitants 
of the same age in Britain and Ireland; and 
about 1 to 6 fewer than the whole inhabitants 
of the earth of a similar description. It is easy 
to adapt them, "ad libitum," to any numerical 
extent. We shall hereaster see that the females 
are considerably more numerous than the males; 
and that majority is much more conspicuous in 
|P_9
the last great division of life, that is, after 20 
years of age. In this adult and aged division 
of life, the predominance both of males and 
females, as contrasted with those under 20, is also 
more conspicuous in cities than in the country. 
It is hereaster observed, that between one third 
and fourth of the whole population of Europe 
are inhabitants of cities and towns. 

[}A Table of the Inhabitants of Europe, 
classed according to their Ages. }]Ages. Numbers. Under 1 year — 4,080,000 5 years — 19,680,000 10 years — 36,000,000 Total under 16 years — 53,760,000 } 132,000,000 Total from 16 years to the 
extreme of existence} 78,240,000 The proportion beyond 60 years 14,200,000 Of these last the males 6,280,000 The females 7,920,000 
It appears from this Table, that the living 
under 1 year, are four million; between 1 and 
5 years, 15 million; between 5 and 10 years, 
17 million; between 10 and 20 years, 29 mil- 
lion. That is in all, under 20 years 66 million, 
or about one half of the inhabitants. Between 
20 and 60 years, there are 50 million; from 60 
to 100 years and upwards, 14 million. 

Extending our views over the surface of the 
globe, we perceive striking distinctions between 
the human species; not only in the four great 
Continents, but also in different parts of the 
same continent. These differences are princi- 
|P_10
pally manifest in the colour of the skin; in the 
complexion, countenance, physiognomy, hair, 
form and stature. We attend here merely to 
corporeal distinction, without including the in- 
tellectual. These great classes of mankind may 
be divided into the European, the Laplander, 
the Tartar, the Chinese, the African-negro, and 
the native American. The modern-discovered 
inhabitants in the islands of the Pacific ocean, 
seem to have no remarkable cast of countenance 
or figure to sever them into a separate class. 
Mankind, exclusive of their original mould, as 
issued from the mint of the Creator, are after- 
wards not only diversified by climate, soil, diet, 
government, religion, association, occupation, 
habit; but throughout a considerable extent of 
the globe, from conquest, emigration, coloni- 
zation, and commercial intercourse, many na- 
tions are now blended and assimilated into one; 
and the elementary characteristic features of the 
aborigines, whether corporeal or mental, more 
faintly imprinted. Besides, every one's expe- 
rience and observation will instruct him, that in 
populous kingdoms these classes branch out into 
innumerable intermixtures, orders, and genera; 
and that the species and varieties are as nume- 
rous as the individuals of the human race. 

It is of essiential importance, not only in an 
enlarged political, but also in a medicinal light, 
to contemplate the various constituent portions 
of human communities; to analyse the different 
members and pieces of these animated political 
structures. In a state of nature there are few 
gradations in society; few professions, or me- 
chanical arts. But by civilization, mankind are 
|P_11
arranged and connected into an infinite series 
of descending and dependent links. Mr. Vol- 
taire makes only two great divisions of civilized 
mankind; the oppressors, and the oppressed. 
Descending the mole-hill and ladder from the 
throne to the cottage, we may trace a multitude 
of gradations in the scale of polished communi- 
ties. We descend through nobility and gentry 
of independent fortunes, in lands or money; 
through literary professions, including divinity, 
medicine, law, and various other branches of 
practical or speculative science; all of which 
united constitute, even in the most opulent na- 
tions, but a small portion of the community. 
We next descend to a fertile hive of husband- 
men and artizans, laborious drudges in mecha- 
nical trades, arts, manufactories, and com- 
merce: to a numerous class of retailers or ven- 
ders of merchandize, and of the necessaries of 
life: to apprentices and clerks throughout the 
various arts and professions: to soldiers, sailors, 
dlomestick servants: to no inconsiderable mul- 
titude buried under ground, and occupied in 
digging metals and fuel from the bowels of the 
earth: to infirm, cripples, diseased, puerperal, 
aged; and to many other links and gradations, 
which must be prodigiously diversified by the 
variety in governments, religion, climate, na- 
tional genius, industry, commerce, and other 
causes which will occur to philosophers, and to 
gentlemen of reflection. They will also trace a 
multitude of diseases not only to these ranks, 
distinctions, and employments, but also to the 
active or sedentary nature of the different pro- 
fessions and arts. 

|P_12
The inhabitants crowded into cities and 
towns, and those dispersed in small villages, and 
in the country, constitute other large groups of 
society. If the result of Susmilch's researches 
and materials, collected throughout Germany, 
can be depended upon as a criterion for other 
European nations, the inhabitants in the country 
are to those in cities and towns as 31/2 to 1. 
Great cities, if we except Rome and Constanti- 
nople, are of modern date in most kingdoms of 
Europe. In the ninth century, a few towns had 
been built in Germany, but in England, cor- 
porations and considerable towns are posterior 
to the Norman invasion. In both ancient and 
modern times necessity alone would naturally 
collect numbers into those rendezvouses of secu- 
rity and defence. Cities, associated communi- 
ties, and towns, during the religious frenzy of 
crusading, and after the termination of this epi- 
demical distemper, were asylums from aristo- 
cratic tyranny; and when of moderate size, are 
feats of politeness, refinement, emulation, arts, 
and society: but when overgrown, they check 
population; they are drains of the human spe- 
cies, the graves of infants, and nurseries of 
vices. Unfortunately also for succeeding gene- 
rations, numerous cities, towns, and harbours, 
have been founded upon low, unhealthy situa- 
tions, surrounded by morasses and hills. Most 
cities seem to have grown to maturity by acci- 
dent and time: their streets are narrow, irregu- 
lar, not sufficiently ventilated, and the inhabi- 
tants absurdly and perniciously thronged toge- 
ther. There are moderate-sized towns, and 
even country districts, whose situations are so 
|P_13
noxious, as to make the burials exceed the 
births: for proofs of which, we need not travel 
to new uncultivated continents and islands, nor 
to rank tropical climates. In the regular con- 
struction and economy of their respective cities, 
vain man is far surpassed by bees. 

Two large and important Classes are formed 
in society, by the distinction of the Sexes into 
male and female. So soon as the organs of ge- 
neration are completely evolved; that is, when 
the two sexes arrive at puberty, they are in- 
flamed with a new passion and pleasing sense. 
In most warm climates, this generative period 
is somewhat earlier than in northern latitudes; 
and in the former also, women are said to be 
more prolifick. We shall therefore devote a few 
words to the union of the sexes, from whence 
ensue procreation and births. We cannot pos- 
sibly form any correct judgment of the waste 
and expenditure of mankind by diseases and ca- 
sualties, without a comparative statement of the 
recruit. This is an obvious medical, political, 
and commercial axiom. 

The mean ages at which marriages in this 
island commence, is computed from 32 to 35 
on the side of the man, and 25 on that of 
the woman: but in this estimate second and 
third marriages are included. Some calcu- 
lators have computed, that amongst five mil- 
lion and an half of inhabitants in England, 
there are annually about forty-one thousand le- 
gal marriages: of which one sixth part are 
widows or widowers; about one marriage to 
every one hundred and four inhabitants; and 
|P_14
the annual marriages to the births, as 1 to 4, 
or 41/2. 

In cities, not only fewer enter into the ma- 
trimonial state, but the product also of city and 
country marriages is observed to differ. Mar- 
riages in cities, one with another, seldom pro- 
duce above four, generally between three and 
four, and sometimes not three children: where- 
as country and village marriages seldom pro- 
duce less than four, and generally between four 
and five at a medium; for some married pairs 
have only one or two; others six, eight, twelve, 
or more; and a small remnant are unprolifick. 
Whether this disparity between the product of 
city and country marriages is to be imputed to 
dissipation, libertinism, and incontinence, both 
in the single and married sate; to the cloudy 
apprehensions and fears of overstocking their 
house; to later, fewer, and less frequent unions 
in the matrimonial bond; or to all these and 
other causes combined, I submit to the reader's 
consideration. 

Natural, or illegitimate children, are enrolled 
in the public records of christenings, and swell 
their proportion to the registered weddings 
somewhat greater than they would appear with- 
out this extraneous addition. In some German 
registers, Dr. Short found, that of 333,655 
births, the illegitimate amounted to one thirty- 
seventh part; and in an inland town of Eng- 
land, that of 10,337 births, 284, or about one 
thirtieth part, were illegitimate. 

Providence has wisely ordained, that through- 
out those European kingdoms, of which we 
have any registers, a few more males should be 
|P_15
born than females; and indeed such a surplus 
is rendered necessary from the waste by wars, 
emigration, intemperance, mechanical arts and 
trades, the inclemency and vicissitudes of the 
weather and seasons, the vices and misfortunes 
to which political punishments are annexed, with 
various other noxious casualties, to all which the 
male sex are most exposed. In Dr. Arbuth- 
not's Table, printed in the London Philoso- 
phical Transactions, of the proportion between 
the births of the sexes, in 46 years were bap- 
tized, of males 329,742; of females 308,644; 
majority of males only 23,098. By the Lon- 
don registers, from 1657 to 1776, I find that 
there have been christened of males, 1,041,149; 
of females, 983,061; or as 18 to 17: and 
therefore, that in this long interval of 120 
years, and comprehending two million of births, 
there is only a trifling majority of males, 
amounting to 58,088; a number which would 
scarce recruit the consumption of a few active 
campaigns. In volume the 7th of the Philosophi- 
cal Transactions abridged, there is an account of 
the annual births during several years at Vienna, 
Breslaw, Dresden, Leipsick, and Ratisbon; and 
in those cities male and female births were as 
19 to 18. Amongst the abortives and still-born 
we also find a plurality of males. 

If the registers can be depended upon, it ap- 
pears that there are more births in winter than 
in summer, not only in town but also in the 
country. The increased population during the 
winter, in cities, must naturally augment the 
births. But although the fruit of the human 
womb may not have arrived at maturity before 
|P_16
winter, it is no proof against the general law 
of the spring and summer influence on animals 
and vegetables in contributing to fecundity and 
generation. We must distinguish between the 
spring and harvest of human fertility. 

If the number of inhabitants in any kingdom, 
city, or village, continues the same without in- 
crease or decrease, and supported by their own 
procreation only, it is evident, that there the 
annual births and burials will be equal, and the 
supply proportioned to the waste; and in equal 
numbers, as many will die at all ages as are 
born in the year, on a general average; and 
the numbers dying any year at one, two, three 
years of age, and so on to the extreme of ex- 
istence, will be just equal with the numbers who 
successively attain to those different ages at which 
the others die. 

The total annual births amongst five million 
and an half of inhabitants in England, are cal- 
culated by Davenant at 190,000; which is 
about one birth to every twenty-five inhabi- 
tants, and amongst ten million of inhabitants in 
Britain and Ireland, the annual procreation will 
exceed three hundred and fifty thousand; and 
the annual mortality should be somewhat infe- 
rior. In the kingdom of Prussia, from the 
year 1715 to 18, there were christened, at an 
annual medium, 78,826; buried, 55,852. In 
the kingdom of Sweden, the annual average of 
births during nine years, ending in 1763, was 
90,240; burials, 69,125. In Norway, in 1761, 
the christenings were 11,024; burials, 6,926. 
In France, during three years, ending in I772, 
the annual average of births was 920,918; bu- 
|P_17
rials, 780,040. In the county district of Vaux, 
in Switzerland, during ten years, the births 
were 3,155; burials, 2,504. The country, says 
Graunt, has 6,339 births for 5,280 burials. In 
that little fertile island Madeira, the inhabitants 
have been computed to double themselves in 
eighty-four years; so great is the difference be- 
tween the births and burials. And in some 
provinces of North America, if Dr. Franklin's 
calculations are correct, the inhabitants double 
themselves in the short space of twenty-five, 
twenty-two, and even fifteen years. 

On the other hand, in all the large cities of 
Europe; in Paris, Vienna, Rome, Dresden, 
Berlin, Amsterdam, London, Edinburgh, Dub- 
lin, and in almost all towns of considerable 
magnitude and population, the total annual 
births are inferior to the burials. It is calcu- 
lated, that in London, within the last 150 years, 
near a million more of the human species have 
been wasted, beyond what were reared by its 
own original growth and procreation. But in 
small villages and country districts, the annual 
births exceed the burials; and it is from this 
redundance that a supply is furnished for the ex- 
traordinary consumption of armies, navies, war, 
colonization, emigration; exclusive of sickness, 
and other morbid casualties: the country and 
village surplus prevents depopulation. There 
are about 41/2 million of births annually in Eu- 
rope, and the deaths are inferior, probably by 
half a million. Wars however are here ex- 
cepted, which will also detract from the 
births. 

|P_18
But if, on one hand, large cities and high 
refinement are obstacles to population, a wild 
state of nature is still more detrimental. There 
are more inhabitants concentrated into one large 
metropolis of Asia or Europe, than could be 
collected in many thousand miles of the North 
American Wilderness on its first discovery. A 
medium state between the vicious extremes of 
refinement and rude savageness; or the middle 
stages between the iron and golden ages of the 
ancient philosophers, is the most favourable to 
the increase of our species. But the causes con- 
ducive to population and depopulation are of 
infinite compass, and are of a compound na- 
ture medical and political. They are connected 
with the state of government, religion, climate, 
genius, industry, riches, poverty, taxes, luxury, 
refinement, dissipation, profligacy, wars, colo- 
nization, emigration, commerce, agriculture, 
the unequal distribution and monopoly of pro- 
perty and farms, the plenty, scarcity, and 
cheapness of food, the encouragement or dis- 
couragement of matrimony, and with many 
other causes closely allied to our future medical 
investigation. Once for all, I embrace the pre- 
sent opportunity to observe, that throughout 
this treatise there are hints and ideas, each of 
which draws a whole train after them: the full 
open detail, and ample discovery is left to the 
reader. 

|P_19
[}CHAP. II. }]
WE are now to view the human race un- 
expectedly arrested, and struggling in 
the tragical and last stages of their terrestrial 
pilgrimage. The vision of human life is soon 
at an end: we are ushered into the world with 
lamentable exclamation; and are too often torn 
out of it in pain and agony. Bills of Morta- 
lity, however defective and inaccurate, yet suf- 
ficiently demonstrate this awful truth, that very 
few of the human species die of old age, or 
natural decay: by far the greater proportion are 
prematurely cut off by diseases. Of all the 
animal tribe, who usually bring forth one at a 
birth, none perish in such numbers in infancy: 
almost one half of human mortality is under 
five years of age. In London, Vienna, Berlin, 
and every other overgrown metropolis of Eu- 
rope, on an average, one half of the children 
born, die under three years of age. But in 
country towns and villages, the proportion of 
infant mortality greatly abates. In some country 
towns of England, of considerable magnitude 
and population, as Manchester, half the chil- 
dren die under five; at Norwich, half under 
six; at Northampton, half under ten years of 
age. London, therefore, will have lost, out of 
equal capitals, a number in the intermediate 
space, between three and ten, more than Nor- 
thampton. 

Attend next to the small proportion of Infant 
Mortality in open country districts. By. Dr. 
|P_20
Short's registers of several small country vil- 
lages in England, the major part born live to 
the ages of 25, 27, 33, and 40. In many 
healthy country parishes, half the inhabitants 
born live to 40, 46, and a few even to 50 and 
60; and rear large families of children. In 
some extensive country districts of Switzerland, 
similar observations have been made by Sus- 
milch and Muret. Here, therefore, is an asto- 
nishing disparity between the prospects of city 
and country life, in the early stages of puerile 
existence. Infants in cities resemble tender 
plants excluded from fresh air, or fish confined 
in stagnant water; and perish before they can 
acquire a solidity and seasoning to endure the 
adulterated quality of the surrounding element. 

Mortality, universally, during the first year 
after birth, is the most enormous in the funeral 
catalogue: it is nearly one fourth of the mor- 
tality of Europe. A London infant at birth, 
has but an equal chance of living to three years 
old; whereas in the country, as before observed, 
half of those born survive to maturity. Upon 
reaching the third year, in cities, infants are 
somewhat seasoned, and the hurricane of pue- 
rile carnage is greatly abated. There is not af- 
terwards such a prodigious disproportion between 
city and country mortality; and, in a few years 
after, between seven and ten, they approach 
nearer to an equality. Death is earlier glutted with 
slaughter in cities, than in the country. From 
the London registers of burials, it appears that 
more die in the metropolis under two years of 
age, than from two to upwards of forty; and 
more under five years of age, than from five 
|P_21
to between fifty and sixty: yet under five, there 
are but an inconsiderable number alive, com- 
pared to the latter class above that age: the 
deaths are greatly disproportioned to the liv- 
ing numbers or capitals. A few more die in 
London in the short interval between five and 
ten years of age, than in the succeeding double 
interval from ten to twenty; and more between 
twenty and thirty, than in the fifteen preceding 
years; and the burial list continues turgid to 
sixty. Between eight and sixteen years of age, 
one of every seventy of the Christ School boys 
is computed to die. Davenant rates the de- 
crement in these years at only one per cent. 
Having surmounted all the dangers and preci- 
pices of the early preceding journey, there is no 
stage wherein the future prospects of existence 
and longevity are so extensive: during those 
years of adolescence, very few die in city, 
town, or country. The tide of life is then at 
the flood; and from thence to the ultimate 
verge of existence, vitality continues gradually 
to ebb. Towards the meridian of life, it sinks 
to two; and at sixty down to four or five per 
cent. 

One reason, but not the only one, as calcu- 
lators alledge, of the great surge in the Lon- 
don bills, from twenty up to forty, is, that 
within this interval of life, the majority of ex- 
traneous new settlers or recruits arrive; and 
consequently augment the burials in the metro- 
polis, from twenty to forty, beyond their na- 
tural proportion: the principal reason is, a uni- 
versal law of nature in every situation; the 
causes and explanation of which will be found 
|P_22
in the history of diseases. After passing the 
meridian, and in the evening of life, the sea- 
soned inhabitants of cities are said, by Dr. 
Price, to have the advantage of the country, 
in health and longevity: that is to say, although 
the number who have survived in the country 
to sixty, seventy, and eighty, are greater pro- 
portionally than in cities, yet the latter class ar- 
rived at those years in London have, compa- 
ratively, surer expectations of life. I do not, 
however, find this assertion verified in fact; the 
balance, if any, vibrating alternately on each 
side. Nearly one fifth of the annual mortality, 
promiscuously, is after 60 years of age; and 
about one half of these, or one tenth or twelfth 
of the whole, are left to moulder by the irre- 
mediable dilapidations of time. The propor- 
tion of inhabitants who reach eighty years of 
age are computed, in London and Vienna, at 
one of every forty: but in country parishes, at 
one of every twenty-two; and in some, even 
one of every eleven. In both city and country, 
the few survivors at ninety, out of each thou- 
sand coetaneous births, will have lost almost all 
their fellow-travellers in the journey, long be- 
fore reaching that goal; and about three or 
four only out of each thousand, on an average, 
will be then left alive. 

There are indeed a few instances of extraor- 
dinary Longevity, to 150 and 165; such are 
Jenkins and Par, in this island. In Bacon 
Lord Verulam's History of Long Livers, male 
and female; their climate, diet, mode of life, 
appetites, exercises, studies, passions, disposi- 
tions, habits, and complexions, were exceed- 
|P_23
ingly dissimilar. It is however probable, from 
observation and analogy, that the indigent and 
laborious class of mankind do not attain to lon- 
gevity in the same proportion with the middling 
and more opulent ranks. The wandering Sa- 
vages of America are notoriously short-lived. 
Throughout Europe, Asia, Africa, and Ame- 
rica, the rich, the poor, the inhabitants of city 
and country, with very different complexion, 
climate, soil, diet, and conveniences, all seldom 
exceed the usual term of life allotted to man: 
seventy and eighty is mentioned in holy writ, as 
the brink of our earthly duration. Since the 
days of Moses; that is, between three and four 
thousand years, human existence has been cir- 
cumscribed within the same narrow bounds. In 
the London registers of mortality, during a pe- 
riod of thirty years, from 1728 to 1758, the 
total mortality is 750,332; and of all this 
number, 242 only reached beyond 100 years of 
age; one of whom arrived at 138. Through- 
out the annual mortality of Europe, which we 
have estimated at four million, there are not 
probably two thousand who have compleated a 
century; nor throughout the globe twelve thou- 
sand of this description. 

In some races and families of men, longevity 
seems to be hereditary; and his age, though lit- 
tle more than a dream, exceeds that of all other 
living creatures, a few only excepted. Amongst 
the quadruped creation, the elephant surpasses 
man in longevity: amongst the birds, the Swan, 
and a few others, have survived upwards of a 
century. The age of fishes is determined with 
more ingenuity than certainty: some seem to 
|P_24
rival man in years. But among the numerous 
vegetable tribes, the oak, chestnut, and some 
other lords of the forest, survive centuries. 

On contrasting the mortality of Males and 
Females, it appears, that, notwithstanding the 
surplus of male births, the perils of child-bear- 
ing, the many vexatious diseases peculiar to the 
fair sex, and that physicians and apothecaries 
have many more patients of the latter; yet the 
total aggregate number of living females ex- 
ceeds that of males, in most European king- 
doms. Upon a numerical inquest in Edinburgh, 
and some other great cities, it was found, that 
females were to males as 4 to 3: in London, as 
13 to 10; and in some other cities and towns, 
as 9 to 8. But in country districts, Graunt and 
Susmilch agree, that the two sexes approach 
nearer to an equality. In the province of Jer- 
sey, in North America, the males were found 
the majority. From 1702 to 1752; that is, 
during a period of fifty years, I find the pro- 
portion of male and female mortality in London 
as follows: Male deaths, 618,076; Female 
deaths, 626,692. Whence, therefore, does it 
happen, that female deaths preponderate over 
the male, when more of the latter are born, 
and, as calculators assert, the mortality of males, 
at all ages, is greater than that of females? As 
a solution of this difficulty and partial exception, 
I should suggest a greater exportation and tran- 
sportation of males to the sea and land service, 
to nautical commerce, and to unhealthy cli- 
mates. 

Even in the marriage state, the chance of 
survivorship seems considerably in favour of the 
|P_25
wife. In Breslaw, during eight years, five mar- 
ried men died to three married women. Sus- 
milch, on a scrutiny through several kingdoms 
and principalities of Germany, found, that three 
married men died to two married women. Dr. 
Price estimates the chance in favour of the wife 
being the survivor in marriage, as 3 to 2; and 
this calculation is confirmed by the experience 
of the general Clerical Society in Scotland, who 
have long established funds to support their 
widows. From their records, it appears that 
twenty married clergymen have died to twelve 
wives; or, as 5 to 3. By an accurate survey 
of several principalities and cities in Germany, 
and collected by Susmilch, the widows were to 
the widowers as 3, and even 4 to 1. At mar- 
riage, it should be observed, there is generally 
a disparity of age; the bridegroom is from six 
to twelve years older than the bride; and there- 
fore should, in the course of nature, die sooner: 
and perhaps also more widowers, comparatively 
with the other sex, enter into a second marriage; 
which tends to reduce their numbers. Besides, 
husbands are more exposed to the vicissitudes 
of the weather and seasons, to excessive labour, 
and noxious trades, and to many other causes 
of diseases. 

Dr. Price finds, that the sexes respectively 
commence to be widowers and widows about 
52 and 44; that is, men and women entering 
into matrimony, on a general average, at the 
ages of 33 and 25, will become widowers and 
widows at 52 and 44: consequently, that each 
marriage will be dissolved by the death of one 
of them, in nineteen years; which is the ulti- 
|P_26
mate term and probability of the husband and 
wife being both alive. For although some mar- 
riages may be protracted forty and fifty years, yet 
others may be dissolved in one year, or in a 
shorter time. 

We have not yet sufficient information to de- 
termine the comparative chances of Female 
Longevity in the married and single state. At 
Berlin, indeed, calculators have remarked, that 
there were more married women alive at great 
ages, than of those who remained single. But 
such result might naturally be expected from a 
greater proportion in the decline of life of wi- 
dows and wives, compared to antiquated vir- 
gins. From the ages of fifteen to twenty-five, 
married women likewise are said to have the ad- 
vantage of the single, in whom the dictates of 
nature are frustrated and violated. 

Comparing the mortality of the Seasons, Dr. 
Short found, from a variety of country registers, 
that mortality general begins its reign in De- 
cember; that at March it is in its zenith; and 
at May in its declension. In twenty-five coun- 
try towns and parishes, he found the winter to 
the summer mortality as 50 to 41. At Man- 
chester, a country town of England, Dr. Per- 
cival found the winter to the summer mortality 
as 11 to 8. At Vevey in Switzerland, during 
sixty years, Mr. Muret found the burials, during 
the four winter months, as 5 to 4 to those of 
the summer. Another proof of this is recorded 
in the Recherces sur la Population, par Messance: 
The total sick admitted into the Hotel Dieu hos- 
pital in Paris, from 1724 to 1763 (forty years) 
were, in the four winter months, December, 
|P_27
January, February, and March, 314,824; and 
in the four summer months, June, July, Au- 
gust, September, 238,522; or as 4 to 3. In 
London too, the undertaker's harvest is in win- 
ter. There is one obvious reason why, in every 
metropolis, the winter mortality should exceed 
that of summer, from the greater concourse of 
inhabitants of all ranks; but independent of ad- 
ditional population in winter, the same law seems 
to prevail in country places. Whether from 
diseases originally engendered in that season, or 
from its more pernicious effects on the lingering 
and convalescent train of chronic and acute di- 
seases, may be disputed. Within the tropical 
circles there is not the same diversity of the 
seasons as in European regions: there the pe- 
riodical hurricane and rainy season, or monsoon, 
is the most sickly and fatal. 

On collating the annual average of deaths, 
at all ages, in a sickly year of London, and 
other great cities, with sickly years in the coun- 
try parishes, Dr. Short found, that cities and 
towns have the advantage of the country, and 
are less annoyed. According to this author, in 
spacious open country distrisits, where fatal epi- 
demick distempers burst out, the burials not 
only exceeded the christenings, but more died in 
one year, than during 6, 10, 12, or sometimes 
15 healthy years; whereas he adds, in London, 
and such other cities, not above one third, 
fourth, or fifth, beyond the ordinary consump- 
tion, are swept away. Pestilential mortality 
alone is the solitary exception to the Doctor's 
proposition. In the London morbid registers 
we may frequently observe, that in different 
|P_28
months the deaths are double or treble above 
equal periods of the same year: but during the 
present century, I find no instance even of tri- 
ple, and very rarely of double excess, in the 
annual London burials. Dr. Short adds, that 
mortality is more regular and constant in cities, 
and not so many destroyed, "per faltum," from 
raging epidemicks, as in the country. In pure 
open air he suggests, that contagion and infection, 
and other adulterated effluvia, are more virulent. 
Or, perhaps he should have said, at least have 
added, that in cities where the atmosphere is 
charged with a load of smoke, and other hete- 
rogeneous vapours, epidemical poisons may be 
blunted, decompounded, or annihilated: that 
likewise in cities human bodies are more early 
seasoned and habituated to such noxious impres- 
sions, and like doctors and nurses, are in some 
degree fortified by habit: that besides in every 
large metropolis, small-pox, measles, nervous, 
putrid, and some other febrile epidemicks, are 
almost constant residents; and consequently the 
devastation from these diseases is more regular 
and equal than in the country, where there are 
several years and more irregular distances be- 
tween their invasions. 

Let us condense our calculations into a few 
general abstracts of human carnage. If we scan 
the mansions of disease and woe, we find, on an 
average, 1 death, annually, out of every 5 fa- 
milies in cities: but in country towns, and open 
districts, 1 out of 7, 8, 9; and in a few healthy 
places, 1 out of every 10 families. Includ- 
ing the whole assemblage of inhabitants in city, 
town, and country, from birth to the extreme 
|P_29
of existence, they are computed to die in the 
following annual proportion to the living: In 
London, 1 of 21; Dublin, 1 of 22; Edinburgh, 
1 of 21; Vienna, 1 of 20; Amsterdam, 1 of 
22; Berlin, 1 of 26; but, dismal to relate, of 
the oppressed negroes in the West India islands, 
1 of 7. This is nearly Dr. Price's calculation; 
but Halley and Susmilch compute only 1 of 22 
to 29 to die annually in cities. In smaller cities 
and towns, such as Norwich and Northampton, 
the general average of deaths is 1 of 24 to 26; 
but in several provinces and healthy country vil- 
lages, 1 of 32 and 33, up to 45, 50, and even 
6o, is the annual drain: 1 of 43 to 50 was the 
average in upwards of a thousand country pa- 
rishes on the continent; and recorded in Sus- 
milch. Within the above short intervals of 
time, there will have died in the respective cities 
and country places enumerated, a number equal 
to the whole inhabitants. 

The ancient Egyptians computed a century 
by 3 generations; thus establishing an auxiliary 
regulator of chronology and history. At this day 33 
or 35 is near the measure of a generation, and the 
general decrease of a community throughout Eu- 
rope, comprehending all the inhabitants in city, 
village, and country: that is, mankind share 
amongst them from about 32 or 33 to 35 years 
each of existence: and within this fugitive in- 
terval of time, a number equal to all the pre- 
sent inhabitants of this island, or of the whole 
earth, will be exterminated. If we extend this 
estimate to the whole human race, eight hun- 
dred million will die in 33 years; twenty-four 
million annually; seventy thousand daily; three 
|P_30
thousand hourly; and fifty every minute. It is 
perhaps superfluous to add, that, in the same 
intervals, an equal or superior number will be 
born. 

According to De Moivre and Dr. Price, 
the probabilities or expectation of life, de- 
crease as we advance from childhood to old 
age, in an arithmetical progression; that is, 
in such a manner that the difference is always 
the same between the number of persons liv- 
ing at the beginning of any one year, and the 
number living at the beginning of the follow- 
ing year.  Or, in other words, less enve- 
loped in mathematical obscurity, out of any spe- 
cified number, an hundred or a thousand, the 
same proportion will continue to die every year 
until near 80 years of age and upwards: conse- 
quently, the probabilities of life are constantly 
decreasing; because notwithstanding the progres- 
sive annual drain from the capitals, yet the 
deaths continue throughout equal. But this 
proportion is certainly erroneous in the first 
stages of life, and until about 10. 

View the above proposition in another light. 
From any given number there will be an equal 
drain annually, until what De Moivre terms the 
complement or maximum, or utmost probable ex- 
treme of life, which he fixes at 86, all are dead. 
The probability, therefore, that the whole of 
any limited number whatsoever, or age, will all 
be exterminated is the number of years between 
86 and the year such a number are all alive. Of 
56 persons alive at 30, they should all be dead 
in 56 years, because 56 added to 30 amounts to 
86, the maximum: of 46 persons alive at 40 
|P_31
years of age, they should all be dead in 46 
years: and 36 persons alive at 50 years of age, 
should be dead in 36 years; for 50 and 36 com- 
plete the maximum. Again, the expectation of 
any single life is only half the maximum or com- 
plement, or half the space between that age and 
the above ultimate term of existence: but here 
we must repeat the former exception, and draw 
the line after 10 years of age. 

The expectation of two equal joint lives, ac- 
cording to De Moivre, is only one third of the 
complement of life. Example: two lives, aged 
40, have an even chance or probable prospect 
of continuing together in existence only 15 
years; which is the third of the complement, 
reckoning from 40 to 86: the expectation of 
the survivor is also 15 years. Or, suppose a lot 
of marriages of persons at 40 years of age, they 
will, on an average, continue together 151/2
years; and the survivors the same time after. 
This expectation, therefore, is the probable du- 
ration of each marriage, and the share of each 
person's life. But it may be proper to add, 
that the duration of marriages, and the value of 
single and joint lives, will, on a promiscuous 
calculation, be different from the registers of 
annuitant and insurance offices, because they are 
scrupulously vigilant to exclude all diseased and 
unhealthy persons from becoming members. 

The following Chart and Tables, present a 
distinct prospect of the fates clipping the mortal 
thread, from birth to old age, in city and coun- 
try. But we are not to suppose that in every 
instance there will be annually a regular arith- 
metical diminution, as marked in the different 
|P_32
tables: some years will be more fatal than 
others; and we are to form estimates from an 
average of several years. Throughout the 
Chart the first column points out the age, the 
second the number living at that age, the third 
the number who die during the year; and so on 
to the end of each table. But observe, that the 
number of infants, at the beginning of the se- 
cond column, are supposed to be all born toge- 
ther on the first day of that year, and this rule 
applies throughout all the remaining ages. 
From the Chart, and from the subsequent dif- 
ferent Tables may be estimated the annual waste, 
out of any specified number, at all ages, the 
ultimate prospects of existence, and the odds or 
probability of a person in health surviving a 
stated number of years. These are also adapted 
to all ages, and to the inhabitants of city, and 
country. It would be endless to point out the in- 
stances of their utility and practical application. 
The two intermediate short Tables demonstrate 
both the total amount, and the gradations of 
annual mortality, at different ages, in London 
and in Europe. 

In one of the short tables just now alluded to, 
I have attempted, as nearly as such an intricate 
and unprecedented subject would permit, or at 
least as I was enabled from any probably data, 
to present at one view the annual mortality, and 
comparative decrement, throughout all ages, of 
the inhabitants of Europe, including city, town, 
and country. We may, in some degree, judge 
of the mortality, comparatively, by the num- 
bers alive in the different intervals of life; and 
|P_
|P_33
by an average of city and country mortality in 
each of those intervals. The annual mortality 
of Great Britain and Ireland, in each of the 
following intervals of life, will, in correspond- 
ence with the population, be inferior, as 1 to 13, 
to that of Europe; and the latter as 1 to 6, to 
that of all the human species. (See a Table in 
the preceding chapter.) 
[^A short horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
[}CHAP. III. }]
HAVING in the preceding Chapter endea- 
voured to establish the mortality of the 
human species at different ages, I am now to 
attempt a more arduous task; to ascertain the 
mortality by different diseases and casualties. I 
propose therefore, in imitation of the geogra- 
phers, to spread out and to review, in one ge- 
neral Chart, the enormous host of diseases which 
disgorge their virulence over the earth, and, 
with frightful rapacity, wage incessant hostilities 
with mankind. By this means, we shall, to use 
a military phrase, reconnoitre more distinctly 
|P_36
our enemies arranged in hostile front; and be 
warned to make the best disposition and prepa- 
ration for defence where the greatest danger is 
apprehended, and the most formidable assaults 
to be sustained. Armed with diseases, the grim 
King of Terrors appears in the most hideous 
aspect. Under all these predatory disguises and 
morbifick forms, I shall track him grappling 
with mankind, and with his tremendous scythe 
mowing down generations. 

I could easily have exhibited tables of the 
Diseases and Casualties in London during the 
greater part of the last century. But, com- 
pared to its present magnitude, the British me- 
tropolis was then insignificant in size: 23 new 
parishes have been since gradually added to the 
London bills: there is also a chasm in that cen- 
tury of 10 years in which the registers are lost. 
Again, until 1665 and 6, London was infested 
with the plague; which disease, previous to that 
date, seems to have been one primary object of 
the registers: and to adopt Graunt and Short's 
sentiments, these records, from various political 
and religious obstacles, were then very negli- 
gently managed. During the early part of this 
interval, the kingdom was distracted with civil 
war; and after the great pestilence in 1665, 
London must have required some years to re- 
cruit. Besides, had I attempted to form tables 
for even the latter part of the last century, the 
reader would have been fruitlesly embarrassed; 
and such an attempt must ever prove abortive. 
For example, under one and the same title, in 
the annually bills of mortality, are often con- 
founded flox, small pox, and measles: con- 
|P_37
sumptions and tissick: cancer, canker, and 
thrush: wolf, cancer, gangrene, and fistula: 
cancer, gangrene, fistula, and mortification: gout 
and sciatica: vapours and water in the head: 
quinsey and thrush: teeth and worms: sores, 
ulcers, bruised and broken limbs: cough, cold, 
and chincough, &c. These are a few specimens 
of Nosological absurdity in the superintendants 
of the public registers. 

Notwithstanding this rabble of diseases, in 
commenting upon the London bills and diseases 
of the present century, I constantly refer back, 
and contrast them with the bills of the last thirty 
years of the preceding century; so that, as near 
as the imperfection of the materials will admit, 
the mortality and diseases of 105 years in Lon- 
don is presented at one view; and comprehends 
the various acute and chronic diseases, by which 
about two million and a half of the human spe- 
cies have been destroyed. The few authors who 
have written on bills of mortality, have obscured 
their works in a cloud of figures and calcula- 
tion: the reader must have no small portion of 
phlegm and resolution to follow them through- 
out with attention: they often tax the memory 
and patience with a numerical superfluity, even 
to a nuisance. 

For the above and many other reasons, I have 
compressed into one chart, the London Diseases 
and Casualties of seventy-five years in the pre- 
sent century: each disease and casualty is ar- 
ranged in a progressive series of fifteen years 
mortality; and in a fifth column is added toge- 
ther the mortality of the preceding five divi- 
sions. During this period, London has been 
|P_38
more populous and stationary in numbers: and 
by this means, the actual and comparative mag- 
nitude, rise, and declension of different diseases, 
will be more conspicuous in each period or in- 
terval: and by measuring the mortality with 
the population, we are enabled, with certain 
precautions and exceptions, to make the diseases 
and casualties of London serve as a morbid ba- 
rometer to the whole nation, and in some de- 
gree to the whole universe. 

The important reason which determined me 
in forming an arrangement of fifteen years, in 
preference to any other number or period, was, 
that the annual havock by similar diseases and 
casualties, throughout this and the neighbour- 
ing island, might be computed with some pro- 
bability by each fifteen years of the London 
bills; and thereby to elicite a new, curious, and 
comprehensive proposition in medicine. For 
instance, if we suppose the standing number, on 
an average, of the London inhabitants at seven 
hundred thousand; and the total inhabitants in 
Britain and Ireland at ten million; and if the 
same diseases and casualties were equally diffused 
and fatal to this whole community, then, in 
such case, the London bills and our chart would 
serve as a scale or index of mortality to both 
kingdoms: as many would die annually of every 
disease and casualty throughout ten million, as 
are cut off in fifteen years in London; for seven 
hundred thousand multiplied by fifteen, amounts 
nearly to ten million. The excess is trifling in 
a general calculation upon so large a scale. 

But to supply the probable deficiency in the 
annual mortality of London by different diseases 
|P_39
and casualties, we must make an addition to each 
of one fourth. To the mortality of small-pox, 
in London, during fifteen years, and rated at 
thirty thousand, we should add one fourth more 
to raise it to its just standard; that is, to about 
thirty-eight thousand; which would be the an- 
nual mortality amongst ten million in Britain and 
Ireland, supposing small-pox equally universal, 
one time or other, and destructive. By the same 
hypothesis, amongst one hundred and thirty mil- 
lion in Europe Variolous mortality annually, 
would amount to upwards of four hundred thou- 
sand, and, amongst eight hundred million, that 
is the whole human race, to nearly two million 
and a half annually. 

Let us view on this great scale the annual ha- 
vock of a few diseases, assuming London as a 
radix to Britain and Ireland, and the latter to 
Europe. It appears, that the annual devastation
from fevers remittent, nervous, and putrid, and 
their species, in Britain and Ireland, is 60,000; 
throughout Europe, 800,000; from small pox 
in Britain and Ireland, 38,000; throughout Eu- 
rope, 494,000: measles are only one tenth of 
small-pox: consumptions, at least in this island, 
are still more deleterious than fevers: from 
asthma and dyspnea, in Britain and Ireland, up- 
wards of 10,000; throughout Europe upwards 
of 100,000: apoplexy is inferior by one half to 
asthma: from dropsy, in Britain and Ireland, 
17,000; throughout Europe, 170,000: from 
child-bed, in Britain and Ireland, 4000; 
throughout Europe, 50,000: from dead births, 
or abortions, at or near maturity, in Britain and 
Ireland, 13,000; throughout Europe, 130,000: 
|P_40
aged, in Britain and Ireland, 31,000; through- 
out Europe, 400,000; that is, according to our 
preceding Table in the former Chapter of the 
annual mortality of Europe, nearly one half of 
those deaths beyond 60 years of age. The an- 
nual mortality throughout the universe will be 
in the ratio of 6 to 1 beyond Europe. 

On the above simple principle, a sort of me- 
dical trigonometry and geometry, a gross esti- 
mate may be formed of the annual havock 
throughout mankind, by every other disease and 
casualty, taking the precaution, however, to at- 
tend to the subsequent criticisms on the London 
bills, and on diseases in general. From these 
Tables and Commentaries we are also furnished 
with a key to the comparative mortality of each 
disease amongst a community, and its devasta- 
tion numerically. 

Another very curious and useful corollary may 
be grounded on the above hypothesis; which is, 
from the proportion of deaths, to form a pro- 
bable conjecture of the numbers who are an- 
nually sick, or assisted with different diseases 
in a community. Example: if one of every 
seven die of the small-pox, and the variolous 
deaths throughout Britain and Ireland are rated 
at 38,000 annually, this number, multiplied by 
seven, amounts to 266,000 annually infected 
in both Islands with variolous contagion. Apply 
the same rule to childbed mortality; rate the 
annual havock by parturition in the two islands 
at 4,000: it will hereaster be shewn, that in 
London one of seventy-four women die in child- 
bed: multiply therefore 4,000 by 74, the pro- 
duct is 296,000, which is not very distant, al- 
|P_41
though inferior to the total annual procreation 
in both islands. And in these two examples, 
I have suggested what may be termed an inverse 
proof of both propositions. Upon the same 
principles a gross estimate may be formed of the 
numbers afflicted with dropsy, and with many 
other diseases. 

Gentlemen who have not particularly at- 
tended to the subject of morbid calculations (and 
very few of the medical profession have) will, 
on better information, be astonished at the fla- 
grant errors daily committed by authors when 
treating of these topicks. Out of the many ex- 
amples which might be enumerated, I shall 
merely select one in proof. Baron Dimsdale, 
in a Treatise on Inoculation, dedicated to the 
present Empress of Russia, calculated that, at 
least, two million were annually destroyed by 
small-pox alone in the Russian empire; and it 
was not until after the publication of my Ob- 
servations on his different Inoculating Essays, 
that this error and others were erased. 

I would request the reader's particular atten- 
tion to another circumstance: which is, that on 
comparing the gradations of mortality in the 
following chart, we are not to estimate the re- 
lative number, frequency, or proportion of cer- 
tain diseases, compared to others by the abso- 
lute mortality of each. For instance, Apoplexy 
kills rather more annually in London than mea- 
sles; but yet the latter disease is infinitely more 
universal and diffused amongst the community, 
and consequently less dangerous to life: cancer- 
ous and venereal cases are widely different in 
the annual number afflicted with each, although 
|P_42
the deaths are not far distant from an equality. 
The same observation will apply to rheumatism, 
compared to the dropsy, and to many other di- 
seases. 

There are between eighty and ninety diseases 
and casualties enumerated in the London bills, 
which, in the subsequent comments, I have dis- 
entangled into their separate genera. This will 
operate as a check and correction to the public 
registers; and by this, their defects and errors 
will be apparent. But objections and difficulties 
occur in our researches for collateral information 
and illustration from hospital records. The di- 
seases of hospitals are by no means a general 
standard of the diseases of the metropolis, and 
much less of the whole nation. The reasons 
also are glaring, why, in hospitals, diseases 
should be less fatal; and in this respect, cities 
should have the advantage of the country. We 
cannot therefore apply hospital registers as a ge- 
neral criterion to a nation, neither as to the mea- 
surement of diseases, nor of cures. Whenever 
authentic and systematic records of diseases, re- 
covery, and mortality, are kept in hospitals, do- 
mestick as well as military, and annually pub- 
lished, whatever may be alledged respecting the 
importance and demerits of such institutions, 
the community, at all events, will derive much 
useful information. One fourth of the annual 
mortality of Paris is in hospitals. But in con- 
trasting the success of medical practice in dif- 
ferent hospitals of Europe, criticks have forgot 
to ascertain the diseases which are admitted or 
excluded, and the proportion of the former; 
consequently their inferences are imperfect and 
erroneous. 

