

[^Sample 1: book - ^]

|P_3
[}the 
ANNIVERSARY ADDRESS 
of the
ROYAL HUMANE SOCIETY. }]
THE Philanthropist and the 
Citizen of the World, whose 
benevolent feelings are interested in the 
welfare and preservation of mankind, and 
whose liberality is extended to the support 
of this Institution, have, ever since its first 
foundation, been annually presented with 
one of the sublimest spectacles, to the 
enjoyment of which the human heart can 
possibly expand. This awful solemnity 
of humanity—this noble representation of 
charity triumphing over death and the 
grave, over misfortune and despair, has at 
each succeeding meeting been attended 
with additional circumstances of exultation 
|P_4
and gratitude, in proportion as the influence 
of the Society has extended, and its success 
increased. 

On the present occasion the Managers
introduce the usual triumphs of the day 
with peculiar satisfaction; because they 
have it in their power to give additional 
interest to the spectacle, by informing this 
benevolent assembly of the advancing 
benefits of the Humane Society, and 
the extension of its preserving care to 
various sea-ports, and other parts of the 
kingdom. Nor do its honours terminate 
in its own immediate extension. This 
original light of resuscitating benevolence 
has not only penetrated the gloom of 
affliction, by its own cheering beams; the 
rays, that have emanated from it, have 
warmed into existence the seeds of philan- 
thropy, which have burst forth in various 
parts, and are likely, ere long, to overspread 
the face of the globe. 

In short, several institutions upon the 
same plan have been formed in different 
parts of the kingdom, &c. since the last 
Anniversary Festival, and are now daily 
assisting in the grand design of beneficence 
|P_5
and diminishing the proportion of human 
misery, by restoring the apparently dead 
to life: and not to this theatre alone is 
confined the representation of exalted and 
enlightened Humanity, conducting through 
the crowd of feeling spectators the grateful 
train of emancipated victims, who, but 
for her exertions, had been devoted to a 
premature grave on the fallacious appear- 
ances of departed animation. 

Exctinctá, quatenus inferre potest sensus, vitâ [/1./]. 
The Rev. Vicessimus Knox, in his Lucubrations on 
Life and Manners, observes, — Many were the 
prejudices formed against the Society for the recovery 
of drowned persons; but let any one place himself a 
moment in the situation of a parent suddenly bereaved of 
his child, and if he is not unfeeling in his nature, he 
will want no argument to induce him to give it every 
encouragement.  — Doubts were once entertained of 
its success, but they may be now removed by ocular 
demonstration.  — It is indeed a most affecting sight 
to behold those who were snatched from the jaws of 
death walking on the public days in solemn procession, 
and paying a grateful obedience to their restorers. 

|P_6
[}ANNUAL PUBLICATION. }]
[}1790. }]
TO address the publick 
repeatedly and periodically on similar 
subject, must be allowed an irksome and 
difficult labour for the individual, to whose 
talk it may constantly fall. Novelty is 
expected from every public character, 
whenever circumstances may oblige him 
to appear before the world. In matters 
of mere entertainment, this expectation 
perhaps is just and reasonable. — But in 
what relates to Charitable Institutions 
(as the calm exertions of Benevolence, 
especially when directed to a particular 
object, must be regular and uniform) such 
an expectation cannot always be gratified. 

But however similar the misfortunes and 
calamities of our fellow-creatures may be 
the narratives of their relief, yet humanity 
will ever listen with the most refined of 
pleasures to the unvariegated tale of human 
Beings restored to life; our various relatives, 
parents, husbans, wives, and children, 
snatched from an untimely fate. To 
|P_7
attend to the repetition of such important 
facts, however plainly and circumstantially 
related, is to the man of sensibility too 
exalted a pleasure to tire or disgust by an 
annual recurrence. The Editor, therefore, 
submits himself to the candour of the 
humane reader, with a confidence, inspired 
by the nature of his subject; conscious that 
the friends of this institution will not explore 
these few pages to gratify the desire of 
literary amusement, but to trace the progress 
of those, who have been arduously labouring 
for the real happiness of their fellow 
creatures, and to extend the best interests of 
the community; — who have been applying 
remedies to those, who would formerly 
have been deemed incurable; who have 
been dispensing life to those, whom ignorance 
would otherwise have consigned to the 
tomb; who have been rescuing the victim 
from the watery grave; counteracting the 
despair of impious suicide; defeating the 
poisonous malignity of noxious vapours; 
disarming the lightning of its deadly rage, 
and, in short, vanquishing the victor Death, 
and baffling his efforts in a variety of 
forms: — For such have been the effects of 
|P_8
the Humane Society; and such is the 
foundation on which it calls upon the 
benevolent and the rational part of mankind 
for encouragement and support. — Nor 
can it be supposed, that the plea of such 
an institution will be disregarded, since 
(besides innumerable recommendations of 
national utility) it comes home to the 
sympathy of every bosom, from the 
consideration, that its preserving charity 
may well be extended to all ranks and conditions 
of mankind. 
Gratum est, quod patriæ civem, populoque reddidisti. 
The Bishop of St. David's, in his 
excellent Anniversary Sermon preached in 
favour of this Institution, observes, The 
good intentions of the Society is proved by 
its constitution; the wisdom and public 
utility of the undertaking are proved by 
its success. — The good intention, the 
wisdom, and the public utility of the 
Institution, give it no small claim upon 
the public for a liberal support. — I must 
particularly mention, that the benefit of 
this Society is by no means confined to 
the two cases of drowning and suspension. 
|P_9
Its timely succours have roused the 
lethargy of opium, have rescued the 
wretched victims of intoxication — 
rekindled the life extinguished by the 
sudden stroke of lightning — recovered 
the apoplectick — restored life to the 
infant that had lost it in the birth — and 
they have proved efficacious in the cases of 
accidental smothering, and of suffocation 
by noxious damps: insomuch that no 
species of death seems to be placed 
beyond the reach of this Society's 
assistance, where the mischief hath gone 
no further than an obstruction of the 
movements of the animal machine, 
without any damage of the organs them- 
selves. Whether an institution so truly 
beneficial to individuals, so serviceable 
to the public, by its success in preserving 
the lives of citizens, deserve not an 
establishment and patronage, to 
give it the means and the authority to 
prosecute its generous views with the 
more advantage; it is for statesmen
to consider, who know the public value 
of the life of every citizen in a free 
state. — It is for us, till this 
|P_10
public patronage be obtained, to 
supply the want of it, what we 
can, by the utmost liberality of 
voluntary contribution. 

To restore animation, is an act that 
seems to carry humanity beyond itself, and 
to approximate to the divinity: as nothing 
can possibly exceed it but creation. 
Ad revocare vitam penè divinitùs fieri videtur. 
To preserve the existence of the
human race, is an obligation incumbent 
upon every individual; and it is pleasing 
to observe, that the generality of mankind 
naturally and chearfully engage in its per- 
formance. But where the safety of others 
can only be procured by hazarding our own 
lives, self-preservation may occasion even 
the humane to deliberate; while the tardy 
and unfeeling willingly lay hold of the 
excuse for their misanthropy. The ad- 
ditional motive of reward is therefore 
requisite, to stimulate the lower classes of 
people to exertion in such cases of imminent 
danger: and the Humane Society has, 
on that account, thought it necessary to 
make it the interest of every one to assist 
|P_11
in preserving the lives of their fellow 
creatures. Even if persons, who occasionally 
give their aid in unfortunate circumstances, 
arrive too late to preserve, or to restore life, 
they are punctually and faithfully rewarded, 
for their humane, though unsuccessful 
labours, by the Managers[/2./]. 

By promoting communications, and 
medical enquiry among gentlemen of the 
faculty, the Society has also contributed 
much to the advancement of professional 
ingenuity, and has of late years very 
much improved the important science of 
resuscitation. 

|P_12
Since the commencement of this 
Institution, the Treasurer has paid the 
rewards in TWO THOUSAND and 
FIFTEEN Cases, viz. 

Persons restored to life, who 
had been drowned, or otherwise 
suffocated. } 890
Lives preserved by the drags, 
&c. of the society, &c. } 611
Unsuccessful cases, 5142015

The lives of more than 1500 persons 
preserved and restored to society, furnish 
the most irrefragable argument of the 
importance and utility of this truly Humane 
Institution. — The parent, the child, the 
wife, the relation, and the friend, can best 
tell by their feelings, the many transports, 
which must therefore have been imparted 
to the bosoms of individuals; and the 
philosophic statesman can readily determine 
how considerable an advantage has been 
conferred upon the state. Nor do the 
exertions of the Humane Society cease 
when they have arrested the stroke of 
|P_13
death, or baffled the designs of meditated 
suicide. The attention of this Institution is 
applied not only to afford oportunities of 
repentance and of peace, but to lead those, 
whom it has preserved, to the attainment 
of that pious serenity, which may render 
life truly valuable. — — For this 
purpose the Managers put into the hands 
of the restored, approved books of 
piety and devotion [/3./]; to which is now 
added, an important Religious Tract, by 
the Rev. Dr. Finch, who preached the 
anniversary Sermon for the year 1788. 
To snatch from Death the victim of despair, 
And give the means of Penitence and Prayer. 
|P_14
In order to render those persons, who have been 
restored to life sensible of the obligations they owe to the 
Supreme Being for the great mercies received, they are 
presented with a Bible, a Prayer Book, and The great 
importance of a religious life, &c.  and it is a circumstance 
of infinite satisfaction to the benevolent and pious 
characters who have favoured the Humane Society with 
their countenance and support, that many of those 
rescued from the watery grave, and other kinds of 
premature death, appear, by their course of life, truly 
sensible of the great mercy of Divine Providence. 
[^A horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
[}On the Principle of Vitality in Man, as de- 
scribed in the Holy Scriptures, and the 
difference between true and apparent
Death. }][^A horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
[}A SERMON, 
For the Benefit of the 
ROYAL HUMANE SOCIETY, 
By SAMUEL, LORD Bishop of St. DAVID's.}][^A horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]"
Nostris rebus sufficiat antiquissimos medicos, qui ex 
collatis sibi invicem observationibus opinionem omnem 
deducebant, credidisse principium quoddam, ab elementis
et materiâ diversum animalibus inesse; quod eorum 
corpora gubernaret atque conservaret, cujusque imperio 
et energiæ motus omnes animalium essent referendi. "
Nicholls, De Animâ Medicâ.
[}THE FOURTH EDITION. }][^A horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
|P_15
The Managers
of the
Royal Humane Society
have, by their indefatigable exertions, in 
transmitting to the most distant parts the 
interesting information of the vast benefits 
derived to society from their Institution, 
excited a similar spirit of philanthropy; 
which, not satisfied with having merely 
excited, they have at an immense expence 
rendered effectual, by supplying every 
necessary assistance to the completion of 
their great object, the establishment of 
institutions corresponding in every respect 
to their own. This will appear, from the 
annexed list of Humane Societies now 
established and brought to maturity in 
various parts of this kingdom, Ireland, 
and the Trans-Atlantic regions. 
Lisbon, Gloucester, 

Aberdeen, 
Leith, 
Dublin, 
Jamaica, 
Boston, 
Philadelphia, 
Worcester, Shropshire 
Northamptonshire, 
Lancaster, 
Bristol, 
Whitehaven, 
Norwich, 
Kent, 
Newcastle upon Tyne. 
[/4./][^A horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
|P_44[^A horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
[}EXTRAORDINARY CASES. }]
[}Suffocation, by Mr. Williams to the Register. }]
MR. D. Hopkins and myself were called to 
the Colliery of S. S. Esq. where a 
dreadful explosion of the inflammable air happened, 
and at the moment killed five of the cutters; 
fourteen men agreed to go into the pit to get up the 
remains of their fellow-labourers; but remaining 
a long time the agents suspected that they were 
suffocated (which was unfortunately the case): 
some more of the Colliers went down, and brought 
up the bodies, apparently lifeless. 

The plan of the truly Humane Society was 
pursued for an hour, when we discovered signs of 
returning life in several of our suffocated patients, 
and were so fortunate as to restore Eight of the 
Colliers to their wives and children. 

Messrs. David, John, and Ed. Martin, Agents, &c. 
rendered us every kind assistance. The names of 
the men restored to life by a long perseverance in the 
means recommended by your excellent Institution 
are, T. Sims, D. Jones, J. Evans, J. Rees, E. 
Hobson, W. Morgan, W. Rose, and James King. 
Thomas Williams, } Surgeons. David Hopkins, 
[/5./]
|P_45[^A horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
Public Benevolence, by encouraging the art of resuscitation, 
has successfully encountered the perils of overwhelming 
waters, pestilential air, and elementary fire; of which 
last circumstance, the subsequent Cases are most pleasing 
and convincing proofs. 
[}Mr. Haynes, to Dr. Hawes. }]
Sir, 

AS an instance of the great necessity of the 
Faculty not giving up all hopes of resuscitation 
on the appearance of death, permit me to state the 
subsequent cases. — I was called to a man who had 
struck dead by lightning. The electric fire 
first fell upon the roof, and was conducted to 
the extremity of the tiles, under which he was 
passing, by a sheeting of lead. — The person was to all 
appearance dead, there being no signs of respiration or 
circulation. I employed the various modes of treatment 
which you had so judiciously recommended; and, 
in about half an hour, feeble signs of respiration 
became perceptible, and he was seized with 
convulsions, attended with efforts to vomit; 
upon which I ordered an emetic, and the con- 
vulsions gradually declined. In about eight hours 
he recovered his speech and in a day or two was 
perfectly restored to life and health. 

I have been called to many cases of sudden death, 
without proving successful, which induced me to at- 
tend your valuable lectures; and I am bound, however, 
in justice to declare that my trouble has been amply 
compensated by the improvement and satisfaction I 
thereby received. To you, Sir, the world is much 
indebted for your valuable researches into the art of 
restoring suspendid animation. Thomas Haynes.

|P_46[^A horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
[}An unfortunate Youth hanged himself. }]
Sir, 

HAPPY in being instrumental in restoring a 
fellow-creature, and wishing to promote your 
laudable institution, I am induced to acquaint you 
with the particulars of a youth, who was suspended. 

The body had the strongest appearances of 
dissolution, the face, &c. was livid, and neither 
respiration, pulsation, nor sensation, could be per- 
ceived. I requested only the necessary assistants 
to remain. — The process of re-animation, of 
the Humane Society, was commenced and vigorously 
pursued, so that by perseverance in the various 
means for half an hour, the breathing became 
perceptible, though laborious and convulsive; a feeble 
pulse, attended with convulsions succeeded, which 
continued for three hours. 

My patient now opened his eyes, with the 
strongest symptoms of delirium. It appeared to 
me at this time proper, as the power of deglutition 
had returned, to get down small and repeated doses 
of a volatile cordial medicine; and in about half an 
hour a copious discharge from the stomach ensued, 
which produced temporary debility, and a com- 
fortable sleep for six hours; when on waking he 
was perfectly recovered. The youth is at this time 
a living monument of the utility of the Humane 
Society. J. M. CHURCH.
[/6./]
|P_47[^A horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
[}Mr. Carterof Shrewsbury to theRegister. }]
Sir, 

WHEN I got to the place, the man who cut 
the object down, stated to me that when he cut 
the string, she sunk about an inch, and was quite 
motionless; that it was very tight about the neck, 
was made with a running noose, and nearly covered 
in some places by the swelling of the parts; that her 
tongue projected about an inch, was much swelled, and 
of a livid colour, and that she was to all appearance 
quite dead — But by a resolute perseverance in the 
means recommended by the Humane Society, in about 
4 hours she was restored to life, with which pleasing 
event I have now the happiness to acquaint you. 

There were upwards of one hundred spectators
who had the satisfaction of seeing the proper means 
employed, which fortunately restored the young wo- 
man alive to her disconsolate friends. 
JOHN CARTER.
[/7./]
|P_48[^A horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
[}An extraordinary recovery from apparent Death, by Intense 
Cold, by Mr.Sheriff, M. A.}]
AN apprentice of Mr. Bowyer's, in a boat from 
Gravesend, was overtaken by a violent storm 
accompanied with a fall of snow. At Erith the boy 
dropped from the bench insensible, and on being 
brought to Deptford, the by-standers looked upon him 
as irrecoverably lost, and, in their usual language, told 
his Master, "he is dead enough. " A quarter of an 
hour elapsed before Mr. Sheriff could attend. He 
observed the countenance displayed the strongest 
marks of dissolution. No pulsation or breathing 
could be perceived — In addition to the usual plan 
recommended by the Humane Society, the 
application of snow appeared remarkably efficacious — 
At length pulsation, &c. returned; and in about two 
hours his life was restored. 

After perusing the above, there is great reason 
to hope, that at a future period the body of some 
traveller (who has missed his way in the pathless fields of 
snow, and who has been obliged to sink under the 
anguish of a tortured mind, and the severity of the 
storm) may fall in the way of some member of the 
Humane Society, or friend to Humanity, who 
will not leave it to be bleached in the northern 
blast; but who, unawed by the strong appearances 
of death, will attempt a similar mode of treatment to 
that which, in the present instance, has been at- 
tended with the most happy success. 
[/8./]
|P_49[^A horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
[}DROWNING. }]
THE Humane Society was 
originally established for the recovery of persons 
apparently dead by drowning; and as accidents of 
this kind, in consequence of commerce, recreation, 
&c. are very frequent, and the success of the Medical 
Assistants is so well known to the world, by the 
Biennial publication of the Reports it appears almost 
unnecessary to trouble the reader with cases of this 
kind; but in order to render our collection uniform, 
the following striking instances of reanimation are 
briefly related. 

[}ADDRESSED 
to
Dr. Lettsom, V. P. and Treasurer. }]
Sir, 

Mr. James Smith, his son, and W. Dudley cros- 
sing the river, and attempting to reach at something 
which floated, by too great exertion capsized the 
wherry, and were in the water more than ten minutes; 
when some people in a boat, who saw the accident at 
a considerable distance, came to their aid, and took 
them up to all appearance dead: their bodies were 
brought on shore, and lay a long time on the 
Pier-Head without any assistance, from the supposition 
that the three persons were totally deprived of life. 
From the time of the accident, till my attendance, 
|P_50
was three quarters of an hour; when I had them 
conveyed to the Three Tuns, employed the usual 
modes of treatment, and in an hour had the happiness 
to restore Dudley and the Son; but it was one hour 
and three quarters before I could perceive any 
symptoms of returning life in Mr. Smith, which 
commenced with spasms about the face, followed 
by strong convulsions, deep groans, and laborious 
respiration. — He continued in this state about two 
hours. — I found it necessary to take away some blood, 
as he is a man of plethoric habit, and had been much 
bruised, by being thrown about on supposition of his 
being dead; but at this time I have the happiness to 
say is perfectly restored to life and health, 
I am, 
Sir, 
Your most humble servant,
Sheerness, Jan. 25.W. LAWRENCE.
[/9./]
|P_51[^A horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
[}Dr.Squires, to the Register 
of the 
Humane Society. }]
I AM exceeding happy in the opportunity of 
transmitting a case, which must afford you great 
pleasure; and, at the same time, evince to the public, 
of what extensive utility the Society's plan is capable, 
for sure I am, in various cases of apparent death, 
many lives might have been preserved (which have 
been given up as lost) if proper methods had been 
used. — The following relation and success proves 
demonstratively the importance of your judicious 
plan of Resuscitation. 

[}The Case. }]
A young woman, in a fit of despair, attempted to 
destroy herself by hanging, in which state she was 
discovered and cut down, in a quarter of an hour from 
the time it was supposed she had been suspended. 
A messenger was dispatched to my house, a mile 
distant from the scene of action. On entering the 
house several women appeared much terrified and 
alarmed; said that the poor girl was certainly dead, 
and they were unwilling to remain with her. She 
had no beating of the heart, no pulsation, her 
respiration likewise totatlly ceased, her face swoln and 
livid. I ordered the body to be put down between warm 
blankets, frictions to be employed, and blowing 
strongly into the lungs, by applying a mouth to that 
of the unfortunate woman; which operation I could 
|P_52
with difficulty persuade any of them to undertake, 
till the idea of the medium of an handkerchief was 
suggested, on which one of the women applied with 
great earnestness to the business; a warming-pan, 
heated, was rubbed over the back for some time; 
the feet and legs were immersed in warm water, 
volatiles to the nose and temples were likewise applied. 

By persisting in the use of these various means 
for twenty minutes, signs of returning life appeared, 
such as sighing and small twitchings; convulsive 
motions followed, with the action of the heart, and 
a return of the natural colour and warmth. It 
was then judged proper to take away blood, to 
prevent the effects of pressure on the brain, which 
might happen from a surcharge of blood forced 
into the vessels by her unhappy attempt to destroy 
herself.— From that time she gradually recovered, and 
I this day took leave of her, perfectly restored in 
body and mind, and sincerely penitent. — This case 
demonstrates the good effects of Perseverance
in the methods. — Lateat Scintilsull Forsan should be 
ever present to the mind when we are called for 
under these unhappy circumstances. That consideration 
will animate us in the most desperate cases of sus- 
pended animation. — ln the present case, the assistants 
and bye-standers were so astonished, that they considered 
the matter more like a resurrection than a recovery." 

I trust, Sir, you will excuse the prolixity of 
this narrative, knowing that communications of such 
instances of success may prove highly beneficial to the 
public, by exciting others, on similar occasions, to 
use their utmost efforts, to save the lives of their fel- 
low-creatures. J. SQUIRES.

|P_53[^A horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
[}on the 
Absurdity of an Opinion,
THAT DEAD BODIES ARE NOT TO 
BE REMOVED UNTIL THE CORONER 
HAS HELD AN INQUEST ON THEM. }]
[}CASE. }]
The Royal Humane Society for the recovery 
of persons from apparent death, among many laudable 
exertions for the restoration of life, have published 
their successful modes of practice, which have been 
presented gratis to the publick for several years. But 
their benevolent views have, in some instances, been 
frustrated, from an idea that it is contrary to law to 
meddle with dead bodies until the Coroner's Jury 
have taken an Inquisition; by which delay frequent 
instances have occurred wherein lives, otherwise re- 
deemable, have been totally lost. 

[}Question. }]
Are there any and what statutes, or other laws, 
now in existence, in any manner prohibiting persons, 
other than the Coroner and his Jury, from inter- 
meddling with human bodies dead, or apparently 
dead, from drowning, suffocating, strangling, &c. 

|P_54
[}Answer. }]
It is a misdemeanor by the common law, and an 
indictable offence, to prevent the Coroner from doing 
his duty, or to obstruct him in the execution of it. 
But the meddling with a body apparently dead, for 
the purpose of preserving life, is not a transgression 
of the law in either of these respects; nor do I know 
any statute by which such an act is prohibited. In 
such cases the Coroner ought certainly to be called 
in as soon as it is evident that the body is dead. If 
this precaution be taken, it is not probable that the 
removing of a dead body from the place where it is 
found, for the benevolent purpose above-mentioned, 
should ever be made the subject of a criminal 
prosecution; but if it should be, the party would 
undoubtedly be acquitted, upon proving that his 
interposition was with the design of preserving life, 
and that the Coroner had an opportunity of taking 
an inquest on the body as soon as that interposition 
appeared to be in vain. 

[}REWARD }]
To Publicans and others, who have been 
deterred from receiving bodies apparently dead into 
their houses, under an apprehension of being liable 
to penalties and expences, are informed that they 
will be indemnified by the HUMANE SOCIETY, 
and from the charges of burial in unsuccessful cases 
W. HAWES, Register.

|P_55
The Manager, Governors, and the Public 
are under particular Obligations to the 
Medical Assistants, who, upon all Occa- 
sions, attend drowned or otherwise suf- 
focated persons, without Fee or Reward; 
and, in so doing, afford the strongest 
proofs of their professional Zeal for the 
preservation of the lives of mankind. 

The Bishop of St. David's observes in his Anni- 
versary Sermon, that the Medical Practioners ac- 
cept no pecuniary recompence for the time which 
they devote to a difficult and tedious process; for 
the mortification which they too often undergo, 
when death, in spite of their efforts, at last carries 
off his prey. Their sole reward is in the holy joy 
of doing good. Of an institution thus free in its 
plan, renouncing self-interest in every shape, 
Philanthropy must be the only basis. The good 
intention therefore of the Society is proved by its 
Constitution; the Wisdom and Public Utility of 
the Undertaking are proved by its Success. 

|P_61[^A horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
[}ROYAL HUMANE SOCIETY,
for the recovery of drowned persons; 
also in the various other cases of sudden 
or apparent death, 
viz. apoplectic and convulsive fits, 
suffocation by damps, or noxious vapours 
proceeding from coal mines, 
the confined air of wells, cisterns, caverns, 
the must of fermenting liquors, 
intoxication, hanging, intense cold; 
and of those by the tremendous stroke of 
lightning. }][^A horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
[}directions for the recovery of the 
apparently dead. }]
I. The restoration of heat is of the greatest 
consequence for the return of life: when, therefore, 
the body is taken out of the water, the cloaths should 
be stripped off; or, if naked at the time of the 
accident, it must be covered with two or three coats, 
or a blanket. The body should then be carefully 
conveyed to the nearest house, with the head a little 
raised. In cold and damp weather the person should 
be laid on a bed, &c. in a room that is moderately 
heated: — In summer, on a bed exposed to the rays of 
the sun, and not more than six persons admitted, as 
a greater number may retard the return of life. The 
|P_62
body is to be well dried with warm cloaths, and gently 
rubbed with flannels, sprinkled with rum, brandy, 
gin, or mustard. — Fomentations of spirits may 
be applied to the pit of the stomach with advantage. 
— A warming-pan covered with flannel should be 
lightly moved up and down the back; bladders, or 
bottles filled with hot water, heated bricks, or tiles 
wrapped up in flannel, should be applied to the soles 
of the feet, palms of the hands, and other parts of 
the body. 

II. Respiration will be promoted, by closing 
the mouth and one nostril, while, with the pipe of a 
bellows, you blow into the other with sufficient force 
to inflate the lungs; another person should then press 
the chest gently with his hands, so as to expel the air. 
If the pipe be too large for the nostrils, the air may 
be blown in at the mouth. Blowing the breath can 
only be recommended when bellows cannot be 
procured. 

III. The bowels should be inflated with the 
fumes of Tobacco, and repeated three or four times 
within the first hour; but, if circumstances prevent 
the use of this vapour, then clysters of this herb, 
or other acrid infusions with salt, may be thrown up 
with advantage. — The fumigating machine
is so much improved as to be of the highest impor- 
tance to the Public; and if employed in every instance 
of apparent death, it would restore the lives of many 
of our fellow creatures, as it now answers the 
important purposs of fumigation, inspiration, and 
expiration. 

IV. Agitation has proved a powerful auxiliary 
to the other means of recovery; one or more of the 
|P_63
Assistants should therefore, take hold of the legs and 
arms, particularly of boys, and shake their bodies 
for five or six minutes; this may be repeated several 
times within the first hour. When the body is wiped 
perfectly dry, it should be placed in bed between two 
healthy persons, and the friction chiefly directed, in 
this case, to the left side, where it will be most likely 
to excite the motion of the heart. 

V. When these Methods have been employed for 
an hour, if any brewhouse, bakehouse, or glasshouse 
be near, where warm grains, ashes, lees, &c. can be 
procured, the body should be placed in any of these, 
moderated to a degree of heat very little exceeding 
that of the person in health. If the warm bath can 
be conveniently obtained, it may be advantageously 
used in conjunction with the earliest modes of 
treatment. 

VI. Electricity should be early employed, as 
it will increase the beneficial effects of the other 
means of recovery on the system. The electrical 
shock,  says Mr. Kite in his Essay on the Recovery
of the apparently dead, is to be admitted as the test 
or discriminating characteristic of any remains of 
animal life; and so long as that produces contractions, 
may the person be said to be in a recoverable state; 
but when that effect has ceased, there can no doubt 
remain of the party being absolutely and positively 
dead. 

VII. If convulsions, or other signs of returning 
life appear, a tea spoonful or two of warm water may 
be put into the mouth; and if the power of swallowing 
be returned, a little warm wine or brandy and water 
may be given. When this gradual approach towards 
|P_64
recovery is observed, and breathing returned, let the 
person be put into a warm bed, and if disposed to 
sleep, as is generally the case, give no disturbance, 
and he will awake, almost perfectly recovered. 

The above methods are to be used with vigor for 
3 or 4 hours, for it is a vulgar and dangerous opinion 
to suppose that persons are irrecoverable, because life 
does not make its appearance; an opinion that 
has consigned an immense number to the grave, who 
might have been restored to life by resolution
and preserverance. 

Bleeding should never be employed in 
such cases, unless by the direction of one 
of the medical assistants, or some other 
respectable gentleman of the faculty, 
who has paid attention to the subject of 
suspended animation. 

On the first alarm of any person being drowned, 
let hot water, flour of mustard, warm blankets, hot flannels, 
flat bottled filled with hot water, a heated warming-pan, 
bellows, brandy, hartshorn drops, and an electrifying 
machine, be procured. These articles being immedi- 
ately employed, may be productive of restoring many 
useful and valuable lives. 

The common people will often restore life by 
pursuing the plans now recommended; but if 
gentleman of the faculty can be obtained, 
their assistance should be immediately requested; as 
their skill will lead them judiciously to vary the 
methods of treatment; and, in a variety of accidents, 
many more lives will be restored to the community 
and to their families. 

|P_65
The above means of restoration have proved 
efficacious in Apparent sudden death, by 
convulsions, intoxications, hanging, intense cold, and the 
tremendous stroke of lightning. — — When persons are 
frost bitten they should be rubbed with snow, 
previous to their being brought into a warm room, 
In suffocation, occasioned by the fumes of sulphur, 
charcoal, &c. dashing the face and breast with cold 
water has been known to restore life. 

In order to excite an earnest attention 
to the apparently dead, it may be proper to 
observe that since the establishment of the Humane 
society, more than two thirds of those, who 
a few years ago would have been interred as inanimate 
corses, are now restored to their joyful relations and 
friends! Among these many were industrious heads of 
numerous families, who would have become a parochial 
charge, had not their valuable lives been thus 
preserved! Many were heedless infants, wandering 
from their parents, who, but for this institution, 
would never have returned! Others were Suicides, 
rushing into eternity in a state of mind the most unfit 
to appear before the tribunal of their Judge! 

|P_66
[}REFLECTIONS 
on 
APPARENT DEATH 
and the 
RETURN of LIFE. }]
The Rev. Dr. Franklin in his 
Anniversary Sermon for this Society, has expressed 
himself on this interesting subject as followers: 

Suppose yourselves in an evening walk of rural 
retirement, on the borders of a delightful stream, 
imagine your contemplations interrupted by a strange 
and uncommon appearance. — At a little distance 
behold a busy, bustling croud of industrious labourers 
encircling the body of their hapless companion, 
whom they have taken out of the neighbouring river, 
and dragged to the shore without life or motion, his 
eyes closed and sunk, his face pale and livid, his 
limbs torpid and motionless; without the least signs 
life they convey him in hopeless despondency to 
his own home. 

One of the Medical Assistans of this 
Institution hears of the event, he flies like the good 
Samaritan to the chamber of sorrow, he stops the 
retreating multitude, calls on the most vigorous and 
active amongst them to assist him, applies with zeal 
and alacrity those means of Resuscitation which 
reason and success dictate as the most proper to 
animate, if possible, the lifeless mass, and pursues them 
with ceaseless toil and unwearied assiduity. — Death 
seems to smile at the ineffectual labour and skill, till 
at length, subdued by fortitude and perseverance, he 
gives up the contest. — A ray of hope breaks in 
upon the gloom, and lights up every countenance. 
— "Behold! again he Moves, Breathes, Lives."
— What follows is not within the power of 
language to describe; imagination alone can suggest 
to you the delightful scene of wonder and 
astonishment, of mutual joy, transport and felicity. 

|P_67
Art. x. Cologne. Nouvelle Découverse d'une Méthode 
pen couteuse, efficace, & assurée de traiter tous les 
Hommes décédés, &c. New Discovery of a cheap, 
efficacious, and approved Method of treating Men 
at their Decease, in order to restore to Life those 
who are only apparently dead. By J. G. C. A. 
Baron de Hupsch, Member of several Academies, 
&c. 1789. 

Some years ago, baron de H. recommended 
electrifying all persons supposed to be dead; and the 
successful trial of the experiment on a lady of 
distinction, last year, has induced him to publish 
this pamphlet, in French and German, in which are 
given ample directions for its application. 
Annalytical Review for Dec. 1789. p. 502.
[^A horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
[}The Electric Shock, a Test of remaining Life. 
Reports of the Humane Society, 
1787, 1788, and 1789. }]
The Baron de Hupsch has discovered, that a 
human body, apparently dead, may be resuscitated by 
being electrified. The idea is so simple, and so easily 
put in practice, that it would be wasting words to 
paint the merit of the discovery or to recommend it 
to general employment. I hasten merely to throw 
out the notice, and recommend it to the faculty to 
make experiments. I recommend it to the humane 
to spread the notice; I recommend it to self-love to 
guard itself with such a buckler against the most 
dreadful of all deaths, a falsely supposed one. The 
clergy, no doubt, will concur in establishing the use 
of so important a preservative; and no supposed 
corpse ought to be interred without an attestation of 
its having been electrified, especially if the reputed 
death was sudden. 

[}Reports of the Humane Society 
Translated into the
Portuguese Language. }]
While the greater part of the inhabitants of the 
Continent are attracting the attention of the rest 
of Europe by their intestine troubles and civil 
commotions, the Editor of this publication is happy 
to see Great Britain distinguished among her 
neighbours by their attempts to imitate her in the 
arts of industry or humanity. Among the latter may 
be classed a Portuguese transtation, which he has 
recently seen, of the "Reports of the Humane 
Society. " The title is, Avisos Interissantes a 
Humanidade ou Colleccao Dealguns arrigos conceruantes 
a restauracao da vida dos assigados, eutros de morte 
apparante ou nimacao suspensad, extratudos dos 
Escriptos publicadotum Engleterre por ordemdu Sociedade 
Humma.  Edudosa luz na lingua Portugueze par 
diligendare a custa de Carlos Murray, Consul Geral 
de S. Magestade Beitannica na Ilha da Madeira. 

The Translator has annexed to the Reports, 
the modes of treatment for the recovery of the 
apparently dead; together with the sentiments of 
Dr. Hawes on sudden death, as well as an 
account of those diseases in which a. suspension of 
the vital faculties may take place; and has also 
translated the Anniversary Sermons preached by 
the Rev. Servington Savery, 1785, and the Rev. 
Sethe Thompson, 1787. 
[^A horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
|P_69
[}SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BENEFACTIONS. }]
[}For carrying on this national and benevolent Design, are 
received by the following Bankers, &c.}]
The Hon. Baron Dimsdale, Sons, and Barnard. 
Langtons, Towgoods, and Amory. 
Down, Thornton, and Free. 
Drummonds and Co. 
Rev. Russell Scott, Porsmouth. 
B. C. Collins, Esq. Salisbury.
R. Thompson, Esq. Rochester.
Dr. Lettsom, Sambrook-house.
Dr. Hawes, Bury-street, St. Mary-Axe.
and the
London Coffee-house.
TEN GUINEAS 
Constitute a Director for Life; and 
ONE GUINEA 
Per Annum, an Annual Director. [^A picture of a crown. ^]

[^1. 
* Death may usurp on Nature many hours; 
And yet the fire of life kindle again 
The O'er prest spirits. — SHAKSPEARE.
^]
[^2. 

[}* Managers of the Humane Society. }]
Dr. LETTSOM, F. R. S. and V. P. 
Joseph Thompson, Esq. V. P. 
Rev. Dr. Milne, 
Rev. J. Pridden, F. A. S. 
Rev. H. Fly, F. R. S. 
Rev. J. B. Sanders, 
Dr. Hawes, 
Dr. Cooper, 
Mr. H. Amory, 
Mr. Beaumont, 
Mr. Dearnes, 
Rev. A. P. Poston, 
John Davenport, Esq. 
John Dod, Esq. 
Mr. Rushforth, 
Mr. Marsh, 
Mr. Stokes. 
Mr. Deputy Nichols. ^]
[^3. 
* COURT of DIRECTORS. 
JOSEPH THOMPSON, Esq. V. P. in the Chair.

Resolved unanimously, 

That the Thanks of this Court be presented to the 
Rev. Dr. FINCH, for his generous and friendly present of 
One Hundred Religious Tracts to the Humane Society, 
entituled, An Earnest Address to Persons recovered from 
Apparent Death, in Cases of Suspended Animation: with 
some Devotional Aids, adapted to their Circumstances and 
Situation. Signed by Order, 
W. HAWES, Register.
^]
[^4. 
⁂ Apparatusses, Drags, the Reports, and several thousand of the 
Plans of Resuscitation have been presented to the Gentlemen of the 
Faculty and others at Jamaica, Boston, Philadelphia, Lancaster, 
Lisbon, &c. in order to form similar Institutions for the preservation of 
the Lives of mankind. 
^]
[^5. 
⁂ The General Court of Directors unanimously resolved, that a 
certain sum should be sent to the men who had brought up the bodies, 
and had likewise assisted in the recovery of the above eight persons. 
The restoration of so many industrious Colliers to their numerous fami- 
lies are amongst the blessed consequences of the Humane Society. 

The Honorary Medal was voted to Mr. Williams, which was 
deposited in the hands of Mr. Gething, one of the cashiers of the Bank, 
in order to be conveyed to that Gentlman at Swansea. 

It may be observed on the present occasion, that Medals have been 
frequently struck in honour of those, who have, by fire and sword, 
laid waste provinces, and depopulated kingdoms; but surely such a 
tribute of public approbation more properly belongs to the Benefactors 
and Preservers of the Human Race. 
^]
[^6. 
⁂ On the instant he had hanged himself his feelings were as follow: 
— When strangling be experienced a sense of suffocation, and most violent 
pain; to this, darkness succeeded; he then seemed to be surrounded with a 
blaze of fire, and became totally insensible; not having the least recollection 
of any thing that afterwards occurred, till his life was perfectly restored. 
^]
[^7. 
⁂ Many persons in a desponding state have hung 
themselves, and though, on being cut down, the 
appearances of death were so strong as to render 
by-standers inattentive to their recovery, yet the 
Medical Assistants, on being informed of such 
melancholy events, have in the most benevolent 
manner commenced and successfully employed the 
means of Resuscitation. Such philanthropic exertion 
have not only restored animation, but also a composed 
 serene state of mind. 
^]
[^8. 
⁂ Three Persons apparently struck dead by the awful and 
tremendous stroke of Lightning; and their lives restored by John Mil- 
ward, Esq. Mr. Haynes, and Mr. Jackson; and the above remarkable 
instance of Life being restored by Mr. Sheriff, demonstratively prove 
that Resuscitation is as practicable, as in those of the suffocated, the 
strangled, or the drowned. 
^]
[^9. 
⁂ The Honorary Medal
being unanimously voted to Mr. Lawrence, it was 
agreed by the General Court of Directors, that 
it should be conferred in the most respectful manner; 
and therefore Lord Stamford, our valuable and 
amiable President, with that condescension for which 
he is eminently distinguished, presented the Medal 
to the above Gentleman at the London Tavern, in 
the presence of more than three hundred benevolent 
characters assembled at the Anniversary Festival of the 
Humane Society, who testified, by loud and repeated 
plaudits, their cordial approbation. 
^]