

[^Sample 1: book - ^]

[}A 
JUSTIFICATION 
of the 
RIGHTS OF THE LICENTIATES, 
&c.}][^A short horizontal double-line in the middle of the page. ^]
A CORPORATE monopoly in a liberal and 
scientific profession, which depreciates the 
great body of that profession, without the slightest 
evidence of their inferiority or disqualification, 
would scarcely be supposed to exist at the close of 
the eighteenth century, in the enlightened metro- 
polis of Great Britain. But, extraordinary and dis- 
graceful as it is, a great majority of the physicians 
of London, equal in talents, education, acquire- 
ments, skill, and conduct, to any body of the 
faculty in Europe, are only tolerated and licensed 
to practise under the authority and controul of a 
narrow corporation. The College of Physicians, 
originally founded for the most beneficent and 
liberal purposes, for the security of the public, 
and the advantage of the faculty of physic, by 
restraining illiterate and unprincipled practitioners, 
|P_2
and by distinguishing and rewarding skilful and 
upright physicians, is now in the possession of an 
inconsiderable and interested party. A few in- 
dividuals, entitled fellows, who have graduated in 
Oxford and Cambridge, where their profession 
cannot be learned, have assumed the right of con- 
fining admission to their own class, or of extending 
it arbitrarily to such of the faculty only, who have 
obtained their degrees elsewhere, as interest or 
partiality may induce them. The great body of 
physicians of London, though possessed of every 
claim, which ability, acquirements, and character 
can give, who have studied and graduated in the 
best medical universities in Europe, are excluded 
and degraded under the appellation of licentiates. 

It is the object of this treatise to prove, that every 
well educated physician, of unimpeached character, 
residing within the jurisdiction of the college, is 
entitled, independently of local study and local gra- 
duation, to be examined for admission into the 
fellowship of the college; and if found competent 
in character, learning, and skill, entitled also to be 
incorporated. 

This will be attempted to be established in 
equity, in law, and in expediency, after a previous 
statement of the immediate benefits of admission, 
and the indirect and prejudicial consequences of 
|P_3
exclusion. In equity, by a comparative statement 
of the claims of the licentiates and fellows. In law, 
by the strict letter and obvious meaning of the char- 
ter and acts of parliament relating to the college; 
by the original incorporation; by the early and long 
continued usage; and by all the authorities on the 
subject, prior to the late decision. In expediency, 
by the advantages, which would accrue to the 
corporation, the profession, and the community. 

It will be shewn, that two bye-laws, which have 
been alledged to extenuate the injustice of the 
college, and alleviate the injury suffered by the 
licentiates, are an aggravation of both. That 
one of them, under which admission has been con- 
ceded through favour, is partial, arbitrary, and 
unjust: calculated to depreciate those admitted 
under it, to divide, depress, and impoverish the 
great body of licentiates, and to exalt and enrich 
the fellows. That the other bye-law is inadequate 
and rigorous, and apparently only intended, as it 
has hitherto been employed, to deceive. 

It will be finally shewn, that the licentiates have 
it in their power, by uniting and forming a society 
of their own, to retaliate the wrongs they suffer, 
and redress their grievances, to eclipse, if not ex- 
tinguish the college. 

|P_4
The very able, elaborate, and conclusive argu- 
ments of the counsel for the claimant, might well 
be relied on to establish the justice of the demands 
of the licentiates. But the writer of this address is 
impelled by motives which he cannot resist, to ex- 
patiate upon this subject. After having dedicated 
many years in the best schools of physic, to the study 
of a laborious and expensive profession, it is scarce- 
ly possible not to feel the injury of being debarred 
its fair advantages. On seeing others of superior 
pretensions, and the highest qualifications, de- 
prived of a just privilege, by a party, many of 
whom have neither had the means nor the powers 
of attaining equal acquirements; it is impossible 
not to feel indignation. From the ostensible 
situation in which the writer has been placed, 
his inquiries the subject have been extended, 
his convictionof the justice of the cause con- 
sequently confirmed, and his zeal to establish the 
right animated. He has been led to investigate 
the question with attention, and to discuss it with 
those, who were most competent to judge of the 
legality, the equity, and the expediency of the 
claim, all which have been uniformly corroborated, 
both by inquiry and discussion. The conviction 
of its justice has not been shaken by the objections 
of the able counsel employed to oppose, nor even 
by the opinions of the learned judges, who decided 
against it. He remains firmly convinced, that 
|P_5
both the letter and spirit of the charter and act of 
parliament, the original incorporation, the early 
usage, the interests of the community, all unite to 
give as clear a title to what the licentiates de- 
mand, as ever was brought forward to a corporate 
right, in a court of law. 

It may perhaps be thought presumptuous to 
impeach the decision of men of great legal weight. 
But the contrary opinion of men of at least equal 
authority would alone jutify the measure, and re- 
fute the imputation. Besides, where the ground of 
equity, on which a decision is founded, is ex- 
plained, every man of common understanding can 
judge of its rectitude. To expound the true 
meaning of perplexed and complicated statutes, 
and to develope the real points of analogy betwixt 
the multifarious and intricate cases, which con- 
stitute common law, and questions to be decided 
by them, require the discernment of an expe- 
rienced lawyer. But the principles of equity, 
when set forth, on which both statutes are enacted 
and cases are decided; and the relation of the 
former, and the analogy of the latter, with points 
determined by them, when stated, are level to 
common sense. The expediency also of decisions 
may, in many instances, be better underitood by 
the persons they affect, than by those who deliver 
them. It will scarcely be disputed that a phy- 
|P_6
sician is more competent to decide what influence 
a monopoly, or an extension of privileges, in a 
medical corporation, will have, both upon the 
profession and the community, than a lawyer. 
There may also be cases where political appre- 
hensions, where opinions formerly given, though 
not judicially, where hereditary partiality im- 
bibed in infancy and long inculcated, where pre- 
dilection for the feats of education [/1./], preference 
for those to whose skill health is consided, par- 
donable biases when they do not prejudice the 
rights of others, may imperceptibly warp the best 
intentioned men, when they venture to decide 
legal claims upon the fallacious ground of con- 
structive expediency. The ablest men are some- 
times betrayed into error, and the most upright 
misled, when partialities combine with preposses- 
sions to influence their judgment. 

When we are unwillingly impelled by a con- 
viction of right, and an obligation of duty, to 
|P_7
arraign a decision of men of unimpeached in- 
tegrity, and of great ability and superior learn- 
ing, it affords an apology to others, and a satis- 
faction to ourselves, that our opinion is supported 
by the highest authorities, which can be resorted 
to on the subject. That satisfaction is heightened 
when peculiar circumstances are discoverable, 
which might obscure the views of such high 
characters, on a particular subject, on which we 
are endeavouring to invalidate their determina- 
tion, without any imputation against their inte- 
grity. Besides the motives of preference, which 
it has been alledged might influence the Court 
of King's Bench in favour of the college, a de- 
ceptive bye-law was brought forward, which 
professed to extend the right of admission, under 
certain restrictions, to the licentiates. It was 
under the impression that the right of incor- 
poration was in an extended to them, and 
that the bye-law requiring previous graduation 
at Oxford and Cambridge, illegal when standing 
alone, was qualified and legalized by this pretended 
source of admission, that the court sustained the 
bye-laws taken together. They could not suspect 
the good faith of such a grave body as the College; 
much less believe them capable of such duplicity, 
as to advance a bye-law in a court of justice, as 
a mere pretext to deceive. They not only con- 
|P_8
ceived that it was to be honestly and fairly 
adhered to, but apparently hoped that it might be 
relaxed. This bye-law, as will be shewn, is 
totally inadequate to the rights of the licentiates, 
and by no means reconciles the decision with 
the real justice of the case: but it certainly does, 
when coupled with other circumstances, in some 
rneasure account for, and render it less excep- 
tionable. 

Previous to any argument to establish the equi- 
table claim of the licentiates, and to prove that 
both the letter and spirit of the charter and act of 
Parliament are decisive in their favour; that the 
original incorporation, the early and long con- 
tinued usage, and the undisputed joint possession 
demonstrate their right; that the opinions of the 
court, in their favour, on the former trials, are strict- 
ly in point; and that a liberal construction and en- 
larged expediency, accord with law and equity to 
re-establish their privileges; it may be proper to 
state the motives which have induced the licenti- 
ates, engaged in the contest, to endeanour to regain 
them. Such a statement will obviate erroneous no- 
tions, hazarded by superficial observers, that the 
disputed object is of inconsiderable importance. It 
will refute the interested objections, under the same 
pretext, of those who endeavoured to damp the 
|P_9
zeal of the licentiates who stood forward; 
and the prudential ones of those, who wished to 
excuse a passive acquiescence in a degrading 
exclusion, by pretending to undervalue what they 
were conscious of being under a professional 
obligation to contend for. It will also supply 
an answer to many suppositions of the same 
nature, which fell from both the bar and the 
bench. 

The College of Physicians is an insititution 
which derives dignity from the importance of its 
objects, which are, the safety of the public; the 
advancement of the science of physic; and the 
guardianship and promotion of the honour and 
interests of the profession. It becomes venerable 
from its antiquity, having been established nearly 
three centuries, by a charter confirmed by act of 
Parliament, during which period its privileges 
have been repeatedly extended by the legislature. 
It derives celebrity from the many eminent phy- 
sicians, who have been its members, and lustre 
from the dignity of their stations, as they have 
always filled and now enjoy the most honourable 
and lucrative professional appointments in this 
kingdom. The college possesses a noble edifice 
for its meetings: A medical library, which it has 
the means of rendering the first in Europe. It 
enjoys, within itself, degrees of rank to distinguish 
|P_10
and reward merit; lectureships and literary ap- 
pointments to excite emulation, and afford an 
honourable field for the display of genius and 
learning; and the disposal of gratuities to re- 
munerate exertion. It establishes an advantage- 
ous intercourse betwixt rising merit and mature 
experience, and enables the deserving aspirer to 
obtain the friendship and profit by the good 
offices of his seniors, who are the best judges of 
his claims, and the most able to promote his 
interests. It raises its members to rank and 
precedency in the profession, and consequently, 
elevates them in the estimation of the public, and 
facilitates their success. 

These direet advantages, which the college 
confer upon its members, are too important to 
the interests of a physician to be passively relin- 
quished. But when, under the interested manage- 
ment of a party, all their indirect consequences 
are considered, their influence in promoting the 
fellows, and depressing the licentiates, will be 
found so powerful, that it becomes an obligation 
of private interest, as well as of professional hon- 
our, to regain, if possible, the right of admission. 
From the operation of the college monopoly, a 
prejudice is diffused that its members, it not the 
only real physicians in London, are, at least, greatly 
superior in education, learning, and skill, as well 
|P_11
as rank, to those whom they only tolerate. This 
is by no means an extraordinary delusion, when 
countenanced and insinuated, by a body, who, 
actuated by a corporate spirit and interested 
zeal, unite with collegiate power and rank, with 
distinctions, titles, and ceremonies, the symbols of 
superiority, the actual possession of the most dig- 
nified and lucrative appointments. This preju- 
dice, however unfounded, is too specious not 
to mislead a great part of the public, too benesi- 
cial to the fellows not to be encouraged by them, 
and too flattering not to deceive even themselves. 
This prepossession necessarily leads to the assump- 
tion of that simulated superiority, which promotes 
the delusion; and the habit of ostentation not 
unfrequently betrays the actor into a notion of 
the actual existence of the rank he attempts to 
display. The college monopoly has thus the 
strongest tendency, and frequently the effect, of 
inflating the fellows with arrogance, and of humi- 
liating and depressing the licentiates, of exciting 
mutual jealousies, of raising an obstacle to all 
bonds of friendship, and even to a liberal and 
social intercourse. 

In addition to the vulgar grounds of prejudice, 
apothecaries, who have so much influence on the 
success of physicians, have peculiar motives for 
|P_12
preferring members of the college. They them- 
selves form a corporation, and corporate bodies 
sympathize with each other. The charter of the 
apothecaries was obtained with the concurrence 
and by the joint interest of the college, to which 
it secures great authority and controul. The two 
corporations have always been intimately con- 
nected, and the apothecaries accustomed to con- 
sider the fellows of the college as their superiors 
and patrons. Besides, the natural pride of man 
unwillingly allows priority of rank, where pre- 
tensions are of a similar nature, if the line of 
distinction is faintly drawn; more especially, 
where the admission implies superiority in learn- 
ing, judgment, and skill. Apothecaries naturally 
prefer those who confer, and who can extend to 
them, the privilege of acting as physicians, to a 
subordinate class, only practising by permission, 
whom they are encouraged to consider as scarcely 
raised above themselves. There can be no doubt 
that men of discernment and candour, and parti- 
cularly apothecaries of that description, who are 
acquainted with the licentiates, do justice to their 
merits, and rank them with the ablest of the pro- 
fession. But however numerous the exceptions, 
the multitude will always be influenced by names, 
appearances, pretensions, and fashion. Indepen- 
dently of their real power and advantages, the 
|P_13
ostensible and assumed superiority of the fellows 
operates forcibly and extensively to the prejudice 
of the licentiates. 

The preference arising from this unjust pre- 
possession, is not the only unfair advantage de- 
rived from their monopoly. In consequence of 
a community of interests, a combination of in- 
fluence, and uniformity of system, they have also 
got possession of the most lucrative and dignified 
appointments and situations in the profession; 
which they transfer, transmit, and perpetuate, in 
their own party. For this their powers are nearly 
as infallible, as their conduct is invariably directed 
by the corporate interest. Their dominion in me- 
dical appointments is so extensive, that they can 
generally decide the contests of licentiates for those 
inferior situations, which fellows decline, in favour 
of the candidate they patronize. The success of 
a licentiate, however superior his merit, against 
another supported by the college, is very rare; 
against a fellow, almost without example. But 
if they should even fail in obtaining for a mem- 
ber of the college any appointment, which is 
contested, they can associate the successful opo- 
nent, and transfer his power and credit to their 
own party, if interest inclines them. The same 
corporate spirit and common interest, which ce- 
ment the fellows in obtaining for each other 
|P_14
public appointments, render them equally zea- 
lous in advancing each other, in private practice, in 
preference to the licentiates. If they do not abso- 
lutely enter into an engagement to recommend each 
other exclusively on consultations, as substitutes, 
as successors, in every situation of advantage, their 
attachment to the corporate interest has all the 
force of a bond. 

It is scarcely conceivable what influence a 
public body, endowed with power, possessed of 
wealth, elevated by popular prepossession, and 
united by interest, has, to promote their joint and 
individual interests. Their power and profits are 
equally concentrated. What the individual loses 
or declines, the corporation preserves. The 
licentiate is carefully excluded. After the fruit- 
less toils and disappointed expectations of many 
years, he still sees a new succession of younger 
fellows exalted above him, by college influence. 
No wonder while he has to struggle against so 
powerful and zealous a combination, if his ad- 
vancement be slow, and his desert unrewarded. 
No wonder if the fellow be raised into distinction 
and affluence, while the licentiate is depressed by 
neglect, or even pines in indigence. There can be 
no doubt that some of the licentiates enjoy a bene- 
ficial practice, and that many fill respectable and 
even profitable situations. The fellows are too 
|P_15
few to engross every thing. Extraordinary ta- 
lents, exertions, connections, or fortune, some- 
times advance licentiates to advantageous ap- 
pointments and lucrative practice, in opposition 
to college influence. But the exceptions only 
confirm the grievance. It is manifest that the 
college, as now constituted, is a partial source of 
rank, power, and gain to the fellows, and a grie- 
vous cause of oppression, degradation, and po- 
verty to the licentiates. 

Having shewn the powerful motives, which the 
licentiates have to emancipate themselves from 
the college yoke, and regain admission, it may be 
proper to give a general description of both the 
fellows and licentiates, as distinct classes of phy- 
sicians. Many, who are but little acquainted 
with the contending parties, may wish to be 
informed of their comparative merits and equi- 
table pretensions; how far they are respectively 
qualified to discharge the duties of a professional 
corporate trust; and entitled to share in those 
advantages, which the legislature has conferred 
upon all competent physicians, previous to a 
discussion of their legal right to them. 

The fellows are a body consisting at present 
of forty-four physicians, forty of whom have gra- 
duated at Oxford or Cambridge, and four have 
|P_16
been admitted, through favour, out of the class 
of licentiates; rather more than half of these only, 
reside in London. Those physicians who graduate 
in the English universities, are, frequently, men of 
sufficient hereditary fortune to pursue such orna- 
mental studies, and reside in such fashionable 
seminaries as are most agreeable to their inclina- 
tions, and flattering to their vanity, and where 
pleasure, ambition, and contingent advantages 
allure them. After the preliminary education of 
public or private schools, they, for the most part, 
without any previous study of pharmacy, anato- 
my, or any branch of medicine, immediately re- 
move to the university. Many of them go there, 
without any fixed future destination, for improve- 
ment in polite literature and general knowledge, 
and to obtain the degree of batchelor in arts, 
previous to the choice of a profession. They are 
then induced to prefer the profession of physic, 
after a prudential comparative view of its ad- 
vantages, or from some promising expectancy, as 
may best suit their inclinations and interests. 
Many, no doubt, go with an original destination 
for the faculty of medicine, under an impression, 
that the opportunities of general instruction, the 
chance of forming profitable connections, the 
prospect of procuring valuable fellowships, and 
the privilege of future admission into the college 
of physicians, may more than compensate the de- 
|P_17
ficient opportunities of acquiring medical know- 
ledge, and the protracted period of arriving at a 
doctor's degree. After they have been admitted 
of some college in one of these univerfities, eleven 
years must elapse before that degree can be ob- 
tained. The previous degrees of bachelor in arts, 
master of arts, and bachelor in physic, must also 
be conferred on them, before they can be cre- 
ated doctors in physic. 

Such a period for study and to many honours 
seem to imply considerable literary and medical 
attainments, and these, in many instances, are un- 
doubtedly, attained. The period of actual resi- 
dence may be, however, and generally is, abridged 
to less than one third of the nominal time, and 
to a shorter period than the licentiates usually 
reside in approved medical schools. Though exa- 
minations, preliminary to each of the above- 
mentioned degrees, are required, they also may 
be, and often are, in a great measure, eluded. 
With the aid of preparatory schemes, containing 
technical and formal answers, which are very 
commonly used, very little real knowledge is re- 
quisite to perform them. 

The opportunities of improvement in Oxford 
and Cambridge in languages, in abstract sciences, 
and polite literature, are considerable, and physi- 
|P_18
cians educated in either of those universities, are 
frequently accomplished scholars. But the pre- 
sumptive claims of such physicians to a medical 
inftitution, established by the legislature for the 
incorporation of every competent physician, with- 
out limitation to the graduates of those univer- 
sities, must depend on their means of improve- 
ment as schools of physic. 

What then are their resources for medical 
instruction? Are they so pre-eminently superior 
as to supersede intirely the pretensions of physi- 
cians educated in every other university? They 
are, in every branch of the art, totally inadequate, 
and comparatively contemptible. Bodies for 
dissection and anatomical demonstration can only 
be procured from London, at an expence and 
with difficulties, which almost preclude the study 
of anatomy. There are scarcely any opportuni- 
ties for investigating the symptoms of diseases, 
and observing the effects of medicines. There are 
but few, if any, clinical lectures for explaining 
them. There are no lectures for teaching the theory 
or the practice of physic. There are no libraries 
or collections of importance appertaining pecu- 
liarly to the profession; no societies for discussing 
subjects, which relate to it. There are not stu- 
dents to excite the exertions of the professors, or 
to animate and improve each other. 
|P_19
So totally inadequate are the means of medical 
improvement, that scarcely more than one student 
graduates in physic, annually, in either of the 
English universities. There are indeed professors 
endowed with salaries, men of learning and ta- 
lents. Some of them also give lectures on collate- 
ral branches, calculated to give general notions of 
the subjects they treat of; but by no means adapt- 
ed to medical students. Their lectures, even on 
these accessary sciences, must necessarily be ac- 
commodated to the superficial views of their au- 
ditors, students of general literature, whose pur- 
suits will not allow them to penetrate into sciences, 
with which their interests are only remotely con- 
nected. Were their lectures adapted to medical 
students, they would probably be only attended 
by a solitary candidate for the doctoral honours 
and advantages. The graduates in medicine, at 
Oxford and Cambridge, are therefore reduced to 
the necessity of acquiring their professional know- 
ledge, for which their own universities do not 
afford the means, in real medical schools. They 
are obliged to make the knowledge of their pro- 
fession subsidiary to those collateral and orna- 
mental branches, which they have an opportunity 
of acquiring; and thus, what ought to be their 
principal object of pursuit is postponed, and be- 
comes only the accessary. Notwithstanding the 
|P_20
essential deficiency of their early education, and 
while they remain in the English universities, 
by superadding the instruction of real medical 
schools, many of them become eminently learned 
and skilful physicians, as well as accomplished 
scholars. Their right to participate in the highest 
professional honours is not disputed. But that 
they should monopolize them exclusivcly, because 
they have graduated where their profession can- 
not be learned, is repugnant to equity and common 
sense. 

The licentiates are a class, amounting at pre- 
sent to one hundred and ten physicians, who have 
had nearly similar educations with all those in 
the British dominions, the few from Oxford and 
Cambridge only excepted. Their hereditary for- 
tunes are, in general, less considerable than those 
of the fellows. Their love of ease, or predilection 
for elegant pursuits remotely connected with the 
knowledge and duties of their profession, cannot 
be so easily indulged. They cannot so conve- 
niently prolong their residence in the most expen- 
sive and dissipated schools, where a knowledge of 
medicine cannot be acquired; nor protract the pe- 
riod of determining on their profession, and of de- 
riving emolument from their exertions, to procure 
adventitious honours. They are, however, with few 
|P_21
exceptions, men of sufficient fortune to obtain all 
the important advantages of education. They are 
early placed in the best schools, where they com- 
monly remain till they have acquired that ele- 
mentary knowledge of languages and sciences, 
which enables them to prosecute their various 
professional studies, and often to become emi- 
nently distinguished for general learning. They 
are afterwards usually placed with an apothe- 
cary, for instruction in pharmacy; a situation not 
so flattering to vanity, nor so favourable for polite 
accomplishments, as a college, but highly ad- 
vantageous and necessary for the preliminary in- 
struction of a physician. They learn there to 
distinguish, select, and preserve, and also to pre- 
pare and compound, those materials, with which 
they are chiefly to accomplish all that future 
learning and skill can enable them, in curing 
or alleviating disease. An accurate knowledge 
of medicines, the primary and indispensible 
part of the education of every practitioner of 
physic, can only be obtained by actually prepar- 
ing them. The pupil of an apothecary is early 
habituated, not only to distinguish and prepare, 
but also to observe the quantities and propor- 
tions administered, and the operation and powers 
of remedies. In addition to these important 
advantages, and that of learning pharmaceutic 
chymistry, the situation generally admits of much 
|P_22
reading, frequently of anatomical instruction, and 
sometimes of attending lectures. 

The real students in medicine, after having 
thus acquired the elements of medical knowledge, 
proceed to those schools, which supply the best 
opportunities of further instruction in their pro- 
fession. They select universities and seminaries, 
where medicine flourishes, regardless of antiquity 
of establishments, local prejudices, ostentatious 
distinctions, titular honours, or assumed privi- 
leges. They pursue their inquiries where they 
are not clogged by unprofitable restrictions, and 
idle formalities and ceremonies, the superstitious 
and exploded usages of dark ages, still retained 
in Oxford and Cambridge, which consume time, 
enhance expence, and abridge improvement. 
They prosecute their researches where disease 
supplies its martyrs for investigating its causes and 
its cure; and death its victims, to instruct the 
future guardian of health to arrest its fatal pro- 
gress. They study where experienced and cele- 
brated professors, large and well regulated hospi- 
tals, extensive and choice collections of natural 
productions and artificial preparations appertain- 
ing to medicine, and where copious and accessible 
medical libraries offer the fullest means of instruc- 
tion: where societies for discussing professional 
subjects stimulate inquiry and promote communi- 
|P_23
cation; where the thronged class calls forth all 
the powers of the teacher, and emulation ani- 
mates the scholar [/2./]. 

But though medicine, which includes so many 
branches of science, engages their chief attention, 
they must of necessity learn the dead languages, na- 
tural history and natural philosophy, and are seldom 
entirely unacquainted with the more abstruse 
sciences, polite literature, and modern languages. 
These, however, they cultivate as subordinate to 
the more immediate branches of their profession, 
and they generally find, and frequently avail them- 
selves of the most ample means of instruction in 
them, where medicine is at the same time best 
taught. Wherever the best opportunities of in- 
struction are presented, they in general pursue 
it, without being confined to any school or any 
country [/3./]. If a genuine medical education, in 
the pursuit of which the accomplishments of the 
scholar and the gentleman are not neglected, can 
complete the physician, the licentiates are indis- 
putably intitled to rank with the highest class of 
the profession, either at home or abroad. For 
|P_24
their moral conduct, there is every security, which 
respectable connections and the consequent ad- 
vantages of good example, and the early initia- 
tion of good principles can produce, strengthened 
by habits of industry, liberal pursuits, and society, 
and the dependence of future success upon irre- 
proachable character. From men animated by 
such inducements, improved by such culture, and 
restrained by such obligations, much undoubtedly 
might be expected. Experience will be found 
to confirm what their advantages promise, that no 
body of physicians contains a greater proportion 
of members distinguished by highly cultivated 
talents, active and useful exertions, valuable pub- 
lications and discoveries, and upright and honour- 
able conduct, than the excluded licentiates. They 
do not rest their equitable claims to share their 
professional honours of their country, impartially 
provided by the legislature for every competent 
physician, on presumptive grounds of merit, 
though it is indisputable that they possess those, 
which give the strongest claims. In addition to 
these grounds, they appeal to experience whe- 
ther they have not always been as able, active, 
and efficient in improving every branch of their 
profession, and in practising it successfully and 
beneficially for the community as the graduates 
of Oxford and Cambridge. They also appeal to 
experience, whether those of their body, who 
|P_25
have obtained that admission into the college, 
through favour, which they were entitled to by 
right, have not discharged the duties and trusts of 
the corporation with equal ability and integrity. 
When their education, their talents, their acquire- 
ments, are considered; when their labours, disco- 
veries, and publications, their private worth and 
public services are estimated; when their compa- 
rative merits are weighed; when it is admitted 
that they have the same pretensions as nearly all 
the physicians in the kingdom, and that they 
actually form the great body of the faculty in 
the metropolis; can any candid, any equitable, 
any honourable man, deny their right, in point of 
justice, to be admissible into a medical corpora- 
tion? into an institution, the only objects of which 
are, to secure the public from illiterate and un- 
principled impostors in physic, and to promote 
the honour and interest of learned, upright, and 
able physicians? 

Under what equitable pretence can the few 
graduates from Oxford and Cambridge, scarcely 
sufficient to perform the necessary duties of the 
college, monopolize such an institution in a free 
and enlightened country? How can they justify 
the libel, implied by rejection, upon the edu- 
cation of nearly every British physician? upon 
|P_26
every real medical university? How palliate 
the rejection, with all its humiliating and inju- 
rious consequences, of such a body as the licen- 
tiates, who with all the presumptive proofs of 
fitness, which the almost uniform education of 
their profession supplies; challenge and solicit any 
equal tests of learning and skill that can be 
established? 

Oxford and Cambridge are seminaries, where 
men of the most exalted genius and profound 
erudition, where the wisest and best men that ever 
honoured this or any country have been educated. 
But of all the sciences, perhaps medicine alone 
has never flourished in either. It is scarcely known 
that medicine is taught in them even in this 
country, and unknown upon the continent that 
such schools of physic exist. Can there be a more 
decisive proof of their insignificancy, than that, in 
general, not more than one or two doctors in 
physic graduate annually at either, even notwith- 
standing the temptation of their indirect and con- 
tingent beneficial consequences. 

Were they as celebrated as they are obscure, as 
medical schools; were there no others, which af- 
ford adequate opportunities of instruction exist- 
ing; there would, even then, be only the same 
|P_27
plea for excluding those from the college, who had 
not been educated in them, that there is now for 
rejecting those, whose education has been confined 
to these universities. But the means of medical 
improvement are so inconsiderable, that there pro- 
bably never was a member of the college, whose 
education was so confined. 

At the period when the charter was originally 
granted, Italy was the chief seat of medical in- 
struction. France, Holland, and Germany, have 
been successively distinguished by the most cele- 
brated medical schools, as Scotland is at present. 
But in the vicissitudes of revolving centuries, the 
English universities have never emerged from ob- 
scurity as the theatres of medicine. It is, how- 
ever, from Oxford and Cambridge, that the col- 
lege candidates assume their title to share in the 
monopoly, whilst it is in the schools of the licen- 
tiates that they learn their profession. Medical 
science must be courted where she resides: with 
Boerhaave, in Holland; in Germany, with Haller; 
or, with Cullen, at Edinburgh. Let the metro- 
polis of England and the college of London 
concentrate her rays from every quarter of the 
globe, and not be confined to the glimmerings of 
schools, where medicine is unknown. Suppose 
the universities of Oxford and Cambridge should 
cease to teach physic; be entirely deserted by 
|P_28
medical students; or be totally abolished as public 
seminaries; must the college of physicians and 
the state of medicine in the metropolis depend 
on their caprice; decline with their decay; and 
the college be annihilated by their extinction? 
Could the legislature ever intend, or, at this pe- 
riod, give its sanction to such an absurdity? 

It is melancholy to observe, how frequently in- 
stitutions, founded in virtue and wisdom, and con- 
fided to men, whose education, abilities, and 
situation in society, impose on them the strongest 
obligations to discharge their trust with integrity 
and fidelity; it is lamentable to reflect, how often 
they are narrowed by jealousy and avarice, and 
perverted by selfishness, so as even to counteract 
diametrically their original and manifest intention, 
and, from sources of beneficence and utility, to be 
converted into instruments of injutice and op- 
pression. 

As a pretext to extenuate their conduct, the 
graduates of Oxford and Cambridge boast of 
superior knowledge of the dead languages, and 
in the preliminary and ornamental branches of 
education. Are then the vehicle and embellish- 
ment of medical knowledge of more importance 
to a physician than the science and practice of 
medicine? Is there not the same probability that 
|P_29
the licentiates excel in the latter, as that the fel- 
lows are superior in the former? 

Admit their pretensions in the dead lan- 
guages, can it be asserted that the licentiates are 
not sufficiently acquainted with these for the 
purposes of medical learning? Do they not un- 
dergo repeated examinations, on various subjects, 
in the Latin language; and do they not challenge 
any tests of knowledge of the Greek, which the 
fellows will undertake? 

If it be conceded that the fellows may boaft a 
more critical knowledge of the dead languages, 
an assumption, which can only be allowed with 
many exceptions, it will scarcely be questioned 
that the licentiates are more conversant in the 
modern [/4./]; in which medical information has for 
sometime been chiefly conveyed, and to which, 
in future, it is likely to be principally confined. 

How ridiculous for men of acknowledged eru- 
dition to be scrupulously balancing their separate 
acquirements and pretensions, which must vary in 
each, as genius, opportunity, or inclination have 
|P_30
directed. Medicine is connected with so many 
branches of knowledge, that the shortness of life 
and imbecillity of human efforts are unequal to 
their attainment. 

The greatest names in which the profession can 
glory, are monuments, at the same time, of know- 
ledge and ignorance, of wisdom and error. Hip- 
pocrates lamented the brevity of life, the extent 
of art, the transientness of opportunity, and the 
fallacy of experience. Boerhaave adopted as his 
motto [/5./], "simplicity is the symbol of truth; " and 
Cullen with equal modesty, to be free from folly 
is the beginning of wisdom [/6./].  And shall a 
few individuals, with vain presumption, mono- 
polize a public scientific institution, under a dis- 
puted claim of superior knowledge in collateral 
and subordinate branches, which, if conceded, 
renders it probable that they are inferior in the 
fundamental and essential departments of their 
profession? The question is not whether the gra- 
duate of Cambridge excels in mathematics, of 
Oxford in polite literature, or of Edinburgh in 
the theory and practice of physic? it is whether 
the candidate for admission into the college, is 
competently learned and skilful in physic? 

|P_31
Without then disputing their separate advan- 
tages, and their respective attainments, there can 
be no doubt that both classes are highly cul- 
tivated, and that neither is intitled to arrogate 
superiority, much less to deprive the other of those 
equal rights, which, if not restricted by law, 
ought, in equity, to be extended to every well 
educated and well qualified physician. 

It has also been alledged, in justification of the 
monopoly, that it is difficult to ascertain the suf- 
ficiency of a candidate for a medical college, 
without an adequate knowledge both of his pre- 
vious opportunities of improvement, and also of 
his attainments and conduct. It is asserted, that 
graduation in the English universities, is a pre- 
sumptive proof of fitness, both in learning and 
morals; and that physicians who graduate else- 
where, having no fixed plan of education, do not 
possess the same preliminary recommendation. 
Leaving out of the consideration the total in- 
adequacy of Oxford and Cambridge as schools of 
physic; admitting that a degree from either is 
intitled to all the weight that a presumptive proof, 
drawn from local study and graduation, can have; 
ought it as such to be exclusively intitled to at- 
tention? While nearly all the physicians in the 
kingdom, and dominions of Great Britain, are 
induced to study and graduate in other univer- 
|P_32
sities; are there not presumptive proofs besides, 
which may intitle a candidate to have his qualifi- 
cations even examined? Is it not just that cor- 
roborating evidence of sufficiency in any profes- 
sion should be deduced from the actual period of 
the candidate's studies; and from his efficient op- 
portunities of improvement, in that art or science 
of which he claims the privileges, independently 
of local residence? The licentiates study in public 
seminaries, where their application, improvement, 
and moral conduct are observed, both by their 
teachers and cotemporary students; and where 
their respective characters are well known. Their 
diplomas are certificates, and evidence of their 
probity, as well as learning. 

If the mere time required to attain a doctor's 
degree in Oxford or Cambridge be a reason why 
men, who have obtained theirs in other univer- 
sities, in a shorter period, should not be admitted, 
immediately after graduating, to equal privileges; 
cannot an additional period for improvement and 
probation, and to equalize the pretensions of the 
latter in this respect, be added to that they have 
previously passed, and given certificates of, in ap- 
proved medical schools? 

Where actual tests of competency can be re- 
sorted to, presumptive and accessary proofs may 
|P_33
be in a great measure dispensed with: but the 
licentiates do not object to every candidate being 
obliged to prove that he has studied an adequate 
time, in good medical schools, and received from 
thence certificates of probity and learning. 

It has indeed been objected to their claim, that 
there are physicians, who have purchased degrees 
without having ever studied in any university. 
Such degrees are undoubtedly intitled to very 
little respect, and, affording no presumptive proof 
of fitness, might justify, if not the rejection of 
persons claiming to be examined for admission 
under them, the strictest application of the real 
tests, and an extended period of probation. But 
those, who have procured such nominal degrees 
are only exceptions, which cannot prejudice the 
rights of the great body of well educated physi- 
cians: of physicians who have studied longer, in 
the best medical schools, than the graduates of 
Oxford or Cambridge have, in general, either stu- 
died medicine, or resided in those universities. The 
licentiates are as zealous as the fellows can be, 
that strict precaution should be observed in the 
admission of members. They wish that undoubted 
tests of ability and learning should be indispensibly 
required. They do not object to restrictions ex- 
acting a certain period of study in approved 
medical schools, and a mature period of life to 
|P_34
be attained before admission into the college. 
Whatever impartial regulations, wisdom can dic- 
tate and justice sanction, they approve. But they 
contend that, as far as is consistent with the 
interests of the college, the rights of physicians 
ought to be impartially admitted. 

It has been shewn that the physicians of Ox- 
ford and Cambridge are few in number, scarcely 
sufficient to perform the necessary duties of the 
college and keep up the succession [/7./]: that 
those universities are totally inadequate to a 
medical education, and therefore cannot entitle 
their graduates to any preference, much less to 
an exclusive monopoly of a medical corporation 
instituted for public purposes. It has been 
shewn that the licentiates are a numerous body, 
of the same class, similarly educated, and possessed 
of the same pretentions with nearly all the phy- 
sicians [/8./] in Great Britain, Ireland, and the British 
dominions: that they, in general, have had the 
best medical education which can be obtained, 
either at home or abroad, and are in fact learned, 
skilful, and upright physicians. It has also been 
|P_35
shewn, that every objection against them, whether 
real, or even only alledged, may be obviated by 
regulations [/9./] which, with the actual tests of 
examination, would amply secure the interests 
and dignity of the college, and allow their right 
of admission on equitable terms. Having establish- 
ed these premises, it is manifest that the equitable 
right of every physician of mature age to be 
examined, who has had an adequate medical 
education, without regard to local study or local 
graduation, is incontrovertible. His right to be 
afterwards admitted a member of the college, if 
found competent, is also equally indisputable. 
It remains to be considered, whether the right so 
established in equity is barred in law. 

In order to establish the legal right of the 
licentiates to have their qualifications for ad- 
mission into the college of physicians examined, 
it is important to premise some rules of law, with 
regard to the construction of charters and statutes, 
|P_36
and respecting the evidence, which ought to 
govern decisions both on individual and corporate 
rights. 

As legal axioms, the following are perhaps 
sufficiently obvious: but it is necessary to state 
them as premises of a conclusion,which invalidates 
the decision of a court of justice. 

Consistency, stability, and security require, that 
the letter of legislative acts should strictly and 
rigidly govern the decisions of courts of law, in 
cases where the intention of the legislature is 
clearly expressed. 

Where the language of an act is not explicit, 
with regard to any point under decision, the 
true legal meaning, when it can be clearly 
deduced from the context, is equally binding. 

Where the intention of the legislature is doubt- 
ful, with regard to any litigated point under deci- 
sion, the court ought to construe it liberally, for 
the benefit of the community. 

Where the intention of a party, who obtained 
a parliamentary grant, can be ascertained, it is a 
strong evidence of the intention of the legislature 
with regard to that party. 

|P_37
Where usage is resorted to, in order to illus- 
trate the nature and extent of a grant, the 
usage of those who obtained it, of their co- 
temporaries, and immediate successors, is most 
decisive. 

Where parties have fully and unconditionally, 
during a long period, and jointly and equally 
enjoyed the same privileges, under one common 
grant, it is a mutual concession and strong evi- 
dence that they are equally intitled. 

When a court of law, after full and repeated 
hearings, deliberately, repeatedly, and without 
dissent, lays down the law, with regard to the 
real points at issue between two parties; and 
when these opinions are legally reported, they 
constitute a high legal authority; though the 
decision upon the case might turn upon errors 
in the proceedings, or upon circumstances foreign 
to its real merits. 

Where the letter and spirit of a grant, illustrated 
by the original intent, usage, and joint possession 
of the parties, cannot be made obvious to the 
bench, and former opinions are got rid of as not 
being absolute decisions in point; when judges 
assume from necessity or choice, the province of 
legislators, and regulate what is to be law, on 
|P_38
grounds of expediency, their views ought to be 
liberal and comprehensive, and their determina- 
tions, made for the many not for the few, 
ought to extend, not abridge, the privileges of 
thc community. 

These are rules, with regard to the decision of 
cases, which may be considered as established 
legal maxims. 

The following positions, respecting the nature 
of corporations, and their rights and duties, are, 
it may he presumed, equally indisputable. 

An aggregate corporation is a politic body, 
constiting of several individuals, united together 
for public purposes, and their own advantage; 
invested with privileges and immunities, and 
bound by duties according to its charter and 
acts of Parliament concerning it. 

A corporation is bound to act up, to the de- 
sign for which it was instituted. 

Perpetual succession is an inherent right, and a 
main end, of every corporate body. 

Every corporation is bound to admit all, who 
are eligible under the letter, and true meaning 
|P_39
and intent of its charter, and of acts of parlia- 
ment concerning it. 

Corporations may make bye-laws for the regu- 
lation of their proceedings, but they cannot 
change the nature of the succession, and give 
themselves a new mode of existence. They can- 
not superadd qualifications for admission not re- 
quired by their charter and acts of parliament 
concerning them. They cannot narrow the num- 
ber of the eligible. 

It is taken for granted that the above positions, 
as well as those, which precede them, respecting 
the rules of evidence and the grounds of decisions, 
are settled, indisputable legal maxims, which 
ought to govern courts of law in their determina- 
tion of causes respecting corporate rights. 

We shall next proceed to prove, by decisive 
evidence, that the letter and spirit of the charter, 
which originally incorporated the physicians of 
London, and of the act of parliament which 
confirmed it, clearly demonstrate, that the crown 
and the legislature did thereby grant and convey, 
in perpetuity, to every competent physician, the 
right of being admitted a member of the corpora- 
tion, if found, upon examination, possessed of the 
qualifications required by the charter and act of 
|P_40
parliament. It will also be shewn, that all prior 
and subsequent statutes and charters, whether 
completed or only intended, confirm this to have 
been the manifest intention of the crown and 
of parliament. 

The first statute which has been discovered 
relative to practitioners in physic, was enacted 
in the ninth year of the reign of Henry V. 
The preamble, after reciting the mischiefs arising 
from illiterate practisers, states, that if no man 
practised therein but al only connynge men 
and approved sufficicntly, y learned in art, 
filosofye, and fisyk, as it is kept in othur londes and 
roialmes, ther shuld many man that dyeth for 
defaute of helpe, lyve, and no man perish by 
unconnyng.  The petition goes on to pray, 
that no person be allowed to practise physic 
bot he have long time y used the scoles of fisyk, 
within some universitee, and be graduated in the 
same.  In this first act of the legislature is 
found the same just and impartial spirit, which 
pervades all subsequent acts, relative to the pro- 
fession. Every physician, who had employed his 
time, and labour, and money, in studying his pro- 
fession, where it was properly taught, who had 
used the schools of physic and graduated, was, without 
limitation to particular universities, entitled to all 
the privileges of his profession. The wise re- 
|P_41
gulations of other realms are referred to, from 
which the superiority of their schools of physic, 
at that period, and the consequent higher estima- 
tion, in which those, who had graduated abroad, 
were held, might be inferred, if not established by 
ample testimony. 

The next statute, respecting physicians, was en- 
acted in the third year of the reign of Henry 
VIII. After enumerating the ignorant and dan- 
gerous persons who practised physic, with great 
infamy to the faculty, and the grievous hurt, 
damage, and destruction of many of the king's 
liege people,  it enacts, that no person within 
the City of London, nor within seven miles of 
the same, take upon him to exercise and occupy 
as a physician or surgeon, except he be first 
examined, approved, and admitted by the 
Bishop of London, or by the Dean of Paul's, 
for the time being, calling to him, or them, 
four doctors of physic; and for surgery, other 
expert persons in that faculty, and for the first 
examination, such as they shall think con- 
venient, and afterward, alway four of them that 
have been so approved.  Here again we find no 
partial limitation. All those, who practised as 
physicians, within the prescribed jurisdiction, were 
equally subject to be examined; and such, as were 
approved, were equally intitled not only to prac- 
|P_42
tise, but they might also perform the higher duty 
of examining and deciding upon the qualifications 
of others. This act remained in force seven years, 
during which period, every physician legally prac- 
tising in London, and within seven miles round 
it, must necessarily have been examined and ap- 
proved. Such approved and legal physicians 
formed an incomplete politic body, possessed of the 
exclusive right of practising, and jointly with the 
Bishop of London, or Dean of Paul's, the power 
of examining others, and of admitting them, if 
competent, both to practise and examine. This 
statute was sufficient for confining the practice of 
the metropolis and its environs to such as were 
duly qualified. It contained the same provision for 
examination, by four approved examiners or cen- 
sors, afterwards adopted in the subsequent charter, 
and also the power of imposing a penalty on such 
as practised without their approbation. It thus 
provided for the main end of the legislature, the 
safety of the community, in a similar manner. The 
charter was modelled upon this statute, and adopt- 
ed its provisions with regard to the public. It only 
enlarged them with respect to physicians, and must 
be considered as a continuation and extension of 
this act. The additional privileges conferred by 
the charter were granted chiefly for the benesit of 
those, who obtained it, and of their successors, for 
the interest and dignity of the faculty of physic. 
|P_43
They hitherto only possessed the right of prac- 
tising, and together with the Bishop of London 
or Dean of Paul's, the power of keeping up 
a succession of legal practitioners. But they en- 
joyed no other legal franchise. They had no 
officers legally constituted, no common seal, no 
power of holding property as a body, of suing 
and being sued, or making binding regulations, 
which are incident to corporations. 

A charter was therefore petitioned for by six 
physicians named in the petition, under the pa- 
tronage of Cardinal Wolsey, then Chancellor of 
England, who is also therein named as a petition- 
er. The six petitioning physicians must neces- 
sarily have been legally authorized to exercise 
their profession. It also cannot be doubted that 
their application, which was to obtain honours 
and privileges for all of their own body, who were 
duly qualified, was made with the concurrence, 
and supported by the influence of those legal 
physicians, who were to share equally with the 
petitioners in the benesits of the grant. Keeping 
in view then that the petitioners for the charter 
were members of a body constituted by a prior 
statute; that every member of that body had 
an interest and equal title to what was applied for, 
and must have exerted a joint influence to obtain 
it; that it was granted by the same king, and 
|P_44
under the patronage of the same minister, during 
whose respective reign and influence the prior 
statute had been enacted; that it contained similar 
provisions for the public, and additional ones 
chiefly for the profession. With these illustrative 
facts before us, let us now consider the words and 
intent of the charter itself, with regard to the 
persons incorporated, and the description of per- 
sons intended to keep up the succession and per- 
petuate the corporation. 

The charter of the college of physicians was 
granted by Henry VIII. in the tenth year of 
his reign. It sets forth: That in order to re- 
strain the temerity of wicked men, who prac- 
tise physic from avaricious motives, to the 
great detriment of the ignorant and credulous; 
therefore, partly in imitation of well regulated 
states in Italy, and many other countries. 

We find here in the preamble of the charter, 
as before in the statute of the ninth of Henry 
V. a convincing proof of the high estimation 
in which the regulations of foreign countries, 
with regard to medicine, were held by the crown, 
as well as by the parliament. This affords a 
strong presumption, that the privileges of phy- 
sicians in England were, as under the former acts 
of parliament, to be extended to such as had 
|P_45
studied and graduated in countries where medi- 
cine flourished; and of which the wise regulations, 
with regard to it, influenced the crown and the 
legislature to imitate them. 

The charter goes on to state, that, partly in 
compliance with the petition of the grave and 
learned men, John Chambre, Thomas Linacre, 
Ferdinand de Victoria, the king's physicians; 
and of Nicholas Halsewell, John Francis, and 
Robert Yaxley, physicians, the king establishes, 
collegium perpetuum doctorum & gravium virorum, 
(a perpetual college of sedate and learned men)
who may publicly practise physic in our City 
of London, and its suburbs, within seven miles 
in circumference.  This is the concise, yet 
definite and comprehensive description of those 
physicians, who were to constitute the corporate 
body. Integrity and learning were the only re- 
quisites. Having pointed out the qualifications, 
the charter proceeds to state the duties of the 
members: whose care it will be, as we hope, 
as well out of regard to their own honour, as to 
public utility, to discourage by their own ex- 
ample and authority, the ignorance and rashness 
of those crafty people, whom we have made 
mention of, and to punish them, both by our 
laws lately made public, and by decrees to be 
established by the college itself.  The same 
|P_46
legal physicians, who had given tests of their 
gravity and learning, and had acted under the 
prior statute, here referred to, were to accomplish 
the same objects, within the same jurisdiction, 
by the same and similar means only. The charter 
goes on to state: In order that these ends may 
be more readily accomplished, we grant to the 
aforesaid John Chambre, Thomas Linacre, &c. 
physicians, quod ipsi omnesque homines ejusdem fa- 
cultatis de & in civitate predicta sint in re & nomine 
unum corpus & comunitas perpetua sive collegium per- 
petuum.(That they, and all men of the same 
faculty, of and in the aforesaid city, be in fact and in 
name one body and perpetual commonalty, or perpetual 
college.) Need there a comment? Can dulness 
mistake, or casuistry evade? Can language and 
intention be more explicit? A charter is granted 
to six persons therein named, that they and all 
other men of the same faculty shall constitute one 
body and perpetual corporation. Can it be a 
question, whether men of the same faculty, with 
the qualifications required by the charter in the 
highest degree, in the precise situation with res- 
pect to claims of those who obtained it, are 
legally entitled to the corporate franchises? 
Their right, under the express terms and letter 
of the charter, is too clear to require to be 
illustrated by additional facts, or enforced by fur- 
ther arguments. 
|P_47
The charter, having pointed out its objects, the 
qualifications and general duties of the members 
of the college, the persons of whom it should 
then, and for ever afterwards consist, proceeds to 
establish the officers it shall have and their duties, 
and the farther privileges it shall enjoy. The 
college shall have power to elect annually, for 
ever, out of their own body, one discreet and 
skilled in the faculty of medicine, to be pre- 
sident of the said college; to supervise, regulate, 
and govern, for the year, the said college or 
commonalty, and all men of the same faculty, 
and their affairs.  The power, here conferred 
on the president, extends not only to the corpo- 
rators, but to all men of the same faculty. The 
charter wisely provides, that those, who are in- 
capable of becoming members, or who refuse to be 
incorporated, shall not be exempted from its juris- 
diction. Otherwise, the very evils, it was granted 
to suppress, would be sanctioned by it. 

The power of perpetual succession, of having a 
common seal, of purchasing lands, of suing and 
being sued, are next conceded; and the charter 
goes on to grant: that the college may hold 
lawful assemblies among themselves, and make 
statutes and regulations for the wholesome govern- 
ment, supervising and correction of the said college 
or commonalty, and of all men exercising the 
|P_48
same faculty in the said city, and within seven 
miles round the same.  The power of making 
bye-laws of regulation is inherent in all corpora- 
tions. It is here expressly granted, with the re- 
striction of their being salutary, which enforces a 
condition to be always presumed in law. But 
can a bye-law, which changes the nature of the 
succession, which disinherits the legitimate suc- 
cessors, which shuts out a majority of the eligible, 
which subverts the constitution of the corporation, 
which endangers its extinction, be considered, in 
contemplation of law, as a mere regulation [/10./]? If 
it could be so strained and perverted, could preju- 
dice distort it into a salutary regulation? 

The next clause of the charter grants to the 
college: that no one should exercise the said 
faculty in the said city, or seven miles round it, 
unless admitted to this privilege by the said 
president and commonalty, or their successors, 
for the time being, by letters of the president 
and college, given under their common seal. 
It is manifest from the clauses, authorizing the 
president to supervise the college and all men of 
the same faculty, empowering the college to 
|P_49
make bye-laws for their own body and all others 
of the same faculty; and from this last recited 
clause, enabling them to punish all, who practised 
medicine without their permission; that there 
were persons, in the contemplation of the charter, 
who might be allowed to practise without being 
entitled to be admitted members. The jurisdiction 
of the college extended to all who practised me- 
dicine in any line or degree; whether as physi- 
cians, as surgeons, or apothecaries; as oculists, or 
partial practisers in any branch of the profession. 
lt is evident that the metropolis must always have 
contained a numerous body, who would not come 
within the description and meaning of the charter 
as eligible for admission, and who might, notwith- 
standing, be permitted to practise under the super- 
intendence and controul of the college. It is, in 
fact, proved from their own annals, that such per- 
sons were so permitted. But can a power of ex- 
cluding such as are incompetent in education or 
learning, or unfit, from the partial and inferior lines 
of the profession they have chosen, authorize the 
rejection of those, who have long time used the schools 
of physic, and graduated in the same, as required by 
the statute of Henry V? of those of the same 
description, who were admitted both to practise and 
examine under the statute of Henry VIII? of those 
who possess the learning and discretion required 
by the charter, and are groundedly learned and 
|P_50
deeply studied in physic, as required by the confirma- 
tory act of parliament? If this be jutisiable, the 
power of those, in possession of the college, of 
admitting others is perfectly arbitrary. They 
could also at pleasure, and with comparative pro- 
priety, exclude the very description of physicians 
they now admit. The dictates of reason, the 
rules of equity, the maxims of law, would, in 
this case, be perfectly nugatory, as applied to the 
construction of this charter. 


[^1. 
* It is very remarkable, and perhaps unfortunate, that one 
of the judges, who presided on this trial, had been employed 
when a counsel to sanction the very bye-laws, which were con- 
tended against by the licentiates; and that the father of another 
of those judges was president of the college when they were 
made. 

Three of the same judges were graduates of the universities, 
whose exclusive privileges were contended against. 
^]
[^2. 
* Edinburgh enjoys all these advantages, and is annually 
attended by more medical students, than have studied either at 
Oxford or Cambridge during any two centuries since their 
foundation. 
^]
[^3. 
 Many of the licentiates, after having accomplished their 
degree at home, have studied in foreign schools, where there 
are excellent opportunities of medical improvement. 
^]
[^4. 
* The period, which must elapse before the degree of doctor 
in medicine can be obtained in the English universities, is an 
obstacle to studying in foreign schools. 
^]
[^5. 
* Simplicitas sigillum veritatis. 
^]
[^6. 
 Initium sapienti stultitia caruisse. 
^]
[^7. 
* The number of offices, with duties annexed, almost equals 
the number of efficient members. 
^]
[^8. 
 The number of physicians who have graduated at Oxford 
and Cambridge, and who are not members of the college, is very 
inconsiderable. 
^]
[^9. 
* A candidate might be required to have attained his 
thirtieth year; to have employed seven years in the study of 
physic in approved schools; to have graduated in a respectable 
university, where previous residence and tests of learning and 
probity are required. But with such presumptive claims he 
ought to be admitted by right to examination: and it approved, 
admitted by right to incorporation, on having completed his 
year of probation as a candidate. 
^]
[^10. 
* The bye-law confining the right of examination for ad- 
mission, into the class of candidates and subsequent incorpora- 
tion, to the graduates of Oxford and Cambridge, is attended 
with all these evils. 
^]