

[^Sample 1: book - ^]

|P_1
[}Directions 
Tending to 
HEALTH 
AND 
Long Life, &c.}]
BEING desired (by Persons of Qua- 
lity) to prescribe some Rules, in or- 
der to promote Health and Long Life, 
and not concern my self about the SOUL: 
But write like a meer Phisitian. I readi- 
ly comply'd, thinking it no harder a Task, 
than the prescribing Physic-Recipes to the 
Sick. 

But, when I sat down, to attempt the 
Design, I soon found my Mistake, and 
that it was quite of another Nature, a 
very difficult Thing; nay, not to be don, 
without breaking the Bar, that was laid 
in my way. So I resolv'd to lay it 
aside. 

|P_2
But musing awhile on the Disappoint- 
ment: It came into my mind, that I ought 
to be ready to every good Word and Work. 

I immediately obey'd the Heavenly Di- 
ctate and reassum'd my Pen and Ink. And 
determin'd to make this fair Proposal. 

That, if you will but lend me the in- 
ferior part of the SOUL, with whom to 
lodge my Directions, and who must be 
the Charioteer of the Body; and at the 
same time take care, that the Superior 
part be so nobly entertain'd with Religion; 
so as to be satisfy'd; That He does not 
break in, or filch upon, our sober Me- 
thod. 

I'll try, what I can do. 

But why! so shie of a Soul? 

What! afraid of your self! 

Is not your specific Order of Being a Rank 
of Spirits? 

Only you are of Them, who are ap- 
pointed to Dwell in Earthly Bodies a- 
while: During which abode we stand re- 
lated to this Kingdom of Matter; But, so 
soon as order'd, obediently to lay them 
|P_3
down and go, and give an Account of what 
we have don in the Body. 

If the Question were put, wherefore did 
God make Man? Who wou'd not be a- 
sham'd SO to answer it: He made him to 
Eat and Drink, and take his Pleasure, to 
gather up Wealth for he knows not who: 
To use his Invention to become a talk and 
wonder to others; And when He hath fetch't 
a few turns upon the Theater, and enter- 
tain'd the Eyes of Beholders, Descend — 
and never be heard of more. 

But who sees not, that the Nature of 
Man is Capable of greater Things, than He 
can here enjoy? 

The truest Notion we can yet have of 
the Primitive Nature as Capacity of Man, 
is by beholding it in its gradual Restitu- 
tion. — 

For it is Capable of a Felicity that shall be 
permanent and know no end. 

But — my Order is, not to Preach — 

But write about Meat, Drink, Airings, 
Transpiration, &c.

I therefore here again compound, for the 
|P_4
inferior Part of the Soul: And for the Loan, 
Promise to mend your Commons, which was 
not my first Intention. 

For I had fixt my mind upon Sanctori- 
us's Chair, and the Lessian Diet, and tho't 
to have put you into it. But as you are 
English Gentlemen, and abound with, and 
are bred up to, Plenty. 

I chuse the Man-like Mean, betwixt the 
two Extreams. 

That of Foreign Authors, which in our 
Country, wou'd be too rigid, and look like a 
Method of Starving, rather than Living. 

The other of guilty Excess and Carelesness, 
which breed dangerous Diseases, That either 
cut off Life in the Prime of its Time; or con- 
sign to fixt Distempers and Decrepitness. 

And only beg the Conduct of a well govern'd 
Mind, to which the Appetites shou'd be obe- 
dient. 

By a temperate, sober Diet, I mean, neither 
eating nor drinking more at a time; nor oftner, 
than the Constitution of the Body allows. 

Now there cannot be one exact Measure 
or all People, nor for the same Person, at all 
|P_5
Seasons: But must vary, according to the Di- 
versity of Constitutions, Ages, Seasons of the 
Year: Disposition, or Indisposition of the Sto- 
mach, and other Infirmities or Circumstances. 

So that, what is convenient for me, may 
be too much for another, and too little for a 
Third, &c.

Here I must leave every one, who is ar- 
rived to the Years of Discretion, to judge of 
that temperate Proportion for himself, which 
is needful; and who may very well guess, 
when he exceeds those Bounds. 

That Measure is to be observ'd, which the 
Stomach can with appetite receive, and by it's 
own Ability digest, without impediment to 
Body or Mind. 

They then, who are indispos'd after Meals, 
troubled with Fumes, Vapors, Heaviness, 
Drowsiness, Yawnings, Flatus, Oppression, &c.
Or any of these. They have certainly trans- 
grest their due Measures. 

For Persons after Meals shou'd be refresht, 
quick, apt and ready to the Exercises of Soul 
or Body. But to bring things into an orderly 
Method: I'll begin with the Day. 

And first, I must charge you to be careful, 
|P_6
very careful of the better part: 'Tis but a lit- 
tle thing I tell you, in comparison. That if 
he is not provided for to his Satisfaction, He'll 
marr our bodily Health and Cheerfulness. 

When you rise out of your warm Bed dont 
enter immediately into a fluttering Night- 
gown, Beau Cap and Slippers. — But keep 
your Head and Neck a little Warmer, with 
Additions to what you wore in the Night; 
buckle up your Shoes quick, girt your Cloaths 
tire about you, till your Pores are gradually 
clos'd. 

After an Hour or two Wash and Dress: Rub 
your Teeth with a little fine Salt, wash and 
gargil your Mouth, with fair Water. This 
preserves your Teeth firm and sound, and keeps 
off Tooth-ach and Swelling. 

About nine o'clock, take some slight Break- 
fast, as Water-gruel, Barley-broath, Flumme- 
ry, Milk, Milk-pottage, Barley-cream, Bo- 
hea-Tea, or green Milk-Tea. 

Milk-tea, with Sal Volatile Oleosum is my 
own Breakfast, thro'out the Year. — I 
put 3 Spoonfuls of cold, raw Milk into my 
China Dish, and sweeten it to my Palate with 
8d or 9d Sugar, then I put one Tea Spoonful of 
S.V.O. which contains 30 or 40 Drops, and 
stir it in, and pour the Tea very hot, I stir 
|P_7
it again and drink it. Thus season'd, I drink 
3 or 4 Dishes in a Morning with Delight and 
great Benefit. 

I chuse green Tea-dust, as preferable to 
whole Tea in this Use: It yields its virtues 
more free, and there follows and acerb or rough- 
ness, which Scours the fibres of the Stomach, 
and enlivens the Archaus 'tis the best Quali- 
ty Breakfast that can be contriv'd: For it puts 
whole Nature into pleasant Activity, and 
brightens the Enjoyments of all the day, when 
as Chocolate is phlegmatic and dull, obstru- 
ctive and windy — the constant use of any 
Nutts, especially parch't or roasted, are 
clammy and heavy upon weak Stomachs, tho' 
toothsome. Several have follow'd my Ex- 
ample herein with great Benefit: Therefore 
I mention it. 

Now while ye are at the Tea-Table, 'tis 
like ye will consult, what's to be for Dinner. 

Pray give these two Notes to your Caterer. 

First, to Buy such Provisions, as are in their 
proper Season. For many things are to be had 
 in great Plenty, which are not wholesome 
Nourishment, being out of Season. 

The other is, That the Females of all things 
are the finest Food, and best Nourishment, 
|P_8
while young: But when they come to 
Breed, &c. the Males are preferable, ex- 
cept a very Fatt Old Hen in January — 

Abhorr'd be strong Beer, Ale, Wine, or a 
Dram of the Bottle in a Morning. 

If any are so ill accustom'd, let'em im- 
mediately consult their Physitians; That their 
vitiated Stomachs may be restor'd to their na- 
tural Heat and Strength, and their inflam'd 
Blood quieted down to a just Consistence and 
Temper. And if S.V.O. be prescrib'd in 
this Case, the Dr. will have the Credit, and 
the Patient the Benefit. 

About Twelve or One a Clock resort to 
the place of Dinner, where begin not too 
eagerly, tho' Appetite presses forward. Eat 
deliberately, chew well: For your Teeth 
are to macerate your Food, and mix it 
with a vivid Saliva, that springs forth in 
the Action: And is of more Benefit to Fer- 
mentation and Chylification, than most are 
aware of. 

Observe the Cravings of your Stomach, and 
don't affect to force it by Wines, Pickles and 
gustful Sauces. 

Don't eat a great deal hastily, and drink at 
the end of the Meal one or two great Draughts. 
|P_9
But take it in moderate Proportions at several 
times while you are eating, and drink the 
oftener. 'Tis more wholesome, and com- 
plemental. 

The first time you think you have pretty 
well done, stop, besure then, 'tis enough for 
that meal. 

Midling Beer, a little Hop't is of sufficient 
Strength for most Persons. 

Having thus temperately Din'd, don't pre- 
sently fall to Tea, Coffee, Fruit, &c.

If the Company see fit to continue toge- 
ther a little, I think some profitable Dis- 
course the best Entertainment. 

And in your Conversation, pray take care 
the Mind appears as decent as the Body, at 
least: So you'll not be reprov'd within, nor 
without. 

Abstain 5 or 6 Hours, then the dilutive 
Cup may be moderately taken, or a lit- 
 wholesome Fruit, and provision made 
for a moderate Supper, contriv'd of such 
things, as are less substantial than what 
was for Dinner, and of a little stronger 
Nourishment than what was mention'd for 
|P_10
Breakfast. Every one's Invention is quick 
enough for his Belly. 

But on a Fish Day, or other slight Dining, 
Exceedings at Supper may be allow'd, provi- 
ded they be earlier taken, and not in so large 
a Quantity as at Dinner. 

I can't but applaud the Wisdom and 
Care of our Ancestors in Dieting young 
Students, at Universities, &c. Where they 
are stinted to such temperate Bounds, as 
will preserve their Health and Quicken 'em 
for their Studies. And their Bodies being 
inur'd to it, They gain a Habit of Tem- 
perance and Sobriety. 

Study is a Concern that draws the Spi- 
rits to the Brain, and is apt to retain 'em 
too long for Health. Therefore excess with 
Study will load the Head with Streams and 
Vapours, that clog the Brain and hazard it 
to many Diseases. 

Or by leaning the Head forward to read, 
cloud the Senses and obstruct and foul the 
Organs. Study and Excess together in some, 
will bloat the Face, bottle the Nose and 
thicken the Lips. And in others cause Red- 
ness of Face, and Pimples, and run the 
Body out of shape. 

|P_11
But the Schollar's Allowance is not a 
measure for all People. For they that are 
employ'd in Study, or other great Con- 
cerns of Mind, ought to Eat and Drink 
less than they, who Labour much with their 
Bodies. Many work like Horses, and there- 
fore eat like 'em. To see this, I hope is no 
Temptation to a refin'd Mind. 

To keep your Body in due Temper, 
observe a temperate Diet. For a little 
well digested and assimilated, preserves the 
Body stronger and more vigorous than Su- 
perfluity. 

Eat not, because the customary Time for 
it is arriv'd, unless your Appetite be so 
too. For to charge the Stomach with a 
new Supply upon a Semi-digestion of the 
former Meal, causes Crudities, and a foul 
Stomach, which must clog the Body, and 
procure Diseases. 

Unequal Proportions of Meat to Drink, 
and Drink to Meat are injurious. 

'Tis a very good Italian Proverb, He that 
will eat much, let him eat little: For by eat- 
ing little at a time, he prolongs his Life, and 
so makes it up. 

An empty Stomach receives with Delight 
|P_12
digests with Strength, and promotes a good 
Concoction; which make Assimilation, Thri- 
ving, and a wholesome clean Body. 

'Tis better to Eat twice a Day with Mode- 
ration, than to make one over-large Meal; 
tho' you do abstain above double the usual 
time, for Compensation. 

However, if you have transgrest at any 
Meal, abstain from the next; or let it be a 
very thin one. 

Have your Variety not at the same, but at 
several Meals. 

Forbear employ of Body or Mind, till half 
an hour, or an hour after Dinner. 

Sit not close to the Fire, even in cold 
Weather, presently after Dinner: For it raises 
Fumes, and hinders Digestion: A cool Air 
will strike the Heat inward, to help the 
new Access. 

Neither eat nor drink presently after Exer- 
cise, or when you are Hot: Stay till Nature 
has recall'd her dissipated Spirits. 

Canary, Sherry, White, or Rhenish Wines 
are not so fit at Meals (where Wine is al- 
low'd) as Claret. The former over-heat and 
|P_13
glut the Stomach; the other accelerate the 
Food too soon, making it pass crude, and ill di- 
gested, Claret corrugates the Stomach, strength- 
ens its tone, moderately warms; and so retains 
the Food, and helps a good Concoction. 

But young Persons, whose Stomachs are 
warm and strong, need not this help. Nay, 
Wine is hurtful for 'em. 

The too early use of Wine and strong Drinks 
does ruin thousands by devouring natural Heat, 
and fir'ing the Blood into Feverish Frets and 
Consumptions. 

The creating of false Appetites with Wine 
and other strong Liquors, in the first use of 
'em, provoke to Gluttony, and after that 
weaken and destroy the Stomach. 

For, besides the preying on the Vital Fire 
and radical moisture; they relax the fibrous 
Folds of the Stomach, and incline to a nauscea, 
and Reachings, next to spewing, and to 
Diarrhæas, and Fluxes, and many nasty Di- 
stempers. Now to remedy such vitiated Sto- 
machs, take my S.V.O. in plenty. I know 
nothing better. 

You may observe that cool, fat, moist Bo- 
dies will bear hunger better than lean, dry, 
cholerick, hot Bodies, which perspire much: 
|P_14
 Yet for such to omit, or lighten a Meal on 
occasion, 'twill sharpen their Stomachs, con- 
coct indigested Matter, and make the next 
Meal relish the better. 

A strong Body may bear for awhile, with 
an irregular Course or Diet, better than a ten- 
der Constitution, which is soon sensible of Dis- 
order. But at length he cuts short his Days 
to what they might be, while puleing Per- 
son out lives him. 

I have often observ'd, for many Years, that 
the Sickly and Infirm survive the Robust and 
Bold, who live at any or no Rate; while the 
others live by some Rule. 

Qui abstinens est, adjiciet Vitæ. 

To come now to my other Directions, re- 
lating to moderate Exercise or Labour: So as 
to promote the necessary Laws of Perspiration. 

A great part of Health arises from the due 
Exercise of the Body. It ought then to be 
so govern'd, that it may be refreshing and 
beneficial. 

All due Exercise makes the Body lightsom, 
brisk and airy, increases natural-heat, pro- 
motes a good concoction in the habit of the 
Body and thriving: Besides a convenient ex- 
pulsion of Excrements. 

|P_15
And here take this Note, never bau'k Na- 
tures first Motions to Evacuation. 

Immoderate Exercise wastes the Flesh, 
fires out natural Heat, frets the Blood, be- 
gets the Scurvy (which looks like a Para- 
dox) by chasing the fixt Salts into such an 
Ebullition with the Spirits, that they tear 
the balmy Texture of the Blood, and make 
void its Continuity, which is the vinculum, 
or tye of Life. 

Persons of a thinner habit of Body, are ve- 
ry apt to be damag'd, by too long or too vio- 
lent Exercise. Gross and corpulent Bodies 
will endure it with less hurt. 

The Measures to be observed (as in Diet) 
cannot be the same to all Bodies; nor to the 
same Persons, at all Seasons. 

So much Exercise as promotes a full per- 
spiration, without sweating, is a convenient 
mean: For it should be ad ruborem non su- 
dorem. 

Moderate Exercise rarifies and plumps the 
Flesh, dilates the minutest Passages, making 
way for new Nourishment and Air to refresh 
and ventilate. 

In Respiration, we don't expire at Mouth 
|P_16
and Nose what we inspire: But some part of 
every draught of Air breaths thro' our Pores, 
as is obvious, by laying your Finger on a bright 
scour'd Dish, you'll see the Effluviums Con- 
dense. 

And if such halitus continually pass, where 
the Skin is so thick: What think you evapo- 
rate continually in the more lax parts, and 
thro'out the whole? 

Now it may be of useful Consideration 
to sickly and tender Bodies; That since so 
much Air must pass thro' 'em daily, to ex- 
cite Curiosity and Enquiry, after the Nature 
of Airs, and what wou'd best suit them. 

No doubt great Amendments may be made 
by the right Application of Airs medici- 
nally, and the frequent changing of 'em, 
with Skill. 

I'm of the Opinion that there is room in 
Science to form a Course of Airs. 

For the Air, which is Common to all 
Things, is the great Source of undeter- 
min'd Life, and the Universal Food of all 
Living Creatures: Because the three Prin- 
ciples are here justly temper'd together, 
and in their First and highest Union and 
Purity, viz. in an illuminated Salt. 

|P_17
But not to digress. 

'Tis the right breathing of Air thro' all the 
Pores of our Bodies, which are hot and per- 
spirous, that I aim at. 

And this is to help't forward by moderate 
Exercise, that enlivens the Spirits, concocts 
crude Matter, and casts off, what can't be 
reduc'd to Aliment; by Stool, Urine, Tran- 
spiration, &c.

Use Exercise in the Forenoon, but give o- 
ver half an Hour before Dinner. In the Even- 
ing 'tis proper again. 

Be not violent at it, nor continue it too 
long, but desist with Refreshment and Plea- 
sure. 

Let every one please his Fancy in innocent 
Recreation, only secure a Decorum. 

Betwixt no Exercise and too much, I'll 
leave you to exercise your Discretion. 

Intend your Exercise gradually, and abate 
so: Then you need no extraordinary Gar- 
ment, when you come off from it, or fear 
catching Cold. 

For from a suddain warmth to a suddain 
|P_18
chilness, there's Danger, Motibus oppositis 
nibil perniciosius. 

'Tis an healthful Sign, to feel lighter and 
brisker at Exercise, than really one is. 

The turgid Effervescence of the Spirits, 
by Exercise expands the Pores, ventilates the 
Blood, and throws off those effluviums which 
endanger Fevers, by amassing, gross, malig- 
nant Humors. 

But violent Exercise sooner destroys the 
Body, than the want of it. 

Therefore consumptive Bodies, and those 
that are hot, cholerick and lean, which re- 
quire but little and mild Exercise, must be 
caution'd against Excess in Recreation or Em- 
ployment, as well as in Meat and Drink: 
Lest they break up their tender crasis of Blood, 
and by firing the Spirits make 'em prey on 
the pure Balsam of Life. They must rest 
much more than others, and often settle their 
Spirits by Ease of Body and Mind. 

I'll venture to advise against two things 
that consume the Flesh, and I'm sure don't 
profit the Spirit. 

The First is Gameing, which I acccount a 
very ill Recreation: For besides Incon- 
|P_19
veniences (not now to take notice, that 'tis 
malum in se) it disturbs the Passions, makes 
violent Commotions, within at least; over- 
heats the Blood, makes restless Nights, &c.
'Tis not properly call'd Play, and yet I don't 
know what to call it, for 'tis not Work nei- 
ther, tho' more Laborious to the whole Man 
than either. 

The second is, unchristian Eagerness, 
and distrustful Carefulness after the things 
of this Life. Oh! how it tears their 
Flesh and Blood Night and Day: Be- 
sides the Horrors of Mind. Yet they are 
pleas'd to be tho't Christians, in the Opi- 
nion of others. 

They will have an Estate: But no sooner 
'tis got, the Man's gon, &c.

Flannel Shifts I don't like. I think it 
better to let 'em alone, while living. For 
they widen the Pores, cause a great Dispen- 
dium of Spirits, dispose to Sweat on slight 
Occasions, which shou'd not be: They 
make your Perspiration excessive, and your 
Body so continually tender, that you can't 
avoid catching cold. 

'Tis necessary to maintain a full Perspirati- 
on; but still invisible. 

|P_20
If the ambient Air is not warm enough, then 
the Air of a Fire, more Cloths, or Exercise 
must be sought. In the Spring and Autumn 
we are more subject to undue Perspirations, be- 
cause of sudden Changes in the Air. For In- 
stance, in April, the Sun will shine strong, and 
warm the Air to a great Degree in the Day: 
Whenas at Evening it shall be chil and cold: 
So again in September. While Summer has 
a steady Heat, and Winter a setled Cold. 

Now when great Quantity of Matter is 
perspiring, and a sudden Check arises, the 
obstructed Effluviums stagnat, and a new Ac- 
cess of Air pressing in, the Body is presently 
surcharg'd: So that you are liable to a Fe- 
ver; or at least to have Matter depos'd on 
the Brain or Lungs; or thrown into Fluxes, 
Loosness, &c.

Hence comes it to pass, that Diseases are 
more rife in Spring and Fall, than in Summer 
and Winter. By reason of the sudden Altera- 
tions of Weather from hot to cold, and cold 
to hot in the same Day. The one promoting, 
the other hindering convenient Transpiration, 
which few minding are the sooner entrapt. 

Insensible Perspiration is not to be rais'd to 
a Sweat: Unless to divert a greater Inconve- 
niency. 

|P_21
A full Perspiration rais'd by Art at seasona- 
ble Times, will more relieve the Body (in some 
Cases) than all other Evacuations combin'd. 

I have known weak Limbs and other De- 
cays, thus restor'd, by Rarefactions only in 
the Night time, without Sweat: And indeed 
my S.V.O. vastly excels here. 

You'll find Persons wonder at the so ear- 
ly Death of their Friends, because they 
have led a Temperate Sober Life. Alas! 
the obstructing of due Transpiration is as 
equally destructive of the Body, as other 
ill Government. 

To go to Stool, or make Water, more than 
usual, is a Sign you don't transpire well, and 
that you are declining from Health. 

As soon as the Head shall but ake, or any 
sick Symptom arise, the Body perspires less, 
and begins to feel heavy and dull. 

I cou'd make appear, that most Fevers and 
many other Diseases arise from unsteady Per- 
spiration. 

But to come to a close. 

It seems then, that slender Diet, frequent, 
tho' moderate Labour, and the seldom use of 
|P_22
sensual Pleasures, are productive of greater 
Health and Serenity of Mind, than Satiety, 
Idleness and Indulgence. 

For Temperance strengthens the Faculties of 
the Soul, as well as the Organs of the Body. 
It preserves Chastity and bridles the Passions. 

Many erroneusly think, they shou'd a- 
bridge themselves of the most substantial 
 Pleasures of Life, if they shou'd abate the 
Bottle, and the gustful Aboundings of Food. 
Whereas wou'd they experience the Change, 
and bring the Body under a temperate Con- 
duct, which wou'd wonderfully tend to the 
Musick of a clean Soul, the whole Man 
wou'd be regal'd hereby, and you'd get Forty 
Shillings a Week to boot, by saving. 

At first, to break off an ill Custom with- 
draw your self from your extravagant Com- 
pany; and from the Sight of Wine, Feasts, 
and tempting Baits: So your Fancy will not 
conceive Delight, nor stir up your Sensual 
Appetites. 

For 'tis Sight, Smell and Taste that entice, 
which if deny'd a little, you'll soon find the 
Pleasure of Conquest: a vast Reward. 

And to assist you in your Fortitude against 
all Excess, observe these two Notes. 

|P_23
First, Don't fancy your Happiness lies in 
any thing without you, as Company, sensu- 
al Pleasure, or Money: For if you want any 
of these, take my Word for't, you'll be a 
devilish Slave to other folks Lusts and Vices, 
besides your own. 

The second is, carry it with a prudent neg- 
lect and dis-esteem of your outward self and 
of all things without you: Thus you'll find 
many, who over-valuating them, will over- 
look you, as a disreputable Acquaintance. 
But hereby you'l drop slender and non-im- 
prov'd Intellects. These Notes well digested 
are very healthful to Soul and Body. 

If a Person of temperate Conduct should 
be indispos'd from any Surprize, he is soon- 
er set right again, than a foul Body, which 
generally falls into tedious and hazardous 
Fits of Sickness: For besides the present Mis- 
adventure, here's a foul Body to be cleans'd, 
&c. And the hazard of Blunders in much 
Physick. For the World abounds with Pre- 
tenders. 

'Tis a hard Case, the immortal Essence 
shou'd be only a Drudge in the Affairs of the 
Body: and not at all regard its own great 
Concerns. 

It can't be tho't, such noble intellectual 
|P_24
Furniture shou'd be design'd, only to keep a- 
live, and manage to the best Appearance a 
Piece of well Figur'd Clay, for a while, and 
then come to Nothing. 

A Temperate Life is a happy Necessity up- 
on the Soul to look out for more suitable En- 
joyments: Such as it may truly call so. 
And a precious Remedy against Satan's 
Devices. 

For Temperance, tho' it first designs the 
single Advantage of the Body: yet tends to, 
and generally ends in the everlasting Happi- 
ness of the whole Man. 

But I must not Preach. 

Then how pleasant is the Temper of an 
healthy sound Body, exprest in a lively active 
Vigour. A sprightly Strength possessing eve- 
ry part, and actuating the whole. As tho' the 
Man were all Body! 

[}So much for Rules. Now for Remedies. }]
AND here I may very pertinently and 
friendly introduce my Sal Volatile Oleo- 
sum, which naturally tends to the raising of 
such a pitch of Health. 

It is not lying within the Sphere of Medicines; 
|P_25
but of a sublimer Original, The Element of 
Air. 

For 'tis that alone can yield this Nitro- 
aereal Volatil Salt, enrich'd with Sulphurs and 
Light, whereby it becomes the Root and Sup- 
port of inferior Beings. 

And forasmuch as our Bodies necessarily 
partake of Air and Aliment, for their continu- 
ed Life, this noble Extract partaking of the 
Form of Light in an inseparable Union with 
refin'd matter; It becomes a fit and proper 
Medium to regulate Meat, Drink, Air, Tran- 
spiration, &c.

You may observe, how it exhibits to view 
some degree of that Splendor, which Vital 
Sulphurs always shine with, as the chosen 
matter, on which the Form of Light first 
descends and unites with: Spiritualizing 
and illuminating such a Portion, as is ne- 
cessary to every Individual, for its Vital 
Ferment. 

This impregnated radical Moisture derives 
both Heat and Influence thro'out the whole 
Body. And as it receives fresh Supplies from 
Air and Aliment, it refines the purer Portion, 
for Support to the Stock of Life, and a gene- 
ral good Habit of Body: Separating the im- 
pure, thro' the various Passages design'd for 
such Purposes. 

This Remedy naturally joins to the Life of 
Beings, and maintains a pure and rich Foun- 
|P_26
tain, whence very wholsome Streams are de- 
rived thro' the gross Corporeity. 

But this sort of Learning (in which Se- 
cret lies) is so much above that, which gives 
the general Qualification to Men, That 'twill 
be to no Purpose to entertain you with it. 

And indeed a Person gets no Reputation 
in this World, if he aims above outward 
Forms of Things. 

For whatever Medicine transcends the Apo- 
thecary's Skill, and can't be made out of 
Shop-Goods, the Author is called a Quack, 
the Alarum is given, all Mouths are open, 
to cry down the Man and his Medicine. To 
such a Trade is Physick come. 

Here I speak feelingly. For such Treat- 
ment have I had ever since I became Professor 
of this S.V.O

But (I thank God) the Excellency and ve- 
ry grat Usefulness of this Blessing has main- 
tain'd its own worth, and Me too, against all 
Opposition. 

How many Diseases are cur'd by it, is as 
needless as laborious to enumerate. 'Tis an 
Antidote against all. 

And proper for every Creature. Tho' this 
sounds strange to short Capacities. 

But in particular, I advise it to weak and 
sickly Stomachs, to help good Chylification 
and Digestion. 

It expels Wind, cures Gripes and Cholicks 
of all sorts. 

|P_27
'Tis excellent against Melancholy, Hypo', 
Vapours, and Fits of any kind. 

It will encrease Breathing, cleanse the re- 
spiring Organs, and very good to cure Colds 
and Foulness of the Chest. 

It enlivens and invigorates the Brain, and 
all the Senses. And derives Strength and Acti- 
vity to the Limbs. 

It purifies and renews the Fountain of Life, 
the Blood, and conserves all the other Fluids 
in just Proportions and a vivid State. 

It preserves the Body from decay and wi- 
thering, and keeps it in Strength and Beauty. 

N.B. To such as are lyable to the Scurvy, 
 Dropsie, Gout, Stone, Colick, Rheu- 
 matism, &c. It ought to be their Con- 
 stant Companion, at Meals in their Drink, 
 and betwixt Meals, besides. 

[}The Use and Doses. }]
IN a quarter of a Pint of River, or other 
Water, stir in 70 or 80 Drops. 

In half a Pint of Table Beer or Ale, from 
15 to 20 Drops. 

In each Glass of Wine 7 or 8 Drops. 

In a Glass of Cyder or Mead 15 to 16. 

In a Glass of Mum 20. 

In every Dish of Milk-Tea, from 20 to 30. 

In rough-Tea 20. In a Dish of lac'd Cof- 
fee 10 or 12. 

Remember to stir them up very well in all 
Liquors, before you Drink 'em. 

|P_28
 Sick Folks and such as have most need, 
should repeat the Dose oftener. 

Be sure to avoid Pump-Waters, and such 
as curdle with these Drops, for all such Wa- 
ters are very pernicious. 

In Fits of the Colick, take the Dose every 
half Hour in Water, for 3 or 4 times. 

The like do on any Surfeit of Meat or Drink. 

Squeeze a drop or two in the Palm of your 
Hand, and smell to it often. 

In any affect of the Head, two or three 
Drops lay'd on the Tongue, diffuses a noble 
gas to the Brain. 

With these Drops you may enrich all Li- 
quors, observing a due Proportion. For they'll 
recover all prickt, sick Liquors: And give a 
Body and Strength to thin, lean ones. 

In Canary, White Wines, Cyder, and o- 
ther spirituous Liquors; you'll see it lye at 
the bottom of the Glass, and shew it self red, 
which is an excellent Mark of the true Me- 
dicine, for that's a view of the internal Sul- 
phur, rending to Fixation. 

But many being us'd to great Variety of 
Medicines, can't understand how so much 
Benefit may be receiv'd by one. Being ac- 
customed to Vomiting, Purging, Sweating, 
 Bleeding, Blistering, &c. But wholly un- 
acquainted with what, so gratefully and in- 
nocently, yet powerfully, joins with the Vital 
Spirits. 

|P_29
[}Another Excellent Remedy to pro- 
mote Health and Long Life, is }]
[}My Tincture of Rheubarb. }]
THis very wholsom and beneficial Drugg 
is deservendly reputed One of the best of 
Vegetable Medicines, and has long obtain'd 
an Universal Esteem. 

'Tis a very mild and benign Purger of Cho- 
ler, Phlegm, Viscous and Tartarous matter 
from the Stomach and Bowels. 

'Tis Specific to the Liver, and Opens the 
Obstructions of it, thinning the Gall, moving 
it to a discharge. 

This Root is Capable of great improvement 
by Artful Preparation, if it be well chosen, 
as to soundness and fulness of Tincture, 
which is no difficulty to an Artist; tho' to 
others 'tis not easie: For there is great Vari- 
ety in this Subject: And often that which is 
least useful, goes at the best Price. The gross 
Earthy part is binding and heating, and too 
hard and stiff upon the fibrous texture, apt 
to force away the mucus of the Guts, which 
is a great Injury— 

Infusions draw but in part its Tincture, 
the greatest skill in handling this noble Sub- 
|P_30
ject lies in the Menstruum, which must be fu- 
sible, penetrating, and attractive. I a little 
value my self on this Attainment. 

For here, I not only get out all the rich 
Tincture of the Drugg; but convey it too 
(with Pleasure thro' the Stomach, &c.) into 
the Blood and more distant parts of the Body, 
whereby I distinguish Purity from Impurity, 
and derive gradually foulness from remote 
parts, and evacuate too, thro' cleansing Or- 
gands and Ducts.—'Tis a greater work to 
Purify the Blood, than to Purge the Bowels: 
And my Tincture has a direct Tendency to 
the former. 

With the Use of This you may keep your 
Blood Clean, Cool and Temperate, and your 
skin from growing Tawney, Greenish, and Yel- 
low— 

'Tis an Excellent preservative against Drop- 
sies, Jaundice, Scurvy, Gout, Asthma, and foul 
Lungs — And the Diseases of the Brain. 

It will cure the Cholick, and all windy, 
weak Stomachs; it helps good Eating, Chy- 
lification, and Digestion, &c.— 

I have long Observ'd the deplorable Case 
of Infants; and that the likeliest and strongest 
Children are sooner cut off, than the Puling 
and Sickly: Only because their Stomachic 
Ferment is stronger. 

The right tempering down this predomi- 
nant Acid early, wou'd save Thousands. And 
I offer this Tincture here in these Cases, of 
|P_31
meer Good Will: For the trifling advantage 
to my self in so dear and Laborious a Medi- 
cine, is not worth while, at my Age. 

But because I wou'd be clearly Understood, 
pray observe — That Sour, Corrosive, con- 
nate Leven, that lies pent up, and undiluted, 
in the Stomachs of Infants, while in the 
Womb, grows such a potent and fiery Acid, 
that so soon as Born, all that they be to re- 
ceive at the Mouth is so corrupted hereby, 
that Surfeits, Wind, Gripes, Belly-ach, and 
Convulsion Fits, are the miserable Conse- 
quences.—I wou'd have the first Thing 
given to Infants new-born a little River-water 
(by no means Pump-waters) sweetned, and 
3 or 4 drops of my Sal Volatile Oleosum, stirr'd 
in 3 or 4 times a day — Or this Tincture of 
Rheubarb — rather sometimes One, and 
other times the Other.—Let it be continu- 
ed a Month for cleansing and purifying. And 
it wou'd contribute much, if the Wet-Nurse, 
as you call Her, drank a draught of Water and 
the S.V.O. in it, twice a day. N.B. Where 
this first Cause of many Distempers is not 
subdu'd in Infancy: In growing Years there 
will be a predominant sourness in the Stomach 
always maintain'd by Meats and Drinks, that 
will Cause Heart-burn, Head-ach, Colick, 
Costiveness, &c.—And an intemperating heat, 
apt to break out into malignant Fevers, Mea- 
sles, Small-Pox, and other foul Eruptions 
thro' the skin. 

|P_32
But the liberal Use of this Tincture of 
Rheubarb to grown Persons will prevent 
many Diseases, and promote Health and 
Long Life. 

The large Dose is a Tea-spoonfull or 40 or 
50 Drops in Tea, Water-gruel, Sage-Tea, 
River-water, or Small-beer, and to be repeat- 
ed thrice in a Morning: It may be repeated 
again in the Evening about 5 or 6 a Clock 
with great benefit— 

Persons inclin'd to Dropsies, Jaundies or 
both, shou'd take it very often and continue 
it. And twice a Week take my Pills— 

As for Children and Infants, from 10 to 20 
Drops, according to their Age: Here it must 
be Dispenst at the Discretion of Others. 

The true Sal Volatile Oleosum is prepared 
to the greatest Perfection, at Dr. Byfield's pre- 
sent Dwelling House, in Great Newstreet, by 
Fetter-lane, over against the Three Tunns. As 
is also his Tincture of Rheubarb. 

They are Dispenst at 2 s 6 d each Vial. 

Now, if any Gentlemen are pleas'd to 
bestow on their Friends this little Book of 
Rules and Remedies: They may have 14 
to the Dozen at my House, as above Dire- 
cted. 

