
[}AN 
ESSAY
OF 
Health and Long Life}]
§ 1. [^Decorative frame around the letter "I".^]IT is a common Say-
ing, That every Man 
past Forty is either a 
Fool or a Physician:
It might have been as 
justly added, that he 
was a Divine too: For, as the World 
goes at present, there is not any Thing 
that the Generality of the better Sort of 
Mankind so lavishly and so unconcern-
edly throw away as Health, except eter-
nal Felicity. Most Men know when they 
|P_2
are ill, but very few when they are well. 
And yet it is most certain, that 'tis ea-
sier to preserve Health than to recover
it, and to prevent Diseases than to cure
them. Towards the first, the Means are 
mostly in our own Power: Little else 
is required than to bear and forbear.
But towards the latter, the Means are 
perplexed and uncertain; and for the 
Knowledge of them the far greatest Part 
of Mankind must apply to others, of 
whose Skill and Honesty they are in a 
great measure ignorant, and the Benefit 
of whose Art they can but conditionally 
and precautiously obtain. A crazy Con-
stitution, original weak Nerves, dear-
bought Experience in Things helpful and 
hurtful, and long Observation on the 
Complaints of others, who came for Relief 
to this universal Infirmary, BATH, have at 
last (in some measure) taught me some of 
the most effectual Means of preserving 
Health and prolonging Life in those who 
are tender and sickly, and labour under 
chronical Distempers. And I thought I 
could not spend my leisure Hours better 
than by putting together the most gene-
ral Rules for that Purpose, and setting 
them in the clearest and strongest Light 
I could, for the Benefit of those who 
|P_3
may want them, and yet have not had 
such favourable Opportunities to learn 
them. 

§. 2. And that I might write with 
some Order and Connexion, I have cho-
sen to make some Observations and Re-
flections on the Nonnaturals (as they are 
called, possibly because that in their pre-
ternatural State they are eminently inju-
rious to human Constitutions; or more 
probably, because tho' they be necessary 
to the Subsistence of Man, yet in respect 
of him, they may be considered as ex-
ternal, or different from the internal
Causes that produce Diseases) to wit, 
1. The Air we breathe in. 2. Our Meat
and Drink. 3. Our Sleep and Watch-
ing. 4. Our Exercise and Rest. 5. Our 
Evacuations and their Obstructions. 6. 
The Passions of our Minds: And lastly,
to add some Observations that come not 
so naturally under any of these Heads. 
I shall not consider here how philosophi-
cally these Distinctions are made; they 
seem to me, the best general Heads for 
bringing in those Observations and Re-
flections I am to make in the following 
Pages. 

|P_4
§3. The Reflection is not more 
common than just, That he who lives 
physically must live miserably. The Truth 
is, too great Nicety and Exactness about 
every minute Circumstance that may im-
pair our Health, is such a Yoke and Sla-
very, as no Man of a generous free Spi-
rit would submit to. 'Tis, as a Poetex-
presses it, to die for fear of Dying. And 
to forbear or give over a just, charitable, 
or even generous Office of Life, from a 
too scrupulous Regard to Health, is un-
worthy of a Man, much more of a Chri-
stian. But then, on the other Hand, to 
cut off our Days by Intemperance, Indi-
scretion, and guilty Passions, to live mi-
serably for the sake of gratifying a sweet 
Tooth, or a brutal Itch; to die Martyrs
to our Luxury and Wantonness, is equal-
ly beneath the Dignity of human Nature,
and contrary to the Homage we owe to 
the Author of our Being. Without some 
Degree of Health, we can neither be a-
greeable to ourselves, nor useful to our 
Friends; we can neither relish the Bles-
sings of divine Providence to us in Life,
nor acquit ourselves of our Duties to 
our Maker, or our Neighbour. He that 
wantonly transgresseth the self-evident
|P_5
Rules of Health, is guilty of a Degree 
of Self-Murder; and an habitualPerse-
verance therein is direct [/1./]Suicide, and 
consequently, the greatest Crime he can 
commit against the Author of his Being; 
as it is slighting and despising the noblest 
Gift he could bestow upon him, viz.
the Means of making himself infinitely 
happy; and also as it is a treacherousfor-
saking the Post, wherein his Wisdom has 
placed him, and thereby rendering him-
self incapable of answering the Designs 
of his Providence over him. The infi-
nitely wise Author of Nature has so 
contrived Things, that the most remark-
ableRules of preserving Life and 
Health are moral Duties commanded 
us, so truē it is, that Godliness has the 
Promises of this Life, as well as that 
to come.

To avoid all useless Refinement, I 
will lay down only a few plain easily 
observed Rules, which a Man may rea-
dily follow, without any Trouble or 
Constraint. 

|P_19
[}CHAP. II. 
Of Meat and Drink. }]
§. 1. TO have our Food, that is, our 
Meat and Drink, as to Quan-
tity and Quality duly regulated, and pre-
cisely adjusted to our concoctive Powers,
would be of the utmost Consequence to 
Health and Long Life. Our Bodies re-
quire only a determinate Quantitythere-
of, to supply the Expences of living: and 
a just Proportion of that to these would 
very probably preserve us from acute,
most certainly from chronical Distempers, 
and enable us to live, without much Sick-
ness and Pain, so long as our Constitu-
tions were originally made to last. The 
Sources of chronical Distempers are first
Viscidity in the Juices, or the Over-
largeness of their constituent Particles,
which not being sufficiently broken by 
the concoctive Powers, stop or retard the 
Circulation; or, secondly, too great abun-
dance of sharp and acrimonious Salts,
|P_20
whereby the Juices themselves are ren-
dered so corrosive, as to burst or wear 
out the Solids; or, thirdly, a Relaxa-
tion, or Want of a due Force and Sprin-
giness, in the Solids themselves. An Ex-
cess in Quantity begets the first, the ill 
Condition of our Meat and Drink the 
second, and both together, with Want of 
due Labour, the third.

 §. 2. The Meat of England is gene-
rallyanimal Substances. The Animals
themselves, from epidemick Causes, bad 
Food, Age, or other Infirmities, have 
their Diseases as well as humanCrea-
tures: and these diseased Animals can 
never be proper or sound Food for Men. 
Adult Animals abound more in urinous 
Salts than young ones: Their Parts are 
more closely compacted, because more 
forcibly united; and so harder of Dige-
stion. 'Tis true, the great Distinction of 
the Fitness or Unfitness of the several 
Sorts of Animals and Vegetables for hu-
man Food, depends upon their original 
Make, Frame, and Nature (and that can 
be found out only by Experience) as also 
upon the special Taste, Complexion, Tem-
perament, and Habits of the Person that 
feeds on them. But by the Help of these 
|P_21
Three Principles, viz. First, That the 
Strength or Weakness of Cohesion of 
the Particles of fluid Bodies, depends up-
on their Bigness or Smallnesss; that is, 
the biggest Particles cohere more firmly, 
than the smaller, because more Parts come 
into Contact in large Bodies than small, 
and so their Union is greater. Secondly,
That the greater the Force [Momentum] 
is, with which two Bodies meet, the 
stronger is their Cohesion, and the more 
difficult their Separation. Thirdly, that 
Salts, being comprehended by plain Sur-
faces, being hard, and in all Changes 
recovering their Figure, unite the most 
firmly of any Bodies whatsoever: Their 
plain Surfaces bring many Points into 
Contact and Union: Their Hardness and 
constant Figure make them durable and 
unalterable; and thereby the active Prin-
ciples, and the Origin of the Qualities 
of Bodies; and when they approach with-
in the Sphere of one another's Activity,
they firmly unite in Clusters; all which 
make the Separation of their original 
Particles the more difficult. I say, from 
these three Principles, we may in gene-
ral compare the Easiness or Difficulty of 
digesting (that is, breaking into small 
Parts) the several Sorts of Vegetables
|P_22
and Animals, one with another; and so 
discover their Fitness or Unfitness for 
becoming Food for tender and valetudi-
nary Persons. 
1. All other Things being supposed 
equal, those Vegetables and Animals,
that come to Maturity the soonest, are 
lightest of Digestion. Thus the Spring 
Vegetables, as Asparagus, Straw-berries,
and some Sorts of Sallading, are more 
easily digested than Pears, Apples, Pea-
ches, and Nectarines; because they have 
less of the solar Fire in them; their Parts 
are united by a weaker Heat; that is, 
with less Velocity, and abound less in, 
nay scarce have any strong and fixed 
Salts. Among the Animals, the com-
mon Poultry, Hares, Sheep, Kids, Rab-
bets, &c. who in the same, or a few 
Years come to their Maturity (that is, to 
propagate their Species) are much more 
tender and readily digested than Cows,
Horses, or Asses, (were these last in use 
for Food, as they have been in Famine) 
&c. for the Reason already given, be-
cause their Parts cohere less firmly. 
And it is observable, of the Vegetables,
which are longest a ripening, that is, 
whose Juices have most of the solar Rays 
|P_23
in them, that their fermented Juices yield 
the strongest vinous Spirits; as Grapes, 
Elder-berries, and the like: and of the 
Animals that are longest in coming to 
Maturity, that their Juices yield the most 
rank and most fœtid urinous Salts.
2. Other Things supposed equal, the 
larger and bigger the Vegetable or Ani-
mal is, in its Kind, the stronger and the 
harder to digest is the Food made thereof. 
Thus a large Onion, Apple, or Pear, and 
large Beef and Mutton are harder to di-
gest than the lesser ones, of the same 
Kind; not only, as their Vessels being 
stronger and more elastick, their Parts are 
brought together with a greater Force; 
but also, because the Qualities are pro-
portionably more intense in great Bodies 
of the same Kind: Thus, other Things 
being equal, a greater Fire is proportion-
ably more intensely hot, than a lesser 
one; and the Wine contained in a larger 
Vessel becomes stronger than that con-
tained in a lesser; and consequently the 
Juices of larger Animals and Vegetables
are more rank than the Juices of smaller 
ones of the same Kind. 
|P_24
3. Other Things being equal, The pro-
per Food appointed for Animals by Na-
ture, is easier digested than the Animals
themselves; those Animals that live on 
Vegetables, than those that live on Ani-
mals; those that live on Vegetables or 
Animals, that soonest come to Maturi-
ty, than those that live on such as are 
longer a ripening. Thus Milk and Eggs
are lighter of Digestion than the Flesh of 
Beasts or Birds; Pullets and Turkies, than 
Ducks and Geese; and Partridge, and 
Pheasant are lighter than Woodcock or 
Snipe; because these last, being long-bil-
led, suck only animal Juices; and for 
the Reasons already given, Grass Beef
and Mutton are lighter than stall-fed Ox-
en and Sheep.
4. All Things else being alike, Fish
and Sea-Animals are harder to digest 
than Land-Animals; because universal-
ly their Food is other Animals, and the 
Salt Element in which they live compacts 
their Parts more firmly; Salts having a 
stronger Power of Cohesion than other 
Bodies. And for the same Reason, Salt 
Water Fish is harder to digest than fresh
Water. Thus the Sea Tortoise is harder 
|P_25
to digest than the Land Tortoise; and 
Sturgeon and Turbit, than Trout or Perch.5. Other Things being equal, Vegeta-
bles and Animals that abound in an oily, 
fat, and glutinous Substance, are harder to 
digest, than those of a dry, fleshy, fibrous
Substance; because oily and fatSubstan-
ces clude the Force and Action of the 
concoctive Powers; and their Parts at-
tract one another, and unite more strong-
ly than other Substances do, (except Salts) 
as Sir Isaac Newton[/2./] observes. Their 
Softness and Humidity relaxes and weak-
ens the Force of the Stomach, and the 
Fat and Oil itself is shut up in little 
Bladders, that are with Difficulty broken. 
Thus Nuts of all kinds pass through the 
Guts, almost untouched: Olives are har-
der to digest than Pease; fat flesh Meat, 
than the lean of the same. Carp, Tench, 
Salmon, Eel, and Turbit, are much harder 
to digest than Whiting, Perch, Trout, or 
Haddock.
6. Vegetables and Animals, all Things 
else being alike, whose Substance is white,
|P_26
or inclining to the lighter Colours, are 
lighter to digest, than those whose Substance
is redder, browner, or inclining towards the 
more flaming Colours; not only be-
cause the Parts that reflect white, and 
the lighter Colours are lesser in Bulk 
than those that reflect the more flaming 
Colours[/3./]; but also because those of the 
more flaming Colours abound more with 
urinious Salts. Thus Turnips, Parsnips,
and Potatoes, are lighter than Carrots, 
Skirrets, and Beet-Raves. Pullet, Tur-
key, Pheasant, and Rabbet, are lighter 
than Duck, Geese, Woodcock, and Snipe. 
Whiting, Flounder, Perch, and Soal, are 
lighter than Salmon, Sturgeon, Herring,
and Mackarel. Veal and Lamb is lighter 
than Red or Fallow Deer. 
7. Lastly, All other Things being e-
qual, Vegetables and Animals of a strong, 
poignant, aromatick and hot Taste, are 
harder to digest than those of a milder, 
softer, and more insipid Taste. High Re-
lish comes from abundance of Salts: A-
bundance of Salts supposes adult Ani-
mals, and such as are long a coming to 
|P_27
Maturity; and where Salts abound, the 
Parts are more difficultly separated, and 
harder to be digested. Strong and aro-
matick Plants imbibe and retain most of 
the solar Rays, and become solid Spirits, 
or fixed Flames. And they that deal 
much in them swallow so much live-
Coals, which will at last inflame the 
Fluids and burn up the Solids. 

§. 3. There is nothing more certain, than that the greater Superiority the con∣coctive Powers have, over the Food, or the stronger the concoctive Powers are, in regard of the Things to be concocted; the finer the Chyle will be, the Circula∣tion the more free, and the Spirits more lightsome; that is, the better will the Health be. Now from these general Propositions, taking in their own parti-
cularComplexion and Habits, vale-
tudinary, studious, or contemplativePer-
sons may easily fix upon these particular 
vegetable or animal Foods, that are fit-
test for them. And if any Error should 
be committed, 'tis best to err on the safest 
Side, and rather chuse those Things that 
are under our concoctive Powers, than 
those that are above them. And in the 
Choice of Animals for our Food, we 
|P_28
must not pass over the Manner of fatten-
ing and fitting them up for the Table. 
About London we can scarce have any, 
but cramm'd Poultry, or stall-fedButche-
ry Meat. It were sufficient to disgust 
the stoutest Stomach, to see the foul, 
gross, and nasty Manner, in which, and 
the fetid, putrid and unwholesome Ma-
terials, with which they are fed. Perpe-
tual Foulness and Cramming, gross Food 
and Nastiness, we know, will putrify the 
Juices and mortify the muscular Substance 
of human Creatures; and sure they can 
do no less in Brute Animals, and thus 
make even our Food Poison. The same 
may be said of hot Beds, and forcing 
Plants and Vegetables. The only Way 
of having sound and healthful animal
Food, is to leave them to their own na-
tural Liberty, in the free Air, and their 
own proper Element, with Plenty of 
Food, and due Cleanness, and a Shelter 
from the Injuries of the Weather, when 
they have a Mind to retire to it. I add 
nothing about Cookery: Plain Roasting 
and Boiling is as high, as valetudinary, 
tender, studious, and contemplativePer-
sons, or those who would preserve their 
Health, and lengthen out their Days, 
ought to presume on. Made Dishes, rich
|P_29
Soop, high Sauces, Baking, Smoaking, 
Salting, and Pickling, are the Inventions 
of Luxury, to force an unnatural Appe-
tite, and encrease the Load, which Na-
ture, without Incentives from ill Habits, 
and a vicious Palate, will of itself make 
more than sufficient for Health and long 
Life. Abstinence and proper Evacua-
tions, due Labour and Exercise, will al-
ways recover a decayed Appetite, so long 
as there is any Strength and Fund in Na-
ture to go upon. And 'tis scarce allow-
ble to provoke an Appetite, with medi-
cinal Helps, but where the digestiveFa-
culties have been spoiled and ruined by 
acute or tedious chronical Distempers. 
And as soon as 'tis recovered to any to-
lerable Degree, Nature is to be left to 
its own Work, without any Spurs from 
Cookery or Physick.

§. 4. The next Consideration is the 
Quantity of Food that is necessary to 
support Nature, without overloading it, 
in a due Plight: That is indeed various, 
according to the Age, Sex, Nature, 
Strength, and Country the Party is of, 
and the Exercise he uses. In these Nor-
thern Countries, the Coldness of the 
Air, the Strength and large Stature of 
|P_30
People, demand larger Supplies than in 
the Eastern and warmer Countries. Young 
growing Persons, and those of great 
Strength and large Stature, require more 
than the Aged, Weak, and Slender. But 
Persons of all Sorts will live more heal-
thy and longer by universal Temperance,
than otherwise. And some general Ob-
servations on the Quantity Persons of 
different Nations and Conditions, have 
lived on, healthy, and to a great Age, 
may give some Assistance to valetudina-
ry and tender Persons, to adjust the due 
Quantity necessary for them. 

§ 5. It is surprising, to what a great 
Age the eastern Christians, who retir'd 
from the Persecutions into the Desarts 
of Egypt and Arabia, lived healthful on 
a very little Food. We are inform'd by 
Cassian, that the common Measure in 
twenty four Hours, was about twelve 
Ounces or a Pound, (for the eastern
Pound was but twelve Ounces) with 
mere Element for Drink. St. Antho-
ny liv'd to 105 Years, on mere Bread 
and Water, adding only a few Herbs at 
last. James the Hermit, to 104. Arse-
nius, the Tutor of the Emperor Arcadi-
us, to 120: 65 in the world, and 55 in 
|P_31
the Desart. St. Epiphanus, to 115. St. Je-
rome, to about 100. Simeon Stylites, 109. 
And Romualdus, 120. And Lewis Corna-
ro, a Venetian Nobleman, after he had u-
sed all other Remedies in vain, so that his 
Life was despair'd of at 40, yet recover'd 
and liv'd, by the mere Force of his Tem-
perance, near to 100 years. 

§ 6. Our Northern Climate, as I said 
from the Purity and Coldness of the Air, 
which bracing the Fibres, makes the Ap-
petite keener, and the Action of Dige-
stition stronger; and from the Labour 
and Strength of the People, which makes 
the Expences of living more, will neces-
sarily require a greater Quantity of Food. 
Yet 'tis wonderful in what Sprightliness, 
Stength, Activity, and fredom of Spirits, 
a low Diet, even here, will preserve 
those that have habituated themselves to 
it. Buchanan informs us, of one Lau-
rence who preserved himself to 140, by 
the mere Force of Temperance and La-
bour. Spotswood mentions one Kenti-
gern (afterwards called St. Mongah,
or Mungo, from whom the Famous 
Well in Wales is named) who lived to 
185 Years, tho' after he came to the 
Years of Understanding, he never tasted 
|P_32
Wine nor strong Drink; and slept on 
the cold Ground. My worthy Friend Mr. 
Web, is still alive. He by the Quickness 
of the Faculties of the Mind, and the 
Activity of the Organs of his Body, shews 
the great Benefit of a low Diet, living 
altogether on vegetable Food and pure 
Element. The History of the Milk [/4./]
Doctor of Croydon, who by living on 
Milk only, cured himself of an other-
wise incurable Distemper, viz. the E-
pilepsy, and liv'd in perfect Health for 
sixteen Years after, till an Accident cut 
him off, I have already narrated in my 
Treatise of the Gout. Henry Jenkins a 
Fisherman, liv'd 169 Years, his Diet 
was coarse and sower, as his Historian
informs us, that is, plain and cooling, 
and the Air where he lived sharp and 
clear, viz. Allerton upon Swale in York-
shire. Parr died sixteen Years younger, 
viz. at the age of 152 Years, 9 Months; 
his Diet was old Cheese, Milk, coarse 
Bread, small Beer, and Whey: And 
his Historian tells us, he might have 
lived a good while longer, if he had not 
changed his Diet and Air, coming out of a 
clear, thin, free Air, into the thick Air 
of London, and after a constant, plain, 
|P_33
and homely country Diet, being taken 
into a spendid Family, where he fed high, 
and drank plentifully of the best Wines, 
whereby the natural Functions of the 
Parts were overcharged, and the Habit 
of the whole Body quite disordered; up-
on which there could not but soon ensue 
a Dissolution.[/5./]Dr. Lister mentions eight 
Persons in the North of England, the 
youngest of which was above 100 Years, 
and the eldest 140. He says, 'tis to be 
observed, that the Food of all this moun-
tainous Country is exceedingly coarse. 
And certainly there is no Place in the 
World more likely to lengthen out Life 
than England, especially those Parts of 
it, that have a free open Air, and a gra-
velly and chalky Soil, if to due Exercise, 
Abstemiousness, and a plain simple Diet
were added. 

§. 7. I have [/6./]elsewhere offered to 
determine the Quantity of Food, suffi-
cient to keep a Man of an Ordinary Sta-
ture, following no laborious Employ-
|P_34
ment, in due Plight, Health, and Vigour; 
to wit, 8 Ounces of Flesh Meat, 12 of 
Bread, or vegetable Food, and about a 
Pint of Wine, or other generous Liquor 
in 24 Hours. But the Valetudinary, and 
those employed in sedentary Professions, 
or intellectual Studies, must lessen this 
Quantity, if they would preserve their 
Health, and the Freedom of their Spirits 
long. Studious and sedentary Men must 
of Necessity eat and drink a great deal 
less, than those very same Men might 
do, were they engaged in an active Life. 
For as they want that Exercise that is 
necessary towards Concoction and Per-
spiration, and that their Nerves are more 
worn out by intellectual Studies, than 
even bodily Labour would waste them; 
if, in any wise, they indulge Freedom of 
Living, their Juices must necessarily be-
come viscid, and their Stomachs relaxed. 
He that would have a clear Head must 
have a clean Stomach. The Neglect of 
which is the Cause, why we see so many hy-
pochondriacal, melancholy, and vapourish 
Gentlemen, among those of the long 
Robe; the only Remedy of which is La-
bour and Abstinence.

|P_35
§. 8. Most of all the chronical Diseases, 
the Infirmities of old Age, and the short
Periods of the Lives of Englishmen, are 
owing to Repletion. This is evident from 
hence; because Evacuation of one Kind 
or another is nine Parts of ten in their 
Remedy: For not only Cupping, Bleed-
ing, Blistering, Issues, Purging, Vomit-
ing, and Sweating, are manifest Evacua-
tions, or Drains to draw out what has 
been superfluously taken down; but even 
Abstinence, Exercise, Alteratives, Cor-
dials, Bitters, and Alexipharmicks, are 
but several means to dispose the gross 
Humours to be more readily evacuated 
by insensible Perspiration; that new and 
well concocted Chyle, and sweet com-
minuted Juices, may take their Place to 
restore the Habit. And therefore it were 
much more easy, as well as more safe and 
effectual, to prevent than incur the 
Necessity of such Evacuations. And a-
ny one may lose a Pound of Blood, take 
a Purge, or a Sweat; by dropping the 
great Meal, or abstaining from animal
Food and strong Liquors, for four or five 
Days (in chronical Cases) as effectually 
as by opening a Vein, swallowing a Dose 
of Pills, or taking a sudorifick Bolus.

|P_36
§. 9. I advise therefore all Gentlemen 
of a sedentary Life, and of learnedPro-
fessions, to use as much Abstinence as 
possibly they can, consistent with the Pre-
servation of their Strength and Freedom 
of Spirits: Which ought to be done as 
soon as they find any Heaviness, Inquie-
tudes, restless Nights, or Aversion to Ap-
plication; either by lessening one half 
of their usual Quantity of animal Food 
and strong Liqours, 'till such Time as they 
regain their wonted Freedom and Indo-
lence; or by living a due Time wholly 
upon vegetable Diet, such as Sago, Rice, 
Pudding, and the like, and drinking on-
ly a little Wine and Water. And if they 
would preserve their Health and Consti-
tution, and lengthen out their Days; they 
must either inviolably live low (or mai-
gre, as the French call it) a Day or two 
in the Week; or once a Week, Fort-
night, or Month at farthest, take some 
domestick Purge, which shall require nei-
therDiet, nor keeping at Home; but 
may at once strengthen the Bowels, and 
discharge superfluous Humours. Of this 
Kind are a Dose (6 or 7) of the Scotch
Pills; half a Dram of the Pilulæ Stoma-
chicæ cum Gummi, with three or four 
|P_37
Grains of Diagryd, mixt; half a Dram 
of the Pilulæ Ruffi; two Ounces of 
Hiera Piera, with one Dram of the Sy-
rup of Buckthorn; two or three Ounces 
of Elixir Salutis; or (what I prefer be-
fore all these) this Preparation of Rhu-
barb:

Take the best Rhubarb in Powder two 
Ounces and a half; Salt of Worm-
wood a Dram; Orange Peel half 
an Ounce; grated Nutmeg two Scru-
ples; Cochineal, half a Dram. In-
fusc 48 Hours by a warm Fire-side, 
in a Quart of true Arrack. Strain 
it off, and put it in a well corked 
Bottle for Use. 

Of this two or three Spoonfuls may 
be taken, two or three Times a Week, 
or at Pleasure, with great Safety and Be-
nefit, without Interruption of Business, 
or Studies, and continued even to ma-
ture old Age, if found necessary. So true 
is old Verulam's Aphorism: [/7./]Nihil ma-
gis conducit ad Sanitatem & Longævi-
|P_38
tatem quam crebræ & domesticæ purga-
tiones. And the Gentlemen of the long 
Robe, those of learned Professions and 
contemplative Studies, must of Necessity 
at last take Sir Charles Scarborough's Ad-
vice, as 'tis said, to the Dutchess of Ports-
mouth: You must eat less, or use more 
Exercise, or take Physick, or be sick.

§. 10. Those who have written about 
Health have given many Rules,where-
by to know when any Person has exceed-
ed at a Meal: I think, there needs but 
this short one, which is; If any Man has 
eat or drank so much, as renders him 
unfit for the Duties and Studies of his 
Profession (after an Hour's sitting quiet 
to carry on the Digestion;) he has over-
done. I mean only of those of learned
Professions and studious Lives; for those 
of mechanical Employments must take 
the Body, the other Part of the com-
pound, into Consideration. If tender
People, and those of learned Professions 
would go by this Rule, there would be 
little Use for Physick or Physicians in 
chronical Cases. Or if they would but 
eat only one Part of animal Food, at the 
great Meal, and make the other two of 
vegetable Food; and drink only Water 
|P_39
with a Spoonful of Wine, or clear small 
Beer; their Appetites would be a suffi-
cient Rule to determine the Quantity of 
their Meat and Drink. But Variety of 
Dishes, the luxurious Artfulness of Cook-
ery, and swallowing rich Wine after eve-
ry Bit of Meat, so lengthen out the Ap-
petite; the Fondness of Mothers, and the 
Cramming of Nurses have so stretched 
the Capacities of Receiving, that there 
is no Security from the Appetite among 
the better Sort. 'Tis amazing to think 
how Men of Voluptuousness, Laziness,
and poor Constitutions, should imagine 
themselves able to carry off Loads of 
high-seasoned Foods, and inflammatory 
Liquors, without Injury or Pain; when 
Men of mechanick Employments, and 
rubust Constitutions, are scarcely able to 
live healthy and in Vigour to any great 
Age, on a simple, low, and almost vege-
table Diet. 

§. 11. Since then our Appetites are 
deceitful, and Weight and Measuretrou-
blesome and singular; we must have Re-
course to a Rule independent of our Sen-
sations, and free from unnecessary Trou-
ble and Pain. To answer which, I know 
nothing but Eating and Drinking by our 
|P_40
Eye. that is, determining first of all ei-
ther by Weight or Measure, or by par-
ticular Observation or Experiment, the 
Bulk, or Number of Mouthfuls of Flesh 
Meat, and the Number of Glasses of strong 
Liquors, under which we are best; and 
then by our Eye determining an equal 
Quantity at all Times for the future: 
Thus the two Wings of a middling Pul-
let, or one Wing and both Legs; three 
Ribs of a middling Neck of Mutton, two 
middling Slices of a Leg or Shoulder, 
throwing away the Fat and the Skin; 
somewhat less of Beef, may be sufficient 
for Flesh Meat, at the great Meal. For 
we are so wisely contrived, that our Food 
need not be adjusted to mathematical
Points: A little over or under will make 
no Difference in our Health. As for 
Pork, and all Kinds of Hog's Flesh, I 
think they ought to be forbidden vale-
tudinary and studious People, as they 
were the Jews: They feed the foulest 
of any Creature, and their Juices are the 
rankest; their Substance the most sur-
feiting, and they are the most subject to 
cutaneous Diseases and Putrefaction, of 
any Creature; insomuch, that in the 
Time of a Plague, or any epidemicalDi-
stemper, they are universally destroyed 
|P_41
by all wise Nations, as the SouthernPeo-
ple do mad Dogs in the hot Months. 
The same Censure I should pàss upon all 
Fish. Most Fish live in a saltish Element, 
and come only into fresh Water Rivers, 
for the Quietness and Conveniency of 
bringing forth their young ones. This 
makes their Parts more closely united and 
harder of Digestion. Besides, as I have 
before observed, they feed upon one a-
nother, and their Juices abound with a 
Salt that corrupts the Blood, and breeds 
chronical Diseases. And 'tis always ob-
servable, that those who live much on 
Fish are infected with the Scurvy, cuta-
neous Eruptions, and the other Diseases 
of a foul Blood. And every Body finds 
himself more thirsty and heavy than usual 
after a full Meal of Fish, let them be 
ever so fresh; and is generally forced 
to have Recourse to Spirits and distilled 
Liquors to carry them off: So that it is 
become a Proverb, among those that 
live much upon them, that Brandy is 
Latin for Fish. Besides, that after a full 
Meal of Fish, even at Noon, one never 
sleeps so sound the ensuing Night; as is 
certain from constant Observation. These 
few Hints may serve the valetudinary
Person, in a gross Manner, to judge by 
|P_42
the Eye the Quantity of solid Flesh Meat 
he takes or ought to take down: For I 
judge the mentioned Quantities to be ra-
ther a little under than over eight Ounces.
As to Broths, Soops, and Jellies, if they 
be strong, I account them equal in Nou-
rishment and harder to digest than the 
same Weight of solid Flesh Meat; and 
three or four common Spoonfuls, at most, 
make an Ounce in Weight in Liquids; 
and about double the Number of Bits 
commonly swallowed at once make the 
same Weight in solid Flesh Meat; for 
Exactness is not here requisite. 

§. 12. Drink is the other Part of our 
Food. The common Drink here in 
England is either Water, Malt-Liquor, 
or Wine, or Mixtures of these; for Cy-
der and Perry are drank but in few Places, 
and rather for Pleasure and Variety than 
common Use. Without all peradven-
ture, Water was the primitive, original 
Beverage, as it is the only Simple Fluid
(for there are but three more in Nature, 
Mercury, Light, and Air, none of which 
is fit for human Drink) fitted for diluting, 
moistening and cooling; the Ends of Drink
appointed by Nature. And happy had 
it been for the Race of Mankind other 
|P_43
mixt and artificial Liquors had never 
been invented. It has been an agreea-
ble Appearance to me to observe, with 
what Freshness and Vigour, those who, 
tho' eating freely of Flesh Meat, yet 
drank nothing but this Element, have 
lived in Health, Indolence, and Chearful-
ness, to a great Age. Water alone is 
sufficient and effectual for all the Pur-
poses of human Wants in Drink. Strong 
Liquors were never designed for com-
mon Use: They were formerly kept (here 
in England) as other Medicines are, in 
Apothecaries Shops, and prescribed by 
Physicians, as they do Diascordium and 
Venice-Treacle; to refresh the Weary, to 
strengthen the Weak, to give Courage 
to the Faint-hearted, and raise the Low-
spirited. And it were as just and reaso-
nable to see Men (and if they go on, it 
is not impossible I may hear of it, since 
Laudanum is already taken into Feasts
and Entertainments) sit down to a Dish 
of Venice-Treacle, or Sir Walter Raw-
leigh's Confection, with a Bottle of Hy-
sterick Cordial, as to a Dish of Craw-
fish-Soop, an Ox-Cheek or Venison-
Pasty, with a Bottle of Hermitage, or 
Tockay, or which some prefer to either 
of them, a Bowl of Punch. Wine
|P_44
is now become as common as Water; 
and the better Sort scarce ever dilute 
their Food with any other Liquor. And 
we see, by daily Experience, that (as na-
tural Causes will always produce their 
proper Effects) their Blood becomes in-
flammed into Gout, Stone, and Rheuma-
matism, raging Fevers, Pleurisies, Small 
Pox, or Measles; their Passions are en-
raged into Quarrels, Murder, and Blas-
phemy; their Juices are dried up; and 
their Solids scorch'd and shrivel'd. Those 
whose Appetite and Digestion is good 
and entire, never want strong Liquors to 
supply Spirits: Such Spirits are too vo-
latile and fugitive for any solid or useful 
Purposes in Life. Two Ounces of Flesh 
Meat, well digested, beget a greater Stock 
of more durable and useful Spirits, than 
ten Times as much strong Liquors, which 
nothing but Luxury and Concupiscence
makes necessary. Happy those, whom 
their Parents, their natural Aversion to 
strong Liquors, or whom kind Provi-
dence among the better Sort, has brought 
to the Age of Maturity and Discretion,
without dealing in or desiring any great 
Quantity of strong Liquors: Their Pas-
sions have been calmer, their Sensations
|P_45
more exquisite, their Appetites less unruly,
and their Health more uninterrupted, than 
any other natural Cause could have pro-
duced. And thrice happy they, who con-
tinue this Course to their last Minutes. 
Nothing is more ridiculous than the com-
monPlea for continuing in drinking on, 
large Quantities of spirituous Liquors; 
viz. Because they have been accustomed 
so to do, and they think it dangerous to 
leave it off, all of a sudden. It were as 
reasonable for him that is fallen into the 
Fire or Water to lie there, because of 
the Danger of removing him suddenly. 
For neither Element will destroy him 
more certainly, before his Time, than wal-
lowing in strong Liquors. If the Quan-
tity of strong Liquors they have been ac-
customed to, may be supposed prejudicial 
to their Health, or to introduce noxious 
Humours into the Habit; the sooner a 
Stop be put to it, the better. No Man 
is afraid to forbear strong Liquors in an 
acute Distemper, what Quantity soever 
he might have drank in his Health: And 
yet any sudden Change of the Humours
would not only be more dangerous then, 
than at any other Time; but also would 
more readily happen and come to pass, in 
such critical Cases. For the whole System
|P_46
of the Fluids, being in a Fermentation,
small Changes or Errors then, would not 
only be more fatal, but more plain and ob-
vious. And if a Person be in Hazard by 
such a sudden Alteration, he cannot live 
long by taking down so much Poison.
But the Matter of Fact is false and ground-
less. For I have known and observed 
constant good Effects from leaving off 
suddenly great Quantities of Wine and 
Flesh Meats too, by those long accustom-
ed to both, am ready to name the Per-
sons, and never observed any ill Conse-
quence from it in any Case whatsoever. 
Those whose Constitutions have been 
quite broken, and running into Dissolu-
tion, have lived longer, and been less 
pained in Sickness by so doing: And 
those who have had a Fund in Nature 
to last longer, have grown better, and 
attained their End by it. I allow every 
Man, that has been accustomed to drink 
Wine, or strong Liquors, a Pint in 24 
Hours: And I am well satisfied, that 
Quantity is sufficient for Health, let their 
Custom have been what it will. Their 
Spirits may indeed flag and sink a little 
at first, for Want of introduced Quick-
lime and Fire. But Low-spiritedness, in 
such a Case, I count no Disease. And 
|P_47
bearing it for some Time, is bountiful-
ly recompenced by the Health, Indo-
lence, and Freedom of Spirits, they after-
wards enjoy: Not taking into Conside-
ration their being rescued from the Ty-
ranny of so immoral and mischievous a 
Habit. It may be sufficient for those 
who are tender, studious, or contempla-
tive, to drink three Glasses of Water with 
a Spoonful of Wine at the great Meal.
And as Sir W. Temple has it, One for 
your self, another for your Friends, a 
third for good Humour, and a fourth for 
your Enemies, are more than sufficient 
after it. 

§. 13. A great Mistake committed in 
this Affair is, that most People think the 
only Remedy for Gluttony is Drunken-
ness, or that the Cure of a Surfeit of 
Meat is a Surfeit of Wine: Than which 
nothing can be more false, or contrary 
to Nature; for, 'tis lighting, as the Say-
ing is, the Candle at both Ends. For, 
first of all, Wine and all other strong Li-
quors are as hard to digest, and require as 
much Labour of the concoctive Powers, 
as strong Food itself. This is not only 
evident with Respect to People of weak 
Stomachs, but also from hence, that heal-
|P_48
thy People who drink only Water, or 
weak small Beer, shall be able to eat and 
digest almost double of what they could, 
did they drink strong Liquors at their 
Meals, as every one that pleases may ex-
perience. Water is the only universal 
Dissolvent or Menstruum, and the most 
certain Diluter of all Bodies proper for 
Food; tho' there are a great many that 
spirituous Liquors not only will not dis-
solve, but will harden, and make more 
undigestible; especially the Salts of Bo-
dies, wherein their active Qualities, that 
is, those which can do most Harm to hu-
man Constitutions, consist. And I have 
known Men of weak and tender Consti-
tutions, who could neither eat nor di-
gest upon drinking of Wine, who, by 
drinking at Meals common Waterheat-
ed, have recovered their Appetites and 
Digestion, have thriven and grown plump. 
'Tis true strong Liquors, by their Heat
and Stimulation on the Organs of Con-
coction, by encreasing the Velocity of the 
Motion of the Fluids, and thereby quick-
ening the other animal Functions, will 
carry off the Load that lies upon the 
Stomach, with more present Chearful-
ness: Yet, besides the future Damages of 
such a Quantity of Wine, to the Stomach
|P_49
and to the Fluids, by its Heat and In-
flammation, the Food is hurried into the 
Habit, unconcocted, and lays a Founda-
tion for a Fever, a Fit of the Cholick,
or some chronical Disease. 

§. 14. Another Mistake I shall ob-
serve, is the extreme Fondness Persons 
of the better Sort here in England,
have lately run into, for the strong and 
high Country Wines. I can think of 
no Reason for this, but the very ho-
nest one the Vulgar give for drinking 
Brandy: that they get sooner drunk on 
it. For surely the middling lighter 
Wines, inflame the animal Juices less, go 
more easily off the Stomach, and afford 
more Room for long Conversation and 
Chearfulness. Excess in them, gives 
less Pain, and is sooner remedied. But 
there are Degrees in this Matter. [/8./]Ne-
mo repente fuit turpissimus. They begin 
with the weaker Wines; these by Use and 
Habit will not do, they leave the Sto-
mach sick and mawkish, they must fly to 
stronger Wine, and stronger still, and run the [/9./]Climax, through Brandy to Bar-
badoes Waters, and double distill'd Spi-
rits, 'till at last they can find nothing 
|P_48
|P_49
|P_50
hot enough for them. People who have 
any Regard for their Health or Lives,
ought to tremble at the first Cravings,
for such poysonous Liquors. Strong 
Waters should never be taken but 
by the Direction of a Physician, or in 
the Agonies of Death. For when Per-
sons arrive at that State, that they become
 necessary to their Ease and Freedom of 
Spirits; they may be justly reckoned a-
mong the Dead, both as to the short 
Time they have to live, and the little Use 
they can be of either to themselves or 
Mankind. I speak not here of those who 
are under an actual Fit of the Gout, or 
Cholick in the Stomach. (We must not 
die for fear of dying.) Nor am I recom-
mendingsour Verjuice or unripe Wines.
But I cannot help being well satisfied, 
both from Reason and Experience, that 
the light Wines, of a moderate Strength,
due Age and full Maturity, are much 
preferable for Chearfulness and Conver-
sation, much more wholsome for human 
Constitutions, and much more proper for 
Digestion than the hot and strong Wines. 
The rich, strong, and heavy Wines ought 
never to be tasted without a sufficient 
Dilution of Water; at least they should 
be used, like Brandy or Spirits, for a Cor-
|P_51
dial[/10./]. Ad summum tria pocula sume.
Whatsoever is more cometh of Sin,
and must be diluted with the Waters of 
Repentance.

§. 15. I have no Intention here to 
discourage the innocent Means of enliven-
ing Conversation, promoting Friendship,
comforting the sorrowful Heart, and rai-
sing the drooping Spirits, by the cheer-
ful Cup and the social Repast. Perhaps I 
may like the harmless Frolick, the warm 
Reception of a Friend, and even the [/11./]
Dulce Furere itself, more than I ought: 
Persons sober in the main, will receive 
little Prejudice from such a Fillip, when 
the Occasions happen but seldom, and 
especially when they make it up, by a 
greater Degree of Abstinence afterwards. 
But a Sot is the lowest Character in Life. 
Did only the Profligate, the Scoundrel, the 
Abandon'd, run into these Excesses, it were 
in vain to endeavour to reclaim them, 
as it were, to stop a Tempest, or calm a 
Storm. But now that the Vice is be-
comeEpidemical, since it has got not 
only among Mechanicks and Tradesmen,
but among Persons of the brightest Ge-
|P_52
nius, the finest Taste, and the most ac-
complish'dParts; and (oh that I could 
give my Conscience the Lye, in men-
tioning them!) even among the first and 
least fallen Part of the Creation itself, 
and those of them too, of the most ele-
gantParts, and the strictest Virtueo-
therwise; and which is still the most sur-
prising of all, even those too, who are 
in all other Respects blameless. Since 
I say the Case is so, it will not be amiss 
to shew, to the Evidence of a Demon-
stration, the Folly as well as the Fruit-
lessness of such a Course. A Fit of the 
Colick, or of the Vapours, a Family-
Misfortune, a casual Disappointment, the 
Death of a Child, or of a Friend, with 
the Assistance of the Nurse, the Midwife,
and the next Neighbour, often give Rise
and become the weighty Causes of so 
fatal an Effect. A little Lowness requires 
Drops, which pass readily down under 
the Notion of Physick; Drops beget 
Drams, and Drams beget more Drams,
'till they come to be without Weight 
and without Measure; so that at last the 
miserable Creature suffers a true. Mar-
tyrdom, between its natural Modesty, the 
great Necessity of concealing its Crav-
ings, and the still greater one of getting 
them satisfied some how. Higher and more 
|P_53
severe Fits of Hystericks, Tremors, and 
Convulsions, begot by these, bring forth 
farther Necessity, upon Necessity, of Drops, 
Drams, and Gills, 'till at last a kind 
Dropsy, nervous Convulsions, a nervous 
Atrophy, or a colloquative Diarrhæa, if 
not a Fever, or a Frenzy, set the poor 
Soul free. It has very often raised in 
me the most melancholy Reflexions, to 
see even the Virtuous, and the Sensible,
bound in such Chains and Fetters, as 
nothing less than omnipotent Grace, or 
the unrelenting Grave could release 
them: They were deaf to Reason and 
Medicine, to their own Experience,
and even to the express Words of 
Scripture, that says, the Drunkard shall 
not inherit the Kingdom of Heaven. Did 
this bewitching Poison actually cure 
or relieve them, from Time to Time; 
something might be said to extenuate the 
Folly and Frenzy of such a Course. But, 
on the contrary, it heightens and enrages 
all their Symptoms and Sufferings, ever 
afterwards, excepting the few Moments 
immediately after taking it down; and 
every Dram begets the Necessity of two 
more, to cure the ill Effects of the 
first; and one Minutes Indolence they 
purchase with many Hours of greater Pain
and Misery; besides the making the Ma-
|P_54
lady, more incurable. Low-spiritedness
in itself is no Disease; besides that there 
are Remedies in Art that will always re-
lieve it, so long as there is any Oilre-
maining in the Lamp; and 'tis in vain 
to try to raise the Dead. Exercise, Ab-
stinence, and proper Evacuations, with 
Time and Patience, will continually make 
it tolerable, very often they will persect-
ly cure it. The running into Drams is 
giving up the whole at once; for nei-
therLaudanum nor Arsenick will kill 
more certainly, although more quickly. 
The Pretence of its being Physick, or a 
present Remedy, is trifling. Cordials of 
any Kind, even out of the Apothecaries
Shops, are but Reprieves for a Time, to 
gain a Respite, 'till proper and extirpat-
ingRemedies can take Place; and are 
never to be used twice, the one imme-
diately after the other, but in the last 
Necessity. And I can honestly say, I ne-
ver failed of relieving, so as to make 
Life tolerable, vapourish, hysterical, or 
hypochondriacal Persons, who would be 
governed in their Diet, by the Use of 
other proper Means, if their was a Fund
in Life, and no incurable Disease, com-
plicated with Lowness. Thus much the 
Weight of the Subject forced from one: 
|P_55
more than this, its Disagreeablenesshin-
ders me to say. 

§. 16. Next to Drams, no Liquor de-
serves more to be stigmatized and banish-
ed the Repasts of the Tender, Valetudi-
nary, and Studious, than Punch. 'Tis 
a Composition of such Parts, as not one 
of them is salutary, or kindly to such 
Constitutions, except the pure Element 
in it. The principal Ingredient is Rum, 
Arrack, Brandy, or Malt Spirits, as 
they are called, all of them raised by 
the Fire, from the fermented Juices of 
Plants, brought from SouthernCoun-
tries, or which have longest born the 
Heat of the Sun in our own Climate:
And 'tis observable, that every Thing 
that has past the Fire, so that it has had 
due Time to divide and penetrate its 
Parts, as far as it possibly can, retains a 
caustick, corrosive, and burning Quality
ever afterwards. This is evident from 
the fiery and burning Touch and Taste of 
new-drawn Spirits, as also from the burn-
ing of Lime-stone, which, tho' extin-
guish'd by Boiling Water, does ever after 
retain its heating and drying Quality, as 
appears from the great Use of Lime-Wa-
ter, in drying up all humid Sores, when 
given inwardly by itself, or compounded 
|P_56
with sudorific Woods and Roots, and 
from its Success in outward Applications 
for the same Purposes. And tho' Time 
may in some Measure get the better of 
this, in its sensible and obvious Operations; 
yet since Water is a grosser Body than Fire,
or Flame, it never can penetrate it so far as 
quite to extinguish its inmost Heat; espe-
cially if we consider, that Spirits are but an 
Accumulation of fine Salts and light Oil,
compacted together into the smallest Vo-
lume; the first whereof is so hard and 
solid, as naturally to retain their Heat 
the longest, into which Water cannot 
enter; the other, to wit the Oyle, is so 
inflamable, that it most readily receives 
Heat and Fire, and defends the Salts
from the Power of the Water over them. 
And in the continued Distillation of Spi-
rits, this Action of the Fire is so strong, 
as to reduce them to liquid Flames at 
last, which will of themselves evaporate 
in visible Flames and Fumes. The other 
principal Part of the Composition is the 
Juice of Oranges and Lemons. And if 
we consider, that a Lemon or Orange
could never be transported half Seas over 
to us, without rotting or spoiling, if gather-
ed when wholly ripe, we should have 
no great Opinion of their Juices.Eve-
rySpanish or Portugal Merchant can in-
|P_57
form us, that they must be gathered 
green, or at least a Month before they 
are ripe, else they are not fit to be sent 
beyond the Seas. The Sea-Air, and their 
being shut up close, gives them that gol-
den yellow Colour, we so much admire. 
The Juice of a Crab Apple, of unripe 
Grapes, or Goose-berries, or even good 
Juice of Sorrel, would come up at least 
to their Virtue of extinguishing the Heat 
of Spirits, if not to their Flavour. And 
how kindly a Guest such Juices would 
be to the fine Fibres of weak Stomachs
and Bowels, I leave every one to judge. 
The Truth is, all fermenting Juices, such 
as these eminently are, must be highly 
injurious to weak Constitutions; for meet-
ing with the Crudities in the Bowels,
they must raise a new Battle and Col-
luctation there, and so must blow up the 
whole Cavities of the human Body, with 
acrid Fumes and Vapours, the great and 
sore Enemy of such Bowels. And in the 
West Indies, where from the Necessity 
of drinking much, because of the Vio-
lence of the Heat, and from the Want 
of proper Liquors there, they are forced 
to drink much PUNCH, tho' Lemons
and Oranges be in their full Perfection, 
they are universally afflicted with Ner-
vous and Mortal dry-Belly-aches, Palsies,
|P_58
Cramps, and Convulsions; which cut 
them off in a few Days, entirely owing 
to this poisonous Mixture. 

The Bath-Water, is the only Remedy
in such Cases, whither they all hasten, 
if they can get thither alive. And here 
I have been inform'd of this Fact, by 
Men of the Profession, as well as their 
Patients, who universally ascrib'd them 
to their drinking of PUNCH and Spiri-
tuous Liquors. If Acids must be had, 
without all peradventure, the Vinous
ones, are the best and safest. The Ro-
mans, tho' they had the vegetable Acids
in perfection, made very little Use of 
them but in Cookery, where the Quan-
tity of the Poison was so small, as 
not to do sufficient Harm, to forbid 
their using them for the Sake of the 
exquisite Relish they gave their Sauces; 
and the constant Drink of the lower 
Souldiery, was Vinegar and Water, which 
they found of excellent Use, both as it 
prevented Fevers, Plagues and Putre-
faction, and also as it gave an Energy
to the unactive Element, and hindered 
it from lodging in the Body. Hence 
also the great Use of Oxymel and Oxy-
crate, (that is, of Vinegar with Honey
and with Water) among all the antient 
Physicians. And indeed, whenever 
|P_59
they prescrib'd an Acid, they very pru-
dently join'd a Corrective with it, both 
to promote its good, and to prevent 
it's bad Effects. The two remaining In-
gredients, are Sugar and Water; and 
these I will give up to the Punch-
Drinkers, and allow them all the Be-
nefit of them, they can bring to this 
Composition: Yet it will still have Ma-
lignity sufficient remaining, to be held 
in Detestation, (at least for any great 
Use, or in any great Quantity, for some 
Poisons are so only by their Quantity) by 
those tender and valetudinary Persons, 
who value Health and Life. The 
Strong, the Voluptuous, and the Aban-
doned, need no Advice, at least they 
will take none. I could never see any 
Temptation, for any one in their Senses, 
to indulge in this Heathenish Liquor, 
but that it makes it's Votaries the soon-
est, and all of a sudden the deepest Drunk,
holds them longest in the Fit, and de-
prives them the most entirely of the Use 
of their Intellectual Faculties, and Bo-
dily Organs, of any Liquor whatsoever. 
It is likest Opium, both in it's Nature, 
and in the Manner of its Operation, and 
nearest Arsenick in it's deleterious and 
poisonous Qualities: And so I leave it to 
them, 

|P_60
Who knowing this, will yet drink on 
and die. 
§ 17. As to Malt Liquors, they are 
not much in Use, excepting small Beer,
with any but Mechanicks and Fox-hunt-
ers. The French very justly call them 
Barley-Soop. I am well satisfied, a weak 
Stomach can as readily and with less pain, 
digest Pork, and Pease-Soop, as York-
shire or Nottingham Ale. They make 
excellent Birdlime, and when simmer'd
some time over a gentle Fire, make the 
most sticking, and the best Plaister, for 
old Strains that can be contriv'd. Even 
the small-Beer that is commonly drank 
at London, if it be not well Boiled,ve-
ryClear, and of a due Age, must be hurtful 
to Persons of weak Nerves, and slow 
Digestion. For fermenting again in the 
alimentary Channels, it will fill the whole 
Cavities of the Body with Windy Fumes
and Vapours, which will at Length play 
odd Pranks in a crasy Constitution. In 
Fine, the Valetudinary, Studious, and 
Contemplative, must be contented with 
a Pint of middling, light Wine a Day, 
one half with, and the other without 
Water. 

§ 18. Since the Time foreign Luxury
has been brought to it's Perfection here, 
|P_61
there are a kind of Liquors in Use among 
the better Sort, which some great Doc-
tors have Condemn'd, by Bell, Book,
and Candle, and others have as extra-
vagantly commended: I mean, Coffee, 
Tea, and Chocolate. For my own Part, 
I take all their Virtue to consist in Cu-
stom, and all their Harm in Excess. As 
to Coffee, it is a meer Calx, or a Kind 
of burnt Horse Bean, but lighter on the 
Stomach, and of somewhat a better Fla-
vour. The Turks use it, and Opiumin-
stead of Brandy. But the Plea that some 
make for running into Excess in it, from 
this Mahometan Custom, is altogether 
weak and groundless; for those that do 
so there, suffer by it, as we do here: 
And those that Debauch in it, turn Stu-
pid, Feeble, and Paralitick by it, espe-
cially when they join Opium with it, as 
they frequently do, as those who wal-
low in these, do here, and are as much 
Despis'd and Expos'd by serious Persons, 
as our Topers and Brandy-swillers are 
here. A Dish or two of Coffee, with a 
little Milk to soften it, in raw or damp 
Weather, or on a Waterish and Flegma-
tick Stomach, is not only innocent, but 
a present Relief. But 'tis as ridiculous, 
and perhaps more hurtful, at least in thin 
and dry Habits, to dabble in it two or 
|P_62
three Times every Day, as it would be 
for such to drink nothing but scalding 
Lime-Water. There are two Kinds of 
Tea in Use, Green and Bohea. Mr. 
Cuningham, who liv'd several Years in 
China, a very learned and accuratePer-
son[/12./]informs us, that they are both ga-
thered from the same Shrub, but at dif-
ferent Seasons of the Year; and that the 
Bohea is Gather'd in the Spring, and is 
dried in the Sun, the Green at the Fire.
But I suspect, and not without Autho-
rity, that, besides these Differences in 
drying, some Infusion of another Plant 
or Earth (perhaps such a one as that of 
Japan Earth, or Catechu) must be pou-
red on some sorts of Bohea Tea, to give 
it the Softness, Flavour, and Heaviness
on the Stomach it has, whereby it be-
comes a meer Drug, and wants the na-
turalSimplicity of Green Tea, which 
when light, and drank neither too Strong 
nor too Hot, I take to be a very pro-
perDiluent, when soften'd with a lit-
tle Milk, to cleanse the alimentary
Passages, and wash off the Scorbutick and 
Urinous Salts, for a Breakfast, to those 
who live full and free; as also it, or Tea
made of a slic'd Orange or Lemon, is 
one of the best promoters of Digestion
|P_63
after a full Meal, or when one is adry 
between Meals, and much more safe 
and effectual than Drams or strong Cor-
dials, which are commonly used for that 
Purpose. Some Persons of weak tender 
Nerves, fall into Lowness and Trem-
bling upon using either of these Liquors 
with any Freedom, from their too great 
Quantity, or their Irritation on the ten-
der, and delicate Fibres of the Stomach. 
Such ought carefully to avoid and ab-
stain from them, as from Drams and 
Drops. But I can never be of their O-
pinion who ascribe the Frequency of 
Scurvy, Vapours, Lowspiritedness, and 
nervous Distempers now, to what they 
were in the Days of our Forefathers, to 
the Custom of Drinking more frequent-
ly and freely of these foreign Infusions.
The Cause is not adequate to the Effect; 
nor indeed has any Analogy to, or Con-
nexion with it. We know that warm 
Water, will most of any Thing promote 
and assist Digestion in weak Stomachs 
and tender Nerves. And by this alone 
I have seen several such Persons recover to 
a Miracle, when cold Mineral Waters, 
Bitters, Cordials and Drams, have done 
rather Hurt than Good. And Tea is 
but an Infusion in Water of an innocent
Plant: Innocent, I say, because we find 
|P_64
by its Taste it has neither poisonous, de-
leterious nor acrimonious Qualities; and 
we are certain from it's Use in the 
Countries it comes from, (which are larg-
er than most of Europe) that they receive 
no Damage from it, but on the contra-
ry, that it promotes both Digestion and 
Perspiration. The Argument from its 
relaxing the Coats of the Stomach and 
Bowels by its Heat, is of no force. For 
unless it be drunk much hotter than 
the Blood itself, it can do no hurt that 
way: And we see the Bath Guides, who 
dabble in Water almost as hot as Tea is 
ever drunk, a great Part of the Day, and 
for one half of the Year at least, are no 
ways injured by it; except when they 
drink strong Liquors, too freely to quench 
the Thirst it raises. However, I should 
advise those who drink Tea plentifully, 
not to drink it much hotter than blood-
warm; whereby they will receive all its 
Benefit, and be secure against all the 
Harm it can possibly do. As to Choco-
late, I am of opinion, it is too hot and 
heavy, for valetudinary Persons; and 
those of weak Nerves. I have before 
observed, that Nuts pass through the 
alimentary Passages untouched; and tho' 
they may part with some of their more vo-
latile Particles, yet, I doubt if they can afford 
|P_65
much nourishment to Persons of weak 
Digestions. Some say, Chocolate gives 
them an Appetite; the meaning of which 
may be, that when they have a good Ap-
petite for their Breakfast; it is not unlike-
ly it may continue all the Day: But I 
am of opinion, 'tis a false and hysterical 
Appetite, such as sharp Wines, and sharp 
Humours in the Stomach give. For fat
and oily Things, such as all Nuts are, 
are hard to digest, and lie long in the Sto-
mach, for reasons I have already ex-
plain'd: It may lubricate and sheath against 
the Irritation of salt and sharp Humours
in the Bowels, and therefore may be good 
in the Colicks and Gravel of those of 
strong and stout Digestion; but can ne-
ver be good Food for those of weak 
Nerves and poor Constitutions. Nothing 
is so light and easy to the Stomach, most 
certainly, as the Farinaceous or mealy 
Vegetables; such as Pease, Beans, Mil-
let, Oats, Barly, Rye, Wheat, Sago, 
Rice, Potatoes, and the like; of some 
of which on Milk or Water, I should 
ever advise the Valetudinary, and those 
of weak Nerves, to make their two lesser
or secondary Meals. Tobacco is another 
foreign Weed, much in use here in Bri-
tain; though not among the best, yet 
among the middle and inferiour Ranks 
of the People: For those of gross and 
|P_66
Phlegmatick Constitutions, who abound 
in serous and watry Humours, who are 
subject to Coughs, Catarrhs, and asthma-
tick Indispositions; who labour under vio-
lentTooth-achs, or are troubled with 
Rheums in their Eyes; who have cold and 
waterish Stomachs, and live fully and 
freely, both Smoaking and Chewing is 
a very beneficial Evacuation, drawing off 
superfluous Humours, Crudities, and cold 
Phlegm, provided they carefully avoid 
swallowing the Smoak, or the Juice; and 
drink nothing, but rinse their Mouths 
with some watry Liquor after it, and 
spit it out. But to thin, meagre, and hectick
Constitutions, it is highly pernicious, 
and destructive; heating their Blood, dry-
ing their Solids, and defrauding the Food 
of that Saliva, which is so absolutely 
necessary towards Concoction. Snuffing
the Leaves, or the grosser Cut in a 
Morning, will readily promote a Flux
of Rheum by the Glands of the Nose; 
and will be of good use, to clear the 
Head and the Eyes. But the ridiculous 
Custom, of perpetually sucking in so-
phisticated Powders, and other Foreign 
Drugs sold for Snuff, cannot but be 
prejudicial both to the Eyes, and even 
to the Stomach; at least, if we believe 
the Reports of those who say they have 
brought it up from thence. 

|P_67
§. 19. I have endeavour'd to assist the 
Reader, with some Observations and 
Reflexions, to enable him towards de-
termining the Quantity and Quality of 
his solid Food, necessary either to prevent 
or cure chronical Distempers. It may 
not be amiss, here to make some Refle-
xions also on the fit Proportion of 
Drink proper for that purpose: As the 
Food is, so must that be, various and 
uncertain, with regard to the Age, Size, 
Labour, and Constitution of the Person, 
and the Season of the Year. I have of-
fer'd to limit the Quantity of strong Li-
quors, fittest to preserve Health and length-
en out Life in general, to a Pound or 
Pint, and that of the middling Kind. 
But the Sickly, the Aged, and those 
who would cure a chronical Distemper, 
must even abate of this Quantity. The 
only remaining Question, is about the 
Quantity of Water, or watry Liquors, 
proper to be mix'd with this strongLi-
quor, or drunk by itself: For in this also, 
though in itself harmless and innocent, 
yet there is a Choice and Preference; 
because, too much Water will only 
serve to distend and swell up the Vessels, 
and wash off some of the finer and more 
nutritious parts of the Chyle; and too 
little, will not be sufficient to dilute the 
solid Food, or to make the Chyle thin
|P_68
and fluid enough, to circulate through the 
fine and small Vessels. I will suppose 
my Patient to deal in no other Cookery,
but Roasting and Boiling; and that he 
eats only fresh Meat. Boiling animal
Food, draws more of the rank, strong,
Juices from it, and leaves it less nutri-
tive, more diluted, lighter and easier
of Digestion. Roasting on the other 
hand, leaves it fuller of the strongnutri-
tive Juices, harder to digest, and wanting 
more Dilution: Those therefore, who 
must have full grown and adult animal
Food, ought to eat it boiled, and well
boiled too; if their Digestion be but 
weak. They who can live on young
animal Food, (which is best for weak 
Stomachs,) ought to eat it roasted, but 
must lessen the Quantity, in respect of 
the same Food boiled; but they must di-
lute it more: For as roast Meat has a 
better Flavour, and more Nourishment, 
so it lies less flabby on the Stomach, and 
does not so readily slip from, or disap-
point the Action of Grinding, which 
has some share in Digestions, both pri-
mary and subsequent: But it will want 
more Dilution, with a watry Men-
struum, to soften its more rigid and 
crisp Fibres. If therefore, the whole 
Weight of the solid Food, in twenty four 
Hours, be supposed a Pound and a Half,
|P_69
then three Pounds of Liquor, that is, 
one of strong Liquor, and two of some 
aqueous Fluid, will in a Medium, be 
sufficient to dilute it abundantly. For 
thus there will be two Particles of a Fluid, 
to one solid Particle; which abating the 
solid Parts thrown off by Siege, will suf-
fice to make the Chyle abundantly thin, 
to circulate through all the fine Channels, 
whose Diameters are larger than that of 
the solid Particle, the principal End of 
its Thinness and Fluidity. More than 
this, would but distend the Vessels, and 
carry off the finer Parts of the Chyle by 
Water or Perspiration; for we constant-
ly find both these encreased by an over-
dose of Fluids: And less would not suf-
ficiently dilute their Food. I should ad-
vise those therefore, who have weakSto-
machs, or relaxed Nerves, to mix their 
Wine with the above-named quantity of 
boiled Water, with a burnt Crust, at least 
Blood-warm, and to drink it after their Meal 
is over, if they can do it with ease, rather 
than in the Time of Eating: For the more 
spirituous and most nourishing Parts of 
the Food, will readily run off, without 
much Dilution; and it will be the grosser
and harder remaining Part, that will want 
it most. And if some time after their 
great Meal, they find their Stomach load-
ed, the Food rising, hard Belching,
|P_70
Heart-burning, or much Yawning, to swill 
down and dilute it with milk-warm, light 
Green Tea, or warm Water, rather than 
to run to Drams and Cordials, the usual, 
but most pernicious Antidote in such 
Cases. And upon great and heavy Op-
pression, much trouble and great struggle 
in the Digestion, to have recourse to 
Carduus or Camomile-Flower Tea, to 
bring it up, rather than to trespass in 
these poisonous and caustick Liquors; 
which, though they may at present les-
sen the suffering, and hurry on the first-
Concoction; yet make them dearly pay 
for it, when the unconcocted load of 
Crudities comes to pass by Siege or Per-
spiration, either in Colicks, Gripes, Va-
pours, and Oppression of Spirits; or by 
a general Disability and Rheumatick
Stitches and Pains. 

§. 20. Upon the Head of Cordials
 mentioned in one of the foregoing Ar-
ticles, I cannot forbear setting down one,
whose Virtues and Efficacy I have long 
tried, and have never found it fail, when 
any thing would succeed: And I recom-
mend it (to be kept by them) to all those,
who are liable to low Spirits, Faintings, 
Oppressions, Sickness at the Stomach, 
Head-achs, and Vapours; and also to 
those who wanting to exert themselves 
|P_71
in any business of consequence, need a 
Flow of Spirits for some short time, for 
that purpose; or indeed upon any sudden 
accident arising of its own accord, out 
of the Habit itself; I think it a kind of 
an universal Remedy, but never to be 
used, but upon such occasions; because, 
Use may weaken it, if not extinguish its 
Vertue. 'Tis thus, 

Take of simple Chamomile-Flower Wa-
ter, six Ounces; Compound Gentian,
and Wormwood Waters, each an 
Ounce and a Half; Compound Spi-
rit of Lavender, sal Volatile, Tinc-
ture of Castor, and Gum Ammoniack
dissolved in some simple Water, 
each two Drams; Tincture of Snake-
weed, and Tincture of the Species 
Diambræ, each a Dram; the Chy-
mical Oils of Lavender, Juniper,
and Nutmeg, each ten Drops, mix-
ed with a Bit of the Yolk of an Egg, 
to make the whole uniform; Assa-
fetida and Camphire in a Rag, each 
half a Dram: But these may be left 
out by those to whom they are dis-
agreeable. 

Two, three or four Spoonfuls of this 
is a present Help in such Cases. It will 
keep six Months good. 
