

[^Sample 1: book - ^]

|P_[^An ornamental horizontal column, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}of the 
IMPROVEMENT 
of 
MEDICINE. }][^An ornamental horizontal line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}SECTION I. 
Plan and Design of the General 
Dispensary. }][^Decorative frame around the letter I^]IT was the sentiment of an 
ancient Roman, that no- 
thing brings men nearer the 
Deity, than giving health 
to their fellow creatures.  The dis- 
position to the relief of distress that pre- 
vails in this city, is a pleasing example of 
the influence of civilization, benevolence, 
|P_2
and piety; and the many hospitals, and 
other receptacles for almost every species 
of misery, are proofs of genuine huma- 
nity, which no preceding age ever exhi- 
bited. But objects of compassion must 
still prevail, as the human constitution is 
still liable to pain and disease; and when 
pain and disease are united with poverty, 
they form a picture of human woe, that 
must naturally excite the pity, and en- 
gage the protection of those, who have 
been exempted from such accumulated 
misery. 

These considerations first gave rise to 
the General Dispensary, as an auxi- 
liary to the hospitals in this metropolis, 
in order to administer advice and medi- 
cines to the poor, not only at the Dis- 
pensary, but also at their own habitations; 
which latter circumstance is an advantage 
peculiar to this plan. And, notwithstand- 
ing the many excellent charities, already 
subsisting for relief of the sick in and 
about this great metropolis; yet, when it 
|P_3
is considered how many poor, from the 
nature of their circumstances and disor- 
ders, are still necessarily confined to their 
wretched dwellings, and perish through 
want of proper assistance, the utility of 
this institution becomes obvious. 

It is presumed that this Charity will be 
particularly serviceable to such poor la- 
bouring families, when visited with ill- 
ness, as have not the ability to assist them- 
selves, and yet are willing to exert their 
utmost endeavours for support in sickness 
as well as in health. What pleasure must 
it, therefore, afford the benevolent and hu- 
mane, to step in, at this critical time of 
distress, to their assistance; and to be, 
under Providence, the happy instruments 
of relieving these poor objects from their 
various afflictions! 

This Charity extends also to the diseases 
of children; as it is too evident, that 
many of these, under a variety of slight 
maladies which affect their tender frames, 
|P_4
are, by neglect or improper treatment, to- 
tally lost to the public; or, if they sur- 
vive, are rendered useless if not burthen- 
some members of the community. It is 
a melancholy truth, that near half the 
number born in London die under two 
years of age. 

The subscription is fixed low, with a 
view to render the Charity more extensive, 
and give the industrious poor an easy op- 
portunity of obtaining recommendations 
from their benevolent neighbours, on the 
earliest attack of sickness; and thereby of 
receiving immediate help, before their dis- 
eases have acquired that degree of violence, 
which indigence and delay must necessari- 
ly occasion. 

Under these peculiar advantages, the 
poor have a physician at their bedside on 
the very day they apply for relief; instead 
of being banished from their habitations, 
when languishing with sickness, to bear 
the controul of alien nurses, they are con- 
|P_5
tinued under the fostering care of their 
own relations, by which love and grati- 
tude are mutually excited, and family con- 
nexions more firmly established; and while 
domestic happiness is thus cultivated, the 
morals of so useful and numerous a class 
of the community are preserved unassailed 
and untainted. 

As such an extensive plan could not be 
immediately carried into execution in all 
the adjoining parts of this great metropo- 
lis, it was thought expedient to establish 
the first Dispensary in the city of London, 
and to settle the limits of visiting the sick 
at their own habitations, for the present, 
within the liberties thereof. 

The Dispensary is situated in Aldersgate- 
street, where a physician attends at eleven 
o'clock every day (Sundays excepted) to give 
advice to such out-patients as shall come 
recommended, and to visit the home-pa- 
tients at the places of their abode, as the 
case may require. — By out-patients are 
|P_6
meant, such as are able to attend the Dis- 
pensary; by home-patients, such as are 
not able to attend. 

Though home-patients are, for the pre- 
sent, such only as live within the city and 
liberties of London; yet, out-patients are 
relieved without any restriction as to place 
of residence. 

An apothecary constantly resides at the 
Dispensary, to receive letters of recommen- 
dation, and compound and deliver out the 
medicines prescribed by the physicians. 

Chirurgical [/1./], venereal, and lunatick cases 
are not admitted, being the peculiar ob- 
jects of other charities. 

|P_7
But as there are medical cases, wherein 
chirurgical assistance is requisite, a sur- 
geon attends on such occasions. 

No persons are deemed objects of this 
charity, but such as are really necessitous. 

Each patient is admitted by a printed 
letter of recommendation, signed by a go- 
vernor; and, when cured, returns thanks, 
that such governor may be informed of his 
right to present another object. 

A general meeting is held on the second 
Wednesday in March, June, September, 
and December, in every year, at which 
nine governors constitute a board. 

A committee of fifteen governors (three 
of whom are a quorum) are chosen at the 
general meetings in June and December, 
and meet at the Dispensary on the last 
Wednesday in every month; which com- 
mittee is open for any governors who please 
to attend, and who are intitled to a vote 
|P_8
equally with the gentlemen appointed 
thereon. 

A medical committee is chosen annu- 
ally, to inspect the drugs used in the 
Dispensary. 

Persons subscribing one guinea annually 
to the support of this Charity, are gover- 
nors during the continuance of their sub- 
scriptions, and intitled to have one patient 
at a time upon the Dispensary list. 

Governors subscribing two guineas an- 
nually are intitled to have two patients 
upon the list. 

A benefaction of ten guineas constitutes 
a governor for life, and admits two pa- 
tients at a time upon the books. 

Nobility, members of parliament, and 
ladies, subscribing as above, may vote at all 
elections, by any governor appointed proxy 
in writing for that purpose. 

|P_9
Annual subscribers, desirous of being 
governors for life, may become such, on 
paying within the year a further sum, to 
make up not less than ten guineas in the 
whole. 
[^A floral ornament. ^]
|P_10
[}SECTION II. }]
[}Progress of the Dispensary, and 
General Review of it's Plan and 
Design. }]
AT the commencement of the Dis- 
pensary, in the year 1770, it was 
circumscribed to admit certain objects and 
diseases only; but, in it's progress, the 
accession of subscribers, and the conse- 
quent increase of it's income, have ren- 
dered many of those restrictions both un- 
necessary and improper. The governors 
have hitherto paid a laudable attention to 
every proposal of improvement; they have 
lately admitted small-pox patients, and do- 
mestic servants, when properly recom- 
mended, to receive the benefits of their 
contributions; they have elected a surgeon 
to attend medical cases, wherein chirurgi- 
cal assistance is requisite; and as they seem 
thus disposed to receive every representa- 
tion which tends to the convenience, in- 
terests, and general good of the poor, I 
|P_11
am induced to lay before them such pro- 
posals, as, from an attentive consideration 
of the finances of the Charity, and the 
miseries of the poor, appeir most calcu- 
lated to promote the great ends of the 
institution, Public Good. 

The finances of the Dispensary, as well 
as the applications of the sick, have gra- 
dually increased since it's first establish- 
ment, which has induced the governors 
to inquire after a more spacious edifice 
for the purpose of conducting the business 
of it; the present, therefore, seems the 
most eligible opportunity for addressing 
them upon a subject now under their con- 
templation, and upon the methods most 
conducive to it's advantage and improve- 
ment; and if it should appear that open- 
ing the Dispensary to surgery in general, 
and to every diseased object that may ap- 
ply for relief, properly recommended by a 
subscriber, would form the broad basis of 
public good, I doubt not but this address 
will meet with that reception and support, 
|P_12
which has hitherto been manifested upon 
other occasions. 

The governors at present do not amount 
to 1000; but as the increase, though gra- 
dual, has been great, there is the fairest 
reason to conclude, that the number will 
soon be doubled. This, however, I shall 
take for granted, and proceed in my cal- 
culations upon such a supposition; but 
whatever number of subscribers be admit- 
ted, the proportional expences will near- 
ly quadrate, and therefore no misconstruc- 
tion can result from adopting two thousand 
instead of the present number. 

Not two years ago the governors of the 
Dispensary found the house first occupied 
for conducting the business of it too small, 
they therefore took one more commodi- 
ous; and this is now as much too little 
as the former had been two years before: 
hence it is hoped they will not pay too 
scrupulous a regard to economy, when 
they have found the public encourage- 
ment so much surpass their most sanguine 
|P_13
expectations. For this reason I have of- 
fered a plan of a Dispensary furnished with 
baths, and proper apartments for every 
useful contingency, with an estimate of all 
the expences that are likely to accrue: and 
as there are many old buildings in Alders- 
gate-street, and in it's vicinity, the go- 
vernors may execute whatever plan they 
are pleased to adopt; and, with such op- 
portunities and advantages, we may hope 
to see personal convenience, simple ele- 
gance, and public utility, at once united. 
[^A floral ornament. ^]
|P_11
[}SECTION III. }]
[}Of the Finances of the Dispensary. }]
IN the year 1774 this Charity was en- 
abled to purchase five hundred pounds 
in the stocks, from the savings made in 
that and the preceding years since it's esta- 
blishment. At the period abovemention- 
ed, the gratuity to the two physicians was 
particularly agitated; and many of the 
governors were then of opinion, that their 
subscriptions would barely answer the nu- 
merous applications of the sick poor, which 
had been of late considerably augmented 
in proportion to the number of subscri- 
bers, from the Charity being more gene- 
rally known among the lower class of 
people; but, as the labor of the physicians 
appeared to have been very great, it was 
agreed to give each one hundred pounds 
for their services during the last year. 

In this city, where opulence is united 
with benevolence, it was not probable 
|P_15
that an an institution so friendly to human nature, 
would be less regarded by the public than 
it had hitherto been; on the contrary, this 
genteel emolument given to the faculty, 
while it animated their application, ren- 
dered the post of physician to the Dispen- 
sary more conspicuous, and more worthy 
the attention of physicians of character 
and reputation, and daily increased the 
generous contributions of the public: the 
applications of the sick consequently in- 
creased, in proportion; and this rendered 
it necessary to elect a third physician the 
same year. 

The expence which the Charity sustain- 
ed by so just an attention to the faculty, 
seemed therefore amply compensated by 
the reputation and additional subscriptions 
procured by it; for in 1775 the governors 
amounted to upwards of eight hundred, 
and five hundred pounds more were laid 
out in the funds; so that the capital a- 
mounted to one thousand pounds, besides 
upwards of one hundred in the treasurer's 
hands. 

|P_16
From From this short view it is evident, that 
the General Dispensary will never fail for 
want of subscriptions, while the faculty 
are treated in such a manner as will en- 
gage gentlemen of eminence to undertake 
the laborious offices of physicians and sur- 
geons to it. 

The progressive accession of governors 
must soon augment the number as high 
as two thousand. The Charity will then 
require three physicians and as many sur- 
geons, whose salaries, with those of the 
apothecary and assistants, are rated in the 
following estimate, which includes all 
other contingent expences. 
£ Three physicians and three surgeons600 One apothecary 80 Two assistants, 40l. each 80 Secretary 40 Collector 100 Drugs, &c. 500 House-rent 120 Miscellaneous expences, coals, candles, &c. 100 1620 2000 governors, at 1l. 1s. per annum, is 2100Interest of 1000l. at 3 per cent. per ann. is 30  £ 2130
|P_17
The expences deducted from the income 
of the Charity will leave an annual surplus 
of five hundred and ten pounds, which, in 
a few years, must be sufficient to enable 
the governors to erect a new building, and 
to extend the benefits of their institution 
to more distant limits. 

It may be objected, that some of the 
governors are subscribers for life, and 
therefore no future subscription can arise 
from them; but to balance this deficien- 
cy, as many gentlemen at least subscribe 
two guineas annually. To this we may 
add donations by will, which will soon 
augment the capital of this Dispensary, 
and preclude every doubt of want of fi- 
nances to answer it's future exigencies. 

With the revenue above-mentioned, the 
General Dispensary will annually afford 
relief to about twelve thousand patients, 
which is nearly double to some hospitals 
in London, whose revenues are four times 
greater. 

|P_18
[}SECTION IV. }]
[}State of the Poor in the City of 
London. }]
THE poor are a large, as well as use- 
ful part of the community; they 
supply both the necessary and ornamental 
articles of life; they have, therefore, a 
just claim to the protection of the rich, 
whose interests must direct them to en- 
courage the industrious in their employ- 
ments, to frame laws for the mainte- 
nance of their rights, and to succour them 
in the misfortunes to which they are un- 
avoidably incident. 

This mutual obligation between the 
rich and the poor, neither of whom could 
long subsist without the aid of the other, 
has in all ages formed the most natural 
and permanent ground of intercourse be- 
tween the different degrees of the people; 
the artizan always depending upon the af- 
fluent for employment, and the success of 
the artizan being always necessary to the 
ease and convenience of the affluent. 

|P_19
In a country where many individuals 
are enriched by commerce, and where all 
people are possessed of civil liberty, and 
the unrestrained exercise of their faculties, 
the ornamental and necessary arts must 
unavoidably flourish: but, wherever many 
persons are employed, labor must be cheap; 
the earnings, therefore, of the artizan, will 
seldom exceed his expences; and as ma- 
ny of these arts depend upon circum- 
stances changeable in their nature, multi- 
tudes must thereby be liable to suffer a tem- 
porary poverty. 

However, whilst health continues, the 
resources which daily open to the industri- 
ous in a trading country, afford also a 
temporary subsistance to their families: 
but a long continuance of health is the 
lot of few. The poor, from the occasio- 
nal want of employment and wholesome 
food, from exposure to all changes of the 
weather, and from various other causes, 
are often visited with sickness, as well as 
with poverty; one, indeed, is consequent 
|P_20
upon the other, and thereby they become 
the immediate objects of assistance. It is 
then peculiarly necessary that the hand of 
pity should be extended to soften the 
pangs of a sick bed, and to restore health 
and ease to the poor in affliction. 

But affecting as the picture of poverty 
united with disease may appear, it serves 
to heighten our approbation of the gene- 
rous and benevolent spirit, which every 
quarter of this city nobly exhibits; the 
numerous hospitals, and other munificent 
receptacles for our distressed fellow-crea- 
tures, are undeniable proofs of the piety, 
compassion, and liberality of the opulent, 
which no preceding age ever afforded. 
Greece had her exquisite statues, and Rome 
her public baths and edifices; but Christia- 
nity hath raised monuments of compassion 
and beneficence, unknown both to ancient 
Greece and Rome. 

In a free country, where the manners of 
the people are thus softened and humanized, 
|P_21
and amongst whom mutual interests must 
perpetually subsist, a spontaneous gratitude 
will naturally arise in the poor towards 
their benefactors, to repay by their indus- 
try those obligations which their unavoid- 
able sickness had incurred; they not only 
meet their families with pleasure, but they 
are animated to follow their daily labour 
with redoubled chearsulness and vigor. 

I have been too intimately acquainted 
with the condition and manners of the 
poor, to want facts in support of what I 
advance; if I err, it will be in not doing 
sufficient justice to that industry and gra- 
titude, which they exemplify in their ge- 
neral deportment. Those, who form their 
judgment from a superficial observation of 
a few intoxicated objects, who are found 
in the most frequented places, are much 
mistaken with respect to the body of the 
laborious poor, who humbly seclude them- 
selves in miserable courts and allies. Vice 
is barefaced, and boldly exposes itself in 
the open streets; but modest worth steals 
|P_22
from the public eye, and frequents the 
most solitary avenues: one vicious man, 
therefore, becomes more conspicuous than 
a thousand good men; and our conclu- 
sions cannot be just without being formed 
from the whole, both with respect to the 
lower as well as higher stations of life. 

When I consider the distresses of the in- 
digent, I rather admire that the instances 
of their misconduct mould be so rare: 
when they behold the affluence, ease, and 
indulgence of their superiors; when, in 
spite of their utmost industry, they can 
with difficulty support their families; and 
when sickness and disappointments super- 
vene, it is not to be wondered at, if some 
expressions of discontent should break forth 
amongst them. But such only can pro- 
perly judge of these repinings, who have 
seen a whole family, that once experien- 
ced better days, confined to one chamber, 
and one solitary bed, with sickness, with 
want, and a total incapacity to raise one 
penny; let such try the experiment with- 
|P_23
out murmuring, before they form a con- 
clusion to the disadvantage of the sufferers. 

During the last three years, I have at- 
tended nearly six thousand poor persons, 
into many of whose habitations I have 
entered, and been conversant with their 
sufferings, and their resignation under 
them; in both of which they have ex- 
ceeded many of their fellow-creatures, 
whose lot has cast them in a superior sta- 
tion, and whose contentment under tem- 
porary miseries, should ever be sustained 
by this comparative reflexion: 
"What myriads wish to be as blest as I! "
Shenstone. 

Great cities are like painted sepulchres; 
their public avenues, and stately edifices, 
seem to preclude the very possibility of 
distress and poverty: but if we pass be- 
yond this superficial veil, the scene will 
be reversed; the pleasing lights and shades 
of the picture will be blended with, and 
lost in a dark back-ground. 

|P_24
A man, conversant only with the com- 
mon concerns of life, would infer, upon 
the least reflexion, that as families in the 
middle station, with the utmost circum- 
spection, cannot restrain their expences 
under considerable sums a year; the la- 
boring poor, and many ingenious artizans, 
who cannot possibly acquire more than for- 
ty or fifty pounds in the same time, must 
be liable to suffer much distress either 
when out of employment, or when visited 
with sickness. Temperance and labor ren- 
der them prolific; and to support a nu- 
merous family with all the necessaries of 
life, by their small earnings, is an invin- 
cible proof of the economy and industry 
that generally prevail among them. 

Sometimes, indeed, by successive attacks 
of illness, they are incapable of procur- 
ing the common necessaries of life; they 
have literally wanted bread, as well as 
cloaths; and, instead of a bed, an old 
oil-cloth has been substituted, and the 
whole furniture of it has been a worn-out 
|P_25
blanket, insufficient to hide what decency 
requires. On such a couch have been 
found a husband, a wife, and two or three 
children, at once chained by disease, with- 
out any resources to procure a morsel of 
bread; they have thus continued, till the 
payment for their wretched dwellings be- 
came due, when this dismal confinement 
has been changed for the horrible re- 
straint of a prison, loaded with putridity 
and poison. 

It must be owned, indeed, that such 
examples of extreme distress do not very 
often occur; they are, however, much more 
frequent, than is usually imagined by those, 
who consider the amazing sum which the 
poor-rates annually amount to, and the 
various other provisions calculated to re- 
lieve the indigent. 

Though I wish not to accuse individuals, 
yet truth obliges me to say, that evils exist 
somewhere, which require immediate re- 
formation. I have reason to believe, that 
the sum annually raised, would supply all 
|P_26
the necessities of the national poor, were 
it timely and properly applied; and this 
I can deduce from the conduct of a socie- 
ty, whose poor are comfortably supported, 
and their children clothed and educated, 
and set forward in life, with no great ex- 
pence to the individuals of the commu- 
nity. 

But from whatever causes the prevailing 
distresses of the poor may originate, pre- 
sent misery requires present aid; whereby 
health, which is so necessary to their sub- 
sistance, will be sooner restored, famine 
and a prison avoided, the nation inriched 
by industry, and a hardy race of useful 
members preserved to the community. 

The occasions of making ourselves hap- 
py by extending relief to the needy, are 
numberless, and would seem adapted to 
diffuse happiness more generally among 
mankind. If affluence and independence 
could universally prevail, the benevolent 
would not experience the inexpressible 
|P_27
pleasure of relieving the distressed; nei- 
ther could there exist that grateful sa- 
tisfaction, which modest indigence ever 
feels from well-timed succour. In this 
city, however, there is no probability that 
these causes of mutual pleasure will ever 
be removed; but, on the other hand, the 
affluence of some rises in proportion to 
the necessities of others, whose wants si- 
lently petition for their assistance. 

A little good, properly directed, is often 
great in it's increase; the widow's mite was 
not bestowed in vain: no person, there- 
fore, should withhold his hand, from the 
reflection that a little can produce no bene- 
fit; but rather be animated to do good, 
by observing that great effects have resul- 
ted from trifling causes; that the smallest 
spring is the source of a mighty river 
which waters numerous provinces; that the 
loftiest oak of the forest is germinated from 
an acorn; and that the particle, that 
seems lost in the ocean, may become a 
pearl of inestimable value. 

|P_28
[}SECTION V. }]
[}Advantages of the Dispensary to 
domestic servants. }]
SICKNESS is the lot of humanity; 
and this useful as well as numerous 
part of she community, who interest them- 
selves in their different departments for 
the profit and pleasure of their masters, 
have a natural claim upon them for relief, 
when rendered incapable of labour by the 
attacks of sickness. The female sex, in 
particular, constitute the majority of do- 
mestic servants in this city; they have 
been accustomed to the plenty of their 
master's table; and frequently receive in- 
dulgencies to which the abject poor have 
not been used: by this, and a continual 
intercourse with people of decent man- 
ners, they acquire a degree of delicacy of 
body, as well as sensibility of mind, that 
renders them less able to undergo difficul- 
ties, or exposure to the wide world. Many 
of them who are born with tender frames, 
|P_29
and delicate constitutions, exert themselves 
so much in the discharge of their duty, as 
renders them liable to numerous ailments; 
and unwilling to complain for fear of in- 
commoding a family, or incurring an ex- 
pence which they themselves are unable 
to support, they patiently linger on, till 
disease becomes too deeply fixed to be era- 
dicated. I have, indeed, been witness to the 
most laudable instances of humanity in mas- 
ters and mistresses of families, who, as soon 
as they have discovered the sickness of their 
female servants, have evinced the tenderest 
care of them, engaging the advice of the 
family physician or apothecary, and tak- 
ing upon themselves every expence that 
might accrue: and where servants meet 
with such treatment the aid of the Dis- 
pensary is not requisite. In some fami- 
lies peculiar circumstances may occur, and 
servants may be seized with certain dis- 
eases, particularly of the infectious kind, 
which may render it highly expedient to re- 
move them to lodgings; but the humane in- 
terference of masters and mistresses may still 
|P_30
be be conducted with no less advantage and se- 
curity to servants than if they were at home. 
There are, however, many heads of fami- 
lies, whose humanity does not rise to such 
complete efforts of genuine compassion. 
The tender domestic, whose sickness is of- 
ten occasioned by an anxious desire to please 
the family, is either left to discharge the 
expences of it, or turned out of the house 
at it's first commencement, for no other 
reason, but because she is sick, and may 
possibly die in the family. If we are 
made to assist and to do good to each other 
in the daily and common occurrences of 
life, how much more should the tenderest 
emotions of sympathy be excited, and the 
most effectual relief be administered, in 
such affecting situations? If we serve our 
fellow-creatures so far only as it creates us 
no trouble, where is the prevalence of 
Christianity over selfishness? The removal 
to strange lodgings, the ideas of anxiety 
thence excited, and the numerous fears 
which are apt, in such a perplexed state, 
to crowd in upon the mind of an inex- 
|P_31
perienced girl, who may have laboured for 
years without saving many shillings, all 
contribute to augment the first malady, and 
protract the cure. 

Thus abandoned and out-cast, what a 
scene of woe do the first returns of health 
exhibit? Perhaps far from her native home, 
without one real friend, but surrounded 
with many false ones of both sexes, how 
unexpectedly do the misfortunes of a frail 
constitution, and the neglect of those who 
should have succoured her in distress, in- 
troduce her into a scene of life, to which, 
however shocking, necessity compels her to 
submit at first, and habit afterwards re- 
conciles her beyond redemption. 

To servants, thus dangerously situated in 
families, I know that the Dispensary has 
been an useful and noble succour. It has 
induced masters and mistresses to admit 
that relief, by which no expence is in- 
curred; and, for the same reason, has en- 
couraged servants to apply early for a cure, 
before their disorders were too deeply 
rooted in the constitution. 

|P_32
Thus not only the health but the morals 
of young people of both sexes have been 
preserved, and that tie betwixt masters and 
servants which humanity and justice have 
formed, has become firmly strengthened; 
and, as I have generally observed, every 
kind assistance that domestics receive, is 
amply repaid by their fidelity, economy, 
and industry. 
[^A floral ornament. ^]
|P_33
[}SECTION VI. }]
[}General Dispensary as it affects the 
Faculty at large. }]
WHERE there are numbers of weal- 
thy citizens, there must always 
exist numbers of poor; the elegance and 
ease of the former depend upon the inge- 
nuity and labor of the latter; and the 
opulent have abundantly testified their sense 
of this connexion, by many costly edifices 
for the reception and relief of the diseased 
poor. Though this has undoubtedly lessen- 
ed the general practice of surgeons and 
apothecaries, it has not lessened their emo- 
luments, as these receptacles are open only 
to poverty and distress; it is, therefore, the 
unprofitable business only that must be de- 
ducted from the income of the faculty at 
large: and, indeed, we find gentlemen of 
the profession so sensible of this, that ma- 
ny of them have become benefactors to these 
very institutions. Hence, if hospitals do 
not operate against the interests of the fa- 
|P_34
culty, the Dispensary cannot injure them; 
because the subjects of it's relief are such 
only as are really necessitous; and from 
such I am sure the faculty are too generous 
and independent to demand the mite of 
hard-earned labor. 

The best plans have been abused, and, 
probably, individuals in easy circumstances 
may have assumed the appearance of neces- 
sity, and thereby partaken of that charity 
which was designed only for the indigent; 
but such instances must rarely, if ever, oc- 
cur in the General Dispensary, because a 
committee of the governors attend daily, 
to prevent impositions of this kind, and to 
rectify every abuse. 
[^A floral ornament. ^]
|P_35
[}SECTION VII. }]
[}Utility of admitting Surgery. }]
A General Dispensary for relieving the 
poor at their own habitations, is 
but a modern institution, different from 
every other charity established in this king- 
dom; the governors, therefore, acted with 
greater circumspection, respecting the in- 
discriminate admission of patients, during 
the infancy of so novel a plan. Perfec- 
tion is not the production of a day; it is 
experience that directs an accurate archi- 
tect in raising a stupendous edifice upon a 
well-laid foundation; and we have now 
sufficient ground to decide upon the pro- 
priety of admitting chirurgical patients as 
well as medical. The governors of the 
Westminster Dispenfary, emboldened by the 
success of this prior establishment in the 
city of London, from the first ventured to 
administer relief to every malady to which 
the human frame is liable; and the rapid 
progress of this institution of but the other 
|P_36
day, is a proof of what the elder Chari- 
ty, with a considerable capital in the 
funds, is now able to accomplish: it 
shews that chirurgical cases are not more 
expensive than medical; and, more than 
this, it evinces, that the worst operations 
may be conducted at the houses of the 
patients with ease and with success. 

We have, indeed, seen this happily 
ascertained, by the success which hath at- 
tended several operations conducted by the 
surgeon to the General Dispensary, and 
some of them in capital cases, without one 
example of fatality. 

There are frequent instances of patients 
laboring under diseases, equally demand- 
ing the care of the surgeon as well as of 
the physician; and most chirurgical cases 
require, likewise, medical assistance: a 
strong plea might hence be formed, for 
admitting such complicated cases; and, 
consequently, for admitting surgery in ge- 
neral. 

|P_37
The poor, whose circumstances often 
compel them to make use of the first means 
of aid which specious pretenders offer them, 
frequently fall victims to ignorance and 
quackery, and thereby for ever impair their 
health, to the injury of their families, and 
and loss of the community. The Dis- 
pensary, however, has proved a noble 
check to impostures in physic, and nearly 
extirpated medical quacks out of the pre- 
cincts of the city; but it's influence has 
not yet been opposed to pretenders in sur- 
gery, by whom hundreds of our unhap- 
py fellow creatures are annually sacrificed 
on Tower-hill and in Moorfields: per- 
suaded I am, however, from the suppli- 
cations of the poor, that these pests of 
society would soon be compelled to quit 
the city for want of bread, were chirur- 
gical cases admitted to partake of the be- 
nefits of the Dispensary. Ignorance and 
impudence would then no longer, in the 
public walks, impose upon the unthinking 
multitude the cures of slight scrophulas 
for confirmed cancers, and of slight in- 
|P_38
flammations of the eyes for the removal 
of blindness the maladies of the poor 
would then be timely checked, and effec- 
tually eradicated, by the joint efforts of 
medical and chirurgical experience, and the 
life of many an useful member would be 
redeemed to the community, their rela- 
tions, and their friends. 
[^A floral ornament. ^]
|P_39
[}SECTION VIII. }]
[}Of consulting, or extraordinary 
Physicians. }]
AS the Dispensary requires three times 
as much attendance as the largest 
hospital in London, though the smaller 
hospitals have double the officers to do 
the duty of them, it is natural to suppose, 
that the labor of each of the Dispensary 
physicians must be too great to allow them 
to officiate one for another; and, at the 
same time, their exposure to infection in 
visiting the poor at their own habitations, 
and frequently the prisoners in the comp- 
ters, must render their health very precari- 
ous; hence much inconvenience must arise, 
for want of assistance during the indispo- 
sition of any of the physicians. 

It appears necessary, therefore, to ap- 
point consulting physicians, to attend dur- 
ing such exigencies; and likewise to con- 
sult with the physicians in ordinary upon 
|P_40
difficult and hazardous cases. They might 
be chosen out of those physicians in ordi- 
nary, who are disposed to retire from that 
laborious station; and the post should be 
merely honorary, and have no salary an- 
nexed to it. The governors, I dare say, 
will not be under the necessity of waiting 
long before they will have an opportunity 
of shewing their approbation of former ser- 
vices, and, without any additional expence 
to the charity, thus rewarding those offi- 
cers who have faithfully discharged their 
duty. 
[^A floral ornament. ^]
|P_41
[}SECTION IX. }]
[}General Dispensary as a School of 
Physic. }]
NEXT to the succour and relief of 
the poor, the promotion of medical 
knowledge is of the utmost importance in 
a medical institution. Unfortunately for 
students of physic and surgery, and for 
mankind in general, no public plan has 
been adopted in Europe for conveying in- 
struction in imitation of private practice; 
and hence it is, that young gentlemen of 
genius and application are so much at a 
loss at the commencement of their practice. 
In places wherein a multitude of our species 
are confined at one time, diseases in general 
put on a sameness of appearance, and have 
all more or less a putrid tendency; but a 
plan like that of the General Dispensary, 
where patients are visited at their own 
habitations, affords an opportunity for stu- 
dents of the healing art to observe the 
varieties in diseases, as they usually arise 
|P_42
in private practice; they will see their 
progress and determination more clearly, 
and learn to distinguish and treat, more 
judiciously, the symptoms they shall in 
future have occasion to prescribe for. 
Were these favourable opportunities of 
information farther improved, by lectures 
of the physicians and surgeons, adapted 
to the reigning diseases and circumstances 
of the patients, we need not hesitate to 
declare, that this institution might be ren- 
dered of the utmost importance to stu- 
dents, to the science of medicine, and to 
the public. 

There are many young gentlemen of 
genius, application, and learning, whose 
finances may have been much impaired in 
acquiring only the rudiments of medicine; 
and, therefore, as public good should ever 
be the motive of conduct with the facul- 
ty, the admission to the benefits of the 
Dispensary should be made as easy as 
possible to the students, who, besides the 
usual contingent expences requisite to ac- 
|P_43
quire medical knowledge, might not deem 
ten guineas per ann. too large a gratuity for 
the privilege not only of attending the prac- 
tice of the physicians and surgeons, but 
likewise of being admitted, during that 
term, to all the lectures, and of seeing the 
manner of compounding medicines, and 
the forms used in prescription. 

The physicians and surgeons might each 
give a public lecture, once every week, 
on the following subjects: 
The physician on Mondays, { Clinical lectures on such 
cases as the Dispensary 
affords. The physician on Tuesdays, { Theory and practice of me- 
dicine. The physician on Wednesdays, { Materia medica, botany, 
and chemistry. The surgeon on Thursdays, { Practical lectures on the 
chirurgical cases in the 
Dispensary. The surgeon on Fridays, { System of surgery, including 
operations in general. The surgeon on Saturdays, { Anatomy, and chirurgical 
observations in general. 
This plan, indeed, may not be fully ex- 
ecuted for some time; but though we can- 
|P_44
not immediately attain perfection, the 
nearer we approach towards it the better. 

By seeing a multitude of cases in quick 
succession, without reflecting carefully on 
each, the attention of the student is often be- 
wildered; and the useful impressions which 
one case affords, may be effaced by sudden 
subsequent ones: it is hence of consequence 
to digest one case before the attention is 
engrossed by another; and, to this end, 
the students should be allowed to visit the 
home-patients belonging to the Dispensary, 
on such days as the physicians attendance 
may be dispensed with; and should draw up 
reports of the state of the disease and the 
present symptoms, as well as the indica- 
tions of cure, and the remedies proper to 
be administered: these reports should be 
presented to the physicians under whom 
the respective cases were admitted, who 
should assign reasons for confirming or re- 
jecting the opinions of their pupils, and 
then offer their own more mature judg- 
ment upon the subject before them. 

|P_45
Every person of information is aware of 
the sanguine notions and theories which 
students acquire by a mere college educa- 
tion: it is a rational practice that must 
confirm some of their opinions, and rectify 
others; that must let them perceive that 
many a disease, which theory has expelled 
in a breath, remains obstinate under the 
care of the ablest physicians. 

Were such a plan adopted, and that it 
might easily be done I know by experi- 
ence, young gentlemen, at their entrance 
upon the anxious and arduous task of the 
guardianship of life, would not be at a 
loss when called to the urgent relief of 
the sick, nor be tempted to adopt an 
unsteady precarious method of treatment; 
but, having carefully combined a system of 
practical and theoretical knowledge, they 
would accurately investigate symptoms, and 
apply those remedies that nature and the 
disease require. 

|P_46
Though I have mentioned medicine in 
a particular manner in this place, the same 
plan might be adopted for surgery, and 
similar good effects would undoubtedly re- 
sult. 

The faculty belonging to the Dispensa- 
ry have long continued to meet together 
once a week, to consult upon all difficult 
cases, and to communicate their mutual 
assistance to each other: and such consul- 
tations, which tend to check the sallies of 
wild fancy, and bring theory to the test of 
experience, must prove peculiarly instruc- 
tive to the pupils, who would hear the 
united observations of persons experienced 
in practice, see the inefficacy of certain 
remedies in certain diseases, and learn to 
apply others better adapted to the urgent 
symptoms, or peculiar constitution of the 
patient. 

In such a process, students would find 
the most ample means of perfecting them- 
selves in the treatment of human maladies; 
|P_47
and, while the healing art advanced to ma- 
turity, the public must necessarily reap the 
benefit, by always meeting with accom- 
plished guardians of health, under whose 
protection they might safely repose that 
dearest of temporal blessings. 
[^A floral ornament. ^]
|P_48
[}SECTION X. }]
[}Influence of the Dispensary on the 
Burials in London. }]
EVERY institution which contributes 
to the preservation of health, or the 
cure of disease, cannot fail to produce some 
diminution in the bills of mortality; and 
the General Dispensary, which, in the 
space of five years, has extended it's assist- 
ance to about twelve thousand diseased 
persons, must have had a considerable share 
in redeeming victims from the grave, espe- 
cially as many of them were too abject to 
purchase the relief of medicine, or to pro- 
cure a friend that had sufficient influence to 
open the lofty gates of an hospital. Many 
of their diseases were also too violent in their 
symptoms, and too rapid in their progress, 
to wait the slow return of the weekly day 
of admission; or of a tendency improper 
for reception into one ward, previously 
crowded with numbers of their diseased 
fellow-creatures. 

|P_49
It has been asserted, that a third part 
of all who die at Paris, die in hospitals. 
In the Hotel Dieu, a great hospital si- 
tuated in the middle of that city, we 
behold a horrid scene of misery; for the 
beds being too few for the numbers 
admitted, it is common to see four, six, 
or even eight patients in a bed together, 
lying four at one end, and four at the 
other. Above a fifth of all who are re- 
ceived into this hospital, die; the an- 
nual number admitted amounting to 
near twenty-two thousand.  Vid. Police 
of France, p. 83. In the two great hos- 
pitals of London, St. Thomas's and St. 
Bartholomew's, about six hundred die 
annually, or one in thirteen of all ad- 
mitted as in-patients.  Vid. Price on the 
Expectation of Lives, p. 216. In the 
Northampton Infirmary, one in nineteen
of the in-patients (communibus annis)
die every year; and in that of Man- 
chester, which is built in an airy situa- 
tion, and tolerably well ventilated, one
in twenty-two.  Percival's Letter to 
|P_50
Aikin on hospitals. In the Dispensary, the 
deaths do not amount to one in thirty-three; 
which, considering the many thousands 
of sick persons annually admitted to par- 
take of it's relief, must contribute not a 
little to the decrease of deaths in this me- 
tropolis; and so indeed it appears to have 
done by the bills of mortality, as the di- 
minution in the burials has been nearly 
progressive every year since it's establish- 
ment, except the year 1772, when the 
small-pox almost solely constituted this 
difference, upwards of two thousand dy- 
ing that year of this disease more than in 
the preceding year 1771. And it should 
be remarked, that small-pox patients were 
then not admitted to the benefits of the 
Dispensary [/2./]. 

It is not merely by the relief which 
the poor have immediately received from 
|P_51
this institution, that this happy diminu- 
tion of burials in the bills of mortality 
has been brought about: the useful in- 
structions which, in every part of London, 
they have received from the physicians who 
have attended them during their illness, 
have greatly contributed to the preserva- 
tion of lives, that might have been sacrified 
to ignorance and quackery. In the space 
of a very few years I have observed a total 
revolution in the conduct of the common 
people respecting their diseased friends; 
they have learned, that most diseases are mi- 
tigated by a free admission of air, by clean- 
liness, and by promoting, instead of restrain- 
ing, the indulgence and ease of the sick. 
Such instruction was new to the poor, though 
important to their preservation; and, when 
we consider how late they have acquired 
this information, we must lament that so 
many centuries have elapsed before an in- 
stitution, like the General Dispensary, be- 
came the object of public attention. 

|P_52
[}SECTION XI. }]
[}Advantages of Baths. }]
THOUGH ohstructed perspiration 
may not now be considered as so 
prolific and general a source of disease as 
it was formerly, yet there is reason to con- 
clude, that many diseases either originate 
from, or are increased by, a diminution of 
this natural excretion; particularly amongst 
the poor, whose employments, and want 
of cleanliness, tend to obstruct the per- 
spirable vessels, and thereby induce the 
disorders dependent thereon. In such 
cases a warm bath must prove peculiarly 
serviceable, by cleansing the surface of the 
body, and restoring that perspiration, by 
the retention of which the disease had 
either been acquired, or considerably aug- 
mented. 

The female poor more especially, by 
confinement in nursing, mismanagement 
in lyings-in, laborious exertions above 
|P_53
their strength, poor diet, and other cir- 
cumstances of hardship, become enfeebled, 
and acquire complaints wherein the cold 
bath would prove more speedily beneficial 
than the continued use of internal re- 
medies. 

There are likewise some sudden and 
painful diseases, which require the imme- 
diate use of a tepid bath, and without 
which the usual remedies would prove in- 
effectual and useless; and it is known, that 
the grateful warmth of water has soon 
procured that ease and relief, which no- 
thing else could give. 

Amidst the number of benevolent plans 
in this metropolis, baths, for the use of 
the poor, have never yet been constructed, 
except in a few hospitals, where they are 
open only to their own patients. The 
Dispensary, therefore, which relieves thou- 
sands, who either cannot get admitted into 
an hospital, or who do not choose to leave 
their habitations and families, must re- 
|P_54
main imperfect, till it is furnished both 
with a warm and a cold bath; the expence 
of which cannot be considered as burthen- 
some to a Charity, whose finances are dai- 
ly augmenting, and whose primary design 
is the good of the poor. 
[^A floral ornament. ^]
|P_55
[}SECTION XII. }]
[}Description of the Plan for a new 
General Dispensary. }]
THE ingenious architects who oblig- 
ingly presented me with the annex- 
ed plan and elevation of a new Dispen- 
sary, have likewise generously intimat- 
ed a disposition to advance money below 
the usual rate of interest, were it necessa- 
ry, in order to complete such a structure. 
If this, however, should not be accepted, 
there is the utmost reason to suppose, that 
the sum requisite for carrying this plan 
into execution, might soon be raised by 
voluntary subscriptions among the opulent 
and generous inhabitants of this city, who 
have so often testified their readiness to 
promote the interests and welfare of the 
indigent and distressed. 

|P_56
[}Ground-Floor, twelve feet high, to 
consist of }]Feet Feet A Physicians room 13 by11B Physicians room for patients, in- 
cluding the apothecary's shop}21 by14C Surgeons room for patients, in- 
cluding the surgery } 21 by14 D Surgeons room 13 by 11 E Staircase 14 by 11 F Hall 10ft. wideG Portico
[}The Basement Story to contain }]A kitchen, scullery, beer and coal cellars. A Hot and Cold Bath. 
[}One Pair Story, fifteen feet high, to 
contain }]Feet Feet A committee room 40 by 21 Two rooms behind ditto, each 13 by 11 
[}Two Pair Story, ten feet high, to 
contain }]Four bedchambers. FINIS. 


[^1. 
* Since this piece was sent to the press, the committee 
have agreed to refer the admission of surgery to the next 
general meeting, in consequence of a motion made for that 
purpose by the author. 
^]
[^2. 
* It must be grateful to every benevolent person to be in- 
formed, that a Dispensary for inoculating the poor at their 
own habitations, is now established in London. 
^]