

[^Sample 1: book - ^]

|P_1[^A horizontal triple line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}AN 

EAS Y WAY 

TO PROLONG

LIFE. }]
HEALTH being the greatest blessing 
upon earth, it is natural to imagine, we 
should be studious to preserve it; and yet, if 
we take a view of the actions and conduct of 
mankind in general, we are led to suppose that 
it is not the greatest good. Instead of paying 
any regard to it, we frequently indulge our 
appetites, at the expence of our constitutions. 
The human body is a piece of mechanism, that 
requires care and attention. It may be com- 
pared to clock-work, which, if not kept free 
from dust and other extraneous, injurious 
substances, will presently be out of order. 
Life is, generally speaking, shortened or pro- 
longed, according to the care we take of it. 

In the first age of the world, the life of man 
was nearly a thousand years; but after the flood, 
|P_2
it was abreviated to half its length. Three gene- 
rations later, it was reduced to one fourth of its 
original term, and man seldom lived above two 
hundred years. About the time of Moses, it 
became shorter still, commonly not exceeding 
one hundred and twenty years, and now, it is 
reduced to little more than half that period. 

But, though we find this gradual declension 
in the several ages of the world; yet we must 
understand, that it was not equally so, in all 
parts, at the same time; for difference of cli- 
mate, and difference of living, caused a dif- 
ference in the length of life. Hence, some of 
the inhabitants of the earth lived three times 
or four times as long as others. 

Now, why the days of man should be thus 
shortened, and his term of life so much re- 
duced, is an object worth our enquiry: and, if 
we compare the manner of our living now, 
with that of the first age of the world, we shall 
see evident reasons for it; every generation hav- 
ing, more and more, impaired its constitution by 
a degenerate course of living, incompatible 
with the laws of nature. And as we must, of 
necessity, admit of hereditary infirmities, we 
have reason to expect, (unless by great refor- 
mation of the injurious customs of later ages,) 
that life in future will be shorter still. 

|P_3
'Tis true, there is another rational cause, 
namely, that when the number of men upon 
the earth was small, it was necessary their life 
should be prolonged, for the purposes of popu- 
lation; but as they increased, this became no 
longer necessary, and the wisdom of the Crea- 
tor found it requisite to shorten their days, 
lest the earth should be overstocked. For 
were men to live nine hundred years now, 
with the present encrease of the species, there 
could not be provision for one tenth part of 
their number. But, notwithstanding this, it is 
a matter of melancholy consideration, to think, 
how much longer a man might live, with tem- 
perance, than he does, at present; and how 
soon the gratification of a little momentary 
pleasure hurries him out of life, perhaps to the 
destruction of his family, and the loss of hap- 
piness hereafter. 

In the infancy of the world, man sought only 
after the necessary requisites of his being, and 
was contented with that competent subsistence, 
which nature required; but, in process of time 
he grew dissatisfied with the bare necessaries of 
life, (that wholesome provision that would 
have greatly prolonged it,) and hunted after 
variety and excess, to please and gratify a 
|P_4
sensual appetite. Thus, one age taught ano- 
ther to be irregular and disordered, dictated new 
inventions to succeeding generations, and trans- 
mitted their ruined practices to the following 
ages to imitate and compleat. 

Hinc illæ lachrymæ! — After this manner, 
and by such means, is the life of man beset by 
innumerable infirmities and diseases: thus, is 
he cut off, before he is well aware of it. 

Now, as it is natural to man to covet length 
of life, we have reason to suppose, he will be 
glad to pay some attention to those things, that 
will either prolong or shorten it; and, as length of 
life depends upon health, health is the principal 
thing to be considered. 

The practice of physic was anciently distri- 
buted into three branches; the first of which was 
confined to surgery; the second, to the admini- 
stration of internal remedies; the last, to a due re- 
gulation of diet. The two former have, in no 
age, received more useful improvement than in 
the present. But, it is greatly to be doubted, 
whether or not an attention has been paid to the 
latter, in proportion to its dignity and impor- 
tance. 

|P_5
Many are the causes of ill health, but the prin- 
cipal one is the variety and excess of food. To 
this then, at present, we shall turn our enquiries. 
But, before we proceed, it may not be unnecessary 
to give the reader some little insight into the na- 
ture of digestion and the properties of food in 
general. 

When food is thrown down into a healthy 
stomach, it naturally dissolves and ferments, it 
being a natural property of the stomach to pro- 
duce fermentation. The aliment being dissolved 
and fermented, is again rendered solid by the juices 
of the stomach; and the nutritive fluid being ex- 
pelled from the solid part, is passed into the intes- 
tines, where it is absorbed by certain vessels that 
open into them, and is converted into blood. The 
remaining part of the food, being retained in the 
stomach, during this process, is afterwards eva- 
cuated. But this fermentation in the body is not 
exactly similar to fermentations out of the body; 
as, in fermentations out of the body, the air 
contained in the substances fermenting is let 
out, which may be found by experiment; but, 
this is not the case in healthy persons and in 
proper food, within the body; fermentation 
there takes place without any extrication of air. 
In weak stomachs, indeed, and in the digesting of 
|P_6
some particular foods, extrication of air will often 
so distend the stomach, as to occasion flatulencies 
and pain; but this is always irregular and un- 
natural. 

Now, if such extrication of air should happen, 
or the food we take, be such as will not, in the 
stomach, readily dissolve, ferment, become solid, 
or re-dissolve; or, in short, if it be such as shall, in 
any way, resist the powers of the stomach, diges- 
tion will be imperfect, and the whole system dis- 
ordered; it being only such part of the food as is 
digested, that nourishes the body. 

If the digestive powers of the stomach be weak, 
natural fermentation will not take place, but such 
fermentation as we observe in flour, when mixt 
with yest, that is, the air in the substances we eat, 
will be extricated; and sometimes to such a degree 
as to distend the stomach greatly, and bring on, 
what is called wind, belchings and pain. In this 
case vegetables will turn acid, and meat will pu- 
trify, before either of them are passed from the sto- 
mach. This occasions heart burn, a certain sign 
of indigestion; and, if this weakness of the sto- 
mach continues, and putrefaction runs to a great 
height, sickness, vomiting, and purging will be 
the consequence, and sometimes fever. Now, 
|P_7
should any quantity of this putrid food be absorbed 
by the vessels, and, in its passage thro' the body, be 
carried into the blood, it will weaken the whole 
system, and, if not timely prevented, bring on 
such a general putrefaction of the blood, &c. as to 
prove fatal. 

If what we eat, be of hard digestion, that is, 
such as will not readily dissolve, or break down, 
or ferment in the stomach, either owing to the 
nature of the food, its hard texture, or the weakness 
of our digestive organs, it will remain too long, 
before it be passed off, and produce a sense of 
weight, fullness, oppression and cold; as is 
the case with salted meats in weak stomachs. 'Tis 
the same, if it will not re-dissolve, after it is coa- 
gulated or become solid. 

So again, if it be too easy of digestion; that is, 
if it be such as will not remain long enough in the 
stomach, owing either to its want of tendency to 
become solid again after it is dissolved; or to the 
strength of the stomach preventing it, the nutri- 
tive part will not have time to separate, and the 
body will not be nourished. 

Further, it must be observed that circulation is 
carried on by a contraction of the heart, driving 
the blood from its cavities into the blood-vessels, 
|P_8
which, immediately on receiving it, contract like- 
wise, and impel it on, thro' the whole round of 
the system, to the heart again. Now, if the heart 
and vessels contract too quick, or with too much 
force, it occasions a strong, quick pulse and fever, 
and will often throw the blood in such quantities 
upon the brain, which is a tender, delicate part, as 
to bring on Stupor, Apoplexy, Delirium, and 
Death: And, it is the property of some substances 
to stimulate or encrease this action of the heart 
and vessels; and of others, to diminish it. Food 
of a viscid, clammy nature, glary, like the white of 
an egg, will adhere to the sides of the stomach, 
and, by so doing, throw the blood, from other 
parts of the body, in such quantities upon the 
brain as to oppress it, and sometimes occasion 
Apoplexy. How this is brought about, is un- 
known; but experience shews us that it is so. 

Persons have been so disordered by eating 
muscles, which are of a viscid nature, that, without 
some timely assistance, they would have died. In 
these cases, the head swells, the face becomes of a 
black red, the eyes are ready to start from their 
sockets, and a Stupor succeeds; but by administer- 
ing a vomit, and making the stomach discharge 
its contents, and by opening the jugular vein, the 
patient has sometimes recovered. 

|P_9
From hence it appears, that some kinds of 
food are wholesome, others unwholesome, and 
that there is none universally proper. It must be 
adapted to the constitution. 

Now, there is a period in the life of man, in 
which the organs of digestion are weak, and yet, 
at the same time, there is a necessity for much 
nourishment. This period is infancy; for, as 
at this time, the body encreases fast, much nou- 
rishment is required to help and forward the 
growth: milk being naturally provided, and 
therefore probably adapted to it, we may sup- 
pose it to be a food of easy digestion and consi- 
derable nourishment. Examining then the pro- 
perties of milk, will give us some insight into the 
nature of food in general. 

Milk is not a simple substance; it is a 
mixture of three; namely, coagulable matter, 
expressed oil, and sugar. Coagulable matter is 
that which will unite, and become solid, leaving 
the rest thinner and more fluid, viz. the curd; and 
expressed oil is such as can be procured from any 
substance by pressing, as oil of almonds, olives, 
and the like: by expressed oil, in milk, we un- 
derstand the cream. 

|P_10
The most simple food, then, does not appear 
to be the easiest of digestion; if it was, we should 
have expected that milk would have consisted of 
one substance only. 

That the coagulable matter is capable of af- 
fording considerable nourishment, may be gather- 
ed from our experiencing that animal mucilage 
nourishes the most; mucilage being that sub- 
stance which has sufficient moisture to keep it 
together: as, for example,—sound, good meat. 

This coagulable matter, in milk, is fluid indeed 
when taken, but there is a juice peculiar to the 
stomach, very different from an acid, that ren- 
ders it solid. We find the stomach of a calf, 
though cleared of every thing that is acid, to 
have this property. An infusion of a few grains 
of the inner coat will coagulate or curdle several 
quarts of milk. 

With respect to cheese, for I shall not have a 
better opportunity to mention it, it has, in general, 
a costive quality; but it differs, in proportion to 
the quantity of oil, in the coagulable part. The 
more rich, oily parts there are in cheese, the more 
nutritive it is and soluble: that is, the readier it 
will digest; the leaner the cheese, the more dif- 
|P_11
ficultly it digests. Cheese is liable to become rank 
and putrid, we must then consider it as having 
all the effects of animal food, when advanced to 
putrefaction; at this time it ceases to be nutri- 
tive, and can only be considered as an assistant to 
digestion. Cheese, indeed, as food, is only fit 
for the laborious and robust. 

Having mentioned cheese, let me drop a word or 
two upon butter. A quantity of pure cream eaten, is 
undoubtedly unwholesome; being, from its dispo- 
sition to get acid and rancid, very difficult of digest- 
ion; but, in the form of butter, it may be used 
with advantage. 'Tis a strong nutriment, fit to ac- 
company our vegetable diet, especially such 
vegetables as are naturally dry of themselves; in 
this case, it gives them the properties of rich, oily 
substances.—But, to return. 

It appears then that milk, and of course all 
other food, must become solid in the stomach, and, 
after that, undergo a fresh change, that is, be re- 
dissolved, for digestion; for which purpose, it must 
remain some time there, before it be passed off. 

Now, that the expressed oil, which is the cream, 
helps digestion, is evident from milk's not digest- 
ing so well when it has been skimmed, the 
|P_12
curd being harder; for the cream and the sugar, 
being mixed with the curd, separate the different 
parts of it more from one another, so that the 
natural fluid of the stomach will penetrate the 
easier, and fermentation go on the better [/1./]. And 
as to sugar, it, being from its nature more apt to 
ferment, will of course facilitate digestion. 

That expressed oil affords nuch nourishment, 
we find from men and animals being able to live 
a long time upon nuts, almonds, &c. such con- 
taining a quantity of this oil. But, expressed oil 
alone produces sense of weight on the stomach, 
owing to a relaxation it brings on, preventing the 
stomach's contracting and expelling its load, and 
if taken in quantities, it will bring on sickness. 

That sugar also affords great nourishment, is 
evident from animals thriving on the shoots of 
young plants, which contain a great deal of sugar; 
and from some negroes living wholly on the 
sugar-cane. But sugar alone is viscid, and, by ad- 
hering to the sides of the stomach, will stimulate 
it and disorder the system, and if diluted with 
any watery fluid, would be so thin as not to be 
|P_13
retained in the stomach long enough for digestion, 
but mixed with the coagulable part of the milk, it 
is sufficiently retained. Either of these substances 
alone then, viz. coagulable matter, expressed 
oil, or sugar, would be hard of digestion; but 
blended, as in milk, they are easy of digestion. 

Immediately after child-birth, when the milk 
begins to flow in the mother's breasts, it contains 
a larger quantity of sugar and water (for there 
is always a small quantity of water) in proportion 
to the coagulable matter. Some months after 
child birth, the coagulable matter encreases, and 
the sugar proportionably diminishes. For as the 
infant-stomach is weak, the solid part of the milk 
is, at first, less, so that a looser mass is formed, much 
easier to be dissolved. As the child grows strong- 
er, its stomach can bear more of this coagulable 
matter, and digests it, if it be firmer. This 
points out, that a young child, one of a month 
old, will not thrive, in general, on breast-milk 
eight or nine months old. 

We also learn from this, that weak stomachs 
require food of easy digestion; strong stomachs, 
food of harder digestion. Thus, chicken, &c.
will nourish people most, recovering from sickness, 
and bacon, &c. will best recruit a labourer. 

|P_14
Having thus far considered the properties of 
milk, the food Nature has designed for the infant- 
stomach, we shall be able to discover the whole- 
someness of other foods, by examining their
different properties; and we will begin with 
vegetables. 

The vegetable substances capable of nourish- 
ing are as follow: 
1. Farrinaceous matter, or flour. This is ge- 
nerally contained in grain; but sometimes we 
find it in the stems of plants, and sometimes in 
their roots. 
2. Vegetable mucilage: as for example, gum- 
arabic, &c. That this is capable of nourishing, 
is evident from whole caravans living on it, for a 
long time, when they can procure no other food. 
3. Sugar. 
4. Expressed oils. And, 
5. Native vegetable acid; or the juice of sour 
fruits, which tends to take off the putrescency of 
animal food: that is, to prevent meat from cor- 
rupting, while it continues in the stomach. 

|P_15
For animal food, without a mixture of vege- 
table, is apt to continue too long in the stomach, 
before it ferments. In this case, it will some- 
times begin to putrify before it be passed off, 
which putrefaction getting into the blood, will 
often bring on a putrefaction of all the fluids of 
the body. This is a complete sea-scurvy, which, 
if not timely remedied, always terminates dread- 
fully. Salting provisions makes them harder of 
digestion; and though it prevents meat from 
corrupting soon out of the body; yet, as the 
salt seldom if ever penetrates sufficiently into the 
substance of the meat, so as totally to secure it 
against putrefaction, when in the body, if it is not 
immediately made to ferment, by the addition of 
vegetable food, or some vegetable acid thrown in 
with it, it will be apt to putrify before it digests, 
and contaminate the whole system. Hence we 
see, how liable mariners are, on a voyage, where 
there is a scarcity of vegetables, to be afflicted 
with the scurvy, and how soon they get rid of 
that disorder, when they once get on shore again, 
to the free use of herbs and roots. 

Now, these five vegetable substances, I have 
mentioned, go naturally through fermentation, 
and are converted into blood. 

|P_16
With respect to the fibres, the solid part of 
vegetables, we find them frequently pass through 
the body, without being altered. As for example, 
peas and the skins of gooseberries, currants, &c.
Now, as the texture of the strongest tendons of 
animal food is constantly destroyed in their pas- 
sage through the body, while such parts of 
vegetable food shall be evacuated as they were 
taken in, it is a question, whether these last were 
digested? If any of them are, it must be such 
only as are young and tender. 

But, to return. Farrinaceous matter is con- 
tained in the seeds of all vegetables; but in many, 
it is so mixed with other substances, as to be unfit 
for use. Thus, we find it in peas, beans, &c.
but in too small quantities for the purposes of 
life. 

So again, we meet with it in nuts; as wal- 
nuts, chesnuts, almonds, filberds, common 
nuts, &c. But these contain too much oil to be 
wholesome for common food. Besides, they 
yield a bitterish, astringent matter, which adds to 
their unwholesomeness. Bitter almonds, acorns, 
&c. which contain a great deal of this matter, 
are more unwholesome still. The oil, contained 
in nuts, will often give a sense of weight in the 
|P_17
stomach, and stimulate the system during diges- 
tion, especially when eaten raw. Besides, the 
farrinaceous matter in them have a viscidity that 
renders them hurtful to the constitution; but 
roasting them will destroy this viscidity, and then 
they may be eaten safely, and will afford much 
nourishment. They may be rendered easier of 
digestion, by mixing them with flour. 'Tis the 
cocoa-nut, mixed with flour, that forms cho- 
colate. 

Farrinaceous matter is found also in many 
roots, as in potatoes, &c. and sometimes in the 
pith of trees, as in the palm-tree. 

We use the pith of one tree, which we make 
into sago, by moistening it with water, beating it 
up, so as to separate it from the fibrous part of the 
tree, drying it into a cake, and afterwards reduc- 
ing it to powder. Thus, it becomes easy of 
digestion, and does not stimulate; but, still, as it 
passes off too soon from the stomach, it does not 
afford much nourishment. However, it is very 
proper food for weak stomachs; as in fevers. 

In the East, they eat rice; in England, wheat; 
in Germany, rye; in some parts, oats and 
barley; and in Africa, Indian wheat. This is 
|P_18
the grain commonly used for food, and it appears 
to be well adapted to digestion. 

Farrinaceous matter is, in its nature, solid, 
capable of being dissolved in water, and forming 
a jelly. If, before we dissolve it in water, we 
expose it to heat, it coagulates or becomes solid; 
thus, if we bake it, we convert it into bread; 
after which, it will not so readily dissolve. But 
bread dissolved by long boiling, is less viscid than 
a solution of flour would be; and consequently 
more wholesome. Was flour used, with water, 
raw, it would be so viscid as to clog and cloy the 
stomach; we therefore prepare it to take off this 
viscidity. 

Flour is not apt to undergo that fermentation 
in the stomach, so as sufficiently to correct the 
putrescency of animal food; we therefore ferment 
it first; that is, we make it into bread. Another 
reason for our converting it into bread, is, that 
in fermentation, extrication of air takes place, 
which leaves a number of holes, making the 
bread spungy; by which means, when eaten, 
it soaks up the fluid of the stomach, and facilitates 
digestion. 

In order to coagulate the flour, that is, make 
|P_19
it into bread, and give it a whiteness, which is 
the nature of all coagulants to do, bakers mix 
with it a quantity of allum, which, if not so great 
as to give the bread a taste, can do no harm to 
adults; but a small quantity will do much mis- 
chief to infants. Panada, therefore, for children, 
should by no means be made of bread in which 
any allum has been mixed. It is for this reason 
physicians prescribe biscuit-powder. 

Sometimes bakers use whites of eggs, and 
sometimes spirits of wine, to coagulate the flour, 
as in French bread; the first is innocent, and the 
last evaporates during the baking, and can 
produce no ill effect. For if bread is not per- 
fectly coagulated, it will sometimes ferment a 
second time in the stomach, particularly if it 
continues long, as in weak stomachs, and turn 
sour; but baking it a second time will totally 
prevent this. Thus, rusks and toasted bread are 
often prescribed for disordered stomachs, as being 
least liable to do mischief; for the least extrication 
of air in weak stomachs is injurious. 

But farrinaceous seeds and roots are not suffi- 
cient to correct the putrescency of meat; we 
therefore make use of vegetables, that were not 
|P_20
originally designed for food, namely, potherbs. 
Of these, 

The one sort are cabbages, colliflowers, bro- 
coli, and all the varieties of this class of plants. 
They contain naturally a stimulating oil, and a 
bitter astringent juice, so as not to be fit for use; 
but we find this only in wild cabbages, &c. By 
cultivation, this oil and bitter juice are destroyed, 
and such as grow in our gardens consist of little 
more than mucilage and sugar; and, of course, 
are fit for food. 

The method taken to destroy these noxious 
juices, is, to grow the plants in the dark, or, 
with as little air as possible: this is done by 
planting them in a rich soil, and thus making 
them so luxuriant, that the leaves shall embrace 
one another, by which means the body of the 
plant grows in the dark, and with little or no air. 
Hence the inner leaves become white, and are 
free from those hurtful juices. The outer leaves 
may be eaten, but the inner ones are most whole- 
some. So young plants are more wholesome than 
old ones, as whatever of these juices they con- 
tain, they are not near so rank. 

Another kind of plants we use, are parsley, 
|P_21
fennel, thyme, mint, sage, &c. and some others 
of the same kind. These contain a stimulating 
oil, that would be injurious to the constitution, 
if eaten in any quantity; and on that account are 
only used as condiments with a seasoning to other 
foods. Cellery is of the same kind; but by 
earthing it up, and thus making it grow in the 
dark, and with little or no air, we destroy its 
noxious oil. Wild cellery, if eaten, would blister 
the mouth. 

The several species of onions, garlick, shalots, 
&c. are of another class; we cannot destroy the 
oil in these, but by boiling. 

Lettuce, endive, dandelion, &c. contain much 
opium, and when wild are very bitter and dis- 
pose to sleep, consequently are unfit for food; 
but by cultivating them in rich soils, and covering 
them from light and air, by tying them up, we 
render them wholesome. 

Spinnage, beets and other plants of that kind, 
when wild, contain also a very bitter oil, so as not 
to be eatable; but by cultivation in rich soils they 
lose this oil. 

In the same manner, asparagus contains oil so 
|P_22
stimulating, that, if eaten wild, would blister the 
tongue; but by cultivating it in rich ground 
and making use only of the young shoots, we avoid 
this inconvenience: but I shall take occasion to 
mention this and every other article more fully 
hereafter. 

None of these plants alone afford much nou- 
rishment: we use them to correct the putrescency 
of animal food, and particularly in the summer, 
as not stimulating. 

They are apt to ferment, and turn sour in a 
weak stomach, and in fermenting, will let loose 
the air contained in them, and occasion wind: 
when persons find this, they should refrain from 
eating them, till their stomach grows stronger; 
for by continuing to take down such things as 
disagree with them, they not only disorder them- 
selves for the present, but will, in time, so injure 
their digestive organs, as to be hereafter at- 
tended with dreadful consequences. 

Peas, beans, kidney-beans, &c. are more fla- 
tulent or windy still; especially when eaten 
unripe, as is always done: such persons there- 
fore with whom they disagree, should by no 
means eat them. 

|P_23
With respect to esculent roots; these contain 
mucilage, sugar and farrinaceous matter, that is, 
flour. The two last afford much nourishment, 
but the mucilage does little else than forward 
fermentation. The more mucilaginous and watery 
these roots are, the more apt they are to ferment 
and correct the putrescency of animal food, and 
consequently the fitter to be eaten in warm wea- 
ther. But the more sugar and flour they contain, 
the more they nourish. 

Turneps, radishes, onions, &c. are equally as 
liable to ferment and correct putrescency, as the 
herbs springing from these roots; and as they 
contain a greater quantity of sugar than their re- 
spective herbs, they are more nutritive. 

Carrots, parsneps, artichokes, Jerusalem arti- 
chokes, &c. contain much sugar and farrinaceous 
matter, but very little mucilage. These are 
wholesome, nutritive, and easy of digestion. 

The sugar adds much to the nutritive quality of 
the farrinaceous matter in all these substances. 

Potatoes, yams, earth-nuts, &c. contain flour 
almost alone, with very little sugar, but more 
water than we find in farrinaceous seeds. How- 
|P_24
ever, the farrinaceous matter is the same in both, 
and is coagulable by heat. We boil them and 
roast them, to destroy their viscidity. 

It was but lately that these roots were introduced 
into Europe for food. They are as nutritive as 
wheat flour, but cannot be so well made into 
bread without a mixture of flour, as they will not 
readily ferment without some such mixture. One 
reason for our not growing them so generally as 
wheat, is, that they are more apt to fail in the 
produce. The crop is not equally certain. 

It is not yet determined, whether mushrooms 
are animals or vegetables. They have all the 
properties of animal-food, and must be considered 
as such. 

[} FRUITS. }]
FRUITS contain sugar, native vegetable 
acid, and mucilage; and their skins contain 
more or less an astringent juice; but so little of it, 
as not to render them unwholesome. Nay, it is 
rather of service, as it stimulates the stomach, 
causes it to contract strongly, and thus prevents 
the fruit becoming acid and flatulent. The 
|P_25
sugar, acids and mucilage are capable of fer- 
menting and being converted into blood. As 
sugar affords more nourishment than any other 
substance, such fruits as are sweetest are the most 
wholesome, viz. figs, grapes, &c.

Sugar is even more nutritive than flour, but 
it is seldom thoroughly digested; being so very 
soluble, it passes off from the stomach before 
any change can take place in it, but entangled 
in the cells of fruit, it is retained longer in 
the stomach, so as to yield some nourishment. 
So again, it is not apt to ferment in the sto- 
mach alone, but mixed with the mucilage of 
fruits, fermentation readily takes place. Besides, 
the acid of fruits helps to correct the putrecency
of animal food. 

The more diluted sugar is, the more apt it 
is to ferment. Hence, watry or mucilaginous 
fruits, with little sugar, as goosberries, currants, 
cherries, &c. afford but little nourishment, but 
then they tend more to correct putrescency. 

Such as contain much sugar and less water 
and mucilage, are not so apt to ferment, con- 
sequently are not so proper to correct putrecency; 
but then they are more nutritive than such as 
|P_26
contain more mucilage and water, and less sugar. 
They afford so much nourishment, that in many 
countries they are used as food: thus, figs, dates, 
&c. in Portugal, are eaten as common food. 

By evaporating the water from fruits, that is 
by drying them, we lessen their disposition to 
ferment, consequently, we make them less flatulent 
and more nutritive. 

The fermentation of some fruits in the sto- 
mach, have, by letting loose the air, sometimes 
so distended it as to prove fatal; but we may 
correct this by adding sugar to them or spices. 
However, such as find they disagree with them, 
if they value their health, should refrain from 
eating them. 

Fruits containing a great quantity of native 
vegetable acid, afford so little nourishment, 
(as lemons, oranges, &c.) that we seldom use 
them, but as a power acting on the stomach, to 
correct the bad properties of other food; as will 
be shewn hereafter. 

Sour fruits, eaten in autumn, have been ac- 
cused of bringing on violent continued purgings, 
but without any reason. Indeed some sour 
|P_27
fruits will act as purgatives, and the purging shall 
continue; but this must be owing to the state of 
the body, predisposed to purge; for we find, 
that when fruit purges a body, not predisposed 
to purge, no purging continues when the fruit 
is evacuated. In hot summers, when there is 
great plenty of fruit, dysenteries or continued 
purgings are apt to be general, but this is owing 
to the heat of the weather; for persons will be 
afflicted with dysentery, who eat no fruit. In 
short, in such disorders they counteract; and 
those who eat no fruit, are more apt to 
purge, than such as do. Nay, if large quantities 
of fruit should purge, it will not prove dan- 
gerous; it will act no further than as a dose of 
physic. 

There is one species of fruit very different 
from others, namely, cucumbers, melons, &c.
This fruit, either ripe or unripe, contains a great 
deal of mucilage of a particular kind. Break 
them in two, and you will see much of this muci- 
lage ooze out, so as to glue the two parts firmly 
together. Now, this mucilage prevents the other 
parts of the fruit from fermenting, consequently 
causes indigestion, and brings on in the stomach 
a sense of weight, coldness and sickness; for 
though the substance be soft, it will not readily 
|P_28
dissolve. Cucumbers have been known to lie in 
the stomach three days undigested. We are 
led to use them in the summer as cooling food; 
but they are very injurious to the constitution. 
Besides, they contain a quantity of essential oil, 
(which no vegetable substance does) very disa- 
greeable and hurtful to a weak stomach. If they 
are eaten, therefore, it should be with oil and 
pepper, as correctors of their noxious qualities. 
There is a natural bitter in the skin of the cucum- 
ber, which will serve to digest it, if eaten at the 
same time; but this should only be done when 
the cucumber is young, as it afterwards becomes 
injurious to the stomach. 

Having now treated of the properties and 
wholesomeness of vegetable food, we will 
proceed next to animal; and herein we will first consider 
the propriety of using it. 

It has been given as a reason for not using 
animal food, that it was inconsistent with 
humanity. There can, however, be little diffi- 
culty about this, as there are a great num- 
ber of animals that must live on animal food 
wholly, not being able to eat vegetable. It was 
therefore the intention of the Creator, that ani- 
mal food should be eaten. All that is to be con- 
|P_29
sidered, is, whether man is that animal that 
is destined to live upon animal food. The 
Pythagorean doctrine, heightened by supersti- 
tion, has been a means of making numbers of 
people, viz. the whole of the Gentoos, the whole 
empire of Hindostan, and part of China, larger 
together than France, Spain, Italy, and Eng- 
land, wholly abstain from meat. 

It is also to be observed, that the race of parti- 
cular animals is seldom diminished, tho' we destroy 
many of them; the increase of animals being 
much below what might be propagated. One 
man and one woman might, in the nature of 
things, have thirty children; but, in general, 
they may have ten, five boys and five girls. At 
every generation, then, were men propagated to 
the utmost, they could increase in number 
five times; so that, in a very short time, a nation 
must become exceedingly populous. It is the 
difficulty of procuring food, and obtaining the 
necessaries and conveniencies of life that prevents 
this propagation: A proof of the superintendency 
of Providence. Now as it is in man, so is it in 
other animals. It is possible for a sow to bring 
forth ten pigs at every litter, so that were this 
species propagated to the utmost, in a few 
years, the increase would be prodigious. Ten- 
|P_30
fold in one year, and a thousand-fold in ten years. 
Here also the difficulty of obtaining food prevents 
increase; there being always a desire of propa- 
gation between the sexes. 

This is more evident, if we observe the great 
increase of rats in a granary, where they multiply, 
in proportion to the quantity of corn there 
lodged. 

These things considered, we may readily see, 
that in destroying annually a number of any one 
species of animals, so far from diminishing that 
species, we shall rather increase it, as in such a 
case, we shall be anxious so to do. So, by sending 
a number of inhabitants out of a country, we do 
not depopulate that country, unless we exceed a 
certain bounds. Animals then living on one 
another, is the means of increasing animal life 
considerably: there can be, therefore, no reason 
why animal-food should not be used. Let us 
examine, then, whether this food be proper. 

Most quadrupeds are confined naturally to par- 
ticular climates, and most of them, in their or- 
gans of digestion, fitted for animal and vegetable 
food. Some have it only in their power to obtain 
animal food, and some only vegetable; but man 
|P_31
seems destined to cover the whole face of the 
earth; no climate being yet discovered unfit for 
his residence. His powers are fitted for animal 
as well as vegetable food, and his digestive organs 
equally adapted to both. And, if we consider 
mankind in their most simple state, where they 
are most guided by instinct, we find as many 
shepherds and hunters living on animal food, as 
husbandmen living on vegetable. 

Animals destined to live on animal food, have 
their intestinal canal shorter than such as live on 
vegetable food. That is (in order to be under- 
stood by such as are unacquainted with physical 
terms) have less length of gut. And as longer 
retention in the stomach is required for animal 
food than for vegetable, and man's digestive or- 
gans are adapted to this, it appears that man is 
destined to live equally on animal food, as vege- 
table. Further, the teeth of man are a medium 
between the teeth of carnivorous animals, and 
and those of grameniverous. Besides, his health 
is better supported by a mixture of the two, than 
it would be, was he to live upon one. The Lap- 
landers, indeed, live nine months on rein-deer, 
and the Greenlander lives upon fish: it is possi- 
ble, therefore, to live on animal food alone. How- 
|P_32
ever, were we obliged to live upon one sort wholly, 
it would be best to live on vegetable; for animal 
food alone, would frequently bring on diseases; a 
mixture therefore is best. In short, man is endowed 
with greater variety in his system and constitution 
than any other animal, he being destined to live 
in all parts of the earth. 

Let us next consider the differences between 
animal and vegetable food. Now, as we said 
before, fermentation which takes place in food, 
within the stomach, is different from that which 
takes place out of it. If the stomach then 
be weak, so as not to bring on fermentation na- 
tural to it, the fermentation that would take 
place out of the stomach, will take place in it. 
Hence it is, that in weak stomachs, food turns 
acid and putrid. This first occasions heart-burn, 
a sure sign of a weak stomach; and if the putre- 
faction should run to a great height, the conse- 
quence is sickness, vomiting, purging, and some- 
times fever. And should a small quantity of such 
putrified matter, as was observed before, be ab- 
sorbed by the vessels, in its passage through the 
body, it will depress the strength, and, without 
a timely remedy, cause a general putrefaction of 
the fluids through the whole system. Thus the 
|P_33
mischiefs of animal food, putrifying, are greater 
and more dangerous than such as arise from 
undigested vegetable food, as this turns sour 
only. 

Another difference is this. Vegetable food, 
during digestion, stimulates less. When the sto- 
mach is distended with food, the whole system, 
during digestion, is more or less stimulated; but 
more so with animal food than with vegetable. 
Now, the more our system is stimulated, the 
quicker is the circulation and the more feverish we 
become. 

As animal food fills the blood-vessels fuller 
with blood than vegetable, it naturally encreases 
our muscular strength; but then it loads the brain, 
(every part being fuller of blood in proportion) 
and occasions heaviness and stupor: whereas 
vegetable food, from not loading the system with 
blood, rather diminishes muscular strength, but 
enables the mind to act with greater force. Ve- 
getable food, therefore, is fitter to give clearness 
of ideas; and animal food is best adapted to 
labour. A physical demonstration might be 
given of this; but to a general reader it would be 
idle. However, habit has a great effect in this 
case. Man accustomed to labour, and to eat ve- 
|P_34
getable food, (as are the porters of Constantino- 
ple) may be capable of great muscular exertion; 
but this does not prove the power of vegetable 
food over animal. So a horse fed on grass, and 
kept in exercise, will be better able to work, than 
one fed on hay and corn for twelve months toge- 
ther, without exercise: but this neither is any 
proof. 

The next thing to be considered is, a maxim 
generally laid down by all authors on this subject; 
namely, that simplicity of food is more conducive 
to health than a variety: but experience teaches 
us the contrary. Milk, as we before observed, 
which affords great nourishment, is a mixture of 
three nutritive substances; and we may venture to 
affirm, that if an alderman was to eat as much of 
beef-stakes, as he does of other things at a 
city-feast, he would bring on sickness and vomit- 
ing. Put variety of grain before a hen, and she 
will eat of that she likes best; but before the 
day is out, she will eat of the other. Instinct 
leads her to this, as most conducive to her 
health. 

Almost all food contains oil, and the stomach 
can better bear a variety of this oil, than a quan- 
tity of one particular sort. Besides, animal and 
|P_35
vegetable food correct the ill qualities of one 
another. Animal food corrects the flatulency of 
vegetable; and vegetable food, the putrescency 
of animal. Indeed, a mixture of some foods 
will disagree, as fish and milk; fish coagulating 
milk too firmly for easy digestion; but there is 
no rule without an exception. 

The mischief of variety of food is its tempt- 
ing us to eat too much: but if we avoid 
eating too much, variety is best, provided that 
variety consists of things easy of digestion. 

But the most singular and curious circumstance, 
with respect to food, is this. The powers of di- 
gestion are adapted to the want of blood in the 
blood-vessels. If they are not sufficiently full for the 
purposes of health, the appetite is great, digestion 
is strong, and much blood is formed; but if they 
are full enough, there is no appetite, digestion is 
weak, and no blood is formed. For, let a man 
swallow as much food as he can, without an appe- 
tite, though he is able to digest it, it will not be 
converted into blood. So watchful is Nature of 
her health. 

Eating too much food, in general, for a length 
of time does harm. It weakens the organs of 
|P_36
digestion, debilitates the constitution, and wears 
it out. Hence arise gout, apoplexy, and all the 
diseases attendant on old age. In disease, men, 
eating too much, never escape with impunity. 

We shall now proceed to the properties of the 
different kinds of animal food. There are two 
substances in meat capable of nourishing; muci- 
lage and expressed oil. 

Animal mucilages differ much from one ano- 
ther; but considered as food, they do not. The 
only difference of consequence is, as far as de- 
pends upon their texture. When the fibres of 
an animal are large, they are not easily dissolved; 
of course, they are difficult of digestion. Beef is, 
on this account, more difficult of digestion than 
mutton; the fibres of the one being larger than 
those of the other. On the same principles, when 
food is coagulated firmly, it is also difficult of 
digestion. The firmer the coagulum, that is, the 
less fluid it contains, the more difficult it will be 
of digestion. Animal food, whose fibres have 
but little fluid between them; that is, dry meat, 
is more indigestible than moist. Thus, lean ani- 
mals are harder of digestion than fat ones; and 
the lean part of fat meat is easier of digestion than 
the lean part of lean meat. By the same way of 
|P_37
reasoning, meat roasted or boiled a great deal, is 
not so digestible as when roasted or boiled but 
little; for when the fluids are expelled by heat, 
the fibres approach closer to each other, and, 
when in the stomach, will not admit the juice of 
the stomach so readily to penetrate it, conse- 
quently, fermentation will not take place so 
soon. 

The readier animal food dissolves in water, the 
more digestible it is. A flounder boiled in an 
equal quantity of water, is sooner dissolved than 
mutton; therefore flounders are easier of digestion 
than mutton; the juice of the stomach being 
little else than warm water, helped by fermenta- 
tion. But fish, though readily soluble in water, 
has a property in it that renders it indigestible, 
which is a certain glariness or viscidity; but when 
the stomach is strong enough to digest it, it is 
easier of digestion than either flesh or fowl. 

Meat apt to putrify, is sooner digested, than 
such as is not. Pidgeon will putrify sooner than 
duck: of course, pidgeon is easier of digestion 
than duck. Now, as the fluids in animal food 
tend to hasten putrefaction; by depriving it of 
those fluids, by long boiling or roasting, we ren- 
der it harder of digestion. By boiling meat till 
|P_38
it be free from gravy, we can keep it from cor- 
rupting for six months. A further proof that 
meat much dressed, is less wholesome than such 
as is little dressed. Such meats, however, as 
putrify the soonest, are injurious to weak sto- 
machs, as this putrescency stimulates during the 
time of digestion. 

It is with a view of rendering meat easier of 
digestion, that we keep it some time after it is 
killed before we eat it. As soon as meat is 
killed, it begins to putrify; and putrefaction is 
the most effectual breaker down of animal sub- 
stance, and a great assistant to solution, which is 
the immediate forerunner of digestion. But the 
length of time meat ought to be kept, should 
be proportioned to its tendency to putrify, 
and the heat of the weather. It is eaten, 
for example, much sooner in summer than in 
winter. 

But the property in which meats differ most, is 
their viscidity or glariness. Such as are viscid, 
adhere to the sides of the stomach, and stimulate 
much. In quadrupeds, young animals have this 
property, such as veal, pig, fawn, and lamb; but 
in a smaller degree. Young birds have the same 
bad property, and all fish, in a great degree; par- 
|P_39
ticularly shell-fish, which on this account, have 
often proved poisonous and fatal to many. When 
these have proved fatal, it has been ascribed to the 
copper vessel in which they were dressed; but 
a little observation would shew the contrary. 
When persons lose their lives by the ill effects of 
copper; sickness, vomiting, and purging take 
place: but when poisoned by shell-fish, the head 
swells, the breast is oppressed, and stupor is the 
consequence. 

Animal food dissolved in water, forms a gela- 
tinous solution or jelly, which is of a viscid na- 
ture, and in some degree, produces the same ef- 
fect as viscid foods. It stimulates, but does not 
yield much nourishment. At the same time, it is 
difficult of digestion, and of course, improper to 
be taken by diseased or weak stomachs. Jellies, 
though long prescribed to strengthen the system 
after a fever, have lately been found prejudicial, 
and the use of them are therefore exploded. 

Essential oils, inherent in some animal food, 
render it difficult of digestion. The essential oils 
of vegetables are often agreeable to the stomach, 
and stimulate it so as to forward digestion; but 
those of animal food, though agreeable to the 
taste, are injurious. Pork, geese, ducks, salmon, 
|P_40
&c. contain much of this oil; and are of course, 
high-flavoured. They may be agreeable to the 
taste of strong stomachs; but if eaten in too great 
quantities, or if the stomach be too weak, they 
will disagree with it, and have the same effect 
with viscidity; that is, they will stimulate the 
system, and sometimes bring on a fever. Animal 
food then, that is viscid, that contains much es- 
sential oil, or will not readily dissolve, is apt to re- 
main too long in the stomach, and do harm. But 
that which will readily putrify and dissolve, is re- 
tained but a short time in the stomach; and is, 
of course, easily digested: for digestion depending 
on the contraction of the stomach, if the stomach 
be so disordered as to lose any of its contractile 
powers, either by the oil or viscidity of the food, 
the food will be retained too long in it. 

We seldom use animal food without some pre- 
paration. Those preparations are either exposing 
them to such heat as will coagulate the solids and 
fluids, or after such coagulation, dissolving them 
in water. By coagulating any animal solid, we 
take off that viscidity which almost all have when 
raw, and the stomach consequently bears it much 
better. Thus we can digest twice the quantity of 
oysters roasted, that we can raw. 

|P_41
In coagulating animal substances by heat, we 
often expose them to great fire, as in roasting; 
which coagulates the outer parts, forming a crust, 
as it were, round the inward fluids, and retaining 
them. This gives them an empyreumatic oil, 
offensive to the smell. In boiling, we avoid 
this empyreumatic, but then we take out the 
essential oil. In frying, we retain both oils, 
so that fried meat is more difficult of digestion 
than either roasted or boiled. 

Chicken, partridges, veal, &c. are more whole- 
some when roasted, than boiled. Mutton, beef, 
pork, &c. are easier digested when boiled. 

All quadrupeds that feed on vegetables are 
used, somewhere or other, for food; such as the 
ox, the sheep, the deer, the goat, the hog, the 
hare, &c. In some countries, horses are eaten; 
in others, squirrels, rats, and mice. Animals 
that live on animal food alone, are seldom eaten; 
as the lion, the cat, the tyger, &c. Few make 
use of dogs, or any animals of that class; those 
who do, feed them on vegetables. Such animals 
as live on animal food alone, being, on account of 
their putrescency, and of the great quantity of 
essential oil contained in them, both disagreeable 
o the stomach, and difficult of digestion. 

|P_42
Birds also are made use of for food, except birds 
of prey; that is, such as live on other birds; 
and we except them for the same reasons that we 
do beasts of prey. We prefer such as live on 
insects to such as feed on fish, because they are 
tenderer; such as live on fish acquiring a tough- 
ness. 

All fish have been eaten, and all shell-fish 
which have sufficient muscular flesh to render them 
worth eating. 

Those birds that are not very putrescent in 
their nature, and are most free from essential oil, 
are the easiest of digestion. As for example, 
moor-game, poultry, partridges, pheasants, &c; 
and of quadrupeds, the deer, the sheep, the ox, 
&c. The older animals of this class are easier of 
digestion than the young ones. Mutton, for in- 
stance, is easier of digestion than lamb; beef 
than veal; venison than fawn; and that on ac- 
count of the viscidity of the flesh of young ani- 
mals. Fish is more difficult of digestion than 
flesh, especially in weak stomachs. And of fish, 
those that have least flavour, that is, such as have 
least essential oil in them, are white, and have some 
degree of firmness, will digest much sooner than 
|P_43
such as are of stronger flavour. Flounders, whitings, 
&c. are easier of digestion than salmon, foals, &c.

But still, quadrupeds afford more nourishment 
than either birds or fish; and those animals of 
stronger flavour, viz. pork, geese, duck, salmon, 
&c. afford more nourishment and are fitter for 
such as labour or take a great deal of exercise, 
than animals of the same class, that are easier of 
digestion. 

Now, to correct the ill qualities of the different 
kind of food, and to assist digestion, we make 
use of a variety of things, such as are called the 
decoraments of the table; which in themselves af- 
ford little or no nourishment. These are spices, 
acids, salt, oil, and sugar. 

Spices act as stimulants. It must here be re- 
collected, that digestion depends upon the con- 
tracting power of the stomach, it being that 
which prevents the food turning acid or putrid. 
Now, if the action of the stomach be weak, that 
is, not sufficiently powerful, food will not be pro- 
perly digested. 

Spices then are powerful stimulants, that is, 
they encrease the action of the stomach, and are 
|P_44
agreeable to it; such as the aromatic spices, viz.
cinnamon, cloves, nutmeg, mace, pimento, &c.
which are the produce of the warmer climates; 
but they are, at the same time, inflammatory, 
tending to encrease the circulation of the blood, 
and bring on fever. We use mustard, onions, 
horse-raddish, &c. for the same purpose. These 
stimulate universally, but are not inflammatory; 
because their powers do not continue long; where- 
as spices stimulate for a considerable length of 
time. Mint, thyme, sage, &c. parsley, fennel, cele- 
ry, &c. are stimulants, but not so powerful as 
mustard, onions, &c. nor are they inflammatory. 

Spices seem adapted to different climates, and 
different stomachs. In warm climates, and weak 
stomachs, spices are more wholesome than in 
colder climates, and stronger stomachs. In warm 
climates, the heat of the atmosphere upon the skin 
keeps up constant great circulation there. The 
internal blood-vessels are, of course, empty, and 
the interior parts consequently weaker, viz. the 
stomach, &c. It requires therefore more pow- 
erful stimulants to assist digestion, and the natural 
weakness of the stomach prevents their inflamma- 
tory power. Hence, we may observe, that spices 
are more wholesome in summer than in winter; 
and that persons of luxurious life, who live with- 
out exercise, whose stomachs are, of course, weak- 
|P_45
ened and impaired, may eat them with greater 
safety than such as are strong, laborious, and 
healthful. 

In colder climates, and with temperate livers, 
the stomach is naturally strong: very little stimu- 
lants, therefore, are required. Inflammatory ones 
must, of course, do mischief. If any, then, are 
used, it should be those of the second class, viz.
mustard, onions, horse-raddish, &c. Nature seems 
here to have provided for herself; for we find 
spices only in warm countries: none grow natu- 
rally in cold ones. But the second class are prin- 
cipally natives of cold climates. If any of the 
spices are made to grow in a cold climate, part of 
their stimulus is lost; and if the second class of 
stimulants are made to grow in a warm climate, 
it is the same. Pepper grown here loses its 
stimulating powers; and an onion grown in Spain, 
is not so strong as one, the produce of England. 
They seem destined then for particular climates. 
In hot countries, therefore, spices are necessary; 
but in colder ones, they are prejudicial. If the 
stomach then be weak, which, in time, will disor- 
der the system, it may be proper, to use spices, 
but, if not weak, on no account to use them; for 
they have sometimes done so much harm, as to- 
tally to destroy digestion, unless great quantities 
have been constantly thrown in with the food. 

|P_46
A little spice, used with the more flatulent vege- 
tables, is frequently serviceable, as by encreasing 
the action of the stomach, it brings on digestion, 
before that fermentation takes place, which in 
weak stomachs, would be attended with extrica- 
tion of air. Thus, we use pepper with greens, 
peas, &c. to correct what is called their windi- 
ness; and we use pepper with broth, to coagulate 
the fluid more firmly, and correct its putre- 
scency, both which are brought about by the action 
of the stomach. Lemon-juice, barley, &c. is 
often added to both, for the same purpose. So 
we eat mustard with salted pork and beef, salted 
fish, &c. in order to assist digestion, by encreasing 
the action of the stomach; salted provisions being 
being more difficult of digestion than such as are 
fresh. 

The second class of substances to assist digestion 
are acids. None but the native vegetable acid, 
viz. the juice of sour fruits, is capable of afford- 
ing nourishment; nor would this, if pure; it is 
owing to the mucilage mixed with it, that it 
nourishes. Acids then assist digestion merely. 

Acids produce many effects. In the first 
place, they stimulate the glands of the stomach, 
creating by their stimulus that sensation we call 
|P_47
hunger. Digestion being considerably affected 
by the appetite; if there is no appetite, though 
the stomach be strong, there will be no digestion
We frequently then employ acids, a little before 
meals, to create an appetite. Thus, in hot 
countries, where owing to an encreased circulation 
of the skin, the internal circulation is diminished, 
and, of course, the stomach weakened, the in- 
habitants accustom themselves to the drinking of 
beverage or lemonade before dinner, to encrease 
their appetite. 

Acids also promote secretion of the glands of 
the stomach, so as to supply the food with a 
watery menstruum; that is, fluid proper and 
sufficient to promote fermentation. 

They act also as sedatives or quieters of the 
rest of the system, taking off that stimulus occa- 
sioned by digestion. Hence they are beneficial in 
warm climates, and in weather where the heat 
naturally stimulates the system; and that stimulus 
is liable to be encreased by digestion. Hence, as 
was said before, fruit is exceeding wholesome in 
the summer, and at certain times, if taken in 
moderate quantities. 

Acids tend likewise to coagulate animal solids, 
|P_48
and fluids; and, assisted by the coagulating fluids 
of the stomach, they take off the viscidity of food. 
Thus we use lemon or vinegar with fish, particu- 
larly shell-fish. Indeed, shell-fish should never be 
eaten without some acid; they being, as was be- 
fore observed, in their nature so remarkably viscid, 
and, of course, so prejudicial to the constitution. 
It is for the same reason, that we use acids with 
veal, lamb, and all young animals; namely, to 
correct their viscidity. Of all acids, vinegar, 
provided we attend to its quality, is the safest. 

Acids check also vinous and acetous fermenta- 
tion; that is, such fermentation as should by no 
means take place in the stomach. It is for this 
reason we use them with substances of loose tex- 
ture, that are apt to turn sour in the stomach, and 
become flatulent or windy. Thus we eat vinegar 
with sallad, and greens of all sorts. So, in all weak 
stomachs, where food is apt to turn sour, and 
cause heart-burn, the use of acids has been found 
to correct and take it off. It is on this account, 
that fruit has been introduced after meals. Acids 
then are useful for many purposes in digestion; 
but taken in too great quantities, they are hurt- 
ful, as they will produce a disposition to flatu- 
lency, pain, and weakness, in the stomach and 
|P_49
bowels, which is afterwards cured with dif- 
ficulty. 

The next substance, in general use with food, 
is salt, which affords no kind of nourishment; 
neither will it digest, but passes through the body 
without any change. It is, however, universally 
used where it can be got; nay, all animals prefer 
food that is saltish to such as is not. This gene- 
ral instinct, we should suppose, would not be 
given, but to some purpose; yet it is difficult to say 
of what use salt is, in digestion. It stimulates the 
glands of the stomach, and promotes secretion of 
the watery menstruum; but of what other use it is, 
we know not. 

We often preserve food with salt; and thus 
preserved, it is considerably more difficult of di- 
gestion. The fibres are hardened, they are not 
so readily dissolved, and they go through the 
proper fermentation of the stomach with difficulty. 
Thus it is, that we cannot live so long on salted 
provision as on fresh; for, as was before observed, 
the salt does not penetrate thoroughly into all 
parts of the meat; therefore, when in the sto- 
mach, before fermentation takes place in the outer 
parts, the inner will putrify, and, by infecting the 
fluids of the body, bring on the scurvy, as we see 
|P_50
it does, in persons upon a long voyage. And 
yet salt may be used, in the greatest quantity, 
so as to prevent putrefaction of food, without 
rendering it totally unfit for nourishment. 

Oil is another substance that may be used to 
help digestion, it taking off the viscidity of food. 
Hence it is, that we eat salad, with which oil has 
been mixed, with the meat of young animals, as 
with veal, lamb, &c. and (with some kinds of fish) 
which, from its glariness, tends much to disturb 
digestion. Oil also takes off the disposition in 
loose vegetables to ferment improperly, and thus 
prevents flatulency. It is for this reason, we use 
it with sallads, greens, &c. But oil, in weak 
stomachs disposed to acidity, is apt to produce 
sourness in the stomach, and bring on heart-burn, 
sickness, vomiting, and purging. Why it should 
have these contrary effects, we cannot say; but ex- 
perience shews it to be true. 

Sugar is another assistant of digestion, by pre- 
venting the bad effects of some food, and affords 
considerable nourishment in itself. A diluted so- 
lution ferments more readily than a more cen- 
trated one; that is, the more water you put to 
sugar, provided you exceed not certain bounds, 
the more readily it ferments. Sugar mixed with 
|P_51
a certain quantity of water, presently becomes vi- 
negar. Now, the looser vegetables and fruits, 
such as salad, currants, cherries, &c. contain in 
them a more diluted solution of sugar than the 
firmer vegetables, or the sweeter fruits. It is on 
this account, that we frequently eat sugar with 
them. Another reason why we eat sugar with 
such vegetables, is to take off the acesency and fla- 
tulency which they are apt to run soon into, by 
rendering them more difficult to ferment. Sugar 
also corrects the putrescency of animal food; but 
not so much as vegetables do. For this purpose, 
it was much used in England before kitchen- 
gardens became general. 

It is not above 150 years since greens, and 
other vegetables were imported from Holland, 
(a kitchen-garden being then a great curiosity.) 
Salted meat at that time, was much eaten; 
and the sea-scurvy very general. Persons were 
then accustomed to eat sugared mutton and su- 
gared ham. At present, the custom is not so much 
abolished, but that we eat sweet sauces with 
various kinds of food. 

Sugar has been said to spoil the teeth. This 
observation may, in some cases, be just; as, where 
the teeth may have a more than ordinary degree 
|P_52
of sensibility; or it may, perhaps, by sticking 
about them, and turning acid, corrode them: but 
faults of this kind are oftener imputed to it than 
it deserves. The finer the sugar, the purer and 
less noxious it is. Preserves are far from unwhole- 
some,—and pickles may be considered as spunges 
filled with vinegar. 

Having thus entered into the several properties 
of eatables, let us now proceed to drinks. 


[^1. 
* If new milk is too rich or heavy for a child's stomach, 
let it be diluted or mixed with water; it should never be 
skimmed. 
^]