

[^Sample 1: book - ^]

|P_1[^An ornamental horizontal column. ^]
THE Diseases incidental to the human 
Body are correspondent, to the Num- 
ber of external, and internal Causes which 
are capable of affecting it, and to the Na- 
ture and State of the Animal Structure. 

All those Things which act immediately 
upon the Body, or make Impression on it, 
at a Distance, through the Medium of the 
Senses, the Changes that happen in the 
Atmosphere which surrounds us, and in 
the Air we breathe, constitute the general, 
external Causes that affect Health. 

The principal internal Causes may be 
reckoned Sleep, and the Quantity, Quality, 
and Modification of such Things as are re- 
ceived into the Stomach. 

|P_2
The particular Causes of Diseases depend 
upon the State of the Animal Oeconomy. 

First, then, I shall make some general 
Observations, for the Purpose of Elucida- 
tion, and afterwards consider the Subject, 
as it naturally arises from these three 
Heads. 

The proper Standard of Health is that 
State, in which all the component Parts 
of the Body (as a Machine) are equally firm 
to resist, pliant to yield, and proportionable 
to be regular. This constitutes an Equili- 
brium or proper Ballance. To preserve, or 
restore this Ballance is Health, and every 
considerable Degree of Variation from it, 
is an equal Degree of Disease. 

The human Fabric may be divided into 
two different Systems. The one is the 
System of Vessels or Tubes, which performs 
the Circulation of the Fluids, and is con- 
ducted on plain mechanical Principles: and 
the other is the Nervous System, which 
|P_3
consists of all those Parts that have Sensi- 
bility and Motion, and whose Properties are 
more difficult to explain. 

When these two Systems are happily 
ballanced and proportioned, all the Powers 
and Functions of the Body, as well as of 
the Mind, come nearest to a State of Regu- 
larity and Perfection. 

In all my Researches into the Nature 
and Principles of the human Mind, I must 
confess that I can discern no one single Ope- 
ration of it distinct from, and unconnected 
with the Body. 

That there most certainly is a prime Move- 
ment, general Sensory, or a concentrated 
Power, which is the Origin of all the Fa- 
culties and Offices of the Body, and that 
this Power resides, or begins, within the 
Brain, Anatomical Dissections, and the 
Observations of common Sense unquesion- 
ably demonstrate. To define the Magni- 
tude, Quantity, or Proportion of this 
|P_4
Power, is utterly impossible, and to say that 
it is immaterial, or that it is something 
which has no Parts, is, positively, to say 
that it is Nothing at all. 

This Power is best known, and I think 
most happily described by the common 
Terms, Mind, Life or Soul. Now, al- 
though I profess, and indeed must treat of 
this Power or Mind as an essential and or- 
ganic Part of the human Structure, I am 
ready, at the same Time, to declare (least 
I should mislead the weak or ignorant) that 
this Doctrine ought not, nor, by any Means, 
can be deemed repugnant to the Belief of 
Immortality, or a future State of Existence. 
On the contrary, it places human Nature 
in a rational Light, and will be found to 
obviate and reconcile those Difficulties 
which occur in considering this nice Point. 

For where is the Objection, in Respect 
of Reason or Philosophy, against the Opinion 
that this Power, Soul, Mind, or animating 
Essence of the Body, immutable in its Pro- 
perties, may, at the final Hour, sublime, 
|P_5
as it were, from the Caput-Mortuum, 
that is, soar aloft, and survive the grosser 
Materials, which the Laws of specific 
Gravity fix to the Earth, and the Texture of 
Parts subjects to Separation and Dissolution? 

The first, and leading Feature in the 
Physiognomy of the Mind is a Quality, Ca- 
pability, or inherent Necessity of perceiving 
all Manner of Impressions whatever. 

From this simple Power of Perception, 
first, Similitude or Resemblance of Things, 
then, Memory, Comparison, Reflection, 
Deliberation, and in short, all the regular 
and progressive Operations of the Mind (by 
Means of an intrinsic, or unceasing Move- 
ment) may be easily conceived to proceed. 

The Passions, so called, form another 
Class of Operations, more energetic than 
the former, because in them, the Impres- 
sions are external, immediate, and impetu- 
ous, and the Perceptions, therefore, recipro- 
cally, more vigorous. 

|P_6
Thus, Anger proceeds from violent Agi- 
tations, Fear is produced by such as are 
strong and quick, Joy arises from vivid, 
and Grief from deep Impressions. Hope 
is the Result of soft and agreeable Emo- 
tions. Which Circumstance proves in the 
clearest Manner, that the Enjoyments of 
Life infinitely surpass the Miseries of it, 
since Hope, by being constantly in Exercise, 
becomes habitual, and never leaves the 
Mind, except for very short and almost im- 
perceptible Intervals. This Argument 
yields a good Lesson for Patience and Con- 
tentment in every possible Situation. Love, 
the Mistress of the Mind, differs from all 
the rest. It is closely interwoven with the 
Animal Frame, and draws its Impulse (of 
all others the most irresistible) from Springs 
which act, within, as well as from Objects 
that excite, without. 

Images, which present to the Mind, 
Beauty, Harmony, and Symmetry, produce 
|P_7
pleasing Emotions; those, which convey 
the contrary Qualities, are accompanied 
with painful Sensations. The former of 
these give a free and full Motion to the 
Nervous Power; a short, quick, and con- 
tracted Movement is the Consequence of the 
latter. 

This Observation may be applied with 
more Force and Conviction than all the ela- 
borate and ingenious Arguments that can be 
adduced, (either in Favour, or in Opposition 
to the Doctrine,) in Testimony of the natu- 
ral Ascendency of moral Virtue in the hu- 
man Mind. 

It shews that Beauty, Order, Dignity 
and Happiness are amiable to the Mind of 
Man, and illuminate with congenial Rays 
the elevated Faculties of the Soul; while 
Deformity, Turpitude, Vice, and Misery 
compose the horrid Contrast, that disgraces 
Society, degrades the Mind, and brutalizes 
the Species. 

None of the Mental Affections or Opera- 
tions, as long as they continue to create re- 
|P_8
gular and pleasing Sensations, by any Means, 
injure, but on the contrary, promote Health. 
The Passions or Affections of the Mind, 
therefore, affect Health, and disorder the 
System, in Consequence of, and in Propor- 
tion to the Impetuosity, Pain and Duration 
of the Impressions or Images which actuate, 
or excite them, and in no other Way. 

Anger, Fear, Hatred, Shame, Grief, 
Anxiety, Jealousy, Envy, Pride, Malice 
and Revenge (to which I may add Study) 
possesses each of them, a certain Modifica- 
tion of the characteristic Marks above des- 
cribed; and all of them produce similar 
Effects upon the Animal System, different 
only, in Degree, and in Point of Continua- 
tion. Love, Hope, and Joy must rank 
differently from the other Passions, as their 
Effects are injurious to the System, only 
when they are violent and excessive. 

The Passions of the Mind then, (agree- 
able to the Limitations pointed out) irritate 
the Nervous System, whose Tubes serve 
|P_9
as Conductors from the Brain throughout 
the whole Body, in such a Manner as to 
produce Spasm. Now Spasm is a Motion 
or Oscillation (whether in the vascular 
or muscular Parts, it makes no Difference) 
so extremely quick, in Point of Succession 
or Alternation, that the Intermissions or ln- 
tervals become imperceptible to the Senses. 
This is a seeming Paradox, an Excess, and 
at the same Time, an Interruption of the 
nervous Influence. 

The spasmodic Stimulus or Effort, thus 
produced by the Passions, particularly affects 
the Head, the Lungs, and the Womb. 
Hence Madness, Fainting, Convulsions, 
Hysterics, Asthma, &c. It disorders the 
Stomach and Intestinal Canal, occasioning 
Colics, Flatulency and Indigestion. It 
constringes the Surface of the Skin, and all 
the nervous Parts and Tubes, and thus 
blocks up the Perspiration, and the other 
Secretions; and by these Means, brings 
Fevers, Obstructions, Scurvy, Nervous 
Disorders, Melancholy, &c. 

|P_10
Vehement and sudden Passions, by means 
of Spasm, sometimes retard and check, for 
a Moment, the progressive Motion of the 
Nervous Influence in the Brain itself. 
Hence a general Relaxation, and involun- 
tary Discharge of the Fæces and Urine, a 
Circumstance which happens not seldom, 
in Cases of extreme Fright or Terror. 

The same Law paints the inward Feel- 
ings upon the Muscles of the Face, by 
various Contractions and Relaxations, it 
gives the Pencil its finest Stroke, and fullest 
Expression in the genuine Language of the 
Eyes, and thus confirms the Face the 
Index, or Proxy of the Mind. 

The immoderate or inordinate Passions 
and Agitations of the Mind are most effec- 
tually prevented, by avoiding, as much as 
possible, every exciting Cause, and by cul- 
tivating Habits of Equanimity and Firm- 
ness, which, with every other valuable 
Accomplishment of the Mind, are chiefly 
to be acquired from Education, or, in 
|P_11
other Words, an extensive, and well chosen 
Fund of Ideas. 

This is a Resource which invigorates and 
exalts the Mind, expands the Reason, fur- 
nishes the Aids of Philosophy, and supplies 
an inexhaustible Store of different Thoughts 
and various Imagery. 

But no particular Management, nor any 
Mode of Access or immediate Application 
whatever to the Mind, can counteract the 
Disadvantages of an unhealthy and infirm 
Habit of Body. Pain must necessarily sour 
the Temper, and make it hasty, morose 
and irascible. Relaxation creates Peevish- 
ness and Imbecillity, and renders the Mind 
irritable, timid, too susceptible of every 
Impression, and liable to Misconception; 
and Obstruction, which is generally the 
Companion of Relaxation, adds Gloom, 
Melancholy, Anxiety, and a disordered 
Imagination to the baneful Catalogue. 

On the other Hand, in those Habits or 
Temperatures, in which the Powers and 
|P_12
Functions of the System rise above the Line 
of Mediocrity, or Standard of Health, and 
occasion Irregularity only on that Account, 
the Dispotion of the Mind receives the 
Stamp, and Wears the Colours of Pride, 
Restlessness, Vanity, and Desire. These, 
moreover, have not so sad a Complexion, 
nor so sickly an Aspect as the former, and 
besides are much more easily reduced to 
the proper Equilibrium. 

In all Cases Where the Passions are once 
excited, the best Antidote is the Creation of 
new and opposite Impressions. 

Change the Objects, shift the Scene, 
sooth the Mind, and compose the Body, 
and if Need be, fortify it also. 

These Rules are applicable in sudden 
Emotions, as Anger, Fear, &c. and are 
equally apposite in the Passions of sus- 
pended Love, Grief, Jealousy, &c. where 
there is always some Image permanently re- 
presented, and, in a Manner, settled upon 
|P_13
the Mind. But to conquer the latter will 
require Time and Perservance. 

Grief ought to be amused, and sup- 
planted by Hope, Fidelity and Consolation 
must soften the edge of Jealousy, and Love 
should certainly be gratified, if possible; or 
if that cannot be done, (since as I said be- 
fore, it has a double Claim) it must be al- 
lowed every reasonable Indulgence, and 
should undoubtedly meet Returns of Sym- 
pathy and Tenderness, somewhere. 

None of the Passions will admit of too 
sudden a Check. It is much better to en- 
deavour to supersede them, by Means of 
other, pleasant, Sensations, than to attempt, 
all at once, to stifle and restrain them. 
The Irritation on the Nerves, when once 
excited, must have some Play. It seeks a 
Vent through one Channel or another, and 
if it burst out in a Flood of Tears, a Fit 
of Laughter, or a Flow of Words, it may 
be reckoned a very favourable Termi- 
nation. 

|P_14
The Air is an invisible, elastic Fluid, 
which covers and encloses the Earth, and 
presses upon the Surface of all Bodies, with 
an amazing Weight. 

The Air acts upon the Animal System, 
in various Ways. It stimulates, more or 
less, in all Circumstances; it relaxes or 
braces according to the Degree of Heat, or 
Cold, which pervades it; the Lungs are 
inflated and expanded with a greater or 
lesser Force, adequate to its Elasticity or 
Purity; and it absorbs and receives the 
diaphoretic Vapour from the Surface of the 
Skin as well as of the Lungs, in Proportion 
to its Dryness and Warmth. 

The Air, in general, is most salubrious, 
in high Situations, in those Places where it 
has a free Circulation, and also near the 
Sea-Coast, and in the Vicinity of Rivers, 
and flowing Water. Air, impregnated 
with foreign Particles, overcharged with 
Moisture, or phlogisticated by the Heat of 
the Sun, the Action of Fire, by sulphure- 
|P_15
ous Vapours, the Breath of Animals, and 
suchlike, is most unwholesome. 

In Asthmas, Consumptions, and Nervous 
Complaints, the Temperature of the Air is 
a material Consideration, and of great Im- 
portance. A light, dry, and warm Air is 
best for weak, and diseased Lungs, and a 
dry and cold, or temperate Air is fittest for 
relaxed, and nervous People. 

The Benefit of Change of Air is known 
to every Body, and many People find, by 
Experience, that a Change even to a more 
indifferent Air is sometimes attended with 
Advantage. The Reason of which is ma- 
nifest from what has been already said con- 
cerning the Qualities and Effects of Air. 
The Changes of Air ought not, in any 
Case, to be too sudden, or too much in the 
extreme; the more gradual they are, the 
less Danger is incurred. 

In all Fevers, but especially those of the 
putrid Kind, Ventilation, or the Admission 
|P_16
of fresh Air is highly necessary. In putrid 
Fevers, the Patient should be removed, and 
the Apartments well washed with Plenty 
of warm Water, and dryed with a quick 
and strong Fire, keeping the Windows 
open, at the same Time. This is a very 
safe and effectual Method of purifying noxi- 
ous Air. 

In the advanced, as well as in the earlier 
Stages of phthisical and consumptive Dis- 
eases, it cannot be improper, after other 
Means have failed, to try a Sea Voyage and 
a warmer Climate. 

The Reaching and Vomiting occasioned 
by Sea sickness, which has been generally 
accounted hazardous, ought not, by any 
Means, to intimidate. If the Disease be 
seated in the glandular Parts of the Lungs, 
if it be of the scrophulous Kind, or of an 
hydropic Nature, or if a general Infarction, 
or local Plenitude of the Lungs give Rise to 
it, (and thus circumstanced indeed from 
one or more of these Causes, the Disease is 
|P_17
most frequently to be met with) in either 
of these Cases, I say, Sea Sickness and 
Vomiting must be undeniably useful. If 
even a Suppuration or Abcess be forming, 
or already formed, the Case is then so ex- 
ceedingly dangerous, that there still remain 
more Chances in Favour of, than against 
the Patient. Besides there is a peculiar 
Kind of Relaxation prevailing in the System 
from the vertiginous Nature of that Sick- 
ness, so that the Action of Vomiting is per- 
formed with less Danger of rupturing any 
'Vessels, and the Ejections from the Sto- 
mach are more abundant than in Vomiting 
produced from any other Cause. 

It may likewise deserve Notice, in this 
Place, that aged People, who may happen 
to be more solicitous to prolong their 
Existence, than concerned in what Lati- 
tude their Ashes are to rest, certainly have 
it in their Power, cœteris paribus, to add 
a few Years to the Period of their natural 
Lives, by removing in the Decline of Life, 
to a hot, tropical Climate. 

|P_18
The Necessities of Nature, and the gene- 
ral Order of Things demand Action in the 
human Species; and the Mechanism of the 
Body plainly shews that it is not only well 
calculated for that Purpose, but also de- 
monstrates that Exercise is even indispen- 
sibly requisite to preserve Regularity in the 
Wheels of Motion, and to fit them for the 
due Performance of their several Offices. 

Exercise is like a Main Spring to the 
Machinery. It promotes the Digestion, 
prepares the Blood for its various Destina- 
tions, distributes it through all the Chan- 
nels of Circulation, throws off the imper- 
fect and offensive Parts of the Fluids, braces 
the Nerves, gives a firm Tone to the Solids, 
and carries an even Flow of Spirits through- 
out the whole System. 

Exercise is hurtful immediately after a 
full Meal, and in the Morning, when 
the Stomach is quite empty, much Ex- 
ercise is injurious. 

Frequent Walking relieves the Head, 
abates Rheumatic Pains, keeps the Bowels 
|P_19
open, is favourable to all the descend- 
ing Evacuations, and has a Tendency to 
prevent the Gout: It contributes to ge- 
neral Health, and by increasing the Cir- 
culation and Secretion in the Legs and 
Feet, (since the Extremities are the ori- 
ginal Seat of the Gout) it may perhaps 
hinder the Formation and Assimilation of 
those morbid Particles, which are found 
to exist, in a concreted State, in a fixed 
or settled Gout. 

Riding on Horse-back is an excellent 
Exercise, and essentially beneficial in ob- 
structed and nervous Habits, and in all 
Affections of the Lungs: But when the 
Nerves or Bowels are very weak, the best 
Substitute is riding in an open Carriage. 

Those who labour under Obstructions and 
Nervous Disorders, should try the Effects of 
some mechanical or domestic Work, and 
particularly such as requires Flexion of the 
Body, as that Attitude tends, in some Mea- 
sure, to give Motion to the stagnant Fluids, 
in the Viscera. But when this is the cus- 
|P_20
tomary Posture in People's common Occu- 
pation, an Alteration in that Case is equally 
necessary, as Obstructions and other Com- 
plaints, may arise from, and be much ag- 
gravated by daily Contortion, or stooping. 

Ploughing, and gardening are also very be- 
neficial Exercises for those who are in a ca- 
chectic, nervous, or valitudinary State, as 
there can be no Doubt but the fresh opened 
Bosom of the prolific Earth must very 
copiously diffuse salubrious Exhalations. 

Moderate Dancing, occasionally, is a 
valuable Kind of Exercise. To the Powers 
of Music, and elevated Festivity, it unites 
the Charms of refined Sociability and At- 
traction, and inspires an Animation which 
moves the System in a more pleasing and 
effectual Manner, and with happier Ef- 
fects than the other common Exercises 
can boast. 

There are two prevailing Errors, in 
Regard of Exercise, which I must re- 
|P_21
mark. People of relaxed, delicate and ner- 
vous Habits, who should always avoid too 
much Action, at one Time, often hurt 
themselves by over Exertion, because they 
judge it adviseable to take Plenty of Ex- 
ercise. There are others, again, who, be- 
ing confined within Doors, and leading a 
sedentary Life, think to compensate for the 
Want of regular Exercise, by a hard Ride, 
or Walk, once a Week. But this is a mis- 
taken Notion. The Nerves of such People, 
unaccustomed to bear so great a Degree of 
Agitation, are overstrained and relaxed by it, 
while the Circulation of their Fluids, which 
is, in general, very slow and languid, is 
thrown into Disorder, from the same Cause, 
and thus a Foundation is laid for those very 
Complaints which it was meant to prevent. 

Hard Labour, and constant Exertion 
evaporates the Nervous Power, distends 
and relaxes the Nerves and Vessels, (unless 
when Labour is habitual, and then indeed it 
|P_22
has a contrary Effect upon the Solids,) throws 
off the nutritious Part of the Blood, and 
thereby wastes and weakens the System. 

In all Cases whatever, let this be an inva- 
riable Rule, that real Weariness and Fa- 
tigue should mark the precise Limits of 
every Species of Exercise and Labour. 

Cleanliness is accompanied with as much 
Utility as Comfort, and should therefore be 
practised, as far as Circumstances will ad- 
mit, by every one. It is a Matter of no 
small Importance to keep the Skin clear 
and clean: both because it is the most 
copious excretory Passage, of the whole 
Body, for the superfluous Diathesis of the 
Blood, and also on Account of its being a 
fine, sensible, nervous Expansion, holding 
a high Degree of Sympathy, with all the 
principal Organs of the System. Hence 
the Skin is the principal Drain whereby the 
Circulation maintains an equal Distribu- 
tion, and the Nervous System preserves its 
Equilibrium. 

|P_23
The Feet should be particularly attended 
to. The bathing of them in warm Wa- 
ter helps to relieve the Head-ach, all Sorts 
of Colics, and nephritic Pains, and is ser- 
viceable in Fevers, and recent Colds. 

As to Clothes, it is always better, espe- 
cially in this Climate, to wear too many 
than too few. Emaciated People recover- 
ing from Illness should have Clothes made 
to fit close. These would help to brace and 
restore them, whereas their old loose 
Clothes tend to keep them relaxed, and, 
at the same Time admit too much Air. 

It is really extraordinary, that any Per- 
son, (yet one may meet such every Day) 
either from Vanity or Ignorance, should 
fall into a Custom so repugnant to common 
Sense, and his own private Feelings, as 
that of girding the Neck till the Eyes start, 
or of wearing Apparel so very tight and 
fashionable, that he can neither bend, 
walk, breathe, nor speak. 

Heat relaxes the Nerves and Solids, and 
rarifies and volatilizes the Fluids, it also 
|P_24
generates Bile, and prepares the Body for 
Fluxes, intermittent, putrid, and epidemic 
Fevers. 

Those, who are much exposed to strong 
Fires, or to intense Heat of any Kind, 
should wear coarse Linnen, or Cotton next 
the Skin, should shift often, and wash the 
Face and Hands with cold Water, and a 
little common Salt dissolved in it, twice a 
Day. 

In the Heat of Summer, a moderate 
Portion of Wine, or Spirits, is quite ne- 
cessary, both to supply the Consumption 
occasioned by the Increase of Perspiration, 
and to recruit the exhausted Strength, and 
also to sharpen the greater Quantities of di- 
luting Liquors, which Thirst naturally re- 
quires. Therefore, one Way with another, 
there ought to be consumed nearly as much 
strong Liquor, in the Summer as in the 
Winter Season. 

Cold gives Tension or Firmness to the 
Fibres, condenses the Fluids, compacts the 
|P_25
Texture of the Blood, and predisposes to 
inflammatory Diseases. 

Warm Clothes, Motion, and sufficient 
Nourishment are the most proper and effec- 
tual Preservatives against excessive Cold: 
And nothing is more preposterous, or more 
dangerous than the Use of too much spi- 
rituous Liquors in cold, severe Weather. 

There is hardly any thing more common 
than to hear People express their Surprize 
at having got Cold, because they are alto- 
gether at a Loss to account for the Cause 
of it. They are not ignorant that damp 
Air, wet Clothes, the drinking cold Li- 
quors when the Body is very hot, or too 
warm Liquors when it is cold, and such 
like, are the chief Causes; but do not con- 
sider that all sudden Transitions from one 
Temperature, and one Extreme to another, 
are equally conducive to the same Effect, 
though the Circumstances of it may not be 
so obvious to them. 

|P_26
Colds bring on Fevers, Inflammations 
of the Throat and Lungs, Pleurisies, Con- 
sumptions, Rheumatisms, Colics, Dia- 
rrhœas, Piles, Palsy, &c. and are often 
so serious in their Consequences, that no 
Body should venture to trifle with Colds, 
even in a slight Degree. 

In severe, recent Colds that affect the 
Breast, Bleeding should be almost invari- 
ably resorted to, and the Perspiration re- 
stored by every Means, except such as are 
of too heating a Nature: In Colds which 
attack the Head, the Regimen ought not 
be too low, least the Complaint should 
descend upon the Lungs. 

To Wear soft Flannel next the Skin can- 
not be too strongly recommended to those 
who labour under any Affection of the 
Lungs, or Weakness of the Bowels. The 
same Expedient will be found serviceable 
in the Rheumatism, and in all scorbutic, 
dropsical, hypocondriac and melancholic 
Complaints. 

|P_27
In each of the above Cases, strong 
Friction upon the Skin, especially the Re- 
gion of the Stomach and Bowels, and along 
the Spine, may be employed with consider- 
able Effect. 

The Custom of Sea-Bathing, and of 
drinking the Mineral Waters, on every 
Occasion, derives more Support, I doubt, 
from the powerful Sanction of Fafhion, 
than from any decided Testimony of their 
being always salutary and efficacious. 

This much I may venture to say, that 
they should be either seldom recurred to, 
or administered with much Discretion. 
Many of the Mineral Waters are impreg- 
nated with very active Ingredients, and by 
too frequent Use, impair, and wear out the 
Constitution; and Cold-Bathing is inimi- 
cal to the Lungs, and in many Instances, 
has paved the Way for bilious Complaints, 
and Obstructions of the Viscera. 

To dip regularly in cold Water, in In- 
fancy, is highly proper. It checks redun- 
|P_28
dant Growth, strengthens the soft Fibres, 
and confirms the Stamina. 

Sound Sleep, continued for seven or eight 
Hours, is, in general, quite sufficient for 
the Purpose of Restoration, yet female, and 
delicate Constitutions require rather more. 

Too much Sleep weakens the Nerves, 
renders the Temper peevish, and predisposes 
to Apoplexy and Palsy, it likewise creates a 
lethargic and indolent Disposition, disqua- 
lifies for Action, and blunts the Energy 
both of the intellectual and corporeal Facul- 
ties. On the other Hand, nothing can be 
more pernicious than the Loss of Sleep, 
and Want of due Rest. Watching, by 
exciting an artificial Fever, and by stimu- 
lating the nervous System, when its Powers 
are already exhausted, effectually wastes the 
Strength, debilitates the Body, and lays it 
open to every Attack, especially to nervous 
and phrenitic Fevers. 

|P_20
The Duration of Sleep must be propor- 
tioned rather to the Nature of the Consti- 
tution, than to the Degree of Exercise, or 
Labour. In lax and tender Habits, the 
natural Motion and Attrition in the 
System, exhaust and dissipate the vital 
Strength much sooner than in those Con- 
stitutions which are hardy and robust; con- 
sequently, the former require longer Sleep, 
to repair the Waste and Consumption, than 
what is necessary for the latter. Besides, 
in those who have much Exercise, or La- 
bour, the Powers of Circulation being 
more complete, and the Sleep more mature, 
the Business of Nature is sooner performed. 

A Life of Labour, and constant Action 
is commonly accompanied with Vigour, 
and good Spirits; but it must be consider- 
ed, that, from the same Cause, the Fibres 
grow rigid, and the fine Tubes become 
impervious and unfit for Motion and Cir- 
culation, in a shorter Space of Time; hence 
the Period of Existence is shortened, and 
yet the same Existence, deprived of the sa- 
|P_30
lutary Effects of continued Exercise, might 
have been prematurely terminated, by the 
Invasion of some Disease generated from 
Ease, Indolence, or Retirement. 

Study, or intense Thought of any Kind, 
especially if fixed on some individual and 
interesting Object, very speedily consumes 
the Nervous Power, within the Brain, 
(while the rest of the System is destitute of 
its Influence) and therefore requires as 
long, and indeed longer Sleep to recruit the 
Strength and replenish the Spirits, than 
hard Labour does. 

I have noticed that Animals of the op- 
posite Gender thrive better when they rest 
or sleep near each other, than those of the 
same Gender do. I shaIl not make any 
Application, but only say, that, whatever 
that Circumstance may be owing to, it is 
surely better to sleep alone than with an 
unhealthy and disagreeable Companion. 

|P_31
Heavy Suppers, much Reading, Study, 
or any considerable Agitation, or Applica- 
tion of Mind, near the Hour of going to 
Bed, all tend to prevent sound Sleep, and 
to occasion Dreams. The drinking of Tea, 
Coffee, or any other thin, weak Liquor 
will also retard Sleep. 

Sound Sleep, properly speaking, is that 
State of perfect Quiet in the Mind, which 
does not admit, or rather is not accom- 
panied with any Perception whatever. 

Dreams, therefore, may be termed a 
Kind of half Sleep, and may be occasion- 
ed by any Irritation that excites the smallest 
Degree of Motion in the System, beyond 
that Point of Tranquillity which constitutes 
real or sound Sleep. If there be any such 
Thing as preternatural Dreams, I confess 
myself entirely unable to account for them. 

Fulness and Flatulency in the Stomach, 
together with lying on the Back, in Per- 
sons of relaxed Nerves, are the Causes of 
|P_32
the Night-Mare. Those, accordingly, 
who are troubled with this unwelcome 
Guest, should strengthen the Nervous Sys- 
tem, lie upon the Side, and drink a Glass 
of Wine, or strong Spirits and Water, 
going to Bed. 

An Appetite for Food or Nourishment 
is an almost infallible Sign of Health: but 
if the Digestion be not, at the same Time, 
regular and perfect, it is a false Appetite, 
arising either from some preternatural Sti- 
mulus, or from luxurious Living, hence 
the Stomach craves more than is necessary. 
The Simplicity of Food has numerous 
Advocates, and there is no Doubt but, the 
more Variety the Stomach is accustomed 
to, the more Dainties, and perhaps the 
larger Quantities are needful. The Man- 
ner of Living should, therefore, be regu- 
lated from the earliest Period. The Child- 
ren of poor People, who are likely to live 
hard, should, from the first, be accustom- 
ed to plain and substantial Food, and 
seldom allowed many Rarities. They 
|P_33
should learn to take whatever is offered 
them, to prevent their Stomachs from be- 
ing too nice; but nothing to which they 
seem to have a fixed Dislike should be 
forced upon them: it is as dangerous as it 
is unnatural. 

The Practice of cramming Children with 
Materials of every Kind, countenanced by 
some Gentlemen of the Faculty, with a 
View to strengthen and corroborate their 
Stomachs, is too absurd, in my Opinion, 
to challenge Animadversion. Such Treat- 
ment must load them with noxious and 
superfluous Humours, train them up for 
Epicureans, and by over Distension of the 
Stomach, and Pressure upon the Lungs, and 
the adjacent Bowels, it cannot but sow the 
Seeds of a Multiplicity of Disorders, par- 
ticularly of the nervous Kind. It must 
also contribute to weaken their Intellects, 
and incur the future Danger of apoplectic, 
epileptic, and paralytic Attacks. 

|P_34
Gormandizing, or immoderate eating, 
in grown People, is productive of similar 
Consequences, Consequences proportiona- 
bly more immediate, and destructive, as 
the Effects of Repletion, in Maturity, are 
always more violent and fatal than in 
Infancy. 

Those who eat plentifully should drink 
liberally too, as that will promote the 
Digestion, and accelerate Chylification, 
and Excretion. 

Sleep may, in some Measure, supply the 
Place of Food, and strong Liquor com- 
pensate for a scanty Meal, but the last 
Alternative is, by far, the worst; it is a 
Substitute that should, on no Account, be 
employed, especially as it always does 
most Mischief, when the Stomach is most 
empty. 

The intemperate Use of spirituous Li- 
quors maintains a continual Fever, de- 
stroys the Tone of the Nerves and Solids, 
|P_35
and at length makes them callous; it 
inflames the Blood, carries it through the 
Lungs, and towards the Brain, with great 
Rapidity, ruptures the Mouths of the small 
Vessels, indurates the Viscera, or Bowels, 
and erodes the Kidneys. Hence a Train of 
complicated Maladies, too tedious to de- 
scribe or enumerate. 

If Liquor be recurred to, with a View 
to keep up the Spirits, it soon evaporates 
with the increased Flow occasioned by it, 
if it be used to relieve Anxiety of Mind, 
the transient Serenity is quickly succeeded 
by a still deeper Gloom, and if it be 
admitted to exhilarate the social Hour of 
convivial Enjoyment, Moderation should 
always fill the Cup, and not suffer one to 
affront his Friend, destroy his Health, or 
stupify his Senses. 

Animal Food is certainly too freely used 
in this Country. The usual Proportion 
stimulates too much, gives a dense, or a 
putrescent Crasis to the Blood, (according 
|P_36
as the Habit is strong, or weak,) and in- 
duces Acrimony, and thus it ultimately 
propagates the Causes of Obstructions, of 
putrid, and nervous Diseases: It generates 
Bile, is the leading Cause of the Scurvy, 
and fosters the Gout and Rheumatism. 
At the same Time it must be admitted, 
that the State of the Air is such, in Eng- 
land, as demands a Diet rather warm and 
stimulating, to counteract the moist, re- 
laxing Quality of it. 

Low and abstemious Living, and a 
thin, Watery, vegetable Diet, robs the 
Body of competent Nourishment, unbra- 
ces the Stomach and Nerves, dissolves 
the Blood, diminishes the Action of the 
Vessels, and reduces the System below the 
Standard of Health: Hence a Predisposi- 
tion to all the Diseases which arise from 
Debility and Relaxation. Yet a very slen- 
der Diet, if the Habit has been accustomed 
to such, will preserve the Ballance, give 
Spirits and Vivacity, and supply all the 
Springs of Health: In short, it is Quan- 
|P_37
tity rather than Quality that replenishes 
the Waste, and affords the true Nutrition 
of Animal Life. Simple Food (in suffi- 
cient Quantity) digests, circulates, and re- 
pairs, gradually, smoothly, and with Cer- 
tainty, whereas the rich, high seasoned 
Repast occasions Perturbation, Heat, and 
Excitement, and thus very frequently dis- 
sipates and carries off, by the different 
Discharges, a considerable Portion of nu- 
tritious Juices, and leaves the Body Weak, 
enervated, and collapsed, instead of nou- 
rishing and recruiting the System, by its 
own Addition. Hence it is that high 
Living demands Luxury to screw up the 
Nerves to their usual Pitch, and hence it is 
also that, being over-strained, they soon 
wear out and break. 

A Diet, consisting chiefly of Milk and 
Vegetables, has been found, in several In- 
stances, to renovate the Constitution, re- 
move Sterility, and eradicate some of the 
most obstinate, chronic Complaints. 

|P_38
Regimen, I am convinced, can produce 
the most salutary Effects, but it needs 
particular Skill to direct it. A Patient, 
in passing from a higher to a lower, 
or from a lower to a higher Regimen, 
must be carried, Step by Step, as Cir- 
cumstances will admit, with great Cir- 
cumspection. 

Tea and Coffee have long been Subjects 
of Reprobation with the Faculty; but I am 
apprehensive that these Articles of Living 
have been too rashly condemned, with- 
out proper Investigation, or good Grounds. 
I look upon them rather as medicinal, 
than dietetic, and would, therefore, advise 
to use them sparingly. 

Coffee is a warm, stimulating Cordial, 
and increases all the Secretions

Tea seems, in general, to be rather irri- 
tating on an empty Stomach, but is very 
suitable, at a proper Interval after Dinner. 
It then dilutes, assists Digestion, quench- 
|P_39
es Thirst, and exhilarates the Spirits.— 

Porter, fortunately for this Metropolis, 
is a good, nutritious, wholesome Liquor: 
yet I doubt there is something of a narcotic 
Quality added to it, which ought not to 
be. It requires Exercise, and should not, 
I think, be drank too new; it is doubtless 
more perfect, and more digestible, when 
moderately stale. 

The excessive Use of Tobacco, in what- 
ever manner it may be exhibited, heats the 
Blood, hurts Digestion, wastes the finer 
Part of the Fluids, and relaxes the Nerves. 
It is most beneficial to People of gross 
and corpulent Habits, who have but little 
Exercise, and breathe foul Air. 

Nothing can be more ridiculous, or 
more pernicious than the Practice of eating 
and drinking Things very hot. It spoils 
the Teeth, brings on the Tooth-Ach, 
weakens the Head and Eyes, ruins the 
Stomach, and does abundance of Mischief. 

|P_40
It is, at all Times, hurtful to fast too 
long, but more particularly in the Morn- 
ing. It admits a Redundancy of Air into 
the Stomach, and the Whole Body suffers 
by it. 

It would be better, in my Opinion, if 
Breakfast were to become a more solid Re- 
freshment than it is, in this Country. An 
Addition would afford a more durable Sup- 
port through the fatiguing Part of the Day, 
and whether it were to supersede the Custom 
of a Luncheon, or not, an equivalent De- 
duction would be very properly substracted 
from Dinner, which is generally more 
plentiful than it ought to be, among those 
who are not limited by Oeconomy. 

Supper should be light, and proportion- 
able to the Degree of Exercise that is to 
succeed. The Quantity of Supper ought 
just to be sufficient to replenish the Waste 
which the different Functions necessarily 
make. If any more be received into the 
|P_41
Stomach, too great a Portion of the Ner- 
vous Power is determined to that Organ, 
and expended there in the Work of Diges- 
tion, while, at the same Time, the Super- 
fluity continues to excite an unseasonable 
Stimulus in the System, which should re- 
main, as much as possible, in a quiescent 
State, during Sleep, and leaves an unneces- 
sary Quantity of Materials in the Stomach, 
next Morning, which ought, then, to be 
nearly empty, and to contain little more 
besides the gastric or common Liquor of 
the Stomach. 

Water, as being a Vehicle particularly 
connected with all the Departments of 
Nourishment, deserves proper Attention. 
Pure, cold Water acts as a tonic or corrobo- 
rant, internally, in the Stomach, as well as 
applied externally. It passes off gently by 
the different Excretions, it dilutes the sa- 
line, and corrects the bilious Part of the 
Blood. Bad Water must be inimical to 
Health, according to the Manner and De- 
gree in which it happens to be impregnated 
|P_42
with heterogenous Matter. Snow Water, 
and Water that freezes most readily into 
Ice, are found to be the purest of all; the 
next in Purity is Rain Water, which falls 
in moderate Weather, and then River Wa- 
ter, which runs with a brisk Current. 
Spring Water, in passing through the Strata 
of the Earth, often imbibes mineral, and 
other Ingredients, and accordingly becomes 
more objectionable: Nevertheless it is com- 
monly and very properly used, because it is 
more readily obtained in a pure State, than 
any of the former generally are. The pu- 
rest Water is that which has neither Taste, 
Colour, nor Smell; that which is lightest 
and most limpid; that which easily lathers 
with Soap: and that which does not effer- 
vesce or bubble, nor form any Sediment 
when good Vinegar, or Spirits of Sal Ammo- 
niac is put into it. The most certain Me- 
thod of purifying Water is by Distillation, 
and the most commodious and easy, is by 
boiling. The Influence of Fire destroys 
Animalculæ, and by diffusing the compo- 
nent Parts of Water, it affords an Oppor- 
|P_43
tunity for the fixed Air, and the too volatile 
Particles to evaporate, and by the same 
Means, decomposes the Combinations, so 
that the earthy and foreign Ingredients fall 
to the Bottom. Filtration, the Mixture of 
Chalk or Sand, Exposure to the open Air, 
and allowing it due Time to settle, are, indi- 
vidually, conducive towards the Purification 
of Water. 

The Influence of the Moon, in her differ- 
ent Phases, upon the Earth, is a Matter well 
known: And authentic Observations seem 
to confirm the Opinion, that Commotions 
in the Animal System, and the Attack of 
febrile, epileptic, and other Diseases, as well 
as periodical Alterations, are, in a certain 
Degree, coincident with the Returns of the 
new, and full Moon. For my own Part, 
although I have no Doubt about the Cer- 
tainty of this Doctrine; yet my own Obser- 
vations have not been so accurate on this 
Point, as to establish any invariable Rules 
which I could presume to offer as a Guide. 

|P_44
A Pendulum of any Kind, suspended in 
such a Manner as to receive no other Motion 
except that conveyed to it by the Pulsation 
of some of the large Arteries of a Person in 
Health, makes a certain Number of strong- 
er Vibrations than ordinary, corresponding 
to the Hour of the Day. If the Position 
be true, (which I have often proved, by rest- 
ing the Right Arm over a Cup, or common 
Beer Glass, holding one End of a Piece of 
Thread, between the Thumb and Finger, 
with a Ring, or such like fastened to the 
other End, which reached towards the 
Center of the Cavity) the Inference must 
be, that there is a certain Number of extra- 
ordinary Pulsations in the Arterial System, 
within the Space of every Hour, varying 
with the Sun's Distance from the Meridian. 
This Experiment I only mention as de- 
serving further Investigation, as it might 
lead to the Discovery of those Periods when 
the Paroxysms of Fevers, &c. may be ex- 
pected; and thus ascertain the most proper 
Time for the Exhibition of Medicines. 

|P_45
I have known Instances where Music af- 
forded effectual Relief in the most violent 
Pain; and believe that its Powers might 
be so managed as to be serviceable in some 
acute, and nervous Cases. 

No virulent, infectious, or contagious 
Disease can possibly be communicated but 
by Means of some of the morbific Particles 
coming in Contact with, and finding Ad- 
mission into the Body, which must also be, 
at the same Time, in a State adapted for 
the Reception, and Nourishment or Assi- 
mulation of the invading Particles. 

Therefore the general Plan of Defence 
against every Species of Infection must be, 
to avoid the Contact of its Effluvia, or to 
repel and dissipate them, when in Contact. 

In the Lues Venerea, and Itch, where the 
infectious Matter is palpably deposited, 
washing and cleansing the Parts will often 
destroy the Infection. 

|P_46
In all infectious Diseases, such as the 
Small Pox, Measles, putrid, pestilential, 
and epidemic Fevers, the Air is the Medi- 
dium, (except when they are communicat- 
ed by Means of infected Clothes, and such 
like,) and consequently the Skin, and the 
internal Surface of the Mouth, Nose, Lungs, 
and Stomach, are the Points of Contact, 
and all these Parts have Pores of Admission. 

The best Method then, in these Cases, 
will be to chew aromatic and pungent Sub- 
stances in the Mouth, to impregnate the 
ambient Air with volatile and correcting 
Particles, and to brace the Stomach with 
such Things as are stimulating and anti- 
sceptic. 

Almost every Year, and often at different 
Seasons of the same Year, there happen pre- 
vailing Fevers, which are very perplexing 
to the Relatives of such as labour under 
them. The natural Duties of Humanity 
constrain their Attendance, their Appre
hensions of Danger to themselves and Fa- 
milies excite their Solicitude, and the An- 
|P_47
swers given by the attending Faculty to their 
anxious Enquiries whether or not the Dis- 
ease be infectious, are seldom satisfactory, 
and perhaps not always quite judicious. 

Let me then, in Regard of this Matter, 
observe, in few Words, that almost all the 
Fevers that occur between the Months of 
April and November, if they do not pro- 
ceed from what is termed catching Cold; 
if they be not regular intermittent; if they 
seem different from any of the known Class 
of common Fevers; and if they be attended 
with peculiar Symptoms, such as an extra- 
ordinary quick Pulse, extreme Debility, ex- 
cessive Sickness at Stomach, violent Pain in 
the Head, Sleepiness, Deafness, and Deli- 
rium; if Circumstances and Appearances 
be such, I say, there is too much Reason 
to believe that the Fevers in Question are, 
more or less, of an infectious and epidemic 
Kind. Indeed, it is to be remembered, 
that morbid Effluvium of any Sort, whether 
infectious or not, when it comes in Con- 
tact frequently, and in considerable Quanti- 
ties, always carries Danger with it. It 
|P_48
has a procreative Power, or Power of gene- 
rating something similar to itself. No Won- 
der then, that those who are much exposed 
to the Breath and Perspiration of diseased 
Persons should lose their Health: neither is 
it strange that those Fevers, which have 
just been described, should spread gradually 
from one Individual, and from one Family 
to another. 

Besides the principal Causes already enu- 
merated, there are many others which af- 
fect Health and occasion Diseases. All the 
different Situations and Employments in 
Life, especially of the mechanical Kind, 
are, more or less, productive of Diseases pe- 
culiar to the Nature and Circumstances of 
each. But as the Discussion of these would 
exceed my Plan, and perhaps be more te- 
dious than desirable, I shall satisfy myself 
with adding some promiscuous Observa- 
tions on the Animal Oeconomy. 

The Laxity of the Fibres and the Quick- 
ness of the Circulation in Children, render 
|P_49
them extremely susceptible of Irritation and 
Disorder from whatever is heating, or sti- 
mulating. The chief Business therefore 
must be to keep them cool and easy. They 
should undergo (those especiaily who are 
weak or ricketty) the Cold-Bath, be ex- 
posed to the open Air, and live upon a light, 
cool Diet. How pernicious then, must it 
be to habituate them to spirituous Liquors, 
which is too frequently offered to Child- 
ren, and to pamper them with whatever 
their Fancy prompts them to ask! 

The first Impression on the human Sys- 
tem in all Cases, has the greatest Effect, 
and the more it has been accustomed to 
Impressions of every Kind, the less liable 
will it be to Agitation and Disorder, in 
future. The Advantage then, of carrying 
Children through the Small-Pox, Measles, 
and all the other infectious and endemical 
Diseases which await them, as early as 
possible, cannot but appear evident. They 
undergo these Complaints with less Danger 
before their Fluids are contaminated, and 
|P_50
also become less subject to the Attack of 
other accidental Disorders, in Consequence 
of their Habit being rather meliorated, and 
their Constitution, in some Measure, con- 
firmed by Emorbification, or the Abatement 
of morbid Tendency. 

If the first juvenile Sensations be so im- 
pressive, of what infinite Importance must 
not prudent and judicious Management be, 
towards forming the Temper, inspiring 
the Genius, bending the Propensities, and 
directing the tender impulsive Movements, 
during the soft, flexible Period of dawning 
Years! It is true, the Miniature of the 
Frame is modelled by the Process of Na- 
ture, and receives the Texture, Lines and 
Proportion, which particularize it, from the 
same original Hand. This Basis or Ground 
Work, it must ever be impossible to alter, 
with Regard to its first Principles of Struc- 
ture and Organization. Nevertheless, the 
ductile Fibres are easily capable of In- 
flexion and Modulation, therefore the 
brightest Springs of the System may be 
|P_51
moved, cherished and augmented, and also 
the Exuberancy and Disproportion of Parts 
suppressed, fashioned and amended. I do 
not conceive, that the Rudiments of a Fool 
can be refined into the Lustre of a Philo- 
sopher, nor that the natural Endowments 
of Parts and Abilities can be debased and 
adulterated down to the Level of the most 
common Materials, or the meanest Capa- 
city, but I am very certain that much 
Good, or Harm, may be done to the tender 
Plant of human Life, when it first begins 
to vegetate. 

In the same Path of Investigation may 
be traced the Laws of Physiognomy, so far 
as they concord with solid Reason, and the 
Test of physical Knowledge. 

It is sufficiently evident to common Un- 
derstanding, that the Shape of the Head, of 
indeed every Animal, corresponds with the 
Nature of the Intellect. Hence it must 
follow, that a certain Conformation, Pro- 
portion or Extension of Parts or Lines (as 
|P_52
well as Texture and Principles) is indispen- 
sibly requisite for the Performance of the 
Faculty of Perception, and the several pro- 
gressive and combined Operations that arise 
from it. For the same Reason it is, that a 
square, or angular Form of the Brain will 
not answer the Purpose, and that a circular 
or globular Figure is, consequently, neces- 
sary. The Face and Head are the princi- 
pal Physiognomical Parts, as they imme- 
diately shew the true Mould and Measure 
which circumscribe the prime Movement, 
or the Brain. 

A flat Face or Features, most probably, 
will not admit, or carry on a Motion in 
the Mind competently full and distinct, this 
therefore, may be the Indication of Defici- 
ency or Weakness of Intellect. Pointed, 
prominent, and acute Lines, may, no 
Doubt, portend Excess, Depth, and Nar- 
rowness of intellectual Motion; accordingly 
Ferocity and Obstinacy may result from 
the former, Cunning and Sagacity from 
the next, and Malevolence and Peevishness 
from the latter. 

|P_53
Elevation of Lines may bespeak Pride, 
and Irascibility; and Depression may intimate 
Inequality or Fickleness of Temper. Pro- 
tuberance of Lines, I would also hope, 
may indicate an Extent of Talents, and 
Depth of Judgment, as well as Strength 
of Impulse, and Propensity. 

It is further obvious enough that the 
Faculties of the Mind cannot possess a full 
Perfection and Congruity of Powers, unless 
there be a concomitant Proportion and 
Symmetry in the corporal Organs. There- 
fore, any great Inequality or Irregularity of 
external Parts must, in some Measure, di- 
minish the Uniformity and Harmony of the 
Whole. It must cramp and confine the Con- 
cordance of Motion, if the Disparity of 
Parts be defective, and render the Move- 
ment awkward and ungraceful, if the Dis- 
parity be superfluous. 

There is also observed a Conformity 
and Alliance between different Parts of the 
Body, considerably distant from one another, 
|P_54
consequently the different Parts must 
originally be proportioned, to each other, 
and likewise, to the Whole. But it is cha- 
ritable to believe, at the same Time, that 
a happy, internal Compages may, some- 
times, take Place, and counterbalance the 
Disadvantages of unfavourable outward 
Signs. 

Nevertheless, all these Congruities and 
Disparities must often be variable and falla- 
cious, if it were for no other Reason, but 
because Magnitude and Energy are not al- 
ways, tho' generally, correspondent. 

Thus, Physiognomical Relation may be 
marked, and carried to a considerable Ex- 
tent, with tolerable Precision: But if one 
Fancy be built upon another, which has 
nothing better than Fancy to support it, 
the airy Phantom may be raised to a prodi- 
gious Height, and the Bubble suspended, 
till, at last, it burst, invisible, in the ro- 
mantic Wilds of metaphysical Delusion. 

|P_55
The Female Constitution, being of a more 
delicate Conformation, and having a finer 
Texture of Nerves than the other Sex, 
gives Women a Quickness of Sensibility, 
and great Promptitude of Expression; it 
softens their Manners, refines their Ideas, 
and produces a lively Sensation of Pleasure 
and Pain. But while they enjoy these Ad- 
vantages, and are deservedly Objects of 
Affection and Esteem, the Softness, and 
peculiar Construction of their Frame sub- 
ject them to many painful and critical Vi- 
cissitudes, which, as they affect both their 
Health and Temper, fully entitle them to 
all possible Lenity and Indulgence. 

When the important Period of Men- 
struation arrives, much depends upon 
proper Management. A sedentary Life, 
Restraint, and Confinement, about that 
Time, are very unfavourable, while mo- 
derate Exercise, the open Air, chearful 
Society, and Indulgence are highly requi- 
site. Hard Work, and Exposure to much 
Cold, and to damp Air, are too dangerous 
|P_56
to be hazarded, even among the poorest 
People. 

Equal Care, and similar Means must be 
employed, towards that critical Time of 
Life, when the Tide of Circulation begins 
to ebb. The more slowly and gradually 
this salutary Evacuation is diminished, 
the less is the Constitution exposed to Dis- 
order, on its final Termination. It is, 
therefore, always adviseable (unless it be 
in some relaxed Habits, where the Dis- 
charge has been too copious) to take due 
Pains and proper Steps to prolong its Con- 
tinuance, and thus secure the System from 
the bad Consequences of an abrupt and 
hasty Departure. 

It is a just Observation that those, who 
grow up very fast, are generally sickly, and 
seldom live to a great Age. The Prime of 
their Life draws very soon towards the 
Verge of Declension, which Stage, like 
their Youth, is equally rapid in its Progress. 
The Case is this. Quick Growth draws 
|P_57
out and elongates the Fibres and Vessels to 
a greater Extension than the gradual In- 
crease of the vital Powers can nourish and 
support; hence the Constitution becomes 
weakly and relaxed. This Error, in the 
Procedure of Nature, should be remedied, 
if practicable, by the Cold Bath, and tonic 
Medicines. 

The premature Indulgence of amorous 
Desires, in the early Bloom of Youth, is 
productive of the most ruinous Conse- 
quences. At this Period, the Mind grows 
warm and well adapted to imbibe a proper 
Fund and Connexion of Ideas, through the 
favourable Disposition of the Nerves; and 
the Body begins to germinate and gather 
Firmness and Vigour from the Matura- 
tion of its Juices, especially those of the 
Glands, which now unfold and afford a 
Repository, for the lymphatic and nutri- 
tious Part of the Fluids, to answer the 
Emergencies of Nature. But the unsea- 
sonable Pursuit of unripe Enjoyment blasts 
these promising Fruits, draws off Health, 
|P_58
and Genius from the System, through 
the Channel of Pleasure, and inevitably 
shortens Life. 

When the Constitution approaches its 
Zenith or confirmed State, if the social 
Impulse occasion Disorder, and reject Con- 
trol, its Effects are too important to be 
neglected, as they often have the greatest 
Influence upon the whole Frame. An ex- 
quite Sensibility in the Nervous System 
united with sufficient Powers in the Cir- 
culation, on the one Hand, and a full, and 
cold phlegmatic Constitution, on the other, 
are the two Extremes of Temperament 
which particularly require Indulgence; 
the former, in Order to diminish that 
Plenitude and Irritation, which (if not re- 
moved) might produce Frenzy, Fevers, 
Inflammations, &c. and the latter, on 
Purpose to create that Excitement and 
Action in the Nerves and Vessels, which 
are necessary to prevent Obstructions, Con- 
sumptions, Hypocondria, &c. 

|P_59
Continued Celibacy generally loads the 
Glands, retards the Circulation, and oc- 
casions Fulness and Stagnation in the 
Vessels. In this State, the Mind, unex- 
panded by the soft Fire of mutual Rap- 
ture, often becomes gloomy, selfish, and 
contracted, and all its Faculties, being 
confined within the narrow Compass of 
ordinary Gratifications, are devoted to 
Habits of parsimonious Care, and con- 
templative Amusement. 

Temperance is the best Pledge for 
Longevity, nevertheless, young People 
should, by all Means, inure themselves 
to the Hardships and Asperities of Life. 
Without some Share of these to temper 
the lethargic Effects of Indolence, the 
Body sinks into a State of Effeminacy 
and Imbecillity, and the Mind soon be- 
comes as feeble and insignificant as the 
Body. 

Little Irregularities may, now and 
then, be committed with Impunity, per- 
|P_60
haps with Benefit, but frequent Shocks 
of Revelry and Debauch overstrain the 
System, indurate the Solids, block up 
the fine vital Channels, and hasten the 
Approach of rigid old Age. 

The Animal Machine, from the Na- 
ture of its Organization, possesses a Power 
of regulating itself, and is constantly ex- 
ercising this Power; therefore all Diseases, 
if fully understood, are curable in the 
Beginning. The most robust Constitu- 
tion cannot, at all Times, be equally 
healthy, but is rather in a State of con- 
tinual Variation; and when the Efforts 
of Nature are inadequate to the Purpose 
of Regulation, Disorder, in a correspond- 
ing Degree, must ensue. Nature, then, 
resists every Species of Disease; and it is 
at those Times, when the Nervous Sys- 
tem is relaxed and exhausted by Heat, 
Fatigue, Watching, Excess, &c. or irri- 
tated by any of the Passions, that the 
Body is particularly susceptible of the 
Cause of Diseases. Fear and Dread of 
|P_61
any infectious Distemper, accordingly, ne- 
ver fail to render a Person more liable to 
receive it. 

In incipient, as well as in confirmed 
Diseases, the Calls of Nature should be 
assiduously watched and regarded, since her 
Dictates and Indications are hardly ever er- 
roneous or improper, whether they point 
to Warmth, Coolness, Sleep, Excitement, 
Abstinence, Nourishment, &c. 

Any Part of the System, that is either 
naturally infirm, or has suffered any Kind 
of Injury, is always most liable to the 
Invasion of Disease and Pain, and should, 
on that Account, be more particularly 
guarded and defended. 

The Approach of all febrile Diseases is 
marked with some extraordinary Agitation 
in the System. Languor, Loss of Strength, 
flying Pains, hideous Dreams, &c. indicate 
somewhat morbid acting on the Nerves; 
but if these be attended with Nausea at 
|P_62
the Stomach, Chills, and alternate Glows, 
or Sweats, some acute Malady is much to 
be apprehended. Indeed Chills, (except 
after Meals and Evacuations) as they 
come by a Constriction of the Skin, and 
a general Spasm through the System, from 
Debility, or Irritation, always import some 
Degree of Danger. From these Symp- 
toms of acute Diseases, Caution ought to 
take the Alarm, and as it is ever easier 
to prevent than cure, it would be most ad- 
viseable to arm and oppose their first Ad- 
vances. 

The Habit is that State of Body peculiar 
to each, and, according as it varies from 
the Standard of Health, is, in an equal 
Measure, subject to Disease. 

A strong and full Habit, (which is ge- 
nerally indicated by a full and hard Pulse) 
in which the Quantity of Blood and Force 
of Circulation are greater than ordinary, 
though it has a Tendency towards inflam- 
matory Complaints, is still infinitely less 
|P_63
dangerous than the opposite Extreme, where 
the Habit is relaxed, and all the vital 
Powers languid and imperfect. Under 
such Circumstances the Body is open to all 
the Train of nervous Disorders, to Ob- 
structions, Dropsy and Scurvy, and expos- 
ed to the Attack of intermittent, nervous, 
bilious and putrid Fevers: and if there be 
a superfluous Quantity of half stagnant, in 
active Fluids in the System, at the same 
Time, the Danger is, in all Respects, 
augmented by it. 

A fat and gross Habit is always nearly 
allied to Disease. The contrary, or rather 
the middle Temperament, is, by far the 
most healthy: It shews that the Offices of 
Digestion, Circulation and Secretion are 
regular and effective. 

If the common Exercises of Life, the 
Cold Bath, and moderate Living will not 
prevent, nor reduce Corpulency, it would 
be better to try the Help of Medicine, than 
be obliged to carry about so unpleasant a 
Burthen as some People do. 

|P_64
It may not be improper here to give a 
Caution against frequent and unnecessary 
Blood-letting, as being a very absurd and 
pernicious Practice. Some think it di- 
minishes Fatness, but I must assure them 
it has the contrary Effect, and that Cor- 
pulency is increased by it, others ima- 
gine that it corrects bad Humours, but 
that is likewise impossible, and many have 
Recourse to it as sovereign Remedy, when- 
ever they are any wise indisposed, but they 
should remember that they are bringing 
themselves into a very bad Habit, a Habit 
which wastes the vital Fluid, impoverishes 
the Blood and debilitates the Constitution. 

The Force or Power of Habit is strik- 
ingly exhibited to such as accurately watch 
its Influence. I have observed it as an 
almost invariable Rule, that all Percep- 
tions, whether of a pleasing or painful 
Nature, return pretty exactly at stated, or 
equal Intervals; I mean that Anxiety, De- 
sire, Fancy, Levity and Pensiveness, as 
well as Sleep, Hunger, and the other 
|P_65
common Solicitations of Nature, make 
their Approaches nearly about the same 
Time that they have been usually gratified 
and indulged. 

Now as the Influence of such Perceptions 
must operate on the mental Faculties, in 
the Way of Coincidence and Recollection, 
and on the corporal Organs, agreeable to 
the Laws of the System, it must follow, 
that the surest Method (when Resolution 
is inadequate to the Task) to subdue any 
Habit, or Custom, is to present new Ob- 
jects to the Mind, and provide different 
Impressions for the Body. Yet, however 
proper this Remedy may be, it must be 
conducted with Discretion, for Fear it 
should imperceptibly degenerate into a 
Course of Dissipation, a most pitiable and 
unhappy Course, in which, the restless 
Mind, warm in the Pursuit of new Grati- 
fication, becomes intoxicated with Plea- 
sure, and missing the Path of rational En- 
joyment, loses itself, inextricable, in a 
Labyrinth of Folly, Madness and Vexation. 
|P_66
Wisdom should ever prescribe Bounds to 
Desire, and still keep some Resource to 
satisfy the various Wants of feeble old 
Age. If Youth and Maturity be spent in 
Excess and Dissipation, if all the richest 
Stores of human Bliss be lavishly and pre- 
maturely exhausted, and the Constitution 
shattered in the wild Career, what new 
Expedients can be devised, what possible 
Means can be found to prop the tottering 
Fabric, or chear the dull Winter of declin- 
ing Years. 

The Regularity and Proportion, which 
is essential to Health, will not suffer much 
Deviation, in any Respect, from the Track 
of established Custom. Hence a Diminu- 
tion, or Alteration in any of the common 
and habitual Evacuations, Secretions, or 
even Perceptions, changes the Equilibrium 
of the System, and very materially affects 
the Health and Constitution. 

When Disorder is the Result of such 
Circumstances, the Ballance must be re- 
|P_67
stored, by promoting the Excretions which 
are retarded, or have ceased; by inviting 
the defective Circulation to the Parts which 
it has deserted, or towards the Extremities, 
in general, by Means of Warmth, Friction, 
Exercise, or Fomentation; and by renew- 
ing those Sensations and Incentives, which 
the Nerves stand in Need of, to increase 
their Energy, and to give free Scope and 
previous Impulse to their nice, progressive 
Motions. 

But when the customary Evacuations 
and Emotions cannot be exactly restored, 
they should be substituted by others as 
similar in their Nature and Effects as 
possible. 

The Nerves being the Medium of Com- 
munication between the different Parts of 
the Body, those Parts, which possess the 
greatest Nervosity or Sensibility, as the 
Head, Lungs, Stomach, Womb, and the 
Skin, have the closest Connexion and 
Sympathy with each other. 

|P_68
Those, therefore, who labour under 
nervous and hysteric Affections, should 
carefully avoid whatever produces disagree- 
able Impressions on the Mind, and every 
Kind of Irritation that may occasion un- 
pleasant Sensations on any of these suscep- 
tible Organs, and should particularly re- 
frain from flatulent and indigestible Food. 

Intellectual Sympathy is one of the most 
refined Emotions of the human Mind. It 
originates in some striking Congruity and 
mutual Harmony, and is excited by fine 
concording Impressions made by some Ob- 
ject which creates Partiality and Esteem, 
and is only perfect, when accompanied with 
an Idea that the attractive Impression is re- 
ciprocal. This sympathetic Endowment 
ever deserves Cultivation and Improvement. 
It renders one capable of all the Enjoy- 
ments of sincere Friendship, and can give 
and receive Consolation in the Hour of 
Anxiety and of Pain. 

|P_69
Antipathy proceeds from something that 
shocks the Imagination, or offends the 
Senses: and when this happens to take 
Place in the tender Years of Infancy, and 
the Impression has been forcibly received, 
the Antipathy frequently continues through 
Life. Such Antipathies are extremely un- 
pleasant, and, I should think, might be 
corrected by gradually familiarizing the 
offending Cause, but if the antipathetic 
Matter affect the Sense of Smell, it will 
probably be more difficult to reconcile it. 

Antipathy furnishes an Exception to the 
general Law of the System, which, it was 
stated, did always receive secondary Im- 
pressions with less Effect than primary ones. 
It is, therefore, necessary to remark that 
when Anger, Terror, violent Fevers, deep 
Intoxication, or any other Cause, have once 
thrown the System into vehement and ex- 
cessive Agitations, (whereby the Nerves are 
irrecoverably strained) the same, or nearly 
the same Cause, in but a very small Degree, 
will produce similar Effects, in the highest 
|P_70
Degree: and these Effects will more easily 
take Place, in Proportion to the Frequency 
and Repetition of the impelling Cause. 
From which Consideration may be per- 
ceived the Necessity of guarding against all 
violent Shocks, and of obviating their Con- 
sequences, as soon and effectually as possi- 
ble. Children, and People of weak Nerves 
and delicate Constitutions should be parti- 
cularly careful in this Respect. 

Nervous and hysteric Complaints, faint- 
ing Fits, Convulsions, Madness and such 
like frequently spring from this Source, and 
in Time, become fixed, habitually, or 
periodically. 

The same Advice must also be extended 
to pregnant Women, whose Imagination, or 
Passions, when violently excited, sometimes, 
mark and injure the Fœtus. There are so 
many incontrovertible Proofs of this Kind 
of Influence, that it is impossible to doubt 
the Certainty of it: which appears to me 
nowise questionable, since I can see no 
|P_71
Difficulty to account for it, in a clear and 
rational Manner. 

Imitation is a very operative Faculty in 
the Animal System. It is a natural and 
spontaneous Action, whereby, without 
Volition, or even Consciousness, one Per- 
son imitates and resembles the Motions, 
Gestures, or Perceptions of another. Si- 
lence, sighing, coughing, Laughter, speak- 
ing, singing, walking and Credulity 
which communicate, and pass from one 
Person to another, like Electricity, are 
obvious Proofs that Similitude, or the 
imitative Faculty, is one of the primary, 
leading Motions in the human Mind, and 
bring no small Evidence in Confirmation of 
what has been already said on that subject. 

Stammering, and other bad Habits, and 
even Convulsions may be contracted from 
this Cause. Which Consideration suggests 
a Caution sufficient to induce People to pay 
due Regard to such Companions and Ob- 
jects as are suffered to have Intercourse 
|P_72
with Children, and Persons in a Weak, 
nervous and irritable State. 

Imagination is the Exercise of primary 
Perception, or Perception of the first Forms 
and Colours, in which Images strike the 
Mind, unaccompanied with, and conse- 
quently unaltered by the deliberative or 
reasoning Operations. Imagination, there- 
fore, considers Objects in the Light they 
first appear, which Appearance does not 
always correspond with Intrinsicness or 
Reality; though very frequently the first 
View of the Mind is as accurate and com- 
prehensive as several Reviews or Compa- 
risons are. When Memory or uncom- 
pounded Reflection represents Images to the 
Mind, these Images arise merely from the 
Power of Recollection, which is only the 
Operation of the first Class of Similitudes: 
but Images, which proceed from Judgment, 
are fashioned with all the Rays and Shades 
of nice and minute Analogy; and these are 
often created without any Assistance from 
Memory. Hence Versatility or Quickness 
|P_73
of Imagination is often found to be a super- 
ficial Quality, and on a Level only with 
the Depth of Memory. But if a warm 
and teeming Imagination be united with 
Solidity of Judgment, and profound Pene- 
tration, it bespeaks the happiest and noblest 
Composition of the human System. 

The Mind is exceedingly susceptible of 
the two opposite Perceptions, Hope and 
Fear. They are the quick-born Offspring 
of Imagination, begotten by the Idea of 
Pleasure, or Pain, whose Familiarity and 
Intimacy always afford them easy Access 
to her Embraces. 

It will then manifestly appear that the 
Influence of Imagination, so far as regards 
the Cause and Cure of Diseases, is nothing 
but the Effect of Hope, or Fear. But 
these Effects have been already explained 
in treating of the Passions. It must, there- 
fore, be obvious whence a healthy Man 
may be frightened into a Fever, and a 
dying Person, in a Manner, quickened into 
|P_74
Life, by the Instillation and Continuation 
of either of these Influences upon the 
Mind. Hence the Effect of Animal Mag- 
netism, and of Nostrums, Charms and En- 
chantments, in sometimes curing Agues, 
Fits and other Disorders, which, in Truth, 
have no Value nor Utility but what they 
derive from this Source. 

Volition, or the Will, Purpose, or De- 
sign, is either intentional, or actual; that 
is, Design intended, or Design executed. 
Of which neither the one nor the other 
is instantaneous, or immediately perform- 
ed; they require both of them several of 
the progressive Operations of the Mind. 
For no Man ever had an Inclination or 
Will to do an Act, before he had first 
reasoned upon it, and considered the End 
or Purport of such an Act. The Mind 
cannot pssibly direct the Nervous Influence 
into the right Arm, in Preference to the 
left, (except in the common and habitual 
Motions of Walking and Gesticulation) till 
it has first poised itself or deliberated, and 
|P_75
then it can give the voluntary Impulse. 
Hence it is manifest beyond Contradiction, 
that every Person, of a sound State of Body, 
is absolutely a free Agent, and may either 
commit, or not commit any particular Act. 
But still the Exercise of Common Sense 
must be present in Order to constitute Crimi- 
nality. If a Person err from Passion, it is 
Madness, if from Ignorance, or wrong Ideas, 
it is Mistake. Both Cases, are entitled to 
Alleviation and Compassion, and should be 
weighed in the Scales of Humanity, with 
the fair Ballance of Candour, placed in the 
Medium of Excitement, to ascertain the 
intrinsic Quality, and compute the true 
Degree of Right, or Wrong. 

FINIS. 

