

[^Sample 1: book - ^]

|P_5
[}A LECTURE, &c. }][^A short horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
THE greatest blessing we enjoy is health, 
without it, wealth, honors, and every 
other consideration, would be insipid, and 
even irksome; the preservation of this 
state therefore, naturally concerns us all. 
In this lecture, I shall not attempt to teach 
you to become your own physicians, for 
when the barriers of health are once bro- 
ken down, and disease has established 
itself, it requires the deepest attention, 
and an accurate acquaintance with the 
extensive science of medicine, to combat 
it; to attain this knowledge demands 
the labour of years. But, a majority of 
|P_6
the diseafes to which we are subject, are 
the effects of our own ignorance or im- 
prudence, and it is often very easy to 
prevent them; mere precepts however, 
have seldom much effect, unless the rea- 
soning upon them be rendered evident; 
on this account, I shall first endeavour, in 
as plain and easy a manner as possible, 
to explain to you the laws by which life 
is governed; and when we see in what 
health consists, we shall be better enabled 
to take such methods as may preserve it. 
Health is the easy and pleasant exercise 
of all the functions of the body and mind; 
and disease consists in the uneasy and 
disproportioned exercise of all, or some 
of the functions. 

When dead matter acts upon dead 
matter, the only effects we perceive are 
mechanical, or chemical; for though 
there may appear to be other kinds of at- 
traction, or repulsion, such as electric and 
magnetic, yet these come under the 
head of mechanical attraction, as pro- 
|P_7
ducing motion; we may therefore lay 
it down as a law, that when dead, or 
inanimate bodies act upon each other, no 
other than mechanical, or chemical ef- 
fects are produced; that is, either mo- 
tion, or the decomposition, and new 
combination of their parts. If one ball 
strike another, it communicates to it a 
certain quantity of motion, this is called 
mechanical action; and if a quantity of 
salt, or sugar, be put into water, the par- 
ticles of the salt or sugar will separate 
from each other, and join themselves to 
the particles of the water; the salt and 
water in these instances, are said to act 
on each other chemically; and in all 
cases whatever, in which inanimate, or 
dead bodies act on each other, the effects 
produced are, motion, or chemical at- 
traction. 

But, when dead matter acts on those 
bodies which we call living, the effects 
are much different; let us take for ex- 
ample a very simple instance.—Snakes, 
|P_8
at least some species of them, pass the 
winter in a torpid state, which has all 
the appearance of death; now heat, if 
applied to dead matter, will only pro- 
duce motion, or chemical combination; 
but if it be applied to the snake, let us 
see what will be the consequence; the 
reptile first begins to move, and opens 
its eyes and mouth; when the heat has 
been applied for some time, it crawls a- 
bout in search of food, and performs all 
the functions of life. Here then, dead 
matter, when applied to a living body, 
produces living functions; for if the heat 
had not been applied, the snake would 
have continued senseless, and apparent- 
ly lifeless. In more perfect animals, the 
effects produced by the action of dead 
matter on them, are more numerous, 
and are different in different living sys- 
tems, but are in general the following— 
sense and motion in almost all animals, 
and in many the power of thinking, and 
other affections of the mind. The pow- 
ers, or dead matters, which are applied, 
|P_9
and which produce these functions, are 
chiefly, heat, food, and air. The proof 
that these powers do produce the living 
functions, is in my opinion a very con- 
vincing one, namely, that when their 
actions are suspended, the living func- 
tions cease; take away, for instance, 
heat, air, and food from animals, and 
they soon become dead matter; and it is 
not necessary that an animal should be 
deprived of all those to put a stop to the 
living functions; if any one of them be 
taken away, the body sooner or later 
becomes dead matter: it is found by ex- 
perience, that if a man be deprived of 
air, he dies in about three or four mi- 
nutes; for instance, if he be immersed 
under water, if he be deprived of heat, 
or in other words, exposed to a very se- 
vere degree of cold, he likewife soon 
dies; or if he be deprived of food, his 
death is equally certain, though more 
slow. It is sufficiently evident then, 
that the living functions are owing to 
the action of these external powers upon 
|P_10
the body. What I have here said, is 
not confined to animals, but the living 
functions of vegetables are likewise caus- 
ed by the action of dead matter upon 
them. The dead matters, which by their 
action produce these functions, are prin- 
cipally heat, moisture, light, and air. It 
clearly follows therefore, from what I 
have said, that living bodies must have 
some property different from dead matter, 
which renders them capable of being 
acted upon by these external powers, so 
as to produce the living functions; for if 
they had not, the only effects which these 
powers could produce, would be mecha- 
nical, or chemical. Though we know 
not exactly in what this property con- 
sists, or in what manner it is acted on, 
yet we see, that when bodies are possessed 
of it, they become capable of being acted 
upon by external powers, and thus the 
living functions are produced; we shall 
therefore call this property excitability, 
and in using this term it is necessary to 
mention, that I mean only to express a 
|P_11
fact, without the least intention of point- 
ing out the nature of that property 
which distinguishes living from dead 
matter, and in this we have the example 
of the great Newton, who called the 
property which causes bodies in certain 
situations to approach each other, gravi- 
tation, without in the least hinting at 
its nature; yet, though he knew not 
what gravitation was, he investigated 
the laws by which bodies were acted on 
by it; in the same manner, though we 
are ignorant of excitability, or the nature 
of that property which distinguishes liv- 
ing from dead matter, we can investi- 
gate the laws by which dead matter acts 
on living bodies through this medium. 
We know not what magnetic attraction 
is, and yet we can investigate its laws; 
the same holds good with regard to elec- 
tricity; if we ever should attain a know- 
ledge of the nature of this property, it 
would make no alteration in the laws 
which we had before discovered. 

|P_12
I shall now proceed to the investiga- 
tion of the laws by which the excitability 
is acted on; but I must first define some 
terms which it will be necessary to use, 
to avoid circumlocution, and at the same 
time to give us more distinct ideas on the 
subject. 

When the excitability is in such a state 
as to be very susceptible of the action of 
external powers, I shall call it abun- 
dant, or accumulated; but when it is 
found not very capable of receiving their 
action, I shall say, it is deficient, or ex- 
hausted. I would not wish however, to 
have it thought, that by these terms I 
mean in the least to hint at the nature of 
excitability, nor that it is really one 
while increased, and at another dimi- 
nished in quantity, for the abstract ques- 
tion is in no shape considered; we know 
not whether the excitability, or the vi- 
tal principle, depends on a particular ar- 
rangement of matter, or from whatever 
cause it may originate; by the terms 
|P_13
here used, I mean only to say, that the 
excitability is easily acted on when I call 
it abundant, or accumulated; at other 
times the living body is with more diffi- 
culty excited, and then I say, the vital 
principle is deficient, or exhausted. 

The laws by which external powers 
act on living bodies, will, on a careful 
examination, be found to be the follow- 
ing— 

First, when the powerful action of 
the exciting powers ceases for some time, 
the excitability accumulates, or becomes 
more capable of receiving their action, 
and is more powerfully affected by them. 

If we examine separately the differ- 
ent exciting powers, which act on the 
body, we shall find abundant confirma- 
tion of this law. Let us first consider 
Light; if a person be kept in darkness 
for some time, and be then brought into 
a room in which there is only an ordi- 
|P_14
nary degree of light, it will be almost 
too oppressive for him, and appear exces- 
sively bright; and if he have been kept for 
a considerable time in a very dark place, 
the sensation will be very painful. In 
this case, while the retina, or optic 
nerve, was deprived of light, its excita- 
bility accumulated, or became more ea- 
sily affected by light; for if a person 
goes out of one room, into another 
which has an equal degree of light, he 
will feel no effect. You may convince 
yourselves of this law by a very simple 
experiment—shut your eyes, and cover 
them for a minute or two with your 
hand, and endeavour not to think of the 
light, or of what you are doing; then 
open them, and the day-light will for a 
short time appear brighter. If you look 
attentively at a window, for about two 
minutes, and then cast your eyes upon 
a sheet of white paper, the shape of the 
window-frames will be perfectly visible 
upon the paper; those parts which ex- 
press the wood-work, appearing brighter 
|P_15
than the other parts. The parts of the 
optic nerve on which the image of the 
frame falls, are covered by the wood- 
work from the action of the light; 
the excitability of these parts of the 
nerve will therefore accumulate, and 
the parts of the paper which fall upon 
them, must of course appear brighter. 
If a person be brought out of a dark 
room where he has been confined, into 
a field covered with, snow, when the 
sun shines, it has been known to affect 
him so much, as to deprive him of sight 
altogether. 

Let us next consider what happens 
with respect to heat; if heat be for some 
time abstracted, the excitability accu- 
mulates, or in other words, if the body 
be for some time exposed to cold, it is 
more liable to be affected by heat, after- 
wards applied; of this also you may be 
convinced by an easy experiment—put 
one of your hands into cold water, and 
then put both into water which is consi- 
|P_16
derably warm; the hand which has 
been in cold water, will feel much 
warmer than the other. If you handle 
some snow with one hand, while you 
keep the other in your bosom, that it 
may be of the same heat as the body, 
then bring both within the same dis- 
tance of the fire, the heat will affect 
the cold hand infinitely more than the 
warm one. This is a circumstance of 
the utmost importance, and ought al- 
ways to be carefully attended to. When 
a person has been exposed to a severe de- 
gree of cold for some time, he ought to 
be cautious how he comes near a fire, 
for his excitability will be so much 
accumulated, that the heat will act 
violently; often producing a great de- 
gree of inflammation, and even some- 
times mortification. We may by the 
way observe, that this is a very com- 
mon cause of chilblains, and other in- 
flammations. When the hands, or any 
other parts of the body have been ex- 
posed to violent cold, they ought first 
|P_17
to be put into cold water, or even rubbed 
with the snow, and exposed to warmth 
in the gentlest manner possible. 

Exactly the same takes place with 
respect to food, if a person have for some 
time been deprived of food, or have taken 
it in small quantity, whether it be meat 
or drink; or if he have taken it of a less 
stimulating quality, he will find, that 
when he returns to his ordinary mode of 
living, it will have more effect upon him 
than before he lived abstemiously. 

Persons who have been shut up in a 
coal-work from the falling in of the pit, 
and have had nothing to eat for two or 
three days, have been as much intoxi- 
cated by a bason of broth, as a person in 
common circumstances with two or three 
bottles of wine; and we all know that 
spirituous, or vinous liquors affect the 
head more in the morning, than after 
dinner. 

|P_18
This circnmstance was particularly 
evident among the poor sailors who were 
in the boat with Captain Bligh after 
the mutiny. The Captain was sent by 
government to convey some plants of 
the bread-fruit tree from Otaheite, to the 
West Indies; soon after he left Otaheite, 
the crew mutinied, and put the captain 
and most of the officers, with some of 
the men, on board the ship's boat, with 
a very short allowance of provisions, and 
particularly of liquors, for they had 
only six quarts of rum, and six bottles 
of wine, for nineteen people, who were 
driven by storms about the south-sea, ex- 
posed to wet and cold all the time, for 
nearly a month; each man was allowed 
only a tea-spoon full of rum a day, but 
this tea-spoon full refreshed the poor 
men, benumbed as they were with 
cold, and faint with hunger, more than 
twenty times the quantity would have 
done those who were warm, and well 
fed; and had it not been for the spirit 
having such power to act upon men in 
|P_19
their condition, they never could have 
outlived the hardships they experienced. 
All these facts, and many others which 
might be brought, establish beyond a 
doubt the truth of the law I have men- 
tioned, namely, that when the powerful 
action of the exciting powers ceases for 
some time, the excitability accumulates, 
or becomes more capable of receiving 
their actions. 

The second law is, that when the ex- 
citing powers have acted with violence, 
or for a considerable time, the excitabi- 
lity becomes exhausted, or less fit to be 
acted on, and this we shall be able to 
prove by a similar induction. Let us 
take the effects of light upon the eye; 
when it has acted violently for some time 
upon the optic nerve, it diminishes the 
excitability of that nerve, and renders 
it incapable of being affected by a quan- 
tity of light that would at other times 
affect it. When you have been walk- 
ing out in the snow, if you come into 
|P_20
your room, you will be scarcely able to see 
any thing for some minutes. Look 
stedfastly at a candle for a minute or 
two, and you will with difficulty discern 
the letters of a book, which you were 
before reading distinctly; and if you hap- 
pen to cast your eyes upon the sun, you 
will not see any thing distinctly for some 
time afterwards. 

Let us next consider the matter of 
heat: suppose water to be heated luke- 
warm, if you put one hand into it, it 
will feel warm; if you now put the 
other hand into water, heated for instance 
to 120° or 130°, and keep it there some 
time, we will say, two minutes, if 
then you take it out, and put it into the 
luke-warm water, that water will feel 
cold, though still it will seem warm 
to the other hand; for, the hand which 
had been in the heated water, has had its 
excitability exhausted by the application 
of heat. Before you go into a warm 
bath, the temperature of the air may 
|P_21
seem warm and agreeable to you, but 
after you have remained for some time 
in a bath that is rather hot, when you 
come out, you feel the air uncommonly 
cool and chilling. 

Let us now examine the effects of 
substances taken into the stomach; and 
as the effects of spirituous, and vinous li- 
quors, are a little more remarkable than 
food, we shall make our observations 
upon them. 

A person who is unaccustomed to 
drink these liquors, will be intoxicated 
by a quantity that will produce no effect 
upon one who has been some time ac- 
customed to take them; and when a 
person has used himself to these stimu- 
lants for some time, the ordinary pow- 
ers which in common support life, will 
not have their proper effects upon him, 
because his excitability has been in some 
measure exhausted by the stimulants. 

|P_22
The same holds good with respect to 
tobacco and opium; a person accustom- 
ed to take opium will not be affected by 
a quantity that would completely intoxi- 
cate one not used to it; because the 
excitability has been so far exhausted 
by the use of that drug, that it cannot 
be acted on by a small quantity. 

These facts, with innumerable others, 
which will easily suggest themselves to 
you, prove the truth of our second pro- 
position, namely, that when the exciting 
powers have acted violently, or for a 
considerable time, the excitability is ex- 
hausted, or less fit to be acted on. 

This exhaustion of the excitability, 
may, however, be either finite, or tem- 
porary; we see animals, while the ex- 
citing powers continue to act, at first 
appear in their greatest vigour, then 
gradually decay, and at last come into 
that state, in which, from the long 
continued action of the exciting powers, 
|P_23
the excitability is entirely exhausted, and 
death takes place. 

We likewise see plants in the spring, 
while the exciting powers have acted on 
them, moderately, and for a short time, 
arrayed in their verdant robes, and adorned 
with flowers of "many mingling hues; "
but, as the exciting powers which support 
the life of the plant, continue to be ap- 
plied, and some of them, for instance heat, 
as the summer advances become increas- 
ed, they first loose their verdure, then 
grow brown, and at the end of summer 
cease to live; because their excitability 
is exhausted by the long continued action 
of the exciting powers; and this does 
not happen merely in consequence of the 
heat of summer decreasing, for they 
grow brown and die, even in a greater 
degree of heat than that which in spring 
made them grow luxuriantly. 

These are examples of the finite, or 
irreparable exhaustion of the excitability; 
|P_24
but we find also, that it may be ex- 
hausted for a time, and accumulated a- 
gain. Though the eye has been so daz- 
zled by the splendour of light, that it 
cannot see an object moderately illumi- 
nated, yet, if it be shut for some time, 
the excitability of the optic nerve accu- 
mulates again, and we are again capable 
of seeing with an ordinary light. 

We find, that we are not always equal- 
ly capable of performing the functions 
of life. When we have been engaged in 
any exertion, either mental or corporeal, 
for some hours only, we find ourselves 
fatigued, and unfit to pursue our labours 
much longer; if in this state, several 
of the exciting powers, particularly 
light and noise, be withdrawn; and if 
we are laid in a posture which does not 
require much muscular exertion, we 
soon fall into that state which nature 
intended for the accumulation of the ex- 
citability, and which we call sleep. In 
this state, many of the exciting powers 
|P_25
cannot act upon us, unless applied with 
some violence, for we are insensible to 
their moderate action. A moderate 
light, or a moderate noise, does not af- 
fect us, and the power of thinking, 
which exhausts the excitability very 
much, is in a great measure suspended. 
When the action of these powers has 
been suspended for six or eight hours, 
the excitability is again capable of being 
acted on, and we rise fresh, and vigor- 
ous, and fit to engage in our occupa- 
tions. 

Sleep then, is the method which na- 
ture has provided to repair the exhaus- 
ted constitution, and restore the vital 
energy; without its refreshing aid, our 
worn out habits would scarcely be able 
to drag on a few days, or at most a few 
weeks, before the vital spring was quite 
run down; how properly therefore has 
the great poet of nature called sleep the 
chief nourisher in life's feast.— 

|P_26
Sleep, that knits up the ravell'd sleeve of care, 
the death of each day's life, sore labour's bath, 
balm of hurt minds, great Nature's second course, 
chief nourisher in life's feast. 

From the internal sensations often ex- 
cited, it is natural to conclude that the 
nerves of sense are not torpid during 
sleep; but that they are only precluded 
from the perception of external objects, 
by the external organs being rendered 
unfit to transmit to them the impulses 
of bodies, during the suspension of the 
power of volition; thus, the eye-lids 
are closed in sleep, to prevent the im- 
pulse of the light from acting on the op- 
tic nerve; and it is very probable that 
the drum of the ear is not stretched; 
it is likewise probable that something 
similar happens to the external appara- 
tus of all our organs of sense, which 
may make them unfit for their office of 
perception during sleep. 

The more violently the exciting pow- 
ers have acted, the sooner is sleep brought 
|P_27
on; because the excitability is sooner 
exhausted, and therefore, sooner re- 
quires the means of renewing it; and 
on the contrary, the more weakly the 
exciting powers have acted, the less is a 
person inclined to sleep. Instances of 
the first are, excess of exercise, strong 
liquors, or study; and of the latter, an 
under proportion of these. 

A person who has been daily accus- 
tomed to much exercise, whether men- 
tal or corporeal, if he omit it, will 
find little or no inclination to sleep; he 
may however be made to sleep by 
taking a little diffusible stimulus; for 
instance, a little warm punch, or opium; 
which act entirely by exhausting the 
excitability to that degree which is com- 
patible with sleep; and when the stimu- 
lant effect of these substances is over, 
the person soon falls into that state. 

But though the excitability may have 
|P_28
been sufficiently exhausted, and the ac- 
tion of the external powers considerably 
moderated, yet there are some things 
within ourselves, which stimulate vio- 
lently, and prevent sleep, such as pain, 
thirst, and strong passions and emo- 
tions of the mind. These all tend to 
drive away sleep, but it may be induced, 
by withdrawing the mind from these 
impressions; particularly from uneasy 
emotions, and employing it on something 
which makes a less impression; sleep, 
in such cases, is frequently brought on 
by listening to the humming of bees, or 
the murmuring of a rivulet; by em- 
ploying the mind on subjects which do 
not require much exertion, nor produce 
too much commotion; such as count- 
ing to a thousand, or counting drops of 
water which fall slowly. 

It sometimes happens, as has been 
well observed by Dr. Franklin, that an 
uneasy heat of the skin, from a want of 
perspiration, occasioned by the heat of 
|P_29
the bed-cloaths, will prevent sleep; in 
this case, he recommends a method, 
which I believe will often succeed— 
namely, to get up and walk about the 
room 'till you are considerably cooled; 
when you get into bed again, the heat 
of the skin will be diminished, and pers- 
piration become more free, and you 
will probably sleep in a very few mi- 
nutes. [/1./]

By induction we have discovered two 
of the principal laws by which living 
bodies are governed; the first is, that 
when the ordinary powers which sup- 
port life have been suspended, or their 
action lessened for a time, the excitability, 
or vital principle accumulates, or becomes 
more fit to receive their actions; and 
secondly, when these powers have been 
|P_30
acted upon violently, or for a considera- 
ble time, the excitability is exhausted, 
or becomes less fit to receive their ac- 
tions. There are therefore three states 
in which living bodies exist.— 

First, a state of accumulated excita- 
bility. 

Second, a state of exhausted excitabi- 
lity. 

Third, when it is in such a state as to 
produce the strongest and most healthy 
actions, when acted upon by the exter- 
nal powers. 

From what I have said, it must ap- 
pear, that life is a forced state, depend- 
ing on the action of external powers 
upon the excitability; and that, by their 
continued action, if they are properly 
regulated, the excitability will be gra- 
dually and insensibly exhausted; and 
life will be resigned into the hands of 
|P_31
him who gave it, without a struggle, 
and without a groan. 

We see then, that that nature operates 
in supporting the living part of the crea- 
tion, by laws as simple and beautiful as 
those by which the inanimate world is 
governed. In the latter we see the or- 
der and harmony which is observed by 
the planets, and their satellities, in their 
revolution round the great source of heat 
and light. 

All combin'd 
and ruled unerring, by that single power 
which draws the stone projected, to the ground. 

In the animated part of the creation, 
we observe those beautiful phenomena, 
which are exhibited by an almost infinite 
variety of individuals, all depending up- 
on one simple law, the action of the 
exciting powers on the excitability. 

I cannot express my admiration of the 
|P_32
wisdom of the creator better than in the 
words of Thompson. 

O unprofuse magnificence divine! 
O wisdom truly perfect ! thus to call 
from a few causes, such a scheme of things; 
effects so various, beautiful, and great. 

Life then, or those functions which 
we call living, are the effects of certain 
exciting powers, acting on the excita- 
bility, or property distinguishing living 
from dead matter. When those effects, 
namely, the functions, flow easily, plea- 
santly, and compleatly, from the action 
of the exciting powers, they indicate 
that state which we call Health. 

I have detained you a long time on 
this subject, but it is of importance to 
make you acquainted with these laws; 
for it is from a knowledge of them, 
that the rules for preserving health must 
be deduced; and having rendered them, 
as I hope, intelligible to you, I shall pro- 
ceed to point out such necessary cautions 
for our conduct, as are easily deduced 
|P_33
from them; and which, experience con- 
firms; and I shall follow an arrange- 
ment in the consideration of the subject, 
which naturally presents itself to us. 
The chief exciting powers which act 
upon us are, air and food; these I shall 
respectively consider, and afterwards 
make a few remarks on exercise. 

The air is the main-spring in the a- 
nimal machine; the source of heat and 
activity, without which our blood would 
soon become a black and stagnant mass, 
and life would soon stop. 

It is now known, that only a part of 
atmospheric air, is necessary for respira- 
tion: the atmosphere near the surface of 
the earth, consists of two kinds of air; 
one, which is highly proper for respira- 
tion, and combustion, and in which, an 
animal immersed, will live much longer 
than in the same quantity of common 
air; and one, which is perfectly impro- 
|P_34
per for supporting respiration, or com- 
bustion for an instant. 

The first of these airs, has been called 
vital air, from its property of supporting 
life, and constitutes about one fourth of 
the atmosphere. [/2./] The other, from its 
property of destroying life, is called 
azote, and forms of course the remain- 
ing three fourths of the atmosphere. 

These two airs may be separated from 
each other by various methods. If a 
candle be inclosed in a given quantity of 
atmospheric air, it will burn only for a 
certain time, and then be extinguished; 
and from the rising up of the water in 
the vessel in which it is inclosed, it is 
evident that a quantity of air has been 
absorbed. What has been absorbed is 
the vital air, and what remains, the a- 
zote; which is incapable of supporting 
|P_35
flame. If an animal be immersed in a 
given quantity of common air, it will 
only live a certain time; at the end of 
this time, the air will be found diminsh- 
ed, about one fourth being extracted 
from it, and the remainder will neither 
support flame nor animal life; this expe- 
riment might easily be made, but it 
seems a piece of unnecessary cruelty. 

By similar experiments to those I have 
mentioned, we get the azote pure; here 
is some, in which a candle has burnt 
out, and in which nothing but azote, 
or the impure part of the atmosphere is 
left [/3./]. I shall plunge a lighted match 
into it, and you see it is instantly extin- 
guished. 

Many metals, and particularly man- 
ganese, when exposed to the atmos- 
|P_36
phere, attract the vital air from it, 
without touching the azote; and it may 
be procured from these metals by the 
application of heat, in very great purity. 
Here is a bottle of that kind of air, 
which I have expelled by heat from 
manganese; I shall plunge a taper into it, 
and you will perceive that it burns with 
great brilliancy. An animal shut up in 
it, would live about four times as long 
as if shut up in an equal quantity of at- 
mospheric air. 

If I take three parts of azote, and one 
of vital air, I shall form a compound 
which is similar to the atmosphere, and 
which is the mixture beft suited to sup- 
port the health of the body; for if there 
were a much greater proportion of vital 
air, it would act too powerfully upon 
the system, and bring on inflammatory 
diseases; it would likewise by its stimu- 
lus exhaust the excitability, and bring 
us sooner to death; and in the same 
manner that a candle burns brighter in 
|P_37
vital air, and would therefore be sooner 
extinguished, so would the flame of life 
be sooner burnt out. 

On the contrary, if the atmosphere 
contained a much less proportion of vital 
air, it would not stimulate the body suf- 
ficiently; the excitability would mor- 
bidly accumulate, and diseases of debility 
would occur. 

Combustion, putrefaction, and the 
breathing of animals, are processes which 
are continually diminishing the quantity 
of vital air contained in the atmosphere; 
and if the all-wise author of nature had 
not provided for its continual re-produc- 
tion, the atmosphere would in all proba- 
bility have long since become too impure 
to support life; but this is guarded a- 
gainst in a most beautiful manner. 

Water is not a simple element, as has 
been supposed, but is composed of vital 
air, and a particular kind of air which 
|P_38
is called inflammable; the same that 
is used to fill balloons. It has been 
found by experiment, than one hundred 
pounds of water, are composed of eighty- 
five pounds of vital-air, and fifteen of 
inflammable air. [/4./]

Water may be decompounded by a 
variety of means, and its component 
parts separated from each other. 

Vegetables effect this decomposition; 
they absorb water, and decompose it in 
their glands; and taking the inflamma- 
ble air for their nourishment, breathe 
out the vital air in a state of very great 
purity; this may be ascertained by a ve- 
ry easy experiment. 

This vital air is received by animals 
into their lungs, gives them their 
|P_39
heat, and communicates a red colour to 
their blood; when animals die for want 
of vital air, their blood is always found 
black. 

From what I have said, it is evident, 
that in large and populous towns, where 
combustion and respiration are continu- 
ally performed on a large scale, the air 
must be much less pure than in the 
country, where there are few of these 
causes to contaminate the atmosphere, 
and where vegetables are continually 
tending to render it more pure; and if 
it was not for the winds which agitate 
this element, and continually occasion 
its change of place; the air of large 
towns would probably soon become unfit 
for respiration. Winds bring us the 
pure air of the country, and take away 
that from which the vital air has been 
in a great measure extracted; but still, 
from the immense quantity of fuel which 
is daily burnt, and the number of people 
|P_40
breathing in large towns, the air very 
soon becomes impure. 

From the greater purity of the air in 
the country, proceeds the rosy bloom 
found in the rural cottage, which we in 
vain look for in the stately palace, or the 
splendid drawing room. Here then are 
reasons for preferring the country, 
which no one will dispute; and when- 
ever it can be done, such a situation 
ought always to be chosen in preference 
to a large town; this cannot be better 
enforced than in the words of Dr. Arm- 
strong.— 

Ye, who amid the feverish world would wear 
a body free of pain, of cares a mind; 
fly the rank city, shun its turbid air; 
breathe not the chaos of eternal smoke, 
and volatile corruption, from the dead, 
the dying, sick'ning, and the living world 
exhaled, to sully heaven's transparent dome 
with dim mortality. 

While yet you breathe, away; the rural wilds 
invite; the mountains call you, and the vales; 
the woods, the streams, and each ambrosial breeze 
that fans the ever undulating sky. 

|P_41
But there are many whose occupations 
oblige them to reside in large towns; 
they, therefore should make frequent 
excursions into the country, or to such 
situations as will enable them to enjoy, 
and to breathe air of a little more purity. 
I say enjoy, for who that has been for 
some time shut up in the town, without 
breathing the pure air of the country, 
does not feel his spirits revived the mo- 
ment he emerges from the azote of the 
town. Let not therefore, if possible, a 
single day pass, without enjoying, if 
but for an hour, the pure air of the coun- 
try. Doing this, only for a short time 
every day, would be much more effec- 
tual than spending whole days, or even 
weeks in the country, and then return- 
ing into the corrupt atmosphere of the 
town; for when you have for a long 
time breathed an impure air, the excita- 
bility becomes so morbidly accumulated, 
from the want of the stimulus of pure 
air, that the air of the country will have 
too great an effect upon you; it will fre- 
|P_42
quently, in the course of a day or two, 
bring on an inflammatory fever, attend- 
ed with stuffing of the nose, hoarseness, 
a great degree of heat, and dryness of the 
skin, with other symptoms of a violent 
cold. 

Large towns are the graves of the hu- 
man species; they would perish in a 
few generations, if not constantly re- 
cruited from the country. The confin- 
ed, putrid air, which most of their inha- 
bitants breathe, their want of natural 
exercise, but above all their dissipation, 
shorten their lives, and ruin their consti- 
tutions. 

Children particularly, require a pure 
air, every circumstance points out the 
country as the proper place for the edu- 
cation of children; the purity of the 
air, the variety of rustic sports, the 
plainness of diet, the simplicity and in- 
nocence of manners, all concur to re- 
commend it. It is a melancholy fact, 
|P_43
that above half the children born in Lon- 
don, die before they are two years old. 

To shew how indispensable fresh air 
is to children, I shall mention one ex- 
ample which sets the fact in the clearest 
light. In the lying-in hospital at Dub- 
lin, 2944 infants, out of 7650, died in 
the year 1782, within the first fortnight 
after their birth, which is nearly every 
third child; they almost all died in con- 
vulsions ; many of them foamed at the 
mouth, their thumbs were drawn into 
the palms of their hands, their jaws 
were locked, the face was swelled and 
looked blue, as though they were choak- 
ed. This last circumstance led the phy- 
sicians to conclude that the rooms in the 
hospital were too close, and hence, that 
the infants had not a sufficient quantity 
of good air to breathe; they therefore 
set about ventilating them better, which 
was done very compleatly. The con- 
sequence has been, that not one child 
dies now where three used to die. 

|P_44
Fewer children indeed die convulsed 
now, than formerly; this is because the 
rich learn, either from books, or con- 
versation with physicians, how necessa- 
ry fresh air is to life and health; hence 
they keep their houses well aired; but 
the poor, and servants, are not made to 
comprehend this matter properly; and 
therefore from neglecting to open their 
windows, and breathing a foul, tainted 
air, the greatest part of their time, many 
disorders are brought on, and others 
rendered worse than they naturally 
would be. [/5./]

|P_45
Having considered the purity of the 
air, let us next take a view of the changes 
in temperature which it undergoes, and 
the effects which these have upon the 
constitution. 

We find the air sometimes considerably 
below the freezing point; nay, even so 
much as 20 or 30 degrees; it is then 
intensely cold; and on the other hand, 
it sometimes rises to a great degree of 
heat. We then find ourselves much re- 
laxed, and our constitutions exhausted. 

To understand how this happens, let 
us consider for a moment the nature of 
heat, and cold.—Heat is one of those 
stimuli which act upon the excitability, 
|P_46
and support life: for if it was totally 
withdrawn, we should not be able to exist 
even a few minutes; and cold, is only 
a diminution of heat. When heat is pre- 
sent, in a proper degree, or the atmos- 
phere is about that degree of heat which 
we call temperate, it just gives such a 
degree of stimulus, and keeps the excita- 
bility exhausted to such a degree, as to 
preserve the body in health; but if it 
continue for a considerable time to be 
much warmer than this temperature, the 
consequence must be, from the laws al- 
ready laid down, an exhaustion of the 
excitability, and a consequent relaxation 
and debility; for, when the excitability 
has been exhausted by the violent applica- 
tion of heat, long continued, the com- 
mon stimulant powers which support 
life, cannot produce a sufficient effect 
upon it, to give to the body that tone 
which is compatible with health. On 
the contrary, when the heat of the air 
falls below what we call temperate, or 
when cold is applied to the body, from 
|P_47
the accustomed stimulus of heat being 
diminished, the excitability must accu- 
mulate, or become more liable to be af- 
fected by the action of the external 
powers. 

This, however, very seldom produces 
bad effects, unless the exciting powers be 
improperly or quickly applied; for we 
can bear a considerable diminution of heat 
without any bad consequences; and in all 
cases I hope I shall be able to make it ap- 
pear, that much more mischief arises from 
the too great action of heat, than from the 
diminution of it. Nature never made any 
country too cold for its inhabitants. In 
cold climates, she has made exercise, and 
even fatigue habitual to them, not only 
from the necessity of their situation, but 
from choice, their natural diversions be- 
ing all of the athletic or violent kind. 
But the softness and effeminacy of mo- 
dern manners, has both deprived us of 
our natural defence against the diseases 
most incident to our climate, and sub- 
|P_48
jected us to all the inconveniencics of a 
warm one. 

People are afraid of going out into the 
cold air; but if they conduct themselves 
properly afterwards, they will never be 
in the least danger from it. Indeed the 
action of cold, unless it be excessive, 
never produces any bad effects. 

Many of you will, no doubt, think 
me here in an error; but I hope you 
will not long entertain that opinion. You 
will say that you have had frequent ex- 
perience to the contrary; that you have 
often gone out into the cold air, and 
have caught dreadful colds. That this 
is owing to the action of cold, I will 
deny; nay, I will assert, that if a per- 
son go out into air which is very cold, 
and remain in it for a very long time, he 
will never perceive any symptoms of 
what is called a cold so long as he re- 
mains there. 

|P_49
A common cold is attended with a 
running of the nose, hoarseness, and 
cough, with a considerable degree of fe- 
verish heat, and dryness of the skin.— 
Now it is universally agreed, that this 
disorder is an inflammation, or is of an 
inflammatory nature; it is an inflamma- 
tion of the smooth, moist skin which 
lines the nostrils, and goes down the 
wind-pipe into the lungs; but as cold 
is only a diminution of heat, or a dimi- 
nution of a stimulus acting upon the bo- 
dy, it is impossible that such a diminu- 
tion can cause a greater action or excite- 
ment; we might as well expect to fill a 
vessel by taking water out of it. But 
let us see how a cold, as it is commonly 
called, is usually produced. When a 
person in cold weather goes out into the 
air, every time he draws in his breath, 
the cold air passes through his nostrils 
and windpipe into the lungs, and in 
thus diminishing the heat of the parts, allows 
their excitability to accumulate, and 
renders them more liable to be affected by 
|P_50
the succeeding heat. So long as that 
person continues in the cold air, he feels 
no bad effects; but if he come into a 
warm room, he first perceives a glow 
within his nostrils and breast, as well as 
all over the surface of the body. Soon 
afterwards, a disagreeable dryness and 
huskiness will be felt in the nostrils and 
breast. By and by a short, dry, tickling 
cough comes on. He feels a shivering, 
which makes him draw nearer to the fire, 
but all to no purpose; the more he tries 
to heat himself, the more chill he be- 
comes. All the mischief is here caused 
by the violent action of the heat on the 
accumulated excitability. For want of 
a knowledge of this law, these disagree- 
able, and often dangerous complaints are 
brought on; when they might be avoid- 
ed with the greatest ease. 

When you take a ride into the coun- 
try on a cold day, you find yourselves 
very cold; as soon as you go into a house, 
you are invited to come to the fire, and 
|P_51
warm yourselves; and what is still 
worse, to drink something warm and 
comfortable, to keep out the cold, as the 
saying is. The inevitable consequence 
of this, is, to bring on the complaints 
which I have just described, which might 
with more propriety, be called heats 
than colds. But how easily might these 
complaints have been avoided! When 
you come out of a very cold atmosphere, 
you should not at first go into a room 
that has a fire in it, or if you cannot 
avoid that, you should keep for a consi- 
derable time at as great a distance from 
the fire as possible, that the accumulated 
excitability may be gradually exhausted, 
by the moderate and gentle action of 
heat; and then you may bear the heat 
of the fire without any danger: but, 
above all, refrain from taking warm or 
strong liquors while you are cold. If a 
person have his hands or feet exposed to 
a very severe cold, the excitability of 
those parts will be so much accumulated, 
that if they should be brought suddenly 
|P_52
near the fire, a violent inflammation, 
aud even a mortification will take place, 
which has often happened; or, at any 
rate, that inflammation called Chilblains 
will be produced, from the violent ac- 
tion of the heat upon the accumulated ex- 
citability of those parts; but, if a person 
so circumstanced, was to put his hands or 
feet into cold water, very little warmer 
than the atmosphere to which he had 
been exposed, or rub them with snow, 
which is not often colder than 32 or 30 
degrees, the morbid excitability will be 
gradually exhausted, and no bad conse- 
quences will ensue. 

When a part of the body only has been 
exposed to the action of cold, and the rest 
kept heated, if, for instance, a person 
in a warm room sits so that a current of 
air coming through a broken pane, should 
fall upon any part of the body, that part 
would be soon affected with an inflam- 
mation, which is usually called a rheuma- 
tic inflammation. 

|P_53
From what has been said, it will be 
easy to account for this circumstance. 
The excitability of the part is accumu- 
lated by the diminution of its heat; but 
at the same time, the rest of the body 
and blood is warm; and this warm blood 
acting upon a part where the excitability 
is accumulated, will cause an inflamma- 
tion; to which, the more you apply heat, 
the worse you make it.—From these 
considerations, we may lay it down as a 
fact, and experience supports us in so 
doing, that you may in general go out of 
warm into cold air without much dan- 
ger; but, that you can never return 
suddenly from the cold into the warm air 
with perfect impunity. 

Hence, we may lay down the follow- 
ing rule, which, if strictly observed, 
would prevent the frequent colds we 
meet with in winter. When the whole 
body, or any part of it, is chilled, bring 
it to its natural feeling and warmth by 
degrees. 

|P_54
But if, for want of observing this ne- 
cessary caution, a cold, as it is called, 
should have seized a person, let us con- 
sider what is proper to be done. 

It will, from the preceding reasoning, 
appear very improper to make the room 
where you sit warmer than usual, to en- 
crease the quantity of bed-cloaths, to 
wrap yourself up in flannel, or particu- 
larly to drink a large quantity of barley- 
water, gruel, or tea, almost boiling hot, 
by way of diluting, as it is called, and 
forcing a perspiration; this will infalliably 
make the disorder worse, in the same 
manner as confining inoculated persons 
in warm rooms would make their small- 
pox more violent. 

Perhaps there would be scarcely such 
a thing as a bad cold, if people, when 
they found it coming on, were to keep 
cool, and avoid wine and strong liquors, 
and confine themselves for a short time 
to a simple diet of vegetable food, drink- 
|P_55
ing only toast and water. Instances are 
by no means uncommon, where a heat 
of the nostrils, difficulty of breathing, 
a short, tickling cough, and other symp- 
toms, threatening a violent cold, have 
gone off entirely in consequence of this 
plan being pursued. 

Colds would be much less frequent, 
were we to take more pains to accom- 
modate our dress to the season: if we 
were warmly cloathed in cold weather, 
our excitability would not be accumu- 
lated by the action of the cold. If a greater 
proportion of females fall victims to this 
disease, is it not because, losing sight, 
more than men, of its primary purpose, 
they regulate their dress solely by fan- 
tastic ideas of elegance? If happily, as is 
observed by Dr. Beddoes, our regret 
should recall the age of chivalry, to break 
the spell of fashion would be an atchieve- 
ment worthy the most gallant of our fu- 
ture Knights. Common sense has al- 
ways failed in the adventure; and our 
|P_56
ladies, alas! are ftill compelled, when- 
ever the enchantress waves her wand, to 
expose themselves half undressed, to the 
fogs and frosts of our island. 

Besides the effects of the air, we ought 
by no means to be indifferent with regard 
to what we take into the stomach as food 
and drink; since these have even a 
greater influence on our health, than the 
circumstances I have already mentioned. 
Among the causes which excite the body, 
and support life, I have formerly menti- 
oned food, or the matters taken into the 
stomach. It is from these matters that 
all the animal solids and fluids are formed; 
these are stimuli, which if totally with- 
drawn, we could not exist many days. 
These stimuli are subject to the same laws 
with all the others which act upon the 
body. When they act properly in con- 
cert with the other powers, they produce 
the healthy state; but if they act in an 
undue degree, whether that action be too 
great or too little, disease will be the 
|P_57
consequence. When they act too feebly, 
the excitability will accumulate; and dis- 
eases of debility, attended with a very 
great degree of irritability, will take 
place: this has been instanced in those 
who have been without food for some 
time. Persons who have been shut up 
in a coal-work by the falling-in of the 
pit, and have consequently been without 
food for some days, have had their ex- 
citability so much accumulated, as to be 
toxicated with a bason of broth. 

To this source we may attribute many 
of the diseases with which the poor are 
afflicted; but they are by no means so 
common as diseases of an opposite nature, 
which arise from a too free use of food. 
I shall confine myself here to the consi- 
deration of what is more strictly called 
food, and afterwards consider the effects 
of strong liquors. 

When we take food in too great quan- 
tity, or of too nourishing a quality, it 
|P_58
will either produce inflammatory diseases, 
such as pleurisy, or by exhausting the 
excitability, it will bring on stomach 
complaints, gout, and all the symptoms 
of premature old age. This follows so 
evidently from the laws we have investi- 
gated, that it is scarcely necessary to say 
more on the subject; and I am sure there 
are few who have not seen examples 
of it. 

Be therefore temperate in eating, and 
eat only of such foods as are the plainest; 
and let a proper quantity of vegetable 
food be mixed with animal. If you 
value the preservation of health, never 
satiate yourselves with eating; but let 
it be a rule from which you ought never 
to depart, always to rise from table with 
some remains of appetite: for, when the 
stomach is loaded with more food than 
it can easily digest, a crude and unassi- 
milated chyle is taken into the blood, 
pregnant with diseases. Nor is the quan- 
tity the only object of attention; the 
|P_59
quality of the food is to be carefully stu- 
died; made dishes, enriched with hot 
sauces, stimulate infinitely more than 
plain food, and therefore exhaust the ex- 
citability, bringing on diseases of indirect 
debility; such as the worst kind of gout, 
apoplexy, and paralytic complaints. "For 
my part, " says an elegant writer, "when 
I behold a fashionable table set out in all 
its magnificence, I fancy that I see gouts 
and dropsies, fevers and lethargies, with 
other innumerable distempers, lying in 
ambuscade among the dishes. " Let it be 
therefore laid down as a rule by those 
who wish to preserve their health, and I 
have nothing to say to those who are in- 
different on that head, to make their 
chief repast on one plain dish, and trifle 
with the rest. 

It is by no means uncommon for a 
medical man to have patients, chiefly 
among people of fashion and fortune, 
who complain of being hot and restless 
all night, and having a foul taste in the 
|P_60
mouth every morning: on examination 
it is found, that in nineteen cases out of 
twenty, it has arisen from their having 
overloaded their stomachs, and at the 
same time neglected to take proper exer- 
cise; for it must always be observed, 
that more may be eaten with safety, 
nay, more is even necessary, when a 
person takes a good deal of exercise. 

When people take little exercise, and 
overload their stomachs, there lies within 
them a fermenting mass of undigested 
aliment; and it is not surprizing that 
this should irritate and heat the body 
during the night. This is likewise the 
foundation of stomach complaints, flatu- 
lencies, and all other symptoms of indi- 
gestion; which more frequently proceed 
from intemperance in eating and drink- 
ing than any other cause. The benefits 
arising from temperance are set in a 
striking light in the following allegory, 
which may be found in the adventurer. 

|P_61
Esculapius, after his deification or ad- 
mittance among the Gods, having re- 
visited his native country, and being one 
day (as curiosity led him a rambling,) in 
danger of being benighted, made the best 
of his way to a house he saw at some 
distance, where he was hospitably re- 
ceived by the master's of it. Cremes, for 
that was the master's name, though but 
a young man, was infirm and sickly. 
Of several dishes served up to supper, 
Cremes observed that his guest ate but 
of one, and that the most simple; nor 
could all his intreaties prevail upon him 
to do otherwise. He was, notwith- 
standing, highly delighted with Escula- 
pius's conversation, in which he observed 
a cheerfulness and knowledge superior to 
any thing he had hitherto met with. 

The next morning, Esculapius took 
his leave, but not till he had engaged his 
good-natured host to pay him a visit at a 
small villa, a few miles from thence. 
Cremes came accordingly, and was most 
|P_62
kindly received; but how great was his 
amazement when supper was served up, 
to see nothing but milk, honey, and a 
few roots, dressed in the plainest, but 
neatest manner, to which hunger, cheer- 
fulness, and good sense, were the only 
sauces. Esculapius seemed to eat with 
pleasure, while Cremes scarcely tasted of 
them. On which a repast was ordered 
more suitable to the taste of our guest. Im- 
mediately there succeeded a banquet com- 
posed of the most artful dishes that luxury 
could invent, with great plenty and va- 
riety of the richest and most intoxicating 
wines. These too were accompanied by 
damsels of the most bewitching beauty. 
Cremes now gave a loose to his appetites, 
and every thing he tasted raised exstasies 
beyond what he had ever known. 
During the repast, the damsels sung and 
danced to entertain them; their charms 
enchanted the enraptured guest, already 
flushed with what he had drank; his 
senses were lost in exstatic confusion. 
Every thing around him seemed Elysium, 
|P_63
and he was on the point of indulging the 
most boundless freedoms, when on a 
sudden their beauty, which was but a 
vizard, fell off, and discovered forms 
the most hideous and forbidding imagi- 
nable. Lust, revenge, folly, murder, 
meagre poverty, and despair, now ap- 
peared in the most odious shapes, and 
the place instantly became a most dire 
scene of misery and confusion. How 
often did Cremes wish himself far distant 
from such a diabolical company, and 
now dreaded the fatal consequence which 
threatened him. His blood ran chill at 
his heart, and joy and rapture were per- 
verted to amazement and horror!— 
When Esculapius perceived it had made 
a sufficient impression on his guest, he 
thus addressed him: "Know, Cremes, 
it is Esculapius who has thus entertained 
you, and what you have beheld is a true 
image of the deceitfulness and misery 
inseparable from luxury and intempe- 
rance. Would you be happy, be tem- 
perate: temperance is the parent of 
|P_64
health, virtue, wisdom, plenty, and 
every thing that can make you happy in 
this or the world to come. It is indeed 
the true luxury of life, for without it 
life cannot be enjoyed. " This said, he 
disappeared, and left Cremes (instead of 
an elegant apartment) in an open plain, 
full of ideas quite different from those he 
had brought with him. 

On his return home, from the most 
luxurious, he became one of the most 
temperate men, by which wise method 
he soon regained health. Frugality pro- 
duced riches, and from an infirm and 
crazy constitution, and almost ruined 
estate, by virtue of this infallible elixir, 
he became one of the happiest men 
breathing, and lived to a healthy old age, 
revered as an oracle for his wisdom 
throughout all Greece. 

If temperance be necessary with re- 
gard to food, it is still more so with re- 
spect to strong liquors; these diffusible 
|P_65
stimuli by quickly exhausting the exci- 
tability, soon blast the vigour, and sap 
the foundation of the strongest constitu- 
tion. Their immediate effects you 
know are stimulant; they raise the ani- 
mal spirits, produce a cheerful state of 
mind, and if taken in greater quantity, 
cause intoxication, or that temporary de- 
rangement of the thinking powers which 
arises from too great a degree of excite- 
ment: but let us see what happens the 
next day; the animal spirits are ex- 
hausted, and the person thus situated, 
finds himself languid and enervated to a 
great degree; for it seems a law of the 
human body, that the spirits are never 
artificially raised, without being after- 
wards proportionably depressed; and to 
shew clearly that in this state the exci- 
tability is exhausted, the ordinary pow- 
ers which in general support life, will 
not have their due effect; and a person 
thus situated finds most relief the next 
day, from taking some of the same 
stimulus which occasioned the exhaus- 
|P_66
tion; because the common exciting 
powers can scarcely act upon his ex- 
hausted excitability. 

But though the excitability be in this 
way exhausted, it will in the course of 
a day or two be again accumulated, and 
it may, perhaps, be suspected that this 
exhaustion can do no harm at all to the 
constitution; but this is a premature 
conclusion, and quite contrary to fact 
and experience, as well as to reason; 
for, just in the same manner that a pen- 
dulum, made to vibrate in the arc of a 
circle, will never return exactly to the 
same height, but fall a little short of it 
every time; so, though the excitability 
may be again accumulated, it never can 
be brought back to what it was before; 
and every fresh debauch will shorten life, 
probably two or three weeks at least, 
besides debilitating the body, and bring- 
ing on a variety of diseases, with pre- 
mature old age. 

|P_67
Those who drink only a moderate 
quantity of wine, so as to make them 
cheerful, as they call it, but not abso- 
lutely to intoxicate, may imagine that 
it will do them no harm. The strong 
and robust may enjoy the pleasures of 
the bottle and table with seeming impu- 
nity, and sometimes for many years, 
may not find any bad effects from them; 
but depend upon it, if a full diet of ani- 
mal food be every day indulged in, with 
only a moderate portion of wine, its 
baneful influence will blast the vigour of 
the strongest constitution. 

While we are eating, water is the best 
beverage. The custom of drinking fer- 
mented liquors, and particularly wine, 
during dinner, is a very pernicious one. 
The idea that it assists digestion, is false; 
those who are acquainted with chemistry 
know, that food is hardened, and ren- 
dered less digestible by these means, and 
the stimulus which wine gives to the 
stomach is not necessary, excepting to 
|P_68
those who have exhausted the excitabi- 
lity of that organ by the excessive use of 
strong liquors. In these, the stomach 
can scarcely be excited to any action 
without the assistance of such a stimulus. 
If food wants diluting, water is the best 
diluent, and will prevent the rising, as 
it is called, of strong food, much better 
than wine or spirits. 

Before I finish this subject, I shall say 
a few words on the pernicious custom of 
suffering children to drink wine, or 
other fermented liquors. Nothing is 
more common than to see, even very 
young children come to the table after 
dinner, to drink a glass of wine. The least 
quantity produces violent effects on their 
accumulated excitability, and by quick- 
ly exhausting it, ruins their constitutions 
through life, and often renders them ha- 
bitual drinkers. 

I can scarcely help attributing in some 
degree the many stomach complaints we 
|P_69
meet with, among young people in the 
present age, and which were unknown 
to our forefathers, to the abominable 
practice of suffering children to drink 
fermented, or spirituous liquors. You 
must all have observed how soon chil- 
dren are intoxicated and inflamed by spi- 
rituous liquors; you may judge then, 
that if these liquors be only a slow poison 
to us, they are a very quick one to 
them. A glass of wine, on account of 
the accumulated excitability of children, 
will have more effect upon them, than 
a bottle will have upon an adult accus- 
tomed to drink wine. If therefore, the 
health of a child, and its happiness 
through life be an object, never suffer it 
to taste fermented, or spirituous liquors, 
till it be fifteen or sixteen years of age, 
unless a little wine be necessary as a me- 
dicine. 

It now only remains for me to take 
some notice of exercise. Of all the va- 
rious methods of preserving health, and 
|P_70
of preventing diseases, which nature has 
suggested, there is none more efficacious 
than exercise, it puts the fluids all in 
motion, strengthens the solids, promotes 
perspiration, and occasions the decompo- 
sition of a larger quantity of atmospheric 
air in the lungs. Hence, in order to 
preserve the health of the body, the au- 
thor of nature has made exercise abso- 
lutely necessary to the greater part of 
mankind for obtaining the means of ex- 
istence.—Had not exercise been abso- 
lutely necessary for our well-being says 
the elegant Addison, nature would not 
have made the body so proper for it, 
by giving such an activity to the limbs, 
and such a pliancy to every part, as ne- 
cessarily produce those compressions, ex- 
tensions, contortions, dilatations, and all 
other kinds of motions that are necessary 
for the preservation of such a system of 
tubes and glands.—And that we might 
not want inducement to engage us in 
such exercise of the body as is proper for 
its welfare, it is so ordered, that nothing 
|P_71
valuable can be procured without it. 
Not to mention riches and honors, even 
food and raiment are not to be come at 
without the toil of the hands and sweat 
of the brow. Providence furnishes ma- 
terials, but expects that we should work 
them up ourselves. The earth must be 
laboured before it gives its increase, and 
when it is forced into its several pro- 
ducts, how many hands must they pass 
through before they are fit for use? Ma- 
nufactures, trade, and agriculture, natu- 
rally employ more than nineteen parts of 
the species out of twenty; and as for 
those who are not obliged to labour by 
the condition in which they are born, 
they are more miserable than the rest of 
mankind, unless they indulge themselves 
in that voluntary labour which goes by 
the name of exercise. 

Of all the different kinds of exercise, 
there is none that conduces so much to 
health as riding; it is not attended with 
the fatigue of walking, and the free air 
|P_72
is more enjoyed in this way than by any 
other mode of exercise. Where it can- 
not be used, walking, or exercise in a 
carriage, ought to be substituted. 

The best time for taking exercise is 
before dinner, for the body is then more 
vigorous and alert, and the mind more 
cheerful, and better disposed to enjoy 
the pleasure of a ride or walk. Exercise 
after a full meal disturbs digestion, and 
causes painful sensations in the stomach 
and bowels, with heart burn, and acid 
eructations. 

But whatever mode of exercise you 
use, it ought not at first to be too violent. 
Dr. Armstrong has given us an excellent 
rule— 

Begin with gentle toils, and as your nerves 
grow firm, to hardier, by just steps aspire. 
The prudent, even in every moderate walk, 
at first but saunter, and by flow degrees 
increase their pace. 

the end. 


[^1. 
* May not the heat, and want of perspiration, de- 
pend on an exhausted irritability of the subcutaneous 
vessels, which will be accumulated by the method here 
recommended? 
^]
[^2. 
* Oxygen gas, according to the new Nomenclature. 
^]
[^3. 
* The fixed air, or carbonic acid gas, formed dur- 
ing the combustion, having been separated by agitation 
in contact with lime water. 
^]
[^4. 
* Strictly speaking, water is composed of the bases 
of these airs, the greatest part of the caloric being 
given out on their union. 
^]
[^5. 
* Where manufactures are carried on to a great ex- 
tent, the air is rendered still worse, and every precau- 
tion ought to be used to preserve the health of the in- 
habitants. Places where manufactures are carried on, 
ought, therefore, to be constructed in such a manner 
as to be very lofty, and capable of being easily venti- 
lated. Night working is undoubtedly a perversion of 
the laws of nature, renders the constitution feeble, and 
lays a foundation for bad health and disease: for it not 
only gives no time for ventilation, and in consequence 
the quantity of oxygen becomes more and more ex- 
hausted, but the number of candles used, contributes 
|P_45
very much to contaminate the air. It has been found 
by experiment that a candle contaminates more air than 
a man. By persons who are interested in the welfare of 
the succeeding generation, night-work will never be 
urged, and it will be right to ventilate the manufac- 
tories every night, as well as during breakfast and 
dinner. 
^]