

[^Sample 1: book - ^]

|P_337[^Two horizontal lines, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}PART III. 
Of Officinal Compositions. }]
IN this Part are intended to be 
given all the Compositions of 
the College, according to their 
last Amendment of the Lon- 
don Dispensatory, which are now in 
use; leaving out those which are 
quite neglected in Practice, and not to 
be met with in the Shops. Next will 
be collected many from Dr. Bates's 
Pharmacopœia; and afterwards from 
any other Author or Person, whose 
Compositions have had Merit e- 
nough to bring them into the Shops, 
and give them a place in Prescrip- 
tion. Some Recipe's also will be 
retain'd, as have fallen into disre- 
gard, either thro the difficulty of 
making, or their liableness to So- 
phistication, which are of uncom- 
mon Efficacy; and likewise some 
inserted, which may be presumed 
worth bringing into the rank of Of- 
ficinal Medicines, both upon the 
account of their easy Composition, 
and convenient keeping; and their 
Efficacy in many Intentions of 
Cure. 

In those of the College they are given 
as they stand exactly in their own 
Dispensatory; but in the subjoin'd Re- 
marks, there is frequently the Liberty 
taken of noting out those Ingredi- 
ents, whose Virtues either fall not in 
with the main Intent of the Compo- 
sition, or cannot be drawn out by 
that particular Preparation, which 
such a Medicine is to be manag'd 
by. As in the Waters, for instance, 
under each Recipe, a mark is set 
upon all those Ingredients, which ei- 
ther have not any Qualities suitable 
to the main Purposes of the Com- 
position, or are of such a Texture as 
will not part with them by Distilla- 
tion, to what comes over the Helm; 
and so in other Forms, according to 
the Nature of the Ingredients, the 
Intention of the Medicine, and the 
particular Management, by which 
it is reduc'd into such a Form. 
The whole Materials of this Part 
we have distributed, as much as 
could be, under divers Sections, ac- 
cording to their nearest Affinity and 
Conveniency in Preparation; for 
the Method in the preceding Part 
of Simples, which has been directed 
by their Virtues and Intentions in 
Cure, would have made this too 
perplexed, and have given more 
trouble than the Advantages of it 
could answer. And in this likewise, 
as in the former, what Medicines are 
not well reducible under any par- 
ticular Division, have a Section 
given to them apart at the latter 
end. 

|P_338
[}SECT. I. 
Of Waters, Spirits, and Essential Oils. }]
IN this Division is intended to be 
given all that is to be perform'd 
by Distillation, which has not al- 
ready come in our way, under some 
of the Preparations of the fore- 
going Part, and are more properly 
reckon'd amongst the Compositions. 
And as the Rationale of this Process, 
or Manner of Preparation, has al- 
ready been given, Part 1. Section 
13. and many necessary Remem- 
brances drop'd concerning it, in 
many of the foregoing Pages; it will 
be needless to say any more by way 
of Preface to this Section, than that 
for the Reasons before given, there 
can be expected no Medicines under 
it, but for the Intentions either of 
Cordials, Diureticks and Diaphore- 
ticks: for, to shorten the Contro- 
versy, if a Balsamick, Cathartick, 
or Opiate could be rais'd by Vapour; 
yet the very Contenders for that 
Opinion allow, that those Proper- 
ties are much more conveniently 
drawn out by other Processes: and 
therefore it may be concluded, that 
no wise Person will look in a di- 
still'd Water for any thing else than 
such subtle and light Parts of a me- 
dicinal Simple, as can fall in with 
the foremention'd Intentions; and 
indeed for this reason very little un- 
der this division comes over weighty 
enough to affect even the Urinary Se- 
cretions: and therefore all which re- 
quire grosser and more efficacious In- 
struments, are excluded from hence; 
as all that is to be done by the mi- 
nutest Agents, and concerns imme- 
diately the Nervous System, and its 
proper Moistures, commonly call'd 
the animal Spirits, most naturally 
are comprehended herein. 

By a Simple-Water is intended to 
draw out the Virtues of any Herb, 
Seed, Flower, Root, &c. which 
may be more conveniently given 
in that Form than any other: 
but because the Phlegm, or watry 
Parts of any medicinal Simple, is 
no better than common Water un- 
distilled; therefore all those Ingre- 
dients which in Distillation raise no- 
thing but a Phlegm, as may be dis- 
cover'd by the Scent and Taste of 
what comes over, are not fit for the 
Still. For which reason the follow- 
ing Waters, which are still retain'd in 
the College-Dispensatory, are good 
for nothing, or at least not worth 
distilling; although yet in some e- 
steem amongst Nurses and ignorant 
People, and upon that account made, 
or pretended to be made, and kept 
in the Shops. To which also we shall 
add those which are nor in use, al- 
though they may be said to be of 
some efficacy; whereby the young 
Prescriber may the better know 
what the Shops can supply him 
with. 

[}College Simple Waters not us'd, or good for nothing. }]Aqua Water of Aqua Water of Abrotan. Southernwood Acetosæ Sorrel Absinth. Wormwood * Agrimoniæ Agrimony 
|P_339Alchimillæ Ladies Mantle * Fabarum Bean-Pods Alkekengi Winter Cherries Fragariæ Strawberry Althææ Marsh-Mallows Fraxini Ash Anagalledis Pimpernel * Fumariæ Fumitory Aparines Cliver Galegæ Goats-Rue Apii Smallage Genistæ Broom Aquilegiæ Columbine Graminis Grass Argentinæ Wild Tansy Hedera ter. Ground-Ivy * Artemisiæ Mugwort Hirundin. Swallows Asparagi Asparagus Hormini Clarry Astacorum Crab-Fish Hyperici St. John's-wort * Atrepl. olid. Stinking Orrace Iridis Orrice Auricul. muris Mouse-Ear * Jugland. Walnuts Bardanæ Burdock Lactis Milk Becabungæ Brooklime Lactucæ Lettice * Betonicæ Betony Lamii Archangel Betulæ Birch-Tree * Lilii Con. Lillies of the Vally * Borraginis Borrage Limacum Snails Bugloss. Bugloss Limonum Lemons Bryoniæ Bryony Limariæ Flaxweed Bursæ Past. Shepherds Pouch Linguæ Avis Ash Calaminthæ Calaminth Linguæ Cer. Harts-Tongue * Calendulæ Marygolds Lujulæ Wood-Sorrel Cancror. Crab-Fish Lumbricorum Earth-Worms Caprisol. Wood-bind Lupuli Hops Cardamin. Cuckow-Flower Majoranæ Marjoram * Cardui Ben. Carduus Malvæ Mallows Carioph. Clove Gillyflower Matricariæ Motherwort Centaur min. Centaury the less Meliloti Melilot Centinodii Knot-Grass Mellis Honey Ceparum Onions Mentastri Horse-Mint Cheresol. Chervil Millesolii Yarrow Chamæd. Germander Nasturtii Water-Cresses Chamæpit. Ground-Pine Nicotianæ Tobacco * Chelidonii Celandine Nummular. Money-wort * Cichori Succory Nymphææ Water-Lilly Citri Citron Ocimi Basil * Cochlear. Scurvy-Grass Omnium Flor. Cow-Dung * Consolid. Comfrey Ononidis Rest-Harrow Corn. Cervin Harts-horn Papav. alb. White Poppy Cotul. fœtid May-weed * Papav. Rhead. Red Poppy Cucumer. Cucumber Parietariæ Pellitory CyaniBlue-Borle * Paralyseos Cowslips Cydonior. Quinces Petasitidis Butter-Burr * Dracunc. Taragon Picarum Magpies Endiviæ Endive * Pimpinellæ Pimpinel Enulæ Elecampane * Plantaginis Plantane Equiseti Horse Tail Pœoniæ Piony* Euphragiæ Eye Bright Polygonati Solomons Seal 
|P_340Pomorum Apples Serpylti Mother-time Porri Leeks * SperniolæFrog-Spawn Portulacæ Purslain Stercoris Vac. Cow-Dung Prasii Hoar-Hound Solani Nightshade Prunel. Sloes Tamarisci Tamarisk * Quercus Oak-Buds * Tanaceti Tansy * Ranarum Frogs Tapsi barb. Mullein Raparum Turnips Taraxici Dandelion Rorellæ Sun-Dew Thymi Thyme Rubi Idæi Raspberries Tiliæ Lime-Tree Sabinæ Savin Tormentillæ Tormentil * Salviæ Sage Tunicæ Gillyflowers Satureiæ Savory Tussilaginis Colts-Foot Satyrii Satyrion Valerianæ Valerian Saxifragiæ Saxifrage Verbenæ Vervain Stabiosæ Scabious Veronicæ Speedwell Scordii Water Germander Vitis Vine Scrophulariæ Figwort Ulmariæ Meadow-Sweet Sempervivi House-leek Urticæ Urent. Stinging-Nettles. 
But although these are separated 
from the rest as good for nothing; 
yet some of them are frequently 
asked for, and may continue so to 
be, as long as Nurses and Midwives 
prescribe: such therefore we have 
bestow'd an * Asterism upon, that 
they may have some Mark of 
Distinction, tho they are not so 
good as what is commonly given 
in their stead from the Water- 
Cock. 

It is to be hoped that, upon a 
revisal of the Dispensatory when 
the College shall judge proper, these 
may be expung'd; whereby the 
Prescriber will be prevented from 
writing for what is not to be had, 
and the Apothecary not under the 
Temptation of putting quid pro quo, 
as they call it, i. e. one thing for 
another. The Simple Waters of any 
Virtue, are the following, which we 
shall only give a List of, because 
their Virtues may be found under 
the respective Simples they are 
drawn from in the foregoing Part; 
and the manner of their Distillation 
has already been taught: only thus 
much it may not be improper to ad- 
vertise of, that whatsoever Properties 
any Simple has from the Grossness 
or Solidity of its Parts, which make 
it act as an Emetick, Cathartick, or 
Astringent; the Residuum, which 
is left after Distillation, will re- 
main in full possession of them; and 
therefore the Operator may husband 
it accordingly. Thus the Syrupus 
Rosarum solutivus, the purging Sy- 
rup of Roses, is as well made after 
the Damask-Rose Water is drawn 
off, as if the Flowers were juic'd, 
or put into Infusion, because no- 
thing of a Cathartick Quality rises 
with the Water; and the Syrupus e 
Rosis siccis, the Syrup of dry'd Red 
Roses, may be as well made with 
the Residuum after the Water is 
drawn off, for the same reason; 
and so of many others. The same 
also holds good as to Extracts, of 
Virtues not communicable to what 
rises in Vapour; and therefore all 
such as those of Gentian, and many 
others, are most conveniently made 
|P_341
with what is left after Distillation: 
concerning which we shall further 
see when we come to Extracts, un- 
der another Section. 

[}College Simple Waters of use, and frequently prescrib'd. }]Aqua Water of Aqua Water of Anethi Dill Melissæ Bawm * Angelicæ AngelicaMenthæMint * Anthos Rosemary * Naphæ Orange-Flowers Cerasor. Nig. Black Cherries Petroselini Parsly * Chamem. Chamomile Pulegis Pennyroyal Fæniculi Fennel * Rosarum Dam. Damask Roses Hyssopi Hyssop Rutæ Rue Juniperi Bac. Juniper Berries Sambuci Flori Elder-Flowers Levistici Lovage * Carminativa Carminative-water.
Some of this List are little us'd, 
tho they much better deserve it than 
many that are; such therefore we 
have distinguish'd also by an Aste- 
rism, as a recommendation to better 
regard in Prescription. 

Of these Waters, tho they all 
bring over something besides Phlegm, 
as is manifest from the Smell and 
Taste of the respective Simples
whence they are drawn; yet it is so 
faint in some of them, that they 
will not keep long without mother- 
ing, and growing ropy: Such 
therefore should have a small quan- 
tity of Spirit thrown into the Still 
with them, about one Pint to each 
Gallon intended to be drawn, which 
will not alter the Virtues, but make 
the Water keep much longer. The 
Black Cherries for Distillation ought 
to have their Stones all broke, be- 
cause from the Kernel proceeds the 
chief Part; for which reason many 
make the Water from the pressing, 
after the Juice is taken out for other 
uses; and some even from bitter 
Almonds, as they give a Water not 
to be distinguish'd from the other. 
The Waters, whose Excellency con- 
sists in their Flavour, as the Orange- 
Flower and Damask Roses, ought to 
bo drawn into a Receiver fitted to 
the Worm with a Bladder, as before 
directed under the Preparation of 
Simples, so that no Particles may 
exhale and be lost. As for the Red
and White Rose Waters, which are 
expected in the Shops, they are very 
honestly deceiv'd, who have Da- 
mask Rose Water diluted, put upon 
them for the other; because there is 
nothing arises from either in the 
Still, but what is common to them 
all, which is in the Scent: and 
therefore as the Damask most a- 
bounds with that, it is very impru- 
dent and ill-husbandry to distil the 
other; altho the Residuums are as 
much different as can be, that of the 
Damask being purgative, and of 
the Red astringent, as was before 
observ'd. The Carminative Water 
we have put here, is the last Run- 
nings of the Aqua Mirabilis, Ste- 
phen's Water, or any other Aroma- 
tick; which tho not directed by any 
Dispensatory, is well worth preser- 
ving, will keep longer, and is better 
for Carminative Juleps, than the 
Waters drawn from any one Sim- 
ple. This is likewise of the least 
Expence of all, because after such 
Compound Aromatick Waters are 
|P_342
drawn low enough, there will still 
run a great deal too good to be 
thrown away; and therefore is best 
kept for the foremention'd Purposes 
under this Title in the Shops. 

[}College Compound Waters. }]
Aqua Absinth. minus & magis 
Comp. Wormwood Water the great- 
er and lesser Compound. See Spirit- 
Absinth. &c.

Aqua Angelicæ Comp. Com- 
pound Angelica Water. See Spirit 
of Angelica. 

[}Aqua Bezoartica, Bezoartick Water. }]
Take Leaves of Celandine with 
their Roots, m. iii ss. Rue m. i. 
Water Germander m. ii. Dittany 
of Crete, Carduus Ben. ana m i ss. 
Roots of Zedoary, Angelica, ana 
ʒ iii. the outward Peels of Citrons, 
Lemons, ana ʒ v. Clove-gilliflow- 
ers ℥ i ss. Red Roses, Centaury 
the lesser, ana ʒ ii. Sp. V. Malaga 
Wine, ana ℔ iii ss. Juice of Le- 
mons, Vinegar in which Clove- 
gillyflowers have been infus'd, ana 
℔ i. let these stand two or three 
days in Infusion; then distil off 
one Gallon, to which add Cinna- 
mon ʒ iii. Cloves ʒ ii ss. Venice 
Treacle ℥ iii. Mithridate ℥ i ss. 
Camphor ℈ ii. Troches of Vipers 
℥ ss. Mace ʒ ii. Wood of Aloes ʒ i. 
yellow Sanders ʒ i ss. Carduus Seed 
℥ i. of Citrons ʒ iii. After proper 
Infusion distil again as before, a- 
bout the same quantity. 

In this, and all Compound Wa- 
ters of the like kind, where the quan- 
tity to be drawn off, is about equal 
to the Spirit, or Wine, put into the 
Still, so much common Water is to 
be thrown in with it, as may be 
judg'd sufficient to preserve the In- 
gredients from burning while the 
desir'd quantity is running off. 

This Water is a very good Alexi- 
pharmick, and where somewhat Cor- 
dial is also requir'd, is preferable to 
the Treacle Water. The Shops ge- 
nerally draw it too low. Its Dose 
is from ʒ ii. to ℥ ii. diluted with some 
convenient Simple Water, or to 
Persons used to strong Liquors drank 
by it self. The double Distillation 
is needless, for all may be as well 
put together, and drawn at once. 
From the Residuum strain'd, and 
evaporated, is made the Extractum 
Bezoarticum, Bezoartick Extract, 
which is reckon'd to be endu'd with 
the same Virtues as the Water, but 
is never prescrib'd; and therefore 
neglected to be made, tho so easily 
done, and without Cost. The Leaves 
of Celandine in this Composition, do 
little or nothing; as also the Dittany 
of Crete, Carduus, Centaury, San- 
ders, Aloes Wood, and Citron Seeds, 
unless the Extract is intended to be 
made. 

[}Aqua Bryoniæ Comp. Compound 
Bryony Water. }]
Take Juice of Bryony Roots 
℔ iiii. Leaves of Rue, Mugwort 
ana ℔ ii. Savin m. iii. Feverfew, 
Catmint, Pennyroyal, ana m. ii. 
Basil, Dittany of Crete, ana m. iss. 
Orange Peels ℥ iv. Myrrh ℥ ii. Ca- 
stor ℥ i. Canary ℔ xii. Distil as usual, 
after proper Maceration; for the 
longer things of this kind infuse 
together, the Water is the bet- 
ter. 

In this, as all other Compound 
Waters, where Wine is order'd, the 
same quantity of proof Spirit is us'd 
in its stead, which makes the Water 
so much higher; and except in a 
few, the same quantity is drawn off 
as there is Spirit put in. This Wa- 
ter, if it be drawn quite so low as 
common Proof Spirit, the oily Parts 
of the Ingredients will make it milky 
|P_343
and foul, which some throw down 
with a little burnt Alum; but it 
spoils the Medicine, and therefore it 
is better kept white as it is, or drawn 
strong enough to suspend those Sul- 
phureous Parts transparent. But the 
former is the best, because other- 
wise the latter running, which will 
continue very strong of the Ingredi- 
ents, will be lost. This is a very 
untoothsome Composition; but ad- 
mirable well suited to the Intention 
of an Hysterick; and there is not 
one Ingredient in it, except the Dit- 
tany, which does not contribute 
thereunto. The Ingredients order'd 
to be juiced, are better put into the 
Still themselves, only they take up 
more room: for a great deal may 
remain in the pressings, which 
would rise, and come over with the 
Water. This is much prescribed in 
Hysterical Cases, and is very forcing 
upon the Uterus, which makes it 
given to promote Delivery, and for- 
ward the proper Cleansings after- 
wards; as also to open menstrual 
Obstructions, and abundance of o- 
ther Female Complaints. It is like- 
wise good against Convulsions in 
Children, and of service in any ner- 
vous Complaint in either Sex. Its 
Dose from ʒ ii. to ℥ ii. with any 
convenient Diluter. From the Resi- 
duum strain'd and evaporated is or- 
der'd an Extract, but it is never 
us'd. 

[}Aqua Cœlestis. }]
Take Cinnamon ℥ i. Ginger 
℥ ss. of all the Sanders, ana ʒ vi. 
Cloves, Galangals, Nutmegs, ana 
ʒ ii ss. Mace, Cubebs, ana ʒ i. 
Cardamoms the greater and lesser, 
ana ʒ iii. Zedoary, ℥ ss. Seeds of 
Fennel Flower ʒ iii. of Anise, 
Fennel, wild Carrot, and Basil, 
ana ʒ i ss. Roots of Angelica, 
Avens, Liquorice, Valerian, Cala-
mus Aromaticus, Leaves of Cla- 
rey, Thyme, Calamint, Penny- 
royal, Mint, Mother of Thyme, 
Marjoram, ana ʒ ii. Flowers of 
Red Roses, Sage, Rosemary, Be- 
tony, Stecha's, Borrage, Bugloss, 
ana ʒ i ss. Citron-Peels ʒ iii. bruise 
them into a gross Powder altoge- 
ther, and infuse them two or three 
Weeks, in Spirit V. ℔ xii. then 
draw off as much by Distillation, 
and put to the Water, of the Spe- 
cies Diambræ, Aromaticum Rosa-
tum, Diamoschu dul. Diamarg. 
sg. Diarrhod. Abbat. and Elect. 
de Gemmis, and ʒ iii. yellow San- 
ders ʒ ii. Ambergrease and Musk, 
ana ℈ i. and of the Julapium ro-
satum ℔ i. let them all stand to- 
gether one Month, frequently sha- 
king the Vessel, and then decant 
or filter it for use. 

The first Inserters of this in the 
London Dispensatory, seem'd by the 
Name they gave it of Heavenly Wa- 
ter, to have a great esteem for it; 
but it is not so much valued now, 
because we do not often find it 
prescrib'd, tho it is a wonderful 
good Cephalick and Cordial, where 
Perfumes are not offensive. In the 
Decays of Age, and languishing 
Constitutions, there is hardly any 
Composition excels it for its sudden 
reviving the Spirits. It greatly 
warms the Blood, and quickens its 
Circulation; and for which reason 
also it provokes to Venery. This 
little differs from the Aqua Vitæ 
Mathtol, Mathtolus's Water of Life, 
which is in the Augustan Dispensa- 
tory, by the Title of Elixir Vitæ; 
and there stands recommended for 
all nervous Infirmities, and particu- 
larly such as are the Consequences 
of Apoplexies, and Epilepsies; as 
Palsies, Loss of Memory, and the 
like. It may be given from ʒii. to 
℥ ii. but ℥ i. is pretty well for a 
|P_344
Dose: and it is better to repeat it 
often, than to take too much at a 
time. This is a tedious perplex'd 
Recipe, and some of the compound 
Species order'd in it are seldom 
made; their Ingredients therefore 
may be afresh dispens'd for this pur- 
pose, tho there are many which may 
as well be omitted, too numerous to 
particularize here: they are to be 
distinguish'd by their want of an 
Aromatick Flavour, for whatsoever 
has not that, cannot fall in with the 
Intention of this Composition. 
Zwelfer greatly blames some parts 
of this, in his Animadversions upon 
the Augustan Dispensatory; and 
gives a new Recipe of his own, but 
it is every jot as tedious, and many 
things in it as superfluous: but the 
most concise of the Germans are 
very prolix and redundant in their 
Prescriptions. 

[}Aqua Epidemica, Plague-Water. }]
Take Roots of Masterwort, An- 
gelica, Pioney, and Butter-burr, 
ana ℔ ss. of Spignel, Viper-grass, 
ana ℥ iv. Virginian Snake-Root 
℥ ii. Leaves of Rue, Rosemary, 
Baum, Carduus, Water-German- 
der, Marigolds with their Flowers, 
Dragons, Goats-Rue, and Mint, 
ana m. iv. Infuse these some days 
in Spirit of Wine rectify'd Cong. ii. 
common Water Cong. iv. then 
draw off Cong. iv. adding to each 
of fine Sugar ℥ i ss. and hang in 
the whole mix'd, ty'd in a Rag, 
of Saffron ℥ ss. 

This is of frequent use, and a 
most excellent Water in all Cases 
that require Alexipharmicks. It re- 
vives the Spirits, and promotes a 
Diaphoresis. To the Stomach it is 
very grateful; and upon eating any 
thing that does nauseate, and is not 
like to digest well, a large Dram of 
this is of good service. It is the Ba- 
sis of most Juleps now prescribed, 
especially in Fevers, or any Diseases 
attended with a Fever. It is drawn 
so small by this Direction, that it 
wants little diluting for grown Per- 
sons, tho Physicians seldom order 
above a fourth part to Simple Wa- 
ters; but it is now generally drawn 
somewhat higher than this Standard: 
but that is an Inconveniency to the 
Prescriber, who cannot tell so well 
for that reason to ascertain his Dose, 
which may be from ℥ ss. to ℥ iv. 
There are abundance of Waters un- 
der this Tribe, insomuch that there 
is hardly a Family that has not a 
Recipe for Plague-Water by Inheri- 
tance. But this is what the Shops 
are obliged to keep to, and is as 
good as any, tho not so costly. The 
Snake-Root ought to be powder'd, 
and infus'd in the Spirit, long before 
the other Ingredients, because it will 
not so soon by much communicate 
its Virtues to any Menstruum: if 
the others are put into the Still all 
green, as they may be most part of 
the Summer-time, it makes the Wa- 
ter rather finer-flavour'd, tho not 
quite so strong; but the Roots are 
always suppos'd to be as fresh as 
they can be taken up. The Meum, 
or Spignel-Root, is order'd to be 
left out, for the disagreeable Scent 
which it gives to the Medicine. And 
if the Carduus, Goats-Rue, and Ma- 
rigold were omitted, it would be 
never the worse; because they raise 
nothing in Distillation, but a taste- 
less insipid Phlegm. The Saffron is 
now always not used, because as it 
is frequently order'd in Pearl-Juleps, 
it would give them a very unhand- 
som Colour. And the Sugar is by 
many neglected, more through In- 
advertence than any good Rea- 
son, because it makes the Water 
much more palatable, and can be 
of no disservice. There is no 
|P_345
occasion for rectify'd Spirit, because 
common Proof will do as well, 
proportioning the Quantity accor- 
ding to their Difference of Strength. 

[}Aqua Gentianæ Comp. Compound 
Gentian-Water. }]
Take Root of Gentian ℔ i ss. 
Centaury the lesser, with its Flow- 
ers, ana ℥ iv. infuse them some 
days in ℔ xii. of White-Wine, and 
then distil about half that quan- 
tity. 

The Shops make this with Spirit 
of Wine instead of White-Wine, 
unless a very few, and then so much 
is to be drawn off as there is Spirit 
put in. This Water is frequently 
prescribed as a Stomachick, and is 
commended for a Deterger, to do 
service in Dropsies, the Jaundice, 
and any Obstructions of the Visce- 
ra, and is given from ʒ ii. to ℥ ii. 
or ℥ iii. at a Dose. But in truth these 
Ingredients give so little that will 
rise in Vapour, that the Spirit comes 
over but very little alter'd; so that 
they who are fond of the Virtues 
as they stand recommended in those 
Ingredients, must look for them in 
the Extract, or never put them into 
the Still: and that is easily made by 
straining and evaporating the Resi- 
duum, and is much used in the 
Shops chiefly with Stomachicks and 
Deobstruents, when they are prescri- 
bed to be made into Pills. Salmon, 
in his Notes upon this Water, says 
it is a Preservative in pestilential 
Seasons, excellent against the Ric- 
kets, helps Stitches in the Side, and 
provokes the Terms and After-Birth; 
and with equal Reason and Con- 
sistency, that wretched Scribler might 
have said it would cure Corns, bro- 
ken Bones, and Apoplexies. And 
yet with such Helps only, how ma- 
ny undertake the Cure of sick Per- 
sons? 

[}Aqua Hungarica, Hungary, or Queen 
of Hungary's Water. }]
Take Flowers of Rosemary ℥ xx. 
rectify'd Spirit of Wine ℥ xxx. let 
them infuse some days, then draw 
off as much as there was Spirit 
put in. 

This is most conveniently made 
by the Copper Alembick, taking 
care that the Receiver is closed with 
a Bladder to the end of the Worm. 
And this way common Spirit may be 
as well used as rectify'd; observing 
not to draw it so low as to be 
cloudy: for after a certain Standard, 
the oily part of the Flowers, which 
is considerable, will turn it milky. 
What runs afterwards, as a great 
deal will, which yet swells and tastes 
strong of the Flowers, may either 
be kept to throw into the Still again, 
when the same is to be made, or 
used in the Shop for a small Spirit 
of Rosemary; and the last Run- 
nings of all may pass for a good 
Simple Water under the same title. 
The Virtues of all these are to be 
known from the Simple, which see, 
Part 2. Sect. 1 No 12. 

[}Aqua Imperialis, Imperial Water. }]
Take Peels of dry'd Citrons and 
Oranges, of Nutmegs, Cloves, 
and Cinnamon, ana ℥ ii. Roots of 
Cypress, Florentine Orrice, Cala-
mus Aromaticus, ana ℥ i. Zedoa- 
ry, Galangals, Ginger, ana ℥ ss. 
Tops of Lavender and Rosemary, 
ana m. ii. Leaves of Bays, Mar- 
joram, Mint, Sage, Thyme, ana 
m. i. fresh Flowers of white and 
damask Roses, ana m. i ss. infuse 
them in ℔ iv. of Rose-water and 
℔ viii. of White-Wine, then distil 
off ℔ viii. 

For the White-Wine put a good 
Proof-Spirit, and the Water will be 
better. This is almost neglected in 
|P_346
Prescription, and not much kept in 
the Shops; but it is a very good 
Cephalick Water, and makes a very 
convenient Julep in any nervous 
Cases whatsoever: and tho it is so 
much slighted in the present Practice, 
this may be said of it, which can be 
of few besides in the whole Dispen- 
satory, That all the Ingredients co- 
incide in one Intention, and are all 
such as will part with their Virtues 
by Distillation. It may be given 
from ʒ ii. to ℥ ii. in any convenient 
Vehicle. It is also a pleasant Cor- 
dial Dram alone, and very good 
upon any sudden Sickness of the Sto- 
mach. 

[}Aqua Lactis Alexiteria, Alexiterial 
Milk-Water. }]
Take Leaves of Meadow-Sweet, 
Carduus ben. Goats-Rue, Mint, 
and Wormwood, ana m. v. Rue 
m. iii. Angelica m. ii. bruise them 
all, and pour upon them Cong. iii. 
of new Milk. Draw off in a cold 
Still to dryness, taking care not to 
burn it. 

If this be intended, as its Name 
imports, for an Alexipharmick, both 
the Ingredients are ill chose, and the 
Manner of Distillation will not raise 
any thing of such efficacy from those 
Ingredients, which have such Virtues 
in them. The three first will give 
nothing but a Phlegm, of neither 
Taste or Scent, and will soon de- 
cay; as likewise does nothing else 
rise from the Milk. As a Diluter
therefore it ought to be rejected, be- 
cause common Water is as good; 
and if it takes place amongst the 
Alexipharmicks, the Herbs which 
have any thing in them that will 
come over in Vapour, ought to be 
dry'd, and put into the Copper A- 
lembick with a sufficient quantity of 
Water; which, when drawn to a 
due strength, that is best judg'd of 
by the Taste, is the best Vehicle in 
the Shops, and therefore is now de- 
servedly in the common Practice 
principally used as such. It is very 
suitable in Alexipharmick and Ce- 
phalick Juleps, and not only a good 
Vehicle for things of more efficacy 
in those Intentions, but contributes 
somewhat thereunto it self. It would 
be no great loss, if the whole of the 
Simple Waters were expell'd the 
Shops, and this substituted in their 
room, having nothing in it unsuita- 
ble to any purpose whatsoever; and 
none of the other Waters being 
possess'd of any Virtues which is not 
to be better obtain'd from their re- 
spective Simples in other Forms. 
But such an Abridgment would much 
prejudice the Decorations of a Shop, 
unless the painted Bottles stand emp- 
ty; which is no very uncommon 
thing, thro the Rejectment of many 
insignificant Medicines already out 
of practice. 

[}Aqua Limacum Magistralis, Magiste- 
rial Snail-Water. }]
Take juice of Ground-Ivy, 
Colts-Foot, Scabious, spotted Lung- 
wort, ana ℔ i ss. of Purslain, Plan- 
tain, Oak of Jerusalem, Paul's- 
Betony, ana ℔ i. fresh Hogs-Blood, 
White-Wine, ana ℔ iv. Garden- 
Snails ℔ ii. Liquorice ℥ ii. Elicam- 
pane-Root ℥ ss. Florentine Orrice 
℥ i. Cotton-Seed ℥ iss. of the grea- 
ter cold Seeds, Aniseeds, ana ʒ vi. 
Saffron ʒ i. Red-Rose Leaves pug. 
vi. of Violet and Borrage-Flowers, 
ana pug. iv. Let them stand three 
days in Infusion, stirring them 
pretty often; then with a gentle 
Fire draw it off by the cold Still
to almost a Dryness, taking great 
care of an Empyreuma. 

This is one of the Compositions 
that Zwelfer greatly condemns, and 
with good reason enough, because it 
|P_347
is intended for a Balsamick; to 
which purpose, we have already 
shew'd, nothing will conveniently 
rise in a distill'd Water, and there- 
fore the Ingredients of this Class are 
much more advantageously managed 
under other Forms: but if the Exi- 
gency of a Patient calls for Help 
from all sides, and if with Medicines 
of this Intention in all the other 
Forms, one in this is also desired; 
the Water from this Recipe may pass 
for one, tho no great stress can be 
laid upon it alone. If all the Herbs 
be put in instead of their Juices, and 
the Water drawn by the Alembick 
with a gentle Fire, and the Refrige- 
ratory kept cool, it will make a bet- 
ter Medicine: for most that can be 
suppos'd to rise from such Ingre- 
dients, is a nitrous Salt wrapt up in 
soft mucilaginous Parts; the cold 
Still therefore will not be able to lift 
them up: and if it be suspected 
that a greater Heat will break and 
spoil such Parts, the advantage of 
raising the more of them, especially 
with the nitrous Mixture they carry 
with them, will sufficiently make up 
such a Loss. This way indeed of 
drawing it, makes the Water not so 
good at first drawing; but it cools 
and softens with keeping, especially 
if for White-Wine a clean Spirit is 
put: because it will else be apt to 
sour and spoil with Age. This ought 
to be drank in great quantities, and 
for some time together; and so 
may do great service in rincing the 
Viscera and Lungs, particularly from 
such beginning Lodgments of Mat- 
ter, as occasion Tubercles and Ul- 
cerations, and lay the soundation 
of a Consumption. 

[}Aqua Lumbricorum Magistralis, Ma- 
gisterial Water of Earth-Worms. }]
Take of Earth-Worms well 
cleansed from Dirt, after they are 
slit, ℔ iii. of Garden-Snails with 
their Shells Cong. ii. let these be 
bruised in a stone Mortar to a mash, 
then put to them Stinging-Nettles 
with their Roots m. vi. wild Ange- 
lica m. iv. Bears-Claw m. vii. Agri- 
mony, Betony, ana m. iii. Rue 
m. i. common Wormwood m. ii. 
Rosemary Flowers ℥ vi. Dock- 
Roots ℥ x. Sorrel-Roots ℥ v. Tur- 
merick, the inner Bark of the Bar- 
berry-Tree, ana ℥ iv. Cloves ℥ iii. 
Fœnugreek ℥ ii. Raspings of Harts- 
Horn, Ivory, ana ℥ iv. Saffron 
ʒ iii. Spirit of Wine small Con. iv ss. 
Let them macerate together 24 
hours, and then draw off the Wa- 
ter with the Copper Alembick, 
and the four first Pints title Spirit
of Earth-Worms, and the rest the 
Water. 

This is an odd Huddle enough of 
Ingredients together, for the same 
Intention as the former. It is usual- 
ly directed to be drawn by the cold 
Still, but we prefer this way, for the 
Reasons given under the preceding 
Composition: but this Water is 
much preferable to that, and is a 
very good Cordial, tho no great 
Balsamick. It may be drank almost 
at discretion. 

[}Aqua Mariæ, The Ladies Water. }]
Take Sugar-Candy ℔ i. Canary 
Wine ℥ vi. Rose-water ℥ iv. boil 
them into a Syrup, and mix with 
it of Aqua Cœlestis ℔ ii. Amber- 
grease and Musk, ana gr. xviii. 
Saffron gr. xv. yellow Saunders in- 
fused in Aqua Cœlestis ʒ ii. Let 
it settle, and decant the Liquor off 
fine by Inclination. 

This deservedly has its Title; for 
it is much fitter for the Closet than 
the Shop, both on account of its 
Costliness as well as Uses. Where 
Perfumes can be bore with, it is an 
extraordinary Cordial, and greatly 
|P_348
raises the Spirits, and is good in all 
Sinkings and nervous Decays. The 
Dose from ʒ ii. to ℥ i. or more, di- 
luted with some other proper Li- 
quor, for it is too rich to drink a- 
lone. This is seldom prescribed, but 
very well worth the making, for 
such as will not be consented with- 
out the highest of Cordials. 

[}Aqua Mirabilis, The Wonderful 
Water. }]
Take of Cloves, Galangals, Cu- 
bebs, Mace, Cardamoms, Nutmeg, 
Ginger, ana ʒ i. Juice of Celan- 
dine ℔ ss. Spirit of Wine ℔ i. 
White-Wine ℔ iii. Digest toge- 
ther 24 hours, and then distil 
off ℔ ii. 

The Juice of Celandine has no- 
thing to do in this Composition, 
for its Parts will afford nothing more 
than common Water. Instead of 
the White-Wine most put a Proof- 
Spirit, and draw off as much as is 
put in. It is generally likewise dul- 
cify'd with Loaf-Sugar at pleasure. 
If it be drawn low, the oily Parts 
of the Spices will show themselves 
in a milky Cloud, and render it un- 
sightly. It is best therefore not to 
draw it lower than it will keep its 
Transparency, and it will then be 
enough sated with the Spices. And 
what runs afterward will make an 
excellent Carminative-Water, which 
may be preserv'd under that Title. 
Some who draw it lower, fine it with 
Alum; but that throws down the 
best part of the Ingredients, and 
leaves the Water much worse. Great 
Age will make it fall without any 
such help, or make it filter out, 
which is the better way of the two, 
if it be let to run so low as to want 
fining. It is a pleasant and a good 
Cordial, and greatly breaks the Wind 
off the Stomach, and disperses Fla- 
tulencies. Some put Pimento in- 
stead of all the Ingredients, the Pro- 
portion of ℥ ii. to Cong. i. of Spi- 
rit: and if the Spirit be good, it 
can hardly be perceiv'd from the 
genuine sort. So that of the Frauds 
which Pharmacy is over-run with, 
this may pass amongst the venial 
ones. 

[}Aqua Papaveris Composita, Com- 
pound Poppy-Water. }]
Take Flowers of wild Corn- 
Poppies ℔ iv. put upon them ℔ ii. 
of White-Wine, and distil to a 
Dryness in the cold Still; repeat 
the Operation three times with 
fresh Poppy-Flowers and the same 
Water, to each Pint of which put 
Nutmegs sliced no ii. of white 
Sugar ℥ ii. 

This Water is almost quite out of 
practice; but if it be perform'd in 
the Alembick, and with a good Spi- 
rit instead of Wine, and to the last 
Cohabation infused fresh Leaves in 
the proportion of a Pound to each 
Gallon, with the Nutmegs, and ad- 
ding the Sugar after it has stood in 
a gentle Warmth (about as much 
as that the Sun gives) for some 
weeks, it will make a beautiful- 
colour'd and grateful Tincture: but 
the Spirit at the last Distillation must 
be drawn pretty high, because the 
Juice of the last infused Flowers, 
which will press out with it, will 
bring it otherwise too low. This 
by some passes for a red Plague- 
Water. And it is very well worth 
making, because, besides its being a 
present Cordial, the Flowers give so 
much of their opiate Qualities, that 
it is very good in all cholick Pains, 
and will wonderfully procure almost 
present Ease in Gripings of the 
Bowels. Some Cholick Waters, 
which are so frequently advertis'd, 
and cry'd up about Town, have 
their Virtues only from the same In- 
|P_349
gredient, and differ not from this 
in any thing material. This is also 
a good Alexipharmick, and is very 
proper to give where Opiates are in- 
dicated in the same Intention. Its 
Dose from ʒ ii to ℥ ii. 

[}Aqua Pæoniæ Comp. Compound 
Pioney-Water. }]
Take fresh Lillies of the Valley 
℔ i. Flowers of Pioney ℥ iv. of 
the Lime-Tree ℔ ss. steep these 
together for some days in Cong. iv. 
of Spanish Wine, (Canary) and 
then draw it off to Dryness. To 
this distill'd Water add the Root of 
Male Pioney ℥ ii ss. white Dittany, 
long Birthwort, ana ℥ ss. Misle- 
toe of the Oak, Rue, ana m. ii. 
Pioney-Seeds husked ʒ x. of Rue 
ʒ iii ss. Castor ℈ ii. Cubebs, Mace, 
ana ʒ ii. Cinnamon ℥ i ss. Squills 
prepared ʒ iii. Flowers of Rose- 
mary pug. vi. Stæchas and Laven- 
der, ana pug. iv. Betony, Clove 
Gilliflowers, Cowslips, ana m. i. 
Juice of Black Cherries ℔ iv. Ma- 
cerate well together, and again 
draw off the Water as before. 

This Water is now much pre- 
scribed, but it is as injudicious a 
Recipe as almost any in the Dispen- 
satory. The first Distillation is alto- 
gether needless: and the drawing 
off the Virtues of any thing Cepha- 
lick, which consists in a Volatility 
of Parts, by a cold Still, is absurd 
and ridiculous. The Whole is there- 
fore more conveniently digested to- 
gether for some days, and then 
drawn off by the Alembick, which 
will raise every thing from the In- 
gredients required; and if Spirit of 
Wine be added instead of the Wine, 
as much may be distill'd as was put 
in. The Flowers ought to be 
thrown into the Spirit as soon as ga- 
ther'd, otherwise their Scent will be 
lost, especially the Lillies, which are 
the chief. And if the full quantity 
of neat Flowers are allow'd, it will 
greatly better the Water; but their 
Dearness makes many reckon Stalks 
and Leaves into the same quantity. 
The Dittany, Birthwort, Misletoe, 
Squills, Betony, and Cowslip Flow- 
ers, are in themselves good for no- 
thing in such Uses; and if they 
were, their Quantities here are ridi- 
culous. For what Virtue can ʒ iii. 
of Squills give to Cong. iv. of 
a distill'd Water; of ʒ iii ss. (ex- 
tremely exact) of Seeds of Rue, 
when the whole might be taken in 
substance at one Dose, without any 
visible Effect? The like may be 
also observ'd of some of the In- 
gredients of Efficacy: For what can 
avail ℈ ii. of Castor in such a quan- 
tity, wherein were it suppos'd all to 
arise, which is more than the Truth 
by half, and reckoning ℥ i. of the 
Water a mean Dose, there would 
not be above  of a Grain of Cas- 
tor to a Dose, which amounts to 
nothing at all as a Medicine? As 
this Medicine therefore is so very 
faulty in its Contrivance, and is very 
much used in the present Practice, 
we shall with due Submission offer 
an Amendment of it, to be made 
use of as the Prescribed pleases to 
direct.— Take Lillies of the 
Valley fresh gather'd, and with- 
out any Stalk, ℔ i. infuse them 
forthwith in Cong. iv. of Spirit 
of Wine, to which put Pioney- 
Root ℔ i. Cinnamon and Cubebs, 
ana ℥ iv. Rosemary and Lavender 
Flowers, ana m. i. Damask Rose- 
Water ℔ vi. draw off Cong. iv. 
We have omitted the Lime and 
Pioney Flowers, because they afford 
nothing in such a Process; and the 
Castor, because it spoils the Water 
as a Cordial, altho it falls in well 
enough with the Intention of a Ce- 
phalick in many Cases. If it be 
|P_350
thus made, it is an excellent Cordial, 
and can be exceeded by nothing, in 
all nervous Cases, both in Children 
and grown Persons: it may be di- 
luted into a Julep with Black-Cherry 
Water, or any such Vehicle, and 
may be given from ʒ i. to ʒ iii. to 
Children, and from ℥ ss. to ℥ ii. to 
grown Persons; and if the Case re- 
quires it, repeated every six or eight 
hours. 

[}Aqua Protheriacalis, A Succedaneum 
for Treacle-Water. }]
Take Scordium (i. e. Water- 
Germander) Scabious, Carduus 
ben. Goats-Rue, ana m. ii. fresh 
Citron and Orange-Peels, ana ℥ ii. 
Seeds of Citron, Carduus, Hart- 
wort, Treacle Mustard, ana ℥ i. 
Flowers of Marigold, Rosemary, 
ana m. i. Bruise and steep these 
in White-Wine ℔ iv. Carduus- 
Water ℔ ii. let them stand a little 
warm some days, and then distil; 
keeping the first ℔ ii. separate, and 
the last by it self. 

This is much of the nature with 
the Treacle-Water, and therefore in 
defect of that, when its Ingredients 
cannot be had, may be made and 
used for it. The Carduus and Goats- 
Rue take up room in it to no pur- 
pose, and may therefore be left out. 
And if ℔ ii. or ℔ iii. of Spirit was 
to be put into the Still along with 
it, it would be better; for other- 
wise it is hardly brisk enough to keep 
without souring. Its Dose from ʒ ii. 
to ℥ ii. 

[}Aqua Raphani Comp. Compound 
Horse-Radish Water. }]
Take of the Leaves of Garden 
and Sea-Scurvygrass, ana ℔ vi. 
bruise them, and press out the 
Juice; to which add the Juices of 
Brook-Lime, Water-Cresses, ana 
℔ i ss. White-Wine ℔ viii. Lemons 
sliced no xii. Briony-Root ℔ iv. 
Horse-Radish ℔ ii. Arum ℥ ss. 
Winter-Bark, Nutmeg, ana ℥ iv. 
Digest them together three days, 
and then draw off in an Alembick 
as much as runs acid, and with 
the taste of any of the Ingredients, 
and mix all together. 

This will look at first making 
very milky, but will fall finer with 
standing, tho it is ne'er the better 
for so doing. Most put in this Spi- 
rit for the Wine, but it is not so 
good, or especially in equal quantity 
to that; because it is of a different 
Operation to what is intended in 
this, which is to promote the Dis- 
charges by Urine: which altho it be 
an Intention best answer'd by things 
in other Forms, and particularly in 
Substance, yet this is as well calcu- 
lated for that purpose, as any thing 
could be to pass over the Helm. 
All the Ingredients herein are of a 
subtile penetrating nature, and great- 
ly abound with volatile Salts, which 
in many gross and sizy Constitutions 
of Blood do great service by divi- 
ding it, and rendring it more fluid; 
which will make the Discharges by 
the Kidneys be increas'd, and like- 
wise any Obstructions in those parrs
be clearly wash'd through. In all 
Obstructions also of the other Vis- 
cera it is an excellent Medicine, and 
prevails against the Jaundice, Ca- 
chexies, and Dropsies; and in scor- 
butick Cases there is nothing beyond 
it, as it greatly forces those minute 
Passages, promotes Transpiration, 
and cleanses the Skin, and other 
small Glands, which entertain'd gross 
Particles, to the detriment of their 
proper Offices. It may be given 
from ℥ ss. to ℥ iii. or ℥ iv. unless at 
first distilling; because then it is so 
pungent, as makes it difficult to take 
without much diluting. This ought 
to be drawn with the Receiver fix'd 
|P_351
close to the Worm by a Bladder, 
otherwise a great deal of the best 
part will fly away. 

[}Aqua Scordii Comp. Compound 
Scordium-Water. }]
Take Juices of Goats-Rue, Sor- 
rel, Scordium, and Citrons, ana ℔ i. 
London Treacle ℥ ii. Digest three 
days, and then distil off the Water. 

This has somewhat of the Vir- 
tues of the former, but is more A- 
lexipharmick; and is somewhat like 
the Treacle-Water, the Doses pretty 
much the same, only a little larger 
in this. This will keep better, if 
the Herbs, tho neither signify much 
besides the Scordium, be put into an 
Alembick with a sufficient quantity of 
Water, and ℔ ii. of Spirit of Wine 
with them, drawing off about Cong. i. 
for otherwise the Water will not 
keep long without souring. Its Vir- 
tues may be best known by those 
of the Simple whence it takes its 
name, in Sect. 6. No 358. Part 2. 
It grows rather more and more out 
of use, and is now seldom met with 
in Prescription. 

[}Aqua Stephani, Dr. Stephens's 
Water. }]
Take Cinnamon, Ginger, Ga- 
langals, Cloves, Nutmegs, Grains 
of Paradise, Seeds of Anise, sweet 
Fennel, Caraway, ana ʒ i. Leaves 
of Thyme, Mother of Thyme, 
Mint, Sage, Pennyroyal, Pellitory 
of the Wall, Rosemary, Flowers 
of red Roses, Chamomile, Ori- 
gany, and Lavender, ana m. i. 
steep them in Gascoign Wine ℔. xii. 
some days, and then distil as usual. 

This is now made with Spirit of 
Wine, instead of what the Dispen- 
satory orders, and drawn as strong 
as Proof Spirit. It is a good Ce- 
phalick and Cordial, and the Ingre- 
dients well suted to those purposes, 
except the red Roses, which have 
nothing to do here. It is likewise 
something Hysterical, and therefore 
frequently used by the Midwives a- 
mongst their Women: tho some, 
for the Pleasantness only of it to the 
Palate, leave out the Pennyroyal; but 
they then rob the Medicine of a 
principal Ingredient. If it be dul- 
cify'd, it makes an admirable Cor- 
dial Dram, and is also a good Car- 
minative. It is much prescribed, 
from ʒ ii. to ℥ ii. or more, at a Dose. 

[}Aqua Terebinthina, Turpentine 
Water. }]
Take Roots of Florentine Or- 
rice, dry'd Mint, Dittany of Crete, 
ana ℥ i. Seeds of Agnus Castus, 
Rue, Lettice, ana ʒ vi. Venice Tur- 
pentine ℥ iv. White Wine ℔ ii. 
Macerate them some time together 
and then distil in an Alembick 
℔ iii. or somewhat more. 

This is a very odd Water, but 
sometimes writ for. The Oil of 
the Turpentine swims upon the top, 
which makes it not only unsightly, 
but inconvenient for taking, at 
which time it is to be shaked toge- 
ther. It has no Virtues ascrib'd to 
it, but what are common to the 
Turpentine or its Oil; in which 
they are more easily come at, and 
therefore is this hardly worth the 
making. Its usual Dose is from ℥ ss. 
to ℥ ii. 

[}Aqua Theriacalis, Treacle-Water. }]
Take Juice of Green Walnuts 
℔ iv. of Rue ℔ iii. Carduus, Mary- 
gold and Bawm, ana ℔ ii. fresh 
Roots of Butter-Burr ℔ i ss. Bur- 
dock ℔ i. Angelica and Master- 
wort, ana ℔ ss. Water Germander 
m. iv. old Venice Treacle, Mithri- 
date, ana ℔ ss. Canary ℔ xii. Vi- 
negar ℔ vi. Juice of Lemons made 
fine ℔ ii. Steep together two days, 
|P_352
and then distil, till there remains 
no Taste of the Ingredients. 

This Water is the most us'd of 
any in the Shops, although an inju- 
dicious Composition enough; for 
the Juices can contribute very little 
to its Virtues, although upon ac- 
count of the proper Season to 
obtain them, this Water cannot 
be made at all times, how much 
soever wanted; unless, as some 
do, the Juices are express'd in their 
Season, and kept on purpose: but 
then I believe it safe to affirm, they 
are good for nothing: for so little 
as is of a Volatile Nature in such 
Simples, will very soon be lost. 
The rest indeed of the Ingredients 
agree well enough to the main In- 
tention of an Alexipharmick and 
Sudorifick; and the Acids contribute 
much to that purpose, but no one 
can imagine what the Lemon-Juice 
is to be depurated for, unless they 
can imagine any foulness to arise in 
Vapours, which has never yet been 
known to happen. If this Water 
is made with the Wine, it will be 
too small even to keep good, and 
therefore they do much better, who 
use the same quantity of Spirit for 
it; and it is generally in the Shops 
drawn too low with that. If the 
Spirit be just common Proof, it 
will bear drawing to double the 
quantity of that put in, but not fur- 
ther. The Acids will continue co- 
ming over to the last; and there- 
fore after enough is obtain'd for pre- 
sent use, some of the last Runnings 
may be kept apart, to throw into the 
Still at another time to a fresh quan- 
tity. It is one of the most agreeable 
of all of this Class, to procure Sweat 
in Fevers, and to throw off, by that 
Discharge, any sudden Disorder re- 
ceived from Cold or Surfeits; but 
the Doses in which it is generally 
prescrib'd are trifling, for it is rarely 
order'd to a grown Person above 
℥ ss. or ℥ i. in a Dose; whereas ℥ iv. 
is but a moderate quantity to have 
any reliance upon, especially to Per- 
sons who are us'd to high living, as 
most are, unless the meanest People 
of all; and in such a Dose it can do 
no manner of harm. But this, not- 
withstanding the good which might 
be done with it if properly apply'd, is 
amongst those things which are us'd 
only to keep doing with a Patient, as 
it is too aptly term'd, rather than to 
answer any Intention of moment: 
else who would send a Julep to a 
strong Man, with a fourth part of 
this, and the rest Simple Water, 
even altho other Alexipharmicks are 
given at the same time? But too 
true it is, that the generality of Prac- 
tice runs upon insipid good-for-no- 
thing Medicines, in compliment to 
some Opinion the Patient may have 
of them, as the Gascoign's Powder, 
&c. or else so much under-dose 
what is of any Virtue, that little can 
be expected from it. 

After the Distillation of this Wa- 
ter, there is the Acetum Thertacale
order'd to be made of the Resi- 
duum, and also an Extract; but 
they are neither ever met with in 
Prescription, and therefore the Shops 
neglect making them. 

[}From Bates's Dispensatory. }]
[}Aqua Antiscorbutica, Antiscorbutic 
Water. }]
Take Leaves of Fumitory, Wa- 
ter-Cresses, both sorts of Scurvy- 
Grass and Brook-lime, ana m. xii. 
Harts-Tongue, Succory, Pine-tops, 
Germander, Hoar-hound, Agri-
mony, and the lesser Centaury, 
ana m. x. Roman Wormwood, 
Liverwort, ana m. iv. Briony- 
Roots ℔ ss. Roots of Female Fern, 
sharp-pointed Dock, and the in- 
|P_353
ner Barks of Bitter-sweet, and Ash, 
ana ℥ vi. Seeds of Ash (i. e. what are 
call'd the Ashen Keys) ℥ i ss. Ange- 
lica ℥ ss. Let them be all bruis'd to- 
gether, and put to ℔ vi. of Rhenish 
Wine, in which a piece of Iron of 
a Pound has been twenty times 
quench'd; then let all be strongly 
pressed from the Ingredients, and 
put into a Glass Body, to which fit 
a Receiver; and in a Sand-Heat 
draw off so much till the remainder 
grows as thick as Honey: which 
may be kept under the Title of 
Extractum Antiscorbuticum; stir- 
ring in to it in fine Powder, 
Troches of Capers ʒ vi. and of the 
Filings of Iron ℥ i ss. 

This has some useless Ingredients, 
but makes a very good Water for 
the purposes expressed by its Title, 
and may be us'd in about the same 
Quantity, and in the same Cases as 
the Compound Horse-radish Water 
of the College. Its Extract likewise 
will make a good Medicine, taking 
care to stir it down often at first, if 
the Powder of Iron ferments it; 
which it is very like to do some time 
after mixture. This is not kept in 
the Shops, or made but by particular 
Prescription. 

[}Aqua Benedicta. }]
Take Quick-lime ℔ i. and pour 
upon it ℔ viii. of boiling Water; 
after some time settling, pour it 
off by Inclination, and filter for 
use. 

This stands commended for an 
extraordinary Medicine in many Cases 
of Obstinacy; and if it be drank 
℥ iii. or iv. three or four times a day, 
is said to cure red pimpled Faces, 
Struma's, Dysenteries, the Whites, 
Rheumatick Pains, and the Diabetes. 
It is certainly a powerful Dryer, and 
very proper to use in Decoctions of 
the Woods, and all Ingredients of 
that Intention: but tho the making 
of it is easy enough, yet here in 
London it may be had at any time 
from the Sugar-Bakers by the Name 
of Lime-Water, as wanted; because 
they use it much in refining their 
Sugars. This is also much prais'd 
for cleansing and drying up old foul 
Ulcers, both by its internal use, and 
washing them frequently with it be- 
sides. This indeed cannot properly 
be call'd an officinal Water, because 
the easy and sudden making it, or 
procuring it ready made, prevents 
its being kept in the Shops; but by 
its frequent use, it was thought not 
amiss to give it a place here. 

[}Aqua Camphorata, Camphorated 
Water. }]
Take Roman Vitriol and Bole 
Armoniack, ana ℥ iv. Camphor 
℥ i. and powder them together. 
Of this mixture sprinkle ℥ i. at 
a time into ℔ iv. of boiling Wa- 
ter, in which stir it well about;
then take it off the Fire, let it 
settle, and decant off that which is 
clear, by Inclination. 

This is an excellent Medicine for 
many purposes externally; and 
therefore deserves to be more regard- 
ed than it is at present in Practice. 
It greatly cleanses Ulcers, by wash- 
ing them frequently with it warm. 
It is good against all Inflammations, 
and almost infallibly cures Defluxi- 
ons of Rheum upon the Eyes. If 
it be too sharp for that use, it may 
be diluted with a little Spring-Water, 
at the time of Application. It keeps 
the Gums clean and firm to the 
Teeth, if they are frequently rubb'd 
with it. And in the Itch, it is both 
safe and efficacious, by washing with 
it frequently the Eruptions and Parts 
affected. 

|P_354
[}Aqua Cephalica, Cephalick Water. }]
Take Male Piony-Root, ℥ iv. 
Angelica, Valerian, ana ℥ i ss. 
Avens ℥ i. Leaves of Sage, Rose- 
mary, Betony, Marjoram, Baum; 
Flowers of Lavender, Betony, 
Piony, Marygolds, Sage, Rose- 
mary, Lillies of the Vally, and 
of the Lime-Tree, ana m. i. Stæ-
cha's ℥ i ss. Red Roses, Cowslips, 
ana m. ii. Rhodium Wood, yel- 
low Sanders, ana ʒ vi. Nutmegs 
℥ i ss. Galangals ℥ ss. Cardamoms 
and Cubebs, ana ʒ iii. Infuse them 
all bruis'd in ℔ xiv. of the best 
White-Wine for ten days; then 
add Cinnamon ℔ i. which let stand 
in Infusion two days longer, and 
then distil off as much as the Wine 
put in. 

This is in the main an excellent 
Composition for the purpose its Ti- 
tle expresses; there being not above 
two or three Ingredients, but what 
are effectual to that Intention: but 
there are rather too many for the 
quantity of Liquor order'd; and 
therefore if a clean good Spirit be 
put for the Wine, and somewhat 
more in quantity, it will make a 
most agreeable Water; and if it be 
dulcify'd with a little Sugar about ℥ i. 
to each ℔ i. it will be very palatable, 
and an excellent Cordial from ℥ ss. 
to ℥ ii. at a time, in any Faintings 
and Sinking of the Spirits, or upon 
any sudden Sickness at Stomach. 
This has not yet got into the 
Shops, but very well deserves 
it. 

[}Aqua Chamæmeli Comp. Compound 
Camomile Water. }]
Take fresh double Camomile 
Flowers m. xxx. let them be 
bruis'd, and pour upon them of 
simple Camomile Water ℔ x. of 
Spanish Wine ℔ xvi. and let them 
stand twenty four Hours; press 
them with a strong Skrew-Press, 
and to the Liquor put afresh of 
the like Flowers m. xx. and after 
due Infusion, to the next strain'd 
Liquor put m. xii. of fresh Flow- 
ers more, which digest and press 
out a third time: to that put of 
the fresh outer Peels of Oranges 
℥ ii. Leaves of Roman Worm- 
wood, Centaury, Pennyroyal and 
Origany, ana m. ii ss. Seeds of 
Dill ℥ ii. Anise, Fennel, Carui, 
Cummin, Carduus Ben. and Car- 
duus Maria, ana ℥ i ss. Juniper and 
Bay-berries, ana ℥ ss. Nutmegs 
℥ iii. After due Maceration of all 
together, distil off Cong. iii. 

Most of these Waters are intended 
by the quantities of Ingredients to 
be drawn by the cold Still; but in 
things of this kind, whose Virtues 
consist in somewhat subtile and vo- 
latile, it is very ill-husbandry to 
work that way: instead of Wine 
therefore in this, a good Spirit will 
do better; and if enough be put in 
this, to draw off Cong. iii. or iv. 
pretty strong, near as high as a 
Proof Spirit, it will be very much sated 
with the Ingredients. There is not 
in the whole Circle of Medicine, so 
powerful a Carminative as this is; 
tho the Centaury, and one or two 
more of the Ingredients, signify lit- 
tle to the purpose. It is also very 
aperient and detersive, and is good 
for any Obstructions or Foulnesses 
of the Viscera, especially of the 
Kidneys, and Urinary Passages. It 
is pity this Composition has not yet 
a place in the Shops, for it highly 
deserves it; and if a small Portion 
of Opium be contriv'd in it, it is 
preferable to any Cholick Water in 
the World, how much soever some 
are cry'd up under that Title. 

|P_355
[}Aqua Cinnamomi Hordeata, Barley 
Cinnamon Water. }]
Take Barley-Water ℔. viii. Cin- 
namon bruis'd small ℥ xii. draw 
off the Water to a dryness. 

This is very ill managed by the 
cold Still, and very little better than 
wasting the Cinnamon; and there- 
fore I believe never made this way, 
although there is nothing of more 
constant use in the Shops, than a 
Water under this Title; but that is 
only the last Runnings in making 
the Spirit of Cinnamon, and is much 
better than this. It is a fine Cordial
and Stomachick, and given against 
Vomitings and Diarrhæa's: it gene- 
rally is prescrib'd in Juleps in the 
room of some Simple Water, and 
makes them very grateful and plea- 
sant to the Palate. 

[}Aqua Epidemica, Plague-Water. }]
Take Leaves of Celandine, 
Rosemary, Rue, Sage, Mugwort, 
Wormwood, Pimpernel, Dragon, 
Scabious, Agrimony, Baum, Wa- 
ter-Germander, the lesser Cen- 
taury, Carduus Ben. Betony and 
Rosa-Solis, (i. e. Sun-Dew) ana 
m. ii. Roots of Angelica, Tormen- 
til, Gentian, Zedoary and Liquo- 
rice, ana ℥ i. Digest them in ℔ viii.
of White-Wine, and then distil 
the whole. 

This is much inferior to the Col- 
lege Plague-Water, half the Ingre- 
dients being not at all to the purpose 
of an Alexipharmick, which all un- 
der this Title ought to aim at. 

[}Aqua Hormini Comp. Compound 
Clarey-Water. }]
Take fresh Leaves of Clarey 
m. xii. sprinkle upon them ℔ i. of 
Spirit. V. and distil to dryness in 
a cold Still: to what comes off put 
of fresh Leaves m. x. of Flowers of 
Archangel m. vi. and make a se- 
cond Distillation, which repeat 
with fresh Ingredients, and the 
same Liquor a third time; adding 
to the last, of Nutmegs ℥ i. and 
letting the Water distil upon ℥ vi. 
of fine Sugar in a Bottle, to which 
is suspended in a Rag, gr. iii. of 
Ambergrease. 

All these Materials, except the 
Nutmegs, are very unfit for Distil- 
lation; but the frequent Repetition 
makes the Water somewhat partake 
of them. It is very pleasing, and 
amongst the good Women in great 
esteem against Abortion, the Whites, 
and other Female Weaknesses. But 
the Ambergrease will vapour a great 
many, with whom such Sweets will 
not agree. 

[}Aqua Opthalmica Sapphirina, 
Blue Eye-Water. }]
Take Lime-Water, for the A-
qua Benedicta before describ'd ℔ i. 
Sal Armoniac ʒ iii. let them stand 
till the Salt is dissolv'd in a Brass 
Pan, and it acquires a blue Co- 
lour; then filter, and put it up for 
use. 

Its Title expresses its principal 
use; and by some it is greatly e- 
steem'd for clearing the Eyes from 
Specks and Films, if two or three 
Drops be frequently instill'd into 
them. 

[}From the Augustan Dispensatory. }]
[}Aqua Arthritica, Gout-Water. }]
Take Flowers of Camomile, 
Leaves of Pennyroyal, Lavender, 
Marjoram, Rosemary, Sage, 
Ground-Pine, ana ℥ ii. Myrrh ℥ ii. 
Cloves, Cinnamon, ana ʒ ii. 
Roots of Piony ℥ ss. Pellitory of 
Spain, Cypress, Orrice, ana ʒ i ss. 
the lesser Cardamoms and Cubebs, 
ana ʒ i. of Nutmegs ℥ ss. Infuse 
|P_356
all together, well bruis'd for four- 
teen days in rectify'd Spirit of 
Wine Cong. i. and then distil the 
whole. 

Zwelfer much approves of this 
Composition, because the Ingredients 
coincide in the main Intention, 
which he is mighty critical in obser- 
ving. There is no occasion of rec- 
tify'd Spirit. V. if it be drawn by the 
Alembick, which is most proper; 
unless it be thought a lower Men- 
struum will not extract the Virtues 
of the Ingredients; and therefore 
double the quantity of common 
Proof may serve as well. It may be 
dulcify'd with a little fine Sugar, to 
make it more palatable. It is a 
very good Water in any Nervous 
Cases; and a continu'd moderate 
use of it will comfort and fortify the 
Fibres, so as to prevent the Dis- 
charge of such Juices upon the 
Joints, as cause Arthritick Pains and 
Swellings. Also in Palsies, Epilep- 
sies, Loss of Memory, and any 
Nervous Decays, it is a good Medi- 
cine; and particularly for those 
whose principal Springs are almost 
wore out by long use, and begin to 
shrink with Age: for grosser Re- 
cruits are not sufficient to moisten 
and warm their chill decaying Or- 
gans. 

