
|P_
[}TO 
The most Eminently 
Learned, the President and Com-
munity of the Royal Col-
legeof PHYSICIANS,
LONDON. }]
Gentlemen, 

[^Decorative frame around the letter "T".^]THE Intention of the following 
Pages, with Difference to your 
illustrious Body, is with all sub-
mission laid at your Feet, carry-
ing no other Views along with 
it, than to promote, the further 
Knowledge of Medicine, the exact and artful 
Composition of which is so highly Necessa-
ry, and conducive to the Welfare of Man-
kind, and the Utility of the Publick. 

I rest assured of a candid Reception 
from the Nature of the Design, which I 
have the vanity to think you will favour, 
because it is only level'd at a Reformation 
|P_4
some of the Errors in Composition that have 
crept into former, and are still retain'd in 
your last Edition of the London Dispensatory,
and a further Recommendation of the many 
excellent Prescriptions, which you have with 
Justice to the Profession, continued and pub-
lish'd to the World, all which I shall en-
deavour to support by Authority, Reason 
and Experience; hence, I flatter myself with 
every thing that can be expected from a 
Society so distinguish'd for universal Lite-
rature, as well as their particular Know-
ledge in Medicine.

This is a meer Trifle which I offer, only 
as an Essay to what I have ready for the 
Press, and to which I doubt not of your ge-
nerous Approbation; for as 'the Study of 
your Lives is devoted to do Good, so you 
will certainly promote every Thing that 
tends to that great End; and what is of more 
Importance than to preserve Life, and re-
store to Man that valuable Blessing of 
Health? 

This Collection of Antidotes, altho', 
no Epidemical Disease should happen (which 
God in his Mercy avert) is of universal 
Tendency, and speaks for itself: The Au-
thors were all Physicians of great Experi-
ence, some of whom liv'd thro' five or six 
Plagues, in which they had been singularly 
successful; and after that devouring Flame 
was Extinguish'd, they had in all their suc-
ceeding Practice, still a mighty Esteem for 
such Antidotes and Alexipharmicks as had 
|P_5
been Serviceable to them, when they stood so 
much in need of their Assistance, on which Oc-
casion they invented and introduced a whole 
Set or Collection of 'em, into Practice among 
which you have the various Prescriptions of 
Sir Walter Rawleigh's great Cordial, that of 
Sir Kenelm Digby's Diaphoretick, Gascoyne 
Powder, with the Goa-Stone, and a great 
Variety of the Lapis Contrayerva, with 
many others; all which are very valuable in 
their Kinds, and consequently, I doubt not 
but the Publication of this will meet with 
a Reception equal to the Merits of those 
learned Gentlemen, who were the Compi-
lers of the several Recipe's and Prescriptions 
therein contain'd, which were certainly Stu-
died and found Useful for the publick Ser-
vice. 

Now, let, me beg leave of your learned 
Society to make some decent and modest 
Remarks upon your last Edition, of your 
Pharmacopeia that from the Justness of 
those Observations, you yourselves may 
Judge of the Necessity there is for a Refor-
mation of the same, and from the Speci-
mens I shall give, make the World sensible 
of the Usefulness of such an Undertaking, 
which, with the last Regards due to your 
venerable Body, I submit to impartial 
Judgment. And in the first Place, I shall 
not wast Time, either upon the Method, or 
Materials you have made Choice of in the 
Simples conducive to your Dispensatory,
whether Roots, Barks, Woods, Herbs, Flow-
|P_6
ers, Fruits, Seeds or the like, but do think 
it wou'd have been a Justice due to the 
Publick, as well as an Advantage to the 
Profession to have inform'd them, which of 
those Simples most constantly are in Use, 
which are seldom used, and which are ne-
ver used at all; which Things are very Ma-
terial, that Time and Money may not be 
thrown away upon what is perfectly Useless; 
as the Roots of Anthorae an Exotick, cal-
led the Counter-poison to Monkshood, 
not Traffick'd in, and of no Virtues that 
are recommended by the Experience of the 
Faculty. 2dly. Arundinis Saccharina; the 
common Reed and Sugar-Cane Roots of no 
Medicinal use. The Roots of Kings Spear 
or Asphodel, Male and Female, not Us'd or 
even Sold in the Druggist, or Apothecaries 
Shops, and many more. 

THE next are those which, are seldom, 
or very rarely used, such as the Hermodactyls,
Woad, Fullers Thistle, Hog-Fennel, Stinking 
Gladon, and an hundred others mention'd to 
little or no Purpose, which had been better 
left out, both for the ease of the Apothe-
cary, and the Prescriber, who is at first em-
barrass'd in so large a Field of Materials, 
loaded by some Authors with great Enco-
comiums of the Feats they have done in 
Physick, which are too apt to flatter and di-
sappoint the Presumptions of a young Pra-
ctitioner. 

I shall pass by the rest of the Simples 
in this short Account, and leave 'em to a 
|P_7
stricter Enquiry, when I come to publish the 
Pharmacopeia Reformata, and so proceed to 
some more material Observations, among 
which, I shall first take Notice of, the Oxy-
mel scilliticum, which you have Prescrib'd 
just in the same manner as formerly, viz.
Three Pounds of Clarified Honey, to two Pounds 
of Vinegar of Squills; whereas in Justness to the 
Operation, and Effects of this Medicine, here 
should be three Pounds of Vinegar of Squills,
to two Pounds of Honey, otherwise the Me-
decine is so clogg'd with the Honey, that the 
Efficacy thereof is lost, and the Acetum
hath not power to assist the Digestion, cut 
the viscous Flegm, discharge Wind and sour 
Belchings from the Stomach, and strengthen 
the Appetite; for which it is a noble Re-
medy, was it not so very Nauseous; but it 
may be excellently adapted by a skillful and 
judicious Physician, who by mixing equal 
parts of the Acetum scilliticum and Oxymel w
ill gain his Intentions. 

I cannot be surpriz'd that you have 
overlook'd this among so many other Com-
positions, which are so Faulty, that they 
are not capable of being made up or 
if they could, wou'd be of no Use, since 
you are pleas'd to persist in your daily Pra-
ctice to prescribe Galbanum along with Am-
moniacum, in order to be dissolv'd, in black 
Cherry-water, or other the like Vehicle, 
and are angry with the Apothecary, when 
he tells you plain, that he knows not how 
to dissolve Galbanum in an aqueous Body, 
|P_8
tho' Ammoniacum will familiarly do it; if 
this Point had been clear'd up in your last 
Edition, of the London Dispensatory, and 
new Rules given to the Apothecary, how to 
make his Dissolution of Galbanum, this 
wou'd have been a great Improvement, and 
given a New turn to the Dispensations of 
Medicines, but till then, we shall believe it 
was not so artfully Corrected, as we had 
Reason to expect from Persons so well quali-
fy'd; otherwise the Spiritus Lavendulæ com-
positus would hardly have remain'd in the 
Condition it stands, considering it is such a 
Farrago of inconsistences unskilfully blend-
ed, the Produce of which, is nothing at all; 
when at the same time the simple Spirit of 
Lavender, is so excellently useful, and may 
be enrich'd at the Physician's pleasure, with 
all the Volatile Aromaticks, &c. according 
to the Nature of the Case, becoming by this 
Means a Spiritus Lavendulæ Extemporaneo 
Compositus.

YourAqua Pæoniae Composita, or Peony-wa-
ter Compound, is an excellent Prescription, 
but wants much of what it was from Langius,
who calls it his Epileptick Water, which Re-
ceipt I shall give you (as it was Originally) 
in the Pharmacopeia Reformata; in the inte-
rim it is high time to expunge Gilbert's 
Water, least some evil minded People shou'd 
deceive themselves, and others, in putting 
their Trust therein. 

As to the Treacle of Audromachus, and 
Mithridate, of which I can find no Reforma-
tion made in your last Edition; it is one 
|P_9
grand Medley of a multitude of Simples 
jumbl'd together without Order or Design; 
the greatest Part of which are either useless, 
or ineffectual. I shall satisfie my own Opi-
nion only to declare that as generally us'd, 
and apply'd, they are both dangerous Me-
dicines ill prepar'd, very Hot and of disagree-
able Qualities to the Intentions they are 
administred. The grand Reason that has 
induc'd all Sorts of People to the Use of 
them, have been drawn from the Authority 
and Experience of the Antients; Galen says 
they, hath spoken in Praise of Treacle in two 
Pieces of his, directed to Piso, and Pamphi-
lianus. To which I answer, that the Autho-
rity cited, is of no force, because they do 
not appear to be Galen's Writings, but falsly 
attributed to him, which is the more Evi-
dent from the Stile and Manner of Writing, 
which is foreign from that of Galen's, besides 
there are several Terms, and Words made 
Use of not elsewhere to be found in the said 
Author's Works, according to the learn'd 
Mercurialis, who says, in eo plurima verba a 
Galeno nusquam usurpata, fabulosæ aliqua 
& stylus totus pene diversus reperiuntur. The 
same Author says, there ought not to be the 
least Fault in any of the Simples, that en-
ter that Composition, speaking of Treacle 
Vitium enim unius Medicamenti totum Composi-
tionem evertit.

Every Body knows the great Abuse in 
the Choice of Vipers, and that of the Mala-
bathrum, which not one in an hundred makes 
|P_10
a right Use of; besides this, the Myrrh we use, 
setting aside the smell, is nothing like that 
describ'd by Dioscorides, but rather Bdelliams,
whereas the Troglotick is the fame, and we 
have no Opo-Balsamum, true Costus, Schænanth, 
Dictamny of Crete, or Falernian Wine. The ge-
nerality of the Opium us'd at this Day, is no-
thing near so fine, or good as Mathiolusre-
lates, and scarce seems to be like what 
Dioscorides describes: For it is a perfect 
Meconium at this Day, as may be evidently 
Proved, 

TheMithridate commonly met with in 
the Shops, is in the same Condition, having 
the same Faults and Imperfections, and 
therefore ought to be rejected, being too hot 
and acrid for the Intentions it is generally 
Prescrib'd, consequently it wants a con-
siderable Reformation, or else ought to be 
expung'd the Dispensatory.

The Confection of Alkermes, altho' ve-
ry prudently divested of its Perfumes now 
a-days, is a Composition very unartfully 
Invented and Describ'd by the Arabians, and 
very little Reform'd and Amended by the 
Moderns, who still closely pursue the Er-
rors of the Arabian Physicians: Indeed the 
Lapis Laruli has been long since thrown out, 
and there remains little behind in this Me-
dicine, which bears a high Name, but 
what we may expect from the Juice or Sy-
rup of the Chermes-Berry with better Suc-
cess; for as to the Aloes Wood, we know little 
or nothing of it, and the Leaf-Gold there-
|P_11
in, is a meer Amusement to Deceive 
the Credulous. Rondeletius instead of speaking 
in its Praise gives a severe Caution against 
the Use of it, which is Back'd by Mr. Fer-
rier, a Physician of Tholouse, who blames Phy-
sicians for the too plentiful Prescribing there-
of: See the Annotations and Observations of 
Mr. Guillemeau. The Confect of Hyacinth
bears a great Resemblance to this, only that 
the last seems to be endowed with no Cor-
dial Virtue at all: Notwithanding the great 
Boasts made of it, from the Fragments of 
Precious-Stones, that enter the Compositi-
on, by the splendid shew of which, together, 
with the Leaf-Gold, many are induced to 
believe it is capable of performing Wonders. 

As I was treating of Mithridate, I must 
take the Liberty to return to the Subject, to 
shew that when Pompey found the Receipt 
thereof written in Mithridates own Hand, 
after the Defeat of that Prince, which he e-
steem'd as a vaulable Secret; it was Com-
pounded but of very few Simples, and those 
very common ones according to the follow-
ingDistick.

Antidotus vero multis Mithridatica fertur 
Consociata Modis, sed magnus scrinia Regis 
Cum rapperet Victor, vilem deprendit in illis 
Synthesim, & vulgatâ satis Medicamina risit: 
Bis denum rutae folium, salis & brevegranum 
Juglandás{que} duas, totidem cum corpore ficus: 
Næcortente die pauco conspersa Lyaeo 
Sumebat metuens, dederatq; pocula tutor. 
|P_12
This Composition then consisted, only 
of two Walnuts, two Figs, Twenty leaves 
of Rue stamp'd together, with a little Salt; 
and this was reckon'd a sovereign Antidote 
against any maglignant Air for 24 Hours 
together, it being sufficient for three or four 
Morning Doses, drinking after it a Glass of 
white Wine 

The next thing to be enquir'd into, is to 
know the Reason, why you still admit Leaf-
Gold into several Preparations, since you 
very well know it is neither Cordial, Corro-
borative, Alterative, or does it any wise con-
tribute to the Nutrition of the Parts accord-
ing to Galen, in his Commentary on the 
first Book of Hippocrates, de ratione Victus in 
Acutis. It can by no Means be call'd an 
Alterative, in that the natural Disposition 
of the Body cannot be affected by Reason of 
the Solidity of its Parts, so that it can nei-
ther heat or cool, dry or moisten the solid, 
or fluid Parts, and how it becomes Purga-
tive I cannot imagine; all which makes good 
what Julius Caesar Scaliger, says in his Exer-
citations against Cardan Exerc. 272. There 
ought to be some Resemblance, some like-
ness in Configuration of Parts; between 
what gives the Nutriment, and the Body 
that receives it. Metals are proper to unite 
with, and feed Metals, but are imcompati-
ble, and foreign to the subsistence and in-
crease of Animals. If Gold is good in any 
Disease, it must certainly be so in the 
Hypochondriack, Melancholy, especially when 
|P_13
it is administred, not as the Arabians,
 in Pills or Powders, or as the Chymists in 
Potions like their Aurum Potabile, but plen-
tifully in Specie, or Golden Showers; nay, 
if the Physician cou'd but prescribe Bank
Bills, his prescriptions would infallibly Cure 
all the Vapours in Town. This is a Specifick, 
even against South-Sea Head-Ach, which, is 
otherwise an incurable Disease. 

And here I cannot forbear to hint at 
the present use of Ivory, that is still con-
tinued, and recommended in many good 
Medicines, when every Body knows, and is 
thoroughly perswaded that Harts-Horn, has 
an hundred times the Virtue, since the o-
ther neither discovers Smell or Taste, or 
any Quality to recommend it for an ef-
ficacious Medicine; several Physicians have 
long since exploded it, as Durel Hantin, 
Mercurialis, Baccius, Sylvaticus Erastus, Al-
bertus, Sebizius, and others; but Ambrose Pa-
rey, by dint of Reason and Experience re-
futes, all the pretended and imaginary Qua-
lities assign'd to this useless and insignificant 
Drug. 

Therefore it becomes more my Admi-
ration, that Gentlemen who have con-
sulted, and weigh'd all these things toge-
ther in the Balance of Reason, should still 
continue the Use of many useless, and ex-
travagant Drugs, which are now directed in 
the several Compositions of your Dispensa-
tory, many of which are rarely, or not to 
be got at all, and others at a very dear Rate, 
|P_14
and good for little or nothing; the first of 
which I mean is, the Bone of a Stags Heart, 
the others are Ambergreese, Musk, and Be-
zoar so frequently prescribed on all Occasi-
ons, in the last of which there are so many 
vile Cheats practic'd, that it is a pity it 
should lye in the power of avaritious, and 
designing Men to Cozen and Deceive the 
World, with such vile Frauds. 

Two Parts in three of the Bezoar, of which 
is sold and made Use of in the Shops is, Fa-
ctitious, and the other that is Natural, is 
only fit to Deceive such as are willing to be 
Deceiv'd, and take a Pleasure to be carry'd 
down with the Stream of popular Errors. As 
to the Factitious, it is generally made up of 
Gall-Stones, found in the Gall-Bladders of 
Oxen, &c. and Lemnian Earth findly ground 
with a little Ambergreese, and so form'd in-
to Stones of various Sizes and Figures; and 
thus the subtle Artist cheats the Apothecary 
with his Counterfeit Stone, and the Physici-
an comes into the Confederacy, by prescrib-
ing his Bezoartick Bolus, or Powder to 
pick the Patient's Pocket: This fallacy up-
on the credulous Sick, will in a little time 
become as despicable, as the vain Pretenti-
ons of the Alchymists, with their Aurum Pota-
tabile, their Sulphur of Metals, and Powder of 
Projection, with which they Bubble the Ig-
norant, and blind the Eyes of the more 
discerning part of Mankind. 

I Hope to God, that you Gentlemen, 
who have both Honour, Justice and Judg-
|P_15
ment, will put a stop to these Deceits where-
by the People are Cheated with false Medi-
cines, which under the pompous Pretensi-
ons of curing more Effectually, are made 
a Handle of, to extract Gold and Silver from 
the Patients Purse: A Reformation of these 
things would be a great Advantage to all 
Parties, and who can we expect it from, but 
your learned Body, who by your Example, 
and Authority have Power to Reform, and 
at the same time inform the World what 
your Opinions are in relation to such cost-
ly Drugs, as Bezoar, and whether the good 
Effects and Virtues thereof are answerable 
to the Physicians Expectation, and that of the 
Patient; if not, that you wou'd ingeniously
 declare this Stone naturally, as brought 
from India, and unsophistieated hath no 
more Virtue than some of our Foreign Earths, 
or Domestick Chalks. 

It is pretended by the Advocates for this 
Stone, that it is a most noble Alexipharmick,
and is both Cordial and Sudorifick, tho' it 
does not appear from the Composition of 
its Parts, being Gross and Earthy, how it 
can encrease or otherwise alter the Motion 
of the Blood, or exhilerate the Spirits, 
which it seems not to have power to fortifie, 
and support. If this be so then, let us sub-
mit to the force of Truth, which we find 
publish'd in the Writings of some of the 
best Physicians of Europe, which Mr. Guy-
bert hath accurately quoted; let us submit 
Opinion, I say to Truth, which is one and 
|P_16
the same throughout the World. Nic Boc-
cangelinus Physician to the Empress, and 
a very knowing Spaniard, in a Treatise of Ma-
lignant and Pestilential Fevers. Chap. 17. Con-
demn's the Use of Bezoar, thus; some make 
up Cordial Powders with Bezoar, Pearl, Coral,
&c. which strangely Deceive them, for, all 
these things encrease the Obstructions, which 
encourage the Fever, the Materials being 
gross, earthy, and Unactive, foul the Stomach, 
clog the Lacterals, and stop the MesaraickVes-
sels, so that the Blood which is Contaminated 
with the malignant Vapours, hath not power 
hereby to refine itself. Hieron: Ruleus, a learn-
ed Physician of Ravenna, in his Commenta-
ries on the 7th Chap. of the 3d Book of Celsus
exposes the Cheat after this manner; I own, 
says he, having often prescrib'd the Bezoar 
Stone, in Malignant, and other Fevers to seve-
ral Persons of Quality, from 8 to 16 Grains, I 
never could observe any good Effect from it, 
by any sensible Operation, or Amendment 
in the Patient; but this we commonly Pre-
scribe to the Rich and Great, by way of Com-
plement, it being very dear: Besides let 
me Caution you, says he, for there are a 
great many Counterfeit, or false Stones, 
which I found by Experience in the last Sick-
ness of Pope Clement the 8th, so that out of 
forty, which were brought me, I cou'd scarce 
meet with one good one. 

MARTIANUS a Roman Physician in 
his Commentaries upon Hippocrates, says, 
that the Bezoar Stone is nothing else, but a 
|P_17
meer Name and Opinion without any Vir-
tue, which he knows to be true upon re-
peated Tryals; Rodericus a Fonseca, a cele-
brated Professor at Padua, in a Tract of his 
on Malignant Fevers, ingenuously owns, that 
he never saw any laudable Effect from it, 
tho' he had frequently us'd it: Johannes Colle
a learned Italian, and Physician to the D. of 
Urbino, in a Book of his call'd Cosmitor Medi-
cans, or a large Treatise of the Bezoar Stone,
makes severe Remarks on those, who boast of 
the Virtues of Bezoar, without any Reason, 
and on those who use it in all Diseases, like 
a Stall for all Horses. Theodorus Angelutius
speaking of the Cure of Malignant Fevers,
condemns it in these Words; I advise all Phy-
sicians, says he, against the use of this Stone, 
since it is a Drug that is good for nothing 
at the best; and all Men of sincerity, who 
are most worthy of Credit confess it, and I 
myself solemnly protest, that I never cou'd 
find the Sick relieved thereby, how easie it 
is, then for every one to Judge of the Dan-
ger there is in Confiding in so uncertain and 
frivolous a Medicine, when the Patient la-
bours under a Malignant Fever, instead of 
a better approved, and more successful Re-
medy. Thomas Minadous, in his Book of 
Fevers, says thus; I cannot so much, as ad-
mit, or have ever met with any occult Qua-
lity in this Bezoar Stone, by which means 
it could prove serviceable in any Kind of 
Fevers; and therefore believe they are all 
fabulous Accounts, and old Womens Tales, 
|P_18
that have been told either by the Arabians,
or the Moderns; for I have try'd it several 
Times in several Diseases, without finding 
any Relief or Advantage from it. Aloisius 
Mundella, in his Experiments on simple Me-
dicines, confirms what all the rest have said, 
whom I have quoted before. 

Permit me, most excellent and learned 
Collegues, to say a Word or two about the 
Drug Sena, which enters so many of your 
well chosen Compositions, and which I have 
the Vanity to think you have not all met 
with in the common Treatises of simple Me-
dicines, tho' the Subject fell in my way, when 
I consulted all the Authors I could then come 
at in compiling my History of Drugs, from 
Pomet, Lemery Tournefort, &c. The Sena,
which Mesue from the Persians, calls Abal-
zemer, is a Plant or Shrub, the Leaves 
whereof Resemble those of Liquorice, it shoots 
up and spreads with many small Branches, 
which are very pliant, the Flowers are yel-
low, with certain Threads or red Streaks 
underneath, after which shoot forth certain 
Follicula or Buds closely folded, which 
hang upon the Plant, by a slender Tail, 
which is very fine, and naturally flat; these 
Buds when Ripe easily fall by the force of 
the Wind, and contain in them a Seed which 
is of a greenish black Colour, and so like 
the Stone of a Raisin, that it is hard to know 
the difference; Serapion in his Book of 
Simples says, these Buds are longish, and in 
form of a Cross, in which the Seed is lodg'd. 
|P_19
They are much Deceived, who think that the 
Tree which Theophrastus calls Colutea to be 
our Sena; because the Colutea which the 
French call Baguenaudier bears large Follicu-
les or Buds, which the Shepherds and Pe-
sants gather to feed their Cattle with, be-
sides, there is a vast difference, in that the 
Sena is an Herb or Plant that lasts but a 
few Months, and the Bagnenaudier is a Tree 
that continues many Years; notwithstand-
ing which the same Virtues have been ascrib-
ed to the last, as to that of Sena, and the 
Merchant impos'd upon as well as the Drug-
gist in buying the one for the other. Mesue
says, that the Sena hath much more Virtue 
and Efficacy in the Bud than the Leaf, espe-
cially if of the Dark green Colour a little 
bitterish, stiptick and astringent in Tast, 
and gather'd when fresh, for otherwise the 
Virtue is lost. The white Buds are good for 
nothing, the green Leaves, better than the 
white, and the thick ones than the thin, but 
the Stalks of no Use at all; and this agrees 
very well with what Matthiolus writes in 
his learned Commentaries on Dioscorides, he 
says indeed, there are two Sorts of these 
Buds, the one of which is gather'd when dry 
and fallen from the Plant, which have no 
Virtue in them, and the other is gathered 
upon the Plant before it is dry and wither'd, 
and these are thick Leaves, and full of Sap, 
being afterwards skillfully dry'd in the 
Shade. 

|P_20
Manardus, a Physician of Ferraramain-
tains, that the Leaves of the Sena have a 
greater Purgative Quality than the Buds, 
but then he takes 'em for such as dropt from 
the Tree ready dry'd; but Fernelius who 
was undoubtedly a more knowing Judge of 
Medicine, follows Mesue and Matthiolus in 
preferring the Buds to the Leaves, and Syl-
vius subscribes to the same Opinion, in his 
Commentaries upon Mesue, Whoever hath 
a Mind to Use the Buds, must observe this 
Description, but such as like the Leaves 
better, must chuse those of the brightest 
Colour, large and fresh, and free from all 
Smell, rejecting the pale and dead Colour'd 
as useless. Our Druggists are often very 
negligent in mixing all together, without 
Choice or Distinction. With submission to 
the more learned, I think we generally un-
der Dose this Medicine in our Compositions, 
and Preseriptions. Serapion orders from a 
Dram, to two Drams in Powder, and half 
an Ounce to five Drams in Decoction, Actu-
arius only one Dram, and in Decoction half 
an Ounce; Fernelius directs two Drams in 
Powder, and six in Decoction, but half an 
Ounce in the Infusion. Your London Di-
spensatory prescribes only a Scruple of Sena
in Powder, and half a Scruple of Rhubarb
and Polypody in seven Drams of Electuarium 
Catholicum, and two Drams only in the De-
coction of Gereon, and in the Lenitive E-
lectuary, to one Ounce a Dram of Sena, with a 
Scruple of that and Polypody in Decoction, in 
|P_21
the larger compound Powder of Sena, half 
a Dram, and in the less 24 Grains. The 
Magisterial Syrup of Apples hath a Dram of 
Sena to an Ounce, but the Purging Syrup 
only a Scruple infus'd to six Drams. Syrup 
of Roses with Sena hath indeed a Dram to 
six Drams of the Syrup. I shall conclude 
this Head, with the form of a Purging Potion 
of Sena, from an eminent Physician of our 
own, who Practiced upwards of sixty Years. 

Take of fine Sena, cut small six Drams, 
Salt of Tartar two Drams, Juice of Lemons
one Ounce, white Wine four Ounces, in-
fuse six or seven Hours, in a Glass Vessel, 
then strain, and infuse therein all Night E-
lectuary of Carthamum three Drams, the Juice 
of Apples one Ounce: In the Morning cla-
rifie this with the white of an Egg, and to 
the strain'd Liquor, add Syrup of Roses,
with Agarick six Drams, Cinamon-Water two 
Drams, the zest of half an Orange Peel. 
Notwithstanding the large Quantity of Sena;
this is a Medicine of a nice and delicate O-
peration, without giving Gripes or Colick, 
and yet moves Ten or Twelve times. 

IN order to introduce our Antidotaria, it 
may not be amiss to give a Specimen of the 
Reformation of two grand Prescriptions, 
which I have already hinted at to be faulty, 
in the Pharmacopeia Londinensis, viz. The 
Confect of Alkermes, and that of Hyacinth.

|P_22
[}The Confection of Alkermes Reformed. }]
Take the Juice of Kermes, sweet Ap-
ples, and Raspberries, of each strain'd ℔ij, 
Sugar of Roses ℔ij, mix and by a gentle Fire 
boil to the Consistence of Honey. The A-
peritive Saffron, or Crocus Martis ℥iij, red 
Rose Buds reduc'd to a Powder, after ha-
ving been first steep'd in Juice of Lemons 
ʒvi, Pearl, Coral, Crabs Eyes and burnt Hart's-
Horn laevigated with Oil of Tartar per De-
liq; of each five Drams, Citron Sanders and 
Bezoar, or Contrayerva Stone, of each ʒss, 
Musk and Ambergreese may be added, at the 
Discretion of the Physician, but it is Judg-
ed much better to be left out. This Com-
position is preferable to that of the Shops, 
for the Intentions aim'd at, being more 
Cordial and Specifical to drive away Melan-
choly and the Malignity of the Bilous Juices, 
besides it is better appropriated to stop 
Fluxes, and to restore Strength. 

[}The Confection of Hyacinth Reformed. }]
Take of the Seeds of Hyacinth and Vi-
per's Bugloss, of each ℥ss, of the Roots of Tor-
mentil, Bistort, Contrayerva, Scorzonera, 
Dictamny, of each ʒiij, Citron and Orange-
Peel dry'd of each ʒiss, Betony and red 
Rose Flowers, of each ʒi, Sorrel and Pur-
slane Seed, of each ℈ij; burnt Hart's Horn, 
yellow Sanders, and white Amber, of each 
ʒij, Magistery of Pearl and Coral, and 
Crabs-Eyes prepar'd, of each ʒvi Bole, Lem-
|P_23
nian and Silesian Earths, of each ʒij, Saf-
fron ℈iv, Camphore ℈i, Tincture of Kermes-
Berries, extracted in Juice of Lemon, and 
reduc'd to the Consistence of Honey ℥ij; all 
these being rightly mix'd, and brought to a 
Powder, may be made into a Mass or Electu-
ary, with Syrup of Lemons, Mulberries, 
&c.

N. B. In this Composition, instead of the 
Fragments of Precious Stones, or the Hya-
cinth, our Author has made Choice of the 
Seed which Dioscorides, thus describ'd, Book 4. 
Chap. 58. The Seed of the Hyacinth, says he, 
is Astringent, and Proper for the Compotisi-
on of Treacles, Myrrh is omitted, because of 
its ingrateful Taste, and as to the Perfumers of 
Musk and Ambergreese, they may be added 
at the Discretion of the Prescriber. But this 
Electuary seems better adapted, than that 
of the Shops, being more Cordial and Resto-
rative, and may be us'd with good Effect 
in Malignant Disentery's and profuse Di-
arrhaea's, as also Pestilential Fevers, Small-
Pox, &c.

[}Antidotaria; 
Or, a Collection of Antidotes, &c.}]
I Design'd to have given you Sir Walter 
Rawleigh's great Cordial from the original 
Manuscript, which you have taken into your 
Dispensatory from Bates, but the Variations 
are so great, and the Articles so Numerous, 
I refer 'em to a larger Work, and shall give 
you Sir Walter Rawleigh's grand Diaphore-
|P_24
tick, taken from Holten, who liv'd with him, 
and also Sir Kenelm Digby's two sudorifick 
Waters, Vegetable and Mineral, appropri-
ated to all burning Malignant Fevers and 
Pestilential Diseases. 

[}Rawleigh's Diaphoretick. }]
Take Mercury sublimate ℔j. Crude 
Antimony, or rather the Regulus ℔ij, 
Grind them well on a Marble, till a Fume 
begin to arise, then put the Mixture into a 
Bolt-Head or Matrass, place this in a Cel-
lar, and let it stand 15 or 20 Hours, till it 
runds into Butter, put that into a Glass A-
lembick, and distill till nothing will come 
over; encrease the Fire till a certain white 
Matter appears sublim'd on the Upper part, 
or Head of the Alembick; then cease till 
the Vessels are cold, and keep the white 
Sublimate a part, or separate, but the Resi-
dence remaining in the bottom is to be divi-
ded into two equal Parts, of which take one 
half, and all the Sublimate gain'd before, 
to this pour the Water which ascended in the 
first Distillation: Drive this till nothing 
further will Distil, and the Vessel being 
cool, the Magma, or Caput Mortum, with what 
is Sublimed must be Ground together in a 
Glass Mortar, and Water put in therewith 
to the Alembick: Drive this over again, 
and Repeat it 7 or 8 times, but give a large 
degree of Fire to the last, that the Subli-
mation may be exactly Regular: The Glas-
ses being cold Collect your Sublimate, then 
|P_25
Grind it again on a Marble, and in a small 
sublimating Furnace, sublime it Thirty 
or Forty times, Grinding it fine, every time, 
theoftener the better; the last time it must 
be reduc'd to an impalpable Powder, and 
put it into a Silver or Gold Vessel, to 
which pour the best Spirit of Wine, and 
burn it, reiterating this Work Seven or 
Eight times, at last you will have a perfect 
dry Powder, to be given from 6 to 12 Grains; 
this was a kind of Panacea to Ralegh, and 
given in Rheumatisms, Small-Pox, Plague, 
Malignant Fevers, and all cutaneous Di-
seases. It moves powerfully to Sweat. 

[}Sir Kenelm Digby's Sudorifick Cordial-Water.}]
Take of the Roots of Scorzonera, Genti-
an, Elicampane, Cinquefoil, Tormentil, Cy-
prus, Aristolochius of both Kinds, of each ℥iv. 
Zedoary ℥iij, the Husks of green Walnuts ℔i, 
of the Leaves of the Orange and Lemon-Tree, 
Bay, Basil and Scordium, of each M. iv, 
the outward Rind of Lemons and Oranges, of 
each ℥x, Juniper-Berries ℥viij, Ivy-Berries 
℥xij, clarified Juice of Valerian, Mead sweet, 
Scabious, Marygold, and Carduus, of each 
℔iij Rhenish Wine, and Rain Water, of 
each five Quarts, white Wine Vinegar ℔v; 
bruise and mix all these together, and set 
'em in Horse-Dung a Week, then Distill in 
Sand to the Consumption of half, and strain the 
Residue, making a strong Expression of the 
|P_26
Magma, which Calcine, to white Ashes: The 
express'd Liquor is to be strain'd through a 
triple Filter, Distill'd again, till the Cordial 
Extract remains, which is to be kept by itself, 
the Salt of the Magma being added thereto, 
for the better preservation and encrease of its 
Virtue: Take of this Cordial now describ'd 
℔ij. Salt of Tartar ℔ss, mix and rectifie 
together, and to the rectified Water, add 
Antimony Diaphoretick ℥ij, burnt Harts-
Horn ℥iv; Mix and Digest in Sand eight 
Days, then Filter. The Dose is ℥i, to ʒvi, 
by itself, or in Treacle-water in Malignant 
Fevers, you may add to this, Juice of Sorrel, 
or Lemons, and little a Sugar, with half a 
Dram of Contrayerva.

[}The Mineral Sudorifick Water of Sir Ke-
nelm Digby.}]
Take of Crude Antimony, ground to a 
subtle Powder ℥i, Salt of Tartar ʒvi, mix well, 
and put them together for some Days, in a 
moist Place, shake often, and at last they 
will dry; Repeat this two or three times, at 
last Grind this finely, put it into a Philoso-
phical Egg, bury it in a Sand heat, or ra-
ther a Reverberatory, six or seven Days, at 
last give a Fire of the fourth degree of Heat, 
so that obscure Clouds may arise, the Mat-
ter will be of a red Colour, which take out, 
Grind afresh, and put it into a stronger Glass, 
pour on Spirit of Wine, and Extract, till 
the Spirit is tinged of a ruby Dye: Dose is 
|P_27
from x to xx Drops in any convenient Li-
quor, as Wine, Treacle or Carduus-Water; 
it is a powerful and noble Sudorifick.

Chalybeate Pills, first invented in the Pla∣-
gue time, for strengthening the Stomach, 
opening Obstructions of the Spleen, and dis-
sipating all the Melancholly and malignant 
Vapours. This Prescription seems to carry 
along with it the Perfection of the Art 
of Composition. 

Take of the Species Hiera Picra ℥ss, A-
loes rosat. ʒij, ℈ij, mix, and of this take on-
ly ʒiij, ℈i, of pure Vitriol of Iron ℈v, red 
Coral, Crab-Eyes, Mastick, Contrayerva 
Stone, Lapis Lazuli prepar'd finely, Salt of 
Worm-wood, of each ℈ij. ss, Balsam of Pe-
ru, as much as will make them into a Mass 
of Pills for ten Doses. 

Every Dose of 
which will con-
tain ʒi, in these 
Proportions. 
Of Hiera Piera, 
and Aloes ℈i, Vi-
triol of Iron ℈ss, 
Red, Coral and 
Crabs-Eyes. 
Mastick, Con-
trayerva Lap. 
Lazuli, and 
Salt of Worm-
wood. 
of each gr. v. 

[}Another Composition of Steel Pills, to 
the same Effect. }]
Take of Mastick ʒij, Benjamin, natu-
ral Balsam, Gum Guajacum, red Coral, Pearl, 
Crabs-Eyes, burnt Harts-Horn, Ultramarine, 
Salt of Wormwood, of each ʒi, Hiera Picra 
℥ss, Aloes Rosat. ʒij, Salt of Steel, or Vi-
triol of Iron ʒiss, with Balsam of Peru,
make a Mass. The Dose is ʒi, taken every Day. 

|P_28
[}A History of the several Compositions that 
make the Contrayerva-Stone, which is 
the Grand Antidotarium.}]
TheContrayerva, or Drake Root, is an 
Indian Plant, which some Judge to be of the 
Nature of Tormentil. This was first intro-
duced into France, in 1602, and much pre-
scrib'd by the Physicians at Paris, in the 
Piague there at that Time, when it 
proved of excellent Service. The Root is 
tuberose and knotty, shooting forth many 
Hairs or Fibres of a yellowish, or rather 
brown Colour, which when chew'd gives an 
Aromatick flavour, and leaves an heat upon 
the Tongue, tho' no bitterness, or stipticity 
is observable. This grows in both the In-
dies, but most plentifully in the West, in the 
Kingdom of Peru, and that Part call'd Ci-
arche and Tonsuglar. The Indians Use it for 
Sallet; they much covet the Root, which 
they cut in Pieces, and put under the Soles 
of their Feet in Winter time: The Goats
from eating of this Plant, are said to gene-
rate the Bezoar Stone, for the Indiansob-
serve those Goats, of which there are seve-
ral Kinds, of which one is call'd Bicuqua,
and those which do not feed upon this Plant, 
never generate any of these Stones; so that 
according to this Notion, their Bezoar seems 
to be a Concretion of Tartar, or the fæcu-
lent Part of the Aliment, form'd from the 
Digestion of the Contrayerva Plant.

|P_29
The Stone in India is made from the 
Juice of the Root, and the whole Plant to-
gether, this is Reduced into Paste, and so 
form'd into Stones of various Sizes. The 
Root is given from a Dram to two, and hath 
had the Power to throw out Boils, Blains 
and Carbuncles, with great Success, in the 
Plague Time, which Encouraged the Physici-
ans to invent several Compositions there 
from 

[}The General Materials for the Contra-
yerva Stone.}]
Contrayerva Root, white Amber, Rock 
Chrystal, Snake-Root, Zedoary, Tormen-
til, Bistort, Angelica, red Coral, Camphore, 
Saffron, Crabs-Claws, Crabs-Eyes, burnt 
Harts-Horn, Vipers, Carline Thistle, But-
ter-Bur, Elecampane, Valerian, Pearl, Ma-
stick, Cochineal, Isinglass, Lemnian, and 
Silesia Earth, Cerusse of Antimony-Flowers 
of ♀, Mosch and Amberbergreese to form 
it into a Mass, the Jelly of Vipers Skins, 
Isinglass, Harts-Horn, or an Extract of 
Scordium; or Scorzonera, with the white 
of an Egg may be necessary. 

[}Various Forms of the Contrayerva Stone,
each of which contain a Dose, which may 
be multiplied at Discretion. }]
Take Antimony Diaphoretick ℈i, Con-
trayerv. Bezoar Animal, Crabs-Claws, of 
|P_30
each gr. x; make a Bole with Jelly of Harts-
Horn, qs. 

Or Take Diaphoretick Magisterial Con-
trayerv. and oriental Bezoar, of each gr. 
vi. Harts-Horn, Pearl, Coral and Crabs-
Eyes prepar'd, of each gr. v. white Amber, 
Lemnian and Silesia Earth, of each gr. iv. 
Ambergreese gr. ij, make a Bole as before. 

3dly, take Ceruse of Antimony, Magi-
stery of Coral, Pearl and Crabs-Eyes, of 
each ℈ss, Saffron and Contrayerva Root, of 
each gr. iv, make a Bole with Jelly of Harts-
Horn, or Mucilage of Quince Seed. 

4thly, take Snake Root, Valerian and 
Contrayerva, of each ℈ss, Cochineal and 
Camphere, of each gr. iv. Bol-Arm. gr. vi, 
mix and make a fine Powder for one Dose, 
or a Bole, with Confect of Alkermes. 

[}Bezoar Animal prepared from Harts-
Horn. }]
Take the freshest and youngest Tips of 
Harts-Horn, Calcine to a perfect whiteness, 
Grind this to a Powder, and make it into 
Troches, with Syrup of Betony or Citron, 
first acuated with some Drops of Oil of Vi-
triol or Sulphur by the Bell. 

[}The first Notion of the Bezoardick Bole.}]
Take of the Contrayerva Stone ℥i. Ori-
ental Bezoar ℥ss, Bezoar Animal ℥iv, Ma-
gistery of Coral, Pearl and Crabs-Eyes, of 
|P_31
each ℥iiss, Crabs-Claws ℥iv, white Amber 
℥ij, Lemnian and Silesia Earth ʒvi, Rock 
Chrystal Calcined into an impalpable 
Powder ʒx, Musk ʒss, with Jelly of Harts-
Horn, made from a Tincture of Saffron; 
make this into a Paste, from whence Stones 
may be form'd. Take of the said Stone, 
gr. xx. Crollius Diaphoretick gr. x, for a 
Dose, and to raise the Alixipharmick power 
greater to the whole Composition of the 
Stone, add the Liver and Heart of Vipers 
ʒij; the Vipers Flesh and Bones dry'd ac-
cording to Art ℥iv, to which put of the 
Roots of Angelica, Tormentil, Contrayer-
va, Zedoary, Scorzonera, Scordium, Rue and 
Orange-Water, of each ʒi, made into a Mass, 
with Jelly of Vipers Skins. 

[}Another COMPOSITION. }]
Take of Cerusse of Antimony or Flowers 
of the same, whether red or white ℥v, 
Harts-Horn prepar'd with Syrup of Angeli-
ca and Oil of Sulphur ℥ij, Roots of Tormen-
til, Scorzoner ℥ij, Butter-Bur, both the Vale-
rians, Bunnian Seed, and Galangal, an ℥ss, 
Crabs-Claws, Crabs-Eyes, red Coral, Silesia-
Earth, Cochineal, of each ℥i, Salt of Car-
duus, Mead sweet, Angelica, Tartar Vitrio-
lated, sal Prunelle, of each ʒij, mix for a 
Paste, with Jelly of Harts-Horn, made up 
with Musk or Saffron, to this may be added, 
Vol. Salt of Vipers ℥i. Aur. Fulminans. 

|P_32
[}The Solar Bezoardick Bole.}]
Take Crollius Diophoretick of ♁ gr. 
xij, Bezoar oriental gr. viij, Bezoar Ani-
mal, Magistery of Coral and Crabs-Eyes, 
an. gr. vij, Cochineal gr. vi, Aurum Ful-
minans gr. iv, Ambergreese gr. ij, mix for 
a Dose. 

N. B. If the foregoing Magisteries are 
made with Spirit of Vitriol, Oil of Sul-
phur, &c. the Medicine will be the more 
Effectual, and better resist the Putrefaction 
of the Malignity. 

[}The Northern Bezoartick-Stone.}]
TakeHartman's Diaphoretick Antimo-
ny, Magistery of Gold, red Coral an. ʒvi, 
common Antimony Diaphoretick, Harts-
Horn Calcined, Crabs-Eyes prepar'd an ℥i, 
Crabs-Claws in Powder ʒij, Ambergreese ʒi, 
Musk ℈i, make this into Paste with Jelly of 
Isinglass, in Rose-Water. 

[}The Southern Bezoartick-Stone.}]
Take of the Magisterial Diaphoretick 
℥i, Cerusse of ♁ ℥iij, burnt Harts-Horn, 
Crabs-Eyes, of Vipers Flesh, Cochineal 
an. ℥iss, Magistery of Pearl, and Co-
ral an. ʒvi, Silesian-Earth ℥i, yellow San-
ders, Orange-Peel an. ℥ss, Roots of Valerian, 
Butter-Bur, Scorzonera, Contrayerva, Seeds 
|P_33
of Angelica an. ʒvi, Ambergreese, Musk an 
ʒss, make a Powder, and then a Paste with 
Jelly of Hart's-Horn, the Dose from a ℈i, 
℈ij, 

[}In the Year 1628, the following Prescrip-
tions of the Contrayerva-Stone were 
directed. }]
Take Contrayerva Root, ℥ij, Hart's-
Horn prepar'd and Lemnian-Earth, of each 
℥i, Cochineal ℥ss, Margarit ℥iv, Snake-Roct 
℥ss, with Isinglass and Juice of Kermes, 
make a Mass; whereof take ʒss, in any 
Cordial-Water. 

Or, take Contrayerva, Snake-Root, of 
each ℥i, Pearl and Crabs-Eyes an. ℥ss, Saf-
fron ʒij, Cochineal ʒij, mix and give ℈ss, to 
℈i, in any appropriated Vehicle. 

[}In the Year 1636, when the Plague 
Raged in London, these Forms were 
Prescrib'd. }]
Take Crabs-Claws in Powder, Bezoar 
Animal, Syrup of Betony, Kermes and Ci-
tron an. ℥iv, Contrayerva, and Snake-Root 
an. ℥v, Seed of Angelica an. ℥i, Antimony, 
Diaphoretick ℥vi, Ambergreese ʒij, mix. 
The Dose is ℈i, to ʒss. Take Contrayerva, 
and Snake-Root, with Crabs-Claws powder'd 
|P_34
an ʒij, Pearl, and Coral an. ʒiij, Crollius, 
Diaphoretick of Antimony ʒi. The Dose ℈i. 

[}The TREACLE-STONE.}]
Take the whole Viper reduc'd to Pow-
der ℥i, Crabs-Eyes ℥iv, Hartman'sDiapho-
retick, or Flowers of ♁, fix'd by the Fire ℥ij, 
Mother of Pearl, Cochineal, and white Am-
ber an. ℥iss, Roots of Tormentil, Bistort, 
Scorzonera an. ℥ij, Kermes Berry, Orange-
Peel and Angelica an. ℥ss, Saffron with Ve-
nice-Treacle, qs. make a Mass. Dose ℈ to ʒi. 

[}A Composition very Successful in the Small-
Pox, Measles, Milliary-Fever, &c. }]
TakeHartman's Diaphoretick gr. x, 
Contrayerva-Stone, and Bezoar an. gr. viij, 
Hart's-Horn prepar'd with Oil of Vitriol, 
Coral, Crabs-Eyes, of each gr. vi, Silesian, 
Lemnian Earth, and Cochineal an gr. v, mix 
for a Dose in Treacle-Water. 

[}The white Contrayerva-Stone.}]
Take of the Contrayerva-Root ℥i, Hart's-
Horn, and Crabs-Claws, laevigated on a 
Marble, with Carduus-Water an. ℥i, Magi-
stery of Pearl and Coral an. ℥ss; make this 
|P_35
up with Jelly of Hart's-Horn and Isinglass; 
the Dose ʒss, to Children ℈i. 

[}The red Contrayerva-Stone.}]
Take of the Contrayerva-Root ℥iss, An-
timony Diaphoretick, Crabs-Eyes an. ʒx, 
Chochineal ℥iss, Bezoar Mineral ℥ss, Grind 
these together, and they will be of an ex-
cellent red Colour; the Dose from ℈i, to ʒss, 
in the Confluent Small-Pox and Purple-Fe-
vers.

[}Confect of Vipers, or the Grand Antidote
against all Sorts of Poyson.}]
Take Vipers in the Spring, Cut their 
Heads off, and cleanse them well in white 
Wine; dry them, and reduce them with 
their Hearts and Livers to Powder, of this 
so prepared, take ℥iv, Roots of Contrayer-
va ℥ij, Tormentil, Scorzonera an. ℥iss, 
Roots of Avens, Vervain, Carline, Bastard, 
Saffron, Fraxinel, Cinquefoil, Elecampane, 
the outward Rind of the Lemon and Orange 
an. ℥i; Roots of Swallow wort, both the the 
Valerians, Burdock, Butter-Bur, Genti-
tian, Zedoary an. ʒvi, Angelica-Roots ʒss, 
Leaves of Scordium, Rue, Malabathrum, 
Paul's Betony, Sanicle, Winter-green an ʒvi, 
Flowers of Self-heal, Spanish Broom, Betony, 
|P_36
Mary-gold, Mead sweet Oranges an. ʒv, 
Seeds of Rue, Scabious, Burdock, Vipers 
Bugloss, Vervain, Sorrel, Purslane, Cardu-
us, St. John's-Wort, Mary-golds, Broom an. 
ʒiij, Citron Sanders, Rhodium, Sassafrass, 
Costus, Schaenath, Calamus Aromaticus, 
Harts-Horn and the Rasping of Human 
Sculls, Lemnian Earth, Gum Guajacum, 
Myrrh, Mastick, Sandarac, Olibanum an. 
℥ss, white Amber, Pearl and Coral prepa-
red; Hartman's Diaphoretick of Antimony 
ʒij, Mace, Cloves, Cinnamon, Infused in 
Juice of Lemon an. ʒvi, all these well 
power'd separately, may be afterwards 
mix'd together in the following Electuary.
Take of fresh Juniper-Berries ℔iv, the Par-
ings of Apples and Quinces an. ℔ss, Roots 
of Sorrel and Succory an. ℥iv, Scabious, Ma-
ry-gold, Wood-Sorrel, Borage, the whole 
Plants an. M. ij, Flowers of Sage, Rosema-
ry, red Roses, Germander, Broom and 
Mugwort an. Pug. iij, Kermes Berries, 
Citron Seeds an. ʒij, Orange-Peel and Rho-
dium Rasped an. ʒiss; Boil all in Spanish
Wine and Carduus-Water, of each equal 
Parts, to which add Juice of Strawberries, 
Raspberries, Cherries or Quinces ℔ij, strain 
this and Boil the Express'd Liquor to the 
Consistence of Honey: Of which take two 
Parts to one of the Spices, or Powder be-
fore Prescrib'd, adding thereto upon Occasi-
on, to every Dose of Antimony Diaphore-
tick ℈i, Aurum Fulminans ℈ss, Oil of Sul-
phur gr. iv; Dose ʒss, to ℈iv. 

|P_37
[}The Imperial Cordial Water inPesti-
lential-Fevers. }]
Take of the dry'd Roots of Swallow-
wort, Angelica, Masterwort, Gentian, Ele-
campane ℥ij, Roots of Carline Thistle, Bur-
dock, Birthworth, Bistort, Tormentil, Ga-
lingal, Scorzonera, Contrayerva an. ℥iij, 
Leaves of Hyssop, Majoram, Rue, Bay, 
Mint, Balm, Mead sweet, Wormwood an. 
℔iij, Flowers of Centaury, Broom, St. 
Johns-wort, Mary-gold, Sage, Lavender and 
Orange an. ℥i, Cinnamon, Cloves, Mace, 
Nutmegs, Zedoary, Galangal, Calamus an. 
ʒx, Juniper-Berries, Rhodium and Citron 
Sanders an. ℥iij, Orange-Peel ℥vi, Strong-
Wine, or Brandy ℔xij, Infuse for 8 or 10 
Days, then Distill, afterwards sweeten with 
Loaf-Sugar, to which add a few Drops of 
Oil of Cinnamon, Burgamot, or Essence of 
Ambergreese. 

[}The Golden Elixir of LIFE.}]
TheAurm Potabile of Blanc was made 
of the best Spirit of Wine, Circulated with 
Honey, Musk and Ambergreese, according 
to the Description of Gabel Rhoverus, in 
|P_38
the second Part of his Antidotarium, pag. 383. 
This is one of the most potent Liquors, yet 
still more Penetrating, and Efficacious, ac-
cording to the following Composition; of 
this Aurum Potabile, Extracted without 
Fire ℔vi, Aurum Fulminans, precipiated by 
Oil of Tartar, which is better, the Chrystals 
of Gold, as taught hereafter to prepare ℥ij, 
Choice Pearl ℥iv, Sugar-Candy ℔iv, Am-
bergreese ℥ij, Musk ℥ss. Saffron ℥iv, Spi-
rit of Salt, doubly-Extracted ℔i, Spirit of 
Wine dephlegmated ℔iv, pour this upon the 
Ambergreese, Musk and Saffron to Extract 
a Tincture by a gentle Heat; then dissolve 
the Sugar in Spirit of Honey; the Gold 
and Pearl will come to an Easie Dissoluti-
on in Spirit of Salt; so that in eight 
Days time you will have each of them di-
stinctly prepared in order for a Mixture, 
which you are to make in a double Cucur-
bit, well luted in the Junctures, and bu-
ried in a Sand Furnace, for forty Days, 
during which time a regular Circulation 
is to be perform'd, at last Decant from 
thence a clear limpid Liquor, which keep in 
Glass Viols close stop't. The Dose is from 
two Drops to a Dram; this is the most 
powerful Corroborative in the Plague, in Hy-
sterick Suffocations, Faintings, Vertigo's and 
Flatulent Disorders of the Stomach and Bowels. 

Chrystals of Gold are made thus. Take 
of Leaf Gold, what you please, pour thereon 
|P_39
a double or triple Part of pure Spirit of 
Salt rectified, make a Dissolution, and Co-
hobate six or eight times in an Alembick, 
with an Hole quite through the Head of 
it, at last force the matter over by a strong 
Fire, and the Chrystals will ascend to the 
Neck of the Vessel, these Chrystals are dis-
solvable in almost any Liquor, and to be 
separated again by Spirit of Salt, and reduc'd 
to their pristine Form. 

Thus Gentlemen, I have given you a 
a short Specimen of my design'd Reforma-
tion of your London Dispensatory, and Hope 
as it will be Useful to the Publick, so it will 
meet with a Candid Reception, and hearty 
Approbation from your learned Society, 
which is the utmost Ambition, of Gentle-
men, with all 

Die 4 is 
xiij, Ap. 
1721. 

Duty and Respect, 
Your most Humble, 
most Devoted and most 
Obedient Servant,
J. Browne. 

FINIS. 
