

[^Sample 1: book - ^]

|P_1[^An illustration ... ^]
[}AN 
INTRODUCTION 
TO THE 
Method of Prescribing, &c.}]
§.1. AFormula or prescription, a- 
mong physicians, is a rati- 
onal assignment and com- 
bination of such pharma- 
ceutical remedies as have 
by art been found to be 
proper in particular cases; 
respect being had to the 
matter and form of the ingredients and medicine: 
so that it may be commodiously made up by the 
apothecary, and applied with ease and success by 
the patient. 

§. 2. Therefore that branch of the practice of 
physic which delivers rules for the effecting this 
rational combination (§. 1.), is termed the method 
of prescribing forms of medicines. 

§. 3. The matter of the formula (§. 1.), whe- 
ther it be the product of nature or art, is sup- 
plied from the (ϋλη ίατοικη) materia medica, or 
pharmaceutical stores. The form thereof is va- 
rious, being determined by the very different 
|P_2
circumstances both of the patient and ingredi- 
ents; as will hereafter more evidently appear. The 
end and design of it, is, an artful preparation and 
just administration of those means by which the 
physician endeavours to answer his indications, and 
effect a cure. 

§. 4. The method of prescribing (§. 2.) therefore 
comprises the very last part which a physician is 
to engage with in his profession; this being the 
point to which his skill in all the other branches 
of the science have a direct tendence: nor does a 
complete workman therein hardly ever miss 
of a happy compensation for his industry and 
care. 

§. 5. From hence (§. 3. and §. 4.), the neces- 
sity, usefulness and advantages as well as dignity 
of this ultimate branch of the profession, are suf- 
ficiently obvious. 

§. 6. The formulæ, or prescriptions, (§. 1.) are 
distinguished into (1.) officinal, respecting a medi- 
cine made and kept ready for future uses in apo- 
thecaries shops; and (2.) extemporaneous, to be 
directly made up and applied for present exigen- 
cies. 'Tis chiefly the latter of these we intend to 
handle in this treatise. 

§. 7. In order to prescribe either of these for- 
mula's (§. 6.), it is supposed that the physician or 
prescriber has a previous knowledge of, 
1. The doctrine of indications; whereby he is 
instructed whether any thing is to be done, what, 
by what means, and after what manner, toge- 
ther with the time, order, &c. in which the me- 
dicines or instruments are to be used. 


2. Of the whole materia medica in all the 
three kingdoms, animal, vegetable and mine- 
ral; inasmuch as they afford the matter (§. 3.) 
of the prescribed formula: but he shou'd be 
more particularly versed in those simples and 
|P_3
medicines which are at hand, or proper to the 
country where he practises. And lastly, 


3. Of all the preparations in pharmacy, both 
chemical and galenical, simple and compound; 
together with the manner in which they all 
operate, and the effects they produce in the 
animal system: for by the knowledge of these 
(1. 2. 3.) the physician knows how to direct 
his choice of ingredients, when he prescribes 
the formula (§. 1.) 


§. 8. And indeed it is not a superficial, as is 
too commonly found, but a just and more exten- 
sive knowledge of the two last: (§. 7. n° 2. 3.), that 
is here required for this purpose. For who will 
pretend to direct the apothecary how to act, that 
is himself ignorant of the proper methods of act- 
ing, in things of that nature? How can any one 
select or make a rational choice of materials which 
he has never seen, or scarce heard of? What 
room has he to foresee (and consequently prevent 
the bad) effects of applications, who has never 
examined their composition and texture, nor ex- 
perienced their action on other bodies? — He 
therefore that intends for this branch (§. 2.) of the 
profession, will doubtless find his account in giving 
some attention to the practical part of officinal phar- 
macy; in critically examining the mechanical struc- 
ture and sensible qualities of the materia medica & 
chemica; and in observing their effects and manner 
of acting on animal bodies. 

§. 9. So that from comparing what has been 
said (§. 7. and 8. with §. 4.), we may naturally 
infer that there is required more time and diligence 
than is generally supposed, to qualify one for this 
business; with regard to which, we are going to 
lay down directions according to the best of our 
abilities. But a just treatment and method will 
|P_4
certainly have their force in making the acquisi- 
tion hereof the more eafy. 

§. 10. Supposing therefore the preliminaries 
(mentioned §. 7. and §. 8.), requisite for prescrib- 
ing forms rationally, to be sufficiently known; 
we shall distribute the matter of our subject 
under three general heads: the first of which, 
by way of introduction to the rest, will com- 
prise the rules and cautions nececessary to be 
observed before prescribing; the second, will ex- 
hibit what relates to prescriptions in general, with- 
out regarding the particular form; and the last, 
will contain the particulars of every individual 
form of medicine in use, with proper examples or 
specimens of each. 
[^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}GENERAL RULES and CAUTIONS 
to be observed before practising. }]
§. 11. A prudent physician never orders any 
thing in his prescription but what he 
has a sufficient reason for, which upon inquiry he 
is able to give: so that he does not act at random, 
from custom or prejudice, but as the indications, 
which he has before rightly deduced and consider- 
ed, direct him. 

§. 12. He is first of all therefore to determine 
rationally, whether in the present case there be 
required any thing to be done on his part. 

§. 13. In consequence of which determination 
if nature herself be found strong enough, and in a 
proper disposition to throw off the disease, if the 
disorder can absolutely receive no benefit from 
medicines, if its nature or particular disposition be 
doubtful and not yet determined, or if it be fore- 
|P_5
seen that a cure thereof will bringon a worse dis- 
ease; it is then both just and rational to omit pre- 
scribing, at least any thing that will much affect 
the œconomy, in order to avoid oppressing the 
patient both in his body and purse. 

§. 14. But to prevent the patient's falling into 
despair from being destitute of physical help, and 
to exclude ignominious reflection on the physician 
and his profession, as seeming useless or imper- 
fect; it is often adviseable in those circumstances 
(§. 13.), to order something innocent in a pre- 
scription; such as will do no harm, if they should 
prove of no great benefit. With this view, the 
physician will acquaint and familiarise himself with 
several forms consisting of simple ingredients; as 
innocent julaps, mild emulsions, easing mixtures, 
unactive powders, &c. by which specious shew of 
assistance, the patient will rest much more quiet 
and easy both in his body and mind, than if left 
destitute with a harsh prognostic. This conside- 
ration will be more particularly useful in the un- 
certain and often imaginary disorders of virgins, 
and married women, especially whilst teeming. 

§. 15. If the physician finds by his indications 
that there is room to expect success from his en- 
deavours, the next step is to determine how and 
by what means that may be obtained with the 
greatest ease and expedition: both which we are 
directed to by the doctrine of indications, which 
being supposed already known, we shall here men- 
tion such only as more immediately relate to our 
present design. 

§. 16. The grand scope in a cure being to re- 
cover (tuto, cito & jucunde) safely, quickly and 
pleasantly, the physician should always have his 
eye fix'd upon that view; as being the point to 
which every thing he orders shou'd have, as much 
as possible, an immediate tendency. 

|P_6
§. 17. Hence he is directed to select the most 
efficacious and proper ingredients, and to combine 
them in a manner most suitable to answer his in- 
tentions, having a regard both to their matter and 
the form. 

§. 18. His prescription should also contain no- 
thing that will be attended with hazard or danger 
in the administration: tho' in desperate and un- 
tractable cases, it is allowable to try a new method; 
supposing it to be conducted with judgment, and 
the relations forewarned of the doubtfulness of 
success in the case. 

§. 19. A physician that consults his character 
and interest, will never be fond of using new and 
unexperienced methods and remedies, whilst there 
are others of long standing in practice as suitable 
for his purpose; and even those, he will order 
with the utmost circumspection: reputation being 
oftener lost and envy got in its room, by such at- 
tempts, than thro' ignorance. 

§. 20. He will reject all obsolete and useless 
medicines, and such as easily change or corrupt 
by keeping, lest they prove disagreeable and hurt- 
ful to the patient, or at least obstruct his inten- 
tion: upon which account, it is proportionably 
better for medicines to be made up at the shops of 
the most celebrated apothecaries; because their 
more constant and speedy vent gives oftener occa- 
sion for a renewal or fresh making of those medi- 
cines: but skill and honesty in compounding, are, 
however, stronger recommendations on the behalf 
of the apothecary. 

§. 21. Rough medicines are to be always laid 
aside, where more gentle ones will serve the turn; 
but if such are used, it must be with great circum- 
spection and prudence, especially when intended 
for weak and delicate habits of body, or very sen- 
sible and nervous parts, lest the violence of the 
|P_7
remedy raise an ill opinion of the physician and 
his profession. 

§. 22. Medicines which require extraordinary 
skill to prepare them, shou'd be made up and ex- 
hibited with one's own hand, or else not be pre- 
scribed at all; unless we be sufficiently assured of 
the faithfulness and dexterity of the apothecary. 

§. 23. Very costly ingredients shou'd be spar- 
ingly or very little used, when others more com- 
mon and cheap are as suitable for the intention; 
which caution we generally find to be observed in 
prescriptions: but some allowance must be made 
for the luxurious daintiness of the rich, who of- 
ten judge the virtue of a medicine by its price. 

§. 24. Exotic or far-fetch'd remedies, are not 
to be superstitiously preferred to such as are the 
product of our own country, when the latter are 
equal to our design; for the indigenous simples and 
compounds are not so subject to adulteration and 
fraud, nor decay from the length of time and 
change of climate, as exoticks are. 

§. 25. It is often prudent to order such things 
as (by their great commonness, easy and frequent 
name, particular smell, taste and other qualities) 
are popularly known and discoverable, by titles 
the least in use, or else mix'd and veiled with 
other substances; lest being discovered, the pa- 
tient might be disgusted at them, or else despise 
them as of no efficacy. 

§. 26. We may be more ready and liberal in 
the use of particular medicines to such as have 
frequently undergone their operation, than to o- 
thers unaccustomed to 'em; which particularly 
holds good with regard to emetics, cathartics, 
opiates, &c.

§. 27. Such ingredients as are unpleasant, nau- 
seous or troublesome to be taken, should be avoid- 
ed as much as possible; or at least ordered in a 
|P_8
very small quantity, and artfully disguised in 
something more agreeable: it being generally bet- 
ter to give nothing, than what nature has a parti- 
cular abhorrence to; which caution is particularly 
of consequence with respect to very nice and 
fanciful women, children, infants, and such as have 
some particular antipathy, &c.

§. 28. Hence it is often proper to be satisfied, 
that the patient has no natural disgust and aver- 
sion to the particular medicine and form pre- 
scribed; for otherwise, remedies extremely well 
adapted to the disorder, may prove not only in- 
effectual, but sometimes of pernicious consequence; 
notwithstanding that be brought about by nothing 
more than the imagination or fancy. 

§. 29. The judicious physician will aim at sim- 
plicity with efficacy, and not multitude and quan- 
tity of ingredients in his prescription; studying 
rather a concise brevity, than a pompous and af- 
fected scroll: and accordingly he will select his 
materials from the vast field of the materia medica, 
not promiscuously, but as they stand approved by 
reason and experience. 

§. 30. But the younger physician, whose cha- 
racter and business are not yet sufficiently establish- 
ed, will accommodate his practice, as much as is 
consistent with his intention, to the customs and 
opinions of the age, place, and people he is con- 
cerned with: thus he will the more easily pave 
the way for coming into publick esteem; but 
when confirmed, and of considerable standing in 
practice, he may then safely disregard such cir- 
cumstances. 

§. 31. Natural and simple medicines are prefer- 
rable to prepared and compound ones, when the 
virtues of both are equally the same. For in pre- 
patation and composition, medicines are not only 
subject to change and put on other qualities, but 
|P_9
their goodness must also greatly depend on the 
honesty and dexterity of the compounder; whereas 
the conduct and constancy of faithful nature greatly 
surpasses all the pretensions of art. 

§. 32. Tho' the knowledge of every simple in 
the Materia medica be useful to a physician, he is 
required to have a more particular acquaintance 
with such as are in constant practice, and for that 
purpose always kept ready in the shops; lest he 
should order things which are not ready at hand: 
which would be matter of little consequence, were 
it not for the prevailing forwardness of substitut- 
ing one thing for another, without consulting the 
physician. 

§. 33. Besides the properties and doses of each 
simple and compound medicine, the young phy- 
sician will remember the several synonimous appella- 
tions usually assigned to each; that he may not be 
liable to order the same thing more than once in a 
prescription, under different titles. Upon the 
same account he will also learn the several general
appellations, which are for brevity used to signify 
several simples, as they are expreffed in Morellus[/1./]. 

§. 34. An acquaintance also with the several 
seasons of the year, proper to vegitable and ani- 
mal substances, should not be neglected but had in 
memory; lest he order something to be fresh ga- 
thered, &c. in autumn or winter, which is to be had 
in that flourishing state only in spring or summer. 

§. 35. The different textures and consistences of 
both simple and compound medicines, must also 
come into consideration; to avoid improper forms 
and proportions in prescription. 

§. 36. The mutual affinity and aptitude of the 
simples for mixture with each other, and of the 
instruments and methods by which they must be 
|P_10
so prepared, should be in like manner learned 
from a rational and practical pharmacy; which 
will make for the interest both of himself and pati- 
ent, and preserve him from being ridiculed by 
the apothecary's man, when he may have occasion 
to mention them in his prescription. 

§. 37. By remembering the constituent ingredi- 
ents of officinal compounds, we may avoid an im- 
proper repetition of the same simples in an ex- 
temporaneous form; but indications, sometimes, 
require such repetition. 

§. 38. Nor is it proper to accumulate many in- 
gredients in one form, which differ, indeed, in 
name, but not in their nature and specisic virtues; 
for that would be much the same as neglecting the 
caution at §. 33. 

§. 39. Such of the select ingredients as may com- 
modiously enter one form, should not, without ne- 
cessity, be distributed into more, respect being had 
to the opinions and circumftances mention'd 
§. 30; for there are some who are much displeased 
with few and short formulæ. 

§. 40. On the other hand, simples which have 
no congruity with each other, so as to mix uni- 
formly, should be left out of the form, or be as- 
signed to some other; especially oily and terebin- 
thinate substances witn watery, and such things, 
as upon mixture, change or destroy the properties 
of each other, &c. of which, particular mention 
will be made hereafter, well worth special ob- 
servation. 

§. 41. To avoid in some measure both these 
difficulties (§. 39. & 40.), we must oppose medi- 
cines not to every trifling, but the most urgent 
Symptoms; for these being the effects or conse- 
quences of the disease, that, or its immediate cause 
being removed, the symptoms mult spontaneously 
vanish; besides, the train of symptoms is often so 
|P_11
numerous and opposite, as to make a distinct 
treatment of them impracticable without confusion. 

§. 42. In very acute diseases, and in symptoms 
extremely urgent, it is adviseable to order remedies 
that may be made up and exhibited with the greatest 
ease and expedition; that a critical opportunity 
may not be lost through a want of the medicine, or 
a delay of the apothecary. 

§. 43. If the texture of the ingredients suit 
them indifferently for several forms, we may, upon 
inquiry, reduce them to that most agreeable to 
the patient; as many have a particular liking, or 
aversion, naturally or from use, more for one form 
than another: by which means the physician and 
his profession will come more into the good opi- 
nion of the patient, as well as taking the medi- 
cine be render'd more certain and pleasant. 

§. 44. On the contrary, we must not be so solli- 
citous about the palate as to forget the proper na- 
ture, danger, and symptoms of the disease; nor 
neglect the pre-disposing cause in the patient's 
habit. Some forms are more suitable to one dis- 
ease than another. How preposterous would it be 
to order an electuary, or bolus, in a quinsy,or where 
deglutition is dissicult, &c.

§. 45. Nor is the intention of a medicine as 
easily answer'd by one form as another: sudorifics 
agree best with a liquid form, absorbents with a 
dry one, and fœtid, or nauseous things, with that 
of a pill, &c. as we shall observe more at large in 
the several histories of each particular form. 

§. 46. The age and circumstances of the pati- 
ent have also their force in determining the parti- 
cular form of the medicine. Infants should not be 
fatigued with internals, when external forms will 
prove as effectual; nor should they be ever mo- 
lested with a bolus, pill, or any thing unpleasant 
and difficult to swallow. 

|P_12
§. 47. The patients natural constitution, or ha- 
bit, has, in like manner, some influence in de- 
manding a variation in the particular form. The 
hot and dry require a liquid, the moist and phleg- 
matic are benefited most by a dry form; but these 
being of less consequence must give place to the 
consideration of §. 43, to 47, which are of greater 
importance [/2./]. 

§. 48. Medicines that are to be taken upon long 
journeys, or continually carried about in boxes for 
constant use, should consist of ingredients the least 
bulky, most effectual and durable, and reduced to 
a form the most convenient and portable. 

§. 49. If a patient finds himself better after a 
prescription, he should continue in the use of it 'till 
the physician finds some variation required; nor 
is it commendable to make a change therein with- 
out an evident and weighty reason. 

§. 50. It is, however, allowable and proper, in 
hereditary, or habitual and very chronical distem- 
|P_13
pers, to vary both the ingredients and form, tho' 
the face of symptoms and their indications re- 
main the same: whereby is shewn the skill of the 
physician and the copiousness of his art, and that 
the patient may not be tired out with one form, 
nor particular medicines become habitual and use- 
less to him. 

§. 51. When no benefit arises from the use of a 
medicine, rather than persist therein, it shou'd be 
changed, either wholly or in part, at the discretion 
of the physician: but, if noxious, it must be 
speedily and altogether suppressed; for, by the ju- 
vantia & ledentia, or what helps and hurts, we 
are dirccted principally how to act. 

§. 52. Lastly, as a prudent physician never re. 
scribes but with great attention and ClI'CllmspCt'I%0n 
of mind, so he should never lay the formula out of 
his hand 'till he has first: revised it; that he may 
be fure every thing is right, diPtinct and clear; 
for it being the too general lot of prescripriong 
to be made up_ by the hands of j0L1I'nCymen 
and apprentices, who are often both ignorant 
and careless, a ssip of the pen, or an obscurify, 
might chance to be of fatal confequence to the pa- 
ticnt. 


[}Of the GENERAL Circumstances of pre- 
scriptions, exclusive of the parsicular form of 
a medicine. }]
§. 53. WE come now to consider the formula, 
or prescription (§. 1.) in general, 
as agreeing with, or common to, all forms with- 
out distinction; and this we shall do (1.) abstractly, 
with respect to the bill itself, and then (2.) in com- 
|P_14
position, with respect to the circumstances of its 
constituent parts. 

§. 54. With regard to the first (§. 53.), we un- 
derstand every thing that does not immediately 
affect or concern the medicine it self; but serve ei- 
ther for ornament, brevity, or perspecuity in the 
way of compounding and applying it. 

§. 55. The first (I.) that occurs among these 
(§. 54.), is an arbitrary and superstitious inscrip- 
tion, appearing in the front of the bill, and con- 
sisting in some particular characters or letters in- 
timating the pious wish and inclination of the pre- 
scriber: as, †. C. D. J D. JJ. α & ω[/3./]; which 
may be, and are, generally omitted without 
neglecting any thing serviceable to the patient. 

§. 56. The next (II.) that appears, at the head 
of the prescription, is that constantly used, abbre- 
viated word (Rec. or ℞.) [/4./]Recipe; importing that 
the apothecary is to take something, afterwards 
mentioned. 

§. 57. Our business is now to examine the (III.) 
order, or series, in which the things to be thus 
(§. 56.) taken are wrote. This we shall perceive 
upon enquiry to vary with every particular form of 
medicine; nor even there, shall we find one con- 
stant and uniform method observ'd; as will be 
more apparent in the particular histories of each. 
We may, however, observe in the general, 
1. That a distinct line shou'd be made of every 
single ingredient; not to obscure them, by 
writing one continuous or in the same direct- 
ion with the other. 

|P_15
2. That ingredients of the same kind should 
be placed next to each other; roots with roots, 
waters with waters, &c.

3. Not to be wanting in the least point of 
order, we should begin and range things, that 
differ from each other in substance, according 
to their quantities; beginning with the largest 
and ending with the smallest, or the reverse. 

4. Next to that consideration (n° 3.), the 
basis, or main ingredients (§. 75.) shou'd hold 
the first place; then, the assistants (§. 78.); af- 
ter them, the correcters (§. 83.); and lastly, the 
vehicle (§. 86.), or what serves to make them up. 

5. Such things as have their quantity undeter- 
min'd, or dependant on the consistence and bulk 
of the rest, shou'd come generally in the last 
place of a prescription. 


Not but there are several exceptions from these 
rules, which will be taken notice of in the ensuing 
parts of this treatise, and will be therefore worth 
the readers observation. 

§. 58. For the (IV.) method of writing, or or- 
dering these several ingredients, and their quanti- 
ties; the more distinct and intelligible they are set 
down, the more commendable: accordingly 
1. The physician shou'd use himself to write 
plain and distinct; not to neglect and hurry over 
his letters with a careless pen. 


2. He shou'd keep up to custom and orthogra- 
phy, to avoid the sneering of an apothecary or 
his man. 


3. An irregular, or confused method of wri- 
ting, shou'd be avoided as much as possible; 
and to make things appear with more evidence 
and method, ingredients of the same kind shou'd 
be placed next to each other (per §. 57. n° 2.): 
|P_16
the general appellation common to each similar 
ingredient shou'd be always placed first, and 
need not be mentioned more than once; as the 
proper names of each shou'd be placed directly 
under and even with the first, in the method of 
§. 57. n° I. The same is also to be observed, 
with respect to several ingredients following 
each other that are to enter a form in the same 
quantity; i.e. not to write the particular mark 
of quantity to each singly, but to assign only 
one character of quantity to them all; before 
which should be inserted the technical word 
ana or aa, which is used to denote that the quan- 
tity to be taken of the several preceeding ingre- 
dients must be equal or alike, whether it be in 
number, weight or measure. — There are ma- 
ny such abbreviations in use, which will be met 
with in the enfuing formulæ, and ought not to 
be neglected (if it were safe) because universally 
received and establish'd by long custom. 


4. Too much brevity in writing is still of a 
worse consequence; especially when the ingre- 
dients and their quantities are order'd, not by 
common letters, but odd characters or figures, not 
constantly used, and often: falsely or imperfectly 
made [/5./]: by which means it too frequently hap- 
pens that the apothecary is brought into a mis- 
take, either of the ingredient or quantity, to the 
|P_17
great danger of the patient. So that it is more 
prudent to intirely relinquish such, or else to use 
those only which are the most distinct and com- 
mon, and the least ambiguous; and then, only 
when (per §. 25.) we have some particular rea- 
son for concealing the ingredients of the formula. 
The characters for weight, shou'd be express'd 
with the greatness exactness, by such as love to 
use them. — And tho' the first sort of char- 
racters are improper to enter prescriptions in 
writing, 'tis yet fit they shou'd be known; as 
they frequently occur in the works of physi- 
cians. 


5. The ingredients of a prescription shou'd be 
wrote for by those names under which they are 
kept and known in the shops; notwithstand- 
ing they shou'd be barbarous or improper: by 
which means the compounder will be under no 
difficulty, nor fall into any mistake. But if for 
concealment (per §. 25.) an uncommon term be 
used, the apothecary shou'd have, if it be ne- 
cessary, a speedy and private intelligence thereof. 


6. The Weights used at present in the shops 
of apothecaries, are ℔ the physical pound}{ ℥ xij.  ℥ an ounce — ʒ viij. { ℥ xij. ʒ a dram — containing ℈ iij. ℈ a scruple — gr. xx.Gr. a grain — ß ij.
A grain is seldom divided further than into two 
equal parts, whose whole amount is supposed 
to be equal to a grain of white pepper or a 
middling barley-corn: but it is much the best 
to use a grain of a determinate or standing 
weight, like that of the Goldsmiths; without 
which, this and all larger weights thence arising, 
as from unity, wou'd be always varying and un- 
certain, as Fernelius observes. 

|P_18

7. The physical measures now in use, are such 
as belong either to dry or liquid ingredients: 
and are 

(1.) Dry; as the 


Fasc. Fasciculus, or a small armfull, being as 
much as can be easily grasped by the arm bended 
together, and is equal to twelve handfuls. 


M. Manipulus, or handfull, which is as 
much as can be taken up by the whole hand at 
once, and may be compared to four pugills, 
or half an ounce. 

Pug. Pugillus, comprehends as much as can 
be contained between the thumb and two first 
fingers, and answers to about the whole or half 
of a dram. 


N°. Numero, in number, equal or unequal. 

(2.) Liquid; comprehending, belides the 
common trading measures, also the Cyath. 
Cyathum, which holds about an ounce and an 
half. 


Cochl. Coohlearium, reckon'd to be about 
half an ounce. 

Gutt. Gutta, or a Drop, which being the least 
of liquid measures, is substituted in room of a 
grain among weights, and may, like that, be 
commodiously subdivided into two (or more) 
equal parts, being first imbibed by a bit of su-
gar, to be afterwards pulverised and divided by 
weight: but the quantity under this measure 
varies with the specisic gravity and degree of 
cohesion in the liquid to be so meafured; and, 
also the quantity of surface in contact with 
it, or the largeness of the bottle's neck from 
whence it is to be dropp'd; which first also 
holds good with respect to the Cyathum and 
Cochlearium. 

|P_19
8. With regard to these medical divisions of 
quantity (n° 6. and 7.), we may observe 
(1.) That every thing, not only soft and 
solid but also liquid, whose quantity is requi-
red to be determined with accuracy and ex-
actness, shou'd be portion'd out by weight 
only. 
(2.) The dry measures (n°. 7.) are to be 
used only for such things as are very bulky, 
and of no strength; as herbs, leaves, flowers, 
seeds, &c. The larger kind of seeds, bulbous 
roots, the whites and yolks of eggs, &c. are 
usually prescribed by number. 
(3.) The liquid measures (n°. 7.) shou'd be 
seldom used in prescriptions, unless to signify 
the particular dose; by reason of their uncer-
tainty, the measures differing with particular 
liquors and countries: but the use of weights 
is more constant and certain; and if we have, 
notwithstanding, a fancy for the use of mea-
sures, we shou'd at least know the several 
weights of different liquors which they can con-
tain. Strong liquids may be also portion'd 
out with more exactness by drams, scruples and 
grains, than by drops. 
(4.) Number, in prescribing ingredients, 
with their weights and measures, is to be ex-
pressed by characters not barbarous (as 1, 2, 3, 
&c.) but Roman (as j, ij, iij, iv, &c.) as being 
more distinct and evident. 
(5.) All weights and measures are usually 
subdivided into halves, and their half part is 
then signified by the character ß. 
(6.) The larger weights and measures are 
to be express'd by the characters proper to 
their whole, or half quantities; and not by 
the number of lesser weights or measures they 
contain. 
|P_20
(7.) Sometimes the weight or measure of an 
ingredient is left to be determined at discre-
tion by the apothecary, and is only wrote 
(q. s) quantum sufficit, or a sufficient quantity: 
which might be well enough bore with, had 
the apothecary any constant rule to go by, or 
were the quantity and consistence of a me-
dicine to be always the same; but when it be-
comes on this account very uncertain, it is ad-
viseable for the physician to determine the quan-
tity, as may be seen under the particular forms
hereafter. 
(8.) Among the ancients, there were many 
other weights and measures than these (n° 7, 
8.) in frequent use; which tho' now obsolete 
and unpractised, are yet necessary to be known 
by a physician that intends to be conversant with 
their writings, and may be therefore learned 
from Fernelius and others 
* A list and explanation of the several weights and measures 
used by the ancient Greek, Roman and Arabian physicians (as 
taken from Fernelius, who is for that end recommended by our au-
thor,) being rather too large to be conveniently inserted in this 
place, the reader will meet with that, and some others, at the 
end of the book. . 


§. 59. The (V.) fifth part of a formula, or bill, 
is the Subscription, directing the apothecary 
in what form the physician wou'd have the ingre- 
dients made up, the manner in which they are 
to be so prepared, and the method in which they 
are to be applied, or exhibited by him to the pati- 
ent. With regard to which, 

1. If a prescription contains but one ingredi- 
ent, which requires no extemporaneous prepa- 
ration, it may be subscribed only (F.) Fiat, 
adding the name of the form, v. g. pulvis, bo- 
lus, &c.

|P_21
2. But if it consists of several, to be only 
mix'd together without other preparation; 
there must be first inserted (M.) misce, and af- 
terwards (F.) fiat, and lastly the name of the 
form; as e. g. M. F. Bolus. But in liquid mix- 
tures it is often sufficient to write M. only; tho' 
it is sometimes requisite to give a particular ad- 
monition concerning the uniformity or exact- 
ness of the mixture. 

3. If there shou'd be required some other 
preparation besides mixture, as cutting, brui- 
sing, digesting, boiling, &c. these are also to 
be inserted either before or after M. as shall seem 
most proper. 

4. It is then requisite to add (if necessary) the 
number of doses into which the medicine is to 
be distributed: where it is also frequently pro- 
per to admonish the apothecary to be very ex- 
act in making every dose equal and alike; be- 
cause they often, for expedition, divide a medi- 
cine by guess or the eye. 

5. Mention is to be sometimes made of the 
receptacle into which the medicine is to be put, 
and of the method of keeping, or close stop- 
ping the same; when they contain things very 
volatile, or foon melting in the air, as will be 
hereafter observed in particular forms 

6. Lastly, the instrument whereby, and the 
particular part of the body to which, the me- 
dicine is to be applied, are required to be 
sometimes mention'd, when it appertains to the 
apothecary; as will be hereafter observed in 
the history of plasters, lambatives, glysters, 
&c.

7. In all these particulars (no 1. to 6.), it is 
best for the physician to be full, and distinct or 
clear, and to use the terms of art, however bar- 
|P_22
barous; lest an error be committed thro' his 
own fault, or the apothecary shou'd be put to a 
nonplus. 


§. 60. The (VI.) last general part of a pre- 
scription or formula, is the Superscription[/6./], 
of the medicine or direction to the patient; which 
is often (tho' not always) very necessary, inasmuch 
as it declares the form of the prescribed medicine, 
its virtue, dose, method and time of administration, 
the proper vehicle, regimen, &c. as far as they 
regard the sick patient and his attendants: which 
is to be carried on in the following order, 

1. Beneath the Subscription (§. 59. n° 1, to 
6.), at a distance from the line, write the capi- 
tal letter S. i. e. signetur, let it be intitled, &c.

2. If there be several medicines of the same 
form and appearance prescribed together for one 
patient; they shou'd be marked with the capital 
letters A, B, C, &c. or numbers, 1, 2, 3, &c. at 
the head or in the margin of each formula, that 
they may be distinguish'd from each other; and 
then these distinguishing marks are to be inserted 
after the letter S. in each Superscription or di- 
rection: e. g. (S. lit. A, vel n°. 1.). But this is 
unnecessary where there is but one formula pre- 
scribed, or where there is several, but easily di- 
stinguishable from each other. 

3. There must be then annex'd the title of the 
medicine, taken from its form and virtue, e. g. 
potio purgans, a purging draught, &c.

4. Next in order, the dose, way of taking, 
the time when, the vehicle and the regimen; 
|P_23
and if any thing else is to be observed, it shou'd 
be mentioned in its proper place. 

5. Since this direction (n°. 1. to 4.) contains 
the rules to be observed by the patient in taking 
or applying the remedy; it shou'd be either cut 
off from the formula or prescription for him to 
keep, or else (which is the common practice) it 
shou'd be translated and wrote fair by the apo- 
thecary, on every label that is affix'd to the re- 
ceptacle of the medicine, to be transmitted there- 
with to the patient. 

6. The style of the direction shou'd be there- 
fore agreeable with the age and country wherein 
it is wrote, being concise and plain, or very in- 
telligible. 

7. In naming the medicine we shou'd avoid 
the ostentatious or quackish titles used by pre- 
tenders, nor ihou'd we ever inhanse or give it 
an hyperbolical epithet; as incomparable, golden, 
grand, &c. For tho' these may take with the 
vulgar and illiterate, it will but expose the pre- 
scriber to laughter and ridicule, among the more 
intelligible part of mankind. 

8. Care is to be also taken to hide or omit the 
names of such diseases as are indecent or impro- 
per to be mention'd in the directions; as the 
lues venerea, disorders of the menses, sterility, 
impotency, &c. For such shou'd be either 
wholly neglected, or at least signisied by terms 
the least known: as exciters of the menses may 
be call'd aperients; antivenerials, purisiers of 
the blood; exciters of Venus, strengtheners, &c.
And what relates to the method of taking, &c.
shou'd be delivered to the patient, if possible, 
by word of mouth. 

9. The dose of the medicine, when left to 
the patient or his attendants, shou'd be ordered 
by quantities the most commonly known and 
|P_24
easy to determine; as by large or tea spoons full, 
the size of nuts, drops, &c. But if it be of 
consequence to have the dose determined to ex- 
actness; the distribution and exhibition thereof, 
may be referr'd to the apothecary. 

10. The method and time of adminiftring the 
remedy, depending upon the particular nature 
of the disease, the medicine itself, and many 
other circumstances; shou'd be in the general di- 
rected so as to suit best with the physician's in- 
tention, and the patient's convenience: neg- 
lecting the scrupulous and superstitious observa- 
tion of times and seasons deduced from astrolo- 
gy, as both useless and unbecoming the sagacity 
of our age. 

11. If there be any occasion for a vehicle to 
take it in, we shou'd endeavour to chuse one, 
that besides pleasing the palate, falls in with the 
intention of the medicine itself. The materials 
for vehicles are usually taken from things that 
are readiest at hand, grateful or pleasant to the 
patient, or become so by common and frequent 
use: as ale, wine, broth, tea, coffee, juleps, 
wafers, marmalade, roasted apple, or the like. 

12. A proper regimen, before, in, and after 
the operation of the medicine, is often abso- 
lutely necessary to be observed; for without this, 
the action of the remedy wou'd be frequently, 
either too much increased, diminish'd, chang'd, 
or wholly destroyed. But to determine what re- 
gimen will be most proper, the doctrine of in- 
dications must be call'd into consideration. 


§. 61. We have been hitherto treating of a for- 
mula in general, exclusive of its particular contents; 
we come now to examine its internal composition, 
the number of its constituent parts, their nature, 
quantity, mutual affinity, proportion and the like. 

|P_25
§. 62. The formula, or prescript (§. 1. &
§. 6.) consists either of (1.) only one officinal sim- 
ple or compound preparation; or else (2.) of se- 
veral such properly combined together: which 
first, we shall call a simple formula; but the last, a 
compound one. 

§. 63. A simple formula (§. 62.), as it con- 
sists of but one officinal preparation selected out of 
many, does scarce require any other restriction or 
limitation than that of its quantity. 

§. 64. Its quantity then, is twofold: (1.) so 
much as is order'd by the physician to be made up 
and sent to the patient by the apothecary at one 
time; or (2.) such a quantity of the first as is to 
be applied or administred to the sick patient at 
once. The first, we shall call the general quantity; 
the latter, the particular one, or dose: but as the 
quantity of the first depends upon the number of 
the last, we shall consider that before the former. 

§. 65. The dose of a medicine comes under two 
considerations; viz. that of continued quantity, and 
that of number. 

§. 66. The bulk or weight of a dose, is deter- 
mined by the physicians due consideration of the 
condition and circumstances of both the patient and 
the medicine: without which, a well chosen re- 
medy, by exceeding or falling short of its just 
quantity, may prove either hurtful or at leaft in- 
effectual. To prevent this, we must therefore at- 
tend 

1. To the nature of the disease, its seat, stage, 
force or degree of strength, causes, symptoms, 
&c. that our force may be proportion'd to the 
obstacle to be removed. For as diseases that are 
violent, acute or deep-rooted, are scarce to be 
overcome but by large doses; so, if we shou'd 
overload a slight case, the remedy itself wou'd 
prove another disease. 

|P_26

2. We must regard the strength; depending 
on that of the fibre, or the blood's motion, and 
functions of the body: that our assistant means 
may be adiquate the defect, and not prove a bur- 
then instead of a helping hand. So that large 
doses will be found to suit strong bodies; whereas 
the weak can only bear small ones. But we must 
carefully distinguish strength that is latent and 
oppress'd, from that which is really absent and 
exhausted. 


3. We must have respect to the age: with re- 
gard to which, the following general rules may 
be of service for internal medicines. 


Suppose a dose proper for a man of a consistent 
age (i. e.) about 30, or when he has done growing) 
to be 
as ——1, or ʒj. a dose for one of14 to 21, will be2/3 or ℈ij. — —7 to 14, —1/2, or ʒß.——4 to 7, —1/3, or ℈j. ——4 —1/4, or gr. xv. ——3 —1/6, or ℈ß. ——2 —1/8, or gr. viij. ——1 — 1/12, or gr. v. 
Old people being observed to be twice children 
in their strength and diet, as such they shou'd be 
also consider'd in this respect of dose; so that we 
may compare 
an old man of 60,to a young man of21 years. — — 70,— 14 — — 80,— 7 
and so with the rest. But it cannot be supposed that 
these rules hold always so, as not to admit of many 
|P_27
exceptions; for, that there must be frequently a 
variation, will appear evidently to all who consi- 
der the diversity of strength in people of the same 
age. So that a true estimate of the dose, is hardly 
deducible from the age alone. 

4. The size of the body, in people of the 
same age, does also frequently require a variation 
in the dose; tho' we shall find, their strength is 
not always proportionable to their size. 

5. The temperature has also some influence 
upon the quantity of a dose. The biliose and 
melancholly can easily dispense with a larger 
mass of cooling, moistening and relaxing me- 
dicines, than their opposite temperatures; and 
so (vice versa) on the contrary side. 

6. The difference of sex has also its force. 
Women, who are generally of a more delicate 
and weak constitution than men, require a pro- 
portionable diminution of the dose. But such as 
are very niceand fanciful, will sometimes throw 
up the dose notwithstanding it was proportion'd 
to their strength. For such, it is therefore ad- 
visable to let the quantity be as small as possible; 
or else to subdivide a larger dose into several 
smaller parcels. 

7. The particular disposition, whether morbid, 
natural, constant, periodical, from the make or 
habit of body, sex, preceeding diseases, &c.
with the complication of the original disease, 
may have each their concern in determining the 
particular dose as well as the kind of a medi- 
cine. 

To this head belong a regard to the menses, 
breeding, lying-in, suckling, hysteric fits in wo- 
men, and the hippo in men; with obesity, tender- 
ness, a weakness in some particular organ, a defor- 
mity in the back or breast, the stone, an aptness to 
|P_28
vomit, with abundance of the like particular indif- 
positions. 

8. To be still more particular, it is sometimes 
very necessary to have a regard to the individual 
constitution, idiosyncrasia, or particular inclina- 
tion of every patient, as they stand affected to 
this or that class of medicines, or some one par- 
ticular remedy. These being generally inexpli- 
cable, are to be known only by experience, or 
from the patient's relation: thus some are pur- 
ged even by the smell of a cathartic; while 
others are scarce affected by double the usual 
quantity taken inwardly for a dose. 

9. Use or custom has also its force here; for 
a large dose of a medicine will produce less ef- 
fect upon one used to the same, than a small 
dose upon one who is a stranger thereto; which 
is very obvious in the use of narcotics and to- 
bacco. 

10. Nor is the employ or course of lise to be 
here altogether neglected; for as the several de- 
grees of health and sickness are particularly in- 
fluenced thereby; so it also frequently brings the 
body into particular habits, which either in- 
crease or diminish the action of certain medicines. 

11. The particular nation or people is to be 
also consider'd with regard to the dose; as they 
have often something in that respect singular and 
proper to themselves. Thus, the Saxons and 
Westphalians[/7./], are hard to work upon. The 
Siamese use an arsenical instead of an antimonial 
cup; and the Indians require a dose of ipecacu- 
anha twenty times as large as the Europeans, to 
make them vomit [/8./]. 

|P_29
12. A regard to the season of the year is also 
sometimes of consequence: as the sultry dog- 
days, the hard frost, or the temperate air, dis- 
pose the body to be more or less affected by 
one and the same dose. 

13. The known strength and virtues of the 
remedy also, when consider'd with their relation 
to the several preceeding heads, still greatly in- 
crease the variation of the dose. Thence, a phy- 
sician that intends to prescribe forms rationally, 
will make himself exactly acquainted with the 
several quantities of medicines found by experi- 
ence, and established by use to be proper for one 
dose: with the several degrees of that dose, as 
being small, mean or large, with respect to the 
preceeding considerations; more especially he 
will keep in memory those of the capital and 
most efficacious medicines. But if he would 
bring any simple into use which has not been yet 
sufficiently experienced, being mindful of the 
rule §. 19. he will begin first with the least quan- 
tity, afterwards judiciously inlarging the dose, 
as he is assured of the preceeding unactivity, or 
usefulness of the medicine. 

14. Sometimes the high price of medicines, 
which are otherwise of no great efficacy, restrains 
the dose to a small compass; witness, prepared 
pearl, gems, oriental and porcupine bezoar, &c.

15. The great bulkeyness of the matter, con- 
taining but a due quantity of medicinal parti- 
cles, obliges the dose to be sometimes less than 
is otherwise requisite; left the load of inactive 
matter shou'd excite a nausea: as is often the 
case in herbs, barks, woods, flowers, &c.

16. The unpleasantness of a medicine, whether 
in taste, smell, or other qualities, frequently per- 
swades the physician to prescribe them in a smal- 
ler dose than the other: as asa fæt. castor. olea, 
&c. agreeable to §. 27. 

|P_30
17. The particular form of the medicine itself, 
often restrains the dose to a determinate quantum. 
For many of the forms have certain limits as to 
quantity, which they cannot exceed without the 
greatest necessity; as will hereafter appear under 
each. 

18. Lastly, the various external or internal 
use of a remedy, and its application to different 
parts of the body, are here, also; to be consi- 
dered as having some influence in determining 
the quantity of a dose. Very wide is the diffe- 
rence between the dose of a cathartic when it is 
to be given by the mouth, and when by way of 
glyster, &c.


Nota. The limits of our present design forbid 
me to say more, or to pursue the theme of dose in 
a more special manner. The copiousness and un- 
certainty of the subject, being scarce determinable 
even by general bounds, prevailed with me not to 
insert (as is usual) a table exhibiting the proper dose 
of every single remedy. These are liable to so many 
exceptions, that they cannot be rationally ascer- 
tain'd to particular cases, without the several pre- 
ceeding conditions (§. 66. n°. 1 to 18.) are first li- 
mited and consider'd. Besides, we have supposed 
our reader (per §. 7.) previously acquainted with the 
doctrine of indications, and the materia medica, 
both simple and compound; which teaches their 
general doses as well as virtues: and then, what 
will be said of each form in particular, will also 
reflect much light upon this head. 

§. 67. The number of doses (§. 65.) is either 
one, or more, being often arbitrary and undeter- 
mined; but it may be generally limited by parti- 
cular consideration; among which, the following 
may be look'd upon as general rules. 
|P_31

1. If one dose will answer the physicians in- 
tention; what need of more? 

2. If the medicine be in itself unpleasant, if 
the patient has an aversion or dislike to the taking 
of it, or if the application or taking be difficult 
and troublesome; these call for the exhibition of 
as few doses as possible. 

3. Medicines, which by keeping, easily fer- 
ment and corrupt, grow moist and liquid, or too 
dry, or else exhale and lose their finest parts, 
shou'd, upon those accounts, be prescribed in 
but few doses at a time. The different state 
of the atmosphere, as to heat, moisture, and 
other qualities, has also its share in limiting the 
quantity and number of doses of such remedies; 
as those states of the air may more or less pro- 
mote such inconveniences or defects of particu- 
lar medicines. 

4. If the adequate dose of a prescribed medi- 
cine is of a larger bulk than can be conveniently 
swallow'd at once, if nothing contradicts, it may 
be properly divided into many lesser doses, to be 
taken at small intervals; to prevent it from ex- 
citing a nausea or vomiting in the patient; 
which is a consideration that takes place princi- 
pally and frequently in emetics and strong ca- 
thartics. 

5. If you order potent remedies for a patient 
whose case, constitution, and particular condi- 
tion is not yet thoroughly known; it is better 
for the just dose to be given in little separate por- 
tions at several times, that we may timely break 
off its use upon the least appearance of its im- 
propriety. The same holds good also with re- 
gard to the use of new and less experienced re- 
medies (agreeable to §. 66. n°. 13.) 

6. If the obscurity, or instability, of the par- 
ticular morbid indisposition renders the effect of 
|P_32
the medicine uncertain; if we are obliged to 
prescribe something (by reason of §. 14.), it 
should be but in small and few doses: by which 
means, less injury can happen to the patient, and 
it may be the more easily changed for some other 
medicine, when that may be required. 

7. When the preparation of a medicine is dif- 
ficult and a long while in making up, unless 
something forbid, it shou'd be prescribed in 
a larger quantity or more doses; to spare the 
time and pains of the apothecary, whose hands 
are sometimes too full. 

8. Hence also, remedies which are difficultly 
convey'd, and to parts remote from apotheca- 
ries, shou'd be (cæteris paribus) prescribed and 
transmitted in larger quantities or more doses. 

9. On the other hand, if the patient lives near 
his physician, so as to be often visited by him, 
the number of doses order'd at one time shou'd be 
few; lest the physician's coming often without 
prescribing shou'd be thought much of, or look'd 
upon as dilatory. 

10. When the same medicine is required to be 
used for a long time together; there shou'd be 
as many doses order'd at once as may be conve- 
nient. For tho' scantiness of a medicine for mo- 
ney, is a persuasive for the patient to take it 
when bought; it will hardly encourage him to 
be constantly purchasing, especially if it be disa- 
greeable at the same time. 

11. If the exhibition of the medicine is to 
be repeated at short intervals of time, the doses 
must be on that account the more numerous; to 
prevent the trouble of repeating the prescription 
and composition. 

12. Lastly, as the patient may like a variety, 
and the different face of the symptoms require a 
change (per §. 50.), both in the form and me- 
|P_33
medicine, especially in chronical cases; it may 
be on those accounts adviseable to order the me- 
dicine in a small quantity: that the form and 
remedy may be changed the oftener, and at a 
less expence to the patient. 


§. 68. The general quantity (§. 64.) of any form 
fit to be prescribed for the patient at one time, 
may be easily estimated from a previous determi- 
nation of the number or size of the proper dose, 
(per §. 66. 67.): for, if the bulk or weight of a 
dose be multiplied by the number you would give, 
the product will be the whole quantity to be or- 
der'd for the patient in one prescription. Whence 
it follows, 
1. That the general quantity will be equal to 
the special or particular one (§. 64.), if only 
one dose be prescribed for at one time. 

2. But if we design the prescription should 
contain more doses than one, the least general 
quantity that can be order'd will be doubly 
equal to the particular one, or dose. 

3. If the dose of a form is to be exactly de- 
termin'd by weight, the general quantity should 
be proportioned so, as that it may be distribu- 
ted into proper and exacft doses, without leaving 
any remainder. But this rule is not constantly 
and every where observ'd; especially if the pre- 
scription contains many doses of a form. 


§. 69. The phyfician should also be mindful of 
the particular consistence and texture of his ingre- 
dient, when he prescribes a simple formula; that 
it may have a natural fitness to be reduced into the 
form he desires. 

§. 70. Lastly, when his prescription orders but 
one ingredient, he should be careful that it be not 
over strong, nauseous to the smell or taste, nor 
|P_34
difficult to swallow, &c. (per §. 27.); because a 
simple formula does not admit of that correction 
and mixture which are necessary to conceal those 
disagreeable qualities; unless he will compliment 
the patient, by ordering the medicine to be taken 
in some proper and pleasant vehicle. 

§. 71. We have been hitherto considering a 
simple formula: our next business is to treat of the 
compound one (§. 62.); which consisting of several 
ingredients, requires greater circumspection and 
skill in is prescription and composition. 

§. 72. There seems, at the first view indeed, to 
be little or seldom occasion for extemporaneous 
composition; since we are furnished with such a 
number of standing officinal compounds (per §. 31. 
and 37.): but the frequent and great necessity we 
are under of forming the officinals into extempo- 
raneous compositions, is sufficiently apparent from 
the following. For, 
1. The officinel simples and compounds are 
frequently not well adapted to the particular cir- 
cumstances of the patient and his disease. Their 
dose is frequently too bulky for their strength, 
their composition unjust or inaccurate, and their 
textures or virtues changed or spoiled by long 
keeping, &c. which considerations are often e- 
nough to dissuade one from the use of officinal 
compounds, tho' they were directly suitable for 
the intention. 

2. When the virtues and strength of an offi- 
cinal medicine are too weak, and not equal to 
the disease we would remove; we are then of- 
ten obliged to the addition of others, more po- 
tent, in an extemporaneous composition. 

3. If its action be too violent, or attended 
with some ill consequence; we are then often 
obliged to moderate and correct it by extempo- 
raneous composition. 

|P_35
4. We have frequently several different in- 
tentions to answer at the same time, which can 
not be done by one officinal simple or com- 
pound: while the natural disposition of the se- 
veral ingredients indicated, to make a uniform 
mixture, requires them to be reduced into one 
form (per §. 39.) 

5. This composition is sometimes required 
also from the situation, sensibility, and other 
circumstances of the Part to which the medicine 
is to be applied or conveyed. 

6. The constituent ingredients suited to each 
indication do also require to be combined in a 
form, for the reafons (§. 43. to §. 50.) which 
determine the particular form, they being of 
themselves very unsuitable. 

7. Composition sometimes serves to conceal a 
necessary remedy (per §. 25.) 

8. It is often requisite, in order to change or 
correct some disagreeable smell, taste or colour, 
in an effectual remedy. 

9. Lastly, the vile and received custom of 
crouding, without necessity, more ingredients 
than are required in an officinal composition, 
often obliges the physician to make a new form: 
tho' prudence sometimes bids the physician, 
especially a junior, (per §. 30.) to pay obedi- 
ence to such old and venerable jumbles. 


§. 73. In the compound formula (§. 71.) we 
are to consider (1.) its component parts, their num- 
ber, use and proportion: (2.) its quantity (§. 64.) 
general, to be made up at once; and particular, to 
be taken at once. (3.) And lastly, its qualities, 
as arising from composition or mixture. 

§. 74. The constituent parts are four in num- 
ber: (1.) the basis or main ingredients; (2.) the 
adjuvans, or what promotes the action of the for- 
|P_36
mer; ( 3.) the corrigens, or correcter of something 
improper therein; (4.) and lastly, the constituens, 
or what serves to inlarge, mix and make up the 
whole. If there be any dirigens, which some 
make a fifth Part, it may be properly taken in 
under the adjuvans. 

§. 75. The Basis is the principal part in the 
composition, calculated against the immediate cause 
and chief symptoms of the disease, being that by 
which the physician endeavours chiefly to answer 
his indications. This is required to be present in 
every form, even the simple one, (§. 63.) where 
it often makes the whole formula: being sometimes 
sufficient of itself alone, without any other addi- 
tion; but it is frequently mixed with other things, 
suitable to make it act with safety, ease and expe- 
dition, as it ought. 


[^1. 
* See a list of these general appellations at the end of the Book. 
^]
[^2. 
* The condition of the disease, being either acute
or chronic, has also no small influence in deter- 
mining the particular form, and manner of exhi- 
bition. — In the 
(1.) Chronic, we should gradually inlarge the 
dose (per §. 26.), and may more regard the pa-
late (per §. 43.) with the patients convenience 
and circumstances (per §. 23. 27. 28. 29. 46. 47. 
48. 50.); always preferring pills, electuaries, 
wines, ales, &c. to a train of boles, draughts, &c.
which appear more formidable and discouraging. 
But, the 

(2.) Acute, generally require medicines of the 
strongest efficacy, to be used often, interchange-
ably, in different forms for the same case, and to 
be more ascertain'd in their dose; as in boles, 
powders, draughts, drops, &c.

^]
[^3. 
* This seems to smell very strong of a Romish or superstitious 
priest-craft; but as such hands are seldom daubed with physic a- 
mong us, we are intirely strangers to things of this nature. 
^]
[^4. 
† When the back part of the ℞ is left out, it makes another 
character (♃) of the same import but more frequent use, as being 
less known. 
^]
[^5. 
* These odd characters, of which the German (and especially 
the chemical) physicians were fond, are extremely seldom, if 
ever, used in prescriptions among us; and therefore the caution 
seems to be directed chiefly to that quarter. But as they frequently 
occur in writers (especially foreigners) in physic, pharmacy and 
chemistry; and as they may be sometimes used with propriety in a 
prescription (per §. 25); it will be proper for the young physician 
to acquaint himself with the chief of them, agreeable to our au-
thor's advice in the end of this paragraph: we have therefore fur-
nished our reader with a list and explanations of the most usual of 
these characters at the end of the book; it being too long to be in-
serted here. 
^]
[^6. 
† Our author calls it signatura, signment. I suppose we need 
not inform our reader that this part of a prescription is almost uni- 
versally left out by our physicians; who judge it most convenient to 
give these orders by word of mouth to the patient or his attendants, 
or leave it to the discretion of the apothecary. 
^]
[^7. 
* Wedelii de compos. medic. tab. II. 
^]
[^8. 
† Histoire de l'academ royale, 1703. 
^]