

[^Sample 1: book - ^]

|P_85
[}PART II. }]
[}Of the preparation of chemical medi- 
cines: with the several substitutions 
and adulterations practised in rela- 
tion to them; as also the best means 
of detecting such practices. }][^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}SECTION I. }]
[}Of the preparation of those medicines, 
where saline substances make the whole, 
or principal part of the subject. }][^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}Preparation of spirit of hartshorn. }]
LET pieces of hartshorn be distilled, with 
a fire gradually augmented, almost to 
the greatest degree. Spirit, salt, and oil will 
arise: and, the oil being taken from them, let 
the spirit, and salt, be mixt together again; and 
distilled with a very gentle heat, and they will 
both rise purer: which operation being seve- 
ral times cautiously repeated, and a proper 
part of the salt taken away to be reserved for 
sublimation, the spirit will become limpid as 
water, and have a grateful smell. 

|P_86
[}Note. }]
Spirit of hartshorn is one of the capital ar- 
ticles of the chemical pharmacy, and has un- 
dergone a greater resolution, in its price, and 
manner of preparation, than any medicine 
whatever. A few years ago, the lowest rate 
it was sold for, in the most wholesale way, was 
half a crown, or three shillings per pound: it 
has since been reduced to the low price of five 
pence or a groat; at which rate, a great part 
of the consumption has been supplied, by the 
preparers, to the wholesale dealers. This is 
done by an intire substitution of other volatile 
spirits, distilled from substances much cheaper 
than hartshorn: and by the treating even these 
in such a manner as disguises their real strength; 
and makes even very weak pass for extreme 
good spirit of hartshorn, though sold as at this 
excessive low price: whereas genuine spirit of 
hartshorn, prepared as the above process directs, 
can never be afforded with reasonable profit for 
less than two shillings per pound. 

It is not, however, essential, that this medi- 
cine should be prepared from horn; but rather 
improper: for volatile spirits, obtained from this 
substance, however often they may be recti- 
fied, at least within any moderate compass, are 
apt to grow brown, foul, and fœtid: so that, 
if kept for any length of time, they become 
nauseous and unsightly: whereas, if distilled 
from bones properly prepared, they require 
|P_87
much less rectification; are more palatable and 
grateful to the stomach; and will retain their 
limpid and colourless appearance for a consi- 
derable duration, a quality very valuable to apo- 
thecaries, especially those in the country, who 
cannot be continually renewing their stock. 

The redundance of, and unfavourable qua- 
lity in, the burnt oil of horns, to which this un- 
fitness to produce good volatile spirits is owing, 
arise from the great quantity of the animal 
gluten which all corneous substances contain: 
this gluten abounding in all parts of animals 
in proportion to their tenacity; of which indeed 
it is the cause: and being, in fact, nothing but 
oil mutually attracting and attracted by the earth, 
which constitutes the solid basis of the parts. 

If we admit all volatile salts to be the same; 
and consider, that this compound, we call spirit 
of hartshorn, consists of water, volatile salt, and 
distilled animal oil; we shall see, that, as no 
difference can lie in the volatile salts, or wa- 
ter; it must, if there be any difference at all 
betwixt this spirit, and that distilled from any 
other animal substance, be in the oil only. 

Now all distilled oils of animal substances, 
being likewise of the same nature; except that, 
by the action of the fire, some are higher ex- 
alted, and gaining a more ethereal nature, be- 
come less liable to putrefaction; while others, 
being less changed from their original grosser 
state, retain some tendency to putrefy; it must 
appear, that there can be no difference in vola- 
tile spirits, but in their being charged, in a 
|P_88
greater or less proportion, with oils that vary 
only in their exaltation, or approach to the ethe- 
real state; in the greater degree of which, con- 
sists their medicinal excellence: as may be 
easily granted, when it is considered, in what in- 
tention they are taken. If, therefore, it should 
be manifest, from experiment, that volatile 
spirit, extracted from prepared bones, or any 
other animal substance, contains a more ethe- 
real oil, than spirit drawn from hartshorn; 
it must consequently be concluded to be a 
more efficacious medicine, as well as a much 
more grateful and convenient one, on the ac- 
count above mentioned. 

Dr. P, in his notes on this article, in the 
translation of, the College-Dispensatory, seems 
to think, this spirit should be divested as much 
as possible of the oil. For he places the per- 
fection of the preparation in the number of 
rectifications: and on this principle, half a 
guinea an ounce has been charged for some 
quantities, supposed to be thus improved. 
But certainly there are limits to the proportion of 
oil that should be thus separated from the 
spirit: for if no oil were necessary to the con- 
stituency of the medicine; but that a pure vo- 
latile salt and water made its proper contents; 
it might be much better prepared, by making 
a solution of volatile salt of sal Ammonia- 
cum in water; or distilling such a spirit 
from a solution of sal Ammoniacum with 
salt of tartar: but the true composition 
of it, is not, from volatile salts and water a- 
|P_89
lone; but from these with the addition of 
ethereal animal oil; which makes, with the o- 
thers a volatile sapo: the oil being evidently an 
ingredient, correspondent to the intention, e- 
qually with the volatile salt; as may be gathered 
from its affinity with other ethereal oils, as of 
amber, or the aromatic vegetables, &c. Which- 
ever of these notions we adopt, the spirit of 
bones seems still preferable to those of horn: 
and we shall principally inquire, how that can 
be best and cheapest prepared: but for the 
sake of those, who adhere to the old faith, as to 
the superiority of the true spirit of hartshorn, to 
other volatile spirits distilled from other animals, 
or parts of them, I shall first make some obser- 
vations on the regular process above given, and 
the best manner of performing it: pointing out, 
also, the defects of the apparatus generally used; 
and shewing how they may be best amended. 

The pots, in which this distillation is made, 
are much too small; being, in general, made 
to contain only three quarters of a hundred 
weight of the horn: whereas, with the same 
fire and trouble, double or treble the quantity 
might be distilled together, in larger pots. The 
reason for this unprofitable manner of work- 
ing, has been the difficulty found in forming 
a proper apparatus, for condensing the distilled 
vapour, when raised in a greater quantity than 
three quarters of a hundred, or a hundred 
weight of materials would afford. The most 
general way has been to use, as a refrigeratory, 
only a series of glass allodials luted together, 
|P_90
and terminating in a glass receiver: but later 
improvements have introduced the use of a long 
tin tube, joined to the pot by one or two al- 
lodials placed next the pot, passing into a large 
earthen or stone jar, made close at the top, 
and venting itself again by another tube of the 
same kind, terminating either in another such 
jar, or a large glass receiver. 

This has been found much preferable to the 
first method, of using glass allodials alone; 
but both of them are far inferior to that de- 
scribed in the next process. 

By the best of these methods, six or eight 
days are required, from the charging the pot, 
to the finishing the operation: for a considera- 
ble time is taken up, for the drying the lute; 
which is with much trouble laid on, and re- 
paired, at so many different junctures: and, 
when this tedious part of the work is finished, 
the fire must be very well regulated, other- 
wise the lute will be blown off, the stench be- 
come intolerable, and a very great waste made 
of the produce of the operation; indeed a con- 
siderable waste, and a very bad smell, will al- 
ways attend this manner of working, even 
when best managed. There is indeed a way, 
that has been hitherto overlooked, from the 
almost universal ignorance in principles, of per- 
sons concerned in these operations, of prevent- 
ing greatly the smell and waste with the worst 
apparatus. For the force on the lute, being in 
a great degree, owing to the air generated in 
that analysis, which the fire makes of the ele- 
|P_91
ments that compose the substances distilled; 
which air being incondensible, as well as highly 
elastic, must somewhere find a vent, as its quan- 
tity augments; this air straining the lute, cracks 
and opens it; and pressing out through these 
cracks or openings, drives with it, likewise, the 
condensible part of the vapour, especially a- 
bout the head, and first allodial, which are re- 
plete with such vapour; because the heat pre- 
vents almost any condensation from being per- 
formed there. If, therefore, a proper vent 
should be made in the receiver, or some distant 
part of the condensing vessels; by means of 
which, the lute may be kept free from its ef- 
forts, and remain intire: the rivus of air 
would pass forwards to the vent of the ex- 
tremity of the surface, and drive along with 
it the condensible vapour that forms the di- 
stilled spirit; which thus coming, in its pas- 
sage, in contact with the refrigerating surface 
of the vessels, will be for the most part con- 
densed, and not blown out through the cracks, 
otherwise produced in the lute. This vent 
may be likewise carried into a small tin pipe, 
communicating with the chimney, or ash- 
hole; by which means, both the elaboratory, 
and places contiguous, may be kept free, in a 
great degree, from this troublesome smell. 

It would be much better, however, in all 
cases, to use the worm, as a refrigeratory, in 
the distillation of hartshorn; according to the 
directions given below: for though the salt 
would not be obtained, in this part of the pro- 
|P_92
cess, in such proportion as when allodials are 
used: yet a considerable quantity may be taken 
out of the receiver, used in such distillation; 
and what more may be wanted, may be got 
out of the receivers, used in the rectification; 
if they be taken off before the spirit begins to 
come over and wash the salt off the sides: and 
the salt procured by these methods, will be 
much freer from oil; and, consequently, much 
less troublesome in rectifying, than that taken 
out of the allodials: it being exactly the same, 
in the result, which way it is separated from 
the distilled spirit; as there will the same pro- 
portionable quantity remain in it after what is 
taken. 

Another defect in the common manage- 
ment of the genuine spirit of hartshorn, is, 
the want of a more commodious method of 
separating, immediately after the distillation, 
the foul oil, which comes over with the spirit 
and salt, and causes a considerable waste, when 
taken out by the methods now used: and, 
which not being very efficacious in freeing it 
from the oil, occasion the spirit to be injured 
by being kept too long commixt with what is 
left floating upon it. This may be best 
remedied by employing the tritorium described in 
the introduction, in the manner below ordered; 
and treating the spirit according to the subse- 
quent directions there laid down. 

In the process of the college above given, 
the salt is ordered to be rectified along with the 
spirit, before its being taken away to be sub- 
|P_93
limed; which is one of the most effectual 
methods of giving it some degree of purity. 
But the more common way, is to separate it 
from the spirit, immediately after the distilla- 
tion from the materials; by which a considerable 
delay is avoided in the rectification of the spirit. 

The number of rectifications intimated to 
be necessary in this process, are likewise fre- 
quently curtailed: though, in order to the 
making the genuine spirit keep tolerably, there 
ought to be four, and these performed at some 
distance of time from each other; the oil 
swimming on the surface of the fluid being care- 
fully separated after each; for fewer rectificati- 
ons, performed at intervals of some length, 
will render the spirit more pure than a greater 
number, quicker repeated: as the oil can be 
much more copiously separated, from the spirit, 
by rectification, after the natural separation of 
it by its own tendency, which shews itself by 
a turbidness and sediment, than, while they 
remain more perfectly united, as in the limpid 
state they are found to be, for some time after 
each rectification. 

[}Method of making spirit of hartshorn, fictitious, 
with respect to the materials, but perfect, with 
regard to the qualities correspondent to the in- 
tention of medicine. }]
 Take any quantity of the bones, from 
whence the fat has been extracted, by those 
|P_94
who collect them for that purpose: distill 
them, and rectify the salt and spirit together, 
taking out a proper quantity of salt, which 
will rise before the spirit, by changing the 
retort before the salt be melted by the spirit: 
rectify the spirit twice more; and, after 
keeping it for some time, filter it through 
paper. 

[}Note. }]
These materials, both from their own nature, 
and the previous preparation in the freeing them 
from all oily substances, by the long boiling, 
practised by the people, who collect them, are 
the best and cheapest materials, from whence 
this spirit could possibly be drawn: they may 
be purchased, in London, at five shillings per 
ton; and they afford a very pure spirit, with 
very little trouble, as I have before men- 
tioned. 

The distillation should be performed in the 
pot, with the worm and other parts of the 
apparatus, as described p. 35, into which, be- 
ing put, and the cover placed on it; which, 
without lute, will make a close joint, the distil- 
lation may be immediately begun; and will 
be over, with proper management, in sixteen 
or eighteen hours. 

|P_93
The end of the bending pipe, added to the 
end of the worm, for that purpose, must be 
let into the neck of a large receiver placed 
under it; and the tin pipe, for carrying off 
the smell, should also have its bending end put 
into the neck of the receiver; and the remain- 
ing opening of the mouth may be made good, 
by some moist, but stiff, clay. 

When the receiver appears of a proper ful- 
ness, it should be taken away; and another put 
in its stead, in the same manner as the first; 
and this should be repeated as often as they fill. 
The receivers should be emptied, by means of 
a tin funnel, into the tin or pewter tritorium 
described p. 30; and the crude spirit kept 
there till it be wanted for rectification; or, if 
the tritorium will not contain all that may 
happen to be made, this spirit may be drawn 
off, from it, into a proper bottle, to make room 
for the fresh, through the lower tube, which 
alone must be used for this purpose; the upper 
one being designed for drawing off the oil, which 
will float on the spirit, and may be easily taken 
away from it, by this method, when there is 
a proper quantity in the tritorium, and the 
spirit raises it to a proper height. 

If, as will sometimes happen towards the 
end of the distillation, the worm should be so 
choaked up with the salt, arising along with 
the spirit, that the passage of the vapours may 
be obstructed, which may be perceived by the 
appearance of the smoke through the juncture 
|P_96
of the cover and pot, the stopper should be 
immediately taken out of the small pipe in the 
upper part of the worm; and, a small tin 
funnel being put in it, water should be poured 
into the worm; which will force its way, by 
melting the concreted salt: and this must be 
repeated till the passage appear free, by the 
running of the water into the receiver with- 
out any sign of obstruction. 

The whole worm must be, likewise, filled 
with water, by the same means, as soon as 
the operation is finished: the end of the small 
bending pipe, at the extremity of the worm, 
being first stopt with a cork: and this water 
may be left in the worm, till the use of the 
pot is again wanted; when it must be taken 
out, and put into the tritorium along with the 
other spirit, which it will nearly equal in 
strength, by having dissolved the salt con- 
creted in the worm, according to the inten- 
tion of its being put there. This should be 
carefully remembered: for, on the clearing 
the worm, by this means, of the salt, which 
is necessarily collected there, each distillation, 
depends the practicability of its use. 

After the first, and every other distillation, 
the oil swimming on the spirit should be care- 
fully separated from it; which may be done, 
by passing this spirit through a large glass fun- 
nel, in the bottom of which, a piece of cotton 
is so placed, that the fluid passing through gra- 
dually, the oil may be kept from following the 
|P_97
spirit, by removing the funnel after the spirit is 
gone through it. 

The oil separated, in the second and third 
rectifications, should be put into a phial, and 
preserved; in order to make the fictitious salt 
of hartshorn. 

After the last rectification, the spirit should 
be filtered, by means of the cullender, &c. 
described p. 32: and, if it be kept a consi- 
derable time, the filtering may be repeated 
before it be fold, if the quantity be considera- 
ble. 

This volatile spirit is, with regard to the 
medicinal intentions, equal in all respects, 
and in some superior, to the true spirit of 
hartshorn; for which at present it is gene- 
rally sold: as is sometimes, likewise, the fol- 
lowing kind. 

[}Compendious preparation of a volatile spirit, 
resembling the above, and the true spirit of 
hartshorn. }]
 Take volatile spirit of sal Ammoniacum, 
obtained by chalk, or salt of tartar, but with- 
out lime, one gallon; or two pounds of sal 
Ammoniacum, and the same quantity of dry 
pearl aslies, may be used, with a gallon of 
water, instead of the spirit; to this add, of 
the crude spirit of hartshorn, or bones, half 
|P_98
a gallon: distill them, as in the rectifica- 
tion of spirit of hartshorn, and draw off 
the spirit, while it comes over of a due 
strength: filter it, after it has been kept 
some days. 

[}Note. }]
This will in all respects resemble perfect 
spirit of haitshorn, as prepared by the first pro- 
cess; but if it be made of the crude spirit of 
hartshorn, like the true spirit, it will be apt to 
turn foul and fœtid. That made with the spirit 
of bones will keep much longer; but not so 
well as the produce of the former process. 

However this substitution may resemble the 
true kind of spirit of hartmorn, or that drawn 
from bones, it will be inferior with regard to 
the medicinal qualities; because, though it 
will appear equally replete with oil, yet it will 
not contain so great a quantity; and what it 
may contain will be of a grosser, and less ethe- 
real nature, as its tendency to grow fœtid, and 
foul, evinces; and, if kept anytime, it will be- 
come nauseous, and be apt to rife on the 
stomach, like the genuine spirit of hartshorn. 

This spirit is, however, much less exception- 
able than another kind too commonly imposed 
on the public; which is prepared by means of 
quicklime, after the following manner. 

|P_99
[}Sophistication of spirit of hartshorn, by means 
of quicklime. }]
 To a gallon of crude spirit of hartshorn, 
or bones, add one pound of quicklime, 
either at the first, or any subsequent rec- 
tification; draw off the spirit, and treat it 
as the genuine. 

[}Note. }]
This is, by much, the worst sophistication 
of spirit of hartshorn; and cannot be too much 
guarded against, by all, who are concerned in 
the sale, or use, of this medicine. When 
indeed it is drawn off with a due proportion of 
strength; and used only to smell to, its ex- 
traordinary pungency renders it very fit for the 
purpose: though this end may be equally well 
answered by volatile spirit of sal Ammonia- 
cum, which is almost every where to be had 
prepared in the same manner: but when this 
kind is drawn off only of the apparent strength 
of the true spirit of hartshorn, and imposed, in its 
place, for internal use, it is a considerable fraud. 
For it is necessarily very defective, in the quan- 
tity of volatile salt; in which the principal effi- 
cacy of this medicine consists: the end of using 
the lime being to increase the pungency; and 
make the spirit, drawn off, much weaker, seem 
equally strong, with that impregnated with the 
|P_100
due proportion of volatile salt; and by this 
means, to increase the quantity. Which delu- 
sion occasions, therefore, only a part of the 
intended dose to be virtually taken. 

If we paid an implicit deference to the au- 
thority of the college, there would be another 
reason against this sophistication: for they have 
condemned the use of lime with volatile salts, 
as rendering them noxiously acrimonious, and 
corrosive. But, if there were any truth in this 
principle, it must hold good, also, with respect 
to fixt alkaline salts; and yet we see, not only 
experience, but even the opinion of this great 
body itself, in the same work, assure us of the 
contrary. Nor does it indeed appear from facts, 
that there is any perfectly dissolvable body, 
which can injure by its acrimony, when suffi- 
ciently diluted. 

This imposition of the spirit of hartshorn, or 
bones, actuated with quick-lime, instead of the 
genuine, is, however, supposed to be easily 
detectible, by the following means. 

[}A method used for detecting the spirit of harts- 
horn sophisticated with quick-lime. }]
Add strong spirit of wine to the suspected 
spirit; and if it do not soon give the ap- 
pearance of little sparkling bodies, swim- 
ming in the fluid, and afterwards subsiding 
to the bottom, it may be concluded to be so- 
|P_101
phisticated, with quicklime, provided, by the 
pungency, it appear to be of due strength. 

[}Note. }]
The principle, on which the above proof is 
grounded, is this. If spirit of wine be added 
to water, impregnate with volatile salts, in the 
proportion of good spirit of hartshorn, it will 
destroy, in a certain degree, the dissolving 
power of the water; and, consequently, a part 
of the salt, before dissolved, will shoot into 
small chrystals, which shew themselves, first 
in the form of little sparkling bodies, and after- 
wards in that of a shining powder at the bot- 
tom of the phials, or other vessel, in which the 
mixture is contained. But, if the spirit be so- 
phisticated with quick-lime, this will not hap- 
pen, from two reasons; first, because quicklime 
changes in such manner, the volatile salts, that 
they become so extremely soluble, the water can 
scarcely be saturated with them, in any propor- 
tion; or made to shoot them in chrystals, 
tho' they abound in any quantity whatever: 
secondly, because the spirit, so sophisticated, 
does not contain a sufficient quantity of salts, 
to occasion the chrystallization of them from 
the weakning the soluble power of the water 
by the spirit of wine, even though their na- 
ture was not changed by the action of the 
quicklime. It may therefore be taken as a 
certain criterion, that the spirit is sophisticated 
|P_102
with quick-lime, if no such appearance follow, 
the admixture of the spirit: but this method 
of trial is nevertheless so far defective, that no 
inference can be drawn from it, with certainty, 
of die spirit's being really genuine, notwith- 
standing a very plentiful chrystallization should 
ensue: though it has been hitherto looked on, 
as equally conclusive as to that point also. But 
a method has been contrived of preparing the 
spirit in such manner, that though the quan- 
tity of volatile salt be greatly deficient, and the 
appearance of due strength be procured by the 
help of quick-lime; yet on this trial, with spirit 
of wine, the result will be the same, as in the 
spirit od hartshorn, where no quick-lime was 
used; and the small chrystals will be produced, 
in such abundance, as to induce the opinion of 
its being extraordinarily good, if this experi- 
ment were a sufficient test. I have seen a quan- 
tity, not less than five hundred weight, treated 
in this manner, which passed the hands of per- 
sons, who thought themselves very skilful 
in matters of this kind: and I make no doubt 
this additional fraud would be more frequently 
practised, if known; especially, as it increases 
the weight of the spirit at a very small expence. 
I shall therefore omit the teaching the method 
of effecting it; and instead of that, give a sure 
way of discovering where it is practised, and 
of determining, moreover, in all cases, whether 
the spirit, when it appears of due strength, be 
prepared with lime, or not. 

[}A more certain method of discovering, when 
spirit of hartshorn, or other volatile spirit, 
is sophisticated with quick-lime. }]
Mix strong spirit of wine with the volatile 
spirit suspected; and, if a chrystalline pow- 
der be produced, let it subside till the fluid 
can be poured off; and having put it into a 
spoon, hold it near the fire, or over the flame 
of a candle: if the powder exhale and dis- 
appear, it may be concluded, that the spirit 
is not prepared with lime, but contains a 
due proportion of volatile salt but if it 
remain after it has undergone, even, a 
gentle degree of heat, it may be taken for 
granted, that not only the use of quick-lime, 
but other elusive methods have been prac- 
tised. 

[}Note. }]
I shall not explain the principles, on which 
this trial is founded, because they will be ob- 
vious to persons, who are any way versed in 
these matters, and a farther elucidation would 
lead others into the knowledge of the art it is 
intended to explode. But whoever purchases 
any considerable quantity of spirit of hartshorn, 
|P_104
would do well to prove it in this manner; and 
may be assured, if it appear of due strength by 
its pungency to the nose, and stand this test, 
that it is not sophisticated with lime; but pro- 
perly replete with volatile salts. 

[}Salt of hartshorn. }]
Let the salt be taken out of the receivers, 
after the distillation, or out of the retorts, 
after the rectification, before it be melted 
by the spirit, which will rise afterwards; and 
sublimed, first with an equal weight of chalk; 
and afterwards with a little rectified spirit of 
wine. 

[}Note. }]
This is the process given by the college for 
the preparation of this medicine. The same 
may be done with respect to the volatile salt, 
obtained from bones, which will keep its white 
colour longer, and be much less subject to grow 
fœtid, than that extracted from horn. 

The quantity of chalk, here directed, is 
much greater than is requisite to absorb the oil, 
and prevent its rising with the salt; for which 
reason only it is added: half the quantity, or 
less, will answer the end equally well. 

The spirit of wine, which is designed to 
combine with, and wash down, the oil from 
|P_105
the salt, does not, on experiment, answer the 
purpose, in a proportion equivalent to the 
inconvenience its elastic vapour, joined to that 
of the volatile salt, produces, during the whole 
operation, by forcing the lute: and it will be 
found, on trying both methods, that the sub- 
limation will succeed, on the whole, better 
without it. 

The sublimation of the salt of hartshorn is best 
performed in a retort, with a small receiver; 
the neck of the retort being short and wide. 

After the salt of hartshorn, or even that of 
bones, have been purified, in the best manner 
they can, by repeated sublimation, it will soon 
grow brown and fœtid, by keeping; which is 
a great inconvenience to those who sell it, and 
have not a quick demand. The following 
fictitious kind has been, therefore, substituted 
for it; being not only free from this incom- 
modious quality of changing colour; but, also, 
prepared with much less trouble and expence. 

[}Fictitious salt of hartshorn, the same with the 
genuine in all other qualities; and not sub- 
ject to change colour, or grow fœtid. }]
Take six pounds of the volatile salt of 
sal Ammoniacum; add to it half a pound 
of chalk, mixt with two ounces of the oil 
taken off the spirit of bones, in the rectifi- 
|P_106
cation, as directed p. 97; sublime them to- 
gether; and separate the white part after the 
sublimation, from that which appears brown; 
the latter being reserved for another subli- 
mation, with a fresh quantity. 

[}Note. }]
In making the volatile salt of the sal Am- 
moniacum, a part of it will necessarily arise 
foul, as we shall fee below: such foul part 
will very well serve for this purpose. 

If it be more convenient, instead of taking the 
volatile salt already made, to conjoin the making 
it, and the converting it into the salt of harts- 
horn, into one operation, the crude sal Am- 
moniacum, and proper quantity of chalk, may 
be used according to the process below given: 
and, in this case, it is best to mix the oil with 
chalk into a stiff paste; and, having formed the 
mixture into balls, to put them into the retort 
after the other ingredients, that they may lie 
out of the reach of the stronger heat, which 
would occasion the oil to rise before the greatest 
part of the salt. 

The salt, so prepared, is indistinguishable 
from the genuine salt of hartshorn, by any other 
means, than keeping it till the continuance of 
its white colour shall shew the difference: and, 
notwithstanding, I have given it the name of fic- 
titious, it is in reality the same, with the salt ob- 
|P_107
tained by the regular process; except that the oil is 
of a purer, and more ethereal nature, than what 
is found in the other: on which account, this 
is certainly preferable, for other reasons, as well 
as its maintaining its whiteness, and not becom- 
ing fœtid. Since, if we allow all volatile alka- 
line salts, to be the same, this must appear a 
better medicine, from the qualities of the oil 
it contains; and recommends itself still further 
by being of a much more cheap and easy pre- 
paration than the genuine. 

[}Calcined hartshorn. }]
Let pieces of hartshorn, or the coal which 
comes out of the pot after the distillation 
of the spirit of hartshorn, be burnt in an 
open fire, till they become perfectly white: 
and, then, let them be levigated as other 
earthy, or testaceous bodies. 

[}Note. }]
The college of London have directed this 
to be done in a potters furnace: and for those, 
who have not occasion to calcine such quan- 
tities, as may answer the expence of a proper 
furnace in their own elaboratory, the sending 
the materials to the potters, tobacco-pipe- 
makers, or other such persons, who have very 
strong fires for other purposes, will be the 
cheapest and easiest method. 

|P_108
[}Fictitious calcined hartshorn. }]
Let the coal of the bones, which re- 
mains, in the pot, after the extraction of 
the volatile spirit from them, be treated in 
the same manner as that of hartshorn. 

[}Note. }]
This substitution is very frequently prac- 
tised; and, if the bones be perfectly calcined, 
the earth will be indistinguishable from that of 
the hartshorn: being in fact absolutely the same 
substance. This, therefore, is a fraud produc- 
tive of very little mischief; and may be per- 
mitted where any such are allowed. 

It is, however, much more difficult, from their 
texture, to give the bones a perfect calcination 
than the horn: and it is, therefore, proper to 
break the coal of them, which is used for this 
purpose, into very small bits; which much 
facilitates the operation. 

[}Volatile salt of sal Ammoniacum. }]
Take of the purest chalk, two pounds, 
sal Ammoniacum one pound, sublime them 
in a retort, with a strong fire. 

|P_109
[}Note. }]
This is the process of the London-college, 
and the common practice: but the quantity of 
chalk is much too great; filling the retort un- 
necessarily, and adding, in some degree, to the 
foulness of the salt; if the chalk, as happens 
very frequently, contain any impurities. The 
following is therefore a much better propor- 
tion of the ingredients: and the directions be- 
low given for the conduct of the operation, if 
observed, will produce a whiter salt, and with 
much less expence and trouble, than the me- 
thods commonly practised. 

[}Improved process, for the making the volatile 
salt of sal Ammoniacum. }]
Take the whitest sal Ammoniacum, dry 
it well while in large pieces, and pick out 
from it, and scrape off every part, which 
appears the least discoloured. Then take 
the cleanest chalk; and dry it thoroughly, 
by heating it as hot as boiling water, but 
not hotter: powder it well, and dry it again: 
mix the sal Ammoniacum and the chalk, 
while both are in this dry state, in the pro- 
portion of five parts of chalk, to four of 
|P_110
the sal Ammoniacum: put them into a re- 
tort, with a thick short neck, and the orifice 
cut very wide: fit to it a small receiver, with 
a long neck; and lute them well together. 
Then put them into a sand-pot; and su- 
blime the salt, very gradually; never suf- 
fering the lower part of the receiver to grow 
very hot. Let the fire, however, be raised 
to a strong heat at the latter part of the 
operation. When the retort and receiver 
are grown cold, break the receiver, and se- 
parate so much of the salt as appears white 
and pure, from the discoloured; and break- 
ing it into lumps, preserve it carefully from 
exhaling, which will dull the transparent 
appearance. The less sightly, and foul, parts, 
may be used for the making the spiritus 
volatilis oleosus; or fictitious salt of harts- 
horn; or purified by resublimation, if that 
be more convenient. 

[}Note. }]
By this method of diminishing the quantity 
of chalk, using only such sal Ammoniacum 
as is clean, and employing a small receiver, 
the necessity of a second sublimation is taken 
|P_111
away: for the purity of the sal Ammoniacum 
will occasion a considerable quantity of the vo- 
latile salt to be pure also: and render the re- 
torts capable of subliming a greater quantity of 
the salt, by diminishing the quantity of ohalk; 
and the using at the same time a small re- 
ceiver, will cause the cake of the sublimed salts 
to be of a due thickness; which it otherwise 
cannot be made, without putting the produce 
of two or three of these operations together, 
and subliming afresh. 

The scrapings, or foul parts, picked out of the 
sal Ammoniacum, need not, in the least, in- 
hance the expence: for they may be used, for 
making the volatile spirits, or any other such 
purpose: neither will the foul parts of the su- 
blimed volatile salt be in the least a loss, for they 
may be very profitably employed also, for the 
purposes abovementioned. 

Great care should be taken, if the powdered 
chalk and sal Ammoniacum be kept after they 
are reduced to that state, either together, or se- 
parately, not to suffer the air to have any access 
to them: for they will immediately attract 
moisture, which is very detrimental to this 
operation; as a very small quantity is apt to 
melt down the salt from the sides of the re- 
ceiver into the bottom, and diminish the thick- 
ness of the sublimed cake, on which the pro- 
duce of the saleable salt depends. 

Much caution should be likewise used, in 
the management of the fire: for, if it be pre- 
cipitated, not only a great risque is run of burst- 
|P_112
ing the retort, or receiver; but, the salt, being 
in too hot a state, to form on the sides, will 
flow down to the bottom of the receiver, and 
produce the disadvantage before mentioned. 

A cake of crude sal Ammoniacum will 
sometimes be found on the top of the chalk, 
after the sublimation; as likewise in the neck 
of the retort. This may be also used for 
making the volatile spirit, and the sal Ammo- 
niacum, as the being mixt with the chalk will 
not in the least injure it for that purpose. 

[}Volatile spirit of sal Ammoniacum with fixt 
alkaline salt. }]
Take of any fixt alkaline salt, one pound 
and half, sal Ammoniacum, one pound, 
water, four pints: with a gentle fire, distill 
off two pints. 

[}Note. }]
This is the process of the London-College; 
in which the quantities seem very ill adjusted: 
for one pound of dry pure, fixt, alkaline salt is 
more than sufficient, to dispossess the volatile 
salt of the sal Ammoniacum of its acid spirit. 
The quantity of fluid drawn off is likewise 
very small, in proportion to the quantity of 
salt: for volatile spirit is extremely strong, 
when one fourth part of it is salt. This salt 
|P_113
may be prepared genuinly, and at a moderate 
expence, in the following manner. 

[}Cheaper method of preparing the volatile spirit 
of sal Ammoniacum with fixt alkaline salt. }]
Take of sal Ammoniacum, and pearl 
ashes, equal parts; add to them about five 
times their weight of water; put them into 
the tin alembic described p. 40; and fix two 
receivers to the two arms; place it in the 
sand-bath; and distill off the spirit, while 
it continues to come off strong: when it 
appears weaker, change the receivers, and 
draw off the remainder so long as the fluid 
partakes of any smell of the volatile salts. 
Put by the strong for use; keeping the weak, 
to be added to the water in the next opera- 
tion, of the same kind; or use it along with 
other volatile spirit, or salt, in the making 
the spiritus volatilis aromaticus; or for any 
such purpose. 

[}Note. }]
The scrapings of the sal Ammoniacum, de- 
signed for the volatile salt, may be employed 
for this purpose: or the foul part of the vola- 
|P_114
tile salt itself, dissolved, may be added to this 
spirit, when there is any convenience in so do- 
ing; but the solution must be first filtered, if it 
appear in the least turbid. 

The use of pearl ashes, instead of salt of 
tartar, which is directed by the Edinburg- 
college, or indeed of any other fixt alkaline 
salt, at present in use, is an obvious saving; and 
comes within the latitude given by the college 
of London. 

This spirit, however, is almost wholly ex- 
cluded practice, by the use of that, made with 
quick-lime, notwithstanding the college of 
London have endeavoured, to prohibit the use 
of volatile spirit made with lime, on account 
of its supposed acrimony; as was before men- 
tioned. But the much greater pungency of 
the kind with lime, which renders it much 
fitter for the purpose of smelling to, on which 
account a great part of the demand is made, 
together with the inconvenience of keeping an- 
other kind for other uses, occasions it to be 
almost universally sold, instead of that with 
alkaline salt, by the wholesale preparers and 
dealers in medicine, to the apothecaries and 
retailers: and it is, therefore, proper to in- 
quire into the best method of preparing it: 
especially as one particular medicine, the col- 
lege themselves have given a place to in their 
last pharmacopæia, cannot be prepared with- 
out it; I mean volatile tincture of the bark, 
which, in the spirit made with fixt alkaline salt, 
becomes only a mucilage. 

|P_115
[}Volatile spirit of sal Ammoniacum made with 
quicklime. }]
Take of sal Ammoniacum, in fine pow- 
der, one pound, of quicklime, which has 
laid in the air till it be broken to powder, 
two pounds; mix them well, and put them 
presently into a retort, with two pounds of 
water: shake them, to mix the powder and 
water; and place the retort in a sand-heat; 
distill off about twelve ounces: but, the 
receiver being changed, about four ounces 
of weaker may be also drawn off. 

[}Note. }]
This is the former process, used for the pre- 
parations of this spirit; but it is faulty in several 
respects. 

The exposing the lime to the air, is so far 
from necessary, as to be very injurious to the 
qualities, by which it operates in this process: 
the quantity, also, of the lime, is much greater 
than needful; both filling the retorts with need- 
less matter, so as to render the produce of the 
operation less, by even two thirds, than it may 
be by a better proportion of the quantities; to 
the great increase of the expence and trouble; 
and causing them, likewise, frequently to break 
|P_116
during during the operation; to the loss of half, or 
more, of the spirit. 

The powdering the sal Ammoniacum, or 
making any previous mixture of it with the 
lime, before they are put into the retort, is 
likewise wholly needless; for the salt will of 
course melt in the fluid as the warmth in- 
creases. 

The quantity of water is likewise much too 
small: for at least twice the weight of the salt 
may be drawn off; according to the proportion 
of the college in the spirit with salt of tartar; 
and, as it is impracticable to draw off the whole 
fluid, (because the retort will crack, when the 
lime attains a certain degree of dryness,) that 
quantity of spirit cannot be obtained with this 
scanty proportion of water. 

The following method, therefore, is much 
better; amending these several errors; and ac- 
commodating the materials to each other in 
due proportion. 

[}Improved method of making the volatile spirit 
of sal Ammoniacum with quicklime. }]
Take of sal Ammoniacum four pounds, 
quicklime five pounds, water three gallons. 
Quench the lime in part of the water, and 
then put it into the pewter alembic for 
making this spirit, described p. 40: add 
|P_117
to it the sal Ammoniacum, and water; and 
place the retort in the sand-bath: where 
distill off ten or twelve pounds, and then 
change the receiver; suffering, afterwards, 
the spirit to distill, while any pungency re- 
mains: this weaker spirit must be added, to 
the materials in some future operation, in 
the place of so much water. 

[}Note. }]
By this diminution of the quantity of lime, 
a retort will, at one operation, distill at least 
three times as much spirit, as in the former 
process: and will frequently serve a second time 
for the same purposes; which can never hap- 
pen when more lime is used. 

It is usual to draw off four or five times the 
weight of the sal Ammoniacum; and the spirit 
will, even then, appear extremely strong: but, 
whoever would have this spirit correspondent 
to that of the college, made with fixt alkaline 
salt, must only draw it off in the proportion of 
three times the weight. 

The use of quicklime, in making the vola- 
tile spirit of sal Ammoniacum, may be de- 
tected by the same trial of it, by means of 
spirit of wine, as has been given for the spirit 
of hartshorn: but as the common trial is sub- 
ject likewise to the same elusion, as was before 
mentioned, the further means, before given, 
|P_118
of ascertaining the nature of the chrystals, pro- 
duced on the addition of the spirit of wine, 
ought also to be used. 

[}Spiritus salis Ammoniaci dulcis; or dulcified 
spirit of sal Ammoniacum. }]
Take of any fixt alkaline salt half a pound, 
sal Ammoniacum four ounces, proof spirit 
three pints: distill with a gentle heat, till a 
pint and a half be come over. 

[}Note. }]
The proportion of the fixt alkaline salt to 
the sal Ammoniacum is here, as before in the 
old process for the volatile spirit, double what it 
needs to be: the quantity of proof spirit is 
likewise improper; for either, out of the three 
pints employed, half the quantity of real spirit 
must be lest behind; or the spirit, which comes 
over, will contain much too little water, to keep 
disfolved the quantity of volatile salt produced: 
for, in order to have three ounces dissolved in 
a pint and half of spirit of wine, the spirit ought 
not to be stronger than proof spirit. But, as in 
fact, this process, so far as regards the addition of 
the spirif of wine, produces nothing more than 
a bare mixture of the solution of the volatile 
alkaline salt, and the spirit, (except the rectifi- 
cation of the latter) it may properly be rejected, 
|P_119
and the following simpler manner substituted, 
in its place, for obtaining the same composition. 

[}Extemporaneous dulcified spirit of sal Ammo- 
niacum. }]
 Take of spirit of sal Ammoniacum, made 
with fixt alkaline salt, one pound: add to it 
rectified spirit of wine half a pound; and 
shake them well together. 

[}Note. }]
This will be, in all respects, the same with 
the other; and may be made, occasionally, with- 
out the trouble of a distinct process: but, if the 
spirit be wanted, free from the appearance of 
salt, which will be found in this mixture, as 
well as in the spirit produced by the process of 
the college of London above given, water must 
be gradually added, till the fait be dissolved; 
taking care, not to put in more than may be 
sufficient to that end. 

[}Spiritus volatilis aramaticus, or sal volatile 
oleosum. }]
Take of the essence of lemons, and essen- 
tial oil of nutmegs, each two drams, of the 
essential oil of cloves, half a dram, dulcified 
|P_120
spirit of sal Ammoniacum, two pints; distill 
them, with a flow fire. 

[}Note. }]
This is a very good and elegant composi- 
tion: but the use of volatile spirit, with the 
proper proportion of spirit of wine, will equally 
well answer the end; and spare the process for 
the making the dulcified spirit. 

In this process, which is that of the college 
of London, it is intended, that a part of the 
dissolved salt should remain in the spirit; in 
order to shew, that the spirit contains the pro- 
per quantity of salt; and that, it is not prepared 
with quicklime; but this is really no certain 
test of either: for there may be a false appear- 
ance of volatile salt, given by the means above 
hinted at, as well in this case as in those of 
the spirit of hartshorn, and volatile spirit of sal 
Ammoniacum; which should, therefore, be ex- 
plored, by the method above given, where there 
is any ground for suspicion of such a fraud; as 
I have more than once seen this sophistication 
actually practised. 

The spiritus volatilis aromaticus may, how- 
ever, be prepared by a cheaper method than 
this process; preserving both the same sensible 
and medicinal qualities. 

|P_121
[}A cheaper method of making the spiritus vola- 
tilis aromaticus, resembling that of the col- 
lege of London, and equally good with respect 
to the intention. }]
Take of the volatile salt of sal Ammonia- 
cum, made with chalk, two pounds, or the 
volatile spirit, made with fixt alkaline salt, 
of the full strength, six pounds; (if the salt, 
and not the spirit, be used, three pints of 
water must be added;) put the spirit, or 
dissolved salt, into a retort, together with 
eight pounds of proof spirit, half a pound 
of pimento or Jamaica pepper, two ounces 
of cassia lignea, and one ounce of essence 
of lemons: place the retort in the back 
part of the sand-bath; and distill off the 
spirit and salt till there be a cloudiness in 
the drops; then change the receiver, and 
draw off the remaining fluid while it ap- 
pears to have any smell or flavour: this 
weaker spirit must be added to the materials 
with the next quantity made. 

|P_122
[}Note. }]
The aromatic spirit, thus prepared, will be 
equally good with that of the college; and may 
be made with much less trouble, and expence; 
if the foul part of the volatile sal Ammoniacum 
be employed for it. 

But it is very frequent, to substitute in the 
place of these kinds, what is prepared by means 
of lime: and the greater pungency which the 
lime gives to the volatile salt in this sort, often 
imposes even on apothecaries, not greatly versed 
in the preparation of chemical medicines; and 
makes them believe it to be good. Where 
there is no undissolved salt in it, the distinguish- 
ing this kind, from that properly prepared, re- 
quires a new method of proof; for the mixing 
spirit of wine, which avails with regard to the 
other volatile spirits, is here evidently of no 
use. The following trial should, therefore, be 
made in this case, where the sophistication by 
lime is suspected, and the spirit is found very 
pungent to the nose. 

[}Method of distinguishing when the spiritus vo- 
latilis aromaticus is made with lime, in the 
cases where there is no undissolved salt with it, 
and the spirit is yet found extremely pungent. }]
Take a small quantity of the volatile sal 
Ammoniacum, powdered, and put it gra- 
|P_123
dually into a phial, containing the spiritus 
volatilis aromaticus, which is to be proved: 
shake them well together; and if the spirit, 
notwithstanding its great pungency, sensi- 
bly dissolve the salt, it may be taken for 
granted, that it was made with lime; but 
if the salt remain intirely undissolved, or be 
dissolved but in a small degree, the contrary 
may be, with certainty, concluded. 
[^A horizontal double-line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}SECTION II. }]
[}Of the preparation of those medicines, 
where vegetable substances make the 
whole, or principal part of the sub- 
ject. }][^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}Salt of wormwood. }]
Take any quantity of wormwood, either 
sresh gathered, or dried gently; put it into 
an iron pot; and, with a gentle fire, reduce 
it to white ashes; which are afterwards to 
be boiled in a sufficient quantity of spring 
water, so as to make a lye: filter the lye, 
|P_124
and exhale it, over a gentle fire, till a brown 
salt be left behind; which, by repeated so- 
lutions, filtrations, and evaporations, may 
be rendered white and pure. 

[}Note. }]
The incineration, or burning, may be better 
performed, upon a clean hearth, in some place 
where the wind cannot blow away the ashes: 
and the repeated means of purification are 
needless, not only because they would fail to 
render the salt more pure than the first filtra- 
tion alone, (provided it be performed through 
paper); but, because, if they did produce a pu- 
rity, and whiteness, in the salt, they would 
render it unmarketable; as being wholly un- 
distinguishable from salt of tartar. 

This salt does not differ from the fixt alka- 
line salt, obtained from any other vegetable, 
by the same means; nor from salt of tartar; 
except that in the preparation of the last, a 
greater calcination being made, the burnt oil is 
destroyed, which gives to the salt of worm- 
wood its brown colour. 

It is very usual, therefore, to substitute the 
salt of other vegetables, for that of worm- 
wood; there being no medicinal difference be- 
twixt them, as we have before observed; as 
both the fixed salts and burnt oils of all vege- 
tables are, when pure, alike in their qualities: 
but a fictitious salt may be made from pure fixt 
|P_125
alkaline salt, exactly the same with the salt 
really obtained from wormwood, by the above 
process, if the following means be used. 

[}Fictitious salt of wormwood, not differing, in 
any respect, from the genuine, but with re- 
gard to its production. }]
Take a little wormwood, and reduce it to 
the state of an imperfect charcoal, by burn- 
ing it in a crucible, covered from the air; 
it must not nevertheless be burnt till the 
flaming quality be destroyed, but taken from 
the fire as soon as it is perfectly black. Put 
some of this coal, together with a pound 
of pearl ashes, into four pints of water, 
and boil them together: let them stand till 
they are cool, and then filter through pa- 
per, and evaporate to a dry salt; to which 
the burnt oil of the coal will have imparted 
a proper degree of brownness; that, if too 
great, must be adjusted by the addition of 
more pearl ashes purified by the filter. 

[}Note. }]
This contains unquestionably the same ele- 
ments, as the true salt of wormwood: since 
the oil, in which alone, there can be possibly 
|P_126
supposed any difference, is here the same as in 
that. 

This substitution may, therefore, be well 
allowed, in any view: and, with respect to the 
medicinal effects, the substitution of salt of 
tartar, or any other fixt alkaline salt, for the 
salt of wormwood, cannot be condemned on 
any maintainable principles, as any way in- 
jurious, or insufficient to the intention of cure; 
according to what we have before shewn. 

[}Salt of tartar. }]
Let crude tartar of either kind, folded 
up in wet brown paper, or contained in a 
proper vessel, be put into the fire, and con- 
tinued there, till all the oil be burnt out: 
the salt is then to be procured from it, by 
solution in boiling water; with a subsequent 
evaporation, after having been filtered thro' 
paper. 

If the salt be required of a more sapona- 
ceous and pungent nature, let it be fused, 
in a crucible, for some hours, with a very 
hot fire, till it acquire a greenish, or blue 
colour. 

[}Note. }]
Salt of tartar was also formerly made by de- 
flagrating nitre and tartar: which may be done, 
|P_127
by powdering them together, in the proportion 
of two parts of tartar to one of nitre; and then 
putting the powder, gradually, by a spoonful 
at a time, into a crucible, heated red hot; 
which must be kept in the fire during the 
operation, and for some time after: The salt, 
being thus duly calcined, must be dissolved, 
and purified, as in the other processes, by fil- 
tering. But all these methods are greatly dis- 
used at present; the wholesale dealers having 
learnt the secret of preparing a fixt alkaline 
salt, by the following much more profitable 
method, which is now for the most part used 
in the place of salt of tartar. 

[}Fictitious salt of tartar. }]
Take of the best pearl ashes, any quan- 
tity; dissolve them in boiling water, in the 
proportion of a pound to a quart; when 
they are dissolved, let the solution stand till 
it be cold; and then filter it through paper: 
being filtered, evaporate the fluid, till a dry 
salt remain; which, being broken into a 
gross powder, must be put into a proper 
bottle of glass or stone, and kept carefully 
from the air. 

The evaporation may be performed in a 
clean iron pot; but not in an earthen pip- 
|P_128
kin; and the greatest care should be taken 
neither to let the solution, or salt, be put 
into copper, or brass vessels, on any account. 

[}Note. }]
This, according to the principles before laid 
down, is, in all respects, the same as salt of tar- 
tar: and fixt alkaline salt being a medicine, 
which both used simply, and in the febrifuge 
draughts, is of the highest efficacy, and con- 
sumed in very great quantity: the substitution 
of this cheaper kind for the salt of tartar, which 
cannot be prepared without much greater cost 
and trouble, is rather a benefit to the public, 
than a detrimental fraud. 

The neglect of the caution, above given, of 
avoiding the use of brass or copper utensils, in 
the preparation of salt of tartar, or this substi- 
tute, frequently occasions it to be very noxious: 
for by powdering it in brass mortars, from 
which it immediately collects all the rust, or 
indeed makes itself a corrosion if there be the 
least moisture, an emetic quality is acquired; 
which affecting those, who take the salt in any 
form, induce them to believe the medicine it- 
self disagrees with them, from its own nature. 

The pearl ashes are frequently adulterated 
greatly with sea salt; but this may be perceived 
by the taste if a small quantity be dissolved, 
for that purpose: and though, perhaps, they 
cannot be easily procured in a pure state, yet 
|P_129
if the solution be made in the proportion above 
directed for the water and salt, the greatest 
part of the sea salt will chrystallize, on the 
fluids being suffered to cool before it be fil- 
tered; and by this, a separation of the greatest 
part will be made; and the remaining small 
part will not deprave the fixt alkaline salt, for 
any medicinal purpose. 

[}Oil of tartar per deliquium. }]
Take any quantity of salt of tartar, 
highly calcined: put it, in any stone, or 
glass, vessel, of a flat form, into a cellar, or 
any moist place: where let it stand, for 
several days, till the salt be dissolved, by the 
humidity of the air; then filter it through 
paper; or separate the fluid from the dregs 
by decantation. 

[}Note. }]
As this is no way different from any other 
solution of the salt, of equal strength; or, as, if 
any change be produced by this method of so- 
lution, it can be only a depravity of the alka- 
line quality by the acid of the air, this process is 
needless: and, therefore, the following extem- 
poraneous method of making this deliquium, 
is used instead of it. 

|P_130
[}Extemporaneous method of making oil of tartar 
per deliquium. }]
Take of fictitious salt of tartar, above- 
mentioned, any quantity: dissolve it, by 
boiling, in half its weight of water; and 
filter the solution when cold. 

If any salt precipitate to the bottom of the 
vessel, in the cooling of the solution, or be 
found in the filter, it may be saved; and put 
to the pearl ashes, when the fictitious salt of 
tartar is to be made from them; or used for 
any such other purpose. 

[}Note. }]
This is a much more expeditious and com- 
modious method, than the tedious manner of 
dissolving the salt, by the moisture of the air: 
which does it so imperfectly, that a great waste 
generally accrues. 

[}Soluble tartar. }]
Take, of any fixt alkaline salt, one pound, 
of water, one gallon: to the salt, dissolved in 
the water boiling, throw in cream of tartar, 
gradually, till the effervescence, that before 
|P_131
arose on each addition, cease to appear; 
which will be, when, or before, three times 
the weight of alkaline salt has been thrown 
into it: then filter the solution through 
paper; and, after a proper evaporation, let 
it be set to shoot into chrystals; or otherwise 
make a total exhalation of the water, that 
the salt may remain in a solid mass. 

[}Note. }]
As there is no necessity of a boiling heat, 
for the combination of the cream, and salt, 
of tartar, into the soluble tartar; and, as this 
medicine is never given in a dry form; it has 
been a practice with some, to spare all parts 
of this process, but the powdering the ingre- 
dients; and to substitute the following simple 
preparation, in the place of the other. 

[}Extemporaneous soluble tartar. }]
Take of any fixt alkaline salt, three pounds, 
of cream of tartar, one pound: powder, and 
mix them thoroughly together. 

[}Note. }]
This will, on dissolving in any fluid, previous- 
ly to its being taken, become exactly the same, 
|P_132
as if it had passed through the other omitted 
parts of the above process; and cannot, there- 
fore, be deemed a substitution of a very cri- 
minal nature. 

In the preparation of this, it is proper to ob- 
serve, strictly, the same caution, as in the case 
of the salt of tartar, with regard to copper or 
brass vessels. 

