
|P_
[}PREFACE. }]
THE intention of the following sheets is to direct a right use 
of those medicines which are necessary to be kept in families, 
whose distance from a good practitioner, or any other cir-
cumstance, renders an immediate application in sudden illnesses 
almost impossible, and occasions those delays in trifling complaints, 
which oftentimes prove of very bad consequence. It has been 
found by experience, for want of proper hints and directions in re-
spect to the doses of medicines, several fatal errors have been com-
mitted, either from the ignorance of persons themselves, or from 
being obliged to have recourse, for want of better, to the advice 
of nurses, and such good women, whose greatest skill extends to 
the making a posset for a sweat, or a plaster for a sore shin. 

Those captains of ships whose vessels are too small to allow of 
carrying a surgeon, and gentlemen whose business may call them to 
take a long voyage in such small vessels, or to travel by land through 
unfrequented or poor places, or those who are going to settle in any 
of his Majesty's plantations, will find a great advantage from being 
thus enabled to become their own physicians in cases of necessity; 
and we often see that Nature, with a little assistance, will free the 
constitution from disorders which are not too deeply rooted, or 
very malignant in the first attack. I would by no means be under-
stood to pretend that the medicines I here recommend, are infal-
lible in the respective disorders they are prescribed for, being for 
the most part such only as are to be found in the dispensatory of 
the college of physicians; where I have been under a necessity of 
compounding, I have attended to the practice of the principal phy-
sicians in town, and assume no further merit to myself than to 
care of selecting such medicines whose operations are the least 
dangerous. Thus far however I will venture to assert, that, by 
following these directions, which are plain and easy, and wrote 
in a stile fitted to the meanest capacity, perspicuity being always 
preferable to elegance in this kind of writing, the patient may, by 
|P_iv
applying what is necessary in time, prevent those ills that follow 
from neglect, which good nursing and a few innocent things might 
at first remove. 

Those who have a knowledge in physic, and do not stand in 
need of my assistance, will in the boxes find many useful medi-
cines to be kept at hand, and may extend their practice, by giving 
me a catalogue of such others as they would chuse to have added. 

Ladies and gentlemen, who reside in the country, will hereby 
be enabled to assist their poor neighbours; which many of them I 
doubt not would take a pleasure in doing, did they but know what 
to apply. 

With each box of medicines may be had a box of scales and 
weights; each weight marked distinctly, that any person may at 
once adjust the proper quantity for a dose. 

As many people may chuse to keep by them what is proper for 
their own particular complaints, whom it may not suit to have the 
box complete, I think it necessary to mention, that any of the 
medicines here recommended may be had separate, or as many of 
them as agreeable, packed up in lesser boxes for the conveniency 
of carriage. 

N. B. Ladies closets are also fitted up with the choicest drugs, 
medicines and cordials, by 

Their obedient, very humble servant, 
HUGH SMITH. 

[}WEIGHTS used in PRESCRIPTION. }]
A pound containing Twelve ounces. 
An ounce containing Eight drams. 
A dram containing Three scruples. 
A scruple containing Twenty grains. 
|P_
[}THE 
FAMILY PHYSICIAN. }]
[}ASTHMATIC TINCTURE. }]
[^Decorative frame around the letter "T".^]THIS tincture is of use in a difficulty of breathing, 
tightness across the breast, and short coughs, parti-
cularly if brought on by cold north-easterly winds, 
which frequently affect the breast, sides, and lungs: 
it allays the cough, opens the chest, and loosens the 
phlegm, so that it easily comes away; and frees the pores of the skin 
which have been shut up by the winds. 

It may be taken as often as occasion requires, from thirty to 
sixty or eighty drops, in a little[/1./] pectoral drink or barley water, 
with which you should dilute plentifully, drinking it of the same 
heat as you would a dish of tea. 

[}ASTRINGENT ELECTARY. }]
Never be too hasty in the use of this electary; it is often found 
that a purging is the means made use of by Nature to carry off 
other complaints, or to free the body from bad humours, which 
might in time beget disorders; now, by stopping this wholesome 
|P_2
drain too soon, these bad humours may be thrown back into the 
blood, and produce the worst consequences: therefore you will 
seldom or never err, by suffering the purging, if not over violent, 
to continue two or three days, at the end of that time, should you 
find the patient weakened by it, or that it is really a disorder it-
self, and not a cure for other disorders, then you may give a dose 
or two of rhubarb, and afterwards proceed to the use of the electa-
ry: by these means you will cleanse the stomach and bowels, and 
get rid of the complaint without any farther trouble. 

Fluxes, which seafaring people are subject to, are to be treated
much in the same manner, but be very careful to cleanse the bowels 
first. 

Some of my friends who have been many years accustomed to 
the sea, recommend the[/2./] purging apozem before the use of astrin-
gents: they say it cools the body, and carries off every thing which 
is disagreeable to the bowels, better than rhubarb, or any other 
purge. After having cleansed the stomach and bowels of the filth 
which occasioned the disorder, by the one or other of these means, 
you will find ipecacuanha given with the astringent electary in very 
small quantities, viz. from half a grain to one or two grains, of 
infinite service; but this should be practised only by those who have 
some little knowledge in physic, and they will have the satisfaction 
to find the method here recommended will seldom, if ever, fail of 
success. 

[}ITS DOSE. }]
Above 14 years — from 2 scruples to 1 dram. 
Between 7 and 14 — from 1 scruple to 2 scruples. 
Between 3 and 7 — from 10 grains to 20 grains. 
Under three years old decrease the quantity in proportion. 

This may be given once in six or eight hours, or night and morn-
ing, as the case requires; either swallowed whole, or dissolved in a 
little hartshorn drink. 

|P_3
Remember beer should be forbid; and[/3./] hartshorn drink supply 
the place of other small liquors. Rice gruel is a proper food. 

Should this or any other of the electaries grow dry, they may 
be softened with a little syrup, or a spoonful of white wine. 

[}BALSAMIC ELECTARY }]
Is good in all tickling coughs, soreness at the breast, inward 
bruises, and such like complaints. 

The quantity of a nutmeg may be taken night and morning, and 
once or twice in the day besides, with a large draught of pectoral
drink made hot after it. 

If costive, take a little of the opening electary, or a few spoonfuls 
of the purging apozem, as you judge most proper, 

[}BARK. }]
The febrifuge quality of this bark, and its peculiar efficacy in
curing intermittent fevers, is now universally known, yet a two 
hasty use of it oftentimes proves prejudicial, a[/4./] remittent or con-
tinual fever being the consequence. You will seldom or never err, 
by giving a vomit first, and if the sick be of a full habit of body, 
you may also purge with safety; you will act more prudently 
by waiting till they have had four or five ague fits before you throw 
in the bark, giving a salt of wormwood[/5./] draught once in six or 
eight hours, which will make the fits more regular, and prepare 
the blood for the bark. You should begin when the fever is gone 
intirely off, and give at least one ounce before you expect it to 
|P_4
return[/6./]; half a dram, two scruples, or a dram may be given 
for a dose, as the stomach will bear it, the less you administer 
at a time the more frequent it must be repeated; for, unless 
you get the whole quantity down within the time you do 
nothing. 

The fit being put by, a second ounce should be taken in the 
like small doses within the three following days, at the distance 
of about six or eight hours; the patient may now rest six days, 
unless signs of the ague's return require the bark to be repeated 
sooner, when a third ounce is to be taken in like manner, a dose 
every six or eight hours; another week being elapsed, a fourth 
ounce is also to be administered, when you may take your leave 
of them, and be pretty well assured they will not be subject to 
a return. 

The common mixture to give it in may be made of three quarters 
of a pint of spring water, and a quarter of a pint of good French 
brandy, sweetened with a bit of sugar, a teacupful of which should 
be taken with each dose; mix the powder in a little of it, and drink 
the remainder after it. 

If it purges, which is oftentimes the case, it should be given in 
a little cinnamon tea; should that not answer, two, three, or four 
drops of laudanum must be added to each dose. 

If, on the contrary, the bark should bind, a few grains of rhu-
barb may be given with each dose as long as you see necessary. 

Above the age of fourteen it will require this quantity to cure the 
ague, under these years your judgment must direct you to de-
crease it; the manner of giving it must be exactly the same[/7./]: 
|P_5
sometimes, when the season is unfavourable, you may meet with 
cases which do not intirely give way to this treatment, if so, let 
them continue the following a fortnight or three weeks after-
wards. 

[}BARK WINE. }]
Take of bark, grossly powdered, two ounces, the yellow peel
of two Seville oranges, and one nutmeg grated; pour three pints 
of old rough red port upon these ingredients; let them stand by a 
gentle fire, in a large bottle, for three or four days, shaking it 
frequently; then pour off a wine-glassful of the clear liquor at 
the time you take it, which should be morning, noon, and night; 
when you have taken one half, another pint of wine may be added, 
and kept upon the ingredients till the whole is taken, at least for 
ten days or a fortnight. A few drops of elixir of vitriol two or three 
times a day with the wine, or mixed in a glass of water, may be 
also serviceable. 

[}BARLEY WATER. }]
Take two table-spoonfuls of pearl barley, wash it, and boil it 
in half a pint of water for two or three minutes; pour away this 
water which will be coloured, and add about three pints of boiling 
water; let it simmer till one pint is consumed. This is a com-
mon and good drink in fevers and every other complaint when a 
soft diluting liquor is adviseable. 

[}COLIC MIXTURE. }]
This mixture is warm and comfortable to the stomach and bow-
els, somewhat opening, proper in colic complaints, and for the 
wind, particularly if after meals; it is likewise serviceable for pains 
in the stomach. 

Two or three table-spoonfuls may be taken at a time. 

|P_6
But if the pain is very violent, and stools are much wanting, give 
of the purging apozem freely, or the opening electary. 

If there are too many stools, first give a little rhubarb, then use 
the astringent electary, which see. 

[}DIACHYLON PLASTER. }]
The use of this plaster is well known in slight cuts, or other lit-
tle accidents; it should be spread with a warm knife upon a piece 
of fine rag or an old glove. 

[}DIURETIC MIXTURE. }]
This mixture is good in all gravelly complaints, and for the 
dropsy, heat of urine, pains in the loins, and stoppage of water. 
One large spoonful, or two upon an emergency, may be given for 
a dose, every six or eight hours, or night and morning as the case 
requires, mixed in half a pint of marshmallow drink, if you can 
procure it, if not, barley water. But observe, if the pain is vio-
lent, you will do right first to give the purging apozem to promote 
stools, and let them drink plentifully of thin water gruel, which 
will cleanse the bowels and urinary passages, and greatly assist the 
intention of this mixture. Remember the body should always be 
kept open; and those who are subject to these complaints, should 
accustom themselves to drink very plentifully of small liquors at all 
times[/8./], which will often of themselves perform a perfect cure. 

[}ELIXIR OF VITRIOL. }]
This is esteemed good to strengthen the stomach and bowels, 
to create an appetite and brace up the solids. 

|P_7
[}ITS DOSE. }]
Above 14 years — from 20 to 30 drops. 
Between 7 and 14 — from 10 to 20. 
Under that age — from 5 to 7 or 8. 
It may be given in a little water, or wine and water; but where 
the patient can be brought to take it, a cup of chamomile tea is 
preferable to any other liquid whatever. 

The proper times for taking it are in a morning fasting, an hour 
before dinner, and two hours after dinner. 

When joined with the tincture of bark, it will be found to add 
considerably to the efficacy of that noble medicine. 

[}FEVER POWDER. }]
When the skin is hot and parched, the tongue white, and other 
common signs of a fever, which every one is acquainted with, such 
as thirst, weariness, &c. put them to bed, and give a dose of the 
fever powder every six or eight hours; let them drink freely of pec-
toral drink, barley water, or the like small liquors, to dilute the 
blood, and encourage a breathing sweat; if you find them mend un-
der this management, and the fever to disappear in a day or two, 
before you quit them, give the purging apozem, which will secure 
their health and add to your reputation. When they are young 
and very full of blood, and the pulse throbbing with great violence, 
it is a strong indication to bleed, to satisfy you more particularly in 
this point refer to the article Bleeding.

It will be frequently necessary under the above symptoms, parti-
cularly if costive, to give the purging apozem before the powder, 
thereby you cleanse the bowels and cool the body, but here your ob-
servation can alone direct you. 

|P_8
[}ITS DOSE. }]
Above 14 years — from 12 to 30 grains. 
Between 7 and 14 — from 8 to 20. 
Between 1 and 7 — from 4 to 12. 
Within the months as your judgment directs. 

On the contrary, should the disorder not give way, unless you 
have some knowledge in physic, it will be most prudent, if you 
can have advice, to commit them to the care of some gentleman of 
the faculty, as you may conclude it is that kind of fever which will 
not yield to this simple method. 

Should I attempt to describe the various kinds of fevers, it would 
only puzzle the unskilful, therefore the above directions are suffici-
ent for those who stand in need of any assistance, to enable them 
frequently to render service, and prevent their ever doing any 
injury. 

[}FIT DROPS FOR CHILDREN. }]
These drops are very good against fits in general, for grown 
persons as well as children; but they are particularly serviceable to 
the latter, more especially in those fits which attend the cutting 
their teeth. 

From three to ten drops may be given for a dose to children 
under twelve months old, above that age increase the number as 
you think fit; grown people may take a large tea-spoonful for a 
dose. 

They may be given in black cherry water, or any other liquor, 
and repeated as often as necessity requires. 

|P_9
[}FRYAR'S BALSAM }]
Is applied to fresh wounds, and is esteemed good to stop bleed-
ing; be careful not to use it to old sores, as it frequently proves 
prejudicial. 

It is given internally, from ten to sixty drops, in a little powder-
ed sugar or a glass of water, in inward decays, bleedings or bruises, 
also in coughs and hoarseness. 

[}GASCOIGN'S POWDER. }]
The reputation of this powder, so long established, renders it 
almost unnecessary to say any thing about its efficacy; its use 
among children is very common, to correct gripings, prevent aci-
dities, and remove little feverish heats; it is frequently, and with 
great propriety, joined with a few grains of rhubarb. 

A child within the month may take from 1 to 4 grains. 

Between 1 and 12 months — from 4 to 8. 
Between 1 and 5 years — from 8 to 12. 
Those who are more advanced in life from 10 to 30. 

It may be taken every six or eight hours, us you see necessary. 

[}GARGLE FOR SORE THROATS. }]
Take half a pint of pectoral drink, two spoonfuls of virgin ho-
ney, and a like quantity of the best white wine vinegar; let the 
throat be gargled frequently with this, as hot as you can bear it. 
If the glands are much swelled, so as to render it difficult to swallow, 
and the patient is very hot and feverish, with a full quick pulse, 
refer to the article Bleeding, and give the purging apozem to open 
the body three or four times, then let him take the fever powder, 
and dilute very plentifully with pectoral drink, or the like. 

|P_10
If, on the contrary, there is a small fluttering pulse (sometimes 
rather quick) with specks in the throat, and it looks discoloured, 
give wine and cordial things. 

[}GLAUBER'S SALTS. }]
This salt is seldom taken alone, except by common people who 
cannot afford to join manna with it, which not only makes it more 
palatable, but prevents the roughness of its operation. 

From ten years old its dose is from half an ounce to one 
ounce, with an equal quantity of manna (some people add 
a double quantity of manna) dissolved in a little water, 
water gruel, or sena tea, but the best form is the purging apo-
zem, which see. 

[}HARTSHORN DROPS }]
Are given in faintings, and esteemed good to thin the blood, its 
known use renders a more minute detail unnecessary. 

The dose is from ten to sixty drops, in any liquid you please. 

[}HARTSHORN AND GUM. }]
Pour three pints of water on each paper of hartshorn and gum, 
let it boil till you can strain off a quart, which should be poured 
through piece of a fine rag, or a lawn sieve, just before you take it 
from the fire, you may add a crust of bread and a bit of cinnamon, if 
agreeable; it may be sweetened to your palate. This is the proper 
drink to be used in common for purgings, after a little rhubarb or 
something of that kind has been given. 

|P_11
[}HEART-BURN LOZENGES. }]
One of them may be kept in the mouth as often as agreeable; 
if costive a few grains of rhubarb should be taken, or a little 
magnesia alba. 

[}HIERA PICRA }]
Is a warm physic, good for disorders in the stomach, and parti-
cularly in female complaints. 

Its dose from one table spoonful to four, at bed time or in 
a morning. 

[}HYSTERIC MIXTURE. }]
This mixture may be taken from a tea-spoonful to a table-
spoonful, which is the proper dose for a grown person, in any 
hysterical complaint; it should be mixed with a little water, or 
with a cup of hysteric and pennyroyal water, being too strong to 
take alone. 

[}JAUNDICE ELECTARY. }]
Where it has not been preceded by the colic, nor is attended 
with a fever or bleedings, it is most likely to proceed from a slug-
gish, viscid bile; in which case the cure is easy, and may be ef-
fected in the following manner: the symptoms every one knows 
are a yellowness of the skin and upon the whites of the eyes, high-
coloured urine and white stools, an inactivity, weariness, oppressi-
on of the spirits, and loss of appetite. 

|P_12
First give a gentle vomit of ipecacuanha, the following morn-
ing let them be purged four or five times with the purging apozem, 
which should be repeated every fourth or fifth day; on the inter-
mediate days of purging give them the quantity of a nutmeg of this 
electary, night and morning, with a salt of wormwood draught af-
ter it; let them dilute plentifully with lemonade, and live upon 
light food. This method will quickly restore their colour, strength 
and spirits. 

[}IPECACUANHA }]
Is a gentle vomit, and may, where there is occasion, be safely 
given to children. I am afraid it is in general rather over-dosed, 
whereby the patient is sometimes injured by straining more vio-
lently than their stomach and constitution will bear. I am con-
vinced from experience, that a few grains will operate on many 
people far better than large doses. The best way of administering 
it to children, and indeed to every body, is to give three, four, five, 
or six grains, mixed in a little water or chamomile tea; and, if it 
does not take effect in ten minutes or a quarter of an hour, repeat 
the same quantity. This method will certainly prevent the bad 
consequences sometimes attending violent vomits, and make the 
operation more easy and pleasant. 

Let them drink thin water gruel, chamomile tea, or the like, to 
work it off. 

[}For the ITCH. }]
An ointment made of one third part of flowers of sulphur, and 
two thirds hog's-lard rubbed in night and morning where it appears, 
is a safe and certain cure, though perhaps not so expeditious 
|P_13
as mercurial preparations, but they have no place here[/9./]

[}LAUDANUM. }]
I have directed the use of this with the bark; a few drops may 
also be joined with the astringent electary, if the purging is obsti-
nate, and does not readily give way: it is likewise proper in many 
other cases; but I would not have the unexperienced be too free with 
it, therefore shall say no more. 

[}MAGNESIA ALBA }]
Is a medicine strongly recommended by many writers, particu-
larly for young children. 

It corrects acidities in the stomach more powerfully than chalk, 
oyster-shells, pearls, coral, crabs eyes, or the like testaceous pow-
ders; and, joined to this, it has a gentle purgative property, and 
is the only one of an alkaline nature at present made use of; it is al-
so serviceable in the heart-burn. 

It may be given to children from twenty grains to a dram, or 
even two drams in a day, a little at a time, mixed in their food; 
grown people may take it more freely. 

[}MANNA }]
IS a gentle purge, which affects only the stomach and bowels;
it is in much esteem for children, and given from one or two drams 
|P_14
to one ounce; grown people may take one ounce and a half or two 
ounces, without stirring them, for which reason it is quickened 
with Glauber's salts, which see. 

[}MARSHMALLOW DRINK. }]
Take a quarter of a pound of marshmallow roots washed very 
clean, and boil them in three quarts of water until one is consumed, 
remove it from the fire, and, when cold, decant off the liquor; if 
you do not think the thickness disagreeable, it will be more effica-
cious by pressing the roots; it may be sweetened with virgin honey. 
This may be drank at pleasure, and is recommended in all cases where 
a soft lubricating regimen is proper; it is much esteemed for the 
gravel and heat of urine. 

[}NERVOUS TINCTURE. }]
Nervous complaints are too common in England to need a 
particular description, in all kinds of them this tincture is very ser-
viceable; it is likewise proper in lowness of spirits, faintings, and 
hysterical cases, giving strength and chearfulness, and raising the 
depressed spirits. The dose is from one to two tea-spoonfuls, two 
or three times a day, in a glass of wine and water, or valerian tea. 

[}OIL of ROSES. }]
This is an excellent outward remedy for all parts in a state of 
inflammation, especially when attended with great pain; in which 
case it is also proper to refer to Bleeding, and the purging apozem. 

The method of applying it is by rubbing it in with a warm hand. 

|P_15
[}OILY EMULSION. }]
Take four large spoonfuls of oil of almonds, half a pint of cold 
barley water, two drams of fine sugar, in powder, and sixty drops of 
spirit of hartshorn; shake them well together, and the whole im-
mediately becomes a white emulsion; two spoonfuls of cinnamon 
water being added, will make it very palatable. 

It is good in stitches and pleuritic pains in the side and breast, 
hoarseness, coughs, &c. 

A tea-cupful may be taken frequently. 

[}OPENING ELECTARY. }]
This electary gently relaxes the belly, without causing sickness 
or gripings, which quick purges are apt to do. 

When intended only to open the body, for a grown person, the 
dose is the quantity of a nutmeg at bed-time; if designed to purge
more brisk, repeat the dose in the morning. 

It may be given to children in a proportionably less degree 
and proves a good physic, particularly where they are troubled 
with phlegm. 

If more agreeable in a liquid form, you may dissolve it in a small 
quantity of any weak drink. 

[}OPODELDOC }]
Is very serviceable in bruises or strains; it should be rubbed in 
with the warm hand three or four times a day. 

|P_16
[}PALSY DROPS. }]
In all cases where a heaviness hangs upon the spirits, with a 
drowsiness, dizziness, or swimming of the head, these drops are 
equally serviceable as in the palsy; all these complaints proceeding 
from the same bad disposition of the blood. 

The dose is from one to two tea spoonfuls, two or three times 
a day, in a glass of wine and water, or valerian tea. 

[}PARALYTIC or PALSY-LINIMENT. }]
This liniment is good in all paralytic complaints, likewise 
where a stiffness and numbness remain after the rheumatism; it 
will remove those acute rheumatic pains which seize the limbs on 
taking cold, and oftentimes proves a cure for the sciatica or hip 
gout: its warm stimulating quality puts the part rubbed with it 
into a glow, frees the pores of the skin, and, by quickening the 
circulation, removes those obstructions which were the cause of 
pain. 

It should be applied, night and morning, with a warm hand, if 
before the fire the better, and the part afterwards covered with a 
piece of warm flannel; where the disorder does not give way, let 
the palsy drops be taken also. 

[}PECTORAL DRINK. }]
Take two table-spoonfuls of pearl barley, boil it two or three 
minutes in half a pint of water, pour away that water, and add a 
quart and half a pint of fresh water to the barley, let it boil ten 
minutes; then add twenty stoned raisins, and one fig cut into 
slices, also a bit of stick liquorice as long as your finger; let these 
boil together a few minutes, and strain off a quart of the pectoral 
drink. 

|P_17
This is an agreeable soft liquor, good in any case where the in-
tention is to dilute; but more especially in coughs, colds, oppres-
sions of the breast, and such like complaints. 

[}PILE ELECTARY. }]
Take the quantity of a nutmeg of this electary night and 
morning, so as to keep the body gently open; avoid pepper and 
all heating things, little or no wine should be drank, and your 
food must be of the lighter and vegitable kind. 

[}PILE LINIMENT. }]
If the piles are external, apply a little of this liniment upon a 
piece of fine rag very frequently, which will cool the part, and 
procure ease. Setting over the steam of warm water is frequently 
serviceable, especially if an handful or two of marshmallow leaves 
and a little bran be added. 

[}POWDER FOR SWEATS. }]
I need not point out the particular circumstances in which 
this is necessary, every one being sensible how much it is of service 
in colds, achs, and pains in the bones, and the like complaints. 

[}ITS DOSE. }]
Above the age of 14 — from 20 to 30 grains. 
Between 7 and 14 years — from 10 to 20 

Under seven years old decrease the quantity as your judgment 
directs; let it be taken at bed-time, with a large draught of white 
wine whey, or something of that kind, and, if very hard to sweat, 
twenty or thirty drops of spirits of hartshorn or sal volatile in it; 
but observe, if there is any fever, the fever powder is most proper. 

|P_18
[}PURGING APOZEM. }]
Pour a pint of boiling water upon one ounce of Glauber's salts, 
one ounce of manna, and one dram of bruised caraway seeds; stir 
them a little to dissolve the manna and salts, cover the vessel, and 
let it stand to cool; you may, if you please, add a little slice of Se-
ville orange peel to the above. 

This is the best method I know of disguising the salts, and ma-
king them sit easy upon the stomach. 

Of the strained liquor a draught may be taken in the morning, and 
repeated once in half an hour or an hour, as the stomach will bear 
it, till it purges sufficiently. The age of the person must be consi-
dered; and, as you know the strength of the apozem, it will be ea-
sy to adjust the dose. 

If intended only to relax the body, a few spoonfuls taken at bed-
time, or in the morning, will have the desired effect. 

A less quantity may at any time be prepared as you find occasion 
for it. 

[}QUICK PURGING POWDER. }]
In many cases, such as dropsical and gross habits of body, foul-
ness of stomach (when a vomit is sometimes previously to be taken) 
and for people of strong constitutions, who live much upon a flesh di-
et and salt provisions, where you think manna and salts are not pow-
erful enough; and even to younger persons whom you want to purge 
very briskly, this purging powder is recommended, and may be gi-
ven in a little of any liquor. 

[}ITS DOSE. }]
 Above the age of 14 — from 25 grains to 2 scruples. 
Between 7 and 14 — from 15 grains to half a dram. 
Between 3 and 7 — from 6 grains to 1 scruple. 

|P_19
[}RHEUMATIC POWDER. }]
This powder may be given night and morning, from one to two 
scruples, with twenty or thirty drops of sal volatile, in white wine 
whey, sage tea,[/10./] or any small liquor. 

The dose should be increased or diminished, so as to keep the 
body open; if the pains are very violent, and the pores of the 
skin shut up by preceding colds, let the paralytic liniment be 
used. 

[}RHUBARB POWDER. }]
All physicians agree in the excellency of this root; it is a good 
purge in many complaints, and strengthens the stomach and bowels; 
it is particularly recommended for children, more especially for the 
worms, as it purges off those crudities in which they breed. 

[}ITS DOSE. }]
 Above 14 years — from 15 to 30 grains. 
Between 7 and 14 — from 10 to 20 grains. 
Between 1 and 7 — from 5 to 15 grains. 
Within the months — from 1 to 5 grains. 

|P_20
[}SALOP }]
Is of late years brought into much esteem in England; it is of 
a restorative and strengthening quality[/11./]; many ladies, whom I 
have had the honour to recommend it to, of tender constitutions, 
where tea has been found to prey over-much upon a week stomach 
and where more nourishment has been necessary than they received 
from their ordinary food, eat it in a morning for breakfast; and I 
must confess it would much please me to see it more universally re-
ceived, particularly by those who are subject to nervous complaints, 
being in its own nature very strengthening, easy of digestion, and, 
in the manner here recommended, affords a great deal of nourish-
ment in an impoverished state of blood; therefore the properest 
food that can be received after a severe fit of sickness, whereby the 
patint is much weakened. 

The common way of preparing it is with water, and a glass of wine 
added to it, but the method I think far preferable is this: 

Boil half a pint of milk with as much water, while it is in a boil-
ing state, let two tea-spoonfuls of the powder of salop, first mixed in 
a bason with a spoonful or two of cold water, be thrown into it; 
after it has simmered a minute or two, stirring it the while, you 
will find the whole of a smooth creamy consistence; a bit of sugar
and a little nutmeg may be added to make it palatable. Those 
whom milk is apt to render costive, should mix the salop with the 
water alone as above directed, and add the milk to it after it is ta-
ken from the fire. 

|P_21
We all know how serviceable a milk diet is in many cases; by 
this method it will agree with them, upon whose stomach it other-
ways turns sour and curdles. 

[}SALT OF WORMWOOD DRAUGHT. }]
Take a scruple of salt of wormwood, pour upon it by little and 
little fresh lemon juice, till it has done fermenting and tastes quite 
insipid, about one large spoonful is sufficient; then add a little fine 
sugar to make it palatable, about a wine-glass of spring or barley 
water, and a pap-spoonful of cinnamon water, makes a most plea-
sant draught. 

Above the age of fourteen, it may be given once in six or eight 
hours, in any little feverish complaints, sickness at stomach, watch-
ings, parched dryness of the mouth, and such-like ills, and is often 
preferable to the fever powder. From seven to fourteen years, half 
a draught is sufficient; under that age still decrease the quantity. 

[}SAL VOLATILE. }]
The use of these drops is so common and well known for raising 
the spirits, that I need only take notice of its dose, which is from 
ten to sixty drops, in a glass of water, or what you please. 

[}SCORBUTIC ELIXIR. }]
This preparation is in an especial manner devoted to the relief 
of scorbutic disorders. It is of a scouring nature, breaks and divi-
des all obstructions of the glands proceeding from a more than or-
dinary thickness of the blood, and, by restoring the mass to a due 
state of fluidity, prevents those feverish dispositions which naturally 
arise from any hindrance in the necessary secretions, such as urine, 
stool, &c. It is a great promoter of urine, and a great quickener 
of the motions of the fluids; it may be likewise serviceable in an 
|P_22
unwieldy habit from sluggish humours, and help to throw off a 
dropsy. From fifteen drops to two tea-spoonfuls may betaken to 
or three times a day, in a draught of sage tea or any other liquor, 
and continued for some time. 

[}SENA TEA. }]
The usual method of preparing this, is, by putting as much of 
the sena leaves as your thumb and two fingers will contain into a tea-
pot, and pouring upon it a gill of boiling water; when cold, pour 
out the liquor, which will be strong enough to give a grown person 
a stool or two. 

A little manna and salts may be dissolved in this sena tea, which 
makes it operate brisker. 

[}SNUFF for the HEAD-ACH. }]
THIS snuff may be safely used in all complaints of the head. It
is prepared from herbs which have a particular efficacy in those 
cases, as is manifest from the infinite service received from it, in old 
and settled pains of the head. 

It may be taken as freely as you please. 

[}SPERMA CETI BOLUS. }]
Take of sperma ceti one scruple, of fever powder ten grains, make 
these into a bolus with a sufficient quantity of syrup, to be taken 
once in six or eight hours, with a little penny-royal and hysteric 
water, in lying in cases and miscarriages, in either of which where 
the pains are violent you may add three, four, or five drops of Lau-
danum to each bolus; remember also to prevent costiveness either 
by gentle clysters, a little sena tea, or some other mild purga-
tive. 

|P_23
[}SPERMA CETI EMULSION. }]
Take two drams of the powder of sperma ceti, rub it in a mar-
ble mortar, with a quarter part of the yolk of one egg, till it is a 
smooth pulp; then add two drams of fine sugar in powder, mix 
them well together, and by little and little pour on half a pint of 
cold barley water; strain it through a fine hair or coarse lawn sieve, 
which will keep back the undissolved part of the sperma ceti, and 
render the emulsion smooth and even; to the whole you may add 
two spoonfuls of cinnamon water. 

A wine-glass may be taken as often as agreeable, in coughs, 
hoarseness, when troubled with flegm, or any of the like complaints; 
also in the hooping cough, when, if they are feverish, you should 
join a little fever powder with it, and purge them with rhubarb 
or the quick purging powder once in four or five days; you may 
likewise give the stomach tincture between breakfast and dinner 
and between dinner and supper: gentle vomits are oftentimes also
serviceable. 

[}SPERMA CETI and SUGAR CANDY. }]
This may be taken at pleasure, when troubled with a cough or 
hoarseness, difficulty of breathing, or with phlegm; it is often of 
some service, and so innocent, it can do no harm even to young 
children. 

[}SPIRIT of LAVENDER }]
Is used in lowness of spirits as a cordial; it is also given in 
faintings and pains in the head; and may be taken frequently, 
from ten to sixty drops, on a lump of sugar, in wine and water, or 
any other liquor. 

|P_24
[}STEEL ELECTARY. }]
In female obstructions this electary may be given, from half a 
dram to one dram, night and morning, in the form of a bolus, or 
made into pills, as is most agreeable, drinking a cup of cold chamo-
mile flower tea, or a little penny-royal and hysteric water; if you 
have reason to think physic is proper, give a dose of hiera picra; at 
bed-time, let the feet be bathed in warm water for ten minutes, 
then wipe them very dry, and, if the weather is cold, wrap them 
up in a piece of flannel. 

[}STOMACH TINCTURE. }]
This tincture is highly proper in a weakness of the stomach, loss 
of appetite, or bad digestion; as a bitter, it frequently contributes 
to the destroying of worms; and not only excites the sense of hun-
ger, but, by its warm aromatic property, at the same time that it 
gives a grateful sensation, strengthens the coats of the stomach, 
which by any cause may have been weakened, and renders it more 
able to break and digest the food taken in for the nourishment of the 
body. 

The dose for a grown person is from one to two tea-spoonfuls,
an hour before dinner, and three hours after dinner, in a glass of 
water; those who are accustomed to drink wine, may add an equal 
quantity to the water. 

When given to children for the worms, it should be taken the 
first thing in the morning, and last at bed-time, in a little water or 
chamomile flower tea. 

A child of seven years old may take a tea-spoonful for a dose; un-
der that age decrease the quantity as your judgment directs. 

|P_25
If you have reason to imagine the stomach is foul, let a gentle 
puke of ipecacuanha be taken before the use of this tincture. 

If inclined to be costive, now and then at bed-time take a dose 
of the opening electary, or a few grains of rhubarb. 

[}STRENGTHENING PLASTER. }]
A piece of this plaster may be applied in any wrench or strain,
weakness of the loins, or other parts. 

[}To make a SYRUP. }]
Dissolve a pound of sugar in half a pint of water, over a gentle
fire, in an earthen pipkin; let it simmer one minute or two, take 
off the scum, and preserve the syrup, which is proper to soften 
the electaries when they grow dry, to make up pills or bolusses, 
and to give children their powders in. 

[}TINCTURE of BARK. }]
This is serviceable in many complaints, in weak and relaxed 
habits of body, flushings and hectic heats; it checks profuse 
sweats, and braces up the solids; it is highly proper in all kinds of 
bleedings, but more efficacious when joined with a fourth part of 
elixir of vitriol. 

It may be given on any emergency; when taken for a constancy, 
the proper hours are the same as for elixir of vitriol, which see. 

The dose is from one to two tea-spoonfuls in any liquor. 

[}TOOTH POWDER for the SCURVY in the GUMS. }]
This powder eleanses and preserves the teeth and gums, takes 
off scales and all kind of filth without injuring the enamel, which 
gritty powders are apt to do. 

|P_26
It should be used with a piece of spunge, every thing which is 
hard or rough being prejudicial, as they destroy the enamel, when 
the teeth must necessarily decay. 

[}TURNER'S CERATE }]
Is commonly used for burns, cuts, scalds, bruises, chilblains,
and other little complaints where the skin is worn off, and is so 
well known I need not be more particular. 

[}VALERIAN ROOT }]
Is of late years come into great esteem in all nervous disorders; 
of the bruised root they make a tea in the same manner as sena tea, 
and drink it three or four times a day, which is a proper thing to 
take the nervous tincture in, being of itself I am afraid not effec-
tual, as the quantity of the root given in this manner, or in the 
tincture prepared from it, is too trifling to have any great depend-
ence upon. 

[}VALERIAN ROOT in POWDER. }]
If you intend to reap benefit from it, you must take it in pretty 
large quantities. It is usually given from half a dram to one 
dram, in a little liquor of any kind, and should be repeated once 
in six or eight hours. 

[}YELLOW BASILICON }]
Is made use of in cases which require more discharge than the 
Turner's cerate will promote, but in a great measure applied for 
the same intention. 

[}WORM POWDER. }]
This powder should be taken the very first thing early in the 
morning, and the last at bed-time, at least one hour after supper, 
mixed in a little honey, currant jelly, or somewhat of the like 
|P_27
nature, and where it is not a spoiled child, let a cupful of cold 
camomile tea, or water with a tea-spoonful of the stomach tinc-
ture, be drank after it. This will keep them open; nevertheless, in 
most cases you should purge once in four or five days; for very 
young children rhubarb is proper; should that not prove strong 
enough, the quick purging powder may be given; but where they
are older and will take it, cleanse their bowels with the purging 
apozem. 

[}ITS DOSE. }]
Above 14 years — from 25 grains to 2 scruples. 
Between 7 and 14 — from 1 scruple to half a dram. 
Between 3 and 7 — from 12 grains to 1 scruple. 
Between 1 and 3 — from 6 to 12 grains. 
|P_28
[}ON 
BLEEDING. }]
I Rather chuse to mention the complaints in which bleeding is 
adviseable under this general head, than with the medicines 
for the respective disorders, because it may naturally be supposed
they cannot always procure the assistance; for which reason, di-
recting to bleed before the use of the medicines, in cases where it 
might prove serviceable, may be a means of preventing their admi-
nistering those remedies, which, taken in time, will frequently 
alone remove the complaints. Besides, I would not wish the un-
skilful to be too free with the lancet, as an injudicious evacuation 
of blood may be succeeded with very bad consequences; and my in-
tention through the whole, as I observed in the preface, being no 
other than to supply families with a few useful remedies for slight 
indispositions, by which they may frequently prevent tedious ill-
nesses, but not to put the unexperienced upon trifling with them-
selves when they are really ill, and can have proper advice. 

Blood should be taken away in the beginning of fevers, when 
there is a strong, quick pulse, the eyes red and fiery, with great 
heat and thirst; but never when they are in the decline, as, from 
being inflammatory, they are often at this period degenerated 
into the nevous kind, when the chief of the affair is to be ma-
naged by the frequent application of blisters. 

In asthmatical complaints, if the patient be of a full habit of 
body. 

|P_29
In coughs, if the pulse is quick and full, with an oppression at the 
breast, or difficulty in breathing. 

In colics, where the pain is violent, the bowels inflamed, and no 
stools. 

In fits, if the spirits are hurried and overpowered, and the patient 
full of blood. 

In swimmings, dizziness, and pains of the head. 

In stitches, and pleuritic disorders of the side and breast, particu-
larly if it gives pain to take a deep breath. 

In sore throats, where there is a strong, quick pulse, and the 
throat greatly swelled and inflamed. 

For the piles it is sometimes serviceable; as likewise in female 
obstructions, and frequently in rheumatic complaints; in apoplec-
tic disorders, a dysentery or bloody flux, and irksome heat of the 
bowels; for the hooping cough, particularly if of a full habit of bo-
dy, and the phlegm which is brought up appears streaked with blood; 
in all of which cases, the quantity taken away must be proportioned 
to the age of the patient, and the violence of the complaint. 

Bleeding again ought to be directed in large abscesses or swellings, 
where the heat and pain is immoderate; for in these cases, by draw-
ing blood, the matter is more easily and speedily brought to ripen, and 
by that means the body more effectually freed from its distempers. 

In a word, wherever prevail sore eyes, sciatica or hip gout, a dry 
husky cough, an head-ach, pains of the womb or of the bladder, dry 
gripes, strangury, gravel, pain from the stone, violent bleedings of the 
nose, ears, or other parts, an inveterate scorbutical itch, and the like, 
opening a vein is of peculiar service; but in dropsies, a jaundice, the 
gout, and all illnesses occasioned by a relaxed state of body, an impo-
verished blood, or too great weakness of the vessels, you must seek re-
lief from the medicines recommended in this little manual, and not, 
by an abrupt and preposterous use of bleeding, increase the disorder, 
and ruin the health of the patient and your own reputation. 

|P_30
[}ON THE
APPLICATION of BLISTERS. }]
To the cautions here laid down with respect to bleeding, I 
shall add a word or two concerning the application of 
blisters. 

The most excellent remedy may be prostituted by an inconside-
rate, rash, and foolish practice; which, it is plain, oftentimes hap-
pens with regard to blisters, by ordering them indiscriminately in 
all severs, and without distinction in any time of the distemper, 
which can only be the effect of ignorance. 

Therefore, before we resolve on an expedient of this nature, it 
would be convenient to consider whether the fever be of the in-
flammatory or nervous kind; if of the former, instead of blistering 
the lancet ought to be used, and a mild cooling regimen set on 
soot, as already directed; this will moderate the heat of the blood, 
and by degrees restore it to its due temper. On the other hand, 
in fevers of the nervous class, where the symptoms are quite dif-
ferent, the pulse being low and weak, the spirits almost spent, and 
the eyes, instead of appearing sparkling, red and fiery, grown 
quite dim, we ought by all means to make use of blisters, and that 
freely. 

They are oftentimes proper in paralytic and nervous complaints, 
as likewise in rheumatic pains and pleurisies, in which cases a blis-
ter applied immediately upon the part affected frequently affords 
great relief; and, and in a variety of other cases they are of infinite 
|P_31
service; but then regard must be paid to the state of the patient's 
blood, for if a full, quick pulse, great heat, thirst, and the other 
symptoms of an inflammatory fever attend upon the disorders, the 
fever must first be conquered, and afterwards, if necessity requires it, 
let blisters be applied. Should they cause a strangury, which will 
sometimes be the case, give the patient plentifully of marshmallow 
drink, or barley water with a little gum arabic dissolved in it; or 
if there is a purging, which you would wish to be stopped, of the 
hartshorn drink, and this inconvenience will soon be remedied. 

In regard to the management of them, the plaster should be spread 
upon a piece of an old glove, and bound on to the part intended; 
after twenty-four hours, the strength of the flies being pretty well 
spent, you may remove the blister, and, if you cannot procure the 
proper dressings, a little Turner's cerate spread upon a piece of fine 
rag may supply its place. 

Should any blisters appear unbroke, snip them with a pair of scis-
sars; if they give violent pain, this may be done when the plaster 
has been applied only twelve hours; when, by discharging the wa-
ter, and laying it smooth on again, you ease the patient, and give 
the blister an opportunity of acting more. 
