

[^Sample 1: book - ^]

|P_514
[}THE FAMILY PHYSICIAN; 
or, 
The Country Lady's Benevolent Employment. }][^A long horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
[}Want of Appetite. }]
IF want of appetite proceeds from errors in diet, or any 
other part of the patient's regimen, it ought to be changed. 
If nausea and reachings shew that the stomach is loaded with 
crudities, a vomit will be of service. After this, a gentle 
purge or two of rhubarb, or of any of the bitter purging salts, 
may be taken. The patient ought next to use some of the 
stomachic bitters infused in wine. Though gentle evacua- 
tions be necessary, yet strong purges and vomits are to be 
avoided, as they weaken the stomach, and hurt digestion. 

Elixir of vitriol is an excellent medicine in most cases of 
indigestion, weakness of the stomach, or want of appetite. 
Twenty or thirty drops of it may be taken twice or thrice a- 
day, in a glass of wine or water. It may likewise be mixed 
with the tincture of the bark; one drachm of the former to 
an ounce of the latter, and two teaspoonfuls of it taken in 
wine or water, as above. 

The chalybeate waters, if drank in moderation, are gene- 
rally of considerable service in this case. The salt water 
has likewise good effects; but it must not be used too freely. 
The waters of Harrowgate, Scarborough, Moffat, and most 
other spas in Britain, may be used with advantage. We 
would advise all who are afflicted with indigestion and want 
of appetite, to repair to these places of public rendezvous. 
The very change of air, and the cheerful company, will be 
of service; not to mention the exercise, dissipation, amuse- 
ments, &c. Tissot. Buchan. 

|P_515
[}The Asthma. }]
The paroxysm of an asthma I must leave to the physician; 
but as a palliative, nothing is of so great importance in the 
asthma, as pure and moderately warm air. Asthmatic people 
can seldom bear either the close heavy air of a large town, or 
the sharp, keen atmosphere of a bleak hilly country; a me- 
dium, therefore, between these is to be chosen; The air near 
a large town is often better than at a distance, provided the 
patient be removed so far as not to be affected by the smoke. 
Some asthmatic patients indeed breathe easier in town than 
in the country; but this is seldom the case, especially in 
towns where much coal is burnt. Asthmatic persons who are 
obliged to be in town all day, ought, at least, to sleep out 
of it. Even this will often prove of great service. Those 
who can afford it, ought to travel into a warmer climate. 
Many asthmatic persons who cannot live in England, enjoy 
very good health in the south of France, Portugal, Spain, 
or Italy. 

Exercise is likewise of very great importance in the asthma, 
as it promotes the digestion, preparation of the blood, &c. 
The blood of asthmatic persons is seldom duly prepared, ow- 
ing to the proper action of the lungs being impeded. For 
this reason, such people ought daily to take as much exercise, 
either on foot, horseback, or in a carriage, as they can bear. 
Buchan. 

[}Dr. Mead's Prescription for the Bite Of a Mad Dog. }]
Take ash-coloured ground liverwort, cleaned, dried, and 
powdered, half an ounce; of black pepper, powdered, a quar- 
ter of an ounce. Mix these well together, and divide the 
powder into four doses; one of which must be taken every 
morning fasting, for four mornings successively, in half an 
English pint of cow's milk, warm. 

After these four doses are taken, the patient must go into 
a cold bath, or cold spring or river, every morning fasting, 
for a month; he must be dipped all over, but not stay in 
(with his head above water) longer than half a minute, if the 
water be very cold. After this, he must go in three times a- 
week for a fortnight longer. 

|P_516
The person must be bled before he begins to use the medi- 
cine. Dr. Mead asserts, that he never knew this remedy fail, 
although he has tried it in a thousand instances. But Dr. 
Buchan, and some others, suspect the Doctor's veracity in 
this particular. 

[}Bleeding at the Nose. }]
Whenever bleeding at the nose relieves any bad symptoms, 
and does not proceed so far as to endanger the patient's life, 
it ought not to be stopped. But when it returns frequently, 
or continues till the pulse becomes low, the extremities be- 
gin to grow cold, the lips pale, or the patient complains of 
being sick or faint, it must immediately be stopped. 

For this purpose, the patient should be set nearly upright, 
with his head reclining a little, and his legs immersed in wa- 
ter, about the warmth of new milk. His hands ought like- 
wise to be put in lukewarm water, and his garters may be 
tied a little tighter than usual. Ligatures may be applied to 
the arms, about the place where they are usually made for 
bleeding, and with nearly the same degree of tightness. 
These must be gradually flackened as the blood begins to 
stop, and removed entirely as foon as it gives over. 

Sometimes dry lint put up the nostrils will stop the bleed- 
ing. When this does not succeed, dossils of lint dipped in 
strong spirits of wine, may be put up the nostrils, or, if these 
cannot be had, they may be dipped in brandy. Blue vitriol, 
dissolved in water, may likewise be used for this purpose, or 
a tent dipped in the white of an egg, well beat up, may be 
rolled in a powder made of equal parts of white sugar, burnt 
allum, and white vitriol, and put up the nostril from whence 
the blood issues. 

Internal medicines can hardly be of use here, as they have 
seldom time to operate. It may not, however, be amiss to 
give the patient half an ounce of Glauber's salts, and the 
same quantity of manna, dissolved in four or five ounces of 
barley-water. This may be taken at a draught, and re- 
peted if it does not operate, in a few hours. Ten or twelve 
grains of nitre may be taken in a glass of cold water and vine- 
gar every hour, or oftener, if the stomach will bear it. If a 
stronger medicine be necessary, a tea-cupful-of the tincture of 
roses, with twenty or thirty drops of the weak spirit of vi- 
triol, may be taken every hour. When these things cannot 
|P_517
be had, the patient may drink water with a little common 
salt in it, or equal parts of water and vinegar. 

If the genitals be immersed for some time in cold water, it 
will generally stop a bleeding at the nose. I have seldom 
known this fail. 

Sometimes, when the bleeding is stopped outwardly, it con- 
tinues inwardly. This is very troublesome, and requires 
particular attention, as the patient is apt to be suffocated 
with the blood, especially if he falls asleep, which he is very 
ready to do after losing a great quantity of blood. 

When the patient is in danger of suffocation, from the 
blood getting into his throat, the passages may be stopped 
by drawing threads up the nostrils, and bringing them out of 
the mouth, then fastening pieces of sponge, or small rolls of 
linen cloth to their extremities; afterwards drawing them 
back, and tying them on the outside with a fussicient degree 
of tightness. 

After the bleeding is stopped, the patient ought to be kept 
as easy and quiet as possible. He should not pick his nose, 
nor take away the tents or clotted blood, till they fall off of 
their own accord, and should not lie with his head low. 
Buchan. Chambers. 

[}Burns. }]
In slight burns, which do not break the skin, it is custo- 
mary to hold the part near the fire, for a competent time; to 
rub it with salt; or to lay a compress upon it dipped in spi- 
rits of wine or brandy. But when the burn has penetrated 
so deep as to blister or break the skin, it must be dressed with 
some of the following liniment:— 

Take equal parts of Florence oil, or of fresh drawn linseed 
oil, and lime-water; shake them well together in a wide 
mouthed bottle, so as to form a liniment. It may either be 
spread upon a cloth, or the parts affected may be anointed 
with it twice or thrice a-day; or it may be dressed with 
the emollient and gently drying ointment, commonly cal- 
led Turner's cerate. This may be mixed with an equal 
quantity of fresh olive oil, and spread upon a soft rag, and 
applied to the part affected. When this ointment cannot be 
had, an egg may be beat up with about an equal quantity of 
the sweetest salad oil. This will serve very well till a pro- 
per ointment can be prepared. When the burning is very 
|P_518
deep, after the first two or three days it should he dressed 
with equal parts of yellow basilicum, and Turner's cerate, 
mixed together. 

When the burn is violent, or has occasioned a high de- 
gree of inflammation, and there is reason to fear a gangrene 
or mortification, the same means muft be used to prevent it 
as are recommended in other violent inflammations. The 
patient, in this case, must live low, and drink freely of 
weak diluting liquors. He must likewise be bled, and have 
his body kept open. But if the burnt parts should become 
livid or black, with other symptoms of mortification, it will 
be necessary to bathe them frequently with warm camphor- 
ated spirits of wine, tincture of myrrh, or other antiseptics, 
mixed with a decoction of the bark. In this case, the bark 
must likewise be taken internally, and the patient's diet must 
be more generous. Buchan. 

[}Colds. }]
Colds are well known to be the effects of an obstructed 
perspiration. Ve shall not spend our time in enumerating 
all the various symptoms of colds, as they are pretty gene- 
rally known. It may not, however, be amiss to observe, 
that almost every cold is a kind of fever, which only differs 
in degree. 

No age, sex, or constitution, is exempted from this disease; 
neither is it in the power of any medicine or regimen to pre- 
vent it. The inhabitants of every climate are liable to catch 
cold, nor can even the greatest circumspection defend them 
at all times from its attacks. Indeed, if the human body 
could be kept constantly in an uniform degree of warmth, 
such a thing as catching cold would be impossible; but as 
that cannot be effected by any means, the perspiration must 
be liable to many changes. Such changes, however, when 
small, do not affect the health; but, when great, they must 
prove hurtful. 

When oppression of the breast, a stuffing of the nose, un- 
usual weariness, pain of the head, &c. give ground to believe 
that the perspiration is obstructed, or, in other words, that 
the person has caught cold, he ought immediately to lessen 
his diet, at least the usual quantity of his solid food, and to 
abstain from all strong liquors. Instead of flesh, fish, eggs, 
milk, and other nourishing diet, he may eat light bread pud- 
|P_519
ding, veal or chicken broth, panada, gruels, and such like. 
His drink may be water gruel sweetened with a little honey; 
an infusion of balm, or linseed sharpened with the juice of 
orange or lemon; a decoction of barley and liquorice with 
tamarinds, or any other cool, diluting, acid liquor. 

Above all, his supper should be light; as small posset, or 
water gruel sweetened with honey, and a little toasted bread 
in it. If honey should disagree with the stomach, the gruel 
may be sweetened with treacle or coarse sugar, and sharpened 
with the jelly of currants. Those who have been accustomed 
to generous liquors, may take wine-whey instead of gruel, 
which may be sweetened as above. 

The patient ought to be longer than usual in bed, and to 
encourage a gentle sweat, which is easily brought on towards 
morning, by drinking tea, or any kind of warm diluting li- 
quor. I have often known this pratice carry off a cold in 
one day, which in all probability, had it been neglected, 
would have cost the patient his life, or have confined him for 
some months. Would people sacrifice a little time to ease 
and warmth, and practice a moderate degree of abstinence, 
when the first symptoms of a cold appear, we have reason to 
believe, that most of the bad effects which flow from an ob- 
structed perspiration, might be prevented. But after the dis- 
ease has gathered strength by delay, all attempts to remove it 
often prove vain. A pleurisy, a peripneumony, or a fatal 
consumption of the lungs, are the common effects of colds, 
which have either been totally neglected, or treated impro- 
perly. 

It is certain, however, that colds may be too much in- 
dulged. When a person, for every slight cold, shuts himself 
up in a warm room, and drinks great quantities of warm, li- 
quor, it may occasion such a general relaxation of the solids, 
as will not easily be removed. It will therefore be proper, 
when the disease will permit, and the weather is mild, to 
join to the regimen mentioned above, gentle exercise; as 
walking, riding on horseback, or in a carriage, &c. An ob- 
stinate cold, which no medicine can remove, will yield to 
gentle exercise, and a proper regimen of the diet. Tissot. 
Buchan. Fothergil. 

|P_520
[}The Colic. }]
Colics, which proceed from excess and indigestion, gene- 
rally cure themselves, by occasioning vomiting or purging. 
These discharges are by no means to be stopped, but pro- 
moted by drinking plentifully of warm water, or weak posset. 
When their violence is over, the patient may take a dose of 
rhubarb, or any other gentle purge, to carry off the dregs of 
his debauch. 

Colics which are occasioned by wet feet, or catching cold, 
may generally be removed at the beginning, by bathing the 
feet and legs in warm water, and drinking such warm dilut- 
ing liquors as will promote the perspiration, as weak wine 
whey, or water gruel with a small quantity of spirits in it. 

These flatulent colics, which prevail so much among 
country people, might generally be prevented, were they 
careful to change their clothes when they get wet. They 
ought likewise to take a dram, or to drink some kind of warm 
liquor, after eating any kind of green trash. We do not 
mean to recommend the practice of dram-drinking, but in 
this case ardent spirits prove a real medicine, and indeed the 
best that can be administered. A glass of good peppermint 
water will have nearly the same effect as a glass of brandy, 
and in some cases is rather to be preferred. 

The bilious colic is attended with very acute pains about 
the region of the navel. The patient complains of great 
thirst, and is generally costive. He vomits a hot, bitter, 
yellow-coloured bile, which being discharged, seems to afford 
some relief, but is quickly followed by the same violent pain 
as before. As the distemper advances, the propensity to vo- 
mit sometimes increases so as to become almost continual, 
and the proper motion of the intestines is so far perverted, 
that there are all the symptoms of an impending iliac passion. 

If the patient be young and strong, and the pulse full and 
frequent, it will be proper to bleed; after which clysters may 
be administered. Clear whey or gruel, sharpened with the 
juice of lemon, or cream of tartar, must be drank freely. 
Small chicken broth, with a little manna dissolved in it, or 
a slight decoction of tamarinds, are likewise very proper; or 
any other thin, acid, opening liquor. 

In the bilious colic, the vomiting is often very difficult to 
restrain. When this happens, the patient may drink a de- 
|P_521
coction of toasted bread, or an infusion of garden mint in 
boiling water. Should these not have the desired effect, the 
saline draught, with a few drops of laudanum in it, may be 
given, and repeated according to the urgency of the symp- 
toms. A small quantity of Venice treacle may be spread 
in form of a cataplasm, and applied to the pit of the stomach. 
Clysters, with a proper quantity of Venice treacle or liquid 
laudanum in them, may likewise be frequently administered. 

The general treatment of the nervous colic is so nearly the 
same with that of the iliac passion, or inflammation of the 
guts, that we shall not insist upon it. The body is to be 
opened by mild purgatives given in small doses, and frequent- 
ly repeated; and their operation must be assisted by soft, oily 
clysters, fomentations, &c. The castor oil is reckoned pecu- 
liarly proper in this disease. It may both be mixed with the 
clysters, and given by the mouth. Arbuthnot. Buchan. 

[}Consumption. }]
This disease generally begins with a dry cough, which 
often continues for some months. If a disposition to vomit 
after eating be excited by it, there is still greater reason to 
fear an approaching consumption. The patient complains 
of a more than usual degree of heat, a pain and oppression of 
the breast, especially after motion; his spittle is of a saltish 
taste, and sometimes mixed with blood. He is apt to be 
sad: his appetite is bad, and his thirst great. There is ge- 
nerally a quick, soft, small pulse; though sometimes the 
pulse is pretty full, and rather hard. These are the common 
symptoms of a beginning consumption. 

Next to proper air and exercise, we would recommend a 
due attention to diet. The patient should eat nothing that is 
either heating, or hard of digestion; and his drink must be of 
a soft and cooling nature. All the diet ought to be calcu- 
lated to lessen the acrimony of the humours, and to nourish 
and support the patient. For this purpose he must keep 
chiefly to the use of vegetables and milk. Milk alone is of 
more value in this disease than the whole materia medica. 

I have known very extraordinary effects from asses milk in 
obstinate coughs, which threatened a consumption of the 
lungs; and do verily believe, if used at this period, that it 
would seldom fail; but if it be delayed till an ulcer is 
|P_522
formed, which is generally the case, how can it be expected 
to succeed? 

Some extraordinary cures in consumptive cases, have been 
performed by womens' milk. Could this be obtained in suf- 
ficient quantity, I would recommend it in preference to any 
other. If the patient can suck it from the breast, it is better 
than to drink it afterwards. I knew a man who was reduced 
to such a degree of weakness in a consumption, as not to be 
able to turn himself in his bed. His wife was at that time 
giving suck, and his child happening to die, he sucked her 
breasts, not with a view to reap any advantage from the milk, 
but to make her easy. Finding himself however greatly be- 
nefited by it, he continued to suck her till he became perfectly 
well, and is at present a strong and healthy man. 

Cows milk is most readily obtained of any; and though it 
may not be so easily digested as that of asses or mares, it may 
be rendered lighter, by adding to it an equal quantity of bar- 
ley-water, or allowing it to stand for some hours, and after- 
wards taking off the cream. If it should, notwithstanding, 
prove heavy on the stomach, a small quantity of brandy or 
rum, with a little sugar, may be added, which will render it 
both more light and nourishing. 

For the patient's drink, we would recommend infusions of 
the bitter plants, as ground-ivy, the lesser centaury, camo- 
mile flowers, or water trefoil. These infusions may be drank 
at pleasure. They strengthen the stomach, promote diges- 
tion, rectify the blood, and at the same time answer all the 
purposes of dilution; and quench thirst much better than 
things that are luscious or sweet. But if the patient spits 
blood, he ought to use, for his ordinary drink, infusions or 
decoctions of the vulnerary roots, plants, &c. Steevens. Tissot. Buchan. 

[}Chilblains. }]
Chilblains often attack children in cold weather. They 
are generally occasioned by the feet or hands being kept wet 
or cold, and afterwards suddenly heated. When children are 
cold, instead of taking exercise to warm themselves gradually, 
they run to the fire. This occasions a sudden rarefaction 
of the humours, and an infarction of the vessels; which be- 
ing often repeated, the vessels are, at last, over-distended, 
and forced to give way. 

|P_523
To prevent it, violent cold, and sudden heat, must be 
equally avoided. When the parts begin to look red and 
swell, the patient ought to be purged, and to have the affected 
parts rubbed frequently with mustard and brandy, or some- 
thing of a warming nature. They ought likewise to be co- 
vered with flannel, and kept warm and dry. Some apply 
warm ashes betwixt cloth to the swelled parts, which fre- 
quently help to reduce them. When there is a sore, it must 
be dressed with Turner's cerate, the ointment of tutty, the 
plaster of cerus, or some other drying ointment. These sores 
are indeed troublesome, but seldom dangerous. They gene- 
rally heal as soon as the warm weather sets in. Buchan. 

[}Costiveness. }]
Costiveness is increased by keeping the body too warm, 
and by every thing that promotes the perspiration; as wear- 
ing flannel, lying too long a bed, &c. Intense thought, and 
a sedentary life, are likewise hurtful. All the secretions and 
excretions are promoted by moderate exercise without doors, 
and by a gay, cheerful, sprightly, temper of mind. 

Thole who are troubled with costiveness, ought, if possible, 
to remedy it by diet, as the constant use of medicines for 
that purpose is attended with many inconveniencies, and often 
with bad consequences. I never knew any one get into a ha- 
bit of taking medicine for keeping the body open, who could 
leave it off. In time, the custom becomes necessary; and ge- 
nerally ends in a total relaxation of the bowess, indigestion, 
loss of appetite, wasting of the strength, and death. 

When the body cannot be kept open without medicine, I 
would recommend gentle doses of rhubarb to be taken twice 
or thrice a week. This is not near so injurious to the sto- 
mach, as aloes, jalap, or the other drastic purgatives so much 
in use. Infusions of senna and manna may likewise be taken, 
or half an ounce of soluble tartar dissolved in water gruel. 
About the size of a nutmeg of lenitive electuary, taken twice 
or thrice a day, generally answers the purpose very well. 

[}Common Cough. }]
A cough is generally the effect of a cold, which has either 
been improperly treated, or entirely neglected. When it 
proves obstinate, there is always reason to fear the conse- 
|P_524
quences, as this shews a weak state of the lungs, and is often 
the fore-runner of a consumption. 

When the cough is not attended with any degree of fever, 
and the spittle is viscid and tough, sharp pectoral medicines 
are to be administered; as gum ammoniac, squills, &c. Two 
table spoonfuls of the solution of gum ammoniac may be 
taken three or four times a day, more or less, according to 
the age or constitution of the patient. Squills may be given 
various ways; two ounces of vinegar, the oxymel, or the 
syrup, may be mixed with the same quantity of simple cin- 
namon water; to which may be added an ounce of common 
water, and an ounce of balsamic syrup. Two table spoon- 
fuls of this mixture may be taken three or four times a day. 

A syrup made of equal parts of lemon-juice, honey, and 
sugar-candy, is likewise very proper in this kind of cough. 
A table spoonful of it may be taken at pleasure. 

In obstinate coughs, proceeding from a flux of humours 
upon the lungs, it will often be necessary, besides expectora- 
ting medicines, to have recourse to issues, setons, or some 
other drain. In this case I have often observed the most 
happy effects from a Burgundy pitch plaster applied between 
the shoulders. I have ordered this simple remedy in the most 
obstinate coughs, in a great number of cases, and in many 
different constitutions, without ever knowing it fail to give 
relief, unless there were evident signs of an ulcer in the 
lungs. 

But coughs proceed from many other causes besides deflux- 
ions upon the lungs. In these cases the cure is not to be at- 
tempted by pectoral medicines. Thus, in a cough proceed- 
ing from a foulness and debility of the stomach, syrups, oils, 
mucilages, and all kinds of balsamic medicines do hurt. The 
stomach cough may be known from one that is owing to a 
fault in the lungs, by this—that in the latter, the patient 
coughs whenever he inspires, or draws in his breath fully; 
but in the former, that does not happen. Tissot. Buchan. 
Chambers. 

[}The Cramp. }]
Cramps are often prevented or cured by compression. 
Thus cramps in the legs are prevented, and sometimes re- 
moved, by tight bandages; and when convulsions arise from 
a flatulent distention of the intestines, or from spasms begin- 
|P_525
ning in them, they may be often lessened or cured, by making 
a pretty strong compression upon the abdomen, by means of a 
broad belt. A roll of brimstone held in the hands is fre- 
quently used as a remedy for cramps. Though this seems 
to owe its effects chiefly to imagination; yet, as it sometimes 
succeeds, it merits a trial. When spasms or convulsive mo- 
tions arise from sharp humours in the stomach and intestines, 
no lasting relief can be procured till these are either cor- 
rected or expelled. The Peruvian bark has sometimes cured 
periodic convulsions after other medicines had failed. 

[}The Dropsy. }]
Take of broom-seed, well powdered and sifted, one drachm; 
let it steep twelve hours in a glass and half of good rich white- 
wine, and take it in the morning fasting, having first shaken 
it, so that the whole may be swallowed. Walk after it, if 
you are able, or use what exercise you can without fatigue, 
for an hour and a half [/1./]
; after which you must be sure to 
take two ounces of olive-oil; and you must not eat or drink 
any thing in less than half an hour, or an hour, after taking 
the oil. Repeat this every other day, or once in three days, 
and not oftener, till cured; and do not let blood, or use any 
other remedy during the course. 

Nothing can be more gentle and safe than the operation of 
this remedy, and it often has little or no sensible one. If 
the dropsy is in the body, it discharges it by urine, without 
any inconvenience; if it is between the skin and flesh, it 
causes blisters to arise on the legs, by which it will run off; 
but this does not happen to more than one in thirty; and in 
this case no plasters must be used, for they would hinder the 
discharge; but you must apply red cabbage-leaves. If the 
disorder is caused by wind, it dispels the phlegm that retains 
the wind. It cures the dropsy in pregnant women, without 
injury to the mother or the infant. It also cures the asthma, 
|P_526
consumption, and disorders of the liver. It is good for the 
bleeding at the nose, and for venomous bites and poisons. 

The efficacy of the above remedy has been proved by the 
cure of upwards of fifty dropsical women with child, and by 
that of more than three hundred other people of both sexes. 

Not long since, this recipe was recommended to a lady, 
who seemed to be in, or nearly in, the last stage of a dropsy. 
She was so much swoln, that she appeared like a woman in 
the last month of her pregnancy, and her disorder had re- 
sisted every thing that had been done for her by the faculty. 
She took the broom-seed, but could not take the whole of 
the oil; however, in a very few months, her husband wrote 
a letter of thanks for her speedy and surprising recovery [/2./]. 

Soon after, the report of this extraordinary cure induced 
another lady, who was afflicted with a dropsy, to make trial 
of the remedy. She was not so much swoln as the former 
lady, but she was exceedingly emaciated, and was so weak, 
that she was carried like an infant into her carriage, when 
she went to take the air; and she had failed of relief from 
the advice of two of the most eminent physicians in London, 
who had pronounced it an ascites, with encysted water. Hap- 
pily they were too liberal minded to set their faces against the 
remedy, as some others have since done, because it was not 
of their acquaintance. This lady followed the directions 
of the recipe very exactly, and was restored to health in a 
few months. 

These successes induced the lady, at whose desire it is pub- 
lished, to recommend the remedy with avidity whenever oc- 
casion offered; and it has pleased God to crown her endea- 
vours with such wonderful success, that she thinks she may 
venture to affirm, that she has never known it fail to cure, 
when taken according to the recipe, and while there was any 
degree of strength remaining; and that it is almost as certain 
a specific for the dropsy, as the bark is for the intermitting 
fever. 

|P_527
[}The Gout. }]
As there are no medicines yet known that will cure the 
gout, we shall confine our observations chiefly to regimen, 
both in and out of the fit. 

In the fit, if the patient be young and strong, his diet 
ought to be thin and cooling, and his drink of a diluting 
nature; but when the constitution is weak, and the patient 
has been accustomed to live high, this is not a proper time to 
retrench. In this case, he must keep nearly to his usual diet, 
and should take frequently a cup of strong negus, or a glass 
of generous wine. Wine whey is a very proper drink in 
this case, as it promotes the perspiration without greatly 
heating the patient. It will answer this purpose better, if a 
tea-spoonful of sal volatile oleosum, or spirits of hartshorn, be 
put into a cup of it twice a-day. It will likewise be proper 
to give at bed-time, a tea-spoonful of the volatile tincture of 
guaiacum, in a large draught of warm wine whey. This will 
greatly promote perspiration through the night. 

Many things will shorten a fit of the gout, and some will 
drive it off altogether; but nothing has yet been found 
which will do this with safety to the patient. In plain, we 
eagerly grasp at any thing that promises immediate ease, and 
even hazard life itself for a temporary relief. This is the 
true reason why so many infallible remedies have been pro- 
posed for the gout, and why such numbers have lost their 
lives by the use of them. It would be as prudent to stop the 
small-pox from rising, and to drive them into the blood, as to 
attempt to repel the gouty matter after it has been thrown 
upon the extremities. The latter is as much an effort of na- 
ture to free herself from an offending cause as the former, 
and ought equally to be promoted. 

After the fit is over, the patient ought to take a gentle 
dose or two of the bitter tincture of rhubarb, or some other 
warm stomachic purge. He should also drink a weak infu- 
sion of stomachic bitters in small wine or ale, as the Peru- 
vian bark, with cinnamon, Virginian snake-root, and orange- 
peel. The diet at this time should be light, but nourishing; 
and gentle exercise ought to be taken on horseback, or in a 
carriage. Sydenham. Tissot. Buchan. 

|P_528
[}The Gravel and Stone. }]
Persons afflicted with the gravel or stone, should avoid ali- 
ments of a windy or heating nature, as salt meats, sour fruits, 
&c. Their diet ought chiefly to consist of such things as 
tend to promote the secretion of urine, and to keep the body 
open. Artichokes, asparagus, spinach, lettuce, parsley, suc- 
cory, purslane, turnips, potatoes, carrots, and radishes, may 
be safely eat. Onions, leeks, and celery, are, in this case, 
reckoned medicinal. The most proper drinks are whey, 
butter-milk, milk and water, barley-water; decoctions of the 
roots of marsh mallows, parsley, liquorice, or of other mild 
mucilaginous vegetables, as linseed, limetree-buds, or leaves, 
&c. If the patient has been accustomed to generous liquors, 
he may drink small gin-punch, without acid. 

Dr. Whyte advises patients who are subject to frequent fits 
of the gravel in the kidnies, but have no stone in the bladder, 
to drink, every morning, two or three hours before breakfast, 
an English pint of oyster, or cockle-shell lime-water. The 
doctor very justly observes, that though this quantity might 
be too small to have any sensible effect in dissolving a stone 
in the bladder, yet it may very probably prevent its growth. 

When a stone is formed in the bladder, the doctor recom- 
mends Alicant soap, oyster or cockle-shell lime-water, to be 
taken in the following manner: The patient must swallow, 
every day, in any form that is least disagreeable, an ounce of 
the internal part of Alicant soap, and drink three or four 
English pints of oyster, or cockle-shell lime-water. The 
soap is to be divided into three doses; the largest to be taken 
fasting in the morning early; the second at noon; and 
the third at seven in the evening; drinking above each dose 
a large draught of the lime-water; the remainder of which 
he may take any time betwixt dinner and supper, instead of 
other liquors. 

The patient should begin with a smaller quantity of the 
lime-water and soap than that mentioned above; at first, an 
English pint of the former, and three drachms of the latter, 
may be taken daily. This quantity, however, he may in- 
crease by degrees, and ought to persevere in the use of these 
medicines, especially if he finds any abatement of his com- 
plaints, for several months; nay, if the stone be very large, 
|P_529
for years. It may likewise be proper for the patient, if 
he be severely pained, not only to begin with the soap and 
lime-water in small quantities, but to take the second or 
third lime-water instead of the first. However, after he has 
been accustomed to these medicines, he may not only take 
the first water, but, if he finds he can easily bear it, heighten 
its dissolving power still more, by pouring it a second time 
on fresh calcined shells. 

The caustic alkali, or soap-lees, is the medicine chiefly in 
vogue at present for the stone. It is of a very acrid nature, 
and ought therefore to be given in some gelatinous or muci- 
laginous liquor; as veal-broth, new milk, linseed tea, a solu- 
tion of gum arabic, or a decoction of marsh-mallow roots. 
The patient must begin with small doses of the lees, as thirty 
or forty drops, and increase by degrees, as far as the sto- 
mach will bear it. 

The only other medicine which I shall mention is the uva 
ursi. It has been greatly extolled of late both for the gravel 
and stone. It seems, however, to be in all respects inferior 
to the soap and lime-water; but it is less disagreeable, and 
has frequently, to my knowledge, relieved gravelly com- 
plaints. It is generally taken in powder from half a drachm 
to a whole drachm, two or three times a-day. It may, 
however, be taken to the quantity of seven of eight drachms 
a-day, with great safety and good effect. Buchan. 

[}The Gripes in Children. }]
When an infant is troubled with gripes, it ought not at 
first to be dosed with brandy, spiceries, and other hot 
things; but should have its body opened with an emollient 
clyster, and, at the same time, a little brandy may be rubbed 
on its belly with a warm hand before the fire. I have sel- 
dom seen this fail to ease the gripes of infants. If it should 
happen, however, not to succeed, a little brandy, or other 
spirits, may be mixed with thrice the quantity of warm wa- 
ter, and a tea-spoonful be given frequently, till the infant be 
easier. Sometimes a little peppermint water will answer this 
purpose wery well. 

|P_530
[}The Hooping, or Chin Cough. }]
One of the most effectual remedies in the chin-cough, is 
change of air. This often removes the malady, even when 
the change seems to be from a purer, to a less wholesome 
air. This may, in some measure, depend on the patient's 
being removed from the place where the infection prevails. 
Most of the diseases of children are infectious; nor is it at 
all uncommon to find the chin-cough prevailing in one 
town or village, when another, at a very small distance, is 
quite free from it. But whatever be the cause, we are sure 
of the fact. No time ought, therefore, to be lost in removing 
the patient at some distance from the place where he caught 
the disease, and, if possible, into a more pure and warm 
air. 

When the disease proves violent, and the patient is in dan- 
ger of being suffocated by the cough, he ought to be bled, 
especially if there be a fever, with a hard full pulse. But as 
the chief intention of bleeding is to prevent an inflammation 
of the lungs, and to render it more safe to give vomits, it 
will seldom be necessary to repeat the operation; yet if there 
be symptoms of an inflammation of the lungs, a second, or 
even a third bleeding, may be requisite. 

The body ought to be kept gently open. The best medi- 
cines for this purpose are rhubarb and its preparations, as the 
syrup, tincture, &c. Of these a tea-spoonful or two may be 
given to an infant twice or thrice a-day, as there is occasion. 
To such as are farther advanced, the dose must be propor- 
tionally increased, and repeated till it has the desired effect. 
Those who cannot be brought to take the bitter tincture, 
may have an infusion of senna and prunes, sweetened with 
manna, coarse sugar, or honey; or a few grains of rhubarb 
mixed with a tea-spoonful or two of syrup, or currant jelly, 
so as to disguise the taste. Most children are fond of syrups 
and jellies, and seldom refuse even a disagreeable medicine 
when mixed with them. 

The garlic ointment is a well known remedy in North 
Britain for the chin-cough. It is made by beating in a mor- 
tar, garlic, with an equal quantity of hogs lard. With this 
the soles of the feet may be rubbed twice or thrice a-day; 
but the best method is to spread it upon a rag, and apply it 
in the form of a plaster. It should be renewed every night 
|P_531
and morning at least, as the garlic soon loses its virtue. 
This is an exceeding good medicine, both in the chin-cough, 
and in most other coughs of an obstinate nature. It ought 
not, however, to be used when the patient is very hot and 
feverish, lest it should increase these symptoms. 

The feet should be bathed, once in every two or three 
days, in lukewarm water; and a Burgundy-pitch plaister kept 
constantly between the shoulders. But when the disease 
proves very violent, it will be necessary, instead of it, to ap- 
ply a blistering plaster, and keep the part open for some time 
with issue-ointment. 

When the disease is prolonged, and the patient is free from 
a fever, the Peruvian bark, and other bitters, are the most 
proper medicines. The bark may either be taken in sub- 
stance, or in a decoction or infusion, as is most agreeable. 
For a child, ten, fifteen, or twenty grains, according to the 
age of the patient, may be given three or four times a-day. 
For an adult, half a drachm, or two scruples, will be proper. 
Some give the extract of the bark with cantharides; but to 
manage this, requires a considerable attention. It is more 
safe to give a few grains of castor along with the bark. A 
child of six or seven years of age, may take seven or eight 
grains of castor, with fifteen grains of powdered bark, for 
a dose. This may be made into a mixture with two or 
three ounces of simple distilled water, and a little syrup, 
and taken three or four times a-day. Buchan. Chambers. 

[}The Jaundice. }]
This disease is first observable in the white of the eye, 
which appears yellow. Afterwards the whole skin puts on 
a yellow appearance. The urine too is of a saffron colour, 
and dyes a white cloth of the same colour. There is likewise 
a species of this disease called the black jaundice. 

If the patient be young, and the disease complicated with 
no other malady, it is seldom dangerous; but in old people, 
where it continues long, returns frequently, or is compli- 
cated with the dropsy, or hypochondriac symptoms, it gene- 
rally proves fatal. The black jaundice is more dangerous 
than the yellow. 

If the patient be young, of a full sanguine habit, and com- 
plains of pain in the right side, about the region of the liver, 
bleeding will be necessary. After this, a vomit must be ad- 
|P_532
ministered, and if the disease proves obstinate, it may be re- 
peated once or twice. No medicines are more beneficial in 
the jaundice than vomits, especially where it is not attended 
with inflammation. Half a drachm of ipecacuanha, in powder, 
will be a sufficient dose for an adult. It may be wrought off 
with weak camomile tea, or lukewarm water. The body 
must likewise be kept open, by taking a sufficient quantity of 
Castile soap. 

I have known Harrowgate sulphur-water cure the jaundice 
of very long standing. It should be used for some weeks, 
and the patient must drink and bathe. 

The soluble tartar is a very proper medicine in the jaun- 
dice. A drachm of it may be taken every night and morn- 
ing in a cup of tea or water-grueI. If it does not open the 
body, the dose may be increased. A very obstinate jaundice 
has been cured by swallowing raw eggs. 

Persons subject to the jaundice, ought to take as much ex- 
ercise as possible, and to avoid all heating and astringent ali- 
ments. Buchan. 

[}The Itch. }]
The itch is seldom a dangerous disease, unless where it 
is rendered so by neglect, or improper treatment. If it be 
suffered to continue too long, it may vitiate the whole mass 
of humours; and if it be suddenly drove in, without proper 
evacuations, it may occasion fevers, inflammations of the vis- 
cera, or other internal disorders. 

The best medicine yet known for the itch, is sulphur, which 
ought to be used both externally and internally. The parts 
most affected may be rubbed with an ointment made of the 
flowers of sulphur, two ounces; crude sal ammoniac, finely 
powdered, two drachms; hogs lard, or butter, four ounces; 
if a scruple or half a drachm of the essence of lemon be added, 
it will entirely take away the disagreeable smell. About the 
bulk of a nutmeg of this may be rubbed upon the extremi- 
ties, at bed-time, twice or thrice a-week. It is seldom ne- 
cessary to rub the whole body; but when it is, it ought not 
to be done all at once, as it is dangerous to stop too many 
pores at the same time. 

Before the patient begins to use the ointment, he ought, if 
he be of a full habit, to bleed, or take a purge or two. It 
will likewise be proper, during the use of it, to take every 
|P_533
morning as much of the flower of brimstone and cream of 
tartar, in a little treacle or new milk, as will keep the body 
gently open. He should beware of catching cold, should 
wear more clothes than usual, and take every thing warm. 
The same clothes, the linen excepted, ought to be worn all 
the time of using the ointment; and such clothes as have 
been worn while the patient was under the disease, are not to 
be used again, unless they have been fumigated with brim- 
stone, and thoroughly cleaned, otherwise they will commu- 
nicate the infection anew [/3./]. Pringle. 

[}A Diarrhœa, or Looseness. }]
A looseness, in many cases, is not to be considered as a 
disease, but rather as a salutary evacuation. It ought, there- 
fore, never to be stopped, unless when it continues too long, 
or evidently weakens the patient. As this, however, some- 
times happens, I shall point out the most common causes of 
a looseness, with the proper method of treatment. 

When a looseness is occasioned by catching cold, or an 
obstructed perspiration, the patient ought to keep warm, to 
drink freely of weak diluting liquors, to bathe his feet and 
legs frequently in lukewarm water, to wear flannel next his 
skin, and to take every other method to restore the perspira- 
tion. 

In a looseness which proceeds from excess or repletion, a 
vomit is the proper medicine. Vomits not only cleanse the 
stomach, but promote all the secretions, which render them 
of great importance in carrying off a debauch. Half a 
drachm of ipecacuanha, in powder, will answer this purpose 
very well. A day or two after the vomit, the same quantity 
of rhubarb may be taken, and repeated two or three times, if 
the looseness continues. The patient ought to live upon 
light vegetable food of easy digestion, and to drink whey, 
thin gruel, or barley-water. 

A looseness, occasioned by the obstruction of any cus- 
tomary evacuation, generally requires bleeding. If that 
|P_534
does not succeed, other evacuations may be substituted in 
the room of those which are obstructed. At the same time, 
every method is to be taken to restore the usual discharges, 
as not only the cure of the disease, but the patient's life, may 
depend on this. 

A periodical looseness ought never to be stopped. It is 
always an effort of nature to carry off some offending matter, 
which, if retained in the body, might have fatal effects. 
Children are very liable to this kind of looseness, especially 
while toothing. It is, however, so far from being hurtful to 
them, that such children generally get their teeth with less 
trouble. If these loose stools should at any time prove sour 
or griping, a tea-spoonful of magnesia alba, with four or five 
grains of rhubarb, may be given to the child in a little pa- 
nada, or any other food. This, if repeated, three or four 
times, will generally correct the acidity, and carry off the 
griping stools. 

From whatever cause a looseness proceeds, when it is 
found necessary to check it, the diet ought to consist of rice 
boiled with milk, and flavoured with cinnamon; rice-jelly; 
sago, with red port; and the lighter sorts of flesh-meat 
roasted. The drink may be thin water-gruel, rice water, or 
weak broth made from lean veal, or with a sheep's head, as 
being more gelatinous than mutton, beef, or chicken-broth. 
Buchan. 

[}Obstructions in young Girls. }]
After a female has arrived at that period of life when the 
menses usually begin to flow, and they do not appear, but, on 
the contrary, her health and spirits begin to decline, I would 
advise, instead of shutting the poor girl up in the house, and 
dosing her with steel, asafœtida, and other nauseous drugs, 
to place her in a situation where she can enjoy the benefit of 
free air and agreeable company. There let her eat whole- 
some food, take sufficient exercise, and amuse herself in the 
most agreeable manner; and we have little reason to fear, but 
nature, thus assisted, will do her proper work. Indeed she 
seldom fails, unless where the fault is on our side. 

This discharge, in the beginning, is seldom so instantane- 
ous as to surprise females unawares. It is generally preceded 
by symptoms which foretel its approach; as a sense of heat, 
weight, and dull pain in the loins; distention and hardness 
of the breasts; head-ach; loss of appetite; lassitude; pale- 
|P_535
ness of the countenance; and sometimes a slight degree of 
fever. When these symptoms appear about the age at which 
the menstrual flux usually begins, eyery thing should be 
carefully avoided which may obstruct that necessary and salu- 
tary evacuation; and all means used to promote it; as sitting 
frequently over the steam of warm water, drinking warm di- 
luting liquors, &c. 

After the menses have once begun to flow, the greatest care 
should be taken to avoid every thing that may tend to ob- 
struct them. Females ought to be exceeding cautious of 
what they eat or drink at the time they are out of order. 
Every thing that is cold, or apt to sour on the stomach, 
ought to be avoided; as fruit, butter-milk, and such like. 
Firm, and all kinds of food that are hard of digestion, are 
also to be avoided. As it is impossible to mention every 
thing that may disagree with individuals at this time, I would 
recommend it to every female to be very attentive to what 
disagrees with herself, and carefully to avoid it. 

From whatever cause this flux is obstructed, except in the 
state of pregnancy, proper means should be used to restore it. 
For this purpose, I would recommend sufficient exercise, in 
a dry, open, and rather cool air; wholesome diet, and if the 
body be weak and languid, generous liquors; also cheerful 
company, and all manner of amusements. If these fail, re- 
course must be had to medicine. 

When obstructions proceed from a weak relaxed state of 
the solids, such medicines as tend to promote digestion, to 
brace the solids, and assist the body in preparing good blood, 
ought to be used. The principal of these are iron, and the 
Peruvian bark, with all other bitter and astringent medicines. 
Filings of iron may be infused in wine or ale, two or three 
ounces to an English quart, and after it has stood for two or 
three weeks, it may be filtered, and about half a wine glass 
of it taken twice a-day: or prepared steel may be taken in 
the dose of half a drachm, mixed with a little honey, or 
treacle, three or four times a-day. The bark, and other bit- 
ters, may either be taken in substance, or infusion, as is most 
agreeable to the patient. 

But the menstrual flux may be too great, as well as too 
small. When this happens, the patient becomes weak, the 
colour pale, the appetite and digestion are bad, and œdema- 
tous swellings of the feet, dropsies, and consumptions ensue. 
This frequently happens to women about the age of forty- 
|P_536
five or fifty, and is very difficult to cure. It may proceed 
from a sedentary life, a full diet, consisting chiefly of salted, 
high seasoned, or acrid food; the use of spiritous liquors; 
excessive fatigue; relaxation; a dissolved state of the blood; 
violent passions of the mind, &c. 

The treatment of this disease must be varied according to 
its cause. When it is occasioned by any error in the pa- 
tient's regimen, an opposite course to that which induced the 
disorder must be pursued, and such medicines taken as have 
a tendency to restrain the flux, and counteract the morbid af- 
fections of the system from whence it proceeds. Arbuthnot. 

[}The Bleeding and Blind Piles. }]
A discharge of blood from the hœmorrhoidal vessels, is 
called the bleeding piles. When the vessels only swell, and 
discharge no blood, but are exceeding painful, the disease is 
called the blind piles. 

A flux of blood from the anus is not always to be treated 
as a disease. It is even more salutary than bleeding at the 
nose, and often prevents or carries of diseases. It is pecu- 
liarly beneficial in the gout, rheumatism, asthma, and hypo- 
chondrical complaints; and often proves critical in colics, 
and inflammatory fevers. 

In the management of the patient, regard must be had to 
his habit of body, his age, strength, and manner of living. A 
discharge which might be excessive, and prove hurtful to one, 
may be very moderate, and even salutary to another. That 
only is to be esteemed dangerous which continues too long, 
and is in such quantity as to waste the patient's strength, 
hurt digestion, nutrition, and other functions necessary to 
life. 

When this is the case, the discharge must be checked by a 
proper regimen, and astringent medicines. The diet must be 
cool, but nourishing, consisting chiefly of bread, milk, cool- 
ing vegetables, and broths. The drink may be chalybeate 
water, orange whey, decoctions or infusions of the astringent 
and mucilaginous plants, as the tormentil root, bistort, the 
marsh-mallow roots, &c. 

The Peruvian bark is likewise proper in this case, both as 
a strengthener and astringent: half a drachm of it may be 
taken in a glass of red wine, sharpened with a few drops of 
the elixir of vitriol, three or four times a-day. 

|P_537
The bleeding piles are sometimes periodical, and return 
regularly once a month, or once in three weeks. In this 
case, they are always to be considered as a salutary discharge, 
and by no means to be stopped. Some have entirely ruined 
their health by stopping a periodical discharge of blood from 
the hœmorrhodial veins. 

In the blind piles, bleeding is generally of use. The diet 
must be light and thin, and the drink cool and diluting. 
It is Iikewise necessary that the body be kept gently open. 
This may be done by small doses of the flowers of brimstone 
and cream of tartar. They may be mixed in equal quantities, 
and a tea-spoonful taken two or three times a-day, or oftener 
if necessary. Or an ounce of the flowers of brimstone, and half 
an ounce of purified nitre, may be mixed with three or four 
ounces of the lenitive electuary, and a tea-spoonful of it ta- 
ken three or four times a-day. 

Various ointments, and other external applications, are 
recommended in the piles; but I do not remember to have 
seen any effects from these worth mentioning. Their prin- 
cipal use is to keep the part moist, which may be done as 
well by a soft poultice, or an emollient cataplasm. When 
the pain, however, is very great, a liniment made of two 
ounces of emollient ointment, and half an ounce of liquid 
laudanum, beat up with the yolk of an egg, maybe ap- 
plied. Tissot. Buchan. 

[}The Quinsey, or Inflammation of the Throat. }]
In general, it proceeds from the same causes as other in- 
flammatory disorders, viz. an obstructed perspiration, or 
whatever heats or inflames the blood. An inflammation of 
the throat is often occasioned by omitting some part of the 
covering usually worn about the neck, by drinking cold li- 
quor when the body is warm, by riding or walking against a 
cold northerly wind, or any thing that greatly cools the 
throat, and parts adjacent. It may likewise proceed from 
the neglect of bleeding, purging, or any other customary 
evacuation. 

The inflammation of the throat is evident from inspection, 
the parts appearing red and swelled; besides, the patient 
complains of pain in swallowing. His pulse is quick and 
hard, with other symptoms of a fever. If blood be let, it is 
generally covered with a tough coat of a whitish colour, and 
|P_538
the patient spits a tough phlegm. As the swelling and in- 
flammation increase, the breathing and swallowing become 
more difficult; the pain affects the ears; the eyes generally 
appear red, and the face swells. The patient is often obliged 
to keep himself in an erect posture, being in danger of suffo- 
cation; there is a constant nausea, or inclination to vomit, 
and the drink, instead of passing into the stomach, is often 
returned by the nose. The patient is frequently starved at 
last, merely from an inability to swallow any kind of food. 

When the breathing is laborious, with straitness of breast, 
and anxiety, the danger is great. Though the pain in swal- 
lowing be very great, yet while the patient breathes easy, 
there is not so much danger. An external swelling is no un- 
favourable symptom; but if it suddenly falls, and the disease 
affects the breast, the danger is very great. When a quinsey 
is the consequence of some other disease, which has already 
weakened the patient, his situation is dangerous. A frothing 
at the mouth, with a swelled tongue, a pale, ghastly counte- 
nance, and coldness of the extremities, are fatal symptoms. 

It is highly necessary that the patient be kept easy and 
quiet. Violent affections of the mind, or great efforts of the 
body, may prove fatal. He should never even attempt to 
speak but in a low voice. Such a degree of warmth as to 
promote a constant, gentle sweat, is proper. When the pa- 
tient is in bed, his head ought to be raised a little higher than 
usual. 

It is peculiarly neccessary that the neck be kept warm; for 
which purpose several folds of soft flannel may be wrapped 
round it. That alone will often remove a slight com- 
plaint of the throat, especially if applied in due time. 
We cannot here omit observing the propriety of a custom 
which prevails among the peasants of this country:—When 
they feel any uneasiness of the throat, they wrap a stocking 
about it all night. So effectual is this remedy, that in many 
places it passes for a charm, and the stocking is applied with 
particular ceremonies. The custom, however, is undoubt- 
edly a good one, and should never be neglected. When the 
throat has been thus wrapped up all night, it must not be ex- 
posed to the cold air through the day, but a handkerchief, or 
a piece of flannel kept about it till the inflammation be re- 
moved. 

The jelly of black currants is a medicine very much in 
esteem for complaints of the throat; and indeed it is of some 
|P_539
use. It should be almost constantly kept in the mouth, and 
swallowed down leisurely. It may likewise be mixed in the 
patient's drink, or taken any other way. When it cannot 
be obtained, the jelly of red currants, or of mulberries, may 
be used in its stead. 

Gargles for the throat are very beneficial. They may be 
made of sage tea, with a little vinegar and honey, or by add- 
ing to half an English pint of the pectoral decoction, two or 
three spoonfuls of honey, and the same quantity of currant 
jelly. This may be used three or four times a day; and if 
the patient be troubled with tough viscid phlegm, the gargle 
may be rendered more sharp and cleansing, by adding to it a 
tea-spoonful of the spirit of sal ammoniac. Some recommend 
gargles made of a decoction of the leaves or bark of the black- 
berry bush; but where the jelly can be had, this is unne- 
cessary. 

An inflammation of the throat being a most acute and dan- 
gerous distemper, which sometimes takes off the patient very 
suddenly, it will be proper, as soon as the symptoms appear, 
to bleed in the arm, or rather in the jugular vein, and to re- 
peat the operation as circumstances require. 

It sometimes happens, before the ulcer breaks, that the 
swelling is so great, as entirely to prevent any thing from 
getting down into the stomach. In this case the patient must 
inevitably perish, unless he can be supported in some other 
way. This can only be done by nourishing clysters of broth, 
or gruel, with milk, &c. Patients have often been supported 
by these for several days, till the tumour has broke; and af- 
terwards they have recovered. Huxham. Fothergil. 


[^1. 
* If the patient is too weak to use other exercise after taking the powder, the 
body and limbs may be rubbed with a flannel, from time to time, during the 
hour and half, giving rest at intervals, according to strength; and indeed the 
practice of this exercise for some minutes, every night and morning, may be of 
great help. 

The quantities directed in the recipe have been given alike to men and to 
women; and there never has been found reason to think that they were too little 
for the one, or too much for the other. 
^]
[^2. 
* I refer such of my readers as wish to inform themselves more fully of its 
great efficacy, to a small pamphlet published by Mr. Dodsley, bookseller, in Pall- 
mall, price only six-pence. 

The author candidly tells the public, that this recipe is taken from a French 
work by Lenery, called Recueil de Secrets, printed at Paris. 
^]
[^3. 
* Sir John Pringle observes, that, though this disease may seem trifling, there 
is no one in the army that is more troublesome to cure, as the infection often 
lurks in clothes, &c. and breaks out a second, or even a third time. The same 
inconveniency occurs in private families, unless particular regard is paid to the 
changing or cleaning of their clothes, which last is by no means an easy ope- 
ration. 
^]