

[^Sample 1: book - ^]

|P_55
[}A 
TREATISE 
ON THE 
MATERIA MEDICA. }][^A long horizontal double-line in the middle of the page. ^]
[}INTRODUCTION. }]
BEFORE entering upon the consideration of particular 
medicines, it may be proper to treat of what in general 
relates to the operation of all of them. There are certain prin- 
ciples which have a reference to the whole; and by explaining 
these in the first place, we shall not only save afterwards much re- 
petition that might otherwise have been necessary, but, by having 
laid down these general principles, it may be possible, in a more 
simple and clear manner, to explain the operation and virtues 
of particular medicines. 

It is the more requisite to enter upon the consideration 
of those general principles, that there are several to which 
physicians do not appear to have given the attention which 
seems to be necessary. Besides, it is well known, that with re- 
spect to the justness and propriety of many of the principles 
which have been adopted, physicians are very far from being 
|P_56
agreed: and I therefore deem it necessary to offer my pecu- 
liar sentiments with respect to many of those principles that 
have been before assumed, and more necessary still to explain 
certain new principles which I shall think it requisite to em- 
ploy. In the last, indeed, I perhaps hazard a great deal; but 
every part of science is still imperfect, and must for ever remain 
so, if attempts be not made to improve it. 

With these views, it is to be remarked, in the first place, 
as a principle commonly assumed upon this subject, that few 
or no medicines act upon the living human body in the same 
manner, and with the same effects, as upon inanimate matter; 
and it is now well known, that the operation and effects of sub- 
stances applied to the living human body, are for the most part 
altogether different from the effects of the same application to 
the dead body. Few indeed, or none, of these substances which 
are considered as medicines, have any effects at all upon the dead 
body; and therefore, assuming this as a principle, when here- 
after I shall have occasion to speak of the action of substances 
upon the body, it must be constantly understood to be their 
action upon the living body only; and at least with very few ex- 
ceptions, which shall be taken notice of when occasion requires. 

Having assumed this principle, it must be obvious, that, in 
order to consider the operation of medicines in general, it will 
be proper to begin with explaining the peculiar circum- 
stance of the human body, by which it is thus capable of being 
acted upon in a peculiar manner by other bodies applied to it; 
and it will also be requisite to enquire concerning the manner 
in which the general operation of medicines may be variously 
modified, according to the different states and circumstances in 
which the human body may be upon different occasions. 

|P_57
[}CHAPTER I. }]
[}OF THE ACTION OF MEDICINES UPON THE BODY IN GENERAL. }][^A horizontal line. ^]IN these days, it is hardly necessary to show that the action of 
other bodies upon the human, is chiefly by the impulse of 
these bodies upon the extremities or other parts of the nerves 
of the human body; in consequence of which, a motion is 
propagated from the place of impulse along the course of the 
nerves, to their origin in the brain or medulla spinalis; and 
that, upon such occasion, there does for the most part arise a 
sensation. This again generally gives occasion to a volition; 
whereby a motion is produced, which being determined along 
the course of the nerves into certain muscles, or moving 
fibres, the action of these, as well as the various effects which 
their action is suited to occasion, are in consequence produ- 
ced. 

This is the general idea of the connection of the human bo- 
dy with the other parts of nature; or of the manner in which the 
human body is acted upon by other bodies, and in its turn acts 
upon these. That condition by which it is fitted to have pecu- 
liar effects produced in it by the action of other bodies, is cal- 
led its Sensibility; which seems to be lodged in every part of what 
|P_58
we we can discern to be parts of its nervous system: And that con- 
dition of the body by which certain parts of it are fitted to have 
certain motions of contraction excited in them, either from a 
communication with the nervous system, as expressed above, or 
by an impulse directly made upon these parts themselves, is 
termed the Irritability of the body; which seems to exist only in 
the muscular or moving fibres, probably of a peculiar structure 
suited to that purpose. 

From all this, we come at this conclusion, That the peculiar 
effects of substances in general, or of those substances in parti- 
cular which we call medicines, when applied to the human body, 
depend upon their action upon its sentient and irritable parts. 

It is, however, to be remarked here, that the action of sub- 
stances in producing their effects, is not universally, as insinua- 
ted above, by the intervention of sensation and volition; for these 
effects are often produced without either the one or the other. 
At the same time it is probable, that in all cases the effects pro- 
duced by the action of other bodies upon the human, although 
not accompanied with sensation, yet are produced by their action 
upon the sentient parts; and it is likewise probable, that in the 
case of action unaccompanied with any volition, both the ac- 
tion and its effects, depend either upon the application of those 
bodies directly to the irritable parts, or upon their application 
to sentient parts, which determine motions into those very nerves 
wherein motions are commonly excited by volition. Upon the 
whole, it is sufficiently probable, that the peculiar action of me- 
dicines depends upon the sensibility and irritability of the hu- 
man body; or, in other words, that it universally depends upon 
motions excited and propagated in the nervous system. These, 
therefore, are theconditions of the living body which we were 
|P_59
engaged to explain. What is the nature of the matter in which 
these motions take place, or in what manner it is inherent in 
the nervous system, is not well known: but we think it may be 
justly held as existing, and may speak of it under the appel- 
lation of the nervous power. As it appears only in the living, 
and disappears entirely in the dead state of the body, it may 
be otherwise properly enough termed the vital principle. 

It does not seem necestary to explain fully here the various 
laws by which the motions of the nervous system are regulated 
and governed: but with respect to the operation of medicines, 
this in general is to be observed, that as there seems to be a pos- 
sible communication of motion from every part of the nervous 
system to every other part of it; so medicines, though applied to 
one small part of the body only, do often, in consequence of the 
communication mentioned, mow their effects in many other 
parts of the body. 

This sympathy or consent, as it is called, of the several parts 
of the body, is in general very well known to physicians; and 
I shall have occasion frequently hereafter to take notice of it, 
in mentioning the effects depending upon it, and the laws by 
which it is governed. At present I am to prosecute the consi- 
deration of it no farther. 

Having now considered the action of medicines as in gene- 
ral upon a living body, it may, in the next place, be observed, 
that as the effect of the action of one body upon another does 
always depend, partly upon the general operation of the body 
acting, and partly also upon the particular circumstances of the 
body acted upon; so it is well known, that as the human body 
is in several respects considerably different in different men, and 
|P_60
even even in the same person at different times, so the operation of 
medicines upon it must be variously modified according to the 
different circumstances in which the body may happen to be, 
and that, either throughout the whole of life in different men, 
or upon particular occasions in the same person. 

It is therefore necessary, before going further, to consider 
those differences in the state of the human body which may 
occur and give occasion to a difference in the operation of 
medicines upon it. We shall, therefore, proceed to consider 
those constitutional differences which take place throughout 
life, under the title of Temperaments, this being the appellation 
under which these diversities are commonly mentioned. 

[}SECT. I. }]
[}OfTemperaments. }]
IN attending to the great number of circumstances in which 
the bodies of men may be different from one another, it is 
scarcely possible to enumerate every particular: but it has 
been at all times presumed, that a great number of these cir- 
cumstances are commonly combined together in the same 
person; and that frequently one man shows a combination of 
circumstances not only different, but sometimes of an opposite 
kind to that of another. Such combinations, upon a particular 
supposition with respect to their causes, the ancients named 
temperaments; and the term has continued to be employed in 
the schools of physic from the most ancient to the present 
time. 

Abstracting from all theory, we continue to employ the 
same term to denote a combination or concurrence of circum- 
stances which happens in certain persons, but which in several 
respects is different from the combination that happens in cer- 
tain others. Upon this footing, I believe the ancients distin- 
guished what they called the different temperaments of men: 
for it is probable that at first they distinguished them by actual 
observation; but very soon they formed a theory with regard 
to them, from whence they formed appellations which have 
|P_62
continued to be applied to them ever since. The appellations 
indeed have been continued, though the theories which laid the 
foundation of them have been long ago exploded; and the mo- 
derns have neither by observation extended the ancient distinc- 
tions, nor, though they have often attempted it, have they 
ever given, so far as I can judge, any happy explanation of the 
causes or foundation of the distinctions they have so generally 
adopted. I believe it will be generally allowed, that this 
part of medical doctrine is still in an embarrassed and undeter- 
mined state. 

In treating the subject, philosophy would require that I should 
in the first place distinguish temperaments, by marking the ex- 
ternal and observable circumstances which are found with some 
steadiness to be commonly combined together: but this I find a 
difficult task, and what my observation has not been so exten- 
sively applied to as to enable me to perform in the manner I 
would wish. I must therefore proceed in another way; and 
shall endeavour to consider those circumstances of the in- 
ternal state of the human body which may give occasion to a dif- 
ference in the state of the functions, and even in the external 
appearances which distinguish different men. 

These circumstances may, I think, be referred to five general 
heads according as they occur, 1st, In the state of the simple so- 
lids; 2dly, In the state of the fluids; 3dly, In the proportion of 
solids and fluids in the body; 4thly, In the distribution of the 
fluids; and, 5thly, In the state of the nervous power. With re- 
spect to each of these heads, I shall now offer the best remarks, 
and give the best explanation, that the present state of our science 
seems to me to admit of. 

|P_63
[}Article I.Of the simple Solids.}]
Whether these are in certain parts of a fibrous, or if they 
are entirely of a cellular texture, it is not necessary to deter- 
mine here. It is enough for our purpose, that they are at dif- 
ferent times of a different degree of density and firmness. This 
particularly appears in the progress of life, when from an al- 
most fluid state they are gradually changed into a more dense 
and solid substance. 

The ancients marked the difference of temperament by the 
colour and strength of the hair of different persons; and many 
experiments show that the strength of the hair does for a great 
part of life follow the density of the simple solid in other parts 
of the body. Dr Brian Robinson, in his Treatise of the Ani- 
mal Oeconomy, has by many experiments clearly shown, that the 
density and strength of the hair increase with the age of the 
person; and therefore, that the state of the hair is correspond- 
ent to that of the simple solids in other parts of the body. It 
is true, indeed, that the state of the simple solid may in different 
persons be considerably varied by the difference of diet, exercise, 
climate, and other the like circumstances: but at the same time, 
as the state of the solid seems to be often an hereditary condition, 
and as it frequently shows itself very early in life, before the 
circumstances just now mentioned can be supposed to have mo- 
dified its state; so it is highly probable, that the state of the 
simple solid depends upon the difference of the original stamina 
of the body: and as that difference will proportionally prevail 
|P_64
throughout throughout the whole of life; so, notwithstanding the circum- 
stances in the manner of living, it will always have its share in 
producing a difference in the state of the solid in different per- 
sons at the same period of life. 

Whilst, therefore, a difference in the state of the solid must 
occasion a difference in the whole of the state of different per- 
sons; so it must be admitted, that a difference in the state of the 
simple solid must at all times have a share in distinguishing 
the temperaments of men. 

It being, however, farther probable, that the state of the mo- 
ving fibres is in some measure modified by the state of the simple 
solid; so likewise it is probable, that the simple solid, according 
to its state of density and elasticity, must have a great share in 
determining the strength or weakness of the moving fibres, and 
consequently of the whole system, so as in this manner espe- 
cially to have a very powerful influence in distinguishing the 
different temperaments of men. 

It here merits particular notice, that as the state of the simple 
solid is for the most part likely to be proportionally the same 
throughout the whole of life; so there is reason to believe that, 
from incidental and sudden changes in the state of the simple solid, 
diseases will seldom arise. This indeed may possibly be affected by 
various incidental causes: but they are either such as very rarely 
occur, or such as cannot be applied at once to a considerable por- 
tion of the system; and which, for the most part, take effect only 
when applied for a great length of time. I am persuaded, there- 
fore, that those sudden changes which frequently occur with re- 
spect to the debility and strength of the system, cannot be imputed 
to changes in the state of the simple solid, which cannot sud- 
|P_65
denly take place, but must be imputed to changes, in the state 
of the moving fibres quem facile mille res turbant. Dr Boer- 
haave gave little attention to the circumstances last mention- 
ed; but whoever studies this subject, will perceive that the il- 
lustrious Professor's doctrine de fibra laxa vel rigida, as explain- 
ing the causes of the fibra debilis vel fortis, will not apply so 
extensively as he has supposed; and consequently, that those 
powers of changing the state of the simple solid which have 
been imputed to internal medicines, are seldom to be regard- 
ed; or at least never without a number of limitations, to which 
little attention seems to have been hitherto paid. 

[}Article II.Of the State of the Fluids.}]
From the earliest accounts of physic with which we are ac- 
quainted, it appears, that from the most ancient times down to 
the present, physicians have been attached almost entirely to 
the study and consideration of the fluids; and from the suppo- 
sed state of these, have endeavoured to explain the phenomena 
both of health and of sickness. In this, however, they appear 
to me to have been unfortunate: for, not to mention the im- 
perfection and falsehood of the many speculations, both of Ga- 
lenists and chemists, which have formerly prevailed on this 
subject, I would venture to assert, that the doctrine concerning 
the fluids is still the most imperfect part of our physiology. 
Every thing systematical that has been delivered upon it, till 
within these last forty years, may be totally disregarded: for it 
is only within the period now mentioned that we have acquired 
any distinct notions of a fundamental doctrine; or, in other 
words, of the state of aggregation in the mass of blood. Even 
|P_66
with respect to this last, there still remains much doubt and ob- 
scurity; but notwithstanding these difficulties, I shall endea- 
vour to consider what may be said with regard to the state of 
the fluids in different persons. 

It may now safely be held, that the mass of blood, or that 
portion of our fluids which fills and flows in the red vessels, and 
from which all the others seem to be derived, is every where a 
heterogeneous aggregate, consisting chiefly and especially of 
three parts; to wit, red globules, gluten, and serosity: And if 
it should be alleged that there are other matters present, as per- 
haps there may be, I shall in the sequel examine the question; 
but in the mean while, I believe they may be considered as por- 
tions of the three principal parts now mentioned. 

With respect to these principal parts, it is sufficiently pro- 
bable that they are in a different proportion in different persons: 
and this different proportion may therefore have a share in gi- 
ving some difference of temperament; although in what cases this 
takes place is not easily to be ascertained. 

That the red globules may be in different proportions to the 
whole mass, we discern very clearly from several diseases, in 
which their quantity is evidently and considerably diminished; 
but what may be their proportion in persons in health, or in 
what manner that proportion is connected with the other cir- 
cumstances of health, is by no means ascertained by any pro- 
per experiments. From several observations on animals whose 
vessels are easily subjected to microscopical examination, it ap- 
pears that the proportion of red globules is greater or lesser ac- 
cording to the greater or lesser quantity of the aliment or nou- 
rishment the animal receives. It is very possible, therefore, that 
|P_67
the quantity of them in the human blood may be affected by 
the same circumstances: But still this does not aid us in deter- 
mining the question with respect to persons in health, who take 
in nourishment in proportion to their several bulks; and whe- 
ther the effect of nourishment be determined by the quality, as 
well as by the quantity, is not ascertained. It appears to me, 
that, if at all, it is not affected much by the quality of nou- 
rishment, unless the difference of that quality be very consider- 
able. It appears also, that the proportion of red globules is as 
great in the animals living entirely upon vegetable aliment, as 
it is in those who live entirely upon animal food, or as it is in 
man, who lives partly upon the one and partly upon the other. 

Many attempts have been made to estimate the proportion of 
the quantity of the crassamentum to that of the serum in the 
extravasated human blood; but hardly any df the experiments 
yet made afford a certain conclusion. The apparent proportion 
of the two masses is very fallacious; being very much varied 
by the circumstances which determine the concretion of the 
cruor to take place sooner or later, and by the time which is allow- 
ed to pass from the time of concretion to that at which the pro- 
portions are examined. It is now indeed well known, that these 
circumstances vary the separation which takes place; and it does 
not appear to me, that in any of the estimates which have been 
made, due attention has been given to the effect of those cir- 
cumstances. When Dr Haller, in his Primæ Lineæ, para- 
graph 138, gives this judgment; In massa sanguinea media 
pars, et ultra, cruoris est. In robore valido serum minuitur 
ad tertiam partem, in febre ad quartam et quintam reducitur, 
in morbis a debilitate increscit;  I am persuaded that he had 
judged entirely from the quantities that appear separated in or- 
dinary blood-lettings, and had not attended to the different 
|P_68
quantities that appear in these according to the different cir- 
cumstances of the blood-letting. In cases of rheumatism, I 
have seen the crassamentum not equal to a third part of the 
serum surrounding it; and other cases, where the serum did 
not separate from the crassamentum, to the amount of a fourth 
part of the whole mass: and from attending to the circum- 
stances of the blood-letting, I have been able to foretel what, 
in twenty-four hours after, would be the condition of the sepa- 
ration. But even supposing we had a more exact estimate of 
the serum with respect to the crassamentum, or in other words, 
of the red globules and gluten taken together, it still remains 
undetermined what proportion these two last mentioned matters 
bear to one another; and consequently it is not yet ascertained 
what is the usual proportion of red globules in the blood of per- 
sons in health, nor how far it may have a share in producing a 
peculiar temperament. 

With respect to the gluten of the blood, considered by itself, 
it is equally difficult to ascertain its proportion either to the 
whole mass or to the several parts of it. It seems to me to be 
determined, that the gluten, whether combined with the red 
globules in the crassarrientum, or spontaneously separated from 
the other parts, is the same kind of matter with that which is 
dissolved in the serum. In what proportion, however, this last 
may be, is by no means accurately determined. There is rea- 
son to believe that the serum is always a saturated solution; but 
at the same time it is probable, that the solvent power of the 
serosity may be greater or less upon different occasions; and 
therefore we still want experiments to ascertain the proportion 
of the whole of the gluten to the rest of the mass. It may rea- 
dily be admitted, that in healthful bodies, both the red globules 
and the gluten may be more or less, according to the quantity, 
|P_69
and in some measure according to the quality, of the aliments 
taken in during a given time: but this will hardly enable us to 
determine what is the proportion in the healthful bodies of dif- 
ferent persons; and consequently what share they may have 
in giving a difference of temperament. It may be presumed, 
however, that with respect to the serosity, the proportion of red 
globules and of gluten taken together, will be greater or less 
according to the force of the digestive and assimilating powers 
in each person; and that these again will be according to the 
general strength or weakness of the system. The proportion of 
the several parts of the fluids, therefore, may be different in 
different temperaments; but still this will not of itself pro- 
duce that difference. 

It remains to consider the third portion of our mass of blood; 
and that is, the serosity; with regard to which, the ascertaining 
its proportional quantity is equally difficult. It must be equal- 
ly so with respect to the ascertaining the proportions of the crassa- 
mentum and the serum; because the proportion of serosity may 
be presumed to be the same with that of the serum: and therefore, 
till the latter can be more exactly ascertained than it has yet 
been, we must endeavour to do it by considering those causes 
which may be supposed to produce in greater or lesier quantity 
the matter contained in the serosity. 

In attempting this, we shall lay aside a consideration that 
might readily present itself, and which is, that of the quantity 
of liquid taken into the body. This certainly does occasionally 
increase the quantity of serosity: but as I believe the excretions 
in healthful bodies are always increased according to the quan- 
tity of liquid matter present in the blood-vessels; so I suppose 
|P_70
that a greater quantity of liquid occasionally taken in, will soon 
pass off by the excretions, and therefore will occasion no steady 
difference in the proportion of serosity in the healthful state of 
different persons. 

We must therefore seek for some other cause of the difference 
in the proportion of serosity. With this view, it appears, that 
the digestive and assimilating powers of the animal œconomy 
are fitted to prepare, from the aliments taken in, a fluid suited 
to the purposes of that œconomy, particularly to the nourish- 
ment of the solid parts of the body; and such fluid, whilst in a 
condition fit for its purpose, we presume to be bland, mild, and 
nowise noxious and hurtful. 

At the same time, it is probable that these same fluids are not 
long stationary in that condition; but in consequence of a cer- 
tain process constantly going on, are changed into such a state, 
that if the change was to go too far, and the changed fluids at 
the same time to be retained in the body, they might prove to 
it extremely noxious, and even pernicious. It is the change 
now mentioned that we suppose to produce the serosity, which, 
although suited to some purposes of the œconomy, is yet at the 
same time necessary to be constantly thrown out of it; and is 
therefore what affords the ordinary excretions. From this last 
circumstance of the serosity being fitted in proportion to its 
quantity to be thrown out by the excretions, we presume that 
its proportion in the whole mass is seldom for any length of 
time to any degree of excess. Still, however, its proportion 
may be different in different persons; and this difference may 
have a share in giving a difference of temperament. It may be 
alleged, indeed, that the animal process which produces a sero- 
sity may be in different degrees of force in different persons; 
|P_71
and consequently, that the serosity may be produced more or less 
quickly, as well as be of a more saline quality, in one person than 
in another: so that in this manner, by a difference in the quantity 
and in the quality of the serosity, a difference of temperament 
may be produced. That this is possible, cannot be denied; but 
I do not know the circumstances in which it takes place, nor 
the external appearances whereby it may be discovered. 

It has indeed been commonly enough supposed, that the 
blood is in a more saline state in some persons than in others; 
and this may be the case, but we have no proper experiments 
to ascertain the quantity or condition of the saline matter in 
the blood. It has been imagined, that the saline state of the se- 
rosity may be discovered by certain appearances on the surface 
of the body: but with respect to these, the conclusion is fallaci- 
ous; because it can be rendered probable, that these appearances 
often depend more upon the state of the skin itself, than upon 
the state of the fluids passing through it. 

Upon the whole of this inquiry into the state of the blood, 
with respect to its aggregation, or with respect to the state and 
proportion of the several parts which compose it as an aggre- 
gate, it seems not only to be uncertain how far these circum- 
stances give a difference of temperament; but, on the contrary, 
it seems probable, that they never do so in any considerable de- 
gree. 

Notwithstanding all this, ever since chemical reasonings 
have been admitted into our physiology, that is, ever since the 
time of Paracelsus, physicians have considered our fluids as 
distinguished by the state of their chemical mixture, either in 
the whole of the mass of blood, or in the several parts which 
|P_72
compose it as an heterogeneous aggregate. It is, however, in 
the latter view only, that is, with respect to the several parts, 
that we can chemically consider the subject; and here it will 
be readily acknowledged, that till very lately, much frivolous, 
hypothetical and false reasoning has prevailed in the chemical 
doctrines respecting the nature and state of our fluids. Even at 
present, physicians have hardly come to be sufficiently chaste in 
avoiding such hypothetical doctrines; and however confident 
they have been in their chemical reasonings, I am unable to 
find any thing either clear or certain upon the subject. Not to 
mention how little we have yet learned of the nature of vege- 
table or animal substances from their chemical analysis, it is 
enough to say here, that with respect to some parts of the mass 
of blood, it is by no means ascertained, either that their chemi- 
cal mixture is upon different occasions anywise changed, or what 
change is produced^ or in what manner such change is effected. 
This may be very confidently asserted with respect to the red 
globules; the mechanical or chemical properties of which are 
neither of them clearly ascertained; and we neither know how 
they are formed or produced, nor in what manner they may be 
chemically changed. 

With respect to the gluten, I am disposed to make the like 
assertion: for it appears to me, that we neither know how it is 
formed from our vegetable aliment, nor what is precisely the 
state of its mixture; and therefore we cannot clearly say à 
priori, how it may be chemically changed. I do not indeed 
know of any observations which ascertain its being in any case 
changed in its sensible qualities. There are indeed cases in 
which its viscidity and force of cohesion seems to be consider- 
ably diminished; but different explanations of these phenome- 
na may be offered: and however they may be explained, the 
|P_73
phenomena seem to take place only in more evidently morbid 
cases: so that we have no just grounds for asserting that any 
such difference takes place in the temperaments of different 
men in health. It has indeed been commonly supposed, that the 
density and viscidity of the mass of blood is different in differ- 
ent persons even in a state of health, and more certainly in the 
case of disease; and this has been imputed either to the greater 
proportion of gluten in the mass, or to the greater viscidity or 
force of cohesion of the gluten that is in due proportion present: 
but neither the one nor the other supposition has been ascer- 
tained by proper experiments.. Some experiments, indeed, as 
those of Dr Browne Langrish, have been offered for the purpose; 
but they are evidently frivolous and fallacious. 

I have said above, that the proportion of gluten in the 
blood may be increased by the quantity of aliments taken in, 
and by the vigour of the system in preparing and assimilating 
these: but it is sufficiently probable, that the proportion of glu- 
ten will be suited to the vigour of the system, and therefore 
produce no morbid state; and although it should have some 
share in gfving a difference of temperament, it will not do 
this as considered by itself, but only as accompanying the other 
circumstances of more power in the system. 

I cannot dismiss this subject without observing, that the sup- 
position of a preternatural spissitude of the mass of blood, or as 
it may be expressed of a lentor, being a frequent cause of disease, 
has had a great share in almost all the modern systems of pa- 
thology; but I allege that it has been for the most part hypo- 
thetical; and has hardly, so far as I know, in any case been as- 
certained as a fact. 1 am disposed to maintain, that the suppo- 
sition is for the most part improbable. The functions of the 
œconomy, depending upon the constant motion of fluids through 
|P_74
many narrow canals, require that those fluids should have a ve- 
ry great fluidity; and accordingly Nature has, for this purpose, 
provided, that a pure water should always make a very great 
part of the animal fluids. It is also certain, that those parts 
whose particles might be disposed to unite together, and to form 
impermeable masses, are for the most part held in a state of so- 
lution, and in a very fluid state; or if there are certain parts 
which are only in a diffused state, these are in very small pro- 
portion to the entirely fluid parts: and while the heat and mo- 
tion of the whole continue, the cohesive matters are kept in a 
very minutely divided state, and diffused amongst the more 
fluid parts; and there is not any evidence of their separation 
from those fluids but in consequence of stagnation. There 
is therefore little foundation for the supposition of a preterna- 
tural spissitude prevailing in the mass of blood, or of its proving 
commonly the cause of disease: And although what I have now 
said be not suited directly to my present purpose of explaining 
the difference of temperament, yet it has some concern in it; 
and in an introduction to the consideration of the operation of 
medicines, cannot be improper. 

But to return to my subject: I have now endeavoured to show, 
with respect to the red globules or gluten, that from the consi- 
deration of their chemical mixture, we can obtain very little 
knowledge towards the distinction of temperaments. It may, 
however, be expected, that by means of chemistry we may obtain 
more from the consideration of the serosity; but how far we can 
go even in this matter, is to me still very uncertain. It is now 
know very well that the serosity of the human blood is a watery 
fluid which holds dissolved in it, besides a quantity of gluten, a 
peculiar salt which is hardly known, or at least is not distinctly 
perceived to be in any other part of nature besides that of ani- 
|P_75
mal bodies. We know also, from the excretions which we pre- 
sume to be afforded by the serosity, that there exists in it also a 
quantity of oily matter; but of what particular nature that is, or 
in what proportion it is present, or in what manner it is com- 
bined with the other parts, we do not know with any precision; 
and therefore cannot say in what measure the consideration of 
this oily part may serve to ascertain the different state of the 
fluids in the different bodies of men in health. 

We may, I think, neglect the consideration of the oily part 
of the blood; but the saline part may seem to deserve more at- 
tention. There is ground to believe, that beside the peculiar 
saline matter above mentioned, there are a number of other sa- 
line matters present in the serosity; but of what nature pre- 
cisely, or in what proportion, remains unknown. To give an 
example of this, we know now that there is in the urine of eve- 
ry person, probably derived from the serosity, an acid, that upon 
certain occasions gives a concretion in the urinary pasiages, and 
which, separated from the urine, puts on the appearance of an 
earthy or stony matter. This, however, has been learned only 
lately from the analysis of such urinary concretions as have be- 
come a disease; and the discovery, while it now enables us to cor- 
rect some parts of our system, serves at the same time to show how 
ignorant we were with regard to the state of the human fluids. 

From these considerations of the several matters which 
we can perceive to exist in the mass of blood, it will ap- 
pear that there is little ground for distinguishing the different 
temperaments of men by the different state of their mass of 
blood. It is indeed very possible, that a different state in this 
respect may take place in different men; but to what degree, or 
by what external marks it may be perceived, in ascertaining 
|P_76
either the one or the other, physicians have hardly yet gone 
any length. 

Without entering thus into the considerations of the diffe- 
rent states of the serosity, it may be imagined there is a grosser 
view, that may be taken for distinguishing the different state of 
the fluids in different persons. 

There is in the human body, as living always in part upon 
vegetable aliments, a power whereby these aliments, after be- 
ing some time in the body, are considerably changed in their 
nature and qualities, being changed into animal fluids; which 
are in several respects considerably different from the vegetable 
matters that were taken in. How this change is effected we do 
not exactly know; and the only circumstance that tends some- 
what towards the illustration of it, is, that a change of vegetable 
matter, nearly analogous to this which happens in the human 
body, is made by its being, subjected to putrefaction: and though 
we cannot distinctly perceive in what portions of the fluid, 
more especially in what manner, or to what degree, this is car- 
ried on in the body; we may pretty safely conclude in general, 
that the animal process is a part of the putrefactive fermenta- 
tion. At the same time we observe, that after the animal pro- 
cess has brought the aliments into that state which is suited to the 
purposes of the animal œconomy, or into the proper state of 
animal fluids, these are not long stationary in that condition, 
but are constantly advancing towards a putrid state; and that 
these degenerating and degenerated parts are what chiefly form 
the saline or earthy ingredients of the serosity, which, with 
a part of the fluid, are constantly passing out of the body by the 
several excretions. 

|P_77
In this view, we can perceive that the animal fluid may in its 
composition be more or less prone and more or less advanced 
towards the putrescent state; and that by these circumstances 
the fluids may be different in the consistence of the whole mass, 
or in the chemical qualities of the serosity: but till the changes 
in these respects have proceeded to a morbid state, we can hard- 
ly perceive them when in a lesser degree, or say how far they 
can, or actually have, a share in distinguishing the tempera- 
ments of men in health. 

From the several remarks we have now offered respecting the 
serosity, it clearly enough appears, that there is a portion of the 
mass of blood which is always in a saline and acrid state; and 
nothing has been more common among physicians than to sup- 
pose that an acrimony of the fluids is a frequent cause of dis- 
ease. 

It is very possible that it may be so, and upon many occa- 
sions it certainly is so; but it appears to me that the supposition 
has been too rashly and too frequently admitted, and that it has 
been for the most part purely gratuitous, without any proper 
evidence of it in fact. The possible species of acrimony have 
been little understood, and several of them altogether erroneously 
supposed. Others of them, though possibly occurring, have not 
been shown really to take place in any unusual quantity; and 
the phenomena adduced in proof of them may be commonly 
explained from other causes, and are certainly often produced 
by causes of a different and even contrary nature. 

With respect to the various acrimony which we have allowed 
to be constantly present in the serosity, it is probable, that upon 
different occasions it may be in greater or lefler quantity: but 
|P_78
for this very reason of its being constantly present, we must 
conclude that it does not stimulate the system very strongly. 
This happens partly from these acrids being constantly diffused 
in other mild fluids, partly from the arterial system not being 
sensible to such a stimulus, and partly from these acrids stimu- 
lating the secretory and excretory organs to a larger excretion, 
whereby they are by one or other excretion immediately thrown 
out of the body. From these considerations, I conclude, that a 
spontaneous and noxious acrimony does not frequently arise; 
for the greatest part of mankind pass their lives without feeling 
any of the effects that might be imputed to it: and though 
there are some instances of its operation, these are very rare, 
and commonly in consequence of unusual and violent circum- 
stances in which the body has been placed. 

With respect to acrid matters introduced into the body from 
without, there is no doubt that many of these are sufficiently 
powerful in disordering the system; but there are certainly also 
many thrown in that have no effect at all: for not to mention 
the various precautions which nature has taken to prevent their 
reaching the mass of blood, I think it is only necessary to ob- 
serve, that even when in the mass of blood, they are rendered 
innocent, by their being joined with, and diffused in, the sero- 
sity, and with it soon thrown out by one or other of the excre- 
tions; so that some of the most acrid, as mercury and cantha- 
rides, show their effects only in the secretory or excretory or- 
gans. 

Upon the whole of this subject, therefore, I would conclude, 
that the supposition of an acrimony as the cause of diseases, has 
been too frequently admitted in our modern pathology; and 
|P_79
that it ought not to be admitted, unless when the causes and ex- 
istence of it are well ascertained. 

To conclude, I will not deny that the state of the fluids may 
have a share in distinguishing the different states of the body 
both in health and in sickness: but at the same time I must 
maintain, that we know little of the manner in which it may 
have this effect; that our theory of the human fluids is still 
very incomplete and imperfect; that while in this condition it 
has been employed too rashly and too largely in every part of 
the system of physic; and that we have little temptation to do 
this, as it is highly probable that the state of the fluids depends 
very much upon other circumstances of the constitution, which 
are more fundamental, and more powerful in determining the 
several conditions of it. 

[}Article III.Of the Distribution of the Fluids.}]
The third circumstance by which we suppose the tempera- 
ments of men may be distinguished, is the different state of the 
distribution of the fluids, and also the different state of the ba- 
lance in this respect between the several parts of the system. 

It is in the first place evident, that it is chiefly by the action 
of the heart the blood is propelled into the several vessels of the 
body: for although the action of the arteries contributes to 
promote the motion of the blood, and although upon certain 
occasions the action of the arteries in particular parts may be 
increased or diminished, so that the momentum of the blood in 
particular parts is promoted or abated without any change in 
|P_80
the action of the heart; yet it is presumed, that in the ordinary 
state of men in health, the action of the arteries is exactly in 
proportion to the action of the heart in distending them; and 
therefore that we may hold the action of the arteries as given, 
and consider the heart alone as the moving power. 

The action of the heart, therefore, taking place, the distribu- 
tion of the blood into the several parts of the body will be in 
proportion to the capacity of the vessels, and in proportion to 
their density or resistance in the several parts. Of this we have 
a clear example in the gradual formation of the body from its 
first beginning to its full growth; during which the parts are 
successively evolved, some of them attaining sooner than others 
their full growth, owing, as it appears to me, to the different 
state of the capacity and resistance of the vessels at the different 
periods of life; which, again, is probably determined by the state 
of the original stamina. 

This makes a considerable difference in the state of man at 
different ages, during the gradual growth of the body; and it 
appears more especially with respect to the head, which, for se- 
veral purposes of the animal œconomy, is first evolved, and 
comes first to its full size. This certainly happens from the 
vessels of the head being, in respect of capacity and density, 
suited to that end; and consequently, in the first part of life, the 
blood is determined in a proportionally greater quantity into 
the vessels of the head than into other parts of the system: and 
it is sufficiently probable, that this proportion is greater as the 
animal is nearer to its origin, and continues greater till the bo- 
dy attains its full growth; after which, however, it continually 
decreases as the animal advances to that period when it may be 
supposed to cease. 

|P_81
When the body has arrived at its full growth, we very gene- 
rally find a symmetry and exact proportion established in the 
size and bulk of the several parts which fall under our observa- 
tion; and we may then suppose the distribution of the blood to 
be suited exactly to that proportion. This indeed takes place 
with great uniformity in the most part of men: but I still deem 
it possible, that a disproportioned capacity in certain parts 
may occcur in certain men, and subsist in them through the 
whole of life. Accordingly, it has been commonly observed, 
that men of large heads, and large in proportion to the length 
of their bodies, are more liable to a plethoric state in the vessels 
of the head, and to the diseases depending upon it. I have also 
remarked in several instances, that men having their feet and 
hands shorter than in the usual proportion to the rest of the bo- 
dy, were more liable to a plethoric state of the lungs. 

This leads me to observe, that of the proportions of the ca- 
pacities of the several parts of the body influencing the distri- 
bution of the blood, one of the most considerable is, the diffe- 
rence of the capacities of the vessels of the lungs, and of those 
of the system of the aorta. It is especially discovered by the 
size of the thorax with respect to the other parts of the body; 
and this may be considered as occasioning a considerable differ- 
ence in the constitutions of men. What effects it has in dispo- 
sing to certain diseases, is well known to physicians. 

Upon this subject of the distribution of the blood, it is parti- 
cularly to be taken notice of, that there is a certain balance be- 
tween the force of the heart, and the resistance of the extreme 
vessels by which the perspiration is thrown out. It is probable, 
that upon this, the state of that excretion in different persons 
very much depends; and which perhaps may be illustrated by 
|P_82
this, that the resistance of the extreme vessels seems, in some 
cases, to be so great as to diminish the perspiration, and in con- 
sequence the appetite. Accordingly, the circumstance of men 
of considerable bulk, and tolerably full habit, having less appe- 
tite, and taking in less food, than others of the same bulk usual- 
ly do, in my opinion may be ascribed to the weakness of the 
heart with respect to the extreme vessels: and, on the other 
hand, we find men of a moderate size, and of a lean habit, take 
in very largely of food; which I think must be imputed to the 
force of the heart being in them, great, with respect to the 
resistance of the extreme vessels. 

With regard to the balance between the heart and extreme 
vessels, we cannot fail to remark, that although the interruption 
or diminution of perspiration is often owing to cold constricting 
the veslels, and increasing their resistance to the action of the 
heart; yet it is at the same time evident, that it frequently may be 
owing to the weakness of the heart not pushing the blood with 
due force towards the surface of the body, that this last is ren- 
dered more liable to be affected by cold. This disposition to 
be affected by cold may take place not only occasionally, as it 
may in most persons, but seemingly it subsists in some through 
a great part of life, and therefore may be considered as di- 
stinguishing the different conditions and temperaments of 
men. 

Of all the differences occurring with respect to the distribu- 
tion of the blood, there is none more remarkable than that of 
the proportion of the quantity in the arteries and veins. It is 
now ascertained, that this is different at different periods of life, 
from the difference occurring in certain circumstances of the 
arteries and veins at those different periods: for it is now 
|P_83
known, that the coats of the veins have a greater proportional 
density in young animals than in old; and therefore the resist- 
ance being greater in the veins at the one period than the other, 
less blood will be received into the veins, and more will be re- 
tained in the arteries. This difference of the quantities of 
blood in the arteries and veins manifestly occurs in the ordina- 
ry progress of life: but it is also probable, that in some per- 
sons the same difference, to a certain degree, takes place through 
the whole course of life, and gives a constant and considerable 
difference in the temperaments of men, as I shall mention more 
fully hereafter. 

[}Article IV.Of the different Proportion of Solid and Fuild in the 
Body.}]
A fourth circumstance producing a difference of tempera- 
ment, is the different proportion of solid and fluid in different 
persons. That this proportion varies at different periods of life; 
that in young persons the solids are less dense and the number 
of vessels is greater; and that consequently the proportion of 
fluid to solid is greater in young persons than in old, there can 
be no doubt: while, on the other hand, the quantity of solid is 
constantly increasing, and the number of vessels diminishing 
through the further course of life; so that these circumstances 
in old age are all of them entirely reversed. These conditions, 
therefore, are ever varying in the progress of life, and at the 
different periods of it, may be supposed to be suited to the œco- 
nomy: but, at the same time, there are circumstances which va- 
ry this matter independent of age. 

|P_84
In the first place, as we have already remarked that the den- 
sity of the simple solid is determined by the state of the origi- 
nal stamina, so the conditions of the system by which the change 
we have mentioned is produced, may be supposed in some mea- 
sure to be determined by the same circumstance. In conse- 
quence of this, the solids throughout the whole of life may be 
more dense in proportion to the size of the vessels; so that the 
proportion of fluid to solid, may be different in different per- 
sons of the same age, and in this respect, throughout the whole 
of life give a difference in the temperaments of men. 

In examining this subject, it is necessary not only to take into 
view the quantity of solid and fluid compared together on the 
whole, but to consider also the manner in which they are applied 
to one another. As the solids are formed into hollow tubes or 
vesiels, through which the fluids are in constant motion, we must 
consider to what degree the vessels are filled by the fluids mo- 
ving through them. 

In this view, it is evident that by the blood moving more 
slowly as it recedes farther from the heart, the vessels con- 
taining the red blood are constantly stretched or distended 
in every dimension beyond the size they would assume if no 
stretching power was applied to them; and this is what may 
be called a plethoric state of the system. Such a state is 
necessary not only to the evolution of the system, and conse- 
quently during the growth of the body, but throughout the 
whole of life it is requisite to the action of the vessels and 
to the due tension and action of perhaps every fibre of the sy- 
stem. This, however, may be different in different persons at 
the same period of life; so that the vessels may be stretched 
more or less beyond their natural capacities. In infancy, the 
solids are lax and yielding, and the vessels can bear to be 
|P_85
stretched more than they commonly are: but as from that period 
the density and resistance of the solids are perpetually increasing, 
so the tension of the arterial system is constantly approaching 
more and more to what it is able to bear, till at length the force 
of the heart can no longer extend the arteries at all, and a 
greater quantity of blood is thrown into the veins. In this 
condition matters remain through the rest of life; but at the 
same time both kinds of vessels remain in a plethoric state. 

From this view of the subject, it will appear that the human 
body, for the purposes of health and the proper exercise of its 
functions, is constantly in a plethoric state; but it is still sup- 
posed, that upon occasions it may be more or less so, and 
may be to such an excess as to produce either a disease, or at 
least a strong tendency to disease. Indeed it is possible, that 
throughout the whole of life, the quantity of blood, and conse- 
quently the fulness and tension of the vessels, may in some per- 
sons be in a greater proportion than in others, and thereby have 
a share in distinguishing the temperaments of different men. 

This last supposition has been universally admitted, and pro- 
bably is well founded, although I find it difficult to deter- 
mine certainly when it does really take place. It may perhaps 
in general be determined by the fulness of the pulse, the appa- 
rent size of the vessels on the surface of the body, the ruddiness 
of the complexion, and the general succulency of the habit. 
With respect, however, to the latter circumstance, we are apt 
to be deceived by our not being able in many cases to discern 
whether the plumpness of the body is owing to the fulness of 
the blood-vessels, or to the quantity of oil in the adipose mem- 
brane. The causes of both are very much the same; and it is 
only when the fulness of the habit takes place to a considerable 
|P_86
degree, that we can with any certainty ascribe it to obesity, ra- 
ther than to plethora or a fulness of the blood-vessels. 

This necessarily leads me to take notice of the different state of 
the adipose membrane, as giving a considerable difference in the 
constitutions of men. The different states of the adipose mem- 
brane are for the most part abundantly obvious; and the effects 
of obesity are often sufficiently observable: but upon what in- 
ternal state of the body, or upon what modification of the œco- 
nomy, it always depends, is not easily to be ascertained. It 
may be supposed in general to depend upon the quantity of 
nourishment, and in particular upon the oily quality of the ali- 
ment taken into the body; but although it certainly does often, 
cœteris paribus, depend upon these, yet at the same time we are 
certain it does not always depend upon these alone, and that in 
producing it many other circumstances may concur. 

It seems to me very possible, that the aliment being given, the 
digestive and assimilating powers may often produce fluids more or 
less disposed to admit of a more or less ready separation of oil, and 
consequently of its secession into the adipose membrane; or that, 
on the contrary, the same powers may produce fluids in a more 
saline state, and in which the oily parts are mixed in such a 
manner as to render them more ready to pass off by the excre- 
tions. It is well known, that an active circulation which power- 
fully supports the excretions, is also powerful in preventing the 
accumulation of oil in the adipose membrane, and that this in- 
deed happens in many persons without any assistance of bodily 
exercise; but we know also, that this accumulation of oil is e- 
specially prevented in those who take a great deal of such exer- 
cise; because this not only supports and promotes the excretions, 
but gives occasion likewise to the constant absorption of the 
|P_87
oil which had been before deposited in the adipose mem- 
brane. 

Whether a condition in the mass of blood disposing it to 
produce a copious serosity, may not be a means of increasing the 
absorption of oil for the purpose of involving an increased acri- 
mony, I cannot positively determine; but this seems to be very 
probable, because we find emaciation to be the consequence of a 
morbid acrimony prevailing in the fluids, as is evident in the 
cases of scurvy, syphilis, and cancer. 

To all these causes increasing or diminishing the fulness of 
oil in the adipose membrane, and which, in the cases of obesity 
or leanness, may allow us in general tp judge of the state of the 
system, and in particular of the state of the fluids, we must add 
a consideration which relates to the function of particular parts. 
The secretion of oil does not seem to me to be yet clearly ex- 
plained: but in general it may be supposed to depend upon 
a peculiar organization in the secretory organ, or in the cellu- 
lar texture receiving it; because it manifestly takes place in some 
parts of the body more than in others. For example, it takes 
place in the amentum more than in the mesentery; and it is oft- 
en found in preternatural quantity, or in greater proportion, 
in certain parts than in others: so that we must suppose it to be 
occasioned by some peculiar circumstances of those parts; and 
may therefore presume, that in the organs concerned in this busi- 
ness over the whole body, there is a peculiar constitution which, 
independent of all the others we have mentioned, has a great 
share in giving that state of obesity or of leanness which often 
marks a difference in the temperaments of men. At the same 
time, the cause of this is not yet well explained. 

|P_88
Before concluding this subject, it may be proper to observe, 
that although a plethora or the fulness of the blood-vessels, and 
obesity or fulness of the adipose membrane, are very different cir- 
cumstances, yet it is probable, that the fulness of the adipose mem- 
brane does always compress and diminish the size of the blood- 
vessels, and gives a plethora ad spatium, which has often the ef- 
fects of the plethora ad volumen: and I have frequently re- 
marked, that while persons of a fat habit may require evacua- 
tions of blood, yet at the same time they bear them worse than 
persons of a lean habit do. 

