en	Behind the Lungs passeth Isofagus of whom its spoken before, and there passeth also veins and Arteries, and all these with trachia arteria do make a stoke repleat unto the gullet, with Pannicles, strong Ligaments, and glandulus flesh to fulfill the voyd places.
en	Let ayre be cleare and light, & free from faultes, That come of secret passages and vaults.
en	Take an Egge, make a hole in the top of it, take out the white, and the yolk, and fill the shell only with Saffron; roast the shell and Saffron together, in Embers of Charcole, untill the shell wax yellow;
en	About 18 months ago I dissected a poor Emaciated Creature, that dyed of a Hydrops, out of whom I took about 10 Gallons of Liquor measured:
en	It is the object of this treatise to prove, that every well educated physician, of unimpeached character, residing within the jurisdiction of the college, is entitled, independently of local study and local graduation, to be examined for admission into the fellowship of the college;
la	All þe veynes I haue nowe tolde That clensen men, both yonge & olde.
en	Wommen of relegion purge noght because of rysyng o nyght and synggyng and ocupacyon in her seruyse her blod wastyth.
en	And som hafe it lengere as þei þat be of hye complexioun and be norysched with hote metys and drinkys, and lyuoun yn mych rest, and þey hafe þis purgacyoun euery moneth oones, but when þey ben with childe ore þat þey be of drye complexioun and laboure muche.
en	The Lungs is also divided into five Lobs, or Pellicles viz. three on the right side, and two on the left;
en	There being not so much as one word concerning Men-midwives mentioned there that we can find, it being the natural propriety of women to be much seeing into that Art: and though nature be not alone sufficient to the perfection of it, yet farther knowledge may be gain'd by a long and diligent practice, and be communicated to others of our own sex.
en	I wyl y=e= telle by & by As I fond wrety~ in abok, Y=t= in borwyng I be tok Of agret ladyes prest Y=t= of gret name bar y=e= mest.
en	Þis is kynde makyng of nervale certayne.
en	I graunt it is the power of the mynde whiche seeth, it is the power of the mynde whiche seeth, it is the power of the mynde which heareth, but yet if any infirmitie take the eyes, if the poores and issues of the eares be stopped & beseged w=t= any grosse humour, i~ vayne & al for nought hathe the mynde his power.
en	I haue sayd als I hafe sens;
en	ONE handful of Garden-Tansy, as much Sage, and twice as much Scurvy-grass, steep'd in two quarts of White-wine, or Strong Ale.
en	In the left hande for the mylte;
en	Drink for ordinary Dyet.
en	To guard therefore against such delusions, and to render the unphysical reader better qualified to decide, in an affair of so much importance, as his own health, and life, is the purport of this Essay; where by demonstrating the influence Nature has over many diseases, he may the readier judge of medical assistance in general, and on what plan, it can best be conducted.
en	and amongst other things, the smell of Sope-Suds, and Lye, in the washing of Clothes, be avoided;
en	Let it sethe tyl halfe be wastyd.
en	The filmes of the braine are very much troubled with this paine, which by reason of their tendernesse, euen the least paines are sharpe and irksome to them.
en	pulmonica mediana.
en	edere terrestris
la	De disciplina scolarium
en	puluis
en	Oleum Rhodij
la	Hinc stygias Ebrius hausit aquas:
la	Quartus gradus est quando habeat vnam portionem frigiditatis et sexdecem caliditatis/ tu~c dicitur esse calida in quarto gradu.
la	Prima etas lune calida est et humida.
en	Dragancia femina
la	Adiuro te, infirmitas, per Patrem et Filium et Spiritum Sanctum ne hic remaneas + Absterge, Domine, maculam ab occulo famuli tui + agios + agios + agios + sanctus + sanctus + sanctus + Christus vincit, Christus regnat, Christus imperat.
la	Jus absinthei sume, jus marubii, jus feniculi, centum grana piperis, farine fabarum, anglice 'flour-ben', siccate duo coccliaria despumate mellis, tantum quantum de jure erbarum et coque simul in olla ad spissitudinem mellis.
la	filius est vita
la	Item ad capud purgandum et vocem clarificandam et raucas reprimendas voces:
en	Pro ossibus extrahere illesis.
la	Item pulegium cum oleo coque et cum eo capud et tempera unge.
en	vena cephalica
la	Ad sanandum scabiem: Super omniam contra huiusmodi passionem humoris inter cutanei.
la	Item si capud videtur sindi pro dolore: Succum edere mixtum cum oleo et aceto et nares unge pacientis.
en	Item pro eodem.
en	vnguentum calidum
la	Si plaga sit in capite et fracta sit taga, est incurabilis; set si taga sit sana, curabilis est.
la	Item rutam et feniculum coque in aqua et cum ea lava capud tuum.
la	Postea appone albumen ovi et condiendo simul et postea cola per pannum et fac unum plaistrum cum lino et pone super anteriorem partem capitis.
en	qualiter fiat auditus
la	Castor gaudet equis, ouo prognatus codem, Pugnis, quot viuunt capitum, totidem studiorum Millia.
la	Item absintheum, rutam et ederam terrestrem tere cum melle et albumine ovi et indutum lintheo capiti appone.
en	Olibani p. ij.
en	Explicit de condicionibus planetarum.
la	Et modo incipit de condicionibus planetarum septem.
la	Secundus gradus est qua~do habeat vnam portionem frigiditatis et quattuor caliditatis/ tune dicitur esse calida in secundo gradu.
en	quo vita nusq~ decidat.
la	Lucidus & mundus sit rite habitabilis aer, Infectus neque sit, nec olens fætore cloacæ.
en	nervus audibilis
la	Hæc reuocat vires, fessaque membra leuat.
en	Ad deponendum telam in oculo.
en	quibus partibus gustabilem praestent
la	Parisiensis Explicit primus liber de Secretis secretorum, secundum translacionem Johannis de Caritate.
la	Valere dicitur fumus terrae in kaluris sub fumigan communibus in aporimatibus; & syropis potus enim datus scabiem pustulas a prurigine inundat Humores superflues inter carnem & cutem desiccat vel ad lepram exposites iuvat
en	Hoc fiet lassum, si te non illa grauabunt.
en	Pro surditate.
la	Tertius gradus est quando habeat vnam partem frigiditatis et octo caliditatis/ tune dicitur esse calida in tertio gradu.
en	qualitas cordis
en	Explicit Liber Cerebri
la	Pone in aquam testam oui plenam calcis vivae & sulphuri vivi & ignis exibit.
Prediction array: [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 1]