en	This indeed is cleer enough, and obliges us to averre a greater antiquity of this operation, than before we were aware of;
en	A barge-man fell into the dock at Queen-hythe, and was drowned.
la	Many þings bene profitable to þe confeccion of clisteries, if þe lech mi3t haue al redy.
en	Aboue y=e= thovme is the make;
en	Now, whatever be our exercise, those whom good fortune has enabled to take it or not, would do well to attend to the following observations.
en	In equity, by a comparative statement of the claims of the licentiates and fellows.
en	Þis is kynde makyng of nervale certayne.
en	I graunt it is the power of the mynde whiche seeth, it is the power of the mynde whiche seeth, it is the power of the mynde which heareth, but yet if any infirmitie take the eyes, if the poores and issues of the eares be stopped & beseged w=t= any grosse humour, i~ vayne & al for nought hathe the mynde his power.
en	For swellyng of membre of man or woman.
en	Also the Gout is a greife in some by way of distention, whereas the body being replete with abundance of humors, the upper and stronger parts put downe their offending fulnesse unto the lower, which descending, the veines, and sinewes, and arteries procure this paine of distention.
en	Alle maner swete þingis, forwhi þei swelliþ, and alle maner notis and accornys of okis.
en	Let ayre be cleare and light, & free from faultes, That come of secret passages and vaults.
la	All þe veynes I haue nowe tolde That clensen men, both yonge & olde.
en	forsoþe þat þe significacions of helyng or curyng and þo þing with which it is helyd or cured be diuerse.
en	For the same.
en	It sufficeth, so that I shew the substance of the thing, and to doe it, that every one may understand it.
en	Let it sethe tyl halfe be wastyd.
en	To guard therefore against such delusions, and to render the unphysical reader better qualified to decide, in an affair of so much importance, as his own health, and life, is the purport of this Essay; where by demonstrating the influence Nature has over many diseases, he may the readier judge of medical assistance in general, and on what plan, it can best be conducted.
en	The Lungs is also divided into five Lobs, or Pellicles viz. three on the right side, and two on the left;
en	Now, by considering the peculiarity of the circumstances, situation, and way of life of these people; and by attentively observing, what at any time gives rise to this disease, what is seen to remove it, and what to increase or mitigate its malignity, we shall be able to form a judgment, not only of the principal causes productive of it, but likewise of the subordinate, or those that in a less degree may contribute their influence.
en	Tak stronge vinegre of whit wyne, and anoynte euery day þryes or foure times þe vysage, þer hit is saucefleme; and hit wol breke out, as hit were a mesel, and when hit is so broken out, anoynte hit, as hit is y seyd by fore an syx dayes, þat þe feolþe may renne out;
en	Dies creticus vel cretica
la	D~ne ihu~ redemisti nos in sanguine tuo.
la	Item trifolium in aqua coque et tempora illini.
la	Item rutam, abrotanum, salgiam, ederam terestrem, trifolium simul tere et distempera cum aqua et bibe.
la	In manus tuas d~ne co~mendo spiritu~ meu~.
en	Pater nr~
en	Ex his fiat puluis subliss.
en	s~ p~miu~ mort~ sacre p~ennis instet gloria.
en	Ad deponendum telam in oculo.
en	laus sit tibi p~ amara passione tua.
en	Vita, Lucrum, Fratres, Parentes, Nati, Valetudo,
la	In noi~e pri~s et filij & spu~s sancti ame~.
en	Pro surditate.
la	Item ad vertiginem: Unaquaque die iii. guttas de urina propria super capud infirmi infunde mane cum sit jejunus.
en	de comune sapore coitus
la	Labilis vt vita est, infirmum est labile corpus, Sic tua qu firment me_ra, vereremmus.
la	Diues inaccessos vbi Solis filia Lucos, &c.
en	Iacea alba
en	Fenugrecum
la	Tertius gradus est quando habeat vnam partem frigiditatis et octo caliditatis/ tune dicitur esse calida in tertio gradu.
la	Item rutam et feniculum coque in aqua et cum ea lava capud tuum.
en	secundum artem.
la	Item lacte canis inunge et non cressent pili evulsi.
la	Experimentum si taga sit fracta cum nuce:
en	Granum solis
la	Sequitur de (missione) sanguinis.
en	Crocus Metallorum
en	Et tunc tolle de igne ut frigeat sicque in pixide pone.
en	Mors furit, urbs rapitur, Seuit mare, sol operitur, Regnum mutatur, plebs peste fame cruciatur.
en	sanguis menstruus
la	Ignis ardens super aquam & natans hoc modo fit sicut ignis volans in aere sed cauda debet esse ad longitudine mvnius palme & debet poni super aquam & sine dubio ardebit super aquam & desuper.
en	pulmonica mediana.
en	'Pede super colles pedes vbi pedere nolles.'
en	Incipit Liber Cerebri
la	Quartus gradus est quando habeat vnam portionem frigiditatis et sexdecem caliditatis/ tu~c dicitur esse calida in quarto gradu.
en	Largire claru~ vespere.
en	Iacea nigra
la	Item folia vervene cum sale trita ossa illisa extrahunt ex qualibet fractura ac vulneri et cum auxungia veteri inposita vulnera sanant et capita mundant.
en	herba pulmonis
en	Uxor, Mors, Pietas, Regnum, Benefactaq; Carcer.
en	nervus audibilis
la	Quod caret alterna requie durabile non est.
la	Item abrotanum bibat et liberabitur.
la	Septem grana juniperi vel ix confortant cerebrum, sensus recuperant, visum donant, pectus mundificant, vocem clarifecant, ventum depellunt, degestionem faciunt, lapidem frangunt, colorem renum curant, contra venenum valent, spiritum letiferum paralisim curant, avalitum dulcorant, eloquenciam dant.
Prediction array: [0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1]