en	Also the Gout is a greife in some by way of distention, whereas the body being replete with abundance of humors, the upper and stronger parts put downe their offending fulnesse unto the lower, which descending, the veines, and sinewes, and arteries procure this paine of distention.
en	BY the term rupture, hernia, or descent, is meant a tumor produced by the falling down or protrusion of some part or parts which should naturally be contained in the cavity of the belly.
en	There was some other small matters to be seen, not worth while for me to mention to you.
en	Blode is hot and moyst in his kynde and therfor men that ben sangweyne in complexion ben hot and moist in his kynde for plente of blood that they haue.
en	It distroith y=e= fe all be dene.
en	The Lungs is also divided into five Lobs, or Pellicles viz. three on the right side, and two on the left;
en	I could instance many more, which Authors do wrongfully apply, as instance they attribute angelica, sage, box, and such like to be under the planet Saturn whereas the herbs are all hot and dry especially box who is hot and dry in the fourth degree, both the first plants are without question under the dominion of the Sun, as being of a good smell and taste and are of known virtues to comfort the heart, arteries, and vital spirits and to resist poyson.
en	The part affected.
en	THE vulgar sort are so strongly prepossest (by reason of their ignorance) that Physicians can discern (by the Urine) the Disease, the conception, the sexe, the parties age, with many other such absurdities that I feare it will bee an hard matter to dispossesse them of that opinion.
en	And if þou take þe mawe of a sowkynge hare, or of a sowkyng calfe and bren it alto powdere, medell þe poudre with þe forsayde pille, þei are mych betture.
en	The body of a man was thrown up at Puddle-dock by the tide, having a deep wound in his neck near his windpipe, besides several other wounds and bruises; had nothing on but the collar of his shirt, and shoes, and stockings.
en	Now, whatever be our exercise, those whom good fortune has enabled to take it or not, would do well to attend to the following observations.
en	Also this medcyne nowe helyth the lepner and the fyer of helle and the grekys fyer and the fyer of Sodom.
en	Therefore it behoveth all Persons, as well Poor as Rich, to be furnish'd with Remedies against that Contagious Disease; and certain Rules, or a Method how to use them:
en	Þis is kynde makyng of nervale certayne.
en	It sufficeth, so that I shew the substance of the thing, and to doe it, that every one may understand it.
en	And 3yf þer schulde be norechyd on hem ony frut it is profyt abele þat che purge er che conseyue to make clene and redy þe place þat þe seed sal ly in.
en	This indeed is cleer enough, and obliges us to averre a greater antiquity of this operation, than before we were aware of;
en	In equity, by a comparative statement of the claims of the licentiates and fellows.
en	Take þe herbe celidoyne whos frute and flours been of goldyn colour, and take þereof the iiij elementz aftre þe maistrie of þe furst boke.
en	He is A vayne of nobill fame;
en	Hoc fiet lassum, si te non illa grauabunt.
la	Gratia dei maior
la	Item folia vervene cum sale trita ossa illisa extrahunt ex qualibet fractura ac vulneri et cum auxungia veteri inposita vulnera sanant et capita mundant.
en	Mors furit, urbs rapitur, Seuit mare, sol operitur, Regnum mutatur, plebs peste fame cruciatur.
la	Item contra omnes capitis dolores: Folia edere trita molissime aceto et oleo roseo mixta fronte illiniatur.
en	Pater nr~
la	Capillos tunde, deinde mundum panniculum .i. est absque ullo medicamine, vel lardi a linthe juxta plage quantitatem in ipso hiatu ossis, ne sanies iruens in juncturas suas putredinem extendat.
en	Ungwentum.
en	tu nos ab hoste p~tege.
en	Pro surditate.
la	Item ne pili contrarii nascantur: Ova formicarum, lacrimam edere i. jus, archemeseam equo pondere, hec omnia in vino quiesse et locum vulneris tange et pili nuncquam renascentur.
en	Pro ossibus extrahere illesis.
la	Quartus gradus est quando habeat vnam portionem frigiditatis et sexdecem caliditatis/ tu~c dicitur esse calida in quarto gradu.
la	Explicit tractatus Johannes de barba vel Johannis de Burdegalia editus contra morbum pestilencialem et est morbus epidemialis Anno domini Millesimo trecentesimo nonagesimo.
en	Iacea alba
en	quibus partibus gustabilem praestent
en	Dirupisti dn~e vincula mea. tibi sacrificabo hostia~ laudis.
la	D~ne ihu~ redemisti nos in sanguine tuo.
la	Item absintheum, rutam et ederam terrestrem tere cum melle et albumine ovi et indutum lintheo capiti appone.
la	Item pulegium cum oleo coque et cum eo capud et tempera unge.
la	et in hora mortis suscipe.
la	Item rutam, abrotanum, salgiam, ederam terestrem, trifolium simul tere et distempera cum aqua et bibe.
la	Labilis vt vita est, infirmum est labile corpus, Sic tua qu firment me_ra, vereremmus.
en	Dragancia femina
la	Item si capud videtur sindi pro dolore: Succum edere mixtum cum oleo et aceto et nares unge pacientis.
en	id est sanguis
en	De humana natura.
en	qualiter visus oculis adveniat
en	Amen Explicit.
la	Vt ignis exeat de vase pleno aque.
en	Largire claru~ vespere.
la	Multi multa sciunt, sed nemo Omnia.
la	Trahit sua quemq~ voluptas.
en	licium
en	Salus populi
la	Dialthææ
la	De gradibus siccitatis et caliditatis sciendum est.
en	Postea inpone broceam usque ad terciam diem.
en	Deinde purga pocione.
en	lutum
la	Carmen ad fluxum sanguinis: 'Domine Deus meus, adiutor sis famulo tuo .N. sicud strinxsisti [\f. 19rb\] fluvium Jordanis quando Christus baptizatus fuit, sic disstringe venas famuli tui .N. plenas sanguine'.
la	Accipe panem siliginis bene fermentatum et acrem et cum exeat a furno, pone in forti aceto et cum bene biberit de aceto, deinde ponatur in furno et iterum coquatur.
la	qui bene degerit, ingerit, egerit, est homo sanus.
en	s~ p~miu~ mort~ sacre p~ennis instet gloria.
Prediction array: [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 1, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 0]