en	Brother I pray the for charite that thou write to me a fewe medecynes that I myght help pore folk that falleth into sekenes and beth vnkonnyng to helpe hem sylfen and of vnpower to huyre hem leches.
en	If you be sick after meat, use this.
en	BY the term rupture, hernia, or descent, is meant a tumor produced by the falling down or protrusion of some part or parts which should naturally be contained in the cavity of the belly.
en	In the left hande for the mylte;
en	So that she neadeth nothynge at all to be auansed and lyfted vp, other with any despitefull rebukes of other craftes, other with some borowed and paynted colours of the rhetoricians, or with the iugglynge castes of amplificacions.
la	For þe sengles.
en	I wyl y=e= telle by & by As I fond wrety~ in abok, Y=t= in borwyng I be tok Of agret ladyes prest Y=t= of gret name bar y=e= mest.
en	Now, by considering the peculiarity of the circumstances, situation, and way of life of these people; and by attentively observing, what at any time gives rise to this disease, what is seen to remove it, and what to increase or mitigate its malignity, we shall be able to form a judgment, not only of the principal causes productive of it, but likewise of the subordinate, or those that in a less degree may contribute their influence.
en	Take green Vitriol calcin'd, Saltpeter, and Sulphur, of each a pound, beat them well together, and keep it for use.
en	A treatise on clysters.
en	That the Air we breathe in may be wholesome, all Things, that may advance or add to the corruption of it, should diligently be removed; our Houses, and Streets kept clean;
en	Aboue y=e= thovme is the make;
en	And as son as che purgis che is abele to conceyue.
en	It sufficeth, so that I shew the substance of the thing, and to doe it, that every one may understand it.
en	Also this medcyne nowe helyth the lepner and the fyer of helle and the grekys fyer and the fyer of Sodom.
en	The thyrde water of seyunte Gyle ys for to distroye many infirmiteys with in a mannys bodye, and hit ys clepid amongyste clerkes and doctoris aqua potabilis and hit ys made in this wyse.
en	I could instance many more, which Authors do wrongfully apply, as instance they attribute angelica, sage, box, and such like to be under the planet Saturn whereas the herbs are all hot and dry especially box who is hot and dry in the fourth degree, both the first plants are without question under the dominion of the Sun, as being of a good smell and taste and are of known virtues to comfort the heart, arteries, and vital spirits and to resist poyson.
en	It is the object of this treatise to prove, that every well educated physician, of unimpeached character, residing within the jurisdiction of the college, is entitled, independently of local study and local graduation, to be examined for admission into the fellowship of the college;
en	Being a discovery of the Body of Man, exactly delineating all the Members, Bones, Veins, Sinews, Arteries, and parts thereof, from the Head to the Foot.
en	The Lungs is also divided into five Lobs, or Pellicles viz. three on the right side, and two on the left;
la	In þe name of þe fader and þe sonne and þe holy gost; and write þes names in perchemyn:
en	Item pro eodem.
en	Item oleo facto de nucibus maioribus capud inunge.
la	Postea extrahe et iterum pone in aceto et ita ter coque in furno hoc modo.
la	De disciplina scolarium
en	Incipit Liber Cerebri
en	de comune sapore coitus
la	PRimus gradus siccitatis & caliditatis est cum aliqua res habeat vna~ portionem frigiditatis et duas caliditatis/ tunc res illa dicitur esse calida in primo gradu.
en	Explicit de condicionibus planetarum.
la	filius est vita
la	Item pulegium coctum in aceto ad narez pone calidum, ut odor intret de ipso et fac coronam de eodem et capiti calidam circum appone.
la	Quo dicto et si absens sit, liberabitur.
la	Corporis & debes non intermittere curam, Inque cibo potuque modus sit, gymnasiisque.
la	Item rutam, abrotanum, salgiam, ederam terestrem, trifolium simul tere et distempera cum aqua et bibe.
en	vena cephalica
en	Puluis sine pari
en	De~ p~pici~ esto m~ pcco~ri
la	Hoc facto lokechestre vivens coque et succum eius adde predictis et mitte in aures et curabitur surditas.
en	secundum artem.
la	Ut pili nascantur: Agrimoniam cum lacte caprino pone super locum sine pilis, et nascentur.
la	Diues inaccessos vbi Solis filia Lucos, &c.
en	Ad capud purgandum.
en	quibus partibus gustabilem praestent
la	Jus absinthei sume, jus marubii, jus feniculi, centum grana piperis, farine fabarum, anglice 'flour-ben', siccate duo coccliaria despumate mellis, tantum quantum de jure erbarum et coque simul in olla ad spissitudinem mellis.
la	Accipe viride lyngnum abietis et cum ardet tolle illud quod fluit in posteriori parte lingni et admisse favum mellis.
en	Verbi gratia:
la	Accipe betam viridem bene tritam et cum succo inunge tempera.
la	quod qualitas tactabilis toti corpori praestetur
la	Hæc reuocat vires, fessaque membra leuat.
la	Hinc stygias Ebrius hausit aquas:
la	Ignis ardens super aquam & natans hoc modo fit sicut ignis volans in aere sed cauda debet esse ad longitudine mvnius palme & debet poni super aquam & sine dubio ardebit super aquam & desuper.
en	Pater nr~
en	Herba cruriatica
la	'Virtutem primam puta esse compescere linguam':
la	dies creticus est dies evasicuis ab infirmitate fine ad vitam, fine ad mortem.
en	eiusmodi
en	Item minta trita timpora line.
en	Fenugrecum
la	Hoc facto conditum est.
la	In manus tuas d~ne co~mendo spiritu~ meu~.
la	Parisiensis Explicit primus liber de Secretis secretorum, secundum translacionem Johannis de Caritate.
la	Si nucem poterit frangere vel nodum straminis, tunc est curabilis.
la	Labilis vt vita est, infirmum est labile corpus, Sic tua qu firment me_ra, vereremmus.
la	spiritus sanctus est remedium
la	Et cum opus fuerit, da jejuno coccliar unum et caveat hiis diebus a lardo et butiro et oleo et ab omnibus salcis.
Prediction array: [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 0, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 1, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1]