en	THe Small Pox are caused of superfluous choller and flegm, the which is mixed with the bloud, and so continuing a certain time it doth encrease so much, that Nature cannot bear it, and so driveth it forth with a great accident of a Fever, the which commonly doth continue four or five daies together, and then cometh forth certain wheals or bladders full of corruption, which within three daies will break and run forth, and many drie.
en	all Filth, and whatever may cause noisom smells, be taken away;
en	forgif me if it be wrang, And excuse me sere frend, for the mater was hard & strang.
en	3e that wyll lette gude men blode, And vaynes wyth al 3owre liues fode, Some vaynes, vse 3e, And mony other lette 3e be.
en	Now, by considering the peculiarity of the circumstances, situation, and way of life of these people; and by attentively observing, what at any time gives rise to this disease, what is seen to remove it, and what to increase or mitigate its malignity, we shall be able to form a judgment, not only of the principal causes productive of it, but likewise of the subordinate, or those that in a less degree may contribute their influence.
en	Brother I pray the for charite that thou write to me a fewe medecynes that I myght help pore folk that falleth into sekenes and beth vnkonnyng to helpe hem sylfen and of vnpower to huyre hem leches.
la	Many þings bene profitable to þe confeccion of clisteries, if þe lech mi3t haue al redy.
en	To knawe the vaynes to let blode one.
en	It sufficeth, so that I shew the substance of the thing, and to doe it, that every one may understand it.
en	and in this I am more confirmed by observing that almost all the infants that are ruptured within the first five or six months of their life, are males.
en	The Lungs is also divided into five Lobs, or Pellicles viz. three on the right side, and two on the left;
en	To guard therefore against such delusions, and to render the unphysical reader better qualified to decide, in an affair of so much importance, as his own health, and life, is the purport of this Essay; where by demonstrating the influence Nature has over many diseases, he may the readier judge of medical assistance in general, and on what plan, it can best be conducted.
en	And Care must be taken not to overload the Stomach, or to eat any thing but what is of good Nourishment, and easy to digest, and grateful to the Stomach.
en	He is A vayne of nobill fame;
en	It is an admirable head Purge, also an excellent and safe Medicine for those who are naturally costive or hot bodies.
en	And if þou take þe mawe of a sowkynge hare, or of a sowkyng calfe and bren it alto powdere, medell þe poudre with þe forsayde pille, þei are mych betture.
en	I haue sayd als I hafe sens;
en	Therefore it behoveth all Persons, as well Poor as Rich, to be furnish'd with Remedies against that Contagious Disease; and certain Rules, or a Method how to use them:
en	So that she neadeth nothynge at all to be auansed and lyfted vp, other with any despitefull rebukes of other craftes, other with some borowed and paynted colours of the rhetoricians, or with the iugglynge castes of amplificacions.
en	I could instance many more, which Authors do wrongfully apply, as instance they attribute angelica, sage, box, and such like to be under the planet Saturn whereas the herbs are all hot and dry especially box who is hot and dry in the fourth degree, both the first plants are without question under the dominion of the Sun, as being of a good smell and taste and are of known virtues to comfort the heart, arteries, and vital spirits and to resist poyson.
en	this, Experience has taught to be very dangerous;
la	'Virtutem primam puta esse compescere linguam':
en	Item oleo facto de nucibus maioribus capud inunge.
en	Oleum Rhodij
en	De~ p~pici~ esto m~ pcco~ri
en	co~tine~tia
en	Fenugrecum
en	Crocus Metallorum
en	et libenter volo me emendare p~ gra~q~ tua~ Miserere mei p~pt~ amara~ passione~ tua~.
en	Ad idem.
la	Postea ungwentum fuscum qualibet die apponatur.
en	sanguis menstruus
la	'Quominus nil pacior paciendi me tenet horror':
la	'Sicut ad omne quod est mensuram ponere prodest, Sic sine mensura deperit omne quod est'
la	Tertius gradus est quando habeat vnam partem frigiditatis et octo caliditatis/ tune dicitur esse calida in tertio gradu.
la	Accipe panem siliginis bene fermentatum et acrem et cum exeat a furno, pone in forti aceto et cum bene biberit de aceto, deinde ponatur in furno et iterum coquatur.
en	lactea porta
en	Quid pro quo,
la	filius est vita
la	Item folia vervene cum sale trita ossa illisa extrahunt ex qualibet fractura ac vulneri et cum auxungia veteri inposita vulnera sanant et capita mundant.
la	Item contra omnes capitis dolores: Folia edere trita molissime aceto et oleo roseo mixta fronte illiniatur.
la	Ungwentum fuscum: Resspice celodonie .vi., de mastic .ii., de mitre .ii., cere .ii., olei libri .vi., quod priusquam in coctura ponatur, dissolvatur (prout mundari poterit) et aliquantulum super ignem in aliquo vase locato prout poterit mundari, cum aqua frigida super asspergatur, et sic mundatum confice sic in ollam, oleum inponatur et sic adjungatur lento.
en	Explicit de condicionibus planetarum.
en	De humana natura.
la	(monumentum ære perennius)
en	noli me tangere.
en	Ungwentum.
en	qualiter odoratibus naribus adveniat
la	Hoc facto lokechestre vivens coque et succum eius adde predictis et mitte in aures et curabitur surditas.
en	Vita, Lucrum, Fratres, Parentes, Nati, Valetudo,
en	Ipse repertorem medicinæ talis & artis, Fulmine Phœbigenam stygias detrusit ad vndas,
en	primi libri regalis disposicionis,
en	Ad faciendum bonum entret.
en	inominata
la	Pilulæ Angelicæ, Aloes Rosata, Pilulæ Tartareæ, Grana Angelica, &c.
en	qualiter fiat auditus
la	Et modo incipit de condicionibus planetarum septem.
la	Ut pili nascantur: Agrimoniam cum lacte caprino pone super locum sine pilis, et nascentur.
la	Multi multa sciunt, sed nemo Omnia.
la	Item pulegium coctum in aceto ad narez pone calidum, ut odor intret de ipso et fac coronam de eodem et capiti calidam circum appone.
en	Pro ossibus extrahere illesis.
la	De condicionibus planetarum septem.
en	qualiter visus oculis adveniat
la	Capillos tunde, deinde mundum panniculum .i. est absque ullo medicamine, vel lardi a linthe juxta plage quantitatem in ipso hiatu ossis, ne sanies iruens in juncturas suas putredinem extendat.
en	Pro dolore in dorso vel spina.
Prediction array: [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0]