en	Now, whatever be our exercise, those whom good fortune has enabled to take it or not, would do well to attend to the following observations.
en	This is good for þe y3en.
en	Also this medcyne nowe helyth the lepner and the fyer of helle and the grekys fyer and the fyer of Sodom.
en	Beneth, when y=e= leuer takis harme.
en	Take green Vitriol calcin'd, Saltpeter, and Sulphur, of each a pound, beat them well together, and keep it for use.
en	This disease is knowne by the patients complaints and answeres.
en	Blode is hot and moyst in his kynde and therfor men that ben sangweyne in complexion ben hot and moist in his kynde for plente of blood that they haue.
en	This has always appeared to me to be the case;
en	Being a discovery of the Body of Man, exactly delineating all the Members, Bones, Veins, Sinews, Arteries, and parts thereof, from the Head to the Foot.
en	Þis is kynde makyng of nervale certayne.
en	In equity, by a comparative statement of the claims of the licentiates and fellows.
en	Let ayre be cleare and light, & free from faultes, That come of secret passages and vaults.
en	Behind the Lungs passeth Isofagus of whom its spoken before, and there passeth also veins and Arteries, and all these with trachia arteria do make a stoke repleat unto the gullet, with Pannicles, strong Ligaments, and glandulus flesh to fulfill the voyd places.
la	Many þings bene profitable to þe confeccion of clisteries, if þe lech mi3t haue al redy.
en	3if y=u= of vomites wylt hawe bote,
en	There being not so much as one word concerning Men-midwives mentioned there that we can find, it being the natural propriety of women to be much seeing into that Art: and though nature be not alone sufficient to the perfection of it, yet farther knowledge may be gain'd by a long and diligent practice, and be communicated to others of our own sex.
en	Alle maner swete þingis, forwhi þei swelliþ, and alle maner notis and accornys of okis.
en	The Lungs is also divided into five Lobs, or Pellicles viz. three on the right side, and two on the left;
en	Wommen of relegion purge noght because of rysyng o nyght and synggyng and ocupacyon in her seruyse her blod wastyth.
la	For þe sengles.
en	To guard therefore against such delusions, and to render the unphysical reader better qualified to decide, in an affair of so much importance, as his own health, and life, is the purport of this Essay; where by demonstrating the influence Nature has over many diseases, he may the readier judge of medical assistance in general, and on what plan, it can best be conducted.
la	Experimentum si taga sit fracta cum nuce:
en	sanguis menstruus
en	Herba cruriatica
la	Si nucem poterit frangere vel nodum straminis, tunc est curabilis.
en	vena cephalica
en	Item minta trita timpora line.
la	In primis pro oculis Aqua facialis preciosa dicta.
en	Dies creticus vel cretica
la	Dimitte nobis debita nra~ sicut & nos dimittim~ debitorib~ nri~s.
la	Pone in aquam testam oui plenam calcis vivae & sulphuri vivi & ignis exibit.
la	dies creticus est dies evasicuis ab infirmitate fine ad vitam, fine ad mortem.
la	Postea ungwentum fuscum qualibet die apponatur.
la	Accipe panem siliginis bene fermentatum et acrem et cum exeat a furno, pone in forti aceto et cum bene biberit de aceto, deinde ponatur in furno et iterum coquatur.
en	herba pulmonis
en	Pro dolore in dorso vel spina.
la	Hinc stygias Ebrius hausit aquas:
en	Dirupisti dn~e vincula mea. tibi sacrificabo hostia~ laudis.
la	Item si capud videtur sindi pro dolore: Succum edere mixtum cum oleo et aceto et nares unge pacientis.
la	et in hora mortis suscipe.
en	nervus audibilis
la	PRimus gradus siccitatis & caliditatis est cum aliqua res habeat vna~ portionem frigiditatis et duas caliditatis/ tunc res illa dicitur esse calida in primo gradu.
la	Ut pili nascantur: Agrimoniam cum lacte caprino pone super locum sine pilis, et nascentur.
en	Contra surditatem:
en	Hic sutus/ fallax/ irascens/ prodigus/ audax/ Astutus/ gracilis/ succus/ croceiq~ coloris.
la	Pro ossibus inpressis in capite vel in alio loco corporis:
la	Deus p~pici~ esto michi pcco~ri D~ne ihu~ xp~e Ego cognosco me grauiter peccasse.
en	Vita, Lucrum, Fratres, Parentes, Nati, Valetudo,
en	Crocus Metallorum
la	'Sicut ad omne quod est mensuram ponere prodest, Sic sine mensura deperit omne quod est'
la	Quo dicto et si absens sit, liberabitur.
en	Puluis sine pari
la	Multi multa sciunt, sed nemo Omnia.
en	Iacea nigra
la	Item folia vervene cum sale trita ossa illisa extrahunt ex qualibet fractura ac vulneri et cum auxungia veteri inposita vulnera sanant et capita mundant.
en	eiusmodi
en	Verbi gratia:
en	incendiu~ sodomoru~,
en	Pro ossibus extrahere illesis.
la	ad Aemilianum cæcum consolatio
en	Salus populi
la	Deinde commedat paciens de illo pane et nichil bibat nisi fortissimum acetum, set cum jejunare facias per diem vel duos et item acerimo aceto et ab pane siliginis acerino interficietur.
la	Carmen ad fluxum sanguinis: 'Domine Deus meus, adiutor sis famulo tuo .N. sicud strinxsisti [\f. 19rb\] fluvium Jordanis quando Christus baptizatus fuit, sic disstringe venas famuli tui .N. plenas sanguine'.
en	qualiter fiat auditus
la	'Quominus nil pacior paciendi me tenet horror':
Prediction array: [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 0, 1, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1]