[^Agrippa, Heinrich Cornelius: Vanitie and vncertaintie^] 
 
[}Henrie Cornelius Agrippa, 
of the Vanitie and 
vncertaintie of Artes and 
Sciences, Englished by 
Ia. San. Gent. 
 
Ecclesiastes .I. 
All is but moste vaine Vanitie: and 
all is most vaine, and but plaine 
Vanitie. 
 
Scene and allowed according to 
the order appointed. 
 
Imprinted at London, by 
Henry Wykes dwelling in Fleete streat, 
at the signe of the blacke 
Elephant. 
 
Anno. 1569.}] 
 
[^Omitted a dedication to the Duke of Norfolke, a preface and eighty-one chapters on various arts and sciences.^] 
[^Extract 1, ff.140r-154r^] 
 
[^f.140r^] 
[}Of Physicke. Cap. 82.}] 
 
BUt now let vs passe from warrefarre, and nobilitee 
to Phisicke, whiche also is a certaine Arte of manslaughter 
altogeather seruill, although it presume 
to passe vnder the title of Philosophie, & aboue the knowledge 
of the lawe, doth seeke to haue the nexte place to diuinitee, 
wherefore there is a greate contention betwene 
Phisitions and Lawiers. For the Phisitions argue in 
this manner: Seinge that there be three kindes of goodes 
by order, of the Soule, Bodie, and of Fortune: the diuine 
hath charge of the firste, the Phisition of the seconde, the 
Lawiers of the thirde, for this cause they will that the 
Phisitions haue the midle place aboue the Lawiers, in so 
muche as the strength and healthe of the bodie is better 
then the riches of Fortune. But there was a certaine 
[/1./] 
Mayor of a Citie, whom I know not, that made an ende 
of this matter in variaunce, with a preatie and pleasant 
demaund. For he asked of them that were in strife, what 
vsage and order was obserued in caryinge men to the Galowes, 
whether wente before, and behinde the theefe or 
the Hangeman? And when they aunsweared that the 
theefe wente before, and the Hangeman nexte, he gaue 
sentence, sayinge: the Lawiers then goo before, and the 
Phisitions come after: reprouinge in this manner theire 
notable robberie, and rashe murders. But returne 
we to Phisicke, which hath many sectes: for there is one, 
which they call Rationall, or Sophisticall, or Dogmaticall, 
and this haue Hippocrates, Diocles, Chrysippus, Caristinus, 
Paraxagoras, and Horosistratus followed, which Galene, 
a longe time after these, did approue: who following 
[^f.140v^] 
Hippocrates more then others reduced the whole Arte of 
Phisicke to the knowledge of causes, and signes, to the 
qualitees of thinges, and to diuers plightes and likinges 
of bodies. But because this secte hath to do about woords, 
rather then aboute the thinges themselues, I confesse it 
is not the meanest parte of naturall Philosophie, yet not 
very necessarie to cure the diseased, I will not saie hurtefull, 
as that whiche referreth mens saulftie and health to 
certaine wrested Sophismes, rather then to pure Medicines, 
with whiche diseases maie be cured: and busied in 
scholerlike Syllogismes, ignoraunt of desertes, wooddes, 
and gardens, dothe not knowe hearbes, and medecine: 
wherefore Serapion confessed that this Rational Phisicke 
belonged not to the Arte of healinge maladies. There is 
then an other secte of Phisicke altogeather gainefull and 
seruill, whereof Phisitions vntill this daie haue theire 
name. For this cause they call it Operatiue, that is workinge, 
deuiding the same into Empericall, & Methodicall, 
hereof in this place we haue to speake. Wherefore they 
call it Empericall, that is to saie, that consisteth in practise, 
of experimentes, the heades whereof were Serapion, 
Heraclides, and both the Apollonij: whom afterwarde of 
the Latines Marcus Cato, C. Valgius, Pomponius, Leneus, 
Cassius Fœlix, Aruntius, Cornelius Celsus, Plinie, 
and many other followed. Of this Hierophilus the Chalcedonian, 
made afterwarde the Methodicall, that is, compendious 
to learne by, and by longe experience the mistresse 
of all thinges, reduced it to certaine rules, whiche 
afterwarde Asclepiades, Themistion, & Archigenes did 
approue with moste stronge argumentes: But Thesillus 
the Italian was he that brought it to perfection, who (as 
Varro saithe) disanulled all the opinions of them whiche 
were before him, and as it were with a certaine doggish 
madnesse enueighed against all the Phisitians of the time 
paste. After these very many barbarouse Philosophers 
of foreine nations wrote thereof, emonge whome the 
[^f.141r^] 
glorie of the Arabians encreased so muche, that to very 
many they seemed the first finders out of this Arte, and 
without doubte it semeth that they maie striue for it, 
if the woordes which they vse grounded vpon the Greeke 
& Latine, did not declare an other originall of this Arte. 
For this cause the volumes of Auicenna, Rasis, and Auerrois 
haue benne receaued in like authoritee with the 
 bookes of Hippocrates, and Galene, and haue gotten so 
great credite, that if one presume to heale an other without 
theire opinions, he semeth manifestly to endomage 
the common saulftie of men. And although these sectes 
of Phisitions be fewe, yet there is no lesse contention, 
and diuersitee of opinions emonge them, then emonge 
the Philosophers. For hire with what foolishe and vaine 
reasons they dispute of Sperme, whiche is the naturall 
humour whereof all liuinge thinges be engendred and 
[/2./] 
fourmed: Pythagoras saide, that it is a skomme or froth 
of the profitablest bloudde, or els the profitablest superfluitee 
of meate. Plato said: that it was a rennyng downe 
of the marowe of the backe bone, because theire backes 
and reynes doo ake, which vnmeasurable vse the acte of generation. 
Alcmeon affirmeth it to be a parte of y~ braine, 
because the eies of them that fulfill the fleashly lustes, doo 
ake, whiche are partes of the braine. Democritus saith: 
that it is a thinge that commeth from all partes of the 
bodie, and Epicurus will that it be taken from the bodie 
and soule. Aristotle saithe, that it is a superfluitee of 
blouddie nourishment, whiche is laste of all digested in 
the members. Others thinke that it is bloudde boyled 
and made white thorowe the heate of the stoones, moued 
onely by this reason, because they, whiche vse the pleasures 
of loue more then theire force can endure, doo voide 
droppes of bloude. Moerouer Aristotle and Democritus 
saie, that the seede of a woman auaileth nothinge to generation, 
and that thei voide no seede, but a certaine particular 
sweate. Galene saith, that they voide sperme, albeit 
[^f.141v^] 
vnperfect for generation, and that the seede of bothe, 
of the man and the woman doth make a liuing creature. 
But Aristotle will, that the bodies of liuinge thinges be 
engendred firste of all of bloudde, and immediatly to be 
nourished, and that the naturall humoure is engendred 
of bloude: Hippocrates contrarywise saithe, that the 
bodies of liuing creatures be first engendred of the foure 
humours. Many Arabians also haue supposed, that perfecte 
liuinge creatures maie be engendred without the 
coniunction of male and female, & be brought foorth with 
out seede: and therfore they saide that the matrices were 
not necessarie but by accidente. But to entreate of the 
originall causes of diseases, Hippocrates placeth them in 
the breathe without the spirite. Hierophilus in the humours: 
Erasistratus in the bloudde of the Artieres, Asclepiades 
considereth them of the indiuisible partes receaued 
into the inuisible pores of the bodie. Alcmeon of the 
abundance or wante of the powers of the bodie. Diocles 
of the vnequalitee of the bodily elementes, and fetchinge 
of the breath. Strato beleued that all diseases came onely 
of superfluitee, rawnesse of the stomake, and of the corruption 
thereof. They likewise disagree in the alteration of 
the meate. For Hippocrates, Galene, and Auicen, doo affirme 
that the meate is digested in the stomake by heate. 
Erasistratus will that this be donne in the belly. Plistonicus, 
and Paraxagoras saie, that it doth not onely digeste, 
but putrifie also: But whiche is more Auicen, and his expositours, 
Gentiles, and Iames of Forline, not without a 
notable errour doo teache that ordure is engendred in the 
stomake: Asclepiades and his followers doo suppose that 
meate is not digested, but is deuided rawe thorowe out 
all the bodie, and furthermore they saie that the learning 
of all the auncientes is vaine, and superfluouse. I speake 
not of y~ iudgements of waters, not yet perfectly knowe~ 
of them, and the pawsinges of the pulses not to be comprehended. 
Hippocrates moreouer whom they woorship 
[^f.142r^] 
for a God, hath not onely differed in many thinges from 
other, but also fallen into a foule erroure. For in his 
booke of the nature of a childe, he saith: A birde is engendred 
of the yolke of an egge, but he hath nourishmente 
and encreasinge of the white, that is in the egge: whiche 
Aristotle proueth to be false in his booke of liuinge creatures, 
and in his booke of the generation of liuinge creatures 
disputinge against Alcmeon, who was of Hippocrates 
opinion, he concludeth thus: The originall of the 
birde is in the white: the meate commeth from the yolke 
thorowe the nauell, to whiche opinion Plinie dothe also 
agree, sayinge: the birde taketh his bodie of the white licour 
of the egge, whose meate is in the yolke. Is not that 
Aphorisme of Hippocrates false? A woman hath not the 
Goute, except her flowers faile: where as many women 
haue the Goute, which haue their flowers. 
 
[}Of Phisicke, that consisteth in practise. Cap. 83.}] 
 
THe whole Arte of Phisicke moreouer is builden vpon 
no other fundation, then vpon false experimentes, 
and fortified with the light beleefe of the 
Sicke, no lesse venemous then beneficiall, so that oftentimes, 
and well neare alwaies, there is more daunger in 
the Phisition, and the medicine, then in the sickenesse it 
selfe, which thing the very chiefest in this Arte doo freely 
confesse, that is to witte, Hippocrates, sayinge: that this 
Arte is harde, and deceaueth the Phisition in proufe. 
And Auicen saithe: that oftentimes the faithe and hope 
of the patient towardes the Phisition, and the medicine, 
is of more force than Phisicke togeather with the Phisition: 
and Galene affirmeth that a Medecine can hardly 
be founde, which maie healpe muche, and that at one very 
instant dothe not hurte in some thinge: and an other 
of them I wotte not who, saithe, the knowledge of Phisicke 
is pleasaunt, and of al other thinges, which consiste 
[^f.142v^] 
of Arte and rules, but the practise accordinge to Phisicke 
is a chaunce. Lette aduenturous sicke men nowe goo, and 
geue credite to perilous experimentes and to chaunce, 
but so pleasaunt (as Plinie saith) is euery mans sweetnes 
of hope alone, that euery one is beleued y~ professeth him 
self a Phisition, whereas there is no greater daunger in 
any leesing. Hereof it commeth to passe that diuers times 
health is there soughte, where death is, for he is thought 
the beste Phisition, whom the Apothecarie, which is partaker 
of his gaine, dothe commende, who practiseth deceipte 
with him to beguile others, whose seruauntes the 
Phisitian doth also binde vnto him by giuinge them monie, 
whiche exercisinge the office of bawdes, & praysinge 
him doo preferre him to the pituous sicke men very excellent 
also is that Phisitian, whiche is clad in braue apparaile, 
hauing ringes on his fingers glimeringe with pretious 
stoanes, and whiche hath gotten authoritee, fame, 
and credence for hauinge bene in farre countries, for hauinge 
made longe pilgrimages, or for beinge of a diuers 
Religion (as a Iewe or a Marane,) for hauinge a very effectuall 
vnshamefastnes of face to deceaue, and an obstinate 
manner of auaunting with stiffe lies, that thei haue 
great remedies. Which hath also won him y~ credite of a 
learned man for standing alwaies in co~tention, & for hauing 
co~tinually in his mouth many wordes halfe Greeke 
and barbarous: & for reckening vp many names of their authours, 
& being in this maner instructed more the~ with a 
leaden grauitee, & as it were with a Souldiers boldnesse, 
w~ this Hipocrisie, he then taketh in hand to practise Phisicke. 
First he visiteth the sicke, he beholdeth y~ water, he 
[/3./] 
feeleth y~ pulse, he looketh on the tonge, he gropeth y~ sides, 
he looketh on the ordure, he wil knowe his maner of diet, 
and searcheth also if there be any things more secrete, as 
if by these he weigheth the Elementes, and as it were 
trieth in a balance the humours of the patiente, & lyeth a 
pace: afterwarde with a greate auaunting he prescribeth 
[^f.143r^] 
him medicines, take pilles, be letten bloud, let clisters be 
made, let pitche clothes be made, let oinctments be made, 
let plaisters be made, let brothes be geuen him, let things 
be geue~ him to chawe, let gargarismes be made, let little 
bagges be made, let perfumes be made, let pleasant meat 
be geuen him, let sirupes be geue~ him, let water be geuen 
him, let triacle be geuen him: and if the desease be not 
vehement, and the patient somewhat delicate he wil prouide 
for pleasaunte thinges, and with great authoritee 
doth commaunde that all suche thinges shoulde be donne 
whiche he thinketh acceptable and pleasaunt to women & 
effiminate men, and when he hath laide him vpon a softe 
bedde, he endeuoureth to bring him a sleepe with droppes 
of well water fallinge into a basen, sometime he minisheth 
the sicknesse with rubbinge, sweatinge, and cuppinge: 
sometime he restoreth the enfeobled sicke man 
with bathes, delicate meate, and with the chaunge of the 
aire: and that he maie be accompted of greate authoritee, 
and also be wondred at, obseruing howers he causeth natural 
alligations and bindinges to be tied about his necke, 
and dothe not minister medicines and drinkes but by the 
Mathematicall Ephimerides. They presume also to beare 
rule ouer the Apothecarie, & biddeth him to compownde 
al things in his presence, and maketh as though he chose 
the best drogues, although oftentimes he cannot discerne 
y~ counterfait from the true, and knoweth not the things 
by theire names. If the sicke parson be riche, or of greate 
authoritie, than to the ende that he may haue more gayne 
and reputation, he prolongeth the disease asmuche as he 
maye, and doth not restore him to healthe but by little & 
little, albeit he can at ones driue awaye the disease with 
one medicine, and otherwhile he bringeth the man to extreame 
daunger of his life, encreasinge the disease with 
his medicines, to the ende that than he maye be sayde to 
haue deliuered him from a most greauous and dangerous 
sicknesse. And if at any time a sicke man happen into his 
[^f.143v^] 
handes, that is greeuously sicke, and shall knowe that the 
disease is perilouse, and the ende therof vncertaine, then 
he creepeth in with these subtilties: with a rough countenaunce 
he prescribeth rules of diet, he commaundeth vnaccustomed 
thinges, and forbiddeth him his ordinarye 
meats, he blameth that which is geue~ him, he threatneth 
him death, he promiseth him life, and demaundeth greate 
rewardes. If he doubteth of the ende, he counsaileth him 
to cal to together his companie and demaundeth a mate, 
that he maye cure the diseased with more suertie, or els, 
as oftentimes it commeth to passe, that he maye kill him 
more warely leaste that an other comming in place, who 
alone restoreth the sicke man to healthe, maye take from 
him his reputation, prayse, & gaine also. If any mishappe 
shall befall to the patiente, or els if contrary to his exspectation 
thorowe manifest ignoraunce he shal depriue him 
of his life, than he doth colourably excuse himselfe in saying 
that it proceedeth either of the strangling renning of y~ 
reume, or of some other like sodaine accidente, and remediles 
chaunce, and he sharply rebuketh the disobedience 
of the patient, or the neglige~ce of the keepers, he blameth 
them of his companie, or putteth the fault in the Apothecarie: 
and in this manner he maketh men beleeue, that no 
sicke man dieth but thorow his owne faulte, and that no 
man can be restored to healthe, but by the meanes of the 
Phisition. But I wil also proue this to be true, that Phisitions 
moste commonlye be naught, and that with theire 
owne testimonies. For Peter of Appona, theire attone 
[/4./] 
maker saith that the Arte of Phisicke is ascribed to Mars, 
which is the hatefullest of all the Planetes and which is 
the authour of ingratitude, brawlinge, and of all iniquitee 
and naughtinesse. And therefore Phisitions for the 
moste parte be ill conditioned, aswell for the influence of 
Mars and Scorpio, as especially because, as he saithe, they 
toke beginning of a vile and a barraine blocke, waxinge 
afterwarde prowde and spitefull, when they were well 
[^f.144r^] 
stuffed, these be his woordes. He was taught perhaps by 
the example of Esculapius, whome the auncient fables doo 
recorde to haue bene the firste finder out of Phisicke, begoten 
of the minde of Iupiter, and by the life of Sol sente 
downe on earthe. But Celsus confesseth, that he was a 
man, but receiued into the number of the Gods. Many 
other affirme that he was begot in fornicatio~ of a comely 
queane called Coronides, of whom ofte~times the Priestes 
in the Temple of Apollo tooke armorous delites, whiche 
faigned him to be sonne of theire God. All doubtles doo 
herein agree, that this God Esculapius was so wicked,y~ 
he needed the lightning of Iupiter to chastice him, of who~ 
Lactantius writeth in this wise to Constantine the Emperour: 
Esculapius also borne not without the wickednes 
of Apollo, what did he at any time worthye of diuine honours, 
but that he healed Hippolitus? Surely he died honourably, 
because he deserued to be slaine with lightning 
by God: these be his woordes. But to tel the truth, Phisitions 
be the wickedest, the contentiouste, the enuiouste, & 
the falsest men of al other. For al doo in such wise disagree 
emonge themselues, that there is founde no Phisitiane, 
who, without exception, addition, or chaunginge, dothe 
approue the medicine appointed by an other: but rather 
doth not speake il of them, and sclaunder them, to the end 
that he may not seeme to be the better Phisition, if he shal 
not speake amisse of the good counsaile of an other, or els 
not adde any thinge to them, whiche oftentimes also be 
too many, wherfore finally the enuie and discorde of Phisitions 
is growen to a Prouerbe. For whatsoeuer one 
[/5./] 
alloweth, the other skorneth, neither is there certaintee 
emonge them, but all their promises be vaine trifles, and 
mere lyes: for this cause when the common people will 
shewe any that lyeth shamefully, they saye to him: thou 
liest like a Phisition. And the greatest laboure of theire 
wittes is occupied in this, that in diuising new matters, 
the good woorkes of the auncients may be neglected and 
[^f.144v^] 
dispised: thei hide also the smal knowledge that thei haue, 
or they will not vtter it, as though the reputation of the 
science were to teach noman, and so enuyinge others do 
also disapointe our life of other mens goodnes. They are 
moreouer very superstitious, arrogaunte, of a naughty 
conscience, prowde, and couetouse, hauinge alwayes this 
[/6./] 
Prouerbe in theire mouthe, take, whilest he feeleth greife, 
makinge also that to ake, whiche is whole, if they thinke 
it wil tourne them to profit, as we reade of Peter of Appona 
(whom they call theire attonemaker) who readinge 
Phisicke in Bononia was so couetous, and arrogaunte, 
that goinge to anye place oute of the Citie to visite sicke 
 [/7./] 
parsons, woulde not be hired vnder fiftie ducates a daye: 
and beinge on a time sent for to Honorius then Pope, he 
couenaunted to haue foure hundreth ducates a day. Pindarus 
saith also that Esculapius father of Phisicke was by 
Iupiter striken with lightninge for a due deserte of couetousnes, 
bicause wickedly and to the damage of the common 
 wealthe he had practised Phisicke. And if by anye 
chaunce the diseased shal happely recouer in their hands, 
they reioyce without measure, noman will be able to set 
fourth the glory of so great a miracle. They will say that 
he hath raised Lazarus from death, y~ he gaue him his life, 
that he is bound to thanke them that he is a liue: & by and 
by, (attributing that to themselues, which belo~geth onely 
vnto God) they auaunt that they haue drawen him out of 
hel, & say, that no rewarde can conteruaile their deserte. 
Some of the~ haue ben in such wise puffed vp with pride, 
that thei suffered themselues to be worshipped for Gods, 
& caused themselues to be called Ioues, as Menecrates the 
Syracusane Phisition, who is reade to haue writen on a 
time to Agesilaus King of Sparta in these woordes: Menecrates 
Iupiter sendeth greeting to King Agesilaus, but Agesilaus, 
laughing priuely at his foly, aunsweared in this 
wise: Agesilaus desireth health to Menecrates: But if any 
vnhappy diseased parson die in y~ hands of the Phisitia~s, 
[^f.145r^] 
whiche oftentimes chaunceth, than they put the faulte to 
the weakenes of nature, to the extremitee of the sicknes, 
or to the vnrulinesse of the patiente, and that the remedies 
of theire Arte doth not extende to this secrete of 
cruel nature, and that they be Phisitians, not Gods, that 
they can heale the curable, but not to restoare the deade 
to life, and that thei cannot minister nothing to the sicke, 
but what experience hathe taught them, and with these 
woordes also they be high minded in vnprosperous chaun~es, 
and moreouer thei accused them that died, of disorder, 
and there with al they wilbe payde, when with their receiptes 
thei haue killed them, which without them might 
haue liued, spoylinge the sicke at one instaunte of theire 
fame, monie, healthe and life, hauing in the meane while 
a salfe conscience: aswell because theire erroure, (as Socrates 
saithe) is couered in the earth, as especially because 
the countrie of the dead is irremeable, that they cannot 
retourne, which they deceiuing with vaine woordes, and 
infecting with noysome medicines, do depriue of life before 
theire time, leaste that thei accuse them of extorcion, 
and murder. Furthermore Phisitians oftentimes be 
contagious, and stinking by reason of vrine, and ordure, 
bepissed, and besheten, and filthier then midwiues, hauing 
all their senses infected, whilest that with their eies 
they behold most filthy and stinking thinges, with their 
eyes and nose they receiue the belking of sicke men, their 
fartinge, their breathinge, blowinge, and stinckinge of 
theire breathe, they taste firste with theire lippes and 
toungue, blacke and deadly drinckes, with their handes 
they stirre ordure and excrementes, and daye and nighte 
they haue in their fantasie, the ouglie images and ghosts 
of the sicke, and innumerable murders doo trowble their 
conscience: and finally all their studie, talke, reason, 
communication, minde, and wit, is conuersaunte aboute 
nothinge but naughtie, filthye, and lothsome thinges, 
and horrible kindes of deathe and diseases: and all theire 
[^f.145v^] 
exercise is in stincking and filthie places, occupied in vile 
cares, and vncleane skill, for infamous gayne sake they 
alwayes stande about sicke mennes iakeses and pispots, 
and like the lapwinge a filthy birde, doo builde their neste 
of mannes ordure. Doo you not daylie see howe they goo 
about the Citie with ringed fingers, and dirtie gownes, 
with a sadde countenaunce, and alwayes pale, and with 
a quicke pace, for hope of veray vile gayne, renne from 
one Apothecaries shoppe to an other, seekinge and begging, 
if in any place a man wil offer them vrine, or a boll 
of ordure to looke vpon, and as the hooded vultures are beste 
nosed about deade bodies, so these me~ are best nosed of al 
about excreme~s: which they say: Hippocrates was wont 
also to taste, that thereby he might the better perceiue 
the nature of the sicknesse: whiche thinge also many doo 
attribute to Esculapius: who for this cause was of Aristophanes 
called Scatophagos, in whiche woorde they be signified, 
whiche feede vpon the superfluitees of meates, 
whiche name afterwarde was deriued to all Phisitions, 
in suche wise, that wee call them Scatophagians 
and Scatomanters, that is, ordure eaters, and lookers on ordure. 
For this cause Scatomacie, Oromancie, Drymimancie, be 
called the diuinations or Prognostications of Phisitia~s, 
gathered by ordures and vrines. Wherefore emonge 
many nations, these seruil Phisitions were in time paste 
reputed infamous, and more then that, (as Seneca testifieth) 
it was accompted a very greate infamie to seeke the 
seruice of a Phisition, and at this day also, many people 
doo exclude Phisitions, Midwiues, and executioners from 
theire tables and bankets, or els they geue them meate 
and drinke in dishes, and cuppes aparte from the other: 
wherefore a man maye here haue indignation againste 
that detestable custome of many Princes, which allowe, 
these pestilente menne not onely to come to theire bedde 
side in the morninge, but to theire tables also, beinge 
infected with the dayly visiting of the sicke, and with the 
[^f.146r^] 
fresh vapours of pestilence, and that more is, if one bidde 
a Phisition to a feast, whilest he is at dinner, he wil talke 
of nothinge but of ordures, vrines, sweatinges, corrupted 
bloude, vomitinge, and of the flowers, and will 
entreate of the fallinge sicknesse, of leprosie, of botches, 
of scabbes, and of the plage, and with the filthines of his 
communication, he will cause al menne to lothe the banket, 
well furnished with veray daintie dishes. Use also a 
Phisition, in ciuill consultations, and ye shall finde noman 
more fonde and foolishe then he, and that perhappes 
aswell because the doctrine of Phisitions (as theire reconciler 
saith) co~sisteth not on vertues, nor good conditio~s, as 
especially because (as the same saith) euery Phisitio~, which 
is honeste by nature, oughte to be ill conditioned, and I 
knowe, that in many cities, it is prouided by publike decrees 
and ordinaunces, that Phisitions maye not be receiued 
 into counsaile, nor beare office, peraduenture not 
so much because they be foolishe, vayne, and stubborne, as 
because they be alwayes vncleane, and so contagious by 
reason of the continuall handlinge of sicke men, and ordure, 
that they doo not onely infecte them whiche approch 
neare to them, but the seates also, and likewise the marble 
stoanes as Lucilius preatelie hath write~ of a certaine 
Phisition in a greeke Epigramme, translated into latine 
by Ausonius, and may thus be inglished. 
 
Alcon, in Phisicke skilde, laste day did touche 
The signe of Ioue, and though he marble were, 
By him he wronge enduerde. Beholde to daye 
From auncient temple out he borne is 
Although a stoane and eke a God he be. 
 
But when they assemble their colledge togeather to trie 
out that, whiche the diseased hathe pissed or shiten the 
nighte before, and as it were the iudges of the Lacedemonians 
called Ephori to giue sentence of life and death, 
it is a marueilous thinge, but muche more to be lamented 
with how many miserable altercations without any 
[^f.146v^] 
iudge they than doo stande at contention aboute the sicke 
mannes bedde, as thoughe they haue benne hired not to 
cure, but to dispute, and that the diseased, to whome (accordinge 
to the Greeke verse of Menander, whiche in 
Englishe is: The bablinge Phisition is as it were a sicknes 
to the diseased) well neare al communication is greuous, 
hathe more neede of theire reasoninge, then of their Phisicke, 
and when they haue like schollers cited certayne 
Aphorismes, for an ostentation, whiche onely they haue 
readye at all times for euerye pourpose, and called vpon 
Hyppocrates, Galene, Auicen, Rasis, Auerrois, theire Reconciler, 
and other of theire Goddes, whose names and 
titles serue them in steede of learning to purchase credit, 
and reputation of knowledge emonge the ignoraunte 
people, they haue for a space benne at daggers drawinge 
touchinge the causes, signes, dispositions, humours, and 
critical dayes, but without discussinge theire controuersie, 
at the length, they conclude with a very sclender ordinaunce, 
concerninge the applying of the remedie, which 
ought to be the heade and tayle of all the matter: and as 
there is a mutuall enmitee emongest them, none of them 
beinge willinge to make theire secretes common (as thei 
terme it) to theire enuiers, as if they shoulde lose that 
whiche they haue taught vnto others, they haue recourse 
to the common methode, whiche if it disappointe them, 
they repayre to practise, as to the holy anker, to the ende, 
that whom reason restoreth not, rashnesse maye further, 
sayeinge: that it is better to proue a doubtfull helpe, then 
none at all: or els leaue the diseased when they cannot 
helpe him, and that continuall feeblenesse (as Ecclesiasticus 
saith) dothe greeue them: sayeing that Hyppocrates 
forebadde medicines to be giuen to desperat parsons: or if 
they be some what religiouse, they referre the disease to 
some saincte, they appoint y~ last receit of al which is this. 
Take a notarie, and seuen witnesses, put there to a Priest 
with holy water and oile, asmuch as is needefull, & leaue 
[^f.147r^] 
thy house in order, for thou must die. For this cause Rasis, 
[/8./] 
who doubtlesse not onely knewe the foolishe beliefe of 
the sicke, but also the contentious ignorance of the Phisitians, 
prouiding not vnwisely for bothe, that is to saie, 
for the patiente and the Phisition, counsaileth in his Aphorismes, 
that one Phisition alone ought to be chosen: 
because, saithe he, one mans errour causeth no great infamie: 
and the profite whiche one man doth to the diseased, 
is commended: but he that shall vse very many Phisitions, 
incurreth into an exceedinge greate errour: these be 
the woordes of Rasis. That au~cient inscription of a tombe 
doth witnesse this: Many Phisitions slewe him: and that 
Greekishe Prouerbe: The accesse of many Phisitions killed 
the diseased: That sayinge also of Adriane the Emperoure 
lyinge at the pointe of death: The rable of Phisitions 
hath destroyed the Prince. Wherfore there is no cou~saile 
more profitable for the preseruinge of life & health, 
then to abstaine from Phisitions. For thanke God for 
the health of bodie, and not the Phisitions, and for this 
cause, Asa Kinge of Iuda was rebuked by the Prophete of 
the Lorde, because in his sickenes he sought not y~ Lorde, 
but trusted in the Phisitions Arte: to whose counsailes 
they whiche geue credence, wil neuer be whole: for there 
is no life more miserable then that, whiche is guided vnder 
the hope of their healpe. I put the case that the Phisitions 
knowe, and I would to God they knew al the vertues 
and operations of the Elementes, rootes, hearbes, 
flowers, fruites, seedes, of liuinge creatures also and minerals, 
and of all thinges, whiche nature the mother of 
them hath brought foorth, yet they cannot with all these 
vertues not onely make man immortall, but whiche is 
lesse, not alwaies cure him that is sicke of euery lighte disease. 
O how often hath not y~ medecine preuailed, which 
should haue preuailed, and whiche should purge, hath not 
purged: how often hath the diseased fallen sicke, & gonne 
to Phisicke eftsones, & at the le~gth after many troubles, 
[^f.147v^] 
and greate expences, either than, or shortly after, euen 
in the presence of Phisitions, he must die. What confidence 
shoulde we than haue in Phisitions, if (as Hippocrates 
him selfe saithe) theire experience be vncertaine? 
What certaine thinge can Phisitions promesse, if that be 
true which Plinie writeth, that no Arte is more vnconstante 
then Phisicke, nor whiche oftener is chaunged? 
There were many nations in time paste and at this daie 
are, which liue without Phisitions, which notwithstandinge 
we see lustie, when they are at the pittes brincke, 
and to liue aboue a hundreth yeares: contrarywise that 
these nice people, whiche liue with the labour & promises 
of Phisitions, for the most parte, doo waxe olde, and die in 
the flower of their yeares: & which is more, that the Phisitions 
themselues are sicke, more than other me~, and almost 
continually, and die before their naturall time. For 
this cause that Lacedemonian made aunsweare to one 
that saide vnto him, hast thou no sicknesse? no, because I 
doo not vse the Phisition, and he replyinge againe, thou 
arte an old man, answeared he, because I neuer vsed the 
Phisition, shewing that there is no other waie more certaine 
for healthe and olde age, then to be without Phisitions: 
But if a man saie, that many haue benne recouered 
by the meanes of Phisitions, we will answeare him contrarywise 
that many haue died, whom Phisicke hath nothing 
profited, and we will laie to his reproche that verset 
of Ausonius sayinge: 
 
By fatall chaunce he did escape, 
and not by Phisickes healpe. 
 
For in time paste the Arcadians did not vse Medecines, 
but (as Plinie saithe) they vsed milke of the springe time, 
because than, more then at any other season, hearbes are 
full of iuyce, & the fruitefullest fieldes serued for Medecines: 
but before the rest they choose cowes milke, because 
they eate all kinde of hearbes. The Lacedemonians also, 
the Babylonians, the Egyptians, & the Portingals (as Herodotus 
[^f.148r^] 
and Strabo testifie) refused all Phisitions: and they 
brought them that were sicke into the market place, and 
into the streates, to the ende that they, whiche were attached 
with the like sicknesse, and had escaped, or knewe 
an other to haue escaped, might counsaile them with the 
remedies which they haue proued vpon themselues: supposinge 
(whiche Cornelius Celsus doth also affirme) that 
there is nothing more auaileable to the trade of Phisicke 
then experience, wherein it is manifestly seene, that the 
beste learned men haue benne oftentimes ouercome by 
an olde wife of the Countrie, and shee with one roote or 
hearbe alone, hath atchieued suche thinges, as the beste 
Phisitions of all, coulde not doo with all theire pretiouse 
Medecines, done exactly with studie and diligence. For 
whilest they go about to cure diseases with intricate and 
monstruous mixtures (whereas nature hath broughte 
forth so many plaine remedies, which should suffice) confounding 
them by a co~pounde collinge of diuers thinges, 
they be leade rather by coniecture, then by cause, or reason, 
& make the whole Arte of Phisicke nothinge els but 
chaunce and coniecture. But this knowinge the force and 
qualitee of one plaine medecine, doth cure harde diseases 
with sounde and approued vertues of nature. They on 
the other side, thorow pretious thinges brought from the 
farthest partes of India, or from the Gades, doo promisse 
and sell health to others: perswadinge them that nothinge 
els but thinges of great price can helpe. Nature doth not 
onely promisse, but also restore healthe with our owne 
countrie hearbes very easie to finde, and little esteemed, 
which euery man maie lightly haue growyng in his gardeine. 
Furthermore these with a presumptuous rashenesse, 
and bablinge gaiely set foorthe, hauige learned it 
out of deceiptfull bookes, & painted Codicils, vse the hardest 
trade of Phisicke to gaine by. This hauinge behelde 
and learned all the plantes growinge in the earthe, and 
fieldes, theire colours, formes, sauours, smellinges, and 
[^f.148v^] 
diuersitees, & proued also of what vertue they be in sickenesses, 
and other chaunces, dothe without rewarde geue 
to euery man vndoubted remedies. The chiefest Phisitions 
also confesse, that they haue learned many moste excellent 
remedies of women, & woorthie to be put in their 
bookes, and as it were, singular thinges lefte to the posteritee, 
as that Medecine whiche Auicen comendeth taught 
him by a woman against the head ache. But if it be true 
that the medecine, which ought to bringe a temperature 
of health, doth consist in the proportion and temperature 
of thinges togeather, aswel emonge themselues, as especially 
also with the quantities of the bodie, whereunto 
they be attributed, & this hath bene a moste diligent care 
in proportioninge, and temperinge Medecines, by iuste 
and harmonicall weightes, leauinge these to the posteritee, 
to be proporcioned to diseased mens bodies, what presumption, 
and sawcinesse is this not onely to alter these 
thinges, but to put to them also, or vtterly to despise or 
not to know them? Whereof it cometh to passe, that like 
as the iuste temperature of Medecine oughte to bringe 
health, so the disagreement therof bringeth griefe, feare, 
sharpnesse of sicknesse, and otherwhile death, & therefore 
an olde wife of the country, dothe more saulfly cure with 
a Medecine made with one, or twoo hearbes of the gardeine, 
y~ the worke of nature, then that Phisition with 
his monstruous, and sumptuous receiptes made with a 
doubtfull coniecture. There haue bene in time paste many 
and moste excellent Philosophers and Phisitions of 
that opinion, that is to saie, that we shoulde not practise 
Phisicke but with very simple thinges. For this cause 
searchinge out and prouinge the forces of simples, they 
haue lefte to vs, which come after, notable bookes, as that 
whiche Chrysippus wrote of the Colewortes, Pythagoras 
of the hearbe Squilla, Marchion of the Radishe, Diocles 
of the Rape, Phanias of the Nettle, Apuleius of 
Betaine, and many other Auncientes of other thinges. 
[^f.149r^] 
But these Phisitions of shoppes doo not onely passe vpon 
them, but also laugh them to skorne, callinge them simple 
men whiche studie to knowe simples. I therefore disswade 
no man not onely to aske counsaile of these Phisitions, 
but also to follow theire steppes, them I meane, 
which cure by simples. But I aduise them to flee and bannishe 
awaie these keapers of shoppes no otherwise then 
Inchaunters, & Witches, whiche with their monstruous 
confections make marchaundise of our infirmitees, & caste 
lottes for our life. For sithens it is necessarie that compounde 
Medecines be made of many sundrie and contrary 
kindes, it is impossible or at least wise very difficulte 
for the Phisition to appointe any certaintee in them, but 
by opinion alone, supposall, & coniecture: & sithens there 
be oftetimes innumerable things, euery of which by him 
self semeth to be of sufficient strength & vertue, against any 
griefe: The Phisitio~ maketh a hochpot of such things, 
as happe, & chaunce, shall then presente to his memorie, 
or els whereunto he shalbe inclined by any other inward 
or hidden instincte. Whereof it cometh to passe, that that 
compounde Medecine taketh vertue, & effect, not so much 
from the power of the simples whiche go into it, as from 
the happie or vnhappie intent of the Phisition, as farre 
as he is induced with a certaine hidden influence, either 
naturall, or celestiall, or Deuelishe, or aduenturous rather 
to choose these then other. And this is that, whiche 
is commonly saide, and they themselues doo confesse that 
one Phisition hath better lucke then an other, and very 
oftentimes the ignoraunt is happier then the learned. 
But whiche is more, I haue seene, & knowne a Phisition 
a man singularlie learned so vnhappie, that of many sicke 
parsons very few or none escaped aliue out of his ha~des. 
I knewe also an other scarsly a smatterer in learninge, 
whiche happely healed well neare all his patientes, and 
many also which were lefte by others as paste hope of recouerie. 
I remember also that I haue reade of a Phisitio~, 
[^f.149v^] 
into whose handes, what noble men & potentates soeuer 
had chaunced, escaped, & all the commons, and rude sorte 
perished, or were in great daunger. Wherefore it is now 
an easie thinge to perceaue that this shoppe Phisicke, 
wherein the fortune of the Phisition can do more then 
learninge, is altogeather or for the moste parte deuinatorie, 
and therefore woorthie to be bannished farre of, and 
condemned as venemous, and murderous. Wherefore 
the Romans, in time paste vnder Cato the Ce~soure, banished 
all Phisitions out of Rome and al Italie, hating their 
mortal lies, & crueltie, that is to witte, because thei slewe 
many more, then they healed: also because thei, being very 
well skilled in makinge poisons, mighte easely be moued 
with hatred, ambition, or gaine, to minister poyson 
in steede of Medecine, and when they haue agreed for a 
summe of monie they sell mens liues: as the Phisition of 
Pyrrhus did, whether he were Timocaris, (as Gellius writeth) 
or Niceas, as some other recompte, who promised Fabritius, 
that he woulde kill his Master with a Medecine: 
whiche mischieuous acte Fabritius detestinge, aduertised 
Pyrrhus by a letter, albeit he was his enemie, that he 
should beware of the Phisition, of whome Claudian speaketh 
in this manner: 
 
The Romans euer hated haue 
the workers of all ill: 
Fabricius him to Pyrrhus sente 
that promisse made to kill 
VVith poyson rancke his master, in 
detestinge his entent, 
VVhom with fierce fight he did assaile 
and not about he wente 
To ende the warre through cursed deede 
of seruaunt 
 
After the same facion Cato in Plinie writeth to his sonne 
of the Greeke Phisitions, sayinge: they haue sworne emonge 
themselues to kill all the Barbarians with Phisicke, 
[^f.150r^] 
but they will doo this for recompence to the ende 
that they maie be in credite, & safely atchieue theire wicked 
purpose. And shortly after he addeth, whereof arise 
many deceiptes in Testamentes, and aduoutries also in 
the houses of Princes, as that of Eudemus was euident 
in Liuia the wife of Drusus the Emperoure: these be the 
woordes of Plinie. Socrates also in Plato would not that 
there should be many Phisitions in a Citie. And nowe a 
daies also it should be profitable for the common wealth, 
to haue very fewe Phisitions or none at all, & that there 
were a lawe to punishe the mortall mischiefe, aswell of 
their ignoraunce, as negligence. For it a deadly offence, 
and it maketh no matter, whether thorow wante of knowledge, 
or negligence, folly, or malice, vncarefully, or diligently, 
the Phisitio~ in steede of medecine, hath ministred 
poyson, and brought man in daunger of his life, and that 
the Phisition shoulde not (as Plinie saithe) escape cleare 
without punishment, for killinge of a man. Which truly 
to them, is one selfe and common honour with the hangman, 
that is to saie, to kill menne and to be recompenced 
therefore: and these men and none els be rewarded for 
murder, for which the law hath appointed a punishment 
to all other men, and hath pardoned and forgeuen none. 
Yet this difference there is, that the Hangeman or Executioner, 
killeth not the malefactours but accordinge to 
[/9./] 
the sentence of the Iudge, but the Phisition againste all 
iudgement slayeth also the giltlesse. Wherefore not vnauaileably 
the ordinaunces of the Popes, doo forbidde the 
Clergie to practise Phisicke, for somuche as the Arte of 
Phisicke is so blouddie a thinge, that if it be lawfull for 
Priestes and the Cleregie to plaie the Phisitions, they 
maie also plaie the Hangemen. And that is to be thought 
wisely donne of Portius in time paste when he forbadde 
the Phisitions, aswell because they alwaies gaine the 
fame of this Science with some straungnes, as especially 
because whilest that they bringing no newe thing, are 
[^f.150v^] 
ashamed to treade in other mens steppes, proue experimentes 
by killing this man & that man, and learne their 
Arte with our daungers, wherewith they gaine by our 
life, & prolonge mens diseases, which might be cured in a 
very short space, & oftentimes thei encrease it for greater 
gaine: Wherefore the Egyptians prouidinge for this deceipte, 
appointed that the Phisitions should cure the bodies 
of the diseased within three daies to the daunger of 
the sicke, and after three daies to their owne perill. 
 
[}Of the Pothecaries Arte. Cap. 84.}] 
 
THey call also Potecaries & Medecine makers theire 
Cookes, whose titles (as y~ Prouerbe is) haue remedies, 
& their boxes, poyson, or (as Homer singeth) 
Of mingled Medecines many are holsome, and many noysome, 
with the which when they wil not doo vs any hurte 
they enforce vs to buye our death with a great summe of 
monie: whilest they ministringe to him one thing for an 
other, or els makinge a Medecine of rotten, stale, and 
mouldie drogues doo oftentimes geue a deadly drinke, in 
steede of a holsome Medecine, whilest that they buye plaisters 
made longe before, collyries, oyntments, lectuaries, 
and other Medecines, made of the refuse & filth of spices, 
and to no other ende but for the gaine of theire shoppes, 
and not knowinge to make a difference betwene al these 
thinges, they beleue the rude marchauntes corruptinge 
all thinges with deceiptes, & sophistications. I could here 
declare theire damnable discordes of the knowledge of 
simple Medecines which they vse, & their errours aboute 
the names of things that appertaine to Phisicke misunderstoode 
by them, and most wickedly vsed, the which beinge 
very many, Nicholas Leonicenus hath declared in a 
large volume. I let to speake of the monstruous confections, 
and mixtures of many and straunge thinges, with 
the which whilest they confounding all thinges wil perswade 
[^f.151r^] 
vs that they will make a Medecine which agreeth 
with euery nature: as they haue determined of y~ making 
of triakle, of the fable of Tyrus, and of that lectuarie of 
Mithridates, nothing els is made but that poetical Chaos: 
 
A rude and vndisposed heape, 
and nothinge els but euen: 
A heauy lumpe and clottered clod, 
of seedes togeather driuen. 
Of thinges at strife emonge themselues, 
for wante of order due: 
VVherein one body hote and colde, 
and moyst and drie renewe 
A combrous fight, - 
 
But be it, that there haue bene certaine profitable medicines 
made and diuised by the ancient Phisitions, which 
we maye receiue as thinges proued, yet they differ farre 
from that true methode, and condemned by the Phisitio~s 
themselues enforced through theire owne conscience so 
to doo, and altogeather reiected of Plinie, of Theophraste, 
of Plutarch, and Hippocrates, Galene, Dioscorides, Eristratus, 
Celsus, Scribonius, Auicenna whose woordes it were 
too tedious to write in this place: and not onely by these 
ancients, but also of many Phisitio~s of fresher memorie, 
emonge which Arnolde of Villa noua saith in his Aphorismes: 
where simples maye easily be had it is deceipte to 
vse compowndes. But now a daies thei dispising altogether 
and not knowing simples, no receiptes be made but 
by these two famous Pillers of Potecaries, and treasure 
of spicers, painted Antidotaries, and golden titles of Mesue 
and Nicholas, and herof it commeth to passe, that whilest 
these Phisitions attendinge theire owne leisure doo 
put the liues of men in the Potecaries handes: and they 
without learninge, and without knowledge geuing credit 
to ignoraunt marchauntes for the auaile of their shop 
 doo mingle thinges togeather, and muche more daunger 
commeth of the medicine then of the disease. But let vs 
[^f.151v^] 
discourse a little of the falsification of pretious thinges 
that serue for medicine which oftentimes be counterfaited 
with so muche deceipte, that they deceiue also experte 
and wise men: and it shoulde be muche auailable to the 
good state of men and the common wealth vtterly to forbidde 
all straunge and foreine medicines, whiche moreouer 
with so greate a price haue benne broughte into the 
realme by theeuishe marchauntes to the damage of the 
common wealthe, and to abate the Phisitions pride, and 
to hold the Apotecaries noses at the grindstone, & to prescribe 
them a lawe, such a one, as Nero (at that time when 
he gouerned well) is reade in time paste to haue made in 
Rome, wherewith they were compelled to vse onely such 
medicinable thinges, as our climate broughte foorthe, for 
asmuche as these doo better agree to the nature of euerye 
of vs, they be also muche more fresher, better chosen, and 
maye be had with lesse difficultie and expence, and with 
less daunger then the foreine, whiche for the most parte 
be suspected bicause thei be very oftentimes falsified, cou~terfeited, 
or refused, or kept too close in the ship, or weate 
in y~ pumpe, or rotten thorow age, or not gathered in due 
season and place, whereof oftentimes greate daunger is 
like to ensue, for coloquintida not ripe, draweth out bloud 
and killeth: and that which groweth alone, and by it self, 
is poyson. Semblably Agaricke masculine is deadly, and 
that whiche is olde is perilous, Scamonie is altogeather 
falsified, and likewise the earthe called Lemnie, and the 
faithfulnesse of seales is worne awaye. Nowe I beseeche 
you what neede we vse these foreine things, if our countrie 
bringe foorthe the same thinges, or of like vertue? Is 
it not a great foly to go rather to India, for that which we 
haue at home? supposinge that our countrie and sea is not 
sufficient: & preferringe foreine things before them of our 
countrie, sumptuous before thrifty, and difficult & brought 
euen from the fardest partes of the worlde, before them y~ 
maye easily be had. Cannot the Splene be cured without 
[^f.152r^] 
Armoniake, nor the liuer without saunders? What if we 
wante Bdellium, cannot the greefes of the entrayles be 
healed? maye not the heade be cured without muske and 
amber? nor the stomake without masticke and corall? If 
these straunge medicines were co~uenable to our bodies, 
without doubte nature whiche prouideth for all thinges 
shoulde haue brought to passe, that they should also grow 
abundantly with vs. Did not our forefathers liue without 
them and more healthfully? These then be the trifles 
of sluggish Phisitions, whiche seeke not to know our medicinable 
things, & the inuentions of y~ Apotecaries which 
seeke not for the common saftie, but for the profit of their 
trade, makinge vs beleue that all thinges of greate price 
can helpe vs and none els, whom Ieremie doth therefore 
reproue: Is there no rosen in Galaad, or is theire founde 
no Phisition? Nature bringeth foorthe and tempreth her 
hearbes in euery Countrie, Region, Nation, Climate, 
Aire, and Age: we graunte that is true, and that some 
things haue more vertue in one place and time the~ in an 
other, notwithstanding they woorke the same effectes in 
euery time and climate, accordinge to the proper temperature 
of men, admit that those rare and pretious things 
be of greater force then our hearbes: but we ought to beleue 
that thei are not holsome, but for the men of that climate, 
for whom they are created and brought foorth. But 
there are moreouer the rauinies of the Phisitions which 
perswade vs that certaine monstrous medicines, & differinge 
from the vse of Phisicke be muche auailable, and 
that without them we cannot be in health prouinge their 
faygned diuises with the destructio~ of miserable menne. 
For this cause thei put in medicines, Vipers, Serpents, 
and al venemous Wormes, and if they wante remedies, 
thei put mans greace in oyntementes, & with a greeuous 
offence of nature they geue men mans flesh to eate, preserued 
in spices whiche they call Mummia. 
 
[^f.152v^] 
[}Of Surgerie. Cap. 85.}] 
 
SUrgerie is not yet spoken of, which is an other parte 
of Phisicke, that cureth the diseases of the body which 
are in the fleshe the practises whereof be apparaunte 
and sure remedies, for the counsailes of other Phisitions 
be vncertaine. The Surgeans see and feele what thei do, 
and accordinge as neede requireth they chaunge, laye to, 
and take away: this emong all the Artes of Phisicke was 
the firste that came in vse. For when men in time paste 
made warres emonge themselues: and wounded one an 
other, they beganne to seeke remedies to heale theire 
woundes. For they beleued that one man coulde cure 
the woundes that an other had geuen. But they supposed 
that other infirmities, and paynes of the inwarde 
partes as engendred thorowe the anger of the Goddes 
were not to be cured with naturall vertues. The first inuentoure 
then of Surgerie was Apis Kinge of Egypte, 
or as Clement of Alexandria wil, one more ancient then 
he called Mizria sonne of Caine, nephew of greate Noe. 
But Esculapius was the firste that wrote of Surgerye. 
Afterwarde Pythagoras, Empedocles, Parmenides, Democritus, 
Chiron, & Peon were excellent therein. Plinie saith 
that the firste whiche practised it in Rome was one Archagatus 
of Peloponesus, and that for the crueltie of cuttinge 
and searinge, he was commonly called a wounde 
maker, and that the name passed afterwarde to executioner, 
and finally that men waxed altogeather wery of the 
Arte and disanulled it. Surgerie then is famous for the 
authoritee of excellent men no lesse then if they were the 
doinges of other Phisitions, but infamous for the filthines 
of poysonous mattier and blouddy crueltee. 
 
[^f.153r^] 
[}Of the Anotomist Arte, or cuttinge of menne by 
Phisitions. Cap. 86.}] 
 
YEt Anatomie doth surmount this Arte in cruelty, 
an open bocherie of Phisitions & Surgeans, wherby 
they haue with moste cruel tormentes dismembred 
the malefactours that were condemned to dye openly, 
sometime aliue, and breathinge. But nowe a dayes 
become somewhat more gentle for the reuerence of Christian 
religion, firste slayinge the man with theire owne 
hands, or of the hangman. With this crueltee they afterwarde 
 cut open the liueles bodye, and tearinge asunder 
mans bodye doo searche, and consider the placing, order, 
measure, worke, nature, and secretes of euery member, 
to learne thereby howe and in what places they shoulde 
cure with this cruell diligence nolesse wicked, then horrible 
and abhominable spectacle. 
 
[}Of the Crafte or Science of curinge brute beastes. 
Cap. 87.}] 
 
There is moreouer an other practise of Phisicke that 
is called curinge of cattal or beastes, which healeth 
the diseases of brute beastes muche more certaine 
and profitable then the other, inuented, as it is sayde, by 
Chiron, and made famous by Columella, Cato, Varro, Pelagonius, 
and Vegetius moste woorthy writers. Yet these 
ringed Phisitions doo not onely accompte it a shame for 
them, but also be altogeather ignoraunte thereof and dispise 
thesame, they are very nice, and as it were the lapwinge 
be delited with nothing but mans ordure. Wherfore 
if any man aske them a medicine for his Asse, or Oxe, 
he shall immediately receiue displeasure in steede of a remedie: 
as y~ it were their dutie not onely to cure men, but 
other liuing creatures also, especially them which be profitable 
vnto menne, for whiche consideration Alphonsus 
[^f.153v^] 
Kinge of Aragon in time paste hired twoo very cunninge 
Doctours of Phisicke with great stipende, for horses 
and Dogges, and commaunded them that they shoulde with 
al diligence search out what remedies, and what maner 
of curinge did agree to al the infirmities of beasts, which 
they doing, made a very profitable booke of these things. 
Iohn Ruel of Paris, did the like of late yeares a man very 
wel learned in bothe tonges, and a notable Philosopher, 
who gathered a piked volume of the deseases of Horses, 
and theire remedies, out of most auncient Authours, as 
Apsirchus, Hierocles, Theomestus, Pelagonius, Anatolius, 
Tiberius, Eumelius, Archedamus, Hippocrates, Hemerius, 
Africanus, and out of Emilius the Spaniard, and Litorius 
Bonaue~tanus, profitable to al horseleaches with the great 
commoditie of the common weale. 
 
[}Of Dietinge Phisicke. Cap. 88.}] 
 
That parte of Phisicke whiche cureth by diete, is yet 
remayninge, wherein Asclepiades before others 
was chiefe, who hauinge for the moste parte taken 
away the vse of receites, reduced the whole Arte of Phisicke, 
to the order of feeding, to the quantitee, and nature 
of meates, and to the seasoninge of them, from whom other 
Phisitions doo not altogeather disagree, but in this 
manner supposing that one standeth in neede of an other, 
feedinge sometimes of medicines, and the same likewise 
of the order and measure of feedinge: for this cause they 
commaunde, forbid, refuse, and blame meates and drinkes, 
whiche God hath created, & prescribe them rules of diete, 
not able to be obserued: and what meates they will not 
haue others to taste, themselues deuoure as pigges doo 
acornes: and the rules which they prescribe to others thei 
firste of al transgresse themselues not so muche of negligence 
as of a set pourpose. For if they were bound to liue 
accordinge to these theire dietinge decrees, they shoulde 
greatly empaire theire healthe: and if they permitted the 
[^f.154r^] 
diseased to liue accordinge to the lawes of nature, as they 
liue, theire purse woulde feele the smarte therof. Of these 
dietes speaketh Ambrose in this manner: The preceptes 
of Phisicke are contrary to the diuine state, which drawe 
men backe from fastinge, they suffer men not to watch, 
they withdrawe men from settinge of the minde on meditation: 
and so he that putteth himselfe into the handes 
of the Phisition, abandoneth himself. And Barnarde writing 
vpon Cantica, saith: Hippocrates and Socrates teache 
to saue soules in this worlde: Christe and his disciples to 
destroie them, which Master of these twoo wil ye folowe? 
He maketh himself manifest that reasoneth, this hurteth 
 the eyes, this the heade, this the stomake: all manner of 
pulse is windy, cheese oppresseth the stomake, milke hurteth 
the heade, the breast broketh not drinking of water: 
whereof this commeth to passe, that thou canste scarslye 
find any thinge to eate in whole riuers, fields, gardens, & 
cellars. But put the case that these woordes of Ambrose & 
Bernarde be spoken to Monckes & to no men els, whiche 
peraduenture ought not to haue so great regarde of their 
health as of their profession: And it is not vnfitting, that 
ciuil men together with y~ regarde of theire health should 
be delited also with varietye and daintines of fare, and 
meates, the firste Phisicke that cureth by diete doth promisse, 
the seconde Coquerie doth performe, whiche is the 
knowledge to dresse meates and drinckes. Wherefore 
Plato calleth this the flatteresse of Phisicke, and many accompte 
it part of dietinge Phisicke: albeit Plinie, Seneca, 
and the residewe of the schole of Phisitions doo confesse y~ 
diuers diseases are enge~dred thorow the varietie of deintie 
meates. 
 
