[^Du Chesne, Joseph: Breefe avnswere^] 
 
[}A BREEFE AVNSWERE 
OF IOSEPHVS 
QVERCETANVS ARMENIAcus, 
Doctor of Phisick, to the exposition of Iacobus 
Aubertus Vindonis, concerning the original, 
and causes of Mettalles. Set foorth 
against Chimists. 
 
Another exquisite and plaine Treatise of the 
same Iosephus, concerning the Spagericall preparations, 
and vse of minerall, animall, and vegitable 
Medicines. 
 
Whereunto is added diuers rare secretes, not heeretofore 
knowne of many. By Iohn Hester, practicioner 
in the Spagericall Arte. 
 
At London, 
Printed Anno. Dom. 
1591.}] 
 
[^A dedication and an epistle to the reader omitted.^] 
 
[^Extract 1, ff. 1r-14v^] 
 
[^f.1r^] 
[}A BRIEFE ANSVVERE OF 
Iosephus Quercitanus Armeniacus, 
Doctor of Physicke, to the exposition of 
Iacobus Aubertus Vindonis: Concerning 
the originall and causes 
of Mettalles. 
 
ANOTHER EXQVISITE AND 
plaine treatise of the same Iosephus, concerning 
the Spagericall preparation, and vse 
of Minerall, Animall, and Vegetable 
medicines. 
 
AND FIRST AN ANSWEARE TO 
his slaunderous Epistle, wherein he goeth about to 
ouerthrow certaine medicines of those whom hee 
calleth Paracelsians.}] 
 
MInding to answeare the little booke 
of Aubertus, concerning the originall 
of mettals, and their causes, 
although it be not greatly worthie 
of answere, yet I neither can, or 
may passe ouer this: greatlie maruelling 
at the rashnes of those me~ 
which dare curse and condemne 
this arte, approued by the authoritie of so many ancient 
and great men, especiallie Hermes Trismegistus, Geber, 
Lullus, Arnoldus, Villanouanus, and our Auicen himselfe, 
Whose testimonies, confirmed with authoritie and arguments, 
yea and with practise it selfe, are of more waight, 
then that they should so easily be shake~ of, with the slender 
reasons, & taunts of such me~. But this truely I grant, 
that through the fault and deceits of some ignorant and 
[^f.1v^] 
wicked men, that the Chymistes are euill spoken of: but to 
condemne thinges for their abuse, specially of so great 
weight (as I know and defend this to be) truely it neither 
can, or ought to be so. For it openeth vnto vs so many 
works of the almightie God, it laieth open so many secretes 
of nature, and preparations of herbes, beastes, and 
mineralles hetherto vnknowen, and sheweth the vses almost 
of all things, which were hidden and laid vp in the 
bosome of Nature, that they shew themselues vnkinde 
toward man that would haue this art buried. 
 
As touching Paracelsus, I haue not taken vpon mee 
the defence of his diuinitie, neither did I euer thinke to 
agree with him in all points, as though I were sworne to 
his doctrine: but besides the testimonie wherewith Erasmus 
adorneth him in certaine Epistles, I dare be bolde to 
say and defend, that he teacheth many things almost diuinely, 
in Phisicke, which the thankfull posteritie can neuer 
commend and praise sufficientle: whereof I trust occasion 
shall be geuen to speake in another place. But 
that all men may know with what discretion (thou Aubertus) 
hast taken in hand to oppugne these things: goe 
to, we will reason of those two points, which in the Preface 
of thy little book thou hast taken vpon thee to handle. 
But thou art a man truelie (as I perceuie) of a verie 
sharpe witte. The one of thy points which thou handlest, 
is concerning Laudanum, accounted verie perilous: the 
other of the burnt eyes of a crabbe, which you also think 
to be ridiculous. 
 
And first, because you thinke it not to be the Laudanum 
of Dioscorides, you demaund what it should be. Learn then 
this of me, that this laudable medicine is so called of the 
Chymical Physicians, and that it doeth plainlie answeare 
vnto his name, if you call it Lawdanum. But you say it is 
made of Opium, Is that it that bringeth such a maze into 
your minde? Indeede Opium is put into it, but of a farre 
better preparation then is commonlie in vse: not without 
the spirite of wine, or the infusion of Diambræ, by certaine 
[^f.2r^] 
monethes, not without the essence of Safferon, Castoreum, 
Coralles, Perles, Mumia, and the oiles of Cinamon, 
Cloues, Mace, and Anniseedes: of all which, being rightly 
mingled (as it is the manner of arte) is made that most 
excellent medicine, to put away all vnkinde heates, to 
stay all fluxes, and to asswage in marueilous sort all manner 
of greefes: yet so, that it doeth not extinguish the naturall 
heate, but rather preserue and defende it by strenthening 
the spirites, much lesse that it doeth benumme 
them, or take away the motions from the parts (which is 
ridicular to be spoken) but with a certeine marueilous 
qualitie wherewith it excelleth, it helpeth the powers, 
as by the description of the foresaid things, and their due 
and not common preparation and mixture may easilie 
be gathered. 
 
What will you say if I adde more, that there is put 
into it the true essence of golde, which is so commended 
in olde time, by the writings of learned Philosophers and 
Physicians? I beleeue you would laugh at this essence, 
which is vnknowen vnto you, yet familiar vnto many philosophers. 
But I affirme that golde to be a most temperate 
and effectuall remedie to helpe the strength of nature, 
against melancholike affections, weake stomackes, 
passions of the heart, and such as be extreamly sadde. 
 
Truelie you may worthelie beleue, that there is much 
more force in his essence, then in your leafe golde. And 
this you will graunt (my friend Aubertus) that there is 
greater force of secrete qualities in that most fine golde, 
then in your brothes sodden with golde. Neither yet doe 
I thinke you doe beleeue (for that were too absurde) that 
golde which cannot be wasted or burned with the heate 
of the fire, can be so digested or ouercome by naturall 
heate, but that it may by some meane strengthen the hart 
the substance remaining whole, when as the opinion of 
the Philosophers is this, that all earth is dead, and that 
it is only the spirites of things that can worke in bodies. 
But Laudanum it selfe, although it be opiat, yet is it not so 
[^f.2v^] 
to be reprehended. For if it were not so corrected afore, it 
were very dangerous, & for his extreame coldnes deadlie, 
as the Paracelsians which are the folowers of the true 
and auncient phisicke, doe well vnderstand. For neither 
doeth any of them doubt, but that Opinm, to take 
away his venemous force, is corrected of many, only with 
safferon, castoreum and mirre, which correction doeth 
nothing hinder, but that it may be done with a better preparation: 
for Aloes also is washed, that it frette not the 
veines with his sharpnes: and blacke Elebore is made so 
commodious for vse, with the spirite of wine, and oile of 
Anieseedes, (that you may learne also of the Chymicke 
Phisicians) that it may be safelie geuen to children against 
the dropsey, and all melancholie affections. Therefore 
opiat medicines are not so rashlie and vnaduisedlie 
to be condemned, of which are made sundrie medicines 
to asswage the vehement paines of the collicke, reines, 
plurisies, and goutes: to prouoke sleepe, to ease the cough, 
to stoppe spitting of bloud, and to stay all reumes, such as 
is that Philonium which is allowed of all auncient Physicions. 
 
Also opiat things are necessarie in medicines that ex. 
pell poison, Antidotes, to strengthen the principall partes, 
to withstande the malignitie of any poison, and infinite 
other affects, as may be seene in that excellent triacle, 
described by Andromachus the elder, into which 3. ounces 
of Opium is put. Likewise in the fourth and last preparation 
of Mitridate, which Galen, Aetius, and other Greekes, 
haue drawen from the ancient Phisicians, Antipater and 
Cleophantus, whose qualities they haue described to be 
most like vnto the triacle. Peraduenture you will except, 
that the composition of this our Laudanum, is not so temperate, 
as this composition of triacle. Therefore you 
should know it first before you reprehende it, which notwithstanding, 
both reason doeth commend, and experience 
sheweth to be very profitable. Which onely medicine 
it were much better for you and such like to haue, 
[^f.3r^] 
for the curing of many diseases, then those sundrie decoctions 
of herbes, wherwith many are most miserably tormented. 
[/1./] 
Plinius writeth, that Licinius the father of Cecinna, 
killed himselfe with Opium, being wearie of his life. 
But I am assured, that there can none be found that hath 
been hurt by the vse of our Laudanum, which you notwithstanding 
falsly and shameleslie doe write: yea many 
learned and godlie men will auouch, that it is not without 
reason geuen, but with most happie successe, and profite 
to the sicke, in all manner of rewmes, and to swage 
inflammations, and all other griefes aforesaid. The composition 
of which most excellent medicine, and the preparation 
described, which is vnknowen to you, and such 
as you are: I had put in print if your writings had not forced 
me to consider, whether it were expedient to caste 
pearles before euery one to treade vpon. 
 
Now I come to the other medicine, which you call a 
iest, and laugh because we minister the eies of Crabs calcined, 
to those that are sicke of a quartane: and specially 
because we prescribe for one dose .+Q. i. +s. of this powder, 
and his mixture, for the cure of the quartane: and you 
conclude, that the whole Lacus Lemanus will scarce yeld 
so many eies of Crabbes, which certeinly is most true: for 
there be no crabbes in that lake, but many Creuises, 
which you (my Aubert) haue not well noted. For there 
be foure kindes of those shell fishes, which the Greekes 
call [^GREEK OMITTED^]. The one is called [^GREEK OMITTED^], that is, a Locust. 
Another they call Gamarum, which Galen calleth 
[^GREEK OMITTED^]. The thirde [^GREEK OMITTED^], which they call Squilla. The 
fourth is the Crabbe, which the Greekes call [^GREEK OMITTED^]. 
All these the learned know to be sundrie kindes. 
 
The Astachi which you supposed to be Crabbes, and 
of the Frenchmen are called Escreuises, are like vnto Locustes, 
and doe little or nothing differ, but onely by a varietie 
of certaine forepartes and armes: for they haue a 
long bodie, and a long taile, whereupon there are founde 
fiue finnes. Only the Crabbes haue a round bodie, and 
[^f.3v^] 
no taile, for they haue little vse of it, because they liue 
neere the earth, and creepe into hollowe places, & swim 
not much. But for your better vnderstanding, you maie 
consult with Aristotle, Plinie, and speciallie with Edwarde 
[/2./] 
Wottonne in his tenth booke of the difference of beastes, 
also the Commentaries of Matheolus vpon Dioscorides, 
which altogether will teach you, that there is very great 
difference betweene the Astachum, whereof you vndiscreetlie 
speake, and the riuer or sea crabbe. But you will 
say, there is no great regard to be geuen vnto words, and 
that these kindes of shell fish, for the most parte, are confounded 
among them selues. Let it be so, this I would also 
speake by the way, because I see you doe lacke them, 
and that our disputation might be both more euident, 
you thinke it two waies absurd, that the eies of crabbes 
calcined, should be prescribed in a quartane, because 
that by their drith and sharpenes they increase the disease. 
O subtile argument, and worthie of such a Phisicion. 
We are not ignorant (my Aubertus) that the continent 
cause or matter of the quartane ague, is the very iuice 
of melancholie, which by his proper causes being gathered 
much together, that it cannot be ruled by the naturall 
heate, at length putrifieng, it inflameth this feuer. 
This melancholie humor the Phisicians make double: 
the one naturall, which is as the fex and slime of bloud: 
the other adust, which is as it were, the congeled tartar or 
ashes of certaine burnt humors: and that commeth speciallie 
of yellowe coller, and melancholie adust, although 
sometime it come of burnt flegme, if we credite the Arabians. 
Therefore seeing that the melancholicke humor 
which is colde and drie, is the matter of these feuers, we 
will confesse with you, the cause of them to be partly cold 
and drie: but that it is increased by the vse of all drie and 
sharp things, we denie as false. For whereas this humor 
by nature is grosse, slimie and tough and that abounding 
speciallie in the spleene Mesenterium, and vseth to be gathered 
about the Hipochondria or sides, and by successe of 
[^f.4r^] 
time to be indurate: truelie there is no learned Physician 
that doubteth, but that it is to be mollified, digested, rarefied, 
made thinne, and cutte: but those thinges which 
for this purpose are of least force, are mollifying, which 
the Greekes call [^GREEK OMITTED^], and those which are of 
a greater force, whotte and thinne, to the seconde or 
thirde degree, are called of the Greekes [^GREEK OMITTED^] of the 
Latinists, rarifying, which with their heate and meane 
drith, doe dissolue and disperse, mollifie and digest all 
the hardnes of the spleene, and greeued bowels. The 
timelie vse of which medicines, chieflie is both requisite 
and greatlie commended in quartanes. So the barke of 
the Ashe, and of Cappars, the roote of Brionia, the wilde 
Cowcumber, Walwort, and Ireos, all whotte and drie some 
euen in the third degree, being taken, they mollifie and 
driue away all hardnes, or being applied outwarde, doe 
dissolue and consume the harde spleene: So may I say of 
Amoniacum, bdellium, opoponax, galbanum, which although 
they be all whotte and drie, euen Barbers know that they 
haue a great force to mollifie and digest. Seeing then 
mollifying and rarefying things are conuenient to cure 
the quartane, as all men confesse being taken in season, 
thinke it not so absurde or ridiculous (my Iacobus) if anie 
doe also vse the ashes of the eyes, or sometimes of the 
heads of Crabbes, or for lacke of them, Creuisses. For 
the ashes of those shellfishes, speciallie of the eyes, haue 
great force to extenuate and dissolue that fex of the melancholie 
humor, which those (whom you call Paracelsians) 
doe name tartar congealed. But if you doe so much 
abhorre these calcinations, which we often vse, and doe 
aske why we doe it, learne this Auberius, out of Galen, in 
the eleuenth booke de simpl. medic. facult. whereas speaking 
of salt, he vseth these words: Salt burned, digesteth 
[/3./] 
more stronglie then vnburned, by how much the bodie 
is made more subtile, receiuing his qualities of the fire. 
Also he writeth in the same book those medicines which 
consist of thinne partes, haue more force then they of 
[^f.4v^] 
grosse partes, although they had like qualitie, because 
they pearce better: for which cause onely wee vse calcined 
Crabbes, to loose those feces, and tartarous humors. 
For by calcination, the salt of things is drawen out, and 
salt must be dissolued with salt onely, if you doe well vnderstand 
it, and so you shall learne that diseases are 
not to be cured with co~traries, but like with like, although 
as yet you perceiue not the reason. Otherwise, how could 
you say that the stones of spunges, burnt glasse, Goates 
bloud dried, the ashes of Cocles, Lapis Iudaicus calcined, 
or the bone of a cuttle, with so great force coulde helpe 
the stone, or grauell of the reines. I know you will flie to 
the Asses sacred anchore, namelie, of secrete qualities, 
which notwithstanding, reason it selfe teacheth to be 
done with the salt which doeth dissolue them, and expel 
them by vrine, what will you then say of the hedge sparrow, 
that laudable medicine of auncient Physicians, for 
the same disease, whereof Paul Æginet. lib. 3. cap. 45. where 
he leaueth it thus written: This (saith hee) pouthered 
whole with salt, and often eaten rawe, driueth out the 
stones that are alreadie growen by vrine, and letteth the~ 
not to growe againe afterward: but if it be burned whole 
with his feathers, & all his ashes, by it selfe, or with a little 
pepper dronk with old wine & hony, it worketh the same 
effect. Thus you see how the ancient Physicia~s did vse the 
ashes, which you call absurd, and in what diseases: euen 
in curing the stone of the reines, whose matter is also 
such a grosse humor, that with heat it groweth to a stone. 
How much more Crabbes calcined preuaile against that 
disease, is noted of Hollerius & Mathiolus, and a thousand 
times hath beene proued by certain experience. Neither 
will I passe ouer (among other medicines which are vsed 
for this disease) Christall, which is the chiefe: Christall (I 
say) calcined, in a reuerberatorie, out of which after is 
drawen his salt, of whose dissolution, in a moist place, is 
made a most excellent oile, very profitable to put away 
all obstructions of the bowels. Wherefore you may not 
[^f.5r^] 
thinke it so ridiculous, that a medicine should be taken out 
of the calcined eyes of Crabbes, neither so to spue out your 
bitter poison against it. This will I also adde out of Galene, 
and the opinion of all the auncientest, that the Crabs them 
selues calcined, euen by the propertie of their whole substance, 
are marueilous effectuall against the biting of mad 
[/4./] 
dogges. And Galens wordes which he reporteth of his master 
Pelope, doe shewe that madnes to be a most drie infection. 
It is not without cause (saith hee) that the Crabbe (being 
a waterie creature) should helpe them that are bitten of 
a mad dog, in whom it is to be feared, least they should fall 
into a most drie disease, that is, madnesse. Nowe there remaineth 
that I should speak of the sharpnes which you finde 
in the calcination of Crabbes: which (as you say) doeth increase 
the quartane. But I feare least by those wordes the 
learned may thinke you vtterly ignorant what a sharpe tast 
is. For it is easie for vs to shewe, that the ashes of Crabs are 
not sharpe: for al sharpe thinges (as it is knowen to Physicians) 
are verie hote, of which Phisicians make two sortes. 
The one sorte may be eaten, the other vnapt to be eaten. 
These haue a certaine sweete, although obscure qualitie 
[/5./] 
mixed. The other are deadly (if we beleue Galen) or at the 
least being laid vpon the skin, do quickle raise a blister. And 
those truelie are to be called sharpe when they are not mingled 
with strange qualities, whose proper terme and ende is 
to burne, as it is the qualitie of sower things to cleanse, of 
sweete, to nourish. And that the ashes of Crabbes worke not 
[/6./] 
that effect, Galens wordes doe shewe, where hee disputeth of 
the differences of bitter and sharpe taste: for the sharpe 
(saith he) hath certaine moisture mingled with it, but the 
bitter he confesseth to haue a hotte and drie qualitie, and 
saith they are like (as a man may well compare them) vnto 
ashes. By which reason you should better haue saide, that 
the ashes of the eies of crabbes are rather bitter then sharp, 
whose moisture being consumed and vapored away by heat, 
they are made drith and ashes: whereby they get not a 
sharpe, but a bitter qualitie: and although an earthlie substance, 
yet thinne, by how much the bodie is made more 
[^f.5v^] 
subtile, taking his qualitie of the fire, as before wee shewed 
[/7./] 
out of Galen, and of necessity is made hot and drye, and 
therefore bitter, to clense, breake asunder, and cut grosse 
and viscose humors, as no doubt ashes and nitre doth (as 
[/8./] 
Galen teacheth) whom at an other time you may better co~sult 
withall, least you appeare plainly ignorant of your first 
principles. But because I see some thinges must be pardoned 
you, go to, I willingly grant you that the calce of crabbes 
is sharpe: but that with his sharpnes, it doth increase the 
quartane, I vtterly deny. For I pray you (good Sir) is not 
Mustard, Peper, and Garlike, so far forth granted vnto him 
that is sicke of the quartane, by all the learned Greekes, Arabians 
and of Paul Aegineta himselfe, that they are also 
prescribed them for a diet. And the Diatrion Pipereon, or 
that they call Diospoliticon, are they not reckoned amongest 
the remedies for the quartane? neither is it besides the purpose 
[/9./] 
to shew the words of the famous Phisition Hollerius vppon 
this point, where he writeth of the diet of the sicke of 
the quartane. As touching the diet (saith he) at the beginning 
of a mean matter, & by spaces fro~ the beginning to the 
force of the disease, you may vse sharpe thinges as mustard, 
and salt meates, and after the force of the fitte the vse of 
them is necessarie, towards the end he addeth. Therefore 
are salt meates commended, because salt doth extenuat and 
driue away the excrementes, dryeth them vp, gathereth 
strength and comforteth. 
 
By this I thinke you and all other do sufficiently perceiue 
how greatly you are deceaued in contemning our remedy 
taken out of the true doctrine of the learned. But because 
you know not the other simples which are put into this medecine, 
or at the least passe them ouer with silence, beholde 
I will gratify you and shew you the composition. It taketh 
the roote of Aron, or Cockow-pintell prepared, also the 
rootes of common Acorus, and Pimpinella, prepared and 
dried, the eies of the Crabbe calcyned (of which for one 
dose, there is vsed not halfe a scruple) with seme~ nastortij & suger 
a mixture is made of all. The dose is one spoonful in the 
morning for to comfort the weake stomacke, to put away all 
[^f.6r^] 
obstructions of the bowels, and hardnes of the splene, an excellent 
medicine often proued, and at this day in vse, with 
most learned Phisitions. I thinke there is no Doctor wil say 
this to be so absurd & hurtfull for the quartane. You should 
therefore if you reproue Paracelsus medicines, haue chosen 
some other more speciall thinges, wherein you might haue 
exercised the greatnes of your witte, and proued your cunning. 
For these thinges (although you enuiously call them 
Theophrasticall) are both agreeable to reason, and to bee allowed 
of euery learned Phisition. But peraduenture you 
will say these thinges haue not beene knowen to the diuine 
Hippocrates, nor vnto Galen, and therefore you will co~clude 
that they are to be reiected: but that is onely by your owne 
iudgement, and not by any reason, wee do not despise their 
excellent knowledge and diuine learning, neither violate 
their lawdable memory, when as we say they were the first 
that florished in Phisicke: yet therewithall we affirme that 
they had not tried all kinde of medecines, or knew the 
properties of them all. Life is short saith Hippocrates, & this 
[/10./] 
art which is occupied about this perillous practise is ouer 
long: Neither was Galen ashamed to confesse where he writeth 
of Hydrargyru~, or quickesiluer 9. of simp. cap. 19. that he 
had neuer made any tryall, neither y=t= it would kill if it were 
eaten, neither if it were applyed outwardly: nor is it to bee 
thought that Theophrastus was the first and onely inuenter 
of so many remedies, the knowledge whereof (he himselfe 
confesseth in his bookes) he attained by the conference of 
diuerse learned Philosophers and Phisitions, both Egyptians 
and Arabians, amongest whom for learning sake, he remayned 
certaine yeares captiue, from whom at the length 
he brought away so many faire prises of remedies, all which 
are take~ partly out of the true oiles drawne of spices, herbes, 
fruites, flowers, and seedes, and thessence of all laxatiues, 
whereof one drop will profit more, then so many drammes 
and ounces: which also (that they may worke by their whole 
substaunce) may bee sowed and cast vpon their proper salt, 
which in many may be done, as in other the earth is to bee 
cast away as vtterly dead and contrary to purgation. Also 
[^f.6v^] 
of diuers rosins, gummes, and other kindes of vegetables 
are drawen many faire and very profitable preparations: as 
also of diuers partes of sundrie beastes, of which rightly prepared 
are made many verie holsome medicines, as by the 
true preparations of Mumia onely knowen vnto the Paracelsians 
is made a most laudable medecine in all pestilent 
infections. Of the oile and salt of a mans scull not buried 
for the epilepsye: of the oile of honie and wax for the tophy: 
of greases and other preparations the better to mollify 
and dissolue. So also of Muske, Ciuet, Castoreum, the 
Vnicornes horne, Iuorie, the horne and bone of the Hart, of 
a Stagge, and infinite other thinges are made many extractions 
for the paines of the hart and such like. Of all which 
the Chimicall art hath taught the true preparations which 
you do condemne. For the Paracelsian remedies are not 
onely taken out of the metalliyne bodies, perles, and pretious 
stones, as many foolishly thinke and perswade the whole 
world: neither are they sharpe and violent (as the ignorant 
and vnskilfull prattle) but most sweete and familier to our 
nature, which through the excellencie of the spirites they 
often preserue, quicken and clense from all impurities onlie 
by sweates: and finallie are not a little profitable by their 
whole substance, as many learned men daily (with great 
successe) doe practice: but of these thinges more then enough. 
Therefore now we will goe forward to those 
thinges which you write touching 
mettalles. 
 
[^f.7r^] 
[}A briefe answeare of Iosephus Quercitanus 
Armeniacus doctor of Phisicke, to 
the exposition of Iacobus Aubertus Vyndon. 
concerning the originall and causes of 
mettalles against the Chimistes.}] 
 
MANY write that mettell is a bodie 
to be digged vp by nature, either liquid, 
[/11./] 
as quick-siluer, or hard, which 
may be molte~ with the heate of the 
fier, as gold, siluer copper, leade and 
tinne, or softened as Iron. Other call 
all things that are digged out of the 
bowels of the earth by the proper 
name of mettalles. So Onesicritus writeth that in Carmania 
there is a mettall of a red chalke. Herodotus affirmeth, 
that in Lybia about Atlantus, is a mettall of salt, and this 
doth Plinie testify in his 33. booke of his naturall historie. 
Others say that is proper mettall, which being molten is 
brought againe to his former forme, and that may be beaten 
out with hammer, is hard and apt to take impression: & 
for that cause they deuide it into six, that is, golde, siluer, 
copper tinne, leade, and Iron: whereunto some haue added 
mercurie, not that it is a mettall indeede, but it may be. The 
Chimistes vse to call them by the names of the planets, not 
to referre their substance to the planets, as Aubertus foolishly 
thinketh: but partly moued with a certaine likenes of 
the greatest and principall starres (for which cause they named 
the two most perfect mettalles, the Sunne and Moone) 
and Iron for his hardnes, Mars, whom the Poets faine to be 
the God of armes and battell, and quicksiluer for the great 
and vncertaine motion they called Mercurie, and partly after 
the Pythagoreans, that they might hide their secrets vnder 
darke speeches. But I see no reason why Antimony 
should be properly receiued among mettalles (wherefore 
by Agricola his leaue, whose aucthoritie Aubertus leaneth 
[^f.7v^] 
vnto) it is to be excepted out of their kinde, for that it is alltogether 
repugna~t to their definition: for all mettalles molten 
doe returne to their proper forme, and such as are easie 
to be driuen, be hard, and apt to receiue impression: by 
which reason they differ from many liquable stones, in which 
the humiditie is not strongly mixed with the dry earthines, 
as also from infinite kindes of marcasites and halfe metalles. 
But Antymony molten doth vtterly loose his first forme, as 
practisioners doe daily trie, neither is it easye to be driuen, 
and practise sheweth it will take no print, and therefore properly 
it cannot be called mettall. But it pleased Aubertus 
which is so learned in mettalles to affirme this, that yet he 
dreameth that tynne glasse (which is that Bisemutum, and 
that sinder or ashie kind of leade whereof Agricola speaketh 
much in the 8. booke de natura fossil.) to be Stibium molten, 
and the Chimists, basiliske, which is most absurd. For that 
tinne-glasse which is commonly called bisemutum, is not 
stibium any way prepared, neither the Chimistes basiliske, 
extract with tartar & niter, may be called bisemutum, which 
I leaue to the iudgement of al that be of vpright mindes: but 
this is small to the purpose, when many thinges are called 
by the name of mettall, and yet not properly. But let vs 
pardon Aubertus in this which neuer saw any mines that he 
might iudge rightly of the~, neither vnderstandeth the minde 
of Agricola. In the meane time hee complaineth that Chimistes 
deuide the metalles into perfect and vnperfect, and 
that he thinketh ridiculous for many causes. First because 
of a certaine diffinition giuen by Geber, which agreeth no 
lesse to one mettall then an other: whereas the perfecte 
might be discried from the imperfect, one diffinition were to 
be giuen to the one an other to the other. As though the 
diffinition of a man were not agreeable to a child, although 
he be not yet come to a mans age: or in other accidentes 
seeme to differ from him, as mettals do differ among themselues. 
So the diffinitions of white and red coralles should 
be sundrie and diuers, that by reason of absolute and perfect 
concoctio~ the white haue not attained the vttermost degree, 
whose definition notwithstanding is all one. But Aubertus to 
[^f.8r^] 
proue his opinion the better, writeth that all thinges, which 
haue essentiall forme (as it is certaine mettalles haue) must 
of necessitie be perfect. And that nature the godly parent of 
all thinges in doing of her office doth not cease or rest (except 
it be letted) vntill she hath attained her purposed end 
and scope. He addeth that the matter whereof any naturall 
thing is made, and whereabout nature is occupied, doth 
moue so long vntill it hath attained the essentiall forme. He 
concludeth that mettall cannot rightly be deuided into perfect 
and vnperfect, neither that gold ought by any meanes 
to be called more excellent and perfect, although it be more 
bewtifull and temperat then other mettalles, all which wee 
must confute, as friuolous and vaine. And to prosecute all 
thinges in due order, we must shew that golde it selfe of the 
true Philosophers is worthily called more perfect, excellent, 
and pure then other mettals: that hereuppon wee 
may conclude, mettalles not without reason to be deuided 
of the Chimistes into perfect and vnperfect. Therefore that 
I may also stay vpon the aucthoritie of Agricola (out of whom 
Aubertus hath specially taken those his wordes) he writeth 
in lib. 5. de ortu & causis subterraneorum, that mettalles do differ 
among themselues, not onely in shining, but also in colour, 
sauour, sent, weight and power. And specially speaking 
of shining (which you Aubertus confesse to be in golde and 
siluer) he saith. But by how much the humor is more subtile, 
thicke and pure, by so much the mettall is more cleere 
and shining: for which cause in this behalfe gold excelleth 
the other. The excellencie of which gold Agricola himselfe 
seeketh in the difference of sent, sauour, and waight. For 
the vnperfect mettalles, when they come in any liquor are 
perceiued to be sower of taste, as copper and Iron: for the 
adust earth is cause of their sowernes, whereof those mettalles 
do participat, as Agricola himselfe witnesseth. But the 
other because of their pure earth, and more abundant water 
do not giue the liquors so sensible a sauor, but rather a 
sweetish tast, as gold and siluer. Also for as much as in gold 
the earth is most pure and verie wel tempered with his water, 
it giueth verie litle or scarse sensible smoke when it is 
[^f.8v^] 
burned, and rather sweete then stinking. And Agricola addeth 
more that gold when it is purged in the fier hath in a 
maner no excrementes because of his puritie, in others there 
is more, but so much more in one, then an other, as it is 
more vnpure. Also the excellency of golde is to bee sought 
for in his force and strength, because that besides it and siluer 
all other mettalles do vanish away in smoke, and perish 
with the violence of fier vppon the test or cople: which happeneth 
vnto them, as the earth in them is found to be lesse 
pure and their temperature not so good. As it hapneth vnto 
Iron through the impure earth, whereof there is great 
store in it. But when as gold alone cannot bee consumed 
[/12./] 
with anie fierie heate, as Aristotle saith, and looseth nothing 
of his waight though it bee burned or tried, of necessity it 
must haue a most pure earth, and well compact with his water, 
whereby it commeth to passe, that his earth doth hold 
and let his humor, that it vapour not away, and contrariwise 
the humour defendeth the earth, that it butne not (as 
saith Agricola) which commeth to passe, as others do affirme, 
because of a most subtill, moist, and drye, that hath not any 
impuritie mixed. By this reason gold according to the nature 
of thinges is purer then other mettalles, and surmounteth 
them in price, because it is the most simple and purest 
mettall, and furthest from imperfection of elementes by 
reason of his forme. So Pliny saith, vnto one thing, which 
[/13./] 
is golde, nothing decayeth by fier (as the Poet also saith) 
and as appeareth by that aforesaid. By this we may gather, 
that amongest all mettalles, gold is not onely the brightest, 
but most temperat and perfect, in respect of which all other 
mettalles may worthely be called vnperfect. For nature alwaies 
tendeth to perfection, that is, to the making of golde, 
which alone amongest mettals is called perfect: for no agent 
naturall (as the Philosophers say) ceaseth from worke 
in his owne matter, neither is seperat, but with putting on 
some forme in that matter. Therefore so long as the agent 
is ioyned to the matter, or worketh vpon the matter, that is 
said to be vnperfect: for the perfection of any thing is not 
but by putting on of forme. For so much then as in all 
[^f.9r^] 
mettalles there is a certaine viscous water, which the Chimistes 
Philosophers call quickesiluer, because of the likenes 
which is put in place of the matter, and that which they 
call sulphur by like similitude of the agent or inducer of form 
in that matter: no mettall can bee called perfect, but that 
fro~ which the sulphur is separated, But because other mettalles 
haue their sulphur mixed in the matter, whereby they 
are killed, made blacke, calcined and burned (which happeneth 
vnto them onely by that dry exhalation, that is, the 
sulphur because it is a matter apt to be set on fire) for that 
cause they be altogether called vnperfect. But on the contrary 
part because onely golde is altogether without this 
sulphur, which the affinitie of gold and quicksiluer by it 
selfe doth sufficie~tly declare. (For as Pliny writeth, all things 
[/14./] 
swimme vppon it but gold, which alone it draweth vnto it) 
By this meanes it is free from corruption both in the fier & 
out of the fier, Of right therefore, it alone is called perfect, 
and formed according to the first and true intention of 
nature, and complete, because it is come to the vttermost 
end wherein it is complete, and pure because the agent is 
not mingled with the matter, but is seperat from it. To this 
purpose writeth Aristotle Met. 3. cap. vltimo speaking of mettalles: 
wherefore saith he they conteine earth in them, and 
are all burned because they haue a drye exhalation, But 
gold alone of all the rest vseth not to be burned. But Aubertus 
not content with these reasons will answeare: what so euer 
hath attained an essentiall forme, of necessity must bee 
perfect. But all mettalles haue their substantial forme. No 
man will deny (saith he) except it be some blockhead ashes 
blower: and by that meanes hereupon concludeth, that all 
are perfect. But it is easy enough for vs to answere this obiection. 
For those thinges which perseuer in their nature 
are called perfect in their kinde through their substantiall 
forme: but some continue by nature in their kinde, which 
notwithstanding are made perfect by some meanes through 
their substantiall forme, to the which their is a certaine motion 
and end: but because they are carried to another later 
essentiall forme, which altogether finisheth the matter 
[^f.9v^] 
it selfe, and maketh it complet: therfore they are called vnperfect, 
so long as they remaine vnder that first forme, in 
respect of the later, to the attaining whereof they do endeuor 
themselues. But if no accompt be made of that later 
forme, but they be considered onely in themselues: they are 
truely perfect in that their kinde (through their essentiall 
forme) as that kinde doth require. This all men see in the 
generation of egges, in which there is a certaine determined 
motion in the getting of his substantiall forme, which 
doth so remaine. But because those egges are by nature ordeined 
to this end, not to remaine vnder that forme, but to 
bring forth a byrde, and so is made the begetting of the latter 
substantiall forme: Therefore egges are called vnperfect 
vnder the forme of an egge: but it is a perfect thing after 
the bringing forth of a birde, for that is the last ende of 
egges. This is likewise to be iudged of mettalles, which 
albeit they haue in their kinde gotten an essentiall forme, yet 
can they not be called perfect, in respect of gold, which alone 
is said to bee perfect, vntill they come to that last & 
perfect end, that is, to the perfection of golde, and become 
golde. And like as in the generation of the Embrio, there is 
comparison of the vegetable soule to the sensible and of the 
sensible to the rationall, and not as formes so other imperfect 
mettalles are in respect of gold. Therefore the Chimisticall 
Philosophers haue worthily deuided the mettalles 
into perfect and vnperfect. For although the difference of 
mettalles be in the forme it selfe, yet shall it not be properly 
the difference of the kindes, as the difference of man 
and horse, but shall be taken more properly of the matter, & 
his partes that is according as it is digested or vndigested, 
complete or incomplete, seeing those are altogether of one 
proper matter. But indigest and incomplete is spoken in 
respect of gold. But whereas Aubertus iudgeth Iron more 
noble then golde, because it serueth more to the vse man, I 
thinke he shall neuer perswade any Phisitions (be they neuer 
so vnlearned) which rather desire to catch gold then Iron. 
But I suppose there is sufficiently spoken touching the excellencie 
and perfection of gold: and because we said that all [^"all" occurs only as catchword.^] 
[^f.10r^] 
mettalles are of one proper matter, although not in 
all alike digested, herein consisteth the point of the question, 
therefore we must now come to seeke out that matter 
of mettalles. The Philosophers make two causes of mettals, 
as also of all other mixed bodies. The one generall and far 
of, which is taken of the elements, as of the first causes of all 
things, of which they co~sist, as of most simple, & are resolued 
againe as into most simple. The Peripatecians contende 
against the Stoickes, that onely the qualities and vertues of 
the elementes doe passe one into another, and altogether 
mingled. The Stoickes contrarily doe affirme that whole 
substances are mingled with the whole: but leauing these 
waues of slipperie opinions we will goe to the safe and quiet 
port. And in this point we do allow the opinion of Aubertus, 
who thinketh the elementes not to be mixed bodies essentially, 
or in deede, but in power, which Galen witnesseth in 
the first book, de methodo medendi, where he writeth that the 
elements are to be mingled wholly with the whole, onely by 
their qualities. Of the second or proper matter of mettalles, 
the opinion of many Philosophers is not agreeable, but very 
diuers. For some said the neerest matter of mettals is a 
moist breath, as Aristotle: & some hold it to be a water drawe~ 
from other elementes, which Agricola alloweth, whose opinion 
our Aubertus agreeth vnto. Other deeme it ashes moistened 
with water. But the Chimist whose opinion Aubertus 
goeth about to ouerthrow, saith quicksiluer is the matter of 
them: some haue ioyned sulphur: all which opinions are 
breefly and diligently to be examined by vs, that the matter 
may bee more euident, and that all men may vnderstand 
how vnworthely Aubertus & others haue inueighed against 
so many famous Chimist philosophers. Aristotle the prince of 
[/15./] 
philosophers assineth a double matter of those things which 
are made within and vppon the earth, by the supernaturall 
power and force, that is a breath and a vapour, by the mixture 
whereof, in the bowelles of the earth hee thinketh all 
are made and haue their originall: and those hee deuideth 
according to the diuerse nature of the matter into two 
sortes, that is, into thinges to be digged, and mettallyne. 
[^f.10v^] 
They are called fossilia, because they are digged out of the 
earth, and like vnto the earth that is digged, neither are 
they liquable, as all kind of stones which are made of a dry 
exhalation set on fier, and with the heate consuming the 
moisture, and in a manner burning it. The other sort are 
metallyne, whereof some are fusible and liquable, because 
they draw neerer to the nature of moisture, then of drith, as 
leade and tinne, and are so called because they are easelier 
molten then beaten. On the contrary, those that are to be 
beaten, which are molten with greater difficulty, as Iron, 
whose next matter is a vaperous breath congealed by cold, 
and groweth into mettall according to the opinion of Aristotle, 
whom our Aubertus thinketh worthy to be reprooued: 
For saith he, it cannot come to passe in the nature of things 
that there may be a passage from one extreame or contrary 
into an other without any meane: for it is euident that 
mettalles and breathes are of contrary qualities, for these 
are very subtill, and the other very grose. Hereupon he concludeth 
in the originall of mettalles, breathes and vapoures 
doe of necessitie first congeale into humors before 
[/16./] 
they harden into mettalls. This did he take out of Agricola: 
but that excellent learned man, Iacobus Scheggius in his co~mentaries 
vpon Arist. Meteors, doth sufficiently defend Aristotle, 
being vnworthily reproued, where he teacheth, that 
the breath or vapor whereof water commeth is one. & that 
whereof mettalles concreteth is an other, as also that wherof 
a storme groweth another: for it is sometime more ponderouse 
and grosse then that whereof water groweth. By 
which reason they propose a further distant matter of mettalles 
which say it is water, the~ they which say it is a breath, 
when as the greatest part of meteors do growe vpon these 
breathes and vaperous matters raised vp out of the water 
and earth by the force of heate: for so much as there is no 
fertility of the water or earth without heat: for heate doth 
procreat these two as a first childe in whose nature the force 
of the parentes (that is of the foure elementes) is represented, 
and as it were an ingendring power of them doth consent 
together, two qualities working by a masculine force, 
[^f.11r^] 
the other two suffering as feminine. But either of them obaying 
the celestiall temperature as their father, whereby 
these thinges without life are accustomed to be procreat, by 
the instrument of the first qualities. And this may be perceaued 
by the verie sence, that so grosse vapors do often 
breake out in places vnder the ground that the diggers can 
not take breath, and sometimes through the grosenes therof 
as Galen witnesseth, are choked. If they be so grosse, who 
will iudge that mettalles and breathes, are of contrary 
qualities, but that they may grow into a sound matter of 
mettalles, without any other meane, as the ponderous vapor 
doth into a storme? Furthermore (as multitudes of people 
can testify) if it hath rained copper and Iron, and that 
stones and such other bodies do grow and are made in the 
vppermost aire, how should these be engendred of water, & 
earth, for whom there is no place to tarrie in the aire, rather 
then of vapour and breath, which both can pearce & 
stay there for their thinnes and heate. Wherefore it is 
certaine that mettalles rather haue their originall of breath 
then of water: which breath because it is grosse, doth also easely 
congeale. But what needeth more of this, when it is 
manifest to all Philosophers that all thinge haue their originall 
of that whereunto they may at last be reduced, For 
all mettalles (except the two perfect) which by greater decoction 
haue their matter more compact and fixed, are they 
not reduced into a breath or vapor? & in the examinatio~ of 
the test or cople do they not vanish away into smoke? Yes 
truly into smoke, which is not turned into water, or moisteneth, 
but grosse because of the earthines mixed with it, being 
co~geled & thickned with cold, which by certain experience 
may daily be seene & perceaued of those which work in 
fier and more easily also of the Philosophers in their sublimations. 
The same doth Tutia, Cadmia and Pompholix with 
other such like prooue, which comming of the vapoures of 
mettalles sticke to the walles of the furnaces, and shew them 
to be grosse in the mines, neither do represent water by any 
meanes. Let Aubertus therefore with his leaden argument 
hold his tongue which goeth about to ouerthrow Aristotles 
[^f.11v^] 
opinion, neither let him iudge rashly of things which 
he knoweth not, but credit those which haue experience, & 
know those vapors to bee most thicke, whereof mettals are 
first congealed, and without any other meane hardned. But 
hauing ouerthrowen Aristotle, let vs see what iudgement he 
will giue of other lerrned men and Philosophers, as of Albertus 
magnus, Geber, and other Coliars (for by that name this 
our noble censor adorneth those excellent men) whose opinions 
Aubertus refelleth in this point, because they say, that 
quicksiluer and sulphur is the next matter of mettalles, and 
goeth about with certeine arguments to shew, how they are 
out of the way. First touching quicksiluer, he saith, it is not 
likely to be the propper matter of mettalles, because it can 
not congeale into hardnes: surely an excellent argument 
and worthy to bee often repeated of the author, whereunto 
notwithstanding he is answered by vs before: he saith it can 
not congeale, because it is of an airy substance. But the vapor 
which we concluded out of Aristotle, to be the next matter 
of mettalles, who will not confesse to be airy in respect of 
water, and notwithstanding who will denie but it may co~geale? 
then I confesse that quicksiluer is airy: and therefore 
many Philosophers iudge it not to be a mettall but onely in 
Power: but I do call it so to bee airy, that it sendeth forth a 
most grosse vapour, which by colde congealeth, as may bee 
seene in Mercurie sublimat, and many other his preparations, 
wherein he sendeth forth his smokes and vapors, but 
not so airye, but they will grow thicke. But what will you 
say to those vnperfect mettalles, which as wee before said in 
examination do flye away into smokes and vapors: what finally 
shall wee thinke of their matter and forme brought to 
nothing, will you not confesse the grosse vapour which wee 
call quicksiluer to bee the matter of them, when at the last 
mettalles are reduced againe into it. But Aubertus alledgeth 
this out of Aristotle: those thinges which perteine vnto water, 
if they conteine in them more aire then water, they can 
not congeale as oile and quicksiluer. But the matter of 
mettalles is necessarie to be brought to a hardnes, otherwise 
they coulde not put on the forme of mettalles: therefore 
[^f.12r^] 
their matter can not bee quicksiluer, for so much as it can 
not congeale to hardnes. But this argument is no more effectuall 
then the former: For he setteth downe as graunted 
that which he hath not by any means proued, and which we 
haue alreadie denyed: for we graunted vnto him that quicksiluer 
was of an airie substance, but that it cannot therfore 
congeale, wee deny, when contrary to his minde we haue 
shewed his vapors do congeale. And truly Aubertus doth 
not deny but by art it doth harden, but hee thinketh that 
neither by art or nature it may congeale into mettalle in 
hardnes or forme, as thoughe to thinke, were to demonstrate 
a thing. Therefore he denyeth quicksiluer to be the 
matter of mettalles: the cause which he alledgeth, that it is 
of an airy substance, is of no force. For wee haue shewed 
out of Aristotle, that it is a vapour of an airy substance in respect 
of water, and neuerthelesse the next matter of mettals. 
Therefore airy thinges are to bee distingnished: for such as 
are altogether and simply airy because of the predominant 
matter cannot be coagulated neither by heat or by cold, because 
their airie moisture cannot bee dryed vp, the earth 
wanting, by which reason also they swimme vpon the water, 
witnesse Aristotle as oile, and are easily set on fire, because it 
is matter of fire, as oile it selfe and wooddes which swimme 
vpon the water, except ebenum which is more earthly, as by 
his waight may be iudged: but quicksiluer is neither set on 
fire, neither matter of fire, but most contrary vnto it like 
water, neither is it light but ponderous, that in it the sou~dest 
boddies of all mettalles will swimme vpon golde onely 
except for the great affinitie of them both, whereby it appeareth, 
that it is of an other substance, then simply aire like 
oile. Therefore to the similitude of this quicksiluer, the next 
matter of mettalles: the Chimicall Philosophers haue said, 
that this quicksiluer is ingendred of a strong commixtion of 
the first matter of all mettals, that is of a moist viscous incombustible 
humour, incorporat with a subtill earth, equally 
and strongly mixed by small partes in the minerall caues 
of the earth. Vnto this wise nature (because the matter 
bringeth not it selfe to effect) ioyneth his proper agent, that 
[^f.12v^] 
is sulphur, which is nothing else then a certaine fatnesse of 
the earth engendred in the proper mines, and by temperat 
decoction thickned, that it may turne the quicksiluer by 
digestion, and concoction into forme of mettall. Therefore 
this sulphur is to the quicksiluer as the man to the woman, 
and as the proper agent to the proper matter. Not that this 
quicksiluer and sulpur (as some foolishly thinke) are found 
by themselues in their nature in the mines, but that these 
are alreadie mingled by nature, and by longe concoction 
brought into the nature of earth. And this truly is the neerest 
matter of mettalles, as in the generation of man meate 
is neerer matter then the elements, the blood neerer then 
meate, and the sperme neerer then blood it selfe: and at last 
by apt digestion the matter receiueth the shape of a man. 
So when as it is said, that mettals are first made of the foure 
elements, as of their generall and first matter: the same 
order kept, it is necessarie that of those elements come vapours, 
of vapours a slimie water (which is yet a neerer matter 
the~ the vapors, lest by defending Aristotle, Aubertus may 
thinke mee to gainsay my selfe) and heauy, mingled with a 
subtile sulphureous earth which is called quicksiluer: of 
which as of a neerer matter by meane of the mixture and 
working of the outward sulphur is made gold or other mettall 
according to the great or lesser digestion of nature. For 
as the Philosopher writeth Metaph. 6. when any thing is said 
to be made of another, either an extreme & perfect, is made 
of a meane and vnperfect, as of a childe, a man, or else an extreme 
of extreme, as aire of water: but let vs returne to our 
Aubertus. He writeth that sulphur also can not bee the matter 
of mettalles. But let vs heare by what reasons he doth 
proue it. Sulphur, saith he, according to Aristotle, is ingendred 
of a hot, drie, and vnctuous breath, but mettals are ingendred 
of an other breath hot and moist, and a litle vnctuous. 
Truly a goodly, but sophisticall argument, by which he 
goeth about to proue his purpose, by the opinions which he 
hath already impugned, Let him therefore remember that 
he before hath affirmed against Aristotle, that breath was 
not the matter of mettalles: and now he doth confesse that 
[^f.13r^] 
mettalles are ingendred of breaths. Therefore he speaketh 
against himselfe, that he shall not neede my refutation: hee 
addeth to proue his opinion, that sulphur waxeth soft with 
moisture like salt, and that mettalles are molten only with 
strong fire: but of a false antecedent can not follow a good 
consequent. For by no meanes is sulphur dissolued into 
water, but by heat is molten like leade: and this should 
our searcher of thinges vnder ground first haue tryed, then 
to affirme so boldlie that which is false. Therefore that dart 
may be bent against him wherewith hee supposed to haue 
wounded the Chimistes. Also he saith, that sulphur is of an 
airy and firie substance, and therefore can not bee increased 
or congealed. But I haue afore shewed the contrary, wherfore 
he is not to looke for any other answeare of me, because 
he hath neither reproued my argument, neither made any 
demonstration of his opinion by firme reasons. But this one 
thing sufficeth, that all wise Chimistes do affirme, that this 
which they call sulphur, is not the common sulphur which 
burneth with combustion of blacknes and adustio~ & is burned: 
whereas their proper sulphur doth whiten, rubify, coagulat, 
and finally make perfect that Chimicall quickesiluer 
which is commonly vnknowen into the substance of golde, 
according to nature, or of the philosophers stone, and gold 
according to art. And this is the true secret sulphur, and 
the onely tincture and shadow of the sonne and the proper 
congeler of his quicksiluer which the Philosophers haue 
shadowed with diuers names their dark speeches and enigmaes: 
whereby it appeareth Aubertus to haue farre erred, 
and by all meanes to bee refused, because he speaketh of a 
sulphur which he knoweth not: and that the Chimick Philosophers 
are not to be blamed because they say quicksiluer 
and sulphur to be the matter of mettalls, which do not vnderstand 
it of the common quicksiluer & sulphur. For they 
know that these things whereof they speake are not founde 
in the mettal mines in their verie nature: but of those two 
they say, there is made a third mixture, hauing the natures, 
properties & vertues of them, that of it may be engendred, 
any mettall according to the diuersitie of the composition, 
[^f.13v^] 
digestion and place. These shall suffice touching the next 
matter of mettalles which Aubertus would have to be water 
wrought vpon by the other elements, but he hath kept sile~t 
the cause why he thinketh so being contented to say that it 
is set forth by others, or that he hath found it in other mens 
writings, which is the saying of a man that will proue his opinion 
by an other mans credit, and not by reason, as the 
true Philosophers doe. But now the efficient causes call vs 
which the Philosophers make double and so many passio~s. 
for heat and cold are called [^GREEK OMITTED^], because they haue power 
to moue: moist and drie [^GREEK OMITTED^], for because they rather 
suffer any thing then worke, and are said to be wrought 
vpon of the first qualities, as of the most noble and higher 
in nature, by whose worke forme is ingendred in thinges: 
for the matter is not knowen by it selfe, but by the chaunge 
which cannot be without suffering, as neither that without 
touching, the which by coniunction, and cogelation, and 
by introduction of act and forme is abolished. But it is to be 
obserued that by the mixture of drie and moist the bodies 
are first called congealed, then harde or soft: of which congealed 
bodies there is a triple difference? for it is either a 
watrie humor that is congealed, or some dry earthly thing, 
or a mixture of them both. Also these, some of them are 
molten, some dried, some moistened, and some made soft. 
But those thinges which are drye and fierie, as hony and 
must, will neuer be congealed, and they which are moist & 
airie predominant as all oily thinges. Wherefore these also 
are not elements, neither the matter of these sufferinges. 
But of bodies which doe congeale and are hardened according 
to Aristotle, some are affected by heate and some by 
cold: by heate drying vp the humor, by cold driuing out the 
heate, Therefore those thinges that are congealed by heat 
by want of moisture are dissolued of cold, which maketh the 
moisture to enter in againe as salt. And those thinges which 
for lacke of heate are congealed, are dissolued againe by 
heate, entring in againe as mettals: for whatsoeuer is dissolued 
melting, is molten either by fire or water. Whatsoeuer 
melteth by water must needes be congealed by hot & 
[^f.14r^] 
drie, that is, fiery heate: and those which fier melteth, or 
whose congelacion in any part it doth dissolue (as horne) 
are congealed by colde, for of contrarie effectes the causes 
be contrarie: and because that mettalles do melt by heat, it 
is of necessitie that first they were congealed by cold, as the 
efficient cause, whereof none of the Chimist philosophers 
doth doubt, although, as Aristotle some time saith, experience 
sheweth vs the contrary: for salt is congealed by 
heate, and may bee dissolued and molten by fier as I haue 
often tried, and it is called fusible salt. Neither Albertus 
Magnus that great Philosopher ought to be reprehended of 
our Aubertus because he referreth the power of making mettalles 
vnto heate, when as Albertus doth not meane it of only 
heat, as he thinketh. Therefore it is to be knowen, as 
Aristotle witnesseth thinges by meanes of colde to suffer rather 
then to worke, because that cold is proper to the patient 
elements, that is water and earth, which both by nature 
are cold. For they do not receiue cold from any other thing 
as they do heate, but by taking away the heat they coole 
of their owne nature, neither are they cooled by any externall 
cause, as the aier and fier. Wherfore albeit cold in mixed 
thinges hath an efficient force, yet it preuaileth rather 
to corruption then to generation, Therefore the Chimists 
are not to be reprooued, although they say that nature needeth 
a heat vnder the earth for the procreatio~ of mettals, as 
a more effectuall efficient cause which may mingle, alter, 
dispose, digest, and concoct their matter, & at last with long 
tract of time frame it into gold as into his last end. Neither 
are they to be reproued in this that they refer some force to 
the influe~ce of the heauenly bodies: for Aristotle confirmeth 
their opinion in his booke de cœlo & mundo and his booke of 
the causes of the properties of elements in these wordes. 
For saith he the first beginnings mouing to generation, and 
inducing forme in euery thing are the starrie and heauenlie 
bodies, by their mouing and light. For they are the first that 
moue, moued of the intelligences to performe the nature 
of generation or corruption for the preseruation of kindes, 
and of them is giuen forme and perfection, and as hee said 
[^f.14v^] 
in an other place: the sonne and man engendreth man: nether 
doth Aubertus rightly conclude vppon this reason, the 
art of Alchemy to be vaine, if mettalles bee ingendred by 
force of the starres, when as the Chimistes can not haue 
the fruition of this heauenly power: for they beleeue with 
the Philosopher, that if formes bee put on vppon inferiour 
thinges by the motion and light of the heauenly bodies, & 
by their site and aspect, the same by consequent to come to 
passe in mettalles, but that is done as it were by a generall 
cause and farre off: but they haue a neerer efficient cause, 
as we said that is heate, by force whereof mettalles congealed 
in the bowels of the earth are disposed, digested & made 
perfect. These thinges thus declared, we must see to what 
end Aubertus tendeth and what is his vttermost scope, hee 
would haue the labour of the Chimistes, which they take vpon 
them in making perfect of mettalles to be vtterly vaine 
and lost, and he denyeth that copper, tinne, Iron or leade, 
(which of them are called vnperfect mettalles) can by any 
art be made perfect, and be turned into gold and siluer. 
 
