[^Johnson, Thomas: Cornucopiæ^] 
 
[}CORNVCOPIÆ, 
Or diuers secrets: 
Wherein is contained the rare secrets 
in Man, Beasts, Foules, Fishes, Trees, Plantes, 
Stones and such like, most pleasant and 
profitable, and not before committed to 
bee printed in English. 
Newlie drawen out of diuers Latine Authors into English 
by Thomas Iohnson.}] 
 
[}AT LONDON. 
Printed for VVilliam Barley, and are to be sold at his 
shop at the vpper end of Gratious streete nere 
Leaden-Hall. 1595.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, ff. A3r-F4r^] 
 
[^f.A3r^] 
 
[}CORNVCOPIÆ, OR 
diuers secrets: wherin is contained 
the rare secrets 
in Man, Beastes, 
Foules, Fishes, Trees, Plantes, Stones and 
such like, most pleasant and profitable 
and not before committed to bee 
printed in English.}] 
 
MAnie are the woonders 
& marwailes 
in this world, and 
almost incredible, 
were it not that 
experience teacheth 
the contrarie: 
for who could bee 
perswaded to beleeue 
that the 
Owstridge could eate or deuoure cold & hard 
Iron, or that hote burning Iron could not hurt 
her stomacke, were it not that it hath and is 
daylie seene and knowne. 
 
There is a little fish called Echines, which 
cleauing to the keele or mast of the Shipe, will 
[^f.A3v^] 
so retaine the shippe that no violence of winde 
or weather can remoue it. 
 
The Salamaunder and the worme Piransta 
liue in the fire, and although they seeme to consume 
and burne away yet are they not hurt or 
burned at all. 
 
The Satyres haue heads like vnto men, and 
bodies like vnto goats, and are capable of reason 
and speech, which is both strange & wonderfull. 
 
The Loadstone hath vertue to draw yron to 
it: yet if you holde a Diamond by him, that 
vertue will bee taken away so long as the Adamant 
is by him. 
 
The stone found in an Eagles neast, bound 
to the left arme of a woman with child preserueth 
from abortion, but bound to her thigh in 
her trauaile, causeth easie and speedie deliuerance. 
Also it is saide that if a theefe eate a 
peece of this stone any manner of way, it shall 
ueuer passe through him. A theefe can not 
swallow any broth wherin this stone hath bin 
sodden. 
 
The Iasper stone restrayneth bleeding. 
 
If any thinge be laid in salt and there left remayning, 
in processe of time it becommeth salt 
it selfe. 
 
Many thinges are holpen by their like, as 
Phisitions can tell that the braines of manye 
thinges are helpefull to the braine of man, the 
[^f.A4r^] 
lunges to the lunges, the eye to the eye, & foote 
to the foote, & c. 
 
The right eye of a Frogge applied to the 
right eye of one that is purblinde, or the left eye 
to the left healeth the party. 
 
So doth the eye of a Crabfish. 
 
The snaile applied in the same sorte helpeth 
the gout. 
 
Euerie barren Beast or Foule causeth sterility 
or barrennes, especiallie the Urine, matrice 
or stones anie waies taken. 
 
So doth the milke of a Mule once in a 
month eaten, cause her that eate it not to conceaue. 
 
If you would moue loue, take such creatures 
as loue most, such are the Turtle, the Sparrow, 
the Swallow, the Waggetaile. 
 
If you would moue audacity, respect the Lion 
and the Cocke. 
 
The dog, the rauen, the cocke, the nightinggale, 
the bat or remouse & such like, especiallye 
the head the hart & the eyes are said to profit in 
vigilancy, or to keepe one from sleeping. 
 
The hart of a Crowe or a Batte borne vppon 
one suffereth not the partie to sleepe till it bee 
taken awaie. 
 
The head of the Batte brought to powder, & 
bound to the right arme doth the like, but put 
vppon the stomacke of one that is a sleepe, it is 
saide that he shall not a wake till it bee taken awaie. 
 
[^f.A4v^] 
The Frogge and the Toade are much effectuall 
to make one talkatiue. 
 
The tongue of a water Frogge put on the 
head of one sleeping: causeth him to speake in 
his sleepe. 
 
The heart of a Toade or of a Night Crowe, 
or the fatte of a Hare put vpon the brest of one 
sleeping, causeth them to tell whatsoeuer shall 
be asked them. 
 
All beasts of long life are said to bee helpers 
to long life. 
 
The hart renueth his age by eating of the 
Serpent. 
 
The Phenix by the fire. 
 
If the right foote of the Pellican bee put in 
hotte dung for three months, thereof will bee 
ingendred a Pellican. 
 
The Load-stone doth not onelie draw iron 
to it, but also maketh that iron to drawe other 
iron to it, if the Load-stone be rubbed therewith. 
 
It is supposed that in like maner the smock 
or other apparrell of a strumpet beeing worne 
of others, giueth a certaine impudencie and 
shameles boldnes to those parties. 
 
Euen so if a Woman behold her selfe ofte in 
the glasse wherein an whore hath accustomed 
to looke in, it maketh her not onely impudent 
bold but also the more prompt to further offending. 
 
[^f.B1r^] 
Also a blacke cloth which hath beene vsed ouer 
the Coffin of dead folkes bringeth a certain 
kinde of sadnes or melancholly to them that 
weare it in apparell. 
 
The Load-stone hath the vertue attractiue, 
the Emerauld giueth great probability to obtain 
riches, the Iasper helpeth byrths, the stone 
Achates giueth sweet and pleasanth speech. 
 
The root of the hearbe Aproxis draweth fire 
to it a farre off. 
 
The Palme tree of the male kind and of the 
female kinde growing together, doo folde the 
branches one within another, as it were embracing 
each other, neither will the female 
beare any frute without the company of the male. 
 
The Uine is greatly delighted with the 
Elme and yeeldeth more frute being placed together. 
 
The Almond tree sollitarily planted is lesse 
fruitfull. 
 
The myrtle tree and the Oliue tree loue each 
other mutually, euen so doth the Oliue tree and 
the figge tree. 
 
In like manner as in plants, so also in foules 
and beastes is there mutuall amity, as betweene 
the Owsell and the Felfare; between 
the Crow and the Hernshawe; betweene the 
Doue and the Peacocke, betweene the Turtle 
[^f.B1v^] 
and the Popiniay. 
 
Also the fish called Musculus loueth the 
Whale so, that he leadeth the Whale from danger 
of Rocks: Also there is a great amitie betwixt 
it and the Chirlepoole. 
 
It is supposed that the Cat so much reioyceth 
with the herb Nep, that euen by the rubbing of 
her selfe against it, she bringeth young by that 
meanes, supplying the defect of the Male. 
 
Also manie Mares in Capadocia conceaue euen 
by the blowing of the winde, and drawing 
in of the same by the nostrils. 
 
Frogges, Toades, Serpents and all kinde 
of venemous things, reioyce greatly in a kinde 
of Persly called Apium Risus, a most venemous 
weede, whereupon who soeuer eateth dyeth 
soone after in laughing. 
 
The snaile being hurt of the serpent, is 
comforted by eating Organie and in like case 
the Storke. The weasell helpeth her selfe vs 
poyson by eating of Rue. And by these meanes 
it is found out that Organy and Rue are great 
resisters of poyson. 
 
The Toade beeing bitten or hurt by anye 
meanes hasteth to Rue or Sage, and rubbeth 
the wound there against, and by that meanes 
is healed. 
 
So men haue learned many precious remedies 
for many diseases euen by brute beasts, as 
we see by the swallow, who hath taught vs 
[^f.B2r^] 
that the ioice of Celandine is singuler for the 
eies, for that she restoreth sight to her yong ones 
with Celandine. 
 
The chattering Pie being sick bringeth the 
bay leafe into hir nest and so is restored. 
 
The Gay, the Partridge, the Owsell & such 
do yearely purge themselues with Bay leaues, 
and in like case the Crow with the same extinguisheth 
the poyson of the Cameleon. 
 
The Lion being diseased is holpen in deuouring 
the Ape. The Lapwing with eating maiden 
haire. 
 
The hart striken with an arrow, knoweth 
how to driue it out with eating of Dictum herb. 
 
The Hinde before her time be to bring forth 
yong, purgeth her selfe with the herb Siler. 
 
Swine hurt of Serpents, are healed by the 
Crabfish. 
 
The Beare hurt in eating of Mandrakes, 
takes help in deuouring the Pismires or Ants. 
 
Duckes, Geese and other birds of the water 
helpe themselues with an herb called Siderits 
that groweth on walles and tyles. 
 
Pigions, Turtles, Hennes and such like are 
healed with the herb Helxine: Cranes with 
bulrushes, Panthers with mans order, Bores 
with Iuie, Hindes with Artechokes. 
 
Neither do Plants, Herbs, Beasts and such 
like, want a certaine kinde of hatred or enmitie, 
as we see Rubarbe hateth choller. 
[^f.B2v^] 
Treacle, poyson, the Saphire stone, also burning 
feuers and griefes of the eyes. The Amatist 
resisteth drunkennesse, and the Iasper 
bleeding and hurtfull fantasies. The Emrauld 
restraineth lust. The stone Achates resisteth 
poyson: the Topace couetuosnes, luxurie and 
all outrages of loue. 
 
The Pismire detesteth the herbe Organie & 
Coleworts, that the one killeth the other placed 
together. 
 
The Oliue tree so detesteth the Cowcumber 
that being placed nere together, they wil turne 
backe and growe hookewise lest they shoulde 
touch one another. 
 
The gall of a Crow hid in some priuie or vnknowne 
place, is saide to feare men for comming 
to that place where it is hidden. 
 
The Adamant disagreeth in such sorte with 
the Load-stone, that being together Iron will 
not be drawne. 
 
Sheepe flie from the herbe called Apimu rauinum, 
as from a most deadlie poyson & which 
is most strange in the liuer of such sheep as die 
of the eating of that herbe, the verie picture of 
the herbe is to be found. 
 
Goates of all other herbes detest Bassil. 
 
The Weasell and the Mouse are at deadlie 
hate, so that if you put the braine of a Weasell 
into your rennet or cheeslepe wherewith you 
gather the curde of cheese, the Mise will neuer 
[^f.B3r^] 
taste or eate the cheeses. 
 
There is a beast like a Lizard that is called 
Stellio hauing blacke spots like starres, which 
is so contrarie vnto the Scorpion, that his verie 
sight terrifieth him that he presently putrifieth 
and becommeth an oile which is singuler 
to heale hurt receauid by Scorpions or other 
venomous beasts. 
 
There is also a mortall hate betwixt the 
Mouse and the Scorpion, in such sorte that a 
Mouse applied to the biting of a Scorpion, 
helpeth the griefe. 
 
Serpents haue no greater enemies than 
Crabfishes, & for that cause swine bitten with 
Serpents are holpen with Crabbes. 
 
If a Crocadile be touched with a quill or fether 
of the bird called Ibis, it makes immoueable. 
 
There is a bird like a Partridge called Otidis 
that cannot abide the sight of an horse. 
 
The Hart cannot abide the sight of the Rauen, 
neither the sight of the Uiper. 
 
The Elephant is feared most when he heareth 
the grunting of a swine: the Lyon when 
he seeth a Cocke. 
 
There is also enmity betweene the Wolfe, 
the Swan, the Bull and the Rauen. 
 
There is continuall war betwixt the Crow 
and the Owle, the Kite and the crow, the Hart 
and the Dragon. 
 
[^f.B3v^] 
Enmitie also betweene the Dolphin and the 
Thirlepoole, the Codfish and the Seawolfe, 
the Cunger and the Lampraie. 
 
The Lobster so feareth the fish Polipus, that 
at his sight he dieth incontinent. 
 
The Lambe and the Wolfe are at enmitie, 
and the Lamb so feareth the Wolfe, that if a 
peece of the skin of a Wolfe bee hanged on the 
crib, they will not eat for verie feare. 
 
It is thought that the Oliue tree is so contrarie 
to whoredome, that if an harlot do plant 
it, either it will die or els bare no fruite. 
 
The Lyon is thought to bee tamed by none 
other meanes than with burned firebrandes, 
which he vtterly detesteth and is a feard of: & 
the Wolfe who feareth neither staffe nor yron, 
yet the casting of a stone is so contrarie to him, 
that in the same place where hee is hit with a 
stone are wormes ingendred. 
 
The Horse feareth the Cammell greatly, so 
that hee can not brooke neither his sight nor 
smell. 
 
The Elephant thoughe neuer so outrage, 
yet seeing a Ramme is eftsones tamed. 
 
A Snake flyeth and feareth a naked man, 
and pursueth or followeth one that is not naked. 
 
A Bull though neuer so fierce, becommeth 
quicklie verie gentle beeing tyed vnto a figge 
tree. 
 
[^f.B4r^] 
Amber commonlie draweth all thinges vnto 
it but Bassell and such thinges as are annoynted 
with Oyle, which sheweth some naturall 
discorde betweene them. 
 
Moreouer it is woonderfull to consider the 
courage in the Lyon, and the Cocke, the feare 
and timerousnes in the Hare and in the Lamb, 
the capacitie and gluttonie of the Wolfe, the 
craft and deceit of the Foxe, the flatterie of the 
Dogge, the couetousnes of the Crowe and 
the Rauen, the pride and stomacke of the 
Horse, the reuengement in the Tyger and the 
Bore, the melancholike sadnes in the Catte, 
the venerie or lust in the Sparrow, the boldnesse 
of an Harlot, the feare of a Theefe, and 
such like innumerable. 
 
The eye of the Basiliske is so odious to man 
that it seeth man before he come nere him, euen 
by looking vpon him. 
 
So doth the eye of a certaine Wolfe called 
Hyena astonish euerie Beast that hee seeth, in 
such sort that they cannot moue nor stirre. 
 
There be certaine wild beasts in the woods 
of Germanie that haue no ioynts in their legs, & 
therfore neuer lie down but stand and leane to 
rest them, which the Hunters knowing sawe 
the Trees (whereunto they are accustomed to 
leane vnto) half a sunder, then the trees falling 
the Beasts also are taken. 
 
Euen so there be many Wolfes which 
[^f.B4v^] 
if they see a man before the man see them, doth 
amaze them euen with their sight, and maketh 
them hoarse, so that they cannot cry nor call because 
they haue taken away the vse of their 
voyce. 
 
Also if a man carrie the hart of a Dogge about 
him, all Dogges will fly from him. 
 
The liuer of a Goat is quite contrary to butterflies, 
and moathes and such like; & Wolfes 
will not eate such pullen as haue eaten of the 
liuer of a Wolfe. 
 
The Pellican reuiues her young ones being 
killed with her own blood. 
 
When the Oister gapeth for aire against the 
tide, the Crabbe putteth a stone betweene 
the two shelles to keepe them open while he eateth 
the meate. 
 
The stone of a mad Dog put into drinke is 
said to cause dissention betweene the parties 
that drinke thereof. 
 
Plinie reporteth that if when you first heare 
the Cucko, you marke where your right foote 
standeth and take vp of that earth, fleas will 
not breed where it is throwne. 
 
Also Plinie affirmeth that if one that hath 
the falling sicknes doo marke the place where 
his head fell at the first beginning of the disease 
and in that place doo driue an Iron naile ouer 
the head, that it will presently help or deliuer 
him from falling any more. 
 
[^f.C1r^] 
Take the paringes of the nailes of any that 
hath the quartaine Ague, and put them in a 
linnen cloth, and tie the same about the necke 
of a quicke Eele, putting the saide Eele into the 
water, and it will deliuer the partie from his 
disease. 
 
The Rauen bringeth forth two egs, whereof 
are ingendred a Male and a Female Rauen. 
 
If you chance to see one Rauen flying alone, 
it signifieth the partie to be a Widdower, or to 
lead his life as a Widdow. 
 
If a Rauen or a Crow doe crooke towards 
one, it pretendeth some aduerse fortune, either 
of person, honour, wife, children or substance, 
as Epictitus Stoicus a most graue Philosopher 
doth affirme. 
 
The merrie countenance of the Swan doth 
presage to shipmen a happie aduenture, and to 
passengers ioy by their iourney. 
 
The Eagle is said to drinke no water but 
blood, and therefore flying ouer an hoast or army 
of Souldiers, doth signifie an happie victorie. 
 
The Phænix promiseth most happie successe, 
but the Uultur most lamentable stratagems. 
 
The Pellican noteth some danger for doing 
good to others. 
 
 The storke is a signe of concord, the chattering 
Pie sheweth some guestes from that 
[^f.C1v^] 
part from whence he looketh, and this is true 
by daylie experience. 
 
The Scrich Owle and the Night-Crow, 
euermore prognosticate death, and this also is 
daylie approued. 
 
The finding of a toade in any uncouth place 
noteth death. 
 
The Hawke flying ouer your heade pretendeth 
death to the partie. 
 
The fighting of Hawkes one with an other, 
noteth mutation of kingdomes. 
 
The Swallow is a signe of enioying a patrimonie 
or inheritance. 
 
The meeting of a Remouse or Bat, signifieth 
euasion from enemies. 
 
To meete the sparrow flying is a signe of euill 
lucke, but in loue matters it noteth good. 
 
The meeting of a Weasel is accounted fortunable. 
 
It is not good to meete with an Hare in a 
iournie, for manie haue proued it euill by common 
experience. 
 
Also the Mule, the Hogge and the Horse are 
not verie fortunable to meete in desert places. 
Sheepe and Goates pretend good: So doe 
Oxen & Dogs to be met in a iournie. 
 
The Mouse pretendeth euill. 
 
The Spider drawing downe her thredde 
from abaue, is a signe that there is hope to receaue 
monie, and this is a common sentence. 
 
[^f.C2r^] 
The meeting of a snake giueth warning to 
beware of some euill tonged enemie. 
 
Woonderfull are the portraitures and proportions 
of men. 
 
Let a man stand vpright and holde vp his 
hands ouer his head, then is there his cubitte 
from the top of his heade to the long fingers 
ende. 
 
The length of the arme from the elbow to 
the end of the fingers, is iust the length from 
the middle of the whorlebone to the sole of the 
foote. 
 
The nauill is iust in the middle of a man, for 
looke howe much distance is from the fingers 
ends holden vpright ouer the heade to the nauil, 
so much is there from the nauill to the sole 
of the feete, and so like wise in the bredth. 
 
The nauill is also the middle point from the 
crowne of the head to the knee. 
 
From the top of the shoulder bone to the elbow 
is the fourth part of a man. 
 
Foure cubittes, or foure times the length of 
halfe the arme: that is to say, from the elbow 
to the fingers end is the stature of the man. 
 
The length of the whole arme from the top 
of the shoulder to the end of the longest finger, 
is halfe the length of the man. 
 
The space betweene the toppe of the one 
shoulder to the top of the other ouer the back, 
is also the fourth part of that mans length. 
 
[^f.C2v^] 
Six handfulles make a cubite, foure handfulles 
make a foote, and foure fingers make 
an hands bredth. 
 
The length of a man, is foure and twentie 
of his handbredths. 
 
Six feet of a well set man maketh his full 
length, but of slender tall men, seauen feete in 
length are his height. 
 
Fourescore and sixteene fingers bredth is also 
the length of the partie that measureth 
them. 
 
The length of the brest from the top to the 
bottome is the sixt part of his stature. 
 
The space from the highest part of the brest 
to the top of the forhead euen to the rootes of 
the haires is the seauenth part of his length. 
 
From the crowne of the head to the bottom 
of the chin maketh the eight part of the length 
of a man. 
 
If you measure the compasse of a mans head 
along by the fore head and rootes of the haire, 
then haue you the first part of his length. 
 
The length of the face from the top of the 
middle of the forehead to the bottome of the 
chinne is the tenth parte: so is the length of 
the hand from the wrest to the forefingers end: 
so also the distance betweene the two dugges, 
and from the bottome of the throat to either of 
the dugges is the like distance, making right 
triangle equall on euerie side. 
 
[^f.C3r^] 
The compasse of the necke is as much as 
from the top of the brest to the chin: euen like 
distance is from the haight of the brest to the 
nauill. 
 
From the top or crowne of the head to the 
chinne, sheweth halfe the compasse of the middle. 
 
From the end of the forefinger measured on 
the backe of the hande to the third ioint of the 
said finger, is of equalitie with the length from 
that ioynt to the backe side of the wrest. 
 
Also the length of the long finger by the out 
side from the end of the naile to the third ioynt 
thereof, is of equall length with the space from 
the wrest, to the bending of the first ioynt of the 
said finger in the inner side of the hand. 
 
The space from the nethermost ioynt of the 
thumb to the greater ioynt of the same, is equall 
to the haight of the forehead. 
 
The two hands are as much as the whole 
face, for with their inside may you couer rightly 
the whole countenance. 
 
The length of the nose, the haight of the forehead, 
and bredth of the mouth are equall one 
with another. 
 
The bredth of the sole of the foote and the 
palme of the hand are both alike. 
 
The compasse both of the eye, and also the 
eare, and the opening of the mouth are all 
one. 
 
[^f.C3v^] 
If you measure from the crowne of the 
head vnder the chin to the crowne of the head 
againe, then haue you the compasse of your 
middle. 
 
The length of your hand from the wrest to 
the longest fingers ende, is the length of the 
foote. 
 
The compasse of the caulfe of the legge, is 
the compasse of the necke. 
 
Twice the compasse of the wreste, is the 
compasse of the caulfe of the legge. 
 
Thrise the compasse of the first ioynt of the 
thumb, is the compasse of the wrest. 
 
Twise the length of the long finger from 
the great or third ioynt to the ende of the finger, 
is the length of your span. 
 
These ought to be obserued in me~ of meane 
stature, and such as are not missformed nor 
diseased. 
 
Maruellous in our eies are the hidden qualities 
in other thinges, as is the nature of a 
stone named Abeston found in Araby, of the colour 
of Iron, which hath not onelie a kinde 
of Wooll growing about it, which some say 
is the doune of the Salamaunder, and of 
truth will not burne and consume awaye 
with fire: but the stone also it selfe beeing 
once hotte will neuer afterwards bee cooled 
againe. 
 
[^f.C4r^] 
Achates the stone sometimes hath the representation 
of the nine Muses, sometimes the 
picture of Uenus, sometime it hath the colour 
of Corall, sometimes of Christall. 
 
Plinie and others affirme that by the smoke 
made by burning of this stone, stormes and 
tempestes are driuen awaie, euen as it is a 
common experiment in all countries that the 
ringing of Belles, doth scatter and put awaie 
thunder. 
 
Galactides the stone beeing verie blacke 
without, yet being broken sendeth out a licour 
both of the same taste and whitenesse of 
milke. 
 
Straunge it is that the fish called an Hornbeake, 
casteth out her spaune by none other 
meanes, but onely by opening of her bellie, & 
that after the casting of the spaune, the wou~d 
closeth againe. 
 
The Adamant or Diamonde stone is so 
hard, that nothing may break it but the blood 
of a Goate. 
 
Among straunge matters, this may seeme 
to bee none of the least, that in Egipt it seldome 
or neuer raineth: yet by the ouer-flowing of 
the riuer Nilus, it is so aboundant of all 
thinges, that it may be compared euen with 
the chiefest: yet is there not a Uine in all Egipt. 
 
The Eele commeth or is ingendred of the 
[^f.C4v^] 
earth and mud without anie spawne, neither 
is there either male or female of them. 
 
It is said that an Hare is one yeare male, & 
another yeare female. 
 
There is in Syria a water called Asphaltum, 
whose vertue is such, that there cannot anie 
thing sinke or be drowned in it that hath life. 
 
Affricke yeeldeth a little serpent called Aspis, 
the stinging stroke whereof cannot by anye 
meanes bee healed but by the drinking of the 
stone of some ancient king. 
 
Wonderfull it is that Plinie writeth of this 
mischieuous worme: for the male (saith he) & 
the female goe both together, and if anie man 
kill one of them, the other stil pursueth the slaier, 
and wil neuer leaue him til he be reuenged: 
yea and will followe him euen through an assembly 
of people, so that there is no helpe but 
to passe ouer some water which it cannot 
passe. 
 
Athanasius the famous Bishop of Alexandria 
is reported to haue liued six whole yeaes in a 
dry cesterne where he neuer saw the sunne. 
 
It is strange to consider the hugenes of the 
Citty of Babilon, for by report it was in compasse 
threescore miles, the walles therof three 
hundred feete in haight, threescore and fifteene 
foote in bredth, hauing one hundred gates of 
brasse, the tower that Nimroth builded, aboue 
fiue miles in haight. 
 
[^f.D1r^] 
Woonderfull is the inhumanitie of the people 
in the further most part of Persia, who whe~ 
their Parentes bee verie sicke or aged they 
throwe them vnto fierce and wilde dogges 
which doe rent and deuoure them. 
 
The dogge-fish is saide to make a noise like 
the barking of a dogge when the fisher hath 
taken him. 
 
In the bankes of the riuer Nilus is ingendred 
a little beast which hath such venemositie 
in his eyes, that who so beholdeth them dieth 
incontinent. 
 
The Cammelles of Bractria will run aboue 
an hundred miles in one day. 
 
There is a kinde of Carbuncle stone called 
Carchedonius of a woonderfull nature, for 
being in an house it is of a purple colour, but 
in the aire it is fierie against the sunne, it sendeth 
forth sparkes, and if wax bee put to it, it 
melteth awaie. 
 
Strabo writeth that in Tartarie nere the Sea 
Caspium, be a kinde of people, that if they perceaue 
that their Parentes liue or exceede the 
age of three score & ten yeares, they put them 
into a close place, and so most vnnaturally doe 
famish them, which done they draw them out 
and leaue them in some desart, going a far off 
from them, and beholding them. Nowe if 
birdes doe deuoure them, they then accounte 
them blessed: if dogges or wild beastes do it, 
[^f.D1v^] 
they doe not account it so happy: but if Dogs 
and wilde beastes doe, they esteeme those me~ 
most vnhappie. 
 
There are Cedar trees in Siria one hundred 
and thirtie foote high, and fiue or six fathome 
in compasse: the wood will neuer rotte neyther 
will wormes breed in them. 
 
The little beast the Chamelion beeing spotted, 
chaungeth those spottes at his pleasure, 
according to the thinge then presente in his 
sight, he sleepeth with his eyes open, so that 
his eyes bee neuer shut, hee neuer eateth nor 
drinketh but liueth only by the aire. 
 
It is suposed that the Stork hath no tong, 
and that the yong ones much succour and prouide 
meate for the old ones. 
 
Corrall is a tree or bush growing in the sea, 
which beeing once gathered & out of the water 
becometh a stone: such is the straunge nature 
thereof. 
 
Strange it is that the Goate should be continuallie 
troubled with an Ague, and the 
Quaile with the falling sicknes. 
 
In Sicile Ileland are Giants which haue 
but one eye and that is in the middle of there 
foreheades. 
 
In Sicillia is a Riuer which runneth from 
the great Mountaine Taurus of such an exceeding 
cold nature, that if any man remaine 
therin any time, it mortifieth the whole body. 
 
[^f.D2r^] 
The beaste Canips which is somewhat like 
an Ape, but that he is more greater and more 
puissant, and his head more like vnto a Dog: 
is of a wonderfull strange nature: for besides 
that they haue a voice like a man, they shewe 
euery houre of the day and night by their making 
of water, for at euery houre doe they 
pisse: to wit foure and twentie times in a naturall 
day. Also they so lament the wane of 
the Moone, that during the time of her darknes 
before her change they neuer wil look vpward 
or eate any thing, but hanging downe 
their heads show a countenance of sorrow. 
 
There bee people vnder the great Cham 
which haue heads like vnto our dogs. 
 
In Aethiope by a towne called Debris is a 
Well of a strange property, for the water in 
the day time is cold as yce, and in the night it 
is boyling hote. 
 
The Dolphin is so wo~derful swift in swimming, 
that wer it not that his mouth is so nere 
his belly no fish might escape him, but by reson 
of his mouth he can tak no fish but lying with 
his belly vpward: his mouable tong is apt for 
voyce, & is greatly delighted with musick & is 
thought of all fishes best to loue mankinde. 
 
Certaine people called Derlices, haue this 
custome: when their friends come to the age 
of 70. yeres, they slay them and eat them calling 
all their neighbors to the feast, but the wome~ 
[^f.D2v^] 
they strangle and then burie them as they doe 
others that die within that age: they punishe 
euerie offence bee it neuer so little euen with 
death. 
 
There is a stone to be had in the heade of a 
Dragon if you sodainely strike off the Dragons 
head, for otherwise the stone dissolueth 
while the Dragon dieth. 
 
The Dromedarie beeing in iournying, can 
endure from anie drinke, for the space of three 
dayes. 
 
In the roote of an Oake is founde a little 
worme of so mischieuous poyson, that if one 
tread on him barefooted, foortwith the skin 
commeth off and all the legge swelleth, and 
which is more to be maruailed at they that do 
handle him that is hurt looseth his skin. 
 
In Solinus you may finde it mentioned, that 
in Affricke there bee certaine people which if 
they praise faire trees, goodly corne, prettie 
children, goodly cattell, and such like they die 
presently. And Plinie also writeth of some, 
which beholding any person stedfastlye with 
an angry countenance they destroy them, and 
this is founde true manie times heere euen amongst 
vs. 
 
Of all foure footed beastes the Elephant is 
the greatest, gentlest, and most tractable and 
of most vnderstanding, his age is two hundred 
yeares. Plinie saith that they vse none 
[^f.D3r^] 
aduontrie, and that if they meete with a man 
in the Wildernes being out of anie waie, they 
will gently goe before him and bring him into 
the plaine way. To this Solinus seemeth to 
agree. 
 
The Elephant is at continuall warre with 
the Dragon, who like an enuious person will 
not be satisfied but with the blood of the Elephant, 
and therefore lying in waite as the Elephant 
passeth by the Dragon, beeing of an 
exceeding length, windeth his taile about the 
hinder legges of the Elephant and so letteth 
his going and then thrusteth his head into the 
Elephants nose and sucketh or exhausteth his 
breath, or els biteth him in the eare, whereto 
he may not reach with his nose, and when the 
Elephant is faint, so that he can no longer indure, 
hee falleth downe vppon the Dragon 
which is full of blood and with the poyson of 
his bodie breaketh him: so that the blood of 
the Dragon and of the Elephant, runneth about 
mingled together, which is that which 
we call Sinopre. 
 
If one doe stedfastly behold the birde Galgulus 
that hath the yeallow Iaundise, foorthwith 
the partie is deliuered and the birde hath 
the disease. 
 
Amongst manie strange thinges found in 
India, this is to be remembred. There is a 
beast called Gazella, which naturally hath a 
[^f.D3v^] 
superfluous blood congealed on his belly and 
groweth like an impostume, and when it is 
ripe, the beast goeth to a tree, or a stone and 
rubbeth his belly thereon vntill that humor 
breaketh out like vnto corrupt matter, which 
at the first doth stinke filthely, but when it hath 
beene hanged in the ayre for a season it waxeth 
ripe, and than hath it an odoriferous sauour, 
and that is it which wee commonly call 
muske. 
 
That which wee call Ciuet is nothing else 
but as it were a superfluous sweate found betweene 
the flanks of a beast much like vnto a 
Cat. 
 
It is reported that the Hearing liueth only 
by water. 
 
The tree whereof groweth the wood Ebenus 
which is as black as ieat, beareth neither 
leafe nor fruit which is rare. 
 
There are people called Hippopodes dwelling 
in the Scithicke Ocean, which haue feet 
like vnto horses. 
 
In Iudye they haue euer two summers, and 
fruites and graine is twise a yeere gathered, 
the winds are alwaies there very calme, temperate, 
and not troublous: their beasts and 
foules more greater than in other Countries, 
and of many more kinds. 
 
Straunge is the nature of the Larix tree 
which perisheth not neither by rotting nor by 
[^f.D4r^] 
eating of wormes, neither will it burne in a 
flame, nor be brought into coales, neither will 
it swim vppon the water as other trees doo, 
and therefore they are either carried in ships 
or laid vppon firre trees, and so pinned together 
close that they may not stirre one from an 
other when they are brought at any time ouer 
the sea. 
 
The vrine of the beast called Linx who is 
faced like a Lion and spotted like a Panther, 
hath this quality in his vrine, that immediatly 
after the making or comming away from it 
sodainely turneth to a stone. 
 
It is said that there is a certain kind of fish 
which in latine is called Loligo, wee haue no 
english name for it, this fish hath his head placed 
between his feet & his belly most strangly, 
and hath two bones one like a knife, and 
the other like a pen. 
 
Among thinges of woonder this is not the 
meanest, that is written of the tree called Lutos, 
which groweth in Affrick, for if any stranger 
doth eat of the frute therof, he doth incontinently 
forget his owne Country wherein he 
was borne. 
 
In the Iles of Maniolæ beyonde the riuer 
Ganges, are such rocks all of Load-stones that 
they draw euen whole shippes that haue yron 
nailes in them. 
 
There haue been diuers men by report that 
[^f.D4v^] 
haue had no teeth but onely one bone, so had 
King Phirrus and Monodos. 
 
In the east parte of the worlde are men hauing 
but one legge, where with they goe by 
leapes, and that more swiftly than any beast. 
 
Such like also are saide to bee in Indie that 
one legge being so great that therewith they 
they couer themselues from the sunne. 
 
It cannot be but strange that the vermine 
called a Shrew going ouer anie beast, should 
make that part lame which she toucheth, yea 
and if shee bite aniething it swelleth vp to the 
hart, and the beast dieth thereof. 
 
Strabo writeth of a certaine kind of Calkey 
clay, whereunto if fire bee put it kindleth in 
such wise, that if a little water be cast thereon 
it burneth more feruently, and may onely be 
extinct with abundance of water or viniger, 
allume and birdlime. Plutarche saith there is 
store thereof in Babilon. 
 
They that inhabitite in the countrie of Hungarie, 
report that they haue a certaine riuer, in 
the which if Iron be often dipped it wil turne 
to copper. 
 
Strange it is that all beasts so marueslously 
delight with the sweete sauour that commeth 
from the Panther: in somuch that smelling 
the sweete aire where they haue their resort, 
thither will all beastes come, and are not 
afraide but onely of the Panther his fierce 
[^f.E1r^] 
lookes: wherein also marke as strange a secrete 
in nature, the Panther perceauing this, of a 
subtiltie hideth his head suffering the rest of his 
bodie to be gazed vpon, t hat he may at the better 
aduantage take his pray of the sillie dismaied 
cattell. 
 
These Panthers the Hircanes rather poison 
with a poyson called acoint than with weapon: 
wherein also see an other secret in the nature of 
the Panther, feeling himselfe to be poysoned, 
hasteth immediatlie to finde the ordure or dunge 
of mankind, and by the eating thereof are preserued. 
If all the bowelles of these beastes bee 
quite taken out of their bodies, yet will they 
liue a long while as some report. 
 
Who can but woonder at the Birde called a 
Phænix shoulde liue sixe hundred yeares, and finally 
carrying sweet spices vp to a mountaine 
by the heat of the sunne & labour of hir wings, 
kindleth fire, whereby shee being all consumed 
and burned, of her ashes riseth another of that 
kinde, and it is supposed that there is but onely 
one of them. 
 
What shuld I say of the Giant Polycrates, 
who in al his life time neuer suffred any griefe, 
aduersitie or misfortune. Nay more he fearing 
chanuge & chance of fortune did cast a ring 
of gold (wherein was set a stone of great value) 
into the Sea, to the intent hee might suffer 
some discontentment, and thereby satisfie the 
ficklenes of fortune: But marke the ende, the 
[^f.E1v^] 
ring cast into the sea the fish deuoured the ring, 
and the same day was caught of the fisher 
and giuen to the King for the greatnes thereof, 
and being opened the ring was found in the fishes 
belly, whereat as well he as all other about 
him maruailed greatly. 
 
The fly Pytalis is ingendred of the fire, and as 
long as it is in the fire it liueth, but when it is 
far from it, it dyeth incontinently. 
 
The Robin-red-brest if he find a man or woman 
dead, will couer all his face with mosse, and 
some thinke that if the body should remaine vnburied, 
that hee woulde couer the whole body 
also. 
 
Plinie sayth, that if a traueller binde Mugwort 
to any part of him, it keepeth him from being 
weary in trauell. 
 
The Sicamore tree beareth not fruit out of 
the toppes of the boughes as the figge tree doth 
vnto which it is like neither will the graine nor 
fruit ripen except it be scraped with an yron instrument. 
 
It is straunge that in the Ile Titos which is 
in the Indian sea, should be trees whose leaues 
doo neuer fall. Also wooll groweth there vpon 
trees which doo beare gourds of the graines of 
Quinces, which being ripe do open, and therin 
is contained the wooll whereof is made very 
fine cloaths. 
 
In the Riuer Ganges, men say are certaine 
fishes called Vermes, three score Cubits in length 
[^f.E2r^] 
hauing such strength that when Oliphants come 
to the water and do drinke, they will take them 
by the nose, and by great force draw them vnto 
them. 
 
All beastes doo detest the female Pimpernell 
and not the male: Also it is reported, that Pimpernell 
laid vnder the threshold of the doore driueth 
away all manner of inchantments and 
witchcraft. 
 
Chickwood beginneth to spring in the middle 
of winter, and in the middle of summer it 
vanisheth away. 
 
Fuchius writeth that that house is neuer stroken 
with Thunder nor Lightning, vppon the 
which doth growe Housleeke, or Syngreene. 
 
Prickmadam floureth thrise euery yeare. 
 
Plinie reporteth that Mugwort is of woonderfull 
effect for womens diseases, in so much 
as if women doo but vsually carry it about 
they shall not at any time be hurt neither 
of corrupt medicines, not of any beast, nor of 
any beast, nor of the sunne his heate. 
 
If you tye a browne threed, packthreed or other 
like about the brim or outer edge of a bell, 
if that bell bee so rong, it will breake incontinent. 
 
It is to be maruailed at, that vppon Midsomer 
Eue which is the Eue of the feast day of 
saint Iohn Baptist, iust at noone is to bee founde 
vnder euery Roote of Plantine and also of 
Mugwort, a Coale ether of Charcole or else 
[^f.E2v^] 
a seacole, which cole as diuers affirme is profitable 
to be borne about one against the plague, 
the ague and other like diseases. In credit it is 
that it should then bee founde and at no time els 
but euen iust at noone. I dare be bold to note it 
for truth, for that I myselfe haue founde it diuers 
times in the presence of many at that 
houre, and hauing sought for the same at other 
times, it is not to be found: but whether it hath 
such vertue as some affirme, I cannot iustlie 
affirme: yet doe I coniecture that it may well 
be, for the strange finding of it at such an houre, 
in my iudgement is more wonderfull than the 
vertues, yea and I dare assure you that I neuer 
knewe any that euer carried it about them, 
that euer had the plague or was troubled with 
any kinde of ague. 
 
It is also incredible that Mugwort put into 
Ale or Beere in the heate of summer, shoulde 
keepe the same from sowring, yet daylie experience 
sheweth the contrarie: so that you put 
in quantitie according to the proportion of your 
drinke, for the greater quantitie requireth also 
the greater quantitie of Mugwort. 
 
Who can but wonder that in some countries 
the Sunne should day by day continuallie rise 
at six of the clocke in the morning, and set at sixe 
at night without alteration. Also that in other 
cou~tries, some daies to be a month, two, three, 
or foure months: I meane that in so long time 
the Sunne setteth not but shineth continually. 
[^f.E3r^] 
Yea and that those that dwell directlye vnder 
the poles of the worlde, haue but one onely day 
in the whole yere, that is to say that they haue 
for six months, or for halfe the yeare continuall 
day and the other halfe yeare haue the continuall 
night with seeing the Sunne. 
 
When the Sunne riseth with vs, it is noone 
with some, with others Sunne setting, with 
others midnight & c. 
 
Aboue other countries Spaine, Iberia, Dalmatia, 
Tolosa, India & the Aethiopian Ilands, are most 
fruitfullest of gold, by the report of Matialis, Plinie, 
Michaell, Anglicus and others. 
 
Corinthus, Caristos, Dodoua, abou~d in Brasse. 
 
Aboue all other places, England, Italie, Thracia, 
and Calabria, excell in multituds of beastes and 
cattell, 
 
Affricke, and Arcadia, in plentie of Asses. 
 
For plentie of Trees, the mount Atlas & Caucasus: 
the fortunate Ilands, India, Cirene, and 
Hiccinia. 
 
The City of Antron in Thessalie, for dennes 
and caues. 
 
In the fortunate Ilands by the report of 
Plinie, are trees that are aboue 144. feete in 
height. 
 
Also he sayth that in India are trees of such an 
exceeding haight that one cannot shoote to the 
top of them. 
 
Hibla in Sicilie surpasseth for Bees and plenty 
of hony. Also for Hares the hill Erimanthus in 
[^f.E3v^] 
Arcadie for wild Boares. 
 
The fortunate Ilands for plenty of byrds of 
all sorts, and store of Apples. 
 
The Englishmen, Armenians, Arabians, 
Ithyreians, some Parthians excel in shooting. 
 
The Irish in casting of the dart. 
 
Plinie reports that in Indie are reeds or canes 
of such length & greatnes, that betweene knot 
and knot may bee made a Boate to carry three 
or foure men. 
 
In Egipt is vineger made so excellent, that it 
is sold for more than the wine it selfe. 
 
Egypt bringeth forth the venemous serpents 
Aspids of whom if any man be stroken, there 
is no remedy but to cut out the wound so deepe 
that none of the venemous matter be remaining 
otherwise they dye. 
 
For Aromaticall things Persia challengeth 
principality. 
 
An Eele will liue 300. yeares and will endure 
eight dayes without water. The Riuer 
Ganges by the report of Plinie & Solinus, breedeth 
Eeles 30 feete in length. 
 
Egipt, Macedonie, and the Iland Melus, 
hath the best Alum. 
 
The best Anise seeds are in Siria. 
 
Aloe in India and the gumme Aloe out of Arabia 
and India. 
 
The chiefest Alablaster commeth from India, 
Damascus, and from Sparta. 
 
The Silke out from the Riuer Orantes and 
[^f.E4r^] 
from Assiria. 
 
Celadusa, the hill Taurimonium in Sicely 
and England abound in Oxen and Kine. 
 
In Phenecia the Kine are of such hugenes, 
that the Women doe stand and milke them. 
Aelianus saith; that by the red sea bee Oxen that 
haue hornes which you may winde or bende, 
which way you please. 
 
In India they will runne as fat as Horses. 
 
In Euboia all their beasts for the most part, 
be white. 
 
The wilde Beasts of Aethiop do moue their 
hornes, euen in like case as they do their eares. 
 
Coricus, a towne in Cilicia, is accounted to 
haue the best and greatest plentie of Saffron, 
but now our English Saffron is it oft accepted 
of in all Countries. 
 
The Canarie Ilands hath the greatest store 
of Dogges, and thereof (after Plinie) tooke the 
name. Others affirme that Sparta is most 
plentifull of Dogges. 
 
The Ilands of Creete, tooke his name of the 
abundance of Chalke or Fullers earth that is 
found there. 
 
The Riuer Nilus, of all other places bringeth 
most Crocodiles. These being bred of egges, 
grow into a greater forme tha~any other thing 
whatsoeuer that is hatcht of an egge. They 
haue no tongues, and liue both vpon land & also 
water, and for foure months in the winter season, 
they eate not any thing at all. 
 
[^f.E4v^] 
The Iland Capraria tooke the name of the 
number of Goates that are found there. 
 
The City of Auella in Campania hath the greatest 
store of nuts and therefore are they called in 
latine nuces Auellana. 
 
The mountaine Hymettus and Hyola haue the 
greatest store of waxe by reason of their multitude 
of Bees. 
 
It is reported that in Pæonia and Illiria is such 
great abundance of Pigeons, that orderly they 
goe forth to fight against them. 
 
The hill of Libanus for Cedar trees: Cayster 
the riuer of Lydia for Swannes are thought to 
be the price: yet Volateranus and others greatly 
commend England for plenty of Swannes. 
 
The Inhabitance about the Alpes haue gret 
plenty of yron and steele, but in my minde not 
comparable to England. 
 
The city of Cerasus in the Ile of Pontus is most 
abounding in Cherry trees. 
 
England hath the greatest plenty of Conyes. 
 
Calabria and Malta haue the name for plenty of 
Cotton. 
 
Aquitane aboundeth in Chesnuts: Massilia in 
Affrick for Dragons. Also in India bee Dragons 
the bee of equall bignes with the Elephant. 
Plinie. 
 
Of all other citties Syracusa hath beene supposed 
to be the richest in the world. 
 
Scithia aboundeth in Horses, Argos for the best 
Horses amongst the beste are accounted, the 
[^f.F1r^] 
Gennites in Ireland. 
 
Affrick for Elephants, Aethiop for the wood 
Ebenus. India hath Ants and Pismires as 
bigge as Dogges. 
 
Babilonia by Herodotus report is one of the 
fruitfullest countries in the world: as well for 
the plentie of trees, vines, oiles, and such like: 
as also for corne and Fodder. 
 
Mauritania and Scythia are most plentifull 
of wilde beastes: and no meruaile sith they 
haue no certaine place of abode, but are carried 
vp and downe in Cartes like vagarant people. 
 
The firtilitie of Egipt is so great, that the 
sheepe there bring forth Lambs twice a yeare, 
and there the Sheepe are shorne twice euerie 
yeare. 
 
The best Marble commeth from Sinada 
in Phrigia. The next to it commeth out of Numidia 
and it is speckled with purple spots. 
 
The greene marble is brought from Laconia, 
and of manie is accounted the most precious. 
 
The Cittie of Corinthus was so laciuious & 
giuen to venerie, that they built there a Temple 
of Uenus, where there was about a thousande 
of the fairest and finest common women 
that could be founde, which were obedient to 
each mans call, the chiefest of them were called 
Lais, Cerene, Leæna, Synope, Phryne, and Sicyone. 
 
[^f.F1v^] 
Damascus in Siria surpasseth for Prunes, 
Calabria for Peares, Aricia in Itaile for leeks 
and Onions. 
 
Briefely Calabria is most famous for store 
of beasts, the Ile Siciona for hides and le_[^ORIG. BLURRED^]er. 
Assiria for the profitable Amomum, the hill Aymetus 
by Athens for Bees and Honie, Babilon 
for Tapestrie, Egipt for Uineger, Persia for 
Spices, the mountaine Citorus for Box, Arabia 
for Silkes, the Iland Celadusa for Oxen, 
Iurie for the pretious balsame, Cicily for saffro~, 
Epirus for dogs, Auella for hasell nuts, Scithia 
for hemp, Dodoua in Greece for pigions, Castri 
in Cilicite for swannes, Noricum in Germanie 
for steele, Mauritania or the M_[^ORIG. BLURRED^]ores 
for pomecitrons, Cuma for onions, Asturia in 
Spaine for ambling horses, India for iuorie, 
Numidie for hennes, the Red Sea for precious 
stones, the Ile Corcica for gardens Miletum 
for wooll, Egipt for _[^ORIG. BLURRED^]are Nibia for honie, Numidie 
for marble, & Themes for brasse, England 
for tinne and lead, Affricke for corne, Arabia for 
mirre, the cittie Uelitra by Roome for egs, Galesia 
for sheepe, Assiria for sweet gummes, the 
Ile Naricia in the sea Aeginum for pitch, Idumea 
for palme trees, the apples of Pheacum, 
the prunes of Damascus, the onions of Cane~tinum, 
Mellauia for purple, Pestaua for Roses, 
Egipt for rosen and gummes, Aeolia for brimstone, 
Indie for suger, Alexandrie also for tapestrie, 
Germanie for black-birds, Persia for 
[^f.F2r^] 
ointments, the riuer Ganges for Pearles, and 
to say the truth England for all thinges: for if 
it be well waied, what store of graine this Iland 
hath it is wonderfull: hauing both sufficient 
for the inhabitance thereof, and also to help 
other countries that want. What country in 
Europ comparable to England? what more 
wonderfull than London? wherein if it be considered? 
what abou~dance of fewell? what store 
of beefes what multitude of Cattell are occupied 
there daylie, it may seeme straunge from 
whence they haue it? What cittie in the world 
so populous, so merchantable, more rich, more 
stored with women of most amiable countenance 
and beautie, more ciueller in their atire? 
Where is there more statelier buildings? what 
countrie more stored with fruit, with precious 
simples? what nation more firtile for honie, for 
tinne, for lead, for foule, for beasts and cattel, for 
swannes, for plentie of wooll, for clothing, for 
fish, for curious and costly hangings? Where 
more store of fine gold & plentie of siluer? where 
more finer wittes, more profound and learned 
men in all sciences? nay where so many, where 
so famous vniuersities & schooles of learning? 
where more valiant and couragious souldiers? 
where such succour ministred to strangers, to 
the distressed, to the persecuted, to the afflicted? 
nay what countrie or nation in the worlde is 
there at this presente that nourisheth so manie 
Aliens from all parts of the world as England 
[^f.F2v^] 
doth? We haue our mines, our quarries for 
stones, our gems, our pretious stones and all 
other necessarie and profitable things, our good 
Godde blessed and praised therefore. 
 
Wee are not troubled with poysoning Serpents, 
nor with fierce Lyons, or with deuouring 
Tigers, Beares, Wolfes, Panthers or any 
such hurtfull beastes as other nations are. 
 
The cittie Bifuntium in Burgundie hath a 
field, wherein there be two welles, the water 
of the one is very sweet, and the water of the 
other is apt to be made salt. 
 
Alos the Cittie of Achaia is famous for salt, 
euen so is England. 
 
In Arcadia Swine are so plentious and fed 
so fat, that they can scarce moue themselues: so that 
Plinie saith, there hath bin found a Rat making 
her nest vpon the bodyes. 
 
Aquitanie hath the name for Salmons: so 
may England. 
 
Sparta excelleth for corke, Oricia and Damascus 
for turpentine, Arabia for fra~kencense. 
 
In India they haue such shels that they couer 
the houses therewith, as we doe ours with 
slate and tile, yea in some places they vse them 
for boates. 
 
Statius saith that there is Riuer in Umbria, 
which causeth all the beastes thet drinke therof 
to become white, which is the reason al their 
beasts for the most part are of white colour. 
 
England and the Cittie Bath in Campania 
[^f.F3r^] 
for bathes are most notable. 
 
Thessalie, the Ile of Pontus, and Colches, 
Iberia and Scithia, haue more poyson & venomous 
herbes than all other Countries. 
 
In Mysia be white Beares so infected with 
poyson, that they kill such dogges as hunt them 
euen with the breath. 
 
Genoesa a cittie in Aetolia is alwaies & continually 
tossed with great windes. 
 
No countrie to bee compared to Iudie for 
glasse. 
 
Varra saith what countrie is comperable to 
Campania for meate, to Faleruum for wine, to 
Appulia for wheate, to England for wooll, tin, 
and lead. 
 
Strange it is that the Iland Gauleegalata 
by Carthage, breedeth no Scorpions: nay the 
very earth killeth them. 
 
Euen so in Ireland we know no venomous 
beast is bred, or if any bee brought from other 
places thether they die. 
 
The Iland Sicaros in Arabia breedeth no 
dogs, and if anie be set on shore there, they run 
raging vp and downe till they die. 
 
Affricke only hath no Deere, neyther is there 
any Beares. 
 
Scithia & the Ile of Pontus haue no Asses 
breeding in them, by reason that they bee colde 
countries, for Asses can not well indure the 
cold. 
 
Arabia bringeth forth no swine of any sorte: 
[^f.F3v^] 
Neither is there a Weasell found in Boeotia, or 
Hares in Ithaca. 
 
In Ebusus are found no Connies, nor on the 
mountaine Olimpus, any wolfes: neither doth 
England breed any wolfes, & as some affirme: 
such as are brought thether will not liue. 
 
In the Ile of Creet are no foxes, nor beares 
nor any other noisome beast. 
 
Plinie saith that in Affrick there are no bores, 
nor Harts nor Goates, nor Beares. 
 
In the Cittie of Thebes commeth no swallowes. 
 
In Creete are no Owles nor Nightcrowes, 
yea and if any be brought thether they will not 
liue. 
 
There is a place in Italie where is not anie 
Storkes: so also in a field by Roome. 
 
There is not any bird to be seene in the Ile of 
Pontus, where Achilles was buried. 
 
In Egipt could neuer Cherrie tree bee made 
to growe by anie meanes that euer could bee vsed. 
 
The herbe Time was neuer seene to growe 
in Arcadia: neyther on the mountaine Cariua in 
Creete was euer any flie found. 
 
There is no moathes found to bee either in 
Thrasia or Phrigia. 
 
In India they haue neyther brasse nor lead, 
but doe exchaunge precious stone and such like 
for them. 
 
In the Ile of Paras are neuer seene any 
[^f.F4r^] 
mise. 
 
In the towne of Dawlis by Delphos is neuer 
heard Nightingale. 
 
Strabo saith that in Portugall are no hilles 
nor mountaines. 
 
Gauleon bredeth no Serpents, neither doth 
Coronea in Boeotia bring out anye mouldewarpes. 
 
Italie hatcheth stately mindes, Fraunce excesse 
of pride, England couetousnesse, Scotland 
craftinesse, Ireland lasinesse, Flaunders drunkennesse. 
 
[}FINIS}] 
 
[}Laboris condimentum ocium.}] 
 
