[^Middleton, Thomas: Meeting of gallants^] 
 
[}THE 
Meeting of Gallants 
at an Ordinarie: 
OR 
The Walkes in Powles. 
 
LONDON 
Printed by T. C. and are to be solde by Mathew 
Lawe, dwelling in Paules Churchyard. 
1604.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, ff. A2r-D3r^] 
 
[^f.A2r^] 
[}A Dialogue betvveene 
Warre, Famine, and the Pestilence, 
blazing their seuerall Euills.}] 
 
[}The Genius of VVarre.}] 
 
FAmine and Pestilence, Cowards of Hell, 
That strike in peace, when the whole worlds vnarmde: 
Tripping vp soules of Beggars, limblesse wretches, 
Hole-stopping Prisoners, miserable Catchpoles, 
Whom one vocation stabs, dare you Furies 
Confront the Ghost of crimson passing Warre? 
Thou bleake-cheekt wretch, one of my plenteous wounds 
Would make thee a good colour. 
 
[}Famine.}] 
 
I Defye, 
Thy blood and thee tis that which I destroy, 
Ile starue thee Warre for this. 
 
[}VVarre.}] 
 
ALasse weake Famine; 
Why, a Taylor is the faridest man thou killst 
That liues by bread, thou darst not touch a Farmer, 
[^f.A2v^] 
No nor his griping Sonne in Lawe that weds 
His daughter with a dowry of stuft Barnes, 
Thou runst away from these, such makes thee flye, 
And there thou lightst vpon the Labourers mawe, 
Breakst into poore mens stomackes, and there driuest 
The sting of Hunger like a Dastard. 
 
[}Famine.}] 
 
BAstard, 
Peace Warre, least I betray thy monstrous birth 
Thou knowest I can deriue thee. 
 
[}Pestilence.}] 
 
And I both. 
 
[}VVarre.}] 
 
ANd I repugne you both, you hags of Realmes, 
Thou Witch of Famine, and Drab of plagues: 
Thou that makest men eate slouenly, and feede 
On excrements of Beasts, and at one meale 
Swallow a hundred pound in very Doues-dung. 
 
[}Famine.}] 
 
Therein thou tellst my glory and rich power. 
 
[}VVarre.}] 
 
And thou. 
 
[^f.A3r^] 
[}Pestilence.}] 
 
BEware Warre how thou speakest of me, 
I haue friends here in England, though some dead 
Some still can showe, where I was borne and bred; 
Therefore be wary in pronouncing mee: 
Many haue tooke my part, whose Carcases 
Lye now tenne fadome deepe: many aliue 
Can showe their skars in my contagious Quarrell: 
Warre, I surpasse the furie of thy stroake, 
Say that an Army fortie thousand strong, 
Enter thy crimson lists, and of that number, 
Perchance the fourth part falls, markt with red death? 
Why, I slay fortie thousand in one Battaile, 
Full of blew wounds, whose cold clay Bodies looke 
Like speckled Marble. 
As for lame persons, and maimed Souldiers 
There I outstrip thee too; how many Swarmes 
Of bruised and crackt people did I leaue, 
Their Groines sore pier'st with pestilentiall Shot: 
Their Arme-pits digd with Blaines, and vlcerous Sores, 
Lurking like poysoned Bullets in their flesh? 
Othersome shot in the eye with Carbuncles, 
Their Lids as monstrous as the Sarazens. 
 
[}Warre.}] 
 
THou plaguy woman cease thy infectious brags, 
Thou pestilent strumpet, base and common murdress, 
[^f.A3v^] 
What men of marke or memory haue fell 
In they poore purple Battaile, say thou'st slayne 
Foure hundred Silkweauers, poore Silk-wormes, vanisht 
As many Tapsters, Chamberlaines, and Ostlers, 
Darest thou contend with me thou freckled-Harlot, 
And match thy durty Glories, with the Splendor 
Of Kingly Tragedies acted by me? 
When I haue dyed the greene stage of the field, 
Red with the blood of Monarchs, and rich states, 
How many Dukes and Earles, haue I drunke vp 
At one couragious Rows? O Summer Diuell, 
Thou wast but made as Rats bane to kill Bawde, 
To poyson Drunkards, vomiting out their Soules 
Into the Bulke of Hell, to infect the Corps 
Of Pewter-buttonde Serieants, such as these 
Uenome whole Realmes: and as Phisitians say, 
Poysons with poyson, must be sorest away. 
 
[}Pestilence.}] 
 
WArre, twit not me with double damned Bawdes, 
Or prostituted Harlots, I leaue them 
For my French Nephewe, he raignes ouer those: 
Ile show you both how I excell you both. 
Who euer read that Usurers dyed in Warre 
Grasping a Sword, or in an yron yeare, 
Languisht with Famine? but by me surprizde 
Euen in their Counting houses, as they sate 
Amongst their golden Hills: when I haue changed 
Their Gold into dead tokens, with the touch 
Of my pale-spotted, and infectious Rodde, 
When with a suddaine start and gastly looke, 
[^f.A4r^] 
They haue left counting Coyne, to count their flesh, 
And summe vp their last vsury on their Brests, 
All their whole wealth lockt in their bony Chests. 
 
[}VVarre}] 
 
ARe Usurers then the proudest Acts thou playdst? 
Pack-Penny fathers, Couetous rooting Moles, 
That haue their gold thrice higher then their soules: 
Is this the Top of all thy glorious Laughters, 
To ayme them at my princely Massacres? 
Poore Dame of Pestilence, and Hag of Famine, 
I pittie your weake furies. 
 
[}Famine.}] 
 
OH I could eate you both, 
I am so torne with Hunger, and with Rage: 
What is not flinty Famine gasping Dearth, 
Worthy to be in ranke weth dusty Warre? 
And little Pestilence, are not my Acts 
More stony-pittilesse then thine, or thine? 
What ist to dye stampt full of drunken wounds, 
Which makes a man reele quickly to his Graue, 
Without the sting of Torments, or the sence 
Of chawing Death by peecemeale? vndone and done, 
In the forth part of a poore short Minute? 
Tis but a bloody slumber, a read dreame, 
Not worthy to be named a torturing Death, 
Nor thine thou most infectious Citty dame, 
That for thy Pride art plagued, bearst the shape 
Of running Pestilence, those which thou strikest 
[^f.A4v^] 
Were death within fewe dayes vpon their hearts, 
Or else presage amendment: when I raigne, 
Heauen puts on a brasse, to be as hard in blessing, 
As the earth fruitlesse in increasing, Oh, 
I rack the vaines and Sinewes, lancke the lungs, 
Freeze all the passages, plough vp the Mawe: 
My torment lingers like a sute in Lawe, 
What are you both to me insolent Euills? 
Ioyne both your furies, they waigh light to mine. 
And what art thou Warre, that so wantest thy good? 
But like a Barber-Surgion that lets blood. 
 
[}Warre.}] 
 
Out Lenten Harlot. 
 
[}Pestilence.}] 
 
Out on you both, and if all matter failes, 
Ile showe my glorie in these following Tales. 
 
[}FINIS.}] 
 
[^f.B1r^] 
[}THE MEETING 
of Gallants at an 
Ordinarie. 
VVhere the Fatte Host telles Tales at the vpper 
ende of the Table.}] 
 
[}Sig. Shuttlecocke}] 
 
WHat Signior Ginglespur, the first Gallant 
I mette in Powles, since the one 
and thirtie daie, or the decease of Iuly, 
and I may fitly call it the decease, for 
there deceast aboue three hundred that 
daye, a shrewde Prologue marry to 
the Tragedie that followed: and yet I 
speake somewhat improperly to call it a Prologue, because 
those that died were all out of their Partes; What dare 
you venture Sig. at the latter ende of a Fraye now? I 
meane not at a Fraye with swordes and Bucklers, but 
with sores & Carbunckles: I protest you are a strong Mettalde 
Gentle-man, because you do not feare the dangerous 
Featherbeds of London, nor to be tost in a perilous 
Blancket, or to lie in the fellowes of those sheetes 
that two dead Bodies were wrapt in some three 
monethes before. Naye I can tell you, there is many an 
[^f.B1v^] 
honest house in London wel stockt before with large linnen, 
where now remaines not aboue two sheetes & a halfe, & 
so the good man of the house driuen to lye in the one sheete 
for shift, till the payre be washt and dried: for you knowe 
tenne wound out of one house, must for shame carry fiue 
payre of shortes with them, being coffind and put to 
boord-wages, the onely Knights policy to saue charges 
in victualles. But soft Signior, what may he be that stalkt 
by vs now in ruinous sute of apparell, with his Page 
out at Elbowes? tis a strange sight in Powles Signior, 
mee thinkes, to see a broken Page follow a seamerent 
Maister. 
 
[}Sig. Ginglespurre.}] 
 
What doe you wonder at that sight now? tis a Limbe 
of the fashion, and as commendable to goe ragged after 
a plague, as to haue an Antient full of holes and 
Tatters after a Battaile: And I haue seene fiue hundred 
of the same rancke in apparell, for most of your 
choyce and curious Gallants came vp in cloathes, because 
they thought it very dangerous to deale with Sattin 
this plague-time, being Diuell ynough without the 
plague: beside there hath bene a great Dearth of Taylors, 
the propertie of whose deathes were wonderfull, 
for they were tooke from Hell to Heauen: All these 
were Motiues sufficient to perswade Gentlemen as they 
loued their liues, to come vp in their old sutes, and be 
very respectiue and carefull how they make themselues 
new-ones, and so venture vppon a Burchen-lane Hose 
and Doublet, were euen to shunne the villanous Iawes 
of Charibdis, and fall into the large swallow of Scylla, 
the deuouring Catch-pole of the Sea: for their bombast is 
wicked ynough in the best and soundest season, and there is 
[^f.B2r^] 
as much perill betweene the wings and the skirts of one of 
their Doublets, as in all the liberties of London, take 
Saint Tooles Parish, and all the most infected places of 
England. 
 
Well, I haue almost mard their market, for Gentlemen 
especially, those that loue to smell sweete, for they are the 
worst Milliners in a Kingdome, and their sutes beare the 
mustiest perfume of any thing breathing, vnlesse it were 
an Usurers Night-cappe againe: And indeed that sents 
worse then the strong breath of Aiax, where his seuenfold 
shield is turnde to a Stoole with a hole in it. But see 
yonder, Signior Stramazoon and Signior Kickshawe, 
now of a suddaine allighted in Powles with their durtie 
Bootes, lets encounter them at the fift Pillar, 
in them you shall finde my talke verified, and the 
fashion truly pictured. What Signior, both well met 
vppon the old worne Brasse, the Moone hath had 
aboue sixe great Bellies since wee walkt here last together, 
and layne in as often: Mee thinkes Signiors, 
this middle of Powles lookes strange and bare, like a 
long-hayrde Gentleman new powlde, washt and shaued, 
and I may fitly say shaued, for there was neuer a 
lufly Shauer seene walking here this halfe yeare: especially 
if he loued his life, hee would reuolt from Duke 
Humfrey, and rather bee a Wood-cleauer in the 
Country, then a chest-breaker in London: But what 
Gallants march vp a pace now, Signiors; how are the high 
waies fild to London? 
 
[}Sig. Shuttlecocke.}] 
 
Euery mans head here is full of the Proclamation, and 
the honest blacke Gentleman the Tearme, hath kept a 
great Hall at Westminster againe: all the Tauernes in 
Kings-streete will be Emperors, Innes and Alehouses at 
least Marquesses a piece: Now Cookes begin to make 
more Coffins then Carpenters, and burie more whole 
meate then Sextons, fewe Bells are heard a nights beside 
old Iohn Clappers, the Bellmans: And Gentlemen twas 
time for you to come, for I know many an honest Tradesman 
that would haue come downe to you else, and set vp 
their shops in the Country, had you not venturde vp the 
sooner; and he that would haue braude it, and bene a vaineglorious 
silken Asse all the last Sommer, might haue made 
a Sute of Sattin cheaper in the Plague-time, then a Sute 
of Marry-muffe in the Tearme-time; there was not so 
much Ueluet stirring, as would haue bene a Couer to a 
little Booke in Octauo, or seamde a Lieftenants Buffe-doublet; 
A French-hood would haue bene more wondred at in 
London, then the Polonians with their long-tayld Gaberdines, 
and which was most lamentable, there was neuer a 
Gilt Spur to be seene all the Strand ouer, neuer a Feather 
wagging in all Fleetstreete, vnlesse some Country Forehorse 
came by, by meere chaunce, with a Raine-beaten 
Feather in his Costrill; the streete looking for all the world 
like a Sunday morning at sixe of the Clocke, three houres 
before seruice, and the Bells ringing all about London, as 
if the Coronation day had bene halfe a yeare long. 
 
[}Sig. Stramazon.}] 
 
Trust me Gentlemen a very sore discourse. 
 
[}Sig. Shuttlecocke.}] 
 
I could tell you now the miserable state and pittifull case 
of many Tradesmen whose wares lay dead on their hands 
by the burying of their seruants, and how those were held 
[^f.B3r^] 
especially very dangerous and perilous Trades that had 
any woollen about them, for the infection being for the most 
part a Londoner, loued to be lapt warme, and therefore 
was saide to skip into wollen cloathes, and lie smothring 
in a shag-hayrde Rugge, or an old fashionde Couerlid: 
to comfirme which, I haue hard of some this last Sommer 
that would not venture into an Upholsters shoppe 
amongst dangerous Rugges, and Feather-bed-tikes, no, 
although they had bene sure to haue bene made Aldermen 
when they came out againe: such was their infectious conceyte 
of a harmelesse necessary Couerlid, and would stop 
their foolish Noses, when they past through Watling street 
by a Ranke of Woollen Drapers. And this makes me call 
to memory the strange and wonderfull dressing of a Coach 
that scudded through London the ninth of August, for I 
put the day in my Table-booke, because it was worthy the 
registing. 
 
This fearefull pittifull Coach was all hung with Rue 
from the top to the toe of the Boote, to keepe the leather and 
the nayles from infection; the very Nosthrills of the Coachhorses 
were stopt with hearb-grace, that I pittied the poore 
Beasts being almost windlesse, and hauing then more 
Grace in their Noses, then their Maister had in all his bosome, 
and thus they ran through Cornewell iust in the 
middle of the street, with such a violent Trample as if the 
Diuell had bene Coachman. 
 
[}Sig. Kickshow.}] 
 
A very excellent Folly, that the name of the Plague 
should take the wall of a Coach, and driue his Worship 
downe into the Chanell. 
 
But see how we haue lost our selues, Powles is changde 
into Gallants, and those which I saw come vp in old 
[^f.B3v^] 
Taffata Doublets yesterday, are slipt into nine yardes of 
Sattin in day. 
 
[}Sig. Stramazon.}] 
 
And Signiors, wee in especiall care haue sent our 
Pages to enquire out a payre of honest cleane Taylors, 
which are hard to be found, because there was such a number 
of Botchers the last Sommer: and I thinke it one 
of Hercules Labours, to finde two whole Taylors about 
London, that hath not beene Plagued for their 
stealing, or else for sowing of false seeds, which peepe out 
before their Seasons. 
 
[}Sig. Ginglespur.}] 
 
But what, dare you venture to an Ordinarie? harke, 
the Quarter-Iackes are vp for a Leanen; I know an honest 
Host about London, that hath barreld vp newes for 
Gallants, like Pickled Oysters, marry your Ordinarie 
will cost you two shillings, but the Tales that lie in Brine 
will be worth sixpence of the money: for you know tis 
great charges to keepe Tales long, and therefore he must 
be somewhat considered for the laying out of his Language: 
for blinde Gue you know has six-pence at the least 
for groping in the Darke. 
 
[}Sig. Stramazon.}] 
 
Yea; but Signior Gingle-spur, you see we are altogether 
vnfurnished for an Ordinarie till the Taylor cut vs out and 
new mould vs: & to rancke amongst Galla~ts in old Apparel, 
why their very Apish Pages would breake Iests vpon our 
Elbowes, and dominere ouer our worne doublets most 
tyrannically. 
 
[^f.B4r^] 
[}Sig. Gingle-spur.}] 
 
Puh. Signior Stramazoon, you turne the Bias the 
wrong way, you doubt where there is no doubt, I will 
conduct you to an Ordinarie where you shall eate priuate 
amongst Essex Gentlemen of your fashioned rancke in Apparell, 
who as yet waite for fresh Cloathes, as you for 
new Taylers, & account it more commendable to come vp 
in seamerent Suites, and whole Bodies, then to haue infectious 
torne Bodies, and sound Suites. 
 
[}Sig. Kickshaw.}] 
 
If it be so, Signior, (harke a Quarter strikes) wee 
are for you, we will follow you, for I loue to heare Tales 
when a merrie Corpulent Host bandies them out of his 
Flop-mouth; but how far must we march now like tottred 
Souldiers after a Fray, to their Nuncions? 
 
[}Sig. Shuttlecocke.}] 
 
Why, if you throw your eyes but a little before you, you 
may see the signe and token that beckens his Guest to him 
do you heare the Clapper of his Tongue now? 
 
[}Sig. Stramazoon.}] 
 
Sfoote, the mad Bulchin squeakes shriller the~ the Saunce 
Bell at Westminster. 
 
[}Sig. Shuttlecocke.}] 
 
Nay, now you shall heare him ring lustily at our entra~ce, 
stop your eares if you loue the~, for one of his words wil run 
about your braines louder the~ the Drum at y=e= Beare-garde~. 
 
[^f.B4v^] 
[}Entring into the Ordinarie.}] 
 
[}Host.}] 
 
What Gallants are you come, are you come? welcome 
Gentlemen; I haue newes enough for you all, welcome 
againe, and againe: I am so fatte and pursie, I cannot 
speake loude inough, but I am sure you heare mee, 
or you shall heare me: Welcome, welcome Gentlemen, I 
haue Tales, and Quailes for you: seate your selues Gallantes, 
enter Boyes & Beardes with dishes and Platters; 
I will be with you againe in a trice ere you looke for me. 
 
[}Sig. Shuttlecocke.}] 
 
Now Signiors how like you mine Host? did I not tell 
you he was a madde round knaue, and a merrie one too: 
and if you chaunce to talke of fatte Sir Iohn Old-castle, 
he wil tell you, he was his great Grand-father, & not much 
vnlike him in Paunch, if you marke him well by all descriptions: 
and see where hee appeares againe. Hee told 
you he would not be longe from you, let his humor haue 
scope enough I pray, and there is no doubt but his Tales 
will make vs laugh ere we be out of our Porridge: Howe 
now mine Host? 
 
[}Host.}] 
 
O my Gallant of Gallants, my Top and Top Gallant, 
how many Horses hast thou kilde in the Countrie 
with the hunting of Harlottries; goe too, was I with 
you, you madde wagges? and I haue beene a merrie 
Knaue this five and fortie yeares, my Bullyes, my 
Boyes. 
 
[^f.C1r^] 
[}Sig Kickshaw.}] 
 
Yea, but my honest-larded Host, where be these Tales 
now? 
 
[}Host.}] 
 
I haue them at my tongues end my Gallant Bullyes of 
fiue and twenty, my dainty liberall Londlords I haue them 
for you: you shall neuer take me vnprouided for Gentlemen. 
I keepe them like Anchouises to rellish your drinke 
wel: stop your mouths gallants, and I wil stuffe your eares 
I warrant you, and first I begin with a Tipsie Uintner in 
London. 
 
[^f.C1v^] 
[}Of a Vintner in London, dying 
in a humour.}] 
 
THis discourse that followes, Gentlemen-gallants, 
is of a light-headed 
Uintner, who scorning to be onely 
drunke in his owne Seller, would get 
vp betimes in the morning, to bee 
downe of his Nose thrice before euening: 
he was a man of all Tauernes, 
and excellent Musitian at the Sackbut, 
and your onely dauncer of the canaries: this strange 
Wine-sucker had a humour this time of infection, to faine 
himselfe sick, and indeed he had swallowed downe many 
Tauerne-tokens, and was infected much with the plague 
of drunkennes: but howsoeuer sick he would be, for the 
humour had possessed him, when to the comforting of his 
poore heart, he powrde downe a leanen shillings in Rose of 
Solace, more then would haue cheerde all the sick persons 
in the Pest-house; and yet for all that he felt himselfe ill at 
his stomacke afterwards, wherefore his request was, reporting 
himselfe very feeble, to haue two men hired with 
sixpence a piece, to transport him ouer the way to his friends 
house: but when he saw he was deluded, and had no body 
to carry him, he flung his Gowne about him very desperatly, 
tooke his owne legges, and away he went with himselfe 
as coragiously, as the best stalker in Europe: where being 
allighted, not long after, he rounded one in the eare in priuate, 
and bad that the great Bell should be towlde for him, 
the great Bel of all, and with all possible speede that might 
be: that done, he gagged open the Windowes, and when 
[^f.C2r^] 
the Bell was towling, cried, lowder yet; I heare thee not 
Maister Bell: then strutting vp and downe the chamber, 
spake to the Audience in this wise. 
 
Ist possible a man should walke in such perfect memory 
and haue the Bell towle for him? sure I neuer heard of any 
that did the like before mee. 
 
Thus by towling of the great Bell, all the Parish rang 
of him, diuerse opinions went of him, and not without cause 
or matter to worke vpon: In conclusion within fewe dayes 
after, he was found to be the man indeed, whose part he did 
but play before; his Pulses were angry with him, and began 
to beate him; all his Pores fell out with him; the 
Bel towld for him in sadnes, rung out in gladnes, and there 
was the end of his drunken madnes; such a ridiculour humour 
of dying was neuer heard of before: and I hope neuer 
shall be againe, now he is out of England. 
 
[}Sig. Stramazon.}] 
 
This was a strange fellow mine Host, and worthy 
Stowes Chronicle. 
 
[}Host.}] 
 
Nay Gallants Ile fit you, and now I will serue in another 
as good as Uineger and Pepper to your Roast beefe. 
 
[}Sig. Kickshawe.}] 
 
Lets haue it; lets taste on it mine Host, my noble fat 
Actor. 
 
[^f.C2v^] 
[}How a yong fellow was euen bespoke and iested to 
death by Harlots.}] 
 
THere was a company of intollerable 
light Women assembled together, who 
all the time of infection, liued vpon Citizens 
seruants: yong Nouices that made 
their Maisters Baggs die of the Plague 
at home, whilst they tooke Sanctuarie in the 
Countrie. Mistake me not, I meane not the best rancke of 
seruants: but vnderlings, and bogish Solles, such as haue 
not witte to distinguish Companies, & auoyde the temptation 
of Harlots, which make men more miserable then 
Dericke. These light-heelde Wagtailes who where armde 
(as they tearme it) against all weathers of Plague and Pestilence; 
carrying alwaies a French Supersedies about 
them for the sicknesse, were determined being halfe Tipsie, 
and as light now in their Heads, as any where else: to execute 
a Iest vpon a yong vnfruitfull Fellow which should 
haue had the Banes of Matrimonie asked betweene him 
and a woman of their Religion, which would haue proued 
Bane indeede, and worse then Rattes bane, to haue beene 
coupled with a Harlot: But note the euent of a bespeaking 
Iest, these women gaue it out that he was dead, sent to the 
Sexton of the Church in all hast to haue the Bell rung out 
for him, which was suddainly heard, and many comming to 
enquire of the Sexton, his name was spread ouer all the parish, 
(hee little dreaming of that dead report being as then 
in perfect health & memorie,) on the morrow as the custome 
is, the Searchers came to the house where he laye to discharge 
their office, asking for the dead Bodie, and in what 
Room it lay, who hearing himself named, in such a cold shape 
almost strucke dead indeede with their words, replyed 
[^f.C3r^] 
with a hastie Countenance (for he could play a Ghost well) 
that hee was the man: At which the Searchers started, and 
thought hee had beene new risen from vnder the Table; 
when vomiting out some two or three deepe-fecht Oaths; 
hee askt what villaine it was which made that Iest of him: 
but whether the conceit strucke cold to his heart or whether 
the strumpets were Witches I know not, (the next degree 
to a Harlot is a Bawde, or a Witch.) but this yongster 
daunced the shaking of one sheete within fewe daies after, 
and then the Searchers lost not their labours, and therefore 
I conclude thus. 
 
That Fate lights suddaine tha'ts bespoke before, 
A Harlots tongue is worse then a Plague-sore. 
 
Well rimde my litle round and thicke Host, haue you 
any more of these in your fatte Budget? 
 
I haue them, my Gallant Bullies, and here comes one 
fitly for sawce to your Capon. 
 
[^f.C3v^] 
[}Of one that fell drunke off from his Horse, 
taken for a Londoner, dead.}] 
 
IN a certaine country-towne not farre 
of, there was a boone companion lighted 
amongst good fellowes, as they call good 
fellowes now a dayes, which are those 
that can drinke best, for your excellent 
drunkard, is your notable Gallant, and 
he that can passe away cleare without 
paying the Host in the Chimney-Corner, 
he is the king of Cannes, and the Emperour of Alehouses, 
this fellow tying his Horse by the Bridle vpon the 
red Lattis of the window, could not bridle himselfe so well, 
but afterward proued more Beast then his Horse, being 
so ouerwhelmed with whole Cans, hoopes, and such drunken 
deuices, that his English Crowne weighed lighter by 
ten graines at his comming forth, then at his entering in: 
and it was easier now for his Horse to get vp a Top of 
Powles, then he to get vp vpon his Horse, the stirrup plaide 
mock-holy-day with him, and made a foole of his foote: 
at last with much adoe he fell flounce into the Saddle, and away 
he scudded out at townes end, where he thought euery 
Tree he saw had bene rising vp to stop him: so strangly 
are the sences of drunkards soft and transported, that at 
the very instant, they thinke the worlds drownd againe; so 
this staggering Monster imagined he was riding vppon a 
Sea-mare: but before he was Tenne Gallops from the 
towne-side, his briane plaide him a Iades trick, and kickt 
him ouer, downe he fell. When the Horse soberer then 
the maister stood still and wonderd at him for a Beast; but 
durst not say so much; by and by Passingers passing too 
and fro, beholding his lamentable downefall, cald 
[^f.C4r^] 
out to one another to view that pittifull Spectacle, people 
flockt about him more and more, but none durst venture 
within two Poles length, nor some within the 
length of Powles: euery one gaue vp his verdit, and all 
concluding in one that he was some coward Londoner, 
who thought to fly from the sicknes, which as it seemed, 
made after him amayne, and strucke him beside his 
horse: thus all agreed in one tale, some bemoning the 
the death of the man, othersome, wishing that all Curmudgins, 
Pennifathers, & fox-furd Usurers were serued of the 
same sauce: who taking their flight out of London, left 
poore Silke-weauers, Tapsters, and Water-bearers, to 
fight it out against sore enemies. In a word, all the towne 
was in an vprore, the Constable standing aloofe off, stopping 
his Nose like a Gentleman-vsher, durst not come 
within two stones cast by no meanes: no, if he might 
presently haue bene made Constable in the hundred: Euery 
Townseman at his wise Non-plus, nothing but 
looking and wondering, yet some wiser then some, and 
those I thinke were the Watch-men, told them flatly 
and plainly, that the body must be remoued in any 
case, and that Extempore: it would infect all the Ayre 
round about else. These horesons seemed to haue some wit 
yet, and their politick counsell was tooke, and embraest 
amongst them, but all the cunning was how to remoue 
him without taking the winde of him: wherevpon two 
or three weather wise Stinkards pluckt vp handfulls 
of Grasse, and tost them into the Ayre, and then whoopeing 
and hollowing, told them the winde blewe sweetly 
for the purpose, for it stood full on his Back-part, then 
all agreed to remoue him with certaine long Instruments, 
sending home for hookes and strong Ropes, as if 
they had bene pulling downe a house of Fire: but this was 
rather a Tilt-boate cast away, and all the people drowned 
[^f.C4v^] 
within: to conclude, these long deuices were brought to remoue 
him without a writ; when by meere chaunce past by 
one of the wisest of the towne next the Constable, for so it 
appeared afterwards, by the holnes of his deuice, who being 
certified of the storie, and what they went about to doe, 
brake into these words openly. 
 
Why my good fellowes, friends and honest neighbours, 
trow you what you venture vppon, will you needs drawe 
the plague to you, by hooke or by crooke, you will say perhaps 
your poles are long ynough. Why you neuer heard or 
read, that long deuices take soonest infection, and that there 
is no vilder thing in the world, then the smell of a Rope to 
bring a man to his end, that you all know. 
 
Wherfore to auoid al farther inconueniences, dangerous 
and infectious, hearken to my exployt: If you drag him along 
the fields, our hounds may take the sent of him, a very 
dangerous matter: if you burie him in the fields, a hundred 
to one but the ground will be rotten this winter; wherfore 
your onely way must be to let him lie as he doth, without 
mouing, and euery good fellowe to bring his Arme-full of 
straw, heape it vpon him, and round about him, and so in 
conclusion burne out the infection as he lies, euery man 
threw vp his old Cap at this, Straw was brought and 
throwne vpon him by Arme fulls, all this while the drownd 
fellow lay still without mouing, dreaming of full Cannes, 
Tapsters, and Beere-barrells when presently they put fire 
to the strawe, which kept such a bragging and a cracking, 
that vp-started the drunkard, like a thing made of fire-workes, 
the flame playing with his Nose, and his Beard 
looking like flaming Apolloes, as our Poets please to 
tearme it, who burst into these reeling words when he spied 
the fire hizzing about his pate. 
 
What is the Top of Powles on fire againe? or is there 
a fire in the Powle-head? why then Drawers, quench me 
[^f.D1r^] 
with double Beere. The folkes in the Towne all in amaze, 
some running this way some that way, knew him at last by 
his staggering tongue, for he was no far dweller, though 
they imagined he had dwelt at London, so stopping his 
Horse which ran away from the fierie Planet his Maister, 
as though the Diuell had backt him, euerie one laught at the 
Iest, closed it vp in an Alehouse, where before Euening the 
most part of them were all as drunke as himselfe. 
 
Sit you merrie still, Gentlemen Gallants, your Dish 
of Tales is your best cheere, and to please you my noble 
Bullies, I would doo that I did not this thirtie yeares, 
Caper, Caper, my Gallant Boyes, although I cracke my 
Shins, and my Guts sinke a handfull lower. Ile doote, my 
lustie Lads, Ile doote. 
 
With that the Host gaue a lazie Caper, and broke his 
Shins for Ioye, the Reckoning was appeazed, the Roome 
discharged, and so I leaue them in Powles where I founde 
them. 
 
[}Host.}] 
 
And now I returne to more pleasant Arguments, 
Gentlemen Gallants, to make you laugh ere you be quite 
out of your Capen: this that I discourse of now is a prettie 
merrie accident that happened about Shoreditch, although 
the intent was sad and Tragicall, yet the euent was mirthfull 
and pleasant: The goodman (or rather as I may fitlier 
tearme him, the bad-man of a House) being sorely pesterd 
with the death of seruants, and to auoyde all suspition of 
the Pestilence from his house aboue all others, did very craftily 
and subtilly compound with the Maisters of the Pest-cart, 
to fetch away by night as they past by, all that should 
[^f.D1v^] 
chance to die in his house, hauing three or foure seruants 
downe at once, and told them that he knew one of them 
would be readie for them by that time the Cart came by, and 
to cleare his house of all suspition, the dead body should bee 
laide vpon a stall, some fiue or sixe houses of: where, there 
they should entertaine him and take him in amongst his 
dead companions: To conclude, night drewe on-ward, and 
the seruant concluded his life, and according to their appointment 
was enstalde to be made knight of the Pest-cart. 
But here comes in the excellent Iest, Gentlemen, Gallants 
of fiue and twentie, about the darke and pittifull season 
of the night: a shipwracke drunkard, (or one drunke 
at the signe of the Ship,) new cast from the shore of an 
Alehouse, and his braines sore beaten with the cruell tempests 
of Ale and Beere, fell Flounce vpon a lowe stall 
hard by the house, there being little difference in the Carcasse, 
for the other was dead, and he was dead drunke, 
(the worse death of the twaine) there taking vp his 
drunken Lodging, and the Pest-cart comming by, they 
made no more adoo, but taking him for the dead Bodie, 
placed him amongst his companions, and away they 
hurred with him to the Pest-house: but there is an oulde 
Prouerbe, and now confirmed true, a Druncken man 
neuer takes harme: to the Approbation of which, for all 
his lying with infectious Bedfellowes, the next morning 
a little before he should be buried, he strecht and yawnde 
as wholesomely, as the best Tinker in all Banburie, 
and returned to his olde Uomit againe, and was druncke 
in Shoreditch before Euening. 
 
[^f.D2r^] 
[}Gingle-spur.}] 
 
This was a prettie Commedie of Errors, my 
round Host. 
 
[}Host.}] 
 
O my Bullies, there was many such a part plaide 
vppon the Stage both of the Cittie and the Subburbs. 
 
Moreouer my Gallants, some did noble Exployts, 
whose names I shame to publish, in hiring Porters and 
base Uassalles to carrie their seruants out in Sackes to 
White-chappell, and such out places to poore mens 
houses that worke to them, and therefore durst doo 
no otherwise but receiue them, though fo their vtter 
ruines, and detestable noysomnesse, fearing to displease 
them for their Reuenge afterwardes, as in putting 
their worke from them to others for their vtter vndoing: 
how many such prankes thinke you haue beene 
playde in the same fashion onely to entertaine Customers, 
to keepe their shops open, and the Foreheads of their 
doores from (Lord haue mercy vpon vs) many I could 
set downe heere and publish them to the world, together 
with all their strange shiftes, and vncharitable 
deuices. 
 
Whereof one especially, notable and politicke may 
euen leade you to the rest and driue you into Imagination 
of many the like: for one to burie foure or fiue persons out 
of his house, and yet neither the Sexton of the same 
Parish, nor any else of his Neighbours in the streete 
where hee dwelles in to haue intelligence of it, (but 
[^f.D2v^] 
all thinges be they neuer so lurking, breake forth 
at the last) this being the cunning and close practise; 
politickly to indent with the Sexton of some other Church 
(as dwelling in one Parish) to see the Sexton of another 
by a pretie peece of Siluer, to burie all that die in the 
same house in his Churchyard, which voide all suspition 
of the Plague from his shap, which may be at the least some 
sixe or seuen Parish Churches off; or at another to practise 
the like; nothing but compounding with a rauenous 
Sexton that liues vpon dead Carcasses, for no Trades 
were so much in vse as Coffinmakers and Sextons, they 
were the Lawers the last Uacation, and had there bountifull 
Fees of their Graue-clients: wherefore they prayed as 
the Countrie-folkes at Hartford did, (If report be no lyar) 
very impiously and barbarously, that the sickenesse might 
last till the last Christmas; and this was their vncharitable 
meanings, and the vnchristian effect of their wishes: 
that they might haue the Tearme kept at Hartford, and 
the Sextons there Tearme still here in London; but 
Winchester made a Goose of Hartford, and ended the 
strife: Thus like Monsters of Nature they wisht in their 
Barbarous hearts, that their desires might take such effects: 
and for the greedy Lucre of a fewe priuate and 
meane persons, to sucke vp the life of thousands. 
 
Many other maruellous euents happened, both in the 
Citty, & else where. As for example, In dead mans place at 
Saint Mary-ouerus; a man seruant being buried at seuen 
of the clocke in the morning, and the graue standing open 
for more dead Commodities, at foure of the clocke in the 
same euening, he was got vp aliue againe by strange miracle: 
which to be true and certaine, hundreds of people can 
testifie that saw him act like a country Ghost in his white 
[^f.D3r^] 
peackled Sheete. And it was not a thing vnknowne on the 
other side, that the Countries were striken, and that very 
grieuously many dying there: many going thither likewise 
fell downe suddainly and dyed, men on Horsebacke riding 
thither, strangely striken in the midst of ther iourneys, sorest 
eyther to light off, or fall off, and dye: and for certain old substantiall 
report, many the last yeare were buried neare vnto 
hye-waies in the same order, in their cloaths as they were, 
booted and spurd, euen as they lighted off, rowld into Ditches, 
Pits and Hedges so lamentably, so rudely, vnchristianlike, 
that it would haue made a pittifull, and remorcefull 
eye blood-shot, to see such a ruthfull and disordered 
Obiect: and a true heart bleed outright, (but not such a one 
as mine, Gallants, for my heart bleeds nothing but Alegant,) 
how commonly we saw here, the husband and the 
wife buried together, a weeping Spectacle containing much 
sorrow: how often were whole housholds emptied to fill vp 
Graues? and how sore the violence of that stroake was, that 
strooke tenne persons out of one house, being a thing dreadfull 
to apprehend and thinke vpon; with many maruellous 
and strange Accidents. But let not this make you 
sad, Gallants: sit you merry stil: Here my 
dainty Bullyes, Ile put you all in 
one Goblet, and wash all 
these Tales in a Cup 
of Sack. 
 
[}FINIS.}] 
 
