[^Bacon, Francis: Aduancement of learning^] 
 
[}THE 
Tvvoo Bookes of 
FRANCIS BACON. 
 
Of the proficience and aduancement 
of Learning, diuine and 
humane. 
 
To the King. 
 
AT LONDON, 
Printed for Henrie Tomes, and 
are to be sould at his shop at Graies Inne 
Gate in Holborne. 1605.}] 
 
[^The first book and the beginning of the second book dealing with various fields of science omitted.^] 
[^Extract 1, ff. 35v-44v^] 
 
[^f.35v^] 
WE come therefore now to that knowledge, 
whereunto the ancient Oracle directeth vs, 
[^f.36r^] 
which is, the knowledge of our selues: which deserueth 
the more accurate handling, by howe much it toucheth 
vs more neerely. This knowledge as it is the 
end and Terme of Naturall Philosophy in the intention 
of Man: So notwithstanding it is but a portion 
of Naturall Philosophy in the continent of Nature: 
And generally let this be a Rule, that all partitions 
of knowledges; be accepted rather for lines & veines, 
then for sections and separations: and that the continuance 
and entirenes of knowledge be preserued. For 
the contrary hereof hath made particular Sciences, 
to become barren, shallow, & erronious: while they 
haue not bin Nourished and Maintained from the 
co~mon fountaine: So we see Cicero the Orator complained 
of Socrates and his Schoole, that he was the 
first that separated Philosophy, and Rhetoricke, 
whereupon Rhetorick became an emptie & verball 
Art. So wee may see that the opinion of Copernicus 
touching the rotation of the earth, which Astronomie 
it self ca~not correct, because it is not repugnant 
to any of the Phainomena, yet Naturall Philosophy 
may correct. So we see also that the Science of Medicine, 
if it be destituted & forsaken by Natural Philosophy, 
it is not much better then an Empeirical practize: 
with this reseruation therefore we proceed to 
HVMANE PHILOSOPHY or HVMANITIE, 
which hath two parts: The one considereth Man 
segregate or distributiuely: The other congregate or in 
societie. So as HVMANE PHILOSOPHY 
is either SIMPLE and PARTICVLAR, 
[^f.36v^] 
or coniugate and Ciuile; HVMANITIE PARTICVLAR 
consisteth of the same parts, whereof Man 
consisteth, that is, of KNOVVLEDGES WHICH 
RESPECT THE BODY, & of KNOVVLEDGES 
THAT RESPECT THE MIND. But before 
we distribute so far, it is good to constitute. For I doe 
take the consideration in generall, and at large of 
HVMANE NATVRE to be fit to be emancipate, & 
made a knowledge by it self; Not so much in regard 
of those delightfull and elegant discourses, which 
haue bin made of the dignitie of Man, of his miseries, 
of his state and life, and the like Adiuncts 
of his common and vndeuided Nature, but chiefely 
in regard of the knowledge concerning the 
SYMPATHIES AND CONCORDANCES BETVVEENE 
THE MIND AND BODY, which 
being mixed, cannot be properly assigned to the 
sciences of either. 
 
This knowledge hath two branches; for as all 
leagues and Amities consist of mutuall Intelligence, 
and mutuall Offices So this league of mind and body, 
hath these two parts, How the one discloseth the other, 
and how the one worketh vpon the other. Discouerie, 
& Impression. The former of these hath begotte~ 
two Arts, both of Predictio~ or Prenotion where 
of the one is honoured with the enquirie of Aristotle, 
& the other of Hippocrates. And although they 
haue of later time beene vsed to be coupled with 
[^f.37r^] 
superstitious and fantasticall arts; yet being purged 
and restored to their true state; they haue both of 
them a solide ground in nature, and a profitable vse 
in life. The first is PHYSIOGNOMIE, which discouereth 
the disposition of the mind, by the Lyneaments 
of the bodie. The second is the EXPOSITION 
OF NATVRALL DREAMES, which 
discouereth the state of the bodie, by the imaginations 
of the minde. In the former of these, I note a 
deficience. For Aristotle hath verie ingeniously, 
and diligently handled the factures of the bodie, but 
not the gestures of the bodie; which are no lesse 
comprehensible by art, and of greater vse, and aduantage. 
For the Lyneaments of the bodie doe disclose 
the disposition and inclination of the minde in 
generall; but the Motions of the countenance and 
parts, doe not onely so, but do further disclose the 
present humour and state of the mind & will. For as 
your Maiestie sayth most aptly and elegantly; As 
the Tongue speaketh to the Eare, so the gesture speaketh to 
the Eye. And therefore a number of subtile persons, 
whose eyes doe dwell vpon the faces and fashions 
of men; doe well know the aduantage of this obseruation; 
as being most part of their abilitie; neither 
can it bee denied, but that it is a great discouerie 
of dissimulations, and a great direction in Businesse. 
 
The later Braunch, touching IMPRESSION 
hath not beene collected into Art; but hath beene 
handled dispersedly; and it hath the same relation 
[^f.37v^] 
or Antistrophe, that the former hath. For the consideration 
is double, EITHER HOVV, AND 
HOVV FARRE THE HVMOVRS AND AFFECTS 
OF THE BODIE, DOE ALTER OR 
WORKE VPON THE MIND; or againe, HOVV 
AND HOVV FARRE THE PASSIONS, OR 
APPREHENSIONS OF THE MINDE, DOE 
ALTER OR WORKE VPON THE BODIE. 
The former of these, hath beene enquired and considered, 
as a part, and appendix of Medicine, but 
much more as a part of Religion or superstition. 
For the Phisitian prescribeth Cures of the minde in 
Phrensies, and melancholy passions; and pretendeth 
also to exhibite Medicines to exhilarate the minde, 
to confirme the courage, to clarifie the wits, to corroborate 
the memorie, and the like; but the scruples 
and superstitions of Diet, and other Regiment of 
the body in the sect of the Pythagoreans, in the Heresy 
of the Manicheas and in the Lawe of Mahumet doe 
exceede; So likewise the ordinances in the Ceremoniall 
Lawe, interdicting the eating of the blood, 
and the fatte; distinguishing between beasts cleane 
and vncleane for meat; are many and strict. Nay, 
the faith itself, being cleere and serene from all 
cloudes of Ceremonie, yet retaineth the vse of fastings, 
abstinences, and other Macerations and humiliations 
of the bodie, as things reall, & not figuratiue. 
The roote and life of all which prescripts, is 
(besides the Ceremonie,) the consideration of that 
dependancie, which the affections of the mind are 
[^f.38r^] 
submitted vnto, vpon the state and disposition of the 
bodie. And if any man of weake iudgement doe 
conceiue, that this suffering of the minde from the 
bodie, doth either question the Immortalitie, or derogate 
from the soueraigntie of the soule: hee may 
be taught in easie instances, that the Infant in the 
mothers wombe, is compatible with the mother, 
and yet separable: And the most absolute Monarch 
is sometimes ledde by his seruants, and yet without 
subiection. As for the reciprocall knowledge, which 
is the operation of the conceits and passions of the 
minde vppon the bodie; We see all wise Phisitians 
in the prescriptions of their regiments to their Patients, 
doe euer consider Accidentia animi: as of great 
force to further or hinder remedies, or recoueries; 
and more specially it is an inquirie of great depth 
and worth, concerning IMAGINATION, how, 
and howe farre it altereth the bodie proper of the 
Imaginant. For although it hath a manifest power to 
hurt, it followeth not, it hath the same degree of 
power to helpe. No more than a man can conclude, 
that because there be pestilent Ayres, able sodainely 
to kill a man in health; therefore there should bee 
soueraigne ayres, able sodainly to cure a man in sicknesse. 
But the inquisition of this part is of great vse, 
though it needeth, as Socrates sayd, A Delian diuer, 
being difficult & profound. But vnto all this knowledge 
DE COMMVNI VINCVLO, of the Concordances 
betweene the Mind and the bodie: that 
part of Enquirie is most necessarie, which considereth 
[^f.38v^] 
of the Seates, and Domiciles which the seuerall 
faculties of the minde, doe take and occupate in the 
Organs of the bodie, which knowledge hath been 
attempted, and is controuerted, and deserueth 
to bee much better inquired. For the opinion 
of Plato, who placed the Vnderstanding in the 
Braine; Animositie, (which hee did vnfitly call 
Anger, hauing a greater mixture with Pride) 
in the Heart; and Concupiscence or Sensualitie in 
the Liuer, deserueth not to bee despised, but much 
lesse to be allowed. So then we haue constituted (as 
in our own wish and aduise) the inquirie TOVCHING 
HVMANE NATVRE ENTYER; as a iust 
portion of knowledge, to be handled apart. 
 
The knowledge that concerneth mans bodie, 
is diuided as the good of mans bodie is diuided, 
vnto which it referreth. The good of mans body, 
is of foure kindes; Health, Beautie, Strength, and 
Pleasure. So, the knowledges are Medicine, or Art 
of Cure: Art of Decoration; which is called Cosmetike: 
Art of Actiuitie, which is called Athletike: 
and Art Voluptuarie, which Tacitus truely calleth 
Eruditus Luxus. This Subiect of mans bodie, is of 
all other thinges in Nature, most susceptible of remedie: 
but then that Remedie is most susceptible 
of errour. For the same Subtilitie of the subiect, 
doth cause large possibilitie, and easie fayling: and 
therefore the enquirie ought to be the more exact. 
 
To speak therfore of Medicine, & to resume that we 
haue sayd, ascending a litle higher; The ancient opinion 
[^f.39r^] 
that Man was Microcosmos, an Abstract or Modell 
of the world, hath beene fantastically streyned 
by Paracelsus, and the Alchimists, as if there were to 
be found in mans body certaine correspondences, & 
parallels, which shold haue respect to all varieties of 
things, as starres, planets, minerals, which are extant 
in the great world. But thus much is euidently true, 
that of all substances, which Nature hath produced, 
mans bodie is the most extreamly compounded. For 
we see hearbs & plants are norished by earth & water; 
Beasts for the most part, by hearbs & fruits; Man 
by the flesh of Beasts, Birds, Fishes, Hearbs, Grains, 
Fruits, Water, & the manifold alterations, dressings, 
and preparations of these seuerall bodies, before 
they come to be his food & aliment. Adde hereunto 
that Beasts haue a more simple order of life, and lesse 
change of Affections to worke vppon their bodies, 
whereas man in his Mansion, sleepe, exercise, 
passions, hath infinit variations; and it cannot be denied, 
but that the bodie of Man of all other things, is of 
the most compounded Masse. The soule on the other 
side is the simplest of substances, as is well expressed. 
 
Purumq; reliquit 
Æthereum sensum, atque Aurai simplicis ignem. 
 
So that it is no maruaile, though the soule so placed, 
enioy no rest, if that principle be true, that Motus 
rerum est rapidus extra locum, Placidus in loco. But 
to the purpose, this variable composition of mans 
bodie hath made it as an Instrument easie to 
distemper; and therefore the Poets did well to 
[^f.39v^] 
conioyne MVSICKE and MEDICINE in Apollo, 
because the Office of Medicine, is but to tune this 
curious Harpe of mans bodie, and to reduce it to 
Harmonie. So then the Subiect being so Variable, 
hath made the Art by consequent more coniecturall, 
and the Art being Coniecturall, hath 
made so much the more place to bee left for 
imposture. For almost all other Arts and Sciences, 
are iudged by Acts, or Master peeces, as I may 
terme them, and not by the successes, and euents. 
The Lawyer is iudged by the vertue of his pleading, 
and not by the yssue of the cause: The Master 
in the Shippe, is iudged by the directing his course 
aright, and not by the fortune of the Voyage: But 
the Phisitian, and perhaps the Politique, hath no 
particular Acts demonstratiue of his abilitie, but is 
iudged most by the euent: which is euer but as it is 
taken; for who can tell if a Patient die or recouer, 
or if a State be preserued, or ruyned, whether it be 
Art or Accident? And therefore many times the Impostor 
is prized, and the man of vertue taxed. 
Nay, we see weakenesse and credulitie of men, is 
such, as they will often preferre a Montabanke or 
Witch, before a learned Phisitian. And therefore 
the Poets were cleere sighted in discerning this extreame 
folly, when they made Æsculapius, and Circe, 
Brother and Sister, both Children of the Sunne, as 
in the verses. 
 
Ipse repertorem medicinæ talis & artis, 
Fulmine Phœbigenam stygias detrusit ad vndas, 
 
[^f.40r^] 
And againe. 
 
Diues inaccessos vbi Solis filia Lucos, &c. 
 
For in all times in the opinion of the multitude, 
Witches, and old women, and Impostors haue had a 
Competicion with Phisitians. And what followeth? 
Euen this that Phisitians say to themselues, as Salomon 
expresseth it vpon an higher occasion: If it befall 
to me, as befalleth to the fooles, why should I labour 
to be more wise? And therefore I cannot much blame 
Phisitians, that they vse commonly to intend some 
other Art or practise, which they fancie, more than 
their profession. For you shall haue of them: Antiquaries, 
Poets, Humanists, States-men, Marchants, 
Diuines, and in euerie of these better seene, than in 
their profession, & no doubt, vpon this ground that 
they find, that mediocrity & excellency in their Art, 
maketh no difference in profite or reputation towards 
their fortune: for the weakenesse of Patients, 
and sweetnesse of life, and Nature of hope maketh 
men depend vpon Phisitians, with all their defects. 
But neuerthelesse, these things which we haue spoken 
of, are courses begotten betweene a little occasion, 
and a great deale of sloath and default: for if 
we will excite and awake our obseruation, we shall 
see in familiar instances, what a predominant facultie, 
The Subtiltie of Spirite, hath ouer the 
Varietie of Matter, or Fourme: Nothing more 
variable then faces and countenances: yet men 
can beare in memorie the infinite distinctions 
of them. Nay, a Painter with a fewe shelles of 
[^f.40v^] 
colours, and the benefite of his Eye, and habite of 
his imagination can imitate them all that euer haue 
ben, ar, or may be, if they were brought before him. 
Nothing more variable than voices, yet men can 
likewise discern them personally, nay you shall haue 
a Buffon, or Pantomimus will expresse as many as hee 
pleaseth. Nothing more variable, than the differing 
sounds of words, yet men haue found the way to reduce 
the~ to a few simple Letters; so that it is not the 
insufficiency or incapacity of mans mind; but it is the remote 
standing or placing thereof, that breedeth these 
Mazes and incomprehensions; for as the sence a far 
off, is full of mistaking, but is exact at hand, so is it 
of the vnderstanding; The remedie whereof, is not 
to quicken or strengthen the Organ, but to goe neerer 
to the obiect; and therefore there is no doubt, 
but if the Phisitians will learne, and vse the true approaches 
and Auenues of Nature, they may assume 
as much as the Poet sayth; 
 
Et quoniam variant Morbi, variabimus artes, 
Mille Mali species, mille Salutis erunt. 
 
Which that they should doe, the noblenesse of 
their Art doth deserue; well shadowed by the Poets, 
in that they made Aesculapius to be the sonne of 
Sunne, the one being the fountaine of life, the other 
as the second streame; but infinitely more honored 
by the example of our Sauiour, who made the body 
of man the obiect of his miracles, as the soule was 
the obiect of his Doctrine. For wee reade not that 
euer he vouchsafed to doe any miracle about honor, 
[^f.41r^] 
or money, (except that one for giuing Tribute to 
Cæsar) but onely about the preseruing, sustayning, 
and healing the bodie of man. 
 
Medicine is a Science, which hath beene (as wee 
haue sayd) more professed, than labored, & yet more 
labored, than aduanced; the labor hauing been, in 
my iudgement, rather in circle, than in progression. 
For, I finde much Iteration, but small Addition. It 
considereth causes of Diseases, with the occasions or impulsions: 
The Diseases themselues, with the Accidents: 
and the Cures, with the Preseruations.The 
Deficiences which I thinke good to note, being a 
few of many, & those such, as ar of a more open and 
manifest Nature, I will enumerate, and not place. 
 
The first is the discontinuance of the auncient 
[/1./] 
and serious diligence of Hippocrates, which vsed to 
set downe a Narratiue of the speciall cases of his patientes 
and how they proceeded, & how they were 
iudged by recouery or death. Therefore hauing 
an example proper in the father of the art, I shal not 
neede to alledge an example forraine, of the wisedome 
of the Lawyers, who are carefull to reporte 
new cases and decisions, for the direction of future 
iudgements. This continuance of Medicinall History, 
I find deficient, which I vnderstand neither to be so 
infinite as to extend to euery common Case, nor so reserued, 
as to admit none but Woonders: for many 
thinges are new in the Manner, which are not new 
in the Kinde, and if men will intend to obserue, they 
shall finde much worthy to obserue. 
 
[^f.41v^] 
In the inquirie which is made by Anatomie, I finde 
[/2./] 
much deficience: for they enquire of the Parts, 
and their Substances, Figures, and Collocations; But they 
enquire not of the Diuersities of the Parts; the Secrecies 
of the Passages; and the seats or neastling of the humours; 
nor much of the Foot-steps, and impressions of 
Diseases; The reason of which omission, I suppose 
to be, because the first enquirie may be satisfied, in 
the view of one or a few Anatomies: but the latter 
being comparatiue and casuall, must arise from the 
view of many. And as to the diuersitie of parts, there 
is no doubt but the facture or framing of the inward 
parts, is as full of difference, as the outward, and in 
that, is the Cause Continent of many diseases, which 
not being obserued, they quarrell many times with 
the humors which are not in fault, the fault being in 
the very frame and Mechanicke of the parte, which 
cannot be remoued by medicine alteratiue, but must 
be accomodate and palliate by dyets and medicines 
familiar. And for the passages and pores, it is true 
which was aunciently noted, that the more subtile 
of them appeare not in anatomyes, because they are 
shut and latent in dead bodies, though they be open 
and manifest in liue: which being supposed, though 
the inhumanity of Anatomia viuoru~ was by Celsus iustly 
reproued: yet in regard of the great vse of this obseruation, 
the inquiry needed not by him so sleightly 
to haue ben relinquished altogether, or referred to 
the casuall practises of surgerie, but mought haue 
been well diuerted vpon the dissection of beastes aliue, 
[^f.42r^] 
which notwithstanding the dissimilitude of 
their parts, may sufficiently satisfie this inquirie. And 
for the humors, they are commonly passed ouer in 
Anatomies, as purgaments, whereas it is most necessarie 
to obserue, what cauities, nestes & receptacles 
the humors doe finde in the parts, with the differing 
kinde of the humor so lodged and receiued. And 
as for the footesteps of diseases, & their deuastations 
of the inward parts, impostumations, exulcerations, 
discontinuations, putrefactions, consumptions, contractions, 
extensions, convulsions, dislocations, obstructions, 
repletions, together with all preternatural 
substances, as stones, carnosities, excrescences, 
wormes, and the like: they ought to haue beene exactly 
obserued by multitude of Anatomies, and 
the contribution of mens seuerall experiences; and 
carefully set downe both historically according to 
the appearances, and artificially with a reference to 
the diseases and symptomes which resulted from 
them, in case where the Anatomy is of a defunct patient; 
wheras now vpon opening of bodies, they are 
passed ouer sleightly, and in silence. 
 
In the inquirie of diseases, they doe abandon 
[/3./] 
the cures of many, some as in their nature incurable, 
and others, as passed the periode of cure; so that Sylla 
and the Triumvirs neuer proscribed so many men 
to die, as they doe by their ignorant edictes, whereof 
numbers do escape with lesse difficulty, then they 
did in the Romane proscriptions. Therfore I wil not 
doubt, to note as a deficience, that they inquire not 
[^f.42v^] 
the perfite cures of many diseases, or extremities of 
diseases, but pronouncing them incurable, doe 
enact a lawe of neglect, & exempt ignorance from 
discredite. 
 
Nay further, I esteeme it the office of a Phisition, 
[/4./] 
not onely to restore health, but to mittigate pain 
and dolors, and not onely when such mittigation 
may conduce to recouery, but when it may serue to 
make a fayre and easie passage: for it is no small felicitie 
which Augustus Cæsar was wont to wish to 
himselfe, that same Euthanasia, and which was specially 
noted in the death of Antoninus Pius, whose 
death was after the fashion and semblance of a kindly 
& pleasant sleepe. So it is written of Epicurus, that 
after his disease was iudged desperate, he drowned 
his stomacke and senses with a large draught and ingurgitation 
of wine, whereupon the Epigram was 
made; Hinc stygias Ebrius hausit aquas: He was not 
sober enough to taste any bitternesse of the stygian 
water. But the Phisitions contrariwise doe make a 
kinde of scruple and Religion to stay with the patient 
after the disease is deplored, wheras, in my iudgment 
they ought both to enquire the skill, and to 
giue the attendances for the facilitating & asswaging 
of the paynes and agonies of death. 
 
In the consideration of the Cures of diseases, I find 
[/5./] 
a deficience in the Receiptes of proprietie, respecting 
the particular cures of diseases: for the Phisitians 
haue frustrated the fruite of tradition & experience 
by their magistralities, in adding and taking out 
[^f.43r^] 
and changing, Quid pro quo, in their receiptes, at 
their pleasures, commanding so ouer the medicine, 
as the medicine cannot comma~d ouer the disease: 
For except it be Treacle and Mythridatu~, & of late 
Diascordium, and a few more, they tye themselues to 
no receiptes seuerely and religiously: for as to the 
confections of sale, which are in the shoppes, they 
are for readines, and not for proprietie: for they are 
vpon generall intentions of purging, opening, comforting, 
altering, and not much appropriate to particular 
Diseases; and this is the cause why Emperiques, 
and ould women are more happie many 
times in their Cures, than learned Phisitians; because 
they are more religious in holding their Medicines. 
Therefore here is the deficience which I 
finde, that Phisitians haue not partly out of their 
owne practize, partly out of the constant probations 
reported in bookes; & partly out of the traditions of 
Emperiques; set downe and deliuered ouer, certaine 
Experimentall Medicines, for the Cure of particular 
Diseases; besides their owne Coniecturall and Magistrall 
descriptions. For as they were the men of the 
best Composition in the State of Rome, which either 
being Consuls inclined to the people; or being Tribunes 
inclined to the Senat: so in the matter we now 
handle, they be the best Phisitians, which being learned 
incline to the traditions of experience; or being 
[/6./] 
Emperiques, incline to the methods of learning. 
 
In preparation of Medicines, I doe finde strange 
specially, considering how mineral Medicines haue 
[^f.43v^] 
beene extolled; and that they are safer, for the outward, 
than inward parts, that no man hath sought, 
to make an Imitation by Art of Naturall Bathes, and 
Medicinable fountaines: which neuerthelesse are 
confessed to receiue their vertues from Minerals: 
and not so onely, but discerned and distinguished 
from what particular Mynerall they receiue Tincture, 
as Sulphur, Vitriole, steele, or the like: which 
Nature if it may be reduced to compositions of art, 
both the varietie of them will be encreased, & the 
temper of them will be more commanded. 
 
But least I grow to be more particular, than is agreeable, 
[/7./] 
either to my intention, or to proportion; I 
will conclude this part with the note of one deficience 
more, which seemeth to me of greatest consequence; 
which is, that the prescripts in vse, are too 
compendious to attaine their end: for to my vnderstanding, 
it is a vaine and flattering opinion, to think 
any Medicine can be so soueraigne, or so happie, as 
that the Receit or vse of it, can worke any great effect 
vpon the bodie of man; it were a strange speach, 
which spoken, or spoken oft, should reclaime a man 
from a vice, to which he were by nature subiect: 
it is order, poursuite, sequence, and interchange of 
application, which is mightie in nature; which although 
it require more exact knowledge in prescribing, 
and more precise obedience in obseruing, 
yet is recompenced with the magnitude of effects. 
And although a man would thinke by the dayly 
visitations of the Phisitians, that there were a 
[^f.44r^] 
poursuance in the cure; yet let a man look into their 
prescripts and ministrations, and he shall finde them 
but inconstancies, and euerie dayes deuises, without 
any setled prouidence or proiect; Not that euerie 
scrupulous or superstitious prescript is effectuall, no 
more than euerie straight way, is the way to heauen, 
but the truth of the direction, must precede seueritie 
of obseruance. 
 
For Cosmetique, it hath parts Ciuile, and parts Effeminate: 
for cleanesse of bodie, was euer esteemed 
to proceede from a due reuerence to God, to societie, 
and to our selues. As for artificiall decoration, it 
is well worthy of the deficiences which it hath: being 
neither fine inough to deceiue, nor handsome to 
vse, nor wholesome to please. 
 
For Athletique, I take the subiect of it largely; that 
is to say, for any point of abilitie, whereunto the bodie 
of man may be brought, whether it be of Actiuitie, 
or of Patience, wherof Actiuitie hath two parts, 
Strength and Swiftnesse: And Patience likewise hath 
two parts, Hardnesse against wants and extremities; 
and Indurance of payne, or torment; whereof we see 
the practises in Tumblers, in Sauages, and in those 
that suffer punishment: Nay, if there be any other 
facultie, which falles not within any of the former 
diuisions, as in those that diue, that obtaine a strange 
power of contayning respiration, and the like, I referre 
it to this part. Of these thinges the practises 
are knowne: but the Philosophie that concerneth 
them is not much enquired: the rather I thinke, 
[^f.44v^] 
because they are supposed to be obtayned, either by 
an aptnesse of Nature, which cannot be taught; or 
onely by continuall custome; which is soone prescribed; 
which though it bee not true: yet I forbeare 
to note any deficiences: for the Olympian 
Games are downe long since: and the mediocritie 
of these thinges is for vse: As for the excellencie of 
them, it serueth for the most part, but for mercenary 
ostentation. 
 
For Arts of pleasure sensuall, the chiefe deficience 
in them, is of Lawes to represse them. For as it 
hath beene well obserued, that the Arts which florish 
in times, while vertue is in growth, are Militarie: 
and while vertue is in State are Liberall: and 
while vertue is in declination, are voluptuarie: so I 
doubt, that this age of the world, is somewhat vpon 
the descent of the wheele; with Arts voluptuarie, I 
couple practises Iocularie; for the deceiuing of the 
sences, is one of the pleasures of the sences. As for 
Games of recreation, I hould them to belong to Ciuile 
life, and education. And thus much of that particular 
HVMANE PHILOSOPHIE, WHICH 
CONCERNES THE BODIE, which is but the 
Tabernacle of the minde. 
 
