[^Cotta, John: Triall of witch-craft^] 
 
[}THE 
TRIALL OF 
Witch-craft, 
SHEWING 
THE TRVE AND 
RIGHT METHODE 
of the Discouery: 
WITH 
A Confutation of erroneous wayes. 
 
By IOHN COTTA, Doctor in Physicke. 
 
LONDON, 
Printed by GEORGE PVRSLOWE for SAMVEL 
RAND, and are to be solde at his shop neere 
Holburne-Bridge. 1616.}] 
 
[^A dedication to Sir Edward Coke and other judges, along with a preface to the reader omitted.^] 
[^Extract 1, pp. 1-23^] 
 
[^p.1^] 
[}THE TRIALL OF 
VVITCH-CRAFT: 
Shewing, the true and right Method 
of the Discouerie.}] 
 
[}CHAP. I. 
Of naturall knowledge, and how it is solely acquired, either by Sense, 
or Reason, or by artificiall and prudent coniectation.}] 
 
AS there is one onely Infinite, 
which hath created all things 
finite: so is there one onely finite, 
most neerly like vnto that 
Infinite, which is wisedome 
and knowledge in men and 
Angels. The knowledge which 
is giuen to Angels, is onely 
knowne to God and Angels. 
The knowledge which is giuen 
to man, is knowne by man, 
limited, measured and confined. It is therefore by the most 
wise Philosophers and fathers, of former times, and the Sages 
of later times and ages agreed, by a generall consent and harmony 
[^p.2^] 
of the same truth, that all things which are allotted 
man to know or vnderstand, are by two waies or instruments 
soly to be atchieued or hoped. The [/1./] first of these is the inward 
vnderstanding: the second is the outward sense. The vnderstanding 
hath knowledge diuers wayes. First immediately, 
by an inbred Idea, and vnderstanding of certaine general notions 
common vnto all men, and in them and with them 
born. This, though intellectuall, may be in some sort assimulated 
vnto that naturall instinct in bruit creatures; by which, 
when they come first into the world, yet immediatly by the 
direction of Nature, they refuse, and flie from that which is 
euill and harmefull, and seek and know that which is needfull 
vnto their life and preseruation. Secondly, the vnderstanding 
hath knowledge by ratiocination, by the discourse and 
vse of reason. By this ratiocination, we do in many things 
gaine a [/2./] certainty of knowledge; in othersome a probability 
and likelihood onely of certainty, yet oft-times in a very 
great neerenesse [/3./] and affinity with certainty. Knowledge 
likewise commeth by the outward senses, which do certainly 
and vndoubtedly informe the vnderstanding concerning 
their seuerall proper obiects, where the faculty is sound, and 
the instruments of sense, and the outward meanes of conueyance 
are rightly disposed. 
 
Among these fiue senses, the sight and hearing, the eye and 
eare, are the most excellent and chiefe wayes of multiplication 
and increase of naturall knowledge. Besides these wayes 
of knowledge; namely, the inward and the outward sense, 
there neuer was, nor euer can be enumeration of any other. 
For this cause the Philosophers haue diuided all things that 
are incident vnto mankinde, to know or vnderstand; either 
vnto such things as immediatly [/4./] in their very first thought 
or mention do proue themselues, and at the first co~sideration 
or sight are euident vnto all men; or such as are directly inferred 
and necessarily proued by other propositions, or such 
as by prudent gesse onely and likely coniecture giue a faire 
probability of truth and certainty. Such things as immediatly 
[^p.3^] 
proue themselues, and are vndoubted, in their first view, 
are subiect either to the sense onely, or vnto the vnderstanding 
onely. Such things as are only proper to the sense, and 
thereto immediatly and properly subiect, are things seene, 
heard, touched, tasted, smelt, as colours, figures, lineaments, 
sounds, musike, hardnesse, softnesse, drinesse, moisture, roughnesse, 
smoothnesse, sowre, sweete, diuersity of odours and 
the like: in which, without the vse of the fiue senses, men 
cannot be sensible or know any thing in this inferiour world 
vnder the heauens. Such things as are subiect vnto the vnderstanding 
onely, and not vnto the sense, and immediatly 
proue themselues, are generall notions and receptions, inseparably 
fixed in the vnderstanding of all men. Of this kind 
are these positions in Philosophie. All things that are made 
haue their matter, [/5./] out of which they were made, haue their 
speciall formes and difference, by which they are apart that 
they are: and lastly to that being, which they are, are risen 
from that which they were not. Likewise, these positions 
in Logicke: Euery proposition is true or false, affirmatiue or 
negatiue, and extendeth generally vnto all vnder the same 
kinde, or to some particulars, or to a singular, or is indefinite. 
Likewise, in Arithmaticke these: One is no number, one cannot 
bee diuided, or is indiuisible; foure is more then two. 
Likewise, in Physicke these: Euery man is sicke or healthful, 
or a neuter: Contraries are cured by contraries, as heat by 
cooling, cold by heating, moysture by drying, drynesse by 
moysting. As in these named Sciences, so in all other; there 
are the like generall notions, immediatly at the first viewe 
proouing themselues vnto the vnderstanding, and euery man 
in common sense and reason, immediatly consenteth vnto 
their truth; and he that denieth it, or seeketh proofe thereof, 
is esteemed iustly madde, or voyd of reason. 
 
There are other things also subiect vnto the vnderstanding 
only, which do not immediatly vpon the first view or 
consideration (as the former) proue themselues, but are proued 
by others more cleere and euident then themselues; as 
[^p.4^] 
this proposition. The motion of the heauens is not infinite. 
This is not manifest vnto euery man at first view, but requireth 
another more manifest then it selfe, to make it manifest 
then it selfe, to make it manifest, thus: That which hath a 
certaine limitted course, circumuolution and motion, cannot 
be infinite; but Astronomie for many thousands of yeares 
hath discouered the courses, periods, reuolutions, and set perambulations 
of the heauens, and therfore the motions of the 
heauens cannot be infinite. It may here easily be obserued, 
how the first position being vnable to proue it selfe, but 
another more manifest doth giue it light, and doth deduce it 
vnto that, which doth so immediately proue it selfe vnto 
common sense and reason, and obseruation of all ages and 
times, that no idiot can be ignorant, or will deny it. 
 
Thus hath been manifested, how some things are immediately 
vnderstood in the very first consideration and view: 
some are proued by themselues, some not proued by themselues, 
but made euident by others. As many things are in 
the former kindes and seuerall manners manifested, and euidently 
proued vnto Reason, Sense, or Vnderstanding: so are 
there many things neither by themselues nor by other euident, 
neither to the vnderstanding and reason, nor to the 
outward sense at the first apparent, but remaine ambiguous 
and doubtfull. In these things certainety of knowledge by 
manifest proofe failing, there remaineth no other refuge, but 
prudent and artificiall coniecture, narrowly looking and 
searching thorow probabilities, vnto the neerest possibilitie 
of truth and certainty. 
 
From hence doe arise excellent vses and benefits vnto vnderstanding, 
though not so farre forth ofttimes gained, as 
is desired vnto all priuate ends, yet so farre forth, as maketh 
wise and vnderstanding men, excell and shine before others. 
Hence it commeth to passe that in doubtfull cases, counsels 
and attempts, one man is seene and knowne to ouershine an 
other, as much as the glorious Sunne doth his ecclipsed sister, 
the Moone. Hence haue issued so many noble and heroike 
[^p.5^] 
Vertues; Sagacitie, exquisitnes of iudgement, Prudence, 
Art, in the administration of high affaires. For, although 
in probabilities are no euident certainties, yet doe 
they so farre forth oft-times aduantage and aduance vnto 
the knowledge of certainety, that it is almost equall vnto 
certainty, and doth perswade and settle discreete resolution 
and disposition in all affaires. In this consisteth the height, 
the top, the summe of Art, and the perfection of all humane 
knowledge, aboue or beyond which, no man could euer soare 
or leuill. By this light onely the former mentioned meanes 
failing, is oft times gained much excellence of natural knowledge 
to man, beyond and without which the eye and sight 
of knowledge in man is sealed vp, his vnderstanding darkned, 
and cannot know many hidden things. And thus to him 
that rightly doth meditate and consider, it is vndoubtedly 
cleere and certaine, how the Creator and infinite Prince of 
all principles hath founded the beginning & end, the power 
and posse of all knowledge, vpon one of the former waies of 
inuestigation, beside which there is no naturall knowledge 
to be expected. Philosophie as yet neuer found other [/6./] waies 
vnto that infinite number of all Arts and Sciences, so admirably 
flourishing thorow so many ages of the world. For 
this cause the most excellent & prime Philosopher, Aristotle, 
reiecteth whatsoeuer ca~not be found by Sense, or proued by 
reason, as spurious. Likewise Ptolomie hath bounded the true 
Art of Astronomie within fatum Physicum, within a necessitie 
in Nature, and to distinguish it from superstition (wherwith 
curiositie vsually defileth or intangleth it) doth limit it 
intra conuenientem natura modum, that is, within proportion 
and measure answerable to Reason and Nature. For this 
cause also, all true Philosophers haue determined the two 
onely instruments of all true Arts, to bee Reason and Experience, 
which Galen doth call the two legges wherevpon the 
Art of Physike doth consist. And therefore in the second 
chapter of his Finitiones medicæ, he saith, Optimus is est Medicus, 
qui omnia in Medicina recta agit ratione, that is, hee who 
[^p.6^] 
doth all things in his subiect of Physike, according to right 
rule of reason, is the most excellent Physicion. 
 
From hence also all true Artists haue defined Art to bee, 
Habitus cumtratione factiuus, that is, a settled habilitie, and 
promptnesse of action, and operation according to reason. 
Vpon this ground others haue built other true rules and obseruations, 
concerning true and lawfull Arts. Therefore (saith 
Galen) ars non est ex ijs quorum neutiquam est potestas, Hagog. 
cap. 5. that is, Art is not of such things as cannot be accomplished. 
Which is worthy noting, to distinguish prestigious 
and supposed Arts from true Art. To this others likewise 
haue added another obseruation, that is, that Art is imployed 
about such things as are in reason profitable and not vaine. 
So saith Scaliger, exercit. 37. Sect. 31. Ars non est de rebus inutilibus. 
It is yet further obserued vpon the same ground, that 
true Art doth not confound or cloud it selfe in mists, but reduceth 
vnto order, light and reason, things dissipate, confused, 
and out of order and reason (as Cicero affirmeth) Ars res 
diuulsas dissolutasque conglutinat, & ratione quadam constringit. 
Vpon the same grounds diuers renowmed common weales 
haue expelled all false and forged Arts: as, Necromancy, 
Aeromancy, Geomancy, with other sortiligious Diuinations. 
Vpon the same reasons, diuers Emperors, Kings, Kingdomes 
and Lawes, haue exploded, censured, and condemned all 
such as vnder pretext of the wholesome Arts of Astronomy, 
Mathematikes, and the like, haue runne into foolish curiosities, 
impostures, and deceitfull practices. Iustinian the Roman 
Law-giuer and Emperour, his lawes are extant to this 
purpose. Likewise Tiberius his Decrees for the expulsion of 
counterfeit Mathematicians and Magicians. And Vlpian in 
his booke de Mathematicis & Maleficis, testifieth the publication 
of their goods, and their inhibition by the Emperors 
from communion with other Citizens so much as in fire or 
water. And as Reason, good Lawes, Kingdomes, Nations, 
and Common-weales haue distinguished ingenuous, liberal, 
true and profitable Arts and Sciences builded vpon reason, 
[^p.7^] 
truth and vnderstanding; from base ignoble, vnprofitable, 
needlesse, curious and erronius Arts: so hath the holy 
Scripture both iustified, sanctified and commended the one, 
and condemned, and nominated with rebuke and shame 
th'other. The first is euident, Exod. 3. verse 1. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. 
where Almightie God doth testifie concerning the knowledge 
and skill of Workmanship in gold, siluer, and stone, 
that he gaue it by his Spirit vnto Bezaleel and Aholiab, who 
were workmen according to knowledge and vnderstanding 
in that lawfull Art, profitable vnto the building of Gods 
house. The second is manifest, Acts 19. ver. 19. where it is in 
their due commendations recorded, that those who before 
vsed and practised vaine & curious Arts, when they were by 
the preaching of the Apostles truely conuerted, in token of 
their vndissembled repentance, they absolutely renounced 
and disclaimed their vaine learning, and openly burnt their 
bookes, though valued at an high rate and rich price. 
 
[}CHAP. II. 
That no Knowledge can come vnto man in any Art or Science, 
but by Sense or Reason, or likely and artificiall coniecture, is 
proued by the Science and Knowledge of Physike in stead of all 
other Arts and Sciences.}] 
 
NOw for the better impression of that which hath bin 
before said: that is, that nothing is or can be detected, 
or is liable vnto mans knowledge, which commeth 
not vnto him by the help of Reason, the inward or the 
outward Sense, Demonstration, Ratiocination, or iudicious 
and prudent Coniectation in reasonable likelihood: let vs 
examine any one particular, ingenuous, liberall or lawfull 
Art or Science, in steade of many, and therein view, how by 
the former mentioned keyes, dores & entrances solely, are opened 
the waies vnto their contemplations, study, and perfect 
[^p.8^] 
apprehension. And if one Art or Science may be sufficient 
herein, I think it most fit to choose my owne, because as 
to my selfe most prompt; so vnto any other not vnprofitable. 
All diseases that happen vnto the body of man are 
either outward or inward, and therefore either seene by the 
eye, and deprehended by the outward Sense, or conceiued 
only by Reason and the inward Vnderstanding. Inward 
diseases, and subiect onely vnto reason and vnderstanding 
doe sometimes appeare clearely and certainly to reason and 
vnderstanding; sometimes they do not appeare certaine, or 
by certaine notes or signes, but by likely markes onely, 
which are the grounds of artificiall coniecture. 
 
And as some diseases are apparent to outward sense, some 
euident to inward reason, some by artificiall coniecture only 
in learned, exact search and perquisition pursued vnto their 
discouery: so also are many diseases hidden from all these 
wayes of inuestigation, and therefore remaine as remembrances 
of mans manifold ignorance in this life, and of the 
secret reseruation of Gods decree and prohibition. As then 
in those diseases which are apparent vnto sight, it is blindnesse 
in a Physicion to make question, in these which are euident 
to reason, to make doubt, is reasonlesse fatuity, in those 
which may be attained by artificiall coniectation, search or 
perquisition, either to be slacke, is sloth, or to be vnable, is insufficiency: 
so in those diseases, which neither outward sense, 
nor inward reason, nor art, nor artificial coniecture can possibly 
discouer: to hope or seeke beyond Sense and Reason, 
and reasonable likelihood, is reasonlesse and senselesse striuing, 
and impatience of those bounds which God hath set 
to limit the curiosity of man. For better proofe and illustration, 
it will not bee impertinent to nominate some particular 
diseases in all these kinds. First for outward diseases, and 
such as are euident to outward sense, they are infinite. Who 
that is the least practised in Physicke, doth not assuredly 
know, when, with his eyes he doth behold an inflammation, 
a Shirrus, a Gangrene, Cancer, Callus, Fistula, Vlcer, 
[^p.9^] 
Leprosie, Psora, Struma, Petechia, Variola, Iaundes, Gout, 
Tabescence, Extenuation, and the like. Secondly, for inward 
diseases euident to reason; he that is least learned, doth 
know, that all diseases which may be defined, must necessarily 
be euident to reason; as also, that it is not difficult to define 
innumerable diseases to him that is able to [/7./] conioine 
with the part affected, the true immediate kinde of the affection. 
The stomake ceasing her proper function of concoction, 
or depriued of appetite, doth it not thereby manifestly 
proue vnto reason some inward ill affection therein? 
If with that ill affection be ioined a manifest inward heat about 
the region of the stomake, accompanied with an Ague, 
drinesse, thirst and other accidents, and consequences of 
heate, is not as plainly detected the kinde of the affection 
to be hot? 
 
Thus both the part affected, which is the stomake apparently 
(because there the former accidents are found originally 
moouing and first seated,) and also the ill affection 
(which by the manifest burning heate doth proue her kind) 
being both conioined, doe truly define the disease to be an 
inflammation of the stomake. The like may be sayd of the 
inflammations of all other inward parts of Plurisies, Phrensies, 
inflammation of the Liuer, Splene, Wombe, Reines, 
Guts and other parts, the certaine testimonies of excessiue 
heate giuing demonstration of an inflammation, and the 
paine (or at least, some defect) or defection in the proper offices 
of the parts manifesting the parts themselues. As concerning 
inward inflammations of diuers parts, so likewise 
of inward Vlcers, and other maladies may be instanced. The 
disease of the bladder is oft certainly knowne, by paine in 
the part, or by cessation of his proper functions, or defection 
therein, and the kinde of disease therein by the excretions 
oft-times proceeding from it. And thus an Vlcer is oft discouered 
in the bladder, by paine, with purulent and sanguinolent 
miction. Diseases likewise of the head are certainly 
discouered and detected vnto reason, by defects growing; 
[^p.10^] 
sometimes in the vnderstanding, sometimes in the memory, 
sometimes in the imagination, sometimes in all those together, 
and sometimes in the generall motion of the whole 
body. Diseases of the heart likewise appeare by the euil and 
faulty motions of the pulse, by soundings and defections in 
liuelihood of the spirits and vitall faculty. Diseases of the 
Wombe or Mother likewise, doe oft demonstrate themselues 
by depriued or depraued motions. It were tedious 
to make a particular enumeration of all diseases of this kind, 
which are in the same manner euident and apparent vnto 
reason. 
 
Now let vs briefly also consider some diseases, which are 
neither euident to Reason, nor manifest to Sense; but are 
gained, detected, and hunted out of their deepe and hidden 
couerts, by the quicke and exquisite sent of probable and 
artificiall coniecture; the necessity or vse whereof, either 
in an ambiguous complication of doubtfull diseases, or in 
the extrication of any intricate single affection or malady, 
there is no man in Physicke exercised, who doth not dayly 
finde. Many examples of diseases of this kinde would cause 
the small body of this little worke voluminously to swell. 
we will therefore onely propose one. 
 
Let vs suppose a sicke man, doubtfully and diuersly with 
these accidents afflicted: namely, a continuall feuer, a cough, 
spitting of bloud, shortnesse of winde, head-ache, deliration, 
want of sleepe, drinesse, thirst, paines in diuers parts, sides, 
ribbes, backe and belly: What disease or diseases here are, 
can neither be manifest to sense, distracted in this confusion, 
multitude and concurrence of accidents; nor yet be euident 
to reason at the first view, because it requireth so different 
consideration, and deuided contemplation of so many seuerals 
apart. Here then it remaineth, that learned, iudicious, 
prudent and discreete artificiall coniecture proceed exactly 
to distinguish and analise, as followeth. All the forenamed 
paines, distempers and accidents may indifferently arise, 
either from the Longs inflamed, or the Liuer, or the 
[^p.11^] 
Midriffe, or the Pleura; because any one of these by it selfe 
doth vsually bring forth all, or most part of them. Heere 
then prudent, artificiall, and exquisite perpension doth exactly 
valew and esteeme all the different manners, quantities, 
qualities, positions and situations of pains; likewise accidents, 
motions, times, manners of motion, caracters, orders, 
and all other both substantiall and circumstantiall considerations. 
 
And first, as touching the feuer, head-ache, thirst, idlenesse 
of braine (because they are common to many other diseases 
besids these, & require no curious, but a more curelesse 
and common respect) prudent & circumspect coniectation 
doth leaue their needlesse confusion of more vsefull and 
needfull perpension, and doth more narrowly search about 
those accidents, which are more inseparable, proper and peculiar 
vnto the diseases named, and by exact disquisition in 
their indifferencies, doth notwithstanding sift out their hidden 
and secretly couched differencies, by which, in exact 
view they are found and distinguished sufficiently differing. 
The inseparable accidents which doe peculiarly, or for the 
most part accompany the diseases before named, that is, the 
inflammation of the Longs, the Liuer, the Midriffe and the 
Pleura, are cough, shortnesse of winde, spitting of bloud, 
paines about the ribbes, sides, belly, which in all these named 
diseases, more or lesse are present, either primarily, or by 
consent of one part with another. These, though seldome 
absent from most of the foure former diseases, and therefore 
not easily distinguished, when they proceed from th'one or 
th'other; yet rightly weighed, and accurately considered in 
their seuerall manners, measures, and right positions in euery 
one, when a part and single, they doe likewise in their 
confused mixture one with another, yeeld distinct and seuerall 
difference to him, that in a iudicious and discerning 
thought, doth beare their iust distinctions apart. For illustration, 
spitting of bloud is vsually a companion to all, or 
most of the foure named diseases; but in one in lesse quantity, 
[^p.12^] 
in another more; in one after one manner, in another after 
another; in one by vomiting, in another by expectoration, 
and in another by coughing; in one with much expuition, 
in another with little; in one with danger of strangulation 
and suffocation, in another without; in one with thicknesse, 
blacknesse, and small quantity of bloud, in another 
with thinnesse, brightnesse of colour, and more quantity; 
and in one of these also with lesse, and in another with 
more difficulty and labour. Shortnesse of winde, or difficulty 
of breathing, is a common companion to all the named 
diseases; but in one with frequent expuition, in another 
without, and where, with expuition, in one with more 
facility, in another with difficulty, in one with one manner 
of discension of the instruments of respiration, in another 
with another, in one kinde of difficulty of respiration more 
frequent, in another lesse, in one more grieuous, in another 
tolerable. 
 
The like may be sayd of coughing, and pains. Coughing 
in one of the forenamed diseases is with much, in another 
with little, and in another with no expuition at all; in one 
continuall, in another with intermission; in one with intension, 
in another with remission; in one loud, in another stil, 
and where, with expectoration, in one of one colour and 
quantity, in another of another; and in another of none at 
all; in one easie, gentle, free and without paine, in another 
grieuous and painfull; yea suffocatory, and neere to strangle. 
Paine likewise is a common companion to al the mentioned 
diseases; but distinguished in th'one and the other, 
by the manner, nature, and situation of the seuerall parts, 
which apart in euery one it possesseth, and also by the different 
oddes, fashions, and kindes of paine; some being sharp, 
some dull, some quicke, some slowe, some with dissension, 
some with punction, some with heauinesse and sensible 
weight, some more grieuous to the Patient lying, some to 
him sitting or standing, some more calme in one position of 
the body, and some in another. 
 
[^p.13^] 
And thus prudent and skilfull coniecture, by due and diligent 
perpension, comparing together oddes, and exactly referring 
vnto true discerning the seuerall properties and differences 
of accidents, their manners, proportions, and other 
due circumstances, doth in the end reduce euery accident to 
his right disease, and euery disease to his right cause; whereby 
the prudent and iudicious Physicion doth cleerely vnderstand, 
directly and timely to apply proper and pertinent remedies. 
And thus in doubtfull cases, which are neither euident 
to Reason, nor manifest to Sense in the Art and exercise 
of Physike, it is manifest how solert and accurate coniectation, 
through the clouds and mists of ambiguities, doth in the 
end so cleerely send forth and giue so faire a light, that doubt 
it selfe doth become out of doubt, and is little inferiour vnto 
certaine and plaine demonstration: As a short summe of all 
that hath been said, whatsoeuer hath beene declared of diseases, 
the same may bee propounded concerning their issues 
very briefely. 
 
The issues of all diseases are either informed from Sense, 
or euident by reason, or scrutable by artificiall coniecture. 
Examples of the first kinde are manifest, when with our eyes 
we behold the motion and Sense externall and other outward 
functions of the body, either abolished, or in an high 
degree depriued of their power and naturall vse. 
 
This certaine testimonie of our sight doth certainely informe 
the vnderstanding, concerning the dangerous issue. 
 
Examples of the second kinde are manifest likewise, when 
we finde either the causes of diseases vnremoueably fixed, or 
the disease it selfe rooted in the substance of any of the principall 
parts, or accidents in malignitie, vehemence, and fury 
irresistable. In these cases a doubtful and hard issue is euident 
to Reason by iust consequent. 
 
Examples of the latter kinde are also apparent, when in 
diseases, good and euill signes are so doubtfully mixed, that 
some promise Life, others as much threaten Death: some in 
number discourage, other some in worth as much as incourage. 
[^p.14^] 
We do oft see and know in the middest of this mist and 
darknes, where there appeareth not to a common sense so 
much as the least shew of any indication of certaine issue; yet 
through the exquisitenesse of prudent and artificiall perpension, 
and due exact distinction in the fore-mentioned seeming 
inscrutable oddes; the learned Physicion euen in the 
first scarce sensible budding of indication, and in the first 
most imperfect and scarce-being; being thereof doth oft 
discouer that true euent, which vsually and for the most part 
is seene and obserued to come to passe. 
 
If any man not rightly apprehending reason, make a doubt 
or question of any such possible exquisitnes, let him consider 
and behold it by an easie example. In an inequalitie of one 
and the same Vermiculant pulse, where the beginning of 
the same distension is quicker, the next continuation or middle 
part is slower, and the beginning of the end thereof, ending 
almost before it begin: it must needs be very difficult, 
nay, almost impossible vnto the first view of Sense or Reason, 
or to a common iudgement or learning, to diuide really, 
and distinguish this one short small motion into two or 
three distinct times and parts of motion, the space so very 
short, the faculty of mouing so low and weake, and the mouing 
it selfe almost altogether in an insensible exiguitie, and 
an indiuisible degree of lownesse. 
 
We see oft-times a common vulgar cannot in his reason 
conceiue it, much lesse by his sense at all perceiue it. Neither 
is it found easie to euery man, though learned therein, yea, 
or educate thereto, either perfectly to apprehend the general 
Idea of such a motion, or at all in the first proofes and tryals 
of his sense or hand to deprehend any particular. Notwithstanding, 
the Physicion that exquisitely discerneth and 
iudgeth, doth both in reason see, that euery single smallest 
motion, hath his diuers distinct diuision of parts, and also by 
his discerning, wary, iudicious and exercised touch, doth apertly 
detect and discouer it: And thus hath been proued by 
seuerall instances taken in the Art of Physike, in steade of all 
[^p.15^] 
other Arts and Sciences, for auoiding tediousnesse and confusion, 
that all knowledge, all Art, all Science whatsoeuer 
giuen vnto man, hath no other entrance, meanes, or wayes 
thereto, but thorow Sense or Reason, or prudent and artificiall 
coniecture, sagacitie and exquisitenesse of iudging and 
discerning thereby. 
 
And that it may the better appeare, that beyond these 
waies and lights, the Physicion cannot finde any knowledge 
or discouery of Diseases: let vs view some particular examples 
of some Diseases for this cause vndiscouerable, and not 
to be detected: and therewith consider the impossibilitie of 
discouerie to consist solely herein; namely, for that they are 
remoued from any capacitie of Sense or Reason, and from 
the reach of all artificiall search, scrutiny and accurate insight 
deriued from both, which is the highest straine of humane 
Vnderstanding. In the generall it cannot be denied (except 
of such whose vnderstandings are extremely blinde) that it 
is impossible, that those diseases should or can bee at all so 
much as suspected (and therefore much lesse knowne) which 
yeeld no shew, no signe, no indication of themselues. There 
needeth hereof no other, nor better proofe, then the enumeration 
of some particular diseases of this kinde. 
 
Are not diuers secret and hidden Apostemations, & other 
inward collections of vicious matter in the body, dayly Seminaries 
of vnexpected and wondred shapes of corruption 
and putrifaction, which lying long hidden in the body, and 
by an insensible growth taking deepe roote, in the end sodainely 
breake forth beyond all possible expectation, or 
thought of the most excellent, exquisie and subtill circumspection 
and disquisition? For a briefe confirmation hereof, 
Hollerius doth mention a man, the cause of whose disease 
while he liued, being vnknowne to Physicions, and Art, after 
his decease his guts were found gangrened and perished, 
and therein things viewed like vnto Water-snakes, and his 
Liuer full of schirrose knots. 
 
There happened vnto my selfe this yeere last past, a Patient, 
[^p.16^] 
a very worthy Gentleman, who being extremely vexed 
with the Strangury, Disurie, and Ischurie together with pissing 
of blood in great abundance, and the stone, who by the 
vse and accommodation of remedies, found much ease, mitigation 
of paines, and qualification of the extremitie of all the 
former accidents. Notwithstanding, for that there were 
certaine indications of an Vlcer in the body or capacitie of 
the Bladder, his recouerie was not expected, but after his 
decease, in the dissection of his body, his Bladder was found 
rotten, broken and black, without any manifest matter therin 
as cause thereof, or so much as one stone, although hee 
had formerly and immediately before auoided many stones 
at seuerall times. This I produce, being fresh in memory, as 
an instance of impossibilitie of knowledge vnto a Physicion 
in many and frequent cases. For how could the fracture or colour 
of his Bladder, while the Patient was liuing, by any exquisitenesse 
of Art or vnderstanding, be knowne in any possibilitie, 
meanes, or power of man, although all the other accidents 
aboue mentioned, were vndoubtedly, by certaine indications 
and signes discouered? I might here deliuer many 
other like Examples out of mine owne knowledge; I will 
onely call to remembrance one more. 
 
I was of late yeares Physicion vnto a right Noble Lady; 
the cause of whose apparent dangerous estate, diuers learned 
and famous Physicions conioyned with my selfe, could neuer 
discouer. In the dissection of her body after her decease, her 
heart was found inclosed with a shining rotten gelly, and 
the very substance of the heart of the same colour. 
 
In the same Lady, an intolerable paine about the bottome 
of her stomack, by fits depriued her of all ease by day, and of 
rest by night, and could neuer be either knowne in the cause, 
or remoued in the accident by any meane or remedy: but after 
death, in the dissection of her body before mentioned, a 
black round gelly as bigge as a Tenice ball, did manifest it 
selfe in that place, where, in her life, the intolerable paine was 
seated and fixed. 
 
[^p.17^] 
Of this euill discoloration of her heart, of the matter and 
euill colour of that matter wherewith her heart was inuironed; 
as also of that collected gelly in her stomake, what 
possible knowledge (thinke you) or exquisite vnderstanding, 
or art of man could euer in her life time giue any notice 
or information? Like vnto this is that which Hollerius 
in the 21. of his rare obseruations doth mention. In a 
sicke man perplexed in a strange manner from an vnknowne 
cause in his life, after his death his liuer and epiploon did appeare 
corrupted and putrified, his stomake toward the bottome 
bruised and full of blacke iuice or humour. Christophorus 
Sillineus, opening the body of a childe after death, reporteth, 
that he saw in the small veines, running thorow the 
substance of the liuer, many small scrauling wormes then liuing. 
Beniuenius doth make mention of a woman tormented 
grieuously by a needle in her stomake, which was impossible 
by any art or exquisitnesse of vnderstanding to be conceiued 
or suspected, if nature it selfe working it out thorow 
the body and substance of the stomake, vnto the outward 
view and sense, had not so discouered it. I will not here 
mention the generation of worms, stones, and the like in the 
guts, gall, heart, longs and other parts, of which no art, or 
excellence of knowledge can possibly take notice, vntil they 
haue proued themselues vnto the sight. Many diseases of 
these kindes being fearefull and terrible accidents, and afflictions 
vnto the body, yet for the most part are neuer detected; 
because they haue not onely no proper true certaine 
likely, but no possible meanes or way of indication or notice 
at all, in any reason or vnderstanding of humane Art or 
Science; without which the most exquisite and Scientifical 
Clarkes are altogether disabled, and must necessarily be ignorant. 
Thus hath been at large manifested, that nothing 
can bee vnto the Physician in his Art and Science knowne, 
which either by outward sense or inward is not apparent, or 
by likely and artificiall coniecture from both, is not detected 
or discerned. The like might be vrged concerning the 
[^p.18^] 
trials of lawe and iustice, and inquisitions of offences and 
errors against the law, which are the diseases of a Common-weale, 
as the former of the body of man. Many offences against 
the law are apparent vnto the outward sense, as sight 
or hearing: and therefore being witnessed by hearers or beholders, 
are without doubt or difficulty immediately dispatched, 
sentensed, and adiudged. Many also are euident 
to reason, which therefore are held and reputed inuincibly 
and infallibly to to conuince. 
 
Many offences also there are, neither manifest to sense, nor 
euident to reason, against which onely likelihood and presumptions 
doe arise in iudgement; whereby notwithstanding, 
through narrow search and sifting, strict examination, 
circumspect and curious view of euery circumstance, together 
with euery materiall moment and oddes thorowly, 
and vnto the depth and bottome by subtil disquisition fadomed, 
the learned, prudent, and discerning Iudge doth oft 
detect and bring vnto light many hidden, intestine, and secret 
mischiefes, which vnsensibly and vnobseruedly 
would otherwise oppresse and subuert the Common-weale. 
When by none of these wayes of extrication the truth can 
possibly be gained, the wise and vpright Iudge vnto necessity 
in want of due warrant vnto iust proceeding, doth with 
patience and sobriety submit. For this cause (as may bee 
seene vpon records) many cases iustly necessarily and vnauoidably 
stand perpetually inscrutable vndecided and neuer 
determined, as certaine proofes and euidences of the limitation 
and annihilation of mans knowledge in many things 
of this life: Almighty God oft-times decreeing to hide some 
truth from the sight of man, and detaining it in his owne secret 
will and pleasure. 
 
[^p.19^] 
[}CHAP. III 
Whether Witch-craft haue any other wayes or meanes of inuestigation, 
then these before mentioned, and what is the true inuestigation.}] 
 
IT hath been at large before declared, how God and Nature 
haue limited and confined all knowledge of man, 
within certaine waies and bounds, out of which, and beyond 
which it cannot passe; as also for that cause, that 
no iustifiable Art or true Science whatsouer, doth or can 
exceede those restraints. There haue been also diuers examples 
produced of the necessity of mans ignorance, in the impossibility 
of much knowledge, and discouery of things hidden 
and inhibited by the iust and vnsearchable decrees of 
God and Nature. It remaineth now to enquire concerning 
one particular subiect of Witch-craft, whether in the co~mon 
way of all other detections of truths, it ought likewise consist; 
or whether by it selfe it haue other priuiledges beyond 
all other trials. If reason be the sole eye and light of naturall 
vnderstanding which God hath giuen vnto reasonable man 
(as is before proued.) If without it can be no naturall knowledge, 
no Art, no Science no discouery. If lawe among all 
people and nations be so iust in all things, as to do or allow 
nothing against true reason (in which consisteth right.) If 
God himselfe, and all flourishing Common-weales haue tyed 
men and lawes, and the decision by them of all doubts, 
questions and controuersies, either vnto right proofe, euidence 
and allegation, according vnto reason, or at least, faire 
likelihood, presumption, and probabilitie; and beyond these 
there neuer was, is, or can be any iust iudgement or triall: 
How is it possible that man can attaine any knowledge of 
Witch-craft, if not by those meanes, by which only his nature 
is capable of whatsoeuer is allotted to be known thereto? 
[^p.20^] 
If this be infallibly true, man must either by the former 
common wayes of knowledge and detection, know likewise 
and detect Witch-craft, or els bee altogether ignorant 
thereof; whereof the contrary by daily experience is manifest. 
It may bee and is obiected, that it is a hard and difficult 
matter to detect Witch-craft, by the former and ordinary 
courses, as is oft seene and found apparent. So is it likewise 
equally difficult, and as hard by the same meanes oft-times, 
for many a iust man to proue and cleere his opposed 
innocency, and for many an iniuriously wronged wretch to 
proue his right, to defend his goods, yea, life it selfe from 
violence; notwithstanding, this is no allowance vnto another 
way, no reason or iustification of any vnwarranted way, 
or way out of the way of Reason, Iustice, and Lawe, be his 
burden neuer so importable, or iniury exceeding crueltie. 
 
For, if God had allowed vnto men alwaies smooth, assured, 
certaine and infallible wayes vnto the satisfaction of their 
wants, and the accomplishment of their intentions & desires 
without failing; what would become of Religion, Vertue, 
and Wisedome? Then should euery man be alike wise, and 
men would be so confident in their own strength and power, 
and so proud, that they would forget God, and neuer 
thinke of the Almighty. If the meanes and waies vnto all 
knowledge, and the information of our desires and affections, 
did meet with no impediment, no opposition, no contradiction, 
no casualty to intercept, and all things should 
prosperously succeed vnto our means and endeuors, there 
would neuer be any vse of Patience, Temperance, or dependance 
vpon the diuine prouidence; and consequently, little 
acknowledgement, and lesse worship and adoration of our 
Creator, who according to his wisedome, good will and 
pleasure, doth otherwise gouerne, guide, order and dispose 
all things. For if vnto our supposed needfull ends, vses and 
necessary desires were certaine and vncontrouled waies, nothing 
impossible, nothing denyed; then were our lust a 
[^p.21^] 
lawe, and man in no power but in his owne, in no awe, in no 
lawe, in no rule. 
 
Therefore Almightie God in his great and vnspeakeable 
Wisedome hath subiected vaine man, and made his pride 
subiect to infinite creatures, limits, restraints, coertions, 
thereby to teach him true wisdome, piety, trust, dependance, 
worship, and adoration of his all-restraining & all-limiting 
vnlimited power. Man therefore must thereby learne to be 
contented so to know, as therewith to learne to know himselfe; 
that is, with his large portion, his lot, his manifold 
indowments, his excellencie of Sense, Reason, Vnderstanding, 
Prudence, Art, not to forget or spurne at their interdictions, 
prohibitions, and inioyned lists, beyond which 
to desire to know, is curiositie, is folly: Sapientia vera, 
Nolle nimis sapere, saith the Poet. It is true Wisedome, not 
to be too wise: that is, not to know, nor desire to know 
more then is allowed or needfull: needful, not in our desires, 
but Gods Decree. 
 
Here then let me intreat reasonable men, not too much (as 
is vsuall) to swell with indignation, or to be puffed with impatience, 
where God doth not apertly reueale and plainely 
(as they desire and thinke needfull) the subtill engines, and 
mysticall craft of the Diuell in the Machinations of Witches 
and Sorcerers, but soberly, modestly, and discreetly, so 
farre forth be contented to pursue the tryall and iust way of 
their Discouery, as with sense, with reason, with Religion is 
iust and righteous, knowing that whatsoeuer is beyond 
these lists; is reasonlesse, senselesse, and impious. 
 
For since God and Nature (as is before said) hath limited 
the scrutinie of all true Arts and Sciences, all naturall 
knowledge for discouerie of controuersies and resolutions 
vnto the lights of Reason & Sense, and artificiall coniecture, 
prudence, art, sagacitie, and subtiltie of vnderstanding deriued 
from thence, vnto what other barre or seate of Iustice 
can Witch-craft appeale or be brought? 
 
It may be obiected, the Art of Witch-craft, being supernaturall, 
[^p.22^] 
and the practice thereof sustained by an extraordinary 
power; that therefore the meanes and waies of discouerie 
must be likewise more then ordinary and supernaturall. 
 
Hereto is truely answered, that since the nature & power 
of Spirits is vnknowne vnto man (as things supernaturall) 
and can be, and is no otherwise knowne, but by examining 
the workes issuing from thence, and comparing them aright 
with that which is naturall (because man in his Reason 
and vnderstanding cannot discerne that which is truely 
trascending his Nature, otherwise, then obseruing how far 
it exceedeth that which is according to Nature:) therefore 
(I say) the workes of the Diuell, or Witches, though sustained 
and produced by a supernaturall power, yet can haue no 
other way for their detection by man, but that which is ordinary 
vnto man, and natural and possible vnto man; for that 
which is aboue or beyond his power or Nature, is not his 
owne. 
 
From hence must necessarily be concluded, that there is 
no other ordinary way vnto man (who knoweth or can 
know nothing but that is naturall) vnto the discouerie 
of that is supernaturall, but that way which is likewise 
naturall. 
 
Although therefore the subiect of Witch-craft require a 
greater measure of knowledge to discerne that which is 
therein really, and truely supernaturall, from that which 
in nature oft-times hath a very great likenesse, and a deceiueable 
similitude therewith: yet is the way vnto that 
knowledge, the common high way which conducteth vnto 
all other knowledge whatsoeuer. Let men then be perswaded 
and contented (since God hath alotted, and allowed 
vnto the nature and power of man no other way) in this only 
warranted true way to seeke the discouery, to finde the 
footing, path, and steppings of Witchcraft, as of all other 
things, which by the Decree of God are reuealed vnto man, 
and subiect vnto the knowledge of man. 
 
It may be here demanded, whether Almightie God doth 
[^p.23^] 
not extraordinarily, and miraculously at some time discouer 
this so abominable sin of Witch-craft, aswell as by ordinarie 
meanes leaue it vnto discouerie? This doubt shall more 
fitly in more due place be hereafter at large discoursed. 
 
It hath now beene here manifested, that there is or can 
be no other ordinarie tryall of Witch-craft, then that which 
is common vnto all other detections of truth: and also that 
all detections subiect vnto the discouerie of man (as hath 
beene before cleared) are drawne and deriued either from 
Sense or Reason, or likely probabilitie raised from both. 
 
[^Extract 2, pp.69-78^] 
 
[^p.69^] 
[}CHAP. X. 
How men may by reason and nature be satisfied, concerning such 
as are indeede and truely bewitched.}] 
 
IT followeth now, according to promise, briefely to point 
vnto direction, how men leauing to enquire at Witches 
& Sorcerers, & Impostors, concerning the sick, supposed 
to be bewitched, may enquire and be better satisfied by the 
light of Reason, which God hath giuen vnto them. Reason 
[^p.70^] 
doth detect the sicke to be afflicted by the immediate supernaturall 
power of the Diuell, two wayes: The first way is by 
such things as are subiect and manifest vnto the learned Physicion 
onely: the second is, by such things as are subiect and 
manifest vnto a vulgar view. 
 
Those things which are manifest vnto the Physicion alone, 
are of two sorts. The first is, when in the likenesse and similitude 
of a disease, the secret working of a supernatural power 
doth hide it selfe, hauing no cause or possibilitie of being 
in that kinde or nature. The second is, when naturall remedies 
or meanes according vnto Art and due discretion applyed, 
doe extraordinarily or miraculously either lose their 
manifest ineuitable nature, vse, and operation, or else produce 
effects and consequences, against or aboue their nature. 
The impossibilitie of either of these in vsuall or ordinarie 
course of nature, doth certainely proue an infallibilitie of 
a superiour nature, which assuredly therefore must needs be 
either Diuine or Diabolicall. 
 
This conclusion concerning the infallibilitie of a supernaturall 
mouer, from the like assumption, the learned and 
worthy preseruer of reuerent antiquitie, Master Camden, in 
his description of Cheshire, hath truely inferred vpon the miraculous 
prelusions, and presages, euer and perpetually forerunning 
the death of the heyres of the house or family of the 
Briertons. These & such like things (saith he) are done either 
by the holy tuteler Angels of men, or els by Diuels, who by 
Gods permission mightily shew their power in this inferiour 
world. 
 
Whensoeuer therefore the Physicion shall truely discouer 
a manifest transcending power, manner, or motion in any 
supposed disease, there is an vndoubted conclusion of the 
Author. Where likewise remedies finde concomitances, or 
consequences contrary to their nature, or such as neuer were, 
nor euer can be contingent in course of nature: this assumption 
truely granted, doth inuincibly inferre a transcendent 
force and vertue, therein neuer to be denied. 
 
[^p.71^] 
Thus how diseases, and the wonderfull accidents which 
oft happen in diseases, may bee by the Physicion detected, 
according vnto the rule of reason, whether induced by the 
Diuell or no, is briefely pointed at. 
 
How the guilt of any man therein wit _[^ORIG. BLURRED^] the Diuell (which 
doth onely conuince a Witch) may and ought appeare, hath 
been before declared, and shall likewise hereafter be further 
made cleare. 
 
It will not now be immateriall or vnprofitable, for confirmation, 
illustration, and better proofe of those two wayes, 
which are distinguished to be onely subiect, and manifest vnto 
the Physicion, in the detection of the secret workes of Diuels 
and Witches in diseases, to produce one or two examples 
of both. 
 
Concerning the first, Fernelius in his 2. booke De Abd: 
Rer. causis, cha. 16. deliuereth a history of a yong man of a noble 
family, who was by a violent conuulsion in an extraordinanary 
maner long time tormented. Diuers learned Physicions 
remained long time doubting and vnsatisfied, both in 
the cause of this disease, as also of the seate or place where 
the cause, with any sufficient reason, might be iudged setled. 
 
Behold very pregnant inducements of the finger of the Diuell, 
mouing in the disease. One was the incredible velocitie 
of motion in the diseased, impossible vnto the force of man: 
the other was, for that in all the fits and conuulsions, though 
very strong and vehement, his sense and vnderstanding remained 
in the diseased, perfect and nothing obscured, or interrupted, 
which in conuulsions according vnto natural causes 
was neuer seene, and is impossible. 
 
The force of these reasons to euince the presidence of the 
Diuell, in the manner and motion of the fore-named disease, 
the Diuell himselfe did shortly after iustifie, declaring and 
professing himselfe the Author thereof in plainely expressed 
words. 
 
In the fore-named booke and chapter, there is another report 
or relation of a man sodainely surprised, with an extraordinarie 
[^p.72^] 
fashion, or shape of madnesse or phrensie, wherein 
he vttered and reuealed things hidden, and of profound science 
and reuelation, not onely aboue the pitch and power of 
naturall capacitie, and the forgerie of fained extasie, but really 
in true and vpright iudgement, and vnpartiall discerning 
beyond all question and exception supernaturall. The 
sequel after made it good. These examples are sufficient vnto 
men that are wise, and with whom reason hath authoritie. I 
doe not affect vnaduised multiplication herein, suspecting 
many histories, and reports of diuers Authors. 
 
The possibilitie of those which are here produced, beside 
the vnstained credit of the Author, is apertly confirmed by 
the holy Scripture, where, in the Lunatike the Diuell manifested 
himselfe by actions, onely proper and appropriate vnto 
the power of a Spirit: such was his casting the Lunatike 
into the fire, and into the water, his violent rending and tearing 
him, which were things impossible vnto the power and 
nature of the Lunatike himselfe, or of his disease alone. 
 
The man possessed among the Gadarens, Math. 8. Mark. 5. 
Luk. 8. likewise doth establish the same, who was knowne, 
and seene euidently, not to be simply or solely diseased, by 
those vndoubted workes, and that finger of the Diuel, when 
he easily brake in peeces those iron chaines wherewith the 
Lunatike was bound: so that no force thereof whatsoeuer 
could hold or binde him; as also when he vttered and spake 
that more then humane vnderstanding and reuelation of Iesus 
Christ to be the Sonne of God: a knowledge as yet vncommunicated 
vnto mankinde, and vnto reason impossible. 
 
Concerning the second way of detection, subiect vnto the 
Physicion alone, namely, when naturall remedies aptly applyed, 
are attended with supernaturall consequences, contrary 
to their nature, or aboue the same, out of the former 
Author, and fore-named place: there is an example also without 
farther straggling of vnquestioned estimation. A certaine 
man there mentioned, vehemently burning and thirsting, 
and by intolerable heate compelled to seeke any mitigation, 
[^p.73^] 
or extinction of his heate and thirst, in want of 
drinke or other fitting liquor, happened to finde an Apple, 
in the moisture and naturall iuice whereof, hoping the vsuall 
short refreshing of the tongue, he, after the first tasting 
thereof, immediately found (not onely that which was contrarie 
to the nature of an Apple, greater burning and thirst 
then before) but had instantly his mouth and iawes so fast 
closed and sealed vp thereby, that he hardly escaped strangling. 
 
The reasonable doubt of the latitation of the Diuel, in this 
faire, harmelesse, and vsuall remedie of the tongue, thirst 
and drinesse, was afterward made more euident and manifest 
by the sodaine and swift obsession of his minde, with frightful 
visions, wherof as in the disposition, temper, substance or 
qualitie of his braine or body, there was no ground or cause, 
so in the Apple it selfe, was no other pernicious mixture, but 
that the Diuel, as with Iudas Sop, though wholesome and 
sauing in it selfe, so in this medicinall fruit, entred and possessed, 
where God permitted. The like may be said of other both 
outward & inward remedies, which by a Magick power are 
and may be oft interrupted, turned and bent vnto a vse contrarie 
to their nature. 
 
For this cause Hyppocrates himselfe in his booke de sacro 
morbo, & de natura muliebri, doth acknowledge many accidents, 
as also diseases and remedies themselues to be diuine, 
as hauing their cause and being aboue the course of nature. 
When therefore fitting vnto any cause, matter, or humour in 
the body, according to true Art and Reason discouered, apt 
and fit remedies, are aptly & fitly by the iudicious Physicion 
applyed, notwithstanding, contrary to the nature and custome 
of such remedies, they haue extraordinary, vnusuall, 
and iustly wondred effects, is there not iust matter of doubt, 
concerning an vnusuall, and an extraordinarie cause answerable 
thereto? The deepe and mysticall contingents in this 
kinde, and their hidden reason and cause, the vnlearned man, 
or hee that is not exercised in difficult discoueries, cannot 
[^p.74^] 
discerne, nor can the intricate and perplexed implications 
therein, of doubts and ambiguities possibly, become intelligible 
in euery ordinary apprehension; yet by the former easie 
and familiar example, euery man may gesse and coniecture 
at the most abstruse. The subtilty of the Diuell doth 
easily deceiue a vulgar thought, and in the cloudes and mists 
of doubts and difficulties beguileth vsually the dimme sight 
and disquisition. 
 
The learned Physicion, notwithstanding possessing true 
iudgement and learning; who doth and can warily obserue, 
and distinguish first the wonders of nature vnknowne vnto 
euery mediocrity of knowing: secondly, the true wonders 
aboue nature in due collation with nature to bee knowne, 
doth not easily or rashly with vulgars, erre or runne mad in 
the confusion of vaine and idle scruples. The wonders of nature, 
are such naturall diseases as are seene in their wondred 
and admired shapes or mixture, to haue a great likenesse or 
deceiuing identity with such maladies, as are inflicted by the 
Diuell. The wonders aboue nature, are such diseases, as are 
truly and vndoubtedly knowne and proued to haue no consistence, 
or power of consistence, or cause in sublunary nature. 
 
Of the first I will heere cite no particular examples, because 
I haue both formerly in a former Manuall, deliuered 
briefly some of their generall [/8./] descriptions, denyed by no 
man that in ancient time was, or at this time is a iudicious 
and learned Physician, as also diuers of their [/9./] particular Histories 
in the persons of some sicke men knowne vnto my 
selfe. 
 
Of the second it is heere needlesse to propound any 
more particulars then those aboue mentioned, which I esteeme 
for the generall illustration sufficient. In true and 
right decision & distinction of the one from the other, multiplicity 
of consideration and circumspection ought diligently 
attend the intricate maze and labyrinth of error, and illusion 
in their deceiueable likenesses, whereby the Diuell, for 
[^p.75^] 
his owne aduantage, and the perdition of seduced and beguiled 
men, doth sometimes cunningly hide his owne workes, 
and the diuelish practices of Witches and Sorcerers, from 
their due detection and punishment; sometimes to insnare 
the guiltlesse and innocent, doth iugglingly seem to do those 
things which Nature doth iustly challenge, not as his, but 
as her owne, in iust ballance weighed. It is most certaine, 
that the Diuell cannot possibly mixe himselfe, or his power, 
with any inferior nature, substance or body, but the alteration, 
by the coniunction of so far discrepant natures, in the vnchangeable 
decree of vniuersall nature of all things, necessarily 
and vnauoidably produced, must needs witnes and 
manifestly detect it in the great and mighty oddes. This is 
very euident and apparent in all the supernaturall workes 
of the Diuell, before mentioned in the generall discourse of 
this small Treatise or worke, whether such as were declared 
manifest to sense, or such as were euident to reason; 
whether such as were affected by the Diuell himselfe, with 
the consent or contract of a Sorcerer or Witch, or such as 
were without their knowledge, society, or contract performed 
by himselfe. All those supernaturall workes of both 
these kindes were therefore knowne to be supernaturall, because 
they were aboue and beyond any cause in sublunarie 
nature. The like the learned Physician may certainely conclude, 
concerning diseases inflicted or moued by the Diuell. 
For it is impossible that the finger or power of the Diuell 
should bee in any malady, but such a cause must needes produce 
some effect like it selfe, where true and iudicious discerning 
is able to finde the infallible, certaine, and vndeceiued 
stampe of difference. Thus farre hath been briefly declared, 
how the Physician properly and by himselfe doth alone enter 
into the due consideration & examination of diseases (where 
is iust occasion of question) whether naturally or supernaturally 
inferred. How vnfit it is here to admit euery idiot for 
a Physician or Counsellor (as is too common both in these 
and all other affaires of health) let wise men iudge. 
 
[^p.76^] 
Certainely from hence it commeth to passe, that most 
men for euer liue in perpetuall confusion of their thoughts in 
their cases, and as a iust iudgement of God against their carelesse 
search and neglect of learned and warranted true counsel, 
all certainty & truth herein doth still fly farre from them. 
For as in these ambiguities is requisite and necessary, a learned, 
iudicious, and prudent Physician; so is it as necessary 
that hee finde those that neede herein aduice, truly and constantly 
obedient vnto good reason, temperate and discreete, 
not mutable vpon euery vaine and idle proiect to start away, 
and to bee transported from reasonable, iust, and discreete 
proceeding, vnto vncertaine, vaine, and Empiricall tryals, 
since wisedome, knowledge and truth are neuer truly found, 
but onely of those, that with diligence, patience, and perseuerance 
search and seeke them out. It remaineth now to 
come vnto the second way of detection of the bewitched 
sicke, which was before said to consist in such things as were 
subiect and manifest vnto a vulgar viewe, as the first vnto 
the learned Physician alone. As of the first, some few examples 
haue been propounded, so of the later let vs also viewe 
other some. 
 
In the time of their puroxismes or fits, some diseased persons 
haue beene seene to vomit crooked iron, coales, brimstone, 
nailes, needles, pinnes, lumps of lead, waxe, hayre, 
strawe, and the like, in such quantity, figure, fashion and proportion, 
as could neuer possibly passe downe, or arise vp thorow 
the naturall narrownesse of the throat, or be contained 
in the vnproportionable small capacity, naturall susceptibility 
and position of the stomake. These things at any time 
happening, are palpable and not obscure to any eye without 
difficulty, offering themselues to plaine and open viewe. 
 
These like accidents Beniuenius, Wierus, Codronchius and 
others also, euen in our time and countrey, haue published 
to haue been seen by themselues. Some other sicke persons 
haue, in the time of the exacerbations of their fits, spoken 
languages knowingly and vnderstandingly, which in former 
[^p.77^] 
time they did neuer know, nor could afterward know againe: 
as Fernelius a learned Physicion, and beyond exception 
worthy credit, doth witnesse concerning a Sicke man 
knowne to himselfe. 
 
Some Sicke men also haue reuealed and declared words, 
gestures, actions done in farre distant places, euen in the very 
time and moment of their acting, doing, and vttering, as 
I haue knowne my selfe in some, and as is testified likewise 
to haue beene heard, knowne, and seene by diuers witnesses 
worthy credit in our [/10./] countrey, in diuers bewitched Sick 
people. 
 
As these examples are manifest to any beholder, which 
shall at any time happen to view them: so are the examples of 
the first and second kinde euident to the reason and iudgement 
of the learned and iudicious Physicion, and all doe 
therfore certainely detect and proue a supernaturall Author, 
cause, or vertue, because they are manifest supernaturall 
effects. 
 
Thus haue wee pointed out briefely, the detection of the 
bewitched Sicke, both by learned Reason proper vnto the iudicious 
Physicion, and also by common sense and reason in 
all men. 
 
If men more at large please to exercise themselues in 
due consideration and proofe heereof, they shall finde more 
certaine and sound satisfaction and fruit, with the blessing 
and allowance of God, then can issue out of the mouthes of 
Sorcerers & Witches, which God hath cursed, and disallowed, 
and in whose hearts and mouthes, the Diuell is oft a lying 
spirit. 
 
It hath been briefely, and yet sufficiently herein proued, 
that Almightie God hath giuen vnto Reason light, whereby 
reasonable, temperate and sober mindes, through circumspect 
care and diligence, may see and behold whatsoeuer 
is truely possible, or iust for man to know, with the fauour 
and allowance of Gods grace, in the detection and discouerie 
of the bewitched Sicke. Whosoeuer therefore shall contemne, 
[^p.78^] [^Original misnumbered as p.80.^] 
or neglect this light, and shall aske counsell of Diuels 
and Witches, the open and proclaimed enemies of God, 
doe certainely relinquish their faith, and trust in God their 
Creatour, and their patience and dependance vpon his prouidence. 
 
And although it may sometimes fall out, that prosperous 
issue doth seeme to follow the counsell of the Diuell, 
yet doth it behooue men to be wary, and not presume, 
lest it proue onely a sweet baite, that by a sensible good, the 
Diuell may draw their bewitched desirous vaine mindes vnto 
an insensible damnable hurt. For certainely, hee who will 
rather be beholding vnto the Diuell, for his life or health, 
then chuse to die in the gracious and mercifull hand of 
God his Creator, can neuer expect to participate any portion 
of saluation in him. 
 
Thus much concerning the reasonable discouerie of the 
bewitched Sicke, wherein leauing to enquire at Witches, 
Sorcerers, or Impostors, vpright men, that loue or feare God, 
or imbrace Religion or common reason, may and ought confine 
and satisfie their iust desires. 
 
