[^Spenser, Benjamin: Vox civitatis^] 
 
[}VOX CIVITATIS, 
OR 
LONDONS Complaint 
against her Children in the 
COVNTREY. 
 
[^Beginning of a flowchart figure.^] 
Shewing to them her 
	infirmitie. 
	povertie. 
	desolate misery. 
 
Vbraiding them with 
	vnkindnesse. 
	vncharitablenesse. 
	distrustfulnesse. 
 
Informing them of her 
	Comfort in God. 
	Counsell to them. 
 
Chiding the Countrey 
for their 
	Ignorance of 
		God. 
		and his hand. 
	Hard-heartednesse in 
		entertaining. 
		burying. 
[^End of a flowchart figure.^] 
 
Taken from her owne mouth, and written 
by Beniamin Spenser, Master in Arts. 
 
IOB. 19. 21. 
Haue pittie vpon me, haue pittie vpon mee oh yee my friends, for the 
hand of God hath touched mee. 
 
LONDON 
Printed by I. D. for Nicholas Bourne. 
1625.}] 
 
[^A dedication to the magistrates, ministers and physicians of London omitted.^] 
[^Extract 1, pp. 1-41^] 
 
[^p.1^] 
[}VOX CIVITATIS.}] 
 
HE that hath many enemies 
beleagering him, 
may doubt, which to set 
vpon first with most safetie 
to himselfe. And as 
Physitians are distracted 
with the many infirmities 
of an old patched vp 
Patient, (which disease in 
him to take away first, that the other make not head 
against his life) so I now poore, distressed, reiected, 
diseased London, once the Phœnix, now the Owle; 
once the Paragon of beautie, now a Patterne of deformitie; 
lately the crowne and pride of great Brittaine, 
now a skar-crow and scorne; know not which way 
to turne me first. My God is angred, my houshold 
plagu'd, my hopefull children dispersed. Which 
last grieues me not least, that I should nourish children, 
who should in time of need so forsake mee. 
I haue sollicited God in supplication, I haue comforted 
my family with my best adjutation; but my 
sorrowes increase, and my friends decrease, which 
makes me send out (in the bitternesse of my soule) 
this exclamation against them, this declaration to 
them. 
 
[^p.2^] 
Ah well said S. Chrysostome; Quod est in arboribus 
humor, hoc est in hominibus Amor: The loue in men 
is like juice in trees, which humor seldome revisites 
the roote being once sent forth, but shoots forward 
into sprigs, leaues, or fruit: so childrens loue seldome 
reflects on the Parents, but boundeth forward 
to some other object. And so deale you (my children) 
with me, whose vngratefulnesse I much pittie, 
though it may be you regard it not. But howsoever, 
I must discharge my Conscience in relating your 
faults, that so (if in your absence some of my lewd 
sonnes prey on your goods) you may not blame me 
for not informing you: nor when you returne (if 
you tast of correction) you may not take hainously 
my reforming you. And least you thinke I speake 
without cause, 
 
[^Beginning of a flowchart figure.^] 
consider my 
	infirmitie. 
	povertie. 
	small company. 
[^End of a flowchart figure.^] 
 
And that you are not guiltlesse, neither of these 
miseries, nor vndeserving my expostulations, I pray 
 
[^Beginning of a flowchart figure.^] 
consider your 
	vnkindnesse to God, and me. 
	vncharitablenesse to the needie. 
	distrustfulnes in Gods providence. 
[^End of a flowchart figure.^] 
 
And yet that I am not comfortlesse, marke my 
confidence; nor louelesse to you, obserue my counsell, 
[^Beginning of a flowchart figure.^] 
in that I wish you to 
	reclaime. 
	repent. 
	beleeue. 
[^End of a flowchart figure.^] 
 
And lastly, Commend me (I can scarce say kindly) 
to those vntaught Countrey-creatures, whom neither 
feare of God, nor knowledge of his Word, 
[^p.3^] 
nor example of my civill government, nor kinde 
entertainement, nor leasing, nor lending, nor trading, 
nor my large contributing to their Briefes, can 
winne to the kinde well-comming of my Children 
dispersed through their infirmitie, nor to the burying 
of them without inhumanitie. And let those 
vniust Iustices and Surly Sirs know my displeasure, 
who care not though I starue for want of foode, 
who keepe backe the people as much as in them lyeth 
from bringing sustenance hither, for feare the 
Plague should come thither in a paire of Paniers. But 
their fault I will put last, as the least in comparison 
of yours, who fright them with your amazednesse. 
But you should haue had more hope in God, more 
trust in his Word, more loue to mee, more respect to 
your selues, then thus to expose your bodies dead, 
or aliue (in this case) to the rude curtesie of the 
ignorantly fearefull (I had almost said) faithlesse 
Countrey. 
 
And all this comes to passe because I am touched 
with infirmitie, which what it is you shall know: 
[^Beginning of a flowchart figure.^] 
my infirmitie is 
	naturall. 
	spirituall. 
[^End of a flowchart figure.^] 
 
My spirituall infirmitie is sinne in generall, but in 
[^Beginning of a flowchart figure.^] 
particular 
	securitie in prosperitie. 
	vnsensiblenesse of visitation. 
	murmuring in want, abusing plentie. 
[^End of a flowchart figure.^] 
 
Which you my Children haue not beene behindhand 
to augment, neither are you guiltlesse. Haue 
not you infected my Aire with swearing, my Taverns 
[^p.4^] 
(which I erected to comfort the sorrowfull) with 
spewing vp your surquedry? My shops with cheating, 
my Churches with hypocrisie, my Suburbs with baudry? 
What sinne am I tainted withall, of which you haue 
not the tincture? What paint haue I put on, of the 
which you haue not the Visor? You have grinded 
my poore, you haue eate my people like bread, you haue sold 
them for old shooes, you haue oppressed by might, and 
Banckruptisme, you haue left debts vnpayd, you haue opened 
a way for vnconscionable men to vndoe others by 
your departing, and left mee, last of all, to desolation, as 
if you were none of those, who had augmented my 
sinne, and therefore need not partake of my punishment. 
These mischiefes you haue left behind you, 
though your bodies are absent, and I feele the smart 
of yours, and mine owne folly. 
 
There are some of you, who are absent, whose 
nakednesse (with Constantine) I had rather cover 
with my cloake, then discover. But I see some wilfully 
let goe the plough, and never looke after it; I see 
Shepheards smitten with feare, sheepe scattered, hearers 
fickle, for want of due ordering, Church discipline reiected, 
Sacraments neglected, the bread of life vilified, 
your selues in counsell and example despised. I am benefited 
by your prayers and paines, therefore will I 
spare reproofe, as not worthy to doe it. But yet obserue 
(I pray you) (especially the most of you that 
are fled) how your people grow dissolute, their natures 
insole~t, their eares itching, their appetite greedie, 
their heads distracted, their hearts vnsettled. I 
accuse no Father of the Church, for they haue no 
[^p.5^] 
particular place of residency, the care of all the 
Churches lyes on them, and they deputed you over 
particular Congregations for your owne good 
and the peoples also, that the Church may want no 
tendance. Yet I say not, that you haue beene the 
fountaine of all this. For you my lay Children (for 
the most part) cannot complaine for want of teaching, 
since you haue followed so little, and playd the 
wantons with your bread. For are not the Iudges 
corrupt, turning Iudgement into Worme-wood? Your 
Iuryes vniust, inclining to the strongest side, because they 
shall bee well payd? Officers cruell, and hard-hearted: 
Physitians and Chyrurgians, ayming more at Coyne then 
Cure: Lawyers speaking not according to the truth, but 
the greatnesse of the fee: Church officers full of partialitie, 
and Conivency, resoluing (as it may seeme) to bee 
forsworne before they vndertake the office? I will not 
say that some get by their offices, relying on the 
power of their place for want of strict examining 
their account. If any be so honest to complaine of 
offenders, Court-Cobwebs cannot hold the great flyes, 
their luggage is so heavie; but some officers like a Spider 
can draw in the little fly to the Center. And though a 
man haue never so much diligence, some Vnder-Officers 
(for a wager) can frustrate all with their 
private Indulgence. No wonder if my yonger Children 
bee bad, when my elder be no better; for to 
their example, Totus componitur orbis: and yet some 
of these are gone, as if they were never the men. 
 
And if their sinnes would spurre away as fast as 
they, I should complaine of no other infirmitie. 
But Quicquid delirunt isti plectuntur Achivt, whatsoever 
[^p.6^] 
you haue done I finde the scourge of it, and 
with my poore Inhabitants may say with David in 
the person of my Saviour; The rebukes of those that 
offended thee, fall vpon me. Yet I excuse not my selfe, 
nor my residents as Innocent, but would not haue 
my selfe onely censured, because I beare the punishment. 
I know that I haue sinned in my hard-heartednesse, 
in not mourning for my late Soveraigne, whose 
Subiects now follow him in death. I often desired 
Warre, when God cryed Peace, or sicknesse to consume 
my multitudes, and strength: and now am weakened. 
Oh turne to me againe thou Lord of Hosts, shew 
vs the light of thy Countenance, and wee shall be whole. 
I know also that I haue the poore with mee, a rude 
people, whom I cannot rule, whose necessitie hath 
hardened them, and their deiection driven them to 
Commit sinne with greedines. And as Cookes frame 
all things to the palate, and omit things profitable; 
so doe they (saith Philo) omit good, and turne all 
things to their present pleasure. But I haue a generation 
heere likewise, who make conscience of sinning, 
whose teares are daily poured forth, and prayers 
sent out, and ejaculations shot vp for my restoring, 
who (I doe hope) shall be heard in that they pray 
for, and I shall be cured, and they shall be blessed. 
 
In the meane time my sorrowes are multiplied 
[/1./] 
not more by sicknesse then by scandalls of weake 
Phantasies, and by the comfortlesse desertion, and 
decession of my Children. My scourge inflicted on 
me is the Plague: A disease fearefull enough, yet not 
halfe so fearefull as my sinnes, through which I haue 
run boldly enough, and in which the Countrey 
[^p.7^] 
people hath taken part with mee. A disease, which 
David chose before Famine or the Sword, Let mee 
fall into the hand of God and not of man. A disease, 
which is some signe of Gods favour: For hee hath 
not suffered Famine to blast our fields with her barren 
breath, neither hath he sayd, Sword cut through this 
Land: but like a Father he hath taken vs in hand 
himselfe; as David cals it, the Chastisement of his owne 
hand: Let mee fall into the hand of God. A disease, that 
was the Last blow, that God tooke at Ægypt, and the 
common scourge of Israel, and vsually set on by an 
Angell, whose stroke mooued the mud of mans nature 
to his owne ruine, which else lyeth still and setled, 
and destroyes man some other way in time. I 
confesse, that I haue heard related, that some of my 
sister Citties haue beene infected by strange accidents: 
but God is my Master, and not Fortune my 
Mistris, some say the infection happeneth by constellations, 
omnious aspects, evill conjunctions, vnseasonable 
weathers, but these must extend themselues 
then beyond a Cittie, and her Suburbs: because 
in these occurents the Aire is tainted, and 
then not kept within the compasse of one Cities Hemispheare. 
 
Some haue beene (they say) infected by meere 
stinkes: they are noysome indeede, but haue no 
more relation to kill this way by a Plague, then by 
other wayes and diseases, which they may breed and 
bring to passe. Bad Fumes are discommodities that 
I am much troubled withall by reason of my noysome 
Children, and idle Servants, but yet my breath 
is not so obnoxious as is reported: for if it were, fiue 
[^p.8^] 
would die to one that doth die, it being the common 
breath, by which all with me doth liue; and being 
that there is two weake bodies for one strong (counting 
women and children.) And beside, if my breath 
were infectious, then would those creatures, whose 
nature haue affinitie with man (as Swine, Cockes, 
and Hennes) receiue such infections in the streets, as 
would forth-with slay them, though they were not 
kept vp in Plagued houses. Therefore doe not scandall 
me, and adde affliction to the afflicted, but consider. 
God is my rocke, and his Word is my pillar, and the 
ground of truth. I know that God may vse outward 
meanes to infect, and suffocate. But least we should 
leane too much to Nature, he doth not (in Scripture) 
reveale this disease so executed: but either he doth 
expresse it done by an Angell, or else doth silence the 
[/2./] 
execution thereof in a mute anger. Iob was smitten 
with scabs, yet the Scripture attributeth it to the devill; 
and why should we thinke but that in a disease 
so mortall, so quicke dispatching as this; but that he 
vsed his good Angell, incensed with his Maisters displeasure, 
or else sent Sathan to buffet vs for our presumptions. 
 
Our Church acknowledgeth the Plague to be 
Gods arrow, and Hippocrates calleth it [^GREEK OMITTED^]. 
And therefore for Gods cause, least you detract from 
his honour, lay it not vpon me. I know that those 
houses, wherein God hath smitten one (for want of 
care and meanes) may and doe taint others, but what 
is this to my breath, or that men should thinke therfore 
that I am totally infected. Or if one goe abroad 
out of such a house into a Congregation, and there 
[^p.9^] 
(because they haue not beene ayred first) taint another 
(as we surmise): or sometimes one being afraid 
of another, their heart faint, and their bloud turnes, 
and they dye of the Plague, their passions (though 
not strucken) helping to worke the humors of their 
body to a sore; is this sufficient to forget the operation 
of God in this Plague, or condemne me, or leaue 
me vtterly desolate? God hath said, that he will send 
evill Angels among vs, yet these can but vexe them to 
whom their licence extends; yet I make no doubt, 
but God makes the Pestilence ordinarily to cleaue 
to a man by infectio~, but this doth not hold alwayes 
that he doth so, and when it doth take one by infection, 
it is not alwayes mortall. 
 
And this is the infirmitie, with which I am at this 
time affected. And that I draw you not into errour, 
take the judgement of other Ancients, and let none 
thinke by an obscure evasion, to make me the more 
to be shunned in necessary neighbourly comfort, by 
saying the Plague in Scripture, and ours were not all 
one; because theirs were suddaine, ours are lingring. 
For God made those sharpe, that wee which were to 
liue vnder the times of mercy, might be warned by his 
[/3./] 
severitie to them. And if he had suffered them to haue 
lived vnder the stroake but so long as Hezekiah did, 
it would haue broken out of them as it did on him 
and vs at this day. God is more mercifull to vs then, 
who by space betweene his stroakes calleth to repentance. 
But let not vs abuse this mercy, and cry out 
rashly, and childishly (before God toucheth vs) that 
all London is infected. Indeed lying and breathing 
vnder Gods stroake, oftentimes infects others: hath 
[^p.10^] 
not God therefore given you learned Physitians to 
your brethren, to help you with Preservatines against 
the infection, though they cannot recover the fish 
that is strucken? And if we vse these good meanes, 
hath not God given vs his word, which declares his 
power, in restraining not onely the infection, but the 
violence of his Devouring Angell also, as our late King 
Iames of blessed memory called it in his Parliament Oration 
the last Plague time. And haue not our Magistrates 
most worthily and carefully provided to shut them 
vp, or dispose of them else-where, who haue beene 
strucken. Which course might doe some good, but 
that we lacke persons and purses to keepe in, and 
keepe the sicke when they are within. All these 
things being observed, I need not be left like Iob on a 
dung hill, nor my infirmitie be so much shunned, that 
I and my Children should be so many myles severed. 
 
The Venereall Pox is ten times a baser disease and 
more absolutely infectious, yet my sonnes (I shame 
to owne them) that haue it, are called good-fellowes. 
Men will not stand vpon it to drinke either Wine or 
Tobacco with them, who are more fit (not for the 
Pesthouse) but the Pistrinum, the Bridewell. The Chyrurgions 
never shunne to cure these, but because the 
hand of God is vpon me, & a lesse infectious disease, 
though more pernitious; I am shunned of some Pastors 
and people, Physitians and Chyrurgions, as if they 
stayed, they should be all dead men; whereas this disease 
is a culling and a picking out of men, to set forward 
(as in a Muster) which causeth it to take at the 
beginning one here, and another halfe a myle off 
[^p.11^] 
then leape thither againe, where it was first, and take 
them away, which at first it left, (as the weekely Bills 
testifie) neither can it be proved, that all these haue 
by any co~tracting or conventing ever met together, 
especially since houses were shut vp. So that (as Fernelius 
saith) this disease hath an hidden beginning, 
and why not an hidden procession? But onely that 
in continuance, some accidents doe befall, vpon 
which our reason hath more ground to traverse and 
discourse. 
 
But some will say, the Plague is mortally infectious, 
and therfore it is wilfull murther to stay if I may goe. 
I cannot say so, If it be thy place and calling to stay. But I 
say, thou then dost kill them wilfully (by thine owne 
argument) whom thou leauest behind, or settest to 
keepe thy sicke: except thou thinkest that servants 
and poore keepers may be killed vp by authoritie. 
 
But surely if it were but well observed, my infirmitie 
rather deserveth an humble reverence, then to 
breede a scandall, or an offence. If it were meerly naturall, 
men might like naturall men flie from it. But 
as it is secretly hidden from the Heathen (as Galen 
and Hippocrates) who grant the beginning thereof to 
be very secret: so the Scriptures declare vnto vs that 
hidden beginning, that so we might know, vnder 
what covert to hide vs. The 91. Psalme tels vs in verse 
the 1. 4. Of the shadow and the wings of the Almightie. 
Therfore the Septuagint translates that Psalme where 
we find the word Pestilence, by the word [^GREEK OMITTED^] which 
signifies a word. Or els they call it [^GREEK OMITTED^] a thing arguing 
the strange nature therof. These learned Iewes 
went to the cause of the Plague. I am not ignorant, 
[^p.12^] 
that the Heathen learned Physitian Gallen called it 
[^GREEK OMITTED^] because of his destroying nature, and mortall 
disposition, & Hippocrates called it [^GREEK OMITTED^] because 
of his spreading nature. These men went no farther 
then the effect, which was visible, but the invisible 
operator and operation was hidden from them, and 
therein they did but guesse. The Scriptures call vs 
to an outward admiration of this wonderfull worke, 
and an inward adoration of God, who is the enlarger 
and restrainer hereof: who makes such sweet promises 
in the 91. Psalme concerning deliverance from it; 
as, Thou shalt goe on the Aspe and the Dragon. Which 
Mollerus on that Psalme saith, signifies the Pestilence, 
and vsed by the Psalmist, Vt vim veneni significantius 
exprimeret: yet not the force of it to infect, but to kill; 
for the sting of the Aspe poysons but those whom it 
strikes, it imparts not the same force to another not 
contacta, no not by touching of the body so stung. 
Yet this my infirmitie doth: yet alwayes not absolutely 
to death, nor doth it alwayes infect to sicknes 
(Deo invante) for we see that your Searchers, Keepers, 
Sextons, Bearers, are the seldomest taken with it. 
 
Therefore the beginning of this my infirmitie being 
invisible, the procession doubtfull, the destroying 
selectiue, (as it were Morbus rationalis, a disease 
that did cull out of discourse or reason men appointed 
to die, and not alwayes infect the next adiacent 
places): my learned and reverent sonnes of former 
times in my affliction divinely haue called for Metaphysicall 
[/4./] 
perfumes. So did M=r= Fenton in his spirituall 
Perfume, as if Kitchin fire did as much good to 
purge away this disease, as our pots of Frankensence 
[^p.13^] 
doth in my streets, when the wind blows it all to one 
end. And that we might haue recourse to God aboue 
(though not without outward meanes) another of 
my well reputed Sonnes counts no Phantasie, that 
[/5./] 
print (as it were) of a blow on some. 
 
The soares we may know from whence they are; 
the tokens ordinarily we may discerne, but from 
whence is this? This seemes to be [^GREEK OMITTED^] or Plaga, 
a blow indeed so termed Revel. 16. 9. All these doth 
but shew vs, whom first and mainly to beleeue vpon, 
the God of spirits, who can call backe his Serieants, and 
withdraw his Action, and forgiue our debt, and forbeare 
our liues till some other time. 
 
Yet I feare me all this will not driue my smells out 
of your nose. If stinkes doth it, doe you thinke the 
stinkes will be ever the lesse when so many thousand 
are dead? No. And yet you will come to towne then, 
and when here is the more stirre, here will be the 
more stinke. 
 
But why did not my stinkes kill you before now? 
[/6./] 
 
Because (say you) God gaue not the Word. 
[/7./] 
 
Why doth not then the most stinking places (as the 
[/8./] 
shambles) infect first, now God hath given the word? 
 
Because God will not haue it so, you will say. True, 
[/9./] 
by the same reason you may be saved heere, and die 
there, or heere when you come backe, because God 
will haue it so. 
 
But you will say, if it comes not onely by such 
[/10./] 
meanes, why happens it vpon the Citie rather then 
the Countrey? 
 
Because God is ever liberall of favours toward great 
[/11./] 
Congregations, his favours are more plentiful, more 
[^p.14^] 
visible, and men are more sensible of them. And 
therefore you shall finde the Apostles (for the most 
part) dedicating their Epistles to Citties; and the 
Prophets likewise bending their Prophesies thereto. 
Now where he is most plentiful in these, he is also of 
his corrections. So to Israel; no people better fed, 
better taught, soundlier whipt. And it is most equall, 
[/14./] 
that when men abuse [^GREEK OMITTED^] the cleare word of life, 
they should haue [^GREEK OMITTED^] the bemudding 
Word of death. 
 
Secondly, It is done to the Citie for the Countreys 
example, that the Pagi, and the Villages round about 
might tremble, and that the Pagani thereof might 
leaue off their Paganish conversation, and stand in awe 
and sinne not: which thing if they doe not, though we 
haue the sharpe ends of the Rod, they may haue (as 
heretofore) the stumps. Mistake me not; I doe not 
hope for it, I feare it. For remember when God afflicted 
vs the last time, when we had Zijm, had not 
you Iim? When we had the Scritchowle, had not you 
the night Raven? When we had the Pestilence, had not 
you the Plague also? You had; and you did taste of 
mine infirmitie. 
 
Therefore consider what I haue declared of it, and 
vse all good medicines, but aboue all medicines take 
Faith, Hope, and a good Conscience. You shall find them 
(my deare children) of more force then the greatest 
Antidote. Remember the promise of God in that 
[/13./] 
91. Psalme, 14, 15, 16. verses, count it precious, let it 
be thy Buckler, as it is in the fourth verse. Mollerus on 
that Psalme saith, Eos qui certa fide in Deum recumberent 
tutos fore a pestis sevitia, that those which trust in 
[^p.15^] 
God shall be free. So M=r= Cupper on the same Psalme. 
And S=t= Chrysostome on the same Psalme saith, Securus 
habitat in terra, & prolixam vitam inveniat, He shall 
dwell secure, and find a long life, but totum hoc fit per 
spem, saith he. True it is, for we see some scape fire 
and sword with boldnesse, others overcome their enemies 
with fortitude, and shall not the Quintessence 
of fortitude, the spirit of valour (which is confidence in 
God) doe much more? Doth not godlinesse profit to all 
[/14./] 
things, both to this life and that which is to come. 1 Tim. 4. 
8? If any one obiect, that godly men die of it, it is true, 
doth God deceiue their trust in that? No. He giveth 
them life, and a better life. For God will not be stinted 
to temporaries by his owne children; and if he 
takes one away in this mind, I hope he doth him no 
wrong. Some wicked men you will say scape too. 
That is, because God will be better then his word to 
all men, that the mouths of all men may be stopped. 
He spares evill men somtime, that they may fulfill 
their sinne; he takes away the good from the evill to 
come. And this is thy encouragement, that if he 
spares of both sorts, why not thee, if thou stayest in 
thy place, and necessary calling? But thou fearest to 
die, because neither prepared in faith nor profession. 
Therefore I conclude my disease to be sore, as to be 
most infectious, yet God can restraine it, and though 
he hath sent out his evill Angell, yet I will trust in the 
good Angell of the Covenant. Doe you so likewise, that 
you may be partaker of my faith, not mine infirmitie; 
and cry, O Lord, thou hast beene our refuge from 
one generation to another. You haue seene my infirmitie, 
the nature of it, the principall remedie against it. 
[^p.16^] 
What els is to be vsed in naturall cure against naturall 
infection, I leaue to your learned and graue brothers 
of Physicke. I haue prescribed that, which never failed 
Probatum est. Iames 5. 17. 
 
[/15./] 
But this is not all my trouble, for my sorrowes are 
increased like my sinnes: sicknesse hath consumed 
my substance; and I may iustly say with David, I am 
weake and poore. 
 
[^Beginning of a flowchart figure.^] 
My povertie lyeth in being voyde of 
	Trading. 
	Money. 
	Victuall. 
[^End of a flowchart figure.^] 
 
All which I am well-nie destitute of at this time. 
This I confesse to be iustly inflicted on me for my 
pride, with which I haue sought to out-face heaven. 
My tinckling feete, and my tiptoe pace, my horned 
Tyaraes, and crisped curled lockes, shinne-pride, 
and shooe-pride, fullnesse of bread hath made me 
lift my heele against my Maker. I said in my prosperitie, 
I should never be moved; but thou O Lord hast turned 
thy face, and I am troubled. My children haue bin 
so full fed, that they haue fallen out among themselues, 
the meanest thinking himselfe as good as the 
Magistrate, and the mightie refusing to looke vpon 
the cause of the meane. My Marchants haue beene the 
Companions of Princes, but now are gone, their place is 
scarce to be found. How hath my backe groaned 
with heavie burdens, and now Isachar stands still for 
want of worke. One waine may carry all I sell in a day. 
I haue had such trading that I could scarce find time 
to serue God, but now every day is an holy-day, because 
I haue prophaned his Holy-day (even his blessed 
Sabbath) which hath beene dedicated to him, as a remembrance 
of his glorious resurrection. But I haue lyen dead 
[^p.17^] 
in sinnes and trespasses. I haue given libertie to my 
servants to execute their wills in Sabbath-breaking, and 
deceiving: now God hath proclaimed libertie for 
them to the Pestilence, to wandring, to idlenesse. My apprentices 
haue beene the children of Knights and 
Iustices of the Countrey, (which they accepted at my 
hands joyfully) but now my Children are cast out 
by those swaines like dung, rated like beggars, served 
like swine in hog styes, buryed in the high way like malefactors. 
But whither doth my griefe transport mee? 
This the Countrey shall heare off hereafter. 
 
I haue opened my Coffers to the Countries wants 
full often, and haue some of their Worships in bonds 
still, but now I want it for my poore Children, and 
they neither looke to discharge their debt, nor in requitall 
of my kindnesse will shew pittie to my dispersed and 
despised Children. 
 
I haue had feasts admired at, whose very sight 
hath cloy'd the appetite, and my very reason hath 
turned Cooke to cocker the palate of my Wantons, I 
would those feastings had stocked my poore kindred 
in my Suburbes, and set them to worke, that 
there might be no complaining in my streets: with which 
sacrifice God would be well pleased. The worst servant 
in my house hath had bread enough, and now I starue 
for hunger: for many of my Children cry for bread, & 
I feare me die of the stomacke sicknesse, as well as the 
spotted sicknesse, if there were a Bill could be gotten 
of all diseases. Davids teares are my repast; his sighs 
my repose. Iobs message is the newes most rife on my 
Exchange. One Countrey robs me of my Asses, another 
of my Cammels; my sheepe are consumed, my children 
[^p.18^] 
are bruised, my selfe strucken with boyles & soares. 
I see nothing but my nakednesse. Those great Gates, 
which were wont to be furnished with spangled 
star-like beauties, are now the lodging for poore 
Children, or places for dung and draught. My Chamber 
and Treasury, which was wont to be my refuge, 
can no more supply my wants, it hath been so swept; 
Beside, the stocke of my Corporations hath beene broken 
to maintaine my wants, and yet my Children 
cry for bread: and their brethren that remaine are 
pressed with their maintenance, and vrged almost 
beyond their abilitie to find them necessaries. 
 
This misery makes me againe remember my folly, 
who haue wished for some meanes that might 
consume some of my Children, I being not able to 
maintaine them. And God hath now sayd Amen to 
my vngracious desires; for he hath taken them away 
who might haue served for my defence. And now I 
see, when God sends mouths, He sends meate also, 
for though I haue buried so many thousand, I haue 
nothing more then I had in wealth, or trading; Nay, 
there are many who would be glad their houses 
were visited, that they might be kept by the Parish, 
because they haue nothing to eate. Yet I haue some 
wicked wretches, who haue learned of some Countrey 
farmers when they want, to grumble against God for 
something, and when they haue Gods plentie to murmur 
for nothing. For their eye is evill because Gods is 
good. 
 
When they haue Corne enough, they say it is 
worth nothing, and they can make no money of it: 
but they can make themselues Curses with it, for 
[^p.19^] 
hording it vp, when they should make bread of it for 
the poore. If they haue bread for their Babes, and 
food for their Hinds, and provision for their Beasts, 
and a reasonable price for the remainder; haue they 
not sufficient? Yes more then they deserue, vnlesse 
the Pillory. Such as these haue helped to hale a 
Curse from God, and by their meanes it is I am so 
leane in lookes, so lanke in purse, so emptie in stomacke. 
But I haue deserved my selfe more then all 
these punishments doubled, yet shall they scape who 
helpe to encrease them? No. That is my feare, that 
God hath not yet done, and my griefe, that mine 
owne Children should farther prouoke him, and 
helpe to aggravate my sorrowes. 
 
For I am not onely weake by sicknesse, poore, being 
destitute of meanes; but forsaken, being desolate 
and forlorne of Company. But here lyes my 
Comfort. The poore shall not alwayes be forgotten; the 
[/16./] 
expectation of the needie shall not perish for ever. And 
although it may be asked in respect of my Babylonish 
sinnes, how is that golden Cittie ceased? Yet I haue 
this hope in Gods mercy, that the first borne of the poore 
[/17./] 
shall feede, and the needie lye downe in safetie. For as 
Saint Austine hath it, Pauper est in animo Dei, non 
in sacculo; the poore is in Gods minde, not in his 
purse, so that his purse may be scattered vpon the 
rich, but his minde runs on the poore. 
 
But yet who would thinke Children should be 
[/18./] 
so vnkinde to a Mother, who hath educated them 
in the knowledge of God, and in the experience of 
her bosome loue, to let their Mother be forlone of 
Company. My company that I stand in neede of, 
[^p.20^] 
[^Beginning of a flowchart figure.^] 
but want; are 
	Ministers. 
	Physitians. 
	Traders. 
[^End of a flowchart figure.^] 
 
The one would helpe me being soule-sicke, the other 
being body-sicke, the third being belly-sicke. 
There are others, whom I finde missing too, as my 
Lawyers, by whose Science it hath beene spoken of 
[/19./] 
me as it was of the Citie Abell: They shall aske counsell 
at Abell, and so they ended the matter. But these 
my Sonnes of late time, haue robbed me of that 
good report, and it is said now, If they aske counsell at 
London, so they may begin the matter, but let it end 
when it will. These men I misse, but I doe not want 
them, except onely the Maister Bees, I could spare 
the swarme of them, especially the waspes, that doe 
little but sting, & sucke honey. I doe not meane them, 
that doe Ius dicere, or Ius dare, but those that doe Ius 
esse, swallow the Law, but not Ius edere, bring little 
to light; those that fill Westminster Hall so full of 
Cobwebs, though (as they say) it be built with Irish 
wood, wher no Spiders will endure: It may be so, 
for all the Spiders are below. I blame not these for absence, 
because many of them be imployed by my Royall 
Soveraigne, and the Father of my Countrey. And I 
know that their judicious Consultations may benefit 
me wheresoever they are. 
 
There be others whose company I misse, namely, 
those that should haue an eye to their Ward, that it 
may be defended from misery or disorder this sicknesse 
time. Whose very housekeeping might haue relieved 
some, refreshed others: but their countenance 
and good example in fasting and praying, would 
[^p.21^] 
haue encouraged all. But they are gone and left the 
burthen vpon one Magistrate and a few Assistants, 
whose care can extend but to his owne abilitie, except 
his power can command them to stand to their 
charge as he doth. But they sit in the Countrey secure, 
and thanke God they are there. Indeed if they 
had stayed here, pitying my distresse, ayding me in 
weaknesse, by disbursing their money, and exercising 
their places, and afterward (when God had 
ceased his hand, & they given him condigne thanks 
for his mercy) they then solacing themselues in the 
pleasant shades, might thanke God for his preservation, 
and their recreation with a safe conscience. But to 
thanke God for his Connivency in their naturall courses 
(except for his mercy that therein they be not 
consumed) is false fire, and savors more of the Kitchin 
then the Conscience. Let them thanke their Coach-horses, 
for I haue so fed their Masters (for the most 
part) that I am sure they could never haue gotten 
halfe so farre without them. 
 
But the higher my childrens groanes rise, the more 
I looke about me, and the more helpe I still misse. 
Where be my Chyrurgions now, that can mortifie 
and revive a wound when they list; and rub over an 
old soare, and picke many a pound out of the paring of a 
mans toe, that can scarrifie a greene wound, and cauterize 
an old one? Where is the ayde I should haue of 
these skilfull men? These are shivers in their kind: 
but at this time they had rather carue at a Capon, or 
Anotamize a Rabbet, then Lance a soare, and doe their 
dutie out of a good Conscience to their sicke Mother. If 
a man that is hanged fall to their share, who but they 
[^p.22^] 
to cut and carue! but to what purpose thinke you? 
As the Priest did of old, Pectoribus inhians spirantia 
consulit exta, gape vpon his gutts, and then make 
good cheare for their owne. These haue the termes 
of Art explained, the secrets of Nature opened, but to 
what purpose, if it be done to admiration rather then 
operation; and to shew the worke of Nature, and yet 
not to helpe Nature? For now I stand in neede, I am 
poasted from the Physitian to the Chyrurgion, by the 
Chyrurgion left to the Barber; where, if I will wash, and 
be gon, and so forth, I may, he can doe no more. 
 
But I did suppose, that my Physitians would not 
haue stirred. Men that haue Antidotes at command, Electuaries, 
Pomanders, and what not, whole Apothecaries 
shoppes full of Conceits and Receipts, to keepe all the 
Cinque-Ports of mans bodie inviolable. Or if a man be 
sicke, they can, or who can (vnder God) restaure nature, 
and restore health? They haue many Powders and 
Antidotes for other men, or for their mony, but none 
to strengthen their owne heart, so much as to stay in 
a Cittie where the Plague is. To these men belongs 
that saying, Luk. 4. 23. Medice cura teipsum. And this 
question which was most noysome, Iobs disease, or the 
Plague: and this demand, which conduceth most to 
salvation; the opinion of a Naturian, (the Plague is infectious) 
or the prescription of Divinitie (he that hath 
an office let him waite on his office.) If you thinke the 
latter, hoc age et vive, our blessed Saviour shall approue 
you, When I was sicke, you visited me. Why are 
we bidden to honor them? Because, saith the Sonne 
of Syrach, They be ordeined for thy health. Are they so? 
the more vncharitable and vnconscionable they to 
[^p.23^] 
leaue me in this distresse. But since I haue set them on 
Horsebacke, they are rid away. My Saviour said, that the 
sicke needs the Physitian, not the healthfull. Yea but 
they say, the Physitian now stands in no need of the 
sicke, for he hath filled his purse, and is gone. Oh sweet 
Samaritane, if thou haddest done so to them or me, 
when thou foundest me lying in the high way to hel 
and death, what had become of vs? Well, had I but 
for all this the Priest to stand by me in this Leprosie, 
I could haue borne it: but as a wounded spirit none can 
beare, so neither can I suffer the losse of my spirituall 
salue: I blame not you, that haue two cares, and two 
cures, (for you are gone every Summer to discharge 
your office to your Countrey sheepe, and when that 
is done, I know you will returne) but you haue no 
charge to pay your charges but my purse. 
 
And especially you that leaue your Pastorall charge 
in the Countrey, taking vp your Litter (Lecture I 
should say) and yet Litter as you vse it, making of 
London a Station till your owne ends be achieved, or till 
some crosse befall me, and then you are gone. Nay, 
because you would not be said to forsake my people, 
you haue sent my people away before with your 
great perswasions to flie. You loue not two Livings till 
you haue them, but a Living and a Lecture, is an easie 
taske, because they are not two cures of Soules, and it 
is true; for one is a wounding of Soules for want of cure. 
 
But this may be defended you thinke, for there is 
much difference betweene the Temple, and the gold of 
[/20./] 
the Temple in Swearing, so it may be there is in Preaching. 
He that hath the charge of two Temples, that 
is something; but he that is called to one, and takes 
[^p.24^] 
the gold of another or two, with neglect of his owne; 
that is nothing: for my money may be taken, and 
your sheepe left vpon the Downes in the Countrey, 
with any Hireling that will doe it cheapest. And 
though my Cittie-children lye sicke, and so the rest 
wants foode it matters not, you haue other sheepe 
then, let the Parson looke to these, say you, let the 
Physitian, saith he, let the Chyrurgion, saith he, let the 
Curate, saith he, and so with Iob I am brought to the 
Ash-heape. But if my children would be ruled by me, 
they shall choose such as will stand to their Teaching, 
and them also; in life and death, sicknesse and in health, 
doing their dutie out of a good Conscience. 
 
But let me not condemne the just with the vnjust. 
There are some of this reverent profession, who are 
worthy of double honour, who haue abode with me in 
temptations, the Lord shew mercy to them, and to those 
worthy Physitians, who haue not beene ashamed of 
my bonds, nor childishly affrighted at my infirmity. 
And those Chyrurgions who haue addicted the~selues 
to my health, the Lord remember them when they 
are in trouble; with all the rest, who haue with me 
humbled themselues vnder Gods hand, and administred 
sweet comfort when it was bitternesse with me. My 
respectfull eye shall ever be vpon them, and their 
names as occasion shall serue, exalted to my power, 
and that beyond ordinary discourse. Especially those 
Aarons, who haue stood betwixt the living and the 
dead. In meane time, accept these ejaculations to 
God for you in requitall: The Lord heare you in the 
day of trouble, the name of the God of Iacob defend you, 
strengthen you when you lye sicke vpon your bed, and deliver 
you not vnto the will of your enemies. 
 
[^p.25^] 
But would one thinke my Tradsmen should goe, 
if but for their profit sake. But the Devill knows their 
minde, that skin for skin, and all that a man hath, he will 
giue for his life. But yet Gods servants haue ever preferred 
his service, their calling; before their owne 
liues. Moses would rather suffer affliction with his brethren, 
then liue in Pharaohs Court. Vriah would not lye 
with his wife, nor eate, nor drinke vnto mirth, while Gods 
Host was in the field. And Salomon saith, it is better to goe 
to the house of mourning then feasting. But these are all 
too little to perswade you, till I set before you your 
faults, as well as mine owne defects. 
 
[^Beginning of a flowchart figure.^] 
Which are these 
	Vnkindnesse. 
	Vncharitablenesse. 
	Distrustfulnesse, 
[^End of a flowchart figure.^] 
 
Your vnkindnesse appears in these foure particulars: 
First, in disgracing me; Secondly, in your Countrey 
merriment; Thirdly, in your leaving me desolate; 
Fourthly, in not paying your debts. 
 
Your disgrace appears in leaving my streets bare, 
[/21./] 
my Temples emptie, my shops shut vp. My Cheapside that 
hath bin my Plate Cup-boord, hath scarce a stall-cloath 
to defend it from the common inquination of ordinary and 
durtie rootes. Beside, you haue made my savor to stinke 
in the Countrey through your rashnes, and their ignorance. 
Secondly, your vnkindnesse appeares in your 
iocound behaviour in the Countrey, at whose lightnesse 
those Sylvans wonder, as at people more vnnaturall 
then themselues. Me thinkes you should feare 
least benumming death might creepe on your angles 
(which I see co~veyed along my streets for your pleasure) 
like the sleepie venome of the Cramp-fish. Or 
[^p.26^] 
[/22./] 
while you shoot in pastime, you should feare least the arrow 
that flyes by day should ayme at you in earnest. You 
bewray the weaknesse of your affection to me, and 
your fellow brethren, your vnsensiblenesse of Gods 
hand, and your shallownes in Religion, even by this. 
Thirdly, haue you not adventured me to the common 
spoyle? If God did not watch the Cittie; If I had not 
[/23./] 
one Sonne left whose care hath shewed him a Father 
to me, how might my doores be broken open, my 
Chests ransackt, mine Obligations torne, my Bonds 
canceld: you will not beleeue this, yet some of you 
(I feare me) will be sensible of it. God continue him 
in this care, and reward him for it. You haue fastned 
your dores with Padlockes, some haue Powder to blow 
them open. When you returne, complaine not what 
you haue lost; least I smile at your folly, and seeme 
to pittie your misfortune. Fourthly, haue you not 
left some of your debts vnpayd, by which I should 
be relieved, never considering what may become of 
you and yours; and then how your Creditors hearts 
must be turmoyld to seeke after their owne. Hath not 
many of you carried away the better part of your estates 
in money, and sowed them by the high-way as the 
Lord hath scattered your bodies? I could name some, 
but time will bring them to light. 
 
To this adde you vncharitablenesse, and then see 
[/24./] 
whether I speake without cause, which first appeares 
in not relieving the poore, who like a Cripple cannot 
follow your nimble Coursers. I am not ignorant 
that some haue given out of their superfluitie, others 
out of pure charitie, but the most haue not: and so 
the little which is left, is consumed, and like Pharaohs 
[^p.27^] 
kine, we seeme never the fatter; for what is this 
among so many? 
 
Secondly, It shewes it selfe in condemning the 
poore; (that they are so obvious to the Plague) as 
if God had a quarrell against none but them. I know 
they are, for the most part, ill livers, intemperate of 
tongue, and appetite, grosse feeders; and such as disorderly 
thrust themselues into danger, all this may conspire 
to their ruine, by preparing their bodies for other 
diseases as well as the Plague: for this disease 
takes hold on them more then others, because they 
be most in number: but my penny-fathers haue not 
all scaped it, nor the finest feeders, and therefore your 
judgement of the poore is somewhat too harsh. 
 
Thirdly, It appeares in not assisting me in your 
prayers. It may be you will say, that you doe in private: 
if I had seene it here, I would haue more easily 
beleeved it: for many of you are gone, where you 
haue no Preaching, nor yet orderly prayers, or at least 
but leane Sermons, though you haue fat pasture. And 
how you will forget your dutie, when you are not 
taught it, I may justly feare. 
 
Other inconveniences you haue brought about, as, 
discouraging those that stay, they weakly conceiving 
that they are but dead men. Some are of a stronger 
temper, but yet Comes in via pro vehiculo est; your 
company might haue beene a great ease vnto them. 
 
Againe, by your departing indiscreetly, how haue 
you disioynted the Countrey with feare, procured rough 
vsage to your selues, and caused me to fare the worse for 
your sakes; for I can scarce get provision from the 
Countrey, and so my misery is doubled. 
 
[^p.28^] 
[/25./] 
But though you haue forsooke me, I could never 
thinke you would haue forsaken your God, but rather 
received evill at his hands as well as good. But you 
[/26./] 
haue either in this, distrusted Gods will, that he will 
not saue you, or els his power that he cannot saue 
you, the Plague being a disease of a depopulating nature; 
or els you mistrust that this Plague came by 
some accident; and so it doth Catch that catch may, 
every one that comes neere it. But my Saviour saith, 
that a sparrow falls not to the ground without the 
will of your heavenly Father. But you will say, that 
you take your flight as a meanes to bring Gods will 
to passe in saving you: you say well, if you can proue 
it. Doe you thinke that God will saue none that stay? 
Or that he will spare all you that be abroad? I dare 
not say so. I feare you would faine wrest Gods will to 
yours. I grant that evill things comming from the 
hand of God, may and ought to be avoided when 
God shewes a man a gap to goe out at; but this must 
not be the gap of our own Phantasie. When God leaues 
a man a lawfull gap, he doth not crosse some positiue 
point of Religion. And if the case be doubtfull, 
then are we to bend our selues to that course, which 
may sute best with the Analogie of Faith, and not to 
our owne particular, except that particular hold also 
in as full grounds of Religion, as the other course. 
Therefore in all such passages we are to obserue, that 
what we doe be not against pietie, charitie, nature, civill 
policie: as that we decline not from God, from our 
neighbour, from our kindred, nor from the Common-wealth. 
 
[^p.29^] 
And these wholsome Rules, my reverent Sonnes 
haue laid downe in former times, though misconceived 
of some of their followers, who willing to 
please their owne nature, haue catched something 
from them, not observing their whole intent. I make 
no doubt, but in generall, and open punishments you may, 
and ought to shift for your selues by removall, as in famine 
Abram did; and in persecution from one Cittie you may 
flie to another, saith my Saviour. But in an vncertaine 
punishment (wherein none can assure themselues 
absolutely in going or staying, or life and death) 
when Religion and Nature rather invites vs to stay, 
it is vaine feare to flie, or els selfe-loue without religious 
respect; except you be such an one as by flight 
neither hurteth other nor others. Or els you be such 
[/27./] whose residence is not necessary. But who are vnnecessary 
(if they be members of a Co~mon-wealth) 
I know not, except women, and young children, and 
some servants, or soiourners, or Gentlemen, who 
haue no relation to me as necessary members. For 
if you thinke the rich men may goe, then hath the 
middle sort little to doe; so that in fine, they will not 
finde themselues very needfull: and let them goe too 
and then others shall haue nothing to doe: and then 
I shall haue none left but the poore, nor of them but 
onely such as can make no scape into the Countrey, 
and so the subiect of the Physitian and the Minister 
being almost gone, there will be little need of them 
too. And for the Magistrate, it will scarce be worth 
his paines; he may appoint an vnder-officer to keepe 
the poore folkes in order. But a Common-wealth 
is a body, and one member me thinkes should nourish 
[^p.30^] 
another; but especially in a Christian Common-wealth. 
[/28./] 
For as Iob speakes in his owne person, a man 
in misery should be comforted of his neighbours, but men 
haue forsaken the feare of the Almightie: the latter part 
of the verse I may say with him concerning you: 
You were ever taught to stand to your calling; especially 
in a doubtfull, and invisible Correction. 
 
One of my worthy Sonnes, a Doctor of Physicke, 
did much blame you the last Plague, for your vnnaturall 
starting one from another. And as I remember 
these were his words: [/29./] It remaineth that acknowledging 
the Pest his Contagion, we notwithstanding (who 
are Christians) carefully avoyde that faithlesse and Paganish 
fearefulnesse, whereby we are made to breake all 
the bonds of Religion, Consanguinitie, Alliance, Friendship, 
and Policie. So that you see how carefull they 
were, and yet how head-strong you haue beene. We 
doe the Pagans wrong to put this fearefulnesse on 
them, for they striue to doe the vttermost duties to 
the sicke, and the dead. It is now Christian fearefulnesse, 
the more our shame. 
 
Some of you will say, that God it may be sent it 
to scatter the Cittie, and punish the pride thereof 
that way: that is hidden from thee, though likely: 
but thou knowest, that God vseth to send crosses for 
sinne, and yet withall to try vs whether we will cleaue to 
him or no. But you haue forsaken him, his Word, and 
me also. Some I feare will aske, Why may not they 
flie as well as the King and State, (indeed some haue 
beene forwarder then his Maiestie in that businesse) 
their liues are as deare to them? Oh remember what 
[/30./] 
Davids Worthies said vnto him, Thou art worth ten 
[^p.31^] 
thousand of vs, he that thinkes not so, knoweth not 
what the light of Israell meaneth. The King is the 
[/31./] 
head and tower: the Councell is the heart of a Land, 
and ought to be defended from diseases, least the life 
be endangered. Beside, their affaires are such as that 
they may be considered off in other places as well as 
here. For want of these considerations I am almost 
beggered, I was at a low ebbe before, but now it is full 
floud with me, but of miserie. I haue scarce a rag left to 
hang on me. For my Woolen Drapers are departed, 
Watling streete is like an emptie Cloyster. And for 
Linnen Drapers, London may grow Lowsie, if shee be 
not the better provided before-hand. In Cheapside, 
one can scarce change a peece of Gold (for a penny 
profit) through the whole rowe. And if I want Spice 
to make comfortable Broth, I must stay the returne of 
the next voyage; for the Grossers are gone also. 
 
Thus am I left disconsolate, because God hath touched 
me; and as Euripides, [^GREEK OMITTED^], 
every friend shuns the distressed, but if I should 
so deale by you, (whose servants are dead, whom 
you set to keepe your goods) all might run to ruine. 
But I haue not so requited you, nor will, while I am 
am able to helpe you. For though you haue forsaken 
me, yet my God hath not, and therefore for his 
sake, I cannot but loue you, and wish you well; and 
I pray God that a feare of no worse thing driue you 
home, then that which hath driven you abroad. 
 
But now I remember where you are, and how both 
you and I haue beene abused by those rough hewen 
and vnnaturall Idumeans (who haue neither knowledge 
in, nor sense of your brother Iacobs afflictions) 
[^p.32^] 
I cannot shew my Comfort in God, nor my Counsell 
to you, till I haue vttered my stomacke to them, 
whom I condemne of ignorance and hard-heartednesse. 
 
[/32./] 
First, of ignorance, I might say of manners, but that 
you will grant at the first word; or of crueltie, but that 
appeares plaine enough; I might say of covetousnesse, 
as hording of Corne, but you are contented to be 
convinced of that, so you may get my money. But I 
say I condemne you of ignorance, which is the fountaine 
of all this misdemeanor. For you are ignorant, 
first, of God, and secondly, of Gods hand, and that appeares, 
by your strange fables of the Plague, as if God had 
no stroake in that disease, till you feele it. You more 
reverence the Clouds, then the Creator; and haue better 
skill in the Weather, then the Scripture. You Hypocrites 
can discerne the face of heaven, but not the season, 
nor the time of Gods visitation. Many of you suppose 
God to be an old man in heaven, and thinke the times 
were never good since your hens left laying so many egges, 
that made your heads addle ever since. Like those Iewes, 
that thought it a fine time when they offered Cakes to 
the Hosts of Heaven. You are afraide to doe good, least 
God should not marke you, and if you doe evill, you 
cry, God sees not, neither doth he vnderstand. Some of 
you I confesse to be better learned, by the paines of 
your carefull Ministers, but yet many of you also, are 
ignorant of charitie toward them whom God hath afflicted. 
 
[/33./] 
How could it els come to passe, that you are so shie 
both of them vntouched, and me being visited, and to others 
of my Children distressed. Some of those, who are 
[^p.33^] 
whole, you haue locked vp in houses, debarring them of 
things necessary, and the libertie of ayre, walkes, and the 
Church. Some you haue imprisoned, I hope they will 
know by what Statute, if you haue done as the report 
goes. Them that are visited, you will not suffer to haue 
attendance, but they must lye comfortlesse, and dye 
desperate of all helpe in this world. They whom God 
smites by the way, you let them dye in ditches, or draw 
them to a hole like dogs; and this (I perceiue) you 
would not doe, but for feare their carkasses should 
infect your ayre. But if God should suffer the Devill 
to haunt those places, for such inhumane vsage, 
then you will remember your crueltie. For no sinne 
will astonish you, but Buggs it may be, would affright 
you. But I feare, God hath worse rods in pickell for 
you then so, though they will sute well to the knowledge 
and beliefe of many of you. 
 
But your Iustices, whose name doth import square 
dealing, would never sinke into my minde, to be the 
Authors of all this discourtesie, and vnchristian dealing, 
till I heard the Countrey-people relate plainely 
to me, that they were warned by those profound and 
admired Iustices, that none of them should dare to 
come and convey any reliefe vnto London, vpon 
paine of being shut vp foureteene dayes, oh rare providence; 
and this was confirmed by their Worships 
hands, oh fearefull warrant; and published as a Proclamation, 
oh grand States-men; But therefore I flie 
to Cæsar, as the woman of Samaria, crying; Helpe my 
[/34./] 
Lord oh King. For I will not beleeue, that this strictnesse 
is from thee, neither can I thinke that thou art 
willing; nay, I know thou art not willing, that I 
should be Plagued and starved at once. 
 
[^p.34^] 
Oh you Pagans, can you be so cruell to a Mother in 
Israell, to whom the proudest of you haue beene beholding 
either for Coyne or Counsell? Worse then 
[/35./] 
Barbarians, for they would comfort poore ship-wrackt 
Paul, and though they misconceived him while the Viper 
was vpon him, yet they thrust him not out till they saw 
farther: and so you, when my disease hath left me, 
will come fawning vp to me, and offer me your service: 
but I shall beleeue you at leisure; you will vrge 
some bald excuse or other, for this vnkindnesse at 
your lodgings (which if I can bring to passe, shall be) 
at the Saracens head, because you haue shewed your 
selues Pagans. As for your followers, they may lye 
in their throate, or any where with your Worships 
permission; I feare me few such as you will be approved 
at Gods barre, and bench for this: When I was sicke you 
visited me. But if you haue a botched horse with his 
backe full of vlcers, you can finde a Farrier to cut out 
the exorbitant flesh: but let a Sonne or a Daughter of 
Abraham dye for want of tendance. If one of you 
haue an Oxe or an Asse in a ditch, you will helpe 
him out, (and may, though it were the Sabbath day 
in case of necessitie) but you can giue warrants to let 
your Brother Christians die in a Ditch. Your Innekeepers 
professe Hospitality; and if a man will, he 
may drinke like a Swine: but if the afflicted of God 
desire repast, or repose, they must lye with the Swine. 
If their Chambers reeke with smoke of Erebus, and 
stinke (like a dead Dog) of spewing; that is not infectious 
because they are vsed to it. But if a Christian come 
from me weary with trauaile, though he hath no 
disease, yet he is kept out with Bills least his breath 
[^p.35^] 
should infect their stinking roomes. 
 
Some of them can keepe a Fox in a Coverlet, and a 
Whore in a Closet whose soule already hath burst 
forth often with Odious soares, and Infectious swellings, 
but they can make no shift for a sicke Body, 
whose soule would bankrupt them to imitate the 
patience thereof vnder Gods hand; but they must 
drop downe without commiseration. Doe you neither 
feare God, nor man that you are thus insolent? 
If a man dye he must be dragged, at a Horse tayle 
like Hector, or drawne with men like Tamberlaine: 
If he liue, he must lye in sollitude, or misery: Oh base 
Heathenisme; vnheard of Barbarisme; I see there is 
no Tyrant like superstitious opinion. If I should giue 
my fury the Bridle, I should set such markes on you 
in this my rage, as a Lyonesse robbed of her whelpes 
would doe, or send out some Satyrs, whose sharpe 
scourge should make you hid your selues. But O 
God thou hast taught me Patience, and I intreate 
thee if I haue offended in this, pardon the exuberancy 
of my passion, which sweles so high to think 
on my Childrens calamity agravated by these mens 
cruelty. I haue now played the part of a weake Woman 
overcome with iniurie, yet I haue not Out run 
the Constable, for he is in the Countrey. 
 
But now I must shew these vnnaturall men (least 
they laugh at my anger, and rejoyce at my tribulation) 
that though I am greeved, I am not discouraged: 
And to my Children, that I loue them, though 
I doe (not without cause) reproue them. I am not 
disheartened, First because I haue hope, that this 
[/36./] 
Plague is Gods purge, to make me more healthie in soule 
[^p.36^] 
and body. In soule for it is good to be afflicted, and those 
whom God loues he chastiseth. I hope it is Gods rod not 
his sword to correct me, not to destroy me: His fire 
to purifie, not to enflame and consume me. 
 
And this not without reason: for, 
 
First this course my God hath vsed heretofore, to 
bring me into the right way. 
 
Secondly, because he hath not given me to slaughter 
of my enemy, nor famine, but hath given me 
hope of the fruites of the earth; and hath taken me 
into his owne hands to chastise me, and I know 
with him there is mercy, and with my Saviour plentious 
redemption. 
 
Thirdly, because he doth it by degrees, as so many 
warnings that I should aske forgiuenesse before he 
strike againe, when as he might consume me at 
once. 
 
Fourthly, because he hath left me as yet the pillars 
of my age, to leane on like Iachin and Booz; good 
Ministers, as monitors to remember me, and good 
Magistrates as Fathers to provide for me. But aboue 
all, the frontispeece of beautie, built vpon these pillars, 
a good and gracious King, whose heart I know, 
and heare, doth pittie my distresse. 
 
Fiftly, I hope it will purge my body from bad 
humors, as vitious persons: Nay, I know it hath already 
of abundance, and the rest will stand (I hope) 
in more awe. 
 
And againe it savours of mercy, in that the poore 
is taken from him, that is to strong for him (namely 
this hard world) and God hath made more 
roome vnder me. And if I provoke him not farther, 
[^p.37^] 
and draw his punishments out longer by distructing, 
or presuming, or for want of repenting, all may turne to 
my good in an extraordinary measure. If my proud 
flesh were but abated, and my pleurisye of vaine desires 
wasted, my stinking weedes extriped, I know the 
Lord can heale me in a trice, and would too, for he 
wils not the death of sinners; and to his Children his 
loue never had beginning, and therefore can never 
haue ending. 
 
Some good men are taken away, and many lay it 
not to heart. I could not well spare them but onely 
for the Lord, heere is so few vpon the earth. But he 
will take them also, least his Children like prodigals 
should assume their portion in this life. Therefore despise 
me not you of Idumea in the Countrey, but marke 
Obediahs Prophecy against them that commiserate 
[/37./] 
not Iacobs affliction. And be not thou a rod, helping 
to beate Gods Children, least my Heavenly Father 
afterward (to shew his loue, and ease my griefe) 
throw that rod into the fire of his furie likewise. 
And say not with thy selfe, that my Children 
brought it to thee, for it was begun this yeare in the 
Countrey as soone as in the Cittie. 
 
Therefore harden not your hearts, but by your timely 
repentance prepare your selues, either to entertaine 
it, or prevent it. And howsoever your weakenesse 
hath prompted you on to vse this violence, yet because 
we are Brethren, and so may continue in Loue, 
and Peace, as well as in profession of truth, my prayers 
shall be poured out for your preservation from 
inward errors, and outward evils. 
 
[^p.38^] 
[/38./] 
And you my deare Children, wheresoever you 
are dispersed, take not too hainously my reproofe, 
since it is just, nor reiect my Counsell, since it is the 
token of my loue. I know your hearts are here, vnlesse 
your treasures are there. Why should they, or 
we be thus seperated, but rather come together, and 
ioyne heart and hand together, and helpe to keepe 
the blowes from one another: or else ease the smart 
of them when they are given by our best charitable 
endevours. I know if all but the poore had gone, 
God would not haue destroyed them all least you 
should want subiects for your charitie. Or if they had 
gone too, yet he would not haue ended his quarrell 
against my walls, but either haue followed you in 
hot pursuit by the way side (as he hath done many, 
or else he would haue waited till you had returned, 
and haue begun againe, least you should haue gloried 
in your owne inventions. 
 
The last of these is yet to be feared. And therefore 
reclaime your erronious confidence in your flight. Else 
though that my heart pant after you, though my 
armes would faine embrace you, yet I loue you so 
well, that I would not draw you to inconveniencie. 
Therefore for your health and preservation thereof, 
by some good Antidote against your change of ayre, 
I referre to your learned brothers of Physicke: not 
that I thinke my whole ayre is infected, or mortall, 
but sickly to any that comes out of a fresher ayre, and 
more dangerous now because you haue somwhat to 
fright you. To strengthen your heart take this Cordiall, 
Repentance, and a good Conscience, vrged from 
Gods mercy, and built on his Word, and well tempered together. 
[^p.39^] 
And for a good Perfume, take the Lords incense, 
[/39./] 
appointed in Exodus, viz. Myrrhe, cleare gumme, 
Galbanum, and Frankensence. Which foure Ingredients, 
haue relation to Prayer and Profession, Faith and 
Charitie. These may be your practise, and your contemplation; 
not to hold to your nose of vaine-glory, or 
hypocrisie, as, Exodus 30. 38. But to offer to God out of 
the Censor of a zealous heart. And then thou shalt smell 
it, and others too, and God be satisfied, and thy 
house well ayred: and then thou mayst returne with 
safetie and comfort. And if God doe touch thee 
with the Plague, thou shalt haue the Pledge of his loue: 
if with the Pest, and not mortally, yet he hath the 
Test and proofe of thee, and thou the proofe and tryall 
of him. If he giue thee the blow of death, and the 
word of life also, he doth thee no hurt. 
 
When thou commest, come with this consideration; 
for it is mine, and I haue found it effectuall: 
Neither would I be rid of his word of life revealed in the 
preaching of the Gospell in my Temples, to be eased of his 
hand of sicknesse on my houses. 
 
Come therefore to your old habitations, not to 
your old sinnes: and as God hath swept my house, 
so desire him to garnish it with vertue, and furnish it 
with graces, Least worse things happen to me and you. 
And glory not in your inventions, or worldly policie, 
or care, but in Gods power and mercy, that we 
may safely reioyce together, and magnifie his great 
Name in his holy Temple. And thinke not they on 
whom the Tower of Siloam fell, were greater sinners then 
the rest of the people, but vnlesse you repent, you will all 
perish. 
 
[^p.40^] 
Neither doe you (my children) which are here 
resident, boast against your weaker brethren: be not 
high minded but feare. Let not the custome of Gods iudgement 
harden thee, but relate vnto thy wandring brethren 
Gods wonders in this iudgement, and mercies in this sicknesse, 
to his glory, and thy comfort, and their encouragement. 
And if there be any evill lurke in thy 
heart, which the broome of Gods wrath hath not swept 
out, repent speedily, least thou brag before the Victory, 
and so God cut thee off suddenly. That so doing you 
may liue in loue and peace together to your liues 
end. 
 
For if this Canker-worme doe no good, he hath a 
Palmer-worme ready to bring famine, if that prevaile 
not, he hath a Catter-piller that vnsensibly shall devoure 
your Common-wealth, and the brother shall 
betray the brother for want of loue, or for loue of 
gaine. If that serue not to reclaime you, he hath Locusts 
of Heretickes, and enemies to extirpe vs, and pill 
vs bare of every good thing; and so what one leaues, 
the other shall devoure. And therefore prevent this 
Morphew that beginnes to spread over my bodie by 
timely repentance, by a seasonable and humble acceptation 
of this kind correction: which God turne 
vnto good, and seale vnto your soules, that the remembrance 
hereof may be a scourge sufficient to 
you vpon every falling into sinne. That your hearts 
may smite you, and you returne before God turne 
vpon you in his iust conceived wrath. Fall not to 
complaining, but to compunction; looke not at the 
deadnesse of trading, but the deadnesse of faith, and 
God shall worke all for the best. 
 
[^p.41^] 
This I wish may be done when you meete, and before 
[/40./] 
you meete. For as David dranke not the water of 
Bethlem, which was bought with bloud (but sacrificed it) 
so neither ought you to bestow our deliverance on 
your ends, but on Gods honor, which hath cost the 
life of so many thousand. In the meane time, the 
Lord keepe you all in soule and body, vntill our 
meeting, and after, even to the comming 
of our LORD IESVS. 
 
[}FINIS.}] 
 
