[^White, John: Prognostication for 1649^] 
 
[}WHITE. 1649. 
 
A Prognostication for 
this Year of our LORD 
CHRIST. 1649. 
Being the next after the Bissextile, 
or Leap-Yeare. 
Wherein is contained the state of 
the whole Year; the disposition of each 
Quarter; and the inclination of the 
Weather for every Quarter of the Moon 
throughout the whole Yeare. 
 
With a Georaphicall Epitomie, of 
the Map of ENGLAND, 
and WALES, &c. 
Also many other things of consequence, 
both pleasant and profitable. 
 
And at the end of the book, is the whole 
Almanack, contained in one Leaf, for this 
Year 1649. which being cut out, is fit to be 
placed in a Table-Booke, Booke 
of Accompt, or other. 
 
By John White, Wel-willer to the Mathematicks. 
 
LONDON, 
Printed for the Company of 
STATIONERS, 1649.}] 
 
[^Omitted a brief chronology of diverse memorable things.^] 
[^Extract 1, ff. B2r-B4r^] 
 
[^f.B2r^] 
[}A breife Declaration of the Disposition of 
the foure Quarters of the Yeare.}] 
 
[}And first of the Spring. 
 
Like to the fragrant Spring doth Youth appeare, 
Young, fresh, and pleasant; so begins the yeare. 
 
Sol in Aries, Taurus, Gemini.}] 
 
AT that time when Golden Phebus 
mounteth the Celestiall Ram, beginneth 
the pleasant and comfortable 
Spring, which wil be this year upon 
Saturday the tenth of March; & then 
he entreth into the first degree of the 
first Equinoxiall, causing the Daies 
and Nights of to be eequall length throughout all the 
World: and this Quarter endeth upon Monday the 
xi. of Iune, in which space of time hee traverseth through 
these three Vernal Signes, Aries, Taurus, and Gemini. 
 
The naturall condition of this Quarter is to be hot 
and moyst, participating of the Sanguine Complexion, 
(signifying Youth,) which humour doth cheifly predominat 
from nine of the clock at night, untill three in the 
morning. Now doth the glorious Sun by his cheerful 
presence comfort and warme the sad and cold Earth, 
causing Trees and Plants to appeare in their beauty: 
Of all other Quarters this is the most wholsome and 
pleasant, being the most convenient time to remove 
Diseases of a long continuance, & to prevent such as are 
likely to ensue. Now do the Birds of the Ayre couple & 
breed, Beasts on the Earth encrease, and Fishes in the 
waters multiply and leave the deepest of the Waters to 
recreate in shallower places. An overwet Spring increaseth 
weedes, causing Fruits to be scarce and rotten 
[^f.B2v^] 
& it is requisite for our healths that wee now use for 
the most part, such things as are of a cold & dry quality, 
and let your Drinkes be more coole and small then in 
Winter: And now is the chiefest time (if necessity 
require) to Bathe, Sweat, Purge, or Bleed. 
 
The usuall Infirmities of this season, are these 
Measels, Small-pocks, Scabbs, Pushes in the face, 
Pestilence, Kings-evill, Agues, Fevers, &c. 
 
[}Of the second part of the Yeare, 
called Summer. 
 
Like the hot Summer, Man is in his prime, 
Stout, bold, and fiery, seeking for to climbe. 
 
Sol in Cancer, Leo, Virgo.}] 
 
SUmmer Quarter beginneth upon the eleventh day 
of Iune, being Munday (which is the longest day 
in the yeare) and endeth upon Wednesday the xii. of 
September, and then the Sun entereth into the first degree 
of the Northerne Tropique of Cancer, and continueth 
his passage through these 3 Solstitial Signes, 
Cancer, Leo, and Virgo. 
 
The naturall condition of this Quarter is to be 
hot and dry, signifying Man-hood, participating of 
the Cholerick complexion, which humour doth chiefly 
reigne from three of the Clock in the morning, till nine 
before noon. The Sun being now at the highest, causeth 
the Dayes to be longest, and the Nights to be shortest: 
Heat is greatest, Floods lowest, Seas quietest; and 
the Winds calmest: The face of the Earth is now 
adorned with flowers in their beauty, & fruits in their 
delicacy, who imparteth of her store to all Creaures 
sensible, for their use and comfort: and the [^ORIG. BLURRED^] 
[^f.B3r^] 
Bees gather their Honey for their future sustenance 
The Naturall heat is now dispersed abroad unto the 
outward parts of the body, and Man is now not so hot 
within as in Winter, nor can he digest such grosse and 
strong Meates as then: Yet are the smallest & coolest 
Drinkes most _[^ORIG. BLURRED^]ing for our healths, and little store of 
Meats best sufficeth Nature, and keepeth the body in 
health: and those which be boyled are the best of digestion 
for weake stomacks; and now use such things as are 
of a cold and moist quality: the Summer over-wet rotteth 
Fruite, and destroyeth Corne. 
 
The infirmities of this Quarter, are Purples, 
Fevers, Pestilence, Agues, paine in the Head and Belly, 
hot Apostumes, Iaundies, &c. 
 
[}Of the third part of the yeare, called 
Autumne or Harvest. 
 
As Autumns Fruits are pluckt, and Leaves decay, 
So Man declines, there's nothing at a stay. 
 
Sol in Libra, Scorpio, Sagitarij.}] 
 
AVtumne, harvest, or the Fal of the Leafe, now disrobeth 
the Earth of her former glory, & taketh its beginning 
on Wednesday the xii. of Septemb. & endeth on 
Tewsday the xi. of Decemb. At the beginning of which 
Quarter the Sun is in the second Equinoctial poynt, 
causing again the dayes and nights to be of an equall 
length: it continueth the time of the Suns passage 
through these three Autumnall Signes, Libra, Scorpio, 
and Sagitari. 
 
By Nature the condition of this Qaurter is to be cold 
and dry, (resembling middle Age) participating chifefly 
of the Melancholy complexion, which humour doth 
[^f.B3v^] 
most; predominat from nine of the clock in the morning, 
till three in the afternoone. Now Grasse is mowed, 
Corne is reaped, Fruites gathered, and the laborious 
Husband-man should now receive some profit of his 
forepassed toyle: (which the Lord of heaven grant for 
the reliefe and comfort of us al;) Flowers [^ORIG. BLURRED^], Leaves 
fall, Floods increase, and all vegetables loose their 
former strength and vigour, and the most part of sensible 
Creatures seek them a shelter against the stormy 
ensuing Winter: Of all the other Quarters of the 
yeare this is the most unwholsome, breeding diseases 
of divers kinds in our Bodies; therefore it is expedient 
to beware of the morning and evening cold, and use 
such things as are of a hot and moist quality. It is now 
a fit time (if need require) to purge, Bath, and Bleed: 
An over-wet Autumne causeth scarcity of fruit, and 
rotteth Grapes, which maketh unwholsome Wines. 
 
The vsuall Sicknesses of this Quarter are many, 
as Fluxes of Blood, sore Eyes, Agues, Melancholy, 
Falling-sicknesse, panies in the Back and Kidnies, 
Emrods, Spleene, the Stone, &c. 
 
[}Of the fourth part of the Yeare, 
Called Winter. 
 
Our Spring, our Summer, and our Autumne past, 
Death like to Winter commeth at the last. 
 
Sol in Capricorn, Aquarius, Pisces.}] 
 
THe Winter Quarter taketh his beginning upon 
Tewsday the xi. of December, and continueth till 
Sunday the x. of March the next ensuing yeare 1650. 
The beginning of this Quarter hath the shortest day & 
longest night in the yeare, and continueth till the sun 
hath made his full revolution through these three Hye 
Signes, Capricorn, Aquarius, and Pisces. 
 
[^f.B4r^] 
By nature this Quarter is cold and moyst, resembling 
old Age, and is of the Flegmatick complexion, 
which humor doth most predominate from three of the 
clock in the after noone, till nine at night. Now doth 
the Seatost Mariners endure many a bitter storme on 
the raging Ocean; for the Winds are high and strong, 
and the Ayre is cold, the vigour & strength of all things 
now waxeth weak and feeble: and the poares of the 
Earth are now encloased, and shut up by the extreame 
coldnesse of the Ayre: Beastes seek for a shelter, Fowles 
flye to the warmest Climates, Serpents betake them 
to their Caves, and the Fishes get into the depest of 
the Waters, and all to shun the extremity of the cold: 
for look whatsoever the cheerfull Spring and comfortable 
Summer did produce and nourish, this Quarter 
doth destroy and vanish; Yet the colder and dryer 
the Winter is, it is the more wholesome for Man and 
Beast: Yet too much cold destroyeth Trees, Plants, 
and Flowers. A wet and warme Winter is a friend 
to Husbandry, but a foe to Nature; yet indifferent 
store of Snow doth ranken the Earth, and preserveth 
Corne. For the preservation of health, it is expedient 
that we should use such Meates as are of a hot and 
dry quality, expelling to cold and unwholsome ayre 
with good Fires, warme Broths, strong Wines, and 
comfortable Drinks; and be carefull to keep your Head 
and Feet from wet and cold: but yet can the stomacke 
digest more grosse and strong Meats then in Summer; 
the reason is, that the naturall heat is driven (by the 
coldnesse of the Ayre) into the inward parts of the body 
to help digestion, and to comfort the vitall Spirits. 
 
The Diseases and sicknesses of this Quarter, are 
these, Coughes, Rhewmes, Doses, Gowtes, Palsies, 
Agues, Cathars sore Eyes, Tootch-ach, Sciaticaes, 
Cramps, Fluxes, &c. 
 
