[^Boyle, Robert: Philaretvs to Empyricus^] 
 
[}Chymical, Medicinal, 
and Chyrurgical 
ADDRESSES: 
Made to Samuel Hartlib, 
Esquire. 
VIZ. 
 
1. Whether the Vrim & Thummim were 
given in the Mount, or perfected by Art. 
2. Sir George Ripley's Epistle, to King Edward 
unfolded. 
3. Gabriel Plats Caveat for Alchymists. 
4. A Conference concerning the Phylosophers Stone. 
5. An Invitation to a free and generous Communication 
of Secrets and Receits in Physick. 
6. Whether or no, each Several Disease hath a Particular 
Remedy? 
7. A new and easie Method of Chirurgery, for the curing 
of all fresh Wounds or other Hurts. 
8. A Discourse about the Essence or Existence of Mettals. 
9. The New Postilions, pretended Prophetical Prognostication, 
Of what shall happen to Physitians, Chyrurgeons, 
Apothecaries, Alchymists, and Miners. 
 
London, Printed by G. Dawson for Giles Calvert at 
the Black-spread Eagle at the west end of 
Pauls. 1655.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 113-132^] 
 
[^p.113^] 
[}PHILARETVS 
TO 
EMPYRICUS.}] 
 
SIR, 
THough I am not ignorant 
that the Secrets 
you possess, are equally 
unknown in their 
compositions, and famed 
for their effects; yet I dare 
confidently expect from your goodness 
and Communication of that 
which was proved so successful in 
the cure of that disease, that the Proverb 
hath listed amongst the inconveniences 
of Wealth. And though 
I doubt not but the charitableness 
of your own disposition, needs no 
[^p.114^] 
Auxiliary motives to obtain the 
grant of so just a favour; yet a desire 
to let you see that Piety and Reason 
are no less your Petitioners in this 
particular, then Philaretus will I 
hope excuse my zeal, if to justifie 
your good nature as well as my request, 
I take leave to represent to 
your consideration, the immensity 
of that goodness, that excludeth not 
its very enemies from its gratious 
effects, and there heapeth benefits, 
not onely where they were never 
deserved, but where they never can 
be returned: this is a noble president 
and fit for your raised spirit; whose 
imitation cannot possibly mislead 
you: since both Gods, Wisdome 
and his happiness, being no less infinite 
than his goodness, places it 
above controversie, that a transcendency 
in the one, is not at all inconsistent 
with the possession of an 
equall degree of the others. Our Saviour 
assureth us, that it is more 
blessed to give than to receive, and 
in effect, we see that God enjoyeth 
a felicity as Supream as any 
[^p.115^] [^Original misnumbered as p.33.^] 
of his Attributes, maketh it his 
continual employment to oblige, 
and that there where he cannot expect 
a Retribution. And therefore 
the more diffused, and the less selfish 
and mercinary our good actions are, 
the more we elevate our selves 
above our own, and the neerer we 
make our approximations to the perfections 
of the Divine nature. But 
to descend from these abstracted 
thoughts into less Platonick considerations, 
we are all acquainted 
with the strong obligation, that not 
charity onely, but bare humanity 
layeth upon us to relieve the distresses 
of those, that derive their pedegree 
from the same father we are 
descended from, and are equal partakers 
with us, of the Image of that 
God, whose stamp we glory in. And 
can we fancy that all the duties of 
charity are fulfilled with the emptying 
the refuse of our servants tables 
into the poor mans basket, and 
flinging a piece of market-money to 
a shivering Beggar? (though we 
deny not those acts their just commendation) 
[^p.116^] [^Original misnumbered as p.134.^] 
no, as our neighbour, 
so far forth as he is afflicted, is the 
object of our charity; so all that we 
are to do, either to remove or sweeten 
that misery, is to be comprehended 
within the Acts of our charity, 
which doth therefore not confine 
us to any particular kinde of assistance 
to our neighbour, that we 
may know it to be our duty to assist 
him in all kinds. Therefore doth the 
Scripture reckon the visiting of the 
afflicted and the prisoners, and the 
comforting of the sick amongst the 
prime and most eminent productions 
of that vertue; and therefore 
our Saviour himself (the exactest 
President sure, of what his whole 
life was a continued practice of) 
did far seldomer employ his omnipotence 
to feed the hungry, then he 
wrought miracles to heal the diseased. 
Certainly the almes of curing 
is a piece of charity, much more extensie 
than that other of relieving; 
since onely beggars are necessitous 
of the last: but Princes themselves 
do often need the former. Why 
[^p.117^] [^Original misnumbered as p.135.^] 
should we think it a greater charity 
(or more our duty) to give a distressed 
wretch shelter from the natural 
cold of the air, than to 
protect him from the aguish icyness 
of the blood? or to shade him from 
the outward salutes of the hot Sun, 
then free him from the inward dog-dayes 
of a burning Feaver? Sure 
this is not a charity much inferiour 
to the preserving of mens lives, to 
restore them that good, without 
which, life it self is but a misery. 
How greatly, and how justly do we 
detest those Usurers, that hoard up 
all their bags from all those uses, 
that onely can give riches the Title 
of a good? And yet the avarice of 
profitable secrets, is by so much 
worse than that of money, by how 
much the buried Treasure is more 
excellent. How universally should 
he be execrated, that in a scarcity 
would keep his Barns cram'd, 
whiles he beholds his pining neighbours 
starving for want of bread? 
And yet the censured Miser cannot 
bestow his corn without losing it; 
[^p.118^] [^Original misnumbered as p.136.^] 
whereas receipts, like Torches, that 
in the lighting of others, do not 
wast themselves, may be imparted 
without the least diminution. Certainly 
if (as a wise man allegorically 
said) he is as much guilty of the extinction 
of a lamp, that denieth it 
necessary oyle, as he that actually 
bloweth it out: they will not have 
a little to answer for, that by a cruel 
refusal of Soverain receipts, permit 
the torments, and the death of thousands; 
they might (without their 
own least prejudice) have prevented, 
that had rather manifest a bad 
nature, than reveal a good secret, 
and hazard the lose of an eternal life 
to themselves, rather than either 
prolong or sweeten a temporal life 
unto others. Lastly, had all men 
been of this Retentive humor, how 
many excellent receipts must they 
themselves have wanted, for which 
they must acknowledge themselves 
beholding unto others? Had all 
men been so covetous of, and in that 
particular, their possessions would 
be, perhaps as narrow as their charity; 
[^p.119^] [^Original misnumbered as p.137.^] 
that costive humor, being not 
more fit to bury than unapt to acquire. 
So that a kind of interest and 
justice as well as charity, seemeth 
to oblige us to make those goods 
communicable, that became ours 
but upon that score. Let us not then 
be less civil to our Posterity, than 
our Predecessors have been to us; 
but conveying to our Succeeders at 
least those benefits we derive from 
our Ancestors; let us not refuse our 
imitation to what we think worthy 
of our applause. 
 
And now Sir, having thus presented 
you with such thoughts of 
mine upon this Subject, as its Nature 
did readly suggest, I shall take 
the liberty succinctly to discuss 
their evasions, that are of a contrary 
sense. And in the first place, I find 
some Physitians objecting, that having 
laid out much of their mony, and 
more of their time, in the search of 
such and such a secret, that discovery 
is now become either their Fortune, 
or their Subsistence, and by consequent 
the divulging it to others, 
[^p.120^] [^Original misnumbered as p.138.^] 
would prove destructive to themselves. 
In this case I must ingeniously 
confess that all I can require is, that 
they deny not those that want it the 
benefit of the Composition, whilst 
that bewrays not the receipt, and 
refuse not to impart the Secret it 
self to those that need it, upon reasonable 
terms: for they that will 
not assent to this, must flie for shelter 
to some other excuse. In the next 
place it is objected by divers, that 
their receipts are of more curiosity, 
or at least have no relation to the 
cure of our Diseases. In which case, 
though I will not precisely exact 
their publication, yet let those 
whose secrets may any other way 
advantage the publick; (since 'tis 
not the kinde so much as the utility 
of our knowledge, that obliges us 
to dedicate it to the publick service) 
Remember his fault that folded up 
his Talent in a Napkin; and fear to 
feel his doom, whose fault they commit. 
Another thing that I must require 
both of these and of the Antecedent 
secretists, is, that they take a special 
[^p.121^] [^Original misnumbered as p.139.^] 
care to have their receipts survive 
their persons, consigning them into 
the hands of some confident or 
other, that they may not follow 
their owners to the grave (where 
next a bad conscience the worst companion 
is a good secret) and give men 
occasion to resemble them to Toads; 
who if we may credit the vulgars 
uncontrouled report, when they feel 
themselves upon the point of dying, 
destroy that Antidotal stone in their 
heads, which is all that is worth any 
thing in them; lest men should have 
cause to vaunt themselves of being 
the better for them; such people 
are in this worse than very Usurers 
and Hogs themselves; that these do 
some kinde of good after their decease, 
but they take a great deal of 
pains to be as little guilty of that 
humanity after they have left the 
world, as they were whilst they lived 
in it. Others there are, that to excuse 
themselves, will tell us, that they 
received their receipts but upon 
condition, and that ratified, perhaps 
with an oath, never to disclose 
[^p.122^] [^Original misnumbered as p.140.^] 
them; or (to give it you in a Periphrasis) 
that never any body should 
be the better for them. To which 
all that I can justly answer is, that if 
this promise have indeed been seriously 
made, it is a greater fault to violate 
it, that it was to make it. Though 
I am apt to believe that if all men 
declined the taking of receipts upon 
these terms, they might have them upon 
better. But by the way I must take 
leave to wonder at their niggard humour, 
that will thus stint their own 
charity, and in the presenting us a 
good, clog it with a restraint, so unsuitable 
to its Nature, that strips it 
of one of its Noblest Prerogatives, 
which is to be diffusive of it self. 
Some I have known, and those too 
conscientious, that alleadge, that the 
easie divulging of receipts, makes 
our Physitians less careful to beat 
about for remedies themselves 
when they find them already 
pared to their hands. To which I 
shall reply, That granting that to 
be true, which is not undisputable, 
it is far better to pleasure some few 
[^p.123^] [^Original misnumbered as p.141.^] 
drones, than venture the perishing 
of whole swarms of Bees. Shall we 
not ease the pains of Legions of anguish 
Christians, for fear of sparing 
the pains of a few undiligent Physitians? 
We know how contrary 
this practice is to his that would 
have spared Sodom it self for the sake 
but of ten good men. Besides that, if 
our Physitians be lazy, so much the 
greater is our necessity of using 
other means of recompence that 
want. Of the like nature with this 
is their excuse, or pretence rather, that 
pretend a fear, that if their compositions 
should come to be divulged, 
they would presently be sophisticated 
or disguised: whereas themselves 
bestow the mixtures in their 
native purity. But thus they decline 
the doing of a certain good 
upon the sore, and perhaps causless 
suspition of a contingent harm; 
grounding their own want of cha-charity, 
upon an uncharitable and 
unlikely apprehension of anothers. 
As if the first inventor of navigation 
should have conceal'd from us that 
[^p.124^] [^Original misnumbered as p.142.^] 
admirable and beneficial Art, for 
fear Pyrates should likewise happen 
to abuse it. Had those Ancient 
Physitians that cure yet in their 
Coffins, and preserve the Lives of 
others after the loss of their own) 
been frighted with these groundless 
jealousies, the Church-yards 
had been frettily throng'd ere this, 
and the dul Sextons spade always 
might be as busie as the Gardners. 
Besides, that 'tis very unlikely, 
there should be then more false receipts 
believed, when there are 
more true ones extant to confute 
them. If men will counterfeit receipts, 
they may easily suppose 
spurious compositions in spight of 
the concealment of the true one: 
but sure the easiest way to prevent 
that kinde of cosenage, is to be so 
liberall of the Legitimate receipts, 
as to make men not to need it. Others 
there are, that promise indeed 
a publication of their secrets, 
but resolve to suspend it till they 
die. 
 
But to omit how much the review 
[^p.125^] [^Original misnumbered as p.143.^] 
and ordering of these secrets, or 
their neglect will either distract or 
trouble us upon our death-bed, and 
not to mention how unfit it is, to 
sow in harvest what should then be 
ready to be reaped; and for a vain 
ostententation to delay both the 
good they might have done all 
their life time, and lose all the 
praises it would justly have deserved; 
To skip all this, I say, how many 
have we noted, whom either an 
unripe Fate would not give respite 
to effectuate those Intentions, or 
the fals usurpations of their Friends 
or Executors, hath cheated of that 
glory themselves might justly have 
expected. Sure these Posthumous 
Treatises on Theames, that have so 
great a tendency to the publick 
good, that are rather the Authors 
dessein than his misfortune, are 
not usually more void of charity 
than Judgement: Since they deprive 
the writer both of praise 
of his labours, and of the possibility 
to reform his errors. Others 
there are, that seek an Apology 
[^p.126^] [^Original misnumbered as p.144.^] 
in telling us that if 'twere any receipt 
of ordinary value, they would 
not scruple at its communication, 
but being a rare and a most excellent 
secret, you must pardon them 
forsooth if they think the~selves only 
worthy its possession. Which is in 
my opinion the very same reason, 
that most should prevail with them 
to disclose it: for the more sanative 
the remedy is, and the greater 
the benefit is, its knowledge may 
afford, the greater obligation lyeth 
upon the owner to impart it, 
since our services will be expected 
proportionable to our abilities. 
For the nature of good is to grow 
greater by extension, but careful 
providence foreseeing how inclinable 
frail men would be to selfishness 
in the dispensation of such 
goods as these, hath most wisely 
provided, that the parting with 
these goods should not prejudice 
their possession, nor liberality impoverish 
him that uses it. Whom 
the Nature of the riches he disperses, 
resembles to the Sun, who 
[^p.127^] [^Original misnumbered as p.145.^] 
though so bountifully he bestoweth 
his Beams on the whole universe 
never findeth a scarcity of them in 
himself: but the much greatest number 
of our secretists doth consist of 
those, who are ashamed to confess 
it, smother their secrets, onely 
that they may be still talked of 
for the sole proprietaries of those 
rarities. But to let thousands perish, 
lest another should have the 
honour of their cure, to endeavour 
rather that our receipts should be 
known by few, then that they 
should cure many, and to prefer the 
vanity of possessing a Rare secret, 
to the satisfaction of having employed 
a successful one, are excuses 
that will hardly pass for currant at 
that great day, when many shall 
be excluded heaven for suffering 
others to be snatcht up thither before 
their natural time, and when 
all men shall be crowned not for 
the excellency of what they have 
done. But because such a kind of 
people, use to be very little toucht 
with considerations of this nature, 
[^p.128^] [^Original misnumbered as p.146.^] 
I shall onely intreat them a little to 
consider whether it be not a greater 
glory to oblige (and have many 
wear ones Livery) than to gain 
the reputation of having buried 
hoards, by keeping ones secrets 
more close than Ingeneers do 
Mines, which the least vent defeats. 
Experience it self can teach us, that 
our Physitians have got more honour 
by those few secrets that have 
died with them: as indeed it is 
not over probable, that closness 
should have like advantages with 
Liberality, in the acquisition of 
esteem and of applause. Lastly, 
some of our Chymists do object, 
that had they in their power that 
great Elixer it self, they call the 
universal Antagonist of all diseases, 
they should think it as unlawful 
to disclose as happy of possess 
it; partly because such extraordinary 
discoveries being rather inspired 
than acquired, ought not to 
be profaned by being divulged, 
and partly too, because that in 
these dissolute times it would be a 
[^p.129^] [^Original misnumbered as p.147.^] 
tempting invitation to all kinde of 
Ryot and Intemperance, by securing 
us from the danger of the diseases 
that attend them. It is strange 
me thinks, that conscience should 
be fallen out with charity! But the 
objection it self furnisheth us with 
an answer to it; for if, since the 
negative is very probable, the Elixir 
be a secret, that we owe wholly to 
our Makers Revelation, not our 
own industry, me thinks we should 
not so much grudge to impart 
what we did not labour to acquire, 
since our Saviours prescription in 
the like case was this: Freely ye 
have received, freely give. Should 
God to one of our Divines reveal 
some newer Truths and Secrets of 
his Gospel, would we not condemn 
him for the concealment of what 
was imparted but to be communicated? 
Those secrets that were 
intended for our use, are not at all 
profaned by being made to reach 
their end: but by being fettered 
from the diffusiveness of their nature. 
And therefore though God 
[^p.130^] [^Original misnumbered as p.148.^] 
should address those special favours 
but to some single person; 
yet he intendeth them for the good 
of all Mankind, and to make that 
Almoner to whom he trusteth 
them, not the grace but the steward 
of his graces. 
 
As for the other edge of the objection, 
shall we that think it unlawful 
to do evil that good may 
come of it; think it just to forbear 
duties lest evil might ensue? And 
shall we let good men languish 
and perish for want of opportune 
relief lest others should be encou-couraged 
to expect it? Besides, 
that the same Reason that is here 
alleadged, would justifie the concealment 
of all other secrets; since 
neither is there any of them that is 
not abusable, nor would our Gallants 
venture upon excesses as they 
do, did they not confide in the 
vertue of those receipts we have 
already. To omit that to imagine 
to restrain vices by refusing men 
the remedies of those excesses they 
seduce them to; is a dessein as unlikely 
[^p.131^] [^Original misnumbered as p.149.^] 
as the means are uncharitable. 
Since our inclinations alone 
being sufficient to vice, the obstracting 
onely of the outward performance, 
whilest the desires are 
unreformed, doth make abstain 
not from the sin, but onely from 
the act. Sure many of these envious 
Salamanders, will one day finde 
their knowledge to be both their 
misery and their crime; when those 
rich secrets that were bestowed as 
jewels for their charity, shall serve 
but to aggravate their guilt. Then 
they will be forced to endure far 
greater torments than those that 
they declined to cure, and with as 
little pitty as they here expressed, it 
being as foolish as unjust for them 
to expect that mercy that they refused 
to give. But by this time Sir 
I fear that I have made you as much 
need a receipt against impatience, 
as my friend doth one against the 
Gout; and therefore I will here 
conclude both your trouble, and 
this letter which beseeching you 
to do me the right to believe, that 
[^p.132^] [^Original misnumbered as p.150.^] 
I shall not more willingly owe my 
life to your skill, than it shall be 
employed in your service, by 
 
SIR, 
Your most humble and 
obliged servant 
PHILARETUS. 
 
