[^L'Estrange, Roger, Sir: Physician cure thy self^] 
 
[}PHYSICIAN 
Cure thy Self: 
OR, AN 
ANSWER 
To a Seditious Pamphlet, Entitled 
EYE-SALVE 
for the English Army, &c. 
 
VVritten and Publish'd for the Information 
and Benefit of the Souldjery; 
and to them Directed. 
April 23. 1660. 
 
LONDON, 
Printed for H.B. at the Gun in Ivy-lane, 1660.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 1-6^] 
 
[^p.1^] 
[}Physician cure thy Self, &c.}] 
 
THere's a lewd Pamphlet titled, — EYE-SALVE 
for the English Army, &c. — 
which being but a Breviate of PLAIN 
ENGLISH, and the ALARUM, 
&c. -- needs no Particular Answer. He that 
reads One, reads All. 
 
It is divided into 4. Heads. 
 
First. A Tedious and Scandalous Charge against the 
Late King. 
 
Secondly. A Groundless Invective against our Present 
Soveraign. 
 
Thirdly. Reasons to the Private Souldjers: perswading 
them of the necessity to Alter both the Laws 
and Government in order to their Safety. 
 
Lastly. A Letter from some Regiments of the Army, 
to encourage the Rest, into a Revolt from the General, 
and an Attempt of Violence upon the Nation. 
 
IT were time lost to spend 20. Sheets of Paper upon the 
first Section, and no body 20. Pins the better for't. 
First, the Particulars have been already answered; and 
Then, all before 1648. is beside the present Question. The 
Reason of the Warr, or the Transactions of it, is not the 
Poynt; but why was Blood shed in the time of Peace? why 
did these Fellows, that during the Hazzard of the War, 
Vowed, and Covenanted to Preserve the King: but having 
got the Power of the Sword into their hands, usurped 
also that of the Government, and Murthered him: Acting 
[^p.2^] 
Extravagancies Themselves, far greater than Calumny 
it self could ever have the Face to fasten upon the 
King? and all this under no pretence of other Necessity, 
than what the Fowlenesse of their Crimes, and the Guilt of 
their own Souls engag'd them in. 
 
In one word: The Question dates from the Seclusion of 
the Members in 1648. and That Act shews us who were 
Reformers, and who Jugglers. 
 
Now for his Clamours against the present King: As 
they are neither Likely in themselves, nor credited by the 
People; so I shall not clogg my self with proofs unnecessary, 
to Acquit him: Referring rather what I have to deliver, 
upon This Subject, to the next head; and 
That is, His Advice to the Private Souldjers; to which, 
I should subjoyn my Own, and to whom I shall dedicate 
the rest I have to say. 
 
This Eye-Salve, Gentlemen, which our pretending 
Oculist presents you with, is a medicine of the same Composition, 
which (by general report) strook Milton Blind: 
and 'tis his Interest that You should be so too. You cannot 
but observe how full of Calumny and Treason it is: and 
One thing most remarquable take notice of. 
 
Your Safety is the only Argument he employs, to engage 
you in the most Bloody, Unchristian, Trayterous, 
Hopeless, and Ridiculous Design that ever was projected. 
Consider, my Masters: you are Men, not Beasts; Christians, 
not Turks; Subjects, not Governours; Reasonable 
Creatures, not Asses: And in fine, you have Souls 
to save. I should esteem my self exceeding happy to see a 
good event of my Wishes, and Endeavours towards 
you: and I do undertake by a plain evidence of sober Reasons, 
to shew you both a clear Light to walk by; and a far 
safer way to a much Nobler End than he proposes. 
 
His Counsel is, That for your future Safety you would seriously 
mind these ensuing Particulars. And mine is the same 
Counsel too; mind them well, and you'll find your Safety 
lyes in avoiding what he advises you to follow: and 
that his hand was in the wrong Box; For, what he calls an 
[^p.3^] 
Eye-Salve, is rather a Plague-Plaster — But now 
to the Particulars themselves. 
 
First, to abandon King, and Lords, Spiritual, and Temporal, 
for these Reasons. 
 
1. They'll seek Revenge against you, for what you did against 
them. 
 
2ly. They'll have the Sword in their Hands; and Regulate 
their Actions by Will, not Law, &c. 
 
3ly. Expect the same, if not Greater Tyranny than formerly, 
over your Persons for Conscience sake; by Whips, &c 
 
4ly. By the establishment of a Single Person, Monopolies 
will be upheld, and Trade destroyed, &c. — 
 
5ly. If the King should be established; that Many which 
should pay your Arriers, must go to pay his Debts. 
 
6ly. You that have no Fortunes, will be punish'd in your 
Carcasses; and Branded with Scorn, and Ignominy as Traytors 
to all Posterity. 
 
In Order: — and to the First, in the first place: 
 
1. Can any thing be more unreasonable, than to object 
Revenge as Dangerous to the Private Souldjers? were 
Ours the most vindictive Prince that ever lived (as you 
your selves know the Quite contrary, so much as you 
know of him) They were still safe. That Revenge must 
be exercised either upon your Lives, or Fortunes. — 
 
As to your Lives: what would that Cruelty avayl him; 
or what should move him to employ it? a Personal pique 
there can be none, he Knows you not; and beside; - many 
of his Father's Party are mingled with you; that took 
up Arms for Bread, and not in Malice. — Neither are 
you look'd upon as Designers, but as Souldjours; under 
command: and such, as during a suspension of the Civil 
Government, subjected your selves to the Law of Arms: 
— You were neither Judges, nor Executioners; — your 
Businesse was in the Field; and the Kings greatest Harms 
were done in the Intervals of Peace. — Further, your 
Obligations under your Present General give you both 
Honour and Protection. From whom, when ever you 
start, you are lost for ever. 
 
These very Circumstances, would secure you, even from 
a Barbarous Enemy: much more then, from a Prince, that 
[^p.4^] 
by a Principle of Courage loves a Souldjour: — by an impression 
of Generosity, that loves a candid Enemy: — and 
by a strong Impulse of natural Goodnesse and Divine Charity, 
that reckons Duty in a Subject, as a Friendship: -- and 
softens Treason it self, in his Familiar Discourses, with the 
Terms only of Humane Frailty. — How eagerly was he 
Persued at Worcester, and how miraculously Preserved! yet 
after This; with how much Tendernesse, and Bounty (out 
of his Little Stock) did he Compassionate, and Relieve Those 
very Persons, in Flanders, that sought his Life at Worcester? 
 
Enough is said to This Point. Examine now your Danger 
in the Point of Fortune. (I do not find many Purchasers 
among the Private Souldjery.) What have you got, 
for all your Hazzards, but Hunger, Infamy, and Rags? 
When yet your Thanklesse Masters have put up half the Revenue 
of three Kingdems into their private Pockets: without 
the venture of a broken Head for't. 
 
For shame, Gentlemen, bethink your selves. Leave these 
ungratefull wretches to their Lot: and Save your 
Souls; your Lives; your Freedoms; — 
Briefly; all the Benefits which your condition is capable 
of, you may enjoy; and 'tis not possible for you to prevail 
against the present Posture and Unity of the Nation. Do you 
consider what it is these your sweet Counsellers oppose? 
The KING forsooth. — To That; — No body names 
him, but in return to them: and the main Issue of our Settlement 
is committed to This Immediate, and next Parliament; 
So that effectually; — You are advised to alter 
the Foundation of our long-establish'd Laws, and some two thousand 
of you to make a War upon the whole rest of the Nation. 
To end this point; here's the Question. 
 
Whether you should rather serve a Pack of Inconsiderable, 
Covetous Traytors; that contrary to Law, have Rifled, 
and Embroyl'd three Nations; and cheated you of your Pay, 
that did their business for them; and then Ruine your selves too 
into the Bargain; — or on the contrary, Return to your Right 
Master; Redeem your Honor, and your Country, by serving 
Him, who having Lost all that these People Got; yet succoured 
[^p.5^] 
you? (Having been Long upon this Particular, I shall be 
the Shorter in the Rest) 
 
2ly. You are advised to provide against a Lawlesse Tyranny 
 
Do so, and Quit Them. But let me tell you; They fear 
the Law, more than the Tyranny. 
 
3ly. You shall be persecuted for Conscience. (they tell you) 
 
No. They're affraid of being Lashed for want on't. Can 
you have better Security in Nature, for all Religious Liberties; 
than the Promise of that Prince, whose Habitual 
Piety; — Tendernesse of Nature; — Exact Faith, 
and Justice to his Word: and whose Unalterable Firmnesse 
to the Protestant Religion, under so great Temptations to 
desert it; — are so unquestionably evident? 
 
4ly. Trade will not florish under a Single Person. 
 
Committee-Trade indeed it's like willdown: so will the Trade 
of Juggling in a Pulpit; — of shewing Tricks with Rings, 
and Bodkins. But where's the Trade These Fellows drive? 
They would be Major Generals again perhaps; — or 
is it, that Hewson has a mind to Cobble again; — and my 
Lord-Sir-John-Master-Jack-Berkstead would fall again 
to his old Trade of Thimble-making. 
 
5ly. Your Arrieres must go to pay the Kings debts. 
 
No: They that Oppose the Government, will probably 
be Desired to pay for Setling of it. 
 
6ly. Your Carcases shall be punished, if you have no Fortunes; 
and you recorded for Traytors. 
 
These Gentlemen measure others by themselves. The 
First, hath been their Practice, and the Latter will be their 
Fortune. For Traytor is a Brand upon such as Resist Authority, 
not upon those that Submit to it. 
 
Hitherto; why no King. — Now; — why the 
Law must run in another Name; (in truth a seasonable 
Consideration) and a Commonwealth be Established. 
 
The Reasons are so Trivial, and so Tedious, I shall not 
trouble my self with the Particulars. This, in short, is the 
grosse of them. 
 
The Law in the Kings name speakes you Traytors; — 
[^p.6^] 
Out-Lawed; — your Purchases, Invalid, &c. 
 
These People dispose of the Skin, before they have 
kill'd the Lion. You should do well to consider that an 
Act of Grace from a Parliament will give you more Security, 
than an Act of Violence against the Law: and for matter of 
Crack'd Titles, I suppose you of the private Souldjery, are 
not much endangered that way. 
 
The Commonwealth-Reasons are like those you meet with 
at your Two-penny Clubs, but a little worse; so that I have 
now only to mind you, that there is not one Motive 
drawn either from true Honor, or Conscience, no, nor 
pretending that way, throughout the whole story. 
 
I come next to the Regimental Letter, and That drives 
the nail to the head. In effect; it is only two Pages and 
a half, spent in Snivling to you, and Railing at the General, 
and as little the Act or Sense of the Regiments, as the 
Interest of the Army. My Masters, so many of you as either 
have a mind to be Hanged by Martial Law, for Mutiny: or 
by the Law of the Land for Treason, shall do very well to 
Follow their advice. Do you not see how the whole Nation 
hunts your Renegado Officers; and that a Proclamation 
is already Published, that Trusses every man of you that 
mixes with them? Go to Gentlemen: Blesse the Noble 
General; — the City of London; — The United 
Nation; — And the Return of the Secluded Members: 
that have reduced Affairs to this Blessed Point, that 
no English man ha's any means left him now to be Happy, 
or Safe; but by being Honest. And so Heaven blesse them 
All, and Direct the next Parliament, and let every man that 
Loves God, and his Country, say AMEN. 
 
[}FINIS.}] 
 
