[^Thomas Emes: Dialogue between alkali and acid^] 
 
[}A 
DIALOGUE 
BETWEEN 
Alkali and Acid: 
CONTAINING DIVERS 
PHILOSOPHICAL and MEDICINAL 
CONSIDERATIONS 
 
WHEREIN 
A late Pretended New Hypothesis, asserting 
ALKALI the Cause, and ACID the Cure 
of all Diseases; is proved Groundless 
and Dangerous. 
 
BEING 
A Specimen of the Immodest Self-applause, 
Shameful Contempt, and abuse of all Physicians, 
gross mistakes and great Ignorance of the Pretender 
John Colbatch. 
 
By T. E. Chirurgo-Medicus 
 
[^GREEK OMITTED^] 
 
LONDON: 
Printed for R. Cumberland at the Angel in St. Paul's Church-Yard 
and Tho. Speed, at the Three Crowns, near the Royal 
Exchange in Cornhill, 1698. And Sold by most of the Booksellers 
of London and Westminster. 
 
Price One Shilling.}] 
 
[^A preface to the reader omitted.^] 
[^Extract 1, pp. 1-21^] 
 
[^p.1^] 
[}A 
DIALOGUE 
BETWEEN 
ALKALI, and ACID.}] 
 
[}Al.}] WELL met Mr. Acid, whither are you hurrying so 
fast, to some Heroe run through the Lungs, or the 
Heart? 
 
[}Ac.}] I should hardly stay to tell you Mr. Alkali, but that I am 
engag'd to oppose you where-ever we meet, you Principle of Death 
and Corruption, I am always provok'd by you, you have done so 
much mischief in the World: And now to your farther reproach, 
I have a fresh instance of your badness, by a Messenger from my 
Lord Lazington, whom you have plagu'd with a fit of the Gout, and 
that a desperate one if I come not in time to his assistance, none 
can help him but I, and he thinks it 7 Years e're I come to him. 
 
[}Al.}] You are very sharp Mr. Acid. I sometime since heard indeed, 
that you have reproach'd me in all Companies, even in 
Coffee-Houses, as well as wrote Books against me, but now I find 
it true: I am glad I have met with you, to tell you, you have 
scandalously reported divers things of me, which if you can't prove 
to my Face, I shall not easily put up the Injury, nor part with 
you willingly without Proof, or Submission. Let my Lord Lazington 
roar a little, you will be the welcomer when you come; and I 
know you can tell how to excuse your delay; some Duke or other 
had sent for you before, and perhaps my Lord will do as well 
without you. Let us try whether you can maintain your Charge: 
You call me the Principle of Death and Corruption, and I hear you 
say I am the cause of all Diseases, and that you alone are the Dr. 
that can do any thing considerable in the Cure of them, and that 
by destroying and expelling Alkali: And this you make an Hypothesis 
of, and call it a new one, of your discovery. 
 
[}Ac.}] I am so far from denying what I have said against Alkali, 
[^p.2^] 
that I continue still to assert my Hypothesis. That all the Alkali 
in the Blood is most certainly an Excrement in a way of being carried 
off by some of the Emunctories, and when any of the Emunctories 
chance to be stopp'd, that the Alkali has not room to pass out, then there 
is a Disease. And the matter of all our Dstempers is the same. And 
whereas Acids are contrary to Alkalies (there being a conflict between 
them where-ever they meet) their being given in due proportion, 
will lessen the matter of the Distemper, and in time, totally extirpate 
it. Similia similibus gaudent, & contraria contrariis curantur. And I 
am so absolutely confirm'd in the truth of my Hypothesis, that I 
am sure it is not in the power of any one to overthrow it. Nay 
the Hypothesis on which I build, I am sure is true. And I have in 
all my Writings, Truth for my Guide: But the opposition I have 
met with, hath been almost insupportable. Truth at its first appearing 
never wants Opposers. But the New Doctrine I have advanc'd 
has gain'd so much Ground, that few Authors in their own 
Life-time, have scarce seen the like. This unwonted and unexpected 
Encouragement, has fill'd me with a sense of Gratitude, 
to me inexpressible. Reason is the true Touch-stone, by which 
we ought to Examine every thing, and I have never advanc'd any 
thing, till weigh'd in the Ballance of my best Reason, and yet, lest 
Reason should deceive me, and I so impose the World; I have 
always join'd Experience to it; so both being conjoin'd, I could 
not well deceive my self, nor lead others into Error. That 
Prodigy of Nature. Mrs. Anne Baynard, said in my hearing, that, 
Reason was that Eternal Standard God Almightly, as a Ray of his own 
Image has impress'd upon Man, to the election, or dislike of what may 
hurt, or succour him; and where this is rais'd and improv'd, makes 
him an Angel, where sunk and depress'd, a groveling Brute. 
 
[}Al.}] I find your Confidence, Mr. Acid, as great as I have heard 
it reported, which is no Argument to me, that you are in the right; 
Confidence and Ignorance being usually Companions: And I am 
the more perswaded it may be in the power, of some one or other 
to overthrow your Hypothesis. If you were sure of the 
truth of it, I confess, it would be impossible it should be found untrue: 
But I supopse you only fancy your self sure. That you 
have Truth for your Guide, I suppose (if you know what you say) 
you mean, you have some certain Truths, as Rules to guide you to 
the invention of others: But perhaps, you may as other fallible 
Men, take some things for Truths that are not true, or not know 
how to use them as Rules, if they are so. What opposition you 
have met with I know not, it seems it was what you could hardly 
bear, I doubt you have thereby confess'd, your strength to be but 
weak. Why Truth should always have Opposers at first, I see 
[^p.3^] 
not, unless when it is not clearly demonstrated, as your Hypothesis 
(to let you suppose it true) is not, as you will go near to find, 
before we have done. And as for the ground, you say, your new 
Doctrine has gain'd in your (but yet short) life-time, beyond the 
Inventions of other Authors, which so surfeits your Heart with 
Joy, I think no body else sees it; for I could never yet meet with 
any one Ingenious Man of your Opinion. And if any few unwary 
Tyros, or Person not studious of Nature, have been pleased 
with your Fancies, I believe, if they will but use their Reason, 
which you say is the Touchstone of Truth, by which we are to examine 
all things; they will find Reason to alter their Opinion, and find 
their Master Acid's best reason was but a false ballance, and did 
indeed deceive him, and that his experience was but mistaken experience, 
and so impos'd upon the Master, and Scholars too. 
But that Reason is an eternal Standard, I do not see; tho' the prodigious 
Mrs. Ann Baynard said so: I rather think her and you, too 
prodigious Metaphysitians; For I take Reason to be peculiar to 
Creatures, and that Creatures and whatever belongs to them are 
not Eternal, unless in the same sense, as an ignorant pretender in 
Physick in the Beaux Language, would be call'd an eternal Quack. 
Neither can I see by any of your reasonings Reason so improved 
in your self, as to give any body any ground to take you for an 
Angel. Mrs. Ann Baynard might be a great Wit for ought I know, 
and Wit and Beauty in a Woman, might possibly make a youngster 
mistake her even for a Goddess, and to be said to be Witty and 
Pretty would please most Women, and by pleasing the Women, a 
Doctor may be likely to meet with an Angel sometimes you know 
Sir. 
 
[}Ac.}] The Doctrine I have advanced is so directly contrary to 
every thing that has been wrote yet, it is enough to startle 
any young Man, nay some old ones too; but I have so enquir'd into 
Diseases, as to be altogether certain of the Truth of my Hypothesis, 
but not so as to make People Immortal, which I believe 
some expect from me: But let People lay aside prejudice and set 
themselves to make Experiments, I am sure they will lay aside 
their old Notions, and embrace my new Hypothesis, and I am morally 
certain that my new Doctrine of Acids at present so much 
decry'd, will soon obtain the publick vogue, carrying a self-evidence 
along with it, and some People will be so enamour'd with 
it, as to use Acids with as must reason, as others now use the 
Cortex; which has been brought so extravagantly in vogue, that 
some use it in all Distempers, and I believe it will in time, be put 
into Plasters to Cure Corns. By this may be seen the instability 
of Humane Nature that is more govern'd by Fancies than by Reason, 
[^p.4^] 
so that what is to day condemn'd is to morrow in great 
value. but the Doctrine of Acids being a thing of Universal extent, 
it is impossible any one should do so much mischief with them, as 
with the Cortex. 
 
[}Al.}] If your Doctrine is directly contrary to every thing yet 
wrote, it is very likely to be contrary to the Truth; for doubtless there 
has been some Truth wrote before. But I am not at all startled 
at your Doctrine Mr. Acid, tho' I confess, I am neither very young 
nor old. What a Novice, or an Old Dotard may be, I know not 
but if any thing be startling, it is your Impudence, which indeed 
seems Monstrous: That a Mushroom in Physick should so confidently 
oppose all that has been yet wrote by all the Learned Physicians 
of all Ages, and pretend to have so enquir'd into Disease 
since Yesterday, as to be certain that the long Study and Practice 
of all other Men gave them nothing but mistakes; but your little 
time has produced absolute certainty. But truly, notwithstanding 
your Opinion of your self, I dare say no body expects Immortality 
from you. As for prejudice, you would have us lay aside, I 
believe I laid it aside, for some time before you began with the 
study of Pharmacy, and have ever since made Experiments, and 
I believe, have had more opportunity, as well as time, to carry 
on a course of experimental Philosophy, than your self; (not to 
disparage you) yet I cannot lay aside all my Notions thereby gotten, 
and embrace your new Hypothesis. Your moral Certainty 
that it will obtain the Publick Vogue, is no better than to say, an 
uncertain certainty. Nor is your Doctrine self-evident to any but 
Mr. Acid's own sharp self; whose Eyes perhaps are Microscopes 
in comparison to other Mens. But there is no fear, People will 
be enamoured with your Hypothesis it has so soure a Countenance. 
But the instability of Humane Nature, (I confess) is such, and some 
other Men are so much govern'd by Fancies as well as you, that 
possibly Acids may be used with the like reason, and extravagance 
as some have used the Cortex; but they will hardly mix them 
with Plaisters. But tho' Alkalies should be to day wholly condemn'd, 
perhaps they may be to morrow in as great value as ever. 
And if it be not possible to do so much mischief with Acids, as 
with the Cortex; yet I believe, some Persons may find enough done 
with them to disswade us from using them as you would have us. 
But I am certain, a confident Empirick may do a great deal of mischief 
with Acids, Alkalies, Cortex, or any thing. 
 
[}Ac.}] People must long since have known my Hypothesis, or 
they must not; if they have not they have groped in the dark, 
and cured Diseases as a blind Man may catch a Hare; if they have 
known it, their giving Alkalies is an Argument, they have not acted 
[^p.5^] 
like honest Men. But no one can charge me with any thing selfish, 
unless it be to leave a Name to Posterity. I want University-Glosses 
to polish over my Discourse, but Truth like Diamonds 
will sparkle among Pebbles, yea appears best naked; and I am 
sorry, I am forced to promulgate this Doctrine in Terms that 
look so like self-commendation but I have been too long meal 
mouth'd, whereby Truth has suffer'd, and my over modesty has 
caus'd me to be oppress'd: But a constant series of success has 
rais'd me many Friends, and nothing but an extraordinary Providence 
could have supported me against so many Enemies: All 
the Chirurgeons in the World, and after the Physitians, but 
from these, I have had the fairer play, and they grow more civil, 
and among the Chirurgeons I gain Friends daily. 
 
[}Al.}] How should People have known your Hypothesis long 
since, when it is not long, since you conceived it, and brought it 
forth; pray you Sir excuse them: And let us come to the tryal 
of Skill, whether your Hypothesis be well grounded or no, and 
see whether you can prove, that all People that have not known 
your Hypothesis have groped in the dark, and cured Diseases either 
by a very rare accident, or not at all, that you are the only 
Man God has given Eyes to, till which is done, I cannot but look 
upon you as a Person of great Impudence, to accuse all the World 
of Learned PHYSITIANS as Fools, or what is worse, as Knaves, 
and uncommon Arrogancy to assert your self the only Wise, yea 
and honest Man pretending to Physick; and that you have nothing 
selfish in you, but to leave a Name to Posterity. Truly methinks, 
you are as selfish as any body: But as for a Name to Posterity, 
it's pity you should want it, I'll help you, that you may be sure 
to have it, and not for nothing. I wish you could have written 
in Latin, that all the World might have known you. Tho' you 
say, you want University-Glosses, you are Rhetorical enough indeed 
Sir; for you have abundance of Hyperboles, nor want you 
other choice Foiles to set off your Diamonds, nor are your Truths 
naked, but so dress'd up (if you have any) that I cannot see the 
Faces of them. But you commend your self so much, it looks not 
like force put upon you; nor do you seem so meale-mouth'd, or 
over modest as you say you are, but speak roundly enough. It's 
pity Truth should suffer, or you be oppress'd for your Virtue, 
Poor young Man: but it may be hoped you will grow stronger. 
But you have had extraordinary Helps, constant Success, and uncommon 
Providence has got you Friends, and supported you 
against so many Enemies, all the Chirurgeons in the World, and 
after the Physitians. Has your Fame spread so largely? Certainly this 
must be by some uncommon Providence, for I cannot find, that 
[^p.6^] 
half the Chirurgeons, or Physitians in England have heard of 
you, (but I will endeavour that they may) much less all the 
World of them, when your Books are wrote but in your own 
Language. But prethee John let me hear no more of these brags, 
but lets come to the contest: I'll give you as fair play as you can 
well wish, and will be added to the number of your Friends, if 
possible. 
 
[}Ac.}] In all Diseases, Physicians have unanimously agreed, that 
Acids have abounded; and if to such a Degree, that their Alkalies 
could not conquer it, then the Patient Dy'd. And as for Alkalous 
Medicines, I dare be positive, they never yet Cured any one Distemper; 
but frequently have done a great deal of mischief. If 
any ever receiv'd any advantage by them, I dare be burnt. If they 
be given in acute Diseases, and Nature be strong, she throws off 
the load in spight of them; if weak, they add to the load, and 
she falls under it. In Chronical Diseases, such as the Gout, poor 
Mortals are let alone to languish under the Distemper. But you 
may say, if my Hypothesis be true, how have others, mistaken 
Physicians, Cur'd Diseases? I answer, I own they have Cur'd 
some Diseases, but they could never tell how: They have given 
Steel, Antimony, and other Preparations, without enquiring into 
the nature of them, supposing them Alkalies; when they at the 
same time are Acids; as also many Vegetable Productions, and 
so Cur'd Diseases, they being Acids. 
 
[}Al.}] Truly John, your Discourse begins to grow nauseous: You 
are not yet Forty Years old, and could you have spent Thirty of 
them in reading the Writings of Physicians, you could not have 
read the Tenth part of what they have Writ, much less have 
known, what success they always had in their Practice. And as positive 
as you are, I believe, I shall give you matter of Fact, as well 
as Reason, enough to convince any modest Man, that Diseases 
have been Cur'd by Alkalies, and when you are convinc'd, I would 
counsel you, to burn your Books, rather that your self, as dareing 
as you are. And for shame forbear to accuse all Physicians at this 
rate, either never to have Cur'd Diseases, or now and then to have 
done it ignorantly, they knew not how, by giving Acids at unwares. 
Do you think others have not took as much pains to know 
the nature of Antimony, Steel, and Vegetable Productions as you? 
Had none of them any way to know Acids from Alkalies? Van 
Heimont, whom you sometime, call'd your Master, saies, he wrought 
Forty Years with great labour and charge (and others have done 
the like) in Analizeing the materia Medica. Fye John, fye! prethee 
give over, I believe, you will sometime find you have done 
your selfe no Credit, nor kindness to cry your self up, and cry 
down all Physicians this rate. 
 
[^p.7^] 
[}Ac.}] I have made reflections on Physicians indeed, but they are 
principally Foreigners; they all to a Man, asserting the Doctrine of 
Alkalies. What I have said, is not to reproach the Physicians of 
our own Nation, who are many of them, as Great Men as ever 
were of the Professions, and this City abounds with such; but my 
design, is to undeceive Young Physicians, who have been impos'd 
upon by Foreigners, and to excite them not to rely upon Men, 
who have broach'd the Chymera's of their own Brain, without making 
Experiments, whether their Notions were true, or false; my 
design being, not to Reflect upon the Noble Society the College, the 
Glory of our Nation, and of the whole World; but I have the 
greatest Reverence and Respect for them. 
 
[}Al.}] Mr. Acid, you do not know what all Foreigners have done, 
neither do they deserve your reproach more than the Physicians 
of our own Nation, or are they less Men: you cannot well be ignorant, 
that some of the College you applaud so, are Foreigners, 
and as deserving as any of the rest. Nor have Foreigners impos'd 
on Young Physicians, more than those of your own Nation, nor 
have they been always Men more full of Chymera's, or less acquainted 
with Experiments; as every one acquainted with the 
Medical World must acknowledg. Nor was Young Mr. Acid the 
fittest Man to undeceive Young Physicians; he should have left it 
to Older Heads, or have stay'd a little longer. Was there none of 
the Fathers of the Noble Society, whom after you had abused in 
general, with all Physicians, you now sweeten up so, as the Glory 
of the whole World: I say, was there none of them that understood 
the Vertue of Acids? Or, none of them so kind as to 
undeceive the Youngsters, that they left it to you? Or, had none 
of them such a Capacity to Write as Mr. Acid? I must tell you 
truly Sir, you are no Credit to them, of what profit soever you 
may be, notwithstanding your Professing Reverence and Respect 
for them. But I believe, after all your bouncing of a New Hypothesis, 
we shall find, that Physicians have used Acids, knowing them 
to be such, long before you were Born; thinking rightly, that neither 
Acids nor Alkalies alone Cure Diseases; but a Physician using 
them all with other things, when, and where he sees occasion. 
And to convince you, and shew you how apt you are at contradict 
your self, (your Memory as you have sometime confess'd, being a very 
treaeherous one) To confirm the truth of your Doctrine, you told 
us, Dr. Jones commended Acids in divers Diseases, a Man of such clearness 
of Reason, that you never heard him mention any thing, but he was 
fully able to demonstrate it. But if what you say of him, be true, 
and your Doctrine may be suppos'd not false; I think he is more like 
to be the Author of it than you, tho' he lets you take the Name; 
[^p.8^] 
and I would advise you, to get him to demonstrate your Hypothesis; 
for I am sure you have not done it. And Dr. Baynard had also 
wonderful Success, and his Practice run upon Acids, and those Gentlemen 
embrac'd Acids out of a Life-saving principle (you say) in opposition to 
the multitude. Likewise you tell us at another time, that, Dr. Watson 
used Acids for Ten Years, which was before the birth of your Hypothesis, 
if you were the Parent of it. Nay, you tell us Oyl of Vitriol 
is commended in Theatro Chymico, pag. 86, & 87. Vol. I. And 
your Master Helmont by advising a Man to take two Drops of Oyl of 
Sulphur every Meal, preserv'd him free from Diseases to an Old-age; 
which advice was given, long before you were born, and doubtless 
he knew, Oyl of Sulphur was an Acid. Nay, Riverius also comes in 
for a Snack, by your leave, when you are kind or forgetful, Curing 
a confirm'd Pthisis with Conserve of Roses and Oyl of Sulphur. Here 
are Foreigners Sir, tho' you say, All of them to a Man, asserted the 
Doctrine of Alkalies. But, your treacherous Memory, once gave away 
all your glory; when you were almost positive, that there was no Physician 
in Christendom, of any business, but had made use of Oyl of Vitriol, 
that dangerous Acid, tho' asserters of Alkalies. But then you 
sting them in the Conscience for such practice, how they can answer 
for it you can't tell, that if Acids are the Cause of Diseases, how they dare 
with a good Conscience give the most temperate Acids, you can't understand. 
But I'll undertake to be Casuist for them, for once; seeing 
you can't resolve it. They used Acids, when they saw occasion, 
with better reason than you do, and Alkalies, as they found 
the nature of the Cases requir'd; being wiser, than to think Acids 
alone, or onely Alkalies the Cause of all Diseases, And to name 
one for instance, to convince you of the truth of the matter, 
Frederick Hoffman Publish'd an ingenious Treatise, 1689. against 
the fancy of some few, who would make Acid and Viscid the Causes 
of all Diseases; wherein he commends Acids in many Cases, yet 
confesses, that Acid and Viscid are the Causes of many Distempers. 
Certissimum porro est (saies he, pag. 5.) & cuivis practicorum obvium 
acidum, & viscidum plurimorum morborum fomitem, ac mineram existere, 
and gives several Instances and Arguments to make it appear, and 
that a Physician cannot be without Alkalous Medicines, & sane 
(saies he again, pag. 10.) nisi velimus dissimulare, nullus gratiosus 
medicus facile carere potest salibus istis Alkalinis Volatilibus, interquæ 
paimas tenet Spiritus Oleosos Sylvii: Spiritus salis armoniaci vinosus 
cum oleis aromaticis, & carminativis varie essentificatus: Spiritus Vini 
a sale Vol. C. C. abstractus, Salia fixa, & illorum solutiones, Lapides 
Cancrorum, Coralia cum lixivio salis Tartari imbibita & imprimis 
salit fixa Sulphuri metallico amicissimo conjugio juncta, &c. And 
concludes, Acidum, ac viscidum motui sanguinis nimis hostile; plurimorum 
[^p.9^] 
morborum causam evadere posse, & contra Medicamenta Alkalina 
acidum destructiva decenter exhibita genenerosissima magnorum 
morborum existere præsidia. And this was wrote several Years before 
your Essay (as you call it) concerning Alkali and Acid. Where 
are you now John? 
 
[}Ac.}] It is true. Some few other Physitians have used Acids, but 
the assistance I had from them is inconsiderable as to the establishing 
my Principles, and if I have made any good steps, it is owing 
to my own industry; for tho' I was not bred at University, 
I have taken as much true pains to inform my self in all parts of 
Physick, perhaps as any Man ever did: And I spent as much Money 
to qualifie me for the practice of Physick as most Men, who have 
spent their time in the Universities, and I have had ocular demonstration 
for my Money, when as some of our University-Men 
have had only the fusty Notions of Old Aristotle for theirs. And 
tho' I have not said all that is to be said in behalf of my Hypothesis, 
yet I have said so much, that I believe I may boldly say, 
it is the best and clearest Hypothesis now extant, on which the 
cure of Diseases may be attempted on greater certainty, than on 
any other Publick. 
 
[}Al.}] At one time you say, all the Physitians in Christendom of any 
business have used Acids, now but some few; we must conclude 
either you contradict your self, or else the Men of business, in all 
Christendom have been but few: But if by Men of business you mean 
such as your self, then I believe indeed they have been but few, 
and the assistance you have had from them, towards the establishing 
your Principles, has not been great I grant; for your reading 
has been little. Yet some assistance I am confident, you have 
had; for your Discourses smell pretty strong of Dr. Andre, of Acid, 
and Alkali Published in English, 1689. But when you say, you 
have taken as much true pains to inform your self in all parts of 
Physick as any ever did, you cannot be excused of Arrogancy; 
for we well know, you neither have had the Years, Abilities nor 
Opportunity many have had. Besides you are so extraordinarily 
accomplish'd in that one Qualification of a Doctor of Physick fashionable 
Language, that it must needs have taken up much of your 
time to acquire it, and hinder your learning other parts of Science. 
But as for your spending as much Money, as most who 
have been bred at Universities, we know very well you never had 
it to spend. But why could not University-Men have Ocular demonstration 
for their Money as well as you: Or, How come they 
to be confin'd to the fusty Notions of Aristotle? for want of other 
Books? I hope you will supply them with fresh Notions for the 
future. But you have not said all that should have been said in 
[^p.10^] 
behalf of your Hypothesis, that is if it were to be made probable. 
Here you are in the right, and I should have perceiv'd it, if you 
had not told me so. And I grant you believe, or would have us 
think your Hypothesis is the best, and clearest in Physick now 
extant to all intents and purposes, and you have said as much as 
this comes to over and over. 'Twas a thousand pities you were 
not able rightly to handle it, that it might have proved the most glorious 
of its kind that ever appear'd on the stage of the World. But after 
all these braggs, and stir for a Name to Posterity (not to talk 
of getting a little Money to purchase an old Coach for the present) 
your Treacherous Memory so far fail'd you, as to let you say, 
you did not pretend to be sole Author, or first broacher of the Doctrine 
of Acids, it having long since been the opinion of some of the most happy 
Practitioners in the World, and is now embraced by some of the 
greatest Men, and most happy Practitioners our Age affords, and that 
you don't pretend to be so great a Man, nor deserve so well of Manking 
as Helmont, Paraselsus, &c. who treading out of the common Path 
did not want maligners; therefore why should you who don't pretend to 
have arriv'd at those great Perfections they had, take it amiss to be 
abus'd, and evil spoken of? Here you are over modest and meal-mouthed. 
For these Men were Foreigners, and often used Alkalies, 
and were ignorant of your Doctrine, that Acids are the cure 
of all Diseases, and yet deserved better of Mankind than you. What 
fit of Modesty is this John? 'Tis to be fear'd your cause will suffer 
for this. But I see in all this you would commend your self 
by comparing your self to such great Men, but you have not 
done it ingeniously yet you should let others praise you, and 
not your own Mouth. 
 
[}Ac.}] I have had several congratulatory Letters from divers 
Learned Men in praise of my Discovery of the Doctrine of Acids, 
as for instance from Dr. Jones, beginning thus, Dear Sir, As for 
Acids, Dr. Baynard and your self deserve eternal praise, &c. From 
N. Tyrling, Dignissime, contra Justitiæ, morumque normam peccarem si 
virum cui Deo proximo vitam debeam silentio preterirem. Nuper, enim 
cum e luce pene evasissem, tu mihi propitius adstetisti, candide effulsisti, 
Tu meus Apollo, &c. And from Dr. Watson thus, Tractatus 
tuos sumnis cum deliciis & voluptate perlegi, & tuum in promovendo 
illo nobilissimo Medicinæ studio institutum maxime demiror in humani 
generis bonum universale: Macte Bone vir Melioribus Avibus, & 
momos aspernare, &c. And in the beginning of my Relation of the 
Person bitten by a Viper, you will find the following Panegyrick. 
To the Unknown Dr. Colbatch, upon his most Ingenious Tracts, 
especially that of Alkalies and Acids. 
 
[^p.11^] 
Physick for Ages past has grop'd her way 
In Paths of Darkness, without any Ray 
Of certain Truth, and still was going astray: 
[^The first three lines are connected with a brace.^] 
When COLBATCH rose, who with reviving Light 
Dispell'd the Clouds, and chas'd away the Night, 
By him th'important Secret is reveal'd 
Through Fraud, and Ignorance so long conceal'd: 
No sordid hopes of Gain, e'er sway'd his mind, 
His only Aim's the good of Humane kind; 
Who first with Pains, and Labour dug the Oar 
Then freely gave us all the Golden store. 
Let Juggling Quacks grown envious of thy Name 
Combine together to obscure thy Fame; 
Such are the Mysteries which thou dost unfold 
They'll write thy Name In Characters of Gold, 
To thee alone Mankind's indebted more 
Than t'all the Doctors that have gone before. 
J. C. Junior 
 
[}Al.}] These Men praise you at a great rate Mr. Acid, one thinks 
eternal Praises your due, another owes his Life to you his Pagan 
Deity, another is ravish'd almost in reading your lusceous Writings, 
and admires your Capacity in promoting Medicine, claps you on the 
Back, and bids you despise your Carpers; But the fourth outdoes, 
them all, and sings you too. I wonder no body did it sooner, 
for you are a Subject enough to inspire the dullest Muse: But 
the Poet might have let us have his name at length, sure he 
needed not to have been shie of owning his Opinion of you any 
more than the other Gentlemen; Besides he might perhaps have 
prevented our mistaking him: For I cannot be perswaded but 
that it was John Colbatch Junior, that was the Poet, however I 
am sure that John Colbatch Junior, caused it to be printed in his 
Book, and had he not been a Junior it had never been there. To 
the Unknown Dr. Colbatch is a very odd Epithet on so Famous an 
Author, it cannot sure be an Ironie, but hold; John Colbatch Jun. 
may be very well thought to be unknown to himself, otherwise he 
could never have Published his own Praises at so extravagant a rate. 
As for his Poetry I say, in short it is Poetry, and it is well it is so; 
for nothing but Poetica licentia can excuse it, it being all fiction: 
And perhaps for this reason Tom Saffold chose to Publish his Bills 
in Verse, knowing the liberty of the Muses to lie. And now I 
mention the Famous Tom Saffold, it brings into my mind what a 
Friend of Mr. Acids, who saw what J. C. Junior had written 
would have added, which was this: 
 
[^p.12^] 
Whilst Saffold liv'd (could you believe him) he 
Outdid all other Quacks in Pharmacy. 
'Twere Saffolds Pills so call'd among the rest, 
deservedly had gaind the name of best. 
Since J. C. Junior rose his greater fame 
Defac'd the Monument of Saffold's Name: 
Believe him, or his Friend, he merits more 
Than all the Saffolds that have gon before. 
His rarest Tincture, and his great Wound-Powder, 
Do praise him every day lowder and lowder. 
In Villers-street near to the Ass of his head, 
John Acid liveth, now Tom Saffold's dead. 
Acid like Saffold mighty Tales has told, 
And here his famous Drops are to be sold. 
 
But to deal plainly with you Mr. Acid, this is but playing the 
Quack, and least you should take it unkindly if I should handle 
him only in rough Prose, who now comes dress'd out so finely 
in Verse. I'll give the Quack his Character in the same fashion. 
As follows, 
 
A Quack's a Medicaster, setting forth 
By base, unhandsome means his feigned worth, 
Whether on Saddle, moving Stage he sit, 
Boasting his Remedies, from street to street. 
Whether he keep a Fool to act his part, 
To draw a concourse there to Preach his Art. 
Whether at Coffee-House he does appear 
At such an Hour, plying for business there: 
Whether his Story he described has 
O'th paper Hangings of a pissing-place. 
[^The last three lines are connected with a brace.^] 
Or tho' his Tales unto a Volume rise, 
To speak him Learned in the People's Eyes 
The Quack's the same in differing disguise. 
 
But I long to see whether John Acid deserves all his great Encomiums, 
and whether his new dug Oar will yield him any Metal 
that will stand the Test, I doubt it will not go through the 
fiery Tryal. 
 
[}Ac.}] As for the great threats daily thundred out of my being 
confuted, they are but Scare-crows to me, I am far from being 
afraid of it, and whoever shall make it appear by solid Experiments, 
[^p.13^] 
that I am in the wrong, shall be my Great Apollo, 
and the first thing I do, shall be to write a Publick Recantation. 
 
[}Al.}] Upon your word Mr. Acid you'll vomit up your so well 
digested Hypothesis; if I can help you to an Emetick, that will 
work upon you: I believe you would never offer so fairly, but 
that you are confident that nothing will turn your stomach: I'll 
try. I fancy Antimony may yield a Medicine strong enough for 
you; you say, 'Tis an Acid, therefore I hope you will be willing 
to take it, if that won't do, we will try your own Vulnerary 
Powder, that's vomitative too, and we will prepare them with Acids. 
I'll give you a process I'll warrant you, and you shall prepare it, 
in your own Elaboratory, You are a profess'd Chymist you know, and 
a Disciple of Helmont, and know nothing so delightful as Chymical Operations. 
Helmont purg'd himself of the Galenical Hypothesis, by 
what he wrought out of the Fire, and if you follow my directions 
it may be you may clear your self of yours and you know you are 
Apothecary enough Master Doctor, to dispence your own Medicines 
skillfully, when you have prepar'd them. 
 
[}Ac.}] I confess I was bred nn Apothecary, and under a Man 
that was not the greatest Master in his Business; but taking notice 
of my Master's imperfections, I apply'd my self, for Four Years 
of his time, to those things my Master could not Teach me in some 
measure; and when I was become a Master in Pharmacy the foundation 
on which Physick is built; I was induc'd to look into the 
Body of Physick it self; and tho' I dont pretend to absolute 
Mastership, yet I shall endeavour to improve my Talent. The 
greatest part of my time I liv'd in Worcester, and tho' I kept an 
Apothecaries Shop, my dependance was wholly upon my Practice. 
And since I speake of my being an Apothecary. I shall give the 
necessary Qualifications of one of that Profession; that you may 
judg such a one has made a large step towards being a good Physician. 
1. An Apothecary must have good acquaintance with the 
Vegetable Kingdom, not only to know the Faces of Plants; but 
their Natures and manners of Operation on Humane Bodies. 
2. He must well understand the Nature and Operation of Minerals 
and Metals, which is not to be attain'd without much Reading 
and hard labour in the fire, and 3. of Animal Bodies, amongst 
which is Man, there being scarce a part of his whole Body, but 
what is sometime or other to be used as a Medicine; but first requires 
the Apothecaries Skill for its Prepatation. The famous 
Etmuller was not asham'd to own that he serv'd Eight Years to an 
Apothecary; yet he became one of the most Eminent Physicians 
in Europe: And for ought I know, the loss of him at that Age he 
[^p.14^] 
Dy'd, deserves as much to be lamented as the loss of any one private 
Man, from him so much might have been expected. 
 
[}Al.}] One might have guess'd you to be an Apothecary, if you 
had never told us so, you talk like an Apothecary: But I 
am sorry you had no better a Master; it had been well you had 
met with one that could have taught you a little good Manners; 
for truly John, you shew none in publishing your Master's imperfections. 
But pray you, who taught you for that Four Years you 
went so far beyond your Master's Capacity, as to become a Master 
your self in Pharmacy? Truly I can hardly believe you are a Master 
in Pharmacy yet. For tho' you call your self a Doctor, I am 
sure you talk as if you knew not what Pharmacy means, when 
you tell us it is the foundation on which Physick is built. You 
have look'd into the Body of Physick at a fine rate: But indeed, 
you don't talk like an absolute Master, to tell us, That Pharmacy, 
that is the making of Medicines, is the foundation on which Physick, 
that is Natural Knowledge, is built. Surely John, you never 
read any Institutions, or if you did, what you read slip'd out of 
your treacherous Memory; but it may be, you would speak with the 
Vulgar, while you think with the Learned, and then the sense of 
it is, That the making of Medicines, is that upon which Medicine 
is built. But if you would talk with the Doctors, they place Physick 
or Physiology in the first place, as the foundation, meaning 
the consideration of Nature it self, in its found state, or due order. 
Then Pathology, the account of its Defects. And thirdly, Semeiotice, the 
consideration of the events or issues of those Defects. Then Hygieine 
which teaches to preserve from those Defects, as much as my be. 
And in the Last place, comes Therapuetice, the method of reducing 
the Defects of Nature, and the fitting the Instruments for that 
purpose is Pharmacy: So that it is far from the foundation of the 
Building. What Practice you built on your foundation of Pharmacy, 
I know not, or whether your dependance were on that Practice. 
You are very kind in giving us the necessary Qualifications of 
an Apothecary, you are willing to inform the World, how fit a Man 
Mr. Apothecary would be thought to be to make a Doctor of. But 
by your Mastership you shew in Pharmacy, and your acquaintance 
with Materia Medica, I believe before we have done, it will appear, 
you have not made that large stride an expert Apothecary has took 
towards being a good Physician: But I shall remark here only, what 
acquaintance you have with Animals; especially such an one as 
your self, of which you say, There is scarce a part but is sometime 
or other to be used as a Medicine. I believe your Brains would 
make an excellent one, but they would hardly yield one Grain of 
sharpness in Distillation. And as I suppose, you would not use 
[^p.15^] 
Man's flesh crude (except in some few Distempers of Women) 
because you say it ought to be prepar'd: If the Fire must be used, 
it will produce Alkalies copiously from both fluids and solid parts 
of Man's Body; and Alkalies acording to your Hypothesis are the 
principle of Death and corruption; and yet all parts of Man's Body 
are sometimes to be prepar'd for a Mediaine. You forget your 
self so oft John, I am asham'd of you. The famous Etmulier was a 
Foreigner and an asserter of Alkalies to be good Medicines, and 
Acids the cause of many Diseases: How comes he in so much Credit 
with you here Sir? He should be rather infamous methinks for 
his Fraud or Ignorance; but you forgive him I see for sake, sake; 
that is, he was an Apothecary, and yeilds you an Argument for 
us, thus, Etmuller was an Apothecary; and yet became one of the 
most Famous Physicians in Europe! one whose loss is much to be 
lamented, he might have been so useful: Ergo, Mr. Acid who 
was an Apothecary, may nevertheless be one of the most Famous 
Physicians in Europe; and so, much to be priz'd: This is the Logick 
of it. But truly I can see no such great hopes of him, he is 
so apt to forget what ever he says and do's; but a blind man may 
catch a Hare, they say. 
 
[}Ac.}] I wrote my Essay of Alkalies and Acids, during the Siege of 
Namur, when I had not the opportunity of consulting Books, nor 
the benefit of coming at my own Papers, wherein I had set down 
my Observations; wherefore, I only made use of those occur'd to 
my Memory, which is a very taeacherous one, so they are not 
so numerous and exact as I design'd them; but yet I was willing 
to venture them abroad as they were, for some reasons; they being 
not in the least design'd to entertain the Learned, but to undeceive 
the Multitude. I have aim'd at certainty, if I can once arrive 
to that (which I will never rest till I have done) I care not. 
If we could have a publick Laboratory at the Nation's Expence I 
should hope to see the matter sooner effected. It costs the Nation 
some Hundred thousand's a Year in Powder and Ball to destroy 
Mankind: Why not One Thousand in Experiments to save their 
Lives? There is a Noble Laboratory already built at the College 
the fittest place for such a thing, and the Governing Officers are 
Men of Fidelity, and of such Publick Spirits, that they are fit to 
be trusted with a greater Summ. 
 
[}Al.}] I think it had been well Mr. Acid you had let alone Writing 
till you could have consulted Books, as well as your own Papers, 
that you might have help'd your Memory (which you now 
confess to be a very treacherous one, and so shew, I have not abus'd 
you) for truly your Observations are not so exact as they should be. 
But you had Reasons to venture them abroad, not to entertain the 
[^p.16^] 
Learned; but to undeceive the Multitude. What's the meaning 
of this Sir, who are the Learned? The Asseyd Doctors such as your 
self, Dr. Jones, Dr. Watson, Dr. Baynard? &c. And are all the rest the 
Multitude? Those perhaps whom you call Young Physicians, tho' for 
Years they may be Old Men. Or, do you mean by the Learned, all 
Physicians, and by the Multitude all other Men who understand no 
thing of Physick. These last you rather seem to mean: But 
what do you Write to teach them Physick? What will become of 
the Doctors then? There is Vinegar, Crab-Verjuice, Lemons and Oranges 
enuogh to be had and you tell them, They can never over Dose 
it, for the Stomach wont fail to reject whatever is to much, and the damage 
is but a puke or two: We shall have them all turn Doctors, 
your method is so easie. But by undeceiving them, I rather suppose, 
you mean you would convince them that the Alkali-Doctors 
are dangerous fellows, or at best good for nothing; that they 
may Employ you Mr. Acid, and your Disciples, if you have any. 
There's the knack of it; and I confess, there needs not much 
exactness in putting out Bills to invite those that know nothing of 
Nature, or good Sense; and this consideration makes me inclinable 
to fancy, you may be as sharp a Fellow in Politicks as Tom 
Saffold, who once shew'd himself more Knave then Fool, when 
being told, his Bills were Non-sense; he wittily reply'd, he Liv'd 
not by Men of Sense. And I confess Fools are soonest caught. 
I applaud you for aiming at Certainty; but if you mean Certainty 
in Physick, and will never rest till you arrive to it; I think, I 
may ptomise the World a perpetual motion on your Credit. A 
Publick Laboratory at the Nation's Expence, would be a brave 
thing (but that would never make you an infallible Doctor, tho' 
you were the Director of it) and a Thousand a Year; yea, Ten 
Thousand would be better spent in such a Design to save Mens 
Lives, than some Hundreds of Thousands to destroy Mankind. 
But methinks Mr. Acid, you give the Nation a hard Complement, 
aud especially His Majesty the Supreme Director of our Expences, 
to say so much Money is spent to destroy Mankind. I don't believe, 
any such wicked Design; but that you abuse both King and 
People. But we have a Noble Laboratory to our wish at the 
College, the fittest place for such a thing. But John, you do not 
only bespatter every body else, but you disgrace the College too, 
by begging Money to buy them Coals and Glasses, as if they were 
either not able to defray the Charges of the design themselves, 
or so covetous they would not, unless the People give Money 
to instruct them in their Art, as well as pay their Fees for the 
effects of it. What the Governing Officers are as to trust, and 
Publick Spirit, I shall leave to those that best know them. But 
[^p.17^] 
indeed John I have no hope that those Men who understand Philosophy 
enough already, will ever be eager in the design you 
talk of, either with their own, or others Money; and submit it 
to your teachings: I could never find them so solicitous about Instructing 
young Physicians as your self Sir; but if they were, I 
should still fear a publick Laboratory, as you would direct it, 
would rather be a publick Pest, that publick Benefit; there 
would be so much Oyl of Vitriol, of Sulphur, and other sharp 
Corrosives made, and given to the Sick, as would destroy ten to 
one more than Powder and Ball do's: When not one in ten but 
sometimes may want a Doctor; but not one in ten thousand go's to 
the Wars: And these things would be so much more dangerous; 
because (like White-Powder) they would do execution, without 
giving a report. For John I must tell you, I still believe, that 
Acids may be the Cause of many Diseases; especially in the Hand 
of a four Hypothetick: And Alkalies may in many cases be very 
good Medicines: And this will go near to be my Opinion, till you 
have convinc'd me by good Reasons, grounded on sufficient Experiments, 
that your new Hypothesis is any more, than a new 
Method of Quacking. 
 
[}Ac.}] Every Man may be capable of judging, whether my Hypothesis 
is true or false, from this easie Method. Every Apothecary's 
Boy knows that all Acids pour'd on Syrup of Violets, or a 
solution of it, will turn it Red, and as the Acid is stronger, or 
weaker, so will the Red colour be: So on the other hand, all 
manifest Alkalies, lixivious or Volatile, will turn the Syrup Green, 
and as the Alkali is stronger, or weaker, so will the Green Colour 
be. Whence I infer if the Serum of Blood did turn the Syrup Red, 
it would be plain, that the Serum did abound with Acids; but if 
on the other hand it turns the Syrup Green it is more, or 
less impregned with Alkalous Particles. I positively assert, I 
could never find the Serum turn the Syrup into any colour but 
Green. All manifest Alkalies thus change the Syrup to a Green. 
Ergo, If the Serum too do's so change it, it must needs abound 
with Alkalous Particles. This is an easie way of Arguing, and 
the plainest Demonstration in the World. And no one that labours 
under the Gout, or any other Distemper Chronical, or Acute; 
but will be glad to lose two or three Ounces of Blood, to 
make this Experiment, on which so much depends. Every Gentleman, 
may thus reason with himself: My Physician tells me, my 
Blood abounds with Acids, and upon that score, gives me Alkalies 
to correct them; but if he should be mistaken, and my Blood 
abound with Alkalies, his giving me Alkalies will encrease the Distemper: 
Therefore since I have so fair an opportunity, my own 
[^p.18^] 
Eyes shall be jugd, what my Blood abounds with: Whether Dr. 
Colbatch's Enemies, being almost all the World of Physicians, or 
he are to be blam'd. If my Blood abound with Acids, he ought 
to be Kick'd out of the Common-Wealth; if on the other hand, 
it abounds with Alkalies; he deserves all the Encouragement in 
the World; for discovering so useful and necessary a Truth, and 
thereby exposing himself to the malice and rage of so many. This 
Experiment is liable to no Objection, I know of; and by it I can 
refer my self to every Gentleman, and from Gentlemen, I shall 
have Justice. Physicians have endeavour'd to expose me, because 
owning me to in the be right; would be owning their own mistakes: 
But by this Experiment, I have appeal'd to more just Judges. 
 
[}Al.}] You begin to talk like a Philosopher, and a Logician too; 
now Mr. Acid, I hope, that I shall have some Work, and that we 
shall leave playing: And I am very glad, I am capable of judging 
of your Hypothesis, by your own concession, since you say, every 
Man is so: And I hope, some Men will be capable of judging 
of what I shall say to it; tho' perhaps, every Apothecary's Boy 
may not: For in some places they do not teach them for the first 
thing, the change of colours in Syrup of Violets, by Acids and Alkalies. 
But I shall appeal to Physicians, and Gentlemen too, if Men 
of Sense. Gentlemen you know, are many of them, troubled 
with the Gout; and I remember you have told us, That all that 
are afflicted with the Gout, are Men of Sense; for you never met with 
one Block-head that was troubled with it. This is good Logick, could 
we suppose, you had met with all the Men troubled with the 
Gout. But I shall love Alkalies the better for this trick: For if 
all that are troubled with the Gout, are Men of Sense, and all that 
are troubled with the Gout abound with Alkalies (as you have affirm'd) 
it looks something like an Argument that Men abounding 
with Alkalies, are Men of Sense; and then on the contrary, Men 
abounding with Acids, are likely to be Block-heads; and I should 
always be afraid of an Acid Doctor, not only least he should be an 
Ass himself, but least he should make me a Fool too, by destroying 
the Alkali in my Blood; which gives me more happiness in a sensible 
Understanding, than infelicity in the sence of a Gouty Paroxysme. 
But tho' I appeal to Gentlemen, as well as Physicians; I shall not 
like, you so far disgrace my Profession, as to suppose, Gentlemen 
better Judges in Physical matters, than Physicians themselves: 
Should I do so, I should shew my self no wiser, that the Barrester 
who would be judg'd by his Clients, whether he pleaded Law, or 
no. I will not accuse Physicians, as either less Wise, or less 
Just, than Gentlemen; however Mr. Acid, or other Gentlemen 
may take it: But assert their Education for the generality, in all 
[^p.19^] 
respects equal to, if not exceeding Gentlemen; and if their accomplshments 
in Physical Knowledge be not greater, it is a great 
shame, aud Gentlemen are unwise in using them. But let us come 
to the reason of your Hypothesis. All Alkalies turn Syrup of Violets 
Green, Tarbox the Blood abounds with Alkalous particles. 
This is an easie way of argueing; but truly your Argument is far 
from a Demonstration; you are out in your Logick here, and 
have not prov'd the Point. For unless you could have made a 
regular Category, and have said, Whatever turns Syrup of Violets 
Green, is an Alkali. But Serum of Blood turns Syrup of 
Violets Green; therefore it is an Alkali, or abounds with Alkali: 
and then have prov'd your Major: It will not follow, that 
the Serum abounds with Alkali: For tho' all Alkalies will turn 
Syrup of Violets Green; yet it wants to be prov'd 
that whatsoever turns it Green, is an Alkali, or that nothing but 
Alkali will do so: Which I am sure, you will never be able to do, 
but by denying some of your assertions; as may appear before we 
have done. But I grant, that the Blood abounds with Alkalous 
particles; if by abounding, you mean only that it yields, or contains 
a great deal of Alkali, and not that it has always too much. 
And what then Mr. Acid? You don't deserve all the Encouragement 
in the World for this necessary Discovery; because truely, 
it is none of your Discovery; being well known, long before you 
were born, to your Master Helmont, and a great many more Famous 
Men; yea, I dare say, all that at-present deserve the 
Name of Physicians, knew it before you ever saw Blood Distill'd, 
or knew it would yield a Salt, or that Serum would turn Syrup 
of Violets Green. But you have discover'd one thing indeed, in asserting 
this your Discovery, that is your self, unacquainted with the 
World of Physicians, or arrogant and foolish in publishing that, as 
your Invention, which was generally known, long before you 
knew any thing of Physick. And truly John, you deserve to be 
laugh'd at and hiss'd, if not kick'd out of the Company of Physicians, 
for this Discovery. But to the Argument, 'Tis true, 
the Blood abounds with Alkali, whoever discover'd the truth of 
it. What then, do's it follow, that the Blood's abounding with 
Alkalies, is the Cause of all Diseases? Not at all. For, if it 
abound with Alkalies, I say, it should do so, as it naturally does 
in Persons most healthy; and it no way follows, that the abundance 
of that which ought to abound; is the Cause of Diseases: 
But the want of the due quantity of that which ought to abound; 
or the abounding of that which should not, or do's not naturally 
abound, is much more likely to be the Cause of a Disease. It is 
well known to those Physicians who have (as they ought) been 
[^p.20^] 
exercis'd in Experimental Phylosophy, that Man's body by a Pyrotechinal 
Examination yields a great quantity of Volatile, Alkalous 
Salt; but the quantity of it is much exceeded by the other Products; 
yea, even by one of them, viz. Water, the abundance 
of which, a Hypothetick Brain, might as well have fancy'd the 
cause, not only of a Dropsy; but of all other Diseases; there being 
more of it to be carry'd off by Perspiration, than of any other Matter. 
It is beyond all doubt, that the Particles constituting the 
Humane Frame, are of different Figures and Sizes, and have 
their determinate Proportions, as to quantity; from whence arise 
the different appearances of the Parts in their Natural 
Shapes and Constitutions; as also the different qualities of the Artificial 
Products from one, and another of them. But for a Man 
to say, That the abounding of any one of these (tho' by abounding, 
he mean one of them is too much in quantity) is the Cause 
of all Diseases; looks so unlike a Philosopher, or even a Rational 
Man, that I admire any one fond of a Reputation, should be 
guilty of such a folly, as either to assert it, or believe it! It is 
evident to all Men, that in any sort, study the Nature of Bodies, 
that a due Proportion of the component Parts is requisite to the 
proper Constitution of a Compound Body. And if a Body consisted 
but of two sorts of Particles: For instance, Acid and Alkalous 
(supposing them themselves so be simple Bodies) in all Reason, 
as there ought to be a certain Proportion; the abounding of 
one, as we as of the other, would make an undue Constitution, 
or Disease. But the Body of Man, consists not wholly of Acid 
and Alkalous Particles; so that one of these two must needs abound, 
to make a Disproportion: but of divers others, either 
Natural Constituents, or Artificial Products: and that it should 
be said, that but one of these can possibly abound, is without any 
colour of Reason; when not only our Food, which encreases 
and maintains the bulk of our Bodies, is so different, abounding 
now with one, then with another sort of Particles Homogenous 
to those our Bodies consist of; but also the various Excrements 
to be Egested may be now one, then another retain'd, or too 
hastily carry'd off, and so cause a disproportion; and what the 
proportion ought to be between these divers Particles, I doubt, 
will be found a matter too hard for a better Philosopher than 
Mr. Acid, certainly to determine. Moreover, the Body of Man 
is to be consider'd as consisting of solid and fluid Parts, containing 
and contained; besides which, there is in Man [^GREEK OMITTED^] 
Impetum faciens, and as we consider Diseases, with relation to this 
threefold Division; the fancy of Alkalies abounding to be the cause 
of all Diseases, will still appear more groundless, too narrow and 
[^p.21^] 
insufficient. In the solid Parts, there is to be consider'd, their 
undue Conformation; too little, or too great, too narrow, or too 
wide in proportion to one another; and so their unequal strength, 
their being too hard or too soft, solid or poreous; with many 
unperceiv'd Solutions of Continuity, &c. from which, divers 
Diseases, on divers occasions, may proceed; and all which, undue 
Conformations, unequal strengths or breaches, cannot be 
suppos'd so different and contrary, to proceed from the single abounding 
of Alkalies in the Blood. For instance, a large disproportionate 
Liver, small Lungs, narrow Veins, Cartilaginous 
Aorta, single Kidney, inward imperceptible Breaches, are impossible 
to be accounted for, from the abounding of Alkali. 2. The 
Liquours or Contents of the Body may be too thick, or too thin; 
moved too fast, or retarded too much, Extravasated, or Coagulated 
in some Vessel or other; of which contrary Effects, the abounding 
of Alkalies onely, cannot be always either the occasional 
or formal Cause. 3. As to the [^GREEK OMITTED^] of Hippocrates, 
or Archeus of Helmont; because some more thinking Heads, than 
Mr. Acid's sour one, have thought it too abstruse or subtil a Notion: 
I shall first tell you plainly, what I mean by it, leaving others to 
determine, whether Hippocrates and Helmont meant the same. By 
the [^GREEK OMITTED^] I mean the Soul, or Mind of Man in its extravagant 
Appetites: 
 
