[^Anonymous: Letter concerning acid and alkali^] 
 
[}A 
LETTER 
TO A 
PHYSICIAN 
CONCERNING 
Acid and Alkali. 
 
Being an Answer to a late Piece, 
Intituled, A Dialogue between 
ALKALI and ACID. 
 
[^GREEK OMITTED^] 
Non soles respicere te, cum dicas injuste alteri? 
Plaut. in Pseud. 
 
By a Gentleman. 
 
LONDON 
Printed for Andrew Bell at the Cross-Keys 
and Bible in Cornhil. 1700.}] 
 
[^Extract 1, pp. 3-47^] 
 
[^p.3^] 
[}A 
LETTER 
TO A 
PHYSICIAN 
CONCERNING 
ACID and ALKALI.}] 
 
SIR, 
THE Ambition I have of a more 
frequent epistolary Conversation 
with you, and my Zeal for your 
Service, have at last overcome the 
aversion I had to a review of those pieces 
which have been written against the New 
Hypothesis of Acids. For at my first reading 
I discovered so much unbecoming Language, 
that had not your Request (which with me 
has always the Force and Virtue of a Command) 
chang'd my resolution, I had never 
condemn'd my self to a second reading this 
[^p.4^] 
Dialogue, much less to the writing Remarks 
on it. 
 
Upon this account I have forborn to take 
notice of the first twenty Pages, concluding, 
that as undecent personal Reflections 
are no marks of Probity and Virtue, so they 
are below the cognisance of a generous mind. 
 
[^GREEK OMITTED^] 
 
I confess I am amazed to see the Ingenious 
Author of the Hypothesis of Acids, treated 
with the utmost Contempt and Scorn, 
without so much as one Author's examining 
the truth of his Hypothesis by Reason and 
Experience. I think it becomes men of 
Letters, Gentlemen and Philosophers, as 
Physicians are, to weigh and consider the 
force of every man's reasoning, and not with 
unmanly reflections to condemn a Doctrine 
which they will not take pains to examine in 
any other way than a Jest: as if the Life and 
Health of mankind were a Trifle to be play'd 
upon in a Satyr. 
 
Poetry is indeed a very pretty thing: but 
I must agree with you that the Character of 
a Satyrist and a Physician are vastly different; 
and as for those Gentlemen who value themselves 
upon a Sarcastical couplet press'd against 
its will to affront a Professor of Physick, 
I must esteem them as a more Genteel 
sort of Mountebanks; for altho there be a 
little more Wit and fine Language in those 
[^p.5^] 
Gentlemens Satyrical Bills distributed by the 
Booksellers, than in the dull Grimace of a 
Market stage, yet the nature, design, and 
effect of the Farce is the same: for Diseases 
not being to be cured with a Jest, the Patient, 
who is taken with these witty recommendations, 
is at once bubbled of his Mony 
and his Health: and for his remedy shall have 
the Honour to be distinguished in the next 
Lampoon. 
 
But for my part, I shall never trust my 
Life in the hands of a Physician, who takes 
so much pains with his Pen, to convince the 
world that he is a rare Poet, till by a demonstration 
he proves that a Correct Canto 
will cure a disease. 
 
Sir, I must observe that the Author of the 
Dialogue has not given one Experiment, 
or laid down the process of any one Medicine 
he would recommend to the world, for 
the good of Mankind, or that might overthrow 
the Hypothesis of Acids; tho he could 
not but be sensible that Dr. Colebatch had 
honourably and fairly offer'd his Method of 
practice to the Critical Observation of the 
Learned. I have therefore confirmed my 
Arguments with a variety of Experiments, 
to which I could have added a far greater 
Number; but I reserve them, that if this Author, 
or any for him, think fit to give Answer, 
they may be producedfor your Service. 
 
[^p.6^] 
In the mean time having resolved to pass over 
the first twenty Pages for the Reasons intimated 
already, I proceed to consider our Author's 
Arguments whereby he endeavours to 
defend Alkali as not being the cause of Diseases. 
 
And this he does by intimating, that Alkali 
cannot be the cause of Diseases, for that 
other causes, that are not Alkali's, may be 
assign'd; and instances in the [^GREEK OMITTED^] 
which he defines, to be the Soul or Mind of 
man in its exorbitant Appetites. It concerns 
not me to examine this definition, for if 
I take it for granted, it no way militates against 
the Hypothesis of Acids; for, when 
we speak of the cause of a Disease, which 
Physicians are said to discover, and by Medicines 
to remove, we always suppose the 
Proximate Cause, which this [^GREEK OMITTED^] never 
can be: as I shall by and by evince, after I 
have taken notice of some other things 
which this Author assigns as the cause of a 
Disease; viz. the undue Conformation of 
the solid parts, as being too hard, or too 
soft, too little, or too great, too narrow, 
or too wide in proportion to one another: 
from which, he says, divers Diseases, on divers 
occasions, may proceed, and instances a 
large disproportionate Liver, small Lungs, 
narrow Veins, Cartaliginous Aorta, single 
Kidney, &c. 
 
[^p.7^] 
To which I answer, that the undue conformation 
of the solid parts is no Disease, 
so long as they retain their due firmness of 
texture; nor can be supposed the cause of 
any Disease, when they perform their peculiar 
Offices of Secretion, &c. For, supposing 
the Organs of Hearing, Seeing, Smelling 
and Tasting, be disproportionate as to 
size or shape, they are not called Diseases; 
nor do I know what Distemper they can produce: 
did you ever know any Distemper 
caused in a Stag, from a Cartilaginous 
Aorta, which is that Physicians call the bone 
of a Stag's Heart? Nor can he assert that 
ever any man was diseased, or died because 
of narrow Veins, or small Lungs: 'tis true, 
that Pain is often produced from the capillary 
Vessels of the Brain, and other parts, being 
too much distended by a violent ebullition of 
the Blood: but no reasonable man would 
ever assign the cause of that Pain to proceed 
from the narrowness of the Veins, for Persons 
who have very large Vessels suffer the 
like pains. 
 
I have often observed in the dissecting of 
Bodies, who have had one of their Kidneys 
obstructed by Stones, Gravels or schirrous 
Tumors, and Ulcers, that the sound Kidney 
and Ureter hath been enlarged considerably 
by the great influx of Urine, and hath 
performed the Office peculiar to both. But 
[^p.8^] 
to prove that the distempered Kidney in such 
cases is caused by an Alkali, I need only advise 
you to examine the Stones, Gravel, 
&c. taken from thence, which upon trial 
will exhibit the Phænomena you can expect 
from most fixt Alkalies. 
 
A large Liver is no more a Disease than 
a large Nose, but rather of excellent use; 
for the Liver is design'd to secrete the Bile, 
that most pernicious excrement of our Bodies: 
so that according to the rules of proportion, 
the larger the Liver is, the greater 
quantity of Bile it will secrete, and the more 
we are benefited thereby. 
 
But if he means a large Morbid Liver, I 
see no reason why he should not grant it to 
be caused from a Superabundancy of Gall: 
for amongst all the Animals that I have dissected, 
who had their Livers distempered, I 
found them always ting'd with Gall: and 
among Butchers it's the common indication 
of a rotten Sheep, when the Liver is not of 
a florid complection, but ting'd with the 
bile: therefore if in such Cases there be a 
disproportionate Liver, it must be from some 
Heterogeneous Particles of matter obstructing 
the Juices in their Circulation through the 
Capillary Vessels of the Liver; from whence 
it becomes inlarged in Magnitude: and this 
is frequently the effects of a Superabundancy 
of bile; for when the Liver is overcharged 
[^p.9^] 
with that Lixivious Alkali, the tone of 
its parts is thereby vitiated, and render'd incapable 
of aptly secreting that destructive 
Juice, and emitting it through its proper 
Emunctories. 
 
Our Author tells us that Diseases are caused 
from the Juices of our Bodies, being sometimes 
too thick, or too thin: But I say it is 
from some Particles of matter admitted into 
the Blood, that is both the Cause of the 
Disease, and of the thickness or thinness of 
the Blood: for if there were not a retention 
of some Particles of matter which ought to 
be carried off, or an admission of others that 
should be prevented, the Blood would neither 
be too thick, nor too thin; but always 
have the same consistency. And in Physick it 
may pass for demonstration, that if you 
find the Blood of a Person labouring under a 
Rheumatism, Scurvy, or Gout, to abound 
with Alkali, and be viscous; and after he is 
cur'd by the use of proper Acid Medicines, 
you then find his Blood yield a less quantity 
of Alkali and be florid, and of a good consistency; 
I say, it's to me a demonstration 
that his Disease proceeded not from Acids 
but from Alkalies, which we found to superabound 
while he labour'd under those Pains, 
but evidently decreas'd upon recovery by 
the use of Acids. 
 
[^p.10^] 
That this is matter of fact, will appear 
to any man that will make the Experiment: 
and I dare affirm that he cannot produceme 
one Instance, of any Person's being cur'd of 
the foremention'd Distempers by the most 
Celebrated Alkalies. But to reassume the 
discourse of the [^GREEK OMITTED^]. 'Tis apparent 
(says our Author) that the exorbitant Desire 
or violent Action of the Will of Man, 
is that which often produceth such effects 
in our Bodies, as when perceiv'd become a 
Disease: for by them the Blood is too much 
retarded in its Course, as well as the more 
subtil Liquors variously disorder'd, and that 
these cannot in an instant produce a greater 
quantity of Alkali than the Body can bear. 
 
He should have told us what these exorbitant 
Desires were, and what their Effects; 
whether the exorbitant Desire of Mony, 
Women, Revenge, or Popular Applause: 
if he means such, then I need not tell you 
what are their effects, for Tyburn gives 
undeniable Proofs that by them the Blood 
comes to be too much retarded in its Course, 
as well as the more subtil Liquors variously 
disorder'd. 
 
But if by produce, he means create any 
Particles of new matter which were not 
preexistent in the Blood and Juices, I know 
no man that will affirm such an absurdity as 
the immediate Production of Alkali by the 
[^p.11^] 
operation of the Mind. A disappointment 
of the Will I know will of a sudden 
cause a relaxation of the whole 
Systema Nervosum, whereby Perspiration 
with all the other Secretions are obstructed, 
and the Organs of Respiration prevented 
from performing their Office; which accidents 
are often observ'd to attend Women: 
and by such a relaxation of the Nerves, and 
Constipation of the Pores, there are frequently 
induc'd Convulsions, and Hysterical Indispositions: 
and these Symptoms are produc'd 
no otherwise from a disappointment 
of the Will, than as it is an antecedent 
Cause, which Medicine does not remove; 
but only concerns if self about the immediate 
cause, the Materia ex qua constat, to 
wit, the Blood and Juices being imbu'd too 
plentifully with malign Particles of matter, 
which I say are Alkalies, whose Secretion 
is by the aforesaid accidents prevented, 
and the total Retention of which is alone 
sufficient to produce the most dismal Symtoms. 
And seeing no man denies, that a 
firmness of texture in the Nerves, and a free 
Perspiration, with all the rest of the Emunctories 
performing their Offices of Secretion, 
are indispensably necessary for the preservation 
of Health: I defy him to prove 
that Nature ever secretes any thing that 
will come under the denomination of an 
[^p.12^] 
Acid when in a state of Health. A Morbid 
Body, when the Nerves are relaxed and the 
tone of the Parts vitiated, I know will sometimes 
eject the most benign Juices, which 
should conduce to the support and preservation 
of the Subject, as in Scrophulous, Cancerous, 
Venereal, and Cachectical Bodies, 
&c. 
 
Page 22. He supposes there should be 
ten, or twenty parts of Alkali in a sound 
Man's Blood, to one of Acid; and from either 
of these Principles exceeding their proportion 
infers, that the Acid or the Alkali may 
be said to abound: but so long as they keep 
up to that standard, neither of these Principles 
can be supposed the cause of a Disease. 
From which I may naturally infer, that these 
or the like Proportions are constantly to be 
found in a state of Health, and that when 
either of these Principles exceed such measures, 
a disorder in our Bodies of one kind 
or other must ensue. 
 
I have for some years been in a state of 
Health, and so according to this supposition 
my Blood must have then abounded with 
such like proportions of Acid and Alkali; 
so that it behoves me to take care that whatsoever 
I eat or drink should yield but one 
part of Acid to ten or twenty of Alkali. 
But on the contrary I have taken quite other 
measures, for within these last twelve 
[^p.13^] 
Months I have drank for many days at least 
a Quart of Crab-Verjuice in twenty four 
Hours, which alone was sufficient to impregnate 
my Blood with six times the quantity 
of Acid he is pleased to allow it: and 
you know there's considerable quantities 
of Acid to be obtain'd from Bread, Wine, 
Oranges, and Lemons, of all which I take 
no inconsiderable quantities; but instead of 
being in the least disorder'd by them, I find 
my self more vegete and sprightly: if at any 
time I want an Appetite, the eating of 
Lemons, or drinking some other proper Acid 
restores it. I could give you a multitude of 
Instances where Gentlemen have complained, 
that after the taking of such Medicaments 
as their Physicians call'd Alkalies, their 
Distempers have been exasperated, their 
Appetites pall'd, but by the use of Acid 
Medicines they have been wonderfully relieved 
in a very short time; of the truth 
of which you may be inform'd by enquiring 
of a multitude of Apothecaries in this 
City. 
 
Page 23. After our Author has given us 
some Experiments made with Acids, and 
Alkalies, mixt in Syrup of Violets, he asserts, 
that there may be Acid enough in the 
Blood to cause a Disease, tho it will not 
turn the Syrup green; but he has not prov'd 
it. 
 
[^p.14^] 
From the beginning of the 24th Page of 
his Dialogue to the 29th, there's nothing but 
Scurrility, and Quotations out of Etmuller, 
Hoffman, Helmont and Hypocrates; so that the 
strength of his Arguments depends altogether 
upon an ipse dixit. 
 
Page 29. He says he is certain that Acids, 
as Oil of Vitriol, Spirit of Nitre, Oil of 
Sulphur, &c. coagulate and thicken the Blood, 
but very fallaciously teaches a wrong way 
of trying the Experiment: his directions are, 
to mix a little of either of the abovemention'd 
Acids with a little of the Blood, or Serum; 
by the which I understand he made 
his Experiments on Blood that had stood 
some time in the Porenger, when the grumous 
part was coagulated, and a Separation 
made of the Serum: a very irrational way 
of trying the Experiment, when the question 
is whether an Acid when taken inwardly, 
and diluted in a proper Vehicle, 
will coagulate Blood when it's warm, fluid, 
and perpetually circulating through its 
Channels, by which means there's made a 
due Commixture of all its parts with whatever 
is ingested. 
 
But to convince you that Acids will not 
coagulate Blood when judiciously used, 
Take 4 or 5 Drops of Oil of Vitriol or Spirit 
of Nitre, and dilute it in 3 or 4 Spoonfuls 
of Water; such a proportion of Acid is as 
[^p.15^] 
much or more, than can be admitted into the 
Blood at any time when taken inwardly: 
when you have opened a Vein, begin to 
drop your Acid Mixture into the Porenger, 
proportionable to the Stream of Blood; at 
the same time begin nimbly to agitate their 
parts with a Goose Quill, or the like, continuing 
the motion of your Feather till the Blood 
is cold. By this Method I have with Oil of Vitriol, 
Spirit of Nitre, &c. not only preserv'd 
Blood fluid, but also free from Putrefaction, 
the last of which is what neither Volatile 
nor fixt Alkalies will do, as may be seen by 
the following Experiments. 
 
[}Experiment I.}] 
 
January 9th, I mixt with one parcel of 
Blood taken from a Woman who then laboured 
under a Pain in her Head, and right 
side about the region of the Liver, 6 drops 
of Oil of Vitriol diluted in two Ounces of 
Water; and it not only preserv'd the Blood 
fluid, but gave it a much better Colour 
and Consistency than some of the same 
Blood had, with which I mixed nothing. 
I then put it into a Viol, and after having kept 
it by me about 18 days, I pulled out the 
Cork, and it was equally free from any Smell 
or signs of Putrefaction as when it streamed 
from the Vein: the quantity of Blood 
[^p.16^] 
made use of in this Experiment was about 
5 or 6 Ounces. 
 
[}Experiment II.}] 
 
With a like proportion of the same Woman's 
Blood, I mixed 30 drops of Oil of 
Tartar (which you know is a fixt Alkali) 
diluted in two Ounces of Water, and the 
Blood seemed to remain fluid while it stood 
in the Porenger; but after I had poured it 
into a Viol, and suffered it to stand close 
stopt for 3 or 4 days, I observ'd that the 
grumous part thereof was precipitated, and 
it stunk most intolerably: the Smell was 
much like that proceeding from a dead Body, 
whose Lungs or other Viscera have 
been ulcerated, and too long expos'd in the 
Air. 
 
[}Experiment III.}] 
 
I also mixed with a like quantity of the 
same Woman's Blood, twenty Drops of Spirit 
of Nitre dulcifi'd, diluted in two Ounces 
of fair Water, and it preserved the Blood 
fluid, gave it a better Colour, and hindered 
any of its parts from subsiding; neither 
did it stink in the least, so as I kept it 
by me, which was about 28 or 30 days. 
 
[^p.17^] 
[}Experiment IV.}] 
 
After the same Method I mix'd with four 
Ounces of the said Person's Blood, 30 Drops 
of Spirit of Sal Armoniac which is an Alkali, 
and it preserv'd the Blood fluid; but 
after seven or eight days keeping I open'd 
the Viol in which it was close stop'd, and 
it sent forth a very offensive stink. 
 
Sir, if these Experiments are not sufficient 
to convince you of the falshood of 
our Author's Assertion, viz. that Acids 
cause a putrefaction in animal Substances, I 
have a variety of others at your service. 
 
Page. 30. He begins to argue a juvantibus 
& lædentibus, and says, that Acids are 
pernicious in Hypochondriack, Hysterical and 
Scorbutical Cases, in divers kinds of Ulcers, 
and Issues; and on the contrary, that 
these are reliev'd and eased by Alkalies. But 
we have only his bare word for't, for 
he hath prov'd neither; and should I undertake 
effectually to prove that Acids are the 
only Medicines which cure those Diseases 
he has nam'd, it must be by enumerating 
Observations of Cures perform'd by 
them; which wou'd, I am afraid, make 
this Epistle too long. Therefore I shall 
only trouble you with the naming some of 
the most celebrated Medicines in use in the 
[^p.18^] 
cure of those Distempers, as Steel in all its 
best Preparations, all the Acid Spirits and 
Elixirs, Crem. Tart. Vitriolat. Sal Suce. 
&c. all which in your practice you are very 
well acquainted with; and I refer you 
to what Dr. Colebatch hath said on that 
Subject in his Treatises already published. 
 
In the same page he says, that from Blood 
or Urine, of either healthy or diseased Persons, 
an Acid is to be obtain'd; but having 
not told us the Process, I must beg his pardon 
if I don't believe him. 
 
Again, he says that he can mix an Alkali 
and an Acid, that in distillation there shall 
come over no Acid, but an Alkalious Liquor; 
and that he can mix an Alkali and an 
Acid, and there shall be neither an Alkali 
nor an Acid obtain'd from them, but a Salsum. 
 
Again, he says that he can mix an Acid with 
an Alkali, and the result of the Experiment 
shall be, that neither an Alkali, Acid, nor 
Salsum, shall be obtain'd from them; but 
like a cunning Man, he will not show us 
how these Tricks of Legerdemain are to be 
perform'd, lest we should discover the Imposture. 
 
Page 31. The natural or artificial Conjunction 
of an Acid and an Alkali, he says 
will make a Salsum; but I call it an 
[^p.19^] 
Acid, because the Acid is most predominant, 
and does operate as such: for if you take 
good Tart. vitriolat. which he calls a Salsum, 
and dissolve it in Water, this Solution 
shall work upon Filings of Steel as manifestly 
as Spirit of Vitriol which is allow'd 
to be an Acid. 
 
The Blood he says appears Salt to the 
taste, which he calls a Salsum: but it's plain 
to him who will taste Blood, that the Salt 
taste thereof hath no Analogy to the Mixture 
of an Acid with an Alkali, no more 
than the mixture of Juice of Lemons and 
Salt of Wood, the one an Acid and the 
other an Alkali, hath with Oil of Tartar, 
or any other manifest Alkali. 
 
Seamens being troubled with the Scurvy 
he assigns to proceed from their eating Flesh 
and Fish too much salted, whereby the 
Spirituous and Volatile parts are too much 
exhal'd, and that common Salt acts not as 
an Acid, but as a Salsum. 
 
I answer, that common Salt by often dissolving 
and chrystalizing shall be so much 
deprived of its Bittern, as to act as an Acid, 
by dissolving Filings of steel, and making 
an ebullition with Alkalies, &c. or if you 
would do it at once, pour one ounce of 
Spirit of Salt into two Quarts of a strong Solution 
of common Salt, then evaporate and 
chrystalize; and so you will have the Salt 
[^p.20^] 
of a finer and larger Grain, and much more 
wholesom and useful in all Cases. The 
reason of which I take to be this, that 
the acid Spirit of Salt does correct the Bittern 
that is in all common Salt. When that 
is done, it shall remain of a closer Texture, 
not apt to run into Liquor; but one pound 
thereof shall serve and do as much as four 
of the common Salt, as I have known my 
self. 
 
Now Sea Salt being prov'd an Acid, I 
cannot imagine how it should be the Cause 
of the Scurvy, when there's scarce a better 
Medicine known for its Cure than Spirit of 
Salt. And a Scurvy being the Symptom 
of a Putrefaction in some degree of the Juices 
of our Bodies, it will still look more like 
a Paradox, that Salt, which is the known 
Preservative of dead Flesh, should be 
the Cause of Putrefaction in that which is 
alive: Nor will the want of the spirituous 
and volatile parts of Flesh and Fish, appear 
to be the cause of any Disease, when you 
consider that Physicians commonly prescribe 
their venereal Patients, &c. Flesh roasted or 
boiled to dryness, and such other Food as 
yield the least quantities of spirituous and 
volatil alkalious Parts, as Watergruel, dry 
Bisket, and Raisins, &c. Now if I did not 
design brevity, I could produce several Instances 
to prove, that Acids are not the Cause 
[^p.21^] 
of the Scurvy, but that they are the only 
salubrious Medicines in use against that 
Distemper. Particularly in a worthy Gentleman, 
who for many years had been extremely 
afflicted with the Scurvy; but after the 
ineffectual use of many Medicines prescribed 
by Physicians of the best Reputation, was 
at last, as he told me, prevail'd upon, by reading 
Dr. Colebatch's Tracts, to eat Lemons 
plentifully, and he quickly arriv'd to the Perfection 
of eating 30 in a day. By which 
Method he recover'd, and enjoys a perfect 
state of Health. The Gentleman's Name I 
have not mention'd, because I had not the 
opportunity of asking his Consent. 
 
Another Assertion our Author makes without 
any Proof or Experiment given, is, That 
tho a coldness or moistness of the Air hinders 
Sweat, yet we perspire more when we 
don't sweat than when we do: which I apprehend 
thus, that we lose more in weight 
when we sit still in the open Air and in a 
cold frosty Morning, than if we were 
sweating in the Bagnio; which I say may 
be prov'd a Mistake by a multitude of Experiments 
made at the Hummums and other 
Sweating-houses, where it's plain, that we 
lose more in weight by one hours sweating 
than we do in four without it. 
 
Sweating and Perspiration I apprehend to 
differ only secundum Majus & Minus; they 
[^p.22^] 
both are consequents attending the open 
Pores of our Bodies, and therefore I think 
it would be ridiculous to imagine that a cold 
or moist Air opens the Pores to promote Perspiration, 
and shuts them at the same time to 
prevent Sweating. 
 
Our Alkali man confesses in the same Page 
that he cannot see how an Acid can be separated 
from Sea Salt when in the Blood and 
other Juices of the Body; and in the next 
Page affirms, that Acids are found separated 
in further recesses than the Stomach and 
Guts, which I think cannot be, from Bodies 
more easily to be dissolv'd than Sea Salt. 
Neither is there any other Separation requisite 
to be made of Sea-Salt or any other 
Food ingested, but a dissolution of their 
Texture, so that every Particle of them may 
be at liberty to exert themselves; and such 
a Separation of Salt is commonly made before 
Deglutition. Besides, it's plain that 
Bones and such like solid Substances are 
in a great measure dissolv'd in the Stomachs 
of Dogs, Ostriches, and other Creatures of 
a voracious Appetite. 
 
Page 32. He says, Acids are found separated 
in further recesses than the Stomach 
and Guts: one Instance he gives is that of a 
Cancerous Breast, cut off by Mr. Smith, 
who was poyson'd by tasting an Acid Liquor 
found therein, so as to be the occasion 
[^p.23^] 
of his death some Months after; and that 
it was so penetrating like Aqua fortis, that 
he could not wash away the taste thereof, 
as he affirm'd on his death-bed to the Physician 
who gave him the account. 
 
Sir, a Man that's poison'd is commonly 
delirious on his death-bed; and it's 
not unusual to hear such in their Phrensy 
accuse the most proper Medicine of being 
the cause of their death. But supposing 
Mr. Smith was poison'd, it will follow, according 
to his own Assertion, that it was not 
done by an Acid, because, says he, I cannot see 
how an Acid Spirit can be separated from any 
thing while in the Blood. But granting 
that it was a strong Acid like Aqua fortis, how 
will you account for its not making way 
through the Breast before Amputation? Again, 
had it been a strong Acid like Aqua fortis, 
it could not fail of raising an Escar on Mr. 
Smith's Tongue who tasted it, which had 
it done, it would then have been impossible 
for him to taste the Liquor so long after, 
because the mortified Flesh wou'd have 
fill'd his Mouth with a stink far surpassing 
that of any Acid Liquor. I presume, Sir, 
that the Physician who told him this Story, 
had the care of Mr. Smith during his 
Sickness, and without doubt fail'd not in exhibiting 
the most Celebrated Alkalies; but 
it appears they did him no service, for 
[^p.24^] 
which reason I believe the Liquor he 
tasted did not kill him without other 
help. 
 
Page 33, 34. In the Small-Pox, Scurvy, 
and Gout, he says it may be reasonably suppos'd, 
that the Blood of Persons so diseas'd 
yielding a greater quantity of Alkali than 
at other times, doth proceed from the Acid 
Particles being precipitated, and so fix'd in 
the extremities by their meeting with the 
Alkaline; so that the Blood flowing in the 
Veins, being depurated from the Acid, it must 
therefore yield a greater proportion of Alkali. 
 
But this Supposition of his is easily overthrown, 
by Chymically analyzing those 
Chalky Substances separated from the Blood 
of Persons afflicted with the Gout, and fixed 
in the Extremities, which you will find 
plainly to exhibit the Phoenomena peculiar 
to Alkalies. 
 
He is also very kind in telling us what 
great difficulties attend the distillation of 
Blood, so as to be able to say, within a grain 
here's all the Alkali, or Acid, in so much 
Blood. But I know, tho 'tis difficult to give 
Judgment to a Grain in the distillation of 
Blood, yet the difference is so manifest between 
Morbid and Sound Blood, that threescore 
or more Grains may be allow'd for 
perspiration through the Lute, deficiency 
[^p.25^] 
of Fire, or the waste in large Glasses, or the 
want of room in small ones, when you make 
use of the same Method in distilling of 
both. 
 
Page 35, 36, 37. The Saliva he says is 
not an Acid, because it will turn Syrup of 
Violets green. Sir, this Experiment does 
not prove that the Saliva is not impregnated 
with a manifest Acid, which is what Dr. 
Colebatch asserts: for there are a multitude of 
other Bodies which will turn the Syrup 
green, yet have in them a manifest Acid, as 
Oils and Vinous Spirits, which, tho they have 
in them a manifest Acid, yet it is so intangled 
or sheathed in the other parts of the Fluid, 
that it cannot be unlocked or set at liberty, 
to exert it self by so clammy a Body as Syrups 
of Violets, yet they operate on other Bodies 
by virtue of their Acid. So Oil of Turpentine 
will dissolve Copper; and it's the Acid 
that is in Sulphur, that makes the Mercury 
so easily embody with it by rubbing, as in 
Ethiops Mineral, and so likewise in Turpentine, 
Spittle, &c. and because he says it's 
from the Turpentine consisting of ramous 
and flexible parts, which I think is the same 
thing with saying they consist of nothing 
at all; for till he shews me those ramous and 
flexible parts, I must believe it is from the 
Acid that is in them that they embody with 
Mercury. Again, the Saliva, &c. receive 
[^p.26^] 
their Denominations of Acid, not from quantity, 
but quality; for were they divested 
of that which gives them the name of Acids, 
they would fail in answering those intentions 
which with it they perform. As for the 
insipid Calxes that kill Mercury, I believe it 
false, till he tells me more of it; for there 
is none that I know of will embody with 
Mercury, and hold it so long as Saline or Acid 
Bodies will. 
 
The Trial he made on Saliva, was on 
that taken from sound Persons that often eat 
and drink Acid things; by which I understand 
that their frequent using of Acids did not impair 
their Health: and in the distillation 
thereof he found a Sal Salsum in the Caput 
Mort. from which might be obtain'd a manifest 
Acid. 
 
Blood, Serum, and other Animal Substances 
(says our Author) give an unpleasant 
Smell when evaporated on the fire, but the 
Saliva will yield a grateful Savour. Sir, you 
know that Nutmegs, Cinamon, and all odoriforous 
Vegetables abound with Acid and 
Sulphur, from whence according to their different 
modifications proceed those grateful 
Smells. Is it not then reasonable to conclude 
that the pleasant Smell arising from Saliva 
when evaporated, comes from an Acid or 
Sulphur? for all Animal Substances, when tending 
to corruption, emit a noxious Smell; 
[^p.27^] 
and from them in that state you cannot find 
a Salsum, such as he had from Saliva. 
 
Now he says that there's no need of any 
Acid in the Stomach, and tell us that his 
Stomach is always best when there's not so 
much Acid in it as will curdle Milk. In answer 
to this I say, there may be an Acid in 
his Stomach, tho not so much as will curdle 
Milk: for a small quantity of Wine, when 
poured slowly into Milk, will not curdle it; 
and you know that Wines have in them a 
manifest Acid. Nay, which is more, take a 
small quantity of Vinegar diluted in Water, 
and pour it into Milk gently, and there will 
ensue no Coagulum. There are a great many 
Vegetables in whom Acid abounds, which 
when decocted in Milk will not coagulate 
it. 
 
Page 40. He will not allow that the 
Saliva acts in the stomach as an Acid, notwithstanding 
an Acid may be obtain'd from 
it. But to convince you that the Saliva 
does act as an Acid, I shall enquire what 
Juices are brought into the stomach to cause 
hunger, which may be known by considering 
what Vessels communicate their Juices 
to that Viscera. 'Tis plain that neither 
the Veins nor Arteries convey any of their 
Juices into the cavity of the Stomach, nor 
is it properly speaking the Lymphatick Vessels; 
neither can it be the Nerves, for I know 
[^p.28^] 
not that they have in them any such quantities 
of Liquor. I conclude then that Hunger 
is caused by that Juice strain'd from the 
Salival Glands, which is continually in a 
state of Health more or less conveyed into 
the Stomach by the pressure of the Muscles: 
and you may observe that in Fevers, &c. 
where that moisture is deficient, the Patient 
has no desire for Food. Hunger is also 
caus'd by the eating Lemons, Oranges, and 
such like Acids. Now if Hunger is caus'd 
only by Acids, I desire him to prove what 
Juice is brought into the Stomach from any 
other part of the Body, that yields a greater 
quantity of Acid than Saliva. 
 
He proceeds to deny the truth of two 
Cures that Dr. Colebatch tells us he perform'd 
on Persons afflicted with the Stone; 
and argues against the opinion of there 
being some Vessels passing from the bottom 
of the stomach to the Kidneys. I confess 
that in all the Bodies which I have dissected 
I could never discover any such Ducts, for 
which I assign this reason, that all Vessels 
which have not in them a quantity of Liquor 
after death, and are not of a very firm 
Texture like the Blood-Vessels or Ureters, 
are very difficult to be found or trac'd, because 
they lie flat and appear like Membranes. 
But to corroborate the notion of there being 
some undiscover'd Cannulas passing from 
[^p.29^] 
the Stomach to the Kidneys, I shall from 
Authority give you the following Observations 
as circumstantial Proofs. 
 
Dr. Havelin of Plimouth gives an account 
of a Patient of his who was Minister of St. 
Martins 12 miles distant from thence, who 
having voided by Urine considerable quantities 
of Herbs that were mixt with his broths; 
and that he having given him some Gummous 
Pills, he also voided two of them through the 
Urinary Passages, which the Doctor had by 
him not long since. 
 
In the Philosophical Transactions, Vol. 2d, 
Tract. 4th, Page 803. Dr. Fairfax tells us of 
a Patient of his who voided a leaden Bullet 
through the Urinary Passages; and subjoins 
his opinion, that there are Vessels 
which pass from the bottom of the Stomach 
to the Kidneys. 
 
A very ingenious Gentleman told me that 
Dr. Mayow's elder Brother, who he says is a 
Man of great Veracity, assur'd him that he 
having used a Bochet in which Raisins were 
boyl'd, the Liquor not being strain'd when 
drank, he discharg'd two of them through the 
Urethra, tho with some difficulty. 
 
But if you please to advert to Dimerbrook's 
Anatomy, you will there find the 
History of several Persons pissing Needles, 
Alkekengi, Mellon Seeds, and other solid 
Substances: besides, I have observ'd that in 
[^p.30^] 
10 or 20 minutes after the eating of Asparagus, 
or taking a few Drops of Oil of Turpentine, 
that the Urine has been highly perfum'd 
by them. 
 
Now he endeavours to obviate this by 
saying, that Cows Milk will taste of the 
Crow Garlick, and it will be very hardly got 
out of the Cheese made thereof: but this 
doth not at all derogate from the reasonable 
opinion that there are some undiscovered 
Cannulas passing from the Stomach to 
the Kidneys, because from the Guts there are 
the Venæ Lacteæ which have immediate 
communication with the mamillary Glands, 
and help to compose them; by which means 
it is that if a Woman suffer a Child to suck 
Milk from her Breast that day wherein she 
takes purging Physick, the Child shall be 
purged also. 
 
Page 45, 46. The Bile he allows to be 
the most alkalious matter in the whole Body; 
and the Dung, he says, yields a fixt Salt, like 
to that obtain'd from the Gall, which no other 
part of the Body doth: but urges, that 
the Gall is mixt with the Chyle to prevent 
any Acid from entring the mass of Blood; 
that the Gall attempers the Chyle, and doth 
great service, tho detain'd in the Body; that 
there's not seen more evil effects from the 
Gall's retention in the Blood, than from its 
absence in the Guts. 
 
[^p.31^] 
I answer, that the Dung affording a fixt 
Salt like to that obtain'd from Bile, which 
he says no other part of the Body will do; 
and the Chyle not appearing ting'd with 
greenness, nor Milk yielding any such fixt 
Salt, which it certainly would if the Bile 
were mixt therewith, are plain Indications 
that the Gall is carried down with the rest 
of the Excrements, but not mix'd with the 
Chyle. Neither will it appear reasonable to 
imagine that the Gall should be carried into 
the Venæ Lacteæ, when you consider how 
narrow those Vessels are, and how thick the 
Bile is, especially when mixt with an Acid. 
 
The Gall's presence in the Guts can be of 
no other use than that it's in a way of being 
ejected by stool; and if it be detain'd in the 
Guts, the consequences are very dismal, as 
violent Colick pains, an Iliaca passio: but 
if any quantities of it pass downwards, a 
Diarrhea ensues, which if too soon stopt, will 
not fail endangering the Patient's Life. 
When the Bile is brought into the Stomach 
by an inverted motion of the Guts, produc'd 
by its Lixivial Particles vellicating their 
Fibres, then corrosive Pains in that Viscera 
ensue, with enormous vomitings. It may be 
known that these Symptoms are produced 
from that Juice, by the Excrements being tinged 
therewith, or the Patient vomiting quantities 
thereof: and I always observe, that 
[^p.32^] 
drinking large quantities of Water or Posset-drink 
when the Gall is lodg'd in the Stomach, 
causing pain, immediatly gives ease, 
after which they vomit; and according to 
the discharge of Bile, such is their relief. If 
it stop in the Liver, it produces violent Pains 
therein, and sometimes makes it schirrous 
and ulcerate, if it remains in the Blood. Various 
are the disorders it produces, according 
to the place it affects, as the Jaundice violent 
Pains in the Head and Back, a depress'd 
Pulse, an universal Languor, with multitude 
of other Symptoms too tedious to enumerate. 
 
I assisted in the opening a Gentleman's 
Body, where was found the Gall-Bladder 
empty; one part of the Liver was schirrous 
and ulcerated. in the Brain we discover'd a 
Mortification under the left side of the 
Os frontis: both Lobes of his Lungs were ulcerated, 
and appear'd to be nothing else but a 
Mass of rottenness. This Gentleman led a 
Sedentary Life, which with other Causes 
concurring, prevented the Bile from being 
carri'd into the Guts, and hinder'd the Liver 
from secreting it. His Friends told me 
that his first complaint was a pain in his 
right-side; this proceeded from the Bile remaining 
in the Capillary Vessels of the Liver, 
whereby a regular Circulation of the 
Juices through that Viscera was prevented, 
[^p.33^] 
and therefore it became schirrous, lost its tone, 
and was disabl'd from separating the Bile, 
and at last ulcerated. The Liver thus ceasing 
to perform its Office, the Gall regurgitated 
or continued in the mass of Blood, 
and fix'd it self on those parts whose strength 
was least able to resist it, as the Brain and 
Lungs, producing in them the foremention'd 
Symptoms: and I have frequently observ'd 
those Bodies stink soonest in whom the Gall 
Bladder was found empty; particularly that 
of a Child I lately open'd, who died complaining 
of a Pain in its Stomach and Guts. 
I found the Liver very much ting'd with 
Bile and by grasping the Stomach in my 
hand, I forc'd upwards about two Spoonfuls 
of the Gall, which discharg'd through the 
Nostrils; for the Mouth being very close 
shut, it could not discharge that way. I also 
found a small quantity of Bile in the Intestinum 
rectum. All which I think were sufficient 
Indications of the Child's death proceeding 
from a Superabundancy of Gall 
brought into the Stomach and Guts, the only 
parts of which it complain'd; and this 
Body stank intolerably. 
 
But to convince you that Acids are admitted 
into the Blood, I shall put you in mind 
of the Pancreatick Juice, which is manifestly 
Acid to the taste. Nay, Chyle taken from 
the Venæ Lacteæ of a Dog some hours after 
[^p.34^] 
he had been well fed, I have by tasting perceiv'd 
it manifestly Acid, when it has been 
kept some time. And you know it's from 
a distribution of the Lacteal Juice, that an 
increase and subsistence is given to all the parts 
of the Body. 
 
So Milk, which is only a more elaborate 
Chyle, by long keeping turns sour, not from 
its being expos'd to the Air; for if you put 
it in a Glass, and having exhausted the Air, 
you seal it up Hermetically, it will notwithstanding 
all your care become sour. And how 
far a deprivation of that Juice is a cause of 
Leanness, may by common Experience be seen 
in wet Nurses. 
 
Thus, contrary to his assertion of the Gall 
being a strict guard preventing any Acid from 
entring the Garison of our Bodies, I think 
it's prov'd that Acids ingested are admitted 
into the Venæ Lacteæ with the Chyle, and consequently 
carried along with it into the mass 
of Blood; without which it were impossible 
we could subsist, as may be seen by that 
Experiment mention'd in Dr. Needham's 
Piece de format. Fæt. where he says that 
Dr. Lower having tore the receptacle of the 
Chyle in a Dog, and preserv'd him alive, 
having stitch'd up the external Wound, the 
Dog, tho very well fed, died the fourth day, 
being starv'd to death: and having open'd 
the Body, he found the Chyle in great quantity 
[^p.35^] 
lodg'd in that part of his Breast which 
was wounded. 
 
Page 65. Acids are by him denyed to hinder 
Putrefaction in animal Substances, from 
Oil of Vitriol, or Spirit of Nitre pour'd on the 
red part of Blood, and turning it into a 
black Corruption, and the Serum into a white 
purulent matter: so Bladder, Leather, Flesh, 
Skins, Tendons, he says, have their textures 
destroy'd by Acids. 
 
I have already answer'd the first part of 
this Objection, and have told you this is a 
fallacious way of trying the Experiment: for 
tho Oil of Vitriol alone will coagulate Blood 
when it is cold, and a Separation made of 
its grumous parts from the Serum; yet if it 
be diluted in a proper quantity of an aqueous 
Vehicle, which is the method of giving such 
strong Acids internally, it will preserve the 
Blood fluid, and free from Putrefaction. 
 
I have preserv'd an Embrio with two 
Ounces of Spir. Nitri diluted in a convenient 
quantity of Water, and its texture hath 
not in the least been destroy'd thereby, but 
hath been free from any Smell or signs of 
Putrefaction: and retain'd a florid complection 
all over the Superficies. 'Tis the Acid of 
Salt which preserves Flesh and Fish from 
Putrefaction; for if you divest the Salt of 
its Acid, what remains will never do the 
business. Vinegar and Salt are the chief ingredients 
[^p.36^] 
made use of in preserving Cucumbers, 
Capers, Walnuts, Kidney Beans, 
&c. 
 
Animals, says our Author, that yield half 
their weight of an Acid Liquor, putrefy 
sooner than others that abound more with 
an Alkali. But he hath not told us what 
Animals; and if I grant what he says, it 
will not prove that their Putrefaction is 
caus'd by the great quantity of Acid, but 
from their deprivation of it: for when the 
Animal was alive, and had all its Acid, then 
there were no signs of Putrefaction in it; but 
being dead, and the Acid thereof gone off in 
Effluvia, there's no reason to wonder that 
the remaining Substances should putrefy. 
 
Page 66. Vegetables that yield most of an 
Acid and Oil in distillation, he tells us will 
rot sooner than others; as Crabs, Oranges and 
Lemons, will rot sooner than Apples that are 
not so sour. 
 
Sir, every years experience informs us 
how false this Assertion is; for Lemons are 
longer preserv'd than Apples, and will not 
putrefy but when bruis'd: Lemon-peel is of 
use many years, if preserv'd only by drying; 
but the skins of Apples will not keep so long. 
Crabs also I am told will preserve longer 
than Apples, but if they rot sooner, it's from 
the loss of their Acidity; for when putrefy'd, 
they are no longer sour. I have kept a Vegetable 
[^p.37^] 
two years in Water acidulated with 
Spirit of Salt, and it hath remain'd sound 
and intire; but I defy him to show me an 
Alkali either volatile or fixt, that will preserve 
Animals or Vegetables from Putrefaction. 
 
Page 67. Allum he asserts is not an Acid, 
notwithstanding an Acid Spirit is to be obtain'd 
from it in great quantities; nor doth 
it operate as an Acid, because, says he, it turns 
Syrup of Violets green. Again, he says, Allum 
is us'd in making of Leather on the account 
of its astringency, to make the Skins more 
compact. Sir, upon tryal I find it's the 
Chalky Substance in Allum which renders the 
Syrup green: for if you take the Acid Spirit, 
and mix it with Syrup of Violets, the Syrup 
will be turn'd red; and it's the Acid Particles 
of the Allum that make the Skins compact; 
for if you separate the Acid parts of 
the Allum from the Chalky Substance, that remaining 
matter will be of no such use. 
 
His Query, how Coffins made of Oak and 
the most resinous Fir, which have in them 
plenty of Acid and Oil, are consum'd, when 
the Bones that abound with Alkali remain 
firm, I can easily answer: for it's plain that 
Rottenness is produc'd in them from the Alkalious 
Flesh and Juices of the putrefying Cadaver 
they contain, emitting plentifully their 
Effluvia, which having no vent continue to 
[^p.38^] 
undulate round the Confines of the Coffin, 
and by degrees entring the Pores of the 
wood produce in it rottenness. The reason 
why Bones corrupt not so soon as the Coffins, 
proceeds from the hardness of their Cortex, 
having smaller Pores than Wood, that will not 
so readily admit these Alkalious Effluvia to 
enter them. And I observe that Bones which 
have been long buried, are always more rotten 
than those preserv'd for Skeletons. Oaks 
and Firs are not so easily consum'd by lying 
in the Earth as he imagines; for in many 
places of Scotland there are every dig'd 
out of the earth large Oaks and Fir-trees, 
which no man now living can remember 
ever grew, or were buried there: these Firs 
have not in them any signs of Putrefaction, 
but when dri'd are us'd by the Country 
People instead of Candles; and in burning 
they afford great quantities of a resinous 
Substance: but the Barks of these Trees 
are commonly rotten, for in them is to be 
found very little of an Acid or Oil. 
 
Page 68. Acids, he says, are not the only 
things will allay thirst, for Nitre will do 
it. By Experience I know that if you 
take from Nitre what is Acid, the remaining 
Substances will not quench thirst; but 
the Acid Spirit given in a due proportion 
with a proper Vehicle, will do it much better 
than Nitre given in substance. 
 
[^p.39^] 
Oil of Vitriol, he says, is a noble Medicine 
in Fevers. I agree with him, and by experience 
I know it is so; but he says that he 
knows an Alkali that is better; I desire he 
would produce it, otherwise I shall believe 
it to be an Acid. 
 
I think it's not material whether the Experiments 
try'd on Dogs, by injecting into 
their Veins Oil of Vitriol, be true or false; 
for that's not the method of giving Acids I 
contend for, not that I question, but if they 
were judiciously made, they would answer 
the Character those Gentlemen have given 
of them. 
 
Page 72, 73. He offers no reasons against 
the giving of Acids in the Small-Pox, but 
says that he has given Alkalies with Success, 
yet hath not told us what Alkalies they 
were. 
 
Sir, the use of Acids in the Small-Pox is 
now so generally believ'd and practis'd, that 
I need not trouble you with Arguments 
from that Topick, especially when I consider 
that your own experience enables you to 
speak more in their praise than I am able 
to do: however I shall subjoin the following 
story, as it was told me by a Chirurgion, who 
formerly belong'd to the Army, and is a 
man of great veracity. He says that during 
the time which he quarter'd in Portsmouth, 
which is about five or six years ago, a multitude 
[^p.40^] 
of that Regiment to which he belong'd 
had the Small-Pox, and he gave them 
for their constant drink large quantities of 
Spir. Vitrioli diluted in fair Water, and 
edulcorated with Syrup. Garyophillorum; and 
the Success he had was generally taken notice 
of throughout the Garison: for tho 
in another Regiment that quarter'd in the 
same Town, and had no greater numbers 
of Men sick than he had, they seldom fail'd 
of burying twelve or fourteen men every 
week, yet in their Regiment there did not 
die one man in six or seven weeks time: 
but he confess'd to me not to have us'd Acids 
then, for the reasons that he does now; he 
says he knew that Acids would quench thirst, 
but never imagin'd they would cure a Disease. 
 
The Alkali in the Blood, our Author says, 
cannot be put into a hurry alone, nor when 
mixt with the smallest quantity of Acid; 
but more Acid added produces a greater heat. 
 
I answer, that a mere Acid given in great 
quantity will not produce a greater heat in 
our Blood, as may be seen in the exhibition 
of Oil of Vitriol to Persons in Fevers, or in 
the mixing Volatile Salt of Hartshorn, or 
Sal Armoniac, which are Alkalies, with Spirit 
of Vitriol an Acid which makes a coldness, 
but I will not say so of Sulphureous 
Acids. 
 
[^p.41^] 
Page 81. The Chalky Substance generated 
in fits of the Gout, he says, will not prove 
the Disease to be caus'd by Alkalies: for, says 
our Author, Alkalious Salts when in solution 
are not coagulated alone, but by meeting 
with Acids. I say that Alkalious Salts when 
in solution, are coagulated with what he 
calls Alkalies: for Spirit of Hartshorn, or 
Spirit of Sal Armoniac made with Salt of 
Tartar, or any other volatile Alkali, will embody 
with Copper, and make what is call'd 
Salt of Vitriol, if they are suffer'd to stand 
together in the cold for a Month. And the 
same Spirit of Sal Armoniac, &c. which he 
allows to be an Alkali in solution, will in 
distillation so intimately unite it self with 
Lime, which is a fixt Alkali, that he shall 
never be able to separate any volatile Alkali 
Salt from it again. Indeed it may have 
the Smell of a volatile Alkali, but there's no 
volatile Alkali Salt to be got from it, as may 
be seen; for if the aforesaid Spirit be three 
or four times distill'd from good Lime, it 
shall be so far from what we call an Alkali, 
that it shall make no ebullition with a manifest 
Acid. 
 
Page 82. He denies that the Offa Alba is a 
Coagulation of the Vinous Spirit with the Urinous 
Salt; but says, that it is a precipitation 
of the Urinous Salt out of its Flegm by the 
effusion of the Vinous Spirit. I must tell 
[^p.42^] 
you, that this Gentleman grosly mistakes 
what Offa Alba is. 'Tis no precipitation of 
the Salt, but a Coagulum of the Vinous and 
Urinous Liquor into one Body: for it's as 
much in a Coagulum at top as at bottom, and 
the top has as much Salt in it as the bottom; 
and if he lets it stand for some little time, it 
will be reduc'd into one intire Liquor. 
 
Page 83. He says we cannot drink Vinous 
Spirits strong enough to coagulate the Alkalious 
Spirit. What will he think of some 
that I have seen drink high rectifi'd Spirit 
of Wine? and he allows that high rectifi'd 
Spirit of Wine will precipitate Alkalious 
Salts. If the aforesaid volatile Spirits are 
distill'd from Testaceous Powders, such as calcin'd 
Oyster-shells, Cockle-shells, &c. the Alkali 
Volatile Salt will be destroy'd. 
 
Moreover, says our Author, this Offa Alba 
is so very subtil and volatile, that it 
would easily find passage, and be carried off 
through the Pores by a gentle heat, and be 
so far from coagulating into a Chalky Substance, 
that it is a good Medicine to thin 
the Blood. The Salt of this thing, which 
he calls Offa Alba, will, if you try it, fix it 
self with common Lime, Oyster-shells, &c. 
 
P. 89. Iron is not an Acid, he says, because 
it blunts and absorbs Acids, making an effervescence 
with them, and is dissolv'd by them. 
But I answer, Iron making an effervescence 
[^p.43^] 
with an Acid, is no more an Argument that it 
is an Alkali, than that Butter of Antimony 
(which is allow'd to be a strong Acid) is an 
Alkali, because it makes a violent effervescence 
with Spirit of Nitre, or Spirit of Vitriol, 
which are Acids. Neither is Iron 
properly an absorber of Acids, but of Salts 
in general: for if you please to try, it will 
be dissolv'd by Acid, Alkali, or what he 
calls Sal Neutrum. If you put upon filings 
of Iron a volatile Alkali, such as Spirit of 
Urine, Spirit of Sal Armoniac, or Hartshorn, 
&c. there will a gentle ebullition ensue: if 
it stand in the cold (for in the heat the Alkali 
will soon be driven away) and this will 
last for a day or two, then you'll find the 
Spirit to be impregnated with the Steel, tho 
it is but little. And Crem. Tart. Tart Vitriolat. 
Common Salt will dissolve Steel, as 
may be seen in several Preparations of Tart. 
and Steel to be had in the Chymists shops. 
From whence may be inferr'd, that Steel is 
not properly an absorber of Acids: And so 
likewise of other Metals; for they will be 
dissolv'd by some Salts, some very easily, 
such as Copper, and others with trouble, if 
the operation be performe'd by the unskilful. 
 
But to go a little further in the matter, 
and do something towards proving that 
Steel abounds with Acid and Sulphureous 
Particles, which is what he denies, and not 
[^p.44^] 
with Alkalious, and so consequently ought 
to be call'd an Acid: I shall first show that 
Iron or Steel (for I shall use the words promiscuously) 
is very much impregnated with 
Sulphur; and then prove, contrary to his 
Assertion, that there is a burning Brimstone 
to be obtain'd from it. 'Tis a common Observation, 
that filings of Steel flung through 
the flame of a Candle, will take fire sooner 
than Gunpowder, and as soon as common 
Brimstone. The violent motion of the Flint 
and Steel, or two pieces of Steel together, 
does the same that the immediat flame of 
the Candle does with the filings. 
 
When the filings of Iron are in dissolution 
with Spirit of Salt, the fumes that arise out 
of the Glass will take fire; and if done in 
a convenient Glass, and a lighted Paper 
held to the Fumes close to the neck of the 
Glass, it will take fire, and fulminate as loud 
as the noise of a Musket. I hope by this 
time the Gentleman may be satisfi'd that 
there is such a thing as common Brimstone 
in Iron: if not, I shall only desire him to 
take a quantity of Sal Martis, and dissolve 
it in common Water, then add a quantity 
of Oil of Tartar somewhat more than enough 
to precipitate the Iron; afterwards 
evaporate all this muddy Liquor to dryness, 
without separating any thing of the precipitate 
from it; then flux what remains 
[^p.45^] 
with a little Charcoal in a strong fire, and he 
will have a very Sulphureous Salt; which if he 
dissolves in Water, and filter it, he may 
precipitate from this Solution by the help of 
distill'd Vinegar, or Spirit of Salt, a Sulphur 
which will burn and stink like common 
Brimston: or if Tart. Vitriolat and filings of 
Iron be mixt together, and put into a strong 
Hessian Retort, and then into a naked fire, 
and continu'd there for twelve or sixteen 
hours; what remains in the Retort, must 
be taken out, and dissolv'd in Water, afterwards 
precipitated by the help of any of the 
abovemention'd Acids, the precipitate will 
be an inflammable Sulphur. I have not mention'd 
the proportion of Tart. Vitriolat. and 
filings of Steel, because I am talking to a 
Chymist. If these Experiments will not suffice 
to prove that there is a Sulphur in Iron, 
I may chance to produce twenty more of 
different sorts; but I suppose these will satisfy 
the reasonable, and then I must conclude 
Steel to be rather an Acid than an Alkali, 
till I am convinc'd by matter of Fact that 
what is call'd a positive Alkali, may be obtain'd 
from it: And I hope no Person will 
doubt, that if I can get a Sulphur from 
Steel, but I may also get an Acid in quantity. 
 
Page 91. Every rational Man, he says, 
will think Acids so far from being useful to 
[^p.46^] 
cure a Disease caus'd from too much Acidity, 
that he will account it no less than Ignem oleo 
extinguere, to use them in such a case. Now 
I shall tell you, that Acids do operate upon, 
and alter the Texture of one another; and 
if so, I am sure that a Disease caus'd by Acids 
may be cur'd by Acids. If the Texture of 
a Body be alter'd, its Qualities must be so 
too, and it must act differently from what 
it did before. All which is plainly seen in 
that very common Experiment in Chymistry: 
for if you take good strong Spirit of Nitre, 
or Aqua fortis, it shall immediately dissolve 
Silver; but if you mix with this Spirit of 
Nitre, or Aqua fortis, some Spirit of Salt, 
which is another Acid as strong as it self, it 
shall immediatly be so alter'd, that it shall 
never be able to dissolve Silver as it did before. 
 
He says, the Doctor's preparation of Steel 
with Sal Armoniac is not made with an Acid. 
I think it is; and to prove it to you, if you 
make this Preparation in a Retort and a 
strong Fire, you shall find nothing but an 
Alkali Spirit to arise, and the Acid will remain 
with the Steel: for if you take the 
Caput Mort. and distil it as other Acid Spirits 
are generally distil'd, you shall have nothing 
but a pure Acid come over, of great 
use in Physick and other things. 
 
[^p.47^] 
But to prove it yet further, I shall trouble 
you with an Experiment or two more: If 
you dissolve filings of Steel in Spirit of Salt, 
which is allow'd to be an Acid, and distil it 
as before in a Retort, you shall find the Caput 
Mort. the same with that made of Sal Armoniac; 
which I also try'd by a Microscope, 
and found the Texture to be the same. And 
to satisfie you yet further that it's not the 
common Salt, but the Acid Spirit of it, 
that is one part of the compound of Salt Armoniac, 
and Volatile Alkali the other, you 
may make a Mixture of Volatil Alkali and 
Spirit of Salt together, and the produce 
will be very fine and good Sal Armoniac; 
from which Sal Armoniac you may again 
separate the Alkali, and then make the 
Doctor's Preparation of Steel. 
 
