and in this I am more confirmed by observing that almost all the infants that are ruptured within the first five or six months of their life, are males.
In þe name of þe fader and þe sonne and þe holy gost; and write þes names in perchemyn:
In equity, by a comparative statement of the claims of the licentiates and fellows.
Tak aloen and stamp it and do it in his mouþe and alsone he shalle speke.
Aboue y=e= thovme is the make;
this, Experience has taught to be very dangerous;
He is A vayne of nobill fame;
Let it sethe tyl halfe be wastyd.
There was some other small matters to be seen, not worth while for me to mention to you.
And if þou take þe mawe of a sowkynge hare, or of a sowkyng calfe and bren it alto powdere, medell þe poudre with þe forsayde pille, þei are mych betture.
Drink half a pint of this Morning and Night.
To knawe the vaynes to let blode one.
After ix daies þer nature is of o substance jwys
It ys made by antepasyn when minucion is made, and anthepasyn ys sayd as wer contrare pascions.
forsoþe þat þe significacions of helyng or curyng and þo þing with which it is helyd or cured be diuerse.
The body of a man was thrown up at Puddle-dock by the tide, having a deep wound in his neck near his windpipe, besides several other wounds and bruises; had nothing on but the collar of his shirt, and shoes, and stockings. 
Þis is kynde makyng of nervale certayne. 
All þe veynes I haue nowe tolde That clensen men, both yonge & olde. 
Blode is hot and moyst in his kynde and therfor men that ben sangweyne in complexion ben hot and moist in his kynde for plente of blood that they haue.
To guard therefore against such delusions, and to render the unphysical reader better qualified to decide, in an affair of so much importance, as his own health, and life, is the purport of this Essay; where by demonstrating the influence Nature has over many diseases, he may the readier judge of medical assistance in general, and on what plan, it can best be conducted.
Also the Gout is a greife in some by way of distention, whereas the body being replete with abundance of humors, the upper and stronger parts put downe their offending fulnesse unto the lower, which descending, the veines, and sinewes, and arteries procure this paine of distention.
If you be sick after meat, use this.
At betonye I wyll be gyn~e Y=t= many vertewys hath hy~ w=t= i~ne, Betonye sothy~ yese lechys bedene Yat kepyth ma~nys body clene, Who so betonye on hym bere Fro wykked sperytis it wyll hy~ were.
The Lungs is also divided into five Lobs, or Pellicles viz. three on the right side, and two on the left;
THe Small Pox are caused of superfluous choller and flegm, the which is mixed with the bloud, and so continuing a certain time it doth encrease so much, that Nature cannot bear it, and so driveth it forth with a great accident of a Fever, the which commonly doth continue four or five daies together, and then cometh forth certain wheals or bladders full of corruption, which within three daies will break and run forth, and many drie.
Behind the Lungs passeth Isofagus of whom its spoken before, and there passeth also veins and Arteries, and all these with trachia arteria do make a stoke repleat unto the gullet, with Pannicles, strong Ligaments, and glandulus flesh to fulfill the voyd places.
BY the term rupture, hernia, or descent, is meant a tumor produced by the falling down or protrusion of some part or parts which should naturally be contained in the cavity of the belly.
ONE handful of Garden-Tansy, as much Sage, and twice as much Scurvy-grass, steep'd in two quarts of White-wine, or Strong Ale. 
For to make a good entret.
I could instance many more, which Authors do wrongfully apply, as instance they attribute angelica, sage, box, and such like to be under the planet Saturn whereas the herbs are all hot and dry especially box who is hot and dry in the fourth degree, both the first plants are without question under the dominion of the Sun, as being of a good smell and taste and are of known virtues to comfort the heart, arteries, and vital spirits and to resist poyson.
That the Air we breathe in may be wholesome, all Things, that may advance or add to the corruption of it, should diligently be removed; our Houses, and Streets kept clean;
Drink for ordinary Dyet.
And Care must be taken not to overload the Stomach, or to eat any thing but what is of good Nourishment, and easy to digest, and grateful to the Stomach.
It is the object of this treatise to prove, that every well educated physician, of unimpeached character, residing within the jurisdiction of the college, is entitled, independently of local study and local graduation, to be examined for admission into the fellowship of the college;
Also the well annointing with oyle of Nutmegges, or Mace adding a few drops of oyle of Cloues Chymicall doth much comfort, keeping the grieued part extraordinary warme.
Let ayre be cleare and light, & free from faultes, That come of secret passages and vaults.
THE vulgar sort are so strongly prepossest (by reason of their ignorance) that Physicians can discern (by the Urine) the Disease, the conception, the sexe, the parties age, with many other such absurdities that I feare it will bee an hard matter to dispossesse them of that opinion.
By it passeth all the chilosity of the meat from the stomack to the Liver.
This has always appeared to me to be the case; 
There being not so much as one word concerning Men-midwives mentioned there that we can find, it being the natural propriety of women to be much seeing into that Art: and though nature be not alone sufficient to the perfection of it, yet farther knowledge may be gain'd by a long and diligent practice, and be communicated to others of our own sex.
This is yuel for þey3en.
And having thus saluted me, presents me the Urine, saying, Sir I desire your opinion of this water, and to tell me (though the sick partie know that too too well already) what the partie ayleth, and what the Disease is;
And 3yf þer schulde be norechyd on hem ony frut it is profyt abele þat che purge er che conseyue to make clene and redy þe place þat þe seed sal ly in.
A treatise on clysters.
For swellyng of membre of man or woman.
Al bowyd is þe rygge so þat ny3e rounde it is Man wher of is þi pryde ther is none jwys
This indeed is cleer enough, and obliges us to averre a greater antiquity of this operation, than before we were aware of;
The thyrde water of seyunte Gyle ys for to distroye many infirmiteys with in a mannys bodye, and hit ys clepid amongyste clerkes and doctoris aqua potabilis and hit ys made in this wyse.
And drynk it w=t= water clene, 
I graunt it is the power of the mynde whiche seeth, it is the power of the mynde whiche seeth, it is the power of the mynde which heareth, but yet if any infirmitie take the eyes, if the poores and issues of the eares be stopped & beseged w=t= any grosse humour, i~ vayne & al for nought hathe the mynde his power.
In the left hande for the mylte;
AS sutures of one kind or another are found necessary, not only in every large wound, but in almost every operation of importance, the consideration of this subject seems first to require our attention.
Make apowdyr of betonye rote,
Take þe herbe celidoyne whos frute and flours been of goldyn colour, and take þereof the iiij elementz aftre þe maistrie of þe furst boke.
Many þings bene profitable to þe confeccion of clisteries, if þe lech mi3t haue al redy.
This disease is knowne by the patients complaints and answeres.
Take green Vitriol calcin'd, Saltpeter, and Sulphur, of each a pound, beat them well together, and keep it for use.
3e that wyll lette gude men blode, And vaynes wyth al 3owre liues fode, Some vaynes, vse 3e, And mony other lette 3e be.
And as son as che purgis che is abele to conceyue.
For þe sengles.
This suture is accordingly now very rarely practised, and it is probable that it will be soon laid entirely aside.
Wommen of relegion purge noght because of rysyng o nyght and synggyng and ocupacyon in her seruyse her blod wastyth.
Now, whatever be our exercise, those whom good fortune has enabled to take it or not, would do well to attend to the following observations.
The true causes of the disease, from observations made upon it, both at sea and land.
Take lynseed &~ letuse, and stampe hem to gedre, and ley to þe stomak, &~ vse þis medicine til þou be hool.
Any of al thes may change a mannys complexion.
Otherwiles the skynne is bowen inward with a stroke and not broken.
For spotes et oþer sekenesse to be don a way in þe face.
It is an admirable head Purge, also an excellent and safe Medicine for those who are naturally costive or hot bodies.
Therefore it behoveth all Persons, as well Poor as Rich, to be furnish'd with Remedies against that Contagious Disease; and certain Rules, or a Method how to use them:
About 18 months ago I dissected a poor Emaciated Creature, that dyed of a Hydrops, out of whom I took about 10 Gallons of Liquor measured: 
and about a month ago a Child which had an Involution of the Intestines; which, I believe, the Vulgar means, and calls the Twisting of the Guts.
A barge-man fell into the dock at Queen-hythe, and was drowned.
Also yf the sekenes be inveterat, i.e., old, be metasentesyn.
This was writen fro Mounpileris to Quene Isabel of ynglond, at þe preier of ye kyng of Fraunce, hir broþer.
Take an Egge, make a hole in the top of it, take out the white, and the yolk, and fill the shell only with Saffron; roast the shell and Saffron together, in Embers of Charcole, untill the shell wax yellow;
Tak ache seed, lynseed and comyn ana, stampe hem to gedre wel, and 3ef þe seek wyþ hote watur.
I wyl y=e= telle by & by As I fond wrety~ in abok, Y=t= in borwyng I be tok Of agret ladyes prest Y=t= of gret name bar y=e= mest. 
Beneth, when y=e= leuer takis harme. 
Also this medcyne nowe helyth the lepner and the fyer of helle and the grekys fyer and the fyer of Sodom.
Brother I pray the for charite that thou write to me a fewe medecynes that I myght help pore folk that falleth into sekenes and beth vnkonnyng to helpe hem sylfen and of vnpower to huyre hem leches.
So that she neadeth nothynge at all to be auansed and lyfted vp, other with any despitefull rebukes of other craftes, other with some borowed and paynted colours of the rhetoricians, or with the iugglynge castes of amplificacions.
It distroith y=e= fe all be dene.
It sufficeth, so that I shew the substance of the thing, and to doe it, that every one may understand it.
Ri3t dere frende Nero as it acordeþ þe significaciouns of wyrchyng for to be considered of þe essencion or beyng of kynde and of þe sekenes so it is nedeful þat þe science or þe connyng of þe þings with which curacioun or helyng schal be giffen for to be perceyued of þe same essencion or beyng.
all Filth, and whatever may cause noisom smells, be taken away; 
Alle maner swete þingis, forwhi þei swelliþ, and alle maner notis and accornys of okis.
Being a discovery of the Body of Man, exactly delineating all the Members, Bones, Veins, Sinews, Arteries, and parts thereof, from the Head to the Foot.
And som hafe it lengere as þei þat be of hye complexioun and be norysched with hote metys and drinkys, and lyuoun yn mych rest, and þey hafe þis purgacyoun euery moneth oones, but when þey ben with childe ore þat þey be of drye complexioun and laboure muche.
The filmes of the braine are very much troubled with this paine, which by reason of their tendernesse, euen the least paines are sharpe and irksome to them.
This is good for þe y3en.
I haue sayd als I hafe sens; 
For the same.
3if y=u= of vomites wylt hawe bote,
Tak stronge vinegre of whit wyne, and anoynte euery day þryes or foure times þe vysage, þer hit is saucefleme; and hit wol breke out, as hit were a mesel, and when hit is so broken out, anoynte hit, as hit is y seyd by fore an syx dayes, þat þe feolþe may renne out;
Sethe all togedyr in a galown of whyte wyne.
The part affected.
forgif me if it be wrang, And excuse me sere frend, for the mater was hard & strang.
and amongst other things, the smell of Sope-Suds, and Lye, in the washing of Clothes, be avoided; 
I am sad & soleynge with hewynes in thoght;For all thy body, in myddis the Arme;
And thus much of the Breast and Heart, which are under the signes Cancer and Leo.
Now, by considering the peculiarity of the circumstances, situation, and way of life of these people; and by attentively observing, what at any time gives rise to this disease, what is seen to remove it, and what to increase or mitigate its malignity, we shall be able to form a judgment, not only of the principal causes productive of it, but likewise of the subordinate, or those that in a less degree may contribute their influence.
