

[^Sample 1: book - ^]

|P_
A 
DIRECTORY
FOR 
Midwives: 

OR, 
A Guide for WOMEN, 
In their Conception, 
Bearing, and 
Suckling their Children. 

[}The First Part Contains,}]
1. The Anatomy of the Vessels of Generation. 
2. The Formation of the Child in the Womb. 
3. What hinders Conception, and its Remedies. 
4. What furthers Conception. 
5. A Guide for Women in Conception. 
6. Of Miscarriage in Women. 
7. A Guide for Women in their Labour. 
8. A Guide for Women in their Lying-in. 
9. Of Nursing Children. 
To Cure all Diseases in Women, Read the Second 
Part of this Book. 


[^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page.^]
By Nicholas Culpeper, Gent. Student in Physick
and Astrology. 
[^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page.^]
Newly Corrected from many gross Errors. 
[^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page.^]

London Printed for J. and A Churchill, at the Black-
Swan in Pater-Noster-Row, 1701. 
|P_1
|P_85
[^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page.^]
[}BOOK V. }]
[^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page.^]
[}A Guide for Women in Conception. }]
SOme Women are so ignorant, they do not know 
when they are Conceived with Child, and others so 
coy they will not confess when they do know it, I shall 
labour to help the former: The latter if they will learn 
to be a little wiser, may help themselves. 

I shall then divide this Book into these Chapters. 
1. Signs of a Woman Conceived with Child. 
2. Whether a Male or Female be Conceived. 
3. Of Conception of Twins, and the Reasons. 
Authors Confuted.
4. Of imperfect Children. 
Authors Opinions.
My own.

|P_86
[}CHAP. I. }]
[}Signs of Conception. }]
MAny are the ways Authors have left for Women 
to know whether they be with Child or not, which 
happens true in many Women, but not in all; some 
of which I shall quote, viz.
1. A coldness and chillness of the outward parts after 
Copulation, for the heat retires to make the Conception. 
2. The Belly waxeth very flat, because the Womb 
closeth it self together to nourish and cherish the seed. 
3. Wringing or Griping pains like Cramps happen in 
the Belly about the Navel. 
4. Loss of Appetite to Victuals, and four belchings, 
exceeding weakness of Stomach. 
5. Divers Appetites and Longings are ingendred. 
6. If cold water be drunk, a coldness is left in the Breast. 
7. The tops of the Nipples look redder than formerly. 
8. The Breasts begin to swell and wax hard, not with-
out pain and soreness.
9. The Veins of the Breasts are more clearly seen, 
than they were wont to be. 
10. The Veins of the Eyes are clearly seen, and the 
Eyes seem something discoloured, as a Looking-glass will 
shew you: This is a good sign. 
11. The Body is weakned and the Face discoloured. 
12. The Excrements of the Guts are voided painfully, 
because the womb swelling, thrusteth the right Gut to-
gether. 

These be the vulgar rules, or at least the best of them. 

Give me leave to deliver what I have known to be 
true, and never yet failed me. 
1. If under the Eye the Vein be swelled, I mean, 
under the lower Eye lid, the Veins in the Eyes appearing 
clearly, and the eye something discoloured, if the Wo-
man have not her Terms upon her at the time, nor 
watched the Night before, you may certainly conclude 
|P_87
her to be with Child: And this appears most plainly just 
upon her Conception, and the first two Months. I have 
told many Women of it before they have been with 
Child a fortnight, and never failed. 
2. Stop the Urin of the Woman close in a Glass three 
days, and then strain it through a fine Linen Cloath; if 
you find small living Creatures in it, she is most assured-
ly conceived with Child; for the Urin which was before 
part of her own substance, will be generated as well as 
its Mistriss. 
3. Take a handsom green Nettle, and put it into the 
Urin of the Woman, cover it close, and let it remain in 
a whole night, if the woman be with Child, it will be full 
of red spots on the morrow; if not, it will be blackish. 

And thus much for Prognostics, whether a Woman 
be with Child, or not. 

[^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page.^]
[}CHAP. II. }]
[}Whether a Woman be Conceived of a Male, or of a 
Female. }]
HErein also I shall 
1. Deliver you the Opinions of Authors. 
2. What I have found to be true by Experience. 

First, Authors give these to be signs of Conception 
of a Male. 
1. The Woman when she riseth up from a Chair, or 
the like, doth sooner stay her self upon her right hand 
than on the left. 
2. The Belly lies rounder and higher that when it is 
a Female. 
3. The Child is first felt to stir on the right side, be-
cause according to Hippocrates the Male Children lie on 
the right side of the womb. 
4. The Woman breeds Boys easier and with less 
pain than Girls, and carries her burden not so heavily, 
but is more nimble in moving, 
|P_88
5. The right Breast is more plump and harder than 
the left, and the right Nipple redder. 
6. The colour of the Woman is more clear, and not 
swarthy as when she Conceives a Girl. 

The contrary to these are signs of Conception of a Fe-
male; it were but loss of time, and blotting of Paper 
to quote them. 

These are some of the vulgar Rules, and the best of 
them; I never knew these fail. 
1. If the circle under the Womans Eye, which is of a 
wan blew colour, be more apparent under the right Eye, 
and the veins most apparent in her right eye, and 
the most discoloured, she is with Child of a Boy; if 
the marks be most apparent in the left Eye, judge her 
to be with Child of a Girl. 
2. Let her milk a drop of her Milk into a Bason of 
fair water, if it sinks to the bottom as it drops in, round 
in a drop, it is a Girl she goes withal; for if it be a Boy, 
it will spread and swim at top; this I never knew fail, 
though it be contrary to all Authors that ever I read. 

[^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page.^]
[}CHHP. III. }]
[}Of the Conception of Twins. }]
AUthors make some slutter about the Conception of 
Twins, and what the reason should be; as also 
how many Children a Woman might naturally have at 
one Birth. 

The Ancients held a Woman might Naturally have 
7 three Boys, three Girls, and one Hermaphrodite; and 
their opinion was grounded upon another as childish (for 
one error ushers in another) because they conceived a 
Woman had seven Cells in her Womb, but long since 
Anatomists beginning to grow pretty perfect in their 
mutual Operation, having found out that the Womb 
had but one Cell, this ridiculous Opinion was quickly 
exploded. 

|P_89
Others hold a Woman can Naturally have but two 
Children and their reason is, because she hath but two 
Breasts: I know no reason but why they may as well 
hold a Woman can go but two miles, because she hath 
but two Legs. We know well enough, that whatsoe-
ver is against nature, is miraculous: and we know as well, 
that 'tis no miracle for a Woman to have three Children 
at one Birth. 

In Ægypt many times Women have five or six Chil-
dren at one Birth; the reason is supposed to be the fruit-
fulness of the place; and if so (as is probable) then 
let Women that would be fruitful, live in fruitful places. 

Aristotle quotes a Woman that brought forth twen-
ty perfect Children at four Births. 

Tragus tells a story of another in Ægypt that had 
seven Children at one Birth. 

All this is nothing to what Albertus Magnus talks of; 
for he tells of one Woman who had twenty two perfect 
Children in her Womb at one time, and miscarried of 
them all; and of another who had an hundred and fifty 
at once, all as big as a mans little finger. 

Besides, they say in a Monastery in Holland, there re-
mains a Tomb of one Margaret, a Countess of Holsted, 
who had three hundred sixty four living Infants born at 
a Birth and all Christened I urge no Man nor Womans 
faith, to believe these things: But come, 

First, To the cause of Conception of Twins, or more 
Children than one at once. 

Secondly, Whether Twins be Conceived at one and 
the same time? 

1. The cause why Twins are Conceived. 

Herein Authors are various: 
Avicenna and Haly Abbas, held the cause to be divers 
Cells in the Womb; but that as I told you, hath long 
since been found out as false as what is falsest. 
Empedocies, attributes it to the plenty of Seed, which 
is able to procreate more than one. 
Esclepiades, to the strength of the Seed by the same 
reason. 
|P_90
Prolemy, to the Position of the Stars, at the time of 
Copulation. 

2. About the second, which is the greater Question 
of the two, Authors differ much. 

Some of the Ancients, and almost all modern writers 
hold them to be conceived at one and the same act of 
Copulation; the Seed not being ejaculated out all at 
once, is divided in the Womb, and so more than one 
Child Conceived. This though it seems something 
plausible, yet it will not hold water. 

Another reason they give is, because the Womb ha-
ving received the Seed, shuts so close that it cannot give 
intermission to any more Seed; and this is as weak as 
the other. For answer to the first; 

The beginnig of the conception is not the casting of 
the Seed into the Womb; for then a Woman must needs 
Conceive every time she hath carnally to do with her 
Husband; but the exquisite mixture of the Seed of both 
Sexes, is the very beginning and cause of Conception, 
and that the Womb having but one Cell, can exquisitely 
mix Seed in two places in that work closing it self so close, 
that no vacuum is left, is incredible. To the second I 
answer, 
The Womb shuts not so close, but what Seed is super-
fluous, hath a place to be let out. 
2. It is the delights of Venus that opens the Womb 
at all times, for it opens the Muscles, therefore volun-
tarily; and why can it not open the Womb at one time 
as well as at another? 
3. Neither do all Authors agree, that Twins are Con-
ceived at one and the same time, for Erasistratus a Fa-
mous Physician, and all the Stoic Philosophers, were of 
my Opinion, viz. That they are Conceived at divers 
times. 
4. All things are brought to pass by a due limitation 
of time; and two Children Conceived at once, must 
needs be born at once, which is impossible; he that 
would know more of this, let them but peruse the Tru-
tina of Hermes, one of the wisest of men, and let him 
|P_91
but understand what he reads, and it is possible he may 
tell you (having the Nativities of both Twins) the very 
hour and minute when they were Conceiv'd. Let no 
Astrologer object to me, that the Trutina of Hermes is 
not exact to a minute; but let them know, that if there 
be a truth in it to a Sign of ascending, there must needs be 
a truth to a degree, and minute, and second; for truth 
comes to a punct. and the failing may be in their non-un-
derstanding of him. 
5. All Authors hold a kind of strange Thing they call 
Superfœtation in Women: Superfœtation, as the Word 
signifies, is a Womans Conceiving of a second Child, after 
she Conceived of the first. 

Authors are very frequent in proof of this, and some 
such have been known in London. 

I shall let pass what Poets say of Alcumæna's bringing 
forth Hercules and Iphyclus, one at the end of the se-
venth, the other at the end of the tenth Month (they that 
would read it, may find it in Plautus his first Play, Am-
phitryo,) and come to the relation of more sober Authors, 
and such as are fide digniores. 

Hippocrates writes of a Woman of Larissa, who 
brought forth two living and perfect Children, forty 
days distant the one from the other. 

Aristotle, de Historia Animalium, abounds in Exam-
ples; and some of the Births were two months distant. 

Rhasis and Avicenna hold, That all Women that have 
their Terms, during the time of their going with Child, 
are subject to Conceive again. 

Pliny gives divers Examples of it. Dodonæus in his 
Observations, many more. And the like you may read 
in Laurentius. 

Thus then you see by this Argument, That 'tis pos-
sible for a Woman to perfect a second Conception after 
she is Conceived at the first; and if so long after, as Au-
thors say, then much more likely sooner, before the 
Womb is filled with the growth of the first. But to make 
the matter beyond all dispute; whereas our Translation 
saith, Gen. 42.And she Conceiv’d AGAIN and bare his 
|P_92
Brother Abel; Those that have skill in the Original 
know, that it should be translated, She CONCEIVED 
UPON CONCEPTION, and bare his Brother Abel.
Let this put an end to the Dispute. 

And then, if the Trutina of Hermes be true (I have 
heard many cavil at it, but never any disprove it, nor 
bring a bit of wise reason against it) there you may find 
a reason why two Children may be Conceived at a months 
distance, and yet Born in one day; and if two Children, 
lying in the same Womb at the same time, be at any time 
Conceived at twice, Is it not most probable they are so 
always? However, this is apparent, that by Testimony 
of all Authors; yea, by the judgment of that prudent 
Physician, Dr. REASON, a Woman may miscarry of one 
Twin, and yet go out her whole time with the other, as 
Hippocrates quotes in his Book, De Natura Pueri. Nay, 
both Aristotle and he, quote Women who brought forth 
two Children at one Birth, and a third fifteen weeks af-
ter: Then it follows, that they are little better than Mur-
derers, who force away the second Child, the first being 
Born before its time; especially if the flux of Blood be 
not great, nor signs of Labour appear. 

Women desire the Act of Copulation after they are 
Conceived, when Beasts do not. 

Poppea, the Daughter of Agrippa the Roman, a wan-
ton Lass, being asked the Question, why Beasts did not 
desire it as well as Women? Answered, Because they are 
Beasts. 

The answer was acute 'tis confest, and acuter, because 
not premeditated, and our own Writers give no wiser; 
for they say, 'tis a Prerogative and Vertue God hath only 
given to Women. Alas, poor Fools; that make a Ver-
tue of a Vice. 

The very truth is, The Curse of God for Adam’s first 
sin lies more heavily upon Man, than it doth upon Beasts, 
and lust is a greater part of this Curse; and the Propa-
gation of many Children at once, an effect of that intem-
perancy: And that I suppose to be Hippocrates his Rea-
son of forbdiding Copulation to Women with Child. For 
|P_93
my own part, far be it from me to forbid it; for I 
know well enough the Nature of Man is so vicious, that 
he must have to do with his Wife, or some body else, in 
that time, or to that which is worse than either. How-
ever, hereby you see the fruits of Original Sin, and what 
cause you have to be humbled in the presence of God for 
it, and require his assistance against the wretched effects 
it produceth. 

[^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page.^]
[}CHAP. IV. }]
[}Of Imperfect Children. }]
MAny are the Forms which Authors have left to Po-
sterity, of Monstrous Births; some altered in 
respect of Sex, as Hermaphrodites, in Form as Beastial,
some double-bodied, some maimed, and many others 
which would do me no good to write, and you as little 
to read it. 

Authors differ much in this Cause. 

The Divine refers it to the judgment of God alone; 
which if true, without the help of Nature, then is every 
Monster a Miracle. 

Astrologers, they refer it to the Stars, and the Posi-
tion of the Moon in deficient degrees, at the time of 
Conception. 

I cannot close with any of both these, neither altoge-
ther with a third, which is more probable, although per-
haps the judgment of Astrologers may concur. 

Some hold the Imagination of the Woman to be a 
great cause, by beholding either such Monsters, or such 
Pictures; and that's the reason, they say, that they are 
so frequent in Ægypt. So also you may read of one that 
brought forth a Black-moor, the Woman beholding the 
Picture of a Black-moor hanging in her Chamber And 
of a Woman at Pisa, that brought forth a Child full of 
Hair like a Camel, because she was so supestitiously 
wise to kneel every day to the Picture of John the Bap-
|P_94
tist coalthed in Camels Hair. Also I my self know a 
Woman, this day living, that in the time of her Con-
ception, fixing her Eyes and Mind much upon a Boy 
with two Thumbs on each hand, sitting at Dinner by her, 
brough forth a Boy with as many. This I say may be 
the cause of some deformity. 

But the greatest cause of Womens bringing forth Chil-
dren imperfect, or mutilated, or crook-back'd, or 
with Issues or Leprosie, &c. I take to be, because the 
act of Copulation was done at that time when the Wo-
man had her Menstrua’s upon her. It was not for nothing 
God himself forbad a Man not to touch a Woman at such 
a time; and from such corrupt beginnings usually little 
good proceeds. Although the Grace of God is free, and 
lays hold on whomsoever he pleaseth, yet usually (I do 
not say always) such are perverse in mind and manners, 
as in Body, Cavendum ab eis quos Deus notavit (saith the 
Latin proverb) beware of such whom God hath marked. 

As for such as are Born Monsters, you must pardon 
me if I make a question whether they were Conceived 
by some Beast or not; for a Woman may Conceive by 
the Seed of a Beast, because it is by Nature fruitful, but 
thereof will be a Monster Born, not a Man. 

Let them that would be Learned Physicians, read these 
Books of mine, viz Platerus, Sennertus, Riverius, Rio-
lanus, Bartholinus, Johnston, Vestingus, Rulandus, 
Sanctor, Cole, &c. 

[^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page.^]
|P_105
[^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page.^]
[}BOOK VII. }]
[^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page.^]
[}A Guide for Women in their Labour. }]
I Do not here intend to teach Midwives how to per-
form their Office, for that they know already, or at 
least should. It being far beside my intent to tell them 
what they knew already, but to instruct them in what 
they know not. 

This is that I shall speak of. 

The Labour of a Woman may be said to be twofold, 
1. Of a Dead Child. 
2. Of a Living Child. 

Of each of which in a Section by it self. 

[}SECT. I. }]
[}Of a Woman Labouring of a Dead Child. }]
IN this it is (that I can think of) only requisite, 
1. To give you Signs when the Child in the Womb 
is dead. 
2. Means how to bring it away. 

First, Signs of the Fruit in the Womb being Dead, 
are, 
1. The Breasts suddenly slack, and fall flat, or bag 
down; what should I provide to feed a Dead Creature? 
saith Dame NATURE. 
2. Coldness possesseth the Belly of the Mother; espe-
cially about the Navel. 
3. Her Urine (Anglicé her Piss) is thick, with filthy 
stinking settling at bottom. 
|P_106
4. No motion of the Child is perceived; no, though 
you wet your hand in warm Water and lay it upon her 
Belly, for that's the way to make the Child stir. 
5. Dreams of Dead Men trouble her in her sleep, at 
which she is affrighted. 
6. She longs to eat such things as Nature never allotted 
to be eaten. 
7. Her Face looks but scurvily, and wanes her usual 
mirth. 
8. Her Breath stinks. 
9. When she turns her self in her bed, or riseth up, the 
Fruit of her Womb swags that way (if it be not a Sole-
cism to call a Dead Child Fruit) like a lump of Lead; 
and indeed if the Child be any thing displaced, it will do 
so; yet if Tansie be but applied to her Navel, or the 
Stone Ætites, it will remedy it, if the Child be alive; 
but not so, if dead. 

For Cure or bringing away the Dead Child, which is 
always obnoxious to the Mother that goes with it; a 
Dead Creature being very contrary to the Living, where-
in appeared the Tyranny of Mezentius in Virgil: 
Mortua quinetiam jungebat corpora vivis, 
Componens manibusq; manus atq; oribus ora. 

Dead Bodies to the Living he did place, 
And joyn'd them hand in hand, and face to face. 


I pray be pleased to accept first of this Caution. Be-
sure you use no means to bring it away before you be 
sure it is Dead, lest you be found little better than Mur-
derers another day. If you follow my former Rules, 
you can hardly (if you have any wit) miss of the truth; 
I mean those in the former Books as well as in this; you 
shall find them better than a Candle and a Lanthorn to 
guide you to the Truth, and you may (if you be wife) 
find enough in them, and learn enough by them, if not 
to teach you wit, yet to tell you what wit you lack; 
when you are confident your Child is Dead (which will 
|P_107
never be, if the Rules your God hath delivered to you by 
my Pen be but followed) I say, if you be confident your 
Child be Dead in your Womb; do thus (and I pray give 
me leave to pass by the vulgar Rules, as though I knew 
them not) 
1. Take half a pint of White-wine and burn it, only 
adding half an ounce of Cinnamon to it, burn it with no 
other Spice; and when they have drunk it (for it will 
not do the Deed by looking upon it) if your pains of 
Travel come upon you, your Child is Dead indeed; if 
not your Child may probably be weak or sick; for Chil-
dren are capable of Sickness even in their Mothers Bellies, 
but it is not Dead; for then, if your Child be living, it 
will refresh it, and give you ease: Take notice by this 
(good Women) Cinnamon refresheth the Child in the 
Womb, and strengthens it. 
2. If the Child prove to be Dead indeed, these Herbs 
are Medicinal boyled in White-wine, take as many of 
them as you can get, and if you can get but one of them 
it may do the deed you desire. Dittany, Betony, Penny-
royal, Sage, Featherfew, Centaury, Ivy-Leaves and 
Berries, &c.
3. Sweet Bazil in Powder, take half a dram at a time 
in White-wine. 
4. The Privities anointed with the Juyce of Garden 
Tansie; or if you please, you may take the Herb in Sum-
mer when it may be most plentifully had, and before it 
run up to Flower, and having bruised it well, boyl it in 
Oyl till the Juyce of it be consumed; if you set it in the 
Sun after you have mixed it with Oyl, before you boyl 
it, and let it remain there a Month together, it will be 
stronger: This is an excellent Oyl for Midwives always 
to keep in a readiness for such a business. 
5. The Stone Ætites held near the Privities, draws a-
way the Child; for its Magnetick Vertue is such, that it 
draws the Child any way, as readily as the Loadstone 
draws Iron. 
6. Make a strong Decoction of Hysop with Water, 
and let the Woman drink it very hot; and it will soon 
|P_108
bring away the Dead Child. If so soon as she is Delivered 
of the Dead Child, you suppose any of the After-birth 
be left behind, for many times in such cases it is rot-
ten, and comes away by piece meals, let her con-
tinue drinking the same Decoction till her Body be 
cleansed. 
7. Take the Roots of Polypodium, stamp them very 
well, warm them a little, and bind them on to the soles 
of her Feet, it will quickly bring away the Child, whe-
ther it be alive or dead. 
8. A Decoction made of the Herb Masterwort, used 
in like manner as the Decoction of Hysop, works the 
same effects. To wise Women I have spoken enough, 
which that ye may all be, read my Platerus, Sennertus, 
RiveriusRiolanus, Bartholinus, Johnston, Veslingius, 
Rulandus, Fernelius, Sanctor, Cole, &c. 

[}SECT. II. }]
[}A Guide for Women Labouring of Living Children. }]
THis I confess is the Basis of this Book, which (that 
I may be as plain as I can) I shall divide into these 
Chapters: 
1. What facilitates the Labour. 
2. Of cutting the Navel-string. 
3. What brings away the After-birth. 
4. Certain necessary Questions answered. 

[^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page.^]
[}CHAP. I. }]
[}What makes the Birth easie. }]
FOR a Caution to this, let me advise all Midwives, 

1. Not give any Thing inwardly to hasten the 
Birth, before they know the true time of Birth is at 
hand; for the want of observing this, hath spoiled many 
a Child, and put the Mother to twice as much pain as 
needed.

|P_109
2. Let not the Child be forced away, unless an im-
moderate Flux of Blood come down; for if such Symp-
tom appear, your best way to save the Woman's life, is, 
to force away the Child. I have known some Women, 
and that of late days, that in such cases have fallen into 
the hands of such Creatures, that they had as good have 
sent for a Butcher to Deliver them. 

3. I confess it is something hard at first, to know when 
the true time of the Womans Labour is; many Women 
being troubled with pains so long before their true Labour 
comes, yea, some many weeks before; and the reason 
why they are so, I conceive to be heat of their Reins. I 
shall be very willing to help in this what I can, therefore 
consider, 
First, Heat of the Reins in Womb in the case may 
be know by swelling of their Legs: When Women with 
Child find their Legs to swell nuch, let them take it for 
granted that their Reins are too hot. 
Secondly, The Cure is to cool the Reins before the 
time with Oyl of Poppies, Oyl of Violets, or Water-Li-
lies, by anointing the Reins of their Backs with them; 
for most assuredly such Women whose Reins are over 
hot, have usually hard Labour. But above all the Re-
medies that I know, I commend the Decoction of Plan-
tane-Leaves and Roots; you may make a strong Decocti-
on of them in waterrs, and then having strained and clari-
fied it with the white of an Egg, boyl it into a Syrup 
with its equal weight of Sugar, and keep it for your own 
use, or your Friends in such cases. 

4. I told you before that the skins which the Greeks
(and our Rabbies from them) call Amnios and Allantois, 
contain the Urin and Sweat of the Child, the use of 
which Urin and Sweat is great before, and in Travel. 

First Before Travel, by their means the Child is 
more easily sustained and born up in the Womb. 

Secondly, In the time of Travel (the Birth approach-
ing) both these skins, the Amnios and Allantois, are 
broken by the vehement stirring of the Child, so that 
these Excrements fall down to the neck of the Womb; 
|P_110
and this is that Midwives call the water, and when they 
see that come away, then they say to them that stand 
by, Now the Birth is near. And 'tis very true, and 
the certainest sign that can be; for the Child is no better 
able long to subsist in the Womb after those skins are 
broken, than a naked Man is in a heap of Snow. These 
waters, if the Child come presently after them, facilitate 
the Labour, by making the passage slippery; and there-
fore let the Midwives endeavour with their Nails, nor 
any thing else to force water away. Dame Nature
knows when the true time of the Birth is, better than 
they, and usually retains the water till that time. On the 
contrary, If the water by accident break away too long 
before the Birth, such things as hasten Nature, may 
be safely given or admitted, such are Dittany, Betony, 
Penny-royal, Juniper berries, red Coral, &c.

2. Featherfew boyled in White-wine, and a draught 
of it drunk; or good Women (if they please) may 
take the Juyce of it when it is in prime (and I think 
that is in May) which having clarified, they may boyl 
into a Syrup with its double weight in Sugar, and so 
keep it by them all the year, untill such time occasion calls 
for its use. My English Physician teacheth you at large. 

Thirdly, Mugwort used in the same manner worketh 
the like effects. 

Fourthly, A dram of Cinnamon in Powder given in-
wardly, profits much in this case. 

Fifthly, Tansie bruised and applyed to the Privities, 
or an Oyl of it so made, and used as you were taught 
before. 

Sixthly. The Stone Ætites held to the Privities, in-
stantly draws away both Child and After burden; yea, 
draws out Womb and all; if you remove it not instant-
ly after they are come away; its Magnetic Vertue is such, 
if you do any Mischief that way, the fault is not mine, 
you are fore-warned of it; for such is the Vertue, That 
both Child and Womb follow it as readily as Iron doth 
the Load stone, or the Load stone the North-star. 

Seventhly. Mizaldus quotes many other ways. 
|P_111
1. An Asses or Horses Hoof hung near the Privities. 
2. A piece of red Coral hung near the said place. 
3. A Load stone held in her left hand. 
4. The Skin a Snake hath cast off, girt about the 
middle next the Skin. 
5. Pears being in her Chamber, hinder her from be-
ing Delivered. 

Eightly, A Decoction of Savory made in White-
wine and drunk, gives speedy Delivery to Women. 

Ninthly, Another good remedy to give speedy Deli-
very to Women, is this; Take wild tansie or Silver-
weed, bruise it, and apply it to her Nostrils. 

Tenthly, Take Date-stones, and beat them to Powder, 
 and let her take half a Dram of them in white-wine at 
a time. 

Eleventhly, Take Parsly, bruise it, and press out the 
Juyce and dip a Linnen Cloth in it, and put it up (being so 
diped) into the mouth of the Womb, it will presently cause 
the Child to come away, though it be Dead, and not only 
the Child, but also the After-burden; and not only so, but 
the Juyce of Parsly, especially Stone Parsly, being drunk by 
a Woman with Child, cleanseth not only the Womb, but 
also the Child in the Womb of all gross humours. 

Twelfthly, it is excellent good in such a case to take 
a scruple of Castoreum in Powder in any convenient 
Liquor: Or two or three drops of Spirit of Castoreum 
or eight or nine drops of Spirit of Myrrh given in any 
convenient Liquor, give speedy Delivery. 

Thirteenthly, Give a Woman in such a case another 
Womans Milk to drink, it will cause speedy Delivery, 
and almost without any pain. 

Fourteenthly, the Juyce of Leeks being drunk with 
warm water hath a mighty operation to cause speedy De-
livery. 

Fifteenthly, Take Piony-Seeds, and beat them to 
Powder, and mix the Powder with Oyl; with which 
Oyl anoint the Lyons and Privities of a Woman being 
with Child, it giveth her Deliverance very speedily, and 
with less Pain than can be imagined. 

|P_112
Sixteenthly, Take a Swallows Nest, and dissolve it 
in water, strain it, and drink it warm, it gives Delivery 
with great speed, and much ease. 

Let Midwives be ruled by me, never to force away a 
Child unless they are confident it be dead. 

Unless the woman Labouring with it, be troubled 
with an immoderate Flux of Blood, or have Convulsions. 

Thus (good Women) have I given you my Rules, 
which if you please to make proof of you shall find as 
constant as the Sun in the Firmament, that never fails 
without a Miracle. I have not medled with your callings 
nor manual Operation, lest I should discover my igno-
rance, like Phormio the Philosopher, who having never 
seen Battle, undertook to read a Military Lecture before 
Hannibal the best Soldier in the World. Dame NA-
TURE was the Mother of what I have written, it hath 
been verified by her two Sons, Dr. Reason and Dr. Expe-
rience. 

[^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page.^]
[}CHAP. II. }]
[}Of Cutting of the Navel-Strings. }]
GReat heed and great care is to be taken about this, 
which some accompt but a trifle; yet in perform-
ing this work (which is quickly done) doth none of 
the least Art and Skill of a Midwife appear. That this 
may be done with that prudence which is Required, you 
ought to observe. 
1. The Time. 
2. The Place. 
3. The Manner. 
4. The Consequent. 

[}I. The Time. }]
The time is so soon as ever the Infant is come out of 
the Womb, whether he comes with part of the After-
birth, or without it; for sometimes the Child brings 
into the World a piece of the Amnios upon its head; 
and this is that good Women call the Caul; nay, so
|P_113
sottish they are, to think a Child Born with a Caul on his 
head, must needs do wonders, cujus contrarium est 
verum. Nay, so much Vertue remains in the Caul it 
self, that it will perform as great Acts as Hercules in his 
twelve Labours, abate me but his fetching Cerberus out 
of Hell. Whereas (as I told you) it is only a piece of 
the Amnios. If you find it upon the Child’s head, you 
shall miss it there; if you miss it upon the Child’s head 
you may find it there. And the reason why some Chil-
dren come into the world with their brows crowned with 
it, is weakness, which is an Argument of short life, 
and such an Argument as seldom fails. Well then, whe-
ther the Child come with this, or without it, so soon 
as it hath made its Exit, or is freed from its Mother, 
consider whether the Child be weak or strong. I told 
you before that both Vital and Natural Spirit was com-
municated by the Mother to the Child by its Navel string. 

If the Child be weak, gently put back part of the Vi-
tal and Natural Blood into the body of the Child by it's 
Navel, for that recruits a weak Child. If the Child be 
strong, you may forbear. Thus you have the time; 
only this, let me tell you, that many Children that are 
Born seeming dead, may be instantly brought to life, 
if good means be used, in which case, take this for one 
(you may also use it if the Child be very weak) viz.
Crush out six or seven drops of Blood out of the part of 
the Navel string which is cut off, and give it the Child 
inwardly. 

[}II. The Place }]
About which Authors make something to do; and 
our Midwives at present can scare agree. 

The distance the Navel string should be cut off, from 
the Childs Body, Ætius Lib. 4. cap. 3. prescribes to 
be four fingers breadth. A wooden Direction, because 
Midwives fingers differ so much in breadth. We will 
imagine he means four inches. The Ancients jumped 
generally in that opinion. Mizaldus was in this point a 
little critical, and yet an honest Man, and his Criticisms 
begat some errors in some Modern Writers, and in our 
|P_114
Midwives at present. Hence (as I suppose) it comes 
to pass that Midwives (if Spigelius speak truth, or others 
who are but his Apes) leave a longer part of the Navel-
string of a Male than they do of a Female, and there 
supposed reason is this, Because in Males they would have 
the Instrument of Generation long, that so they may 
not be Cowards in the Schools of Venus. But the Fe-
males, they cut it shorter, and that they think forsooth 
makes them modest, and their Privities narrower. This 
Spigelius and all our Modern Writers jeer at. His words 
translated verbatim are these; I must make my self merry 
with this Opinion; for if it were in the power of Women 
to make the Privities greater or lesser by cutting off the 
Navel string, in sober sadness, all Women Labouring with 
Child, would complain of Midwives, and that deservedly 
too, because they left them not a great part of their Na-
vel-strings when they were Born, that so their Privities 
being large, they might be Delivered with the more ease. 
Thus Spigelius, and all the rest harp upon the same string. 

Mizaldus orders it to be cut long both in the Male and 
Female Children; his reason is, because the Instruments 
of Generation follow the proportion of it. And there-
fore if it be cut too short in the Female, it will be a hin-
drance to her having Children. Taisnier, a Famous 
Astronomer affirms the same thing. Let no Men prat-
tle to me of impossibilities: If there be not an Harmony 
in Nature, how can it consist? If Nature Formed the 
whole Child by the Navel string in the Womb, is her 
wits so far run a wool gathering, that she can do nothing 
by it afterwards? They say it dies, and therefore is 
made invalid; when as the self conceitedness of their own 
Brains makes their Judgment so invalid, that like Æsop’s 
Crow, they think themselves to be an Eagle, when 'tis 
no such matter. Mizaldus made Dame NATURE, 
They Dr. IGNORANCE the Basis or Foundation 
of their Judgments. 

Let them tell me a Reason, 
1. Why the Load-stone draws Iron? 
2. Why the cutting of Onions make their eyes run 
|P_115
on water? I will use on other Argument than one of 
their own Reasons, if not both to confute themselves. 
Besides, I will quote you one or two things more out 
of Mizaldus, and all upon two Premises 

1. If the Navel string of a Child after it is cut, be 
suffered to touch the ground, the Child will never hold 
its water, neither sleeping nor waking, but will be sub-
ject to an involuntary Pissing during its Life. 
2. A piece of the Navel string of a Child Born a-
bout one, so that it touch his skin (Mizaldus saith you 
may wear it as a foyle in a Ring) defends him that bears 
it, both from the Falling sickness and Convulsions; 
both which I have known and tried, as also the former. 
He saith further, That it defends him from Witches and 
Devils, which how true it is, let time determine; the 
Man was honest, and honest Men usually tell the truth. 
And if the Rabbies in our times Studied the Sympathies 
of Nature but half so much as they Study to get Money, 
our Physicians would be able, whereas now they are 
covetous: They mistook PRIVATE for PUB-
LICK Good: and that's the Bane of a Common-
wealth, and the only way they make you and yours, 
first Fools, secondly Slaves. But enough of this.

[}III. The Manner. }]
I intreated you before to note whether the Child were 
weak or strong. If the Child be weak, and Born almost 
Dead, put back (as I told you before) the blook which 
you shall usually find flow back by the Umbilical Vein, 
and the Vital Spirits, which you shall usually find flow 
back by the Umbilical Arteries; and do it by degrees too, 
and very gently; for Nature goes soberly to work in what 
she doth, and hates rashness; so ought a Midwife to do, 
if she will be her Servant 

So you shall perceive the Child which seemed like a 
dead creature before, instantly to be refreshed and awak-
ed like a Man out of sleep. If the Child seem very lusty 
and sprightful, stop the Navel-string near its Navel, 
that so neither Blood nor Vital Spirits may retire, and 
that's the way to keep a Child lusty when it is so. The 
|P_116
want of observation of these rules, destroys many a 
Child. I have candidly delivered my own Opinion, 
and what Truth God hath revealed to me herein, and 
am free from the Blood of all those that through neglect 
are lost this way. Having premised this, let the ligature 
or binding be very strong, neither cut it off very near 
the binding, lest the binding unloose; And let Priests 
prattle what they will of the Soul, if the Vital Blood re-
tire back through the Navel, Life will follow it, and leave 
the Soul behind to pick Straws. It is the Spirit of Man 
is the Life thereof, and not only of Man, but of Beasts 
and Plants. And the Spirit is nought else but the Com-
munications of the God-head to it in a natural way, as 
I shewed you before, Psal. 104. 29, 30. You need 
not fear to bind the Navel-string very hard, because it 
is void of sense: and that part of the Navel string which 
you leave on, falls off its own accord, in a very few 
days; The whole course of Nature being now changed in 
the Child, it having another way ordained to nourish it 
self. With what Instrument you cut it of, it matters 
not, provided it be sharp, and you do it cleverly. The 
piece of the Navel-string that falls off, let it not touch 
the ground, remembring what before I told you, and 
you may keep it for those uses if you please; if not, I 
cannot help it. If you mind your Neighbours good so 
much as I do yours, you will do it. 

[}IV. The Consequent, or what follows the cutting off 
the Navel-string. }]
The Navel-string being cut off, apply a little Cotton 
or lint to the place to keep it warm, least the cold enter 
into the Body of the Child, which it will most assuredly 
do, if you have not bound it hard enough, and if you 
have, 'tis good to be sure, as the Miller said when he 
took his Tole twice The greatest of evils will certainly 
follow the comming in of the cold into the body of the 
Child that way. When that part of the Navel-string 
which you left remaining, is fallen off, it is the usual cu-
stom of Midwives to put a piece of a burnt ragg to it, 
which we commonly call Tinder. I would rather advise 
|P_117
them to put a little of the Powder of Bole-Armonic to 
it, because of its drying quality. The curse of God upon 
Women, for their first sin lies more heavily upon them, 
than it doth upon Beasts; for they licking it with their 
tongues, can reduce it into such an Orb, as no air can 
penetrate. But the first Woman, your great Grand-
motherEve, having offended God, her posterity are 
forced to crave help of her Neighbours in such case, 
when Beasts are not. 

[^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page.^]
[}CHAP. III. }]
[}What brings away the After-Birth. }]
AS much danger ensues upon a Woman (if not 
more) after the Delivery of the Child, than be-
fore: It doth not so to Beasts. Authors have written 
of bringing away the After-birth, and it would make a 
Man sick to read it. If you take notice of Lapwings when 
they are in fight of other Birds, imagine a Kite or the 
like (for they hate all Birds of prey) you shall have 
more of them come to help them, than you shall see 
or find within seven Miles of the place. I never heard 
nor read they paid them for the assistance, for I sup-
pose they knew no use of Money. The reason is, they 
love one another, but we our selves. Cæsar's Motto of 
the Crow was excellent: 

Tarpeio quondam consedit culmine Cornix, 
Est bene non potuit dicere, dixit crit. 
From the Tarpeian Steeples top the Crow 
Cry'd out, All is not well, but 'twill I trow. 

And just thus is my Verdict of Authors. You think 
you can see much when you can see a Tree, and not run 
your head against it in the dark; 'tis well you can do so 
in the Night; I think it is now about break of day; 
if so, then the Sun will rise, and then you need not give 
|P_118
a Doctor Ten Shillings to lead you 
with an [/1./]Ignis Fatuus. If you would 
know when day breaks, turn your 
Face towards the East, for from thence 
the Wise men came. Authors have 
gotten a rugged way when it comes 
not as Dr. CONCEIT would have it. I shall give 
you my own Opinion; if Midwives will force it away, 
let them pare their nails first, for Musicians and Mid-
wives must not wear their nails too long. 

Gentle means become a wearied Woman best, chur-
lish remedies are allotted for Felons: The Womb is 
quick, the After-birth is dead. Let the quick expel the 
Dead. Its dangerous if it be retained (I confess it) but 
is there no other way to kill a Dog but to hang him? The 
danger of retaining it is very great. Being retained, it 
putrifies, and thence come scurvy Diseases, Fevers, A-
postnumes. Convulsions and other the like Diseases, and 
usually Death at the tail of them. Authors perscribe 
Remedies. so many as will fill a Hop sack, Baths, Suffu-
migations, Pessaries and what not: If ordinary Reme-
dies be prepostreous (if not dangerous) what must we 
do then? Do thus: 
1. Delays are dangerous: A Midwife thought so her 
self, when the case was her own. 
2. What brings away the Birth, brings away also the 
After birth. A dead thing will drag whither you please, 
so will not a living, for that may draw back: I will 
not now dispute the Point, what is dead and what is li-
ving but take it upon the vulgar Opinion because I desire 
not to lead you into doubtful Disputations. My own 
Rules are real. 
1. Use the same means you did to bring away the 
Birth. 
2. Comfort the Woman It is more fitting practice 
for you, than to sit telling of Gossips Tales. 
3. A little white Hellebore in Powder (aliasSnee-
zing Powder) is a pretty good Remedy. 
4. Remember Tansie, and the Stone Ætitis. 
|P_119
5. The Herb Vervain, either boyled in Wine or a Sy-
rup made with the Juyce of it, and its double weight 
of Sugar (I hope I need not write one thing twice, to 
bid you clarifie the Juyce before you boyl it into a Sy-
rup) and a Spoonful or two of that given doth the Deed. 
6. I hope I need not bid you not to terrifie Women 
in that case, knowing that they endured pain enough 
before: If you are Midwives, shew you selves Women. 
7. Featherfew and Mugwort work the same effect 
that Vervain doth; but my Opinion is, not so strong-
ly. If you are wise, here's enough to know my mean-
ing; if not, you are unfit to be Midwives. 
8. Alessanders boyled in Wine, and the Wine drunk, 
is a gallant Remedy to bring it away; so also is sweet 
Chervil, or sweet Cicely, Angelica-roots and Master 
wort used in like manner. 
9. The smoak of Marygold-flowers received up a 
Womans Privities by a Funnel, brings away easily the 
After-birth, although the Midwife have let go her hold. 
110. If you boyl Mugwort in water till it be very 
soft, then take it out, and apply it like a Pultis to the 
Navel of a Woman in Travel, it instantly bringeth away 
both Birth and After-Birth, but you must speedily take 
it away so soon as both Birth and After-birth are come 
forth, lest it draw down the Womb also. 

[^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page.^]
[}CHAP. IV. }]
[}Certain necessary Questions Answered. }]
IN truth my Reason in this Chapter is to teach Women 
more wit, and if they be but minded to learn, if 
they be not, I cannot help it. 

The Questions I shall answer, are these? 

Quest. 1. Why Women bring forth with pain? 

Answ. I told you before (or I am deceived if I did 
not) That the sense of feeling was distributed to the 
|P_120
whole Body by the Nerves and Sinews. The mouth of 
the Womb is so strait, that it must needs be dilated at 
the time of her Delivery. The dilating thereof stretch-
eth the Nerves, thence comes pain. 

Quest. 2. Why some Women bring forth with more 
pain than others? 

Answ. Because the mouth of the Matrix in some 
Women is fuller of Nerves than others, as may appear 
by Anatomies. 

Quest. 3. Why are Women so lame and sore after Travel? 

Answ. The usual Opinion of Midwives is, Because the 
Bones are moved out of their places A tale of a Tub 
when the bottom is out. I confess it was the Opinion 
of Dr. Read, and some other good Anatomists, That 
in the Womans Labour, the Share bone and the Os 
sacrum part. It is called Os sacrum, not because of any 
inherent holiness in it, according to Dr. Read, but be-
cause of its bigness; it being the custom (as he saith) 
among the Græcians to call great things holy. I think 
rather the name is fetched from the Hebrews than the 
Greeks, it being the Bone which the Angel that wrestled 
with Jacob touched, caused him to halt upon his Thigh; 
and ever after the Jews had so high an esteem of that 
Bone, that they eat none of the Flesh which grew upon 
it. This by the by. 

Crook, Columbus and others are of Opinion, these 
Bones open not; the matter is not much, whether they 
do or not. The Bones are joyned together by Carti-
lages, and the Ligaments being bedew'd with superflu-
ous moisture, may give away, and neither Bones, Carti-
lages nor Ligaments are sensible; therefore this cannot 
be the Reason  What's the Reason then? 

It's this; The Nerves which (as I told you) carry 
the sense throughout the whole Body, are stretched in 
Labour, and therefore there must of necessity follow 
soreness and lameness, till they are reduced to their for-
mer State and Order. 

Quest. 4. What's the Reason the Navel-string is 
twisted together, not much unlike to a Cord? 

|P_121
Answ. The vulgar Opinion of Anatomists is, That 
the Blood by that delay, might be the better prepared; 
A waking Dream! The true Reasson are three. 
1. That the Navel strings might be the stronger; 
for if a Cord be not the stronger for twisting, why is 
it twisted? 
2. The different position of the Child in the Womb. 
The different Form of the Mother, in going, sitting 
and lying, might compress one of these Vessels, that so 
the Vital Spirit could not pass in by the Arteries for 
quickning the Child; nor the Blood by the Veins for 
its nourishment, nor the Urin pass out by the Urachos
for its ease, which Nature hath most strangely voided 
by this twisting of the Vessels. 
3. It is a most wonderful help in the cutting of the 
Navel-string; for it stays both Blood and Vital Spirits 
from flowing out too hastily after the Birth of the Child.

Quest. 5. What's the Reason of those Nodes or 
Knots in the Navel-string of the Child. 

Answ. Another whimsey Midwives have scrap'd up 
concerning this; for so many of them as they find, so 
many Children they affirm the Mother will have after 
that. Neither is this enough, but this error hath gotten 
a sort of attendants; for the knots are not of an equal 
distance the one from the other. The long intervals 
between the knots shew long intervals between Child 
and Child, and the short the contrary. Those knots 
that look reddish signifie Males, and the whitish Fe-
males. And all this is as true as the Sea Burns; which 
clearly appears, if you consider that Women, within 
a very few, have the like number of them in all their 
Children; nay, sometimes more in their last Children 
than in their first. 

The true reason is, 

Dame Nature, like a vigilant Nurse, forms these, 
that the Blood and Vital Spirit might be kept back 
from coming too violently upon the Child that so instead 
of feeding it, she might not choak it. And thus for 
this much Book. 

|P_122
They that would be knowing Physicians, let them 
study these Books of mine, viz.Platerus, Sennertus, 
Rivernis, Riolanus, Bartbolinus, Johnston, Veslingus, 
Rulandus, Fernelius, Sanctor, Cole, &c. 

[^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page.^]
[}BOOK VIII. }]
[^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page.^]
[}A Guide for Women in their Lying-In. }]
AND this shall be divided into Two Sections. 
1. The Diet she ought to keep when she lies-in. 
2. How to remedy the Accidents she is sub-
ject to at that time. 

[}SECT. 1. }]
IT is not unknown unto most good Women, That a 
woman may deliver her Body of many infirmities at 
such a time. And it is a little unknown to me, that 
the breathing in of ill Air, and the the eating of ill Diet, is 
the cause of most infirmities. For preventing of the 
one, and remedying of the other; be pleased to take 
notice of these few Rulers which I shall deliver. 
1. By way of Caution. 
2. By way of Instruction. 

First, If her Body be exceeding weak, keep her not 
too hot: Extremity of heat weakens Nature, and 
dissolves the Strength. 

Secondly, Be she weak or strong, let no cold Air 
come near her at first: For cold is, 
1. An enemy to the Spermatical Parts. 
2. If it get into the Womb, it increases the Af-
ter pains. 
3. Causeth Swellings in the Womb. 
4. Hurts the Nerves. 

|P_123
Thirdly, Let her Diet be hot, and let her eat but 
little at a time. Women many times have Apish Nurses, 
and they give Reasons just like themselves, as though 
they were spit out of their mouths. O, say they, Your 
Belly hath been much emptied and you must fill it again; 
and you have lost a great deal of Blood, and do lose daily. 
And you must eat soundly, and drink profoundly, or 
else you will be so weak, you will not be able to help 
your self. Silly Creatures, and good for little but to 
wash Dishes for three half-pence a day! For the Blood 
she voids is superfluous, and good for nothing but to do 
mischief, and hath been kept in her body a long time: 
The voiding of it conducing to her health, and not to 
her weakness. And this appears, that if it be retained, 
and can by no means be brought away, grim Death 
usually looks his captives pale in the Face; if not Chro-
nical Diseases (which some count worse) are her com-
panions to her next Child, if not to another World. 

Fourthly, Another sottish Opinion that they have, 
That Oat-meal Caudles purge a Woman in that case. 
Virgins that use themselves to eat Oat-meal, are taught 
by woful experience that it binds, and that's the reason 
they get the Green-sickness by it. I never knew a bind-
ing thing purge by boyling, although I have known 
Purging things to bind by boyling. 

Fifthly, Let her the first three days (and longer if 
she be weak) avoid the light. Her Labour weakens 
her Eyes exceedingly by a Harmony between the Womb 
and them. Her Eyes, if they were weak before, may 
be strengthened at this time. 

Sixthly, Let her avoid great noises and sadness, toge-
ther with trouble of mind: For whether it be most fitting 
she should be praising God for her Delivery, or troubled 
about the wagging of a straw, judge you. 

My Instructions are these: 
1. So soon as she is laid in her bed, let her drink a 
draught of burnt White-wine, in which you have melted 
a dram of Sperma Cets. 
|P_124
2. The Herb Vervain is a most singular Herb for this 
purpose, and grows commonly in every High-way. For 
though the Remedies of the College of Physicians grow 
in the East-Indies, and must give Mony for them, 
the Remedies of God are near at hand, and to be had 
for gathering, or else he was mistaken, who said, His 
tender mercies are over all his works. The Herb for-
tifies the Womb so exceedingly, that it will do more 
in two days with it, than in two weeks without. It is 
in its prime in May or June, when if you will gather it, 
and take the pains to dry it in the Sun, you may keep 
it all the year. If you do not, it's not my fault; you 
may use it any way, boyl it in her meats and drinks; 
it hath no offensive taste, though, very pleasant vertues. 
3. If the Woman be any way Feverish, add Plantane 
to it, whether Leaves or Roots it matters not. If she be not 
Feverish, it will not do amiss to add them both together, 
Vis unita Fortior, joyned strength is strongest. 
4. If her Courses come not away as they should do, 
leave out the Plantane, and instead thereof, put Mother 
of Thyme. 
5. If the Womb be full (which may be easily per-
ceived by the impurity of the Blood, it either coming 
away in gobs or stinking) or you suspect any of the 
After-birth to be left behind (which is a thing may 
sometimes happen, though the Midwives be never so a-
ble) make her a drink of Featherfew, Mugwort, Penny-
royal, Mother of Thyme boiled in White-wine and 
sweetned with Sugar. 
6. Panados and New-laid Eggs is the best Meat for 
het at first, of which let her eat often, and but a little 
at a time. 
7. Let her use Cinnamon in all her Meats and Drinks; 
for it strengthens the Womb like a Castle Fortified with 
Walls and Bulwarks. 
8. Let her stir as little as may be till after the fifth, 
sixth or seventh days after Delivery, if she be weak Let 
her talk as little as may be, for it weakens her. Gossips 
tales do Women little good in such a case. 
|P_125
9. If she goes not well to Stool, give her a Clyster 
made only with the Decoction of Mallows, and a little 
red Sugar. Old sage Cato prescribes Coleworts to Wo-
men in such a case, and took no other Physic, neither 
himself nor his Houshold. And Chrysippus was so vain-
glorious to write a whole Treatise of them, making 
them an universal Medicine for the whole Body, and 
every Disease it is subject to. But I spake with Dr. EX-
PERIENCE the other day, and he told me they 
were extream windy; and Dr. REASON who is 
always in his Company (both of them being the Sons 
of Dame NATURE) told me windy things were 
extream bad for Women in that case. 
10. When she hath lain-in a week, or something 
more, let her use such things as close the Womb; Of 
which, Knot grass and comfry bear away the Bell; you 
may if you please add a little Purging to it, and do your 
selves no harm; put in Polypodium, both Leaves and 
Roots bruised. Our College of Physicians, and so do 
the Ancients also affirm, That Polypodium of the Oak 
is to be preferred before all other Polypodiums whatso-
ever. I know no other reason they have for it, but only 
because it is more scarce; and because more scarce, 
more dear; and because more dear, it brings more Money, 
and that's the grease makes the Wheels go. You need not 
ask in what quantity these Herbs must be used; they 
are so harmless, you cannot offend in the use of them. 
If you be pleased to use the Directions, you, to your ad-
miration, shall find the singular effects of those instru-
ctions to your own health and comfort, and to my desire 
that am the Pen-man of them. They are most of them 
my own, if not all; you shall scarce find any of them 
in anothers writings. And thus you see I do not only 
wish you well, but Labour to do you good. 

|P_126
[}SECT. 2. }]
[}How to remedy the Accidents a Woman is subject unto 
in her Lying-In. }]
THE Accidents are these, — 

[}I. The After-pains. }]
About the Cause of which Authors keep a terrible 
quarter. They must say something, though to little 
purpose Some think it to be the thinness, some the 
thickness, some the sliminess of the Blood, and some the 
sharpness of it. The Opinion of Hippocrates was, That 
Women were most troubled with them at the Birth 
of the first Child; Cujus contrarium est verum; the 
good old Soul was mistaken. Dr. Experience whispers 
the contrary into every good Womans ears that had 
more Children than one, I do not justly know the cause 
my self: And yet this I know, That if my former 
Cautions and Instructions be observed, they will be 
either none at all, or very few. If it be not too late to 
help it (for Women will be willfull as well as Men) 
boil an Egg soft, and pour out the Yelk of it with which 
mix a spoonful of Cinnamon-water, and let her drink 
it; and if you mix two grams of Ambergreece with it, 
it will be better. I hold Vervain taken before, to be as 
good as either. 
2. Take Onions, and boyl them very well in water, 
then stamp them with Oyl and Cinnamon and Seeds in 
Powder, spread them upon a Cloath, and apply them 
to the Region of the Womb. 
3. Take Bayberries, beat them to Powder, put the 
Powder upon a Chafing-dish of Coals, and let her re-
ceive the smoak of them up her Privities. 
4. Take Tar and Barrows-grease, of each equal quan-
tities; boyl them both together, and whilst it is boyl-
ing, add a little Pidgeons dung to it. Spread some of 
this upon a Linnen Cloth, and apply it to the Reins of 
the back of a Woman that is troubled with After-pains, 
and it will speedily give her ease. 
|P_127
5. Let the Woman that is troubled with After-pains, 
take half a dram of Bayberries beaten into Powder in a 
draught of Muskadel. 

By putting all these together, a Man may gather, that 
the After-pains proceed from cold and wind. 

[}II. Excoriations in the lower part of their Womb. }]
For the remedy of which the usual Medcine is Oyl 
of sweet Almonds; a better remedy in my Opinions is 
Oyl of St. John's wort, to anoint that part withal. 

[}III. Sometimes through great straining to bring the 
Child into the World, the Woman comes to be 
troubled with the Hæmorrhoids and Piles. }]
For cure of which,
1. Let her use Polypodium bruised and boyled in her 
Meats and Drinks. 
2. Let her be let Blood in the Vein Saphæna. 
3. Take an Onion, and having cut a hole in the 
middle of it, fill it full of Oyl, roast it, and having 
bruised it altogether, apply it warm to the Fundament. 
If you think this Medicine be too hot; Take a dozen 
Snails without shells, if you can get them; take so many 
shells and pull them out, and having bruised them with 
a little Oyl, apply them to it warm. 
4.A better than any in my Opinion is: Take as ma-
ny Woodlice as you can get (some Countries call them 
Sows) bruise them, and having mixed them with a li-
tle Oyl, apply them warm to the place. 
5. If she goes not well to Stool, let her take an ounce 
of Cassia Fistula drawn at night going to Bed; she needs 
keep no greater Diet after it. 

[}IV. Retention of the Menstrua's, }]
Which is a thing usually mortal, if not remedied. 

Hippocrates, in his Book, De Natura-pueri, holds 
a Woman ought to be Purged according to the time 
that the Child is in shaping or forming, which is thirty 
days in a Male, forty in a Female. Sacred Writ, Levi-
ticus, Chap. 12. delivers these words; if she bring 
forth a Male Child, she shall continue in the Blood of 
her Purification thirty and three days. If she bring 
|P_128
forth a Maid Child, she shall continue in the Blood of 
her Purification threescore and six days. I know not 
how to understand this Scripture, unless it be confined 
only to Abraham's Houshold and their Seed, to whom the 
Levitical Law was only written as a Rule of Practice: 
And Experience will teach us, that Hippocrates his 
Rules were only calculated for the Meridian of Greece, 
and very seldom found Authentic in our Hemisphere. 
Besides, Women that give their Children suck themselves, 
have them not so long as those that do not. And if that 
Blood be impure (as I shewed before, and as is agreeable 
to reason) then is it not fit a Woman should give 
her Child suck very speedily after her Delivery; for if 
the Blood be impure, how can it breed good Milk? 
Dirty water will make but dirty pottage: And the re-
taining of an impure thing, doth the Body harm. That 
the First Milk of a Woman is naught, may appear, Be-
cause the first Milk of a Cow is brackish, and turns to 
Curds and Whey; yet lies not the Curse of God so hea-
vy upon Cattle for the first sin of Man, as it doth upon 
Men and Women. 

'Tis an easie matter to know when a Woman is purg-
ed enough in such a case. If the work be well done, 
health and strength follows, if not, sickness. 

If it be not well done: 
1. Take such Medicines as strongly provoke the 
Terms; you had a Catalogue of them before, part of 
which are Dittany, Bettony, Savory, Penny-royal, 
Featherfew, Sage, Centaury, Juniper-berries, Piony-
roots, &c. If this do not the deed, in a day or two 
dangerous effects are like to follow (if not prevented). 
Therefore, 
2. Let her take two or three Spoonfuls of Briony-
water every Morning; you may find the Receipt in 
my Translation of the London Dispensatory. In their 
first Master piece it was called Hysterical water; but in 
the second (because my body should know it was the 
same) Briony-water. 
3. Gentian-roots beaten into Powder, and a dram 
|P_129
of them take every Morning in Wine, is a most singu-
lar Remedy: and yet in my Opinion, 
4. The Roots of Birthworth, either long or round, 
so used, and taken as the former, is better than that. 
5. Take twelve Piony Seeds, and beat them into 
very fine Powder, and let her drink them in a draught 
of hot Carduus Posset drink, and let her sweat after 
it. If this do not bring them down the first time she 
takes it, let her take as much more about three hours af-
ter. Make much of these Medicines. 

[}V. Over flowing of the Menstrua's. }]
Which is easily cured by Comfry and Knot grass, so 
used and taken as you were instructed before. For in-
deed the Rules in the former Section being observed, 
you shall have no need of these once in an age. 

The truth is, this infirmity seldom happens to Wo-
men after they are Delivered. If it do, beside the for-
mer Remedies, 
1. Take Shepherds-purse, either boiled in any con-
venient Liquor, or dried and beaten to Powder, and 
it will be an admirable Remedy to stop them: For in-
deed the Herb is especially appropriated to the Privities. 
2. The Leaves and Flowers of Brambles, or either 
of them being dried and beaten into Powder, and a 
dram of them taken every Morning in a Spoonful of red 
Wine, or in a Decoction of the Leaves of the same which 
perhaps is far better, is an admirable Remedy for immo-
derate flowing of the Terms in Women. 
Such as would be skilful Physicians, let them read 
these Books of mine, viz.Platerus, Sennertus, Rive-
rius, Riolanus, Bartbolinus, Johnston, Vestingius, Sanctor
Rulandus, Cole, &c. 


[^1. * Jack with a 
Lanthorn, or 
Will with a 
Wisp.^]