
|P_1
[}OF 
URINE. }]
[}CHAP. I. 
Of the Principles and chief Accidents of Urine. }]
URINE new made, or after putrefacti-
on by long digestion, may be Chymi-
cally resolv'd into these Principles. 
By Distillation, 1st, A small Spirit, 
like that of Wine diluted with Water, ascends; 
but in so little a quantity, that 'tis not easily ta-
sted: This is succeeded by a watery Liquor 
considerable in quantity, intermix'd with some 
looser particles of Salt, and principally Sulphur:
3dly, A very penetrative Water is exhal'd, com-
monly call'd Spiritus Urinæ, which has but lit-
tle of the Wine-like Spirit, being generally only 
a Phlegm very much sharpen'd with Salt;where-
fore, as in Vinegar distill'd, it ascends last. 

But because the Salt of Urine is volatile, and 
of Vinegar fluid, therefore the distill'd Liquor 
impregnated with the particles of this, is very 
Acid; but what's incorporated with the saline 
particles of the other, is very sharp and pungi-
tive. 

'Tis hence evident, That the Spiritus Urine
|P_2
(commonly so call'd) owes its sharpness especial-
ly to Salt; because tho' most subtile, it takes not 
flame; but extinguisheth it, if presented to it. 

After Distillation, and the remaining moisture 
being wholly evaporated, another portion of Salt
with a little Earth remains in the bottom of the 
Matrass, out of which by a stronger heat, a Volatile 
Salt may be sublim'd, leaving the earthy Dregs behind. 

This Anatomy of Urine, plainly shews, That 
the Principles whereof it consists, are most Wa-
ter and Salt, a little Sulphur and Earth, and very 
little Spirit. We may discern the Saltness of 
Urines by Taste and Touch; in Taste it comes 
nearest a Nitrous Salt, and proceeds from the 
salt Particles of what we eat, which by Conco-
ction in the Vessels, is for the most part elabo-
rated into a Volatile Salt, i. e. a Salt and cer-
tain Spirit, which by their long and mutual com-
bination are knit together in the closest tye: 
hence Salt it self otherwise fix'd, is volatiliz'd, 
and (as 'twere by the Wing of another) becomes 
not unfit for motion. 

From the different Dispositions of our Bodies, 
Urines contain more or less Salt, and that (ac-
cording to the Accidents) more volatile or fix'd, 
and therefore are different in Colour and Con-
sistence. 

That there's Sulphur in Urines, their speedy 
putrefaction and stink sufficiently prove; and it 
proceeds from the saline-sulphureous Particles of 
Nourishment. 

Of this Sulphur there's less than in Blood, the 
Horns of Animals, or Soot; (and therefore in the 
|P_3
Distillation of Urine, nothing almost Oily or 
Fat ascends) for while the Blood circulates, the spi-
rituous and sulphureous Bodies which depart from 
it, for the most part evaporate: In the interim, the 
saline and watery reliques make up the Urine. Yet 
Urines always have some Sulphur, but the quan-
tities and proportion are diversly altered, accord-
ing to the different degrees of Concoction and 
Crudity; hence proceed the changes of heat and 
consistence in Urines. That the wine-like Spi-
rits of Urine are but few, 'tis evident from the 
defect in the Liquor first Distill'd, as also from 
the sudden putrefaction of Urine; but the inte-
stine motion of the Particles in Urine, conclude 
some; viz. the separation of Thin from Thick, 
and the spontaneous division of some parts from 
others, and the collection of that Hypostasis, or 
thick substance which generally subsides, at the 
bottom of Urine; besides, the saline Particles (in-
asmuch as they become volatile) are closely wed-
ded to the spirituous, and therefore become more 
brisk in motion and quick of energy. Yet accord-
ing to the different plenty and prevalency of Spirits 
in Urines, there are divers modes of those Nubeculæ,
or Urine-clouds, and also of the Sediments, and 
the Urines themselves, have a more quick or 
slow putrefaction. The watry-part in Urine, far 
exceeds the rest in quantity, as being almost six 
times more than the other: And by Distillation 
'tis not so clearly separated, but that some vola-
tile parts of Salt and Sulphur ascend together 
with it, which tincture it with an ingrateful sent. 

This has its original from a plentiful ingestion 
of Liquids with Food, which yet of what kind 
|P_4
soever they be, lose their proper Qualities, and ac-
quire others, before their change into Urine; for 
nothing almost sincere of that Liquor we drink, 
besides moisture, barely remains in the Piss. 

The distillation and evaporation of Urine,
plainly demonstrate, that there's some portion of 
Earth, as well as slimy-muddy Dreggs in it; for 
when all the liquid parts are exhal'd, the Earth, 
as a Caput mortuum, remains in the bottom in a 
moderate quantity. 

For in the Nutritive Juice, besides the active 
Principles of Salt, Sulphur and Spirit, is requir'd 
something solid, whence Bodies have their bulk 
and magnitude. The Recrements and earthy 
Dreggs of this, are plentifully dissolv'd in the 
serous part, making the contents of a more thick 
consistence; but this is different according to the 
variable State of Concoction and Crudity. 

These are the Principles which make up the 
Body of Urine, into which, by Chymistry 'tis 
easily resolvable. 

From the combinations and various admix-
tures of these, the other Accidents of Urine, viz.
Quantity, Colour and Consistence, which are sen-
sibly the most observable in it, and from hence 
the especial Objects of Urine-judgment, do arise; 
for when almost nothing besides is discernible in 
Urine, those make the first Phænomenons, in the 
right solution of which, the whole Hypothe-
sis of this Science consists. 

Wherefore in the next place, I shall Treat of 
these; and first, concerning the Urines of sound 
Men, what is their Quantity, Colour, Consistence 
and Contents; as also I shall endeavour to de-
|P_5
clare upon what mixture of Elements, what Con-
coction of the Bowels and Vessels, every one of 
these depend, 

In the next place it shall be shew'd, how far 
the Urines of sick Persons, differ from the Rule 
and Standard of those who are sound. And I 
shall endeavour to assign the proper Causes of 
their change to each of these Differences; and 
what I have said hitherto, shall finish the first 
scope of my Discourse, to wit, the Anatomy of 
Urine.

[}CHAP. II. 
Concerning the Quantity and Colour in Sound 
Mens Urine. }]
THE quantity of Urine in Sound Men, 
ought to be a little less, than the Liquids 
dayly ingested; for what is potable and moist 
that is daily taken, is the very matter of which 
Urines primarily consist. But these (when hun-
ger and thirst urge) are more plentifully requir'd, 
that they may sufficiently dilute the Mass of 
Chyle, for its right Fermentation in the Bowels; 
as also that it may serve for a Vehicle, both to 
convey it into the Mass of Blood, that the Blood it 
self may circulate in the Vessels without Stagnati-
on, and to the Nervous Juice, that it may actuate 
and moisten the Organs of sense and motion. 
Thus the serous part having almost contributed 
whatever Spirit or Sulphur it had, gives place 
to a new Nutritive Humor, and it self then, as 
|P_6
unprofitable, is carry'd off from the Blood, by 
the seclusive help of the Kidneys.

The Nourishing Liquor, which at last is chang'd 
unto Urine, is different in its own nature; some-
times waterish, sometimes inpregnated with Spi-
rits, sometimes with Salt and Sulphur; and ac-
cording to the different prevalency of this or that 
Element in it, many Variations happen: but no 
liquids wholly and unchanged pass our Bodies, 
but in diverse parts, undergo their mutations and 
loose some portion of their quantities, before 
they be ultimated into Piss. For the Liquor to be 
turn'd into Urine, being first receiv'd into the Sto-
mach, and staying there till Concocted, is also 
Impregnated with Salt and Sulphur of its own 
or other dissolv'd particles, from some more 
solid nourishment; after this, much of it, toge-
ther with the Nutritive Juice is mixt with the 
Blood, with which after long Circulation, and then 
according to the various temper of the Blood, and 
its accension in the Heart, it receives a further tin-
cture of Salt and Sulphur; hence some portion of 
it, is deriv'd into the Brain and Nerves, and there 
being render'd weak and non-Nutritive 'tis final-
ly again reduc'd into the mass of Blood. After 
that, the more generous part of the Serum is spent 
upon the Blood and the Nervous juice, a great 
part also by Sweat and other Emunctories, the re-
mainder, while the Blood continually passeth 
the Reins, is there separated from it, either by 
Percolation, or the Force of some Fermentation, 
by way of precipitation, passing the Ureters, in-
to the Bladder, whence 'tis ejected. 

From the Original and view of this serous 
|P_7
part now discrib'd, 'tis evident and that clearly, 
that the Urine ought to answer the quantity of 
Liquids ingested in a proportion somewhat less, 
perhaps about a third, which plainly shews the 
complextion and strength of the Bowels, whose 
Office is Concoction, and likewise of the Blood 
it self, as also in some sort, the temper and 
distribution of the Succus Nervosus: Moreover 
it carries with it the signs of the affects of the 
urinary Passages. 

The quantity of the Urine does not always hit 
this Rule, but sometimes exceeds, sometimes 
comes short, and for a little time, may 
consist with a State, not much out of tune; 
but the long continuance of such different 
Accidents argues a sickly condition: Concerning 
these, I shall speak amongst the Phænomenons
of Urine in a crasy Body. 

In the next place, I consider the Colour of a 
sound Urine.

The Urine that is made, after a perfect Con-
coction in the whole Body, is of a Citron-colour 
like a Lixivium indifferently boil'd, which 
without doubt proceeds from the Salt and Sulphur 
of the Nutritive Juice and Blood, dissolv'd by e-
bullition in the Serum.

This Colour arises not from Salt only, (as some 
contend) for any Liquor that is impregnated with 
Salt (except it be evaporated to a certain thik-
ness) doth not at all grow Yellow: And truly 
the Salt of Tartar dissolv'd by liquation, yet re-
mains clear. 

To what's objected concerning a lixivium of A-
shes; I answer, the whole quantity of Sulphur is not 
|P_8
spent by burning, but the citron colour arises from 
some Salt and other adust Sulphureous particles 
cleaving to the ashes, infus'd and incocted in the 
Liquor. Nor has sound Urine this tincture from 
Sulphur only; for Sulphur in a Waterish Men-
struum, cannot be dissolv'd without the addition 
of Salt; neither parts with any of its tincture 
without such addition: and therefore if you digest 
Salt of Tartar and common Sulphur together in 
Water, or boil Antimony in a Salt Menstrum,
both liquors, Urine like, grow Yellow from 
thence; even so the Salt and Sulphureous parti-
cles of Nourishment, by digestion in the Stomach 
and Intestines, and by circulation with the Blood 
in the Arteries and Veins, being minutely divid-
ed and througly incocted with the Serum, make 
the Urine of a Citron-colour. 

The dissolution of Salt and Sulphur in manner 
aforemention'd, by which Urines become Citron-
colour'd, is first begun in the Bowels, afterwards 
perfected in the other Vessels, much depending up-
on the Concoction of the Stomach and Intestines. 

For here by the help of Heat, and Fermentati-
on, the Nourishments ingested are especially fer-
mented. The tye of mixture being loosed, the 
Sulphureous and Saline particles minutely brok-
en, are advanc'd into Chyle, and then the Se-
rum, which is the remainder from the concocti-
on and distribution of that Milkie Juice, becomes 
citron colour'd; as when Salt of Tartar and com-
monSulphur are dissolv'd together in any Liquor, 
and some Acid pour'd upon it, it presently 
turns milkie, and soon after, the contents being se-
paratedper Sabsidentiam, the remainder of the 
Liquor grows yellow like a Lixivium.

|P_9
But if the Nourishment, through some indis-
position of the Stomach, be not rightly digested 
in the first Concoction, as it often happens in a 
Pica, Dropsie, and other Distemperatures of the 
Bowels, the Urine then becomes crude, clear 
and almost insipid like Fountain Water. 

But by reason of the too exalted, or otherwise 
deprav'd Ferments of the Bowels; as in the Scur-
vy, Hypocondriack Melancholy, or in a Feaverish
constitution, the particles of nourishment being 
too much dissolv'd in the first Region, the Urines
become red and thick. 

The Serum, which in the first Concoction, as is 
said, had got a tincture like Lie, being mixt with 
the Blood, as long as it circulates with it, is yet 
further concocted and gets a deeper colour; for 
tho' the throughly concocted particles of Blood 
are generally separated into the Vesicula fellis, yet 
partly their incoction in the Serum enhances 'its 
tincture. Hence Urine first made after Conco-
ction is most pale; the next made somewhat red; 
and after long fasting, yet more deep. 

Where the Blood is more cold, as in a Ca-
chexia, the colour of Urine is below its just 
state; but where the Blood is accended and 
as 'twere boil'd by a Feaverish Heat, 'tis of a high Red. 

'Tis worthy observation, that some Urines, and 
those sound, made after large drinking, are not 
colour'd, but pale and waterish. 

Concerning which, the enquiry is, how the 
Serum so suddenly passes the Stomach, (contrary 
to common belief) and running through first the 
Chylie-passages, then the Veins, Arteries, the 
Ventricles of the Heart, the turnings and wind-
|P_10
ings of the Reins and Ureters, in so short a 
space is sent out of the Body; and besides, 
otherwise than in most other cases, borrows no 
colour in its passages, but loses its own. 

'Tis probable, besides the long circuit of the Nu-
tritive juice, wherein after some stay in the Sto-
mach, it glides down the Intestines, and thence 
is carry'd through the lacteal-Vessels into new 
passages, and thence into the Veins; (a circuit 
not to be run in a trice, therefore) 'tis probable, I 
say, that there's another more proper passage of 
the same Nutritive Juice, by which 'tis present-
ly convey'd to the Mass of Blood and perhaps to 
the Succus Nervosus. Wherefore after long hun-
ger, immediately upon Eating, but especially up-
on Drinking, we find a sudden refreshment, which 
cannot be suppos'd to proceed but from Spirits or 
Vapours; because immediately after such drinking 
follows pissing, and that sooner than the Mass of 
Chyle can be thought to be sent out of the Sto-
mach. Therefore it seems not improbable, that 
forthwith a thinner part of the Nourishing Liquor 
(that's receiv'd into the Stomach) consisting of 
some Spirit and espeially Water, is imbib'd by 
its Membranes, like a Spunge, and thence in-
still'd into the Mouths of the Veins, and is present-
ly mixt with the Blood in its return to the Heart. 
For many are of this opinion, that the Chyle in 
some measure is immediately deriv'd from the 
Stomach and Intestines, through the branches of 
the Vena porta into the Mass of Blood. And 
as the lacteal passages carry it about in a long 
Circuit, by which 'tis sent into the descending 
Branch of the Vena cava, so by a nearer way, 
|P_11
through these Vessels, may it be carry'd into the 
ascending branch of the same Vein; for the
 Blood, being in some measure impoverisht with 
its Circulation, returning both ways, ought to be 
refreshed with a new Juice, before it enters the H
eart, to enliven the Ferment there. 

Now since the far greater part of Blood is car-
ry'd upward, it seems certainly Reasonable, that
some part of the Nutritive Juice should as 'twere 
fewel for a new accension in the Heart) be con-
veyed into the Blood already spent and grown 
feeble. Many arguments make for this, which 
to recite, were too large a digression from my 
present scope; wherefore I think 'tis in some mea-
sure after the manner aforesaid, that we piss such 
a pale waterish Urine, so soon after drinking. 

That Liquor, which from Nourishment is so spee-
dily convey'd into the Mass of Blood, not passing 
through so many windings, as the membranes 
of the Bowells, (as if drawn by distillation, the 
grosser part rejected) in a manner, is only Wa-
ter and Spirit, whereby it may refresh the Vi-
tal Spirits and dilute the Blood. In which task, 
the spirituous part being spent, the waterish 
part, being weighty and troublesome by reason of 
its plenty, is continually sent out by the Kidneys; 
and since it comes from the Stomach, not as yet 
embrewed with Salt and Sulphur, nor is not so 
long circulated with the blood, as to acquire 
from thence, a lixivious tincture, tis piss'd out 
thin and clear. 

|P_12
[}CHAP. III. 
Concerning the Consistence and Contents of the Urine of the sound. }]
HItherto have we discours'd of the Quan-
tity and Colour of Urines in sound Bo-
dies; but as to the Contents, there ought to be 
nothing in sound Urines, besides the Nubecula
or Urine-sloud; and what this is, and how it 
is form'd, in the next place remains to be ex-
plain'd. 

While the mass of Blood is commixt with se-
rum and the Nutritive humour, 'tis continually 
circulated in the Vessels; from hence a certain 
Nutritive Juice, by perpetual digestion is elabo-
rated, which becomes a Nutriment at last, con-
tinually supplying the solid Parts. This at first 
is concocted into a glutinous Humour, not much 
unlike the white of an Egg; after that, into slen-
der Filaments, which being interwoven in the pores 
and little spaces of the solid Parts, supply them 
with an augmentation always of new Substance. 
And while the Serum, that is mixt with the 
Blood, washes over all the regions of the Body, 
it swallows up in it self a superfluous part of this 
last Nourishment, design'd for the Augmentati-
on of the solid Parts, and carries out with it, 
that which makes the Urine-cloud. When this 
appears (because it signifies Concoction and Nu-
trition in some measure) 'tis accounted a lauda-
ble sign; but if no such Phænomenon be visible, 
|P_13
'tis a sign of Crudity, as in a Cachexia and Dyscra-
sie in Feavers.

It consists of slender Filaments (as aforesaid) 
and is disperst thro' the whole body of the Urine,
and then is gather'd together into one Cloud, 
Thus; the Filaments are long and somewhat 
smooth, having some asperities, bramble-like, so 
that being mov'd to and fro, they easily take hold 
one of another, and are complicated in themselves; 
as if we shou'd cast many Hairs into a Vessel full 
of Water, and there by often shaking, and tossing 
the Vessel about, the Hairs, which at first Swim 
on the top, here and there, shortly after Mutual-
ly embrace, and knit in one knot. After the 
same manner, ('tis probable) the Filaments which 
make up the Nubecula or Urine-cloud, being 
tost too and fro by the innate heat and Spirits of 
the Urine, do concur and knit together, till by 
a mutual complex of each other they Concenter 
into one little Cloud; and because those Fila-
ments are more compact and firm, than the rest 
of the Contents of the Urine, by reason of their 
Gravity, they fall to the bottom. 'Tis highly 
probable, that such Filaments, in some Persons 
make up the Urine-cloud; because the Blood in 
a good State, and consequently disposed for 
Nourishment, is interwoven with many Fibres 
or white threads, which any body may discover 
by phlebotomy, when the Blood is receiv'd in-
to hot Water; therefore 'tis probable that some 
divided slender parts of those threads, being 
snatch'd along with the Serum, are the matter 
of that Wool-like Subsidence in the Urine: 
Wherefore in a Cachexia, the blood being water-
|P_14
ish through Crudities, and unfit for Nourishment, 
is distitute of those Elaborated small fibrous 
threads; as likewise in great Dyscrasies, when by 
an over ebullition of the Blood, the Nutritive 
Juice is not rightly concocted into such like 
threads, the Hypostasis or thick Sediment of the 
Urine is either utterly wanting, or very much 
confus'd and troubled. 

A good and laudable Urine-cloud is white, 
round and equal, falling towards the bottom; 
and to this is requir'd, first, that the Nourish-
ment be rightly elaborated, whereby the Fila-
ments may become somewhat smooth, round 
and firm, like slender threads. 

2dly. That the Urine be sufficiently Impreg-
nated with Spirits, which (as 'tis evident in the 
Fermentation of new Wine) may drive and exa-
gitate the parts to and fro. 

3dly. That the Liquor be not too thick, nor 
its pores prepossess'd with other little bodies, 
whereby it may happen, that the motion of the 
Contents may be hindred; wherefore there ought 
to be an ample space left, to agitate and hurry 
about such Particles. If the Urine-cloud be red, 
'tis a Sign that the last nourishment is render'd 
adust, and over concocted by too much Heat; 
therefore such a Sediment for the most part, is 
in the beginning of Feavers, while the Con-
coction of the Bowells and Vessels is not whol-
ly preverted. If the Hypostasis be broken and 
unequal, 'tis a sign, that the Nutriment de-
sign'd for the solid Parts, is not rightly and e-
qually concocted, that its particles are not alto-
gether Congenerous, i. e. of the same kind, and 
of 
|P_15
the same Nature, and therefore the Filaments 
hang not together Uniformly, but as 'twere af-
ter a Separate and confus'd manner of Implicati-
on; hence some that are more crass, fall to the 
bottom; others more rare, hang higher. When 
the substance, of which the Hypostasis is made, 
doth not altogether fall, but wholly hangs ei-
ther in the top or middle Region, it happens 
thus, either because 'tis made of Filaments not 
perfectly Elaborated, firm and compact, but more 
thin and Spungy, or because the Liquor is more 
than ordinary Impregnated with Salt and Sul-
phur, and therefore like a strong Lixivium, bears 
up that weighty matter, which otherwise wou'd 
fall to the bottom. 

Some times the Nubecula or Urine-cloud is 
wholly wanting in sound Bodies, after long 
Hunger, immoderate Labours or extraordinary 
Sweats, the matter being either wholly spent 
in Nutriment; or evaporated by Sweat: And. 

In Feavers, because the mixture of the Blood 
is greatly Deprav'd: in the longing and deprav'd 
Appetites of Child bearing Women; in a Ca-
chexia or an ill habit of body, and other such 
like Affects, by reason of the Predominant Cru-
dity. 

Concerning the Consistence of sound Urines,
not many things worthy observation occur. 
'Tis commonly like Middle Ale well purify'd 
by Fermentation, or a Lixivium indifferently 
boil'd: viz. The aqueous part of the Urine,
ought to contain within its pores and spaces 
many particles of Salt and Sulphur broke and 
disolv'd very small, as also a little Earth disjoin'd 
|P_16
into the least atomes, and disperst throughout the 
whole body of the Urine. If the Consistence be 
thinner, than it ought to be, as 'tis seen in clear 
and waterish. Urine, 'tis a Sign of Indigestion 
and Crudity, that the aliment is not fully con-
cocted: but if the Urine be more crass and thick 
than it ought to be, 'tis a Sign the body of the 
Liquor is clogg'd with Preternatural Contents; 
but of these elsewhere, when we treat of the 
Urines of sick Persons. Hitherto have we spok-
en of Urine in a sound Body, both as the Excre-
ment and Sign of Concoction rightly perform'd 
in the Bowells and other Vessels. 

We must take the measures of its Quantity 
from what we drink; its Citron-colour, from Salt
and Sulphur dissolv'd and incocted in the Serum.
The Hypostasis or Contents depend upon the fi-
laments elaborated in the mass of Blood, for 
the nourishment of the solid parts. Its Consi-
stance is from Salt and Sulphur, together with 
some particles of Earth, filling up the pores and 
spaces of the serous Part. It remains next, that 
we treat of the Urines of sick Persons, in which 
likewise the Quantity, Colour, Contents and Con-
sistence, as also some other accidents, offer them-
selves to our consideration. 

[}CHAP. IIII. 
Of the Quantity and Colour of the Urines of Sick 
Persons. }]
IN a desease or sickly State of Body, the Quan-
tity of Urine frequently answers not the ne-
|P_17
cessary proportion of ingested Liquids; for sometimes 
there's a Defect, (sometimes an Excess) in the 
just Measure, when the Urine is far less than the 
ingested Liquors. The reason of the Defect is, be-
cause the serous part Stagnates somewhere in the 
Body, or is diverted some other way, than that of 
the Urinary excretion; For 'tis either 1st, lodg'd a-
about the Bowels and their cavities, and sometimes 
also stays longer, than it ought, in the Stomach, 
by which means 'tis somewhat distended, causing 
troublesome Spitting: but more frequently it is 
lodg'd in the hollow of the Paunch, sometimes in 
the cavity of the Breast or Head, and there usual-
ly produces Dropsical Diseases: or 2dly. the serum
Stagnates in the Vessels, and thereby augmen-
ting the Mass of Blood and Nervous Liquor, 
greatly perverts their motion: or 3dly. that wa-
terish Humour is thrown upon the habit of the Bo-
dy and so creates a swelling of the whole or some 
parts: or 4thly and lastly 'tis obstructed in the 
Urinary passages, by a Stone or some Viscous 
matter creating Pain and Convulsions in those 
parts, and a Superfluity of serum in the whole 
Body. 

But when the serum is diverted otherways, it 
often disposes the Sick to frequent and trouble-
some Sweats, or almost a continual Flux. The 
Affects therefore which the deficient Quantity of 
Urine indicates, are Swellings and aqueous colle-
ctions of some Bowels, also sometimes Rheuma-
tick Pains, sometimes an ill Disposition of the 
genus nervosum, sometimes an universal Dropsy
and phlegmatick Tumours, and sometimes the 
|P_18
Stone in the Reins and Bladder; sometimes also 
the penury of Urine is the effect and sign of 
some other præternatural Evacuation, to wit, of 
Sweat, a Diarrhœa, or some other immoderate Ex-
cretion. To describe every cause and mode of 
the office of the Serum, either as it is in the Bo-
dy, or as it is excern'd thence, were in a manner 
to bring over hither, the whole matter of all the 
Affects; for many and diverse are the Occasions 
and Circumstances, by reason of which the serum
is lodg'd in this or that Part, and by staying in 
the Body, lessens the quantity of Urine.Not-
withstanding, the principal and most frequent 
cause of this, is not so much the Vice of the Li-
ver, Spleen or Reins, as that of the Blood it s
elf. 

Free and plentiful Pissing, as likewise its tar-
rying in the Body and penurious Excretion, de-
pend especially upon the temper of the Blood 
and its Accension or Fermentation in the Heart: 
For, if the Blood be impregnated with active 
principles, (viz. Spirit, Sulphur and Salt) 
rightly exalted, and have a lively Ferment in the 
Vessels, so that the well loosened complex of 
the Liquor be rightly accended by the Ferment of 
the Heart, it all in a manner Spiritualizeth, and 
by its Heat and rapid Motion Transmits it self, 
without obstruction, through every Part; what-
soever is superfluous and volatile evaporates, and 
while the Blood that is rarify'd and as 'twere 
boyling with Heat, passeth the Reins, that which 
is the serous part, either by reason only, the Kid-
neys, is as 'twere its Strainer, or having in them 
|P_19
some Coagulated matter, is easily separated and 
as 'twere Precipitated from the rest of the Mass 
of Blood. Tis the same in a manner with the Mass 
of Blood, what we observe in Milke; viz.
while it grows Hot and almost Boyling, it ea-
sily Curds or Coagulates, and its Serum or Whey 
soon separates by pouring in a little Runnet or 
any sharp sour Liquor; but if it be Cold, though 
you pour in stronger Ferments and a considerable 
quantity of any Acid, scarce any Precipitation 
follows. 

Therefore if the Blood become more Cold and 
Watery from an ill constitution of Diet, so that 
being less impregnated with active Particles, its 
Ebullition is more slow, 'tis accended as 'twere 
piece-meal in the Heart, and circulates very slow-
ly and with difficulty in the Vessels, and run-
ning the course of the pores and passages in the 
Flesh and Bowels, sticks by degrees, leaving 
something of it self behind it: whence Obstructi-
ons and Tumours every where accrue. 

By this means also, the Blood being Feeble 
and Viscous, is consequently less sit for Precipi-
tation or Percolation, and doth not so readily 
convey its serous Excrements into the Kidneys, 
but leaves them every where dispers'd in the 
whole Body, by reason of the Settlement of 
some Humour and Difficulty of Circulation. 
Wherefore in this State, those things which 
much exagitate the Blood, as Exercise, swift and 
frequent Motion; or as those things which like 
Rennet infus'd do precipitate, as Acids and Salt 
Preparations do, provoke Urine more plentiful-
ly. 

|P_20
Sometimes sick Persons Piss very copiously, so 
that in the space of twenty four hours, they e-
vacuate twice or thrice as much Urine as they 
have taken Liquids. The cause of which Effect is 
divers, and the Signification much different. If af-
ter the diminution' of its quantity, or suppression of 
Urine; if in dropsical affects, Rheumatisms or other 
nervous Passions, or the crisis of Feavers, plenty 
of Urine naturally, or by the use of Diureticks,
freely ensue, for the most part it presages the 
discontinuance of the Disease and Preternatural 
Indisposition; or at least, its declension. But 
if (as I have often observ'd, without these fore-
going and premention'd effects) the Urine far 
exceeds the ingested Liquids, and thence ensue a 
remarkable Debility, this indeed portends an ill 
State, an inclination to an Atrophy or Consumpti-
on. I have known some Women of a slender 
thin habit of Body, who sometimes being indis-
pos'd for many days together, were wont to make 
in great plenty (above what Liquids they took) a 
thin Watery Urine, without Contents or Urine-
cloud, at which time, they complain'd of their 
strength languishing, difficulty of Breathing, and 
an inability to Motion. 

I suppose in this case, the Blood and Succus 
Nervosus, by an exalted and fluid Salt, became 
too acid, and consequently unapt to be in the least 
dissolv'd in their mixture, and were too much 
dispos'd to Serosities; for 'tis observable, that 
whatever Liquids, tho' thick and clammy, if 
kept till sour, they presently become more thinn 
and waterish. Further, 'tis manifest, that those 
|P_21
accidental overflowings of Urine arise from 
such a disposition of the Blood and Humours; 
for the Urine has a Vinegar Smack: and such 
affects (as aforemention'd) are ordinarily cur'd 
by Chalybeat Medicines, and not always by com-
mon Astringents and Thickners. 

Now as to the Colour of the Urine of the Sick, 
that of sound Persons must be the rule and Stand-
ard, by which all the rest ought to be try'd and 
judg'd. 

Since then the Colour of theirs who are Sound, 
ought to be Citron; the Urine of those that are 
sick, will either be more Pale than Citron, and so 
white like common Water; or more deep-
ly tinctur'd, and then generally 'twil be either of 
a Flame or Saffron-colour, Red, Green or Black. 
In short, I'le endeavour to appropriate the Cau-
ses, from which each of these Alterations proceed, 
and what Affects or preparations of Diseases they 
usually indicate. 

The Urine is clear like Water, when by rea-
son of the indigestive faculty of the Stomach, 
the Saline and Sulphureous particles of our Meat 
are not so well concocted and minutely broke, 
that they can be volatiliz'd and dissolv'd in the 
Serum to tincture it so deep, as that after all its 
windings and passages it can bespeak its Origi-
nals. 

For Liquids, that are to be chang'd into Urine,
by reason they are press'd and driven through 
secret and very narrow Passages, as 'twere by 
Distillation, thereby loose their Colour and Con-
sistence which they had when ingested, and im-
|P_22
bibe nothing from the Chyle (whose vehicle they 
are) but what is volatile. Wherefore if by rea-
son of eminent Crudity, Salt and Sulphur and o-
ther Contents be not first volatiliz'd in the Bow-
els, nor after, dissolv'd in the Vessels so far, as 
to run the same course with the Serum, this at 
last, in a manner divested of all, is sent out like 
clear Water. And that such Urines generally 
want their active Principles, 'tis evident, because 
they are longest preserv'd from Putrifaction. 

Such Urine in Virgins generally signifies a Chlo-
rosis or the Green-Sickness, in most an ill habit 
of Body or a Dropsie; in some 'tis a sign of great 
crudity and the want of Concoction; and some-
times also, in those who are subject to the Stone,
it Preindicates an approaching Fit, viz. while the 
Serum in the Kidneys is coagulated by an acid 
fermenting Juice, its Contents being condens'd 
into a Tartarous matter, a thin waterish part 
is only excern'd. They who for a time, (let the 
Disease be what it will) Piss thin and waterish, 
have very often these Symptoms; difficult and 
frequent Breathing after motion, Distension about 
the region of the Stomach, and as 'twere a Swel-
ling or Puffing up, after Meat. The reason of 
which wholly depends upon want of Volatiliza-
tion in the Blood: For, because its Liquor is de-
stitute of active particles rightly exalted, viz. (Spi-
rit, Sulphur and Salt) therefore 'tis not suffici-
ently accended by the ferment of the Heart, where-
by the whole should presently sally and as 'twere 
break forth into a Flame; but fermenting with 
difficulty, and apt to Stagnate, or for the most part 
|P_23
to settle in the Heart, 'tis much oppress'd by it; 
wherefore, if the Blood thus dispos'd, be hasten'd 
thro' the Ventricles of the Heart, by a motion more 
quick than ordinary, because it has not free Rare-
faction, it presently sallies out, in a manner all 
at once; therefore there is need of a greater En-
deavour, and more frequent Agitation of the 
Lungs to pump it. 

Waterish Urines therefore, fore-tell such like 
Crudities in the Blood; because if they have re-
ceived, in a manner, no tincture from the Salt
and Sulphur, 'tis a sign their particles are less 
dissolv'd, or less volatiliz'd, in the Mass of Blood. 

As to the Distention of the Stomach, of which 
clear Urines are both an effect and sign; I say, 
for want of a due Fermentation, the Chyle is not 
all changed into a volatile white Substance, but 
(like Bread not fermented) is alter'd and trans-
muted into a heavy ponderous Mass, which is 
slowly, and not without a Viscous Phlegme ac-
companying it, sent from the Stomach, whose re-
liques being fixt to the foldings and membranes 
of the Stomach, obstruct all its Pores and Passa-
ges, so that nothing can evaporate, and what is 
more Thin and Spirituous, cannot be carry'd to the 
Blood forthwith through secret Passages as it 
ought. Hence plenty of Flatulencies or Windi-
ness is engender'd; which speedily stretches the 
Stomach, blowing it up beyond its proportion. 
And since those dreggs, by long residence in the 
Stomach, abound with a fixt Salt, they sometimes 
degenerate into an Acid, sometimes into a Vitri-
oline or other base Heterogeneous matter, whence 
|P_24
Violent pains in the Stomach, deprav'd Appetite, 
violent heat with frequent Thirst, sometimes vi-
olent Vomitings and other very grievous Sym-
ptoms arise. Some of which, tho' they argue 
heat, and that in a great degree, lurke and lye 
hid within: yet those who are thus affected for 
want of Concoction, often make Crude and Wa-
terishUrine. We have thus now largely treat-
ed of clear Urine, because the reasons of the rest, 
may be had hence, which are Pale and thin with-
out Colour or Consistence, in those who are Sound. 
For the Phænomenons of Pale straw-colour'd or 
other Colours below Citron, arise, and may be 
explicated after the same manner we have alrea-
dy said of the Water-like, clear Urine, from 
the greater or less Dissolution and Concoction of 
Salt and Sulphur in the Serum.

Another kind of Urine, more Pale than Citron, 
yet remains, not at all Thin but Thick, of a sullied 
whitish Colour, which is commonly observ'd, 
Children make, when their Bowels are much 
troubled with Wormes; the reason of which seems 
to be, because the matter of which Wormes 
are ingender'd, is a viscous Phlegm through in-
digestion of Chyle and want of Volatilization, 
heapt up in the Bowels, which doth not readily 
transmit any tincture to the Urine, because the 
matter is fixt; after that, the same matter putrid-
fying, is exalted and volatiliz'd in a manner, and 
then partly by Heat and Spirit is form'd into 
Wormes, and that phlegmatick matter, being 
unfit for nourishment, 'tis separated from the 
Blood with the Serum and mixt with the Urine;
|P_25
hence that white Colour and whitish Sediment. 

Sometimes in Feavers, especially the Urines
of Children grow white; the reason of which 
is, because the supply of Nutritive Juice coming 
from the Chyle to the Mass of Blood, is not 
rightly assimilated, but degenerates into an ex-
crementitious Humour, a part of which being 
incocted in the Serum, gives it a more thick Con-
sistence and milkie-colour, otherwise than in Fea-
vers of the Adult, where when the Heat is more 
strong and vigorous, the mixture of such Juice 
tinctures the Serum with a deep Red. 

Sometimes also Urines appear white, from a 
Gonorrhæa, Flour albus, Ulcers of the Kidneys, 
Ureters, or Urinary passage, by reason of the com-
mixture of Matter or corrupted Seed. Howe-
ver it be, the white colour of the Urine, is pro-
duc'd by its Contents, which falling to the bot-
tom, the Liquor for the most part becomes of a 
yelowish-pale Colour, like as 'tis seen in the pre-
paration of Lac Sulphuris, where the Milkie sub-
stance falling to the bottom, the Liquor swim-
ming above, is commonly of a Citron colour. 

Urines whose Colour is more Intense, than 
Citron, owe not their appearances only to the 
more than ordinary dissolution of Salt and Sul-
phur, but in some measure, to the more crass 
Contents in the Liquor. 

The plentiful dissolution of Salt and Sulphur is 
perform'd in the Vessels containing the very Mass 
of Blood, and thence is the Tincture deriv'd up-
on the Serum, and this for the most part, comes 
to pass two ways. 

|P_26
First, either by reason of a Feaverish Heat, in 
as much as the Blood boyling in the Vessels, and 
being more accended in the Heart, is much weak-
ned in its mixture; and therefore the particles of 
Salt and Sulphur, which are separated by Ebulli-
tion, plentifully impregnate the Serum. Or 
Secondly, without a Feaver, when such like Sul-
phureous and Saline little Bodies, which were 
wont to be sent out at other Emunctories, are 
detain'd; therefore being heapt up, by little and 
little in the Blood, they are commixt with the 
Serum: Of which, there are two particular 
Cases or Modes for either the Excre-
ments of Blood, which especially partake 
of an adust Sulphur, and ought to be sent 
forth by the Vesicula Fellis, are retain'd and so 
mixing with the Serum, tincture it with a yel-
low: Or the Effluviums which are especially of a 
Saline nature, and were wont to evaporate by in-
sensible Transpiration are retain'd, and by them is 
the Urine tinctur'd, like a Lixivium or with a 
Lye-like colour. 

All Persons in the Jaundise have Urine of the 
frist sort; but that of the latter, is familiar to 
the Scurvy; for in a Scorhutick Habit, the Sa-
line Particles of Blood fall short of Volatilizati-
on, and become fluid, wherefore by reason of 
fixation, they evaporate less, and being plenti-
fully heap'd up in the Mass of Blood, they great-
ly prevent its Mixture, and especially impre-
gnate the Serum with Salt.

The Contents which augment the colour of 
Urine are of two sorts, viz. Either the adust 
|P_27
Recrements, which are the reliques of the Blood's 
Inflammation: Or the Particles of the Nutritive 
Juice, degenerated into an unknown Matter; of 
which, in their proper place hereafter: Our pre-
sent Task is, a particular decyphering every Co-
lour, that is above Citron. 

In the first place, The Flame-colour'd Urine
appears like the yellowish red Vapours in the Di-
stillation of Spiritus Nitri, and this is very often 
found in Intermitting Feavers, frequently in Ter-
tians. This Colour arises from a small portion 
of thin yellow Choler, mix'd with the Serum,
while 'tis in motion; for in this Feaver there is 
a sharp and hot Distemperature of the Blood, 
which burnes and in a manner torrifies all the 
Humours, and therefore plentifully produceth 
Choler.

And tho' this for the most part, is sent out 
by the Ductus bilarius; notwithstanding, since 
it abounds in the Vessels, part of it, or (what's 
equivalent) the adust Particles of Blood and Hu-
mours being incocted in the Serum, tincture it 
with a deep yellowish-red. This Urine is Thin 
and Shining, because in this Disease, almost a 
continual Sweat forces out the Excrements of 
the Nutritive Juice and the more gross part of 
the Serum, to the circumference of the Body. The 
Saffron-colour'd Urine, which dies Linnen-
cloth with the same colour, is an undoubted 
Sign of the Jaundise; and 'tis thus tinctur'd 
from yellow Choler, or Salt and Sulphur adust 
and plentifully mix'd with the Serum, For that 
Yellow is necessarily produc'd by the more than 
|P_28
ordinary continual motion and over-heat of the 
Blood: And Nature has design'd the Vesicula 
Fellis and its passages which are radicated in the 
Liver, for discharging the Choler from the Mass 
of Blood. But if this Office of the Ductus Bila-
rius, in conveying the Gall, be any ways hin-
der'd, that Humour stagnating in the Blood and 
plentifully heap't up there, dies the Skin, Blood, and 
Urine especially, with a yellow Tincture. 

A Safftron-colour'd, differs from a Flame-co-
lour'dUrine; because in the last, only some 
part of the thinner, in the first, a more crass 
and plentiful part of the Gall is incorporated 
with the Urine: Farther, in yellow Choler, 
Sulphur being long circulated with an ac-
companyingSalt, is fully dissolv'd by it, and 
becomes like Paint, colouring any Subject with 
a Saffron tincture, like as when common Sul-
phur and the Oil of Tartar are dissolv'd together. 

But that Redness which is in Urine, without 
the stagnation of Choler, happens after the same 
manner, as in a Lixivium or Lie of Ashes, 
where the Particles of Sulphur without any pre-
disposition, from those of Salt, together with them 
are imbib'd in the Liquor. 

In the next place, we will Treat of Red Urines,
which are of a different Nature, depend upon 
different Causes, and many times signify differ-
rent kinds of Affects; the chief of which, and 
their proper significations we'll briefly describe. 
First of all, the Liquor grows red of it self, re-
mains in the same Condition, neither is the Co-
lour of any part of it alter'd by Subsidence. Or, 
|P_29
2dly, the deep dye of Urine proceeds especially 
from what's contain'd in it; and after its resi-
dence to the bottom, it becomes Yellowish, or 
less Red than before. The Affects which such 
Urines are wont to signify, are especially, Fea-
vers, Scurvy, and a confirm'd Consumption.

Let's consider the Reasons of each. When 
the Urine which is made Red, continues so. 'Tis 
either 1st, of an indifferent Consistence and Tran-
sparent, and then it owes its Colour to Salt and 
Sulphur more than ordinarily adust and there-
fore plentifully incocted in the Serum.

Or, 2dly, Such an Urine is Red, as also Dark 
and Muddy and besides what particles of Salt
and Sulphur it hath, some earthy Particles are 
emboyl'd in it, which sticking in the Pores and 
Passages of the Urine, do not all precipitate; be-
cause the Liquor of the Urine divested of its fit 
Spirits, which wou'd separate and precipitate all 
parts of a different disposition, as it usually happens 
in Wine that hath lost its Head, or been sower'd by 
Thunder; in which Case, the Liquor is impre-
gnated with thick and muddy Dreggs, and for 
want of due Spirits cannot finally clarify and be-
come limpid as before. 

Hence such Urine is the worst of signs in Fea-
vers; because it signifies such a confusion of a-
dust matter in the Blood, that ought to be sepa-
rated, and yet the Vital Spirits cannot bring it un-
der and overcome it. The Urine is sometimes 
made Red, because of its Contents, which falling 
to the bottom, the Liquor becomes of another 
Colour 

|P_30
Now this, as 'tis said above, is two-fold, viz.
sometimes thin, which is the matter or remaind-
er of the adust Recrements from the deflagration of 
the Blood: Sometimes thick, viz. from the de-
generate Particles of the Nutritive Juice; both 
these being torrify'd by the Blood's Ebullition 
and being separated, are partly sent out by Sweat, 
and partly mix'd with the Serum, whose Consi-
stence they thicken, and enhance its Colour, to 
wit, as long as those Contents are held up, be-
ing enclos'd in the Pores and Passages of the Li-
quor, the Colour appears more deep, and the Con-
sistence more thick; but these being fallen to the 
bottom, the Redness and Thickness of the Liquor 
are abated: The reason of both which shall be 
assign'd hereafter, when we assert the Causes of 
Clearness, Darkness, and other Colours of Urines.
Now let's enquire What's the Reason of the dif-
ference, that Red Urines are wont to be made 
#####Feavers, the Scurvy, Consumptions, and per-
haps in other Affects. 

1st. In Feavers the Liquor of Urines is of a 
deep Red, through the plentiful dissolution of 
Salt and Sulphur, whose Particles are plentifully 
#ncocted in the Serum; for while the Blood and 
Humours are in Ebullition from a Febrifick Cause, 
by reason of great Heat, highly inflam'd, the little 
bodies of Salt and Sulphur being torrefy'd and 
#dust are more dissolv'd, and by incoction in the 
Serum, tincture it more deeply; as a Lixivium,
or Lie of Ashes boyl'd on the Fire, becomes far 
more red, than if we only proceed by way of In-
fusion. 

|P_31
As likewise in Feavers, the Contents of Urine
often advance its Colour, that is, by rea-
son of the Intemperature and Deflagration of the 
Blood; for then both the degenerate Particles of 
the Nutritive Juice, as also another matter (like 
Ashes remaining from the Calcination of Blood) 
are burnt, as 'twere into a red Calx, which be-
ing shut up in the Pores of the Urine, render 
its Colour higher; and afterwards falling to the 
bottom, becomes a red Sediment, like Painter's 
Oaker

2dly, In an inveterate Scurvy, the Urine is 
often so high colour'd, that 'tis not exceeded in a 
violent burning Feaver, which (if evaporated or 
distill'd) yields plenty of Salt with slimy Dreggs, 
wherefore it seems evident by this Experiment. 
that this high Colour, owes its original to Salt
Principles, as was hinted before; because in 
Scorbutick Cases, those Salt Particles, which 
ought to be Volatiliz'd, and sent forth by a con-
stant Transpiration, are fix'd and restrain'd from 
their usual Motion, and therefore are more plen-
tifully heap'd up in the affected Body. This Salt
(afore-said) remaining within, with Sulphur
and Earth, is diversly coagulated, and then plen-
tifully resolv'd. And from this different Coagu-
lation and Re-dissolution, follows wonderful 
Symptoms of this Disease. 

Likewise from these Saline Particles, plenti-
fully dissolv'd with some Tartarous Dreggs, and 
diluted with the Serum, Urines become tin-
ctur'd with adeep and high Red. Besides in this 
Affect, when inveterate, the course and pas-
|P_32
sages of the Liver and Vesicula Fellis being ob-
structed and deprav'd, they perform their Of-
fice worse, in separating the adust Particles of 
Blood from the rest of the Mass, which being 
plentifully loaded with it, and dissolv'd in the 
Serum, do the more dye it with a Lie-like Tin-
cure. And if those Particles of adust Sulphur,
over-ballance those of a fix'd and Scorbutick
Salt, the Jaundise is in complication with the 
Scurvy, and the Urine then dyes Linnen with a 
Saffron-colour. 

But if they be exceeded by the Saline Particles,
only a Scorbutick Affect is produc'd, in which the 
Urine is highly red; but yet will not make yellow 
Linnen. That 'tis thus, it is highly probable; for, 
in Dissecting many of those, who had frequently 
made red Urine and dy'd of the Scurvy, it has 
has been observ'd, that their Liver or the Vesicu-
la Fellis was greatly in fault: In some, the Li-
ver hath appear'd wholly bloodless and dry'd 
like a Cow's Udder: In others, the Vesicula Fel-
lis was quite empty: In some obstructed with 
little Stones: In others again, fill'd with Mo-
thery Dreggs, nor at all bitter: but in all those 
that were so affected, a separation of the Gall 
was hinder'd. 

3dly, by reason of Salt so dissolv'd, the Urines
are sometimes Red in Gouty Diseases for besides 
the Arthritik Fits (in which such Urine is of-
ten made) I have observ'd, in some very pain-
sal Affects, imitating, in a manner, a Feaver,
with a deep red Urine, wandring Pains, some-
times raging in this, sometimes in that Part; so 
|P_33
that the afficted Patient could scarce stand upon 
his Feet, or move a Member; troubled also 
with Watchings and frequent Sweats, and like-
wise with Thirst, great dryness of the Jaws, the 
Urine very red, with a plentiful Sediment; yet 
in the interim, 'twas not evident, that there was 
any great Ebullition in the Blood, that the Pati-
ent was under any great Languor of Spirits, or 
Head-ach, whereupon I suspected this Affect was 
especially from the genus Nervosum, chiefly de-
pending upon the Exorbitances of a Saline, rather 
than a Sulphureous Principle. 

4ly, Likewise the Urine is Red in a confirm'd 
Consumption, especially if a Hectick (as 'tis ge-
nerally) be join'd with it. The reason of which 
is, if at any time an Ulcer has seiz'd the Lungs;
from thence, a putrid Matter being mix'd with 
the Blood in it's Circulation, causes almost a con-
tinual Ebullition; whereby the Sulphureous and 
Saline Particles, being more plentifully dissolv'd 
and incocted in the Serum, render its Liquor 
Red: Besides, by reason the Blood is thus con-
taminated, almost all the Nutritive Juice dege-
nerates into Putrefaction, and with those Recre-
ments the Urine being impregnated, grows more 
Red, and is plentifully stuss d with its Contents. 
An evidence of which is, that ConsumptivePer-
sons are for the most part, hot after Meat, their 
whole Body being put into a Feaverish-heat, 
which is succeeded by Nocturnal Sweats. More-
over, there is in the Urines a thick and plenti-
ful Sediment, viz.

The Nutritive Juice being mix'd with the 
|P_34
Blood, and not rightly assimilated, causeth an 
Ebullition in it, and degenerating into some 
strange Matter, is partly driven through the Skin, 
partly transmitted by Urine, and partly aug-
ments its Colour and Consistence. 

Hitherto have we Treated of Red Urines; and 
every kind of 'em now hinted at, have many De-
grees of intension and remission; for as the Causes 
change in them, so in the Colour and Consi-
stence they are either weaker or stronger. 

As for Green or Black Urine, I confess, I ne-
ver saw any that was either exactly green as 
Leeks, or black as Ink. But I think, from a 
very high yellow, with a dark or somewhat Inky 
mixture, the appearances of greenish or blackish 
Urine may arise, which Authors usually call 
green or black Urine.

But those Urines which are thus colour'd, do 
either constantly remain in the same state for 
some time, and are signs of the Black-Jaundise,
or the Blood affected with some Virulency; or 
the Urines are occasionally diversly chang'd, and 
are sometimes of that, and sometimes presently 
of another Colour; so that I have known Hypo-
condriacal Persons wont first to make such Urines,
and then a little after, like those of sound Per-
sons. 

As to the former, when the Jaundise
grows very high, so that the adust portion of Sulphur
and Salt have a longer continuance in the Mass 
of Blood, these same by long incoction, acquire 
a Colour more deep than yellow; viz. at first 
Greenish, and then afterwards somewhat Black, 
|P_35
with which the Serum is in like manner tin-
ctur'd. For if yellow Gall be taken out of the 
Vesicula Fellis, and put into a Bolt-head, and 
expos'd to the gentle heat of a warm Bath, it 
waxes shortly green, and afterwards by continu-
ance will appear almost as black as Ink. Where-
fore in the Black-Jaundise, which is only the 
Yellow, by longer continuance advanc'd into a 
greater degeneracy, there's nothing more usual 
than an Inky-Urine.

Further, such Urines sometimes appear in a 
malignant Feaver and the Plague, as also fre-
quently after the drinking of Poyson, and in 
these Cases, are commonly a deadly Sign; be-
cause they argue the Blood much corrupted, and 
as 'twere mortify'd, the Spirits being vanquish'd, 
and the bond of mixture loos'd, just as when a 
part in our Bodies is Ulcerated, and afterwards 
perverted into a Gangrene or Mortification, pre-
sently the Piss, which before was waterish, 
white or yellow, becomes black. Wherefore 
in the aforesaid Affects, when the Urine grows 
black, the Serum and Blood being wholly vitia-
ted, the outward Skin is likewise darkned with 
such a Colour. 

Urines that are tinctur'd with a greenish, or 
especially a black Colour, at certain times 
which often happens to Hypocondriacks) very 
likely proceed from the Dregs of the Bilis atra,
or the black Choler entreasur'd in the Spleen;
and then through too plentiful congestion, over-
flowing at sometimes, mix with the Mass of 
Blood: For such Matter being often effunded in-
|P_36
to the Stomachs of some Men, produces greenish 
or inky Vomits: As likewise in others, the same 
Matter being suck'd up by the Blood, in its Cir-
culation, may tincture the Urine with such like 
Colours. 

Hitherto have we spoken of the Colours of 
Urines: Those that are Pale, proceed from too 
much Crudity; almost all those that are High-
colour'd, arise either from Salt or Sulphur too 
plentifully dissolv'd, and sometimes, from the 
adust Recrements throughly incocted in the Se-
rum; or from the more crass Contents of the 
Urine, whether they be the very Calx and re-
mainder of the Aliment degenerated in Con-
coction, or the Liquations and mouldrings of the 
Consumptive Body, or some ill-affected Part 
thereof; which expressions will be better under-
stood, if we explain the manner, how such-like 
Dissolutions and Contents may diversly change 
the Colour of Urine.

The Causes of different Appearances and 
changeable Colours, as also of Darkness and 
Transparency in Urines (as in other Liquors) 
depend wholly on the different immission and 
emmission of the Rays of Light. 

For, if the body of the Liquor be thin, with 
open Pores and Passages, that the Rays of Light 
may be easily transmitted, 'tis then Transpa-
rent and Clear, like Fountain-water: But if the 
Pores of the Liquor be stuff'd with Contents, or 
little Bodies swimming in it, so that the illu-
minating Rays be refracted and broken in the 
transmission, at last when they appear accord-
|P_37
ing to the different Modes of Refraction and Re-
flection, in the (as yet) diaphanous Liquor, the 
Colour will appear either Citron, Saffron, or Red. 

But if the spaces of the Pores, be yet more pos-
sess'd, so that the Light be not at all transmit-
ted, from thence Darkness will proceed: But 
then if the Rays once receiv'd, be but little or 
not at all reflected, the Liquor will appear of a 
dusky or blackish Colour. But if they be Re-
flected according to the different modes of Re-
flection, the appearance will be White, Ashe-
colour'd, or of another kind; upon this Suppo-
sition, that as the Liquor of the Urine is some-
times in a manner, almost devoid of Salt, Sul-
phur, and other Dissolvables, it easily transmits 
the Light. Sometimes being moderately, or much 
stuft'd with such-like Contents, it either distorts 
the incident Rays in their passage, or wholly im-
bibes them, or lastly reflects them: So that from 
hence, 'tis easy to unfold all the Phænomenons
of Colours and Consistence in Urines.

It happens frequently, that the Colour of the 
same Urine is much chang'd; for that which is 
made Red, being expos'd to the Air, becomes 
White or of a Darkish-colour, and then a lit-
tle time after of a Citron colour; the reason of 
which appearance seems to be this: 

This Urine when made is red, because the 
Pores of the Liquor are much possess'd with the 
Contents: Yet as long as those Pores are kept 
open by Heat, they transmit the Rays of Light
in such manner (tho' diversly distorted) that they 
by way of Reflection, rebound again. 

|P_38
But this Urine, is no sooner expos'd to the 
cold Air, but the Pores being shut up, the posi-
tion of Parts are chang'd in the Contents, and 
therefore the transmission of the Rays of Light is 
hinder'd, wherefore the Liquor becomes presently 
dark, and as those Rays are reflected this or that 
way, the Colour becomes white, dusky, or some 
other Colour. But at last the Contents, by their 
weight, falling to the bottom, the Pores being 
freed, easily transmit the Rays of Light, and do 
less distort them; wherefore the Colour appears 
not high, but Citron. 

From what has been said concerning the Co-
lour of Urines, it may appear what's the Causes 
of the different Consistence of Urines: For as 
the Particles of Salt, Sulphur, or adust Matter, 
or the Nutritive Juice depriv'd of a right Assimi-
lation, are more or less incocted in the Se-
rum, the Urines become more or less Thick or 
Thin in their Consistence. 

In the next place it remains, we speak of the 
Preternatural Contents in Urine.
