
|P_3[^A horizontal floral ornament, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}A SHORT 
Historical Account
Of the several Kinds of 
WORMS
Breeding in 
Human Bodies, &c.}][^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}Chap. I.
Of the Breeding of Worms in 
Human Bodies. }]
THAT our Bodies should become 
the Prey of Worms, when they are 
returning to their Original Dust, 
might be submitted to without Regret; but 
to be seiz'd on before that time, and even 
|P_4
upon our very Entrance on Life, that In- 
fant Innocence should sustain the Fate of the 
Profane Prometheus, in having their tender 
Bowels corroded by these Intestine Vultures, 
is a Condition exceedingly deplorable, and 
yet so very frequent, that 'tis almost always 
suspected in Children on every Disorder, 
and not unjustly; since, as Platerus observes, 
few Persons are free from Worms; and Ex- 
perience verifies the Observation in the Dis- 
section of Dead Bodies. 

Hippocrates has assur'd us, That unborn 
Infants are invaded by them; and Dolæus in 
Dissecting an Infant, which dy'd as soon as 
born, tells us, he found a Cluster of Worms
in its Bowels. 

The Physicians and Philosophers of former 
Ages, had a very short and easy Way of 
Accounting for the Generation of Insects, by 
supposing them bred of themselves, out of 
some putrefying Matter, by the Assistance 
of Heat or Motion. 

But this Account is now justly rejected, 
as extreamly Absurd and Unreasonable, by 
those, who have been the least acquainted 
with the great and surprizing Discoveries of 
the Modern Philosophers; who, by the As- 
sistance of Microscopes (an Advantage un- 
|P_5
known to former Ages) have found, that 
the minutest Insects are furnish'd with all 
the Parts that are necessary, not only for 
Life, but also for the Propagation of their 
several Kinds, as perfect as in larger Ani- 
mals; and consequently, are not produc'd 
at Random; but are the regular Off-spring 
of Parents of the same Kind, no less than 
others. 

It's observable, that Nature's wise Au- 
thor has given such a Propension to those 
Creatures, who cannot bring up their Pro- 
geny, to lay their Eggs in Places proper to 
breed them. Thus Flies commonly drop 
theirs in dead Bodies, Pustles, Ulcers, &c. 
because in such tender Parts their Eggs may 
lie easy, and find Warmth sufficient to 
hatch them; and afterwards, Humidity and 
Food for the Nourishment of the Animal. 
An Instance of this is related by Mr. de la 
Cross, in his Memoirs, p. 229. 

A Dutch Woman had her Leg swoln and 
glandulous, about a Span from the Knee; 
the Chyrurgion, who had it in Cure, to 
know the Cause of the Disease, took off 
this glandulous Body to the Bigness of a 
Nail, wash'd it in Brandy, cut it, and per- 
ceiv'd therein a great many little Worms; 
whereupon, having consulted Mr. Leeuwen- 
|P_6
hoeck, he affirm'd, they were come from 
the Eggs, which a Fly had lain in the mor- 
tify'd Part, as he prov'd in the following 
Manner; He put these Worms into a Box, 
with a Piece of raw Beef, which was soon 
consum'd by them, as well as the glandu- 
lous Body, wherein they were hatch'd; He 
fed them three several times, and five Days 
after, viz. July 31, he found his Box empty; 
but having look'd carefully about the Room, 
he recover'd some of these Worms, that 
would eat no more, and were already grown 
to the length of ones Nail: He put them 
on a Paper, cover'd with a large Glass; 
and the next Day, in the Morning, he ob- 
serv'd one of these Worms shortned, but 
encreas'd a third Part in Bulk, so that it 
had something of the shape of a Tun: In 
the Evening, he perceiv'd four others in 
the same Posture, which from White became 
Red. 

Aug. 11. The Cods of these Worms were 
all black, he open'd one of them, whence 
he took out a perfect Fly, that was yet wet 
and motionless: He observ'd, that besides 
the Cod, this Insect was wrap'd up in a 
very thin Membrane. He open'd this un- 
timely Fly, and found a great quantity of 
Eggs in its Body. 

|P_7
Aug. 15. All the Flies inclos'd in the Glass 
were hatch'd, and at the same time he per- 
ceiv'd other Flies against the Glass-Windows 
of his Chamber, which he had suppos'd to 
have come from those Worms, which he had 
not retriev'd. In feeding these Infects, most 
part dy'd, or fled away: So that, Sept. 7. he 
had but Two left, that were probably Male 
and Female, for they laid 145 Eggs; some 
of which he caus'd to be hatch'd in less than 
24 Hours, by carrying them in his Pocket, 
shut up in a Box. 

The Learn'd Baglivi, Physician at Rome,
in a Letter to Mr. Andry at Paris, writes thus 
concerning the Breeding of Worms. The 
Beginning and Original of all Animals and 
Vegetables is from an Egg; for what else 
are the Seeds of Plants but Eggs, in which 
all the Rudiments of the future Plant are 
contracted, as it were, into a short Compen- 
dium? And those, by Virtue of the Fermen- 
tation of the Nutritive Juice, by the Ela- 
stick Power of the Air, and the double 
Warmth, one of the Sun, and the other of 
the central Warmth of the Earth, the great 
Mother of all, are uncover'd by little and 
little; and their Fetters being as it were 
loos'd, they grow, and arrive in due time 
to such a Bulk, as great as is allotted to every 
sort of Plant by the Laws of Nature. 

|P_8
If all Philosophers and Physicians think 
thus concerning Vegetables, much more 
must they think so of living Creatures, not 
only of those that are call'd Perfect, but of 
the Imperfect also, which are commonly 
call'd Insects. For besides, that there is the 
same equal Order in all Things, and that 
all come from one Principle, and after a cer- 
tain general Circuit, end all in one again; 
Insects, by an admirable Connexion and 
Construction of Parts, and by a more no- 
ble Exercise of vital Operations, do not only, 
in no wise, give place to Plants, but far excel 
them. 

Wherefore, since no Man says that Plants 
rise from Putrefaction, they ought not in 
Reason to deduce the Original of Insects, 
and other baser Animals from thence. For 
'tis a shame to Philosophers and Physicians, 
in this most happy Age of Sciences, where- 
in the Causes of Things are illustrated by 
Experiments, and solid Precepts of the Ma- 
thematicks, to ascribe to the fortuitous 
Chance of Putrefaction, that which the con- 
stant and perpetual Law of Nature, remain- 
ing in its Seeds, rules and directs. 

For 'tis not Putrefaction that produces im- 
perfect living Creatures, but the Heat and 
Fermentation of the Things putrefying, that 
|P_9
makes fruitful the Seeds of Things spread 
all over the World, if I may be allow'd so 
to speak; or rather, it stirs up, and revives 
the imperceptible Parts of the future living 
Creature in the Egg; and, as it were, in- 
spires 'em with the first Life, in the same 
manner with the Heat of the Sun, or that 
of brooding Hens. 

What we have said of Insects in gene- 
ral, may be aptly apply'd to the Worms
bred in Human Bodies, seeing they are not 
generated by putrefying Humours; but the 
Worms Eggs lying hid in the Intestines, are 
enliven'd, and brought forth by the same 
Means. 
[^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}Chap. II. }]
[}Of the several Kinds of Worms
bred in Human Bodies. }]
THESE pernicious Animals differ 
greatly, not only among themselves, 
as to Shape, and other Circumstances; but 
also in respect of the several Parts of the 
|P_10
Body they possess, and whence they receive 
their Denomination. 

Thus the Cephalick breed in the Head, 
where they occasion violent Pains, Distra- 
ctions, and sometimes contagious Distem- 
pers; Sennertus mentions a Person afflicted 
with an Head-Ach violent to Distraction; 
when after seven Days Continuance, and the 
Patient almost dead with the Pain, a Worm
came out of his right Nostril, above a Span 
long, after which he soon recover'd. 

Mr. Andry says, he knew a Man, who 
being cur'd of a Venereal Disease, complain'd 
afterwards of an unsufferable Pain in his 
Head; for which his Skull was trepan'd, 
and a little short Worm was found upon the 
Dura-mater; which being taken out, the Pa- 
tient recover'd a persect Health. 

Such another Case is related by Forestus, 
only the Worm he speaks of was Black. 

Hild-sheim tells of a Person, who voided 
Thirteen long Worms alive, and Woolly 
like a Caterpiller from his Nostrils, Ears and 
Mouth. 

C. Gemma reports of a Matron dying of a 
Pestilential Fever, whose Head being open'd, 
|P_11
there appear'd abundance of Worms, both 
in the Substance of the Brain, and between 
the Coverings, and also Swarms of Insects 
like Bugs. 

But the Account which F. Angelinus sent 
his Friend is wonderful, concerning a Person 
who had an Epidemical Fever, and was 
restless eight Nights; when, upon his Re- 
covery, he was troubled with an Itching in 
his right Nostril; and soon after there came 
out of it a Worm as long as ones little Fin- 
ger, its Body thick and red, its Head black 
and hard, with two sharp Arms like those 
of a Scorpion; six Feet towards the Head, 
and some small ones towards the Tail, on 
which it walk'd very briskly; it liv'd four 
Days without Food. 

Kerckingius in his Anatomical Observations, 
gives us the Figure of an Hairy horn'd 
Worm, which came out of the Nostril of a 
Woman at Amsterdam, on the 21st of Sept.
1688. which he kept alive 'till the 3d of 
October, without giving it any Food: And 
which is very Remarkable, it brought forth 
another Worm before it dy'd. 

A Pestilential Fever rag'd at Beneventum, 
and swept off abundance of People; at length 
the Physicians opening the Head of one that 
|P_12
dy'd of it, found a little live Worm very 
short, and all over red; and having try'd 
several Things to kill it, found nothing ef- 
fectual but the Decoction of Radishes in 
Malmsey Wine, which was no sooner pour'd 
on the Worm but it dy'd; after which they 
administred the same Remedy to all their 
Patients, and almost all recover'd. 

Schenckius also relates, That in the Year 
1571. an Epidemical Fever rag'd in Ancona, 
which caus'd a furious Giddiness, and Death 
on the third or fourth Day. All the Physi- 
cians of the Place confess'd they did not 
understand the Disease, and consequently 
knew not how to cure it. A rich young 
Man finding a Periodical Pain beginning in 
his Head, became apprehensive of being 
seiz'd with the Distemper; and being fright- 
ed by the ingenuous Acknowledgment of 
the Physicians, left the Country, and went 
to Venice; where calling for a Consultation 
of the most Learned Physicians, one of them 
asserted, that a Worm in the Brain was the 
occasion of those Periodical Pains, which 
were so violent in the Paroxysm, without 
disturbing his Reason or Memory, that it 
seem'd as if his Head had been bored with 
an Iron. 

|P_13
They administred several Things without 
Effect, so that he dy'd in three Days time 
after his Arrival. They open'd his Head, 
and found on the Right side, under the  Pia- 
mater the Head of a Worm, which by Rea- 
son of the cold Air, immediately retir'd in- 
to the Substance of the Brain. They then 
cut open the Ventricles of the Brain, and 
trac'd out the Worm, which was all over 
Red, as long as one's Fore-finger; the 
Head black and pointed, and the Neck 
Hairy. 

Amatus Lusit. took a Worm out of the in- 
ner Corner of a Girl's Eye; 'twas half a 
Span long, white, and alive when taken 
out. 

Sometimes Worms are found in the Ear, 
as in a Girl of Ten Years old, who was 
afflicted with the Evil, and had a violent 
Pain in the Right Ear, which suppurated 
from time to time, and sometimes she be- 
came Deaf. Mr. Andry, after a fruitless Ap- 
plication of several Remedies, suspected 
Worms, and apply'd an Ointment for that 
Purpose; whereupon abundance of small 
Worms came forth, they were yellow, long, 
and very slender. 

|P_14
Kerkingius gives an Account of five Worms,
which came from a Man's Ear in the Year 
1663. very much like Hog-Lice. 

There are Worms which breed under a 
Crust, that covers the surface of the Teeth. 
They are very small, and have a round Head, 
mark'd with a black Point, the other Part 
of their Body being long and slender. These 
Worms corrode the Teeth by degrees, and 
occasion a Stink, but no violent Pain. They 
are call'd Dentarii.

Even the Liver has been observ'd to en- 
tertain these Insects, so Casper Bauhinus re- 
lates, That in October 1578. several small 
Worms were found in the Liver of a Child 
of two Years of Age, that dy'd of the 
Small-Pox: They were red, round, some- 
what long and soft; it seem'd strange to 
several Physicians, who were present at the 
opening: But it may be consider'd, that 
there may be several Accidents, wherein 
the Gall in the Liver may be so much al- 
ter'd, as to lose very much of its Bitter- 
ness, and thereby permit the Ingendring of 
Worms.

They sometimes breed in the Heart, oc- 
casioning violent Pains, Swoonings and sud- 
|P_15
den Death. Thus Sphererius writes, That 
a Florentine Gentleman discoursing one Day 
with a Stranger, in the Great Duke of  Tus- 
cany's Court, drop'd down dead, on a sud- 
den; and his Body being open'd on Suspi- 
cion of Poison, a live Worm was found in the 
Heart. 

The Pleurisy has been often observ'd to be 
occasion'd by Worms. Gabucinus visited a 
Maid, seiz'd with a Pleurisy, and observing 
her cold and hot reciprocally, and in her hot 
Fits one of her Cheeks very red, the other 
continuing pale, suspecting Worms, he pre- 
scrib'd her a Medicine for that purpose, 
which brought away a great Number of 
Worms, and thereupon the Pleurisy left 
her. 

Several ancient Men, as Quercitan testifies, 
defunct of Pleurisies, had their Intestines full 
of large Worms, which he concluded the 
Cause of that Distemper. 

Dr. Loss, in his Observations, relates such 
a Case of a Youth about Fourteen Years of 
Age, of a thin and bilious Constitution, 
who in a very sharp Winter, having got- 
ten Cold, was seiz'd with a true Pleurisy, 
attended with a continual Fever; a prick- 
ing Pain in his lest Breast, reaching to his 
|P_16
Throat, a difficulty in Breathing, a violent 
Cough, and Spitting of Blood; his Body 
was by Intervals cold and hot, with a Red- 
ness in his Cheeks, and a great Restlessness. 
About the fifth Day of the Disease, being 
Costive, a Glister of Milk was injected, 
which brought away five Worms, which 
were Teretes; wherefore with some Alte- 
ration of the Medicines, which were before 
prescrib'd, the following Powder was ex- 
hibited. 

℞ Scord. card. ben. a ℈j Corallin. ℈ij C.C.C.ʒj 
Rhabarb. ℈4 Sal Centuar. ℈j Dose ʒss. 

After which Worms came away daily, in 
all above Thirty, and he recover'd. 

Dr. Andry had so remarkable a Case of this 
sort, that it put him upon Writing an en- 
tire Book on the Subject of Worms. The 
Case was this, On the 4th of June, 1698. 
a young Man, about Thirty Years of Age, 
was seiz'd with a Fever, great Pain in his 
Side, Spitting of Blood, and Difficulty of 
Breathing. He began the Cure by Opening 
a Vein, and repeated the same the next Day, 
on the 3d he sweated, on the 4th he seem'd 
to be much better; but from thence to the 
5th he had a Delirium, which went off the 
next Morning. The Delirium not being 
|P_17
preceded by the usual Signs, occasion'd a 
Suspicion of Worms, and finding withal a 
great many in his Excrements by Stool, 
he prescrib'd a purging Medicine the next 
Morning (which has been very successful 
in that Case) an Hour after the taking it, 
the Patient found something stir in his Bo- 
dy, which Motion continu'd two Hours, 
and determin'd in the Issuing forth of a 
live Worm, or rather Link of Worms, four 
Ells three Inches in Length, being the  Cu- 
curbitini, which are particularly describ'd, 
p. 34. 

Sometimes we meet with 'em in the 
Blood, where they obstruct the Orifice in 
Bleeding; so a Chirurgion at Paris, whilst 
he was Bleeding a Patient, found the Blood 
stop on a sudden; and turning up the Arm 
to find the Cause, he saw an horned Worm
as long as an Earwig, which burst out with 
Violence along with the Blood. 

Such another Accident is related by Mr. 
de la Crose, in his Memoirs, of Mr. du Puy, 
a French Physician; who being present at 
the Bleeding of a Lady, his Patient, the 
Blood, after it had sprung out above two 
Ounces, stop'd on a sudden; and as he 
was looking for the Cause of it, he per- 
ceiv'd an Heterogeneous Body that stop'd 
|P_18
the Orifice; whereupon taking the Chirur- 
gion's Forceps, he drew out a Worm as big 
as could come out of the Incision. 

He accounts for its coming there in the 
following Manner: The Egg of some fly- 
ing Insect had been swallow'd by the Pa- 
tient in her Food, and being descended in- 
to the small Guts, went with the Chile 
into the Milky Veins, through all the Pores 
of the filtrating Glandules, the Heart, 
Lungs, Aorta, 'till arriving at last to the 
Extremities or the Fingers, it remain'd 
there among their small Arteries and Veins, 
and was hatch'd out by the most conve- 
nient and natural Heat of the Blood and 
Flesh. Having thus gotten the Life and 
Motion of a Worm, it swam for greater 
Ease and Room into the Arm; and follow- 
ing still the cherishing Liquor, wherein it 
was bred, it came at length to the Inci- 
sion of the Vein, whence Mr. du Pay ex- 
tracted it. 

They have been often seen in the Urine, 
and of various Kinds; some like Hog-Lice, 
others like Mites in Cheese, some like 
Leeches, others like Grass-Hoppers; of 
which last sort was that voided by Count 
Mansfield, when he lay ill of a continual 
Fever. 

|P_19
Vidius writes of one, who after tedious 
Pains in the Kidnies, discharg'd a small 
Worm by Urine; its Head was sharp and 
horned, its Back and Belly broad, and 
cover'd with an hard Shell like a Tortoise, 
its Colour black, but reddish on the Bel- 
ly. 

Sennertus says, he saw the whole Sub- 
stance of the Kidnies of a Dog wasted, and 
only the outward Skin left, which was full 
of Worms like Earth-worms.

Dr. Turberville, in the Philos. Trans. No.
167. p. 839. gives an Account of a Gentle- 
woman, who was much troubled with the 
Falling-Sickness, and discharg'd by Urine a 
great Number of short Worms like  Milli- 
pedes; two or three Purges were prescrib'd 
her, and still in every Water that was 
brought the Physician, he found, Eight, 
Ten, or more of those Worms; they ap- 
pear'd lively, and full of Motion, and the 
Fits continu'd daily; at last he gave her 
Oxymel Helleboratum in Tansy-Water, which 
wrought well, and was successful; so that 
she had a compleat Cure. 

In the Philos. Trans. there is an Account 
of one Mr. Thomas Dent, who being af- 
|P_20
flicted with Tumours on his Tongue, ap- 
ply'd himself to one Mrs. French at  Lei- 
cester; who (in the Presence of Two Al- 
dermen of that Town, Mr. Gibbs, Chap- 
lain to the Earl of Derby, and others) 
pierc'd the Parts tumify'd with a Lancet, 
and drew some Blood; and soon after with 
a small Spatula, and another Instrument, 
wherewith she open'd the Orifices, she 
pick'd out five or six Worms at a time. 
She plainly shew'd them to the Spectators, 
as they came out of the Flesh; they were 
all alive, and mov'd their Heads, some- 
what lesser than ordinary Maggots: In less 
than eight Days she took out of the Tongue 
more than an hundred Worms, almost all 
of the same Bigness, except two very large 
ones, which she said were of a Cancerous 
Production. She took more than Thirty 
out of the Gums, which last Operation was 
her ordinary Practice. 

Mr. de la Crose in his Memoirs, p. 223. 
gives an Account of one Sarah Hastings, 
who follow'd the same Practice at Holm, 
in Huntingdon-shire; and had attain'd to 
so great Skill, as to discern at first Sight, 
whether any Person had Worms great or 
small in his Gums, Tongue or Face: These 
Worms she affirm'd to be the Cause of Rot- 
tenness of the Teeth, of Pustules, and ma- 
|P_21
ny other Putrefactions; she drew them 
out of any Part in three or four Minutes, 
with a Goose-Quill, cut like a Pen; she 
pierc'd the Part so Dexterously, that the 
Pain was almost insensible; then she threw 
the extracted Worms into a Glass of clean 
Water, where they appeared to have a 
round and red Head, the rest of the Body 
being white. He there relates several ex- 
traordinary Cures of that Sort, too large to 
insert here. 

But of all the Parts, the Stomach and 
Guts are the most usually infested with 
Worms, especially in Children: However, 
before we enter upon a particular Descrip- 
tion of those, which properly belong to 
these Parts, it may be convenient to en- 
tertain the Reader with some Histories of 
very strange Animals, excluded the Sto- 
mach by Vomiting. The Accounts are 
taken out of the Philos. Transactions.

The first is Dr. Lister's, of a Baker at 
York, who in March 1681/2. vomited up a 
Worm of a very strange Figure; I found 
it (says the Doctor) in the Blood, which 
came up with it; having caus'd it to be 
wash'd, for the more careful Examination 
of it; much of the Blood being Clods of 
a kind of skinny and fleshy Substance. Of 
|P_22
this kind of Blood there was about two 
Pounds sav'd in the Washing, and this 
odd Animal amongst it: It was of a dark, 
green Colour, like an Horse-Leech, and 
spotted, not unlike some of them. I could 
not perceive, when I found it, any Life 
or Motion in it. The Girl, who wash'd 
it, had beaten off almost a Fin, and part 
of one of the Forks of the Tail, and burst 
its Belly; yet it was regularly and curi- 
ously shap'd in all its Members. The 
Man imagin'd he drank it the Summer 
before in Pond-Water, whereof he was 
us'd to drink after sore Labour in his Cal- 
ling. This is certain, he had about his 
Stomach, and right Side, a most exqui- 
site and tormenting Pain for at least four 
Months, which many times threw him 
into Horrors and Chilness, Ague like; and 
indeed, when he vomited this up, he was 
the sickest Man I ever saw, not to die: 
He also voided Blood by Stool several 
Days. 

I am at a loss where to place this Ani- 
mal, it not being like any thing I ever 
saw in Nature. It was about four Inches 
long, and in the thickest Part three Inches 
about; it had three Fins on a side, all near 
the Head, and all of them were thick and 
fleshy; but the forked Tail was finny and 
|P_23
transparent, and to be extended. It was 
plac'd Horrizantally, not as that of most 
(if not all) small Fish, and even Newts
and Tadpoles, or Frogs in Disguise, in which 
Particular it differs from all, as well as in 
the Fleshiness of the Fins. 

Besides this odd Animal, I found the 
Head of another of a different Shape; but 
the like dark green Colour. 

I'm apt to think, we often eat and drink 
what is alive; and 'tis certain, some 
Things will live on in our Stomachs in 
spight of Concoction, as Gut-Worms bred 
in us, and perhaps in some Children be- 
fore they are born. And yet I am of the 
Mind, that what was accidentally swal- 
low'd by us alive, and that shall have the 
Power to live on within us (especially if 
it be young and tender) and yet growing, 
may have its Shape and design'd Form so 
monstrously perverted, as to appear to us 
quite another Thing than naturally it is; 
and this I take to be the Case of this odd 
Creature, which might have been the 
Spawn, or Embrio of a Toad or Newt. 

The skinny Lumps of Blood vomited up 
with it, I think, may be easily accounted 
for. For this Spawn, or Embrio of a Toad
|P_24
or Newt, might well envenom the Sto- 
mach or Gut, in which Part or Wrinckle 
soever it chanc'd to rest or stick first, and 
cause an Inflamation there, and have it 
swell'd or clos'd up within a Tumour of 
its own making; which in Process of Time 
might gather to this Bigness, and at 
length bursting in Pieces, come up toge- 
ther. 

Familiar Instances of this Nature we see 
in Fruits or Wens, which Insects raise 
upon Vegetables; who by natural Instinct 
know how to envenom a Plant, and com- 
pendiously provide both Food and Housing 
for their Young. So far Dr. Lister. 

The next is, No. 117. p. 395. Of a Girl 
at Sheffield, about eight Months old, who 
was seiz'd with violent Fits of Vomiting, 
which held her about a Week; and Mr. 
Fisher being sent for, and happening to say, 
that Wormwood was good for the Stomach, 
whilst he was gone to fetch some Things 
proper for that Occasion, they in the mean 
Time offer'd the Child some Wormwood Ale, 
which she took so greedily, that she swal- 
low'd down a Pint of it; and at his Re- 
turn, she vomited up in his Presence three 
Hexapodes (i. e. Worms with six Feet) all 
very active and nimble; and the Child 
|P_25
soon recover'd. Mr. Fisher carry'd them 
the same Day to Mr. Jessop (who sent the 
Account) they kill'd one of them in try- 
ing Experiments upon it, but gave each of 
the other Two, the Head of a shining  A- 
tricapella (a Bird with black Feathers on 
its Head) which in about five Week's 
Time they eat up, Bones, Feathers and all, 
except the Extremities of the Feathers and 
Beaks. Then they gave them a Piece of 
Larus (a Sea-Cob) but that it seems did 
not agree so well with them, for they dy'd 
within two Days after. 

The last Account is Dr. Lister's, the Son 
of one not far from Rippon, about 9 Years 
of Age, in Feb. 1674. was afflicted with 
a great Pain in his Stomach, and continual 
Vomitings; a Powder was given him, 
wherein was a small Quantity of Mercurius 
Dulcis; he thereupon vomited up several 
strange Worms, two of which were brought 
the Doctor at York, one dead, the other 
alive, 'till he put it into Spirit of Wine, 
to preserve it in its true Shape. These 
Worms were very Caterpillers, with fourteen 
Legs, viz. six small pointed, the eight 
middle Stumps, and the two hind ones 
Claspers. They were something more than 
an Inch long, of the thickness of a Duck's- 
Quill, thin hair'd, or rather naked, with 
|P_26
brown Annuli, and black Heads; the 
same for kind, that is often seen on Plants. 
These, no doubt, would in due time, if 
the Place had not hindred, have shrunk 
into Chrysalis's, and chang'd into Moths; 
as also those mention'd by Mr. Jessop, in 
the preceeding History, would have chang'd 
into Beetles.

The proper Inhabitants of these dark 
Regions, are of four Sorts; viz. The 
Teres, the Cucurbitini, the Tænia, and the 
Ascarides. 

1. Of the Teres, or common long and 
round Worm, Dr. Tyson has given a very 
curious Anatomical Description in the  Phi- 
los. Trans. No. 147. p. 154. from whence I 
shall borrow a few Observations. Tho' we 
are gravell'd (says the Doctor) in Assign- 
ing how these Sorts of Worms should come 
first into the Body; yet being once there, 
nothing is more plain, than that they are 
propagated by an univocal Generation; 
there being in this Sort, so perfect a Di- 
stinction or Sexes, Male and Female; and 
the Organs of each so curiously contriv'd, 
so conspicuous and plain, as shew how so- 
licitous Nature is in preserving, and propa- 
gating the meanest Species. 

|P_27
This Worm, which Children are usually 
troubled with, is usually a Foot long, the 
Male generally less than the Female; its 
thickness about that of a Wheat Straw, or 
Goose-Quill, at both Extreams, they grow 
narrow, the Mouth consists of three Lips, 
the Anus of a transverse Slit, a little before 
the extream Point of the Tail. 

In Cutting thro' the Muscles under the 
Skin, there issu'd out a copious Ichor, which 
is naturally discharg'd by some Pores in the 
Skin, and makes a Covering to the Body, 
which is often cast off, and observ'd as a 
mucous Matter in the Stools of those, who 
are troubled with them. 

In Opening the Cornua Uteri of the Fe- 
male Worm, they were found turgid with 
a Milky Juice, a little of which being 
plac'd on a small Microscope, was found to 
be nothing else but an infinite Number of 
Eggs, tho' to the naked Eye, it appear'd 
only as a fluid Body. 

By Comparing that small Quantity, I did 
observe, and in which I could distinguish 
so many Eggs, with the whole Quantity 
contain'd, in both the Cornua, I cannot 
guess there could be fewer than Ten Thou- 
|P_28
sand in each Female Worm, which suffici- 
ently accounts for that prodigious Number 
of Worms, sometimes observ'd to be bred 
in Animal Bodies; and were it not that 
the greatest Part of the Litter of this Worm
is usually carry'd forth by the Fæces, it 
could not be avoided, but we should be de- 
vour'd by such a multiparous Enemy, bred 
in our own Bowels; of whose pernicious 
Effects, some of the following Instances are 
fatal Proofs. 

Dr. Preston, in the Philos. Trans. p. 326. 
No. 224. relates, That in Dissecting a Boy 
of Nine Years of Age, who dy'd suddenly, 
being seiz'd with a Fit of Vomiting; be- 
sides, a great many other Disorders of all 
the Bowels, they found a Worm in the Sto- 
mach about nine Inches long, and a Line 
and a half broad. 

Dr. James Burrows reports, in the Philos. 
Trans. No. 264. p. 598. That in May or 
June 1700. a Labouring Man of middle 
Age at Stanton, seven Miles from Bury, 
had for many Days together so inordinate 
an Appetite, that he eat up an ordinary 
Leg of Veal roasted at a Meal. He would 
eat Sow-Thistles, and divers other Herbs, 
as greedily, during the time his Bulimia
lasted, as the Beasts that use such Food; 
|P_29
and all he could get was little enough to 
satisfy his Hunger, 'till at length he voided 
divers Worms, as long, and as big about 
as a Tobacco-Pipe; after which, his Ap- 
petite declin'd by degrees, 'till it came to 
the common Rate of others. 

We have also an Account, in the same 
Place, of a Dissection perform'd by the 
Sieur Soye, in an Hospital, on the Body of 
a Servant Maid, about twenty six Years of 
Age, who was from time to time seiz'd 
with a Bloody-Flux. He found the Colon, 
and part of the Mesentery ulcerated, the 
Mouth of which Ulcer was so large, that 
one might easily thrust in his Fist at it, and 
'twas stop'd with a Clew of Worms greater 
than it. 

Dr. Loss, in his Book of Observations
writes, That the Son of Sir Lewis Dive, a 
Child of a good Constitution of Body, af- 
ter an Indisposition of two or three Days, 
attended with a dry Cough, and a restless 
Condition, especially in the Night, with 
continual Cryings, was at length seiz'd 
with violent and continual Convulsions, 
whereof in three Days he dy'd. In cut- 
ting open the Body to discover the Cause, 
they were soon satisfy'd, when they found 
the Duodenum quite eaten thro' by a Teres, 
|P_30
or long Worm, which was taken out a- 
live. 

Dr. Willis, in his Book of Fevers tells us, 
He knew one in an acute Fever, who was 
molested with continual Swoonings, 'till he 
vomited up a long round Worm; and there- 
upon his Swoonings left him. 

Examples of this Kind are very nume- 
rous, and 'tis no wonder to meet with this 
Species in their proper Soil; but the Ac- 
count which Dr. Lister has publish'd in the 
Philos. Trans. is very surprizing; viz. In 
April 1673. a Chyrurgion at York brought 
him about twenty Worms, which he had 
just taken out of an ulcerated Ancle of a 
Girl about eight Years of Age; she had 
been in great Misery some Months, and 
had been sent up to London, where she was 
touch'd and dress'd for the Evil; some- 
time after her Return, her Pain contiuu-
ing, a young Puppy was open'd, and ap- 
ply'd to the Sore. The Chyrurgion, who 
took off the Puppy, found it to his great 
Surprize full of Worms, at least sixty in 
Number, of the Species of the Teretes, which 
Children familiarly void from the Guts. 
They were between three and four Inches 
long, all about an equal Bigness, as of one 
Brood, something thicker than a Duck's-
|P_31
Quill, very sharp at both Ends; stiff, and 
exactly round, and yet could move, and 
twist themselves visibly enough. The Leg 
was sound, all but the Ancle, which was 
vastly swell'd, and the Girl otherwise hear- 
ty, and well colour'd. 

2. The Taenia, or Tape Worm, so call'd 
from its Resemblance to a Tape or Rib- 
bon, is broad and flat, and white; its 
Thinness renders it diaphanous, its Length 
is very uncertain, because its Substance be- 
ing very soft and tender; it usually breaks 
off when it comes away, so that 'tis very 
rare to find it entire; the whole is proba- 
bly the Length of all the Bowels, that is, 
seven times the Length of the Man; but 
lying very much folded together, takes up 
but little Room; it usually comes away 
Piece-meal, seven or eight Foot long, some- 
times nineteen, twenty three, thirty; forty 
five Foot of it has been found broke off at 
a time; it grows gradually smaller towards 
the Tail, which terminates in a very small 
and long Part like an Hair; in its widest 
Part, its Breadth is about that of one's Fore- 
finger. 

Spigelius tells us of a Woman, who void- 
ed at several times several Pieces of this 
Worm, whereof two were extraordinary 
|P_32
long. The first that came away, was two 
Yards and a half long, containing the Tail 
Part of the Worm, but wanting the ex- 
tream Part of the Tail, perhaps unknow- 
ingly broke off by the Patient before, part 
of it hanging out of the Anus; her Sister 
drew it forth so far, but tir'd with its pro- 
digious Length, she broke it off with her 
Nails; this Piece, in that Part where it 
was fresh broke off, was as broad as ones 
little Finger, and became narrower gradu- 
ally as it approach'd the Tail; its Sub- 
stance was soft, throughout white, blood- 
less like a Membrane of the Guts. Ano- 
ther Piece that came away about a Year 
after, was eight Foot long, and the breadth 
of ones Middle-Finger; the Joints were 
larger and thicker, the Incisures wider, and 
the Sides more jagged. 

Fabricius gives a Description of the like 
Sort of Worm, which a Woman of twenty 
Years of Age voided, upon taking a Purg- 
ing Medicine, which was twenty Spans 
long; one of the Extreams was as slender 
as a Thread, the other broad. 

The same Author relates the following 
History. 

|P_33
A Lady at Lausanne, in France, very 
subject in her Youth to Palpitations of the 
Heart; and after a sort of Purge she us'd 
to take, she voided sometimes very long 
Pieces of Worms. After she was marry'd, 
and began to have Children, her Palpita- 
tions left her, only she was troubled with a 
Lienteria; during which, she voided down- 
wards several Pieces of Worms; some six, 
some nine, others ten Spans long. Every 
time she voided these Pieces, she felt the 
Worms break in her Bowels; one Day, af- 
ter taking her Remedy, she voided a Piece 
of Worm seven Ells long; and a few Days 
after, another Piece, without perceiv- 
ing as before that any thing broke; from 
which time she became perfectly well. All 
the Pieces put together, would make above 
twenty Ells. 

Olaus Borrhicius tells us, That a Patient 
of his has voided eight hundred Foot of 
this Worm in several Pieces; and that hi- 
therto, he has not met with the Head; for 
the Patient declar'd, that always in the 
Voiding, he perceiv'd it break off. 

A Sucking-Child (by the Relation of 
Casp. Wolphius) brought forth a broad Worm, 
at least three Ells long. 

|P_34
3. The Cucurbitinj, or spurious jointed 
Tape Worm; Vallisnerius, an Italian Physi- 
cian, has publish'd a very large and accu- 
rate Description of this Species of  Gut- 
Worms, the Result of his indefatigable In- 
dustry, from whom I have taken this Ac- 
count following. Anno 1706. visiting a 
Jewess, twenty five Years of Age, three 
Months gone with Child (who, like many 
of that Nation, was incident to broad 
Worms, which in her third or fourth Month, 
usually occasion'd her to Miscarry; but 
when she was not with Child, they never 
gave her any Disturbance. She often void- 
ed, by Vomiting and Stool, many of these 
Worms, as well singly as link'd together, 
in the manner of a Chain:) She had just 
discharg'd a very long Chain of these Worms, 
besides several singly. He separated with- 
out much Pains, many of these from each 
other in that Part which was largest; but 
observ'd, they were very strictly joyn'd to- 
gether. 

Every one of these consisted of a Mem- 
branous, soft, white, shining, flexible and 
slippery Matter; the upper Part smaller 
than the lower. 

|P_35
In the upper Side of each there arise two 
very small Prominences, which, when 
press'd with the Fingers, feel like little 
Horns, or crooked Thorns, and are con- 
spicuous by the Microscope.

By these they adhere firmly to the hin- 
der Part of the preceding Worm, in whose 
postick Part are Cavities fitted to receive 
these Prominences. 

The lateral Parts of these Worms are rug- 
ged, and out of their Middle rises a kind 
of Tet, whose Center is perforated with a 
very conspicuous Opening, and pours out 
sometimes a quantity of Chyle, sometimes 
clear Water, sometimes a yellow Serum.

Their Mouth is in the narrower and up- 
per Side, between the two Protuberances; 
If it be objected, that if the Mouth be in 
this Part, they cannot receive Nourishment 
by it adhering so closely to the preceding 
Worm. 'Tis answer'd, they being fed with 
a fluid Matter Chyle, which penetrating e- 
very where, easily enters that Chink where 
the Mouth is, since the middle Part is not 
so close as the Jettings. Besides, that when 
the Worms adhere so close, 'tis to preserve 
themselves when in danger of Expulsion; 
|P_36
at other times they are more closely con- 
nected. 

These flat Worms, when single, very 
much resemble in Bigness and Shape the 
Seed of a Gourd, which in Latin is call'd 
Cucurbita, whence they are call'd  Cucur- 
bitini; and being very numerous, and ad- 
hering to each other so firmly in the man- 
ner aforesaid, do form a Chain of a sur- 
prizing Length, which has been mistaken 
by several very eminent Authors for an en- 
tire Worm; in particular, the Ingenious 
Dr. Tyson, and Mr. Andry of France, the 
former having given a very particular and 
large Account of it in the Philos. Trans. No.
146. p. 113. 

Mr. Andry, in Examining these Worms
very diligently with a Microscope, after cut- 
ting them open, perceiv'd them full of 
small globular Bodies, resembling that Clu- 
ster of Eggs, usually found in Carps: These 
Eggs are so numerous, that the Quantity 
taken up with the Point of a Pin, tho' 
no bigger than a Grain of Dust, would ap- 
pear, under a Microscope, an incredible Pile 
of small Eggs; which sufficiently accounts 
for the vast Number of these Insects. 

|P_37
They are found in Persons of all Ages. 

Dr. George Francus saw a Child one Year 
three Months old, in the Year 1686. in 
good Health, and Fleshy; who, tho' it 
suck'd, us'd to drink Beer and Water, after 
he had voided several small Worms upwards 
and downwards; at length, brought away 
a Chain of Cucurbitini three Ells long; which 
would have been much longer, if the frighted 
Nurse had not broke it off, instead of draw- 
ing it all out. Miscel. Curios.

Wagner relates of a Soldier, who was 
freed of such a Chain of Worms six Ells 
long; and soon after of another longer than 
the former. 

Examples of these Worms are innumera- 
ble, tho' many Authors have set them 
down so confusedly, that 'tis not possible 
to distinguish whether they are the genuine 
Taenia, describ'd in the second Article, which 
is but one entire Worm, or this spurious 
Sort, consisting of a Chain of Cucurbitini.

Dr. Tyson mentions a Person in London, 
who has voided vast Quantities of these 
Worms for several Years together; but in 
several Pieces, two, three, four, six, or 
|P_38
more Yards long; and says, he had a Piece 
by him of a great Length, voided by a 
young Man, upon the Use of an Emul- 
sion of the cold Seeds. It was twenty four 
Foot long, and consisted of five hundred 
and seven Joints or Worms, in Thickness a- 
bout that of an Half-Crown. The Person 
drag'd it from himself, not without fright- 
ful Apprehensions, that Guts, and all were 
coming out. 

These Chains of Worms lye convoluted in 
several Places, and are sometimes as long 
as all the Guts, and sometimes vastly ex- 
ceed that Length. 

These Worms have been found sometimes 
included in a Bag; which has been mista- 
ken by several for a large Worm. The 
Jewess, before-mention'd, upon a Time 
imagining a large Piece of her Bowels 
coming from her, tho' she felt no Pain, 
being frighted at it, she sent for her Phy- 
sician, who was himself at first surpriz'd 
at it. This Substance was like a doubl'd 
Rowler, close in every Part, compos'd of a 
thick, smooth, shining, transparent and 
mucilaginous Membrane, two Thumbs 
broad, above a Yard long; it was hol- 
low, and contain'd within it a numberless 
Quantity of Cucurbitini, not link'd toge- 
|P_39
ther; but every one separate, their Bigness 
was various, they were all alive, and mov'd 
freely. 

This Bag seems to be form'd mostly of 
a concressible Humour in the Intestines, af- 
ter the same manner as Polypus's in the 
Heart and Arteries, and is encreas'd by a 
glewy Matter, cast out by these Worms
from their lateral Orifices. 

The Teretes also, or long and round 
Worms, are sometimes found involv'd in 
such a Bag. 

4. The last Species of Worms, usually 
found in the Intestines, are the Ascarides; 
they are very small and round, full of Vi- 
vacity and Motion. Their Habitation is in 
the lowest Part of the Intestines, where 
they provoke a continual Itching; and oc- 
casion sometimes most direful Symptoms. 
Dr. Curteis, in his Treatise on the Recovery 
of Health, gives us the following Exam- 
ple. 

A Boy, about twelve Years of Age, was 
so extreamly afflicted with such formidable 
Symptoms, as were imputed to the Effect 
of Witchcraft: What gave Birth to so ge- 
neral a Conjecture, were the extraordinary 
|P_40
Convulsions, Rolling, Screaming, violent 
Beating himself, &c. by frequent Paroxisms; 
all which soon disappear'd, and the My- 
stery was at an end, upon his liberally 
taking the Æthiops, Mineral and Purging; 
and thereupon voiding an almost incredible 
Number of Worms of different Sizes, and 
especially of these Ascarides; whereupon 
the Patient was rescu'd from his imagin'd 
Witchcraft, and a very poor old Woman 
from worse than Hanging, who was suspect- 
ed of being the Occasion. 

Several Examples of this Sort of Worms
might be produc'd out of Authors; but this 
is sufficient for a Specimen. 
[^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page. ^]
|P_41[^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}Chap. III. }]
[}The Signs of Worms from 
Mr. Andry.}]
THE Signs of Worms are Common or 
Particular. 

The common Signs shew the Genius, and 
the Particular the Species; that is, when 
the Common meet, we say, there are 
Worms; and when we find particular Signs, 
we may say, not only that there are Worms
in general, but that those Worms are of 
such a particular Sort. 

The common Signs are fiery sparkling 
Eyes, livid Cheeks, cold Sweats in the 
Nights, Abundance of Spittle drivelling 
from the Mouth in Sleep, great Drowth 
in the Day-time, Dryness of the Tongue 
and Lips, a Stinking-Breath, Grating of 
the Teeth in Sleep, a constant Looseness, 
with whitish Excrements, frothy Urine, 
sometimes White, sometimes Obscure, but 
for the most part Thick and Muddy. 

|P_42
Frequent Vomitings, and Convulsion-Fits 
are sometimes Signs of Worms; that is, 
when the Vomitings throw up nothing but 
what has been eaten, and the Convulsions 
are without Foaming at the Mouth. 

Sometimes they rise in their Sleep, and 
move their Lips as if they were eating: To 
know if these Symptoms are from Worms, 
observe, if they are eas'd by Abstinence; 
for they that have Worms, cannot fast with- 
out finding themselves tormented; not by 
Hunger, for many times they have no Ap- 
petite; but by Twitchings and Tearings, 
caus'd by the various Motions of the Worms
in search of Food. 

A dry Cough is very often a Sign of 
Worms; by this Forestus knew, that a lit- 
tle Girl, who had been six Months ill of a 
Quartan-Ague, was troubl'd with Worms; 
he prescrib'd her Medicines accordingly, 
which brought away five Worms, and her 
Ague thereupon left her. 

A Stinking-Breath is very often a Sign; 
so Brassavolus, visiting an old Man eighty 
Years of Age, who seem'd to lye a dying, 
knew by his Breath that he was troubl'd 
with Worms; he thereupon directed him 
|P_43
some Vermifuges, which scour'd away five 
hundred Worms, and cur'd him. 

Raging Hunger many times proceeds 
from Worms, when 'tis accompany'd with 
extream Leanness, tho' the Party eat much; 
thus a Boy, about twelve Years of Age 
(says Forestus) had kept his Bed for seve- 
ral Months, and was dry'd almost to a  Ske- 
leton, without feeling any other Illness than 
a slight Pain in his Belly, near his Navel: 
The Physician was at first a little at a stand 
to find out the Distemper, the Cause of 
which he could not imagine; for the Child 
eat very well, tho' to no Purpose; his 
Urine was of a good Consistency and Co- 
lour, tho' somewhat Crude and Waterish; 
but the Pain of his Belly, together with his 
extraordinary Hunger, caus'd him to suspect 
Worms: Therefore, for several Days, twice 
a Day, he order'd a Glass of the Decoc- 
tion of Hyssop, Marjoram, Fennel, Fumitory, 
Centaury and Wormwood, with Oxymel, Sy- 
rup of Fumitory, and Honey of Roses. This 
Medicine, every time he took it, caus'd 
him to void a great Number of Worms, 
and perfectly cur'd him. 

The particular Signs differ according to 
the Species of Worms.

|P_44
The Signs of Long and Round Worms, 
are Tensions of the Belly, with Hardness 
and Pain, Itching of the Nose, Corrosion 
of the Guts, Hiccoughs, a Palpitation in 
Sleep, Waking with sudden Startings, or 
Shrieks, an unequal Pulse, intermitting 
Fevers, of which the Party will have three 
or four Fits, without any certain Order; 
the Eyes hollow, and sometimes red; the 
Cheeks sometimes glowing red, and some- 
times of a Lead Colour; sometimes they 
want a Stomach, and vomit after Eating; 
they have Fevers, accompany'd with Cold 
in the extream Parts of the Body: These 
Signs never meet altogether, but some- 
times one, sometimes another. 

The Signs of Ascarides are a continual 
Itching in the Fundament, causing Faint- 
ings, and sometimes Swoonings; the Itch- 
ing proceeds from the Motion of these 
Worms, and the quick Sense of the Part 
where they lye. 

The Signs of the Tænia, or Tape Worm, 
are Lassitude, and Faintings after Meat; 
frequent Numbness and Dulness in the Day- 
time, which cause an Heaviness above the 
Navel, tho' these may proceed from other 
Causes. 

|P_45
The Signs of the Cucurbitini are little 
Bodies, like the Seeds of Cucumers or 
Melons, found in the Excrements; I sup- 
pose they are the young Brood not yet 
link'd together. Both Hippocrates and  Ari- 
stotle mention these as certain Signs; to 
which may be added shifting Pains of the 
Liver, accompany'd with great Fluxes of 
Spittle; Pains in the Stomach succeed 
those of the Liver by Intervals, and some- 
times attended with tedious Pains in the 
Back. 

[}Some Observations from Baglivi. }]
When Children are observ'd to rub their 
Bellies very much, 'tis a Sign of Worms; 
especially if they are often grip'd. 

Very often it happens, that Persons are 
suddenly, and without any apparent Cause 
or Signs of any other Distemper, reduc'd 
to the extreamest Danger, like the Assault 
of an Apoplexy, with Coldness of the ex- 
tream Parts, a creeping Pulse (which is 
most commonly a Sign of Worms, as is also 
the Hiccough) Swooning, and sometimes 
a sudden Madness; in such a Case we 
ought to suspect Worms, and to prescribe 
accordingly. 

|P_46
Bleeding by Drops, in continual Fevers, 
from the Nostrils, is sometimes a Sign of 
Worms, as very Judicious Authors have as- 
serted. 

Whenever there is the least Cause to 
suspect Worms, by no Means defer the Ad- 
ministration of Remedies; for they often 
occasion sudden Death to grown Persons, 
as well as to Children or Infants. 

Whatever Distemper Children are trou- 
bled with, Worms, are always to be suspect- 
ed; for either they immediately encrease 
the Disease, or by Reason of its Continu- 
ance, the Seeds of Worms are hatch'd into 
Life, and fill the Bowels with that pestife- 
rous Vermine. 
[^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page. ^]
|P_47[^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}Chap. IV. }]
[}Of the Remedies for the Destroy- 
ing of Worms. }]
And they are, 

1. EXternal Applications, as  Fomenta- 
tions, Cataplasms, Ointments,  Pla- 
sters, all which are not a little beneficial; 
For as Dr. Fuller observes, Worms do so 
securely burrow, and intrench themselves 
in the Foldings and Cavities of the Bowels, 
as to escape and elude the Impression of 
Purging, or other Medicines; for which 
Reason outward Applications are very use- 
ful to disturb them from their lurking Pla- 
ces, and so expose them to the Attacks of 
Internals, which may destroy, and expel 
them. 

|P_48
2. Internal Administrations, which by a 
specifick Quality, disturb and kill them; 
the Forms of these are various as Liquors, 
Syrups, Powders, Bolusses, Pills, &c. where- 
of some are Purgative, others not; in the 
Use of which Dr. Andry recommends the 
following Observations. 

That the best Time to take them is in 
the Wain of the Moon; he confesses, he 
look'd upon this at first as an idle Fancy, 
but that his Experience convinc'd him of 
his Mistake. 

That in the Administration of Reme- 
dies for the Worms, there ought to be due 
Intermissions; lest being too vigorously 
attack'd, they shou'd retire into the Ca- 
vity of the Gut-Colon, where they wou'd 
be very much out of the reach of Medi- 
cines. 

As for Glisters, they are observ'd to be 
very useful, and they are of two general 
Kinds; Sweet and Bitter. 

The Latter are of great Efficacy against 
the Ascarides; which (as Dr. Fuller ob- 
|P_49
serves) are a small, but an almost invin- 
cible Nation; for tho' you shou'd wash 
away all by one Glister, yet a new and 
numberless Off-spring will quickly disco- 
ver themselves, being produc'd of the Seed 
of the former, deposited in the Rectum; 
so that 'twill not be sufficient to have ex- 
pell'd the Parents, unless their Posterity 
be also vigorously prosecuted and destroy'd; 
this may be done, if after the Ascarides dis- 
appear, we do not presently desist, but re- 
peat these bitter Injections for some time, 
once in two or three Days at first, and af- 
terwards once a Week. 

But for the Teretes, or long and round 
Worms, these bitter Injections are by no 
Means proper, so long as they are brisk, 
lively and agile, and inclin'd to get up 
into the Stomach, or small Guts, lest be- 
ing driven upon those Parts, they shou'd 
occasion a great deal of Mischief there; 
but after the Use of other Medicines, which 
have made them Sickly, and thrust them 
down, the Exhibition of such Glisters
may be very seasonable and success- 
ful. 

The sweet Glisters made of Milk, Su- 
gar, &c. are convenient before the Use 
|P_50
of the Bibber ones, when the Worms are 
lurking in the small Guts, where, by gnaw- 
ing and tearing the Bowels, they excite 
violent Pains in the Belly; for the Worms
take to the Milk, being pleasant and agree- 
able to them, and so leave off preying on 
the Bowels, and are also entic'd out of 
their Burrows, and following the agree- 
able Liquor, are dispos'd to come away by 
Stool. 
[^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}A View of some of the most 
celebrated Remedies. }]
Dr. Simon Pauli's Worm Powder, which 
expell'd a great Number of the  Cucur- 
bitini.

℞ C. C. rad filic. a ʒij Corallin. sem 
sancton. a ʒj Myrrh lig. Al. fl. Sulph. 
a ʒss. Nitri. ʒiij M. f. Pulvis dos. 
ʒj. 

Dr. Nic. Andry's Powder, which brought 
away that large Chain of Cucurbitini,
and cur'd the Patient of a Pleurisy, men- 
tion'd Page 16. 

|P_51
℞ Diagryd. Crem. Tart. Diaphor. Miner. 
Rhab. rad. filicis fæmin. a ʒss Tana- 
cet fol. & fl. p. i. Cort. rad Mori. 
ʒj M. f. Pulv. in jusculo pingui 
mane, jejuno Ventriculo exhiben- 
dus. 

Electuarium Vermifugum. 

℞ Succ. Menth. & Trifol. fibrin a ℥ij 
Rutæ & Marrhubij albi a ℥j coq. 
leviter cum Sacch. alb. ℔j & des- 
pumentur tum adde Corallin. & s. 
Tanacet ac sancton a ℥ss Cinnam & 
Cardamom min. a ℥ij Cort. Citr. 
condit. ℔ss & f. Elect. 

Scharff's Essence for Worms, which expell'd 
a Worm of a very great Thickness. 

℞ Herb. Abrotan, Scordij Tanacet a 
Mj. Rad dictam filicis Zedoar. a 
℔ss fl Centuar Mj. Persicor p. ij Co- 
rallin ℥iss. s. Sancton. Coriand. a ʒvj 
Bacc. Junip. ℥ij Myrrh. Theriac. a 
℥ss. Concis. Contus. infunde in S. q. 
Sp. Juniper rectif. Tinctum quod est 
separetur; Novus Sp. affundatur; 
conjunctis liquoribus addendo Sp. 
C. C. sale volatili impregnati ℥ij. f. 
Essentia. 

|P_52
A Fomentation by Dr. Fuller. 

℞ Rad Aristoloch. rot. ℥j Herb. Abs. 
vulg. Abrotan. fæm. Tanacet Sabin. 
a Mj. Helleborast. Mss. Pulp. Colo- 
cynth. Aloes. a ʒj f Dec. in aq ℔iij 
ad ℔ij col. pro fotu ope stupharum 
Abdominis regioni calide usurpan- 
do. 

After using this Stupe or Fomentation, the 
following Pultice may be laid on the 
Navel. 

℞ Ther. Ven. Farin. Lupin. a ʒiij sem 
Sancton ʒiss hier picr. ʒss Ol. Ab- 
sinth. Still. gt. xvj succ. Tanacet. qs. 
F. Cataplasma 

Or this Plaister. 

℞ Aloes ℥ij Ol. Abs. chym. gt. viij-cum 
fell. bov. qs. F. Massa quæ super Alu- 
tam ducta Umbilico applicetur. 

A Bitter Glister to expel and kill the  Asca- 
rides, from Dr. Fuller.

℞ Rad. serp. V. ʒj Colocynth. ℈j Herb 
Tanacet Sabinæ a Mss. f. decoctio in 
|P_53
aq. F. qs. col. ℥vj adde Ol. Hyperic. 
℥ss. Ol. Abs. Chym. ʒss. sp. Hier 
picr. ℈ss. M. 

The same may be us'd for the other Sorts 
of Worms, but then others made of Milk 
ought to preceed, for Reasons before-men- 
tion'd. Dr. Fuller gives the following for 
this Purpose. 

℞ Lact. Vaccin. rec. ℥vj Theriac Ja- 
nuens. ℥ij M. 

The Honourable Mr. Boyle, in his Trea- 
tise of Specifick Medicines, commends Small 
Beer frequently shaken with good  Quick- 
silver, as an excellent Remedy to kill Worms; 
the Quicksilver communicating its Virtue, 
without changing the Colour or Taste of 
the Liquor. 

The Æthiops Minerable has been gene- 
rally observ'd to have very happy Effects; 
Dr. Harris, in his Treatise of Children's 
Diseases, relates an extraordinary Cure per- 
form'd by that Medicine, as follows. 

J. P. A Boy of Thirteen Years of Age, 
was so pin'd away with a Consumption by 
Worms, as it prov'd, that he was more like 
a Skelaton, than a living Person; his Eyes 
|P_54
hollow, his Nose sharp, and his Bones only 
cover'd with Skin; he became senseless, 
and so weak, that he could scarce crawl 
from one Side of the Room to the other 
with the Swiftness of a Snail; all his Ex- 
crements by Urine and Stool, fell involun- 
tarily from him. By taking the foresaid 
Medicine twice a Day for some Time, and 
gently Purging every fourth Day without 
Rhubarb, he voided a great many Worms, 
and recover'd perfectly well. 

Such, whose Curiosity leads them to en- 
quire more fully after Instances of this Na- 
ture, may consult the elaborate Works of 
Dr. Nicholas Andry, and Dr. Daniel Clerc,
who have treated very largely on this Sub- 
ject. 

|P_55[^A horizontal floral ornament, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}AN 
APPENDIX}]
[}Concerning the first Original of 
Worms. }]
IT has been already observ'd in the 
preceeding Treatise, that even unborn 
Infants are not always free from Worms, 
which Vallisneri, an Italian Physician, en- 
deavours to Account for in the following 
Manner. 

The Chyle (says he) appointed for the 
Nourishment of the Infant, is first pre- 
par'd in the Stomach of the Mother, and 
render'd more perfect and pure by the Di- 
gestions and Glands of the Bowels. Now, 
since the Intestines are the general Seat of 
Worms, and the Fetus is for several Months 
nourish'd by this Chyle, the Seeds of Worms, 
|P_56
which are in the Mother's Bowels, mixing 
with the Flower of the Chyle, are, by the 
usual Passages, carry'd along to the  Mem- 
branes, which involve the Fetus: By this 
Means it may be easily guess'd how the  In- 
fant may receive this Verminous Progeny 
into its own Bowels. But if it happen, 
that the Mother be either entirely free, or 
having Worms, they shou'd not happen to 
spawn during the Time of her being 
pregnant, then, indeed, the Infant will 
not be infested with them in this Manner; 
but if this Infant shou'd happen to be 
suckl'd by another Woman, who has 
Worms, her Milk may furnish the Child 
with a Colony of these Insects, since Milk 
differs not from Chyle, and is convey'd from 
the Bowels to the Breasts. 

But whence (it may be demanded) have 
this Mother or Nurse these Worms, which 
they thus communicate to the Child? 'Tis 
answer'd, they have also receiv'd them in 
the Manner aforesaid; and that they have 
been so convey'd down through all Ages, 
from the Beginning of the World, and the 
first Parents of Mankind. 

And, indeed, since the Seeds of Things, 
none excepted, were created at the Begin- 
ning of the World, all Sorts of Insects, 
|P_[^An illustration of a type of worm. ^]
[}Fig. 1. }][^An illustration of worm eggs. ^]
[}Fig. 2. }][^An illustration of a type of tapeworm. ^]
[}Fig. 3. }][^An illustration of a part of a worm. ^]
[}Fig. 4. }][^An illustration of a section of a worm. ^]
[}Fig. 5. }][^An illustration of a section of a worm. ^]
[}Fig. 6. }][^An illustration of a section of a worm. ^]
[}Fig. 7. }][^An illustration of a section of a worm. ^]
[}Fig. 8. }][^An illustration of ten smaller worms. ^]
[}Fig. 9. }][^An illustration of three hookworms. ^]
[}Fig. 10. }]
|P_57
may vie with Man himself for the Anti- 
quity of their Original; and forasmuch as 
those Worms, which inhabit the Bowels of 
Mankind, are never found elsewhere; it 
must be inferr'd, that their Seeds were ori- 
ginally implanted in the Body of the first 
Man, or Woman. 

At this Rate, 'twill be objected, all Per- 
sons must necessarily be possess'd with these 
Insects, or else their Succession might fail. 

'Tis suppos'd, that the Seeds or Eggs of 
Worms may lye a long Time within every 
Man's Body; and these, sometime or other, 
as Occasion offers, be produc'd into Life, 
which, without such Occasion, wou'd have 
remain'd unchang'd: Thus, in a certain 
ancient Person, the Eggs of the Tape-Worm
were hatch'd not 'till after the fifty fifth 
Year of his Age, at which Time he began 
to be molested with that kind of Worm; 
either because the Juices of his Bowels had 
never before gotten that Quality, which was 
requisite to vivify those Eggs; or because 
the Place was not rightly dispos'd for that 
Purpose. But those that in this Man were 
so slowly excluded, may be much sooner 
in another, even before his Birth, or in his 
Childhood, or Youth, according as Cir- 
cumstances may favour their Production. 

|P_58
Again, in many Persons they may be 
never animated; because there may be al- 
ways wanting a suitable Disposition of the 
Humours, or Place to produce them, just 
as the Eggs of the Vermis Africanus; for 
Example, tho' they may be lodg'd in the 
Skin or Flesh of every Many, yet this In- 
sect troubles none but Africans, Indians and 
Arabians; not the Inhabitants of the  Nor- 
thern Climates, because the Heat of Africa, 
or India, promotes the Vivification of these 
Eggs, which cannot be animated in colder 
Countries; as on the other hand the Seeds 
of the Taenia, by Reason of the Moisture of 
the Climate, are render'd fruitful amongst 
the Hollanders, which in India or Africa, 
because of the extream Driness of those 
Regions, are unprolifick. 

This Notion is confirm'd by the Obser- 
vation of Hemmersam, who speaking of the 
Vermis Africanus, says, 'tis worth noting, 
that those, who only sail by Guiney, feel 
an Itching in the Skin, chiefly in that of 
the Arms and Legs; but most commonly 
in the Thighs: This Itching certainly indi- 
cates the beginning Motion of the Vermis 
Africanus, excited by the Heat of that 
Country. 

|P_59
Every one knows, how much Heat, and 
the Fermentation of Juices, conduces to the 
Production of Animals. 

Neither is the seeming Uselessness of so 
many Seeds, consequent upon this Notion, 
any just Objection, when the same may be 
said of many other Seeds, whereof the 
much greater Part is often lost; and that 
Loss not to be accounted of, if we consider 
their infinite Number. 

Nor, lastly, ought we to object the of- 
ten long Continuance of these Eggs in the 
Body, before they are vivify'd; for as 
much as the Seeds of several Plants kept 
many Years, and afterwards committed to 
the Earth, do germinate as readily as if 
they had been fresh; and the Ova of Wo- 
men advanc'd in Years, are often equally 
prolifick with those of younger Women. 

These Worms, then (may the Objector 
further argue) were created by God in the 
Body of Adam, either before his Fall, or 
afterwards; but if we consider Man as he 
was first created, perfectly Innocent, it 
seems not probable, that the just and good 
God would implant such foul Vermine in 
his immaculate Body. And besides, as 
|P_60
that State of Innocence was entirely free 
from all manner of Diseases, and possess'd 
of a perfect Happiness, undisturb'd by any 
Disorder of Body, it were impossible he 
should have any Worms in his Bowels; 
which we find, by daily Experience, are the 
Causes of innumerable Disorders; and even 
of Death it self. 

Nor can it easily be imagin'd, how this 
filthy Insect, hatch'd, and nourish'd in Pu- 
trefaction, could suit with that sweet man- 
ner of Living, directed by the Light of 
pure Reason, void of all Intemperance, 
and its Consequences; which produce that 
putrid Humour, proper to receive, and pro- 
duce the Eggs of Worms.

To have Recourse to the Divine Presci- 
ence in this Case, viz. That God foresee- 
ing the Apostacy of his Creature, prepar'd 
for his Punishment, would be very unrea- 
sonable, since the Suffering should by no 
means preceed the Offence. 

If on the other hand we say, that these 
Worms were form'd after the Alteration of 
his Nature, by his Disobedience to the Di- 
vine Command, the Difficulty will be yet 
greater; for then 'twill follow, that God 
began a new Creation, which is contrary 
|P_61
to the Tenour of the sacred Scriptures, 
which inform us that God, before he crea- 
ted Man, produc'd all other Creatures; not 
excepting Insects. 

To remove these Objections, 'tis asserted, 
That before Man's Formation, all other 
Animals, Plants, &c. were created; and 
that Man was last form'd out of the 
Mud. 

That in this Mud, those Worms, which 
were a little before created, were implant- 
ed, and so enter'd in the Composition of his 
Body, being probably design'd by Provi- 
dence, whilst he continu'd Innocent, to be 
very useful to him, and to contribute to the 
Perfection of his Body; and, should he af- 
ter lapse from his Integrity, become a Pu- 
nishment to him. 

Now, tho' this may seem strange, that 
Worms should any way conduce to the Be- 
nefit and Perfection of our Bodies, yet let 
us consider. 

That those Machines, which are self- 
moving, as Watches, &c. are always e- 
steem'd more Perfect and Surprizing, the 
more they comprehend other Machines, e- 
qually Curious, within their Structure. And 
|P_62
is not the World accounted more Perfect, 
by containing such an infinite Variety of 
Animals, great and small, honourable and 
base, as they are call'd; if any of its 
Countries prove destitute of Inhabitants, 
are they not accounted unhappy, and des- 
picable? Why should not, then, our little 
World be esteem'd more compleat, by 
being furnish'd with its proper Inhabi- 
tants? 

Nor would it be any Injury to our first 
Parent, to suppose his Body the Recepta- 
cle of various and wonderful Insects, which, 
whilst he continu'd Innocent, were so far 
from being Pernicious to him, that they 
render'd him more Perfect, and redounded 
to his Honour. They liv'd quietly, and 
amicably with him, and sed on the Super- 
fluities of indigested Food only; they ex- 
ceeded not their just Limits, they abstain'd 
from preying on the Bowels, and did no 
Injury to the Walls of their Inclosures, but 
gently licking and cleansing their Man- 
sions; they gratefully requited the Bene- 
fit of their Reception: Moreover, if the 
Fibres of the Bowels were at any time 
become torpid, or oppress'd with too copi- 
ous, or excrementitious Juices, which might 
be detrimental to the Body; these might 
excite them to the brisker Discharge of 
|P_63
their Functions; in short, they might be 
no ways Noxious, but very Beneficial. 

But this Felicity of Adam prov'd but 
short; for by Rebelling against his Maker, 
the Natures of all Things were soon chang'd; 
and then these Worms also became the Mi- 
nisters of Divine Vengeance, as well as 
Lyons, Tigers, Serpents, and other destructive 
Animals. 
[^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page. ^]
FINIS. 
[^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page. ^]