
|P_3
[}THE 
CURIOSITIES
OF 
Common Water.}]
[^Decorative frame around the letter "F".^]FOR the Benefit of Mankind 
in general, I have taken 
pains to give the World an 
Account of what I have 
found written in the Works of 
the most eminent Physicians 
concerning the Good that Mankind may 
receive from the Use of Common Water, 
and of the Informations I have had con-
|P_4
cerning the Benefits thereof from others 
by word of mouth; and of what I have 
discover'd by my own Experience from 
frequent Tryals during a time that hath 
intervened from that of thirty to seventy 
four Years of Age: which is sufficient to 
confirm the stupendous Effects thereof in 
many Particulars, that shall be mentioned 
as my own Discovery with respect to this 
excellent Remedy, which will perform 
Cures with very little Trouble, and with-
out any Charge, and is also to be had 
wherever there are any Habitations, which 
is what can hardly be said of any o-
ther thing: so that in some sense, Water 
may truly be stiled An Universal Reme-
dy, since the Diseases it either prevents or 
cures may have this Remedy applied to all 
Persons, and in all Places where Men do 
inhabit. 

The first Commendation of Common 
Water that I shall mention, is that which 
is written concerning it by Dr. Manwa-
ring, in his Method and Means of enjoy-
ing Health; wherein he saith, that Wa-
ter is a wholesome Drink, or rather the 
most wholesome—being appointed for 
Man in his best State: which doth strong-
ly argue that Drink to be the most suit-
able for human Nature—answering all 
the Intentions of common Drinks, for it 
|P_5
cools, moistens and quencheth Thirst; 'tis 
clear, thin, and fit to convey the Nourish-
ment through the smallest Vessels of the 
Body—and is a Drink that is a Rule to 
itself, and requires little Caution in the 
Use of it, since none will be tempted to 
drink of it more than needs: And that 
in the Primitive Ages of the World, Wa-
ter-Drinkers, he says, were the longest 
Livers by some Hundreds of Years— 
nor so often sick and complaining, as we 
are. 

Dr. Keill, when he treats concerning 
the Stomach, in his Abridgment of the 
Anatomy of Human Bodies, saith, that 
Water seems the fittest to promote Di-
gestion of the Food which we eat; all 
spirituous Liquors having a Property by 
which they hurt, rather than help Di-
gestion; the sad Effects of which they 
are sensible of, he saith, who by a long 
use thereof have lost their Appetite, hard-
ly ever to be restored without drinking 
Water, which seldom faileth of procuring 
a good Appetite and a strong Digestion. 

Dr. Prat, in his Treatise of Mineral 
Water, shews it to be his Judgment, that 
if People would accustom themselves to 
drink Water, they would be more free 
from many Diseases; such as Tremblings, 
|P_6
Palsies, Apoplexies, Giddiness, Pains in 
the Head, Gout, Stone, Dropsy, Rheuma-
tism, Piles, and such like: Which Dis-
eases are most common among them that 
drink strong Drinks, and which Water 
generally would prevent. Moreover, he 
also saith, that Water plentifully drank 
strengthens the Stomach, causeth an Ap-
petite, preserves the Sight, maketh the 
Senses lively, and cleanseth all the Pas-
sages of the Body, especially those of the 
Kidneys and Bladder. 

'Tis said also by Dr. Duncan, in his 
Treatise of hot Liquors, that when Men 
contented themselves with Water, they 
had more Health and Strength; and that 
at this day those who drink nothing but 
Water, are more healthy, and live longer 
than those who drink strong Liquors, 
which raises the Heat of the Stomach to 
Excess, whereas Water keeps it in a due 
Temper. And he adds in another part of 
the Book, that by hot Liquors the Blood 
is inflamed; and such whose Blood is in-
flamed, live not so long as those who are 
of a cooler Temper: a hot Blood being 
commonly the Cause of Fluxes, Rheums, 
ill Digestion, Pains in the Limbs, Head-
ach, Dimness of Sight, and especially of 
Hysteric Vapours. He also imputes the 
Cause of Ulcers to a hot Blood, and de-
|P_7
clares, that if Men kept their Blood cool 
and sweet, by a moderate cooling Diet,
they would never be troubled with Ul-
cers, or other Breakings out. 

Sir John Floyer also, in the Preface to 
his Treatise of Cold Baths, does affirm, 
that Vapours both in Men and Women 
are caused by hot things, and that by 
leaving off strong Liquors and a hot Diet, 
and by drinking Water, he had procured 
to himself a better Health, and more 
Hardiness, than he had enjoyed for many 
Years. And in the Body of that Book 
he affirmeth, that drinking of Water in 
the Morning, cools the Blood, prevents 
Defluxions, and washes off the bilious 
and salt Recrements by Urine; and that 
drinking Water after Dinner, cools and 
stops the too high Fermentation of the 
Stomach, which is the Cause of breeding 
Wind or Belching after Meat: to the 
Truth of which, the Author of this Ac-
count can bear a full Testimony, who 
being for many Years afflicted with this 
belching up of Wind after Meat, did at 
length prevent the same, by drinking 
Water after eating, instead of other Drink, 
which in time did cool that Hypochon-
driack Heat, from whence those Belchings 
did proceed. 

|P_8
Having read over an old Book written 
by one Sir Tho. Eliot, entitled, The Ca-
stle of Health, he there declared from his 
own Experience, that in the County of 
Cornwall, tho it was a very cold Quar-
ter, the Poorer Sort, which in his time 
did never, or but very seldom drink any 
other Drinks but Water, were strong of 
Body, and lived to a very great Age; to 
which Relation that of Sir Henry Blount
is very agreeable who affirmed, in his 
Book of Travels into the Levant, (where 
under the Turkish Government the Use 
of Wine was forbid, and where the com-
mon Drink is Water) that he then had a 
better Stomach to his Food, and digested 
it more kindly than he ever did before 
or since. 

And in the Treatise of the Vanity of 
Philosophy, written by Dr. Gideon Har-
vey, it is affirmed by him, that it is not 
Heat that causeth a good Digestion, but 
a proper Ferment or Liquor provided by 
Nature, to dissolve the Food into a Sub-
stance like unto Pap made with fine 
Flower: which Dissolvent, he saith, is 
much depraved by hot spirituous Liquors, 
and therefore he commends Water above 
all other Drinks to promote Digestion. 

|P_9
Water-drinking is also said by Dr. Al-
len to be good to prevent two deplorable 
Distempers, the Gout and the Hypochon-
driack Melancholy; for, says he, the Gout 
is generally caused by the too great drink-
ing of fermented Liquors, and is never 
said to have assaulted any Drinker of 
Water; and he saith also, that Melan-
choly Hypochondriack is kept off longest 
by drinking Water instead of strong 
Drink. To which let me add, that I once 
knew a gouty Gentleman, who, to avoid 
his drinking Companions in London,re-
tired to New Brentford, where I then 
lived; in which Town, by a very tempe-
rate Diet of one Meal a day, and drink-
ing only Water, he lived two whole Years 
free from Pain: but being visited by one 
who came that way, and invited to drink 
but one Bottle of Claret between them, 
he fell next day into a terrible Fit of the 
Gout, which held above a Month after; 
of which being recover'd, he by the same 
Course continued well till I left the Place, 
which was about a Year and a half after. 

The good Properties of Water are fur-
ther manifested in preventing the breed-
ing of Gravel in the Kidneys; for Zechias,
in Consult. 17. as he is quoted by Salmon,
affirms, that nothing doth so much abate 
|P_10
the Heat of the Kidneys, and free them 
from those Recrements which cause Pain 
in the Back, one great sign of Gravel, as 
Water does: but he adviseth to drink it 
warm, by the Use of which, he saith, the 
unnatural Heat in time will be so extin-
guished, that no more of that Matter 
causing Gravel will be produced in the 
Body. Which Assertion, by Experience 
I have found to be true: for observ-
ing much Gravel to be voided by me, as 
also abundance of Matter floating in the 
Urine like Bran, with a great number of 
Recrements like Cuttings of Hair, some 
above an Inch long; which Substances 
were found in all the Water I made in 
above twelve Months; for which I could 
get no Remedy: I was advised to 
drink Water, which in about half a Year 
did entirely free me from those Symp-
toms which some imputed to Witchcraft 
out of Ignorance; so that from that time 
to this present I never have been troubled 
with it. 

Water also is commended as efficacious 
to prevent the breeding of the Stone in 
the Bladder, for it hath been observed, 
that in some who have been cut for the 
Stone, that new Stones have been ingen-
der'd, so that some young Persons have 
been cut several times. Now to prevent 
|P_11
this, the drinking Water hath been ad-
vised with Success; for by this that in-
temperate Heat in the Body was abated, 
which did occasion the Distemper. Some 
have advised to drink it warm, and others 
cold, and in particular Van Heydon, a 
Physician of Ghent in Flanders, in his 
Book, entitled, Help for the Rich and 
Poor; which he saith, in p. 49. is suffi-
ciently insinuated by Piso and Alexander,
who do assure us, that the taking a 
Draught of cold Water in the Morning, 
hath done so much good, that several af-
ter the voiding of a Stone never had any 
more Stones grow in them. 

Which Experiment may give light to 
the Discovery of a way to cure the Stone 
without cutting; for if the growing of 
new Stones can be prevented by drinking 
Water, let it be hot or cold, it may pre-
vent a Stone from growing bigger when 
begun; and if the aiding Matter to in-
crease a Stone new begun, can be pre-
vented, Nature in time may waste that 
which is begun, especially if some Drops 
of sweet Spirit of Nitre be added to all the 
Water drank, which will powerfully 
help to cool, and is known to be an ad-
mirable Mover or Provoker of Urine, and 
will waste a Stone, and make it crumble 
like Fullers Earth, if applied to a Stone 
|P_12
taken from the Body. Or the Water may 
be sweeten'd with Honey, which is now 
much in use among the Gentry, as I am 
informed by an ingenious Apothecary; 
who told me, that among them at present 
Pump-Water and Honey was in great re-
pute to give ease in Gravel: and there is 
so near an Affinity between Gravel and 
the Stone, that what is proper for one, 
will be suitable to both, and will prevent 
the growing of both. 

Water is also stiled in Sennertus's Works
the Balsam of Children, the drinking of 
it by the Mother being one of those things 
whereby Children may be strengthen'd 
in the Womb, and will prevent those In-
juries that are done them by drinking 
strong Liquors; which Sampson's Mother 
was not allowed to do, for she was com-
mandednot to drink Wine or strong 
Drink, Judg. 13.4. But I will not say, 
if all Women should do this, their Chil-
dren shall be as strong as Sampson was; 
yet this I will say, if they would do this, 
they would find their Children more free 
from Distemper and Frowardness, and so 
much more easy to nurse and bring up, 
and be less liable to an immature Death; 
the want of which Abstinence from strong 
Drinks is the Cause why so many rich 
People find it hard to bring up Children, 
|P_13
in comparison to what is done by the 
Poor: for these last are born of Mothers, 
who not only are prevented from being 
Gluttons by their want of Dainties, 
which are deceitful Meat, Prov. 23.3. 
but they seldom taste Wine or strong 
Drink: whereas the Rich not only feed 
high, and so engender foul Blood, but 
they also drink strong Drinks, which in 
most Constitutions do over-heat the Hu-
mours of the Body, and that Blood by 
which their Children are nourished du-
ring their Pregnancy. Which Injury to 
unborn Infants would be prevented, if 
the Mother would be temperate in Diet, 
and drink Water, especially at Meals, by 
which the Blood of the Mother would 
be kept cool and clean; which must needs 
communicate a healthful Substance to the 
Child within her, and prevent all those 
Distempers which Infants do bring with 
them into the World. 

And here it may be proper to add, 
what by divers Experiments hath been 
found to be true, that the drinking Water 
by Nurses while they give suck to Chil-
dren, will wonderfully increase Milk in 
those that want it, as every one will find,
who can be persuaded to make use there-
of. I have advised many to make use of 
it, who have found that by drinking a 
|P_14
large Draught of Water at Bed-time, 
they have been supplied with Milk suf-
ficient for that Night, when before they 
wanted it, and could not be supplied by 
any other means: And besides, they who 
have found their Children restless by reason 
of too much Heat in their Milk, do find 
them much more quiet after their Milk 
is cooled by Water-drinking. 

By drinking Water also, the want of 
Food for a time may be suffered without 
starving; for I have been informed by a 
credible Friend, who was an Officer at 
Sea, that being sent down to Stafford to 
take care to see some Men conveyed on 
Ship-board, that had deen press'd by Act 
of Parliament for the Sea-Service; he 
found in the Prison, where they were 
kept, a lusty Fellow, who had declared 
he would starve himself rather than go to 
Sea, and taking particular notice there-
of, he found upon due Enquiry, that for 
twenty days he had refused to eat any 
manner of Food, only he drank each day 
about three Pints or two Quarts of Wa-
ter, hoping thereby to get himself dis-
charged: but when he found his Preten-
sions to be in vain, and that in about two 
days they should all march for London,
he condescended to eat some Food, begin-
ning with a little, and in the March he 
|P_15
was observed to travel as well as the best 
Man. I find also an Account in Dr. Car's 
Letters, of a certain crack-brain'd Man, 
who, at Leyden, when the Doctor resided 
in that University, pretended he could 
fast as long as Christ did; and it was 
found that he held out the time of forty 
Days without eating any Food, only he 
drank Water and smoak'd Tobacco. And 
I once had a sad Complaint from a poor 
old Woman of the Greatness of her Want, 
affirming that oftentimes she had not ea-
ten any Food for two or three days; upon 
which I asked her, if she did not then 
suffer much Uneasiness in her Stomach: 
she said she did, but found a way at last 
to assuage her Hunger, by drinking Wa-
ter, which did satisfy her Appetite. 

Water is also of great use to strengthen 
weak Children, for we are informed by 
Dr. Joseph Browne, in his Treatise of 
Cures performed by Cold Baths, that the 
Welsh Women do preserve their Children 
from the Rickets, by washing them 
Night and Morning in cold Water, till 
they are three quarters of a Year old, 
p. 79. And 'tis said by Sir John Floyer,
in his Treatise of Cold Baths, that a La-
dy in Scotland, who had lost several Chil-
dren through Weakness, did by the Ad-
|P_16
vice of a Highland Beggar-Womanpre-
serve those she had afterwards, by wash-
ing them daily in cold Water. And I my-
self did advise a Neighbour, whose Child 
began to be ricketty, to treat the Child 
in the same manner; but she, instead of 
washing, dipt it over head and ears every 
Morning, it being then in the Summer-
time: the Event of which was, the Child 
became strong, and had a good Counte-
nance, tho before it was in the Face very 
pale and wan. Which shews how great 
the Power of Water is, when used out-
wardly, to invigorate the Spirits, and 
strengthen Nature. 

It is also a known Custom, to prevent 
the Swellings that follow Bruises in the 
Faces of Children, by immediately ap-
plying thereunto a Linnen Cloth four or 
six times double, dipt in cold Water, and 
new dipping it as it begins to grow warm; 
for the Cold repels or prevents the flow-
ing of Humours to the Part, which other-
wise would cause great Swelling, and after 
turn blackish: and if upon neglecting to 
do so, a Swelling should succeed, it may be 
discussed by fomenting Night and Morn-
ing, for an hour at a time, with Water 
as hot as can be endured; for that will 
give vent to the Humours to transpire 
|P_17
through the Skin, or dissolve them, so as 
to make them capable of returning back. 

Moreover, by means of Water all 
Sickness at the Stomach may be cured, 
which is done thus: Take four Quarts 
of Water, make it as hot over the Fire as 
you can drink it; of which Water let a 
Quart be taken down at several Draughts; 
then wrap a Rag round a small Piece 
of a Stick, till it is about the Bigness of a 
Man's Thumb, tie it fast with some Thread; 
and with this, by endeavouring gently to 
put it a little way down your Throat, 
provoke yourself to vomit up again most 
of the Water: then drink another Quart, 
and vomit up that, and repeat the same 
the third and fourth time. You may al-
so provoke Vomiting by tickling your 
Throat with your Finger, or the Feather-
End of a Goose-Quill; but the Cloth 
round a Skuer maketh one vomit with 
most ease, which is done with no Trou-
ble when the Stomach is full. And by 
this way of Vomiting, which will be all 
performed in an hour's time, that vitious 
and ropy Phlegm in the Stomach, which 
causeth the Sickness, will be cast up, so 
that the Party in that time will be free 
from all that inward Disturbance, if you 
use the Remedy at the first; but if the 
Sickness hath continued for a time, it 
|P_18
will require the same Course once or 
twice more, which may be done in three 
or four Hours, one after another, with-
out any other Inconvenience, besides that 
of being a little sore in the Breast the 
next Day, which will soon go off by 
the Force of Nature. Which Remedy, 
by forty Years Experience, I look upon 
to be infallible in all Sickness at the Sto-
mach from what Cause soever, and for 
all Pains in the Belly which seem to be 
above the Navel; for these are all in the 
Stomach, as by long Experience I have 
found: which Pains are generally counted 
the Cholick; but it is not so, for true 
Cholicks are always below the Navel, in 
the Gut, Colon. And by this means I have 
eased very great Pains caused by eating 
Mussels that were poisonous; and it is 
also a certain Cure for all Surfeits or Dis-
orders that follow after much eating; so 
that the Lives of Multitudes might be 
saved by this means, who for want of 
expelling what offends, do often die in 
Misery: For by thus cleansing the Sto-
mach at the first, the Root of Diseases 
proceeding from Surfeiting, unwholesome 
Food, or any viscous Humours from a 
bad Digestion, are prevented; the Sto-
mach being the Place in which all Dis-
tempers do at first begin. No Man was 
more subject to Sickness than myself be-
|P_19
fore thirty Years of Age; but since I found 
out the way of vomiting with Water, 
which is now above forty Years, I never 
have been sick for two Days together: 
for when I find myself ill to any great 
degree, I betake myself to this way of 
vomiting, which in an hour's time re-
stores me to Ease, and perfectly removes 
my Illness; and the same Benefit all my 
Family find in it, as do others also whom 
I can persuade to try the Experiment; 
which is such, that no Physician what-
ever can advise a better to the King 
himself, should he fall sick. For, in the 
first place, 'tis not a nauseous Remedy, it 
does not make the Patient sick, as the 
best of all other Vomits do; and then 
'tis a Vomit which is at our own Com-
mand, since we can leave off when we 
please: and it infallibly works a Cure to 
all sick Stomachs. 

Some few indeed pretend they are not 
able to vomit by this means; now if 
they cannot vomit, let them take a Pint 
of Water when they find themselves ill 
from eating, and do so every three or 
four Hours, eating no more till they are 
hungry; and they will find the Water di-
gest and carry off what was offensive. 
The ingenious Dr. Cheyne, in his Trea-
tise of the Gout, doth affirm that warm 
|P_20
Water drank freely in a Morning fasting, 
and at Meals, (and I say cold Water is as 
good) hath been a sovereign Remedy for 
restoring lost Appetites, and strengthen-
ing weak Digestions, when other more 
pompous Medicines have failed. And 
he adviseth Gouty Persons, after Excess 
either in Meat or Drink, to swill down 
as much fair Water as their Stomach 
will bear, before they go to bed, where-
by they will reap these Advantages, ei-
ther the Contents of the Stomach will be 
thrown up, or both Meat and Drink will 
be much diluted, and the Labour and Ex-
pence of Spirits in Digestion much saved. 
And indeed I have found by long Expe-
rience, that nothing causeth so good a Di-
gestion as fair Water; but this requires 
time to free us from the Uneasiness that 
an ill Digestion causeth, whereas Vomiting 
is an immediate Remedy, and frees a 
Man from it upon the spot. 

We are told by Sir John Floyer, in his 
Treatise of Bath and Mineral Springs,
that Vomiting with Water is very useful 
in the Gout, Sciatica, Wind, Shortness of 
Breath, Hypochondriack Melancholy, and 
Falling-Sickness; which Distempers are 
generally derived from evil Matter con-
tained in the Stomach, as is likewise Gid-
diness in the Head and Apoplexies, with 
|P_21
which myself once seemed to be threat-
ned; for after eating a plentiful Dinner, 
I was seized with Giddiness, and the Sight 
of my Eyes became so depraved, that 
things seemed double, which was accom-
panied with a strange Consternation of 
Spirit; and having read, that Apoplexies 
generally seize after eating, I immediate-
ly called for Water, and not daring to 
stay till it was warmed, I drank it cold, 
and by the help of my Finger provoked 
Vomiting: upon which I did immediate-
ly overcome the Evils I was threatned 
with, the Symptoms before mentioned 
being the same as did precede the Fit of 
an Apoplexy in another Person, as himself 
afterwards told me, who died of it the 
third Fit. 

As for People who are troubled with 
Shortness of Breath, 'tis certain from Ex-
perience, that Vomiting with warm Wa-
ter three or four times will afford certain 
Relief. And the same may be prevented 
by drinking nothing but Water after-
wards, either cold, or warmed with a 
Toast: for upon doing this, the Difficulty 
of Breathing will apparently abate; which 
Water, if you please, may be boiled with 
Honey. And I knew one, who by this 
means, as he was advised by me, lived 
comfortably in this City two or three 
|P_22
Winters, but having undertaken Business 
which did occasion drinking strong Drinks, 
was the next Winter carried off by the 
Distemper: Wine, Ale, or Brandy, being 
as bad as Poison to People troubled with 
Shortness of Breath. 

Some People are taken with violent Vo-
miting, and the Excess thereof in some 
hath been so great, as to endanger their 
Lives, yea, cause Death: in which Case 
Water will be very helpful; for if a Pint 
of it warmed be drank after every Vo-
mit, it will prevent that violent Straining, 
wherein lieth the Danger of all Vomiting, 
because to strain violently when but little 
will come up, does endanger the break-
ing of some inward Vessel. And besides 
this, the offending Matter will be sooner 
loosen'd from the internal Part of that 
Bowel, the Stomach, and cast out, upon 
which the Vomiting will sooner cease: 
For after this manner the famous Syden-
ham, a most honest Writer, did overcome 
the Cholera Morbus, or Vomiting and 
Looseness, so common in his Time, and 
was found by the weekly Bill to kill more 
than now die of Convulsions; for his way 
was to boil a Chicken in four Gallons of 
Water, which made a Broth not much 
differing from Water, of which he order'd 
large Draughts to be given, and some of 
|P_23
it to be taken by Clyster, till the whole 
Quantity was spent, if the Vomiting did 
not stop before; which did so take off the 
Sharpness of the Matter offending, and 
wash it out, that the Party in a little 
time became well. And the same was 
the Practice of Sigismundus Grasius,
who commends pure Water in a Vomit-
ing and Looseness to be drank in large 
Quantities; for thereby, he saith, the 
corrosive or sharp Humours will be so 
weaken'd, that they will no more offend: 
and he faith it may be drank cold, if the 
Patient be strong, otherwise let it be 
warmed. 

And in Common Fluxes without Vomit-
ings a Quart or more of warm Water 
drank, will so weaken the Sharpness 
whereby the Distemper is caused, that it 
will soon be overcome, and the Gripings 
eased; and in the Bloody Flux, which is 
the most dangerous of all Fluxes, the in-
geniousCornelius Celsus adviseth a large 
Drinking of cold Water as the best of 
Remedies: but then no other Substance 
must be taken till the Disease is cured. 
And another great Physician, by Name 
Lusitanus, affirms, Cent. 1. Obser. 46. 
that he knew one, who, being in the 
Summer-time afflicted with this bloody 
Flux, did drink a large quantity of cold 
|P_24
Water, and did thereby recover. This 
large quantity therefore of Water in these 
Fluxes, doth so correct the Sharpness of 
the Humour offending, that it can have 
no power to cause Pain, or corrode the 
Vessels, and cause bloody Digestions or 
Stools. 

Water also is a Drink that conduceth 
above all things to cure Consumptive 
People, for the Digestion being weaken'd, 
is the Cause of producing a hot, fretting 
Nourishment; which is injurious to the 
tender Substance of the Lungs, and which 
constringes and stops up the Lymphatick 
Vessels, thro which the Nourishment is 
to pass to all the Parts; so that by de-
greesthe Body for want of due Supplies 
consumes: which Obstructions, and that 
Acrimony that causeth them, will be o-
pen'd and sweeten'd by the plentiful Use 
of Water; if taken before the Lungs be-
come ulcerous. Which Cure of Consump-
tions by Water is recommended in the 
Writings of Dr. Couch, who in his Praxis 
Catholica tells us, that he knew a Man 
cured very soon of a Consumption by 
drinking pure Water. And 'tis said by 
another, that some have been cured of 
Consumptions by drinking no other 
Drink but Water, avoiding all Malt Li-
quors and sharp Wines: for Wine or 
|P_25
any other strong Liquor is pernicious in 
this Distemper. 

Some there are who are much troubled 
with flushing Heat in their Face, and o-
therswith a Heat in the Back; in both 
which Cases, Water, used as common 
Drink, is the best Remedy, with a spare 
cooling Diet: and 'tis also excellent for 
such as have red Blotches in their Face,
which proceeds from a hot fretting Blood, 
which, by Water-drinking, and a mode-
rate Diet, will be kept under: for as Dr. 
Duncan, before quoted, doth affirm, 
those who keep their Blood cool and clean, 
are never troubled with Breakings out, 
like many others, who may be known to 
be Drinkers of hot Drinks, and use a hot 
full Diet, by their Faces. 

Water is also commended by the Lear-
ned for the Cholick; thus Riveriusaf-
firms, that in the Cholick large drinking 
of Water hath been found to be an excel-
lent Remedy; and 'tis said by Fortis, that 
when he practised at Venice, he often 
gave cold Water in the Cholick with 
good Success. With whom an English
Physician, Dr. Wainwright, in his Me-
chanical Account of the six Non-natu-
rals, concurs; for he saith that Water-
Drinkers are never troubled with the 
|P_26
Cholick, and that many thereby have 
been cured when all other Remedies 
failed. 

And in the Small-Pox, Water hath also 
been proved to be an excellent Drink. 
Salmon, in his Synopsis Medicinæ, saith, 
that in this Distemper you may safely give 
the Sick fair Water, of which, says he,
they may drink liberally to quench Thirst; 
the want of which plenty of Drink hath 
been the Death of many a Patient. 
Which Opinion of his was right, as by 
Experience I have found in two of my 
own Children, when sick of this Distem-
per; to whom, after I had given a gentle 
Vomit of Emetick Tartar, I gave no other 
Drink but Water, and they both recove-
red safely, and were not in the least light-
headed, as two others before were in the 
same Distemper, when treated otherwise: 
and I remember that one Dr. Betts being 
consulted in a Case where the Eruptions 
did not come out kindly, did order two 
Quarts of cold Water to be drank as 
soon as could be, upon which they came 
out according to expectation, and the 
Party did well. 

'Tis also certain, that in what we call 
burning Fevers, Water is found to be a 
safe and effectual Remedy. It is said by 
|P_27
Dr. Primrose, in his Popular Errors, that 
many great Physicians have commended 
the drinking cold Water in Diseases, and 
they attribute to it the chief Place in 
Fevers, where the Sick must drink large-
ly; for thus taken, it will quench all 
Heat, pag. 374. And Galen is said, by an 
English Author, to reprove Crasistratus
for denying cold Water in burning Fe-
vers; and says, that this is a Remedy for 
any Fever, provided it be drank in 
great abundance: with which Opinion I 
find Dr. Oliver to agree, who, in his Es-
say on Fevers, says, That in Fevers we 
must drink oftner than Thirst calls for it, 
and such Draughts as are plentiful; and the 
Drink he prescribes, is either cold Water 
or Barley-Water. Dr. Wainwrightaf-
firms also, that Water is proper in Fe-
vers, and that the Antients gave as 
much of it as the Patient could drink.
And by another 'tis said, that if you give 
the Patient nothing but Water for three 
Days, that in the third Day the Fever 
will be cured generally; but if it is not, 
give for Food a little Barley-Broth, and 
the Fever will not exceed the seventh 
Day. And by another we are informed, 
how one in a Fever, that was past Hope,
being forbidden to drink Water, which 
he greatly desired, did find means, in 
the Absence of his Nurse, to get a large 
|P_28
Pot-full, which he drank off, and lay down 
again, being well cooled; after which he 
fell into a Sweat, and so was cured. And 
I find that Dr. Cook of Warwick, in his 
Book of Observations on English Bodies,
does prescribe, for the Cure of Fevers, 
first a Vomit, and afterwards as much 
cold Water as the Patient can drink; and 
he saith, that if he sweat upon it, the 
Sweat must he continued as long as can 
be. And 'tis said by another, that 'tis an 
excellent Remedy in Fevers to drink a 
Quart of hot Water, and sweat upon it, 
being covered warm. There is also one 
Dr. Quinton, who, in his Book of Obser-
vations, writes, That to one in a malig-
nant Fever, whose Pulse was so low it 
could scarcely be felt, there was three 
Quarts of Water given, at several Draughts, 
to make him vomit; but it did not ope-
rate that way, yet the Event was this, 
that it did refresh him, much raised his 
Pulse, brought him into a breathing 
Sweat, and passed off by Urine: which 
Lowness of the Pulse my own Experience 
hath often found to be raised by drinking 
Water plentifully. And I know a Woman, 
who tho' she in a Fever had the Advice 
of two Doctors, yet became distracted: 
I bid the Nurse give her a Pint of cold 
Water, which she drank up, and in three 
or four Minutes came to her right Senses; 
|P_29
and desiring to drink more, she recovered. 
And I have observed, that when, in Fe-
vers, the Patient can relish no other Drink, 
yet Water is always drank with pleasure, 
as it also will always be after the eating 
sweet things, that spoil the Relish of o-
ther Drinks; which is one Excellence pe-
culiar to Water, and shews it to be most 
agreeable to the Nature of Mankind, tho' 
now so much slighted. 

And as for the Gout, which Dr. Harris
saith, in his Anti-Empirice, is gotten ei-
ther by high feeding, or drinking much 
Wine, or other strong Drink; it may be 
cured, as that Author doth affirm, by a 
very spare Diet, and drinking Water: ac-
cording to what is said also by Sir Theo-
dore Mayhern, who, in his Medicinal 
Counsels, adviseth to leave off all strong 
Drinks in this Disease, and drink only 
Water. And Van Heydon saith also, in 
his Treatise of Help for the Rich and 
Poor, that there is not any greater Reme-
dy for the Gout than drinking Water,
not only by young but old Men; many of 
whom, he saith, have drank cold Water 
for many Weeks, which hath succeeded 
so well, though they were far gone in 
Years, that they found great Ease there-
by, without that Offence to the Stomach, 
or Hindrance of Digestion, which some 
|P_30
did seem to fear. And he also commends 
the large drinking of Water in the Scia-
tica, or Hip-Gout, he having often cured 
this Distemper, by this means, in less time 
than could reasonably be expected; and 
the same myself have found to be effec-
tual in a like Pain in the Shoulder, which 
had continued very bad for three Months. 
For, being taken with a Fever, I drank 
in one Day about four Quarts of Water; 
which though it did not make me sweat, 
because I lay not in my Bed, yet it cured 
me so that I slept well that Night; and 
in the Morning, when I rose, I did find 
that the Pain in my Shoulder was not 
felt, neither did it ever return. And the 
same Success I have had in the Pains of 
other Parts, whereby I judge, that in all 
Pains whatever the drinking of Water is 
proper, as well as in the Gout; and ac-
cordingly I find cold Water advised to be 
drank largely for the Cure of the Head-
ach from hard Drinking; that Pain pro-
ceeding from the same Cause the Gout 
does, namely from Heat, as all Pains do. 

It is said also by Dr. Wainwright, that 
in the Itch, Scurvy, Leprosy, and in all 
hot inflammatory Distempers, such as 
Pleurisies, Rheumatisms, and St. Antho-
ny's. Fire, Water is a proper Remedy; 
but he adviseth to drink it hot in some Ca-
|P_31
ses, as doubtless ought to be done in Pleuri-
sies. He also saith, that Water is proper in 
Head-aches, Catarrhs, Vapours, Falling-
Sickness, Dullness of Sight, Melancholy, 
Shortness of Breath, Scurvey in the 
Mouth, and Windiness in the Stomach:
And, for Wind in the Stomach, I, by long 
Experience, have found it the best Reme-
dy, who, in the former part of my Life, 
through a disorderly Diet, and drinking 
strong Drink like others, was never free 
from windy Belchings, and sometimes ve-
ry sickish Qualms after Meals; from which 
at length I was delivered, by drinking 
only Water at Meals, so that for above 
forty Years I have been seldom troubled: 
and if I find myself troubled, a Pint or 
more of cold Water, in less than half an 
Hour, will set me free, by drinking of it. 

And that Water is the best Remedy for 
the Mischiefs that come by Hard Drink-
ing, Experience teacheth; there being no-
thing that so effectually frees from those 
nauseating and reaching Qualms the next 
Morning, as the drinking a Pint or more 
of fair Water; which effectually allays the 
Inflammation of the Bowels, occasioned 
by strong or hot Drink, which spoils the 
Strength of the Stomach, as it doth the 
Strength of all other Parts; nothing being 
a greater Enemy to the Vigour of the 
|P_32
Nerves and Sinews, since by much drink-
ing, Men make themselves unable to 
stand or go: Which Effect would never 
follow, if Liquors, that abound with Spi-
rits, were strengthening; and if they were 
strengthening, the Fibres of the Stomach 
would not be so weakened, after drinking 
strong Drinks, as to make Men sick: which 
Sickness will soon be recovered by the 
drinking cold Water, this being also the 
best Remedy, if taken largely, for that 
Heat of Urine which is often occasioned 
by Hard-drinking. 

In Colds, Water is the best of all Drinks 
to prevent Floods of Rheum from the 
Nose and Mouth, as my long Experience 
testifies, and the drinking thereof will 
prevent Coughs; for a Cough will seldom 
succeed a Cold, if Water is used from the 
first as common Drink: and if, through 
Neglect, a Cough should become trou-
blesome, the Use of Water, avoiding all 
Wine and strong Drink, will contribute 
much to the Cure. Some order the Wa-
ter to be drank warm, but others say that 
to drink it cold vastly excells the using of 
it hot in a Cough. 'Tis said by Van Hey-
don, that some may think it strange to ad-
vise Water in such Diseases, which most 
do account to proceed from Crudity or 
Indigestion; but, he says, that in any Dis-
|P_33
ease where the Case is dangerous, the 
Use of Water is the only Friend to Na-
ture; cold Water being a Preventer ra-
ther than a Cause of Crudity, since, by 
all Experience, it is proved to be a Pro-
moter of a good Digestion: And at this 
time I know a Woman, 78 Years of Age, 
who for this ten Years hath had a great 
Cough, and spits much tough Phlegm, 
that hath this present Winter 1722, been 
persuaded to leave off all strong and small 
fermented Liquor, and drink only Wa-
ter at Meals, and sometimes a Dish or 
two of Tea; and hath found herself much 
less subject to cough than before, and 
scarce coughs at all in Bed. 

It is the general Opinion of most Physi-
cians, that Wine and Strong-Drinks are 
not proper for Children, and that the 
smaller and cooler their Drink is, the bet-
ter it will be with them; and that no-
thing conduceth more to the Health of 
Children than drinking Water, which 
will prevent the Foundation of those 
Diseases that are caused in many by 
Strong-Drink, and do shew themselves in 
their more advanced Age, wherein ma-
ny also do suffer much by the ill Custom 
of making them Gluttons, by constantly 
cramming their Stomachs with Food, 
many being thereby destroyed among the 
|P_34
Children of the Rich before they come 
to the Years of Maturity; when the Chil-
dren of poor Country People, who fare 
hard, and very often drink Water, stand 
their Ground till full grown: for fewer 
Children die in the Country than in great 
Cities, where Luxury in Diet doth more 
abound; which is one Reason why so few 
Housekeepers in London were born in it,
the great Supply of Inhabitants being 
from the Country, Children being brought 
up more hardy there than in London,
where great Numbers are killed by over-
pleasing their Palates. Which Mischief 
would be, in a great measure, prevented 
by their being accustomed to drink Wa-
ter; which, by Experience, is found to 
make young Children free from that Frow-
ardness which is commonly caused by a 
sharp, and hot, or feverish Blood, which 
ingendereth Wind, and causeth Pain and 
Gripes: for there is no Pain but is the 
Consequence of Heat, if it is not caused 
by Blows and Bruises. 

Water, I have found, by long Experi-
ence, to be of excellent use in Burns and 
Scalds; for in all Burns and Scalds that 
are slight, if the Part is plunged imme-
diately into cold Water, the colder the 
better, the Pain will instantly be ta-
ken off; and it will fetch out the Fire, if 
|P_35
continued so long, as will be required to 
do it by any other Remedy. And if the 
Burn be so considerable, that other Reme-
dies must be applied, none of which will 
take off the Smart of themselves in less 
than two or three Hours; yet if you ap-
ply cold Water presently, after other Ap-
plications are made to the Part, the 
Pain immediately will cease, till the Re-
medy becomes effectual: so that the Ease 
Water will give in such Cases, makes it 
of good Use. Which Remedy, as it hath 
not been discovered till now, appears to 
transcend all other Remedies in this Case; 
because, in a moment, the great Smart 
will be eased, if the Water is cold, and 
will be felt no more if the Part afflicted be 
kept immersed in it till the Fire is extin-
guished, either by the Water, or the Me-
dicine applied. Besides, it is a Remedy 
every where ready at hand, which can-
not be said of any other; which generally 
requires so much time to get it ready, 
that much Pain will be endured, if Bli-
sters do not arise, which do much increase 
the Trouble. If the Part burnt, or 
scalded, cannot be dipt in Water, you 
may apply Water to it, with double Lin-
nen Cloths dipped therein, and new dipt 
as they grow warm; by which means I 
have cured Burns and Scalds in the Face 
|P_36
without blistering, when applied imme-
diately before Blisters did arise. 

I once knew a large Ulcer in the Foot, 
made by the running of melted Brass in-
to the Shoe, that was kept in hand by a 
Surgeon nine Weeks, without any pro-
bability of healing, because of the great 
Inflammation that attended it; but the 
Party being a Lover of Angling, was 
persuaded to go with some others to 
Hackney River: some of them went bare-
legg'd into the Water, to come at a cer-
tain Hole where much Fish was some-
times found. The Sport was so good that 
the lame Man, having pulled off his Stock-
ings and Plaisters, went in also, where he 
staid above two Hours, and coming out 
again he found the Ulcer, which appear-
ed very red and angry when he went in, 
did look pale; he put on his Dressings,
and came home, and in lese than a Fort-
night his Ulcer healed up: which doubt-
less was occasioned by the abating of 
the Inflammation by the Coldness of the 
Water. And I have had an Account also 
from an Acquaintance, that was Surgeon 
to a Merchant Ship, that their Gunner, 
at a time when the Captain treated some 
Friends on board, going to charge a Gun 
that just before had been fired off, the Car-
tridge he was ramming down took fire, 
|P_37
whereby he was blown into the Water, 
and had some of his Fingers torn off, and 
it was about an Hour before a Boat could 
be got to take him up: but they found 
that the Coldness of the Water had al-
most stopt the Bleeding, and the Cure was 
effected so speedily, that other Surgeons 
wondered at it; which he imputed to the 
Water, which kept back the Humours, by 
its Coldness, from flowing to the Part at 
the first: so that there was no Impedi-
ment, from Inflammation, to hinder heal-
ing; for the chief Impediment to healing, 
is Inflammation in Wounds or Ulcers. 

And as for Strains and Sprains in the 
Joints, cold Water affords the best and 
most speedy Remedy, as Van Heydonaf-
firms; who saith, That by bathing in 
cold Water all harm so received may, by 
this Remedy, be cured more safely and 
more speedily than by any other, with-
out Loss of Time, Cost, or Trouble; for 
no more is to be done, than, as soon as 
can be, to put the Part into a Tub of 
cold Water for about two Hours, which 
will prevent all Swelling and Pain, by 
repelling or keeping back the Humours 
that otherwise would flow to the Part. 
And if it should be the Shoulder, or any 
other Part, which is so hurt, that cannot 
well be immersed in Water after this 
|P_38
manner, Water may be applied, by dip-
ping Towels folded up into it, and lay-
ing them to the Part, as is done, in effect, 
to the wrenched Joints of Horses; about 
which, if you wind oftentimes a thick 
Rope made of Hairs, and then cast upon 
it divers times a Pail of cold Water, the 
Wrench will be cured; which Experi-
ment is now commonly practised by those 
concerned about Horses. 

Bathing in cold Water hath also been 
found to be a good Remedy to strengthen 
Weakness in the Joints, as Sir John 
Floyer, in his Treatise of Cold Bathing,
hath shewed; and which by Experience 
I found to be true in a certain Woman, 
who complained of great Weakness and 
Pain in her Ankles: I advised her to dip 
the Part in cold Water every Morning for 
about a quarter of an Hour, and to do 
the same at Night; and in about twenty 
Days she became as strong in that Part 
as she was in the other. And Sir John
tells us of a Boy who could not stand, his 
Limbs were so weak, that by bathing in 
cold Water, perfectly recover'd his Strength 
in a little time. 

Great Pain in the Head hath been also 
cured by this means; for we are told by 
Van Heydon, that one Sir Toby Mathews
|P_39
had for twenty Years been troubled with 
great Pain in one side of his Head, and 
a great Defluxion of Rheum from his 
Nose; but he at last was cured, by apply-
ing cold Water to the Part every day for 
about a quarter of an hour: upon read-
ing of which, I tried the Experiment up-
on myself, who for a long time had been 
trouble with the running of much clear 
Water from my Nose, with great spitting 
of thin Rheum: for I let a Water-Cock 
run upon the Mould of my Head every 
Morning, by which, in about six Weeks 
time, I was eased of my Trouble. And 
since that I had a credible Information 
of a certain Servant-Maid, who was af-
flicted greatly with a Rheumatism and 
an intolerable Pain in the Head, who be-
ing put into St. Thomas's Hospital, her 
Nurse was order'd by the Doctor to ap-
ply to her Head Towels four times dou-
ble, dipt in cold Water, changing them 
as they became warm, which she was to 
continue doing four or five Hours; in 
which time she was freed from that Pain 
in the Head, and was afterwards cured of 
the Rheumatism by other Means. 

The Want of Sleep in Fevers may be 
cured likewise by the Application of cold 
Water: for to a near Relation, who could 
not sleep for three Days and three Nights, 
|P_40
I order'd a Towel to be several times 
folded up, then to be dipt in Water, and 
a little wrung out and so laid upon her 
Forehead, and to be new dipt as it grew 
hot; which in about two Hours time so 
cooled her Head, that she fell into a Sleep, 
and continued in it five Hours: and I or-
der'd the farce to be done the next Night, 
with the same effect. And we find that 
Dr. Cockburn, in his Treatise of Sea Dis-
eases, d#d order for the want of Sleep in 
Fevers, to dip a Towel, four times dou-
bled, in Oxycrat, which is six parts Wa-
ter, and one part Vinegar, to be bound 
about the Head and Temples; which, he 
saith, will cause Sleep with wonderful 
Success: but Water only will have the 
same effect, as I often have proved. 

And that the Use of cold Water in 
Swoonings is of great effect, common Ex-
perience teacheth; for if a Dish or Cup 
of cold Water is thrown strongly upon the 
Face, the Person in an instant will recover 
his Senses, tho for a time he seemeth 
dead, and perhaps might not have reco-
ver'd in some cases, if cold Water had 
not been so applied: such Faintings being 
sometimes deadly, which proceed from pos-
sonous Vapours ascending up to the Brain 
from a foul Stomach; for such Effects 
there are, as I have found by Experience, 
|P_41
who, in my young Days, did swoon away 
twice; at both which times I was sensi-
ble of a Collection of Wind in my Sto-
mach, from whence I plainly felt a Fume 
or Vapour ascend to the Head, that in an 
instant deprived me of all Sense: but be-
ing both times in the Company of a Per-
son who had seen the thing tried, he 
dash'd some cold Water against my Face, 
which I remember made me start, as if 
I had been suddenly a waked. And I am 
apt to think, that some die in such a Fit, 
when none are near to help them; and 
especially when so taken in their Sleep, 
which, I believe, none need fear who live 
temperately, or that eat no Suppers: none 
who have refrained from Suppers, having 
been ever found to die in Sleep. 

Dangerous Bleedings at the Nose have 
also been cured with cold Water largely 
drank, syringing cold Water up their 
Nostrils, and applying Towels round their 
Necks dipt in cold Water, changing them 
as they grow warm; for 'tis said by a 
good Writer, that this will so cool the 
Heat of the Blood, and by the Coldness 
of the Water syringed up the Nose, so 
contract the Mouths of the bursted Veins 
which bleed, that it will put a stop to 
the Bleeding. Such Bleedings have also 
been stopt by dashing cold Water often 
|P_42
into the Face, as a French Writer hath 
affirmed, whose Name was Flamand;
and the same also is affirmed by Cook, in 
his Marrow of Surgery.

Cold Water is an absolute Cure for all 
small Cuts in the Fingers or other Parts;
for if when cut, you close the Cut up 
with the Thumb of your other Hand, 
keeping it so closed for a quarter or half 
an Hour, this will infallibly stop the 
Bleeding: after which, if you double up 
a Linnen Rag five or six times, dip it in 
cold Water, and apply it to the Part, 
binding it on fast. This, by preventing 
Inflammation and a Flux of Humours, 
will give Nature time soon to heal it 
without any other Application, as is seen 
in the common Practice of Surgeons 
when they let a Man blood; for all the Appli-
cation they make to the Vein so cut, is a 
Pledget of Linnen dipt in cold Water, and 
bound on with a Fillet: for all Wounds 
without loss of Substance will heal of 
themselves, if Inflammation is prevented, 
and the Lips of the Wound are kept close 
together. 

We also are told by Van Heydon, that 
in his time some were of an opinion, that 
a Person bit by a mad Dog might be pre-
served from that Symptom, call'd, The 
|P_43
Fear of Water, which generally follows 
and proves so mortal, by applying cold 
Water to the Place bitten: And this, he 
says, they conceive to be no unlikely thing, 
if there is any credit to be given to what 
Cornelius Celsus writes, who saith, that 
the only Remedy in this case is to throw 
the Party who is in this Condition, or 
hath the Fear of Water upon him, into a 
Pond or River, and when plunged over 
Head and Ears, to keep him in the Wa-
ter till filled with it, whether he will 
or no; and by this means both his Thirst 
and Dread of Water will be cured. For if 
this Immersion be of use when the Party 
is so far gone, why should it not be of 
greater force in preserving from it, if spee-
dily applied and repeated? Now tho this 
is mention'd by him as a probable Opi-
nion, yet Experience in our days shews, 
That the plunging the Patient into the 
salt Water either of the River of Thames, 
about Gravesend, or in the salt Springs 
in Cheshire, is an infallible means to pre-
vent any Evil succeeding the Bite of a 
mad Dog; they must indeed be dipt so 
often, as to be almost drown'd before the 
Danger is over; but 'tis a question whe-
ther the Saltness of the Water contributes 
any thing to this Cure, since Boerhave, the 
present Professor at Leyden, affirms, That 
when Men bitten by a mad Dog are 
|P_44
arrived to the Fear of Water, call'd an 
Hydrophobia, they may be cured, by blind-
ing the Patient's Eyes, and throwing of 
him into a Pond of Water often, till he 
seems not to be afraid of it, or but very 
little, and then force him to drink large 
Quantities. 

And we are told by Dr. Browne, that 
a Person troubled with the Falling Sick-
ness, by happening to fall into a cold 
Spring, (I suppose it was in the time of 
his Fit) was freed from his Distemper all 
his Life after: and he saith there is no 
need of preparing the Body for it in this, 
as in some other Cases. But the Patient, 
when plunged into a cold Bath, ought to 
continue in the Bath each time about 
three or four Minutes: for in plunging 
over head and ears at his first Entrance 
into a cold Bath, the Brain will be so sen-
sibly affected, as to be relieved from the 
Distemper, which is a kind of Convul-
sion proceeding from an Inflammation, or 
some other Cause; but we want more 
Experiments to confirm this Notion:
Which Notion may be worth noting, that 
the thing may be tried in others, to see 
whether it will succeed as it did in this 
Person. For 'tis said by the ingenious 
Dr. Pitcairn, a Scotchman, some time 
Professor at Leyden, that there is no such 
|P_45
thing as the Art of Physick, but Reme-
dies were found out by chance, p. 264. of 
his Works; for if Physick were an Art as 
certain in its Rules, as the Rules are that 
belong to Musick, or to Watch-making, 
Physicians would as seldom be mistaken in 
their Prescriptions, as the others are in their 
Designs. But when Remedies happen to 
be discover'd, and prove often to be ef-
fectual, the remembring that Remedy, 
to apply it in a like case, often brings 
Reputation to the Prescriber; and if it 
fails, some other Experiment must be 
tried, which, were Physick an Art, need 
not be done. 

'Tis also said by the same Dr. Browne,
that Madness and Melancholy, with all 
their Retinue, may find better Effects 
from the Use of bathing in cold Water, 
than from other violent Methods, with 
which People so afflicted are now treated; 
for, says he, that which will make a 
drunken Man sober in a minute, will 
certainly go a great way towards the 
Cure of a Madman in a month. Now 
'tis most certain, to my own Knowledge, 
that if a drunken Man be plunged over 
head and ears in cold Water, he will come 
out of it perfectly sober: And some I 
have known, that in such cases have been 
recover'd by barely washing their Heads 
|P_46
in cold Water. And the forementioned 
Opinion of Dr. Browne is confirmed by 
the Practice of Dr. Blair, who, in a Let-
ter to Dr. Baynard, declares, That he cu-
red a Man raving mad, who being bound 
in a Cart, stript of his Clothes, and blind-
folded, that the Surprize might be the 
greater; he on a sudden had a great Fall 
of Water let down upon him from the 
height of twenty foot, under which he 
continued so long as his Strength would 
permit: and after his Return home, he 
fell into a Sleep, and slept twenty-nine 
Hours, and awaked in as quiet a State of 
Mind as ever, and so had continued to 
the time of the writing that Letter, which 
was twelve Months. 

Which Relation seems to make that a 
more probable Truth, which was related 
in a Letter from Sir John Floyer to Dr. 
Browne, and printed by that Doctor; 
wherein it is said, that in Normandy they 
immerse Fools, or dip them in cold Wa-
ter, to cure them: a hot Brain being the 
Cause, perhaps, of several Disorders in the 
Understanding, and is in great part found 
to be true, in the ridiculous Behaviour of 
some drunken Men, which, when their 
Heads are become cool, abhor what they 
before did do or say. Now if such Dipping 
would cure Fools among us, great Num-
|P_47
bers might be made more happy than 
they are. 

Dr. Browne, in his Discourse of Cold 
Baths, affirms likewise, that to bathe in 
cold Water hath been found to be the 
quickest, safest, and pleasantest Cure for 
the King's Evil; and he tells us, in p. 85. 
of a Yorkshire Gentleman, who was 
grievously afflicted with this Distemper, 
having great Ulcers in the Glands of his 
Neck, which were so much inflamed, as to 
bring him very low; but being advised 
by Dr. Baynard to bathe in the Cold 
Bath, he in a Month's time was perfectly 
cured, his Ulcers being healed up, con-
trary to the Opinion of the most learned 
Physicians. 

We also find mention, in the Description 
of the Scottish Islands, of an odd Remedy 
commonly made use of there for the Cure 
of the Jaundice; which is this: They 
strip the Party naked, lay him upon the 
Ground on his Belly, and pour unawares 
upon his Back a Pail of cold Water. And 
also Pains in the Joints, as Dr. Curtis
tells us, will be cured, by holding the 
Part under the Stream of a Pump or 
Cock; and fomenting with cold Water is 
commended as good to assuage hot Swel-
lings. And I know a Person who had 
|P_48
often been subject to blood-shot or in-
flamed Eyes, who afterwards, upon the 
beginning of the same Distemper, took, 
by Advice, a Ball of linnen Rags, dipt 
them in cold Water, and applied them to 
the Part, cooling them by new dipping 
as oft as they grew hot: which Applica-
tion was continued three Hours, in which 
time the Humour was so repelled, as to 
be troublesome no more; for the Party, 
to my knowledge, hath had no sign of 
that Distemper since, tho the same had 
been very troublesome many times be-
fore. 

It is also advised by Dr. Gideon Har-
vey, to wash the Eyes well twice a day in 
cold Water, as the best Remedy to prevent 
Defluxions on them, and preserve the 
Eye-sight, which it greatly comforts. And 
this I have found true for many Years, 
my Eyes being often apt to be dim and 
stiff on a sudden, so that I could scarce 
open my Eye-lids; which, upon washing 
for a minute with fair Water, hath been 
felt no more till a good while after. Be-
sides which Benefit to the Eyes, Authors 
say it is also good to preserve the Memo-
ry, if the whole Forehead be washed 
twice a day; which is a certain Cure for 
itching in the Eyes, as Authors tell us. 

|P_49
Some People are troubled with a Callo-
sity, or Hardness of the Bottoms of their 
Feet, which is so troublesome, as to be a 
hindrance to their easy walking; for 
which a Cure is prescribed by Dr. Cook,
that is, to soak them well in warm Wa-
ter, till the Hardness is soften'd, and then 
scrape it off with the Edge of a Knife: 
and if the Feet burn with any unnatural 
Heat, the bathing often in hot Water 
will cool them, by giving vent to what 
offends. 

And the plentiful drinking of Water 
is commended in the Scurvey, by Dr. Pit-
cairn, to dissolve the Scorbutick Salts, and 
carry them out by Urine, whether they 
are Acids or Alkalies; and myself having 
formerly been extremely troubled with 
the Scurvey, which often made me faint 
and weak, and my Pulse so low as scarce-
ly to be felt, I found at last that the 
Pulse would infallibly rise upon drinking 
a Pint or more of cold Water, and in a 
little time I should become brisk and 
strong: For I have often found that upon 
a Disorder of the Stomach, the Strength 
of the bodily Members soon would fail, and 
would easily be recovered when the Dis-
order of the Stomach was removed; 
and have, by long Experience, found that 
|P_50
nothing conduceth so much to bodily 
Strength as a Stomach in right Order, 
which requires Temperance and cooling 
Drink. 
