
|P_
A 
SHORT ACCOUNT
OF THE 
STATE of MIDWIFERY
IN 
London, Westminster, &c. 

|P_
[}The 
State of Midwifery.}]
[^Decorative frame around the letter "I".^]IS it not very surprising, nay and un-
accountable, that tho' almost all the 
other parts of Surgery have been cul-
tivated with great assiduity, by the 
most knowing Men, ever since Hip-
pocrates, nay and before him, yet ('till about the 
middle of the last century) the operations necessary for 
the safety of women in labour, and their children; 
operations of more consequence to mankind than 
almost all the rest; operations so often wanted, so 
difficult many times to perform, and upon which al-
ways two, and sometimes more lives depend, seem 
to have been entirely left to a parcel of ignorant 
women, or to Men little better qualified than they, 
who upon any extraordinary difficulty (as too many 
still do) took hooks or knives, and carved the chil-
dren to pieces; and often also destroyed the Mother? 

The Surgeons at Paris, &c. to remedy this evil, 
have for many years past, obliged all the Midwo-
men to be examined and approved of at their hall, 
before ever they dare set up for practice: An ex-
ample most worthy of imitation! But how, or by 
what infatuation, our Dom. fac. totum suffered these 
|P_2
operations to drop through their fingers, (as if they 
were no part of their profession, as if they were not 
manual operations, or were of little or no conse-
quence to mankind,) into the hands of Doctors, 
inferioris sortis medici, (as a certain Gentleman 
calls them,) Apothecaries, and the lowest class of 
their own Fraternity! (some of whom have been, 
and are, as illiterate, of as low capacities, and as little 
acquainted with the other great operations of Surgery, 
as almost any of the women) and have and do allow 
every silly woman, who takes it in her head, with 
very little or no instruction, to practice impunè
among his Majesty's subjects, without any the least 
examination or licence! are questions I shall not 
now take upon me to answer. But to proceed: 

The first rational account we ever had of deli-
vering women in labour, was published at Paris 
by Mr. Mauriceau, in 1668. In his dedication, 
he gives the following honest account of his design: 
I have the rather undertaken this work, that 
Midwives might find therein what they ought to 
know, the better to exercise their art, and un-
dergo the examination they are obliged to at 
Surgeons-Hall, before they are admitted to 
practice. In his preface, he says, I have 
not run out into superfluous discourse (i. e. he 
had avoided all puzzling and unintelligible 
Theories and Hypotheses, about generation, 
nutrition, superfoetation, and such sort of jar-
gon,) that I might be more serviceable both 
to Surgeons and Midwives.

This plain practical work, would undoubted-
ly have had a much better effect upon our Mid-
women, 
|P_3
had they not been puzzled and confound-
ed, (instead of being instructed) by the artful insi-
nuations of the translator, in his preface and mar-
ginal notes, published in 1672. as will appear by 
the following quotations. 

Dr. Chamberlen, in his preface, says, Hav-
ing long observed the great want of necessary 
directions how to govern women with child, 
and in child-bed, &c. I design'd a small ma-
nual to that purpose; but meeting some time 
after in France with this treatise of Mauriceau, 
which in my opinion exceeds all former Au-
thors, I changed my resolution into that of 
translating him; whom I need not much com-
mend, because he is fortified with the approba-
tion of the wardens of the Surgeons company of 
Paris. Pray would the Doctor have thought he 
had been so well fortified, if he had had the approba-
tion of the then wardens of the Surgeons company of 
London? or the approbation of the college of phy-
sicians at Paris? I have carefully rendered his 
book into English, for the benefit of our Mid-
wives. This is certainly a very fair and honest 
Exordium, a worthy and laudablc Design; but pray 
mark the end on't: Of whom many may yet very 
well admit of an additional knowledge. This 
cannot be denied, but pray where are they to go 
look for this additional knowledge, if he means, in 
their profession? Is it to be found in his preface and 
marginal notes upon Mauriceau's work? No! they 
rather darken, than explain, the Author's meaning. 
But the additional knowledge the Doctor means, and 
has taken such pains to inculcate, through the 
|P_4
whole of his preface and notes, is to inform them 
the He and his family can assist them better than any 
other Men; that they have no business to meddle 
with any child, except those who just drop into 
their hands, and that whenever the least difficulty 
appears, to send for him, or some or the Nostrum-
mongers; as will appear evidently from the tenure 
of the whole. 

Then he goes on, The principal thing wor-
thy the observation of Midwives in this book, 
is accurately to discover what is properly their 
work, and when it is necessary to send for ad-
vice and assistance, that so, many women and 
children may be preserved, that now perish for 
want of seasonable help. i. e. shall victims 
to the ignorance of Midwomen. And that 
Midwife's skill is certainly the greatest, and 
she deserves most commendation, who can 
soonest discover the success of the labour, 
and accordingly either wait with patience, or 
timely send for advice and help. Pray is not 
that Midwwoman's skill still greater? and does she 
not deserve much more commendation? who can 
soonest discover what obstructs the delivery, and 
then removes the obstruction herself, and thereby 
saves the woman the fright, trouble, and expence, 
of sending for any farther help or advice? Nor 
can it be so great a discredit to a Midwife (let 
some of them imagine what they please) to have 
a woman or child saved by a man's assistance, as 
to suffer either to die under her own hand, tho' 
delivered: For that Midwife mistakes her office, 
that thinks she hath performed it, by only laying 
|P_5
the woman; because her principal duty is to 
take care that she and her child be well, with 
safety and convenient speed parted; who 
don't know that? and, if this be impossible for 
her, it will justify her better to wave her imagi-
nary reputation, and send for help. No doubt 
of it. But would it not have been much better if 
they had been taught to do their office themselves? 

Thus you see Mr. Mauriceau's design in pub-
lishing his book, was to instruct the Midwomen 
how to perform their office better; but Dr. Cham-
berlen perverts that design, and seems to have the 
Interest of the Midmen, and not that of the Mid-
women, or — principally at heart, as is evi-
dent from the foregoing quotations, &c. 

Notwithstanding all these coaxes and threats, 
which he plays off so briskly upon the town Mid-
women, (who are undoubtedly much better qualifi-
ed, than those in the country) in case they don't send 
for him, &c. on every trifling difficulty, he goes on, 
and says, Yet in countries and places where help 
and good advice is not seasonably to be had, 
Midwives are compelled to do their best, as 
God shall enable them. Pray has God any 
where promised to give more assistance to a country 
than a town Midwoman? Thus the poor country 
Midwomen are to act as God shall enable them; 
but the town Midwomen, as the Doctor &c. shall 
direct, Utrum horum! Pray has God Almighty given 
us the least ground to expect, that he will in-
spire us in an instant, even upon the most urgent 
occasion, with the perfect knowledge of any use-
ful art, only because it would just then be of ser-
|P_6
vice to us? No. But he has told us, that, if we 
want to acquire the knowledge of any useful art, 
we must diligently and assiduously apply ourselves 
to the study of it in the most proper manner we 
can. Dii laborantibus omnia vendunt!Which dan-
gerous and uncertain trials in doth not become 
them to put in practice upon women, where 
no timely assistance need be wanting. Thus 
you see, the Doctor thinks dangerous and un-
certain trials may lawfully be put in practice 
on women in the country, tho' not upon those in 
town, where he and the rest of the Nostrum-
mongers may be had. But, pray, might not 
many of these uncertain and dangerous trials, 
both in town and country, have been prevented, if 
he had endeavoured as much to instruct them how 
to give better assistance themselves, as he has done 
to let them know when to send for him, &c. 
Are not the women's lives in the country as va-
luable as those in town? 

Then he goes on to tell them in what particu-
lar cases they ought to send for him, &c. viz. 
"1. In most wrong births, with or without pain." 
(alias with or without danger or difficulty) 2. All 
floodings with clods, tho' little or no pain, 
whether at full time or not. 3. All convulsions. 
4. Many first labours. 5. And some others;
(i. e. every other case, when the People are sub-
stantial,) viz. tho' the child be right, if little or 
no pain, after the breaking of the waters, and 
the child's not following them in some six or 
ten hours after, require the good advice of, and, 
peradventure, speedy delivery by expert physi-
|P_7
cians clans in this practice. Pray would not expert Sur-
geons in this practice do as well? Is it not evident 
from the Doctor's list of cases, that very few wo-
men (except those in the country, or who are very 
poor) could escape those expert Physicians? viz. He, 
his father, and two brothers. 

But least the charge he has given to the Mid-
women (of sending for him, &c. upon every tri-
fling occasion) should not have weight enough, 
he also threatens the poor suffering women with 
what may happen to them, in case they don't oblige 
their Midwomen to send for them. Let me 
therefore advise the good women, not so readily 
to blame those Midwives who are not backward 
in dangerous cases," (or not dangerous cases,)
to desire advice, least it cost them dear;" (pray 
don't it always cost them dear when they do?) 
by discouraging and forcing them to presume 
beyond their knowledge and strength, As for 
their want of knowledge, I take it to be more their 
misfortune than their fault, because they have 
not yet had such proper opportunities of informing 
themselves, as they ought to have; but as to 
strength, I'm satisfied most of them have enough, 
did they know how to make a proper use of it. 
especially when too many are over confident." 
For this compliment the Midwomen are as much 
obliged to him, as for many others he passes upon 
them. 

In another place he says, If therefore the 
use of hooks by Physicians (pray what business 
have physicians with hooks? Are not pen, ink, 
and paper, their proper instruments? What right 
|P_8
have they then to encroach upon us? Don't they 
make a sad outcry, are not they alarmed as if 
their craft was in danger, when we use pen 
and ink? except in Pauper cases. and Sur-
geons, be condemned, (without thereto neces-
sitated by some monstrous birth, &c.) Now 
you see he is obliged to own, notwithstanding all 
he says to the contrary, that hooks are some-
times absolutely necessary. We can much less 
approve of a Midwife's using them, as some here 
in England boast they do; which rash presump-
tion, in France, would call them in question for 
their lives. The Doctor allows, pag. 5. country 
Midwives are compelled to do their best as 
God shall direct; them: Now supposing that God 
should direct one of them to make use of a croch-
et, in a fit case, and after a proper manner, 
must she be tried for her life for it? Is not this a 
very hard charge upon the poor Midwomen, with-
out any proof? I must diffent so far from the Doc-
tor's opinion, that I believe the hardiest Mid-
woman in London, would tremble at the very 
thought of it, unless they were fully instructed how 
to use it, as—; but for what they may do 
in the country, according to the Doctor's advice, 
above recited, I cannot answer. 

Mr. Mauriceau (pag. 179.) says, A Midwife 
vaunted she was more skilful in her art than any 
Surgeon. Upon which Dr. Chamberlen remarks, 
that, It seems Midwives in other countries, as 
well as England, have that pernicious vanity.
But, pray were there no Midmen then in Eng-
land, who had vaunted they could perform what 
|P_9
they really could not? Vid. Mr. Mauriceau's 26th 
observation, quoted below. 

MR. Mauriceau, pag. 203. If the arm be ad-
vanced as far as the shoulder, &c. Dr. Chamberlen 
remarks, which seldom is, unless an Ignorant 
Midwife tamper with it. Are not these pretty 
compliments? but where is the instruction? Are 
not all practitioners, of the very least experience, 
sensible it often happens without any tampering. 
But notwithstanding he has been so lavish in 
these, and many other places, in censuring 
those good women, yet he winds up his preface 
with a salvo for all, viz. I hope no good 
Midwives will blame me for reprehending the 
faults of Bad ones, who are only aimed at, and 
admonished in this work; and I'm confident 
none but the Guilty will be concerned, and take 
it to themselves, which I desire they may, and 
amend. Is not this cobweb easily seen through? 
Is not this the first time he has mentioned good 
Midwives? 

[}Dr. Chamberlen's account of his secret. }]
HE is not content with amusiing, confound-
ing, nay, and abusing the Midwomen, at 
the same time he makes a shew of teaching them, 
but also serves the Midmen the same sauce; by 
telling them he has a secret, which will do won-
ders, i. e. It will save many children's lives, 
which, they who do not know it, (or something 
as good,) must destroy; but cannot in honour 
(notwithstanding it might save thousands of lives) 
|P_10
discover it even to them, because it might preju-
dice the personal interest of his father and two 
brothers, who only, in all Europe, know it: But 
what they may do in Africa, Asia, &c. this 
deponent sayeth not. His own story is as fol-
lows: My Author, lib. ii. cap. 17. justifies 
the fastening hooks in the head of a child that 
comes right, and yet because of some difficulty 
or disproportion, cannot pass; which I confess 
has been, and is yet the practice of the most 
expert artists in Midwifery, not only in Eng-
land, but throughout Europe. But I can neither 
approve of that practice, nor those delays;
(Pray observe how long he was in attempting to 
deliver that woman at Paris, vid. M. M. obs. 26. 
quoted below; because my father, brothers, 
and self, (tho' none else in Europe as I know,) 
Pray had not Sir David Hamilton more business, 
and as good, if not better success, in the 
practice of Midwifery than he? May we not then 
reasonably suppose, that he either knew his secret, 
or had one of his own, tho' he never made any 
noise about it, which answered as well? have, 
by God's blessing, and our iudustry, attained to, 
and long practised a way to deliver women in 
this case, without any prejudice to them or their 
infants; tho' all others (being obliged, for want 
of such an expedient, to use the common way) 
do, and must endanger, if not destroy one or 
both with hooks. Pray would it not have 
been a grateful return, for God's blessing them 
with so useful a secret, to have communicated it to 
the rest of the Midmen, whereby the destruction 
|P_11
of so many women and children, might have been 
prevented? By this manual operation a labour may 
be dispatched, (on the least difficulty) so that 
on the least difficulty, either to Midwomen or 
Midmen, we must immediately run for one of the 
Nostrum-mongers. with fewer pains, and soon-
er, to the great advantage, and without danger 
both of woman and child.

He is not content with having thus acquainted 
us with the great value of his secret, and who be-
sides himself are possessed of it, in his epistle, but 
also mentions and recommends it over and over, 
ad nauseam usque, through the whole of his remarks 
on this work, for fear the Midwomen should at-
tend Mr. Mauriceau so much, that they should for-
get his Nostrum, E. G. Mr. Mauriceau, pag. 176. 
If there be any case, wherein a Surgeon 
ought to make the greatest reflection, and use 
most precaution in his art, it is this; to know 
whether the infant be alive or dead? Dr. Cham-
berlen remarks, This caution is not so necessary 
to those practitoners which can fetch a child 
coming right, or with the Arm, without hooks 
or sharp instruments, as the translator of 
this book, and his father, and his brothers can.

Mr. Chapman in his essay on Midwifery, 1733. 
says, Dr. Chamberlen's secret was the Forceps. 
Then makes the following quaint observation on 
the fore-mentioned remark: Here is some-
thing very odd methinks, in applying this 
secret to both these cases, as equally service-
able to either, the cases differing so very 
|P_12
widely, and requiring a quite different method: 
For the head presenting, and far advanced, is 
to be taken hold of by the Forceps, and ex-
tracled; when a child which presents an arm, 
is to be turned, and so brought away by its 
feet; i. e. without either hooks or sharp in-
struments. 

Whence its evident, Mr. Chapman did not 
apprehend the Doctor's view in applying his secret 
to the arm as well as the head. It was undoubted-
ly the better to puzzle the cause, the better to con-
ceal his Nostrum, that he applies it to two cases, 
between which there is not the least analogy. He 
might as well have said, it would be of great use in 
extracting the stone, or in drawing teeth. 

MR. Mauriceau, pag. 204. The arm 
is to be twisted off, if the child be dead.
Dr. Chamberlen, Good if the child be dead; 
but it may be always done without.Undoubt-
edly it may be often done without twisting it 
off, but not with his Forceps. Mr. Mauriceau, ibid. 
Before you use the Crotchet, be sure the child is 
dead. Dr. Chamberlen, this caveat is un-
necessary to those who understand the art aright.
i. e. only the Nostrum-mongers. Dr. Chamber-
len, The use of the crotchet may be con-
nived at when the child is dead; but because 
the most careful may often times be mistaken, 
it cannot be approved of; as appears in the 
translator's epistle to the reader. Dr. Chamberlen, 
pag. 226. Tho' the Crotchet cannot hurt a dead 
child, yet it may endanger the woman by slipping:
So may a Lancet, Traphine, or any other instru-
|P_13
ment in the hands of those who don't know how 
to use them.) Wherefore the translator of this 
treatise cannot approve of it, having an easier 
and safer way to do this operation, as he men-
tions in his preface to this book. Dr. Chamber-
len, pag. 227. All this (viz. the use of the 
Crotchet) were to no purpose, if others had the 
art to do it, as the translator can, and mentions 
in his preface to this book.

DR. Chamberlen, pag. 229. Those instru-
ments are very unsafe for the woman;(un-
doubtedly, when in unexperienced hands, other-
wise they are not at all dangerous;) and having 
a better way, I cannot pass them without mani-
festing my dislike. Mr. Mauriceau, pag. 194. 
It's a great question, whether a living child 
ought to be destroyed to save the mother?
Dr. Chamberlen, This question is out of doors, 
for the reason given in the foresaid preface.
I'm afraid this will prove but a very bad reason in 
some cases, notwithstanding it's laid down with 
such a magisterial and dictatorial air, as I shall 
prove at a more proper time. Mr. Mauriceau, 
pag. 195. says, It is always better of two evils 
to choose the least, so we ought always to pre-
fer the mother's life before the child's. Dr. 
Chamberlen, This chapter might be very well 
spared, if every practitioner had the art the 
translator professeth in his epistle, of fetching a 
child, when it comes right, without hooks, or 
turning it.

IF turning will do, there is never any occasion 
for hooks, or for his secret either. Thus you see 
|P_14
with what fulsome repetitions, what nauseous re-
commendations of his Nostrum, he has stuffed his 
remarks; but has not made one remark, that can 
be of any advantage to our Midwomen; and seems 
to have had nothing elfse in view through the 
whole, but to tell them when they ought to send 
for him, and to let them know, that he, &c. 
could serve them better than any body else. 

OUR translator, like all the rest of the Secret-
mongers, has given a better character of his No-
strum, than I fancy it deserves. E. G. He has 
taken a great deal of pains, and used all his art to 
persuade us, that he, &c. can fetch a child, which 
presents right, at all times, and in all circumstances, 
without hooks, or turning, &c. but how this qua-
drates with the two following cases, (one of which 
is translated by the Doctor himself, and the other 
is recorded in Mr. Mauriceau's 26th observation,) 
I leave the reader to judge. 

MR. Mauriceau, pag, 198. tells us, that in the year 1660, while he practised Midwifery in 
the Hotel Dieu, one of the Deputies had a wo-
man whose Child she could not posibly bring 
forth further than its head; therefore called the 
head Midwife to her aid; who likewise used her 
utmost skill but in vain: And when they had 
both thus tir'd themselves in pulling the head, 
I came in accidentally, and they desired me to 
examine, and find the cause why the child could 
not be drawn forth with all their strength, 
which was sufficient to have drawn forth the 
shoulders, if they had been as big again as they 
were; which having considered, I immediately 
|P_15
conceived the difficulty to proceed from some-
thing else: I then put my hand into the womb, 
up to the child's shoulders, which seemed small 
enough to pass with ease, therefore I concluded 
that the hindrance was not there.

After that, I put my hand farther up to-
wards it's belly, which I found very much swel-
led by a dropsy. I therefore told them that it 
was impossible ever to deliver the woman, until 
the water was emptied by piercing the belly: 
But not having a Crotchet in my pocket, I sent 
to another Surgeon of the same hospital, and 
told him the story, adding withal that the child 
could not be born, unless an orifice was made 
to empty the belly: but he would not take my 
advice, imagining he could extract it with his 
hands; but he soon separated the head from 
the shoulders, the Midwives having almost done 
it before. Afterwards he fell to work with his 
Crotchet, and in about three quarters of an hour 
brought away both arms, several ribs, heart, 
and lungs, and tired himself heartily, yet in all 
this time, he had never opened the Diaphragma, 
nor Abdomen, which I advised him to do every 
moment, without which it was impossible to 
draw forth the rest of the body. Then he gave 
me the Crotchet, telling me I might weary my-
self as well as he had done; which I willingly 
accepted, knowing very well, that instead of 
amusing myself, as they had done, by pulling it, 
I ought only to pierce the infant's belly to let out 
the waters, after which all the rest would easily 
follow. I then introduced my left hand as far 
|P_16
as the side of the infant's belly, and then with 
my right guided the Crotchet upon it, to the 
same place, then turned its point, and struck it 
into the infant's belly, so that I made a hole big 
enough to receive the ends of my two fingers, 
with which I stretched the orifice, and the wa-
ters gushed out, so that with one hand I easily 
drew out the rest of the body, to the astonish-
ment of this Surgeon, whom I could never 
persuade that the infant was so full of the dropsy. 
I filled the belly afterwards, through the hole I 
had made, and it held about five quarts. I 
have set down this story, that other Surgeons 
may know how to behave on the like occa-
sions.

Pray what could Dr. Chamberlen have done 
with his Forceps in this case? But the following 
story will more clearly shew, that he himself has 
been foiled, Secret and all. 

[}Mr. Mauriceau's observation xxvi. }]
Of a woman who died with her child in her 
womb, which could not be extracted by an 
English Physician who undertook to deliver 
her.

ON the 19th of August, 1670. I visited a 
little woman, about thirty-eight years of 
age, who had been in labour of her first child 
for four days, the membranes being broke the first 
day of her illness, and yet there was hardly any 
dilatation of the mouth of the womb. I ordered 
|P_17
her to be blooded, and in case that did not 
encrease her pains, to give her a decoction of 
Senna, in order to excite them; which succeed-
ed so well, that next day the womb was suffi-
ciently dilated. Nevertheless, it was nor possi-
ble to deliver her. The infant presented it's 
head, but could not advance into the passage, 
because of the straitness and bad formation of 
the bones of the Pelvis, which made it impossi-
ble for me to introduce my hand tho' I have a 
very small one, or any other instrument where-
with I could deliver her. I therefore declared 
to the good women, that it was not possible to 
deliver her at all, except by the Caesarian section, 
which I did not care to meddle with, &c. But 
soon after I left her, there was an English Phy-
sician, named Chamberlen, recommended by 
somebody to visit her.

When he came and heard how it was, and 
what had passed, he seemed exceedingly sur-
prized that a Man of so much experience, as I was 
reputed to have, could not deliver her; yet, for all 
that, he assured them, that he would deliver her in 
less than half a quarter of an hour, let the diffi-
culty be what it would: Accordingly he set a-
bout the work, but instead of finishing it in half 
a quarter of an hour, as he had promised, he 
worked above three hours, (Secret and all) 
without any intermission, except to breath a 
little now and then. And at last, having 
spent, to no purpose both his strength and art, 
and seeing the poor woman ready to expire in 
his hands, he was obliged to give it up, and 
|P_18
declared also, that it was not possible to deliver 
her. The poor woman died with her child in 
her belly about twenty-four hours after he 
left her: Upon opening the body, I found 
the womb pierced and tore in several places, 
by the instruments that Physician had blind-
ly used without the guidance of his hand, 
which being much larger than mine could 
not be introduced. Nevertheless this Physi-
cian had come from England to Paris, about 
six months before, in hopes of making his for-
tune. He gave it out that he had a particular 
secret for delivering children when the head pre-
sented; and bragg'd that he could lay the most 
troublesome and dangerous in half a quarter of 
an hour. Nay, he had even proposed to the 
king's first physician, that if he would give 
him 10000. crowns he would discover his se-
cret. But the bad success of the fore-mentioned 
case put him so much out of humour, that he 
returned a few days afterwards to England.

Does not this story shew how little dependance 
there is upon secrets, tho' never so positively re-
commended? Does not this shew how cautious 
people ought to be in believing of them? Does 
not this shew, that, tho' they may be really use-
ful in some cases, yet they are not so in all, as 
they commonly pretend? 

Preface. I shall now take leave to offer 
an apology for not publishing the secret I men-
tion we have to extract children without hooks, 
where other artists use them, viz. there being 
my father and two brothers living, that practise 
|P_19
this art, I cannot esteem it my own to dispose 
of,(a pretty and reasonable excuse indeed!)
"nor publish it without injury to them; (but there 
was not a word of this when he was bargaining with the 
French king's first Physician,)and think I have 
not been unserviceable to my country, altho' I 
do but inform them that the fore-mentioned 
three persons of our family, and myself, can 
serve them in these extremities, with greater 
safety than others.

If Ward's Pill, or any other quack medicine, 
was found by experience, to be generally of use in 
this, that, or t'other disease, it may be sent with 
proper directions, to all parts of the kingdom; so 
that the most distant inhabitants would have almost 
the same benefit of it, with those among whom 
Mr. Ward lived; and consequently Mr. Ward 
might very justly say, that (notwithstanding he 
would not discover what his medicine was com-
posed of, because it would be worth so much year-
ly to him and his successors,) yet his country was 
obliged to him, for telling them where they might 
purchase so beneficial a remedy. 

But how few in the whole community could 
be the better for all the manual operations in Mid-
wifery, four Men could perform? Can four Men 
deliver all the good women in England, who want 
their assistance, supposing they were to ride post 
night and day after them? Is there any proportion 
between the benefit the publick would receive from 
the quack medicines, and the secret manual opera-
tions of four Men? What service is it then to the 
country in general, for the Doctor to tell them, 
|P_20
that he and three others can serve them with great-
er safety than other Men? 

Nevertheless I'm far from thinking, that 
the publick has any right to expect, that every 
private Man (who, at a considerable expence, and 
assiduous study, makes any considerable discovery 
in manual operations, which cannot be made uni-
versally useful, as medicines may, and really are, 
except they are fully and distinctly explained,) 
should always communicate Gratis the fruits of his 
labour and expence. No! they ought to be hand-
somely rewarded, not only for the real service they 
have done, but to encourage industry in others. 

But the Doctor offered to discover this secret 
to the French for ten thousand crowns; pray why 
did he not make the same offer to his country? 
Had not his country better have given each of them 
ten thousand crowns, than exposed so many thou-
sands of beautiful women, and innocent children, 
to the danger of hooks, sharp instruments, &c. 
the Doctor exclaims so much against? Surely yes. 

Dr. Chamberlen. pag. 221. says, The Author, 
viz. Mauriceau,) you see was only a Surgeon.
Pray what would he have him be? a Doctor, an 
Apothecary, or what? Are not these operations 
merely chirurgical? who then can be so fit to per-
form them as Surgeons? Are not the Superioris 
sortis #i, who never delivered one of them, as 
capable of directing for them, both before and after 
delivery, as any Doctor or Apothecary who had 
laid several? No doubt of it! they are much more 
capable! and it's very surprizing they don't assert 
their own right, and ours? What then can 
|P_21
Dr. Chamberlen mean by this sneer, this sarcasm? 
Especially when Mr. Mauriceau is then talking as 
much to the purpose, as ever he, or any body else 
did, on that subject, viz. that when a woman has 
a violent flooding, &c. the best way to serve her, 
is to deliver her as soon as possible, whether at full 
time or no? Prove the contrary who can. 

In pag. 172. he explains himself a little more 
plainly. Mr. Mauriceau says, A Surgeon 
ought always to endeavour to bring the chil-
dren alive. Upon which the Doctor makes the 
following most insolent remark, And therefore 
undertake what he can safely perform, and 
what he cannot, leave to others that may,
(pray who be they, Doctors, Apothecaries, Sha-
vers, or Nostrum-Mongers?) for life is not to 
be played with.

Is not the good which Surgeons do their patients 
as evident as the Sun? E. G. When they cut for the 
stone, when they perforate the scull, reduce a luxa-
tion, &c. neither of which can be affected only by the 
strength of nature. But as the learned and honest 
Baglivi frankly owns, It's often doubtful whether 
the cure, supposed to be performed even by Physi-
cians of the first rank, was mostly owing to na-
ture, or the medicines, &c. which they directed.
E.G. "In fevers, small pox, consumptions, &c." 
What ground had he then to charge the Surgeons with 
playing with life? The Doctor owns, pag. 14. That 
Surgeons only practise Midwisery in France;
and so they do, or ought to do, every where else. 

But how far the Doctor went out of his own 
ken, when he talked to Surgeons in such a magi-
|P_22
sterial and dictatorial way, in matters merely chi-
rurgical, the three following cases will evidently 
demonstrate. Case 1. Mr. Mauriceau, pag. 344. 
says, That children's gums ought to be cut 
with a Lancet, tho' Nurses sometimes do it with 
their Nails. Yet our commentator says, A 
thin groat (a small piece of silver) is as good or 
better than either. Whence it's evident, our 
translator was only a Doctor. Notwithstanding he 
takes upon him to direct the Surgeons in such an 
imperious and dictatorial way; yet in this observa-
tion, he betrays himself, and plainly shews, he 
did not understand this very little part of Surgery, 
even so well as the very Nurses. The method he 
proposes is so far from being better than Mauri-
ceau's, he takes upon him so freely and publickly 
to correct, that it is worse than that used by the 
old women, as will appear at sight, to every pro-
per judge. Case 2. Mr. Mauriceau, pag. 227. 
says, When by the first fastning of the Crotchet, 
the head is drawn a little lower, you may loosen 
it out of the first place, to fasten it further up, 
that stronger hold may be taken and so suc-
cessively removing and fastening of it till the head 
is quite born, &c. Dr. Chamberlen, "This is 
needless and dangerous, in case Crotchets be used, 
unless they lose their hold.

Can any thing expose a Man's judgment more 
than finding fault in the wrong place? Would not 
this remark convince any Man that he had never used 
a Crotchet, nay, that he did not know how to use 
it? The Doctor himself allows, that Crotchets are 
absolutely necessary in some cases, and considering 
|P_23
his large share of practice, it's impossible but 
some of these very cases must fall in his way. 
Pray what did he do then? Did he use the Crotchet 
himself? or did he send for a Surgeon to use it for 
him? Case 3. Of a violent Flooding. Mr. Mauri-
ceau, pag. 89. The woman being put into a 
proper posture, the Surgeon having well greased 
his hand, introduces the end of his fingers into 
the mouth of the womb, then opens them gent-
ly to dilate it, (i. e. by little and little, with-
out either great violence or hurry,) wide enough 
to admit his whole hand; then, if the mem-
branes are not broke, let him break them; then, 
tho' the Head presents, let him search for the feet, 
and draw it forth by them, because there is bet-
ter hold, and more easy to deliver by them, 
than by the head, or any other part of the 
body. Dr. Chamberlen, Without it could 
be done without hooks, as mentioned in the 
preface of the translator.

IF this is not puzzling the cause, if this is 
not amusing and confounding people instead of 
instructing them, pray what can be called 
so? Is not bringing the child out by the feet, as 
Mr. Mauriceau directs, bringing it out without 
hooks? Besides, don't every body know, that it 
may be quicker brought away by the feet than by 
the head; and that the sooner the woman is deli-
vered, the sooner the flooding will stop? Is not 
this making good, bad? Is not this finding fault 
where there is none? Don't this prove that 
Mr. Mauriceau was a good and faithful Surgeon, 
and that Chamberlen was only a — Doctor. 

|P_24
Thus, upon the whole, I think it's evident, 
that Dr. Chamberlen's main design, in his preface, 
and notes upon Mr. Mauriceau's book, was to puz-
zle, rather than instruct the Midwomen or Mid-
men, to persuade them, that he, and the rest of 
the Nostrum-mongers, could serve them better 
than any other artists; and to represent Physicians, 
tho' unacquainted with almost every other part of 
Surgery, as fitter persons to deliver women in la-
bour than Surgeons, &c. 

In 1734. Dr. HODY published 225 Cases in Mid-
wifery, written some years before by the late in-
genious and experienced Mr. William Gif-
fard, Surgeon and Man-midwife. In which he 
has given the following account of the Igno-
rance of the Midwomen, and its fatal conse-
quences. 

Case I.I Was fetched to the wife of a chair-
man, and found one arm of the 
child sunk down without the outer orifice, and 
the shoulder and side so engaged, and sunk 
so low, that I could neither return the arm, nor 
with all my strength move the other parts to 
fetch it by the feet. Another Man-midwife
 — had been there before me, who at first 
would not attempt any thing without a sum of 
money was laid down; (a great piece of inhu-
manity too many are guilty of,) but upon assu-
rances that he should be paid, he worked upon 
the poor woman, and left her in a worse con-
dition than he found her. (Thus you see Mid-
|P_25
men are not all witches any more than the 
Midwomen.) However this was the state I 
found her in, which gave me occasion to re-
primand the Midwife, telling her she had not 
sent for help in time, and not till she had work-
ed upon her, which had occasioned those parts 
to be funk so low, and so strongly engaged, 
that I could neither return the arm, nor pass 
my hand (the whole passage being stopped up 
on every side) to fetch it by the feet; which 
might have been very easily done had I been 
sent for in time. The case being so desperate 
at first, I was at a loss where to begin: Her 
pulse was very languid and low, and she was in 
cold sweats, so that I fear'd she would die un-
der the fatigue and pain she must of necessity 
undergo. Then he twisted off the arm, and 
with great difficulty extracted the rest, of the 
infant with his Crotchet; yet after all this 
woman recovered. Q. 1. Whether one in 
fifty recovers after such a job? Q. 2. Whether 
this bad posture of the child, the great suffer-
ing and danger of the mother, might not have 
been prevented, nay, and the child's life saved, 
had a skilful Midwoman attended? 

Case II.The child was born dead, which 
is generally the fate of those children whose 
Placenta offers first, (Madam du Tertre, head 
Midwoman in the Hôtel Dieu at Paris, and Au-
thor of one of the best books on this subject, pub-
lished in 1677. says, the Placenta offering before 
the child, is the most certain sign of its being 
|P_26
dead,[/1./]) if a proper person be not at hand to de-
liver them immediately. Who can be so pro-
per, who is so likely to be in the way as a skil-
ful Midwoman? But as long as they want skill to 
perform it, the child must die before a Midman 
can be brought. 

Case III. The Midwife informed me, that 
the navel-string was thrust into the Vagina, be-
yond the Os internum, but could not inform 
me what other part presented. Many Mid-
wives are ignorant of the method of touching, 
which oftentimes occasions very great misfor-
tunes both to mother and infant, and sometimes 
is the death of both, but most commonly of 
the child (Is not destroying one bad enough?)
which being for some time engaged in a wrong 
posture, and the waters gone off, the Uterus is 
so collapsed, it gives great trouble to the opera-
tor, much more pain to the mother, and very 
often, as I said before, occasions the death of 
the infant; all which may be prevented if a 
skilful operator is sent for in time. But much 
better, if a skilful operatrix attended. 

Case IV. I visited a woman who had been 
some days in labour, and the Midwife affirmed 
that the waters run off the preceding day, and 
that she thought a foot presented, but upon my 
touching I found it to be the hand bent back-
|P_27
wards in the passage, and protruded out of the 
inner orifice up to the shoulder.

Case V. The Midwife told me that one 
hand and the arm was sliped down into the Va-
gina, and that it had laid so for some hours, 
and the waters, she said, were gone of several 
hours before the hand was protruded. I rebuk-
ed her (as he very well might) for not sending 
sooner; she alledged, for excuse, that her labour 
might have succeeded in time: Then I told her 
that it was impossible, in the posture the child 
presented, it could ever be born.

Case VI.The Midwife told me, that one 
child had been born, and another remained be-
hind, that the membranes, with the waters, pres-
sed forwards, and were very tight at every 
pain; but the woman having flooded very much 
after the birth of the first child, the Midwife 
could not tell me what part of the second pre-
sented. I Blamed the Midwife for not sending 
for me sooner, &c. Whereupon I passed up my 
hand, and found the membranes much extend-
ed with the waters, and the legs of the infant 
(which the Midwife knew nothing of, not 
knowing how to touch) pressed forward into 
the Vagina.

Case VII.Upon examining the Midwife, 
at my first coming, how the child presented, she 
answer'd, &c. This convinced me of the Mid-
wife's ignorance in the method and knowledge 
of touching, and I could wish it was not too 
common. I have generally found them igno-
rant in this point, which often occasions the 
|P_28
death both of Mother and infant, (Why did 
not he do his endeavour to amend this great evil? 
What signifies finding fault with them in every 
page without attempting a remedy?) and gives 
a great deal of pain to the Man-midwife.

Case VIII.I was sent for to a woman, 
whose child was brought out to the shoulders, 
where it had stuck for about three hours; the 
Midwife not knowing how to draw out the 
arms and the head. They had also sent for ano-
ther Midwife before I got there, but she knew 
not how to extricate the child out of this snare. 
Then I extracted it, but the child was dead, 
which could not otherwise be expected, since it 
had been so long held in that posture.

Case IX.I first enquired of the Midwife, 
how matters stood in general, but she giving me 
no satisfactory account, I descended to particu-
lars. I then asked her if the membranes were 
broke, and if so, how long before; to which she 
could not give a ready answer, so that I found 
her thoroughly Ignorant. I next enquired how 
long the navel-string had been fallen down; 
Her answer was, several hours. I told her, 
i. e. rebuked her, &c.

Case X. I was sent for to a person, whose
child was born, and the Placenta left behind. 
Upon my coming there, the Midwife told me 
that she had attempted, by all methods she was 
mistress of, to fetch it, but could not succeed: 
Wherefore, considering the length of time, from 
the bringing of the Foetus to my coming, I thought 
no more time ought to be lost; and immediate-
|P_29
ly put up my hand, and found the inner orifice 
so much contracted, that at first I could scarce 
pass up the ends of my two fore-fingers, but af-
ter some time I dilated it so much, that I was 
able to pass my hand, &c.

This Case will shew us, what difficulties 
people often fall into from the Ignorance of the 
Midwife, in not knowing how to pass their 
hands as soon as the Foetus is protruded.

Case XII found the Scalp was extended 
and separated from the Cranium. This I judged 
to have proceeded from the Midwife's top rudely 
handling the head.

Case XII. The Midwife being very igno-
norant, was not able to give me a satisfatory 
account of the case. I found the Labia Pudendi 
very much swell'd, &c. wherefore Irebuked the 
Midwife, telling her, that when she had done 
all the mischief she could, then she persuaded 
them to send for me: This is a common fault 
amongst them, not being willing to have 
further help, 'till matters are come to the last 
extremity.

Case XIII.I thereupon passed up my hand 
into the Vagina, and found the parts somewhat 
swell'd, by the Midwife's too rudely handling 
them.

Case XIV.Upon passing my hand, I 
found the Midwife had been too busy, for 
the arm was sunk low, and much swell'd; not 
knowing better, she had endeavoured to bring 
it away in the posture it presented; whereupon 
I Rebuked her, telling her, that by her so doing 
|P_30
she had made bad work, and shew'd her, that 
it was almost (he might have said altogether)
impossible to bring it away in the posture it 
came in. 

Case XV.This case should be a caution to 
Midwives to send for help in time, when a child 
comes Footling, and not to venture (unless 
they are very skilful) to bring it forwards.
But whose fault is it they are not all very skilful? 
Why are they suffered to practise, who are not 
very skilful? Would not Madam du Tertre have 
laughed at any Man, who should have told her, 
she must not venture to bring a child forwards 
when the feet presents? Are not our women as ca-
pable of being taught as the French women? 

Case XVI.I came, and the Midwife be-
ing a Novice in her profession, was not capable 
of giving proper directions. She should have 
advised the labouring woman to have, kept 
back, as much as possible, her throws, and not 
forced downwards, and she ought to have passed 
her hand up, and pressed against the child's 
buttocks, to retain it from slipping down, when-
ever the pains pressed forwards; (or, which 
would have been much more to the purpose, put up 
her hand, laid hold of the feet, and brought it a-
way by them;) but the Midwife neglecting to 
give this advice, or to act in this manner, I 
found the hip of the infant, with the Scrotum, 
sunk low into the Vagina, and strongly engaged 
between the bones of the Pelvis, so that I could 
not move it by any means.

|P_31
Case XVII.I found things very bad, which 
in a great measure proceded from the Ignorance 
of the Midwife; I therefore rebuked her for her 
carelessness, &c.

Case XVIII.I enquired of the Midwife, 
if the waters were broke, how long they had 
been gone off, and what part presented; She 
told me that the waters had been run off some 
hours, but what part presented she knew not. I 
soon perceived her Ignorance; for upon passing 
my singers, I found the membranes protruded 
by the waters beyond the Os internum, into 
the Vagina, about the bigness os a pig's blad-
der, so that the waters were not gone off, as 
she said, for some hours, and being Ignorant of 
the method of touching, it was impossible she 
could tell what part presented.

Case XIX.I was call'd about six in the 
morning, and the Midwife told me, that the 
Membranes were broke, and the waters flowed 
off about twelve o'clock at night, and that the 
first part which presented was the elbow. I Re-
buked her for staying so long before she sent 
for help, and I soon discovered her Ignorance; 
for she told me that she had delivered several 
children where the arm came first, in the same 
posture, and some were born alive, &c. The 
child was born dead, which I imagined to pro-
ceed from its lying so long in the posture I 
found it, and the Midwife's too rudely pulling 
the arm when it first fell into the passage, in 
hopes, as she thought, to have brought away 
the child in the posture it presented. By her 
|P_32
violent pulling she had almost separated the arm 
from the shoulder.

This is one amongst the Many inconve-
niences that occur from the ignorance of Mid-
wives: Had I been sent for as soon as the mem-
branes were broke, and before the shoulder, by 
reiterated pains, was so strongly locked between 
the bones of the Pelvis, most of my trouble, 
and the child's life might have been saved.
Undoubtedly! or if she had had skill enough to 
have done it herself. 

Case XX.When I came I found the child 
protruded to the hips, which hung out beyond 
the Labia Pudendi, the Midwife told me that 
the waters run off about an hour before; that 
the child presented with the feet first, and that 
when she had brought it to the buttocks, it stuck 
there, nor could she bring it any further. I re-
buked her for not sending at first, when she 
found it to present in a wrong posture; but 
she in excuse, as is usual amongst them, told me, 
that she had brought out many children offering 
in that posture. (She must indeed have been a 
very ordinary Midwife if she had not.) The child 
from its having lain some time so pressed, was 
dead, which, I told her, was very probably ow-
ing to her neglect, in not sending sooner, when 
she was satisfied the child presented wrong.

Case XXI.Upon examination of the child's 
head, I found a Tumour, about the bigness of 
a pigeon's egg, on its upper part, arising, as I 
judged, from the Midwife's too rudely hand-
ling it, or (which is much more probable) it's 
|P_33
lying so long locked between the bones. But 
it's their way to haul the Midwomen in, head and 
shoulders, guilty or not guilty. 

Case XXII.I Rebuked the Midwife for 
not sending sooner, telling her the danger she 
had exposed the poor woman to by her delay: 
She in excuse, answered me, that she had never 
had such an accident before, altho' she had been 
a Midwife above eleven years; however I found 
she was very ignorant.

Case XXIII.This case (viz. the Placenta 
being lest behind, occasioned a flooding) should 
be a caution to all Midwives not to delay send-
ing early, and not depend too far on their own 
skill and experience; for it's plain this poor 
woman died a Martyr to either the Midwife's 
Ignorance, or vain Opinion of her own Self-
sufficiency, which too much prevails amongst 
them.

Case XXIV.Passing my hand into the 
Vagina, I found the arm bent and broke, 
by the Midwife's too rudely handling it. The 
child was born dead, which proceeded, as I 
judged, from its long lying in so uneasy a 
posture, and from the Midwife's Ignorance, in 
not knowing how to keep up the arm, &c.

Case XXV.Men-midwives frequently find 
great difficulty in passing their hand into the 
womb, when, from the Ignorance of the Mid-
wife, they are obliged to fetch the Placenta after 
the child has been born some time, the Os inter-
num being upon these occasions generally very 
|P_34
much contracted. Pray is not a Midwoman's 
hand easier passed at first, than a Midman's at last. 

Case XXVI.One foot presented; but the 
Midwife (thinking herself capable of delivering 
the woman, being in her own opinion very Self-
sufficient, altho' she was very ignorant,) would 
not at first send for assistance, &c.

Case XXVII.As soon as the Midwife found 
that the hands presented, she sent for me. This 
is what Midwives seldom do; (a black swan 
indeed!) trusting too much to, and depending upon 
their own Sufficiency, which very often occa-
sions the loss of the child, and sometimes of the 
mother.

Case XXVIII.The Midwife's Ignorance, 
in not knowing how to pass her hand, occasion'd 
this uneasiness.

Case XXIX.This is one among the many 
misfortunes that attend a Man-midwife, when he 
he is sent for too late, proceeding from the neg-
ligence, supineness, ignorance, or self-sufficiency 
of the Midwife; which last prevails in most of 
them, and is very often the occasion of the loss 
either of the mother or child, or sometimes 
both.

Case XXX.The Ignorance of the Midwife, 
in not knowing how to keep up the womb from 
being forced before the head so low into the Va-
gina, was what added so much to my difficulty 
in delivering this woman.

Case XXXI. When I came, I found all 
but the head was protruded beyond the Labia 
Pudendi, but that stuck above, altho' the Mid-
|P_35
wife had pulled so strongly, that she had near 
separated the body from the head. The Mid-
wife, being Ignorant, did not take care to turn 
the child's face towards the Spine of the mother 
as the body advanced. However, I brought it 
out in a minute's time, this surprized all that 
were present, because the Midwife had been 
working above an hour, without making any 
advance. Had I been there early, I might very 
probably have saved the life of the child, but 
Self-sufficiency, join'd with an idle Notion that 
they suffer in their character if they send for a 
Man's assistance, generally prevents most Mid-
wives from sending early, by which they too 
often endanger the lives of both mothers and 
children, and give no small trouble to the Man-
midwife.

Case XXXII.The Midwife could not fetch 
the Placenta, for as she was ignorant in the me-
thod of passing her hand into the Uterus, up to 
the body of the Placenta, to examine whether it 
adhered to it, she had only pulled by the end of 
the string which hung out, and so had very 
near broke it close to the Placenta; she had 
made no Ligature upon the end of the string, 
therefore a Hemorrhage had ensued, and the 
woman had lost a great quantity of blood. Mid-
wives very often depend too much upon their 
own judgment, and think themselves Self-suffi-
cient, so that they postpone sending for help in 
time, whereby the poor women become Victims 
to their Ignorance or Self-conceit.

|P_36
Case XXXIIIThe Child's arm presented 
several hours before I was sent for; upon which 
I rebuked the Midwife for not sending sooner; 
but she, to justify herself, had the Assurance to 
to tell me, that she had brought out several 
children presenting in that manner; whereupon I 
shewed her the impossibility of it, and advised
her for the future always to send for help, as 
soon as she should find the hand to present first, 
and not, by pulling the hand, draw it further 
down, and engage the shoulder in the passage, 
as she had now done. Pray would it not have 
been much more seasonable advice to have shewn 
her how to pass her hand, and get hold of the 
feet, &c. 

Case XXXIV.The Nurse came and told 
me the child was born, but the Midwife was 
soiled in her attempts to fetch away the Placenta. 
I went, and found the Midwife was both igno-
rant of the cause of its being retained, and the 
method of passing the hand to extract it; yet 
I brought it away whole in less than half a mi-
nute's time, which much surprized both the wo-
man and the by-standers, the Midwife having 
spent so much time without being able to effect 
it. Sometimes a Man gets more credit by do-
ing nothing than by a difficult operation! 

Case XXXV.The Man-midwife's being 
sent for so late, too often proceeds from the Igno-
rance or Self-sufficiency of the Midwife, (but 
oftener from the modesty of the women, covetousness, 
or real poverty of the men, &c.) who either 
not knowing how to behave in difficult cases, 
|P_37
or fearing she should suffer in her character 
should she desire assistance, puts off the calling 
in of a Man-midwife to the last extremity, so 
that the mother and child too often become vic-
tims either to her negligence or ignorance.

Case XXXVI.The Midwife depending 
upon her own Sufficiency, (altho' she was very 
ignorant) had let the child advance too far, 
without taking care to turn and bring the face 
backwards towards the Os Sacrum, and had for 
some time endeavoured to bring out the head, 
but to no purpose; wherefore I was at last sent 
for, and found the parts very dry, and some-
what swelled, by the rude Handling of the 
Midwife.

Case XXXVII.The woman had been in 
labour forty-eight hours; the Midwife being 
very Ignorant, could neither tell me how the 
Child presented, nor at what time the mem-
branes broke, but answered me, according to 
her dialect, that it was a dry labour.

Case XXXVIII.The child was brought 
into the world all but the head, where it had 
stuck two or three hours before I came; the 
Midwife being very Ignorant, was not able to do 
the business herself, nor would she send for assi-
stance in time, so that the child was lost, and 
the mother narrowly escaped.

Case XXXIX.The Midwife, in attempt-
ing to bring away the Placenta, had inverted 
the Uterus, for I found the whole body of the 
Uterus, with the Placenta, adhering to it's Fun-
dus, hanging out beyond the Labia Pudendi; 
|P_38
I Rebuked the Midwife for not sending 
sooner, and told her, that she, thro' her Igno-
rance, was the immediate cause of this woman's 
death. Before I examined her, the Midwife 
told me, that the Placenta was partly brought 
out, being ignorant that she had also pulled out 
the womb, &c.

CASE XL. But the Midwife by pulling the 
Navel-string too rudely, had broke it off near 
the Placenta, which was left in the womb. 
As soon as I came, I passed up my hand, where 
I found the Placenta entirely separated from the 
Uterus, and partly protruded into the Vagina, 
so that I readily brought it away, and in so short 
a time, that the people that were present were 
greatly surprized. Had the Midwife under-
stood how to have passed her hand, she might 
easily have brought away the burden before; 
and for want of this knowledge, some women 
fall into violent floodings, whence faintings, 
convulsions, and death. A wonderful opera-
tion indeed! But does she deserve the Name of a 
Midwoman who could not have extracted it as 
quick as he? 

Case XLI.Had I been sent for before the 
membranes were broke, the waters passed off, 
the arm slipped down, and the back part of the 
shoulder so rivetted, I might not only have pre-
served the Child, but prevented the Mother's 
suffering so much pain, and have likewise saved 
myself much fatigue and trouble. Without 
doubt! 

|P_39
It's too true, that many Midwives are Igno-
rant "of the method of touching," (and it's as true 
they might with very little trouble be taught;) and 
therefore are incapable of judging in what man-
ner the Child presents, until an arm, or some 
other part is protruded into the Vagina, which 
is often so locked between the bones of the Pel-
vis, that it is scarce possible to remove it; and 
too often they depend so much upon their own 
sufficiency, and delay sending for assistance in 
time, that both the mother and child, but more 
frequently the latter, die martyrs to their pre-
sumption.

Case XLII. I was sent for about two in 
the morning, the Midwife had delivered the 
Child about six the evening before, but not be-
ing able, notwithstanding all her endeavours, to 
bring away the Placenta, she at last left the 
woman, telling her, that it would in time come 
away, and that she had known it retained four-
teen days without any inconveniency; but as 
this was a doctrine I was a stranger to, and be-
ing on the contrary well satisfied that inconve-
niencies might attend, should it not be speedily 
drawn away; therefore —.

Case XLIII.The child's arm was slipped 
out into the Vagina, which, as soon as the Mid-
wife observed, who was first sent for, she pro-
posed that a Man-midwife should be sent for, 
telling those that were present, that it was not a 
Midwife's business; whereupon another Midwife 
was sent for, who pretended to do the work of a 
Man-midwife, and at first gave them assurances 
|P_40
that she would deliver her, but after she had 
worked upon her for half an hour, or longer, 
puting her into several postures, as kneeling, 
standing, &c. she left her in a much worse con-
dition than she found her; for being ignorant of 
the method of delivery, when a child offered in 
the manner this did, she truly had endeavoured 
to draw the child forward in the same posture it 
presented, whereby she had drawn the hand out, 
and part of the arm, beyond the Labia Pudendi, 
and almost separated it at the shoulder. The 
temerity, joined to the ignorance of this Mid-
wife, very much encreased the difficulty of lay-
ing her. If I had been sent for in time, I might 
with much more ease have delivered the woman, 
and withal have saved the Child. I have meet 
with some Midwives, who have had the igno-
rance and assurance to tell me, that they have 
deliver'd children thus presenting, without turn-
ing and bringing them by the feet.
