
|P_3
[}A 
REPLY
TO 
Mr. Douglass's Short Account 
of Midwifery, &c.}]
[^Decorative frame around the letter "M".^]MR. Douglass his short Account 
of the State of Midwifery in 
London and Westminster, in 
which he has endeavoured to 
cast a Cloud of Reproach over 
the Characters of those that practise this 
noble and necessary Branch of Physick, but 
particularly my own, need not have remain-
ed so long unanswered, could I have per-
swaded myself it had deserved it. 

|P_4
Malicious Productions are generally best 
despised; but lest Silence should be look'd 
upon as an Argument of Guilt, as in these 
Cases by the Weak it sometimes is, and 
Mr. Douglass should be encourag'd to deal 
farther in Calumny and Aspersion, I am at 
length induced to give him a Reply, 
which I shall at once enter upon, without 
farther Preface or Preamble. 

To begin then with his Dedication:
The only Motives of Dedications seem to 
be, either to submit one's Performance to 
a proper Judge, to make some small re-
turn of Gratitude for Benefits receiv'd; or 
else to curry Favour. Now, as the Ho-
nourable and worthy Lady, to whom Mr. 
Douglass has dedicated his Book, cannot 
possibly be supposed to be a Judge of its 
Merit; and, in all probability, never con-
ferr'd the least Favour upon the Author,
the Reader cannot well be mistaken in con-
jecturing what was Mr. Douglass's true 
Drift in his Dedication.

His Quibble, how a Man can be a 
Wife, without being an Hermaphrodite?
Whether a Maid may not be taught the 
Art of delivering Women, and yet be no 
Wife? That Widows lay Women, and yet 
are not Wifes, and his Query about Girl-
Midwifes, are too low and trifling to deserve 
|P_5
a serious Answer, and seem rather to be 
the product of a pert Sufficiency, than a 
sound Judgment. They are rather Indica-
tions of one who was willing to cut him-
self out Work for criticising at all Events, 
than of a cool and sober Reasoner. 

In answer to his, I shall beg leave to 
put the following Queries.

1. If the Term Midwifery is properly ap-
plied to the Practice of that Art, when 
in the Hands of either Sex, why may 
not either Man or Woman so practi-
sing, be in Propriety of Speech call'd a 
Midwife?
2. Is not the Word Midwifery rather ex-
pressive of Practice on a Wife, who on-
ly is presum'd to want the Assistance of 
a Man or Woman in the present Case, 
than of the Sex of the Person practising? 
3. On receding from the common Form 
and Custom of Speech in this Case, is 
not the supposed Absurdity exchang'd 
for Unintelligibility? That is, what Idea 
can be fix'd to, what Etymology found 
for the new Term Midman and Mid-
woman?
The Word Midman, he owns himself, 
is not an over-neat Expression, and it cer-
|P_6
tainly carries (to use his own Words) more 
Nonsense in the very Front of it, than the 
Term he has endeavoured to explode. 
Custom or Use hath always the Effect of 
a Law;

Quem penes arbitrium est & jus & norma loquendi. 
Hor. 
And what is Language but a customary and 
receiv'd use of Words? So that we may 
see the Term Man-Midwife may be de-
fended, both from Custom and Propriety,
and will doubtless be in use long after Mr. 
Douglass himself shall be forgotten. 

In Page 3. Mr. Douglass falls very foul 
on the Character of the celebrated Dr. 
Chamberlen, representing him as puzzling
and confounding the Art he profess'd, to 
the Advantage of most of the greatest 
Families in this Kingdom, rather than im-
proving it; and very indecently, and un-
justly too, brands him as an artful and 
insinuating Translator. He says, he rather 
darkens, than explains his Author's (Mau-
riceau's) Meaning; and confidently affirms, 
all the additional Knowledge he was the 
Author of, to be only to tell the World, 
that He, and his Family, can assist Women 
in Labour better than any body else, and 
gives him the mean Epithet of a Nostrum-
monger. (Page 4.) He pronounces every 
thing with an ipse dixit, like a second 
Aristotle, and sets himself up at once, 
|P_7
both for Judge and Jury. The late learn-
ed Dr. Friend, in his Epistle to Dr. Mead, 
about Purging in the Small Pox, gives Dr. 
Chamberlen a very different Character from 
Mr. Douglass, speaking of him as one most 
skilful in the Art he profess'd; (Hist. 5.) 
Whence we may plainly see, how different 
the Character of the same Person is, when 
drawn by real and pretended Judges. 

P. 5. He taxes him with perverting 
Mr. Mauriceau's Design by his Translation, 
and having his own Literest at heart more 
than that of the Midwomen, as he ridicu-
lously terms them. 

He accuses him of coaxing the Mid-
women, and yet in the same Sentence 
coaxes them himself, and pays a fulsome 
Compliment to the Qualifications of the 
Town Midwomen above those in the Coun-
try. P. 5. The Town Midwomen may 
possibly (some of them) become his Pupils,
when he gives his intended Lectures, and 
so ought in Prudence to be well spoken 
of. But those in the Country being too 
remote for this extraordinary Advantage, 
will, for aught I can see, in his Opinion, 
still labour under the Imputation of being 
unqualified ('till his Scheme for having Mid-
men to instruct the Midwomen in Country 
places can take Effect) unless their Affairs 
can permit them to take a Journey to Lad
|P_8
Lane, where, it seems, the only Person pro-
per to instruct them is to be met with. 

Upon Dr. Chamberlen's saying, "that 
in Countries and Places where Advice 
is not seasonably to be had, Midwifes 
are compelled to do their best, as God 
shall enable them (P. 5.)" which is a 
common Expression for a conscientious 
discharge of their Duty, according to the 
best of their Abilities. Mr. Douglass takes 
occasion here, to cut a very indecent Joke
upon the Deity, by asking, if God has any 
where promised to give any more Assistance 
to a Country, than a Town Midwoman?
In the next place, he substitutes God and 
the Doctor acting as two equal Beings; 
and then, to prove that the Divine God-
head will reward us with the Knowledge 
of any useful Art, in Proportion to our 
own honest Diligence and Assiduity, which 
in holy Writ he has assured us he will; 
or, which is the same thing, to prove a 
point of Revelation, he quotes a Passage 
from a Heathen Poet; Dii laborantibus om-
nia vendunt: thereby making mention of 
false Gods in the plural Number, for what
 the true and one God only can perform. 
Risum teneatis? Upon Dr. Chamberlen's 
advising the good Women not to blame 
those who are not backward in dangerous 
Cases, to desire Advice, lest it cost them 
dear; he indecently asks: If it does not 
|P_9
always cost them dear when they do?Al-
luding, I presume, to the Gratifications u-
sually given in such Cases; notwithstanding 
he advances, a little farther, that a SUR-
GEON ought to be well satisfied for any 
Improvement in, or Invention relating to, 
a manual Operation, P. 20. Is not De-
livery, wherever the Help of either Man 
or Woman is required, in the strictest Sense 
a manual Operation? And if so, why must 
not a Physician be rewarded for his Trou-
ble, as well as a Surgeon. But Self, like 
Oil, will be always uppermost. 

In the same Page (the 7th.) the Plot of 
Mr. Douglass's whole Performance begins to 
open, when he says, that the Midwomen's
want of Knowledge is more their Misfortune
than their Fault, because they have not yet 
had such proper Opportunities of informing 
themselves as they ought to have. But 
now it must hereafter be their Fault more 
than their Misfortune, if they are not bet-
ter qualify'd, after knowing where the Source 
of all Knowledge in Midwifery is to be 
found. This is the first Act of Mr. Dou-
glass's Farce; and in the succeeding ones 
the Plot will unravel itself more and more, 
so as to be well understood by the dullest 
Reader, unless I am much mistaken. 

He asking (Pag. 8.) "Whether Physi-
cians don't always make a sad Out-cry, 
|P_10
and are not alarm'd as if their Craft
was in danger, when Surgeons use Pen
and Ink, except in Pauper Cases," is 
an indecent and false Reflection on the 
Gentlemen of the Faculty. Herein he 
brands Physick, that glorious Science, with 
the ignominious Name of a Craft; as if 
it were only a knavish Combination of 
Men to get Money, and at the same time 
openly taxes them with Covetousness, and 
Hardness of Heart, in denying their Ad-
vice to Paupers. It is well known, that 
all the Gentlemen of that Profession, 
whose Advice is worth having, are very 
charitable, and willing to relieve the di-
stressed Poor, without any View or Ex-
pectation of Gratification. And where he 
can give me an Instance of one Surgeon's
curing a Wound, setting a Fracture, or re-
ducing a dislocated Limb, for nothing, I'll 
undertake to bring him five Physicians
in this Town that have attended in the 
most noisome and contagious Distempers, 
without the least Desire of Reward: Nay, 
so far from it, they have relieved the 
Poor they have thus generously cur'd, 
with Money and other Necessaries out of 
their own private Bounty. But I shall 
leave this to the Resentment of those to 
whom it belongs. 

In the same Page he says, that the 
Doctor allows Midwives are compell'd to 
|P_11
do their best, as God shall direct them; 
to which he replies: Now supposing God 
should direct one of them to make use of a
Crotchet, in a fit Case, and after a proper 
manner, must she be try'd for her Life for 
it? Which is another shocking Joke upon 
the Godhead, equal, if not superior to that 
before observed. 

Here too is another Coax to the Lon-
don Midwomen, that the hardiest of them 
would tremble, upon his Belief, at the 
very thought of a Crotchet, unless they 
were fully instructed how to use it. But 
poor unfortunate Country Midwomen! he 
cannot pretend to answer for them: They 
are at too remote a distance from Lad Lane
to come to his Lectures; and if upon 
this melancholy occasion I may be allow'd 
to borrow a Scrap of Latin from him, 
proh dolor! O lack! O lack! 

Page 9. Mr. Douglass asks, if Dr. Cham-
berlen's Cobweb is not easily seen thro'?
Now, were I disposed to Ill-nature, with 
how much more Justice might I apply 
this Saying to his own? 

Page 12. He seems to own my Obser-
vation on Dr. Chamberlen's Secret just. But 
I was unwilling, like Mr. Douglass, to make 
any farther Remark upon it; and thought, 
|P_12
what I said sufficient, without an unman-
nerly Freedom. 

Page 13. He bestows upon Dr. Cham-
berlen the ignominious Title of a ma-
gisterial and dictatorial Writer. 

Not content with this, in the next Page 
(14.) he very candidly calls him, a ful-
some Repeater, a nauseous Recommender of 
his Nostrum, a Writer that has not made 
one Remark to the Advantage of Mid-
women, and one who seems to have had 
nothing else in view, but to tell them when 
they ought to send for him, and to let them 
know, that he, &c. could serve them 
better than any body else. All which may 
be reckoned as Proofs of Mr. Douglass's 
want of Candour and good Manners. And 
now to make use of his own Words, utrum 
horum, p. 54. 

Page 20. He owns, that Surgeons who 
have made any considerable Discovery in 
manual Operations, which cannot be made 
universally useful, as Medicines may, and 
really are, unless they are fully and di-
stinctly explain'd, should always commu-
nicategratis the Fruits of their Labour 
and Expence. No, says he, they ought 
to be handsomely rewarded, not only for 
the real Service they have done, but to 
|P_13
encourage Industry in others. Why then 
does he accuse me for keeping the use of 
the Fillet a Secret, which is in the strictest 
Sense a manual Operation, and one that 
cannot be made universally useful, as Me-
dicines may? Indeed he has here spoke my 
own private Sentiments; in this we en-
tirely agree: and I presume he will hard-
ly hereafter ask me, why I don't com-
municate it? He himself, it seems from 
his own Words, cannot expect it gratis;
so that he must first tell me what he will 
be pleased to offer, before, we can come 
to any other Terms. However, for his 
Comfort, I promise him to be more rea-
sonable than he says Dr. Chamberlen was 
with the French King's Physician, p. 19. 
and to be contented with less than Ten 
thousand Crowns; tho' in Proportion to 
the Superiority Mr. Douglass always seems 
to think Surgeons have over Physicians, I 
ought at least to insist upon Twenty thou-
sand. 

Page 21. He says Dr. Chamberlen is in-
solent, and there very candidly ranks Do-
ctors, Apothecaries, Shavers, and Nostrum-
mongers, all together; but has wisely left 
the Surgeons, and consequently himself, out 
of the Number, as being superioris sortis
(still to borrow a little more of his Learn-
ing) to Doctors and Apothecaries. And now 
the Town has been informed of their su-
|P_14
perior Merit, I hope no body will dare, 
after this publick Notification, to refuse 
them their proper Homage, upon pain of 
Mr. John Douglass's Displeasure. 

In the same Page he puts a Question 
which no body ever denied: Whether the 
Good which Surgeons do their Patients be 
not as evident as the Sun? E. g. When 
they cut for the Stone, perforate the Scull,
reduce a Luxation, &c. But it is doubt-
ful, it seems, from Baglivi, whether the 
Cures suppos'd to be performed by Phy-
sicians, even those of the first Rank, are 
mostly owing to Nature, or the Medicines, 
&c. which they directed. No one, that 
I know of, has ever question'd the Good 
which Surgeons do in their own proper 
Profession; but I am afraid, when they 
go beyond their Last, they'll doubly ve-
rifyBaglivi's Saying of the Physicians, and 
do more Harm than they are capable of 
foreseeing. Surgeons, he observes, only 
practise Midwifery in France; and so, says 
he, they ought to do every where else.
What then in his Wisdom he will propose 
to be done with such Physicians as are en-
gag'd in this Profession, I know not, un-
less he will generously procure them to 
be promoted to the Dignity of Shavers
(among which he just now chose to rank 
them) for which the Faculty ought doubt-
less to be extreamly thankful. 

|P_15
A little after, he accuses the Doctor of 
going out of his Ken; but why? Only 
because he pretends to advise the Surgeons.
And in the next Page (22.) to be even 
with him for this Presumption, affirms, 
that the Doctor did not understand that 
very little part of Surgery, the Method of 
cutting Childrens Gums, so well as the 
very Nurses.

In the same Page he hints, as if the 
Doctor was not appris'd of the use of the 
Crotchet; and in the next Page (23.) 
concludes, that Mr. Mauriceau was a good 
and faithful Surgeon, and Chamberlen only 
a — Doctor, with a long Dash before 
it. It is to be hop'd, Mr. Douglass may 
so far overcome his Modesty, as in the next 
Edition of his elaborate Performance, to 
fill up the Blanks that are in this. If the 
Antithesis here is to hold good, and Mr. 
Mauriceau was a good and faithful Surgeon,
which I will not deny, the contrary Cha-
racter must necessarily fall upon Dr. Chamber-
len as a Physician. But how far Mr. Dou-
glass is capable of judging of the Qualifi-
cations of a Physician, or who set him up 
for a Censor, I must leave the Faculty to 
determine. 

Page 24. He sums up the whole he 
has to say in relation to Dr. Chamberlen,
|P_16
in telling us, that his main Design, in his 
Preface and Notes upon Mr. Mauriceaus 
Book, was to Puzzle, rather than in-
struct the Midwomen or Midmen; and to 
persuade them, that He, and the rest of 
the Nostrum-mongers, as he ignominiously 
calls them, could serve them better than 
any other Artists. 

Now, is not this a very fine Character 
of a Physician, who was allow'd by all 
proper Judges, to be a Man of great Ho-
nour and Abilities? If what he would in-
sinuate be believd, must not the Doctor 
appear viler than a common Pick-pocket
or Street-robber, wilfully to puzzle and mis-
lead People in Matters relating to Life and 
Death? But what seems to stick most 
upon Mr. Douglasss Stomach, as a thing 
he can no ways digest, is the Doctor's re-
commendingPhysicians as fitter Persons to 
deliver Women than Surgeons. Will Mr. 
Douglass pretend to say, that the Surgeons
have more Knowledge, Learning, and Abi-
lities than the Gentlemen of the Faculty? 
If not, how come Surgeons to be more
qualified for the Art of Midwifery than 
Physicians? But Self is here to be con-
cerned; and Mr. Douglass seems inclin'd 
for the common Good, to turn those il-
literate People the Physicians out of Pra-
ctice, pointing out the Occupation he thinks 
|P_17
them most fit to be employ'd in, under the 
laudable Profession of Shavers. 

From Dr. Chamberlen, Mr. Douglasspro-
ceeds to Mr. Giffard, Surgeon, another late 
Writer in Midwifery; for it seems they must 
all feel his critical Lash. But as I shall leave 
the Defence of Mr. Giffard to his Publisher, 
and Reviser, the ingenious Dr. Hoddy, who is 
much more capable of doing it than myself, I 
shall be short in my Remarks on this Head. 

First then, upon Mr. Giffards ingenuously 
relating, "That a Man-Midwife had work'd 
upon a poor Woman, and left her in a worse
Condition than he found her," he makes this 
paultry Witticism, in a Parenthesis, That Mid-
men are not at all Witches any more than the 
Midwomen.

Pag. 25. A little after, upon Mr. Giffards 
saying, that the Fate of those Children, whose 
Placenta offers first, is Death, if a proper Person 
be not at hand to deliver them immediately, he 
subjoins, who can be so proper, or likely to be 
in the Way, as a skilful Midwoman? and yet at 
the same time he observes, that as long as they 
want Skill to perform it, the Child must die be-
fore a Midman can be brought. Now where the 
good Women are to meet with this extraordi-
nary Skill, the Reader will see in the Sequel. 

Again, upon Mr. Giffard's candidly saying, "
That Mischiefs may be prevented by a 
|P_18
skilful Operator, if sent for in Time," he 
replies, but much better if a skilful Operatrix
attended; thereby giving the Old Women the 
Preference before the Surgeons, which, as it 
does not seem to have been Mr. Douglass's 
Drift, must be look'd upon as an unwary Con-
cession.

Pag. 28. He asks what signifies finding 
fault with the Midwives in every Page with-
out attempting a Remedy? And Pag. 33. 
affirms, that it is our Way to haul the Mid-
women in Head and Shoulders, guilty
or not guilty. To which I shall only reply, 
that one, if not the only, Method of attempt-
ing a Remedy, is, to find fault where they de-
serve it, and strictly, without Favour or Pre-
judice, to shew them their Errors; without 
which, they will never be much improv'd. 
But that we haul them in, as he expresses him-
self, Head and Shoulders, guilty or not guilty,
is what Mr. Douglass ought first to have prov'd,
before he had so roundly and uncharitably 
chargd us with it. 

Pag. 30. He asks if our Women are not as 
capable of being taught as the French Women? 
I answer in the Affirmative, and beg he would 
tell me, who ever made a Question of it? 

Pag. 36. Upon Mr. Giffard's observing, 
what indeed is but too true, that the Men-
Midwife's being sent for, so late, too often pro-
ceeds from the Ignorance or Self-sufficiency of 
|P_19
the Midwife, he excuses them, by affirming, 
that it is oftener from the Modesty of the Wo-
men, Covetousness, or real Poverty of the Men,
&c. Thus you fee his Pupils, the Midwomen,
are infallible, and the Saddle is to be plac'd on 
any Horse rather than the right one. Had 
Mr. Douglass long practis'd the Art of Mid-
wifery, he would have been sufficiently sensi-
ble, that many Men-Midwives have been hin-
der'd from being sent for in Cases of the ut-
most Extremity, where the Sufferers were wil-
ling enough to have had superior Advice, and 
the Husbands neither covetous nor poor.

Pag. 39. He says, it is true that Women 
may be taught the Method of touching with 
very little Trouble. Now if he makes the same 
Concession in relation to the other Branches of 
Midwifery, it is to be hop'd his Lectures may 
be heard at a very little Expence, which is a 
Consequence possibly he was not aware of. 

From Mr. Giffard, Mr. Douglass advances 
to take notice of my own Essay upon Mid-
wifery, first publish'd in 1733. and after I have 
dwelt so long in defending the Character of the 
two fore-mention'd Gentlemen, whose Shades 
are no way able to answer for themselves, I 
hope I shall not be thought too partial if I 
should now endeavour to defend my own, 
against Mr. Douglass's trifling and unjust As-
persions. 

|P_20
In the first place, he charges me with com-
plimenting the Midwomen, because I wrote a 
Book for their Improvement, and thought that 
all the Treatises, hitherto written on this Sub-
ject, were calculated more for the Instruction 
of my own Sex than the other. Pag. 41. This 
he affirms to be a Mistake, because, he says, 
Madam Du Tertre composed her Book for the 
Use of the Midwives Apprentices in the Hotel 
Dieu, and Madam Lovys Burgeois's Book was 
translated into English, and put forth for the 
sole Use of Midwives. Now as to the first, I 
presume it never was translated (from his own 
Pretensions to undertake it) and I do not pre-
tend to understand the French Language. As 
to the other, I never saw it, or heard of it before. 

Upon my saying, "That I have daily, dur-
ing the Space of above twenty Years Prac-
tice, seen many fatal Mistakes committed by 
Midwives," he asks, what Sort of Midwives 
these must have been, who committed fatal 
Mistakes, every Day, for above twenty Years 
together? By Daily, I did not think I should 
be understood every particular Day, but that 
I had frequently seen such fatal Practices, as 
himself doubtless would, had he ever been 
conversant in the Practice of that Art he 
would have the World believe him so expert 
in. Nor can I help observing in this Place, 
that Mr. Douglass cannot be a proper Person 
to instruct others, as not being Master of 
|P_21
the Art himself. He then puts a Quere, 
how are the civil Magistrates to be appriz'd of 
their Mal-practice, if the honest Testimonies of 
such as are call'd in upon them, and are Wit-
nesses and Judges of it, are not to be regarded? 
How are the Women themselves to be made 
sensible of their Errors if their Superiors are 
denied the Liberty of reproving them, when 
faulty, and freely professing the Truth? If the 
Men are to be blam'd for their Integrity and 
Impartiality, and accus'd of hauling the Wo-
men in Head and Shoulders, guilty or not 
guilty, whenever they blame the Midwives for 
their Faults, Mr. Douglass's Quere, in relation 
to the civil Magistrates, is like for ever to re-
main unanswer'd. 

Again, upon my delivering it as my Opi-
nion, "That such Mistakes could not have 
happen'd had they ever read a Treatise so 
properly adapted to their Capacities, and at 
the same time so full and plain as I hop'd 
my own to be," he asks, with his wonted 
Candour, whether, if they had read Madam 
Du Tertre's little Book, they would not have 
found it more properly adapted to their Capa-
cities, as full and plain, and her Sentiments 
more accurately expressed? To which I reply, 
as having never seen, nor been able to under-
stand her Book, if I had; that I cannot tell.
Tho' at the same time I must, in justice to my-
self, observe, that I cannot see what relation 
this has to the Matter in Dispute; nor can 
Madam Du Tertres little Book, being as full 
|P_22
and plain, or more accurately express'd, than 
mine, hinder mine from being full and plain
too, which is all that I have asserted. 

Besides, if forty Persons, as well as Madam 
Du Tertre, had made the same Improvements 
and Observations in Practice, and wrote them 
in a Language I do not understand how does 
that detract from, or lessen any thing I ad-
vance? A candid Person would think that it 
rather confirmd it. 

In the next place he taxes me with having 
the same Aim he has the Assurance to assert 
Dr. Chamberlen had; namely, to tell the Mid-
women, when, and in what particular Cases to 
send for my superior Advice, and not to instruct 
them how to give better Assistance themselves.
After the very indecent Freedom he has taken 
with the Character of Dr. Chamberlen, I can-
not wonder at any he can take with mine, as 
most willingly owning my own Inferiority. But 
before Mr. Douglass had tax'd me with this un-
charitable Way of proceeding, he ought to 
have been better acquainted with me than he 
seems to be, and to have prov'd, that I have 
not laid down any Rules for the Improvement 
and Advantage of Midwives. Will he affirm 
that I have advanc'd nothing towards their In-
struction? If so, let him ingenuously prove it, 
not by low and impertinent Cavils, but cool
and sober Arguments, and not arrogate to him-
self the Offices of both Judge and Executioner,
in a Cause wherein he appears only as an Ac-
|P_23
cuser; and I doubt not, but that before I have 
done pleading, the Court of impartial Readers
will look upon his Prosecution as entirely mali-
cious, and readily grant me a Copy of my In-
ditement. Does not he own that Madam Du 
Tertre and myself have advanc'd the same Me-
thods of Practice? And does not he highly 
extol many Things in her Treatise which are 
found in mine? Since then we have liv'd in 
different Ages, and have never had the least 
Knowledge of one another, how can that 
Practice be esteem'd bad in me, which is 
reckon'd so extraordinary in Madam Du 
Tertre?

Pag. 43. He accuses me of first coaxing, and 
then threatening the Midwives, as Dr. Cham-
berlen did before me, because I say, "I have 
ever found the most experienced Midwives 
the most ready to call in farther Assistance, 
and that they find their Account in it; whilst 
it is quite otherwise with those, who, from 
too great an Opinion of their own Judg-
ment and Abilities, run great Hazards, or 
at the best call us in too late, and so lose 
their good Name, and justly suffer in their 
Reputation. That the best Midwives send 
early for Advice upon Appearance of Dan-
ger and Difficulty; the suffering Fair readily 
consents to it, and by this means both Lives 
are sav'd." Pray who can see any thing in 
this Passage like coaxing or threatening, or in-
deed any thing else, but plain and known 
Truth? I would desire to know, who coaxes
|P_24
the Women, when he immediately asks, "if 
the suffering Fair would not have been much 
more oblig'd to her Midwoman, if she had 
perform'd the Work herself, and thereby 
sav'd both the Uneasiness and Expence of 
superior Advice." Of the first Part of this 
Accusation then, he appears to be guilty him-
self, and the Reader need not be at a Loss for 
the Reason of it. But as for threatening, that 
was not Mr. Douglasss Intention at a Time 
when he was bespeaking them for his Pupils;
for it must be a very silly Bird indeed, that, 
according to the Proverb, bewrays its own Nest. 
He likewise desires to know, "If these two 
Speeches were not pick'd out of Dr. Cham-
berlen's Preface?" I answer, No; but must 
beg leave to subjoin, that I shall never have 
the worse Opinion of myself for thinking alike 
with so great a Man, notwithstanding Mr. 
Douglass is pleas'd to give him the Title of a 
puzzling, confounding, insinuating, insolent 
Nostrum-monger.

Upon my faying, "That I have an In-
vention of my own to extract Children when 
the Head presents and sticks in the Passage, 
with the Fillet, which I must beg leave to 
be silent in, as the great Dr. Chamberlen was 
before me, in chusing to conceal the Method 
whereby he could extract Children in this 
Case without Hooks, where other Artists 
are forc'd to use them," he adds, was there 
ever such an Excuse beard of? Because the 
great Dr. Chamberlen, says he, acted a very 
|P_25
ungenerous Part in this Affair, therefore Mr. 
Chapman must be excus'd for doing just the 
same Thing. Then he asks, whether I might 
not as well have said, That the Doctor had 
been guilty of Simony or Sacrilege, and was not 
punish'd for it, and therefore I might, for the 
same Reason, expect the same Grace, in case I 
should ever take it in my Head to commit the 
same Crimes? Not remembering his former Decla-
ration, Pag. 20. Of his being far from thinking 
that the Publick has any Right to expect, that 
every private Man (who at a considerable Ex-
pence, and assiduous Study, makes any considera-
ble Discovery in Manual Operations which cannot 
be made universally useful, as Medicines may, 
and really are, &c.) should communicate gratis 
the Fruits of his Labour and Expence. Besides 
at the same time that I keep the Fillet a Secret, 
I frankly own the Forceps to be preferable, for 
which I give my Reasons. How then can the 
Concealment of the former be an Injury to any? 

A little after, Pag. 45. he taxes me with 
being mistaken, in affirming, that I was the 
second Englishman who wrote originally and 
professedly on this Subject. Now I never 
affirm'd that I was the second Englishman, &c. 
only said, if I was not mistaken, &c.[/1./] This 
I afterwards was sensible of, and accordingly 
candidly own'd it, in my second Edition, in this 
following Words,[/2./]When I publish'd the 
|P_26
first Edition of this Work, I thought myself, at 
least, the second Englishman, who had written 
professedly on the Subject; I have since found I 
was mistaken, &c. so that Mr. Douglass himself 
is here guilty of a Mistake, if not a wilful 
Misrepresentation. Tho' whether I was right 
or wrong in this, 'tis nothing to the Subject 
Matter, and at best but a low and trifling Cavil.

Upon my saying, if the Child offers any 
other Part than the Head, be it what it will, 
the Hand is to be pass'd gently into the 
Womb, the Feet are to be search'd for, the 
Child to be turn'd, and that Way brought 
forth; and Pag. 20. Having farther observ'd, 
that a Child, presenting with its Head, is often 
to be turn'd and deliver'd with the Feet first, 
and in all other Postures whatever always with 
the Feet first, Mr. Douglass proceeds, But 
suppose a Foot, or the Feet present, what need 
have we then to pass the Hand into the 
Womb to fetch them? And suppose the 
Buttocks present, and are so low in the Passage 
that they cannot be push'd back without Dan-
ger, is it not much easier and quicker to slip 
the Fingers over the Bend of the Thigh, or over 
the Ossa Ilia, and draw it forward in that 
Posture, than to run the risque of forcing them 
back to come at the Feet? And then trium-
phantly concludes it to be plain from these 
Quotations, That I, notwithstanding my 25 
Years Practice, was perfectly unacquainted with 
this Case, tho' Madam Du Tertre describes it 
|P_27
very accurately. I have said in my firstEdi-
tion, except when it presents with the Feet, &c. 
And, in my second, have mention'd the Buttocks,
and when the Child may be brought away in 
that Posture. Pag. 11. I own there (by ma-
king that Case an Exception) that this had slipp'd 
me in the first, so that nothing is more plain, 
than that I was not unacquainted with the Case, 
tho' Mr. Douglass is pleased, with his usual 
Candour, to accuse me of being perfectly so. 
No Person can possibly imagine a Case of that 
Nature should never happen to me in twenty 
seven Years extensive Practice. And tho' I 
forgot to take notice of it in the Essay, yet I 
have sufficiently mention'd it in my Treatise.
So that if the former had been much more im-
perfect in this respect than it is, yet as it stands 
corrected in the latter, it must certainly be very 
unfair and ungenerous to fix upon any but the 
last Edition. 

Upon my giving an Account of having 
with my Finger dilated and cast back the 
Mouth of the Womb, and so releas'd a little 
Prisoner, he asks, if Madam Du Tertre's Fin-
ger would not have released the Prisoner as soon, 
and as safely as mine? Pag. 47. Upon my 
saying again, that more than two Inches of the 
String itself, from the Navel, is unnecessary, 
whereas I have commonly known Midwives 
leave five or six, he adds; that Madam Du 
Tertre likewise advises the String to be tied 
two Inches from the Child's Navel, and then 
|P_28
triumphs in the following Manner, Where now 
is the mighty Secret he makes such aFussabout? 
Is it any thing more than anOld Womantold 
us before he was born? Pag. 48. Upon saying 
too, that it is my constant Practice to pass my 
Hand immediately after the Birth, in order to 
extract the Placenta; he enquires what there is 
so extraordinary in it, that it deserves to be 
noted so emphatically, as my constant Practice 
is? And then asks if Madam Du Tertre, &c. 
did not so? Pag. 56. Again, he twits Dr. Mau-
bray, as well as myself, with Madam Du 
Tertre, as likewise in Pag. 59. And lastly, 
Pag. 61. Upon my declaring my Unwillingness 
to put a Person upon her Labour too early, 
which God knows is too often done, he asks if 
Madam Du Tertre would not as carefully have 
avoided putting her upon her Labour before 
her Time, as I did? 

As for Madam Du Tertre and myself being 
of the same Opinion, I cannot possibly see 
how he can fairly turn that to my Disadvan-
tage, since what is right in Madam Du Tertre
can never be wrong in me. So that instead of 
doing me an Injury, which I think was plainly 
his Intention, by such trifling Insinuations, he 
has paid me a handsome Compliment, in own-
ing my Practice to be the same with Madam 
Du Tertre's whom he seems to be so very 
fond of. 

To return; Pag. 47. After repeating what 
I have said in relation to the Folly of dipping 
|P_29
the Infant's Hand, when hanging out of the 
Womb, in cold Water, rubbing it with Ice, 
or touching it with a wet Cloth, which some 
ignorant Midwives practise, he desires to be 
inform'd, "how many Midwives I have ever 
known guilty of these Fooleries?" I answer 
too many; and it is probable, had Mr. Douglass
long practised the Art of Midwifery, he would 
have, met with the same. 

A much greater Instance, of his being but 
little conversant in this Art, he gives us in the 
very next Page, where, upon my saying that 
few Midwives are sufficiently appriz'd of the 
unhappy Symptom there mention'd, viz. a 
violent Flooding, he declares, that he differs 
so far from me, in this Assertion, that, in 
his Opinion, there is not one Midwife in a 
thousand who knows not, that a violent Flood-
ing will either occasion Abortion or Death. 
I confess few, if any Midwives, can be so 
totally ignorant, as not to know that Flooding
will occasion Death if no Stop be put to its 
Fury. Yet many are apt to flatter themselves, 
that the Sufferer may be deliver'd by her 
natural Pains, till it is too late, as appears 
from several Cases I have cited (few to what I 
could have given) which shews they were not 
sufficiently appriz'd of the Danger. And I 
hope I may be excused being so full on 
this Head, as many have been before me, 
since it is a Thing of such vast Consequence 
in Practice.

|P_30
But to return back to Mr. Douglass's Ob-
servation in relation to what I advanc'd about 
the Navel-string, Pag. 48. I thought it proper 
to mention what I have there said, as I had 
very often found the leaving so much of the 
String to be a common Practice, and indeed the 
Custom, of most Midwives in the Country. I 
never once mention'd it as a Secret; so the 
Fuss about it, as he elegantly words it, is with 
himself.

Again, as to his Quere, whether it is not 
every Body's Practice to pass their Hand 
immediately and examine if there are any 
more Children, and if no more, to fetch the 
Placenta? I answer No; not even among 
the Assistants of my own Sex, much less 
with the Women, for I assert that few of them 
take this Method. 

Few Midwives, even in this Town, pass their 
Hand (if I may give credit to theirDeclara-
tion, and my own Experience) and fewer yet 
in the Country. So that the Woman in whose 
Case this is mention'd had really stood but a 
bad Chance; had an ignorant Midwife been 
call'd in upon her, as I have there affirm'd. Here 
Mr. Douglass has certainly burnt his Fingers, 
and taken hold of one of the best Observations 
in my whole Book; which may serve to shew 
his extraordinary Judgment. That few Mid-
wives in this Town do pass their Hand is an 
|P_31
Affirmation I dare submit to the Chief of the 
Profession. Pray whence comes it that we are 
so often sent for to extract the Placenta?

Is not what I have wrote on this Subject 
Matter of Instruction to Midwives? And there-
fore as it is against my own Interest, it must 
be judg'd to be honest at least, which, I 
trust will have no small Weight in my Fa-
vour. 

If I have written any thing that will not 
stand the Test, but that my HerculeanAnta-
gonist does not pretend to, why do not proper 
Judges disprove me? If nothing but what will 
stand the Trial, why must I be loaded with 
such trifling and malicious Cavils? Really I 
think no one more unhappy, than he who 
snarls, and shews his Teeth, yet cannot 
bite; and I at once despise and pity such a 
Person. 

All Midwives are not Du Tertre's; and why 
I should not say, this is my constant Practice,
I know not; nor do I see wherein I could 
offend any Person thereby (and nothing surely 
but Calumny and Ill-nature could ever have sug-
gested a Censure from this.) How wrongfully 
then does he accuse me of having condemn'd 
the Midwives unjustly, because I affirm, that if 
an ignorant Midwife had been concern'd in the 
Case abovementioned, who had only taken the 
first Child and After-birth, the last would pro-
|P_32
bably have been left behind, and either violent 
Flooding, or a bad Fever would have ensued; 
and, as the Woman was before ill, and ex-
treamly weak, it would very likely have cost 
her her Life? Is not what I have said true?
Can what is here spoken, of an ignorantMid-
wife, belong to a good one? And would not 
one, ignorant of her Profession, have occasion'd 
in all Probability the Misfortune I there men-
tion? For I say again, that few do pass their 
Hand. Upon the whole then, I think I may 
with most Justice retort his own Words upon 
him, and apply what he says of the Midwives 
to myself, viz. That, guilty or not guilty, 'tis all 
one, I must be haul'd in, and condemn'd for an 
imaginary as well as a real Fault. Pag. 50. 

Pag. 51. He relates the Case of my being 
sent for to a Gentlewoman who kept a Tavern 
at Ipswich, viz. that the Child was dead, and 
the Mother flooding; that when two Midwives 
and a Surgeon, just then set out in the Profession, 
had all us'd their Endeavours to little or no 
Purpose, I was call'd in, and deliver'd her in a 
Minute; that I left her under the Care of 
Dr. Beeston, but that she died in six or seven 
Days. Upon this he very candidly observes, 
that I have not indeed told this young Gentle-
man's Name, tho' I have describ'd him so well 
that he doubts there's not a Man in all Ipswich,
nor perhaps twenty Miles round, but can tell 
who I mean; and then craftily insinuates, 
What Injury might not such a Tale do a worthy 
|P_33
young Fellow? And twits me with being incon-
sistent with myself, in relation to the Advice I 
gave in Pag. 114. of my first Edition; namely, 
that we should not take an unkind Advantage 
of a Slip or Accident that may happen to befal 
a Brother in his Practice. 

I hope I cannot fairly be charg'd with being 
inconsistent with myself, or taking an unkind 
Advantage of a Brother, whereas the Publica-
tion of my Essay was many Years after the 
Case referr'd to, and the young Surgeon there 
mention'd, had in all Probability, either given 
up that Branch of Practice, or was well esta-
blish'd in it. 

In the next Page he cites a Passage from my 
Preface, wherein I say that the Dignity of this 
Art will appear to every Person in a much 
more advantageous Light, if we reflect on the 
Learning of the Professors of it, and then ig-
nominiously subjoins, E. G. Dr. C—, Dr. 
M—, Dr. W—, Dr. G—, Dr. A—, 
Dr. B—, Dr. Gregoire, Tota notus in Urbe!
&c. It is much to be wish'd that Mr. Douglass
had condescended so far as to have fill'd up 
this formidable Catalogue of Blanks, that the 
Gentlemen, he there reflects upon, might have 
a fair Opportunity of defending themselves from 
such scurrilous Treatment. Is this being con-
sistent with himself, to charge me with de-
tracting from a young Surgeon's Character, in 
so favourable a Manner; as not to give even the 
initial Letter of his Name; when in the very 
|P_34
next Paragraph, he uncharitably and malici-
ously insults the Reputation of no less than 
seven Physicians, as he himself seems to own, 
by giving them all the Title of Doctor; but 
if by this he would only aim at those who 
would willingly impose themselves upon the 
World as such, he should have told us their 
real Names, that Gentlemen of Learning and 
Character may not suffer thereby; there being 
several Physicians of Reputation in this City, 
the initial Letters of whose Names are the same
he has thought fit to set down. 

Upon my saying, that the Improvements 
these, great Men have made in this Art, have 
effectually wip'd away the Load of Slander and 
Ignominy, with which this Profession was 
formerly branded, he has the Assurance to ask, 
for I can call it nothing else, if ninety nine in a 
hundred (a pretty large Proportion truly) of these 
great Men I talk of, have not kept their Im-
provements to themselves? With this insinuat-
ing Doubt, if ever they made any.

Now if this be not scurrilous Treatment, I 
know not what can possibly be so. But 
this is not all, he proceeds farther, and asks if 
most of them now, as well as myself, don't 
pretend to have Secrets? And if they don't 
endeavour to puzzle, at the same time they 
make a show of instructing others? Don't they, 
says he likewise, very seldom, if ever, consult 
together, as they always ought to do in difficult or 
|P_35
dangerous Cases? And then asks, What can 
hinder them, except the Fear of discovering the 
Insignificancy of their pretended Secret, or their
Real Ignorance? What intolerable Usage 
is here? What Opinion must By-standers have 
of the Profession, when one, who would im-
pose himself upon the Town as a Judge,
represents the Professors of it as a Set of 
crafty, puzzling, ignorant People? How 
far his Fellow Citizens are to thank him, for 
deterring, by false and malicious Hints, those 
who are already (from a mistaken and 
blameable Modesty) too averse to the Assis-
tance of Men-Midwives, in Cases of Extre-
mity, where a faithful Wife, or hopeful Heir
may perhaps be lost, is what I think every 
reasonable Man may determine. But I shall leave 
him to the Resentment of those worthy Gen-
tlemen he has so much insulted, and only ob-
serve farther on this Head, that I well hop'd, 
(and still with Reason do) that the late, and 
present Practitioners, had wip'd off the Load 
of Scandal that was us'd to blacken this Pro-
fession, and design'd a just Compliment to them. 
But nothing can stand good where Envy and 
Ill-nature meet. And indeed if they have not 
done it, I can only be accus'd of being too 
complaisant; which is a Fault I must do Mr. 
Douglass the Justice to own he has no where in 
his Book been guilty of, unless once to his 
Friend and Countryman, Dr. Mitchell, as will 
presently be made appear. 

|P_36
Upon my saying, in the second Edition of 
my Book, that I did not send my Papers to 
the Press till I had got a Friend to revise and 
correct the Diction, which I believe is not 
an usual thing, he desires to he inform'd, if 
I can be a tolerable Judge of Diction myself, 
who have suffer'd my Friend to write Woman-
Midwife, Women-Midwives, &c. and then 
blames me, or my Corrector, for calling Dr. 
Maubray an ingenious and laborious Author, 
endeavouring, at the same time, to set the 
Doctor in a very ridiculous Light. Now al-
lowing Dr. Maubray to be as silly a Writer as 
Mr. Douglass would have him, he must own 
at least, that I have some Good-nature in me (to 
which Mr. Douglass seems to be a Stranger) to 
allow him a Character he did not well deserve. 
I shall always endeavour to speak with Modesty
and Respect of my Superiors; not following 
Mr. Douglass's Example in recommending and 
puffing myself to the Town, as the only Dicta-
tor left in my Profession. 

After Mr. Douglass has vented his Spleen 
upon the Doctor, he triumphs in the following 
Manner. Pray does such a Writer as this 
deserve the Epithets of ingenious and labo-
rious? Wherein does his Ingenuity appear? 
Wherein is his Labour of any Use? Pray 
can any thing expose a Man's Judgment 
more than laughing or hissing, praising or 
finding fault in the wrong Place Pag. 56.

|P_37
Without doubt Mr. Douglass has Penetration 
enough to avoid those Sands in which he sees 
others sink; and so great a Reformer as himself 
can never be suspected of being guilty of those 
Faults he so vehemently reproves in others. 
But to judge him now by his own Words. He 
reprimands me for calling Dr. Maubray, an 
ingenious and laborious Author, and at the 
same time gives the late Dr. Mitchell the Epi-
thets, of a just, tart, reverend, and learned
Writer. After what I have advanc'd above, 
in relation to Mr. Douglass's very ill Usage of 
the Gentlemen of the Faculty, it may seem odd 
perhaps, that I should here question the Re-
putation of any Gentleman myself; nor should 
any thing have induc'd me to it, had I not 
here a very fair Opportunity to display Mr. 
Douglass's great Partiality. In order to which 
I appeal to all the Physicians in this Town, 
to whom the learned Dr. Mitchell, as he 
calls him, was but too well known, whether 
he was not the great Physical-fool of the Age? 
The standing Jest of all his Acquaintance? 
Tho' some Men of Sense thought him too 
low even for that, And as for his Sooter-
kin dissected, wherein, Mr. Douglass says, 
he has so justly and tartly reprimanded 
Dr. Maubray (who certainly deserv'd it for 
such a false and credulous Surmise as the Exis-
tence of the Suyger or Sucher, had Dr. Mitchell
been able to have done it) it is too well known, 
for its execrable Stupidity, to need any Exa-
mination in this Place. For the Truth of which 
|P_38
I'll stand by the Determination of the most 
partial Reader that ever perus'd this extraordi-
nary Performance, excepting only Mr. Douglass,
who, if he went thro' it with a grave and com-
pos'd Countenance, is, I believe, the only one 
that ever did. Mr. Douglass too assures us, 
that he was, Utriusque Medicinae Doctor. P. 55. 
Greatly to the Honour of both the Professions 
no doubt! Pray was not desiring him to shew 
his Diploma, which some Gentlemen of top 
Reputation thought to be a sham one, a stand-
ing Jest at Child's? Was it not always pro-
duc'd with the utmost Shame and Reluctance? 

Now to retort Mr. Douglass's Words upon 
himself, which may be done with the utmost 
Justice; pray does such a Writer as this deserve 
the Epithets of just, tart, reverend, or learned? 
Risum teneatis? Wherein does his Tartness or 
Learning appear? Pray can any thing expose a 
Man's Judgment more than laughing or hissing, 
praising or finding fault in the wrong Place?
And pray who would think Mr. Douglass a 
Judge of Learning himself, who calls such a 
Writer as this, a learned one? 

But to return; what had I to do with Dr. 
Maubray's Treatise, beyond what belong'd to 
my Subject? He might be very learned and 
laborious, yet erroneous too; as I prove he was 
in relation to the Forceps, in which being ob-
lig'd to be close upon him, I thought I could do 
no less than do him Justice where I found him 
right. I had no Business rudely to rake into 
|P_39
his Ashes, neither was I answering or writing 
against his Book. Besides, I shew'd him the 
more Respect, from hearing him well spoken 
of by better Judges than Mr. John Douglass,
or myself. Nor could I imagine a Piece of 
just Civility would ever have been made so ill-
natur'd an Use of by any, much less by the 
Doctor's own Countryman. Had I treated 
Dr. Maubray with the ungentlemanlike Free-
dom Mr. Douglass has Dr. Chamherlen, he 
might then, and I doubt not would, have 
fallen upon me for that too. So that civil or 
uncivil, guilty or not guilty, I must be haul'd in,
as he says the Midwomen are, by the Head and 
Shoulders. Pag. 55. He hopes I will explain the 
Doctor's Account of Men being chang'd into 
Women, in my next Edition, for he owns, as 
it stands in the Doctor's Book, it is far beyond 
his Comprehension; and that the Account he 
gives of it is so sublime, that it rather puzzles
than instructs him. But in the Name of Won-
der what is all this to me? What have I to do 
to explain in any Author that which is foreign 
to my Subject. If I am to answer for all the 
silly or wrong things that are advanc'd in Au-
thors, I shall have enough to do with a Wit-
ness. 

He says I make a great Splutter (elegant 
indeed!) about breaking the Membranes of the 
second Child, in Order to bring it away by the 
Feet, as if I had discover'd something new. 
But however, to make me some amends, he 
|P_40
immediately pays me a great Compliment, by 
observing that Dr. Maubray's Words on this 
Occasion, which, he says, are perfect Nonsense, 
are very different from mine; which, as it is the 
only Place in his whole Book wherein he seems 
to have any tolerable Opinion of me, I would 
not be thought so ungrateful as not to take 
some notice of it. I never imagin'd that in 
this Case I had discover'd any thing new; and 
what I there said was for the Information of 
Women, who most of them, if not all, leave 
the Birth of the second Child to Nature. So 
that I think his own very genteel Splutter
might have been as well omitted. 

In the same Page he asks, "Who ever 
call'd the Flowing of the Waters a Flooding, 
but myself." And observes, that every body 
else means a dangerous Flux of Blood by a 
Flooding. I never did call the Flowing of the 
Waters a Flooding. It's a base and false Charge. 
Pray have not I taken notice, that the Flowing of 
the Waters was wrongfully call'd a Flooding?
What Mr. Douglass then has here said might 
have been let alone. I could as easily have 
call'd it Nonsense as himself. 

Again, because I honestly and earnestly re-
commend the careful Extraction of the Placenta,
which can never be left behind without the 
greatest Danger, he observes, Pag. 57. after 
his Laconick Manner, that I make a great Rout
about it for three Pages together, as if no body 
had known any thing of the Matter before; 
|P_41
and upon my saying that I am glad to find 
Dr. Maubray recommending so safe a Practice, 
he asks, "If I can find any body who does not 
recommend it, as well as Dr. Maubray
and myself?" Let who will recommend or dis-
recommend it, I'm sure I have found several 
that don't practise it, to the endangering of 
their Patients Lives; and to prevent such ill 
Consequences for the future, Was the Reason 
of my making such a Rout about it, or rather 
so faithfully and earnestly recommending it. 

I still assert that the Placenta is often left by 
Midwives, and for their Instruction alone, it 
was I spoke so much about it. How-then can 
what I have said be call'd a Rout? But 
Mr. Douglass must necessarily be elegant if he 
writes at all. 

He affirms in the same Pag. 57. That I have 
censur'd Dionis, which I think, I have done 
with a deal of Justice, for saying, "That the 
Placenta in an Abortion of two or three 
Months may be left to come away of itself,"
and then replies, That undoubtedly this may 
very often be done without any Danger, 
tho' he adds, that it is certainly saper to bring 
it away at first, if sent for in Time, &c. which 
seems to me to be Nonsense; for if it he safer to 
bring it away at first, how can it be left without 
any Danger? Does not the Word safer naturally 
imply a1 Danger in its being left behind? If not, 
how can one Practice be safer than the other. 
If the Child has been come away some Time, 
|P_42
he says, he should give himself no Trouble 
about it till a Flooding appear'd, and affirms, 
that he knew it once left whole (by the Obsti-
nacy of the Mother, who could by no means 
be persuaded to have it taken away) between 
the fourth and fifth Month, and yet she did 
very well. Whether the Words, I knew it 
once, were here meant to signify his own prac-
tising of this Art, I cannot determine; but he 
himself seems to think this Practice wrong by 
blaming the Woman with Obstinacy, for not 
consenting to have it taken away. Indeed, as 
he says, she might notwithstanding this have 
done well; but then it was certainly great odds 
she might not, and her Recovery was doubtless 
more owing to good luck than any thing else. 

He says the experienc'd Mr. Giffard is also 
of the same Opinion, when he observes, "That 
of two Evils the greater ought to be shunn'd, 
there being less Danger in leaving Part of 
the After-birth, which will very often, with-
out doing any great harm, come away with 
the Lochia, than in using any force in ex-
tracting it, by which we very often hurt the 
Womb." Without doubt of two Evils the 
lesser ought always to be chosen; but I think 
Mr. Giffard's Words are here to be taken with 
great Restriction. For his saying that the re-
maining Part of the Placenta will often come 
away with the Lochia, implies that it will not 
always do so; and that it will do no great 
harm plainly intimates that it may do some.
The Womb to be sure is never to be hurt, 
|P_43
in extracting the Placenta; and when it 
cannot be got away, without doing more 
harm than the Retention of it may occa-
sion (which I believe but seldom happens) 
it must doubtless be left behind. But then 
this is nothing to the Necessity of its being 
always taken away, which is what I have so 
earnestly recommended. Will Mr. Douglass
affirm, that it is ever safer to have it retain'd,
than extracted? I hope he will not pretend to 
give this Advice in his Lectures, lest Mankind 
should be but little indebted to him, and the 
State of Midwifery, after his mighty Endea-
vours to reform it, be left in a much worse 
Condition than he found it. This ought to be 
look'd upon as one of the most certain Maxims
in Practice, that, where it can possibly be done, 
the Womb ought to be clear'd, and nothing 
suffer'd to be included in it, lest a Fever or 
Flooding should ensue, which are but too com-
monly the Consequences of such a Neglect. 

A little after, he says, I give one Instance 
of a Child I deliver'd with the Buttocksfore-
most, and then asks, how does this quadrate,
with what I say, Pag. 11. of the same Book. 
"If the Child offers any other part than the 
Head, the Hand is to be passed into the, 
Womb, the Feet search'd for, and the Child, 
to be turn'd, and brought forth by them."
Here he wilfully omits an Exception I make in 
the very next Line, thus: But there is one 
Case to be excepted, viz. when the Child presents 
the Buttocks, and is far advanc'd in that Posture, 
|P_44
even beyond the Labia; it is then to be extracted 
as it lies: which I should chuse to perform by 
passing a Finger or two of one Hand, or if possi-
ble of both Hands to the Groin, and thus bring 
the Child away, rather than attempt theFeet: 
This however can be done only when the 
Child is small, or the Woman large; otherwise 
the Woman is to be laid on her Back, with her 
Hips rais'd, and her Shoulders low, and then 
the Child to be return'd, so as the Feet may be 
commanded. 

In the same Page, after having repeated 
what I said, in Case of a Child that was ex-
tracted with its Face lying towards the Os 
Pubis, Pag. 174. of my second Edit. That 
I was unwilling to have recourse to Art. 
He proceeds, Is it not the Art of Midwifery, 
which the Midwomen have been taught, the 
only thing which distinguishes them from 
other Women? Are not they oblig'd to 
make use of their Art at every Labour they 
are call'd to? Why then does he so often 
make use of the Words Art and Artists, and 
only apply them to himself and some other 
Men? Won't any one, who reads Madam 
Du Tertre's little Book, be convinc'd, that 
she has shewn more Art, and better Diction, 
than either Dr. Maubray, or — Does her 
being a Woman make it improper to say, 
she had Recourse to Art, or that she was an 
Artist?

|P_45
I shall only observe here, that all the com-
mon Assistance was before given; and as all 
Artists well know, the Expulsion now lay 
wholly upon Nature, except the taking hold 
of the Head, which I was unwilling to come 
to, if Nature would have finish'd her Work 
herself. But what harm there is in making use 
of the Terms Art and Artists, I profess myself 
utterly uncapable to comprehend. As to his 
Query, why I keep the Fillet a Secret, after I 
have own'd it to be neither so speedy nor so 
secure a Method as the Forceps? Pag. 59. I 
shall only answer, That I was fairly and honestly 
resolv'd to own as much, and that I had al-
ready done it in the Body of my Treatise. So 
how insignificant this Remark is, will appear to 
every Reader. 

But in relation to his charging me with the 
Cut of the Forceps being but an indifferent one, 
Pag. 60. I think I am not to answer for the 
Fault of the Engraver, since the Form and Di-
mensions, the Use and Advantage are the same, 
whether well represented or not? 

Again, as to his asserting that I endeavour 
to fob him off with saying, that all other 
People's Fillets are for the Foot, and mine only 
for the Head, I heartily disown it. I never yet 
said that all other People's were for the Foot,
&c. but only that I did not believe the manner 
of passing it over the Head to he so universally 
known and practised. Which I still have as 
|P_46
much Reason to believe as ever; and if so, 
why must not I have the Liberty to mention it? 

Pag. 62. After repeating two Instances 
wherein Mr. Giffard and myself have com-
plain'd of Mal-Practice, he subjoins, "Could 
a Turk believe there were any wholsome 
Laws in a Country where such Barbarities 
were not severely punished?" To which I 
shall only reply, as I have once before observ'd, 
how can the guilty be punish'd for them, or 
how can their Faults ever come to the Cogni-
zance of the Publick, if those who are Wit-
nesses of them, and candidly relate them, must 
have a Noise and Clamour rais'd against them, 
for so doing, and be represented as a Set of 
partial designing Men, hauling in the Women 
by the Head and Shoulders, and accusing them 
whether guilty or not?

In the Instance of Mal-Practice there men-
tion'd, I have observ'd, that a Physician was 
sent for, who had lately taken upon him to 
practise Midwifery, but was so little acquainted 
with the Art, that he neglected the only thing ne-
cessary in that Case, viz. a speedy Delivery 
by turning the Child; which Words, mark'd 
here in Italick, he reprints in capital Letters, 
as pointing out, I presume, my indecent Usage 
of a Gentleman or the Faculty. But if such 
a Representation of bad Practice, as this, de-
serves to be distinguish in Capitals, where 
shall we find Letters or Paper large enough to 
|P_47
display his own gross Usage of Dr. Chamberlen,
and other Physicians? 

Pag. 63. Mr. Douglass makes a very ungen-
tleman like Reflection on many great and worthy 
Gentlemen of the Faculty of Physick, and 
asks where these Doctors could be admitted to 
their Degrees? Must it not, says he, have been 
in some Popish Country, where Orthodoxy is 
reckoned a better Recommendation than the 
Knowledge of Diseases? Where visiting Chapels
three or four times a Day is thought more con-
ducive to the making a good Physician, than 
frequenting the Hospitals as often? Among the 
rest he here ungenerously reflects on one, who 
when he wrote this had the Honour to be 
related to (I mean his own Brother, lately dead 
at St. Christophers) who, I have been told, 
took his Degree in France. But what has the 
Religion of a Country to do with Art and 
Science? Have not several extraordinary Men 
in the Profession, nay some of the greatest Or-
naments of it, taken their Degrees in Popish
Countries. To mention no more than his 
favourite Baglivi, whom he justly stiles incom-
parable? 
