
|P_7
[}AN 
ESSAY
ON THE 
Virtue and Efficient Cause 
OF 
MAGNETICAL CURES. }]
[^Decorative frame around the letter "I".^]IT is needless, to give a Definition 
of what is understood by Magneti-
cal Cures. Since the Invention of 
a certain Powder made of Vitriol 
calcin'd, or rather exsiccated by the 
Reverberation of the Sun-beams, 
commonly call'd Sympathetical Pow-
der, People seem almost to be convinc'd, that there 
is another Way for Curing, chiefly certain Wounds, 
than by an immediate Application of certain Reme-
dies to the Part afflicted. Only the Difference lieth 
herein, that a great many either out of Prevention, 
or perhaps sometimes out of Ignorance or Self-inte-
rest, stiffly maintain, that the Cause of such Cures is 
in nothing else to be look'd for, than in the Super-
|P_8
stition of certain People. Some go still farther, and 
do ascribe the Virtue to certain Ceremonies and even 
to Charms. Of the last Opinion are at this Day 
few, more of the first; and it seems, as if this opi-
nion was supported by the Experience itself made 
by many People, with the said Sympathetical Powder 
to no Purpose; which hath given Room to them to 
say, that the Effects of this Powder, if there are any, 
are only visible according to the more or lesser Share 
of Superstition, the Person is possess'd with, who 
maketh Use thereof. Moreover the little Practice 
made with this Powder, tho' nothing at all expensive, 
and though the Advantage of Novelty it hath, is 
again an other Argument by which they strive to 
evidence, that there is no relying at all on this 
Remedy. 

In my Opinion both Parties are equally to be 
blamed. The one, for ascribing to a Thing more 
than really is in it, or can be produced by its Inter-
vention, though all imaginable Care is taken in 
the Preparation of it; and the other, for deriding 
every Thing they are not able to comprehend with 
their Senses. My Intention is therefore here, to 
consider on the efficient Cause of Magnetical Cures, 
which will be a Means to prove the Possibility there-
of; and this being done, I shall conclude with pub-
lishing for the Good of the Publick, a Method to 
be depended upon, and hitherto kept as a Secret in 
private Families, for magnetically curing certain 
Wounds without Pains and without the Application 
of any Remedy. 

There is a Kind of Affection between all and 
every Thing, by Virtue of which, they alter or af-
fect one another without a visible Touching. The 
daily Experience convinceth us thereof, and who de-
nieth it, 
Ostendi Solem postulat ille sibi.

|P_9
The Examination and Knowledge of these Quali-
ties and hidden Virtues in Nature, is call'd natural 
Magick, founded upon the Sympathies of Things, 
and who is acquainted with the Concord or Discord 
therein, is call'd skilful in Magicks, and able to 
produce many marvelous Effects, appearing to the 
Vulgar to be contriv'd by the Help of Daemons; 
though this Mystery is nothing else, but a Science 
of the Sympathies and Antipathies between superi-
our and inferiour Things. 

Sympathy is a mutual Consent between Physical and 
Natural Things, by which they friendly embrace one 
another, call'd by some a Compassion. Galen useth 
the Word of Friendship, Pliny Concord, and Tully
a Conveniency and natural Continuation; for though 
the Bodies of Iron and a Loadstone are distant from 
one another, nevertheless Nature is also continued 
in them, that they agree or meet in one. The same 
calleth it an Affinity in Nature, and Bapt. Porta a 
Consent; by others it is metaphorically named a 
Symphony or Harmony. Antipathy is a mutual 
Affection between Things, by virtue of which they 
shun, abhor, or are against one another. Galen and 
Pliny are calling it a Fighting and Discord; others 
a Dissenting, Enmity, Variance and Hatred; others 
a Resistance, as hindering or resisting Actives to be 
applied to Passives. 

As from the Sympathy of superiour and celestial 
Virtues ariseth a Drawing, (attractio) and conveying 
(deductio) to the Terrene and inferiour Body, also 
from Antipathy a Resistance; Plato calls therefore 
Magick the Attraction or Drawing of one Thing 
from another, caused by an Affinity in Nature. 

Now all the Parts of this World, or all the 
Members of one Animal, depending from one Au-
thor and Principle, are joyned together by one and 
the same Nature. In us, the Brain, Heart, Lungs, 
Liver and the Rest draw something from one ano-
|P_10
ther, and mutually assist one another; also that if 
one of them suffereth, the Others are likewise suf-
fering or compatising. The same it is in respect 
of all the Bodies in this World joined together; 
they likewise serve and are served mutually by one 
another; and from this common Alliance, or Affi-
nity, ariseth a common Love, and from this com-
mon Love a common Attraction or Drawing. This 
is the Reason, that the Loadstone draws Iron unto 
it, and the Sun many Flowers: This is the Reason 
that Heliotropium turneth with the Sun both at 
Rising and going down, and Selinetropium with the 
Moon. 

We ought to consider Sun, Moon and the rest ac-
cording to the terrene Quality; and Stones, Vege-
tables and Animals according to the celestial Quali-
ty; and so we will find, that what is above, hath 
Connexion with what is below, and what is below, 
with what is above. For, by the fatal Law given by 
our Creator, the terrene Body is to serve the celestial; 
and as every individual Part of the first is endued 
with a Matrix adapted to bring forth its like, so the 
last is appointed to animate it continually with a cer-
tain Substance, which is able to cause its engendering 
and begetting without Intermission. The Sympathy 
and Antipathy, so notable in Animals, Minerals and 
Vegetables, is therefore to nothing else to be ascri-
bed, than to the Influence of the celestial Bodies; 
and their Impression according to the Constitution 
of each Species and individual Being, either in general 
or sometimes according to the singular Fabrick of 
one Species in particular. Also a Saphire, to speak 
generally, is no where offensive to the Eyes; but 
nevertheless there hath been found one who did 
strike the Sight of the Eye by the first Applicati-
on. 

But by what Means some natural Things join to-
gether is very difficult to demonstrate out of com-
|P_11
mon Philosophy. Because what is joyned or coupled 
to a Thing, is of the same Being or Essence, or is 
of the Quality of this Being; or is in it, as the Form 
is in the Subject, or appertains to it or toucheth it 
either like a Thing transmuting, in respect to what 
is transmuted, or like Art in respect of the Subject 
Matter. Moses seems to have clearly expounded to 
us five Things fasten'd or knit together; Heaven 
and Earth, Earth and Voidness, a bottomless Gulph 
and Darkness, the Spirit of God and the Waters, 
Light and Bodies. The first Way of this Connex-
ion is signified by the Earth empty and void. For 
an empty and void Earth is its Matter before it is 
supply'd with a Form from elsewhere. 

The second Way of Connexion is signified by 
Darkness all over the Face of the bottomless Gulph. 

The third by Light springing up, rising, or com-
ing upon the Bodies. 

The fourth, by Heaven and Earth; the one be-
ing joined to the other, as Actives to Passives, or as 
a Thing transmuting, to what is to be transmuted. 

The fifth, by the Spirit of the Lord. 

But let us see, how this is in us. Earth is a ter-
rene Body, empty of Life, void of Sense; above it 
are Darkness, Dulness, Death, Stupidity, and no 
Feeling. 

Light is Life, which quickeneth, moveth, stirreth, 
and giveth Sense to it. 

Heaven is the Soul and the Spring of this Light. 

The Spirit of God is the Understanding, the 
Brightness of the divine Countenance. The Reason 
of this Joyning, or Connexion is this: The Body 
is void in itself, hath its Darkness; then it is joined 
to Light, through Light to Heaven, through Hea-
ven to a spiritual Substance, as appears by the fol-
lowing, viz.

The bottomless Gulph, 
Darkness, 
|P_12
Void of Life. Earth. Void of Sense, 
Light, Quickening and giving Life. 
Heaven, the Spring of Light, 
The Spirit. 
Here we see in what Order Things created are 
knit together. Here we see the Bond and Knot of 
the Natural Benevolence. But what Philosophy is 
this you will say? Certainly not a vulgar one, which 
judgeth of Things by Sense, Matter and manifest 
Qualities; but a heavenly, more subtile and an ab-
strase one. 

Body and Soul being Substances very far distant 
from one another, there was need of a mean Bond 
to join these distant Substances together, and to this 
Purpose is that thin and spiritual small Body ap-
pointed, which Physicians, as well as Philosophers, 
call Spirit. This copulating Spirit is more excellent 
than the Elements, and even answers to Heaven. 
Aristoteles speaks of this Proportion thus: Like as 
all the Virtue of the Heavens is conveyed to the 
Earth by the Vehicle of Light; also all the Facul-
ties of the Soul, viz. Life, Motion and Senses are, 
by the Help of this bright Spirit, convey'd and 
transferr'd to the terrene Body. That all what I 
have said, may be more convincing, I shall produce 
some memorable Examples of Antipathys and Sym-
pathys, which Authors of no little Authority have 
left to Posterity. 

First of all we meet with a notable Antipathy 
in Poisons; not every Antidote resists all Sorts of 
Poison, according to Galen.—de Antid. Each Kind 
of Poison hath its particular Antidote. 

The Scythians were used to besmear their Arrows, 
and Sabres, with a certain Poison compos'd of hu-
man Blood, and a Matter coming out of Putrefac-
tion; corrupt and filthy Blood of Vipers; a slight 
|P_13
Wound with an Instrument also prepared was dead-
ly, and nothing could help but Cantharides, which, 
against all other Poisons is ineffectual, according to 
Galen and Dioscorides.

According to Pliny, there is no greater Poison for 
Trees than wild Parsnip, because, being near them, 
it taketh not only all the Substance away, but it 
boreth and pierceth Holes, like as with a Sword, 
through the very Roots of the Trees. 

Galen, I. de Theriaca ad Pison. affirms, that a 
Herb call'd Trifoly boiled and applied to Bitings of 
Vipers, is to take immediately away all Pains; but 
if apply'd on sound People, that it causeth the same 
Pains People suffer being bit by Vipers. Scaliger
endeavours to give a Reason of this Mystery, but 
it is more according to the Subtilty of his Genius than 
a true one. So much of Poisons. 

But what shall we say of the invincible Hardness 
of a Diamond, which contemptibly withstands the 
two greatest; Forces in Nature; and, notwithstand-
ing, yields to Goat's Blood, being steep'd therein 
when it is fresh and warm? 

Is not this a surprizing Example of a natural Va-
riance or Discord? By what Ingenuity hath this 
been found out? By what Accident, or what Con-
jecture was there only to experiment such an im-
mense Secret, chiefly in a Goat, the filthiest of all 
Animals? 

A Lion, feared by all Animals, and who careth 
neither Tyger nor Bear, is, notwithstanding astonish-
ed at the Sight of a far weaker Animal, a Cock. 
Do you ask the Reason thereof? Perhaps there is a 
certain Strength in the Eyes of a Cock, as some 
think, repugnant to the Eyes of a Lion. Certainly 
we cannot look for the Reason of it in the Matter 
or Senses, otherwise we would fall into endless Per-
plexities; but we must look for it in the Contem-
plation of Things above us. I remit my Readers to 
|P_14
Proclus in his Book of Magicks, where he giveth 
a Reason, ex professo, of this seeming Prodigy. 

Who knows not the Discord between a Spider and 
a Toad or Serpent? The first, perceiving one of the last 
under the Shade of a Tree, after having it artfully 
entangled in its Web, pierceth its Brains with such a 
Force, that it is no more able to disentangle itself 
from its Prison; nor dothit find an End thereof till 
it is dead. 

The Antipathy between an Ash-Tree and a Ser-
pent, hath been so much experimented, that we 
know from thence, that a Serpent will always shun, 
even the Morning and Evening Shade of this Tree, 
and fly from it so far, that a Fire being made on 
one Side, and on the other a Semi-Circle of Leaves 
and Branches of an Ash-Tree, it rather will jump, 
and endeavour to escape through the Fire, than pass 
the Ash-Tree. 

I proceed to Vegetables, where equally we meet 
with an evident and notable Discord. For an Oak-
Tree will not prosper in Places where Olives grow; 
and an Olive-Tree leaveth in Groves of Oaks, 
such offensive Roots, which actually do kill the 
Oak-Trees. The same being planted near Wallnut-
Trees, either dieth itself or remains always weak, or 
causeth the same Effects in the Wallnut. 

The Hatred between Colewort or Cabbage and 
Vines, is more visible. For a Vine with its crooked 
Tendrels doth tye and bind itself to every Thing 
that it doth catch, only it refuseth the same to Cab-
bage, and being near it, it bends to the opposite 
Side. Colewort or Cabbage being boiling, if only a 
few Drops of Wine are pour'd upon it, will imme-
diately cease to boil, and the Cabbage will lose its 
Colour. The same will dry through and through, if Cy-
clamen, a Kind of Briony or Origan, or wild Marjorum 
is near it; and Vines will become worse in the 
Neighbourhood of Bay-Trees. 

|P_15
There is such an Antipathy between a Crab and 
Polypody, that this Herb being apply'd, will cause 
its throwing off the Shell wherewith it is covered, or 
at least its Claws. Fern and Reeds are so repugnant 
to one another, that neither of them will suffer the 
other near it, which is the Reason that we neither 
find Fern in Places where Reeds grow, nor Reeds 
in Ferny Grounds. 

Homer, Pliny and Dioscorides, do report, that 
Alysson, St. John's Wort and Rue, or Herbgrace, 
are of such a natural Repugnancy against malignant 
Spirits, that like Heads of Wolves affixed to Gates, 
so these Herbs hang'd up in Houses, do secure Men 
and Beasts against all kinds of Sorcery or Poison. 
Homer, who by his Travels got a great Skill in 
Magicks, relateth, that Mercurius arm'd Ulysses
against the Inchantments of Circe by the use of Rue 
or Herbgrace. And in the History of Toby,deli-
ver'd to us by Sacred Writ, we find, that the An-
gel taught Toby to take Part of the Heart of a Fish 
drawn out of the River, and to cast it upon Coals; 
the Smoke of which was to rid Men and Women of 
all kinds of Demons. We ought therefore not to 
call in Question the like Amulets, grounded on na-
tural Reasons, since a certain Substance is issuing out 
from them, which according to Experience is capable 
effectually to repair the Strength of Bodies, and to 
resist Poisons or any thing else that is offensive. 

THE Root of white Peony, and the Hoof of an 
Elk, are of an Antipathy against the Falling Sickness; 
the Seed of Melanthium, against Rheums or falling 
down of raw Humours; Wolf's Dung against 
Colicks; not by virtue of Charms, as some very 
ignorantly think, but because some Vapours like 
Atoms issue from their Substance, which sent forth 
to the Brain, do dry it, and alter the Cause of the 
Sickness by their own Virtue. Galen, after many 
|P_16
Trials, speaks thereof: That we are to depend upon 
the like Amulets, as working by their own Sub-
stance, and not by the virtue of imaginary Charms, 
l. 6. & 10. de Simplic. Medic.

The Hand of a Fisherman is stupify'd, as soon 
as he toucheth a Fish call'd the Cramp Fish, though 
it be with a long Pole. A little Fish, half a Foot 
in length, call'd a Suckstone or Sea Lamprey,cleav-
ing to the Keel of a Ship, hindreth the Course there-
of, though Wind and Weather is favourable. This 
is not done by virtue of Charms, but by Reasons I 
have just now mention'd. It is certainly a stupen-
dous Miracle of Nature, that such a small Fish is 
capable to stay a like Bulk, and to hinder the Course 
of a great Ship, though in full Sail, by no other 
means, than by cleaving to it. 

Pliny reports, that the imperial Ship, wherein 
Antony did intend to circuit and to exhort his Peo-
ple, was stay'd by such a Fish; and that he was 
oblig'd to go into another Ship, mean while that 
his Fleet was driven a great way off. Caius's Gally 
bound for Antium, an ancient City in Italy, and 
rowed by four hundred Hands, had the same Fate; 
and it seems this Fish to be ominous, since this 
Prince, soon after his coming back, was deadly 
wounded. There was no longer Room to dive into 
the reason of this Staying, as soon as this Fish was 
found cleaving to the Stern of the Ship. But being 
brought into the Ship, it proceeded; and it is par-
ticularly to be admir'd, why it was able to stay the 
Ship by cleaving to it, and could not do the same 
after being brought into the Ship. We must acknow-
ledge, that Nature here is intricate, and cannot be 
understood by our Senses. For besides what I have 
said, it seems as if she knowing of an approaching 
Danger did intend to remove it. The Ship wherein 
the Ambassadors of Periander were sent, for 
|P_17
having the noble Boys gelded, was stay'd in its 
Course; as if Nature did judge it detestable to rob 
Men of what is given them to their Preservation. 
The Ship of Caius Caesar, not long after assassina-
ted at Rome, was stay'd, as if Nature commiserating 
Caesar's Fate, would keep him back from this Mis-
fortune, and hinder his unhappy Course. As much 
of Sea Lampreys.

It hath been found by Experience, that a living 
Duck apply'd to the Belly asswageth the Gripings. 

A living Spider inclosed in a Walnut Shell, and 
tyed to the Neck to cure the Quartan Ague. The 
Pairings of a Sick Person's Nails of Hand and Feet, 
tyed upon the Back of a living Crawfish, and also 
thrown into flowing Water, to expel a Tertian 
Ague.

A Tooth of a living Mole to cure the Tooth-
Ach, only by touching the afflicted Part therewith. 

A little Bone found in the Ham of a Hare's Leg 
behind the Knee, to resist the Stone or Gravel in 
the Reins, and Cramps or Convulsions shrinking, 
or plucking of the Sinews; and arising either of 
too much Fulness, or overmuch Emptiness. 

Galgalus (a Galbus) a Bird which being looked 
upon by one who hath the Yellow Jaundice, cures 
the Person and dies it self. 

The Heart of a Raven carried about to hinder 
Sleep, and the Heart of a Bat to provoke it. 

The Bones of the Head of a Mare affix'd upon 
a Post in a Garden, to chase Palmer or Canker-
Worms. 

A Herb called Dog's-Tooth (having seven Knots) 
mention'd by Dioscorides under the name of Coro-
nopus, if ty'd to one's Head, effectually cureth the 
Head-Ach. 

A Man falling sick at the time when Violets, or a 
|P_18
Herb called Cicuta[/1./], much like our Hemlock is 
bearing Flowers, tho' he is cured, will certainly re-
lapse as soon as he hath a smell thereof. I cannot 
pass over what Pliny reciteth out of Pythagoras, 
Crateva, Democritus, Appollodorus, Cleemporus, and 
many others, of the wonderful virtue and power or 
some Herbs. An Herb call'd Adamantis, growing 
in Armenia and Cappadocia,[/2./] being held near Ly-
ons, causeth them turn upside down, with a yawn-
ing an unpleasant open Sound. 

Arianis, an Herb growing with a People in Scy-
thia, call'd Ariani, from whence it hath its Name, 
of a Colour shining like Fire; when gathered, the 
Sun being in Leo, will by touching Wood, set it on 
fire, the same Wood being before thoroughly anoin-
ted with Oil. 

Æshynomene, an Herb so bashfull, that it shrinks 
in the Leaves, as soon as one cometh near it with 
the Hand. 

Theangelis, an Herb growing in Syria, Babylon,
and many other places, maketh People Prophesy, 
having drunk of a Liquor poured upon this Herb. 

Gelotophillus, an Herb growing about Borysthenes,
being drunk with Wine and Myrrh, causeth Laugh-
ing which never ceaseth, except Kernels of a Pine 
Apple with Pepper and Honey are taken in Date-
Wine. 

Æthiopis, an Herb growing in Æthiopia, like a 
Lettice, wherewith, according to Pliny, Enchanters 
will open any Lock, turn any Stream, and dry any 
River. 

Ophiusa, an Herb in Æthiopia, dangerous to 
|P_19
look on; being drunk, it doth so terrify the Mind 
with a Sight of angry and dreadful Serpents, that 
condemned Persons for fear thereof did kill them-
selves; and therefore it was used to be given to 
such as had committed Sacrilege. 

A kind of Spider that hath in his Legs three 
Knots or Joints, whose Sting is perilous and deadly, 
called Phalangium, immediately dieth by touching a 
certain Herb we know by the Name of Crocis. 

Oenotheris, a kind of Herb strewed on wild 
Beasts, tameth them. 

Achimenis, a kind of Poley, which in time of 
Battle being cast into an Army causeth them to fear. 

Latace, an Herb which the King of Persia did 
give to the Embassadours, to the end they should 
never lack necessary Food wherever they came. 

The ancient History doth report of Æmilianus 
Scipio, otherwise called Africanus Minor, that he 
opened the Gates of Carthage with a peculiar Herb, and dry'd Moors and fennish Places With Aethiopis, an Herb before mentioned: And who hath ever come near all the hidden Virtues of Nature? Who hath ever been able to give Reasons thereof? or at least what Conjectures could there be to experi-
ence or make Experiments of all these things? Cer-
tainly we must acknowledge it to have been deli-
ver'd by a particular Blessing of the Supreme Being. 

The Presence of a Diamond hindereth the Load-
stone to draw Iron unto it, and the Presence of Oil 
hindereth Amber to draw Straw unto it. And if we 
consider the Enmity between things to hurt one ano-
ther, it is not unlikely, that our Ancestors did infer 
from thence, that perhaps some Remedy for their 
own use might lie concealed under it; the Success 
hath answer'd their Conjectures, and we are oblig'd 
to reverence likewise something hidden in Sympa-
thies which is of a confederate Virtue either to keep 
at a distance, or to expel something that is bad. 

|P_20
Every Day we meet with a notable Concord be-
tween Herbs and the celestial Bodies. We are assur'd 
of the solar Presence by the Flowers of an Herb call'd Cichoreum, Succory, which at the Rising of the Sun 
openeth, and at its Setting closeth itself up again. 

Lapinus a Kind of Pulse, is daily turn'd about 
with the Sun, also that the Sky being cloudy, Hus-
bandmen know by it, what o' Clock it is. The 
Herb Mallows conforms itself likewise to the Motion 
of the Sun. 

Authors of no small Credit unanimously affirm 
that Thunder and Lightning never hurts a Bay or 
Fig-tree, nor an Hide of a Sea-calf, or Hyæna, 
nor a white Vine. Octavius Agustus therefore arm-
ing himself with the last, and Tiberius Cæsar by 
wearing a Crown made of Bay-leaves, secur'd, them-
selves against Thunder; because these Things are 
not only of a Nature to refist the Vehemency of 
Lightning, but also to throw back the Blasts of it. 
There is a wonderful Sympathy between Metals and 
the Miners-Rod, or a little Twig with two Branches 
cut off a Hasle-tree, by the Help of which Miners 
search after Gold and Silver Veins. It would be in 
vain to seek for the Cause thereof in the manifest 
Qualities. 

The Sympathy subsisting between Stones and the 
celestial Bodies is still greater: Their Power is more 
extensive than that of Herbs; because they seem not 
only to command the celestial Bodies, but also Men. 
Who is ignorant of the Pilot's Needle, a Piece of 
Iron rubb'd with the Load-stone, always pointing to 
the Arctic Pole? Selenites, a Stone found in Arabia,
hath a White in it, which decreaseth and increaseth 
as the Moon doth. 

A Turquois, according to Theophrastus and Pro-
clus, doth change and wax very pale, being worn by 
a sick or decaying Person; but it is more to be won-
der'd at, that the precious Colour of this Stone is 
|P_21
chang'd into a sooty and smoaky one, or receiveth 
some Spots, or appears to be chink'd, when there is 
a considerable Danger approaching the Person it is 
worn by. 

And for Antipathies, the same Authors do report, 
that the Emerald effectually doth resist Fevers and 
Poisons; and that it breaks, being overcome by 
Poison. 

Androdamas, a precious Stone, hard and heavy, 
bright like Silver, and in form of divers little Squares, 
putteth away the Fury of Anger, and Rage of Letchery. 

Genianes, a precious Stone, procureth Punish-
ment to a Man's Enemy. 

Dendritis, a precious Stone, which, being put 
under a Tree, maketh that the Ax in cutting it 
should hot be dull'd. 

Siderites, a Stone like Iron, hath Power to cause 
Variance amongst Men. No doubt, these Stones 
do actually spout or drive out an invisible hidden 
Power. And though they are solid Things, never-
theless the native Heat and Rubbing and Touching 
draws out a Virtue, which it communicateth to the 
Heart and Brains. There are Medicines of a great 
Use by Reason of their Resemblance, we see them 
daily prevail against many Diseases for no other 
Reason but because the have one another's Anatomy 
and Signatura. This is a Way of making Demon-
strations by Resemblance, by which the Creator of 
all Things oftentimes discovereth sublime and hidden 
Things to instruct us by the Idea of their Resem-
blance to what they have been from the Beginning 
destinated. 

All Herbs, Flowers, Trees, &c. are magical 
Signs granted by their Author, the Knowledge 
Whereof brings us to the true Physick, i. e.Signa-
tum; because the Signs externally discover'd by 
Nature, are Tokens of certain internally hidden Vir-
|P_22
tues; and that Signatum, and the inward Kernel, is 
always signify'd by the outward Physiognomy. 

What is the Reason, that many Diseases cannot 
be cur'd with every Remedy? Because they proceed 
from an astral Impression of the Firmament, there 
is need of an astronomical Influence; that is to say, 
of Things which have an Analogy between the great 
and lesser World: Herein doth consist the true mag-
netical Virtue of the Firmament, and the Means to 
resist Diseases caused by such Impressions. This 
Influence and Signatura we observe in some Plants; 
the notablest and most evident do appear in Hyperi-
con and Persicaria; the first is pierc'd or bor'd with 
small Holes, and the other spotted with red Spots, 
as if Blood had dropp'd upon it. 

The same Signaturae, so very useful to the Judg-
ment of Diseases, are likewise to be met with in 
other Vegetables; and it is not sufficient for a Bota-
nicus to search into the external Signaturæ of Plants, 
their Time and Place of growing; but he ought also 
to concern himself about the inward Principle, and 
their Virtue, which is the Image of God implanted 
in Things created. This Principle is known by 
many Names; some call it the Balsam of Nature, 
vital Sulphur, radical Seed, first Matter; some natu-
ral Heat, Mercury of Life, universal Spirit. It ne-
ver is destroy'd in the Corruption of Things; the 
Elements and all mix'd Bodies being dissolv'd, it will 
nevertheless remain. This Balsam doth occupy the 
whole Anatomy of Bodies in living Creatures and 
Plants; in some Animals rather a certain Part, as 
the Heart, &c. and according to the Diversity of 
Impressions, Tincture, Abundance of Humours, 
Quality, and Difference, it produceth different and 
divers Actions. By virtue of this Balsam some 
Plants and Parts of Animals are of an Antipathy against 
Diseases; and by the Virtue and Power of this Bal-
sam some Parts of Animals are of a Sympathy with 
|P_23
some Parts of the human Body, aiding, strengthen-
ing, and preserving it in its radical Vigour. 

Who neglects this Principle, the Signature of 
Things, without overcoming a thorough Knowledge 
thereof, is unworthy of the Name of a Physician. 
If there were nothing else, the Knowledge of this 
Mystery would make a Physician excel in his Art, 
according to what Hippocrates says of those, who 
know before-hand which can be cured, and which 
must die. 

It cannot be denied, that every Disease hath its 
particular Signs, procuring the Knowledge thereof to 
us; and the same Signs are to be found in the Re-
medies also mark'd by Nature. We may therefore 
say in general, and with a great deal of Truth, that 
this Disease is a Disease for this Remedy, and this 
Remedy is a Remedy for this Disease. The Herb 
Tussilago is a Remedy for obstructed Lungs, because 
it weareth the same Mark. The Herbs Lingua Cer-
vina and Scolopendrium are a Remedy against a 
puff'd-up or swollen Milt, because they represent 
the Figure of the Milt. The maketh appear, that 
it is possible to overcome a Knowledge of Nature by 
the Signs of the Remedies; and that the Mystery 
of Sympathies and Antipathies, in respect of Things, 
as well as their Qualities, are of a vast Benefit for a 
Physician. 

These who are skilful in this secret Philosophy, 
and have watch'd Opportunities to experience Na-
ture's Strength, are capable of producing many 
wonderful Effects: And as the Way of their Pro-
ceedings, as in many other Things, is hidden and 
conceal'd, the unskilful not seldom ascribe the Cause 
of their Actions to the Delusions of Daemons; that 
is to say, to Magick call'd Goëtia, from Mourning; 
because it is an Invocation of evil Spirits near Tombs, 
and German-sisters to Necromancy, which, for call-
ing the Souls of the Dead, requireth the Effusion of 
|P_24
humane or some other Blood of black Cattle, where-
with Daemons are delighted. 

True Magick, grounded upon natural Causes, is 
nothing else but a thorough Knowledge of the Con-
cord or Discord between Stones, Herbs, Minerals, 
Animals, and the Stars, which, exactly to learn, re-
quireth a great deal of Wisdom, and is in no way 
contrary to divine Laws. 

This natural Magick hath always been honour'd 
and approv'd of by diligent Searchers in the celestial 
and sublunar Beings, as tending to the Admiration 
of the Works of God. Who is diving therein, can-
not but overcome a Knowledge of an infinite Num-
ber of Things, impossible to be understood by any 
other Means. 

It will add a great deal of Light to the further 
Unfolding of our Mystery, to make mention in this 
Place of some Experiments made with Rings of 
Gold, Silver, Latten, or any other Metal dedicated 
to celestial Bodies, whose Virtue one intends to pro-
cure to himself. I say of Rings, in whose Cavity is 
fasten'd a Stone, and under it an Herb of a Sympa-
thy with the same Star. Trallianus, Gordonius, 
Mesue, and many others, do report, that the Virtue 
thereof is to rejoice the Heart, and to expel Dis-
eases. 

Gyges, a King of Lydia, got a Stone, taken out 
of the Head of a Dragon, inclos'd in his Ring, 
which when he turn'd to the Palm of his Hand, he 
could be seen of none; but he himself could see 
every one; whence the Proverb, Gygis annulus: By 
the Help of this Ring, it is said, he flew Candaules,
and committed Adultery with his Wife. Alexander 
Trallianus tells us, that the Image of Hercules
strangling a Lyon, set in a Ring, cureth the Cholick. 
The Philosopher Eudaemus is said to have prepar'd 
Rings against Stingings of Serpents, Charms, and 
Diseases. Josephus, in his Antiquities, reports to 
|P_25
have seen, in the Presence of the Emperor Vespasia-
nus, one Eleazar, a Jew, apply to the Nose of one 
possess'd with a Daemon a Ring, under the Seal of 
which was laid a Root found by Solomon; and that 
this Eleazar did draw out of the Nose the Dæmon, 
who immediately falling on the Ground, was banish'd 
by him, upon reciting Solomon's conjuring Hymn 
against Dæmons. The same doth tell us, that 
Solomon hath been very skilful in Magicks: And that 
Moses, the Lawgiver of the Jews, did begin to learn 
Magicks in Egypt, where he made Rings of Love
and Forgetfulness: The Ring of Forgetfulness he gave 
to the Egyptian Women to forget him, which caused 
his free returning from Egypt. This was not per-
form'd by the Help of prohibited Magick, as Apol-
lonius and Lysimachus have tax'd Moses with, and 
therefore been refuted by the said Josephus; but by 
the Help of a thorough Knowledge of the celestial 
and sublunar Beings, their Destination and Virtues. 
And it is known, that Empedocles, Pythagoras, De-
mocritus, and Plato himself, learn'd Magicks from 
the Egyptian Priests. 

It is therefore not generous, to call intirely in 
question all Cures perform'd by Characters, graven 
Images tied to the Neck, &c. because their Opera-
tion is natural, and perform'd by the wonderful In-
fluence of the celestial Bodies agreeing with our Bo-
dies. It is not reasonable intirely to deny Credit to w
hat our Ancestors, diligent Searchers in Nature's 
Closet, have left to Posterity, in respect of Charac-
ters and Seals, wrought at certain times, according 
to the Virtue and Influence of the Bodies above us, 
without any Superstition, (which is fram'd only by 
the Ignorance of this Mystery) without any Profa-
nation, or Offence to the Name of God, and with-
out any Violation of Faith or Religion. That this 
useful Knowledge hath in After-times been so very 
much hidden, and seems at this Day almost intirely 
|P_26
lost, can be ascrib'd to no other Reason but to the 
Misuse of these characters. Men falling to Super-
stition, and not understanding the Reason of their 
Working, did attribute more to them than our 
Creator had granted, and intended to discover there-
by. I am very far off to attribute to these Images 
a Virtue in themselves; nor do I affirm, that Cha-
racters or Names, graven under Constellations, have 
a Virtue by reason of the Figure; because the Figure, 
Number, Bigness, Situation, and the Solution of 
what is continual, are no Principles of Actions. I 
would intirely deny their Virtue, in case there were 
nothing else acting or moving, by whose Authority 
Characters are powerful. I have been oblig'd to in-
large upon this Subject for Reason to make appear 
what is true, it being the Perfection of our Under-
standing; and to shew what Difference there is be-
tween true and physical Signaturae, and superstitious 
and unlawful ones, which, for Contemplation-sake, 
we may know, but no-where but in Practice. There 
is no Virtue in Heaven and Earth, which hath not 
its Offspring from God: Also Medicines are visible 
to the Body, Words invisible to the Body; now if 
Herbs or Words are curing, the Cause is notwith-
standing in God; therefore the Herb itself is not the 
Medicine, but it is hidden in it invisibly by God. 
It shews a great deal of Ignorance to condemn, or 
to deride things remote or distant from our Senses, 
and not fit to be comprehended by them. Who is 
not astonish'd at the wonderful Effects of precious 
Stones? Nevertheless we cannot deny, that there is 
a great natural Power in them, chiefly when under 
certain Constellations certain Figures and Signatures 
are graved therein. It is false what some report, 
that the Effects of precious Stones are produced by 
a magical Virtue, and not by a natural one: It pro-
ceeds from the School of Magicians, who used pre-
cious Stones, graven under certain Constellations, 
|P_27
for a Pretext of their Inchantments. It is sufficient-
ly known, that an Emerald gets loose from the 
Finger at the Death of the Person it is worn by; 
and that a Stone, which comes from New Spain,
known by the Name of Lapis Nephriticus, is of 
great Efficacy against the Stone in the Kidneys, if 
but bound to one's Arm. Who does not admire 
the Virtues of a Turquois? and an infinite Number 
of Experiments made with precious Stones, as well 
as Herbs, could be quoted; which if they do not 
every-where, and not always answer, nevertheless do 
not deserve to be call'd in question; because not 
every thing doth every-where and always concur, 
and the Rarity or Singularity of Effects doth never 
take away the Cause in Nature; for wonderful 
Things in Nature are perform'd by a due Applica-
tion of Actives to Passives hereunto dispos'd so 
closely and so secretly, that the Cause thereof seems 
exceedingly remote or distant. It is outragious to 
ascribe every thing immediately to the Works of Beel-
zebub, which are remote from our Senses, as if a 
hidden Virtue in Nature, the Instrument of the Di-
vine Power, was not able to produce many wonder-
ful Things without the Assistance of this Prince of 
evil Spirits. It is likewise outragious in such, who 
intirely given to Superstition, either out of Igno-
rance, or out of a foolish Doubtfulness, maintain the 
most evident Things to proceed from hidden Causes, 
who, besides the Colour and Taste, ascribe no other 
Virtues to Plants; as if a particular Concord or 
Agreement between them and something above us, 
was not capable to produce, besides their first sen-
sual Virtues, some hidden ones; witness the daily 
Experience. I take it, therefore, to be very indis-
creet to assign, in singular Facts, no other Cause than 
what seems to us to be; for who can deny, that 
either by some Inspiration, or by Chance and meer 
Accidents, Effects are produced semblable to natural 
|P_28
ones? And it is sufficient for one, who understand-
eth or setteth out the Causes of Things natural, to 
have shew'd such a semblable Effect to be the Effect 
of natural Causes, either always or for the most part, 
And tho' the Event doth not always answer, never-
theless the Power and Motion in Nature is not to be 
denied; because all Causes for producing one Effect 
do seldom concur, which is to be seen in Things, 
which, for reason of their Fewness, Variety, and 
Singularity, are consider'd as Miracles and Prodigies; 
for these Things have natural Causes, but they are 
seldom dispos'd or ready for the like Effects. If 
therefore the Effect is natural, the Cause must be the 
same, and also contrarywise. Now the Effects of 
Images, graven under the Constellation of certain 
celestial Bodies, are natural; consequently the Cause 
thereof must likewise be natural. And tho' this 
Cause is hidden, and hard to be understood, and 
very remote from our outward Senses, nevertheless 
there is no Occasion to have recourse to a diabolical 
Power; but we ought attentively to consider by 
what Help, and by what Concurrence of Causes, 
such an Effect is produced or not produced; and we 
ought rather to take an Opportunity from these mar-
vellous Causes, and the natural Effects produced by 
them, to acknowledge and to proclaim the wonder-
ful Power of God; who having evidently implanted 
such marvellous Virtues in Nature, how wonderful 
must He appear in Things intirely hidden from 
us? 

Having sent this before, I proceed to the Seals 
themselves. The Image of Jupiter is graved in a 
white or clear Stone, or pure Silver or Pewter, for 
procuring a healthful Life, Honour and Riches. 

The Image of Mars against Timorousness and 
Pusillanimity. 

The Image of Sol in pure Gold, for procuring the 
|P_29
Favour of Kings and Princes, and for curing Diseases 
afflicting the Heart. 

The Image of Venus holding in her Hand Flowers 
and Apples, for procuring Mirth, Beauty and 
Strength to the Body. 

The Image of Mercury, to sharpen Memory. 

The Image of Luna, to procure Honour and 
Wealth, and to cure Diseases afflicting the Brains. 
These Seals are to be made under certain Constella-
tions, diligently and exactly to be observed by one 
skillful in Astrology; and as there is a great Nicety 
requir'd for making them, I think proper to send 
my Readers to the Authors themselves, who have 
treated of these I have related, as well as of a great 
many more, in an ample manner, satisfactory to each 
one's Desires. I proceed now to other Images and 
Monuments, to whom the antient Sophi and Doc-
tors ascribe a marvellous Virtue, if they are ingra-
ved in convenient Stones and worn and kept with 
Honour and Reverence (without all manner of 
Superstition.) The first of all are the Arcana's of the 
ancient and great Rhagael, who is said to have ex-
perienc'd the following, viz.

The Image of a comely Dragon, graved in a Ruby 
or any other Stone of the like nature, to have a Vir-
tue to increase Wealth, and to keep him who wear-
eth it in Health and Chearfulness. 

The Image of a Falcon, graved in a Topaz, to 
help to acquire the Benevolence of Kings, Princes 
and great People. 

The Image of an Astrolabium, an Instrument 
wherewith the Motions of the Stars are gathered 
and the Distance, to keep him who weareth it, 
healthfull and free from all Diseases and unfortunate 
Accidents in travelling. 

The Figure of a Frog, graved in a precious Stone 
call'd Beryl, found in India, in Fashion fix-square, 
in Colour like Oyl or Water in the Sea, to have the 
|P_30
Virtue to reconcile Enemies, and make Friendship 
amongst Men, by touching only Persons being at 
Variane. 

The Image of a Bat, graved in a precious Stone 
call'd Heliotropium, in colour green like a Leek 
Blade, to make him who weareth it able to resist 
Daemons. 

The Image of a well-dress'd Man having some-
thing in his Hand which is handsome, being gra-
ven in a Cornelian, to have the Virtue to stop Blood, 
and to help to Honour. 

The Image of Leo or Sagittarius, graven in a 
Stone, to resist Poison, and to free from Agues. 

The Image of a Man with a Sword in his Hand, 
graven in a Cornelian, to preserve the Place wherein 
it is, against Lightning and Thunder. 

The Image of a Man with his right Hand erec-
ted, graven in a Chalcedony, to enable him who 
wears it to accomodate Quarrels, to make him heal-
thy, and overcome all Accidents in travelling. 

The Name of God being graven in a precious 
Stone call'd Cerauni, of a high Colour with a Star 
in the midst of it, to preserve every Place where 
this graven Image is, against Tempests, and to give 
him who weareth it Strength and Victory against 
his Enemies. 

The Image of an armed Man graven in a Load-
stone, to render him who weareth it victorious in 
War. So far Rhagel.

[/3./]

Chael, one of the Sons of the Chil-
dren of Israel, a very ancient Doctor, 
during the time he was in the Wilder-
ness, made many Observations, and 
caused Figures to be graved according to the Course 
of the Planets. Perceiving the Effects thereof, he 
compiled a Book of the Virtue of such Images, 
amongst which the following are the most notablest. 
Hallowed be God, who hath given such Virtues to 
|P_31
the Earth for the Welfare of the human Generation. 
These Words are to be found in the very Beginning 
of the Book written by the said Chael.

The Figure of a Man sitting behind a Plow, with 
a long Beard, a long Face and bent Eye-brows, four 
Men leaning upon his Neck, he himself having in 
his Hands a Fox and a Vulture; if such a Stone in 
which these things are graven, is tyed to one's Neck, 
he will be able to discover hidden Treasures; he will 
dream of Treasures, and of the manner to overcome 
them. There is still another Virtue to free Beasts 
from Sickness, if they drink the Water wherein 
this Stone hath been washed. This Stone must be 
graved in the day and hour of Venus. But what 
Stone is must be, is not signify'd. 

The Image of a Man, having on his Neck a 
Shield, on his Head a Helmet, and in his Hand a 
Sword, treading under Foot a Serpent, being graven 
in a red Jasper, and ty'd to the Neck, is to make 
him who weareth it to overcome his Enemies in a 
Battle, chiefly if such a Battle is fought on a Tues-
day.

The Image of a Horse, having above a Croco-
dile, graven in a Jacinct, to have the Virtue to help 
him who weareth it to his just Demands, to make 
him beloved or lovely. It must be set in Gold, be-
cause Gold causeth its Virtue to increase. 

The Figure of a Man sitting and a Woman stand-
ing before him with her Hairs spread abroad, the 
Man looking upwards; this Figure also graven in a 
Cornelian, will procure the Benevolence of every 
Body touch'd therewith. Under the Stone must be 
put a little Ambergrise and Turpentine. 

A Man sitting with a lighted Candle in his Hand, 
being graved in a Chrysolite, hath the Virtue to 
cause him who weareth it, to become rich. It must 
be set in the finest Gold that can be had. 

|P_32
A Stag, or a Hunter, or a Dog, or a Hare, gra-
ven in a Stone, hath the Virtue to tame lunatick and 
frantick People. 

The Image of a woman, having in one Hand a 
Bird, and in the other a Fish, graven in a Stone, to 
have a Virtue in fishing and fowling. It must be 
set in Silver. 

An Image, whose Forepart is a Horse, and the 
Backpart a She Goat, being graved in a Stone, is of 
a Virtue to give Luck in bringing up and feeding all 
kinds of Animals. It must be set in Lead. 

The Image of a Vulture, with an Olive-Branch in 
his Bill, being engraved in a Stone call'd Pyrites[/4./]
and worn in a Silver Ring, is to cause him who 
weareth it to be look'd at with Admiration and 
Amazement. 

The Figure of a Ram and a Lyon, graven in a 
precious Stone, has a Virtue to reconcile discordant 
People, being touched therewith. It is to be set in 
Silver. 

The Figure of a Basilisk fighting with a Dragon, 
and above it the Head of a Man graven in a Corne-
lian and ty'd to the Neck, causeth him who wear-
eth it to vanquish all kind of Beasts, as well on Earth 
as in the Sea. 

The Figure of a naked Man puff'd up, and the 
Figure of another Man well dress'd, having in one 
Hand a Cup, and in the other a Bough of an Herb 
or Plant, being graved in an Agath, has a Virtue to 
free from all kind of Fevers and Agues, if it is worn 
only for three Days. 

The Figure of Scorpio and Sagittarius fighting to-
gether, graven in a Stone, and set in an Iron Ring 
and printed into Wax, is to make Discord instantly 
amongst such who are touched therewith. 

|P_33
The Figure of half a Woman and half a Fish; 
the Woman having in one Hand a Looking-glass, 
and in the other a Bough, being graved in a Jacinct 
and set in Gold, is to make invisible him who 
weareth it as often as he pleaseth. The Seal is to be 
covered with Wax, and to be worn towards the 
Palm of the Hand. This Figure is mentioned twice 
by the same Author with almost the same Words. 

The Figure of a Serpent, above it a Man, and on 
the Man sitting a Raven, being graved in a Stone, to 
make him who weareth it witty and prudent. 

The Figure of a Man standing, and being cloathed 
with a Coat of Mail, and having a naked Sword in 
his Hand, being found graved in a Stone, and set 
in an Iron Ring of the same Weight, to cause him 
who weareth it to be irresistible in War. 

The Figure of a Man with a Beard, and a long 
Face; and bent Eye-brows; sitting upon a Plow 
between two Bulls, being graved in a Stone, to 
cause him, who weareth it, to be prosperous in 
Husbandry; to discover Treasures; to be valiant in 
Fighting; to convert Enemies into Friends; to resist 
many Diseases; and to make Serpents fly from his 
Face: To be likewise powerful against the Falling-
Sickness; and being Worn by a sick Person, to re-
cover Health immediately. To cause the Virtue to 
be still stronger, it must be set in Iron, double the 
Weight in respect of the Stone. 

The Figure of an Eagle graven in a precious 
Stone called Ætites; and set in a Ring of Lead, to 
cause him, who weareth it, to be beloved by every 
body, and be obeyed by all Kind of Animals. Ac-
cording to Pliny this Stone is found in an Eagle's 
Nest, and is like an Eagle with a white Tail, with-
out which, it is thought, that the Eagle cannot lay 
her Eggs. Of this Stone is reported, that being 
|P_34
laid to a Woman's Thigh, it causeth quick Deliver-
ance. 

The Sign of Capricorn, graved in a Cornelian or in 
any other Stone, and set in Silver, to cause him who 
weareth it to abound in Honour, to acquire every 
Body's Friendship, and to be able to resist every Body 
in Fighting, how stout and valiant soever they may 
be. Thus far Chael.

[/5./][/6./]

The Image of a Man of a great Sta-
ture, standing, graved in a Stone call'd Diadochus, 
(a Stone like a Beryl) having in the right Hand an 
Obolus, or an Halfpenny, and in the other a Ser-
pent, above him the Figure of the Sun, and under 
his Feet keeping a Lion prostrate; if such a Stone 
is set in a Ring of Lead with a little of Mugwort or 
Motherwort, and the Root of Fenugreek, it will 
impower him who weareth it, to call on the Shore 
of a River the Spirits belonging to the Waters, and 
to receive answer to what he is asking of them. 

The Figure of Aquarius, (one of the Signs of the 
Zodiack) being graved in a green Jasper, and worn, 
causeth Profit in buying and selling. A Bird carry-
ing in his Bill a Leaf, and the Head of a Man being 
in his Sight looking at the Bird, if this is graved in a 
precious Stone, called Pangonius, having many 
Angles, and set in Gold, is to cause him who wear-
eth it to become rich and respected by every Body. 

The Figure of Jupiter, which is a Man sitting on 
a Bench or Chair with four Feet, four Men standing 
before Jupiter, and Jupiter having his Hands 
erected towards Heaven, and on his Head a Dia-
dem; if such a Figure is graved in a Jacinct, and set 
in Gold, and this Ring worn, or an Impression there-
|P_35
of made in Wax, and tyed to the Neck of a Person, 
it will cause him to have granted of Kings and wise 
People, every thing he desireth. 

The Figure of a Man on Horseback, holding in 
one Hand the Bridle, and in the other a Bow bent, 
and girded with a Sword; if such a Figure is graved 
in a precious Stone call'd Pyrites, before mentioned, 
and set in Gold, it is to render him who weareth it 
victorious in a Battle, and no body can resist him. 

The Figure of a Woman, having her Hairs spread 
over her Breast, and in her Sight a Man as coming 
unto her and making some Signs of Love, being 
graved in a Jacinct or Crystal and set in Gold, and 
under the Stone a little Ambergrise. Aloe and Mug-
wort or Motherwort, will cause him who weareth 
such a Stone in a Ring to be obey'd by every body, 
and if he toucheth a Woman therewith she will love 
him; and if he layeth it under his Head at going 
to Bed, he will see any thing he desireth. 

The Image of a Man sitting over a Fish, and over 
the Head of the Man a Peacock, being graved in a 
red Stone, and laid under the Table at a Feast, no 
Body, eating with the right Hand, will be satiated. 

The Image of a naked Man standing, and at his 
right Hand a Girl likewise standing, whose Hairs 
are tyed round the Head, and the Man is holding his 
left Hand over her Breast, and the Right round her 
Neck, looking in her Face, and the Girl looking 
downwards; if such a Figure is graved in a Stone 
and set in an Iron Ring, and under the Stone laid a 
little Bit of a Sparrow's Tongue, and of that of a 
Bird called Upupa, Myrrh, Alum, and human 
Blood; the Person who weareth such a Ring will 
be invincible, no body can resist, and no Beast can 
hurt him. It will cure the Falling Sickness, if red 
Wax is seal'd therewith and tyed to the Neck; and 
|P_36
if it is held to the Neck of a Dog, it will stop his 
barking. 

The Image of a Man holding Flowers in his Hand, 
being graved in a Cornelian, and set in a Pewter 
Ring, the Ring being made on a Monday or Friday
in the 4th, 8th or 12th Hour, every Body will obey 
who is touched with this Ring. 

The Figure of a Man bearded, with a long 
Face and bended Eyebrows, sitting upon a Plow, 
between two Bulls, and having a Vulture in his 
Hand, being graved in a Stone, is of Virtue to cause 
good Success in planting of Trees, discovering of 
Treasures, and to be victorious in Battles. It cureth 
the Falling Sickness, and must be set and worn in 
an Iron Ring. 

The Figure of a Man holding a Scythe in his Hand 
over his Head, and under his Feet a Crocodile, being 
graved in a Stone, and set in a leaden Ring, and 
under the Stone laid a little of the Root of an Herb 
call'd Sea-Onyon, is to cause him who weareth it 
to be secure against all his Enemies, and on Jour-
nies against Robbers and Highwaymen. 

The Figure of a Man holding a Sword in his 
Hand, and sitting on a Dragon, being graved in an 
Amethyst, and set in a leaden or Iron Ring, is to 
procure to him who weareth such a Ring, the Obe-
dience of all Spirits and Discovery of all Treasures. 

The Figure of an Eagle standing, graved in a pre-
cious Stone call'd Aetites, before mentioned, and set 
in a leaden Ring, causeth him who weareth it to be 
successful in fishing; no Beast can hurt him, and he 
is beloved by every Body. 

The Figure of a Man, having in his Hand a 
Bough of a Palm or Date Tree, being graved in a 
Stone, is to render him who weareth it acceptable 
and beloved by Princes and great People. As much 
out of Hermes.

|P_37
[/7./]

Thetel, a very antient Doctor, writing 
of Gravings in Stones, relateth the follow-
ing Seals to be of a great Virtue. 

The Image of a Man graved in a 
Jasper, having a Shield in the left and some Wea-
pons in the right Hand; instead of the Feet, Vipers, 
and instead of a Man's Head, a Head of a Cock 
or Lyon, to be of Virtue against Enemies, and to 
cause him who weareth it, to be victorious; and 
that such a Stone is prevailing against Poison, and 
stayeth Blood from what Place soever it proceeds. 

The Figure of a Man having a Bundle of Flowers 
on his Neck, graved in a Jasper, to give Virtue to 
understand Diseases, and to stop Blood from what 
place soever it proceeds. And it is said that Galen
had such a Stone. 

A Woman having in one Hand a Bird, and in 
the other a Fish, graved in a Chrysolite, to profit 
much in negotiating. 

The Figure of a Stag, graved in a Jasper, to have 
the Virtue to cure lunatick and frantick People. 

The Figure of a Virgin with a long Garment, 
holding a Laurel in her Hand, being graved in a Jas-
per, to secure him who weareth it from being drown'd, 
and to procure every thing to be granted to him. So 
far Thetel.

[/8./][/9./]

The Figure of a Man sitting on a Plough, having 
a short Neck and a long Beard, four Men lying upon 
his Neck, holding in one Hand a Fox, and in the 
other a Vulture; such a Seal being tied to the Neck, 
is profitable to Husbandry and discovering of Trea-
|P_38
sures. The Trial thereof is to be made following, 
viz. Take pure black Wool without being dyed, 
wrap your Stone therein, and after having laid it be-
tween Wheat Straw, lay your Head upon it, and you 
will see in your Sleep all the Treasures of the Coun-
try you are in. It hath likewise the Virtue to cure 
all Languishings of Beasts, if they drink of the Wa-
ter wherein this Stone hath been wash'd. 

A Man graved in a green Jasper, having a Shield 
bending on his Neck, and a Helmet upon his Head, 
with a Sword erected, treading upon a Serpent; such 
a Stone if you wear on your Neck, you will fear no 
Enemy; you will be victorious in every thing, but 
chiefly in martial Things. It must be set in Brass. 

A Horse carrying on its Back a Crocodile, graved 
in a white Jacinct, to render one beloved by Men and 
Beasts. 

The Figure of a Man sitting, and a Woman stand-
ing before him with her Hairs hanging down to the 
Thighs, lifting her Eyes upwards, being graved in a 
Cornelian, hath the Virtue to cause every Body to 
be obedient. It must be set in double the Weight of 
Gold, and under it laid Betony and Ambergrise. 

A Horse foaming, and a Man upon its Back hav-
ing a Scepter in his Hand, graved in an Amethyst, 
is to procure the Favour of Princes and great People 
to him who weareth it. It must be set in Gold or 
Silver of double the Weight in respect to the Stone. 

The Head of a Man, with a long Beard and a 
little Blood about his Neck, being graved in a Dia-
mond, procureth Victory and Audacity, preserveth 
the Body from being hurt, and causeth Favour from 
Princes. 

The Image of a Cock, or of three Girls, being 
grave in an Agath, maketh him who weareth it 
beloved by Men. 

The Figure of a Lyon graved in a Gernet, is to 
|P_39
procure Riches, to rejoyce the Heart and to expell 
Sadness. 

The Figure of a Man, like a Merchant carrying 
Goods to sell, graved in an Emerald, is to procure 
Riches, to make victorious, and to ease from Troubles 
and Grief of Mind. 

The Figure of a Bull or a Calf, graved in a Load-
stone, to procure a prosperous Journey through every 
Place one travelleth, and to secure against Enchant-
ments. 

The Figure of a Horse or a Wolf, graved in a 
Jasper, to cure Fevers and to stop Blood. 

The Figure of a Man armed with a Sword in his 
Hand, graved in Stone call'd Sardius[/10./], or in an 
Amethyst, to procure to him who weareth it a good 
Memory, and to make him witty. 

The Figure of a Stag or a Buck Goat, graved in 
a Chalcedony, hath the Virtue to increase Riches if 
it is worn in a Purse where is Money in. 

The Figure of a Lobster (Locusta Marina)gra-
ved in a Beryl, to make up Quarrels and to cause 
Love between married People. 

The Figure of a Night-Crow or Raven (Nocti-
corax or Nycticorax, a Bird dedicated to Pallas) gra-
ved in a Stone, to cause a Man to be skillful and 
eloquent. 

The Image of a Peacock graved in a convenient 
Stone, to make him who weareth it rich. 

The Figure of a Man, killing with a Sword a 
Lyon or any other Beast, to make him who wear-
eth it victorious and beloved. 

The Figure of a naked Man, puffed up and 
crowned, holding in one Hand a great Cup, and in 
the other a Bough of an Herb, being graved in an 
|P_40
Agath Stone, and set in a Ring of any Metal, hath 
the Virtue to free him who weareth it immediately 
from a Fever. 

The Figure of a Man sitting on Fishes, graved in 
a red Jasper, and laid near one, is to hinder him to 
be satiated, in case he eateth with his right Hand. 

The Figure of a Woman, having her Hairs spread 
abroad, her Breasts naked, in her Sight being a Man 
looking in her Face; if this Figure is graved in a 
Jacinct, Garnet or Crystal, and set in a Ring of Gold 
of the same Weight as the Stone is, and under the 
Stone Ambergrise, Aloe and Polypody, it will pro-
cure to him who weareth it the Love and Regard 
of every body, and if he layeth it under his Head 
he will see in his sleep every thing he desireth to see. 

The Figure of a Man being on Horseback, hold-
ing in one Hand the Bridle, and in the other a Bow, 
and being girded with a Sword; if such a Figure is 
graved in a Stone call'd Pyrites, before mention'd, 
and set in a golden Ring, it hath the Virtue to make 
him who weareth it victorious in Battles, and no 
body can resist him; if he dippeth the Ring in Oil 
of Nutmegs, every Body will fear him, and if he 
anointeth his Face with this Oil, no body will oppose 
him. 

The Figure of a naked Man, and at his right 
Hand standing a Girl naked, and having her Hairs 
tied about her Head, the Man laying his right Hand 
round the Neck of the Girl, and the left upon her 
Breast, the Man looking in the Face of the Girl, and 
she towards the Ground; if such a Figure is graved 
in a Loadstone, and set in a Ring of Iron of as much 
Weight as the Stone is, and under the Stone laid the 
Tongue of an Houp (Upupa) Myrrh, Alum, and 
as much human Blood as the Weight of the Tongue, 
no body can resist him who weareth such a Ring 
either in War or elsewhere, no Robber nor savage 
|P_41
Beast can come in the House where such a Stone is 
kept; and one afflicted with the falling Sickness, is 
cured by drinking the Water wherein this Ring is 
washed. If a Piece of red Wax is seal'd with this 
Image and tied to the Neck of a Dog, it will hin-
der him to bark. 

The Figure of a Woman, holding in one Hand a 
Bird, and in the other a Fish, graved in Crystal, 
is profitable in Catching of Birds. It must be set in 
Silver. 

The Figure of a Man with the Head of a Buck-
Goat instead of his own, to be powerful in acquiring 
of Riches. 

The Figure of an Eagle graved in a Crystal, to 
make him who weareth it rich, victorious and elo-
quent. 

The Figure of a Turtle graved in a Stone call'd 
Pangonius (a precious Stone with many Angles) and 
set in a leaden Ring, is to cause him who weareth it 
to be never wounded nor hurted, and to be honour'd 
by every body, chiefly by old People. 

The Figure of a Bird holding a Leaf in his Bill, 
and in his Sight being the Head of a Man or of a 
Vulture, graved in Gold, is to procure to him who 
weareth it Profit in every thing he buyeth and sel-
leth, and to draw Customers to him. 

The Figure of a winged Horse, called Pegasus, be-
ing graved in a Stone, to be profitable to Warriours, 
and to give Audacity and Alacrity. 

Mars armed, or a Virgin with a Garment bended 
or turned round about her, being graved in Jasper, 
is to be useful in Warfare, to secure him who wear-
eth it against a violent Death and other unlucky Ac-
cidents. 

The Figure of an armed Man on Horseback, with 
a Javelin in his Hand, graved in an Amethyst, is to 
cause him who weareth it to be victorious in War. 

|P_42
The Figure of Hercules, holding in his right Hand 
a Club, and killing a Lyon or any other Monster, 
being graved in a Stone, hath the Virtue to him 
who weareth it, Victory in all Battles. 

The Figure of a Virgin holding a Lamp, being 
graved in a Crystal, hath the Virtue to preserve 
the Eye Sight. 

The Figure of Aries, Leo, and Sagittarius, graved 
in a precious Stone, to prevail against cold Diseases, 
and to resist phlegmatick Fevers, and by reason of the 
Planets which are ruling in these Signs, to procure 
Dignities, to make beloved by God and Men, elo-
quent and ingenious; but it must be graved triangu-
lar-wise, in the upper Part Leo, and below at the 
right Hand Aries, and at the left Sagittarius.

The Figure of Taurus, Virgo, and Capricornus,
graved in a Stone, is to prevail against hot and moist 
Diseases. It causeth him who weareth it to incline 
to rural Business, as plowing, planting, sowing, culti-
vating of Vineyards and the like. Capricornus must 
be graved in the Cone, at the right Hand Taurus, and 
at the left Virgo.

The Image of Gemini, Libra and Aquarius,gra-
ved in a Stone, is powerful against cold and dry 
Diseases arising from melancholic Humours; chiefly 
it prevails against Quartans. Libra must be graved 
at the Point of the Triangle, and at the right of 
the Basis Aquarius, and at the left Gemini.

The Figure of Cancer, Scorpio and Pisces, graved 
in a Stone, hath the Virtue to prevail against hot and 
dry Diseases, and such as do proceed from Choler; 
but it causeth him who weareth it to be inconstant, 
unjust, and an Enemy to Truth. Cancer must be 
graved at the Point of the Triangle, below, at the 
right Hand Pisces, and at the left Scorpio.
