

[^Sample 1: book - ^]

|P_3[^An ornamental horizontal column, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}SIRIS: 
A Chain of 
Philosophical Reflexions 
AND 
INQUIRIES, &c.}]
For Introduction to the following 
piece I assure the reader, that no- 
thing could, in my present situation, 
have induced me to be at the pains 
of writing it, but a firm belief that it would 
prove a valuable present to the Public. 
What entertainment soever the reasoning 
or notional part may afford the mind, I will 
venture to say, the other part seemeth so 
surely calculated to do good to the Body, that 
|P_4
both must be gainers. For if the lute be not 
well tuned, the musician fails of his har- 
mony. And in our present state, the opera- 
tions of the mind, so far depend on the right 
tone or good condition of it's instrument, 
that any thing which greatly contributes to 
preserve or recover the health of the body, is 
well worth the attention of the mind. These 
considerations have moved me to communi- 
cate to the Public the salutary virtues of Tar 
water; to which I thought my self indispen- 
sibly obliged, by the duty every man owes 
to mankind. And, as effects are linked with 
their causes, my thoughts on this low but 
useful theme led to farther inquiries, and those 
on to others remote, perhaps, and speculative 
but, I hope, not altogether useless or unen- 
tertaining. 

1. IN certain parts of America, Tar water 
is made by putting a quart of cold wa- 
ter to a quart of tar, and stirring them well 
together in a vessel, which is left standing till 
the tar sinks to the bottom. A glass of clear 
water being poured off for a draught is repla- 
ced by the same quantity of fresh water, the 
vessel being shaken and left to stand as before. 
And this is repeated for every glass; so long 
as the tar continues to impregnate the water 
|P_5
sufficiently, which will appear by the smell 
and taste. But as this method produceth tar 
water of different degrees of strength, I chuse 
to make it in the following manner. Pour a 
gallon of cold water on a quart of tar, and 
stir and mix them thoroughly with a ladle or 
flat stick far the space of three or four minutes, 
after which the vessel must stand eight and for- 
ty hours that the tar may have time to sub- 
side, when the clear water is to be poured off 
and kept for use, no more being made from 
the same tar, which may still serve for com- 
mon purposes. 

2. This cold infusion of tar hath been used 
in some of our colonies, as a preservative or 
preparative against the small-pox, which fo- 
reign practice induced me to try it in my own 
neighbourhood, when the small-pox raged 
with great violence. And the tryal fully an- 
swered my expectation: all those, within my 
knowledge, who took the tar water having 
either escaped that distemper, or had it very 
favourably. In one family there was a re- 
emarkable instance of seven children, who 
came all very well through the small pox, ex- 
cept one young child which cou'd not be 
brought to drink tar water as the rest had 
done. 

|P_6
3. Several were preserved from taking 
the small pox by the use of this liquor: 
others had it in the mildest manner, and others 
that they might be able to take the infection 
were obliged to intermit drinking the tar-water. 
I have found it may be drunk with great safe- 
ty and success for any length of time, and this 
not only before, but also during the distemper. 
The general rule for taking it is, about half 
a pint night and morning on an empty stomach, 
which quantity may be varied, according to 
the case and age of the patient, provided it 
be always taken on an empty stomach, and 
about two hours before or after a meal. 

4. It seemed probable, that a medicine of 
such efficacy in a distemper attended with so 
many purulent ulcers, might be also useful in 
other foulnesses of the blood, accordingly I 
tried it on several persons infected with cuta- 
neous eruptions and ulcers, who were soon re- 
lieved, and soon after cured. Encouraged by 
these Successes I ventured to advise it in the 
foulest distempers, wherein it proved much 
more successful than Salivations and wood 
drinks had done. 

|P_7
5. Having tried it in a great variety of 
cases, I found it succeed beyond my hopes; 
in a tedious and painful ulceration of the bow- 
els, in a consumptive cough and (as appeared 
by expectorated pus) an ulcer in the lungs; 
in a pleurisy and peripneumony. And when 
a person, who for some years had been sub- 
ject to erysipelatous fevers, perceived the usu- 
al fore-running symptoms to come on, I ad- 
vised her to drink tar water which prevented 
the erysipelas. 

6. I never knew any thing so good for 
the stomach as tar water: it cures indigestion 
and gives a good appetite. It is an excellent 
medicine in an asthma. It imparts a kindly 
warmth and quick circulation to the juices 
without heating, and is therefore useful, not 
only as a pectoral and balsamic, but also as 
a powerful and safe deobstruent in cachectic 
and hysteric cases. As it is both healing and 
diuretic, it is very good for the gravel. I be- 
lieve it to be of great use in a dropsy, having 
known it cure a very bad anasarca in a per- 
son whose thirst, though very extraordinary, 
was in a short time removed by the drink- 
ing of tar water. 

|P_8
7. The usefulness of this medicine in 
inflammatory cases is evident, from what 
has been already observed [/1./]. And yet 
some perhaps may suspect that, as the tar it 
self is sulphureous, tar water must be of a hot 
and inflaming nature. But it is to be noted 
that all balsams contain an acid spirit, which 
is in truth a volatile salt. Water is a men- 
struum that dissolves all sorts of salts, and 
draws them from their subjects. Tar, there- 
fore, being a balsam, it's salutary acid is ex- 
tracted by water, which yet is incapable of 
dissolving it's gross resinous parts, whose 
proper menstruum is spirit of wine. There- 
fore tar water, not being impregnated with 
resin, may be safely used in inflammatory 
cases: and in fact it hath been found an ad- 
mirable febrifuge, at once the safest cooler and 
cordial. 

8. The volatile salts separated by in- 
fusion from tar, may be supposed to contain 
it's specific vertues. Mr. Boyle and other 
later Chymists are agreed, that fixed salts are 
much the same in all bodies. But it is well 
known that volatile salts do greatly differ, 
and the easier they are separated from the 
|P_9
subject, the more do they possess of its spe- 
cific qualities. Now the most easy separa- 
tion is by infusion of tar in cold water, which 
to smell and taste shewing it self well impreg- 
nated, may be presumed to extract and re- 
tain the most pure volatile and active par- 
ticles of that vegetable balsam. 

9. Tar was by the ancients esteemed 
good against poisons, ulcers, the bites of ve- 
nomous creatures, also for pthisical, scrophu- 
lous, paralitic and asthmatic persons. But the 
method of rendering it an inoffensive medicine 
and agreeable to the stomach, by extracting 
it's virtues in cold water, was unknown to 
them. The leaves and tender tops of pine 
and fir are in our times used for diet drinks, 
and allowed to be antiscorbutic and diuretic. 
But the most elaborate juice, salt, and spirit 
of those evergreens are to be found in tar; 
whose virtues extend not to animals alone, 
but also to vegetables. Mr. Evelyn in his 
treatise on Forest trees observes with wonder, 
that stems of trees, smeared over with tar, 
are preserved thereby from being hurt by the 
invenomed teeth of goats and other injuries, 
while every other thing of an unctuous na- 
ture is highly prejudicial to them. 

|P_10
10. It seems that tar and turpentine may 
be had more or less, from all sorts of pines 
and firs whatsoever; and that the native 
spirits and essential salts of those vegetables 
are the same in turpentine and common tar. 
In effect this vulgar tar, which cheapness and 
plenty may have rendered contemptible, ap- 
pears to be an excellent balsam, containing 
the virtues of most other balsams, which it 
easily imparts to water, and by that means 
readily and inoffensively insinuates them into 
the habit of the body. 

11. The resinous exsudations of pines and 
firs are an important branch of the materia 
medica, and not only useful in the prescrip- 
tions of physicians, but have been also 
thought otherwise conducive to health. Pliny 
tells us, that wines in the time of the old 
Romans were medicated with pitch and resin; 
and Jonstonus in his Dendrographia observes 
that it is wholesome to walk in groves of 
pine trees, which impregnate the air with 
balsamic particles. That all turpentines and 
resins are good for the lungs, against gravel 
also and obstructions, is no secret. And that 
the medicinal properties of those drugs are 
found in Tar water, without heating the 
|P_11
blood, or disordering the stomach, is con- 
firmed by experience: and particularly that 
pthisical and asthmatic persons receive speedy 
and great relief from the use of it. 

12. Balsams, as all unctuous and oily 
medicines, create a nauseating in the stomach. 
They cannot therefore be taken in substance, 
so much or so long, as to produce all those 
salutary effects, which, if thoroughly mixed 
with the blood and juices, they wou'd be 
capable of producing. It must therefore be a 
thing of great benefit, to be able to introduce 
any requisite quantity of their volatile parts 
into the finest ducts and capillaries, so as not 
to offend the stomach, but, on the contrary, 
to comfort and strengthen it in a great degree. 

13. According to Pliny, liquid pitch 
(as he calls it) or Tar was obtained by set- 
ting fire to billets of old fat pines or firs. 
The first running was tar, the later or 
thicker running was pitch. Theophrastus is 
more particular: he tells us the Macedoni- 
ans made huge heaps of the cloven trunks of 
those trees, wherein the billets were placed 
erect beside each other. That such heaps or 
piles of wood were sometimes a hundred and 
eighty cubits round, and sixty or even a 
|P_12
hundred high: and that having covered them 
with sods of earth to prevent the flame from 
bursting forth (in which case the tar was lost) 
they set on fire those huge heaps of pine or fir, 
letting the tar and pitch run out in a channel. 

14. Pliny saith, it was customary for 
the antients, to hold fleeces of wooll over 
the steam of boiling tar, and squeeze the 
moisture from them, which watery substance 
was called pissinum. Ray will have this to 
be the same with the pisselæum of the anci- 
ents; but Harduin in his Notes on Pliny, 
thinks the pisselæum to have been produced 
from the cones of cedars. What use they 
made of these liquors anciently I know not: 
But it may be presumed they were used in 
medicine, though at present, for ought I can 
find, they are not used at all. 

15. From the manner of procuring 
tar [/2./] it plainly appears to be a natural 
production, lodged in the vessels of the tree, 
whence it is only freed and let loose (not 
made) by burning. If we may believe 
Pliny, the first running or tar was called ce- 
drium, and was of such efficacy to preserve 
from putrefaction, that in Ægypt they em- 
balmed dead bodies with it. And to this he 
|P_13
ascribes their mummies continuing uncur- 
rupted for so many ages. 

16. Some modern writers inform us that 
tar flows from the trunks of pines and firs, 
when they are very old, through incisions 
made in the bark near the root. Pitch is tar 
inspissated: and both are the oyl of the tree 
grown thick and black with age and sun. 
The trees like old men being unable to per- 
spire, and their secretory ducts obstructed, they 
are, as one may say, choaked and stuffed with 
their own juice. 

17. The method used by our colonies in 
America, for making tar and pitch, is in effect 
the same with that of the ancient Macedoni- 
ans; as appears from the account given in the 
philosophical transactions. And the relation 
of Leo Africanus who describes, as an eye 
witness, the making of tar on Mount Atlas, 
agrees in substance, with the methods used by 
the Macedonians of old, and the people of 
New England at this day. 

18. Jonstonus in his Dendrogra- 
phia, is of opinion, that pitch was anciently 
made of cedar, as well as of the pine and fir 
grown old and oily. It should seem indeed that 
|P_14
one and the same word was used by the an- 
cients in a large sense, so as to comprehend the 
juices issuing from all those trees. Tar and 
all sorts of exsudations from evergreens are, 
in a general acceptation, included under the 
name resin. Hard coarse resin or dry pitch is 
made from tar, by letting it blaze till the mois- 
ture is spent. Liquid resin is properly an oily 
viscid juice oozing from the bark of ever- 
green trees, either spontaneously or by incision. 
It is thought to be the oyl of the bark inspi- 
siated by the sun. As, it issues from the tree 
it is liquid, but becomes dry and hard being 
condensed by the sun or by fire. 

19. According to Theophrastus, resin 
was obtained by striping off the bark from 
pines, and by incisions made in the silver fir 
and the pitch pine. The inhabitants of Mount 
Ida, he tells us, striped the trunk of the 
pine on the sunny side two or three cubits 
from the ground. He observes that a good 
pine might be made to yield resin every year; an 
indifferent every other year, and the weaker 
trees once in three years; and that three run- 
ings were as much as a tree cou'd bear. It is 
remarked by the same author, that a pine 
doth not at once produce fruit and resin, but 
the former only in its youth, the later in its 
old age. 

|P_15
20. Turpentine is a fine resin. Four 
kinds of this are in use. The turpentine of 
Chios or Cyprus which flows from the Tur- 
pentine tree; the Venice turpentine which 
is got by piercing the Larch tree; the Strars- 
burgh Turpentine which Mr. Ray informs 
us is procured from the knots of the silver 
fir; it is fragrant and grows yellow with 
age; the fourth kind is common turpen- 
tine neither transparent, nor so liquid as 
the former; and this Mr. Ray taketh to flow 
from the mountain pine. All these turpentines 
are useful in the same intentions. Theophras- 
tus saith the best resin or turpentine is got from 
the Terebinthus growing in Syria and some of 
the Greek islands. The next best from the 
silver fir and pitch pine. 

21. Turpentine is on all hands al- 
lowed to have great medicinal virtues. Tar 
and it's infusion contain those virtues. Tar 
water is extremely pectoral and restorative, 
and if I may judge, from what experience I 
have had, it possesseth the most valuable qua- 
lities ascribed to the several balsams of Peru, 
of Tolu, of Capivi and even to the balm of 
Gilead, such is it's virtue in asthmas and 
pleurisies, in obstructions and ulcerous erosi- 
|P_16
ons of the inward parts. Balsams as hath 
been already observed are apt to offend the 
stomach. But tar water may be taken with- 
out offending the stomach. For the strength- 
ening whereof it is the best medicine I have 
ever tried. 

22. The folly of man rateth things by 
their scarceness, but Providence hath made 
the most useful things most common. 
Among those liquid oily extracts from trees 
and shrubs, which are termed Balsams, and 
valued for medicinal virtues, Tar may hold it's 
place as a most valuable balsam. It's fra- 
grancy sheweth, that it is possessed of ac- 
tive qualities, and it's oilyness, that it is 
fitted to retain them. This excellent balsam 
may be purchased for a penny a pound, 
whereas the balsam of Judæa, when most 
plenty, was sold on the very spot that pro- 
duced it, for double its weight in silver, if 
we may credit Pliny; who also informs us 
that the best balsam of Judæa flowed only 
from the bark, and that it was adulterated 
with resin and oyle of turpentine. Now 
comparing the vertues I have experienced in 
Tar, with those I find ascribed to the pre- 
cious balm of Judæa, of Gilead, or of Mecha 
(as it is diversly called) I am of opinion, that 
|P_17
the later is not a medicine of more value or 
efficacy than the former. 

23. Pliny supposed amber to be a 
resin, and to distill from some species of pine, 
which he gathered from it's smell. Never- 
theless it's being dug out of the earth shews it 
to be a fossil, though of a very different kind 
from other fossils. But thus much is certain, 
that the medicinal virtues of amber are to 
be found in the balsamic juices of pines and 
firs. Particularly the virtues of the most 
valuable preparation, I mean salt of amber, 
are in a great degree answered by Tar water, 
as a detergent, diaphoretic, and diuretic. 

24. There is, as hath been already 
observed, more or less oyl and balsam in all 
evergreen trees, which retains the acid spirit, 
that principle of life and verdure; the not 
retaining whereof in sufficient quantity, 
causeth other plants to droop and wither. 
Of these evergreen trees productive of resin, 
pitch, and tar, Pliny enumerates six kinds in 
Europe; Jonstonus reckons up thrice that 
number of the pine and fir family. And, in- 
deed, their number, their variety, and their 
likeness makes it difficult to be exact. 

|P_18
25. It is remarked both by Theo- 
phrastus and Jonstonus, that trees growing 
in low and shady places do not yield so good 
tar, as those which grow in higher and more 
exposed situations. And Theophrastus fur- 
ther observes, that the inhabitants of mount 
Ida in Asia, who distinguish the Idæan pine 
from the maritime, affirm, that the tar flow- 
ing from the former is in greater plenty, as 
well as more fragrant than the other. Hence 
it shou'd seem, the pines or firs in the moun- 
tains of Scotland, might be employ'd that 
way, and rendered valuable; even where 
the timber, by it's remoteness from water- 
carriage, is of small value. What we call 
the Scotch fir is falsly so called, being in 
truth a wild forest pine, and (as Mr. Ray 
insorms us) agreeing much with the descrip- 
tion of a pine growing on mount Olympus in 
Phrygia, probably the only place where 
it is found out of these islands; in which of 
late years it is so much planted and culti- 
vated with so little advantage, while the 
cedar of Lebanon might perhaps be raised, 
with little more trouble, and much more 
profit and ornament. 

|P_19
26. The pines, which differ from the 
firs in the length and disposition of their 
leaves and hardness of the wood, do not in 
Pliny's account, yield so much resin as the fir 
trees. Several species of both are accurately 
described and delineated by the naturalists. 
But they all agree so far as to seem related. 
Theophrastus gives the preference to that 
resin which is got from the silver fir and pitch 
tree (έλάτη and πίτυς) before that yielded by 
the pine, which yet he saith is in greater 
plenty. Pliny, on the contrary, affirms that 
the pine produceth the smallest quantity. It 
shou'd seem therefore that the interpreter of 
Theophrastus might have been mistaken, in 
rendering πέυκη by pinus, as well as Jon- 
stonus, who likewise takes the pine for the 
πεύκη of Theophrastus. Hardouin will have 
the pinus of Pliny to have been by others 
called πέυκη, but by Theophrastus πίτυς. 
Ray thinks the common fir, or picea of the 
Latins to be the male fir of Theophrastus. 
This was probably the spruce fir; for the 
picea according to Pliny, yields much resin, 
loves a cold and mountainous situation, and 
is distinguished, tonsili facilitate, by its fitness 
to be shorn, which agrees with the spruce fir, 
whereof I have seen close shorn hedges. 

|P_20
27. There seems to have been some con- 
fusion in the naming of these trees, as well 
among the ancients as the moderns. The 
ancient Greek and Latin names are by later 
authors applied very differently. Pliny him- 
self acknowledgeth, it is not easy even for the 
skilful to distinguish the trees by their leaves, 
and know their sexes and kinds: and that 
difficulty is since much increased, by the dis- 
covery of many new species of that ever- 
green tribe, growing in various parts of the 
globe. But descriptions are not so easily 
misapplied as names. Theophrastus tells us, 
that πιτυς differeth from πεύκη, among other 
things, in that it is neither so tall nor so 
streight, nor hath so large a leaf. The fir 
he distinguisheth into male and female: the 
later is softer timber than the male, it is also 
a taller and fairer tree, and this is probably 
the silver fir. 

28. To say no more on this obscure 
business which I leave to the Criticks, I shall 
observe that according to Theophrastus not on- 
ly the turpentine trees, the pines, and the firs 
yield resin or tar, but also the cedars and palm 
trees; and the words pix and resina are taken 
by Pliny in so large a sense as to include the 
|P_21
weepings of the Lentiscus and Cypress, and 
the balms of Arabia and Judæa; all which 
perhaps are near of kin, and in their most use- 
ful qualities concur with common tar, especi- 
ally the Norwegian, which is the most liquid 
and best for medicinal uses of any that I have 
experienced. Those trees that grow on 
mountains, exposed to the sun or the North 
wind, are reckoned by Theophrastus to produce 
the best and purest Tar: And the Idæan pines 
were distingnished from those growing on the 
plain, as yielding a thinner, sweeter, and better 
scented tar, all which differences I think I have 
observed, between the tar that comes from 
Norway, and that which comes from low 
and swampy countries. 

29. Agreeably to the old observation 
of the Peripatetics, that heat gathereth homo- 
geneous things and disperseth such as are he- 
terogeneous, we find chymistry is fitted for 
the analysis of bodies. But the chymistry of 
nature is much more perfect than that of human 
art, inasmuch as it joineth to the power of 
heat that of the most exquisite mechanism. 
Those who have examined the structure of 
trees and plants by microscopes, have disco- 
vered an admirable variety of fine capillary 
tubes and vessels, fitted for several purposes, 
|P_22
as the imbibing or attracting of proper nou- 
rishment, the distributing thereof through all 
parts of the vegetable, the discharge of su- 
perfluities, the secretion of particular juices. 
They are found to have ducts answering to 
the tracheæ in animals, for the conveying of 
air; they have others answering to lacteals, 
arteries and veins. They feed, digest, respire, 
perspire and generate their kind, and are pro- 
vided with organs nicely fitted for all those 
uses. 

30. The sap vessels are observed to be fine 
tubes running up through the trunk from the 
root. Secretory vessels are found in the bark, 
buds, leaves, and flowers. Exhaling vessels, 
for carrying off excrementitious parts, are dis- 
covered throughout the whole surface of the 
vegetable. And (though this point be not so 
well agreed) doctor Grew in his anatomy of 
plants, thinks there appears a circulation of the 
sap, moving downwards in the root, and feed- 
ing the trunk upwards. 

31. Some difference indeed there is be- 
tween learned men, concerning the proper use 
of certain parts of vegetables. But, whether 
the discoverers have rightly guessed at all their 
uses or no, thus much is certain, that there 
|P_23
are innumerable fine and curious parts in a 
vegetable body, and a wonderful similitude or 
analogy between the mechanism of plants and 
animals. And perhaps some will think it not 
unreasonable, to suppose the mechanism of 
plants more curious than even that of animals, 
if we consider not only the several juices se- 
creted by different parts of the same plant, 
but also, the endless variety of juices drawn 
and formed out of the same soil, by various 
species of vegetables; which must therefore 
differ in an endless variety, as to the texture 
of their absorbent vessels and secretory 
ducts. 

32. A Body, therefore, either animal or 
vegetable may be considered, as an organised 
system of tubes and vessels, containing several 
sorts of fluids. And as fluids are moved 
through the vessels of animal bodies, by the 
systole and diastole of the heart, the alter- 
nate expansion and condensation of the air, 
and the oscillations in the membranes and 
tunicks of the vessels; even so by means of air 
expanded and contracted in the tracheæ or 
vessels made up of elastic fibres, the sap is 
propelled through the arterial tubes of a plant, 
and the vegetable juices, as they are rarefied 
by heat or condensed by cold, will either as- 
|P_24
cend and evaporate into air, or descend in 
the form of a gross liquor. 

33. Juices therefore, first purified by 
straining through the fine pores of the root, 
are afterwards exalted by the action of the air 
and vessels of the plant, but, above all, by 
the action of the sun's light; which at the 
same time that it heats, doth wonderfully ra- 
refy and raise the sap; till it perspires and 
forms an atmosphære, like the effluvia of ani- 
mal bodies. And though the leaves are 
supposed to perform principally the office of 
lungs, breathing out excrementitious va- 
pours and drawing in alimentary; yet it 
seems probable, that the reciprocal actions of 
repulsion and attraction, are performed all 
over the surface of vegetables, as well as 
animals. In which reciprocation, Hippocra- 
tes supposeth the manner of nature's acting, for 
the nourishment and health of animal bodies 
chiefly to consist. And, indeed, what share 
of a plant's nourishment is drawn through 
the leaves and bark, from that ambient hetero- 
geneous fluid called air, is not easy to say. 
It seems very considerable and altogether ne- 
cessary, as well to vegetable as animal 
life. 

|P_25
34. It is an opinion received by many, that 
the sap circulates in plants as the blood in 
animals: that it ascends through capillary ar- 
teries in the trunk, into which are inosculated 
other vessels of the bark answering to veins, 
which bring back to the root the remainder of 
the sap, over and above what had been depo- 
sited, during it's ascent by the arterial vessels, 
and secreted for the several uses of the vege- 
table throughout all it's parts, stem, branches
leaves, flowers, and fruit. Others deny this 
circulation, and affirm that the sap doth not 
return through the bark vessels. It is never- 
theless agreed by all that there are ascending 
and descending juices; while some will 
have the ascent and descent to be a circula- 
tion of the same juices through different ves- 
sels: others will have the ascending juice to 
be one sort attracted by the root, and the de- 
scending another imbibed by the leaves, or 
extremities of the branches: lastly, others 
think that the same juice, as it is rarefied or 
condensed by heat or cold, rises and subsides 
in the same tube. I shall not take upon me 
to decide this controversy. Only I cannot 
help observing, that the vulgar argument from 
analogy between plants and animals loseth 
much of it's force, if it be considered, that 
|P_26
the supposed circulating of the sap, from the 
root or lacteals through the arteries, and 
thence returning, by inosculations, through 
the veins or bark vessels to the root or lacteals 
again, is in no sort conformable or analogous 
to the circulation of the blood. 

35. It is sufficient to observe, what all 
must acknowledge, that a plant or tree is a 
very nice and complicated machine [/3./]; by 
the several parts and motions whereof, the 
crude juices admitted through the absorbent 
vessels, whether of the root, trunk, or 
branches, are variously mixed, separated, al- 
tered, digested, and exalted in a very wond- 
derful manner. The juice as it passeth in and 
out, up and down, through tubes of different 
textures, shapes, and sizes, and is affected by 
the alternate compression and expansion of 
elastic vessels, by the vicissitudes of seasons, 
the changes of weather, and the various ac- 
tion of the solar light, grows still more and 
more elaborate. 

36. There is therefore no chymistry like 
that of nature, which addeth to the force of 
fire the most delicate, various and artificial 
percolation [/4./]. The incessant action of the 
|P_27
sun upon the elements of air, earth, and 
water, and on all sorts of mixed bodies, ani- 
mal, vegetable and fossil, is supposed to 
perform all sorts of chymical operations. 
Whence it should follow, that the air con- 
tains all sorts of chymic productions, the va- 
pours, fumes, oyls, salts, and spirits of all 
the bodies we know: From which general 
aggregate or mass, those that are proper be- 
ing drawn in, through the fine vessels of the 
leaves, branches, and stem of the tree, under- 
go in it's various organs, new alterations, 
secretions, and digestions, till such time as 
they assume the most elaborate form. 

37. Nor is it to be wondered, that the 
peculiar texture of each plant or tree, coope- 
rating with the solar fire and preexisting juices, 
should so alter the fine nourishment drawn 
from earth and air, [/5./] as to produce vari- 
ous specific qualities of great efficacy in me- 
dicine; especially if it be considered that in 
the opinion of learned men, there is an in- 
fluence on plants derived from the sun, besides 
it's mere heat. Certainly doctor Grew, that 
curious anatomist of plants, holds the solar 
influence to differ from that of a mere culinary 
|P_28
fire, otherwise than by being only a more 
temperate and equal heat. 

38. The alimentary juice taken into the 
lacteals, whether of animals or vegetables, 
consists of oily, aqueous, and saline particles, 
which being dissolved, volatilised, and di- 
versly agitated, part thereof is spent and exha- 
led into the air; and that part which remains 
is by the œconomy of the plant, and action 
of the sun, strained, purified, concocted, and 
ripened into an inspissated oyl or balsam, 
and deposited in certain cells placed chiefly 
in the bark, which is thought to answer the 
panniculus adiposus in animals, defending 
trees from the weather, and, when in suffici- 
ent quantity, rendering them evergreen. This 
balsam, weeping or sweating through the 
bark, hardens into resin; aud this most copi- 
ously in the several species of pines and firs, 
whose oyl being in greater quantity, and 
more tenacious of the acid spirit or vegetable 
soul (as perhaps it may not improperly be 
called) abides the action of the sun, and at- 
tracting the sun beams, is thereby exalted and 
enriched, so as to become a most noble medi- 
cine; such is the last product of a tree, per- 
fectly maturated by time and sun. 

|P_29
39. It is remarked by Theophrastus, that 
all plants and trees while they put forth have 
most humour, but when they have ceased to 
germinate and bear, then the humour is 
strongest and most sheweth the nature of the 
plant, and that, therefore, trees yielding re- 
sin should be cut after germination. It seems 
also very reasonable to suppose the juice of 
old trees, whose organs bring no new sap, 
should be better ripened than that of others. 

40. The aromatic flavours of vegetables 
seem to depend upon the sun's light, as much 
as colours. As in the production of the later, 
the reflecting powers of the object, so in that 
of the former, the attractive and organical 
powers of the plant cooperate with the 
sun [/6./]. And as from sir Isaac Newton's 
experiments it appears, that all colours are 
virtually in the white light of the sun, and 
shew themselves when the raies are sepa- 
rated by the attracting and repelling powers 
of objects, even so the specific qualities of 
the elaborate juices of plants seem to be 
virtually or eminently contained in the solar 
light, and are actually exhibited upon the 
separation of the raies, by the peculiar powers 
|P_30
of the capillary organs in vegetables, attract- 
ing and imbibing certain raies, which produce 
certain flavours and qualities, in like manner 
as certain raies being reflected, produce cer- 
tain colours. 

41. It hath been observed by some curious 
anatomists, that the secretory vessels in the 
glands of animal bodies are lined with a fine 
down, which in different glands is of diffe- 
rent colours. And it is thought, that each 
particular down, being originally imbued 
with it's own proper juice, attracts none but 
that sort; by which means so many various 
juices are secreted in different parts of the 
body. And perhaps there may be something 
analogous to this, in the fine absorbent ves- 
sels of plants, which may cooperate towards 
producing that endless variety of juices, ela- 
borated in plants from the same earth and 
air. 

42. The balsam or essential oyl of vegetables 
contains a spirit, wherein consist the specific 
qualities, the smell and taste of the plant. 
Boerhaave holds the native presiding spirit to be 
neither, oyl, salt, earth, or water; but some- 
what too fine and subtile to be caught alone 
and rendered visible to the eye. This when 
|P_31
suffered to fly off, for instance, from the oyl 
of rosemary, leaves it destitute of all flavour
This spark of life, this spirit or soul, if we 
may so say, of the vegetable departs without 
any sensible diminution of the oyl or water 
wherein it was lodged. 

43. It should seem that the forms, souls, 
or principles of vegetable life, subsist in 
the light or solar emanation [/7./], which 
in respect of the macrocosm is what the 
animal spirit is to the microcosm; the 
interior tegument, the subtile instrument 
and vehicle of power. No wonder then that 
the ens primum or scintilla spirituosa, as it is 
called, of plants should be a thing so fine and 
fugacious as to escape our nicest search. It is 
evident that nature at the sun's approach ve- 
getates; and languishes at his recess; this ter- 
restrial globe seeming only a matrix disposed 
and prepared to receive life from his light; 
whence Homer in his hymns styleth earth 
the wife of heaven, άλοχ, όυραν  άςερόεντος. 

44. The luminous spirit which is the form 
or life of a plant, from whence it's differences 
and properties flow, is somewhat extremely 
|P_32
volatile. It is not the oyl, but a thing more 
subtile whereof oyl is the vehicle, which re- 
tains it from flying off, and is lodged in seve- 
ral parts of the plant, particularly in the cells 
of the bark and in the seeds. This oyl pu- 
rified and exalted by the organical powers of 
the plant, and agitated by warmth, becomes 
a proper receptacle of the spirit; part of 
which spirit exhales through the leaves and 
flowers, and part is arrested by this unctuous 
humour that detains it in the plant. It is to 
be noted this essential oyl animated, as one 
may say, with the flavour of the plant is very 
different from any spirit, that can be procur- 
ed from the same plant by fermentation. 

45. Light impregnates air, [/8./] air im- 
pregnates vapour; and this becomes a watery 
juice by destillation having risen first in the 
cold still with a kindly gentle heat. This 
fragrant vegetable water is possessed of the 
specific odour and taste of the plant. It is re- 
marked that destilled oyls added to water 
for counterfeiting the vegetable water can 
never equal it, artificial chymistry falling 
short of the natural. 

|P_33
46. The less violence is used to nature 
the better it's produce. The juice of olives 
or grapes issuing by the lightest pres- 
sure is best. Resins that drop from the 
branches spontaneously, or ooze upon the 
slightest insicion, are the finest and most fra- 
grant. And infusions are observed to act 
more strongly than decoctions of plants, tho 
more subtile and volatile salts and spirits 
which might be lost or corrupted by the 
later, being obtained in their natural state 
by the former. It is also observed that the 
finest, purest, and most volatile part is that 
which first ascends in destillation. And, in- 
deed, it should seem the lightest and most ac- 
tive particles required least force to disengage 
them from the subject. 

47. The salts, therefore, and more active 
spirits of the tar are got by infusion in cold 
water: but the resinous part is not to be dis- 
solved thereby: [/9./] Hence the prejudice 
which some perhaps may entertain against 
Tar water, as a medicine, the use whereof 
might inflame the blood by it's sulphur and 
resin, appears to be not well grounded; 
it being indeed impregnated with a fine acid 
|P_34
spirit, balsamic, cooling, diuretic, and posses- 
sed of many other virtues [/10./]. Spirits are 
supposed to consist of salts and phlegme, pro- 
bably too somewhat of a fine oily nature, 
differing from oyl in that it mixeth with 
water, and agreeing with oyl, in that it 
runneth in rivulets by destillation. Thus 
much is allowed, that the water, earth, and 
fixed salt are the same in all plants; that, 
therefore, which differenceth a plant or makes 
it what it is, the native spark or form, in the 
language of the chymists or schools, is none 
of those things, nor yet the finest oyl, 
which seemeth only it's receptacle or vehicle. 
It is observed by chymists, that all sorts of 
balsamic wood afford an acid spirit, which is 
the volatile oily salt of the vegetable: Here- 
in is chiefly contained their medicinal virtues, 
and by the tryals I have made it appears, 
that the acid spirit in tar water, possesseth the 
virtues, in an eminent degree, of that of guai- 
acum, and other medicinal woods. 

48. Qualities in a degree too strong for 
human nature to subdue, and assimilate to it 
self, must hurt the constitution. All acids, 
therefore, may not be useful or innocent. But 
this seemeth an acid so thoroughly concocted, 
|P_35
so gentle, bland, and temperate, and withal 
a spirit so fine and volatile, as readily to enter 
the smallest vessels, and be assimilated with the 
the utmost ease. 

49. If any one were minded to dissolve 
some of the resin, together with the salt or 
spirit, he need only mix some spirit of wine 
with the water. But such an intire solution 
of resins and gums, as to qualify them for 
entering and pervading the animal system, 
like the fine acid spirit that first flies off from 
the subject, is perhaps impossible to obtain. 
It is an apothegme of the chymists, derived 
from Helmont, that whoever can make 
myrrh soluble by the human body, has the 
secret of prolonging his days: and Boer- 
haave owns that there seems to be truth in 
this, from it's resisting putrefaction. Now 
this quality is as remarkable in Tar, with 
which the ancients embalmed and preserved 
dead bodies. And though Boerhaave him- 
self, and other chymists before him, have 
given methods for making solutions of myrrh, 
yet it is by means of alcohol which extracts 
only the inflammable parts. And it doth 
not seem that any solution of myrrh is im- 
pregnated with it's salt or acid spirit. It may 
|P_36
not, therefore, seem strange if this water 
shou'd be found more beneficial for procuring 
health and long life, than any solution of 
myrrh whatsoever. 

50. Certainly divers resins and gums 
may have virtues, and yet not be able for their 
grossness to pass the lacteals and other finer 
vessels, nor yet, perhaps, readily impart 
those virtues to a menstruum, that may with 
safety and speed convey them throughout the 
human body. Upon all which accounts, I 
believe tar water will be found to have sin- 
gular advangages. It is observed that acid 
spirits prove the stronger, by how much the 
greater degree of heat is required to raise 
them. And indeed, there seemeth to be no 
acid more gentle than this, obtained by the 
simple affusion of cold water; which carries 
off from the subject the more light and sub- 
tile parts, and, if one may so speak, the very 
flower of it's specific qualities. And here it 
is to be noted, that the volatile salt and 
spirit of vegetables do, by gently stimulat- 
ing the solids, attenuate the fluids contained 
in them, and promote secretions, and that 
they are penetrating and active, contrary to 
the general nature of other acids. 

|P_37
51. It is a great maxim for health, that 
the juices of the body be kept fluid in a due 
proportion. Therefore, the acid volatile spi- 
rit in tar water, at once attenuating and 
cooling in a moderate degree, must greatly 
conduce to health, as a mild salutary deob- 
struent, quickening the circulation of the 
fluids without wounding the solids, thereby 
gently removing or preventing those obstruc- 
tions, which are the great and general cause 
of most chronical diseases; in this manner an- 
swering to the antihysterics, assa fœtida, gal- 
banum, myrrh, amber, and in general, to all 
the resins and gums of trees or shrubs useful 
in nervous cases. 

52. Warm water is it self a deobstru- 
ent. Therefore the infusion of tar drunk 
warm, is easier insinuated into all the nice 
capillary vessels, and acts, not only by virtue 
of the balsam, but also by that of the ve- 
hicle. It's taste, it's diuretic quality, its be- 
ing so great a cordial, shew the activity of 
this medicine. And at the same time that it 
quickens the sluggish blood of the hysterical, 
its balsamic oily nature abates the too rapid 
motion of the sharp thin blood in those who 
are hectic. There is a lentour and smooth- 
ness in the blood of healthy strong people, on 
|P_38
the contrary, there is often an acrimony and 
solution in that of weakly morbid persons. 
The fine particles of Tar are not only warm 
and active, they are also balsamic and emol- 
lient, softening and enriching the sharp and 
vapid blood, and healing the erosions occa- 
sioned thereby in the blood vessels and 
glands. 

53. Tar water possesseth the stomachic 
and cardiac qualities of elixir proprietatis, 
Stoughton's drops, and many such tinctures 
and extracts, with this difference, that it 
worketh it's effect more safely, as it hath no- 
thing of that spirit of wine, which, however 
mixed and disguised, may yet be well ac- 
counted a poison in some degree. 

54. Such medicines are supposed to be 
diaphoretic, which being of an active and 
subtile nature, pass through the whole 
system, and work their effect in the finest ca- 
pillaries and perspiratory ducts, which they 
gently cleanse and open. Tar water is ex- 
tremely well fitted to work by such an insen- 
sible diaphoresis, by the fineness and activity 
of it's acid volatile spirit. And surely those 
parts ought to be very fine, which can scour 
the perspiratory ducts, under the scarf skin or 
|P_39
cuticle, if it be true that one grain of sand, 
wou'd cover the mouths of more than a 
hundred thousand. 

55. Another way wherein tar water 
operates, is by urine, than which perhaps 
none is more safe and effectual, for cleansing 
the blood and carrying off it's salts. But it 
seems to produce it's principal effect as an 
alterative, sure and easy, much safer than 
those vehement purgative, emetic, and sali- 
vating medicines, which do violence to na- 
ture. 

56. An obstruction of some vessels causeth 
the blood to move more swiftly in other 
vessels, which are not obstructed. Hence 
manifold disorders. A liquour that dilutes 
and attenuates resolves the concretions which 
obstruct. Tar water is such a liquour. It 
may be said, indeed, of common water, that 
it attenuates, also of mercurial preparations 
that they attenuate. But it shou'd be con- 
sidered that mere water only distends the 
vessels and thereby weakens their tone; and 
that Mercury by it's great momentum may 
justly be suspected of hurting the fine capil- 
laries, which two deobstruents therefore 
might easily overact their parts, and (by les- 
|P_40
sening the force of the elastic vessels) remotely 
produce those concretions they are intended 
to remove. 

57. Weak and rigid fibres are looked on 
by the most able physicians, as sources of two 
different classes of distempers: a sluggish mo- 
tion of the liquids occasions weak fibres: there- 
fore tar water is good to strengthen them as it 
gently accelerates their contents. On the 
other hand, being an unctuous bland fluid it 
moistens and softens the dry and stiff fibres: 
and so proves a remedy for both extremes. 

58. Common soaps are compositions of 
lixivial salt and oyl. The corrosive acrimo- 
ny of the saline particles, being softened by 
the mixture of an unctuous substance they in- 
sinuate themselves into the small ducts with 
less difficulty and danger. The combination 
of these different substances makes up a very 
subtile and active medicine, fitted for mixing 
with all humours, and resolving all obstructi- 
ons. Soap therefore is justly esteemed a most 
efficacious medicine in many distempers. Al- 
caline soap is allowed to be cleansing, attenu- 
ating, opening, resolving, sweetening; it is 
pectoral, vulnerary, diuretic, and hath other 
good qualities which are also to be found in 
|P_41
tar water. It is granted, that oyl and acid 
salts combined together exist in vegetables, 
and that consequently there are acid soaps as 
well as alcaline. And the saponaceous nature 
of the acid vegetable spirits, is what renders 
them so diuretic, sudorific, penetrating, ab- 
stersive and resolving. Such, for instance, is 
the acid spirit of Guaiacum. And all these 
same virtues seem to be in tar water in a mild 
and salutary degree. 

59. It is the general opinion that all acids 
coagulate the blood. Boerhaave excepts vi- 
negar which he holds to be a soap, inasmuch 
as it is found to contain an oyl as well as an 
acid spirit. Hence it is both unctuous and 
penetrating, a powerful antiphlogistic, and 
preservative against corruption and infection. 
Now it seems evident that tar water is a soap 
as well as vinegar. For though it be the 
character of resin, which is an inspissated gross 
oyl, not to dissolve in water [/11./], yet the salts 
attract some fine particles of essential oyl: 
which fine oyl serves as a vehicle for the acid 
salts, and shews it self in the colour of the 
tar water: for all pure salts are colourless. 
And though the resin will not dissolve in wa- 
ter, yet the subtile oyl, in which the vegeta- 
|P_42
ble salts are lodged, may as well mix with 
water as vinegar doth, which contains both 
oyl and salt. And as the oyl in tar water dis- 
covers it self to the eye, so the acid salts do 
manifest themselves to the taste. Tar water 
therefore is a soap and as such hath the me- 
dicinal qualities of soaps. 

60. It operates more gently as the acid 
salts lose their acrimony being sheathed in 
oyl, and thereby approaching the nature of 
neutral salts, are more benign and friendly to 
the animal system: and more effectually, as 
by the help of a volatile smooth insinuating 
oyl, those same salts are more easily introduc- 
ed into the capillary ducts. Therefore in fe- 
vers and epidemical distempers it is (and I 
have found it so) as well as in chronical di- 
seases, a most safe and efficacious medicine, 
being good against too great fluidity as a 
balsamic, and good against viscidity as a soap. 
There is something in the fiery corrosive na- 
ture of lixivial salts, which makes alcaline 
soap a dangerous remedy in all cases where an 
inflammation is apprehended. And as in- 
flammations are often occasioned by obstruc- 
tions, it shou'd seem an acid soap was much 
the safer deobstruent. 

|P_43
61. Even the best turpentines, however 
famous for their vulnerary and detergent qua- 
lities, have yet been observed by their warmth 
to dispose to inflammatory tumours. But the 
acid spirit [/12./] being in so great proportion in 
tar water renders it a cooler and safer medi- 
cine. And the ætherial oyl of turpentine 
though an admirable dryer, healer, and ano- 
dyne, when outwardly applied to wounds 
and ulcers, and not less useful in cleansing the 
urinary passages and healing their ulcerations, 
yet is known to be of a nature so very relax- 
ing as sometimes to do much mischief. Tar 
water is not attended with the same ill effects, 
which I believe are owing in a great measure 
to the ætherial oyls being deprived of the acid 
spirit in distillation, which vellicating and con- 
tracting as a stimulus might have proved a 
counterpoise to the excessive lubricating and 
relaxing qualities of the oyl. 

62. Woods in decoction do not seem to 
yield so ripe and elaborate a juice, as that 
which is deposited in the cells or loculi tere- 
binthiaci, and spontaneously oozes from them. 
And indeed though the balsam of Peru obtain- 
ed by boiling wood and scumming the decoc- 
tion, be a very valuable medicine and of 
|P_44
great account in divers cases, particularly 
asthmas, nephritic pains, nervous colics and 
obstructions, yet I do verily think (and I do 
not say this without experience) that Tar wa- 
ter is a more efficacious remedy in all those 
cases than even that costly drug. 

63. It hath been already observed that 
the restorative pectoral antihysterical virtues 
of the most precious balsams and gums are 
possessed in a high degree by tar water [/13./]. 
And I do not know any purpose answered by 
the wood drinks, for which tar water may 
not be used with at least equal success. It con- 
tains the virtues even of Guaiacum which 
seems the most efficacious of all the woods, 
warming, and sweetening the humours, dia- 
phoretic and useful in gouts, dropsies and 
rheums, as well as in the foul disease. Nor 
shou'd it seem strange, if the virtues obtain- 
ed by boiling an old dry wood prove inferior 
to those extracted from a balsam. 

64. There is a fine volatile spirit in the 
waters of Geronster, the most esteemed of all 
the fountains about Spa, but whose waters do 
not bear transporting. The stomachic, cardiac 
and diuretic qualities of this fountain some- 
|P_45
what resemble those of tar water, which, if I 
am not greatly mistaken, contains the virtues 
of the best chalybeat and sulphureous waters; 
with this difference that those waters are apt 
to affect the head in taking, which tar water 
is not. Besides, there is a regimen of diet to be 
observed, especially with chalybeat waters, 
which I never found necessary with this. Tar 
water layeth under no restraint either as to 
diet, hours, or employment. A man may 
study or exercise or repose, keep his own 
hours, pass his time either within or without, 
and take wholesome nourishment of any kind. 

65. The use of chalybeat waters, however 
excellent for the nerves and stomach, is often 
suspended by colds and inflammatory disor- 
ders; in which they are acknowledged to be 
very dangerous. Whereas tar water is so far 
from hurting in those cases, or being discon- 
tinued on that account, that it greatly contri- 
butes to their cure [/14./]

66. Cordials, vulgarly so called, act im- 
mediately on the stomach, and by consent of 
nerves on the head. But medicines of an 
operation too fine and light to produce a sen- 
sible effect in the primæ viæ, may, never- 
|P_46
theless, in their passage through the capilla- 
ries, operate on the sides of those small ves- 
sels, in such manner as to quicken their os- 
cillations, and consequently the motion of 
their contents, producing in issue and effect, 
all the benefits of a cordial much more lasting 
and salutary than those of fermented spirits, 
which by their caustic and coagulating qua- 
lities do incomparably more mischief than 
good. Such a cardiac medicine is tar water. 
The transient fits of mirth, produced from 
fermented liquors, are attended with propor- 
tionable depressions of spirit in their intervals. 
But the calm chearfulness arising from this 
water of health (as it may be justly called) 
is permanent. In which it emulates the vir- 
tues of that famous plant Gen Seng, so much 
valued in China as the only cordial that raiseth 
the spirits without depressing them. Tar water 
is so far from hurting the nerves as common 
cordials do, that it is highly useful in cramps, 
spasms of the viscera, and paralytic numb- 
ness. 

67. Emetics are on certain occasions ad- 
ministred with great success. But the over- 
straining and weakening of nature may be 
very justly apprehended from a course of eme- 
tics. They are nevertheless prescribed and 
|P_47
substituted for exercise. But it is well remark- 
ed in Plato's Timæus that vomits and purges 
are the worst exercise in the world. There is 
something in the mild operation of tar water, 
that seems more friendly to the œconomy, and 
forwards the digestions and secretions in a 
way more natural and benign, the mildness of 
this medicine being such that I have known 
children take it, for above six months toge- 
ther, with great benefit, and without any in- 
convenience; and after long and repeated ex- 
perience I do esteem it a most excellent diet 
drink fitted to all seasons and ages. 

68. It is I think allowed that the origine of 
the gout lies in a faulty digestion. And it is re- 
marked by the ablest physicians, that the 
gout is so difficult to cure, because heating 
medicines aggravate it's immediate, and cool- 
ing it's remote cause. But tar water, although 
it contain active principles that strengthen 
the digestion beyond any thing I know, and 
consequently must be highly useful, either to 
prevent or lessen the following fit, or by invi- 
gorating the blood to cast it upon the extre- 
mities, yet it is not of so heating a nature as 
to do harm even in the fit. Nothing is more 
difficult or disagreeable than to argue men 
out of their prejudices, I shall not therefore 
|P_48
enter into controversies on this subject, but if 
men dispute and object, shall leave the deci- 
sion to time and tryal. 

69. In the modern practice, soap, opium, 
and mercury bid fairest for universal medi- 
cines. The first of these is highly spoken of. 
But then those who magnify it most, except 
against the use of it in such cases where the 
obstruction is attended with a putrefactive 
alkali, or where an inflammatory disposition 
appears. It is acknowledged to be very dan- 
gerous in a pthisis, fever, and some other 
cases in which Tar water is not only safe but 
useful. 

70. Opium though a medicine of great 
extent and efficacy, yet is frequently known 
to produce grievous disorders in hysterical or 
hypochondriacal persons, who make a great 
part, perhaps the greatest, of those who lead 
sedentary lives in these islands. Besides, upon 
all constitutions dangerous errours may be 
committed in the use of opium. 

71. Mercury hath of late years become 
a medicine of very general use. The extreme 
minuteness, mobility, and momentum of its 
parts, rendering it a most powerful cleanser of 
|P_49
all obstructions, even in the most minute ca- 
pillaries. But then we should be cautious in 
the use of it, if we consider, that the very 
thing which gives it power of doing good 
above other deobstruents, doth also dispose it 
to do mischief. I mean it's great momentum, 
the weight of it being about ten times that of 
blood, and the momentum being the joint 
product of the weight and velocity, it must 
needs operate with great force; and may it 
not be justly feared, that so great a force en- 
tering the minutest vessels, and breaking the 
obstructed matter, might also break or wound 
the fine tender coats of those small vessels, 
and so bring on the untimely effects of old 
age, producing more, perhaps, and worse ob- 
structions than those it removed? Similar 
consequences may justly be apprehended from 
other mineral and ponderous medicines. There- 
fore, upon the whole, there will not perhaps 
be found any medicine, more general in it's 
use, or more salutary in it's effects than tar 
water. 

72. To suppose that all distempers arising 
from very different, and it may be from con- 
trary causes, can be cured by one and the 
same medicine must seem chimærical. But it 
may with truth be affirmed, that the virtue 
|P_50
of tar water extends to a surprising variety of 
cases very distant and unlike [/15./]. This I have 
experienced in my neighbours, my family, 
and my self. And as I live in a remote cor- 
ner among poor neighbours, who sor want of 
a regular physician have often recourse to me, 
I have had frequent opportunities of tryal, 
which convince me it is of so just a tempera- 
ment as to be an enemy to all extremes. I 
have known it do great good in a cold wate- 
ry constitution, as a cardiac and stomachic; 
and at the same time allay heat and feverish 
thirst in another. I have known it correct 
costive habits in some, and the contrary ha- 
bit in others. Nor will this seem incredible 
if it be considered that middle qualities natu- 
rally reduce the extreme. Warm water, for 
instance, mixed with hot and cold will lessen 
the heat in that, and the cold in this. 

73. They who know the great virtues of 
common soap, whose coarse lixivial salts are 
the product of culinary fire, will not think it 
incredible, that virtues of mighty force and 
extent should be found in a fine acid soap [/16./], 
the salts and oyl whereof, are a most elabo- 
borate product of nature and the solar 
light. 

|P_51
74. It is certain tar water warms, and 
therefore some may perhaps still think it can- 
not cool. The more effectually to remove 
this prejudice, let it be farther considered, 
that as on the one hand, opposite causes do 
sometimes produce the same effect, for in- 
stance, heat by rarefaction and cold by con- 
densation do both increase the air's elasticity: 
so on the other hand, the same cause shall 
sometime produce opposite effects: heat for 
instance in one degree thins, in another coa- 
gulates the blood. It is not therefore strange 
that tar water shou'd warm one habit, and 
cool another, have one good effect on a cold 
constitution, and another good effect on an 
inflamed one; nor, if this be so, that it shou'd 
cure opposite disorders. All which justifies 
to reason, what I have often found true in 
fact. The salts, the spirits, the heat of tar 
water are of a temperature congenial to the 
constitution of a man which receives from it 
a kindly warmth, but no inflaming heat. It 
was remarkable that two children in my 
neighbourhood, being in a course of tar wa- 
ter, upon an intermission of it, never failed to 
have their issues inflamed by an humour much 
more hot and sharp than at other times. But 
it's great use in the small-pox, pleurisies, and fe- 
|P_52
vers, is a sufficient proof that tar water is not 
of an inflaming nature. 

75. I have dwelt the longer on this head, 
because some gentlemen of the faculty have 
thought fit to declare that tar water must en- 
flame, and that they would never visit any 
patient in a fever, who had been a drinker of 
it. But I will venture to affirm, that it is so 
far from increasing a feverish inflammation, that 
it is on the contrary a most ready means to 
allay and extinguish it. It is of admirable 
use in fevers, being at the same time the sur- 
est safest and most effectual both paregoric and 
cordial; for the truth of which, I appeal to 
any person's experience, who shall take a 
large draught of it milk warm in the pa- 
roxysm of a fever, even when plain water or 
herb teas shall be found to have little or no 
effect. To me it seems that it's singular and 
surprizing use in fevers of all kinds, were 
there nothing else, would be alone sufficient 
to recommend it to the public. 

76. The best physicians make the idea of a 
fever to consist in a too great velocity of the 
heart's motion, and too great resistance at the 
capillaries. Tar water, as it softens and gent- 
ly stimulates those nice vessels, helps to pro- 
|P_53
pel their contents, and so contributes to re- 
move the later part of the disorder. And for 
the former, the irritating acrimony which ac- 
celerates the motion of the heart is diluted 
by watery, corrected by acid, and softened by 
balsamic remedies, all which intentions are an- 
swered by this aqueous acid balsamic medi- 
cine. Besides, the viscid juices coagulated by 
the febrile heat are resolved by tar water as 
a soap, and not too far resolved, as it is a 
gentle acid soap; to which we may add, that 
the peccant humours and salts are carried off 
by it's diaphoretic and diuretic qualities. 


[^1. (a). Sect. 5. ^]
[^2. (b) Sect. 13. ^]
[^3. (g) 30, 31 ^]
[^4. (d) 29. ^]
[^5. (f) 33. ^]
[^6. (h) 36, 37. ^]
[^7. (m) 40. ^]
[^8. (n) 37, 43. ^]
[^9. (p) Sect. 7. ^]
[^10. (q) Sect. 42, 44. ^]
[^11. (a) Sect. 47. ^]
[^12. (e) Sect. 7, 8. ^]
[^13. (d) Sect. 9, 21, 22, 23. ^]
[^14. (f) Sect. 7. ^]
[^15. (h) Sect. 3, 4, 5, 6, 21, &c.^]
[^16. (g) 58. ^]