
|P_[^person breathing with a long tube^]
|P_
[}A 
DISSERTATION
ON THE 
Recovery of PERSONS drown'd.}]
[^Decorative frame around the letter "A".^]AS Truth in general is of the last Im-
portance, not only in affording a 
noble and exalted Satisfaction to the 
Mind, but also in forming the Mo-
rals, and by that Means, promoting 
the most valuable Interests of So-
ciety; so nothing can be a greater Reproach to 
Reason, nor a more palpable Affront offered to its 
august and venerable Author, than that ignoble 
and unmanly Turn of Mind, commonly known by 
the Name of Credulity, which is no more than an 
implicit Contempt of Reason, and all the mental 
Powers, producing a Propensity to believe certain 
Tenets, Doctrines, or Facts, without that Degree 
of Evidence, which a Mind studious of Truth 
ought to require. 

But however odious Credulity may appear, when 
painted in her native Colours, she is nevertheless, 
|P_2
if we may be allowed the Expression, a Spectre,
which haunts the various Classes and Distinctions 
of Mankind, under a Form so infatuating and 
alluring, as to seduce them from the plain and 
amiable Paths of Truth, and bewilder them in 
the dark and gloomy Labyrinths of Ignorance, 
Error, and Confusion. This deplorable Observa-
tion is in no Instance more effectually verified, 
than in these very Men, who profess a sacred Ve-
neration for Reason, and pretend to go wherever 
Truth shall conduct them; for, we frequently 
find, not only antient, but also modern Philoso-
phers and Physicians, labouring with a pompous 
Shew of Learning and Ratiocination, to prove 
that Nature, by her stated and established Laws, 
was capable of producing certain Effects, which 
Time has afterwards discovered never to have had 
any Existence, except in the Imaginations of the 
Credulous, or in the chimerical Works of Au-
thors, who forsaking Fact and Nature, have giv-
en a full Scope to their Fancy and Invention. 
Thus in former Ages it was keenly disputed, 
how it came about, that a small Fish, call'd the 
Remora, was capable of putting a speedy Stop to 
a Ship under Full-sail; but this pretended Fact 
has, by later and more penetrating Naturalists, 
been discover'd to be absolutely false. And, no 
doubt, the ever memorable Rabbit-Woman of 
Godalmin, would have made a considerable Fi-
gure in the Annals of the Royal Society, and af-
forded Matter to the Members for copious Dis-
sertations on the Force of Imagination, if she had 
prudently ceas'd Breeding a Day sooner. This 
bad Piece of Conduct, has, however, thrown an 
almost irreparable Disgrace upon natural Know-
ledge, by inducing the sober and judicious Part of 
Mankind to imagine, that it was totally employ'd 
|P_3
in explaining Visions and Chimeras. Therefore, if 
we intend to philosophise in such a manner as not 
to disgrace Philosophy, we must have Facts duly 
ascertain'd, before we attempt to explain and ac-
count for them; since, according to Kercher, in 
his Mund. Subterran. Lib. 10. "'Tis as absurd 
in physical Matters, to philosophise without 
Experience, as it is for a blind Man to pretend 
to judge of Colours."

Tho' from what has been said, it sufficiently 
appears, that Credulity is fatal to Truth, yet we 
observe in the Minds of some Men, an arrogant and presumptuous Scepticism, which, admitting no-
thing but what is easy to the Conception of its 
Possessors, is no less prejudicial to the genuine In-
terest of Science, and Philosophy; for, as, by 
the former we are expos'd to the Danger of adopt-
ing Error as well as Truth; so by the latter our 
Minds are, as it were, manacled, and hinder'd 
from giving a rational Assent to Things and Facts 
cloath'd with the most striking and distinguish'd 
Characters of Evidence, for no other Reason, than 
that we cannot comprehend them. It is, for In-
stance, a culpable Diffidence, to disbelieve the Pos-
sibility of a Person's retaining a latent Principle 
of Life, after he has remain'd some Hours, Days, 
and even Weeks under Water, since numerous 
Facts, related by the best Authors, vouch'd by 
the most candid Witnesses, and recorded in the 
publick Archives of the most penetrating and 
sagacious Nations, concur to remove the smallest 
Remains of Uncertainty in this Point. Besides, 
I would have the Gentlemen of this Class remem-
ber, that their Conduct bespeaks an insupportable 
Degree of Pride, and amounts to a formal De-
claration, that they themselves are blessed with 
Geniuses far superior to others, since nothing can 
|P_4
be true, but what is comprehensible by the vast 
Extent of their Capacities. And tho' Modesty and 
Common-Sense, should not direct them to this 
Observation, yet what the World calls moral Evi-
dence stands upon Foundations, too stable and sure 
to be shaken by their frivolous Conceits, or ill-
grounded Remonstrances. In a Word, the wise 
and thinking Part of Mankind will always be in-
duc'd to give their Assent to Facts seen by a suf-
ficient Number of Witnesses, who have Sense e-
nough to guard against Imposture themselves, and 
Honesty enough to say nothing but what is Truth to 
their Neighbours. All these advantagious Circum-
stances attend the following Narrations, which, for the 
common Benefit of Mankind, have been collected 
from Authors of the greatest Veracity, in order 
to shew, that there is often a Possibility of restor-
ing drown'd Persons to Life, after vulgar Preju-
dice, and a Want of sufficiently extensive Views 
with Respect to the Laws of the animal Oeconomy, 
have laid a Foundation for concluding them irre-
trieveably dead, and past all Hopes of Recovery. 

Dr. Bruhier, an eminent Physician of Paris,
well known to the learned World, and highly 
esteem'd for his Knowledge in his Profession, a-
bout three Years ago, publish'd a Treatise on the 
Uncertain Signs of Death, tending to prove, that 
many People are interr'd before they are really 
dead; and that there are frequent Instances of Per-
sons who have liv'd many Days without Respira-
tion, or any other apparent Signs of Life. This 
Doctrine he establishes by many incontestable His-
tories of People who have actually surviv'd their 
Funerals, and liv'd many Years after they had 
been buried, upon a Supposition, that they were 
actually dead. Hence he very judiciously infers, 
|P_5
that 'tis not imprudent but inhuman, to suffer the 
Interment of our Friends and Relations, before 
we are convinc'd from the most evident Marks, 
that they are certainly and irrecoverably deceas'd; 
or till such time as the Beginning of Putrefaction 
convinces us, that no Hopes remain of a Revival. 

In Confirmation of what this celebrated Physi-
cian has advanc'd, many Examples might be 
found in our own Country, which escap'd his Re-
searches; and no doubt it happens much more 
frequently, than is generally imagin'd; especial-
ly in hysterical Women, in those who have con-
tracted a Habit of drinking spirituous Liquors to 
Excess, but particularly in those who have been 
guilty (for so I can't forbear calling it) of taking 
frequent Doses of Opium, or its Preparations, so 
as to render Life insupportable without them, of 
which there are too many Instances. 

This Doctrine, however true, is not altogether 
modern; for we learn from Diogenes Laertius, that the celebrated Empedocles acquir'd uncommon 
Honour, by restoring a Woman to Life who was 
thought to be dead many Days, and whose Dis-
order he discover'd to be only a Strangulation of 
the Uterus, that is, an hysteric Fit. 

We learn, farther, that Heraclides of Pontus, a 
noted Philosopher, wrote a Treatise upon this ve-
ry Subject, which he intitled, ###Greek omitted###, Of 
the Distemper in which the Patient is depriv'd of 
Respiration. In this he asserted, that the Disor-
der might continue thirty Days, during which 
there was no Respiration, or any other Signs of 
Life, without any Marks of Putrefaction; and 
that notwithstanding, the Patient might at last re-
cover. 

In Consequence of the frequent Interments of 
People before they were really dead, Dr. Bruhier,
|P_6
in 1745, publish'd a small Pamphlet, containing 
Proposals for the Regulation of Funerals, and the 
Prevention of such calamitous Disasters; which he 
endeavours to have confirm'd by the Legislature; 
for, says he, how many Women weary of their 
Husbands, and Husbands equally weary of their 
Wives; how many Children who have either a 
real or an imaginary Reason to be dissatisfied with 
their Parents; and, especially, how many cove-
tous and necessitous Heirs, who have long waited 
for the happy Moment, which was to put him in 
Possession of an opulent Fortune, may not abuse 
the Liberty the Law affords them of burying their 
Friends at the End of twenty-four Hours, at 
which Time they may, possibly, be really alive, 
and capable of a Recovery. And to prove this 
Regulation the more necessary, he relates the fol-
lowing Histories. 

A Woman about eighty Years old, being taken 
for dead, was about to be laid out as such, when a 
Person, who had perus'd his Treatise, oppos'd the 
Design. Next Morning the Woman was found 
recover'd from her profound Syncope, which, 
considering the intense Cold of the Season, had 
probably prov'd a real Cause of her Death, had 
she been taken out of her Bed. 

It is also sufficiently known, that Cardinal Spi-
v#sa, first Minister to the King of Spain, being 
supposed dead, and committed to a Surgeon in 
order to be embalm'd, thrust away the Hand 
which conducted the fatal Instrument, which put 
a real End to his Life. But notwithstanding this 
Accident, the barbarous Surgeon proceeded to 
finish the Operation. 

But as Submersion, or Drowning, is the Subject 
of our present Enquiry, I shall only farther take 
Notice of the Histories relating thereto. 

|P_7
The celebrated Kunckel, in Ephemerid. Nat. 
Curios. informs us, that a young Man had the Mis-
fortune to fall from a Boat into the Water, and 
sunk to the very Bottom, about fifteen hundred 
Paces, from the Shoar, which he did not reach 
till two Hours after. However, as it is natural 
for Persons to give an Account of the several 
Circumstances attending their respective States of 
Calamity and Distress, the young Man inform'd 
those who had the Curiosity to enquire into his 
Condition during that Time, that whilst he was 
making the most strenuous Efforts to preserve his 
Life, he thought of nothing but God, and the 
Means of recommending himself to his Favour and 
Acceptance; that the Voice of his darling Sister, 
who wept bitterly on the Shore, for the Fate of 
her Brother, had serv'd to conduct him to the 
Land; that the Disturbance of the Water by those 
who sought for him, and the Lamentations of the 
People on the Shore, were not only distinctly 
heard by him, but also prov'd extremely shock-
ing and uneasy to him; that he thought his Re-
spiration was carried on, without his knowing in 
what Manner, that the Water had not penetrated 
into any of the Cavities of his Body; and that he 
was hot, instead of being cold. 

The same judicious Author informs us, that he 
had an Opportunity of examining a Fisherman, 
who fell from a Boat into the same Place, and was, 
by Means of the Ice, kept under Water for three 
Days, but upon his being found, appear'd full of Vi-
gour, said that he enjoy'd good Health, and af-
firm'd, that the most remarkable Circumstance of 
which he had been conscious was, that a large 
Bladder had been form'd around his Head for his 
Preservation. 

|P_8
The memorable Accident which befel the Swiss 
Diver is so well attested, and accompanied with 
such a peculiar Train of Circumstances, that it 
cannot fail to make the most lively Impressions 
upon every Person capable of the smallest Degree 
of Reflection. As Necessity lays a Foundation for 
Industry, which frequently cannot be employ'd, 
but in a manner, which is either prejudicial to 
Health, or fatal to Life, so this adventurous Man 
follow'd the Business of plunging into the Water, 
and searching those Holes in which he imagined 
the larger and better Sort of Fishes were lodg'd. 
Accordingly, being employ'd as Dr. Bruhierre-
lates the Story, to furnish a Dish of Fish for a 
Company, who intended to regale themselves with 
a fine Dinner, he cheerfully undertook the Task. 
His Employers, in the mean Time, accompanied 
him to the Brink of the River, and seeing him 
plunge into the Water, retir'd, not in the least 
doubting but he would keep his Word. The 
Swiss, however, happening not to bring the Fish 
at the Hour appointed, the Company, when the 
Afternoon was pretty far advanc'd, went to the 
Banks of the River, in order to know the Rea-
son of their Disappointment. As the Clothes of 
the Diver lay on the River-side, so they soon su-
spected his deplorable Fate, and accordingly or-
der'd him to be search'd for with Hooks, in the 
Place into which they had seen him plunge. The 
Efforts for this Purpose were not in vain, for he 
was at last found, and taken out of the Water, 
tho' wounded in several Parts. 

As this unfortunate Man had been under Water 
for nine Hours, so the Curate of the Place, whose 
Profession call'd for some Care of a Person in such 
a Situation, had a Mind that he should be forth-
with interr'd; and he had been infallibly commit-
|P_9
ted to the Grave, had not the celebrated Mr. Egly,
a Member of the Royal Academy of Inscriptions,
who observ'd a Kind of Ebullition in the Water 
discharg'd from his Mouth, positively affirm'd 
that he was not dead. For that Gentleman justly 
ascrib'd this Ebullition to the languid and imper-
ceptible Remains of Respiration. 

This Conduct of Mr. Egly, however uncom-
mon, yet made so deep an Impression upon the 
Spectators, that they carried the unfortunate Di-
ver, into an adjacent House, where having laid 
him out at full Length, they compress'd his Ab-
domen, in order to procure a Discharge of the 
Water he had swallow'd. By this Means having 
in three Quarters of an Hour evacuated a consi-
derable Quantity of Water, he mov'd one of his 
Legs, a Circumstance which sufficiently evinc'd 
that he still retain'd some faint Remains of Life. 
For this Reason he was, by Mr. Egly's Orders, 
wrap'd up in warm Sheets, and gradually reftor-
ed to a natural Heat. Then being laid in a warm 
Bed, and his Life becoming gradually more con-
spicuous, a liberal Venesection was made, which 
was succeeded by a Sigh, then by a slight Know-
ledge of what had befallen him, and soon after by 
a total Restitution of Health; and tho' Gratitude 
is rarely to be met with in the Breasts of the Vul-
gar, yet this important Service, ever after touch'd 
the Heart of the Swiss, with the highest and most 
lively Sense of the Obligations he lay under to 
Mr. Egly.

Mr. Durham, a Gentleman sufficiently celebrat-
ed for his untainted Integrity, and extensive Learn-
ing, in his Physico-Theology, quotes the following 
History from Pechlinus, an Author of no less Can-
dour and Reputation. 

|P_10
About eighteen Years ago, a Gardner of Fron-
ningholm, now sixty-five Years old, and sufficiently 
vigorous and robust for a Person of that Age, 
made a generous Attempt to rescue an unfortu-
nate Neighbour who had fallen into the Water; 
but being too fool-hardy, he ventur'd upon the 
Ice, which broke, and let him fall into the River, 
which at that Part was eighteen Ells in Depth: 
He went perpendicularly to be Bottom, in which 
his Feet stuck for sixteen Hours before he was 
found. He himself says, that he was no sooner 
under Water, than he became rigid, and lost not 
only the Power of Motion, but also all his Senses, 
except that of hearing, which was affected by the 
Ringing of some Bells at Stockholm. He at first, 
also perceived a Kind of Bladder before his Mouth, 
which hinder'd the Ingress of the Water by that 
Passage tho' it enter'd freely into his Ears, and 
produc'd a Dulness of Hearing for some Time 
after. This unfortunate Man was in vain sought 
for during sixteen Hours, at the End of which 
Time he was taken up by Means of an Hook fix'd 
in his Head, and upon his total Recovery said, 
that he was sensible of that particular Part of his 
Fate. However, whether from the prevailing Cu-
stom of the Country, or the Persuasion of particu-
lar Persons, certain Attempts were made in order 
to restore him to Life: For this Purpose he was 
wrap'd up in Blankets, lest the Air entering too 
precipitately into his Lungs should prove fatal to 
him. In this Condition, being gradually warm'd 
by Means of Sheets, he was rubb'd and stimulated 
till the Motion of his Blood, which had been 
check'd for so many Hours, return'd. At last he 
was totally restor'd by Means of Cordials, and an-
tiapoplectic Liquors. He as yet bears the Mark of 
the Hook, and says, that he is still subject to vi-
|P_11
olent Head-achs. This singular Accident, attested 
by the Oaths of Persons who had been Eye-wit-
nesses to it, induc'd the Queen to give him an an-
nual Pension, and he was introduc'd to the Prince, 
in order to give an Account of what had 
befallen him. 

The celebrated Pechlinus has wrote the History of 
a Woman, who remaining under Water for three 
whole Days, was happily restor'd to Life, almost 
in the same manner as the Gardner. This Fact, 
was so notorious, that the learned Tilasius,Libra-
ry-keeper to the King of Sweden, and in whose 
Time the Woman was still alive, gave the follow-
ing Certificate of it, which is still kept in the Ar-
chives of the Acad. Natur. Curios.

There lately was in Dalia, commonly calledWorms-
land, a Woman of the Name of Margaret Larsdotter, 
who having the Misfortune to be thrice drown'd, 
remain'd the first Time, she being then young, for three 
whole Days under Water, but the two other Times 
had more speedy Relief afforded her. She died in
1672, in the seventy-fifth Year of her Age. Telasius. 

Tho' this Accident, and the Delivery from it, 
happening so many different Times to the same 
Person, may be some be look'd upon as fabulous 
and romantic, yet upon the whole it appears to be 
cloath'd with the most genuine Character of Truth 
and Evidence; for is it credible, that a Man of 
Probity, Candour, and learning, as we may rea-
dily suppose the Librarian of a rich and powerful 
Monarch to be, should in a manner so positive and 
circumstantial, dare to affirm a Fact, which was 
only suspect, and much less one that was abso-
lutely false? Is it probable that a Man of Pechlinus's Character, who is no less universally than justly 
|P_12
applauded for his extensive Erudition and con-
summate medicinal Knowledge, should compose 
an elaborate Treatise in order to explain the Pos-
sibility of this Fact, without taking due Pains to 
have its Reality sufficiently confirm'd and ascer-
tain'd? or, in a word, is it to be supposed, that 
this Physician, who was look'd upon as the Glo-
ry and Ornament of the Swedish Nation, should 
have the Impudence, to appeal to all the Literati
of Sweden, for the Truth of a Fact, which had 
not the Sanction of sufficient Evidences? Why 
should we be more scrupulous than Pechlinus's con-
temporary Authors, who never call'd the Truth 
of this Fact in Questions? The celebrated Bartholin,
in Act. Med. Haffn. Tom. 3. Obs. 42. speaks of it 
in the following manner; "I can by no Means 
remain diffident with respect to the Truth of a 
Story confirm'd by the concurring Testimonies 
of so many Witnesses of Candour and Vera-
city; and of which Pechlinus has demonstrated 
the Possibility by other Examples of a similar 
Nature: I am only surpris'd, that so singular a 
Narrative, should be so long buried in Oblivion, 
in a Nation otherwise so curious and fond of 
Discoveries."

But we shall have no manner of Reason to doubt 
of this Fact recorded by Pechlinus, when we re-
flect, that other celebrated Physicians and Philoso-
phers, assure us of the Truth of other Accidents 
highly similar and analogous to it. Thus Alexan-
der Benedicius, Lib. x. Cap. 9. speaks in the fol-
lowing manner. "Life has been frequently seen 
restor'd to Persons who have remain'd under 
Water during forty-eight Hours." The same 
Author, for this very Reason, thinks it highly im-
proper, to inter drown'd and hysteric Patients, 
till seventy-two hours after their suppos'd Death. 
|P_13
Borelli, in Cant. 2. Obs. 2. informs us, that, "a cer-
tain Person of Distinction having remain'd for 
a long Time under the Water, was taken for 
dead when he was found; but proper Efforts 
being made to restore his Life, he was rous'd 
from his suppos'd Death, and long surviv'd his 
Misfortune." Besides, the Credibility of the 
Fact, told by Pechlinus, is sufficiently confirm'd 
by the Suffrage of the learned and judicious Zac-
chias, who, in his 79th Consultation, wrote in or-
der to determine, whether the Return of Life to 
a young Man who had remain'd an Hour under 
Water, was miraculous, and as some supersti-
tious People would have it, to be ascrib'd to a 
Person of superior Sanctity, speaks in the follow-
ing manner. "This Event is so far from being 
miraculous, that it can hardly come under the 
Denomination of surprising, since vast Numbers 
of Persons have return'd to Life, after having 
been drown'd, or suffocated in any other man-
ner, not only for some Hours, but also during 
one, and even three whole Days; because the 
Suppression of Respiration in the Water, had 
occasioned an Oppression of the Spirits, and 
had brought on an apoplectic Paroxysm, which 
render'd them apparently dead, tho' their Lives 
were really preserv'd by Transpiration, which 
augmenting gradually, laid a Foundation for 
a free Respiration."

The Possibility of retaining a Principle of Life 
for a long Time under Water, is still more sur-
prisingly confirm'd by Kunckel, in Miscellan. Nat. Curios. Decad. 3. An. 5 & 6. Obs. 71. where he 
speaks in the following manner. "I am suffici-
ently sensible, that in Sweden, no one Doubts of 
the Possibility of retaining Life under Water for 
eight Days; and that the sollowing Accident is 
|P_14
by no Means call'd in Question by those who 
live near the Place where it happened. Some 
Time ago, about four Leagues from the Town 
of Falung, a Painter fell from a Boat into the 
Water in such a manner, as to remain upright 
with his Feet at the Bottom. He was in vain 
search'd for during eight Days; at the End of 
which Time, he appear'd alive on the Surface 
of the Water. The Magistrate and Clergyman 
of the Place, ask'd him the following Questions. 
Whether he had respir'd all the Time of his 
Submersion? To which he answer'd, He knew 
nothing of the Matter. Whether he had thought 
upon God and recommended his Soul to him? 
To which he reply'd, Very often. Whether he 
could see and hear? To which he answer'd, 
Yes, and said that he would often have laid 
hold of the Hooks employ'd in finding him, if 
he could have mov'd his Arms. He also, add-
ed, that the Fish prov'd highly offensive and 
uneasy to him, by the Attacks they made on his 
Eyes; and being ask'd by what Means he guard-
ed against these Attacks, he answer'd, by mov-
ing his Eye-lids. As to his Sense of hearing, 
he affirm'd, that nothing wrs more ungrateful, 
and even painful, to him than striking the Sur-
face of the Water; and that in a particular man-
ner, he was affected with a violent Pain of his 
Ears, which was forthwith communicated to his 
whole Body, every Time People came to draw 
Water in Buckets. When he was ask'd, Whe-
he had been sensible of Hunger, and discharg'd 
his Excrements? He reply'd, that he had not. 
Being interrogated, Whether he had slept? he 
answer'd, he knew nothing of it, but believ'd 
he had, because he was some time depriv'd of 
all Sensation and Reflection; adding, that all 
|P_15
the Thoughts he remember'd to have pass'd in 
his Breast, had only God, and the Means of 
his own Deliverance, for their Objects."

The Nature and Circumstances of the Accident 
now related, lay a sufficient Foundation, for our 
believing the following memorable Event, espe-
cially as it happened to a Person of Distinction, 
and is attested as authentic by Men of Learning 
and Probity. 

Gocellinus, a young Man, and Nephew to one 
of the Archbishops of Cologne, had the Misfortune 
to fall into the Rhine, and was not found for fifteen 
Days after; and being laid in an adjacent Church, 
in order to be interr'd, soon return'd to Life, and 
surviv'd the Accident a long Time. 

As there are a great many secret Things in Na-
ture, and probably numberless latent Circumstances 
in the animal Oeconomy, with which we are en-
tirely unacquainted; and as Persons of a curious 
and attentive Turn of Mind, daily observe Acci-
dents, which they before thought impossible, so we 
have no Reason to doubt of surprising Facts, re-
lated by Men of Learning and Candour, nor for-
mally to deny the Truth of Events, which at first 
appear incredible. Of this Kind, is the following 
Narrative. 

The celebrated Mr. Burmann assures us, that in 
Boness of Pithovia, he heard a funeral Sermon 
preach'd upon the Death of one Laurence Jones,
a Man of seventy Years of Age, who as the Preacher 
said, was drown'd when sixteen Years old; and 
continued seven Weeks under Water, notwithstand-
ing which, he return'd to Life, and enjoy'd good 
Health. However visionary and romantic this Ac-
cident may appear, in the Eyes of those who pre-
tend to have divested their Minds of vulgar Er-
rors, yet it has met with Credit from the most pe-
|P_16
netrating and sagacious Authors who liv'd at the 
Time in which it happen'd. Thus the learned and 
judicious Langelott, in Miscellan. Natur. Curios. 
Decad. 1. An. 6. Obs. 20, not being able to con-
ceive how a Person can preserve a Principle of Life 
so long, without the Assistance of the Air, in Wa-
ters so cold and full of Nitre, as those of Sweden,
and not being satisfied with similar Accidents 
daily happening to some Birds and Infects, is yet 
so far from doubting of the Truth of this Acci-
dent, that he applies to the learned Members of 
the Acad. Natur. Curios. for their Opinion and 
Explication of it; by which Means he imagin'd 
that effectual Measures for restoring many drown'd 
Persons might be discover'd. Besides, it is by no 
Means probable that a Man of Mr. Burmann's Ve-
racity would forge such a Story, in order to see 
what enormous Lengths Credulity was capable of 
carrying his Fellow-Creatures; nor is it possible 
that the Clergyman, should, from the Pulpit, as-
sert this Fact as true, if it had not really been so, 
since Laurence Jones, was a Native of the Place, 
and well known to every one of his Audience. 

But upon the Whole, granting that this Narra-
tive of Laurence Jones was false, which however 
we have no Reason to believe, yet the Recital of 
it has a great Tendency not only to illustrate our 
Subject, but also to produce happy Effects in Life; 
for, 1st, It is certainly the genuine and uncontro-
verted Interest of the Public, to be appriz'd of the 
Possibility of a Person's retaining a Principle of 
Life for a long Time under Water; 2dly, The 
Conclusion to be drawn from this seemingly mira-
culous Effect is, that if after a long Time, a Bo-
dy is taken out of the Water, without the Signs 
of Putrefaction, it is the Duty of those who find 
such a Body, to treat it as if there were still a 
|P_17
Possibility of restoring it to Life; and 3dly, If it 
is certain from uncontroverted Facts, that Persons 
have retain'd Life under Water for several Days, 
there is no Reason, from the Laws of the animal 
Oeconomy, and the hitherto known Properties 
of the animal Fluids, to disbelieve that the like 
should happen to Persons who have also remain'd 
under Water for several Weeks. 

As our Modesty ought always to be propor-
tion'd to the difficult and intricate natures of the 
Subjects we pretend to consider, so we frankly 
acknowledge, that these and other similar Acci-
dents, as it were, bewilder the Mind, and perplex 
the most penetrating Capacities, when they attempt 
to account for them; since we have never yet 
discover'd wherein the constituent Principle of 
Life exactly consists, and since there are various 
Properties both of the Solids and Fluids of the 
human Body, to which we are intire Strangers. 
Some however, affirm, that a Principle of Life 
may in the deplorable State of Submersion, be re-
tain'd for a long Time, because the Coldness of 
the Water renders the Circulation slower, and 
suppersses the Transpiration of the vital Air con-
tain'd in the Blood; whilst at the same Time, 
some Portions of the Air lodg'd in the Water, 
probably penetrate into the Bodies of such Per-
sons. But Platerus and Bartholin seem to account 
in a more rational and satisfactory manner for 
Phænomena of this Kind. The former of these 
Authors, in explaining how a Woman, who was 
drown'd in the Rhine, for murdering her own 
Child, return'd to Life after she was found, af-
firms, that this Accident was the Effect of a Syn-
cope, in which Respiration and the Motion of 
|P_18
the Heart are stopt. Now 'tis certain from Expe-
rience and Observation, that these two Functions 
may be supperess'd without the actual Loss of Life, 
as is frequently obvious in violent Syncopes, and 
hysteric Paroxysms, from which the Patients do not 
often recover in an Hour or more, during which 
Time, the slightest Indications of Life by the Pulse 
and Respiration, are not to be observ'd. 

If any one should say, that it bespeaks an un-
pardonable Excess of Credulity, to believe that a 
Syncope may last for a Week or longer, and that 
consequently the Motion of the Heart and Pulse 
may be for that Time suspended, without neces-
sarily producing Death; we may justly reply, 
that hitherto no Person has discover'd wherein the 
Essence and Principle of Life consists; and that 
there are in Nature various Phaenomena, which 
seem to prove, that the Motion of the Heart, 
and the Circulation of the Humours, are rather 
palpable Signs of the Existence of Life, than its 
proximate and immediate Causes. This Doctrine 
we shall endeavour to establish, in a strictly ana-
logical manner, by comparing those Events which 
happen to Vegetables and the Brute Creation, 
with similar Accidents which befall Mankind. 

For this Purpose we shall first consider the State 
and Condition of such Plants, as retain a Princi-
ple of Life and Vegetation during the whole Win-
ter. All the Difference, according to Pechlinus,
between these, and the Plants of the animal Kind 
is, that in the latter the Principle of Motion is 
weaker, and the Texture of the Fibres less firm; 
whereas the former contain a much larger Quan-
tity of Oil, and have the Spirit subservient to their 
Vegetation repell'd by the Cold, to the Bulbs, 
|P_19
Roots, and Seeds, where it circulates in a languid 
manner, without having Force to propel Buds, 
Flowers, and Blossoms, till the kind and genial 
Hears of the Spring, render it more powerful and 
active. Why may we not, therefore, suppose that 
something analogous to this may happen in some 
human Bodies, who have been under the Water 
for some Time. 

This is not the only Instance in nature, which 
we can bring in Confirmation of our Doctrine; 
for certain Insects pass the whole Winter in 
Chrysalides, or considerably hard Pellicules, with-
out discovering the smallest Signs of Life, tho' 
'tis certain they are not dead, since a small De-
gree of Heat only, is requisite to produce their 
last Metamorphosis. The Reason of this apparent 
Death, is the Cold of the Atmosphere, so inspis-
sating their Fluids, as that they can only circulate 
in a faint and languid manner, round an highly 
minute and small Center. The Degree of Fluidi-
ty which they retain, is however, so considerable, 
that a more intense Cold than we perceive on the 
Earth, is incapable of totally coagulating them, 
as is sufficiently evinc'd by the curious Experi-
ments of Mr. Reaumur.

This Phaenomenon is not only observ'd in the 
Chrysalides of Insects, but the Seminal Principle is 
also preserv'd free from Coagulation, and without 
discovering the smallest Sign of Life, in Eggs, 
which may be consider'd as the Chrysalides, or Pel-
licules of Animals whose Life is perceptible. A-
quatic Insects, also, plunge themselves into the 
Mud, where they remain without Motion, till the 
Spring; which holds equally true of Frogs and 
Toads, according to Valentinus, in Dissert. Epistol. 4. 
|P_20
The like happens to some terrestrial Insects; for 
Mr. Reaumur has by Experiment and Observa-
tion sufficiently evinc'd, that Ants during the 
whole Winter, remain apparently dead, till the 
Approach of the Spring. 

A third and more powerful collateral Proof of 
this Doctrine, is drawn from the Consideration of 
some Animals, whole Blood is warm, and circu-
lates in the same manner with that of the Human 
Species; since in these also the Circulation and 
Respiration are suppress'd during the Winter, 
but return in the Spring. 

Thus of Swallows it may be said, that during 
one Half of the Year they are dead, and the other 
alive. Olaus Magnus, and Scheffer, in a Letter 
wrote to Hevelius, affirm, that in some northerly 
Countries, it is very common for Fishermen to 
find in the Water large Clusters of Swallows, 
which in the Beginning of the Autumn, had thus 
pil'd themselves up. Those Authors also inform 
us, that some Species of Swallows, spontaneously 
seek a Refuge in the Waters, others take their 
Flight to foreign Climates, others conceal them-
selves in the Holes of old and decay'd Buildings, 
in the Sand, and in their own Nests; and that 
others finding a Decay of Strength in their Pas-
sage to other Countries, plunge themselves into the 
Sea, where they remain till the genial Spring 
rouses their latent Principle of Life and Motion. 

The celebrated Kircher, in Mund. subterran. Lib. 
8. Sect. 4. informs us, that the Inhabitants of 
Peloponesus, and other Territories of the Archipe-
lago, have told him, that every Year, they ob-
serv'd large Quantities of Storks and Swallows 
flying thro' their Countries from Egypt and the 
|P_21
Coasts of Lybia, and that these latter when fatigu'd 
with flying, plac'd themselves, to the number of 
five or six, on the Back of a Stork, whom they 
recompens'd by an uninterrupted and melodious 
Song. There, are, therefore, continues the Au-
thor, some Swallows which fly from one Country 
to another; but 'tis equally certain from Expe-
rience, that the Swallows of cold Climates make 
no such Voyages; but during the Winter conceal 
themselves in Caves, Lakes, Rivers, Seas, and the 
Cavities of Trees. 

Olaus Magnus, in Lib. 15. Chap. 10. informs 
us, that such Swallows as are taken out of the 
Water before the due Time, do not live long; 
and adds, that the Inhabitants of Tivoli, when 
shewing him Mount Scisso, which Name it receives 
from a foolish Report of its being divided at the 
Crucifixion of our Saviour, assur'd him, that in 
the Winter-Season, large Quantities of Swallows 
apparently dead were to be found on it; where-
as no such Animals are to be found there in 
Summer. He then quotes Cysatus, who in his 
Description of Switzerland affirms, that about 
Christmas, some Workmen when digging up the 
Earth for laying the Foundation of a public Edi-
fice, found a subterraneous Cave, from which flew 
about twenty or more Swallows. Whence the Au-
thor concludes, that all these Birds do not pass 
the Sea at their Disappearance, but that some re-
tire into the Cavities of Mountains, others in Hol-
low-Trees; but that this most frequently happens 
in northerly Climates. 

Fortunus Licetus, in Tr. de Feriis Altric. Animal. 
Disp. 19. affirms, that in upper Poland, every 
Person may be experimentally convinc'd, that the 
|P_22
same Swallows which in Summer build their Nests 
upon the Tops of Houses, towards the End of 
September plunge themselves into Ditches and Ri-
vers, where they remain conceal'd till about the 
Middle of May. He, also, informs us, that when 
the Inhabitants seeing Fish thro' the Ice, break it 
in order to catch them, they also frequently find 
Clusters of Swallows adhering to each other, with-
out discovering the smallest Signs of Life, till 
they are brought to a Stove, where they soon re-
turn to Life. But what is still more remarkable 
is, that as soon as the Polanders, who imagine it 
unlawful to kill these Swallows, set them at Li-
berty, they forthwith fly back to the Water, and 
plunge themselves into it. 

The celebrated Huet, Archbishop of Avranches,
who travell'd thro' Sweden, informs us, that be-
tweenCaen and the Sea, along the Shore of the 
River Orne, there are many Caves, in which, dur-
ing the Winter, have been found large Clusters of 
Swallows, suspended like so many Bunches of 
Grapes; and that the like was long ago observ'd in 
Italy. For Pedo Albinovanus, in the Elegy he com-
pos'd on the Death of Mecaenas, speaks of the Re-
treat of the Swallows to the Rocks, as an infalli-
ble Sign of the Approach of Winter. 

Congelantur Aquæ, scopulis se condit Hirundo, 
Verberat egeledas garrula vere Lacus. 
Bodin, quoted by Camerarius, Cant. 7. Hist. 71. 
informs us, in the second Book of his Theatre of 
Nature, that when the People who inhabit the 
Coasts of the Baltic Sea, are employ'd among the 
Rocks in searching for yellow Amber, they fre-
|P_23
quently find large Clusters of Swallows. Camera-
rius subjoins, that some Authors affirm, that "Swal-
lows conceal themselves in the Bottom of the 
Sea, where they sleep till the Appearance of a 
proper Season for their quitting it; but this is 
impossible since they have Lungs, and for that 
Reason must necessarily perish in such a Con-
dition." But however specious and conclusive 
this Reasoning of Camerarius may appear, yet 'tis 
certain that the Truth of Facts, which have actual-
ly happened, can never be invalidated. 

Franciseus de Frankenau in his Medicinal Satyres, 
confirms this Opinion with Respect to Swallows, 
by the Authorities of Lauremberg, in Acer. Philol.
Lib. 3. Cap. 71; of Isaac Vossius, in his Append. 
de Lucis Natur. Cap. 1; of Deusingius, in Vindict. 
Fæt. Sect. 5; and of Fournier, in his Geography, 
who in Part 1. Lib. 2. Cap. 5. informs us, that 
they are commonly found in the Norwegian-Seas, 
as also in the Lakes and Rivers of Silesia, Po-
land, Bohemia, and Moravia; and that in the Be-
ginning of the Autumn, large Numbers of them 
plunge themselves into Wells. The same Author, 
also, establishes his own Opinion by the additional 
Suffrages of Cromerus, in Hist. Polon, Lib. 1; of 
Hevelius; of Marcellus Donatus, in Hist. Med. 
Memorab. Lib. 4. Cap. 12. and of Helvicius, in 
his Epigrams. 

The celebrated Mr. Falconet, whose Judgment 
and Veracity render his single Word a sufficient 
Evidence, informs us, that being in the House of 
a Gentleman of Brest in the Winter Season, he saw 
a Servant bring in a Kind of Mass or Lump, which 
appeared to be Earth, and which some Fishermen 
had caught in their Nets. By washing it carefully, 
|P_24
in order to discover what it was, it was found to 
be a Group of Swallows, which resum'd Life by 
being expos'd to the Fire for some time. 

Swallows are not the only Birds which conceal 
themselves in the Bottoms of Rivers, in order to 
pass the Winter; for John Baptiste de Fulgosa,for-
merly Doge of Genoa, affirms, that Gervas Tibel-
lerius, wrote to Otho the Fourth, that some Per-
sons having thrown their Nets into a River of that 
Country in the Winter Time, they brought to 
Land a large Quantity of Storks, which were ap-
parently dead, with their Beaks fix'd in each 
other's Fundament; but they were soon restor'd 
to Life, by means of Heat. The same Author 
adds, that in 1467, near Metz in Lorrain, a large 
Number of apparently dead Storks were found in 
a River, and that being put into a warm Bath, 
they recover'd Life. 

The learned Vossius, in Append. de Lucis Natur.
informs us, that at the Approach of Winter, Storks, 
Herons, and some other Birds of the like Nature, 
do not fly to Egypt, or into more temperate Cli-
mates, but plunge themselves into Ditches and 
Marshes. 

The Possibility of retaining Life for a long Time 
under Water, is still farther evinc'd, by considering 
those Birds with which our Fields and Forests are 
richly stock'd in Summer; but which are not to be 
seen in Winter. If it should be said, that these, dur-
ing the Winter, live upon the Stores they have amass'd 
in the Summer; I answer, that they are by no Means 
provident against future Want. Hence they must 
necessarily conceal themselves, in Places suited to 
their particular Natures; and as it is equally im-
possilble for them, as for the human Species, to live 
|P_25
awake without Aliments, 'tis more than probable 
that during the whole Winter, they are, as it were, 
lock'd up in so lethargic a Sleep, that they sustain 
no Loss or Dissipation of their Fluids, and conse-
quently require no Reparation. 

If it should be ask'd, whether these Animals, 
during such a State, retain a real Principle of Life? 
I answer, that the Thing is not only probable, but 
may be also evinc'd from Fact and Experience, 
since the most celebrated natural Historians and 
Physicians give us strong and uncontroverted In-
stances of this Kind. Thus in Ephemerid. Nat. Cu-
rios. we are inform'd, that a certain Gentleman in 
the Winter Season, order'd an hollow Trunk of a 
Sallow Tree, which by his Direction had been cut 
down the preceding Autumn, to be laid on the 
Fire; but a small Portion of it happening to be 
left in a Corner of the Room, he had the Curiosity 
to examine it, and upon his doing so, found Fea-
thers arrang'd and dispos'd in a natural Manner: 
These he gently pluck'd off, and underneath found 
the Flesh of a small Bird which he believ'd to be 
dead, though he could not discover to what Spe-
cies it belonged. However, with respect to this 
Circumstance, he was soon undeceiv'd; for having 
expos'd it to the Influence of the Fire, it soon dis-
cover'd palpable Signs of Life. Something simi-
lar and analogous to this, no doubt, happens with 
respect to many of those Quadrupeds which inha-
bit our Forests, for Want of a Nourishment pro-
per to give their Blood that Degree of Fluidity, 
which is absolutely necessary to its Circulation, 
since it is certain, that a far smaller Number is to 
be seen in Winter than in Summer. 

After these Examples of an apparent Death in 
Birds whose Blood is warm, we have no Reason 
to be surpriz'd at Pechlinus, when he affirms, that in 
|P_26
the Winter Time, Fishes not only appear dead, 
but are consequently cover'd over with a Crust of 
Ice in their Holes, without having the vital Prin-
ciple destroy'd in them; for they begin to live a-
fresh, when the Heat of the Atmosphere, or an 
artificial Fire, melts the Ice. The like, continues the 
Author, happens to Serpents, Toads, Frogs, Tortoi-
ses, and in a Word all amphibious Animals, when the 
Cold inspissates their Juices; which being naturally 
viscid, are consequently more proper to prevent 
the Dissipation of that vital Spirit, which is abso-
lutely necessary to restore them to Life. 

'Tis to be observ'd, that those Fishes which have 
been thus frozen, do not long survive their artificial 
Restitution to Life; because the Frost having al-
ter'd the Principles of their Blood, the vital Spirit, 
when beginning to act and unfold itself, can no 
longer form a Mass of Fluids of an uniform Na-
ture. Thus Wine when frozen, and artificially 
thaw'd, contracts a disagreeable Flavour, because 
the Solution being procur'd in an unnatural Man-
ner, hinders the spirituous Part of the Wine from 
mixing with its other Principles, in the same Or-
der and Proportion as before. 

What Pechlinus advances with Respect to Fishes, 
is entirely conformable to the Opinion of Theo-
phrastus, in Tr. de Piscibus in siceo degeritibus, where 
we are inform'd, that the Inhabitants of Pontus,
frequently find Fishes in the Ice, which discover no 
Signs either of Motion or Sensation, till they are 
put into a Fish-Back, or laid among Straw. This 
Circumstance, according to Theophrastus, happens 
particularly to the Gudgeon, and some other Fishes 
of a similar Nature. 

The last Proof of the Possibility of a Person's 
retaining a Principle of Life for a long Time under 
Water, without a Supply of Aliments for the 
|P_27
Purposes of Nutrition, is drawn from a Considera-
tion of some Quadaupeds, as the Hedge-Hog, 
the Marmotte, the Dormouse, and some others, 
which in the Beginning of Winter concealing 
themselves in the Earth, are seiz'd with so pro-
found a Sleep that they appear to be dead, since 
neither the Pulsation of their Arteries, nor their 
Respiration are perceptible. This Circumstance, 
no doubt, induc'd the celebrated Harvey in Lib. 
de Generat. Animal. Exercit. 50, to speak in the 
following Manner: "Some sanguineous Animals 
live long without any Pulse, and lie conceal'd 
during the Whole of the Winter, notwithstand-
ing which they remain alive, tho' their Heart 
retains no Motion, and their Respiration stops, 
just as it happens to Persons attack'd with Sin-
copes, and hysteric Fits, whose Pulse is totally a-
bolish'd." Tho' Harvey was the glorious Dis-
coverer of the Circulation of the Blood, and may 
for that Reason be suppos'd to be a keen Advo-
cate in its Behalf, yet 'tis sufficiently obvious from 
this Passage, that he did not believe it absolutely 
necessary to the Preservation of Life. But Pechli-
nus, whether from Prejudice, or rational Deducti-
ons from what he had observ'd, is of Opinion, 
that in these Animals, Respiration is carried on, 
by a Motion of the Diaphragm, so insensible as to 
escape the Eye of the Observer. He also observes, 
that in this State, it is necessary their Respiration 
should be such, because if it was perform'd in the 
usual Manner, the Motion of the Blood would be 
so likewise; in consequence of which, the Trans-
piration and Necessity for Aliments would be e-
qually strong; a Circumstance incompatible with 
the Condition of these Animals, which lie hid un-
der the Earth during the whole Winter. 

|P_28
Tho' these Relations may possibly appear very 
singular and surprising to Persons unacquainted 
with Natural History; yet they infallibly prove, 
that in the brute Creation at least, Respiration, the 
Circulation of the Blood, and Pulsation of the Ar-
teries may cease for a long Time, without the total 
Extinction and Destruction of Life. Now is it 
not highly probable, or rather absolutely certain, 
that something similar and analogous to this may 
happen to human Creatures, who have the Misfor-
tune to be drown'd, since in both, the Solids and 
Fluids act and move by the same Laws, so in both 
Suffocation must be the same Thing, and conse-
quently its Effects remov'd by the same Means? 

Besides, there is by no Means any Reason for 
believing, that an Instance of this surprsing Absti-
nence and Want of Food, prodnc'd by such a pro-
found and lethargic Sleep, as that of the Marmotte, 
is not to be found among the human Species; for 
in Miscellan. Academ. Natur. Curios. An. 8. Obs. 67. 
the celebrated Ludovicus, first Physician to the 
Duke of Saxe-Gotha informs us, that a young Girl, 
who for some Fault she had committed being ap-
prehensive of a severe Chastisement from her Pa-
rents, retir'd to the most conceal'd Part of a 
Thicket, where, seven Days after her Elopement, 
she was found lying on her Belly with all the ap-
parent Signs of Death, except that her Limbs 
were still flexible and pliant; her Visage was 
overspread with a viscid Phlegm, which was co-
ver'd with an hoary Kind of Down, and with the 
falling Leaves which had adher'd to it. Her 
Mouth and Nostrils were entirely full of a thick 
Mucus: But notwithstanding these seemingly dis-
couraging Circumstances, the Physician call'd to 
her Assistance, order'd her Body to be warm'd by 
Means of Friction; Then, with warm Water, 
|P_29
washing away the Phlegm which cover'd her Face, 
and the viscid Mucus which obstructed her Mouth 
and Nostrils, he pour'd into her Mouth a Spoon-
ful of Brandy, which seem'd to go down her 
Throat, and was the only Cordial he had at hand. 
Upon exhibiting a second Spoonful, she fetch'd a 
Sigh, and a third made her open her Eyes. 

We now proceed, to consider the most proper 
and efficacious Measure to be taken for the Relief 
of drown'd Persons; for which Purpose we shall 
previously investigate and ascertain the genuine 
Cause of Suffocation. 

Not only the antient Schools of Greece and Ara-
bia, but also most of the succeeding Physicians, 
till the Days of Platerus, imagin'd that the Suffo-
cation was produc'd by the Water which enter'd 
into the Stomach, Breast, and Lungs; in Conse-
quence of which false Notion they thought them-
selves fully authoriz'd to attempt its Discharge 
with all possible Expedition. For this Purpose 
they order'd drown'd Persons to be suspended by 
the Feet, or laid upon their Bellies, on a Hogshead 
or Tub, which was to be agitated from one Side 
to the other, imagining that by this Position, 
the Abdomen and Breast being compress'd, and 
the Head hanging down, the Agitation of the 
Vessel, must necessarily facilitate the Evacuation 
of the Water, which they suppos'd was also fa-
vour'd by the declining Situation of the superior 
Part of the Body. With the same Intention, they 
also order'd such Measures as had a Tendency to 
excite Vomiting. 

But as a false Theory never fails to lay a Foun-
dation for a dangerous Practice, so we have just 
Reason to condemn this Method of Suspension, or 
hanging by the Heels; for the Water swallow'd 
by drowning Persons descends into the Stomach, 
|P_30
and not into the Thorax, so that it cannot prevent 
their Recovery. This Circumstance must happen, 
not only so long as a Person retains a Sense of his 
State and Condition, but also afterwards; for as 
the Water is hinder'd from entring into the Arte-
ria Trachaea and Lungs by a mechanical Effort, in 
which Reason has no share, so the Lungs may in 
this State be compar'd to an empty Bottle plung'd 
in Water, into which the Fluid does not enter, be-
cause the Air it contains resists its Access, and this 
the rather happens, because the Motion of the 
Breast, destin'd to attract the Air, at that Time, 
totally ceases, and consequently nothing forces the 
Water to enter and fill up its Place. This Doc-
trine is not only evinc'd from the Structure of the 
Parts, but also confirm'd by Experience. 

Thus the learned Platerus, in Quest. 5. positive-
ly affirms, that if drown'd Persons swallow any 
Water, the Quantity of it is too small to prove 
mortal to them; because he always found but ve-
ry little of it in their Stomachs. He also adds, 
that most of the Water which appears to be dis-
charg'd from the Mouths of Persons suspended by 
the Heels, really flow'd from their Cloaths. 

Nymman, in Tr. de Vita foet. in Utero, speaks 
thus, "Who could believe that a Foetus so long 
included in the Uterus, where it moves all its 
Limbs, should yet never move its Jaw-bone, 
nor open its Mouth. Besides, it always has its 
Nostrils open, notwithstanding which it has ne-
ver been observ'd that the Liquor of the Am-
nios has enter'd its Body. Thus it is with the 
Human Foetus, as with those who are drown'd, 
since in dissecting many of these last, I have 
hardly found a Pint of Water in their Bodies."

In the Miscellan. Nat. Curios. An. 2. Obs. 251. 
Wepfer, gives an Account of the Anatomy of 
|P_31
some Beavers, one of which was drown'd. The 
Author having open'd the Arteria Trachæa, no 
Water was discharg'd from the Lungs; but there 
were about four Ounces of Water, like the Wash-
ings of Flesh, found in the right Cavity of the 
Breast, and about three Ounces of the same Kind 
in the Left. This Extravasation the Author just-
ly supposes produc'd by the Expression of a bloody 
Lymph from the Pores of the Bronchia of this 
Animal, which had for a long Time struggled a-
gainst so violent a Death as that of Drowning. 
Neither pure Water nor Water ting'd with Blood, 
were observ'd either in the Arteria Trachæa, or in 
the Bronchia.

Bhonius, in the Appendix to his Treatise de Re-
nuntiat. Vuln. Diss. 2. informs us, that in dissect-
ing a great many Women drown'd for murdering 
their Children, he had shewn the Spectators, that 
there was little or no Water in their Lungs and 
Abdomen; and adds, that in order to render him-
self more certain with Respect to this Circumstance, 
he had, drown'd several Animals, in whose Cavities, 
tho' drown'd alive, he had never perceiv'd any 
Water. 

Dethardingius, at present Professor of Medicine 
in Coppenhagen, in a Letter wrote when he was 
Professor at Rostoch, in 1714, gives us an Account 
of the Dissection of a Soldier, who attempting to 
make his Escape from a Garrison, was drown'd in 
a Ditch, and upon being open'd had in his Sto-
mach only about a Pint of Beer, which he had 
drank some Time before. The Professor took 
care previously to apprise the Spectators, that 
there would not be a single Drop of Water in his 
Breast, which as well as his Abdomen, was very 
much elevated; and the Event verified the Pre-
diction. 

|P_32
Johannes Conradus Becker, in his Treatise de 
Submers. Mort. Sin. Pot. Aq. gives us the four 
following Histories. A Dog, says he, being 
drown'd and lying in the Water for an Hour, his 
Abdomen, Stomach, and Intestines, appear'd tu-
mified and inflated, tho' a single Drop of Water 
was not found in them. The Lungs were, also, 
inflated, without containing Water, like those of 
hang'd Persons, but immediately collaps'd upon 
suffering the Air to escape thro' an Incision made 
in the Arteria Traehæa. The Author subjoins, that 
this Observation render'd the Doctrine of the An-
tients highly suspected by him. 

The second, is the History of a Peasant, taken 
from the Water, after he had been some Weeks in 
it, and was entirely putrified. After opening his 
Duodenum, two Ligatures were made on that In-
testine, which was very much inflated, and from 
the Aperture of which nothing was discharg'd, but 
a Liquor which was Chyle mix'd with Beer, of 
which the Peasant had, at a Market, drank so li-
berally, as to intoxicate himself. The Tumefacti-
on of the Stomach, laid a Foundation for suspect-
ing that it contain'd a large Quantity of Water, 
tho' upon laying it open, nothing was found but a 
Pint of a Liquor, whose Smell exactly resem-
bled that of Beer. The Lungs were so much in-
flated, that when an Incision was made in the Breast, 
they burst out; but their Inflation was speedily dis-
sipated, by making an Aperture in the Arteria 
Trachea, thro' which the Air was discharg'd with 
a considerable Noise. In cutting the Lungs into 
Pieces, no extraordinary Signs of Humidity were 
perceiv'd, nor were any preternatural Circum-
stances observ'd, except Spots of different Colours. 

The third History, is that of a Woman drown'd 
in a Well, in whose Intestines nothing but Chyle 
|P_33
was discover'd, neither was there any Water in the 
Lungs. The Intestines collaps'd upon making a 
small Puncture in them, and an Aperture being 
made in the Arteria Trachea, the Air escap'd thro' 
it from the Lungs with some Noise. 

The fourth and last History related by Becker, is 
that of a Man who was found standing upright in 
a Bason, where he had remain'd under Water for 
five Days. His Stomach, which was large, was 
only inflated with Wind, and hardly contain'd six 
Ounces of a whitish Liquor. The Lungs being 
equally inflated, collaps'd upon cutting the Arteria 
Trachea, from which the Air was discharg'd with 
a considerable Noise. When he was found, two 
Spoonfuls of Water were not discharg'd from his 
Mouth. "He was, however, continues Becker,
every where surrounded with Water, but 
that Element, notwithstanding the Minuteness 
of its Parts, could not penetrate into the Arte-
ria Trachea and Oesophagus, in order to fill the 
Cavities of the Viscera; an evident Proof that 
these Parts were so defended against every Thing 
that made an Attempt to enter them, that the 
Water itself could not force a Passage into 
them."

From these Observations, the celebrated Author 
concludes, that the Absence of Water in the Lungs 
and Intestines, is not a Proof that a Person has 
been thrown into the Water after his Death. This 
Observation is of the last Importance to those whose 
Business it is to make Reports before Courts of Ju-
dicature, tho' it is contrary to that of Rodericus à 
Castro, adopted by many Philologists and Crimi-
nalists, and among others by Feltman in Tr. de Ca-
davero inspiciendo, Cap. 21. But as in the Opinion 
of Becker, the Lungs are not inflated in those who 
are thrown into the Water after Death, so we may 
|P_34
from their Inflation draw a Proof, that the Person 
was alive when drown'd, or put into the Water. 

Since, therefore, it is sufficiently obvious, both 
from the Structure of the Parts, and the Authori-
ties of the most penetrating Anatomists, that little 
or no Water enters the Bodies of drown'd Persons, 
so 'tis equally obvious, that the Practice of hang-
ing by the Heels, is not only useless, but must also 
contribute to destroy those Remains of Life which 
may possibly be lost; for by such a Suspension, the 
whole Column of the Blood convey'd to the Heart 
by the inferior Vena Cava, will necessarily press upon 
that convey'd by the superior Vena Cava, where the 
Blood being interrupted in its Course, must neces-
sarily regurgitate into the jugular Veins, and conse-
quently into the Head, where, by its Quantity and 
Weight, it retards the Motion of the Spirits, whose 
free Progress is absolutely necessary to restore the Cir-
culation of the Blood, on which Life in a great 
Measure depends. 

As it is of great Importance, to know the Cause 
of the Inflation of drown'd Persons, since it is not 
produc'd by the Water they swallow, so the learn-
edDethardingius accounts for it in the following 
manner, "Those, says he, who die in the Water, 
are not destroy'd for Want of Air, but by 
means of too large a Quantity of it; they do 
not die in Expiration, but in Inspiration; and 
in a Word, nothing more resembles each In-
spiration, than the Phaenomena observ'd in 
drown'd Persons; for if we attentively consider 
what happens to ourselves, we perceive that the 
Breast is as it were lengthen'd, the Abdomen 
elevated, and the Flanks inflated, and that this 
State subsists, so long as we draw in the Air, or 
retain it in the Breast. Now the same Things 
happen in drown'd Persons, only with this Dif-
|P_35
ference, that in the latter, the Inspiration is 
perform'd with Rapidity and Violence, whereas 
in the former it is carried on quietly and without 
any Effort. In Persons not drown'd, a Depres-
sion succeeds the Elevation; but in drown'd 
Persons the Elevation of the Abdomen, and the 
Elongation of the Breast subsist; by which means, 
all the Parts continue in a State of Expansion. 
This is, no doubt, the Meaning of those, who 
look upon the Death of drown'd Persons as a 
Suffocation, and pretend that the Cause of it, 
and that of strangled Persons is the same; for 
those two Kinds of Death have a great Resem-
blance and Analogy, as is sufficiently obvious 
from the Elevation of the Abdomen, which in 
hang'd Persons subsists after their Death."

From this Theory 'tis sufficiently easy to con-
ceive, that the Inflation of the Lungs, is the Cause 
of the Death of drown'd Persons; accordingly 
Dethardingius from the preceding Doctrine draws 
the following Conclusions; "The Vesicules of 
the Lungs are inflated by the Air, the Bronchia 
are lengthen'd, the Blood Vessels distributed 
thro' the whole Body of the Lungs, are com-
press'd; and tho' the Elongation of the Bron-
chia assists the Entry of the Blood into the large 
Vessels, as well those proper to the Lungs, as 
the bronchial Artery and Vein, as those which 
are only subservient to the Circulation, as the 
pulmonary Artery and Vein, yet the Circulation 
is not carried on equally in the Capillaries; since 
the Presence of a rarified Air in the Vesicules 
compresses the Blood, and forcing it to stop 
there, hinders it from passing into the Left Ven-
tricle of the Heart, in order to accomplish the 
Circulation. Now as soon as there is a consi-
derable Retardation in this important Function, 
|P_36
the vital Motions also gradually cease, and 
Death approaches insensibly."
