

[^Sample 1: book - ^]

|P_1[^^]
[}AN 
ESSAY 
on 
FEVERS, 
And their different Kinds. }][^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}CHAP. I. }]
[}Of the most simple Fevers. }]
THE great Boerhaave, in his admi- 
rable Aphorisms de cognoscendis & 
curandis Morbis, begins with the 
Diseases of a simple Fibre; and 
indeed the only Method, to attain to any con- 
siderable Knowledge in any Science, is to begin 
from the very Elements of that Science; for 
whatsoever is most simple is more easily under- 
stood, than that which is more complex: Me- 
thod and Perspicuity are the natural Conse- 
quence of such a Procedure. 

|P_2
Thus, in examining into the Nature of Fe- 
vers, it seems most proper to consider the 
most simple of the Kind first. — Let us suppose 
then a Person, both as to his Solids and Fluids, 
in perfect Health, engaged in violent Exercise, 
as by Running, or the like: This, if long con- 
tinued, will greatly encrease the Velocity, Fric- 
tion, and Heat of the Blood, which, when 
considerably above natural, are called a febrile 
State. — Here is then the most simple Fever, ari- 
sing from nothing but the encreased Action of 
the Solids on the Fluids, and the Re-action of 
the latter on the former; which soon subsides 
on the Cessation of the Motion, or violent Ex- 
ercise. 

Let us next suppose another perfectly healthy 
Person, exposed to cold moist Air, by which 
his Perspiration may be considerably suppres- 
sed; hence will follow an encreased Quantity 
of Humors, and an encreased Effort of Na- 
ture to throw them off, and remove the Ob- 
structions: Whence a feverish Habit will fol- 
low, which however frequently soon wears 
off by the kindly relaxing Warmth of a Bed, 
or the like, assisting Nature's Endeavours. 

A third, of an equally good Constitution, 
drinks too largely of Wine, or other spirituous 
Liquors; which, encreafing the Quantity of 
Humors, and also the Motion of the Blood 
by its stimulating Quality, produces a Fever, 
|P_3
which in like Manner soon goes off, by Absti- 
nence, &c.

In any one of these Cases, only a simple Ephe- 
mera, or short Fever, is generated. — But if, in 
the first Cafe, the Blood was so violently agita- 
ted and rarefied, as that, by its great Impetus, 
and Dilatation of the Vessels, some of the red 
Globules were forced into the serous Arteries; 
an inflammatory Obstruction would be form- 
ed: As we see even externally, when the red 
Globules are forced into the Vessels of the Tu- 
nica Conjunctiva of the Eye, where only Lymph
or Serum should pass. And if withal the Velocity 
and Heat of the Blood should be so great, as to 
dissipate much of its thinnest Part; the Remain- 
der would be left gross and thick, and less fit 
for a free Circulation through the Minima Vas- 
cula; and the very Serum would be turned into 
a Kind of Jelly. — For a Heat, not much greater 
than the Heat in a common Fever, will coagu- 
late the Serum of the Blood; the Consistence of 
which Jelly will be in Proportion to the Vio- 
lence and Duration of the Heat. — Here then, 
I say, by the mere simple accelerated Motion 
of the Blood, an inflammatory Fever would be 
produced, of much longer Duration, and more 
dangerous Consequence. —If the Inflammation 
seizes the Lungs, a Peripneumony; if the Pleu- 
ra, a Pleurisy; if the Brain, or its Mem- 
|P_4
branes, a Phrenzy is generated.—And these 
Disorders prove much more severe, where, an- 
tecedent to this violent Motion of the Blood, 
there was a great Strength of the Fibres, and a 
great Density and Quantity of Blood. 

If in the second Case, the Obstruction of the 
Pores and Perspiration be very considerable, 
the Fibres strong and tense, the Blood much in 
Quantity and very thick, Fevers of the same 
Kind ensue. 

If in the third Case, to tense Fibres and much 
viscid dense Blood, a great Quantity of Wine, 
or other stimulating Liquors, be added; both 
the Quantity and Velocity of the Blood may be 
so greatly encreased, as to bring on a dangerous 
acute Fever, which too often follows drunken 
Debauches. 

Now as any one of the above Causes may 
singly produce a Fever; on the Concurrence of 
two, or all three, a more violent one, cæteris pa- 
ribus, will arise. Thus, from cooling too sudden- 
ly after vehement Exercise, as by exposing the 
Body to very cold Air, and stopping the Sweat 
and Perspiration at once, a very dangerous in- 
flammatory Fever will come on; which will 
be much more violent, if the Blood had been 
heated and encreased by a large Quantity of 
any spirituous Drink immediately before.—By 
the bye, nothing so effectually carries off the 
ill Consequences of a drunken Bout, as keep- 
|P_5
ing warm, and lying long in Bed to soak it out, 
as they call it. 

Now considering the proximate Causes of 
these Fevers, the Method of Cure is very ob- 
vious, which is by lessening the Velocity, Quan- 
tity, and Acrimony of the Blood as soon as pos- 
sible. — But nothing so soon abates the too rapid 
Motion, Quantity, and Heat of the Blood as 
Bleeding; for by this Means the red Globules 
of the Blood and Vis motrix are lessened — By 
Bleeding ad Deliquium, as Galen, and some of 
the ancient Physicians, did in inflammatory 
Fevers, the Blood's Motion almost quite ceases 
for a short Time. 

Bleeding therefore is certainly the first In- 
tention in the Cure of Fevers, that arise from 
too great a Quantity, and too rapid a Motion 
of the Blood; and the longer it is neglected, 
the more viscid and acrimonious is the Blood 
rendered, by dissipating its more thin Part, 
condensing the red Globules, and heating the 
Serum to such a Degree, as to turn it into a 
Kind of Jelly. — And, by exalting the animal 
Salts and Oils to a greater and greater Degree 
of Acrimony (which is always in Proportion to 
the Intensity and Duration of the Heat) the 
whole Mass grows putrid at length, and unfit 
for animal Uses. — Besides, whatever Obstructi- 
ons may be formed either in the extreme 
Branches of the sanguine, or Beginings of the 
|P_6
serous Arteries, are apt to be more and more 
radicated by the too violent Motion of the 
Blood. — So that the Neglect of Bleeding, at the 
Begining of any acute Disease, is very often 
never to be compensated in the subsequent Sta- 
dia of the Fever; when the Impaction of the 
obstructing Matter is so far advanced, and the 
Thickness and Viscidity of the Humors so great, 
as to elude the Force of all Manner of Attenu- 
ants and Diluents. 

In general, the Quantity of the Blood to be 
taken away is to be determined by the Strength 
of the Patient and his Pulse; by the Intense- 
ness of his Fever, Heat, and the Vehemence 
of his Symptoms, as to Pain, Difficulty of 
Breathing, &c. — Nay, the very Bulk of the Per- 
son is to be considered also; for certainly, cæ- 
teris paribus, a big strong Man can bear to lose 
more Blood than a small strong Man. — 'Tis 
safer however to take away too little, than 
too much at a Time, as the Operation may be 
so soon and so easily repeated, and as often as 
may be indicated. — If the Pain, Heat, Difficul- 
ty of Breathing, &c. abate not after Bleeding, 
it shews the Necessity of drawing more Blood. 

And here let me caution the younger Prac- 
titioner not to be deceived by an oppressed Pulse, 
which is often the Consequence of too great a 
Fulness of Blood; this is manifest, by the Vi- 
brations of the Artery becoming more free and 
|P_7
strong after Bleeding in such Cases, as daily Ex- 
perience evinces.—If he is doubtful in the Case, 
let him apply his Finger to the Pulse in the 
other Arm, while the Patient is bleeding; and, 
if he finds it flag considerably, flutter, or inter- 
mit, it is Time to desist; if it beats stronger 
and more open, he may proceed with Safety 
and Success. — There are indeed some very 
apt to faint on Bleeding from a natural Laxity 
of the Fibres, and Want of that due Elasticity, 
which should contract the Vessels in Proportion 
to the Evacuation. — These should be bled in a 
recumbent Posture, and the Orifice may be fre- 
quently stopped for a short Time, whereby 
Fainting will be in a great Measure prevented. — 
These Persons, though they have too lax Fi- 
bres and Vessels, are often plethoric, and of 
Course require Bleeding; especially where the 
Load of the Humors begins to overbear the 
Power of the Heart, which is the common 
Case in an oppressed Pulse. 

Bleeding not only lessens the Quantity and 
Velocity of the Blood, but it also makes Room 
for the Entrance of diluting Liquors into it. — 
Proper Dilution is absolutely necessary in all 
Fevers, especially in the ardent and inflamma- 
tory; for in these the Blood is rendered too 
thick and viscid by the Dissipation of the thin- 
nest Parts of it, and the remaining Serum is 
more and more incrassated, or jellied, by the 
|P_8
great and continued Heat: So that cooling, 
thin, diluting Liquors are necessary to supply 
the continual Waste of the Lymph and Serum, 
and to keep the whole Mass in a due Degree of 
Fluxility. — These, in general, should be of the 
acescent, and somewhat also of the saponace- 
ous Kind. Of the former, as they are very 
cooling, and prevent the Encrease of the alca- 
lescent Acrimony of the Humors, which would 
otherwise be continually advancing by the great 
Friction and Heat of the Blood: (for the ani- 
mal Salts are greatly exalted, and made more 
corrosive, by the feverish Heat, and the animal 
Oils are by the same Cause turned rancid at 
length, and highly acrid: The sweetest Oils, 
or Butter, by great Heat, become vastly cau- 
stic.) — Of the latter, as they not only dissolve 
the Lentor better, but also keep the Humors 
more properly mixed, by uniting the Salts, 
Sulphurs, and Waters more intimately with 
the Blood. I have often known pure Water, 
drank plentifully in acute Fevers, rendered 
almost as pale and insipid as when drank ;(which, 
by the Way, is a very dangerous Symptom.) 
Water, as Water, will not unite with oily Li- 
quors; so that when the Serum of the Blood 
hath been jellied by Heat, and its oily Part ex- 
alted, and encreased, by melting down the Fat 
in the Membrana adiposa, &c. it is no Wonder 
that plain Water neither mixes well with the 
|P_9
Blood, nor proves an effectual Diluent. Hence 
therefore follows the Necessity of mixing some- 
thing saponaceous with it, as Sugar, Syrup, 
Jellies, or Rob of Fruits, as Currants, Rasber- 
ries, Cherries, or the like. — Juice of Lemons, 
or Oranges, by mixing a little Sugar with it, 
and a proper Quantity of Water, becomes a 
very grateful Drink, and answers the Intention 
of a Diluent both acid and saponaceous. 

Befides the Use of Diluents as to the Hu- 
mors of the Body, no small Advantage will 
arise from them as to the Fibres and Vessels, 
which they tend to relax; especially when they are 
drank somewhat warm. — Now too great a Ten- 
sion of the Fibres, &c. is naturally concomi- 
tant to great Velocity, Heat, and Density of 
the Blood, which always attend, or rather are the 
very Essence of an inflammatory Fever. — Eve- 
ry one knows what tepid Bathing will do exter- 
nally; and it may be easily supposed that sub- 
tepid Diluters internally will have an analogous 
Effect. — In all these Views, the Blood is render- 
ed less rapid, less viscid, and, in Consequence, 
less hot; which are Matters of the highest Im- 
port in the Cure of ardent and inflammatory 
Fevers. It may be added, that obstructed Ca- 
pillaries, and obstructed Perspiration, are by 
such Means most safely and effectually remedi- 
ed, the Humors being rendered fluxile, and 
the minima Vascula permeable. For it is to be 
|P_10
noted, that where gentle and general Sweats 
follow plentiful Dilution, with Liquors of a 
cooling relaxing Nature, they are commonly 
critical, and soon carry off the Fever. I say, 
gentle Sweats; for profuse ones should never 
be encouraged in the Begining of Fevers, as 
they drain off the thinnest Part of the Blood, 
and leave the Remainder too thick, viscid, and 
apt to obstruct. — In a particular Manner I have 
often observed them of the highest ill Conse- 
quence in the Begining of Pleurisies, Peri- 
pneumonies, and the Small-Pox. — And for the 
same Reason, profuse Discharges by Stool, and 
thin Urine, are hurtful. 

But the most pernicious Method of raising 
Sweats in the Begining of Fevers, is by giving 
hot volatile alexipharmac Medicines, stoving 
up the Patients in hot Air, and smothering them 
almost with Loads of Bed-cloaths; for these 
encrease the Motion and Heat of the Blood al- 
ready too violent, and add Fewel to the Fire: 
Nay, very often, they are so far from raising 
Sweat, that they prevent it, by hurrying on 
the Blood with too great Rapidity to give off 
any natural and regular Secretions. — It is well 
known, the higher the Fever, the less the Ex- 
cretions by Sweat, Urine, Saliva, and the 
like. — 

Certainly, if mere encreased Motion of the 
Blood can bring on a Fever, whatever will en- 
|P_11
crease that Motion will continue and augment 
it, which these Methods and Medicines are 
known to do. 

For these Reasons also Blisters, which throw 
an acrid salt into the Blood, and greatly stimu- 
late the Fibres, are very improper in the Be- 
gining, at least, of all ardent and inflammato- 
ry Fevers. — Yet how often do we see, in the 
common Practice, a Patient bled largely, then 
blistered, and forthwith put under a Course of 
hot alexipharmac Bolusses, Cordials, &c.?
Which is just as rational as to pull out Part of 
too large a Fire first, and then forthwith endea- 
vour to quench the Remainder, by throwing 
on Gunpowder, or Spirit of Wine; — or to lay 
on Whip and Spur to an Horse on the Fret, 
when we would stop him; which is really the 
Case in Blistering, where the oscillatory Power 
of the Vessels is too great, and the Motion of 
the Fluids too rapid. 

After Bleeding, cooling, emollient, laxative 
Clysters are of very great Use in the Cure of 
acute Fevers, even at the very Begining, to 
bring off the indurated Excrements, which fre- 
quently are pent up within the Intestines, and to 
give a Discharge to any bilious acrid Matter, 
which might otherwise, in Part at least, be 
resorbed by the Lacteals, &c. into the Mass of 
Blood. — Besides, they are a Kind of warm, re- 
laxing Fomentation to the Parts in the Pelvis
|P_12
and lower Belly, and both derive from the 
Head and Præcordia, and promote a Discharge 
of Urine also. 

A gentle lenient Purge, likewise, is often of 
the greatest Service, more effectually to cleanse 
the intestinal Canal of the putrid Saburra. But 
I would always advise to such as act chiefly in 
the primæ Viæ, as Manna, Cream of Tartar, 
Sal cathartic. Glauberi, Rhubarb, Tamarinds, 
and the like: — All drastic Purgers are certainly 
very pernicious, and so are all the hot aloetic
Tinctures, Pills, &c. — Indeed, all profuse Purg- 
ing is hurtful, as it drains off too much of the 
lymphatic Part of the Blood, and thickens the 
remaining. — When Nature seems to have too 
great a Tendency that Way, first a Dose of 
Rhubarb, then a little of the Species è Scordio, 
with a diacodiate Anodyne, or the like, may be 
proper. 

In very Deed, little more seems necessary in the 
Cure of ardent inflammatory Fevers, than pro- 
per and well-timed Evacuations, and plentiful 
cooling Dilution, with a few nitrous Medicines, 
and the acid saponaceous Juices of Vegetables; 
for these not only tend to keep the Blood in a 
due Degree of Fluidity, but also to prevent its 
running into a putrid State: — In giving these 
freely, we do but follow Nature (our best 
Guide) that earnestly demands them. — For how 
averse soever she may be to Meat in Fevers, she 
|P_13
ardently desires Drink; and it is a Symptom of 
very bad Omen when she doth not, till the Fe- 
ver considerably abates, at least. 

If, from any of the above Causes, an inflam- 
matory Fever should seize a Person that had an 
antecedent sharp State of Humors, the Fever 
would prove much the more violent: because 
the acrimonious Salts would act as so many Sti- 
muli, accelerate the Blood's Motion, and pro- 
duce a speedier and greater Putrescence of it. 
— Hence therefore the utmost Necessity of 
Dilution in such Cases, to dissolve and wash 
off the Salts offending, (for nothing but a wate- 
ry Menstruum will dissolve Salts) and likewise 
Medicines opposite in Nature to the peccant 
Acrimony. — But the Diluters also should have 
something of the Saponaceous in them, for Rea- 
sons hinted at above; especially when the oily 
Parts of the Blood are greatly encreased by the 
Melting down of the Fat by the Heat of the 
Fever: which often happens to a surprising 
Degree, and very suddenly, in some very fat 
Persons, and which continually grows more 
and more acrid and rancid, and requires some 
saponaceous Medium to unite it with the aque- 
ous Parts; otherwise it produces the most fatal 
Obstructions, and highest Degree of Acrimony. 

As to the Manner of Dilution, I think the 
Sick should be allowed to drink as freely, and 
as often as they please, but not forced to load 
|P_14
their Stomachs with too large Draughts at a 
Time; which create a Nausea, Indigestion, 
and Wind, with great Anxiety and Restlesness, 
and, in the Event, Vomiting, or Purging. 

The Practice of Asclepiades was in Nothing 
more monstrous than in denying all Manner of 
Drink to the Sick, for the first three Days of 
the Fever: And he is very far from keeping up 
to the Rule, he lays down, of curing tutò, ce- 
leriter, & jucundè; when, as Celsus says, convelle- 
bat vires ægri luce, vigilia, siti ingenti, sic ut 
ne os quidem primis diebus elui sineret. Cels. 
Lib. 3. Cap. 4. — I am sure that he did not learn this 
from the great Hippocrates, nor from Reason, 
Nature, or Experience. — But this Man from a 
Declaimer turned Physician, and set himself up 
to oppose all the Physicians of his Time; and 
the Novelty of the Thing bore him out, as it 
frequently doth the Quacks of the present Time; 
and ever will, whilst the Majority of the World 
are Fools. 

I think smaller Draughts, frequently given, 
the best Way of Dilution: For, of the fame 
Quantity of Liquor drunk in a certain Time, 
more is like to be imbibed by the absorbing 
Vessels, planted thick from the Mouth to the 
Stomach, by frequently sipping it down, than 
if swallowed at once in a full Draught; because 
it is in this Way more frequently, and much 
|P_15
longer applied to these Vessels. — Besides, when 
swallowed, the Action of the Stomach and In- 
testines is more effectual in squeezing it into the 
Lacteals and mesaraic Vessels, when in small 
Quantities, than when they are, as it were, de- 
luged with the Liquor. 

Moreover, Dilution and Relaxation may be 
further carried on by emollient Fomentations, 
tepid Baths, cooling lenient Clysters, &c. — 
Bathing of the Arms and Hands, Legs and 
Feet, and also of the Hypochondria, is of very 
great Service in Fevers of the inflammatory 
Kind; (the good Effects of which I once ex- 
perienced on myself) but the Fotus should not 
be much hotter than the present Temper of the 
Body, which may easily be adjusted by a Ther- 
mometer. This Method not only supplies the 
Blood with Moisture through the absorbing Ves- 
sels, but also greatly tends to open the obstruct- 
ed, and produce a general Relaxation of Fi- 
bres, now commonly too rigid. In very dry 
strigose Constitutions, it cannot but be of the 
greatest Service. — The Skins and Bladders of 
Animals, when very dry, will transmit nothing; 
but, when moistened, Water, &c. will pass 
through their Pores. — And the Drinking fre- 
quently of tepid, emollient Liquors is at the 
same Time a Kind of an internal relaxing Fotus
to the primæ Viæ, Præcordia, &c. which is of 
no small Consequence, especially in Inflam- 
|P_16
mations of the Lungs, Pleura, &c. — I shall on- 
ly further add on this Head, that this was the 
Practice of the Ancients, who gave little else 
in Fevers, besides thin Watery Diluents, Ptisan
or Barley-water, Hydromel, Oxymel, &c. and 
used very frequent Fomentations and Clysters. 

As encreased Velocity of the circulating Hu- 
mors will of itself bring on a Fever, all Causes 
that encrease the Blood's Motion will encrease 
the Fever; the Strength of the Fever there- 
fore will be in a compound Ratio of the mov- 
ing Powers, viz. strong tense Fibres, much 
dense rich Blood, and many acrid Salts in it, 
which stimulate the Heart and Arteries to more 
frequent and vehement Contractions. — The 
large Use of very salt and spiced Meats will 
raise a feverish Heat, even in the most healthy. 

On the contrary, the weaker and more lax 
the Fibres, the thinner and poorer the Blood, 
the less vehement the Fever. — This is the Case 
in what we call slow, or nervous Fevers; which 
are generated by low, watery, unwholesome 
Diet, crude washy Fruit, rainy warm and wet 
Seasons, long and great Anxiety of Mind, De- 
jection of Spirits, &c. — Here indeed a Kind 
of Lentor, or Ropiness of the Humors, is also 
generated, and is a proximate Cause of the 
Disease; but it is not of the inflammatory 
Kind (or what the Ancients called Phlegma 
phlegmonodes, which is particularly inherent in 
|P_17
the red globular Parts of the Blood) for it sub- 
sists chiefly in the serous and lymphatic Vessels, 
which hence become obstructed; and from such 
a poor ropy State of the Blood few animal Spi- 
rits are generated, and they are irregularly se- 
creted and distributed: hence the nervous Symp- 
toms, which denominate the Fever. — And yet 
as there are Obstructions formed, the stagnant 
Lymph grows more and more acrimonious, 
which brings on more or less of a Fever, known 
by the Quickness of the Pulse, irregular Heats, 
Chills, &c. — All the Humors of the Body 
grow more and more corrosive, the longer they 
stagnate; even hydropric Swellings of the Legs, 
though at first as cold as Marble, become at 
last highly inflamed, the Humors at length so 
very acrid as to produce an Erysipelas, Vesica- 
tions, Ulcers, &c. as is often observed at the 
Close of Dropsies. 

Now as the Seat of these Fevers seems chiefly 
in the ultima Vascula, or the serous and lym- 
phatic Arteries, and perhaps in the very Ori- 
gin of the Nerves; and as they are always at- 
tended with too great a Flaccidity and Torpor of 
the Nerves and Fibres, and the Obstructions lie 
more remote from the great Road of the cir- 
culating Blood; it is no Wonder they are not so 
easily affected by Medicines, and so readily re- 
moved, as if their Cause lay more particularly 
in the sanguineous Vessels. — Besides it must be 
|P_18
considered, that the Nerves and Fibres are not 
presently restored to their due Tone. — Hence 
we in Fact see that this Kind of Fevers is 
both longer in forming, and much longer in 
being carried off, than a common inflamma. 
tory Fever. 

These two Sorts of Fevers seem to have in a 
great Measure opposite Causes, and in Conse- 
quence very different Symptoms and Effects. 
— Let us consider some intermediate febrile 
State, which will elucidate this whole Affair. 
Turn we therefore our Thoughts on an inter- 
mittent Fever. 
[^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}CHAP. II. }]
[}Of intermitting Fevers. }]
THE common procatarctic Causes of Agues 
are a moist, foggy Atmosphere exhaling 
from a swampy, morass Soil, or a Continuance 
of cold, rainy, thick Weather; hence in low, 
fenny Countries Agues are endemic, and in such 
Seasons epidemic. By such Constitutions of the 
Air the Fibres are too much relaxed, and re- 
gular Perspiration obstructed, which soon cre- 
ate a Lentor of the Blood, and that Obstructi- 
ons and some Degree of Stagnation in the ulti- 
mate Branches of the sanguineous Arteries; as is 
manifest from the Coldness, Paleness, and Li- 
|P_19
vidity of the Fingers, Nails, Lips, &c. which 
immediately precede and begin the Rigor of an 
aguish Paroxysm. — The Blood hence recoils up- 
on the Heart, and all the Powers of Nature 
rouse up to remove the Obstructions; which 
are soon carried off by the hot Fit, in Sweats, 
turbid Urinej, &c. — We see a Kind of aguish 
Paroxysm brought on by Bathing in very cold 
Water; Paleness, Coldness, Shivering, a Stop- 
page of the Blood in the cutaneous Arteries, and 
Repulsion towards the Heart: you are no 
sooner out of the Bath than the Heart, Arteries, 
&c. overcome the Resistance from the prece- 
dent Constriction, and bring on an universal Glow
of Heat. But, if the Person bathed be weak, 
the Water very cold, and the Continuance in 
it long; he may die in the cold Bath, as a weak- 
ly Patient may in the cold Fit, (which common- 
ly happens) the Heart not being able to over- 
come the Resistance. 

If the Fibres are pretty strong, the Lentor
and Obstructions not very great; the Paroxysm 
easily wears off by this Effort of Nature. — But 
if the Lentor and Obstructions are great, the 
Fibres strong and more tense; the Fever runs 
very high in the hot Fit, and is readily changed 
by wrong Management into an acute Continual. 
— Indeed it is observable that some epidemic 
Agues, in some Constitutions, at first put on 
the Appearance of ardent Fevers, and then 
|P_20
break into Quotidians, or Tertians; and it is not 
uncommon for a Quotidian, or Tertian, to be 
changed by a very hot Regimen at the Begin- 
ing, as volatile Spirits, Brandy, Pepper, Snake- 
root, &c. (which are too often quacked upon 
the poor Patient) into an inflammatory Fever 
with Frenzy, Pleurisy, or Peripneumony. — 
So that the Constitution of the Solids and Fluids, 
in some Kinds of Agues, seems not greatly dif- 
ferent from that of inflammatory Fevers. — I 
well remember, that the Catarrhal Fever, which 
spread through all Europe under the Name of 
Influenza in the Spring, 1743, frequently be- 
came pleuritic, or peripneumonic; and as fre- 
quently, after two or three Days, ran into a 
Quotidian, or Tertian: the Difference of the 
Constitutions of the Patients, &c. thus altering 
the Face and Nature of the Disease. 

Sometimes quotidian, semi-tertian and ter- 
tian Fevers, are very rife and cotemporary 
with epidemic Pleurisies, and Peripneumonies; 
as particularly in [/1./] 1744: — The cold Season, in 
some Constitutions, bracing up the Fibres so 
high, and condensing the Blood into such a 
Degree of Viscosity, as to bring on these in- 
flammatory Fevers on taking Cold, or other 
Accidents; — whilst, on Persons of a more lax 
System of Nerves and Fibres, and more weak, 
|P_21
watery Humors, it only raised the Powers of 
the oscillatory Vessels so high, and warmed the 
Blood so much, as to carry off the ill Conse- 
quences of deficient Perspiration, and ropy 
heavy Juices, by repeated Fits of a regular In- 
termittent. — Thus we often see Persons of low 
Spirits, and a leucophlegmatic Habit of Body, 
raised into a feverish Disposition by the Use of 
warm invigorating Medicines, Chalybeates, &c.
And if this Turn of Nature be well managed, 
it generally ends in their perfect Recovery. — 
If you can change a slow nervous Fever into a 
regular Intermittent, you soon cure your Pa- 
tient. 

But further, I have more than once known 
Pleurisies, Peripneumonies, and inflammatory 
Rheumatisms, reign very much in a cold, dry 
Spring, and a great Number of Intermittents 
succeed them in the following warmer Months; 
the Heat abating the Rigidity of the Fibres, 
and resolving in some Measure the Viscosity 
and Density of the Blood: Whereas had the 
Solids continued more tense, and the Blood 
more dense and viscid, inflammatory Fevers 
would have been the Consequence, on taking 
Cold, or the like; which now only produced 
an aguish Disorder. 

Regular vernal Intermittents have many Times 
very salutary Effects, by breaking the Lentor
and morbid Cohesions of the Blood; as a Storm 
|P_22
purges a thick foggy Atmosphere. The in- 
vigorating Power of the advancing Spring, and 
the encreasing genial Warmth and Dryness of 
the Air, by rarefying and attenuating the hea- 
vy, sizy Humors, and opening the Pores, are 
the Reasons why vernal Agues go so easily off 
at the Approach of Summer. And probably 
the enlivening, attenuating Influences of the 
growing Spring, actuating the Powers of Na- 
ture to throw off the heavy, ropy Colluvies, 
that in some may be considerably amassed du- 
ring a cold moist Winter, may be one Reason, 
at least, of the Frequency of Agues in the 
Spring Season. — It is certain, all Nature at that 
Time of the Year undergoes a Kind of Orgasm; 
even the torpid Vegetables regain fresh Life, 
and their concreted Juices resume new Motion. 

It appears from [/2./] Experiments, that the 
Blood in Quotidians is more dense and tenaci- 
ous than in Tertians, in Tertians than in Quar- 
tans; so that in Quotidians, cæteris paribus, it 
comes nearest an inflammatory State: And it is 
commonly noted, that if the Fever, from a 
regular Tertian, runs into a Semi-tertian, or 
Quotidian, or greatly anticipates the Time of 
the regular Paroxysm; a remittent, or conti- 
nual Fever is forthwith the Consequence. — And 
this is too often effected by a very hot Regi- 
men, or a too hasty Use of the Bark. — Indeed 
|P_23
we very frequently see that Quotidians, and 
double Tertians, (which, by the bye, are of- 
tentimes the same Thing) will not bear the 
Bark at the Begining; till the saline Draughts, 
proper diluting Attenuants, and, in some Cases, 
Bleeding, Purging, and Vomiting have been 
made Use of. — In Truth, I never think it pru- 
dent, in such Kinds of Intermittents, to give 
the Bark, in any Form, till after four or five 
Paroxysms at least, and after having drawn more 
or less Blood from Persons pretty much inclin- 
ed to the plethoric; — and this Method is more 
especially to be observed in vernal Agues. — I 
must further note, that as nothing is more 
effectual in curing Agues than well-timed Vo- 
mits, and those too repeated; (as Nature shews 
us, by making this one of her constant Efforts 
in the Paroxysm) so previous Bleeding makes 
them much more safe, in full sanguine Habits, 
especially when given in the Paroxysm; which 
is frequently practised with great Success. — Nor 
is this a new Practice; for Celsus advises, cum 
primum aliquis inhorruit, & ex horrore incaluit, 
dare ei oportet potui tepidam aquam subsalsam, & 
vomere eum cogere. Lib. iii. Cap. 12. 

We see then that some Kinds of Agues bor- 
der too near on the inflammatory State, and re- 
quire a cool Regimen, proper Dilution, and, 
many Times, Bleeding to some Degree, as 
well as other Evacuations. I have known it 
|P_24
necessary to join Nitre to the Bark during the 
whole Process of Cure, and even sometimes 
to suspend its Use for a Day or two, and give 
Salt of Wormwood and Juice of Lemons with 
Infusion of Chamomile-flowers and Sevil-orange 
Rind, or the like. — If an Intermittent runs into 
an inflammatory continual Fever, Bleeding and 
a gentle cool Purge will soon reduce it to its 
Type. 

But as some Intermittents are apt to run up 
into an inflammatory Fever, far the greater 
Number, especially in the autumnal Season, are 
disposed to sink into low irregular Remittents, 
putrid or slow nervous Fevers. It is not a very 
rare Thing to find a Quotidian fall into a Ter- 
tian, thence into a Quartan, and at last end in 
a Dropsy; and this particularly in some Sea- 
sons and Places. This evidently shews that 
the Fibres grow more and more enervate, and 
the Blood very vapid and watery. — Even vernal 
Tertians, which oftentimes cure themselves in 
a favourable Season, prove many Times exceed- 
ing obstinate in wet, rainy Summers, and the 
Patients are exceeding apt to relapse on the 
slightest Occasions: This was particularly ob- 
servable in the wet, cold Summers of 1734 and 
1735 [/3./]. — In such Cases I have known the daily 
Use of the Flesh-brush, and frequent cold 
|P_25
Bathing, of very great Use in preventing Re- 
lapses. — Perhaps it is the Winter-cold, bracing 
up the Fibres, that commonly puts a Stop to 
Agues in that Season; for it hath been noted, 
that they are often very stubborn in a warm 
moist Winter. 

Improper Evacuations by Bleeding and Purg- 
ing, an unwholesome, gross, glutinous Diet, 
vapid ropy Drinks, as stagnant heavy Water, 
foul Beer, and the like, render these Agues ve- 
ry anomalous, obstinate and dangerous, and 
make them frequently degenerate into malig- 
nant, putrid, or slow nervous Fevers; other- 
wise they end in Dropsies, Jaundice, or univer- 
sal Obstructions of the Viscera of the Abdomen, 
and frequently in Diseases of the Genus nervo- 
sum. — In a Word whatever takes down the 
Spring of the Fibres too much, and weakens 
the Crasis of the Blood, will be productive of 
these Mischiefs; and this especially, when due 
Perspiration is frequently interrupted by cold 
damp Air, Want of due Exercise, gross heavy 
slimy Diet, as Fish, Lettuce, Cucumbers, and 
other watery insipid Fruits, which are known 
to suppress the Perspiration greatly. 

These Observations then evidently shew the 
Necessity of using a warm, invigorating, atte- 
nuating Regimen in the Cure of Agues, which 
affect Persons of a lax Habit of Body, and a 
poor thin Blood; in a particular Manner when 
|P_26
a wet, foggy Atmosphere prevails. — Under 
such Circumstances the Cortex of Peru, however 
good and carefully chosen, frequently proves 
ineffectual, unless assisted with proper Alexi- 
pharmacs, as Rad. Serpentar. Virgin. — Contra- 
yerv. Myrrh, Camphire, &c. — After four or five 
Paroxysms, warm Chalybeates may be added 
with very great Success. — But never be too 
hasty in giving the Bark, or Chalybeates, where 
the Patient hath a yellow Cast of the Countenance, 
a tense Abdomen, and a very costive Habit of 
Body. — In which Case mercurial, saponaceousDeobstruents with Rhubarb, Aloetics, regenerate
or soluble Tartar, should be premised; nay they 
may in some Cases be very conveniently joined 
with the Bark. 

From the whole then of what hath been said 
on this Head, it appears that a regular Terti- 
an is a Medium between an inflammatory and a 
slow nervous Fever; and that, on the one 
Hand, the Constitution of the Solids and Fluids 
may be so highly wrought up as to fire the 
Blood into a continual Inflammatory; and that, 
on the other, it may be so far depressed as to 
bring on the low Influent, or slow nervous Fe- 
ver. — And hence the Cause and Cure of such 
Fevers respectively seem to be obvious. 

Now as every Kind of Fever is a Struggle of 
Nature to relieve herself from something op- 
pressive, we should always favour her Endea- 
|P_27
vours by the most proper Means that Reason 
and Experience suggest. But we should be 
very cautious, at the Begining especially, how 
we proceed in spurring on, or bridling her 
Efforts, till we have well considered the Na- 
ture, Quantity, and Quality of the Disease, 
and the Constitution of the Patient. In order 
to this it will be highly necessary to make a di- 
ligent Examination into these two Things; 1st, 
the State of the Solids, and 2dly, that of the Fluids. 
[^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}CHAP. III. }]
[}Of the State of the Solids. }]
PRobably all that we call Firmness of Body, 
and Strength of Constitution, is originally 
owing to the rudimental Stamina of our Bodies; 
and on the strong, or weak, Texture of them, 
in a great Measure, depends our future pros- 
perous, or adverse Health. — There was indeed 
a determined Constitution and Strength of Fi- 
bres designed by Nature, and any Deviation 
from it may be called a Disease; which may a- 
rise from weakly Parents, Errors in Diet, Ex- 
ercise, and many other Things: And this De- 
viation I would have heedfully attended to in 
Practice. 

A due Proportion of Tensity, consistent with 
a proper Degree of Flexibility, constitutes the 
|P_28
happy Medium in which perfect Health consists. 
Too great a Degree of Rigidity tends to waste 
the nutritious Juices too suddenly, and ends in 
a Marasmus; as too great a Laxity of the Ves- 
sels makes them liable to be overloaded, and 
brings on a Leucophlegmatia, or Dropsy. The 
former over-digests the animal Fluids, the lat- 
ter doth not sufficiently assimilate what is taken 
in by Way of Nutriment. 

A very strong elastic Set of Vessels act with 
great Force on the contained Fluids, and pro- 
duce much Friction, and of Course great Heat, 
and withal a constant and large Dissipation of 
the more subtile and aqueous Parts, which ren- 
der the Blood-Globules, in Proportion, more 
numerous, more dense and compact, and the 
Humors in general more viscid; as is evident 
by the State of the Blood always observable in 
strong laborious People, which is ever of this 
Kind. — Where this considerably overbears the 
Standard of Nature, it becomes constitutional 
Disease, and causes a perpetual Fever, as it 
were, and at long Run ends in Atrophy and a 
compleat Marasmus, if some violent inflamma- 
tory Disease doth not snap them off much 
sooner; and to which they are exceedingly lia- 
ble, and from which, on Account of the dense 
viscous State of the Blood, the Rigidity and 
Contraction, or Stricture of the Vessels, they 
escape wish much greater Difficulty than others 
|P_29
of softer Fibres, and a more weak, but fluxile, 
Blood. There is no Advantage without an Al- 
lay; the Rose hath its Prickles; these Disad- 
vantages flow even from the highest Health and 
Vigor: Human Frailty!

In such Constitutions the Use of emollient 
farinaceous Drinks and Diet are highly pro- 
per, and frequent subtepid Bathing, especi- 
ally in very dry, and very cold Weather. 
— Where Persons of such a Frame fall into 
inflammatory Fevers, as Pleurisies, Peripneu- 
monies, or the like, I would always advise 
great Plenty of tepid, watery, emollient Dilu- 
ents to be perpetually sipped; by which Means 
the warm Vapor relaxes the Parts and Passages 
of the Lungs, and promotes a freer Flow to 
the Blood through them, and a more easy and 
copious Expectoration; at the same Time that 
the Blood is thus most effectually diluted. — 
Withal Fomentations, emollient and diluting, 
moderately warm (not too hot) should be ap- 
plied to the Feet, Legs, Hands, Arms, Hy- 
pochondria and Breast; which have oftentimes 
a surprising good Effect, and are of infinitely 
greater Advantage and Efficacy than some of 
the indigestible Trash of the Shops, upon which so 
much Stress was formerly laid. 

I have known the preposterous Use of the 
cold Bath, on a strigose and a too rigid Habit of 
Body, of exceeding great Detriment; for that 
|P_30
even yet augments the Corrugation and Tensity. 
— You may generally observe that most, who 
use the cold Bath, grow somewhat thinner, 
though more vigorous and active. — Some Years 
since I was consulted by a Gentleman of a thin 
scraggy Habit of Body, but of much natural 
Vivacity of Spirit, and one that constantly used 
much Exercise, and had long accustomed him- 
self to cold Bathing in the Sea very frequently, 
even sometimes in very cold Weather: He 
wasted daily in his Flesh, and at length became 
weak and very low-spirited. — I judged, that 
by this Method the fibrous System was over- 
braced, and that too much of the finer Lymph, 
and even of the Liquidum nervosum, was forced 
off by the Pores, &c. For he all this while 
used a sufficient Quantity of Food, and had no 
extraordinary sensible Evacuation. — I put him 
on a soft, relaxing, nourishing Diet, forbad 
him the Use of the Cold-Bath, and at last sent 
him to use the Waters at the Bath: — The E- 
vent was, that he soon recovered much better 
Health, Spirits and Flesh. Nothing on the 
contrary more effectually strengthens weak, 
lax Fibres than cold Bathing: By this weak, 
flabby, rickety Children are soon invigorated, 
as it were to a Miracle. — Indeed in the Times 
of Popery and Ignorance, when the Priests were 
Knaves, and the People Fools, many a Well
was sanctified for nothing but pure cold Water, 
|P_31
the Virtues of which the Miracle-mongers whol- 
ly attributed to a Saint of their own making. 

The Doctrine of the ancient Methodists, with 
Respect to the Strictum and Laxum, if rational- 
ly pursued, might be of great Service in the 
Practice of Physic; though they indeed fre- 
quently confounded them both in Theory and 
Practice. But Boerhaave hath made many ra- 
tional and valuable Observations on the Dis- 
eases of too tense, and too lax Fibres, which 
are of exceeding great Use in Practice. — There 
seems to be another Species of Fibres not taken 
Notice of, which may be called the tender, or 
delicate Constitution of the Solids, which is most 
readily and highly affected with Pleasure, or 
Pain; but in which the Stamina are so slender, 
that a very slight Accident breaks them. This 
is often observed in thin, fair Persons, of a ve- 
ry delicate Frame, but exceedingly lively; in 
whom the Spirit is willing, though the Flesh is 
weak: Such very often fall into a Hæmoptoe, 
or other Hemorrhages, Colliquations, and a 
pulmonary Phthisis, and thence become what 
is peculiarly called Consumptive. 

We have taken a short View of the ill Ef- 
fects of a too great Stricture, or Tension of the 
Solids; let us next cursorily see what Disadvan- 
tages arise from their too great Laxity. 

Weak Vessels do not sufficiently act on the 
contained Fluids, they do not sufficiently com- 
|P_32
minute, round off, and assimilate the chylous Par- 
ticles: — Indeed the Chyle itself, where the Or- 
gans of Digestion are weak, is never well pre- 
pared. — Where the Vessels have a due Tone, 
and act with Vigor on the nutritious Juices 
which they receive from the Stomach, &c. no 
chylous irregularly formed Particles are to be 
found in the Blood after a few Hours from the 
Repast; but, in weakly leucophlegmatic People, 
they are never, or not till after a very long 
Time, reduced into Blood-globules, and a pro- 
per Serum. — Besides in these lax Habits the 
Blood itself is not sufficiently actuated, and dri- 
ven on with Force enough to keep a due vital 
Warmth, nor to work up the Salts and Sul- 
phurs, or Oils, to such a just Degree of Tenuity, 
as may fit them to serve the Purposes of animal 
Nature; nor are the red Globules of the Blood 
(the great Principle of Life and Heat) duly 
compacted, and moulded into a sufficient 
Roundness and Firmness. — Hence irregular 
Concretions in the Vessels, a Lentor, or Ropi- 
ness in the Serum and Lymph, few animal Spi- 
rits, and all the Secretions weak and imper- 
fect. — From the whole follow Cachexy, leuco- 
phlegmatic and dropsical Disorders, irregular 
intermittent and remittent Fevers, or those of 
the slow nervous Kind; the Humors running 
into a Kind of Putrescence for Want of due Mo- 
tion and Circulation, and stagnating in the ul- 
|P_33
tima Vascula, on Account of the Obstructions 
continually forming from the Want of a due 
Action of the Vessels, which do not sufficiently 
agitate, comminute and protrude their Con- 
tents. 

Now all Humors of the Body, that stagnate, 
soon begin to corrupt and grow acrimonious; 
and that too many Times to such a Degree as 
to bring on Fevers of the worst Kind: For 
though the Circulation may be very languid, 
from the Weakness of the contracting propel- 
ling Vessels, yet it is sufficient to cause some 
Degree of feverish Heat from the stimulating 
Acrimony, and at last a general Putrefaction; 
witness the chlorotic Fevers, which very often 
prove of exceeding dangerous Consequence. — 
Cold hydropic Tumors of the Legs frequently 
end in a Kind of Erysipelas and Gangrene. 

A due Consideration therefore of the State 
of the Solids is a Matter of high Importance to 
Physicians, not only in chronic, but also in 
acute Diseases; for they are generally the pri- 
mary efficient Causes of the particular States of 
the Fluids. For Instance, we may naturally 
conclude that a Man of a robust Constitution, 
strong, rigid Fibres, and used to much Exer- 
cise, hath a dense rich Blood, inclining to such 
a Degree of Viscidity, as will bring on Inflam- 
mations on the Accession of a feverish Disorder; 
and, of Course, that timely Bleeding is the 
|P_34
proper Way to prevent it: On the contrary, that 
a weak, lax, flabby Constitution hath a poor, 
thin, watery Blood, and cannot bear Bleeding 
well, nor large Evacuations. 

A diligent Enquiry of this Nature is of vast 
Concern in the Begining of acute Diseases, par- 
ticularly in the Small-pox, and other eruptive 
Fevers; so as to determine one to bleed, or 
not to bleed. 

For Instance, where a strong Man, with a 
strong Pulse, is seized with violent Symptoms 
of the Small-pox, it would be unpardonable 
not to bleed before the Eruption; for we cannot 
but suppose the inflammatory Fever must run 
high in such a Constitution; but it would be 
great Rashness to bleed Persons of a weak, lax 
Habit, unless some very urgent Symptom de- 
manded it. — Yet how little is this regarded in 
the vulgar Practice? For some bleed, and vo- 
mit, of Course, upon the least Appearance of 
an Attack of the Small-pox; whereas others 
are so fearful of weakening their Patients, that 
they suffer them to die of the Inflammation, 
even abstracted from the Virulence of the Dis- 
ease. 

If a Physician hath a previous Knowledge of 
the Patient, he can be at no great Loss in judg- 
ing of his Constitution; and therefore Celsus
rightly pronounces, cum par scientia sit utiliorem 
|P_35
tamen medicum esse amicum quam extraneum[/4./]. 
When that is not the Case, hard firm Flesh, 
dry Skin, great Heat, Thirst, and Colour, hot 
Breath and violent Pains, with a strong, tense, 
quick Pulse, are pretty evident Symptoms of 
strong, very elastic Fibres, and of an ardent or 
inflammatory Fever. — A weak, quick, soft 
Pulse, no great Heat, or Colour, little Thirst, 
pale Urine, a soft Flesh and Skin, clammy, 
partial, irregular, cold, or profuse Sweats, with 
Heaviness and Anxiety, rather than severe 
Pains, and a moist, though perhaps a white 
coated, or foul Tongue, denote the contrary. — 
But in Truth these Things are rather to be 
learned from Experience, than taught by Pre- 
cept: — Therefore I shall say no more on this 
Head. 
[^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}CHAP. IV. }]
[}Of the State of the Fluids. }]
THE State of the Fluids should next be 
considered, which, in a great Measure, 
depends, as was said before, on the Condition 
of the Solids. 

There is then, 1st, a State of the Blood, in 
which the Humors are too dense and viscous, 
in which the Blood-globules are in too great 
|P_36
Quantity, and too closely compacted or con- 
densed, in which the serous Globules are so 
likewise: — In a Word, in which the whole 
Mass of the Fluids is too glutinous, and too 
apt to concrete into a solid Form. — Persons of 
vigorous Constitutions, of strong Fibres, that 
use much Exercise, and a full Diet, are pecu- 
liarly subject to this State. — Now when the 
Blood-globules are very dense, and in great 
Quantity, and the Vessels very strong and 
elastic, a great Momentum of Motion must be 
produced in the circulating Fluids, and of 
Course great Friction, and much Heat, which 
both dissipates the more fluid Parts of the Blood, 
and encreases its Viscosity; so that the Residue 
becomes very glutinous, and less fit to pass the 
extreme Branches of the capillary Arteries; 
and hence Obstructions, hence Inflammations. 

Besides great Heat tends to coagulate the 
Serum; a Heat, not much above the common 
Heat in an ardent Fever, will turn the Serum of 
the Blood into a Jelly, as is found by Expe- 
rience: — Hence, when Blood is drawn off in 
high inflammatory Fevers, it appears covered 
over with a thick glutinous Coat, or Buff, as it 
is called; I have seen it in some severe pleu- 
ritic and rheumatic Disorders near an Inch 
thick. — That it is thus formed by the febrile 
Heat, is manifest; for at the first Bleeding, at 
the very Begining of the Fever, it shall often 
|P_37
appear appear pretty florid, tho' very dense; whereas 
on the second, third, or fourth Bleeding, when 
the Heat hath had a longer Continuance, and 
been encreased to a greater Degree, it becomes 
exceeding sizy, and covered over with a very 
thick Buff: — And indeed, in general, the 
stronger the Fever, and the Person from whom 
it is drawn, so much the more thick and tena- 
cious. — And this in a particular Manner hap- 
pens in Fevers attended with violent Pain, as 
Pleurisies, Rheumatisms, &c: — For the Pain 
being a Stimulus, which greatly encreafes 
the Motion, Friction, and Heat, it incrassates the 
Serum in Proportion to its Vehemence. — And 
the inflammatory Size also sticking in the ex- 
treamly small Vessels of the Membranes, &c.
over-distends them, and produces further In- 
flammations and Pains; so that they mutually 
encrease one the other. Tho' this dense State 
of Blood, in Health, is attended with great 
bodily Strength, a strong firm Pulse, and much 
natural Heat; yet, on the Access of a Fever, 
it produces very violent Symptoms, quickly 
fatal, unless prevented by timely Bleeding, 
cooling, diluting, emollient Drinks and Medi- 
cines. 

But further, an Over-fulness of even good 
Blood is a Degree of Disease, and therefore 
Hippocrates[/5./] pronounces the athletic GREEK 
|P_38
dangerous, and Celsus elegantly says from him, 
that Persons of such a Habit suspecta habere 
bona sua debent[/6./]. — Such a Plethora not only 
over-distends the sanguineous Arteries, but also 
too much dilates the Orifices of the serous and 
lymphatic Arteries; by which, on the slightest 
Occasions, the Blood-globules are forced into 
them, and form Obstructions errore loci, as 
it is called: Whence Inflammations and Rup- 
tures of the Vessels frequently follow, particu- 
larly in the Brain and Lungs. — Here nothing 
will relieve equal to Blood-letting, which (if 
not too immoderate) is so far from weakening, 
that it strengthens the Patient, by restoring a 
due Æquilibrium between the Solids and Fluids: 
The keeping up of which however is a Matter 
of great Nicety in some Cases and Constitu- 
tions; tho', in general, it admits of a consi- 
derable Latitude, even consistent with Health. 
Some delicate, florid, plethoric People suffer 
immediately from a very small Degree of over, 
or under, Living; and I have known some 
Men of this Constitution, that have had as re- 
gular a menstrual Discharge, by some Kind of 
Hæmorrhage, as the more delicate Sex. — The 
best bred, and most accurately fed, Cock, will 
not hold his athletic State above twenty-four 
Hours [/7./], and dwindles from it surprisingly 
|P_39
soon — Quia non ultra progredi potest, retro, quasi 
ruinâ quâdam, revolvitur, as Celsus [/8./] says of a 
plethoric Man. 

There is, 2dly, a Constitution, or Crasis of 
the Blood, quite opposite to the former, in 
which there are too few Blood-globules, and 
those too loosely compacted; and in which 
the Serum is too watery and vapid, and some- 
times of a ropy slimy Nature. From this 
weak pituitous Blood all the Secretions are 
imperfect, and not sufficiently participant of an 
animal Nature; the Bile inert, the animal Spi- 
rits flat and deficient, the Saliva a mere insipid 
Mucus, and so on. — Hence universal Indige- 
stion, Weakness, Coldness, Paleness, Caco- 
chymy, Dropsy, &c. — In a Word, such a slow 
Motion of the Humors, that at length, for 
Want of a due Circulation, they run into mor- 
bid Concretions obstructing the Vessels in some 
Places, and stagnating in others, where they 
fall into spontaneous Corruption, productive at 
last of such a Degree of Acrimony, as to end 
frequently in Fevers of a very malign Nature, 
and dangerous Consequence: And this the 
more so, as the Vessels, in such a miserable 
Constitution, have greatly lost their Elasticity, 
and the Blood its most vital Principles: — So 
that, in the Event, either the slimy Lentor stag- 
nates up to the Heart, or the corrupted Hu- 
|P_40
mors corrode and destroy the most delicate 
and essential Parts of the animal Fabric, parti- 
cularly the Compages of the Brain, where the 
Humors naturally move exceeding slow, and 
the Vessels are of the most tender Structure. — 
Thus as too rapid a Circulation often bursts 
the minute Vessels; so the Humors, moving 
too slowly, stagnate, corrupt, and at length 
corrode them. 

These two different States of the Fluids may 
not improperly be called constitutional, as they 
naturally follow the respective State of the So- 
lids; so as that a strong rich Blood always at- 
tends a strong elastic Set of Vessels, and a 
weak watery Blood a relaxed Habit of Body: 
where either considerably deviates from the 
Standard of Nature, it becomes a real Disor- 
der, and is to be duly regarded in whatever 
concurring Disease happens [/9./]. 

|P_41
[}CHAP. V. }]
[}Of the dissolved and putrid State of the 
Blood. }]
BUT, besides these, there is moreover a 
third State of Blood, of more dangerous 
Consequence than either; I mean a State of it, 
that more immediately tends to Dissolution and 
Putrefaction: — This is evidently the Case in 
some Scorbutics, (as they are called) where, 
without any considerable, antecedent, sensible 
Disorder (more than perhaps a Kind of Lassi- 
tude and Langour) Persons have, on a sud- 
den, an Eruption of violet-coloured, livid, or 
even black and blue Spots all over their Body, 
and forthwith fall into profuse, and sometimes 
dangerous, and even fatal Hæmorrhages, when 
they have scarce thought themselves, or been 
thought by others, to be under any Manner of 
Disorder. — Abundance of Instances of this Kind 
happen: I have seen a great many both in 
Children and grown Persons, and frequently 
foretold the ensuing Hæmorrhage. 

Where Women have such Eruptions, or black 
or blue Vibices, or large irregular Spots like 
Bruises, they are always subject to a vast Over- 
flow of the Catamenia, if not to other profuse 
Hæmorrhages. — Nay when Persons of either 
Sex are affected with these Appearances, they 
|P_42
are apt to bleed excessively from the slightest 
Wound, and very often without any, from the 
Gums, Nose, Guts, or urinary Passages. 

The Blood of such Persons, when it hath 
been drawn off, in order to prevent the further 
Progress of the Hæmorrhage, as was imagin- 
ed, (which by the Way is very improper, un- 
less there are very manifest Signs of a Ple- 
thora) always appears a mere Gore as it were, 
not separating into Crassamentum and Serum, as 
usual, but remaining in an uniform half-coagu- 
lated Mass, generally of a livid, or darker Co- 
lour than usual, tho' sometimes it continues 
long very florid; but it always putrefies very 
soon. — It is even observable, that the Breath
of such People most commonly stinks much 
before the Eruption, and their Urine frequently 
smells very rank; evident Signs of the begin- 
ing Putridity of the Humors; which, growing 
more and more acrimonious, at length erode 
the Vessels. For these Kinds of Hæmorrhages 
often happen to Persons, that have not the 
least Sign of a Plethora, no full, no very quick 
Pulse, little or nothing of a feverish Habit, 
nor under the Use of violent Exercise; so that 
they happen from the Corrosion, not the Rup- 
ture, of the Vessels broke open by too great a 
Quantity and Velocity of the Blood. — In some 
very tender and delicate Constitutions indeed, 
a very small Effort will sometimes burst their 
|P_43
fine thin Vessels, as is observable in some, who 
are subject; to a Hæmoptoe, or Bleeding at the 
Nose from every small Accident; but these 
Hæmorrhages are seldom attended, or pre- 
ceded, with livid, or violet-coloured Erupti- 
ons, &c. — In these Cases Drawing of small 
Quantities of Blood is proper, to abate the too 
great Impetus on the tender Vessels, even tho' 
there may be no apparent Plethora. 

Tho', I am persuaded, the above-mention- 
ed Hæmorrhages most commonly arise from 
an acrimonious State of the Humors, which 
breaks the Crasis of the Blood, and corrodes 
the Extremities of the capillary Arteries; 
yet they sometimes also happen from a too 
loose Contexture of the Blood-globules, not 
sufficiently compacted by the Action of the 
Heart, Arteries, &c.; for Want of which they 
become oblate Spheroids, or irregularly formed 
Moleculæ, instead of regular Spheres, and of 
Course of a greater Diameter, and a less firm 
i than natural. — But it appears from 
microscopical Observations (especially those 
made with the Solar Microscope) that the Blood- 
globules, in passing thro' the minutest Rami- 
fications of the sanguineous Arteries, change 
their globular, into a very oblong Figure fre- 
quently, in order to pass thro' these exceeding 
small Vessels. — And it is easy to conceive how 
those loosely cohering Globules may be broken 
|P_44
in their Passage, as the enlarged Bulk makes 
their Transit more difficult. — Now as these 
broken Parts are of much less Diameter than 
the original Globules, they may readily enter, 
and even pass thro' some of the excretory 
Ducts, and transude per Diapedesin, as the An- 
cients called it. — That this is so in Fact seems 
to appear from the bloody Urine, Stools, and 
other Hæmorrhages, which sometimes happen 
without any Manner of Pain, Violence of Mo- 
tion, or the least Suspicion of the Rupture of 
any Vessels: — Nay, I have more than once or 
twice seen in malignant Fevers, and that too 
where the Motion of the Blood was far from 
being very rapid, a Kind of [/10./] bloody Sweat 
from the Axillæ, tinging the Linnen almost of 
a Burgundy Wine Colour. — And it is observa- 
ble, that when this Sort of Hæmorrhages 
happens from the Nose, the Matter is a thin 
bloody Ichor, not concreting, as Blood com- 
monly doth from the Nose of Persons in Health, 
or in an inflammatory Fever, which is gene- 
rally very thick, shining and florid: — Some 
chlorotic Girls are vastly apt to bleed from the 
Nose, and yet their Blood doth but just colour 
a linnen Cloth. — The Petechiæ, Vibices, or livid 
Stigmata, that very often attend these Hæmor- 
rhages, shew that the Blood-globules are dis- 
|P_45
solved, or broken down, and enter into the 
serous Arteries, Vasa exhalantia, &c; where 
sticking fast they form these Appearances. — 
And I have particularly noted, in some putrid, 
malignant Fevers, a Kind of yellow, or rather 
dim Petechiæ[/11./], vastly numerous, and of not 
less fatal Omen than the others: Here the 
Blood-globules were broken into such small 
Particles, as to have quite lost their original 
Colour when combined. Perhaps the fuligi- 
nous Sweats, and dark-coloured, or black Urine 
with a livid Sediment, which sometimes hap- 
pen in Fevers of the malignant Kind, arise 
from a broken corrupted State of the Blood- 
globules: I have seen several Times the Urine 
rendered almost quite black, depositing an im- 
mense Quantity of Matter nearly of the Co- 
lour of Coffee-grounds. — And we are sometimes 
surprised to see the Face and Hands of the 
Sick grow dirty, and sooty as it were, tho' all 
imaginable Care was taken to keep them clean. 

Besides there are some Things that seem to 
destroy the Copula of the Blood-globules, and 
greatly promote the Secession of the six serous 
Globules, that compose them, one from ano- 
ther; particularly Laurel-water, which makes 
the Crassamentum vastly less dense, and exceed- 
|P_46
ingly more soft and tender than natural, and 
turns the Serum red, or of the Colour of Bur- 
gundy Wine, as appears from the curious Ex- 
periments [/12./]of Dr. Nicholls and Dr. Langrish[/13./]. 
— The Bite of the Serpent Hæmorrhous[/14./] causes 
such a Dissolution of the Blood, that it breaks 
forth from all Parts of the Body, even the 
very Pores, and kills by an universal Hæmor- 
rhage. Possibly profuse Sweat, Diarrhæa, Dia- 
betes, and spontaneous Salivations, may arise 
from a Kind of Dissolution of the serous Glo- 
bules. — A long and large Use of Mercury will 
turn the whole Mass of Blood into a mere wa- 
tery Colluvies. 


[^1. 
* Vid. Obs. nostr. de Aere & Morb. Epidem. Vol. II. Martio, 
Aprili, Maio, 1744. 
^]
[^2. 
* See Dr. Langrish's Modern Theory, &c. Chap. V. 
^]
[^3. 
* Vid. Obs. nostr. de Aere & Morbis Epidemic. Vol. I. 
^]
[^4. 
* Præfat. sub finem. 
^]
[^5. 
* Aphirsm 3. Sect. i. 
^]
[^6. 
* Lib. II. Cap. 2. 
^]
[^7. 
† See Dr. Bryan Robinson on 
the Food and Discharges of human Bodies, p. 119. 
^]
[^8. 
* Lib. II. Cap. 2. 
^]
[^9. 
* Ardent and inflammatory Fevers are naturally the Effect 
of over-elastic and rigid Fibres, and a very dense viscid 
Blood; as the low and slow nervous Kind are of a too lax 
State of Vessels, and a weak and thin Blood. — But there are 
several Diseases, especially those arising from Contagion, which 
are common to both. 
^]
[^10. 
* Dr. Hodges, of the Plague, observed purple Sweats in it, 
and some like Blood. 
^]
[^11. 
* Vid. Obs. nostr. de Aere & Morb. Epidem. Vol. I. Ann. 
1735, Mart. & Aprili; & Vol. II. Anno 1740, Junio. 
^]
[^12. 
* Dr. Mead of Poisons, 3d Edit. p. 270. 
^]
[^13. 
† See his Experiments on Brutes. 
^]
[^14. 
‖ See Lucan, Dioscorid.Nicander in Theriacis, &c. 
Dr. Mead of Poisons. 
^]