
|P_1[^Two horizontal lines, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}A 
TREATISE
ON THE 
TEETH.}]
THE Teeth, which are the hard- [/1./]
est and smoothest Bones of the 
Body, are formed within the 
Cavities of the Jaws. Above the Gums 
they are not covered by any Membrane, 
but within their Sockets are invested 
with the common covering of all other 
Bones; viz. the Periosteum, a fine 
transparent Skin, observable in scraping 
any Bone, after the Meat is taken clean 
off. 

The Number of Teeth in a grown 
Person are generally thirty-six; more 
or less according to Age, Constitution, 
&c. As they are not all formed at once, 
so neither do they all appear at the same 
time; the last but one, of the great 
Teeth in each Jaw, 'tis remarkable, sel- 
dom appears 'till about the Age of twen- 
|P_2
ty-one, and the last, sometimes not till 
that of forty. 

Each Tooth is composed of an in- 
ternal bony Substance, and an exter- 
nal vitrious Cortex, of a solid hard Con- 
sistence, and of the Colour of Ivory. 
The Uses of this glossy Substance are 
to prevent the Teeth being worn by 
the Friction they undergo in Mastica- 
tion or Chewing; and to preserve their 
bony Substance from the Air. 

The different Shape and Series of 
the Teeth are sufficiently obvious; the 
four front Teeth in each Jaw which are 
thin and broad, are called Incissores or 
Cutters, from their cutting or dividing 
the Aliment. The Canini or Dog-teeth, 
which are two in each Jaw, are so call- 
ed from their Resemblance to the Tusks 
of a Dog; those of the upper Jaw are 
by some, called the Eye-teeth, from the 
Communication of Nerves betwixt them 
and the Eyes; they are thick and round, 
terminating in a sharp Point, and like 
the Incissores have but one Root, but 
are remarkably strong, and of a greater 
Length than any of the rest: Their 
proper Use being to pierce and hold the 
|P_3
Aliment steady when we bite it, as the 
front Teeth are very apt to be forced 
outwards by the Things we hold or 
break with them. 

The large or double Teeth, are by 
Anatomists called Molares or Grinders, 
from their Use in grinding and making 
small our Aliment before it is swallowed. 
They are ten in each Jaw; their Extremi- 
ties are broad and uneven, and because the 
Pressure upon them is perpendicular, 
they are provided with two or three, 
and sometimes four Roots separated a 
little from one another, and inclining 
somewhat outwards, that in chewing our 
Aliment the Pressure may be less upon 
the Jaws, than if they run directly down- 
wards, and with only a single Root. 

The first Teeth, according to  Hip- 
pocrates, are engendered in Time of Preg- 
nancy; this Urbain Hemard confesses he 
never could discover; he says, indeed, 
that having opened the Jaws of some 
Children three or four Days old, and 
others immediately at their Birth, he has 
found the Incissores, the Canini, and 
some of the Molares on each Side the 
Jaw in part ossified, and in part muci- 
|P_4
laginous, of a middling Size, and sur- 
rounded with their little Alveoli. 

However this may be, it is certain 
they do not appear, until some Time af- 
ter the Formation of the other Bones, 
notwithstanding the Matter of which 
they are formed, is at the same Time in 
the Womb; and therefore Galen[/2./] writes, 
that he who would understand the Works 
of Nature, and observe her Oeconomy in 
the Composition of the human Body, 
ought not implicitly to rely on what 
he finds in Books, but rather what he 
sees with his Eyes. 

The Teeth are formed within the Ca- 
vities of the Jaws, which are lined with 
a thin Membrane, supplied with several 
Vessels, conveying a thick, viscous, trans- 
parent Liquor, which as it increases, 
hardens into the Form of Teeth. 

This transparent Humour appears 
first in Form of a Mucus, afterwards a 
thin cortical Lamella, and some ossious 
Strata are perceived, with a large 
Cavity in the Middle, then gradually 
both the vitrious and bony Parts increase 
by the hardening of the Mucus, and 
Opposition of new Matter. 

|P_5
The ossious Strata are no other than 
a Separation of this fluid Matter, made 
by the same Membrane which covers 
the whole Cavity of the Jaw; and this 
Division forms two Lays, one below the 
other, the uppermost of which forms 
the Teeth which come out first; but 
about the seventh Year, they are thrust 
out by the Teeth made at the undermost 
Lay, which then begin to sprout; if these 
latter be lost, they seldom if ever grow 
again; some are indeed observed to shed 
their Teeth twice, which must be owing 
to their having three Lays of this Matter. 

The Teeth receive Nerves and Vessels 
at the Orifices of their Roots; it is these 
Nerves which are afflicted in the Tooth- 
ach, and which are frequently shewn 
to the common People, by the ignorant 
among Tooth-drawers, for Worms; 
which they pretend would have eaten 
the whole Tooth in a short time, &c.
Part of these Nerves being always torn 
away with the Tooth drawn, it requires 
great Care to keep the Mouth warm un- 
till the Gum becomes closed, and the 
Nerve defended from the Air. 

This Orifice commonly closes about 
|P_6
the Age of thirty-five, which is the 
Reason why old People are not so sub- 
ject to the Tooth-ach as young. 

The first Teeth perceived, are the 
Incissores of the upper Jaw, then those 
of the lower, these being the thinnest and 
sharpest. After them appear the  Ca- 
nini, and last of all the Molares.

The general Opinion is, that the 
Teeth are connected to thin Alveoli, 
or Sockets, by that kind of Suture called 
Gomphosis, that is, like a Nail drove in- 
to a Piece of Wood; but this is proved 
to be false by the following Experiment. 
If the Jaws be macerated in Water, for 
some Time, all the Teeth will drop out, 
which they would not do, if they were 
of the same Size of their Alveoli. From 
hence it appears, that it is by a  Liga- 
ment, or by the Articulation called  Syn- 
chondrosis.

That the Teeth are joined to their 
Sockets by some means like this is evi- 
dent, for when a Tooth hath been 
drawn and replaced immediately, it hath 
taken root, and been as firm as ever, 
which could not have happened, had 
|P_7
not the Cavity been lined with a Mem- 
brane, which contained it. 

After all that can be said concerning 
the Formation of the Teeth, nothing 
will so much illustrate the Tooth in Em- 
brio, as that called the Sweet-Tooth in 
a Calf, by which the Reader may form 
an Idea, not only of the Colour and Sub- 
stance of the Mucus, or Juice usually 
suck'd out, but of the Lamella or Shell- 
work itself. 

The Teeth are so necessary to Man, [/3./]
that I conceive the greatest Diffi- 
culty of his subsisting in the younger 
part of his Life without them: Certain 
it is, that the strongest Constitution, 
would not be able to digest or separate 
a Quantity of Chyle sufficient for the 
Nourishment of the Body for any con- 
siderable Time, were the Aliment to 
be swallowed whole and unprepared; 
for it is well known how much the 
chewing our Aliment contributes to the 
easy and expeditious Digestion of it, 
and consequently to our Health. There 
are indeed many old People and others, 
who for want of Teeth are confined to 
a liquid Diet, such as Broths, Jellies, 
|P_8
Milk, &c. for the Sake of an easy Di- 
gestion. To those in old Age, I think 
such a Diet not only proper, but very 
necessary; for Nature, by the Decay of 
Strength, the Loss of Teeth, and the 
gradual Diminution of our Senses, seems 
to have appointed this Time, as a Re- 
turn to our primary Innocence; that we 
may make our Exit in some Measure 
conformable with our Birth: And at 
this Time the Weakness of the Body 
generally renders it incapable of per- 
forming the natural Functions, and con- 
sequently of digesting such Meats, as 
before it had been accustomed to. 

Upon a transient Reflection we might 
imagine it injudicious of Nature to leave 
Age thus helpless and unable to support 
itself, but upon a more careful Survey, 
we shall find in this, as well as in all 
her Works, that her Oeconomy is ab- 
solutely just, and that every minute Va- 
riation of Form, &c. is important: 
Whenever we think otherwise, we ought 
always to suspect our Capacities of being 
too gross to comprehend the Sublimity 
of her Wisdom. 

The Loss of Teeth to an old Man, 
is in Fact but trifling, for the Human 
Body is so providentially disposed, that 
|P_9
as the natural Powers begin to lessen 
in their Force and Action, the less is 
required in the Constitution to maintain 
that Force and Action; and that a less 
Quantity of Chyle will better nourish 
and support Health in old Age, is a 
Truth every Anatomist is able to as- 
sert, for it is frequently seen in the Dis- 
sections of the older Subjects, that ma- 
ny of the small Vessels, and sometimes 
Part of the larger also have been collaps- 
ed and grown up, so as to reject the 
Fluid that used to circulate through 
them: And this is one Reason why old 
People are most subject to paralytic 
Disorders. 

If the Number of Vessels be diminish- 
ed, as in this Case they certainly are, 
then is there the less required to fill 
them, and the Body is more easily sup- 
ported than before, and from hence it 
is, that we can so well dispense with 
the Loss of Teeth when old: But when 
this Loss happens earlier in Life, I think 
it may justly be deemed very great, since 
it is capable of depriving us of our 
Health, our Beauty, our Voice: Nor 
does the Inconveniency stop here, it 
proves of Detriment even to Society. 

|P_10
If such extensive Effects appear 
strange, let the Husbandman, so neces- 
sary to Society, be viewed in this State, 
and we shall soon be convinced, that 
the Want of Teeth is of greater Mo- 
ment than is commonly imagined: It 
would oblige him to live on a liquid 
Diet, by no means proper in his labo- 
rious Employ; for we are not the least 
capable to support the continual Action 
of the Body (and which in his Business 
is almost violent) without proper Food; 
I mean such as will remain some Time in 
the Stomach and yield its Nourishment 
gradually to the lacteal Vessels, which 
receive and carry it to the Blood. 

This is always performed by such Food 
either animal or vegetable. And if the 
Diet of the Labourer consisted only of 
those Juices exclusive of the Substances, 
tho' these latter afford no Part of Nou- 
rishment, yet the Body would waste, 
the Fibres would become lax, the In- 
testines would lose their Tone, and a 
general Languor would seize the whole 
Body; and if not relieved by a Change 
of Diet, a Diarrhea, Dropsy, &c.
would be the certain Introduction to 
Death. 

|P_11
The Consequence of a liquid Diet is 
no where more obvious, than in the old 
sedentary Man, in whom, by an inac- 
tive Life, the Viscera are rendered weak, 
and the Vigour of the digesting Powers 
in a great Measure lost for want of Use. 
He is indeed better able to support Life 
than the working Man, as he is void of the 
Fatigue; but with what great Difficulty it 
is effected, may be seen in his pale lan- 
guid Countenance, his emaciated Bo- 
dy, and the Defect of Vigour in his 
Motion. 

I cannot help reflecting in this Place 
on the general Error of Men fond of 
Study, whose contemplative Geniuses in- 
clining them to a Life, in other Respects 
full of Indolence and Neglect, they sup- 
pose it agreeable to their Way of Life, 
to eat their Aliment liquid, and pre- 
pared for an expeditious Passage in the 
Primae Viae; in this Method they seem 
to imitate Birds and other Animals, 
which, in the room of Teeth, Nature 
has supplied with two Stomachs. Where 
in the first the Corn is only swelled and 
softened by the Liquor of its Glands, 
but broken and disolved in the second; 
which is composed of very strong Mus- 
|P_12
cles. This Oeconomy is wonderful in 
the Animal, but by no means applicable 
to the rational Creature. Although the 
Pot and other Implements used in Cook- 
ery, where the Aliment receives some 
Degrees of Digestion, may bear some 
Analogy to the first Stomach in the Ani- 
mal, yet the Operation is different, it is 
by the Succus Gastricus, a Liquor sepa- 
rated by the Glands of the Stomach, 
that the Corn is made soft and fitted to 
the Action of the second Stomach, where 
it is received together with the Juices 
of the first. But in boiling, the most 
nutrimental Parts are lost, the more 
volatile and spiritous evaporate, while 
the gross fatty Parts are blended with 
the Water. 

Therefore whoever takes down the 
Substance loads the Stomach to very 
little Purpose, and whoever drinks the 
Broth will relax his Stomach, and rob 
it of the Vigour required to perform its 
Office. But nothing will so much con- 
vince us of the Impropriety of such a 
Regimen, as a Knowledge of Digestion, 
and the Manner of its being performed; 
which for the Sake of such Readers as 
are unacquainted with these Subjects 
|P_13
we will take a cursory View of in its 
first Stages. 

The principal Agents employed in 
this Action, are the Teeth, the Saliva, 
the Succus Gastricus, and the Liquors we 
drink. The Aliment being broke by the 
Teeth, and mixed with the Saliva in the 
Mouth, descends into the Stomach, where 
it imbibes the Juices of the Glands, and 
the Liquors drank, whose chief Property 
is to soften the Aliments, as they are 
Fluids which easily enter the Pores of 
moist Bodies, and, swelling them, break 
their most intimate Cohesions; and this 
is augmented by the Impetus which the 
Heat of the Stomach gives to the Particles 
of the Fluids; and likewise by rarefying 
the Air contained in the Pores of our 
Food, which bursts its Parts asunder. 

The Aliments thus prepared, their Parts 
soon separate from one another, and di- 
solve into a Fluid with the Liquor of the 
Stomach, by the continual Motion of its 
Sides, whose absolute Power is demon- 
strated (by Pitcairn) to be equal to the 
Pressure of 117088 Pound-weight: To 
which if we add the absolute Force of 
the Diaphragm, and Muscles of the  Ab- 
domen, which likewise conduce to Di- 
|P_14
gestion, the Sum will amount to 250734 
Pound-weight. 

From whence this Force? Or for what 
Purpose hath Nature (who yet hath ne- 
ver been detected in an Error) employed 
all this Mechanism, if useless? There 
can be no Occasion to spare it the Trouble 
of its Office, and the only Excuse Men 
find for so doing, is because 'tis already 
weakened by some Cause, and incapable 
of acting. But to such I would observe, 
that 'tis not by these Means to be brought 
to its natural Tone. And the studious 
Man, whose Life is generally inactive, 
will find it more to his Advantage, and 
agreeable to the Constitution of his 
Nerves, on whose Sensation he de- 
pends for his Ideas, to live more upon 
Food containing the natural Juices, of 
which Kind especially are all roasted 
Meats. 

I could not conveniently treat on this 
Subject without mentioning Digestion, 
since the Teeth are the first and necessary 
Organs of it. Wherever we observe these 
Instruments wanting in Animals, &c. we 
shall always find them furnished with 
|P_15
two Stomachs; and where they have 
Teeth besides, they are only used as 
Weapons of Defence, which we see in 
the Viper, and some Kinds of Fish, who 
swallow their Prey whole. 

From hence we may conclude, that 
the Teeth, besides their Importance for 
the Preservation of our Health, are like- 
wise necessary for the Agreement of the 
Voice, the Pronunciation and Articula- 
tion of our Words, and the Ornament of 
the Face. 

Tho' the Production of the Teeth is [/4./]
entirely the Work of Nature, the Preser- 
vation of them depends greatly upon our- 
selves. 

Men are naturally attentive to their 
Health, but by a Neglect of this Kind 
they are too often rendered incapable of 
attaining it: For, as I have before 
shewn, the Health depending on the 
Digestion of the Aliments, which ought 
first to be pounded as it were, and broke 
for the easier Admission of the Juices of 
the Stomach: And this being the Office 
of the Teeth, it intimately concerns us 
|P_16
to keep them in such Order as will enable 
them to perform it. 

The Means to preserve them, consists 
then principally in the Choice of a good 
Regimen, and avoiding the Use of such 
Things as are hurtful to their external 
Parts. 

The first you see will not only preserve 
the Teeth, but at the same Time the 
Health also, as it consists in the Choice 
of such Aliment as will yield a good 
Nourishment. But the Generality of 
People are so prone to Intemperance, 
and eat with so little Attention, or rather 
so precipitately, that too much cannot be 
said of its ill Effects. Nothing is capable 
of producing greater Disorders, than an 
imperfect Mastication; for if the Ali- 
ment be not well broken by the Teeth, 
'tis certain the Dissolution in the Stomach 
will be long, laborious, and imperfect. 
And the sweet balsamic Blood, will be 
changed into a thick, acrid, and vis- 
cous State. And this Alteration cannot 
fail of producing a bad Effect in the 
Teeth, not only as it circulates thro' 
them, but by the Vapours which arise 
from the Stomach and Breath, and 
|P_17
lodge upon them as they pass thro' the 
Mouth. 

The too great Use of Vegetables, as 
also the Flesh of Pork, salted Meats, 
Salt-fish, Cheese, &c. must be preju- 
dicial, as they all produce a bad Chyle. 

All Kinds of Sweet-meats and Sugars 
contribute very much to the Destruction 
of the Teeth; because their gluey Juice 
is insinuated into the Gums, and sticks 
to the Teeth; besides, Sugars are of an 
acid, penetrant, and corrosive Nature, 
and by a Chymical Analysis we see that 
the Effects will be sooner or later per- 
nicious. 'Tis also remarkable that those 
People who make great Use of this Poi- 
son, are more subject to the Tooth-ach, 
and lose their Teeth sooner than others. 

Those who love Sugar, and use it 
frequently, are seldom remarkable for 
handsome Teeth, and very rarely good 
ones. This is particularly exemplified 
in Holland, the Inhabitants whereof, 
especially the Women, are great Tea- 
drinkers, and in their Manner some- 
what particular, for instead of sweetning 
each Dish with Loaf-Sugar as in Eng- 
|P_18
land, they hold a Piece of Sugar-Candy 
in their Mouths, which frequently 
serves six or eight Dishes before 'tis di- 
solved, which inevitably produces those 
Effects to which they are so subject, viz.
the Loss and Ruin of their Teeth: 
For 'tis rare to find a Dutch Woman of 
thirty Years of Age with a good Set of 
Teeth: For this Reason, after eating 
Sugar, or any Thing that contains much 
Sugar in its Composition, it will be ne- 
cessary to rince the Mouth with warm 
Water, to dissolve and wash away those 
Parts which would stick to the Gums 
and Teeth. 

It would be absurd from hence to 
conclude it absolutely necessary to de- 
prive ourselves of these Things, but to 
regulate their Use; and not to make a 
Habit of that which Experience shews 
to be prejudicial most certainly is worth 
our Consideration. 

Of no less Importance is Mode- 
ration in Drinking, since our Health is 
equally dependant on Sobriety; the ma- 
ny Constitutions we see ruined by Ex- 
cess of this Kind, is a stronger Argument 
|P_19
to deter us than any Thing that can be 
further said on this Head. 

'Tis as necessary likewise to avoid 
chewing or breaking any hard Bodies, as 
Nuts, Cherry-stones, &c. biting off the 
Ends of Thread or Silk, lifting up 
great Weights, picking them with In- 
struments of Gold, Silver, or any other 
Metal, by which they may be either 
loosened or lost, and other such idle 
and pernicious Practices. 

Excessive smoaking Tobacco is also 
very injurious (especially if Care be not 
taken to cover the End of the Pipe with 
Wax); which will by Degrees wear off 
their vitrious or glossy Substance, and 
subject them to the Danger of becoming 
rotten, and perfectly useless: It besides 
gives them a black and filthy Appear- 
ance, and causes an unnatural Heat in the 
Mouth, which by the immediate Ad- 
mission of cold Air, may arrest a Hu- 
mour in the Gums or neighbouring 
Glands, and be the Foundation of great 
Pain and Trouble. 

I would not have the Reader imagine 
me ignorant of the Qualities of Tobac- 
|P_20
co: I am sufficiently sensible of its Ser- 
vice in preserving the Teeth, by evacu- 
ating the superfluous Humours: But 
like any other Specific, it may, if im- 
properly made use of, answer a very 
different Effect. I would therefore by 
all Means advise washing the Mouth 
with warm Water, and not exposing it 
too soon after smoaking to the Impressi- 
ons of a cold Air, &c.

The Effects which have been observed 
to follow smoaking, are the very same 
when we eat our Victuals too hot, and im- 
mediately, or in a little Time after, eat 
something cold. Many People drink, 
in the same Instant, a Liquor almost 
boiling hot, and some other as cold as 
Ice, without recollecting that the Diver- 
sity of Heat and Cold is able to arrest 
and fix the Humours which nourish the 
Teeth, which stagnating, will ferment 
and break the Membrane that covers the 
Roots of the Teeth, and render them 
carious. 

This Effect is produced by the Dila- 
tation of the Parts and the Rarefaction of 
the Liquids that pass thro' the Vessels, 
occasioned by Heat. As Cold on the 
|P_21
contrary will contract and shut up the 
Parts, abate the Motion of Circulation, 
and render the Juices contained in the
Vessels, thick and incapable of passing. 

The great Preservation of our Teeth, 
in short chiefly depends on our Regimen 
of Living; the Constitution, and the 
Teeth, have so equal a Dependance on 
each other, that the Destruction of the 
latter proves the Ruin of the former, 
almost as certain, as that a bad Blood 
can never supply the Teeth with good 
Nourishment. 

The Causes that produce the Diseases [/5./]
of the Teeth, are two in general: The 
one internal, the other external. The 
internal Cause is owing to the Quantity 
or Quality of the Lymph, which by its 
corrosive Parts is capable of destroying 
the most compact Parts of the human 
Body, such as are the Teeth, by break- 
ing the external Substance, or glossy 
Covering of the Bones of which they 
are composed. 

The Lymph we find of this Character 
in the Scurvy, in the King's Evil, and in 
the Pox. 

|P_22
When the nutritious Juice is too 
abundant, or distributed in too great 
Quantity into the Teeth, that it stagnates 
between their Alveoli and their Roots, 
its Effects are very dangerous, like as 
when the Blood is inflamed, it may 
form phlegmonic Abscesses in the Ca- 
vity of the Teeth, or in the neigh- 
bouring Parts: It may also occasion 
the most exquisite Pains, incurable but 
by the Loss of the Tooth. 

[/6./]Too much Sleep, too much watching, 
a too sedentary Life, or a too laborious 
one, contribute not a little to the Preser- 
vation or to the Ruin of the Teeth. 

The good Quality of the Milk which 
the Child receives from its Nurse is of 
great Importance to the Formation of the 
Teeth, in the Time of toothing; as it 
serves to prevent or diminish the many 
Accidents that happen to Children, when 
the Teeth are disposed to pierce the 
Membrane of the Gum, that covers 
their Extremities and opposes their 
Issue. 

|P_23
All violent Passions are capable of al- 
tering Digestion, of increasing or thick- 
ning the Mass of Blood, of causing Ob- 
structions, and of stopping the Secre- 
tions and Excretions which should ope- 
rate daily for the Preservation of our 
Health. The Passions, I say, may, when 
they alter the Mass of Blood to a certain 
Degree, be ranged with the internal 
Causes that produce the Diseases of the 
Teeth. 

All Persons in a pituitous or pletho- 
rick Habit of Body, in whom the Lymph 
is very abundant, are generally subject to 
suffer not only Pain in the Teeth, but 
even their Loss. 

The Generality of Women with Child 
are likewise subject to this Complaint: 
The menstrual Discharge being stopped, 
the Mass of Blood must rest charged 
with a Superfluity; 'tis therefore from 
the Quantity that is deposited on the 
Teeth or on the Gums, that Women 
suffer this Uneasiness sooner when with 
Child than at other Times; and we see 
that they are often afflicted for the same 
|P_24
Reason, when their monthly Oeconomy 
is over. 

The Jaundice occasions so much Dis- 
order in the Blood, that the Teeth 
sometimes perish by an Abscess on those 
Parts. 

The external Causes are not less in 
Number, nor are they less dangerous in 
their Effects. The thick Vapours that 
arise from the Stomach and Lungs ad- 
here to the Mouth much in the same 
Manner that Soot adheres to the Sides of 
the Chimney, forming a tenacious vis- 
cous Substance that covers the Teeth like 
Paste. This tenacious Matter is very 
hurtful to the Teeth. When certain 
little Portions of our Aliment adhere to 
the Teeth, or stick betwixt their Inter- 
stices or the Gums, it is capable of pro- 
ducing the same Effect, especially if we 
neglect rincing our Mouths after. 

The Injuries of the Weather are the 
Causes of Rheums and Catarrhes, from 
which the Teeth, the Alveoli, and the 
Gums, are too often very great Suffer- 
ers. 

|P_25
The too great Use of dentrifick Pow- 
ders serves chiefly to Destruction, as they 
use or wear off the Part of the most Im- 
portance to their Preservation, viz. their 
Enamel or vitrious Substance. 

But the Neglect in not keeping them 
clean, is the most general Cause of 
all the Disorders that happen to the 
Teeth. 

Mercury is a great Enemy to the 
Teeth, not only by itself but by the bad 
Effects that it may produce in the Body, 
by the corrosive Qualities that most of 
the Preparations of Mercury are charged 
with, or by the Alliance that it contracts 
with different Principles in our Bodies, 
when it stays too long, or when 'tis not 
properly evacuated. 

'Tis very evident that Mercury, by its 
ill Effects, swells the Gums and renders 
them sore; this it does also to the Mem- 
branes that cover the Roots of the Teeth, 
either internally or externally; it de- 
sects, if I may be allowed the Expressi- 
on, the very Roots, and throws them 
out of their Sockets, or otherwise, it 
|P_26
stroys them by the Caries that it occa- 
sions. These melancholy Effects we see 
but too often, especially where Mercu- 
ry hath been employed by Persons little 
versed in its Use. The most experien- 
ced Practitioners in the Venereal Disease
use it with the utmost Circumspection, 
and with great Industry guard against 
its Poison. The Gilders and those 
who cover Looking-Glasses, Plumbers, 
and such as work in Mines, &c. expe- 
rience the bad and fatal Impressions 
that Mercury makes upon them, and 
particularly upon their Teeth. 

'Tis by the Effects produced from these 
Causes, that the Teeth are attended with 
such Diversity of Diseases, almost al- 
ways accompanied with Pain, more or 
less violent. 

Authors have reckoned the Number 
of Diseases of the Teeth to amount to 
upwards of an hundred, but I find on- 
ly nineteen necessary to comprehend all 
that may be useful to know, and these 
may be divided into three Classes: In 
the first are those produced by external 
Causes; in the second are contained the 
Disorders of the Alveoli and Gums; 
|P_27
and in the third are the Diseases acci- 
dental or symptomatic. 

The first Disease from external Causes [/7./]
worth our Notice is, the Tartar 
or Turf, concerning which Authors 
speak of many different Sorts, as the 
yellow, the grey, the black, and the 
petrified, and distinguish them also by 
their Degrees of Consistence; but as 
this last is owing only to the Duration, 
and the Difference of Colour not mate- 
rial, I shall speak only of the most com- 
mon Sort, which is of a dark yellow, 
tending rather to a brown Colour. 

The Tartar is a Matter accumulated 
on the Surface of the Teeth, near the 
Gums, which in Process of Time will 
form a strong Crust, of a considerable 
Bigness, common to those who are ne- 
gligent in keeping their Teeth clean. This 
foreign Matter as it increases in Quan- 
tity, inevitably consumes the Gums, 
and by that Means occasions a Rottenness 
of the Teeth. 

For the better understanding the Na- 
ture of this Tartar, with the Causes 
|P_28
that produce it, and the Manner of its 
insensible Formation, the two following 
Principles may be of Service. 

First the Foundation of this Matter 
and its Increase may bear some Analo- 
gy to the Stones formed in the Kidneys, 
Bladder, &c. which owe their Origin 
very often to a Retention of some Mat- 
ter, capable of Attraction and Cohesion:
The small Portions of our Aliment that 
adhere to the upper Part of the Teeth, 
or betwixt their Interstices, being soft- 
ened by the Saliva, become of a gluey 
Consistence, which soon grows dry, by 
the Assistance of more Air, passing in 
Inspiration and Expiration. 

Secondly, when the Saliva becomes 
viscous, from a Deprivation of the 
Lymph, and is loaded with saline Par- 
ticles, 'tis very probable that it may be 
lodged upon the Body of the Teeth, 
and by Degrees form the Mass we are 
speaking off. That this Matter may be 
so caused, I am the more ready to be- 
lieve from the Observation [/8./] of a strong 
|P_29
Concretion being found upon the Roots 
of the Tongue, formed by a viscous 
Lymph, resembling the Saliva in Thirst. 
'Tis difficult to assign any other Cause 
than that the Saliva may become tar- 
tarous and form this Substance. 

The first Lay or Bed of Tartar be- 
ing once formed, 'tis easy to conceive it 
augmented by the Addition of fresh 
Matter, and to increase to an extraordi- 
nary Size. 

From the Nature of this Disease we 
may readily infer, that the Cure, or 
Means to prevent it, will consist in keep- 
ing such a Regimen as will preserve the 
Purity of the Blood in its natural State; 
and by being careful to wash the 
Mouth often, (which is absolutely ne- 
cessary to prevent a stinking Breath oc- 
casioned as well by this Neglect as the 
Disorder here mentioned) we may main- 
tain the Use and Beauty of our Teeth, 
for many Years. 

The Jaundice of the Teeth is men- 
tioned as another Disease; but I think 
with Impropriety, it being nothing more 
than a tarnished Substance, or Viscosity 
|P_30
sticking to the Teeth, like Dust, or the 
Humidity that covers the Surface of a 
Looking-glass when 'tis not kept clean; 
and to me it seems to be nothing more 
than a Bed or Lay of Matter, form- 
ing the Tartar. 

[/9./]The Sensibility and Agacement of 
the Teeth, are Disorders produced from 
external Causes. 

The Writers on this Subject have 
been of opposite Opinions, some main- 
taining the Teeth to be insensible Bodies, 
others on the contrary making them ex- 
tremely capable of Sensation. 'Tis true 
that simply as so many Bones, we may 
consider them as insensible; but as co- 
vered and lined with Membranes, and 
furnished with Vessels and Nerves, we 
cannot deny them the Quality of Sensa- 
tion, any more than other Parts of the 
Body. 

By the Sensibility of the Teeth is to 
be understood that fixed and permanent 
Pain, that we generally express by say- 
ing we have the Tooth-ach. 

|P_31
By the Agacement of the Teeth is 
meant that acute Pain we express 
by saying they are set on Edge, caused 
by certain Sounds, such as the touching 
of Stuffs, the slipping of a Knife or 
Fork upon a China-Plate, or the filing 
a Piece of Iron, &c. &c.

The Pains of the Teeth are of diffe- 
rent kinds: But the most general are 
those called pungent or pricking, com- 
ing by Intervals; the other distensive or 
continual, such as accompany a Caries, 
in which the Air by drying or crisping 
the Fibres, Nerves and Coats of the 
little Vessels, render them bony, and 
contract their Diameters too small to re- 
ceive any Fluid thro' them, by which 
Means the Efforts of the Humours, to 
distend their Orifices, cause that Pain 
we call distensive. 

If on the contrary the little Vessels 
should be ruptured, the Liquor extrava- 
sated would soon change its Nature, and 
fermenting would irritate the Mem- 
branes, and produce the Pain called 
pungent. 

|P_32
The Agacement we find to be a dif- 
ferent Kind of Sensation, owing, ac- 
cording to the general Opinion, to an 
acid Juice, insinuated betwixt the Fibres 
of the Membranes, that covers the 
Roots of the Teeth; and when the 
Teeth are compressed against this Mem- 
brane, that Disposition occasions the 
Action of the Juices against the Fibres 
of the Membrane. 

I believe that the Juices of certain 
Fruits, such as Cherries, Gooseberries, 
Apples, &c. may be insinuated betwixt 
the Interstices of the Fibres that com- 
pose the Membranes, and distending 
them, intercept the Course of the Li- 
quors in some Vessels, and by stretch- 
ing the Nerves, produce a Sensation 
more or less troublesome to bear: But 
'tis very different from that seated in 
the Body of the Tooth. 

What makes me consider that the 
Agacement is fixed only to the Body or 
Surface of the Teeth is, if they are 
wiped with a Piece of warm Linen, it 
will immediately diminish their Uneasi- 
ness. And in Opposition to the Opini- 
on of an Acid being the Cause, the 
|P_33
following Experiment will serve to con- 
vince: If the Herb Sorrel be chewed 
between the Teeth, the Agacement will 
suddenly cease; if this Disease be oc- 
casioned by an Acid, is it not strange 
that it should admit of this Remedy? 
Sorrel which is itself an Acid, must ra- 
ther increase than abate the Disorder! 'Tis 
possible that some Parts of the Juice 
may be subtle enough to penetrate the 
Fibres that terminate it: But how Sor- 
rel acts in remedying this Evil, I con- 
fess, I am not able to conceive. We 
may observe that the Air taken in Re- 
spiration when the Mouth is half open, 
will produce the same Effect: And I 
cannot believe that Air in passing, pres- 
ses so forcibly as to make that Compres- 
sion against the Membranes at the Roots 
of the Teeth, which they assign to be 
the Cause. 'Tis more natural to suppose 
that the subtle Particles of the Air en- 
tering the Pores of the Enamel, and the 
Resistance made to the grosser Parts, 
may occasion a Tremor in the Tooth, 
and a Sensation not unlike the Agace- 
ment. 

The Caries or Rottenness is a Disease [/10./]
produced likewise from external Causes. 

|P_34
The Teeth are more subject to this 
Disease, than all the other Bones in the 
Body, both by their Structure and Situ- 
ation. 

This Disease is occasioned by a Hu- 
mour insinuated between the boney Fi- 
bres of the Teeth, which generally 
meets with Obstructions in the most sub- 
stantial Part of the Tooth, and by the 
particular Impulse, that every Particle 
communicates to the Cells of the Tooth, 
by Degrees, breaks off little Parcels, 
and in Time, makes that dark Cavity 
in the Tooth which we call hollow.

The Teeth are more subject to Rot- 
tenness than the other Bones, because 
their Periosteum is more pressed; which 
renders them subject to Obstructions, 
&c. The Molares are more subject to 
this Disease than the Incissores or  Cani- 
ni; and the Incissores and Canini of the 
upper Jaw, more than those of the 
lower Jaw, because by their Situation 
they are more exposed to Heat and Cold, 
in eating or drinking, in Inspiration and 
Expiration. 

|P_35
It often happens, that after a Tooth 
is attack'd with a Caries, the opposite 
Tooth, on the other Side of the same Jaw, 
is affected also. Nor does it appear 
that this Effect depends only upon Haz- 
ard: For 'tis remarkable, that in the 
opposite Tooth the Caries will not 
only much resemble the other, but 
sometimes be exactly uniform to it. 

The Vulgar, as well as certain Au- 
thors, are of opinion, that all Pains of 
the Teeth are caused by a Worm, that 
gnaws and eats the Membranes and 
Nerves of the Teeth. This Notion is 
founded upon pretended Experiments 
on these Infects, which (as they report) 
by smoaking Hembane, will fall from 
the Teeth, &c. And some of the 
Doctors of Montpellier have been very 
prolix in their Accounts of the Genera- 
tion of these Worms; besides the Dis- 
coveries with their Glasses: But who- 
ever will be at the Pains to make some 
Trials with the Microscope, may prove 
the Absurdity of this Notion. 

|P_36
The Time in which the Caries ra- 
vages most of the Teeth, is between the 
Age of 25 and 50 Years. 

I have omitted the many Divisions 
that may be seen in some Books upon 
this Subject; both on Account of their 
Perplexity and Non-use. For the Ca- 
ries, of what Kind or Cause soever, pro- 
duces its Effects, more or less consider- 
able, according to the Parts of the 
Tooth they attack. And the Operations 
practised on these Occasions are more or 
less difficult, according to the Situation 
of the Tooth; or according as the Ca- 
ries is more or less penetrating in the 
Body, or the Roots of the Teeth. 

Whenever the Caries is situated with- 
out the Gums, either on the Sides, or 
Extremity of the Tooth, the Cure will 
consist in separating the rotten Part from 
the sound, by Exfoliation, with the File, 
the Rugine, Cautery, &c. And by fill- 
ing the Cavity with Wax (which must 
be often renewed) it will defend the 
boney and nervous Parts from the Air, 
or the Impression of any other Bodies; 
likewise hinder any Bits of our Aliment 
|P_37
from lodging in the Cavity, which are 
so apt to putrify and cause a stinking Breath. 

Altho' the Teeth, in their natural [/11./]
Situation, are harder and more compact 
than the other Bones in the Body, and 
more remarkably so in the human Specie 
than Brutes, we find them by Experience 
extremely subject to break; especially 
when the least Defect happens in them. 

Their Fractures, are simple, compound, 
or Fissure. 

The Simple happens often by Falls 
and Blows, particularly by the Attempts 
to draw them before they are loose: 
The Compound is when, their Roots are 
strongly attached to their Alveoli, and a 
Piece of the Jaw comes away with Part 
of the Tooth: A Fissure is a Fracture 
lengthways, without any seeming Alte- 
ration in the Form of the Tooth. 

When once the Parts of the other 
Bones are divided, they never can be 
again united; for the Vessels distributed 
in them are not so disposed as to furnish 
a Juice sufficient, or that is capable of 
a Glutination; because their proper Sub- 
|P_38
stance is too compact to give them Pas- 
sage; or their Motion, the Air, and 
Bodies that they touch, are Obstacles that 
oppose the Re-union of the divided Parts. 

But tho' the Re-union of the Fracture 
be impracticable, the Scales, or Splinters, 
that remain, may be extracted, or their 
Angles and sharp Points smoothed and 
polished. 

[/12./] All the Luxations the Bones suffer in 
their Articulations, are either complete, 
or incomplete. When a Tooth is 
loosened, it is a Luxation incomplete. 

If after having been naturally well 
situated, they lean either in, or out of 
the Mouth, of one Side, or the other, 
they are so many Luxations. 

When a Tooth turns in the Alveoli, 
so that the lateral Parts of the Tooth 
incline, either outwards or inwards, 'tis 
a Luxation complete. 

When a Tooth seems to be longer, 
and exceed the others, that the Neck 
and Part of the Roots appear above the 
Edge of the Gums, occasioned by some 
|P_39
Matter contained in the Alveoli, 'tis a 
Semi-luxation. 

The large Teeth are most frequently 
luxated inwards. The Incissores, on the 
contrary, generally luxate outwards: 
Altho' both these Dislocations are bad, 
and incommode the Equality of Masti- 
cation, yet the Luxation inwards is the 
worst, because it fatigues and hurts the 
Tongue; which Uneasiness is more than 
the Inconvenience that is caused by the 
Teeth against the Lips, or Cheeks, when 
they fall outwards. The least inconve- 
nient Luxation is, when the Tooth is 
only turned in the Cavity of the Alveoli. 

When the Teeth are luxated, in such 
a manner as to exceed the others by 
their Extremities, which we call a Luxa- 
tion, or Dislocation of the Bottom to the 
Top of the lower Jaw, or of the Top to 
the Bottom of the upper Jaw, the Masti- 
cation is very difficult. 

In all these Cases, the Remedy is, to 
return them, each, in their proper Places, 
by which means they will often become 
quite fast; to guard against the Causes 
of Luxations, and so fortify the Gums. 

|P_40
[/13./]The Diseases that happen to the Parts 
of the Teeth contained within the Al- 
veoli and Gums, are, 

1. Caries of the Neck and Roots of 
the Teeth. 

2. Inflammation of the Membranes, 
that line the internal Cavities of the Roots 
of the Teeth, their Periosteum, &c.
occasion'd by Cold. 

3. Abscesses in the Cavities of the 
Teeth and Gums: The Consequence of 
an Inflammation. 

4. Atrophy, or Dryness of the Al- 
veoli and Membranes of the Gums; 
which is sufficient to make the Teeth 
fall out, without any Caries, and even 
without Pain. 

The accidental, or symptomatic Dis- 
eases of the Teeth, are, 

1. Caries of the Alveoli, caused by 
the Teeth. 

|P_41
2. Exostosis of the Alveoli, occasioned 
by the Teeth also. 

3. Inflammation of the Periosteum, 
lining the Cavities of the Alveoli. 

4. Fracture of the Alveoli, caused by 
the Extraction of the Teeth, &c.

5. Hemorrhage, sometimes violent, 
occasion'd by the Extraction of the 
Teeth also. Sometimes this Hemorrhage 
proceeds from, the Gums being tore in 
the Operation of drawing. 

6. Abscesses in the Gums, Cheeks, 
and Palate, caused by the Teeth. 

7. Fistulas occasion'd by long Conti- 
nuance of those Abscesses. 

8. Miscarriages have been the Conse- 
quence of violent Pains in the Teeth: 
And, 

9. Nausea, Vomiting, Diarrheas 
and Fevers, and to Infants, even Death 
itself. 

|P_42
[}On the Methods of Cleaning the 
Teeth with Observations on Sca- 
ling. }]
THE common Methods for pre- 
serving the Colour of the Teeth, 
serve rather to blacken and destroy 
them: And I would caution the Public 
against the Use of all Remedies sold with 
this Design; The Opiates, and many 
Medicines of different Titles, to my 
certain Knowledge, are composed of 
Brick, China, Rotten-stone, or other 
Ingredients of this Nature, powdered 
or levigated very fine, and coloured ac- 
cording to the Fancy of the Inventors. 
It is very natural to conceive that these 
Powders must act upon the Teeth 
much in the same manner as a File, or 
the Dusts used in polishing Metals; by 
which means the enamel'd Substance 
will be wore away, and the long Part 
of the Tooth left bare, and defenceless 
to all Insults. 

The white Salt, Scuttle-fish Bone, 
Salt of Tartar, Salt of Lead, Burnt-al- 
|P_43
lum, and other Ingredients of the same 
Species, the World has been long 
abused with. 

Juice of Sorrel, Juice of Lemons, 
Spirit of Allum, Spirit and Salt of Vi- 
triol, have been employed on this Occa- 
sion, and tho' with the greatest Circum- 
spection, have always in the End given 
them a yellow Colour, never to be re- 
paired. Nor is this the only bad Effect 
produced by these Liquors, for by a fre- 
quent Application, they corrode, and eat 
little Holes in the Enamel of the Teeth: 
Notwithstanding it is in the Use of these 
Remedies that consist all the Secrets of 
our Quacks! and if we examine the 
Teeth of any of their Confidents (that 
seem to have reaped the greatest Advan- 
tage from them) with a Microscope, or 
even with the naked Eye, the Ravage 
they have made will easily shew us a 
sure Foundation for a Caries. 

The Methods of cleaning the Teeth 
are various. Most People use small 
Brushes, or Bits of Cloth or Linen, 
without any Suspicion of their Im- 
propriety, but they are much too 
rough, and by frequent indiscreet Use, 
|P_44
often ruin the Gums and Teeth. For this 
reason I would abolish their Use, and ad- 
vise a Piece of Spunge, dipped in warm 
Water, in which should be dissolved a 
Piece of Soap, to be used preferable to 
all other Methods whatever. Soap is 
known to be of a penetrating, attenuating 
and detergent Nature, and therefore not 
only most proper for cleaning the Teeth, 
but also very serviceable in most Disor- 
ders of the Gums; in short, it may be 
used with the utmost Propriety; the on- 
ly Objection to be made, is the Offence 
it may give on account of its Taste: but 
Custom will render it familiar, and suffi- 
ciently recompense die Trouble of using 
it. 

I would recommend the Morning as the 
most convenient Time for cleaning the 
Teeth; but before using of the Spunge, 
it will be necessary to scrape off the gluey 
Substance, which adheres to their 
Surface, with a Quill; and after clean- 
ing them with the Spunge and Soap, 
the Mouth may be rinced with Hun- 
gary Water, Spirit of Lavender, &c. 
diluted with warm Water. 

The Scurvy of the Gums is dependent 
|P_45
on the bad State of the Constitution, the 
relieving of which last will infallibly cure 
the other. When the Teeth become 
loose, from whatever Cause, a Tea- 
spoonful of the Tincture of Myrrh, mixed 
with a Tea-cup-full of Water, to wash the 
Mouth with twice or thrice a Day, will 
be the most efficacious Remedy. 

'Tis become a great Fashion with the 
English Ladies, (and with too many of 
my own Sex) to have their Teeth sea- 
led; and this Practice, shocking as it is, 
seems to be pursued with an uncommon 
Attention. 

The Design of this Operation is to 
beautify the Colour of the Teeth, by re- 
moving the Tartar or Turf, which ad- 
heres to their Surface, and is done with 
Iron Instruments, made for that Purpose. 
But whoever will consider attentively the 
Nature of the Teeth, and of this petrified 
Substance, which I have already descri- 
bed, will readily conceive the Impro- 
priety of this Practice. 'Tis very proba- 
ble that by endeavouring to detach this 
Matter, some of the enamel'd Part may 
be taken away with it; and this not only 
depends on Hazard, but is the certain 
|P_46
Consequence of frequent Use; indeed these 
Instruments themselves, by often rubbing 
upon the Vitrious Substance, must risque 
its Ruin, both as they are of a Nature too 
hard to approach the Teeth, and as their 
Mettalic Particles will insinuate themselves 
into the Pores of the Enamel, and never fail 
to produce great Michief. 

If it should be said that this Matter 
may be removed by a dextrous Hand, 
one familiar in the Operation, without 
any such Dangers, a brief Repetition of 
the Nature of the Disease will, I hope, 
prove a sufficient Answer. 

The Tartar is generally accumulated 
on that Part of the Teeth which joins 
with the Gums, and covers more or 
less, according as it encreases in Quan- 
tity, that Part we call the Neck of the 
Tooth, which it separates from the Gum. 
This is the true State of the Disease. 

Now suppose the Operator ever so 
dextrous, he must, in Consequence of 
taking away this Matter, expose the Neck 
of the Tooth bare, and liable to all Inju- 
ries of the Air, the Aliment, or what- 
ever comes near it; in which are contain- 
|P_47
ed many Causes of a Caries. This Mat- 
ter when left to itself, seldom fails of 
dropping off insensibly, and if 'tis the 
Colour only which induces us to try the 
Remedy, 'twould be much better to be 
content with this Inconvenience, than 
subject ourselves to its ill Effects. But 
by following the Methods I have 
advised, there will be no necessity for 
exposing ourselves to this Operation. 

A certain Merchant in, the City, tho' 
otherwise sufficiently covetous, bestow- 
ed a considerable Purse upon one of our 
foreign Operators; who had in good 
Truth changed the Colour of his Teeth, 
from a Black to a very beautiful White: 
But behold the Consequence! The Mer- 
chant found himself under a Necessity 
of bespeakihg a new Sett; for they all 
actually fell out, one after the other: I 
saw him within three Months after the 
Operation, when he had only two remain- 
ing in his Head. This is an Instance not 
without its Precedent. 

Thus it is that our curious Ladies 
and others, by endeavouring (by these 
unatural Means) to make their Teeth 
exceeding white, will at length bring on 
|P_48
a Caries, and render them black and 
frightful as well as useless. I am asto- 
nished to see so many pretending an 
Aversion to Foreigners, and yet suffer them 
(as we say of Sharpers, &c.) to draw the 
furthest Teeth in their Heads. And I am 
still more sorry to see such numbers of 
the finest Women become the Dupes 
of such foreign Miscreants. 
[^A horizontal line spanning the whole page. ^]
[}Diseases of Children in the Time 
of Toothing. }]
THE Teeth hardly make their Ap- 
pearance in the Mouth before they 
require some Succour from Surgery: 
The Caries is the first Disease that works 
their Ruin, and is their greatest Enemy 
during Life; but even before their Ap- 
pearance, the Diseases they cause, we 
know by Experience, are considerable 
enough to take away Life. 

The first Appearance of Teeth hap- 
pens commonly about seven Months af- 
ter our Birth, and is attended with 
divers Accidents. The Symptoms pre- 
ceding their Appearance is an Itching 
|P_49
of the Gums, follow'd by a Ptyalismus, 
or Salivation of the Infant, easily disco- 
ver'd by the great Quantity of Saliva 
running from the Mouth. After this 
follows the Swelling of the Gums, ac- 
companied with great Pain. 

If the Child has Strength to resist, he 
will be attack'd with the Apthæ, or little 
Ulcers, convex with a white Point: 
These Ulcers are often engender'd by 
the most acrid and serous Parts of 
the Blood, formed most easily on the Sur- 
face of the Membrane in the Mouth, 
being the most soft and tender. Some- 
times the parotid Glands swell and be- 
come considerable Abscesses. 

When the Teeth, especially the  Ca- 
nini, are upon the Point of piercing 
the Gums, the Itching is then turn'd 
into great Pain, with Swelling of the 
Cheeks and Eyes, Catarrhs, Fever, 
Diarrhea, Nausea, Vomiting, Insom- 
nitude, Convulsions, Lethargy, and too 
often the tragical Scene ends in Death. 

The Thirst occasioned by the Fever 
excites them to suck more than their 
little Stomachs are able to bear; and from 
|P_50
hence follows that Indigestion, and Cor- 
ruption, Vomiting, and Diarrhea, to 
which they are so subject. 

All the Symptoms happening to Chil- 
dren of the first Age are produced by 
the Compression the Teeth make in divid- 
ing the Gums: And 'tis remarkable that 
these Disorders sometimes happen to 
Children of a more advanced Age, tho' 
very seldom. 

The Incisores are more sharp, and 
pierce the Gums with less Pain than the 
Canini. The Molares, as they are large 
and flat upon their Extremities, are the 
Occasion of more Difficulty and Pain; 
but as they make their Appearance later 
than the others, the Child hath generally 
acquired greater Strength to resist their 
Efforts. 

The Diseases I have mentioned, are 
indeed more or less considerable, as the 
Child is more or less vigorous.  Hippo- 
crates tells us, that those who cut their 
Teeth in the Winter, are less liable to the 
Danger of the Fever, than in a warmer 
Season: that when they have a Diar- 
rhea, they are less subject to Convulsions; 
|P_51
that the healthiest-looking Children, and 
who sleep sound, are in Danger of being 
surprized with Convulsions, of which 
Death is not always the Consequence. 

From these Prognostics we may 
judge of the Effects resulting from a 
good or bad Constitution of the Child, 
&c. But I would advise Mothers on 
these Occasions to apply to a Man of 
Skill in the Profession, and be extremely 
cautions of engaging in an Affair where- 
in the least Error may prove fatal. 

FINIS. 
