

[^Sample 1: book - ^]

|P_83
[}A 
TREATISE 
OF THE 
SCURVY. }][^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}PART II. }][^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}CHAP. I. }]
[}The true causes of the disease, from observations 
made upon it, both at sea and land. }]
THE scorbutic taint is induced chiefly 
by the agency of certain external and 
remote causes; which, according as 
their existence is permanent or casual, and in 
proportion to the different degrees of violence 
with which they act, give rise to a disease more 
or less epidemic, and of various degrees of ma- 
lignity. 

Thus, where the causes productive of it are 
general, and violent in a high degree, it becomes 
an epidemic or universal calamity, and rages 
|P_84
with great and diffusive virulence: as happens 
often to seamen in long voyages; sometimes to 
armies [/1./], very lately to the German soldiers 
in Hungary[/2./]; frequently to troops when 
closely besieged, as to the Saxon garrison in 
Thorn[/3./], the besieged in Rochelle, as also 
Stetin[/4./]: and at other times to whole coun- 
tries; as in Brabant, in the year 1556 [/5./]; 
and in Holland, ann. 1562 [/6./]. 

2dly, Where these causes are fixed and per- 
manent, or almost always subsisting, it may be 
there said to be an endemic or constant disease; 
as in Iceland, Groenland[/7./], Cronstadt[/8./], 
the northern parts of Russia[/9./], and in most 
northern countries as yet discovered in Europe, 
from the latitude of 60 to the north pole. 
It was also formerly in a peculiar manner en- 
demic in several parts of the Low Countries, in 
Holland and Friesland; in Brabant, Pomera- 
nia, and the Lower Saxony[/10./]; and in some 
|P_85
places of Denmark[/11./], Sweden, and Nor- 
way[/12./], chiefly upon the sea-coasts. 

Lastly, Where these causes prevail less fre- 
quently, and are more peculiar to the circum- 
stances of a few, it may be there said to be spo- 
radic, or a disease only here and there to be 
met with; as in Great Britain[/13./] and Ireland, 
several parts of Germany, &c. 

Now, by considering the peculiarity of the 
circumstances, situation, and way of life of 
these people; and by attentively observing, 
what at any time gives rise to this disease, what 
is seen to remove it, and what to increase or 
mitigate its malignity, we shall be able to form 
a judgment, not only of the principal causes 
productive of it, but likewise of the subordi- 
nate, or those that in a less degree may con- 
tribute their influence. It is indeed a matter 
of the utmost consequence, to investigate the 
true sources of this evil; as, upon the removing 
or correcting of these, the preservation of the 
body from its first attacks, as well as its conse- 
quences, in a great measure depends. And 
|P_86
we shall begin with considering the situation 
of those at sea, among whom it is said to be 
so often an epidemic calamity. 

In the proof of the identity of this disease 
on both elements [/14./], I observed, that the cau- 
ses productive of it at sea, were to be found 
also at land, in a smaller degree: but before 
determining what are the true causes of its be- 
ing so often epidemic at sea, it may not be a- 
miss to remark what they are not, although 
commonly accused. 

Many have ascribed this disease to the great 
quantity of sea-salt [/15./], necessarily made use of 
by seamen in their diet: and it has been there- 
fore denominated a muriatic scurvy. 

Whether this salt, instead of producing the 
scurvy, may not, on the contrary, from its an- 
tiseptic quality, become the means of prevent- 
ing it for some time, I shall not take upon me 
to determine, as my experiments do not autho- 
rise this conclusion; though they plainly prove, 
that it neither causes the distemper, nor adds 
to its malignity. For in the cruises after menti- 
oned, where the scurvy raged with great vio- 
lence, it was then a fashionable custom to 
|P_87
drink the salt-water, by way of gentle physic. 
I have been told, that Admiral Martin, and se- 
veral officers in his fleet, continued the use of it 
during a whole cruise. I had at that time several 
patients under a purging course of this water, 
for the itch, and obstinate ulcers on their legs; 
and have experienced very good effects from it, 
especially in the last case: yet none of these 
people, after continuing this course for a 
month, had the least scorbutic complaint. 

But to put it beyond all doubt, that sea-salt 
is not the occasion of the scurvy, I took two 
patients, (in order to make trial of the effects 
of different medicines in this disease, to be 
more fully related afterwards), with very putrid 
gums, swelled legs, and contracted knees, to 
whom I gave half a pint of salt water, and 
sometimes more, every day for a sortnight: 
at the expiration of which time, I was not sen- 
sible of their being in the least worse; but 
found them in the same condition as those who 
had taken no medicine whatever [/16./]. From 
which I am convinced, that sea-salt, at least 
|P_88
the drinking of salt water, by no means dis- 
poses the constitution to this disease. 

But I would not be understood here to mean, 
nor does it follow from what has been said, 
that although sea-water, which is a composi- 
tion in which this salt is a principal ingredient, 
has no bad influence upon the scurvy, that a 
diet of salt flesh and fish is equally innocent. 
The contrary of which will appear in the se- 
quel. The brine of meats, in particular, is of a 
different quality from either purified sea-salt or 
salt water; for we find that this salt may be so 
intangled by the animal oils, especially in salt 
pork, that it is with great difficulty disen- 
gaged from them after many washings, and the 
most plentiful dilution. So that as this saline 
quality is inextricable from such food, it is ren- 
dered improper in many cases to afford that 
soft, mild nourishment, which is required to 
repair the body. It is remarkable, that the 
powers of the human machine can animalise o- 
ther salts; that is, convert them into the am- 
moniacal sort, or that of its own nature: while 
this sea-salt seems to elude the force of our so- 
lids and fluids; and retaining its own unchange- 
able nature in the body, is to be recovered un- 
altered from the urine of those who have taken 
|P_89
it. Thus, sea-salt has no effect in producing 
this disease; whatever meats, hardened and pre- 
served by it may have, by being rendered of 
hard and difficult digestion, and improper for 
nourishment. And this is farther confirmed 
by the daily experience of seamen; who, upon 
the first scorbutical complaint, are generally de- 
barred the use of every thing that is the least 
salted: notwithstanding which, the disease in- 
creases with great violence: While at other 
times, it breaks out when there is plenty of 
fresh flesh-provisions on board; as was the case 
in Lord Anson's ships, on their leaving the coast 
of Mexico[/17./]. 

Others, again, have supposed such to be the 
constitution of the human body, that health 
and life cannot be preserved long, without the 
use of green herbage, vegetables and fruits; 
|P_90
and that a long abstinence from these, is alone 
the cause of the disease [/18./]. 

But if this were truly the case, we must have 
had the scurvy very accurately described by the 
ancients; whose chief study seems to have been 
the art of war; and whose manner of besieging 
towns was generally by a blockade, till they 
had forced a surrender by famine. Now, as 
they held out many months, sometimes years, 
without a supply of vegetables; we should, no 
doubt, have heard of many dying of the scur- 
vy, long before the magazines of dry provisions 
were exhausted. The continuance of those 
sieges far exceeded most of our modern ones; 
even the five months blockade of Thorn, 
upon which Bachstrom has founded this sup- 
position. It would likewise be a much more 
quent disease in every country, than it really 
is: for there are persons every where, who, 
from choice, eat few or no green vegetables; 
and some countries are deprived of the use of 
them for five or six months of the year; as is 
the case of many parts in the highlands of 
Scotland, Newfoundland, &c.; where, however, 
the scurvy is not a usual malady. 

It would be tedious to give many instances, 
|P_91
they being notorious, of ships crews continu- 
ing several rnonths at sea, upon their ordinary 
diet, without any approach of the scurvy. I 
have been three months on a cruise, during 
which time none of the seamen tasted vege- 
tables or greens of any sort; and although for 
a great part of that time, from want of fresh 
water, their beef and pork were boiled in the 
sea-water, yet we returned into port without 
one scorbutical complaint. I have known mes- 
ses, as they are called, of seamen, who have 
lived, during a whole voyage of three years, on 
the ship's provisions, for want of money to 
purchase better fare, especially greens; and 
who were so regardless of health, as to expend 
what little money they could procure, in bran- 
dy and spirits: so that a few onions, or the 
like, was their whole sea-store; and a meal 
with vegetables was seldom eat by them, above 
twice or thrice in a month, during the whole 
voyage. Notwithstanding which, they have 
kept free from the scurvy. 

But it was remarkable, in the two cruises 
afterwards to be mentioned, in his Majesty's 
ship the Salisbury, where I had an opportunity 
of making observations on this disease, that it 
began to rage on board that ship, and indeed 
|P_92
all the Channel squadron, upon being less than 
six weeks at sea; and after having left Plymouth, 
where plenty of all sorts of greens were to be 
had; by which, as one would have thought, 
the sailors had sufficiently prepared their bodies 
against the attack of this malady. Yet here, in 
so short a time as two months, out of 4000 men 
in that fleet, 400 at least became more highly 
scorbutic [/19./], than could reasonably have been 
expected, had they all been debarred the use 
of vegetables for six months on shore, like our 
highlanders, and many others. And what 
puts it beyond all doubt, that the disease was 
not occasioned solely by the want of vegetables 
for so short a time, is, that the same ship's 
company of the Salisbury, in much longer crui- 
|P_93
ses, kept quite free from the distemper, where 
their circumstances as to want of fresh vege- 
tables were similar. It was observable, that in 
the longest cruise she performed, while I was 
surgeon, there was but one scorbutical patient 
on board, who fell into the disease after having 
had an intermitting fever. We were out at 
that time from the 10th of August to the 28th 
of October; which was a twelve weeks conti- 
nuance at sea, and consequently as long an abs- 
tinence from vegetables. 

So that although it is a certain and experi- 
enced truth, that the use of greens and vege- 
tables is effectual in preventing the disease, and 
extremely beneficial in the cure; and thus we 
shall say, that abstinence from them, in certain 
circumstances, proves the occasional cause of the 
evil: yet there are unquestionably to be found 
at sea, other strong sources of it; which, with 
respect to the former, (or want of vegetables), 
we shall hereafter distinguish by the name of 
the predisposing causes to it. The influences 
of which latter, at times, must be extremely 
great, as in the case of Lord Anson's squadron 
in passing round Cape Horn[/20./], to induce so 
universal a calamity; from which hardly any 
|P_94
one of them seems to have been exempted, 
attended with the mortality of above one half of 
them, when they had been but little more than 
three months at sea: while whole countries 
are observed to live on the same, nay, even 
a less wholsome diet; and many people for 
years abstain from vegetables, without almost 
any inconveniency. 

Some have alledged this to proceed from 
something peculiar in the confined and polluted 
air of a ship; and the stagnation of the bilge- 
water in the hold has been accused as a main 
cause of the distress. But had this last the ef- 
fects presumed, they would be most senfibly 
felt by those who are most exposed to it, viz.
the carpenters; who at sea are often obliged 
to measure, every four hours, the quantity 
of bilge-water; and do then, and at other 
times in mending the pumps, suffer very great 
inconveniencies, being almost suffocated by it: 
nay instances are not wanting where they have 
been killed at once with this noxious vapour, 
to which they lie the nearest when in bed. 
Yet it does not appear from my own experience, 
nor from the accounts which I have been able 
to collect, that they are more liable to the 
scurvy than others on board. 

|P_95
As to any other inconveniencies from filth, 
or want of cleanliness, in a close place, and 
where the cutaneous and pulmonary perspira- 
tion of a multitude is pent up and confined; 
they are not peculiar to ships, but common to 
all crouded jails, hospitals, &c.: and what- 
ever bad effects such a vitiated air may have on 
this disease, yet it is certain the scurvy is not 
the usual and natural consequence of it. This 
is the more particularly to be noted, in order 
to determine the genuine effects of this pecu- 
liar evil disposition of air; which are at all 
times, and in all places, a malignant, highly- 
contagious fever, known by the name of the jail- 
distemper. This is almost the only disease ob- 
served in the transport-ships which daily carry 
over numbers of people to Virginia, few or 
none of whom become scorbutic; as likewise 
in ships that have been crouded with sol- 
diers. And, universally, whenever many per- 
sons are confined together long under close- 
shut hatches, they will at length contract this 
fever, without any approach of the scurvy a- 
mongst them; unless, as may sometimes be the 
case, the body, weakened and exhausted by the 
preceeding sickness, is afterwards rendered 
more susceptible of the scorbutic taint, where 
|P_96
other scorbutic causes prevail. Though I have 
oftentimes had occasion to see this contagion 
bred by putrid air, yet I never observed any 
scurvies, either at the time or after it. 

In the latter end of the year 1750, the go- 
vernment contracted with a Dutch master of 
a vessel to carry over 200 Palatines to our co- 
lony in Nova Scotia. The brutal Dutchman, 
contrary to express orders, confined these poor 
people below, and would not permit them to 
come so often upon deck as was requisite for 
their health; by which means they contracted 
this malignant fever, which killed one half of 
them. And here it was remarkable, there 
was not one of these people who, after reco- 
vering at sea, or upon land, became scorbutic; 
nor had they any such distemper in the ship 
[/21./]. 

|P_97
The truth really is, a putrid air, though ne- 
ver observed solely to be productive of this dis- 
ease, has a pernicious influence in aggravating 
its several symptoms: and where an epidemic 
scorbutical constitution at the same time sub- 
sists, they give rise to a complicated, scorbutical 
and malignant fever; which I shall have occa- 
sion to mention among the symptoms of this 
malady. 

But the scurvy by itself is often experienced 
to make great ravage, where the air has been 
properly renewed and ventilated, and the whole 
ship kept clean and sweet. I have been 
told, that the Namur's crew, in their expedi- 
tion to the East Indies, though very healthy 
at the Cape of Good Hope, became scorbutic 
at the time they arrived at Fort St David's, 
notwithstanding the use of that truly noble 
|P_98
invention, Sutton's machine [/22./]. And though 
Lord Anson's ship was kept uncommonly clean 
and sweet after they left the coast of Mexico; 
yet the progress of their misery was not at all 
retarded by it. And, what is further pretty re- 
markable, we know, that the scurvy may be 
perfectly cured in the impure air of a ship; of 
which the following is a memorable instance. 

His Majesty's ship the Guernsey brought in- 
to Lisbon, after a cruise off Cadiz, 70 of her 
crew afflicted with this disease. Many of them 
were far advanced, even in the last stages of it. 
The plague at this time raging at Messina, it 
was with great difficulty our ships could obtain 
|P_99
pratique in any port: so that it was found 
impracticable to land them. There was an- 
other very troublesome circumstance. For, 
in order to conceal so great a number of sick 
from the visit of the officers of health, they 
were under a necessity of shutting them up for 
some time together in a close place. For this 
purpose they were with great difficulty remo- 
ved into the Captain's store-room; where there 
is generally worse air than in any other part of 
the ship. This was performed with imminent 
danger to many of their lives. Several of 
them, though moved with extreme caution, 
fell into the scorbutic deliquium; whose pre- 
servation was owing to the judgment of their 
ingenious surgeon, and to the liberality of the 
Captain, who, upon this occasion, ordered 
them to be plentifully supplied with his richest 
cordial wines. But every one of these men 
recovered on board before they left the place, 
without being landed. The ship lay strict 
quarentine a fortnight. After that they were 
obliged to be extremely circumspect in allow- 
ing even those who were pretty well recovered, 
to go on shore; as their ill looks might have 
betrayed their situation to the Portuguese. 
This ship had no ventilators: and it is natural 
|P_100
to suppose there might be some remissness in 
the article of cleanliness, where there was 
such a number of sick; who, notwithstand- 
ing, all recovered. 

The learned writer [/23./] of the great Lord 
Anson's voyage, after clearly evincing the fal- 
sity of many speculations concerning this disease, 
and justly exploding some opinions which usu- 
ally pass current about its nature and cause, is 
pleased modestly to offer a very plausible and 
ingenious conjecture, well deserving considera- 
tion. Perhaps a distinct and adequate know- 
ledge of the source of this disease may never 
be discovered. But, in general, there is no 
difficulty in conceiving, that as a continued 
supply of fresh air is necessary to all animal 
life, and as this air is so particular a fluid, 
that without losing its elasticity, or any of 
its obvious properties, it may be rendered 
unfit for this purpose, by the mixing with 
it some very subtile, and otherwise imper- 
ceptible effluvia; it may be conceived, I say, 
that the steams arising from the ocean may 
have a tendency to render the air they are 
spread through, less properly adapted to the 
support of the life of terrestrial animals, 
|P_101
unless these steams are corrected by effluvia 
of another kind, and which perhaps the 
land alone can supply. 

It must be allowed, that the air, which is a 
compound of almost all the different bodies 
we know, has many latent properties, by 
which animals are variously affected; and 
these we neither can at present, nor perhaps 
ever will be able to investigate. We do not 
even know certainly what this pabulum vitæ is 
in that fluid, which preserves and supports ani- 
mal life. The only means then we have to 
judge of the existence of such an occult quality 
as may be supposed peculiar to the air of the 
ocean, must be from its effects. These, upon 
this supposition, ought to be most noxious, 
and most sensibly perceived, in the middle of 
the great oceans, and at the widest distance 
from the continents and islands, where there 
is the greatest want of land-air, and of its vital 
influences, which may be presumed so necessary 
to the support of the life of terrestrial animals. 
But it is experienced, that ships cruising upon 
certain coasts, at a very small distance from the 
shore, where the air consequently differs wide- 
ly from that of the main ocean, as being im- 
pregnated with many particles from the land, 
|P_102
and is almost the same with that of the sea- 
port towns, are equally, if not more, afflicted 
with this disease, than others are in crossing the 
ocean. And it will be found universally to 
appear in a much shorter time, and rage with 
greater violence, (all circumstances being other- 
wise alike), in a squadron cruising in the narrow 
seas of the Baltic and Channel, or upon the 
coasts of Norway and Hudson's bay, than in 
another continuing the same length of time in 
the middle of the Atlantic ocean. We often 
observed our Channel cruisers quickly over-run 
with the scurvy; while their consorts, fitted out 
at the same port, and consequently with the 
same state of provisions and water, who soon 
left them, stretching into the main ocean up- 
on a voyage to the Indies, or upon a much 
longer cruise off the Canaries or Cadiz, kept 
pretty free from it. For my own part, I ne- 
ver could remark any alteration upon our scor- 
butic patients, while we continued for many 
days close in upon the French shore, with the 
wind or air coming from thence, or when, at a 
greater distance from any land, we kept the 
middle of the Channel: and yet, in either of 
those stations, difference of weather had a re- 
markable influence upon scorbutic ailments. 

|P_103
Nay, ships and fleets, without going to sea, 
are often attacked by this malady while in har- 
bour. Thus, when Admiral Matthews lay long 
in Hieres bay with his fleet, many of the sea- 
men became highly scorbutic; on which ac- 
count some hundreds were sent to Mahon ho- 
spital. And the same has happened to our 
fleets when at Spithead, and even when lying 
in Portsmouth harbour. This disease is not 
indeed peculiar to the ocean, there being many 
instances of its raging with equal violence at 
land [/24./]. 

From what has been said, it appears, that 
the strong predisposing causes to this calamity 
at sea, are not constant, but casual, upon that 
element. For though it should be granted, 
that the sea-air gives always a tendency to the 
scorbutic diathesis, yet the evil proves often 
highly epidemic and fatal in very short voyages, 
or upon a very short continuance at sea, to 
crews of ships who, at other times, have con- 
tinued out much longer, cruising in the same 
place, and in parallel circumstances of water 
and provisions, and yet have kept entirely free 
|P_104
from it. Thus, the great Lord Anson cruised 
for four months, waiting for the Acapulco ship, 
in the Pacific ocean; during which time, we 
are told, his crews continued in perfect health: 
when, at another time, after leaving the coast 
of Mexico, in less than seven weeks at sea, the 
scurvy became highly epidemic, notwithstand- 
ing plenty of fresh provisions and sweet water 
on board. And when it raged with such un- 
common malignity in passing Cape Horn, it de- 
stroyed above one half of his crew, in less time 
than he kept the seas in perfect health, in the 
before mentioned cruise. 

I had an opportunity in two Channel cruises, 
the one of ten weeks, the other of eleven, ann.
1746 and 1747, in his Majesty's ship the Sa- 
lisbury, a fourth rate, to see this disease rage 
with great violence. And here it was remark- 
able, that though I was on board in several o- 
ther long Channel cruises; one of twelve weeks 
particularly, from the 10th of August to the 
28th of October; yet we had but one scorbutic 
patient; nor in any other that I remem- 
ber, had we the least scorbutic appearance. 
But in those two I have mentioned, the scurvy 
began to rage after being a month or six weeks 
at sea; when the water on board, as I took 
|P_105
particular notice, was uncommonly fweet and 
good; and the state of provisions such as could 
afford no suspicion of occasioning so general a 
sickness, being the same in quality as in for- 
mer cruises. And though the scorbutic people 
were, by the generous liberality of that great 
and humane commander, the Hon. Captain 
George Edgcumbe, daily supplied with fresh pro- 
visions, such as mutton-broth and fowls, and e- 
ven meat from his own table; yet, at the expi- 
ration of ten weeks, we brought into Plymouth
80 men, out of a complement of 350, more or 
less afflicted with this disease. 

|P_180
[}CHAP. IV. }]
[}The prophylaxis, or means of preventing this 
disease, especially at sea. }]
FOR the prevention of this disease at land, 
a warm, dry, pure air, with a diet of 
easy digestion, consisting chiefly of a due mix- 
ture of animal and vegetable substances, (which 
is found to be the most wholsome food, and 
agreeable to the generality of constitutions), 
will for the most part prove sufficient. 

Those who are liable to it by living in mar- 
shy wet soils, and in places subject to great rains 
and fogs; and others who inhabit unwholsome 
damp apartments, as the lower floors and cel- 
lars of a house in winter, should remedy these 
inconveniencies by keeping constant fires, to 
correct the hurtful moisture; which will still 
prove more effectual for the purpose, if made 
of aromatic woods. But it is rather adviseable 
for persons threatened with this malady, to 
remove into dry, chearful, and better-aired 
|P_181
habitations. Their principal food in such a 
case should be broths made of fresh flesh- 
meats, together with plenty of recent vege- 
tables, if they can be procured; otherwise of 
preserved roots and fruits. Their bread ought 
to be made of wheat-flour, sufficiently lea- 
vened, and well baked; and at their meals 
they are to drink a glass of good sound 
beer, cyder, wine, or the like fermented li- 
quor. The observance of these directions, to- 
gether with moderate exercise, cleanliness of 
body, ease and contentment of mind, procu- 
red by agreeable and entertaining amusements, 
will prove sufficient to prevent this disease from 
rising to any great height, where it is not al- 
together constitutional. 

In towns or garrisons when besieged, of- 
ficers should take care that the beds, barracks, 
and quarters for the soldiers, be kept dry, 
clean, and warm, for their refreshment when 
off duty; and that their men be sufficiently 
provided with thick cloaks and warm cloaths, 
for shelter against the inclemency of cold, and 
rains, when necessarily exposed to them. The 
ammunition-bread should be light, and well ba- 
ked, and their other provisions as sound and whol- 
some as possible. To correct the too gross and 
|P_182
solid quality of these, they would do well to 
join vegetables, even the most common, and 
such as are to be met with on the ramparts, 
with their other food. This precept becomes 
still more necessary when the garrison's provi- 
sions in store are spoiled or unsound; in which 
case the use of vinegar is recommended by se- 
veral authors. Bachstrom's advice, of sowing 
the seeds of the antiscorbutic plants [/25./],so that 
they may grow up with the grass on the ram- 
parts, will, upon this occasion, be found very 
beneficial. They can indeed be under no dif- 
ficulty in procuring some of the most salutary 
of them at all times, if they are provided with 
their seeds, such as the garden-cresses; which, 
in a few days, even in their apartments, will 
supply them with a fresh antiscorbutic salad. 
When the army is in the field, they generally 
meet with such plenty of wholsome vegetables 
as are sufficient to prevent this disease becoming 
fatal to many of them, except in desert and 
depopulated countries. 

But the prevention of this calamity at sea, 
and the preservation of a truly valuable part of 
mankind, viz. the seamen of all nations, from 
its fatal and destructive malignity in long voyages 
|P_183
and cruises, is what in a particular manner de- 
mands our attention, and has exercised the ge- 
nius of some of the most eminent physicians 
in all parts of Europe for above a century past. 

A German who had acquired a considerable 
fortune in the East Indies, by being Dutch
Governor of Sumatra, was so affected with pi- 
ty and humanity for the many afflicted sailors 
he had observed in this malady, that, imagi- 
ning the art of chemistry, which at that time 
made a great noise in the world, might proba- 
bly furnish some remedy for their relief, he e- 
rected and endowed a perpetual professorship 
of that science at Leipsic. He nominated 
his countryman Dr Michael, a very great che- 
mist, who was the first university-professor of 
chemistry in Europe; and remitted him a consi- 
derable sum of money, in order to bear the 
expence of his experiments, with the promise 
of a much greater, in case he succeeded in the 
discovery of a remedy for prevention of the 
scurvy at sea. The Doctor spent an incredible 
deal of time and labour in preparing the most 
elaborated chemical medicines. Volatile and 
fixed salts, spirits of all sorts, essences, elixirs, 
electuaries, &c. were yearly sent over to the 
East Indies; nay even the quinta essentia (which 
|P_184
became afterwards a celebrated nostrum for the 
scurvy in Germany) of the chemical oil of the 
seeds of scurvy-grass. But all proved ineffectual. 

Bontekoe recommended to the Dutch sailors 
an acrid alcaline spirit; Glauber[/26./] and Boer- 
haave, a strong mineral acid, viz.sp. salis. 
The Royal navy of Great Britain has been 
supplied, at a considerable expence to the go- 
vernment, by the advice of an eminent physi- 
cian, with a large quantity of elixir of vitriol; 
which is the strong mineral acid of vitriol com- 
bined with aromatics. Wine-vinegar was like- 
wise prescribed upon this occasion by the col- 
lege of physicians at London, when consulted 
by the Lords of the Admiralty; which differs 
from all the former, being a mild vegetable a- 
cid procured by fermentation. Vinegar has 
been indeed much used in the fleet at all times. 
Many ships, especially those fitted out at Ply- 
mouth, carried with them cyder for this pur- 
pose, upon the recommendation of the lear- 
ned Dr Huxham. The latest proposal to the 
Lords of the Admiralty was a magazine of 
dried spinage prepared in the manner of hay. 
This was to be moistened and boiled in their 
food. To which it was objected by a very 
|P_185
ingenious physician [/27./], That no moisture 
whatever could restore the natural juices of the 
plant lost by evaporation, and, as he imagined, 
altered by a fermentation which they under- 
went in drying. 

Moreover, all the remedies which could be 
used in the circumstances of sailors, that at any 
time have been proposed for the many various 
diseases going under the name of a scurvy at 
land, have likewise been tried to prevent and 
cure this disease at sea: the effects of several of 
which, besides the before mentioned, I have 
myself experienced, viz. salt water, tar-water, 
decoctions of guajac and sassafras, bitters with 
cort. winterani; and such warm antiscorbutics 
as can be preserved at sea, viz. garlic, mustard- 
seed, pulv. ari comp. et spirit. cochlear.; which 
last was formerly always put up in sea-medicine 
chests. I have also in various stages, and for 
different symptoms of this distemper, made trial 
of most of the mineral and fossil remedies 
|P_186
which have been recommended for the scurvy 
at land; such as mercurial, chalybeate, anti- 
monial, vitriolic, and sulphureous medicines. 
But, before I mention the result of these expe- 
riments, and the observations made upon the 
effects of several remedies that have been most 
approved of in this disease, it may not be amiss 
to take notice, that the want of success hither- 
to in preventing this fatal malady at sea, seems 
chiefly owing to these two causes. 

1st, The methods of preservation have been 
put in practice too late; that is, when the dis- 
ease was already bred; it being generally then 
that elixir vitriol, vinegar, cyder, and other 
antiscorbutics, were administered: whereas cer- 
tain precautions seem necessary to prevent the 
first attacks; it being found, that almost all 
diseases are easier prevented than afterwards 
removed. 

2dly, Too high an opinion has been enter- 
tained of certain medicines recommended by 
physicians at land, rather from a presumption 
founded on their theory of the disease, than 
from any experience of their effects at sea. In- 
deed the causes which they were supposed to 
obviate, were often none of the true and real 
occasions of the distemper. Thus lime-water 
|P_187
has been long since prescribed to correct the 
too great quantity of sea-salt necessarily used 
by sailors. And the college of physicians at 
London gave it as their opinion, that Lowndes's 
salt made from brine was preferable for salting 
sea-provisions, to that made of sea-water, even 
to the bay-salt; from a suspicion of some noxious 
qualities in this salt which might occasion the scur- 
vy. Sp. sal, el. vitriol, and vinegar, were deemed 
proper antidotes to the rank and putrid state of 
sea-provisions, and water; or perhaps to the 
putrescent state of the humours in this disease. 

But whatever good effect for the last purpo- 
ses these may be supposed to have had in a 
smaller degree; yet experience has abundantly 
shewn, that they have not been sufficient to 
prevent this disease, much less to cure it. And 
the same may be said of many others. The 
consequence of which is, the world has now 
almost despaired of finding out a method of 
preventing this dreadful evil at sea; and it is be- 
come the received opinion, that it is altogether 
impossible there, either to prevent or cure it. 
But it is surprising, that this ill-grounded belief, 
so fatal in its consequences, should have gained 
credit, when we see people recovering from 
this disease every day, (even in the most deplo- 
|P_188
rable condition, and in its last stages), in a 
short time, when proper helps are administer- 
ed. I have already given an instance of seventy 
people cured in the bad air of a ship, without 
being landed [/28./]. I shall hereafter produce 
other instances of this disease being cured at 
sea, though these must have occurred to every 
person who has had occasion there to be con- 
versant with scorbutical cases [/29./]. 

It may be proper, in order to fully to re- 
move this prejudice, to observe, that an epide- 
mical scurvy, either at sea or land, is an adven- 
titious, not a natural disease: that is to say, it 
is not owing to any spontaneous degeneracy of 
the human body, from a healthful condition 
into this morbid state; but to the influence of 
very powerful and active, but such plain and 
obvious causes as have been before assigned [/30./]. 
And it is constantly experienced, that when 
these causes do not subsist, or are corrected and 
guarded against, the disease may be effectually 
prevented. This will admit of a demonstra- 
tion from many facts. Officers are seldom or 
|P_189
never affected with the scurvy; even the sub- 
altern and petty officers generally keep free 
from it, while it commits great ravages among 
the common seamen. There have occurred 
frequent instances of English and Dutch ships 
being in company together, where the for- 
mer were in great distress from this disease; 
while the latter, by a very small difference in 
their diet, were quite healthy. But what is 
sufficient to convince the greatest sceptic, that 
this calamity may be effectually prevented, 
is the present healthfulness of Newfoundland, 
the northern parts of Canada, and of our fac- 
tories at Hudson's bay. In those parts of the 
world, the scurvy was formerly more fatal to 
the first adventurers and planters, than it was 
ever known at sea; which facts I shall have 
occasion presently to mention, and account for. 
And as it is a satisfaction to know that this dis- 
ease may effectually be prevented, so it is like- 
wise an encouragement to the utmost diligence 
in discovering, and putting in practice, the means 
proper for that purpose. 

It being of the utmost consequence to guard 
against the first approaches of so dreadful an e- 
nemy, I shall here endeavour to lay down the 
measures proper to be taken for this end, with 
|P_190
that minuteness and accuracy which the im- 
portance of the subject, and the preservation 
of so many valuable and useful lives, justly de- 
mand; and at the same time shall, as much 
as possible, avoid offering any thing that may 
be judged impracticable, or liable to exception, 
on account of the difficulty or disagreeableness 
of complying with it. And, lastly, I shall 
propose nothing dictated merely from theory; 
but shall confirm all by experience and facts, 
the surest and most unerring guides. 

What I propose is, first, to relate the effects 
of several medicines tried at sea in this disease, 
on purpose to discover what might promise the 
most certain protection against it upon that ele- 
ment. 

The medicine which succeeded upon trial, 
I shall afterwards confirm to be the surest pre- 
servative, and most efficacious remedy, by the 
experience of others. 

I shall then endeavour to give it the most 
convenient portable form, and shew the me- 
thod of preserving its virtues entire for years, 
so that it may be carried to the most distant 
parts of the world in small bulk, and at any 
time prepared by the sailors themselves: 
adding some farther directions, given chiefly 
|P_191
with a view to inform the captains and com- 
manders of ships and fleets, of methods proper 
both to preserve their own health, and that of 
their crews. 

It will not be amiss further to observe, in 
what method convalescents ought to be treated, 
or those who are weak, and recovering from o- 
ther diseases, in order to prevent their falling 
into the scurvy; which will include some ne- 
cessary rules for resisting the beginnings of this 
evil, when, through want of care, or neglect, 
the disease is bred in a ship. 

As the salutary effects of the prescribed mea- 
sures will be rendered still more certain, and 
universally beneficial, where proper regard is 
had to such a state of air, diet, and regimen, 
as may contribute to the general intentions of 
preservation or cure; I shall conclude the pre- 
cepts relating to the preservation of seamen, 
with shewing the best means of obviating many 
inconveniencies which attend long voyages, 
and of removing the several causes productive 
of this mischief. 

The following are the experiments. 

On the 20th of May 1747, I took twelve 
patients in the scurvy, on board the Salisbury
at sea. Their cases were as similar as I could 
|P_192
have them. They all in general had putrid 
gums, the spots and lassitude, with weakness 
of their knees. They lay together in one 
place, being a proper apartment for the sick in 
the fore-hold; and had one diet common to 
all, viz. water-gruel sweetened with sugar in 
the morning; fresh mutton-broth often times 
for dinner; at other times puddings, boiled 
biscuit with sugar, &c.; and for supper, barley 
and raisins, rice and currants, sago and wine, 
or the like. Two of these were ordered each 
a quart of cyder a-day. Two others took 
twenty-five gutts of elixir vitriol three times 
a-day, upon an empty stomach; using a 
gargle strongly acidulated with it for their 
mouths. Two others took two spoonfuls of 
vinegar three times a-day, upon an empty sto- 
mach; having their gruels and their other food 
well acidulated with it, as also the gargle 
for their mouth. Two of the worst patients, 
with the tendons in the ham rigid, (a symp- 
tom none of the rest had) were put under a 
course of sea-water. Of this they drank half a 
pint every day, and sometimes more or less as 
it operated, by way of gentle physic. Two o- 
thers had each two oranges and one lemon gi- 
ven them every day. These they eat with gree- 
|P_193
diness, at different times, upon an empty sto- 
mach. They continued but six days under 
this course, having consumed the quantity 
that could be spared. The two remaining 
patients, took the bigness of a nutmeg three 
times a-day, of an electary recommended by 
an hospital-surgeon, made of garlic, mustard- 
seed, rad. raphan. balsam of Peru, and gum 
myrrh; using for common drink, barley-water 
well acidulated with tamarinds; by a decoction 
of which, with the addition of cremor tartar, 
they were gently purged three or four times 
during the course. 

The consequence was, that the most sudden 
and visible good effects were perceived from the 
use of oranges and lemons; one of those 
who had taken them, being at the end of six 
days fit for duty. The spots were not indeed at 
that time quite off his body, nor his gums sound; 
but without any other medicine, than a gar- 
garism of elixir vitriol, he became quite heal- 
thy before we came into Plymouth, which was 
on the 16th of June. The other was the best 
recovered of any in his condition; and being 
now deemed pretty well, was appointed nurse 
to the rest of the sick. 

|P_194
Next to the oranges, I thought the cyder [/31./]
had the best effects. It was indeed not very 
sound, being inclinable to be aigre or pricked. 
However, those who had taken it, were in a 
|P_195
fairer way of recovery than the others at the 
end of the fortnight, which was the length of 
time all these different courses were continued, 
except the oranges. The putrefaction of their 
gums, but especially their lassitude and weak- 
ness, were somewhat abated, and their appe- 
tite increased by it. 

As to the elixir of vitriol, I observed that the 
mouths of those who had used it by way of 
gargarism, were in a much cleaner and better 
condition than many of the rest, especially 
those who used the vinegar; but perceived o- 
therwise no good effects from its internal use 
upon the other symptoms. I indeed never 
had a great opinion of the efficacy of this me- 
dicine in the scurvy, since our longest cruise 
in the Salisbury, from the 10th of August to 
the 28th October 1746; when we had but one 
scurvy in the ship. The patient was a marine, 
(one Walsh); who, after recovering from a quoti- 
dian ague in the latter end of September, had ta- 
|P_196
ken the elixir vitriol by way of restorative for 
three weeks; and yet at length contracted the 
disease, while under a course of a medicine re- 
commended for its prevention. 

There was no remarkable alteration upon 
those who took the electuary and tamarind de- 
coction, the sea-water, or vinegar, upon com- 
paring their condition, at the end of the fort- 
night, with others who had taken nothing but 
a little lenitive electuary and cremor tartar, at 
times, in order to keep their belly open; or a 
gentle pectoral in the evening, for relief of their 
breast. Only one of them, while taking the 
vinegar, fell into a gentle flux at the end of ten 
days. This I attributed to the genius and 
course of the disease, rather than to the use of 
the medicine. As I shall have occasion else- 
where to take notice of the effects of other me- 
dicines in this disease, I shall here only observe, 
that the result of all my experiments was, that 
oranges and lemons were the most effectual re- 
medies for this distemper at sea. I am apt to 
think oranges preferable to lemons, though 
perhaps both given together will be found most 
serviceable. 

It may be now proper to confirm the effica- 
cy of these fruits by the experience of others. 
|P_197
The first proof that I shall produce, is borrowed 
from the learned Dr Mead[/32./]. 

One year when that brave Admiral Sir 
Charles Wager commanded our fleet in the 
Baltic, his sailors were terribly afflicted 
with the scurvy: but he observed, that the 
Dutch ships then in company were much 
more free from this disease. He could im- 
pute this to nothing but their different food, 
which was stock-fish and gort; whereas 
ours was salt fish and oat-meal [/33./]. He 
was then come last from the Mediterranean, 
and had at Leghorn taken in a great quantity 
of lemons and oranges. Recollecting, from 
what he had often heard, how effectual these 
fruits were in the cure of this distemper, he 
ordered a chest of each to be brought up- 
on deck, and opened, every day. The men, 
besides eating what they would, mixed the 
juice in their beer. It was also their con- 
stant diversion to pelt one another with the 
rinds, so that the deck was always strewed 
and wet with the fragrant liquor. The 
|P_
happy effect was, that he brought his sail- 
ors home in good health. 

I have been favoured upon this occasion, by 
different gentlemen, with many instances of 
the like good effects of these fruits in this dis- 
ease at sea; particularly by Mr Francis Russel, 
in a cruise performed by the Princess Caroline
off the islands of Sardinia and Corsica; where, 
according to his relation, some of these fruits 
got at Vado, preserved great part of the crew, 
which otherwise must undoubtedly have pe- 
rished. 

An ingenious surgeon of great merit and ex- 
perience in the Guernsey when extremely di- 
stressed by the scurvy [/34./], has the following 
observation in his letter upon it. I have 
great reason to believe, that several lives 
were absolutely preserved, when we were at 
sea, by a lemon squeezed into six or eight 
ounces of Malaga wine mixed with water 
and given twice a-day. 

I am informed, it was principally oranges
which so speedily and surprisingly recovered 
Lord Anson's people at the island of Tinian. 
Of which that noble, brave, and experien- 
ced commander was so sensible, that, before 
|P_199
he left the island, one man was ordered on 
shore from each mess to lay in a stock of them 
for their future security. 

My ingenious friend Mr. Murray, who has 
favoured me with so many useful observations 
upon this disease; and has had the greatest op- 
portunities of being acquainted with it, as he 
for a considerable time attended the naval ho- 
spital at Jamaica whilst our great fleets were 
in the West Indies, and was likewise surgeon 
of the Canterbury, expresses himself thus in his 
letter. As to oranges and lemons, I have 
always found them, when properly and suf- 
ficiently used, an infallible cure in every 
stage and species of the disease, if there was 
any degree of natural strength but left; 
and where a diarrhæa, lientery, or dysen- 
tery, were not joined to the other scorbutic 
symptoms. Of which we had a most convin- 
cing proof, when we arrived at the Danish
island of St Thomas[/35./]; where fifty patients 
belonging to the Canterbury, and seventy to 
the Norwich, in all the different stages of 
this distemper, were cured, in little more 
than twelve days, by limes alone; where 
|P_200
little or no other refreshments could be ob- 
tained. 

It was reasonable to ascribe this to the emi- 
nent virtues of these fruits; as it is well known, 
and daily experienced, that without such reme- 
dies scorbutic people will infallibly die in the 
purest land-air. But what cures such deplora- 
ble cases, must still more powerfully prevent 
them. Perhaps one history more may suffice 
to put this out of doubt. 

In the first voyage made to the East In- 
dies[/36./], on account of the English East- 
India company, there were employed four 
ships, commanded by Captain James Lanca- 
ster their General, viz. the Dragon having the 
General and 202 men, the Hector 108 
men, the Susan 82, and the Ascension 32. 
They left England about the 18th of April; 
in July the people were taken ill on their 
passage with the scurvy; by the 1st of Au- 
gust, all the ships, except the General's, were 
so thin of men, that they had scarce enough 
to hand the sails; and, upon having a con- 
trary wind for fifteen or sixteen days, the 
few who were well before, began also to fall 
|P_201
sick. Whence the want of hands was so 
great in these ships, that the merchants who 
were sent to dispose of their cargoes in the 
East Indies, were obliged to take their turn 
at the helm, and do the sailors duty, till 
they arrived at Saldania[/37./]; where the Ge- 
neral sent his boats, and went on board him- 
self, to assist the other three ships; who were 
in so weakly a condition, that they were 
hardly able to let fall an anchor, nor could 
they hoist out their boat without his assist- 
ance. All this time the General's ship con- 
tinued pretty healthy. The reason why his 
crew was in better health than the rest of 
the ships, was owing to the juice of lemons; 
of which the General having brought some 
bottles to sea, he gave to each, as long as it 
lasted, three spoonfuls every morning fast- 
ing. By this he cured many of his men, 
and preserved the rest: so that although his 
ship contained double the number of any of 
the others; yet (through the mercy of God, 
and to the preservation of the other three 
ships) he neither had so many men sick, nor 
lost so many as they did. 

|P_202
Here indeed is a remarkable and authentic 
proof of the great efficacy of juice of lemons 
against this disease; as large and crouded ships 
are more afflicted with it, and always in a high- 
er degree, than those that are small and airy. 
This little squadron lost 105 men by the scur- 
vy. Upon its afterwards breaking out among 
them when in the East Indies, in a council 
held at sea it was determined, to put directly 
into some port where they could be supplied 
with oranges and lemons, as the most effec- 
tual and experienced remedies to remove and 
prevent this dreadful calamity. 

I cannot omit upon this occasion observing, 
what caution is at all times necessary in our rea- 
soning on the effects of medicines, even in the 
way of analogy, which would seem the least 
liable to error. For some might naturally con- 
clude, that these fruits are but so many acids, 
for which tamarinds, vinegar, sp.sal. el. vitriol, 
and others of the same tribe, would prove ex- 
cellent succedaneums. But, upon bringing this 
to the test of experience, we find the contrary. 
Few ships have ever been in want of vinegar 
and, for many years before the end of the 
late war, all were supplied sufficiently with el. 
vitriol. Notwithstanding which, the Channel- 
|P_203
fleet often put on shore a thousand men miser- 
ably over-run with this disease, besides some 
hundreds who died in their cruises. Upon 
those occasions tar-water, salt water, vinegar, 
and el. vitriol especially, with many other 
things, have been abundantly tried to no pur- 
pose: whereas there is not an instance of a 
ship's crew being ever afflicted with this disease, 
where the before mentioned fruits were proper- 
ly, duly, and in sufficient quantity, administered. 

I elsewhere observed the uncertainty of such 
theories as are founded upon the chemical prin- 
ciples of acid and alcali [/38./]: for although a- 
cids agree in certain properties; yet they differ 
widely in others, and especially in their effects 
upon the human body. Of theory in physic 
the same may perhaps be said, as has been ob- 
served by some of zeal in religion, That it is in- 
deed absolutely necessary; yet, by carrying it 
too far, it may be doubted whether it has 
done more good or hurt in the world. 

Some will perhaps say, that these fruits 
have been often used in the scurvy without suc- 
cess; as appears from the experience of physi- 
cians, who prescribe them every day in that 
disease at land. And here we may again ob- 
|P_204
serve the fatal consequence of confounding this 
malady with others. Legions of distempers 
(according to Willis and others) very differ- 
ent from the real and genuine scurvy, have 
been classed under its name: and because the 
most approved antiscorbutics fail to remove such 
diseases, hence we are told by authors [/39./], that 
it is the masterpiece of art to cure it. But this 
is contradicted by the daily experience of sea- 
men, by the journals of our sea-hospitals, and 
by the yearly experience of our English East- 
India ships at St Helena, and the Cape of Good 
Hope. So that nothing can be more absurd, 
than to object against the efficacy of these 
fruits in preventing and curing the real scurvy, 
because they do not cure very different dis- 
eases. 


[^1. 
(a) Vid. Nitzsch. 
^]
[^2. 
(b) Vid. Kramer. 
^]
[^3. 
(c)Bachstrom. 
^]
[^4. 
(d)Krameri epistol. p. 23. 
^]
[^5. 
(e)Dodon eus, & Forrestus. 
^]
[^6. 
(f)Ronsseus. 
^]
[^7. 
(g)Herman. Nicolai. Vid. act. Haffn.
^]
[^8. 
(h)Sinop eus. 
^]
[^9. 
(i) Vid. Commerc. literar. Norimb. an. 1734, p. 162. 
^]
[^10. 
(k)Wierus, Ronsseus, &c.
^]
[^11. 
(l) Vid. Concilium facultatis medicæ Haffn. de scorbuto. 
^]
[^12. 
(m)Brucæus. 
^]
[^13. 
(n) Vid. Dr Gainger's account of the scurvy at Fort-Wil- 
liam. 
^]
[^14. 
(o) Part. 1. chap. 3. 
^]
[^15. 
(p)Listeri exercitatio de scorbuto. 
^]
[^16. 
(q) This experiment, of giving scorbutic people salt wa- 
ter, has been often tried; and some have thought they recei- 
ved benefit from it. See chap. 4. 
^]
[^17. 
(r) Vid. Part. 3. chap. 2. Dr Mead, who was thoroughly 
acquainted with their situation, observes, that, upon that occa- 
sion, fresh flesh-provisions, and plenty of wholsome rain-water, 
did not avail them. Discourse on the scurvy, p. 100. 

That salt flesh-meats have sometimes no share in occasioning 
this disease, is demonstrable from the many Germans in Hungary
destroyed by it, who eat neither salt beef nor pork; on the con- 
trary, they had fresh beef at a very low price. Vid. Krameri 
epist. p. 33. 

The soldiers in the Russian armies also had no salt provisions. 
Vid. Nitzsch. 
^]
[^18. 
(s)Observationes circa scorbutum; auctore Fre. Bachstrom.
^]
[^19. 
(t) Upon the return of the fleet to Plymouth, Dr Huxham
makes the following remark in the month of July 1746. Ter- 
ribilis jam sævit scorbutus inter nautas, præcipuè quos secum reduxit 
Martin, classis occidentalis præfectus. Excruciantur perplurimi ulceri- 
bus fœdis, lividis, sordidis, ac valde fungesis: mirum est profectò et
insolitum, quàm brevi tempore spongiosa caro, fungi ad instar, his ulceri- 
bus succrescit, etsi paulò antè scalpello derasa, eaque interdum ad ma- 
gnitudinem enormem. Non solùm miseris his, at verè utilibus homini- 
bus, per se infensa est maximè scorbutica lues, sed et illos etiam omni 
penè morbo, qui ab humorum corruptione pendet, obnoxios admodum
reddit; febribus nempe putridis, malignis, petechialibus, pessimo va- 
riolarum generi, dysenteriæ cruentæ, hæmorrhagiis, &c. Multo 
magis adeò bonis his fuit exitio quàm bellicum fulmen!  Observati- 
ones de aëre et morbis epidemicis. 
^]
[^20. 
(u) Vid. Part. 3. chap. 2. 
^]
[^21. 
(x) Communicated by Mr. Ives. This contagious petechial 
fever was as a plague to the ship Dragon, of 60 guns, and 400 
men, for the space of six months. During which time I seldom 
or never had in my list less than sixty or seventy patients. Ma- 
ny of them relapsed to the third and fourth time. It was a 
dreadful, painful scene ! Not a fifth part of our people escaped. 
My first mate, Mr. Blincow, soon died in it. Another gentleman, 
whom our necessities obliged the Commodore to warrant as mate 
from another ship, died also. My other mate, Mr Thomas Peck, 
(present surgeon to the sick and wounded at Deal), narrowly 
|P_97
escaped with life. To these losses I must add my own dear bro- 
ther, who commanded the soldiers on board, several gentle- 
men of the quarter-deck, and sixty of our stoutest and best sail- 
ors. Yet, amidst all this danger, through the providence of 
God, I escaped untouched, to the surprise of all who knew our 
circumstances, and the fatigue I underwent, when for most part 
destitute of all assistance. But I have not seen one instance of 
this illness having been complicated with the scurvy, or of the 
scurvy seizing a man recovered from that fever for at least six 
months afterwards; which was indeed one of the longest inter- 
vals we ever enjoyed freedom from it. 
^]
[^22. 
(y) When accounts were received from that great and experien- 
ced officer Admiral Boscawen, of the general healthfulness of his 
squadron at the Cape, it was with great reason ascribed to the 
benefit derived from these useful pipes; though their preserva- 
tion from the scurvy in particular seems to have been owing 
chiefly to their having had a good passage, and touching at 
different places, where proper refreshments were procured them 
by their brave and wise commander. Upon their arrival at Fort 
St David's, the surgeon to that hospital acquaints me, that the 
men of wars crews became as highly scorbutic, as any of the o- 
thers, whose ships were not provided with the machine. 

The case of our annual Greenland ships, who are so well fit- 
ted, large, and convenient, and carry no more men than are 
just sufficient to navigate them, puts it beyond all doubt, that 
confined putrid air, bad provisions and water, have often no 
share in producing this disease. For confirmation of which, see 
Mr Maude's account of them, part 2. chap. 5. 
^]
[^23. 
(z) The Reverend Mr Walter. 
^]
[^24. 
(a) Vid. the case of the German troops in Hungary, and of 
the Russian armies, part 3. 
^]
[^25. 
(a) Vid. Observationes circa scorbutum, &c. p. 36. 
^]
[^26. 
(b) In his book, intitled, Consolatio navigantium, &c.
^]
[^27. 
(c)Dr Cockburn.—The Doctor's judgment is fully confirm- 
ed by experience. We find the college of physicians at Vienna sent 
to Hungary great quantities of the most approved antiscorbutic 
herbs dried in this manner; which were found to be of no be- 
nefit. Many of these would have their virtues as little impaired 
by drying as spinage, e.g. marsh trefoil. Kramer tried almost 
every species of dried herbs to no purpose. Vid. part. 3. chap. 2. 
^]
[^28. 
(d) P. 99. 
^]
[^29. 
(e) Many instances have already been given in Mr Ives's 
journal, part 2. chap. 1. 
^]
[^30. 
(f) Part 2. chap 1. 
^]
[^31. 
[}(g) Extract of a letter from Mr lves. }]
I judge it proper to communicate to you, what good effects 
I have observed in the scurvy, from the use of cyder and sea- 
water, during the last cruise I made in the western squadron, 
with my honoured benefactor Admiral Martin. But as I do not 
pretend to have taken notice of any thing, more than merely a 
palliative benefit from them, I think, without mentioning par- 
ticular cases, it will be sufficient for me to inform you, that, 
in our preceeding cruise with the western squadron, his Majesty's 
ship Yarmouth, of 70 guns and 500 men, was not only troubled 
with the scurvy in common with other ships, but, in spite of all 
my endeavours, lost in it a proportioned number of men. Up- 
on our return from that cruise, I took an opportunity to repre- 
sent to the Admiral, that as vegetable juices of all sorts were 
from experience found to be the only true antiscorbutics, and 
I had myself formerly experienced the good effects of apples, it 
was reasonable to presume that cyder must certainly be of ser- 
vice. This suggestion agreed with some accounts the Admiral 
had received from others; and he with great readiness bought, 
and put under my care, several hogsheads of the best South-Ham
cyder. During the next cruise, each scorbutic patient had dai- 
ly a quart or three pints of cyder; and as many of them as I 
could prevail on, took twice a-week three quarters of a pint of 
sea-water in a morning. In all other respects I treated them as 
I used to do people in the scurvy; which you well know, from 
the conversation which has often passed betwixt us on this sub- 
ject, was with squill vomits, pills composed of soap, squills, 
garlic, &c.elixir vitriol, and other medicines suited to the 
different stages and symptoms of the malady. In one word, 
we had this cruise as many scorbutic patients as any other ship, 
|P_195
in proportion to our complement of men. But although all the 
rest buried a great many, some to the number of 20, others 30, 
40, 50, and upwards; yet the Yarmouth did not bury more 
than two or three; and these at the latter end of the cruise, all 
our cyder having been expended for a week or ten days before. 
Upon our arrival at port, we sent to the hospital a great many 
in very dreadful circumstances. 
^]
[^32. 
(h) Discourse on the scurvy, p. 111. 
^]
[^33. 
(i) The first is seldom now put on board ships of war, and 
f the last English sailors eat but little. 
^]
[^34. 
(k) See the case of that ship, chap. 1. p. 98. 
^]
[^35. 
(l) See the former part of this letter, chap. 1. p. 107. 
^]
[^36. 
(m) Vid. Harris's collection of voyages, and Purchas's 
collection, vol. 1. p. 147. 
^]
[^37. 
(n) A bay near the Cape of Good Hope. 
^]
[^38. 
(o) Part. 1. chap. 2. 
^]
[^39. 
(p)Boerhaave, and many others. 
^]