

[^Sample 1: book - ^]

|P_[^A horizontal double-line, spanning the whole page. ^][^A horizontal double-line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}a 
TREATISE 
on 
MADNESS. }][^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}SECT. I. }]
[}The Definition of Madness. }]
MADNESS, though a terrible and at 
present a very frequent calamity, is 
perhaps as little understood as any 
that ever afflicted mankind. The names alone 
usually given to this disorder and its several 
species, viz. Lunacy, Spleen, Melancholy, Hurry 
of the Spirits, &c. may convince any one of the 
|P_2
truth of this assertion, without having recourse 
to the authors who have professedly treated on 
this subject. 

Our defect of knowledge in this matter is, I 
am afraid, in a great measure owing to a defect 
of proper communication: and the difficulties 
attending the care of Lunaticks have been at 
least perpetuated by their being entrusted to Em- 
piricks, or at best to a few select Physicians, 
most of whom thought it adviseable to keep the 
cases as well as the patients to themselves. By 
which means it has unavoidably happened that 
in this instance experience, the parent of me- 
dical science, has profited little, and every Prac- 
titioner at his first engaging in the cure of Lu- 
nacy has had nothing but his own natural sense 
and sagacity to trust to; except what he may 
perchance have heard of Antimonial vomits, 
strong purges, and Hellebore, as specifically anti- 
maniacal: Which traditional knowledge however, 
if indiscriminately reduced to practice, a little 
experience will soon make him wish he had been 
an entire stranger to. 

There is therefore reason to hope, that an at- 
tempt to discover the causes, effects, and cure of 
Madness, will meet with a favourable reception; 
since, whatever may be the event, the intention 
|P_3
is right; and it is some comfort to think that no- 
thing of this nature, even though it should fall 
short of what is aimed at, can in its conse- 
quences be entirely useless. For the judicious 
reader will at least be hereby inclined to turn 
his thoughts to the same subject, and may even 
receive instruction from the miscarriages of such 
an undertaking. 

But the peculiar misfortune just now mention- 
ed, viz. want of proper communication, though 
the chief, is not the only hindrance to our know- 
ledge: for Madness hath moreover shared the 
fate common to many other distempers of not 
being precisely defined. Inasmuch as not only 
several symptoms, which frequently and acciden- 
tally accompany it, have been taken into the ac- 
count as constant, necessary, and essential; but 
also the supposed cause, which perhaps never ex- 
isted or certainly never acted with such effect, 
has been implied in the very names usually given 
to this distemper. No wonder therefore is it, 
whilst several disorders, really independent of 
Madness and of one another, are thus blended 
together in our bewildered imagination, that a 
treatment, rationally indicated by any of those 
disorders, should be injudiciously directed against 
Madness itself, whether attended with such symp- 
toms or not. Much less can we blame the Phy- 
|P_4
sician, who being prejudiced by the supposed 
cause couched in the name of the distemper 
he has to deal with at every new or full Moon 
attenuates, evacuates, or alters the peccant hu- 
mours by medicines peculiarly adapted to the 
black or splendid Bile, &c.

In order therefore to avoid this mischievous 
confusion of sentiment as well as language, and 
that we may fix a clear and determinate mean- 
ing to the Word Madness; we must for some 
time at least quit the schools of Philosophy, and 
content ourselves with a vulgar apprehension of 
things; we must reject not only every supposed 
cause of Madness, but also every symptom which 
does not necessarily belong to it, and retain no 
one phœnomenon but what is essential, that is 
without which the word Madness becomes nuga- 
tory and conveys no idea whatever: or, in other 
words, no definition of Madness can be safe, 
which does not, with regard at least to some 
particular symptoms, determine what it is not, 
as well as what it is. 

First then, though too great and too lively a 
perception of objects that really exist creates an 
uneasiness not felt by the generality of men, and 
therefore discovers a præternatural state in the 
instruments of Sensation, and tho' such uneasi- 
ness frequently accompanies Madness, and is there- 
|P_5
fore sometimes mistaken for it; nevertheless An- 
xiety is no more essentially annexed to Madness, 
so as to make part of our complex idea, than 
Fever, Head-ach, Gout, or Leprosy. Witness the 
many instances of happy Mad-men, who are 
perfectly easy under what is esteemed by every 
one but themselves the greatest misfortune hu- 
man nature is liable to. 

Secondly, though too little and too languid a 
perception of things that really exist and are ob- 
truded with force sufficient to excite sensation in 
the generality of men, discovers as præternatural 
a state or disorder in the instruments of Sensation 
as uncommon Anxiety, and tho' it sometimes at- 
tends Madness, and is likewise mistaken for it, 
especially by the French who call Mad-men and 
Fools by the same name; nevertheless such defect 
of Sensation is no more essentially annexed to 
Madness than the former symptom of Anxiety, 
which that very frequent symptom of Madness 
sufficiently proves. 

But— qui species alias veris capiet, commotus habe- 
bitur  — And this by all mankind as well as the 
Physician: no one ever doubting whether the 
perception of objects not really existing or not 
really corresponding to the senses be a certain 
sign of Madness. Therefore deluded imagination, 
|P_6
which is not only an indisputable but an essential 
character of Madness, (that is without which, all 
accidental symptoms being removed from our 
thoughts, we have no idea whatever remaining 
annexed to that sound) precisely discriminates 
this from all other animal disorders: or that man 
and that man alone is properly mad, who is fully 
and unalterably persuaded of the Existence or of 
the appearance of any thing, which either does 
not exist or does not actually appear to him, and 
who behaves according to such erroneous per- 
suasion. 

Madness, or false perception, being then a 
præternatural state or disorder of Sensation; be- 
fore we attempt to discover its causes effects and 
cure, it will be necessary for us to investigate the 
seat the causes and the effects of natural Sensa- 
tion. For the consideration of the abuse or fault 
of any thing necessarily brings that very thing 
into comparison with what it was when sound 
and perfect; and 'tis impossible for us rationally 
to amend or restore what never was the object of 
our thoughts. 

Be it therefore our first endeavour to contem- 
plate natural Sensation: if haply this most distin- 
guishing property of animal life may supply us 
with actual and positive knowledge of some mat- 
|P_7
ters that relate to the present subject; or at least 
may point out to us what it is that herein sur- 
passes our imperfect understandings. A science 
negative indeed, and by no means so satisfactory 
to the pride and speculative curiosity of man as 
the former, but very often as useful and as con- 
ducive to the attaining practical truth. 
[^An ornamental illustration in the middle of the page. ^]
|P_8
[}SECT. II. }]
[}The Seat of natural Sensation. }]
WHoever is conscious that he hears, sees, 
or feels, and beholds all animals he 
is conversant with acting just in the 
same manner as he does when he hears, sees, or 
feels, must acknowledge that his own and every 
other animal body is as really endued with Sen- 
sation as that it exists. 

Whoever attentively contemplates in what 
manner he and every other animal is affected by 
external impulse, must acknowledge that some 
parts of the same body, however animated, are 
quite insensible, some endued with a less degree 
of Sensation than others. 

Whoever is moreover sufficiently versed in A- 
natomical researches, and has learnt to separate 
those parts of an animal body, which, however 
contiguous or closely connected, are nevertheless 
really distinct from each other, very readily disco- 
vers several soft fibres, each of which is actually 
divisible into many smaller of the same kind, as 
far as his eye can trace; and he by analogy 
justly concludes that each of those smaller fibres 
|P_9
is as capable of being still farther and farther 
divided beyond the reach of vision, and even of 
human imagination. 

These soft fibres are all connected with the 
contents of the cranium, and in different parts 
of the body they are collected into fasciculi; 
every one of which is enveloped by a continua- 
tion of those very membranes which within the 
cranium contain the substance of the brain and 
its medullary appendages. 

Every such fasciculus as well as the several 
fibres it is resolveable into is called a Nerve: a 
name borrowed indeed from the ancients, but 
used by them in a very different signification. 
For by νεΰρον and nervus neither the Greeks nor La- 
tins meant any thing soft and medullary, but on 
the contrary the hard and elastic substance of a 
tendon or ligament; as the word άπονεύρωσις, still 
retained by the moderns to signify the fascia or 
membrane expanded over and connecting the 
muscular fibres, sufficiently shews. 

Every nerve, which is within the reach of 
our observation, is extended between the me- 
dulla oblongata or its appendage the medulla spi- 
nalis and the place of such nerve's destination. 
But every such nerve is thus extended in a man- 
|P_10
ner very different from the disposition of the 
blood-vessels, and indeed of all other portions of 
the same body which are called similar. For 
in its passage it neither is split into ramifications, 
nor is it at all connected with any contiguous 
parts of the body, except with some substances 
equally nervous called ganglions chiefly obser- 
vable in the mesentery. 

If a nerve in a living body be distracted by 
external force, there immediately arises an ex- 
quisite sensation called pain. Which sensation is 
always in a direct proportion to the quantity of 
such distracting force; and which never ceases 
either untill the distracting force is removed or 
is become unactive, or untill the material par- 
ticles which constitute the said nerve are by this 
distraction irrecoverably disunited. 

If to a nerve in a living body be applied any 
acrimonious objects, that is such portions of mat- 
ter whose surfaces are full of angles, and which 
when assisted with proper impulse are therefore 
capable of distracting the particles that constitute 
the nervous substance, there immediately arises 
the same painful sensation: which is always in 
a direct proportion to the quantity and acuteness 
of such acrimonious angles, and to the impulse 
with which they are impacted, and which con- 
|P_11
tinues as long as in the former case of visible 
distraction occasioned by external force. 

Those parts of an animal body, in which the 
greatest quantity of nervous fibres is manifestly 
contained, and in which such nervous fibres lie 
the most exposed and undefended by any other 
matter that constitutes the same body, are the 
soonest and the most affected whenever any ex- 
ternal objects are applied with force sufficient to 
excite sensation. 

Those membranes, which not only within 
the cranium surround the brain, but which also 
serve as sheaths to the several appendages of the 
brain, collecting them into nervous fasciculi all 
over the body as far as the eye can trace, are 
indeed every where contiguous to and seem in- 
timately connected with the medullary substance 
they contain: nevertheless upon the application 
of any external objects they all discover no ex- 
traordinary signs of sensibility, any more than 
several other membranes in the same body, which 
are equally vascular and elastic. Witness the 
many well attested cases of erosions and other 
accidents of the dura mater unattended with 
any degree of pain. 

|P_11
All which constant and uncontroverted ob- 
servations prove, 1. That the nervous or me- 
dullary substance derived from or rather com- 
municating with the brain is the seat or instru- 
ment of natural Sensation: 2. That no other 
matter whatever, whether animated or not, is 
such seat or instrument. 
[^An ornamental illustration in the middle of the page. ^]
|P_13
[}SECT. III. }]
[}The supposed Causes of natural Sensation. }]
THAT the medullary or nervous sub- 
stance continued from or rather con- 
nected with the brain is the seat of Sen- 
sation, is a point now so universally agreed upon, 
that perhaps it might have been sufficient barely 
to have asserted it without any formal proof. 
Happy should we be, if the causes of Sensation 
were as clearly and incontestably settled. 

But I am afraid before any right or satisfactory 
notion can be formed concerning this matter, 
we must get rid of some opinions, which how- 
ever absurd have of late passed upon many for 
real knowledge. 

The reason of this difference, which at pre- 
sent subsists between the discovery of the seat, 
and the discovery of the causes of Sensation, is 
not in the things themselves that have been en- 
quired after, but in the manner of enquiry. 
Because in fixing the seat of Sensation we have 
been content with facts that are apparent to all 
men, and which if any one should controvert, 
he must disclaim the evidence of his own senses: 
|P_14
But in assigning the causes of Sensation several 
things have been assumed as matters of fact, 
which have never been discovered, and which 
may at least with equal probability be denied 
as admitted. 

For here the Hypothetical Genius, forgetful 
that he hath Nature's works for his contempla- 
tion, and despising that poor pittance of know- 
ledge which the real appearance of things sup- 
plies every one with as well as himself, hath 
dared without any warrant to coin new ideas; 
hath made free with air, water, æther, nay even 
electrical fire; and imagining that to be pro- 
bable which is barely possible, and then heighten- 
ing this assumed probability up to matter of fact, 
he takes one large stride more and roundly as- 
serts that the brain is a gland; that its cortical 
portion is a convolution of secretory vessels designed 
to separate from the blood one or other of those ele- 
mentary substances, which he hath by ways un- 
known introduced into the carotid arteries for this 
his present purpose; that the medullary portion of 
the brain and nerves is nothing else but a collection 
of excretory ducts serving to convey this elemen- 
tary matter to all the sensible parts of the body: 
which matter either by undulation or retrograde 
motion imparts to the Sensorium commune all those 
impulses it receives from such external objects as 
|P_15
affect the extremities of the nervous filaments. 
This excrement therefore of the brain tho' in- 
visible is the necessary cause of sight, tho' im- 
palpable the sufficient cause of feeling, and 
tho' an animal Spirit the material cause of ani- 
mal Sensation. 

Now, as the secretion of such a nervous fluid 
and consequently its very existence depends en- 
tirely upon the analogy that is supposed to lie 
between the brain and every glandular substance, 
in case the brain is very unlike a gland in any 
material circumstance, this whole machinery is 
immediately destroyed. 

Admitting therefore, what has never yet been 
proved, that the cortical portion of the brain re- 
sembles the secretory organ of a gland, yet the 
medullary or nervous substance is different from 
all excretory ducts whatever: inasmuch as no ex- 
cretory duct is ever found but what is immedi- 
ately detached from the gland whence it issues; 
whereas on the contrary the supposed glandular 
or secretory substance of the brain is continued 
to every part supplied with nerves, and these 
nerves the supposed excretory ducts, after that 
they have left the cranium and their glandular 
origin the brain, wherever they are capable of 
being examined, remain as closely connected 
|P_16
not only with the cortical or secretory portion of 
the brain, but even with the productions of the 
dura and pia mater, as the medullary substance 
itself whilst contained within the cranium. 

This observation alone would be sufficient to 
destroy the very foundation of a nervous fluid, 
if any Hypothesis whatever could deserve a seri- 
ous consideration. But it may be feared that a 
solemn confutation of chimæras will appear equal- 
ly ridiculous as an attempt to establish them; 
and he may perhaps incur the suspicion of insa- 
nity which these theorists have deserved, who 
shall fight in earnest with shadows, and mispend 
his time in offering reasons, why the solid con- 
stituent parts of the medullary substance con- 
tained in every nerve bid fairer for supplying us 
with the material cause of Sensation, than a fluid 
never yet discovered, and which its very authors 
confess was once foreign to the body, and even 
extracted from dead and putrescent matter spi- 
rited up, we know not how, into animality. 

Let us therefore quit this enchanted ground to 
those, if such there be, who are still inclined to 
dispute upon it; and in order to clear our way 
a little more to the real causes of Sensation, let 
us divert our attention to a very common phrase, 
viz. weakness of nerves, which tho' not pro- 
|P_17
fessedly systematical, like the former scheme of 
animal spirits, is nevertheless extremely delusive; 
inasmuch as it seems indirectly to offer another 
solution of the phœnomenon in question, and to 
ascertain the cause of Sensation. 

For since the word weakness, when joined with 
material substances, can convey no idea but a 
lax cohæsion of such particles as constitute those 
substances; therefore the phrase weakness of 
nerves, which denotes a morbid excess of Sensa- 
tion, seems to imply that Sensation itself is ow- 
ing to the loose cohæsion of those material par- 
ticles which constitute the nervous substance, in- 
asmuch as the quantity of every effect must be 
proportionable to its cause. 

By this inaccurate manner of talking, the 
most distinguishing property of animal nature is 
in danger of being blended with inanimate mat- 
ter. For, if the case really were what these 
words seem to import, all bodies whose particles 
do not cohære with too great a degree of proxi- 
mity would be nervous, that is endued with Sen- 
sation. But, since no portion of matter, however 
loosely compacted, is nervous except it is part of 
an animal body, therefore the medullary sub- 
stance of a nerve is endued with Sensation not 
because its constituent particles are loosely united: 
|P_18
and every nervous filament, tho' it consists of 
parts extended and not too closely cohæring, is 
confessedly as distinct from every other material 
substance consisting of parts extended and equally 
cohæring, as a man from a carcas, or an horse 
from an equestrian statue. 
[^An ornamental illustration in the middle of the page. ^]
|P_19
[}SECT. IV. }]
[}The real Causes of natural Sensation. }]
SENSATION, however perplexed it may 
seem to those who too curiously enquire 
into its nature, is to the modest observer 
as clear in idea and as fully to be accounted for, 
at least to all useful intents and purposes, as any 
phœnomenon whatever. 

For is not what we feel a plain matter of fact, 
of which we are not only certain and conscious 
ourselves, but which we are likewise capable of 
communicating to others by words or signs? 
And are we not perfectly well acquainted with 
many things, which when impelled with force 
sufficient will make us feel; and which it is 
frequently in our power to apply, remove, or 
avoid, as best suits our interest? 

It is the heedless or rather the wilful neglect 
of precisely separating these many evident and 
external causes of Sensation as well from their 
unknown and internal operations as from their in- 
termediate and equally unknown effects, that has 
created such difficulties in contemplating this 
phœnomenon. 

|P_20
For the mutual cohæsion of material particles, 
as essential to our idea of an animal body as 
sense itself, but not better accounted for, hath 
however been looked upon as a thing much less 
mysterious. 

Which seeming diversity can be owing to no- 
thing else, but because the generality of man- 
kind have contented themselves with the useful 
and the attainable knowledge of such external 
objects, as will harden or soften those bodies 
they are applied to, without enquiring too nice- 
ly why the constituent particles of those bodies 
are more or less united upon such application; 
or indeed why they are united at all: whereas 
the philosopher in his contemplation of sensible 
matter is not content with knowing certainly 
like other men what objects externally applied to 
a nerve will create, increase, or deaden sensation, 
but moreover conjectures why; and attempts by 
any means whatever to assign the manner in 
which these external objects act upon, and the 
changes they produce in the nervous substance 
previous to sensation their last effect; which ef- 
fect, for reasons best known to himself, seems 
to demand a more explicit solution than the co- 
hæsion of material particles. 

|P_21
In endeavouring therefore to assign the causes 
of Sensation, be it one of our chiefest cares to 
distinguish them from one another as effectually 
in our mind, as they are really different in their 
nature, and to separate what we actually and 
usefully know from what we are, and perhaps 
shall always be without any great damage, en- 
tirely ignorant of. 

For which purpose, it may not be amiss to 
premise a few considerations on causes in gene- 
ral; which will illustrate the subject of our pre- 
sent enquiry and at the same time be confirmed 
thereby. 

First then, by observing that any one phœno- 
menon frequently follows another, we conclude 
that the second is owing to the first; and hence 
we get the ideas of cause and effect. 

Secondly, by observing that any one phœno- 
menon never fails to follow another, we con- 
clude that the first is not only a cause but also a 
sufficient cause of the second. 

Thirdly, by observing that the second phœ- 
nomenon never occurs but in consequence of the 
first, we further conclude that the first is not 
|P_22
only a cause but a necessary cause of the second, 
which is therefore called the causa sine qua non. 

Fourthly, by observing that the second phœ- 
nomenon follows the first without either the evi- 
dent or the demonstrated intervention of any 
other phœnomenon as necessary or at least ac- 
cessary to its existence, we conclude that the 
first phœnomenon is moreover the immediate 
cause of the second. 

Fifthly, by observing either that the first phœ- 
nomenon is not always succeeded by the second, 
or that the second is not always preceded by the 
first, we conclude that the first phœnomenon is 
either not a sufficient or not a necessary, but 
merely an accidental cause of the second. 

Sixthly, by observing or by admitting as un- 
deniable that any one or more phœnomena in- 
tervene between the first and the last in question, 
we plainly discover that the first is remote, and 
that the several other intervening phœnomena in 
their order approach nearer and nearer to the 
immediate cause. 

Seventhly, a very little reflection upon causes 
and effects as thus stated will make us conclude 
that the remote and accidental causes of any 
|P_23
effect may be many, but that the sufficient and 
necessary as well as the immediate cause can 
be but one. Since either of two causes supposed 
sufficient will render the other unnecessary; and 
either cause supposed necessary will render the 
other insufficient. Which unavoidable conclu- 
sion, by the way, might be extended beyond 
secondary agents or instruments, improperly cal- 
led causes, and would give an additional proof, 
if any was wanting, to the unity of the first, the 
necessary, the sufficient, and indeed strictly 
speaking the sole cause of all things. 

Thus, to instance in our present subject; sight, 
hearing, taste, smell, &c. which frequently suc- 
ceed the application of external objects, are look- 
ed upon by us as the effects of such external ob- 
jects; and we in common discourse refer our ideas 
back to those objects as to their causes, as when 
we say we see the sun , we hear the drum, &c.

But, forasmuch as the external objects of sense, 
however forcible their application may be, do not 
always and in all animal bodies create sight, &c.
And moreover, as the very same perceptions do 
sometimes, at least in disordered subjects, arise 
without any external object that really affects 
them; it is impossible but every such external 
object must be meerly accidental, and by no 
|P_24
means the sufficient or the necessary cause of 
such its nervous effect: Which sufficient and ne- 
cessary cause is therefore internal, that is it in- 
hæres in the very frame and constitution of the 
nervous substance itself; whereby alone such 
substance is rendered capable of being affected 
by any external object so as to create Sensation; 
and without which internal cause no thing what- 
ever would actually become an object of our 
senses. 

For the same reason all such external causes 
are not only accidental but likewise remote. 
Since the necessary and sufficient cause at least 
must intervene; and besides, before an external 
object can create any sensation whatever, it 
must produce several intermediate effects, viz.
motion, impulse, and pressure: all which pre- 
cede not only sight, &c. thereby excited, but 
also precede that particular internal affection of 
the nerve itself, whatever it is, which is the im- 
mediate, the necessary, and the sufficient cause 
of such perception. 

The accidental and remote causes of Sensa- 
tion, as also their intermediate effects, provided 
such effects are external to the nervous sub- 
stance, very readily discover themselves, and are 
clearly comprehended. For indeed they are all 
|P_25
bodies that lye within our observation (many 
of which are within our reach) and the motion 
and impulse of those bodies, or of particles emit- 
ted therefrom, upon the organs of sense: which 
every one not only has a clear idea of, but is 
moreover certain of their existence, motion, and 
impulse. 

Now, as no body whatever can be capable of 
creating Sensation in consequence of its motion 
and impulse, without pressing upon the nerve af- 
fected by such impulse; therefore pressure of the 
medullary substance contained in the nervous 
filaments approaches nearer in order to the im- 
mediate cause of Sensation, than the motion and 
impulse of any external object. 

Pressure of the medullary substance contained 
in the nervous filaments cannot indeed be ima- 
gined without some alteration in the former ar- 
rangement of those material particles which con- 
stitute that substance. But we have no idea 
whatever, either visible or intellectual, how and 
in what manner those particles are by such 
pressure differently juxtaposited, previously to 
Sensation thereby excited. 

Whence it undeniably follows that pressure 
upon the medullary substance contained in the 
|P_26
nervous filaments is the last in order of all those 
causes of Sensation, which we have any idea of. 
Thus far and no farther our knowledge in these 
matters reaches, limited by the outside of the 
seat of Sensation; what passes within being meer 
conjecture. For if a new position of medullary 
particles, which is an immediate and unavoidable 
effect of external pressure, does not discover it- 
self any more than their constitutional arrange- 
ment; what account can we with any the 
least degree of modesty pretend to give of all the 
alterations in the nervous substance still subse- 
quent to such pressure and to change of place 
thereby occasioned; a regular series of which 
may, for any thing we know to the contrary, 
precede the immediate cause of sensation. 
[^A small ornament in the middle of the page. ^]
|P_27
[}SECT. V. }]
[}The salutary Effects of natural Sensation. }]
SENSATION is always accompanied with 
some degree of pleasure or uneasiness; no 
animal being indifferent to what he sees, 
hears, or feels. These additional and in some 
degree inseparable affections demonstrate the di- 
rect tendency of Sensation to the preservation of 
life; inasmuch as every one spontaneously flies 
from those objects which hurt and are at enmity 
with him, and covets such as create satisfaction 
and are suitable to his interest. 

But, tho' no one at first sight would doubt 
whether the perception of pleasure is agreeable 
to his nature, and conducive to its preservation; 
it may with great reason be doubted by those 
who reflect a little whether such perception, 
however convenient it may seem to animal life, 
is alone instrumental in its preservation, and 
without the intervention of the contrary affection 
ever conduces to health. 

For uneasiness is so interwoven in the very 
frame of mortals, that even the greatest present 
|P_28
satisfaction implies the removing or stifling the 
greatest uneasiness which before disquieted. And 
a sense of future pleasure, as it excites desire, in 
that very desire implies a present uneasiness ade- 
quate to the supposed enjoyment of the pleasure 
in expectation. By which present uneasiness, 
according to Mr. Locke's just observation, the 
will is determined. 

However paradoxical therefore it may seem, 
nothing is more true than that Anxiety, a real 
evil, is nevertheless productive of real good; and, 
tho' seemingly disagreeable to Nature, is absolute- 
ly necessary to our preservation, in such a man- 
ner, that without its severe but useful admoni- 
tions the several species of animals would speedily 
be destroyed. 

For first, are not hunger and thirst very salu- 
tary Anxieties? By which the nerves of the 
mouth œsophagus and stomach excite all ani- 
mals from the first moment of their birth to seize 
on such objects, as are capable of relieving those 
natural and healthy but agonizing sensations. 

Now the real good produced by the gratifica- 
tion of these appetites is by no means to be pla- 
ced in their present gratification alone. What- 
ever he may imagine, who being ignorant of the 
|P_29
animal œconomy looks no farther than the actual 
pleasure which accompanies the stifling such sen- 
sations. For the end herein proposed by the 
Author of Nature is undoubtedly the refection 
of that very body which hungers and thirsts; 
whose constituent particles by the inevitable ef- 
fects of vital action are in a continual flux and 
decay; whereas the efficient or coercive causes 
of eating and drinking are those sensations alone, 
which torment every animal to a very good pur- 
pose. Who perhaps would not otherwise give 
himself the trouble of opening his mouth, much 
less by hard labour earn food wherewith to fill 
it; even tho' he should be assured that the loss 
of meat and drink to-day, tho' not at all incon- 
venient to him at present, will be sensibly felt 
to-morrow by his distempered body, and that 
his idleness and fasting will be soon attended 
by fatal consequences. 

Secondly, the introducing fresh air into the 
lungs being as necessary for the immediate con- 
tinuance of life, as it is for other purposes of 
the animal œconomy which are more remote, 
and at present unknown; therefore every ani- 
mal provided with organs of respiration, whether 
awake or sleeping, draws into his breast and ex- 
pels a quantity of external air sufficient to dis- 
tend them from the first moment of his birth 
|P_30
till the last period of life. Which alternate 
action, if he either carelessly or obstinately omits 
it, he is very soon compelled to perform by that 
inexpressible Anxiety which attends a long de- 
tention of air once admitted as well as the re- 
fusing admission to any air at all. 

Thirdly, forasmuch as voluntary exercise of 
the body is no less requisite to the due circula- 
tion and secretions of the animal fluids, and the 
salutary consequences thereon depending, than 
the propulsive action of the heart and the resi- 
lition of the arterial tubes; which the ill effects 
of a sedentary life sufficiently prove; therefore 
the uneasy sensation that is always occasioned by 
satiety and the wearisome condition of idleness 
determine all animals, to whom activity is thus 
necessary, frequently to alter their place of resi- 
dence, and to remove from those objects they 
have long been conversant with, however plea- 
sing and eagerly sought for they might once have 
been. 

Fourthly, all the afore-mentioned instances 
of uneasy sensation, however nearly allied to 
and often ending in sickness, are nevertheless 
the natural effects of perfect health. But be- 
sides these there occur several other anxieties, 
which are the unavoidable effects of real sickness 
|P_31
and moreover frequently determine the will of 
the patient to such things as are capable either 
of relieving the present disorder or of prevent- 
ing its mischievous consequences. Thus, to in- 
stance in one particular, feaverish heat threatens 
putrid obstructions, and at the same time occa- 
sions intense thirst and an almost insatiable crav- 
ing for acidulated water. Which desire, if not 
contradicted by the officious and ill-tim'd care of 
the by-standers, procures a remedy that is both 
diluting and antiseptic. 

Lastly, tho' the nervous energy be neither 
absolutely necessary nor alone sufficient to excite 
muscular action, yet such is the connection be- 
tween the nervous and muscular fibres, however 
really distinct from each other, that animal sen- 
sation often instantaneously precedes animal ac- 
tion, so as to have confounded these two qua- 
lities, or at least to have made the one appear 
the immediate and only cause of the other. 
And, what chiefly deserves our notice whilst we 
are considering the salutary effects of Sensation, 
Convulsion itself, a distempered excess of animal 
motion, which is a frequent effect of uneasy 
Sensation, sometimes becomes its sudden and ef- 
ficacious remedy, by removing the material 
cause of such uneasy Sensation, and that without 
|P_32
any determination or interpolation of the will 
whatever. 

All which nervous appetites as well as muscu- 
lar motions, that either preserve or restore health, 
and are seemingly excited by somewhat rational- 
ly forecasting their salutary ends, have given rise, 
I suppose, to some modern metaphorical expres- 
sions, viz.Nature, and the Anima invented by 
Willis and deifyed by Stahl. Which figurative 
words, tho' not quite philosophical, are innocent 
and even useful, in case they are applied only to 
avoid periphrases in relating medical matters of 
fact. But young Practitioners, who are often 
told that they are to imitate and assist Nature, 
must take great care not to be misguided by the 
literal sense of words, or fancy any thing like 
personal consciousness and intellectual agency in 
the animal œconomy. For in such case of mis- 
apprehension these and the like expressions be- 
come as absurd as all the exploded Faculties of 
the Ancients, and, what is much worse, may be 
as mischievous as an instrument of death in the 
hands of a Madman. 

|P_33
[}SECT. VI. }]
[}The Causes and Effects of Anxiety and Insensi- 
bility, two species of Sensation disordered tho' 
not delusive. }]
H AVING contemplated the seat causes 
and effects of natural and true Sensa- 
tion; before we proceed to consider 
delusive Sensation, the only subject of this en- 
quiry, it may be not improper to take some no- 
tice of those two other disorders of the same 
quality, which were excluded from our definition 
of Madness, viz. præternatural Anxiety or Sen- 
sation too greatly excited by real objects, and its 
contrary Insensibility or Sensation not sufficiently 
excited by real objects, tho' acting with their usual 
force and tho' capable of engaging the attention 
of all other healthy animals of the same species. 

For, although Madness in its proper sense be 
clearly distinct from the too lively or the too lan- 
guid perception of things really existing, it how- 
ever very often is preceded by or accompanied 
with the first and as often terminates in the se- 
cond of these two disorders. Besides the being 
too much affected by external impulse, tho' it 
|P_34
does by no means imply Sensation materially de- 
lusive, inasmuch as the ideas excited by such im- 
pulse are referred to true and corresponding ob- 
jects; yet the quantity of concomitant affection 
not being proportionate and therefore not in all 
respects corresponding to the natural quantity of 
its real cause hath apparently some deviation from 
absolute truth, and from the natural and usual 
circumstances of this animal function. And Sen- 
sation not proportionate to real impulse, tho' it 
is not strictly speaking delusive, hath however as 
great a deviation from absolute truth as excessive 
Sensation itself. 

Now Sensation, which in its most natural and 
perfect state is sooner or later attended with some 
degree of uneasiness, may with very little addi- 
tion be heightened into Anxiety either by the too 
great or too long continued force of external ob- 
jects, or by the illconditioned state of the nerve 
itself, whereby it is rendered liable to be too 
much affected with the usual action of such ex- 
ternal objects. 

This illconditioned state of the nerve may be 
inhærent in the internal proper and unknown 
constitution of the medullary substance, or it 
may be external to that substance, and arise from 
the loss or defect of those membranes which en- 
|P_35
velope and sheathe the seat of Sensation, and are 
designed to protect it from such rude attacks and 
impressions as might otherwise endanger the dis- 
solution of so soft a matter. 

For, whenever those integuments are quite re- 
moved from a nerve which is endued with no 
more than a common share of sensibility, An- 
xiety must ensue the application of any external 
objects that are capable of exciting natural Sen- 
sation. And in fact we find that the laying 
bare any sensible part and exposing it to the 
common air, which usually refreshes the body 
whilst cloathed with skin, immediately distracts 
us with intolerable torment. 

For the same reason Anxiety, which follows 
an entire removal of the nervous sheaths, will in 
some degree arise whenever those sheaths are not 
strong and sufficiently compacted so as to answer 
the purpose of defence. That is the sensation 
of the nervous or medullary fibres, tho' they con- 
tinue the same, will be in a reverse proportion 
to the cohæsion of those minute particles which 
constitute the solid and elastic fibres. And in 
fact we find that Anxiety is almost always the 
consequence of morbid laxity, except where the 
intervention of fat, lymph, or viscid congestions 
|P_36
owing to such laxity substitute an occasional de- 
fence. 

No wonder is it then that the straining or 
loosening the solid parts of human bodies should 
frequently render those bodies liable to be vio- 
lently affected by such objects as are scarce felt 
or attended to by other men, who enjoy a na- 
tural or artificial strength and compactness of 
fibres. 

And from hence we are enabled to annex a 
true and intelligible meaning to that expression 
before taken notice of, viz.weakness of nerves. 
Which word weakness would not have been so 
improper, if it had been joined in idea not to 
that substance which is strictly nervous, but to 
its integuments and contiguous membranes; and 
if laxity, an accidental and remote cause of ex- 
cessive and therefore uneasy Sensation, had not 
been thereby made liable to be mistaken for its 
immediate necessary and sufficient cause. 

Whatever may be the cause of Anxiety, it 
chiefly discovers itself by that agonising impati- 
ence observable in some men of black November
days, of easterly winds, of heat, cold, damps, 
&c. Which real misery of theirs is sometimes de- 
rided by duller mortals as a whimsical affectation. 
|P_37
And of the same nature are the perpetual tem- 
pests of love, hatred, and other turbulent pas- 
sions provoked by nothing or at most by very 
trifles. In which state of habitual diseases ma- 
ny drag on their wretched lives; whilst others, 
unequal to evils of which they see no remedy but 
death, rashly resolve to end them at any rate. 
Which very frequent cases of suicide, though ge- 
nerally ascribed to Lunacy by the verdict of a 
good-natured Jury, except where the deceased 
hath not left assets, are no more entitled to the 
benefit of passing for pardonable acts of madness, 
than he who deliberately has killed the man he 
hated deserves to be acquitted as not knowing 
what he did. 

Among the morbid effects of Anxiety or the 
præternatural excess of Sensation one, which fre- 
quently attends upon it and more particularly 
demands our attention, is Spasm or the præter- 
natural excess of muscular action. Which state 
of morbid motion, tho' sometimes salutary as has 
been before observed, is oftner occasioned by this 
nervous disorder to no good purpose whatever; 
and, when very violent or of long continuance, 
is necessarily productive of numberless evils and 
of acute and chronical distempers, which if not 
relieved in time almost always end in death. 

|P_38
Another effect of Anxiety or of the præterna- 
tural excess of Sensation is the nervous disorder 
directly contrary to it, viz. Insensibility, that 
is a præternatural defect or total loss of Sensa- 
tion. 

Whether this entire change from one extream 
to the other is owing to the material instruments 
of Sensation having been strained by Anxiety or 
rather by some of its causes, cannot perhaps be 
determined with any degree of certainty. But 
thus much is clear in reason that any distraction, 
which is sufficient to disunite or break in pieces 
the medullary substance, must be sufficient to 
make it unfit for its function; and it is as un- 
deniable in fact that Anxiety is frequently either 
attended with such spasmodic disorders or occa- 
sioned by such external injuries as must necessari- 
ly distract the nerves thereby affected. 

Not that Insensibility is owing to no other 
cause except Anxiety. For it is at least as often 
occasioned by the internal and unknown con- 
stitution of the nervous or medullary substance 
itself, which was either formed imperfect at first 
or hath since degenerated. 

|P_39
And, besides the internal and unknown de- 
fect in the seat of Sensation, Insensibility may as 
often be ascribed to another cause external to 
the nerve and sufficiently understood. For, 
since the nervous integuments or neighbouring 
membranes do sheathe the medullary substance, 
and thereby prevent the morbid excess of its 
energy; whenever the fibres that compose those 
integuments or membranes are præternaturally 
compacted and of too close a texture, instead 
of moderating they undoubtedly must deaden or 
destroy Sensation. And for the same reason 
those nerves that are pillowed with fat, soaked 
in lymph, or stifled by obstructed vessels, cannot 
and in fact do not receive a proper that is a sen- 
sible impulse from external objects, altho' such 
objects are rightly and forcibly applied, and al- 
though the nervous substance itself is perfectly 
sound, and in its internal constitution fitted for 
the efficacious reception of such external im- 
pulse. 

But, whatever may be the cause of Insensi- 
bility, its ill effects are many and as obvious as 
they are unavoidable, and need not be here 
enumerated. For they are all those disorders in 
the animal œconomy, which Sensation in its 
natural vigour was designed to prevent. The 
|P_40
defect therefore or loss of this salutary and vital 
quality must either hurry on or suffer the sickly 
body to approach nearer and nearer to the last 
period of animal life. 
[^An ornamental illustration in the middle of the page. ^]
|P_41
[}SECT. VII. }]
[}The Causes of Madness. }]
WHoever is satisfied with our account of 
the seat and causes of natural and true 
Sensation, will acknowledge that the 
one immediate necessary and sufficient cause of 
the præternatural and false perception of objects, 
which either do not exist, or which do not in 
this instance excite such sensation, must be some 
disorder of that substance which is medullary and 
strictly nervous. And moreover, as he cannot 
discover the natural and internal constitution of 
this medullary substance, which renders it fit for 
the proper perception of real and external im- 
pulse or rather of the ideas thereby excited; he 
must for the same reason own that he is unable 
to discover wherein consists that præternatural 
and internal state of the same nervous matter, 
which disposes it to be without any such impulse 
affected by those very ideas, that would have 
been presented to the imagination, if the same 
nervous matter had been acted upon by some- 
thing external. Or, to speak more technically, 
forasmuch as the one immediate necessary and 
sufficient cause of the perception of real objects 
|P_42
is unknown, we must likewise remain entirely 
ignorant of the one immediate necessary and suf- 
ficient cause of the perception of Chimæras, 
which exist no where except in the brain of a 
Madman. 

But, altho' the immediate and internal cause of 
delusive as well as of true Sensation is absolutely 
hid, many remoter and external causes thereof 
frequently discover themselves to the by-stander, 
notwithstanding that the idea thus excited is not 
by the patient himself referred to any one of those 
true causes, but to something else, which may 
or may not exist, and which certainly does not 
in this particular case act upon the affected or- 
gan. 

Thus, to instance in a very common accident, 
the eye that is violently struck immediately sees 
flames flash before it; which idea of fire 
presented to the imagination plainly shews that 
those material particles which constitute the 
medullary substance of the optic nerve are af- 
fected by such blow exactly in the same manner, 
as they are when real fire acts upon the eye of 
a man awake and in his senses with force suffi- 
cient to provoke his attention. Thus variety of 
sounds disturb the ear that is shocked by the 
pulsation of vessels, by the inflammation or other 
|P_43
obstruction of those membranes which line the 
meatus auditorius, by the intrusion of water, and 
in short by any material force external to the 
medullary portion of the seventh pair of nerves; 
which force hath no connection with any sono- 
rous body, that by its elastic vibration commu- 
nicates an undulatory motion to the intermediate 
air. 

Now suppose that any one perfectly awake 
without the accident of such a blow sees fire, or 
without the pulsation of vessels, inflammation, or 
any obstruction in the meatus auditorius, &c.
hears sounds; or suppose that the idea of flame 
really excited by a blow is by him referred to an 
house on fire, or the idea of sound excited by 
the pulsation of vessels, &c. is referred to a mu- 
sical instrument, which is not near enough to be 
heard, or is not really played upon; the man 
who is so mistaken, and who cannot be set right 
either upon his own recollection or the informa- 
tion of those about him, is in the apprehension 
of all sober persons a Lunatic. 

From whence we may collect that Madness 
with respect to its cause is distinguishable into two 
species. The first is solely owing to an internal 
disorder of the nervous substance: the second is 
likewise owing to the same nervous substance be- 
|P_44
ing indeed in like manner disordered, but disor- 
dered ab extra; and therefore is chiefly to be at- 
tributed to some remote and accidental cause. 
The first species, until a better name can be 
found, may be called Original, the second may 
be called Consequential Madness. 

The internal disorder of the medullary sub- 
stance, or the cause of Original Madness, for the 
same reason as the immediate necessary and suf- 
ficient cause of true Sensation, can be but one: 
but the external and accidental causes of Conse- 
quential Madness, as well as of true Sensation, may 
be many. 

Now no external cause whatever can be sup- 
posed capable of exciting delusive any more than 
true perception, except such cause acts materially 
upon the nerve thereby disordered, and that 
with force sufficient to alter the former arrange- 
ment of its medullary particles. Which force 
necessarily implies impulse and pressure in delu- 
sive Sensation, in the same manner and order as 
it does in the perception of objects really corres- 
ponding thereto. 

Pressure therefore amongst all the external and 
discoverable causes of false as well as of true per- 
ception is in our apprehension the nearest to such 
its apparent effect. As to the intermediate al- 
|P_45
terations of the medullary substance, that may 
really precede delusive Sensation, they are all as 
much unknown as are the nervous effects which 
intervene between the pressure made by any ex- 
ternal object and the true and adequate idea of 
that very object. 

But, altho' Consequential Madness cannot be 
supposed without some sort and degree of pres- 
sure upon the nerves, nevertheless every sort and 
degree of pressure does not always and unavoid- 
ably produce Consequential Madness. For the 
nerves may suffer external impulse, and yet the 
pressure thereby occasioned either may not have 
force sufficient to excite any idea at all; or it 
may act with too great a force and in so shock- 
ing a manner as to dissolve or greatly disunite 
the medullary matter; in which case Sensation, 
which can never exist but whilst that matter does 
properly cohere, instead of being perverted will 
be abolished, or at least suspended untill the con- 
stituent particles are reunited. 

What this particular sort and degree of pres- 
sure is, which is capable of creating delusive Sen- 
sation, we are not able to ascertain; because the 
different circumstances of the unknown subject 
acted upon will make the nervous effects variable 
and oftentimes contrary, notwithstanding the ac- 
|P_46
tion of the known cause considered per se is in 
all respects the same. 

But, altho' we cannot exactly describe the 
particular strength of that external impulse which 
excites, any more than we can discover why it 
excites delusive ideas; thus much we may rea- 
sonably conclude in general that all material ob- 
jects, which by their action or resistance occa- 
sion a sufficient but not too great a pressure upon 
the medullary substance contained in the nerves, 
may be the remoter causes of Consequential Mad- 
ness. 

Which conclusion is not only agreeable to 
reason, but is moreover confirmed by matter of 
fact and almost every day's experience. Witness 
the internal exostoses of the cranium, the indu- 
rations of the sinus's and processes of the Dura 
Mater, which have frequently been found in 
those who died mad; witness the intropression 
of the skull or concussion of the head, which if 
not apoplectic is almost always attended with a 
delirium. And indeed every one, who contem- 
plates several cases of Consequential Madness and 
those accidents which precede the same, will 
find that pressure of the medullary substance 
somewhere or other collected intervenes between 
such accidents and these their delirious effects. 

|P_47
One case of Consequential Madness that proves 
the intervention of such pressure is an effect of 
Insolation or what the French call coup du Soleil. 
An instance of which I lately met with in a Sai- 
lor, who became raving mad in a moment while 
the Sun beams darted perpendicularly upon his 
head. Which maniacal effect of heat could be 
attributed to no assignable cause, except either to 
the violent impression of the Sun's rays upon the 
medullary substance of the brain, which the cra- 
nium in this case was not able to defend, or to 
the intermediate rarefaction of blood contained in 
the vessels of the Dura or Pia Mater, which vessels 
being suddenly distended compressed the same 
medullary substance. Of the same nature and 
owing to the same rarefaction of fluids in the 
brain are those delirious fevers called Calentures; 
one of which was, I suppose, mistaken for the 
plague by the [/1./] Author of the Physicians last Le- 
gacy, and treated with bleeding usque ad animi 
deliquium, which indeed is its only cure. 

Another case of Consequential Madness is a 
sudden inflammation arising in those membranes 
which surround and therefore when thus distend- 
ed compress the contents of the cranium and its 
nervous appendages. This state of inflammation 
|P_48
whilst the patient lives discovers itself by the sud- 
den redness of the eyes external coat, which is 
a part or rather a production of the Dura Mater: 
and that membrane after death is frequently upon 
dissection found turgid and discoloured with a 
red bloody suffusion, just in the same manner 
as if it had been artificially injected. 

Another case of Consequential Madness is a 
gradual congestion of serum or other fluid mat- 
ter upon the same membranes which envelop the 
medullary substance; whereby those membranes, 
tho' not with equal danger as when they are sud- 
denly inflamed, yet with the same delirious ef- 
fects compress their nervous contents. This se- 
rous congestion is discoverable by the opaque and 
cloudy appearance of the cornea, for the same 
reason as an inflammatory tumor in the Dura 
Mater is betrayed by the external coat of the eye 
being tinged with blood. 

Pressure of the medullary substance, the near- 
est in our apprehension to Madness of all its 
known and remoter causes, most frequently and 
most effectually produces this its nervous effect, 
whilst it acts upon the contents of the cranium, 
as is evident from the cases above-mentioned. 
But, altho' the brain is undoubtedly the princi- 
pal seat of delusive sensation, nevertheless it is 
|P_49
not the only one: forasmuch as the same sangui- 
nary or serous obstructions are capable in any other 
nervous part of the body of exciting false ideas as 
well as in the brain, at least to some degree and 
in proportion to the quantity of medullary matter 
there collected so as to be sufficiently compressed 
by such obstructions. Thus the stomach, intes- 
tines, and uterus, are frequently the real seats of 
Madness, occasioned by the contents of these vis- 
cera being stopt in such a manner as to compress 
the many nervous filaments, which here commu- 
nicate with one another by the mesenteric gan- 
glia, and which enrich the contents of the ab- 
domen with a more exquisite sensation. Thus 
the glutton who goes to-bed upon a full stomach 
is hagridden in his sleep. Thus 
Men prove with child as powerful fancy works: 
And patients truly hypochondriacal or hysterical 
refer that load of uneasiness they feel in their 
bellies to some imaginary object, which if it really 
existed and acted upon their senses would excite 
the very same idea. 

|P_50
[}SECT. VIII. }]
[}The Causes of Madness. }]
FOrasmuch as præternatural pressure upon 
the nerves is in human apprehension the 
nearest to delusive sensation thereby ex- 
cited; whatever injury creates such pressure must 
be a remoter cause of Consequential Madness. 

Under this head therefore of remoter causes 
are to be ranked the internal exostoses of the 
cranium, the induration of the Dura Mater, the 
fracture and intropression of the skull and con- 
cussion of the head, as also, if it were of any 
service in the cure of madness to enumerate 
them, the many and various accidents these de- 
lirious injuries may be owing to. 

To the same number of remoter causes we 
must add morbid distensions of the vessels conti- 
guous to the medullary substance. And, as se- 
veral cases mentioned in the foregoing section are 
clearly resolvable into such distensions, whose re- 
moval or diminution will frequently be sufficient 
to answer our intention and is almost always ne- 
cessary and serviceable in the cure of this distem- 
|P_51
per; it may be of use to spend a little time in 
examining into the nature and origin of those 
vascular distensions which end in Consequential 
Madness. 

Whoever has attended to the accidents that 
animal bodies are liable to must have observed 
that several membranes, which in their natural 
state appear smooth and even, are sometimes 
suddenly at other times gradually elevated be- 
yond the surface or plane they before helped to 
compose. To the first of these two cases wri- 
ters on Surgery have given the name of Tumors 
by Fluxion, to the second that of Tumors by Con- 
gestion; thereby ascribing the quick or slow ap- 
pearance of these swellings to the different mo- 
tion of the fluids themselves, which materially 
formed them, and which according to the me- 
dical philosophy then in fashion contained all the 
resources of life health and sickness. 

Now, altho' the discovery of the blood's cir- 
culation hath demonstrated that the fluids are 
passive in every circumstance of animal life whe- 
ther sound or distempered, it will however be 
very useful in prosecuting the present enquiry to 
take into our account the cases themselves as dis- 
tinguished from one another by their different 
manner of appearance which cannot be contro- 
|P_52
verted, and then endeavour to assign other rea- 
sons for such their appearance, which not only 
really exist, but which also are sufficient to pro- 
duce either species of tumor. 

Tumors then by Fluxion ending in Madness 
are either vessels distended by the rarefaction of 
their proper and natural contents, as in the case 
of Insolation; or, which is the most frequent ac- 
cident, they are the same vessels obstructed by 
the sudden intrusion of improper fluids into 
smaller canals which were never designed to give 
either a passage or admittance to such contents, 
as in the case of Inflammation. Now this change 
of place and forcible propulsion of fluids from 
their natural ducts into improper receptacles must 
apparently be owing to some power external to 
the fluids so propelled, which power either was 
not excited or did not effectually act the moment 
before such delirious obstructions took place. But 
the spasmodic constriction of those muscular fi- 
bres which surround the extremities of arteries 
and veins, and are at rest till ruffled by some ac- 
cident, is a power occasionally excited, and 
when acting with sufficient force is capable of 
driving the blood out of its natural channels into 
vessels not originally fitted for its reception. And 
it is moreover a repeated observation that Mad- 
ness frequently succeeds or accompanies Fever, 
|P_52
Epilepsy, Child-birth, and the like muscular dis- 
orders; and that the tumultuous and visibly spas- 
modic passions of joy and anger are all at least 
for a time maniacal. But these passions con- 
stringe the muscles of the head and neck, and 
therefore like a ligature force the blood that was 
descending in the jugular veins back upon the 
minutest vessels of the brain. 

Spasm therefore, when it is productive of tu- 
mors by Fluxion or of sudden distensions in the 
vessels contiguous to the nervous substance, as also 
spasmodic passions such as joy and anger are to 
be reckoned amongst the remoter causes of Mad- 
ness. Not but that the same muscular constric- 
tion is often excited by the application of several 
external objects; which objects are therefore to 
be added to the same class. For besides the ma- 
ny well attested cases of poisons or medicines, 
which as soon as swallowed convulse the body 
and intoxicate the understanding, such as Hem- 
loc, and the root lately mistaken for Gentian, 
such as Opium when administered to some par- 
ticular patients, &c. The many bottle-com- 
panions whose pulses beat high and quick, whose 
faces are flushed with blood in the same manner 
as if they were strangled, who are first wild and 
then stupid, who drink till they see double, and 
then drink on till they cannot see at all, as well 
|P_54
as the crowds of wretches that infest our streets 
and fill our hospitals, evidently prove to the vulgar 
as well as to the Physician that vinous spirits in- 
stantaneously provoke an irregular action of the 
muscles succeeded by temporary delirium; and 
that, if the same noxious draughts are taken in 
too large doses or frequently repeated, they be- 
come a very common tho' remoter cause of con- 
tinual madness. 

If any one rather supposes that such external 
objects, which produce Madness, act immediate- 
ly upon the nerves thereby affected, and that 
spasm, tho' an undoubted effect of the same ob- 
jects, is the companion and not the intervening 
cause of their delirious effect: However probable 
the contrary opinion may still appear to those, 
who consider that spasm never fails to precede or 
to accompany the nervous disorders subsequent 
to such application, and moreover that spasm is 
sufficient to produce maniacal symptoms; never- 
theless the nearest known cause of Madness re- 
mains exactly the same, and these external ob- 
jects are still to be reckoned among its remoter 
causes, which ever opinion is the more probable. 
Since it is impossible for any one of them to act 
at all upon the nerves without motion impulse 
and pressure in the same manner and order, as 
if they had previously occasioned muscular con- 
|P_55
striction and vascular obstruction its most usual 
effect. 

As for Tumors by Congestion ending in Mad- 
ness, that is to say those loads of fluids which 
gradually overcharge the vessels contiguous to the 
nerves, and by compressing a sufficient quantity 
of medullary matter create delusive sensation as 
effectually as does inflammation or any sudden 
distension of the same vessels: such gradual or 
chronical congestions are frequently, tho' not al- 
ways, an effect of a very different sort of mus- 
cular constriction, easily distinguishable from the 
former by its manner of invasion and continu- 
ance. For this spasmodic action of the muscu- 
lar fibres is very gentle at first, and so far from 
alarming either the patient or his friends, that 
for some time it is very little attended to or even 
discernable. But what it wants in violence is 
more than made up by its obstinate duration and 
encrease: inasmuch as it seldom remits, and is 
with great difficulty relieved by art. This spe- 
cies therefore of spasm must likewise be added 
to the remoter causes of Consequential Mad- 
ness. 

To such constant muscular constriction, and 
to the gradual or chronical congestions in the 
brain or mesenteric viscera thereby occasioned, 
|P_56
the despairing bigot, incapable in his own ap- 
prehension of being pardoned by infinite mercy, 
or predestined by infinite justice to eternal mi- 
sery before he had a being, the moping lover, 
the motionless widow or mother bereft of her 
children, may at first view be ascribed. Who 
all wear contractæ seria frontis, and discover the 
fixed muscular marks of passions slower indeed 
in their operation than the turbulent storms of 
joy or anger, but which in consequence of pres- 
sure upon the nerves are as much the remoter 
causes of Madness, and indeed sooner or later 
are as destructive to every animal power. 

The same Tumors by Congestion, capable 
with intervening pressure of creating Consequen- 
tial Madness, are indeed oftentimes an effect of 
laxity in the overloaded vessels themselves. But 
even this weakness, if traced to its original, will 
frequently be found owing to one of the two 
aforementioned species of muscular constriction. 

To such vascular laxity arising from muscular 
spasm may be referred the many instances of 
Madness occasioned by præmature, excessive, or 
unnatural Venery, by Gonorhœas ill cured with 
loads of Mercury and irritating Salts, by fevers, 
and other such like convulsive tumults. And 
from hence we may account for the chimærical 
|P_57
dreams of infirm and shattered Philosophers, 
who after having spent many days and nights 
without closing their eyes in unwearied endea- 
vours to reconcile metaphysical contradictions, 
to square the circle, to discover the Longitude or 
grand Secret, have at last fallen half asleep, and 
who by excessive attention of body have strained 
every animal fibre, and may without a metaphor 
be said to have cracked their brains. 

But, altho' laxity arising from spasm is most 
commonly the cause of gradual obstructions end- 
ing in delusive Sensation, nevertheless the same 
delirious tumors by Congestion, more especially 
those that act upon the nervous matter contain- 
ed in the abdomen, are formed sometimes 
without laxity or any spasmodic disorder 
whatever, either by excess of eating or by 
defect of voluntary motion: which motion is just 
as necessary to a due propulsion of the fluids 
thro' the uterine and hæmorrhoidal vessels, and 
thro' the many and intricate ramifications of the 
vena portæ, as is the action of the heart or the 
resilition of the vessels themselves. Gluttony 
therefore and idleness are both to be added to 
the remoter causes of Consequential Madness. 

To the first is owing the meagrim of the Epi- 
cure. To the second, perhaps more than to a 
|P_58
spirit of lying, may be ascribed the temptations 
of St. Anthony and the lazy Monks his followers, 
the extasies of sendentary and chlorotic Nuns, 
and their frequent conversations with Angelic 
ministers of grace. Not to mention what now 
and then happens to the senior Recluses in our 
Protestant Monasteries at Oxford and Cambridge. 
[^An ornamental illustration in the middle of the page. ^]

[^1. 
* Dr. Dover. 
^]