
|P_
[}THE 
DESIDERATUM:
OR 
ELECTRICITY made PLAIN. }]
I. 1. FROM a thousand Experiments it ap-
pears, that there is a fluid far more 
subtle than Air, which is every where diffused thro' 
all Space, which surrounds the Earth and pervades 
every Part of it. And such is the extreme Fine-
ness, Velocity and Expansiveness of this active 
Principle, that all other Matter seems to be only 
the Body, and this the Soul of the Universe. This 
we might term Elementary Fire; but that it is hard 
for us to separate the Ideas of Fire and Burning:
Altho' the latter is in reality but a preternatural 
and violent Effect of the former. 

2. It is highly probable this is the general Instru-
ment of all the Mo#ion in the Universe: From this 
pure Fire, (which is properly so called) the vulgar 
Culinary Fire is kindled. For in Truth there is 
but one Kind of Fire in Nature, which exists in 
all Places and in all Bodies. And this is subtle and 
active enough, not only to be, under the Great 
Cause, the secondary Cause of Motion, but to pro-
duce and sustain Life thro'out all Nature, as well 
in Animals as in Vegetables. 

|P_10
3. To this effect the learned Bishop of Cloyne
observes, "The vital Flame is supposed to be the 
Cause of all the Motions in the Body of Man, 
whether natural or voluntary. And has not Fire 
the same Force to animate thro'out, and actuate 
the whole System of the World? Cherishing, heat-
ing, fermenting, dissolving, shining, and operating 
in various Manners, as various Subjects offer, to 
employ, or to determine it's Force? It is pre-
sent in all Parts of the Earth and Firmament, tho' 
latent and unobserved, till some Accident produces 
it into Act, and renders it visible in it's Effects." 

4. This great Machine of the World requires 
some such constant, active and powerful Principle, 
constituted by it's Creator, to keep the heavenly 
Bodies in their several Courses, and at the same 
Time give Support, Life and Increase to the vari-
ous Inhabitants of the Earth. Now as the Heart 
of every Animal is the Engine which circulates the 
Blood thro' the whole Body, so the Sun, as the 
Heart of the World, circulates this Fire thro' the 
whole Universe. And this Element is not capable 
of any essential Alteration, Increase or Diminution. 
It is a Species by itself; and is of a Nature totally 
distinct from that of all other Bodies. 

5. That this is absolutely necessary both to feed 
common Fire, and to sustain the Life of Ani-
mals, it seems may be learn'd from an easy Experi-
ment. Place a Cat, together with a lighted Candle, 
in a cold Oven: Then lute the Door close, having 
fixt a Glass in the Middle of it: And if you look 
thro' this, you may observe, at one and the same 
Instant, the Candle goes out, and the Animal dies. 
A plain Proof, that the same Fire is needful to sus-
tain both culinary Fire and animal Life: And a 
large Quantity of it. Some doubtless pervades the 
Oven Door; but not enough to sustain either 
Flame or Life. Indeed every Animal is a kind of 
Fire-Engine. As soon as the Lungs inspire the 
|P_11
Air, the Fire mingled with it is instantly dispers-
ed thro' the pulmonary Vessels into the Blood: 
Thence it is diffused thro' every Part of the Body, 
even the most minute Arteries, Veins and Nerves. 
In the mean Time the Lungs inspire more Air and 
Fire, and so provide a constant Supply. 

6. The Air seems to be universally impregnat-
ed with this Fire, but so diluted, as not to hurt 
the Animal in Respiration. So a small Quantity 
of a Liquor dropt in Water, may be friendly to an 
human Body, tho' a few Drops of the same Li-
quor, given by themselv#s, would have occasioned 
certain Death. And yet you cannot conceive one 
Particle of the Water, without a Particle of the 
Medicine. 'Tis not impossible, this may be one 
great Use of Air, by adhering so closely to the 
elementary Fire, to temper and render salutary to 
the Body, what would otherwise be fatal to it. 

7. To put it beyond dispute, that this Fire is 
largely mixt with the Air, you may make the fol-
lowing Experiment. Take a round Lump of Iron, 
and heat it to a Degree called a welding Heat: 
Take it out of the Fire, and with a Pair of Bel-
lows blow cold Air upon it. The Iron will then 
as effectually melt, as if it were in the hottest Fire. 
Now when taken out of the Forge, it had not Fire 
enough in it to conquer the Cohesion of it's Parts: 
But when this Fire is join'd with that which was 
mixt with the Air, it is sufficient to do it. On the 
same Principle we account for the Increase of a 
Coal or Wood Fire by blowing it. 

8. And let none wonder that Fire should be so 
connected with Air, as hardly to be separated. As 
subtle as Fire is, we may even by Art attach it to 
other Bodies; yea, and keep it Prisoner for many 
Years: And that either in a solid or a fluid Form. 
An Instance of the first we have in Steel: Which 
is made such, only by impacting a large Quantity 
of Fire into Bars of Iron. In like Manner we 
|P_12
impact a great Quantity of Fire into Stone, to 
make Lime. An Instance of the second Kind we 
have in Spirits, wherein Fire is imprison'd in a 
fluid Form. Hence common Spirits will burn all 
away. And if you throw into the Air Spirits rec-
tified to the highest Degree, not one Drop will 
come down again, but the universal Fire will take 
hold of and absorb it all. 

9. That this Fire subsists both in Air, Earth, 
and Water; that it is diffused thro' all and every 
Part of the Universe, was suspected by many of the 
antient Naturalists, and believed by the great Sir 
Isaac Newton. But of late Years it has been fully demonstrated: Particularly, by Mr. Stephen Gray,
a Pensioner at the Charterhouse; who some Years 
since presented to the Royal Society, an Account 
of many Experiments he had made, whereby this 
subtle Fluid became clearly perceptible both to the 
Sight and Feeling. Because the Glass Tube, by 
Means of which those Experiments were made, 
was observed when rubbed to attract Straws and 
other light Bodies (a known Property of Amber, 
called in Latin Electrum) these Experiments 
were termed electrical: A Word which was soon 
affixt to that subtle Fluid itself, and every Thing 
pertaining to it. But improperly enough: Seeing 
the attracting (or seeming to attract) Straws and 
Feathers, is one of the most inconsiderable of all 
the Effects, wrought by this powerful and uni-
versal Cause. 

10. It was afterwards found, that a Glass Globe 
was on some Accounts preferable to a Glass 
Tube: Particularly, as it was less Labour to turn 
the one for some Hours together, by means of a 
small Wheel, in the mean Time rubbing it with a 
dry Hand, or a little Cushion, than to rub the 
Tube for so long a Time. It w#s likewise ob-
served, that a greater Quantity of ethereal Fire 
might be collected by this Means than by the other. 
|P_13
I say collected; for that Fire is no more created by 
rubbing, than Water is by pumping. The grand 
Reservoir thereof is the Earth, from which it is 
diffused thro' all the other Parts of common Mat-
ter. Accordingly in these Experiments, the Globe 
rubbing against the Cushion, collects Fire from it. 
The Cushion receives it from the Frame of the 
Machine; the Frame of the Machine from the 
Floor. But if you cut off the Communication 
with the Floor, no Fire can be produced, because 
none can be collected.

11. In the Year 1746, Mr. de Muschenbroek,
Professor of natural Philosophy at Leyden, was led 
by a casual Experiment, into many new Discove-
ries. These were chiefly made by Means of a 
large but thin Glass Phial. The best way to pre-
pare which is, to coat it with thin Lead; to line 
it on the inside with Leaf-Gold, to within two 
Inches of the Top, and to fasten some Tinsel Fringe 
to the Bottom, (or to the End of the Wire within 
the Phial) so as to touch the Gold Lining. By 
this Wire going thro' the Cork, the Phial is hung 
on any metallic Body, which communicates by a 
Wire, with the Globe or Tube. This metallic 
Body has been term'd, the prime Conductor, as it 
conducts or conveys the Fire collected by the Tube 
or Globe, either into the Phial, or into any other 
Body communicating therewith. 

12. But all Bodies are not capable of receiving 
it. There is in this Respect an amazing Differ-
ence between them. The Excrements of Nature, 
as Wax, Silk, Hair, will not receive the ethereal 
Fire, neither convey it to other Bodies: So that 
whenever in circulating it comes to any of these, 
it is at a full stop. Air itself is a Body of this 
Kind; with great Difficulty either receiving or 
conveying this Fire to other Bodies: So are Pitch 
and Rosin (Excrements, as it were, of Trees). To 
|P_14
these we may add Glass, Amber, Brimstone, dry 
Earth, and a few other Bodies. These have been 
frequently stiled Electrics per se; as if they alone 
contain'd the electric Fire: An eminently improper 
Title, founded on a palpable Mistake. From the 
same Mistake, all other Bodies, which easily re-
ceive and readily convey it, were term'd Non elec-
trict; on a Supposition, that they contain'd no 
electric Fire: The contrary of which is now al-
low'd by all. 

13. That this Fire is inconceivably subtle, ap-
pears from it's permeating even the densest Me-
tals, and that with such Ease, as to receive no per-
ceptible Resistance. If any one doubt, whether it 
pass thro' the Substance, or only along the Surface of Bodies, a strong Shock taken thro' his own Bo-
dy, will prevent his doubting any longer. It dif-
fers from all other Matter in this, that the Par-
ticles of it repell, not attract, each other. And 
hence is the manifest Divergency in a Stream of 
electrical Effluvia. But tho' the Particles of it re-
pell each other, yet are they attracted by all other 
Matter. And from these thr e, the extreme sub-
tlety of this Fire, the mutual Repulsion of its Parts, 
and the strong Attraction of them by other Mat-
ter, arises this Effect, that if a Quantity of elec-
tric Fire be applied to a Mass of common Matter 
of any Bigness or Length, (which has not already 
got its Quantity) it is immediately diffused thro' 
the whole. 

14. It seems, this Globe of Earth and Water, 
with its Plants, Animals, Buildings, have diffused 
thro' their whole Substance, just as much of this 
Fire as they will contain. And this we may term 
their natural Quantity. This is not the same in all 
Kinds of Matter: Neither in the same Kind of 
Matter in all Circumstances. A solid Foot of one 
Kind of Matter (as Glass) contains more of it than 
|P_15
a solid Foot of another Kind. And a Pound 
Weight of the same Kind of Matter, when rare-
fied, contains more than it did before. 

15. We know that this Fire is in common 
Matter, because we can pump it out, by the Globe 
or Tube: We know that common Matter has 
near as much of it as it can contain, because if we 
add a little more to any Portion of it, the addi-
tional Quantity does not enter, but forms a Kind 
of Atmosphere round it. On the other Hand, we 
know that common Matter has not more of it 
than it can contain. Otherwise all loose Portions 
of it would repel each other; as they constantly do, 
when they have such Atmospheres. Had the Earth, 
for Instance, as much electric Fire in Proportion, 
as we can give to a Globe of Iron or Wood, the 
Particles of Dust and other light Matter, would 
not only repel each other, but be continually re-
pelled from the E#rth. Hence the Air being con-
stantly loaded therewith, would be unfit for Re-
spiration. Here we see another Occasion to adore 
that Wisdom, which has made all Things by 
Weight and Measure. 

16. The Form of every electric Atmosphere, is 
that of the Body which it surrounds: Because it is 
attracted by every Part of the Surface, tho' it can-
not enter the Substance already replete. Without this Attraction, it would not remain round the Bo-
dy, but dissipate into the Air. 

17. The Atmosphere of an electrified Sphere, is 
not more easily drawn off, from any one Part of 
it than from the other, because it is equally at-
tracted by every Part. But it is not so with Bo-
dies of other Figures. From a Cube it is more 
easily drawn off at the Corners than at the Sides: 
And so from the Corners of Bodies of any other 
Form, and most easily from the sharpest Corners. 
For the Force with which an electrified Body re-
|P_16
tains it's Atmosphere, is proportion'd to the Sur-
face on which that Atmosphere rests. So a Sur-
face four Inches square retains it's Atmosphere, 
with sixteen Times the Force that one of an Inch 
square does. And as in pulling the Hairs from an 
Horse's Tail, a Force insufficient to pull off an 
Handful at once, could easily pull it off Hair by 
Hair: So tho' a blunt Body can't draw off all the 
Atmosphere at once, a pointed one can easily draw 
it off, Particle by Particle. 

18. If you would have a sensible Proof, how 
wonderfully pointed Bodies draw off the electric 
Fire, place an Iron Shot of four Inches Diameter 
on the Mouth of a dry Bottle. Suspend over it a 
small Cork-Ball by a silken Thread, just so as to 
rest against the Side of the Shot. Electrify the 
Shot, and the Ball will be repelled four or five 
Inches from it. Then present to the Shot six or 
eight Inches off the Point of a sharp Bodkin. The 
Fire is instantly drawn off; so the Repulsion ceases, 
and the Ball flies to the Shot. But a blunt Body 
will not produce this Effect, till it is brought with-
in an Inch of the Shot. If you present the Point 
of the Bodkin in the Dark, you may see some-
times at a Foot Distance, a Light gather upon it 
like a Glow-worm, which is manifestly the Fire it 
extracts from the Shot. The less sharp the Point 
is, the nearer it must be brought, before you can 
see the Light. And at whatever Distance you see 
the Light, you may draw off the electric Fire. 

19. To be convinced that pointed Bodies throw
off, as well as draw off the Fire, you may lay a 
long sharp Needle on the Shot. It cannot then be 
electrified, so as to repel the Ball, because the Fire 
thrown upon it, continually runs off, at the Point 
of the Needle: From which in the Dark you may 
see such a Stream of Light, as in the preceeding 
Instance. 

|P_17
20. While the electric Fire, which is in all Bo-
dies, is left to itself, undisturb'd by any external 
Violence, it is more or less dense, according to the 
Nature of the Body which it is in. In dense Bo-
dies it is more rare: In rare Bodies it is more dense. 
Accordingly every Body contains such a Quantity 
of it, rare or dense, as is suitable to it's Nature. 
And there is some Resistence to every Endeavour 
of altering it's Density, in the whole of any Body, 
or in any Part of it. For all Bodies resist either 
the Increase or Diminution of their natural Quan-
tity. And on the other Hand, when it has been 
either increased or diminished, there is a Resistence 
to it's Return to it's natural State. 

21. With regard to the different Resistence made 
by different Bodies, in either of these Cases, it is an 
invariable Rule, that Glass, Wax, Rosin, Brim-
stone, Silk, Hair, and such like Bodies, resist the 
most: And next to these, the Air, provided it be 
dry, and in a sufficient Quantity. That this Re-
sistence is least in Metals, Minerals, Water, Quick-
silver, Animals and Vegetables: Which we may 
rank together, because the Difference in their Re-
sistence is very inconsiderable: And that in these 
Bodies the Resistence is greater, when their Sur-
face are polish'd, and extended in length, than 
when their Surfaces are rough and short, or end in 
sharp Points. 

22. When a Body has more electric Fire forced 
into it, than it has naturally, it is said to be elec-
tifiedpositively. When Part of the natural Quanti-
ty is taken away, it is said to be electrified negative-
ly. Now when an Iron Bar is negative'y electrified, 
the Fire drawn out, does not go in again as soon 
as the Experiment is over, but forms an Atmos-
phere round it, because of the Resistence it finds in 
it's Endeavour to dilate itself, either into the Air 
or into the Bar. And when it is electified positively,
|P_18
the same Kind of Atmosphere is form'd, by the 
Fire accumulated upon it. Whether therefore Bo-
dies are electrified negatively or positively, and re-
main so when the Experiment is over, there are si-
milar Atmospheres surrounding them, which will 
produce similar Effects. 

23. But we can electrify no Body beyond a cer-
tain Degree: Because when any is electrified to 
that Point, it has an Atmosphere round it sufficient-
ly strong to ballance any Power that endeavours to 
electrify it farther. Nor is the electric Fire either 
from the Tube or the Globe, able to force its Way 
thro' this. 

24. And in the ordinary Course of Nature, this 
subtle, active Fluid, which not only surrounds eve-
ry gross Body, but every component Particle of 
each, where it is not in absolute Contact with it's 
neighbouring Particle, can never be idle, but is 
ever in Action, tho' that Action be imperceptible 
to our Senses. It is ever varying it's Condition, tho' imperceptibly, in all Parts of all Bodies what-
ever; and electrifying them more or less, tho' not 
so forcibly as to give sensible Signs of it. All Bo-
dies then, and all their component Particles, when 
in their natural Situation, have round their Surfa-
ces, where they are not in absolute Contact with 
other Surfaces, an imperceptible Atmosphere suffi-
cient to ballance the smaller Force with which they 
are attack'd: Every Way similar to the perceptible 
Atmosphere of Bodies forcibly electrified. In these 
imperceptible Atmospheres is placed the Power 
which resists their being electrified to an higher 
Degree than they are naturally. And this Power 
lies in the Elasticity of the subtle Fluid, every 
where dispersed both round all Bodies and in 
them. 

25. Glass is very difficultly electified, which seems 
to prove it has a very dense electric Atmosphere. 
|P_19
Metals are easily electrified. Consequently they 
have rare and therefore weakly-resisting Atmos-
pheres. But as Heat rarefies all Bodies, so if Glass 
be heated to a certain Degree, even below melting, 
it will give as free a Passage to the electric Fire, 
as Brass or Iron does: The Atmosphere round it 
being then rendered as rare as that of Metals. Nay, 
when melted, it makes no more Resistence than 
Water. But it's Resistence increases, as it cools. 
And when it is quite cold, it resists as forcibly as 
ever. Smoothly-polish'd Wax resists as much as 
Glass. But even the small Heat raised by rubbing, 
will render it's Atmosphere as rare as that of Me-
tals, and so intirely destroy it's Resistence. The 
same is true of Rosin and Brimstone. Even the 
Heat arising from Friction, destroys the Resistence 
which they naturally make to being electrified: A 
strong Proof, that the Resistence of all Bodies there-
to, is exerted at their Surfaces, and caused by an 
electric Atmosphere of different Densities, accord-
ing to different Circumstances. 

26. Most Experiments will succeed as well with 
a Globe of Brimstone, as with one of Glass. Yet 
there is a considerable Difference in their Nature. 
What Glass repells, Brimstone (as also Rosin) at-
tracts. Rubbed Glass emits the electric Fire: 
Rubbed Brimstone, Rosin and Wax receive it. 
Hence if a Glass Globe be turned at one end of a 
prime Conductor, and a Brimstone one at the other, 
not a Spark of Fire can be obtain'd; one receiving 
it in, as fast as it is given out by the other. Hence 
also if a Phial be suspended on the prime Con-
ductor, with a Chain from it's Coating to the Ta-
ble, and only one Globe turned, it will be elec-
trified (or charged, as they term it) by twenty turns 
of the Wheel: After which it may be discharged,
that is, unelectrified, by twenty Turns of the other 
Wheel. 

|P_20
27 The Difference between Non Electrics(vul-
garly speaking) and Electrics per se, is chiefly this. 
1. A Non Electric easily suffers a Change, in the 
Quantity of Fire it contains. It's whole Quantity 
may be lessen'd by drawing out a Part, which it 
will afterwards resume. But you can only lessen 
the Quantity contain'd in one of the Surfaces of an 
Electric: And not that, but by adding at the same 
Time an equal Quantity to the other Surface. So 
that the whole Glass will always have the same 
Quantity in it's two Surfaces And even this can 
only be done in Glass that is thin: Beyond a cer-
tain Thickness we know no Power that can make 
this Change. 2. The ethereal Fire freely moves 
from Place to Place, in and thro' the Substance of 
a Non Electric. But thro' the Substance of an 
Electric it will by no Means pass. It freely en-
ters an Iron-Rod, and moves from one End to 
another, where the Overplus is discharged. But 
it will not enter, or move thro a Glass-Rod. Nei-
ther will the thinnest Glass which can be made, 
suffer any Particle of it entering one of it's Sur-
faces, to pass thro' to the other. 

28. Indeed it is only Metals and Liquids, that 
perfectly conduct (or transmit) this Fire. Other Bo-
dies seem to conduct it, only so far as they contain 
a Mixture of these; accordingly, moist Air will con-
duct it, in Proportion to it's Moistness. But dry 
Air will not conduct it at all: On the contrary, it 
is the main instrument, in confining any electric 
Atmosphere, to the Body which it surrounds. Dry 
Air prevents it's dissipating (which it does presently 
when in vacuo) or passing from Body to Body. 
A clear Bottle full of Air, instead of Water, can-
not be electrified. But exhausted of Air, it is elec-
trified as effectually as if it was full of Water. 
Yet an Electrical Atmosphere and Air, do not ex-
clued one another. For we breath in it freely, 
|P_21
and dry Air will blow thro' it, without altering it at all. 

29. When a Glass Phial is electrified, whate-
ver Quantity of Fire is accumulated on the in-
ner Surface, an equal Quantity is taken from the 
outer. Suppose, before the Operation begins, the 
Quantity of Fire contain'd in each Surface, is 
equal to twenty Grains: Suppose at every Turn of 
the Globe, one Grain is thrown in: Then after 
the first Stroke there are twenty one within, nine-
teen only without: After the second, the inner Sur-
face will have twenty-two, the outer but eighteen: 
And so on, till after twenty Strokes, the inner 
will have forty, the outer none. And the. Opera-
tion ends: For no Power or Art of Man can throw 
any more on the inner Surface, when no more 
can be taken from the outer. If you attempt to 
throw more in, it is thrown back thro' the Wire, 
or flies cut in Cracks thro' the Sides of the Phial. 
The Equilibrium cannot be restored in this Phial, 
but by a Communication form'd between the inner 
and outer Surface, by something external, touching 
both the outer, and the Wire which communicates 
with the inner Surface. If you touch these by 
Turns, it is restored by Degrees: If both at once, 
it is restored instantly. But then there is a Shock 
occasioned by the sudden passing of the Fire thro' 
the Body, in it's Way from the inner to the outer 
Surface. For it moves from the Wire to the Fin-
ger, (not from the Finger to the Wire, as is 
commonly supposed). Thence it passes thro' the 
Body to the other Hand, and so to the outer Sur-
face. 

30. The Force with which this Shock may be 
given, is far greater than one would conceive. 
It will kill Rats, Hens, or even Turkeys in a Mo-
ment: Others, that are not quite killed, it strikes 
blind. It will give Polarity to a fine Needle, mak-
|P_22
ing it point North and South, as if touched by a 
Loadstone. It will invert the Polarity of a Com-
pass, and make the North Point turn to the South. 
At the same Time the Ends of the Needles are fine-
ly blued like the Spring of a Watch. It will melt 
off the Heads and Points of Pins and Needles: And 
sometimes the whole Surface of the Needle is run 
and appears as it were blister'd, when examined by 
a magnifying Glass. It will melt thin Gold or Sil-
ver, when held tight between two Panes of Glass, 
together with the Surface of the Glass itself, and 
incorporate them in a fine Enamel. Yea a strong 
Spark from an electrified Phial, makes a fair Hole 
thro' a Quire of Paper doubled: Which is thought 
good Armour against the Push of a Sword, or 
even a Pistol Bullet. And 'tis amazing to observe 
in how small a Portion of Glass, a great Electrical 
Force may be. A thin Glass-Bubble, about an 
Inch Diameter, being half filled with Water, part-
ly gilt on the outside, when electrified gives as 
strong a Shock as a Man can well bear: Allowing 
then that it contains no more Fire after charging 
than before, how much Fire must there be in this 
small Glass! It seems to be a Part of it's very Sub-
stance. Perhaps if that Fire could be separated 
from it, it would be no longer Glass. It might in 
losing this lose its most essential Properties, it's 
Transparency, Brittleness, and Elasticity. 

31. Some have not improbably supposed, that all 
Electric Bodies, so called, are by their original Con-
stitution, thro'ly saturated with Electric Fire: That 
it remains fixt in them, (unless while the Texture 
of those Bodies is quite alter'd by Liquefaction) 
that Fire fixt in a Body constitutes an Electric, and 
all Bodies where it is not fixt are Non Electrics.
Agreeably to which they suppose that in all Non 
Electrics, the Original Fire, loosely inhering, is 
easily driven on by the new collected Fire, which 
|P_23
then possesses its Place: But that in Electrics the 
Original Fire being impacted into their Substance, 
and therefore more firmly inhering, will not give 
Way to, or be driven on by, the new collected 
Fire. Such is Air in particular; with the Particles 
of which the original Fire is closely incorporated. 
Dry Air seems to be so fully saturated with it, that 
it is scarce capable of receiving any more: Where-
as all n#w-collected Fire is continually endeavour-
ing to return into the Earth. Let Wires be elec-
trified ever so strongly, yet the Moment any Part 
of them is touch'd by a Person standing on the 
Floor, they are electrified no longer; all the Fire 
escaping thro' him into the Earth. 

32. Upon the Principles of Electricity, we may 
give a more rational Account, of many Appearan-
ces in Nature, than has yet been done: Of Thun-
der and Lightning in particular. In order to which 
we may observe, all electrified Bodies retain the 
Fire thrown into them, till some Non-electric ap-
proaches: To which it is then communicated with 
a Snap, and becomes equally divided. Electric Fire 
is strongly attracted by Water, and readily mixes 
with it. And Water being electrified, the Vapours 
arising from it, are equally electrified. As these 
float in the Air, they retain the additional Fire, till 
they meet with Clouds not so much electrified. 
Then they communicate it with a Shock. 

33. The Ocean is compounded of Water, and 
Salt; one an Electric, the other not. When there 
is a Friction among the Parts near its Surface, the 
Fire is collected from the Parts below. It is then 
plainly visible in the Night, at the Stern of every 
failing Vessel. It appears from every Dash of an 
Oar: In Storms the whole Sea seems on Fire. The 
Particles of Water then repell'd from the electrified 
Surface, continually carry off the Fire as it is col-
lected. They rise and form Clouds which are high-
|P_24
ly electrified, and retain the Fire till they have an 
Opportunity of discharging it. 

34. Particles of Water rising in Vapours, attach 
themselves to Particles of Air. One Particle of Air 
may be surrounded by twelve Particles of Water as 
large as itself, all touching it, and by more added 
to them. Particles of Air thus loaded would be 
drawn nearer together by the mutual Attraction of 
the Particles of Water, did not the Fire, Common 
or Electric, included therein, assist their mutual 
Repulsion. Hence they continue suspended. But 
if Air thus loaded, be compress'd by adverse Winds, 
or by being driven against Mountains, or if it be 
condensed by the Loss of it's Fire, it will continue 
suspended no longer, but will descend in Dew. And 
if the Water surroun ing one Particle of Air comes 
into contact with that surrounding another, they 
naturally coalesce into a Drop, and so descend in 
Rain. 

35. The Sun supplies common Fire to all Va-
pours, rising either from Sea or Land. Vapours 
having both this and Electric Fire, are better sup-
ported than those which have this only. For when 
Vapours rise into the coldest Region, the common 
Fire may fail. But the Cold will not diminish the 
Electric: This is always the same. Hence Clouds 
raised from fresh Waters, from moist Earth, or 
growing Vegetables, more easily descend and de-
posite their Waters, as having but little Electric
 Fire, to keep the Particles separate from each other. 
So that the greatest Part of the Water raised from 
the Land, falls on the Land again. But Clouds 
raised from the Sea, having both Fires, and much 
of the Electric, support their Water far more strong-
ly, and being assisted by Winds, may bring it 
from the Middle of the widest Ocean to the Middle 
of the broadest Continent. And yet a Way is pro-
vided whereby these also are readily brought to de-
|P_25
posite their Water. For whenever they are driven 
against Mountains by the Winds, those Mountains 
take away their Electric Fire: And being cold, the 
common also: Hence the Particles immediately close. 
If the Air was not much loaded, the Water falls in 
Dew on the Top and the Sides of the Mountain. 
If it was, the Electric Fire being taken at once 
from the whole Cloud, it flashes brightly, and 
cracks loudly. And the Particles instantly coales-
cing for want of that Fire, fall in an heavy 
Shower. 

36. When a Ridge of Mountains stops the 
Clouds, and draws the Electric Fire from the Cloud 
first approaching it, the next when it comes near 
the first, now deprived of it's Fire, flashes into it, 
and deposites it's own Water. The third Cloud 
approaching, and all that succeed, act in the same 
Manner; as far back as they extend, which may 
be for several hundred Miles. Hence the continual 
Storms of Thunder, Lightning and Rain, on the 
East Side of those va#t Mountains, the Andes, which 
running North and South, intercept all the Clouds 
brought against them from the Atlantick Ocean. In 
a plain Country, there are other Means to make 
them drop their Water. For if an electrified Cloud 
coming from the Sea, meets in the Air a Cloud 
coming from the Land, and therefore not electri-
fied, the first will give it's Flash into the latter, and 
thereby both will be made to deposite their Wa-
ter. The Concussion of the Air contributes also to 
shake down the Water, not only from those two 
Clouds, but from others near them. When the Sea 
and Land Clouds would pass at too great a Distance 
from each other, they are mutually attracted till 
within the Distance. For the Sphere of Electrical 
Attraction is far beyond the flashing Distance. And 
yet where a Cloud contains much Fire, it may 
strike at a considerable Distance. When a Con-
|P_26
ductor has but little Fire in it, you must approach 
very near before you can draw a Spark. Throw 
into it a greater Quantity of Fire, and it will give 
a Spark at a greater Distance. But if a Gun Bar-
rel, when electrified, will strike and make a Noise, 
at the Distance of an Inch, at what a Distance, and 
with how great a Noise, may ten thousand Acres 
of electrified Cloud strike? No Wonder that this 
should melt Metals (which our artificial Flash does 
in some Degree) tho' perhaps not so properly by 
it's Heat, as by insinuating into the Pores, and cre-
ating a violent Repulsion between the Particles of 
the Metal it passes thro'. This overcomes the At-
traction whereby they cohere, and so melts the me-
tallic Body. And this accounts for its melting a 
Sword in the Scabbard, or Gold in the Pocket, 
without burning either. 

37. But Thunder Clouds do not always contain 
more than their natural Quantity of Electric Fire. 
Very frequently they contain less. And when this 
is the Case, when they are negatively electrified, 
altho' the Effects and Appearances are nearly the 
same, yet the Manner of Operation is different. 
For in this Case, it is really the Fire from the 
Mountains, or other Part of the Earth which strikes 
into the Cloud; and not, as we imagine, Fire from 
the Cloud which strikes into the Earth. And we 
may easily conceive, how a Cloud may be nega-
tively electrified. When a Portion of Water is rare-
fied into a thin Vapour, the Fire it contains is rare-
fied too. Consequently it has then less than it's 
natural Quantity of Fire. Such a Cloud therefore 
coming within a due Distance of the Earth, will 
receive from it a Flash of Electric Fire; which 
Flash, to supply a great Extent of Cloud, must of-
ten contain a great Quantity of Fire. Such a Cloud 
also passing over Woods of tall Trees, may silently 
receive some Supply, either from the Points of the 
|P_27
Boughs, or from the sharp Ends and Edges of the 
Leaves. The Cloud thus supplied, flashes into 
other Clouds that have not been so supplied; and 
those into others, till an Equilibrium is produced, 
among all that are within a striking Distance of 
each other. And hence are repeated Strokes and 
Flashes, till they descend in Showers to the Earth, 
their Original. Rain, especially when in large 
Drops, generally brings down the Electric Fire: 
Falling Snow often: Summer Hail, always, tho' 
silently. Consequently, any of these may prevent 
Thunder and Lightning; or at least, abate it's 
Violence. Rain is helpful in another Respect like-
wise. By wetting Men or Beasts, it saves many 
Lives. For if your Cloathes are thro'ly wet, and a 
Flash of Lightning strikes the Top of your Head, 
it will run in the Water over the Surface of your Bo-
dy into the Ground: Whereas if your Cloaths 
were not wet, it would go thro' your Body. Hence 
a wet Chicken cannot be killed by a Stroke from the 
Phial; whereas a dry one is kill'd in an Instant. 
See here also the Wisdom and Goodness of Him, 
who sendeth forth Lightning with the Rain! It 
should likewise be observ'd, that wherever electrifi-
ed Clouds pass, Spires, Towers, Chimneys, and 
high Trees, as so many Points, draw the Electric 
Fire, and the whole Cloud frequently discharges 
there Therefore it is highly dangerous in such a 
Storm, to take Shelter under a Tree. 

38. Common Fire (if it be any thing more, than 
a different Modification of the same Element) is 
more or less in all Bodies, as well as Electrical. If 
there be a sufficient Quantity of either in any Bo-
dy, it is inflamed. But when the Quantity of com-
mon Fire therein is small there needs more Elec-
tric Fire to infl#me it. Where the Quantity of 
common Fire is greater, less of the Electric will 
suffice. So if Spirits are heated, a small Spark in-
|P_28
flames them. If they are not, the Spark must be 
greater. Sulphureous Vapours, whether rising 
from the Earth, or from Stacks of moist Hay or 
Corn, or any other heated and reeking Vegetable, 
contain ab ndance of common Fire. A small Ad-
dition of Electric then will inflame them. There-
fore they are easily kindled by Lightning. 

39. Any who would be clearly convinced of the 
Nature of Lightning, may make the following Ex-
periment. Make a small Cross of two thin Strips 
of Wood, the Arms being just so long, as to reach 
the four Corners of a large, thin Silk Handkerchief 
when extended. Tie the Corners of this to the 
Extremities of the Cross; and so you have the Bo-
dy of a Kite: Add to this a proper Tail, Loop 
and String, and it will rise in the Air like one made 
with Paper: But this is fi#ter to bear the Wind 
and Wet in a Storm without tearing. To the Top 
of the Cross fix a sharp pointed Wire, rising a Foot 
above it. Tie a Silk Ribbon to the End of the 
Twine next the Hand; and where the Silk and 
Twine join, fasten a Key. Raise this Kite when 
a Thunder-Storm is coming on: But he that holds 
the String, must stand in a Porch, or under some 
other Covering, that the Ribbon may not be wet. 
He must likewise take particular Care, that the 
Twine do not touch the Top or Side of the Porch. 
As soon as the Thunder-Cloud comes over the 
Kite, the pointed Wire draws the Electric Fire 
from it. The Kite and all the Twine are then 
electrified, as plainly appears by this, that the loose 
Filaments of the Twine stand out every way, and 
are attracted by an approaching Finger. And when 
the Kite and Twine being wet, conduct the Fire 
freely, it will stream from the Key, on the Ap-
proach of the Knuckle. By this Key the Phial 
may be charged, and all other Experiments made, 
as by the Globe. And this is a Demonstration, 
|P_29
that the Electric Fire thereby obtain'd, is the very 
same with that of Lightning. 

40. May not the Knowledge of this Power in 
pointed Bodies, of drawing off the Fire contain'd 
in these Clouds, suggest to us a very probable Me-
thod, of preserving Houses, Churches, Ships from 
the Stroke of Lightning? Might we not fix on 
the highest Part of them, upright Rods of Iron 
made sharp as Needles, and gilt, to prevent rust-
ing, which otherwise would hinder their free Con-
veyance of the Electric Fire? From the Foot of 
those Rods (which need not be above half an Inch 
diameter) a Wire may pass down the Outside of 
the Building into the Ground; or down round one 
of the Shrouds of a Ship, and down her Side, till 
it reaches the Water. Would not these Rods si-
lently draw off the Electric Fire, before the Cloud 
was nigh enough to strike? And thereby in a good 
Measure secure us from that most sudden and terri-
ble Mischief! Let it not be objected, that the us-
ing this probable Means of preventing a threatning 
Danger, would imply any Denial of, or Distrust 
in, Divine Providence Not at all: We know 
the Creator of the Universe, is likewise the Go-
vernor of all Things therein. But we know like-
wise that he gove ns by second Causes; and that 
accordingly it is his Will, we should use all the 
probable Means he has given us, to attain every 
lawful End. It is therefore no more an Impeach-
ment of his Providence, when we foresee a Storm 
of Lightning and Rain, to shelter our House (as far 
as we are able) from the one, than to shelter our-
selves in that House from the other. Is it not just 
as innocent (if it be possible) to keep our Rooms 
tight from Lightning, as from Wind and Water? 

41. It may not be improper to add one or two 
Observations, before we proceed to what is of more 
Importance. Scarce any Phenomenon in Nature 
|P_30
has been esteem'd more difficult to be accounted for 
than those luminous Appearances in the Sky, term'd 
Aurora Borealis, or Northern Lights. But these al-
so may be rationally explain'd, upon the Principles 
of Electricity. We often see Clouds at different 
Heights, passing different Ways, North and South 
at the same Time. This manifestly proves differ-
ent Currents of Air, one of them under the other. 
Now as the Air between the Tropics is rarefied by 
the Sun, it rises; the denser Air pressing into it's 
Place. The Air so raised, moves North and South, 
and if it has no Opportunity before, must descend 
in the Polar Regions. When this Air with it's Va-
pours descends into contact with the Vapours aris-
ing there, the Electric Fire which it brought be-
gins to be communicated, and is seen in clear 
Nights; being first visible where it is first in Mo-
tion, namely in the most Northern Parts. But from 
thence the Streams of Light seem to shoot Souther-
ly, even to the Zenith of Northern Countries. 

42. Another Phenomenon of a totally different 
Kind, may be accounted for on the same Princi-
ples, altho' Mr. Prior supposes Solomon himself to 
ask, as a Question which he could not answer, "
Whence does it happen, that the Plant which well 
We name the Sensitive, should move and feel? 
Whence know her Leaves to answer her Command, 
And with quick Horror fly the neighbouring Hand? "

Allowing for Poetical Amplification the plain Fact 
is this. The Sensitive Plant, as it were, shrinks 
away, as soon as your Hand approaches it. And 
from a turgid and vivid Appearance, instantly droops 
and hangs it's Leaves. Now suppose this Plant to 
contain more Electric Fire than any other Plant or 
|P_31
Animal, it must or Course communicate that Fire, 
to any other that touches it. And if so, it's Leaves 
and Branches must be in a languid State, till they 
have recover'd their natural Quantity. To illustrate 
this, set any small Tree in a Pot on a Cake of 
Brimstone. Electrify it and it grows extremely 
turgid, so as to erect it's Leaves. But the Mo-
ment you touch one of them, the whole Tree 
droops, and hangs all it's Leaves and Branches. 

To throw all the Light I can on the Subject, I 
subjoin a few Extracts from several other Writers. 

[}An Extract from Mr. Watson's Experiments and 
Observations. }]
1. When two Plates, the one electrified, the 
other not, were brought near each other, the Flash-
es of bright Flame were so large, that in a dark 
Room, I could distinctly see the Faces of 13 Per-
sons. P. 6. 

2. A Piece of large blunt Wire was hung to the 
Conductor. To the End of this when electrified a 
black Surface not electrified being brought near, 
(tho' not near enough to cause a Snap) a Brush of 
Blue Flame, quite different from the former, issued 
of more than an Inch long, and an Inch thick. P. 7. 

3. If a Person strongly electrified lays his Hand 
on the Cloaths of one that is not, especially if they 
are thin Woollen or Silk, they both feel as it were 
many Pins pricking them, as long as the Globe is 
in Motion. 

4. If Oil of Turpentine be set on Fire in a Ves-
sel held by one electrified, the Smoke arising there-
from, received against a Plate held at a Foot Dis-
tance from the Flame, by one standing on Rosin, 
will enable him to Fire warm Spirits of Wine. 
The Electric Strokes have been likewise felt, upon 
touching the second Man, when the Plate he held 
|P_32
in the Smoke has been between seven and eight 
Feet above the Flame. P. 8. 

5. Take burning Spirits of Wine instead of Oil 
of Turpentine: And if the second Man hold the 
End of an Iron Rod at the Top of the Flame, he 
may k ndle other warm Spirits held near his Finger. 
Hence we find that either Smoke or Flame con-
ducts the Electric Fire, and does not perceptibly 
diminish it's Force. P 9. 

6. If the Wire of the Phial be not touched, the 
electrified Water or Steel Dust will retain it's 
Force many Hours, may be convey'd several Miles, 
and will afterward exert it's Force upon touching 
the Wire. P. 16. 

7. If an Egg is hung on the Conductor, and a 
Person grasping the electrified #hial with one Hand, 
brings the Palm of his other near the Bottom of the 
Egg, he receives a smart #troke on the Hand, as 
with a Ferula, and his Hand seems full of a more 
red Fire than is usually observed. P. 24. 

8. Any Number of Persons communicating with 
each other, the first of whom grasps the Phial, and 
the last touches the Conductor, receive the same 
Shock as if it was #ne only. P. 25. 

9. The Electric Force always describes a Cir-
cuit, and moves in the straitest Line it can, be-
tween the Conductor and hial. P. 26 

10. To prove th#s, while the Machine stood on 
Wax, I stood upon the Floor; and putting one 
Hand on the Machine, touch'd the Gun Barrel 
with the other. Upon this Fire issued, and the 
snapping continued as long as I held my hand on 
the Machine, but no longer This shew'd at once, 
that the Electric Fire past from the Floor thro' my 
Body to the Machine. P 36. 

11. If the Electric Fire is not stopt, no Sign of 
it's Presence is observable in the Bodies suspended 
to the Globe. Tho' it throws ever so much of this 
|P_33
Fire upon them, it passes from them to the Floor 
whence it came. But if it is stopt, it is then ac-
cumulated in or upon these Bodies: Altho' this can 
be done only to a certain Degree, after which it 
continually disperses. If when it is accumulated, a 
Man standing on the Floor touches those Bodies, 
the Snap is felt, and the Fire is seen. But this 
snapping is not when the Fire passes off continual-
ly, as from a Piere of blunt Wire hung to the 
Barrel, and a Han# brought near it. Then it ap-
pears like a blue Cone of Flame, with it's Point 
towards the Wire. When the Hand is held at a 
proper Distance there is a Blast therefrom, as of 
cold Air. If you #o not determine the Electric 
Fire to a Point, it is dispersed from all parts of the 
electrified Body: But if you do, by thus holding 
your Hand near the Fire, you see how it passes to 
the Floor, and so into the Earth. The Globe there-
fore only circulates this Fire, which is collected by 
it's Friction against the Hand or Cushion, and 
which is constantly supplied to these from the Earth. 
And accordingly the #ngr#ss of it, as well as the 
Egress is visible. For, if while any unelectrified 
Body touches the Barrel, you bring your Finger near 
the Wood-Work of the Machine, you will see 
the Brush of Blue Flame set in from it to the Wood-
Work. And this Flame passes diverging into the 
Machine, and continues as long as the Barrel is 
touched. P. 44. 

12. That the Electric Atmosphere which sur-
rounds all electrified Bodies, extends to a consider-
able Distance, appears from their attracting a fine Thread, at the Distance of some Feet. If no un-
electrified Body is near, this Atmosphere seems to be equally spread over that which is electrified. But if one unelectrified is brought near, the greatest Part of it is determined that Way; whence the Attraction of the other Parts of the electrified Body 
|P_34is considerably diminished. This is the Cause of Electric Repulsion, which does not operate, till the Electric Ether is sufficiently accumulated. This Repulsion is strongest in #hose Parts of the electrified Body, where unelectrified Bodies are brought near it. For by these the Electric Blast, which otherwise is general, is particularly deter-
mined. P. 46. 

13. When the Machine is placed upon Rosin, 
if a Man standing likewise on Rosin, touches the 
Barrel while the Globe is turning, he will receive a 
Snap or two, and no more. But if he touch the 
Wood-Work of the Machine with one Hand, and 
the Barrel with the other, he receives Snaps again, 
which continue as long as he touches the Machine, 
and no longer. Here the Man by touching the 
Machine with one Hand, becomes a Part thereof; 
and by turning the Globe, Part of the Electric 
Fire inherent in his Body, is transmitted to the Bar-
rel; but it is restored to him, on his touching the 
Barrel with his other Hand. If instead of touch-
ing the Machine or Barrel he holds his Finger 
near either, or both, you see the Fire go out and 
return. P. 64. 

14. May we not gather from the preceeding 
Experiments, 1. That the Attraction and Repul-
sion of electrified Bodies, is owing to the Flux of 
Electric Ether? 2. That this Ether is no other 
than pure Fire? 3. That this Fire appears in dif-
ferent Forms, according to it's different Modifica-
tions? When brought towards a Point is it not a 
lambent Flame? When nearer still, may we not 
both hear and feel it? And does not it's lighting 
up Spirits demonstrate, that it is real Fire? 4. That 
this Fire is intimately connected with all Bodies, 
tho' least of all with pure, dry Air? We have ex-
tracted it from Water, Flame, Smoke, red hot 
Iron; and from a Mixture 30 Degrees colder than 
|P_35
the freezing Point. 5. That it is extremely subtle 
and highly Elastic? 6. That the Electric Machine 
may as properly be term'd a Fire-Pump, as Mr. 
Foyle's Machine, an Air Pump? And lastly, that 
Fire is not Mechanically producible from other 
Bodies, but is an original, distinct Principle? 

[}An Extract from Mr. Wilson's Dissertation onElec-
tricity. }]
Prop. 1. When two Bodies equally replete with 
Electric Matter approach each other, no Flame or 
Snap will ensue. P. 5. 

Prop. 2. Two Bodies equally electrified repel 
each other. P. 6. 

Prop. 3. An Electric Body interposed between 
a Person and the Earth, prevents his exciting Elec-
tricity in another Body by Friction. P. 11. 

Prop. 4. If there is originally a certain Quanti-
ty of Electric Matter in a Body of a given Mag-
nitude and Density; and that Matter be equally 
distributed therein, by it's Elastic Force, according 
to the Density of the Parts: Upon increasing the 
Quantity of Matter by adding other Bodies of the 
same Kind, the Quantity of Electric Matter will 
be increased in the same Proportion. P. 14. 

Prop. 5. As Electric Bodies act on light Bo-
dies that are not electrified, so unelectrified Bodies 
act on the Electric Matter contain'd in electrified
 Bodies. P. 16. 

Let a Wire be electrified in the Dark, and if 
you hold any unelectrified Body 7 or 8 Inches from 
the End of it, a Stream of Fire will issue from it, 
which will diverge to that Body. But the Diver-
gency will lessen as it approaches it, till the Rays 
become parallel. If the Body be held not directly 
before the End of the Wire, but wide of it at 
about two Inches Distance, the Fire will describe 
curvilinear Rays towards that Body. P. 17. 

|P_36
Hence it appears, that unelectrified Bodies act in 
like Manner with electrified: Only the acting Force 
of the one being increased by Friction, is greater 
than that of the other. 

Prop. 6. When two equally Electric Atmos-
pheres are brought so near as to touch, they repell 
each other with a Force equal to their Densi-
ties. P. 19. 

Prop. 7. If while a Fluid surrounds a Globe 
which is electrified and turn'd round an Axis pas-
sing thro' it's Center, an unelectrified Body be held 
near the Equator of it, the Fluid will rise succes-
sively towards that Body, as it turns round, in 
like Manner as the Sea is affected by the Moon. 
P. 23. 

The Shock given by the Phial is in Proportion 
to the Size of it, the thinness of the Glass, and 
the Number of Points in contact with it's Sur-
face. P. 25. 

[}An Extract from Mr. Martin's Essay on Electricity. }]
1. The Electric Matter is emitted from some 
sort of Bodies when rubb'd, which are call'd Elec-
trics. P. 9. 

2. By other Sorts of Bodies, therefore term'd 
Non-Electrics, it is not emitted. 

3. It will run off to all Non-Electrics, but it re-
strained by all Electrics. 

4. It shines like a Flame, and is emitted with a 
Snap: If towards a Non Electric, the Fire is con-
densed, less or more, and so appears of a bluish, 
Purple, Yellow, or White Colour. 

When the Electric Fire is not so much condens-
ed as to explode, as in Thunder and Lightning it 
goes off in a dilated Stream of purple Flame, great-
ly resembling that Part of the Aurora Borealis,
which appears in Streams of Light. 

|P_37
When it is little condensed, it appears bluish, as 
all other faint Lights do: When a little denser, it 
appears Purple: When denser still, it looks Yellow,
like Candle Light: When highly condensed, it is 
clear and white, like the Light of the Sun. So 
the White Lightning is of all others most fierce. 
So Phosphorus rubb'd a little, spends itself in an 
harmless Blue Flame: But upon a greater Attriti-
on, kindles into a White Flame, and burns with 
an outragious and unquenchable Fire. p. 17. 

And as Lightning pervades soft Substances un-
hurt, but dissolves hard and compact Bodies, so 
Electric Fire pervades the soft, muscular Parts of 
the Body, but violently strikes the Bones and Ten-
dons. Again, as those denser Parts of Lightning 
which we call Thunder-Bolts, striking against hard 
Bodies, glance by Reflection to different Parts, so 
this Fire, striking against the Elbow, is reflected 
from thence across the Breast, to the other El-
bow. p. 18. 

Indeed different Persons are affected thereby in 
a very different Manner. Some are extremely ca-
pable of it, some not: And some are not suscep-
tible of it at all: A Person, for Instance, who has 
the Small-Pox, cannot be electrified by any Means 
whatever. p. 20. 

Experiment 1. On the Axis, in the Center of 
my Globe, is fixt a circular String of Threads. 
When the Globe is at rest, they all hang down: 
When it is in Motion, they all extend themselves 
from the Center, strait toward the inner Surface of 
the Globe (like the Spokes of a Coach-Wheel) 
which they nearly touch. Thus they continue till 
the Electric Virtue ceases, and then gradually fall 
down, as at first. p. 22. 

Exp. 2. While they are extended, if you move 
your Hand toward the Surface of the Globe, they 
move every Way toward the Hand. Hence we see 
|P_38
the amazing Subtlety of this Fire, which pervades 
Glass as readily as if nothing were in the Way. 

Exp. 3. Place a Hoop of Fine Threads round 
the Globe in Motion, and all of them will stand 
perpendicular to the Surface. Hence we learn that 
the Electric Power acts equally, both within and 
without the Globe, and in Directions perpendicu-
lar to it's Surface. 

Exp. 4. If the Room be then darken'd, the 
Ends of the Threads on the Outside, will be all 
tipt with Fire. But those within are not, which 
shews that this Power acts only ab intraout-
wardly. p. 23. 

Exp. 5. An Iron Rod being hung on Silken 
Strings, with one End about  of an Inch from the 
Globe, will at the other End (which terminates in 
a conical Point) emit a Purple Flame diverging 
every Way. Hold your Finger within  of an Inch, 
and the Fire will issue more largely. p. 24. 

Exp. 6. Hold your Finger still nearer, and the 
Rays will be so condensed as to run to it in a 
Stream of Yellow Flame; which is also sensible to 
the Feeling, as a gentle Wind, and smells like the 
Fire of Phosphorus. 

Exp. 7. If you put your Finger on the Rod, 
the Flame instantly disappears, the Fire all running 
off upon the Finger. But take it off, and the 
Flame appears again. 

Exp. 8. Apply your Finger near a Tin Tube 
so suspended, and you may see the Fire, and both 
hear and feel the Snap. p. 25. 

Exp. 14. Under an electrified Plate, put some 
Leaf-Gold or other light Substances on another 
Plate unelectrified: And it will be attracted and 
repell'd alternately, between the two Plates. For, 
each Time it touches the lower Plate, it discharges 
he Electric Fire, and so becomes again attract-
ble. p. 28. 

|P_39
Exp. 18. If to a Gun Barrel you adapt a 
small Tin Cup, and pour in Water; a Person 
holding his Finger perpendicular over the Water, 
within  of an Inch of it's Surface, will find the 
Water rise in Form of a Cone to meet his Finger, 
and from the Top of it, a Stream of Fire will issue 
to the Finger and snap as usual p. 30. 

Exp. 19. A dry Spunge is an Electric. But if 
it be dipt in Water, and then hung on the Barrel, 
put your Finger near it, and the Fire issues out, and 
the Drops which before fell very slowly, will now 
fall very fast. If the Room be darkened, they will 
appear as Drops of Fire. p. 3#. 

Exp. 20. A Syphon hung on the Cup, drops 
very gently till it is electrified; but then the Wa-
ter runs in a Stream, which in the Dark is like a Stream of Fire. 

Exp. 21. Open a Vein in a Person standing on the Rosin, and the Blood will fly out to a certain Distance. But let him be electrified, and it will spin out with a much greater Force, and to a far greater Distance. 

Exp. 24. If Mercury be put for Water, the Electric Force is something greater, but in no Pro-
portion to it's Density. 

Exp. 25. When the Mercury is saturated, the 
Electric Streams will issue thro' the Wire more co-
piously than from the Phial of Water, and will 
snap of themselves, which the Streams issuing from 
the Water never do. 

Exp. 27. The electrified Phial will not retain 
the Fire very long: But if you hold it up in a 
dark Room, it will be seen to go off from the 
Point of the Wire, in a small white Flame. p. 34. 

Exp. 30. A Cup of Water held by an electri-
fied Person will emit Fire more forcibly than his 
Body. p. 35. 

|P_40
Exp. 32. A Person standing on the Ground, 
cannot easily kiss an electrified Person standing on 
the Rosin. p. 36. 

Exp. 38. If a square Piece of Leaf Gold be 
placed between two Plates, about two Inches asun-
der, one of them electrified, the other not at first 
it will be attracted, and repell'd alternately, till in 
a while it will lose its Motion, and remain sus-
pended between them. p. 39. 

Exp. 42. If the Globe be exhausted of Air, 
and then turn'd, the electric Fire will act wholly 
within the Globe, where it will appear (in a dark 
Room) as a Reddish or Purple Flame, filling the 
whole Globe. But this, as the Air is re-admitted 
into it, will gradually disappear. In this Case, the 
electric Fire is confined within, by the elastic Air 
on the Outside. p. 40. 

[}An Extract from Mr. Watkins's Account of electrical 
Experiments. }]
When the Machine is to be used, the Globe 
should be wiped clean, with a clean, dry, warm 
Flannel, it's Pivots oil'd, and the Cushion and 
Phial warmed. In damp Weather, there should be 
a Fire in the Room. p 4. 

Exp. 4. Let an unelectrify'd Plate, with scour-
ing Sand upon it, be held 5 or 6 Inches under an 
electrify'd Plate, and the Sand will be so attracted 
and repell'd, as to resemble a stormy Shower. p. 16. 

Exp. 7. If a Glass Ball, of 4 or 5 Inches dia-
meter, be hung by a Wire to the Gun-barrel, and 
a Ball of  of an Inch diameter, exceeding thin, 
placed on a smooth Plate, be brought near it, this 
will not only be attracted by the large Ball, but 
will perform continual Revolutions round it, ex-
actly as the Planets do round the Sun. p. 22. 

Exp. 9. Hang a Loadstone on the Barrel, and 
a Key on the Armature of it: And if you bring 
|P_41
your Finger near the Key, it will snap and emit 
Fire. A plain Proof that the electric and magnetic 
Power no way hinder each other. p. 25. 

Exp. 35. A Sparrow kill'd by the electric 
Shock, was found livid without, as if kill'd with a 
Flash of Lightning, and most of the Blood Vessels 
within were burst. Animals shock'd on the Head, 
if not kill'd, are commonly struck blind. p. 55. 

Exp. 41. Ice held by an electrify'd Person, 
will fire warm Spirits of Wine. p. 61. 

Exp. 43. Mr. Watson put an Ounce of Oil of 
Vitriol, an Ounce of Iron Filings and four Ounces
 of Water, into a Flask. An Ebullition ensued. 
An electrify'd Person applied his Finger to the 
Mouth of the Flask. The Vapour took fire, and 
burnt out of the Neck a long Time. p. 63. 

From an Experiment made by Mr. Watson, and 
others, it appear'd, that the electric Fire circulat-
ed, without Interruption, from the Surry Side of 
the Thames over Westminster Bridge, to the West-
minster Side, and thence thro' the River to the Surry
Side again, which is upwards of 800 Yards. Spirits 
of Wine also were fired at the same Distance. 

From this, and several other Experiments, it ap-
peared, that Distance, simply considered, did lit-
tle, if at all, impair the Force of the electric Shock. 

They afterwards convey'd this Shock thro' a 
Circuit of four Miles, and sound the Motion of 
the electric Fire to be nearly, if not quite, instan-
taneous. 
