
|P_
THE Publisher of the following short Ac-
count of the ÆTHER having prepared, 
and successfully made Use of it in his private 
Practice, for several Years, has at length deter-
min'd to endeavour to extend it's Utility, by thus 
making it public; as he knows of no one who 
has ever published it's medicinal Virtues; or offer-
ed it to Sale in it's Perfection; or given the Cri-
teria by which they who are unacquainted with 
it might distinguish the Genuine from the Spuri-
ous: And he doubts not but every candid Person 
who examines it, will agree with him, That it 
carries with it the strongest Marks of a valuable 
Addition to the Materia Medica, and therefore 
ought to lie no longer in Obscurity. 

|P_
[}AN 
ACCOUNT 
OF THE 
ÆTHER, &c.}]
[^Decorative frame around the letter "T".^]THIS truly extraordinary Chemical Pre-
paration is not a new Discovery, having 
been known and esteemed, as a valuable 
Curiosity, by many of the greatest Che-
mists and Philosophers, both Ancient and 
Modern; particularly by Sir[/1./]Isaac Newton, and the 
Honourable[/2./] Mr. Boyle, who both mention it in their 
Works, tho' not by this Name: And therefore be-
fore any Thing is said of it's Virtues as a Medicine, it 
may not be improper to explain the Nature of it, and 
enumerate a few of it's remarkable Properties, consider-
ed as a Curiosity in Chemistry, in which Light chiefly 
it has hitherto been view'd by those who have been 
acquainted with it. 

It is a kind of Ethereal Oil, produced by the 
Decomposition of the Vinous Spirit by Means of the 
Vitriolic Acid, and differs essentially both from Vinous 
Spirits and Essential Oils in several Respects, tho' it 
agrees with them in some, as will appear hereafter: 
But as the Vinous Spirit may be decomposed by means 
of all the three Mineral Acids, viz. the Vitriolic, the 
|P_4
Nitrous and the Marine, and as these all act differently 
on the Spirit, they will, of Course, produce three dif-
ferent Kinds of ÆTHER; which, from the Name 
of the Acid employ'd in making them, are term'd Ma-
rine, Nitrous, or Vitriolic: The last only is the Kind 
here understood, it's Properties being more singular and 
extraordinary, and, as an ÆTHER, more perfect 
than either of the others; the Reason of which seems 
to be, that the Vitriolic Acid is a much stronger Agent 
on the Spirit, and more perfectly decomposes it, than 
either the Nitrous or Marine.

It is the most light, most volatile, and most in-
flammable, of all known Liquids: It swims upon the 
highest rectified Spirit of Wine as Oil does upon Wa-
ter, and flies away so quickly as hardly to wet a Hand 
it is dropped upon; from which Properties it probably 
has obtained it's Name. It is so readily inflammable, 
as to take Fire at the approach of a Candle, before the 
Flame touches it. Any Electrified Body will also pro-
duce the same Effect. 

It is one of the most powerful Solvents known in Che-
mistry: It is neither acid nor alcaline, and therefore is 
perfectly free from that faline Acrimony with which all 
the common Volatile Spirits abound: It has a greater 
Affinity with Gold than Aqua Regia has, altho' it will 
not dissolve it in the Mass, or whilst in it's Metallic 
Form; but if you add ÆTHER to a solution of 
Gold in Aqua Regia, it presently takes all the Gold 
from it's former Solvent, keeping it perfectly dissol-
ved and suspended, without the least Precipitation; 
and becomes of a yellow Colour: The ÆTHER, 
thus saturated with the Gold, does not mix with the 
Aqua Regia, but may readily be separated from it by 
simple Decantation, and thus a true and safe Aurum 
|P_5
potabile is readily prepared for those who want such a 
Medicine. The Union of these two Substances is very remarkable, one being the heaviest solid Body we know, 
and the other the lightest Liquid. 

The ÆTHER is remarkably cold, when dropped 
upon the Hand, and it affects the Thermometer in an 
extraordinary Manner; for if the Ball of either a Mer-
curial or Spirituous Thermometer be immersed in it, 
the Spirit or Mercury immediately sinks considerably, 
tho' both the ÆTHER and the Thermometer have 
stood a sufficient Time together to be brought to the 
temperature of the Room, before the Experiment was 
made. The Thermometers dipt into Water, or Spirit 
of Wine, in the same Manner, suffer not the least Al-
teration. 

They who chuse to see a further Account of the 
singular Effects which this curious Fluid produces, may 
peruse what Doctor Frobenius, a German Chemist, has 
published concerning it, in the Philosophic Transactions 
for the Years 1733 and 1741. 

But the most valuable Qualities of the ÆTHER 
are it's medicinal ones; it having been found by repeat-
ed Experience to be an excellent Remedy in most ner-
vous Diseases; particularly in Fits of all sorts, whether Epileptic, Convulsive, Hysteric, Hypochondriac, or Para-
lytic: In habitual Head-aches, Gout, Rheuma-
tism, Pains in the Stomach, Windy Disorders 
of the Stomach and Intestines, Hooping Cough, 
Asthma, Pleuritic Pains, and Deafnfss; all 
which Diseases have, in a singular Manner, been removed 
by it; and that the Publisher may contribute all the As-
sistance he can in extending the use of this Medicine, the 
following Methods of applying it are given, which have 
been attended with Success. 

|P_6
[}Particular Directions for using the ÆTHER. 
In the HEAD-ACH. }]
A Fit of the Head-ach is almost instantly removed 
by applying the ÆTHER externally to the Fore-
head, by means of a bit of Linen Rag, in the Manner 
hereafter directed for it's external Application. Or it 
may be applied to any other Part of the Head where 
the Pain lies, being first shaved, if necessary. If the 
Pain is violent, a Dose of it should be also taken in-
wardly. In stubborn Cases it will likewise be service-
able to snuff a little of the ÆTHER up the Nostrils, 
either alone or mixed with equal Parts of Lavender 
Water, Hungary Water, or Brandy; or it may be more 
convenient to apply a bit of Linen Rag, wetted with 
ÆTHER, up the Nostrils. Any of these Means, 
or all of them, must be repeated if the Pain is so ur-
gent as to require it. To cure this Disorder radically, 
when it is of long standing, and to prevent it's Re-
turn, the Medicine must be taken inwardly for a con-
siderable Time every Night at Bed-time, or in violent 
Cases, every Night and Morning, in a small Draught 
of cold Water, according to the General Direction for 
taking it inwardly, given p. 11. In some particular 
Cases, Vomits are very serviceable. 

[}A VERTIGO. }]
A Vertigo, Giddiness, or Swimming in the Head, 
will generally be removed by proceeding in the sam 
Manner as for the Head-ach. 

[}The EPILEPSY. }]
No Disease is more difficult to cure than the Epi-
lepsy or Falling-Sickness; yet several Instances have 
|P_7
occurred where the most violent Degrees of it have been 
cured, even in grown Persons, by taking a Dose of this 
Medicine regulary every Night and Morning for a con-
siderable Time. The Dose must be regulated accord-
ing to the Age of the Patient, as mentioned in the 
General Direction, Page 11. If a Pain is felt in 
any Part of the Head, the ÆTHER must be ap-
plied to that Part occasionally, and it must be previous-
ly shaved, if necessary. It will be proper to give a 
small Dose of Tinctura Sacra, or of the Pill. Rufi,
at proper Intervals, as once a Week or Fortnight. 
It will also, in most Cases, be necessary to give now 
and then a Vomit. If it be suspected that the Patient 
has Worms, proper Medicines to destroy them ought 
also to be given. 

[}In CONVULSIONS. }]
In Convulsions, or Convulsive Disorders, give the 
ÆTHER inwardly, a Dose two three Times a 
Day, or oftener, according to the exigence of the Case; 
and it should also be applied externally to the Fore-
head, or any other Part of the Head, during the Fit. 
If the Patient is full of Blood, bleeding is necessary, and 
if Costive, a Dose of Manna, Senna, or any gentle Lax-
ative, or a Clyster, should be given. 

[}Hysteric and Hypochondriac DISORDERS. }]
This Medicine has excellent Effect in Hysteric Fits,
and in all that Train of Symptoms which Hysteric and 
Hypochondriac Persons are subject to; such as Risings in 
the Throat threatning Suffocation, difficult Breathing, 
Flutterings and Palpitations of the Heart, frequent 
Fainting, Lowness of Spirits, violent Pains in the 
Head, Languor of the whole Body, Dullness of the 
|P_8
Mind and Senses, with constant Anxieties and Inqui-
etude, &c. The Dose must be repeated according to 
the urgency of the Symptoms; and the Medicine must 
be continued some Time after the Complaints disap-
pear, to prevent a Relapse. It will be serviceable du-
ring the Use of the ÆTHER, especially in Case of 
Costiveness, to take at proper Intervals a gentle Purge, 
such as Tinctura Sacra, Pill. Rufi, Rhubarb, or Glau-
ber's Salts. Bodily Exercise of all sorts contributes 
greatly to the Cure of these Complaints, especially Ri-
ding on Horseback. 

[}PALSY. }]
InPalsies, and all Paralytic Complaints, the Patient, if 
a grown Person, must take the quantity of a Tea Spoonful 
of the ÆTHER every Night and Morning. The Dose 
must be lessened in young People, according to their 
Age. It will also be proper to snuff a little of it up 
the Nostrils once or twice a Day, or apply a bit of Rag 
wetted with it up the Nostrils. The ÆTHER must 
also be applied externally to the Part affected, at least 
once every Day. It should likewise be applied now and 
then to the Forehead, or any other part of the Head, 
especially if the Tongue, Eyes, or any part of the 
Face or Head be affected. If the Arms or Hands are 
Paralytic, the Application should be made to the low-
er and back Part of the Neck, as well as to the Part af-
fected. If the Disease has seiz'd the Thighs, Legs, or 
Feet, the Application must not only be made to them, 
but likewise to the Back Bone, at the Loins. As this 
Medicine cannot, on account of it's Volatility and Pun-
gency, be properly applied to the Whole of a Paraly-
tic Limb at once, but only to a small Part of it, the 
Application therefore may be made sometimes to one 
|P_9
Part, and sometimes to another, as shall be thought 
proper. 

This Disease will require a longer or shorter Continu-
ance of these Means, according to the Degree of it, 
and the Time it has continued. A Vomit should be 
given, and repeated now and then as the Patient can 
bear it; but if Vomits seem too fatiguing, a Dose of 
Tinctura Sacra may be given in their room. Paralytic 
Patients should use as much Bodily Exercise as possible, 
and the Head, Neck, and the whole Spine, as well as 
the Parts affected, should be frequently rubbed with a 
hot and dry Cloth till they appear red. 

[}GOUT. }]
This Medicine is of singular Service in the Gout, not 
only while it continues in the Limbs, but particularly 
when it flies inwards, and attacks the Head, Stomach, or 
any of the internal Parts; in which Cases a few Doses will 
not fail to give present Relief. It should be taken in the 
Quantity of a Tea Spoonful, two or three Times every 
Day, or oftener, if the Case be violent, during the Gou-
ty Fit. It carries off the Gouty Matter by Urine, which 
it renders very thick and turbid. At any Time when 
there is a Necessity to abate the excessive Pain in the 
Part affected, the ÆTHER may be applied to it 
externally, according to the Method given p. 12. It 
will be proper to continue taking the ÆTHER once 
or twice a Day for some Time after the Fit is gone, 
and to begin taking it again about the Time of it's 
expected Return; by which Means, tho' it may not 
prevent the Return of the Fit, which in many Cases 
perhaps ought not to be desired, yet it will shorten it's 
Continuance, and moderate the Pain of it. 

|P_10
[}RHEUMATISM. }]
In Rheumatic Complaints the Patient must take a 
Dose of this Medicine every Night and Morning, or 
oftener, if the Pains are violent; and it must be conti-
nued till the Disease is removed, or longer, to prevent 
a Relapse. If the Pain is fixed in any particular Part, 
the ÆTHER must be applied to it twice a Day, as 
directed hereafter. It must be observed that #####
very much conduces to the Cure of obstinate #ic 
Rheumatisms, and must be repeated at proper Intervals 
if necessary; the Blood in this Disease being generally 
very sizy. 

[}Disorders of the Stomach and Intestines.}]
This Medicine presently cures Flatulent Cholics, 
removes all Windy Disorders of the Stomach and In-
testines, and corrects Acidities lodged there. It is also 
found to have excellent Effect in correcting that Weak-
ness, or bad Habit of the Stomach and Intestines, 
which studious Persons, and such as lead sedentary 
Lives, are particularly subject to, and is attended with 
four Belchings, Heart-burn, Windy Distensions, Pain 
and Uneasiness in the Stomach and Bowels. It must 
be taken every Night and Morning, according to the 
General Direction below. Care should be taken to 
prevent Costiveness in these Cases, which is best remo-
ved by chewing Rhubarb, or taking it any other way, 
or by a Dose of Manna, or Glauber's Salts, taken oc-
casionally. 

The ÆTHER is an extraordinary Diuretic in 
Dropsies: It is an excellent Medicine in an Asthma, 
and the Hiccup; and may be looked upon as a Spe-
cific in that Disease of Children called the Hooping-
Cough, or Chin-Cough; in all which Cases it must 
|P_11
be taken inwardly, according to the General Directi-
on below, and the repetition of the Dose must be regu-
lated by the violence of the Disease. 

ADose of it taken at going to Bed, after Drink-
ing too freely, has been found to prevent the Head-
ach, Sickness, &c. which usually follow next Morning. 

It has removed Deafness, and Hardness of Hear-
ing, by moistening a little Cotton with a few Drops 
of it, putting it into the Ear, and holding the Finger 
for a few Minutes over it, at the same Time snuffing 
a few Drops of it, mixed with Spirit of Lavender, up 
the Nostrils, or putting a bit of Rag wet with the 
ÆTHER alone up the Nostrils. 

It has frequently removed a temporary Dimness of 
Sight, attended with a Swimming or Uneasiness in 
the Head, by external Application to the Forehead; 
and is a promising Medicine in that Sort of Blindness 
called a Gutta Serena, and in Beginning Cata-
racts, in which Cases it should be taken inwardly, as 
well as applied to the Forehead, and up the Nostrils. 

It is likewise found to be of great Service in remo-
vingPleuritic Pains, and Stitches in the Side, 
by applying it to the affected Part, in the Manner di-
rected for external Application. 

[}The Method of taking the ÆTHER Inwardly. }]
The General Dose for a grown Person is a common 
Tea Spoonful; and the best Vehicle to take it in is a 
small Draught of Cold Water. If it be only stirred 
in the Water with the Spoon, and the Mixture drank 
immediately it strikes the Nostrils by it's Volatility, 
but may be thought by some as agreeable when 
so taken as when the two Liquors are more in-
timately mixed, by shaking them together in a Phial, 
|P_12
and from thence pouring them into a Glass to be 
drank; for tho' it has but little Smell in this Manner, 
it is more warm to the Palate than in the other. The 
Patient may use the Way of Mixing he likes best, and 
if he has any Objection to Water, may take it in any 
other agreeable cold Liquor. Children in the Month 
may take two or three Drops for a Dose; those of a 
Year old may take seven or eight Drops; those of five 
or six Years old may take from twenty to twenty-five 
Drops, and so encreasing according to their Years: 
Or it may perhaps be better, in giving it to Children, 
to mix a Tea Spoonful of ÆTHER, with a convenient 
Quantity of Water, and, shaking it well, give at a 
Dose about one twentieth Part of this Mixture to a Child 
a Month old; about one eighth Part to a Child 
twelve or fourteen Months old; to those about five 
Years old one third Part of the Mixture; half of the 
Mixture to those about seven Years old, and two thirds 
of it to those about fourteen Years old. 

[}The Method of applying the ÆTHER Externally. }]
To apply it Externally, you must procure a Bit of 
Linen Rag, of such a Dimension as to be conveniently 
covered by the Palm of the Hand; moisten this Rag 
with a little of the ÆTHER as it lies upon your 
Palm, and instantly apply it to the Part affected, pres-
sing it very close, so as to prevent the Escape of it's 
Fumes, for two or three Minutes, in which Time the 
Rag will be found dry, and may be taken away. It 
will be more convenient, on some Occasions, (as in 
applying it to Paralytic Parts, Rheumatic Pains, and 
the Gout, to place the Rag upon a Piece of a soft, thin 
Bladder; and, when moisten'd with the ÆTHER, 
to bind it gently upon the Part. A slight Redness usually 
|P_13
appears upon the Part after the Application, but it 
quickly vanishes; but it may sometimes happen, where 
the Skin is very tender and too much ÆTHER has 
been applied to the Forehead, or within the Ears, that 
it may affect the Skin more than the Patient chooses; 
which is avoided by applying a less Quantity for the 
future. This is the Secret of a present famous Practi-
tioner, who having a Method sometimes of concealing 
his Application, is said to cure the Head-ach, fixed 
Rheumatic Pains, &c. by the Touch of his Hand. 

It is very easy to conceive, from the extreme Sub-
tlety of this Medicine, that it must produce many ex-
cellent Effects in such Diseases as those above menti-
oned, as it is converted into Vapour by a much less 
Heat than the common Animal One; so that being 
swallowed, it can hardly subsist in any Part of the human 
Body under any Form but that of an extremely pene-
trating volatiliz'd Vapour; and it is perceptible by 
it's Smell, as it passes thro' the Pores of the Skin, se-
veral Hours after taking; so that it's stay in the Body 
is longer, and it's Effects there more durable, than 
might be expected from such a subtle Substance. 

Notwithstanding the extreme Subtlety of the 
ÆTHER, it is perfectly innocent and safe to take, 
as it contains nothing that is acrimonious or corrosive; 
so that it may be given even to the youngest Children 
without Hesitation. It neither purges nor vomits; nor 
does it encrease any of the sensible Evacuations, ex-
cept that of Urine, and sometimes that of Sweat, if 
taken when in Bed; but as it is so distinctly perceived 
by the Smell passing thro' the cutaneous Pores of those 
who take it, it is highly probable that it encreases in-
sensible Perspiration. 

|P_14
Another observable Property in this Medicine is, 
that it does not coagulate or thicken the Serum of the 
Blood, but thins it; and therefore has direct contrary 
Effects to all the common Spirituous Compositions, when 
either taken inwardly, or externally applied, and is es-
sentially different from the most subtiliz'd Vinous Spi-
rits; for tho' Spirit of Wine is used in making it, yet 
it is so far decomposed by the Process, that it's Nature 
is entirely changed. In consequence of this Quality in 
the ÆTHER, the Publisher has successfully dissolved 
some particular obstinate Tumours, by applying it to 
them, when other Means have failed—This Hint He 
hopes will not pass unnoticed by the Gentlemen of the 
Faculty, as it is evident no Application whatever can 
equal it in Subtlety and Dissolving Power. 

THE Medicine so much celebrated in Germany, and 
so frequently commended and used in Practice by the 
late famous Professor Hoffman, under the Title of his 
Liquor Mineralis Anodynus, was nearly of the same Na-
ture with the ÆTHER, but not so powerful, nor so 
highly subtilized. 

Repeated Experience has confirmed the Efficacy of 
this Medicine in all the Diseases before mentioned; and 
from the Consideration of it's uncommon Qualities, it 
may be presumed to be an excellent Remedy in many 
others, if judiciously given: Hence it seems surprising 
that so valuable an Addition to the Materia Medica as 
the ÆTHER doubtless is, should have been so much 
neglected, or so little known; but the Reasons are, 
that the Process whereby it was made was kept secret 
by some who rated the Preparation at a very extrava-
gant Price, and not sufficiently attended to by others, 
who consider'd it only as a Chemical Curiosity, not as 
a Medicine. 

|P_15
The chief Merit the Publisher of this Account pre-
tends to, is, the ascertaining the Medicinal Virtues of this 
curious Preparation, by several Years Experience, and 
making them more publickly known; the reducing it's 
Price, which has hitherto been so extravagant that had 
it's Virtues and Properties been known, only a small 
number of the afflicted could have enjoy'd the Benefit 
of it; and, the bringing it to a greater Degree of Perfec-
tion than any hitherto sold; what he offers being a per-
fectly rectified Vitriolic ÆTHER. 

It may not be improper to give the Marks by 
which good ÆTHER may be known. It is per-
fectly colourless, except it has receiv'd some accidental 
Tinge from the Cork of the Phial in which it has been 
kept; and so volatile as to strike the Nose very power-
fully. It's Smell is more or less sulphureous, accord-
ing to the management of some Part of the Process. 
Wetting the Finger with it, or dropping a little upon 
the Hand, it vanishes instantly, and leaves no Moisture 
behind; so that the Part scarcely seems to have been 
wet. Half a Dozen Drops, dropped together upon 
a Table, will disappear in a few Seconds of a Minute, 
and leave only the Appearance of a large oily Ring be-
hind; but if it leaves the least Watery or Spirituous 
Moisture, or does not evaporate in much less than a 
Minute, it is not good. The best ÆTHER will 
dissolve in, or mix with, a certain Quantity of Water; 
and that is the best which requires the largest Quantity 
of Water to dissolve it: If, therefore, to six Tea Spoons-
ful of Water in a small Phial, you add one of the Æ-
THER to be examined, cork up the Phial, and 
shake them very well together; and upon standing a 
little while some part of the ÆTHER appears at 
Top, in form of Oil, sufficient to cover the surface of 
the Mixture, it may be pronounced good, (provided it 
|P_16
also answers in the other Methods of Trial) and the 
more appears the better is the ÆTHER; but if 
none appears, or not enough to cover the surface of 
the Mixture, it was either adulterated, or not well rec-
tified. If to this Mixture of ÆTHER and Water 
you add a little Salt of Tartar, and any Fermentation 
ensues, the ÆTHER was not well rectified. Upon 
shaking briskly a Phial containing ÆTHER, if the 
Bubbles, or Proof as they are usually called, do not disap-
pear in less Time, and in larger Bubbles, than any o-
ther Liquor, (the Vinous Alcohol perhaps excepted.) 
'tis not Genuine. 

It is the more necessary to observe these Rules of 
proving the Quality of the ÆTHER, as the im-
perfect Sorts have been found to disagree with the 
Stomach, and produce other bad Effects, besides dis-
appointing the Patient's Expectation. 

The ÆTHER that has the foremention'd Pro-
perties, (for there are Preparations sold by the same 
Name, which are very imperfect Imitations of it) is 
made and sold by M. TURNER, Surgeon, in Liverpool.
The Ounce Phial two Shillings; the Half Ounce one 
Shilling. The Phials are square; the Word ÆTHER 
inscribed on one Side, and M. TURNER on the op-
posite, and sealed with a Lion gardant, &c. Proper 
Abatement will be made to Druggists, Apothecaries, 
or the Gentlemen of the Faculty who use any consi-
derable Quantity. To prevent it's escape and loss, a 
small Quantity of Water is put into each Phial, which 
should be kept with the Cork downwards, by which 
Means the ÆTHER is prevented, by the interposi-
tion of the Water, from evaporating. 

The Publisher has also appointed it to be sold by 
Mr. R. Board, Chemist and Druggist, in Grace-church-
street; and Mr. J. Wilkie, Bookseller, at the Bible in 
St. Paul's Church-yard, LONDON: and Mr. Peter 
Wilson, Bookseller, in Dame-street,Dublin. 
