
|P_
[}AN 
INQUIRY
INTO THE 
Nature, Cause, and Cure
OF THE 
CROUP.
angina membranacea}]
THE Science of Medicine has been, 
gradually, advancing for these two 
thousand years by past; and is now 
brought to a great degree of improve-
ment; perhaps to as great a degree, every 
circumstance considered, as the difficulty of 
the art, the limitation of the human facul-
ties, and the continual attempts to further 
refinement, too often conducted merely by 
fancy, will admit of. 

One used to consider the progress of the 
different arts, their gradual advancement to 
perfection, and their subsequent decay, may 
|P_4
be apt to contemplate, with some alarm, the 
present situation of physic. More attention 
is paid to the classing of diseases, as if they 
were natural and permanent entities, than 
to the complete history of each particular 
one; more to the sub-division and splitting 
of them into separate species, from some 
slight difference in the symptoms, than to 
the general turn and complexion of the 
whole disease; more to the novelty and 
change of application, than to the improve-
ment of what is already discovered and in 
use. These, a speculative mind will be apt 
to consider as proofs of too great refine-
ment, and distant marks of a future change. 

It is by a close attention to the history 
of particular diseases, that the science has 
made such great advances. The accuracy of 
ancient and modern authors hath left few 
diseases untouched. By describing every 
circumstance belonging to them, and the 
appearances, which occurred, on inspecting 
the bodies after death, they have ascertain-
ed most diseases, and laid a foundation for 
arriving at as certain a knowledge of the 
|P_5
rest, as the narrow limits of our powers will 
allow. For cases in medicine are the expe-
riments of this branch of Natural Philoso-
phy. 

There is one disease, however, which 
had entirely escaped all regular examina-
tion; and concerning which, there was lit-
tle to be learned by inquiry, and still less 
from books; I mean the Croup. I never 
have seen any thing written on this subject, 
except a Thesis, where the author gives us 
no facts; and classes it amongst the spasmodic 
distempers, to which it has no resemblance, 
either in its progress or cure. The Catarrhus 
suffocativus of Etmuller, tho' it resembles the 
Croup in many particulars, yet appears to be 
a very different disease in some symptoms, 
in the cure, and appearances after death. 

DrRussel, in his Oeconomy of Nature, 
describes, in a few lines, a disease very similar 
to this, in most of its symptoms: But it seems 
not exactly the same, as it was attended with 
ulcers about the larynx, and terminated of-
ten in a sphacelus of the lungs. Besides, 
|P_6
had it been the same disease with our Croup, 
the same appearances must have occurred, 
upon dissection, to him as to us. 

I shall, therefore, treat this disease 
as entirely unknown as to its nature, cause, 
effects, and cure; and try how far our facts 
will carry us towards a discovery of these. 

How so singular and dangerous a disease 
has been totally neglected, while such atten-
tion has been paid to most others, is not the 
least surprising circumstance belonging to it. 
Its external features ought to have been suf-
ficient to have roused an inquisitive searcher 
into diseases; its internal appearances, if but 
once seen, must have raised, from their sin-
gularity, the strongest desire to investigate 
its nature. But these seem to have been more 
than counterbalanced by its local situation; 
the unfrequency of its appearance; the sub-
jects which it attacked, these being general-
ly children, and unable to give a distinct ac-
count of their complaints; the rapidity of 
its course; the apparent easiness of its symp-
toms; and their similitude to other catarrhal 
|P_7
or peripneumoniac distempers. These seem 
to be sufficient reasons for its being so long 
undistinguished and undescribed, without 
laying us under any necessity of looking on 
it as a new disease. Probably it has existed 
more or less in all ages; for the same pro-
ductive causes must have operated formerly, 
as they do at present. 

This disease happens, or at least is ob-
served, so seldom in this city, that very few 
cases must occur to any particular person, 
during the course of a whole lifetime. To 
have the power of seeing more, one must put 
himself in the way of intelligence, especially 
at places situated on the coast. By that 
means, I have had an opportunity of attending 
more cases, than otherwise would have fallen 
to the share of any one. The danger of the 
symptoms under such apparent ease, and the 
singularity of its appearances after death, in 
the first examination, excited my curiosity. 
The subsequent cases were sufficient to show 
me its nature, tho' perhaps not to point out 
a certain cure. That is not always allowed 
to mortals. To be able, however, to distin-
|P_8
guish it from other diseases; to discover the 
nature of it; to point out when it is cureable, 
and when not; perhaps to lay a foundation 
for improvement in its most desperate state; 
that is the design of the following pages. 

To be the first author in treating a disease; 
to have no assistance from preceding experi-
ence, is a situation a little uncommon in these 
modern times. To this cause, and to the 
rarity of the disease, must be imputed my 
not bringing it to that degree of improve-
ment, that I could wish; and that has hap-
pened in other diseases. If this can serve 
for a foundation to excite others to inquire, 
to preserve, and to communicate facts ob-
served by them, my labour will be well be-
stowed. 

This disease appears to belong peculiarly 
to children; and the younger they are, af-
ter they are weaned, the more liable they seem 
to it. On the breast, they appear less sub-
ject to it; or, which is as probable, as they 
cannot tell their complaints, it is taken for 
some other disease. I never saw, or heard of 
one, above twelve years of age, affected by 
|P_9
it. After this the body gains a strength 
capable of resisting the cause, or of expelling 
it when received. About this time, or a lit-
tle after, very great changes happen in the 
human frame. 

It seems, likewise, in a great measure, to 
have a local situation; and to be very sel-
dom found at any great distance from the 
sea-shore. It appears much less in Edinburgh
than in Leith, or Musselburgh. It is often 
seen along the coast of Fife; and is very 
common, I am told, along the coast of Air-
shire and Galloway. Tho' I never heard of 
it in the neighbouring coast of England, yet 
probably it is to be found there too. The 
same causes, that kept it from being so long 
attended to here, may still make it neglected 
there. Very wet and marshy situations, 
sometimes, produce it. 

IN the first history of a disease, it becomes 
absolutely necessary, to set down the cases 
and the facts, as they really happened. In 
diseases, that have already been described, it 
is sufficient to enumerate the symptoms, as 
they generally appeared, by which the diffe-
rence betwixt that species, and any of the 
|P_10
former, may be observed. But in a new 
disease, as little ought to be left to the fancy 
or judgment of the historian as possible; for, 
from the natural appearance of the symptoms, 
all our reasoning and conclusions must take 
their rise. As cases are analogous to the expe-
riments of Natural Philosophy, they ought 
to be described as circumstantially. Hippo-
crates, that great historian of diseases, treats 
his epidemics, as they were new distempers, 
in this way. 

[}CASE I. }]
March 15th. Was called to Miss****, 
aged fifteen months, of an inflammatory con-
stitution, and living within a quarter of a 
mile of the sea-shore. The day before, she 
had appeared duller and hotter than usual. 
This morning she was attacked with a diffi-
culty of breathing. Her pulse was strong, 
and about 135 in a minute; five ounces of 
blood was immediately taken from her. Af-
ter which, she was seized with the sharp stri-
dolous voice, which I can resemble to no-
thing more nearly than the crowing of a 
|P_11
cock; and which is the true diagnostic sign 
of this disease. She had a quick and high 
breathing, and unusual heat in her fore-
head, and palms of her hands. Her feet and 
hands were swelled, and had an ædematous 
appearance. As her pulse was still strong, five 
ounces of blood was again taken from her, 
which seemed to ease her greatly. The 
steams of warm water and vinegar made her 
spit up, and did her service. Her belly 
was kept constantly loose with magnesia alba;
and that night a blister was applied round 
her neck. On the third day, she was a lit-
tle easier; but the voice still remained shrill, 
the breathing high, and pulse strong. At 
night four leeches were applied to her throat; 
and the orifices, constantly fomented with 
warm water, continued blooding for four 
hours. Next morning all the symptoms 
went off. In this case, the repeated blood-
ings, especially the local one, with internal 
and external fomentation, did most remark-
able service. I was not so certain about the 
effects of the blister. 

|P_12
[}CASE II. }]
MISS ******, aged eighteen months, 
healthful, living near a great loch, and a-
bout a mile distant from the sea, was seized, 
March 30th, with the Croup. She had im-
mediately lost five ounces of blood by leeches, 
and had got a vomit. Next morning, she 
had taken a second vomit, after which I first 
saw her. Her voice had the characteristical 
shrillness, only, when she raised it, or cough-
ed. Her breathing was quick. Pulse about 
130. and rather weak. Dry, rough, short 
cough. She had no pain in swallowing, but 
showed uneasiness when she turned about her 
head. Urine clear, and without sediment. 
The steams of warm water and vinegar, and 
a blister round the neck, were ordered. In 
the evening she was better, and her lungs ap-
peared somewhat moister. That night she 
rested pretty well; and on the third day her 
voice was natural, except when she coughed. 
She had a running at the nose, and there was 
a cloud in the urine. The vomit repeated. 
On the fourth day, the voice was still some-
|P_13
what unnatural. The urine now deposited 
a light sediment, which lasted for three or 
four days, during which she gradually reco-
vered. She had the same disease again six 
months after, but in a slighter manner. 

[}CASE III. }]
A Child two years old, who had had 
the small pox six weeks before, had been 
seized, August 8th, with the croupy voice. 
Leeches had been applied, and blisters be-
hind the ears, and to the throat: On the 
12th, I saw him, and sound his breath-
ing bad, great stuffing, shrill voice, and a 
swelling externally on the superior part of 
the trachea. Pulse 140. Every thing look-
ed ill. Steams, external fomentation, poul-
tices, and several leeches were applied to the 
throat. 13th, the child greatly relieved, 
more chearful, and voice more natural. 
14th, pulse much better, and the peculiari-
ty of voice and the swelling almost gone. 

I need not relate more cases of this 
kind, as such like commonly occur, and as 
|P_14
they are sufficient to prove its nature in this 
situation. The only remark that I shall 
make is, that the symptoms of these three 
patients, and their cure, show plainly the 
Croup, in this state, to be a disease of an in-
flammatory nature, attacking the organs of 
voice and respiration, particularly the supe-
rior parts of the trachea, and that the local 
inflammation often ends by resolution. This 
disease appears to be confined chiefly to the 
trachea, as the patients have no pain in de-
glutition; as they generally complain, when 
they are of an age to speak, of a dull pain in 
the upper part of it; as sometimes an 
external swelling is seen there; and as the 
fauces are at most but a little redder. 

Let us now see what light other situa-
tions of the disease, and inspection into the 
morbid body, will give us. 

[}CASE IV. }]
September 29th, 1760, was called to 
a boy of seven years of age, who had been 
some days sick. He lived on Leith bridge, had 
|P_15
been ill of the chin-cough the preceeding 
winter, and had recovered of the measles a-
bout six weeks before this. He had been fre-
quently purged, and had been tolerably well, 
excepting a slight cough, till he was seized, 
four days before I saw him, with fever, heat, 
thirst, and the shrill croupy voice. When I 
saw him, his pulse was quick, with a little 
degree of hardness, but not strong. He swal-
lowed easily; but complained of a pain in 
the trachea, when he spoke, or when I pressed 
it with my fingers. His face had been swel-
led. Great drought. Breathing high, 
but not very quick. He sometimes expecto-
rated, and had often frothy saliva upon his 
lips. The urine had a white ouzy sediment. 
His senses and his head were quite clear and 
distinct. He was immediately blooded, and 
at night had leeches applied to his throat, 
and a blister round it. The next day his 
pulse was weaker, and beat 175 in a mi-
nute. Breathing quicker, and often altered. 
Distinct in all his senses. Died that night. 

|P_16
On laying open the parts, there was no ap-
pearance of any inflammation on the fauces.
But, to my great surprise, the whole superior 
internal surface of the trachea was covered 
with a white soft thick preternatural coat 
or membrane, easily separable from it, and 
generally lying loose upon it, and purulent 
matter lodged below, and around it. The 
subjacent parts were red; but no great de-
gree of inflammation. As we searched 
downwards, the same appearances continued 
thro' the ramifications of the aspera arteria,
tho' the membrane seemed here softer, thin-
der, and to become of a more purulent na-
ture. All the branches of the windpipe and 
bronchiae were filled with purulent matter; 
and we could easily squeeze it out, in great 
plenty, from all these pipes. The substance 
of the lungs was quite sound, and in a natu-
ral state. 

These circumstances appeared, at that 
time, so new and surprising to me, that I 
looked on them as accidental, and not the 
natural effects of the disease. But I was soon 
convinced of the contrary. 

|P_17
[}CASE V. }]
October 5th. I was called-to the last 
boy's sister, aged five years, who had been 
observed, only the day before, to complain of 
a dull pain in the throat. She had been im-
mediately blooded, and had got a mixture of 
spt. minder. and theriac, with a blister to the 
neck. She had been in a constant sweat 
since she began to take the mixture. When 
I saw her she had the dry shrill voice, and 
difficult breathing, with great motion of the 
ribs and scapulae. Her face was a little swel-
led and red; deglutition easy. Her pulse 
was quick, and of a proper degree of strength. 
What she expectorated seemed to be of a pu-
rulent nature. Her senses were all in the na-
tural state. Leeches were immediately ap-
plied to her neck, and afterwards a warm 
fomentation, and the steams of warm water 
and vinegar: these appeared to give her some
 ease. At night she seemed worse, and could 
not ly long in one posture. She was vomited 
with the syr. scillit. and threw up a great deal 
of gross ropy defluxion. I tryed her with a 
|P_18
mixture of camphire and nitre. The next 
day her pulse was 152, and weaker. The 
amygdalæ appeared a little swelled, and cover-
ed with mucus. She had a little difficulty 
of deglutition. Frequent reachings. She 
called often for drink, but drunk little at a 
time. Tongue white and furred. Breath-
ing rather quicker to-day, and often altered. 
Eat some spoonfuls of panada and wine. 
She was ordered an emollient injection, and 
garlick cataplasms to her feet. In the after-
noon, all the symptoms were worse. The 
injection had operated thrice. Breathing 
difficult and quicker. Great restlessness and 
anxiety. Pulse weaker and intermitted. She 
died in the evening, all her senses being di-
stinct, and having eat somewhat just before. 
What she spit up appeared thin; but what 
came up, with the short stiffled cough, was 
always thick and yellow, like matter. 

WHEN she was opened by Mr GibsonSur-
geon, we perceived the glands at the root of 
the tongue turgid, covered with mucus, and 
their excretories open. The amygdalæ
were larger than usual; but neither they, 
|P_19
nor the neighbouring parts, were inflamed. 
All about the glottis was covered with a tough 
viscid mucus. When the trachea was open-
ed no inflammation appeared; but all its su-
perior internal surface, particularly the back 
part, next the oesophagus, was covered with a 
soft half-dissolved-like-membrahe, detached 
from the subjacent parts, lying loose like the 
blankets of a bed that has been lain in, and 
matter like pus on each side of it, and betwixt 
it and the membrane of the trachea. Some 
of the small glands about the glottis were 
turgid. The farther down we searched, the 
more purulent matter we found; but no mem-
brane appeared here. When we came to 
where the trachea enters the lungs, by squeez-
ing them, we could force out thro' it a great 
deal of whitish glutinous liquid. The same 
matter appeared in all the ramifications of 
the lungs, and they seemed to be intirely full 
of it, as we could squeeze it our, mixed with 
a little blood, from the smallest divisions of 
that canal. The substance of the lungs ap-
peared quite sound. The internal coat of 
|P_20
the stomach seemed, likewise, very soft, and 
covered with a great quantity of mucus.

[}CASE VI. }]
January 3d. I was called to a boy of 
seven years of age, at Musselburgh, who had 
gone about till this morning, but had com-
plained for four days of a great difficulty in 
his breathing, and of a constant dull pain a-
bout the head of the trachea, attended with 
a shrill voice. As his pulse was quick, and 
his breathing difficult, the Surgeon had that 
morning taken twelve ounces of blood from 
him, and given him Gum. Ammon. Sal. C. C. 
gr. iv. When I saw him, at night, his pulse 
was very frequent and weak, his breathing 
quick; still a little pain about the head of the 
trachea; no inflammation to be seen in the 
fauces, and his urine deposited an ouzy sedi-
ment. His voice was feeble, and the shrill-
ness had gone off. As I saw he would soon 
die, I desired the Surgeon to open him, and 
to be particularly attentive to every circum-
stance in the whole course of the trachea, as 
|P_21
some unusual appearances, there, had occur-
red to me in this disease. 

He told me, afterwards, that the lungs 
were not in the least inflamed; that he found, 
a little below the aperture of the glottis a 
quantity of what appeared to him pure mat-
ter; but had not observed whether or not 
there was any membrane, nor whether the 
ramifications of the trachea were filled with 
the matter. This, however, must certainly 
have been the case, as matter was actually 
found in the superior parts of the trachea,
as his lungs appeared otherwise sound, and 
could not be the cause of his death; and as 
he had the same purulent sediment in his 
urine, which I had observed in the former 
cases, and which attends all collections of 
matter, in whatever part of the body they 
are contained. To our purpose, it is suffici-
ent, that matter of a purulent kind, was 
found in the trachea.

[}CASE VII. }]
A Bookbinder's child, four years old, 
in this town, was seized with a cough and 
|P_22
quick breathing, Saturday October 5th, 
1763. As it appeared of the croupy kind, 
he was blooded with leeches that day, and 
blistered next day. After this he seemed 
better, and went coughing thro' the house 
that week. Sunday 13th, I first saw the 
child. The voice was rather more hoarse 
than usual in the croup; the pulse very quick, 
and the breathing very laborious, with a 
little pain in the throat in swallowing. Dry 
short cough. I suspected that there was a 
considerable mixture of the angina with the 
croup here. Leeches were applied to the 
neck, with fomentation and steams. 14th, 
Breathing much better, and all the symptoms 
easier. 15th, All the symptoms worse. Pulse 
and breathing very quick. Died the 16th. 

The trachea, when opened by Mr Wood
surgeon, was covered, for half an inch from 
the glottis downwards, with a firm white 
thick membrane, from which, for an inch 
further down, was a soft yellowish purulent-
like matter, not yet hardened. All the mem-
branes of the trachea were entire under these, 
but much inflamed and red. In some parts 
|P_23
of the lungs, the vesicles contained the same 
kind of matter, but in no great quantity. 

[}CASE VIII. }]
October 20th, 1763. A girl, aged four years, 
coughed a little, was out the day fol-
lowing, and, at night, the cough increased 
with hoarseness. On the 22d, Mr Wood,
the family-surgeon, by accident, saw her play-
ing, and observing her breathing laborious, 
and her pulse quick, tho' she was otherwise 
well, he blooded her. 23d, She was worse, and 
had a blister applied to her throat and back, 
and got an injection. 24th, I saw her first; 
her breathing quick, and hoarse; pulse 180; 
urine with an ouzy sediment; and was told, 
that she had coughed up, what seemed to the 
family, pure matter. By her breathing, more 
of the same kind still seemed to be left be-
hind. She eat and drank without any pain. 
To expel the matter, if possible, she got a vomit 
of squills; but nothing came away. 25th, 
She was much in the same way; and I ob-
served some matter mixed with the saliva,
|P_24
that she had coughed up. Breathing ex-
ceeding quick, and laborious. Ordered the 
steams of warm vinegar to be drawn into the 
lungs, on purpose to produce a fit of cough-
ing; but it had no such effect, and she died 
in the evening. 

WHEN the trachea was opened, by Mr 
Wood, the whole internal surface was cover-
ed with a membrane for three inches down-
wards from the glottis. This membrane was 
compleat all around, did not adhere to the 
trachea, and came off in the shape of a hol-
low tube. The natural coats of the trachea
seemed entire, and not ulcered. The substance 
of the lungs was quite sound; but the vesicles 
of the left lobe were filled with yellow thick 
pus, which sunk in water. The new formed 
membrane had some degree of tenacity; and, 
when steeped in milk-warm water for two days, 
did not dissolve, but preserved some degree 
of cohesion. Mo fibres could be observed 
in it. 

THE preceeding facts excited the curiosity 
of some gentlemen, and have been confirmed 
|P_25
from similar observations made by them, and 
which they lately transmitted to my hands. 

[}CASE IX. }]
MrWardrobe Surgeon related to me the the 
following case. A boy, eight years of 
age, and healthful, had been ill two days. 
His breathing was difficult; his voice was 
croupy; he was feverish, and had all the o-
ther symptoms of the disease. He was blood-
ed, blistered, &c. but all to no purpose; 
and died the fourth day. 

The whole trachea, externally, appeared 
swelled, and rather oedematous than inflam-
matory. When he opened it, the whole in-
side was covered with a soft, thick, pale-co-
loured membrane, which easily separated from 
the parts below; those had a slight degree 
of inflammation. When he pursued the ra-
mifications of the trachea thro' the lungs, 
there was found, there, a considerable quantity 
of real pus, which seemed to fill all those 
pipes. The lungs themselves were sound. 
Nothing can be liker the former cases than 
|P_26
this; and as Mr Wardrobe had no occasion 
of ever seeing it again, he had concluded, as 
I had done before, in similar circumstances, 
that it was an anomalous case. It now ap-
pears to be the common course of nature, in 
that disease, when mortal. 

[}CASE X. }]
The following case, in confirmation of 
the preceeding, was communicated to me 
by Mr Balfour Surgeon, and which I shall de-
liver in his own words. November 1st 1763, 
I was desired to visit a child, between two 
and three years old, living at the Canonmills.
His face was flushed; his breathing laborious; 
his cough of the hard croupy kind; his pulse 
was frequent; his tongue clean; with little 
drought, and no pain. I was informed by 
the parents, that the child had been very 
healthful; but for eight days past had been 
troubled with a cough, which did not put 
on the present appearance till the night be-
fore I was called; and that the child had, 
till that time, gone about, and eat his meat 
heartily. They had then applied leeches to 
|P_27
his neck, which bled a great deal, and 
had with difficulty been stopt. I immedi-
ately took away, from the jugular vein, two 
cupfulls of blood more, which was sizy; and 
being informed, that he sometimes reached, 
I ordered a vomit of tinct. ipecacuanh. with 
an addition of acet. scillit. which was given 
about an hour after he was blooded, and 
brought up a great deal of tenacious mucus.
That night, he got a blister to his back, and 
the saline mixture every two hours. Nov.
2d, His Pulse was as frequent, but not so 
firm. All the other symptoms rather worse. 
He was ordered a decoction of the bark; the 
oily saline mixture, to be taken internally; 
and the camphorated volatile oil, to be ap-
plied externally. The child took two or 
three doses of the decoction and mixture; 
but towards the evening, the symptoms grow-
ing worse, the medicines were discontinued. 
The child died next morning. 

When the trachea was laid open, I 
thought that a suppuration had happened; 
but, upon nearer inspection, found, that it 
was only the mucus which had acquired a pu- 
|P_28
rulent colour; and that it was formed into a 
membranous crust, which every where lined 
the internal membrane of the trachea, from 
the larynx, to its entrance into the thorax.
This preternatural membrane appeared thick-
est about the middle of the trachea; and, there, 
seemed almost to fill up the passage. It was 
so firm, that a considerable portion separate-
ed, at once, leaving the natural membrane 
of the trachea bare and sound, and with the 
appearance of a slight inflammation. I put 
a considerable portion of the preternatural 
membrane into water; and, after that, it still 
retained a degree of tenacity, but had 
too little firmness to be preserved. 

[}CASE XI. }]
MrWood Surgeon gave me the following. 
A child, about sixteen months old, was seiz-
ed with the Croup, and died the seventh 
day. On opening the body, there was found 
in the lower part of the larynx, and 
beginning of the trachea, a substance of 
a membranous appearance, adhering slight-
|P_29
ly around the inside of these parts. 
When it was removed, the membranes 
of the trachea were found entire, and 
somewhat redder than usual. Along the 
trachea and bronchial branches, there was a 
considerable quantity of mucus. It was frothy, 
and somewhat tenacious. This mucusex-
tended as far as the membranous appear-
ance, and downwards into the minutest 
branches of the bronchiae, in which it had a 
yellowish purulent appearance. The surface 
of the lungs was somewhat reddish. 

[}CASE XII. }]
The following case, which was communi-
cated to me by—, I think worth relating; 
as it shows the disease in a different situ-
ation from all the preceeding; indeed, 
under such circumstances, as I never had 
an opportunity to see, and must appear 
very seldom in, for it is the only one of its 
kind that I have heard of. 

Miss ******, about nine years old, was 
seized with a slight cough, on the 25th of 
|P_30
October, owing to rainy weather, and wet 
feet. On the 26th, when I saw her first, the 
scarcely had any heat, thirst, or sickness, and 
no pain of any kind, except when she cough-
ed, or was fretted, which bringing on a quick 
inspiration, she then felt some slight pain in 
the windpipe, a little below the rima glottidis.
Her voice was shrill, like that of a young 
cock. She was blooded; got a gentle vomit; 
emolient cataplasms to her feet; and a blister 
to her back. 27th, Symptoms no better. 
No difficulty of deglutition, and no redness 
to be seen in the throat. She never expec-
torated any thing like pus or phlegm, during 
the whole course of the disease. Steams of 
warm water were tried. 28th, Her cough 
was incessant for some hours, during which, 
she coughed up a piece of a membrane. This 
I believed to be a part of what lines the 
trachea, as it had a mortified appear-
ance, and was like black shagg silk. She 
died soon after this. 

Upon opening the body, the disease seem-
ed seated, solely, in the head of the trachea,
as its membrane appeared to me mortified 
|P_31
two inches downwards. Below that, the 
trachea, and its branches, seemed quite 
sound. 

It was very natural for one, who had 
never any opportunity of seeing this disease 
in its natural situation, to think, that a mor-
tification had seized on the coats of the tra-
chea. But to one who has been accustom-
ed to inspect bodies, in this disease, it must 
appear probable, that it was only the preter-
natural and morbid membrane become black, 
which gave the trachea the appearance of be-
ing mortified. No wonder that the coats of 
the trachea were thought to be in a gangre-
nous state, when I imagined they had suppu-
rated in the first case, that I met with. The 
coughing up a piece of the membrane, shows 
that it was this loosely adhering one, and 
none of the natural ones, which are so firm-
ly attached; and which, having no fleshy 
parts below, could not have been so easily se-
parated. This, then, appears to differ in no 
other point from the others, but only that 
here the morbid membrane had dryed 
|P_32
and turned black; whereas, in all the former, 
it was moist and white. 

These are all the cases, that I have kept 
an account of, or received from others. Tho' 
few, they are leading ones, and sufficient to 
establish many material facts and circumstan-
ces, that have hitherto been unknown, with 
regard to this disease. We will now draw, 
from them, some conclusions; which, as we 
have proceeded so cautiously, will be the 
more certain. If we add any reasoning, to 
set these conclusions in a clearer light, we shall 
keep as close as possible to settled experi-
ment; and shall give it only as probable con-
jecture, finding fault with no person who may 
reason differently. 

Corollary I. It seems easy, in general, 
to distinguish the Croup from all other 
diseases hitherto described. A peculiar sharp 
shrill voice, not easily described; a remark-
able freedom from all complaints, when in 
imminent danger, so that they will eat a mi-
nute before they expire; a quick laborious 
breathing; a frequent pulse, sometimes 
strong at first, but always soft and weak to-
|P_33
wards the end; scarce any difficulty of de-
glutition, or remarkable inflammation in the 
fauces; a dull pain, often, and sometimes an 
external swelling in the upper part of the 
trachea; senses quite distinct to the last; and 
all the symptoms most rapid in their progress, 
characterise sufficiently this disease. I have 
not mentioned a cough, as that symptom is 
sometimes absent; and when it attends the 
Croup, it is not of the common kind, but more 
short and stiffled, and less convulsive, with 
little or no expectoration. 

The other symptoms, that often attend 
it, such as a red swelled face, œdematous 
feet, drought, urine sometimes with, and, at 
other times, without a sediment, reachings, 
&c. are not so constant as the former; and 
therefore, are not so characteristical. 

Those not conversant in this disease, of-
ten mistake peripneumoniacal complaints, 
and severe colds, for it; and, as they frequent-
ly cure these, they are apt to look on it as 
not so dangerous. But we have seen, that 
the lungs are totally free from any inflam-
mation, and are not the seat of the disease. 
|P_34
The Catarrhus suffocativus of Etmuller seems, 
likewise, to have been a peripneumony. And, 
as he describes no peculiarity in the voice; as 
the symptoms seem to have been, apparently, 
severer; and as it returned, at stated and re-
gular periods, we must consider them as dif-
ferent diseases, tho' similar in many points. 

As this disease has different vulgar names, 
for I am told, that on the west coast, they call 
it the Chock, or Stuffing, a technical one becomes 
absolutely necessary. A name is best given 
from the apparent symptoms, which are al-
ways conspicuous, while the cause is general-
ly hidden, and often doubtful. The lead-
ing symptoms here, are, the shrill voice, and 
difficult breathing. It, therefore, may pro-
perly be called Suffocatio stridula.

Corol. II. As it appears peculiar to a 
certain age, and local, in a great measure, as 
to its situation, so it seems to attend certain 
seasons of the year. All the preceeding cases 
showed themselves during the course of the 
winter, from the month of October to the 
month of March, except one in August,
which was probably owing to the antecedent 
|P_35
small-pox; for long catarrhs from the small 
pox, measles, or chin-cough, are strong pre-
disponent causes to this disease. The moist 
and cold weather in winter, seems to have 
great power in producing this disease. 

Corol. III. Very different have been the 
opinions, with regard to the seat of the Suf-
focatio stridula. Some placing it in the glot-
tis and its muscles; some in the coats of the 
trachea; while others have fixt its seat in the 
lungs themselves. None of all these opini-
ons appear to be true. The glottis is never 
found contracted or inflamed; the lungs 
are quite sound; and the coats of the trachea
seem to suffer only by second hand. 

The seat of this distemper appears to be 
the cavity of the wind-pipe. The place first, 
and most particularly, affected, is the upper 
part of the trachea, about an inch below the 
glottis; for in that part they complain of a 
dull pain; the external swelling has been ob-
served there; and the morbid membrane we 
have found stretching from that place down-
wards. The back part of the trachea, where 
there are no cartilages, seems, from the in-
|P_34
|P_35
|P_36
spection of those that die of this disease, to be 
its first and principal seat, as this morbid 
membrane is often found there, when it is in 
no other part. 

No wonder that the morbid appearances 
are chiefly found there; for, there, are lodg-
ed the greatest number of glands, designed 
for the secretion of mucus. This fluid is se-
parated from glandular bodies, deposited be-
twixt the different membranes, which are per-
forated by an infinite number of almost im-
perceptible small holes, that give a passage 
to the excretory ducts of these glands. The 
largest of these lye on the outer, and poste-
rior surface of that membrane, which serves, 
on the back part, to make up the deficiency 
of the cartilages, as they are not compleat 
circles. 

In some of the former cases, the whole 
glands, at the root of the tongue, and the 
amygdalæ were turgid, and the parts covered 
with mucus. In the mucous glands, in general, 
this distemper ought to be considered, as ori-
ginally seated; but, from particular causes, 
more directed to those of the trachea;
|P_37
where, from the nature of the part, it be-
comes visible in a different shape. 

Corol. IV. Various have been the the-
oretical opinions of people, who never had 
the opportunity, or gave themselves the 
trouble, to search into the real cause of this 
distemper. Some have attributed it to spasms 
of the muscles, that contract the glottis.
That it was not occasioned by spasms of the 
muscles, that contract the larynx, might 
have appeared from the symptoms them-
selves. Had this been of the class of spas-
modic nervous diseases, it would have come 
in paroxysms, with remission and exacerba-
tion; the urine would always have been pale; 
convulsions would have come on before death; 
and antispasmodics, instead of evacuants, 
would have been the remedies. 

Had these muscles, or any of the coats of 
the trachea, been inflamed or mortified, as 
others have thought, the pain would have 
been greater than it is, before the mortifica-
tion; and the pulse would have been strong-
er, than it generally is, as the parts are 
membranous. 

|P_38
If, according to the opinion of many, the 
lungs had been inflamed and suppurated; the 
cough would have been more incessant and 
violent; the pulse full and soft; with a sen-
sation of weight in the breast, sizy blood, 
dry tongue, and delirium. 

But all these fanciful erroneous opinions 
fall to the ground, when we once inspect the 
morbid body. From that true source of 
knowledge, we learn, that the cause of this 
disease is a preternatural white, tough, thick 
membranous crust, covering, often for many 
inches, the inside of the trachea. This mem-
brane is of so tenacious a consistence, that it 
can remain soaking in warm water, for ma-
ny days, without dissolving. It is not at-
tached to the parts below, but is easily se-
parable from them, as there is always mat-
ter behind it. When it ends, the trachea is 
covered with good pus, or purulent mucus;
as are, generally, the ramifications of the 
bronchiæ and vesicles, which, in some cases, 
were quite filled with it. To account how 
this matter, as there is no ulceration; and 
how this membrane are formed, we must 
trace things from their source. 

|P_39
The blood consists of three principal parts, 
the crassamentum, serum, and lymph; the last 
of which is a diaphanous liquor, full of ge-
latinous and nutritious particles. This 
liquor very similar to the white of an egg, 
is coagulable by heat, alkohol, acids, and by 
every method which attracts or evaporates 
the watery particles. This coagulable part, 
probably, is the nutritious part of our 
blood. 

This gelatinous lymph abounds more in 
young animals, than in those come to matu-
rity. Geoffroy le Cadet, in the Mem. Acad. 
des Sciences, for the year 1730, by many ex-
periments shows us this fact; and makes it 
appear, that there is twice as much nutritive 
jelly in veal, as in beef. The final reason for 
this is self-evident; for young creatures, on 
account of their growing, require a greater 
supply of nourishment. Children must, there-
fore, abound more with it than men. 

The mucus separated from glands, in diffe-
rent parts of the body, viz. nose, fauces, œso-
phagus, stomach, guts, trachea, and bronchiæ,
appears to be very analogous to this lymph. 
|P_40
The former differs from the latter, only, in 
its greater spissitude; and this alteration is 
brought about after its secretion, the more 
watery parts being volatilized and dissipated, 
while the more heavy and viscous remain be-
hind. This mucus is extremely disposed to 
inspissation, as appears from experiments. 
Even the admission of cold air into the tra-
chea thickens this mucus, often, to such a de-
gree, that it stagnates in the glands, and all 
secretion is entirely stopt. 

In children, as well as in old people, this 
secretion is plentiful, owing to the great 
quantity of it they contain, and to the laxity 
of their vessels. This evacuation is particu-
larly increased during the cold and moist 
weather of winter, when the perspiration is 
diminished, and the glandular secretions in-
creased. 

This evacuation is promoted by all sti-
mulants, operating on the trachea and lungs, 
as we observe from the effects of snuff, and 
the smoak of tobacco. The maritime air 
supplies a stimulus, calculated to increase the 
secretion from the mucus glands of the trachea
|P_41
and lungs. Along with the moisture, sweep-
ed from the sea by the winds, is carried 
likewise, a great quantity of sea-salt; as every 
thing, at some distance from the shore, tastes 
salt. This inspired into the lungs, stimu-
lates the orifices of the tracheal glands, and 
increases the mucous secretion. This effect 
will happen more particularly in children, as 
their nerves are more irritable, than those of 
people advanced in years. Hence we find, 
that, in moist winter weather, particularly a-
long the sea-shore, children should have an 
unusual secretion of mucus, from the glands 
of the wind-pipe. Diseases, such as the small-
pox, measles, chin-cough, &c. and other na-
tural causes, have the same effect in increasing 
this discharge. When these are combined, 
there exists the greatest predisposition to this 
disease. 

When there happens a very great secre-
tion of this coagulate fluid from the glands 
of the trachea in children, they are either not 
sufficiently attentive, or often too young, to 
spit it up. The thinner parts are carried off 
during expiration, while the remainder is 
|P_42
thickened and compressed, by the obstruction, 
that the narrowness of the glottis must make 
to the exit of the air from a larger canal. 
Every circumstance encourages its concre-
tion into a solid firm membrane, while the 
more internal parts of the mucus, continuing 
still fluid, and the continual secretion of 
more, keep it separated from the parts be-
low. 

But how happens it that we find pure 
matter, which sinks in water, behind the 
membrane, and in the different ramifications 
of the trachea, when there is no ulceration? 
Matter does not seem to be formed, as was 
generally thought, by the vessels of the ulcer; 
but to exist in the blood, particularly in the 
serous and lymphatic liquors, nearly in the 
fame state; and to be, probably, the true nu-
trititious, nay, perhaps, the coagulable part 
of our fluids. Dr Pringle, in his ingenious, 
useful, and accurate experiments, upon sep-
tic and antiseptic substances, found, that the 
serum, when stagnating, and exposed to heat, 
let fall a white substance like pus; and, from 
thence, justly, concludes, that the pus of ulcers 
is formed, in the same way, by the evapora-
|P_43
tion of the more watery particles, and the 
subsiding and inspissation of this part. This 
fluid shows a great tendency to become solid, 
by restoring quickly all loss of substance. 

There cannot be a fitter situation, for 
the formation of pus from the mucous secre-
tion, than the trachea and lungs. There the 
same secretion, evaporation, stagnation, and 
heat exists, as in an ulcer; and, therefore, 
the same consequence should, and does, hap-
pen. We often see real pus spit up in the 
end of a cold. Perhaps this change from 
mucus to pus, happens before the membrane 
is formed, as pus shows such a tendency to 
assume a solid form, and is designed by Na-
ture to repair all deficiencies in the solids. 

This disease now appears of a very singu-
lar nature, and unlike any other that we 
know. Du Haen has, indeed, lately told 
us, that he has sometimes found, in dissection, 
the viscera covered, externally, with a white 
tough crust. I wish he had given us the 
history of some of these patients. He ima-
gines, that it was formed from the inflam-
matory crust in the blood; but, here, there 
never is found any. 

|P_44
I have lately met with a description in 
the Philosophical Transactions abridged, Vol. 
3d, page 68th, of a membrane formed in the 
inside of the trachea."A boy five years 
old, died of a consumption. A year be-
fore his death, he was troubled with a dry 
cough, which continued ever after, spitting, 
now and then, a little quantity of blood. 
Ten or twelve days before he died, his 
nurse took notice of some thick skins he 
spit up. His Physcian, having exami-
ned one of them, sound, it had the shape 
and consistence of a vessel, which made 
him think it might perhaps be some ves-
sel of the lungs. The child being dead, 
I opened the body. In the left side of 
the lungs, I found a little purulent sanies.
The inside of the trachea was incrustated 
with a slimy membrane, which I took off 
from the trachea, and the branches in the 
lungs, insomuch that that pellicula made 
a perfect vessel, from the larynx to the ve-
ry extremities of the bronchiæ, from which 
it came off very easily, without breaking ei-
ther the trunk, or the branches. It adhered 
|P_45
to the inward coat of the trachea, only by 
some small filaments, which were so ten-
der, that they broke off easily; and made 
me think, the production of that extraor-
dinary vessel was nothing but the mucila-
ginous humour, continually discharged 
by the glands of the trachea, grown more 
clammy by the distemper, and so dry that 
it could not be spit out; this incrusting 
the inside of the trachea and bronchiæ, and 
growing thicker, was at last shaven off by 
the violent fit of coughing the child was 
sometimes taken with, and then was re-
newed again by the succeeding mucus. This 
new vessel would not dissolve in hot water. 
The vessels of the lungs, that is the tra-
chea and bronchiae, the pulmonary arteries 
and veins, were as whole as could be."

It appears, by the dissection, that there 
was no imposthume formed in the lungs; and 
that the child died from this preternatural 
membrane. Perhaps, many of the polypus's, 
thrown up from the bronchial vessels of grown 
up people, might have the same origin. 
|P_46
These cases show, how apt the mucus is to ac-
quire a solid form. 

We have an account, in the Philosophi-
cal Transactions abridged, vol. 2d, of a dis-
ease in Cornwall, called the morbus strangula-
torius, which, from the pustles, petechiæ; and 
putrid disposition of the fluids, appears more 
nearly allied to the malignant sore throat, 
altho' it sometimes attacked the aspera arte-
ria. A case is, there, related, where a hol-
low membranous coat, of the shape of the 
trachea and its branches, was coughed up, 
and supposed to be the natural membrane of 
these parts. Another similar to the former 
came up afterwards. The patient lived about 
a day after this. 

Corol. V. There appears, from the pre-
ceeding facts, two very different situations of 
the Suffocatio stridula; the former more in-
flammatory, and less dangerous; the latter 
less inflammatory, and highly dangerous. 
In the former, the pulse is generally strong; 
the face red; drought great; and they agree 
with evacuations: In the latter, the pulse is 
very quick, and soft; great weakness; tongue 
|P_47
moist; less drought; great anxiety; and 
evacuations hasten death. The former may 
be called the inflammatory; and the latter, 
the purulent state. 

These are two very different stages of 
the distemper, and must be carefully distin-
guished by the practitioner, that he may 
know how to direct his applications; or, at 
least, how to form a just prognosis; as he is, 
generally, not called till the patient is in 
the latter stage. If this disease comes on 
with an old habitual cough, or by slow de-
grees, the inflammatory stage will scarcely be 
perceivable. 

IF the pulse is very soft and feeble, especi-
ally after being strong; or any purulent mat-
ter comes up with spitting, vomiting, or 
coughing, which happened in some of the 
former cases, we have a proof that the pu-
rulent state is, already, formed. Experi-
ence has taught me another mark, by which 
I can distinguish these different states. I 
have observed, that the urine, which, du-
ring the inflammatory state, is thin, had 
always, after the purulent state came on, a 
|P_48
light ouzy purulent sediment, such as people 
have from matter collected any where, that 
has no vent outwards. 

NO wonder, that the matter is speedily 
absorbed, in this situation, as it is contained 
in the bronchiae and vesicles, and of course im-
bibed by the whole internal surface of the 
lungs and trachea; a surface infinitely great-
er than any imposthume can have. Hence 
the blood will be suddenly filled with it; and 
the urine have that white purulent sediment, 
which arises from absorption of matter. 

In the latter stage, we find the membrane 
compleatly formed. Is it so in the former? 
I suspect that it has not yet got a firm con-
sistency; otherwise evacuations would not 
have so sudden and salutary an effect, as they 
produce in this stage. Perhaps, the turgid and 
inflamed glands are but yet expelling the 
thick mucus, which is circulating thro' the 
vessels in too great a quantity, and in too in-
spissated a state. This is strongly confirmed 
by the great quantity of mucus, sound in 
the stomach, and the swelling of the mucous 
glands at the root of the tongue. Even af-
|P_49
ter death we perceive some degree of inflam-
mation in the coais of the trachea, which 
probably has been greater at the beginning, 
when the flux of humour commeneed, and 
the irritation was stronger. 

Corol. VI. It seems to be no very dif-
ficult matter to account, from the cause, 
for all the symptoms of this disease. A strait-
ening of the trachea, and dryness of the parts, 
will mechanically alter the voice, and make 
it more shrill; for we find in all wind instru-
ments, the notes are acute in proportion to 
the smallness of the bore. Mr Balfoursur-
geon told me, that he attended a child in a 
disease, which, from the similarity of voice, 
appeared to him the Croup. The child died. 
When opened, a piece of shell, which the 
child had sucked in with it's breath, was ly-
ing across the trachea, about an inch below 
the glottis, and the membrane was infla-
med and dry. Here was an artificial Croup 
raised, from which we may evidently per-
ceive how the voice is altered in the natural 
disease. 

|P_50
When there appears to be a great quan-
tity of mucus circulating in the vessels; when 
there is, often, so much mucus or pus in all the 
pipes of the lungs; when there is a preterna-
tural membrane formed in the trachea; no 
wonder that Nature excites a fever, her ge-
neral and constant resource, when she is vio-
lently attacked and in danger. 

Considering the acuteness of the fever; 
considering the obstruction in the trachea, 
bronchiæ, and vesicles; with what difficulty the 
air must gain admission to distend them; and 
what hindrance that must give the blood 
circulating through the lungs; a laborious 
breathing must, necessarily, attend the other 
symptoms. 

As the blood passes with some difficulty 
thro' the lungs, an unusual weakness must 
certainly come on, the face become swell-
ed, and the extremities appear œdematous. 

To account for that total want of pain, 
or so slight a one that they don't attend to 
it, unless when asked, is a matter of some 
difficulty. That the membrane of the wind-
pipe, in general so very irritable from every 
|P_51
slight cause, should calmly bear the presence 
of such a quantity of matter, and of so thick 
a membrane, is not the least surprizing cir-
cumstance of this uncommon distemper. The 
mucus being a humour natural to these parts; 
its slow and gradual collection and inspissa-
tion; fresh mucus constantly separated, which 
hinder the membrane from hurting the tra-
chea, unless in motions of the neck; these 
reasons may account, in part, for the dimi-
nution of that natural irritability, which re-
sides in these places. But they do not satisfy 
me altogether. We cannot expect to have 
all our doubts removed. 

Corol. VII. This disease appears, in ge-
neral, to be a very dangerous one, and the 
more so, as it is silent in its progress, and 
gives no visible alarm, till death is near at 
hand. The first stage of this distemper, of-
ten, passes unobserved; and, before we see 
it, is beyond all remedy. As it happens, fre-
quently, to young children, who are unable 
to speak or describe their feelings, we have 
double reason to be afraid. 

|P_52
If we be not called till the third or fourth 
day; if the breathing appears much affected, 
the pulse quick and weak, the face red, 
great anxiety, and frequent tossing, the dan-
ger is great and pressing. But if we see the 
patient the first or second day of the attack; 
if the breathing is not very bad; the pulse, 
though frequent, strong, and firm; and 
more especially, if the voice is only altered, 
in its stronger exertions of crying or cough-
ing, but more natural in its common state, 
we may entertain hopes of a recovery. The 
first sign commonly of safety, is the cough 
becoming stronger and less dry, with that 
peculiar sound which attends moistened 
lungs; for this shows that the membrane is 
not formed, or is already dissolved, and that 
the inflammatory state is abated. 

The case seems very desperate, when the 
membrane is once formed, and the lungs 
filled with matter. In the latter case, the 
patient is soon suffocated, as effectually, tho' 
more slowly, as if he was immersed over the 
head in it. 

|P_53
It appears, from the preceeding cases, 
that the membrane, alone, is sufficient to 
kill, as there was but little matter found 
in the lungs of some of them. 

Desperate as the case is, the patient's 
recovery is, perhaps, not altogether impos-
sible. Nature, by the means of a critical 
cough, may eject the membrane and matter; 
though, indeed, the sensation of these parts, 
by which it must effectuate this, seems al-
most altogether destroyed. If that happen-
ed, the patient would recover, as the lungs 
are quite sound. 

In one of the former cases, part of the 
membrane was thrown up, but the patient 
died. I was told by Mr Gibson surgeon, 
that a patient of his escaped, after throw-
ing up a great quantity of matter, and 
coughing up large pieces of a membrane. 

The following curious case was commu-
nicated to me, lately, by Mr Rae surgeon. 
A boy betwixt five and six years of age, 
was seized, August 5th, 1764, with a slight 
cold and hoarseness. On the 8th, had a dif-
ficulty of breathing, the shrill voice, and a 
|P_54
little fever. As the boy was in a natural sweat, 
he ordered a mixture with Spt. Minder. 9th, 
Pulse quicker, and no expectoration. Was 
blooded, got an injection, and had a blister 
applied to his throat. 11th, This morning 
he was told, that, after a severe fit of cough-
ing, a membrane-like substance, about two 
inches long, pretty tough, and resembling a 
piece of thin white leather, had been thrown 
out. In the evening, some pus was obser-
vable in the phlegm expectorated up, and ea-
sily distinguishable from it. The boy did 
not recover his voice for three months. 

Art, though not in the way of internal 
medicine, may attempt effectuating the same 
end. 

Corol. VIII. We have had occasion to 
see, in the preceeding cases, great variety of 
different applications, and their good or 
bad success. Let us deduce some general 
rules with regard to practice. In the inflam-
matory state, bleeding appears to have been 
attended with immediate good effects, and 
to be a powerful remedy in this situation. 
This ought to be done expeditiously and 
plentifully, while the pulse will allow it. It 
|P_55
is best to take blood at first, with the lan-
cet, so that a sufficient quantity may soon be 
drawn off; and, afterwards, by leeches, appli-
ed to the upper and fore part of the throat. 
Their orifices, when kept open by the appli-
cation of warm wet-cloths, will allow the 
blood to onze from them for many hours. 

It seems necessary to keep the patient's 
belly constantly loose, by such medicines as 
children will take; for we ought to be ve-
ry attentive not to set them a-crying, as that 
may suddenly suffocate the child. For this 
purpose, I generally use tablets of magnesia 
alba, made palatable with sugar. Some of 
the cooling resolvent salts, such as the chry-
stalisedsal polychrest, dissolved in whey, will 
be of service, provided the patient will peace-
ably take them. 

Blisters; applied round the neck, af-
ter the vessels are well emptied, do great 
service. They seem to do none, when ap-
plied before this time; nay, if the state is 
very inflammatory, must do much hurt, 
from their violent stimulus on the vessels. 
Emollient fomentations and cataplasms, ap-
|P_56
plied round the neck, are of considerable 
use, and keep up a local evacuation. 

These evacuations operate in several dif-
ferent ways, viz. by thinning the dense mu-
cus, while yet circulating in the blood; by 
diverting its flux from the parts affected, as 
there is a great communication and consent 
betwixt the different mucous glands thro' the 
body; but, particularly, by increasing the 
absorbent power of the vessels on emptying 
them; by which means the purulent mat-
ter will be sucked in from the lungs. It was 
found in the urine of one of the foregoing 
convalescent patients. 

The resolvent and gently stimulating 
steams of warm water and vinegar, drawn in 
with the breath, seemed always to have an 
immediate good effect. Is it from dissolving 
the thick mucus, and so opposing its concre-
tion? That is probably the case, as the pa-
tient always spits a great deal after it, and 
the lungs appear moister. 

Vomits are, frequently, given in this 
stage of the disease. They are, generally, 
thought to be of use; but I never saw any 
|P_57
advantage arising from them. I rather su-
spect that they must be often pernicious, as 
they increase the secretion of mucus in the 
lungs, without expelling it, which is the ve-
ry circumstance that, if possible, we ought, 
to guard against. The evacuation that they 
make otherways is but small. 

Gentle sudorifics may be of service, as 
they divert the flux from the more internal 
parts to the external. Others think that 
these are of use; and prescribe the Vin. emet.
in small quantities. I cannot say that I ever 
saw any great advantage from them. 

But when the membrane is once form-
ed, or the purulent matter, in great quantity, 
collected in the lungs, evacuations can be 
no longer of any use; they rather hurt, as 
the pulse is then weak. Hence the reason, 
why people differ about the effects of evacu-
ations in this disease; some deeming them 
the only certain remedy, while others hold 
them to be destructive. Both have built 
their opinion on facts and observation. But 
as their applications were made in different 
stages of the distemper, the effects behoved 
|P_58
to be different. What was the only remedy 
in the inflammatory state, must appear hurt-
ful in the purulent. 

In this state of purulency we plainly see, 
that nothing can do service, but what brings 
up the matter from the lungs, and that spee-
dily too. And pray what medicines can do 
this? Vomits only evacuate, immediately, 
the stomach; but by means of the sympa-
thy of the nerves, they often bring on a 
coughing, during their action. They might 
be of service, if they had this salutary effect; 
but I never saw them answer this purpose, 
though often given with that design. The 
nerves are, indeed, so unactive, that we 
can entertain no reasonable hopes from this 
quarter. 

Shall we endeavour to excite a cough, 
by the means of effluvia, or steams inspired 
into the lungs? That has been tried, to no 
purpose; for the membrane which covers the 
trachea, and the mucus or matter which co-
vers the lungs, render these parts insensible 
to any external irritation. 

|P_59
To effectuate a solution of the morbid 
membrane, after it is once completely formed 
and consolidated, seems to me impossible by 
any internal or external medicine that I know. 
To effectuate its expulsion appears equally 
impossible. We have, then, no method re-
maining to save the patient's life, but that 
of extraction. That cannot be done thro' 
the glottis. When the case is desperate, 
may we not try bronchotomy? I can see no 
weighty objection to that operation, as the 
membrane can be so easily got at, and is ve-
ry loose. Many a more hazardous opera-
tion is daily performed. I would propose, 
however, that it should be first tried on a 
dead subject, that we may proceed with all 
manner of caution and assistance. But 
something ought to be tried in this dange-
rous situation. 

We have now brought our Inquiry to a 
conclusion. The facts, we hope, will ap-
pear curious, exact, and sufficiently nume-
rous for our purpose; the method such as 
as is used in mathematics and natural philo-
sophy, for discovering unknown truths; and 
|P_60
the conclusions new, surprising, and natu-
rally arising from the facts. If we have not 
brought this Inquiry to that degree of per-
fection, in every point, that we could have 
wished, we have the satisfaction, at least, to 
think, that, so far as we go, our discoveries 
are certain, as they are built on the foun-
dation of Nature. Shunning, with all ima-
ginable care, fruitless and deceitful specula-
tions, however entertaining, we have con-
stantly kept our facts and experiments 
in view, as the only road to the improve-
ment of medicine, and the good of man-
kind. 

FINIS. 
