
|P_
[}A SHORT
TREATISE
 ON
 ONANISM.}]
Physicians are agreed that Copulation, 
When age adult, and high-brac'd nerves invite, 
Shou'd neither be immoderately desired, 
Nor dreaded to excess. The good old man 
Is by his tame frigidity admonished, 
Not to engage in the dull drudgery, 
Mistaken for enchanting scenes of pleasure; 
Lest thus he snap his feeble thread of life. 
But what more base, more noxious to the body, 
Than by the power of fancy to excite 
Such lewd ideas of an absent object; 
As rouse the organs form'd for nobler ends, 
To rush into th' embraces of a phantom, 
And do the deed of personal enjoyment! 
|P_
[}THE 
PREFACE.}]
THIS little Treatise was at first not intended to be published se-
parate, but only to be annexed to ano-
ther work of the author's, printed at the same time, entitled, Observations on Spe-
cific Medicines, &c. But as many may have an occasion to peruse this part without the other, who would not care to be at the expence of purchasing both together, a few copies were printed off separate for this reason. 

|P_viii
All the merit which the author pre-
tends to in this, as well as in the other Treatise, is, his having offered to man-
kind the means for relief, established upon reiterated experience, (the most infallible foundation for the science of physic) which will scarce ever fail of giving satisfaction to the miserable pa-
tient; especially if the rules and direc-
tions prescribed, and given with the medicines herein recommended, are strictly adhered to. 

In long protracted and obstinate cases, which will not easily yield to the gene-
ral method of cure, herein mentioned, the author desires to be consulted ei-
ther in person or by letter. He requests those who send their cases, to be very particular with respect to the symptoms of their indisposition, length of time they have been afflicted, what means 
|P_ixthey have already used, and likewise their age, present degree of strength, constitution, habit of body, &c. and all letters, (post-paid) directed to him, to be left at Mr Fletcher's and Co. book-
sellers, at the Oxford-Theatre, on the North-Side of St. Paul's Church Yard, shall have due attention paid them, and be answered with all the speed that the distance of place will admit of. 
LONDON, Nov. 1766. 
W. FARRER. 

|P_
[}A SHORT 
TREATISE
 ON
 ONANISM. }]
[^Decorative frame around the letter "M"^]MASTUPRATIO, or Ma-
nustupratio; Manual Stupration, or Self-Pollution, 
is a vice hardly to be named, much less 
to be practised in a country, where virtue, 
decency, or politeness, have the least re-
|P_12
gard paid to them; and this abominable and 
unmanly practice is productive of the most 
deplorable, and generally incurable disor-
ders. 

Providence has implanted in human na-
ture what is by some called, the Passion 
of Love, and by others, the Appetite of Lust,
for very wise purposes; but has given us 
reason to restrain this necessary inclination, 
and keep it within due limits. Every day, 
however, furnishes us with cases which 
evince, that reason is not always a ballance 
against the appetites; for boys regardless, 
or perhaps ignorant of the consequences, 
too frequently indulge themselves in this 
preposterous method of venery; and it is 
beyond a doubt, that many, more ad-
vanced in years, who are long immured in 
colleges and cloisters, and at last elope 
from their cells, utterly destitute of science, 
and equally unacquainted with the world 
and books, are not less guilty of this enor-
mous vice. 

|P_13
These by a most detestable kind of 
magic, conjure up at pleasure an ideal Ve-
nus, and thus never want an opportunity 
of enjoying an imaginary mistress. The 
frequent repetition of these execrable plea-
sures induce an infinitude of the worst dis-
orders; such as Lethargies, Vertigo's, 
Atrophys, Apoplexies, Palsies, Lowness 
of Spirits, Hypochondriacal Disorders, 
Amauroses, a Tabes Dorsalis, and the worst 
species of a Gonorrhæa, most commonly 
attended with an utter impotence as to 
real enjoyments; besides an innumerable 
train of various nervous complaints, such 
as are the frequent attendants upon a de-
clining age, when the vigour of youth be-
gins to wear off. 

These disorders chiefly derive their ori-
gin from those universal convulsions, that 
always attend the emission of the Semen;
and if we consider the human body, as made 
up of flexible pipes, and yielding fluids, 
we shall readily understand how Convul-
|P_14
sions wear out the constitution, and pro-
duce these effects, viz. by destroying the 
strength and elasticity of the solid parts. 
And that the extacy which accompanies 
venereal enjoyments is of the nature of a 
convulsion, is not hard to be conceived. 
Quincy, in his explanation of Sanctorius's 
Aphorisms expressly says, that At the 
time of coition, the fibres are intensely 
drawn up; that too frequent use of this 
exercise, cannot but be very prejudicial to 
health by overstraining and destroying the f
orce of the fibres[/1./]; the natural conse-
quence of which must be a springyness and 
action upon their contents. Hence per-
spiration is lessened,[/2./] the fluids run into 
preternatural cohesions, and obstructions are 
generated. And this morbid condition is 
still augmented by an excessive loss of the 
|P_15
Semen itself, since the blood is thereby 
robbed of its most pure, balsamic, and in-
vigorating particles. 

Besides, it is worthy of remark, that 
people who are accustomed to such filthi-
ness, are not so easily cured of any chro-
nical distemper as those who are free from 
it; for as Celsus, speaking about venereal 
intercourses, prudently remarks, Caven-
dumne in secunda valetudine adversæ presidia 
consumantur: that is, "We should take 
care of consuming wantonly in a state 
of health, what would be our support 
during sickness."

The Semen verile, is a fluid of the 
most elaborate and noble production in 
the whole body, except that of the nerves, 
if such there be; and it is this vital feed 
which makes men hot, robust, hairy, 
of a strong and deep voice, bold and 
courageous, and fit to contrive, or exe-
|P_16
cute any enterprize. Men are a proof of 
this; whereas they who are destitute of vi-
tal Seed, are wrinkled, pale, weak, of a 
shrill voice, without hair, beardless and ef-
feminate; such are eunuchs. For we know 
from experience, when the secretory or-
gans of this juice are destroyed by cas-
tration before the time of puberty, as is 
frequently done in Italy to preserve the 
voice; or if by any accident a man is de-
prived of his testicles after this age, the 
destruction of these marks of verility also 
follow, in confirmation of this Boerhaave
has given us an instance of fact. "There 
was, says he, an intrepid soldier, who, 
aspiring after the reward proposed by 
the general, to him who would first fix 
the standard in the enemies fort, climbed 
through the thick battery of the enemy, 
but unfortunately the fire of a cannon 
took off both his testicles; yet he reco-
vered, and became at length effemi-
nate, not in mind but in body. The 
strength of the several muscles of the 
genital parts still continued, and no-
|P_17
thing towards his virility but his testicles, 
and yet his voice soon altered, and beard 
fell off, &c." But the man who is re-
tentive of the seminal juices, becomes bold, 
hardy and strong, like the beasts of the 
forest; witness the Athletæ of old, who 
led chaste lives. 

Therefore as the Semen is, as it were, 
the flower and choicest part of the blood 
and nervous fluid, so venery ought to be 
only moderately used; lest too great an 
evacuation of this substance prove preju-
dicial to health. A frequent ejection of 
the Semen requires a sound and vigorous 
habit of body, because it exhausts the 
strength, and weakens the person; hence 
Pythagoras when asked, when coition was 
to be used, wisely answered, "When 
you have an inclination to render your-
self weaker."

As venery then only agrees with persons 
of robust and vigorous constitutions, so 
|P_18
the use of it is principally beneficial to 
health, after the stomach is empty, and 
perspiration duly performed, especially if 
the person has slept well, and taken ali-
ments of a nutritive quality, and easy di-
gestion. All these things are of such a 
nature, as to increase the strength and vi-
gour of the body, and consequently to 
favour venery, or at least prevent the bad 
effects it would otherwise have. It is also 
to be observed, that it is more salutary in 
Spring than at any other season of the year. 

The person who would often engage 
in venery, ought to guard against all surfeits, 
hunger, labours, excessive studies, vene-
sections, watchings, purges, and every 
thing which can in the least impair and 
destroy the strength. 

Celsus observes, 
"That we ought not too 
eagerly to pursue, or too sollicitously to 
avoid, intercourses with the tender sex. 
|P_19
Pleasures of this kind, rarely indulged, 
render the body alert and active, but if 
too frequently repeated, weak, languid, 
and inactive. And as the proper de-
gree of these pleasures is not to be esti-
mated by the number of repetitions, 
but by the constitution, the age, and 
the strength of the person; so we may 
take it for granted, with respect to this 
particular, that the enjoyment which is 
neither followed by weakness, nor suc-
ceeded by pain, is not prejudicial. 

The day is the worst season for plea-
sures of this kind, especially if they are 
succeeded by a full meal; the night is less 
hazardous, but even then subsequent 
fatigue, with long watching, render it 
improper. It is also to be abstained 
from in summer, because at that time, 
it is subject to throw the humours into 
preternatural commotions. 
"
|P_20
But as moderation in every thing con-
tributes to health, so likewise does tempe-
rate venery, and every one ought carefully 
to consider what his constitution can bear. 
For a very robust person may safely indulge 
himself in a degree of venery, which would 
remarkably weaken one of a worse con-
stitution. 

Persons of a tender and delicate habit of 
body, and weak Crasis of blood and spi-
rits, should by no means indulge them-
selves in venereal engagements, without 
great moderation and caution; those who 
are either too young, or too old, and those 
who are lately recovered from a disease, 
ought also to abstain from venery, lest they 
bring on too great a relaxation of the 
nerves, and by overstraining the fibres that 
compose all the parts of their bodies, in-
jure and weaken their several functions in 
the animal system, and become liable to all 
those disorders that have been already men-
tioned. 

|P_21
Thus they, who by nature were stronger 
than others, have, by intemperance, ren-
dered themselves much weaker than those 
who were naturally weak; and those who 
were much weaker by nature, have, by 
their temperance, become superior in 
strength, to those who were stronger; for 
nothing renders an animal robust, but the 
seminal juice, which is therefore of great 
efficacy and importance towards health, 
strength and magnanimity, as well as pro-
creation. 

But as there are too many, who do not 
attend to the rules here laid down, so 
much as would be convenient for them, 
perhaps the following case may be of some 
importance, to such as have not yet utter-
ly destroyed their constitutions, by an im-
moderate pursuit after pleasures. 
"
A young man of twenty-five years of 
age, of a phlegmatico-sanguine habit, and 
|P_22
who from his very infancy, had a tender 
constitution, when about fifteen years 
of age, learnt of a wicked school-fellow, 
the execrable trick of Mastupration. He 
indulged himself in this vile and unman-
ly practice, very frequently, even al-
most daily, from the fifteenth to the 
twenty-third year of his age, and applied 
himself at the same time to writing in 
a very small character; by which means 
he contracted such an excessive weak-
ness of his head and eyes, that these 
latter were frequently convulsed, during 
his preposterous entertainment. 

Some time ago, while he was wick-
edly employed in this manner, and his 
design upon the very point of being 
executed, some person or other unex-
pectedly knocked at his chamber door, 
which accident put him into such con-
fusion, that the ultimate scene of his di-
version was left unaccomplished. Upon 
this he immediately felt so exquisite a 
pain, and so vehement a tension in his 
|P_23
testicles, and spermatic vessels, that he 
could not walk without the utmost diffi-
culty. The force of his genius, and the 
sight of his eyes, seemed at the same 
time to be diminished and impaired. 

Though he had the danger, with 
which this execrable practice threataned 
him, in full view, yet after the pain 
of his testicles was removed, he was 
so much infatuated as to repeat his 
crime, and begin afresh his former course; 
but he was soon after seized with the 
like pain in his genitals, and especially 
in his testicles, where the pain was ac-
companied with a very considerable ten-
sion. By the use of external and in-
ternal medicines for about half a year, 
he also got this disorder removed, but 
with some difficulty. 

Soon after he was seized with a swel-
ling in those vessels, which go to the 
|P_24
left testicle. The swelling appeared 
larger than ordinary after his meals, 
but was not accompanied with pain, 
unless, when by his folly he brought a 
stimulus on the parts; but though it 
was void of pain, it was attended with 
another very unlucky circumstance, for 
it remains with him to this very day. 
To this was joined so great a weak-
in his head and eyes, that when he was 
about to read any thing, he seemed to 
be drunk, and flushed with wine; the 
pupils of his eyes were extremely di-
lated, and his eyes themselves racked 
with darting pains, accompanied with 
some degree of tension; his eye-lids 
seemed, as it were, oppressed with a 
kind of weight; in the morning they 
were conglutinated together, and wa-
tered very much; but this was not all, 
for both corners of his eyes, besides 
the violent pains with which they were 
racked, were also clogged and stuffed 
with a whitish kind of matter. 

|P_25
In this deplorable state he was obliged 
to give over reading, and interrupt the 
course of his studies, for the space of 
six months, during which time he only 
employed himself in exercise and re-
creation, and in taking the medicines, 
which were judged proper for one in his 
condition; by which means he recovered 
so far, as to be able to apply himself 
to his studies for two or three hours a 
day, which he can still do; but if at 
any time he should chance to protract 
his application, and lengthen out his 
studies beyond their stated time, he is 
immediately seized with the above symp-
toms; besides, he was become so lean 
that his body was little more than a 
skeleton; and though his appetite was 
good, yet he was indisposed after his 
meals, and was affected with a kind of 
drunkenness. 

But when he got a juster sense of 
things, and had for almost the space of 
|P_26
two years abstained from his former 
practices, and from all commerce with 
women, he began to be troubled with 
very frequent nocturnal pollutions, by 
which he found his body gradually more 
and more weakened, and his strength 
impaired; so that now what seemed 
principally to be regarded was the re-
moval of this imbecility, which was after 
some time entirely cured, by the use 
of my Strengthening Electuary, 
of which more will be said hereafter. 
"
From this account, we learn, that Venery 
used either too soon or too often, not only 
impairs the strength of the body in gene-
ral, but also debilitates the noble functions 
of the brain and eyes, to such a de-
gree, that the loss becomes almost irre-
parable. 

I have had an opportunity of seeing a 
great many cases, where persons well ad-
|P_27
vanced in years, have by immoderate ve-
nery, not only brought upon their eyes 
redness, darting pains, accompanied with 
tension, a heavy sensation, as if a weight 
was laid upon them, and a frequent shed-
ding of tears, but likewise such a weak-
ness of sight, that they were rendered in-
capable either to read or write; and I have 
found that in these very cases, the pupils 
were always dilated, as they are in a Gutta 
Serena, by reason of the weakened, or 
lost tone of the muscular and nervous 
sibres which surround them. But why 
need I stop here? since I myself knew two 
cases, in which a Gutta Serena itself was 
brought on by excessive venery, and a long 
series of grief. 

Hence it appears how great and sur-
prizing a consent there is between the se-
minal parts, or rather the spirituous se-
minal fluid itself, and the fabric of the 
eye, which is composed of the finest mem-
|P_28
branes, nerves and muscular fibres, as 
well as the most clear and transparent 
fluids. 

The lymphatic seminal fluid is almost 
of the same nature and quality with that 
fluid which is secreted in the brain, and 
distributed through all the nerves of the 
body; for which reason, the more plenti-
ful the evacuation of the former is, the 
more scanty and defective the secretion of 
the other in the brain must of course be. 
Hence also a reason may be assigned why 
those youths, who begin too early to taste 
the forbidden joys of Venus, sustain a con-
siderable loss of memory, and are render-
ed unfit for study; and likewise why per-
sons farther advanced in years, who are 
excessively addicted to venereal pleasure, 
lose their strength, and bring on a pre-
mature death. 

|P_29
The reason of the nocturnal pollutions 
in the case just recited, is very plain; for 
the more copious and frequent the afflux 
of the humours, especially of the seminal 
matter, has been to the organs destined for 
generation, either by the force of ima-
gination or otherwise; I say the more fre-
quent and copious such an afflux has 
been, the more the spermatic vessels are 
dilated and relaxed, and the seminal juice 
for that very reason, flows into them in a 
greater quantity, and lays a foundation 
for those wanton ideas, and seminal excre-
tions, which even during sleep affect peo-
ple of a warm imagination. 

But the most formidable species of this 
disease, is when the retaining vessels are so 
extremely relaxed, as to permit the semi-
nal juices to pass off upon the slightest 
stimulus, as a luscious idea, or conversation 
with a woman, after straining at the dis-
charge of the excrements, or after riding 
|P_30
on horseback in consequence of a relaxa-
tion. In the night time the same accident 
happens from venereal dreams, with a sen-
sation of enjoyment; and this is frequent-
ly attended with a continual weeping, or 
gleet, which exhausts the strength of the 
patient. 

The matter of this flux is an humid, 
thin, cold, colourless substance, called by 
Hippocrates, a Liquid Semen[/3./] which is void 
of fœcundity: for how is it possible that 
nature thus refrigerated, should emit a 
prolific juice? Those afflicted with this dis-
order must of necessity become old in ha-
bit of body, slow, languid, dull, spiritless, 
silent, feeble, wrinkled, unactive, pale, ef-
feminate, of a weak appetite, cold, with 
a heaviness of the limbs, and a numbness 
of the legs, weak, lazy, and indisposed 
|P_31
for all manner of action; in many subjects 
this disorder is the forerunner of a Palsy; 
but it oftener terminates in that species of 
a Consumption, called by physicians Tabes 
Dorsalis.

A Tabes Dorsalis is a violent disorder, 
little treated of by physicians, though ful-
ly described by Hippocrates[/4./]. The symp-
toms which presage this Consumption, I 
have for the most part observed to be these, 
an hypochondriacal oppression, melancholy, 
|P_32
and too much thoughtfulness, pain in 
the back, and often in the head, an aching 
pain, rolling and hanging down of the 
testicles, a weakness of memory and sight, 
and a decay of strenght; there is a sense 
of weight and giddiness of the head, and 
a ringing in the ears, and as the disorder 
proceeds, all the symptoms are increased, 
the legs swell, as in dropical cases; in 
some, Ulcers arise on the loins, some of 
which are healed, whilst others rise in their 
stead. At last, a violent Cataract arising, 
the patient is rendered totally blind; these 
are followed by some others; as a thirst, 
an hectical disposition, an Atrophy, a wast-
ing of the flesh, &c. &c. till at last the 
body is brought to the highest degree of a 
Consumption; and that very often with-
out any cough, or any other remarkable 
sign of a Consumption of the Lungs. 

These are the most common disorders 
that ensue from the excessive use of Venery,
and the preposterous practice of Self-Pol-
lution, for the cure of which I have two 
|P_33
medicines which I shall recommend; the 
first, which answers the first intention of 
cure, viz. the stopping of the Gonorrhæa, 
is my Strengthening Electuary, which 
braces up and strengthens the weakened 
and relaxed solids, warms and invigorates 
the habit, promotes digestion, and thereby 
furnishes the dispirited and impoverished 
blood, with laudable and benign chyle. 

The other medicine is my Restorative 
Nervous Elixir, which is perhaps the 
most stimulating Restorative that medicine 
can produce, and in the last decays of life, 
will still supply the vital lamp with some 
recruits; it is good in all Languors, Weak-
ness, and Decays of the constitution, for 
it strengthens all parts of the body, espe-
cially the stomach, when relaxed and 
disordered with frequent debauches, and 
by restoring the oscillation of the fibres, 
quickens the various motions, and gives 
fresh vigor to the animal functions. It is 
|P_34
an admirable remedy for those who have 
been in a manner wore out with venereal 
engagements, especially if their pleasures 
have been purchased at the expence of a 
few salivations, or a frequent use of mer-
curial medicines, and it will revive any 
constitution that it not quite mouldered 
into rottenness. But they best deserve such 
a Restorative, who by acute diseases, such 
as malignant Fevers, the Small-Pox, and 
the like, have been so broke and shattered 
in their constitutions, as hardly to be with-
in a possibility of recovery. For in such it 
will to admiration repair the impoverished 
juices, and fill again the veins with a warm, 
generous, nutritive blood. 

It is excellent in diseases of the head, 
arising from a consent with the stomach, 
such as the Vertigo, Head-ach, Sleepy 
Diseases, dread of an Apoplexy, Weak-
ness of the memory and sight, and a noise 
or ringing in the ears. In Scrophulous 
|P_35
habits also, which are leaning towards 
Consumptions, it will be of the utmost 
service. And when young persons are not 
so early happy in their conjugal embraces 
as many wish to be, and it be suspected 
from a coldness, and insufficiency upon 
that account on either side, the use of this 
medicine cannot fail to render their inter-
course prolific, as it actually romoves the 
causes of impotency in one sex, and of 
sterility, or barrenness, in the other. But 
the use of it is varily to be indulged, lest 
with it be kindled a heat that reasonable 
coition cannot assuage. And let such as 
indulge themselves too lavishly in these en-
joyments, be careful how they spur nature, 
and prompt with such helps, lest they 
run off their life and strength too precipi-
tately, for the best constitutions in the 
world, wear out and sink under the fre-
quent repetition of such profusion, as the 
frequent straining any elastic body what-
soever, will weaken more and more it's 
spring, till it is quite lost, notwithstanding 
all the helps of art to preserve it. 

|P_36
To conclude. The omnipotent Creator 
has given us Passions for very wise and good 
ends; which seem to be, that thereby we 
may be urged with a kind of impetuosity 
to shun evil, and embrace good; wherefore 
the passions are not bad in themselves, it 
is by their excess that they become vicious, 
when they rise to so extravagant a pitch, as 
not to be governed by the dictates of 
reason. But we ought to use our best 
endeavours to keep them within proper 
bounds, and the more difficult the conflict, 
the more glorious will be the victory. 

We have all a natural propensity to 
pleasures; but these are of two very dif-
ferent sorts, the sensual and the mental. 
Sensual pleasures engross the greatest part 
of mankind, while these few only, quos 
equus amavit Jupiter, are taken with the 
beauties of the mental. And the reason 
why so many run after pleasures of the 
first sort, seems to be, because they hardly e
ver allow themselves an opportunity of 
|P_37
tasting the sweets of an upright conscience, 
or of feeling that joy, which arises to a 
good man, from the moderation of his ir-
regular desires; and being entirely devoted 
to the gratification of their sensual appe-
tites, they never give attention to the real 
charms of virtue. Wherefore whosoever 
desires to enjoy this solid happiness, ought 
to enure himself by degrees to the love of 
virtue, and ever carefully to avoid adding 
fuel to the fire of his passions. 

Apposite to these sentiments is that say-
ing which Cicero puts into the mouth of 
Cato, as by him received from the great 
Archytas of Terentum; that nature never 
afflicted mankind with a more capital plague, 
than bodily pleasure; the eager desires of 
which spur on to enjoyment with ungovernable 
rashness.[/5./]

|P_38
And the rest of what that great philoso-
pher has written on this subject, must de-
light the mind of every wise man in the 
perusal. Wherefore, Virtue's exclamation 
in Silius Italicus, is very just: 
Quippe nec ira Deum tantum, nec tela, nec hostes, 
Quantum sola noces, animis illapsa voluptas[/6./]. 
Pleasure by gliding on the minds of men, 
More mischiefs hast thou wrought than hostile arms, 
Than wrath of Gods. 

But as the due government of the passi-
ons strengthens the mind, so temperance 
in diet renders the body less exposed to 
these turbulent motions. And this rule 
holds good, not only in those, who are 
naturally of a hot constitution, but even 
in those who curb their appetites; be-
cause it keeps them in a state of tranqui-
lity. And this is the way in general to 
resist these evils, or at least to diminish 
their effects. 

|P_39
As for those who would have us to be 
entirely devoid of passions, and to sup-
press all the affections of the mind, as if 
they were so many evils; they certainly 
have a wrong notion of the wisdom, and 
goodness of the Almighty Creator, who 
has inserted, and, as it were, interwoven 
them into our frame for excellent purposes; 
for they are not only beneficial to indivi-
duals upon many occasions, but even ne-
cessary for keeping up society and con-
nexions between mankind. 

FINIS 

|P_
[}ADVERTISEMENT. }]
[}The Medicines recommended in this Treatise, 
with full directions for their use, may be 
had by the author's particular order, of 
Mr. Fletcher and Co. booksellers, at the 
Oxford-Theatre, the North-Side of St. 
Paul's Church-Yard; and by their ap-
pointment in most of the principal Towns in 
England.}]
1. THE Restorative Nervous Elixir,
for the recovery of decayed and 
broken constitutions. For those who have 
been in a manner wore out with venereal 
engagements, by long courses of mer-
curial medicines, or by salivations; for 
|P_
all those nervous and other disorders, that 
arise from the shameful practice of Self-
Pollution; for Venereal Impotency; and 
for all disorders of the head and nerves 
which proceed from a weakness and debi-
lity of the nervous system. In bottles at 
10s. 6d. 
2. A Strengthening Electuary, for the 
cure of that species of Gonorrhœa, which is 
owing to a weakness of the seminal vessels. 
It cures all kinds of Agues, and all disor-
ders of the stomach and primae viæ, which 
proceed from a relaxation and decay of 
their tone (the common consequence of 
hard drinking) an overflowing of the 
Menses and Lochia, and prevents Abor-
tion. In pots at 5s. 3d. 
|P_
[}Where also may be had the following Spe-
cific Medicines, recommended by the author 
in his Observations on Specific Medi-
cines, &c. viz. }]
1. A Pectoral Elixir, for the cure of all 
diseases of the breast; such as Coughs, 
Catarrhs, Fluxions, Difficulty of Breath-
ing, Asthmas, Empyemas, Consumptions, 
(if curable) and Vomica of the Lungs. — 
It cures the Tooth-Ach if applied with a 
bit of cotton, and all kinds of Wounds 
and Bruises. In bottles at 4s. 
2. A Specific Tincture, &c. for the cure of 
every kind of Dropsy. In parcels at 7s. 6d. 
3. A Cephalic Electuary, for the certain 
cure of the Epilepsy (if it is not hereditary) 
and Palsy; for Virtigo's and all kinds of 
Convulsions, and particularly for that odd 
disorder called St. Vitus's Dance. In pots 
at 10s. 6d. and 5s. 3d. 
|P_
4. Anodyne Mineral Balsam, for the cure 
of the Jaundice, for Fits of the Stone and 
Gravel; for the Heart-burn and Cholic; 
and outwardly, for all contractions of the 
limbs, and fixed pains of the Gout and 
Rheumatism. In bottles at 3s. 6d. 
5. Catholic Pills, for the Diseases peculiar 
to Women; such as a Chlorosis, or Green 
Sickness, and a Suppression of the Menses; 
and particularly for all the various hysteric 
and nervous Disorders incident to the fe-
male Sex, in the decline of life, when 
the Menses cease. As also for the cure of 
all hysteric and hypochondriac disorders. 
In boxes at 3s. 6d. 
6. An Essence, for the cure of every spe-
cies and degree of the Venereal Disease, 
Flying Pains and Head-Achs, the relicks 
of ill cures. A few drops of this medi-
cine in a glass of water is a dose, and in 
slight cases, in eight or ten days, the cure 
|P_
is effected, without any inconveniency 
to the patient. It is also excellent in the 
Leprosy and Scurvy, and all disorders that 
proceed from an impurity of the blood 
and humours. In bottles at 3s. 
7. A Chymical Fluid, for the certain cure 
of the Itch, and all defadations of the skin, 
and for healing old and inveterate Ulcers. 
In bottles at 1s. 6d. 
8. Worm Powders, for the cure of all 
kinds of Worms, whether in infants or 
adults. In parcels at 2s. 
For a more particular account of these 
Remedies, and the diseases in which they 
are proper, see the author's Observations, 
&c. above-mentioned; price 2s. 6d. which 
may be had at each place where the medi-
cines are sold. 

|P_
N. B. All these Specific Remedies are 
signed by the author in his own hand 
writing, and sealed with his coat of arms, 
to prevent impositions. They will keep 
any length of time after they have been 
opened, provided they are again well stop-
ped, or tied over, and will be equally ef-
ficacious seven years after, as when they 
were first purchased. 
