
|P_3
[}ON THE 
EXTRACT
OF 
LEAD.}]
IT is not my intention here to descant on 
the praises of Mr. Goulard's remedy.[/1./]
That is already too well known throughout 
Europe, to want any assistance from my pen. 
My views coincide entirely with those of the 
author, in endeavouring to bring it to still 
greater perfection, by considering it with more 
preciseness both as to it's composition and use. 
To be ignorant of these would be a fault, 
willingly to conceal it's superior virtues, 
would be an injury to society, and a mannes 
of proceeding very different from the author's, 
who has published all his knowledge on the 
subject without reserve. 

|P_4
This medicament, justly looked upon by those 
of the faculty, who are free from prejudice, as 
the best and most universal topic in surgery, 
may very properly be substituted in the place 
of all others generally prescribed: it will 
frequently prove efficacious when the rest have 
failed, and will repair the disorders they have 
brought upon the constitution. 

I don't pretend to mention this medicine 
as a new discovered one, on the contrary, 
we have received it from antiquity, known 
by the name of Acetum Litargiri; but by its 
having been ill made, mal-a-propos applied, 
and prescribed in improper quantities, it 
was for some time out of repute, and with-
out the assistance and the vigilance of Mr. 
Goulard's speculative turn, who has had re-
solution enough to stem the torrent of opposi-
tion, this remedy, like many others, by having 
been improperly made and as improperly ad-
ministred, would have fallen into the pos-
session only of the quacks. For want of proper 
vinegar the basis of this medicine it frequent-
ly deceived the practitioners, who, from not 
knowing its properties and the real method of 
composing it, entirely laid it aside. But it has 
of late been too minutely considered to be 
any longer neglected, and is now looked 
upon, by the impartial part of mankind, to 
be one of the greatest ornaments of the dis-
pensatories, as well as the most efficacious re-
medy in surgery. It is then to Mr. Goulard, a 
|P_5
skilful surgeon of Montpellier, we owe its re-
vival; which could never have been effected, 
but by a man of his eminence, and like him ex-
empt from vulgar prejudice, which has hither-
to laid to the charge of this salutary remedy 
faults, from which the experiments of many 
famous in their profession are now endeavour-
ing to clear it in favour of mankind. 

When this extract is made with natural 
vinegar, and the strongest which can be pro-
cured in the south of France, where nature 
in favourable years, and in particular can-
tons, furnishes this vegetable liquor with 
more virtues, than any art of the vinegar-
makers can possibly endow it with, it possesses 
all the dispersing, cooling, and resolving qualities 
proper for dividing the glutinous stagnated 
matter in the obstructed vessels; it relaxes them 
when too much contracted, and restores to the 
solids and fluids the proportion of circulation 
necessary for preserving the animal œconomy 
in a state of health. The common vinegars, 
owing their strength to sal armoniac, to pepper, 
and the dung of the feathered kind, which can't 
fail of robbing this extract of the qualities ne-
cessary for its perfection, as do likewise other 
factitious vegetable acids, such for example, 
as are brewed in England, and in the nor-
thern countries, under the appearance of vine-
gar. The latter, 'tis true, tho' not capable 
of injuring the constitution, act as stimula-
tors to the stomach; but this property is not 
|P_6
sufficient to perfectly dissolve the lead, or to 
impregnate these metallic particles with the 
particular qualities they acquire by the ad-
dition of tartar natural to those vinegars, 
which are made with the strongest wines.[/2./]
I shall not here enter upon the bad qualities 
which may be conveyed to lead by the in-
|P_7
gredients made use of in the composition 
of factitious vinegars, which are brewed ac-
cording to every one's particular recipe.
The best argument in favor of the extract of 
Saturn, made in particular parts of the south of 
France, and against any other extract made 
with common vinegars, is, that the tartar of 
Languedoc has the preference in chymical 
processes, some of which are in vain attempted 
without it. Another argument still more cor-
roborative is that, at Montpellier alone good 
verdigrease can be procured, on account of the 
singular property of its vinegar, and for some 
other concurrent and unknown reasons, which 
help to dissolve the copper the basis of the 
above drug. For the same reason we may be 
induced to think that the tartarous particles 
of the wine of that country, being refined by 
its change into vinegar, may contribute more 
efficaciously to dissolve the lead, which experi-
ence daily proves. Common vinegars help only 
to divide it in parts, some of Languedoc pro-
perly elected dissolve it so thoroughly, that 
without any sediment it preserves its weight, 
a certain proof that it incorporates itself more 
with this species of vinegar, which no doubt 
must render it's effects more efficacious. It is 
certainly owing to this, that the medicine 
we speak of possesses cooling, dispersing, re-
solving qualities, and by no means a repelling 
one, as has been hinted by certain people. 
This requires an explanation, which will be 
|P_8
easily understood by the meanest capacity, as 
I shall endeavour to express myself in the 
plainest terms. 

When the lead is divided only, it's parts 
are too gross and ponderous to remain sus-
pended in the vegetable liquid its vehicle; 
this causes it to subside: on shaking the bottle, 
they again incorporate with the liquid, with-
out suffering a diminution of their volume; 
this volume by preventing them from penetrat-
ing to the vessels tho' the pores of the skin 
causes them to remain in the tissue of those parts, 
and, by stopping up the passages of perspirati-
on, gives rise to what is generally termed re-
pulsion. But, when the metal is so far dissolved, 
as always to remain suspended in the vegetable 
liquid, its parts are so fine and so far attenuat-
ed, as not to be discernable thro' the most per-
fect microscope; they then easily penetrate 
the pores of the skin, follow the course of the 
perspiratory vessels, and put in motion the 
inspissated and stagnated fluids, which they 
again return to the road of circulation. When 
the metallic particles act thus, the aquatic 
vehicles, with which they are combined, 
loosen the skin, which was before in a state of 
too great tension, whilst the spiritous ones re-
store to the vessels that elasticity of which they 
had been deprived. Thus a resolution of the hu-
mours is effected by means of transpiration 
and circulation: but a wise and cautious prac-
titioner must always attend to the progress of 
|P_9
the complaint, when either putrefaction or a 
degree of malignity is apprehended; and care 
should be always taken to mix this with diges-
tives, for critical discharges, as by abating their 
heat it will prevent the neighbouring parts 
from being affected, and secure the patient 
against a too copious discharge which fre-
quently attends these cases. 

The comparison made between the ex-
tract of Saturn, and its salt, commonly called 
the sugar of lead, will be found unjust, 
when we consider, that the latter is made 
with vinegars of all sorts of wines, and that 
those of Switzerland, which produce the 
greatest quantity of this sugar, are made of 
wines very little impregnated with tartar, and 
that too of an inferior quality. But after 
all, this very sugar of lead, which is quoted 
as a proof of the repelling quality to be found 
in our medicine, is it not made use of by the 
ablest practitioners, both as an internal and 
external medicine? if so, with how much more 
confidence may we make use of Mr. Goulard's 
extract, properly made, in the above circum-
stances? A practice of fifty years, has suf-
ficiently convinced me of its superiority over 
the sugar of lead, which I have known fail, 
when the other has always answered my in-
tentions. 

Such, as are thus disposed to criticise the 
most approved remedies, won't give themselves 
time to reflect, that an accidental failure of 
|P_10
success might be owing to this extract not 
having been properly made in its commence-
ment, or succeeding processes, to its having 
been given in too great a quantity, or ap-
plied cold, as indeed the author sometimes 
recommends with a view only to the tempe-
rate climate he writes in: thus have these 
people been induced, without having any 
regard for themselves, to confirm the opinion 
of the vulgar, who generally attribute the 
death of the patient to the last remedy, and 
thus shamefully take advantage of this fal-
lacious argument to cry down the good effects 
of the extract of Saturn, and to extol reme-
dies at best uncertain, often fallacious, and 
which custom alone, the tyrant of the mind, 
authorises the use of both against reason and 
experience. Many examples might be brought 
to refute what persons, otherwise respectable, 
have thought proper to advance to the pre-
judice of this remedy; but I will refer the 
reader, to many observations given by the 
author in his treatise[/3./], and to take into con-
sideration here the first paragraph of the third 
Formula, page 208, on the inefficacy of the 
poultices generally prescribed. 

The proofs I have given of the necessity of 
procuring the best vinegar, and the rules I 
shall lay down in the sequel, for the better 
making and using this extract, having been 
|P_11
approved of by men of knowledge and rank 
in this country, ever intent on means to assist 
the poorer part of mankind, have induced 
me to procure a quantity of it from the foun-
tain head itself. I have applied to Mr. 
Goulard for this purpose, to whom I have 
likewise communicated my thoughts on the 
farther improvement and use of this remedy,
 which I have the satisfaction to know entirely 
coincide with his. This concurrence of Ideas, 
which originally sprung from a fifty years ac-
quaintance, having been fellow-students to-
gether, has induced me to imitate him on 
other occasions,[/4./] and has been the means of 
his allowing me to be the sole vender in this 
country of the extract he himself made[/5./]. 

This topic, which properly speaking is an 
universal chirurgical medicine and easily pro-
cured, has this triple advantage over others. 
First, it costs but little; secondly, it is pre-
pared in an instant; and thirdly, it may easily 
be conveyed from place to place. 

Whoever is provided with it may prevent 
the bad consequences of bruises occasioned 
either by a fall or blow; it prevents an 
echymosis, or extravasation of blood, the 
general attendant of fractures and dislocations, 
|P_12
till proper assistance can be procured to dress 
the patient secundum artem; in these circum-
stances it should be made use of in the begin-
ning, as it is a known remedy against inflam-
mations and mortifications, the general atten-
dants of these complaints. I shall not enter 
into a detail of the other disorders it will relieve, 
but shall refer the reader to Mr. Goulard's 
treatise; I shall only lay down here some 
few rules for its use, drawn from experience, 
which have met with Mr. Goulard's appro-
bation, both as to that and its composition. 

I. Every one is sufficiently acquainted with 
the powerful effects of vegetable acids, and 
particularly those of vinegar in regard to 
brass, to deter him from making this extract 
in vessels of that metal. No precaution is suf-
ficient to prevent the vinegar from imbibing 
some of the copper; it is therefore much more 
adviseable to make use of vessels made either 
of glass, earth, or pewter. I should have 
been much more uneasy about a gentleman's 
servant, who had swallowed by chance, the 
8th of December last, a certain quantity of the 
vegeto-mineral water, had not I been very 
sure that the extract had not been made in a 
brass kettle. I assured the master in answer 
to his letter, that no bad consequences would 
ensue, but that it would be adviseable to 
order the patient to drink some warm water. 

|P_13
[}Copy of Mr. **** Letter. }]
SIR, 

One of my servants has swallowed, by 
accident, some of the vegeto-mineral water; 
are there any bad consequences to be appre-
hended, and what is best to be done? It hap-
pened about half an hour ago. I am, &c. 


8th December 1769. The day after I received the following. 


salute SIR, I have the pleasure to inform you, that 
my servant is perfectly well to day: he felt 
last night some pains in his stomach, which 
the warm water removed, but no stitches, no 
cholicks. I am &c. 


9th December, 1769. II. The external qualities, which charac-
terize the true original extract of Saturn, 
consist in its colour, its smell, its weight, its 
consistence, and its taste: its colour is that of 
orange, its consistence a little sirupy, its smell 
empyreumatical, or of burnt sugar, its weight 
a third part more than that of the vinegar; 
so that a phial, which holds three ounces 
of vinegar, ought to weigh at least four 
ounces when filled with the extract; the 
|P_14
thickness of this medicine may be as great a 
defect as its lightness: for, if it weighs more 
or less than it ought, it cannot but deceive in 
regard to the proportions made use of, and 
not answer to the directions given. See p. 8.2#

III. When bad vinegar has imbibed as 
much lead as it can possibly dissolve, the super-
fluous metallic particles are observed to sink 
to the bottom of the bottle, such extract, im-
properly called so, is but an imperfect division 
of the lead, which must be rejected for the 
reasons mentioned in page 8. 

IV. From this mixture of lead and vine-
gar is produced a water called by the 
author vegeto-mineral; and this water is 
endowed with excellent virtues, when made 
use of in lotions, fomentations, injections, and 
baths, and in the different formulæ described 
by Mr. Goulard, in his cerate, poultices, po-
matums, liniments, plaisters, &c. but the 
water, of which the vegeto-mineral is com-
posed, ought to be particularly considered in 
its own natural state, before it is made use of 
to form this medicated water. Every species 
of water is not proper for this use. Rain water, 
when purged and filtered, and that of rivers, 
whose bottoms consist of either sand or gravel 
free from mud, are to have the preference, 
especially after having been purified either by 
standing some time, or filtering through proper 
paper; spring and pump water being impreg-
|P_15
nated with gypsous or selenitous particles, give 
rise to a new change of the metallic ones of the 
lead; and thus a white precipitate is formed, 
which will by no means incorporate with the 
water. "These effects, says a clebrated chy-
mist[/6./], are owing to a separation of the vitriolic 
acid of the selenites from the earth, to which it 
was joined, which now mixes with the lead 
of the extract of Saturn, and thus forms a 
vitriol of lead. In that instant the vinegar 
mixes with the earth of the selenites, and they 
form together an acetose-calcarious salt; so that 
at the same time a new dissolution and a new 
combination are effected. Thus the medicine is 
by no means that of the vegeto-mineral water, 
but a mixture of vitriol of lead, acetose salt, 
and brandy. On this occasion the vitriol of 
lead seems to descend in form of a white 
powder, tho' it is in reality a saline matter 
dissoluble in water; the reason is, that it can-
not be dissolved without difficulty, and that 
there is not a sufficiency of water to dissolve 
the whole quantity collected: the remainder 
of the water contains in dissolution a small 
quantity of this vitriol of lead. In fine, if you 
add to the precipitate a large quantity of 
boiling water, the dissolution is perfect; which 
proves, that this precipitate is a saline sub-
stance." From this argument, founded on 
|P_16
natural philosophy, and confirmed by the 
experiments of all who make use of water 
not properly purified, may we not conclude 
that we have no reason to be surprised that 
this remedy has sometimes baffled our endea-
vours? is it not, on the contrary, a subject of 
astonishment, that notwithstanding this ac-
cidental defect in its composition it has so 
frequently been crowned with the greatest 
success? In fine, the water, which dissolves 
soap the most effectually, is to be preferred, tho' 
it will be proper first to purify it well. When 
the extract is thrown into improper water, it 
whitens it only for a time, and then falls to 
the bottom, without being able to mix per-
fectly with it afresh; this water becomes 
curdled, and like sour milk; and in this state 
it is by no means to be made use of, as not at 
all likely to answer our expectations. To this 
we may ascribe the want of success, which 
serves to prejudice many against the remedy, 
and to please others, who are by no means its 
friends for want of being better acquainted 
with it. When proper water cannot be pro-
cured, care must be taken to distil others, if 
opportunity serves. This may be easily done 
with the common alembic, taking care to 
throw away some pints of the first distilled, 
as it is frequently liable to be foul, by the 
uncleaness of the head of the still: you must 
likewise take care to leave about a quarter 
of it in the still, before you have finished 
|P_17
your process, to prevent the rising of any of 
its heterogeneous particles. But in case of 
necessity, where proper water is not to be 
had, any kind of water may be used, taking 
care to boil and filter it thro' paper which is 
not stiffened, till some of the best water can 
be procured[/7./]. 

V. Nothing is of greater consequence in 
prescriptions, than the ascertaining the just 
proportion remedies of this kind bear to each 
|P_18
other: I think the author has rather neglected 
in regard to his. Looking upon it himself as 
a topical one only, he has been little anxious 
about the quantities used in lotions, poultices, 
&c. for common cases; nor is it indeed very 
material, but when particular cases occur; 
such as inflammations of the eyes, ears, throat, 
and of other parts endued with no less a de-
gree of sensibility. The author seems to have 
mistaken the quantity of extract proper for 
the occasion, see page 204. where he says, 
"For example, (speaking of the eyes) put at 
first ten or twelve drops of it (extract of 
Saturn) to a common glass of water, and 
increase them gradually, as the inflamma-
tion is seen to disperse—and after, against 
the defluxions of the tympanum of the ear 
and occasional deafness, taking care in these 
cases, to add to the drops of the extract, 
double the number of drops of campho-
rated brandy, though common brandy may 
be used, as for opthalmies."

The indefinite measure of a glass of water 
gives here an equivocal sense. It is always 
improper to prescribe a remedy by measure, 
when it is to be used with circumspection. 
Nothing can be ascertained by a glass of 
water, a coffee spoonfull, or drops. These 
measures contain more or less according to the 
different places they are used in, and drops may 
vary according to the consistence of the ex-
tract. As all measures then vary, and ever 
|P_

[}ENGLISH and FRENCH WEIGHTS compared. }]

PARIS WEIGHT. Grain.           24 Scrupule.         72 3 Dragme.     576 24 8 Once.     4608 192 64 8 Marc.   9216 384 128 16 2 Livre. 


TROY WEIGHT. Pds. Ounc. Drachs. Scrup. Grs. 0: 0: 0: 0: 0 ⅚ 0: 0: 0: 0: 19⅔ 0: 0: 0: 2: 19 0: 0: 7: 2: 12½ 0: 7: 7: 0: 0 1: 3: 6: 0: 0 


AVOIRDUPOIS WEIGHT. Pounds. Ounces. Drachms. 0: 0: .03 0: 0: .72 0: 0: 2.16 0: 1: 1.28 0: 8: 10.24 1: 1: 4.48 


TROY WEIGHT. Grain.         20 Scruple.     60 3 Drachm.   480 24 8 Ounce. 5760 288 64 12 Pound. 

N. B. The Troy Ounce is also frequently divided into twenty Penny-weights, each consisting of twenty-four grains. 


AVOIRDUPOIS WEIGHT. Ounces. Drachms. 0: .036 0: .731 0: 2.194 1: 1.554 13: 2.651 


PARIS WEIGHT. Marc. Once. Drs. Scr. Grs. 0: 0: 0: 0: 1# 0: 0: 0: 1: ⅜ 0: 0: 1: 0: 1 4/7 0: 1: 0: 0: 9 1/7 1: 4: 1: 1: 13⅔ 


AVOIRDUPOIS WEIGHT. Drachm.   16 Ounce. 256 16 Pound. 


TROY WEIGHT. Pounds. Oun. Drach. Scr. Grs. 0: 0: 0: 1: 7⅓ 0: 0: 7: 0: 17½ 1: 2: 4: 2: 0 


PARIS WEIGHT. Marc. Onc. Drs. Scr. Grs. 0: 0: 0: 1: 9⅓ 0: 0: 7: 1: 5⅓ 1: 6: 6: 1: 13⅓ 

N. B. In the Fractions of Grains I have taken the nearest that could be expressed by single 
Figures, in those of Avoirdupois Drachms I have made Use of Decimals. 

|P_19
in the same country, care must be taken, 
where it is possible, to make use of weights, 
and to reduce foreign ones to those of the 
country we live in. The author himself has 
followed the weights and measures of the 
country he does inhabit; I will follow the 
English one, called Troy,[/8./] as it has more affi-
nity to the Montpellier weight, being di-
vided like that into ounces, drachms, scruples, 
and grains. The Troy pound indeed, con-
tains only twelve ounces, and the Montpellier 
sixteen, but in the ounce, there is only a dif-
ference of seven grains and an half, the Troy
ounce being so much heavier than the Mont-
pellier. In the drachm, the difference is less than 
a grain, in the scruple, not a third of one. The 
grain differs more in proportion, as the Mont-
pellier scruple is divided into twenty four 
grains, and the Troy scruple into only twenty; 
but for the satisfaction of those, who may be cu-
rious to know the exact difference between the 
English and Montpellier weights, I have added 
a table, in which is expressed the value of the 
Montpellier pound, half pound, ounce, drachm, 
and grains, both in Troy and Avoir-du-Pois
weight, as likewise the several values of these 
sorts of weights, compared with the Montpel-
lier and with each other; and this I imagine 
will be the more welcome, as most of the au-
thors, who treat of the comparison of English 
|P_20
and French weights, are more likely to mislead 
than to inform their readers. I cannot help 
remarking here, that the origin of different 
weights, arose from the ancient custom of re-
gulating them by that of a barley corn, which 
served as a standard for all the rest, by mul-
tiplying them into carats, scruples, drachms, 
ounces, pounds, &c; but, as it necessarily hap-
pened, that the barley corns, made use of in 
different countries, weighed more or less on 
account of their size, moisture, or dryness, 
it gave rise to the difference of weights, and 
made it difficult to ascertain precisely those of 
different countries. It is much to be wished 
that the different powers of Europe would 
come to a general regulation of weights, it 
would be a change of much greater import-
ance to trade than that of the old stile, which 
all nations have not adopted, though there are 
none who would not find their account in 
having a general or universal standard for mea-
sure and weight. This, which was always 
looked on as an impossibility, would be the most 
easy to be executed, without any expence to 
governments, and with the easiest one for 
every individual. 

But let us now return to the method of 
prescribing the extract of Saturn, and again 
resume our subject, from which this episode 
has somewhat hurried me. I shall then make 
use of the weight, generally known by the 
name of Troy-weight. The proper and ge-
|P_21
nerally prescribed quantity of extract to a bot-
tle of pure water,[/9./] is two drachms (five penny 
weight) if the extract is well made, which quan-
tity will make about a hundred and ten drops. 
Now, if we suppose the bottle ought to weigh 
twenty-nine Troy ounces, and a glass of water 
to weigh about three ounces, the quantity of 
extract, according to the proportion given by 
Mr. Goulard, would exceed, or at least be equal 
to that of the vegeto-mineral water prescribed 
by him for common uses, when, on the 
contrary, the quantity ought to be diminished 
considerably. So that I would recommend, 
in inflammations of the eyes, to put only two 
drops of the extract to every ounce of water, 
and the same proportion to be observed in all 
cases, where the sensibility of the part is equal-
ly delicate, especially since Mr. Goulard has 
brought his extract to so great a degree of 
perfection. 

The method of counting the drops is to 
have a cork bored from end to end, through 
which pass a tube about the size of a small 
quill commonly called a pinion; this quill 
must be cut off at both ends, like the obtuse 
end of a tooth-pick; and of the two extremi-
ties of the tube thus cut, one enters into the 
bottle, and the other remains on the outside 
of the cork. By inclining the bottle down-
wards and putting the end of the fore-finger 
|P_22
upon the aperture of the tube you may let 
the drops fall at pleasure, one after the other. 

Mr. Goulard does not recommend his po-
matum in opthalmies, and I think with great 
reason; greasy and oleagenous substances are 
always dangerous in inflammations of the 
eyes, and erisipelatous complaints, though 
they are equally adviseable for those of the 
ears: he ought to have recommended the 
frequent washing the eyes, externally with 
the vegeto-mineral water, and keeping a 
bolster constantly on them, well wetted with 
that water. This I have constantly practised 
with success, but you must be careful always 
to add some brandy, and even that which is 
camphorated. This omission, on the part of 
the author in his first prescription, gives an 
air of obscurity to the last part of his second 
paragraph, by putting you in mind there of 
the necessity of making use of brandy in the 
second prescription, as well as in the first; a 
circumstance he has entirely omitted. Let it 
be remarked, that camphorated brandy on 
all occasions is to be preferred to the non-
camphorated, as I shall endeavour to prove 
in the following article. 

VI. It is my opinion, that in the cases, in which 
the author recommends the use of camphire, 
one of the most antiphlogistic, and antispasmodic 
medicines in physic or surgery, he does not pre-
scribe it in large quantities enough. Camphire 
is one of those medicines we use too sparingly, 
|P_23
not being sufficiently conversant in its effects, 
which are always wonderful, whether made 
use of externally or internally. I would re-
commend a work of Mr. Pouteau, intitled, 
Melanges de Chirurgie, which would con-
vince any one of the good qualities of this 
drug. I know an English gentleman, who 
not only preserves himself from, but cures 
himself of many complaints by the use of 
camphire, of which he takes inwardly a large 
quantity; and always carries about him a box 
of it. When I make use of this with the 
extract of Saturn, it is in large quantities, 
and with some precautions different from those 
of Mr. Goulard. If it is given in small quan-
tities, it has no effect; when mixed with po-
matums, cerates, liniments, it is obliged to 
undergo the heat of fire, by which means the 
volatile parts of it are evaporated; what re-
mains of them, insensibly passes away, so that 
in a few days none is left. Whenever the 
vegeto-mineral water is made use of, I would 
recommend the same quantity of campho-
rated brandy, as the author prescribes of that 
which is not camphorated. This campho-
rated brandy should be kept in a bottle well 
corked; you must be careful likewise to fill 
it up now and then, and see that the camphire 
you make use of for this purpose is not too 
airy, but that it is fresh, oily, and of a strong 
perfume. 

|P_24
VII. Mr. Goulard recommends the vegeto-
mineral water to be warmed only during the 
winter, and to make use of it in summer in 
its natural state. This distinction may be a 
very just one at Montpellier, and in other 
warm climates; but in England and other 
cold countries it is absolutely necessary al-
ways to warm it, otherwise the metallic 
particles are not so thoroughly divided; and 
by the water's being impregnated with the 
vegetable parts only the repelling proper-
ty, with which it is reproach'd, only re-
mains; the same may be said of all cold wa-
ters, they act as repellents, by causing too 
great a tension in the fibres they ought to 
relax, and the colder they are the greater is 
their repelling power; but when warmed, 
they are of a moistening, relaxing, softening 
and resolving quality. But particular care must 
be taken not to exceed the dose above pre-
scribed in inflammatory cases; Mr. Cosmond 
a celebrated surgeon has well observed that 
the leaden particles, when introduced into the 
vessels in too large a quantity, irritate and 
force them so considerably, as frequently to add 
to the complaint, instead of relieving it. This 
is a fault that many, who are ignorant of the 
effects of this remedy, frequently fall into; 
and often blame the medicine, when them-
selves are only in fault. 

In cases, where the lymph only is affected, 
the same precaution is not necessary, as a 
|P_25
drachm or two of extract more may be safely 
added to each bottle of water. 

VIII. Such, as are little versed in the know-
ledge of the medicinal virtues of metals, are 
very apt to make cosmetic pomatums with 
the vegeto-mineral water. These have fol-
lowed the errors handed down to us by our 
ancestors, who have made use of lead under 
various forms; others did use such as magis-
teries of pewter and bismuth, &c. which have 
rather served to destroy the beauty of the 
skin, than to preserve it; the reason is evident: 
these metals, by infinuating themselves into 
the pores, there depose some of their par-
ticles the most divided, and by first opening, 
and then filling up these pores spoil the finest 
features. 

These metallic particles become of a black 
dye, and plainly shew a leaden colour, which 
can be concealed only from the eye, by the 
application of a white wash composed of the 
same drug, which by plaistering over the sur-
face of the skin add to its deformity. The 
author of these remarks begs leave to caution 
the fair sex from trusting to these pomatums, 
the composition of which is a secret, the bet-
ter to conceal the known poison they are 
fraught with, which for a short time appears 
to answer their intentions, only to give the 
deeper wound afterwards. Time only can 
re-establish nature, and the use of the poma-
tums described by the author in his Treatise 
|P_26
on Ruptures, p. 138, by leaving out the gold 
and the saffron, the first making the skin black, 
the other yellow. This pomatum, without 
altering the skin, softens, and nourishes it, 
preserves its transparency, destroys tetters and 
redness, fills up wrinkles, and repairs all da-
mages done to it, either by the use of other 
pomatums or paint. This pomatum is infi-
nitely superior to that of Saturn, or the cerate 
for removing the piles, for the scalding of 
the skin, and to remove the spots, which re-
main after the small pox, if applied to it some 
time after the eruption. 

IX. I must here add, that the pure liquid 
extract of Saturn,[/10./] mixed with double the 
quantity of oil of turpentine is the most 
sovereign remedy known against a sprain in 
a horse, by rubbing him with this liniment, 
as soon as the accident happens, taking care 
to keep the part well covered, till you have 
got him home to the stable; if he should still 
continue lame, or appear in pain, you must 
rub him again, before he grows cold, and 
repeat this every four hours, keep him well 
cloathed, and allow him but half his usual 
quantity of food, and give him warm water 
with some bran in it to promote perspiration: 
it seldom happens, if these rules are attended 
to, but that the cure is compleated in four-
and-twenty hours.

|P_27
[}COPY}]
Of the POWER granted to the AUTHOR
of these REMARKS, to provide the PUB-
LIC with the original EXTRACT
of LEAD.

I The under writer, counsellor to the King, 
and perpetual Mayor of the town of 
Alet; lecturer and demonstrator royal in 
surgery; demonstrator royal of anatomy in 
the college of physicians; fellow of the royal 
academies of sciences in Montpellier, 
Toulouse, Lion, Nancy; pensioner of 
the King and of the province of Langue-
doc for lithotomy, and late surgeon to the 
royal and military hospital in Montpellier, 
do hereby certify that, in consequence of the 
friendship which has subsisted these fifty years 
past between Mr. George Arnaud my 
fellow student and myself, I do pass my 
word by this present, and engage myself to 
supply the said Mr. G. Arnaud, doctor in 
physic in the university of Tubinguen, anci-
ent member of the royal academy of surgery, 
lecturer and professor of anatomy in the col-
lege of surgeons at Paris, and in London
|P_28
as one of the corporation of surgeons of the 
city, to supply, I say, the said Mr. G. Ar-
naud and him only in England with a suf-
ficient quantity of my extract of saturn made 
by myself, in the best manner I am able, in 
order to be distributed by him, or those com-
missioned by him, over all the dominions of 
his British Majesty; promising besides 
to supply with the same no other in England
as long as he shall continue to sell that I have 
sent him, or shall continue to send him, to 
confirm which I do put here my hand and 
seal, this day being the 2d of March, 1770. 
GOULARD. 

FINIS. 

[}ERRATUM. }]
Page 23, line 21, after Left, read But whenever, &c. 
