
|P_
A 
DISSERTATION
ON THE 
GOUT,
AND ALL 
CHRONIC DISEASES. 

[Price One Shilling and Six-pence.] 

|P_
[}A 
DISSERTATION
ON THE 
GOUT, &c.}]
[^Decorative frame around the letter "H".^]HOWEVER common it may be 
for men that suffer to complain 
of the evils of life, as the un-
avoidable lot of humanity; would 
they stop but for a moment to consider them 
in the light of reason and philosophy, they 
would find little or no foundation for them 
in nature; but that every man was the real 
author of all of most of his own miseries. 
Whatever doubts may be entertained of moral 
evils, the natural, for the most part, such as 
bodily infirmity, sickness, and pain; all that 
class of complaints which the learned call 
chronic diseases, we most undoubtedly bring 
|P_12
upon ourselves by our own indulgences, ex-
cesses or mistaken habits of life; or by suffer-
ing our ill-conducted passions to lead us astray 
or disturb our peace of mind. Whatever no-
tions men have been taught or have received 
of other causes, such as accidental colds, or 
particularities of constitution, this or that thing 
disagreeing or surfeiting, &c. these are too tri-
fling to produce diseases that commonly last for 
life: there must be something more substantial, 
something more constant and permanent in 
our daily habits, to produce such inveterate 
evils. Though if you read authors or consult 
practitioners, what do you find, but that you 
have taken cold, though you know not how, 
or that your complaints are gouty, rheumatic, 
bilious, nervous, &c.? words that satisfy, 
though they give no kind of idea, and seem 
to have gained credit and assent only by the 
politeness of physicians, who, while they are 
taking their patients money, are too well bred 
to tell them disagreeable truths, and that it is 
by their own faults they are ill. To enquire 
a little further into this matter may be well 
worth our trouble; the task seems to have 
been left for me, and I will perform it most 
sincerely. 

|P_13
I have long had it in my mind to write upon 
chronic diseases in general, in the hope of giv-
ing mankind, what most assuredly they have 
never yet had, a few rational ideas about 
them; thinking that, if the true original 
causes of them were fully and fairly set forth, 
men could not be so capitally mistaken to 
impute them, as they do, to the false and ima-
ginary, and therefore apply false and imaginary 
remedies; nor think that the general health 
of mankind were to be overset by every trifle, 
and the recovery of it lay hid in a few drops or 
powders of any kind. Did they better under-
stand the nature of chronic diseases in general, 
and whence they proceed, they could not be 
so unreasonable to think they might live as they 
list with impunity, expecting repeated remedy 
from art; or, did they know any thing of the 
nature of medicine, they would find that, 
though fits of pain have been relieved, or 
sickness cured by it for a time, the establish-
ment of health is a very different thing, de-
pending upon other powers and principles: 
the first may be and often is done by medicine, 
the other never. That their opinion of me-
dicine is vain and ridiculous must appear, I 
think, very evidently to any one who re-
|P_14
collects that the art of physic has now been 
practised, more or less regularly, above two 
thousand years; and most assuredly there is 
not yet discovered any one certain remedy for 
any disease. Ought not this to make us 
suspect that there is no such thing? How can 
it be, when different degrees of the very same 
disease require various means and methods, 
and the same thing that in one degree would 
relieve, or perhaps cure, in another might kill? 
It is by plan, by regimen, and successive in-
tention, that diseases must be cured, when 
they are curable; or relieved and palliated 
when they are not. The skilful in medicine, 
and learned in nature, know well that health 
is not to be established by medicine; for its 
effects are but momentary, and the frequent 
repetition of it destructive to the strongest 
frames; that if it is to be restored, it must be 
by gently calling forth the powers of the body 
to act for themselves, introducing gradually a 
little more and more activity, chosen diet, and, 
above all, peace of mind, changing intirely 
that course of life which first brought on the 
disease: medicine co-operating a little. That 
this is the truth, all who know any thing of 
nature or art must know: and I may safely 
|P_15
take upon me to say, that, though I firmly 
believe health may be restored in most cases that 
are not absolutely mortal, I am very sure that 
no invalid was ever made a healthy man by the 
mere power of medicine. If this be the case, 
how must the initiated, according as their hu-
manity is touched, either laugh at or pity the 
poor foolish world, surrendering at discretion to 
the most ignorant of quacks, pretending to in-
fallible remedies which are not in nature. But 
what is still more ridiculous, the patients them-
selves are often so ashamed to own they have 
been deluded, that they favour the cheat, by 
pretending to relief which they never felt. 

I have collected a few materials for this 
work, which I intend to put in order, as soon 
as I can find time and industry enough to set 
about it in earnest; and, if I can finish it to 
my own satisfaction, perhaps I may some time 
or other trouble the world with it. At pre-
sent I think myself particularly called upon 
to say something of the gout, as that disease 
was to make a considerable part of my plan; 
and, as I see now so many, and hear of more, 
who are throwing away, not only their money 
very foolishly, but, as I verily believe, the 
|P_16
future health of their lives also, in hopes of a 
medical cure for it, to shew that such hopes 
are chimerical, and contradictory to every idea 
of true philosophy and common sense. 

I shall therefore take a few extracts from 
this general plan, sufficient to shew the real 
original causes of all chronic diseases; which, 
though they have been multiplied without end, 
and numberless causes been assigned them, are 
certainly not many, and their first causes very 
few. I think they may very fairly be reduced 
to these three: Indolence, Intemperance, and 
Vexation. 

From one or more of these three causes, I 
have undertaken to prove that all or most 
chronic diseases are produced; for different dis-
eases may have the same original cause, the 
difference proceeding from the various degree 
of strength and vigor in bodies; so that what 
would be gout in one, in another might be 
rheumatism, stone, colic, jaundice, palsy, &c. 
The gout is manifestly, and I think confessed-
ly, a disease of the best constitution, and may 
therefore fairly stand as a representative of all 
the rest: as such I shall consider it for the 
|P_17
present, and speak of these causes in their order: 
but it may be necessary to say a word or two of 
the gout itself before we enquire into its cause. 

The gout is so common a disease, that there 
is scarcely a man in the world, whether he 
has had it or not, but thinks he knows per-
fectly what it is. So does a cook-maid think 
she knows what fire is as well as Sir Isaac 
Newton. It may therefore seem needless at 
present to trouble ourselves about a definition, 
to say what it is: but I will venture to say 
what I am persuaded it is not, though contrary 
to the general opinion. It is not hereditary, 
it is not periodical, and it is not incurable. 

If it were hereditary, it would be necessarily 
transmitted from father to son, and no man 
whose father had it could possibly be free 
from it: but this is not the case, there are 
many instances to the contrary: it is therefore 
not necessarily so; but the father's having it 
inclines or disposes the son to it. This is the 
causa proegumena or prædisponent of the learned, 
which of itself never produced any effect at all; 
there must be joined the causa procatarctica,
or active efficient cause, that is, our own in-
temperance or mistaken habit of life, to pro-
|P_18
duce it; and accordingly, as this operates more 
or less, so will the gout be. Our parents un-
doubtedly give us constitutions similar to their 
own, and, if we live in the same manner they 
did, we shall very probably be troubled with 
the same diseases; but this by no means proves 
them to be hereditary: it is what we do our-
selves that will either bring them on, or keep 
us free. 

If it were hereditary, it would appear in 
infancy and in women, which in general it 
does not. I may be told of some women 
who have had it. I believe never very young, 
nor till they had contributed to it themselves; 
for women, as well as men, may abuse a good 
constitution. I have heard likewise of a boy 
or two out of a million that had it, or some-
thing like it; but these boys had been suffered 
to sip wine very early, and been fed and in-
dulged every way most unwholsomely. 

Those, who insist that the gout is hereditary, 
because they think they see it so sometimes, must 
argue very inconclusively; for if we compute 
the number of children who have it not, and 
women who have it not, together with all 
those active and temperate men who are free 
from it, though born of gouty parents; the 
|P_19
proportion will be found at least a hundred to 
one against that opinion. And surely I have 
a greater right from all these instances to say 
that it is not hereditary, than they have from 
a few to contend that it is. What is all this, 
but to pronounce a disease hereditary, and 
prove it by saying that it is sometimes so, but 
oftener not so? Can there be a greater absur-
dity? 

No diseases are hereditary but those of taint 
or infection, and maleformation; the gout is 
none of these, and therefore is not hereditary. 

If the gout be a disease of indigestion, and 
therefore of our own acquiring, we must rea-
son very ill, or rather not reason at all, when 
we say it is hereditary; for surely no man 
will say that indigestion is hereditary, any more 
than intemperance. There are whole nations 
of active people knowing no luxury, who for 
ages have been free from it, but have it now 
since the Europeans have brought them wine 
and spirits. 

If the gout be thought hereditary because 
it is incurable by medicine, the same may be 
said of every other chronic disease, none of 
|P_20
which ever are cured by it, I mean, so as 
not to return again. When was there a 
man who, having had one fit of rheuma-
tism, stone, colic, &c. however happily re-
lieved by art for a time, had it not again 
and again, or something worse in the place 
of it; till he became a confirmed invalid, and 
died long before his time; unless some very 
remarkable alteration took place in the course 
of his life to confirm his health? So it is in 
the gout: a man gets a fit of it, and by abs-
tinence, patience, time, and nature, the crude 
acrimony producing it is subdued and ex-
hausted, and he is relieved for that time; 
(he might be so much sooner, and very safely 
too, by the assistance of art judiciously em-
ployed) he recovers however, and in a few 
months is taken again. Why? Not from 
any thing inherent in his constitution, but 
because he returned to his former habit of life 
that produced it at first, and will for ever pro-
duce it, while the strength of his body lasts. 

The truth is, we breed it at first, we renew 
it again and again, and bring it on ourselves 
by our own mistakes or faults, which we 
would fain excuse by throwing them back 
upon our parents, that our complaints may be 
|P_21
more justly founded. And as bankrupts, un-
done by idleness and extravagance, for ever 
plead losses and misfortunes; so do we in-
heritance to exculpate ourselves. 

It is natural enough for those who believe 
the gout hereditary to think it also periodical, 
as if something innate and inherent in our 
constitutions produced it at certain times: but 
this is a great nistake; for, if it were periodi-
cal, it must be regularly so. The only pe-
riodical disease I know is the intermittent fever, 
which, till it be disturbed by the bark or any 
other febrifuge, is as regular as a good clock. 
The returns of the gout are always very un-
certain, according to the quantity or quality 
of accumulated indigestion within, and the 
strength of our bodies. 

I come now to shew that the gout is not 
incurable. If by the cure of it be meant the 
administering a pill or a powder, or medicine 
of any kind to do it, I fear it is and ever will be 
incurable. It has been long and often at-
tempted in vain, from the origin of physic to 
this day, from the first quack to the present. 
Indeed there is a most glaring absurdity at 
first sight, that must stop any man of com-
|P_22
mon sense, who has the least insight into 
nature, or knowledge of the human frame: 
for, if the gout be the necessary effect of in-
temperance, as I hope to shew very evidently 
that it is, a medicine to cure it must be 
something that will enable a man to bear 
the daily intemperance of his future life un-
hurt by the gout or any other disease; 
that is, something given now that will take 
away the effect of a future cause. As well 
might a medicine be given now to prevent 
a man's breaking his leg or his neck seven 
years hence. One would think the utmost 
that any rational man could expect from me-
dicine was, that it should have power to re-
lieve and remove present disorders, leaving 
the body quite free, without pretending to 
insure it from future injuries. Here lies the 
error: men think the gout to be something 
latent in the body now, which, once well 
eradicated, would never return; not suspecting 
it to be no more than each day's indigestion 
accumulated to a certain pitch; that, as long 
as the vigor of life lasts, always brings on 
every fit, which once well over, the man has 
no more gout, nor seeds of gout in him than 
he who never had it; and, if he did not breed 
it again, most certainly would never have it 
|P_23
again. A proof of this is, that the gout has 
been often cured by a milk diet, which, as 
long as it lasted, has generally kept the patient 
free. But this method of cure I cannot ap-
prove, because it relaxes and enervates the man, 
and does not sufficiently support the health 
and vigor of his body. 

Though I think the gout incurable by me-
dicine, it is so far from being incurable in its 
nature, that I am firmly persuaded it may 
be more easily and more perfectly cured than 
almost any other chronic disease; and this is 
another strong argument that proves it not 
hereditary. My reason is, that it is confes-
sedly a disease of the strongest and best con-
stitution relieving itself by throwing off harsh 
and bad humors from the vitals, and out of the 
blood upon the extremities, where they do 
least harm to the powers and principles of 
life and health; and as these humors can be 
nothing more than the daily accumulations of 
indigestion, if a man can live without breed-
ing constantly this indigested acrimony, he 
may most undoubtedly live free, not only from 
the gout, but every other chronic disease also. 
And that he may live so, not in a perpetual 
|P_24
state of mortification and self-denial, but with 
great ease and comfort to himself, in the truest, 
most philosophic luxury, I shall endeavour to 
prove, I hope to the satisfaction of all think-
ing, reasonable men. 

I have said, that Indolence, Intemperance,
 and Vexation, are the original causes of all or 
most of our chronic diseases: perhaps a few ac-
cidents must be excepted, to which the strongest 
and healthiest are most liable; and the effects 
of fevers not happily ended; and which I 
except, to obviate all cavil and dispute with the 
men of art. I believe, to every considerate 
man, whose eyes have been opened so as to 
give him the least insight into nature, the 
truth of this proposition will be so self-evident, 
that he must instantly perceive it; and every 
invalid that will be candid enough to do it, 
may fairly trace all his complaints up to one 
or other of these causes. But it may require 
some explanation to the generality of men, 
who are so short-sighted as never to look back 
or forward far beyond the ken of their nose, 
and therefore never see either distant causes 
or effects; and when they are sick seldom 
enquire more than for some cold or surfeit of 
|P_25
yesterday, and to some such trifling cause im-
pute diseases that last for life. An accidental 
cold or even debauch that happens but seldom 
can have no such effect; and men otherwise 
healthy, living in good habits, soon get rid of 
both. It is the constant course of life we lead, 
what we do, or neglect to do, habitually every 
day, that if right establishes our health, if 
wrong, makes us invalids for life. 

Men ignorant of the ways of nature in the 
production and support of animals, not know-
ing what she requires to preserve them in 
health and vigor to their utmost period, have 
conceiv'd very strange and most assuredly very 
false ideas of diseases in general, and seem to 
think every disease a distinct kind of being or 
thing, and that there are medicines opposed to 
each, that will certainly remove and cure it. 
This makes them so solicitous to know the 
name of their complaint, which once ascer-
tain'd, they think the remedy not far off. 
Poor men! Is not the gout sufficiently distin-
guished? But where is the remedy? Certainly 
not in the precarious skill of prescribing doc-
tors, or the secret of ignorant and enterprizing 
quacks. They fancy too that there is great 
|P_26
variety of constitution, with diseases unavoid-
ably peculiar to each: that certain times of 
life must produce many, and that it is impos-
sible to grow old without sickness of some kind 
or other. There is certainly no foundation in 
nature for any of these opinions, nor is there 
any real essential difference of constitution, 
but of strong or weak, and this is produced 
more by habit than nature. The strong by 
bad habits will become weaker, and by good 
the weak stronger. But the most delicate 
frames may be as healthy as the strongest, for 
the same reason that a squirrel may be as 
healthy as an elephant. There is no disease 
necessarily peculiar to any time of life, how-
ever the changes into the different stages of it 
may affect the valetudinary. And it is pos-
sible for men to live to great age without any 
disease at all, for many have lived to up-
wards of an hundred with uninterrupted 
health. 

Not from the natural defects of our con-
stitutions therefore, but the abuse of them, 
proceed all our chronic diseases. That is, 
from Indolence, Intemperance, or Vexation. 

|P_27
Let us now proceed to enquire what must 
be the necessary effect of one or more of these 
causes acting daily upon the body; whether 
in the strongest and most vigorous frames it 
must not be the gout; in weaker, rheuma-
tism, colic, stone, palsy, &c. or any, or all of 
the nervous and hysterical class. 

First, of Indolence, by which I do not mean 
insensibility, but an inactive habit of life, tak-
ing the word in the general common sense it 
is now used. 

[}OfIndolence. }]
IT seems to have been the design of Pro-
vidence that all men should labor, every 
one for himself: that some are rich enough 
to purchase the labor of others is a mere ac-
cident with regard to individuals, in which the 
care of Providence appears to be no otherwise 
concerned, than having unequally distributed 
those powers and abilities by which active and 
fiery spirits rise uppermost to preserve the har-
mony of subordination, without which society 
|P_28
could never exist. The rich and great have 
so far forgot this first principle of nature, that 
they renounce all bodily labor as unworthy 
their condition, and are either too lazy or too 
inattentive to substitute exercise instead of it: 
thus sacrificing health to indulgence and dig-
nity, they do not enjoy those advantages their 
superior stations and fortunes give them; but 
in happiness fall often below the laboring 
hind. I remember to have seen a very inge-
nious little book upon the origin of evil, in 
which labor is considered as a great evil. 
The agreeable author must surely mean when 
it is excessive, and urged on to the wearing 
and wasting the body; for in general labor is 
the first principle of good to mankind, and 
to none more than the laborious themselves. 
Does he mean that it would be better for us 
all, did the earth spontaneously bring forth her 
fruits in such abundance, that we should no 
more labor or contend for them than we do 
for the air, and have nothing to do but bask 
in ease, and riot in enjoyment? If so, I can 
by no means agree with him; for soon, very 
soon, in such a state of things, there would 
not be one healthy man upon the earth, and 
the whole race must quickly perish. Indeed, 
|P_29
I am afraid, notwithstanding all our unreason-
able and unphilosophical complainings, the 
utmost wit of man cannot remove the least 
evil out of nature, without taking with it all 
the good. But begging pardon for this little 
digression, and to come back to my own pur-
pose, I think he had been nearer the truth, 
had he put Indolence in its stead, which is a 
source of great evil. Nothing undermines the 
foundation of all our happiness, the health and 
vigor of the body, like it, or lays such a train 
of diseases to come. But I must endeavor to 
shew in what manner. 

It is upon the minutest and almost invisible 
parts of the body, our best health, strength, 
and spirits depend: these fine parts, commonly 
called capillaries, are little pipes or tubes, the 
extended continuations of the larger blood-
vessels, through which the finest parts of the 
blood must constantly pass, not only to keep 
these very small channels always free and open, 
but also that the particles of the blood may in 
their passage be attenuated, broken, and rub-
bed into globules perfectly smooth and round, 
and easily divisible into still less and less, till 
they escape the sight assisted even by the 
|P_30
microscope; which gives ocular demonstration 
of this most amazingly minute circulation. 
I have observed myself, and any curious pa-
tient man may see with a good microscope, 
in the pellucid membrane of any living ani-
mal, this surprizing minuteness. He may se-
lect and observe one single vessel, the smallest 
of those that convey red blood, many of which 
would not equal the smallest hair in size, 
through which the blood may be seen passing, 
not like a fluid, but a number of little red so-
lid balls pushing one another on till they come 
to the extremity or ramification of the vessel 
where it divides into two still less. There 
the first globule, stopping a little, and recoil-
ing, is pushed on again till it divides into two, 
and, losing its red colour, passes on in the 
smaller pipes fitted only to receive the serum; 
which undergoes the same circulation till it be 
refined into lymph, and this into still finer 
fluids; which, being thus prepared, escape into 
a subtility beyond all possible observation. 
Now the strength of the heart and arteries 
alone, in a sedentary course of life, is by no 
means sufficient to keep up and perpetuate this 
motion through these capillaries, but requires 
the assistance and joint force of all the muscles 
|P_31
of the body to act by intervals, compress the 
veins, propel and accelerate the circulation of 
the whole mass of blood, in order to force 
and clear these pipes, and to triturate, cribrate, 
and purify the fluid passing through, forming 
every particle of it into a perfect globule, which 
is the form all the atoms of matter must take 
from much agitation. Without this extra-
ordinary occasional aid, the little vessels would, 
by their natural elasticity, close up into fibres, 
or be obstructed by rough angular particles 
sticking in them, and stopping all passage. 
Numberless evils of the chronic kind, espe-
cially all nervous diseases, owe their origin to 
this cause alone. Accordingly we see most 
of those who have lived for any time in a state 
of indolence, grow emaciated and pale by 
the drying up of these fine vessels; or, if they 
happen to be of a lax habit, having a good 
appetite, and nothing to vex them, they may 
be loaded with fat; but they grow pale withal, 
many of those fine pipes being nevertheless 
closed up; so that they appear bloated, and 
their fat unwholsome, having much less blood 
in their veins than thinner people. Hence 
we may learn why these languid pale persons 
upon the least motion become faint and breath-
|P_32
the blood hurrying through the larger 
vessels yet free, and, like a crowd obstructing 
its own passage, causing a dangerous suffoca-
tion. Or, if they have not been long in this 
state, nor the capillaries quite closed, they glow, 
especially young women, with a momentary 
red, the fine vessels being for that time ex-
panded. Thus inactivity first forms obstruc-
tions in these exquisitely fine parts, upon which 
the health and vigor both of body and mind 
depend entirely, and lays the foundation of 
many diseases to come; which other conco-
mitant circumstances, such as a violent cold, 
excess of any kind, infection from without, 
or a particular disposition of the body within, 
make often fatal to many in this habit of life; 
and which the industrious and active never 
feel. 

Now I would ask any reasonable person, 
capable of considering this operation of nature 
with the least glimmering of philosophy, or 
even the attention of common sense, and most 
assuredly it concerns every man to consider it 
well, whether he can conceive it possible to 
substitute any medicine to be swallowed, that 
shall act upon the blood and vessels like the 
|P_33
joint force of all the muscles of the body, act-
ing and reacting occasionally in a regular 
course of moderate daily labor or exercise. 
Unless this can be done, I will venture to 
pronounce that there is no such thing as a 
lasting cure either for the gout, or any other 
chronic disease. Yes, Sir, says a common 
practitioner, cordials, volatiles, bracers, strength-
eners, will do this, will keep up an increased 
circulation. Possibly they may for a few hours, 
by doing mischief for many days: but their 
action soon subsides, and the stimulus ceases; 
they must therefore be repeated and repeated 
for life. Woe be to him that takes them; 
and to him that leaves them off, unless it be 
done with great judgment. While they act, 
they coagulate the juices and corrupt the 
whole mass of blood; and when omitted, the 
patient must feel all the languors and horrors 
of a crapulary fever after repeated debauch; 
and must have recourse to them again and 
again, like a dram-drinker, who cannot bear 
his existence but in a state of intoxication. 
No, art can never come up to nature in this 
most salutary of all her operations. 

But these obstructions from crude particles 
of the blood, and this inanition of the capilla-
|P_34
ries, are not all the evils produced by indo-
lence. That sprightly vigor and alacrity of 
health which we feel and enjoy in an active 
course of life, that zest in appetite, and re-
freshment after eating, which sated luxury 
seeks in vain from art, is owing wholly to 
new blood made every day from fresh food 
prepared and distributed by the joint action 
of all the parts of the body. No man can 
have these delightful sensations who lives two 
days with the same blood, but must be lan-
guid and spiritless. To introduce new juices 
the old must be first thrown off, or there will 
be no room, there will be too great a plethora 
or fulness; the first cause of disease in many 
cases. In a state of inactivity the old humors 
pass off so slowly, the insensible perspiration 
is so inconsiderable, that there is no void to be 
filled; consequently by degrees the appetite, 
which is the last thing that decays, that is, the 
desire of supply, must daily diminish, and at 
last be totally lost. Here art can do wonders; 
it can procure evacuations; we can bleed, 
purge, and vomit; but then, to do any good 
by these, the case must be recent, before the 
humors are vitiated by too long a stay in the 
body, which will be the case very soon, for 
|P_35
they are all in a perishable state, which makes 
their daily renewal so essentially necessary to 
health: but then these artificial evacuations dis-
charge all alike; the new, the middle, and 
the old juices; that is, the chyle, the blood, 
the serum, and lymph; and by this indiscri-
minate action make strange confusion in those 
that remain: whereas in nature's course there 
is a constant regular transmutation and suc-
cession from one state to another; that is, 
from chyle into blood, and blood into serum, 
serum into lymph, and so on, till they are all 
in their turn, like wave impelling wave, ha-
ving done their office in various shapes, ela-
borated and ground to such a minute subtility 
and fineness, that they pass off in the vapor of 
insensible perspiration. In a state of indolence 
they do not pass off either so soon or so regu-
larly as they ought, because there is not mo-
tion, nor consequently heat enough to throw 
off the vapor: they lodge in the body too long, 
grow putrid, acrimonious, and hurtful many 
ways, like the matter formed in an ulcer, 
which, while it is yet sweet, is more healing 
than any balsam the surgeon can apply; but 
when confined, it soon becomes corrosive, 
and like a caustic eats it's way all round in 
|P_36
fistulas to find vent. This shews the virulent 
acrimony of these confined and stagnating hu-
mors: hence the breath and perspiration, what 
there is of it occasionally, of indolent people 
is never sweet; and hence in jails, where these 
noxious vapors are collected and condensed 
from crouded wretches languishing in indo-
lence, very malignant and pestilential fevers 
arise. 

Perpetual blisters have been often thought, 
and sometimes found, to be serviceable in 
draining off some of these superfluous juices be-
fore they are much corrupted, and making, 
by a faint resemblance of nature's action, a 
little more room for new; and it is for this 
reason they do any good at all, by increasing 
the general circulation, and forcing off a 
few of those humors that had circulated too 
long in the body, and were becoming acrid: 
for the quantity they discharge is so trifling, 
that there could be no physiology, nor even 
common sense, in supposing the evacuation to 
be the benefit procured. By a vomit or a purge 
the discharge is a hundred fold more, but the 
good obtained not always so great, because 
by these the humors are indiscriminately thrown 
|P_37
off, and much more of the new than the old. 
Many have used frequent bleeding to renew 
their blood, and I have known it answer very 
well to some, especially old people who had 
been long accustomed to it, whom it preserved 
to great age: but then it must be begun in 
time, before the whole mass of humors be 
vitiated, and continued for life. Is it not 
strange that men should seek and prefer these 
violent artificial methods to the simple, easy, 
pleasant and constant action of nature, and 
chuse rather to take a vomit or a purge than 
a walk, and wear a perpetual blister than 
make the least use of their limbs? 

Thus indolence must inevitably lay the 
foundation of general disease, and according 
to the constitution and a few concomitant cir-
cumstances will be the kind of the disease: 
in the very best it may be gout or rheumatism; 
in the weaker habits colic, jaundice, palsy, stone, 
&c. with all of the hysterical and hypochondri-
acal class. In vain have ingenious men of read-
ing and study, mental labor and sedentary life, 
who are more subject to disease in general than 
the gay and thoughtless, endeavour'd to obviate 
the evil by abstinence, an excellent means of 
|P_38
remedy in many cases, and which few practise 
but true philosophers, who are not the most 
likely to want it. But yet even they do not 
find it answer, and for the reasons which I 
have just given; that we cannot live two days 
in health and spirits with the same blood; there 
must be a new daily supply of that ethereal 
part of our food called up to the brain to sup-
port its own, as well as the labor of the whole 
body. By this I mean the most elaborated 
refined part of all our juices, which constantly 
repairs and nourishes the smallest vessels and 
fibres; whether I may be allowed to call it 
animal spirits or not, is not material. When-
ever this æther fails, we must necessarily feel 
languor and lassitude both of body and mind. 
With this difference, that in weariness of the 
limbs from much action the lees and coarser 
parts are thrown off also, and the first meal 
and first sleep soon supplies the defect. In 
mental labor the feculence remains to obstruct 
all appetite; there is no room, and therefore 
no call for supply; the whole man suffers and 
sinks. 

|P_39
[}OfIntemperance. }]
I COME now to speak of Intemperance, 
for Indolence, blunting all our sensations, 
naturally leads us to Intemperance: we 
want the whip and spur of luxury to excite our 
jaded appetites. There is no enduring the per-
petual moping languor of indolence: we fly 
to the stimulating sensualities of the table and 
the bottle, friend provokes friend to exceed 
and accumulate one evil upon another; a joy-
ous momentary relief is obtained, to be paid 
for severely soon after: the next morning our 
horrors increase, and in this course there is no 
remedy but repetition. Thus whoever is in-
dolent is intemperate also, and partly from 
necessity; and the evils necessarily following 
both these causes often make the rich and 
great more wretched than the poor, and the 
ballance of happiness is held more equally be-
tween them; for however other things may 
be distributed, happiness like water always 
finds its level among men. I wish this obser-
vation might cure these of their envy, and 
teach the others how to enjoy their wealth. 

|P_40
Before I return to my subject, I fear I must 
make an apology for what I am going to say, 
and hope no one will be offended, when I ven-
ture to say that nine in ten of all the chronic 
diseases in the world, particularly the gout, o
we their first rise to intemperance. Many a 
good man, who piques himself upon being the 
most sober regular creature alive, and never 
eats but of one or two plain dishes, as he 
calls them, nor exceeds his pint of wine at any 
meal; keeps good hours, and never sleeps 
above eight or nine, may be surprized, if not 
affronted, to have his diseases imputed to in-
temperance; which he considers as a great 
crime. And yet he is often ill, sick in his 
stomach, troubled with indigestion, and crippled 
by the gout. The case is, we judge of tem-
perance and intemperance from our own 
habits, without any just idea of either. What 
we are used to do, and see others do, we 
think right, and never go up to nature for our 
knowledge. The best way to explain what 
I mean by intemperance, may be to inquire 
what is nature's law of temperance, and to 
deviate from that must be considered as intem-
perance. And here I must beg leave to ob-
serve, that temperance is a thing of which no 
|P_41
Englishman has or can have the least idea, if 
he judges from his own or his neighbors habits. 
To form some notion of it he must have seen 
other countries, particularly Spain, Portugal, or 
Italy, and observed how men live there. What 
they call temperance, or even tolerable living, 
with us would be thought downright starving. 
In this view temperance is local and compa-
rative; but what I mean is natural temperance 
not depending upon place or custom (for I do 
not mean fasting or abstinence, which can 
never be salutary but after repletion) and we 
must not judge of it from countries where a 
piece of bad bread and an onion with a 
draught of water is thought a tolerable meal; 
nor from our own, where beggars live better 
than the nobles of some countries, and where 
we riot in the choice of plenty native and exo-
tic every day. 

To come then to my idea of it: I think 
there is an absolute, determined temperance, 
to be measured by every man's natural un-
provoked appetite, digestion and consumption, 
while he continues in a good state of health, 
and right habit of life. As long as a man eats 
and drinks no more than his stomach calls for, 
|P_42
and will bear without the least pain, disten-
tion, eructation or uneasiness of any kind; 
nor than his body consumes and throws off to 
the last grain; he may be said to live in a very 
prudent well-regulated state of temperance, 
that will probably preserve him in health and 
spirits to great old age. 

This is nature's law: and the reverse of it, 
or indeed any great deviation from it, must be 
intemperance. When we eat without appe-
tite, or urge beyond moderate satiety, pro-
voked by incentives of any kind: when we 
drink without thirst for the sake of the liquor. 
Indeed I cannot allow him to be strictly tem-
perate who drinks any wine or strong liquor at 
all, unless it be medicinally, or now and then 
for the sake of society and good humor, but 
by no means every day. 

Now let us compare this simple idea of tem-
perance with the common course of most men's 
lives, and observe their progress from health to 
sickness: for I fear we shall find but very few 
who have any pretensions to real temperance. 
In early youth we are insensibly led into in-
temperance by the indulgence and mistaken 
|P_43
fondness of parents and friends wishing to make 
us happy by anticipation. Having thus ex-
hausted the first degrees of luxury before we 
come to the dominion of ourselves, we should 
find no pleasure in our liberty did we not ad-
vance in new sensations, nor feel ourselves free 
but as we abuse it. Thus we go on till some 
friendly pain or disease bids, or rather forces, 
us to stop. But in youth all the parts of our 
bodies are strong and flexible, and bear the 
first loads of excess with less hurt, and throw 
them off soon by their own natural vigor and 
action, or with very little assistance from arti-
ficial evacuations. As we grow older, either 
by nature in due time, or repeated excesses 
before our time, the body is less able to free 
itself, and wants more aid from art. The 
man however goes on, taking daily more than 
he wants, or can possibly get rid of; he feels 
himself replete and oppressed, and, his appe-
tite failing, his spirits sink for want of fresh 
supply. He has recourse to dainties, sauces, 
pickles, provocatives of all sorts. These soon 
lose their power; and though he washes down 
each mouthful with a glass of wine, he can 
relish nothing. What is to be done? Send 
for a physician. Doctor, I have lost my sto-
|P_44
mach; pray give me, says he, with great in-
nocence and ignorance, something to give me 
an appetite; as if want of appetite was a dis-
ease to be cured by art. In vain would the 
physician, moved by particular friendship to 
the man, or that integrity he owes to all men, 
give him the best advice in two words, quære 
sudando, seek it by labor. He would be thought 
a man void of all knowledge and skill in his 
profession, if he did not immediately, or after 
a few evacuations, prescribe stomachics, bitter 
spicy infusions in wine or brandy, vitriolic 
elixirs, bark, steel, &c. By the use of these 
things the stomach, roused to a little extra-
ordinary action, frees itself, by discharging it's 
crude, austere, coagulated contents into the 
bowels, to be thence forwarded into the blood. 
The man is freed for a time, finds he can eat 
again, and thinks all well. But this is a short-
liv'd delusion. If he is robust, the acrimony 
floating in the blood will be thrown out, and 
a fit of gout succeeds; if less so, rheumatism 
or colic, &c. as I have already said. But let 
us suppose it to be the gout, which if he bears 
patiently, and lives moderately, drinking no 
madeira or brandy to keep it out of his sto-
mach, nature will relieve him in a certain time, 
|P_45
and the gouty acrimony concocted and ex-
hausted by the symptomatic fever that always 
attends, he will recover into health; if assisted 
by judicious, mild, and soft medicines, his 
pains might be greatly assuaged and mitigated, 
and he would recover sooner. But however 
he recovers, it is but for a short time; for he 
returns to his former habits, and quickly brings 
on the same round of complaints again and 
again, all aggravated by each return, and he 
less able to bear them; till he becomes a con-
firmed invalid and cripple for life, which, 
with a great deal of useless medication, and 
a few journies to Bath, he drags on, till, in 
spite of all the doctors he has consulted, and 
the infallible quack medicines he has taken, 
lamenting that none have been lucky enough 
to hit his case, he sinks below opium and 
brandy, and dies long before his time. This 
is the course I have lived to see many take, 
and believe it to be the case of more whom 
I have never heard of, and which any one 
may observe in the circle of his acquaintance: 
all this chain of evils is brought on and ac-
cumulated by indolence and intemperance, or 
mistaken choice of diet. How easily might 
|P_46
they have been remedied, had the real causes 
been known and attended to in time. 

I believe I must here explain a little more 
fully what I mean by provoking the appetite, 
which I take to be the general mode of in-
temperance among men; for custom has made 
all kinds of incentives to excess so common, 
that those of daily use, far from being con-
sidered in the class of intemperance, are by 
most people thought to be not only salutary 
but necessary; and they never suspect the least 
evil from the common decoraments of the table, 
salt, pepper, mustard, vinegar; and yet, however 
extraordinary it may seem, I will venture to 
pronounce that excess in any of these must be 
doubly prejudicial to health; hurtful in them-
selves by their acrimony, they provoke the 
appetite beyond natural satiety to receive an 
oppressive load, which the stomach itself would 
soon feel, were it not artificially stimulated to 
discharge it into the blood by wine and strong 
liquors immediately after. Thus one error 
brings on another, and when men have eaten 
too much, they drink too much also by a 
kind of necessity. He will certainly be a 
healthier man, who is very moderate in the use 
|P_47
of these things, than he who exceeds; they 
may he sometimes useful as medicines; but 
can never add to the wholsomeness of our daily 
food. To give some weight to what I say, 
there are whole nations in the world that have 
never known any of them, and are healthy, 
strong, and vigorous. 

If this be true of the common provocatives 
at every poor man's board, who is there that 
exceeds not nature's law? who is truly tempe-
rate? What shall we say of that studied, 
labored, refined extravagance at the tables of 
the rich, where the culinary arts are push'd to 
that excess, that luxury is become false to it-
self, and things are valued, not as they are good 
and agreeable to the natural and undebauch'd 
appetite; but high, inflammatory, rare, out of 
season, and costly; where, though variety is 
aimed at, every thing has the same taste, and 
nothing it's own. I am sorry and ashamed, that 
men professing luxury should understand it so 
little, as to think it lies in the dish or the sauce 
or multitude of either; or that urging beyond 
natural satiety can afford any real enjoyment. 
But this they do by all the researches of culinary 
and medical art, introducing all the foreign 
|P_48
aids to luxury, every stimulating provocative 
that can he found in acids, salts, fiery spices, 
and essences of all kinds, to rouse their nerves 
to a little feeling; not knowing the more they 
are chafed and irritated the more callous they 
still grow; and the same things must now be 
more frequently repeated, increased in quantity, 
and exalted in quality, till they know not 
where to stop, and every meal they make 
serves only to overload and oppress the stomach, 
to foul and inflame the blood, obstruct and 
choak all the capillary channels, bring on a 
hectic fever of irritation, that though it raise 
the spirits for the evening, leaves behind it all 
the horrid sensations of inanition and crapula 
the next morning; and but that nature is so kind 
as to stop them in their career with a painful 
fit of gout or some other illness, in which she 
gets a little respite, they would soon be at the 
end of their course. 

Men bring all these evils upon themselves, 
either not knowing or not attending to two 
things: the one, that pleasure is a coy coquet, 
and to be enjoy'd must not always be pursued; 
we must sometimes sit still, that she may come 
and court us in her turn: the other, that plea-
|P_49
sure and happiness are as distinct things as riot 
and enjoyment: besides, pleasure is not in-
finite, and our sensations are limited: we can 
bear but a certain measure, and all urging be-
yond it, infallibly brings pain in it's stead. 
Let the men of high experience bear me testi-
mony, that this is true of all the luxuries of 
the table, wine, music, women, and every 
sensuality. 

These men may tell me, perhaps, that I 
have made a mighty fine declamation against 
luxury and intemperance; but what is this to 
the purpose? they desire not to be told of their 
faults, nor to hear disagreeable truths which 
they know already. Have I no art or skill 
to reconcile health and luxury, no remedy, 
no rare secret to repair and restore sensation 
and vigor worn to rags? No Medea's kettle 
to boil anew? If not, do not describe to us 
a life of moderation, temperance, and exercise: 
it is not worth having upon these terms. I am 
aware of the unreasonable expectations of many, 
that their demands would rise high, some of 
them to the impossible. At present I am only 
setting forth the causes; when I come to 
|P_50
talk of remedy, I will endeavour to convince 
them that the artificial helps they expect are 
not in nature, but that there are in nature 
ways and means by which many gouty, 
broken constitutions, that have been despaired 
of, might be repaired and restored to a very 
desirable degree of health and enjoyment. But 
I must first say a word or two to the in-
temperate or mistaken in the middle class 
of life. 

In England all degrees of men are furnish'd 
with the means of intemperance, and therefore 
it is no wonder that most men are intemperate. 
If they are less so in other countries, it is not 
that they have more virtue, but they want the 
means: their oppressive governments, the pre-
carious state of property, and their superstitious 
religion, keep them so poor that luxury is not 
in their power. They have however this ad-
vantage from their poverty, that they are much 
less afflicted with chronic diseases than we are. 
I verily believe there are more gouts in Eng-
land, than in all the rest of Europe: a proof 
that good living is more universal. But not to the 
advocates for this good living do I wish to ad-
|P_51
dress myself; I fear they will be as incorrigible 
as their superiors in higher and more refined 
luxury. But there are some not intemperate 
from choice, but example, habit, custom, 
mistake, not knowing their daily diet to be 
unwholsome and productive of their diseases. 
To these it may be of some use to have the un-
wholsome pointed out, and their choice direct-
ed to better things. Men of laborious oc-
cupations, who work in the open air, can and 
do bear great excesses and much unwholsome 
diet without much hurt: I never knew a sick or 
gouty gardener that was not a remarkable sot. 
But men of sedentary trades and business, 
shopkeepers of all kinds, feel much sooner and 
more heavily the ill effects of intemperance or 
mistaken choice in their meat and drink. Their 
first care therefore ought to be, not to add the 
diseases of intemperance to those of inactivity, 
but proportion what they take as well in 
quantity, as in quality, to their consumption. 
But let us see how well they do this. They 
all say they live upon plain things, and never 
indulge in made dishes; but they will eat 
heartily of a goose or duck, with a large quan-
tity of sage, onion, pepper and salt, a pig 
with similar preparation, and a hare with 
|P_52
higher and more compounded seasoning. Do 
they ever eat veal without stuffing, or even a 
leg of mutton without caper-sauce? If ever 
they eat a steak or a chop, if it is sometimes 
without pepper, I believe it is never without 
pickles, the worst of all poisons. They are 
surprized that such meals should rise on their 
stomachs with flatulence, sour and bitter hic-
cups and eructations, which if they did not 
keep them down with a sufficient quantity of 
wine or sometimes a dram, they would be 
troubled with all the time of digestion. If this 
method succeeds so far as to quiet their sto-
machs for the present, they go on with it, 
regardless or ignorant of future and distant 
consequences. Thus are these sharp, harsh, 
hot and inflammatory things forced out of the 
stomach into the blood, before it has had time 
to dilute and subdue, or reject them, and the 
superfluous load they bring along with them. 
And thus is laid the foundation of every dis-
ease, that appears when these acrid and fiery 
particles are accumulated in the blood to a 
certain degree. 

There are others whose pretensions to plain 
diet may seem better founded, but who never-
|P_53
theless eat, and are fond of things un-
wholsome, and very unfit for men of sedentary 
lives, such as salted and smoked flesh and fish 
of all kinds, hams, tongues, heavy flour pud-
dings, toasted cheese, &c. all which are of 
such hard and indissoluble texture, that they 
never dissolve well in the stomach of a plow-
man: the same salt, seasoning, and smoke, 
which harden and preserve them from putre-
faction before they are eaten, keep them from 
dissolution afterwards, so that they never are 
digested at all; nor is it possible any good 
nourishment should ever come from them: 
the salts they contain are indeed melted in the 
intestinal juices, and get into the blood, pro-
ducing, in the best constitutions, those tettery, 
itchy, or scaly eruptions, commonly but very 
erroneously called the scurvy, which is quite 
another kind of disease. To this kind of food 
is owing the bad health of country people, 
and their children's rickety heads and limbs, 
and big and hard bellies. 

Another capital mistake many people fall 
into, who in other respects are very moderate 
in their diet, is, that the flesh-meat they eat 
is always over-done; if boiled too much, the 
|P_54
juices are lost; if over-roasted, fried, or broil-
ed, the action of the fire, continued too long, 
changes the mild animal flesh into something 
of another quality; the fat is made bitter and 
rancid, which fire will always do by the sweet-
est oil; and the scorched outside of the lean, 
dry and acrimonious: the less therefore all 
flesh-meat undergoes the power of fire, the 
milder and wholsomer it is. I do not mean 
by this to recommend the customs of Cannibals 
and Tartars who eat raw flesh; or beasts of 
prey, that devour animals alive: but it may 
be observed, that the first are free from our 
diseases, and the others amazingly strong and 
vigorous. We may learn this from them 
at least, that our meat cannot be the whol-
somer for being, as some call it, thoroughly 
done; and that we should learn to like it 
with some of its red juices unspoiled by the 
fire. Upon this principle the English cookery 
is to be preferred to the French, who stew 
and roast to rags; and of English cookery 
broiling must be the best. 

This leads me to another observation, which 
perhaps none but physicians, or those who 
have studied well the nature of man and his 
aliments, are able to make. It is this: that 
|P_55
man being born to devour most of the fruits 
and animals of the earth and water, there 
ought to be a certain proportion of animal 
and vegetable substances in his food ; the ani-
mal tending spontaneously to putrefaction, the 
vegetable correcting that tendency from go-
ing too far: thus from the due mixture of 
both qualities results that neutral property, 
equally distant from acid as alkali, that is 
essentially necessary to produce good blood. 
This is so manifest, that whoever will observe 
attentively may see, whenever either of these 
prevails in the body, there is so strong a de-
sire and longing for things of the other sort, 
as well as pleasing sensation in the palate and 
stomach when they are taken, as plainly in-
dicate the natural want. Let a man have 
lived long upon flesh-meat wholly, he will 
have a most eager appetite for fruit and vege-
tables; and if kept too long without them, 
as is the case with those who have lived some 
time at sea, will grow sick of the real scurvy; 
but if before they are too far gone they reach 
the land, they will eat the first common grass 
they can come at, with more avidity than a 
horse or ox, and be perfectly cured by it. 
In like manner they who have lived long 
|P_56
upon vegetables (which regimen is often pre-
scribed to invalids, especially in the gout) 
will have great craving for flesh-meat. We 
ought to learn from all this to attend diligently 
to the calls of nature, and ballance the mix-
ture with due proportion, not only that our 
vitals may have the less labor in preparing 
and making our juices fit for nourishment, 
but to prevent the diseases that are peculiar to 
the predominancy of either. And here I may 
observe, that the error of most men's diet in 
every class of life is, that the acid, crude and 
austere, almost always abound; not that they 
do not eat flesh-meat enough, but they spoil 
it in the preparation and cookery, changing 
its animal nature into something worse than 
vegetable, taking off intirely all its tendency 
to dissolution and putrefaction by salting, smok-
ing, pickling, potting, and preserving things 
that in their own simple nature would soon 
corrupt and dissolve; but by these preparations 
are hardened and embalmed to keep for years 
like mummies. The same may be said of 
every kind of made dishes; the salts, spices, 
hot herbs, and acids, with which they are 
seasoned and compounded, preserve and harden 
them to keep for ever: the sauces and gravies 
|P_57
they swim in have the same effect as so much 
pickle. The things we feed upon ought all 
to be in a perishable state, or they will never 
furnish the materials of good blood; and what-
ever is hardened or seasoned so as to keep long 
before it be eaten, ought not to be eaten at all, 
for it will never dissolve in the stomach. 

The nature of most chronic diseases, and 
their first symptom heartburn, as it is com-
monly called, plainly shew the original cause 
to be acid crudity prevailing in the juices; 
producing coagulations, concretions and ob-
structions of various kinds; all which are very 
manifest in the gout, rheumatism, stone, and 
most nervous cases: the remedies also, that 
sometimes relieve and palliate, confirm this; 
such as the volatile alkalies, hartshorn, salt 
ammoniac, testaceous powders, sope, &c. 
Many may be surprized at this, and say it can-
not be; for, though they have these diseases, 
they take little or no acids: but there are 
many things they take that are acescent, that 
is, liable to become acid, especially by the heat 
of the stomach. This they are not aware 
of; but they are in their nature much more 
prejudicial than things already sour; for, be-
|P_58
sides that people take not these in any quan-
tity, the acescent never become sour but by 
the act of fermentation, which, being raised 
in the stomach where it ought never to hap-
pen, produces strange tumults, wind, vapor, 
gas, that is, that fume arising from ferment-
ing liquors of any kind, which has been known 
sometimes to kill at a stroke. It may here be 
necessary to enumerate some of those things 
called acescent. These are sweets of every kind, 
puddings, cakes, pastry, creams, confections, 
&c. and every thing made of flour, especially 
fermented; bread in particular, so far from be-
ing the wholsome thing many imagine, is not 
only unwholsome by its acescency, but, by 
the strong ferment it contains, it forces into 
fermentation every thing capable of it, that 
it meets with in the stomach[/1./]: the bread of 
London I fear is particularly so; partly by be-
ing robbed of its bran, which in some degree 
would soften and correct it, but chiefly by 
having in it, besides its usual ferment, a great 
quantity of sour alum, most absurdly added to 
|P_59
make it unnaturally white[/2./] In this light we 
must also consider most sorts of seasonings, 
stuffings, force-meats, and compounded sauces. 
But the greatest acescent, or rather bane of all, 
high and low, rich or otherwise, whoever 
they are that take it constantly, is wine: wine 
alone produces more diseases than all the other 
causes put together. All men allow that wine 
taken to excess is hurtful: they see the imme-
diate evils that follow; but distant effects, that 
require more attentive and deducive observa-
tion, very few see or believe; and, judging from 
present and agreeable feelings, they say that a lit-
tle wine is wholesome, and good for every one, 
and accordingly take it every day, give it their 
children, and teach them to like it by debauch-
ing their natural taste in the earliest infancy: 
thus they come to relish it by habit, and to be 
uneasy without it, like snuff-takers without 
their tobacco; the want is equally habitual 
and unnatural in both cases; for the stomach 
wants wine no more than the nose does snuff: 
the immediate sensation of both, after a little 
|P_60
use, is pleasant; but the remote effect of the 
wine taken constantly infinitely more pernici-
ous than of the snuff. This hurts the nose 
only; the other accumulating a little indi-
gestion every day, corrupts all the juices of the 
body most essentially. And though it be often 
taken with a view to promote digestion and 
assist the operations of the stomach, it manifest-
ly does harm to both. Instead of digesting 
and dissolving, it hardens, and prevents dis-
solution, and curdles and corrupts the milky 
chyle and first juices produced from our food. 
It warms indeed and stimulates the stomach to 
greater exertion than is natural or necessary, and 
thereby enables it to discharge it's contents the 
sooner; whence that agreeable feel of warmth 
and comfort from it's immediate action. But 
by this extraordinary action it forces our food 
out of the stomach too soon, before it is soften-
ed, dissolved, and properly prepared, and 
sends it into the bowels crude, hard, and au-
stere, in that state to be carried into the blood, 
there to produce every kind of disease. What-
ever therefore the advocates for a little wine 
every day may think, or argue in favor of it; 
they are most undoubtedly in a very great error, 
and it were certainly much better and safer to 
|P_61
drink a bottle and get a little merry once a 
week, drinking water only or small beer at all 
other times: in which interval nature might 
totally subdue it, and recover intirely. Water 
is the only liquor nature knows of or has pro-
vided for all animals; and whatever nature 
gives us, we may depend upon if, is safest and 
best for us. Accordingly we see that when 
we have committed any excesses or mistakes of 
any kind, and suffer from them, it is water 
that relieves. Hence the chief good of Bath, 
Spa, and many other medicinal waters, es-
pecially to hard drinkers. It is the element 
that dilutes and carries off crudities and indi-
gestions, &c. the mineral virtues they con-
tain may make them tolerable to the stomach 
in their passage, but do, as I believe, little 
more in the body: it is the water that cures. 
Wine, if it be not one of our own inventions, 
was given us as a cordial in sickness, weariness, 
sorrow, and old age, and a most salutary 
charm it would be for most of these evils, did 
we not exhaust it's power by daily use, and 
instead of taking it as such, drink it up as 
common draught in youth and health to make 
us mad. I know this is a very tender topic to 
touch upon, and too favorite a pleasure to 
|P_62
argue against, with any reasonable hope of 
convincing; most men having so indulged 
themselves in this bewitching habit, that they 
think they cannot live without a little wine 
every day, and their very existence depends 
upon it; their stomachs require it, nature calls 
for it, St. Paul advises it, it must be good. 
Thus men catch at every shadow of an argu-
ment that favors their inclinations. St. Paul 
advises it as a medicine sometimes, but certain-
ly not every day. There is no medicine I 
know of, that, taken every day, will not 
either cease to act entirely, or by acting too 
much do harm. It will be said, that many 
drink wine every day without gout, stone, or 
any disease at all in consequence of it. I be-
lieve not many, or I should know some of 
them. If any are so strong as to bear it to old 
age unhurt, they must be very active as well as 
strong to subdue it. But I have nothing to say 
to these; my business is with invalids who 
complain, and certainly ought not to measure 
constitutions with those above their match. 
The same arguments will hold equally in favor 
of every other bad habit. Your nose will 
want it's snuff, your palate it's spices; and 
when the fashion was for women to be small 
|P_63
waisted, their galled sides grown callous by 
the long compression of the stays wanted their 
support. Nature, like a true female, cries 
out at the first violence, but submits in time, 
is reconciled, and grows fond of the ravisher. 
But it is the business of philosophers to dis-
tinguish carefully between the real wants of 
nature and the artificial calls of habit; and 
when we find these begin to hurt us, we ought 
to make the utmost persevering efforts to 
break the enchantment of bad customs; and 
though it cost us some uneasy sensations 
at first, we must bear them patiently; they 
will not kill; and a very little time will recon-
cile us to better modes of life. 

There is another capital mistake many labor 
under in the choice of their wine, preferring 
the strong, hot, and coarse sorts, Madeira, 
Port, Mountain, &c. to the milder, more 
elegant, and certainly less unwholsome French 
and Italian wines, accounting them better for 
the stomach, and good against wind, &c. My 
observation has been, that they who use these 
strong stomach wines to cure wind are never 
free from it, and all the gouty disorders of in-
digestion. Indeed, it cannot well be other-
|P_64
wise; for there is nothing so repugnant to 
natural digestion as the use of these strong 
liquors, which instead of dissolving harden 
every thing; and thus for ever, when the first 
warmth is gone off, leave a crapulary, crude, 
sour load of yesterday to ferment, fret, and 
irritate the stomach and bowels every day. 

Thus have I endeavor'd to point out two of 
the true, primary, capital causes of the gout, 
and most other chronic diseases; and most 
sincerely wish that what I have said may en-
gage those whom it mostly concerns, the gouty, 
the infirm and valetudinary of every class, to 
observe, reflect, and think for themselves upon 
the hints I have thrown out; in which light 
what I have said, must be considered, rather 
than as logical or demonstrative proof. I 
know the reasoning and arguments may be 
much improved and carried farther, and if I 
had more leisure I might have attempted it: 
but I am well aware of the unsurmountable 
difficulty of convincing men against their will 
by any arguments at all. I chuse therefore at 
present to invite them to self-conviction from 
their own observations and experience. I flatter 
myself they will find it well worth their pains, 
|P_65
to reason a little more than they do with and 
for themselves; and it will be a great point 
gained for them, if it turn their misled opinions 
from all that imaginary power of restoring 
health in any of that multitude of ridiculous 
and most truly contemptible medicines, that 
are daily obtruded upon the public, with end-
less lies to recommend them, by a set of the 
poorest, most ignorant and paultry rogues in 
the nation; and engage their attention to their 
true remedy, a right institution of life. In 
judging of which, if they find themselves un-
equal to the task, they may be assisted by 
men of humanity, skill, and honesty. 
