

[^Sample 1: book - ^]

|P_3[^Four horizontal lines, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}A 
SHORT ACCOUNT 
OF A 
SOCIETY 
FOR THE 
Recovery of Drowned Persons, 
AND FOR }]
[}Such as are Suffocated by Damps in 
Mines, or seemingly deprived of 
Life, by Stifling, Strangling, 
and other Accidents. }][^A long horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
OF the various Institutions formed 
for the Welfare of Mankind, none 
appear more worthy of attention, than 
those that are calculated for Preserving 
the Human Species. In the year 1767 a 
few wealthy Gentlemen of the City of 
|P_4
Amsterdam, struck with the variety of 
instances in which persons falling into the 
water were lost for want of proper 
treatment, when brought on shore, 
formed themselves into a Society for 
the Recovery of Drowned Persons. These 
Gentlemen have pursued their design 
with so much zeal and success, that in 
the space of four years they had the 
satisfaction to find, that in not less than 
a Hundred and Fifty cases, drowned per- 
sons were recovered by the means pointed 
out by them and recommended in the 
United Provinces by advertisements and 
other publications. Their First Object 
was, to inform the common people, as 
well as the inferior practisers of physic, 
in what manner to treat a person appa- 
rently lifeless: and their Second, was to 
animate them by proper rewards to pur- 
sue the methods recommended. 

In the Instructions published upon 
that occasion, they gave caution, in the 
|P_5
first place, to forbear from practices very 
common in most countries; such as rolling 
the body over a cask; tying it up by 
the legs, with the head downwards; and 
all other rough usage, intended to dis- 
gorge water, vulgarly imagined to be 
swallowed by the drowned person. And 
they directed, first, to force air into the 
body, either at the mouth, or up the 
intestines; recommending the stimulating 
vapour of tobacco as more efficacious than 
common air: and, in the next place, to 
strip off the wet clothes; and as soon 
as possible, to apply external heat to the 
body, by means of fire, of friction with 
flannel cloths, or the natural warmth of 
two persons in bed, taking the body be- 
tween them. They directed rubbing the 
body all over, especially along the back 
bone, with woollen cloths wetted with 
brandy, and strewed over with dry salt; 
and the chaffing the temples with a volatile 
spirit, and holding the same to the nose. 

|P_6
The Rewards published by them for 
attempting the recovery of a drowned 
person, were the sum of Six Ducats, or a 
Gold Medal, over and above all expences 
attending the same, not exceeding Four 
Ducats. 

The great success of this undertaking, 
and the advantages accruing from it to the 
State, has induced each of the several 
Provinces of the Republic of the Low 
Countries to take proper measures for 
extending the benefits of it, by enjoining 
an observance of the Society's directions 
through their respective districts. 

The salutary effects of this institution 
are now no longer confined to the United 
Provinces—The Boards of Health at Ve- 
nice, at Milan and Padua, have adopted 
it—The City of Hamburgh has done the 
same—The Empress of Russia has coun- 
tenanced it in her dominions—The Em- 
press Queen of Hungary has given very 
particular encouragement to it—And in 
|P_7
France it is at this time under considera- 
tion, by what means it may best be united 
with the general police of the king- 
dom. 

It is a matter worthy of observation, that 
whatever discoveries had been made by 
the Faculty, of the method of recovering 
Drowned Persons, prior to the year 1767, 
yet till that Period, hardly any other at- 
tempts appear to have been made, but such 
as were suggested, at a time of confusion 
and distress, by ignorant people who for the 
most part are greatly misled by the un- 
happy prejudices prevailing in this mat- 
ter. 

The world has been undoubtedly much 
indebted to Dr. Mead, Dr. Winslow and 
his Commentator Dr. Bruhier, Dr. Fother- 
gill, Dr. Haller, Dr. Lecat, Dr. Tissot, 
Dr. Van Engelen, Dr. Gummer, and others, 
for very useful Observations and Essays 
upon this subject. 

|P_8
The several Cases published and de- 
scribed in the Memoirs of the Dutch 
Society, sufficiently prove the advantages 
arising from an observance of the Rules of 
that Institution. It appears from those 
Cases, that persons of all ages, from two 
years old to seventy-two, have been re- 
covered, though apparently dead when 
brought on shore; that many persons 
have been restored, who have been im- 
mersed from fifteen minutes to an hour and 
a half; and in such instances as nothing 
less than the most indisputable testimony 
would render credible. It is found by ex- 
perience, that relief may be given, not only 
in drowning, where it has been usual to 
despair of it; but in other cases, such 
as Suffocation by Sulphurous Vapours [/1./]; in 
cases of Strangling, Stifling, and in many 
apparent deaths by Cold, Hunger, and 
other causes. 

|P_9
From what has been already said, it is 
much to be wished, that some means may 
be found of giving the benefit of this va- 
luable Institution to Great Britain and its 
Colonies. 

If the number of accidents is propor- 
tioned to the number of persons employed 
on the water, this kingdom is more in- 
terested than any other nation, in the art 
of restoring drowned persons. The 
large coal-mines in Great Britain, where 
numbers of men are yearly destroyed by 
the damps, which are so commonly fatal to 
the miners, and the frequent instances of 
persons who come to an untimely end, by 
strangling, and other casualties, render the 
art of restoring suffocated and strangled 
persons to life, of great consequence to the 
community. 

The author of this account flatters him- 
self that the subject of it is worthy of 
attention, and shall think himself happy 
if his design of promoting an Institution 
|P_10
in Great Britain, with some Improvement 
upon those adopted in the neighbouring 
nations, in order to which he has already 
taken some steps, shall meet with general 
countenance and approbation. 
[^A horizontal line, spanning the whole page. ^]
The following Cases are selected from the 
Society's Account of the Success of its un- 
dertaking, and plainly demonstrate the 
truth of the foregoing Remarks, and 
afford the most satisfactory evidence that 
all the Ends proposed by the Institution 
have been obtained, except indeed what 
appears by the Cases themselves, that the 
Society's Instructions have been too often 
neglected. 

In all these Cases the Premium offered by the 
Society has been obtained, previous to 
which proof must be made that the Patient 
had no sign of life when brought on shore; 
and the utmost care is always taken to 
secure a true and faithful account of the 
|P_11
circumstances of each. Many of them 
appear to have been drawn up by illiterate 
persons; therefore such idle circumstances 
as are nothing to the purpose are left out 
of this Translation. 

[}CASE I. }]
AT Amsterdam, on the 17th of Sep- 
tember, 1767, an old Woman was 
taken out of the Rakin, a deep Canal, in 
which she had lain sunk a considerable time; 
and being supposed dead, was to be car- 
ried away to an Hospital for burial: but 
Sybrand Yserman, a Skipper of Gouda, 
who had read the Society's Advertisement, 
believing that Tobacco-smoke might re- 
cover her, made the trial with a lighted 
pipe he had in his mouth: he put it up 
her anus, and taking the bowl in his 
mouth, blew up the smoke of it, and of 
another pipe after it, which by degees so 
far recovered her, that she was able soon 
after to be carried home. 

|P_12
[}CASE II. }]
AT Groningen, on the 29th of Fe- 
bruary, 1768, the daughter of Henry Pie- 
tersz, a Child of about two years old, fell 
head foremost into a washing-tub, and 
remained some time in it undiscovered. 
Its Father having found and taken it 
out, endeavoured to recover it by various 
means for the space of half an hour, at 
the end of which time it gave some 
very faint signs of life, and then with- 
out any sensible motion in its pulse, 
fell into a strong Convulsion fit. But 
upon continuing the Injection of To- 
bacco-smoke into its intestines, and chaf- 
fing its temples with Balsam Vitæ, and 
holding the same to its nose, it recovered 
surprisingly, and in so short a space as 
two hours. 

[}CASE III. }]
AT Rotterdam, on the 11th of February, 
1768, the Wife of Arnold Van Deyl, a 
|P_13
house-painter, got up unperceived and 
went out of the house in the night 
time, and three several times threw her- 
self into a Canal. She was twice taken 
out before she could sink, and appear- 
ing sensible, was left to go home. She 
afterwards plunged herself a third time, 
sunk, and remained three quarters of an 
hour under water. When she was found 
again, she was taken out, and treated 
by Cornelius Maaswinkel, a Surgeon, who 
in the space of an hour recovered her 
by various means, but principally by the 
injection of Tobacco-smoke, and then 
putting her in bed to ther Husband. 
This rash action was committed in de- 
spair, because the man her reputed hus- 
band, by whom she had two Children, 
obstinately refused to marry her: after 
this disaster he owned himself in the 
wrong, and consented to marry her; and 
this desperate Attempt restored her to 
|P_14
that happiness which other means had 
failed to obtain. 

[}CASE IV. }]
ON the 25th day of May, 1768, 
about two Miles from Leiden, as the 
Trekschuit from Delft was passing on, 
the halling-rope broke, and four passen- 
gers, then upon deck, fell overboard. 
Three of them were soon got out; but 
the fourth, named Jan Spyker, a Haber- 
dasher of Amsterdam, went to the bot- 
tom: he was, when found and brought 
on shore, to all appearances dead. Four 
Charity-Boys belonging to Amsterdam 
attempted to recover him, and brought 
him to life again by the means directed in 
the Society's Instructions. 

[}CASE V. }]
AT Amsterdam, on the 10th of Au- 
gust, 1768, one Lambert Tuebbes from 
Balk in Friseland, threw himself into 
the Town-ditch, in a fit of despair, 
|P_15
and lay immersed at least twenty mi- 
nutes. He was got out with difficulty, 
and in a great degree recovered by Frederic 
Pieterson, a Surgeon; but remaining weak, 
he was the next day carried to an 
Hospital, where, notwithstanding Dr. 
Hagen's care, and the attempts of others 
to save him, he died in the space of two 
days, the distressing circumstances he had 
long laboured under having too much 
weakened him. 

[}CASE VI. }]
AT Flushing in Zeeland, on the 14th 
of October, 1768, one Jan Hassel, a Ma- 
rine of twenty-three years of age, and 
a German by birth, being in liquor, 
fell from a high bridge into the water, 
and remained half an hour immersed. 
When he was taken out, his eyes were 
closed, his mouth open, and his face 
blue: he was quite cold, motionless, 
without any feeling, without breath, or 
|P_16
any symptom of life. Half an hour 
more elapsed before he was got into a 
house and assistance given him. He 
was then laid before a great fire, rub- 
bed with hot cloths dipped in Brandy; 
and in three quarters of an hour he 
discharged some froth at the mouth. 
In half and hour after that, about nine 
ounces of blood were taken from him, 
by bleeding at the jugular vein; soon 
after which he puked up some clear 
water. Volatile Spirits were then used, 
as was also the Tobacco Fumigator which 
could not sooner be obtained, and the 
moment a sufficient quantity of vapour 
was introduced into his bowels, he 
gave farther signs of life, and threw up 
some more water. A little brandy with 
a few drops of Spirit of Sal Ammoniac
was then given him; the Spirit was 
held to his Nose, and the rubbing was 
continued, upon which the blood began 
to circulate, and he was bled at the arm; 
|P_17
after which he spoke, and desired to be 
allowed to sleep, which being complied with, 
he slept all night, and was well enough 
next day, to continue his journey, being 
only a little feverish, with a complaint of 
soreness all over his body. The whole 
of this treatment was directed by Joseph 
Raymondon, a surgeon to a Dutch ship of 
war. 

[}CASE VII. }]
NEAR Harlingen in Friseland, on the 
18th of October, 1768, the Child of 
Hendrik Beerendsz, a Girl of four years 
old, fell into a ditch headlong, and stuck 
in the mud; and having none but young 
children with her, who ran away frightened, 
no alarm or assistance was immediately 
given; but she was some time afterwards 
taken out by a person coming along the 
road, who discovered her, and thought 
her quite dead. As he brought her into 
town, he met with a Surgeon, one Jan 
|P_18
Schoonebeek, who directly turned her head 
downwards, and kept shaking her as she 
was carried home: there he continued the 
same motion by other hands for more than 
half an hour—when she gave some signs of 
life, threw up a little slime, and began a 
crying, after which she was put into a 
warm bed, and perfectly recovered. 

[}CASE VIII. }]
AT Wester-en Hilliger Lee in the Pro- 
vince of Groningen, on the 6th of Septem- 
ber, 1768, the Son of the Reverend Mr. 
Conradus Woldringh, a Child aged two 
years and five months, running after a 
dog, slipt through a hedge into a large 
ditch, and after being sought for more 
than fifteen minutes, was brought home 
quite lifeless. Its father, called down from 
his study, examined it attentively, and 
concluded it dead. Yet greatly anxious 
for its recovery if possible, he ordered a 
large fire to be made, and the Child to be 
|P_19
stripped. He then took it upon his knees, 
wrapping it up in his own warm night- 
gown, held it in an inclined manner, 
with its feet higher than its head, and 
with his hands and knees kept its body in 
constant agitation. It was after that well 
rubbed, and warmed before the fire, then 
fiercely burning, and in the space of ten 
minutes it gave some faint signs of life, 
uttering that little sound frequently heard 
at the moment of children's birth, and it 
bled a little at the nose. 

The rubbing and agitation being now 
continued upon a cushion, it began to 
groan, and to breath with great difficulty 
—but it still farther recovered with the 
perseverance of this treatment: its night- 
clothes were put on, and it was laid in a 
warm cradle by the fire side. More than 
half an hour elapsed before it regained 
heat in all parts of its body; but as soon 
as that was obtained, it broke out in a 
|P_20
profuse sweat, and the recovery was com- 
pleted. 

[}CASE IX. }]
WITHIN two miles of Rotterdam, on 
the 9th of November, 1768, one Hendrik 
Stroiberg, a labouring man, in liquor, 
was drowned in the river Rotte; he was 
laid upon a lighter near the place where 
he was taken up, after an immersion of 
thirty minutes and more. Somer farther 
time elapsed before Dr. John Evans, who 
directed this cure, could find a proper 
place of treatment for him: he was then 
stripped, his joints were become so stiff, 
as to render the stripping him difficult. 
He was put into a warm bed, rubbed, 
and properly treated: some pulsation was 
found in his arms, when a Surgeon at- 
tempted to bleed him, but with little 
effect. Some Tobacco-smoke was blown 
up his intestines, and contributed to his 
recovery. At the end of an hour and a 
|P_21
half, he complained of a difficulty in 
breathing, and an oppression at his heart, 
for which an emetic was given him, that 
operated downwards instead of upwards. 
The next day he had a sharp pain at his 
breast, which was scarce bearable when 
he breathed: a second bleeding and some 
medicines removed that pain to his right 
side, where it settled, yet lessened by de- 
grees, as he recovered. 

[}CASE X. }]
AT Amsterdam, on the 30th of Novem- 
ber, 1768, one Lambert Ploos, an old 
man, fell from a boat he was pushing 
forward under a bridge, and sinking to 
the bottom of the canal, was not readily 
found, because it was dark: being got out 
at last, he was put into a barge, and rolled 
on a cask, though he was cold and stiff— 
some brandy was poured into his mouth, 
and he was carried to a public-house, where 
he was laid before a large fire, stripped, 
|P_22
and rubbed, and had some dry clothes put 
on. When he shewed some signs of life, 
a mess of beer and bread, with mace and 
some brandy in it, was given him by degrees 
as he recovered; which was so fast, that in 
about six hours from the first of the 
accident, he could be conveyed to a boat 
that was to carry him home to s'Graveland, 
where he was perfectly restored to health. 

[}CASE XI. }]
AT Rotterdam, on the 30th of No- 
vember, 1768, a man called Jan Josephus 
van Lel, being in liquor, fell into the river 
Maese, in the dark, and was got out as soon 
as he could be found. Some of the by- 
standers rolled him upon a cask, and would 
have made an end of him soon, had not 
Dr. Evans rescued him out of their hands. 
His neck was then rubbed with brandy, 
of which some part was poured into his 
nose; and some of it getting into his 
mouth, he opened his eyes and endea- 
|P_23
voured to swallow it. Being got home, 
he was undressed, put to bed, rubbed, 
and attempted to be blooded, which how- 
ever he would not suffer to be done. Some 
time after, he voided blood up and down 
from the bruises of his being rolled, and 
in a few hours afterwards he expired. 

The common error of this rough treat- 
ment is still farther exemplified by the 
case of a young man, drowned in the same 
river, who must instantly have been 
killed by the blind zeal of the bystanders, 
had not an Apothecary, called Bezoet, 
forcibly taken him out of their hands. 

[}CASE XII. }]
AT Alkmaar in Holland, on the 19th 
of January, 1769, one Lodewick Schoe- 
ning, a Maltster belonging to a Brewhouse, 
the Starry Crown, ran into a canal in 
pursuit of his hat, and shot forward so 
far, as not to be found in less than fifteen 
minutes; and when he was got out, he 
|P_24
seemed so very lifeless and stiff as to be 
out of the reach of art. However to leave 
no means unattempted, he was first rolled 
over a cask, then carried to a brewhouse, 
laid before a great fire, and undressed; 
and seeming to give some signs of life, a 
glass of Jeneva was poured into his mouth, 
which farther recovered him and made 
him throw up some water. Another glass 
of it, which he asked for, set him up so 
far, that, though much swollen, he was 
able to be carried home, where he re- 
covered gradually. 

[}CASE XIII. }]
AT Leuwarden in Friseland, on the 
26th of January, 1769, the Child of 
Hendrik Hendriks Gardeniers, a boy of 
three years and six months old, fell under 
the ice, and remained there for half an 
hour before he could be found: when 
he was taken out, he was dead to all ap- 
pearance; but a humane woman, named 
|P_25
Ida Schapeling, took him into her house, 
stripped him directly, wrapped him up 
in a woolen apron, warmed and rubbed 
him before a fire, and chaffed his head 
with warm brandy. After forty minutes 
treatment, putting her finger into his 
mouth, she found he bit it, and then she 
poured in a spoonfull of brandy. After 
this she put the child into a warm bed, 
with a stone jug of hot water at its feet; 
and by such means made it so much 
better, that in the space of an hour from 
its first being brought into her house, its 
parents could safely carry it away wrapped 
up in a blanket; and she had the pleasure 
to see it come to thank her the next day. 

The Magistrates of Leuwarden had 
this Case published in their town news- 
paper, with all its circumstances. 

[}CASE XIV. }]
AT Amsterdam, on the 25th of Feb- 
ruary, 1769, a maid servant, drawing 
|P_26
water in the morning, fell into the canal 
before her master's door, and after some 
struggling sunk to the bottom. She was 
got out, in about a quarter of an hour, and 
had not the least sign of life in her. Air 
and Tobacco-vapour were immediately 
blown up her intestines: she was stripped, 
laid before a fire, and was rubbed with 
cloths dipped in brandy, till some signs of 
life were discovered, when also some 
froth appeared upon her mouth. An as- 
sisting Surgeon's apprentice tried to bleed 
her, but got no more than a few drops: 
not being satisfied with this, he opened 
the jugular vein, and took away eight or 
nine ounces of blood. As she recovered, 
fourteen or fifteen drops of Spirit of Sal 
Ammoniac were given her in water. Some 
hours afterwards she was put to bed, was 
rubbed, and had a Tobacco-clyster. She 
was also bled in her right arm, and at 
length came entirely to herself; yet com- 
plained of an oppression in her breast. 
|P_27
At noon she was ordered to be blooded a 
third time. At four in the afternoon, 
little complaint remained, but a straitness 
over her breast, which she had before been 
subject to, and was afterwards cured. 

[}CASE XV. }]
AT Rotterdam, on the 8th of April, 
1769, the daughter of Meindert den 
Broeder, a girl of ten years of age, fell 
into a stagnated deep muddy ditch, 
near the rampart of the town, and stuck 
in it for some time. When she was taken 
out of it, she seemed, according to the 
account of the Surgeon Hooykaas who 
directed the following treatment, to be 
absolutely dead, and looked as black as if 
she had been hanged, having also a quan- 
tity of froth at her lips and nose. She 
was immediately stripped, put between 
warm blankets, and rubbed. After the 
introduction of some Tobacco-vapour into 
the intestines, a bleeding was attempted, 
|P_28
and only about four ounces of blood ob- 
tained, by drops; the jugular vein not 
being practicable, upon account of the 
great swelling of the neck and head. 
Three persons then continued to rub, and 
inject smoke, for the space of an hour, 
when a faint yawning, like that of a de- 
parting patient, gave the first small sign 
of life. Some Spirit of Sal Ammoniac, 
held to the nose, produced no effect; but 
in an hour and a half, some slight pulsa- 
tion was discovered; soon after which, 
she discharged upwards and downwards, 
and then began to move her legs and arms. 
At the end of two hours, she began to 
scream, and cried out, I am fallen into 
the water; and afterwards complained of 
soreness all over her body. Some cordial 
was at this time given her, which had 
before been fruitlessly attempted, and now 
served greatly to recover her. About an 
hour and a half afterwards, she com- 
plained of a great pain in her bowels, and 
|P_29
a difficulty in breathing, for which a 
clyster with an infusion of Tobacco was 
administered, and it operated in so copious 
a manner, as to give her great relief. 
An hour and a half after this, she was 
delirious, and still more oppressed—it was 
again tried to bleed her, and still without 
success; but a blister was applied to her 
back, and thought to do her good. A 
laxative medicine was given her by degrees 
during the night, and had its intended 
effect. Next morning she had a violent 
pain in her side, and a considerable op- 
pression, for which recourse was had to 
bleeding, which at last succeeded on her 
hand, and immediately relieved her. The 
next day she voided some hard, black, 
clayey stuff: the day after that, she com- 
plained of a pain in her breast, which 
was found to proceed from some skin 
being rubbed off during the operation. 
Her tongue remained furred for some 
days, but was at last cleared by a repeti- 
|P_30
tion of the laxative medicine; and she 
then gradually recovered her former 
strength, to the great comfort and assist- 
ance of an old helpless father, whom this 
girl took care of, whilst the mother was 
absent, indefatigably working as a chair- 
woman for the subsistance of her family. 

[}CASE XVI. }]
AT Amsterdam, on the 9th of April, 
1769, it happened at nine o'clock at 
night, that Beetje Harmets, a widow 
woman of sixty-two years of age, fell 
into the Keisersgragt, and remained im- 
mersed a quarter of an hour. As soon as 
she was got out, two Surgeon's appren- 
tices, C. de Beer, and J. A. Beverly, had 
her stripped before a fire, bled her, rub- 
bed her hard, especially along the spine 
of the back, with cloths dipped in brandy, 
and blew some Tobacco-smoke into her 
mouth, which made her throw up some 
water, and then she gave some signs of 
|P_31
life; but soon after she was taken with 
strong convulsion fits, nearly baffling all 
hopes of farther recovery; yet by perse- 
verance, and reducing a rupture she was 
found to have, she grew so much better, 
as to be able, in three hours time from 
her immersion, to be conveyed home in a 
carriage. 

[}CASE XVII. }]
At Amsterdam, on the 17th of April, 1769, 
Anna Woertman, a woman of twenty-seven 
years of age, belonging to that pleasant part 
of the city called the Plantage, was taken 
out of the water, without its being known 
how long she had lain in it. She was incon- 
siderately rolled upon a float, for a quarter 
of an hour, and is said to have voided a good 
deal of water. She was then carried into 
a house, where Bernardus Donselaar, an apo- 
thecary, was sent for, and told she had just 
before given some very faint sign of life; 
though in fact she appeared quite lifeless, 
|P_32
was stiff, and had green and blue spots all over 
her body.—She was laid before a fire in 
blankets, and rubbed with a mixture of 
spirit of Sal Ammoniac and Essence of 
Rosemary, along the back bone, the loins, 
the neck, the head and temples, and a 
stone jug with hot water was laid at her 
feet. Some farther signs of life then ap- 
pearing, she began to shake as in the cold 
fit of an ague, spake and complained; 
upon which some spoonfuls of Jeneva 
were given her, and she was blooded—her 
blood was black and thick, not inflamed. 
Being thirsty, some milk and water was 
given her; and then she fell into fits seem- 
ingly strong enough to carry her off: these 
however were removed by a cordial ad- 
ministered to her. In the space of four 
hours and a half she was so much better, 
as to be carried home, and put to bed to 
her sister, where she fell into a breathing 
sweat. About five hours afterwards she com- 
plained of a great oppression, and a violent 
|P_33
pain in all her limbs; for which an aperient 
laxative mixture was given, and which 
made her part with a quantity of watery 
matter. The pain augmenting, and fixing in 
her side and breast, she was twice bled, and 
her blood being then found much inflamed, 
it was wished to repeat the bleedings; but 
she proved to be too weak: however, a 
blister was applied to her side; and other 
treatment being opportunely given, she 
was entirely recovered in the space of a 
fortnight, the slowness of which is attri- 
buted to her having been afflicted six 
months before with a fever, and constant 
depression of spirits, upon account of bad 
circumstances. 

[}CASE XVIII. }]
AT Amsterdam, on the 26th day of 
May, 1769, at midnight, a young woman, 
Racheltje Ooms, taken out of the Damrak, 
where she was found drowned, was first 
rolled upon a cask, and then carried into 
|P_34
a house, attempted to be bled by Barend 
Boerregter, a Surgeon, then rubbed and 
chafed with Spirit of Sal Ammoniac, had 
brandy spouted into her mouth, and her 
nose tickled with a feather—but all this 
being done without effect, she was laid 
before a fire, the rubbing was continued, 
some more brandy put into her mouth, 
and after three quarters of an hour, some 
pulsation being felt in her left arm, a 
bleeding was performed there, and more 
than twelve ounces of blood taken away; 
after which she gave such signs of life, as 
made all farther treatment appear super-
fluous; and she was able to walk home at 
the end of five hours from the time of 
her being first found. 

[}CASE XIX. }]
AT Amsterdam, on the 29th of July, 
1769, a Boy of fourteen years of age, 
called Jacob Voorm, rowing with some 
others in a boat, fell overboard, and 
|P_35
sunk directly. More than twenty minutes 
elapsed before he could be got out of the 
water. He was then carried into a house, 
where by the direction of Floris Loosjes, an 
apothecary, he was stripped of his clothes, 
laid in a blanket, and rubbed all over; 
Tobacco-smoke was blown up into his 
intestines, and wind forced into his mouth, 
whilst his nose was held close, and this 
repeatedly. He was bled at the arm, and 
nine or ten ounces of blood were taken 
away; after which, upon the appearance 
of some signs of life, a little brandy was 
put into his mouth; and the room in 
which he was thus treated, being thought 
too close, he was carried into a more airy 
room, where some more brandy being 
forcibly spouted into his throat, he roused 
at once, and screamed out; when he be-
came quieter, some milk and water was 
given him to drink. He was then put 
to bed, had hot cloths applied to him, 
and was well covered up. He grew warm 
|P_36
by degrees, excepting at the soles of his 
feet, and was delirious at times; but that 
ceasing, he complained of a pain and in-
flammation in his throat, which, by the 
prescription of a Physician, was got the 
better of in a few days, and the lad totally 
restored. 

[}CASE XX. }]
AT Rotterdam, on the 1st of August, 
1769, at the dock, in the Herring-fleet, 
one Gerrit Schrauwen, the skipper of a 
yacht belonging to Mr. Hogendyk, in 
changing the situation of the shed in 
which such pleasure-boats are kept, slipped 
his hold, fell into the water, and sunk 
directly in a part where the depth was 
not less than twenty five feet. A peasant 
first observed this shed floating by itself, 
then discovered a hat near it, and con-
cluding some mischance had happened, 
gave the alarm; upon which several men 
came with boat-hooks, which proved too 
|P_37
short, and some time elapsed before they 
could get others, none longer being at 
hand. He was at last got out by a friend 
of his, one Arnoldus Fynands, who found 
him at the distance of fifty paces from the 
float from which he fell; and it appeared 
that he had endeavoured, as long as his 
senses lasted, to get towards the quay. 
When he was taken out of the water, his 
eyes were close shut; his face was distorted, 
and looked wan; and his jaw was so 
much fixed, that with difficulty his mouth 
was broke open, and brandy was poured 
into it twice without any success: more 
than twenty-five minutes were now 
elapsed since he first fell in; yet his friend, 
with three other workmen of the dock-
yard, attempted to recover him; they 
shook him violently, they by turns rubbed 
his breast and belly, squeezed his throat, 
and forced some water and blood out of 
it. They then carried him to the house of 
one Schaardenberg, a Surgeon, dwelling 
|P_38
at some distance from the dock, there 
stripped him of his wet clothes, and put 
on others dry and warm of the bystanders. 
They then had recourse to the usual treat-
ment, and could not in less than twenty 
minutes obtain any signs of life, which 
they did at last, when the Surgeon put 
into his mouth some spiritous liquor, to 
which the patient had always an aversion. 
He than began to scream, called for his 
companion, looked aghast, and recovered 
by degrees. When he was sufficiently 
better, they led him home staggering, and 
throwing up more water and blood. 
During two or three days, he looked 
gloomy, and was low-spirited; but soon 
after, especially by means of a trip taken 
with his master, he recovered entirely.

[}CASE XXI. }]
AT Oostzaandam in North-Holland, 
on the eighth of August, 1769, a Child of 
three years old, the Son of Albert Masker, 
|P_39
a Taylor, was taken out of the water, after 
an immersion of fifteen minutes, and 
brought home to its parents. A Surgeon, 
J. Van Macheren, by whose door it was 
carried, followed it, and took care of it. 
He found the child entirely motionless, 
its limbs supple, its head and face blue, 
and a quantity of bloody froth upon its 
mouth and nose. He stripped off its wet 
clothes as fast as possible, and put it to 
bed between blankets, with a jug of hot 
water at its feet. He then applied the 
Tobacco-vapour pipe, and rubbed its 
back bone with fine salt and warm brandy. 
He opened its mouth by force, to pour in 
some brandy and butter, which ran out 
again directly: he held the Spirit of Am- 
moniac Salt to its nose, blew snuff into 
it, and tickled it with a feather. Soon 
after this, he perceived some pulsation in 
a large artery, which encouraged him to 
continue his treatment, 'till he heard a 
rattling in its throat, and a rumbling in 
|P_40
the belly. Then it began to sweat, and 
to reach a little, and had a discharge; 
which symptoms did not appear till after 
the space of three hours, at the end of 
which it was in a fair way of recovery. 
After having some rest, it was feverish and 
drowsy; as much beer and butter, and 
weak tea, as could be got down, being 
given to it, the amendment was percepti- 
ble. An oppression remaining, some sour 
dough was put to its feet, and it became 
well and chearful again the next day. 

[}CASE XXII. }]
IN Amsterdam, on the 23d of August, 
1769, Samuel Abrahams, a Jew, who got 
his livelihood by carrying greens about for 
sale, fell from a fish-float into the water, 
sunk, and was got out again by two other 
Jews. Some time after, Frans Nicolas 
Wickel, a Surgeon, came to their assistance, 
got him carried into a public house, had 
him stripped, laid before a fire, and 
|P_41
rubbed all over the body with brandy, and 
took twelve ounces of blood from him:
after which, to continue the treatment 
without interruption, he got the assistance of 
Jacob de Koningh, another Surgeon's appren- 
tice, and they together continued rubbing, 
held Spirit of Sal Ammoniac to his nose, 
gave him two Clysters of an infusion of 
Tobacco, with some salt and oil, which 
produced a copious evacuation: they 
poured some Liquor Anodinus into his 
mouth; he then puked, and came to him- 
self so speedily that in one half-hour's 
time he asked for some drink. Some milk 
and water was then given him, a dry shirt 
was put on, and he was laid between blan- 
kets in bed, because he complained of an op- 
pression upon his breast; and half an hour 
afterwards, sitting up in bed, he seemed 
taken with a convulsion fit, fell back and 
expired. This sudden death was by some 
attributed to the falling sickness, to which 
he was said to have been subject. 

|P_42
[}CASE XXIII. }]
AT Amsterdam, on the 23d of August, 
1769, the Son of Arent van den Bergh, a Boat- 
man, being a child of somewhat less than 
two years old, fell into a rain-water cistern 
with a very narrow mouth, into which 
its mother would have slid after it without 
any prospect of assistance, had she not been 
prevented by some bystanders, who them- 
selves did what they could to get at the 
child, but were obliged to have recourse 
to a lad, who being thin could slip down, 
and being held, grope for the child below 
him. He did so with good success, and 
got the child, which was then (poor help- 
less thing) laid upon a cask, rolled and 
otherwise tormented, to bring it to itself 
again. One of the assistants had the pre- 
sence of mind to use a Tobacco-pipe, to 
blow its smoke up the child's intestines; 
upon which some signs of life being dis- 
covered, it was laid upon its mother's lap, 
|P_43
just when Dr. Bernard, who had been sent 
for, came in, and directed the following 
treatment, of which he himself has given 
the account. He ordered a good fire to 
be made, got the mother to strip the child, 
and made enquiry about what had been 
done prior to his coming.—He then had 
it diligently rubbed all over with Jeneva 
and Salt, 'till it uttered a plaintive sound, 
and some froth appearing at its mouth and 
nose, it began to puke.—It now hung its 
head over its shoulders, seemingly distressed, 
then threw up some more phlegm, and 
had a discharge.—The uneasy motion of 
the head continued, without the least pul- 
sation in any of the blood-vessels, 'till at 
last, with a third fit of puking, some beat- 
ing was felt in the left arm.—Then the 
motion of the head lessened, the child 
seemed less oppressed, and began to cry. 
The mother was then asked what it liked 
to drink; and that proving to be beer, a little 
of it was warmed with some sugar, and 
|P_44
was drank off with eagerness.—It seemed 
as yet not rightly recovered, for want of a 
more copious discharge, for which a mix- 
ture was ordered to be given by a spoonful 
every hour, the child being kept as warm 
as possible in blankets, the pungent vapour 
of the Tobacco was not thought farther 
eligible:—it was also judged that a bleed- 
ing was not advisable, neither of the 
jugulars being turgid, nor any blood ves- 
sels discoverable in its arms, or on its 
hands. In the evening it lay quiet, looked 
about distinctly, and, as the mother thought, 
grew better visibly; its hands felt natu- 
rally warm, its pulse was regular, but 
quick as usual with children of that age.— 
The mixture having had no effect, it was 
repeated, and the mother charged to keep 
the child very warm, as it was imagined it 
must sweat much in the night, with the 
great quantity of water it had swallowed; 
and to forward this, she was directed to lay 
a jug with hot water at its feet; all which 
|P_45
she exactly complied with. It did sweat 
considerably in the night, and started often 
in its sleep, 'till about midnight, when it 
began to rest quietly:—early in the morn- 
ing it had two stools, after which it asked 
to stay up and be dressed; which being 
granted, it took its breakfast as usual, 
played about a while, and then lay down to 
sleep again. It recovered perfectly, though 
Dr. Bernard says it was of an uncom- 
monly weak frame, and much inclined to 
the rickets. 

[}CASE XXIV. }]
AT Zuiderdrachten, in the province of 
Friseland, on the 3d of June, 1769, a Boy of 
three years old, the Child of Cornelis 
Gedsers, a Wool-dresser, fell into a ditch, 
out of which he was taken as dead. He 
was treated by a Surgeon, who in the space 
of fifteen minutes obtained some faint signs 
of life, but could not in less than nine hours 
get him so far recovered as to speak. He 
|P_46
tried every method, recommended or not, 
except bleeding. He shook the child for 
a considerable time with its head down- 
wards:—he blew air into its intestines, first 
with a Tobacco-pipe, and afterwards with 
a Syringe:—he opened its mouth by force, 
and blew air into its throat:—he dried 
its body, chafed it, and rubbed it with 
brandy and salt along the back bone.— 
He held a volatile salt to its nose; tickled 
it with a feather; rubbed the soles of its 
feet with a brush, and gave it two clysters; 
after all which applications, his endeavours 
were attended with the desired effect. 

[}CASE XXV. }]
In the City of Dordregt in Holland, in 
the month of July, 1769, it happened that 
a boy of six years old, at play on a wharf, 
fell from a beam into the water, unnoticed 
by his playfellows, who, when they missed 
him, ran up to the road to seek for him: 
but a younger child, not yet fit to play 
|P_47
with the others, and who at some little 
distance had seen him fall in, and stood 
staring for a time as struck with amaze- 
ment, ran home to tell of this accident; 
and at that very moment met its father, 
who was just returned from the Province 
of Zealand. This unexpected circumstance 
diverted the child from its purpose for a 
while; but as soon as a moment's quiet 
succeeded to the great expressions of joy 
in the family, the little child took the 
opportunity to make them understand, 
by broken words and signs, that somebody 
was fallen into the water, and led them to 
the place where it happened; upon which, 
immediate search being made, the boy 
was found, and taken out, dead to all 
appearance, after having remained for so 
considerable a time under water. He was 
carried home, was undressed, had some 
tobacco-smoke blown up his intestines, 
and was put into warm blankets, in which 
he gave some faint signs of life, crying 
|P_48
when the soles of his feet were tickled, 
but without any other certain symptom. 
After many more trials, his mother took 
him into bed to her, and by rubbing and 
cheering him all night, got him to a 
state of perfect recovery. The steady 
perseverance in this treatment is remark- 
able by its being carried on for a space of 
time not less than twelve hours, and gives 
room to the Surgeon, Jan Van Hespel, who 
relates the case, to utter this exclamation: 
— Who knows in how many thousand 
persons the remaining spark of life is 
extinguished by injudicious practices! 
when speedy and proper endeavours 
might restore a sufficient degree of 
genial heat. 

[}CASE XXVI. }]
AT Leuwarden in Friseland, on the 3d 
of September, 1769, a Boy of four years 
and five months old, the Son of Cornelis van 
Meningen, a Tanner, fell into the water, 
|P_49
and slid forward from the place at which 
he went in, which was pointed out by 
a still younger child who had seen the acci- 
dent from the other side of the canal. After 
more than half an hour's search by several 
persons, he was taken out by his own 
father, who immediately ran about with 
him in constant agitation, and had wind 
repeatedly blown up into his intestines by 
the assistants: as soon as the child was 
brought home, it was stripped, the blow- 
ing was continued, and it was rubbed be- 
fore the fire 'till it gave some faint signs of 
life, soon after which it threw up some 
clear water, and voided some thin excre- 
ment: it was then thought proper to give 
it a little fresh butter melted with brandy, 
to make it reach, which it did repeatedly, 
and its speech returned, at which time 
it was put to bed well wrapped up; and 
thus by degrees it recovered, so as to be 
able in the course of three days to go to 
school again. 

|P_50
[}CASE XXVII. }]
At Amsterdan, on the 8th of September, 
1769, Hanna Polak, a German Jewess, 
drawing up a pail of water, slipped from 
the plank upon which she stood, fell into 
the canal, and receiving a blow of the pail 
upon her head, was stunned, and sunk at 
once. She was got out in eight or ten 
minutes time, and attended by Michiel 
Cramer, an Apothecary, and Isaac Serrano, 
a Surgeon, the latter of which bled her 
upon the spot where she was first laid 
down: they then got her carried into a 
house, where they blew wind into her 
lungs and intestines; gave her a clyster, 
and rubbed her back bone with Spirit of 
Sal Ammoniac: having no bed, they set 
her in blankets on a chair near to a German 
stove. Three hours elapsed before one 
single stroke of a pulse was felt in her,— 
and that symptom giving fresh vigour to 
the operators, the rubbing was continued; 
|P_51
a stimulating clyster was given her, she 
was kept as warm as possible, and began 
to perspire. Two hours and a half after 
that, she began to speak, took some liquid, 
and threw up some water. She fell then 
into convulsive fits, which by some medi- 
cines were allayed. At the end of six 
hours more, she was bled again at the foot, 
which composed her greatly, and from 
thence forward she gradually recovered. 

[}CASE XXVIII. }]
AT Horn in North-holland, on the 15th 
September, 1769, two Boys driving a 
waggon into town, and delivering some 
bags of meal at the slope of the Rusbrug, 
a bridge near the north gate of the town, 
it happened that the horse took fright, 
flew across the road, and threw the wag- 
gon upside-down into the ditch, where- 
with a Boy who sat in the middle of it 
was covered, the other who was in the 
fore part of it having jumped off. The 
|P_52
Boy who fell under, by name Cornelis Smit, 
was sixteen years old. Five men of the 
town ran to his assistance, but knew not 
on what side of the waggon to get at him: 
after some time they espied one of his legs 
sticking out a little from under it, and 
in vain endeavoured to pull him out: 
the Boy lay upon his back, deeply de- 
pressed in the mud by the weight of the 
waggon, beside which the horse was also 
in the way:—they then cut his traces; 
as soon as he found himself less confined, 
he began to rear and struggle, and was 
near trampling the Boy's leg to pieces; 
they held and stroked him, 'till he was 
quite loose, and then led him out; after 
which lifting up the waggon, they dragged 
out the Boy, and laid upon the bank, 
covered and disfigured with mud, and as 
they thought dead beyond doubt. It was 
incumbent upon them however to try to 
find out whether any life still remained in 
him, and to recover him if possible. They 
|P_53
first washed the mud off his head, face and 
neck, which they found to be black and 
blue; they cut the collar of his shirt, and 
then poured some brandy into his mouth, 
by the effect of which upon the muscles of 
his face, they discovered some motion in 
him, which was surprising after his having 
been more than a quarter of an hour in the 
above deplorable situation. They laid him 
upon a cask, and rolled him slowly about, 
in expectation of some farther signs of life, 
which indeed returned but faintly: upon 
those indications they put into his mouth 
some buttered beer with brandy, and rolled 
and shaked him again; after which he began 
to throw up some froth, water and blood. 
He then was carried to a neighbouring 
public-house, where he was with difficulty 
stripped of his clothes, washed all over 
with warm water, and wiped with hot 
cloths, which seemed to restore life to 
him, for he cried out with it. Some dry 
woolen things were then put on him; he 
|P_54
was set in a great chair before a good fire; 
and something emetic was twice given him 
with so much effect, that he vomited up, 
as is said, even clods of mud. Thus clear- 
ed, he was put into a warm bed, where at 
first he was feverish, but afterwards rested 
well; and next day, to the surprise of all, 
was quite recovered, and had not one sin- 
gle part of his body hurt. 

[}CASE XXIX. }]
AT Amsterdam, on the 7th of Septem- 
ber, 1769, a Child of one Nicolas Vermeulen
playing upon a bridge fell thro' the rails 
into the water. The mother then big 
with child, saw the accident out of her 
window, flew down stairs, ran to the bridge, 
jumped down to save it, and was in great 
danger of drowning. The father, who at 
that moment got home, finding out what 
was the matter, made haste to the quay, 
and with some assistance got out his wife 
first, and afterwards, in a quarter of an hour's 
|P_55
time, the child was found, and brought on 
shore, to all appearance dead. Several 
attempts to recover it were in vain made, 
both on the quay and in the house; at 
length one Christoffel Roodolphs, a Surgeon, 
came to their assistance: he had the child 
stripped directly, wrapped in warm blan- 
kets, and laid before a fire. He then 
took some brandy in his mouth, forced 
open that of the child, and spouted it in: 
he blew his breath strongly into its mouth, 
and in about twelve minutes time some 
signs of life appeared, such as a faint respi- 
ration, a sighing, a grinding of the teeth, 
and some convulsive motion, the ordinary 
progressive symptoms of recovery. He 
continued his treatment for an hour and a 
half longer, and bled the child, after 
which it seemed quiet for a while, yet was 
a good deal oppressed in its breathing. The 
next day it was relieved by a second bleed- 
ing, after which it recovered by degrees to 
perfect health. 

|P_56
[}CASE XXX. }]
AT Leyden, on the 4th of February, 
1769, as Jacobus Clavan, a Tanner's jour- 
ney-man, twenty three years of age, was 
stepping into a boat to help his super- 
annuated father to row, he missed his step, 
fell into the water, went down, and com- 
ing up again, he cried out, I am lost!  then 
sunk, and remained at the bottom. His 
poor father could do no more than feebly 
to call for help. A quarter of an hour 
elapsed before he was got out of the water, 
and on shore. No signs of life appeared: 
a good deal more time was lost before it 
was agreed upon to carry him into a house, 
and ere he was received into one: and in 
this way half an hour passed from his first 
falling into the water, before any treat- 
ment was attempted, when Dr. Jac. 
Smazen gave him his assistance by ordering 
him to be stripped before a good fire, co- 
vered with blankets, and rubbed all over: 
|P_55
this was followed with opening a vein in 
each arm, the orifice in the first having 
yielded but a few drops of blood; but the 
other flowing freely, some small motion 
was perceived in the body; a little brandy 
was then poured into his mouth, and he 
was chafed with some more. With this 
assistance, and the loss of twelve ounces of 
blood, he became sensible, threw up some 
phlegm, seemed violently oppressed, and 
complained of a great pain in his head and 
breast. He was then put into a warm bed, 
a cordial was given him, and afterwards a 
mess of buttered beer and bread, with which, 
and some rest, he became so much better, 
that he was carried home in less than nine 
hours from the beginning of the accident. 
He did not however recover very fast, for 
it was more than three days before he ac- 
quired his usual strength. 

|P_56
[}CASE XXXI. }]
AT Amsterdam, on the 17th of November, 
1769, it happened, that as Antony Witneven, 
a porter, was leaning against some baskets 
by the water-side, probably somewhat in 
liquor, they gave way, and he fell into the 
Canal. When he was got out by some of 
his fellow porters, they pronounced him 
dead:—they nevertheless carried him to a 
beercellar, set him upon his head, shook him, 
and gave hime some farther rough and very 
improper usage:—notwithstanding which, 
by some warmth and rubbing, he gave 
signs of life, and recovered in some degree, 
but in two days time he died. 

This, and other instances, help to shew 
that a recovery is found more difficult, 
where the patient has been much addicted 
to liquor, and where the first treatment has 
been preceded by rough usage. 

|P_57
[}CASE XXXII. }]
IN the suburbs of Groningen, on the 
19th of November, 1769, the son of 
Casper Boschman, a boy of nine years 
old, washing his hands at a hole cut 
in the ice, fell in, and slid forward about 
eight feet under it. As soon as a younger 
brother of his had given the alarm by his 
running to fetch a pole, the boy was sought 
for with it; and his father returning from 
church, informed of the accident, ran to 
the place, got into the hole, broke the 
ice with his hands, breast, and shoulders, 
notwithstanding its being two inches thick, 
and having found his child at last, ran 
home with it upon his arms, shaking it 
as he went, though to all appearance dead. 
He still ran about with it for a time, in 
the same manner, at home, whilst a fire 
was lighting, and then made two women 
sit down with it before the fire, to rub it 
all over with warm cloths, especially along 
|P_58
the back bone, and to slap the soles of its 
feet with their hands. Soon after this 
treatment the child seemed to breathe a 
little; and then it was put to bed, with a 
stone bottle of hot water at its breast and 
hands, and heated bricks were put to its 
back and feet. As the child recovered, the 
father made it take some brandy with 
melted butter, which made it puke up 
some water and blood; but by repeating 
the dose some of it stayed upon its sto- 
mach: soon after it appeared delirious by 
intervals, which however went off; and 
it recovered gradually during the course of 
several days, at the end of which its 
strength returned entirely. 

[}CASE XXXIII. }]
In the large Canal, near the Town of 
Ouderkerk, the Trekschuit going from Gouda
to Amsterdam, in the night, it happened on 
the 22d of December, 1769, that one Jan 
Valk, a bulky man, advanced in years, a 
|P_59
passenger, fell over-board, sunk and re- 
mained a quarter of an hour under water, 
before the boat could be stopped, turned, 
and he got out. As soon as he was taken 
into the schuit, a shopkeeper from Rotter- 
dam, Pieter Knuijsting, the person who was 
seated by him before he fell in, took charge 
of him, laid him on cushions upon the 
middle bench, and desired such of the 
passengers as smoked Tobacco, to fill 
and light their pipes; of which he made 
such good use, that after blowing up 
the vapour of seven pipes into the intestines 
of the patient, he gave some signs of life, 
and brought up a few mouthfuls of water. 
After using seven more pipes, and being 
supplied with the handkerchiefs of the 
passengers, warmed by means of the stoves 
generally used in the Trekschuits, he 
rubbed the patient's breast and belly with 
them for above half an hour, and by the 
time they arrived at the town, he began to 
sit up, and soon after was led into a tavern, 
where being undressed, he was put to bed 
|P_60
in warm blankets; but not gathering 
warmth, and having complained of exces- 
sive cold, a stone bottle with hot water 
was laid to his feet, and therewith at the 
end of two hours treatment he was much 
recovered: but as soon as the town gates 
were opened, and a surgeon could be got, 
he was let blood, and he recovered so well 
as to be able to return home in the evening 
of the same day in another schuit. 

[}CASE XXXIV. }]
AT Rotterdam, on the 31st of January, 
1770, the streets being slippery, it happened 
that Johanna Onkruid, a Woman of about 
fifty-four years of age, drawing water out 
of the Canal before her door, fell into the 
water, and slipped under the ice without 
being observed, and there being a lock 
near to the place, she was slowly con- 
veyed towards it by the current of the 
water: she was afterwards discovered by 
another woman also drawing water, who 
gave the alarm, and had her taken out as 
|P_61
soon as possible. She was carried home, 
and Hendrick van Schaardenburgh, a Sur- 
geon, took charge of her. He first poured 
some brandy into her mouth, had her strip- 
ped, had some aired things put on her, laid 
her in a warm bed, and put stone bottles 
with hot water near her body. After that, 
he used the Tobacco-vapour pipe, and got 
the body well rubbed all over; which being 
done with assiduity, for half an hour, he 
then obtained the first signs of life, gave 
her some cordial drops in a glass of wine, 
and went on as before. She began to move 
restlessly after a time, threw up some water, 
coughed, and seemed much oppressed, tho' 
she had not then quite recovered her senses. 
She got somewhat to drink, but could not 
keep it upon her stomach; she then had an 
evacuation of another kind, and desired to 
be allowed to sleep, which she did tolerably 
well for some hours, but then complained 
of an oppression and great pain at her breast, 
which lessened by slow degrees, and she re- 
covered, having long been tender and asth- 
|P_62
matic, for which reason this surgeon did 
not bleed her, but used all means to re- 
store her to strength speedily, she being 
the only support of an old, decrepit, help- 
less mother. 

[}CASE XXXV. }]
AT Neykerk in Friseland, on the 24th of 
January, 1770, Aafke Symons, wife of Jan 
Reinders, fell into the Town Canal, lay un- 
der the ice for more than half an hour, be- 
fore it could be broke enough to get her 
out; and by proper and diligent treatment 
afterwards, she was brought to life again, 
and speedily recovered. 

[}CASE XXXVI. }]
AT Hilversum in Friseland, on the 10th 
of February, 1770, the son of Myndert van 
Goch, a child of about two years old, fell 
into a pit that had little more than a 
foot of water in it, yet a sufficient quan- 
tity to drown the child, which lay in it 
with its head down and its heels upwards. 
|P_63
A man coming past, after it had lain about 
half an hour, took it out of the pit, and 
carried it home, where it was laid by for 
another half-hour, as dead; when Doctor 
Francis Cordemans proposed to attempt its 
recovery. He proceeded in the usual man- 
ner, brought it to life in some hours, and 
restored it to health in a few days. 

[}CASE XXXVII. }]
AT Rotterdam, on the 26th of February, 
1770, Jan Kok, a Brush-maker's lad, of 
fourteen years of age, drawing water out of 
the Canal early in the morning before it 
was light, fell in, sunk under a boat, and 
remained there for half an hour. His 
master having sought for him elsewhere, 
at last groped for him with a hook about 
the place where he generally took up 
water, and having found him, had him 
carried home as dead; but Jan Hofman, a 
Surgeon, sent for, recovered him, and by 
|P_64
proper means restored him so perfectly that 
he returned to his work in a few days. 

[}CASE XXXVIII. }]
AT Gouda in South Holland, it hap- 
pened on the 3d of March, 1770, that a 
girl of four years and a half old, the 
daughter of Cornelis Krap, was taken out 
of a canal drowned, and brought home. 
She was thought to be dead, was stripped, 
rolled up in a sheet, and laid by to be 
buried. But some persons coming in a 
while after, proposed to make a trial of re- 
covery, though she was quite cold and stiff. 
They then proceeded to treat her, accord- 
ing to the Society's Instructions, very assi- 
duously for the space of two hours and a 
half, when they had the satisfaction of re- 
storing her to life. 


[^1. 
* By an order of the Queen of Hungary, persons suffo- 
cated by Damps in her Mines, are treated in a particular 
manner, according to Instructions, and have been recovered. 
^]