
|P_
[}A short Description of the Composition, Preparation and Pro-
perties of the THREE GREAT MEDICINES prepared 
and dispensed at the TEMPLE OF HEALTH, in the centre 
of the Royal Terrace, Adelphi, London: and which 
are now sold in almost every city and great town in the world; 
being perhaps the first advertised Medicines that sovereign 
Princes, and crowned Heads! were ever advised, or by their 
Physicians permitted to take. }]
(With ample Directions for using the Medicines.) 

[}I. ELECTRICAL ÆTHER! 
Or, an aggregate compound of the most active faculties 
of the material soul of the universe. }]
THIS admirable Composition is one of the purest and most 
subtil essences in nature. It is a combination, or concen-
tration of all her elementary powers, and vivifying influences: be-
ing an essence extracted by air, magnetism, and the electrical or 
celestial fire, from the richest oriental aromatics, &c. with the 
balmiest and most active æther. A few of the richest, mildest, 
and most cordial roots, barks, seeds, flowers, fruits, gums and 
balsams, which flow into this great metropolis from the four quar-
ters of the globe, especially those from Asia, and the choicest of 
the British simples, are under my own immediate inspection selected, 
properly prepared, and put into massy glass vessels, and upon them 
is poured a due quantity of the finest ætherial spirit. They are 
then placed in one of the great metallic globes on the dome of the 
electrical Temples of Health and of Hymen, in the Apollo and other 
apartments of those GREAT and most useful Institutions, to be acted 
upon by the celestial fire, &c. and lastly, the essence is purified by 
filtration upon a new principle, which prevents all possibility of the 
finest and most volatile parts evaporating. 

The globes are entirely lined with metal in the in—as well as 
on the outside. They are twelve in number, each containing full 
thirty-six gallons. The glass vessels too, are covered with metal, 
inclosed in curious magnetic cases, and their stoppers are pierced 
with glass tubes and thick metal rods, which end in a multitude of 
points, from which streams of the electrical fire, &c.—are conti-
nually pouring in upon the æther and aromatics, in luminous and 
most glorious streams. 

The immense quantity of this vivifying restorative fire, &c. which is 
accumulated in these Temples, flows thus into the medicines through 
the rods and tubes above-mentioned, which with the magnetic efflu-
vium passes even through the outside of the glasses, &c. to the sub-
stances contained in them: for each of the four great globes be-
comes
|P_3
a genial, cool OVEN, glowing with the plenitude of these sa-
lutary, vital, and harmonious influences. 

By this curious and most wonderful process, like every operation 
which I perform on my patients, with this, or with any other part 
of my astonishing and tremendous apparatus, (which, altoge-
ther, in both the Temples, occupies in fact twenty rooms) I have it in 
absolute command and subjection acting arbitrarily or at pleasure 
on the medicines,—on my patients—or on any part of their body or 
limbs particularly affected, in any quantity, or with any degree of 
power, according to the nature of the substances, or as the various 
constitutions, &c.—of my patients require: in short, the whole of 
the apparatus employed in making the three Great Medicines men-
tioned in this Description, if solid metal, would weigh considerably 
above seven hundred thousand pounds. After the above account of 
the composition and preparation of the electrical æther, it would 
be quite unnecessary for me to dwell on its manifold and surprizing 
virtues. Philosophers, physicians and chemists must plainly see, 
that by the above means, a rich, yet SIMPLE homogene, and VI-
VIFYING QUINTESSENCE must be produced,—an utter enemy 
to diseases and corruption,—and a cordial peace-maker in all strife 
and discord in the human body! These facts must be too obvious 
to every person of even a very common understanding, to require 
commenting upon. I shall just say that for preventing every spe-
cies of infection, and for curing all low, nervous, lingering and 
putrid diseases, nothing on earth can equal this most noble quin-
tessence which I chuse to call, simply,—Electrical Æther; and as it 
is much easier and wiser to prevent diseases, than to cure them, 
I shall point out, very briefly, its uses in the first place as a pre-
ventive. 

First, then, all persons who frequent public places, and who 
regard their health, ought never to be without a vial of the electri-
cal æther, even in their pocket—those especially who are subject to 
catch colds and dangerous disorders,—or who have weakness and 
oppressions at their breast and stomach,—or a nervous system irri-
table and relaxed. 

It is well known, by every person who knows any thing at all of 
medicine or philosophy, that the air of any place after it has been 
breathed, and charged with the phlogisticated or mephitic breath, 
perspiration, &c. of even the cleanest, soundest and healthiest persons, 
—becomes not only altogether unfit for respiration, but likewise abso-
utely and highly poisonous. But how much more dangerous and un-
wholesome must it be, to draw into our lungs, perhaps for several hours 
together, the foul and putrid exhalations which reek from the dirty bo-
dies and garments—secret sores—and corrupted lungs crammed up in 
places of public amusement!—I am not at all surprized at the severe 
diseases and sudden deaths which happen among both young and 
|P_4
old. No; but I am astonished that many more do not happen; 
and that so many rational beings should submit to the drudgery 
and danger, not to mention the expence, of attending crouded 
—nonsensical—public places. But as it is in vain to oppose the ty-
rannic force of fashion, or to shake off the mighty influence of 
HABIT, which, with absolute sway govern every thing that hath 
the breath of life, I would advise every prudent person before they 
go into such places to fortify their body, and harmonize their mind, 
with taking a tea spoonful of the electrical æther, or nervous æthe-
rial balsam on sugar, or in any thing they like best—and even to 
smell now and then to the former in such places when they sus-
pect danger, or when they find themselves languid or oppressed. 
—By these precautions, many hundreds of the nobility and gentry in 
Europe, experience daily from it the happiest effects; and when they 
return home faint, relaxed and exhausted, from over heated rooms, 
public or private; from enervating indulgencies too, (in sacrificing to 
Venus or Bacchus) or from violent agitations of body and of mind—they 
are presently refreshed, recruited, composed, and invigorated by smel-
ling to the electrical æther for a few minutes, by taking a tea spoonful 
or two of it, (or rather, of the nervous ætherial balsam) in a glass of 
brandy,—of wine,—or of cold water:—or even by pouring a lit-
tle of the electrical æther into a bason or quart mug half filled 
with hot water, coffee, green tea, or an infusion of aromatic Bri-
tish herbs, flowers, &c. and breathing over it for a few minutes. By 
these means, under God! sweet, sound, and refreshing sleep, and 
mental tranquility, are with certainty procured,—and all possibi-
lity of disease or decay, effectually warded off:—and these happy 
effects are rendered still more certain, kindly and lasting, if the 
persons will wash or bathe their face, neck, hands, feet, and pri-
vate parts—especially the latter, with pure cold water—or 
with milk and water—about blood warm. This simple and de-
lightful affair of bathing the private parts and fundament every night 
and morning, summer and winter, in sickness and in health, in 
cold milk or water—is of more importance to the bodily health, 
youthful beauty, and sweet desireableness of men and women, than 
any thing I can possibly mention or inculcate. If this most salutary 
practice of applying even partially, cold or at most tepid water or 
milk, to the surface of the body and limbs,—if simplicity, modera-
tion, regularity and temperance, in the indulgence of every appe-
tite, and in the gratification of every desire—in a word, if prudence, 
wisdom, delicacy, virtue, and that genuine religion which flows 
warm and silent in an everlasting and supremely cordial circulation, 
between THE PERFECTION OF EVERY EXCELLENCE— 
THE ETERNAL SOURCE OF LIFE, LOVE, LIGHT AND 
HAPPINESS!—and the benevolent—the melting—the enlarged 
human breast!—If this sterling—this all-blessing religion 
which knows no distinction of sect, church, age or country— 
|P_5
and whose signet of divinity is liberty, forbearance and universal 
love! — if these, with their white-robed attendants who came 
down from heaven and who will conduct us thither—namely, Inno-
cence, Activity, and Peace—were permitted to direct and controul 
our thoughts, words and actions daily, from our birth to the last 
day of life—the image of God which he stampt on mankind at their 
original creation would be in a great measure recovered and pre-
served—we should continue very long and very happily in this transi-
ent—probationary state of existence—a hundred years seeming but 
as one summer's day, while with a gradual descent, we would glide 
gently and sweetly down the hill of life, under the serene and lucid 
influence of its evening sky. 

Behold, here, in a few words, my courteous and intelligent rea-
der, a complete system, or the whole Art of Health, beauty, love-
liness, long-life and happiness, temporal and eternal; which, if 
properly and constantly attended to, physicians and dignified clergy-
men, would be almost as unnecessary in the world, as soldiers and 
solicitors; and as are such codes of laws and discipline, in church and 
in state as they are at present administered in almost every nation on 
earth,—which are in general dark, unreasonable, unjust and diaboli-
cal, and extremely contradictory to the spirit, and advancement of true 
religion, sound policy, and of the Healing Art, however agreeable to 
the letter of the law, the canons of the churches, or the practice 
of the Royal Colleges of Physicians. Millions of the human spe-
cies have felt, and millions do now feel, too sensibly the truth of 
this assertion.—O Law! O Physic! O Divinity! when—when will you 
undergo a necessary ordeal—a thorough, a rational reformation I— 
As to WARS—I will not mention them; for my whole frame qui-
vers with horror even at the thought of them.—Carnage!— bank-
ruptcies, poverty! — devastation! —hunger and thirst,—horrible ap-
prehensions!—forced from our native land;—and all these for 
what? why, for the honor and Glory of the God of mercy and peace 
—for a punctilio of what is called national honor;—too often indeed 
for nothing at all—to obtain an eventual evil—or for the acquisition 
of the shadow of a shade. I could almost venture I think to prophecy, 
that the time will come, tho' perhaps it is very distant, when the in-
terests and differences of nations, and what is called the ballance of 
power, will be settled by less horrible—less unnatural—less diabolical 
means than fire and sword; and that the children of those men, naval 
and military, who are now trained up to, and who glory in ruin and 
devastation, carnage, theft, depredation and murder, will be taught 
to adorn the sciences, embellish the arts, or to illuminate the human 
mind—instead of hewing down like savage monsters, their fellow 
creatures—or of eating up, like drones, the bread of the children of 
industry. But I beg pardon for making this digression; I beg 
pardon, I mean, of their Worships and High Mightinesses, the 
clergy!!! the Heroes or men of war!! the lawyers! and the 
|P_6
physicians, and I will now return to finish the descriptive sketch of 
the nature and properties of my electrical æther. 

In the course of last winter I had frequent opportunities of ob-
serving the good effects of this essence, and of the nervous ætherial 
balsam, upon many Ladies and Gentlemen who were uncommonly 
susceptible of the evils which arise from the cold rawness and fogs 
of this variable climate; occasioning rehumatic complaints in the 
joints, and still more particularly in the head and face, with swel-
lings of the cheek and gums, sore throats, and tickling defluxions 
on the breast and lungs. By the use of these two medicines, 
and by keeping the body open with the Imperial Pills, those com-
plaints which formerly had confined them almost constantly thro' 
the winter to the house were happily prevented; and in others 
who were seized as usual, the cough, soreness of the breast, fe-
vers and inquietudes were speedily carried off by the gentle and 
moderate use of these precious, and most friendly medicines. 

But the electrical æther is more especially necessary for those who 
attend courts of justice, public meetings, sick persons, and those 
places where hundreds of common people are crammed up in the 
galleries, &c. Nothing in nature is or can be equal to the electri-
cal æther, the nervous ætherial balsam, and the cool open air in 
curing all, even the very worst, and most confirmed species of low-
nervous-putrid fevers; ulcerated and gangrenous sore throats; 
the small-pox,—mortifications, and the whole tribe of putrid con-
sumptive, dropsical, scorbutic and paralytic disorders. By only smell-
ing to, or breathing over the æther, and taking now and then a tea 
spoonful of it, or of the balsam in a cup of white wine,—tar water, 
or common cold water,—the patient always finds instant relief, and 
generally a perfect cure; while those about him, or in the house, 
are effectually secured from that dangerous malignancy which often 
sweeps off whole families into one common and untimely grave. 

As the effects, or rather the medicines themselves, fly in a mo-
ment with the swiftness of light from the sun—over the whole 
system, no other cordial whatever in nature has been found so in-
stantaneously and so lastingly to recruit the strength and spirits 
after great fatigue, or violent exertions of body or of mind, espe-
cially in Venereal pleasures.—They refresh, brace, compose, com-
fort, and literally speaking, illuminate, all the bodily,—and thro'
 them—all the mental faculties; in short, in all severe ill-
nesses, in sinkings, and in faintings in consequence of severe ex-
cruciating pain, profuse evacuations of blood, &c. and draining 
weaknesses of every kind, or from whatever causes proceeding, 
these medicines (especially the nervous ætherial balsam) are 
ALWAYS found to produce the most astonishing good effects, 
which are manifested to the patient, and to every one present, 
even the first minute they are used. 

|P_7
[}II. NERVOUS ÆTHERIAL BALSAM! 
Or, the restorative ætherial oil, for decayed and worn out
constitutions. }]
IF the reader can conceive of the richest—purest—and most 
strengthening parts of all the cordial and nourishing things he 
is acquainted with in nature—being extracted, purified, exalted, 
harmonized and concentrated into a small compass,—he may also 
conceive of the nature and properties of this precious balsam. 

The Peruvian bark, cinnamon, saffron, castor, lavender, sage, rose-
mary, red-rose-buds, electrical nitre, ambergrise, myrrh, amber, and
 benjamin;—the balsams of Tolu and Gilead,—and various other bal-
my bracers, and fragrant aromatic strengtheners are selected with my 
own hand, and prepared under my own eye: a pure ætherial es-
sence, combined with a certain portion of the richest and most ge-
nuine wine, is then poured upon the ingredients, and being pro-
perly mixed and secured, they are placed to macerate and digest, 
like the electrical æther, under the united influences of dephlogisti-
cated or vivifying air, æther, magnetism and electricity, in the 
great globes which compose the tremendous pyramids on the domes 
of the Temples. 

From the present general stile of living—from the luxury, folly, 
dissipation, and enervating indulgences of persons, perhaps of every 
rank, the disorders which now a days prevail, and which harass and 
wear out human life, are such as proceed either from condensed 
fluids, morbid humours, and heterogeneous viscidities in the blood 
or lymph;—or, from irritation, relaxation and debility of the so-
lids and nervous system. The former however complicated,—how∣ever various in their appearances, are very justly attributed to vene-
real, scorbutic, gouty, or scrophulous humours—and the latter are 
promiscuously and not improperly termed nervous; they arise chiefly 
from tepid soft luxurious and artificial living, enervating indulgen-
cies, I mean in venereal pleasures, and from drinking daily that 
agonizing yet bewitching poison, foreign tea; and are often so dis-
tressing and oppressive to the miserable patient,—as to make riches 
and honours, and even life itself a burthen—a weary and heavy bur-
then, which they would gladly,—nay even sometimes—impiously and 
fatally venture to lay down. 

In the former cases, namely, in viscidities and impurities of the 
blood and juices, from scorbutic, venereal, gouty and rheumatic 
humours, the Imperial Pills, by and by to be described, will be 
found in general the safest and most certain antidote: and in the 
latter, viz. in all nervous, putrid and debilitated habits, this nervous 
|P_8
ætherial balsam is without exception the mildest and most effectual 
remedy that can be met with in the whole circle of nature!—for in 
all nervous complaints and weaknesses;—in all convulsions, epi-
leptic, apoplectic and hysteric fits, in all obstructions and irregula-
rities in the monthly periods of women, particularly at the two cri-
tical and most dangerous periods of commencement and final ces-
sation, this Balsam, the Electrical Æther, or the Imperial Pills, are 
absolutely infallable in producing the happiest effects. For I will 
venture to say, that there is scarce a menstrual obstruction in the 
world—however complicated, or however confirmed, but what will 
be overcome and effectually removed by taking three tea spoonfuls of 
the electrical æther and as much of the Nerv. Æth. Balsam, mixed 
both together in a pint of cold water for three successive mornings, 
if the patient is plump and sanguine; but if on the contrary, she is 
lean, cold and languid, she must take three tea spoonfuls of the
nervous ætherial balsam, and the like quantity of the Electrical 
Æther, thrice every day in wine, spirits, or herb tea, and continue 
it for only three days. In both cases, and under these opposite cir-
cumstances, with due attention to the above distinctions, a perfect 
cure will undoubtedly take place; especially if plenty of the me-
dicines be rubbed on the loins and back bone, and in the former 
case the application of cold water is made to THE PARTS, hands 
and feet, for hours daily,—and in the latter case warm wine or 
spirits and water—be applied daily in like manner.—In both, and 
in every case, running about in the open air is earnestly recom-
mended.—But when the patient is too much weakened and re-
duced from the opposite causes,—namely, too long—too copious and 
profuse a flow,—and great paleness and debility brought on; —rest, 
cool air,—the application to the parts, and indeed to every part of the 
body and limbs, of cold milk and water, or red wine, and a course of 
the nervous ætherial balsam, with an infusion or tea of the Peruvian 
bark, red rose leaves, and a little nitre, with Bristol or Spa water 
—will build her up into a rock of snowy alabaster, studded with 
roses and streaked with celestial blue, removing the causes of ste-
rility, or barrenness,—making her a lovely and desirable compa-
nion! —a healthy and a happy mother!—But for farther particulars 
relative to these delicate and important matters, see my "Private 
Medical Advice to Married Ladies and Gentlemen; to those especially 
who are not blessed with children"—with full directions for preven-
tion, or for speedy and perfect recovery after miscarriages and dan-
gerous lyings-in. To be had, comprised and printed in two sheets 
folio, sealed up, alone at my House in the Adelphi, and at the 
Temple of Hymen, in Pall Mall, price only One Guinea. 

N. B. In the above, such simple, natural, and effectual means 
for removing the causes of barrenness in both sexes as never were 
recommended, or even thought of before, in any age or nation, 
|P_9
—are pointed out;—and such directions given, as will, if duly at-
tended to, make man and wife sweeter—lovelier—more amiable, 
—and more desireable in the eyes of one another. 

After what has been already said, I need scarcely add, that in 
all scarlet, miliary, jail, bilious, nervous, putrid, spotted and ma-
lignant fevers—especially those of the East and West Indies, Ame-
rica, &c. these medicines are absolute and speedy specifics. A person 
armed and provided with these, and with the genuine powder of 
Dr. James, need not fear any inflammatory fever, or any low, 
putrid, malignant, or bisious fever or complaint whatever; in any 
climate, season, or in any part of the terraqueous globe. These 
will be a most complete apothecary's shop, and nature, common 
sense, and the patient's own feelings—a trio of the safest and wisest 
physicians. 

In every case, therefore, where the patient is low, faint, feeble 
or emaciated, from scorbutic or venereal virus, a sharp poverty— 
or putrid dissolution of the blood and juices;—or from want of a 
due elastic tone of the solids—arising from a deficiency of the vital spi-
rits—or of the balmy nervous fluid, this nervous ætherial balsam! 
has not its equal in nature;—and this I aver confidently, from 
very much, and very happy experience in actual practice, which in 
all things is the only infallible guide—the only incontrovertible evi-
dence! Thousands by it alone, have been snatched from the grave: 
and still many more thousands of the human species when languid 
and worn out with diseases, excesses, irregularities, enormities and 
early imprudencies, have been suddenly built up into firm rocks 
of blooming health, and intellectual happiness. 

I shall conclude this short account of this great medicine, by 
observing, that in all lesser nervous complaints and uneasinesses, 
occasioned by tea, coffee, adulterated wine, or pernicious liquors; 
and in all those little lingering fevers, heats and chillinesses, and 
those tremors and quiverings of body, and restless anxieties, dread, 
horrors, discontent and unsettlednesses of mind, which proceed 
merely from an irregular circulation of the blood, or from spasms, 
debility, or relaxation of the nervous system,—this ætherial balsam 
will always be found of immediate service, and by a gentle— 
persevering course of it, and of the Imperial Pills, duly attending 
to the directions given with them, a perfect and a lasting cure will 
in general be obtained. Because by them the blood and juices 
are purified, sweetened, tempered, and brought to a pure fluid 
state, while the solids are braced and strengthened, and the nerves 
sheathed, nourished, steadied and coiled up. 

Many fanciful, rich, and luxurious people, who are in fact in 
good health, and who ought by no means to take this precious 
ætherial balsam, or any other medicine, nevertheless accustom 
|P_10
themselves to take more or less of it, and even an imperial pill or two 
every day;—with such people, or when at any time they are taken 
into a sound and tranquil body, they produce no other operation or 
sensation, than a more genial and brisker flow of the blood and animal 
spirits,—and that species of contentment, thankfulness, and benevo-
lent gladness of heart, which makes us happy in ourselves, and agree-
able to all about us: but where they meet with diseases and corruption, 
they encounter them with the boldness and majesty of a lion, effec-
thally expelling them, and leaving a clean and a quiet house for health and happiness to reside in. 

The nervous ætherial balsam, then, is by very far, and without 
exception, the most exhilerating, antispasmodic, bracing, restora-
tive, strengthening, and consequently antisceptic medicine in the 
world—infinitely superior to the common tinctures of the bark, va-
lerian, castor, saffron, lavender, &c.—and infinitely more cordial 
and mild than the burning inflammatory salts, and fiery fetid spirits 
of hartshorn, eau de luce, sal volatile, and all the liqueurs, drams, 
and cordials, foreign and domestic, which only bewitch and give a 
temporary relief, which must soon give way to additional horror, 
darkness, dejection and despair. 

[}III. THE IMPERIAL PILLS. 
Or, the universal purifiers of the blood and juices.}]
THIS title was given to them to mark their exceeding supe-
riority over all the analeptic or stomachic pills, antiscorbutis 
drops, and alterative purifying medicines that perhaps ever were in-
vented, or which are now used in the world.—In all weaknesses, op-
pressions, flatulencies, cholickly gripings, and windy distensions of 
the stomach and bowels, especially when those uneasy, and indeed 
tormenting complaints proceed from scorbutic, venereal, gouty or 
bilious humours, freting, corroding, and irritating the nervous coats 
of the stomach and bowels;—or from heats, acidities, crudities and 
indigestions, occasioned by full and foul feeding; excessive drinking 
of hot and foul wines and liquors; heats and colds, or surfeits; ir-
regular and late hours as to sleep; want of exercise, and perspiration, 
&c. &c,—in all such cases, the Imperial Pills are constantly found 
to give immediate relief, and if the person is prudent and temperate, 
by a regular and gentle perseverance in the use of them—a perfect 
and a lasting cure will, with a moral certainty, be obtained. 

These pills are a composition of the purest parts of the choicest ar-
ticles of the Materia Medica, combined and rendered still more 
|P_11
active, by the united influences of air, æther, and magnetism[/1./]ac-
cording to the true principles of electricity, and of the philosophic 
chemistry, and are constantly acted upon by these powerful and most 
genial agents for several months in the upper globe, of the pyramidal 
|P_12
metal dome of the Temple of Health, which globe alone, like each 
of the other three, contains thirty-six gallons, and is of the finest 
burnished gold. 

The Imperial Pills are of so mild and friendly a nature that they 
are found to agree perfectly well with both sexes and with every age 
and constitution. They operate first by dissolving all tough, cold 
phlegm or slime, and other gross, corrupted, bilious and putrid hu-
mours, which not only clog and irritate the stomach and bowels, but 
form a nest and nourishment for those common and most destructive 
vermin, worms—which they effectually kill, evacuate and carry off 
by stool and urine: after that, by continuing their moderate use as 
an alterative, without change of diet, confinement, or any irk-
some restraint whatever, they subdue, eradicate, and expel by stool, 
urine, and a breathing insensible perspiration, all scorbutic, gouty, 
rheumatic, venereal, bilious and scrophulous humours, however 
long they may have lurked and prevailed in the system, preying on, 
and exhausting the strength and spirits, and undermining and de-
stroying all the springs and principles of life. 

Rubbing and exercise are universally allowed to be good for the re-
covery as well as for the preservation of health. Now these act by 
exciting the electrical fire in the body which removes obstructions, 
animates and braces. The Imperial Pills therefore, and the Ætherial 
Balsam, being filled with the electrical or celestial fire, and solar 
light, which the balmy resins of which they are composed have im-
bibed and do retain, promote all the natural and necessary circula-
tions, secretions and absorptions, and consequently must be of the 
greatest service to those persons, especially to females, who take too 
little free air and exercise, tho' at the same time they live full, and 
are of a costive or irregular habit. Upon the same grounds they 
are found exceedingly beneficial in those heats, spasms, pains, and 
uneasinesses in females, occasioned by the periodical fulness of their 
vessels, and from certain other causes: but the good effects in gouty, 
scorbutic, and rheumatic cases, and in all eruptions, or pimples of 
the face,—sores or blotches, of the body and limbs, however invete 
rately blended in the blood,—however obstinately confirmed in the 
constitution—are really astonishing. The dreadful train of sufferings 
which the miserable patients in the above cases endure, and even the 
most obstinate rheumatic swellings and weaknesses of the joints, &c. 
yield very readily to the superior efficacy of these excellent pills;— 
|P_13
and they are a diuretic of so soft yet searching a nature, that they 
generally give very speedy ease in severe fits of the stone and gravel, 
and by persevering in a proper course of them, and of my Nervous 
Ætherial Balsam at the same time, and drinking veal broth with 
plenty of gum arabic dissolved in it, or of a decoction of liquorice, 
linseed, and marshmallow roots poured upon shred leeks, and bruised 
fennil seeds with some honey or treacle, they often have been found 
to cure radically those most painful and most excruciating disorders. 

But in all less grievous, tho' abundantly troublesome complaints 
of the first passages—they are an absolute specific. For they imme-
diately restore lost appetite, and correct all hot, acrid, and four fer-
mentations in the stomach and bowels, which they so genially cool 
and invigotate, as to enable them to concoct and extract those fine 
mild nutritious juices of our food and drink, which nourish the body 
and gladden the soul. By these means the breath is rendered balmy 
and sweet; the face is cleared from scurf, heat and pimples, prema-
ture wrinkles are smoothed away and obliterated, and the com-
plexion rendered clear, smooth fresh and youthful; and all these 
happy effects are produced insensibly as it were, without (as I 
said before) confinement, particular regimen in food or drink, or 
hindrance of business; their operation, like the Nervous Ætherial 
Balsam, being so mild and congenial to human nature, that they may 
be taken under any circumstance, in any climate, or at any season of 
the year, tho' when taken merely as a preserver of health, the spring 
and autumn seasons are doubtless the most proper. 

The Imperial Pills therefore, while they fortify the stomach 
and bowels, and purge the blood and lymph from all morbid humours, 
and heterogeneous sharpnesses and viscidities, they so perfectly eradicate 
all venereal and scorbutic diseases, that I defy the world to bring me 
any such case if at all curabl, but what I will radically, speedily and 
safely cure by a proper course first of these pills, and afterwards of 
my Ætherial Balsam, without the use of one grain of that horrible 
poison, mercury. Indeed than these medicines, and my Electrical Sul-
phur, there has been no others as yet discovered, whatever quacks and 
empyries may pretend, which so speedily and so completely counteract 
the deadly effects of mercury, and other violent medicines, which of-
ten so tear, shake, and debilitate the constitution as to make the dear 
bought cure of the primary complaint, no great blessing to the feeble 
unnerved patient. This singular and most invaluable quality of the 
Imperial Pills is ocularly demonstrated to the patient and to all his 
friends, by almost instantly stopping the highest salivation, throwing 
off the pocky or scorbutic virus, &c. by stool, by urine, and by sweat: 
and by making the quicksilver run off in globules by stool in quan-
tities nearly proportioned to those that had been unfortunately used. 
Now the universally allowed, and two well known effects of mercury 
are to dissolve and break down the mass of blood into a sharp, watery 
|P_14
putrid gore;—and to tear, deaden, relax, and render tremulous the 
whole nervous system; but the Imperial Pills carry the mercury and 
all venereal and scorbutic humours entirely out of the body, restoring 
the healthy tone of the stomach, bowels, and solids in general;—
and the nervous ætherial balsam very speedily warms, and steadies 
the cold—quivering—tottering body; restoring the balmy crasis of 
the blood and juices; sheathing, bracing, and invigorating the dry, 
shrunk and tremulous nerves; and absolutely cures all seminal weak-
nesses and debility in both sexes, from whatever causes proceeding, 
but those especially which arise from ill cured, neglected, improperly 
treated or repeated venereal complaints, early imprudencies, irre-
gularities, and all unnatural and inordinate exertions and indulgen-
cies especially in the sacrifices that are made to Venus, or to Bac-
chus[/2./]. Let the inventors or proprietors of other medicines which are 
sent abroad into the world, make a parade of their patents, &c.—
For these great medicines I never thought of such securities or sanc-
tions. No. I am not afraid of any one counterfeiting them, tho' I 
find it has been vainly and ridiculously attempted. The compositions 
are so curious and complex, and the ingredients so very subtil, that 
they will not bear to be analyzed by even the most skilful adept in 
philosophical or pharmaceutical chemistry. I repeat it. The in-
gredients are too costly and too numerous,—the processes too com-
plex and tedious,—and the apparatus employed in the preparation 
of them costs too many thousand pounds for most adventurers, even 
of abilities, in the medical or medicinal line to engage with or even to 
think of. They are now, I find, bought by some of the most emi-
nent of the faculty, in various parts of the world as well as in 
these kingdoms, and exhibited in severe dangerous and important 
cases sometimes as their own preparations: and I assure the nobility, 
gentry, and even the faculty who are desirous of knowing every ingre-
dient in the composition of each, or of either of the three medicines, 
that they need only apply to me to be fully satisfied in every particular 
which they feel themselves interested in. To know them is to approve 
of them; and to use them once, is to use and recommend them most 
cordially for ever. Such is their intrinsic excellency that they will 
bear every test—even the test—the criterion—the fiery ordeal of ex-
perience in the most confirmed, and most hopeless cases:—for they 
have been brought to their present high state of perfection by long 
and deliberate investigations of the real qualities of medicines, by the 
deepest researches into chemistry, enlightened by the important dis-
coveries and improvements which have lately been made in natural 
philosophy; and finally, by the nicest and most assiduous attention to 
the effects and operations of the medicines themselves, in a most ex-
|P_15
tensive course of private practice in this, as well as in various foreign 
countries; and the invariable result of their judicious use has been effec-
tually, to prevent, and with certainty to cure most diseases to which 
mankind is obnoxious,—but especially those which the natives of these 
islands are liable to at sea or in foreign countries—insomuch that many
gentlemen, especially of the army and navy would now almost as soon 
go to sea without provisions, or upon along journey without money as 
without a certain stock of these three precious remedies. Indeed, in 
the hands of people of prudence and good sense, they supersede the 
need of a travelling physician, or of any medicine chest—for they 
are of themselves an apothecary's shop fully adequate to the preven-
tion and cure of most diseases. And so thoroughly convinced am I 
of the universal salutariness, and superior efficacy of these three great 
medicines, that in a very few years I will probably relinquish the 
practical part of medicine altogether, but continue to dispense these 
medicines all over the world, WHILE, for the good of the human 
species of every nation and clime,—even for the children of those 
who shall be born a thousand years hence, I will publickly teach 
medicine and philosophy in academical lectures, and from time to 
time publish what I am now compiling, viz. a complete System of 
Prophylactic and Practical Medicine; or, the whole art (without 
even a shadow of reserve) of preventing and curing diseases. Per-
haps, likewise, I may send into the world, a complete and rational 
Body of Divinity, or true vital religion, which I am now likewise 
preparing; and perhaps, moreover a manual of Human Prudence;—
or a safe and complete guide of life: and a simple, yet full and na-
turally digested code of laws for civil, political, and ecclesiastical 
government,—submitted with great deference to those, to whom 
they more immediately, and more properly belong. But to return, 
I was observing the efficacy of the three great medicines in re-
storing decayed, consumptive, and worn-out constitutions, or after 
severe diseases, harsh and improper medicines, or hardships and sick-
ness in foreign hot climates. Upon this subject I can scarce say enough. 
Yet to those who are acquainted with the medicines everything which 
even I could say, would be quite unnecessary. What need is there to 
expatiate on the genial qualities of the sun, which are universally 
felt, and universally acknowledged?—I will only observe for the in-
formation of the world in general, that in all such cases, they moisten, warm, refresh and build up the whole system, with bland, 
mild, balmy and nutritious juices; and by inducing a free, re-
gular, steady and genial circulation of the blood (which is the true 
radical moisture) spirits, and nervous fluid, or that ætherial invisible 
principle which actuates the nerves, and which altogether constitute 
the balmy life of the body; and, finally, by inducing the due and re-
ciprocal action of the solids and fluids on each other; or in other 
words, that happy equilibrium—that peaceful balance! which nature 
|P_16
delights in, and constantly endeavours to maintain in the whole vi-
sible as well as invisible creation—they produce in the human body 
that peaceful, homogene, tranquil state which we call health, and 
which is doubtless the natural and original state of all created things: 
for pain, discord and disease, are so very unnatural, that even pain 
and disease are only a departure from, and imply a possibility of 
health,—or the attainment of that state which nature pants after, 
and which man originally possessed. All distempers are in fact but a 
struggle between the vis vitæ and the peculiar Miasma, or Fomes Mer-
bi. Indeed every species and degree of pleasure, and of bodily and 
mental happiness which we enjoy in this world, are only the irradia-
tions or emanations of this primary principle, namely, concord or 
health. This is the great unity!—the root and branches—the 
flowers and the fruits—the sap and the life of mankind; To contrive 
and adapt, from the harmonious combination of the four elements 
acting on natural substances of known efficacy, such medicines as 
could root out disease, discord and strife from the human body, and 
produce, cultivate and nourish this heavenly unity, hath been my 
constant study, I may say, day and night for many years. How far 
I have succeeded has been long and abundantly obvious, not only 
from the prodigious and unprecedented sale of these Great Medi-
cines; but from the astonishing and well known numbers which 
are daily dismissed from the Temple of Health perfectly cured of dis-
eases which had baffled all other human means. Now this unity or 
health,—this self-remedy in nature for all her disorders, was the 
seal with which God impressed every thing at the creation. And it 
was THIS in man which was emphatically called, "the image of 
god."—This was paradise for man! This was the paradise of the 
earth, and of all the elements.—But man departing from God, and 
from the innocence and simplicity in which he was created, brought 
discord and diseases into his soul and body;—from hence proceeds 
his short and uncertain existence in this world; hence flow pain, 
disease and death;—and from hence, too, perhaps all evil and com-
motions within and without, in the natural and in the moral world. 
All fevers, fermentations, jarrings, restlessness, commotions, pains 
and diseases in the human body, are, therefore proofs of that hid-
den—constitutional peace and health which it has lost, and necessa-
rily gravitates unto, and endeavours to regain, altho' it knows not 
the way—nor is it always so happy as to meet with, or follow, a 
friendly and unerring guide. 

That the above medicines, conjunctly, are such a friend—such a 
guide! no one will doubt who has attended properly to the plain, 
open and simple description which I have given of them; nor will 
any one deny the truth of the fact, who has fairly and prudently used 
them—even in the most desperate cases. These great medicines 
then, will restore health and tranquility—because they restore in our 
|P_17
body, as I have above shewn, that original unity,—balance—har-
mony or equilibrium which nature delights in, and continually strives 
to maintain in all her works—especially in the human body and mind, 
as being the most perfect and important of all that she has created, or 
placed on this terraqueous globe! 

These, therefore, conjunctly, may justly be esteemed the true and 
genuine universal medicine!—the boasted and long wished for Pri-
ma Materia!—Aurum potabile! or elixir vitæ! of the philosophers, che-
mists, and physicians of every age since medicine became a science.—
In these three medicines, by the wonderful influence of the mighty—primary—simple agents upon each other, and upon the simple sub-
stances above mentioned, which for so many ages have been found so 
friendly to man—is produced and fixed,—a vivifying—homogene 
principle which counteracts disease, insures health, and the prolonga-
tion of our mortal existence. In the balmy bed of these three medi-
cines, all elementary and intestine strife ceases. Here, the active—
the irresistible powers of air, earth, fire and water blend their seem-
ingly jarring principles, and are at peace. Here wih the swiftness 
of thought, they meet in one common centre. They kiss each other 
as it were,—cordially embrace, and are at rest in this paradisiacal—
this balmy bed. For be it known (and however paradoxical it may 
appear, it is nevertheless a certain—sublime, and philosophical truth) 
that the quickest motion, is the most perfect rest. When a boy whips 
his top into the briskest motion—it turns about with such exceeding 
swiftness that it appears perfectly motionless—and he says it is 
asleep. Would not any thing that could pass from this to the East 
Indies and back again in the thousandth part of a moment—be at 
perfect rest?—could a thought—or any thing that could glance or 
be shot from your eye in London to the farthest verge—to the most 
distant point of the globe and back again in the millionth part of the 
time of a twinkle in your eye,—could it be said to move at all?—
Surely not.—When the cause of disease therefore is expelled by these 
great medicines they instantly compose all strife. I never swallow 
any wine, spirits, or malt liquor, strong or weak, mixt nor unmixt, 
and yet I undergo daily with pleasure, cheerfulness and good health, 
more fatigue of body and of mind, than perhaps any other man in 
London;—If, after the business of the day, or when I am forced 
to be up all night when sent for in great emergencies—I find myself
faint and exhausted,—I immediately draw the vapour of the electri-
cal æther with great force into my nostrils—or pour a few tea-
spoonfuls of it into a bason of warm water and breathe over it;—
and ordering a few new laid eggs to be beat as it were into a thin 
oil, and then mixed with some sugar and verycold water, I drink 
it off, and eating a bit of biscuit, rich ripe fruits, or dry bread two 
days old, I find myself, in a few minutes, perfectly fresh and re-
|P_18
cruited. But what always astonishes me above measure is, the seem-
ingly miraculous effect of my Electrical Æther, or Nervous Æthe-
rial Balsam, of which, when I take a tea-spoonful or two 
into my mouth upon a bit of sugar, I feel my body refreshed, 
braced, and strengthened, and my mind enlarged and illuminated, 
in one moment. It darts its genial ætherial soul with the swiftness 
of light—or with the inconceivable swiftness above mentioned, through 
every nerve—vein—artery! I desire to repeat, in other words, 
what I have already expressed; namely, that if thro' extreme bodily 
fatigue and anxiety, I feel myself as it were crampt in a cold dark 
room,—in a moment,—by the means of the electrical æther, and 
nervous ætherial balsam, I find myself saluted as it were by love,—
joy, health and harmony! who in a moment fling open celestial 
scenes—and smiling, transport me on soft waving wings—with 
balmy and melodious gales, into the sweet—brilliant, and flowery 
palace where they, the handmaids of happiness, reside!—illumi-
nated with ten thousand lights of virgin wax!—or warmed and 
gilded with a vernal—a meridian sun! But to descend from the re-
gions of metaphor. 

These wonderful and most genial medicines attune the body, and 
thro' it the mind;—or, rather, the mind and the body freed from 
discord and disease, recover, by their own energy, their natural 
and original healthy tone and brilliancy:—And this happy state at-
tained—every thing which surrounds us appears likewise pleasant, 
gay and harmonious. Like, as in musical instruments tuned in uni-
son, every chord which is touched, strikes and calls forth, by its own 
vibratory force alone, a corresponding musical tone from every octave 
in the other instruments in the same room, thus invisibly touched. 
These are facts perfectly well known to philosophers, and to those who 
have studied music as a science. But to return; I say, that upon the 
grounds of reason and common sense, it is no wonder that these medi-
cines, when judiciously applied, are so efficacious as to remove all dis-
orders that arise from the jarrings and disproportions of the constituent 
parts or qualities in human bodies—because these medicines are a-
dapted, and accommodate themselves to all, and health ensues in the 
most easy, simple, and natural manner. The wise and sacred writer 
says, "That God hath created medicines out of the earth, and that he 
who is wise will not despise them."—Now as the qualities or virtues 
of all roots, leaves, flowers, fruits and seeds,—and of every medi-
cinal substance in nature, whether animal, vegetable, or mineral, 
must undoubtedly reside in some little drops—some exquisitely small 
particles of oneprima materia! which is the fountain or centre of
existence, life and health—and as this fountain—or source—or 
|P_19
centre, is to be found alone by the gift of God; or, in other words, 
by his blessing on the reverential and assiduous labours and investiga-
tions of those who search unweariedly into the vast treasures of na-
ture, with a view of promoting the good and happiness of the world, 
and the honour and glory of God!—Whenever therefore, we can 
extract and concentrate from the adventitious, gross, or inactive 
parts—the balmy, simple, homogeneous and vivisying particles of 
substances truly medicinal, by means of the harmonious combination 
of the great universal principles of air, æther, magnetism, electricity, 
and solar light, we need look for no other medicines; and I defy any 
physician to mention an indication in the cure of any disease, whether 
by altering, attenuating, opening, purifying, sweating, purging, vo-
miting, passing off by the kidnies; or by taking off spasms and irri-
tations—by bracing and comforting the nerves,—or by strength-
ening and vivifying the whole system, but may be answered in the 
completest and most friendly manner, by the judicious modulations 
and exhibitions of these three great medicines. They will therefore, 
upon principles perfectly demonstrable, cure all curable diseases, 
gladden the heart, illuminate the mind, and prolong human exist-
ence to the longest possible period. Because this exact mixture of 
hot and cold, moist and dry,—this harmonious tempering of the 
primary vital elements, coalescing like chords in music, must be 
peace makers in the strife or disorders of the constituent parts and 
qualities of man's body;—and because the true quintessence of na-
ture is Fire. I don't mean the gross, impure, consuming, culinary fire 
which we have every day before us in the world: by no means. The 
fire which I employ in the cure of diseases, and in the preparation 
of those three great medicines, is the true elementary fire, which has 
been worshipped as it were by the philosophers of all ages. They 
hadglimpses of it; and even its dawn gleaming on their horizon filled 
them with ideas so vast and sublime! that the herd of the world called 
them mad enthusiasts. How much greater felicity must we enjoy, 
upon whom the sun of science shines so bright as at this day. How 
much more may we benefit and enlighten the human species! But 
still, the sun just alluded to, is far—very—very far from having at-
tained its meridian altitude It even now points, but at six o'clock 
of a summer morning. Yet how fast—how sweetly—do the buds of 
every branch of science open!—The birds sing—all nature re-
joices! But those charming fields—these delightful prospects tempt 
me to wander too far. I will return. The fire I say which I employ 
in the cure of diseases, and for the preparation of these great medi-
cines, is the universal living fire which connects and moves the whole 
solar system—which animates all nature, and which you, my cour-
|P_20
teous reader—this book, the chair you sit in, the charming object 
by your side, and in a word, every thing in the universe is full of; 
and which we can now in a moment extract, and make visible or per-
ceptable to all your five senses. This fire is the breath of life—the spi-
rit of God!—which he breathed at the creation into man's nostrils, 
and which gives and maintains life throughout all his other works!—
It is the vital principle of generation! the fire which quickens 
the embryo in the womb!—even the pure fluid, celestial, electri-
cal fire which pervades, purges, and animates all nature! con-
suming disease and corruption—attracting and uniting the four ele-
ments—without destroying their variety or distinct powers,—because 
it is itself a composition of them all—the joy of them all—and in a 
word the great band or material soul of the universe! 

This, then, is the natural—the celestial quintessence or instuence 
with which those three great medicines are impregnated—and 
with which they are replete:—even with the harmonious combination of 
the four elementary qualities in one;—and whenever this pure and 
simple light, or concord is received into the body—disease and dis-
cordmust vanish, as the cold and darkness of the night must vanish 
at the presence of the morning—of the summer's sun!—and I will 
now conclude this short and very imperfect account of my great 
medicines with assuring those sick and infirm persons who have not 
yet had the happiness to partake of their salutary influences,—
that they are in their nature and operations, easy and benign,—
genial and gentle as a dove—strengthening and exhilirating the 
soul and body of[/3./] those to whom they are thankfully and prudently 
administered:—whilst at the same time they are as strong and as 
furious as lions in subduing and evacuating diseases, and every thing 
|P_21
that is injurious or unfriendly to good health, or to human existence. 
But the strength above alluded to, is the strength of a protector—
and the fury, that of love!—because they hurt not the weakest or 
most delicate, in infancy or in old age:—to the former they are as 
milk and honey—to the latter, as generous wine, or the smoothest —
the sweetest oil!—and to pursue the metaphor, they are in the last 
stages, of most severe and fatal diseases, what fresh oil is to an ex-
piring lamp—when the flame is, like a sickly shadow quivering and 
gasping in the dry socket. 

These great medicincs which are sold at no other place in London 
or Westminster but at the TEMPLE OF HEATH! Adelphi, 
and at the TEMPLE OF HYMEN, in Pall-Mall, are care-
fully put up and secured in strong flint vials:—even the Imperial 
Pills—because they would immediately lose their virtue if kept in a 
pill-box—or exposed to the open air. The three medicines are all 
sold at the same price, viz.—in vials of five Shillings, Half a Guinea, 
and One Guinea each.—For the conveniency of the navy and ar-
my,—of the commanders of East and West-India ships—and of la-
dies and gentlemen travelling by sea or land, proper assortments of 
all the three medicines, are put up in mahogany cabinets of Five, 
Ten, and Twenty-Five Guineas—with very ample, directions. By 
which means not only much money to physicians, apothecaries, 
&c. may be saved, but likewise under God, the lives of many hun-
dred persons of worth, fashion and of fortune, who travel into fo-
reign countries—may be yearly preserved,—who, otherwise, might 
be swept off by diseases in a few days—when absent from their fa-
milies, and far distant from their affectionate friends. 

Proper allowance is made to merchants and captains of ships who 
buy them in large quantities for sale in foreign countries. In all fe-
vers and relaxations—and in BILIOU, spasmodic putrid malig-
nant and consumptive complaints, in the East and West-Indies, and 
in America—they are immediate and absolute specifics. So that 
any lady or gentleman of sense and liberality, may, thus assisted, 
become sovereign physicians, and often save not only their own, but 
the life of a friend or of a fellow creature, when apparently at the 
point of death—and when given over by even the best physicians. 
But above all, they are most earnestly recommended to people of 
weak nerves and relaxed habits—who are particularly susceptible of 
catching colds and infectious disorders—to those likewise who are 
apprehensive of strokes of the apoplexy or pally—and still more, es-
pecially to those under sentence of death—I mean those persons who 
have already been visited by those sudden—dreadful—and merciless 
harbingers of the awful—the tremendous hour! 

|P_22
⁂ Any respectable person, not of the faculty, in any capital city 
or town in Great-Britain or Ireland—or in any other part of the 
world, where these great medicines are not yet established,—and 
who are very desirous to vend them, ought to lose no time in apply-
ing to me, thro' their agents or correspondents in London. As 
ready money is expected, a proper allowance is made; but all ex-
pences of carriage, advertizing, &c.—must be defrayed by the per-
sons themselves; and it is an invariable rule with me to return im-
mediately the money for what ever quantity may at any time be sent 
back as unsold.—In order to prevent trouble, I think it right to be 
very particular in mentioning the terms or conditions upon which I 
dispense these medicines all over the globe, for the general good of 
mankind, as well as for my own honour and emolument. 
