
|P_
[}AN 
ESSAY
ON THE 
Bite of a Mad Dog, &c.}]
1. I Know not of any human attempt 
which bears a better resemblance to 
the knight of La Mancha's attack of a 
wind-mill, than that of combating vulgar 
errors; of reasoning against received opi-
nions. The most powerful and pointed 
arguments generally fall to the ground, 
when opposed by the impenetrable shield 
of common prejudice. Nevertheless, in 
the present age, when science is hourly 
making such rapid advances towards the 
discovery of truth; when knowledge is 
so much more universally diffused than in 
|P_2
former times, it seems not unreasonable 
to hope, that mankind may be persuaded 
to bestow a few moments unbiassed atten-
tion on a subject confessedly of the highest 
medical importance. 

2. This subject hath indeed been amply 
and learnedly treated by ancient and mo-
dern physicians, in various countries and 
languages; in this kingdom particularly, 
by the celebrated Dr. Mead, and the no 
less famous Dr. James; the latter of 
whom published, in the year 1760, an en-
tire volume on Canine Madness. Ancient 
authors were less diffuse, and were gene-
rally satisfied with transcribing from each 
other. Most of these writers I have con-
sidered with attention, and acknowledge 
myself much obliged to them for many 
important facts: I cannot, however, avoid 
observing, that their labours have a mani-
fest tendency to confirm the fatal preju-
dice which I most devoutly wish to eradi-
cate; I therefore think myself justified in 
adding a small pamphlet to the volumi-
nous tracts already written on the disease 
commonly, but improperly, called the 
hydrophobia, or dread of water. I say 
|P_3
improperly, because this aversion to water, 
or to drink of every kind, is only one 
symptom of the disease in question, and 
that not constantly nor exclusively; for 
there are many examples on record, suf-
ficiently authenticated, of this symptom, 
this hydrophobia, in patients not bitten by 
a dog, or by any other animal. 

3. I am even inclined to assert, that the 
hydrophobia is not generally a symptom of 
the disease produced by the bite of a mad 
dog. It rarely happens that the patient 
has any aversion to water or other liquid; 
until by experience he finds an insuperable 
difficulty in swallowing. He then dreads 
the approach of water, having already 
found that the attempt to swallow any l
iquid produces a violent and painful con-
vulsion; so that the symptom in question 
is rather a real difficulty of swallowing 
liquids, than a dread of water. As far as 
my own experience reaches, I can, with 
great truth, aver, that I have never yet met 
with a single patient, who expressed any 
aversion to the sight, sound, or mention 
of water, until he had found, by experi-
ence, that drinking gave him pain. 

|P_4
4. Some years ago, I was sent for to a 
young gentleman, who, about six weeks 
before, had been bit in the arm by one of his 
father's hounds. A few hours before his 
death, he stept into a tub of warm water 
without fear, sat down, and continued in 
it half an hour. I shall, in its proper 
place, relate his case circumstantially: I 
mention it at present only to prove, that 
the hydrophobia is improperly considered 
as a diagnostic symptom of this disease. 

5. I am equally inclined to dispute the 
propriety of the denomination rabies ca-
nina, canine madness; for though persons 
thus unhappily afflicted are often violently 
agitated during a short time previous to 
their death, yet they generally retain their 
reason to the last moment: this disease, 
therefore, is improperly considered as a 
species of madness, if by madness we un-
derstand, a distraction, suspension, or per-
version of the reasoning faculties. 

6. Writers, fond of searching into an-
tiquity for what is not worth finding, have 
taken great pains to discover the most an-
cient authors that have written on canine 
|P_5
madness. Hippocrates, most certainly, 
has not said a single word on the subject, 
whatever some of his wise commentators 
may have imagined. A learned list of 
ancient authors, who have written on the 
hydrophobia, may be collected from vari-
ous modern writers; but we search in 
vain for useful information on this sub-
ject among the remains of high antiquity. 

7. But if the disease we are about to 
investigate be neither a species of rabies,
nor hydrophobia, what shall we call it!— 
It were idle to dispute about a mere name; 
but when a misnomer conveys a false idea, 
it is no longer a matter of indifference. 
The fatal disorder communicated to the 
human species by the bite of a mad dog 
is doubtless a spasm of the organs of de-
glutition and respiration; a species of an-
gina convulsiva, vel suffocativa. The 
generic term Angina, is thus defined by 
the learned Boerhaave, in his 783d apho-
rism—Impedita valde, dolens admodum, vel 
et impedita et dolens simul, deglutitio atque 
respiratio, quæ contingit a causa morbosa 
agente in partes binis his functionibus inser-
vientes, supra pulmones et supra stomachum 
|P_6
positas, Angina vocatur; and in aphorism 
818, he says,—Si convulsionum causa quæ-
cunque musculos pharingis laryngesve oc-
cupaverit, oritur subita suffocativa an-
gina.

8. As I am here writing particularly 
to medical readers, it is unnecessary to 
translate the above quotation. Such read-
ers, after comparing these definitions with 
the symptoms of the hydrophobia, as it is 
called, will, I believe, acknowledge their 
surprise, that Boerhaave should not rather 
have classed it as a species of angina than of 
mania. Later nosologists seem equally un-
fortunate in point of arrangement. In the 
system of the celebrated Sauvages, we find 
Hydrophobia in the class Vesaniæ, and 
order Morositates. His definition of the 
class is, error in imaginatione, appetitu, 
vel juditio; of the order, cupiditates aut 
aversiones depravatæ. Now, I appeal, not 
to systematic writers, but to those who 
have attended patients suffering under this 
dreadful distemper; and I request them 
to recollect, whether erroneous imagina-
tion, appetite, or judgment, or depraved 
desires or aversions, were among the symp-
|P_7
toms they observed? As to the patient's 
refusing to drink, it proceeds not from an 
imaginary aversion to water, but from a 
real, a painful convulsion in the organs of 
deglutition, excited by every effort to 
swallow liquids. 

9. Linneus divides the disease in ques-
tion into two distinct genera, viz. Rabies,
and Hydrophobia: the first he defines in 
these words, Desiderium mordendi laceran-
dique innocuos; the second, thus, Aver-
satio potulentorum cum rigore et sardiasi,
adding, sœpius præcedenti maritata. He 
places them in the class Mentales, and 
order Pathetici, where, from what I have 
said above, they must appear to have no 
business. 

10. In Vogel's arrangement, under the 
class of Febres, and order continuæ, we 
find the Hydrophobia thus characterized, 
Febris cum aversatione liquidorum, singultu, 
convulsione, et delirio. The absurdity of 
making the hydrophobia a continued 
fever is so obvious, that it requires no 
comment. 

|P_8
11. Dr. Cullen denominates his second 
class of diseases, neuroses, which he de-
fines—Sensus et motus læsi, sine pyrexia et 
sine morbo locali. Spasmi constitute the 
third order of this class, and of this order, 
the last genus is hydrophobia, thus defined 
— Potionis cujuslibet, ut convulsionem pha-
ryngis dolentem cientis, fastidium et horror; 
plerumque e morsu animalis rabidi. Of 
this genus he admits two species, viz. 
vulgaris, and spontanea, the first of which 
is the immediate object of our present 
consideration. 

12. Dr. Cullen, with his usual saga-
city, saw the error of former medical 
writers, who mistook this spasm in the 
organs of deglutition, for a species of 
madness. 

13. But by what name soever we dis-
tinguish this dreadful disease, previous to 
our enquiry concerning its symptoms in 
the human species, let us endeavour to 
ascertain those by which it may be known 
in the brute, where it originates. 

Authors have amused themselves with 
learned disquisitions concerning the cause 
|P_9
of this rabies in dogs, wolves, foxes, &c.
Some accuse worms within the cranium, 
or under the tongue. Dr. Cheyne ascribed 
it to a superabundance of animal salts, 
and Dr. James was of opinion that ex-
tream heat, want of water,[/1./] and putrid 
animal food, are generally the cause of 
this madness in dogs, which he calls a 
fever. 

14. The usual symptoms which indi-
cate approaching madness in a dog, are, 
first, an evident diminution of his natural 
keen appetite for food. He eats, indeed, 
and laps his milk or water, but with 
obvious indifference. His eyes have lost 
their usual lustre; he drops his ears and 
tail, shews no sign of hilarity at the ap-
proach of his master, and his whole aspect 
exhibits a picture of melancholy, perfectly 
intelligible to those who are accustomed 
to observe this animal with attention. In 
a day or two more, he refuses both meat 
and drink, shuns the society of other dogs, 
and is equally, after a short reconnoitre, 
avoided by them. He now quits his ha-
bitation, runs forward, evidently without 
having any thing in pursuit, snaps at every 
|P_10
animal that comes in his way, and within 
forty-eight hours dies convulsed. 

15. Such are the symptoms of this dis-
temper in the brute creation; and these 
symptoms are so constant and unequivocal, 
that all danger might easily be prevented, 
by the smallest degree of attention. In 
the first stage of the disorder, the dog has 
no propensity to bite, so that he may be 
seized and tied up without fear. 

16. Boerhaave has collected from Fra-
castorius and other writers, a catalogue of 
symptoms more numerous, and somewhat 
different from those above enumerated; but 
as it was not the result of his own obser-
vation, his description of this, as of many 
other diseases, should be read, cum grano 
salis.

17. Pliny,[/2./] in his chapter de medicina 
animalium, tells us, that there is a worm 
under the tongues of dogs, which if ex-
tracted when they are whelps prevents 
their running mad. This doubtless was 
a vulgar error of the times in which he 
wrote, and thus the universal prevalence 
|P_11
of this absurd opinion down to the pre-
sent age is accounted for. Dr. James 
very justly ridicules this idea of a worm 
under the tongue.[/3./]—"I take it (says the 
Doctor) to be a nerve; and this con-
tracting when recently taken away, the 
ideots fancy it stirs, and believe it a 
worm, towhich it bears no manner of 
resemblance."—He is certainly right 
in believing it not to be a worm; but he 
is mistaken in supposing it a nerve, for a 
reason which himself hath adduced, name-
ly, its contraction; nerves are not elastic. 
He is also wrong in saying, it bears no 
resemblance to a worm.[/4./] Morgagni pro-
bably was nearer the truth, in calling it a 
tendinous ligament. Be it what it may, 
it is certainly of use to the dog and its 
extirpation answers no salutary purpose. 

18. Let us now trace the progress of 
this fatal disease in those of the human 
species who have the misfortune to be bit 
by a mad dog or cat. The wound, on 
immediate inspection, discovers no signs 
of malignity. If it be so superficial as 
scarcely to have drawn blood it generally 
heals without the least inflammation, and 
|P_12
in that case there is little or no danger: on 
the second day it seems a mere scratch, 
and on the third it is hardly visible. But 
if, on the second morning, we observe an 
inflamed circle spreading from the wound, 
resembling that which surrounds the 
puncture when inoculation for the small-
pox has taken effect, there is reason to 
believe that part of the poisonous saliva
of the enraged animal is absorbed, and the 
consequent symptoms may be rationally 
expected. 

19. Meanwhile the patient takes the 
Ormskirk, or some other equally infallible 
medicine, is hurried away to the sea, in 
which he is two or three times dipped 
and half drowned; the wound heals, and 
all his apprehensions vanish. Unhappily, 
this delusion also vanishes in the space of 
five or six weeks, about which period he 
feels a[/5./] pain in the part where he was bit, 
gradually extending over the whole limb. 
He now recollects his misfortune. The 
horrible stories he has heard rush upon his 
mind, and the hourly expectation of 
|P_13
madness and death fill his whole soul. 
Under such apprehensions it is no wonder 
that he should discover symptoms of 
impatience, anxiety, and even of delirium. 
But these symptoms proceed from, and 
are always in proportion to, his appre-
hensions. His reasoning faculties continue 
unimpaired; his pulse becomes irregular 
and quick; but there is no preternatural 
heat, foul tongue, nor any other febrile 
symptom. He complains of a fullness and 
prickling in his throat, and swallows his 
spittle with difficulty. So far from ex-
pressing any aversion to water, he calls for 
drink; but in the attempt to swallow it 
he is convulsed, and, after two or three 
painful efforts, the approach, or even the 
sight of any liquid produces horror. He 
continues some time longer to swallow 
solid food without much pain or difficulty. 
At last even that is impossible. He 
now becomes sensible of an irresistable 
inclination to struggle, and wishes to 
be held; he breathes quick and with great 
difficulty, and in a few hours after dies 
convulsed, as if he were strangled with a 
cord. 

|P_14
20. Such, and such only, are the proper 
diagnostic symptoms of this fatal disorder: 
they are amply sufficient to distinguish it 
from any other, and are therefore all that 
are necessary to be generally known; but 
as a disease so frequently mortal cannot be 
too well understood, I shall proceed to 
mention the symptoms above omitted, as 
I find them enumerated by the principal 
authors that have written on this subject. 

21. Cœlius Aurelianus, who collected 
his history of the hydrophobia from 
Eudemus, Soranus, and other writers with 
whom we are little acquainted, tells us 
that the hydrophobia is immediately pre-
ceded by extreme irritability, unusual 
motions of the body, disturbed sleep or 
absolute wakefulness, indigestion, stretch-
ings, yawning, nausea, imaginary notions 
of bad weather, and no appetite for drink. 
To these symptoms, according to the 
same author, succeed, when the hydro-
phobia begins, a desire to drink[/6./], with 
terror at the sight, sound, or name of 
water. The patient is afraid even of 
|P_15
fomentations with oil; his pulse is dense 
(densus) small and irregular: sometimes 
a small degree of fever, convulsive motions 
of the stomach, spasms in the precordia, 
numbness of the joints, and torpor of the 
intestinal canal; frequent inclination to 
make water; trembling and catchings of 
the limbs; voice hoarse, resembling the 
barking of a dog; spiral posture of the 
body, like that of a dog lying on the 
ground; anxiety when any person enters 
the room, as if apprehensive that he should 
bring water; redness of the face and 
eyes; body emaciated, the superior parts 
pale and sweating; veretri frequens tensio 
cum seminis involuntario jactu, &c. 

22. To the symptoms above mentioned 
Boerhaave adds the following—Lassitude,[/7./] weight, and indolence in every muscle of 
the body; disturbed sleep, frequent 
startings, frightful dreams, convulsions; 
constant inquietude, depression, sighing, 
and love of solitude. If the patient be 
bled, the blood exhibits no morbid ap-
pearance. He now complains of a squeez-
ing about his heart. He is terrified not 
only at the sight of any fluid, but even of 
|P_16
any pellucid or reflecting body. He 
vomits viscid bilious phlegm or poraceous 
bile; grows hot and feverish. To a 
gradual exacerbation of these symptoms 
are now accumulated a dry projected 
tongue, open foaming mouth, extreme 
thirst, an irresistable inclination to spit at, 
and bite those that are near him; cold 
sweats, complete rabies, and on the fourth 
day the patient dies. 

23. Dr. Mead copies Boerhaave without 
any material alteration, except in saying 
that death relieves the patient in two days 
after the first symptom of hydrophobia.

Sauvages, in his Nosologia, adds no 
other symptom to those above related; but 
from Dr. James we learn the following 
very curious and material proof of the 
salutary instinct of dogs, namely, that 
they fly from persons actually infected by 
the bite of a mad animal. 

24. Such readers as are not acquainted 
with medical authors, and particularly 
with the writings of the celebrated 
Leyden professor, will wonder why he 
|P_17
should have exhibited so numerous a 
catalogue of symptoms, if it be true, that 
so few of them really occur in patients 
afflicted with this malady. But his wonder 
will cease, when he is told that Boer-
haave, when he began the study of physic, 
found the science a mere chaos. He 
immediately conceived the idea of re-
ducing it to method, and, after much 
reading, condensed and arranged his 
materials in the form of aphorisms, con-
stituting a new system of physic, which 
aphorisms he used as the text of his acade-
mical lectures. All his symptoms very 
seldom occur in the same patient: they 
were collected from a variety of authors, 
and are to be remembered by physicians, 
rather as possible phenomena than as abso-
lute diagnostics. 

25. Having thus attended our unfortu-
nate patient to the final period of his 
life, let us proceed to examine the 
morbid appearances in his body upon 
dissection. 

26. Cappivacci, an Italian, was, I be-
lieve, the first anatomist who published 
|P_18
an account of any dissection of this kind. 
His observations, together with those of 
Zwingerus, Brechtfeld, and other writers, 
were republished in the Sepulchretum, and 
thence collected by Boerhaave, and con-
densed into a single aphorism, which, for the 
sake of the English reader, I will translate.
[/8./] —"The morbid phenomena discoverable 
in the body by dissection are generally 
the organs of deglutition somewhat in-
flamed, bilious gluten in the stomach, 
the gall-bladder full of black bile, the 
pericardium dry, the lungs incredibly 
distended with blood, the heart full of 
blood almost dry, the arteries full, the 
veins empty, blood in the arteries ex-
tremely liquid, and scarce coagulating 
in the air, all the muscles, viscera, 
brain, and spinal marrow, dryer than 
usual."

27. Zwingerus,[/9./] in a body which he 
dissected, found the membraneous inter-
stices between the cartilaginous circles of 
the aspera arteria intensely red, and the 
stomach and intestines sprinkled with red 
spots. 

|P_19
28. Brechtfeld found the entire tract of 
the œsophagus narrow,[/10./] and in a state of 
constriction. 

29. M. Tauvry, a French anatomist,[/11./] found the gula and aspera arteria in a state 
of inflammation. 

30. Morgagni tells us of an hydro-
phobic patient whose body,[/12./] though dis-
sected sixteen hours after death, in a cold 
season, was intolerably putrid. Black 
bile was found in the gall-bladder; the 
lungs were also black, and very offensive. 
The right auricle of the heart was much 
dilated, the left very narrow. The blood-
vessels of the brain were all full; the brain 
was rather dry. 

31. The same author relates another 
history of a man who died about a month 
after being bit by a mad dog,[/13./] and whose 
body, which was dissected about twenty-
four hours after death, in the hottest 
season of the year, was much less offensive 
than the former. His neck had a livid 
appearance; the blood-vessels of the 
stomach were as full as if they had been 
|P_20
injected; the stomach was distended with 
air, and contained besides a yellow and 
greenish water; part of the liver was 
livid, and the gall-bladder was full of 
brown bile; the diaphragm was a little 
inflamed; the lungs on the posterior part 
were tumid with blood, and black; the 
upper part of the œsophagus, aspera arteria, 
pharynx, and larynx seemed nearly gan-
grenous; in the head, the vessels of the 
meninges were distended with blood, and 
the internal substance of the brain was 
dotted with red points; the internal ven-
tricles contained a reddish serum.

32. In a third dissection the stomach 
was found to contain a viscid cineritious 
fluid,[/14./] and the gall-bladder a small quan-
tity of yellow bile; the illiac veins were 
violently distended with blood, and their 
corresponding arteries quite empty; lungs 
stuffed full with crassamentum, and in part 
almost in a gangrenous state; the heart 
contained a small quantity of blood re-
sembling melted pitch; the organs of 
deglutition shewed no other signs of in-
flammation than a slight redness at the top 
of the pharynx; but the membrane which 
|P_21
invests the epiglottis was crisp and shrivel-
led; all the vessels of the meninges were 
immoderably full of black blood; neither 
the cerebrum, cerebellum, spinal marrow, 
viscera of the thorax and abdomen, nor any 
of the muscles were more dry than they 
generally are; in the ventricles of the 
brain were about three ounces of yellowish 
serum.

33. Morgagni,[/15./] after comparing these 
observations with those of Mead, Plancus, 
Fabbri, Brogiani, &c. concludes, that the 
bodies after death differ more from each 
other than when living: "For (says he) 
whilst alive, they all drink with great 
difficulty, and most of them not with-
out horror; but, upon dissection, we 
find no one phenomenon common to 
every subject. As to that dryness of 
the parts, so generally observed, it is 
by no means universal; nor does it 
seem to deserve much consideration, 
because the violent agitations of the pa-
tient, and the consequent evacuations, 
sensible and insensible; the frequent 
exhibition of alexipharmics, and long 
|P_22
abstinence from liquids, are sufficient 
to account for it."

34. On the authority, therefore, of 
Morgagni, who was a man of most ex-
tensive anatomical reading and experience, 
we must conclude, that dissections have 
not hitherto discovered the part, or parts, 
of the human body particularly affected, 
or injured, and consequently no curative 
indication can thence be deduced. He is 
of opinion, nevertheless, that the seat of 
the disorder is in the nerves and brain. 
Democritus and Gajus,[/16./] two of the most 
ancient writers on this subject, were of 
the same opinion; as were also the dis-
ciples of Asclepiades. Some of the anci-
ents accused the diaphragm, some the 
stomach and intestines, and some the heart. 

35. Boerhaave,[/17./] from the history and 
comparison of the hydrophobia with other 
diseases, was induced to believe, that it is 
first an affection of the nerves; that con-
vulsions of the viscera are thence produc-
ed; that the blood and humours thence 
become vitiated; but that the primary 
seat of the disorder is in the region of the 
|P_23
stomach. In this last part of his theory, 
he followed the opinion of Arthemidorus,[/18./]
Artorius, and the disciples of Asclepiades.

36. Dr. Mead was persuaded,[/19./]that the 
seat of the disease is in the nervous fluid, 
contaminated by the saliva of the dog act-
ing as a ferment, and gradually assimilat-
ing the whole to its own degree of morbid 
acrimony. 

37. Dr. James ridicules these opinions, 
and roundly declares,[/20./] that "he does not 
believe one syllable of the modern 
doctrine of nervous juices and nervous 
distempers." Previous to the display 
of his own theory, in order to render it 
intelligible to readers unacquainted with 
anatomy, he translates, from Boerhaave's 
preface to his collection of authors on the 
venereal disease, a minute description of the 
cellular membrane; to which he adds two 
pages more, on the same subject, from 
Cheselden. The first of these begins 
thus—"This membrane is of a vascular 
contexture,"&c. This is certainly not 
true. If Dr. James had ever read so com-
mon a book as Haller's Primæ Lineæ, he 
|P_24
would not have quoted Boerhaave and 
Cheselden on this occasion. His theory, h
owever, is briefly this—The poison con-
tained in the saliva of the mad dog is 
communicated through the wound made 
by his teeth to the fat contained in the 
cellular membrane, which fat, by fer-
mentation with the saliva, is assimilated 
into a poison; now this fat being mixt 
with the blood, and conveyed to the liver, 
by the vena portarum, the bile is contami-
nated, and necessarily produces all the 
symptoms observable in canine madness. 

38. To render this theory more intel-
ligible, the Doctor informs the ignorant 
reader,[/21./]"that there is a perpetual inter-
course betwixt the blood vessels and 
the cellular membrane, and conse-
quently between the contents of both, 
the blood and fat."—It is somewhat 
singular, that this poisoned fat should, in 
its passage to the liver, mix with the 
blood without injuring that fluid, which 
throughout the entire progress of the dis-
ease is found to differ in nothing from 
that of a person in health. This obsta-
cle was too obvious to escape the Doctor; 
|P_25
but he tumbles over it very clumsily: he 
supposes, notwithstanding appearances, 
that the blood must be ultimately viti-
ated by the bile; so that the blood first 
vitiates the bile, and the bile returns the 
compliment to the blood. 

39. Thus, then, according to Dr. 
James, the liver is the primary seat and 
fountain of the hydrophobia, which vis-
cus, he tells us,[/22./]"supplies the rest of the 
body with bile in immense quantities."
In what physiological school the Doctor 
learnt that the rest of the body is supplied 
with bile in immense quantities is diffi-
cult to imagine. I know of no part of the 
body which is supplied with bile except the 
duodenum, where, mixing with the di-
gested aliment issuing from the stomach, 
part of it is converted into chyle, and 
thereby bereft of all its bilious qualities, 
and the remainder carried through the 
intestinal canal, and finally ejected: so 
that no bile, quasi bile, is absorbed, and 
consequently no part of the body except 
the intestinal canal is supplied with this 
fluid. 

|P_26
40. But, if it be true that the liver is 
the part of the body chiefly affected in the 
human species, we may, I think, fairly 
conclude, that this viscus is also the pri-
mary seat of the disorder in dogs. Now, 
it is very certain, that the liver of a 
mad dog, supposed to be an infallible 
remedy against canine madness, hath 
been frequently eaten without any bad 
effect. 

41. There is yet another objection to 
Dr. James's hypothesis, which the ana-
tomical reader will probably think of 
some weight.—Page 78 of his treatise, he 
tells us, that the poisonous saliva ad-
hering to the tooth of a dog is im-
mediately communicated to the fat re-
siding in one or more of the cells of the 
cellular membrane; that "a scratch 
is sufficient, if it only raise the cuticle, 
without drawing a drop of blood;" 
for (continues the Doctor) this subtile 
poison, as well as the venereal venom, 
is capable of entering the cellular mem-
brane when applied to any part not 
covered by the cuticula.

|P_27
42. Is it possible that Dr. James, the 
author of a medical dictionary in three 
folio volumes, should not have known, 
that there is no external part of the hu-
man body which is not covered by the 
cuticle. That he was really ignorant of 
this fact is still more evident from the 
following passage in his 16th page—After 
relating a case from Van Swieten, who 
quotes it from Palmarius, of several chil-
dren having caught the hydrophobia by 
kissing their father, who had been bit by 
a mad dog, he says—"In this case it is 
very possible that some of the frothy 
saliva might be conveyed to the lips or 
the mouth of the children, which, not 
being defended by the cuticle, might 
communicate the contagion, as it hap-
pens with respect to the venereal poi-
son." —Now, it is not only certain that 
the glans penis, the lips, and mouth, are 
covered by the cuticle, but that it is 
continued through the fauces, œsophagus
and intestinal canal. 

43. But the Doctor assures us that, for 
the saliva of the dog to poison the fat, "a 
scratch is sufficient, if it only raises the 
|P_28
cuticle." Surely, the Doctor had for-
got, that the cellular membrane, with 
which he took so much pains to make his 
readers acquainted, and in which the fat 
resides, adheres to the internal surface of 
the cutis vera, which therefore must ne-
cessarily be perforated before the saliva 
can be brought into contact with the fat. 

44. If Dr. James had been at all ac-
quainted with the absorbent lymphatic 
vessels, whose extremities perforate the 
cuticle in every part of the surface of the 
body, he would not have deemed those 
parts only which he supposed destitute 
of this external shield susceptible of the 
canine poison. Though the medical 
world be much indebted to the minute 
enquiries of Doctors Monro and Hunter 
for a more perfect intelligence of the 
lymphatic system, yet the absorption of 
fluids through the pores of the skin hath 
been generally known, even prior to the 
days of Galen, who, as a proof of this 
fact,[/23./] says—Si sitiens balneum ineat, illi sitis 
sedabitur. Innumerable experiments have 
been made by later writers in order to 
establish this doctrine, particularly by 
|P_29
Boyle, Bellini, and many others.[/24./] In the
Philosophical Transactions we read of men 
working in quicksilver mines, whose bodies 
had imbibed so much of that metal, that 
they changed the colour of brass by 
rubbing it with their hands, or even by 
breathing upon it. We know that by 
handling turpentine the urine acquires 
a violet smell; that tobacco will vomit, 
and aloes purge, when externally ap-
plied; but the fact most universally 
known is the constant effect of mercu-
rial unction. 

45. Hence it is evident that the cuti-
cula, or epidermis, as it was called by the 
Greeks, is no defence against the canine, 
or any other poison, if the application be 
continued sufficiently to give time for its 
absorption: it is therefore necessary, when 
the saliva of a mad dog touches any part 
of the skin, to wipe it off immediately, 
and wash the spot. The examples, indeed, 
of persons thus infected without a wound 
are not numerous, because those on whose 
hand or face the saliva rests naturally wipe 
it off before it can be absorbed. 

|P_30
46. But, in defence of Dr. James it may 
be urged, that, whether the cuticle be 
pervious or not, or in whatsoever manner 
the canine poison pass the cutis, it proves 
nothing against that part of his hypothesis
which establishes the fat as the immediate 
receptacle of the poison, and its future 
vehicle to the liver. 

47. In reply to this defence, it will be 
sufficient to observe, that the bibulous 
lymphatics, by which fluids on the surface 
of the body are absorbed, do not discharge 
their contents into the cellular texture, 
but, creeping along its membranes, com-
municate with larger veins which ter-
minate in the receptaculum chyli, the 
thoracic duct, or jugular vein; so that the 
canine poison, or any other fluid, absorbed 
from the surface of the body, cannot 
remain in a state of extravasation with the 
fat in the cellular web, but must neces-
sarily be thrown into the general mass of 
circulating fluids[/25./]. 

|P_31
48. Dr. James's theory, therefore, being 
contradicted by anatomical demonstration, 
necessarily falls to the ground. The hypo-
thesis of Boerhaave, Mead, and others, 
who supposed the seat of the disease to be 
in the nervous fluid, is equally insup-
portable, because no such fluid circulates 
in the nerves, which are not tubes but 
solid fibres, whose extremities therefore 
are incapable of absorption. 

49. If these theories be false, those who 
read for information will ask, where lies 
the truth? If such readers have sufficiently 
attended to the 47th paragraph they will 
easily conceive that the poisonous saliva 
of the dog is absorbed by the capillary 
lymphatic veins, whose ramifications ex-
pand to every part of the surface of the 
human body; those veins which imbibe 
the matter communicated by inoculation, 
the venereal virus, water, and infectious 
miasmata from the air. 

|P_32
50. But, if this be true, why is it 
necessary, in order to communicate the 
small pox by inoculation, that the 
cuticle should be raised?—I answer: It is 
not necessary; but that by this operation 
the communication of the disease is 
rendered more certain, because the matter 
being lodged under the cuticle, by re-
taining its moisture, continues longer in a 
fit state for absorption. 

51. If it should be further asked, why 
the canine poison, thus introduced, con-
tinues circulating in the body five or six 
weeks before it produces that disease, of a 
single paroxism, called the hydrophobia?
—I answer, that in this it differs from 
other inoculated diseases only in point of 
time, In all inoculations there is an in-
tervention of some days between the cause 
and effect; but why that of canine madness 
requires a longer time for assimilation 
and maturity must remain a mystery, 
until we are better acquainted with na-
ture'smodus operandi. Probably there are 
other contagious diseases whose malignant 
miasmata may be equally slow in their 
progress from admission to efficiency. 

|P_33
52. Some attempts have been made to 
discover the nature of this canine poison 
by the help of microscopes and chemical 
experiments; but to no purpose. Dr. 
Mead supposed it to consist of fiery saline 
particles.[/26./] Dr. 
Heysham believes it to be 
an acid; but this is mere conjecture. All 
we know of the matter is, that it is a 
poison sui generis, which, being absorbed 
by the lymphatic veins, produces certain 
effects in the human body; no mecha-
nical nor chemical theory, therefore, can 
assist us in the invention of a remedy 
against the bite of a mad dog. Analogy 
may possibly be of some use. Chance, 
the great inventor of medicines, hath not, 
I think, been successful in the present 
case. Let us, however, proceed to the 
most important, the therapeutic division 
of our essay. 

53. Mithridates, king of Pontus, about 
two thousand years ago, is said to have 
invented that farrago of more than forty 
ingredients called by his name. Historians 
tell us that, believing it to be an universal 
antidote, he took a dose of it every 
morning. In justice however to his 
|P_34
Pontic majesty, I must not suppress what 
Samonicus writes on this subject. "When 
Pompy (says he) took the baggage of 
Mithridates, he found, among his 
papers, the prescript for compounding 
the famous antidote against all poisons, 
invented by that king: he was much 
surprised to find that it consisted only 
of twenty leaves of rue, two walnuts, 
two figs, and a little salt." To whose 
inventive genius we are indebted for the 
forty ingredients which were afterwards 
added I know not, unless to that of 
Damocrates, under whose name this cele-
brated antidote shines conspicuous even 
in the last edition of the London Phar-
macopoeia.

54. Andromachus, a native of Crete, 
cotemporary with Galen, not satisfied with 
an antidote of forty-five ingredients, com-
posed one of more than sixty, which he 
called ###Greek omitted###(serenitas) from its sedative 
or anodyne effect. This impertinent 
jumble of stuff was afterwards called 
Theriaca, from the Greek word ###Greek omitted###, fera,
a wild beast, being an antidote against the 
invenomed bite of mad or poisonous 
|P_35
animals. This notable hodge-podge is 
also to be found even in the last edition 
of the London Dispensatory; and, what 
is more extraordinary, there are, I am 
told, some physicians who continue to use 
these theriacas in their prescriptions: 
with what intention is best known to 
themselves. 

55. If the inventors of theriacas had 
any ideas at all, they probably thought 
that, in so great a number of ingredients, 
it was possible some one of them might 
hit the mark they aimed at, for the same 
reason that sportsmen prefer a number of 
small shot to a single bullet; but I am 
rather inclined to think them the inven-
tion of some arch apothecary's apprentice, 
who had a mind to try what sort of a 
medicine he could produce by jumbling 
together every drug in the shop. Be their 
origin however what it might, they are 
certainly the oldest antidotes upon record, 
and, from the proportion of opium they 
contain, might possibly alleviate the 
spasmodic symptoms incidental to the bite 
of a viper, or of a mad dog. 

|P_36
56. Dioscorides wrote a treatise on the 
Theriaca, in the second chapter of which 
he recommends, as a medicine that might 
be depended on for the bite of a mad dog, 
two spoonfuls of the ashes of the river crab, 
with half the quantity of gentian, to be 
taken in a large glass of wine.[/27./] Galen 
prescribes the same medicine, with the 
addition of a small quantity of frankin-
cense: the crabs he burnt alive in a copper 
dish, after the rising of the star Sirius,
when the sun was in the constellation 
Leo, and on the eighteenth day of the 
moon. This invaluable secret he learnt 
from old Æserion the emperic, who, being 
Galen's master, must have lived cotem-
porary with Dioscorides, and might pro-
bably be the inventor of this infallible 
medicine, for so it was esteemed by these 
physicians. 

57. Dr. Mead is of opinion that this 
remedy is recommended by the ancients 
upon rational grounds, because it is a 
diuretic; For (says he) the surest reme-
dies in all ages against this venom have 
been such as provoke a great discharge 
by urine. Reflecting on this circum-
|P_37
stance, this Esculapius of his times, con-
ceived the great idea of recommending to 
the world his infallible Pulvis Antylissus,
which, at the doctor's request, was ho-
noured with a place in the London 
Pharmacopoeia.

58. Whence did Dr. Mead conclude 
that this powder of calcined river crabs, 
or crawfish (for such he supposes them to 
have been) would promote a great discharge 
of urine? He certainly thought that this 
calcination, like the incineration of vege-
tables, would produce an alkaline salt. 
If he had possessed the least degree of 
chemical knowledge, he would have 
known that the animal itself would burn 
to a mere earth, totally inert, and that its 
shell would be converted into quick lime, 
of which consequently, with a very small 
proportion of earth, this specific must 
consist. 

59. Dr. James's chemical knowledge 
appears to have been not much inferior to 
that of Dr. Mead, whom he thinks to-
tally wrong in translating the ###Greek 
omitted### of Dioscorides, and Galen, River 
Crawfish. He is clearly of opinion, and 
|P_38
takes some pains to prove, that these 
authors meant a species of river crab, and 
not crawfish. Dr. James prudently ob-
serves, that we ought to be very accurate 
in our quotations from ancient authors, 
"lest the medicine recommended be 
mistaken for something that may not 
possess the same virtues." This is 
doubtless a wise observation; but any 
chemist's boy would have told him, that 
the virtues, whatever they may be, of a 
calcined crawfish, crab, or oister, are 
exactly the same; that all shells are calca-
rious earth, and consequently burn to 
quick lime, in no respect different from 
that produced by the calcination of chalk, 
lime-stone, or marble. But, that Dr. 
James, as well as Dr. Mead, supposed that 
this calcination of river crabs produced an 
alkaline salt is evident from the following 
passage. Speaking of this powder, he says — "I believe it may have some efficacy in 
preventing the canine madness,[/28./] though 
none that can be depended upon. This 
opinion is founded on its being an 
highly alkaline substance; and all or 
most of the pretended specifics for this 
distemper are alkaline, and destroyers of 
|P_39
acids; as the celebrated pancake made 
of oister-shells, mentioned by Dessault, 
Armenian Bole, Tin, and many other."
These last words put the doctor's skill in 
chemistry quite out of doubt. 

60. But, as we can hardly suppose that 
Dioscorides and Galen ventured to give 
their patients two spoonfuls of quick lime, 
it is probable that they did not calcine 
these crabs, or crawfish, sufficiently to 
convert the shells into lime, though long 
enough to dissipate the volatile parts of 
the animal. On this supposition this 
specific powder becomes a mere absorbent 
earth, a pulvis è chelis cancrorum, possessed 
of no diuretic virtue; yet Galen pro-
nounces it infallible.[/29./]

61. The next diuretic antidote of the 
ancients, "recommended (as Dr. Mead 
thinks) upon rational grounds," is the 
Spongia Cynorrhodi, sponge of the dog-
rose, "Which (says the Doctor) is so 
celebrated an antidote, that P. Boccone,
who has written a whole discourse upon 
its virtues, tells us it is called in Sicily 
Sanatodos, or All-heal." We also in 
this country have a common plant dig-
|P_40
nified with the same name, and equally 
insignificant in its medical capacity. These 
panaceas are generally good for nothing. 
But Dr. Mead ranks this gall of the briar 
among his animal diuretics, because Mr. 
Ray found it to be the nidus of a fly.— 
"Now (says the Doctor) all insects 
abound with a diuretic salt."—If the 
lie direct were admissible in polite conver-
sation, I would say, this is not true. But 
I marvel exceedingly that he did not ob-
serve that this Sanatodos of the Sicilians is 
called in England a Dog-rose, because it 
produces a medicine for a mad-dog: also, 
that he forgot to inform his readers, that 
this celebrated antidote originated in the 
dream of an old woman, as he must have 
read in Pliny. 

62. Dr. Mead, after specifying, from 
the ancients, other diuretics, which cer-
tainly are not diuretics, proceeds to the 
recommendation of his infallible Pulvis 
Antilyssus, which he declared never failed 
of success, though he had used it a thou-
sand times. "I have often wished (adds 
the Doctor) that I knew so certain a 
remedy in any other disease."—Surely 
|P_41
such testimony, from so great a physician, 
must be more than sufficient to establish 
the infallibility of any medicine beyond 
all suspicion: and yet two greater men, 
Boerhaave and Van Swieten,[/30./] are of opinion 
that it is good for nothing; and Dr. James 
assures us, that "it has been given,[/31./]
without success, to a great number of 
people and animals in many parts of 
the kingdom."

63. This infallible Pulvis Antilyssus is 
prescribed by Dr. Mead in the following 
words— "Take of the herb called, in 
Latin, Lichen cinereus terrestris, in 
English, Ash-coloured ground-liver-
wort, cleaned, dried, and powdered, 
half an ounce; of black pepper pow-
dered, two drachms. Mix these toge-
ther, and divide the powder into four 
doses, one of which must be taken 
every morning fasting for four morn-
ings successively in a pint of cows 
milk."—I have now before me a 
London Dispensatory with manuscript 
notes by my worthy friend Dr. Longfield, 
a physician deservedly distinguished for 
his sound judgement, and extensive me-
|P_42
dical knowledge. On the blank leaf op-
posite to the Pulvis Antilyssus, he wrote— 
"This is Dr. Mead's famous powder: it 
is most certain that it never cured one 
person bit by a mad dog."

64. A moderate share of experience in 
the medical powers of plants is sufficient 
to determine à priori the virtue of this 
Lichen, which, together with the rest of 
its tribe, discovers no other sensible qua-
lity than a slight degree of astringency, 
and therefore can have no other effect than 
what may be expected from any other 
medicine, astringent in the same degree; 
unless we admit the doctrine of specifics, 
to which Dr. Mead would doubtless have 
objected, being himself a sectator of the 
mechanical Belini.[/32./] — Insipidæ et inodoræ 
vim medicam vix exercent, is an aphorism 
of Linnæus. "This rule (says Dr. Cullen) 
seems to be without exception; and it 
is on this account, and not on any 
proper experience, that many plants 
are expunged from the Materia Medica,
as having no taste or odour which should 
point out in them any active quali-
ties."—After such evidence, we may, 
|P_43
I think, justly proceed to the condemna-
tion of the infallible Pulvis Antilyssus.

65. But Dr. Mead, in order to con-
vince the world that he had not adopted 
this medicine without proper scientific 
investigation, informs his readers, that he 
examined the Lichen cinereus terrestris by 
distillation, and that the result of his ana-
lysis was, some acid water, some oil, and 
some coal that contained fixt salt. A 
bunch of docks, of nettles, of thistles, 
or of any other common weed, would have 
yielded the same. This sort of analysis 
can be of no use in discovering the medi-
cal virtues of plants. The receipt to make 
this celebrated Pulvis Antilyssus was first 
brought to England by Captain Dampier, 
who called the plant Jew's Ear (Tremella 
auricula of Linnæus) a kind of ash-coloured 
fungus, which is frequently found on the 
trunks of old trees. But it seems Sir 
Hans Sloane was of opinion that the Cap-
tain was mistaken; that he certainly meant 
the ash-coloured Liverwort, which, on the 
authority of so great a naturalist, was ac-
cordingly adopted. Is it not probable 
from this history, that, in rejecting the 
|P_44
original Jew's Ear, Dr. Mead seized the 
ear of the wrong sow? 

66. The next infallible medicine I shall 
examine is that which, about thirty years 
ago, was brought from Tonquin by Sir 
George Cobb, when he returned from the 
East Indies. It consists of native and 
factitious Cinnabar each twenty-four 
grains, with sixteen grains of Musk, 
powdered and mixt well together. This 
dose is to be taken in a glass of Arrack 
once only, and repeated after an interval 
of thirty days The absurdity of making 
any distinction between native and factiti-
ous Cinnabar, which are precisely the same 
thing, is too obvious to need a commen-
tary: it proves, however, the ignorance of 
the Chinese old woman who probably 
invented the medicine, and of all those 
who in prescribing this powder have con-
tinued to observe the same ridiculous dis-
tinction. But, in the composition of this 
specific, there is another absurdity of more 
importance. All the cinnabars, whether 
native, factitious, or of cinnabar of anti-
mony, are mere powder of post; abso-
lutely inert. 

|P_45
67. "Factitious cinnabar (says Dr. 
James) is made of three parts of mer-
cury to one of sulphur; and,[/33./] as I re-
member, a pound of good native cin-
nabar yields near fourteen ounces of 
fluid mercury; and therefore it seems 
that the good effects of this medicine 
ought to be principally, if not entirely, 
ascribed to mercury."—Dr. James, hav-
ing resolved to sport a preparation of mer-
cury as the only specific for canine mad-
ness, was quite satisfied with this sort of 
reasoning: but we must come nearer to 
the point. 

68. Native cinnabar is the ore of mer-
cury; that is, mercury mineralized by 
sulphur, in the proportion of about six, 
seven, or eight parts of the former to one 
of the latter.—Sulphur possesses the singu-
lar property, in combination with mer-
cury or antimony, of rendering both these 
violent metallic substances inactive. It is 
particularly well known of antimony that 
it is more or less mild in proportion as 
the regulus is combined with more or less 
sulphur. This chemical fact Dr. James 
must have known, if he had understood 
|P_46
the process for making his own fever-
powder. But mercury, before it can ex-
ert its stimulant power, must not only 
be completely extricated from the sulphur 
with which it formed cinnabar, but must 
afterwards be divided by trituration, or 
dissolved in a mineral acid. Now, the 
only means of decomposing cinnabar is by 
fire, in, what is called by chemists, the 
dry way. In the human body, therefore, 
it is impossible; but if we could suppose 
the mercury actually separated from the 
sulphur, not being dissolved by a mineral 
acid, or otherwise divided, it would still 
remain in a state of total inactivity: a 
priori, therefore, cinnabar may be pro-
nounced inert. 

69. But, lest the advocates for this 
Tonquin medicine should deem this sort 
of philosophical argument inconclusive, 
let us take the opinions of a few eminent 
chemists on the subject.[/34./]—Dr. Cullen, in 
his Lectures on Materia Medica, speaking 
of mercurial preparations, says— "Crude 
mercury, and the combination in cin-
nabar and Æthiops mineralis, to which 
may be added Æthiops antimonialis, in 
|P_47
so far as it contains mercury, can only 
by accident, or indirectly, prove medi-
cines."—"Triturated with sulphur,[/35./]
mercury becomes an inert substance. 
This I could determine à priori,whe-
ther it was in the form of Æthiops 
mineral, or native or factitious cinna-
bar."—Dr. Lewis in his Dispensatory 
tells us, that "cinnabar, like Æthiops,[/36./]
is inactive."—Cartheuser, having given a 
large quantity to a dog, says, that it pro-
duced no sensible effect, but that part of 
it passed through the intestines unaltered, 
and that the remainder was found in the 
stomach and bowels.—Dr. Longfield, 
whom I have before mentioned, wrote the 
following note on the article cinnabaris 
factitia in the Pharm. Col. Reg. Med. 
Londinensis—"It is a shame that the cin-
nabars are not totally exploded: they 
have not the least title to the character 
of nervous medicines; they are both 
inert."—But it were unfair to conceal 
from the reader, that a famous German 
chemist of the last century was of a dif-
ferent opinion. He considered cinnabar 
as an efficacious medicine, and ascribed its 
virtue to its beautiful colour, with which 
|P_48
Archeus is so charmed as to neglect the 
disease which he was employed in exiting; 
for it seems this Archeus, this creature of 
Van Helmont's distempered brain, is won-
derfully delighted with the colour red. 

70. In answer to all this reasoning à 
priori, I shall be told, that experience is 
the only test, and that the instances upon 
record, of the hydrophobia being cured 
or prevented by the Tonquin powder are 
innumerable. In reply to this answer— 
First, there are examples upon record of 
persons having died of the hydrophobia 
after taking it, particularly in two cases 
related in the London Medical Obser-
vation:[/37./]Secondly, many other medicines, 
equally infallible and equally extolled, 
have deservedly sunk into contempt: 
Thirdly, no attestation of facts will con-
vince a rational being that an effect was 
produced without a sufficient cause: now, 
a substance which is demonstrably inert 
can produce no effect in an animal body, 
and therefore can cure no disease. 

71. Cinnabar being thus, I think, 
fairly dispatched, if there be any anti-
|P_49
dotal power in the Tonquin medicine, it 
must be attributed to to the antispasmodic 
virtue of the musk: Dr. James ascribes it 
to its alkaline quality— "Musk (he tells 
us) is an animal substance, and conse-
quently of an alkaline nature; and as 
alkalies have in all ages been recom-
mended in this case, it seems at least to 
be not prejudicial."—This is damning 
musk with faint praise. But what did 
the Doctor mean by ascribing to it an 
alkaline quality because it is an animal 
substance? Had he forgot that animal 
matter wants the assistance of fire to pro-
duce alkali? If every species of animal 
matter be an alkaline medicine, the parings 
of his own nails would have done as well. 
Musk, however, is doubtless a powerful 
antispasmodic, and for that reason may be 
of service in the hydrophobia.

72. This Tonquin powder is ordered 
to be taken in a glass of Arrack, doubtless 
with no other intention than to cover the 
taste of the musk. This vehicle, how-
ever, suggests an idea, which, though I 
may think it extravagant, I will commu-
nicate. Suppose, when the symptoms of 
|P_50
the fatal disease in question first appear, 
previous to the difficulty of swallowing 
liquids, the patient were to drink to in-
toxication of any strong liquor he may 
chuse. Who, without trying it, will 
pretend to circumscribe the antispasmodic 
effect of this remedy? It is certainly not 
contra-indicated by any febrile or mani-
acal symptoms. In a forlorn hope no at-
tempt can be too extravagant. It will at 
least answer one good purpose: I mean 
that of relieving the patient from several 
hours of the most horrid anxiety that can 
possibly be conceived. 

73. I now beg leave to call the reader's 
attention to the mercurial preparation so 
strenuously recommended by Dr. James 
in his Treatise on Canine Madness. It is 
called Turpith mineral; it is a precipitate 
of mercury from its solution in the Vitri-
olic acid, by which it was not only dis-
solved but calcined. Whether it be a pure 
calx of mercury, without any adhesion of 
vitriolic salt, is a matter of dispute among 
chemists of the first reputation. Monsieur 
Baumè declares positively,[/38./]que, ce precipitè 
est absolument privé de toute acide, lorsqu'il 
|P_51
a été lavé à plusieurs reprises dans de l'eau 
bouillante—Nevertheless, from the effect 
of the medicine, I presume he is mistaken. 
It is a very rough mercurial, fit only for 
dogs, to which animals Dr. James seems 
to have given it with success. As to its 
effect on the human species, he produces 
no more than one single case of a patient 
bit by a mad dog, and cured under his 
own immediate care by Turpith mineral, 
He relates, indeed, three or four other 
cases in support of his specific, on the 
authority of persons of his acquaintance; 
but hear-say evidence in this case, as in 
courts of justice, is inadmissable.—Dr. 
Raymond,[/39./] physician at Marseilles gave 
seven boluses, containing each four grains 
of Turpith mineral, to a patient bit by a 
mad dog: the patient died. 

74. The Ormskirk medicine, which in 
many parts of this kingdom, particularly 
in the North, is deemed infallible, ap-
pears, from the report of Dr. Black and 
Dr. Heysham,[/40./] to consist of,[/41./]Powder of 
chalk, half an ounce; Armenian bole, three 
drachms; Allum, ten grains; Powder of 
elecampane root, one drachm; Oil of anise,
|P_52
six drops.—Now, though the chemical 
enquiries of these gentlemen may not be 
admitted as proof positive, yet when the 
result of experiments made by two able 
chemists, at different times, is precisely 
the same; when a medicine composed of 
the supposed ingredients has the same 
colour, taste, and smell, we have the 
strongest presumptive evidence that our 
conjectures are well founded; especially, 
when there is no discoverable difference 
between the effect of the real and sup-
posed composition. 

75. As to the medical virtues of the 
ingredients above-mentioned, they are suf-
ficiently known.—Chalk is a mere absor-
bent earth, without any other power than 
that of destroying the acid it may meet 
with in the primæ viæ, and, during the 
effervescence, of producing a little calca-
rious gas, commonly called fixt air.— 
Armenian bole, such as is generally sold 
by the druggists, is nothing more than a 
lump of pipe-clay, coloured with a little 
red ochre or rust of iron.[/42./]—Allum is an 
|P_53
astringent, and nothing more.—Elecam-
pane-root hath been generally ranked 
among the Alexipharmics; it is said to 
assist expectoration, and, in large doses, to 
act as a diuretic and cathartic: it is, how-
ever, in no estimation, and in so small a 
dose, mixt with the other ingredients, can 
produce no effect.—As to the six drops of 
oil of aniseed, I presume their efficacy, in 
the present case, will hardly be insisted 
on. 

76. Possibly I may be told, that, though 
these several ingredients, separately taken, 
may possess no extraordinary medical 
powers, yet, like other compounds they 
may, when united, form a medicine of 
considerable virtue.—I acknowledge that 
a powerful medicine may be formed by a 
judicious combination of simple ingre-
dients, prescribed on chemical principles; 
but I am very certain, that an ignorant 
jumble of chalk, clay, allum, and elecam-
pane, will form nothing but an hetero-
generous mass of dirt, that may do harm, 
but cannot possibly do good in any disease 
whatsoever. 

|P_54
77. But, say the advocates for the Orm-
skirk powder, what signifies reasoning 
against facts? Are there not a thousand 
examples of the hydrophobia prevented 
by taking this medicine? Would the sa-
gacious inhabitants of the northern coun-
ties have such faith in a mere ignis fatuus?
—Far be it from me, to doubt the sa-
gacity of the northern counties: they are 
by no means singular in mistaking shad-
dows for realities. All quack-medicines, 
and more than half the medicines used 
in regular practice, are ignes fatui. What 
are all the vaunted panaceas, theriacas,
antidotes, and specifics, but ignes fatui,
deceptions, chimeras? 

78. The several specifics above consi-
dered have all successively had their day of 
infallibility, and have all been equally 
supported by experience, the true test of 
medical virtue: that is, a number of 
people bitten, or supposed to be bitten, 
by dogs supposed to be mad, have taken 
the Ormskirk, or any other infallible 
powder, and have escaped the hydro-
phobia. But in the London Medical Ob-
servations,[/43./] &c. we have, on the authority 
|P_55
of Dr. Fothergill, an incontestable proof 
that the Ormskirk medicine is not infal-
lible: Mrs. Bellamy, who was bit by a 
mad cat, took it, and "conformed to 
the directions given by the vender in 
every respect," yet died of the hydro-
phobia about four months after, as, I 
make no doubt, would all the patients 
that ever took the Ormskirk medicine, if 
they had been really infected by the canine 
poison. 

79. This censure I do not confine to the 
Ormskirk, nor yet to any of the medi-
cines above-mentioned: it comprehends 
every prophylactic remedy taken inter-
nally. Can any thing be more absurd 
than to imagine, that a disease received 
into the body by inoculation; a poison 
absorbed by the lymphatic veins, and 
mixed with the general mass of circu-
lating fluids, can be destroyed by a medi-
cine taken into the stomach? Is there any 
analogy in the history of physic to autho-
rize such expectations? Will any powder, 
pill, or bolus, stop the progress of the 
small-pox by inoculation, or prevent it 
from taking effect? Was there ever a phy-
|P_56
sician weak enough to attempt to prevent 
any other infectious disorder, after the 
poisonous liquid or miasmata were actually 
absorbed? 

80. Having thus, I hope not unfairly, 
considered the pretensions to infallibility 
of the specifics introduced and recom-
mended by particular men, we are come 
at last to that sovereign remedy extolled 
by every writer on canine madness, ancient 
and modern, and used in all countries, in 
every age, from the days of Celsus to the 
present moment—I mean bathing in cold 
water. To this part of our subject I beg 
the reader's particular attention, because I 
am very certain that many lives have been 
lost by a foolish dependence on this broken 
reed. I have said that all writers on 
canine madness, ancient and modern, have 
recommended cold-bathing; but I must 
except Dr. Falck, the author of The 
Seaman's Medical Instructor, and Dr. Fo-
thergill, who wrote a paper in the London 
Medical Observations,[/44./] purposely to prove 
the inefficacy of bathing in the sea. 

81. The physician last mentioned was 
of opinion, that the practice of bathing 
|P_57
in salt-water, as a preservative, originated 
in a mistake. Celsus directs the patient,[/45./]
actually labouring under the hydrophobia, 
to be thrown unexpectedly into a fish-
pond: if he cannot swim, he is to be 
suffered to flounce and drink, raising him 
a little now and then, so as to keep him 
from drowning; but, if he can swim, he 
is to be frequently ducked, that in spite 
of himself he may be satiated with water: 
"Thus (says Celsus) his thirst and dread 
of water will be cured at the same time."

82. Celsus was mistaken in supposing 
that he could force the patient to drink 
by holding him under water, or that, 
after being half drowned, he would look 
on water with less horrour, or swallow 
liquids with greater ease. The latter part 
of this discipline is daily practised, by the 
old women at the watering places, on the 
wretched creatures that are sent by old 
women, male and female, from the inland 
country. This practice of drowning the 
patient in order to cure him of an aversion 
to water, absurd as it is, was probably 
taken from Celsus, who, though a sensible 
|P_58
man, possibly without experience or much 
reflexion, prescribed it on the authority 
of some Greek writer; but why the sea 
was substituted for a fish-pond, and how 
it came to pass that what Celsus ordered 
as a cure for the hydrophobia actually 
present, should be applied as a prophy-
lactic, a preservative remedy, is difficult 
to conceive. 
