
|P_
[}PREFACE. }]
THERE are two very different methods 
of curing the Gonorrhœa, the one 
wholly by internal medicines, the other 
principally by injection. The former is 
generally a very uncertain and disagreeable 
process, the latter is both expeditious and 
safe, but dreaded by many persons on ac- 
count of a false idea which has long pre- 
vailed. This ill founded notion it is my 
business at present to confute by several 
arguments supported by quotations from 
Authors of distinguished credit. 

Mr. Pott recommends the advice given 
by Lord Bacon to a student, "to consider 
one disease at a time, and to become tho- 
roughly acquainted with that, before he 
|P_iv
undertakes another." He further observes, 
"that the only means by which true and 
useful knowledge is to be obtained in 
every part of surgery, are a competent 
knowledge of the anatomical structure of 
the human frame, a close attention to 
the symptoms of diseases in the living, 
and a minute examination of the appear- 
ances in the dead: these are the great foun- 
tains of all medical knowledge." Mr. Pott
has here pointed out, in a very judicious 
manner, the path which every chirurgical 
practitioner and writer should pursue, who 
undertakes to explain the true nature, 
seat, and cure of any bodily disorder. 

Chancery-Lane, 
January 1, 1783. 

|P_
[}TABLE OF CONTENTS. }] Page 
TREATISE on the Gonorrhœa. 
 1 
On the Cure by internal Medicines. 10 
Particular Observations on Nitre. 12 
Injections strongly recommended. 17 
Objections to them answered. 18 
On the Difference between Pus and Muens. 20 
Brief Account of the Remedies used for the Cure 
of the Lues. — 25 
A Critical Enquiry into the different Methods of 
administering Mercury. — 29 
Objections to Mercurial Pills, &c. — 37 
— to Mercurial Ointment. 41 
A Recapitulation of the Argument, with addi- 
tional Observations. — 45 
|P_[^A horizontal triple-line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}A 
TREATISE 
on the 
GONORRHOEA. }][^A long horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
THE part principally affected by the 
Gonorrhœa is the penis, which con- 
sists of three parts; two of which are called 
corpora cavernosa, and lie on each side, 
and a third, which is situated underneath, 
named corpus spongiosum urethræ, con- 
sisting of the bulb and membranous part, 
continued on to the bladder, and termina- 
ting at the other extremity in the corona, 
or glans penis. The urethra has three 
glands, which were discovered by Cowper, 
and called mucous glands, from the tena- 
city of the liquor which they separate. 
There are also two, (or rather one,) about 
the size of a nutmeg, they lie at the neck 
|P_8
of the bladder, between the vesiculae semi- 
nales and penis, under the ossa pubis, al- 
most within the pelvis of the abdomen; 
they separate a limpid glutinous humour, 
which is carried into the urethra by several 
ducts, which enter near those of the pro- 
statae The two first of Cowper's glands 
are about the bigness of a French bean, of 
a depressed oval figure, and a yellowish 
colour like the prostatæ, being on each 
side the bulb of the urethra, a little above 
it. Their excretory ducts arise from the 
internal surface next the inner membrane 
of the urethra, into which they open a little 
lower by two distinct orifices, just below 
the curvature of the ossa pubis in perinæo, 
where they discharge a transparent viscous 
liquor. The third mucous gland is a 
small conglobate yellowish gland, like the 
former, but somewhat less, situated above 
the angle of the flexure of the urethra, un- 
der the ossa pubis, in the perinæum, near 
the anus: it has two excretory ducts, which 
enter the urethra obliquely, a quarter of an 
inch below the two former, and discharges 
a liquor like them both in colour and con- 
sistence. 

The seat of the Gonorrhœa in women is 
the vagina, which is affected with a dis- 
|P_9
charge like that of the urethra in men. It 
lies between the bladder and intestinum 
rectum, and has rugæ, under which are 
small glands, whose excretory ducts are 
called lacunæ. These glands separate a 
mucilaginous slimy liquor to lubricate the 
vagina, and are the seat of the Gonorrhœa 
in this sex, as the glands in the urethra are 
in the male. The meatus urinarius being 
a very short passage, the heat and scalding 
is consequently much less than in the men. 

A Gonorrhœa from the urethra in a 
man, begins with an uneasiness about the 
parts of generation, together with an ap- 
pearance of a little whitish matter, about 
the orifice of the urethra, a little swelling 
and sometimes redness there, and a slight 
pungency upon the evacuation of urine. 
The whitish matter soon increases in 
quantity, the inflammation about the 
end of the urethra becomes more evident, 
and for the most part there is now a ten- 
sion and hardness through the whole of 
it, a swelling of the lacunæ, and a sen- 
sation of stricture in the penis, particu- 
larly on erection. The matter still in- 
creases, flows out, and grows thinner, 
loses all its adhesiveness, and is of a 
yellow, or greenish colour. There is 
|P_10
now always a redness about the end 
of the canal; often a pain from the dis- 
tention of the urethra, during the eva- 
cuation of urine, and a much severer to- 
wards the orifice, from its stimulus, with 
an increase of the redness just after it is 
evacuated. The inflammation prevents 
the extension of the urethra in erection, 
so that the penis is at that time curved 
downwards with great pain, which is in- 
creased if it be raised towards the belly, 
and the stimulus occasions it often to be 
erected, especially when warm in bed [/1./]. 

I believe it would generally be esteemed 
good practice on this occasion to give nitre 
in considerable quantity, a purging elec- 
tuary, pill, or salts, and to take blood 
freely from the patient; also to direct large 
quantities of diluting liquors, and further to 
recommend a strict regimen and abstinence 
from particular meats, vegetables, and 
strong liquors. The question is, are such 
medicines and restriction necessary? In 
my humble opinion they are not, and 
they appear, upon the whole, to do more 
harm than good, as I shall endeavour to 
demonstrate from the experience of those 
|P_11
who are well qualified to give an opinion in 
a matter of this kind, and also from my 
own observation and practice. 

Dr. Cullen remarks, "that purgatives 
not only inflame the rectum, but also extend 
their irritation to the urethra. " May not 
chordee and priapism then often be attri- 
buted to this cause? 

Dr. Fordyce recommends "increasing 
the secretion a little, by such gentle pur- 
gatives as procure only two or three evacu- 
ations a day. "—But who can ensure his 
patient two or three stools only in a day? 
The intestines being once put into motion, 
will not accommodate themselves exactly 
to our wish or convenience. Happily for 
the patient, it is certain that even gentle 
purging may be dispensed with on these 
occasions. 

He adds, "that severe purging often 
augments the inflammatory symptoms, 
brings on strangury and exulcerations, gives 
occasion to inflammation of the testicles, 
and other neighbouring parts, or it stops 
the running before the infection is washed 
off, and the Gonorrhœa either returns in a 
few days, or exulcerations take place. "

The Doctor further observes, "that long 
continued purging is apt to weaken the 
|P_12
stomach and intestines, to hurt the di- 
gestion, to produce obstinate gleets, and 
leave hypochondriacal symptoms, particu- 
larly in irritable or melancholic habits. "

Many more authorities might be adduced 
in proof of the bad effects of a course 
of purgatives in these cases, which are 
generally of considerable duration, when 
treated in this manner. Neither are anti- 
phlogistic remedies to be depended upon, 
as they sometimes produce the very contra- 
ry effect to what was expected from them: 
amongst the first of these is nitre, in inflam- 
matory disorders. Dr. Lewis, a late writer 
of no small credit, reckons, that nitre often 
gives relief in stranguries, and heat of urine, 
proceeding either from a simple or a vene- 
real taint; and indeed the greatest part of 
practitioners have always given it, and still 
continue to give it in the venereal ardor 
urinæ. 

This practice, however, says Dr. Hope
in his lectures on the Materia medica, I 
am apt to believe has taken its rise from 
the name of ardor having always been 
given to the pain in evacuating the urine, 
during the time of a venereal inflamma- 
tion of the urethra, and the name and 
virtues of a cooler, having always been 
|P_13
attributed to this salt. But it is certain 
that the urine passed during the time of 
a venereal inflammation is no warmer 
than at other times, and therefore to 
prescribe a cooler to allay the heat of it, 
is absurd: and I am persuaded, that on 
a free and candid examination of this 
matter, it will be found, that nitre has 
not the smallest power of alleviating the 
pain which is then felt; for I have given 
it in all the different stages of this disease, 
in small and in large doses; but from 
the sole use of it in a great number of trials, 
have never been able to observe that it 
afforded the least relief. Nor, when we 
consider the cause of that pain, and the 
effects of nitre, have we any reason to 
expect it; for the pain certainly proceeds 
from the acrid salts in the urine, stimu- 
lating the inflamed or excoriated urethra; 
and a solution of nitre applied to any ex- 
coriated part always gives considerable 
pain. Experiments assure us, that on 
taking nitre into the stomach, the urine 
becomes impregnated with it. The larger 
therefore the doses are, the stronger will 
this impregnation be, and the greater 
stimulus added to the urine; so that we 
may sensibly conclude, that this salt will 
|P_14
rather augment than diminish the pain in 
evacuating it. The Doctor further re- 
marks, that there are many weak and 
delicate stomachs which cannot bear 
the cold it produces, and others in 
whom it always creates sickness and 
nausea. 

Besides the disagreeable circumstance of 
taking great quantities of nauseous me- 
dicines, we find there is the greatest un- 
certainty as to their real effects on the 
diseases they are intended to remove. A 
powder or medicine of any kind, applied to 
blood in a bason, may visibly affect that 
fluid, and render it thin or thick; yet 
being taken into the stomach, and possibly 
from thence into the circulation, it may 
have a very different effect on the circula- 
ting fluids, or perhaps none, having un- 
dergone a material alteration in its course. 

A late celebrated Lecturer on the Mate- 
ria Medica, discoursing with his pupils on 
the powerful operations of mucilaginous 
medicines in the alleviation of the pain 
arising from the stone in the bladder, re- 
marked that such medicines were extremely 
useful where the stone was of the mulberry 
kind, and apt to vellicate the coats of the 
bladder. He told them the ropy mucilage 
|P_15
would envelope the stone, and make a uni- 
formly smooth surface, entirely depriving 
it of its asperities, and consequently of its 
power of hurting the bladder. 

It is difficult for one conversant with the 
mechanism of the human body, and the 
operation of medicine, to conceive, that a 
mucilage given by the mouth will arrive 
at the bladder in that state. We are cer- 
tain that particular remedies will stimulate 
particular parts: balsam of capivi, for in- 
stance, being absorbed, is known to af- 
fect the kidnies and bladder, by the strong 
odour it imparts to the urine; but we do 
not find this, or any other medicine, ex- 
cept quicksilver, will pass off in the same 
form in which it is administered by the 
mouth. This balsam is very much esteem- 
ed for its great virtues, particularly in cer- 
tain stages of the Gonorrhœa, but it is so 
very disagreeable, on account of its oily 
and bitter quality, as well as its smell, that 
some patients are soon disgusted with it, 
and others will not be prevailed upon to 
take it at all; we cannot therefore think 
it strange, that many gentlemen should 
often prefer injections to all other means, 
which do not appear to produce effects in 
any degree equal to the trouble which at- 
|P_16
tends them. It must be acknowledged 
that patients often suffer more from the 
remedy than the disorder; they are often 
more emaciated, weak, and pallid in their 
countenance, (circumstances which fre- 
quently lead to disagreeable discoveries,) 
from the operations of purgatives in the 
space of one week, than they would have 
been in a month, if there had been no 
attempt made to check the progress of this 
disorder. 

There are many people who have not 
leisure to pursue the several directions and 
prescriptions given by practitioners; and 
if they could find time, they would have 
but little inclination to undergo so much 
fatigue and trouble. Such tedious pro- 
cesses are very ill contrived for the mul- 
titude, who must be, and are daily cured by 
means much more easy, expeditious, and quite 
as effectual; and if one class of men are 
cured in this manner, why should not all 
enjoy the same benefit? 

I have asserted, that a regimen, or par- 
ticular diet, is not necessary in the cure of 
the Gonorrhœa, when treated in the man- 
ner here recommended. Some have asked, 
if the disorder is not inflammatory, and if 
living low is not indispensibly necessary 
|P_17
in every complaint of this kind? It may 
be said in reply, that this is a local inflam- 
mation, which yields at once to a cooling 
detergent liquid applied to the part; whilst 
internal medicines are commonly slow and 
uncertain in removing it.—When mercury 
does not pass into the stomach, there is no 
occasion to enjoin restrictions with respect 
to diet, since no disagreement can then 
happen; patients may live in the same 
manner as at other times, only avoiding 
excess. 

Dr. Hugh Smith, who is an advocate for 
vitriolic injections, asserts, "That a Go- 
norrhœa, if taken in the beginning, may 
generally be cured in a fortnight, without 
any injuty to the constitution, or any ill 
effects whatsoever [/2./]. "

I have met with the greatest success in 
the cure of this complaint from the same 
sort of injections, and find they answer 
much better than mercurial ones, which 
deposit a considerable sediment, and being 
conveyed into the urethra, cause irritation 
and pain in that tender passage. 

The injection should be applied cold, 
rather than warm, (as cold braces and 
|P_18
warmth relaxes,) which I find often com- 
pletes the cure in much less than a fort- 
night, the time mentioned by the Doctor. 

If the injection causes any more than a 
slight sensation of smart or pain in the pas- 
sage, it is evidently too much impregnated 
with vitriol, and the solution must be made 
weaker, as the irritation of the liquor would 
increase the symptoms instead of diminish- 
ing them. 

The great objection to this sort of prac- 
tice is raised on the supposition that In- 
jections are apt to produce stricture in the 
urinary passage, This idea, I apprehend, 
is not well founded; having enquired of 
many different people who have been 
troubled with strictures, if they had used 
injections for the cure, and was generally 
answered in the negative.—I am much 
inclined to think with Doctor Fordyce, 
"That when a gonorrhoœa continues long, 
it sometimes produces a stricture in the 
part. " Inflammation is naturally dispo- 
sed to produce contraction and stricture in 
the different sacculi and passages of the 
body, as well as in the urethra: therefore 
we may conclude, that evils are often at- 
tributed to Injections, which in fact owe 
|P_19
their origin to other causes [/3./]. The same 
gentleman justly observes, that omitting 
the injection once or twice will often make 
it fail of curing, when it would have other- 
wise produced that effect [/4./]. He likewise 
remarks, that patients treated in this man- 
ner, are less liable to inflammation of the 
testicles, or of the glands in the groin (or 
to chancres) or strictures. These observa- 
tions are certainly founded on fact. It is 
the general opinion, that small doses of 
mercury ought to accompany the Injection. 
See Fordyce, Saunders, Smith, and others.— 
Conformably to this idea, I give a grain of 
mercurial powder, and apply it to the cu- 
ticular surfaces of the lips, or the tongue, 
and at the same time make use of the vi- 
triolic, in preference to every other Injection. 
Though I have made repeated trials of se- 
|P_20
veral, I know of no other which would 
remove the disorder in twice the time which 
this does; but there are some that would 
not succeed at all, and rather aggravate the 
symptoms. 

It is now proved by a repetition of in- 
genious experiments, and generally admit- 
ted, that the discharge in a Gonorrhœa pro- 
ceeding from the urethra, is not pus, but 
mucus. Pus is the matter which proceeds 
from wounds and ulcers, but mucus comes 
from surfaces not ulcerated, though some- 
times inflamed. Dr. Hunter says, he has 
often dissected the urethra of persons who 
have died, having the Gonorrhœa at that 
time, and he adds, that he never disco- 
vered any ulcer in the passage. Mucus is, 
in itself, an innocent, mild fluid, but ca- 
pable of acquiring virulence and acrimo- 
ny from contagious infection. 

The Gonorrhœa is an increased and 
virulent discharge from the mucous glands [/5./]
of the urinary passage. Mucus, when 
untainted, is transparent like the white 
of an egg, appears as a drop sometimes 
at the orifice of the urethra next the 
glands, is of a mucilaginous viscidity, and 
its use is to sheathe and defend the passage 
|P_21
from the irritating salts conveyed in the 
urine. It resembles the fluid in the eye, 
which is secreted in small quantity, but 
when the lachrymal gland is stimulated by 
grief, dust, or other offending substance, 
the discharge becomes copious and some- 
times acrid. 

Darwin observes, in his experiments 
on pus and mucus, "That whenever 
the secretion of any fluid is increased, 
there is at the same time an increased 
heat in the part. " The same gentleman 
observes, that "the catarrhal humour 
from the nostrils of some who ride in 
frosty weather, and the tears which run 
down the cheeks of those who have an ob- 
struction of the puncta lachrymalia, are 
easily distinguished from others, by their 
abounding in ammoniacal or muriatic salts, 
whence they inflame the circumjacent skin: 
thus in the catarrh, the upper lip becomes 
red and swelled from the acrimony of the 
mucus, and patients complain of the salt- 
ness of its taste. The eyes and cheeks are 
red with the corrosive tears, and the ichor 
of some herpetic eruptions erodes far and 
wide the contiguous parts, and is pungent- 
ly salt to the taste, as some patients have 
informed him. "

|P_22
When the mucous membrane of the 
nose is stimulated by a violent cold, or 
other cause, we often see an extraordinary 
quantity of discharge from that organ; 
yet no one suspects the existence of any 
ulcers there, and I have often observed, 
that the discoloured mucus of that part 
bears so strong a resemblance to the viru- 
lent discharge in the gonorrhœa, that it 
would frequently perplex persons conver- 
sant in these matters to distinguish two 
handkerchiefs, the one from the other, when 
stained with the respective mucus. Either 
of these fluids having acquired acrimony 
will inflame, and sometimes slightly exco- 
riate irritable nervous membranes. These 
excoriations generally heal of themselves, 
and when they do not, no one hesitates 
to apply repellent and healing medicines 
to the part, without even the smallest 
suspicion of any bad consequence. With 
ulcers the case is very different, there 
being the greatest reason to apprehend 
danger from the absorption of matter into 
the circulation. Writers of good credit 
assert, that a drop of acrid pus, absorbed 
into the blood, affects all the fluids, stimu- 
lates the vessels, and is capable of produ- 
cing violent disorders, such as putrid fe- 
|P_23
vers, &c. Impressed with such a belief, 
no thinking man, in this or any age, 
would adopt a practice at once so irrational 
and dangerous: but as the discharge is 
merely mucus, and has no concern with the 
system or animal œconomy, it may be safely 
washed away, like any other sordes, or filth 
from the surfaces of the body, by injec- 
tions, which are not only far more expedi- 
tious in producing their effects, but also 
appear, on a due comparison of the merits 
of each, to possess another advantage, that 
of being a more cleanly, safe, and agreeable 
method of cure, than any other whatsoever. 
I have only to add in this place, that I am 
confirmed more and more in the use of in- 
jections, which entirely answer the above 
description and commendation. 

|P_25
[}A 
BRIEF ACCOUNT 
OF THE 
REMEDIES in USE for the CURE 
of the 
LUES VENEREA, 
from its 
First Appearance in Europe. }]
THE cure of this disorder, which has 
now prevailed all over Europe near 
three centuries, has not been so much im- 
proved by the profession as might have 
been expected during so long a period. It 
raged for several years uncontrouled, be- 
fore an effectual remedy for it was disco- 
vered. After the antidote for this poison 
was found to exist in mercury, yet still 
so very unfortunate was the applicat on
of it, that many lives were lost by sa- 
livations, shocking to relate, in conse- 
|P_26
quence of the want of sufficient know- 
ledge of the nature and qualities of this 
mineral, in the practitioners of those 
times. 

"The first attempts of the cure of vene- 
real maladies, by this remedy, were learned 
from the Arabians, who having recom- 
mended mercurial ointments in the Leprosy
or scabies, gave a handle to the Italian
physicians, to try their efficacy in removing 
the foulness of the skin from a new and ter- 
rible contagion: neither were they sparing 
of their liniments, which they continued 
to rub in for twelve, fifteen, nay, some- 
times for above thirty days together [/6./], " a 
very dangerous practice, which prevails too 
much even in the present age. Sarsaparilla, 
 sassafras, guaicum, have all at different pe- 
riods been in more or less estimation for 
their antivenereal virtues; but mercury is 
the only antidote for this poison, on which 
any age has reposed an entire confidence. 

In 1685, Dr. Sydenham wrote on this 
amongst other subjects. His account 
shews, that although the use of the re- 
medy was better understood, yet the cure 
of the disorder was but little improved. 

|P_27
In 1731, Dr. Turner, a member of the 
College of Physicians in London, who had 
made the Venereal Disease his particular 
study, thought proper to communicate his 
observations and practice to the world. His 
drastic purges, and mercurial prescriptions, 
were such as might destroy the most robust 
constitution; what then must have become 
of those of a weak and delicate frame? 

Dr. Boerhaave has advanced a system of 
his own, apparently less detrimental than 
former ones, and which has been very 
much adopted of late years. The Doctor's 
theory of the disease is, that it is seated in 
the fat; therefore evacuations which de- 
stroyed it, must, in his opinion, contri- 
bute greatly to the cure of this disorder; 
for which reason the Doctor recommended 
the most powerful sudorifics and purga- 
tives, the former of which though hurt- 
ful, are less prejudicial to the constitution 
than the latter. 

Dr. Astruc, a celebrated writer, has given 
a very sensible and accurate description of 
the Lues Venerea in all its stages, with di- 
rections for its cure; but the remedies are 
as violent as those recommended by pre- 
ceding writers, and ought therefore to be 
exploded. 

|P_28
Baron Van Swieten recommends The Cor- 
rosive Sublimate to be given internally. It 
had hitherto only been used externally to 
fungus in wounds, on account of the vio- 
lence of its nature. Even when admini- 
stered in rum or brandy, to correct it, the 
stomach can seldom retain it, for which 
reason it has grown into disrepute, although 
it has a most astonishing and rapid effect in 
removing venereal symptoms. 

Mr. Professor Plenk advises the giving 
Quicksilver with gum arabic, to prevent 
it from exciting a salivation. This is the 
least prejudicial of all the modes of admini- 
stering mercury internally. 

Fumigation, which is lately revived, 
I have often seen applied to sores with hardly 
any perceptible advantage, and sometimes 
it gave great pain, and did a manifest in- 
jury. 

Two circumstances have conduced great- 
ly to the better treatment of this complaint, 
within these twenty or thirty years; I 
mean, the extraordinary improvements in 
anatomy and chymistry: by the former 
we have acquired a better knowledge of 
the seat of this disorder, and by the lat- 
ter, of the medicines employed to effect it's 
cure. 

|P_29
[}A 
CRITICAL ENQUIRY 
into the 
OPERATION of MERCURY, 
and the different 
Modes of administering it considered. }][^A long horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
DIFFERENCE of opinion prevails 
with regard to the mode of admini- 
stering mercurial preparations; the advo- 
cates for each, giving their reasons for that 
which they adopt in preference to any 
other. The alterative method is much in 
esteem and practice, and with some devia- 
tion and caution may be rendered very 
beneficial. 

This appellation of alterant or alterative 
is given to all such medicines as correct the 
|P_30
bad qualities of the blood, and other animal 
fluids, without occasioning any sensible evacu- 
ation. According to Dr. Woodward, all 
that is commonly alledged concerning the 
change of principles or ferments of dis- 
eases by alterant remedies, is merely chi- 
merical and imaginary; he remarks, that there is no change made to the advantage of the human body without a successive renovation and discharge of what is hurtful, and a supply of its place by something in- 
nocent. 

The Doctor gives the preference to eva- 
cuants, as being the only medicines ca- 
pable of freeing the machine from whatever 
incommodes it. Some take a contrary 
course, and ascribe even the salutary ef- 
fects of evacuants to their alterative nature, 
which has been alledged of mercury in the 
cure of the venereal disease. Among alte- 
rant medicines there are several which 
change the scene of the symptoms, and 
others which suspend the action of the mor- 
bific matter for a time; but these reme- 
dies which hold the morbific principles 
captive pro tempore, are only palliatives, 
and even on some accounts dangerous, 
since they may as well captivate other prin- 
ciples necessary to lise. 

|P_31
Dr. Fordyce says, "Whatever prepara- 
tion we employ, we should give it in such 
a manner, and in such a dose as to pro- 
duce hardness, fullness, and moderate fre- 
quency of the pulse, with as little sensible 
evacuation as possible; for that the mercury 
cures sooner, and with greater certainty, 
when the strength is but little, than when 
it is much reduced by it. "

Mr. Plenck is of opinion, "that mer- 
cury, together with the venereal virus, 
may be more conveniently and more easily 
evacuated by the ordinary excretions of 
sweat, stool, and urine. "

It seems to me much more safe to per- 
mit the gradual evacuation of mercury 
(after it has circulated some time, and sub- 
dued the virus) than to confine it within the 
body by opiates, or other means, so as to oc- 
casion hardness, fullness, and acceleration of 
the pulse. The saturation or surcharge 
of the system with mercury is very ha- 
zardous, as it sometimes terminates in a 
fatal diarrhæa. Surely it is most prudent 
to permit a little of the mercury to depart, 
and throw into the circulation such a pro- 
portion only, as may be altogether safe and 
|P_32
yet sufficient to keep up a gentle mercurial 
stimulus in the habit. 

Mercury and wine operate somewhat 
alike upon the body. With a certain 
quantity of wine, hardness, fullness, and 
acceleration of the pulse will supervene, 
till at length in common an evacuation 
takes place; when it does not, and the 
wine is retained there, (like mercury ex- 
hibited as an alterative), it excites feverish 
heat, and does the constitution much more 
injury than when it passes off gradually by 
any of the ordinary evacuations. 

Dr. Fordyce observes, "it is never ne- 
cessary to salivate a patient, unless he be so 
irritable, that the smallest dose of mercury 
immediately affects his mouth, or unless 
the disease be proceeding so fast that it 
would be hazardous to wait till it was 
checked by the remedy given in such a 
manner as to avoid salivation; or except- 
ing when we cannot trust to his using it 
regularly. On the contrary, salivation ren- 
ders the effects of the medicine uncertain. "
The same author says, "If, notwithstand- 
ing these precautions, a salivation should 
come on, we know of no remedy which 
will remove it with any degree of certainty, 
|P_33
although sulphur, camphire, and purga- 
tives have been recommended for this pur- 
pose. If therefore the case be urgent, the 
best way is to let it go on, using the mer- 
curial ointment as above described. "[/7./]


I have ever found those patients more 
easily cured, who were most susceptible of 
the mercurial stimulus. Let there be an 
affection of the mouth and cheeks, and an 
amendment of the complaint takes place at 
least nine times in ten; the mercury will 
run off in general very soon if the process is 
discontinued, which it must not be, but 
the tenderness of the mouth is to be kept 
|P_34
up to a certain degree, according to the 
urgency of the disorder, and to prevent a 
relapse, especially in chancres with hard- 
ness, and in other inveterate cases. It is 
not the mere quantity of mercury, but the 
method of directing its operation, which in 
my opinion is the chief circumstance to be 
relied on in the cure. I would certainly 
run the risk, if there was any, of not imme- 
diately curing, rather than expose my pa- 
tient to the hazard of a large quantity of 
accumulated mercury ready at an hour's 
notice, or less, to emancipate itself from 
the body by stimulating the intestines, and 
thus exhausting life. 

We may be amused with the theory of 
mercury circulating in the system in perfect 
equilibrium, not inclining more to one se- 
cretion than to another; but it is certain, 
this is a powerful medicine that ought not 
to be trifled with; we cannot say to it—So 
far shalt thou go, and no further. The 
most skilful pilot will find it difficult so to 
trim his vessel that it shall not sink or over- 
turn when too heavily laden with mercury. 

The ingenious Plenck, (to whom the 
world is so much indebted for the great im- 
provements he has made by his experi- 
ments on mercury, and in the cure of this 
|P_35
disease) says, that a salivation is a danger- 
ous practice; for the famous Astruc, says 
he, asserts that there frequently supervene, 
violent fevers, diarrhæa, dysentery, hæ- 
moptoe, an immobility of the jaws, and 
likewise a suffocation, and that too, when 
a salivation has been most properly con- 
ducted; and after him the most skilful 
Locher tells us the same.— 

Several years since a practitioner had 
the misfortune to lose (within a short time 
of each other) two patients with chancres, 
for the cure of which he had raised very 
high salivations by mercurial ointment. 
Just as their complaints were healed, and 
salivation began to decline, one of the 
 gentlemen was seized with a dysenteric flux, 
and expired within a few hours: his death 
was attributed to a piece of butter which 
the nurse had inadvertently put into his 
gruel. The other died also of a flux, 
arising from the sudden descent of the mer- 
cury overturning the equilibrium, and rush- 
ing through the patient's bowels with irre- 
sistible impetuosity.— 

To form a just idea of a salivation, we 
should perambulate the public hospitals, 
where there are wretches miserable indeed! 
|P_36
miserable in having a sad disease, but much 
more so in having a cure to encounter 
which makes the unhappy objects call on 
death for a deliverance from their pains. 
Their head, face, and tongue so swelled, 
as to forbid their uttering a syllable. Their 
cheeks often torn to pieces, a salivary flux 
of two or three quarts a day, with breath 
extremely offensive, teeth loose, tongue and 
gums ulcerated and inflamed, attended with 
a severe unremitting head-ach; and this 
process is the same in all cases and seasons: 
it may truly be said, such remedies are 
worse than the diseases they are intended 
to remove. But this is not all the pa- 
tient has to undergo; add to this, fre- 
quent severe cholicky pains, accompa- 
nied with diarrhæa and dysentery, which 
continuing, so often prove fatal. The 
patient can swallow no solid food during 
this severe operation, and indeed scarcely 
liquids, and is almost dead with hunger, 
having often an appetite without the pos- 
sibility of indulging it. Thus are per- 
sons confined for several weeks, and when 
the process is finished, they are so re- 
duced in flesh, as to be quite a spectacle, 
and frequently go into a deep decline.— 
|P_37
If these evils may be prevented, and that 
they may, we have daily experience added 
to the strongest testimonies, are we not 
all called upon by every motive of con- 
science, religion, and humanity, to preserve 
the unhappy from ruin, by rejecting so 
cruel a practice? 

Graviora morbis patimur remedia; 
Nec Vita tanti est, vivere ut possis, mori. 

If the surgeons who superintend the hos- 
pitals would make a trial of my me- 
thod, I am convinced from experience, 
they would be able, without annoying the 
stomach, to convey any quantity of any 
mercurial preparation into the system in 
few hours, instead of weeks. This may be 
done by rubbing mercury on the back and 
middle of the tongue, and repeating the 
process at the shortest intervals. There is 
no occasion to wait for its operation as in 
the case of pills, but we may safely stimu- 
late these surfaces as much and as often as 
we chuse, till we have actually produced 
the desired effect on the system. Let the 
mouth be well cleared of the saliva, and 
I know of no other impediment to the 
success of this process. Dr. Home, profes- 
sor of physic at Edinburgh, has honoured 
me by making a variety of public experi- 
|P_38
ments in the Edingburgh Infirmary, which 
will soon appear in the Doctor's intended 
publication. By these experiments it is 
proved, that mercury is more quickly in- 
troduced, with greater certainty, and with 
less prejudice to the constitution in this way, 
than by any of the other modes of admini- 
stering it internally or externally. 
[^A long horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
[}Objections to Mercury in the Form of Pills, 
Bolus, &c.}]
WITH respect to Pills, it is certain 
that many patients find a difficulty 
in taking them. First, it is hardly pos- 
sible so to distribute the mercury through- 
out the mass, that there shall not be some 
difference and uncertainty in the dose when 
divided into pills; and secondly, they 
sometimes pass through the body undis- 
solved. When they dissolve, they irritate, 
perhaps corrode, the stomach, an organ 
most essential to health. This circum- 
stance has excited universal complaint and 
dread of mercury, which however being 
administered in my method, is so very 
|P_39
mild, that it does not in the least impair 
the constitution, as the surface on which 
the mercury is laid, will bear a consider- 
able degree of irritation without any sort 
of prejudice. [/8./]
[^A long horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
The saline chrystals of mercury velli- 
cate and twitch the sensible membranes 
of the stomach to that degree, as excites 
them to an excretion of their contents 
and glandular juices upwards or down- 
wards, according as the force of irrita- 
tion is greater or less. —Mead on Poi- 
sons, 

Of all the various modes of admini- 
stering mercury, that which you recom- 
mend seems to me the most safe, and 
I have no doubt but it will likewise be 
found the most efficacious. A false opi- 
nion has long prevailed, that every me- 
|P_40
dicine ought to be taken into the sto- 
mach: this has done much mischief. 
Many people have such an aversion to 
medicines of all kinds, that they will 
suffer any thing rather than swallow a 
single dose. Others have such a debility 
of the Viscera, that though they can 
swallow mercury, yet it tears their sto- 
mach and bowels to pieces. Of this 
every medical practitioner must have 
seen many instances. There are few 
persons who have been so unfortunate as 
to take large quantities of this mineral 
in the usual way, who do not exhibit 
melancholy proofs of its baneful effects 
on the stomach and bowels. By your 
mode of administering mercury, these 
effects are obviated, while it is much 
more cleanly and agreeable than the 
common method of applying it to the 
skin. —Extract from Dr. Buchan's
Letter. 

Dr. Hunter observes, "that this process 
is preferable to pills or boluses, as the ca- 
lomel stimulates the primæ viæ much less, 
and therefore he adds, people with very 
tender bowels may bear it much better in 
this form than any other. " Therefore it is 
|P_41
best for all constitutions, as every person 
has most undoubtedly tender bowels. 

Dr. Krohn, in his letter to me mentions 
the case of a gentleman, "who had a vi- 
rulent chancre on the frœnum, of which he 
was cured in a fortnight by this process, 
without the smallest inconvenience; on the 
contrary, he found his bowels perfectly free 
from any attack on them, the usual atten- 
dants on former methods of treatment, 
which he had frequently experienced pre- 
vious to this trial. "

"How many originally, vigorous, de- 
duce their present weak bowels, and crazy 
constitutions, from the mischiefs occasioned 
by the action of the Mercury on the primæ 
viæ. "—Mr. Cruikshank's Letter. 

After ample trial of all the different mer- 
curial preparations in common use, I find 
that any of them may be safely and expe- 
ditiously conveyed into the system from the 
surfaces of the mouth, and that those of the 
most subtle and active kind are equal to 
the cure of the most confirmed disease. 
Their stimulating quality supplies the place 
of friction, which is only necessary when 
any of the milder preparations are em- 
ployed. 

|P_42
[}Objections to Mercurial Ointment. }]
The friction of Mercurial Ointment 
is to many people one of the most dis- 
agreeable things in the world. It's 
leaden colour, contrasted with the skin, 
makes it look dirty. It has a particu- 
larly offensive smell, independent of that 
of the turpentine, or balsam of sulphur, 
which may have been employed in extin- 
guishing the quicksilver. From the cir- 
cumstance that half an hour's friction, 
or even that of a whole hour, if ever so 
well performed, will not commonly ef- 
fect a total absorption of the ointment, 
the skin is generally left a little smeared 
with it: after the process is over, as it is 
oily it does not evaporate, or dry readily, 
and will easily stick to whatever it 
touches. Patients are obliged to sleep in 
flannel drawers to prevent the ointment 
from getting through and daubing the 
bed clothes. They must be frequently 
changing these drawers, constantly wash- 
ing the skin; or, as washing off the oint- 
ment would retard rather than forward 
the cure, they must remain dirty for six 
weeks, or perhaps three months toge- 
ther; and if by accident any part of the 
|P_43
ointment gets upon their linen, from 
it's colour it is very apt to give the 
alarm in families, and lead to disagree- 
able discoveries. 

Mr. Cruikshank's Letter. 

Dr. Manning, in his Practice of Physic, 
on the subject of my mercurial process ob- 
serves as follows; "By this method we 
not only avoid the inconveniencies of unc- 
tion, but the purgative effects that are 
often produced by mercury when taken in- 
to the stomach. "

With respect to a regimen in the treat- 
ment of the Lues, abstinence and low 
living certainly retard the cure. Persons 
afflicted with this distemper, are much sub- 
ject to despondency, and living more freely 
now than at other times, raises the spirits 
of the patient, and contributes to his cure 
by co-operating with the medicine; there- 
fore I shall continue to recommend that 
practice, at the same time should object as 
strongly as any other practitioner, to every 
indulgence that might be prejudicial. It 
has been said, that people under a course of 
mercury cannot be kept too warm, which 
is true only when the mercury affects the 
|P_44
stomach or bowels, or greatly opens the 
pores of the skin; but from the very 
mild operation of mercury on the system in 
my method, patients are exposed to all 
weathers, without injury to the constitu- 
tion. 

Dr. Krohn on this subject says, "this 
mode agrees better with people who are 
debauchees, having had essential proof of 
this assertion in a patient who drank all 
kinds of strong liquors, was scarcely ever 
in bed for a week together, till break of 
day, and was much exposed to cold damp 
air. "
[^A long horizontal line in the middle of the page. ^]
[}A Recapitulation of Objections to the common 
Methods of administering MERCURY, 
accompanied with some new Observations, 
and conveying a short and pointed View of 
the Whole. }]
ALues is a venereal infection in the 
mass of blood; and is to be cured by 
throwing a sufficient quantity of mercury 
into the system to expel it. 

|P_45
There are many ways of conveying mer- 
cury into the circulation of the blood. 

The usual methods are by pills, bo- 
luses, and draughts, and also by outward 
application of mercurial ointment. 

The first three are conveyed by the 
mouth into the stomach, where the mer- 
curial particles are in part absorbed by 
the lymphatic vessels of that organ, and 
conveyed into the blood; also by the same 
vessels in the intestines, and frequently the 
greatest portion of the mercury escapes out 
of the body by this outlet, having first irri- 
tated the animal œconomy throughout the 
whole of the canal. 

Mercury may be prevented from passing 
downwards by joining opium with it, which 
takes off its stimulus, and generally pre- 
vents its purgative effects; but this often 
creates sickness and reaching, and shakes 
the whole nervous system. 

Two grains of mercury taken up into the 
blood by the mouth, will produce as power- 
ful an effect on the system, as twenty grains 
thrown into the stomach, on the pre- 
sumption that eighteen of the twenty make 
their exit downwards: we reckon only 
what gets into the system, for what pas- 
ses through, is lost, and certainly better 
|P_46
had never been given. The stomach re- 
sembles a sink with a grate in it, and is not 
constructed to retain mercury. 

Mercurial ointment cures by being taken 
up into the blood by the absorbents of the 
external skin, and when introduced there, 
by operating on the whole vascular system, 
and expelling the venereal poison by the 
different secretions and excretions of the 
body. 

The objections to this mode of practice 
are, First, that it is dirty and disagreeable; 
that it is commonly slow and tedious: that 
it requires too much labour for persons 
in a weak state, and if the friction is per- 
formed by other hands than their own, that 
one half of the ointment, or more, must in- 
fallibly be lost to the patient, and may 
prove very injurious to the party who ap- 
plies it. 

Mercurial ointment affects the stomach 
or bowels, and brings on purging; inso- 
much that it is not uncommon for patients, 
both in public and private practice, to die 
under a course of unction, of violent cho- 
lics, accompanied by sanguinary and other 
fluxes, and this happens by the quantity of 
mercury absorbed proving an overbalance 
for the constitution. 

|P_47
Practitioners do not accurately know 
what quantity of mercury may be given, 
and what quantity of it will take effect, as 
different constitutions require different doses. 
Five grains of mercurial ointment will take 
more effect on one subject, than fifty on 
another; after using it ten or fifteen days 
successively, no visible effect may be pro- 
duced on the constitution; yet, on the 
eighteenth or twentieth, a salivary flux may 
commence, and continue for a fortnight 
or three weeks, and the patient's strength 
become exhausted. At this juncture should 
a diarrhæa unfortunately take place, it 
carries off the patient in a few hours, not- 
withstanding all the endeavours of the most 
skilful of the faculty. 

I have made use of such arguments 
as have occurred to me in behalf of this 
new method, and have advanced nothing but 
what my repeated experience doth fully 
warrant. If the ideas of other practitioners 
do not coincide with mine, I shall be 
happy to see their avowed and printed sen- 
timents on this important subject, divested 
of prejudice and delivered with candour. 

Should it be asserted that this method 
sometimes fails, let not that declaration pre- 
vent the trying it, as this may be urged 
|P_48
against all medical practice, and often, no 
doubt, with the greatest injustice. 

It is said that this process, by shorten- 
ing the cure and lessening the medicines, 
will diminish the fee. The profession need 
not object to it on that account, as they 
are paid, not for their medicine, this being 
no object, but for their skill and judge- 
ment. Patients of liberal dispositions will 
always be pleased with dispatch and make a 
handsome return: and others will find their 
interest also in behaving in the same equi- 
table manner. 

FINIS. 
