

[^Sample 1:  book - ^]

|P_
A 

TREATISE

ON THE

 Theory and Practice

OF

MIDWIFERY. 

By W. SMELLIE, M. D. 

A NEW EDITION.

 to which is now added, His

SET OF ANATOMICAL TABLES, 

exhibiting

The Various CASES that occur in Practice, 

 Accurately engraven on

FORTY COPPERPLATES; 

with explanations. 


[^A long horizontal line.^]
IN THREE VOLUMES. 
[^A long horizontal line.^]

VOL. I.

[^A horizontal line that is thicker in the middle. ^]

EDINBURGH: 
Printed for C. ELLIOT, Parliament-Square. 
[^A short horizontal line.^]
M. DCC. LXXXIV. 
|P_
|P_
|P_63
[^A long horizontal line, spanning the whole page.^]
[}CHAP. II. }]
[}Of the external and internal Parts of Generation 
proper to Women. }]
[}Sect. I. The external Parts and Vagina. }]
THE Mons Veneris is situated at the 
upper part of the Pubes, from which al-
so begin the Labia Pudendi, stretching down 
as far as the lower edge, where the Frænum 
Labiorum or Fourchette is formed. 

The Clitoris with its Præputium is found 
between the Labia, on the middle and fore-
part of the Pubes; and from the lower part 
of the Clitoris, the Nymphæ rising, spread 
outwards and downwards to the sides of the 
Os Externum, forming a kind of sulcus or 
furrow, called the Fossa Magna or Navicularis, 
for the direction of the Penis in coition, or 
the finger in touching, into the Vagina. See 
Collect. II. No 1, 2. 

The Meatus Urinarius is immediately below 
|P_64
the under edge of the Symphysis of the Ossa 
Pubis, and at the upper part of the Os Exter-
num, which is the orifice of the Vagina, si-
tuated immediately below the said bones of the 
Pubes: the lower edge of which bones is 
equal to the lower edge of the Frænum or 
Fourchette, which bounds the inferior part of 
the Fossa Magna and Os Externum, restraining 
it as if with a bridle. 

The Perinæum extends from this border to 
the Anus, being about one inch or one and an 
half in length: the wrinkled part of the Anus 
is about three quarters of an inch in diameter; 
from thence to the Coccyx the distance is 
about two inches: so that the whole extent 
from the Fourchette to this bone amounts to 
about four inches, or four and a quarter. 

What remains of the lower part of the Pel-
vis is covered and filled up with the integu-
ments, adipose membrane, and the muscles cal-
ledLevatores Ani; while within these are 
contained the muscles belonging to the Clito-
ris, mouth of the bladder, Os Externum, and 
Anus. See Tab. IV. 

In young children, there is a thin membrane 
called the Hymen, extended over the lower 
part of the Os Externum, representing the fi-
gure of a crescent; the concave and open side 
being turned towards the Meatus Urinarius. 
In some, the middle of this concave is attached 
to the lower part of the Meatus, forming two 
small openings; nay, in some adults this mem-
brane has entirely shut up the entrance of the 
Vagina, so that they have been altogether im-
|P_65
perforated; but, when broke, it recedes, and 
forms the Carunculæ myrtiformes. See Col-
lect. II. No 3. 4. 5. 

On each side of the Meatus Urinarius are 
two small lacunæ or openings, the tubes of 
which, ending in a kind of sacculus, come 
from the prostrate gland: from these a thin 
fluid is ejected in time of copulation, and that 
from some women with considerable force; and 
sometimes, though seldom, to the quantity of 
several drachms. 

The Urethra in women is about one inch and 
an half in length. The Vagina is formed of a 
strong thick membrane, of a spongy texture, 
more contracted in virgins than in married wo-
men. When stretched to its full extent, it may 
be about five, six, or seven inches long, and 
two in width, according to the difference of 
stature in different women: but, when the 
Uterus hangs down in the Vagina, the length 
will not be more than two or three inches; 
and it may be stretched with the finger to the 
wideness of three or four. The inside of it, in 
young women, is full of rugæ, folds or wrin-
kles, which are partly obliterated in those who 
have born children. The upper end of the Va-
gina is joined to the circumference of the lips 
of the Os Uteri, which resemble the mouth of 
a puppy or tench; and a thin expansion of 
this membrane, being reflected inwards, co-
vers the exterior part of these lips, which in 
virgins are smooth and of an oval form. It is 
also continued along the inside of the Uterus, 
constituting the internal membrane of the neck 
|P_66
and Fundus, which is likewise full of plicæ, 
especially in young subjects. See Tab. V. VI. 

As to the different names of those parts, 
the book of Schurigius, published at Dresden 
in the year 1729, may be consulted. The en-
try of the Vagina is commonly called the 
Sphincter Vaginæ, and the mouth of the womb 
is often distinguished by the appellation of Os 
Tincæ: but, as the mention of these parts will 
frequently occur in the course of this treatise, 
I shall, in order to avoid confusion or mistake, 
call the first Os Externum, and the other Os 
Internum, through the whole book. 

[}Sect. II. Of the Uterus. }]
THE Uterus is about three inches long 
from the Os Internum to the upper part 
of the Fundus, and one inch in thickness from 
the fore to the back part. It is divided into 
the Neck and Fundus; the length of the neck 
being an inch and three quarters, while that 
of the fundus is one inch and one quarter. 
The width of the Uterus at the neck is about 
one inch, but at the fundus twice as much. 
The Uterus is smaller in young women. 

The outside-shape of the Uterus in some 
measure resembles a flattened cucurbit, or 
that kind of spear which hath a long neck. 

The canal or entrance from the Os Inter-
num to the cavity of the Fundus Uteri, will 
admit a common director; being a little wider 
in the middle, and more contracted at the up-
per end. 

|P_67
The cavity of the Fundus, is in point of fi-
gure something between an oval and tri-
angle: one of the angles commencing at the 
upper end of the foresaid canal, and the other 
two expanding the sides of the Fundus, from 
which arise the Fallopian tubes. These tubes 
are about three inches long; and so narrow at 
their entrance from the Uterus, as scarcely to 
admit an hog's bristle; but the cavity of each 
turns gradually wider, and ends in an open 
mouth or sphincter, from the brim of which 
is expanded the Fimbria or Morsus Diaboli, 
that generally bears the likeness of jagged 
leaves, and in some resembles an hand with 
membranous fingers, which is supposed to 
grasp the Ovum when ripe and ready to drop 
from the Ovarium. 

The Uterus is formed first of the inside 
membrane that rises from the Vagina, and 
lines all the interior part of the womb: imme-
diately above this coat is the thick substance of 
the Uterus, composed of a plexus of arteries, 
lymphatics, veins, and nerves; and the ves-
sels on its surface, when injected, seem to 
run in contorted lines. It appears to be of the 
same glandular texture (though not so com-
pact) as that of the breasts, without any mus-
cular fibres, except such as compose the coats 
of the vessels: neither is there any necessity 
for that muscle which Ruysch pretended to dis-
cover at the fundus, for the convenience of 
forcing off the placenta; because this cake as 
frequently adheres to other parts of the womb 
as to the fundus. 

|P_68
The substance of the Uterus appears more 
compact and pale than that of muscles; or if it 
be muscular, at least the fibres are more close, 
and more intricately disposed, than in other 
muscular parts. The blood-vessels of the womb, 
in the virgin or unimpregnated state, are very 
small, except just at their approach to its sides, 
at the roots of the Ligamenta lata: But, as 
soon almost as they enter its substance, they are 
dispersed into such numbers of smaller branches 
through the whole, that, when it is cut, we can 
observe but few, and those very small, orifices, 
much less any cavities that deserve the name of 
sinuses. Indeed, when this part is minutely 
injected, it seems to be almost nothing but 
a mass of vessels; a circumstance common to 
it with other parts of the body: And anato-
mists are agreed, that the greater number of 
vessels visible in such nice injections, are those 
thro' which the serum or lymph of the blood 
circulates in the living body; whence the er-
ror loci in an Ophthalmia is imitated by subtile 
injections of coloured matter into the arteries 
of the dead subject. See Tab. V. 

When the Uterus stretches in time of gesta-
tion, the vessels are proportionably dilated by 
an increase of the fluid they contain: so that, 
at the time of delivery, some of them are capa-
cious enough to admit the end of the little fin-
ger. Yet the substance of the womb, for the 
most part, instead of growing thinner, as Mau-
riceau alleges, or thicker, according to Da-
venter, continues its natural thickness du-
ring the whole term of pregnancy; and this 
|P_69
equality is maintained by the gradual disten-
tion of the vessels that enter into its composi-
tion. In time of labour, indeed, as the wa-
ters are discharged, the Uterus contracts itself 
and grows thicker; and the resistance ceasing 
at the delivery of the child and after-birth, it 
becomes smaller and smaller, until it has near-
ly resumed its natural dimensions. See Col-
lect. III. No. 1. 2. Tab. IX. XII. 

For, as the Uterus contracts itself after par-
turition, the arterial blood cannot flow into it 
in the same quantity as that with which the 
vessels are filled in their state of distention. The 
fluids are gradually emptied into the Vena Ca-
va Ascendens, but chiefly through the mouths 
of the vessels that open into the cavity of the 
womb; and the vessels themselves that were 
stretched, elongated, and seemed to recede 
from one another, are also contracted by de-
grees, and that in such a direction as to re-
duce the Uterus into the same shape and size 
which it bore before impregnation: nay, the 
fibres are again so compacted, that they, and 
even the vessels, are scarce discernible. 

The Vagina on its outside is covered with a 
thick adipose membrane: by means of which 
it is on the fore-part attached to the lower part 
of the bladder, and on the back-part to the 
lower end of the Rectum and Anus; and by 
the same means all these parts are connected 
with the Peritonæum, or internal surface of the 
Pelvis. 

The Uterus is contained in a duplicature of 
the Peritonæum, which covers it every where 
|P_70
above, and is connected with its substance by 
a very thin cellular membrane; as for the Pe-
ritonæum in itself, it is a smooth membra-
nous expansion, that covers all the inside of 
the Abdomen, and gives external coats to all 
the Viscera contained in that cavity. On the 
fore-part it lines the muscles of the Abdomen 
and Diaphragma; backwards, it covers the 
abdominal Viscera in general, the Aorta and 
and Vena Cava Descendens, the kidneys, ure-
ters, and spermatic vessels, the external and 
internal Iliacs, the Psoas and muscles that co-
ver the inside of the Ilium, whence it rises 
double, and forms the Ligamenta Lata, in 
which are contained the Ovaria and Fallopian 
tubes. This dublicature, where it meets in the 
middle, invelops all the Uterus, as before ob-
served, and gives a covering to the round li-
gaments that rise from each side of the Fun-
dus Uteri, and are inserted or lost about the 
upper and external part of the pubes and groin. 
The Peritonæum is also reflected from the fore-
part of the Uterus over the upper part of the 
bladder: and upon the back-part of the Ute-
rus it descends even upon the Vagina, from 
which it is again reflected upwards over the 
Rectum. By these attachments, especially the 
broad and round ligaments, the Uterus is kept 
between the Vesica Urinaria and Rectum, loose-
ly suspended in the Vagina, within two or three 
inches of the Os Externum; the Epiploon and 
intestines occupy the upper and fore part of 
the Pelvis, by which means the Uterus is pres-
sed downwards and backwards to the lower 
|P_71
and concave part of the Sacrum. (See Tab. 
V. fig. 2.) As the Vesica Urinaria fills and 
stretches with Urine, the Viscera are raised: 
but as the bladder is emptied, they return; 
and this is the reason that the Os Uteri is com-
monly felt backwards towards the Os Coccygis. 
Sometimes it is found tilted to one side; at 
other times forwards towards the Pubes, and 
the Fundus pressed low down on the back-part. 
The Os Uteri is also higher or lower according 
as the ligaments are more or less lax or tense. 
In coition, the Uterus yields three or four 
inches to the pressure of the Penis, having a free 
motion upwards and downwards, so that the 
reciprocal oscillation, which is permitted by 
this contrivance, increases the mutual titilla-
tion and pleasure. See Tab. V. 

The ligaments undergo no extraordinary 
extension in time of uterine gestation, because 
they sink down two inches with the Uterus in 
an unimpregnated state; and when the Fun-
dus rises, they will be raised, at the same time, 
to the height of not only these two inches, but 
as much more, without being stretched in the 
least: Besides, as the Uterus rises still up-
wards, the sides of it approach the Ilia, from 
whence the broad ligaments take their origin; 
and this circumstance is equal to an acquisition 
of three inches more: So that, upon the whole, 
these ligaments seem to be very little stretched, 
even in the last month of pregnancy. 

|P_72
[}Sect. III. Of the Ovaria, Vessels, Ligaments, 
and Fallopian Tubes. }]
THE Ovaria are two small oval bodies, one 
of which is placed behind each Fallopian 
tube; supposed to be little more than a clus-
ter of Ova, whence they derive their present 
name: for, by ancient authors, they are men-
tioned by the appellation of the female testi-
cles. Each Ovarium is about one inch in 
length, half as broad, and one quarter of an 
inch in thickness; more convex on the fore 
than on the back part, of a smooth surface, 
covered with the Peritonæum. See Tab. V. 

The blood-vessels are, first, the Spermatic 
Arteries and Veins, which have nearly the same 
origin as those in men, are mostly distributed 
upon the Ovaria and tubes, and at the upper 
part of the Uterus communicate with the hy-
pogastrics; from the branches of which the 
body of the womb is furnished. All these ar-
teries anastomose, and are supposed to detach 
small ramifications that open into the cavity of 
the Uterus. The veins are large, communi-
cate one with another, with the Hæmor-
rhoidals and Vena Portarum, and have no 
valves. 

The Ligamenta Rotunda are two vascular 
ropes composed of veins and arteries inclosed 
in the duplicature of the Ligamenta Lata; 
seemingly arising from the crural artery and 
vein, from whence they are extended to the 
sides of the Fundus Uteri. 

The nerves come from the Intercostals, 
|P_73
Lumbares, and Sacri; as described in Boer-
haave's Institutes, and Winslow's Anatomy. 

[^A long horizontal line, spanning the whole page.^]
[}CHAP. III. }]
[}Sect. I. Of the Catamenia and Fluor Al-
bus, in an unimpregnated State. }]
THE Uterus, according to some, and all 
the parts subservient to generation, arrive 
at full growth about the age of fifteen: The 
vessels are then sufficiently dilated, and those 
that end in the cavity of the womb, so di-
stended with blood, that their mouths are 
forced open, they empty themselves gradually, 
and for that time the Plethora in the Uterus 
and neighbouring parts is removed. 

Several ingenious theories have been crect-
ed, to account for the flux of the Menses; 
particularly by Doctors Friend, Simpson, and 
Astruc: the two last of whom, with many 
others, allege, that there are sinuses in the 
Uterus, furnished with side-vessels opening 
into its cavity; which sinuses are gradually 
stretched by the blood they receive from the 
arteries, until the fourth or beginning of the fifth 
week, when the lateral vessels are forced open, 
and the accumulated blood evacuated into the 
cavity of the womb. But, if this were case, 
the same mechanism must prevail in other 
parts of the body, through which the like pe-
riodical discharge is made, when the Uteus 
is obstructed; as from the nose, hairy scalp, 
lungs, stomach, mesenteric and hæmorrhoidal 
vessels, and even thro' the skin of the legs, and 
|P_74
other parts of the body. Besides, such an accu-
mulation in large sinuses, though the blood 
were not entirely stagnated, would produce a 
viscosity like that which obtains in the rheuma-
tism and other inflammatory distempers. 

Those who live in hot climates, are fre-
quently visited with the Menses at the age of 
twelve; and women who are kept warm, and 
live delicately, undergo this discharge earlier 
than those who use a different regimen: and 
if the catamenia do not flow at the stated 
time, the patient is soon after seized with the 
chlorosis, unless some other evacuation hap-
pens in lieu of the Menses. 

They commonly cease to flow about the 
age of forty-five, except in those with whom 
they began at twelve, or in such as have born 
a great many children; in which case, they cease 
about the age of two-and-forty, or sooner. 

In young people, the momentum of the 
circulating fluid is greater than the resisting 
force of the solids; so that the vessels continue 
to be gradually stretched, until, by their num-
ber, capacity, and length, this momentum is 
dissipated, so as to become no more than equal 
to the resistance. About this time the super-
plus of blood begins to be discharged, and 
thus the equilibrium is preserved till the age 
of forty-five; when the fibres growing rigid, 
the incrementum is lessened, the evacuation is 
no longer necessary, nor has the blood force 
enough to make good its wonted passage into 
the cavity of the womb. In the same manner 
are produced the symptoms of old age. 

|P_75
The catamenia are, therefore, no more 
than a periodical discharge of that superplus of 
blood which is collected through the month, 
and, towards the crisis, attended with pains in 
the loins, breast, and head, more or less acute, 
according to the circumstances of the ple-
thora; all which complaints gradually vanish 
when the menses begin to appear. 

This evacuation commonly continues till 
the fifth or sixth day, in some to the third 
only, and in others to the seventh: the quan-
tity discharged being, according to Hippo-
crates, two heminæ; equal, by the computa-
tion of some, to eighteen or twenty, and, in the 
opinion of others, to twenty-four, ounces: but 
this must certainly be a mistake; for they 
rarely exceed four ounces, except when they 
flow in too great quantity. 

Women that are delicately kept, and plen-
tifully fed, have this discharge more frequent-
ly, and in greater quantity, than those who 
are inured to much exercise, or subject to 
copious perspiration: yet both these consti-
tutions may be healthy, and ought not to be 
tampered with by prescriptions for altering 
the period or quantity of this evacuation. In-
deed, if the flux be so frequent or immode-
rate as to exhaust the strength of the patient, 
it will be necessary to prescribe bleeding be-
fore the return of the period, rest, cooling and 
astringent medicines, not only taken internally, 
but likewise applied externally, and injected 
into the vagina. See Collect. IV. No 1. 2. 

On the contrary, if they flow too seldom, in 
|P_76
too small quantity, or do not appear at all, 
so that a dangerous plenitude ensues, the ple-
thora must be lessened by plentiful bleeding 
and repeated purges, and the discharge so-
licited by warm baths, fumigation, and exer-
cise. But if the patient has been long ob-
structed from a lentor, viscosity, and retarded 
motion of the fluids in the uterus and neigh-
bouring parts, the fullness must be taken off 
by the above-mentioned evacuations, unless 
the constitution be already weakened: then 
every thing that will gradually attenuate the 
fluids, and quicken their circulating force, 
ought to be administered; such a chalybeat 
and mercurial medicines, together with warm 
bitter and stomachic ingredients, assisted with 
proper diet and exercise, according to the 
prescriptions to be found in Hoffman, Friend's 
Emmenologia, and Shaw's Practice of Physic. 
See Collect. IV. No 3. 4. 

[}Of the Fluor Albus. }]
The inside membrane of the uterus, ac-
cording to Astruc, is thick-set with small glands, 
which he calls the colatura lactea: These, in an 
unimpregnated uterus, separate a mucus that 
lubricates the cavity and canal of the neck, 
by which means the sides are prevented from 
coalescing or growing together. The Fluor 
Albus is no other than this mucus discharged 
in too great quantity from the uterus, as well 
as from the vagina; and this excess, when it 
happens from plenitude, in those who feed 
plentifully without taking sufficient exercise, 
|P_77
is often remedied by general evacuation, such 
as venæsection, emetics, cathartics, and a more 
abstemious diet, with a greater share of exer-
cise than usual. But the cure is more diffi-
cult when the complaint is of a long standing, 
and proceeds from a bad habit, the constitu-
tion being weakened by the inordinate dis-
charge: In this case, it will be necessary to 
use repeated emetics, gentle exercise, and all 
those medicines that contribute to strengthen 
a lax habit of body; or, if the distemper be 
cancerous, it must be palliated with anodynes. 
As to the form of prescription in all these cases, 
Hoffman may be consulted. See Collect. IV. 
No 5. 6. 

[}Sect. II. Of Conception. }]
THE minutiæ or first principles of bo-
dies being without the sphere of hu-
man comprehension, all that we know is by 
the observation of their effects; so that the 
modus of conception is altogether uncertain, 
especially in the human species, because op-
portunities of opening pregnant women so sel-
dom occur. 

Although the knowledge of this operation 
is not absolutely necessary for the practice of 
Midwifery, an investigation of it may not only 
gratify the curious, but also promote farther in-
quiries; in the course of which, many material 
discoveries may be made, in the same manner as 
many valuable compositions in chemistry were 
found out in the last century by those who ex-
|P_78
ercised themselves in search of the philosopher's 
stone. 

From the time of Hippocrates to the six-
teenth century, it was generally believed that 
the Embryo and Secundines were formed by 
the mixture of the male and female semen in 
the Uterus: but during the last hundred 
years, anatomy received great improvements 
by the frequent dissection of human bodies; 
and in some female subjects, the Fœtus was 
found in one of the Fallopian tubes; in 
others, it was discovered in the Abdomen, with 
the Placenta adhering to the surface of the 
viscera. See Collect. V. 

Malphigius and others, between the years 
1650 and 1690, wrote expressly upon the in-
cubation of eggs, their formation, and the 
gradual increase of oviparous animals. The 
great Harvey observed the progress of the vi-
viparous kind, in a great number of different 
animals which he had opportunities of open-
ing. De Graaf dissected near one hundred 
rabbits, and is very particular and accurate in 
the observations he had made. Ruysch, Al-
des, Needham, Steno, Kerkringius, Swam-
merdam, Bartholine the son, and Drelincourt, 
employed themselves in the same inquiries; 
and, in consequence of their different remarks, 
a variety of theories have been erected: yet 
all of them have been subject to many objec-
tions; and even the following, though the 
most probable, is still very uncertain. 

When the parts in women, subservient to 
generation, attain their come or full growth, 
|P_79
one or more of the Ova being brought to ma-
turity, that part of the Peritonæum which 
covers the Ovarium begins to stretch; the 
nervous fibres are accordingly affected, and 
contract themselves so as to bring the Fimbria 
of the Fallopian tube in close contact with the 
ripe Ovum: by which mechanism, this last is 
squeezed out of its nidus or husk into the ca-
vity of the tube, through which it is conveyed 
into the Uterus by a vermicular or peristal-
tic motion; and if it is not immediately im-
pregnated with an Animalcule of the male 
semen, must be dissolved and lost, because it 
is now detached from the vessels of the Ova-
rium, and has no Vis Vitæ in itself. 

The external coat of the Ovum is the 
membrane Chorion; one fourth part of which 
is the Placenta, supposed to be the root by 
which it was formerly joined to the vessels of 
the Ovarium; and the navel-string is no other 
than a continuation of the vessels belonging to 
this cake. 

The Chorion is on the inside lined with an-
other membrane called Amnion; and both are 
kept distended in a globular form by a clear 
serous fluid, or thin lymph. 

As for the male semen, according to the 
observation of the celebrated Leeuwenhoek, it 
abounds with Animalcula, that swim about in 
it like so many tadpoles; and these are larger 
and more vigorous the longer the semen hath 
remained in the Vesiculæ Seminales. 

The parts of both male and female being 
thus brought to maturity, the following cir-
|P_80
cumstances are supposed to happen in coition, 
especially in those embraces which immediately 
follow the evacuation of the Menses. In the 
woman, the friction of the Penis in the con-
tracted Vagina, the repeated pressure and 
shocks against the external parts, the alternate 
motion upwards and downwards of the Uterus, 
with its appendages, the Ovaria, Fallopian 
tubes, and round ligaments, produce a gene-
ral titillation and turgency; in consequence of 
which, the nervous fibrils are convulsed, and 
a fluid ejected from the prostate or analogous 
glands, as well as from those of the Uterus 
and Fallopian tubes. The Fimbria belonging 
to one of which, now firmly grasps the ripened 
Ovum, which at the same instant is impreg-
nated with the male seed that in the orgasm 
of coition had been thrown into the Uterus, 
and thence conveyed into the cavity of the 
tube by some absorbing or convulsive power. 
When the two matured principles are thus 
mingled, one of the Animalcula insinuates it-
self into the Ovum, and is joined with its belly 
to that ruptured part of it from which the 
navel-string is produced; or, entering one of 
the vessels, is protruded to the end of the 
Funis, by which a circulation is carried on 
from the embryo to the placenta and mem-
branes. The ovum being impregnated is 
squeezed from its nidus or husk into the tube, 
by the contraction of the fimbria; and thus 
disengaged from its attachments to the ova-
rium, is endowed with a circulating force by 
the animalculum, which has a vis vitæ in it-
|P_81
self: the vessels on the surface of the ovum 
being opened in consequence of its detach-
ments from the ovarium, absorb the sur-
rounding fluid which is secerned by the glands 
in the cavity of the tube and uterus, or forced 
into them by motion, heat, and rarefaction, 
and carried along the umbilical vein for the 
nourishment and increase of the impregnated 
mass. 

Of the semen that is injected or absorbed 
into the uterus, part is mixed with the fluid 
secreted by the glands in the canal of the neck, 
which is blocked up with a sort of gluten 
formed by this mixture; so that the Ovum 
is thereby prevented from sinking too far down, 
and being discharged. 

This theory of conception, though very in-
genious, and of all others the best supported 
with corroborating considerations, such as, 
that Fœtuses and Embryos have been actually 
found in the cavity of the tube and abdomen, 
without any marks of exclusion from the 
Uterus; besides other presumptions that will 
be mentioned when we come to treat of the 
nutrition of the Fœtus; I say, notwithstanding 
the plausibility of the scheme, it is attended 
with circumstances which are hitherto inex-
plicable; namely, the manner in which the 
Animalculum gains admission into the Ovum, 
either while it remains in the ovarium, so-
journs in the tube, or is deposited in the 
Fundus uteri; and the method by which the 
vessels of the navel-string are inosculated with 
those of the Animalculum. Indeed, these 
|P_82
points are so intricate, that every different 
theorist has started different opinions concern-
ing them, some of which are rather jocular 
than instructive. 

[}Sect. III. Of the increase of the Uterus after 
Conception. }]
IT is supposed that the Ovum swims in a 
fluid, which it absorbs so as to increase 
gradually in magnitude till it comes in contact 
with all the inner surface of the Fundus; and 
this being distended in proportion to the aug-
mentation of its contents, the upper part of 
the neck begins also to be stretched. 

About the third month of gestation, the 
ovum in bigness equals a goose-egg; and 
then nearly one fourth of the neck at its upper 
part is distended equal with the fundus. At 
the fifth month, the fundus is increased to a 
much greater magnitude, and rises upwards to 
the middle space betwixt the upper part of 
the pubes and the navel; and at that period 
one half of the neck is extended. At the 
seventh month, the fundus reaches as high as 
the navel; at the eighth month, it is advanced 
midway between the navel and scrobiculus 
cordis; and in the ninth month, is raised quite 
up to this last mentioned part, the neck of the 
womb being then altogether distended. See 
Tab. V. VI. VII. VIII. 

Now that the whole substance of the uterus 
is stretched, the neck and os internum, which 
were at first the strongest, become the weakest 
|P_83
part of the womb, and the stretching force 
being still continued by the increase of the 
fœtus and secundines, which are extended 
by the inclosed waters in a globular form, the 
os uteri begins gradually to give way. In 
the beginning of its dilatation, the nervous 
fibres in this place being more sensible than 
any other part of the uterus, are irritated and 
yield an uneasy sensation; to alleviate which, 
the woman squeezes her uterus by contract-
ing the abdominal muscles, and at the same 
time filling the lungs with air, by which the 
diaphragm is kept down; the pain being ra-
ther increased than abated by this straining, is 
communicated to all the neighbouring parts 
to which the ligaments and vessels are attached, 
such as the back, loins, and inside of the 
thighs; and by this compression of the uterus 
the waters and membranes are squeezed against 
the os uteri, which is of consequence a little 
more opened. See Tab. IX. X. XI. XII. 

The woman being unable to continue this 
effort for any length of time, from the violence 
of the pain it occasions, and the strength of 
the muscles being thereby a little exhausted 
and impaired, the contracting force abates; 
the tension of the os tincæ being taken off, it 
becomes more soft, and contracts a little; so 
that the nervous fibres are relaxed. This re-
mission of pain the patient enjoys for some 
time, until the same increasing force renews 
the stretching pains, irritation, and something 
like a tenesmus at the os uteri; the compres-
sion of the womb again takes place, and the 
|P_84
internal mouth is a little more dilated, either 
by the pressure of the waters and membranes, 
or, when the fluid is in small quantity, by the 
child's head forced down by the contraction of 
the uterus, which in that case is in contact 
with the body of the fœtus. See Tab. XII. 
XIII. XIV. 

In this manner the labour-pains begin, and 
continue to return periodically, growing strong-
er and more frequent until the os uteri is 
fully dilated, and the membranes are depressed 
and broke; so that the waters are discharged, 
the uterus contracts, and, with the assistance 
of the muscles, the child is forced along and 
delivered. 

Although this account may be liable to ob-
jections, especially in those cases when the 
child is delivered before the full time, it ne-
vertheless seems more probable than that hy-
pothesis which imputes the labour-pains to the 
motion of the child calcitrating the uterus: 
for it frequently happens that the woman never 
feels the child stir during the whole time of 
labour; and dead children are delivered as 
easily as those that come alive, except when 
the birth is retarded by the body's being swel-
led to an extraordinary size. 

[}Sect. IV. Of the Magnitude, Weight, and different 
Appellations given to the Ovum and Child. }]
WHEN the ovum descends into the 
uterus, it is supposed to be about the 
size of a poppy-seed, and in the third month 
|P_85
augmented to the bigness of a goose egg. Ten 
days after conception, the child (according 
to some authors) weighs half a grain; at thirty 
days, is increased to the weight of twenty-two 
grains; at three months, weighs betwixt two 
and three ounces; and at nine months, from 
ten to twelve, and sometimes sixteen, pounds: 
by which calculation it would appear that the 
progress of the Fœtus is quickest in the be-
ginningof its growth; for from the tenth to 
the thirtieth day (according to this supposition) 
it increases to three and forty times its weight. 
All these calculations are uncertain. 

The conception is called an Embryo, until 
all the parts are dictinctly formed, generally 
in the third month; and from that period to 
delivery, is distinguished by the appellation of 
Fœtus. 

[}Sect. V. Of Twins. }]
WHEN two or more children are in-
cluded in the uterus at the same 
time, each has a separate placenta with um-
bilical cords and vessels: sometimes these 
Placentæ are altogether distinct, and at other 
times they form but one cake. 

Yet, by an instance that lately fell under my 
observation, it appears that sometimes twins 
have but one placenta in common. Whether 
or not they were two sets of membranes, I 
could not discover, because they had been tore 
off by the gentleman who delivered the wo-
man: but when the artery in one of the navel-
|P_86
strings was injected, the matter flowed out at 
one of the vessels belonging to the other; and 
the communication between them is still vi-
sible, though they are separated at the distance 
of three or four inches. 

When two children are distinct, they are 
called twins; and monsters, when they are 
joined together; the first (according to the 
foregoing theory) are produced when different 
animalcula impregnate different ova; and 
the last are engendered when two or more 
animalcula introduce themselves, and are in-
cluded in one ovum. See Tab. X. 

[}Sect. VI. Of Superfoetation. }]
IT was formerly imagined that a woman 
might conceive a second time during 
pregnancy, and be delivered of one child 
some weeks or months before the other could 
be ready for the world: but this opinion is 
now generally exploded; because the ovum fills 
the whole fundus uteri, and the gelatinous 
substance already mentioned locks up the neck 
and os internum, so as to hinder more semen 
from entering the womb and impregnating a 
second egg in any subsequent coition. Where-
fore, in all those cases which gave rise to this 
supposition, it may be taken for granted that 
the woman was actually with child of twins, one 
of which lying near the os internum, might 
chance to die and mortify, so as that the mem-
branes give way, and the dead fœtus is dis-
charged, while the other remains in the uterus 
|P_87
and is delivered at the full time. On the 
other hand, by some accident, the first and 
largest may be born some days or weeks be-
fore the full time, and afterwards the os tincæ 
contract so as to detain the other till the due 
period. At other times the child that lies 
next to the fundus is the smallest, and follows 
after the birth of the other, sometimes dead 
and putrified, and sometimes in an emaciated 
condition. See Collect. VI. 

[}Sect. VII. Of Abortions. }]
AMiscarriage that happens before the 
tenth day was formerly called an efflux, 
because the Embryo and Secundines are not 
then formed, and nothing but the liquid con-
ception or genitura is discharged. From the 
the tenth day to the third month, it was known 
by the term expulsion, the Embryo and Se-
cundines being still so small that the woman 
is in no great danger from violent flooding. 

If she parted with her burden betwixt that 
period and the seventh month, she was said to 
suffer an abortion: in which case she under-
went greater danger, and was delivered with 
more difficulty than before; because the ute-
rus and vessels being more distended, a larger 
quantity of blood was lost in a shorter time, 
the fœtus was increased in bulk, and the 
neck of the womb is not yet fully stretched: 
besides, should the child be born alive, it will 
be so small and tender that it will not suck, 
and scarce receive any sort of nourishment. 

|P_88
When delivery happens between the seventh 
month and full time, the woman is said to be 
in labour. But, instead of these distinctions, if 
she loses her burden at any time from concep-
tion to the seventh or eighth, or even in the 
ninth month, we now say indiscriminately, she 
has miscarried. 

Hippocrates alleges that a child born in the 
seventh month, sometimes lives: whereas if it 
comes in the eighth, it will probably die: be-
cause all healthy children, says he, make an 
effort to be delivered in the seventh month; 
and if they are not then born, the nisus is re-
peated in the eighth, when the child must be 
weakened by its former unsuccessful attempt, 
and therefore not likely to live; whereas, 
should the second effort be deferred till the 
ninth, the fœtus will by that time be suffi-
ciently recovered from the fatigue it had un-
dergone in the seventh. Experience, how-
ever, contradicts this assertion; for the older 
the child is, we find it always (cæteris paribus) 
the stronger, consequently the more hardy 
and easily nursed: neither is there any suffi-
cient reason for adhering to the opinion of 
Pythagoras on this subject, who declares that 
number eight is not so fortunate as seven or 
nine. 

The common term of pregnancy is limited 
to nine solar months, reckoning from the last 
discharge of the catamenia: yet in some, tho' 
very few, uterine gestation exceeds that period; 
and as this is a possible case, we ought always 
to judge on the charitable side, in the persua-
|P_89
sion that it is better several guilty persons 
should escape, than one innocent person suffer 
in point of reputation. See Collect. VII. 

[}Sect. VIII. Of False Conceptions and Moles. }]
IT was formerly supposed, that if the parts 
of the Embryo and Secundines were not 
separated and distinctly formed from the mix-
ture of the male and female semen, they 
formed a mass, which, when discharged before 
the fourth month, was called a false concep-
tion; if it continued longer in the uterus so 
as to increase in magnitude, it went under 
the denomination of a mola. But these things 
are now to be accounted for in a more pro-
bable and certain manner. Should the Em-
bryo die (suppose in the first or second month) 
some days before it is discharged, it will some-
times be entirely dissolved; so that when the 
secundines are delivered, there is nothing else 
to be seen. In the first month the Embryo is 
so small and tender, that this dissolution will be 
performed in twelve hours; in the second 
month, two, three, or four days will suffice 
for this purpose; and even in the third month, 
it will be dissolved in fourteen or fifteen: be-
sides, the blood frequently forms thick la-
minæ round the ovum, to the surface of 
which they adhere so strongly, that it is very 
difficult to distinguish what part is the placenta, 
and what membrane. Even after the Embryo 
and placenta are discharged in the second or 
third month, the mouth and neck of the 
|P_90
womb are often so closely contracted, that the 
fibrous part of the blood is retained in the 
fundus, sometimes to the fifth or seventh day; 
and, when it comes off, exhibits the appear-
ance of an ovum, the external surface, by the 
strong pressure of the uterus, resembling a 
membrane; so that the whole is mistaken for 
for a false conception. 

This substance, in bigness, commonly equals 
a pigeon or hen egg; or if it exceeds that 
size, and is longer retained, is distinguished 
by the appellation of mola: but this last 
generally happens in women betwixt the 
age of forty-five and fifty, or later, when 
their menses begins to disappear; sometimes 
from internal or external accidents that may 
produce continued floodings. If the cata-
menia have ceased to flow for some time in 
elderly women, and return with pain, such a 
symptom is frequently the forerunner of a 
cancer; before or after this happens, some-
times a large flesh-like substance will be dis-
charged with great pain, resembling that of 
labour; and, upon examination, appears to be 
no more than the fibrous part of the blood, 
which assumes that form by being long pres-
sed in the uterus or vagina. See Collect. 
VIII. 

In this place it will not be amiss to observe, 
that the glands of the Uterus and Vagina will 
sometimes increase and distend the adjacent 
parts to a surprising degree. If (for example) 
one of the glands of the uterus be so obstruct-
ed as that there is a pressure on the returning 
|P_91
vein and excretory duct, the arterial blood 
will gradually stretch the smaller vessels, and 
consequently increase the size of the gland, 
which will grow larger and larger, as long as 
the force of the impelled fluid is greater than 
the resistance of the vessels, that contain it; by 
which means a very small gland will be en-
larged to a great bulk, and the Uterus gradu-
ally stretched as in uterine gestation, though 
the progress may be so flow as to be protracted 
for years instead of months. Nevertheless 
the os internum will be dilated, and the 
gland (if not too large to pass) will be squeezed 
into the Vagina, provided it adheres to the 
Uterus, by a small neck: nay, it will length-
en more and more, so as to appear on the 
outside of the os externum; in which case 
it may be easily separated by a ligature. This 
disease will be the sooner known and easier 
remedied, the lower its origin in the uterus 
is. But should the gland take its rise in the 
vagina hard by the mouth of the womb, it 
will show itself still sooner; and a ligature may 
be easily introduced, provided the tumour is 
not so large as to fill up the cavity, and hin-
der the neck of it from being commodiously 
felt. Though the greatest difficulty occurs 
when the gland is confined to the uterus, be-
ing too much enlarged to pass through the os 
internum. 

Sometimes all or most of the glands of the 
uterus are thus affected, and augment the 
womb to such a degree, that it will weigh a 
great many pounds, and the woman is de-
|P_92
stroyed by its pressure upon the surrounding 
parts; but should this indolent state of the 
tumour be altered by any accident that will 
produce irritation and inflammation, the parts 
will grow scirrhous, and a cancer ensue. 

This misfortune for the most part happens 
to women when their menstrual evacuations 
leave them; and sometimes (though seldom) 
to child-bearing women, in consequence of 
severe labour. 

Some people have affirmed that the Placenta, 
being left in the Uterus after the delivery of 
the child, grows gradually larger. But the 
contrary of this assertion is proved by com-
mon practice; from which it appears, that 
the Placenta is actually pressed into smaller di-
mensions, and sometimes into a substance al-
most demi-cartilaginous: for, after the death 
or delivery of the child, the Secundines re-
ceive no farther increase or growth. Dropsies 
and hydatides are also supposed to be formed 
in the uterus, and discharged from thence to-
gether with air or wind. The Ovaria are 
sometimes affected in the same manner, are 
inflamed, inposthumate, grow scirrhous, can-
cerous, and the patient is destroyed by the 
discharge which gradually fills the abdomen 
with pus and ichor; so that all these complaints, 
if known, ought to be obviated in the begin-
ning. See Collect. IX. 

|P_93
[}Sect. IX. Of the Placenta and Membranes. }]
IHave already observed that the Ovum is 
formed of the Placenta with the Chorion 
and Amnion, which are globularly distended 
by the inclosed waters that surround the child. 
The Placenta is commonly of a round figure, 
somewhat resembling an oat-cake, about six 
inches in diameter, and one inch thick in the 
middle, growing a little thinner towards the 
circumference: it is composed of veins and 
arteries, which are divided into an infinite 
number of small branches, the venous parts of 
which unite in one large tube, called the um-
bilical vein, which brings back the blood, and 
is supposed to carry along the nutritive fluid 
from the vessels of the Chorion and Placenta, 
to the child, whose belly it perforates at the 
navel; from thence passing into the liver, 
where it communicates with the vena por-
tarum and cava. It is furnished with two 
arteries, which arise from the internal iliacs of 
the child, and running up on each side of the 
bladder perforates the belly where the umbi-
lical vein entered; then they proceed to the 
Placenta, in a spiral line, twining around the 
vein, in conjunction with which, they form 
the Funiculus umbilicalis, which is commonly 
four or five hand-breadths in length, some-
times only two or three, and sometimes it ex-
tends to the length of eight or ten. The two 
arteries, on their arrival at the inner surface of 
the Placenta, are divided and subdivided into 
|P_94
minute branches, which at last end in small 
capillaries that inosculate with the veins of the 
same order. These arteries, together with 
the umbilical vein, are supposed to do the 
same office in the Placenta which is afterwards 
performed in the lungs by the pulmonary ar-
tery and vein, until the child is delivered and 
begins to breathe: and this opinion seems to 
be confirmed by the following experiments. 
If the child and Placenta are both delivered 
suddenly, or the last immediately after the 
first; and if the child, though alive, does not 
yet breathe, the blood may be felt circulating 
sometimes slowly, at other times with great 
force, through the arteries of the Funis to the 
Placenta, and from thence back again to the 
child, along the umbilical vein. When the 
vessels are slightly pressed, the arteries swell 
between the pressure and the child, while 
the vein grows turgid between that and the 
Placenta, from the surface of which no blood 
is observed to flow, although it be lying in a 
bason among warm water. As the child be-
gins to breathe, the circulation, though it was 
weak before, immediately grows stronger and 
stronger; and then in a few minutes the pul-
sation in the navel-string becomes more lan-
guid, and at last entirely stops. If after the 
the child is delivered, and the navel-string cut, 
provided the Placenta adheres firmly to the 
Uterus, which is thereby kept extended; or, 
if the womb is still distended by another child; 
no more blood flows from the umbilical ves-
sels than what seemed to be contained in them 
|P_95
at the instant of cutting; and this, in com-
mon cases, does not exceed the quantity of 
two or three ounces: and finally, when, in 
consequence of violent floodings, the mother 
expires either in time of delivery or soon 
after it, the child is sometimes found alive and 
vigorous, especially if the Placenta is sound; 
but if tore, then the child will lose blood as 
well as the mother. 

The external surface of the Placenta is di-
vided into several lobes, that it may yield and 
conform itself more commodiously to the inner 
surface of the Uterus, to which it adheres, so 
as to prevent its being separated by any shock 
or blows upon the abdomen, unless when 
violent. 

Those groups of veins and arteries which 
enter into the composition of the Placenta, re-
ceive external coats from the Chorion, which 
is the outward membrane of the Ovum, thick 
and strong, and forms three-fourths of the ex-
ternal globe that contains the waters and the 
child; the remaining part being covered by 
the Placenta; so that these two in conjunc-
tion constitute the whole external surface of 
the Ovum. Some indeed allege, that these 
are inveloped with a cribriform or cellular sub-
stance, by which they seem to adhere by con-
tact only, to the Uterus; and that the inner 
membrane of the womb is full of little glands, 
whose excretory ducts, opening into the fun-
dus and neck, secrete a soft thin mucus (as 
formerly observed) to lubricate the whole ca-
vity of the Uterus, which beginning to stretch 
|P_96
in time of gestation, the vessels that compose 
these glands are also distended; consequently 
a greater quantity of this mucus is separated 
and retained in this supposed cribriform and 
cellular substance, the absorbing vessels of 
which take it in and convey it along the veins 
for the nourishment of the child. The womb 
being therefore distended in proportion to the 
increase of the child, those glands are also 
proportionably enlarged; by which means a 
larger quantity of the fluid is separated, be-
cause the nutriment of the child must be aug-
mented in proportion to the progress of its 
growth; and this liquor undergoes an altera-
tion in quality as well as quantity, being 
changed from a clear thin fluid into the more 
viscous consistence of milk. In some cases, 
this mucus hath been discharged from the 
uterus in time of pregnancy, and both mother 
and child weakened by the evacuation; which 
may be occasioned by the chorion's adhering 
too loosely, or being in one part actually se-
parated from the womb. 

Formerly, it was taken for granted by 
many, that the Placenta always adhered to the 
fundus uteri. But this notion is refuted by 
certain observations; in consequence of which 
we find it as often sticking to the sides, back, 
and fore parts, and sometimes as far down as 
the inside of the os uteri. See Tab. V. VI. 
VIII. IX. X. XI. XIII. 

When the Placenta is delivered, and no 
other part of the membrane tore except that 
through which the child passed, the opening is 
|P_97
generally near the edge or side of the placenta, 
and seldom in the middle of the membranes; 
and a hog's bladder being introduced at this 
opening, and inflated, when lying in water, 
will show the shape and size of the inner sur-
face of the womb, and plainly discover the 
part to which the placenta adhered. 

The Chorion is, on the inside, lined with 
the Amnion, which is a thin transparent mem-
brane, without any vessels so large as to ad-
mit the red globules of blood: It adheres to 
the chorion by contact, and seems to form 
the external coat of the funis umbilicalis. 

This membrane contains the serum, in 
which the child swims; which fluid is supposed 
to be furnished by lymphatic vessels that open 
into the inner surface of the amnion. If this 
liquid is neither absorbed into the body of the 
fœtus, nor taken into the stomach by suction 
at the mouth, there must be absorbing vessels in 
this membrane, in the same manner as in the 
abdomen and other cavities of the body, 
where there is a constant renovation of humi-
dity. 

The quantity of this fluid, in proportion to 
the weight of the fœtus, is much greater in 
the first than in the last month of gestation 
being in the one perhaps ten times the 
weight of the embryo, whereas in the other 
it is commonly in the proportion of one to 
two: for six pounds of water surrounding a 
fœtus that weighs twelve pounds, is reckon-
ed a large proportion, the quantity being of-
|P_98
ten much less; nay, sometimes there is very 
little or none at all. 

In most animals of the brute species, there 
is a third membrane called allantois, which re-
sembles a long and wide blind-gut, and con-
tains the urine of the fœtus. It is situated be-
tween the chorion and amnion, and com-
municates with the urachus that rises from the 
fundus of the bladder, and runs along with 
the umbilical vessels, depositing the urine in 
this reservoir, which is attached to its other 
extremity. This bag hath not yet been cer-
tainly discovered in the human fœtus, the 
urachus which, though plainly perceivable, 
seems hitherto to be quite imperforated. 

From the foregoing observations upon nu-
trition, it seems probable, that the fœtus is ra-
ther nourished by the absorption of the nutritive 
fluid into the vessels of the placenta and cho-
rion, than form the red blood circulated in 
full stream from the arteries of the uterus to 
the veins of the placenta, and returned by 
the arteries of the last to the veins of the first, 
in order to be renewed, refined, and made ar-
terial blood in the lungs of the mother. 

Yet this doctrine of absorption is clogged 
with one objection, which hath never been 
fully answered; namely, That if the placenta 
adheres to the lower part of the uterus, when 
the os internum begins to be dilated a flood-
ing immediately ensues; and the same symptom 
happens upon a partial or total separation of 
the placenta from any other part of the womb; 
|P_99
whereas no such consequence follows a separa-
tion of the chorion. 

The new theorists indeed observe, that 
there is no necessity for a supply of red blood 
from the mother; because the circulating force 
in the vessels of the fœtus produces heat and 
motion sufficient to endue the fluids with a 
sanguine colour; that neither is there occa-
sion for returning and refining this blood in 
the lungs of the mother, because that office is 
sufficiently performed in the placenta, until 
the fœtus is delivered, when its own lungs are 
put to their proper use; and lastly, that the 
blood of the mother is too gross a fluid to an-
swer the occasions of the fœtus. Certain it 
is, the chick in the egg is nourished by the 
white which is forced along the vessels, and 
the quantity of red blood increases in pro-
portion to the growth of the contained em-
bryo or fœtus, without any supply from the 
hen. 

On the whole, the opinions broached upon 
the nutrition of the embryo and fœtus in 
utero have been various, as well as those 
that are adopted concerning the modus of 
conception. 

