

[^Sample 1: book - ^]

|P_1[^A horizontal double-line, spanning the whole page. ^]
[}an 
ACCOUNT 
of the 
INTRODUCTION of FOXGLOVE 
into 
MODERN PRACTICE. }]
AS the more obvious and sensible properties of 
plants, such as colour, taste, and smell, have 
but little connexion with the diseases they are adapted 
to cure; so their peculiar qualities have no certain 
dependence upon their external configuration. Their 
chemical examination by fire, after an immense 
waste of time and labour, having been found use- 
less, is now abandoned by general consent. Possi- 
bly other modes of analysis will be found out, 
which may turn to better account; but we have hi- 
therto made only a very small progress in the che- 
mistry of animal and vegetable substances. Their 
virtues must therefore be learnt, either from observ- 
ing their effects upon insects and quadrupeds; from 
analogy, deduced from the already known powers 
of some of their congenera, or from the empirical 
usages and experience of the populace. 

The first method has not yet been much attended 
to; and the second can only be perfected in propor- 
tion as we approach towards the discovery of a truly 
natural system; but the last, as far as it extends, lies 
|P_2
within the reach of every one who is open to infor- 
mation, regardless of the source from whence it 
springs. 

It was a circumstance of this kind which first fixed 
my attention on the Foxglove. 

In the year 1775, my opinion was asked concern- 
ing a family receipt for the cure of the dropsy. I 
was told that it had long been kept a secret by an 
old woman in Shropshire, who had sometimes made 
cures after the more regular practitioners had failed. 
I was informed also, that the effects produced were 
violent vomiting and purging; for the diuretic ef- 
fects seemed to have been overlooked. This medi- 
cine was composed of twenty or more different herbs; 
but it was not very difficult for one converfant in 
these subjects, to perceive, that the active herb could 
be no other than the Foxglove. 

My worthy predecessor in this place, the very hu- 
mane and ingenious Dr. Small, had made it a prac- 
tice to give his advice to the poor during one hour 
in a day. This practice, which I continued until 
we had an Hospital opened for the reception of the 
sick poor, gave me an opportunity of putting my 
ideas into execution in a variety of cases; for the 
number of poor who thus applied for advice, 
amounted to between two and three thousand an- 
nually. I soon found the Foxglove to be a very 
powerful diuretic; but then, and for a considerable 
time afterwards, I gave it in doses very much too 
|P_3
large, and urged its continuance too long; for mis- 
led by reasoning from the effects of the squill, which 
generally acts best upon the kidneys when it excites 
nausea, I wished to produce the same effect by the 
Foxglove. In this mode of prescribing, when I had 
so many patients to attend to in the space of one, 
or at most of two hours, it will not be expected that 
I could be very particular, much less could I take 
notes of all the cases which occurred. Two or three 
of them only, in which the medicine succeeded, I 
find mentioned amongst my papers. It was from 
this kind of experience that I ventured to assert, in 
the Botanical Arrangement published in the course of 
the following spring, that the Digitalis purpurea 
merited more attention than modern practice be- 
stowed upon it. 

I had not, however, yet introduced it into the more 
regular mode of prescription; but a circumstance 
happened which accelerated that event. My truly 
valuable and respectable friend, Dr. Ash, informed 
me that Dr. Cawley, then principal of Brazen Nose 
College, Oxford, had been cured of a Hydrops Pec- 
toris, by an empirical exhibition of the root of the 
Foxglove, after some of the first physicians of the age 
had declared they could do no more for him. I was 
now determined to pursue my former ideas more 
vigorously than before, but was too well aware of 
the uncertainty which must attend on the exhibition 
of the root of a biennial plant, and therefore conti- 
nued to use the leaves. These I had found to vary 
much as to dose, at different seasons of the year; 
|P_4
but I expected, if gathered always in one condition 
of the plant, viz. when it was in its flowering state, 
and carefully dried, that the dose might be ascer- 
tained as exactly as that of any other medicine; nor 
have I been disappointed in this expectation. The 
more I saw of the great powers of this plant, the 
more it seemed necessary to bring the doses of it to 
the greatest possible accuracy. I suspected that this 
degree of accuracy was not reconcileable with the 
use of a decoction, as it depended not only upon the 
care of those who had the preparation of it, but it 
was easy to conceive from the analogy of another 
plant of the same natural order, the tobacco, that 
its active properties might be impaired by long boil- 
ing. The decoction was therefore discarded, and 
the infusion substituted in its place. After this I be- 
gan to use the leaves in powder, but I still very often 
prescribe the infusion. 

Further experience convinced me, that the diure- 
tic effects of this medicine do not at all depend up- 
on its exciting a nausea or vomiting; but, on the 
contrary, that though the increased secretion of 
urine will frequently succeed to, or exist along with 
these circumstances, yet they are so far from being 
friendly or necessary, that I have often known the 
discharge of urine checked, when the doses have 
been imprudently urged so as to occasion sickness. 

If the medicine purges, it is almost certain to fail 
in its desired effect; but this having been the case, 
I have seen it afterwards succeed when joined with 
|P_5
small doses of opium, so as to restrain its action on 
the bowels. 

In the summer of the year 1776, I ordered a 
quantity of the leaves to be dried, and as it then 
became possible to ascertain its doses, it was gradu- 
ally adopted by the medical practitioners in the cir- 
cle of my acquaintance. 

In the month of November 1777, in consequence 
of an application from that very celebrated surgeon, 
Mr. Russel, of Worcester, I sent him the following 
account, which I choose to introduce here, as shew- 
ing the ideas I then entertained of the medicine, 
and how much I was mistaken as to its real dose.— 
I generally order it in decoction. Three drams of 
the dried leaves, collected at the time of the blos- 
soms expanding, boiled in twelve to eight ounces of 
water. Two spoonfuls of this medicine, given eve- 
ry two hours, will sooner or later excite a nausea. 
I have sometimes used the green leaves gathered in 
winter, but then I order three times the weight; 
and in one instance I used three ounces to a pint 
decoction, before the desired effect took place. I 
consider the Foxglove thus given, as the most cer- 
tain diuretic I know, nor do its diuretic effects 
depend merely upon the nausea it produces, for 
in cases where squill and ipecac. have been so 
given as to keep up a nausea several days together, 
and the flow of urine not taken place, I have found 
the Foxglove to succeed; and I have, in more than 
one instance, given the Foxglove in smaller and 
|P_6
more distant doses, so that the flow of urine has 
taken place without any sensible affection of the 
stomach; but in general I give it in the manner 
first mentioned, and order one dose to be taken 
after the sickness commences. I then omit all me- 
dicines, except those of the cordial kind are wanted, 
during the space of three, four, or five days. By 
this time the nausea abates, and the appetite be- 
comes better than it was before. Sometimes the 
brain is considerably affected by the medicine, and 
indistinct vision ensues; but I have never yet 
found any permanent bad effects from it. — 

I use it in the Ascites, Anasarca, and Hydrops 
Pectoris; and so far as the removal of the water 
will contribute to cure the patient, so far may be 
expected from this medicine: but I wish it not to 
be tried in ascites of female patients, believing 
that many of these cases are dropsies of the ovaria; 
and no sensible man will ever expect to see these 
encysted fluids removed by any medicine. 

I have often been obliged to evacuate the water 
repeatedly in the same patient, by repeating the 
decoction; but then this has been at such distances 
of time as to allow of the interference of other 
medicines and a proper regimen, so that the patient 
obtains in the end a perfect cure. In these cases 
the decoction becomes at length so very disagree- 
able, that a much smaller quantity will produce the 
effect, and I often find it necessary to alter its 
taste by the addition of Aq. Cinnam. sp. or Aq. 
Juniper. composita. 

|P_7
I allow, and indeed enjoin my patients to drink 
very plentifully of small liquors through the whole 
course of the cure; and sometimes, where the eva- 
cuations have been very sudden, I have found a 
bandage as necessary as in the use of the trochar. — 

Early in the year 1779, a number of dropsical 
cases offered themselves to my attention, the conse- 
quences of the scarlet fever and sore throat which 
had raged so very generally amongst us in the pre- 
ceding year. Some of these had been cured by 
squills or other diuretics, and relapsed; in others, 
the dropsy did not appear for several weeks after the 
original disease had ceased: but I am not able to 
mention many particulars, having omitted to make 
notes. This, however, is the less to be regretted, 
as the symptoms in all were very much alike, and 
they were all without an exception cured by the Fox- 
glove. 

This last circumstance encouraged me to use the 
medicine more frequently than I had done hereto- 
fore, and the increase of practice had taught me to 
improve the management of it. 

In February 1779, my friend, Dr. Stokes, commu- 
nicated to the Medical Society at Edinburgh the re- 
sult of my experience of the Foxglove; and, in a let- 
ter addressed to me in November following, he says, 
Dr. Hope, in consequence of my mentioning its 
use to my friend, Dr. Broughton, has tried the 
Foxglove in the Infirmary with success.  Dr. 
|P_8
Stokes also tells me that Dr. Hamilton cured Dropsies 
with it in the year 1781. 

I am informed by my very worthy friend Dr. 
Duncan, that Dr. Hamilton, who learnt its use from 
Dr. Hope, has employed it very frequently in the 
Hospital at Edinburgh. Dr. Duncan also tells me, 
that the late very ingenious and accomplished Mr. 
Charles Darwin, informed him of its being used by 
his father and myself, in cases of Hydrothorax, and 
that he has ever since mentioned it in his lectures, 
and sometimes employed it in his practice. 

At length, in the year 1783, it appeared in the 
new edition of the Edinburgh Pharmacopœia, into 
which, I am told, it was received in consequence of 
the recommendation of Dr. Hope. But from which, 
I am satisfied, it will be again very soon rejected, 
if it should continue to be exhibited in the unre- 
strained manner in which it has heretofore been 
used at Edinburgh, and in the enormous doses in 
which it is now directed in London. 

In the following cases the reader will find other 
diseases besides dropsies; particularly several cases 
of consumption. I was induced to try it in these, 
from being told, that it was much used in the West 
of England, in the Phthisis Pulmonalis, by the 
common people. In this disease, however, in my 
hands, it has done but little service, and yet I am 
disposed to wish it a further trial, for in a copy of 
Parkinson's Herbal, which I saw about two years ago, 
|P_9
I found the following manufcript note at the article 
Digitalis, written, I believe, by a Mr. Saunders, who 
practised for many years with great reputation as a 
surgeon and apothecary at Stourbridge, in Worces- 
tershire. 

Consumptions are cured infallibly by weak de- 
coction of Foxglove leaves in water, or wine and 
water, and drank for constant drink. Or take of 
the juice of the herb and flowers, clarify it, and 
make a fine syrup with honey, of which take 
three spoonfuls thrice in a day, at physical hours. 
The use of these two things of late has done, in 
consumptive cases, great wonders. But be cautious 
of its use, for it is of a vomiting nature. In 
these things begin sparingly, and increase the dose 
as the patient's strength will bear, least, instead of 
a sovereign medicine, you do real damage by this 
infusion or syrup. 

The precautions annexed to his encomiums of this 
medicine, lead one to think that he has spoken from 
his own proper experience. 

I have lately been told, that a person in the neigh- 
bourhood of Warwick, possesses a famous family re- 
ceipt for the dropsy, in which the Foxglove is the 
active medicine; and a lady from the western part 
of Yorkshire assures me, that the people in her coun- 
try often cure themselves of dropsical complaints by 
drinking Foxglove tea. In confirmation of this, I 
recollect about two years ago being desired to visit a 
|P_10
travelling Yorkshire tradesman. I found him inces- 
santly vomiting, his vision indistinct, his pulse forty 
in a minute. Upon enquiry it came out, that his 
wife had stewed a large handful of green Foxglove 
leaves in half a pint of water, and given him the 
liquor, which he drank at one draught, in order to 
cure him of an asthmatic affection. This good wo- 
man knew the medicine of her country, but not 
the dose of it, for her husband narrowly escaped 
with his life. 

It is probable that this rude mode of exhibiting 
the Foxglove has been more general than I am at 
present aware of; but it is wonderful that no author 
seems to have been acquainted with its effects as a 
diuretic. 

|P_11
[}CASES, 
In which the Digitalis was given by the 
Direction of the Author. }]
[}1775. }]
IT was in the course of this year that I began to 
use the Digitalis in dropsical cases. The pa- 
tients were such as applied at my house for advice 
gratis. I cannot pretend to charge my memory with 
particular cases, or particular effects, and I had not 
leisure to make notes. Upon the whole, however, 
it may be concluded, that the medicine was found 
useful, or I should not have continued to employ 
it. 

[}CASE I. }]
December 8th. A man about fifty years of age, 
who had formerly been a builder, but was now much 
reduced in his circumstances, complained to me of 
an asthma which first attacked him about the latter 
end of autumn. His breath was very short, his 
countenance was sunken, his belly large; and, up- 
on examination, a fluctuation in it was very percep- 
tible. His urine for some time past had been small 
in quantity. I directed a decoction of Fol. Digital. 
recent. which made him very sick, the sickness re- 
curring at intervals for several days, during which 
time he made a large quantity of water. His breath 
gradually drew easier, his belly subsided, and in 
|P_12
about about ten days he began to eat with a keen appetite. 
He afterwards took steel and bitters. 

[}1776. }]
[}CASE II. }]
January 14th. A poor man labouring under an 
ascites and anasarca, was directed to take a decoction 
of Digitalis every four hours. It purged him smart- 
ly, but did not relieve him. An opiate was now 
ordered with each dose of the medicine, which then 
acted upon the kidneys very freely, and he soon lost 
all his complaints. 

[}CASE III. }]
March 15th. A poor boy, about nine years of 
age, was brought for my advice. His countenance 
was pale, his pulse quick and feeble, his body great- 
ly emaciated, except his belly, which was very large, 
and, upon examination, contained a fluid. The 
case had been considered as arising from worms. He 
was directed to take the decoction of Digitalis night 
and morning. It operated as a diuretic, never made 
him sick, and he got well without any other medi- 
cine. 

[}CASE IV. }]
July 25th. Mrs. H—, of A—, near 
N—, between forty and fifty years of age, a 
few weeks ago, after some previous indisposition, 
was attacked by a severe cold shivering fit, succeed- 
ed by fever; great pain in her left side, shortness 
of breath, perpetual cough, and, after some days, 
|P_13
copious expectoration. On the 4th of June, Dr. 
Darwin, [/1./] was called to her. I have not heard what 
was then done for her, but, between the 15th of June, 
and 25th of July, the Doctor, at his different visits, 
gave her various medicines of the deobstruent, to- 
nic, antispasmodic, diuretic, and evacuant kinds. 

On the 25th of July I was desired to meet Dr. 
Darwin at the lady's house. I found her nearly in 
a state of suffocation; her pulse extremely weak and 
irregular, her breath very short and laborious, her 
countenance sunk, her arms of a leaden colour, 
clammy and cold. She could not lye down in bed, 
and had neither strength nor appetite, but was ex- 
tremely thirsty. Her stomach, legs, and thighs 
were greatly swollen; her urine very small in quan- 
tity, not more than a spoonful at a time, and that 
very seldom. It had been proposed to scarify her 
legs, but the proposition was not acceded to. 

She had experienced no relief from any means that 
had been used, except from ipecacoanha vomits; the 
dose of which had been gradually increased from 15 
to 40 grains, but such was the insensible state of her 
stomach for the last few days, that even those very 
large doses failed to make her sick, and consequent- 
ly purged her. In this situation of things I knew 
of nothing likely to avail us, except the Digitalis: 
but this I hesitated to propose, from an apprehen- 
sion that little could be expected from any thing; 
that an unfavourable termination would tend to 
|P_14
discredit a medicine which promised to be of great 
benefit to mankind, and I might be censured for a 
prescription which could not be countenanced by 
the experience of any other regular practitioner. 
But these considerations soon gave way to the desire 
of preserving the life of this valuable woman, and 
accordingly I proposed the Digitalis to be tried; 
adding, that I sometimes had found it to succeed 
when other, even the most judicious methods, had 
failed. Dr. Darwin very politely, acceded imme- 
diately to my proposition, and, as he had never 
seen it given, left the preparation and the dose to 
my direction. We therefore prescribed as follows: 

R. Fol. Digital. purp. recent. ℥iv. coque ex 
Aq. fontan. puræ ℔iss ad ℔i. et cola. 

R. Decoct. Digital. ℥iss. 

Aq. Nuc. Moschat. ʒii. M. fiat. haust. 2dis 
horis sumend. 

The patient took five of these draughts, which 
made her very sick, and acted very powerfully up- 
on the kidneys, for within the first twenty-four 
hours she made upwards of eight quarts of water. 
The sense of fulness and oppression across her sto- 
mach was greatly diminished, her breath was eased, 
her pulse became more full and more regular, and 
the swellings of her legs subsided. 

26th. Our patient being thus snatched from im- 
pending destruction, Dr. Darwin proposed to give 
her a decoction of pareira brava and guiacum shav- 
|P_15
ings, with pills of myrrh and white vitriol; and, 
if costive, a pill with calomel and aloes. To these 
propositions I gave a ready assent. 

30th. This day Dr. Darwin saw her, and di- 
rected a continuation of the medicines last pre- 
scribed. 

August lst. I found the patient perfectly free 
from every appearance of dropsy, her breath quite 
easy, her appetite much improved, but still very 
weak. Having some suspicion of a diseased liver, 
I directed pills of soap, rhubarb, tartar of vitriol, 
and calomel to be taken twice a day, with a neutral 
saline draught. 

9th. We visited our patient together, and re- 
peated the draughts directed on the 26th of June, 
with the addition of tincture of bark, and also order- 
ed pills of aloes, guiacum, and sal martis to be ta- 
ken if costive. 

September 10th. From this time the management 
of the case fell entirely under my direction, and 
perceiving symptoms of effusion going forwards, I 
desired that a solution of merc. subl. corr. might be 
given twice a day. 

19th. The increase of the dropsical symptoms 
now made it necessary to repeat the Digitalis. The 
dried leaves were used in infusion, and the water 
was presently evacuated, as before. 

|P_16
It is now almost nine years since the Digitalis was 
first prescribed for this lady, and notwithstanding I 
have tried every preventive method I could devise, 
the dropsy still continues to recur at times; but is 
never allowed to increase so as to cause much dis- 
tress, for she occasionally takes the infusion and re- 
lieves herself whenever she chooses. Since the first 
exhibition of that medicine, very small doses have 
been always found sufficient to promote the flow of 
urine. 

I have been more particular in the narrative of 
this case, partly because Dr. Darwin has related it ra- 
ther imperfectly in the notes to his son's posthumous 
publication, trusting, I imagine, to memory, and 
partly because it was a case which gave rise to a ve- 
ry general use of the medicine in that part of Shrop- 
shire. 

[}CASE V. }]
December l0th. Mr. L—, Æt. 35. Ascites 
and anasarca, the consequence of very intemperate 
living. After trying squill and other medicines to 
no purpose, I directed a decoction of the Fol. Digi- 
tal. recent. six drams to a pint; an eighth part to 
be taken every fourth hour. This made him sick, 
and produced a copious flow of urine, but not enough 
to remove all the dropsical symptoms. After a fort- 
night a stronger decoction was ordered, and, upon 
a third trial, as the winter advanced, it became 
necessary to use four ounces to the pint decoction; 
and thus he got free from all his complaints. 

|P_17
In October 1777, in consequence of having pur- 
sued his intemperate mode of living, his dropsy re- 
turned, accompanied by evident marks of diseased 
viscera. A decoction of two drams of Fol. Digital. 
siccat. to a pint, once more removed the dropsy. He 
took a wine glass full thrice a day. 

In January 1778, I was desired to visit him again. 
I found he had gone on in his usual intemperate life, 
his countenance jaundiced, and the dropsy coming 
on apace. After giving some deobstruent medi- 
cines, I again directed the Digitalis, which again 
emptied the water; but he did not survive many 
weeks. 

[}1777. }]
[}CASE VI. }]
February —. Mrs. M—, Æt. 45. Ascites 
and anasarca, but not much otherwise diseased, and 
well enough to walk about the house, and see after 
her family affairs. I thought this a fair case for a 
trial of the Digitalis, and therefore directed a de- 
coction of the fresh leaves, the stock of dried ones 
being exhausted. About a week afterwards, calling 
to see my patient, I was informed that she was dead; 
that the third day after my first visit she suddenly 
fell down, and expired. Upon enquiry I found 
she had not taken any of the medicine; for the 
snow had lain so deep upon the ground, that the 
apothecary had not been able to procure it. Had 
|P_18
the medicine been given in a case seemingly so fa- 
vourable as this, and had the patient died under its 
use, is it not probable that the death would have 
been attributed to it? 

[}CASE VII. }]
February 11th. Mr. E—, of W—, Æt. 61. 
Hydrothorax, ascites and anasarca, consequences of 
hard drinking. He had been attended for some 
time by a physician in his neighbourhood, who had 
treated his case with the usual remedies, but with- 
out affording him any relief; nor could I expect to 
succeed better by any other medicine than the Digi- 
talis. The dried leaves were not to be had; and 
the green ones at this season being very uncertain in 
their strength, I ordered four ounces of the roots 
in a pint decoction, and directed three spoonsuls to 
be given every fourth hour, until it either excited 
nausea, or a free discharge of urine; both these 
effects took place nearly at the same time: he made 
a large quantity of water, the swellings subsided 
very considerably, and his breath became easy. Eight 
days afterwards he began upon a course of bitters 
and deobstruents. The dropsical symptoms soon 
increased again, but he had suffered so much from 
the severity of the sickness before, that he was nei- 
ther willing to take, nor I to give the same medicine 
again. 

Perhaps this patient might have been saved, if I 
had been well acquainted with the management and 
|P_19
real doses of the medicine, which was certainly in 
this instance made very much too strong; and not- 
withstanding the caution to stop the further exhibition 
when certain effects should take place, it seems the 
quantity previously swallowed was sufficient to distress 
him exceedingly. 

[}CASE VIII. }]
March 11th. Mrs. H—, Æt. 32. A few 
days after a tedious labour, had her legs and thighs 
swelled to a very great degree; pale and semi-trans- 
parent, [/2./] with pain in both groins. After a purge of 
calomel and rhubarb, ung. merc. was ordered to be 
rubbed upon the groins, and the following decoction 
was directed: 

R. Fol. Digital. purp. recent. ℥ii. 
Aq. puræ. ℔i. coque ad ℔iss et colatur. adde. 

Aq. cinn. sp. ʒiv. M. capiat. cyath. vinos. 
parv. bis quotidie. 

The decoction presently increased the secretion 
of urine, and abated the distension of the legs: in 
a fortnight the swelling was gone; but some days 
after leaving her bed, her legs swelled again about 
the ancles, which was removed by another bottle 
of the decoction on the 2lst of April. 

|P_20
[}CASE IX. }]
March 29th. Mr. G—, Æt. 47. Very 
much deformed; asthma of several years continu- 
ance, but now dropsical to a great degree. Took 
several medicines without relief, and then tried the 
Digitalis, but with no better success. 

[}CASE X. }]
April 10th. G— G—, Æt. 70. Asthma and 
anasarca. Took a decoction of the fresh leaves of 
the Digitalis, which produced violent sickness, but 
no immediate evacuation of water. After the sick- 
ness had ceased altogether, the urine began to flow 
copiously, and he was cured. 

[}CASE XI. }]
July 10th. Mr. M— of T—, Æt. 54. A 
very hard drinker; had been affected since November
last with ascites and anasarca, for which he had 
taken several medicines without benefit. A de- 
coction of the recent leaves of the Digitalis was then 
directed, an ounce and half to a pint, one eighth 
of which I ordered to be given every fourth hour. 
A few doses brought on great nausea, indistinct vi- 
sion, and a great flow of urine, so as presently to 
empty him of all the dropsical water. Indeed the 
evacuation was so rapid and so complete, that it be- 
came necessary to apply a bandage round the belly, 
and to support him with cordials. 

|P_21
In something more than a year and a half, his 
dropsy returned, but the Digitalis did not then 
succeed to our wishes. In August, 1779, he was 
tapped, and lived afterwards only about five weeks. 

For more particulars, see the extract of a letter 
from Mr. Lyon. 

[}CASE XII. }]
September 12th. Miss C— of T—, Æt. 48. 
An ovarium dropsy, and anasarcous legs and thighs. 
For three months in the beginning of this year she 
had been under the care of Dr. Darwin, who at 
different times had given her blue vitriol, elaterium, 
and calomel; decoction of pareira brava, and guia- 
cum wood, with tincture of cantharides; oxymel of 
squills, decoction of parsley roots, &c. Finding no 
relief, she discontinued the use of medicines, until 
the urgency of her symptoms induced her to ask 
my advice about the end of August. She was great- 
ly emaciated, and had almost a total loss of appetite. 
I first tried small doses of Merc. sublim. corr. in 
solution, with decoction of burdock roots, and blis- 
ters to the thighs. No advantage attending the 
use of this plan, I directed a decoction of Fol. 
Digit. a dram and half to a pint; one ounce to be 
taken twice a day. It presently reduced the anasar- 
cous swellings, but made no alteration in the disten- 
sion of the abdomen. 

|P_22
[}CASE XIII. }]
October 9th. Mrs. B—, Æt. 40. An ova- 
rium dropsy. Took a decoction of Digitalis without 
effect. Her life was preserved for some years by 
repeated tapping. 

[}1778. }]
[}CASE XIV. }]
February 8th. Mr. R— of K—. Had 
formerly suffered much from gout, and lived very 
intemperately. Jaundiced countenance; ascites; 
legs and thighs greatly swollen; appetite none; ex- 
tremely weak; confined to his bed. Had taken 
many medicines from his apothecary without advan- 
tage. I ordered him decoction of Digitalis, and a 
cordial; but he survived only a few days. 

[}CASE XV. }]
March 13th. Mr. M—, Æt. 54. A thorax 
greatly deformed; asthma through the winter, suc- 
ceeded by dropsy in belly and legs. Pulse very 
small; face leaden coloured; cough almost continual. 
Decoction of seneka was directed, and small doses 
of Dover's powder at night. 

17th. Gum-ammoniac and squill, with elixir 
paregor. at night—26th, Squill and decoction of 
seneka.—30th, His complaints still increasing, de- 
|P_23
coction of Digitalis was then directed, which relieved 
him in a few days; but his complaints returned 
again, and he died in the month of June. 

[}CASE XVI. }]
August 18th. Mr. B—, Æt. 33. Pulmonary 
consumption and dropsy. The Digitalis, and that 
failing, other diuretics were used, in hopes of gain- 
ing some relief from the distress occasioned by the 
dropsical symptoms; but none of them were effectu- 
al. He was then attended by another physician, 
and died in about two months. 

[}CASE XVIII. }]
September 21st. Mrs. M— W— G—, 
Æt. 50. An ovarium dropsy. She took half a pint 
of Infus. Digitalis, which made her sick, but did not 
increase the quantity of urine. She was afterwards 
relieved by tapping. 

[}CASE XVIII. }]
October 28th. R— W—, Æt. 33. Ascites 
and universal anasarca; countenance quite pale 
and bloated; appetite none, and the little food he 
forces down is generally rejected. 

R. Fol. Digit. purp. siccat. ʒiii. 

Aq. bull. ℔i. digere per horas duas, et colat. 
adde aq. junip. comp. ʒiii. 

|P_24
He was directed to take one ounce of this infusion 
every two hours until it should make him sick. 
This was on Wednesday. The fifth dose made 
him vomit. On Thursday afternoon he vomited 
again very freely, without having taken any more 
of the medicine. On Friday and Saturday he made 
more water than he had done for a week before, 
and the swellings of his face and body were con- 
siderably abated. He was directed to omit all medi- 
cine so long as the urine continued to flow freely, 
and also to keep an account of the quantity he made 
in twenty-four hours. 

These were his reports: October31st. Saturday, 5 half pints. November1st. Sunday, 6 2d. Monday, 8 3d. Tuesday, 8 4th. Wednesday, 7 5th. Thursday, 8 

On Wednesday he began to purge, and the 
purging still continues, but his appetite is better 
than he has known it for a long time. No swelling 
remains but about his ancles, extending at night 
half way up his legs. 

Omit all medicines at present. 7th. Saturday, 71/2 half pints. 8th. Sunday, 8 9th. Monday, 63/4l0th. Tuesday, 61/211th. Wednesday, 6 12th. Thursday, 61/4

|P_25
On Tuesday the 17th, some swelling still remain- 
ed about his ancles, but he was in every other re- 
spect perfectly well. 

He took a few more doses of the infusion, and no 
other medicine. 

[}CASE XIX. }]
December 8th. W— B—, Æt. 60. A hard 
drinker. Diseased viscera; ascites and anasarca. 
An infusion of Digitalis was directed, but it had no 
other effect than to make him sick. 

[}1779. }]
In the beginning of this year we had many drop- 
sies in children, who had suffered from the Scarlatina 
Anginosa; they all yielded very readily to the Digi- 
talis, but in some the medicine purged, and then 
it did not prove diuretic, nor did it remove the 
dropsy until opium was joined with it, so as to pre- 
vent it purging.—I did not keep notes of these 
cases, but I do not recollect a single instance in 
which the Digitalis failed to effect a cure. 

[}CASE XX. }]
January 1st. Mr. H—. Hydrops Pectoris; 
legs and thighs prodigiously anasarcous; a very dis- 
tressing sense of fulness and tightness across his sto- 
mach; urine in small quantity; pulse intermitting; 
breath very short. 

|P_26
He had taken various medicines, and been blis- 
tered, but without relief. His complaints continu- 
ing to increase, I directed an infusion of Digitalis, 
which made him very sick; acted powerfully as a 
diuretic, and removed all his symptoms. 

About three months afterwards he was out upon 
a journey, and, after taking cold, was suddenly 
seized with difficulty of breathing, and violent pal- 
pitation of his heart: he sent for me, and I ordered 
the infusion as before, which very soon removed 
his complaints. He is now active and well; but, 
whenever he takes cold, finds some return of difficult 
breathing, which he soon removes by a dose or two 
of the infusion. 

[}CASE XXI. }]
January 5th. Mrs. M—, Æt. 69. Hydrotho- 
rax, (called asthma) ascites and anasarca. I di- 
rected an infusion of Fol. Digital. siccat. three drams 
to a pint; a small wine glass to be taken every third 
or fourth hour. It made her violently sick, acted 
powerfully as a diuretic, set her breath perfectly at 
liberty, and carried off the swelling of her legs; 
when she was nearly emptied, she became so lan- 
guid, that I thought it necessary to order cordials, 
and a large blister to her back. Mr. Ward, who 
attended as her apothecary, tells me she had some 
return of her asthma in June and October following, 
which was each time removed by the same medicine. 

|P_27
[}CASE XXII. }]
January 11th. Mr. H—, Æt. 59. Ascites 
and general anasarca. A large corpulent man, and 
a hard drinker: he had repeatedly suffered under 
complaints of this kind, but had been always re- 
lieved by the judicious assistance of Dr. Ash. In 
the present instance, however, not finding relief as 
usual from the prescriptions of my worthy friend, 
he sent for me; after examining into his situation, and 
informing myself what had been done to relieve him, 
I was satisfied that the Digitalis was the only medi- 
cine from which I had any thing to hope. It was 
therefore directed; but another patient requiring 
my assistance at a distance from town, I desired he 
would not begin the medicine before I returned, 
which would be early on the third day; for I was 
well aware of the difficulties before me, and that 
he would inevitably sink under too rapid an evacu- 
ation of the water. On my return I was informed, 
that the preceding evening, as he sat on his chair, 
his head sunk upon his breast, and he died. 

This case, as well as case VI. is mentioned with 
a view to demonstrate to younger practitioners, how 
sudden and unexpected the deaths of dropsical pati- 
ents sometimes happen, and how cautious we should 
be in assigning causes for effects. 

[}CASE XXIII. }]
August 31st. Mr. C—, Æt. 57. Diseased 
viscera, jaundice, ascites and anasarca. After try- 
|P_28
ing calomel, saline draughts, jallap purges, chrystals 
of tartar, pills of gum ammoniac, squills, and 
soap, sal succini, eleterium, &c. infusion of Digi- 
talis was directed, which removed all his urgent 
symptoms, and he recovered a pretty good state of 
health. 

[}CASE XXIV. }]
September 11th. I was desired to visit Mr. L—, 
Æt. 63; a middle sized man; rather thin; not ha- 
bitually intemperate; found him in bed, where he 
had been for three days. He was in a state of furi- 
ous insanity, and had been gradually losing his rea- 
son for ten days before, but was not outrageous the 
first week: his apothecary had given him ten grains 
of emetic tartar, a dram of ipecacoanha, and an 
ounce of tincture of jallap, in the space of a few 
hours, which scarcely made him sick, and only oc- 
casioned a stool or two; upon enquiring into the 
usual state of his health, I was told that he had been 
troubled with some difficulty of breathing for thirty 
years past, but for the nine last years this complaint 
had increased, so that he was often obliged to sit up 
the greater part of the night; and, for the last year, 
the sense of suffocation was so great, when he lay 
down, that he often sat up for a week together. His 
father died of an asthma before he was fifty. A few 
years ago, at an election, where he drank more 
than usual, his head was affected as now, but in a 
slighter degree, and his asthmatic symptoms vanish- 
ed; and now, notwithstanding he has been several 
|P_29
days in bed, he feels not the least difficulty in 
breathing. 

Apprehending that the insanity might be owing 
to the same cause which had heretofore occasioned 
the asthma, and that this cause was water; I ordered 
a decoction of the Fol. siccat Digital, three drams to 
half a pint; three spoonfuls to be taken every third 
hour: the fourth dose made him sick; the medicine 
was then stopped; the sickness continued at inter- 
vals, more or less, for four days, during which time 
he made a great quantity of water, and gradually 
became more rational. On the fifth day his appe- 
tite began to return, and the sickness ceased, but 
the flow of urine still continued. 

A week afterwards I saw him again, and examined 
him particularly; his head was then perfectly ra- 
tional, apetite very good, breath quite easy, per- 
mitting him to lie down in bed without inconveni- 
ence, makes plenty of water, coughs a little, and 
expectorates freely. He took no other medicine, 
except a little rhubarb when costive. 

[}CASE XXV. }]
September 15th. Mr. J. R—, Æt. 50. Subject 
to an asthmatical complaint for more than twenty 
years, but was this year much worse than usual, 
and symptoms of dropsy appeared. In July he 
took G. ammon. squill and seneka, with infus. 
amarum and fossil alkaly. In August, infusum amar. 
|P_30
with vin. chalyb. and at bed-time pil. styr. and 
squill. His complaints increasing, the squill was 
pushed as far as could be borne, but without any 
good effect. September 15th, an infusion of Digitalis 
was directed, but he died the next morning. 

[}CASE XXVI. }]
September 18th. Mrs. R—, Æt. 30. After a 
severe child-bearing, found both her legs and thighs 
swelled to the utmost stretch of the skin. They 
looked pale, and almost transparent. The case be- 
ing similar to that related at No. VIII. I determined 
upon a similar method of treatment; but as this pa- 
tient had an inflammatory sore throat also, I wished 
to get that removed first, and in three or four days 
it was done. I then directed an infusion of Digi- 
talis, which soon increased the urinary secretion, 
and reduced the swellings, without any disturbance 
of her stomach. 

A few days after quitting her bed and coming 
down stairs, some degree of swelling in her legs re- 
turned, which was removed by calomel, an opening 
electuary, and the application of rollers. 

[}CASE XXVII. }]
October 7th. Mr. F—, a little man, with a 
spine and thorax greatly deformed; for more than 
a year past had complained of difficult respiration, 
and a sense of fulness about his stomach; these com- 
plaints increasing, his abdomen gradually enlarged, 
|P_31
and a fluctuation in it became perceptible. He had 
no anasarca, no appearance of diseased viscera, and 
no great paucity of urine. Purges and diuretics of 
different kinds affording him no relief, my assistance 
was desired. After trying squill medicines without 
effect, he was ordered to take Pulv. fol. Digital. in 
small doses. These producing no sensible effect, 
the doses were gradually increased until nausea was 
excited; but there was no alteration in the quantity 
of urine, and consequently no relief to his com- 
plaints. I then advised tapping, but he would not 
hear of it; however, the distress occasioned by the 
increasing fulness of his belly at length compelled 
him to submit to the operation on the 20th of No- 
vember. It was necessary to draw off the water again 
upon the following days: December the 8th. — — 27th. 1780. February the 4th. — — 23d. March the 9th. 

During the intervals, no method I could think of 
was omitted to prevent the return of the disease, 
but nothing seemed to avail. In the operation of 
February 23d, his strength was so much reduced, 
that the water was not entirely removed; and on 
the 9th of March, before his belly was half empti- 
ed, notwithstanding the most judicious application 
of bandage, his debility was so great, that it was 
judged prudent to stop. After being placed in bed, 
the faintness and sickness continued; severe rigors 
|P_32
ensued, and violent vomiting; these vomitings con- 
tinued through the night, and in the intervals he 
lay in a state nearly approaching to syncope. The 
next day I found him with nearly the same symp- 
toms, but remarked that the quantity of fluid he 
had thrown up was very much more than what he 
had taken, and that his abdomen was considerably 
fallen; in the course of two or three days more, he 
discharged the whole of the effused fluid; his strength 
and appetite gradually returned, and he was in all 
respects much better than he had been before the 
last operation. 

Some time afterwards, his belly began to fill 
again, and he again applied to me; upon an accu- 
rate examination, I judged the quantity of fluid 
might then be about four or five quarts. Nature 
had pointed out the true method of cure in this 
case; I therefore ordered him to bed, and directed 
ipecacoanha vomits to be given night and morning: 
in two or three days the whole of the water was 
removed by vomiting, for he never purged, nor 
was the quantity of his urine increased; his appe- 
tite and strength gradually returned; he never had 
any further relapse, and is now an active healthy 
man. I must leave the reader to make his own re- 
flections on this singular case. 

|P_33
[}1780. }]
[}CASE XXVIII. }]
January 11th. Captain V—, Æt. 42. Had 
suffered much from residing in hot climates, and 
drinking very freely, particularly rum in large quan- 
tity. He had tried many physicians before I saw 
him, but nothing relieved him. I found him 
greatly emaciated, his countenance of a brownish 
yellow; no appetite, extremely low, distressing 
fulness across his stomach; legs and thighs greatly 
swollen; pulse quick, and very feeble; urine in 
small quantity. As he had evidently only a few 
days to live, I ordered him nothing but a solution 
of sal diureticus in cinnamon water, slightly acidu- 
lated with syrup of lemons. This medicine effect- 
ing no change, and his symptoms becoming daily 
more distressing, I directed an infusion of Digitalis. 
A few doses occasioned a copious flow of urine, 
without sickness or any other disturbance. The me- 
dicine was discontinued; and the next day the urine 
continuing to be secreted very plentifully, he lost 
his most distressing complaints, was in great spirits, 
and ate a pretty good dinner. In the evening, as 
he was conversing chearsully with some friends, he 
stooped forwards, fell from his chair, and died in- 
stantly. Had he been in bed, I think there is rea- 
son to believe this fatal syncope, if such it was, 
would not have happened. 

|P_34
[}CASE XXIX. }]
February 6th. Mr. H—,Æt. 63. A corpu- 
lent man; had suflered much from gout, which for 
the last year or two had formed very imperfectly. 
He had now symptoms of water in his chest, his 
belly and his legs. An infusion of Digitalis removed 
these complaints, and after being confined for the 
greater part of the winter, he was well enough to 
get abroad again. In the course of a month the 
dropsical symptoms returned, and were again re- 
moved by the same medicine. Bitters and tonics 
were now occasionally prescribed, but his debility 
gradually increased, and he died some time after- 
wards; but the dropsy never returned. 

[}CASE XXX. }]
February 17th. Mr. D—, Æt. 50. Ascites 
and anasarca, with symptoms of phthisis. He had 
been a very hard drinker. The infusum Digitalis 
removed his dropsical symptoms, and he was suffi- 
ciently recovered to take a journey; but as the 
spring advanced, the consumptive symptoms in- 
creased, and he died soon afterwards, perfectly ema- 
ciated. 

[}CASE XXXI. }]
March 5th. I was desired to visit Mrs. H—, 
a very delicate woman, who after a severe lying-in, 
had her legs and thighs swollen to a very great de- 
|P_35
gree; pale and semi-transparent. I found her ex- 
tremely faint, her pulse very small and slow; vomit- 
ing violently, and frequently purging. She was at- 
tended by a gentleman who had seen me give the 
Digitalis in a similar case of swelled legs after a lying- 
in (see Case XXVI.) about six months before. He 
had not considered that this patient was delicate, 
the other robust; nor had he attended to stop the 
exhibition of the medicine when its effects began to 
take place. The great distress of her situation was 
evidently owing to the imprudent and unlimited 
use of the Digitalis. I was very apprehensive for 
her safety; ordered her cordials and volatiles; a free 
supply of wine, chamomile tea with brandy for 
common drink, and blisters. The next day the situ- 
ation of things was much the same, but with all this 
disturbance no increased secretion of urine. The same 
methods were continued; an opiate ordered at night, 
and liniment. volatile upon flannel applied to the 
groins, as she now complained of great pain in those 
parts. The third day the nausea was less urgent, 
the vomitings less frequent, the pulse not so slow. 
Camphorated spirit, with caustic volatile alkaly, was 
applied to the stomach, emulsion given for common 
drink, and the same medicines repeated. From 
this time, the intervals became gradually longer be- 
tween the fits of vomiting, the flow of urine in- 
creased, the swellings subsided, the appetite return- 
ed, and she recovered perfectly. 

|P_36
[}CASE XXXII. }]
March 16th. Mr. D—, Æt. 70. A paralytic 
stroke had for some weeks past impaired the use of 
his left side, and he complained much of his breath, 
and of a straitness across his stomach; at length, an 
anasarca and ascites appearing, I had no doubt as to 
the cause of the former symptoms; but, upon ac- 
count of his advanced age, and the paralytic affec- 
tion, I hesitated to give the Digitalis, and there- 
fore tried the other usual modes of practice, until 
at length his breath would not permit him to lie 
down in bed, and his other symptoms increased so 
rapidly as to threaten a speedy dissolution. In this 
dilemma I ventured to prescribe an infusion of the 
Fol. siccat. Digital. which presently excited a copious 
flow of urine, and made him very sick; a strong 
infusion of chamomile flowers, with brandy, relieved 
the sickness, but the diuretic effects of the Digitalis 
continuing, his dropsy was removed, and his breath- 
ing became easy. The palsy remained nearly in 
the same state. He lived until August 1782, and 
without any return of the dropsy. 

[}CASE XXXIII. }]
March 18th. Miss S—, Æt. 5. Hydrocepha- 
lus internus. As the case did not yield to calomel, 
when matters were nearly advanced to extremities, 
it occurred to me to try the Infusum Digitalis; a 
few doses of which were given, but had no sensible 
effect. 

|P_37
[}CASE XXXIV. }]
March 19th. A young lady, soon after the birth 
of an illegitimate child, became insane. After be- 
ing near a month under my care, swellings of her 
legs, which at first had been attributed to weakness, 
extended to her thighs and belly; her urine became 
foul, and small in quantity, and the insanity re- 
mained nearly the same. As it had been very dif- 
ficult to procure evacuations by any means, I or- 
dered half an ounce of Fol. Digital. siccat. in a 
pint infusion, and directed two spoonfuls to be giv- 
en every two hours: this had the desired effect; 
the dropsy and the insanity disappeared together, 
and she had afterwards no other medicine but some 
aperient pills to take occasionally. 

[}CASE XXXV. }]
April 12th. Mr. R—, Æt. 32. For the last 
three or sour years had had more or less of what 
was considered as asthma;—it appeared to me Hy- 
drothorax. I directed an infusion of Digitalis, 
which presently removed his complaints. In June
following he had a relapse, and took two grains of 
the Pulv. fol. Digit. three times a day, which cured 
him after taking forty grains, and he has never had 
a return. 

|P_38
[}CASE XXXVI. }]
May 15th. Mrs. H—, Æt. 40. A spasmo- 
dic asthma, attended with symptoms of effusion. 
An infusion of Digitalis relieved her very consider- 
ably, and she lived four years afterwards without 
any relapse. 

[}CASE XXXVII. }]
May 26th. R— B—, Æt. 12. Scrophu- 
lous, consumptive, and at length anasarcous. Took 
Infus. Digital. without advantage. Died the July
following. 

[}CASE XXXVIII. }]
June 4th. Mrs. S—, of W—, Æt 49. 
Ascites and anasarca. Had taken many medicines; 
first from her apothecary, afterwards by the direc- 
tion of a very judicious and very celebrated physi- 
cian, but nothing retarded the increase of the 
dropsy. I first saw her along with the physician 
mentioned above, on the 14th of May; we direct- 
ed an electuary of chrystals of tartar, and Seltzer 
water for common drink; this plan failing, as others 
had done before, we ordered the Infus. Digital. which 
in a few days nearly removed the dropsy. I then 
left her to the care of her physician; but her con- 
stitution was too much impaired to admit of restor- 
ation to health, and I understand she died a few 
weeks afterwards. 

|P_39
[}CASE XXXIX. }]
June 13th. Mr. P—, Æt. 35. A very 
hard drinker, was attacked with a severe hæmoptoe, 
which was followed by ascites and anasarca. He 
had every appearance of diseased viscera, and his 
urine was small in quantity. The powder and the 
infusion of Digitalis were given at different times, 
but without the desired effect. Other medicines 
were tried, but in vain. Tapping prolonged his 
existence a few weeks, and he died early in the 
following autumn. 

[}CASE XL. }]
June 27th. Mr. W—, Æt. 37. An appa- 
rently asthmatic affection, gradually increasing for 
three or four years, which not yielding to the usual 
remedies, he took the infusion of Digitalis. Two 
or three doses made him very sick; but he thought 
his breathing relieved. After one week he took it 
again, and was so much better as to want no other 
medicine. 

In the course of the following winter he became 
hectic, and died consumptive about a year after- 
wards. 

[}CASE XLI. }]
July 6th. Mr. E—, Æt. 57. Hydrothorax 
and anasarca; his breath so short that he could not 
|P_40
lie down. After a trial of squill, fixed alkaly, and 
dulcified spirit of nitre, I directed Pulv. Digital. 
gr. 2, thrice a day. In four days he was able to 
come down stairs; in three days more no appearance 
of disease remained; and under the use of aromatics 
and small doses of opium, he soon recovered his 
strength. 

[}CASE XLII. }]
July 7th. Miss H— of T—, Æt. 39. In 
the last stage of a phthisis pulmonalis became dropsi- 
cal. She took the Digitalis without being relieved. 

[}CASE XLIII. }]
July 9th. Mrs. F—, Æt. 70. A chear- 
ful, strong, healthy woman; but for a few years 
back had experienced a degree of difficult breathing 
when in exercise. In the course of the last year her 
legs swelled, and she felt great fulness about her 
stomach. These symptoms continued increasing 
very fast, notwithstanding several attempts made by 
a very judicious apothecary to relieve her. The 
more regular practitioner failing, she had recourse 
to a quack, who I believe plied her very powerfully 
with Daphne laureola, or some drastic purge of that 
kind. I found her greatly reduced in strength, her 
belly and lower extremities swollen to an amazing 
size, her urine small in quantity, and her appetite 
greatly impaired. For the first fortnight of my at- 
tendance blisters were applied, solution of fixed 
alkaly, decoction of seneka with vitriolic æther, 
|P_41
chrystals of tartar, squill and cordial medicines were 
successively exhibited, but with no advantage. I 
then directed Pulv. Fol. Digital. two grains every 
four hours. After taking eighteen grains, the urine 
began to increase. The medicine was then stopped. 
The discharge of urine continued to increase, and 
in five or six days the whole of the dropsical water 
passed off, without any disturbance to the stomach 
or bowels. As the distenfion of the belly had been 
very great, a swathe was applied, and drawn gradu- 
ally tighter as the water was evacuated. As no pains 
were spared to prevent the return of the dropsy, 
and as the best means I could devise proved unequal 
to my wishes, both in this and in some other cases, 
I shall take the liberty to point out the methods 
I tried at different times in as concise a manner as 
possible, for the knowledge of what will not do, may 
sometimes assist us to discover what will. 

1780. 

July 18th. Infusum amarum, steel, Seltzer water. 

September 22d. Neutral saline draughts, with tinct. 
canthar. 

26th. Pills of soap, garlic and millepedes. 

30th. The same pills, with infusum amarum. 

October 11th. Pills of aloes, assafetida, and sal mar- 
tis, in the day-time, and mercury rubbed down, 
at night. 

December 21st. The accumulation of water now re- 
quired a repetition of the Digitalis. It was di- 
rected in infusion, a dram and half to eight ounces, 
and an ounce and half given every fourth hour, 
|P_42
until its effects began to appear. The water was 
soon carried off. 

30th. Sal diuretic. twice a day. To eat preserved 
garlic frequently. 

1781. 

February 1st. Pills of calomel, squill and gum am- 
moniac. 
3d. Infusion of Digitalis repeated, and after the 
water was carried off, Dover's powder was tried 
as a sudorific. 

March 18th. Infus. Digital. repeated. 

26th. Pills of sal martis and aromatic species, with 
infusum amarum. 

May 5th. Being feverish; James's powder and 
saline draughts. 

10th. Laudanum every night, and an opening 
tincture to obviate costiveness. 

24th. Infus. Digitalis, one ounce only every fourth 
hour, which soon procured a perfect evacuation 
of the water. 

August 11th. Infus. Digitalis. 

Octobcr 19th. An emetic, and fol. Cicut. pulv. 
ten grains every six hours. 

November 8th. A mercurial bolus at bed-time. 

16th. Infus. Digitalis. 

December 23d. An emetic—Pills of seneka and gum 
ammoniac—Vitriolic acid in every thing she 
drinks. 

25th. Squill united to small doses of opium. 

1782. 

January 2d. A troublesome cough—Syrup of gar- 
lic and oxymel of squills. A blister to the back. 

|P_43
4th. Tincture of cantharides and paregoric elixir. 

28th. Infus. Digitalis, half an ounce every morn- 
ing, and one ounce every night, was now suffi- 
cient to empty her. 

March 26th. Infus. Digitalis; and when emptied, 
vitriol of copper twice a day. 

April 1st. A cordial mixture for occasional use. 

Two months afterwards a purging came on, which 
every now and then returned, inducing great 
weakness—her appetite failed, and she died in 
in July. 

[}INTERVALS. }]
From July 9th, 1780, to December 21st, 171 days. 
From December 21st to February 3d, 1781, 34 days. 
From February 3d to March 18th, 44 days. 
From March 18th to May 24th, 66 days. 
From May 24th to August 11th, 79 days. 
From August 11th to November 16th, 98 days. 
From November 16th to January 28th, 1782, 74 
days. 
From January 28th to March 26th, 57 days. 
None of the accumulations of water were at all 
equal to that which existed when I first saw her, for 
finding so easy a mode of relief, she became impa- 
tient under a small degree of pressure, and often 
insisted upon taking her medicine sooner than I 
thought it necessary. After the 26th of March the 
degree of effusion was inconsiderable, and at the 
time of her death very trifling, being probably car- 
ried off by the diarrhœa. 

|P_44
[}CASE XLIV. }]
July 12th. Mr. H—, of A—, Æt. 6o. In 
the last stage of a life hurried to a termination by 
free living, dropsical symptoms became the most 
distressing. He wished to take the Digitalis. It 
was given, but afforded no relief. 

[}CASE XLV. }]
July 13th. Mr. S—, Æt. 49. Asthma, or 
rather hydrothorax, anasarca, and symptoms of a 
diseased liver. He was directed to take two grains 
of Pulv. fol. Digital. every two hours, until it pro- 
duced some effect. It soon removed the dropsical 
and asthmatic affections, and steel, with Seltzer wa- 
ter, restored him to health. 

[}CASE XLVI. }]
August 6th. Mr. L—, Æt. 35. Ascites and 
anasarca. Pulv. Digital. grains three, repeated every 
fourth hour, until he had taken two scruples, remov- 
ed every appearance of dropsy in a few days. He 
was then directed to take solution of merc. sublimat. 
and soon recovered his health and strength. 

[}CASE XLVII. }]
August 16th. Mr. G—, of W—, Æt. 86. 
Asthma of many years duration, and lately an in- 
cipient anasarca, with a paucity of urine. He had 
never lived intemperately, was of a chearful dispo- 
sition, and very sensible: for some years back had 
|P_45
lost all relish for animal food, and his only support 
had been an ounce or two of bread and cheese, or 
a small slice of seed-cake, with three or four pints 
of mild ale, in the twenty-four hours. After try- 
ing chrystals of tartar, fixed alkaly, squills, &c. I 
directed three grains of Pulv. fol. Digital. made 
into pills, with G. ammoniac, to be given every six 
hours; this presently occasioned copious discharges 
of urine, removed his swellings, and restored him 
to his usual standard of health. 

[}CASE XLVIII. }]
August 17th. T— B—, Esq. of K—, 
Æt. 46. Jaundice, dropsy, and great hardness in 
the region of the liver. Infusion of Digitalis carri- 
ed off all the effusion, and afterwards a course of 
deobstruent and tonic medicines removed his other 
complaints. 

[}CASE XLIX. }]
August 23d. Mr. C—, Æt. 58. (The person 
mentioned at Case XXIII.) He had continued free 
from dropsy until within the last six weeks; his ap- 
petite was now totally gone, his strength extremely 
reduced, and the yellow of his jaundice changed to a 
blackish hue. The Digitalis was now tried in vain, 
and he died shortly afterwards. 

[}CASE L. }]
August 24th. Mrs. W—, Æt. 39. Anasar- 
cous legs and symptoms of hydrothorax, consequent 
|P_46
to a tertian ague. Three grains of Pulv. Digitalis, 
given every fourth hour, occasioned a very copious 
flow of urine, and she got well without any other 
medicine. 

[}CASE LI. }]
August 28th. Mr. J— H—, Æt. 27. In 
consequence of very free living, had an ascites and 
swelled legs. I ordered him to take two grains of 
Fol. Digital. pulv. every two hours, until it pro- 
duced some effect; a few doses causes a plentiful 
secretion of urine, but no sickness, or purging: in 
six days the swellings disappeared, and he has since 
remained in good health. 


[^1. 
* Then resident at Lichfield, now at Derby. ^]
[^2. 
* This disease has lately been well described by Mr. White, 
of Manchester. 
^]